for example, two verbs willbeconsideredsimilariftheyhavelargecommon sets of modifying subjects, objects, adverbs etc. distributional similarity does not capture directly meaning equivalence and entailment but rather a looser notion of meaning similarity (geffet and dagan, 2005). 
previous attempts have used, for instance, the similarities between case frames (lin and pan57 tel, 2001), anchor words (barzilay and lee, 2003; shinyama et al, 2002; szepektor et al, 2004), and a web-based method (szepektor et al, 2004;geffet and dagan, 2005). 
(geffet and dagan, 2005), who exploited the distributional similarity approach over the web to address the same task as ours, obtained higher precision but substantially lower recall, considering only distributional candidates. 
there is also a workshop devoted to thistask (daganetal.,2005). 
consequently, they proposed a definition for the lexical entailment relation, which conforms to the general framework of applied textual entailment (dagan et al, 2005). 
recent attention to knowledge-rich problems such as question answering (pasca and harabagiu 2001) and textual entailment (geffet and dagan 2005) has encouraged natural language processing researchers to develop algorithms for automatically harvesting shallow semantic resources. 
a similar idea by geffet and dagan (geffet and dagan, 2005) was proposed forcapturing lexical entailment. 
the method for noun entailment acquisition by (geffet and dagan, 2005) is based on the idea of distributional inclusion, according to which one noun is entailed by the other if the set of occurrence contexts of the former subsumes that of the latter. 
it was noted recently by geffet and dagan (2004, 2005) that distributional similarity captures a quite loose notion of semantic similarity, as exemplified by the pair country party (identified by lin's similarity measure). 
a similar idea relying on word co-occurrence was proposed by geffet and dagan (geffet and dagan, 2005)but ourmethodis simpler and we expect it to be applicable to a wider range of vocabularies. 
