D.C. teacher contract talks still stuck.

As recently as a month ago, both sides reported that they were close to a deal, with each prepared to give ground. That accord would allow the District to remove teachers from schools -- because of closure, declining enrollment or other conditions -- with minimal attentionto seniority. Under current rules, teachers with the least amount of service are removed first, although those rules do not apply in the current budget emergency. 

The contract proposal also would allow those who lose their positions to remain on the payroll for a year while they look for other jobs in the system. They also could accept buyouts or retire with full benefits if they had 20 years of service.

Sources said Rhee was prepared to give up her effort to weaken tenure protections, which she says have spawned an attitude among teachers that they are guaranteed jobs for life.

Union leaders say that tenure is nothing more than a due-process mechanism that provides teachers who have more than two years' experience with a grievance process if they are fired.

Union officials said the layoffs are a bitter development because they were announced with almost no notice. The cuts were triggered, according to Rhee, by the D.C. Council's decision to reduce the school system's 2010 budget by $20.7 million in late July. She said she also must cut personnel who have not been needed since the closing of 23 schools after the 2007-08 year.

Washington Teachers' Union President George Parker told a D.C. Council hearing on Friday that he did not know of the reductions until the Sept. 16 announcement by Rhee and Mayor Adrian M. Fenty (D). 

"There was probably some intentional effort not to inform us," Parker said.

But the union's court filings in a lawsuit challenging the layoffs include a Sept. 11 letter from Deputy Chancellor Kaya Henderson confirming that there would be cuts.

In the absence of a new contract, Rhee has moved to reach her goal of replacing a broad segment of the 4,000-member District teaching corps. Last year, her principals placed about 150 instructors on probationary "90-day plans," warning that they faced dismissal if they didn't improve. About 80 were eventually terminated. She also has eliminated other teachers considered poor performers during this fall's budget crunch.

Parker said the contract talks will have to wait while the union wages an urgent legal and political fight to roll back the layoffs. "This is the number one priority," he told the council. "I feel a little indifferent to contract negotiations right now." 
