A Probabilistic Genre-Independent Model of Pronominalization 
Michael Strube 
European Media Laboratory GmbH 
Villa Bosch 
Schlol3-Wolfsbrunnenweg 33 
69118 Heidelberg, Germany 
Michael. St rube@eml .vil la-bosch. de 
Maria Wolters 
Inst. f. Kommunikationsforschung u. Phonetik 
Universitiit Bonn 
Poppelsdorfer Allee 47 
53115 Bonn, Germany 
wolters@ikp.uni -bonn.de 
Abstract 
Our aim in this paper is to identify genre- 
independent factors that influence the decision to 
pronominalize. Results based on the annotation of 
twelve texts from four genres show that only a few 
factors have a strong influence on pronominaliza- 
tion across genres, i.e. distance from last mention, 
agreement, and form of the antecedent. Finally, we 
describe aprobabilistic model of pronominalization 
derived from our data. 
1 Introduction 
Generating adequate referring expressions i an ac- 
tive research topic in Natural Language Generation. 
Adequate referring expressions are those that en- 
able the user to quickly and unambiguously identify 
the discourse ntity that the expression co-specifies 
with. In this paper, we concentrate on an important 
aspect of that question, which has received less at- 
tention than the question of anaphora resolution in 
discourse interpretation, i.e., when is it feasible to 
pronominalize? 
Our aim is to identify the central factors that in- 
fluence pronominalization across genres. Section 2 
motivates and presents the factors that were investi- 
gated in this study: distance from last mention, par- 
allelism, ambiguity, syntactic function, agreement, 
sortal class, syntactic function of the antecedent and 
form of the antecedent. Our analyses are based on 
a corpus of twelve texts from four different genres 
with a total of more than 24,000 words and 7126 
referring expressions (Section 3). The results of 
the statistical analyses are summarized in Section 
4. There are strong statistical associations between 
each of the factors and pronominalization. Only 
when we combine them into a probabilistic model 
we can identify those factors whose contribution 
is really important, i.e. distance from last mention, 
agreement, and to a certain degree form of the an- 
tecedent. Since these factors can be annotated tel- 
atively cheaply, we conclude that it is possible to 
develop reasonable statistical pronominalization al- 
gorithms. 
2 Factors in Pronoun Generation 
2.1 Previous Work 
Lately, a number of researchers have done corpus- 
based work on NP generation and pronoun resolu- 
tion, and a number of studies have found differences 
in the frequency of both personal and demonstrative 
pronouns across genres. However, none of these 
studies compares the influence of different factors 
on pronoun generation across genres. 
Recently, Poesio et al (1999) have described a
corpus-based approach to statistical NP generation. 
While they ask the same question as previous re- 
searchers (e.g. Dale (1992)), their methods differ 
from traditional work on NP generation. Poesio 
et al (1999) use two kinds of factors: (1) factors 
related to the NP under consideration such as agree- 
ment information, semantic factors, and discourse 
factors, and (2) factors related to the antecedent, 
such as animacy, clause type, thematic role, proxim- 
ity, etc. Poesio et al (1999) report hat they were not 
able to annotate many of these factors reliably. On 
the basis of these annotations, they constructed de- 
cision trees for predicting surface forms of referring 
expressions based on these factors - with good re- 
sults: all 28 personal pronouns in their corpus were 
generated correctly. Unfortunately, they do not eval- 
uate the contribution of each of these factors, so we 
do not know which ones are important. 
Work on corpus-based approaches to anaphora 
resolution is more numerous. Ge et al (1998) 
describe a supervised probabilistic pronoun resolu- 
tion algorithm which is based on complete syntac- 
tic information. The factors they use include dis- 
tance from last mention, syntactic function and con- 
text, agreement information, animacy of the refer- 
ent, a simplified notion of selectional restrictions, 
18 
Agree 
Syn 
Class 
SynAnte 
FormAnte 
Dist 
Dist4 
Par 
Ambig 
Agreement in person, gender, and number 
Syntactic function 
Sortal Class (cf. Tab. 2) 
Syntactic function of antecedent. 
"F" for first mention, "N" for deadend 
Form of antecedent (pers. pron., poss. 
pron., def. NP, indef. NP, proper name) 
Distance to last mention in units 
Dist reduced to 4 values (deadend, 
Dist=0, Dist= 1, Dist>=2) 
Parallelism (Syn=SynAnte) 
Number of competing discourse ntities 
Table 1: Overview of factors 
and the length of the coreference chain. Cardie & 
Wagstaff (1999) describe an unsupervised algorithm 
for noun phrase coreference resolution. Their fac- 
tors are taken from Ge et al (1998), with two excep- 
tions. First, they replace complete syntactic infor- 
mation with information about NP bracketing. Sec- 
ond, they use the sortal class of the referent which 
they determine on the basis of WordNet (Fellbaum, 
1998). 
There has been no comparison between corpus- 
based approaches for anaphora resolution and more 
traditional algorithms based on focusing (Sidner, 
1983) or centering (Grosz et al, 1995) except for 
Azzam et al (1998). However, their comparison 
is flawed by evaluating a syntax-based focus algo- 
rithm on the basis of insufficient syntactic informa- 
tion. For pronoun generation, the original centering 
model (Grosz et al, 1995) provides a rule which is 
supposed to decide whether a referring expression 
has to be realized as a pronoun. However, this rule 
applies only to the referring expression which is the 
backward-looking center (Cb) of the current utter- 
ance. With respect o all other referring expression 
in this utterance centering is underspecified. 
Yeh & Mellish (1997) propose a set of hand- 
crafted rules for the generation of anaphora (zero 
and personal pronouns, full NPs) in Chinese. How- 
ever, the factors which appear to be important in 
their evaluation are similar to factors described 
by authors mentioned above: distance, syntactic 
constraints on zero pronouns, discourse structure, 
salience and animacy of discourse ntities. 
2.2 Our Factors 
The factors we investigate in this paper only rely on 
annotations of NPs and their co-specification rela- 
tions. We did not add any discourse structural anno- 
tation, because (1) the texts are extracts from larger 
texts which are not available to us, and (2) we have 
not yet found a labelling scheme for discourse struc- 
ture that has an inter-coder reliability comparable to 
the MUC coreference annotation scheme. 
Based on our review of the literature and relevant 
work in linguistics (for sortal class, mainly Fraurud 
(1996) and Fellbaum (1998)), we have chosen the 
nine factors listed in Table 1. Methodologically, we 
distinguish two kinds of factors: 
NP-level factors are independent from co- 
specification relations. They depend on the 
semantics of the discourse entity or on discourse 
information supplied for the NP generation algo- 
rithm by the NLG system. Typical examples are 
NP agreement by gender, number, person and case, 
the syntactic function of the NP (subject, object, 
PP adjunct, other), the sortal class of the discourse 
entity to which an NP refers, discourse structure, or 
topicality of the discourse ntities. In this paper, we 
focus on the first three factors, agreement (Agree), 
syntactic function (Syn), and sortal class (Class). 
Since we are using syntactically annotated ata 
in the Penn Treebank-II format, the syntactic func- 
tion of an NP was derived from these annotations. 
Agreement for gender, number, and person was la- 
belled by hand. Since English has almost no nomi- 
nal case morphemes, case was not annotated. 
Sortal classes provide information about the dis- 
course entity that a referring expression evokes or 
accesses. The classes, summarized in Table 2, were 
derived from EuroWordNet BaseTypes (Vossen, 
1998) and are defined extensionally on the basis 
of WordNet synsets. Their selection was motivated 
by two main considerations: all classes hould oc- 
cur in all genres, and the number of classes hould 
be as small as possible in order to avoid problems 
with sparse data. Four classes, State, Event, Action, 
and Property, cover different types of situations, 
two cover spatiotemporal characteristics of situa- 
tions (Loc/Time). The four remaining classes cover 
the two dimensions "concrete vs. abstract (Con- 
cept)" and "human (Pers) vs. non-human (PhysObj) 
vs. institutionalised groups of humans (Group)". 
Since we are only interested in the decision 
whether to employ pronouns rather than full NPs 
and less in the form of the NP itself, and since our 
methodology is based on corpus annotation, we did 
not take into account more formal semantic ate- 
gories such as kinds vs. individuals. 
Co-specification-level factors depend on infor- 
mation about sequences of referring expressions 
19 
Person 
Group 
PhysObj 
Concept 
Loc 
Time 
Event 
Action 
State 
Property 
one or more human beings 
institutionalized group of human beings 
physical object 
abstract oncept 
geographical location 
date, time span 
sth. which takes place in space and time 
sth. which is done 
state of affairs, feeling . . . .  
characteristic orattribute of sth. 
Table 2: Overview of Sortal Classes with rough 
characterizations of relevant synsets 
which co-specify with each other. Such a sequence 
consists of all referring expressions that evoke or ac- 
cess the same discourse ntity. In this paper, we use 
the following factors from the literature: distance 
to last mention (Dist and Dist4), ambiguity (Am- 
big), parallelism (Par), form of the antecedent (For- 
mAnte), and syntactic function of the antecedent 
(SynAnte). We also distinguish between discourse 
entities that are only evoked once, deadend entities, 
and entities that are accessed repeatedly. 
Parallelism is defined on the basis of syntactic 
function: a referring expression and its antecedent 
are parallel if they have the same syntactic function. 
For calculating distance and ambiguity, we seg- 
mented the texts into major clause units (MCUs). 
Each MCU consists of a major clause C plus 
any subordinate clauses and any coordinated major 
clauses whose subject is the same as that of C and 
where that subject has been elided. 
Dist provides the number of MCUs between the 
current and the last previous mention of a discourse 
entity. When an entity is evoked for the first time, 
Dist is set to "D". Dist4 is derived from Dist by as- 
signing the fixed distance 2 to all referring expres- 
sions whose antecedent is more than 1 MCU away. 
Ambiguity is defined as the number of all discourse 
entities with the same agreement features that occur 
in the previous unit or in the same unit before the 
current referring expression. 
3 Data 
Our data consisted of twelve (plus two) texts from 
the Brown corpus and the corresponding part-of- 
speech and syntactic annotations from the Penn 
Treebank (LDC, 1995). The texts were selected 
because they contained relatively little or no direct 
speech; segments of direct speech pose problems for 
both pronoun resolution and generation because of 
the change in point of view. Morpho-syntactic in- 
formation such as markables, part-of-speech labels, 
grammatical role labels, and form of referring ex- 
pression were automatically extracted from the ex- 
isting Treebank annotations. 
The texts come from four different genres: Popu- 
lar Lore (CF), Belles Lettres (CG), Fiction/General 
(CK), and Fiction/Mystery (CL). The choice of 
genres was dictated by the availability of detailed 
Treebank-II parses. Table 3 shows that the distri- 
bution of referring expressions differs considerably 
between genres. 
The texts from the two non-narrative types, CF 
and CG, contain far more discourse ntities and 
far less pronouns than the narrative genres CK and 
CL. The high number of pronouns in CK and CL 
is partly due to the fact that in one text from each 
genre, we have a first person singular narrator. CK 
patterns with CF and CG in the average number 
of MCUs; the sentences in the sample from mys- 
tery fiction are shorter and arguably less complex. 
CL also has disproportionally few deadend refer- 
ents. The high percentage of deadend referents in 
CK is due to the fact that two of the texts deal with 
relationship between two people. These four dis- 
course referents account for the 4 longest corefer- 
ence chains in CK (85, 96, 109, and 127 mentions). 
Two annotators (the authors, both trained lin- 
guists), hand-labeled the texts with co-specification 
information based on the specifications for the Mes- 
sage Understanding Coreference task (Hirschman 
& Chinchor (1997); for theoretical reasons, we did 
not mark reflexive pronouns and appositives as co- 
specifying). The MCUs were labelled by the sec- 
ond author. All referring expressions were anno- 
tated with agreement and sortal class information. 
Labels were placed using the GUI-based annotation 
tool REFEREE (DeCristofaro et al, 1999). 
The annotators developed the Sortal Class anno- 
tation guidelines on the basis of two training texts. 
Then, both labellers annotated two texts from each 
genre independently (eight in total). These eight 
texts were used to determine the reliability of the 
sortal class coding scheme. Since sortal class an- 
notation is intrinsically hard, the annotators looked 
up the senses of the head noun of each referring NP 
that was not a pronoun or a proper name in Word- 
Net. Each sense was mapped irectly to one or more 
of the ten classes given in Table 2. The annotators 
then chose the adequate sense. 
The reliability of the annotations were measured 
9111 20
Genre 
CF 
CG 
CK 
CL 
words ref. expr. entities sequ.. MCUs % pron. %deadend med. len. 
6097 1725 1223 125 304 19.59% (1.8%, 0.3%, 58.3%) 89.78% 3 
6103 1707 1290 120 269 16.17% (9.8%, 1.1%, 4%) 90.70% 2 
6020 1848 1071 113 386 36.15% (19.5%, 1.2%, 56.1%) 89.45% 2 
6018 1846 954 170 477 35.64% (14.0%, 1.5%, 53.6%) 80.09% 4 
Table 3: Relevant quantitative characteristics of the texts. Average length: 2020 words, 120 MCUs. sequ.: 
number of sequences of co-specifying referring expressions. % deadend: percentage of discourse ntities 
mentioned only once. % pronouns: percentage ofall referring expressions realized as pronouns, in brackets: 
perc. of first person singular pronouns, perc. of second person singular pronouns, perc. of third person 
singular masculine and feminine pronouns, reed. len.: median length of sequences ofco-specifying referring 
expressions 
with Cohen's n (Cohen, 1960; Carletta, 1996). Co- 
hen (1960) shows that a n between 0.68 and 0.80 al- 
lows tentative conclusions, while e; > 0.80 indicates 
reliable annotations. For genres CF (n = 0.83), CK 
(n = 0.84) and CL (n = 0.83), the sortal class an- 
notations were indeed reliable, but not for genre CG 
(n = 0.63). Nevertheless, overall, the sortal class 
annotations were reliable (n ---- 0.8). Problems are 
mainly due to the abstract classes Concept, Action, 
Event, State, and Property. Abstract head nouns 
sometimes have several senses that fit the context 
almost equally well, but that lead to different sor- 
tal classes. Another problem is metaphorical usage. 
This explains the bad results for CG, which features 
many abstract discourse ntities. 
4 Towards a Probabilistic 
Genre- Independent  Model  
In this section, we investigate owhat extent the fac- 
tors proposed in section 2.2 influence the decision to 
prominalize. For the purpose of the statistical naly- 
sis, pronominalization is modelled by a feature Pro. 
For a given referring expression, that feature has the 
value "P" if the referring expression is a personal 
or a possessive pronoun, else "N". We model this 
variable with a binomial distribution. I 
4.1 How do the Factors Affect 
Pronominalization? 
First, we examine for all nine factors if there is a 
statistical ssociation between these factors and Pro. 
Standard non-parametric tests how a strong associ- 
ation between all nine factors and Pro. 2 This holds 
~For all statistical calculations and for the logistic regres- 
sion analyses reported below, we used R (Ihaka & Gentleman, 
1996). 
2We used the KruskaI-Wallis test for the ordinal Ambig 
variable and the X2-test for the other, nominal, variables. Since 
first mentions and deadends are coded by the character "D" in 
both for all referring expressions and for those that 
occur in sequences of co-specifying referring ex- 
pressions. All of the tests were significant at the 
p < 0.001-level, with the exception of Par: for ex- 
pressions that are part of co-specification sequences 
the effect of that factor is not significant. 
In the next analysis tep, we determine which of 
the feature values are associated isproportionally 
often with pronouns, and which values tend to be 
associated with full NPs. More specifically, we test 
for each feature-value pair if the pronominalization 
probability is significantly higher or lower than that 
computed over (a) the complete data set, (b) all re- 
ferring expressions in sequences of co-specifying 
referring expressions, (c) all third person referring 
expressions in sequences. Almost all feature values 
show highly significant effects for (a) and (b), but 
some of these effects vanish in condition (c). Be- 
low, we report on associations which are significant 
at p < 0.001 under all three conditions. 
Unsurprisingly, there is a strong effect of agree- 
ment values: NPs referring to the first and second 
person are always pronominalized, and third person 
masculine or feminine NPs, which can refer to per- 
sons, are pronominalized more frequently than third 
person neuter and third person plural. Pronouns are 
strongly preferred if the distance to the antecedent is 
0 or 1 MCUs. Referring expressions are more likely 
to be pronominalized in subject position than as a 
PP adjunct, and referring expressions with adjuncts 
as antecedents are also pronominalized less often 
than those with antecedents in subject or object po- 
sition. There is a clear preference for pronouns as 
possessive determiners, and referring expressions 
that co-specify with an antecedent possessive pro- 
noun are highly likely to be pronominalised. We 
both Dist and Dist4, both are treated as a categorical variable 
by R. For more on these tests, see (Agresti, 1990). 
"1,1 21
also notice strong genre-independent ffects of par- 
allelism. Although at first glance, Ambig appears to 
have a significant effect as well, (median ambiguity 
for nouns is 3, median ambiguity for pronouns 0), 
closer inspection reveals that this is mainly due to 
first and second person and third person masculine 
and feminine pronouns. 
The sortal classes show a number of interest- 
ing patterns (cf. Table 4). Not only do the classes 
differ in the percentage of deadend entities, there 
are also marked differences in pronominalizabil- 
ity. There appear to be three groups of sortal 
classes: Person/Group, with the lowest rate of dead- 
end entities and the highest percentage of pro- 
nouns - not only due to the first and second per- 
son personal pronouns- ,  Location/PhysObj, with 
roughly two thirds of all entities not in sequences 
and a significantly lower pronominalization rate, 
and Concept/Action/Event/Property/State/Concept, 
with over 80% deadend entities. Within this group, 
Action, Event, and Concept are pronominalized 
more frequently than State and Property. Time is the 
least frequently pronominalized class. An impor- 
tant reason for the difference between Loc and Time 
might be that Times are almost always referred back 
to by temporal adverbs, while locations, especially 
towns and countries, can also be accessed via third 
person neuter personal pronouns. 
Interactions between the factors and genre were 
examined by an analysis of deviance run on a fit- 
ted logistic regression model; significance was cal- 
culated using the F-test. All factors except for Par 
show strong (p < 0.001) interactions with Genre. 
In other words, the influence of all factors but paral- 
lelism on pronominalization is mediated by Genre. 
There are two main reasons for this effect: first, 
some genres contain far more first and second per- 
son personal pronouns, which adds to the weight of 
Agree, and second, texts which are about persons 
and the actions of persons, such as the texts in CK 
and CL, tend to use more pronouns than texts which 
are mainly argumentative or expository. 
4.2 Which Factors are Important? 
To separate the important from the unimportant fac- 
tors, many researchers use decision and regression 
trees, mostly the binary CART variant (Breiman 
et al, 1984). We use a different kind of model here, 
logistic regression, which is especially well suited 
for categorical data analysis (cf. eg. Agresti (1990) 
or Kessler et al (1997)). In this model, the value 
of the binary target variable is predicted by a lin- 
ear combination of the predictor variables. Vari- 
able weights indicate the importance of a variable 
for classification: the higher the absolute value of 
the weight, the more important i is. 
Logistic regression models are not only evaluated 
by their performance on training and test data. We 
could easily construct a perfect model of any train- 
ing data set with n variables, where n is the size of 
the data set. But we need models that are small, yet 
predict the target values well. A suitable criterion 
is the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC, Akaike 
(1974)), which punishes both models that do not fit 
the data well and models that have too many pa- 
rameters. The quality of a factor is judged by the 
amount of variation in the target variable that it ex- 
plains. Note that increased prediction accuracy does 
not necessarily mean an increase in the amount of 
variation explained. As the model itself is a contin- 
uous approximation of the categorical distinctions 
to be modelled, it may occur that the numerical vari- 
ation in the predictions decreases, but that this de- 
crease is lost when re-translating numerical predic- 
tions into categorical ones. 
The factors for our model were selected based on 
the following procedure: We start with a model that 
always predicts the most frequent class. We then de- 
termine which factor provides the greatest reduction 
in the AIC, add that factor to the model and retrain. 
This step is repeated until all factors have been used 
or adding another factor does not yield any signifi- 
cant improvements anymore. 3 
This procedure invariably yields the sequence 
Dist4, Agree, Class, FormAnte, Syn, SynAnte, Am- 
big, Par, both when training models on the complete 
data set and when training on a single genre. Inspec- 
tion of the AIC values suggests that parallelism is 
the least important factor, and does not improve the 
AIC significantly. Therefore, we will discard it from 
the outset. All other factors are maintained in the 
initial full model. This model is purely additive; it 
does not include interactions between factors. This 
approach allows us to filter out factors which only 
mediate the influence of other factors, but do not ex- 
ert any significant influence of their own. Note that 
this probabilistic model only provides a numerical 
description of how its factors affect pronominaliza- 
tion in our corpus. As such, it is not equivalent to 
a theoretical model, but rather provides data for fur- 
3We excluded Dist from this stepwise procedure, since the 
relevant information is covered already by Dist4, which fur- 
thermore has much fewer values. 
22
Class 
%deadend 
% pronouns 
% pron.(sequences) 
Act Concept Event Group Loc Pers PhysObj Prop State Time 
84.1 80.0 88.0 46.1 63.3 17.3 65.5 88.5 87.8 92.9 
6.2 8,5 6.0 28.4 5.7 63.4 10.2 2.5 3.2 0.3 
32.5 29.6 33.3 51.6 15.4 73.8 27.2 21.4 23,7 4.5 
Table 4: Results for Sortal Classes. % deadend: percentage of deadend entities; % pronouns: percent 
pronominalised, % pron. (sequences: percent pronominalised relative to all occurrences in co-specification 
sequences 
% correct 
AIC 
% variation 
CF CG CK CL all 
97.1 93.5 93.6 91.5 
324.7 654.8 786.1 904.0 
83.0 65.4 70.1 65.4 
93.1 
2685.8 
68.7 
Table 5: Quality of models fitted to each of the 
genre-specific corpora (CF, CG, CK, CL) and the 
complete data set (all). % correct: correctly pre- 
dicted pronominalization decition, AIC: Akaike In- 
formation Criterion, % variation: percentage of 
original variation in the data (as measured by de- 
viance) accounted for by the model 
ther theoretical interpretation. 
Results of a first evaluation of the full model 
are summarized in Table 5. The model can ex- 
plain more than two thirds of the variation in the 
complete data set and can predict pronominalization 
quite well on the data it was fitted on. The mat- 
ter becomes more interesting when we examine the 
genre-specific results. Although overall prediction 
performance r mains table, the model is obviously 
suited better to some genres than to others. The best 
results are obtained on CF, the worst on CL (mys- 
tery fiction). In the CL texts, MCUs are short, a 
third of all referring expressions are pronouns, there 
is no first person singular narrator, and most para- 
graphs which mention persons are about the inter- 
action between two persons. 
The Relative Importance of Factors. All val- 
ues of Dist4 have very strong weights in all mod- 
els; this is clearly the most important factor. The 
same goes for Agree, where the first and second per- 
son are strong signs of pronominalization, and, to a 
lesser degree, masculine and feminine third person 
singular. The most important distinction provided 
by Class appears to be that between Persons, non- 
Persons, and Times. This holds as well when the 
model is only trained on third person referring ex- 
pressions. For singular referring expressions, Per- 
sonhood information is reflected in gender, but not 
for plural referring expressions. Another important 
influence is the form of the antecedent. The syn- 
tactic function of the referring expression and of its 
antecedent are less important, as is ambiguity. 
In order to examine the importance of the fac- 
tors in more detail, we refitted the models on the 
complete data set while omitting one or more of the 
three central features Dist4, Agree, and Class. The 
results are summarized in Table 6. The most inter- 
esting finding is that even if we exclude all three 
factors, prediction accuracy only drops by 3.2%. 
This means that the remaining 4 factors also con- 
tain most of the relevant information, but that this 
information is coded more "efficiently", so to speak, 
in the first three. Speaking of these factors, ques- 
tions concerning the effect of sortal class remains. 
Remarkably enough, when sortal class is omitted, 
accuracy increases by 0.7%. The increase in A1C 
can be explained by a decrease in the amount of 
explained variation. A third result is that informa- 
tion about the form of the antecedent can substitute 
for distance information, if that information is miss- 
ing. Both variables code the crucial distinctions be- 
tween expressions that evoke entities and those that 
access evoked entities. Furthermore, a pronominal 
antecedent tends to occur at a distance of less than 2 
MCUs. The contribution of syntactic function re- 
mains stable and significant, albeit comparatively 
unimportant. 
Predictive Power: To evaluate the predictive 
power of the models computed so far, we determine 
the percentage of correctly predicted pronouns and 
NPs. The performance of the trained models was 
compared to two very simple algorithms: 
Algorithm A: Always choose the most frequent 
option (i.e. noun). 
Algorithm B: If the antecedent is in the same 
MCU, or if it is in the previous MCU and there 
is no ambiguity, choose a pronoun; else choose 
a noun. 
Table 7 summarises the results of the compari- 
son. To determine the overall predictive power of 
23 
excluded 
none 
Class 
Agree 
Dist4 
Dist4 + Class 
Dist4 + Agree 
Agree + Class 
Dist4 + Agree + Class 
AIC 
fit 
%correct 
2686 92.6 
2785 93.3 
2984 92.6 
3346 90.2 
3443 90.2 
3597 89.6 
3098 92.6 
3739 89.4 
~ explained variation 
Dist4 Agree Class PForm Syn PSyn Ambig 
54.4 21.1 5.7 3.8 2.3 0.5 l.l 
54.4 21.1 n.a. 4.7 2.8 0.5 1.1 
54.4 n.a. 14.3 6.2 2.7 0.6 1.1 
n.a. 35.8 6.1 32 3 0.8 0.I 
n.a. 35.8 n.a. 33.7 3.4 0.8 0.1 
n.a. n.a. 31.4 35.4 3.1 0.8 0.2 
54.4 n.a. n.a. 13.11 3.5 0.5 3.6 
n.a. n.a. n.a. 52.62 4 0.7 1.7 
Table 6: Effect of leaving out any one of the three most important factors on model fit. italics: significance 
is p < 0.0.5, for all other factors, p < 0.005 or better. 
test data set 
CF CG CK CL all 
Alg. A 80.4 83.8 63.8 65.4 72.8 
Alg. B 91.1 93.0 88.6 84.7 89.4 
Model 96.5 92.2 91.8 90.9 92.6 + 0.02 
w/oClass 96.8 92.4 91.7 90.7 93.0+ 0.01 
pothesize that the decrease in performance is mainly 
due to the model itself, not to the training data. The 
results presented in both Table 5 and 7 show that 
although the model we have found is not quite as 
genre-independent as we would want it to be, it pro- 
vides a reasonable fit to all the genres we examined. 
Table 7: Results of algorithms vs. models on test 
data in % correct prediction if referring expression 
is to be pronominalised or not. Setup for genres: 
model is trained on three genres, tested on the re- 
maining one 
the model, we used 10-fold cross-validation. Al- 
gorithm A always fares worst, while algorithm B, 
which is based mainly on distance, the strongest fac- 
tor in the model, performs quite well. Its overall 
performance is 3.2% below that of  the full model, 
and 3.6% below that of the full model without sor- 
tal class information. It even outperforms the mod- 
els on CG, which has the lowest percentage of Per- 
sons (12.9% vs. 35% for CF and 43.4% and 43.5% 
for CL and CK). For all other genres, the statistical 
models outperform the simple heuristics. Excluding 
sortal class information can boost prediction perfor- 
mance on unseen data by as much as 0.4% for the 
complete corpus. The apparent contradiction be- 
tween this finding and the results reported in the 
previous section can be explained if we consider 
that not only were some sortal classes comparatively 
rare in the data (Property, Event), but that our sortal 
class definition may still be too fine-grained. 
We evaluated the genre-independence of the 
model by training on three genres and testing on the 
fourth. The results show that the model fares quite 
well for genre CF, which is also the genre where the 
overall fit was best (see Table 5). We therefore hy- 
5 Future  Work  
We have described a probabilistic model of pronom- 
inalization that is able to correctly predict 93% of 
all pronouns in a corpus that consists of twelve texts 
from four different genres. Since the model was de- 
rived from a limited corpus and a limited number of 
genres, we cannot guarantee that our results are ap- 
plicable to all texts without modifications. But since 
its performance on our sample is consistently above 
90% correct, we are reasonably confident hat our 
main findings will hold for a wide variety of texts 
and text types. In particular, we isolated several fac- 
tors which are robust predictors of pronominaliza- 
tion across genres: distance from last mention and 
agreement, and to a certain extent he form of the 
antecedent, which appears to be a good substitute if
the other two factors are not available. All three fea- 
tures can be computed on the basis of a chunk parse, 
a rough morphosyntactic analysis of the resulting 
NPs, and co-specification sequences. In computa- 
tional terms, they are comparatively cheap. Large 
corpora can be annotated relatively quickly with this 
information, which can then be used for statistical 
pronoun generation. 
The comparatively expensive sortai class anno- 
tation, on the other hand, was not very important 
in the final model; in fact, prediction accuracy de- 
creased when sortal class was included. There 
are two main reasons for this: first, the proposed 
sortal class annotation scheme needs further work, 
24 
second, the relationship between sortal class and 
pronominalization may well be too intricate to be 
modelled by the factor Class alone. 
We set out to find a genre-independent model 
of pronominalization. The model we found per- 
forms quite well, but genre still considerably affects 
its performance. Where does the remaining, unex- 
plained variation come from? The variation might 
be just that - stylistic variation. It might stem from 
one of the traditional factors that we did not take 
into account here, such as thematic role. However, 
we suspect that the crucial factor at play here is dis- 
course structure (McCoy & Strube, 1999). 
Acknowledgements Work on this paper was be- 
gun while Michael Strube was a postdoctoral fellow 
at the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, 
University of Pennsylvania, nd Maria Wolters vis- 
ited the Institute for a week in summer 1999. We 
would like to thank Kathleen McCoy, Jonathan De- 
Cristofaro, and the three anonymous reviewers for 
their comments on earlier stages of this work. 
References 
Agresti, Alan (1990). Categorical Data Analysis. New 
York, N.Y.: Wiley. 
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at statistical model 
identification. 1EEE Transactions Automatic Control, 
19:716-722. 
Azzam, Saliha, Kevin Humphreys & Robert Gaizauskas 
(1998). Evaluating a focus-based approach to 
anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the 17 th In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics 
and 36 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, Montr6al, Qu6bec, Canada, 
10--14 August 1998, pp. 74-78. 
Breiman, Leo, Jerome H. Friedman, Charles J. Stone & 
R.A. Olshen (1984). Classification and Regression 
Trees. Belmont, Cal.: Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole. 
Cardie, Claire & Kiri Wagstaff (1999). Noun phrase 
coreference as clustering. In Proceedings of the 1999 
SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora, Col- 
lege Park, Md., 21-22 June 1999, pp. 82-89. 
Carletta, Jean (1996). Assessing agreement on classifi- 
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 22(2):249-254. 
Cohen, Jacob (1960). A coefficient of agreement for 
nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Mea- 
surement, 20:37--46. 
Dale, Robert (1992). Generating Referring Expressions: 
Constructing Descriptions in a Domain of Objects 
and Processes. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
DeCristofaro, Jonathan, Michael Strube & Kathleen E 
McCoy (1999). Building a tool for annotating ref- 
erence in discourse. In ACL '99 Workshop on the 
Relationship between Discourse~Dialogue Structure 
and Reference, University of Maryland, Maryland, 21 
June, 1999, pp. 54-62. 
Fellbaum, Christiane (Ed.) (1998). WordNet: An Elec- 
tronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press. 
Fraurud, Kari (1996). Cognitive ontology and NP form. 
In T. Fretheim & J. Gundel (Eds.), Reference and 
Referent Accessibility, pp. 65-87. Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: Benjamins. 
Ge, Niyu, John Hale & Eugene Charniak (1998). A sta- 
tistical approach to anaphora resolution. In Proceed- 
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Very Large Corpora, 
Montr6al, Canada, pp. 161-170. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Aravind K. Joshi & Scott Weinstein 
(1995). Centering: A framework for modeling the lo- 
cal coherence of discourse. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 21 (2):203-225. 
Hirschman, Lynette & Nancy Chinchor (1997). MUC- 
7 Coreference Task Definition, http://www. 
muc. sais.  com/proceed ings / .  
Ihaka, Ross & Ross Gentleman (1996). R: A language 
for data analysis and graphics. Journal of Computa- 
tional and Graphical Statistics, 5:299-314. 
Kessler, Brett, Geoffrey Nunberg & Hinrich Schiitze 
(1997). Automatic detection of text genre. In Proceed- 
ings of the 35 th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics and of the 8 th Confer- 
ence of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Madrid, Spain, 7-12 July 
1997, pp. 32-38. 
LDC (1995). Penn Treebank-H. Linguistic Data Consor- 
tium. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Penn. 
McCoy, Kathleen F. & Michael Strube (1999). Gener- 
ating anaphoric expressions: Pronoun or definite de- 
scription? In ACL '99 Workshop on the Relationship 
between Discourse/Dialogue Structure and Reference, 
University of Maryland, Maryland, 21 June, 1999, pp. 
63-71. 
Poesio, Massimo, Renate Henschel, Janet Hitzeman & 
Rodger Kibble (1999). Statistical NP generation: A
first report. In R. Kibble & K. van Deemter (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the Workshop on The Generation of 
Nominal Expressions, 11th European Summer School 
on Logic, Language, and Information, Utrecht, 9-13 
August 1999. 
Sidner, Candace L. (1983). Focusing in the compre- 
hension of definite anaphora. In M. Brady & R.C. 
Berwick (Eds.), Computational Models of Discourse, 
pp. 267-330. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Vossen, Piek (Ed.) (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual 
Database with Lexical Semantic Networks. Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Kluwer. 
Yeh, Ching-Long & Chris Mellish (1997). An empiri- 
cal study on the generation of anaphora in Chinese. 
Computational Linguistics, 23( ! ): 169-190. 
25
