Minimizing Word Error Rate in 
Textual Summaries of Spoken Language 
Klaus Zechner and A lex Waibel 
Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
(zechner ,waibel}@cs. cmu. edu 
Abstract 
Automatic generation of text summaries for spoken 
language faces the problem of containing incorrect 
words and passages due to speech recognition er- 
rors. This paper describes comparative experiments 
where passages with higher speech recognizer confi- 
dence scores are favored in the ranking process. Re- 
sults show that a relative word error rate reduction 
of over 10% can be achieved while at the same time 
the accuracy of the summary improves markedly. 
1 Introduction 
The amount of audio data on-line has been grow- 
ing rapidly in recent years, and so methods for ef- 
ficiently indexing and retrieving non-textual infor- 
mation have become increasingly important (see, 
e.g., the TREC-7 branch for "Spoken Document Re- 
trieval" (Garofolo et al, 1999)). 
One way of compressing audio information is the  
automatic creation of textual summaries which can 
be skimmed much faster and stored much more effi- 
ciently than the audio itself. There has been plenty 
of research in the area of summarizing written lan- 
guage (see (Mani and Maybury, 1999) for a compre- 
hensive overview). So far, however, very little atten- 
tion has been given to the question how to create 
and evaluate a summary of spoken audio based on 
automatically generated transcripts from a speech 
recognizer. One fundamental problem with those 
summaries i that they contain incorrectly recog- 
nized words, i.e., the original text is to some extent 
"distorted". 
Several research groups have developed interac- 
tive "browsing" tools, where audio (and possibly 
video) can be accessed together with various types 
of textual information (transcripts, ummaries) via a 
graphical user interface (Waibel et al, 1998; Valenza 
et al, 1999; Hirschberg et al, 1999). With these 
tools, the problem of misrecognitions is alleviated 
in the sense that the user can always easily listen 
to the audio recording corresponding to a passage 
in a textual summary. In some instances, however, 
this approach may not be feasible or too expensive 
to pursue, and a short, stand-alone textual repre- 
sentation of the spoken audio may be preferred or 
even required. This paper addresses in particular 
this latter case and (a) explores means of making 
textual summaries less distorted (i.e., reducing their 
word error rate (WElt)), and (b) assesses how the 
accuracy of the summaries changes when methods 
for word error rate reduction ar e applied. Summary 
accuracy will be a function of how much relevant 
information is present in the sun'mary. 
Our results from experiments on four television 
shows with multiple speakers how that it is possi- 
ble to reduce word error rate while at the same time 
also improving the accuracy of the summary. Fur- 
thermore, this paper presents a novel method for 
evaluation of textual summaries from spoken lan- 
guage data. . . . .  
The paper is organized as follows: In the next : 
section, we review related work on spoken language 
summarization. In section 3 we describe our sum: 
marizer. Next, we present and discuss our proposal 
for an audio summarization evaluation metric (sec- 
tion 4). In section 5 we describe the Corpus that we 
use for our experiments and how i t  was annotated. 
Sections 6 and 7 describe xperixnents on both hu .... 
man and machine generated transcripts of the audio 
data. Finally, we discuss and summarize the results 
in sections 8 and 9. 
2 Related work ? " 
(Waibel et al, 1998) report results of their sum- 
marization system on automatically transcribed 
SWITCHBOARD data (Godfrey et al, 1992), the word 
error rate being about 30%. In a question-answer 
test with summaries offive dialogues, ubjects could 
identify most of the key concepts using a summary 
size of only five turns. However, the results vary 
widely across five different dialogues tested in this 
experiment (between 20% and 90% accuracy). 
(Valenza et al, 1999) went one step further and 
report that they were able to reduce the word error 
rate in summaries (as opposed to full texts) by using 
speech recognizer confidence scores. They combined 
inverse frequency weights with confidence scores for 
each recognized word. Using summaries composed of 
186 
one 30-gram per minute (approximately 15% length 
of the full text), the WER dropped from 25% for 
the full text to 10% for these summaries. They also 
conducted a qualitative study where human subjects 
were given summaries of n-grams of different length 
and also summaries with speaker utterances as min- 
imal units, either giving a high weight o the inverse 
frequency scores or to the confidence scores. The 
utterance summaries were considered best, followed 
closely by 30-gram summaries, both using high con- 
fidence score weights. This suggests that not only 
does the WER drop by extracting passages that are 
more likely to be correctly recognized but also do 
summaries seem to be "better" which are generated 
that way. 
While the results of (Valenza et al, 1999) are in- 
dicative for their approach, we want to investigate 
the benefits of using speech recognizer confidence 
scores in more detail and particularly find out about 
the trade-off between WER and summarization ac- 
curacy when we vary the influence of the confidence 
scores. To our knowledge, this paper addresses this 
trade-off for the first time in a clear, numerically de- 
scribable way. To be able to obtain numerical values 
for summary accuracy, we had our corpus annotated 
for relevance (section 5) and devised an evaluation 
scheme that allows the calculation of summary ac- 
curacy for both human and machine generated tran- 
scripts (section 4). 
3 Summar izat ion  sys tem 
Prior to summarizing, the input text is cleaned up 
for disfluencies, such as hesitations, filled pauses, 
and repetitions. I In the context of multi-topical 
recordings we use for our experiments, summaries 
are generated for each topical segment separately. 
The segment boundaries were determined to be at 
those places where the majority Cat least half) of the 
human annotators agreed (see section 5). Intercoder 
agreement for topical boundaries i fairly good (and 
higher than the agreement on relevant words or pas- 
sages).2 
To determine the content of the summaries, we 
use a "maximal marginal relevance" (MMR) based 
summarizer with speaker turns as minimal units (cf. 
(Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998)). 
The MMR formula is given in equation 1. It gen- 
erates a list of turns ranked by their relevance and 
states that the next turn to be put in this ranked 
list will be taken from the turns which were not yet 
ranked (tar) and has the following properties: it is 
(a) maximally similar to a "query" and (b) max- 
imally dissimilar to the turns which were already 
1 More details about this component and other parts of the 
summarization system can be found in (Zechner and Walbei, 
20oo). 
2For details ee (Zechner, 2000).  
ranked (tr). As "query" we use a frequency vector 
for all content words within a topical segment. The 
A-parameter (0.0 < A < 1.0) is used to trade off the 
influence of C a) vs. (b). 
Both similarity metrics (sire1, sire2) are inner 
vector products of (_stemmed) term frequencies (see 
equations 2 to 4); tft is a vector of stem frequencies 
in a turn; f ,  are in-segment frequencies of a stem; 
f ,  rna= are maximal segment frequencies of any stem 
in the topical segment, sirnl can be normalized or 
not. The formulae for tfa (equation 4) are inspired 
from Cornell's SMART system (Salton, 1971); we 
will call these parameters "smax', "log", and ?'freq", 
respectively. 
neztturn = argmax(Asima(tn,j,query) 
tnr,~ 
- (1 - A) maxsim2 (tnrd, tr,t~)) (1) 
tr ,  k 
siml : tf~tft or \[tf=tit~ (2) 
I / I  -I 
tftztft~ 
I I I  I 
tfi,, = 0.5 + 0.5 /~" or 1 + logfi., 
or ~,, (4) 
Using the MMR algorithm, we obtain a list of 
ranked turns for each topical segment. We com- 
pute this both for human and machine generated 
transcripts of the audio files ("reference text" vs. 
"hypothesis text") .3 
4 Eva luat ion  metr i cs  
The challenge of devising a meaningful evaluation 
metric for the task of audio summarization is that 
it has to be applicable to both the reference (hu- 
man transcript) and the hypothesis transcripts (au- 
tomatic speech recognizer (ASR) transcripts). We 
want to be able to assess the quality of the sum- 
mary with respect to the relevance markings of the 
human annotators (see section 5), as well as to re- 
late this "summary accuracy" to the word error rate 
present in the ASR transcripts. 
The approach we take is to align the words in the 
summary with the words in the reference transcript 
(wa). For ASR transcripts, word substitutions are 
aligned with their "true original" and word inser- 
tions are aligned with a NIL dummy. That way, 
3The human reference is cons idered  to be an "optimal" or 
"ideal" rendering of the words which were actually said in a 
conversation. Human transcription errors do occur, but are 
marginal and hence ignored in the context of this paper. 
187 
we can determine for each individual word wa in 
the summary (a) whether it occurs in a "relevant 
phrase" and (b) whether it is correctly recognized 
or a recognition error (for ASR transcripts). 
We define word error rate as WER = (S + 
I + D) / (S  + I + C) (I=insertion, D=deletion, 
S=substitution, C=correct). 
Each word's relevance score r is the average num- 
ber it occurs in the human annotators' relevant 
phrases (0.0 < r <_. 1.0). Relevance scores for in- 
sertions and substitutions are always 0.0. 
We choose to define the summary accuracy sa 
("relevance") as the sum of relevance scores of all 
n aligned words ~--~? r~, divided by the maximum 
achievable relevance score with the same number of 
n words somewhere in the text (i.e., 0.0 < sa <_ 1.0). 
Word deletions obviously do not show up in the sum- 
mary, but are accounted for, as well, to make the 
WER computation sound. 
To better illustrate how these metrics work, we 
demonstrate them on a simplified example of only 
two speaker turns (Figure 1). The first line repre- 
sents the relevance score r for each word (the number 
this word was within a "relevant phrase" divided by 
the number of annotators for that text). In turn 1, 
"this is to illustrate" was only marked relevant by 
two annotators, whereas "the idea" by 3 out of 4 
annotators. The second line provides the reference 
transcript, the third line the ASB. transcript. Line 
4 gives the type of word error, and line 5 the con- 
fidence score of the speech recognizer (between 0.0 
and 1.0, 1.0 meaning maximal confidence). 
Now let us assume that turn 2 shows up in the 
summary. The scores are computed as follows: 
? When summarizing the reference: Here, the 
word error rate is trivially 0.0; the summary 
accuracy sa is the sum of all relevance scores 
(-6.0) divided by the maximal achievable score 
with the same number of words (n = 7). l"hrn 2 
has 6 words which were marked relevant by all 
coders (r -- 1.0), turn l 's highest score is r = 
0.75. Therefore: sa2 = 6.0/(6.0 + 0.75) = 0.89. 
This is higher than the summary accuracy for 
turn 1: sal = 3.5/6.0 = 0.58(n = 6). 
? When summarizing the ASR transcript ("hy- 
pothesis"): Selecting turn 2 will give sa2 = 
0.02.25 = 0.0 (n = 5) .  For turn 1, sal = 
2.25/(0.75 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0) = 1.0 
(n = 6; the sum in the denominator can only use 
relevance scores based on the aligned words wa 
which were correctly recognized, therefore the 
1.0-scores in turn 2 cannot be used). Turn 2 has 
WER=6\ [5=l .2 ,  turn 1 has WER=3/6=0.5 .  
Obviously, when summarizing the ASB. output, we 
would rather have turn 1 showing up in the summary 
than turn 2, because turn 2 is completely off from 
the truth and turn 1 only partially. The fact that 
turn 2 was considered to be more relevant by human 
coders cannot, in our opinion, be used to favor its 
inclusion in the summary. An exception would be 
a situation where the user has immediate access to 
the audio as well and is able to listen to selected 
passages from the summary (see section 1). In our 
case, where we focus on text-only summaries to be 
used stand-alone, we have to minimize their word 
error rate. 
Given that, turn 1 has to be favored over turn 2, 
both because of its lower WEB, and because of its 
higher accuracy with respect o the relevance anno- 
tations. 
In order to increase the likelihood that turns 
with lower WEB, are selected over turns with higher 
WEB., we make use of the speech recognizer's con- 
fidence scores which are attached to every word hy- 
pothesis and can be viewed as probabilities: they are 
in \[0.0,1.0\], high values reflecting a high confidence 
in the correctness of the respective word. 4 Follow- 
ing (Valenza et al, 1999) we conjecture that we can 
use these confidence scores to increase the probabil- 
ity of passages with lower WEB, to show up in the 
summary. To test how far this assumption is justi- 
fied, we correlated the WEB. with various metrics of 
confidence scores: (i) sum of scores, (ii) average of 
scores, (iii) number of scores above a threshold, (iv) 
the latter normalized by the number of all scores, 
and (v) the geometric mean of scores. Table 1 shows 
the correlation coefficients (Pearson r) for the four 
ASK transcripts we used in our experiments ( ee sec- 
tion 5). To prevent he influence of large differences 
in turn length, those computations were done for 
subsequent "buckets" of 50 words each. 
Since in most cases we achieve the highest corre- 
lation coefficient (absolute value) for method (iv = 
avgth) (average number of words whose confidence 
score is greater than a threshold of 0.95), we apply 
this metric to the computation ofturn-query similar- 
ities (sire1 in equation 1). We use the two following 
formulae to adjust the similarity,scores. (We shall 
call these adjustments MULT and EXP in the follow- 
ins.) 
\[mutt\] sirn~ = Siml (1 + aavgth) (5) 
\[ezp\] sim'l' = s imlavgth ~ (6) 
For both equations it holds that if a = 0.0, the 
scores don't change, whereas if c~ > 0.0, we en- 
hance the weights of turns with many high confi- 
dence scores ("boosting") and hence increase their 
likelihood of showing up earlier in the summary. 5 
Even though our evaluation method looks like it 
would "guarantee" an increase in summary accu- 
4The speech recognizer computes  these scores based on the 
acoustic stability of words during lattice rescoring. 
5For EXP, we define 0 ? ---- O. 
188 
TURN 
re1: 
REF: 
HYP: 
e r r :  
con:  
TURN 
re l  : 
REF: 
HYP: 
err: 
con:  
1: 
0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.75 0.75 *** 
this is to illustrate the idea *** 
this is to  ILLUMINATE *** idea 
C C C S D C I 
1 1 1 0 .9  - 0 .8  0 .8  
2: 
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 
and here we have very  re levant  in fo rmat ion  
and HE ** BEHAVES **** IRREVERENT FORMATION 
C S D S D S S 
0.8  0 .7  - 0 .8  - 0 .8  0 .9  
Figure 1: Simplified example of two turns (for score computation) 
BACK 
(i} sum -0.43 
(ii) average -0.53 
Off) scores > 0.95 -0.55 
( iv) normal i zed  (ii i) -0.58 
(v) geometric mean -0.53 
19CENT BUCHANAN 
-0.51 -0.12 
-0.52 -0.43 
-0.48 -0.35 
-0.48 -0.48 
-0.53 -0.42 
GRAY 
-0.03 
-0.42 
-0.25 
-0.44 
-0.38 
Table 1: Pearson r correlation between WER and confidence scores 
racy when the word error rate is reduced, this is 
not necessarily the case. For example, it could turn 
out that while we can reduce WER by "boosting" 
passages with higher confidence scores, those pas- 
sages might have (much) fewer words marked rele- 
vant than those being present in the summary with- ~ 
out boosting. This way, it would be conceivable to 
create low word error summaries that contain also 
very few relevant pieces of information. However, as 
we will see later, WER reduction goes hand in hand 
with an increase of summary accuracy. 
5 Data  character i s t i cs  and  
annotat ion  
Table 2 describes the main features of the corpus we 
used for our experiments: we selected four audio ex- 
cerpts from four television shows, together with hu- 
man generated textual transcripts. All these shows 
are conversations between multiple speakers. The 
audio was sampled at 16kHz and then also automat- 
ically transcribed using a gender independent, vo- 
cal tract length normalized, large vocabulary speech 
recognizer which was trained on about 80 hours of 
Broadcast News data (Yu et al, 1999). The average 
word error rates for our 4 recordings ranged from 
25% to 50%. 
The reference transcripts of the four recordings 
were given to six human annotators who had to seg- 
ment them into topically coherent regions and to de- 
cide on the "most relevant phrases" to be included 
in a summary for each topical region. Those phrases 
usually do not coincide exactly with speaker turns 
and the annotators were encouraged to mark sec- 
tions of text freely such that they would form mean- 
ingful, concise, and informative phrases. Three an- ? 
notators could listen to the audio while annotat- 
ing the corpus, the other three only had the hu- 
man generated transcripts available. 2 of the 6 an- 
notators only finished the NewsHour data, so we 
have the opinion of 4 annotators for the recordings 
BUCHANAN and GRAY and of 6 annotators for BACK 
and 19CENT. 
6 Exper iments  on  human generated  
t ranscr ip ts  
We created summaries of the reference transcripts 
using different parameters for the MMR computa- 
tion: For tf  we used "freq", "log", and "smax"; fur- 
ther, we did or did not normalize these weights; fi- 
nally, we varied the MMR-A from 0.85 to 1.0. Sum- 
marization accuracy was determined at 5%, 10%, 
15%, 20%, and 25% of the text length of each sum- 
marized topical segment and then averaged over all 
sample points in all segments. Since these were 
word-based lengths, words were added incrementally 
to the summary in the order of the turns ranked via 
MMR; turns were cut off when the length limit was 
reached. As explained in the example in section 4, 
the accuracy score is defined as the fraction of the 
sum of all individual word relevance scores (as de- 
189 
TV show 
number of speakers 
speaker turns 
words in transcript 
length in minutes 
topical segments 
word error rate (in %) 
BACK 19CENT BUCHANAN GR.AY 
NewsHour 
5 
24 
1216 
8.6 
4 
25.6 
NewsHour 
2 
27 
1281 
8.6 
4 
32.6 
Crossfire 
4 
69 
3252 
17.3 
4 
32.5 
Table 2: Characteristics of the corpus 
Crossfire 
5 
7O 
2205 
11.9 
3 
49.8 
i 119CE T I BUCH*NAN I O A* I av0*a'? I 0,  
0.533 0.596 0.513 0.443 0.522 
Table 3: Reference summarization accuracy of MMR o~ 
summaries 
termined by human annotators) over the maximum 
possible score given the current number of words in 
the summary. 
Table 3 shows the summary accuracy results for 
the best parameter setting (if=log, no normaliza- 
tion) ~. 
7 Exper iments  on automat ica l ly  
generated  t ranscr ip ts  
Using the same summarizer as before, we now cre- 
ated summaries from ASR transcripts. Addition- 
ally to the summary accuracy, we evaluate now also 
the WER for each evaluation point. Again, we ran 
a series of experiments for different parameters of 
the MMR formula (if=log, smax, freq; with/without 
normalization). As before, we achieved the best re- 
sults for non normalized scores and tf=log. We var- 
ied a from 0.0 to 10.0 to see how much of an effect we 
would get from the "boosting" of turns with many 
high confidence scores (see equations 5 and 6). 
The ExP formula yielded better esults than MULl? 
(Table 4), the optimum for ExP was reached for 
= 3.0 with a WER of 26.6%, an absolute improve- 
ment of over 8% over the average of WER=35.1% 
for the complete ASR transcripts (non-summarized). 
The summarization accuracy peaks at 0.47, a 9% 
absolute improvement over the a = 0.0-baseline and 
only about 5% absolute lower than for reference sum- 
maries (Table 4 and Figure 2). 
When we compare the baseline of ~ = 0.0 (i.e., no 
"boosting" of high confidence turns) to the best re- 
sult (a = 3.0), we see that the WER drops markedly 
by about 12% relative from 30.1 to 26.6%. At the 
same time, the summarization accuracy increases by 
about 18% relative form 0.401 to 0.472. 
? I f  we use non-normal ized scores, the value of the MMR-X 
does not  have any measurab le  effect; we assigned it to be 0.95 
for all subsequent  experiments. 
0.$ 
0.25 
Summary accuracy vL Word mror rate 
FgXP Ioenula 
' ' i 0"2.35 0.4 0.45 0 5 0.65 
=unvnan/accuracy 
Figure 2: Summary accuracy vs. word error rates 
with ~.xP boosting (0 < a < 7) 
Results for the MULT formula confirm this trend, 
but it is considerably weaker: approximately 6% 
WER reduction and 14% accuracy improvement for 
c~ = 10.0 over the c~ = 0.0 baseline. 
An appendix (section 11) provides an example of 
actual summaries generated by our system for the 
first topical segment of the BACK conversation. It 
illustrates how WER reduction and summary ac- 
curacy improvement can be achieved by using our 
confidence boosting method. 
8 D iscuss ion  
The most significant result of our experiments i , 
in our opinion, the fact that the trade-off between 
word and summary accuracy indeed leads to an op- 
timal parameter setting for the creation of textual 
summaries for spoken language (Figure 2). Using 
a formula which emphasizes turns containing many 
high confidence scores leads to an average WER re- 
duction of over 10% and to an average improvement 
in summary accuracy of over 15%, compared to the 
baseline of a standard MMR-based summary. 
Comparing our results to those reported in 
(Valenza et al, 1999), we find that their relative 
190 
a = 0~0 
P.xP (o = 3.0) 
MOLT (0 = 10.0) 
BACK 19CENT 
acc I WER acc I WER 
0.411 26 .2  0.501 26.7 
0.648 18.8 0.501 26.7 
0.575 21.5 0.501 26.7 
BUCHANAN G RAY average  
acc WER acc WER ace \] WER 
0.412 30 .6  0.280 36.9 0.401 30.1 
0.444 26.9 0.296 34.0 0.472 26.6 
0.429 29.6 0.317 35.7 0.456 28.3 
Table 4: Effect of a on summary accuracy vs. WER (in %) transcripts with ExP and MULl" boosting methods 
I IBm?K\[ 19C NT BUOHA ANIO AYI 
avgth -0.79 -0.11 -0.43 -0.03 
Table 5: Correlation between WER and confidence 
scores on a turn basis 
WER reduction for summaries over full texts was 
considerably arger than ours (60% vs. 24%). We 
conjecture that reasons for this may be due to the 
different nature and quality of the confidence scores, 
and (not unrelated), to the different absolute WER 
of the two corpora (25% vs. 35%): in transcripts 
with higher WER, the confidence scores are usually 
less reliable (eft Table 1). 
Looking at the four audio recordings individually, 
we see that the improvements vary strongly across 
different recordings. We conjecture that one reason 
for this fact may be due to the high variation in 
the correlation between WER and confidence scores 
on a turn basis (Table 5). This would explain why, 
e.g., BACK'S improvements are much stronger than 
those of the BUCHANAN recording or why there are 
no improvements for the 19CENT recording. How- 
ever, GRAY does improve despite its very low abso- 
lute correlation. 
9 Summary  
In this paper, we presented experiments on sum- 
maries of both human and machine generated tran- 
scripts from four recordings of spoken language. We 
explored the trade-off of word accuracy vs. summary 
accuracy (relevance) using speech recognizer confi- 
dence scores to rank passages with lower word error 
rate higher in the summarization process. 
Results comparing our approach to a simple MMR 
ranking show that while the WER can be reduced by 
over 10%, summarization accuracy improves by over 
15% as measured against ranscripts with relevance 
annotations. 
10 Acknowledgements  
We thank the six human annotators for their tedious 
work of annotating the corpus with topical segment 
boundaries and relevance information. We also want 
to thank Alon Lavie and the three anonymous re- 
viewers for useful feedback and comments on earlier 
drafts of this paper. 
This work was funded in part by ATR - Inter- 
preting Telecommunications Re earch Laboratories 
of Japan, and the US Department ofDefense. 
Re ferences  
Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use 
of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reordering 
documents and producing summaries. In Proceed- 
ings of the ~Ist A CM-SIGIR International Con- 
ference on Research and Development in Informa- 
tion Retrieval, Melbourne, Australia. 
John S. Garofolo, Ellen M. Voorhees, Cedric G. P. 
Auzanue, and Vincent M. Stanford. 1999. Spoken 
document retrieval: 1998 evaluation and investi- 
gation of new metrics. In Proceedings of the ESCA 
workshop: Accessing information in spoken audio, 
pages 1-7. Cambridge, OK, April. 
J. J. Godfrey, E. C. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 
1992. SWITCHBOARD: telephone speech corpus 
for research and development. In Proceedings of 
the ICASSP-9~, volume 1, pages 517-520. 
Julia Hirschberg, Steve Whittaker, Don Hindle, Fer- 
nando Pereira, and Amit Singhal. 1999. Finding 
information i  audio: A new paradigm for audio 
browsing/retrieval. In Proceedings of the ESCA 
workshop: Accessing information in spoken audio, 
pages 117-122. Cambridge, OK, April. 
Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury, editors. 1999. 
Advances in automatic text summarization. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Gerard Salton, editor. 1971. The SMART Retrieval 
System -- Experiments in Automatic Text Pro- 
cessing. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jer- 
sey. 
Robin Valenza, Tony Robinson, Marianne Hickey, 
and Roger Tucker. 1999. Summarisation f spo- 
ken audio through information extraction. In Pro- 
ceedings of the ESCA workshop: Accessing in- 
formation in spoken audio, pages 111-116. Cam- 
bridge, OK, April. 
Alex Waibel, Michael Bett, and Michael Finke. 
1998. Meeting browser: Tracking and summa- 
rizing meetings. In Proceedings of the DARPA 
Broadcast News Workshop. 
Hua Yu, Michael Finke, and Alex Waibel. 1999. 
Progress in automatic meeting transcription. 
In Proceedings of EUROSPEECH-99, Budapest, 
Hungary, September. 
191 
a relative sa WEB. in % turns in summary 
0.0 0.428 29.2 2, 1 \[beginning\] 
3.0 0.885 11.8 1, 5\[beginning\] 
Table 6: Relative summary accuracy, WER, and se- 
lected turns by the summarizer for (a) no boosting 
and (b) P.XP boosting. 
higher WER scores, case (b) (0 = 3.0) successfully 
ranks turn 1 first due to its higher confidence scores 
and hence both summary accuracy and WElt scores 
improve. 
turn avg. relevance score 
1 0.663 
2 0.369 
3 0.149 
4 0.212 
5 0.274 
WERin % avgth. 
9.5 0.84 
27.5 0.40 
26.9 0.39 
11.1 0.08 
27.7 0.17 
Table 7: Average relevance scores, WER, and confi- 
dence values for the five turns of BACK'S first topical 
segment. 
Klaus Zechner and Alex Waibel. 2000. Dia- 
summ: Flexible summarization of spontaneous 
dialogues in unrestricted domains. Available from 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?zechner/publications.html. 
Klaus Zechner. 2000. A word-based annota- 
tion and evaluation scheme for summariza- 
tion of spontaneous speech. Available from 
http://www .cs.cmu.edu/~zechner/publications.html. 
11 Append ix :  Example  summar ies  
This appendix provides summaries for the first topi- 
cal segment of the BACK conversation. The contents 
of this conversation revolves around former Illinois 
congressman Dan Rostenkowski who had been re- 
leased from prison and was ready to re-enter public 
life. 
Figure 3 shows the human transcript of this seg- 
ment which is about two minutes long and con- 
sists of 5 speaker turns. Figure 4 contrasts the 
machine generated summaries for this segment (a) 
without confidence boosting (a -- 0.0) and (b) using 
the optimal confidence boosting (c~ = 3.0, method 
ExP). Insertions and substitutions are capitalized 
and marked with I- or S- prefixes. Table 6 compares 
the relative summary accuracies ( a) and word error 
rates (WER in %) for these two summaries (aver- 
age over the 5 sample points from 5% to 25% sum- 
mary length). Additionally, the turns that show up 
in the summaries are listed in their ranking order. 
Table 7 provides the average relevance scores, word 
error rates, and confidence scores ("avgth") for each 
turn of this topical segment. 
We observe that the most relevant urn is turn 
1 which has, incidentally, also the lowest WER. 
Whereas in case (a) (o = 0.0), turn 2 is ranked 
first and therefore dominates the lower relevance and 
192 
1 e l i zabeth :  i t  has been e ight  months s ince  dan roetenkowsk i  ua lked  out  o f  a u i scons in  federa l  
p r i son  n ix  months s ince  he le f t  a ha l fuay  house in  ch icago  the  fo rmer  chai rman of  the  house ways and means 
committee i s  ready  to  s tep  back in to  the  pub l i c  eye 
2 e l i zabeth :  the  recept ion  was-warm the  banquet  ha l l  packed w i th  the  c i ty ' s  movers and shakers  
the  th i r ty  f i ve  do l la rs  a p la te  inv i ta t ion  re fer red  to  ros tenkowsk i  an mr. chai rman ros tenkowsk i  
made no re ference  to h i s  conv ic t ion  fo r  misus ing  federa l  funds  on ly  a br ie f  re fe rence  to  h i s  f i f teen  
months of  p r i son  t ime 
3 dan:  i g raduated  from oxford  and i rea l ly  had a rhodes scho larsh ip  the  past  th ree  years  have been a 
constant ly  cha l leng ing  t ime fo r  me change never  comes eas i ly  and g iven  the  c i rcumstances  
o f  my s i tuat ion  that  has par t i cu le~r ly  t rue  fo r  me at  t imes  th ings  have been dosnr ight  b leak  and i 
uou ldn ' t  want to  wish my exper ience  on my uors t  enemy but  there  were some s i l ver  l in ings  i ' ve  had an 
oppor tun i ty  to  read and re f lec t  in  a bay that  uasn ' t  poss ib le  when i was 
in  constant  moment in  these  
remarks  today  i 'd  l i ke  to  share  some of  my conc lus ions  
4 e l i zabeth :  the  conc lus ions  d id 'not  due l l  on the  demise of  dan ros tenkuwsk i ' s  career  but  
the  demise o f  par ty  po l i t i cs  
5 dan:  those  who say that  the  pres ident ' s  po l i t i ca l  poser  has been ueakened by scanda l  have t ru ly  shor t  
memories the  sad fac t  i s  that  p res ident  c l in ton  has never  had a democrat i c  base in  congress  a group 
of  peop le  uhom one cou ld  suppor t  the  wh i te  house on any g iven  i ssue  are  not  there  
Figure 3: Human transcript of first topical segment (BACK) 
1 e l i zabeth :  hen been e ight  months s ince  dan ros tenkoesk i  ba lked  out  o f  
u i scons in  federa l  p r i son  I -~YBE 
2 e l i zabeth :  wan S-ALARMED the  banquet  ha l l  packed s i th  the  c i ty ' s  
S-CDM~O~S S-IH S-CHAHBERSS-UHICH th i r ty  f i ve  S-DOLLAR a p la te  
S - IN ITAT IO| re fer red  to  routenkoeek i  an S-MR. chai rman I-LET 1-HE I-ASK 
ros tenkousk imade no re ference  to  h i s  conv ic t ion  fo r  I -HIS S-USIHG federa l  
funds  on ly  a br ie f  re fe rence  to  S- IS  f i f teen  months o f  p r i son  t ime 
1 e l i zabeth :  has been e ight  months s ince  dan routenkoesk i  
ea lked  out  o f  s i scons in  federa l  p r i son  I-SAYBE s ix  months s ince  he le f t  
S-THE ha l fuay  house in  ch icago  the  fo rmer  chairman of  the  house says  and 
means committee ready  to  s tep  back in to  the  pub l i c  eye 
5 dan:  S-ALSO say  that  the  pres ident ' s  po l i t i ca lpower  has been eeakened by 
scanda l  S-RIGHT S-ESPECIALLY shor t  S-MEMORY S-THAT S-DISSATISFACTI0| that  
p res ident  c l in ton  has never  
Figure 4: Machine generated summaries for (a) ~ = 0.0 and (b) a = 3.0 (25% of text length) 
193 
