Cut and Paste Based Text Summarizat ion 
Hongyan J ing  and  Kath leen  R .  McKeown 
Depar tment  of Computer  Sc ience 
Co lumbia  Un ivers i ty  
New York,  NY  10027, USA 
hj ing,  kathyQcs .co lumbia .edu  
Abst ract  
We present a cut and paste based text summa- 
rizer, which uses operations derived from an anal- 
ysis of human written abstracts. The summarizer 
edits extracted sentences, using reduction to remove 
inessential phrases and combination to merge re- 
suiting phrases together as coherent sentences. Our 
work includes a statistically based sentence decom- 
position program that identifies where the phrases of 
a summary originate in the original document, pro- 
ducing an aligned corpus of summaries and articles 
which we used to develop the summarizer. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
There is a big gap between the summaries produced 
by current automatic summarizers and the abstracts 
written by human professionals. Certainly one fac- 
tor contributing to this gap is that automatic sys- 
tems can not always correctly identify the important 
topics of an article. Another factor, however, which 
has received little attention, is that automatic sum- 
marizers have poor text generation techniques. Most 
automatic summarizers rely on extracting key sen- 
tences or paragraphs from an article to produce a 
summary. Since the extracted sentences are discon- 
nected in the original article, when they are strung 
together, the resulting summary can be inconcise, 
incoherent, and sometimes even misleading. 
We present a cut and paste based text sum- 
marization technique, aimed at reducing the gap 
between automatically generated summaries and 
human-written abstracts. Rather than focusing 
on how to identify key sentences, as do other re- 
searchers, we study how to generate the text of a 
summary once key sentences have been extracted. 
The main idea of cut and paste summarization 
is to reuse the text in an article to generate the 
summary. However, instead of simply extracting 
sentences as current summarizers do, the cut and 
paste system will "smooth" the extracted sentences 
by editing them. Such edits mainly involve cutting 
phrases and pasting them together in novel ways. 
The key features of this work are: 
(1) The identification of cutting and past- 
ing operations. We identified six operations that 
can be used alone or together to transform extracted 
sentences into sentences in human-written abstracts. 
The operations were identified based on manual and 
automatic omparison of human-written abstracts 
and the original articles. Examples include sentence 
reduction, sentence combination, syntactic transfor- 
mation, and lexical paraphrasing. 
(2) Deve lopment  o f  an automatic system to 
per form cut and paste operations. Two opera- 
tions - sentence reduction and sentence combination 
- are most effective in transforming extracted sen- 
tences into summary sentences that are as concise 
and coherent as in human-written abstracts. We 
implemented a sentence reduction module that re- 
moves extraneous phrases from extracted sentences, 
and a sentence combination module that merges the 
extracted sentences or the reduced forms resulting 
from sentence reduction. Our sentence reduction 
model determines what to cut based on multiple 
sources of information, including syntactic knowl- 
edge, context, and statistics learned from corpus 
analysis. It improves the conciseness of extracted 
sentences, making them concise and on target. Our 
sentence combination module implements combina- 
tion rules that were identified by observing examples 
written by human professionals. It improves the co- 
herence of extracted sentences. 
(3) Decomposing human-wrltten summary  
sentences. The cut and paste technique we propose 
here is a new computational model which we based 
on analysis of human-written abstracts. To do this 
analysis, we developed an automatic system that can 
match a phrase in a human-written abstract o the 
corresponding phrase in the article, identifying its 
most likely location. This decomposition program 
allows us to analyze the construction of sentences 
in a human-written abstract. Its results have been 
used to train and test the sentence reduction and 
sentence combination module. 
In Section 2, we discuss the cut and paste tech- 
nique in general, from both a professional nd com- 
putational perspective. We also describe the six cut 
and paste operations. In Section 3, we describe the 
178 
system architecture. The major components of the 
system, including sentence reduction, sentence com- 
bination, decomposition, and sentence selection, are 
described in Section 4. The evaluation results are 
shown in Section 5. Related work is discussed in 
Section 6. Finally, we conclude and discuss future 
work. 
Document sentence: When it arrives some- 
time next year in new TV sets, the V-chip will 
give parents a new and potentially revolution- 
ary device to block out programs they don't 
want their children to see. 
Summary sentence: The V-chip will give par- 
ents a device to block out programs they don't 
want their children to see. 
2 Cut  and paste  in  summar izat ion  
2.1 Re la ted  work  in professional 
summarizing 
Professionals take two opposite positions on whether 
a summary should be produced by cutting and past- 
ing the original text. One school of scholars is 
opposed; "(use) your own words... Do not keep 
too close to the words before you", states an early 
book on abstracting for American high school stu- 
dents (Thurber, 1924). Another study, however, 
shows that professional abstractors actually rely on 
cutting and pasting to produce summaries: "Their 
professional role tells abstractors to avoid inventing 
anything. They follow the author as closely as pos- 
sible and reintegrate the most important points of 
a document in a shorter text" (Endres-Niggemeyer 
et al, 1998). Some studies are somewhere in be- 
tween: "summary language may or may not follow 
that of author's" (Fidel, 1986). Other guidelines or 
books on abstracting (ANSI, 1997; Cremmins, 1982) 
do not discuss the issue. 
Our cut and paste based summarization is a com- 
putational model; we make no claim that humans 
use the same cut and paste operations. 
2.2 Cut and paste operations 
We manually analyzed 30 articles and their corre- 
sponding human-written summaries; the articles and 
their summaries come from different domains ( 15 
general news reports, 5 from the medical domain, 
10 from the legal domain) and the summaries were 
written by professionals from different organizations. 
We found that reusing article text for summarization 
is almost universal in the corpus we studied. We de- 
fined six operations that can be used alone, sequen- 
tially, or simultaneously to transform selected sen- 
tences from an article into the corresponding sum- 
mary sentences in its human-written abstract: 
(1) sentence reduction 
Remove extraneous phrases from a selected sen- 
tence, as in the following example 1: 
1 All the examples in this section were produced by human 
professionals 
The deleted material can be at any granularity: a
word, a phrase, or a clause. Multiple components 
can be removed. 
(2) sentence combination 
Merge material from several sentences. It can be 
used together with sentence reduction, as illustrated 
in the following example, which also uses paraphras- 
ing: 
Text Sentence 1: But it also raises serious 
questions about the privacy of such highly 
personal information wafting about the digital 
world. 
Text Sentence 2: The issue thus fits squarely 
into the broader debate about privacy and se- 
curity on the internet, whether it involves pro- 
tecting credit card number or keeping children 
from offensive information. 
Summary sentence: But it also raises the is- 
sue of privacy of such personal information 
and this issue hits the head on the nail in the 
broader debate about privacy and security on 
the internet. 
(3) syntactic transformation 
In both sentence reduction and combination, syn- 
tactic transformations may be involved. For exam- 
ple, the position of the subject in a sentence may be 
moved from the end to the front. 
(4) lexical paraphrasing 
Replace phrases with their paraphrases. For in- 
stance, the summaries ubstituted point out with 
note, and fits squarely into with a more picturesque 
description hits the head on the nail in the previous 
examples. 
(5) genera l i za t ion  or specification 
Replace phrases or clauses with more general or 
specific descriptions. Examples of generalization 
and specification include: 
Generalization: "a proposed new law that 
would require Web publishers to obtain 
parental consent before collecting personal in- 
formation from children" --+ "legislation to 
protect children's privacy on-line" 
Specification: "the White House's top drug 
official" ~ "Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the 
White House's top drug official" 
179 
p . . . . .  
,_e_ yr _', - 
I , Co-reference ~, 
I . . . . . . . . .  I 
,\]WordNet'l 
~ned ie~ -~ 
Input~icle . I ~  
I Sentenc i extracti?nl ) 
extracteikey sentenc~ 
Cut and paste based generation 
\[ Sentence r duction \] 
I Sentence combinatio~ 
Output summary 
Figure 1: System architecture 
(6) reorder ing  
Change the order of extracted sentences. For in- 
stance, place an ending sentence in an article at the 
beginning of an abstract. 
In human-written abstracts, there are, of course, 
sentences that are not based on cut and paste, but 
completely written from scratch. We used our de- 
composition program to automatically analyze 300 
human-written abstracts, and found that 19% of sen- 
tences in the abstracts were written from scratch. 
There are also other cut and paste operations not 
listed here due to their infrequent occurrence. 
3 Sys tem arch i tec ture  
The architecture of our cut and paste based text 
summarization system is shown in Figure 1. Input 
to the system is a single document from any domain. 
In the first stage, extraction, key sentences in the ar- 
ticle are identified, as in most current summarizers. 
In the second stage, cut and paste based generation, a 
sentence reduction module and a sentence combina- 
tion module implement the operations we observed 
in human-written abstracts. 
The cut and paste based component receives as 
input not only the extracted key sentences, but also 
the original article. This component can be ported 
to other single-document summarizers to serve as 
the generation component, since most current sum- 
marizers extract key sentences - exactly what the 
extraction module in our system does. 
Other resources and tools in the summarization 
system include a corpus of articles and their human- 
written abstracts, the automatic decomposition pro- 
gram, a syntactic parser, a co-reference resolution 
system, the WordNet lexical database, and a large- 
scale lexicon we combined from multiple resources. 
The components in dotted lines are existing tools or 
resources; all the others were developed by ourselves. 
4 Ma jor  components  
The main focus of our work is on decomposition of
summaries, sentence reduction, and sentence com- 
bination. We also describe the sentence xtraction 
module, although it is not the main focus of our 
work .  
4.1 Decomposi t ion of human-wr i t ten  
summary  sentences 
The decomposition program, see (Jing and McKe- 
own, 1999) for details, is used to analyze the con- 
struction of sentences in human-written abstracts. 
The results from decomposition are used to build 
the training and testing corpora for sentence reduc- 
tion and sentence combination. 
The decomposition program answers three ques- 
tions about a sentence in a human-written abstract: 
(1) Is the sentence constructed by cutting and past- 
ing phrases from the input article? (2) If so, what 
phrases in the sentence come from the original arti- 
cle? (3) Where in the article do these phrases come 
from? 
We used a Hidden Markov Model (Baum, 1972) 
solution to the decomposition problem. We first 
mathematically formulated the problem, reducing it 
to a problem of finding, for each word in a summary 
180 
Summary sentence: 
(F0:S1 arthur b sackler v ice pres ident  for law and publ ic  po l i cy  of  t ime warner  inc ) 
(FI:S-1 and) (F2:S0 a member  of  the direct market ing  assoc iat ion told ) (F3:$2 the com-  
mun icat ions  subcommit tee  o f  the senate  commerce  commit tee  ) (F4:S-1 that legislation ) 
(F5:Slto protect  ) (F6:$4 chi ldren' s ) (F7:$4 pr ivacy ) (F8:$4 onl ine ) (F9:S0 could dest roy  
the spontaneous  nature that makes  the internet  unique ) 
Source document sentences: 
Sentence 0: a proposed new law that would require web publishers to obtain parental consent before 
collecting personal information from children (F9 could destroy the spontaneous  nature  that  
makes  the internet  un ique ) (F2 a member  of the direct market ing  assoc iat ion told) a 
senate panel thursday 
Sentence 1:(F0 arthur  b sackler v ice pres ident  for law and publ ic  po l icy  of  t ime warner  
inc ) said the association supported efforts (F5 to protect  ) children online but he urged lawmakers 
to find some middle ground that also allows for interactivity on the internet 
Sentence 2: for example a child's e-mail address is necessary in order to respond to inquiries such 
as updates on mark mcguire's and sammy sosa's home run figures this year or updates of an online 
magazine sackler said in testimony to (F3 the communicat ions  subcommit tee  o f  the senate 
commerce  commit tee  ) 
Sentence 4: the subcommittee is considering the (F6 children's ) (F8 online ) (F7 privacy ) 
protection act which was drafted on the recommendation f the federal trade commission 
Figure 2: Sample output of the decomposition program 
sentence, a document position that it most likely 
comes from. The position of a word in a document 
is uniquely identified by the position of the sentence 
where the word appears, and the position of the word 
within the sentence. Based on the observation of cut 
and paste practice by humans, we produced a set of 
general heuristic rules. Sample heuristic rules in- 
clude: two adjacent words in a summary sentence 
are most likely to come from two adjacent words in 
the original document; adjacent words in a summary 
sentence are not very likely to come from sentences 
that are far apart in the original document. We 
use these heuristic rules to create a Hidden Markov 
Model. The Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi, 1967) is used 
to efficiently find the most likely document position 
for each word in the summary sentence. 
Figure 2 shows sample output of the program. 
For the given summary sentence, the program cor- 
rectly identified that the sentence was combined 
from four sentences in the input article. It also di- 
vided the summary sentence into phrases and pin- 
pointed the exact document origin of each phrase. 
A phrase in the summary sentence is annotated as 
(FNUM:SNUM actual-text), where FNUM is the se- 
quential number of the phrase and SNUM is the 
number of the document sentence where the phrase 
comes from. SNUM = -1 means that the compo- 
nent does not come from the original document. The 
phrases in the document sentences are annotated as 
(FNUM actual-text). 
4.2 Sentence  reduct ion  
The task of the sentence reduction module, de- 
scribed in detail in (Jing, 2000), is to remove extra- 
neous phrases from extracted sentences. The goal of 
reduction is to "reduce without major loss"; that is, 
we want to remove as many extraneous phrases as 
possible from an extracted sentence so that it can be 
concise, but without detracting from the main idea 
that the sentence conveys. Ideally, we want to re- 
move a phrase from an extracted sentence only if it 
is irrelavant to the main topic. 
Our reduction module makes decisions based on 
multiple sources of knowledge: 
(1) Grammar  checking.  In this step, we mark 
which components of a sentence or a phrase are 
obligatory to keep it grammatical ly correct. To do 
this, we traverse the sentence parse tree, produced 
by the English Slot Grammar(ESG) parser devel- 
oped at IBM (McCord, 1990), in top-down order 
and mark for each node in the parse tree, which 
of its children are obligatory. The main source of 
knowledge the system relies on in this step is a 
large-scale, reusable lexicon we combined from mul- 
tiple resources (Jing and McKeown, 1998). The lexi- 
con contains ubcategorizations for over 5,000 verbs. 
This information is used to mark the obligatory ar- 
guments of verb phrases. 
(2) Context  in fo rmat ion .  We use an extracted 
sentence's local context in the article to decide which 
components in the sentence are likely to be most 
relevant o the main topic. We link the words in the 
extracted sentence with words in its local context, 
if they are repetitions, morphologically related, or 
linked with each other in WordNet through certain 
type of lexical relation, such as synonymy, antonymy, 
or meronymy. Each word in the extracted sentence 
gets an importance score, based on the number of 
links it has with other words and the types of links. 
Each phrase in the sentence is then assigned a score 
181 
Example 1: 
Original sentence : When it arrives sometime next year in new TV sets, the V-chip will give 
parents a new and potentially revolutionary device to block out programs they don't 
want their children to see. 
Reduction program: The V-chip will give parents a new and potentially revolutionary device to 
block out programs they don't want their children to see. 
Professionals : The V-chip will give parents a device to block out programs they don't want 
their children to see. 
Example 2: 
Original sentence : Sore and Hof fman's  creation would allow broadcasters to insert 
multiple ratings into a show, enabling the V-chip to filter out racy or violent material but leave 
unexceptional portions o.f a show alone. 
Reduction Program: Som and Hoffman's creation would allow broadcasters to insert multiple rat- 
ings into a show. 
Professionals : Som and Hoffman's creation would allow broadcasters to insert multiple rat- 
ings into a show. 
Figure 3: Sample output of the 
by adding up the scores of its children nodes in the 
parse tree. This score indicates how important he 
phrase is to the main topic in discussion. 
(3) Corpus  ev idence .  The program uses a cor- 
pus of input articles and their corresponding reduced 
forms in human-written abstracts to learn which 
components of a sentence or a phrase can be re- 
moved and how likely they are to be removed by 
professionals. This corpus was created using the de- 
composition program. We compute three types of 
probabilities from this corpus: the probability that 
a phrase is removed; the probability that a phrase is 
reduced (i.e., the phrase is not removed as a whole, 
but some components in the phrase are removed); 
and the probability that a phrase is unchanged at 
all (i.e., neither removed nor reduced). These cor- 
pus probabilities help us capture human practice. 
(4) Final  dec is ion.  The final reduction decision 
is based on the results from all the earlier steps. A 
phrase is removed only if it is not grammatically 
obligatory, not the focus of the local context (indi- 
cated by a low context importance score), and has a 
reasonable probability of being removed by humans. 
The phrases we remove from an extracted sentence 
include clauses, prepositional phrases, gerunds, and 
to-infinitives. 
The result of sentence reduction is a shortened 
version of an extracted sentence 2. This shortened 
text can be used directly as a summary, or it can 
be fed to the sentence combination module to be 
merged with other sentences. 
Figure 3 shows two examples produced by the re- 
duction program. The corresponding sentences in 
human-written abstracts are also provided for com- 
parison. 
2It is actually also possible that the reduction program 
decides no phrase in a sentence should be removed, thus the 
result of reduction is the same as the input. 
sentence reduction program 
4.3 Sentence  combinat ion  
To build the combination module, we first manu- 
ally analyzed a corpus of combination examples pro- 
duced by human professionals, automatically cre- 
ated by the decomposition program, and identified 
a list of combination operations. Table 1 shows the 
combination operations. 
To implement a combination operation, we need 
to do two things: decide when to use which com- 
bination operation, and implement he combining 
actions. To decide when to use which operation, we 
analyzed examples by humans and manually wrote 
a set of rules. Two simple rules are shown in Fig- 
ure 4. Sample outputs using these two simple rules 
are shown in Figure 5. We are currently exploring 
using machine learning techniques to learn the com- 
bination rules from our corpus. 
The implementation of the combining actions in- 
volves joining two parse trees, substituting a subtree 
with another, or adding additional nodes. We im- 
plemented these actions using a formalism based on 
Tree Adjoining Grammar  (Joshi, 1987). 
4.4 Ext rac t ion  Modu le  
The extraction module is the front end of the sum- 
marization system and its role is to extract key sen- 
tences. Our method is primarily based on lexical re- 
lations. First, we link words in a sentence with other 
words in the article through repetitions, morpholog- 
ical relations, or one of the lexical relations encoded 
in WordNet, similar to step 2 in sentence reduction. 
An importance score is computed for each word in a 
sentence based on the number of lexical links it has 
with other words, the type of links, and the direc- 
tions of the links. 
After assigning a score to each word in a sentence, 
we then compute a score for a sentence by adding up 
the scores for each word. This score is then normal- 
182 
Categories Combinat ion Operat ions 
Add descriptions or names for people or organizations 
Aggregations 
Substitute incoherent phrases 
Substitute phrases with more general or specific information 
add description (see Figure 5) 
add name 
extract common subjects or objects (see Figure 5) 
change one sentence to a clause 
add connectives (e.g., and or while) 
add punctuations (e.g., ";") 
substitute dangling anaphora 
substitute dangling noun phrases 
substitute adverbs (e.g., here) 
remove connectives 
substitute with more general information 
substitute with more specific information 
Mixed operations combination of any of above operations (see Figure 2) 
Table 1: Combination operations 
Rule 1: 
IF: ((a person or an organization is mentioned the first time) and (the full name or the full descrip- 
tion of the person or the organization exists somewhere in the original article but is missing in the 
summary)) 
THEN" replace the phrase with the full name plus the full description 
Rule 2: 
IF: ((two sentences are close to each other in the original article) and (their subjects refer to the 
same entity) and (at least one of the sentences i the reduced form resulting from sentence reduc- 
tion)) 
THEN:  merge the two sentences by removing the subject in the second sentence, and then com- 
bining it with the first sentence using connective "and". 
Figure 4: Sample sentence combination rules 
ized over the number of words a sentence contains. 
The sentences with high scores are considered im- 
portant. 
The extraction system selects sentences based on 
the importance computed as above, as well as other 
indicators, including sentence positions, cue phrases, 
and tf*idf scores. 
5 Eva luat ion  
Our evaluation includes separate valuations of each 
module and the final evaluations of the overall sys- 
tem. 
We evaluated the decomposition program by two 
experiments, described in (Jing and McKeown, 
1999). In the first experiment, we selected 50 
human-written abstracts, consisting of 305 sentences 
in total. A human subject then read the decomposi- 
tion results of these sentences to judge whether they 
are correct. 93.8% of the sentences were correctly 
decomposed. In the second experiment, we tested 
the system in a summary alignment ask. We ran 
the decomposition program to identify the source 
document sentences that were used to construct he 
sentences in human-written abstracts. Human sub- 
jects were also asked to select the document sen- 
tences that are semantlc-equivalent to the sentences 
in the abstracts. We compared the set of sentences 
identified by the program with the set of sentences 
selected by the majority of human subjects, which is 
used as the gold standard in the computation of pre- 
cision and recall. The program achieved an average 
81.5% precision, 78.5% recall, and 79.1% f-measure 
for 10 documents. The average performance of 14 
human judges is 88.8% precision, 84.4% recall, and 
85.7% f-measure. Recently, we have also tested the 
system on legal documents (the headnotes used by 
Westlaw company), and the program works well on 
those documents too. 
The evaluation of sentence reduction (see (Jing, 
2000) for details) used a corpus of 500 sentences and 
their reduced forms in human-written abstracts. 400 
sentences were used to compute corpus probabili- 
ties and 100 sentences were used for testing. The 
results show that 81.3% of the reduction decisions 
made by the system agreed with those of humans. 
The humans reduced the length of the 500 sentences 
by 44.2% on average, and the system reduced the 
length of the 100 test sentences by 32.7%. 
The evaluation of sentence combination module 
is not as straightforward as that of decomposition 
or reduction since combination happens later in the 
pipeline and it depends on the output from prior 
183 
Example  1: add descr ipt ions or names  for people or organization 
Original document sentences: 
"We're trying to prove that there are big benefits to the patients by involving them more deeply in 
their treatment", said Paul Clayton, Chairman of the Depar tment  deal ing with comput-  
erized medica l  in fo rmat ion  at Columbia. 
"The economic  payoff  f rom breaking into health care records is a lot less than for 
banks", said Clayton at Columbia. 
Combined sentence: 
"The economic payoff rom breaking into health care records is a lot less than for banks", said Paul 
Clayton, Chairman of the Department dealing with computerized medical information at Columbia. 
Professional: (the same) 
Example 2: extract  common sub jects  
Original document sentences: 
The new measure  is an echo of  the original bad idea, blurred just enough to cloud prospects 
both for enforcement and for court review. 
Unlike the 1996 act, this one appl ies only  to commerc ia l  Web sites - thus sidestepping 
1996 objections to the burden such regulations would pose for museums, libraries and freewheeling 
conversation deemed "indecent" by somebody somewhere. 
The new vers ion also replaces the vague " indecency"  standard,  to which the court objected, 
with the better-defined one of material ruled "harmful to minors." 
Combined sentences: 
The new measure is an echo of the original bad idea. 
The new version applies only to commercial web sites and replaces the vague "indecency" standard 
with the better-defined one of material ruled "harmful to minors." 
Professional: 
While the new law replaces the "indecency" standard with "harmful to minors" and now only 
applies to commercial Web sites, the "new measure is an echo of the original bad idea." 
Figure 5: Sample output of the sentence combination program 
modules. To evaluate just the combination compo- 
nent, we assume that the system makes the same 
reduction decision as humans and the co-reference 
system has a perfect performance. This involves 
manual tagging of some examples to prepare for the 
evaluation; this preparation is in progress. The eval- 
uation of sentence combination will focus on the ac- 
cessment of combination rules. 
The overM1 system evMuation includes both in- 
trinsic and extrinsic evaluation. In the intrinsic evM- 
uation, we asked human subjects to compare the 
quality of extraction-based summaries and their re- 
vised versions produced by our sentence reduction 
and combination modules. We selected 20 docu- 
ments; three different automatic summarizers were 
used to generate a summary for each document, pro- 
ducing 60 summaries in total. These summaries 
are all extraction-based. We then ran our sentence 
reduction and sentence combination system to re- 
vise the summaries, producing a revised version for 
each summary. We presented human subjects with 
the full documents, the extraction-based summaries, 
and their revised versions, and asked them to com- 
pare the extraction-based summaries and their re- 
vised versions. The human subjects were asked to 
score the conciseness of the summaries (extraction- 
based or revised) based on a scale from 0 to 10 - 
the higher the score, the more concise a summary is. 
They were also asked to score the coherence of the 
summaries based on a scale from 0 to 10. On aver- 
age, the extraction-based summaries have a score of 
4.2 for conciseness, while the revised summaries have 
a score of 7.9 (an improvement of88%). The average 
improvement for the three systems are 78%, 105%, 
and 88% respectively. The revised summaries are 
on average 41% shorter than the original extraction- 
based summaries. For summary coherence, the aver- 
age score for the extraction-based summaries i 3.9, 
while the average score for the revised summaries i
6.1 (an improvement of 56%). The average improve- 
ment for the three systems are 69%, 57%, and 53% 
respectively. 
We are preparing a task-based evaluation, in 
which we will use the data from the Summariza- 
tion EvMuation Conference (Mani et al, 1998) and 
compare how our revised summaries can influence 
humans' performance in tasks like text categoriza- 
tion and ad-hoc retrieval. 
6 Re la ted  work  
(Mani et al, 1999) addressed the problem of revising 
summaries to improve their quality. They suggested 
three types of operations: elimination, aggregation, 
and smoothing. The goal of the elimination opera- 
tion is similar to that of the sentence reduction op- 
184 
eration in our system. The difference is that while 
elimination always removes parentheticals, sentence- 
initial PPs and certain adverbial phrases for every 
extracted sentence, our sentence reduction module 
aims to make reduction decisions according to each 
case and removes a sentence component only if it 
considers it appropriate to do so. The goal of the 
aggregation operation and the smoothing operation 
is similar to that of the sentence combination op- 
eration in our system. However, the combination 
operations and combination rules that we derived 
from corpus analysis are significantly different from 
those used in the above system, which mostly came 
from operations in traditional natural language gen- 
eration. 
7 Conclusions and future work  
This paper presents a novel architecture for text 
summarization using cut and paste techniques ob- 
served in human-written abstracts. In order to auto- 
matically analyze a large quantity of human-written 
abstracts, we developed a decomposition program. 
The automatic decomposition allows us to build 
large corpora for studying sentence reduction and 
sentence combination, which are two effective op- 
erations in cut and paste. We developed a sentence 
reduction module that makes reduction decisions us- 
ing multiple sources of knowledge. We also investi- 
gated possible sentence combination operations and 
implemented the combination module. A sentence 
extraction module was developed and used as the 
front end of the summarization system. 
We are preparing the task-based evaluation of the 
overall system. We also plan to evaluate the porta- 
bility of the system by testing it on another corpus. 
We will also extend the system to query-based sum- 
marization and investigate whether the system can 
be modified for multiple document summarization. 
Acknowledgment 
We thank IBM for licensing us the ESG parser 
and the MITRE corporation for licensing us the co- 
reference resolution system. This material is based 
upon work supported by the National Science Foun- 
dation under Grant No. IRI 96-19124 and IRI 
96-18797. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 
or recommendations expressed in this material are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the National Science Foundation. 
References 
ANSI. 1997. Guidelines for abstracts. Technical Re- 
port Z39.14-1997, NISO Press, Bethesda, Mary- 
land. 
L. Baum. 1972. An inequality and associated max- 
imization technique in statistical estimation of 
probabilistic functions of a markov process. In- 
equalities, (3):1-8. 
Edward T. Cremmins. 1982. The Art of Abstracting. 
ISI Press, Philadelphia. 
Brigitte Endres-Niggemeyer, Kai Haseloh, Jens 
Mfiller, Simone Peist, Irene Santini de Sigel, 
Alexander Sigel, Elisabeth Wansorra, Jan 
Wheeler, and Brfinja Wollny. 1998. Summarizing 
Information. Springer, Berlin. 
Raya Fidel. 1986. Writing abstracts for free-text 
searching. Journal of Documentation, 42(1):11- 
21, March. 
Hongyan Jing and Kathleen R. McKeown. 1998. 
Combining multiple, large-scale resources in a 
reusable lexicon for natural anguage generation. 
In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 
17th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 607-613, Universit6 
de Montreal, Quebec, Canada, August. 
Hongyan Jing and Kathleen R. McKeown. 1999. 
The decomposition of human-written summary 
sentences. In Proceedings of the P2nd In- 
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Re- 
search and Development in Information Re- 
trieval(SIGIR'99), pages 129-136, University of 
Berkeley, CA, August. 
Hongyan Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for au- 
tomatic text summarization. In Proceedings of 
ANLP 2000. 
Aravind.K. Joshi. 1987. Introduction to tree- 
adjoining rammars. In A. Manaster-Ramis, ed- 
itor, Mathematics of Language. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam. 
Inderjeet Mani, David House, Gary Klein, Lynette 
Hirschman, Leo Obrst, Therese Firmin, Michael 
Chrzanowski, and Beth Sundheim. 1998. The 
TIPSTER SUMMAC text summarization eval- 
uation final report. Technical Report MTR 
98W0000138, The MITRE Corporation. 
Inderjeet Mani, Barbara Gates, and Erie Bloedorn. 
1999. Improving summaries by revising them. In 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics(A CL '99), 
pages 558-565, University of Maryland, Mary- 
land, June. 
Michael MeCord, 1990. English Slot Grammar. 
IBM. 
Samuel Thurber, editor. 1924. Prgcis Writing for 
American Schools. The Atlantic Monthly Press, 
INC., Boston. 
A.J. Viterbi. 1967. Error bounds for convolution 
codes and an asymptotically optimal decoding al- 
gorithm. IEEE Transactions on Information The- 
ory, 13:260-269. 
185 
