Experiments on Sentence Boundary Detection 
Mark  Stevenson  and  Rober t  Ga izauskas  
Depar tment  of  Computer  Science, 
Un ivers i ty  of  Sheff ield 
Regent  Cour t ,  211 Por tobe l lo  St reet ,  
Sheff ield 
S1 4DP Un i ted  K ingdom 
{marks, robertg}@dcs, shef. ac.uk 
Abst ract  
This paper explores the problem of identifying sen- 
tence boundaries in the transcriptions produced by 
automatic speech recognition systems. An experi- 
ment which determines the level of human perform- 
ance for this task is described as well as a memory- 
based computational pproach to the problem. 
1 The  Prob lem 
This paper addresses the problem of identifying sen- 
tence boundaries in the transcriptions produced by 
automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems. This 
is unusual in the field of text processing which has 
generally dealt with well-punctuated text: some of 
the most commonly used texts in NLP are machine 
readable versions of highly edited documents uch 
as newspaper articles or novels. However, there are 
many types of text which are not so-edited and the 
example which we concentrate on in this paper is 
the output from ASR systems. These differ from 
the sort of texts normally used in NLP in a number 
of ways; the text is generally in single case (usually 
upper), unpunctuated and may contain transcrip- 
tion errors. 1 Figure 1 compares a short text in the 
format which would be produced by an ASR system 
with a fully punctuated version which includes case 
information. For the remainder of this paper error- 
free texts such as newspaper articles or novels shall 
be referred to as "standard text" and the output 
from a speech recognition system as "ASR text". 
There are many possible situations in which an 
NLP system may be required to process ASR text. 
The most obvious examples are NLP systems which 
take speech input (eg. Moore et al (1997)). Also, 
dictation software programs do not punctuate or 
capitalise their output but, if this information could 
be added to ASR text, the results would be far more 
usable. One of the most important pieces of inform- 
1 Speech recognition systems are often evaluated in terms 
of word error ate (WER), the percentage oftokens which are 
wrongly transcribed. For large vocabulary tasks and speaker- 
independent systems, WER varies between 7% and 50%, de- 
pending upon the quality of the recording being recognised. 
See, e.g., Cole (1996). 
G00D EVENING GIANNI VERSACE ONE OF THE 
WORLDS LEADING FASHION DESIGNERS HAS 
BEEN MURDERED IN MIAMI POLICE SAY IT WAS 
A PLANNED KILLING CARRIED OUT LIKE AN 
EXECUTION SCHOOLS INSPECTIONS ARE GOING 
TO BE TOUGHER TO FORCE BAD TEACHERS OUT 
AND THE FOUR THOUSAND COUPLES WH0 SHARED 
THE QUEENS GOLDEN DAY 
Good evening. Gi~nni Versace, one of 
the world's leading fashion designers, 
has been murdered in Miami. Police say 
it was a planned killing carried out 
like an execution. Schools inspections 
are going to be tougher to force bad 
teachers out. And the four thousand 
couples who shared the Queen's golden 
day. 
Figure 1: Example text shown in standard and ASR 
format 
ation which is not available in ASR output is sen- 
tence boundary information. However, knowledge of 
sentence boundaries i required by many NLP tech- 
nologies. Part of speech taggers typically require 
input in the format of a single sentence per line (for 
example Brill's tagger (Brill, 1992)) and parsers gen- 
erally aim to produce a tree spanning each sentence. 
Only the most trivial linguistic analysis can be car- 
ried out on text which is not split into sentences. 
It is worth mentioning that not all transcribed 
speech can be sensibly divided into sentences. It has 
been argued by Gotoh and Renals (2000) that the 
main unit in spoken language is the phrase rather 
than the sentence. However, there are situations 
in which it is appropriate to consider spoken lan- 
guage to be made up from sentences. One example 
is broadcast news: radio and television news pro- 
grams. The DARPA HUB4 broadcast news evalu- 
ation (Chinchor et al, 1998) focussed on informa- 
tion extraction from ASR text from news programs. 
Although news programs are scripted there are of- 
ten deviations from the script and they cannot be 
relied upon as accurate transcriptions of the news 
84 
program. The spoken portion of the British National 
Corpus (Burnard, 1995) contains 10 million words 
and was manually marked with sentence boundar- 
ies. A technology which identifies entence boundar- 
ies could be used to speed up the process of creating 
any future corpus of this type. 
It is important o distinguish the problem just 
mentioned and another problem sometimes called 
"sentence splitting". This problem aims to identify 
sentence boundaries in standard text but since this 
includes punctuation the problem is effectively re- 
duced to deciding which of the symbols which poten- 
tially denote sentence boundaries ( . ,  !,  ?) actually 
do. This problem is not trivial since these punc- 
tuation symbols do not always occur at the end of 
sentences. For example in the sentence "Dr. Jones 
l ec tures  at  U.C.L.A." only the final full stop de- 
notes the end of a sentence. For the sake of clarity 
we shall refer to the process of discovering sentence 
boundaries in standard punctuated text as "punc- 
tuation disambiguation" and that of finding them 
in unpunctuated ASR text as "sentence boundary 
detection". 
2 Related Work 
Despite the potential application of technology 
which can carry out the sentence boundary detec- 
tion task, there has been little research into the 
area. However, there has been work in the re- 
lated field of punctuation disambiguation. Palmer 
and Hearst (1994) applied a neural network to the 
problem. They used the Brown Corpus for training 
and evaluation, noting that 90% of the full stops in 
this text indicate sentence boundaries. They used 
the part of speech information for the words sur- 
rounding a punctuation symbol as the input to a 
feed-forward neural network. But, as we mentioned, 
most part of speech taggers require sentence bound- 
aries to be pre-determined and this potential cir- 
cularity is avoided by using the prior probabilities 
for each token, determined from the Brown corpus 
markup. The network was trained on 573 potential 
sentence nding marks from the Wall Street Journal 
and tested on 27,294 items from the same corpus. 
98.5% of punctuation marks were correctly disam- 
biguated. 
Reynar and Ratnaparkhi (1997) applied a max- 
imum entropy approach to the problem. Their 
system considered only the first word to the left 
and right of any potential sentence boundary and 
claimed that examining wider context did not help. 
For both these words the prefix, suffix, presence of 
particular characters in the prefix or suffix, whether 
the candidate is honorific (Mr., Dr. etc.) and 
whether the candidate is a corporate designator (eg. 
Corp.) are features that are considered. This sys- 
tem was tested on the same corpus as Palmer and 
Hearst's system and correctly identified 98.8% of 
sentence boundaries. Mikheev (1998) optimised this 
approach and evaluated it on the same test corpus. 
An accuracy of 99.2477% was reported, to our know- 
ledge this is the highest quoted result for this test 
set. 
These three systems achieve very high results 
for the punctuation disambiguation task. It would 
seem, then, that this problem has largely been 
solved. However, it is not clear that these techniques 
will be as successful for ASR text. We now go on to 
describe a system which attempts a task similar to 
sentence boundary detection of ASR text. 
Beeferman et al (1998) produced a system, "CY- 
BERPUNC", which added intra-sentence punctu- 
ation (i.e. commas) to the output of an ASR system. 
They mention that the comma is the most frequently 
used punctuation symbol and its correct insertion 
can make a text far more legible. CYBERPUNC 
operated by augmenting a standard trigram speech 
recognition model with information about commas; 
it accesses only lexical information. CYBERPUNC 
was tested by separating the trigram model from 
the ASR system and applying it to 2,317 sentences 
from the Wall Street Journal. The system achieved 
a precision of 75.6% and recall of 65.6% compared 
against he original punctuation i  the text. 2 A fur- 
ther qualitative valuation was carried out using 100 
randomly-drawn output sentences from the system 
and 100 from the Wall Street Journal. Six human 
judges blindly marked each sentence as either ac- 
ceptable or unacceptable. It was found that the 
Penn TreeBank sentences were 86% correct and the 
system output 66% correct. It is interesting that the 
human judges do not agree completely on the ac- 
ceptability of many sentences from the Wall Street 
Journal. 
In the next section we go on to describe exper- 
iments which quantify the level of agreement that 
can be expected when humans carry out sentence 
boundary detection. Section 4 goes on to describe a
computational pproach to the problem. 
3 Determining Human Abi l i ty 
Beeferman et. al.'s experiments demonstrated that 
humans do not always agree on the acceptability of 
comma insertion and therefore it may be useful to 
determine how often they agree on the placing of 
sentence boundaries. To do this we carried out ex- 
periments using transcriptions ofnews programmes, 
specifically the transcriptions of two editions of the 
~Precision and recall are complementary  evaluation met- 
rics commonly  used in Information Retrieval (van Rijsbergen, 
1979). In this case precision is the percentage of commas pro- 
posed by the system which are correct while recall is the per- 
centage of the commas occurring in the test corpus which the 
system identified. 
R~ 
BBC television program "The Nine O'Clock News" .3 
The transcriptions consisted of punctuated mixed 
case text with sentences boundaries marked using a 
reserved character ("; "). These texts were produced 
by trained transcribers listening to the original pro- 
gram broadcast. 
Six experimental subjects were recruited. All sub- 
jects were educated to at least Bachelor's degree 
level and are either native English speakers or flu- 
ent second language speakers. Each subject was 
presented with the same text from which the sen- 
tence boundaries had been removed. The texts were 
transcriptions of two editions of the news program 
from 1997, containing 534 sentences and represented 
around 50 minutes of broadcast news. The subjects 
were randomly split into two groups. The subjects 
in the first group (subjects 1-3) were presented with 
the text stripped of punctuation and converted to 
upper case. This text simulated ASR text with no 
errors in the transcription. The remaining three sub- 
jects (4-6) were presented with the same text with 
punctuation removed but case information retained 
(i.e. mixed case text). This simulated unpunctuated 
standard text. All subjects were asked to add sen- 
tence boundaries to the text whenever they thought 
they occurred. 
The process of determining human ability at some 
linguistic task is generally made difficult by the lack 
of an appropriate reference. Often all we have to 
compare one person's judgement with is that of an- 
other. For example, there have been attempts to 
determine the level of performance which can be ex- 
pected when humans perform word sense disambig- 
uation (Fellbaum et al, 1998) but these have simply 
compared some human judgements against others 
with one being chosen as the "expert". We have 
already seen, in Section 2, that there is a signific- 
ant degree of human disagreement over the accept- 
ability of intra-sentential punctuation. The human 
transcribers ofthe "Nine O'Clock News" have access 
to the original news story which contains more in- 
formation than just the transcription. Under these 
conditions it is reasonable to consider their opinion 
as expert. 
Table 1 shows the performance of the human sub- 
jects compared to the reference transcripts. 4 
An algorithm was implemented to provide a 
baseline tagging of the text. The average length of 
sentences in our text is 19 words and the baseline al- 
gorithm randomly assigns a sentence break at each 
word boundary with a probability of ~ .  The two 
annotators labelled "random" show the results when 
this algorithm is applied. This method produced a
3This is a 25 minute long television ews program broad- 
cast in the United Kingdom on Monday to Friday evenings. 
4F-measure (F) is a weighted harmonic ombining preci- 
sion (P) and recall (R) via the formula 2PR 
PTR " 
very low result in comparison to the expert annota- 
tion. 
1 Upper 84 68 76 
2 Upper 93 78 85 
3 Upper 90 76 82 
4 Mixed 97 90 94 
5 Mixed 96 89 92 
6 Mixed 97 67 79 
Random Upper 5 5 5 
Random Mixed 5 5 5 
Table 1: Results from Human Annotation Experi- 
ment 
The performance of the human annotators on the 
upper case text is quite significantly lower than 
the reported performance of the algorithms which 
performed punctuation disambiguation on standard 
text as described in Section 2. This suggests that 
the performance which may be obtained for this task 
may be lower than has been achieved for standard 
text. 
~Sarther insight into the task can be gained from 
determining the degree to which the subjects agreed. 
Carletta (1996) argues that the kappa statistic (a) 
should be adopted to judge annotator consistency 
for classification tasks in the area of discourse and 
dialogue analysis. It is worth noting that the prob- 
lem of sentence boundary detection presented so far 
in this paper has been formulated as a classification 
task in which each token boundary has to be clas- 
sifted as either being a sentence boundary or not. 
Carletta argues that several incompatible measures 
of annotator agreement have been used in discourse 
analysis, making comparison impossible. Her solu- 
tion is to look to the field of content analysis, which 
has already experienced these problems, and adopt 
their solution of using the kappa statistic. This de- 
termines the difference between the observed agree- 
ment for a linguistic task and that which would be 
expected by chance. It is calculated according to for- 
mula 1, where Pr(A) is the proportion of times the 
annotators agree and Pr(E) the proportion which 
would be expected by chance. Detailed instructions 
on calculating these probabilities are described by 
Siegel and Castellan (1988). 
Pr(A) - Pr(E)  
= (1) 
1 - Pr(E) 
The value of the kappa statistic ranges between 
1 (perfect agreement) and 0 (the level which would 
be expected by chance). It has been claimed that 
content analysis researchers usually regard a > .8 to 
demonstrate good reliability and .67 < ~ < .8 al- 
f16 
lows tentative conclusions to be drawn (see Carletta 
(1996)). 
We began to analyse the data by computing the 
kappa statistic for both sets of annotators. Among 
the two annotators who marked the mixed case (sub- 
jects 4 and 5) there was an observed kappa value of 
0.98, while there was a measure of 0.91 for the three 
subjects who annotated the single case text. These 
values are high and suggest a strong level of agree- 
ment between the annotators. However, manual 
analysis of the annotated texts suggested that the 
subjects did not agree on many cases. We then ad- 
ded the texts annotated by the "random" annotation 
algorithm and calculated the new ~ values. It was 
found that the mixed case test produced a kappa 
value of 0.92 and the upper case text 0.91. These 
values would still suggest a high level of agreement 
although the sentences produced by our random al- 
gorithm were nonsensical. 
The problem seems to be that most word bound- 
aries in a text are not sentence boundaries. There- 
fore we could compare the subjects' annotations 
who had not agreed on any sentence boundaries but 
find that they agreed most word boundaries were 
not sentence boundaries. The same problem will 
effect other standard measures of inter-annotator 
agreement such as the Cramer, Phi and Kendall 
coefficients (see Siegel and Castellan (1988)). Car- 
letta mentions this problem, asking what the dif- 
ference would be if the kappa statistic were com- 
puted across "clause boundaries, transcribed word 
boundaries, and transcribed phoneme boundaries" 
(Carletta, 1996, p. 252) rather than the sentence 
boundaries he suggested. It seems likely that more 
meaningful ~ values would be obtained if we restric- 
ted to the boundaries between clauses rather than 
all token boundaries. However, it is difficult to ima- 
gine how clauses could be identified without parsing 
and most parsers require part of speech tagged input 
text. But, as we already mentioned, part of speech 
taggers often require input text split into sentences. 
Consequently, there is a lack of available systems for 
splitting ASR text into grammatical clauses. 
4 A Computat iona l  Approach  to  
Sentence  Boundary  Detect ion  
The remainder of this paper describes an implemen- 
ted program which attempts entence boundary de- 
tection. The approach is based around the Timbl 
memory-based learning algorithm (Daelemans et al, 
1999) which we previously found to be very success- 
ful when applied to the word sense disambiguation 
problem (Stevenson and Wilks, 1999). 
Memory-based learning, also known as case-based 
and lazy learning, operates by memorising a set of 
training examples and categorising new cases by as- 
signing them the class of the most similar learned 
example. We apply this methodology to the sen- 
tence boundary detection task by presenting Timbl 
with examples of word boundaries from a train- 
ing text, each of which is categorised as either 
sentence_boundary or no_boundary. Unseen ex- 
amples are then compared and categorised with the 
class of the most similar example. We shall not 
discuss the method by which Timbl determines the 
most similar training example which is described by 
Daelemans et al (1999). 
Following the work done on punctuation disambig- 
uation and that of Beeferman et. al. on comma in- 
sertion (Section 2), we used the Wall Street Journal 
text for this experiment. These texts are reliably 
part of speech tagged 5 and sentence boundaries can 
be easily derived from the corpus. This text was 
initially altered so as to remove all punctuation and 
map all characters into upper case. 90% of the cor- 
pus, containing 965 sentence breaks, was used as a 
training corpus with the remainder, which contained 
107 sentence breaks, being held-back as unseen test 
data. The first stage was to extract some statistics 
from the training corpus. We examined the training 
corpus and computed, for each word in the text, the 
probability that it started a sentence and the prob- 
ability that it ended a sentence. In addition, for each 
part of speech tag we also computed the probability 
that it is assigned to the first word in a sentence and 
the probability that it is assigned to the last word. 6 
Each word boundary in the corpus was translated to 
a feature-vector representation consisting of 13 ele- 
ments, shown in Table 2. Vectors in the test corpus 
are in a similar format, the difference being that the 
classification (feature 13) is not included. 
The results obtained are shown in the top row of 
Table 3. Both precision and recall are quite prom- 
ising under these conditions. However, this text is 
different from ASR text in one important way: the 
text is mixed case. The experimented was repeated 
with capitalisation information removed; that is, 
features 6 and 12 were removed from the feature- 
vectors. The results form this experiment are shown 
in the bottom row of Table 3. It can be seen that 
the recorded performance is far lower when capital- 
isation information is not used, indicating that this 
is an important feature for the task. 
These experiments have shown that it is much 
easier to add sentence boundary information to 
mixed case test, which is essentially standard text 
with punctuation removed, than ASR text, even as- 
5Applying a priori tag probability distributions could have 
been used rather than the tagging in the corpus as such re- 
liable annotations may not be available for the output of an 
ASR system. Thus, the current experiments should be viewed 
as making an optimistic assumption. 
eWe attempted to smooth these probabilities using Good- 
Turing frequency estimation (Gale and Sampson, 1996) but 
found that it had no effect on the final results. 
87 
Position Feature 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Preceding word 
Probability preceding word ends a sentence 
Part of speech tag assigned to preceding word 
Probability that part of speech tag (feature 3) is assigned to last word in a sentence 
Flag indicating whether preceding word is a stop word 
Flag indicating whether preceding word is capitalised 
Following word 
Probability following word begins a sentence 
Part of speech tag assigned to following word 
Probability that part of speech (feature 9) is assigned to first word in a sentence 
Flag indicating whether following word is a stop word 
Flag indicating whether following word is capitalised word 
sentence_boundary or no_boundary 
Table 2: Features used in Timbl representation 
Case information \[I P I R I F 
Applied I 78 \[ 75 \[ 76 
Not applied 36 35 35 
Table 3: Results of the sentence boundary detection 
program 
suming a zero word error rate. This result is in 
agreement with the results from the human annota- 
tion experiments described in Section 3. However, 
there is a far greater difference between the auto- 
matic system's performance on standard and ASR 
text than the human annotators. 
Reynar and Ratnaparkhi (1997) (Section 2) ar- 
gued that a context of one word either side is suf- 
ficient for the punctuation disambiguation problem. 
However, the results of our system suggest that this 
may be insufficient for the sentence boundary detec- 
tion problem even assuming reliable part of speech 
tags (cf note 5). 
These experiments do not make use of prosodic in- 
formation which may be included as part of the ASR 
output. Such information includes pause length, 
pre-pausal lengthening and pitch declination. If this 
information was made available in the form of extra 
features to a machine learning algorithm then it is 
possible that the results will improve. 
5 Conc lus ion  
This paper has introduced the problem of sentence 
boundary detection on the text produced by an ASR 
system as an area of application for NLP technology. 
An attempt was made to determine the level of 
human performance which could be expected for the 
task. It was found that there was a noticeable dif- 
ference between the observed performance for mixed 
and upper case text. It was found that the kappa 
statistic, a commonly used method for calculating 
inter-annotator agreement, could not be applied dir- 
ectly in this situation. 
A memory-based system for identifying sentence 
boundaries in ASR text was implemented. There 
was a noticeable difference when the same system 
was applied to text which included case information 
demonstrating that this is an important feature for 
the problem. 
This paper does not propose to offer a solution to 
the sentence boundary detection problem for ASR 
transcripts. However, our aim has been to high- 
light the problem as one worthy of further explor- 
ation within the field of NLP and to establish some 
baselines (human and algorithmic) against which 
further work may be compared. 
Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to thank Steve Renals and 
Yoshihiko Gotoh for providing the data for human 
annotation experiments and for several useful con- 
versations. They are also grateful to the following 
people who took part in the annotation experiment: 
Paul Clough, George Demetriou, Lisa Ferry, Michael 
Oakes and Andrea Setzer. 
References  
D. Beeferman, A. Berger, and J. Lafferty. 1998. CY- 
BERPUNC: A lightweight punctuation annota- 
tion system for speech. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech 
and Signal Processing, pages 689-692, Seattle, 
WA. 
E. Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proceeding of the Third Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP-92), 
pages 152-155, Trento, Italy. 
R~ 88
L. Burnard, 1995. Users Reference Guide for the 
British National Corpus. Oxford University Com- 
puting Services. 
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classific- 
ation tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational 
Linguistics, 22(2):249-254. 
N. Chinchor, P. Robinson, and E. Brown. 
1998. HUB-4 Named Entity Task Defini- 
tion (version 4.8). Technical report, SAIC. 
http ://www. nist. gov/speech/hub4-98. 
R. Cole, editor. 1996. Survey of the State of the 
Art in Human Language Technology. Available at: 
http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/HLTsurvey/HLTsurvey.html. 
Site visited 17/11/99. 
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel, K. van der Sloot, 
and A. van den Bosch. 1999. TiMBL: Tilburg 
memory based learner version 2.0, reference guide. 
Technical report, ILK Technical Report 98-03. 
ILK Reference Report 99-01, Available from 
http ://ilk. kub. nl/" ilk/papers/ilk9901, ps. gz. 
C. Fellbaum, J. Grabowski, S. Landes, and A. Ban- 
mann. 1998. Matching words to senses in Word- 
Net: Naive vs. expert differentiation of senses. In 
C. Fellbaum, editor, WordNet: An electronic lex- 
ieal database and some applications. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
W. Gale and G. Sampson. 1996. Good-Turing 
frequency estimation without tears. Journal of 
Quantitave Linguistics, 2(3):217-37. 
Y. Gotoh and S. Renals. 2000. Information extrac- 
tion from broadcast news. Philosophical Trans- 
actions of the Royal Society of London, series A: 
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 
(to appear). 
A. Mikheev. 1998. Feature lattices for maximum en- 
tropy modelling. In Proceedings of the 36th Meet- 
ing of the Association for Computational Linguist- 
ics (COLING-ACL-98), pages 848-854, Montreal, 
Canada. 
R. Moore, J. Dowding, H. Bratt, J. Gawron, 
Y. Gorfu, and A. Cheyer. 1997. CommandTalk: 
A Spokcaa-Language Interface to Battlefield Simu- 
lations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 1-7, 
Washington, DC. 
D. Palmer and M. Hearst. 1994. Adaptive sen- 
tence boundary disambiguation. In Proceedings of 
the 1994 Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pages 78-83, Stutgart, Germany. 
J. Reynar and A. Ratnaparkhi. 1997. A max- 
imum entropy approach to identifying sentence 
boundries. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 
16-19, Washington, D.C. 
S. Siegel and N. Castellan. 1988. Nonparametrie 
Statistics for the Behavioural Sciences. McGraw- 
Hill, second edition. 
M. Stevenson and Y. Wilks. 1999. Combining weak 
knowledge sources for sense disambiguation. In 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 884- 
889. Stockholm, Sweden. 
C. van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retrieval. 
Butterworths, London. 
89 
