Aggressive Morphology for Robust Lexical Coverage 
Will iam A. Woods 
Sun Microsystems Laborator ies  
1 Network Drive 
Bur l ington,  MA 01803 
Wi l l iam.Woods@east .sun.corn 
Abstract 
This paper describes an approach to providing lex- 
ical information for natural anguage processing in 
unrestricted domains. A system of approximately 
1200 morphological rules is used to extend acore lex- 
icon of 39,000 words to provide lexical coverage that 
exceeds that of a lexicon of 80,000 words or 150,000 
word forms. The morphological system is described, 
and lexical coverage is evaluated for random words 
chosen from a previously unanalyzed corpus. 
1 Motivation 
Many applications of natural language processing 
have a need for a large vocabulary lexicon. How- 
ever, no matter how large a lexicon one starts with, 
most applications will encounter terms that are not 
covered. This paper describes an approach to the 
lexicon problem that emphasizes recognition of mor- 
phological structure in unknown words in order to 
extend a relatively small core lexicon to allow ro- 
bust natural language processing in unrestricted do- 
mains. This technique, which extends functionality 
originally developed for the Lunar system (Woods et 
al., 1972), has been most recently applied in a con- 
ceptual indexing and retrieval system (Woods, 1997; 
Ambroziak and Woods, 1998; Woods et ai., 2000). 
The system described here uses a collection of 
approximately 1200 knowledge-based morphologi- 
cal rules to extend a core lexicon of approximately 
39,000 words to give coverage that exceeds that of an 
English lexicon of more than 80,000 base forms (or 
150,000 base plus inflected forms). To illustrate the 
need for a robust extensible l xicon, a random sam- 
ple of 100 words from the vocabulary of the million- 
word Brown corpus (Kucera and Francis, 1967), con- 
tained 24 words that were not included in a 300,000- 
word list of English word forms. This suggests that 
approximately 25% of the words in the Brown cor- 
pus would not be covered by an independent lexicon 
of even 300,000 words. 
In a recent experiment, 54% of approximately 
34,000 word types (numbers and hyphenated words 
excluded) from a 3.1-million-word corpus of techni- 
cal literature would not be covered by our hypothet- 
ical 300,O00-word lexicon. Many of these are special 
forms (e.g., Nb203 and Ti/tin), and some are ap- 
parent misspellings (e.g., auniprocessor and sychro- 
nized), but the following are a sampling of fairly nor- 
mal words that were not in the 300,O00-word list: 
busmaster 
copyline 
hereabove 
preprocessing 
uniprocessors 
unreacted 
2 Integrated, Preferential, Heuristic 
Morpho logy  
There are a number of systems that have been used 
to describe natural language morphology for compu- 
tational use. The most popular of these is perhaps 
the finite-state Kimmo system (Koskenniemi, 1983). 
Other approaches are described in (Sproat, 1992). 
The system described here differs from other systems 
in a number of dimensions. First, it is integrated 
with an extensive lexicon, a semantic ontology, and 
a syntactic analysis ystem, which it both consults 
and augments. For example, subsumption relation- 
ships in the semantic ontology enable the system to 
determine whether a proposed root is a container or 
a mental attitude, so that cupful is interpreted as a 
unit of measure (a kind of noun), while hopeful is 
interpreted as an adjective. 
Second, it uses ordered preferential rules that at- 
tempt to choose a small number of correct analy- 
ses of a word (usually 1-3) from the many potential 
analyses that might be found. Finally, it uses rules 
that are heuristic in that they are not guaranteed to
give correct analyses, but rather are designed to deal 
with various tates of lack of knowledge and to make 
plausible inferences in the face of uncertainty. The 
focus is to use what it knows (or can infer) to de- 
termine a usable set of part-of-speech lassifications 
for the word and to determine any root-plus-affix 
or internal compound structure that is apparent. If 
possible, it also assigns a semantic ategorization to 
the word. It deals with unknown as well as known 
218
roots, and it indicates relative confidences in its clas- 
sifications when its rules indicate uncertainty in the 
result. 
The role of the morphological nalysis component 
in this system is to construct lexical entries for words 
that do not already have entries, so that subsequent 
encounters with the same word will find an already 
existing lexical entry. Thus, morphological nalysis 
happens only once for each encountered word type 
that is not already in the core lexicon. The resulting 
lexical entries can be saved in a supplementary lex- 
icon that is constructed as a side-effect of analyzing 
text. The rules of the morphological analysis sys- 
tem can ask syntactic and semantic questions about 
potential base forms. The system handles prefixes, 
suffixes, and lexical compounds (e.g., bitmap and re- 
plybuffer). It also handles multiword lexical items 
and many special forms, including Roman numer- 
als, dates, and apparent phone numbers. 
2.1 Morpho log ica l  rules and the  lexicon 
The morphological nalysis system makes use of a 
number of different kinds of morphological rules, ap- 
plied in the following preferential order to words that 
are not already in the lexicon: 
1. Morph-precheck for special forms 
2. Phase one pass with suffix rules (allow only 
"known" roots in phase one) 
3. Prefix rules 
4. Lexical compound rules 
5. Check of name lists and city lists for words not 
yet recognized 
6. Phase two pass with suffix rules (allow unknown 
roots and default rules) 
Generally, the rules are ordered in decreasing or- 
der of specificity, confidence and likelihood. Very 
specific tests are applied in Step 1 to identify and 
deal with "words" that are not ordinary sequences 
of alphabetic haracters. These include numbers, 
alphanumeric sequences, and expressions involving 
special characters. Falling this, an ordered sequence 
of suffix rules is applied in Step 2 in a first pass that 
will allow a match only if the proposed root word is 
"known." The same list of rules will be applied later 
in a second pass without this known-root condition 
if an earlier analysis does not succeed. This issue of 
"known" roots is a subtle one that can involve con- 
sulting external lists of known words as well as words 
already in the lexicon, and can also consider certain 
derived forms of known roots to be "known," even 
when they have not been previously encountered. 
For example, if.fish is a known word, then fishing is 
as good as known, so is considered a "known" root 
for this purpose. In general, suffix rules applied to 
"known" roots are more reliable than applications of 
rules to unknown roots or to words with no identifi- 
able root. 
If no phase-one suffix rules apply, prefix rules are 
tried in Step 3 to see if an interpretation of this word 
as a prefix combined with some other "known" word 
is possible. Falling this, a set of lexical compound 
rules is tried, in Step 4, to see if the word is inter- 
pretable as a compound of two or more words, and 
failing that, lists of first and last names of people 
and names of cities are checked in Step 5. All of 
steps 3-5 are considered more reliable if they suc- 
ceed than the phase-two pass of the suffix rules that 
comes in Step 6. This ordering allows prefixes and 
compounding to be tried before less confident suffix 
analyses are attempted, and avoids applying weak 
suffix analyses to known names. Various other ways 
to order these rules have been tried, but this order 
has been found to be the most effective. 
2.2 Special  fo rm tests  
Before trying pattern-based rules for suffixes, pre- 
fixes, and lexical compounds, the morphological n- 
alyzer makes a number of tests for special forms that 
require idiosyncratic treatment. These tests include 
the following: 
? number (including integer, floating, and expo- 
nential notations, including numbers too large 
to be represented internally as numbers in the 
machine), 
? Roman numeral (vii, mcm), 
? ordinal (1st, 2nd, twenty-third), 
? alphanum (Al203, 79D), 
? letter (b, x), 
? initial (B.), 
? phone number (123-4567), 
? hyphenated adjective (all-volunteer), 
? ra t io  (s/S, V/R), 
? multiword lexical item (snake_in_the_grass), 
? special proper nouns (gls@mit.edu, /usr/bin, 
http://www.sun.com, C+ + ) 
2.3 Pat tern -act ion  rules 
Suffix rules in this system are pattern-action rules 
that specify: 
1. a pattern of characters to match at the end of 
the word to be analyzed, 
2. possibly a number of characters to remove 
and/or a sequence of characters to add to form 
a root (or base form), 
3. a sequence of tests and action clauses indicating 
possible interpretations of a word matching this 
pattern. 
'21_q 219
These rules are organized into blocks that are typi- 
cally indexed by a shared final letter, and are applied 
in order within a block until a rule is encountered 
that generates one or more interpretations. At that 
point, no further rules are tried, and the interpreta- 
tions generated by that rule are used to construct a
lexical entry for the analyzed word. 
The following is an example of a fairly specific, 
but productive, knowledge-rich morphological suffix 
rule: 
((f i s h) (kill 4) 
(test (plausible-root root)) 
(cat nmsp 
(is-root-of-cat root '(adj n)) 
eval (progu (mark-dict lex 
(mark-dict 
(mark-dict 
(mark-d ict  
' -es))) 
'false-root 
root t t) 
lex 
'kindof 
'fish t t )  
lex 
'has-prefix 
root t t )  
l ex  
'root 
'fish t t) 
This rule matches a word that ends in fish and 
removes four letters from the end (the fish part) to 
produce a root word which it then tests to see if it 
is a plausible root (e.g., does it at least have a vowel 
in it?). If it gets this fax, the rule will construct 
a category nmsp interpretation (a kind of noun), if 
the condition ( i s - root -o f -cat  root  ' (adj n))  is 
true (i.e., if the root is a known adjective or noun). 
This rule deals with words like hagfish and goatfish 
and comes before the rules that handle words with 
ish as a suffix, like doltish and oafish. Incidentally, 
this rule doesn't apply to oafish because the hypoth- 
esized root on, which would result from removing 
four letters, is not known to be an adjective or noun. 
When this rule succeeds, it specifies that the word 
will be assigned the category nmsp, a category indi- 
cating a word that has a mass sense, a singular count 
sense, and can also be used as a plural (e.g., Goatfish 
are 1%nny-looking.). (The category nmsp comes from 
a collection of 91 syntactic ategories, organized in 
a hierarchy based on generality, so that, for exam- 
ple, nm subsumes nmsp.) The action part of this rule 
specifies that (contrary to the usual case) the "root" 
obtained by removing characters from the end of the 
word (e.g., goat) is in this case a false root. The real 
root is fish, and the false root (goat) is actually a 
prefix. The rule also specifies that the word refers 
to a kind of fish and that the inflectional paradigm 
for this word is -es (thus allowing goatfishes as an 
alternative plural). 
The rules within a block are ordered in decreasing 
order of confidence and specificity. Thus, rules with 
conditions that check explicit inflectional paradigms 
of known roots are ordered before rules that guess 
the inflectional paradigm from the spelling of the 
root, and rules with more specific conditions are or- 
dered before rules with less specific conditions so 
that the latter can assume that the former will al- 
ready have been tested and rejected. The rules 
within a block of suffix rules will typically try for 
interpretations in roughly the following order: 
1. inflected form of a known root satisfying a 
named inflectional paradigm (paradigmatic) 
2. inflected form of a known word in right category 
with unknown inflectional paradigm 
3. apparent inflected form of a known word of 
some other category 
4. apparent inflected form of an unknown word 
5. apparent derived form of a known root of the 
right category 
6. apparent derived form of a known root regard- 
less of category 
7. apparent derived form of an unknown root 
8. word with apparent syntactic ategory and per- 
haps suffix, without identifiable root 
9. guessed noun (and perhaps verb also, if core 
vocabulary is not comprehensive) 
The last rule in this sequence is a default guess- 
ing rule that depends on a flag that tells it whether 
it is running with a core lexicon that is believed to 
contain most nonobvious verbs. If so, then only the 
noun part-of-speech is assigned, but with a smaller 
core lexicon, the guessing rules would also assign a 
less likely interpretation as a verb, in order to pro- 
vide a way for unknown verbs to be parsed correctly 
in sentences. 
Prefix rules are similar in structure to suffix rules, 
except hat the pattern is matched at the beginning 
of the word, and the rule blocks are indexed by the 
initial letter of the word. Lexical compound rules 
have a slightly different format and are called by a 
specialized interpreter that looks for places to divide 
a word into two pieces of sufficient size. The points 
of potential decomposition are searched from right 
to left, and the first such point that has an interpre- 
tation is taken, with the following exception: The 
morph compound analyzer checks for special cases 
where, for example, the first word is plural and ends 
in an s, but there is an alternative segmentation i  
which the singular of the first word is followed by a 
220 220
word starting with the s. In such cases, the decom- 
position using the singular first word is preferred 
over the one using the plural. For example, the 
word minesweeper will be analyzed as mine+sweeper 
rather than mines+weeper. This preference heuris- 
tic is specific to English and might be different for 
other languages. 
2.4 Recurs ive  app l icat ion  of  rules 
When attempting to apply a rule to a word, the 
morphological analyzer can be applied recursively 
to analyze the hypothesized root. A simple caching 
technique is used to control the potential for com- 
binatoric explosion and to block looping. This is 
sufficiently effective that the time required for mor- 
phological analysis is a negligible part of the time 
required for processing large amounts of natural an- 
guage text. Protection against looping is especially 
important for a kind of morphological rule that de- 
rives one word from another without either of them 
being a root of the other in the usual sense (e.g., de- 
riving communist from communism or external from 
internal). Operating in a loop-safe nvironment al- 
lows rules like these to identify the relationship be- 
tween a new word and a known word in either di- 
rection, whichever of the two forms is encountered 
first. 
3 Eva luat ion  
Since analyzing a word is done once per unknown 
word type and consumes a negligible fraction of the 
overall text-processing time, speed of operation is 
not considered a factor for evaluation. The inter- 
esting dimension of evaluation deals with the cov- 
erage of the rules and the kinds of errors that are 
made. This was tested by applying the system to 
two word lists randomly selected from the Brown 
corpus and provided to me by Philip Resnik, using 
some sampling tools that he developed. The first of 
these (the token sample) consists of 100 word tokens 
selected randomly, without eliminating duplicates, 
and the second (the type sample) consists of 100 
distinct word types selected randomly from the vo- 
cabulary of the Brown corpus. Prior to a single test 
run on each of these samples, neither the lexicon nor 
the morphological rule system had any exposure to 
the Brown corpus, nor had either of these word lists 
been looked at by the experimenter. Consequently, 
the results are a fair evaluation of the expected per- 
formance of this system on an unknown domain. 
3.1 Grad ing  ru le  per fo rmance  
Since different syntactic category errors have dif- 
ferent consequences for parsing text, it is useful to 
grade the syntactic ategory assignments of the ana- 
lyzer on an A-B-C-D-F scale according to the sever- 
ity of any mistakes. Grades are assigned to a lexical 
entry as follows: 
A if all appropriate syntactic ategories are assigned 
and no incorrect categories are assigned 
B if all categories are correct, allowing for catego- 
rizing an adjective or a name as a noun or a 
noun as a name 
C if an entry has at least one correct category and 
is correct except for missing a noun category or 
having a single extra category 
D if there is more than one extra category or if there 
is a missing category other than one of the above 
cases, provided that there is at least one correct 
category 
F if there are no correct categories 
Both A and B grades are considered acceptable 
assignments for the sake of evaluation, since cate- 
gory B errors would allow a reasonable parse to be 
found. This is because the grammar used for pars- 
ing sentences and phrases allows a noun to be used 
as an adjective modifier and a proper noun to be 
used in place of a noun. One parser/grammar that 
uses this lexicon also allows any other categoo; to be 
used as a noun, at the expense of a penalty, so that 
a C grade will still enable a parse, although with a 
penalty and a substantial likelihood that other false 
parses might score better. Similarly, a D grade in- 
creases the likelihood that a false parse might score 
better. 
Separately, we measure whether count/mass dis- 
tinctions are made correctly (for nouns only), 
and whether roots of derived and inflected forms 
are identified correctly. We are interested in 
the count/mass distinction because, like the com- 
mon/proper noun distinction, it affects the gram- 
maticality and likelihood of a noun phrase interpre- 
tation for a singular noun in absence of an explicit 
determiner. 
3.2 Sampl ing  rule per fo rmance  
The morphological nalyzer has been applied to the 
words from the two sample word lists that were not 
already in its core lexicon. There were 17 such 
words from the token sample and 72 such words 
from the type sample. Of the 17 unknown token- 
sample words, 100% were graded B or better (88% 
A and 12% B); 85% of the roots were identified cor- 
rectly (all but one); 85% of the count noun senses 
were found (all but one); and 100% of the mass noun 
senses were found. Token-sample performance is not 
a very challenging test for a morphological nalyzer 
because it is biased toward a relatively small number 
of frequently occurring word types. Token-sample 
performance is used to assess the per-token error rate 
that one would expect in analyzing large amounts of 
running text. In contrast, type-sample performance 
@@1 221
Table 1: Syntactic ate ;ory performance of the analyzer. 
Category Grade A B C D F B or better 
Number 62 8 1 0 1 70 
Percent 86% 11% 1.5% 0% 1.5% 97% 
Table 2: Count/mass distinction performance of the analyzer. 
Count/mass Good count Extra count Good mass Missing mass 
Number 39 1 14 1 
Percent 100% 2.6% 93% 6.7% 
Table 3: Root identification performance of the analyzer. 
Detect root Good Wrong Debatable Missing Extra 
Number 57 1 1 0 1 
Percent 95% 1.7% 1.7% 0 1.7% 
gives a measure of the expected performance on new 
words the analyzer is likely to encounter. 
For the 72 words in the type sample that are not 
covered by the lexicon, Tables 1-3 show the syntactic 
category performance of the analyzer and its abilities 
to make count/mass distinctions and identify roots. 
Notes on incorrect or debatable analyses: 
1. One N (noun) for a probable name (Tonio), 
counted as B. 
2. Two NPR(proper name) for abbreviations; 
(A. V. may be ADJ, W.B. is correct), counted 
as one B and one A. 
3. One wrong root when suffix ism was identified 
as root of hooliganism in a hypothesized com- 
pound hooligan+ism (arguably justifiable as a 
kind of ism, which is known in the lexicon, but 
counted as an error anyway). Reanalyzing this 
word after hooligan is a known word gets the 
correct interpretation. 
4. One debatable root in the hyphenated phrase 
reference-points whose root was listed as points 
rather than reference-point. This is due to a 
bug that caused the hyphenated word rules to 
incorrectly identify this as a verb, rather than 
a noun (counted as F for syntax). 
5. One extra root for embouchure from embouche 
(but a correct form of the French root?). 
6. One missing category N for bobbles, which was 
given category V but not N because the core 
lexicon incorrectly listed bobble only as a verb 
(counted as C for syntax). This is corrected by 
adding the missing category to the lexical entry 
for bobble. 
4 Conclus ions 
We have described an approach to robust lexical cov- 
erage for unrestricted text applications that makes 
use of an aggressive set of morphological rules to 
supplement a core lexicon of approximately 39,000 
words to give lexical coverage that exceeds that of a 
much larger lexicon. This morphological nalyzer 
is integrated with an extensive lexicon, an ontol- 
ogy, and a syntactic analysis ystem, which it both 
consults and augments. It uses ordered preferential 
rules that attempt to choose a small number of cor- 
rect analyses of a word and are designed to deal with 
various states of lack of knowledge. When applied 
to 72 unknown words from a random sample of 100 
distinct word types from the Brown corpus, its syn- 
tactic category assignments received a grade of B or 
better (using a grading system explained herein) for 
97% of the words, and it correctly identified 95% 
of the root words. This performance demonstrates 
that one can obtain robust lexical coverage for natu- 
ral language processing applications in unrestricted 
domains, using a relatively small core lexicon and an 
aggressive collection of morphological rules. 
References 
Jacek Ambroziak and William A. Woods. 1998. 
Natural anguage technology in precision content 
retrieval. In International Conference on Natural 
Language Processing and Industrial Applications, 
Moncton, New Brunswick, Canada, August. 
www.sun.com/research/techrep/1998/abstract- 
69.html. 
Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level model for 
morphological nalysis. In Proceedings of the In- 
ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli- 
gence, pages 683-685, Los Angelos, CA. Morgan 
Kauffmann. 
H. Kucera and W. Francis. 1967. Computa- 
tional Analysis of Present-Day American English. 
Brown University Press. 
222
Richard Sproat. 1992. Morphology and Computa- 
tion. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
William A. Woods, Ronald M. Kaplan, and Bon- 
nie L. Nash-Webber. 1972. The lunar sciences 
natural anguage information system: Final re- 
port. Technical Report BBN Report No. 2378, 
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc, Cambridge, MA, 
June. (available from NTIS as N72-28984). 
William A. Woods, Lawrence A. Bookman, Ann C. 
Houston, Robert J. Kuhns, Paul A. Martin, and 
Stephen Green. 2000. Linguistic knowledge can 
improve information retrieval. In (these proceed- 
ings). 
William A. Woods. 1997. Conceptual indexing: 
A better way to organize knowledge. Technical 
Report SMLI TR-97-61, Sun Microsystems 
Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, April. 
www.sun.com/research/techrep/1997/abstract- 
61.html. 
223 223
