Using Corpus-derived Name Lists for Named Entity Recognition 
Mark  Stevenson  and Rober t  Ga izauskas  
Depar tment  of  Computer  Science, 
Un ivers i ty  of  Sheff ield 
Regent  Cour t ,  211 Por tobe l lo  S t reet ,  
Sheff ield 
S1 4DP Un i ted  K ingdom 
{marks, robertg}~dcs, shef. ac.uk 
Abst ract  
This paper describes experiments to establish the 
performance of a named entity recognition system 
which builds categorized lists of names from manu- 
ally annotated training data. Names in text are then 
identified using only these lists. This approach does 
not perform as well as state-of-the-art named en- 
tity recognition systems. However, we then show 
that by using simple filtering techniques for improv- 
ing the automatically acquired lists, substantial per- 
formance benefits can be achieved, with resulting F- 
measure scores of 87% on a standard test set. These 
results provide a baseline against which the con- 
tribution of more sophisticated supervised learning 
techniques for NE recognition should be measured. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Named entity (NE) recognition is the process of 
identifying and categorising names in text. Systems 
which have attempted the NE task have, in general, 
made use of lists of common ames to provide clues. 
Name lists provide an extremely efficient way of re- 
cognising names, as the only processing required is 
to match the name pattern in the list against the 
text and no expensive advanced processing such as 
full text parsing is required. However, name lists are 
a naive method for recognising names. McDonald 
(1996) defines internal and external evidence in the 
NE task. The first is found within the name string 
itself, while the second is gathered from its context. 
For example, in the sentence "President Washington 
chopped the tree" the word "President" is clear ex- 
ternal evidence that "Washington" denotes a person. 
In this case internal evidence from the name cannot 
conclusively tell us whether "Washington" is a per- 
son or a location ("Washington, DC"). A NE sys- 
tem based solely on lists of names makes use of only 
internal evidence and examples uch as this demon- 
strate the limitations of this knowledge source. 
Despite these limitations, many NE systems use 
extensive lists of names. Krupke and Hausman 
(1998) made extensive use of name lists in their sys- 
tem. They found that reducing their size by more 
than 90% had little effect on performance, conversely 
adding just 42 entries led to improved results. This 
implies that the quality of list entries is a more im- 
portant factor in their effectiveness than the total 
number of entries. Mikheev et al (1999) experi- 
mented with different ypes of lists in an NE system 
entered for MUC7 (MUC, 1998). They concluded 
that small lists of carefully selected names are as 
effective as more complete lists, a result consistent 
with Krupke and Hausman. However, both studies 
altered name lists within a larger NE system and it 
is difficult to tell whether the consistency of perform- 
ance is due to the changes in lists or extra, external, 
evidence being used to balance against the loss of 
internal evidence. 
In this paper a NE system which uses only the in- 
ternal evidence contained in lists of names is presen- 
ted. Section 3 explains how such lists can be auto- 
matically generated from annotated text. Sections 
4 and 5 describe xperiments in which these corpus- 
generated lists are applied and their performance 
compared against hand-crafted lists. In the next sec- 
tion the NE task is described in further detail. 
2 NE background 
2.1 NE Recognition of Broadcast News 
The NE task itself was first introduced as part of 
the MUC6 (MUC, 1995) evaluation exercise and was 
continued in MUC7 (MUC, 1998). This formulation 
of the NE task defines seven types of NE: PERSON, 
ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, DATE, TIME, MONEY and 
PERCENT. Figure 1 shows a short text marked up 
in SGML with NEs in the MUC style. 
The task was duplicated for the DARPA/N IST  
HUB4 evaluation exercise (Chinchor et al, 1998) 
but this time the corpus to be processed consisted 
of single case transcribed speech, rather than mixed 
case newswire text. Participants were asked to carry 
out NE recognition on North American broadcast 
news stories recorded from radio and television and 
processed by automatic speech recognition (ASR) 
software. The participants were provided with a 
training corpus consisting of around 32,000 words 
of transcribed broadcast news stories from 1997 an- 
notated with NEs. Participants used these text to 
290 
"It's a chance to think about first-level questions," said Ms. <enamex 
type="PERS0N">Cohn<enamex>, a partner in the <enamex type="0RGANIZATION">McGlashan 
Sarrail<enamex> firm in <enamex type="L0CATION">San Mateo<enamex>, <enamex 
type="L0CATION">Calif.<enamex> 
Figure 1: Text with MUC-style NE's marked 
develop their systems and were then provided with 
new, unannotated texts, consisting of transcribed 
broadcast news from 1998 which they were given a 
short time to annotate using their systems and re- 
turn. Participants are not given access to the eval- 
uation data while developing their systems. 
After the evaluation, BBN, one of the parti- 
cipants, released a corpus of 1 million words which 
they had manually annotated to provide their sys- 
tem with more training data. Through the re- 
mainder of this paper we refer to the HUB4 training 
data provided by DARPA/NIST as the SNORT_TRAIN 
corpus and the union of this with the BBN data as 
the LONG_TRAIN corpus. The data used for the 1998 
HUB4 evaluation was kept blind, we did not exam- 
ine the text themselves, and shall be referred to as 
the TEST corpus. 
The systems were evaluated in terms of the com- 
plementary precision (P) and recall (R) metrics. 
Briefly, precision is the proportion of names pro- 
posed by a system which are true names while recall 
is the proportion of the true names which are actu- 
ally identified. These metrics are often combined 
using a weighted harmonic called the F-measure 
(F) calculated according to formula 1 where fl is a 
weighting constant often set to 1. A full explana- 
tion of these metrics is provided by van Rijsbergen 
(1979). 
F= ( f~+l)  xPxR 
(fl ? P) + R (1) 
The best performing system in the MUC7 exercise 
was produced by the Language Technology Group of 
Edinburgh University (Mikheev et al, 1999). This 
achieved an F-measure of 93.39% (broken down as 
a precision of 95% and 92% recall). In HUB4 BBN 
(Miller et al, 1999) produced the best scoring sys- 
tem which achieved an F-measure of 90.56% (preci- 
sion 91%, recall 90%) on the manually transcribed 
test data. 
2.2 A Full NE  sys tem 
The NE system used in this paper is based on Shef- 
field's LaSIE system (Wakao et al, 1996), versions 
of which have participated in MUC and HUB4 eval- 
uation exercises (Renals et al, 1999). The system 
identifies names using a process consisting of four 
main modules: 
List Lookup This module consults several ists of 
likely names and name cues, marking each oc- 
currence in the input text. The name lists in- 
clude lists of organisations, locations and per- 
son first names and the name cue lists of titles 
(eg. "Mister", "Lord"), which are likely to pre- 
cede person names, and company designators 
(eg. "Limited" or "Incorporated"), which are 
likely to follow company names. 
Par t  of speech tagger  The text is the part of 
speech tagged using the Brill tagger (Brill, 
1992). This tags some tokens as "proper name" 
but does not attempt o assign them to a NE 
class (eg. PERSON, LOCATION). 
Name pars ing  Next the text is parsed using a col- 
lection of specialised NE grammars. The gram- 
mar rules identify sequences of part of speech 
tags as added by the List Lookup and Par t  
of  speech tagger  modules. For example, there 
is a rule which says that a phrase consisting 
of a person first name followed by a word part 
of speech tagged as a proper noun is a person 
name. 
Namematch ing  The names identified so far in the 
text are compared against all unidentified se- 
quences of proper nouns produced by the part of 
speech tagger. Such sequences form candidate 
NEs and a set of heuristics is used to determ- 
ine whether any such candidate names match 
any of those already identified. For example one 
such heuristics ays that if a person is identified 
with a title (eg. "President Clinton") then any 
occurrences without the title are also likely to 
be person names '(so "Clinton" on it own would 
also be tagged as a person name). 
For the experiments described in this paper a re- 
stricted version of the system which used only the 
List Lookup module was constructed. The list 
lookup mechanism arks all words contained in any 
of the name lists and each is proposed as a NE. Any 
string occurring in more than one list is assigned the 
category form the first list in which it was found, al- 
though this did not occur in any of the sets of lists 
used in the experiments described here. 
3 L i s t  Generat ion  
The List Lookup module uses a set of hand- 
crafted lists originally created for the MUC6 eval- 
uation. They consisted of lists of names from the 
gazetteers provided for that competition, supple- 
mented by manually added entries. These lists 
291 
evolved for the MUC7 competition with new entries 
and lists being added. For HUB4 we used a se- 
lection of these lists, again manually supplementing 
them where necessary. These lists included lists of 
companies, organisations (such as government de- 
partments), countries and continents, cities, regions 
(such as US states) and person first names as well as 
company designators and person titles. We specu- 
late that this ad hoc, evolutionary, approach to cre- 
ating name lists is quite common amongst systems 
which perform the NE task. 
In order to compare this approach against a simple 
system which gathers together all the names occur- 
ring in NE annotated training text, a program was 
implemented to analyse text annotated in the MUC 
SGML style (see Figure 1) and create lists for each 
NE type found. For example, given the NE <enamex 
type="LOCATION">SAN MATE0<enamex> an entry 
SAN MATE0 would be added a list of locations. 
This simple approach is certainly acceptable for 
the LOCATION, ORGANIZATION and, to a more lim- 
ited extent, PERSON classes. It is less applicable to 
the remaining classes of names (DATE, TIME, MONEY 
and PERCENT) because these are most easily recog- 
nised by their grammatical structure. For example, 
there is a rule in the NE grammar which says a num- 
ber followed by a currency unit is as instance of the 
MONEY name class- eg. FIFTY THREE DOLLARS, FIVE 
MILLION ECU. According to Przbocki et al (1999) 
88% of names occurring in broadcast news text fall 
into one of the LOCATION, ORGANIZATION and PERSON 
categories. 
Two sets of lists were derived, one from 
the SHORT_TRAIN corpus and a second from the 
LONG_TRAIN texts. The lengths of the lists produced 
are shown in Table 1. 
Corpus 
Category SHORT_TRAIN LONG_TRAIN 
ORGANIZATION 245 2,157 
PERSON 252 3,947 
LOCATION 230 1,489 
Table 1: Lengths of lists derived from SHORT_TRAIN 
and LONG_TRAIN corpora 
4 L i s t  App l i ca t ion  
The SHORT_TRAIN and LONG_TRAIN lists were each 
applied in two ways, alone and appended to the ori- 
ginal, manually-created, lists. In addition, we com- 
puted the performance obtained using only the ori- 
ginal lists for comparison. Although both sets of lists 
were derived using the SHORT_TRAIN data (since the 
LONG_TRAIN corpus includes SHORT_TRAIN), we still 
compute the performance of the SHORT_TRAIN lists 
on that corpus since this provides some insight into 
the best possible performance which can be expected 
from NE recognition using a simple list lookup mech- 
anism. No scores were computed for the LONG_TRAIN 
lists against he SHORT_TRAIN corpus since this is un- 
likely to provide more information. 
Table 2 shows the results obtained when the 
SHORT_TRAIN lists were applied to that corpus. This 
first experiment was designed to determine how 
well the list lookup approach would perform given 
lists compiled directly from the corpus to which 
they are being applied. Only PERSON, LOCATION 
and ORGANIZATION name classes are considered since 
they form the majority of names occurring in the 
HUB4 text. As was mentioned previously, the re- 
maining categories of name are more easily recog- 
nised using the NE parser. For each configuration of 
lists the precision, recall and F-measure are calcu- 
lated for the each name class both individually and 
together. 
We can see that the original ists performed reas- 
onably well, scoring an F-measure of 79% overall. 
However, the corpus-based lists performed far bet- 
ter achieving high precision and perfect recall. We 
would expect he system to recognise very name in 
the text, since they are all in the lists, but perfect 
precision is unlikely as this would require that no 
word appeared as both a name and non-name or in 
more than one name class. Even bearing this in mind 
the calculated precision for the ORGANIZATION class 
of names is quite low. Analysis of the output showed 
that several words occurred as names a few times in 
the text but also as non-names more frequently. For 
example, "police" appeared 35 times but only once 
as an organisation; similarly "finance" and "repub- 
lican" occur frequently but only as a name a few 
times. In fact, these three list entries account for 61 
spuriously generated names, from a total of 86 for 
the ORGANIZATION class. The original lists do not 
include words which are likely to generate spurious 
entries and names like "police" would only be recog- 
nised when there was further evidence. 
The SHORT_TRAIN lists contain all the names oc- 
curring in that text. When these lists are combined 
with the original system lists the observed recall re- 
mains 100% while the precision drops. The original 
system lists introduce more spurious entries, leading 
to a drop of 3% F-measure. 
The results of applying the corpus-derived lists to 
the texts from which they were obtained show that, 
even under these circumstances, perfect results can- 
not be obtained. Table 3 shows a more meaningful 
evaluation; the SHORT_TRAIN lists are applied to the 
TEST corpus, an unseen text. The original system 
lists achieve an F-measure of 83% on this text and 
the corpus-derived lists perform 8% worse. However, 
the configuration of lists which performs best is the 
union of the original ists with those derived from the 
292 
Lists Original SHORT_TRAIN Combination 
Name Type P R F P R F P R F 
ALL 86 73 79 94 100 97 88 100 94 
ORGANIZATION 84 49 62 83 100 90 79 100 88 
PERSON 78 71 74 99 100 99 88 100 94 
LOCATION 92 88 90 98 100 99 95 100 97 
Table 2: SHORT_TRAIN lists applied to SHORT_TRAIN corpus 
corpus. This out-performs each set of lists taken in 
isolation both overall and for each name category in- 
dividually. This is clear evidence that the lists used 
by the system described could be improved with the 
addition of lists derived from annotated text. 
It is worth commenting on some of the results for 
individual classes of names in this experiment. We 
can see that the performance for the ORGANIZATION 
class actually increases when the corpus-based lists 
are used. This is partially because names which are 
made up from initials (eg. "C. N. N." and "B. B. C. ") 
are not generally recognised by the list lookup mech- 
anism in our system, but are captured by the 
parser and so were not included in the original lists. 
However, it is also likely that the organisation list is 
lacking, at least to some level. More interestingly, 
there is a very noticeable drop in the performance 
for the PERSON class. The SHORT_TRAIN lists achieved 
an F-measure of 99% on that text but only 48% on 
the TEST text. In Section 2.1 we mentioned that the 
HUB4 training data consists of news stories from 
1997, while the test data contains tories from 1998. 
We therefore suggest hat the decrease in perform- 
ance for the PERSON category demonstrates a general 
property of broadcast news: many person names 
mentioned are specific to a particular time period 
(eg. "Monica Lewinksi" and "Rodney King"). In 
contrast, the locations and organisations mentioned 
are more stable over time. 
Table 4 shows the performance obtained when the 
lists derived from LONG_TRAIN were applied to the 
TEST corpus. The corpus-derived lists perform sig- 
nificantly worse than the original system lists, show- 
ing a large drop in precision. This is to be expec- 
ted since the lists derived from LONG_TRAIN contain 
all the names occurring in a large body of text and 
therefore contain many words and phrases which are 
not names in this text, but spuriously match non- 
names. Although the F-measure result is worse than 
when the SHORT_TRAIN lists were used, the recall 
is higher showing that a higher proportion of the 
true names can be found by analysing a larger body 
of text. Combining the original and corpus-derived 
lists leads to a 1% improvement. Recall is noticeably 
improved compared with the original lists, however 
precision is lowered and this shows that the corpus- 
derived lists introduce a large number of spurious 
names. 
From this first set of experiments it can be seen 
that perfect results will not be obtained even using 
lists contain all and only the names in a particular 
text, thus demonstrating the limitations of this na- 
ive approach to named entity recognition. We have 
also demonstrated that it is possible for the addi- 
tion of corpus-derived lists to improve the perform- 
ance of a NE recognition system based on gazetteers. 
However, this is not guaranteed and it appears that 
adding too many names without any restriction may 
actually lead to poorer results, as happened when 
the LONG_TRAIN lists were applied. 
5 F i l te r ing  L is ts  
The results from our first set of experiments led us to 
question whether it is possible to restrict the entries 
being added to the lists in order to avoid those likely 
to generate spurious names. We now go on to de- 
scribe some methods which can be used to identify 
and remove list entries which may generate spurious 
names. 
Method 1: Dic t ionary  F i l te r ing  The derived 
lists can be improved by removing items in the 
list which also occur as entries in a dictionary. 
We began by taking the Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary Englisb (LDOCE) (Procter, 1978) and 
extracting a list of words it contained including all 
derived forms, for example pluralisation of nouns 
and different verb forms. This produced a list of 
52,576 tokens which could be used to filter name 
lists. 
Method 2: Probability F i l te r ing  The lists can 
be improved by removing names which occur 
more frequently in the corpus as non-names 
than names. 
Another method for filtering lists was imple- 
mented, this time using the relative frequencies of 
phrases occurring as names and non-names. We can 
extract the probability that a phrase occurs as a 
name in the training corpus by dividing the num- 
ber of times it occurs as a name by the total number 
of corpus occurrences. If this probability estimate is 
an accurate reflection of the name's behaviour in a 
293 
Lists Original SHORT_TI~IN Combination 
Name Type P R F P R F P R F 
ALL 86 79 83 90 65 75 83 86 84 
ORGANIZATION 82 57 67 76 66 71 79 81 80 
PERSON 77 80 78 93 32 48 79 83 81 
LOCATION 93 89 91 97 81 88 92 94 93 
Table 3: SHORT_TRAIN \]ists applied to TEST corpus 
Lists Original LONG_TRAIN Combination 
Name Type P R F P R F P R F 
ALL 86 79 83 64 86 73 62 91 74 
ORGANIZATION 82 57 67 44 85 58 43 88 58 
PERSON 77 80 78 55 75 63 53 86 66 
LOCATION 93 89 91 87 92 89 84 94 89 
Table 4: LONG_TRAIN lists applied to TEST corpus 
new text we can use it to estimate the accuracy of 
adding that name to the list. Adding a name to a 
list will lead to a recall score of 1 for that name and 
a precision of Pr  (where Pr  is the probability value 
estimated from the training corpus) which implies an 
F-measure of ~.2Pr 1 Therefore the probabilities can 
be used to filter out candidate list items which imply 
low F-measure scores. We chose names whose cor- 
pus probabilities produced an F-measure lower than 
the overall score for the list. The LONG_TRAIN lists 
scored an F-measure of 73% on the unseen, TEST, 
data (see Table 4). Hence a filtering probability of 
73% was used for these lists, with the corpus stat- 
istics gathered from LONG_TRAIN. 
Method  3: Combin ing  F i l ters  These filtering 
strategies can be improved by combining them. 
We also combined these two filtering strategies in 
two ways. Firstly, all names which appeared in the 
lexicon or whose corpus probability is below the fil- 
tering probability are removed from the lists. This is 
dubbed the "or combination". The second combin- 
ation strategy removes any names which appear in 
the lexicon and occur with a corpus frequency below 
the filtering probability are removed. This second 
strategy is called the "and combination". 
These filtering strategies were applied to the 
LONG_TRAIN lists. The lengths of the lists produced 
are shown in Table 5. 
The strategies were evaluated by applying the 
filtered LONG_TRAIN lists to the TEST corpus, the res- 
ults of which are shown in Table 6. There is an 
1Analysis of the behaviour of the function f (P r )  -- 2P~ l+Pr  
shows that it does not deviate too far from the value of Pr  (ie. 
. f (P r )  ~ Pr )  and so there is an argument for simply filtering 
the lists using the raw probabilities. 
improvement in performance of 4% F-measure when 
lists filtered using the "and" combination are used 
compared to the original, hand-crafted, lists. Al- 
though this approach removes only 108 items from 
all the lists there is a 14% F-measure improvement 
over the un-filtered lists. Each filtering strategy used 
individually demonstrates a lower level of improve- 
ment: the dictionary filtered lists 12% and the prob- 
ability filtered 10%. 
The "and" combination is more successful be- 
cause filtering lists using the dictionary alone re- 
moves many names we would like to keep (eg. coun- 
try names are listed in LDOCE) but many of these 
are retained since both filters must agree. These 
experiments demonstrate hat appropriately filtered 
corpus-derived lists can be more effective for NE re- 
cognition than hand-crafted lists. The difference 
between the observed performance of our simple 
method and those reported for the best-performing 
HUB4 system is perhaps lower that one may ex- 
pect. The BBN system achieved 90.56% overall, 
and about 92% when only the PERSON, LOCATION 
and ORGANIZATION name classes are considered, 5% 
more than the method reported here. This difference 
is perhaps lower than we might expect given that 
name lists use only internal evidence (in the sense 
of Section 1). This indicates that simple application 
of the information contained in manually annotated 
NE training data can contribute massively to the 
overall performance of a system. They also provide 
a baseline against which the contribution of more 
sophisticated supervised learning techniques for NE 
recognition should be measured. 
294 
NE 
Category 
ORGANIZATION 
PERSON 
LOCATION 
Un-Filtered Dictionary Probability 
List Filtered Filtered 
2,157 1,978 2,000 
3,947 3,769 3,235 
1,489 1,412 1,364 
Or 
Combined 
1,964 
3,522 
1,382 
And 
Combined 
2,049 
3,809 
1,449 
Table 5: Lengths of corpus-derived lists 
Original t Un-Filtered Dictionary I Probability Or And 
Lists Lists Filtered Filtered Combination Combination 
Name Type P R F P R F P R F P R F P R F P R F 
ALL 
ORGANIZATION 
PERSON 
LOCATION 
86 79 83 
82 57 67 
77 80 78 
93 89 91 
64 86 73 
44 85 58 
55 75 63 
87 92 89 
95 79 85 
86 72 78 
96 66 78 
98 89 93 
96 73 83 
85 74 79 
96 40 56 
97 90 93 
95 73 83 
84 60 70 
100 49 66 
98 90 94 
93 81 87 
84 76 80 
94 66 78 
97 92 94 
Table 6: Filtered and un-filtered LONG_TRAIN lists applied to TEST corpus 
6 Conclusion 
This paper explored the role of lists of names in 
NE recognition, comparing hand-crafted and corpus- 
derived lists. It was shown that, under certain condi- 
tions, corpus-derived lists outperform hand-crafted 
ones. Also, supplementing hand-crafted lists with 
corpus-based ones often improves their performance. 
The reported method was more effective for the 
ORGANIZATION and LOCATION classes of names than 
for PERSON, which was attributed to the fact that 
reportage of these names does not change as much 
over time in broadcast news. 
The method reported here achieves 87% F- 
measure, 5% less than the best performing system 
in the HUB4 evaluation. However, it should be re- 
membered that this technique uses only a simple ap- 
plication of internal evidence. 
References 
E. Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proceeding of the Third Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP-92), 
pages 152-155, Trento, Italy. 
N. Chinchor, P. Robinson, and E. Brown. 
1998. Hub-4 named entity task defini- 
tion (version 4.8). Technical report, SAIC. 
http ://www. nist. gov/speech/hub4_98. 
G. Krupke and K. Hausman. 1998. Isoquest Inc: 
description of the NetOwl(TM) extractor system 
as used for MUC-7. In Message Understanding 
Conference Proceedings: MUC 7. Available from 
http ://www.muc. saic. com. 
D. McDonald. 1996. Internal and external evid- 
ence in the identification and semantic ategor- 
ization of proper names. In B. Boguraev and 
J. Pustejovsky, editors, Corpus Processing for 
Lexical Aquisition, chapter 2, pages 21-39. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
A. Mikheev, M. Moens, and C. Grovel 1999. 
Named entity recognition without gazeteers. In 
Proceedings of the Ninth Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics, pages 1-8, Bergen, Norway. 
D. Miller, R. Schwartz, R. Weischedel, and R. Stone. 
1999. Named entity extraction from broadcast 
news. In Proceedings of the DARPA Broadcast 
News Workshop, ages 37-40, I-Ierndon, Virginia. 
MUC. 1995. Proceedings of the Sixth Message Un- 
derstanding Conference (MUC-6}, San Mateo, 
CA. Morgan Kaufmann. 
1998. Message Understanding Conference Proceed- 
ings: MUC7.  http ://www.muc. sale com. 
P. Procter, editor. 1978. Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English. Longman Group, Essex, 
UK. 
M. Przbocki, J. Fiscus, J. Garofolo, and D. Pallett. 
1999. 1998 HUB4 Information Extraction Eval- 
uation. In Proceedings of the DARPA Broadcast 
News Workshop, ages 13-18, Herndon, Virginia. 
S. Renals, Y. Gotoh, R. Gaizausaks, and M. Steven- 
son. 1999. Baseline IE-NE Experimants Using the 
SPRACH/LASIE System. In Proceedings of the 
DAPRA Broadcast News Workshop, ages 47-50, 
Herndon, Virginia. 
C. van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retrieval. 
Butterworths, London. 
T. Wakao, R. Gaizauskas, and K. Humphreys. 1996. 
Evaluation of an algorithm for the recognition and 
classification of proper names. In Proceedings of 
the 16th International Conference on Computa- 
tional Linguistics (COLING-96), pages 418-423, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 
295 
