Compound Noun Segmentat ion Based on Lexical Data 
Extracted from Corpus* 
J untae  Yoon  
j t yoon@l inc .c i s .upenn.edu  
IRCS,  Un ivers i ty  of  Pennsy lvan ia ,  
3401 Walnut  St. ,  Su i te  400A,  
Ph i lade lph ia ,  PA  19104-6228,  USA 
Abst ract  
Compound noun analysis is one of the crucial prob- 
lems in Korean language processing because a series 
of nouns in Korean may appear without white space 
in real texts, which makes it difficult to identify the 
morphological constituents. This paper presents an 
effective method of Korean compound noun segmen- 
tation based on lexical data extracted from corpus. 
The segmentation is done by two steps: First, it is 
based on manually constructed built-in dictionary 
for segmentation whose data were extracted from 30 
million word corpus. Second, a segmentation algo- 
rithm using statistical data is proposed, where sim- 
ple nouns and their frequencies are also extracted 
from corpus. The analysis is executed based on CYK 
tabular parsing and min-max operation. By exper- 
iments, its accuracy is about 97.29%, which turns 
out to be very effective. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
Morphological analysis is crucial for processing the 
agglutinative language like Korean since words in 
such languages have lots of morphological variants. 
A sentence is represented by a sequence of eojeols 
which are the syntactic unit~ delimited by spacing 
characters in Korean. Unlike in English, an eojeol 
is not one word but composed of a series of words 
(content words and functional words). In particu- 
lar, since an eojeol can often contain more than one 
noun, we cannot get proper interpretation of the sen- 
tence or phrase without its accurate segmentation. 
The problem in compound noun segmentation is 
that it is not possible to register all compound nouns 
in the dictionary since nouns are in the open set 
of words as well as the number of them is very 
large. Thus, they must be treated as unseen words 
without a segmentation process. Furthermore, ac- 
curate compound noun segmentation plays an im- 
portant role in the application system. Compound 
noun segmentation is necessarily required for im- 
proving recall and precision in Korean information 
* This work was supported by a KOSEF's  postdoctoral fel- 
lowship grant. 
retrieval, and obtaining better translation in ma- 
chine translation. For example, suppose that a 
compound noun 'seol'agsan-gugrib-gongwon(Seol'ag 
Mountain National Park)' appear in documents. 
A user might want to retrieve documents about 
'seol'agsan(Seol'ag Mountain)', and then it is likely 
that the documents with seol'agsan-gugrib-gongwon' 
are also the ones in his interest. Therefore, it 
should be exactly segmented before indexing in or- 
der for the documents to be retrieved with the query 
'seol'agsan'. Also, to translate 'seol'agsan-gugrib- 
gongwon' to Seol'ag Mountain National Park, the 
constituents should be identified first through the 
process of segmentation. 
This paper presents two methods for segmentation 
of compound nouns. First, we extract compound 
nouns from a large size of corpus, manually divide 
them into simple nouns and construct the hand built 
segmentation dictionary with them. The dictionary 
includes compound nouns which are frequently used 
and need exceptional process. The number of data 
are about 100,000. 
Second, the segmentation algorithm is applied if 
the compound noun does not exist in the built-in 
dictionary. Basically, the segmenter is based on fre- 
quency of individual nouns extracted from corpus. 
However, the problem is that it is difficult to dis- 
tinguish proper noun and common noun since there 
is no clue like capital letters in Korean. Thus, just 
a large amount of lexical knowledge does not make 
good results if it contains incorrect data and also it is 
not appropriate to use frequencies obtained by auto- 
matically tagging large corpus. Moreover, sufficient 
lexical data cannot be acquired from small amounts 
of tagged corpus. 
In this paper, we propose a method to get sim- 
ple nouns and their frequencies from frequently oc- 
curring eojeols using repetitiveness of natural lan- 
guage. The amount of eojeols investigated is man- 
ually tractable and frequently used nouns extracted 
from them are crucial for compound noun segmen- 
tation. Furthermore, we propose rain-max compo- 
sition to divide a sequence of syllables, which would 
be proven to be an effective method by experiments. 
l_qF~ 
To briefly show the reason that we select the oper- 
ation, let us consider the following example. Sup- 
pose that a compound noun be composed of four 
syllables 'sl s2s3s4 '. There are several possibilities of 
segmentation i  the sequence of syllables, where we 
consider the following possibilities (Sl/S2S3S4) and 
(sls2/s3s4). Assume that 'sl' is a frequently ap- 
pearing word in texts whereas 's2s3s4' is a rarely 
occurring sequence of syllables as a word. On the 
other hand 'sis2' and 's3s4' occurs frequently but 
although they don't occur as frequently as 'sl'. In 
this case, the more likely segmentation would be 
(sls2/s3s4). It means that a sequence of syllables 
should not be divided into frequently occurring one 
and rarely occurring one. In this sense, min-max is 
the appropriate operation for the selection. In other 
words, rain value is selected between two sequences 
of syllables, and then max is taken from min values 
selected. To apply the operation repetitively, we use 
the CYK tabular parsing style algorithm. 
2 Lexica l  Data  Acquisition 
Since the compound noun consists of a series of 
nouns, the probability model using transition among 
parts of speech is not helpful, and rather lexical in- 
formation is required for the compound noun seg- 
mentation. Our segmentation algorithm is based on 
a large collection of lexical information that consists 
of two kinds of data: One is the hand built seg- 
mentation dictionary (HBSD)  and the other is the 
simple noun dictionary for segmentation (SND). 
2.1 Hand-Built  Segmentation Dictionary 
The first phase of compound noun segmentation uses 
the built-in dictionary (HBSD). The advantage of 
using the built-in dictionary is that the segmenta- 
tion could (1) be very accurate by hand-made data 
and (2) become more efficient. In Korean compound 
noun, one syllable noun is sometimes highly ambigu- 
ous between suffix and noun, but human can easily 
identify them using semantic knowledge. For ex- 
ample, one syllable noun 'ssi' in Korean might be 
used either as a suffix or as a noun which means 
'Mr/Ms' or 'seed' respectively. Without any seman- 
tic information, the best way to distinguish them 
is to record all the compound noun examples con- 
taining the meaning of seed in the dictionary since 
the number of compound nouns containing a mean- 
ing of 'seed' is even smaller. Besides, we can treat 
general spacing errors using the dictionary. By the 
spacing rule for Korean, there should be one content 
word except noun in an eojeol, but it turns out that 
one or more content words of short length sometimes 
appear without space in real texts, which causes the 
lexical ambiguities. It makes the system inefficient 
to deal with all these words on the phase of basic 
morphological analysis. 
compound nouns 
gajuggudu(leather shoes) 
gajugggeun(leather string) 
gaguyong(used for furniture) 
sagwassi(apple seed) 
podossi(graph seed) 
chuggutim (football team) 
analysis information 
gaj ug(leather)-bgudu(shoes) 
gajug(leather) +ggeun(string) 
gagu(furniture)-bxyong(used for) 
sagwa(apple) q-nssi (seed) 
podo(grape)-t-nssi(seed) 
chuggu(foot ball)+tim(team) 
Table 1: Examples of compound noun and analysis 
information in built-in dictionary 
To construct the dictionary, compound nouns axe 
extracted from corpus and manually elaborated. 
First, the morphological analyzer analyzes 30 mil- 
lion eojeol corpus using only simple noun dictionary, 
and the failed results are candidates for compound 
noun. After postpositions, if any, are removed from 
the compound noun candidates of the failure eoje- 
ols, the candidates axe modified and analyzed by 
hand. In addition, a collection of compound nouns 
of KAIST (Korea Advanced Institute of Science & 
Technology) is added to the dictionary in order to 
supplement them. The number of entries contained 
in the built-in dictionary is about 100,000. Table 1 
shows some examples in the built-in dictionary. _The 
italic characters such as 'n' or 'x' in analysis infor- 
mation (right column) of the table is used to make 
distinction between oun and suffix. 
2.2 Extraction of Lexical Information for 
Segmentation from Corpus 
As we said earlier, it is impossible for all compound 
nouns to be registered in the dictionary, and thus the 
built-in dictionary cannot cover all compound nouns 
even though it gives more accurate results. We need 
some good segmentation model for compound noun, 
therefore. 
In compound noun segmentation, the thing that 
we pay attention to was that lexical information is 
crucial for segmenting noun compounds. Since a 
compound noun consists only of a sequence of nouns 
i.e. (noun)+, the transition probability of parts of 
speech is no use. Namely, the frequency of each noun 
plays highly important role in compound noun seg- 
mentation. Besides, since the parameter space is 
huge, we cannot extract enough lexicai information 
from hundreds of thousands of POS tagged corpus 1
even if accurate lexical information can be extracted 
from annotated corpus. Thus, a large size of cor- 
pus should be used to extract proper frequencies of 
nouns. However, it is difficult to look at a large size 
of corpus and to assign analyses to it, which makes 
it difficult to estimate the frequency distribution of 
words. Therefore, we need another approach for ob- 
taining frequencies of nouns. 
~It is the size of POS tagged corpus currently publicized 
by ETRI (Electronics and Telecommunications Research In- 
stitute) project. 
197 
l#l 
l l i i i l l~  
Figure 1: Distribution of eojeols in Korean corpus 
It must be noted here that each noun in compound 
nouns could be easily segmented by human in many 
cases because it has a prominent figure in the sense 
that it is a frequently used word and so familiar with 
him. In other words, nouns prominent in documents 
can be defined as frequently occurred ones, which we 
call distinct nouns. Compound nouns contains these 
distinct nouns in many cases, which makes it easier 
to segment them and to identify their constituents. 
Empirically, it is well-known that too many words 
in the dictionary have a bad influence on morpho- 
logical analysis in Korean. It is because rarely used 
nouns result in oversegmentation f they are included 
in compound noun segmentation dictionary. There- 
fore, it is necessary to select distinct nouns, which 
leads us to use a part of corpus instead of entire 
corpus that consists of frequently used ones in the 
corpus. 
First, we examined istribution of eojeols in cor- 
pus in order to make the subset of corpus to extract 
lexical frequencies of nouns. The notable thing in 
our experiment is that the number of eojeols in cor- 
pus is increased in proportion to the size of corpus, 
but a small portion of eojeols takes most parts of the 
whole corpus. For instance, 70% of the corpus con- 
sists of just 60 thousand types of eojeols which take 
7.5 million of frequency from 10 million eojeol corpus 
and 20.5 million from 30 million eojeols. The lowest 
frequency of the 60,000 eojeols is 49 in 30 million eo- 
jeol corpus. We decided to take 60,000 eojeols which 
are manually tractable and compose most parts of 
corpus (Figure 1). 
Second, we made morphological analyses for the 
60,000 eojeols by hand. Since Korean is an aggluti- 
native language, an eojeol is represented by a se- 
quence of content words and functional words as 
mentioned before. Especially, content words and 
functional words often have different distribution 
of syllables. In addition, inflectional endings for 
predicate and postpositions for nominals also have 
quite different distribution for syllables. Hence we 
can distinguish the constituents of eojeols in many 
cases. Of course, there are also many cases in which 
the result of morphological analysis has ambigui- 
ties. For example, an eojeol 'na-neun' in Korean 
has ambiguity of 'na/N+neun/P', 'na/PN+neun/P' 
and 'nal/V+neun/E'. In this example, the parts 
of speech N, PN, P, V and E mean noun, pro- 
noun, postposition, verb and ending, respectively. 
On the other hand, many eojeols which are ana- 
lyzed as having ambiguities by a morphological n- 
alyzer are actually not ambiguous. For instance, 
'ga-geora' (go/imperative) has ambiguities by most 
morphological nalyzer among 'ga/V+geora/E' and 
'ga/N+i/C+geora/E' (C is copula), but it is actu- 
ally not ambiguous. Such morphological mbiguity 
is caused by overgeneration f the morphological n- 
alyzer since the analyzer uses less detailed rules for 
robustness of the system. Therefore, if we examine 
and correct he results scrupulously, many ambigui- 
ties can be removed through the process. 
As the result of the manual process, only 15% of 
60,000 eojeols remain ambiguous at the mid-level of 
part of speech classification 2. Then, we extracted 
simple nouns and their frequencies from the data. 
Despite of manual correction, there must be ambigu- 
ities left for the reason mentioned above. There may 
be some methods to distribute frequencies in case 
of ambiguous words, but we simply assign the equal 
distribution to them. For instance, gage has two pos- 
sibilities of analysis i.e. 'gage/N' and 'galV+ge/E', 
and its frequency is 2263, in which the noun 'gage' is 
assigned 1132 as its frequency. Table 2 shows exam- 
ples of manually corrected morphological nalyses of 
eojeols containing a noun 'gage' and their frequen- 
cies. We call the nouns extracted in such a way a 
set of distinct nouns. 
In addition, we supplement the dictionary with 
other nouns not appeared in the words obtained 
by the method mentioned above. First, nouns of 
more than three syllables are rare in real texts in 
Korean, as shown in Lee and Ahn (1996). Their 
experiments proved that syllable based bigram in- 
dexing model makes much better result than other 
n-gram model such as trigram and quadragram in 
Korean IR. It follows that two syllable nouns take 
an overwhelming majority in nouns. Thus, there are 
not many such nouns in the simple nouns extracted 
by the manually corrected nouns (a set of distinct 
nouns). In particular, since many nouns of more 
2At the mid-level of part of speech classification, for ex- 
ample, endings and postpositions are represented just by one 
tag e.g. E and P. To identify the sentential or clausal type 
(subordinate or declarative) in Korean, the ending should be 
subclassified for syntactic analysis more detail which can be 
done by statistical process. It is beyond the subject of this 
paper. 
198 
eojeols constituents meaning 
gage gage/N@ga/V+ge/E store@go 2263 
gage-ga gage/N+ga/P store/SUBJ 165 
gage-neun gage/N+neun/P@ga/V+geneun/E store/TOP@go 113 
gage-ro gage/N+ro/P to the store 166 
gage-reul gage/N+reul/P store/OBJ 535 
gage-e gage/N+e/P in the store 312 
gage-eseo gage/N+eseo/P in the store 299 
gage-yi gage/N+yi /P  of the store 132 
frequencies 
extracted noun frequency 
gage store 2797 
Table 2: Example of extraction of distinct nouns. Here N, V, P and E mean tag for noun, verb, postposition 
and ending and '@' is marked for representation f ambiguous analysis 
than three syllables are derived by a word and suf- 
fixes and have some syllable features, they are useful 
for distinguishing the boundaries of constituents in
compound nouns. We select nouns of more than 
three syllables from morphological dictionary which 
is used for basic morphological nalysis and consists 
of 89,000 words (noun, verb, adverb etc). Second, 
simple nouns are extracted from hand-built segmen- 
tation dictionary. We selected nouns which do not 
exist in a set of distinct nouns. 
The frequency is assigned equally with some value 
fq. Since the model is based on min-max composi- 
tion and the nouns extracted in the first phase are 
most important, the value does not take an effect on 
the system performance. 
The nouns extracted in this way are referred to 
as a set of supplementary nouns. And the SND for 
compound noun segmentation is composed of a set 
of distinct nouns and a set of supplementary nouns. 
The number of simple nouns for compound noun seg- 
mentation is about 50,000. 
3 Compound Word  Segmentat ion  
A lgor i thm 
3.1 Basic Idea  
To simply describe the basic idea of our compound 
noun segmentation, we first consider a compound 
noun to be segmented into only two nouns. Given a 
compound noun, it is segmented by the possibility 
that a sequence of syllables inside it forms a word. 
The possibility that a sequence of syllables forms a 
word is measured by the following formula. 
Word(si, . . .  sj) - fq(si , . . ,  sj) Iq~ (1) 
In the formula, fq(s~,...sj) is the frequency of 
the syllable s i . . .s j ,  which is obtained from SND 
constructed on the stages of lexical data extraction. 
And, fqN is the total sum of frequencies of simple 
nouns. Colloquially, the equation (1) estimates how 
much the given sequence of syllables are likely to be 
word. If a sequence of syllables in the set of distinct 
nouns is included in a compound noun, it is more 
probable that it is divided around the syllables. If 
a compound noun consists of, for any combination 
of syllables, sequences of syllables in the set of sup- 
plementary nouns, the boundary of segmentation is 
somewhat fuzzy. Besides, if a given sequence of syl- 
lables is not found in SND, it is not probable that it 
is a noun. 
Consider a compound noun 'hag?gyo-saeng- 
hwal(school life)'. In case that segmentation of 
syllables is made into two, there would be four 
possibilities of segmentation for the example as 
follows: 
1. hag 9yo-saeng-hwal 
2. hag-gyo saeng-hwal 
3. hag-gyo-saeng hwal 
4. hag-gyo-saeng-hwal ? 
As we mentioned earlier, it is desirable that the eo- 
jeol is segmented in the position where each sequence 
of syllables to be divided occurs frequently enough 
in training data. As the length of a sequence of sylla- 
bles is shorter in Korean, it occurs more frequently. 
That is, the shorter part usually have higher fre- 
quency than the other (longer) part when we divide 
syllables into two. Moreover, if the other part is 
the syllables that we rarely see in texts, then the 
part would not be a word. In the first of the above 
example, hag is a sequence of syllable appearing fre- 
quently, but gyo-saeng-hwa! is not. Actually, gyo- 
saeng-hwal is not a word. On the other hand, both 
hag-gyo and saeng-hwal re frequently occurring syl- 
lables, and actually they are all words. Put another 
way, if it is unlikely that one sequence of syllables is 
a word, then it is more likely that the entire syllables 
are not segmented. The min-max composition is a 
suitable operation for this case. Therefore, we first 
199 
take the minimum value from the function Word for 
each possibility of segmentation, and then we choose 
the maximum from the selected minimums. Also, 
the argument taking the maximum is selected as the 
most likely segmentation result. 
Here, Word(si . . .  sj) is assigned the frequency of 
the syllables i . . .  sj from the dictionary SND. Be- 
sides, if two minimums are equal, the entire sylla- 
ble such as hag-gyo-saeng-hwal, if compared, is pre- 
ferred, the values of the other sequence of syllables 
are compared or the dominant pattern has the pri- 
ority. 
3.2 Segmentat ion  A lgor i thm 
In this section, we generalize the word segmentation 
algorithm based on data obtained by the training 
method escribed in the previous ection. The basic 
idea is to apply min-max operation to each sylla- 
ble in a compound noun by the bottom-up strat- 
egy. That is, if the minimum between Words of 
two sequences of syllables is greater than Word of 
the combination of them, the syllables should be 
segmented. For instance, let us suppose a com- 
pound noun consist of two syllable Sl and s2. If 
min(Word(Sl), Word(s2)) > Word(sis2), then the 
compound noun is segmented into Sl and s2. It is 
not segmented, otherwise. That is, we take the max- 
imum among minimums. For example, 'hag' is a fre- 
quently occurring word, but 'gyo' is not in Korean. 
In this case, we can hardly regard the sequence of 
syllable 'hag-gyo' as the combination of two words 
'hag' and 'gyo'. The algorithm can be applied recur- 
sively from individual syllable to the entire syllable 
of the compound noun. 
The segmentation algorithm is effectively imple- 
mented by borrowing the CYK parsing method. 
Since we use the bottom-up strategy, the execu- 
tion looks like composition rather than segmenta- 
tion. After all possible segmentation f syllables be- 
ing checked, the final result is put in the top of the 
table. When a compound noun is composed of n 
syllables, i.e. sis2. . ,  s,~, the composition is started 
from each si (i = 1. . .  n). Thus, the possibility that 
the individual syllable forms a word is recorded in 
the cell of the first row. 
Here, Ci,j is an element of CYK ta- 
ble where the segment result of the sylla- 
bles sj,...j+i-1 is stored (Figure 2). For 
instance, the segmentation result such that 
ar g max(min( W ord( s l ), Word(s2)), Word(s1 s2)) 
is stored in C1,2. What is interesting here is 
that the procedure follows the dynamic pro- 
gramming. Thus, each cell C~,j has the most 
probable segmentation result for a series of syl- 
lables sj ..... j+i-1- Namely, C1,2 and C2,3 have 
the most likely segmentation of sis2 and s2s3 
respectively. When the segmentation of sls2s3 is 
about to be checked, min(value(C2,1), value(C1,3)), 
1 
i 
11-1 
n 
1 ... j ... n -1  n 
\ 
\ 
composition resul t  
for sl""sl+l-1 
Figure 2: Composition Table 
min(value(Cl,1),value(C2,2)) and Word(sls2s3) 
are compared to determine the segmentation for 
the syllables, because all Ci,j have the most likely 
segmentation. Here, value(Ci,j) represents the 
possibility value of Ci,j. 
Then, we can describe the segmentation algorithm 
as follows: 
When it is about to make the segmentation f syl- 
lables s~... sj, the segmentation results of less length 
of syllables like s i . . . s j -1 ,  S~+l... sj and so forth 
would be already stored in the table. In order to 
make analysis of s i . . .  s j, we combine two shorter 
length of analyses and the word generation possibil- 
ities are computed and checked. 
To make it easy to explain the algorithm, let us 
take an example compound noun 'hag-gyo-saeng- 
hwa~ (school ife) which is segmented with 'haggyo' 
(school) and 'saenghwar (life) (Figure 3). When it 
comes up to cell C4,1, we have to make the most 
probable segmentation for 'hag-gyo-saeng-hwal' i.e. 
SlS2S3S4. There are three kinds of sequences of syl- 
lables, i.e. sl in CI,1, sis2 in C2,1 and SlS2S3 in C3,1 
that can construct he word consisting of 8182s384 
which would be put in Ca,1. For instance, the word 
sls2s3s4 (hag-gyo-saeng-hwal) is made with Sl (hag) 
combined with sus3s4 (gyo-saeng-hwal). Likewise, 
it might be made by sis2 combined with s3s4 and 
sls2s3 combined with s4. Since each cell has the 
most probable result and its value, it is simple to 
find the best segmentation for each syllables. In 
addition, four cases, including the whole sequences 
of syllables, are compared to make segmentation of
SlS2SaS4 as follows: 
1. rain(value(C3,1), value(C3,4)) 
2. min(value(C2,1), value(C2,3)) 
3. min(value( Cl,1), value(C3,2)) 
4. Word(SlS2SaS4) = Word(hag-gyo-saeng-hwal) 
Again, the most probable segmentation result is 
put in C4,1 with the likelihood value for its segmen- 
tation. We call it MLS (Most Likely Segmentation) 
200 
hag gyo saeng hwa2 
( ? .... . .  . . . .  . _ _  
arg max(min(w(hag),w(gyo)),w(hag-gyo)) 
Figure 3: State of table when analyzing 'hag-gyo- 
saeng-hwal'. Here, w(si . . . sj) = value(Cij)  
which is found in the following way: 
MLS(C4,z) = 
ar g max(rain(value(C3,1), value( C3,a ) ), 
rain(value(G2,1), value(C2,3)), 
rain(value(C1,1), value(C3,2)), 
Word(sls2s3sa)) 
From the four cases, the maximum value and the 
segmentation result are selected and recorded in 
C4,1. To generalize it, the algorithm is described 
as shown in Figure 4. 
The algorithm is straightforward. Let Word and 
MLS be the likelihood of being a noun and the most 
likely segmentation for a sequence of syllables. In the 
initialization step, each cell of the table is assigned 
Word value for a sequence of syllables sj . . .  sj+i+l 
using its frequency if it is found in SND. In other 
words, if the value of Word for the sequence in each 
cell is greater than zero, the syllables might be as a 
noun a part of a compound noun and so the value is 
recorded as MLS.  It could be substituted by more 
likely one in the segmentation process. 
In order to make it efficient, the segmentation re- 
sult is put as MLS instead of the syllables in case 
the sequence of syllables exists in the HBND. The 
minimum of each Word for constituents of the result 
as Word is recorded. 
Then, the segmenter compares possible analyses 
to make a larger one as shown in Figure 4. When- 
ever Word of the entire syllables is less than that of 
segmented one, the syllables and value are replaced 
with the segmented result and its value. For in- 
stance, sl + s2 and its likelihood substitutes C2,1 
if min(Word(sl) ,  Word(s2)) > Word(sis2). When 
the entire syllables from the first to nth syllable are 
processed, C,~,x has the segmentation result. 
The overall complexity of the algorithm follows 
that of CYK parsing, O(n3). 
3.3 Defau l t  Analys is  and Tun ing  
For the final result, we should take into consideration 
several issues which are related with the syllables 
that left unsegmented. There are several reasons 
that the given string remains unsegmented: 
i .o?1 .. .i i .oo I 
~equence of ~yllabl~ iu diviner gel 
default ~ementatitm pointer 
Figure 5: Default segmentation pointer for 'geon- 
chug-sa-si-heom' where 'si-heom' is a very frequently 
used noun. 
1. The first one is a case where the string consists 
of several nouns but one of them is a unreg- 
istered word. A compound noun 'geon-chug- 
sa-si-heom' is composed of 'geon-chug-sa' and 
'si-heom', which have the meanings of autho- 
rized architect and examination. In this case, 
the unknown noun is caused by the suffix such 
as 'sa' because the suffix derives many words. 
However, it is known that it is very difficult to 
treat the kinds of suffixes since the suffix like 
'sa' is a very frequently used character in Ko- 
rean and thus prone to make oversegmentation 
if included in basic morphological nalysis. 
2. The string might consist of a proper noun alad a 
noun representing a position or geometric infor- 
mation. For instance, a compound noun 'kim- 
dae-jung-dae-tong-ryeong' is composed of 'kim- 
dae-jung' and 'dae-tong-ryeong' where the for- 
mer is personal name and the latter means pres- 
ident respectively. 
3. The string might be a proper noun itself. For 
example, 'willi'amseu' is a transliterated word 
for foreign name 'Williams' and 'hong-gil-dong' 
is a personal name in Korean. Generally, since 
it has a different sequence of syllables from in 
a general Korean word, it often remains unseg- 
mented. 
If the basic segmentation is failed, three proce- 
dures would be executed for solving three problems 
above. For the first issue, we use the set of distinct 
nouns. That is, the offset pointer is stored in the ini- 
tialization step as well as frequency of each noun in 
compound noun is recorded in the table. Attention 
should be paid to non-frequent sequence of syllables 
(ones in the set of supplementary nouns) in the de- 
fault segmentation because it could be found in any 
proper noun such as personal names, place names, 
etc or transliterated words. It is known that the per- 
formance drops if all nouns in the compound noun 
segmentation dictionary are considered for default 
segmentation. We save the pointer to the boundary 
only when a noun in distinct set appears. For the 
above example 'geon-chug-sa-si-heom', the default 
segmentation would be 'geon-chug-sa' nd 'si-heom' 
since 'si-heom' is in the set of distinct nouns and the 
pointer is set before 'si-heom' (Figure 5). 
201 
/* initialization step */ 
for i----1 to n do 
for j= l  to n- i+l do 
value(Ci,j) = Word(s t . . .  sj+i-1); 
MLS(C i , j )  = s t . . .  sj+~-i ; if value(Ci,j) > 0 
?; otherwise 
for i=2 to n do 
for j= 1 to i do 
value( Ci,j ) = max(min( value( Ci_l, j  ), value( C1j+i_ l  ) ), 
min (value( C i -  2,j ) , value( C2,j_ 2 ) ) , 
min(va\[ue(Cl, j) ,value(Ci_,, j+l)),  
Word(st... s~+~)) 
M LS(  Ci,j ) = arg max(min(value( C i _ l j ) ,  value( C i j+ i_ l  ) ), 
min( value( Ci_ 2j  ) , value( C2 j_  2 ) ) , 
Word(s~ . , . si+j)): 
, , , , , ,  , , , ,% . . . . . .  , , , , 
Figure 4: The segmentation algorithm 
If this procedure is failed, the sequence of syllables 
is checked whether it might be proper noun or not. 
Since proper noun in Korean could have a kind of 
nominal suffix such as 'daetongryeong(president)' or 
'ssi(Mr/Ms)'  as mentioned above, we can identify 
it by detaching the nominal suffixes. If there does 
not exist any nominal suffix, then the entire syllables 
would be regarded just as the transliterated foreign 
word or a proper noun like personal or place name. 
4 Experimental Results 
For the test of compound noun segmentation, we 
first extracted compound noun from ETRI POS 
tagged corpus 3. By the processing, 1774 types of 
compound nouns were extracted, which was used as 
a gold standard test set. 
We evaluated our system by two methods: (1) 
the precision and recall rate, and (2) segmentation 
accuracy per compound noun which we refer to as 
SA. They are defined respectively as follows: 
P rec is ion  = 
number of correct constituents in proposed segment results 
total number o\] constituents in proposed segment results 
Reca l l  = 
number of correct constituents in proposed segment results 
total number of constituents in compoundnouns 
SA = 
number of correctly segmented compound nouns  
to ta l  number of compoundnouns 
3The corpus was constructed by the ETRI (Electronics 
and Telecommunications Research Institute) project for stan- 
dardization of natural anguage processing technology and the 
corpus presented consists of about 270,000 eojeols at present. 
What influences on the Korean IR system is 
whether words are appropriately segmented or not. 
The precision and recall estimate how appropriate 
the segmentation results are. They are 98.04% and 
97.80% respectively, which shows that our algorithm 
is very effective (Table 3). 
SA reflects how accurate the segmentation is for a 
compound noun at all. We compared two methods: 
(1) using only the segmentation algorithm with de- 
fault analysis which is a baseline of our system and 
so is needed to estimate the accuracy of the algo- 
rithm. (2) using both the built-in dictionary and the 
segmentation algorithm which reflects system accu- 
racy as a whole. As shown in Table 4, the baseline 
performance using only distinct nouns and the al- 
gorithm is about 94.3% and fairly good. From the 
results, we can find that the distinct nouns has great 
impact on compound noun segmentation. Also, the 
overall segmentation accuracy for the gold standard 
is about 97.29% which is a very good result for the 
application system. In addition, it shows that the 
built-in dictionary supplements he algorithm which 
results in better segmentation. 
Lastly, we compare our system with the previous 
work by (Yun et al , 1997). It is impossible that we 
directly compare our result with theirs, since the test 
set is different. It was reported that the accuracy 
given in the paper is about 95.6%. When comparing 
the performance only in terms of the accuracy, our 
system outperforms theirs. 
Embeded in the morphological nalyzer, the com- 
pound noun segmentater is currently being used for 
some projects on MT and IE which are worked in 
several institutes and it turns out that the system is 
very effective. 
202 
Number of correct constituents 
Rate 
Precision 
3553/3628 
98.04 
Recall 
3553/3637 
97.80 
Table 3: Result 1: Precision and recall rate 
SA 
Number of correct constituents 
Rate 
Whole System Baseline 
1726\]1774 1673/1774 
97.29 94.30 
Table 4: Result 2: Segmentation accuracy for Compound Noun 
5 Conc lus ions  
In this paper, we presented the new method for 
Korean compound noun segmentation. First, we 
proposed the lexical acquisition for compound noun 
analysis, which consists of the manually constructed 
segmentation dictionary (HBSD) and the dictionary 
for applying the segmentation algorithm (SND). The 
hand-built segmentation dictionary was made manu- 
ally for compound nouns extracted from corpus. The 
simple noun dictionary is based on very frequently 
occurring nouns which are called distinct nouns be- 
cause they are clues for identifying constituents of 
compound nouns. Second, the compound noun was 
segmented based on the modification of CYK tab- 
ular parsing and min-max composition, which was 
proven to be the very effective method by exper- 
iments. The bottom up approach using min-max 
operation guarantees the most likely segmentation, 
being applied in the same way as dynamic program- 
ming. 
With our new method, the result for segmenta- 
tion is as accurate as 97.29%. Especially, the al- 
gorithm made results good enough and the built- 
in dictionary supplemented the algorithm. Conse- 
quently, the methodology is promising and the seg- 
mentation system would be helpful for the applica- 
tion system such as machine translation and infor- 
mation retrieval. 
6 Acknowledgement  
We thank Prof. Mansuk Song at Yonsei Univ. and 
Prof. Key-Sun Choi at KAIST to provide data for 
experiments. 
Re ferences  
Cha, J., Lee, G. and Lee, J. 1998. Generalized Un- 
known Morpheme Guessing for Hybrid POS Tag- 
ging of Korean. In Proceedings of the 6th Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora. 
Choi, K. S., Han, Y. S., Han, Y. G., and Kwon, O. 
W. 1994. KAIST Tree Bank Project for Korean: 
Present and Future Development. In Proceedings 
of the International Workshop on Sharable Natu- 
ral Language Resources. 
Elmi, M. A. and Evens, M. 1998. Spelling Cor- 
rection Using Context. In Proceedings o\] COL- 
ING/A CL 98 
Hopcroft, J. E. and Ullman, J. D. 1979. Introduc- 
tion to Automata Theory, Languages, and Com- 
putation. 
Jin, W. and Chen, L. 1995. Identifying Unknown 
Words in Chinese Corpora In Proceedings of NL- 
PRS 95 
Lee, J. H. and Ahn, J. S. 1996. Using n-grams 
for Korean Text Retrieval. In Proceedings of 19th 
Annual International A CM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Re- 
trieval 
Li, J. and Wang, K. 1995. Study and Implementa- 
tion of Nondictionary Chinese Segmentation. In 
Proceedings of NLPRS 95 
Nagao, M. and Mori, S. 1994. A New Method of 
N-gram Statistics for Large Number of N and Au- 
tomatic Extraction of Words and Phrases from 
Large Text Data of Japanese. In Proceedings of 
COLING 94 
Park, B, R., Hwang, Y. S. and Rim, H. C. 1997. 
Recognizing Korean Unknown Words by Compar- 
atively Analyzing Example Words. In Proceedings 
o\] ICCPOL 97 
Sproat, R. W., Shih, W., Gale, W. and Chang, 
N. 1994. A Stochastic Finite-State Word- 
segmentation Algorithm for Chinese. In Proceed- 
ings of the 32nd Annual Meeting o\] ACL 
Yoon, J., Kang, B. and Choi, K. S. 1999. Informa- 
tion Retrieval Based on Compound Noun Analysis 
for Exact Term Extraction. Submitted in Journal 
of Computer Processing of Orientla Language. 
Yoon, J., Lee, W. and Choi, K. S. 1999. Word Seg- 
mentation Based on Estimation of Words from 
Examples. Technical Report. 
Yun, B. H., Cho, M. C. and Rim, H. C. 1997. Seg- 
menting Korean Compound Nouns Using Statis- 
tical Information and a Preference Rules. In Pro- 
ceedings of PACLING. 
203 
