MIMIC: An Adaptive Mixed Initiative Spoken Dialogue System for 
Information Queries 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll 
Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories 
600 Mountain Avenue 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974, U.S.A. 
jencc @research.bell-labs.corn 
Abstract 
This paper describes MIMIC, an adaptive mixed initia- 
tive spoken dialogue system that provides movie show- 
time information. MIMIC improves upon previous 
dialogue systems in two respects. First, it employs 
initiative-oriented strategy adaptation to automatically 
adapt response generation strategies based on the cumu- 
lative effect of information dynamically extracted from 
user utterances during the dialogue. Second, MIMIC's 
dialogue management architecture decouples its initia- 
tive module from the goal and response strategy selec- 
tion processes, providing ageneral framework for devel- 
oping spoken dialogue systems with different adaptation 
behavior. 
1 Introduction 
In recent years, speech and natural anguage technolo- 
gies have matured enough to enable the development of
spoken dialogue systems in limited domains. Most ex- 
isting systems employ dialogue strategies pre-specified 
during the design phase of the dialogue manager with- 
out taking into account characteristics of actual dialogue 
interactions. More specifically, mixed initiative systems 
typically employ rules that specify conditions (generally 
based on local dialogue context) under which initiative 
may shift from one agent o the other. Previous research, 
on the other hand, has shown that changes in initiative 
strategies inhuman-human dialogues can be dynamically 
modeled in terms of characteristics of the user and of 
the on-going dialogue (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998) 
and that adaptability of initiative strategies in dialogue 
systems leads to better system performance (Litman and 
Pan, 1999). However, no previous dialogue system takes 
into account these dialogue characteristics or allows for 
initiative-oriented adaptation of dialogue strategies. 
In this paper, we describe MIMIC, a voice-enabled 
telephone-based dialogue system that provides movie 
showtime information, emphasizing its dialogue man- 
agement aspects. MIMIC improves upon previous ys- 
tems along two dimensions. First, MIMIC automat- 
ically adapts dialogue strategies based on participant 
roles, characteristics of the current utterance, and dia- 
logue history. This automatic adaptation allows appro- 
priate dialogue strategies to be employed based on both 
local dialogue context and dialogue history, and has been 
shown to result in significantly better performance than 
non-adaptive systems. Second, MIMIC employs an ini- 
tiative module that is decoupled from the goal selection 
process in the dialogue manager, while allowing the out- 
come of both components ojointly determine the strate- 
gies chosen for response generation. As a result, MIMIC 
can exhibit drastically different dialogue behavior with 
very minor adjustments o parameters in the initiative 
module, allowing for rapid development and comparison 
of experimental prototypes and resulting in general and 
portable dialogue systems. 
2 Adaptive Mixed Initiative Dialogue 
Management 
2.1 Motivation 
In naturally occurring human-human dialogues, peakers 
often adopt different dialogue strategies based on hearer 
characteristics, dialogue history, etc. For instance, the 
speaker may provide more guidance if the hearer is hav- 
ing difficulty making progress toward task completion, 
while taking a more passive approach when the hearer 
is an expert in the domain. Our main goal is to enable 
a spoken dialogue system to simulate such human be- 
havior by dynamically adapting dialogue strategies dur- 
ing an interaction based on information that can be au- 
tomatically detected from the dialogue. Figure 1 shows 
an excerpt from a dialogue between MIMIC and an ac- 
tual user where the user is attempting to find the times 
at which the movie Analyze This playing at theaters in 
Montclair. S and U indicate system and user utterances, 
respectively, and the italicized utterances are the output 
of our automatic speech recognizer. In addition, each 
system turn is annotated with its task and dialogue ini- 
tiative holders, where task initiative tracks the lead in the 
process toward achieving the dialogue participants' do- 
main goal, while dialogue initiative models the lead in 
determining the current discourse focus (Chu-Carroll and 
Brown, 1998). In our information query application do- 
main, the system has task (and thus dialogue) initiative if 
its utterances provide helpful guidance toward achieving 
the user's domain goal, as in utterances (6) and (7) where 
MIMIC provided valid response choices to its query in- 
tending to solicit a theater name, while the system has 
97 
dialogue but not task initiative if its utterances only spec- 
ify the current discourse goal, as in utterance (4). i 
This dialogue illustrates everal features of our adap- 
tive mixed initiative dialogue manager. First, MIMIC au- 
tomatically adapted the initiative distribution based on 
information extracted from user utterances and dialogue 
history. More specifically, MIMIC took over task initia- 
tive in utterance (6), after failing to obtain a valid an- 
swer to its query soliciting a missing theater name in (4). 
It retained task initiative until utterance (12), after the 
user implicitly indicated her intention to take over task 
initiative by providing a fully-specified query (utterance 
(11)) to a limited prompt (utterance (10)). Second, ini- 
tiative distribution may affect the strategies MIMIC se- 
lects to achieve its goals. For instance, in the context 
of soliciting missing information, when MIMIC did not 
have task initiative, a simple information-seeking query 
was generated (utterance (4)). On the other hand, when 
MIMIC had task initiative, additional guidance was pro- 
vided (in the form of valid response choices in utterance 
(6)), which helped the user successfully respond to the 
system's query. In the context of prompting the user for 
a new query, when MIMIC had task initiative, a lim- 
ited prompt was selected to better constrain the user's 
response (utterance (10)), while an open-ended prompt 
was generated to allow the user to take control of the 
problem-solving process otherwise (utterances (1) and 
(13)). 
In the next section, we briefly review a framework for 
dynamic initiative modeling. In Section 3, we discuss 
how this framework was incorporated into the dialogue 
management component of a spoken dialogue system to 
allow for automatic adaptation of dialogue strategies. Fi- 
nally, we outline experiments evaluating the resulting 
system and show that MIMIC's automatic adaptation ca- 
pabilities resulted in better system performance. 
2.2 An Evidential Framework for Modeling 
Initiative 
In previous work, we proposed a framework for mod- 
eling initiative during dialogue interaction (Chu-Carroll 
and Brown, 1998). This framework predicts task and dia- 
logue initiative holders on a turn-by-turn basis in human- 
human dialogues based on participant roles (such as each 
dialogue agent's level of expertise and the role that she 
plays in the application domain), cues observed in the 
current dialogue turn, and dialogue history. More specif- 
ically, we utilize the Dempster-Shafer theory (Shafer, 
1976; Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984), and represent the 
current initiative distribution as two basic probability as- 
signments (bpas) which indicate the amount of support 
for each dialogue participant having the task and dia- 
logue initiatives. For instance, the bpa mt-cur({S}) =
l Although the dialogues we collected in our experiments (Sec- 
tion 5) include cases in which MIMIC has neither initiative, such cases 
are rare in this application domain, and will not be discussed further in 
this paper. 
0.3, mt-c~,r({U}) = 0.7 indicates that, with all evidence 
taken into account, there is more support (to the degree 
0.7) for the user having task initiative in the current urn 
than for the system. At the end of each turn, the bpas 
are updated based on the effects that cues observed ur- 
ing that turn have on changing them, and the new bpas 
are used to predict he next task and dialogue initiative 
holders. 
In this framework, cues that affect initiative distribu- 
tion include NoNewlnfo, triggered when the speaker sim- 
ply repeats or rephrases an earlier utterance, implicitly 
suggesting that the speaker may want to give up initia- 
tive, AmbiguousActions, triggered when the speaker pro- 
poses an action that is ambiguous in the application do- 
main, potentially prompting the hearer to take over ini- 
tiative to resolve the detected ambiguity, etc. The ef- 
fects that each cue has on changing the current bpas 
are also represented asbpas, which were determined by 
an iterative training procedure using a corpus of tran- 
scribed ialogues where each turn was annotated with the 
task/dialogue initiative holders and the observed cues. 
The bpas for the next turn are computed by combining 
the bpas representing the current initiative distribution 
and the bpas representing the effects of cues observed 
during the current urn, using Dempster's combination 
rule (Gordon and Shortliffe, 1984). The task and dia- 
logue initiative holders are then predicted based on the 
new bpas. This framework was evaluated using anno- 
tated dialogues from four task-oriented domains, achiev- 
ing, on average, a correct prediction rate of 97% and 88% 
for task and dialogue initiative holders, respectively. In 
Section 3.2, we discuss how this predictive model is con- 
verted into a generative model by enabling the system to 
automatically detect cues that were previously labelled 
manually. We further discuss how the model is used 
by the dialogue manager for dynamic dialogue strategy 
adaptation. 
3 MIMIC :  M ixed  Init iative Mov ie  
In fo rmat ion  Consu l tant  
MIMIC is a telephone-based dialogue system that pro- 
vides movie showtime information. It consists of the fol- 
lowing main components, implemented on a distributed, 
client-server a chitecture (Zhou et al, 1997): 
1. 
. 
Telephony server: this component detects rings 
and hang-ups, and enables treaming of audio data 
on channels of a telephony board. 
Speech recognizer: the recognizer receives audio 
data from the telephony server and generates the 
word string hypothesis that best matches the audio 
input. We used the Lucent Automatic Speech Rec- 
ognizer (Reichl and Chou, 1998; Ortmanns et al, 
1999), configured to use class-based probabilistic n- 
gram language models to allow for rapid updates of 
movie/theater/town names. 
_ql:l 
98
Utterance 
(1) S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system. 
(2) How can I help you? 
(3) U: What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair? 
\[what time is analyze this playing in montclair\] 
(4) S: What theater would you like? User 
(5) U: Montclair. 
\[montclair\] 
(6) S: Choices for theater are Wellmont Theater and Clearviews Screening Zone. System 
(7) What theater would you like? 
(8) U: Clearviews Screening Zone. 
\[urn movie screening zone\] 
(9) S: Analyze This is playing at Clearviews Screening Zone in Montclair at l:15pm, 4:10pm, System 
and 6:30pm. 
(10) Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information about. 
(11) U: What time is Analyze This playing at the Welimont Theater? 
\[what time is analyze this playing at the wellmont theater\] 
(12) S: Analyze This is playing at Wellmont Theater in Montclair at 3:15pm, 5:45pm, 8:20pm, User 
and lO:lOpm. 
(13) Can I help you with anything else? 
Task 
Initiative 
User 
Dialogue 
Initiative 
System 
System 
System 
System 
System 
Figure 1: Excerpt of an Adaptive Mixed Initiative Dialogue 
3. NLP/Dialogue component: this main application- 
dependent component receives a user utterance hy- 
pothesis from the speech recognizer, and generates 
system utterance(s) in response. Three major tasks 
are carried out by this component: 1) semantic in- 
terpretation, which constructs frame-based seman- 
tic representations from user utterances, 2)dialogue 
management, where response strategies are selected 
based on the semantic representation f the user's 
utterance, system's domain knowledge, and initia- 
tive distribution, and 3) utterance generation, where 
utterance templates are chosen and instantiated to 
realize the selected response strategies. These three 
tasks will be discussed in further detail in the rest of 
this section. 
4. Text-to-speech engine: the TTS system receives 
the word string comprising the system's response 
from the dialogue component and converts the text 
into speech for output over the telephone. We used 
the Bell Labs TTS system (Sproat, 1998), which 
in addition to converting plain text into speech, ac- 
cepts text strings annotated to override default pitch 
height, accent placement, speaking rate, etc. 2 
3.1 Semantic Interpretation 
MIMIC utilizes a non-recursive frame-based semantic 
representation commonly used in spoken dialogue sys- 
tems (e.g. (Seneff et al, 1991; Lamel, 1998)), which 
represents an utterance as a set of attribute-value pairs. 
Figure 2(a) shows the frame-based semantic representa- 
tion for the utterance "What time is Analyze This playing 
2 See (Nakatani and Chu-Carroll, 2000) for how MIMIC's dialogue- 
level knowledge is used to override default prosodic assignments for 
concept-to-speech generation. 
Question-Type: When 
Movie: Analyze This 
Theater: null 
Town: Montclair 
(a) Semantic Representation 
Question-Type: When 
Movie: mandatory 
Theater: mandatory 
Town: optional 
(b) Task Specification 
Figure 2: Semantic Representation a d Task Specifica- 
tion 
in Montclair?" 
MIMIC's semantic representation is constructed by 
first extracting, for each attribute, a set of keywords from 
the user utterance. Using a vector-based topic identifi- 
cation process (Salton, 1971; Chu-Carroll and Carpen- 
ter, 1999), these keywords are used to determine a set 
of likely values (including null) for that attribute. Next, 
the utterance is interpreted with respect o the dialogue 
history and the system's domain knowledge. This al- 
lows MIMIC to handle elliptical sentences and anaphoric 
references, as well as automatically infer missing values 
and detect inconsistencies in the current representation. 
This semantic representation allows for decoupling 
of domain-dependent task specifications and domain- 
99
independent dialogue management s rategies. Each 
query type is specified by a template indicating, for each 
attribute, whether a value must, must not, or can option- 
ally be provided in order for a query to be considered 
well-formed. Figure 2(b) shows that to solicit movie 
showtime information (question type when), a movie 
name and a theater name must be provided, whereas a
town may optionally be provided. These specifications 
are determined based on domain semantics, and must be 
reconstructed when porting the system to a new domain. 
3.2 Dialogue Management 
Given a semantic representation, the dialogue history and 
the system's domain knowledge, the dialogue manager 
selects a set of strategies that guides MIMIC's response 
generation process. This task is carried out by three 
subprocesses: 1) initiative modeling, which determines 
the initiative distribution for the system's dialogue turn, 
2) goal selection, which identifies a goal that MIMIC's 
response attempts to achieve, and 3) strategy selection, 
which chooses, based on the initiative distribution, a set 
of dialogue acts that MIMIC will adopt in its attempt to 
realize the selected goal. 
3.2.1 Initiative Modeling 
MIMIC's initiative module determines the task and di- 
alogue initiative holders for each system turn in order 
to enable dynamic strategy adaptation. It automatically 
detects cues triggered uring the current user turn, and 
combines the effects of these cues with the current ini- 
tiative distribution to determine the initiative holders for 
the system's turn. 
Cue Detection The cues and the bpas representing 
their effects are largely based on a subset of those de- 
scribed in (Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998), 3 as shown 
in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). Figure 3(a) shows that obser- 
vation of TakeOverTask supports a task initiative shift 
to the speaker to the degree .35. The remaining sup- 
port is assigned to O, the set of all possible conclusions 
(i.e., {speaker,hearer}), indicating that to the degree .65, 
observation of this cue does not commit to identifying 
which dialogue participant should have task initiative in 
the next dialogue turn. 
The cues used in MIMIC are classified into two cate- 
gories, discourse cues and analytical cues, based on the 
types of knowledge needed to detect hem: 
I. Discourse cues, which can be detected by consider- 
ing the semantic representation f the current utter- 
ance and dialogue history: 
? TakeOverTask, an implicit indication that the 
user wants to take control of the problem- 
solving process, triggered when the user pro- 
vides more information than the discourse x- 
pectation. 
3We selected only those cues that can be automatically detected in 
a spoken dialogue system with speech recognition errors and limited 
semantic interpretation capabilities. 
? NoNewlnfo, an indication that the user is un- 
able to make progress toward task completion, 
triggered when the semantic representations of 
two consecutive user turns are identical (a re- 
sult of the user not knowing what to say or the 
speech recognizer failing to recognize the user 
utterances). 
2. Analytical cues, which can only be detected by tak- 
ing into account MIMIC's domain knowledge: 
? lnvalidAction, an indication that the user made 
an invalid assumption about the domain, trig- 
gered when the system database lookup based 
on the user's query returns null. 
? lnvalidActionResolved, triggered when the 
previous invalid assumption is corrected. 
? AmbiguousAction, an indication that the user 
query is not well-formed, triggered when a 
mandatory attribute is unspecified or when 
more than one value is specified for an at- 
tribute. 
? AmbiguousActionResolved, triggered when the 
attribute in question is uniquely instantiated. 
Computing Initiative Distribution To determine the 
initiative distribution, the bpas representing the effects 
of cues detected in the current user utterance are instan- 
tiated (i.e., speaker~hearer in Figure 3 are instantiated as 
system~user accordingly). These effects are then inter- 
preted with respect o the current initiative distribution 
by applying Dempster's combination rule (Gordon and 
Shortliffe, 1984) to the bpas representing the current ini- 
tiative distribution and the instantiated bpas. This results 
in two new bpas representing the task and dialogue initia- 
tive distributions for the system's turn. The dialogue par- 
ticipant with the greater degree of support for having the 
task/dialogue initiative in these bpas is the task/dialogue 
initiative holder for the system's turn 4 (see Section 4 for 
an example). 
3.2.2 Goal Selection 
The goal selection module selects a goal that MIMIC at- 
tempts to achieve in its response by utilizing informa- 
tion from analytical cue detection as shown in Figure 4. 
MIMIC's goals focus on two aspects of cooperative di- 
alogue interaction: 1) initiating subdialogues to resolve 
anomalies that occur during the dialogue by attempting 
to instantiate an unspecified attribute, constraining an at- 
tribute for which multiple values have been specified, or 
correcting an invalid assumption i  the case of invalid 
41n practice, this is the preferred initiative holder since practical 
reasons may prevent the dialogue participant from actually holding the 
initiative. For instance, if having task initiative dictates inclusion of 
additional helpful information, this can only be realized if M1M1C's 
knowledge base provides uch information. 
"INN 100
Cue Class 
Discourse 
Analytical 
Cue 
TakeOverTask 
NoNewlnfo 
InvalidAction 
lnvalidActionResolved 
AmbiguousAction 
AmbiguousActionResolved 
BPA 
mt-tot({speaker}) = 0.35; mr-tot(O) = 0.65 
mt-,~ni({hearer}) = 0.35; mt-nn~(O) = 0.65 
mt-i~({hearer}) = 0.35; mt- ia(O) = 0.65 
mt-iar({hearer}) = 0.35; mt- iar(O)  = 0.65 
mt-aa({hearer}) = 0.35; mt-a~(O) = 0.65 
mt . . . .  ({speaker}) = 0.35; mt . . . .  (O) = 0.65 
(a)Task Initiative 
Cue Class 
Discourse 
Analytical 
Cue 
TakeOverTask 
NoNewlnfo 
lnvalidAction 
InvalidActionResolved 
AmbiguousAction 
AmbiguousActionResolved 
BPA 
md-tot({speaker}) = 0.35; ma-tot(O) = 0.65 
md-nni({hearer}) = 0.35; md-nni(O) -~- 0.65 
md-ia ({hearer}) = 0.7; md-ia (O) = 0.3 
ma-iar({hearer}) = 0.7; ma-iar(O) = 0.3 
ma-aa({hearer}) = 0.7; md_a~(O) = 0.3 
ma . . . .  ({speaker}) = 0.7; md . . . .  (O) = 0.3 
(b)Dialogue Initiative 
Figure 3: Cues and BPAs for Modeling Initiative in MIMIC 
Seleet-Goal(SemRep): 
(1) IfAmbiguousAction detected 
(2) ambiguous-attr +--get-ambiguous(SemRep) 
/* get name of ambiguous attribute */ 
(3) If (number-values(ambiguous-attr) == 0) 
/* attribute unspecified *,1 
(4) Instantiate(ambiguous-attr) 
(5) Else/* more than one value specified */ 
(6) Constrain(ambiguous-attr) 
(7) Else if lnvalidAction detected 
(8) ProvideNegativeAnswer(SemRep) 
(9) Else/* well-formed query */ 
(10) answer +-- database-query(SemRep) 
(11 ) ProvideAnswer(answer) 
Figure 4: Goal Selection Algorithm 
user queries (steps 1-8) 5 (van Beeket  al., 1993; Raskutti 
and Zukerman, 1993; Qu and Beale, 1999), and 2) pro- 
viding answers to well-formed queries (steps 9-11). 
3.2.3 Strategy Selection 
Previous work has argued that initiative affects the de- 
gree of control an agent has in the dialogue interaction 
(Whittaker and Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 
1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1998). Thus, a cooper- 
ative system may adopt different strategies to achieve the 
same goal depending on the initiative distribution. Since 
task initiative models contribution to domain/problem- 
solving goals, while dialogue initiative affects the cur- 
5An alternative strategy to step (4) is to perform adatabase lookup 
based on the ambiguous query and summarize the results (Litman et 
al., 1998), which we leave for future work. 
rent discourse goal, we developed alternative strategies 
for achieving the goals in Figure 4 based on initiative 
distribution, as shown in Table 1. 
The strategies employed when MIMIC has only dia- 
logue initiative are similar to the mixed initiative dia- 
logue strategies employed by many existing spoken di- 
alogue systems (e.g., (Bennacef et al, 1996; Stent et 
al., 1999)). To instantiate an attribute, MIMIC adopts 
the lnfoSeek dialogue act to solicit the missing informa- 
tion. In contrast, when MIMIC has both initiatives, it 
plays a more active role by presenting the user with addi- 
tional information comprising valid instantiations of the 
attribute (GiveOptions). Given an invalid query, MIMIC 
notifies the user of the failed query and provides an open- 
ended prompt when it only has dialogue initiative. When 
MIMIC has both initiatives, however, in addition to No- 
tifyFailure, it suggests an alternative close to the user's 
original query and provides a limited prompt. Finally, 
when MIMIC has neither initiative, it simply adopts No- 
tifyFailure, allowing the user to determine the next dis- 
course goal. 
3.3 Utterance Generat ion  
MIMIC employs a simple template-driven utterance gen- 
eration approach. Templates are associated with dialogue 
acts as shown in Table 2.6 The generation component re- 
ceives from the dialogue manager the selected ialogue 
acts and the parameters needed to instantiate the tem- 
plates. It then generates the system response, which is 
sent to the TTS module for spoken output synthesis. 
6In most cases, there is a one-to-one-mapping between dialogue 
acts and templates. The exceptions are Answer, NotifyFailure, and 
SuggestAlternative, whose templates vary based on the question type. 
101 
Task + Dialogue Dialogue None 
Constrain Clarify Clarify Acknowledge 
Instantiate GiveOptions lnfoSeek Acknowledge 
InfoSeek 
ProvideAnswer Answer Answer Answer 
LimitedPrompt OpenPrompt 
ProvideNegativeAnswer NotifyFailure NotifyFailure NotifyFailure 
SuggestAltemative OpenPrompt 
LimitedPrompt 
Table 1: Strategy Selection Based on Goal and Initiative Distribution 
Dialogue Act 
Clarify 
Acknowledge 
GiveOptions 
InfoSeek 
Answer 
OpenPrompt 
LimitedPrompt 
NotifyFailure 
SuggestAltemative 
Template 
"Did you say < valuel > .... or < valuen >.9" 
"Uh-huh." 
"Choices for < attribute > are < valuex > ... < value, >7 
"What < attribute > would you like?" 
E.g., "< movie > is playing at < theater > at < time1 > ... < time,, >" 
"Can I help you with anything elseT' 
"Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information about." 
E.g., "< movie > is not playing at < theater >. 
E.g., "< movie > is playing at < alternativetheater > at < timex > ... < timen >" 
Table 2: Mappings Between Dialogue Acts and Utterance Templates 
4 Examples 
To illustrate MIMIC's adaptation capabilities, we return 
to the dialogue in Figure 1, which is repeated in Figure 5 
and annotated with the cues detected in each user turn 
(in boldfaced italics) and the dialogue acts employed for 
response generation i each system turn (in boldface). 
The bpas representing the initiative distribution for ut- 
terance (3) are the initial bpas, which, based on MIMIC's 
role as an information provider, are 
mt-(3)({S}) = 0.3, mt-(3)({U}) = 0.7; 
= 0.6, md- (3 ) ({V})  = 0.4. 
The cue AmbiguousAction is detected in utterance (3) 
because the mandatory attribute theater was not specified 
and cannot be inferred (since the town of Montclair has 
multiple theaters). The bpas representing its effect are 
instantiated as follows (Figure 3): 
mt-,,({S}) = 0.35, mt_ , , (O)  = 0.65; 
md-aa({S}) = 0.7, md-aa(O) = 0.3. 
Combining the current bpas with the effects of the ob- 
served cue, we obtain the following new bpas: 
mt-(4)({S}) = 0.4, mt_(a)({U}) = 0.6; 
md_(4)({S}) = 0.83, md_(4)({U}) = 0.17. 
The updated bpas indicate that MIMIC should have dia- 
logue but not task initiative when attempting to resolve 
the detected ambiguity in utterance (4). 
MIMIC selects Instantiate as its goal to be achieved 
(Figure 4), which, based on the initiative distribution, 
leads it to select he InfoSeek action (Table I) and gener- 
ate the query "What heater would you like?" 
The user's response in (5) again triggers Ambiguous- 
Action, as well as NoNewlnfo since the semantic repre- 
sentations of (3) and (5) are identical, given the dialogue 
context. When the effects of these cues are taken into 
account, we have the following initiative distribution for 
utterance (6): 
mt-(6)({S}) = 0.62, mt_(6)({U}) = 0.38; 
md-(6)({S}) = 0.96, rnd_(6)({V}) = 0.04. 
Although Instaatiate is again selected as the goal, 
MIMIC now has both task and dialogue initiatives; thus 
it selects both GiveOptions and lnfoSeek to achieve this 
goal and generates utterances (6) and (7). The addi- 
tional information, in the form of valid theater choices, 
helps the user provide the missing value in (8), allow- 
ing MIMIC to answer the query in (9) and prompt for 
the next query. However, despite the limited prompt, 
the user provides a well-formed query in (11), trigger- 
ing TakeOverTask. Thus, MIMIC answers the query and 
switches to an open-ended prompt in (13), relinquishing 
task initiative to the user. 
In addition to its automatic adaptation capabilities, an- 
other advantage of MIMIC is the ease of modifying its 
adaptation behavior, enabled by the decoupling of the 
initiative module from the goal and strategy selection 
processes. For instance, a system-initiative rsion of 
MIMIC can be achieved by setting the initial bpas as fol- 
lows: 
mt-initial({S}) = 1; 
md--initial({S}) -~1. 
102 
(1) S: Hello, this is MIMIC, the movie information system. 
(2) How can I help you? 
(3) U: What time is Analyze This playing in Montclair? 
\[what time is analyze this playing in montclair\] 
(4) S: What theater would you like? 
(5) U: Montclair. 
\[montclair\] 
(6) S: Choices for theater are Wellmont heater and Clearviews Screening Zone 
(7) What theater would you like? 
(8) U: Clearviews Screening Zone. 
\[um movie screening zone\] 
(9) S: Analyze This is playing at Clearviews Screening Zone in Montclair at 1:15pm, 
4:10pm, and 6:30pm. 
(10) Please say the name of the movie or theater or town you would like information 
about. 
(11) U: What time is Analyze This playing at the Wellmont heater? 
\[what time is analyze this playing at the wellmont theater\] 
(12) S: Analyze this is playing at Wellmont heater in Montclair at 3:15pm, 5:45pm, 
8:20pm, and 10:10pm. 
(13) Can I help you with anything else? 
\[AmbiguousAction\] 
\[lnfoSeek\] 
\[AmbiguousAction, NoNewlnfo\] 
\[GiveOptions\] 
\[InfoSeek\] 
\[AmbiguousActionResolved\] 
\[Answer\] 
\[LimitedPrompt\] 
\[TakeOverTask\] 
\[Answer\] 
\[OpenPrompt\] 
Figure 5: Annotated Dialogue Shown in Figure 1 
This is because in the Dempster-Shafer theory, if the 
initial bpas or the bpas for a cue provide definite evi- 
dence for drawing a certain conclusion, then no subse- 
quent cue has any effect on changing that conclusion. 
Thus, MIMIC will retain both initiatives throughout the 
dialogue. Alternatively, versions of MIMIC with differ- 
ent adaptation behavior can be achieved by tailoring the 
initial bpas and/or the bpas for each cue based on the ap- 
plication. For instance, for an electronic sales agent, the 
effect oflnvalidAction can be increased so that when the 
user orders an out-of-stock item, the system will always 
take over task initiative and suggest an alternative item. 
5 System Evaluation 
We conducted two experiments oevaluate MIMIC's au- 
tomatic adaptation capabilities. We compared MIMIC 
with two control systems: MIMIC-SI, a system-initiative 
version of MIMIC in which the system retains both ini- 
tiatives throughout the dialogue, and MIMIC-MI, a non- 
adaptive mixed-initiative version of MIMIC that resem- 
bles the behavior of many existing dialogue systems. In 
this section we summarize these experiments and their 
results. A companion paper describes the evaluation pro- 
cess and results in further detail (Chu-Carroll and Nick- 
erson, 2000). 
Each experiment involved eight users interacting with 
MIMIC and MIMIC-SI or MIMIC-MI to perform aset of 
tasks, each requiring the user to obtain specific movie in- 
formation. User satisfaction was assessed by asking the 
subjects to fill out a questionnaire after interacting with 
each version of the system. Furthermore, a number of 
performance f atures, largely based on the PARADISE 
dialogue valuation scheme (Walker et al, 1997), were 
automatically logged, derived, or manually annotated. In 
addition, we logged the cues automatically detected in 
each user utterance, as well as the initiative distribution 
for each turn and the dialogue acts selected to generate 
each system response. 
The features gathered from the dialogue interactions 
were analyzed along three dimensions: system perfor- 
mance, discourse features (in terms of characteristics 
of the resulting dialogues, such as the cues detected in 
user utterances), and initiative distribution. Our results 
show that MIMIC's adaptation capabilities 1) led to bet- 
ter system performance in terms of user satisfaction, dia- 
logue efficiency (shorter dialogues), and dialogue quality 
(fewer ASR timeouts), and 2) better matched user expec- 
tations (by giving up task initiative when the user intends 
to have control of the dialogue interaction) and more effi- 
ciently resolved ialogue anomalies (by taking over task 
initiative to provide guidance when no progress is made 
in the dialogue, or to constrain user utterances when ASR 
performance is poor). 
6 Conclusions 
In this paper, we discussed MIMIC, an adaptive mixed- 
initiative spoken dialogue system. MIMIC's automatic 
adaptation capabilities allow it to employ appropriate 
strategies based on the cumulative ffect of information 
dynamically extracted from user utterances during dia- 
logue interactions, enabling MIMIC to provide more co- 
operative and satisfactory responses than existing non- 
adaptive systems. Furthermore, MIMIC was imple- 
mented as a general framework for information query 
systems by decoupling its initiative module from the 
goal selection process, while allowing the outcome of 
both processes to jointly determine the response strate- 
gies employed. This feature nables easy modification to 
MIMIC's adaptation behavior, thus allowing the frame- 
work to be used for rapid development and comparisons 
103 
of experimental prototypes of spoken dialogue systems. 
Acknowledgments 
The author would like to thank Egbert Ammicht, An- 
toine Saad, Qiru Zhou, Wolfgang Reichl, and Stefan 
Ortmanns for their help on system integration and on 
ASR/telephony server development, Jill Nickerson for 
conducting the evaluation experiments, and Bob Carpen- 
ter, Diane Litman, Christine Nakatani, and Jill Nickerson 
for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper. 
References 
S. Bennacef, L. Devillers, S. Rosset, and L. Lamel. 
1996. Dialog in the RAILTEL telephone-based sys- 
tem. In Proceedings of the 4th International Confer- 
ence on Spoken Language Processing. 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Michael K. Brown. 1998. An 
evidential model for tracking initiative in collabora- 
tive dialogue interactions. User Modeling and User- 
Adapted Interaction, 8(3-4):215-253. 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Bob Carpenter. 1999. Vector- 
based natural anguage call routing. Computational 
Linguistics, 25(3):361-388. 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Jill S. Nickerson. 2000. Evalu- 
ating automatic dialogue strategy adaptation for a spo- 
ken dialogue system. In Proceedings of the 1st Con- 
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associ- 
ation for Computational Linguistics. To appear. 
Jean Gordon and Edward H. Shortliffe. 1984. The 
Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence. In Bruce 
Buchanan and Edward Shortliffe, editors, Rule-Based 
Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the 
Stanford Heuristic Programming Project, chapter 13, 
pages 272-292. Addison-Wesley. 
Lori Lamel. 1998. Spoken language dialog system de- 
velopment and evaluation at LIMSI. In Proceedings 
of the International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue, 
pages 9-17. 
Diane J. Litman and Shimei Pan. 1999. Empirically 
evaluating an adaptable spoken dialogue system. In 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
User Modeling, pages 55-64. 
Diane J. Litman, Shimei Pan, and Marilyn A. Walker. 
1998. Evaluating response strategies in a web-based 
spoken dialogue agent. In Proceedings of the 36th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 780-786. 
Christine H. Nakatani and Jennifer Chu-Carroll. 2000. 
Using dialogue representations forconcept-to-speech 
generation. In Proceedings of the ANLP-NAACL 
Workshop on Conversational Systems. 
Stefan Ortmanns, Wolfgang Reichl, and Wu Chou. 1999. 
An efficient decoding method for real time speech 
recognition. In Proceedings of the 5th European Con- 
ference on Speech Communication a d Technology. 
Yan Qu and Steve Beale. 1999. A constraint-based 
model for cooperative r sponse generation i informa- 
tion dialogues. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Na- 
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
Bhavani Raskutti and Ingrid Zukerman. 1993. Elicit- 
ing additional information during cooperative consul- 
tations. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of 
the Cognitive Science Society. 
Wolfgang Reichl and Wu' Chou. 1998. Decision tree 
state tying based on segmental c ustering for acoustic 
modeling. In Proceedings of the International Confer- 
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. 
Gerald Salton. 1971. The SMART Retrieval System. 
Prentice Hall, Inc. 
Stephanie Seneff, James Glass, David Goddeau, David 
Goodine, Lynette Hirschman, Hong Leung, Michael 
Phillips, Joseph Polifroni, and Victor Zue. 1991. De- 
velopment and preliminary evaluation of the MIT 
ATIS system. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech 
and Natural Language Workshop, ages 88-93. 
Glenn Shafer. 1976. A Mathematical Theory of Evi- 
dence. Princeton University Press. 
Richard Sproat, editor. 1998. Multilingual Text-to- 
Speech Synthesis: The Bell Labs Approach. Kluwer, 
Boston, MA. 
Amanda Stent, John Dowding, Jean Mark Gawron, Eliz- 
abeth Owen Bratt, and Robert Moore. 1999. The 
CommandTalk spoken dialogue system. In Proceed- 
ings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 183-190. 
Peter van Beek, Robin Cohen, and Ken Schmidt. 1993. 
From plan critiquing to clarification dialogue for co- 
operative response generation. Computational Intelli- 
gence, 9(2):132-154. 
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 1990. Mixed ini- 
tiative in dialogue: An investigation i to discourse 
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics, pages 70-78. 
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candance A. 
Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A 
framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In 
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Associ- 
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 271-280. 
Steve Whittaker and Phil Stenton. 1988. Cues and con- 
trol in expert-client dialogues. In Proceedings of the 
26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, pages 123-130. 
Qiru Zhou, Chin-Hui Lee, Wu Chou, and Andrew Pargel- 
lis. 1997. Speech technology integration and research 
platform: A system study. In Proceedings of the 5th 
European Conference on Speech Communication and 
Technology. 
104 
