TEXT ANALYSIS: SESSION INTRODUCTION 
Donald E. Walker 
Ar t i f i c ia l  InCeUigence  CanCer 
SRI lncernaCional 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
Text analysis I s  a promis ing area  fo r  
app l l caC lons  of compuCaClonal l ingu is t i cs ,  wlch 
regard  bosh Co the prospeces  fo r  Cechnologlca l  
achievement and co the potent ia l  benef i ce  thac 
chose achievements can prov ide .  Books, a r t i c les ,  
and documents in cexC form are a major  source o f  
in fo rmat ion .  Being able Co use computers more 
effecclvely in the analysis of chess maCerlals 
would have slgnificanC impl lcaClons fo r  v i rCua l ly  
every  in te l lec tua l  ac t iv i ty .  Moreover, deve lop-  
manes in chis area are essantlal if mankind is Co 
cake advantage of  as wel l  as merely  Co cope wish 
the vase quant i ty  of  textua l  data a l ready  s tored  
in  computer--readable form, an amount that  i s  
increasing rapidly because of the use of computer- 
d i rec ted  photocompos i t ion  for  p r in t ing  and the 
pracC lca l i cy  of  opt i ca l  character  recogn i t ion  
techn iques .  
I f ind  lC use fu l  to d i s t ingu ish  s ix  k inds of  
operat ions  chac can be performed on a g iven  body 
of text : "  
(1) Segmentat ion - -break  the text  up in to  ICe 
const i tuent  e lements;  a t  the lowest  leve l  th i s  
operat ion  ident i f ies  the "e lementary  un i ts "  In 
the text ,  presuming,  of  course ,  that  there  i s  a 
parClcular seC of criteria for the i r  
determinat ion ;  somewhat h igher ,  I t  segregates  
grammatical and semanCic units within a 
sentence; more soph is t i ca ted  procedures 
de l ineate  d i scourse  s t ruc tures .  
(2) Representat ion - -character i ze  the in forma-  
t ion  conta ined in the text ;  th i s  operat ion  can 
be as s imple as ass ign ing  a set  of index tens  
or as complicated as creating a set of 
predicate/argument structures re la t ing  the 
var ious  e lements in the text ;  summaries and 
abst rac ts  of the text  const i tu te  in termed ia te  
representat ions .  
(3) Classlflcation--identify the text  as 
similar to and different from other texts in 
relation to a see of predetermined categories; 
this operation establishes the position of the 
text In.some more general fr~unework. 
(4) Modlfication--~hange the wording of some 
par t  of the text; thls operation corresponds to 
Note that generation, the creation of the text 
itself, i s  presumed for  this d iscuss ion ,  and that 
translaclon of a ~exC turn another language ls 
also nor inc luded.  
the casks o f  rewr i t ing  par ts  o f  the text  as 
we l l  as making cor rect ions ;  i t  begs the 
quasClon of  when the mod i f i ca t ion  is  
su f f i c ient ly  la rge  to resu l t  in cons ider ing  the 
text  to be new. 
(5) Convers ioQ- -Crans for~ content  e lements  from 
the text  in to  some other  nontextua l  or  at  leas t  
nonsequent ia l  s t ruc ture ;  in  th i s  operat ion  
in fo rmat ion  i s  ext rac ted  from the text  and 
reorgan ized  accord in  8 to externa l ly  determined 
c r i te r ia .  
(6)  D i f fe rent ia t ion - - locate  par t i cu la r  const i -  
tuents  t r tch/n a text ;  th i s  operat ion  f inds  
chose elements Chat whol ly  o r  par t ia l l y  march a 
g iven spec i  f lea  C?on. 
I t  should be c lear ,  on re f lec t ion ,  that  these 
operat ions  over lap  in  complex ways; some presume 
others ;  moreover,  the i r  e f faces  ere s t rong ly  
context  dependent,  re f lec t ing  the purpose and the 
par t i cu la r  framework fo r  the ana lys i s .  While I 
make no sarong c la ims fo r  the i r  u t i l i ty ,  I be l ieve  
chat i t  i s  impor tant  fo r  the f ie ld  to d i s t ingu ish  
the d i f fe rent  k inds of th ings  that  people want to 
do wi th  texts .  
The s ix  papers  inc luded in the sess ions  on 
text  ana lys i s  aC th i s  conference i l lus t ra te  the 
beginnings of a technology that will allow us to 
address  some of the under ly ing  i ssues .  Three of 
them deal  wlth the problem of conversion; 
specifically, they show how information can be 
extracted from a text and formatted for storage ~n 
a database .  
In "Spec ia l i zed  in fo rmat ion  ext rac t ion :  
auComaClc chemical  reaction coding from English 
descriptions," Larry H. Reeker, Elaine M. Zamora, 
and Paul E. Blower present  a system that  ext racts  
information on chemical  reactions from the 
experimental sections of papers in specialized 
chemistry Journals, converting l~ Into a format 
that chemists use to identify that kind of data. 
James R. Cowle, in his paper "Automatic 
analysis of descriptive texts," describes a system 
for interpreting texts that contain stylized 
descriptions, like those in cata logues  and 
directories. He shows how examples from a field 
guide Co wild flowers can be processed to Identify 
attributes characteristic of plants, which are 
then scored in  a canonical form. 
107 
"Automatic representation of the semantic 
relationships corresponding to a French surface 
expression" describes the procedures Gian Plero 
Zarri is using to analyze statements about French 
historical events so they can he translated Into 
the complex semantic data definition language 
established for the RESEDA system. 
All three of these systems entail selecting 
texts wlth specialized language character i s t i cs ,  
res t r i c ted  sub jec t  mat ter ,  and a l im i ted  number of 
d isc rete  parameters  into which the in fo rmat ion  
ext rac ted  i s  Co be scored .  None of the papers  
d i scusses  the procedures  fo r  access ing  the 
information once stored, although all consider 
such procedures  to be an essential component of a 
more comprehensive retrieval system. KESEDA is a 
special case, because It already has a facility 
established to retrieve data stored In the system 
and to make inferences based on those data. 
In cont ras t  to the preced ing  papers ,  
" 'Exper tness  ? from s t ructured  text?  ~ECONSIDER: a 
d iagnost i c  prompt ing program,"  by Mark S. Tur t le ,  
David D. ShererCz,  Marsden S. S lo i s ,  and Stuar t  
Nelson, begins wlth a text  in which the 
information is already highly structured. It 
contains, for a large number of diseases, 
descriptions of the medical characteristics 
associated wlth each, which are stored as an 
inverted file index. Presented wlth the findings 
for a particular patient, the system identifies 
the disease or diseases whose characteristics 
correspond most closely to them. The authors are 
particularly interested in deter~Inlng how such a 
text can be modified to enhance the effectiveness 
of the retrieval process. 
The paper by George Vladutz, "Natural 
language text segmentation techniques applied to 
the automat ic  compi la t ion  of  p r in ted  sub jec t  
indexes and for online database access," focuses 
on the segmentation of self-contalned text 
fragments into semantlc-related constituents. He 
shows how titles from bibliographic citations can 
be processed to identify phrases that can be used 
in a Key Word Phrase subject index. The method, 
intended for application over a broad range of 
topics, is based on a predetermined llst of 
nominal syntactic patterns that can be recognized 
usln E a small, domaln-lndependent dictionary. 
"Using natural language descriptions to 
improve the usability of databases," by Carole D. 
Hafner and John D. Joyce, shows a set of 
procedures for identifying text phrases that 
correspond to classes of objects in a database. 
The authors have made extensions to the command 
language of a relational data management system so 
that users can name and describe database objects 
using natural language phrases. Computational 
linguistic techniques make it possible to 
recognize partly specified names and to allow 
partial recovery from ambiguity through an 
identification of context. 
The approaches presented in these papers 
derive primarily from work on the syntactic and 
semantic analysis of structures at the lexical or 
sentence level. None as yet builds on more 
complex procedures that reflect discourse 
properties of text coherence and cohesion. 
Further research on pragmatics and speech acts 
certainly is essential for some kinds of progress. 
However, there are other directions to pursue. 
One that seems important is determining how 
existing knowledge resources can be applied to the 
problem, People certainly make use, both 
explicitly and implicitly, of a variety of aids 
when they analyze texts. Particularly worth 
considering are dictionaries, a number of which 
are now available in machlne-readable form, 
reference materlals that contain biographical, 
geographical, or other specialized kinds of 
information, and encyclopedias. We need to 
establish procedures that will allow these 
resources to be used in text analysis. It is also 
appropriate to note that we do not have much data 
on the features of any body of text that might 
serve as a standard for comparison, much less the 
detailed studies of the characteristics of texts 
of all kinds that will be essential to ensure 
continuing progress in thls field. A systematic 
s tudy  of the varieties of texts and of the 
purposes for which they can analyzed would provide 
useful guidelines for research at thls stage of 
our understanding. 
108 
