KNOWLEDGE-BASED APPROACHES: SESSION INTRODUCTION 
Ivan A. Sag 
Department of Linguistics 
Stanford University 
Stanford, CA 94305 
As research  in  natura l  l anguage process ing  
spawns commerc ia l  p roducts ,  as  i t  now beg ins  Co, 
our  research  community acqu i res  new eth ica l  and 
pract i ca l  respons ib i l i t i es .  All software packages 
have limitations, and research progress consists 
in dev is ing  techn iques  that  lead  to reduc ing  these  
l im i ta t ions .  There i s  every  reason  to  be l ieve  
that  currently available natural language 
interfaces may be of significant value to those 
who purchase them, despite their limitations, and 
that their successors will be of even greater 
value. Our responsibility to accurately convey 
the limitations of existing systems, as well as 
their capabilities, is two-fold: an ethical 
responsibility to  the pub l i c  not to mislead 
potential consumers, and a pract i ca l  
responsibility to each other not to destroy the 
credibility of fu ture  research  resu l t s  that  lead  
Co enhanced language process ing  capabilities. 
Row are we living up to this responsibility? 
One commercially available product now advertises 
by dep ic t ing  users  that  a re  sat i s f ied  because  they  
can "simply type \[their\] question in everyday 
conversational dialogue, PHRASED ANY WAY \[THEY\] 
LIKE \[emphasis added\]". Another boasts an 
"understanding of IIN'REST~ICTED \[emphasis added\] 
English queries comparable to a human's". The 
former acknowledges chat "every product has a 
limit to what it can do" (The only English 
sentence offered as beyond the system's 
capability, however, is: "To be or not to be, 
? .."). But the latter proudly asserts: 
"DISADVANTAGES: none". The former is at best 
misleading. But the latter makes a mockery of 
both the intellectual content of our discipline 
and the basic principles of honesty in 
advertising. 
How do we assess the limitations of natural 
language systems? When we are presented with a 
user-computer interaction, whether in a llve 
demonstration or in a scholarly paper such as 
chose being presented at this conference, there is 
an implicit trust. We assume, for example, chat 
each sentence being processed is really being 
processed, and further that each sentence is 
merely one instance of a large class of similar 
sentences, all of which can be processed in llke 
fashion. Likewise, when we see cooperative, 
seemingly intelligent responses to queries, we 
assume that there is some generality to the 
intelligence, that tt will exhibit itself in  a 
variety of different circumstances, and will 
transport itself to different domains. 
Thus we as a community would be shocked to 
hear reports of public demonstrations of INSTALLED 
natural language systems where unexpected 
deviations from planned presentations expose what 
appear to be "canned" responses rather than 
intelligent language processing, if such 
incidents were to occur, there would be great 
cause for alarm. The implicit trust I referred to 
earlier would have been violated, and the very 
integrity of our discipline called into question. 
To retain credibility as a responsible research 
community, we must devise better methods for 
evaluating research, ways of exposing hucksters 
and charlatans in our midst, and some means of 
enforcing standards that guard against overzealous 
and unprincipled marketing of commercial products. 
Sensible research of course takes many 
shapes. Among the key issues of our field that 
make good sense to address are the following: 
1. new techniques for representation or 
processing 
2. limitations of existing techniques 
3. comparisons among existing techniques 
4. new problems for theories of represen- 
tation or processing 
5. properties of system design thac ensure 
desirable functioning (e.g., discussions of 
modularity and portability) 
6. assessing the limitations of existing 
systems 
The papers in this session couch on several 
such issues. Boguraev and Sparck Jones discuss 
number 5; both Finln and Palmer and Pazzani and 
Engelman touch on number 3; Montgomery is 
concerned with number 4; Lehnert and Shwartz 
address number 6. In some cases the contribution 
helng made is clear. In other cases, I for one 
find it difficult to assess whether the systems 
being described do what they do in a principled 
way that will generalize to other applications, or 
in an ad hoc fashion chat is devoid of 
intellectual interest. In the absence of agreed- 
upon standards for evaluating descriptions of such 
systems, I can only urge both authors and audience 
to address the issues I have raised, doubtless not 
for the first time, in the oral presentations and 
subsequent discussion. 
54 
