HANDLING ILL-FORMED INPUT: SESSION INTRODUCTION 
Ralph M. Weischedel 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Delaware 
Newark, Delaware 19711 
i. In t roduct ion  
Suppose we call "normat ive" any sys- 
tem based on a set of  const ra ints  (wheth- 
er pragmatic ,  semantic,  or syntact ic) .  
Input that v io lates  the constra ints  of a 
system could be termed " i l l - formed".  Son- 
dhe imer  and Weischede l  (1980) ident i fy  
two genera l  c lasses of input appear ing  
i l l - formed to a normat ive  system. Input 
wil l  be cal led 
abso lu te ly  i l l - formed, if nat ive 
speakers  genera l ly  agree that it 
v io lates  one or more l inguist ic  con-  
straints,  or  
re lat ive l  Z i l l - formed, if it v io la tes  
some co n s t r a----~nt--\[~---o f the computa-  
t ional  system, though nat ive speakers  
perce ive noth ing odd about it. 
Examples of  abso lute  i l l - fo rmedness  
include misspe l l ings ,  mistyp ings,  
mispunctuat ions ,  tense and number errors,  
word order problems, run-on sentences,  
sentence fragments, ext raneous  forms, and 
meaning less  sentences.  Examples  of rela- 
t ive ly  i l l - formed input include unknown 
words and requests that are beyond the 
l imits of e i ther  the computer  system or 
the natural  language interface. 
In natura l  language access (e.g. 
Engl ish access) to in format ion systems, 
the magn i tude  of the prob lem of abso lute  
i l l - formedness can be seen in several  
case studies. If one includes te legraphic  
and e l l ipt ica l  const ruc t ions  in the class 
of absolute i l l - formedness,  then case 
s~udies reported in Thompson (1980) and 
Eastman and McLean (1981) indicate that 
as much as 25% of quer ies  to quest ion -  
answer ing  systems are abso lu te ly  i l l -  
formed. On the other  hand, no mat ter  how 
large the d ict ionary ,  grammar,  and under-  
lying system, there wi l l  a lways be unk-  
nown words  and phrases  (e.g. proper  
names) and imposs ib le  requests  (due to 
user misconcept ions  of  the capab i l i t i es  
of  the under ly ing  system).  
2. Br ie f  overv iew of the papers  of this 
sess ion 
This sess ion cons ists  of papers  by 
Jensen and Heidorn;  Marsh;  and Granger  et 
al. The paper  by Jensen and Heidorn  
presents  a par t i cu la r  heur i s t i c  for 
dea l ing  with unparsab le  input. S ince 
they have  separate  exp l ic i t  heur i s t i cs  
for spec i f ic  ungrammat ica l  forms, a s ig- 
n i f icant  p ropor t ion  of  unparsab le  input 
in thei r  system wil l  be re la t ive ly  i l l -  
formed. One of the goa ls  of the EPISTLE 
project ,  of  wh ich  this is a part, is cr i -  
t iquing bus iness  letters.  
Marsh 's  paper  descr ibes  a technique 
for f i l l ing in mater ia l  omi t ted  from 
f ragmentary  inputs. Both syntact ic  in- 
format ion and domain -spec i f i c  const ra in ts  
on semant ic  c lasses are used. This is 
part of  an ongoing ef fort  in ext ract ing  a 
data base from free-text  medica l  records, 
such as narrat ive  d i scharge  summaries.  
The paper by Granger  et el. reports  
on NOMAD, a system for taking cryptic,  
er ror fu l  naval sh ip - to -shore  messages and 
generat ing  we l l - fo rmed versions.  The 
paper descr ibes  the methods  used for p~o- 
cess ing unknown words, fragments, miss ing 
punctuat ion,  and tense errors. 
*This material is based upon work partially sup- 
ported by the National Science Foundation under 
Grant No. IST-8009673. 
One way to c lass i fy  i l l - fo rmednes3 
work is by the choices made regard ing 
several  issues. Each of the fo l lowing 
sect ions wil l  present  one issue. 
89 
3. App l i ca t ion  area and respond ing  to 
i l l - fo rmedness  
I l l - fo rmedness  process ing  has been  
examined in many ~pp l i ca t ion  areas,  in- 
c lud ing  data  base access (Hendrix,  et 
al., 1978), bu i ld ing  a data base (Marsh, 
1983), g rammar  check ing  ( Jensen and 
Heidorn,  1983),. generat ing  we l l - fo rmed 
messages f rom i l l - fo rmed and incomplete  
ones (Granger,  et al, 1983) and 
in te l l igent  computer -ass i s ted  language 
inst ruct ion  (Weiachedel ,  et al, 1978). 
Proper  response to an i l l - fo rmed 
input depends  on the app l i ca t ion  env i ron -  
ment and the user. For example,  suppose 
a presuppos i t ion  of  an input is incor rec t  
accord ing  to the computer  model .  In a 
language ins t ruc t ion  env i ronment ,  the 
system shou ld  cor rec t  the er roneous  in- 
put, in fo rming  the student  of  the cause 
of  the error;  th is  makes sense s ince stu- 
dents are er ror  prone in learn ing  a 
language.  In data  base  access,  the sys-  
tem might  in form the user  of  the false 
presuppos i t ion  and suggest  a l te rnat ive  
quer ies  (Kaplan, 1978), s ince the user 
does not usua l ly  benef i t  f rom the empty  
set as a response.  On the other  hand, in 
the app l i ca t ion  Granger  is invest igat ing ,  
the system should  check  an assumpt ion  it 
has made regard ing  the incomplete  text  
and try an a l te rnat ive ,  s ince the incon-  
s i s tency  may stem from an assumpt ion  the 
system made in complet ing  f ragmentary  
input. 
4. The role of const ra in ts  
Perhaps i l l - fo rmedness  should  be 
handled by s imply  not encod ing  some con- 
stra ints  in the normat ive  system. Wal tz  
(1978) and Schank, et al (1980) have 
taken this approach  for a large c lass of  
syntact ic  const ra in ts .  In cer ta in  app l i -  
cat ions,  one can get by w i th  such an 
approach  due to the great  amount of  
~edundancy  in natura l  language.  However,  
it c lear ly  wi l l  not work in gener%l ,  s in- 
ce const ra in ts  genera l ly  car ry  mean ing  
and tri,n the search space. All  three 
papers of this sess ion cap i ta l i ze  on con- 
stra ints  (or expectat ions) ,  and propose 
mechan isms for p rocess ing  i l l - fo rmedness .  
Given a commitment  to employ  con-  
stra ints  rather  than ignor ing them, there 
at9 sti l l  the fo l lowing des ign issues : 
a) whether  two separate  systems, 
perhaps running in para l le l ,  should  
be bu i l t  for we l l - fo rmedness  and for 
i l l - fo rmedness  
b) whether  i l l - fo rmed process ing  
can be stated as exp l ic i t  mod i f i ca -  
t ions ~) we l l - fo rmedness  process ing ,  
and 
c) whether  a metr ic  can be use/ 
instead of  employ ing  any spec ia l  
p rocedures  for i l l - fo rmedness .  
We ischede l  and Sondhe imer  (1981) argue 
for an approach  that exp l i c i t l y  re la tes  
i l l - fo rmedness  process ing  to the rules of 
the normat ive  sys tem via meta - ru les  
(rules that operate  on rules) .  A more  
complete  d i scuss ion  of  the a l te rnat ives  
appears  there.  
5. Cate~or i za t iqn  o f  e l l ips i s ,  
con junct ion ,  and other  g ray  cases  
It is debatab le  whether  cer ta in  
phenomena shou ld  be c lass i f ied  as we l l -  
formed or not. E l l ips is  ( f ragmentary  
input  wh ich  in context  conveys  a complete  
thought)  is an example .  In such cases, 
the de f in i t ion  of  " i l l - fo rmedness"  in 
terms of a normat ive  system, as wel l  as 
the d i s t inc t ion  between abso lu te  and 
re la t ive  i l l - fo rmedness ,  sheds l ight  on 
the issue. In Marsh 's  system, syntact i c  
forms for e l l ipses  are exp l i c i t l y  coded 
in the normat ive  system. Jensen  and 
He idorn  do not inc lude rules for f rag-  
ments in the grammar,  but  v iew it as 
re la t ive  i l l - fo rmedness  to be processed  
by a recovery  strategy.  Granger ,  et al 
a lso v iew e l l ips i s  as re la t ive ly  i l l -  
formed. 
Con junct ion  fo rmat ion  is another  
in teres t ing  case. Though use of con junc -  
t ion is c lear ly  g rammat ica l ,  a number  of  
ind iv idua ls  (Sager, 1973; Woods,  1973; 
Kwasny  and Sondhe imer ,  1981) have argued 
that it shou ld  not be inc luded in the 
normat ive  grammar,  but  rather  shou ld  be 
processed  via a recovery  st rategy.  
Therefore ,  they have  argued for t reat ing  
it as re la t ive ly  i l l - formed.  
I suspect  that ca tegor i z ing  a lmost  
any par t i cu la r  const ra in t  as normat ive  
could  be the bas is  for argument .  The 
c r i te r ia  for dec id ing  whether  a con-  
s t ra int  shou ld  be inc luded in the norma-  
t ive sys tem inc lude at least the fol-  
lowing: 
a) whether  a nat ive speaker  wou ld  
edit inputs that v io la te  it, 
b) whether  v io la t ing  the const ra in t  
can y ie ld  usefu l  inferences,  
c) whether  examples  exist  where  the 
const ra in t  carr ies  meaning,  
d) whether  the constra int?  if 
c lass i f ied  as normat ive,  t r ims the 
search space, and 
e) whether  a p rocess ing  s t ra tegy  
for the const ra in t  can be stated 
more eas i l y  as a mod i f i ca t ion  of 
normat ive  process ing,  as in the case 
of con junct ion .  
90 
6. Knowled@e sources 
In processing il l-formedness, there 
is usually more than one alternative for 
diagnosing the problem and for recover- 
ing. Oftentimes there is more than one 
alternative for what was intended. What 
kinds of knowledge are brought to bear on 
the problem? Jensen and Heidorn use syn- 
tactic information and an ordering heu- 
ristic in their parser. Marsh uses syn- 
tactic information and semantics (pri- 
mari ly selection restrictions). Granger 
et al also employ syntactic and semantic 
constraints, but addit ional ly employ 
"scripts" of stereotypical events in the 
environment of naval ship-to-shore mes- 
sages. 
Using more classes of information to 
infer what was intended is an open prob- 
lem~ the kinds of semantic and pragmatic 
knowledge that could be helpful have 
barely been tapped. 
7. Control 
much needed to determine the effec- 
tiveness and costs of competing stra- 
tegies. 
Publishing addit ional col lections of 
i l l-formed input is critical. The pat- 
terns of behavior evident in such 
collections not only suggest heur ist ics  
for i l l -formedness processing but also 
provide a basis for benchmarks upon which 
to base empirical comparisons. 
One other area needing much research 
is models of particular users, their 
plans, and goals. This is important to 
infer the intended meaning of an indivi- 
dual, since many explanations exist. For 
instance, when no interpretation can be 
found, spell ing corrections, inferring 
the meaning of an unknown word, or relax- 
ing a syntactic or semantic constraint 
are all possibi l it ies. Granger, et al 
(1983) and Allen, et al (1983) both 
report progress on using pragmatic infor- 
mation to deal with fragmentary input. 
The control mechanisms of the norma- 
tive system (e.g. bottom-up versus top- 
down and the point at which semantic con- 
straints are used) are not of concern to 
us here. Rather, what is of interest is 
a) the point at which ill- 
formedness strategies are employed, 
b) the mechanism for identifying 
what the proble~ is, 
c) the nature of response, if any, 
once a specific hypothesis of the 
problem is made, and 
d) the search strategy for selec- 
ting an intended interpretation. 
The obvious benefit  of ill- 
formedness research is more natural, 
easy-to-use systems. An addit ional bene- 
fit is that study of i l l -formedness 
should lead to better understanding of 
how normative systems should be designed. 
References 
Allen, James F., Alan M. Frisch, Diane J. 
Litman, "ARGOT: The Rochester Dialogue 
System", Proceedings of the National 
Conference on Ar t l f i c~ l  -'~tell~qenc--'~--~e," 
(1982), 66-7~. . . . . . .  
Many alternatives exist for these de- 
cisions; an overview of them appears in 
Sondheimer and Weischedel (1980). 
8. Future directions 
As evident from this session, the 
processing of il l-formed input has become 
a very active research topic that is of 
critical importance in a wide variety of 
applications. Yet, there is much to be 
done. There are many kinds of ill- 
formedness for which better heuristics 
are needed. 
~nother need is empirical studies. 
Controll ing the processing of i l l-formed 
input is a substantial problem no matter 
what approach one takes, since processing 
il l-formedness requires relaxing the very 
constraints that trim the search space 
for possible interpretations. Because 
control is such an important issue, 
thorough, rigorous empirical studies are 
Eastman, C. M. and D. S. McLean, "On the 
Need for Parsing I l l -formed ~nput," 
American Journal of Computational 
L in~u is t i cs ,~(1981-T ,  2~7. ~ ......... 
Granger, Richard H., Chris J. Staros, 
Gregory B. Taylor, and  Riku Yoshii, 
"Scruffy Text Understanding: Design and 
Implementation of the NOMAD System", this 
volume, 1983. 
Hendrix, G. G., E. D. Sacerdoti, D. Sa- 
galowicz and J. Slocum, "Developing a 
Natural Language Interface to Complex 
Data", ACM Transactions on Database 
Szstems, 3, 2, (1978), i05-147-7 . . . . .  
Jensen, Karen and George E. Heinorn, "The 
'Fitted' Parse: 100% Parsing Capabi l i ty 
in a Syntactic Grammar of English", this 
volume, 1983. 
Kaplan, S. J., "Indirect Responses t9 
Loaded Questions," Theoretical Issues in 
Natural Language Pr6ces6in~i2-~ ~s i~} 
o---~-~llinois at ~~h'ampa ign ,  July~ 
1978. 
Kwasny, S. C., and N. K. Sondheimer, 
"Relaxation Techniques for Parsing Ill- 
Formed Input", American Journal of 
Computat%ona! Lin~uissics, --77----~981\]~, 
99-108. 
Marsh, Elaine, "Util izing Domain-Specif ic 
Information for Processing Compact Text", 
this volume, 1983. 
Sager, Naomi, "The String Parser for 
Scientif ic Literature." In R. Rustin, 
Ed., Natural Language Processing. New 
York: Algorithmics Press, 1973. 
Schank, Roger C., Michael Lebowitz, and 
Lawrence Birnbaum0 "An Integrated 
Understander", American Journal of 
Computational Linguistics, ~'-~--~19805~, 
13-30. 
Sondheimer, N. K. and R. M. Weischedel, 
"A Rule-Based Approach to I l l -Formed 
Input," Proceedings of the E_~h~_~h 
International'Confe'rence--on Computatlonal 
Linguisticss-~-T6kyo, October 1980, 46---~4-- 
Thompson, B. H., "Linguistic Analysis of 
Natural Language Communication with Com- 
puters", Proceedings of the Ei_~hth 
International Conference--on Computatlona-\[ 
Linguistics, Tokyo, October, 1980, 
190-201. 
Waltz, D. L., "An English Language Ques- 
tion Answering System for a Large Rela- 
tional Database", Communications of the 
ACM, 21, 7, (1978), 526-539. 
Wei~chedel, R.M. and N. K. Sondheimer, "A 
Framework for Processing I l l -Formed 
Input", Dept. of Computer & Information 
Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, 
DE, 1981. 
Weischedel, R. M., W. M. Voge, and M. 
James, "An Artif icial Intell igence 
Approach to Language Instruction", 
Artif icial Intelligence, i0, (1978), 
225-240. 
Woods, W. A., "An Experimental Parsing 
System for Transit ion Network Grammars." 
In R. Rustin, Ed., Natur~l Language 
Processing. New Yor-k? ~igorlth~-ics 
Press, 1973. 
92 
