SPEECH IbrrERFACES: SESSION IN~ODUCTION 
Douglas L. Hogan 
13625 Middlevale Lane 
Silver Spring, ~m 20906 
ABSTRACT II CURRENT TECHNOLOGY 
The speech interface is the natural one for 
the human user and is beginning to be used in a 
limited way in many applications. Some of these 
applications are experimental; still others have 
achieved the status of cost-effective utility. A 
brief summary of the current state-of-the-art of 
speech input and output are presented. The two 
papers in the session represent specific examples 
of current work. Some comments on the need for 
linguistically oriented development conclude the 
paper. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Over the past four decades it has often been 
felt that the solution to the problem of "machine 
recogni t ion of speech" is ".. just around the 
corner." When the sound spectrograph was invented 
(a l itt le less than forty years ago) engineers,  
acoust ic ians,  phoneticists,  and l inguists  were 
certain that the mysteries of speech were about to 
be unveiled. When powerfu l  computers  could be 
brought to bear (say - twenty years ago) there was 
a renewed feeling that such tools would provide 
the ~eans to a near term solution. When artifi- 
cial intelligence was the buzzword (a little over 
ten years ago) it was clear that now the solution 
of the recognition problem was at hand. Where are 
we today? A number of modest, and modest ly  
priced, speech recognit ion systems are on the 
market and in use. This has come about because 
technology has permitted some brute force methods 
to be used and because simple applications have 
been found to be cost effective. 
In speech output systems a similar pattern 
has emerged. Crude synthesizers such as the 
~askins pattern playback of thirty years ago were 
capable of evoking "correct" responses from lis- 
teners. Twenty-five years ago it was thought that 
reading machines for the blind could be construc- 
ted by concatenat ing words. Twenty  years ago 
formant synthesizers sounded extremely natural 
when their control  was a "copy" of a natural  
utterance. Modern synthesizers are one one-thou- 
sandth the size and cost; they stil l  only sound 
natural  when a human utterance is analyzed and 
then resynthesized as a complete entity. Conca- 
tenatin 8 words is still no better, though cheaper, 
than it was twenty years ago. 
A. Speech Input 
There are now several  speech recogni t ion 
systems on the market which are intended to recog- 
nize isolated words and which have been trained 
for an individual speaker. The vocabulary sizes 
are on the order of 100 words are phrases. Accu- 
racy is always quoted at "99+%." These recogni- 
zers use a form of template  match ing wi th in  a 
space which has the dimensions of features versus 
time. The "true" accuracy is a function of the 
vocabulary size, the degree of cooperativeness of 
the speaker, and the innate dissimilarity of the 
vncab ulary. Since the systems are recogniz ing 
known words by known speakers the major source of 
varia billty in successive words is the time axis. 
The same word may (and will) be spoken at differ- 
ent speaking rates. Unfortunately,  d i f ferent  
speaking rates do not result  in a l inear speed 
change in all parts of a word; the voiced por- 
tions of the word, loosely speaking the vowels, 
respond more to speed change; the unvoiced por- 
tions of the word, loosely the consonants, re- 
spond less to speed change. As a result, a non- 
linear time adjustment is desired when matching 
templates. This sort of time adjustment is car- 
ried out wi th a mathemat ica l  process known as 
dynamic programming which permits exploration of 
all plausible non-linear matches at the expense 
of (approximately)  squaring the compu rat ional 
complexity in contrast to the comblna torlal com- 
putat ional  growth that would otherwise  be re- 
quired. The medium and high performance speech 
recognizers usually contain some form of dynamic 
programming. In some cases more than one level 
of dynamic  programming is used to provide for 
recognition of short sequences of words. 
The actual use of these recognizers has de- 
veloped a number of consequences. Many of them, 
including the first paper in this session involve 
the use of speech recognition during hands-and- 
eyes busy operations. These appl icat ions wi l l  
almost always be interactive in nature; the system 
response may be visual or aural. Prompt response 
saying what the system "heard" is crucial  for 
improving the speaker's performance. A coopera- 
tive speaker clearly adapts to the system. To 
date, many applications are found where a restric- 
ted interactive speech dialog is useful and eco- 
nomical.  At this time the speech recogni t ion 
178 
mechanism i s  re la t ive ly  inexpens ive;  the expens ive  
component is the initial cost of developing the 
dialog for the appl lcaClon and interfacing the 
recognition element Co the host computer system. 
At the present tlme recognition is not accom- 
plished in units smaller than the word. It has 
been hoped chat it might be poss ib le  to segment 
speech in to  phonemes. These would be recogn ized ,  
a lbe i t  wi th  some er rors ;  the s t r ings  of phonemes 
would then be matched wi th  a lex icon .  To date ,  
adequate segmentat ion  for  th i s  sor t  of  approach 
has not  been ach ieved .  In fac t ,  in  cont inuous  
f luent  speech good word boundar ies  are  not  read i ly  
found by any algorithmic means. 
B. Speech Output 
There are re la t ive ly  few speech synthes izers  
in  the  pure  sense  of  the  word.  There  are  many 
speech output  dev ices  which produce speech as the 
inverse of a previously formed analysis process. 
The ana lys i s  may have been performed by encodln& 
techniques in the tlme domain; alternatively, it 
may be the result of soma form of extract ing a 
vocal source or excitation function and a vocal 
tract descrlptlou. When the analysis is performed 
on a whole phrase the prosodic features of the 
i nd ivdua l  u t te r ing  the phrase are preserved;  the 
speech  sounds  natura l .  When ind iv idua l  words  
produced by such an ana lys l s - synthes ls  p rocess  are  
concatenated the speech does not sound natura l .  
In any event ,  the  process  descr ibed  above 
does not allow fo r  the open ended case,  synthes is  
of  unres t r i c ted  text .  This p rocess  requ i res  that  
a number of  s teps  be car r ied  out  in a sat i s fac tory  
way. F i r s t ,  o r thograph ic  text  must  be in ter -  
preted;  e.g. we read "NFL" as a sequence of  th ree  
words  but  we pronounce  the word "FORTRAN', we 
automat ica l ly  expand out  the abrev ia t ion  "St . " ,  
etc. Second, the orthography must be converted Co 
pronunciation, a distinctly non-trlvial task in 
En~llsh. This is normally accomplished by a set 
of rules together with a table of exceptions to 
those rules. Although pronouncing dictionaries do 
exist in machine form, they are still coo large 
for random access memory technology, although thls 
wil l  not be t rue  in the reasonably near future. 
Proper  nouns, especial ly names of people and 
places, will often not be amenable to the rules 
for normal English. Third, the pronunciation of 
the word must be mapped into sequences drawn from 
an inventory of smaller units. At various times 
these units have been allophones, phonemes, dl- 
phones (phoneme pairs), demlsyllables, and sylla- 
bles. The units are connected with procedures  
which range from concatenat ion  to smooth in terpo-  
la t ion .  F ina l ly ,  i t  i s  necessary  to develop sat -  
i s fac tory  prosody for  a whole phrase or sentence.  
Th is  i s  normal ly  in terpreted  as prov id in& the  
in fo rmat ion  about in f lec t ion ,  t iming,  and s t ress .  
This f ina l  s tep  is  the one in which the greates t  
d i f f i cu l ty  ex is ts  at the present  t ime and which 
presents  the s t rongest  bar  to natura l  sound ing  
speech. The second paper  in thls session deals 
wlth the development of stress rules for prosody, 
one component of =he overall problem. 
llI LINGUISTIC NEEDS IN SPEECH INTERFACES 
A, Current Research 
Moat of the current high end work in speech 
recognition attempts Co c6nstrain the allowable 
sequence of words by the application of some kind 
of grammar. This may be a very artificial gram- 
mar, for example the interaction wlch an airline 
reservation system.  Other research efforts at- 
tempt Co develop models of the language through an 
informat ion cheoretlc analysis. Coming full 
circle we find words being analyzed as a Markov 
process; Merkov, of course, was analyzing language 
when he developed thls "mathematically defined" 
procese .  
Normal iz ing recognit ion to the speaker is 
being approached in two ways. The first, cur- 
rently being explored at the word reco&nit lon 
level consists of developing enough samples of 
each word from many speakers so chat clustering 
techniques wil l  permit the speaker space to be 
spanned with a dozen or so examples. The second 
approach attempts to enroll a speaker in a recog- 
nlt lon system by speaking "enough" text so tha~ 
the system is able to develop a model of that 
person 's  speech. 
In research on speech synthesis considerable 
attention is now being &iven to try, by analysis, 
to determine rules for prosody. Application of 
these rules requires grammatical analysis of the 
text which is to be converted co speech. 
8. The Future 
As both of the speech interface tasks become 
more and more open-ended It is clear that 
sat isfactory performance wil l  require very 
substantial aid from linguistic reseacrh. In the 
case of recognition this is necessary to reduce 
the number of hypotheses that must be explored at 
any given point in a stream of unknown words. In 
the case of text-to-speech, understandin~ of what 
iS being said will contribute to producing more 
natural and acceptable speech. 
IV FURTHER READING 
The reference below surveys the current 
state-of-the art more deeply than can be presented 
here. It also calls out the need for Increased 
application of lln&ulstlc information to speech 
interface development as well as providln~ an 
extensive set of references for those of you who 
would llke Co dig deeper. 
Flanagan, James L., Talking with Computers: Syn- 
thesis and Reco~nitlon of Speech by Machines, 
IEEE Trans. on Biomed. En&.) BME~29, No.4, pp 
223-232 (April 1982). 
179 
