CN YUR CMPUTR RAED THS?  
Linda G. Means  
Computer  Science Depar tment  
General  Motors  Research Laboratories 
Warren ,  M ich igan  ,18090 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes strategies for automatic 
recognition of unknown variants of known words in 
a natural anguage processing system. The types 
of lexical variants which are detectable include in- 
flexional aberrations, ad hoc abbreviations and 
spelling/typographical errors. This technique is 
independent of any particular grammar or parsing 
formalism, and can be implemented as a lexical 
lookup routine which heuristically prunes and or- 
ders the list of possible fixes found in the lexicon, 
then allowing the parser to treat the list of candi- 
dates as a set of multiple meanings for a polyse- 
mous word. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes a technique for automatic 
recognition of unknown variants of known words 
in a natural language processing system. ~Known 
word" refers here to a word which is in the lexi- 
con. The types of lexical variants which are de- 
tectable include inflexional aberrations, ad hoc 
abbreviations and spelling/typographical errors. 
The strategies presented here have been imple- 
mented fully in an English database query system 
and play a crucial role in a text-understandlng sys- 
tem which is in the early stages of design. This 
technique, however, is independent of any par- 
ticular grammar or parsing formalism, and can 
be implemented as a lexical lookup routine which 
heuristically prunes and orders the list of possi- 
ble fixes found in the lexicon. First, a context-free 
plausibility assessment is based on a comparison of 
the structure of each candidate fix with that of the 
unknown word, and determines the order in which 
fixes will be considered by the parser. Then, the 
parsing process can choose among the candidate 
fixes in the same way that it tests multiple mean- 
ings of polysemous words for a good syntactic and 
semantic fit. The use of heuristics to identify the 
most plausible fixes for a hypothesized ad hoc ab- 
breviation or spelling error will be the focus of this 
paper. 
Unknown words have traditionally been handled 
by natural language processing systems in the fol- 
lowing ways: 
1. Query the user for a replacement, possibly of- 
fering a menu of spelling corrections. This 
strategy will allow correction of misspelled 
words as well as correctly spelled words which 
are not in the lexicon, and generally ensures 
an accurate interpretation by the computer. 
However, continued interaction of this sort 
may  prove frustrating to a poor typist, and 
is, of course, unsuitable for a non-interactive 
natural language processor. 
2. Enter into a dialogue with the user to provide 
a definition for a new word. This strategy 
requires a lexicon interface based on a met- 
alanguage which would specify grammatical 
properties for a word without necessitating an 
inordinate degree of linguistic sophistication 
or knowledge of the database on the part of 
the end user. Although various attempts have 
been made to design such interfaces I, many  
outstanding research issues remain, and this 
approach too requires an interactive environ- 
ment. 
3. Try to infer syntactic and/or semantic fea- 
tures of the unknown word from the linguis- 
tic context, with no user interaction. This 
strategy can be used to choose a plausible 
correction for a misspelled word as well as to 
parse an expression containing an unknown 
word. Early research in this area attempted 
to model human reasoning about unknown 
words in a script-based parser \[5\], and has 
since come to encompass a variety of multi- 
strategy, expectation-based techniques as ex- 
emplified in the DYPAR \[2\] and NOMAD \[4\] 
systems. This technique shifts the burden of 
linguistic expertise from the end user to the 
computer system, but has met so far with 
only limited success, and accuracy can only 
be assured by interaction with the user to 
XTwo outstanding examples are the TELI  \[1\] and TEAM 
\[6\] systems, 
93 
confirm the hypothesized interpretation. An  
additional limitation to this approach is that 
many existing natural language parsers can- 
not accomodate this sort of analysis. 
At General Motors Research Laboratories we 
have encountered two situations in which the tra- 
ditional interactive strategies axe inadequate, and 
where it is preferable to try to fix an unknown 
word automatically. 
The first involves Datalog, our research proto- 
type of an English database query system \[7\]. This 
system was designed with the philosophy that a 
more humanlike sort of interaction is obtained by 
letting the system reason about ambiguities of MI 
sorts as well as it can, always informing the user of 
its interpretation before displaying the response. 
Automatic lexical correction satisifes the objec- 
tives of this design principle. 
A more compelling need for this capability has 
arisen in a text-understanding project that we 
have undertaken, which aims to read and sum- 
maxize the content of free-form text records in a 
diagnostic database. The cases axe entered by au- 
tomotive technicians in the process of solving a va- 
riety of vehicle failure problems referred to them 
by service personnel in dealerships. The techni- 
cians are generally people who axe not expert typ- 
ists, may not have excellent language skills, and 
have a time constraint imposed by a heavy load 
of calls. Also, two of the three free-form text 
fields in the database are abstract lines which axe 
limited to a few words, which imposes a severe 
space constraint. As a result, the language used 
in the free-form text tends to be highly ill-formed, 
with an abundance of ad hoc abbreviations and 
typographical and spelling errors. And  although 
the technicians' least compelling concern at data- 
entry time is linguistic in nature, their errors come 
back to haunt them, as the lexical errors impede 
the success of subsequent keyword searches done 
to find analogous cases in the database. So auto- 
matic lexicai correction, in addition to being nec- 
essary to our text-understanding task in the longer 
text field, could also be of service in making cor- 
rections to the abstract lines in the database. The 
size of the database precludes the feasibility of 
an interactive system which would read text from 
existing cases and query a program operator for 
f i xes .  
Incidentally, all examples used here of spelling 
errors and ad hoc abbreviations axe taken from 
our free-form text data. 
2 FLEX IBLE  MORPHOLOGY 
One common type of spelling error involves 
spelling changes in base forms when adding an 
inflexional suffix. Two sorts of errors must be 
addressed in this area: failure to make a nec- 
essary spelling change (e.g. plug/pluged), and 
the occurrence of inappropriate spelling changes 
(come/comming). Inflected forms containing ei- 
ther of these errors can be detected by a forgiving 
morphology algorithm. 
Our algorithm currently recognizes only one 
prefix and/or suMx per word. Flexibility regard- 
ing inflexional spelling changes pertains only to 
suffixes; although additional suffixes can be spec- 
ified easily, those currently recognized axe: 
-, (noun, verb) -er (adj) 
-ed (verb) -eat (adj) 
-ing (verb) -ly (adj, adv) 
-merit (verb) 
The flexible morphology algorithm looks for a 
known suffix at the end of an unknown word. If 
found, the suffix is stripped off, and the remainder, 
a postulated base form, is looked up in the lexicon. 
If not found, spelling change transformations axe 
performed on the base form, and lexical lookup is 
performed after each transformation. Morphologi- 
cal analysis succeeds when a postulated base form 
is found in the lexicon with a syntactic category 
which is compatible with the suffix. 
Consider the two ill-formed inflexions men- 
tioned above. For an unknown word pluged, the 
-ed suffix is stripped off. The remainder, plug, 
is found in the lexicon as a verb, so morphology 
succeeds. For the unknown word comming, the 
postulated base form after stripping off the -ing is 
comm. Transformations specified for an -ing suffix 
axe-" 
1. If base ends in a double consonant, reduce it. 
2. If base ends in a single consonant, append an 
-Co 
3. If base ends in -i, change to -y. 
In the case of ,omm, morphology succeeds after 
performing the first two transformations and find- 
ing the verb come in the lexicon. 
This algorithm has proven quite effective in rec- 
ognizing inflected forms which contain common er- 
rors such as erroneously doubling a word-final con- 
sonant or failing to double a consonant before an 
94 
inflected suffix; failure to drop word-final -e before 
-ing; and failure to change -y to -ie before adding 
-s or  -ed. 
Morphology is the first fix tried for an unknown 
word, as it is less computationally intensive than 
detection of spelling errors and ad hoc abbrevia- 
tions, and occurs more frequently. 
3 AD HOC ABBREVIAT ION RECOG-  
N IT ION 
absence of contextual evidence is more difficult. 
For each possible abbreviation expansion found in 
the lexicon for an unknown word, a comparison is
made between the structure of the unknown word 
and that of the expansion, and the candidate fix is 
assigned to one of five categories, which serves as a 
measure of its plausibility. Distinct heuristics are 
used to rate contraction-type and truncation-type 
fixes. The criteria used to classify candidate fixes 
and the ordering of the five plausibility categories 
are described below. 
When morphology fails to detect a variant of a 
known word, an ad hoc abbreviation or spelling 
error is hypothesized. Each possible abbreviation 
expansion found in the lexicon is assigned a plau- 
sibility score on the basis of a comparison of the 
structure of the unknown word and of the poten- 
tial fix. 
There are definite identifiable tendencies used 
by humans to abbreviate words. Although the ten- 
dencies which will be discussed here have not been 
tested empirically, our abbreviation-plausibility 
heuristic which incorporates them performs well 
in ordering lists of candidate abbreviation expan- 
sions. Further experimentation with the algorithm 
will undoubtedly produce even better results, but 
the heuristics described here have performed sat- 
isfactorily. 
Abbreviation occurs as a result of truncation or 
contraction. To identify candidate abbreviation 
expansions for a postulated abbreviation, the lex- 
icon is searched for words whose initial substring 
coincides with the unknown word (truncation- 
type fixes) and words which contain all letters 
of the unknown word in the same relative order 
(contraction- type fixes}. Bear in mind that an- 
other property of abbreviations i that they gen- 
erally begin in the same letter as the word from 
which they axe derived 2, so it is only necessary to 
search the portion of the lexicon beginning in the 
same letter as the unknown word, and it is only 
necessary to consider lexical words whose length 
exceeds that of the unknown word. 
Finding possible expansions of an abbreviation 
is a simple task. s Rating their plausibility in the 
2The rare exceptions uch as zrm't for transmit or ztra for 
e~ra will not be treated here. 
SThe only exceptions are those infrequent abbreviat ions 
which contain letters not occurr ing in the expansion, like 
no. as an abbrev ia t ion  for number. These tend to be 
common abbreviat ions which should be entered into the 
lexicon; ad hoc abbreviat ions generally do not have  this 
characteristic. 
3.1 Truncat ion - type  Abbrev ia t ions  
Truncation-type fixes are classified as either 
plausible or implausible, based on the extension 
string, i.e. the string which is chopped off to ab- 
breviate a word. I will refer to the two truncation 
classifications as trunc-good (plausible) and trunc- 
bad (implausible}. 
If the extension consists entirely of vowels or en- 
tirely of consonants, it is classified as trunc-bad, as 
people generally tend to truncate words by delet- 
ing at least an entire syllable. If the unknown 
word ends in a vowel and the extension begins in 
a consonant, again it gets a trunc-bad rating, as 
people tend to truncate words by using the entire 
initial syllable(s), plus the initial consonant(s) of 
the following syllable if the preceding syllable ends 
in a vowel. If the entire initial consonant cluster 
of the expansion does not occur at the start of the 
unknown word, assign trunc-bad. 
Any truncation-type fix not classified as trunc- 
bad is rated as trunc-good (plausible}. So the lex- 
ical word hesitation is classified as trunc-bad for 
an unknown word heM, and trunc-good for an un- 
known word hes. 
3.2 Cont ract ion - type  Abbrev ia t ions  
Three degrees of plausibility are distinguished 
for contraction-type fixes. Because the elimination 
of vowels from a word is a common contraction 
strategy, and the absence of vowels in an unknown 
word is a strong indicator of an ad hoc abbrevi- 
ation as opposed to a spelling error, the highest 
degree of plausibility is assigned to those lexical 
words from which only vowels have been excised 
to derive the unknown word. The classification 
designated for such fixes is called missing-vowels. 4 
4The missing-vowels criterion requires two qualif ication. 
I f  a doubled consonant in the abbreviat ion is simplified, 
the abbreviat ion can still be classified as missing-vowels.  
95 
For an unknown word assm, for instance, assume 
will be classified as a missing-vowels fix. 
For contraction-type fixes in which consonants 
as well as vowels have been excised to derive the 
unknown word, one of two classifications i as- 
signed: contract-good (plausible) and contract- 
bad (implausible). The favorable rating is as- 
signed if none of the following criteria for an im- 
plausible rating apply: 
I. If the abbreviation cannot be derived from the 
lexical word by removing a single substring, 
assign contract-bad. This criterion reflects 
the common tendency to contract a word by 
using some initial portion plus some final por- 
tion. For an unknown word ht, some fixes 
classified as contract-bad for this reason are 
hatch, hertz and heater. 
2. If the abbreviation differs from the lexical 
word by a single substring, but the substring 
contains only consonants, assign contract- 
bad. This is motivated by the fact that at 
least one entire syllable is generally removed 
to contract a word. For an unknown word 
sateh, the fix scratch is classified as contract- 
bad. 
3. If the abbreviation differs from the lexical 
word by a single substring, but a vowel imme- 
diately precedes or follows the substring in the 
expansion, assign contract-bad. The implau- 
sibility here arises from the fact that a vowel 
in the abbreviation is adjacent to a different 
consonant than in the lexical word, which is 
unlikely, or that two adjacent vowels in the 
abbreviation are not adjacent in the lexical 
word, which is even less likely. Consider as 
an example the fix regulate for an unknown 
word rears. 
4. If the entire initial consonant cluster of the  
lexicM word does not occur at the start of the 
abbreviation, assign contract-bad, e.g. strain 
as a fix for stn. 
Consider the classification of fixes from our lex- 
icon for an unknown word compt as an example of 
the ordering capability of the contraction heuris- 
tics: 
For instance, the abbreviat ions probbl, probl, prbbl and prbl 
all have a missing-vowels relat ionship with the expan- 
sion probable. Also, for each vowel  removed to derive the 
abbreviat ion, all adjacent vowels in the expansion must  
also have been removed. Thus, count is not classified as 
a missing-vowels fix for an unknown word cont. 
missing-vowels contract-good contract-bad 
compute compartment consumption 
compact compensate 
component computer 
complaint composite 
3.3 Order ing  of  P laus ib i l i ty  Categor ies  for 
Abbrev ia t ions  
The five abbreviation plausibility classifications 
themselves are ordered in terms of plausibility. 
From high acceptability to low, the ordering is: 
1. missing-vowels 
2. trunc-good 
3. contract-good 
4. trunc-bad 
5. contract-bad 
As a result, missing-vowels fixes axe always pre- 
ferred over truncation or other contraction fixes. 
Plausible truncation fixes are preferred over plau- 
sible contraction fixes, but plausible contraction 
fixes are preferred over implausible truncation 
fixes. For an unknown word 8pr, fixes are found 
in our lexicon for four of the five classifications: 
missing- trune- contract-  contract-  
vowels good good bad 
spare sprocket speaker separate 
super spring spacer spark 
spray speedometer 8port 
sprint sputter sulphur 
spicer suppressor 
3.4 In teract ion  of  Morpho logy  and  Abbre -  
v ia t ion  Detect ion  
Abbreviations are easily recognizable when in- 
flected with suffixes known to the morphological 
analyzer. If an unknown word ends in a known 
suffix, the suffix is stripped off, and if the remain- 
der does not end in a vowel s, two comparisons are 
made with each lexical entry: one with the entire 
unknown word, and one with the suffix stripped 
off, checking for syntactic ategory compatibility 
between the suffix and the lexical definition. So for 
an unknown word such as outs, expansions will be 
found for the entire word (e.g. outside), and also 
for out, with a syntactic category restriction of 
noun or verb (e.g. outlet, outline). 
It is not unusual to encounter an abbreviation 
with an inflected suffix. It is unusual, however, for 
SAbbreviat lons rarely end in a vowel  (see Section 5), so if 
the str ing left after str ipping off a suffix ends in a vowel,  
the unknown word is not l ikely to be an abbreviat ion.  
96 
an ad hoc abbreviation to incorporate the spelling 
changes required to inflect the expansion. Given 
the contraction ass//for assembly, for instance, the 
plural form of the abbreviation is likely to be as- 
sys, not aasies. As a result, I don't see a need to 
perform the usual spelling change transformation~ 
on an inflected abbreviation. 
4 SPELL ING CORRECTION 
The currently implemented spelling corrector is 
capable of identifying five types of spelling/typo- 
graphical errors: wrong letter, missing letter, ex- 
tra letter, transposed letters, and missing blank 
(incorrect segmentation in which two words are 
run together). The first four of the error cate- 
gories listed above have been found to account for 
over 80% of the spelling errors found in studies 
performed with end users \[3\], \[9\]. Like the abbre- 
viation detector, the spelling corrector only treats 
words which consist entirely of alphabetic charac- 
ters. 
4.1 Spel l ing Er ror  P laus ib i l i ty  Assessment  
Unlike the abbreviation plausibility strategies, 
the spelling correction plausibility heuristics can- 
not identify implausible fixes; they can only dis- 
tinguish the most highly plausible fixes from 
the other fixes, which are considered plausibility- 
neutral. 
No discriminators have been established for 
missing-blank fixes. In the wrong-letter category, 
the plausibility rating is boosted for fixes in which 
the correct letter phonologically resembles its erro- 
neous replacement (e.g. substitutions within sets 
of sibilants, vowels, or nasals), or when the two 
letters are adjacent on the keyboard. 
Missing-letter fixes are rated by comparing the 
missing letter with the letters that precede and fol- 
low it in the fix. A fix is assigned a higher score if 
a missing vowel is preceded or followed by another 
vowel (reflecting the common spelling error of re- 
ducing a diphthong, triphthong, vowel digraph or 
trigraph), or if a missing consonant is preceded or 
followed by an identical consonant (capturing the 
propensity to reduce doubled consonants). 
Extra-letter fixes are also evaluated on the ba- 
sis of the letters preceding and following the extra 
letter. A higher rating is assigned to those fixes in 
which an extra consonant is preceded or followed 
by an identical consonant, or an extra voweloccurs 
adjacent to another vowel, capturing the proclivity 
to unnecessarily double consonants or create diph- 
thongs or triphthongs. Transposed-letters fixes 
are considered plausible when the two transposed 
letters are adjacent (even more so when adjacent 
transposed letters are both vowels), and when two 
consonants have been transposed around vowels. 
Other researchers have expressed doubt about 
the feasibility of searching a large lexicon for 
all possible spelling corrections \[2\], preferring an 
expectation-based search in which the syntactic 
and/or semantic features expected by the parser 
upon encountering an unknown word are used to 
prune the search space for corrections. For a 
parser which can accommodate this approach, per- 
haps a combination of expectation-based pruning 
and plausibility heuristics would yield the best re- 
sults. Even in the absence of parser expectations, 
a couple of strategies can be employed to reduce 
the search space considerably. 
First, for the five categories of errors which we 
can detect, a lexical word need not be considered 
as a fix unless the length differential with the un- 
known word is less than 2 (accounting for all er- 
ror types except missing blank), or unless the un- 
known word begins in the lexical word (in the case 
of a missing blank). 
Secondly, another pruning strategy which mer- 
its mention is that of searching only the subset of 
the lexicon beginning in the same letter as the un- 
known word. An  examination of one abstract field 
in 11,000 cases from our diagnostic database re- 
vealed only two misspelled words in which the ini- 
tial letter differs from that of the correction (oight 
for light and irratic for erratic}. There occurred 
in the same data set 1207 misspelled words begin- 
ning in the same letter as the correction. Perhaps 
typists tend to notice and correct a misspelling 
more readily when the initial letter is in error. At 
any rate, our data seem to indicate that this prun- 
ing strategy is not unreasonable, particularly in an 
interactive application like database query where 
the fail-sake method of querying the user exists in 
the event of spelling correction failure. 
When spelling correction fails to find an accept- 
able fix beginning in the same letter, other lexical 
subsets may be searched as a last resort, chosen 
perhaps on the basis of phonetic similarity or key- 
board adjacency to the first letter of the unknown 
word (which would prove successful in our excep- 
tional cases of oight and irratie). 
Using the pruning strategies of a < 2 length 
differential in a same-first-letter subset of the lexi- 
97 
con, we have experienced very good response time 
with a lexicon of over 2600 words, which would 
be a good indicator of success for applications like 
database query where lexicons tend to be rather 
limited. 
4.2 I n te ract ion  of  Morpho logy  and  Spel l ing 
Cor rect ion  
The interaction of the spelling corrector with 
the morphological analyzer is more problematic 
than abbreviation-morphology interaction. The 
difficulty lies in the occurrence of morphological 
spelling changes in inflected forms (recall that 
inflected abbreviations generally do not incorpo- 
rate the usually requisite spelling changes}. For 
spelling correction as well as abbreviation recogni- 
tion, two comparisons are made with each entry in 
the appropriate lexical subset when the unknown 
word ends in an inflected suffix: one comparison 
with the entire unknown word, and a second with 
the postulated base form, checking for syntactic 
category compatibility with the possible fix. 
One obvious problem is that while our spelling 
correction algorithm can identify one and only 
one spelling error per word, an inflexional spelling 
change in an already misspelled word results in 
two deviations from the lexical word. Consider, 
for instance, a~perating as a misspelled inflexion 
of aeparate. After stripping off the -ing from the 
unknown word, a comparison of the postulated 
misspelled base form aeperat with the lexical word 
separate will fM1. 
One possible solution to this problem would in- 
volve the use of an inflect-word function which 
composes its base and suffix arguments into an in- 
flected form with requisite spelling changes. The 
lexical search for fixes then would compare the in- 
flected unknown word with the inflected form of 
the lexical word (e.g. compare aeperatingwith aep- 
aratin?, computing the latter form from the lexical 
entry ~eparate inflected with suffix -ing). 
5 ADJUDICAT ION BETWEEN SPELL -  
ING AND ABBREVIAT ION F IXES  
Once the lists of abbreviation fixes and spelling 
fixes have been ordered internally, priority must 
be given to one of these categories. Although a 
numerical score is assigned to each fix, the rela- 
tivity of the scores holds only within the broader 
categories of spelling and abbreviation, and not 
across categories. Various criteria may be applied 
to determine whether the unknown word is more 
likely to be an abbreviation or a misspelling. 
While there occasionally occur such fortuitous 
signals of abbreviation as a word-final period or an 
apostrophe before an inflected suffix (e.g. rcpl'ed 
for replacea~, other subtle discriminators can also 
be identified. With the exception of standard ab- 
breviations for U.S. states and a few other com- 
mon abbreviations (e.g. ilmo, demo, info), abbre- 
viations of single words (as opposed to acronymic 
abbreviations} rarely tend to end in vowels. An 
unknown word ending in a vowel, then, is much 
more likely to be a misspelling than an ad hoc 
abbreviation. 
Consider too the fact that while the spelling 
heuristics fail to identify implausible fixes, the 
abbreviation heuristics do identify classes of im- 
plausibility for truncations as well as contractions. 
Generally speaking, abbreviation fixes classified as 
trunc-bad or contract-bad axe implausible to such 
a high degree that they should not be considered 
at all when more plausible abbreviation fixes or 
any spelling fixes have been identified. So the fi- 
nal ordering of the entire list of fixes may be es- 
tablished by listing spelling fixes first (or maybe 
only} when the unknown word ends in a vowel or 
when no abbreviation fix is classified higher than 
trunc-bad, and placing abbreviation fixes before 
spelling fixes otherwise. 
6 ROLE OF THE PARSER 
The Datalog parser has a Cascaded ATN archi- 
tecture, in which semantic feedback is provided 
to the working parser during the parse. A suc- 
cessful parse yields a semantic representation of
the input expression as well as a syntactic parse 
tree. Lexical ambiguity is resolved by the parser 
through the rejection of unacceptable interpreta- 
tions by either syntax or semantics. Multiple ab- 
breviation and/or spelling fixes for an input word 
axe treated by the parser as cases of lexical ambi- 
guity, differing only in how the user is informed of 
the fix when the response is displayed. In the orig- 
inal implementation f the lexical correction algo- 
r ithm in Datalog, even though the list of candi- 
date fixes found during lexical lookup was not or- 
dered or pruned before parsing, good results were 
obtained in the recognition of spelling errors and 
abbreviations. The incorporation of plausibility 
heuristics, however, reduces parsing time consid- 
erably, as they eliminate unlikely candidates from 
consideration before parsing while also ordering 
98 
candidates in terms of plausibility, thus obtaining 
a successful parse earlier. 
7 FURTHER RESEARCH ISSUES 
Although initial experimentation with the lex- 
ical correction algorithm has yielded fairly good 
results in our database query system and text- 
understanding project, many  research issues re- 
main unresolved. These pertain primarily to lex- 
ical variants which the algorithm cannot identify 
as possible fixes. 
7.1 Robust  Spel l ing Correction 
Spelling errors which are not handled include 
extra blank (incorrect segmentation which splits 
one word into two), more than one letter in error 
(e.g. droan for drone}, and misspellings which co- 
incide with a lexical word (this would be a rare 
occurrence for an ad hoc abbreviation). Further 
work is needed to design a more robust spelling 
correction algorithm which can account for a 
greater variety of spelling errors as well as discrim- 
inate among good and bad correction candidates e. 
The five types of spelling errors found by our pro- 
gram are often the result of keyboard slips instead 
of a misconstrual of the correct spelling. An  ideal 
spelling correction algorithm would assess the dif- 
ferences between an unknown word and a postu- 
lated fix in terms of keyboard layout and typing 
habits, as well as phonetic similarity and interfer- 
ence from other words with a similar pronuncia- 
tion (e.g. fluzuate for fluctuate). 
7.2 Unknown Words  
Identification of truly unknown words (those 
which should be added to lexicon) is difficult. We 
get around this problem with our free-form text 
by preprocessing all new text to find new words 
to add to the lexicon. Morphology weeds out in- 
flected forms of known words. A list of unknown 
words is then sent to a lexicon building program, 
which allows a lexicon builder to make decisions 
about each word and automatically creates a lex- 
ical definition with features elected by the user. 
Misspellings, abbreviations and inftexions can be 
skipped over easily, or renamed as new lexical en- 
tries. In the lexical lookup stage, an acceptability 
threshold can be established below which a fix will 
6An excellent source of information on spelling correction 
algorithms is Peterson's annotated bibliography in \[8\]. 
be rejected from consideration, so if no candidate 
fixes exceed the threshold, none will be considered 
by the parser. 
7.3 Misspel led Inf lexional  Suiftxes 
Spelling correction of inflexional suffixes is lack- 
ing. Morphology cannot recognize a word with a 
misspelled suffix such as engagernant, and as only 
the base form engage occurs in the lexicon, spelling 
correction cannot find the correct fix either. Per- 
haps spelling correction of inflexional suffixes can 
be implemented as a last resort measure. I haven't 
seen much of a need for it, possibly because the 
suffixes we identify are quite short, although it 
could be a problem if multiple suffixes were rec- 
ognized by morphology (e.g. 8tandardlzation =
standard + ize + ation). 
7.4 Abbrev ia t ion  I r regular i t ies  
Misspelled abbreviations are another difficulty; 
the algorithm will not recognize accell as a trun- 
cation of acceleration. 
Abbreviated inflected suffixes on abbreviations 
are also beyond our current capabilities; whereas 
repled can be recognized as an inflected contrac- 
tion of replaced, repld cannot be recognized (and 
the latter is probably the more likely contraction). 
7.5 Shor t  Words  
One- and two-letter words are difficult to fix be- 
cause of the high number of candidate fixes that 
are found. We do not attempt to fix one-letter 
words, and generally find an unwieldy number of 
spelling fixes as well as abbreviation fixes for two- 
letter words. 
7.6 Syl labic Analys is  of  Abbrev ia t ions  
We have not yet experimented with a syllable- 
based comparison of the unknown word with can- 
didate fixes as a method of context-free plausibil- 
ity assessment. Although this approach may prove 
to be more effective, it would also be more compu- 
tationally intensive and may be unnecessary. The 
strategies described here have been designed to 
capture many of the same generalities regarding 
abbreviation plausibility which would be inherent 
to a syllable-based approach. 
99 
8 CONCLUSION 
Several decades of research in natural language 
processing have resulted in significant advances 
in our ability to parse well-formed input within 
a well-specified omain. One challenge which we 
now face is the ability to forgive linguistic devia- 
tions which do not obscure meaning. 
The lexical correction techniques described here- 
in appear to be promising for natural language ap- 
plications in which it is necessary to curtail user in- 
teraction in resolving ambiguities. Even in a more 
interactive environment, the usefulness of this ca- 
pability should not be ruled out. It accommodates 
users who lack good spelling and/or typing skills 
by forgiving spelling errors and by allowing consid- 
erable conservation of keystrokes through ad hoc 
abbreviation recognition. 
\[6\] Barbara J. Grosz, Douglas E. Appelt, Paul A. 
Martin, and Fernando C.N. Pereira. TEAM: 
An Experiment in the Design of Transportable 
Natural-Language Interfaces. Artificial Intel- 
ligence, 32:173-243, 1987. 
\[7\] Carole D. Hafner and Kurt S. Godden. Design 
of Natural Language Interfaces: A Case Study. 
Research Publication GMR-4567, General Mo- 
tors Research Laboratories, Warren, MI, 1984. 
\[81 James L. Peterson. Computer Programs 
for Detecting and Correcting Spelling Errors. 
Communications of the A CM, 23(12):676-687, 
1980. 
\[91 James L. Peterson. A Note on Undetected 
Typing Errors. Communications of the A CM, 
29(7):633-637, 1986. 
9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Many thanks to my GMR colleagues Kurt God- 
den and Sam Uthurusamy for their continued in- 
terest and feedback on this topic. 
References  
\[I\] Bruce W. Ballard and Douglas E. Stum- 
berger. Semantic Acquisition in TELl: A 
Transportable, User-Customized Natural Lan- 
guage Processor. In Proceedings of the P.~th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, pages 20-29, 1986. 
\[2\] Jaime G. Carbonell and Philip J. Hayes. Re- 
covery Strategies for Parsing Extragrammati- 
cal Language. American Journal of Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 9(3-4):123-146, 1983. 
\[3\] Fred J. Damerau. A Technique for Computer 
Detection and Correction of Spelling Errors. 
Communications of the ACM, 7(3):171-176, 
1964. 
\[4\] Richard H. Granger. The NOMAD System: 
Expectation-Based Detection and Correction 
of Syntactically and Semantically Ill-Formed 
Text. American Journal of Computational 
Linguistics, 9(3-4):188-196, 1983. 
\[5\] Richard H. Granger, Jr. FOUL-UP: A Pro- 
gram that Figures Out Meanings of Words 
from Context. In Proceedings of the 5th In- 
ternational Joint Conference on Artificial In- 
telligence, pages 172-178, 1977. 
100 
