MORPHOLOGICAL  PROCESSING 
IN THE NABU SYSTEM 
Jonathan Slocum 
Microelectronics and Computer 
Technology Corporation (MCC) 
3500 West Balcones Center Drive 
Austin, Texas 78759 
ABSTRACT 
The Nabu morphological processor is 
designed to perform a number of different func- 
tions, of which five have so far been identified: 
analysis, guessing (about unknown words), syn- 
thesis, defaulting (proposing the most likely in- 
flectional paradigm for a new base form), and 
coding (producing all possible inflectional 
paradigm variants for a new base form). Com- 
plete or very substantial analyzers have been 
produced for a number of diverse languages; 
other functions have been implemented as well. 
This paper discusses our design philosophy, as 
well as our technique and its implementation. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nabu is a multilingual Natural Language 
Processing system under development in the 
Human Interface Laboratory at MCC, for 
shareholder companies. Its morphological com- 
ponent is designed to perform a number of dif- 
ferent functions. This has been used to produce 
a complete analyzer for Arabic; very substantial 
analyzers for English, French, German, and 
Spanish; and small collections of rules for Rus- 
sian and Japanese. In addition, other functions 
have been implemented for several of these lan- 
guages. 
In this paper we discuss our philosophy, 
which constrained our design decisions; elaborate 
some specific functions a morphological com- 
ponent should support; survey some competing 
approaches; describe our technique, which 
provides the necessary functionality while meet- 
ing the other design constraints; and support our 
approach by characterizing our success in 
developing/testing processors for various com- 
binations of language and function. 
DES IGN PHILOSOPHY 
Before we set about designing our mor- 
phological processor, we elaborated our 
philosophical commitments regarding an NLP 
system. These include: (1) multilingual applica- 
tion, (2) fault-tolerant, fail-soft behavior, (3) 
rule reversibility, (4) disparate functionality, (5) 
inherent parallelism, (6) grammatical clarity, 
and (7) rigorous testing. 
MULT IL INGUAL APPL ICAT ION 
The algorithms and their software instantia- 
tion must admit application to any human lan- 
guage likely to confront our system; these in- 
clude the languages of major demographic 
and/or economic significance (and their 
relatives). Our selected representatives are 
English, French, German, Spanish, Russian, 
Arabic, Chinese, and Japanese. 
FAULT-TOLERANT,  FA IL -SOFT 
BEHAVIOR 
Real-world NLP applications, whether for 
text or interactive dialog, will be confronted 
with numerous errors of various types. As far as 
users are concerned, guaranteed failure in the 
presence of any error is intolerable: a system 
must overcome simple mistakes without discern- 
able problems. For example, insignificant typing 
and/or spelling mistakes should be ignored, as 
should minor morphological blunders. Users do 
not like to be asked for corrections of 
(seemingly) simple mistakes, and of course 
printed texts cannot be queried in any case. In 
the presence of more serious problems, perfor- 
mance should degrade only gradually. This is 
nothing more than a commitment to 
understanding the utterance, rather than 
punishing the user for errors in it. We contend 
that human-like fault-tolerant, fail-soft behavior 
must be incorporated in the fundamental design 
of a system: it cannot be tacked-on after system 
development. Creating an applied system for a 
"perfect" natural language that is hypothesized, 
but never observed, is misguided, aside from be- 
ing wasteful. 
RULE  REVERSIB IL ITY  
To the extent feasible and reasonable, the 
linguistic rules in an NLP system should be re- 
versible -- useful for both analysis and synthesis. 
But it is not enough to have one, completely re- 
versible grammar performing two functions. 
Indeed, reversibility may not be always 
desirable: in keeping with the commitment o 
fault-tolerant, fail-soft behavior, an analyzer 
should over-generate (accepting some incorrect 
228 
forms as input), whi lea  synthesizer should never 
produce them as output. Since these two func- 
tions are, therefore, rather different processes, 
one must search for a means to distinguish the 
rules (linguistic descriptions) from the strategies 
(linguistic processes, called grammars) controll- 
ing their application: the former can be revers- 
ible, while the latter might not be. 
D ISPARATE FUNCTIONAL ITY  
Analysis and synthesis constitute two obvious 
linguistic processes (grammars imposed upon 
rule sets). There are, however, even more 
processes than these of interest in a practical set- 
ting: that is, there may be a number of gram- 
mars built from a single set of linguistic rules, as 
we demonstrate below. Thus, a processor must 
admit the simultaneous instantiation of a num- 
ber of grammars in order to be called general. 
INHERENT PARALLEL ISM 
Acceptable runtime performance in any sig- 
nificant real-world NLP setting is now under- 
stood to require implementation on parallel 
machines. Thus, grammars must be inherently 
suited to parallel execution, and such oppor- 
tunities must somehow be representable in the 
formalism in which the grammars are expressed. 
GRAMMATICAL  CLARITY  
In any real-world application, the number of 
linguistic rules and the complexities of grammars 
imposed upon them is considerable. Successful 
implementation and maintenance thus requires 
that the grammars be clearly and concisely 
stated, however powerful they may be. Not only 
must the rule formalism be relatively clean and 
simple, but also a grammar must be viewable at 
various levels of detail. Variable granularity in 
the presentation enhances the opportunity for 
comprehensibility. 
R IGOROUS TEST ING 
In order to become practical, a system must 
admi t - -  and have undergone -- rigorous testing. 
It is not enough to develop a micro- 
implementation, then claim that the system can 
be scaled up to become a real application 
(presumably to be tested on end-users). More 
than just a philosophical commitment o the 
idea of testing, this requires that the system ac- 
tually be fast enough during the development 
phase that thorough testing (of grammars, etc.) 
can take place at that time. If its speed is gla- 
cial during the development phase, a complex 
system cannot be completed, and its practicality 
will never be shown. 
MORPHOLOGICAL  PROCESSES 
We have, so far, identified five interesting 
morphological processes: analysis, guessing, syn- 
thesis, defaulting, and coding. The first two 
concern comprehension; the other three, produc- 
tion. 
ANALYS IS  
Morphological analysis is a relatively well- 
understood notion -- which is not to say that 
there is agreement concerning what the result 
should be, or how it should be produced. But, 
generally speaking, analysis is agreed to involve 
the decomposition of a surface-form string 
(usually in English called a word) into its con- 
stituent base-form morphemes and their func- 
tional attachments; this may be finer-grained, as 
when each morpheme is associated with lexical 
or other linguistic information, and indeed the 
process is usually understood to imply access to 
a stored lexicon of morphemes, in order to cor- 
rectly identify those contained in the string. 
Analysis is assumed to perform this decomposi- 
tion according to a set of language-specific 
strategies (i.e., a grammar) limiting the possible 
decompositions. 
GUESS ING 
In keeping with a commitment to fault- 
tolerant, fail-soft behavior, a system must, e.g., 
deal with unknown words in an uttterance by 
making plausible guesses regarding their mor- 
phological, lexical, syntactic, and even semantic 
properties. A morphological guess ing 
grammar ,  presumably operating after the 
analysis grammar has failed, must embody 
heuristic strategies, and these may well differ 
from those of the analyzer, even though the rule 
stock upon which they draw might be identical. 
For example, while the analyzer must, sooner or 
later, entertain all possible decomposition 
hypotheses, the guesser might best be con- 
strained to produce only the "most 
l ikely/plausible" hypotheses. 
SYNTHESIS  
Synthesis, like analysis, is a relatively well- 
understood notion, albeit characterized by 
debate concerning the details. Generally speak- 
ing, synthesis is the composition of a surface- 
form string encoding the information contained 
in one or more base-form morphemes having 
known functional attachments. Synthesis, like 
analysis, is assumed to perform this composition 
as dictated by a grammar. Note again that, in 
practice, this grammar cannot be the simple in- 
verse of the one controlling analysis: a syn- 
thesizer should be prohibited from making mis- 
takes that are tolerated (if, indeed, even noticed) 
by an analyzer. 
229 
DEFAULT ING 
Guessing is relevant to end-users, dealing as 
it does with unknown words in an input ut- 
terance. Developers, on the other hand, faced 
with teaching the system \[how to synthesize 
only\] the correct surface forms of words being 
defined, can make use of additional functions, 
such as a de fau l t ing  grammar .  Given a root 
or stem form and part of speech, a lexical 
defaulter can propose the most likely inflectional 
paradigm for a word. This is better than requir- 
ing the lexicographer to type in the variants, or 
manually encode the paradigm in some other 
fashion: greater human reliability is experienced 
when validating good guesses and correcting a 
few wrong ones than when entering everything 
from scratch. 
CODING 
When the lexical defaulter guesses incor- 
rectly, a cod ing grammar  could render all 
potential inflectional paradigms (as permitted by 
the language), from which the lexicographer 
could select the correct one(s) for the newly- 
defined word. This is desirable, because greater 
human reliability is experienced in selecting from 
among possible inflections than in producing all 
and only the correct variants. 
SURVEY 
One of the more popular frameworks for 
morphological processing is the two-level model 
developed by Koskenniemi \[1983\], modified and 
extended by Karttunen \[1983\]. Two-level models 
are fully reversible, performing both analysis 
and synthesis, and correspond to finite-state 
machines, hence they appear to enjoy some com- 
putational advantages. However, there are both 
theoretical and practical problems. It appears 
that the model is not sufficiently powerful to ac- 
count for some human languages (e.g., Icelandic, 
which exhibits recursive vowel harmony). The 
model can be decidedly inelegant in some 
respects (e.g., in handling alternations uch as 
the English nominate/nominee by positing a 
"lexical entry" nomin). There is a very sub- 
stantial time penalty involved in compiling two- 
level grammars (it may be measured in hours), 
which impedes rapid debugging and testing. 
Finally, the "advantages" of reversibility are ar- 
guable, for reasons discussed above and below. 
Affix-stripping models are commonly 
employed, especially for English \[Slocum, 1981\]. 
The IBM system \[Byrd, 1983\] also uses affix 
rules in a strictly word-based model of morphol- 
ogy, but the rules are unordered and thus only 
marginally may be said to constitute a gram- 
mar; certainly, morphosyntactic behavior is not 
highlighted. These two systems were developed 
for English analysis only; they are not reversible 
in any sense, and have hot been tested on other 
languages. A serendipitous ituation exists, in 
that they have a certain degree of fault-tolerance 
built in, though this was not a goal of the 
design/implementation process. 
In order to elucidate morphosyntax, some ap- 
proaches use a simple (e.g., two-level, or similar) 
model to account for orthographic behavior, and 
a "grammar of words" to analyze morpheme se- 
quences yntactically (e.g., \[Bear, 1986\], \[Russell 
et al, 1986\]). It does not seem that these ap- 
proaches, as described, lend themselves to any 
sort of reversal, or other form of rule-sharing; 
furthermore, only analysis is mentioned as an 
application. 
Even simpler models have employed allomor- 
phic segmentation; morphosyntax may be ap- 
proximated by a longest-match heuristic 
\[Pounder and Kommenda, 1986\] or defined by a 
finite-state grammar \[Bennett and Slocum, 
1985\]. The required entry of every allomorphic 
variant of every word is both a theoretical and a 
practical disadvantage, but runtime processing is 
speeded up as a positive consequence due to total 
neglect of spelling changes. Fault-tolerant be- 
havior is not built-in, but can be almost trivially 
added (whereas, in many other models, it would 
be difficult to incorporate). The systems cited 
here are used for analysis only. 
No previous models of morphology seem to 
have been used for anything but analysis, and 
occasionally synthesis; the other three functions 
mentioned above, and others that might exist, 
are neglected. Although the author has dis- 
cussed other functionality in earlier work 
\[Slocum and Bennett, 1982\], even there the mor- 
phological processors used for analysis, synthesis, 
and defaulting/coding were distinct, being im- 
plemented by entirely different software 
modules, and shared only the dictionary entries. 
THE NABU TECHNIQUE 
In Nabu, rules are separate from the 
strategies imposed upon them. Rules may be 
thought of as declarative in nature; they are or- 
ganized in an inheritance hierarchy. The 
"grammars of words" imposed upon them, 
however, may be thought of as procedures -- ac- 
tually, dataflow networks. 
RULE H IERARCHY 
The structure of the rule hierarchy is deter- 
mined by linguists, purely for their own con- 
venience, and implies no runtime behavior of 
any kind. That is, the rule hierarchy is purely 
static and declarative in nature. The one con- 
straint is that, at the top level, collections of 
rules are distinguished by the language they 
belong to -- i.e., the first division is by language. 
Typically, though not necessarily, the second- 
230 
level division imposed by the lingusts is that of 
category: the part-of-speech of the surface-forms 
for which the rule subset is relevant. For lan- 
guages that distinguish inflection from deriva- 
tion, our linguists have generally found it con- 
venient to divide rules at the third level in terms 
of these two classes. Other than the top-level 
language division, however, the structure of the 
hierarchy is entirely at the discretion of the 
responsible linguists. Consequently, we have ob- 
served that different linguists - each responsible 
for the morphological rules (and grammars) of 
entire languages - prefer and employ different 
organizational principles. 
Rules may also be thought of as declarative 
in nature -- though, in fact, for the purposes of 
maintenance they embody certain procedural be- 
haviors such as a self-test facility. A mor- 
phological rule is an equation between one letter- 
string+feature-set, which we call a g losseme,  
and another. One side of the equation describes 
what might be called the "surface" side of a 
glosseme, as it represents an encoding of infor- 
mation nearer to (but not necessarily at!) the 
surface-string level: all this really means is that 
relatively more information is expressed in the 
string part than in the feature part. The other 
side, in turn, describes what might be called the 
"base" glosseme, as it represents an encoding of 
information closer to (but not necessarily at!) 
the base-form level, with relatively less infor- 
mation expressed in the string part than in the 
feature part. It is important o note that the in- 
formation content of the two sides is the same 
- only the form of the information changes. 
This is why we classify a rule as an equat ion ,  
and this also admits rule reversibility in the im- 
plementation. 
As a trivial example of such an equation, 
consider the English inflectional rule 
\ ["+s" 0\] -~ \ [ "+"  (NOUN PL)\]. 
The "surface" side, on the left, describes a 
glosseme string whose last character is the letter 
s \[by means of the pattern "-t-s"\] and places no 
constraints on the glosseme's feature set \[by 
means of the empty list 0\]. The "base" side, on 
the right, describes an equivalent glosseme whose 
string lacks the final letter 8 \[by means of the 
pattern "+" \ ]  and constrains the feature set \[by 
means of the two features (NOUN PL)\]. Ex- 
ecuted in one direction, this rule removes an 8 
and adds the two features (NOUN PL); reversed, 
the rule removes the two features (NOUN PL) 
and adds the morpheme s. Obviously, this 
English rule conveys the notion that a NOUN 
may be inflected for PLural by means of the 
\[bound\] morpheme s at its right end. 
The plus sign (+) in a pattern is used to in- 
dicate whether prefixation or suffixation of the 
glosseme string is being described, depending on 
whether the pattern precedes or follows it; or a 
pattern may describe an entire glosseme string 
via omission of the sign. In a pattern, al- 
phabetic case is important: a lower-case letter 
signifies a constant, and must be matched by the 
same letter (in any case) in the glosseme; an 
upper-case letter signifies a restricted variable, 
and must be matched by some letter from the 
set over which it is defined. Thus, for example, 
in English rules we use the letter V to stand for 
Vowel; C, for Consonant; and G, for Gemminat-  
ing consonant. (Of course, the variable restric- 
tions are entirely arbitrary as far as Nabu is 
concerned. Each linguist defines sets of vari- 
ables and their match restrictions according to 
taste and the language at hand.) 
If the same variable appears more than once 
in a pattern, it is required to match the same 
letter in the glosseme: the equation 
\ [ "+GGing"  01 = \ [ "+G"  (VERB PRPL)\] 
thus describes doubling of the last consonant 
in an English verb, before suffixation of the 
present participial morpheme. Another facility 
is required for convenience in describing alter- 
nation. In German, for example, certain mor- 
phological operations involve the umlauting of 
vowels; thus, an unmarked vowel on the "base" 
side may require replacement by an umlauted 
vowel on the "surface" side. If only one vowel 
behaved this way, this would be no problem: the 
corresponding letters would simply appear in 
their places in the patterns. But there are three 
vowels that behave like this in German (a, o, 
and u) in the identical context. In order to 
eliminate the need for tripling the size of the 
rule base otherwise required to describe this 
phenomenon, we provide the linguists with a 
means for pairing-up variables, so that a charac- 
ter matching one may be replaced by the cor- 
responding character in the other's set. Many 
other languages exhibit this kind of alternation, 
making this a useful technique. 
A character in a pattern string matches one 
and only one character in a glosseme string. 
Generally speaking, the characters appearing in 
a pattern string are those of the language being 
described, as one would expect. Some languages, 
however, lack a case distinction -- Arabic, for ex- 
ample -- rendering the variable notation prob- 
lematic. In this situation, upper-case letters 
from the Roman alphabet are used to represent 
variables in rules. 
Given this framework, creating a bidirec- 
tional rule interpreter is relatively straightfor- 
231 
ward. Rule execution is a matter of matching 
according to one side of the equation and (if that 
is successful) transforming according to the other 
side. So long as every rule is truly an equation 
(and only a human linguist can decide this, ex- 
cept in trivial cases) then every rule is reversible 
-- that is, can be used for comprehension as well 
as production, because thc interpreter can trans- 
form a rule's output back into the original in- 
put. In Nabu, as noted curler, there are cur- 
rently two comprehension processes (analysis and 
guessing) and three production processes 
(synthesis, defaulting, and coding). But neither 
collections of rules nor their hierarchical struc- 
ture describes uch functionality. 
CONTROL GRAPHS 
A morphological grammar is an execution 
strategy imposed upon a bocly of morphological 
rules. Bearing in mind that morphological rules 
can apply to the outputs of other rules (consider 
the derivational process in English, as for ex- 
ample when the word derivational is constructed 
from derive + ation + al), and that such com- 
pounding is not free, but linguistically con- 
strained, it is obvious that the compounding 
constraints -- as well as the individual rules 
themselves -- must be accounted for. In Nabu, 
an execution strategy is represented as a 
dataflow network, which we loosely term a 
control graph. 
A control graph is a collection of nodes con- 
nected by directed arcs. Each node is composed 
of a bundle of morphological rules, which may 
be applied when input reaches that node, and 
whose output may be passed across arcs to other 
nodes. There will be one or more designated 
start nodes,  where input appears and process- 
ing begins (conceptually, in parallel, if there are 
multiple start nodes). From each start node, 
there will be a path to one or more designated 
termina l  nodes,  where processing ends and the 
graph's output is emitted. The path may be of 
arbitrary length; start nodes may themselves be 
terminal nodes. In analysis, encountering a ter- 
minal node entails dictionary look-up; in syn- 
thesis, output of a surface-form. 
There are two types of arcs, Success and 
Fai lure;  the former are arcs across which 
successfully-applied rules will pass their output, 
and the latter are arcs across which the original 
input to a node is passed, should no rule inside 
it be successful. A successful rule is one whose 
input side ("surface" or "base," depending on 
whether the graph is engaged in comprehension 
or production) matches the input glosseme, and 
whose output side represents the same infor- 
mation as was present in the input, only refor- 
mulated. 
Conceptually, the rule~ inside a node may be 
executed in series or in paral le l .  The linguist 
controls this by setting a flag in each node; thus, 
some nodes may fire rules in parallel, while 
others fire their rules serially. (In serial nodes, 
rule execution terminates as soon as one rule 
succeeds; there is no backup.) In either case, all 
success arcs are traversed in parallel, or else all 
failure arcs are traversed in parallel, depending 
on whether any rule(s) succeeded -- meaning all 
possible morphological analyses are produced for 
later consideration. 
To take a simple example, consider the word 
derivations, and assume that neither it nor the 
singular form derivation is in the dictionary. 
An English analyzer graph might have multiple 
start nodes, one of which is intended (by the 
linguist) for inflected nouns. The input glosseme 
\["derivations" O\] 
is thus passed to the node PLURAL-NOUN, 
which contains, among others, the rule 
\ ["+s" 0l = \ [ "+"  (NOUN PL)\]. 
The suffix pattern "+s"  matches the glos- 
seme string, and no features are required to be 
present in the glosseme, thus this rule succeeds 
and produces the output glosseme 
\["derivation" (NOUN PL)\[. 
If PLURAL-NOUN has been marked as a ter- 
minal node (in addition to being a start node), 
then dictionary look-up will take place. If so, by 
our assumption above it fails. Our hypothetical 
graph contains a Success arc from PLURAL- 
NOUN to DEVERBAL-NOUN, which contains, 
among others, the rule 
\["+ation" (NOUN)I = ("+e" (VERB 
(DERIVE NOUN +ION))). 
When (and if) this rule fires, it would match 
the suffix (ation) in the glosseme string 
derivation, and the feature (NOUN), and there- 
fore transform that glosseme into 
pL)f'.'derive" (VERB (DERIVE NOUN +ION) 
Note the e restoration: rules can in principle 
remove and add any letter sequence, hence affix 
alternation is handled in a straightforward man- 
232 
ner. If DEVERBAL-NOUN has been marked as 
a terminal node, then dictionary look-up will 
take place: the VERB entry derive is retrieved. 
The glosseme feature li~t, in addition to indicat- 
ing the main-entry ("derive") and lexical catego- 
ry (VERB) to look for in the dictionary, contains 
sufficient information to allow transformation of
the stored entry for derive into a representation 
of its surface-form realization (derivations), in 
terms of syntactic category (NOUN), sub- 
categorization features (PL), and semantics (the 
meaning of derive, transformed by +ION). 
There remains only one problem to account 
for: that of compositional vs. non-compositional 
readings. Words with strictly non-compositional 
readings (e.g., fruitful, which is not computable 
from fruit and ful) simply must be stored in the 
dictionary; this is not a contentious claim. 
Words with strictly compositional readings (e.g., 
derivation, which is computable from derive and 
ation) may or may not be stored in the diction- 
ary: this is an efficiency consideration, based on 
the usual time vs. space trade-off, and is also not 
subject to significant debate -- at least, not with 
respect o theoretical implications. 
The problem arises for cases where both com- 
positional and non-compositional readings exist 
for the same word (e.g., largely). In such situa- 
tions, the non-compositional reading must of 
course be stored, but it would be nice if this did 
not require storage of the compositional reading 
as well. In Nabu, we solve this by means of a 
DECOMPOSABLE flag that must appear within 
the non-compositional definition of a word, in 
case that word also has a compositional reading 
which is to be computed. During the course of 
morphological analysis, performing successful 
dictionary look-up (at a "terminal" node) will 
affect subsequent processing: if the DECOM- 
POSABLE flag is noted, then the glosseme just 
submitted to dictionary .look-up will also be 
passed across any success arcs leaving that node, 
for further analysis. In the absence of a 
DECOMPOSABLE flag, successful dictionary 
look-up marks a truly terminal case, and the 
results are returned (possibly along with read- 
ings from other paths in the graph) forthwith. 
The operations of other types of control 
graphs are analogous to those of the analyzer. 
The principles are the same, with small excep- 
tions (some noted above), and so are not ex- 
emplified here. 
PROCESSORS IMPLEMENTED 
In addition to the rule and graph interpreters 
per se, delivered to MCC shareholders in 
mid-1985, Nabu includes a variety of tools sup- 
porting the development, esting, maintenance, 
and multilingual documentation of morphologi- 
cal rule hierarchies and grammars. These tools 
(not described in this paper, for reasons of space) 
have been used to create a great many rules and 
several morphological processors. Non-terminals 
included, the English morph-rule hierarchy num- 
bers 626 nodes; French, 434; German, 493; 
Spanish, 1395; and Arabic, 882. In addition to 
these mature rule hierarchies, some preliminary 
work has been done on the Russian and Japanese 
rule hierarchies. 
ANALYZERS 
The English analyzer is complete with 
respect to inflection; it has been successfully 
tested on, among other things, the entire collec- 
tion of inflectional variants presented in 
Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary 
(ca. 42,500 nouns, 8,750 verbs, and 13,250 
adjectives). It also accounts for the great bulk 
of English derivation, as determined by various 
word frequency lists, and is undergoing gradual, 
evolutionary extension to the missing (low- 
frequency) affixes and their combinations. A 
first version of this grammar  was delivered to 
MCC shareholders in mid-1985, followed by 
upgrades in 1986 and 1987. The current 
analyzer numbers 20 nodes and 60 arcs. 
As mentioned earlier, a complete Arabic mor- 
phological analyzer exists; so far as we are 
aware, it accounts for all morphological 
phenomena in the language -- no mean feat, for 
a language in which a single root form could in 
theory be realized as over 200,000 surface forms, 
and in which morphemes are frequently discon- 
tinuous (i.e., cannot be described by simple af- 
fixation models) \[Aristar, 1987\]. This 371-node, 
l133-arc analyzer was delivered to MCC 
shareholders in mid-1986, and may represent the 
first complete analyzer ever produced for Arabic. 
The French and German analyzers are com- 
plete with respect to inflection (highly irregular 
forms, like sein in German, naturally excepted). 
The former numbers 71 nodes and 121 arcs; the 
latter, 54 nodes and 79 arcs. The 19-node, 17- 
arc Spanish analyzer is nearly complete with 
respect to inflection; adjectives remain a tem- 
porary exception. With respect o verbs, for ex- 
ample, it has been tested on an extensive list of 
conjugated verbs \[Noble and Lacasa, 1980\], com- 
prising over 6,000 surface forms, and in the first 
such test it was 970"/0 accurate. 
GUESSERS 
A 76-node, 116-arc German guessing graph 
has been implemented and tested. It is still ex- 
perimental, and incomplete, but it does go 
beyond inflection to account for some deriva- 
tional processes. Our Arabic guesser is actually 
the Arabic analyzer graph: such strategy sharing 
is not always appropriate, as discussed above, 
but it would seem to be so for languages that, 
233 
like Arabic, are morphologically very rich, ad- 
mitting as a consequence v ry strong predictions. 
DEFAULTER 
A 21-node, 23-arc English defaulting graph 
exists. It seems to be complete (insofar as such a 
processor might be), in that it constitutes a 
seemingly adequate component of a dictionary 
entry coding tool. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Morphological grammars in Nabu are able to 
account for all compositional readings of 
arbitrarily-complex surface-forms in a wide 
range of languages. Furthermot'e, the formalism 
and development environment are reasonably 
comfortable. These claims are supported by our 
implementation and large-scale testing of several 
diverse grammars. 
For philosophical reasons, we are opposed to 
the idea that grammars (as opposed to in- 
dividual rules) must be reversible: even if it were 
not for the need of five-fold rather than merely 
dual functionality, the need for fault-tolerance in
a practical system, without consequent fault- 
exhibition, argues for separate analysis and syn- 
thesis grammars. We also point out that, in our 
implementations, the \[non-reversible\] control 
graphs tend to be much smaller in size than the 
hierarchies of \[reversible\] rules, hence the storage 
penalty for "redundancy" is inconsequential. 
REFERENCES 
Aristar, A., "Unification and the Computa- 
tional Analysis of Arabic," Computers and 
Translation 2, 2, (April-June) 1987, pp. 67-75. 
Bear, J., "A Morphological Recognizer with 
Syntactic and Phonological Rules," Proceedings 
of COLING86, Bonn, 1986, pp. 272-276. 
Bennett, W.S., and J. Sloeum, "The LRC 
Machine Translation System," Computational 
Linguistics 11 (2-3), 1985, pp. 111-121. 
Byrd, R.J., "Word Formation in Natural 
Language Processing Systems," Proceedings of 
the 8th IJCAI, Karlsruhe, 1983, pp. 704-706. 
Karttunen, L., "Kimmo - A General Mor- 
phological Processor," Texas Linguistic Forum 
22, 1983, pp. 165-186. 
Koskenniemi, K., "Two-level Model for Mor- 
phological Analysis," Proceedings of the 8th IJ- 
CAI, Karlsruhe, 1983, pp. 683-685. 
Noble, J., and J. Lacasa. Handbook of 
Spanish Verbs. Iowa State University Press, 
Ames, Iowa, 1980. 
Pounder, A., and M. Kommenda, 
"Morphological Analysis for a German Text-to- 
Speech System," Proceedings of COLING86, 
Bonn, 1986, pp. 263-268. 
Russell, G.J., S.G. Pulman, G.D. Ritchie, 
and A.W. Black, "A Dictionary and Morphologi- 
cal Analyser for English," Proceedings of 
COLING86, Bonn, 1986, pp. 277-279. 
Slocum, J., "An English Affix Analyzer with 
Intermediate Dictionary Look-up," Working 
Paper LRC-81-1, Linguistics Research Center, 
University of Texas, February 1981. 
Slocum, J., and W.S. Bennett, "The LRC 
Machine Translation System: An Application of 
State-of-the-Art Text and Natural Language 
Processing Techniques to the Translation of 
Technical Manuals," Working Paper LRC-82-1, 
Linguistics Research Center, University of Texas, 
July 1982. 
234 
