THE MULTIVOC TEXT-TO-SPEECH SYSTEM 
Olivier M. Emorine and Pierre M. Martin 
Cap Sogeti Innovation 
Grenoble Research Center 
Avenue du Vieux Chene, ZIRST 
38240 Meylan, FRANCE 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we introduce MULTIVOC, a 
real-world text-to-speech product geared to the 
French language. 
Starting from a ordinary French text, MUL- 
TIVOC generates in real-time a high quality speech 
using a synthesis-by-diphone m thod. The process- 
ing is divided into 3 main transformations (phoneti- 
zation, automatic prosody and rhythm marking, and 
generation of LPC frames). 
This paper provides a full description of 
MULTIVOC including not only the technical view 
but also some applications of the product within the 
real world. 
1. PRESENTATION OF MULTIVOC 
The text-to-speech MULTIVOC system is the 
result of a technology transfer from a research insti- 
tute (CNET Lannion, France), which developed the 
basis of the system, to an industrial company (Cap 
Sogeti Innovation, France) which made the system a 
commercial product. Generating Linear Prediction 
Coding frames from ordinary text written in French, 
the goal of MULTIVOC is to give any standard 
applications the ability to produce (in real time) 
low-cost and high-quality speech output. 
MULTIVOC is shipped as a complete 
software system which aims to provide a sophisti- 
cated driver enabling applications to directly send 
French spoken text. The software package consists 
of the kernel of the driver itself and a set of dic- 
tionaries used by it. Several tools in the package 
allow an advanced user to tailor his own MUL- 
TIVOC driver to specific usage. Beside this static 
configuration facility, MULTIVOC also provides 
several run-time features. By submitting specific 
requests an application can change the following 
parameters: 
? The sampling frequency for generated frames. 
Three different frequencies are available: 8 kHz, 10 
kHk and 16 kHz. This parameter will characterize 
the quality of the output voice, a frequency of 16 
kHz providing the best results. 
? The tone of the output voice can be adjusted in 
the range 50-350 Hz. 
? The speech speed may be set from 1 to 10 syll- 
ables per second. 
? Two styles of prosody are provided. The 
"reading-style" corresponds to the usual way of 
reading a text, while the "advertising-style" is dedi- 
cated to short commercial messages like jingles. 
? One can also choose between a female or a male 
voice. 
The method used for the synthesis produces 
Linear Prediction Coding (LPC) frames generated 
from a diphone dictionary. Such a dictionary is 
specific to the sampling frequency used (8, 10 or 
16kHz) and also to the style of voice (Female or 
Male). For this purpose, MULTIVOC provides 6 
differents diphone dictionaries. 
The overall processing is organized as a pipe- 
lined set of transformations applied to the input text. 
At the higher level, one can distinguish the follow- 
ing functions: 
The pre-processing (or lexical processing) is 
a text-to-text ransformation aiming to expande 
some non-worded terms like numbers (1987 --> 
"Mille Neuf Cent Quatre-Vingt-Sept"), administra- 
tive numbers (A4/B5 --> "A Quatre B Cinq") or 
acronyms (CSINN. --> "Cap Sogeti Innovation"). 
The phonetization process transforms the 
pre-processed text into phonemes according to pre- 
defined rules stored in a user-modifiable base. 
The prosody marking process scans the 
phonetized text and generates appropriate marks to 
reflect the prosody of the text using built-in rules 
based on the different punctuation signs and the 
grammatical type of words. 
The rhythm marking process computes the 
duration associated to each phoneme. 
Last, the frame generation process produces 
the LPC frames which correspond to the input text 
according to the different parameters specified and 
can be sent directly to the output device. 
115 
In this overall processing, we have deli- 
berately avoided a time-consuming syntax analysis, 
to enable MULTIVOC to run in real time. This 
choice has made MULTIVOC a commercially 
viable product providing a high-quality speech at 
low cost and which has been sold to serve as a 
basic component for several industrial applications. 
MULTIVOC is available on IBM-PC based systems. 
2. THE MULTIVOC PROCESS 
As explained in the previous section, the input 
text provided by an application is processed in a 
"pipe-line" through five processes (see figure 1). 
French Text 
Pre-processing 
I 
ktion 
J 
\[ 
Prosody marking 
I \[ Rhythm Computation 
I 
Generation of LPC frames 
"Reading.Style" Prosody 
I 
1 
1 
I \] \[ Generation of LPC frames \] \['Advertising-Style ProsodyJ 
I 
LPC Frames 
Figure 1 : The MULTIVOC processing 
Each process takes as input the result of the 
preceding one and fills specific attributes of the 
objects composing the internal representation of the 
text. The final result, a list of LPC frames, is then 
sent to the LPC interpreter of a speech synthesis 
device (not described here). 
? PRE-PROCESSING 
The main purpose of this first step is to 
decompose the input sentences into a list of ~ords 
and to set the lexical attributes of each word. In 
order to allow ordinary-written text to be correctly 
processed, some patterns are translated into a 
sequence of words: 
? numbers are expansed according to the French 
language rules. The words generated are tagoed to 
permit a correct prosody marking for numbers. 
,, digital dates, time templates (not exhaustive) are 
matched against corresponding patterns in a set of 
rules which define the transformation to be applied. 
Patterns corresponding to the matching part and the 
transformation format are expressed using a UNIX- 
scanf/printf-like syntax. 
? abbreviations and acronyms are translated accord- 
ing to a user-defined lexicon. The translation part 
associated each entry of the lexicon can be: 
- empty to specify that the recognized word is to 
be spelled 
ex: 'MIT.' --> . (which will produce 'M I T' 
\[EM EE TAY in French\]) 
- a full text string which will replace the match- 
ing word 
ex: 'MIT.' --> 'Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology' (in French!...) 
- a phonetic string if the pronunciation is very 
different from the lexical form. This function is 
particularly useful for company or product names 
ex: 'MIT . ' - -> 'AI"MAYTI'. (better) 
? mathematic symbols are also translated 
The process then checks if each word can be 
pronounced, according to a dictionary of the French 
sequences of pronounceable tters, and if it cannot 
the word is spelled. 
Finally, an attribute is associated to each word 
describing the grammatical nature of the word (pro- 
noun, determin, preposition . . . .  ). This dictionary is 
rather small (300 entries) and does not contain most 
verbs but does contain the usual auxiliaries. 
A complete analysis of the sentences would 
provide a better prosody but, due to the size of the 
corresponding dictionary, could not be processed in 
real-time. The resulting prosody is nevertheless 
judged very natural, albeit in some few cases some- 
what strange. 
<LC> and <RC> are the respective Left and 
Right contexts of the Matching Sequence 
<PS> is the sequence of Phonetic Symbols to be 
generated 
and has the meaning: 
"Replace <MS> by <PS> if <MS> is preceded by 
<LC> and followed by <RC>. 
Each context specification (<LC> and <RC>) 
can be empty, in which case the rule is applicable 
with no conditions, or can be expressed as a logical 
combination of elementary context: 
context == elementary.context AND context 
I elementary.context OR context 
\[elementary.context 
An elementary context is either a sequence of 
characters or a class of sequence of characters (e.g. 
consonants or vowels). 
During interpretation, if several rules are 
applicable, the one containing the longest Matching 
Sequence is chosen: thus, the interpreter goes from 
the particular case to the general case. If more than 
one rule satisfies this criterion the first one is chosen 
and if no rule is applicable, a character is popped 
from the input and pushed to the output before the 
process tart again. 
Example of rules: 
\[ _LORS \]_PUTS _QUOl \] QUE_ \[\] ..> <K><EU>_. 
\[\] _QUE \[\] -.> <K><E> . 
Note: several characters play a special role." 
- the character ' ' (underscore) denotes a blank character 
- the character T denotes the logical operator OR 
- the character '&' denotes the logical operator AND 
One of the set of rules is dedicated to the determi- 
nation of the correct liaisons between words. 
? PHONETIZATION 
This process transforms the sentences into a 
sequence of phonetic symbols. This transformation 
is carried out by five set of rules. The sets are 
applied successively to the input text. 
Each rule has the following form: 
\[<LC>\] <MS> \[<RC>\] --> <PS>. 
where 
<MS> is the Matching Sequence of characters in 
the input text 
? PROSODY MARKING 
The synthetic speech produced by mere con- 
catenation of diphones is comprehensible but not 
very natural. To provide it with an acceptable qual- 
ity, it is necessary to operate a prosody processing. 
Prosody facts are of two kinds (Emerard, 1977), 
(Guidini, 1981), (Sorin, 1984): 
? macro-prosody, related to the syntactic and seman- 
tic structure of the sentence, 
117 
? micro-prosody, treating the interaction between 
two consecutive phonemes. 
A study of a set of phrases and the diversity 
of the voice "styles" (reading, advertising . . . .  ) has 
provided an automatic prosody generation system 
(Aggoun, 1987). In the first step, this process 
decomposes the sentences in a set of so-called 
prosody-groups, and associates to each of them a 
group category. In the second step, each word 
within a group is marked and a pause is associated 
with it. 
Prosody-Group Categorization 
A prosody-group is by consecutive words. A 
set of rules determines the boundaries of a group 
and its associated category. The main criteria 
involved in this decomposition are: 
? the punctuation marks (including the end of a sen- 
tence), each of them defining a different category 
? the grammatical natures of two consecutive words. 
For example, a group ends after a lexical 
word (noun, non-auxiliary verbal form) followed by 
a grammatical word (determinant, pre-position . . . .  ). 
In that case, the category of the group depends on 
the second word. 
The resulting sequence of groups is then pro- 
cessed in order to adjust their categories. Here 
again, the process is governed by rules based on the 
following information: 
? the length of the group (the number of words it 
contains), 
? the number of syllables of each word within the 
group, 
? the number and the length of non-lexical words, 
? the category of the adjacent groups 
As an example of rule: 
IF there exist a sequence (S) containing 3 groups 
of category '5' without a pause already established 
for one of them, 
AND if one of them (G) begins with one of the 
following determinant ('AU' or 'AUX') 
THEN give a category '4' to G and give it a short pause 
except if its pause is already long. 
For instance, 50 rules of this kind allow a complete 
categorization of the groups. 
\[Note: some of them are simpler !\] 
Word Marking 
According to the category of the group it belongs 
to, its length, its grammatical nature, each word of a 
group is then marked and, possibly, a pause is 
placed at the end of the word. 
For example: 
IF the group contains exactly 2 non-lexical consecutive 
words, 
AND the first one has one syllable 
AND the second more than one, 
THEN give the first word the mark  '6+' and give the second 
the mark  '4-' 
It should be noted that the set of rules used depends 
on the style of prosody required by the application 
('reading' or 'advertising'). 
Although some attempts have been made to 
express the prosody-marking rules in a declarative 
way (Sorin, 1984), (Aggoun, 1987), based on the 
logic paradigm, the efficiency criteria and the real- 
time objective we have defined for this product led 
us to represent them in a procedural way rather than 
in a production-Srule form. 
At the end of this process, some words remain 
unmarked. In the next processes, we consider a 
sequence of unmarked word terminated by a marked 
one (a prosody-word) as the basic entity to deal 
with. 
? RHYTHM COMPUTATION 
The third process involved in MULTIVOC 
consists in the computation of the duration to asso- 
ciate to each phoneme. This duration is computed 
according to the different attributes attached to each 
word and to each phoneme, which are: 
? the kind of phoneme (plosive \[bang\], fricative 
\[french\], liquid \[long\]), 
? the mark associated the word 
? the number of syllabin of the word 
? the position of the phoneme within the word 
and a set of rules using this information. As an 
example of such rules: 
IF the last phoneme of the word is a vowel 
AND the mark of tire word is '5' 
OR if a pause is associated with the word, 
THEN give a duration of '1.4' to this phoneme 
\[Note: the default duration of every phoneme is '1.0' \] 
118 
? PROSODY GENERATION 
To every word-mark corresponds a macro- 
melody schema. This schema enables us to deter- 
mine the variation of the pitch along the word. 
Three basic functions are used to express the pitch 
variation: 
? constant: the pitch remains unchanged 
? linear interpolation 
? exponential variation, 
namely F(t) = F(to) * e -p(t -tO) 
where F(t) denotes the value of the pitch at the 
time 't', tO is the initial time and p is a con- 
stant (p = 0.68) 
Every macro-melody schema begins at Fdeb, 
the fundamental frequency of the speaker. Fde b is set 
to 240 Hz for a Female voice and 120 Hz for a 
Male voice. This fundamental is adjusted if the 
word has a micro-mark '+' or '-'. 
Then a set of rules determines when these 
functions hould be applied to a word. 
As an example: 
For words with mark  '1 '  and containing more than 
four syllables: 
- apply constant from the beginning until the middle of 
the second vowel, 
- apply exponential with p/2 until the beginning of the 
first 'voise' phoneme of the last syllable (point A), 
- apply constant Fdeb/2 from the end of the 
last vowel (point B) to the end of the word, 
- interpolate f rom A to B 
Then a set of micro-prosody rules is applied 
on the vowels ('fine tuning'). 
Example: 
IF a vowel is not in the last syllable of a word 
AND followed by an unvoiced consonant 
THEN the pitch of the last LPC f rames of the vowel is 
adjusted in the following manner :  
let C = \[ F (LF  - 3) - 7/12 * Fde b \] * 100 in 
F(LF - 2) = F (LF -  3) - 10 * C 
F (LF -  1) = F (LF -  3) - 15 * C 
F(LF) = F(LF  -3) - 20 * C 
At these step in the process, all needed infor- 
mation has been computed (pitch, duration) and 
MULTIVOC generates an LPC structure after hav- 
ing accessed a dictionary of diphones to get the 
coefficient of the lattice filter for each phoneme. 
3. IMPLEMENTATION OF MULTIVOC 
The MULTIVOC software was developed in 
C on MS-DOS 3.2 and is compatible with UNIX 
BSD 4.2. This product is sold either as a running 
package (binary form) for IBM-PC compatible com- 
puters or as an adaptable package (source form) for 
specific usage. 
On the IBM-PC, the speech synthesis device 
used comes from the OROS Company (France) and 
is featured as an IBM-PC pluggable board (OROS- 
AU20) based on a Texas Instruments TMS320/20 
processor. Tile MULTIVOC driver is implemented 
as a memory-resident program which application 
can address using an interrupt mechanism. Doing 
this, any application can very easily send text to be 
pronounced in real time. 
A Microsoft Windows application has been 
developed to demonstrate the facilities offered by 
MULTIVOC. Users can enter text using a built-in 
editor and can send all or mouse-selected text to 
MULTIVOC. A form (Dialogue-Box) allows the 
different parameters of MULTIVOC to be set to 
user specified values. 
MULTIVOC has also been successfully ported 
to UNIX BSD 4.2 on a SUN-3 but the driver 
specific aspects have not yet been developed 
because of tile lack of speech synthesis devices for 
such machines. 
4. APPLICATIONS OF MULTIVOC 
We give below three examples of concrete 
and real-world applications of MULTIVOC in an 
industrial context: 
? The first one was to use MULTIVOC to pro- 
nounce TELEX-style messages. This has been real- 
ized by defining an appropriate lexicon for the 
numerous abbreviations and acronyms used in such 
messages. The sources of MULTIVOC have not 
been modified. 
* The second application, or class of application, is 
to adapt MULTIVOC to low cost and small home- 
computers to devek)p a new generation of product 
for this market (Computer aided education software, 
for example). This is conducted by two customers 
who bought the sources of MULTIVOC and are 
now producing a restricted version of the product. 
119 
? The third application is to use MULTIVOC as a 
basic component in a sophisticated application. We 
are now running a project for the French Telecom- 
munications (DGT) to develop phone-based mall 
services. Using a standard French phone, any user 
will be able to call the mailing service and dial 
commands to hear the different messages he has 
received. Several user-friendly features will enable 
to hear again part or all of a message or to change 
MULTIVOC-Iike parameters (deeper voice, slower, 
...). For the purposes of this project MULTIVOC 
will not be changed. 
5. FURTHER WORK 
The work planned around MULTIVOC is of 
two kinds: the more research issues and the more 
commercial/industrial ones. 
Research issues will include the handling of 
other languages (English), knowing that some 
important parts of MULTIVOC have been dedicated 
to French for reasons of efficiency and therefore 
will have to be re-written. More valuable results are 
foreseen by applying our company's experience in 
natural language processing (Lancel, 1986), (Deci- 
tre, 1987) to the input phase of MULTIVOC. 
As a commercial issue, we will continue to  
sell the MULTIVOC software system and to colla- 
borate with our customers. In the industrial field we 
think that a component like MULTIVOC will be a 
much-appreciated complement o many common 
applications. To prepare that, we envisage to install 
MULTIVOC on other machines and other operating 
systems and this should not cause any trouble. 
We will also adapt MULTIVOC to different 
speech synthesis devices based on the lin,:ar predic- 
tion technique. Finally, we will investigate the use 
of other synthesis technics (synthesis by formants 
for instance). 
7. REFERENCES 
Aggoun A., "Le syst~me Synthex: Traitement de la 
prosodie en synth~se de la parole", Technique et 
Science Informatiques, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 217-229, 
1987 
Decitre P., Grossi T., Jullien C., Solvay J.P., "Plan- 
ning for Problem Formulation in Advice-Giving 
Dialogue", 3rd Conference of the European Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Copenhagen (Denmark), 1987. 
Emerard F., "Synth~se par Diphones et Traitement 
de la Prosodie", Th~se de troisi6me cycle, Univer- 
sit6 de Grenoble, 1977. 
Guidini A., Choppy C., Dupeyrat B., "Application 
de R6gles au Calcul Automatique de la Prosodie. 
Comparaison avec la Prosodie Naturelle", Sympo- 
sium Prosodic, Toronto 1981. 
Lancel J.M., Rousselot F., Simonin N., "A Granunar 
Used for Parsing and Generation", Proceedings of 
the XIth International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 536-539, Bonn (FR Germany), 1986. 
Sorin C., Stella M., Aggoun A., Barthkova K., 
"R~gles Prosodiques et Synth~se de la Parole 
'MULTI-STYLE', Symposium Franco-Sovi6tique 
sur le Dialogue Homme-Machine, Pouchino, 1984. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Although based on a quite simple mechanism 
using only a local lexical analysis, avoiding expen- 
sive syntactic or semantic analysis, the results 
obtained with MULTIVOC are impressive. In partic- 
ular, the output speech has very natural prosody. 
Finally, the performance achieved by MULTIVOC 
makes it a real-time Text-To-Speech system that 
will be widely applied in industry. 
120 
