A TOO1. FOR INVESTIGATING TIlE SYNONYMY RELATION 
IN A SENSE DISAMBIGUATED THESAURUS 
Martin S. Chodorow 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598 
and 
Department of Psychology, Hunter College of CUNY 
New York, New York 10021 
Yael Ravin 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598 
ltoward E. Sachar 
IBM Data Systems Division 
White Plains, New York 10601 
Abstract 
This paper describes an exploration of the 
implicit synonymy relationship expressed by 
synonym lists in an on-line thesaurus. A series 
of automatic steps was taken to properly con- 
strain this relationship. The resulting roupings 
of semantically related word senses are believed 
to constitute a useful tool for natural language 
processing and for work in lexicography. 
Introduction 
The importance of semantic processing of 
natural language i:, generally acknowledged 
(Grishman 1986) and needs no justification. 
Work on applications such as information re- 
trieval or machine translation has consistently 
focused on semantic analysis. A wide range of 
models has been suggested, based on semantic 
networks, on fuzzy logic, on conceptual de- 
pendencies and more. Common to all these 
models, however, is the researchers' reliance 
on hand-built semantic databases. These da- 
tabases tend to be rather limited in scope and 
often restricted to narrow domains. If the 
process of constructing them remains manual, 
broad-coverage s mantic analysis by comput- 
ers will be severely handicapped for quite a 
long time. It is our goal, therefore, to explore 
automatic and semi-automatic ways of con- 
structing these semantic databases, through the 
manipulation of machine-readable s mantic 
sources. In this paper, we concentrate on 
heuristics for the automatic manipulation of 
synonyms found in an on-line thesaurus. 
First, we should clarify what we mean by 
"synonyms". The definition of synonymy and 
the existence of synonyms have long been de- 
bated in linguistics. Some believe it is impos- 
sible to capture meaning, not even of the most 
concrete terms in natural anguage. Conse- 
quently, it is impossible to define synonymy 
or to identify synonymous terms (Quine 1960). 
Others believe it is possible to give full seman- 
tic representations of meaning and therefore to 
define synonymy formally and to identify true 
synonyms (Katz and Fodor 1963). According 
to this view, synonymy is a relationship of 
sameness of meaning between words, which is 
defined as the identity of their semantic rep- 
resentations. 
We have chosen an operational approach 
to synonymy: The synonyms of a headword w 
are whatever words are listed in the entry for 
w in an on-line version of The New Collins 
Thesaurus (1984) (C'I'). l According to the au- 
thors, "...no synonym is entered unless it is 
fully substitutable for the headword in a sensi- 
We have stored CT as a DAM file (Byrd, et al, 1986) with 16,794 keyed records containing a total of 287,136 syn- 
onym tokens. It has been supplemented with part-of-speech information from the UDICT computerized lexicon 
system (Byrd, 1986). 
144 
ble English sentence" (Collins 1984:v). This 
may suggest hat each entry (i.e., a headword 
and its synonym list) contains all and only 
words that are closely related semantically. But 
the same synonyms appear in several lists, and 
headwords are themselves ynonyms of other 
headwords, so that the lists in CT are implic- 
itly interconnected. We seek algorithms to 
process all the words that are interconnected 
in the thesaurus into sets which share crucial 
semantic features. 
In the first section of this paper, we char- 
acterize the properties of the CT intercon- 
nections that we discovered in our 
manipulation of the CT links. Because of the 
asymmetric and intransitive nature of these 
links, our main difficulty has been to devise 
proper means of control to keep the computed 
sets of words closely related in meaning. In the 
second section, we describe our first control 
measure - our manipulation of senses of words 
rather than of words themselves. In the third 
section, we describe automatic ways of pruning 
the semantic trees we obtain. In the final sec- 
tion, we illustrate how this work can benefit 
various natural language applications by pro- 
viding automatic access to semantically related 
word senses and an automatic means for 
measuring semantic distance. 
Properties o f  CT-synonyms 
In the context of CT, a strong criterion for 
defining a set of words which share crucial se- 
mantic features is a criterion which requires 
every member of the set to be a synonym of 
every other member. The words in such a set 
would exhibit symmetric and transitive links. 
There are 27 sets of words in CT which are 
symmetric and transitive. Within the context 
of the thesaurus, these may be considered to 
have identical meaning. 26 out of the 27 are 
word pairs - the 27th is a triple - and all have 
a single sense and a unique part of speech. 2 
These sets are given below. 
allocate = allot 
aphorism = apothegm 
astonishing = astounding 
at times = from time to time 
- -  7"  bystander = eyewitness 
cemetery = necropolis 
congratulate = felicitate 
eatable = edible 
entomb = inter 
everybody = everyone 
exactitude = exactness 
greetings = regards 
insomnia = sleeplessness 
lozenge = pastille 
myopic = near-sighted 
naught = nought 
perk = perquisite 
permeable = porous 
piddling = piffling 
podium = rostrum 
prizefighter = pugilist 
prizefighting = pugilism 
saw = saying 
slattern = slut 
testy = tetchy 
triad = trinity = trio 
weal = welt 
Most of the synonymy links in CT are mark- 
edly different from these. 62% are asymmetric 
(e.g., part has department as a synonym, but 
department does not have part); and 65% are 
non-transitive (e.g., part has piece as a syno- 
nym; piece has chunk as a synonym; but part 
does not have chunk as a synonym)) This 
asymmetry and non-transitivity have been 
noted by others (Dewdney 1987). Thus, in or- 
der to obtain semantic sets for most of the 
words in the thesaurus, symmetry and transi- 
tivity are too strict. An algorithm which per- 
mits asymmctric and non-transitive links must 
be developed. (See Warnesson 1985 for a dif- 
ferent approach.) 
According to the substitutability definition 
of synonymy adopted by Collins, links should 
always be symmetric since if it is possible to 
substitute b for a in a "sensible" English con- 
text, then it is always possible to reintroduce a
2 It should be noted that CT's vocabulary is limited. Thus, it does not contain the verb "perk" or the noun "saw" as 
an instrument of cutting. The list of transitive and symmetric sets will vary with the size of the on-line source. 
3 The percentage of non-transitive links does not include synonyms which have no entries in CT (see footnote 4,); nor 
does it include synonyms which could not be disambiguated (see the section on sense disambiguation). Thus 65% is 
a conservative estimate. 
145
into that context as a substitution for b. Nev- 
ertheless, we have found at least five different 
sources of asymmetry. 23% of the total 
CT-synonyms are either phrases or rare and 
colloquial words, which do not appear as main 
entries in the thesaurus, uch as dwelling place 
(a synonym of abode) and digs (a synonym of 
quarters).* About 68% 5 of the remaining 
asymmetries appear to be mere oversights on 
the part of the lexicographers. For example, 
assembly has throng listed as a synonym of one 
of its senses, but throng does not list assembly 
as a synonym, although it does give 
assemblage, congregation, multitude, and other 
related words. Many of these omissions eem 
to be due to the fact that rare, very formal or 
metaphoric words tend not to be offered as 
synonyms. This may explain why conversant, 
familiar and informed, for example, are listed 
as synonyms of cognizant, while cognizant is 
not listed as their synonym. 18% are instances 
of hypernymy (the superordinate relation). 
For example, book lists manual as a synonym, 
but manual does not list book; instead special 
types of books such as handbook are given. 
This is because book is really a hypernym (not 
a synonym) of manual. I lypemym links are 
truly asymmetric n nature. 
words whose entries list house as a synonym, 
produces a grouping containing 89% of all the 
nouns in CT. Obviously, with such a large 
number of words, it is not surprising that most 
bear little semantic relation to the root node. 
The computational tool we have used for 
computing the transitive closure over 
synonymy is a program known as SPROUT. 
It was originally used (Chodorow, et al, 1985) 
to generate taxonomic trees from the hyponym 
relation as extracted from Webster's Seventh 
Collegiate Dictionary (Merriam 1963). 
SPROUT starts with a root node and retrieves 
from a designated file (in this case, a DAM fde) 
the words that bear the given relation to the 
root. These words are the ftrst-level 
descendents (daughters) of the root. SPROUT 
then applies recursively to each of the daughter 
nodes, generating their daughters, etc. In this 
way, the tree is generated in a breadth-first 
fashion. The process is complete when the 
only nodes that remain open are either termi- 
nals (i.e., nodes that have no daughters) or 
nodes that appear earlier in the tree, indicating 
a cyclic structure. The house tree reached clo- 
sure at the 1 lth level. 
Two other sources account for the remain- 
ing asymmetries: 8% of the asymmetric cases 
result when a central sense of one word is 
synonymous with a very peripheral sense of 
another. One sense of say lists add, as in "I le 
added that he would do the demonstration." 
The entry for add does not however contain 
this peripheral sense and deals only with the 
arithmetic add. Finally, 6% are due to vo- 
cabulary inconsistencies. For example, record 
has annals, archives and diary as synonyms; 
whereas annals and archives have the plural 
records; and diary has the phrase daily record. 
We believe that the CT-synonyms are non- 
transitive for many of these same reasons. 
Is it possible to reach any noun in CT by 
following the synonym links to and from any 
other noun? The answer is NO, but almost. 
Computing the transitive closure over the syn- 
onyms of the noun house, where we include 
the words listed in the entry for house and the 
Sense Disanzbiguation 
Perhaps the diversity in meaning encount- 
ered in the sprout of house came from consid- 
ering nodes to be words. Words are, of course, 
polysemous, o a better choice might be word 
senses. The CT-entry of house is given below. 
The numbers 1-6 indicate six different senses. 
1. abode, building, domicile, dwelling, 
edifice, habitation, home, homestead, 
residence 
2. family, household, mrnage 
3. ancestry, clan, dynasty, family tree, 
kindred, line, lineage, race, tribe 
4. business, company, concern, 
establishment, firm, organization, outfit 
(*Informal), partnership 
5. Commons, legislative body, p .arliament 
6. hotel, inn, public house, tavern 
4 We had to ignore these words in our subsequent manipulation of the CT-entries because they had no synonym lists. 
Thus,  the total number of synonyms available for processing is 221,957. 
s The following percentages were computed on the basis of fifty random entries. 
146 
The synonyms listed for each sense are not 
separated into their senses. Consequently, 
shnply following the synonyms of housel will 
not solve the problem unless each of the syn- 
onyms for it (abode, ..., residence) is marked 
with its appropriate sense. We have tried two 
automatic methods of sense marking (i.e. sense 
disambiguation): disambiguation by symmetry 
and disambiguation by intersection. 
In a dictionary-style thesaurus such as CT, 
an entry A may have word B listed as a syno- 
nym of its nth sense, and entry B may have 
word A listed as a synonym of its mth sense. 
We can mark B in entry A as the mth sense 
of B, and A in entry B as the nth sense of A. 
An example of this type of one-to-one map- 
ping in CT is given below. 
dense (adj) 1 .... condensed ... solid .... 
2 .... dull ... stupid ... 
dull (adj) 1. dense .... stupid .... 
2 .... callous ... unsympathetic 
:7. drab ... muted .... 
ttere, sense 1 of dull is synonymous with sense 
2 of dense. 37% of the 287,000 synonym to- 
kens show this type of symmetry. Of course, 
there are also mappings of the one-to-many 
variety (for example, only the first sense of 
feeble has faint as its synonym, whereas both 
senses I and 2 of faint have feeble), but they 
account for only .5% of the tokens. By this 
method of disambiguation-by-symmetry, we 
could automatically mark the senses of all 
synonyms in one-to-one and one-to-many re- 
lations. The third type of mapping, many-to- 
many, accounts for just .5% of the total, but 
it poses a problem for the strategy outlined 
above. This can best be seen by considering 
an example. Senses 1 and 2 of institution list 
establishment as a synonym, and senses 1 and 
2 of establishment list institution. Is sense 1 of 
institution synonymous with sense 1 of estab- 
lishment or with sense 2? The distribution of 
the terms institution and establishment cannot 
answer the question. 
The problem of many-to-many mappings 
and the large percentage of asymmetric 
CT-synonyms led us to another method. 
Consider again the case of dense and dull. 
Evidence for linking sense 2 of dense with 
sense I of dull comes from the symmetric dis- 
tribution of the two words in the entries. 
There is however another piece of evidence for 
linking sense 2 of dense with sense 1 of dull, 
and that is the co-occurrence of the word stu- 
pid in their synonym lists. Thus, the inter- 
sections of synonym lists serve as the basis for 
an automatic disambiguation of the many-to- 
many mappings, and, for that matter, for the 
disambiguation f the whole CT. This is sim- 
ilar to Lesk's suggestion for disambiguating 
hypemyms (Lesk 1986). The intersection 
method disambiguated more entries than the 
symmetry method, but it, too, left a certain 
percentage of ambiguous words. In some 
cases, the intersection of two words was null. 
For example: succesfful and victorious are 
symmetric synonyms but none of their other 
synonyms are shared. Their entries are given 
below.6 
SUCCESSFUL: 
> > 0acknowledged$ at the top_of the treeS99 
best-selling$99 booming$99 efficacious$ 
favourable$ flourishing$0 fortunates 1.2 
fruitful$3 lucky$1 lucrative$0 
moneymaking$0 out in frontS99 paying$99 
profitable$1 prosperous$1 rewarding$0 
thriving$0 topS unbeaten$1 victorious$ 
wealthy$0 
VICTORIOUS: 
> > 0championS conquering$99 firsts 
prizewinningS99 successful$ 
triumphantS0 vanquishing$99 winningS2 
In other cases, there was a tie. For example, 
ripe2 has equal-size intersections with both 
perfeetl and perfect4. In their following en- 
tries, ties are indicated by a pair of numbers 
joined by a period. 
PERFECT: 
> > labsoluteS 1 completeS 1.3 completed$99 
consummateS2 entire$1.3 fmished$2 fulls 1 
out-and-outS sheerS2 unadulterated$99 
unalloyed$99 unmitigated$2 utterS99 wholeS l 
> > 4accomplished$2 adeptS 1experienced$1 
expertS2 finished$1 masterly$0 polished$ 
practised$ skilful$0 skilled$0 
RIPE: 
> > 2accomplished$1 completeS2 finished$ 
in readiness$ perfectS1.4 prepared$1 
ready$1 
The number following the dollar sign indicates the sense number. No number indicates that the intersection is null 
and therefore a sense number was not picked up. 99 indicates that the word has no entry in CT and consequently 
no sense numbers. 0 means that there was only one sense given in the entry. 
147 
No disambiguation resulted in either of these 
cases. The results obtained with each method 
are shown in the following table: 
by symmetry: 
sense disambiguated: 103,648 (46.7%) 
ties: 1,662 (0.7%) 
remainder: 116,647 (52.5%) 
Total number of synonyms 
available for processing: 221,957 
by intersection: 
sense disambiguated: 
ties: 
remainder: 
179,126 (80.7%) 
6,029 (2.7%) 
36,802 (16.6%) 
Total number of synonyms 
available for processing: 221,957 
Figure 1. Disambiguation Results 
The quantitative advantage of the inter- 
section method is evident. To determine the 
qualitative difference, we studied cases where 
the symmetry and the intersection methods 
conflicted. We compared fifty randomly se- 
lected entries. Of the approximately 900 syno- 
nyms listed in the entries, 337 were 
disambiguated by both methods. Of these, 
there were 33 pairs for which the two methods 
disagreed. 20 were symmetric ties, 
disambiguated by the intersection method. 5 
were intersection ties, disambiguated by the 
symmetry method. The remaining 8 were given 
to two human reviewers. In 3 out of the 8, the 
reviewers could not determine which of the 
methods provided better disambiguation, as 
shown in the following example. 
FEEBLE: 
1. debilitated, elicate, doddering, effete, 
enervated, enfeebled, etiolated, exhausted, 
failing, faint, frail, infu'm, languid, 
powerless, puny, shilpit (*Scottish), 
sickly, weak, weakened 
2. fiat, flimsy, inadequate, incompetent, 
indecisive, ineffective, ineffectual, 
inefficient, insignificant, insufficient, 
lame, paltry, poor, slight, tame, thin, 
unconvincing, weak 
POOR: 
1. badly off, broke (*Informal), destitute, 
hard up (*Informal), impecunious, 
impoverished, indigent, in need, in want, 
necessitous, needy, on one's beam-ends, on 
one's uppers, on the rocks, penniless, 
penurious, poverty-stricken, skint 
7 As before, sense numbers  follow the dollar sign. 
148 
(*BritishSlang), stony-broke (*BritishSlang) 
2. deficient, exiguous, inadequate, 
incomplete, insufficient, lacking, meagre, 
miserable, niggardly, pitiable, reduced, 
scanty, skimpy, slight, sparse, straitened 
3. below par, faulty, feeble, inferior, 
low-grade, mediocre, rotten (*Informal), 
rubbishy, second-rate, shabby, shoddy, 
sorry, substandard, unsatisfactory, 
valueless, weak, worthless 
4. bad, bare, barren, depleted, exhausted, 
fruitless, impoverished, infertile, sterile, 
unfruitful, unproductive 
5. hapless, ill-fated, luckless, miserable, 
pathetic, pitiable, unfortunate, unhappy, 
unlucky, wretched 
6. humble, insignificant, lowly, mean, 
modest, paltry, plain, trivial 
The symmetry method linked feeble2 with 
poor3, whereas the intersection method linked 
feeble2 with poor2. The remaining 4 cases 
were somewhat clearer. In 3, the intersection 
method performed better; in one, the symme- 
try method was superior. To conclude, the 
best disambiguation algorithm would be a 
combination of the two methods. We are cur- 
rently studying more cases where the methods 
disagree in order to determine how they should 
be combined. In the following, though, we rely 
on disambiguation by intersection. 
Transitivity 
After numbering each token in CT by sense 
and disambiguating senses, we sprouted from 
the f'trst sense of house. Each node in the new 
sprout is not a word anymore, but a specific 
(numbered) sense of a word. Words not 
disambiguated bythe intersection method were 
ignored in the new sprout. Sense 
disambiguation did not significantly improve 
the results of the sprout. The sprouting closure 
of housel contains 85% of the total number 
of noun senses in CT. 
Using senses instead of words, we recom- 
puted the number of sets which are symmetric 
and transitive (see section on CT-properties 
above) and found 86. Given below are some 
of the new sets) 
adhesiveS2 = glueS1 = pasteS1 
beaks I = bi1155 
conservatory$0 = hothouseS 1 
drawS11 = tieS7 
gradeS3 = gradientS0 
grouchS2 = grouseS2 = grumbleS3 
myopic$0 
poisonS 1 
spectatorS0 
well-off$2 
wolf$2 
= near-sighted$0 = short-sightedSbtal noun senses in CT. Closure was reached 
= venomS1 at the 4th level. The first following list in- 
= witness$1 cludes most of the nodes that were rejected by 
= well-to-doS0 the pruning method. The second list includes 
= womanizerS0 most of the nodes that were accepted. 8 
Why is sense disambiguation so ineffective 
in restricting the number of nodes encountered 
in sprouting? Consider for example the 
thesaurus eparation into senses for building: 
1. domicile, dwelling, edifice, fabric, 
house, pile, structure 
2. architecture, construction, erection, 
fabricating, raising 
Sense 2 is a mixture of the act of building, the 
object built, and its design. This indicates that 
poor sense separation in CT is responsible for 
spuriously related word senses. We feel that a 
reliable indication of poor sense separation in 
CT might be an intersection of two synonyms 
which is of the size 1. For example, the inter- 
section of buiMing2 and erectionl contains 
only construction. 
Erection: 
1. assembly, building, construction, 
creation, elevation, establishment, 
fabrication, manufacture 
2. building, construction, edifice, pile, 
structure 
By ignoring CT links with intersections of size 
1 we were able to eliminate some of the prob- 
lematic senses and reduce the sprout o include 
only 76% of the total CT-nouns, as opposed 
to the previous 85%. 
In an attempt o maintain semantic on- 
tent, we have explored automatically pruning 
the sprout tree when a semantically irrelevant 
branch is generated. Before any CT-synonym 
is accepted as a node of the tree, its 
descendents are checked against he immediate 
descendents of the root node. If their inter- 
section is not null, the node is accepted into 
the sprout tree. We have experimented with a 
few variations: choosing either the daughters 
or both daughters and granddaughters of either 
the root node or the branch node. We have 
also varied the size of the intersection. A 
promising scheme involves checking the 
daughters of each node against he daughters 
and granddaughters of the root, discarding 
nodes whose intersection is of size 1. When 
pruned this way, the sprout tree of housel 
reached transitive closure with a total of 173 
noun senses, which constitute 1.4% of the 
2-homeS3 2-fabricS2 3-barracks$0 
3-assembly$2 3-compositionS 1 3-erectionS 1 
3-fabricationS1 3-figureS3 -formS7 
3-formationS2 3-shapeS I 
3-designS4 3-makeS 12 3-makingS1 
3-manufactureS3 3-mouldS2 3-organizationS I 
3-productionS1 3-houseS2 3-pointS2 
3-orientationS 1 3-quarterS 1 4-chambers 1 
4-frameworkS0 4-systemS1 4-anatomy$2 
4-buildS4 4-hullS 1 4-physiqueS0 
4-rackS1 4-skeletonS0 4-arrangementS1 
4-configurationS0 4-formatS0 
4-organizationS2 4-arclfitecture$2 
4-turnS17 4-conformationS0 
4-constitutionS2 4-methodS2 
. . .  
4-entourageS2 4-fieldS3 4-aspectS2 
0-houseS 1 1-abodeS0 l-buildingS 1
1-domicileS0 l-dweUing$0 l-edificeS0 
1-habitationS1 l-homeS1 l-residenceS1 
l-address$1 -establishmentS4 1-placeS5 
l-seatS4 2-lodgingS0 2-quarters$0 
2-1odgings$0 2-mansionS0 2-pileS4 
2-structureS2 2-constructionS 1 
2-erectionS2 -households I 2-padS4 
2-1ocation$0 2-situationS 1 
2-whereabouts$0 3-accommodationS2 
3-billetS 1 3-apartmentS0 3-frameS4 
3-make-upS2 3-structureS1 3-bearings$0 
3-localeS0 3-placeS1 3-positions 1 
3-siteS 1 3-spotS2 3-emplacementS 1 
3-1ocality$2 3-seatS2 3-settingS0 
3-stationS1 3-environmentS0 3-sceneS2 
Applications 
One way in which sprout trees of syno- 
nyms may prove to be useful is in measuring 
the semantic distance between words. It is 
possible, for example, to sprout from two dif- 
ferent root nodes until their trees intersect, hat 
is, until they have a common node, which, 
with further sprouting, will become a common 
branch. We believe that a common node in- 
dicates a common semantic aspect and that an 
algorithm for measuring semantic distance be- 
tween words can be formulated on the basis 
of the common nodes of their trees. Intuitively, 
the algorithm will depend on the number of 
The number preceding the word indicates the level on which it was encountered in the tree. The number following 
the dollar sign indicates its sense number. 
149 
common branches and on the level at which 
they occur in the respective trees. Here we are 
taking a somewhat simple view in considering 
only the hrst common node encountered. Our 
SYNCHAIN program produces simultane- 
ously two sprout trees from two root nodes. 
After all words on a level are encountered in
the two trees, the program checks whether the 
trees intersect. It stops when a common node 
is encountered. The user specifies the two root 
nodes and the level to which the trees should 
be sprouted. The program provides a common 
node, if one was encountered. This is illus- 
trated in the two following examples: 
the man visited the apartment in a white suit. 
DECL NP DET 
NOUN* 
VERBI* 
NP DET 
NOUN* 
9 pp 
PUNC "." 
ADJ* "the" 
"man" 
"visited" 
ADJ* "the" 
"apartment" 
PREP "in~ 
DET ADJ* "a" 
AJP ADJ* "white" 
NOUN* "suit" 
Figure 3. Parse Tree 2 
synchain apartmentS0 houseS 13 
apartmentS0-> placeS5 <-houseS1 
synchain apartmentS0 suitS5 3 
chain could not be constructed 
In the In, st example, the apartment$O tree and 
the houseS1 tree intersect on their first level. 
Both have placeS5 as their daughter. In the 
second example, the apartment$O tree and the 
suitS5 tree (in the meaning of garment) do not 
intersect as far as the third level. This suggests 
that the word senses of the t'n'st pair are much 
closer in meaning than those of the second. 
This distinction can assist in the analysis 
of natural language text (for purposes of 
translation, text critiquing .and others), by 
providing semantic information to a syntactic 
parser. In particular, we have in mind a parser 
such as the PLNLP English Parser, PEG 
(Jensen 1986), which cannot resolve cases of 
syntactic ambiguity on its own. Consider the 
following pair of sentences with their PLNLP 
analyses: 
the man visited the apartment in the house. 
DECL NP DET ADJ* "the" 
NOUN* "man" 
VERB* "visited" 
NP DET ADJ* "the" 
N O U N * "apart ment" 
'~ PP PREP "in" 
DET ADJ* "the" 
NOUN* "house" 
PUNC "." 
PEG produces similar analyses for the two 
sentences, where the prepositional phrases are 
attached to the closest head, that is, to the 
noun apartment. A question mark indicates an 
alternate attachment to the verb visited. Se- 
mantic information is needed to resolve the 
attachment ambiguity (Jensen and Binot 
1986). Our measure of semantic distance can 
determine the proper attachment in this case. 
If the two nouns are semantically close, the 
attachment displayed by PEG is the more 
plausible one. If the two nouns are seman- 
tically distant, the alternate attachment is more 
plausible. 
An automatic measure of semantic distance 
can assist information retrieval systems as well. 
One can conceive of a system which will re- 
trieve documents containing synonyms of 
the key word by first searching for a very re- 
strictive set of synonyms (first-level synonyms 
perhaps). If not enough documents are re- 
trieved, words that are more distant seman- 
tically can be searched for as well. Another 
application for which a sprouted synonym tree 
is useful is third-generation -line dictionary 
systems (Neff, et al, 1988). Among other 
things, these systems display synonyms to us- 
ers who are editing natural anguage texts. The 
list of synonyms presented by the system can 
be arranged according to the semantic distance 
between the word interrogated and the words 
on the synonym list. It should be noted, how- 
ever, that for this application, words need to 
be arranged according to additional parameters 
as well. Synonyms that are polysemous or rare 
may be poor substitution candidates in a gen- 
eral text. 
Figure 2. Parse Tree 1 Finally, we are now investigating the pos- 
sible use of our tools by lexicographers who 
wish to update and revise an existing on-line 
thesaurus. Easy access to asymmetric links, to 
synonyms with very small intersecting lists, to 
lists of words that are pruned from sprout 
trees, and to any other sorted information that 
we can provide automatically should make the 
150 
work of lexicographers much more easily 
manageable. Our goal is to develop a tool that 
will automatically ocate all different ypes of 
inconsistencies and oversights in the thesaurus 
(Ravin, et al, in preparation). 
Conclusion 
We have explored the nature of the implicit 
synonym links in CT and have found it com- 
plex but promisingly rich. Our goal is to con- 
tinue to improve the automatic extraction of 
information from this source, until we form 
acceptable sets of semantically related words. 
These sets will have to satisfy both human 
intuitions about meaning and some more the- 
oretic linguistic riteria. To these sets, we will 
add information from other on-line sources. 
This direction of research seems promising as 
a first step towards the automatic organization 
of meaning. 
REFERENCES 
Byrd. R. J. (1986), "Dictionary Systems for 
Office Practice," Proceedings of the Grosseto 
Workshop "On Automating the Lexicon". Also 
available as IBM Research Report RC 11872. 
Byrd, R. J., G Neumann, and K. S. B. 
Andersson (1986) "DAM - A Dictionary Ac- 
cess Method," IBM Research Report. 
Chodorow, M. S., R. J. Byrd, and G. E. 
tleidom (1985) "Extracting Semantic Hierar- 
chies from a large On-line Dictionary," Pro- 
ceedings of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 299-304. 
Collins (1984) The New Collins Thesaurus, 
Collins Publishers, Glasgow. 
Dewdney, A. K. (1987) "Word ladders and a 
tower of Babel lead to computational heights 
defying assault," Scientific American, August 
1987, 108-111. 
Grishman, R. (1986) Computational 
Linguistics, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Jensen, Karen (1986) "PEG 1986: A Broad- 
coverage Computational Syntax of English," 
Unpublished paper. 
Jensen, Karen and Jean-Louis Binot (1987) 
"Disambiguating Prepositional Phrase Attach- 
ments by Using On-Line Dictionary Defi- 
nitions," to appear in Computational 
Linguistics, special issue on the lexicon. Also 
available as IBM Research Report RC 12148. 
Katz, J. and J. Fodor (1963) "The Structure 
of a Semantic Theory," Language, 34, 
2:170-210 
Lesk, M. (1986) "Automatic sense 
disambiguation using machine-readable dic- 
tionaries: ttow to tell a pine cone from an ice 
cream cone," Proceedings of 1986 SIGDOC 
Conference, Canada. 
Marcotorchino, F. (1986) "Maximal Associ- 
ation Theory", in Classification as a Tool for 
Research, W. Gaul and M. Schader, eds., 
North I Iolland. 
Merriam (1963) Webster's Seventh New 
Collegiate Dictionary, G. & C. Merriam, 
Springfield, Massachusetts. 
Neff, M. S., R. J. Byrd, and O. A. Rizk (1988), 
"Creating and Querying Lexical Data Bases," 
ACL Second Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing. 
Quine, W. (1960) Word and Object, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Ravin, Y., M. Chodorow, and 1I. Sachar (in 
preparation) '~Fools for lexicographers rcvising 
an on-line thesaurus." 
Wamesson, I. (1985) "Optimization of Se- 
mantic Relations by Data Aggregation Tech- 
niques," Journal of Applied Stochastic Models 
and Data Analysis, 1,2 (December), J. Wiley, 
New York. 
151 
