THE SEMSYN GENERATION SYSTEM:  
INGREDIENTS,  APPL ICAT IONS,  PROSPECTS 
D ie tmar  RSsner  
c /o  P ro jekt  SEMSYN 
Inst i tut  ffir Informat ik,  Univers i t?t  S tut tgar t  
Herdweg 51, D-7000 Stut tgar t  1, West  Germany 
e-mail: semsyn@if istg.uucp 
Abstract: 
We report about the current status of the SEM- 
SYN generation system. This system - initially 
implemented within a Japanese to German MT 
project - has been applied to a variety of gen- 
eration tasks both within MT and text genera- 
tion. We will work out how these applications 
enhanced the system's capacities. In addition 
to the paper we will give a demo of both the 
German and a recently implemented English 
version of the system. 
1 The starting point 
The SEMSYN project began in 1983 with an 
MT application as starting point: We had to 
investigate the possibility of using seman- 
tic structures derived from Japanese as in- 
put to a generator for German. The seman- 
tic structures were produced from Japanese 
titles of papers in information technology by 
the parser of Fujitsu's ATLAS/I I-system, the 
German generator had to be designed and im- 
plemented by SEMSYN. A first prototype was 
presented at the end of 1984, further en- 
hanced versions of this Japanese/German sys- 
tem were demonstrated at various meetings, 
e.g. COLING-86 \[RSsner 86a\]. 
2 Design guidelines 
When we designed and implemented the initial 
SEMSYN generator we tried to base this work 
on guidelines like the following \[Rfsner 86b\]: 
? The implemented system should not be 
confined by its/ irst application. 
Since we had only little influence on the 
format of the output of our partner's 
parser for Japanese we designed a more 
general frame language that served as in- 
put to our system. 
The generator should be easily extensible 
and transportable to other applications. 
This gave strong motivation for choosing 
an object-oriented implementation tech- 
nique. 
The generator should be integrated in an 
environment of  software tools supporting 
~every day" work (e.g. testing, debuggi~zg, 
experimentation) with the system. 
This led to the implementation of a whole 
system of utilities: e. g. menu-based tools 
for lexicon update and maintenance or an 
interactive ditor for semantic structures. 
3 The basic machinery 
The SEMSYN generator is organized into two 
major modules: 
? the generator kernel or 'realization com- 
ponent' and 
? the front end generator or 'morpho/- 
syntactic omponent'. 
We will have a closer look at the operation 
of these modules now. 
3.1 The  generator  kerne l  
The generator kernel starts from a semantic 
representation, i.e. a 'message' in the sense of 
\[McDonald et al 87\]. Its task is to 'realize' the 
25 
message, i.e. to decide how its content may be 
expressed in natural anguage: 
? What is the adequate syntactic form for 
the utterance as a whole? 
? How should the subparts of the conceptual 
representation be realized and integrated 
into the utterance? 
? What are appropriate lexicalizations - as 
lexemes or whole phrasal structures of the 
target language - for the elements of the 
message? 
3.2 The  l ingu is t i c  representat ion  
The output of the generator kernel is a func- 
tional grammatical structure. This linguistic 
representation fully specifies the intended ut- 
terance: 
? the syntactic ategory of the whole utter- 
ance and the grammatical functions and 
syntactic ategories of all subparts, 
? the syntactic features of the head of each 
syntactic entity, 
? the lexemes or special lexical items - 
marked with category information like 
:*PN for proper names or :*NC for noun 
compounds - to be used. 
3.3 The  f ront  end  generator  
The functional grammatical structures pro- 
duced by the generator kernel are input to the 
front end generator. This module has to exe- 
cute all syntactic and morphological processes 
that are necessary to produce the correspond- 
ing surface string. This involves: 
? linearization, i.e. constituent ordering, 
? agreement handling, 
? inflection. 
The need for an explicit linguistic represen- 
tation of the intended utterance and a sepa- 
rate final processing step is especially obvi- 
ous for highly inflectional languages with a 
rich repertoire of agreement phenomena (e.g. 
French, German). 
3.4 Examples  
3.4.1 Frame structures as semantic repre- 
sentation 
SEMSYN's generator kernel expects its input 
in a frame notation. Although there are mi- 
nor variations between the different applica- 
tions the basic format is fixed: frame struc- 
tures consisting of a 'semantic symbol' as name 
and named roles or slots with - recursively - 
frame structures as fillers. 
An example of a case frame: 
(GENERATE 
:AGENT (PROJECT :NAME (:*PN SEMSYN)) 
:OBJECT (LANGUAGE :ATTRIBUTES GERMAN)) 
Here the toplevel frame structure contains 
the semantic symbol 'GENERATE'  and has 
two filled roles :AGENT and :OBJECT as fur- 
ther information. 
3.4.2 A realization result 
When the generator kernel realizes this case 
frame as a clause in active voice this results 
in the following functional grammatical struc- 
ture: 
( : CLAUSE 
(:VERB 'gener ie r '  ) 
(:FEATURES (:VOICE ACTIVE)) 
( : SUBJ 
(:NG (:HEAD 
(:*NC (:*PN 'SENSYN I) 
' - '  ' P ro jek t ' )  
( : FEATURES 
(:NUM SG)(:DET DEF)(:CAS NOM)))) 
( :DIROBJ 
(:NG (:HEAD 'Sprache') 
(:FEATURES (:HUM SG)(:DET ZERO)) 
(:CLASSIFIER 'deutsch' )))) 
This yields the following German sentence~: 
"Das SEMSYN-Projekt generiert 
deutsche Sprache." 
(The SEMSYN project generates Ger- 
man language.) 
3.5 Ob jec t -o r iented  imp lementa -  
t ion  o f  rea l i za t ion  knowledge  
The main features of the object-oriented 
paradigm that we exploited for the implemen- 
I English glosses added as convenience for the reader. 
26 
tation of realization knowledge in the genera- 
tor kernel are 
? hierarchy as organisation principle for the 
knowledge base and 
? message passing between objects as pri- 
mary control structure. 
The specialization hierarchy used is rooted in a 
general class that defines the basic methods for 
realization (KBS-Schema). On the next level 
are general classes for 
? case frames (CASE-Schema) 
? concepts (CONCEPT-Schema) 
? relations (RELATION-Schema). 
These classes differ with respect o the possi- 
ble realizations of their instances: 
? concept-schemata allow only realizations 
as noun groups 
? case-schemata allow for various clausal 
forms (active, passive, topicalized) as well 
as nominalized forms 
? subclasses of relation-schema incorporate 
knowledge about realization possibilities 
for (more complex) semantic relations like 
the relation between :MEANS and :PUR- 
POSE, :REASON and :RESULT etc. 
3.5.1 A relation-schema 
The semantic representation of a summary 
of Macbeth may contain the following frame 
structure: 
(REASON - FOR 
: RESULT 
(MURDER :AGENT MACBETH :OBJECT DUNCAN) 
: REASON 
(PERSUADE 
:AGENT (LADY-MACBETH :SPECIALIZE AMBITIOUS) 
:OBJECT MACBETH)) 
One possible way to express this relation is 
to realize the fillers of :REASON and :RE- 
SULT as clauses and add the clause from 
:REASON as a subordinate to that of :RE- 
SULT: 
"Macbeth ermordete Duncan, da die 
ehrgeizige Lady Macbeth Macbeth 
fiberredete" 
(Macbeth murdered Duncan because 
the ambitious Lady Macbeth per- 
suaded Macbeth) 
4 Other applications of the 
system 
In the meantime improved and extended ver- 
sions of the SEMSYN generation system have 
been applied to quite a variety of input struc- 
tures and generation tasks: 
? machine translation applications: 
- Generation of German from (hand- 
written) semantic structures pro- 
posed for use within EUROTRA 
\[Held, RSsner, Weck 87\] 
- Generation of German sentences in 
the domain of doctor/patient com- 
munication from semantic structures 
produced from Japanese and En- 
glish by CMU's Universal Parser 
\[Tomita, Carbonell 86\] 
? Text generation: 
- SEMTEX: generation of news stories 
from statistical data \[R5sner 87\] 
-GEOTEX:  generation of descrip- 
tive texts for geometric onstructions 
\[Kehl 86\] 
Although the basic design of the generator 
\[R5sner 86b\] proved to be flexible enough and 
could remain untouched each of these appli- 
cations has led to additional features of the 
whole system. 
4.1 MT app l i ca t ions  
4.1.1 Title translation 
In the first application of the system we 
started from semantic representations derived 
from titles of Japanese papers in the field of 
information technology. Titles are in most 
cases noun groups. In order to generate Ger- 
man equivalents we had to provide the proto- 
type primarily with knowledge about German 
noun group structures. On the other hand, 
for many of these semantic structures clausal 
forms were possible as well. We therefore pro- 
vided the system with "stylistic" switches that 
allowed the alternative generation of clauses 
from case frames as well. 
27 
4.1.2 MT for doctor/patient communica- 
tion 
The sample of semantic structures in this ex- 
periment was taken from doctor/patient com- 
munication. 
The semantic structures produced 
by CMU's parsers for Japanese and English 
are basically case frames, but include syntac- 
tic information as well (e.g. about :MOOD 
or :TIME). The fragment of German gener- 
able by the SEMSYN system was extended by 
yes/no-questions and imperatives. 
An example: 
English input to CMU's parser: 
"i have a pain in the throat" 
Semantic structure as input to SEMSYN: 
(*HAVE'A'SYHPTOH 
:HO00 DEC 
:AGENT (*PATIENT 
:HUHAN + :PRO 1 :NUHBER SG 
:PERSON 1) 
:TIHE PRESENT 
:SYHPTOH (*PAIN 
:LOCATION 
(*BOOY-PART :NAHE *THROAT))) 
German generation: 
"Ich habe Schmerzen im Rachen." 
4.1.3 EUROTRA-D/SEMSYN experiment 
In order to support he EUROTRA-D group, 
we ran this experiment: 
A sample of semantic structures as 
proposed for use within ECIROTRA 
\[Steiner 86\] should serve as input to 
our generator. 
This experiment was interesting under var- 
ious aspects: 
? The semantic representation used is based 
on systemic grammar; since the classes 
used are already hierarchically structured 
it was relatively easy to implement them 
as a FLAVOR hierarchy of realization 
classes. 
? The sample of semantic structures was 
chosen to cover the complete list of Ger- 
man sentential types from a textbook 
\[Helbig, Buscha 86\]. In order to be able 
to generate all of these surface forms we 
had to further enrich the generable frag- 
ments with e.g. 
- infinitival complements 
- genitive objects 
- subject and object clauses. 
4.2 Text  generat ion  
4.2.1 SEMTEX: Generation of news stories 
SEMTEX starts from mere labor market data, 
extract a list of semantic representations from 
them as "text plan" and then converts this list 
into texts like the following: 
"Die Zahl der Arbeitslosen in 
der Bundesrepublik Deutschland ist 
im Dezember spllrbar angestiegen. 
Sic hat yon 2210700 auf 2347100 
zugenommen. Die Arbeitslosenquote 
betrug Ende Dezember 9.4 Prozent. 
Sic hatte sich Ende Dezember des 
letzten Jahres auf 9.3 Prozent be- 
laufen. Der DGB hat erkllirt, er sehe 
in der Vergriil3erung der Arbeits- 
losenzahl ein negatives Zeichen." 
The main concern in implementing SEM- 
TEX has been to provide the SEMSYN gener- 
ator with mechanisms that keep track of pre- 
vious generation decisions thus creating a rep- 
resentation of the textual context built up by 
the already uttered sentences. This context is 
used: 
? to avoid repetition in wording, 
? to deliberately elide information still valid 
(e.g. about the time period concerned), 
? to decide on pronominalisation a d other 
types of reference. 
In addition a representation f the temporal 
context is used 
? to dynamically determine grammatical 
tense and 
? to produce appropriate natural language 
descriptions for the time units mentioned 
\[R6sner 86b\]. 
28 
4.2.2 GEOTEX: Verbalizing objects and 
operations 
In the GEOTEX application the SEMTEX 
text generator is combined with a tool for 
interactively creating geometric onstructions 
\[Kehl 86\]. The latter offers formal commands 
for manipulating (i.e. creating, naming and - 
deliberately - deleting) basic objects of Eu- 
clidean geometry. The generator is used to 
produce descriptive texts related to the geo- 
metric construction: 
? descriptions of the geometric objects in- 
volved, 
? descriptions of the sequence of steps done 
during a construction. 
Verbalizing the course of a construction: 
When GEOTEX is describing the course of 
a construction in a concise and coherent ext it 
starts from the sequence of commands of the 
geometry language. Let us look at an example: 
(PUN SA 15 10) 
(PUN $B 20 7) 
(KRE $K $8 $A) 
Each of these commands in turn causes 
GEOTEX 
? to update the associated FLAVOR repre- 
sentation for the domain, 
? to display (if possible) the objects on the 
screen (in this case: point $A with co- 
ordinates (15, 10), point $B with coordi- 
nates (20, 7), circle $K with center $B and 
through $A), 
? to create a message from the operation and 
give it as input to SEMTEX. 
SEMTEX renders this information in the 
order given. For the example this resulted in 
the following text: 
"Ich zeichne den Punkt Sa (15/10) 
ein." 
(I draw point Sa (15/10).) 
"Und den Punkt $b (20/7)." 
(And point Sb (20/7).) 
"Urn ihn schlage ich den Kreis $k 
durch $a." 
(Around it I draw Sk through Sa.) 
To achieve this result SEMTEX' context- 
handling mechanisms have been enriched: 
Elision is no longer restricted to adjuncts. 
For repetitive operations verb and subject 
will be elided in subsequent sentences (cf. 
the sentences 1and 2). 
The distinction between known informa- 
tion (i.e. known geometric objects) and 
new one (i.e. new objects created from 
known ones) is exploited to decide on 
constituent ordering: the constituent re- 
ferring to the known object is "topical- 
ized", i.e. put in front of the sentence (cf. 
sentence 3). 
In addition the system allows for more ways 
to refer to objects introduced in the text: 
pronouns, textual deixis using demonstrative 
pronouns ("dieser Punkt",this point), names. 
The choice is done deliberately: Pronouns are 
avoided if their use might create an ambigu- 
ity; reference by name is used when an object 
has not constantly been in focus and therefore 
has to be re-introduced. 
5 SEMSYN's  So f tware  Envi -  
ronment  
SEMSYN's generation system has been imple- 
mented on a SYMBOLICS lisp machine. Dur- 
ing the implementation we aimed at utilizing 
as much of the functionality of this machine 
in order to get optimal support for our work. 
We have built up an environment of linguis- 
tic and software tools that, though designed 
for our projects purposes, may be - at least in 
part - of interest for other projects in MT and 
CL in general. 2 
5.1 In ter face  too ls :  
This comprises all software that provides easy 
and comfortable communication with the sys- 
tem (even for casual users). 
SEMSYN's user interface is centered around 
SEMNET-GRAPHICS,  a tool for visualiz- 
ing semantic nets - the starting point of 
the generation - as mouse-sensitive graph- 
ics \[R6sner 86b\]. The graphical represen- 
tation is embedded in an interface "frame" 
2 These tools are best illustrated by an interactive demo. 
29 
\[Weinreb, Moon 81\] whose "panes" are dis- 
playing various intermediate structures - de- 
pending on the users chosen "frame configu- 
ration" - and the generation result. 
5.2 Experimentation tools: 
These tools extend the capabilities of the user 
interface and are intended to enable and sup- 
port experiments with the system. 
SEMNET-EDIT is a tool for experimenting 
the generator by interactively editing semantic 
nets \[Kehl 85\]: 
? modification of given semantic nets 
? creation of semantic nets from scratch 
? generation of German from created or 
modified semantic nets and/or their sub- 
nets. 
Experimentation tools of this type are not only 
useful for purposes of debugging and system 
improvement but proved as well to be very 
helpful as comfortable means for introduction 
into the system's capabilities and limitations. 
5 .3  Lex icon  too ls :  
In every realistic application dictionaries play 
an important role as body of linguistic knowl- 
edge; the need for support in maintaining and 
updating them seems obvious. 
SEMSYSTEM uses two types of dictionar- 
ies: A single German root form dictionary 
(with morpho/syntactic nformation) for the 
generator front end and so-called "realization 
dictionaries", that relate semantic symbols to 
German lexical items (root forms of verbs, 
nouns, adjectives . . . .  ) and that may vary for 
different applications of the generator. For 
both types of lexica there are window- and 
menu-based tools for maintenance. 
6 Prospects :  F rom mono-  to  
multi l ingual generation 
6.1 Teach ing  Eng l i sh  to  the  sys tem 
In a recent experiment 3 we changed and ex- 
tended our generator system in such a way that 
3This work is done in collaboration with Odyssey Re- 
search Associates, Ithaca, N.Y. 
- using the same representation for the differ- 
ent domains - the texts of SEMTEX and GEO- 
TEX may be produced in English as well. 
A system produced example text from the 
newspaper application: 
Increase in the number of unem- 
ployed. 
NURNBERG/BONN (cpa) DECEM- 
BER 5,85. The number of unem- 
ployed in West Germany has in- 
creased slightly during November. 
It has increased from 2148800 by 
61900 to 2210700. At the end 
of November the unemployment rate 
had a value of 8.8 percent. At the 
end of the year-ago period it had 
a value of 8.7 percent. Gerd Muhr, 
the speaker of the DGB, declares, it 
sees a bad sign in the increase in the 
number of unemployed. 
French will be the next target language; we 
have started to prepare the morphological and 
syntactic data for such an experiment. 
6 .2  Re la ted  work  
There is more recent work in "multilingual 
generation" from data: 
RAREAS, a system synthesizing weather 
forecasts from data provided by meteo- 
rologists \[Kittredge t al. 86\] is currently 
being equipped with French as second 
target language. 
Kukich's ANA, a system generating En- 
glish stock market reports from Dow 
Jones data \[Kukich 83\], has a second 
tongue as well: The generation of French 
bulletins has been possible by replacing 
ANA's "linguistic module" with a French 
version - called FRANA \[Contant 86\] - 
while leaving ANA's other modules un- 
touched (i.e. Fact Generator, Message 
Generator, Discourse Organizer). 
6 .3  Why mul t i l i ngua l  generat ion?  
6.3.1 Aspects of application: 
Generation of natural anguage texts in differ- 
ent languages (and probably different styles) 
from the same knowledge base might be an 
30 
interesting alternative to human or machine 
translation of these texts. 
Re-Generation (of e.g. software manuals 
or maintenance handbooks) in different lan- 
guages might be much more economic than 
manually "updating" those texts when the un- 
derlying knowledge base changes. 
6.3.2 Aspects of implementation: 
Multilingual generation enforces the separa- 
tion of generator knowledge into language de- 
pendent data and language independent ma- 
chinery. 
In order to keep a generator easily portable 
to other languages the implementor will have 
to allow as much declarativity as possible. 
6.3.3 Aspects of linguistic theory: 
Work in multilingual generation from seman- 
tic representations may be seen as an exercise 
in contrastive linguistics: 
A central issue for any generator starting from 
semantic structures i the choice of an appro- 
priate syntactic structure for the expression of 
a given meaning structure. 
What are the differences and correspondencies 
between the different target languages with 
respect o this choice? (E. g. Focus may be 
expressed by constituent order in German, in 
English you may have to choose a passive.) 
Similarly. 
What are the differences between the tar- 
get languages with respect to the seman- 
tic features that are obligatory in order to 
be able to produce surface text? (E.g. 
In the Japanese/German MT application we 
were confronted with the fact that the se- 
mantic structures derived from Japanese did 
not contain semantic information about in/- 
definiteness or multiplicity.) 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: 
The SEMSYN project is funded by the West 
German Ministry for Research and Technol- 
ogy (BMFT). The project is currently cooper- 
ating with partners from Japan (University of 
Kyoto; NTT Basic Research Laboratories) and 
USA (International Center for MT at CMU). 
We have to thank all partners for their support. 
The SEMSYN system is the joint effort of a 
variety of people. Special thanks to M. Emele 
(Stuttgart) for his work on the front end gen- 
erator, to W. Kehl (Stuttgart) for his imple- 
mentation of GEOTEX and the editor for se- 
mantic nets and to O. Rambow (Ithaca, N.Y.) 
for our joint experiment to teach English to 
the system. 
A note on implementation and demonstration 
The SEMSYN generator and the applications 
as described in this paper are fully imple- 
mented and run in ZetaLISP and FLAVORS 
on SYMBOLICS lisp machines. We would like 
to demonstrate he system at the conference. 
References 
\[Contant 86\] Contant, C. "Generation automa- 
tique de texte: application au sous- 
language boursier", M.A. thesis, Dept. de 
Linguistique, Univ. de Montreal, 1986. 
\[Emele 86\] Emele, M. "FREGE - Entwick- 
lung und lmplementierung eines objek- 
torientierten FRont-End-GEnerators fffr 
das Deutsche", Diplomarbeit, Institut f fr  
Informatik, Uni Stuttgart, 1986. 
\[Heid, R6sner, Weck 87\] Heid, U.; 
RSsner, D.; Weck, B.: 'Das EUROTRA- 
D/SEMSYN-Experiment: Generierung 
deutscher S5tze aus semantischen Repr~i- 
sentationen', in: Tillmann, H.G.; Will6e 
(Hrg.):"Analyse und Synthese gesproch- 
ener Sprache", (Hildesheim: Olms), 1987. 
\[Helbig, Buscha 86\] Helbig, G.; Buscha, J.: 
"Deutsche Grarnmatik. Ein Handbuch fh'r 
den Ausl~nderunterricht", Leipzig, 1986. 
\[Kehl 85\] Kehl, W.: "Erweiterung der 
graphischen Schnittstelle des SEMSYN-  
Projekts", Studienarbeit, Insitut ffir In- 
formatik, Univ. Stuttgart, 1985. 
\[Kehl 86\] Kehl, W.:"GEOTEX - Ein System 
zur Verbalisierung geometrischer Kon- 
struktionen', Diplomarbeit, Institut fiJr 
Informatik, Univ. Stuttgart, 1986. 
\[Kempen 87\] Kempen, G. (Ed.): "Natural 
language generation: New results in Ar- 
tificial Intelligence, Psychology and Lin- 
guistics", Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht/Boston, 1987. 
31 
\[Kittredge etal. 86\] Kittredge, 
R., A. Polguere, E. Goldberg: " Syn- 
thesizing Weather Forecasts from format- 
ted Data", in: COLING-86, Proceedings, 
Bonn, August 1986. 
\[Kukich 83\] Kukich, K. "Design and Imple- 
mentation of a Knowledge-Based Report 
Generator", ACL Annual Meeting, Pro- 
ceedings, 1983. 
\[McDonald 83\] McDonald, D.D. 
"Natural Language Generation as a Com- 
putational Problem: an introduction", in: 
Brady & Berwick (eds.) "Computational 
Models of Discourse", MIT Press, 1983. 
\[McDonald et al 87\] McDonald,D.D., 
J.D. Pustejovsky, M.M. Vaughan "Fac- 
tors contributing to efficiency in natural 
language generation", in: \[Kempen 87\] 
\[R6sner 86a\] RSsner, D.:~Vhen Mariko talks 
to Siegfried - Experiences from 
a Japanese~German Machine Translation 
Project", in: COLING-86, Proceedings, 
Bonn, August 1986. 
\[RSsner 86b\] RSsner, D.: "Ein System zur 
Generierung yon deutschen Texten aus 
semantischen Reprdsentationen", Disser- 
tation, Institut f. Informatik, Univ. 
Stuttgart, 1986. 
\[RSsner 87\] R6sner, D.: "The automated news 
agency: the SEMTE,Y text generator for 
German", in: \[Kempen 87\] 
\[Steiner 86\] Steiner, E.: "Generating Se- 
mantic Structures in EUROTRA-D' ,  in: 
COLING-86, Proceedings, Bonn, August 
1986. 
\[Tomita, Carbonell 86\] Tomita, M. & 
J. Carbonell: "Another Stride Towards 
Knowledge-Based Machine Translation", 
in: COLING-86, Proceedings, Bonn, 
August 1986. 
\[Weinreb, Moon 81 \] Weinreb, D. & Moon, D.: 
"LISP machine manual, MIT, 1981. 
32 
