TIC : PARSING INTERESTING TEXT. 
David Allport 
School o/Cognitive Sciences 
University of Sussex, 
Falmer, 
Brighton BN1 9QN 
davida%ulc ,,c.mssex.cvaxa@cs -clac ad? 
ABSTRACt  
This paper gives an overview of the natural  
language problems addressed in the Traffic 
Information CoHator/Condenscr (TICC) pro-  
jeer, and describes in some detai l  the 
"interesting-corner parser" used in the TICC's 
Natural  Language Summariser. The TICC is 
designed to take free text input describing 
local traffic incidents, and automatical ly  out-  
put local traffic information broadcasts for 
motorists in appropriate geographical areas. 
The "interesting-corner parser uses both syn-  
tactic and semantic information, represented 
as features in a unification-based grammar, to 
guide its bi-directional search for significant 
phrasal groups. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The overal l  goal of the TICC project is 
to show the potential  benefits of automati -  
cal ly broadcasting local traffic information. 
Our target system, dealing with traffic 
incidents in the Sussex area, is to be com- 
pleted by September 1989. The project forms 
part of the A lvey Mobile Information Sys- 
tems large-scale Demonstrator. 
The Natural  Language Summariser com- 
ponent of this system is being developed at 
Sussex University. Its function is to accept 
a series of free text messages describing 
traffic incidents, and to extract from these 
messages any information that might be 
relevant for broadcast o other motorists. 
The Natural  Language Summariser is 
designed to work in a restricted domain, and 
only needs to solve a subset of the problems 
of text understanding. The TICC's output 
messages are short and very simple assem- 
blies of canned text, posing no significant 
natural language generation problems. Our 
main concern is that the messages hould be 
useful to motorists, i.e that they be rel iable 
indications of the state of the roads at the 
time they are broadcast. 
Programs such as METEO \[Chevalier et 
al. 1978\] have demonstrated that in a res- 
tr icted domain with a restricted sub-language, 
automatic information broadcasts can be use- 
fuL Programs such as FRUMP \[De Jong 
1979, De Jong 1982\] have also demonstrated 
that expectation-driven analysers can often 
successful ly capture the gist of free text. 
However, the top-down depth-f irst 
confirmation of expectations based on sketchy 
scripts, ignoring most of the input structure, 
can lead to serious misinterpretat ions \[Ries- 
beck 82\]. Our concern for accuracy of 
interpretation has led us to a processing stra- 
tegy in which the Natura l  Language Sum- 
mariser analyses the input text at a far 
greater level of detai l  than is given in the 
output messages, so the system "knows more" 
about the traffic incidents it is describing 
than it says in its broadcasts. Our parser 
uses both syntactic and semantic information 
to guide its search for phrases in the input 
that might be direct ly or indirect ly relevant 
to motorists, and explores alternat ive possible 
interpretations bottom-up using an active 
chart \[Farley 1970, Kay 1973\]. 
This is an ongoing research project, and 
we do not claim to have solved al l  the 
problems involved in developing a successful 
system yet. The current paper considers the 
part icular natural  language problems we are 
addressing and describes the "interesting- 
corner parser" that has been implemented in 
the prototype system. 
2. THE NATURAL LANGUAGE 
SUMMARISER'S TASK 
2.1 INPUT: Our input data comes from 
the Sussex Police, who have a computer sys- 
tem for storing the text of incoming traffic 
messages from a var iety of sources (eg. 
patrol  cars, emergency services, motoring 
organisations). An example of the style of 
this text, derived from real input but with 
names etc. changed, is given in fig.1. 
The series of messages dealing with a 
211 
single incident continues over a number of 
hours, depending on the severity of the 
incident, and the TICC can afford to spend 
up to one minute analysing an average 
length message. ALl aspects of the police 
management of the incident are described, 
and many of the messages are only 
indirectly relevant to motorists. For example, 
if one of the vehicles involved in an 
accident needs a total l i ft to remove it from 
the road, the l ikely delay time given in the 
broadcast message may be longer, although 
the need for the total l i ft  wilt  not itself be 
mentioned in the broadcast. Much of the 
input is completely uninteresting for the 
TICC's purposes, such as details of injuries 
sustained by people involved, or of which 
police units are dealing with the incident. 
There is a great variety in prose style, 
from the "normal" to the highly telegraphic, 
but there is a strong tendency towards the 
abbreviated. It is a non-tr iv ial  task to 
correctly identify the lexical items in the 
text. Parts of the input string which are not 
recognised as entries in the Summariser's lex- 
icon (or regular derivations from entries) 
may be of four types: 
i) Names, numbers etc, which may be 
recognised as such from the context (e.g pc 
humphr ies  requesta .... ford cortina reg 
ABC123). 
ii) Other English words not in the lexi- 
con, which cannot rel iably be predicted to be 
proper names (e.g hovis  /orry b/dwn o/s bull's 
head ph). 
Misspellings of items in the lexicon. 
iv) Non-standard abbreviations of known 
words or phrases. 
Abbreviations are not always of "canoni- 
cal" form, and may be derived from com- 
plete words in three different ways, as fol- 
lows: 
i) Single morpheme roots: These usu- 
al ly have more than one possible abbreviated 
form and never include punctuation eg. gge, 
grg or gar for garage. But some words do 
have canonical abbreviations (eg ~-d for road 
and st for street (or saint). 
LD Mu l t i -morpheme roots: These often 
take only the first letter from the first root 
morpheme, and then either part or all of the 
second morpheme. They occasionally include 
slash punctuation eg. cway, c /way for car- 
rlageway, recycle, m/c  for trmtorcycle, o/s for 
outalde (or offside), and ra for roundabout. 
Sequences / phrases: Some sequences 
of words have canonical abbreviations (e.g 
bbc and not  britbrdcrp). Canonical examples 
seen in Fig. 1. below include rta for road 
traffc accident and oic for officer in charge. 
Non-canonical sequences may have a 
variety of abbreviations for each of the con- 
stituent words, and may or may not have 
slash or period punctuation, eg. f /b  for rite 
brigade, eamb or eaamb for east (sussex) ambu- 
lance, hazchem for hazardous chemicals. 
The problem is compounded for the 
TICC by the fact that the input we receive 
is all in upper case, hence the even the con- 
vention of distinguishing proper name abbre- 
viations by upper case is not applicable. In 
order to cope with these different types of 
input string, we need not only a "phrasal 
lexicon* as advocated by Becket \[Becket 
1975\], but also an *abbreviation lexicon". 
T/mei 1634 LocatWn: scaynes hill, haywards heath 
1634 rta serious near top scaynes hill persons trapped rqst esamb f /b  1/2 mile 
south Jw freshfleld rd. 
1638 fm pc 123 acc Inv reqd poss black oic pc 456 
1639 fire and arab en route 
1642 req total l i f t  for saloon car rota garage 
1654 eamb now away from scene 
1655 freshfleld bodyshop on way 
1657 fm pc 456 req rd closed n and s of hill st crnr 
1658 req two traft units to assist re closures 
1709 can we inform brighton 1234 tell mr fred smith will be late due to th/s rta 
1715 local authority required loose paving stones 
1723 fm pc 234 at st george's hosp. dr in charge having examlued mr jones now 
feels thls is not likely to be a black- driver of lorry has arrived, wil l  
probably be released after treatment for cuts. car 45 will be free from ._ 
hesp in about 20 rain 
Fig. 1. An  extract from an example (:ctltlc~s) incident log. 
212 
Our aim is to have a unified process for 
identifying idiomatic or fixed phrases and 
abbreviated sequences as in iJJ) above, so that 
for example as soon as pass, aaap and a.a.a.p. 
are all identified as the same "lexicaI item". 
Work on this is, however, at a prel iminary 
stage, and we have not yet found any gen- 
eral solution to the problem. 
2.2 SUMMARISATION: Deriving a short 
broadcast for motorists from a long series of 
messages uch as that in fig. 1 requires two 
main phases. First, the Natural Language 
Summariser must bui ld up a picture of what 
is happening at the scene of the incident. 
Second, a Tactical Inferencer must decide 
what motorists should be told regarding the 
incident. 
The Natural Language Summarising pro- 
cess also requires two phases. In the first 
phase a Message Analyser extracts interesting 
information from a single message. In the 
second phase an Event Recogniser puts 
together the information from a series of 
messages to bui ld up a description of the 
incident as a whole, or rather those aspects 
of the incident relevant to other motorists 
(see fig 2. below). 
The Message Analyser does not bui ld a 
complete representation of the syntax and 
semantics of messages uch as those at 1709 
and 1723 in fig. 1 above, since they have no 
bearing on the progress of the traffic incident 
as far as other motorists are concerned. It 
just searches for phrases describing "interest- 
ing" events. These fall into two classes: 
P r imary  Events: Such as vehicles 
blocking the road, substances spilling onto 
the road, all or part of the road being 
closed, diversions being put into operation, 
garage coming to remove vehicles from the 
road, services like fire brigade and county 
council removing hazards, etc. 
The input messages rarely describe these 
events in full,  so the Event Recogniser must 
infer, for example, that if the local council 
has been called out to remove debris from 
the road, that at some time earlier debris 
must have fal len on the road. 
Secondary  Events:  These include 
requests that some of the pr imary events 
should happen, and people being informed 
that primary events have happened are hap- 
pening or wil l  happen. 
We wiLt not have any model of the 
beliefs of the various agents involved in 
incident handling. As far as the TICC 
Natural Language Summariser is concerned, 
the meaning of someone being informed that 
a pr imary event has happened is equivalent 
to the statement hat it has happened. But 
the Tactical Inferencer wi l l  use its model of 
the typical progress of traffic incidents to 
predict the significance of the pr imary events 
for other motorists. For example, if a vehicle 
is stated to need a front suspended tow, 
then the Tactical Inferencer wi l l  predict that 
a certain amount of time wi l l  elapse before 
the vehicle is towed away. 
2.3 OUTPUT: Not every message input 
to the system wil l  produce an update to the 
Event Recogniser's description of the incident, 
because the Message Analyser may fail to 
find a description of an interesting event. 
But even when the Event Recogniser passes a 
description of a traffic incident to the Tacti- 
cal Inferencer, this wil l  not necessarily result 
in a broadcast. For example, the Event 
Recogniser may recognise a series of messages 
as describing a traffic light failure incident. 
The Tactical Inferencer may decide to broad- 
cast a message about this incident if it has 
occurred on a busy main road in the rush 
hour, but not if it has occurred late at night 
in a smaU village. 
Free Text 
Messages ~Message 
I Road/Junction Database I 
Analyser )----~ <Event Recogniser )------~<Taczical inferencer ) 
I Incident Description Database I I Incident Database I 
Messages for 
Broadcaster 
Flg. 2. Part of  the TICC system, showing Message Anal~ser, 
Event Recogniser, and Tactical Inflerencer. 
213 
The domain knowledge used in the the 
Tactical Inferencer is non-l inguistlc, and con- 
cerns inferences about the l ike ly  t ime delays 
for different types of incident, the geographi- 
cal areas l ike ly  to be affected by  a given 
incident, etc. The Transport  and Road 
Research Laboratory,  part  of the Department 
of Transport,  are assisting us in the develop- 
ment of rules for this part  of the system. 
There are other components of the TICC 
system which we do not detaU in this paper, 
such as the graphical interface, via a map of 
the Sussex area, to a database of of current 
traffic incidents. A l though the TICC is 
designed to send its messages to a dedicated 
broadcasting system, the actual broadcasting 
aspect of the project is the responsibi l i ty of 
RACAL research, one of our other A lvey  
coIlaborators. In our current prototype sys- 
tem, implemented on a Sun-3 workstat ion,  
broadcasts to local geographical areas in 
Sussex are simulated, and the Tactical 
Inferencer is extremely simple. 
3 . I1V I 'E~ING CORNER PARSING 
The parser that has been implemented 
for the Message Analyser  searches bidirection- 
a l ly  for aU syntactic parses associated with 
semanticaUy interesting parts of the input. 
Before describing the search strategy in more 
detail,  we need to c lar i fy  what  a syntactic 
parse looks l ike in our grammar formalism, 
and how we specify what  is semantical ly 
interesting. 
3.1 THE GRAMMAR FORMALISM:  We 
use a unification-based grammar formal ism, 
with rules that look similar to context-free 
phrase-structure rules. Both immediate domi-  
nance and constituent ordering information 
are specified by the same rule, rather than 
by separate statements as in FUG \[Kay 
1985\], LFG \[Kaplan & Bresnan 1982\] and 
GPSG \[Gazdar et at 1985\]. Feature-passing 
between categories in rules is done expl ic i t ly 
with logical variables, rather than by con- 
ventions such as the HFC and FFP in GPSG 
\[Gazdar et al1985\]. Thus the rule format is 
most similar to that used in DCG's \[PereLra 
& Warren 1980\]. Categories in rules are 
feature/value trees, and at each level the 
value of a feature may itself be another 
feature/value tree. Feature values may be 
given logical names, and occurrences of 
feature values having the same logical name 
in a rule must unify.  
The feature trees which constitute 
categories in our grammar may specify both 
syntactic and semantic features, so that we 
can wr i te "syntactic" rules which also iden- 
t i fy  the semantic types of their constituents. 
For example, if  we use the feature sf on 
categories to specify a tree of semantic 
features for that category, then the rule: 
(1) vp=(s f :VSF) - -> v=(sf=(patient:P):VSF),  
n I~(sf :P)  
says that a verb phrase may consist of a 
verb fol lowed by  a noun phrase, and that 
the semantic features on the noun phrase 
( label led t)) must un i fy  with the semantic 
features specified as the value of the patient 
sub-feature of the verb's semantic features, 
and addi t ional ly  that  the semantic features 
on the whole verb phrase ( label led VSF) 
must un i fy  wi th  the (complete tree of) 
semantic features on the verb. 
By adding domain-specif ic semantic 
feature information to lexical categories, we 
gain the power of domain-specif ic semantic 
grammars, which have been shown to be suc- 
cessful for handl ing i l l - formed input in l im-  
ited domains \[Burton 1976\]. But because we 
use unification by extension as the basic cri-  
terion for node admissabi l i ty  when we test 
for rules to licence local trees, we can also 
capture generalisations about syntactic 
categories that are not domain-specific. So for 
example if we had a verb-phrase rule such 
as (2) and a lexical entry  as in (3): 
(2) vp - ->  vffi(trftrans), np 
(3) close vffi(trffi(trans), 
sf=(event type=road_c losure,  
agentfservice, 
patientffiroadlocation)) 
then the verb feature tree specihed in (2) 
would uni fy  with the verb feature tree in 
(3). Hence close can be treated both as a 
domain specific verb and as an instance of 
the general class of transit ive verbs. 
Using a feature-based semantic grammar 
therefore gives us a compact representation of 
both domain independent and domain-specific 
information in a single uni form formal ism. 
Syntactic generalisations are captured by  
rules such as (2), and domain-specif ic sub- 
categorisation information is expressed in 
feature-trees as in (3), which states that close 
has the semantic features of a road-closure 
event, expecting an agent wi th  the semantic 
features of a service (eg police) and a patient 
with semantic features indicating (a part  of) 
a road. As with al l  sub-languages, our 
214 
lexicon also includes domain-specific meanings 
for part icular lexical items, eg. black mean- 
ing rata/  (cp messages at 1638 and 1723 in 
fig. 1 above). 
3.2 A GRAMMAR FOR THE TICC 
DOMAIN: Writ ing a grammar to give ade- 
quate coverage of the input that our system 
must handle is a lengthy task, which wi l l  
continue over the next two years. However, 
analysis of a corpus of data from police logs 
of over one hundred incidents in the Sussex 
area, and tr ials with experimental grammars, 
have led us to adopt a style of grammar 
which we expect wi l l  remain constant as the 
grammar expands. 
We do not attempt to map telegraphic 
forms onto "fuLly grammatical" English forms 
by some variant of constraint relaxation 
\[Kwasny & Sondheimer 1981\]. We s imply 
have a grammar with fewer constraints. This 
is because it is not a lways easy to decide 
what is missing from an el l iptical sentence, 
or which constraints should be relaxed. Con- 
sider for example the message at 1655 from 
fig. 1, repeated here: 
(4) freshfield bodyshop on way  
It is not at al l  clear what  the "full" senten- 
t im form of this message ought to be, since 
it might also have been phrased as one of: 
(5.1) freshfield bodyshop is on the way 
(5.2) freshfield bodyshop is on its way  
(5.3) freshfield bodyshop are on the way 
(5.4) freshfield bodyshop are on their way 
Each of the (5.1)-(5.4) must be al lowed 
to be grammatical  (and each might occur in 
our type of input), since noun phrases nam- 
ing corporate entities can regular ly be 
regarded as singular or p lural  (cp. Ford 
Motors has announced massive profits ... vs. 
Ford Motors have announced massive profits). 
But in each case the semantic representation 
that the Message AnMyser must bui ld only 
needs to represent the fact that the garage 
called freshfield bodyshop are going some- 
where (which the Event Recogniser wi l l  
expect to be the scene of the incident, in 
order to remove the damaged vehicle). Since 
the distinctions between the syntactic forms 
in these examples is irrelevant for our pur-  
poses, it would be a waste of the parser's 
effort to introduce search and inference prob- 
lems in the attempt to map the syntax of 
(4) uniquely into the syntax of one or other 
of the forms in (5). Indeed it is more 
appropriate for our purposes to regard on 
way as a domain-specific idiomatic phrase, 
equivalent to ?n route, entre etc (each of 
which occur in s imilar contexts). 
In keeping wi th  this approach to i l l -  
formedness, our grammar contains many 
categories (ie feature-trees), that would  not 
be recognised as syntactic categories in gram- 
mars for normal  English, eg. we have special 
rules for phrases containing predicted unk-  
nowns such as names, car registration 
numbers, etc. Our parser is looking for 
phrases describing events rather than sen- 
tences, and we wi l l  not necessari ly a lways 
assign a structure with a single "S" label 
spanning aH the input message. 
As we noted in 3.1 above, the lexical 
entries for words that suggest interesting 
events include trees of semantic features that 
specify expected fillers for various roles in 
these events. These feature trees provide 
selectional restrictions useful for guiding the 
parse, but do not themselves constitute the 
"semantics" of the lexical entries. The 
semantics are represented as f irst-order logical 
expressions in a separate field of the lexical 
entry, and representations of the meaning of 
phrases are bui l t  using semantic rules associ- 
ated with each syntactic rule, as phrases are 
completed in the bottom-up parse. 
3.3 THE SEARCH STRATEGY: 
Interesting-corner parsing is basical ly an 
adaptation of bottom-up chart parsing to 
al low is land-driving through the input string, 
whi lst  st i l l  parsing each indiv idual  rule uni-  
directionaUy. This gives a maximal ly  
efficient parse for our goal of re l iably 
extracting from the input aU and only the 
information that is relevant to other motor-  
ists. This form of expectation-driven parsing 
differs from that used in earl ier script-based 
systems such as MARGIE \[Schank 1975\], ELI 
\[Riesbeck 1978\] and FRUMP in four ways: 
First, the interesting-corner parser uses 
an active chart to consider bottom-up al l  
interesting interpretations that might be given 
to an input message, rather than proceeding 
left to r ight and filtering out later (r ight) 
candidate interpretations on the basis of ear- 
l ier ( left) context. 
Second, if there are no interesting lexical 
items in the input string, or if the only 
interesting items occur at the (r ight) end of 
the input, there is no attempt to match aU 
the leftmost items to a series of candidate 
scripts or frames using top-down expecta- 
tions. 
215 
Third, the expectations themselves are 
expressed declarat ively in feature trees that 
form part of the lexical categories, which 
control the search via standard unification 
with declarative rules, where previous sys- 
tems used procedural "requests" in the lexi- 
con. 
Fourth, our parser bui lds an explicit  
syntactic tree for the input, albeit including 
semantic features, rather than by  bui lding a 
semantic representation "directly' .  
The interesting-corner parser checks the 
semantic features on every lexical item in 
the input to see if they are interesting, but 
this is a far faster operation than testing 
many times whether a series of lexical items 
matches the expectations f rom a top-down 
script. This does assume that the parser can 
identi fy what  the lexical items are, which is 
problematic as we noted in section 2.1 above. 
But as we shal l  see, the interesting-corner 
parser does use predictions about the presence 
of lexical items wi th  part icular  features in 
its search, and hence is in no worse a posi- 
tion than a str ict ly  top-down parser as 
regards matching expectations to i l l - formed 
lexical items. 
3~.1 UNIDIRECTIONAL ISLAND-  
DRIVING: Is land-dr iv ing is useful for text 
where one needs to start  f rom clear ly 
identifiable (and in our case, semantical ly 
interesting) parts of the input and extend the 
analysis f rom there to include other parts. 
But parsing ru les  bi -d irect ional ly  is 
inherently inefficient. Consider, for example, a 
chart parse of the input string a b given a 
single rule: 
c=> ab .  
A standard bottom-up left - to-r ight  active 
chart parse of this input would  create three 
nodes (1 a 2 b 3) two active edges (an 
empty one at node 1 and one f rom nodes 1 
to 2) and one inactive edge ( f rom node 1 to 
3). 
But a bi-directional parse, al lowing the 
rule to be indexed at any point, would bui ld 
a total of 7 active edges (one empty one at 
each node, and 2 pairs with one constituent 
found, bui l t  in different directions, ie 5 dis- 
t inct edges). It would  also bui ld the same 
inactive edge in two different directions. For 
a rule with three daughters, a bidirectional 
parse produces 14 active edges (9 of which 
are dist inct) and again 2 inactive edges. 
This redundancy in structure-bui ld ing 
can be removed by incorporating constituents 
into ru les  unidirect ional ly  whi lst  st i l l  parsing 
the text  bidirectionalAy. We do this by 
indexing each rule on either le f t -most  or 
r ight-most daughter,  and parsing in a unique 
direction away from the indexed daughter.  
In order to preserve completeness in the 
search, the chart must contain l ists of active 
and inactive edges for each direction of 
expansion, although the same structure can 
be shared in the inactive edge-l ists for both 
directions. The fundamenta l  rule of edge- 
combination must be augmented so that when 
an inactive edge is added to the chart, it 
combines wi th  any appropriate active edges 
at both of its ends. This process might be 
? m , called "indexed-corner pars ing ,  m that it 
effectively combines left-corner parsing and 
r ight-corner parsing, and the direction of 
parse at any stage s imply  depends upon how 
the indiv idual  grammar rules are indexed. 
The interesting-corner parser implements 
an indexed-corner chart  parser, wi th  the 
addit ion of an agenda control  mechanism and 
an indexing principle for grammar rules. 
3.3.2 AGENDA CONTROL: The insertion 
of edges into the agenda is constrained by  
the value of a "control-feature N, which 
specifies where to look in the feature-trees 
that constitute our categories in order to find 
the semantical ly ~interesting ~ features. In 
our examples (1) and (2) above, this 
control=feature is named sf. When a normal  
bottom-up chart parse begins, al l  lexical 
items are tested to see whether they can 
spawn higher edges. But in the interesting- 
corner parse, higher edges are only spawned 
from lexical items that have a control - feature 
specification which unifies wi th  a pre=defined 
init ial  value of the control feature. Thus by  
assigning (s f -event__ type)  to be the init ial  
value of the control feature, we ensure that 
only  those edges are entered into the agenda 
that have semantic feature trees that are 
extensions of this tree (eg the semantic 
feature tree for close in (3) above). This 
effectively means that parsing must  begin 
from words that suggest some k ind of 
interesting event. Note that the init ial  active 
edges may be proposed from any point in 
the input string, and their direction of 
expansion from that point is determined by 
the indexing on the rules. 
For al l  active edges proposed from lexi-  
cal items that were in i t ia l ly  recognised to be 
interesting, the parser checks the l ist of edges 
sought for "interesting" categories (ie. those 
with values for the control - feature sf). I f  
216 
there are any, it searches, in the direction of 
expansion for the current active edge, for 
any lexical items that have a semantic 
feature-tree which unifies with the new 
specification of what is "interesting'. 
For example, if the rule given in (1) 
above is indexed on the left daughter, and 
an active edge is proposed starting from an 
inactive edge representing the lexical item 
close defined as in (3) above, then via the 
logical name P the features on the noun- 
phrase being sought become instantiated to 
(sf -roadlocat ion).  The parser then looks 
rightwards in the input string for any lexical 
items having semantic feature trees that are 
extensions of this new tree. If it finds any, 
it predicts more active edges from there, and 
so forth. 
Fig. 3 below il lustrates the numerical 
order in which the interesting-corner parser 
incorporates nodes into the parse tree for a 
very simple "sentence" (in our grammar we 
allow sentences with deleted auxiliaries), but 
with the details of the feature trees omitted 
for legibility. 
Extension unification allows one of the 
structures to be unified (the target) to be an 
extension of the other (the pattern), but not 
vice-versa. This means that it is more res- 
tricted than graph unification, and hence can 
be implemented mote efficiently. It is less 
restricted than term unification, and hence 
less efficient at parse-time, but it does allow 
the grammar and lexicon to be far more 
compact than they would be with term- 
unification in the absence of a grammar pre- 
processor. However, using extension 
unification as the basic operation does also 
mean that that the unification of logical 
variables in rules is not order-independent, 
and hence we need an indexing principle to 
determine the direction in which particular 
rules should be parsed. 
3.3.3 THE INDEXING PRINCIPLF: Our 
general principle for indexing rules is that 
we must parse from categories that specify 
general information (ie. that have small 
feature-trees) to those that specify particular 
modifications of that general information (ie. 
that provide extensions to the smaller trees 
by unification). This usual ly means that we 
parse from syntactic heads to complements, 
eg indexing sentences on the vp (cf. HPSG 
\[Proudian & Pollard 1985\]). 
In our example rule (1), we index on 
the verb, because its expectations pecify the 
general semantic type of the object, and the 
semantic feature tree of the noun-phrase wi l l  
specify a sub-type of this general type, and 
therefore wiLt be an extension of the verb's 
patient semantic feature tree. In the example 
shown in fig 3, the semantic tree of the np 
built  at node 4 is: 
( s f - ( road locat ion - (name-hunt ingdon,  
r t i t le - lane) ) )  
which unifies by extension with the feature 
tree (sf - roadlocat ion)) ,  and this as we saw 
above became the expected semantic tree for 
the noun-phrase when rule (1) unified with 
the verb in (3). 
Final ly, rules for categories that have 
expected unknowns as daughters are always 
indexed on the known categories, even if 
these ate not the grammatical head (eg we 
index on the policeman's title for rules han- 
dling sgt smith, irtsp brown etc. and on the 
known title of a road for cases like hunting- 
don lane. markworthy avenue etc. 
3.3.4 EXTENSIONS TO THE CURRENT 
SYSTEM: There are many aspects of the 
TICC's Natural Language Summarisation ot 
dealt with in this paper, such as the seman- 
tic rules used in the Message Analyser and 
10 s 
7 poltitle unknown 8 
I I 
pc chisholm 
/ 
v l 
I 
closing 
5 
np ~ 4 
nl  
unknown 3 n 
I I 
huntingdon 
Fig. 3. Showing the order tn which the Interesting-corner parser 
conatructs a parse tree, starting with the mast interesting words. 
217 
the Event Recogniser. There are also many 
inadequacies in the current implementation of 
the Message Analyser, eg in its handling of 
abbreviations/phrases, and in the handling of 
input that is "ill-formed" even with respect 
to our relatively unconstrained grammar. 
However, work is currently in progress 
on these problems, and we believe that the 
basic mechanisms of interesting-corner parsing 
are sufficiently powerful to enable us to 
achieve a practical solution, whilst being 
sufficiently general to ensure that such a 
solution will be theoretically interesting. 
4.  CONCLUSION 
The automatic production of traffic 
broadcasts, given the type of free text we 
have described in this paper, poses many 
difficult problems. In many ways our overall 
approach to these problems follows in a long 
tradition of semantically driven systems, but 
the processing style of our Message Analyser 
is much closer to that used in contemporary 
syntax-driven systems. We make explicit use 
of rules in a unification-based grammatical 
formalism that express both semantic and 
syntactic information declaratively, and our 
interesting-corner parser provides a search of 
the input messages that is both thorough and 
efficient. 
We believe that complete understanding 
of free text messages is well beyond the 
state of the art in computational linguistics, 
but that we can nevertheless develop the 
TICC's Natural Language Summariser to have 
sufficient partial understanding to be practi- 
cally useful. 
REFERENCF~ 
Becket, J.D. (1975) *The Phrasal Lexi- 
con', in R. C. Schank and B. L. Nash- 
Webber (eds.), proceedings of the Workshop on 
Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Pro- 
cessing. Cambridge, Mass., Bolt, Beranek and 
Newman, pp. 70-73. 
Burton, R. (1976) "Semantic Grammar: an 
Engineering Technique for Constructing 
Natural Language Understanding Systems", 
Technical Report 3453, Cambridge, Mass., 
Bolt, Beranek and Newman. 
Chevalier, M., Dansereau, J., and Poulin, 
G. (1978) "TAUM-METEO: Description Du 
Systeme.', Montreed, Groupe TAUM, Univer- 
site de Montreal 
DeJong, G.F. (1979) *Skimming Stories in 
Real Time", Doctoral Thesis, New Haven, 
Yale University. 
DeJong, G.F. (1982) *An Overview of the 
FRUMP System', in Wendy O. Lehnert and 
Martin H. Ringle (eds.), Strategies for Natural 
Language Processing. Hillsdale, Erlbaum, pp. 
149-176. 
Earley, J. (1970) "An Efficient Context- 
free Parsing Algorithm", Communications of 
the ACM. vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 451-455. 
Gazdar, O., Klein, E., PuHum, G., and 
Sag, I. (1985) GeneraZlsed Phrase Strt~c~twe 
Grammar. Oxford, Blackwell. 
Kaplan, R., and Bresnan, J. (1982) "Lexi- 
cal Functional Grammar: a Formal System 
for Grammatical Representation', in Joan 
Bresnan (ed.), The Menta2 Representation of 
Grammatical Relations. Cambridge MA, MIT 
Press, pp. 173-281. 
Kay, M. (1973) "The MIND System', in 
Randall Rustin (ed.), Natural Language Pro- 
cessing. New York, Algorithmics Press, pp. 
155-188. 
Kay, M. (1985) "Parsing in Functional 
Unification Grammar", in David R. Dowty, 
Lauri Karttunen and Arnold M. Zwicky 
(eds.), Natural Language Parsing. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 251-278. 
Kwasny, S.C., and Sondheimer, N.K. 
(1981) "Relaxation Theories for Parsing Ill- 
formed Input', American \]~nnal of Computa- 
tional Linguistics. vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 99-108. 
Pereira, F.C.N., and Warren, D.H.D. 
(1980) *Definite Clause Grammars for 
Language Analysis - a Survey of the Formal- 
ism and a Comparison with Augmented 
Transition Networks", Artificial Intelligence. 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 231-278. 
Proudian, D., and PoLlard, C.J. (1985) 
"Parsing Head-driven Phrase Structure Gram- 
mar',  ACL Proceedings, 23rd Annual Meeting. 
pp. 167-171. 
Riesbeck, C.K. (1978) *An Expectation- 
driven Production System for Natural 
Language Understanding', in Donald A. 
Waterman and Rick Hayes-Roth (eds.), 
Pattern-directed Inference Systems. New York, 
Academic Press, pp. 399-414. 
Riesbeck, C.K. (1982) "Realistic Language 
Comprehension", in Wendy G. Lehnert and 
Martin H. Ringle (eds.), Strategies for Natural 
Language Processing. HHlsdale, Erlbaum, pp. 
37-54. 
Schank, R.C. (1975) Conceptual Informa- 
tion Processing. Amsterdam, North-Holland. 
218 
