XUXEN: A Spelling Checker/Corrector for 
Basque Based on Two-Level Morphology 
Agi r re  E. ,  A legr ia  I. ,  A r reg i  X., 
A r to la  X., D iaz  de I la r raza  A., 
Maritxalar M., Sarasola K. 
Informatika Fakultatea 
P.K.  649 
20080 DONOSTIA  (Basque Country - Spain) 
xabier@si.ehu.es 
Urkia M. 
U.Z .E . I .  
Aldapeta, 20 
20009 DONOSTIA  (Basque Country)  
Abslract 
The application of the formalism of two-level 
morphology to Basque and its use in the 
elaboration of the XUXEN spe l l ing  
checker/corrector aredescribed. This application is 
intended to cover a large part of the language. 
Because Basque is a highly inflected language, 
the approach of spelling checking and correction 
has been conceived as a by-product of a general 
purpose morphological analyzer/generator. This 
analyzer is taken as a basic tool for current and 
future work on automatic processing of Basque. 
An extension for continuation c lass  
specifications in order to deal with long-distance 
dependencies is proposed. This extension consists 
basically of two features added to the standard 
formalism which allow the lexicon builder to make 
explicit he interdependencies of morphemes. 
User-lexicons can be interactively enriched with 
new entries enabling the checker from then on to 
recognize all the possible flexions derived from 
them. 
Due to a late process of standardization f the 
language, writers don't always know the standard 
form to be used and commit errors. The treatment 
of these "typical errors" is made in a specific way 
by means of describing them using the two-level 
lexicon system. In this sense, XUXEN is intended 
as a useful tool for standardization purposes of 
present day written Basque. 
1 Inlroduclion 
This paper describes the application of two-level 
morphology to Basque, along with its use in the elaboration 
of the XUXEN spell ing checker/corrector.  The 
morphological analyzer included in XUXEN has been 
designed with the aim of laying the foundations for further 
development of automatic processing of Basque. The fact 
that Basque is a highly inflected language makes the 
correction of spelling errors extremely difficult because 
collecting all the possible word-forms in a lexicon is an 
endless task. 
The simplicity of English inflections made for reduced 
interest in research on morphological nalysis by computer. 
In English, the most common practice is to use a lexicon of 
all of the inflected forms or a minimum set of 
morphological rules (Winograd, 83). That means that while 
a great many language independent tools have been 
developed for syntactic and semantic analysis, the same 
cannot be said for morphological tools. In 1981, Kaplan and 
Kay (Kaplan et al, 81) made a valuable contribution in 
designing aformalism for phonological generation by means 
of rules compiled in an automaton. This idea would later be 
followed up by Koskenniemi (Koskenniemi, 83-85; 
Karttunen et al, 87) in the two-level formalism. The 
computational model for two-level morphology has found 
widespread acceptance in the following years due mostly to 
its general applicability, declarativeness of rules and clear 
separation of linguistic knowledge from the program. The 
essential difference from generative phonology is that there 
are no intermediate states between lexical and surface 
representations. Word recognition is reduced to finding valid 
lexical representations which correspond to a given surface 
form. Inversely, generation proceeds from a known lexical 
representation and searches for surface representations 
corresponding to it. The complexity of the model is studied 
in depth in (Barton, 85), who with few exceptions agrees 
with Karttunen (Karttunen, 83) in feeling that thc 
complexity of a language has no significant effects on the 
speed of analysis or synthesis. 
There have been many implementations of the two-level 
model for very different languages, ome of them taking a 
full coverage of the language: Finnish, English and Arabic 
among others. Our implementation is intended to cope 
extensively with present day Basque. 
XUXEN manages user-lexicons which can be 
interactively enriched during correction by means of a 
specially designed human-machine dialogue which allows 
the system to acquire the internal features of each new entry 
(sublexicon, continuation class, and selection marks). 
Moreover, XUXEN deals with errors often due to recent 
standardization f Basque. An additional lexicon includes 
alternative variants to the standard entries and additional rules 
119
model erroneous morphophonological hanges; this allows a 
specialized treatment of "typical errors". 
Following are given an overview of Basque morphology 
and the application of the two-level model to Basque, then 
the lexical database built as a support for this and other 
applications i described, and finally, the strategies followed 
in the design and implementation f the spelling checker- 
corrector. 
2 Brief Description of Basque Morphology 
Basque is an agglutinative language; that is, for the 
formation of words the dictionary entry independently takes 
each of the elements necessary for the different functions 
(syntactic ase included). More specifically, the affixes 
corresponding to the determinant, number and declension 
case are taken in this order and independently of each other 
(deep morphological structure). 
One of the principal characteristics of Basque is its 
declension system with numerous cases, which differentiates 
it from the languages from surrounding countries. The 
inflections of determination, umber and case appear only 
after the last element in the noun phrase. This last element 
may be the noun, but also typically an adjective or a 
determiner. For example: 
etxe zaharreAN (etxe zaharrean: in the old house) 
etxe: noun (house) 
zahar: adjective (old) 
r and e: epenthetical elements 
A: determinate, singular 
N: inessive case 
So, these inflectional elements are not repeated in each 
individual word of a noun phrase as in the Romance 
languages. 
Basque declension is unique; that is, there exists a single 
declension table for all flexionable ntries, compared to 
Latin for instance,which has 5 declension paradigms. 
As prepositional functions are realized by case suffixes 
inside word-forms, Basque presents a relatively high power 
to generate inflected word-forms. For instance, from one 
noun entry a minimum of 135 inflected forms can be 
generated. Moreover, while 77 of them are simple 
combinations of number, determination, and case marks, not 
capable of further inflection, the other 58 are word-forms 
ended with one of the two possible genitives or with a 
sequence composed of a case mark and a genitive mark. If 
the latter is the case, then by adding again the same set of 
morpheme combinations (135) to each one of those 58 
forms a new, complete set of forms could be recursively 
generated. This kind of construction reveals a noun ellipsis 
inside a complex noun phrase and could be theoretically 
extended ad infinitum; in practice, it is not usual to find 
more than two levels of this kind of recursion in a word- 
form but, in turn, some quite frequent forms contain even 
three or more levels. This means that a morphological 
analyzer for Basque should be able to recognize the amount 
of 77 + 58 ( 77 + 58 ( 77 + 58)) = 458683 inflected forms 
for each noun taking into account only these two levels of 
recursion. 
e.g. semeA 
semeArl 
semeArEN 
semeArEN etxeA 
semeArENA 
semeArENArl 
(the son) 
(to the son) 
(of the son) 
(the house of the son) 
(the one (house) of the son) 
(to the one (house) of the son) 
This generation capability is similar for aLl parts of 
speech. In the case of adjectives, due to the possibility of 
graduation, this capability is 4 times greater. 
The grammatical gender does not exist in Basque; there 
are not masculine and feminine. However, the verb system 
uses the difference sometimes, depending on the receiver and 
the grade of familiarity: this is the case of the allocutive 
verb forms. 
Verb forms are composed of a main verb and an auxiliary 
finite form. The verb system in Basque is a rich one: it is 
often found in a single finite verb form morphemes 
corresponding toergative, nominative and dative cases. 
Derivation and composition are quite productive and they 
are widely used in neologism formation. 
3 Application of Two-Level Morphology to 
Basque 
3.1 The Rules 
The correlations existing between the lexical level and the 
surface level due to morphophonological transformations are 
expressed by means of the rules. In the case of Basque 21 
two-level rules have been defined. These rules are due to the 
four following reasons: eminently phonological (7 rules), 
morphological (3 rules), orthographical (5 rules), and both 
phonological nd morphological (6 rules). The effects of the 
rules are always phonological. Given that suppletion cases 
are rare in Basque, phonemically unrelated allomorphs of the 
same morpheme are included in the lexicon system as 
separated entries. No rules deal with these phenomena. The 
rules are applied to express three types of realizations: adding 
or removing a character, or alternation of a character from 
the lexical to the surface level. These basic transformations 
can be combined. 
In order to control the application of the rules 17 
selection marks are used. Since two-level rules are sensitiVc 
only to the form of the word, these marks inform on part ol 
speech, special endings and other features needed for handlin~ 
exceptions in rules. 
Examples of rules: 
2nd rule: ADDITION OF EPENTHETICAL e. 
2:e  ?=~ \[ C:C / 8: / 6:r / 4: \] 
8th rule: VOICING OF t. 
t:d ?=> \[ i&2: l  / n&2:n  / n2:n \] 
where C represents any consonant, 2 is the selection marl 
stated at the beginning of affixes requiring epenthetical e, 1 
is the selection mark stated at the end of those lemmas witl 
final au diphthong, 6 is the selection mark stated at the em 
of those lemmas with final hard r, 4 is the selection marl 
120
stated at the end of verb infinitives with final n, and & is the 
selection mark stated at the end of place names with final 1 
or n which forces voicing of following t. 
The first rule states that the selection mark 2 is realized 
as surface , always and only when it is preceded either by a 
consonant or a selection mark 8, or a selection mark 6 
realized as surface r, or a selection mark 4. 
The second rule specifies the voicing of lexical t, always 
and only when it is preceded either by a n or I followed by 
the selection marks & and 2, or a n followed by the 
selection mark 2. 
At the moment, the translation of rules into automata 
required by the two-level formalism is made by hand. 
3.2 The Lexicon System 
Among the morphological phenomena handled by our 
system so far, we would like to emphasize the following: 
whole declension system --including place and person 
names, special declension of pronouns, adverbs, etc.--, 
graduation of adjectives, relational endings and prefixes for 
verb forms --finite and non-finite-- and some frequent and 
productive cases of derivation and compounding. 
The lexicon system is divided into sublexicons. Lexical 
representation is defined by associating each entry to its 
sublexicon and giving it the corresponding continuation 
class. 
a) Sublexicons: Lemmas, auxiliaries of verbs and finite 
verb forms, and different affixes corresponding to 
declension, determination, number, verb endings, and 
so on are distinguished. 
All of the entries in the sublexicons are coded with 
their continuation class and morphological 
information. At present near 15,000 items are 
completely coded in the lexicon system: 8,697 
lemmas, 5,439 verb forms and 120 affixes. They are 
grouped into 94 different sublexicons. Within short 
time, this number will be increased in order to code 
all the 50,000 entries present at the moment in the 
database supporting the lexicon. The entry code gives, 
when appropriate, information on part of speech, 
determination, number, declension case, gender 
(exceptional cases), relation (of subordination), part of 
speech transformation that a relational affix produces, 
type of verb, root of finite verb forms, tense-mood, 
grammatical person, etc. along with the specific 
information each entry requires. 
b) Continuation class: Generalizations are not always 
possible. For example, while with nouns and 
adjectives the assignment of a single continuation 
class to all of the elements of each category has been 
possible, adverbs, pronouns and verbs have required 
more particularized solutions. A number of 79 
continuation classes have been defined. 
The system permits the unlimited accumulation and 
treatment of information as it extracts data from the 
dictionary according to the segmentation found. This feature 
is essential to Basque given that: a) a large amount of 
morpho-syntactic knowledge can be derived from a single 
word-form, and b) there is no set theoretical limit to the 
potential recursion of genitives. 
Separated representation for homographs and homonyms 
-- in the main sublexicon, with the same or different 
continuation classes-- has been made possible. Although 
this distinction is not necessarily relevant o morphological 
analysis, future work on syntax and semantics has been 
taken into consideration. 
3.3 Some Problems and Possible Solutions 
Although until now, the notation and concept o f  
continuation class have been used, in authors' opinion it is 
the weakest point of the formalism. Specially in dealing 
with the Basque auxiliary verb, cases of long-distance 
dependencies that are not possible to express adequately have 
been found. Different solutions have been proposed to solve 
similar problems for other languages (Trost, 90; Schiller, 
90). The solution suggested below is not as elegant and 
concise as a word-grammar but it seems expressive enough 
and even more efficient when dealing with this kind of 
problems. To this end, an improved continuation class 
mechanism is being implemented. This mechanism supports 
the following two extra features: 
bans that can be stated altogether with a continuation 
class; they are used to express the set of continuation 
classes forbidden further along the word-form (from 
the lexical entry defined with this restricted 
continuation class). 
Examples: 
bait (PERTSONA - LA - N) 
this states that among the morphemes in the word- 
form following to the verb prefix bait  are to be 
allowed those belonging to the continuation class 
PERTSONA but also that further on in the word no 
morphemes belonging to the continuation classes LA 
or N will be accepted. 
continuat ion class-tree: the lexicon builder has 
the possibility of restricting the set of allowed 
continuation morphemes for a given one, by means 
of making explicit hese morphemes through different 
segments in the word-form; this explicitation is done 
by giving a parenthesized xpression representing a 
tree. This mechanism improves the expressiveness of 
the formalism providing it with the additional power 
of specifying constraints to the set of morphemes 
allowed after the lexicon entry, stating in fact a 
continuation "path" - -not restricted to the immediate 
morpheme-- which makes explicit that set in a 
conditioned way. 
Examples: 
joan NA TZAI 0 (I went to him) 
joan NA TZAI T * (I went to me*) 
etorri HA TZAI T (You came to me) 
etorri HA TZAI N * (You came to you* (fern.)) 
Long-distance dependency ases are found in the verb 
finite form instances above: the initial morpheme na 
121
(nominative, first person) allows dative morphemes 
corresponding to the third person after the morpheme 
tzai (root) but not those corresponding to the first 
person. Analogously the theoretically possible 
hatzain* is not grammatical in Basque because it 
combines two second person morphemes in 
nominative and dative cases. The continuation 
corresponding to na can be stated as follows: 
na (KI (DAT23 (N_KE)), TZAI (DAT23 (LAT))) 
which specifies two alternative continuation "paths" 
allowed after this morpheme: the one including the 
morphemes in the continuation class KI and that 
which includes those in the continuation class TZAI. 
In both cases DAT23 restricts the set of morphemes 
potentially permitted as continuation of those in KI 
or TZAI, allowing only the 2nd and 3rd person dative 
morphemes. Without this extension of the 
formalism, it would be possible to do it by storing 
repeatedly the morpheme tzai in two or more different 
lexicons, but this is not very useful when the distance 
between dependent morphemes i  longer. Similarly: 
ha (KI (DAT13 (N_KE)), TZA! (DAT13 (LAT))) 
is the way to express that ha (nominative, 2nd 
person) is to be combined with dative morphemes of 
1st and 3rd person but not with those of 2nd. 
Continuation classes N_KE and LAT further estrict 
the morphemes allowed conditioning them in this 
case to the classes KI and TZAI respectively. Note 
that in this example two different cases of long- 
distance dependency are present. 
4 The Lexical Database 
The lexical database is supported permanently in a relational 
system. This database is intended as an independent 
linguistic tool. Within this framework, information about 
the two-level exicon system is stored in three different 
relations. 
Each lexicon is mainly characterized by the 
susceptibility of its components o be the initial morpheme 
in a word-form and by whether or not they are of semantic 
significance. 
In another elation, continuation classes are defined in 
terms of lexicons or other continuation classes. It is 
possible to store examples as well. 
Finally, the main component of the database is the set of 
lexicons with their associate ntries: the two-level form of 
the entry is stored along with its original form, the source 
from which it has been obtained, examples, and in some 
cases (lemmas) the usage frequency. Obviously, the 
linguistic knowledge related to the entry is also stored in 
this relation. 
A user friendly interface allows the lexicon builder to do 
the operations of addition and updating of entries, 
consistency checking, etc. in a comfortable way. Selection 
marks depending on knowledge contained in the database 
such as part of speech, subcategorization f nouns, special 
endings for certain categories, etc. may be automatically 
derived from the information i  the base. 
The production of the up-to-date run-time lexicon and 
continuation class definitions in the format required by the 
two-level system is obtained automatically from this 
database by means of specially designed procedures. 
5 The Spell ing Checker /Cor~ctor  
The morphological nalyzer-generator is an indispensable 
basic tool for future work in the field of automatic 
processing of Basque, but in addition, it is the underlying 
basis of the spelling checker/corrector. The spelling checker 
accepts as good any word which permits a correct 
morphological breakdown, while the mission of the 
morphological analyzer is to obtain all of the possible 
breakdowns and the corresponding information. Languages 
with a high level of inflection such as Basque make 
impossible the storage of every word-form in a dictionary 
even in a very compressed way; so, spelling checking cannot 
be resolved without adequate treatment of words from a 
morphological standpoint. 
From the user's point of view XUXEN is a valid system 
to analyze documents elaborated by any word processor. It
operates at a usual speed and takes up reasonable amount of 
space, thus allowing it to work with any microcomputer. 
5.1 The Spelling Checker 
The basic idea of accepting words which have a correct 
morphological nalysis is fulfilled with classic techniques 
and tools for detecting spelling errors (Peterson, 80). A filter 
program appropriate for the punctuation problems, capital 
letters, numbers, control characters and so on has been 
implemented. In addition to the mentioned problems, 
difficulties intrinsic to Basque, like word-composition, 
abbreviations, declension of foreign words, etc. have been 
also taken into account. Besides this filter, interactive 
dialogue with the user, buffers for the most frequent words 
(in order to improve the performance of the system), and 
maintenance of the user's own dictionary (following the 
structure of the two-level lexicon) are the essential elements 
to be added to the morphological nalyzer for the creation of 
a flexible and efficient spelling checker. 
It is very important to notice the necessity of a suitable 
interface for lexical knowledge acquisition when it comes to 
managing with precision the inclusion of new lemmas in 
the user's own dictionary. Without this interface, 
morphological nd morphotactical information essential to 
the checker would be left unknown and, so, no flexions 
could be accepted. Currently, the system acquires  
information from the user about part of speech, 
subcategorization for nouns --person or place names, 
mainly-- and some morphonological features like final 
hard-or-soft r distinction. So, the user, giving to the system 
several answers, makes possible the correct assignment of 
continuation class and selection marks to the new lemma. In 
this way, open class entries may be accepted and adequately 
treated. Entries belonging to other classes may also be 
entered but no flexions of them will be recognized. This 
ability of the checker to deal correctly with new lemmas 
122
requires, in turn, certain grammatical knowledge from the 
user. 
Our prototype, running on a SUN 3/280 and using a 
buffer containing 4,096 of the most frequent word-forms, 
checks an average of 17.1 words per second in a text with a 
rate of misspellings and unknown words (not present in the 
current lexicon) of 12.7%. Considering the word-forms the 
system deems as erroneous, tatistical tests have shown that 
60% are actual misspellings, 16% would have been 
recognized had the general lexicon been more 
comprehensive, and the rest correspond to specific words 
(technical terms, proper nouns, etc.) which the user should 
include in his own dictionary. 
Within a short time minor changes will provide greater 
performance. A PC version is also in use. 
5.2 The Spelling Conector 
When a word is not recognized by the spelling checker, the 
user can choose, among other options, to ask the system for 
suggestions for replacing the erroneous word. These 
suggestions, logically, must be correct words which will be 
similar to the word-form given by the user. 
To find similar words to propose, there exists two 
working lines: 
1) Using as a guide the "sources of error" described by 
Peterson (Peterson, 80), errors are basically of two types: 
- Errors due to lack of knowledge of the language: these 
errors are often not dealt with on the assertion that 
they are infrequent, but Pollock and Zamora (Pollock, 
84) evaluate their frequency at between 10% and 15%. 
Moreover, because Basque is a language whose 
standardization for written use has begun only in 
recent years, a higher degree of error would be 
expected for it. 
- Typographical errors. According to the classic 
typification by Damerau (Damerau, 64) 80% of 
"typos" are one of the following four types: one 
exceeding character, one missing character, a mistaken 
character, or the transposition of two consecutive 
characters. 
Following that, n+26(n-1)+26n+(n-1) possible 
combinations (n being the length of a word) can be 
generated; they must be examined to verify their 
validity and the most probable must be selected. For 
this examination it is normal to use statistical 
methods which, though not very reliable, are highly 
efficient (Pollock, 84). 
2) Definition of a measurement of distance between 
words and calculation of which words of the dictionary give 
a lesser distance with respect to the erroneous word (Angell, 
83; Tanaka, 87). The most frequently used measure is the 
"distance of Levenshtein". 
This second method, measurement of distance, is slower 
but much more reliable than the first one, though it is not 
suitable for a lexicon system where the words are 
incomplete, as is the case. Due chiefly to this, the chosen 
option has been the adaptation of the first method, taking 
into account the following criteria: 
Handling of typical errors. A linguistic study 
has been carried out on typical errors, that is, errors 
most frequently committed ue to lack of knowledge 
of the language itself or its latest standardization 
rules, or due to the use of dialectal forms. To store 
typical errors a parallel two-level exicon subsystem 
is used. In this subsystem, each unit is an erroneous 
morpheme which is directly linked to the 
corresponding correct one. When searching for words 
the two-level mechanism is used together with this 
additional lexicon subsystem. When a word-form is 
not accepted by the checker the typical errors 
subsystem is added and the system retries the 
orthographical checking. If the incorrect form is now 
correctly analyzed --so, it contains a typical error-- 
the correct morpheme corresponding tothe erroneous 
one is directly obtained from the typical errors 
subsystem. There will also be additional two-level 
rules, which will reflect the erroneous, but typical 
morphonological alternations in dialectal utilizations 
or training periods. 
Generating alternatives. Generating alternatives 
to typographical errors using Damerau's 
classification. 
Trigram analysis. In generating the alternatives, 
trigram analysis is used both for discarding some of 
them as well as for classifying them in order of  
probability. 
Spelling checking of proposals. On the basis 
of the three previous criteria, incorrect word-forms 
would be offered to the user. Therefore, the word- 
forms must be ted into the spelling checker to check 
whether they are valid or not. 
The whole process would be specially slow, due mostly 
to the checking of alternatives. To speed it up the following 
techniques have been used: 
If during the analysis of the word considered wrong a 
correct morpheme has been found, the criteria of 
Damerau are applied only in the part unrecognized 
morphologically, so that the number of possibilities 
will be considerably lower. This criterion is applied 
on the basis that far fewer "typos" are committed at 
the beginning of a word (Yannakoudakis, 83). 
Moreover, on entering the proposals into the checker, 
the analysis continues from the state it was in at the 
end of that last recognized morpheme. 
On doing trigrammatical nalysis a trigram table 
mechanism is used, by means of which generated 
proposals will be composed only of correct rigrams 
and classified by their order of probability; thus, 
correction analysis (the slowest element of the 
process) is not carried out with erroneous trigrams and 
the remaining analyses will be in the order of 
trigrammatical probability. Besides that, the number 
of proposals to be checked is also limited by filtering 
the words containing very low frequency trigrams, and 
never exceeds 20 forms. At any rate, after having 
obtained three correct proposals, the generation 
process will end. 
123
If a word is detected as a typical error, it will not be 
verified as a possible "typo". This requires the 
analysis of typical errors to take place previous to 
that of "typos", in spite of being less probable. The 
justification is that we are particularly interested in 
giving preferential treatment to typical errors and, 
what's more, these can be handled more speedily. 
The average time for the generation of proposals for a 
misspelt word-form, on the SUN machine cited above, is 
1.5 s. The best case is when three or more alternatives are 
found in the buffer of most frequent words, and takes less 
than 0.1 s. The worst case, when no correct proposals are 
found for a long word-form and when no correct initial 
morphemes were recognized uring its analysis, takes around 
6s.  
6 Conclusions 
The XUXEN analyzer/checker/corrector has been de~ribed as 
based on the two-level morphological formalism. It deals 
with Basque, a highly inflected language recently 
standardized. At the moment a prototype of the system has 
been implemented in C language. This implementation is a 
general tool for Basque useful for texts written by any word 
processing programme. 
As is well known, in the two-level model morphemes 
are stored in the sublexicons without alterations, unlike in 
other systems. From a linguistic standpoint, he clarity and 
respect for the lexical unit promoted by this way of focusing 
morphological nalysis is of great importance. However, 
long-distance dependencies between morphemes can not be 
adequately expressed by means of the continuation class 
mechanism. An improved continuation-class mechanism to 
solve this problem is suggested. 
At present, the lexicon system contains nearly 15,000 
items, now the coding of new iemmas in order to reach 
50,000 entries is being completed. At this moment finite 
verb forms (approximately 2,000) are in the lexicon, 
although they could be seen as analyzable forms. These verb 
forms have been described by means of their component 
morphemes taking into account the long-distance dependency 
problems they present. This have been done using the 
extension of the continuation-class formalism described in 
3.3 which is currently being implemented. 
With the lemmas and morphemes coded so far, XUXEN 
is able to recognize approximately three millions different 
word-forms without at all counting forms produced by 
genitive recursion. Considering that most of lemmas in the 
lexicon can take genitive suffixes, our present 
implementation of the spelling checker would recognize 
thousands of millions of word-forms. 
User-lexicons can be interactively enriched with new 
entries enabling XUXEN to recognize from then on all the 
possible flexions derived from them. 
An additional two-level lexicon subsystem is used in our 
system to store the so-called typical errors. Typical errors are 
due often to the recent standardization f the language and 
dialectal uses. This lexicon subsystem is used preferably 
when suggesting alternatives tothe user. 
Acknowledgements 
Prof. Koskenniemi for his fruitful comments on an earlier 
version of this paper. 
References 
Agirre E., Alegria I., Arregi X., Artola X., Diaz de Ilarraza 
A., Sarasola K., Urkia M. Aplicaci6n de la morfologia de 
dos niveles al euskara. S.E.P.L.N, vol. 8, 87-102. 1989. 
Angell R., Freund G., Willety P. Automatic Spelling 
Correcting using a trigram similarity measure. Information 
Processing & Management, vol 19, nQ4, 1983. 
Barton, E. Computational Complexity in two-level 
Morphology, 1985. 
Damerau F. A technique for computer detection and 
correction of spelling errors. Comm. of ACM vol. 7 pp. 
171-176, 1964. 
Euskaltzaindia. Aditz laguntzaile batua. Euskaltzaindia, 
Bilbo 1973. 
Euskaltzaindia. Euskal Gramatika: Lehen urratsak (I eta II). 
Euskaltzaindia, Bilbo 1985. 
Kaplan, R. M., and M. Kay. Phonological rules andfinite- 
state transducers. Paper read at the annual meeting of the 
Linguistic Society of America in New York City, 1981. 
Karttunen, L. KIMMO : A two-level Morphological 
Analyzer. Texas Linguistic Forum, Vol 22, Pp.165-186, 
1983. 
Karttunen L., Koskenniemi K., Kaplan R. A Compiler for 
Two-Level Phonological Rules in "Tools for Morphological 
Analysis", Center for the Study of Language and 
Information, Report No. CLSI-87-108. 
Kay, M. Morphological Analysis.. A.Zampolli & N 
Calzolari eds. (1980). Proc. of the Int. Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (Pisa), 1973. 
Koskenniemi, K . .  Two-level Morphology: A genera\] 
Computational Model for Word-Form Recognition and 
Production, University of Helsinki, Department of General 
Linguistics. Publications no 11, 1983. 
Koskenniemi, K. Compilation of Automata fror~ 
Morphological Two-level Rules. Pp. 143-149. Publicatior 
n ? 15. University of Helsinki, 1985. 
Peterson J.L. Computer Programs for detecting anc 
correcting spelling errors. Comm. of ACM vol.23 n~12 
1980. 
124
Pollock J., Zamora A. Automatic spelling correction in 
scientific and scholarly text. Comm. of ACM vol.27 358- 
368, 1984. 
Ritchie, G.D., S.G, Pulman, A.W.Black and G.J. Russell. 
A Computational Framework for Lexical Description. 
Computational Linguistics, vol. 13, numbers 3-4, 1987. 
Sarasola, I. Gaurko euskara idatziaren maiztasun-hiztegia. 
(3gn. liburukia), GAK, Donostia, 1982. 
Schiller A. Steffens P. A lexicon for a German two-level 
morphology. Paper ead at Euralex 1990 (Benalm,'idena). 
Tanaka E., Kojima Y. A High Speed String Correction 
method using a hierarchical file. IEEE transactions on 
pattern analysis and Machine Intelligence vol.9 n%, 1987. 
Trost, H. The application of two-level morphology to non- 
concatenative German morphology. COLING-90, Helsinki, 
vol.2 371-376. 
Winograd, T. Language as a cognitive process. Vol.l: 
Syntax, pp 544-549. Addison-Wesley, 1983. 
Yannakoudakis E.J. The rules of spelling errors. Information 
Processing & Management vol. 19 nQ2, 1983. 
125 
125
