Joining Statistics with NLP for Text Categorization 
Pau l  S. J acobs  
Artificial Intell igence Laboratory  
GE Research and Development  Center 
Schenectady,  NY 12301 USA 
psjacobs@crd.ge.com 
Automatic news categorization systems have pro- 
duced high accuracy, consistency, and flexibility using 
some natural language processing techniques. These 
knowledge-based categorization methods are more pow- 
erful and accurate than statistical techniques. However, 
the phrasal pre-processing and pattern matching methods 
that seem to work for categorization have the disadvan- 
tage of requiring a fair amount of knowledge-encoding 
by human beings. In addition, they work much better at 
certain tasks, such as identifying major events in texts, 
than at others, such as determining what sort of business 
or product is involved in a news event. 
Statistical methods for categorization, on the other 
hand, are easy to implement and require little or no hu- 
man customization. But they don't offer any of the ben- 
efits of natural anguage processing, such as the ability to 
identify relationships and enforce linguistic constraints. 
Our approach has been to use statistics in the knowl- 
edge acquisition component of a linguistic pattern-based 
categorization system, using statistical methods, for ex- 
ample, to associate words with industries and identify 
phrases that information about businesses or products. 
Instead of replacing knowledge-based methods with statis- 
tics, statistical training replaces knowledge ngineering. 
This has resulted in high accuracy, shorter customiza- 
tion time, and good prospects for the application of the 
statistical methods to problems in lexical acquisition. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Text categorization is an excellent application domain 
for natural language processing systems. First, it is a 
task in which NLP techniques have born fruit, producing 
high accuracy along with other benefits \[Hayes and We- 
instein, 1990; Kuhns, 1990; Tong et al, 1986\]. Second, it 
provides an easy way of measuring success, by comparing 
system responses with "expert" category assignments. 
Third, it is a ripe domain for exploring statistical meth- 
ods for automated knowledge acquisition. Published 
work on text categorization has focused on the first item 
above, arguing convincingly for knowledge-based tech- 
niques and their accuracy, but has not yet opened the 
way for the investigation of category assignment as a 
way of testing NLP methods or on the prospects for ac- 
quisition. This work focuses on combining statistics and 
NLP in a knowledge-based categorization system, using 
statistics as way of augmenting hand-coded knowledge. 
The context of this research is a commercially- 
developed system \[Rau and Jacobs, 1991\] that automat- 
ically assigns categories to news stories for "custom clip- 
ping" and other markets. Like Construe/TIS \[Hayes and 
Weinstein, 1990\], the work derives from, and coordinates 
with, NLP efforts, but the system primarily uses a lexico- 
semantic pattern matcher for categorization \[Jacobs et 
al., 1991\]. Categorization tasks vary greatly in difficulty, 
but the recall and precision results produced in our tests 
are similar to those reported by other systems, with cov- 
erage of over 90% on topic assignment and performance 
better than human indexers on most aspects of the task. 
Figure 1 shows a typical example of a news story, with 
associated human-assigned categories. Retrieval is per- 
formed by matching a desired set of categories (termed 
a query or profile) against those assigned in the text 
database. Our system, known as NLDB, mimics these 
category assignments, extracting company names \[Rau, 
1991\], topics or subject indicators, industries, and others 
(including, for example, stock exchanges and geographic 
regions). The program also incorporates portions of the 
SCISOR system \[Jacobs and Rau, 1990\], which can fill 
certain other fields, such as the target and suitor of a 
takeover. 
This sort of system has a simple appeal: the "answers" 
(the set of category assignments) are usually clear-cut, 
yet they clearly require some detailed content analysis. 
On the other hand, the technologies that could con- 
tribute to this analysis are bafflingly complex, from dis- 
course methods that distinguish topics from background 
events to word sense techniques that help to distinguish, 
for example, COMMUNICATIONS from BROADCASTING and 
HEALTH CARE from PHARMACEUTICALS. 
Figure 2 shows the complete list of industry and topic 
assignments currently in use to categorize texts in the 
NLDB system. 
The development of this system has advanced the 
state of the art in practical NLP by proving the util- 
ity of statistical training methods on a knowledge-based 
NLP task. Feeding in large volumes of texts with hu- 
man answers has found new ways around old problem~, 
in knowledge acquisition. This paper explains the re- 
lationship between problems in NLP and performanc? 
in categorization and describes a statistical method fol 
automatically creating lexico-semantic patterns for cat- 
egorization. 
178
Companies Industries Topics Other 
ARGOSYSTEMS AVIATION BUSINESS CORPORATE 
ARGOSYSTEMS INC DEFENSE CONTRACTING CONTRACT NEWSGRID 
BOEING ELECTRONICS NYASE 
BOEING CO(BA) OTC 
UTL USA 
UTL CORP(UTLC) 
BOEING'S ARGOSYSTEMS SUBSIDIARY TO MAKE TENDER OFFER FOR ALL UTL CORE SHARES 
SEATTLE (JULY 31) PR NEWSWIRE - The Boeing Co. (NYSE: BA) has announced its agreement tocause its whol- 
ly-owned subsidiary ARGOSystems of Sunnyvale, Calif., to make a cash tender offer at $4.75 per share for all shares of 
UTL Corp. (NASDAQ: UTLC) of Dallas. 
The transaction is valued at approximately $20 million. The boards of ARGOSystems and UTL have approved the 
transaction. 
The tender offer will commence no later than Aug. 6. Upon completion of the tender offer, the agreement calls for a 
merger in which the remaining UTL stockholders will also receive $4.75 in cash per share. The tender offer is subject to 
certain conditions including the tender of at least a majority of the outstanding UTL shares. 
UTL Corp. designs, develops, manufactures and markets electronic warfare systems used for reconnaissance and sur. 
veillance. The systems provide information on the location and identification ofradar and communications emitters .... 
Figure 1: Input Text and Assigned Categories 
2 Overa l l  Resu l t s  
Figure 3 summarizes the overall results of this experi- 
ment, including the results of assigning topic categories 
(the task generally reported in this sort of work) and in- 
dustry categories with statistics only, natural anguage, 
and the combination; and the overall effect of the com- 
bined approach. 
Recall here has essentially the same meaning as in 
information retrieval; i.e. the percentage of human- 
assigned categories that the system also produced. Pre- 
cision is the percentage of system-assigned categories 
that also appeared in the human indices. These statis- 
tics make the dubious (and often incorrect) assumption 
that the human-assigned categories are always correct. 
In Figure 1, for example, NLDB included AEROSPACE on 
the industry list--This hurts precision because it is not 
included on the human list. 
The major achievement here is that the combination 
of statistical analysis and natural anguage based cate- 
gorization is considerably better than either alone. The 
system uses statistical methods where they do better (i.e. 
industries) and NLP where it does better (i.e. topics), 
and shows that combined NLP and statistics can be bet- 
ter than either technique alone within a particular task. 
The results tend to understate he real impact of this 
combination, in part because of the large differences in
difficulty among sets of categories, and in part because 
of the portion of the human-assigned categories that are 
incorrect. In analyzing sample texts where the human 
categories differ from the automatically-assigned cate- 
gories, we have found that the system tends to be cor- 
rect about as often as the human indexer, with many 
cases so difficult to judge that multiple independent as- 
sessments differ. Since this means that the system recall 
against he human is higher than human recall against 
the system, the results indicate that the system's overall 
performance is better than human performance. How- 
ever, for the purpose of this experiment, we use these 
results to compare different system configurations, and 
not to illustrate an absolute measure of accuracy. 
3 Categor i za t ion  ~ Natura l  Language 
While it is easy to attain a certain level of accuracy in 
text categorization using a single layer of techniques and 
to combine all texts and all categories in evaluating the 
results, this aggregation of results obscures many of the 
real problems where NLP and categorization come to- 
gether. Each type of category can highlight a different 
set of NLP issues, and different texts reveal different pro- 
cessing problems. For example, the problem of mistaking 
a totally irrelevant text for a text of a particular category 
is very different from the subtle task of distinguishing 
texts about one category from another. Similarly, NLP 
results in processing texts within a category are quite 
different from results in assigning texts to categories, for 
reasons that will be explained below. 
The best way to evaluate NLP techniques, therefore, 
is within the context of a more precise task than cate- 
gorization ill general, and as a complement tostatistical 
methods. Even in component tasks where pure statis- 
tical methods tend to outperform pure NLP methods, 
NLP can play an important role in improving results, 
and statistics can play a role in improving NLP. 
179
Industry Segments 
advertising electronics photography 
aerospace entertainment plastics 
agriculture environmental + services ' precious +metals 
autos financial + services publishing 
aviation food railroads banking forestry +products 
beverages freight real + estate 
biotechnology health + care restaurants 
broadcasting industrial + products retail 
building + material insurance rubber 
business + services machinery ship building 
chemicals metals telecommunications 
computers mining textiles 
construction nuclear + energy tobacco 
consumer + products office + equipment toys 
defense +contracting personal +care + products travel services educational + services petroleum + products 
electronic + publishing pharmaceuticals trucks 
utilities 
Subject Indicators 
air + force depression money 
antitrust divestiture nasd halt 
appointment dividend nasd resume 
bankruptcy earnings navy 
boycott economy new product 
budget election 
business executive change news 
cabinet expansion newsbrief 
capitol export prime + rate 
career government public offering 
chg-naq import recession 
commodity inflation refinancing 
congress insider + trading resignation 
contract joint venture restructuring 
corporate labor socialism 
coup lawsuit 
crime layoff space 
debt legislation strike 
deficit market taxes 
democracy merger trade 
military unemployment 
Figure 2: Keywords for Industry and Topic Segments 
Categorization Task 
Topic assignment (NL) 
Topic assignment (Stats) 
Topic assic~nment (Stats + NL / 
Industry assignment (NL) 
Industry assignment (Stats} 
Industry assignment (Stats + NL) 
Recall 
.94 
.73 
.95 
.34 
.64 
.67 
Precision 
.61 
.79 
.65 
.18 
.50 
.46 All categories (NL) .74 
All categories (Stats + NL) .79 .64 
Figure 3: Overall Results 
3.1 Word  Weights  for Indust ry  Ass ignment  
For example, in the news categorization task described 
earlier, natural language delivered the weakest perfor- 
mance relative to statistics on the assignment of indus- 
try categories. Performance on topic assignment was 
generally much higher using natural anguage, and com- 
pany name extraction and variation was handled using 
a separate mechanism \[Rau, 1991\]. The two most ob- 
vious differences between topic assignment and industry 
assignment are: 
1. It is generally easy to determine where the topic of 
a story is expressed, either in the first sentence or 
by spotting certain words and phrases that are good 
indicators, while the industries involved can appear 
almost anywhere in a story, 
2. The breadth of language that expresses topic is 
much narrower than the breadth required to handle 
the different industries; for example, it is quite easy 
to identify texts dealing with bankruptcies, lawsuits, 
and mergers using a few key words and phrases (vo- 
cabularies of no more than 20 or 30 words per topic): 
but a single industry can be indicated by any num- 
ber of words or expressions, including names of spe- 
cific customers, products, or devices. 
For these reasons, statistics have the upper hand in 
the identification of industries, and the first pass at the 
NLDB system used linguistic methods for topic assign- 
ment and statistical methods for industries. This wa~ 
unsatisfying, because we quickly came across errors in 
the results that might have been prevented using simple 
NLP methods, as well as places where the results could 
have helped to augment or correct linguistic knowledge 
The statistical methods, which will be described later 
involve weighting individual words and phrases accord- 
ing to their value in distinguishing industries. The most 
180
obvious errors resulting from these methods were finding 
a good indicator in the wrong place (either in irrelevant 
text or in background text), and finding a good indica- 
tor used in a different way. These errors pervade the re- 
sults of statistical categorization, with the most obvious 
problems coming when the results clearly derived from 
the misinterpretation f individual words and phrases. 
For example, the word brewing occurred 14 times in a 
sample of about 11,000 news stories. In 9 out of those 14 
cases, or 64%, the story was correctly categorized under 
the industry BEVERAGES, which includes less than 1% of 
the stories. By most any statistical metric, brewing is 
a strong indicator for BEVERAGES (better, in fact, than 
beer and beverages, although not quite as good as Pepsi). 
However, the statistical categorization method failed, for 
example, on the following text, incorrectly assigning the 
text to BEVERAGES: 
The issue first surfaced Monday when 
Dawes complained there is a "black hole" of in- 
formation about how Richards deposited state 
money while the S&L  crisis was brewing I 
The word gas is not quite as good an indicator as 
brewing--in 55% of occurrences it indicates PETROLEU 
PRODUCTS, and 11% of the time UTILITIES, with scat- 
tered other interpretations. But gas is much more fre- 
quent than brewing, occurring 835 times in the same 
training sample where brewing occurred 14 times. So, 
in terms of overall performance, knowing when gas is a 
good indicator of an industry can make more of a differ- 
ence. The problem is with texts such as the following: 
Of  55 check-ups of the 17 patients, mild di- 
arrhea was reported during 2 percent of check- 
ups, nausea or vomiting in about 3 percent and 
a moderate increase in intestinal gas in about 
10 percent. 
While the problem with brewing above can easily be 
solved by using any simple method of filtering out ir- 
relevant ext (the sentence appears in the middle of a 
story about a political campaign), this is not the case 
with gas. The gas example, like many similar errors, ap- 
pears in relevant text describing the health effects of bran 
cereal, which could be correctly categorized as HEALTH 
CARE and FOOD. 
Note also that it is difficult to compensate for errors 
in individual word weights by using combined statistical 
weights for categorization. This point will he discussed 
more in Section 5, but the main problem is that content 
words like patients, nausea and check-ups imply don't 
have enough information content o act as good discrim- 
inators compared to gas. 
3.2 Recal l  and  Prec is ion  
While it is easy to spot places where statistics tend to 
introduce erroneous categories, thus lowering precision 
in examples uch as brewing and gas above, it is harder 
to understand why statistical methods also fail to pro- 
duce enough information to assign a category, thus pro- 
ducing low recall. Since the task of assigning industries 
aitalics added 
depends more on what businesses companies are in than 
what an individual story is about, the information about 
the industry is often localized, perhaps even in a single 
mention of a company or product. For example, the 
following is a typical, though difficult, story about an 
executive change: 
.... James W. Nelson has been named vice 
president-manufacturing and distribution for 
the household products group at Lehn & Fink 
Products, maker of such well-known brands as 
Lysol, Love My Carpet, Resolve, Chubs, Mop 
& Glo, Ogilvie, Minwax and Thompson's. 
Lehn & Fink Products, headquartered in 
Montvale, is a leading international marketer 
of household and do-it-yourself products. 
The human categorizer assigned the story to the 
categories of CONSUNER PRODUCTS and PERSONAL CARE 
PRODUCTS, although the latter is probably an error. 
While CONSUMER PRODUCTS is the strongest category in- 
dicated statistically, from words such as household and 
brands, it is still weakly indicated; in fact, it would be 
difficult to get a statistical measure to admit CONSUMER 
PRODUCTS without also including RETAIL, BEVERAGES, 
BUILDING MATERIAL, and even TEXTILES, which are 
loosely coupled with terms such as brands, do-it-yourself 
and carpet. It is also quite difficult, because of the high 
independent frequencies of the words, to identify house- 
hold products as a collocation or combination that should 
be considered. 
The key to getting good recall and precision on texts 
such as these is to consider the weights of the individual 
words and phrases to determine what industries could 
be involved, but to use the structure of the texts to 
help determine where the industry information might 
be. Phrases like X is a leading marketer of Y or X 
is the maker of Y appear throughout news stories, and 
are sure indicators of industry information, even though 
they do not point to any particular industry. Linguistic 
approaches probably won't help to guess that Love My 
Carpet is a consumer product, but they can help to de- 
termine that the industry discriminators lie in the text 
following patterns uch as X is the maker of Y. Statistics 
can then guess the industries associated with Y. 
The NLP method used in NLDB associates categories 
with linguistic patterns. We will next describe the pat- 
tern language, then explain how statistical methods can 
automatically add simple patterns. 
4 Lex ico -Semant ic  Pat terns  
In SCISOR \[Jacobs and Rau, 1990\], MUC \[Jacobs et 
al., 1991; Krupka et al, 1991\], and other applications, 
we have found that lexically-driven pre-processing serves 
as a complement to parsing and semantic interpretation, 
both in identifying portions of relevant ext and in mark- 
ing the input text to make it easier to process. Our 
lexico-semantic pattern rules are quite similar to those 
in CONSTRUE/TIS \[Hayes and Weinstein, 1990\], asso- 
ciating each pattern with an action rule that can ma- 
nipulate text or activate or de-activate a category. This 
181
type of knowledge structure has proven effective for topic 
identification as well as other forms of pre-processing. 
Because the pattern matcher is designed as an efficient 
"trigger" mechanism and an aid in parsing, the patterns 
are mostly simple combinations of lexical categories. The 
patterns largely adopt the language of regular expres- 
sions, including the following terms and operators: 
? Lexical features that can be tested in a pattern 
? Logical combination of lexical feature tests- -OR, 
AND , and NOT 
? Wild cards 
? Variable assignment (?X = ) 
? Grouping operators- -  <> for grouping, D for dis- 
junctive grouping 
? Repet i t ion--  * for 0 or more, + for 1 or more 
? Range- -  aNfor 0 toN,  -?-Nfor l toN 
? Optional Const i tuents--  {} for optional 
While this pattern language provides a tool for rec- 
ognizing linguistic constructs, most patterns for cate- 
gorization are simple lexical items, semantic ategories, 
or combinations. For example, the word root dividend 
and the phrase holders of record are good indicators of a 
DIV IDEND story. 
Most topics have rules that include such sure-fire sin- 
gle words and phrases, along with some more complex 
patterns. For example, the following two rules help to 
recognize stories about mergers and acquisitions: 
(or tender merger) offer => C-TAKEOVER ; 
? " C1  . . .  announced . . .  acquisition of ... C2 
J 
?C l=~cname~ * $announce-verb  * $merger-verb 
? 5 \[of with\] $ ?C2=~cname} 
=> (C-TAKEOVER (r-agent ?Cl) (r-target ?C2)) 
In addition to helping to catch a broader ange of con- 
structs that indicate takeovers, the more complex pat- 
terns like the second one above can make preliminary as- 
signments of roles, which can greatly speed and aid pars- 
ing in systems that perform both parsing and categoriza- 
tion. The ability to construct and add these more sophis- 
ticated patterns by hand is a major advantage, which ac- 
counts for much of the benefit of knowledge-based meth- 
ods over statistical means. However, the more simple 
patterns are required, the more labor-intensive this pro- 
cess can be, and the more manual tuning must be done 
in order to get accurate results. 
Statistical methods have the advantage of building 
rules automatically from a training set. But, in order 
to get the benefit of statistics, the methods used must 
add knowledge in the same form as the knowledge-based 
rules, and must produce a clear result that is accessible 
for knowledge engineering. In other words, the statis- 
tical methods themselves must be an aid rather than a 
replacement for knowledge acquisition. The next section 
describes how this is accomplished. 
5 Stat is t ics  and  Acquisition 
The strategies for statistical training described here all 
use  a "training" set of 11,500 news stories, including 
about 3,000,000 words, with human-assigned categories 
assigned to each story. The "test" set used was a 
new sample of one day's news, or 700 stories including 
200,000 words. 
Many statistical methods in information retrieval use 
probahilistic weights of individual terms \[Salton and 
McGill, 1983\], where a term can be a single word, root, 
or combination of words. The techniques we explored 
include various weighting schemes, with the end goal be- 
ing to use heavily-weighted terms as the building blocks 
for patterns. A term can be weighted with respect o its 
overall relevance, or with respect o its ability to deter- 
mine a particular category. The "pure" statistical results 
reported earlier summed the weights of all terms in a text 
with respect o each industry category. 
Automating the process of acquiring lexico-semantic 
patterns poses a number of distinct problems. First, 
there has to be some means of distinguishing where in- 
dustry information might appear in a text. Second, sin- 
gle words should he distinguished from phrases in certain 
cases where the individual words might be misleading. 
Third, the statistical methods must produce individual 
actions, not weights that must be combined to derive the 
final answer or answers. Fourth, there has to be some 
good way of determining when the statistical results were 
bound to introduce errors. 
All of these requirements come together to assure that 
the statistical methods can be used to improve existing 
sets of pattern-action rules, that manual methods will 
not counteract he results of acquisition, and that the 
statistical and NLP methods can interact gracefully. 
5.1 Ident i fy ing  Re levant  Text  
Many of the errors with statistical methods, especially 
when single words and phrases are used for categoriza- 
tion, come from unusual occurrences in background or 
irrelevant exts, such as the brewing example earlier. A 
similar case is the word Yankee which is an excellent in- 
dicator of NUCLEAR ENERGY (because of the New Hamp- 
shire Yankee Power Plant), except in an isolated cluster 
of articles about George Steinbrenner, the owner of the 
New York Yankees. 
We tried two methods of correcting for such problems. 
First, we noted that most industry information is con- 
tained in the headline, first, and last paragraphs of texts, 
and tested using only these paragraphs for categoriza- 
tion. Second, we tried a simple filter to score how much 
each paragraph was like a first or last paragraph, using 
the following calculation for the relevance weight of a 
term: 
1000 d log 2 b 
Where b is number of occurrences of each term in the 
first and last paragraphs of text, and d is the ratio oI 
occurrences in these texts to all occurrences, minus a 
constant. 
The following are some of the noteworthy results ot 
these tests: 
182
? A separate relevance filter produced some improve- 
ment over simple term weighting, about 3 points in 
precision, and a larger improvement, about 5 points, 
when only "in-or-out" patterns were used. This was 
above and beyond a comparable gain from consid- 
ering only headline, first, and last paragraphs. 
? Almost all combinations of looking at first, last, and 
additional relevant paragraphs ended up with about 
the same results. In other words, looking at only 
paragraphs with high relevance scores that were also 
at the beginning or end of a story produced about 
the same results, combining recall and precision, as 
looking at highly relevant paragraphs in addition to 
the first and last paragraphs. We settled on using 
only first and last paragraphs with relevant scores 
because this simply minimizes the amount of text 
that must be processed. 
? Using only first and last paragraphs for training, as 
well as categorizing, produced no improvement in 
results. We think that this is because the improve- 
ment from having a more accurate training sample 
is neutralized by having less text to train on. This 
suggests using a still larger training sample. 
These tests showed that a simple relevance filter pro- 
duced a consistent, small, advantage in accuracy over 
using the whole text of each story. However, surpris- 
ingly, it was hard to see any gain from considering the 
middle parts of stories where those parts had high rel- 
evance scores. This suggests that further work could 
produce better indicators of relevance that get industry 
information out of the middle parts without introducing 
more extraneous categories. 
5.2 Co l locat ions  and  Names  
Statistical methods looking for sure-fire indicators must, 
by their nature, consider overwhelming statistical evi- 
dence even when these indicators are relatively infre- 
quent. Unfortunately, even when a word or phrase cor- 
relates with an industry 100% of the time in a sample, 
this does not mean that it will be a sure indicator in a 
new sample. This is especially a problem with proper 
names and names of locations, but is also an issue with 
words that occur frequently in collocations. 
Treating words as individual indicators when they re- 
ally are part of a name or collocation can hurt precision 
by increasing the chance that the single word will appear 
independently. It can also hurt recall, because the com- 
bined evidence derived from a name or collocation can be 
strong even when the individual words contribute little. 
As evidence of the problem with proper names, the 
words Flint (a city in Michigan where General Motors 
produces cars and trucks), Donahue (the name of a pop- 
ular daytime TV show), and Warner (a communications 
conglomerate) are all good statistical indicators. In fact, 
in the training sample of about a month's worth of news, 
Donahue was an indicator of BROADCASTING 18 out of 18 
times, making it a better indicator even than Pepsi. But 
in the one-day test sample, Donahue occurred only once, 
in a story about the president of Nike (the athletic shoe 
company). Flint occurred in a story about an art display 
in the Michigan town, and Warner as a name unrelated 
to the communications company. 
While accurate recognition of proper names is neces- 
sary for good precision, it is also a requirement for recall. 
A company may be involved in industries that are diffi- 
cult to get from either the parts of the name or the sur- 
rounding context. For example, household is a weak indi- 
cator for CONSUMER PRODUCTS, but the company House- 
hold International is in the IIDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS cat- 
egory. Similarly, Digital Equipment is in a different in- 
dustry from Digital Communications. Since these names 
are so important for industry assignment, we found that 
the best results came from handling all proper names 
separately and being much more lenient about when to 
admit an industry name based on the name of a company 
than for individual words and phrases. 
With other compounds, there were again problems 
with both recall and precision. Recall problems came 
from common words that have a special meaning when 
conjoined, such as real estate--both real and estate fre- 
quently occur, and have no significance with respect o 
industry, but real estate is a good indicator of the REAL 
ESTATE category. Television is a weak indicator of several 
industry categories, but television viewers and television 
networks are strong indicators. 
We took a simple approach to handling such col- 
locations, by computing mutual information statistics 
\[Church et al, 1989\] for bigrams (two-word sequences) 
in the training corpus, and treating combinations with 
a high degree of mutual information as if they were sin- 
gle terms. So real estate would be treated as an atom, 
the individual words not being considered for catego- 
rization. This yielded fair results, but probably is not as 
good a method as looking for discriminators specifically 
when the individual words are indicators of multiple cat- 
egories. 
The following are some of the key results from separate 
processing of names and collocations: 
? Company name extraction was the best contribu- 
tor to accuracy, with a 10% improvement in re- 
call and no significant loss of precision over treat- 
ing company names as any other word. This is an 
especially compelling result because the individual 
components of company names are often themselves 
good indicators, and because the size of the train- 
ing set is not nearly large enough to cover many 
of the companies that occur in a given test (hence 
the training data inherently miss a fair number of 
companies). 
? The use of bigrams yielded about a 6% gain in pre- 
cision with no real effect on recall. We expect that 
the number of bigrams was not adequate to have a 
major positive impact on recall, while the method of 
ignoring the individual component words can neu- 
tralize some of the positive effect. 
5.3 Set t ing  Word  Thresho lds  
Knowledge-based methods aim at high-accuracy individ- 
ual patterns. It is hard to balance these against weighted 
terms, so it is best to tune the statistics to identify sim- 
ple indicators rather than weights to be combined with 
183
other weights. This way, a rule can combine hand-coded 
knowledge with automatically-acquired data by looking 
for industry information in a particular place and get- 
ting the industry from a single indicator in that place, 
as in the company manufactures satellites. 
Because work in information retrieval \[Salton and 
McGill, 1983\] has suggested that combinations of 
weighted terms could be more accurate than single in- 
or-out assignments, we compared a number of different 
weighting methods with a number of different methods 
for discriminating key indicators. We found that, in gen- 
eral, the combination of weighted terms produced better 
results than simply taking the union of the industries 
activated by the "best" terms. However, the results for 
the best discrete assignment of industries to individual 
terms were very close to those of the weighted terms, and 
the benefits of this approach--including the ability to 
integrate statistics with knowledge-based methods, the 
identification of important ambiguities in word mean- 
ing, and speed and simplicity--suggest that statistical 
thresholds for individual terms, without any combining 
of weights, is a good approach. 
We had to devise a statistical means of distinguish- 
ing only those terms that were very good indicators by 
themselves of a particular category, without having to 
compute a score for each paragraph. This would not 
have worked without the pre-processing of relevant ext, 
name and collocation extraction. In fact, the perfor- 
mance of categorization using single in-or-out erms was 
more than 10% lower in precision than the combina- 
tion of weights without the pre-processing, but about 
the same with the combined method. The apparent ex- 
planation for this is that most of the error introduced 
in using single terms as discriminators comes from the 
confusion of terms either in special combinations or in 
irrelevant ext. 
The following is the formula for weighting terms that 
are individual indicators of a particular category: 
(200d)(log2 b)(log~ r) 
where b is number of times a term appears is a story 
about a particular category, d is the difference between 
that number and the overall percentage of words in texts 
of that category, and r is the ratio of combined proba- 
bilities to the product of independent probabilities, the 
mutual information statistic. 
With a threshold of 100, this weight identifies terms 
that are good independent indicators of each topic. 
These terms can then be used automatically, either by 
themselves or in combination with other terms, to create 
patterns in the knowledge base. 
5.4 Combin ing  In format ion  
The statistical pre-processing methods and calculations 
of relevance weights and weights for category indicators 
lay the groundwork for automatically constructing lin- 
guistic patterns for categorization. Because these indi- 
vidual discriminators can be combined with hand-coded 
knowledge, the statistical recognition of these terms is 
sufficient to augment a knowledge base automatically, 
and the combination of the hand-coded rules with the 
statistical patterns is better than either alone (although 
it could always be argued that, with a little more work, 
the same rules could have been hand-coded). 
These results are not completely satisfying. The sta- 
tistical acquisition method uses only a fraction of the 
power of the pattern language, and the error rate of the 
system could still be reduced. We tried three different 
types of methods-finding exceptions, co-indicators, and 
meta-indicators-to try to improve results using combina- 
tions rather than single term rules. These three methods 
are described as follows: 
Except ions :  Exceptions spot secondary terms that 
would override a category indicated by a "good" 
term, for example, if oil appears in a text about 
the automobile industry rather than petroleum, it 
might appear near motor or engine. 
Co- lnd icators :  Co-indicators spot combinations of 
words, where at least one was a "good" term, where 
the combination was a much better indicator that 
the single term. 
Meta - lnd icators :  Meta-indicators spot terms such as 
produces and manufactures, which are not them- 
selves indicators of a particular industry, but often 
appear near terms that indicate an industry. 
For this process, we compiled a set of tables cover- 
ing, for each good discriminator, the words that ap- 
peared as neighbors of that term along with the num- 
ber of times those words appeared in texts about the 
"right" category vs. texts not about the category. This 
was a computation-intensive process for 3 million words, 
so much so that we had to reduce the size of the table 
by considering only terms with moderate frequency--the 
highest frequency terms are "stop" words, and the lowest 
frequency terms are not good discriminators. 
The following are the major results of this analysis: 
? Using exception lists to try to correct for precision 
problems turned out to be of surprisingly little value 
(about 2% precision). While it is possible that dif- 
ferent methods would yield better results, it seems 
that the data on exceptions are just too sparse--it 
is much easier to get good data on positive examples 
from the training set than negative xamples. 
? Using co-indicators, or second order relations, ap- 
peared to be much more promising than exceptions. 
Like the use of bigrams, this produced only a small 
effect (about 2% in both recall and precision), but 
any technique that improves recall without a loss of 
precision is worth exploring. 
? The use of recta-indicators, while also not produc- 
ing a major effect on results, looks like the most 
promising method. Like co-indicators, these meta- 
indicators rely mainly on positive examples from the 
text, but they have the additional advantage of be- 
ing able to use much larger volumes of data. 
6 Fer t i le  Areas  fo r  Future  Research  
While the improvements in overall system performance 
on this task came as a result of many months of en- 
gineering and experiments, the most promising aspect 
184
of this evaluation is the prospect for new areas where 
statistics can help natural anguage and vice versa. We 
have identified three critical research areas that are likely 
to improve both system performance and general NLP 
performance. 
The first major area of research is in discourse, or text 
structure analysis. This experiment showed that the first 
and last paragraphs of a news story give much more accu- 
rate information than others, and that a general assess- 
ment of relevance of a paragraph serves as a good filter 
for the extraction of information from that paragraph. 
However, this simple filter falls far short of really identi- 
fying where the information in a story lies. For example, 
in many stories the "last" paragraph really comes in the 
middle of a text, with some additional material coming 
at the end because of incidental information or strange 
editing. Similarly, in more complicated texts, there can 
be more than one introductory paragraph, multiple con- 
eluding paragraphs, and other critical information in the 
middle. Statistical techniques are a very weak means of 
guessing this type of structural information. We expect 
that we can improve the results slightly with some more 
sophisticated discourse analysis; and, perhaps more im- 
portantly, this type of evaluation can measure how well 
a structural theory of text can perform. 
The second area to explore is developing eneralized 
patterns from detailed statistical analysis. The first- 
order logarithmic measures used for acquisition here are 
overly simplistic, and assume that relationships between 
words and categories are basically independent. This as- 
sumption is false, because the words are a manifestation 
of concepts and linguistic relations in the text that the 
statistics are ignoring. We are investigating a variety 
of more complex means, including multivariate discrimi- 
nant analysis, that help to determine when, for example, 
the effect of combining satellite with weapon is really an 
effect of combining satellite with any military concept. 
The third, more linguistic, area is in identifying the- 
matic roles. In meta-indicators described earlier, we are 
really identifying potential function words in the text, 
such as produces or manufactures. Since the use of these 
terms in category assignment really assumes that any 
company or industry appearing around them is involved 
in the function or operation, it should be possible to use 
more detailed parsing to check whether this assumption 
fits linguistically, and to use the statistical analysis to 
acquire functional or thematic relations that can help in 
more detailed analysis. 
7 Summary and Conclusion 
This paper has addressed the area where statistical and 
linguistic analysis come together with an application 
focus - -  the assignment of categories to news stories, 
particularly the identification of topics and industries. 
The experiments reported here show that using statis- 
tical methods to acquire simple lexical patterns helps 
knowledge-based processing and leads to a substantial 
improvement in overall system performance. In addition, 
this method promises to ease the burden of hand-coding 
knowledge for each application, by automatically identi- 
fying the significant erms and combinations of terms to 
use knowledge-intensive NLP applications. 
Re ferences  
\[Church et al, 1989\] K. Church, W. Gale, P. Hanks, and 
D. Hindle. Parsing, word associations, and predicate- 
argument relations. In Proceedings of the Interna- 
tional Workshop on Parsing Technologies, Carnegie 
Mellon University, 1989. 
\[Hayes and Weinstein, 1990\] Philip J. Hayes and 
Steven P. Weinstein. CONSTRUE/TIS: A system for 
content-based indexing of a database of news stories. 
In Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference on 
Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, May 
1990. 
\[Jacobs and Rau, 1990\] Paul Jacobs and Lisa Ran. 
SCISOR: Extracting information from on-line news. 
Communications of the Association for Computing 
Machinery, 33(11):88-97, November 1990. 
\[Jacobs et al, 1991\] Paul S. Jacobs, George R. Krupka, 
and Lisa F. Rau. Lexico-semantic pattern matching 
as a companion to parsing in text understanding. In 
,Fourth DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop, pages 337-342, San Mateo, CA, February 1991. 
Morgan-Kaufmann. 
\[Krupka et al, 1991\] George R. Krupka, Paul S. Jacobs, 
Lisa F. Rau, and Lucja Iwafiska. Description of the 
GE NLToolset system as used for MUC-3. In Proceed- 
ings of the Third Message Understanding Conference 
(MUC-3), San Mateo, CA, May 1991. Morgan Kauf- 
mann Publishers. 
\[Kuhns, 1990\] Robert Kuhns. News analysis: A nat- 
ural language application to text processing. In 
Paul S. Jacobs, editor, Text-Based Intelligent Sys- 
tems: Current Research in Text Analysis, Information 
Extraction, and Retrieval, pages 147-150. September 
1990. GE Research and Development Center Report 
CRD90/198. 
\[Ran and Jacobs, 1991\] Lisa F. Rau and Paul S. Jacobs. 
Creating segmented atabases from free text for text 
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Research and Development in Infor- 
mation Retrieval, pages 337-346, October 1991. 
\[Ran, 1991\] Lisa F. Ran. Extracting company names 
from text. In Tim Finin, editor, Sixth IEEE Con- 
ference on Artificial Intelligence Applications. IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Miami Beach, Florida, 
February 1991. 
\[Salton and McGill, 1983\] G. Salton and M. McGill. 
An Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983. 
\[Tong et al, 1986\] Richard M. Tong, L. A. Appelbaum, 
V. N. Askman, and J. F. Cunningham. RUBRIC III: 
An object-oriented expert system for information re- 
trieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual IEEE Sym- 
posium on Expert Systems in Government, pages 106- 
115, Washington, DC., October 1986. IEEE Computer 
Society Press. 
185
