Extended Spelling Correction for German 
Ralf Kese, Friedrich Dudda, Gerhard Heyer, Marianne Kugler 
TA Triumph-Adler AG 
TA Research EF 
Fiirther Str. 212 
D-8500 Nuremberg 80 
e-mail: ralf@triumph-adler.de 
Abstract 
A conscrvativc extension of standard 
spciling corrcction systems for German is 
discusscd which goes beyond normal 
chccking of isolated single words by 
taking multi-words, linguistically 
motivatcd non-words, as well as contexts 
into account. 
1 Motivation 
As indicated by Maurice Gross in his COLING 
86 lccturc (Gross, 1986), European languages 
contain thousands of what he calls "frozen" or 
"compound words". In contrast to "free forms", 
frozen words though being separable into 
several words and suffixes - lack syntactic and/or 
semantic compositionality. This "lack of 
compositionality is apparent from lexical 
restrictions" (at night, but: *at day, *at evening, 
ctc.) as well as "by the impossibility of inserting 
material that is a priori plausible" (*at {coming, 
present, cold, dark} night) (Gross, 1986). 
Since the degree of frozenness can vary, the 
procedure for recognizing compound words 
within a text can be more or less complicated. 
Yet, at least for the entirely and nearly entirely 
frozen forms, simple string matching operations 
will do (Gross, 1986). 
However, although this clearly indicates that 
at least those compound words whose parts have a 
high dcgrce of frozenness are accessible to the 
methods of standard spelling correction systems, 
the problem is that these systems at best try to 
cope with (some) compound nouns (Frisch and 
Zamora, 1988) while they are still ignorant of the 
bulk of other compound forms and of violations 
of lexical and/or cooccurrence (Harris, 1970) 
restrictions in general. 
As Zimmermann points out (Zimmermann, 
1987) with respect to German forms like "in 
bezug auf" (= frozen) versus "mit Bezug auf" (= 
free), compounds clearly are out of the scope of 
standard spelling correction systems due to the 
fact that these systems check for isolated words 
only and disregard the respective contexts. 
Following Gross and Zimmermann (Gross, 
1986; Zimmermann, 1987), we propose to further 
extend standard spelling correction systems onto 
the level of compound words by making them 
context-sensitive as well as capable of treating 
more than a single word at a time. 
Yet even on the level of single words many 
more errors could be detected by a spelling 
corrector if it possessed at least some rudimentary 
linguistic knowledge. In the case of a word that 
takes irregular forms (like the German verb 
"'laufen" or the English noun "mouse", for 
example), a standard system seems to "know" the 
word and its forms for it is able to verify them, 
e.g., by simple lexicon lookup. Yet when 
confronted with a regular though false form of 
the very same word (e.g. with "laufte" as the 
lst/3rd pers. sg. simple past ind. act., or with the 
plural "mouses"), such a system normally fails to 
propose the corresponding irregular form ("lief" 
or "mice") as a correction alternative. 
Following a hint in (Zimmermann, 1987), we 
propose to enhance standard spelling correction 
systems on the level of isolated words by 
introducing an additional sort of lexicon entries 
that explicitly records those cognitive errors that 
are intuitively likely to occur (at least in the 
writings of non-native speakers) but which a 
126
standard system fails to treat in an adequate way 
for system intrinsic reasons. 
Considering that most of these errors give a 
clear indication of a writer's knowledge of the 
orthography of a language, and that therefore 
their correction may be of particular importance 
to him, the system also is explicitly intended to 
exemplify how more complex linguistic 
phenomena that are of importance to a user may 
yet be treated by simpler means, thus achieving 
in the sense of an engineering approach (Heyer, 
1990) a satisfactory trade-off between theoretical 
costs and practical benefits. 
Overview of new Phenomena for 
Spelling Correction 
As there are irregular forms which nevertheless 
are well-formed, i.e.: words, there are also 
regular forms which are ill-formed, i.e.: non- 
words. Whereas words usually are known to a 
spelling correction system, we have to add the 
non-words to its vocabulary in order to improve 
the quality of its corrections. 
(1) 
(2.1) 
(2.3) 
(2.1) 
(2.3) 
(2.2) 
(2.3) 
(3) 
lch lattfe eis. 
versus  
Ich laufe attf dem Eis. 
Er d~rfte Bankrott machen. 
versus  
Er dfirfte bankrott sein. 
Sic kann nicht Fahrrad fahren. 
versus  
Sie kann nicht radfahren. 
Es war bitter kalt. 
versus  
Es war ein bitterkalter Tag. 
Er liebt Ich-Romane. 
versus  
Er liebt Romane in Ichform. 
BetonblOcke vs. *Betonblocks 
versus  
Hi~userblocks vs. *HiiuserblOcke 
On the level of single words in German, non- 
words come from various sources and comprise, 
among others, false feminine derivations of 
certain masculine nouns (*Wandererin, *Abtin), 
false plurals of nouns (*Thematas, *Tertias), non- 
licensed inflections (*beigem, *lila(n)es) or 
comparisons (*lokaler, *minimalst) of certain 
adjectives, false comparisons (*nahste, 
*rentabelerer), wrong names for the citizens of 
towns (*Steinhagener, *Stadth~iger), etc. Some 
out-dated forms (e.g.: PreiBelbeere, verk~iufst, 
abergl~iubig) can likewise be treated as non- 
words. 
It's on the level of compounds that words 
rather than non-words come into consideration 
again when we look for contextual constraints or 
cooccurrence restrictions that determine 
orthography beyond the scope of what can be 
accepted or rejected on the basis of isolated 
words alone. 
For words in German, these restrictions 
determine, among other things, whether or not 
certain forms (1) begin with an upper or lower 
case letter; (2) have to be separated by (2.1) 
blank, (2.2) hyphen, (2.3) or not at all; (3) 
combine with certain other forms; or even (4) 
influence punctuation. Examples are: 
(4) Er rauchte~ ohne daft sic davon wuBte. 
versus 
*Er rauchte ohneL daft sic davon wuBte. 
3 Method 
According to a distinction made in the literature 
(Pollock and Zamora, 1984; Salton, 1989), there 
are two main approaches in automatic spelling 
correction: While the 'absolute' approach "consists 
of using a dictionary of commonly misspelled 
words, and replacing any misspelling detected in 
a text by the corrected version listed in the 
dictionary" (Salton, 1989), the 'relative' approach 
consists of locating in a conventional dictionary 
with correct spellings words "that are most similar 
to a misspelling and selecting a correction from 
these. Generally, the selection method is based on 
maximizing similarity or minimizing the string- 
to-string edit distance" (Pollock and Zamora, 
1984). 
Although there is some use of 'absolute' 
methods in some systems (Pollock and Zamora, 
1984), "referencing a dictionary of correctly 
spelled words" (Frisch and Zamora, 1988) is 
standard. On that basis, most of the purely 
motoric single word errors, or "typographical 
127
errors" (Berkel and Smedt, 1990), can be 
corrected. Some conventional systems additionally 
try to cope with a certain subset of cognitive, or 
"orthographical" (Berkei and Smedt, 1990), errors 
which "result in homophonous strings" and 
involve "some kind of phonemic transcription" 
(Berkel and Smedt, 1990) for their correction. 
Sincc the cognitive errors outlined in 1 and 2 
abovc are non-standard, in the sense that they are 
ncither motoric (by definition) nor phonologically 
motivated, a straightforward method to correct 
thcm is the 'absolute' one of directly encoding 
error pattcrns in a lexicon and replacing each 
matching occurrence in a text by the correction 
listcd in the system lexicon. 
Now, in ordcr to treat single (non-) words 
and compounds in a uniform way, each entry in 
the systcm lcxicon is modelled as a quintuple 
<W,L,R,C,E> specifying a pattern of a (multi-) 
word W for which a correction C will be 
proposed accompanicd by an explanation E iff a 
given match of W against some passage in the 
text under scrutiny differs significantly from C 
and the - possibly empty - left and right contexts 
L and R of W also match the environment of W's 
counterpart in the text. 
Disrcgarding E for a moment, this is 
tantamount to saying that each such record is 
interpreted as a string rewriting rule 
W- ->C / L R 
replacing W (e.g.: Bczug) by C (e.g.: bezug) in the 
environment L R (e.g.: in auf). 
The form of these productions can best be 
characterized with an eye to the Chomsky 
hierarchy as unrestrictcd, since we can have any 
non-null number of symbols on the LHS replaced 
by any numbcr of symbols on the RHS, possibly 
by null (Partee et al, 1990). 
With an eye to semi-Thue or extended 
axiomatic systems one could say that a linearly 
ordered sequence of strings W, C1, C2, ..., Cm is 
a derivation of Cm iff (1) W is a (faulty) string 
(in the text to be corrected) and (2) each Ci 
follows from the immediately preceding string by 
one of the productions listed in the lexicon 
(Partee et al, 1990). 
Thus, theoretically, a single mistake can be 
corrected by applying a whole sequence of 
productions, though in practice the default is 
clearly that a correction be done in a single 
derivational step, at least as long as the system is 
just operating on strings and not on additional 
non- terminal symbols. 
Occurrences of W, L, and R in a text are 
recognized by pattern matching techniques. An 
error pattern W ignores the particularly error- 
prone aspects upper/lower case and word 
separator (see the examples in 2 above). It thus 
matches both the correct and incorrect spellings 
with respect o these features. 
Beside wildcards for characters, like "*", a 
pattern for W, L, or R may contain also 
wildcards for words allowing, for example, the 
specification of a maximal distance of L or R 
with respect to W. Since the types of errors 
discussed here only occur within sentences, such 
a distant match has to be restricted by the 
sentence boundaries. Thus, by having the system 
operate sentencewise, any left or right context is 
naturally restricted to be some string within the 
same sentence as W or to be a boundary of that 
sentence (e.g.: a punctuation mark). 
Any left or right context is either a positive 
or a negative one, i.e., its components are 
homogeneously either required or forbidden in 
order for the corresponding rule to fire. So far it 
has not been necessary to allow for mixed modes 
within a left or right context. 
In case a correction C is proposed to the user, 
additionally a message will be displayed to him 
identifying the reason why C is correct rather 
than W. Depending on the user's knowledge of 
the language under investigation, he can take this 
either as an opportunity to learn or rather as a 
help for deciding whether to finally accept or 
reject the proposal. 
There are two kinds of explanations, absolute 
and conditional ones. Whereas absolute rules 
indicate that the system has necessary and 
sufficient evidence for W's deviance, there clearly 
are cases where either W or C could be correct 
and this question cannot be decided on the basis 
of the system's lexical information alone. In these 
cases, a conditional or i f -then explanation is 
given to the user offering a higher-level decision 
criterion which the system itself is unable to 
apply. 
Take, as an example, the sentence 
128
Dieser Film betrifft Alt und Jung. 
which clearly allows for two readings, one which 
renders "Alt und Jung" as the false spelling of the 
idiomatic expression "alt und jung" meaning 
"everybody", and another one which takes "Alt 
und Jung" as the correct form that literally 
designates the old and the young while excluding 
the middle-aged. Thus, substitutability by 
"jedermann" (i.e.: "everybody") would be an 
adequate decision criterion to convey to the user. 
Although the method described above 
introduces a new kind of lexical data, its (higher- 
level) error correction still operates on nothing 
but strings. No deep and time-consuming 
analysis, like parsing, is involved. 
Restricting the system that way makes our 
approach to context-sensitiveness different from 
the one considered in (Rimon and Herz, 1991), 
where context sensitive spelling verification is 
proposed to be done with the help of "local 
constraints automata (LCAs)" which process 
contextual constraints on the level of lexical or 
syntactic ategories rather than on the basic level 
of strings. In fact, proof-reading with LCAs 
rather amounts to genuine grammar checking and 
as such belongs to a different and higher level of 
language checking. 
Context sensitive spelling checking, as 
proposed here, can be regarded as a checking 
level in its own right, lying in between any 
checking on word level and grammar checking. It 
thus could complement he two-level checker 
discussed in (Vosse, 1992) by correcting especially 
those errors in idiomatic expressions, like "te alle 
tijden" -> "te allen tijde", which cannot be 
detected on word or sentence level; compare 
(Vosse, 1992). 
4 A Processing Model 
A good model of the system is given by a 
deterministic multitape Turing machine (Hopcroft 
and Ullman, 1979) consisting of a finite control 
with, in effect, three tapes and tape heads. The 
following description relates to sentence level: 
Initially, the input appears on the first tape 
with each of the tape's cells containing either a 
word, a blank (symbolized below by a single "B"), 
or a left or right sentence boundary symbol. 
Thus, any input sentence can be stored by a 
finite sequence of cells. 
The second tape holds a read-only copy of 
the initial text. While the first tape will be 
rewritten, the second serves just as a reference 
tape. The third tape is also read-only, it holds the 
finite sequence of lexicon entries. 
Consider the following snapshot of the system 
TI: B in B Bezug B auf B 
T2: B in B Bezug B auf B 
T3: /b/ezug (1in ) lauf  bezug 
where "Bezug" has been scanned on the reference 
tape T2, and a pattern /b/ezug has been found in 
the lexicon T3 that ignores upper/lower case in 
the match but requires a lower case "bezug" just 
in case "in" can be found as 1 word to the left (as 
is expressed by "(1in") and "auf" can be found 1 
non-blank cell to the right on T2. 
Since the corresponding contexts of /b/ezug 
can be verified on T2 (by simply moving T2's 
head " to the respective cells, scanning their 
contents, and comparing these with the relevant 
information on T3), finally the error "Bezug" is 
corrected on T1 and a new checking cycle is 
started with the next word: 
TI: B in B bezug B auf B 
A 
T2: B in B Bezug B auf B 
A 
Note, as should be clear from the outset, that 
a previous correction on T1 is not available as a 
context for any next word under scrutiny, but 
only the uncorrected words on T2 are. 
Thus, if it were counterfactually the case that 
"auf" had to be corrected somehow whenever it 
appeared to the right of "bezug" as opposed to 
"Bezug", and given the input of the above 
example, our system - though producing "bezug" 
as the left context of "auf" on T1 - would clearly 
fail to correct "auf" since it would still be taking 
any context from T2. 
129
Although one can think of other, more 
realistic, cases (like, e.g., "dab ich Eis laufte" -> 
"dab ich cislief") which require two or more 
correction steps such that at least one of these 
steps ("Eis lief" -> "eislief") depends on another 
one ("laufte" -> "lief"), there clearly are other 
alternatives (like writing clever lexical entries) 
beside giving up reading from T2. 
Giving up T2 would mean to give up the 
simple working hypothesis that all the higher- 
Icvcl errors within a givcn input sentence can be 
corrcctcd indcpendcntly. As a consequence, the 
systcm would become much more complex and, 
probably, less efficient. 
For German, we have not yet faced any 
(significant amout of) data that would justify a 
more complex redesign of the system. However, 
since the data captured in the system's lexicon 
covers at present some 50 % of the relevant 
phenomena compared to the Duden (Berger 
1985), the ultimate complexity of the system has 
to be regarded as an open and empirical question. 
read beyond a known abbreviation. This might 
result eventually in taking two sentences to be 
one, but would, of course, not disturb intra- 
sentential error correction. Nothing, however, 
prevents the system from stopping at an unknown 
abbreviation and thereby falling short of a 
context it otherwise would have recognized. From 
this it is clear that the system should at least 
know the most frequent abbreviations of a given 
language. 
Likewise, the formatting information of a text 
is preserved to a very high degree during 
correction, as it should be. Nevertheless, there 
naturally are cases where some such information 
will get lost as is clear from the simple fact that 
there can be shrinking productions reducing n 
differently formatted elements on the LHS to m 
elements on the RHS, with m < n. But these are 
borderline cases. 
What is less acceptable, for each of the 
implcmentations mentioned above, is the lack of 
integration of the checking on the various levels. 
5 Status of Implementation 
A first prototype of the system described above 
has been developed in C under UNIX within the 
ESPRIT II project 2315 "Translator's Workbench" 
(TWB) as one of several separate modules 
checking basic as well as higher levels of various 
languages Ilike grammar and style; see (Thurmair, 
1990) and (Winkelmann, 1990)\]. 
A derived and extended B-release version - 
covering 3.000 rewriting rules - has been 
integrated into both a proprietary text processing 
software under DOS and Microsoft's WINWORD 
1.1 under MS WINDOWS 3.0. In each case it runs 
independently from the built-in standard spelling 
verifier, although this is not transparent to the 
user who perceives just one proofreader checking 
each sentence of a text twice, i.e., on two 
different levels. 
On both these implementations, some 
problems have received practical solutions to an 
acceptable degree. 
For example, the problem of mistaking an 
abbreviation for the end of a sentence (because 
both end with a dot), which could prevent a 
context from being recognized, is 'solved' by 
having the sentence segmentation routine always 
Thus, it may happen that the checkers 
running one after the other over the same text - 
disturb each other's results by proposing 
antagonistic orrections with respect to one and 
the same expression: Within the correct passage 
"in bezug auf", for example, "bezug" will first be 
regarded as an error by the standard checker 
which then will propose to rewrite it as "Bezug". 
If the user accepts this proposal, he will receive 
the exactly opposite advice by the context 
sensitive checker. 
On the other hand, checking on different 
levels could nicely go hand in hand and produce 
synergetic effects: For, clearly, any context 
sensitive checking requires that the contexts 
themselves be correct and thus possibly have been 
corrected in a previous, possibly context free, 
step. The checking of a single word could in turn 
profit from contextual knowledge in narrowing 
down the number of correction alternatives to be 
proposed for a given error: While there may be 
some eight or nine plausible candidates a~, 
corrections of "Bezjg" when regarded in isolation, 
only one candidate, i.e. "bezug", is left when the 
context "in auf" is taken into account. 
Thus, there is a strong demand for arriving al 
a holistic solution for multi-level language 
checking rather than for just having various level 
130
experts particularistically hooked together in 
series. This will be a task for the future. 
6 Ongoing Work 
As an inhouse test revealed, it is very important 
for users to have the possibility to add data to the 
system. As a consequence of that we are currently 
developing a higher-level user dictionary that will 
accept and support entering context-sensitive 
(multi-) words of the kind discussed in this 
paper. 
At the same time, data acquisition is still 
going on. Since, unfortunately, there is (to our 
knowledge) no ready-made corpus of higher-level 
errors available, the collection of data is a time 
consuming process. The best reference book for 
German seems to be the Duden (Berger 1985), yet 
it consists of an unstructured mixture of all 
possible kinds of errors and often presents a 
paradigmatic example rather than all the members 
of a given error class. 
As concerns languages other than German, we 
take it that a similar approach is feasible for 
them as well. Although in comparison with, e.g., 
English, French, Italian, and Spanish, German 
seems to be unique as concerns the relevance of 
the context for upper/lower case spellings in a 
large number of cases, there are at least, as 
indicated in (Gross, 1986), the thousands of 
compounds or frozen words in each of these 
languages which are clearly within reach for the 
methods discussed. 
Rudolf Frisch and Antonio Zamora. Spelling 
assistance for compound words. IBM Journal of 
Research and Development, 32(2): 195-200, March 
1988. 
Maurice Gross. Lcxicon Grammar. The 
Representation of Compound Words. In 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 
1-6, Bonn, Germany, August 1986. International 
Committee on Computational Linguistics. 
Zellig S. Harris. Papers in Structural and 
Transformational Linguistics. Formal Linguistics 
Series, volume 1. D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1970. 
Gerhard Heyer. Probleme und Aufgaben ciner 
angewandten Computerlinguistik. KI-Kiozstliche 
Intelligenz 3(1): 38-42, 1990. 
John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 
Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and 
Computation. Addison -Wesley Publishing 
Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 1979. 
Barbara H. Partee, Alice ter Meulen, and Robert 
E. Wall. Mathematical Methods in Linguistics. 
Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy, volume 30. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands 1990. 
Joseph J. Pollock and Antonio Zamora. Automatic 
spelling correction in scientific and scholarly text. 
Communications of the ACM, 27(4): 358-368, 
April 1984. 
References 
Dieter Berger, editor. Richtiges und gutes 
Deutsch. WOrterbuch der sprachlichen 
Zweifelsfalle. Der Duden in 10 B~inden. Das 
Standardwerk zur deutschen Sprache, volume 9. 
Bibliographisches Institut, Mannheim, Germany, 
3rd ed. 1985. 
Brigitte van Berkel and Koenraad De Smedt 1990. 
Triphone Analysis: A combined method for the 
correction of orthographical and typographical 
errors. In Proceedings of the Second Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 
77-83, Austin, Texas, February 1988. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
Mori Rimon and Jacky Herz. The Recognition 
Capacity of Local Syntactic Constraints. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 155-160, Berlin, 
Germany, April 1991. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Gerard Salton. Automatic Text Processing. The 
Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of 
Information by Computer. Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 
1989. 
Gregor Thurmair. Parsing for Grammar and Style 
Checking. In Papers presented to the Thirteenth 
International Conference on Conwutational 
Linguistics, volume 2, pages 365-370, Helsinki, 
Finland, August 1990. Hans Karlgren, editor. 
131
Theo Vosse. Detecting and Correcting Morpho- 
syntactic Errors in Real Texts. In Proceedings of 
the Third Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, Trento, Italy, March/April 
1992. Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Giintcr Winkelmann. Semiautomatic Interactive 
Multilingual Style Analysis (SIMSA). In  Papers 
presented to the Thirteenth International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
w)lume 1, pages 79-81, Helsinki, Finland, August 
1990. Hans Karigren, editor. 
Harald Zimmermann. Textverarbeitung im 
Rahmen moderner Bi~rokommunikationstechniken. 
PIK. Praxis der lnformationsverarbeitung und 
Kommunikation 10: 38-45, 1987. 
132
