Robust parsing of natural language descriptions 
expressed in telegraphic style 
Michela Fasolo, Lorenzo Garbuio, 
Andrea Malanima 
Centro Studi CERVEDomani, CERVED SpA, 
Corso Stati Uniti 14, 35020 Padova (Italy) 
Nicola Guarino 
Italian National Research Council, LADSEB-CNR 
Corso Stati Uniti 4, 35020 Padova (Italy) 
email: guarino@ ladseb.pd.cnr.it 
1 Introduction 
Sublanguages represent an important application area for 
NLU (Grishman and Kittredge,1986). Their syntactic 
simplicity and reduced semantic variability provide clear 
computational advantages. In the present paper we consider a
sublanguage currently used for official publication of 
business activities which is characterized by a telegraphic 
style typical of commercial ds. Morphological nd syntactic 
ill-formedness i very frequent within this sublanguage, 
hence a robust parser is a must. 
The corpus we have considered was extracted from the 
on-line archives of the Italian Chambers of Commerce, and 
contains about 4 million descriptions of economic activities. 
They represent an important source of information about he 
structure of the Italian economy. Since our main goal is 
intelligent information retrieval, only a part of the 
information contained in the sentences i  considered relevant. 
Basically, the kind of information we are interested in 
involves nouns, prepositions and noun modifiers, and 
involves verbs only in their nominalized or infinitive form. 
The peculiarity of the parsing approach described in the 
paper consists in the fact that we limit the syntactic analysis 
to the elementary relationships occurring among these 
elements, discarding whatever is not recognized by the 
morphological analyzer and giving up the attempt o 
reconstruct the syntactic tree of the whole sentence. 
2 The sublanguage 
Examples of the sublanguage we are considering are reported 
below: 
Produzione conto terzi olio di oliva. 
*production (for) third parties (of) olive oil. 1 
Mulino. Produzione di foraggio cereali mais. 
*Mill. Production of fodder cereals com. 
La produzione, l'importazione, l'esportazione, il commercio 
all'ingrosso e al dettaglio di prodotti tessili in fibre naturali e 
sintetiche  articoli per la casa in genere. 
1 The translation provided is rather literal, but reflects the 
ungrammatical, telegraphic style of the sublanguage. 
*Production, import, export, wholesale and retail trade of 
textile products of natural and synthetic fibres and articles for 
the home. 
As we can see, the utterances are mostly formed by 
complex noun phrases rather than complete sentences, in 
which the number of constituents and the nesting degree 
may be rather high. Ellipses of prepositions and/or 
coordinating conjunctions are also frequent; the use of 
adjectives i relatively poor, and, when used, they generally 
bind the technical component of the information; the use of 
locutions with adjectival function is also common. Finally, 
the usage of verbs is quite scanty, and restricted to 
conversational parts; lexical mistakes are also recurrent. 
In their basic version, these noun phrases are formed 
either by a single noun or by a group of the form NI-P-N2 
(noun, preposition, noun) where N1 is associated with an 
economic activity, and N2 with the object of this activity 
linked by a preposition, which is often absent. 
3 Syntactic analysis 
The core of our approach is the extraction of elementary 
syntactic relationships (ESR) from a possibly ill-formed 
sentence. ESR's are described by a definite clause grammar 
(DCG), a fragment of which appears in Fig.1. Due to the 
presence of the special symbol skip in the right side of the 
rules, this grammar turns to be a special, very simple case 
of a discontinuous grammar (Dahl, 1989). 
esr(na(N,A)) 
esr(npn(N1,EN2)) 
esr(nn(N1,N2)) 
esr(ncn(N1 ,C,N2)) 
---* na(N,A). % noun-adjective 
-.> npn(N1, P, N2). % noun-preposition-noun 
nn(N1, N2). % noun-noun 
--.3. ncn(N1,C,N2). % noun-conjunction-noun 
na(N,A) ~ noun(N), adj(A). 
npn(N1, P, N2) -~ noun(N1), skip, prep(P), possible_adjs, noun~group(N2). 
nn(Nl, N2) -~ noun(N1), possible_adjs, noun(N2). 
non(N1, C, N2) ~ noun(N1), skip, conj(C), noun group(N2). 
noun group(N) -~ noun(N) I art(A), noun(N). 
possil~e_adjs --~ adjectives I \[ \]- 
adjectives --~ adj(A), possible_conj, adjectives. 
possib~e_conj --> conj(C) I \[ \]- 
Prolog expansion of the skip symbol: 
skip(S0,S2):- appond(S1 ,$2,S0). 
Fig 1 A part of our DCG grammar 
229
The introduction of the skip allows us to ignore 
unknown or ill-formed words, and accounts in a very 
compact way for the positional variations of the structure 
elements. 
4 The system 
Input text first passes through a morphological nalyzer 
similar to the one used in (Antonacci et al, 1988). Before 
undergoing syntactical analysis, the relevant phrases 
occurring within descriptions are isolated by taking into 
account he coarse semantic trait (activities vs. activity 
objects) of the nouns involved. After a single description has 
been analyzed by our grammar, ESR's undergo an 
intermediate processing in order to reduce morphological nd 
syntactic ambiguity and to take into account ellipses and 
conjunctions. These phenomena are handled by employing 
preference schemes improved by semantic ontrol (Hobbs 
and Bear, 1990). 
Finally, ESR's are converted into conceptual 
relationships by using a many-to-many mapping between 
syntactic and conceptual relations imilar to the one used in 
(Antonacci et al, 1988); conceptual relationships are 
subsequently validated by using a semantic knowledge base, 
and finally merged into a semantic tree. The knowledge 
representation technique adopted is inspired by the ITL 
system (Guarino, 1991), where semantic validation reduces 
to order-sorted unification. 
5 Preliminary results 
A prototype of the system has been implemented on 
Macintosh workstation in LPA MacProlog. It has been 
tested on a significative fragment of our corpus (about 2000 
descriptions inthe areas of agriculture and services). 
The output of the system has been manually tested by a 
linguist, for correctness and completeness. Errors turn out to 
be independent of the syntactic algorithm, and are mainly 
due to (i) lack of semantic knowledge; (ii) lack of lexical 
knowledge (unknown or ill-formed words); (iii) difficulties 
with disambiguation a d phrase separation. 
The query system is now under development. 
As far as system efficiency is concerned, the time 
complexity of the whole analysis process seems to be 
almost quadratic with respect to the length of the sentence, 
while the mean understanding time is well below 10 seconds 
on a Macintosh Ilfx. 
6 Discussion and conclusions 
We would like to make clear that the approach we have 
presented is seriously limited, by the fact that we are not 
able to fully exploit syntactic information. This means that 
complete sentences containing verbs and subordinate clauses 
cannot be properly handled. However, our experiments show 
that the approach behaves well in the field of real business 
descriptions. 
Semantic knowledge plays a fundamental role in our 
system, as it has to validate the syntactic relationships 
proposed by the shallow parsing algorithm. Currently, our 
knowledge base consists of a taxonomy of 3000 concepts, 
together with 360 semantic onstraints for the conceptual 
relations. Although the current prototype uses a hand-written 
knowledge base, some techniques for semi-automatic 
extraction of semantic knowledge from our large corpus have 
been studied in our project (Velardi et al, 1991). The idea is 
that the non-ambiguous sentence fragments present in the 
corpus capture specific word usage patterns, which, via a 
human-controlled generalization process, may generate the 
kind of semantic onstraints we are looking for to pu t in the 
knowledge base. 
A full syntactic parsing would be too expensive for large 
corpora, and it would also fail to consider useful information 
embedded within ill-formed sentences. The encouraging 
preliminary results indicate that our approach constitutes a 
good compromise between syntactic ompleteness and 
meaning extraction. 
In conclusion, the shallow parsing algorithm we have 
described may play a crucial role in order to trigger a boot- 
strapping process of knowledge acquisition, giving us some 
chance to overcome, at least in our domain, a major bottle- 
neck in natural language understanding. 
References 
Ver6nica Dahl. Discontinous grammars. Computational 
Intelligence, 5(4):161-179, 1989. 
F. Antonacci, M. Russo, M.T. Pazienza, and P. Velardi. 
Representation a d Control Strategies for large Knowledge 
Domains: An Application to NLP. Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 2 (3-4), 1988. 
Jaime G. Carbonell and Philip J. Hayes. Recovery 
Strategies for Parsing Extragrammatical Language. 
Computational Linguistics, Special Issue on Ill-Formed 
Input, 9(3-4), 1983. 
Michela Fasolo, Lorenzo Garbuio and Nicola Guarino. 
Comprensione di descrizioni di attivit~ economico-produttive 
espresse in linguaggio naturale. In Proceedings of the 5 ?- 
Convegno sulla Programmazioni Logica (GULP "90), 
Padova, Italy, 1990. 
Jerry R. Hobbs, John Bear. Two Principles of Parse 
Preference. In Proceedings of the 13th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-90), 
Helsinki, Finland, 1990. 
Ralph Grishman and Richard Kittredge ditors. Analysing 
Language in Restricted Domains: Sublanguage Descriptions 
and Processing. Lawrence Erlbaum Ass., Hillsdale, New 
Jersey, 1986. 
Nicola Guarino. A Concise Presentation f ITL. To appear 
in M. Richter editor. Processing Declarative Knowledge. 
Springer-Verlag, 1991. 
K. Jensen, G.E. Heidorn, L.A. Miller, and Y. Ravin. Parse 
Fitting and Prose Fixing: Getting a Hold on Ill-Formedness. 
Computational Linguistics, Special Issue on Ill-Formed 
Input, 9(3-4), 1983. 
Paola Velardi, Maria Teresa Pazienza, and Michela Fasolo. 
How to encode semantic knowledge: a method for meaning 
representation a d computer aided acquisition. To appear on 
Computational Linguistics, 1991. 
230
