Learning a Scanning Understanding for 
"Real-world" Library Categorization 
Ste fan  Wermter*  
Computer  Sc ience Depar tment  
Un ivers i ty  of  Hamburg  
2000 Hamburg  50 
Federa l  Repub l i c  of  Germany 
Abst ract  
This paper describes, compares, and evaluates three dif- 
ferent approaches for learning a semantic lassification of 
library titles: 1) syntactically condensed titles, 2) com- 
plete titles, and 3) titles without insignificant words are 
used for learning the classification in connectionist re- 
current plausibility networks. In particular, we demon- 
strate in this paper that automatically derived feature 
representations and recurrent plausibility networks can 
scale up to several thousand library titles and reach al- 
most perfect classification accuracy (>98%) compared 
to a real-world library classification. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Our goal is to examine hybrid symbolic/connectionist 
and connectionist approaches for classifying a substan- 
tial number of real-world title phrases. These approaches 
are embedded in the framework of SCAN (Wermter 92), 
a Symbolic Connectionist Approach for Natural lan- 
guage phrases, aimed towards a scanning understanding 
of natural anguage rather than focusing on an in-depth 
understanding. For our experiments we took an existing 
classification from the online catalog of the main library 
at Dortmund University and as a first subclassification 
we selected titles from three classes: "computer science" 
(CS), "history/politics" (HP), and "materials/geology" 
(MG). 
2 P reprocess ing  o f  T i t le  Phrases  
2.1 Symbol ic  Syntact i c  Condensat ion  
The first approach used syntactic ondensation based on 
a chart parser and a headnoun extractor. The symbolic 
chart parser built a syntactic structure for a title using 
a context-free grammar and a syntactic lexicon. Then 
the headnoun extractor etrieved the sequence of head- 
nouns for building a compound noun. For instance, the 
compound noun "software access guidelines" was gen- 
erated from "guidelines on subject access to microcom- 
puter software". This headnoun extractor was motivated 
*This research was supported in part by the Fed- 
eral Secretary for Research and Technology under cont ract  
#01IV101AO and by the Computer Science Department of 
Dortmund University. 
by the close relationship between oun phrases and com- 
pound nouns and by the importance of nouns as content 
words (Finin 80). 
Each noun in a compound noun was represented 
with 16 binary manually encoded semantic features, like 
measuring-event, changing-event, scientific-field, prop- 
erty, mechanism etc. The set of semantic features had 
been developed as a noun representation for a related 
scientific technical domain and had been used for struc- 
tural disambiguation (Wermter 89). The first approach 
contained a relatively small set of 76 titles since for each 
noun 16 features had to be determined manually and for 
each word in the title the syntactic ategory had to be 
in the lexicon which contained 900 entries. 
2.2 Unrest r i c ted  Complete  Phrases  
In our second approach, we used an automatically ac- 
quired significance vector for each word based on the 
occurrence of the words in certain classes. Each value 
v(w, ci) in a significance vector epresented the frequency 
of occurrence of word w in class ci divided by the total 
frequency of word w in all classes. These significance 
vectors were computed for the words of 2493 library ti- 
tles from the three classes CS, HP, and MG. 
2.3 E l iminat ion  of  Ins igni f icant  Words  
In the third approach we analyzed the most frequent 
words in the 2493 titles of the second approach. We 
eliminated words that occured more than five times in 
our corpus and that were prepositions, conjunctions, ar- 
ticles, and pronouns. Words were represented with the 
same significance vectors as in the second approach. This 
elimination of frequently occuring domain-independent 
words was expected to make classification easier since 
many domain-independent i significant words were re- 
moved from the titles. 
3 The  Arch i tec ture  o f  the  Recur rent  
P laus ib i l i ty  Network  
The semantic lassification was learned by using a con- 
nectionist recurrent plausibility network. A recurrent 
plausibility network is similar to a simple recurrent net- 
work (Elman 89) but instead of learning to predict 
words, recurrent connections support the assignment of 
plausible classes (see figure 1). The recurrent plausi- 
bility network was trained in a supervised mode using 
251
the backpropagation learning algorithm (Rumelhart et 
al. 86). In each training step the feature representa- 
tion of a word and its preceding context was presented 
to the network in the word bank and context bank to- 
gether with the desired class. A unit in the output layer 
received the value 1 if the unit represented the particular 
class of the title, otherwise the unit received the value 0. 
The real-valued hidden layer represented the context of 
preceding words. At the beginning of a title the context 
bank was initialized with values of 0 since there was no 
preceding context. After the first word had been pre- 
sented the context bank was initialized with the values 
of the hidden layer that encoded the reduced preceding 
context. 
Classes 
! ! 
Hidden layer 
! 
Word bank Context bank 
Semantic nput features 
Figure 1: Recurrent Plausibility Network for Titles 
4 Resu l t s  and  Conclus ions 
For the first approach the 76 titles were divided into 61 
titles for training and 15 titles for testing. For the 2493 
titles in the second and third approach we used 1249 ti- 
tles for training and 1244 for testing. Using these train- 
ing and test sets we examined ifferent network archi- 
tectures and training parameters. For the first approach 
a configuration with 6 hidden units and a learning rate 
of 0.001 showed the smallest number of errors on the 
training and test set. For the second and third approach 
3 hidden units and the learning rate 0.0001 performed 
best. 
Below we show example titles, the titles after pre- 
processing, and their sequential class assignment. The 
first two titles illustrate that two titles with the same fi- 
nal headnoun ("design") are assigned to different classes 
due to their different learned preceding context. The 
third title illustrates the second approach of classifying 
an unrestricted complete phrase. The network first as- 
signs the CS class for the initial phrase "On the op- 
erating experience of the..." since such initial represen- 
tations have occurred in the CS class. However, when 
more specific knowledge is available ("doppler sodar sys- 
tem...") the assigned class is changed to the MG class. 
In the fourth example the same title is shown for the 
third approach which eliminates insignificant domain- 
independent words. In general, the second and third 
approach ave the potential to deal with unanticipated 
grammatical nd even ungrammatical titles since they 
do not rely on a predefined grammar. 
1. Title: Design of relational database schemes by 
deleting attributes in the canonical decomposition; 
Approachl: Compound noun: Decomposition (CS) 
attribute (CS) scheme (CS) design (CS) 
2. Title: Design of bulkheads for controlling water in 
underground mines; Approach1: Compound noun: 
Mine (MG) water (MG) bulkhead (MG) design 
(MG) 
3. Title: On the operating experience of the doppler 
sodar system at the Forschungszentrum Juelich; 
Approach2: Unrestricted complete title: On (CS) 
the (CS) operating (CS) experience (CS) of (CS) 
the (CS) doppler (MG) sodar (MG) system (MG) at 
(MG) the (MG) Forschungszentrum (MG) Juelich 
(MG) 
4. Title: On the operating experience Of the doppler 
sodar system at the Forschungszentrum Juelich; 
Approach3: Unrestricted reduced title: 
operating (CS) experience (CS) doppler (MG) so- 
dar (MG) system (MG) Forschungszentrum (MG) 
Juelich (MG) 
The overall performance of the three approaches as 
recorded in the best found configuration is summarized 
in table 1. The first approach performed worst for clas- 
sifying new titles from the test set alhough the titles 
in the training set were learned completely. The second 
approach performed better on the test set for a much 
bigger training and test set of unrestricted phrases. The 
third approach demonstrated that the elimination of in- 
significant words from unrestricted phrases can improve 
performance for the big set of titles. 
Performance Approach1 Approach2 Approach3 
Training 100% 98.4% 99.9% 
Testing 93% 97.7% 99.4% 
Table 1: Performance for Semantic Classification 
In conclusion, we described and evaluated three dif- 
ferent approaches for semantic lassification which use 
hybrid symbolic/connectionist andconnectionist repre- 
sentations. Our results show that recurrent plausibility 
networks and automatically acquired feature representa- 
tions can provide an efficient basis for learning and gen- 
eralizing a scanning understanding of real-world library 
classifications. 
References  
Elman J.L. 1989. Structured representations and connection- 
ist models. Proceedings o\] the Eleventh Annual Conference 
o\] the Cognitive Science Society, Ann Arbor. 
Finin T.W. 1980. The semantic Interpretation of Com- 
pound Nominals. PhD Thesis. University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. 
Rumelhart D.E., Hinton G.E., Williams R.J. 1986. Learn- 
ing Internal Representations by Error Propagation. In: 
Rumelhart D.E., McClelland J.L. (Eds.) Parallel distributed 
Processing Vol. 1. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Wermter, S. 1989. Integration of Semantic and Syntac- 
tic Constraints for Structural Noun Phrase Disambiguation. 
Proceedings o\] the Eleventh International Joint Conlerence 
on Artificial Intelligence, Detroit. 
Wermter, S. 1992 (forthcoming). Scanning Understand- 
ing: A Symbolic Connectionist Approach .for Natural Lan- 
guage Phrases. Technical Report. University of Hamburg. 
252
