Practical World Model ing for NLP Applications 
Lynn Carlson 
U.S. Department of Defense 
Ft. George G. Meade, MD 20755 
lcarlson@ a.nl.cs.cmu.edu 
Sergei Nirenburg 
Center for Machine Translation 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
sergei@ nl.cs.cmu.edu 
1 Why Does One Need a World Model? 
Practical NLP applications requiring semantic and pragmatic 
analysis of texts necessitate he construction ofa world model, 
an ontology, to support interpretation f text elements. Con- 
straints on world model elements erve as heuristics on the 
cooccurrence of lexical and other meanings in the text, facil- 
itating both natural anguage understanding and generation. 
Propositional meanings (defined in the lexicon in terms of 
links to the world model) trickle down to the text meaning 
representation as instances of world model entities. Our pri- 
mary objective in world modeling is to support multilingual 
applications, o constructing a language-independent ontol- 
ogy is crucial. The word sense view of ontology building 
leads to proliferation of concepts whenever words in different 
languages do not "line-up" (see EDR 1990), while using a 
core set of "primitives" is limited for large-scale applications, 
if shades of meaning are to be captured. In our environment, 
concept acquisition is guided by examining cross-linguistic 
evidence and representational trade-offs. In other large-scale 
ontology projects, the separation of lexical from conceptual 
knowledge is not always clear, as in the Cyc project at MCC, 
a knowledge base containing millions of facts about he world 
(Lenat and Guha, 1990), or the KT system (Dahlgren, 1988), 
which classifies commonsense knowledge for English words. 
In the DIONYSUS project at CMU, the world model, the lex- 
icon and the text meaning representation are closely intercon- 
nected, in terms of their content and format. World modeling 
is supported by the ONTOS system, which consists of a) a con- 
straint language, b) an ontology, or set of general concepts, c) 
a set of domain models and d) an intelligent knowledge acqui- 
sition interface. The basic features of the ONTOS constraint 
language are as follows (see Carlson & Nirenburg, 1990, for 
details). A world model is a collection of frames. A frame 
is a named set of slots, interpreted as an ontological concept 
(voluntary-olfactory-event, geopolitical-entity). A slot rep- 
resents an ontological property (temperature, caused-by) and 
consists of a named set of facets. A facet is a named set of 
fillers. Facets refer to the status of property values, e.g.: 
value actual values of property 
(e.g., for concept instances) 
default typical value of a property 
sem set of"legal" values; 
akin to selectional restrictions 
A filler is a symbol, number, range, etc. A symbolic filler 
(prefixed by "*") names an ontological concept: (ALL (SUB- 
CLASSES (value *property *object *event))). 
2 Ontology Building in Context: Scalar 
Attributes 
In the ONTOS system, a mechanism relating scalar attributes 
(AGE, TEMPERATURE) to measuring units (TEMPORAL- 
UNIT, THERMOMETRIC-UNIT) allows scalar information 
to be converted into a standard format for interlingua rep- 
resentation. The DOMAIN slot of a scalar attribute de- 
fines the types of concepts the attribute can describe. In the 
ATrRIBUTE-RANGE slot, the sem facet specifies an abso- 
lute constraint on the range of numerical values the attribute 
can have, while the measuring-unit facet designates a standard 
unit for interpreting the constraint: 
(AGE 
(DOMAIN (sem *object)) 
(ATTRIBUTE-RANGE (sem (> 0)) 
(measuring-unit *second) ) ) 
Ontology building has never been a totally independent 
project in our environment. World knowledge in DIONYSUS 
has been acquired with the express purpose of using it in a nat- 
ural language processing system. Knowledge representation 
requirements of such a system include, in addition to ontol- 
ogy specification, a representation for a lexicon entry and a 
language for recording the meaning of input text. The inter- 
action between these static knowledge sources and a natural 
language analyzer is illustrated in Figure 1. 
World modeling decisions about scalar attributes are influ- 
enced by the way the lexicon is built and vice versa. In 
the DIONYSUS system, relative scalar terms like very old, 
or high~low are not given a separate ontological status. In- 
stead, lexical entries for such words are associated with on- 
tologically motivated constraints on scalar attributes. The 
language-specific relationship between word-modifier and the 
language-independent r lationship between concept-property 
is illustrated using the example of fresh-brewed coffee. In the 
ontology, the concept COFFEE appears as follows: 
(COFFEE 
(IS-A (value *beverage)) 
(AGE (sem (> 0)) 
(default (<> 0 4)) 
(measuring-unit *hour))) 
The default facet of the AGE slot expresses a typical range 
of values for the age of COFFEE, which can be overridden, as 
235
3 
.- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  -. 
/ . . " "  " , .~ 
ONTOS 2 LEXICON 4 TA~RLAMo A TEXT 
CONSTRAINT ENTRY M~AN ING REPRESENTATION 
LANGUAGE ," ................. FORMAT ...................... ~NGUAGE 
:;IIURCE TEXT ............. ~//.. ANALYZER 
Figure 1: Interrelationship of Ontology, Lexicon, Text Meaning 
Representation a d Processor in a Natural Language Understanding 
System. The numbered links in the figure are interpreted in the 
following manner, h ontological concepts are represented in the 
ON'rOS constraint language. 2, 3, 4: portions of the ONTOS constraint 
language, the lexicon entry formal and TAMERLAN are shared. 5: 
lcxical entries are represented in the lexicon entry format. 6, 7: 
lexical entries have pointers to information in TAMERLAN and/or 
information i  the ontology. 8: TAMERLAN is a formal anguage for 
representing the meaning of NL texts. 9: source text is supplied 
to the analyzer for processing. 10, 1 h part of the analysis process 
involves accessing and retrieving syntactic, semantic and pragmatic 
information storedin thelexicon. 12" theoutputofsemantic analysis 
is the representation f text meaning (interlingua text), expressed in 
TAMERLAN. 
long as the absolute constraint isnot violated. The measuring- 
unit facet selects an appropriate measuring unit from the class 
TEMPORAL-UNIT. 
In the lexicon, the link between a word sense and an onto- 
logical concept is established in the SEM zone of an entry (see 
Meyer et al 1990). In the simplest case, there is a direct link, 
e.g., between the lexeme + c o f f e e -  n 2 (the sen se of coffee, 
the beverage), and the concept COFFEE. However, adjectives 
like fresh-brewed, old, etc., which represent relative informa- 
tion about age, are linked indirectly to an ontological concept, 
via a constraint on the default range of the AGE property for 
a given class of objects. For example, the SEM zone of lex- 
ical entry +fresh-brewed-nl establishes the following 
linkage: 
instance-of :  ' ~COFFEE or TEA'' 
age: (range < 0.I) 
The range function calculates a default value for fresh- 
brewed coffee, namely, less than 10% of the ontologically 
specified efault range for the AGE of COFFEE. 
Lastly, we demonstrate informally the interdependence of 
lexicon, ontology and text meaning representation in DIONY- 
SUS for the sentence I smelled the fresh-brewed coffee. First, 
we identify the predicate-argument structure, and record the 
syntactic pattern information i  the SYN-STRUC zone of the 
lexical entry for smell: 
smell  (the sense of 'vo luntary  percept ion' )  
ent i ty  that per forms a vo luntary  
perceptua l  event: I (SUBJ) 
ent i ty  that is the target  of a 
vo luntary  perceptua l  event: 
coffee (OBJ) 
Next, links between word sense and ontological concept 
are created for the open-class lexical items in the sentence. 
These links are recorded in the SEM zone of the lexical entry, 
where a correspondence is established between semantic and 
syntactic roles: 
smell ---+ 
VOLUNTARY-OLFACTORY-EVENT 
AGENT: ANIMAL (^$varl) 
; l inks to the SUBJ role 
THEME: PHYS ICAL-OBJECT (^$var2) 
; l inks to the OBJ  role 
The A$varl retrieves the meaning of the lexeme bound to 
the variable $varl during syntactic parsing, places it in the 
AGENT role of VOLUNTARY-OLFACTORY-EVENT, and 
checks to make sure that the ontologically specified constraint 
(AGEN'I2. ANIMAL) is satisfied. 
Finally, we illustrate the key components of the text mean- 
ing representation for a sentence: 
clause 
head: vo luntary -o  i fac tory -event_ l  
aspect  : 
phase : end 
durat ion : p ro longed 
i terat ion:  s ingle 
vo luntary-o i fact or y -event_ l  
agent: speaker 
theme: cof fee 1 
cof fee i 
age: < 0.4 hour 
3 Conclusions 
We have addressed some of the issues that arise when world 
modeling is viewed as.a component of knowledge support for 
natural anguage processing. In DIONYSUS, the interdepen- 
dence of ontology, lexicon and text meaning representation is 
such that ontology acquisition ever proceeds in an isolated 
fashion. The discussion presented here regarding scalar at- 
tributes is just one example of ontological decision making in 
context. We would like to thank the members of the DIONY- 
SUS pro jec t -  Ralf Brown, Ted Gibson, Todd Kaufmann, John 
Leavitt, Ingrid Meyer, Eric Nyberg and Boyan Onyshkevych. 
Thanks also to Irene Nirenburg and Ken Goodman. 
References 
Carlson, Lynn and Sergei Nirenburg. 1990. World Model- 
ing for NLP. TR CMU-CMT-90-121. Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
Dahlgren, Kathleen. 1988. Naive Semantics for Natural 
Language Understanding. Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Press. 
EDR. 1990. Concept Dictionary. TR 027. Japan Electronic 
Dictionary Research Institute. 
Lenat, Douglas and R.V. Guha. 1990. Building Large 
Knowledge-Based Systems. Reading, MA: Addison- 
Wesley. 
Meyer, Ingrid, Boyan Onyshkevych, and Lynn Carl- 
son. 1990. Lexicographic Principles and Design for 
Knowledge-Based Machine Translation. TR CMU- 
CMT-90-118. Carnegie Mellon University. 
236
