DILEMMA-2: A LEMMATIZER-TAGGER 
FOR MEDICAL ABSTRACTS 
Hans  Pau lussen  
Facult6s Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix, 
rue de Bruxelles 61, B-5000 Namur, Belgium 
phone +32-81-72.41.37, fax +32-81-23.03.91, e-mail hpaulus@cc.fundp.ac.be 
Wi l ly  Mar t in  
Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1105, NL- 1007 MC Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
phone +31-20-548.37.63, fax +31-20-661.30.54, e-mail lexico@let.vu.nl 
Abstract  0 In t roduct ion  
This paper eports on the development of 
DILEMMA-2*, a lemmatizer-tagger for the 
sublanguage of medical abstracts. The program 
is an extension of DILEMMA-I, a lemmatizer- 
tagger for general English texts. 
In the first section a brief outline is given 
of DILEMMA-1. Particular attention _is paid to 
the original concept of a default category which 
is linked with a categorial graph by means of a 
pointer system. In the second section we show 
why DILEMMA-1 was not able to get a 
suitable score when lemmatizing medical 
abstracts, the main reason being the inability to 
recognize sublanguage specific vocabulary. In 
the next section a description is given of the 
most important errors along with their 
solutions; these errors are then categorized as 
gaps or wrong assignments. The former could 
be dealt with in either a suffix list or a gaps 
filler default. The latter mainly concerned 
wrongly assigned past participles and errors on 
noun, verb or adjective assignment. 
After implementation f the proposed 
solutions, a comparison is made between the 
results of DILEMMA-1 and DILEMMA-2, 
showing that the results of DILEMMA-1 have 
been improved substantially within a 
sublanguage context, and this by using 
linguistic, i.e. sublanguage, knowledge, thus 
avoiding ad hoc remedies. 
DILEMMA-2 was developed aspart of a research contract 
for Elsevier Science Publishers (ESP), Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. The development of DILEMMA-lwas 
carried out as part of contract research for Van Dale 
Lexicografie Publishers, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
In this paper we describe DILEMMA-2, a lemmatizer- 
tagger for medical abstracts, which is an updated version of 
DILEMMA-1, a lemmatizer-tagger for general texts. After 
a brief outline of DILEMMA-1 we give a description of 
the types of errors we found when running the general 
lemmatizer on medical abstracts. This is followed by some 
examples of the solutions we proposed and implemented 
into DILEMMA-2. Finally, the results of DILEMMA-I 
and DILEMMA-2 are compared, showing that a 
sublanguage approach can lead to workable results in the 
development ofreal world applications. 
1 D ILEMMA-1  
DILEMMA-1 is an automatic lemmatizer-tagger fo
general English texts, developed at the University of 
Antwerp during the academic year 1985-1986 (see 
\[MARTIN 88b\]). For each word of the text it tries to find 
its lemma (or dictionary entry form) and its grammatical 
category, and subcategories (orspecifiers) where necessary. 
Being a lemmatizer, not a parser, DILEMMA-1 is as 
such limited to a relatively basic level of syntactic 
analysis, which however can be used as input to a more 
powerful syntactic analyzer. In this way, a lemmatizer can 
be considered an invaluable tool for corpus linguistics. 
To carry out the task of assigning grammar 
categories and possible specifiers DILEMMA-1 looks at 
word forms from four different points-of-view. First of all 
word forms are looked at out-of-context (dictionary look- 
up, morphological procedures). In a second step the 
immediate context is taken into account: word forms are 
analyzed and checked by looking at the words immediately 
preceding and following them. In a third step, the proto- 
syntactic module, a larger context (such as verb patterns) 
is taken into account. Finally, in the temporary memory, 
word forms are checked by looking at the whole text. 
Like most modern lemmatizers, DILEMMA-1 uses 
as much linguistic knowledge as possible, by translating 
any regularity on the lexico-morphological level into 
141
rules, thus keeping the dictionary small. But in the case of 
DILEMMA-1 the size of the dictionary is exlxemely small 
when compared to other lemmatizer-taggers: a little over 
3600 words. For a comparison between DILEMMA-1 and 
CLAWS, another well-known, lemmatizer-tagger for 
English, see \[MARTIN 88b\]. In passing it can be noted 
that DILEMMA-1 uses a dictionary only half the size of 
that used in CLAWS. This smallness is due to criteria 
adopted on the macro- and micro-level of the dictionary. 
The vertical macro-level is concerned with the words to 
select as entry, whereas the horizontal micro-level deals 
with the information to store next to the dictionary entry. 
Figure 1: successor and predecessor relations 
between the categories 
-- PRON ~ DET 1 
VERB ~-~ NOUN ~ ADJ 4-~ ADV 4-- PREP 4 -  PART 
On the macro-level, the dictionary entries are selected 
according to the following three principles: frequency, 
closure (of classes, e.g. prepositions) and irregularity (e.g. 
irregular verbs, irregular plurals). In other words, the 
dictionary only contains words which are either frequent or 
which belong to closed classes or which cannot be deduced 
from the grammar of the English language. To construct 
the list of frequent words, we used Van Dale's English- 
Dutch Dictionary (\[MARTIN 89\]), where very frequent 
words are labeled F4 or F3. These frequency codes were the 
result of an earlier research project (\[MARTIN 83\], 
\[MARTIN 88a\]). 
On the micro-level, categorial information is stored 
preferentially. Each word is given a preferential default 
category which can shift to other categories along a 
categorial graph manipulated by the program (see Fig. 1). 
This way of storing categorial information is based on the 
fact that DILEMMA-1 also tries to look for regularity in 
the categories words can have, and that is what makes it so 
different from other lemmatizers. 
Table h part of the DILEMMA dictionary 
wordform lemma DC ptr  spec i f ie rs  
k ing k ing noun 1 
k iss k iss  verb  r 
kit kit noun 1 
k i tchen  k i tchen  noun n 
knee knee noun 1 
kneel  knee l  verb  n 
knel t  knee l  verb  n pastpapa  
knew know verb  n past  
Being a morphologically poor language, English has 
a large number of grammatical homonyms. DILEMMA-1 
starts from the assumption (i) that English words can have 
different categories, (ii) that each word has a default 
category (DC), and (iii) that the necessary categorial shifts 
can be systematized. The DC, which is the main category 
of a word, is established on the basis of frequency, analogy 
and/or meaning. Next to a DC, each word in the dictionary 
(see Table 1) has a pointer (left, fight or neither) indicating 
the direction in which a category can shift through a 
categorial graph which was established after calculating the 
combination and frequency of categories. The word "kiss", 
for example, has the category 'verb '  as DC, and can shift 
' r ight '  to the 'noun'  category. All categorial shifts are 
guided by condition-action rules in the rule component of 
the DILEMMA-1-program. Note also that the categories 
'numera l '  and ' in ter jec t ion '  are not integrated in 
the graph. The numeral only has a predecessor, viz. noun; 
the interjection has neither a predecessor nor a successor. 
Table 2:DILEMMA-1 output sample 
*W 
*W 
The 
i nc l inat ion  
here 
is 
to 
accept  
a 
de 
facto 
cease- f i re  
in 
Laos  
ra ther  
than  
cont inue  
to 
ins is t  
on 
a 
ver i f i -  
ca t ion  
of 
the 
cease- f i re  
by 
the 
in terna-  
t iona l  
cont ro l  
commiss ion  
before  
par t i c i -  
pat ing  
in 
the 
Geneva  
conference  
the  det  art  
inc l inat ion  noun sg 
here  adv  
be verb  pres 3 sg 
to par t  
accept  verb  inf  
a det  art 
cease- f i re  noun sg 
in prep  
Laos  noun prop  
ra ther  adv  
than conj  
cont inue  verb  
to part  
ins is t  verb  inf  
on prep  
a det  art 
ver i f i -  noun sg 
cat ion  
of p rep  
the det  art 
cease- f i re  noun sg 
by prep  
the det  art 
in terna-  adj  
t iona l  
cont ro l  noun sg 
commiss ion  noun sg 
be fore  prep  
par t i c i -  verb  ing 
pat ing  
in prep  
the  det art 
Geneva  noun prop  
conference  noun sg 
The use of categorial information and pointers 
changes the dictionary into an economical and dynamic set 
of lexemes. This is maybe the most striking feature of the 
modular architecture of DILEMMA-I, and it explains also 
why the program can run even within a PC-environment. 
For a fuller account of the DILEMMA-l-program we refer 
to \[MARTIN 88b\]. 
!4P  142
An output sample of DILEMMA-1 is shown in 
Table 2, which is a sentence from the BROWN-corpus 
(see \[KUCERA 67\]). The first column is the text, the 
second is the lemmatized form, and the following columns 
give the category and possible specifiers. When a word is 
not recognized, or when recognition is doubtful, it is 
flagged by a double asterisk. 
DILEMMA-I  was tested on a number of general 
language text samples and proved to be a very powerful 
tool. A sample of error analysis on 6 texts taken from a 
standard British English corpus (the LOB corpus 
\[JOHANSSON 78\]) shows e.g. that for general language 
texts, DILEMMA-I 's  success rate does not drop below 
90%, nor does it exceed 97%, on the average leading to a 
score of + 93.50% (see Table 3). 
Table 3: results LOB samples 
text 
number 
total of 
word- 
tokens 
tomlof 
made 
elTl3t 
percen- 
tage 
relative 
Success  
rate 
1 123 6 4.87 95.13 
2 183 7 3.82 96.18 
3 196 7 3.57 96A3 
4 143 14 9.79 90.21 
5 239 17 7.11 92.89 
6 246 19 7.72 92.28 
1-6 1130 70 6.14 93.86 
Nevertheless, when DILEMMA-1 was tested on a 
number of medical abstracts, its scoring reference point of 
93.50% was not reached at all. 'Best results' were more 
likely to lie within the 90% area, the average being about 
86% (see Table 6). The object of this research project was 
how to bring back the success rate for lemmatizing 
medical abstracts, without changing the philosophy behind 
the DILEMMA-I-program, which is developed as a 
robust, preferential, dynamic system in which items can 
take different values governed by constraints. Moreover, in 
a language such as English, categories are often functional 
instead of lexical (which explains, in part, the small size 
of the lexicon). 
2 A Sublanguage Approach 
When running the DILEMMA-1 program on medical 
abstracts, we found that most errors are related to the 
sublanguage of medical abstracts. For example, most gaps 
in the output are due to a lack of sublanguage specific 
vocabulary in the DILEMMA-1 dictionary: e.g. astrocyte, 
fibrillary, acidic, GFAP. Another point which supports 
the idea of sublanguage influence is that the more abstracts 
resemble general language texts, the more their results lie 
within the general language area. In an extreme case there 
was only one error in a text of 42 words (success rate = 
97.62%). Very unlike the average medical abstract, this 
text showed no symbols or abbreviations, and it had short, 
non-complex sentence structures. For a fuller account of 
lexical differences between sublanguage and general 
language lexicons, see \[MCNAUGHT 91\]. 
An example showing that the sublanguage f atures 
are not solely confined to the lexical level is the following 
sentence, where 'counts' - -wh ich  can be either ' verb '  
or 'noun '  - -  must shift from 'verb '  to 'noun '  when 
found at the beginning of a sentence: 
e.g. Counts of neocortical cells did not 
reveal differences in cell numbers. 
This categorial shift is a sublanguage shift, as 
categorial and syntactic ambiguity does not exist here, i.e. 
sentence initial verbal constructions such as imperatives 
and questions do not occur in the sublanguage of medical 
abstracts. 
To improve the DILEMMA-1 program, we not only 
tried to tackle the problems from a sublanguage approach, 
but we also decided to implement all program adaptations 
in a separate module which can be called up by the user 
whenever he wants. Such a modular architecture makes it 
easier to adapt he program to another sublanguage. 
Although not new, the sublanguage approach is 
being adopted more and more in the implementation of
real world applications, where computational linguists are 
constantly confronted with how to organize the vast 
amount of world knowledge. The domains can be very 
diverse as can be seen in the examples of 
\[CHEVALIER 78\] (automatic translation of weather 
forecasts), \[DEVILLE 89\] (automatic man-machine 
dialogue system handling requests for administrative 
information) and \[PALMER 90\] (physics world problems 
for college students involving pulley systems). Only by 
strictly defining the limits of the application domain can 
one write programs without having to resort o brute force 
techniques. 
Even if we stress the sublinguistic haracter of the 
errors in the DILEMMA-1 output, there were of course 
also a number of general errors, most of which could not 
be solved within the context of the DILEMMA-1 
framework which presupposes no (clause) syntactic 
knowledge. In the rest of this paper we will focus our 
attention on the modifications added at the sublanguage 
level. 
3 D ILEMMA-2  
DILEMMA-2 is the result of the corrections we made to 
DILEMMA-1 within the context of medical abstracts. The 
type of errors encountered were either gaps or wrong 
assignments ( ee Table 6 at the end of this section). 
143
3.1 Gaps 
As explained in section 2, most gaps were sublanguage 
specific words. Putting the missing scientific terms in the 
dictionary was not considered a good solution: this would 
have been against he basic principle of the DILEMMA 
concept, which was to keep the dictionary as small as 
possible; in any case, it would have been a practically 
impossible task (ESP has a database of more than 100.000 
scientific terms). In as far as the missing terms showed 
some regularity at the lexico-morphological and syntactic 
level, they could be dealt with outside the dictionary, by 
using a sublanguage specific suffix list and a sublanguage 
specific gaps filler default. The former has been arrived at 
by considering medical sublanguage from a broad point-of- 
view, situating it within the functional domain of 
scientific writing. Table 4 gives a sample of scientific 
suffixes which have categorial power and which are typical 
for the formation of medical terms in a broad sense of the 
term. 
Table 4: part of the scientific suffix list 
emia  noun n 
enchyma noun n 
es i s  noun n 
escent  adj  n 
fe rous  adj  n 
fuge  noun r 
gen  noun 1 
gene  noun n 
As to the default for the remaining aps, it became 
apparent from the sample analysis that medical texts, like 
most scientific texts, heavily nominalize. As a result, we 
expect remaining gaps to be (part of) NPs. Given the 
contents of the existing DILEMMA dictionary this leads 
us to a choice between (predominantly) nouns and 
adjectives. Therefore, only in a last module is 
DILEMMA-2 allowed to fill out all remaining aps as 
nouns unless these gaps: 
(a) occur in prototypical patterns for 
adjectives uch as (pron  is mentioned 
here, because it has not been shifted to 
Det): 
Det  X Noun 
Pron  X Noun 
(b) occur in prototypical patterns for verbs, 
such as possible candidates for a 
Verb+Object  NP : 
X Ad j  (Noun) 
Det  (Adj) (Noun) 
(C) end in -a l , -a r , - i l e ,  - ine , -y ;  
unless followed by Noun, then they are 
shifted to Adjective. These are typical 
endings which can also yield adjectives 
and/or verbs. 
In these cases the gaps remain unfilled mad are flagged 
for further processing by a higher module, such as a clause 
module or a syntactic parser. 
3.2 Wrong Assignments 
Although wrong assignments are far less frequent han 
gaps, they can be important in so far as they can give rise 
to wrong results in further processing (e.g. in establishing 
NPs), and in so far as they are no longer easily 
recoverable. The most important of these errors are related 
to either those cases where specification of simple past o~ 
past participle is difficult to distinguish, or to erron 
concerning noun, verb or adjective assignment. Anothel 
problem, we will not deal with in this paper, is the ample 
use of differently structured abbreviations, uch as: MH, 
VAHR,  b.i.d., mRna. These were handled by ar 
abbreviations procedure. 
A major problem, well known in English taggin~ 
and so not only restricted to medical texts, is the wron~ 
specification of verbs which can be either simple past ol 
past participle. As long as the specifier is no~ 
disambiguated, it is referred to as PAST_PAPA. In the 
following example both 'revealed' and 'increased' were 
assigned PAST, whereas 'increased' should have beer 
assigned PAP/~ 
e.g. Western blot analysis revealed 
increased levels of GFAP in Mo(br/y) 
forebrain and cerebellum. 
In the context of another ESP project on automatic 
indexing of medical abstracts, it is important to correctl3 
delineate NPs and therefore to recognize PAPA 's  
However, within the framework of a lemmatizer-tagge 
this is not an easy task. Again, a sublanguage approach 
of great help here. Attributive PAPA 's  in ou 
sublanguage occur much more often than in genera 
English texts. Consequently, in some very strictly defmea 
contexts we could partly disambiguate he PAST_PAP/ 
problem, as in the following three examples: 
(a) When a PAST PAPA is preceded by an 
ING-form and f-ollowed by a noun, select 
PAPA: e.g. physicians are expressing 
increased willingness. 
(b) When a PAST PAPA is preceded by a 
noun and followed by a preposition or a 
particle, select PAPA: e.g. cells isolated 
from ... 
(c) When a PAST PAPA is found at the 
beginning of a ~tence ,  select PAPA: e.g. 
Affected males suffer profound eficits in 
oxidative metabolism. 
Each case was implemented in a condition-actioJ 
rule, so that example (a), when written as a C-function 
looks as follows: 
144
if ( ( th isspec == C_past) 
&& ( th is \ [0 \ ] .spec2 == C papa) 
&& (prevspec == C_ing) 
&& (nextcat == C_noun)) 
th i sspec  = C_papa;  
th i s \ [0 \ ] . spec2  = C_nu l l spec ;  
This function states that 
if 
and 
and 
and 
then 
and 
the specif ier of the selected 
word is C past  
it has an a l te rnat ive  
specif ier C papa 
the specif ier of the preced ing  
word is C ing 
the category  of the next word 
is C noun 
change the specif ier of the 
selected word into Cpapa  
e l iminate  the a l te rnat ive  spec i f ie r  
As stated above, our proposal of PAST_PAPA rules 
was based on observations of the Elsevier corpus of 
medical abstracts at our disposal. We found that the 
contexts in which wrongly coded attributive PAPA's occur, 
can - -  as a rule - -  be characterized as: 
(a) object NP s following a verb (e.g. and 
have found marked changes); 
Co) NP8 not (directly) following a verb (e.g. 
once in individual association and once in 
a combined,fixed preparation); 
(c) complex NP 8 (e.g. after a co-ordinating 
conjunction); 
(d) subject NP s at the beginning of sentence 
(e.g. Affected males suffer profound 
deficits ...). 
In the case of errors concerning noun,  verb  or 
adj e ct ive assignment, we encountered similar context 
problems, and again, only in very strict contexts could a 
rule be applied. 
3 .3  Resu l ts  
After implementation of the proposed solutions, we 
compared the success rates of DILEMMA-1 and 
DILEMMA-2. An output sample, based on six randomly 
selected texts from 30 ESP samples, is given in Table 5. 
The results, summarized in Table 6, show that the 
modifications in DILEMMA-2 have improved the success 
rate considerably, even passing the scoring reference point 
of DILEMMA-1 (93.5% vs. 96%). 
Table 5: part of lemmafized medical abstract 
A a det art 
comparative comparative adj 
b ioava i la -  b ioava i la -  noun sg 
b i l i ty  b i l i ty  
study study noun sg 
of of prep  
the the det art 
ant i tuber -  ant i tuber -  noun sg 
culosis culosis 
drugs drug noun pl 
isoniazid isoniazid noun sg 
r i fampin  r i fampin  noun sg 
and and conj coor 
pyraz inamide  pyraz inamide  noun sg 
was be verb past 
carried carry  verb papa 
out out adv 
in in prep 
a a det art 
group group noun sg 
of of prep 
i0 10 hum 
hea l thy  hea l thy  adj 
vo lunteers  vo lunteer  noun pl 
after after prep 
admin i -  admin i -  noun sg 
st rat ion s t rat ion  
of of p rep  
the the det art 
three three num 
compounds compound noun pl 
once once adv 
in in p rep  
ind iv idua l  ind iv idua l  adj 
association associat ion noun sg 
and and conj coot 
once once  adv 
in in p rep  
a a det art 
combined combined adj 
fixed fix verb  papa 
preparat ion  preparat ion  noun sg 
4 Conc lus ions  
In this paper we have shown that it is possible to adapt a 
general lemmatizer-tagger for the specific purpose of 
lemmatizing medical abstracts, and this by using 
linguistic knowledge, rather than any ad hoc solutions. 
A dynamic, preferential, and constraint-based system 
with a very small dictionary such as DILEMMA-1 lends 
itself particularly well to such an adaptation, as no 
massive lexical importation is necessary, although it 
looks like that at first sight. Instead, mainly 
morphological and syntactic sublanguage knowledge has 
been made use of, leading to a sublanguage suffix list, a 
sublanguage default procedure and improved functions of 
145
PAS~" PAPA specifiers. The program was modified 
modul~ly so that adaptations toother sublanguages could 
easily be carded out. In this way DILEMMA-2 is at 
present used as an invaluable pre-processor for an abstracts 
indexing program at Elsevier Science Publishers, 
Amsterdam. It should be clear that, generally speaking, 
lemmatizing-tagging performance orrelates in a positive 
way with indexing and information retrieval in that it 
paves the way for finding NPs (as possible index terms) 
and that it abstracts away from inflectional variation (thus 
covering morphological variants in search words). 
Although some minor corrections ate still possible 
(for example in the lemmatizing procedures), we believe 
that DILEMMA-1 cannot reach a higher score within the 
limits it is conceived for. Interestingly, improvements are 
possible 'horizontally', thus allowing extensions for other 
sublanguages; further 'vertical' ref'mements should be left 
to more powerful tools. On the other hand, by bringing in 
more flags to signal uncertainties, DILEMMA-2 could 
reach, with some small guided post-editing effort, a near- 
perfect score. 
Table 6: summary dilemmatized ESP abstracts 
textl text2 text3 text4 text5 
total amount 186 86 150 176 242 of words 
wrong 12 3 6 5 22 
assignments 
gaps 21 7 14 15 32 
total amount 33 10 20 20 54 
of errors 
total amount 25 7 16 14 37 of corrections 
rema.n.n~,il- 8 3 4 6 17 
errors 
text 6 
233 
11 
16 
9 
7 
TOTAL 
1073 
53 
100 
153 
(14.25%) 
108 
45 
(4.19%) 
suc?.~ss rate 
DILEMMA- 1 
85.75 % 
DILEMMA-2 
95.81% 
References 
\[CHEVALIER 78\] 
Chevalier, M.: TAUM-METEO: description du 
syst~me, Groupe de recherche en traduction 
automatique, University of Montreal, 1978. 
\[DEVILLE 89\] 
Deville, G.: Modelization of task-oriented utterances in
a man-machine dialogue system, PhD dissertation, 
UIA: Antwerpen, 1989. 
\[JOHANSSON 78\] 
Johansson, S., G. Leech & H. Goodluck (eds.): 
Manual of information to accompany the Lancaster- 
Oslo-Bergen corpus of British English, for use with 
digital computers, University of Oslo, 1978. 
\[KUCERA 67\] 
Kucera, H. & W. N. Francis (eds.): Computational 
analysis of present-day American English, Providence, 
Rhode Island, 1967. 
\[MARTIN 83\] 
Martin, W.: "The construction of a basic vocabulary: 
an objective-subjective approach" in Linguistica 
Computazionale III, 183-197, 1983. 
\[MARTIN 88a\] 
Martin, W.: "Variation in lexical frequency" inP. van 
Reenen & K. van Reenen-Stein (eds.): Distributions 
spatiales et temporelles, 139-152, Benjamins: 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 1988. 
\[MARTIN 88b\] 
Martin, W., R. Heymans & F. Platteau: "DILEMMA, 
an automatic lemmatizer" in W. Martin (ed.): 
COLINGUA 1, UIA: Antwerpen, 5-62, 1988. 
\[MARTIN 89\] 
Martin, W. & G. Tops (eds.): Van Dale Grool 
Woordenboek Engels-Nederlands, Van Dale 
Lexicografie: Utrecht/Antwerpen, 1989, 2nd edition. 
\[MCNAUGHT 91 \] 
McNaught J., B. Nkwenti-Azeh, W. Martin & E. te~ 
Pas: Feasibility of standards for terminologica~ 
description of lexical items, report written for the EC 
in the EUROTRA-7 framework, UMIST: Manchester 
Vrije Universiteit: Amsterdam, 1991. 
\[PALMER 90\] 
Palmer, M. S.: Semantic processing for finit? 
domains, CUP: Cambridge, 1990. 
146 146
