Tagging and Al ignment of Parallel Texts: 
Current Status of BCP 
A. Winarske 
ISSCO, GenSve* 
S. Warwick-Armstrong 
ISSCO, Gen~ve t 
J. Hajie 
Charles University, Prague ~ 
1 Introduction 
Access to on-line corpora is a useful tool for studies in 
lexicography, linguistics, and translation. Many  means 
of accessing such corpora are available, but few, if any, 
provide more than a language for matching character 
strings. As a result, the user is obliged to spend a great 
deal of time extracting information herself. As more 
and more texts are put in machine readable format, it 
becomes increasingly obvious that more specialized, in- 
telligent tools are required to fully exploit the available 
data. BCP,  the Bilingual Concordancy Program under 
development at ISSCO, is an instance of such a tool. 
In previous work done at ISSCO on BCP, a rather 
oversimplified view of text structure was taken \[Warwick 
et. al., 1989\]. Attention was focused on the difficulties 
of alignment and somewhat less so on access questions. 
Alignment remains a subject of active research, but ex- 
perience has proven that text marking and morphology 
are not to be taken so lightly. Indeed, many small dif- 
ficulties have shown themselves to be insurmountable 
without the aid of heuristic decision modules. As a re- 
sult, the initial approach to text tagging and morphology 
has been thoroughly revised. 
2 Brief Overview 
The BCP package consists of four submodules: pre- 
processer, morphology, alignment, and access. The text 
pre-processor, bcpmark ,  marks paragraph and sentence 
boundaries, numbers, words, and punctuation. The 
morphological analyzer, bcpmor f ,  is built around a 
unification-based parser, and returns feature-structure 
descriptions in SGML format, although the feature 
structure itself is in a linear notation only. The align- 
ment module is the subject of much experimentation a d 
currently is running with the Church-Gale alignment al- 
gorithm \[Gale and Church, 1991\]. The access module has 
been described in previous work \[Warwick et al, 1989\] 
and will not be discussed further here. The focus of this 
abstract will be on bcpmark  and bcpmor f .  
*Many thanks to Graham Russell for his invaluable advice 
on this abstract. 
tISSCO, 54 route des Acacias, Gen~ve 1227, Switzerland 
"*Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of 
Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Malostrauskd 
n~n~st~ 25, 118 00 Praha 1, Czechoslovakia 
3 bcpmark:  The Pre-Processor 
bcpmark  is the first step in preparing text for the align- 
ment program. It marks paragraph and sentence bound- 
aries, numbers, words, and punctuation, with the out- 
put in SGML notation, bepmark  is easily customized 
to suit a particular text type or language via a user- 
defined data file. Extensions and alterations to the data 
are accordingly simple. There are accompanying tools 
to check number standardization results and sentence 
boundary marking. Languages currently supported are 
French, German, Italian, Czech, and English. 
3.1 Input  Text  
bcpmark  is intended to be usable on all text types, so 
that entails a certain amount of flexibility. Regardless, 
there are two major problems: no interpretation of the 
input text, and the need to be "parameterized" for dif- 
ferent textual conventions. 
Problems instantly arise in conjunction with numbers, 
abbreviations, conflicts with differing punctuation con- 
ventions, and capitalization. In particular, German noun 
capitalization causes great problems to a system which 
relies heavily on capitalization marking sentence begin- 
nings. 
In bcpmark ,  the sentences are marked by either the 
onset of a paragraph marker or by encountering an end- 
of-sentence punctuation mark in the appropriate context 
for a particular language. We define six contexts essen- 
tial for deliminating sentences: 
1. Characters are always considered part of a word. 
2. Abbreviations which can never end a sentence ven 
if they are followed by a dot. There may also be 
contracted abbreviations. 
3. Abbreviations which in front of a number cannot 
end a sentence. 
4. Words which followed by a number followed by a 
period usually signal a sentence boundary. 
5. The sequence 
single-capital-letter, tapir alized-word 
is normally not recognized to be a sentence bound- 
ary. 
6. Certain words followed by sequences of the form 
number, cap i ta l i zed-word  
227
(especially in German texts) should not be marked 
as sentence boundaries. 
7. Words which probably do not start a new sentence 
if preceded by a sequence number . This is espe- 
cially useful for languages like German, which mark 
ordinal numerals by dots which do not indicate an 
end of sentence. 
4 Morphology 
Morphological variations can be classified as inflection, 
derivation, and compounding \[van Gaalen et al, 1991\]. 
An adequate morphology should be able to handle all 
three. There are several parts to the BCP morphology: 
the morphology grammar, the regular and irregular dic- 
tionaries, and the code. There is also a facility for testing 
and debugging the morphology grammar. The output 
format is an SGML-notation version of feature struc- 
tures, where ambiguous analyses are expressed in tags 
raher than multiple word-forms in the text. 
5 Alignment 
The technique originally used for aligning texts was to 
link regions of texts according to regularity of word co- 
occurrences across texts \[Catizone t al., 1989\]. Pairs 
of words were linked if they have similar distributions 
in their home texts. This strategy doesn't always work 
well because in many languages a good writer does not 
use the exact same word many times in a text. Simi- 
larly, a good translator does not always translate a word 
exactly the same way every time it occurs. Clearly this 
algorithm is heavily text dependent. For texts with lim- 
ited vocabularies this might work extremely well, but in 
"free" text it falls. 
Currently we are experimenting with assorted algo- 
rithms; a major problem is having good test texts to 
run them on. So far the best results on reasonable text 
come from the Gale-Church algorithm \[Gale and Church, 
1991\]. It has been tested on English, German, French, 
Czech, and Italian parallel texts. The Gale-Church al- 
gorithm relies on the length of regions, where the char- 
acter is the unit of measurement. (For details see their 
paper.) We have experienced three problems with this 
method. First, the implementation f the algorithm pub- 
lished in Church-Gale severely limits the size of the input 
file \[Gale and Church, 1991\]. This is, however, merely 
an implementation problem. Second, there is no way 
to set "anchor points" and align around them. That is, 
one cannot pick two anchor points, one in each text, and 
have the program align the corresponding regions above 
and below the anchor points. (See \[Brown et al, 1991\] 
for discussion of an alternative.) This is not necessarily 
a problem either, and can be worked around. Lastly, it 
does not give usable results on texts which are not abso- 
lutely parallel. That is to say, on texts which do not have 
exactly the same number of large regions, with the same 
hierarchical structure. A single extra line of characters 
in one text will cause a complete failure of the alignment 
algorithm. This is a major difficulty. 
6 Conc lus ion  
We are very happy with our marking program and ea- 
gerly anticipating thorough testing of the new morphol- 
ogy, especially with regards to extensive xperimenta- 
tion with German texts. We are satisfied with the cur- 
rent alignment method. We may also end up writing a 
parser to disambiguate he tagged text and this would fit 
in well with previous ISSCO work on unification-based 
grammatical formalisms \[Estival, 19901. Clearly there is 
room for expansion and improvement. 
The modular structure of BCP is a great strength, as 
it enables independent use of the modules. Similarly, the 
access module functions to its full capacity on the output 
of the other three, but can also be used on output of the 
alignment unit alone. This great flexibility clearly lends 
itself to ease of integration into other systems. 
References  
\[Brown et al, 1991\] Brown, P., J. Lal, and R. Mercer. 
"Aligning sentences in Parallel Corpora", Proceed- 
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Berkeley, 1991, 189-176. 
\[Catizone t al., 1989\] Catizone, R, G. Russell, and S. 
Warwick. "Deriving Translation Data from Bilingual 
Texts", Proceedings of the First International Lezical 
Acquisition Workshop. Detroit, 1989. 
\[Estival, 1990\] "ELU User Manual.", Technical Report 
Fondazione Dalle Molle, Geneva, 1990. 
\[van Gaalen et al, 1991\] van Gaalen, M., A. Hugento- 
bier, L. des Tombe, S. Warwick-Armstrong. "Termi- 
nology Translation Checking for Company X' ,  inter- 
hal ISSCO/STT proposal, 1991. 
\[Gale and Church, 1991\] Gale, W., and Church, K. 
draft version of "A Program for Aligning Sentences 
in Bilingual Corpora", submitted to ACL 1991. See 
following entry. 
\[Gale and Church, 1991\] Gale, W., and K. Church. "A 
Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Cor- 
pora", Proceedings ACL 1991, Berkeley, 1991, 177- 
184. 
\[Warwick et al, 1989\] Warwick, S, J. Haji~, and G. 
Russell. "Deriving Translation Data from Bilingual 
Texts", Proceedings of the First International Lexi- 
cal Acquisition Workshop, Detroit, 1989. 
228
