Automatic Extraction of Facts from Press Releases 
to Generate News Stories 
Peggy M. Andersen, Philip J. Hayes 
Alison K. Huettner, Linda M. Schmandt 
Irene B. Nirenburg 
Carnegie Group, Inc. 
5 PPG Place 
Pittsburgh, PA 15222, USA 
Abstract 
While complete understanding of arbitrary input text 
remains in the future, it is currently possible to construct 
natural anguage processing systems that provide a partial 
understanding of text with limited accuracy. Moreover, 
such systems can provide cost-effective solutions to 
commercially-significant business problems. This paper 
describes one such system: JASPER. JASPER is a fact 
extraction system recently developed and deployed by 
Carnegie Group for Reuters Ltd. JASPER uses a 
template-driven approach, partial understanding 
techniques, and heuristic procedures to extract certain key 
pieces of information from a limited range of text. 
We believe that many significant business problems can 
be solved by fact extraction applications which involve 
locating and extracting specific, predefined types of 
information from a limited range of text. The information 
extracted by such systems can be used in a variety of 
ways, such as filling in values in a database, generating 
summaries of the input text, serving as a part of the 
knowledge in an expert system, or feeding into another 
program which bases decisions on it. We expect to 
develop many such applications in the future using similar 
techniques. 
1. Introduction 
While a computer program that can provide complete 
understanding of arbitrary input text remains a distant 
dream, it is currently possible to construct natural anguage 
processing systems that provide a partial understanding of 
certain types of text with limited accuracy. Moreover, such 
systems can provide cost-effective solutions to 
commercially-significant business problems. This paper 
describes one such system: JASPER. JASPER (Journalist's 
Assistant for Preparing Earnings Reports) is a fact 
extraction system recently developed and deployed by 
Carnegie Group for Reuters Ltd. JASPER uses a template- 
driven approach and partial understanding techniques to 
extract certain key pieces of information from a limited 
range of text. Specifically, JASPER takes as input a live 
Steven P. Weinstein 
Reuters Ltd 
85 Fleet Street 
London, EC4P 4AJ  England 
feed of company press releases from PR Newswire. It 
identifies which of those releases contain information on 
company earnings and dividends, and for those releases, it
extracts a predetermined set of information. It then 
reformats that information into a candidate Reuters news 
story and ships it off to a financial journalist for validation 
or editing. JASPER improves both the speed and accuracy 
of producing Reuters stories and hence provides a 
significant competitive advantage in the fast-paced world of 
financial journalism. 
JASPER gets excellent results in terms of both accuracy 
and speed. It does this by combining frame-based 
knowledge representation, object-oriented processing, 
powerful pattern matching, and heuristics which take 
advantage of stylistic conventions, including lexical, 
syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic regularities observed in 
the text corpus. The shallow, localized processing approach 
that we have adopted focusses on the information to be 
extracted and ignores irrelevant ext. The first phase of 
JASPER has been deployed at Reuters for use and testing. 
It provides a low-risk and high-value solution to a real- 
world business problem. 
JASPER's architecture facilitates transfer to other fact 
extraction applications; the domain-independent core which 
controls processing is separate from the application-specific 
knowledge base which makes decisions about extracting 
information, so only the latter needs to be rewritten for other 
applications. Still, the knowledge ngineering required to 
build an application is significanL We estimate that the 
JASPER application involved approximately eight person 
months in knowledge ngineering, apart from basic system 
development. 
Many significant business problems can be solved by 
similarly focussed fact extraction applications. The 
information extracted can used in a variety of ways, such as 
170
filling in values in a database, generating summaries of the 
input text, serving as a part of the knowledge in an expert 
system, or feeding into another program which bases 
decisions on it. We expect to develop many such 
applications in the future using similar techniques. 
2. Related Work 
Most text understanding systems have generally fallen 
into two categories: 
? systems which attempt to perform a complete linguistic 
analysis of the text 
o systems which perform partial understanding to 
accomplish certain specific understanding tasks 
Most of the linguistically-based systems perform a more 
or less pure syntactic analysis and a semantic and/or 
pragmatic analysis to arrive at a representation of the 
meaning of the text. TACITUS \[3\], PROTEUS \[5\], 
PUNDIT \[2\], CAUCUS \[9\], and the News Analysis System 
(bIAS) \[6\] all fall into this category. The systems differ in 
the specifics of the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic 
analysis used and in the degree to which the different levels 
of processing are integrated. For example, TACITUS' 
syntactic step does enough semantic processing to produce a
logical form; a second step performs pragmatic tasks such 
as reference resolution. Some systems base their processing 
on a particular linguistic theory; for example, CAUCUS 
uses Lexical Functional Grammar and NAS uses a 
Government-Binding approach to syntax and semantics. 
Other systems use more idiosyncratic approaches to the 
analysis. 
These linguistically-based systems have a tremendous 
potential for complete understanding ofa wide range of text, 
because, in theory, they do a complete analysis of the text. 
However, the processing of such systems tends to be 
relatively slow; in addition, these systems have tended to be 
used in research contexts in part because the range of 
coverage that they can provide is necessarily imited. A full 
analysis of text that covers diverse topics or that must be 
processed at a high rate of throughput is not feasible given 
the current state of the art. 
Systems which do not attempt a complete understanding 
of the text, but rather focus on specific understanding tasks 
are more likely to result in deployable applications. 
ATRANS \[7\], the only major deployed fact extraction 
system before JASPER, is the most notable example. 
ATRANS operates in the domain of international banking 
telexes, dealing with one major subclass of such telexes -- 
money Iransfer telexes. ATRANS automatically extracts 
the information required to complete the transfer (the 
various banks mentioned in the telex, their roles in the 
money transfer, payment amounts, dates, security keys, etc.) 
and formats it for entry into the bank's automated 
transaction processing system. The understanding 
techniques used in ATRANS are based on caseframe 
analysis using the Conceptual Dependency formalism 
\[8\] which relies on semantics over syntax, and does not 
require a complete analysis of the text. 
General Electric's SCISOR system \[4\] uses a hybrid 
approach, combining syntactic and caseframe parsing. This 
allows it to exploit he strong top-down domain expectations 
provided by caseframes to deal with relevant fragments 
from text that it cannot fully analyze, while at the same time 
generating complete linguistic analyses when possible. 
SCISOR is also designed so that general grammatical 
knowledge and domain-specific knowledge are kept 
separate. This will greatly facilitate its transfer to other 
domains. 
3. Business Problem 
A major component of Reuters business is to provide 
real-time financial news to financial traders. Corporate 
earnings and dividend reports are two routine, but extremely 
important, types of financial news that Reuters handles. 
Publicly-traded companies must, by law, provide this 
information periodically, and equities traders rely on news 
services like Reuters to distill the companies' reports and 
make the information available within minutes or even 
seconds o that they can use it to make decisions about 
which stocks to buy and sell. It is imperative that the 
reports be generated very quickly and very accurately; if
Reuters can produce important earnings and dividend stories 
first, they will have the edge in the very competitive r al- 
time financial news market. 
One important electronic sources of earnings information 
is PR Newswire, which provides a wide range of press 
releases on many topics to subscribers. Figure 1 is a typical 
earnings press release received through the PR Newswire 
service. Figure 2 shows the corresponding Reuters news 
story which a reporter would generate from this release. 
While the production of these reports is crucial to Reuters 
business, it is a routine, tedious task which requires just 
enough domain knowledge and human intelligence to 
require trained reporters. JASPER helps Reuters produce 
earnings and dividend news stories ubstantially faster, with 
fewer errors, and with less tedium. JASPER automatically 
generates draft earnings and dividend stories from the press 
releases carried on PR Newswire and makes them available 
171
/FROM PR NEWSWIRE MINNEAPOLIS 612-871-7200/ 
TO BUSINESS EDITOR: 
GREEN TREE ANNOUNCES THIRD QUARTER RESULTS 
ST. PAUL, Minn., Oct. 17 /PRNewswire/  -- Green Tree 
Acceptance, Inc. (NYSE, PSE: GNT) today reported net 
earnings for the th i rd quarter ended Sept. SO of 
$i0,395,000, or 70 cents per share, compared with net 
earnings of $10,320,000, or 70 cents per share, in the 
same quarter of 1989. 
For the nine months, net earnings were $26,671,000, 
or $1.70 per share, compared with the first nine months 
of 1989, which had net earnings of $20,800,000, or $1.21 
per share. 
GREEN TREE ACCEPTANCE, INC. STATEMENT OF EARNINGS 
(in thousands) 
Throe Months Nine Months  
9/30/90 9/30/89 9/30/90 9/30/89 
Earnings before income 
taxes 16,903 16,785 43,360 33,825 
Net earnings 10,395 10,320 26,671 20,800 
Earnings per share: .70 .70 1.70 1.21 
weighted average common 
shares 
outstanding 11,599 11,494 11,597 11,450 
-0- 10/17/90 
Figure 1: An example PR Newswire r lease 
GREEN TREE ACCEPTANCE, INC <GNT.N> Q3 NET 
ST. PAUL, Minn, Oct 17 
Shr 70 cts vs 70 cts 
Net 10.4 mln vs 10.3 mln 
Avg shrs 11.6 mln vs 11.5 mln 
Nine Months 
Shr 1.70 dlrs vs 1.21 dlrs 
Net 26.7 mln vs 20.8 mln 
Avg shrs 11.6 mln vs 11.5 mln 
Figure 2: An example Reu~rs news tory 
tO reporters for editing. Reporters need only check the 
information and make any necessary changes. 
In all, JASPER attempts to extract 56 different values 
from an earnings release, though not all of these will ever be 
present in any given release. Most of the values that 
JASPER extracts are numbers -- net income, per share 
income, revenues, sales, average number of shares 
outstanding, etc. -- and most information types are reported 
for four time periods: the quarter just ended, the 
corresponding quarter of the prior year, the fiscal year to 
date just ended, and the corresponding year to date period of 
the prior year. Other information types have only one 
value; these include the quarter being reported (Q1, Q2, Q3, 
or Q4), the end date of the quarter being reported, the place 
of origin of the release, the dividend, the date on which the 
dividend will be paid, etc. 
The JASPER system was developed between December, 
1990 and August, 1991. The software was installed in early 
August, 1991, and reporters in New York and other Reuters 
offices in the United States began experimental use of the 
system immediately. 
Results of this use have shown that JASPER does its job 
quickly and accurately. 
? JASPER processes the average earnings or dividend 
release in approximately 25 seconds. 
? By the standard measures of recall and precision, the 
system is over 96% accurate overall in selecting relevant 
releases for processing. 
? By correstxmding measures for fact extraction, the 
system is over 84% accurate overall in extracting the 
desired information from the selected releases. Over 
90% of the values that JASPER places in the stories it 
generates are correct. 
? JASPER handles 33% of targeted releases perfectly. It 
handles 21% of all earnings tories with no errors or 
omissions whatever;, and handles 82% of all dividend 
releases with no errors or omissions. 
4. Technica l  Approach  
Upon receiving a press release from PR Newswire, 
JASPER first determines whether it is "relevant" -- that is, 
whether it is one of the earning or dividend releases from 
which we wish to extract information. Carnegie Group's 
Text Categorization Shell (TCS)\[1\] is used to do this 
selection. Only about 20% of the information on the wire is 
relevant. 
JASPER has a frame representation which defines the 
specific information types to be extracted from relevant 
texts. These frames guide the remainder of the processing. 
The slots of the frame define what information is to be 
extracted and also hold information about how the 
processing for each slot is to be performed. 
For each slot in the frame, the system tries to match 
against each sentence an associated set of patterns of words; 
if any of the patterns match, a procedure, or extraction 
method, also associated with the particular slot, is called to 
decide whether the patterns which matched can be used to 
assign a value to the slot. The exllaction method may 
decide that no slot value should be assigned, or it may 
translate the information that matched into a canonical form 
and store it in the frame. Once all available information has 
been extracted and stored in the frame, JASPER generates a 
news story from the information and makes the story 
available to reporters for editing. 
Together, the patterns and the extraction methods make 
up the application-specific rulebase. The rulebase is tailored 
to the syntactic structures and vocabulary that we have 
observed in our analysis of the corpus. JASPER does not do 
complete syntactic parsing or complete semantic analysis of 
the text. Instead, it matches "sketchy" patterns, looking 
only for relevant words or phrases within sentences. The 
extraction methods too were written expressly to handle the 
forms that we have observed in PR Newswire texts. The 
rulehase makes certain assumptions about the language it 
expects to fmd in a text; while these assumptions are not 
always borne out, they are in most cases, and JASPER 
reaches avery high level of accuracy because of them. 
172
The input press releases often have a table along with the 
textual part, as in the example in Figure 1. The information 
contained in the two parts often overlaps, but in most cases 
neither the textual nor the tabular part gives all the required 
information. We therefore xtract he information from 
both the text and the table and then merge the two sets of 
values. In this paper we do not discuss the techniques used 
to extract information from tables. 
JASPER runs under Ultrix on a DECstation 3100. The 
dedicated standalone DECstation has loose system 
interfaces to the PR Newswire feed and to a Tandem 
computer on which the reporters edit stories. The core 
extraction system runs in Lucid Common Lisp and uses the 
Common Lisp Object System (CLOS) to represent its 
frames. 
4.1. Text Understanding Contro l  
The control of the text understanding component of 
JASPER follows a simple algorithm. For each sentence in 
the release, JASPER checks every item on an ordered list of 
targeted information types, or slots, to determine whether a
value has already been assigned to the corresponding slot. 
If no value has yet been stored, JASPER tries to match the 
current sentence against a set of patterns associated with that 
slot. If any pattern matches, tentatively identified values 
from the sentence are bound to pattern matcher variables, 
and the extraction method associated with that information 
type is called to interpret the results of the pattern matching. 
The extraction methods are application-specific 
procedures associated with individual slots which use the 
results of pattern matching to determine whether any slots 
should be f'llled and what value(s) should be used. If an 
extraction method assigns a value to a slot, the slot is 
marked as "done" and is removed from the list of slots to try 
on subsequent sentences. 
4.2. The Pattern Matcher 
One important component of Carnegie Group's Text 
Categorization Shell is a powerful pattern matcher which 
matches complex patterns of words written in a specialized 
pattern language against text. This technology is also 
central to JASPER's fact extraction technology. The 
network-based left-to-right pattern matcher includes 
disjunction, negation, optionality, and skipping operators, 
and performs regular and irregular English morphology 
transformations when words are specified as nouns or verbs. 
The following pattern illustrates the pattern matching 
operators: 
((profit +N ! earnings) 
(&skip 8 ($n ?mil l ion dol lar  +N)) 
(&n (per share))) 
This pattern says to match either the word profit or profits 
(+!; indicates that it is a noun) or earnings, followed within 
eight words by any number ($n), followed optionally by 
million, followed by dollar or dollars; and a match will fail 
if the phrase per share follows dollar. This pattern would 
match in sentences like the following: 
e ABC Company announced profits of more than 50 
million dollars last year. 
The pattern will not match in the following sentences, 
however: 
? XYZ Company'sprofits will be 2.25 dollarsper share. 
? XYZ Company announced that its earnings for the third 
quarter of 1990 will exceed expectations at45.6 million 
dollars. 
The former sentence will fail because per share follows 
dollars. The latter will fall because more than eight words 
intervene between earnings and the number, 
JASPER uses an extended version of the TCS pattern 
marcher for extracting information. It not only provides a 
boolean indication of whether a pattern matched, but also 
saves the information that we want to extract from the 
matches as special variables. A variable binding operator 
was added which can transform words matched in the text 
into a canonical form or simply save the words that 
matched. For example, this pattern 
(&if ($n) %number) 
will match any number and bind the number that matched to 
the pattern matcher variable %numbe=. 
This variable binding operator can also canonicalize 
values, as shown in the following pattern: 
(&if 
(((fourth ! 4th) (quarter ! qtr)) ! 
(Q4)) (%quarter = 4)) 
Patterns like this one can match a variety of expressions 
with the same meaning, binding a pattern matcher variable 
to a single form representing this meaning. This pattern 
matches all of the following phrases and binds the variable 
%q.uazter  to 4 in every case: fourth quarter, 4th quarter, 
4th qtr, fourth qtr, Q4. Once the crucial information is 
saved as pattern marcher variables, it can be used by the 
exlraction methods to fill in values in a frame representation 
of the text 
4.3. Knowledge Representation 
JASPER uses CLOS to control the extraction processing 
and to store the extracted information. Each type of release 
from which we extract information -- earnings and 
dividends -- has a frame, or CLOS class, associated with it, 
173
with a slot for each information type that JASPER extracts. 
Figure 3 shows a portion of the earnings frame. 
{lEARNINGS 
net-income-group: <net-lncome-group-obJect> 
current-quarter-net:<net-income-obJect> 
prior-quarter-net <net-income-object> 
currrent-ytd-net: <net-income-object> 
prlor-ytd-net: <net-lncome-object> 
;eri;d-reported: <period-reported-object> 
)}" " . 
Figure 3: Earnings Extraction Frame 
As mentioned above, we are interested in extracting 
numbers for four different time periods for many 
information types. The slots current-quarter-net ,  
pr io r -quar ter -net ,  cur rent -y td -net ,  and 
pr ior -y td-net  in Figure 3 represent the four slots for 
net income. All four slots are processed together using the 
same patterns and extraction methods; in order to 
accomplish this, a group slot, net - income-group  in the 
example, is defined to hold the information required for 
processing these slots. The individual slots corresponding 
to each time period then hold the specific values extracted 
from the text. 
Other information types have just one slot; for example 
per iod- repor ted  in the example represents he period 
for which earnings are being reported (QI, Q2, Q3, or 04). 
This slot contains the information about how to extract he 
information -- the pattems and extraction methods -- and 
also holds the value once it is extracted. 
Each of the slots in the earnings frame in turn has a class 
as its value; these classes tore information about how to do 
the extraction, and once information has been extracted 
from the press release, they store the value extracted. Each 
of these classes has the following slots associated with it for 
extracting from text: 
? a set of patterns to be used for extracting information 
from text 
? a procedure, or method, for extracting information from 
text 
? the value extracted 
4.4. The JASPER Extract ion Rulebase 
This section describes application-specific patterns and 
procedures used for fact extraction. In analyzing the 
relevant texts, we found tremendous regularity in the 
language and syntactic structures used due to stylistic 
conventions followed by U.S. companies in reporting 
earnings and dividends. The patterns and extraction 
methods take advantage of these regularities, handling the 
forms that are most likely to occur in the text with a high 
level of accuracy, and the forms that occur less frequently or 
not at all less accurately. 
The patterns used for extraction tend to match "sketchy" 
phrases, with skipping between the relevant elements of the 
pattern. For example, in order to find the net income we 
need to know that earnings are under discussion and we 
need to know what the amount of the earnings was; we can 
skip over other irrelevant information. A pattern like the 
following was used for net income: 
((profit +N ! earnings) 
(&skip 8 
((&if ($n) %number) 
?(&if (million) %mult) dol lar +N)) 
(&n (per share))) 
The patterns and extraction methods follow a few main 
strategies, depending on the kind of information to be 
extracted. Each of the strategies i  described below. 
4.4.1. Extracting Information for Simple Slots 
Several slots for earnings and dividends required a very 
simple strategy. The reporting period for earnings is an 
example of this type of slot. The patterns match simple 
phrases and bind a variable to the value to be extracted; the 
extraction method then takes the value bound to the 
variable, canonicalizes it if necessary, and fills in the 
appropriate value in the frame. 
Below is the pattern for the fourth quarter reporting 
period: 
(&if 
(((fourth ! 4th) (quarter ! qtr)) ! 
(Q4)) 
(%quarter = 4)) 
If this pattern is matched, the pattern matcher variable 
%quar ter  is bound to the value 4. The extraction method 
for the repor t ing -per iod  slot is then called to fill in 
the value for the slot in the frame. 
4.40. Understanding Time Context in Text 
Earnings figures are generally given for four periods. In 
order to interpret he numbers in an earnings release, the 
system must not only find the figures reported and 
determine which information type they refer to (e.g. net 
income), but must also know the time period they apply to -- 
the current or prior year, and the quarter or the year to date. 
For efficiency and for accuracy in handing elliptical time 
expressions, we handled time phrases separately, 
maintaining a time context which is then used to determine 
which of the four group slots to fill with the figures 
extracted. This time context makes it possible to process 
pairs of sentences like the following: 
? Earnings during the fourth quarter of 1990 were 50_5 
million dollars. Sales were 74.3 million dollars. 
When JASPER processes the fh'st sentence it stores as the 
174
time context in working memory the fact that the last period 
mentioned was a quarter and the last year mentioned was 
the current one. After the time context is set up in this way, 
the earnings information is invcessed. The following 
sentence gives sales information, but does not provide any 
information about time. Despite this, the persistent time 
context in working memory allows us to determine that the 
slot to fill is the sales slot for the current quarter rather than 
for the prior quarter or for one of the year-to-date slots. 
The extraction procedures for time handling use 
heuristics based on our analysis of the particular texts to be 
handled and on our knowledge of English syntax, semantics, 
and pragmatics. While JASPER does not handle all time 
contexts correctly, it performs very well on the types that 
occur in the corpus of PR Newswire arnings reports. 
4.4.3. Extracting Numbers for Group Slots 
JASPER uses the same strategy for filling in all slots in 
earnings releases that require number values. We will use 
net income as an example. Net income has four specific 
slots to fill, one for each of the reported time periods; all are 
handled together by the net - income-g=oup slot, which 
has a single set of patterns to match and a single extraction 
method to sort out which of the specific slot(s) to fill when 
relevant patterns match. 
The net - income-group  slot has two sets of patterns, 
informally called current patterns and prior patterns: 
* current patterns match a word or phrase like earnings 
followed at some distance by a number; the number is 
bound to a pattern matcher variable. For example, 
((profit +N ! earnings) 
(&skip 8 
((&if ($n) %number) 
?(&if (million) %mult) dollar +N)) 
(&n (per share))) 
. prior patterns match, in different orders, a word like 
earnings and a comparison word (e.g., compared, 
increase ... from, rise ... from, versus, etc.) followed at 
some distance by a number, which is bound to a pattern 
matcher variable. The following is an example of one 
such pattern: 
((profit +N ! earnings) 
(&skip 8 (increase +V ! decrease +V) 
(&skip 8 (from)) 
(&skip 8 ((&if ($n) %number) 
?(&if (million) %mult) 
dollar +N)) 
(&n (per share))) 
These two patterns match the net income from the current 
and prior period in sentences like the following: 
? XFZ Company's profits for the current year increased 
from 45.5 million dollars last year to 50 million dollars. 
The time context described above is used to help determine 
which time period the extracted numbers refer to. 
Conflicts between multiple matches are resolved by a 
heuristic procedure which allows JASPER to handle very 
complex sentences like the following with perfect accuracy: 
*ABC Company reported net earnings of 50 million 
dollars or 45 cents per share on revenues of 62 million 
dollars this year compared to earnings of 55 million 
dollars or 51 cents per share on revenues of 71.1 million 
dollars last year. 
5. Status and Results 
JASPER was deployed for testing and use by reporters in 
early August 1991. Reporters in New York and other 
Reuters offices in the United States are currently using the 
system as an aid in producing earnings reports from PR 
Newswire announcements. 
Accuracy tests run at Carnegie Group on a set of press 
releases that the system developers had never seen showed 
that JASPER's accuracy compares favorably with the 
results seen at the Second Message Understanding 
Conference (MUCK-II) \[9\]. 
JASPER also runs quickly enough to be used in this real- 
time application at an average of about 25 seconds per 
relevant press release. Reuters required processing to be 
less than 30 seconds in order for the journalists to get the 
stories out in the very tight timeframes they have to work 
with. 
5.1. Accuracy 
Before delivering JASPER we ran an accuracy test on 
100 earnings releases and 50 dividend releases that the 
system developers had not seen or analyzed prior to the test. 
Accuracy scores were calculated by manually comparing the 
values extracted by JASPER with the correct values 
specified by a Reuters journalist. We measured accuracy 
separately for selection of relevant releases and fact 
extraction. Results are reported below. 
5.1.1. Selection 
Selection refers to the identification of relevant earnings 
and dividend reports in the slream of press releases from PR 
Newswire. Selection is measured with the standard 
measures of recall and precision. Recall is the percentage 
of actual earnings and dividend announcements that the 
selection process ucceeds in finding. If recall is high, the 
system is not missing many items that it should select. 
Precision is the percentage of announcements that JASPER 
selects that are actually relevant, i.e. relate to earnings or 
dividends. If precision is high, the system is not wrongly 
selecting many items that should not be selected. These 
measures correlate closely with the recall and precision 
175
measures used for MUCK-II, with only minor differences. 
The figures in Figure 4 are based on 1047 PR Newswire 
releases, representing four days transmissions. The 
"Expected" figures represent the number of relevant releases 
actually present in the sample; the "Assigned" figure.s 
represent the number of releases elected by JASPER. We 
calculate overall accuracy as the average of the recall and 
precision scores. 
Earnings Dividend Combined 
Expected 115 25 140 
Assigned 117 25 142 
Correct 112 24 136 
Recall 97.4 96.0 97.1 
Precision 95.7 96.0 95.8 
Overall 96.6 96.0 96.5 
Figure 4: JASPER Selection Accuracy 
To compare our results with those of MUCK-II, we have 
chosen the highest score for recall and precision for each of 
four tests: two tests each with two different data sets. The 
In'st test on each data set was run "cold" -- the system 
developers had not seen the data in advance. The second 
test in each case was run after the system developers had 
made some changes to accommo4ate the test d_ata. The best 
recall and precision scores for each test do not necessarily 
come from the same system. 
TSTI TsTI TST2 TST2 
With With 
Cold Changes Cold Changes 
Recall 65% 85% 100% I00% 
Precision 100% 90% 100% 100% 
Overall 83% 88% 100% 100% 
Figure 5: Beat MUCK-II Selection Accuracy 
5.1.2. Extraction 
We use two measures of accuracy for fact extraction: 
completeness and correctness. Completeness corresponds 
roughly to the recall measure used in MUCK-II, and to the 
recall measure used for selection; it measures the percentage 
of targeted values available in the PR announcements that 
are actually extracted correctly by the system. A targeted 
value is one that should, according to Reuters practice and 
style guidelines, appear in the Reuters news story. 
correct values extracted 
completeness = 
total targeted values 
Correctness corresponds roughly to the precision measure 
used in MUCK-II and the precision measure used for 
selection; it measures the percentage of times that a value 
extracted by the system is correct. 
correct values extracted 
correctness = 
total values extracted 
JASPER was designed with an emphasis on correctness 
rather than on completeness onthe assumption that reporters 
are less likely to overlook gaps than wrong values in the 
story. To compensate for this built-in bias, we also 
calculate an overall accuracy figure for extraction by 
averaging the percentages obtained for completeness and 
cor r~tness .  
In the accuracy results given in Figure 6, the 
"Unadjusted" figures are the raw results of the test. The 
"Adjusted" figures take into account ypographical errors in 
the PR Newswire input (treating them in our favor), as well 
as the judgments of the same Reuters reporter egarding 
permissible deviations from his output. The figures "With 
Changes" are based on a second test on the same input after 
some changes had been made to the extraction rulebase. 
Unadjusted Adjusted with 
Changes 
Targeted 1549 1542 1542 
Extracted 1274 1275 1293 
Correct 1153 1170 1190 
Completeness 74.4 75.9 77.2 
Correctnes 90.5 91.8 92.0 
Overall 82.5 83.9 84.6 
Figure 6: JASPER Extraction Accuracy 
Figure 7 shows results from MUCK-II. The best test 
scores from each of four test for their correlates of 
completeness and correctness are given. The completeness 
and correctness scores do not necessarily come from the 
same system for any given test. The four tests involved two 
tests each of two different data sets. The first test on each 
data set was run "cold" -- the system developers had not 
seen the data in advance. The second test in each case was 
run after the system developers had made some changes to 
accommodate the test data, and so should correspond 
roughly to our lest "with changes". While the MUCK-II 
TSTI TSTI TST2 TST2 
With With 
Cold Changes Cold Changes 
Completeness 44% 67% 68% 94% 
Correctness 93% 95% 93% 98% 
Overall 69% 81% 81% 96% 
Figure 7: Best MUCK-II Extraction Accuracy 
accuracy measures differ somewhat from JASPER's, we 
believe that they are similar enough to show that JASPER 
compares favorably with the results of the systems which 
competed in MUCK-II. 
6. Conclus ions 
JASPER shows that text understanding technology has 
progressed to the point that it can be applied profitably to 
real commercial pplications. However, the state of the art 
will not allow the technology to be applied to unconstrained 
applications. Instead, applications must be selected 
carefully in order to yield positive results. Certain 
176
characteristics of applications will make them better 
candidates for fact extraction using Carnegie Group's 
technology and, we believe, other technologies a  well: 
? The events or reports have predictable components, or 
information types to be extracted. 
? The information to be extracted tends to be expressed 
through an unambiguous and predictable, though 
possibly wide-ranging, set of linguistic forms. 
Technologies like JASPER, which extract information 
from text using shallow, focussed processing techniques 
based on complex pattern matching and heuristic decision- 
making, can be profitably applied to applications having 
these characteristics. JASPER's accuracy compares 
favorably with other text understanding systems, and its 
processing speed allows for real-time use of the extracted 
information in a time-critical application. JASPER is a 
deployed system which solves a real business problem. We 
believe there any many other such business problems that 
could be solved with similar techniques. We expect o see 
the deployment of many more such applications in the 
future. 
8. Schank, R, C. Conceptual Information Processing. 
North Holland, Amsterdam, 1975. 
9. Sundheim, B. Second Message Understanding 
Conference (MUCK-II) Report. 
NavalOceanSystemsCenter, September, 1989. 
References 
1. Hayes, P. J., Andersen, P. M., Nirenburg, I. B., and 
Schmandt, L. M. TCS: A Shell for Content-Based Text 
Categorization. Sixth IEEE AI Applications Conference, 
Santa Monica, March, 1990. 
2. Hirschman, L., et. al. The PUNDIT Natural-Language 
Processing System. Proceedings of the Annual AI Systems 
in Government Conference, Washington, D.C., March, 
1989, pp. 234-243. 
3. Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Martin, P., Edwards, D. 
Interpretation as Abduction. Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics, Association of Computional Linguistics, June, 
1988, pp. 95-103. 
4. Jacobs, P. S. and Rau, L.F. "SCISOR: Extracting 
Information from Online News". Comm. ACM 33, 11 
(November 1990), 88-97. 
5. Ksiezyk, T., and Grishman, R. An Equipment Model 
and its role in the Interpretation of Noun Compounds. In 
DARPA' s 1986 Strategic Computing Natural Language 
Processing Workshop, Information Sciences Institute, 
Marina del Rey, CA, 1986, pp. 81-95. 
6. Kuhns, R. J. A News Analysis System. COLING88, 
Budapest, August, 1988. 
7. Lytinen, S. and Gershman, A. ATRANS: Automatic 
Processing of Money Transfer Messages. Proceedings of 
the Fifth National Conference of the American Association 
for Artificial Intelligence, Philadelphia, August, 1986, pp. 
1089-1093. 
177
