A Method  of Automat ic  Hyper text  Construct ion 
from an Encyc lopedic  Dict ionary of a Specif ic Field 
Sadao Kurohash i ,  Makoto  Nagao ,  Satosh i  Sato  and  Masah iko  Murakami  
Dept .  of  E lect r ica l  Eng ineer ing ,  Kyoto  Un ivers i ty  
Yosh ida-honmach i ,  Sakyo ,  Kyoto ,  606, Japan  
1 In t roduct ion  
Nowadays, very large volume of texts are created and 
stored in computer, and as a result the retrieval of texts 
which fits to a user's demand has become a difficult prob- 
lem. Hypertext is a typical system to answer this prob- 
lem, whose primary objective is to establish flexible as- 
sociative links between relevant ext parts and to allow 
users to select and trace links to see relevant ext con- 
tents which are connected by links. A difficult problem 
here is how to construct automatically a network struc- 
ture in a given set of text data. This paper is concerned 
with (1) automatic conversion of a plain text set into 
a hypertext structure, and (2) construction of flexible 
human interface for the hypertext system. We applied 
natural language processing methods to locate impor- 
tant conceptual terms in a text corpus and to establish 
varieties of links between these terms and appropriate 
text portions. 
2 Ext rac t ion  o f  thesaurus  in fo rmat ion  
The text corpus we handled as a concrete xample was 
the Encyclopedic Dictionary of Computer Science (here- 
after abbreviated as EDCS. Iwanami Publ. 1990. En- 
glish translation will appear soon from Academic Press). 
It includes 4500 terms and has the text volume of two 
million Japanese characters (4 Mega bytes). 
The first part of the term description of EDCS is 
devoted to synonyms, antonyms, abbreviations and 
broader concept words. This part has typical sentential 
styles such as, 
(i) A is {sometimes, often, also, commonly, ...} {called, 
written, named, expressed, ...} as B, C, ..., or D. 
(ii) A is abbreviated as B. 
(iii) A is {an abbreviation, a contraction, ...} of B. 
(iv) A stands for B. 
(v) We call A S {for short}. 
(vi) A is B. A is included in B. 
(vii) A is called as B, so C as D. 
By finding these sentential patterns the relation between 
the words A and B is established as follows. 
(i) p-link is set up f rom a synonym word  to a sen- 
tence  which defines the synonym relation. 
(ii) s-link (by synonym) is set up f rom a def ined word  
to def in ing words  by synonym relation. 
Typical sentential styles of intensional definition are: 
(i) A is defined as B. A is regarded as B. 
(ii) A means B. A connotes B. A is B. 
(iii) A is a {kind, form, way, branch, method, ...) of B. 
(iv) A is regarded as B, so C as D. 
By identifying these patterns in a term description part, 
the relation between the defined word (A) and the defi- 
nition sentences i established as: 
(i) p-link is set up f rom the def ined word  to the 
def in i t ion sentence  when the defined word is not 
the headword of the term description. This is the 
case when the defined word is not so important as 
a headword of the dictionary, and so a rather sim- 
ple definition description is embedded in the term 
description. 
(ii) s-link (by synonym) is set up between the  def ined 
words  in the above word extraction process if there 
are plurals of the defined words. 
isa-link is established between a narrower concept 
word (A) and a broader concept word (B) as A isa B. 
Here A and B are descriptors which represent other syn- 
onym words, isa thesaurus is first established for the 
words defined by intensional definitions. By utilizing 
this thesaurus extensional definitions are analyzed to get 
words of broader/narrower relation defined by these sen- 
tences (refer to the next section). Then the thesaurus is 
reformulated by the addition of new words which have 
isa relation, and which are obtained from extensional 
definitions. 
3 Ext rac t ion  o f  o ther  in fo rmat ion  
Sentences of extensional definition introduce examples 
and narrower concept words of the defined words. Typ- 
ical sentential styles of the extensional definition are: 
(i) A is {divided, classified, ...} into B, C, ..., and D. 
(ii) A includes B, C, ..., and D. 
(iii) There exist B, C, ..., and D {in, for} A. 
From these sentences we get the information that A 
is a defined word, and B, C, ..., and D are narrower (or 
239
Table 1: Functional relations between words. 
Relation 
A isa B 
A syn B 
A anti B 
A hcomp B 
A hprop B 
A hfuni B 
A hfuno B 
A deal B 
A purp B 
A used B 
A set B 
AbyB 
Meaning 
A isaB  
A is synonym of B 
A is antonym of B 
A has B as a component 
A has a property of B 
A has an intrinsic function of B 
A has an extrinsic function of B 
A deals with B 
A has a purpose of B 
A isused in  B 
A sets B 
A is done in/by B 
lower) concept words. However, there are sometimes the 
cases where the above sentential styles do not necessarily 
mean the expected efinitions. Therefore to make sure 
the relations A and B, C, ..., and D are the expected one, 
we introduced a simple checking procedure as follows. 
(i) the semantic ategory of the narrower concept words 
must be the same as that of the defined word. 
(ii) isa thesaurus is checked to see no contradiction be- 
tween the defined word and its narrower concept 
words. 
By identifying the above sentential patterns in a term 
description just after the intensional definition sentences, 
the relation between the defined word (A) and its nar- 
rower term (B, C, ..., D) is established as: 
(i) p-link is set up f rom a nar rower  te rm to its 
def ining sentences  which include the word by the 
condition that the narrower term is not the head- 
word of the dictionary. 
(ii) The extracted words have broader/narrower rela- 
tion and are included in the isa thesaurus, and are 
given s-links (by isa). 
We tried to extract functional relations between words 
from the definitional sentences. The extraction is mainly 
performed by checking the sentential structure and par- 
ticularly the verb property of the defining sentences, and 
additional checking is done for the consistency between 
A and B (Table 1). Links are established from A to B 
by s-links with meaning attributes hown in Table 1. 
EDCS has, besides the term description, the word tree 
which is similar to a thesaurus, and which shows graphi- 
cally the structure of the whole area of computer science. 
Word tree is stored in computer by s-link, and p-link is 
established from a word in the word tree to the cor- 
responding term description, p-link is also established 
from an index word to the text portion in which the in- 
dex word is included. The term description has reference 
words at the end of the term description. This reference 
is done by s-link. 
4 Retrieval system 
Information retrieval can be done from varieties of as- 
pects by tracing p- and s-links. A user can start the 
dictionary consultation by giving an arbitrary word(W), 
the meaning of which he or she wants to know. 
(i) When W is a headword the term description of W 
is displayed. 
(ii) When W is an index word the term description 
which includes the explanation of the index word 
is displayed with the special mark of that explana- 
tion part. When there are several terms to W, these 
candidates are shown with simple explanations, and 
the user can choose one of them for more detailed 
description. 
(iii) When W is a basic componential word of some com- 
pound words these words are shown to the user to 
select a proper compound word. Then the process 
(ii) is activated. 
(iv) When W is not in the above categories the text 
search for the whole text data of the dictionary can 
be started. The full text search will be completed 
in a few seconds, and all the matched parts can be 
displayed by KWIC representation. 
(v) A user can see on the display the part of the word 
tree which includes W when it is a headword, and 
can understand the relative situation of the word 
W in relation to other words in the wider scope of 
the computer science field. The user can point any 
word in the word tree to see its details. 
When the term description of a headword is dis- 
played on the screen, any word on the screen can 
be marked, and the process of (i) ,~ (v) can be ac- 
tivated from the marked word. 
A user can ask what are the words which are related 
to W by a certain functional relation, and can go to 
the process (i) ~, (v) with these words. 
5 Conclusion 
Automatic linking of index words with the corresponding 
text portions by p-links was compared with the indices 
in the published book, which were given by human. We 
can say that a fairly good coincidence is obtained. Some 
links which are set by automatic process are not proper, 
but there are many links which were not set up by human 
by his or her carelessness. The appropriateness of the s- 
links which are set by automatic process was checked by 
random sampling, and 92% of the links was recognized 
as appropriate. 
The evaluation result shows that the language pro- 
cessing introduced into the structuring of a large vol- 
ume of text data of the Encyclopedic Dictionary of Com- 
puter Science as a hypertext system was successful. This 
method is widely applicable for the hypertext construc- 
tion of varieties of dictionaries. 
(vi) 
(vii) 
240
