A Practical Methodology 
for the Evaluation of Spoken Language Systems 
Sean Boisen and Madeleine Bates* 
Bol t  Beranek  and Newman,  Inc. (BBN)  
10 Mou l ton  Street, Cambr idge  MA 02138 USA 
sbo isen@bbn.com,  bates@bbn.com 
1 Introduction 
A meaningful evaluation methodology can advance the 
state-of-the-art by encouraging mature, practical applications 
rather than "toy" implementations. Evaluation is also cru- 
cial to assessing competing claims and identifying promis- 
ing technical approaches. While work in speech recognition 
(SR) has a history of evaluation methodologies that per- 
mit comparison among various systems, until recently no 
methodology existed for either developers of natural an- 
guage (NL) interfaces or researchers in speech understanding 
(SU) to evaluate and compare the systems they developed. 
Recently considerable progress has been made by a num- 
ber of groups involved in the DARPA Spoken Language 
Systems (SLS) program to agree on a methodology for 
comparative evaluation of SLS systems, and that method- 
ology has been put into practice several times in com- 
parative tests of several SLS systems. These evaluations 
are probably the only NL evaluations other than the series 
of Message Understanding Conferences (Sundheim, 1989; 
Sundheim, 1991) to have been developed and used by a 
group of researchers at different sites, although several ex- 
cellent workshops have been held to study some of these 
problems (Palmer et al, 1989; Neal et al, 1991). 
This paper describes a practical "black-box" methodology 
for automatic evaluation of question-answering NL systems. 
While each new application domain will require some devel- 
opment of special resources, the heart of the methodology is 
domain-independent, and it can be used with either speech 
or text input. The particular characteristics of the approach 
are described in the following section: subsequent sections 
present its implementation in the DARPA SLS community, 
and some problems and directions for future development. 
2 The  Eva luat ion  F ramework  
2.1 Characteristics of the Methodology 
The goal of this research as been to produce awell-defined, 
meaningful evaluation methodology which is 
*The work reported here was supported by the Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency and was monitored by the Off'ice of Naval 
Research under Contract No. 00014-89-C-0008. The views and 
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors 
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the offi- 
cial policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency or the United States Government. 
? automatic, to enable evaluation over large quantities of 
data 
based on an objective assessment of the understanding 
capabilities of a NL system (rather than its user inter- 
face, portability, speed, etc.) 
? capable of application to a wide variety of NL systems 
and approaches 
? suitable for blind testing 
? as non-intrusive as possible on the system being eval- 
uated (to decrease the costs of evaluation) 
? domain independent. 
The systems are assumed to be front ends to an interactive 
database query system, implemented in a particular common 
domain. 
The methodology can be described as "black box" in thai 
there is no attempt o evaluate the internal representations 
(syntactic, semantic, etc.) of a system. Instead, only the 
content of an answer elrieved from the database is evalu- 
ated: if the answer is correct, it is assumed that the system 
understood the query correctly. Comparing answers has the 
practical advantage ofbeing a simple way to give widely var. 
ied systems acommon basis for comparison. Although some 
recent work has suggested promising approaches (Black e, 
al., 1991), system-internal representations are hard to com. 
pare, or even impossible in some cases where System X hm 
no level of representation corresponding to System Y's. I 
is easy, however, to define a simple common language fo~ 
representing answers (see Appendix A), and easy to ma~ 
system-specific representations i to this common language. 
This methodology has been successfully applied in the 
context of cross-site blind tests, where the evaluation i:
based on input which the system has never seen before 
This type of evaluation leaves out many other important as 
pects of a system, such as the user interface, or the utilit: 
(or speed) of performing a particular task with a system tha 
includes a NL component (work by Tennant (1981), Bate: 
and Rettig (1988), and Neal et al (1991) addresses some o 
these other factors). 
Examples below will be taken from the current DARPt 
SLS application, the Airline Travel Information Systen 
(ATIS). This is a database of flights with information o
the aircraft, stops and connections, meals, etc. 
162
te 
NL 
"meaning" 
Application 
Interface I DB Commands 
Score (Right, Wrong, No Answer) 
SLS  
Answer  
v \[!!!iiiiiiiii!#:iiii:#~ii~ii~ii~!~ii~i~iiiii!!iiiiiiii Data 
\] Answer  
Preparation 
Figure 1: The evaluation process 
2.2 Evaluation Architecture and Common Resources 
We assume an evaluation architecture like that in Figure 1. 
The shaded components are common resources of the eval- 
uation, and are not part of the system(s) being evaluated. 
Specifically, it is assumed there is a common database which 
all systems use in producing answers, which defines both the 
data tuples (rows in tables) and the data types for elements 
of these tuples (string, integer, etc.). 
Queries relevant to the database are collected under con- 
ditions as realistic as possible (see 2.4). Answers to the 
corpus of queries must be provided, expressed in a common 
standard format (Common Answer Specification, or CAS): 
one such format is exemplified in Appendix A. Some por- 
tion of these pairs of queries and answers is then set aside 
as a test corpus, and the remainder is provided as training 
material. 
In practice, it has also proved useful to include in the 
training data the database query expression (for example, an 
SQL expression) which was used to produce the reference 
answer: this often makes it possible for system developers 
to understand what was expected for a query, even if the 
answer is empty or otherwise limited in content. 
2.2.1 Agreeing on Meaning 
While the pairing of queries with answers provides the 
training and test corpora, these must be augmented by com- 
mon agreement as to how queries should be answered. In 
practice, agreeing on the meaning of queries has been one 
of the hardest tasks. The issues are often extremely subtle, 
and interact with the structure and content of the database 
in sometimes unexpected ways. 
As an example of the problem, consider the following 
request to an airline information system: 
List the direct f l ights from 
Boston to Dal las that serve 
meals. 
It seems straightforward, but should this include flights 
that might stop in Chicago without making a connection 
there? Should it include flights that serve a snack, since a 
snack is not considered by some people to be a full meal? 
Without some common agreement, many systems would 
produce very different answers for the same questions, all 
of them equally right according to each system's own defi- 
nitions of the terms, but not amenable to automatic inter- 
system comparison. To implement this methodology for 
such a domain, therefore, it is necessary to stipulate the 
meaning of potentiMly ambiguous terms such as "mid-day", 
"meals" , "the fare of a flight". The current list of such 
"principles of interpretation" for the ATIS domain contains 
about 60 specifications, including things like: 
? which tables and fields in the database identify the ma- 
jor entities in the domain (flights, aircraft, fares, etc.) 
? how to interpret fare expressions like "one-way fare", 
"the cheapest fare", "excursion fare", etc. 
? which cities are to be considered "near" an airport. 
Some other examples from the current principles of inter- 
pretation are given in Appendix B. 
163
2.2.2 Reference Answers 
It is not enough to agree on meaning of queries in the 
chosen domain. It is also necessary to develop a common 
understanding of precisely what is to be produced as the 
answer, or part of the answer, to a question. 
For example, if a user asks "What is the departure time of 
the earliest flight from San Francisco to Atlanta?", one sys- 
tem might reply with a single time and another might reply 
with that time plus additional columns containing the carrier 
and flight number, a third system might also include the ar- 
rival time and the origin and destination airports. None of 
these answers could be said to be wrong, although one might 
argue about the advantages and disadvantages of terseness 
and verbosity. 
While it is technically possible to mandate xactly which 
columns from the database should be returned for expres- 
sions, this is not practical: it requires agreement on a much 
larger set of issues, and conflicts with the principle that eval- 
uation should be as non-intrusive as possible. Furthermore, 
it is not strictly necessary: what matters most is not whether 
a system provided exactly the same data as some reference 
answer, but whether the correct answer is clearly among the 
data provided (as long as no incorrect data was returned). 
For the sake of automatic evaluation, then, a canonical 
reference answer (the minimum "right answer") is devel- 
oped for each evaluable query in the training set. The con- 
tent of this reference answer is determined both by domain- 
independent linguistic principles (Boisen et al, 1989) and 
domain-specific stipulation. The language used to express 
the answers for the ATIS domain is presented in Appendix A. 
Evaluation using the minimal answer alone makes it pos- 
sible to exploit the fact that extra fields in an answer axe not 
penalized. For example, the answer 
(("AA" 152 0920 1015 "BOS . . . .  CHI" 
"SNACK"  ) ) 
could be produced for any of the following queries: 
? "When does American Airlines flight 152 leave?" 
? "What's the earliest flight from Boston to Chicago?" 
? "Does the 9:20 flight to Chicago serve meals?" 
and would be counted correct. 
For the ATIS evaluations, it was necessary to rectify this 
problem without overly constraining what systems can pro- 
duce as an answer. The solution arrived at was to have 
two kinds of reference answers for each query: a minimum 
answer, which contains the absolute minimum amount of 
data that must be included in an answer for it to be correct, 
and a maximum answer (that can be automatically derived 
from the minimum) containing all the "reasonable" fields 
that might be included, but no completely irrelevant ones. 
For example, for a question asking about the arrival time of 
a flight, the minimum answer would contain the flight 1D 
and the arrival time. The maximum answer would contain 
the airline name and flight number, but not the meal ser- 
vice or any fare information. In order to be counted correct, 
the answer produced by a system must contain at least the 
data in the minimum answer, and no more than the data in 
the maximum answer; if additional fields are produced, the 
answer is counted as wrong. This successfully reduced the 
incentive for systems to overgenerate answers in hope of 
getting credit for answering queries that they did not really 
understand. 
2.2.3 Comparison Software 
Another common resource is software to compare the ref- 
erence answers to those produced by various systems. 1 
This task is complicated substantially by the fact that the 
reference answer is intentionally minimal, but the answer 
supplied by a system may contain extra information, and 
cannot be assumed to have the columns or rows in the same 
order as the reference answer. Some intelligence is there- 
fore needed to determine when two answers match: simple 
identity tests won't work. 
In the general case, comparing the atomic values in an an- 
swer expression just means an identity test. The only excep- 
tion is real numbers, for which an epsilon test is performed, 
to deal with round-off discrepancies arising from different 
hardware precision. 2 The number of significant digits that 
are required to be the same is a parameter of the comparator. 
Answer comparison at the level of tables require more so- 
phistication, since column order is ignored, and the answer 
may include additional columns that are not in the specifica- 
tion. Furthermore, those additional columns can mean that 
the answer will include extra whole tuples not present in 
the specification. For example, in the ATIS domain, if the 
Concorde and Airbus are both aircraft whose type is "JET", 
they would together contribute only one tuple (row) to the 
simple list of aircraft ypes below. 
( ( " JET" )  
( "TURBOPROP" ) 
( "HEL ICOPTER"  ) 
( "AMPHIB IAN")  
( "PROPELLER") )  
On  the other hand, if aircraft names were included in the 
table, they would each appear, producing a larger number of 
tuples overall. 
( ( "AEROSPAT IALE  CONCORDE"~. " JET") 
( "A IRBUS INDUSTRIE  .... JET")  
( "LOCKHEED L18 8 ELECTRA .... TURBOPROP"  \] 
.o.) 
With answers in the form of tables, the algorithm explores 
each possible mapping from the required columns found in 
the reference answer (henceforth REF) to the actual columns 
found in the answer being evaluated (HYP). (Naturally, there 
must be at least as many columns in HYP as in REF, or the 
answer is clearly wrong.) For each such mapping, it reduces 
HYP according to the mapping, eliminating any duplicate 
tuples in the reduced table, and then compares REF against 
that reduced table, testing set-equivalence b tween the two. 
Special provision is made for single element answers, sc 
that a scalar REF and a HYP which is a table containing 
a single element are judged to be equivalent That is, a 
scalar REF will match either a scalar or a single elemenl 
1The first implementation of this software was by Lance 
Ramshaw (Boisen et al, 19891. It has since been re-implementex 
and modified by NIST for the ATIS evaluations. 
2For the ATIS evaluations, this identity test has been relaxed 
somewhat so that, e.g., strings need not have quotes around their 
if they do not contain "white space" characters. See Appendix t
for further details. 
164
table for HYP, and a REF which is a single element able 
specification will also match either kind of answer. 
For the ATIS evaluations, two extensions were made to 
this approach. A REF may be ambiguous, containing several 
sub expressions each of which is itself a REF: in this case, 
if HYP matches any of the answers in REF, the comparison 
succeeds. A special answer token (NO_ANSWER) was also 
agreed to, so that when a system can detect hat it doesn't 
have enough information, it can report that fact rather than 
guessing. This is based on the assumption that failing to 
answer is less serious than answering incorrectly. 
2.3 Scoring Answers 
Expressing results can be almost as complicated as obtaining 
them. Originally it was thought hat a simple "X percent 
correct" measure would be sufficient, however it became 
clear that there was a significant difference between giving 
a wrong answer and giving no answer at all, so the results are 
now presented as: Number right, Number wrong, Number 
not answered, Weighted Error Percentage (weighted so that 
wrong answers are twice as bad as no answer at all), and 
Score (100 - weighted error). 
Whenever numeric measures of understanding are pre- 
sented, they should in principle be accompanied by some 
measure of the significance and reliability of the metric. Al- 
though precise significance tests for this methodology are not 
yet known, it is clear that "'black box" testing is not a perfect 
measure. In particular, it is impossible to tell whether a sys- 
tem got a correct answer for the "right" reason, rather than 
through chance: this is especially true when the space of 
possible answers is small (yes-no questions are an extreme 
answer). Since more precise measures are much more costly, 
however, the present methodology has been considered ad- 
equate for the current state of the art in NL evaluation. 
Given that current weighted error rates for the DARPA 
ATIS evaluations range from 55%--18%, we can roughly 
estimate the confidence interval to be approximately 8%. 3 
Another source of variation in the scoring metric is the fact 
that queries taken from different speakers can vary widely 
in terms of how easy it is for systems to understand and 
answer them correctly. For example, in the February 1991 
ATIS evaluations, the performance of BBN's Delphi SLS on 
text input from individual speakers ranged from 75% to 10% 
correcL The word error from speech recognition was also 
the highest for those speakers with the highest NL error rates, 
suggesting that individual speaker differences can strongly 
impact he results. 
3Assuming there is some probability of error in each trial 
(query), the variance in this error rate can be estimated using the 
formula 
where e is the error rate expressed as a decimal (so 55% error = 
0.55), and n is the size of the test set. Taking e = 0.45 (one of the 
better scores from the February 91 ATIS evaluation), and n -- 145, 
differences in scores greater than 0.08 (8%) have a 95% likelihood 
of being significant. 
2.4 Evaluation Data 
2.4.1 Collecting Data 
The methodology presented above places no a priori re- 
strictions on how the data itself should be collected. For 
the ATIS evaluations, everal different methods of data col- 
lection, including a method called "Wizard scenarios", were 
used to collect raw data, both speech and transcribed text 
(Hemphill, 1990). This resulted in the collection of a num- 
ber of human-machine dialogues. One advantage of this ap- 
proach is that it produced both the queries and draft answers 
at the same time. It also became clear that the language 
obtained is very strongly influenced by the particular task, 
the domain and database being used, the amount and form 
of data returned to the user, and the type of data collection 
methodology used. This is still an area of active research in 
the DARPA SLS community. 
2.4.2 Classifying Data 
Typically, some of the data which is collected is not suit- 
able as test data, because: 
? the queries fall outside the domain or the database query 
application 
? the queries require capabilities beyond strict NL under- 
standing (for example, very complex inferencing or the 
use of large amounts of knowledge outside the domain) 
? the queries are overly vague ("Tell me about . . .")  
It is also possible that phenomena may arise in test data 
which falls outside the agreement on meanings derived from 
the training data (the "principles of interpretation"). Such 
queries should be excluded from the test corpus, since it is 
not possible to make a meaningful comparison on answers 
unless there is prior agreement on precisely what the answer 
should be. 
2.4.3 Discourse Context 
The methodology of comparing paired queries and an- 
swers assumes the query itself contains all the information 
necessary for producing an answer. This is, of course, often 
not true in spontaneous goal-directed utterances, ince one 
query may create a context for another, and the full con- 
text is required to answer (e.g., "Show me the flights ... ", 
'Which of THEM . . .") .  Various means of extending this 
methodology for evaluating context-dependent queries have 
been proposed, and some of them have been implemented 
in the ATIS evaluations (Boisen et al (1989), Hirschman et 
al. (1990), Bates and Ayuso (1991), Pallett (1991)). 
3 The  DARPA SLS  Eva luat ions  
The goal of the DARPA Spoken Language Systems program 
is to further esearch and demonstrate he potential utility of 
speech understanding. Currently, at least five major sites 
(AT&T, BBN, CMU, MIT, and SRI) are developing com- 
plete SLS systems, and another site (Paramax) is integrating 
its NL component with other speech systems. Representa- 
tives from these and other organizations meet regularly to 
discuss program goals and to evaluate progress. 
165
This DARPA SLS community formed a committee on 
evaluation 4, chaired by David Pallett of the National Insti- 
tute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The committee 
was to develop a methodology for data collection, training 
data dissemination, and testing for SLS systems under de- 
velopment. The first community-wide evaluation using the 
first version of this methodology took place in June, 1990, 
with subsequent evaluations in February 1991 and February 
1992. 
The emphasis of the committee's work has been on au- 
tomatic evaluation of queries to an air travel information 
system (ATIS). Air travel was chosen as an application that 
is easy for everyone to understand. The methodology pre- 
sented here was originally developed in the context of the 
need for SLS evaluation, and has been extended in important 
ways by the community based on the practical experience 
of doing evaluations. 
As a result of the ATIS evaluations, a body of resources 
has now been compiled and is available through NIST. This 
includes the ATIS relational database, a corpus of paired 
queries and answers, protocols for data collection, soft- 
ware for automatic omparison of answers, the "Principles 
of Interpretation" specifying domain-specific meanings of 
queries, and the CAS format (Appendix A is the current 
version). Interested parties should contact David Pallet of 
NIST for more information. 5 
4 Advantages and Limitations of the 
Methodo logy  
Several benefits come from the use of this methodology: 
? It forces advance agreement on the meaning of critical 
terms and on some information to be included in the 
answer. 
? It is objective, to the extent hat a method for selecting 
testable queries can be defined, and to the extent hat 
the agreements mentioned above can be reached. 
? It requires less human effort (primarily in the creating of 
canonical examples and answers) than non-automatic, 
more subjective valuation. It is thus better suited to 
large test sets. 
? It can be easily extended. 
Most of the weaknesses of this methodology arise from the 
fact that the answers produced by a database query system 
are only an approximation of its understanding capabilities. 
As with any black-box approach, it may give undue credit 
to a system that gets the right answer for the wrong reason 
(i.e., without really understanding the query), although this 
should be mitigated by using larger and more varied test 
4The primary members of the original committee are: Lyn 
Bates (BBN), Debbie Dahl (UNISYS), Bill Fisher (NIST), Lynette 
Hirschman (M1T), Bob Moore (SRI), and Rich Stern (CMU). Suc- 
cessor committees have also included Jared Bernstein (SRI), Kate 
Hunike-Smith (SRI), Patti Price (SRI), Alex Rudnicky (CMU), and 
Jay Wilpon (AT&T). Many other people have contributed to the 
work of these committees and their subcommittees. 
5David Pallet may be contacted at the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, Technology Building, Room A216, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, (301)975-2944. 
corpora. It does not distinguish between merely acceptable 
answers and very good answers. 
Another limitation of this approach is that it does not 
adequately measure the handling of some phenomena, such 
as extended ialogues. 
5 Other  Eva luat ion  Methodologies 
This approach to evaluation shares many characteristics 
with the methods used for the DARPA-sponsored Message 
Understanding Conferences (Sundheim, 1989; Sundheim, 
1991). In particular, both approaches are focused on exter- 
nal (black-box) evaluation of the understanding capabilities 
of systems using input/output pairs, and there are many sim- 
ilar problems in precisely specifying how NL systems are to 
satisfy the application task. 
Despite these similarities, this methodology probably 
comes closer to evaluating the actual understanding capa- 
bilities of NL systems. One reason is that the constraints 
on both input and output are more rigorous. For database 
query tasks, virtually every word must be correctly under- 
stood to produce a correct answer: by contrast, much of 
the MUC-3 texts is irrelevant to the application task. Since 
this methodology focuses on single queries (.perhaps with 
additional context), a smaller amount of language is being 
examined in each individual comparison. 
Similarly, for database query, the database itself implicitly 
constrains the space of possible answers, and each answer 
is scored as either correct or incorrect. This differs from 
the MUC evaluations, where an answer template is a com- 
posite of many bits of information, and is scored along the 
dimensions of recall, precision, and overgeneration. 
Rome Laboratory has also sponsored a recent effort to 
define another approach to evaluating NL systems (Neal et 
al., 1991; Walter, 1992). This methodology is focussed on 
human evaluation of interactive systems, and is a "glass- 
box" method which looks at the performance of the linguistic 
components of the system under review. 
6 Future Issues 
The hottest opic currently facing the SLS community with 
respect o evaluation is what to do about dialogues. Many 
of the natural tasks one might do with a database interface 
involve extended problem-solving dialogues, but no method- 
ology exists for evaluating the capabilities of systems at- 
tempting to engage in dialogues with users. 
A Common Answer  Spec i f i ca t ion  (CAS)  for 
the ATIS Application 
(Note: this is the official CAS specification for the DARPA 
ATIS evaluations, as distributed by NIST. It is domain in- 
dependent, but not necessarily complete: for example, it 
assumes that the units of any database value are unambigu- 
ously determined by the database specification. This would 
not be sufficient for applications that allowed unit conver- 
sion, e.g. "Show me the weight of . . . "  where the weight 
could be expressed in tons, metric tons, pounds, etc. This 
sort of extension should not affect he ease of automatically 
comparing answer expressions, however.) 
166
Basic Syntax in BNF 
answer , casl  \[ ( casl  OR answer ) 
casl  , scalar-value \[ relation \] NO.ANSWER 
I no_answer 
scalar-value , boolean-value I number-value \[ 
string 
boolean-value , YES \[ yes \[ TRUE \[ true \[ NO 
I no I FALSE I false 
number-value , integer \] real-number 
integer , \[sign\] digit+ 
sign , + - 
digit ,0  1 \[ 2 \[ 3 { 4 \[ 5 { 6 I 7 I 
8 9 
real-number , sign d ig i t+,  digit* \[ d ig i t+,  digit* 
string , char_except_whitespace+ I " char* " 
relation , ( tuple* ) 
tuple ~ ( value+ ) 
value , scalar-value \ [N IL  
Standard BNF notation has been extended to include two 
other common devices : "A+" means "one or more A's" 
and "m*" means "zero or more A's". 
The formulation given above does not define 
char_except_whitespace and char. All of the standard ASCII 
characters count as members of char, and all but "white 
space" are counted as char_except_whitespace. Following 
ANSI "C", blanks, horizontal and vertical tabs, newlines, 
formfeeds, and comments are, collectively, "white space". 
The only change in the syntax of CAS itself from the 
previous version is that now a string may be represented as 
either a sequence of characters not containing white space 
or as a sequence of any characters enclosed in quotation 
marks. Note that only non-exponential real numbers are 
allowed, and that empty tuples are not allowed (but empty 
relations are). 
Additional Syntactic Constraints 
The syntactic lasses boolean-value, string, and number- 
value define the types "boolean", "string", and "'number", 
respectively. All the tuples in a relation must have the same 
number of values, and those values must be of the same 
respective types (boolean, string, or number). 
If a token could represent either a string or a number, it 
will be taken to be a number; if it could represent either a 
string or a boolean, it will be taken to be a boolean. Inter- 
pretation as a string may be forced by enclosing a token in 
quotation marks. 
In a tuple, N IL  as the representation f missing data is 
allowed as a special case for any value, so a legal answer 
indicating the costs of ground transportation in Boston would 
be 
({"L" 5.00) ("R" nil) 
("A" nil) ("R" nil)) 
Elementary Rules for CAS Comparisons 
String comparison is case-sensitive, but the distinguished 
values (YES, NO, TRUE, FALSE, NO~ANSWEP~ and NIL) 
may be written in either upper or lower case. 
Each indexical position for a value in a tuple (say, the ith) 
is assumed to represent the same field or variable in all the 
tuples in a given relation. 
Answer relations must be derived from the existing re- 
lations in the database, either by subsetting and combining 
relations or by operations like averaging, summation, etc. 
In matching an hypothesized (HYP) CAS form with a ref- 
erence (REF) one, the order of values in the tuples is not 
important; nor is the order of tuples in a relation, nor the 
order of alternatives in a CAS form using OR. The scoring 
algorithm will use the re-ordering that maximizes the indi- 
cated score. Extra values in a tuple are not counted as errors, 
but distinct extra tuples in a relation are. A tuple is not dis- 
tinct if its values for the fields specified by the REF CAS 
are the same as another tuple in the relation; these duplicate 
tuples are ignored. CAS forms that include alternate CAS's 
connected with OR are intended to allow a single HYP form 
to match any one of several REF CAS forms. If the HYP 
CAS form contains alternates, the score is undefined. 
In comparing two real number values, a tolerance will 
be allowed; the default is -t-.01%. No tolerance is allowed 
in the comparison of integers. In comparing two strings, 
initial and final sub-strings of white space are ignored. In 
comparing boolean values, TRUE and YES are equivalent, 
as are FALSE and NO. 
B Some Examples from the Principles of 
Interpretation Document for the ATIS  
Application 
(Note: these are excerpted from the official Principles of In- 
terpretation document dated 11/20/91. The entire document 
is comprised of about 60 different points, and is available 
from David Pallet at NIST. 
The term "annotator" below refers to a human prepar- 
ing training or test data by reviewing reference answers to 
queries.) 
INTERPETING ATIS QUERIES RE THE DATABASE 
1 General Principles: 
1.1 Only reasonable interpretations will be used. 
An annotator or judge must decide if a linguistically 
possible interpretation is reasonable or not. 
1.2 The context will be used in deciding if an interpretation 
is reasonable. 
. . .  
1.3 Each interpretation must be expressible as one SQL 
statement. 
At present (11/18/91) a few specified exceptions to this 
principle are allowed, such as allowing boolean answers 
for yes/no questions. 
1.4 All interpretations meeting the above rules will be used 
by the annotators to generate possible reference an- 
swers. 
A query is thus ambiguous iff it has two interpretations 
that are fairly represented by distinct SQL expressions. 
167
The reference SQL expression stands as a semantic rep- 
resentation or logical form. If a query has two inter- 
pretations that result in the same SQL, it will not be 
considered ambiguous. The fact that the two distinct 
SQL expressions may yield the same answer given the 
database is immaterial. 
The annotators must be aware of the usual sources of 
ambiguity, such as structural mbiguity, exemplified by 
cases like "the prices of flights, first class, from X to 
Y", in which the attachment of a modifier that can ap- 
ply to either prices or flights is unclear. (This should 
be (ambiguously) interpreted both ways, as both "the 
first-class prices on flights from X to Y" and "the prices 
on first-class flights from X to Y".) More generally, if
structural ambiguities like this could result in different 
(SQL) interpretations, they must be treated as ambigu- 
ous. 
2 Specific Principles: 
In this arena, certain English expressions have special 
meanings, particularly in terms of the database distributed 
by TI in the spring of 1990 and revised in November 1990 
and May 1991. Here are the ones we have agreed on: (In 
the following, "A.B" refers to field B of table A.) 
2.1 Requests for enumeration. 
A large class of tables in the database have entries that 
can be taken as defining things that can be asked for 
in a query. In the answer, each of these things will be 
identified by giving a value of the primary key of its 
table. These tables are: 
Table Name English Term(s) 
aircraft aircraft, equipment 
airline airline 
airport airport 
flight_stop (intermed.) stops 
2.2 Flights. 
Primary Key 
aircraft _code 
airline_code 
airport_code 
flight_id, stop_number 
high_flight_number 
2.2.1 A flight "between X and Y" means a flight "from 
X toY".  
? o .  
2.2.3 A request for a flight's stops will be interpreted 
as asking for the intermediate stops only, from the 
flight_stop table. 
. o .  
2.3 Fares. 
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
2.3.3 
2.3.8 
A "one-way" fare is a fare for which 
round_trip_required = "NO". 
A "round-trip" fare is a fare with a non-null value 
for fare.round_trip_cost. 
The "cheapest fare" means the lowest one- 
direction fare. 
. . .  
Questions about fares will always be treated as 
fares for flights in the maximal answer. 
2.4.1 
2.4.2 
2.4.3 
2.4.4 
2.9 
The normal answer to otherwise unmodified 
"when" queries will be a time of day, not a date 
or a duration. 
The answer to queries like "On what days does 
flight X fly" will be a list of days.day.name fi lds. 
Queries that refer to a time earlier than 1300 hours 
without specifying "a.m." or "p.m." are ambigu- 
ous and may be interpreted as either. 
Periods of the day. 
The following table gives precise interpretations 
for some vague terms referring to time periods. 
The time intervals given do not include the end 
points. Items flagged with "*" are in the current 
(rdb3.3) database interval table. 
PERIOD BEGIN TIME END TIME 
morning* 0000 1200 
afternoon* 1200 1800 
evening* 1800 2200 
day* 600 1800 
night* 1800 600 
early morning* 0000 800 
. , .  
o . ,  
Meaning requests. 
2.9.1 With the particular exceptions noted below, re- 
quests for the "meaning" of something will only be 
interpretable if that thing is a code with a canned 
decoding definition in the database. In case the 
code field is not the key field of the table, infor- 
marion should be returned for all tuples that match 
on the code field. Here are the things so defined, 
with the fields containing their decoding: 
Table Code Field Decoding Field 
aircraft aircraft_code aircraft_description 
airline airline_code airline_name 
airport airport_code airlx~_name 
city city_code city_name 
class_of_service booking_class class_description 
code_description code description 
. , .  
2.11 Queries that are literally yes-or-no questions are con- 
sidereal to be ambiguous between interpretation as a 
yes-or-no question and interpretation asthe correspond- 
ing wh-question. For example, "Are there flights from 
Boston to Philly?" may be answered by either a 
boolean value ("YES/TRUE/NO/FALSE") or a table of 
flights from Boston to Philadelphia. 
2.15 When a query refers to an aircraft ype such as "BOE- 
ING 767", the manufacturer (if one is given) must 
match the aircraft.manufacturer fi ld and the type may 
be matched against either the aircraft.code field or the 
aircraft.basic_type field, ambiguously. 
2.16 Utterances whose answers require arithmetic omputa- 
tion are not now considered to be interpretable; this 
does not apply to arithmetic omparisons, including 
computing the maximum or minimum value of a field, 
or counting elements of a set of tuples. 
2.4 Times . . . .  
168
References 
B. Ballard. A Methodology for Evaluating Near-Prototype 
NL Processors. Technical Report OSU--CISRC-TR-81-4, 
Ohio State University, 1981. 
M. Bates and D. Ayuso. A proposal for incremental dia- 
logue evaluation. In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, San Mateo, California, February 1991. 
DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
M. Bates and M. Rettig. How to choose NL software. A/ 
Expert, July 1988. 
E. Mack, S. Abney, D. Flickenger, C. Gdaniec, R. Grishman, 
P. Harrison, D. Hindle, B. Ingria, F. Jelinek, J. Klavens, 
M. Liberman, M. Marcus, S. Roukos, B. Santorini, and 
T. Strzalkowski. A procedure for quantitatively comparing 
the syntactic overage of English grammars. In Proceedings 
of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, San Ma- 
teo, California, February 1991. DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Inc. 
S. Boisen, L. Ramshaw, D. Ayuso, and M. Bates. A proposal 
for SLS evaluation. In Proceedings of the Speech and Nat- 
ural Language Workshop, San Marco, California, October 
1989. DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
DARPA. Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, San Mateo, California, June 1990. Morgan Kauf- 
mann Publishers, Inc. 
DARPA. Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, San Mateo, California, February 1991. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
DARPA. Proceedings of the Third Message Understand- 
ing Conference (MUC-3), San Marco, California, May 1991. 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
DARPA. Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, San Mateo, California, February 1992. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
C. HemphiU. TI implementation f corpus collection. In 
Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
San Marco, California, June 1990. DARPA, Morgan Kauf- 
mann Publishers, Inc. 
L. Hirschman, D. Dahl, D. McKay, L. Norton, and 
M. Linebarger. A proposal for automatic evaluation of dis- 
course. In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, San Marco, California, June 1990. DARPA, Mor- 
gan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
J. Neal, T. Finin, R. Grishman, C. Montgomery, and S. Wal- 
ter. Workshop on the Evaluation of Natural Language Pro- 
cessing Systems. Technical Report (to appear), RADC, June 
1991. 
D. S. Pallett. DARPA Resource Management and ATIS 
benchmark test poster session. In Proceedings of the Speech 
and Natural Language Workshop, San Mateo, California, 
February 1991. DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
M. Palmer, T. Finin, and S. Walter. Workshop on the Eval- 
uation of Natural Language Processing Systems. Technical 
Report RADC-TR-89-302, RADC, 1989. 
B. M. Sundheirn. Plans for a task-oriented evaluation of 
natural language understanding systems. In Proceedings of 
the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, ages 197-202, 
Philadelphia, PA, Februrary 1989. 
B. M. Sundheim. Overview of the Third Message Under- 
standing Evaluation and Conference. In Proceedings of the 
Third Message Understanding Conference (MUC-3), pages 
3-16, San Marco, California, May 1991. DARPA, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
H. Tennant. Evaluation of Natural Language Processors. 
PhD thesis, University of Illinois, 1981. 
S. Walter. Neal-Montgomery NLP system evaluation 
methodology. In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, San Mateo, California, February 1992. 
DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc. 
R. M. Weischedel. Issues and Red Herrings in Evaluating 
Natural Language Interfaces. Pergamnon Press, 1986. 
169
