SEISD: An environment for extraction of 
Semantic Information from on-line dictionaries 
Alicia Agent (1) Irene Castell6n(1) 
M. A. Marti (2) German Rigau (1) 
Francese Ribas (1) Horaeio Rodriguez (1) 
Mariona Taul6 (2) Felisa Verdejo (1) 
1 Introduction. 
(1) Universitat  Pol it~cnica de Catalunya. Departament  de LSI.  
Pau GargaUo, 5 08028-Barce lona  Spain 
(2) Universitat de Barcelona. Departament  de Fi lologia Rom~mica. 
Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes, 585 08007-Barce lona  Spain 
Knowledge Acquisition constitutes a main problem as 
regards the development of real Knowledge-based systems. 
This problem has been dealt with in a variety of ways. One 
of the most promising paradigms is based on the use of 
already existing sources in order to extract knowledge from 
them semiautomatically which will then be used in 
Knowledge-based applications. 
The Acquilex Project, within which we are working, 
follows this paradigm. The basic aim of Acquilex is the 
development of techniques and methods in order to use 
Machine Readable Dictionaries (MRD) * for building lexical 
components for Natural Language Processing Systems. 
SEISD (Sistema de Extracci6n de Informaci6n Semfintica 
de Diccionarios) is an environment for extracting semantic 
information from MRDs \[Agent et al 91b\]. The system 
takes as its input a Lexical Database (LDB) where all the 
information contained in the MRD has been stored in an 
structured format. 
The extraction process is not fully automatic. To some 
extent, the choices made by the system must be both 
validated and confirmed by a human expert. Thus, an 
interactive environment must be used for performing such a 
task. 
One of the main contribution of our system lies in the 
way it guides the interactive process, focusing on the choice 
points and providing access to the information relevant o 
decision taking. 
System performance is controlled by a set of weighted 
heuristics that supplies the lack of algorithmic riteria or 
their vagueness in several crucial decision points. 
We will now summarize the most important 
characteristics of our system: 
? An underlying methodology for semantic extraction from 
lexical sources has been developped taking into account the 
characteristics of LDB and the intented semantic features to 
be extracted. 
? The Environment has been conceived as a support for the 
Methodology. 
? The Environment allows both interactive and batch 
modes of performance. 
? Great attention has been paid to reusability. The design 
and implementation f the system has involved an intensive 
* We acknowledge the facilities received from Biblograf, S.A. 
for using its Vox MRD. 
re-use of existing lexical software (written both within and 
outside Acquilex project). On the other hand the possibility 
of further use of our own pieces of software has also been 
taken into account. 
? The system performance is controlled by a set of 
heuristics. The system provides us with a means of 
evaluating and modifying these sets in order to improve its 
own autonomy. 
? The system has been used to extract semantic 
information from the Vox Spanish dictionary. 
2 Methodo logy .  
The final goal of a system like ours \[Agent et al, 91a\] is to 
obtain a large conceptual structure where the nodes would 
correspond to the lexical senses in the dictionary, the 
information present in definitions would be encoded within 
the nodes and the relations would be made explicit. 
The kind of relations we can set between senses are the 
relations that appear, in an explicit or implicit form, in the 
dictionary entries. The most important relation is, of course, 
the ISA one, which allows us to build a taxonomy of 
concepts related by the hypemym-hyponym links. 
Although a brute force approach is used sometimes for 
limited purposes, we cannot follow this for two main 
reasons: 
? The lack of limitations over the words that could appear 
in the dictionary definitions that would imply the use of a 
general-purpose morphological nalyzer with a very large 
coverage. 
? The need for different grammars to parse entry definitions 
belonging to distant semantic fields (we use different 
grammars for parsing entries belonging to "substance", 
"food" or "instrument" fields). 
The conclusion was to build the whole conceptual 
structure from several "chunks" of conceptual nets, so that 
each one would correspond toa narrow domain and would be 
built independently. For each of these domains we have 
selected one or more starting words or senses (that 
correspond to the root of the taxonomies we intend to 
extrac0 and proceeded top-down from them. 
3 Overv iew o f  the  sys tem.  
Our system carries out four differents tasks: taxonomy 
construction, semantic relations extraction, heuristics 
253
validation and knowledge integration into a LKB (Lexical 
Knowledge Base that will contain the conceptual structures 
extracted from the LDB) as shown in figure 1. The first one 
consists of the extraction of the taxonomy structure which 
underlies the dictionary definitions, starting from a top 
entry. The second, the extraction of the other semantic 
relations which appear in the definitions of the taxonomy 
already created. The validation of the heuristics applied in the 
taxonomy construction is the third task. Finally, all the 
information acquired is integrated into the LKB. The choosed 
formalism for defining LKB structures i based on a typed 
Feature structure (FS) system augmented with default 
inheritance. 
VPdL, IDA' I ' ION Tuk  3 "rtutk 4 
Fig. 1: General Scheme of the System. 
3.1 Taxonomy Extraction. 
This module is in charge of the extraction of the taxonomies 
which underlie the definitions of the Vox dictionary. 
In our case, the problem of the extraction of the generic 
term is solved by means of FPar syntactic-semantic analyser 
\[Carroll 90\] with a general simplified grammar for the 
extraction of the generic term and specific ones for the 
modifiers. Given a sense, using this parser, we can detect its 
hyperonyms as well as other semantic relations. 
The input of the analyser is a sense augmented with its 
morphological features.. The morphological analysis is 
carded out using an optimized version of Seg-Word analyzer 
\[Sanfilippo 90\]. 
3.2 Semantic Extraction. 
Once a taxonomy is created, a treelike structure in which all 
the senses included are connected with their hyperonym 
(except for the first Top entry ) and their hyponym (except 
the terminal senses) is available. 
The next step (semantic extraction) lies in performing a
similar process to the taxonomy building, but with a 
different grammar and without user intervention. This batch 
process is called definition analysis. The grammar, of 
course, must be more complete and complex than the one 
for generic term extraction, because it must allow the 
extraction of the "differentia" from the definitions associated 
to the nodes of the taxonomy. 
3.3 Heuristic Validation. 
The definitions of sets of parametrized heuristics, the use of 
these sets for guiding the selection process and the existence 
of a mechanism for evaluating the performance and allowing 
the updating of such heuristics, constitute relevant features 
of our system. 
Heuristics are means of implementing criteria for taking 
decisions in situations where no algoritmic solution can be 
stated. 
Basically, a heuristic is a procedure that assigns a score to 
each of the different options it must consider. A global 
score, result of those corresponding to each heuristic, is 
obtained, and then, a decision based on these global scores is 
taken. 
4 Eva luat ion .  
The environment has been used to extract semantic 
information from the Vox dictionary. Vox is a monolingual 
Spanish dictionary containing about 90.000 entries (around 
150.000 senses). We have concentrated on narrow but 
significative domains, including both noun ("substance", 
"food", "drink", "person", "place" and "instrument"), 
involving around 3000 senses, and verb ("movement", 
"ingestion" and "cooking"), involving around 300 senses, 
taxonomies. 
An initial set of heuristics has been built mainly for 
dealing with sense disambiguation tasks. Different 
taxonomies have been constructed using this environment. 
The required linguistic knowledge sources (FPar 
grammars, Seg-Word rules, conversion rules) have been 
developped concurrently with the taxonomy building 
environmenL 
References .  
\[Ageno et al, 91a\] Ageno A., Cardoze S., Castell6n I., 
Martf M.A., Rigau G., Rodriguez H., Taul6 M., Verdejo 
M.F. "An environment for management and extraction of 
taxonomies from on-line dictionaries". UPC, Barcelona. 
ESPRIT BRA-3030 ACQUILEX WP NO.020 
\[Ageno et al 91b\]Ageno A., Cardoze S., Castell6n I., Martf 
M. A., Ribas F., Rigau G., Rodriguez H., Taul6 M., 
Verdejo M. F. "SEISD: User Manual". UPC, Barcelona. 
Research Report LSI-91-47 
\[Carroll 90\] Carroll J. "Flexible Pattern Matching Parsing 
Tool (FPar)." Technical Manual. Computer Laboratory, 
University of Cambridge. ESPRIT BRA-3030 ACQUILEX 
\[Sanfilippo 90\] Sanfilippo A. "Notes on Seg-Word". 
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge. 
ESPRIT BRA-3030 ACQUII.EX 
254
