Automat ic  Generation of On-Line Documentat ion in the IDAS 
Project* 
Ehud Reiter, Chris Mellish, and John Levine 
Department of Artificial Intelligence 
University of Edinburgh 
80 South Bridge 
Edinburgh EH1 1HN BRITAIN 
(e-mail: e.reiter@ed.ac.uk) 
Abst rac t  
The Intelligent Documentation Advisory Sys- 
tem generates on-line documentation and help 
messages from a domain knowledge base, using 
natural-language (NL) generation techniques. 
This paper gives an overview of IDAS, with par- 
ticular emphasis on: (1) its architecture and the 
types of questions it is capable of answering; (2) 
its KR and NL generation systems, and lessons 
we have learned in designing them; and (3) its 
hypertext-like user interface, and the benefits 
such an interface brings. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The Intelligent Documentation Advisory System (IDAS) 
project is attempting to use natural-language (NL) gen- 
eration and hypertext echnology to produce an on-line 
documentation and help system that supports users of 
complex machinery. In this paper we present an overview 
of the most recent IDAS prototype developed at the Uni- 
versity of Edinburgh, including descriptions of: 
? IDAS's overall architecture, and particularly its 
queslion space, i.e., the set of queries it is designed 
to answer; 
? IDAS's I(R and NL generation components, with 
particular emphasis on lessons we have learned while 
building them, and related design decisions; 
? IDAS's hypertext-like user interface, and the oper- 
ations it is intended to support. 
IDAS is a collaborative ffort between the University 
of Edinburgh, Raeal Instruments Ltd., Racal Research 
? The IDAS project is partially funded by UK SERC grant 
GR/F/36750 and UI( DTI grant IED 4/1/1072, and we are 
grateful to SERC and DTI for their support of this work. We 
would also like to thank the IDAS industrial collaborators - -
Inference Europe, Ltd.; Racal Instruments, Ltd.; and Racal 
Research, Ltd. - -  for all the help they have given us in 
performing this research. Thanks also to Robert Dale and 
tile anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments 
Ltd., and Inference Europe Ltd. As this paper is written, 
the project is about half-way through its 3-year lifespan. 
Several prototypes have been built to date; this paper 
describes the most recent one built at the University of 
Edinburgh, which consists of about 5000 lines of Lisp 
code. Work on IDAS continues as this paper is being 
written, with current tasks including the expansion of 
the existing domain knowledge base, and the integration 
of the documentation software with the actual hardware 
being documented. We have not yet carried out any 
formal evaluations of IDAS, although we hope to arrange 
such tests once the current expansion and integration 
tasks are completed; the existing system has been shown 
to many people informally, generally with quite favorable 
reactions. 
The initial IDAS system documents an ATE (Auto- 
matic Test Equipment), a complex device made by Racal 
Instruments for testing potentially faulty electronic de- 
vices. The ATE contains an assortment of electronic 
instruments, a switching system that connects these in- 
struments to a UUT (Unit Under Test), and a computer 
which runs test programs that test the UUT with the in- 
struments. Potential IDAS users include operators who 
use the ATE to test UUTs; maintenance t chnicians who 
look for faults in the ATE itself; and programmers who 
create test programs. The current IDAS prototype is 
designed to support operators and maintenance techni- 
cians; support for programmers may be added later. 
2 Arch i tec ture  
A simplified version of IDAS's architecture is shown in 
Figure 1. Textual output from test programs and other 
ATE software is intercepted by the Listener, 1which de- 
tects mentions of ATE components and extracts infor- 
mation about the user's task (e.g., what test program 
he is running). Mentioned components are added to the 
discourse in-focus list, and are also made mousable in 
1The Listener has not yet been implemented in the 
prototype. 
64
ATE 
Test 
Programs 
" ex ual--, i tener__ W I itia, pointin 
output . question space 
| 
I 
I 
e 
I Discourse context I ~ NLG Content 
,,. . . . . . . . . . . .  Task context .-~ ": . . . .  Determination 
"'.," KB info 
IDAS KB, includes: I /o" "~\[  NLG Text 
Domain knowledge '?? ""J?'l Planning 
Content-determ. ules ; oO? ' 
User-expertise models ~..'? 
User-task models ' 
Grammar ,' . . . .  -~  
Lexicon i 
New point in 
question space 
Hypertext 
Interface 
~ SPL -.j NLG Surface Annotated 
Realization text string 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ! .DA.s . s . .y . s tem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
User 
Figure 1: Simplified IDAS architecture 
the output window; if the user clicks on one, he invokes 
IDAS and the Listener creates an initial query about that 
component, i.e., an initial point in question space (Sec- 
tion 2.1). The question space point is given to IDAS's 
NL generation system, which generates a response us- 
ing three modules: content determination, which picks 
relevant information out of the knowledge base to com- 
municate to the user; text planning, which converts this 
information into an expression in SPL, the ISI Sentence 
Planning Language \[Kasper, 1989\]; and surface realiza- 
tion, which produces a surface form, i.e., an annotated 
text string. 
The annotations consist of text-formatting commands 
(e.g., Begin-New-Line) and hypertext specifications. 
The annotated text string is given to the Hypertert In- 
lcrface system, which presents it to the user in a hy- 
pertext window; this window also includes buttons for 
hyperschema follow-up questions (Section 4.1). If the 
user clicks on a mouse-sensitive word or a button, the 
point in question space that corresponds to this query 
is passed to the NL generation system, and the process 
iterates. 
2.1 Quest ion  Space 
Question space is the set of queries that can be given 
to IDAS's NL generation system; IDAS's hypertext sys- 
tem can be viewed as a tool that enables a user to 
move around question space until he finds a point that 
gives him the information he is looking for. A point in 
question-space is a tuple with five components: 
? Basic-question: Currently includes What-is-it, 
Where-is-it, What-is-its-purpose, What-are-its- 
specifications, What-are-its-parts, What-is-it- 
connected-to, How-do-I-perform-the-task. 2 
? Component: the target of the question, e.g., 
Pr inter -36 or Computer -3 ;  components are usu- 
ally physical ATE components, but can in some 
cases be actions or other knowledge-base entities. 
? Task: The user's task, e.g., Operations or Replace- 
Part. 
? User-Expertise: The user's expertise level, e.g., 
Novice or Skilled. 
? Discourse-in.focus: The set of in-focus objects for 
referring expression generation \[Grosz and Sidner, 
1986\]. 
For example, the question space point (What-is-it, 
DC-Power-Supply-23,  Operations, Skilled, {VXI- 
Chassis-36, DC-Power-Supply-23}) represents the 
query "What is the DC Power Supply" when asked by 
a user of Skilled expertise who is engaged in an Op- 
erations task with the discourse context containing the 
objects VXI .Chassis-36 and DC-Power-Supply-23.  
The NL Generation component would in this case pro- 
duce the response 
~How-do-l-perform-the-task is interpreted as How-do-I- 
use-it for Operations tasks, How-do-I-replace-it for Replace- 
Part tasks, etc. 
65
"The DC power supply is a black Elgar AT- 
8000 DC power supply." 
Variations in the above tuple would be processed as 
follows: 
? Component :  If a different component had been 
specified, IDAS would have generated another re- 
sponse that communicated colour, manufacturer, 
and model-number information, as specified by the 
content-determination rule for What-is-it questions 
asked during Operations tasks (Section 3.2). For 
example, if the component had been Pr in ter -12 ,  
the generated text would have been 
"The printer is a white Epson LQ-1010 
printer." 
? Basic  Quest ion:  A different response pattern (i.e., 
content-determination rule) would have been used 
for a different basic question. For example, if the 
basic question had been What-is-its-purpose, the re- 
sponse would have been 
"The DC power supply provides DC power 
for the UUT." 
? Task: A different response pattern would also have 
been used if a different ask had been specified. For 
example, for the What-is-it question, if the user's 
task had been Replace-Part instead of Operations, 
colour would have been omitted but a part number 
would have been included, e.g., 
"Tile DC power supply is an Elgar AT- 
8000 DC power supply with part number 
OPT-EP2." 
? User-Expert ise:  Tile What-is-its-purpose r sponse 
would have been phrased differently if the user's 
expertise level had been Novice instead of Skilled: 
'unit under test' would have been used instead of 
'UUT', 'power' instead of 'DC power', and 'the black 
power supply' instead of 'the DC power supply', giv- 
ing: 
"The black power supply provides power 
for the unit under test." 
? Discourse- in- focus:  The discourse-in-focus li t does 
not affect the above responses, but it would affect 
the response to Where-is-it. The response to Where- 
is-it under the original discourse-in-focus li t would 
have been: 
"The DC power supply is below the VXI 
chassis." 
If the discourse-in-focus li t had included Mains- 
Cont ro l -Un i t -29  instead of VXI -Chass is -36,  the 
location would have been given relative to the 
mains-control-unit instead of the VXI-chassis, i.e., 
the text would have been: 
"The DC power supply is above the mains 
control unit." 
Question space is quite large: the current prototype 
has 40 components, 7 basic questions, 6 user-tasks, and 
3 user-expertise models, so there are over 5000 points 
in its question space even if variations in the discourse 
context are ignored, a A more realistically sized system 
would document several hundred components and prob- 
ably would have additional user-task and user-expertise 
models as well; its question space could therefore asily 
contain several hundred thousand points. Many point., 
in question space represent queries that produce the 
same text (e.g., responses to Where-is-it do not depend 
on the user's task); even if only 10% of the points ir 
question space produce distinct responses, however, this 
still means that a realistically-sized IDAS system must 
be able to generate tens of thousands of different re- 
sponses. The justification for using natural languag~ 
generation in IDAS is that it would be difficult to entel 
20,000 different canned text responses for 200,000 differ- 
ent queries, and almost impossible to maintain this doe. 
umentation database as new ATE configurations wer~ 
announced; using NL generation from a domain knowl. 
edge base accompanied by explicit task, expertise, an( 
discourse models makes it feasible to supply appropriaU 
answers for this multitude of possible queries. 
3 KR and  NLG 
The fundamental purpose of IDAS's knowledge repre. 
sentation (KR) and natural-language neration (NLG 
components i  to represent domain information in a mot, 
efficient form than thousands of canned text responses 
For example, a component's model number will typicall2 
appear in at least 30 different query responses (i.e., ques. 
tion space points); representing it in the knowledge bas, 
and using NLG to produce text from the knowledge bas, 
allows the documenter to enter (and update) this infor 
mation only once, instead of 30 times. 
Many of the theoretically interesting aspects of IDAS' 
KR and NLG systems are discussed elsewhere, e.g., \[Re 
iter and Mellish, 1992; Reiter and Dale, 1992\]. Here, w, 
present a brief overview of the KR and NLG systems 
and then discuss three design decisions that we mad 
during the course of development: allowing canned tex 
and other 'cheats'; generating short and focused replies 
3The prototype's knowledge base is not complete; cur 
rently only about 2/3 of tile potential queries can b 
answered. 
66
and stressing authorability instead of deep reasoning in 
content-determination. These decisions were not part 
of the original IDAS design, but rather were made as 
a result of experience in developing prototypes and in- 
teracting with our industrial collaborators; hence, they 
are 'lessons' we have learned that may be of interest 
to other researchers and developers working on similar 
applications-oriented projects. 
3.1 Knowledge  Representat ion  
The IDAS knowledge-representation system uses a KL- 
ONE type taxonomy \[Brachman and Schmolze, 1985\] to 
represent domain entities (e.g., companies, ATE com- 
ponents, user actions) and linguistic knowledge (gram- 
matical units, lexieal definitions, etc.). The knowledge- 
base is supported by a KL-ONE-like automatic lassi- 
tier; a superclass-to-subclass ttribute inheritance sys- 
tem, based on Touretzky's minimal inferential distance 
principle \[Touretzky, 1986\]; and a graphical browse/edit 
tool. We currently use a small demonstration knowl- 
edge base that contains about 200 classes that represent 
domain entities (e.g., the company Raeal ,  the compo- 
nent Counter - t imer ,  and the user-action Clean),  and 
50 roles that represent domain attributes (e.g., colour 
and manufacturer) .  The knowledge-base will, of course, 
need to be substantially enlarged before it is of much use 
to real users. 
The knowledge-base also contains user-expertise and 
user-task models. The user-expertise models overlay the 
class taxonomy, and specify what words a user knows 
and what primitive actions he can execute; they are in 
some ways similar to the user-models used in the FN 
system \[Reiter, 1990\]. The task models do not con- 
tain any structure themselves, but affect which content- 
determination rule is chosen (Section 3.2), and hence the 
system's decision as to what information the response 
should communicate to the user. The current proto- 
type contains 3 user-expertise models and 6 task models. 
More expertise and task models will probably be added 
with time, but we expect our final system to have at 
most tens of such models, not hundreds; our objective 
is provide expertise and task models that are a reason- 
able fit to most circumstances, not to be able to cover 
all possible users performing all possible actions. 
An authoring tool for the knowledge base is currently 
being developed by one of our industrial collaborators. 
Such a tool, which we hope will be directly usable by 
technical authors and domain experts, is of course vital 
to the ultimate success of the project. 
3.2 Natural  Language Generat ion 
Natural-language generation is performed in IDAS in 
three stages: 
Content Determination: The basic-question, compo- 
nent, and user-task components of the question- 
space tuple are used to pick a content-determination 
rule, which specifies which information from the do- 
main knowledge base should be communicated to 
the user. 
Text Planning: The KB information is turned into an 
SPL term, in a process which is sensitive to the user- 
expertise and discourse components of the question- 
space tuple. This process involves, for example, 
generating referring expressions and choosing open- 
class lexical items. 
Surface Realization: The SPL term is converted into a 
surface form, i.e., a set of words with formatting and 
hypertext annotations. Except for its hypertext- 
related abilities, the IDAS surface-generation sys- 
tem has a similar functionality to a subset of 
the PENMAN system \[Penman Natural Language 
Group, 1989\]. 
IDAS's NL generation system is only designed to be 
able to generate small pieces of text (a few sentences, 
a paragraph at most). This is because IDAS's hyper- 
text system should enable users to dynamically select 
the paragraphs they wish to read, i.e., perform their own 
high-level text planning \[Levine el al., 1991\], thereby 
eliminating the need for the generation system to per- 
form such planning. 
3.3 Des ign  Decis ions 
3.3.1 Canned Text  and  o ther  Cheats  
We decided fairly early on not to put a great deal 
of effort into 'properly' handling rarely-occurring spe- 
cial cases, but instead to support canned text and other 
'cheats' as a way of handling these cases. If a particular 
response is difficult for our KB system to represent or our 
generation system to generate, we simply enter canned 
text for this response, or (preferably) generate as much 
of the response as possible with straightforward applica- 
tions of our knowledge-based techniques, and then add 
canned text annotations to convey things it would be 
difficult to generate. 
For example, one instructional action in the knowledge 
base is "mount the ITA against the test head with the 
four lugs of the ITA resting in the four hooked recepta- 
cles of the test head". This is currently represented as a 
Mount  action where the aetee is the ITA,  the location 
is the Test -head ,  and the manner  is the canned text. 
67
"with the four lugs of the ITA resting in the 
four hooked receptacles of the test head". The 
system could be augmented to 'properly' represent this 
manner modifier, but we felt development efforts could 
more productively be spent elsewhere, and hence have 
left this modifier as canned text. Since IDAS's domain 
KB is only used for generating text and does not have 
to support general domain reasoning, the decision on 
whcn to use canned text can be made on such engineer- 
ing grounds. 
We believe that 'cheating' in this and other manners 
(e.g., by only supporting a small number of user task 
and expertise models) is unavoidable, given our goal of 
building a usable NL generation system with non-trivial 
domain coverage. As in so many other fields, there is 
something like a 90%-10% law in operation; properly 
handling the 10% of special and unusual cases would 
require 90% of the development effort. With current- 
day NL generation technology, it is difficult enough to 
do a good job on the 90% of common cases; spending 
ten times this effort to handle the remaining 10% of un- 
usual cases would not be justifiable, since we would get 
a much better usability payoff by spending a fraction of 
this effort in improving the handling of common cases. 
3.3.2 Shor t  Targeted  Responses  
When the project started, our industrial collaborators 
gave us an initial list of sample responses they wanted us 
to try to generate. These responses were fairly general, 
a.nd subsequent discussions revealed that using more 
context-specific responses was preferable both for our 
collaborators and for us. Our collaborators preferred 
such responses because they were more likely to give 
users the information they really needed, while we found 
that the context-specific responses were in many ways 
easier to generate than the original responses; this was 
largely because they tended to have simpler linguistic 
and rhetorical structures. 
For example, the original human-generated response 
for the query "What is the ARINC-429 Interface" was 
"The ARINC-429 interface is a serial Avionics 
bus interface for communicating with a UUT 
fitted with this bus interface. ARINC 429 is 
a single source, multi-sink unidirectional data 
transmission standard. It is used to interface 
digital avionics equipment in commercial appli- 
cations, but is also seen in military equipment 
where there is a commonality with commercial 
equipment." 
In our current prototype, if this query was asked by a 
user with a Skilled expertise level who was engaged in a 
Replace-Part task, the response would be 
"It is a Racal 10500-130 ARINC-429 interface 
with part number RIL-523." 
The second response is intended to inform the user of 
the interface's manufacturer, model number, and part 
number, since that presumably is the information some- 
one performing a Replace-Part task most needs to know. 
Hypertext follow-ups enable the user to get the location 
of the ARINC-429 interface and a list of its subcompo- 
nents; these also might be important pieces of informa- 
tion for a Replace-Part task. 
The second response thus gives the user the informa- 
tion he most needs to know to perform his task, and uses 
hypertext follow-ups to enable him to obtain other pos- 
sibly important pieces of information; it does not give 
him a general description of the ARINC standard, as 
was present in the original human-generated response. 
This information is not directly relevant o the Replace- 
Part task, and could be as much of a distraction as a 
help to a maintenance technician; 4 it also would be dif- 
ficult to represent and generate this text in the current 
IDAS architecture, xcept as canned text (e.g., it is diffi- 
cult to represent the concept of 'military equipment that 
has a commonality with civilian equipment' in the IDAS 
knowledge base). 
Short, specific, and targeted responses were thus felt 
to be both more useful and in many ways easier to gen- 
erate. There is a danger that such responses might be 
inappropriate, if one of the contextual factors (task, ex- 
pertise, discourse) is incorrect. We will investigate this 
in more detail when we perform user-evaluation trials; 
our hope is that users will be able to use IDAS's hy- 
pertext follow-up capabilities to obtain the information 
they need if an inappropriate response is generated. 
3.3.3 Content  Determinat ion  
IDAS uses a much simpler content-determination sys- 
tem than other generation systems with somewhat sim- 
ilar goals (e.g., COMET \[McKeown et al, 1990\] and 
WIP \[Wahlster et al, 1991\]). Instead of using planning 
\[Moore and Paris, 1989\] or schemas \[McKeown, 1985\] 
to determine what to communicate, IDAS's content- 
determination system is based on rules (created by do- 
main experts) of the form 'if a user asks question Q about 
a component of type C in the context of task T, he should 
be told facts F'. 5 In other words, it is intended to sup- 
4The author of the original human-generated response 
agrees with this assessment. 
5The rules are actually represented as KB classes with 
appropriate basic-question, component ,  and task role 
fillers, and attached ata that indicates the facts to be com- 
municated; content-determination is done by classifying the 
current question-space point into the rule taxonomy, and in- 
heriting the attached ata \[Reiter and Mellish, 1992\]. 
68
port easy authorability, instead of reasoning from basic 
principles. We felt'this was the most appropriate way 
in which to achieve IDAS's goal of fairly broad, but not 
necessarily deep, domain coverage. 
One drawback of the lack of plan-based content- 
determination is that IDAS can not in general answer 
Why questions about its suggested actions, in the man- 
ner described by \[Moore and Swartout, 1990\]. Indeed, 
because IDAS does not have access to an underlying do- 
main reasoning system (such as the EES system used 
by Moore and Swartout), it can only respond to a Why 
question if a 'purpose' plan for the relevant object or ac- 
tion has been explicitly added to the knowledge base by 
a domain expert. 
4 Hyper text  
4.1 Hyper text  in IDAS 
IDAS's hypertext interface allows users to issue new 
queries by mouse-clicking on pieces of text. Hypertext 
links are automatically added to referring expressions 
and action descriptions; clicking on a referring expres- 
sion pops up a menu of basic questions that can be asked 
about the referred-to component in the current context, 
while clicking on an action issues a request for IDAS to 
explain this action in more detail (i.e., issues a How-do- 
I-perform question for this action). 
P~esponses can also contain hyperschema follow- 
up buttons. These are specified by the content- 
determination rules' (Section 3.3.3), i.e., by rules of the 
form 'if a user asks question Q about a component of 
type C in the context of task T, he should be given the 
opportunity to ask follow-up question F'. These follow- 
up questions were originally intended to implement a 
variant of McKeown's schema system \[MeKeown, 1985\] 
where the user, instead of the system, decided which 
ATN arc to traverse; hence the name hyperschema. The 
mechanism is quite general, however, and can be used to 
add any useful follow-up question to a hypertext node. 
The current IDAS system also adds a special MENU 
button to all nodes, which allows users to explicitly 
modify their question-space oordinates in any way they 
choose; this button is primarily a development aid, and 
may not appear in the final system. 
Users can utilize the hypertext interface for many pur- 
poses, including: 
? Elaboration: If a user wants further information 
about an object or action mentioned in the text, he 
can obtain it by clicking on the textual description 
of that cntity. 
? High-level text planning: Ilyt~erschemas nd the 
other follow-up mechanisnas allow users to dynam- 
ically specify which paragraphs they are interested 
in reading; this effectively means they can perform 
their own high-level text planning (Section 3.2). 
* Browsing: The hypertext interface provides some 
support for general browsing, which may be neces- 
sary if a user is not entirely sure which question he 
should ask. We may add more support for browsing 
in the future, such as a hypertext-based structural 
browser similar to the one proposed for the IMAD 
system \[Hayes and Pepper, 1989\]. 
IDAS's hypertext interface is in some ways similar to 
the one presented by \[Moore and Swartout, 1990\], al- 
though it has a broader scope; Moore and Swartout used 
hypertext primarily to enable users to ask for clarifica- 
tions of explanations, while IDAS uses hypertext as a 
general input mechanism which users can use to pose 
any question the system is capable of answering. 
The current IDAS prototype does not do anything in- 
teresting in modeling the discourse structure of hyper- 
text dialogues; it simply assumes that each hypertext 
node corresponds to a separate closed focus-space \[Grosz 
and Sidner, 1986\], and hence that an object introduced 
in one node cannot be referred to in another node unless 
it is re-introduced. We suspect this may be an overly 
conservative approach, and hope to do more research in 
the future on the relationship between the focus spaces 
of different hypertext nodes. 
4.2 Example  
Figure 2 shows some example IDAS texts produced by 
the various follow-up mechanisms. The initial query was 
What-are-its-parts, asked about the complete ATE by a 
Skilled expertise person performing an Operations task; 
this produces the text shown in Response 1. The under- 
lined part names (which are in fact referring expressions) 
are all mousable, as is ATE in the title question and the 
buttons on the bottom line. Response 2 was produced 
by clicking on tes t  head in Response 1, and selecting 
What-is-it from a pop-up menu of basic questions; this 
response was generated using the same user-task, user- 
expertise, and discourse-in-focus question-space ompo- 
nents as Response 1. 6 The hyperschema follow-ups for 
(What-is-it, ?Component, Operations) are (Where-is- 
it, ?Component, Operations) and (How-do-I-perform- 
the-task, ?Component, Operations), so WHERE and USE 7 
follow-up buttons are added to the response, s The MENU 
~As mentioned above, IDAS currently assumes that dis- 
course focus-space changes within one hypertext node do not 
have any effect on other nodes. 
Zltow-do-I-use-it is the interpretation of Itow-do-l- 
perform-the-ta~k under an Operations user-task 
~Other questions, e.g., What-are-its-parts, C/Ill be asked 
by clicking on test  head in the title question, alld selecting 
69
Figure 2: Example IDAS Texts 
button was described above; it allows the user to explic- 
itly specify a new point in question space. Response 3 
was obtained by clicking on WrlERE; it answers 'Where is 
the test head'. 
Response 4 comes from clicking on the USE button in 
Response 2; 9 it is a response to 'How do I use the test 
head'. In this response the underlined nouns tes t  head, 
ITA mechanism, and ITA are all linked to pop-up menus 
of basic questions about these components, while the 
verbs unlock, mount, and lock are all linked to How- 
do-I-perform queries for the relevant action. Clicking on 
unlock produces Response 5, which presents a step-by- 
step decomposition of the action of unlocking the ITA 
mechanism. Response 6 was obtained by clicking on 
lever  in Response 5, and selecting What-is-it from the 
pop-up menu. 
4.3 Hyper text  vs NL  Unders tand ing  
From IDAS's perspective, hypertext is a technique for 
enabling users to specify an input (i.e., a question-space 
point) to the NL generation system. As such, it is natu- 
ral to compare it to other input mechanisms, particularly 
natural language text input. The advantages of hyper- 
text over NL input systems include: 
? Implementation: A hypertext interface is easier to 
implement than a NL input system; indeed, we have 
found that generating hypertext is only marginally 
from the pop-up menu. 
9An identical response would have been obtained by 
clicking on USE in Response 3, since Responses 2 and 3 
have the same task, expertise, and discourse question-space 
conlponents. 
more difficult than generating conventional text (i 
appropriate graphics support software is available) 
Implementing an NL input system, in contrast, is 
major undertaking. 
. Deictic References: As \[Moore and Swartout, 1990 
point out, a hypertext interface makes many (al 
though not all) kinds of references trivial for a user 
he simply points to the phrase that describes th, 
object or action he wants more information about 
The user does not have to construct a complex re 
ferring expression (e.g., "the board I was told to re 
move in the second sentence"), and the system doe'. 
not have to try to resolve such complex references. 
? Transparency of Capabilities: NL understandinl 
systems are in general only capable of answering 
subset of the questions the user is able to pose, an( 
the user may become confused if he is not aware o 
the boundaries of this subset \[Tennant et al, 1983\] 
This problem does not arise with hypertext, whet, 
the user is only allowed to issue questions that th, 
system can answer. 
Perhaps the primary disadvantage of hypertext sys 
tems is their lack of flexibility; hypertext systems typi 
cally limit the user to pointing to a single entity and ask 
ing one of a small number of questions about it, while NI 
input systems allow queries to be stated using the ful 
power of English or other human languages. While thi 
is a severe, perhaps crippling, drawback in many applica 
tions, we believe it is less of a problem in IDAS, becaus, 
IDAS is only capable of responding to a small numbe 
70
of basic questions about entities in any case. Hypertext 
clicking can in fact be used in IDAS to pose almost all 
questions that IDAS is capable of answering; if the user 
is allowed to use the MENU button, then any answer- 
able query can be issued through the hypertext inter- 
face. Accordingly, IDAS does not currently include an 
NL understanding component, and there are no plans for 
adding one; we believe that hypertext mechanisms will 
provide a sufficient query input mechanism for IDAS. 
5 Conc lus ion  
The IDAS project is attempting to use natural-language 
generation and hypertext technology to build a proto- 
type of an on-line documentation a d help system for 
complex machinery. IDAS is based around the ideas of 
(1) having a well-structured question space; (2) using 
KR and NL generation systems that produce short tar- 
geted responses and allow canned text to be used when 
necessary; and (3) presenting users with a hypertext-like 
interface that allows them to pose follow-up and elabo- 
ration questions. Our hope is that this combination will 
allow us to construct a system that demonstrates that 
current-day natural-language generation technology can 
be used to build a useful on-line documentation facility; 
this, indeed, is the ultimate goal of the IDAS project. 
Re ferences  
\[Brachman and Schmolze, 1985\] Ronald Brachman and 
James Schmolze. An overview of the KL-ONE knowl- 
edge representation system. Cognitive Science, 9:171- 
210, 1985. 
\[Grosz and Sidner, 1986\] Barbara Grosz and Candace 
Sidner. Attention, intention, and the structure of dis- 
course. Computational Linguistics, 12:175-206, 1986. 
\[Hayes and Pepper, 1989\] Phil Hayes and Jeff Pepper. 
Towards an integrated maintenance advisor. In Hy- 
pertezt 1989 Proceedings, pages 119-127, Pittsburgh, 
1989. 
\[Kasper, 1989\] Robert Kasper. A flexible interface for 
linking applications to Penman's entence generator. 
In Proceedings of the 1989 DARPA Speech and Natu- 
ral Language Workshop, pages 153-158, Philadelphia, 
1989. 
\[Levine t al., 1991\] John Levine, Alison Cawsey, Chris 
Mellish, Lawrence Poynter, Ehud Reiter, Paul Tyson, 
and John Walker. IDAS: Combining hypertext and 
natural language generation. In Proceedings of the 
7'bird European Workshop on Natural Language Gen- 
eration, pages 55-62, Innsbruck, Austria, 1991. 
\[McKeown et al, 1990\] Kathleen McKeown, Michael 
Elhadad, Yumiko Fukumoto, Jong Lim, Christine 
Lombardi, Jacques Robin, and Frank Smadja. Nat- 
ural language generation i COMET. In Robert Dale, 
Chris Mellish, and Michael Zock, editors, Current Re- 
search in Natural Language Generation, pages 103- 
139. Academic Press, London, 1990. 
\[McKeown, 1985\] Kathleen McKeown. Discourse strate- 
gies for generating natural-language text. Artificial 
Intelligence, 27:1-42, 1985. 
\[Moore and Paris, 1989\] Johanna Moore and Cecile 
Paris. Planning text for advisory dialogues. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 203-211, 1989. 
\[Moore and Swartout, 1990\] Johanna Moore and 
William Swartout. Pointing: A way toward explana- 
tion dialogue. In Proceedings of the Eighth National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 457-464, 
1990. 
\[Penman Natural Language Group, 1989\] Penman Nat- 
ural Language Group. The Penman user guide. Tech- 
nical report, Information Sciences Institute, Marina 
del Rey, CA 90292, 1989. 
\[Reiter and Dale, 1992\] Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 
A fast algorithm for the generation of referring ex- 
pressions, 1992. Submitted to COLING-1992. 
\[Reiter and Mellish, 1992\] Ehud Reiter and Chris Mel- 
lish. Using classification to generate text, 1992. Sub- 
mitted to ACL-1992. 
\[Reiter, 1990\] Ehud Reiter. Generating descriptions 
that exploit a user's domain knowledge. In Robert 
Dale, Chris Mellish, and Michael Zock, editors, Cur- 
rent Research in Natural Language Generation, pages 
257-285. Academic Press, London, 1990. 
\[Tennant et al, 1983\] Harry Tennant, Kenneth Ross, 
Richard Saenz, Craig Thompson, and James Miller. 
Menu-based natural anguage understanding. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 151-158, 1983. 
\[Touretzky, 1986\] David Touretzky. The Mathematics of 
Inheritance Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, 
California, 1986. 
\[Wahlster el al., 1991\] Wolfgang Wahlster, Elisabeth 
Andre, Som Bandyopadhyay, Winfried Graf, and 
Thomas Rist. WIP: The coordinated generation of 
multimodal presentations from a common represen- 
tation. In Oliverio Stock, John Slack, and Andrew 
Ortony, editors, Computational Theories of Com. 
munication and their Applications. Springer-Voting. 
1991. 
71
