Dialogue Management for Telephone Information Systems 
Scot t  McGlashan and Norman Fraser  and N ige l  G i lber t  
Social  and Computer  Sciences Research  Group 
Un ivers i ty  of Sur rey  
Gui ld ford ,  U.K.  
Eric Bilange 
Cap Gemin i  Innovat ion  
118 rue de Tocquev i l le  
5017 Par is ,  F rance  
Pau l  He is terkamp 
Da imler -Benz  AG 
Wi lhehn-Runge-St rasse  11 
D-7900 Ulna, Germany 
N ick  Youd 
Logica Cambr idge  L td  
104 Hil ls Road 
Cambr idge ,  U.K.  
Abst ract  
A distributed approach to spoken dialogue 
management for real-time telephone informa- 
tion systems is outlined. 
1 Introduction 
The approach to dialogue managenaent described here 
has been developed as part of the Sundial project 
(Speech UNderstanding in DIALogue) whose goal is to 
build real-time integrated computer systems capable of 
maintaining co-operative dialogues with users over stan- 
dard telephone lines. 1 Systems have been developed for 
four languages - French, German, Italian and English 
- within the task domains of flight reservations and en- 
quiries and train enquiries. 
Each system consists of five components: a speech 
recognition component inputs acoustic speech signals 
fi'om the telephone and outputs a word lattice; a parser 
extracts a plausible string from the lattice and assigns it 
syntactic and semantic representations; a dialogue man- 
ager gives these representations an interpretation, de- 
cides how the dialogue lnay continue and, if it is the 
system's turn to speak, plans a system utterance; a text. 
generator constructs a. detailed linguistic representation 
from the plan; and a text-to-speech system synthesizes 
the representation for transmissiol~ by telephone. '2 
2 Two Problems of Dialogue 
Management 
The SUNDIAL dialogue manager addresses two prob- 
lems facing spoken dialogue systems. The first is that, 
for maxinmm usefulness, dialogue management eeds to 
be generic:  i.e. the dialogue manager module must 
be able to interpret and generate utterances in more 
1SUNDIAL is partly funded by the Commission of the 
Europeam Communities under the ESPRIT II programme ~s 
project P2218. 
2See Peckham (1991) for an overview of the Sundial 
system. 
thai\] one language and across more than one task do- 
main. The. second problem is that dialogue management 
must provide co -operat ive  in teract ion  with the user. 
To achieve this, the system needs to produce utterances 
which are perceived by the user as natural, coherent and 
helpful within the context of the dialogue. The purpose 
and modality of the dialogue forms part of this context: 
in our case, task-driven spoken dialogues. The system 
needs to deal with inconsistent task information, such 
as that obtained when the speech recognizer and parser 
yield a. plausible but incorrect interpretation; for exam- 
pie, the user said 1 want to fly to Lannion, but the system 
understands London rather than Lannion. 
3 A Distr ibuted Solution 
The Sundial solution to these problems lies, in part, 
ill the d i s t r ibuted  arch i tec ture  of the dialogue man- 
ager. Tile dialogue manager is responsible for providing 
a co-operative interaction with the user (Gerlach and 
ttoracek, 1989). From the user's point of view, system 
utterances must be appropriate and helpful to the user 
iTi the cur'rel~t dialogue context. To achieve this, both 
interpretation of user utterances and planning of system 
utterances must. be informed by the past and current 
states of the interaction. Co-operative dialogue manage- 
meut, therefore, requires the construction and mainte- 
nance of an in teract iona l  model :  i.e. a model which 
specifies the layers of st.ructure which can be distin- 
guished in dialogues. Following Grosz and Sidner (1986) 
we distinguish linguistic structure, attentional, or belief 
structure, and intelltionM structure. Intentional struc- 
ture is further differentiated into dialogue structure and 
task structure (Bunt, 1989). tiowever, rather than us- 
ing a un i ta ry  mode l  where these layers are given as 
a single structured representation, we have adopted a 
d i s t r ibuted  mode l  where these layers are distributed 
across a. number of modules. Each rnodule consists of a 
partial model of the interaction, rules for updating the 
model as well as associated ialogue management flmc- 
tions. \["urthern~ore, modules may need to collaborate 
with each other in order to determine how to update 
245
their model: their update rules may depend upon infor- 
mation maintained in another module. 
The interactionM model is falsification definite since 
agents assume rather than infer that their belief model 
corresponds to that of the other agent. This places an 
obligation on agents to make explicit the state of their 
belief model so as to give the other agent the opportunity 
to correct or modify it. For example, if the system utters 
You want to. go to London in response to the user's re- 
quest, the user has an opportunity to contest he current 
state of the system's belief model. 
The Sundial dialogue manager consists of five mod- 
ules. The linguistic interface module interfaces the di- 
alogue manager with the parser and is responsible for 
maintaining a linguistic model of system and user utter- 
ances. The dialogue module is responsible for maintain- 
ing a model of dialogue context, building an interpre- 
tation of user utterances and determining how the dia- 
logue should continue. Dialogue structure is based on the 
framework of Roulet and Moeschler in which dialogue 
is hierarchically structured il/to exchanges, interventions 
and dialogue acts (Moeschler, 1989). In order to deter- 
mine the appropriate contextual interpretation of user 
utterances, the dialogue module interacts with the belief 
module which maintains a model of belief containing not 
just concepts created directly as a result of user utter- 
ances, but also inferential extensions. For example, if the 
system initiated an exchange to determine tile departure 
date of a flight, this exchange can be closed if the belief 
model can interpret the user's utterance as refierencing 
a 'date' concept. The belief module requires context in- 
formation from the dialogue module in order to guide 
the interpretation process. For example, the second can 
reference date or flight concepts (the second of May or 
the second flight) depending on the context. The belief 
module additionally eoopera.tes with the message plaT~- 
ning module in order to provide selnantic descriptions of 
concepts referenced in the plan of system utterances. 
Finally, the task module is responsible for maintaining 
a model of the task structure of the dialogue, consult- 
ing domain-specific application databases and informing 
the dialogue module of the current state of t.he ta.sk. 
Typically, this involves deciding whether sufficient task 
information has been provided by the user and, if not, 
which additional parameters are required. 1,ess frequent 
are int~'ractions which arise when a user provides sulfi- 
cient, but incorrect, information: for example, there is 
no flight to the stated destination city. Rather than sim- 
ply informing the dialogue module that the task cannot 
be satisfied, the task module a.ttempts to relax task pa- 
rameters and suggest, alternative vMues for them (Guy- 
omard and Siroux, 1988). For example, if there are no 
flights available ill the morning of the given departure 
day, flights in the afternoon n-my be suggested. In such 
cases, system utterances are selected and formulated so 
as to make explicit to the user the fact that an alterna- 
tive is being offered. 
4 hnplementation 
Tile Sundial dialogue manager has been implemented 
in Quintus Prolog and tested on a variety of differem 
hardware platforms. It has been integrated with the 
rest, of the Sundial system and successfully manages a
range of English, French, and German spoken (public 
network) telephone dialogues relating to flight enquiries, 
flight reservations, and train enquiries. Language and 
task call be changed in the dialogue manager simply 
by resetting switches which govern the choice of static 
knowledge bases consulted uring dialogue management. 
Current average response times for the entire Sundial 
system (including speech recognition and synthesis) are 
around 10 seconds, with the dialogue manager taking 
1-2 seconds. However, a significant amount of optimiza- 
tion has still to be carried out, and it is expected that 
response times will approach real time within the next 
six months. The lexicon currently contains around 300 
entries for each language. 
5 Conc lus ion  
Two problems facing dialogue management in tele- 
phone information systems - -  co-operative interaction 
and portability across languages and task domains - -  
have been addressed by the dialogue manager ill the 
Sundial system. Our solution has been to distribute 
the intera.ctional model, as well as functions dealing 
with co-operative interaction, across a number of semi- 
independent modules. Each module is an expert on a 
local part of the interactional model. The language of 
spoken interaction and the application task can both be 
changed by instructing the relevant modules t.o consult 
different knowledge bases. In this way the generic Sun- 
dial dialogue manager can be customized for specific lan- 
guages and applications. 
References  
Harry C. Bunt. Towards a dynamic interopreta- 
tion theory of utterances in dialogue. In Ben A.G. 
Elsendoorn and Iterman Bonma, editors, Working 
models of human perception.. Academic Press, 1989. 
Michael Gerlach and Hehnut Horacek. Dialog control 
in a. na.lural language system. \]n Proceeding of the /tlh 
CoT@'reuce of the European Chapter of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, 1989. Manchester. 
Barbara .I. (h'osz and Candace L. Sidner. Attentions, 
iut.emions, and the structure of discourse. Compu- 
laliol~al .Li~guistics, 12(3):175-204, July-September 
1986. 
Marc Guyomard and Jaques Siroux. An approach to 
co-operation i  man machine oral dialogue. In ERGO- 
IA, 1988. 
Jacques Moeschh:r. Moddlisation du dialogue, 
reprdseutation de l'infdrence argumentative. Hermes, 
1989. 
.leremy Peckham. Speech understanding and dialogue 
over the telephone: an overview of progress in the 
Sundial project. \[n Proceedings of the 2nd European 
Conference on Speech Communication and Technol- 
ogy, pages 1469-1472, 1991. 
246
