Applied Text Generation* 
Owen Rambow 
Un ivers i ty  of  Pennsy lvan ia  
Depar tment .o f  CIS 
Ph i lade lph ia ,  PA  19104 
rambow@l inc .  c i s .  upenn,  edu  
Tanya  Kore lsky  
CoGenTex ,  Inc. 
105 Lenox  Road 
I thaca ,  NY  14850 
tanya?cogent  ex. com 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper presents the Joyce system as an example of a 
fully-implemented, application-oriented text generation 
system. Joyce covers the whole range of tasks associated 
with text generation, from content selection to morpho- 
logical processing. It was developped as part of the in- 
terface of the software design environment Ulysses. The 
following design goals were set for it: 
? The generated text must be of sufficiently high qual- 
ity so that the user community of the underlying 
application accepts it as part of the documentation 
of software designs. 
? The generation must be fast enough so that the sys- 
tem can be used as a tool during the design process. 
? The system must be adaptable to new needs as they 
arise during further development of the underlying 
system, and it must be portable to completely new 
applications. 
While we were able to exploit existing research for 
many of the design issues, it turned out that we needed 
to develop our own approach to text planning (Rambow 
1990). 
This paper will present the system and attempt to 
show how these design objectives led to particular design 
decisions. The structure of the paper is as follows. In 
Section 2, we will present he underlying application and 
give examples of the output of the System. In Section 
3, we will discuss the overall structure of Joyce. We 
then discuss the three main components in turn: the text 
planner in Section 4, the sentence planner in Section 5 
and the realizer in Section 6. We will discuss the text 
planner in some detail since it represents a new approach 
to the problem. Section 7 traces the generation of a short 
text. In Section 8, we address the problem of portability, 
and wind up by discussing some shortcomings of Joyce 
in the conclusion. 
"Research on the original Joyce system (described in this 
paper) was supported by the AFSC at Rome Laboratory un- 
der grant no. F30602-85-C-0098 to Odyssey Research As- 
sociates. A successor system to Joyce has been under de- 
velopment at CoGenTex since early 1991. We would like to 
thank Richard Kittredge, Robert Rubinoff and two anony- 
mous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier versions of 
this paper. 
2 The  Joyce  System in the  U lysses  
User  In ter face  
The Joyce text generation system was developped a~ 
part of the software design environment Ulysses (Ko- 
relsky and Ulysses Staff 1988; Rosenthal et al1988) 
Ulysses includes a graphical environment for the de. 
sign of secure, distributed software systems. The useJ 
manipulates icons that symbolize components (boxes) 
data ports of components (circles) and data flow be- 
tween ports (arrows). Additional information, princi 
pally about the security level of the components ant 
ports, is entered through menus. The design proceed, 
hierarchically by top-down structural decomposition. 
As a tool in the user interface, Joyce generates two 
different ypes of texts about software designs: 
? It generates annotations of the design which are in 
tended to serve as part of the system documentatior 
during and after the design process. A short and 
long version of these texts are available. The lon~ 
version can be several paragraphs long. The text~ 
usefully complement the graphical representation~ 
since the graphical representation can show only om 
level in the structural decomposition, and since th, 
additional information that is available about eacl 
component (in particular, security level) cannot b, 
displayed graphically. 
? It is used to explain the result of the application o
a heuristic security design tool, the "flow analyzer" 
The texts Joyce generates are specifically conceived c 
as written texts. The text output is integrated into th 
graphical environment in such a way that much of th 
same interactive functionality is available ither throug\] 
the text output window or through the graphical inter 
face window. For example, if a designer eads the desig\] 
annotation generated by Joyce and notices that the secu 
rity level of a component has been entered wrong, the1 
the error can be corrected by clicking at the name of th 
component in the text window and accessing the apprc 
priate menu. 
As an example of the output of Joyce, consider the tex 
in Figure 2. It is an annotation of the component "Host" 
The top level decomposition of this component is show\] 
in Figure 1. The text annotates the software design b: 
describing its structure and interpreting it in terms c 
40
Ulysses  Graph ics  In ter face  -- HOST 
!i TIP Net Handler 
Qq) 
Figure 1: The HOST Graphical Representation 
its security characteristics. The text in Figure 4 is gen- 
erated by 3oyce in order to report the results of the flow 
analyzer; the graphical representation of the underlying 
system can be seen in Figure 3. Note that the structures 
of the two texts are quite different: while the Host text 
is structured according to more abstract categories uch 
as design structure and functionality, the Black Box text 
follows the path of the insecure flow through the compo- 
nent. 
Joyce has been fully implemented in Common Lisp, 
and runs on the Symbolics Lisp Machine and on Sun 
workstations. A successor version has been ported to 
the Apple Macintosh. 
HOST:  Genera l  S t ruc ture  and  Secur i ty  Fea- 
tures 
The multilevel Host is a complex component of the 
Station. It contains a Kernel, a TIP, a Process, a 
Net Handler and a group of Managers. The Pro- 
cess, the TIP, the Managers and the Net Handler 
communicate only through the Kernel. The man- 
ifestly secure Process and the Managers perform 
auxiliary functions. The Process is low-level. The 
TIP serves as interface to a User; the Net Handler 
handles communication with a Net. The security 
statuses of the TIP, the Managers and the Net Han- 
dler have not yet been specified. 
The Kernel is a complex component. Its secu- 
rity status has not yet been specified. The Ker- 
nel contains a Message Switch, an Address Register 
and a Locator. The Address Register, the Locator 
and the Message Switch communicate directly with 
each other. The low-level Address Register and the 
multilevel Locator are data-bases. The Message 
Switch handles communication with the TIP, the 
Process, the Managers and the Net Handler. The 
security status of the Message Switch has not yet 
been specified, 
Figure 2: The HOST Text 
Ulysses  Graphics  Interface -- BLACK BOX 
1 
t 
Figure 3: The BLACK BOX Graphical Representation 
BLACK BOX: INSECURE FLOW 
In the Black Box an insecure flow occurs. Classified 
information enters the Black Box through P6. It is 
passed through the Inputter to the Merger, which 
may upgrade it to top-secret. The Merger passes 
it to the Analyzer, which has been assumed secure. 
The Analyzer downgrades it to secret. It passes 
it through the Incrementor to the Formater, which 
downgrades it when a classified corrected reading 
leaves through P34. 
Figure 4: The BLACK BOX Text 
3 The  St ructure  o f  Joyce  
Joyce consists of three separate modules, which perform 
distinct tasks and access their own knowledge bases (Fig- 
ure 5). 
1. The text planner accesses the domain representation 
and produces a list of propositions, which represents 
both the content and the structure of the intended 
text. Each proposition is expressed in a language- 
independent, conceptual frame-like formalism. It 
encodes a minimal amount of information, but can 
be realized as an independent sentence if neces- 
sary. The text planner draws on domain communi- 
cation knowledge expressed in a high-level schema 
language (see Section 4). 
2. The sentence planner takes the list of propositions 
and determines how to express them in natural an- 
guage. This task includes choosing lexicalizations 
and a syntactic structure for each proposition, and 
assembling these lexico-syntactic structures, called 
Deep Syntactic Representation or DSyntR, into 
larger sentences. It draws on knowledge captured 
in the conceptual/English dictionary. 
3. The linguistic realizer takes the syntactic structures 
and produces urface sentences. It draws on syntac- 
tic and morphological knowledge, expressed in the 
English lexicon. 
Usually, the different tasks of text generation are di- 
vided among two modules (planning and realization), 
41
: Eng l i sh  " 
Text 
'.. .............. , , 
Tat  Planner 
. . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  i i 
Conceptual 
Representation i 
Sentence Plannes" 
. . . . . . .  J . . . . . . .  i 
v~-sr . , -~  ! 
Representation i 
Realizer - j  
Figure 5: The Structure of Joyce 
rather than three. However, there is a certain amount 
of disagreement about where the line between the two 
is to be drawn. For example, MeKeown's TEXT (McK- 
eown 1985) performs the tasks that Joyce classifies as 
sentence planning as part of the realization process, 
whereas Meteer's SPOKESMAN (Meteer 1989) clas- 
sifies them as part of text planning. (See (Meteer 
1990, p.23sq) for a useful summary of the terminolog- 
ical issues 1.) In this paper, "text planning" will always 
be used in the narrow sense of "content selection and 
organization". The architecture of Joyce is directly in- 
fluenced by that of the SEMSYN system (RSsner 1987; 
RSsner 1988). RSsner divides the realization component 
into two parts, the "generator kernel" and the "generator 
front end". This distinction is mirrored exactly by the 
distinction between sentence planning and realization in 
Joyce. 
There are two main advantages to such a tripartite ar- 
chitecture, one conceptual and the other practical. Con- 
ceptually, the advantage is that linguistic planning tasks 
are clearly separated from the actual grammar, which 
comprises word order and morphological rules. These 
rules can be stated independently of the formulation of 
purely semantic rules that determine lexical and syn- 
tactic choices. This modularity makes the system more 
maintainable. The linguistic planning tasks should, how- 
ever, be clearly separated from the textual planning 
tasks: while the linguistic planning tasks are language- 
dependent, he textual planning tasks appear not to be 2. 
1 Note that the tasks Meteer groups together as "Syntax" 
- choosing the syntactic structure and linearization - are in- 
separable only in certain syntactic representations. In Joyce, 
the Deep-Syntactic Representation e codes yntactic struc- 
ture but not linear order (see Section 6 for details). 
2We are not aware of any example in which different ext 
plans (as defined here) are needed for different languages. 
The fact that functionally similar texts may display different 
structures in different cultures hould not be confused with 
language-specific constraints on text structure. 
Thus, if multi-lingual generation is desired, text planning 
and sentence planning ought to be performed by distinct 
components. 
On a more practical evel, modularity in design and 
implementation can be exploited by parallel process- 
ing of independent modules. While the current im- 
plementations of Joyce do not allow for parallel exe- 
cution, the incremental processing of parallel comput- 
ing tasks on a serial machine is also advantageous, as 
is argued in the WIP project (Wahlster et al1991; 
Harbusch et al1991) 3. Incrementality reduces the ini- 
tial response time of the system (though not the overall 
processing time). This can be crucial if multi-paragraph 
text is to be generated by an interface tool. In the Joyce 
system, the text planner cedes control to the sentence 
planner as soon as the text planner has defined a propo- 
sition. Once the sentence planner has constructed the 
DSyntR of a complete sentence, it sends it to the re- 
alizer which generates the English sentence. Thus, the 
first sentence is output by Joyce shortly after the text 
generator is invoked; text continues to be output approx- 
imately at reading speed. The effect is that a user of the 
text generator has the impression that he or she never 
has to wait for the system to respond, even when it is 
generating lengthy texts. 
Throughout he system, processing is message-driven 
in the sense of (McDonald et al1987): control ies in the 
input, which is used to construct he next level of repre- 
sentation. There is no need for backtracking or feedback 
from one level of processing to an earlier one. As is 
argued by McDonald el al., such an architecture con- 
tributes to processing efficiency. 
We will now discuss the three modules of Joyce in 
more detail. 
4 The  Text  P lanner  
Prior to the design of the text planning component of 
Joyce, several existing approaches were studied. Since 
the structure of the descriptive text (Figure 2) does 
not mirror the structure of the domain, Paris's "pro- 
cedural strategy" (Paris and McKeown 1987) cannot be 
used in general. Hovy's RST-based planner (Hovy 1988) 
assumes that content selection has Mready been per- 
formed, contrary to the situation in the Ulysses applica- 
tion; furthermore, there are efficiency problems in a pure 
STRIPS-like planning paradigm. We therefore found 
McKeown's schema-based approach (McKeown 1985) to 
be the most promising. However, it turned out that gen- 
eral rhetorical schemas cannot adequately capture the 
structure of the intended texts. In (Kittredge t al 1991), 
we argue that planning certain types of texts - such as re- 
ports and descriptions - requires domain-specific knowl- 
edge about how to communicate in that domain. That 
knowledge we call "domain communication knowledge" 
(DCK). For example, in describing secure system designs 
3Incrementality within the realizer has little practical 
benefit when the realizer is reasonably fast; its study is 
mainly motivated by psycholinguistic considerations. There- 
fore, there was no attempt in Joyce to make the realizer 
incremental. 
42
you must relate the security level of each component, 
but not, say, the number of ports or their security levels. 
Furthermore, the connectivity of components should be 
stated before their functionality. In the flow analyzer 
text, the security levels of the components need not be 
communicated at all, but if a component (other than the 
final component of the path) downgrades information, it
must be stated whether and why the component is se- 
cure. This very precise knowledge about which domain 
information eeds to communicated and in what order 
cannot simply be derived from general principles. We 
have also argued that in many existing text planning 
systems, such DCK has been encoded implicitly. In the 
interest of efficiency, modularity and portability we have 
decided to represent DCK explicitly in Joyce. 
We have developed a "schema language" for easy rep- 
resentation of DCK, called DICKENS (Domain Commu- 
nication Knowledge ENcoding Schemas). The schemas 
are similar in form to those used by McKeown. Basically, 
schemas can be seen as a description of text structure. 
The system, however, interprets each schema as a list 
of instructions. The instructions can be calls to other 
schemas, recursive calls to the same schema, or they 
can be one of a set of special commands provided by 
the schema language. One special command produces a
specific proposition and sends it to the sentence planner. 
Other special commands upport conditional branching 
and iteration. During execution, each schema is associ- 
ated with a particular subset of the domain representa- 
tion, which is called the focus (in the sense of McKeown's 
"global focus"). In the Ulysses application, the focus 
always corresponds to one component. There are spe- 
cial commands to shift the focus. In addition to the fo- 
cus, which limits the domain representation from which 
information can be communicated, a theme can be set 
which determines information structure within individ- 
ual propositions. The theme corresponds to McKeown's 
"local focus". As has been widely recognized, thematic 
structure affects issues such as grammatical voice at the 
linguistic level. 
In addition, two further special commands were found 
to be necessary in order to perform text planning: 
? A portion of the text plan can be edited. To do this, 
a schema is called, but any propositions that are cre- 
ated (by the schema or by any schema it calls) are 
not sent to the sentence planner. They are kept on 
a separate list in the order they are created. When 
the execution of the schema terminates, an editing 
function is applied to the list. The editing function 
can delete propositions, change their order, change 
their contents or create new ones. The choice of an 
editing function depends on the domain and on the 
particular equirements of the text. Further study is 
needed in order to determine the types of editing op- 
erations that can be made and to devise a high-level 
language to express them; the goal is to eventually 
establish a library of editing operations. Typical 
editing operations we have used include juxtapos- 
ing similar propositions or juxtaposing propositions 
with certain similar slots (typically, the agent slot). 
An example is given in Section 7. 
This type of revision is different from the revision 
discussed in (Gabriel 1988) and (Meteer 1991). In 
these systems, the linguistic specification of the tar- 
get texts is revised. In Joyce, it is the text plan 
itself, i.e. the pre-linguistic representation of text 
content and structure, that is subject to revision. 
? Schemas can post to a "blackboard", and check this 
blackboard for messages. This allows for additional 
control and communication between schemas which 
are called at different imes during the text planning 
process and cannot communicate with each other 
directly. 
Instead of being templates that limit the structure of 
the text to certain preconceived types, the schemas are 
now an explicit and compact representation of domain 
communication knowledge. 
5 The  Sentence  P lanner  
The sentence planner combines all those planning tasks 
that are specific to the target language. It receives 
propositions from the text planner and sends the 
DSyntR of complete sentences to the realizer for pro- 
cessing. It has two main tasks: first, it chooses lexi- 
cal and syntactic realizations by consulting the Concep- 
tual/English dictionary; second, it determines sentence 
scope by merging the DSyntR of individual propositions. 
We will discuss each of these steps in turn. 
The Conceptual/English dictionary is implemented as 
a set of procedures that operate on the propositions. 
Each proposition is mapped into the DSyntR of a clause 
(i.e., its root is a verb). Lexicalization can take prag- 
matic factors into account. It can also refer to a history 
of lexicalizations if lexical variation is desired. After a 
DSyntR has been constructed, certain syntactic para- 
phrase operations are performed if necessary, for exam- 
ple passivization if a grammatical object is the theme of 
the sentence, or if the subject is absent. 
The second task of the sentence planner is to deter- 
mine the scope of sentences. Combining the linguistic 
realization of propositions into larger sentences i a cru- 
cial issue because it increases the quality of the gener- 
ated text. For example, The low-level Address Register 
and the multilevel Locator are data-bases (from the Host 
text in Figure 2) is significantly better than the four 
clauses from which it was formed: The Address Reg- 
ister is a data-base. It is low-level. The Locator is a 
data-base. It is multilevel. An informal study in which 
subjects were asked to revise a (grammatical) text con- 
taining only single-proposition sentences supported the 
claim that longer sentences are preferred over shorter 
ones whenever possible and reasonable. 
The first question that arises is at what level proposi- 
tions should be combined. To date, the issue of sentence 
scoping has always been dealt with at a pre-linguistic, 
conceptual level (e.g. (Dale 1988) or (Carcagno and 
Iordanskaja 1989)). However, different languages have 
different syntactic means of combining clauses; clause 
combining must refer to the specific linguistic resources 
of the target language. Therefore, in Joyce the task is 
performed by the sentence planner rather than the text 
43
planner 4. Joyce performs the following syntactic lause- 
combining operations: Relative clause formation, adjec- 
tival attachment ( he process by which an adjective from 
a copula-construction is embedded in an NP), and con- 
junction. Conjunction includes multiple conjunctions of 
more than one clause, and may lead to elision of repeated 
sentence lements ("conjunction reduction"). For exam- 
ple, in the example quoted above, the lexeme data base 
occurs only once in the conjoined sentence. 
The second question that arises is how clause combi- 
nation should be restricted. We have identified stylistic 
and discourse constraints. The stylistic constraints are 
constraints against the sentence becoming too long (an 
upper bound on the number of clauses that can be com- 
bined into one sentence), and a constraint on recursive 
embedding of relative clauses. Discourse constraints are 
imposed by the structure of the text: clauses belonging 
to conceptually distinct text units should not be com- 
bined. The text planner can send a special message, 
called conceptua l -break ,  to the sentence planner. It 
signals the beginning of a new textual unit. These spe- 
cial messages are triggered by appropriate indications in 
the DICKENS specifcation of the DCK. 
The algorithm is as follows. The sentence planner 
maintains a "current" DSyntR. Each incoming propo- 
sition is translated into a DSyntR, which the sen- 
tence planner then attempts to merge with the current 
DSyntR. If none of the clause combination strategies 
work, or if stylistic heuristics interfere, or if the incoming 
proposition is a conceptua l -break ,  the current DSyntR 
is sent to the realizer and the new DSyntR becomes the 
current one. The process of clause combination can be 
very easily modeled at the DSyntR level: relative clause 
formation and conjunction reduce to simple tree compo- 
sition operations. (In the case of adjectival attachment 
only the adjective node is attached.) Issues such as word 
order in relative clauses, the morphological form of the 
complementizer, and conjunction reduction can be dealt 
with at further stages of processing. 
6 The Linguistic Realizer 
The linguistic component is based on Meaning-Text The- 
ory (MTT) (Mel'~uk 1988), and is a reimplementa- 
tion (in Lisp) of Polgu~re's Prolog implementation of a 
Meaning-Text model for English (Iordanskaja et al1988; 
Iordanskaja et al1991). 
MTT defines three successive levels of representation. 
With each level of representation is associated a compo- 
nent which transforms the representation i to the next 
higher level. Each component is implemented as a sepa- 
rate module in Joyce. 
? The Deep-Syntactic Representation (DSyntR) is a 
dependency grammar tree representing the syn- 
tactic relationships between the meaning-bearing 
4In Section 7, we discuss an example in which two propo- 
sitions are merged by the text planner. The crucial point is 
that in that example, the two propositions are merged into a 
single proposition. Here, we are discussing cases in which two 
distinct propositions are linguistically realized in the same 
sentence. 
~ sc~t  progressive 
Merger information Analyzer 
definite indefinite definite 
Figure 6: DSyntR of sentence The Merger is passing 
information to the Analyzer 
words of a sentence. Sister nodes are unordered with 
respect o each other. The nodes are labelled with 
lexemes which are annotated with features. Numer- 
ical arc labels represent the syntactic arguments of 
the governing lexeme, while ATTR represents he at- 
tributive relation. An example is shown in Figure 6. 
Note that the function words the, is, to are not yet 
represented. 
? The Surface-Syntactic Representation (SSyntR) is 
also a dependency grammar epresentation, but it 
includes all lexemes of the final sentence. The tran- 
sition between DSyntR and SSyntR is achieved by 
looking up function words in the English lexicon. 
and by expanding rammatical features uch as verb 
tenses. 
? The Deep Morphological Representation (DMor- 
phR) is a linearization of the nodes of the SSyntR. 
? The Surface Morphological Representation is in fac! 
the written form of the English sentence. Morpho- 
logical processing is done by a component closel~ 
based on SUTRA-S (Emele and Momma 1985). 
While linguistic realizers based on other theories coulc 
have been used, this MTT-based approach offers the fol- 
lowing advantages: 
? The approach is based on an independently moti. 
vated linguistic theory. Much linguistic work ha., 
already been done in the MTT framework (for ex. 
ample (Mel'6uk and Pertsov 1987)). 
? The modularization of different ypes of linguisti~ 
knowledge makes the grammar easier to maintain 
Parallelism in computation could be exploited. 
? The dependency grammar used to express the tw( 
syntactic levels of representation permits the sepa 
ration of the semantically relevant issue of grammat 
ical relations (e.g., subjecthood) from pragmaticall\] 
relevant issues of surface word order (e.g., topical 
ization). 
7 An  Example  
As an example, consider the sample text in Figure 4. I 
describes the occurrence of an insecure flow in compo 
nent Black Box. The texts that explain insecure flow; 
are generated by a set of eight schemas, one of which i 
shown in Figure 7. It is the first that is invoked. 
Special commands are preceded by a colon; command 
not starting with a colon are calls to other schemas 
44
(defschema flow-analysis-error 
:title "Insecure flow" 
: theme "information" 
:make-proposition (insecure-flow :location focus) 
:make-proposition (enter :agent (get-infornation) 
:object focus 
:location (entry-port focus)) 
:make-proposition (id-security :agent (get-information) 
:value (get-level (entry-port focus))) 
conceptual-break 
:shift-focus-and-edit (next-component initial-follow-path #'merge-send-data)) 
Figure 7: The FLOW ANALYZER schema 
The arguments to special commands immediately fol- 
low the command. The : t i t le  special command gen- 
erates a title. Command :theme sets the initial theme 
of the paragraph, influencing issues such as passiviza- 
tion. Then follow three :make-propos i t ion  commands, 
which each produce one proposition. The first argu- 
ment to :make-propos i t ion  is the class of the propo- 
sition. The slots are typically filled with pointers into 
the domain representation of the application program. 
focus is a pointer maintained by the text planner which 
refers to the global focus (currently the component Black 
Box, represented by pointer #<COMPONENT Black Box>), 
while get - in fo rmat ion  and ent ry -por t  are functions 
provided by the underlying application program. Not all 
arguments must be filled by a :make-propos i t ion  com- 
mand; the sentence planner will choose lexical and syn- 
tactic realizations accordingly. The text planner sends 
an insecure - f low proposition to the sentence planner, 
which translates it into a DSyntR tree (which repre- 
sents the clause In the Black Box an insecure flow oc- 
curs) and returns control to the text planner. The text 
planner then proceeds to the next :make-propos i t ion  
command, and sends the proposition shown in Figure 8 
to the sentence planner. When the sentence planner e- 
ENTER 
AGENT #<information> 
OBJECT #<COMPONENT Black Box> 
LOCATION #<PORT P9> 
Figure 8: The ENTER proposition 
ceives the enter  proposition, it translates it into the 
DSyntR tree shown in Figure 9, which could be ex- 
pressed as the clause information enters the Black Box 
through P6. Note that the choice of enter as verb is due 
to the fact that information is currently the theme; if 
Black Box were the theme, the choice would have been 
receives. The sentence planner then tries to combine 
the new DSyntR with the current one (which was de- 
rived from the previous proposition). This fails (since 
the two clauses have different verbs and different ac- 
tants), so the current DSyntR is sent to the realizer, 
which prints out the first sentence. The new DSyntR 
Black Box information through 
definite indefinite prep \[ 2 
Y 
P6 
Figure 9: DSyntR of sentence information enters the 
Black Box through P6 
becomes the current one. Control is returned to the text 
planner, which processes the third :make-propos i t ion 
command and sends the appropriate proposition to the 
sentence planner. The sentence planner generates the 
clausal DSyntR tree shown in Figure 10 (the informa- 
tion is classified). It then attempts to combine the new 
information classified 
def'mite adjective 
Figure 10: DSyntR of sentence The information is clas- 
sified 
clause with the "current DSyntR", first using the adjec- 
tival attachment strategy. This succeeds, yielding the 
tree shown in Figure 11. It then returns control to the 
text planner, since another clause could be merged with 
the current DSyntR. The text planner then calls schema 
conceptual-break. The only effect of this schema is to 
send a conceptua l -b reak  message to the sentence plan- 
ner, which thereupon sends its current DSyntR to the re- 
alizer. The realizer prints out the surface sentence Clas- 
sified information enters the Black Box through P6. 
The last command of the schema first shifts the 
(global) focus to next-component,  which is the next 
component raversed by the insecure flow. The sec- 
ond argument of the : shift-focus-and-edit command 
designates the next schema to be called. This corn- 
45
Black Box Information through 
del'mite indefinite prep 
classified P6 
adjective 
Figure 11: DSyntR of sentence Classified information 
enters the Black Box through P6 
mand also initiates the editing process. All proposi- 
tions that are generated as a result of this command 
are kept on a list rather than sent to the sentence plan- 
ner. When the command has been executed, the list 
is edited by the function given as the third argument, 
# 'merge-send-data .  The effect of this function is to 
combine two successive send propositions into a single, 
new one, so that two clauses uch as the Analyzer sends 
the information to the Incrementor and the Incrementor 
sends the information to the Formater yield the Ana- 
lyzer sends the information to the Formater through the 
Incrementor. Note that this combination is not a lin- 
guistic one but a conceptual one, since it relies on facts 
about sending data in this domain, rather than on the 
syntax or lexical semantics about the verb send. It must 
therefore be performed by the text planner, and not the 
sentence planner. 
8 Por t ing  the  System 
Porting is an important way to evaluate complete applied 
text generation systems, since there is no canonical set 
of tasks that such a system must be able to perform and 
on which it can be tested. (Realization components, on 
the other hand, can be tested for their syntactic and 
perhaps lexical coverage.) Joyce was originally designed 
to generate only component descriptions (as in Figure 2). 
The "flow analyzer" heuristic tool was added later to 
the system, and the completely different ype of text it 
required was a first successful test of Joyce and its text 
planner in particular. 
The modular design of Joyce proved beneficial dur- 
ing the porting to the new application. The following 
conceptually well-defined tasks were required during the 
development of the "flow analyzer" application: 
1. Since the flow analyzer is a new type of tool, no 
corpus of texts was available for study. Instead, 
sample texts were written by hand and critiqued by 
domain experts. The texts were then revised and 
resubmitted to the experts. The "ideal text" that 
emerged was then analyzed and the DCK needed 
to generate it expressed in terms of schemas. We 
interpret he cycle of writing, critiquing and revising 
as a process of DCK acquisition. 
2. New classes of proposition were defined. These in- 
clude enter ,  upgrade and downgrade. Some of the 
proposition classes from the earlier descriptive ap- 
plication could be reused, such as send. 
3. The Conceptual/English dictionary was extended to 
account for the new proposition classes. 
4. Several new lexical items were entered into the 
English lexicon. For example, the English lex- 
eme downgrade subcategorizes for two nouns and 
a propositional phrase obligatorily headed by to. 
Note that those parts of Joyce that deal with facts of 
English (including clause combination) needed no atten- 
tion (other than updating the lexicon). 
We are currently working on porting a successor of 
Joyce to several new applications, including the genera- 
tion of project management reports. Initial results, in- 
cluding a prototype, are encouraging. 
9 Conc lus ion  
We are aware of several shortcomings of Joyce, which we 
will address in future versions of the system. 
? While we have argued in (Kittredge et al1991) 
that rhetoric cannot be the central guiding princi- 
ple in text planning, it appears to play an impor- 
tant role as a constraint on possible text structures. 
Furthermore, it helps determine the use of connec- 
tives between rhetorically related clauses. Finally, 
it may determine when conceptual breaks occur in 
text structure which affect sentence scoping (Scott 
and de Souza 1990). We are currently investigating 
the option of augmenting the DCK schemas with 
rhetorical annotations. 
? The current form of the Conceptual/English dictio- 
nary is not satisfactory, since the dictionary writer is 
too free in writing dictionary entries. For example, 
the dictionary could be used as a back door for the 
introduction of new content which the text planner 
was (for whatever easons) unable to plan. Meteer 
discusses the same problem in McKeown's original 
TEXT system (Meteer 1990, p.35). An interface to 
the dictionary that is more restrictive is needed. 
? While it is possible to set a theme in the text 
plan, thematic structure has not received suffi- 
cient attention. Rules of thematic progression (as 
implemented, for instance, in McKeown's TEXT) 
are not taken into consideration. Furthermore. 
clause combination is also sensitive to thematic 
structure (Kuno 1976; Derr and McKeown 1986: 
Iordanskaja 1989), which is currently not taken intc 
account. 
Despite these shortcomings, Joyce has proven to be 
successful and useful tool in the Ulysses user interface. I! 
has met the design objectives of speed and quality, and 
our experience in porting the text generator to new task., 
and to new applications indicates that Joyce is a flexible 
system that can adapt to a variety of text generatior 
tasks. 
46
Bib l iography  
Carcagno, Denis and Iordanskaja, Lidija, 1989. Con- 
tent Determination and Text Structuring in Gossip. 
In Proceedings of the Second European Workshop on 
Text Generation. Edinburgh. 
Dale, Robert, 1988. Generating Referring Expressions 
in a Domain of Objects and Processes. PhD thesis, 
University of Edinburgh. 
Derr, Marcia A. and McKeown, Kathleen R., 1986. Us- 
ing Focus to Generate Complex and Simple Sentences. 
In 24 th Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL'86), ACL, pages 319-326. 
Emele, Martin and Momma, Stefan, 1985. SUTRA- 
S: Erweiternngen eines Generator-Front-End fiir das 
SEMSYN-Projekt. Technical Report, Universit~t 
Stuttgart. 
Gabriel, Richard P., 1988. Deliberate Writing. In Mc- 
Donald, David D. and Bolc, Leonard (editors), Natural 
Language Generation Systems, pages 1-46. Springer 
Verlag. 
Harbusch, Karin; Finkler, Wolfgang; and Schauder, 
Anne, 1991. Incremental Syntax Generation with 
Tree Adjoining Grammars. In Proceedings 4.Int. GI- 
Kongress Wissensbasiertc Systeme, GWAI. Miinchen. 
Hovy, Eduard H., 1988. Planning coherent multisenten- 
tim text. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting, 
ACL, pages 163-169. Buffalo. 
Iordanskaja, Lidija, 1989. Communicative Structure 
and Its Use During Text Generation. Technical Re- 
port TR 15-10, Odyssey Research Associates, Ithaca, 
NY/Montr~al, PQ. 
Iordanskaja, Lidija; Kittredge, Richard; and Polgu~re, 
Alain, 1988. Implementing the Meaning-Text Model 
for Language Generation. Paper presented at 
COLING-88. 
Iordanskaja, Lidija; Kittredge, Richard; and Polgu~re, 
Alain, 1991. Lexical Selection and Paraphrase in a 
Meaning-Text Generation Model. In Paris, Cecile; 
Swartout, William; and Mann, William (editors), Nat- 
ural Language Generation in Artifical Intelligence and 
Computational Linguistics, pages 293-312. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Kittredge, Richard; Korelsky, Tanya; and Rambow, 
Owen, 1991. On the Need for Domain Communica- 
tion Knowledge. Computational Intelligence 7(4). 
Kuno, S., 1976. Subject, theme and the speaker's empa- 
thy - a reexamination f relativization phenomena. In
Li, Charles N. (editor), Subject and Topic, pages 417- 
444. Academic Press. 
McDonald, David D.; Meteer (Vaughan), Marie W.; and 
Pustejovsky, James D., 1987. Factors contributing to 
efficiency in Natural Language Generation. In Kern- 
pen, Gerard (editor), Natural Language Generation, 
pages 159-181. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 
McKeown, Kathleen, 1985. Text Generation. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Mel'Suk, Igor A., 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice. State University of New York Press, New 
York. 
Mel'Suk, Igor A. and Pertsov, Nikolaj V., 1987. Sur- 
face Syntax of English. John Benjamins, Amster- 
dam/Philadelphia. 
Meteer, Marie W., 1989. The SPOKESMAN Natural 
Language Generation System. Technical Report, BBN 
Systems and Technologies Corporation. 
Meteer, Marie W., 1990. The 'Generation Gap': The 
Problem of Expressibility in Text Planning. Technical 
Report 7347, BBN Systems and Technologies Corpo- 
ration. 
Meteer, Marie W., 1991. The Implication of Revisions 
for Natural Language Generation. In Paris, Cecile; 
Swartout, William; and Mann, William (editors), Nat- 
ural Language Generation in Artificai Intelligence and 
Computational Linguistics, pages 155-177. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Paris, Cecile L. and McKeown, Kathleen R., 1987. Dis- 
course Strategies for Describing Complex Physical Ob- 
jects. In Kempen, Gerard (editor), Natural Language 
Generation, pages 97-115. Martinus Nijhoff Publish- 
ers. 
Rambow, Owen, 1990. Domain Communication Knowl- 
edge. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Work- 
shop on Natural Language Generation. Dawson, PA. 
RSsner, Dietmar, 1987. The Automated News Agency 
SEMTEX - a Text Generator for German. In Kem- 
pen, G. (editor), Natural Language Generation: New 
Results in Artificial Intelligence, Psychology and Lin- 
guistics, pages 138-148. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston. 
RSsner, Dietmar, 1988. The SEMSYN Generation Sys- 
tem: Ingredients, Applications, Prospects. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, ACL. Austin. 
Scott, Donia R. and de Souza, Clarisse Sieckenius, 1990. 
Getting the message across in RST-based Text Gen- 
eration. In Dale, Robert; Mellish, Chris; and Zock, 
Michael (editors), Current Research in Natural Lan- 
gugae Generation. Academic Press, London. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang; Andre, Elisabeth; Graf, Winfried; 
and Rist, Thomas, 1991. WIP: The Coordinated Gen- 
eration of Multimodal Presentations from a Common 
Representation. I  Proceedings of the 5th Conference 
of the European Chapter, ACL. Berlin. 
47
