Tools for Grammar Engineering 
Gregor Erbach 
Univers i ty  of  the Saarland 
Computat ional  Linguistics 
W-6600 Saarbri icken 
Federal  Republ ic  o f  Germany 
erbach@col i .un i -sb .de 
We describe a tool for the development and verification of 
broad-coverage grammars that are to be used for both 
analysis and generation. Such a tool is used to ensure that 
the coverage of the grammar is sufficient (in logical terms 
the completeness of the grammar) and to control over- 
generation (the correctness of the grammar). 
Introduction 
For practically applied natural language processing systems, 
grammars with extensive coverage are required. The writing 
of broad-coverage rammars is so complex a task that it 
cannot be done on paper alone, but must be supported by 
powerful tools for testing the grammar with respect o 
consistency, coverage, overgeneration a d accuracy. 
Grammar writing is similar to programming in that 
grammars and programs must be tested and debugged until 
their input/output behaviour meets the given specifications 
and they run efficiently. Unlike programming, which can be 
approached by techniques like top-down refinement, modul- 
arization and so on, grammar writing is an incremental 
process, which consists of a cycle of 
? writing or modifying of the grammar, 
? testing of the grammar, 
? debugging the grammar. 
Grammar engineering tools must support his work cycle. 
All existing grammar engineering tools include an editor 
for modification of the grammar, possibly enhanced by 
syntax checking, a locate function'for quick access to rules 
and lexical en~es. More advanced Systems provide structure- 
oriented editing or a graphical editor for feature structures. 
Most grammar engineering tools are built around a (chart) 
parser, which is used to test the grammar by parsing 
sentences. The parse results can be visualized and inspected 
in detail. Generally, the chart, phrase structure trees and 
feature structures can be displayed graphically. 
This work was supported by IBM Germany's LILOG 
project. I would like to thank Roman Georg Arens, Jochen 
D0rre, Tibor Kiss, Ingo Raasch, Hans Uszkoreit and Jan 
Wilms for useful discussion. 
These modes of presentation are often linked such that it is 
possible to select an edge of the chart or a node of the tree, 
and view the corresponding (sub)tree or feature structure or 
definition in the source file. 
Few systems give diagnostic output hat shows where a 
unification failure has occurred. 
While a tool built around a parser is useful for checking 
the coverage and input/output behavior of the grammar, it 
does not help to control overgeneration, and is not very 
useful in locating errors in the grammar which are due to 
unification failure. 
We propose a grammar engineering tool consisting of a 
parser for checking coverage, a generator for controlling 
overgeneration, debugging and documentation tools. 
Too ls  fo r  checking coverage and ef f i c iency  
For checking the coverage of the grammar, we use a 
bottom-up chart parser for the grammar formalism STUF 
(DOrre 1991). The parser is designed to support and 
encourage xperimentation with different grammars and 
processing strategies (Erbach 1991). 
In addition to charts, trees, and feature structures, the 
parser provides extensive statistics about the parsing 
process: 
? the time needed for finding the first analysis and for 
finding all analyses, 
? the number of possible parsing tasks, 
? the number of parsing tasks on the agenda, 
? the number of successful parsing tasks (chart items), 
? the number of chart items that are used in a result ree. 
The last three statistic data are available for each grammar 
rule. In this way it is possible to define parsing strategies 
that are sensitive to the rule which is involved in the parsing 
task. A good parsing strategy will delay rules that are often 
unsuccessful. 
The tool includes a test suite, that it a set of sentences 
covering various syntactic phenomena, nd also a set of ill- 
formed strings. Semantic representations are associated with 
the well-formed sentences. 
Testing of the grammar involves parsing the strings in the 
test suite and checking whether the parse results contain the 
243
correct semantic representation(s), and whether the ill-formed 
strings are correctly rejected. 
The converse form of testing, giving semantic represen- 
tations to a semantic generator and checking whether it 
produces the correct strings is necessary for evaluating the 
semantic overage of the grammar. 
Tools for controlling overgeneration 
Our tool includes a generator whose task it is to generate a 
representative set of sentences in order to check whether the 
grammar overgenerates. 
Before turning to the question what constitutes a 
representative sample of a language, we describe the 
algorithm used for generation \[Erbach and Arens 1991\]. 
The algorithm builds up successively onger constituents 
from shorter ones. The initial constituents of length 1 are 
the words from the lexicon. More constituents of length 1 
are added by applying unary rules to the constituents of 
length 1. Constituents of length n are built by applying a 
binary rule to constituents of length x and length y, such 
that x+y=n, or by applying a unary rule to a constituent of 
length n. 
Since in general, languages are infinite, it isnot possible 
to generate all sentences. The language generated can be 
limited by 
? setting a maximal sentence l nth, 
? limiting the initial lexicon, so that only one member of a 
class of lexical entries is present, 
? excluding certain rules of the grammar, so that certain 
constructions that one is presently not interested in are 
avoided, e.g. relative clauses, 
? limiting recursion, 
? filtering the constituents generated according to the 
grammar writer's interests, for example only sentences and 
noun phrases. 
b 
All of these devices which limit the grammar must be 
used with caution, in order to avoid losing interesting 
examples in the language sample generated. 
When looking through the generated language sample, the 
user may select any sentence, and view its feature structure 
and derivation tree, using the tools provided with the parser. 
Debugging tools 
Sometimes, it is desirable to know how certain linguistic 
descriptions fit together. For example, when debugging a
grammar, one might want to see what happens if a particular 
rule is applied to two particular lexical items, or whether Or 
not two feature structures unify. With a parser-based tool, 
one must make up a sentence in which such a configuration 
occurs, and then inspect he parse result. 
We provide this functionality more directly. The user may 
select any linguistic object (lexical entry, type definition or 
chart item) and unify it with any other linguistic object. If 
grammar ules are seen as local trees, the user may also 
unify any linguistic unit with any of the nodes in the local 
tree defined by the grammar rule. 
While unification failures are not kept track of during 
parsing for efficiency reasons, this structure builder will 
show exactly which features have caused a unification to 
fail, and thus assist in the diagnosis of errors in the  
grammar. 
Documentation tools 
Good documentation of a grammar is a prerequisite for 
modifying or extending it or re-using it fo r  another 
application, and should be supported and by appropriate 
tools. We believe that documentation tools are best 
integrated with a grammar engineering tool. There are 
various reasons for doing so. 
First of all, the tool can be constructed such that it 
reminds the user of including documentation in the source 
files and keeps track of when definitions in the grammar 
were changed, and by whom. 
Second, integration of grammar engineering and 
documentation tools makes it easy to include output of the 
parser (charts, trees and feature strctures) into the documenta- 
tion that is being written. 
Third, we assume that the technical documentation is a 
hypertext. In addition to the standard hypertext links from 
one piece of text to another, we can include links from the 
text to the functionality of the grammar engineering tool. 
By selecting a word, or the name of a grammar rule or a type 
definition in the text of the documentation, a link will be 
built that allows the user to either view its definition in the 
source file or display its feature structure. By selecting an 
example sentence in the documentation text, it is possible to 
activate the parser to view its chart, tree or feature structure. 
Implementation 
The tool described here has been partially implemented in
Quintus Prolog and X-Windows under AIX on an IBM 
PS/2. It is integrated into the text understanding system 
LEU/2 developed in IBM Germany's LILOG project. 
The parser was implemented by the author, the grammar 
formalism and the user interface by Jochen D(irre and Ingo 
Raasch and the generator by the author and Roman G. Arens. 
References 
Gregor Erbach and Roman Georg Arens. Evaluation von 
Grammatiken ftir die Analyse nattirlicher Sprache durch 
Generierung einer repr~entativen Satzmenge. In Procee- 
dings of GWAI -91,. pages 126-129, Bonn, September 
1991, Springer. 
Jochen DOrre. The Language of STUF. In: O. Herzog and 
C.-R. Rollinger (eds.): Text Understanding in LILOG, 
pages 33-38, Springer, Berlin, 1991. 
Gregor Erbach. A Flexible Parser for a Linguistic 
Development Environment. In: O. Herzog and C.-R. 
Rollinger (eds.): Text Understanding in LILOG, pages 74- 
87, Springer, Berlin, 1991. 
244
