Automatic Learning for Semantic Collocation 
Satosh l  SEK INE*  
Tokyo Informat ion and Communicat ions  Research Laboratory  
Matsush i ta  Electric Industr ia l  Co.,Ltd. 
3-10-1, higashimita, tama-ku, kawasaki 214 JAPAN 
J e remy J .CARROLL  
Sof ia  ANANIADOU 
Jun ' i ch i  TSUJ I I  
Centre for Computat iona l  Linguistics 
University of Manchester  Inst i tute of Science and Technology 
P.O.Box 88, Manchester M60 1QD, United Kingdom 
Abst rac t  
The real difficulty in development of practical 
NLP systems comes from the fact that we do 
not have effective means for gathering "knowl- 
edge". In this paper, we propose an algorithm 
which acquires automatically knowledge of se- 
mantic collocations among "words" from sam- 
ple corpora. 
The algorithm proposed in this paper tries to 
discover semantic ollocations which will be 
useful for disambiguating structurally ambigu- 
ous sentences, by a statistical approach. The 
algorithm requires a corpus and minimum lin- 
guistic knowledge (parts-of-speech of words, 
simple inflection rules, and a small number of 
general syntactic rules). 
We conducted two experiments ofapplying the 
algorithm to different corpora to extract dif- 
ferent types of semantic ollocations. Though 
there are some unsolved problems, the results 
showed the effectiveness of the proposed algo- 
rithm. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Quite a few grammatical formalisms have been proposed 
by computational linguists, which are claimed to be 
"good" (declarative, highly modular, etc.) for practi- 
cal application systems in NLP. It has also been claimed 
that extra-linguistic, domain specific knowledge is in- 
dispensable in most NLP applications, and computa- 
tional frameworks for representing and using such do- 
main knowledge have also been developed. 
However, the real difficulty in developing practical 
NLP systems i due to the fact that we do not have effec- 
tive means for gathering the "knowledge", whether lin- 
*SEKINE is now a visitor at C.C.L., U.M.I.S.T. 
s ekine @ ccl. umist, ac. uk 
guistic or extra-linguistic. In particular, it has been re- 
ported \[Ananiadou, 1990\] that not only extra-linguistic, 
domain knowledge but also linguistic knowledge required 
for application systems varies, depending on text-type 
(technical reports, scientific papers, manuals, etc.), sub- 
ject domain, type of application (MT, automatic ab- 
straction, etc.) etc. This means that we have to have ef- 
fective and efficient methods either for adapting already 
existing knowledge for a specific "sublanguage" or for ac- 
quiring knowledge automatically, for example from sam- 
ple corpora of given applications. 
In this paper, we propose an algorithm which auto- 
matically acquires knowledge of semantic ollocations 
among "words". "Semantic" here means that the col- 
locations the algorithm discovers are not collocations 
among words in the sense of traditional linguistics but 
collocations that reflect ontological relations among en- 
tities in given subject domains. We expect that the 
knowledge to be extracted will not only be useful for 
disambiguating sentences but also will contribute to dis- 
covering ontological classes in given subject domains. 
Though several studies with similar objectives have 
been reported \[Church, 1988\], \[Zernik and Jacobs, 1990\], 
\[Calzolari and Bindi, 1990\], \[Garside and Leech, 1985\], 
\[Hindle and Rooth, 1991\], \[Brown et al, 1990\], they 
require that sample corpora be correctly analyzed or 
tagged in advance. It must be a training corpus, which 
is tagged or parsed by human or it needs correspondence 
between two language corpora. Because their prepara- 
tion needs a lot of manual assistance or an unerring tag- 
ger or parser, this requirement makes their algorithm~, 
troublesome in actual application environments. On the 
other hand, the algorithm in this paper has no such 
requirement, it requires only a minimum of linguistic 
knowledge, including parts-of-speech of words, simple in- 
flection rules, and a small number of general syntactic 
rules which lexicon based syntactic theories like HPSG 
CC etc. normally assume. The parser is not a deter- 
ministic parser, but a parser which produces all possible 
analyses. All of the results are used for calculation ant 
104
the system assumes that there is a correct answer among 
them. The algorithm builds correct structural descrip- 
tions of sentences and discovers emantic ollocations at 
the same time. It works as a relaxation process. 
2 Overview 
Before giving the algorithm formally, we illustrate an 
overview in this section, by using simple examples. 
Though the algorithm can be used to extract knowledge 
useful to resolve a wide range of syntactic ambiguities, 
we use here the prepositional phrase attachment problem 
as an illustrative xample. 
We assume a syntactic parser which provides all pos- 
sible analyses. It produces yntactic descriptions of sen- 
tences in the form of syntactic dependency structures. 
That is, the description to be produced is represented by 
a set oftuples like \[head word, syntact i c  re la t ion ,  
argument\] ,  each of which expresses a dependency rela- 
tion in the input. The syntactic relation in a tuple is 
either a grammatical relation like SUB J, OBJ, etc. (in 
case of a noun phrase) or a surface preposition like BY, 
WITH, etc. Following the normal convention of depen- 
dency representation, the argument is represented by the 
governor of the whole phrase which fills the argument 
position. 
When an input sentence has attachment ambiguities, 
two or more tuples share the same argument and the 
same syntactic-relation but have different head-words. 
For example, the description of the sentence 
"I saw a girl with a scarf." 
contains two tuples like 
\[girl, WITH, scarf\] 
\[saw, WITH, scarf\] 
As repeatedly claimed in natural language under- 
standing literature, in order to resolve this ambiguity, 
a system may have to be able to infer "a scar f  cannot 
be used as an instrument to see", based on extra- 
linguistic knowledge. A practical problem here is that 
there is no systematic way of accumulating such extra- 
linguistic knowledge for given subject fields. Further- 
more, the ambiguity in a sentence like " I  saw a g i r l  
with a te lescope"  cannot be resolved only by refer- 
ring to knowledge about the world. It requires a full 
range of context understanding abilities, because the 
interpretation of "a g i r l  with a te lescope"  is less 
likely in general but can be a correct one in certain 
contexts. That is, unless a system has a full range of 
contextual understanding abilities (which we think will 
be impossible in most application environments in the 
foreseeable future), it cannot reject either of the possi- 
ble interpretations as "impossible". The best a system 
can do, without full understanding abilities, is to select 
more plausible ones or reject less plausible ones. This 
implies that we have to introduce a measure by which 
we can judge plausibility of "interpretations". 
The algorithm we propose computes uch measures 
from a given sample corpus in a certain way. It gives 
a plausibility value to each possible tuple, based on the 
sample corpus. For example, the tuples (saw, WITH, 
scar f )  and (g i r l ,  WITH, scar f )  might be assigned 
0.5 and 0.82 as their plausibility value, which would show 
(g i r l ,  WITH, scar f )  to be more plausible than (saw, 
WITH, scar f )  . This produced knowledge can be used 
to disambiguate interpretations of the sentence " I  saw 
a girl with a scar f " .  
The algorithm is based on the assumption that the 
ontological characteristics of the objects and actions de- 
noted by words (or linguistic expressions in general) and 
the nature of the ontological relations among them are 
exhibited, though implicitly, in sample texts. 
For example, nouns denoting objects which belong to 
the same ontological classes tend to appear in similar 
linguistic contexts (for example, in the same argument 
positions of the same or similar verbs). Or if an ob- 
ject (or an ontological class of objects) is "intrinsically" 
related to an action (like " te lescope"  to "see") ,  the 
word denoting the class of objects co-occurs frequently 
with the verb denoting the action. The co-occurrence 
would be more frequent han that of those whose onto- 
logical relations are rather fortuitous, like "g i r l "  and 
"telescope". 
Note that we talk about extra-linguistic "ontology" 
for the sake of explaining the basic idea behind the ac- 
tual algorithm. However, as you will see, we do not 
represent such things as ontological entities in the ac- 
tual algorithm. The algorithm counts frequencies of co- 
occurrences among words and calculates word distances 
which interpret such co-occurrences as contexts. Nor 
do we posit any dichotomy between "intrinsic" relations 
and "accidental" relations among actions and objects. 
Differences are  quantitative, not qualitative. That is, 
co-occurrences of "girl" and "scarf" are more frequent 
than, for example, those of "pig" and "scarf". 
The algorithm in this paper computes the plausibility 
value of hypothesis-tuples like (g i r l ,  WITH, scar f ) ,  
(saw, WITH, scar f ) ,  etc., basically by counting 
frequencies of instance-tuples \ [g i r l ,  WITH, scar f \ ] ,  
\[saw, WITH, scar f \ ] ,  etc. generated from sample texts 
by a syntactic parser. 
3 Algor ithm 
3.1 Re laxat ion  Process  - In fo rmal  Exp lanat ion  
of  the  A lgor i thm 
Though the algorithm simply counts frequencies of co- 
occurrences of word relations, there are some compli- 
cations. In this section, we also use the prepositional 
phrase attachment problem as an example, though the 
algorithm can be applied to any kind of structural am- 
biguity. 
1. We have to count frequencies of "meaningful" co- 
occurrences between verbs and nouns, i.e. co- 
occurrences where the nouns actually appear in the 
position of the head-noun of PP's  which can be at- 
tached to verbs or other nouns. The frequency of 
"general" co-occurrences where the two words oc- 
cur, for example, in the same sentences may be of 
little use. 
This means that we encounter the problem of the 
chicken and the egg here, i.e. in order to obtain ire- 
105
quencies of "meaningful" co-occurrences in sample 
texts, we have to know the correct attachment po- 
sitions of PPs, and determining the correct attach- 
ments of PPs in sample texts requires knowledge of 
frequencies of "meaningful" co-occurrences. 
2. We usually cannot expect o have a corpus of sample 
sentences large enough for "intrinsic" relations to 
appear significantly more often than "accidental" 
relations. It is desirable, or inevitable in a sense, 
to introduce methods of increasing the number of 
co-occurrences. 
One possible way of doing this (which we have 
adopted in our algorithm) is to introduce "seman- 
tic" similarity measures between words, and count 
the number of extended co-occurrences taking the 
similarity measures into account. That is, the 
frequency of \[girl, WITH, necklace\] in sample 
texts contributes not only to the plausibility value 
of the tuple (g i r l ,  WITH, neck lace) ,  but also 
to that of (g i r l ,  WITH, scar f ) ,  according to the 
similarity value (or semantic distance) of "scar f "  
and "necklace". 
Because we compute semantic distances among 
nouns based on (dis-)similarities of their patterns of 
co-occurrence with other words (in short, two nouns 
are judged to be close to each other, if they often 
co-occur with the same words), we also encounter 
an chicken and egg problem here. The calculation 
of semantic distance requires frequencies of collo- 
cation, and in order to find semantic ollocations, 
semantic distance could be helpful. 
The two chicken and egg problems in the above are 
treated differently in the algorithm. We focus on 
the first problem in this paper, while readers who 
are interested in the second problem can refer to 
\[Sekine t al., 1992\] 
In the following, we call the tuples generated 
from sample texts by a parser "instance-tuples" 
and the tuples to which plausibility value are as- 
signed "hypothesis-tuples". Instance-tuples and 
hypothesis-tuples are indicated by \[A, R, B\] and (A, 
R, B), respectively. 
Note that for the sake of explanation the following 
is not an accurate description of the algorithm. An 
accurate one is given in the next section. 
Input: I saw a girl with a telescope. 
(STEP-I)  Generate instance-tuples 
All possible instance-tuples such 
as \[saw, SUBJ, I\], \[girl, WITH, te lescope\ ] ,  
\[saw, WITH, te lescope\ ] ,  etc. are generated by a 
simple parser. 
(STEP-2) Assign credits 
Assign credits to the instance-tuples, by considering 
the plausibility value of corresponding hypothesis- 
tuples. As we will explain later, we assign credits in 
such a way that 
(a) 
(b) 
the sum of credits assigned to competing 
instance-tuples is equal to 1. Competing tuples 
means such tuples as \[girl, WITH, scar f \ ]  
and \[saw, WITH, scar f \ ]  which show different 
attachment positions of the same PP. 
the credits assigned to instance-tuples are pro- 
portional to the plausibility value of the corre- 
sponding hypothesis-tuples. 
Because hypothesis-tuples have the same plau- 
sibility value at the initial stage, each instance- 
tuple is assigned the same credit, say, 1/(num- 
ber of competing tuples). The credit of \[saw, 
SUB J, I\] is one, while the credits of \ [g i r l ,  
WITH, scar f \ ]  and \[saw, WITH, scar f \ ]  are 
0.5. 
(STEP-3) Calculate plausibility values 
Compute plausibility values of hypothesis-tuples, 
accumulating credits assigned to the corresponding 
instance-tuples. 
All occurrences of instance-tuples generated from 
the sample corpus have their credits assigned in 
(STEP-2). We assume that tuples correspond- 
ing to "intrinsic" ontological relations occur more 
often in texts than "accidental" ones. That is, 
we expect that instance-tuples of \ [g i r l ,  WITH, 
scar f \ ]  occur more often than those of \[saw, WITH, 
scar f \ ]  and that the sum of the credits of \ [g i r l ,  
WITH, scar f \ ]  is greater than that of \[saw, WITH, 
scar f \ ] .  This leads to a higher plausibility value 
for (g i r l . ,  WITH, scar f )  than for (saw, WITH, 
scar f ) .  
After (STEP-3), the algorithm goes back to (STEP- 
2) to compute new credits to instance-tuples. Unlik~ 
the first cycle, because the hypothes{s-tuple (g i r l ,  
WITH, scar f )  has been assigned a higher plausi. 
bility value than (saw, WITH, scar f ) ,  the credit 
to be assigned to \ [g i r l ,  WITH, scar f \ ]  would b~ 
higher than \[saw, WITH, scar f \ ] .  
When we recompute the plausibility value ii 
(STEP-3), the increased credit assigned to \[gir l~ 
WITH, scar f \ ]  in (STEP-2) increases the plausibil 
ity value of (girl, WITH, scarf) and on the othel 
hand, the decreased credit of \[saw, WITH, scar f :  
results in a lower plausibility value for (saw, WITH 
scar f ) .  
By repeating (STEP-2) and (STEP-3), we expec 
there should be an increase in the credits assigned t~ 
instance-tuples which correspond to correct attach 
ment position. Further, the credits of hypothesis 
tuples should approach values which represent th, 
real "intrinsicality" of the denoted relationships. 
(STEP-3) will be further augmented by introducin 
semantic distances between words., i.e. a simila 
hypothesis helps to increase the credit of a hypoth 
esis. We expect his should resolve the second typ 
of chicken and egg problems. See \[Sekine t al 
1992\] 
106
3.2 Termino logy  and notat ion  
instance-tuple \[h, r, a\] : a token of a dependency rela- 
tion; part of the analysis of a sentence in a corpus. 
hypothesis-tuple (h,r ,a) :  a dependency relation; an 
abstraction or type over identical instance-tuples. 
cycle : repeat time of the relaxation cycle. 
CT,~ : Credit of instance-tuple T with identification 
number i. \[0, 1\] 
V~ : Plausibility value of a hypothesis-tuple T in cycle 
g. \[0, 1\] 
D g (wa,wb) : distance between words, w= and Wb in 
cycle g. \[0, 1\] 
3.3 A lgor i thm 
1. For each sentence we use a simple grammar to find 
all tuples possibly used in this sentence. Each 
instance-tuple is then given credit in proportion to 
the number of competing tuples. 
1 
CT = number of competing tuples (1) 
This credit shows which rules are suitable for this 
sentence. On the first iteration thesplit of the credit 
between ambiguous analyses is uniform as shown 
above, but on subsequent i erations plausibility val- 
ues of the hypothesis-tuples V~ -1 before the itera- 
tion are used to give preference to credit for some 
analyses over others. The formula for this will be 
shown later. 
2. Hypothesis-tuples have a plausibility value which 
indicates their reliability by a figure from 0 to 1. 
If an instance-tuple occurs frequently in the cor- 
pus or if it occurs where there are no alternative 
tuples, the plausibility value for the corresponding 
hypothesis must be large. After analysing all the 
sentences of the corpus, we get a set of sentences 
with weighted instance-tuples. Each instance-tuple 
invokes a hypothesis-tuple. For each hypothesis- 
tuple, we define the plausibility value by the fol- 
lowing formula. This formula is designed so that 
the value does not exceed 1. 
V~{ : 1 - H (1 - CT,~) (2) 
i 
3. At this stage, the word-distances can be used to 
modify the plausibility values of the hypothesis- 
tuples. The word-distances are either defined ex- 
ternally by human intuition or calculated in the 
previous cycle with the formula shown later. Dis- 
tance between words induces a distance between 
hypothesis-tuples. Then for each hypothesis-tuple, 
another hypothesis-tuple which gives greatest effect 
can be used to increase its plausibility value. The 
new plausibility value with similar hypothesis-tuple 
effect is calculated by the following formula. 
V~{ = V@ + (1 - V~{) * V~, ? (1 - D g (w=, wb)) 2 (3) 
4. 
Here, the hypothesis-tuple T '  is the hypothesis- 
tuple which gives the greatest effect to the 
hypothesis-tuple T (original one). Hypothesis-tuple 
T and T'  have all the same elements except one. 
The distance between T and T'  is the distance be- 
tween the different elements, w= and Wb. Ordinarily 
the difference is in the head or argument element, 
but when the relation is a preposition, it is possible 
to consider distance from another preposition. 
Distances between words are calculated on the basis 
of similarity between hypothesis-tuples about them. 
The formula is as follows: 
. 
D g (w~, wb) ET  (V~{ - V~{,)# = (4) 
n 
T and T'  are hypothesis-tuples whose arguments are 
w= and wb, respectively and whose heads and rela- 
tions are the same. /9 is a constant parameter. 
This procedure will be repeated from the begin- 
ning, modifying the credits of instance-tuples be- 
tween ambiguous analyses by using the plausibility 
values of hypothesis-tuples. This will hopefully be 
more accurate than the previous cycle. On the first 
iteration, we used just a constant figure for the cred- 
its of instance-tuples. But this time we can use the 
plausibility value of the hypothesis-tuple which was 
deduced from the previous iteration. Hence with 
each iteration we expect more reliable figures. 1'o 
calculate the new credit of instance-tuple T, we use: 
. 
CT -- V~ a o) 
Here, V@ in the numerator position is the plausi- 
bility value of a hypothesis-tuple which is the same 
tuple as the instance-tuple T. VT g in the denomina- 
tor position are the plausibility values of competing 
hypothesis-tuples in the sentence and the plausibil- 
ity value of the same hypothesis-tuple itself, a is a 
constant parameter. 
Iterate step 1 to 5 several times, until the informa- 
tion is saturated. 
4 Exper iment  
We conducted two experiments to show the effectiveness 
of our algorithm. The first one uses a small, artificial 
corpus to show how the algorithm works. The second 
one is a real experiment in which we use data from a 
real corpus (computer manuals). 
4.1 Art i f ic ia l  corpus  
We treat the prepositional attachment ambiguity in this 
experiment. Though the corpus consists of only 7 arti- 
ficial sentences, this experiment shows the basic charac- 
teristics and the effectiveness of the algorithm. 
The corpus and the input data to the algorithm are as 
follows: 
107
Sentences: 
I saw a gir l  with a telescope. 
I saw a gir l  with a scarf. 
I saw a gir l  with a necklace. 
I saw the moon with a telescope. 
I meet a gir l  with a telescope. 
A gir l  with a scarf saw me. 
I saw a gir l  without a scarf. 
Dict ionary:  
I, girl, moon, telescope, 
scarf, necklace,  me = Noun 
saw, meet = Verb 
wi th ,wi thout  = Prepos i t ion  
Distances:  
0.2 = {with without} 
0.2 = {scarf  neck lace} 
0.3 = {saw meet} 
1.0 = between unspec i f ied  words 
Rules of Grammar: 
Noun <-(SUB J)- Verb 
Verb - (OBJ) -> Noun 
Noun - (Prep<with>)-> Noun 
Verb - (Prep<with>)-> Noun 
Table 1 shows the result of the first cycle. Figures 
in this table show the plausibility values of hypothesis- 
tuples between the words in the corresponding columns. 
The plausibility value of the hypothesis-tuple (saw, 
WITH, te lescope) ,  for example, is 0.75. 
WITH, neck lace)  becomes only 0.66. The difference 
in the behavior of these two hypothesis-tuples is caused 
by the difference of the plausibility values assigned to 
the hypothesis-tuples (g i r l ,  WITH, scar f )  and (saw, 
WITH, scar f ) .  The plausibility values are 1.00 and 0.50 
respectively. 
saw WITH 
girl WITH 
moon WITH 
meet WITH 
saw WITHOUT 
girl WITHOUT 
telescope scarf necklace 
0.81 0.66 0.66 
0.75 1.00 0.82 
0.50 - - 
0.68 0.24 0.24 
0.48 0.66 0.32 
0.48 0.82 0.32 
Table 2: Plausibility values with similar hypothesis effect 
Then we proceed to the second cycle, using the plausi- 
bility values which were produced in the previous cycle. 
Table 3 shows the plausibility values after the fifth cycle. 
saw WITH 
girl WITH 
moon WITH 
meet WITH 
saw WITHOUT 
girl WITHOUT 
telescope scarf necklace 
1.00 0.26 0.30 
0.93 1.00 0.99 
0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.57 0.04 0.04 
0.64 0.01 0.01 
0.58 1.00 0.64 
Table 3: Plausibility values after the fifth cycle 
saw WITH 
girl WITH 
moon WITH 
meet WITH 
saw WITHOUT 
girl WITHOUT 
telescope 
0.75 
0.75 
0.50 
0.50 
scarf necklace 
0.50 0.50 
1.00 0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
Table 1: Plausibility values after the first cycle 
These plausibility values basically reflect the num- 
ber of co-occurrences of the two words. However, the 
hypothesis-tuple (g i r l ,  WITH, scar f )  has plausibil- 
ity value 1.0, because in the sentence "A g i r l  with a 
scar f  saw me", there is no ambiguity in the attachment 
position of "with a scar f " .  
Then we compute the effects of similar hypothesis- 
tuples by considering distances among words. The effects 
which the existence of similar hypotheses has on other 
hypotheses are clearly shown in Table 2. 
The plausibility values of the hypothesis-tuples have 
changed from the former ones. For example, we can 
find a sharp distinction between the plausibility values 
of the hypothesis-tuples ( aw, WITH, neck lace)  and 
(g i r l ,  WITH, neck lace)  Though these two have the 
same plausibility value 0.50 before considering the effect 
of similar hypotheses, the plausibility value of (g i r l ,  
WITH, neck lace)  becomes 0.82 while that of (saw, 
By the fifth cycle, most of the figures have moved well 
? towards the extremes, either 0 or 1. 
For example, the plausibility values of the hypothesis- 
tuples (saw, WITH, necklace)  and (girl, WITH, 
neck lace) ,  are well apart, 0.30 and 0.99, respectively, 
although they had the same plausibility value after the 
first cycle. Also the hypothesis-tuple (moon, WITH, 
te lescope)  has the plausibility value 0.00, though its 
initial plausibility value was 0.50. We can claim that the 
learning process has worked well in making these differ- 
ences. 
On the other hand, if the movement owards ex- 
treme values was too strong, there might be a pos- 
sibility that only the strongest plausibility value sur- 
vived. When there are two hypotheses which have in- 
stances in the same sentence, how do the plausibility 
values move? This can be seen with the two hypothesis- 
tuples (saw, WITH, te lescope)  and (girl, WITH, 
te lescope)  which are contradictory hypothesis-tuple~ 
in the sentence "I saw a gir l  w i th  a te lescope" 
In the results, both of their plausibility values are hig\[ 
and avoid the monopoly, because a number of instance 
tuples and a similar hypothesis contribute to increase 
the plausibility values of both of the hypotheses tuples. 
Note that the relation (saw, WITHOUT, te lescope)  
which does not appear in the sentences, has a rathe~ 
high plausibility value, 0.64. This occurred becaus~ 
of the effect of the similar hypothesis-tuple (saw: 
WITH, te lescope) .  But the relation (meet,  WITH 
108
te lescope) ,  which has a relatively high plausibility 
value 0.57, is normally unacceptable. This is caused by 
the close distance between the words 'meet '  and ' see ' .  
The distances between words in the 5th cycle are 
shown in Table 4. 
telescope 
telescope 0'.00 
scarf 0.54 
necklace 0.52 
scarf necklace 
0.54 0.52 
0.00 0.26 
0.26 0.00 
Table 4: Distances between words in the 5th cycle 
we put the credit 1/2 for each instance-tuple in which 
N2 is an argument. 
We have not made any word distance information be- 
fore the process. 
We classified the results obtained as correct or incor- 
rect. 'Correct' means that a hypothesis-tuple which has 
the highest plausibility value is the correct tuple accord- 
ing to our human judgement. ' Incorrect' means it is 
judged wrong by a human. 'Indefinite' means that plau- 
sibility values of some hypothesis-tuples have the same 
highest value. 'Uncertain' means that it is impossible 
even for a human to judge which hypothesis tuple is the 
best without context. The results are shown in Table 6. 
These results, both the plausibility values of 
hypothesis-tuples and the word distances, seem to be- 
have as we expected. 
4.2 The  Japanese  compound noun corpus  
We conducted an experiment using compound nouns ex- 
tracted from a :Japanese computer manual, because of 
its simplicity and feasibility. The corpus consists of 4152 
sentences (about 90,000 words). This might be small 
considered for statistical analysis purpose, but as the 
corpus is a sublanguage one, the structures of sentences 
are rather homogeneous and therefore the number of sen- 
tences might be considered sufficient. 
There are 616 compound nouns in the corpus, where 
210 different words appear. We call an element word of 
a compound noun a 'word'. 
No. of words No. of compound nouns 
2 474 
3 113 
4 27 
5 2 
total 616 
Table 5: Number of compound nouns 
We assume that all words in each compound noun can 
be structurally related, if they satisfy a condition that a 
relation has a preceding argument and a following head. 
For example, from a compound noun with 4 elements, 
we can extract 6 tuples as follows. 
Compound noun: N1 N2 N3 N4 
tuples initialcredit 
IN2, MODIFY, N1\] 1/3 
IN3, MODIFY, NI\] 1/3 
\[N4, MODIFY, NIl i/3 
\[N3, MODIFY, N2\] I/2 
IN4, MODIFY, N2\] i/2 
IN4, MODIFY, N3\] 1 
We know that each element can be the argument in 
one relation. In the above example, N1 has 3 instance- 
tuples in which to be the argument. We put the credit 
1/3 as initial credit for each instance-tuple. Similarly, 
Words 
3 
4 
5 
total 
(%) 
correct incorrect indefinite uncertain 
66 29 5 13 
41 7 5 1 
4 0 0 2 
111 36 10 16 
(70.7) (22.9) (6.4) (-) 
Table 6: Results of experiment with compound nouns 
The percentage of correct answers was about 70 %. 
Though this result is not as impressive as that of the 
last experiment, it is not bad. 
From a perusal of the incorrect analyses, we can 
find typical reasons for making an incorrect analysis. 
When there are 2 competing tuples for a 3-element com- 
pound noun, these tuples are individually both accept- 
able in many cases. For example, let's take a compound 
noun 'file transfer operation'. If we consider the 
two instance-tuples, \ [ t rans fer ,  MODIFY, f i l e \ ]  and 
\ [operat ion ,  MODIFY, f i l e \ ] ,  both are acceptable in 
the absence of any context. In this case, the plausibility 
values of the two hypothesis-tuples become almost the 
same. But there might be a very small difference which 
may be caused by the effect of a similar hypothesis-tuple. 
If the wrong hypothesis tuple gains the higher plausibil- 
ity value, the analysis becomes wrong. 
We think that the relation between the words of a 
compound noun can be defined not only by a semantic 
relation between each word but also by the structure 
of the compound noun itself. This feature of compound 
nouns makes it hard to get a higher percentage of correct 
answers in this experiment. 
5 Unso lved  Prob lems 
(a) Parameters 
The behavior of the algorithm changes according to 
the two parameters, a in formula 5 and /3 in for- 
mula 4. Though the parameters are set as a = 4.0 
and 13 --- 20.0 in the experiments, we have no estab- 
lished procedures for determining these parameters 
appropriately. We need to develop criteria or meth- 
ods to determine these parameters, depending on 
characteristics of sample texts, etc.. 
(b) Word sense ambiguity 
109
The entity of collocational relation is represented 
by a word and the relation labels are either a sim- 
ple grammatical functions or a surface prepositions. 
This means we ignored the word sense ambiguity of 
a word'or a preposition in this algorithm. A new 
method to treat this problem might be needed. 
(c) Combination with other clues of disambiguation 
It is already known that ontological knowledge is 
not the only clue to settle ambiguities. There are 
the problems related with context, discourse, situ- 
ation etc.. We want to weave these problems into 
our algorithm. It also has to be noted that rather 
local, structural preferential clues may help disam- 
biguations. \[Wilks, 1985\] 
(d) Word distance 
Though we currently assume that the semantic dis- 
tances of words are given in the form of single num- 
bers, our research group is now planning to extend 
to cover multi-dimensional spects of word mean- 
ings. This extension may introduce another compli- 
cation in our algorithm. 
(e) Form of collocation 
In the current algorithm, semantic ollocations are 
represented in the form of a triplet (tuple). How- 
ever, each tuple expresses only a collocation between 
two words. This is not sufficient for treating re- 
lationships among several words, such as subcate- 
gorization frames of predicates, knowledge frames, 
etc. In order to treat such multi-word collocations, 
we may have to treat co-occurrences of triplets in 
similar fashions to how we treat co-occurrences of
words. 
6 Future  D i rec t ions  
Besides planning to resolve the problems written above, 
there are some other ideas for extending our project. 
Some of them are really stimulating. 
(a) More experiments 
Though the results of the two preliminary experi- 
ments look promising, we have to conduct more ex- 
periments using another eal corpora before claim- 
ing that the algorithm is effective. 
(b) Extension to Machine Translation 
Though the algorithm in its present form is designed 
to acquire monolingual knowledge, we are planning 
to develop it for acquiring "knowledge" for transla- 
tion. 
If "semantic" collocations discovered by the algo- 
rithm reflect the domain ontology, the collocations 
in two languages (and the semantic lasses of words 
to be produced based on the collocations) are ex- 
pected to be similar in the sense that their corre- 
spondence is rather straightforward. 
Experience in MT research, however, generally in- 
dicates the opposite, i.e. monolingual regularities 
and bilingual regularities are sometimes orthogonal 
and the correspondences of two languages are not 
so straightforward. 
These two rather contradicting predictions (and ex- 
periences) have to be consolidated through actual 
experiments. 
(c) Incremental learning system 
We don't need to distinguish the knowledge acquisi- 
tion phase from the phase of using it in actual appli- 
cation systems. It is possible to acquire knowledge 
and exploit it at the same time. 
7 Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank our colleagues at CCL, in partic- 
ular Mr.J.Phillips, Mr.K.Kageura, Mr.S.Kinoshita and 
Miss.E.van de Veen, whose comments on various occa- 
sions have been very useful. 
Re ferences  
\[Ananiadou, 1990\] Sofia Ananiadou. Sublanguage stud- 
ies as the Basis for Computer Support for Multilingual 
Communication. Proceedings of Termplan '90, Kuala 
Lumpur, 1990. 
\[Church, 1988\] Kenneth Ward Church. Word Associa- 
tion Norms, Mutual Information, and Lexicography. 
Computational Linguistics, 16(1)22-29, March 1990. 
\[Zernik and Jacobs, 1990\] Uri Zernik and Paul Jacobs. 
Tagging for Learning: Collectin G thematic relations 
from Corpus. 13ih COLING-90, 1990 
\[Calzolari and Bindi, 1990\] 
Nicoletta Calzolari and Remo Bindi. Acquisition of 
Lexical Information from a large Italian Corpus. 13th 
COLING-90, 1990 
\[Garside and Leech, 1985\] Roger Garside and Fanny 
Leech. A Probabilistic Parser 2nd Conference of the 
European Chapter of the A.C.L., 1985. 
\[Hindle and Rooth, 1991\] Donald Hindle and Mats 
Rooth. Structural Ambiguity and Lexical Relations. 
29th Conference of the A.C.L., 1991. 
\[Brown et al, 1990\] Peter Brown, John Cocke, Stephen 
A.Della Pietra, Vincent J.Della Pietra, Fredrick 
Jelinek, John D.Lafferty, Robert L.Mercer, Paul 
S.Roossin. A statistical approach to machine trans- 
lation. Computational Linguistics, 16(2) 79-85, 1990 
\[Wilks, 1985\] Yorick Wilks. Right Attachment and Pref- 
erence Semantics. 2nd Conference of the European 
Chapter of the A.C.L., 1985. 
\[Sekine t al., 1992\] S.Sekine, S.Ananiadou, J.J.Carroll~ 
J.Tsujii. Linguistic Knowledge Generator submittea 
paper for the 14th COLING-92, 1992 
110
