Lexical Processing in the CLARE System 
Dav id  M.  Carter* 
SRI  In ternat iona l  
Cambr idge  Computer  Sc ience Research  Cent re  
23 Mi l lers Yard  
Cambr idge  CB2 1RQ,  U .K .  
1 In t roduct ion  
In many language processing systems, uncertainty in the 
boundaries of linguistic units means that data are rep- 
resented not as a well-defined sequence of units but as a 
lattice of possibilities. This is often the case in speech 
recognition, syntactic parsing and Japanese kana-kanji 
conversion. In contrast, however, it is often assumed 
that, for languages written with interword spaces, it is 
sufficient o prepare an input character stream for pars- 
ing by grouping it deterministically into a sequence of 
words, punctuation symbols and perhaps other items. 
But for typed input, spaces do not necessarily corre- 
spond to boundaries between lexical items, because of er- 
rors and other, linguistic, phenomena. This means that 
a lattice representation, ot a simple sequence, should be 
used throughout front end (pre-parsing) analysis. The 
CLARE system under development at SRI Cambridge 
uses such a representation, allowing it to deal straight- 
forwardly with combinations or multiple occurrences of 
phenomena that would be difficult or impossible to pro- 
cess correctly under a sequence representation. This pa- 
per concentrates on CLARE's ability to deal with typing 
and spelling errors, which are especially common in in- 
teractive use, for which CLARE is designed. 
The word identity and word boundary ambiguities en- 
countered in the interpretation of errorful input often 
require the application of syntactic and semantic knowl- 
edge on a phrasal or even sentential scale. Such knowl- 
edge may be applied as soon as the problem is encoun- 
tered; however, this brings major problems with it, such 
as the need for adequate lookahead, and the difficulties 
of engineering large systems where the processing levels 
are tightly coupled. To avoid such problems, CLARE 
adopts a staged architecture, in which indeterminacy 
is preserved until the knowledge needed to resolve it is 
ready to be applied. An appropriate representation is of 
course the key to doing this efficiently. 
*CLARE is being developed as part of a collaborative 
project involving SRI International, British Aerospace, BP 
Research, British Telecom, Cambridge University, the UK 
Defence Research Agency, and the UK Department of Trade 
and Industry. 
2 Spaces  and Word  Boundar ies  
In general, typing errors are not just a matter of one 
intended input token being miskeyed as another one. 
Spaces between tokens may be deleted or inserted. Mul- 
tiple errors, involving both spaces and other characters, 
may be combined in the same intended or actual token. 
A reliable spelling corrector must allow for all these pos- 
sibilities. 
However, even in the absence of "noise" of this kind, 
spaces do not always correspond to lexical item bound- 
aries, at least if lexical items are defined in a way that is 
most convenient for grammatical purposes. For example, 
"special" forms such as telephone numbers or e-mail ad- 
dresses, which are common in many domains, may con- 
tain spaces. In CLARE, these are analysed using regular 
expressions, which may include space characters. 
The complexities of punctuation are another source 
of uncertainty: many punctuation symbols have several 
uses, not all of which necessarily lead to the same way 
of segmenting the input. For example, periods may in- 
dicate either the end of a sentence or an abbreviation, 
and slashes may be simple word-internal characters or 
function lexically as disjunctions. 
CLARE's architecture and formalism allow for all 
these possibilities, and, as an extension, also permit 
multiple-token phrases, such as idioms, to be defined as 
equivalent o other tokens or token sequences. This fa- 
cility is especially useful when CLARE is being tailored 
for use in a particular domain, since it allows people not 
expert in linguistics or the CLARE grammar to extend 
grammatical coverage in simple and approximate, but 
often practically important, ways. 
3 CLARE 's  P rocess ing  Stages  
The CLARE system is intended to provide language pro- 
cessing capabilities (both analysis and generation) and 
some reasoning facilities for a range of possible applica- 
tions. English sentences are mapped, via a number of 
stages, into logical representations of their literal mean- 
ings, from which reasoning can proceed. Stages are 
linked by well-defined representations. The key interme- 
diate representation is that of quasi logical form (QLF), 
a version of first order logic augmented with constructs 
for phenomena such as anaphora nd quantification that 
can only be resolved by reference to context. The unifica- 
259
tion of declarative linguistic data is the basic processing 
operation. 
In the analysis direction, CLARE's front end process- 
ing stages are as follows. A sentence is divided into a 
sequence of clusters separated by white space. Each 
cluster is then divided into one or more tokens: words 
(possibly inflected), punctuation characters, and other 
items. Tokenization is nondeterministic, and so a lat- 
tice is used at this and subsequent stages. Next, each 
token is analysed as a sequence of one or more segments. 
For normal exical items, these segments are morphemes. 
The lexicon proper is first accessed at this stage. Various 
strategies for error recovery (including but not limited to 
spell ing/typing correction) are then attempted on tokens 
for which no segmentation could be found. After this, 
edges without segmentations are deleted; if no complete 
path remains, sentence processing is abandoned. Fur- 
ther edges, possibly spanning non-adjacent vertices, are 
added to the lattice by the phrasal equivalence mecha- 
nism mentioned above. Finally, morphological, syntactic 
and semantic stages apply to produce one or more quasi 
logical forms (QLFs). These are checked for adherence 
to sortal (selectional) restrictions, and, possibly with the 
help of user intervention, one is selected for further pro- 
cessing. 
4 Segmentat ion  and  Spe l l ing  Cor rect ion  
English inflectional morphology is sufficiently simple to 
allow CLARE to use a fairly simple affix-stripping ap- 
proach to token segmentation. One major advantage of 
this is that spelling correction can be interleaved irectly 
with it. Root forms in the lexicon are represented in a 
discrimination et for efficient access. When the spelling 
corrector is called to suggest possible corrections for a 
word, the number of simple errors (of deletion, inser- 
tion, substitution and transposition) to assume is given. 
NormM segmentation is just the special case of this with 
the number of errors set to zero. The mechanism non- 
deterministically removes affixes from each end of the 
word, postulating errors if appropriate, and then looks 
up the resulting string in the discrimination et, again 
considering the possibility of error. 
Interleaving correction with segmentation promotes 
efficiency in the following way. As in most other correc- 
tors, only up to two simple errors are considered along 
a given search path. Therefore, either the affix-stripping 
phase or the lookup phase is fairly quick and produces 
a fairly small number of results, and so the two do not 
combine to slow processing down. Another beneficial 
consequence of the interleaving is that no special treat- 
ment is required for the otherwise awkward case where 
errors overlap morpheme boundaries; thus desigend is 
corrected to designed as easily as deisgned or designde 
are. 
If one or more possible corrections to a token are 
found, they are preserved as alternatives for disambigua- 
tion at the later syntactic or semantic stages. The lattice 
representation allows nmltiple-word corrections (involv- 
ing both the insertion and the deletion of spaces) to be 
preserved along with single-word ones. The choice is only 
finally made when a sortally coherent QLF is selected. 
5 An  Eva luat ion  
To assess the usefulness of syntactico-semantic con- 
straints in CLARE's spelling correction, the following ex- 
periment was carried out. Five hundred sentences falling 
within CLARE's current lexical and grammatical cover- 
age were taken at random from the LOB corpus. Al- 
though CLARE's core lexicon is fairly small (1600 root 
forms), it consists of the more frequent words in the lan- 
guage, which tend to be fairly short and therefore have 
many candidate corrections if misspelled. The sentences 
were passed, character by character, through a channel 
which transmitted a character without alteration with 
probability 0.99, and with probability 0.01 introduced 
one of the four kinds of simple error. This process pro- 
duced a total of 102 sentences that differed from their 
originals. The average length was 6.46 words, and there 
were 123 corrupted tokens in all. 
The corrupted sentence set was then processed by 
CLARE with only the spelling correction recovery 
method in force and with no user intervention. Up to 
two simple errors were considered per token. No domain- 
specific or context-dependent knowledge was used. 
Of the 123 corrupted tokens, ten were corrupted into 
other known words, and so no correction was attempted. 
Parsing failed in nine of these cases; in the tenth, the 
corrupted word made as much sense as the original out 
of discourse context. In three further cases, the original 
token was not among the corrections uggested. The 
corrections for two other tokens were not used because 
a corruption into a known word elsewhere in the same 
sentence caused parsing to fail. 
Only one correction (the right one) was suggested for 
59 of the remaining 108 tokens. Multiple-token cor- 
rection, involving the manipulation of space characters, 
took place in 24 of these cases. 
This left 49 tokens for which more than one correction 
was suggested, requiring syntactic and semantic process- 
ing for further disambiguation. The average number of 
corrections uggested for these 49 was 4.57. However, 
only an average of 1.69 candidates (including, because of 
the way the corpus was selected, all the right ones) ap- 
peared  in QLFs satisfying selectional restrictions; thus 
over 80% of the wrong candidates were rejected. Treat- 
ing all candidates as equally likely in the absence of fre- 
quency information, syntactic and semantic processing 
reduced the average ntropy from 1.92 to 0.54, removing 
72% of the uncertainty. Comparisons of parsing times 
showed that a lattice could be parsed many times faster 
than separate alternative strings when the problem to- 
ken is towards the end of the sentence and/or has several 
syntactically plausible candidate corrections. 
The corpus on which the experiment was carried out 
consisted only of sentences of which CLARE could parse 
the uncorrupted versions. However, the figures presented 
here give grounds to believe that false positives - a wrong 
"correction" causing a spurious parse of an unparsable 
original - should be rare. If the replacement of one word 
by another only rarely maps one sentence inside cover- 
age to another, then a corresponding replacement on a 
sentence outside coverage should yield something within 
coverage ven more rarely. 
260
