Zero Pronoun Resolution in a 
Machine Translation System by using 
Japanese to English 
Verbal Semantic Attributes. 
Hiromi Nakaiwa and Satoru Ikehara 
NTT Network Information Systems Laboratories 
1-2356 Take Yokosuka-Shi Kanagawa 238-03 Japan 
Abst rac t  
A method of anaphoral resolution of zero pronouns 
in Japanese language texts using the verbal semantic 
attributes is suggested. This method focuses 
attention on the semantic attributes of verbs and 
examines the context from the relationship between 
the semantic attributes of verbs governing zero 
pronouns and the semantic attributes of verbs 
governing their referents. The semantic attributes of 
verbs are created using 2 different viewpoints: 
dynamic haracteristics of verbs and the relationship 
of verbs to cases. By using this method, it is shown 
that, in the case of translating newspaper a ticles, the 
major portion (93%) of anaphoral resolution of zero 
pronouns necessary for machine translation can be 
achieved by using only linguistic knowledge. 
Factors to be given special attention when 
incorporating this method into a machine translation 
system are examined, together with suggested 
conditions for the detection of zero pronouns and 
methods for their conversion. This study considers 
four factors that are important when implementing 
this method in a Japanese to English machine 
translation system: the difference in conception 
between Japanese and English expressions, the 
difference in case frame patterns between Japanese 
and English, restrictions by voice and restriction by 
translation structure. Implementation of the 
proposed method with due consideration of these 
points leads to a viable method for anaphoral 
resolution of zero pronouns in a practical machine 
translation system. 
1 Introduction 
In all natural anguages, components hat can be easily 
deduced by the reader are frequently omitted f~om expressions 
in texts. In Japanese in particular, the subject and object are 
often omitted. These phenomena cause problems in 
machine translation because components not overtly 
indicated in the source language (i.e. Japanese) become 
mandatory elements in the target language (i.e. English). 
Thus, in Japanese to English Wanslation systems itbecomes 
necessary to identify corresponding case elements omitted 
from the Japanese original (these are referred to as "zero 
pronouns") to be translated into English expressions. 
Therefore, the technique of zero pronoun resolution is an 
extremely important function. 
Several methods have been proposed with regard to this 
problem. Grotz et al proposed the method of resolving 
definite noun phrases by using a centering algorithm. 
Kameyama expanded this concept by introducing property 
sharing constraints and applied it to zero pronoun resolution 
in Japanese. This method relies on the types of 
postpositional particle and whether there are any empathy- 
loaded verbs to exercise control over priority rankings for the 
focus of discourse segments. 
Yoshimoto suggested a method that uses topics from a 
dialogue. This method has focused attention on the 
characteristic of the Japanese language where the case for the 
sentence isdetermined by the type of postpositional particle 
(e.g. "ha" (pronounced "wa"), "ga", "wo" and "hi" indicate 
the theme, subject, direct object and indirect object 
respectively). The method uses case elements accompanied 
by the postpositional particle "ha" and case dements become 
the theme or subject matter through expressions governed by 
a special sentence structure pattern. 
Kuno classified zero pronouns into two categories 
(pseudo-zero, real-zero) and suggested separate resolution 
methods for each category. This method handles pseudo-zero 
pronouns (omitted by across-the-board discourse deletion) 
and real-zero pronouns (topicalized noun phrase or a noun 
phrase existing in a dialogue scene which can become a
referent, somewhat resembling personal pronouns in the 
English language) separately from the point of the referent 
detection method. 
The foregoing methods of anaphoral resolution can be 
divided into two major groupings. One uses comparatively 
superficial information such as the types of postpositional 
particles or the existence / non-existence of interjections. 
The other introduces the concepts of plans and scripts. 
When considering application to machine translation, the 
former leads to problems in the precision of resolutions 
because it is restricted to using specified information. The 
latter needs common knowledge and world models and to 
develop a translation system handling texts over a broad 
field, the volume of knowledge to be prepared beforehand is
so large that this method can be regarded as impossible to 
realize. 
Thus in this paper, attention has been focused on verbal 
semantic attributes. We propose a method of resolving zero 
201
pronouns common in Japanese discourse. The method uses 
the dynamic haracteristics of verbs and the relationship 
between verbs. The rules needed by this method are 
independent of the fields of the source text. Therefore, 
anaphora resolution may be conducted with a relatively 
small volume of knowledge, so the proposed method is very 
suitable for machine translation. 
2 Zero P ronouns  as v iewed f rom Machine 
Trans la t ion  
Zero pronouns are very common in Japanese discourse, but 
the number of zero pronouns that actually require resolution 
varies according to the purpose for which analysis results are 
to be used. For example, the case of a question and answer 
system involving a task such as replying to questions from 
a user who has just read a sentence. The questions, which 
can come from several points of view, must be anticipated, 
and practically all of the zero pronouns in the sentence will 
require resolution. In contrast, in the case of machine 
translation of text, depending on the translation languages, 
zero pronouns requiring resolution tend to limited. This 
paper considers the task of extracting zero pronouns in a 
Japanese to English text machine translation system. We 
first examine the four basic factors important in 
implementing such a system. 
2.1 The difference in conception between 
Japanese and English expressions 
When extracting zero pronouns in machine translation, 
whether the zero pronouns require resolution analysis or not 
needs to be decided. For example, in the sentence. 
(1)X-sha ha 2-gatsu-l-nichi, ha-dodhisuku-shouchi wo 
CompanyX TOP February 1 hard disc device OBJ 
hatsubai-suru. 
place on sale 
"Company X will put on sale the hard disc device from 
February 1." 
asubj aobj tsuki-4OO-dai seisan-suru. 
400 units per month produce 
"They produce 400 units of it per month." 
The second sentence has a structure that is centered 
around the verb "seisan-suru(produce)" and the subject and 
object have become zero pronouns. But to translate the 
sentence into natural English, there is a need to rewrite it 
into a predicate noun sentence ("da" sentence, so called 
because of the original Japanese "Gessan wa 400 dai da") to 
lead 
(2) Gessan ha 400-dai da. 
Monthly production TOP/SUBJ 400 units is 
"Monthly production is 400 units". 
To translate the expression in this form, referential 
analysis of the zero pronouns of the subject and object of the 
verb "produce" is no longer necessary. When translating 
this type of expression, the syntactic/semantic structure of 
the sentence to be translated is first converted into an 
English type structure in the source language (This is makes 
the Japanese-Japanese conversion) in an analysis phase. 
Selection of only zero pronouns whose referent needs to 
resolved becomes possible. 
2.2 The difference in case frame patterns 
between Japanese and English 
There are verbs, the case elements of which are mandatory in
Japanese but optional when translated into English. For 
example, an expression such as, 
(3) X (facility) de Y (animals) wo kau. 
X at Y OBJ keep 
"At Y(facility), X(animals) are being kept." 
in which there is no subject in Japanese, it would be 
possible to translate this by using the expression," X raise 
Y". In cases uch as this, it would be useful to prepare case 
patterns to be used for syntactic analysis for each and every 
translation of English verb form and designate the English 
case structure when analyzing the Japanese. Elements which 
do not become mandatory cases in English will then not be 
mandatory cases in Japanese ither. Thus deciding which 
zero pronouns must be analyzed can be done accurately. 
2.3 Restrictions by Voice 
Elements which have become zero pronouns in Japanese 
will, if the voice can be changed to give natural English, not 
need to be resolved. For example, 
? A sentence originally in the passive voice 
In this case, converting the English expression to passive 
voice will limit the zero pronouns for which the referent 
must be identified. 
? Sentences containing verbs which take the passive voice 
in Japanese become active in English. For example, the 
expression, 
(4)A ga B (document) ni keisai-sareru. 
A OBJ B in publish-PASSIVE 
" A is published in B." 
is the passive expression of "osubj publishes A in B" in 
which the subject has become a zero pronoun. In English, 
however, even though there is no subject in Japanese, it is 
possible to translate this to the expression "A appears in B". 
In cases such as this, case frame patterns must be prepared 
by modifying the English language to be used in syntactic 
analysis. When analyzing the Japanese, it is possible to 
limit the number of zero pronouns which must be resolved 
by limiting mandatory case patterns to those instances that 
are accompanied by passive aspects which are mandatory 
cases in the English case pattern. 
2.4 Restriction by translation structure 
In the expression, 
(5)X-sha ha haadodhisuku-souchi wo hatsubai-suru. 
Company X TOP hard disc device OBJ place on sale 
"X Company will place on sale the hard disc device," 
202
osub sofuto wo OS ni Kumikomu-kow de 
software OBJ OS into incorporate-EMBEDDED by 
setsuzoku-daisuu wo fuyasi-ta 
number of units to be connected OBJ increase-PAST 
"They increased the number of units to be connected by 
incorporating the software into the OS." 
the verbs "incorlxnate" and "increase" have tamed the subject 
into a zero pronoun. The sentence with "Kumikomu- 
koto(incorporate-EMBEDDED)" is structured as an 
"embedded sentence" modifying the action "koto". 
Translated into English, the portion "koto de" becomes the 
methodical case "by incorporating software into the OS" and 
assumes a gerund phrase xpression. That is the embedded 
sentence in Japanese becomes a prepositional phrase 
accompanied by a gerund phrase. Because different sentence 
structures are generated between Japanese and English, zero 
pronouns need to be extracted by converting the Japanese 
original to an English like syntactic/semantic structure. 
In a Japanese to English machine translation system, it 
is important to classify zero pronouns with due 
consideration of the factors outlined above. 
3. Appearance  o f  Zero  P ronouns  in 
Newspaper  Ar t i c les  
With due consideration of the conditions as presented in 
Chapter 2, we examine where troublesome zero pronouns 
and their referents appear in newspaper articles. Newspaper 
articles generally tend to use compressed forms of 
expressions. Thus, declinable words are frequently turned 
into nouns by compressing the declinable suffixes. Thus, 
more often than not, it is impossible to determine the zero 
pronoun's referent merely by relying on postpositional 
particle information, themes or the types of empathy-loaded 
verbs. For example, 
(6) NTT ha 
1WIq" TOP 
"NTr will 
shingata-koukanki wo dounyuu-sita. 
new model switchboard OBJ introduce 
introduce a new model switchboard." 
esubj fiko-shindan-kinou wo wusai, 
self checking function OBJ equip 
"The new model switchboard is equip with self checking 
function and" 
esubj 200-shisutemu wo secchi-suru yotei-da. 
200 systems OBJ install be-planning-to 
"NTI" is planning to install 200 systems." 
In the first sentence, the subject is topicalized, but in the 
second sentence, the subject of the first portion of the 
sentence and the subject of the latter portion of the sentence 
are zero pronouns. Of the two zero pronouns, in the former 
case, the "shingata-koukanki"(new model switchboard), 
which is the object of the former sentence, and in the latter 
case, "NTT", which is the subject of the former sentence 
become the referents. Thus, when there are elements which 
have been topicalized, and there are no other elements that 
can be topicalized, it cannot be taken for granted that 
topicalized elements will become the resolution elements for 
zero pronouns. Under such circumstances, there is a need for 
information other than whether the element has been 
topicalized or not, such as further semantic restrictions. 
The lead paragraphs in 29 newspaper articles, totaling 
102 sentences in all, were examined for zero pronouns and 
their referents, and the results are shown in Table 1. There 
were 88 cases of zero pronouns. According to this study, 
the case where elements topicalized by the postpositional 
particle "ha" in the first sentence became the referents of zero 
pronouns when being made the subject in the second 
sentence, was most common, with 45 instances (51%). 
Furthermore, zero pronouns having referents in the first 
sentence, totalled 76 instances (86%). With newspaper 
articles, the fast sentence contains information that gives an 
outline of the entire article and thus the case element tends 
to become the referent. There were 67 instances (74%) of 
zero pronoun referents in the second and following sentences 
being used by the first sentence amounted to 67 
instances(74%) which strongly suggests the importance of 
the first sentence. 
ent/~earl~ 
tlon* 
1st SUBJ 
sent- OBJ 
ence  
2nd SUBJ 
Sentenoe OBJ 
and after ! ETC. 
Sub Total \[Cases\] 
1 s t sentence 
Ha Ga Wo Etc. 
6 0 1 0 
0 0 1 0 
0 0 0 0 
145 4 12 1 
0 0 6 0 
0 0 0 0 
76 
2rid sentence 
and thereafter. 
WithinSameSentenc~ 
Ha Ga Wo Etc. 
7 0 0 1 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
8 
2nd sentence and Non 
thereafter, in the Sub 
Not h theSameSmtence S nt- Total 
Ha Ga Wo Etc. ence \[Cases\] 
1 
0 9 
0 
0 0 0 0 3 
0 0 0 0 0 79 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 4 88 
Table 1 Frequency of Appearance of Zero Pronouns and Their Referents 
(Source of Sample Sentences: Nikkei Sangyo Newspaper, Information column,lead paragraphs during February, 
1988.29 articles (102 sentences) 2-8 sentences per article. 
Of the newspaper a ticles tested, the number of sentences with zero pronoun(s) contained was 56 out of 102.) 
* "Ha"(pronounced "Wa"),"Ga","Wo", which are postpositional particles in Japanese,respectively indicating the 
theme, subject, direct object. 
203
Moreover, there were 12 instances (14%) where the 
referent was neither the theme nor the subject; the zero 
pronoun is the subject. From this, it can be observed that 
it would be inappropriate o rely solely on the technique of 
selecting the referent from case elements that have been 
topicalized or of determining the order of priorities for 
resolution elements from the type of postpositional particle. 
These 12 instances were studied further and found to contain 
verbs that included the referent. Such verbs were 
"hatsubaisuru" (sell), "kaisetsusuru" (establish), 
"kaihatsusuru" (develop) and other such words intended to 
introduce new object elements. Verbs for zero pronouns tend 
to be a noun predicate as in "LAN da" (That is LAN) -- \[In 
English, it would correspond to the expression, "o be 
<noun>"\] or, to words such as "belong to" indicating 
attributes. To resolve this type of zero pronoun, it would 
appear essential that verb attributes be categorized and the 
zero pronoun referent be determined from the relationships of
verbal semantic attributes. 
4 C lass i f icat ion of  Verbal  Semant ic  
Attributes 
As mentioned in the preceding chapter, the resolution of 
certain types of zero pronouns that could not be dealt with 
by conventional methods, may now be resolved by using 
semantic information. Therefore, in this chapter, the verbal 
semantic attributes will be categorized for the purpose of 
resolving zero pronouns using only linguistic knowledge 
(i.e. not world knowledge), The referent of zero pronouns 
will be determined by the relationship between attributes. 
Japanese verbs will be categorized using the following 2 
viewpoints. 
Verb Categorization Standards 
? Dynamic Characteristics of Verbs 
Categorization based on the inherent concepts of verbs 
and the reaction brought about o discourse situation by 
the verbs 
Ex. "motsu"(to have) --- Possession 
"kaihatsusuru"(to develop) --- Production 
? Relationship of Verbs to Cases 
Ex."kanseisuru":SUBJ becompleted->SUBJ be produced 
"kaihatsusuru":SUBJ develop OBJ->SUBJ produce OBJ 
The conceptual system of verbs as categorized by these 
standards i shown in Figure 1. 
Next, we consider the relationship between verbs, by 
examining the information regarding the relationships 
within sentences containing zero pronouns and assess 
whether this information will be furnished anew to sentences 
containing the referent. The verbal semantic attribute (VSA) 
between verbs governing the referent and the verb governing 
the zero pronoun can be summarized in the form shown in 
Table 2. The use of this relationship will make it possible 
to make an assumption of verbal relationship and to 
determine the referential e ements of zero pronouns based on 
the relationship of the two factors of verbal semantic 
attributes. 
As mention,ed in Chapter 3, the first sentence of the lead 
paragraph in a newspaper article often consists of a 
discourse structure that presents an outline of the contents of 
the entire article. Here, we shall refer to a unit sentence of 
this type as a "topicalized unit sentence", and based on its 
semantic attributes, the referents of zero pronouns in 
sentences that follow will be selected. 
By relying on the categorization of verbal semantic 
attributes, and observing the rules for determining the 
referential elements of zero pronouns as described by its 
attribute value, we find that it is possible to describe multi- 
purpose anaphora resolution analysis rules which do not rely 
on the target domain of the analysis. Thus because, the 
information that is required for analysis is contained within 
the scope of linguistic knowledge, anaphora resolution el 
zero pronouns using this method can be applied to machine 
translation. 
EVENT 
i - - '1SUBJ  exist 
2 SUBJ not  ex is t  EX lStance / 
ATTRibute 
ABSTract 
i RELat ion  POSSession 
--STATE ~ RELat ion 
PERCEPtual STate 
MENTal 
STate EMOTive STate 
NATURe THINKing STate 
I ' -1 from SUBJ to 01 
-Phys ica l  TRANSfer ~ SUBJ TRANS 0BJ 
POSSessive r -  1 SUBJ accepted 
-- PHYSical - - TRANSfer - -  2 SUBJ provides OBJ2 
ACTion ATTRibute 
- TRANSfer . . . . . . . .  
- -ACTion 
"--BODily TRANSfer . . . . . . . .  
- -  RESULT . . . . . . . .  
BODily ACTion 
- USE 
-CONNECTive ACTion ........ 
- PRODuction F ~ SUB2 produced SUBJ produce OBJ 
-Menta l  TRANSfer . . . . . . . .  
MENTal "-\]-- PERCEPtual ACTion - -  ACTion . . . . . . . .  
/ 
BECOME \[--EMOTive ACTion 
CAUSE t - 'TH INK ing  AcTion 
ENABLE 
STArt END 
\[--~ s tar t  
end 
Figure 1 System of Verbal Semantic Attributes 
Conditions for 
z~ropronouns 
VSA case 
POSS Subject 
I'HINK-ACT Subject 
Conditions 
for referents 
VSA 
I ss- sl 
& START 
POSS-TRANS 1 
& START 
Verbal Assumed 
{elationship referents 
Detailed Object 
explanation 
Policy Subject 
decision 
? . . . . . . . .  , . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . .  .= . . . . . . . .  ? . . . . . . . .  
Table 2 Rules for Determining Resolution Elements 
by Verbal Semantic Categories 
204
5 Format of Anaphorai  Resolution 
5.1 Algorithm 
The structure of the system for resolution of zero pronouns 
using verbal semantic attributes i  shown in Figure 2. The 
Japanese sentence to be analyzed has already undergone 
morphological nalysis, syntactic/semantic analysis, and the 
results are input to context analysis. In context analysis, 
anaphora resolution of zero pronouns is conducted as 
follows. 
(Step 1) --Detection of zero pronouns. 
If they exist, examine whether there are referents 
within the same sentence. 
If they exist, and resolution is concluded, proceed 
to Stcp 4 
Resolution of referents within the same sentence relies on 
two types of methods. 
1) Anaphoral resolution of zero pronouns based on the type 
of conjunction 
2) Anaphoral resolution based on 
verbal semantic attributes 
The f irst method uses 
constraints where anaphoral  
elements determine the syntactic 
structure depending on the type of 
postpositional particle and of 
conjunctions. A portion of the 
rules for determining anaphoral 
elements depending on the type of 
conjunctions is shown in Table3. "to'(when) 
The second method is when, within 
the same sentence, anaphoral 
elements cannot be determined 
based on conjunctions (for example, 
when three or more types of unit 
sentences exist within the same 
sentence), anaphoral resolution is 
then conducted using VSA. 
(Step 2)--When they do not exist 
within the same 
sentence,referent candidates are selected from 
among the case elements of topicalized unit 
sentences that are retained within the contextual 
information stage sector, The standard for 
selection will be based on the relationship 
between VSA of verbs governed by zero pronouns 
and VSA of topicalized unit sentences and on the 
rules for designating verbs given in Table 2. 
When constraints by verbs are satisfied, anaphoral 
relationships become valid and proceed to Step 4. 
(Step 3)--When the referent cannot be detected, handle as 
"processing impossible". 
Based on the semantic restrictions imposed on the 
zero pronoun by the verbs, conjecture anaphoral 
elements. 
(Step 4)--From the knowledge base for sentence structure 
control, use the rules for extraction of topicalized 
unit sentences determined by relying on the 
sentence structure of target field of analysis 1 to 
select the topicalized unit sentence and have the 
context information retaining sector retain the 
sentence. 
Proceed to the next sentence. 
Sentence Structure Control \] \] 
I(no,ledge base I I 
Rule~o~%a~r~ez'i?in' ~ \[ I 
Verbal Semantic Information 
? Knowledge Base 
Verbal Semantic 
Feature Syatea 
Rules for Determining L 
Verbal Relationships \[. 
Japanese Sentence Analysis Routine 
\[ Morphological Analysis \[ 
I 
Syntactic Analysis \[ 
I 
Semantic Analysis I 
Context Analysis 
Contextual \[nfornation \] 
Storage Sector 
/ 
Zero Pronoun ~ Zero Pronoun 
? q Resolution Sector I IDetection Secfor 
ExamplenfConnecting Words 
of Zero Pronouns 
kar a "(bec ause )~ "s h i " (and )
, "ba"(if..then..) 
Figure 2 Structure of This System 
"tsutsu " (wh i le  ) ,*  * 
"nagara'(while)** 
Con s train ttotheCaseMarker 
"ha"(FOP/SUBJ) 
Connection with Referents* 
sub sent. ->main sent. 
"tame"(so tnat) "ha"(TOP/SUBJ) sub sent.<-->main sent. 
"mama"(wile) "ha"(TOPISUBJ), "ga"(SUBJ', sub sent. -> main sent. 
"tari"(and),"te"(after) "ha"(TOP/SUBJ),"ga"(SUBJ) sub sent.<-->main sent. 
"ha"(TOPISUBJ), "wo"(OBJ) sub sent. -> main sent. 
sub sent.<-->main sent. "ha"(FOP/SUBJ), "ga"(SUBJ) 
"wo"(OSJ) 
Table 3 Constraints to Zero Pronouns and their referent with Connecting Words 
* The arrows go from the sentence which include referents to the sentence including the 
zero pronouns capable of correspondence. 
** In the ease of "tsutsu" and "nagara", the "we" case will become the target of referents 
only when its connection is "CONTRARY-AFFIRMATIVE"(This type of connection is 
translated as "although" in our system) 
5.2 Examples 
Using the example sentence (6) and using the technique 
mentioned here, an example of zero pronoun resolution is 
given in (7). 
(7) N /T  ha shingata-koukanki we dounyuu-sita. 
NIT  TOP new model switchboard OBJ introduce 
"NTr will introduce a new model switchboard." 
Tooicalized Unit Sentence: 
(introduce (VSA (POSS-TRANS2 & START)) 
(SUBJ "NTI")(OBJ "new model switchboard")) 
1In the case of newspaper articles, the first sentence in the 
article becomes the topicalized unit sentence. When the first 
sentence consists of a number of unit sentences, et an order of 
priority for the topicalized unit sentence depending on the type 
of conjunction used. Specifically, in the case of compound 
sentences, rules such as the main sentence taking precedence 
will be applied 
205
~subj jiko-shindan-kinou wo wusai, 
self checking function OBJ equip 
"The new model switchboard is equipped with a self 
checking function and" 
(equip (VSA (POSS)) 
(SUBJ eSUBJ) (OBJ "self checking function")) 
~SUBJ= "new model switchboard" 
~subj 200-shisutemu wo secchi-suru yotei-da. 
200 systems OBJ install be-planning-to 
"NTT is planning to install 200 systems." 
(be-planing-to (VSA (THINK-ACT)) 
(SUBJ eSUBJ) (OBJ .... )) 
eSUBJ = "N'I'r" 
ToDicalized Unit Sentence: 
(introduce (VSA (POSS-TRANS2 & START)) 
(SUBJ "NTT")(OBJ "new model switchboard")) 
The results of analyzing the first sentence are used to 
extract he topicalized unit sentence. In example (7), the 
first sentence is structured from the unit sentence and the 
result of analysis is stored in the context information storage 
sector as the topicalized unit sentence. Next, from the 
analysis results of the second sentence, it can be understood 
that the subjects of "tousaisuru (is outfitted with or equipped 
with)" and "yoteida (is planning to)" have been converted to 
zero pronouns. Since there are no referents within the same 
sentence, the case element within the topicalized unit 
sentence becomes the referent candidate. The VSA of 
"tousaisuru" and "yoteida" are respectively, "POSS", 
"THINK-ACT", and the VSA of topicalized unit sentence 
verb are "POSS-TRANS2" and "START". Thus, according 
to the rules given in Table 2, "Detailed explanation" and 
"Policy decision" are established as the verbal semantic 
relationships and the object and subject of the topicalized 
unit sentence respectively, and become the referents. 
6 Implementation in a Machine Translation 
System 
The following is an outline of the processing undertaken by 
the Japanese to English machine translation system, ALT- 
J/E (See Figure 3). First, a morphological nalysis of the 
input Japanese sentence is conducted, followed by a 
dependency analysis of elements in the sentence. Unit 
sentences 2 are extracted based on results of the relationships 
between verbs, and from these a simple unit sentence 3 is 
extracted. Subjective expression information such as 
2a unit sentence is a part of the sentence in which the tree 
structure is centered around one predicate in the sentence; there 
are occasions when embedded sentences are included in a unit 
sentence. 
3a simple unit sentence is one where a unit sentence has been 
parsed to the level where it has only one predicate.. 
(Ex.(in English) 
"This is the only paper that contains the news" <- unit sentence 
"This is the only paper", "the only paper contains the news" 
<- simple unit sentences ) 
modality, tense and aspect is extracted from the simple unit 
sentence to yield the objective simple unit sentence. This 
objective simple unit sentence, as shown in Figure 4, is 
collated with two types of pattern dictionaries having 
predicates as index words (the idiomatic expression transfer 
dictionary and the semantic valentz pattern transfer 
dictionary). When there is no appropriate pattern, a general 
pattern transfer rule is applied. This determines the syntactic 
and semantic structure pattern that is used in Japanese to 
English conversion. In the cases of (3) and (4) in Chapter 2, 
(1) Morphological analysis: 
Separation of words, determination f words part of speech 
(2) Dependency analysis: 
-Determination f relations between sentence lements 
(3) J-J conversion: 
-Conversion of expressions within Japanese 
(4) Simple sentence xtraction: 
-Determining the scope of influence of all predicates from 
dependency analysis results 
(5) Simple sentence analysis: 
(5.1) Predicate analysis: 
-Extraction of modality and other elements 
and conversion to an ordinary sentence 
(5.2) Gerund phrase analysis: 
-Determination of semantic structure of gerund phrases 
and compound words 
(6) Embedded sentence analysis: 
-Determination of the semantic structure of embedded 
sentences 
(7) Ordinary sentence conversion to English: 
-Conversion of objective xpression by means of pattern 
dictionary 
(8) Connection analysis: 
-Determination of relations between declinable words 
(9) Optimal result selection: 
-The best(semantically and syntactically most plausible) 
interpretation is selected 
(10) Zero anaphora resolution: 
-Resolution of zero anaphora by use of contextual 
information 
(11) Resolved element conversion: 
-Determination of the conversion method for resolved zero 
anaphora 
(12) Unit sentence generation: 
(12.1) Basic structure generation: 
-Determination of the structure of the entire English 
sentence 
(12.2) Adverbial phrase generation: 
-Determination f adverbial phrase translation from 
modality, tense, verb and other elements 
02.3) Noun phrase generation: 
-Conversion of phrase and compound word structures 
and embedding ofembedded sentences 
(13) Connecting structure generation: 
-connection of the unit sentences according to connection 
attributes and the presence or absence of a subject 
(14) Modality tense structure generation: 
-Insertion of auxiliary verbs and infinitives, 
transformation of word model / syntactic structure 
(15) English sentence coordination: 
-Contraction, setting of determiner 
Figure 3 Process Outline of Japanese-English 
Machine Translation System, ALT-J/E 
206
\[Example of Idiomatic Expressions\] 
(1) Example of idiomatic phrase pattern 
X(Subject) ha se ga takai => X be tall 
X TOP back SUB high 
(2) Example of functional verb combination 
X (subject) ha Y(subject) no h/nan wo abiru 
X TOP Y by criticism OBJ be-subjected-to 
" X (subject) is subjected to criticism by Y" 
( -> X is criticized by Y) I Conversion within 
( -> Y criticizes X + passive) IJapanese language 
( => Y claim X (+passive) IApplication of Japanese to 
I English conversion pattern 
=> X be claimed by Y. I Transformation f English 
\[Example of Semantic Combined Value Pattern\] 
X (subject) ga Y (cultural, human activity) wo anki-suru. 
X SUBJ Y OBJ memorize 
=> Xleam Y by heart. 
"X(subject) memorizes Y (cultural, human activity)~" 
X (facility) de Y (animals) wo kau. 
X at Y OBJ be-kept 
"Y (animals) are kept at X (facility). " 
X (subject) ga Y (food) wo taberu. 
X(subjec 0 SUBJ Y OBJ eats 
"X (subject) eats Y (food) ." 
Ex. Y =<niwatori> => 
(1) bird ...... hen 
(2) food ... chicken 
Figure 4 
=> X raise Y 
=> X eat Y 
Y = chicken 
Example of Application of Japanese-English 
Conversion Pattern Dictionary 
~Relerent appearnce 
x 
-~ location 1 s t sentence 
Zero Pronouns \~ \ 
appearnce location "- Ha 
6 
SUBJ / 
1st 6 
Sentence 
OBJ 0 
Ga Wo 
o 
0 / 
1 
1 
0 / 
1 
0 0 ETC. 0 
Etc. Ha Ga 
0 . . . .  
0 -- 
0 - -  
they are not identified during processing as cases of zero 
pronouns. If numerous interpretations remain at this point, 
a single and final interpretation is decided on, based on the 
results of interpretation of the pattern at the objective simple 
unit sentence level. Also, as seen in (1) and (7) of Chapter 
2, when there is a wide difference between the structures in 
Japanese and English, converting the Japanese structure 
resulting from analysis to a structure as close as possible to 
the English expression can make it possible to avoid 
referential analysis; only the zero pronouns that are used in 
the English translation need to be treated. If, after the 
foregoing analysis, zero pronouns still remain, anaphora 
resolution using the context is conducted as shown in 
Chapter 5. At this stage, the sentence pattern used in 
generating the unit sentence is established and all that 
remains is to use this to generate the backbone xpression in 
English, adding other relevant information such as modality, 
tense and conjunction. In doing so, care should be taken to 
avoid the situation where extracting zero pronouns after 
correspondence analysis results in verbose English. In this 
case elliptical pronouns and definite articles should be used. 
7.  Eva luat ion  
The 102 sentences from 29 newspaper articles' lead 
paragraphs, as introduced in Chapter 3, were used as target 
sentences; the results of  processing zero pronouns, 
appearances, and rate of resolution in analysis, are shown in 
Table 4. The rate of success in anaphoral resolution by this 
method including zero pronouns outside the scope of target 
processing (referent not appearing within the tex0 was about 
2nd sentence 2rid sentence and 
and thereafter thereafter. Not in the 
Within same sentence same sentence 
Wo Etc Ha Ga Wo Etc. 
None 
in the Sub 
Sentence Total 
Cases 
0 
/ 
1 
7 
0 / 
9 
\[78% 
0 
~4.5 
2nd SUBJ / 
45 
Sentence 
OBJ 0 
and 
after ETC. 0 
|H|||EHEEE 
I/EEEEEEEE 
mmmmmmmmNp 
0 / 
3 
0 0 
0 0 
75 
/ 
79 
\[95% 
Sub Total \[Cases\] 
74 8 O $2 
/ / 0 / / 
76 8 4 88 
\[97%\] \[100%\] \[0%\] 93% 
Table 4 The Frequency of Successful Resolution of Zero Pronouns by This Method 
* With the fractions in the above table, the denominator denotes the number of cases of zero pronouns occurrence, 
and the numerator the number of cases of zero pronouns ucceeding in resolution. 
207
93%. The rate exclusive of the zero pronouns outside the 
scope of target processing was as high as 98%. 
Examples of failure in anaphoral resolution are shown 
below. They fall into 2 types, those where world knowledge 
is necessary (a), and those where the referent appears in the 
sentence so that analysis is possible by converting the 
sentence structure in JoJ conversion (b,c). In (b), however, a
rule for anaphoral resolution that handles it as a different 
sentence within the same sentence is necessary. In (c), the 
sentence structure of the topicalized unit sentence needs to be 
changed to "---ha ---sisutemu wo hanbaishi-hajimeru."( --- 
will begin selling the --- system) thus changing the case of 
"--- sisutemu no"(of the --- system). 
? Examoles of suoolement orocessin2 failures 
:(Total 6 cases) 
(a) Those requiring worldwide knowledge (common sense) 
. . . .  4 cases 
e.g. 
(9) asubj ofukon ni natte, --- 
the office computer IND-OBJ becoming 
"(the mainstream product type) 
becoming the office computer, ---" 
(esubj =the mainstream product ype) 
(10) A-sha ga matome-ta 
Company A SUBJ gather-PAST 
densen-toukei ................ niyoruto, 
data wire and cable statistics according to 
"According to data wire and cable statistics gathered by 
Company A, " 
asubj kouchou wo tsuzuke-teiru. 
prosper OBJ continue to 
"(the wire and cable industry) continues to prosper" 
(asubj =the wire and cable industry) 
(b) The case element of "wo" case within the same sentence 
becomes the referent of "ga" case of zero pronouns 
residual B.- .. . . . . . . .  1 case 
e.g. 
(11) A-sha ha B-eigyousho wo shinsetsu, 
company A TOP Sales Office B OBJ open newly 
"Company A will open its new sales office B and" 
asubj 2-gatsu-l-nichi kara .. eigyou wo hajimeru 
February 1 from sales activities OJB begin 
"(Sales Office B) begin sales activities from February 1." 
(esubj =Sales Office B) 
(c) A noun modifying another noun by "no" turns it into a 
supplement candidate. 1 case 
e.g. 
(12)--- ha ---sisutemu no hanbai wo hajimeru. 
TOP system of sales OBJ begin 
"--- will begin sales of --- system" 
asubj ha --- no-mono 
TOP belongs to 
"(the --- system) belongs to ---" 
(asubj = the --- system) 
8. Summary 
This paper has suggested a powerful method for anaphoral 
resolution using VSA to deal with the zero pronouns 
appearing in Japanese texts. With previously suggested 
methods, it was difficult to realize pronominal resolution of 
zero pronouns in a practical translation system due to the 
huge volume of knowledge necessary (common sense and 
world knowledge). In contrast, he proposed method, which 
utilizes semantic attributes of categorized verbs, makes it 
unnecessary todescribe rules unique to various fields. With 
a comparatively imited volume of knowledge, it is thus 
possible to anaphorically resolve zero pronouns. This 
method has been realized in the machine translation system 
ALT-J/E. ALT-J\]E was assessed by processing common 
Japanese newspaper articles. It was found that 93% of the 
Japanese zero pronouns requiring anaphoral resolution had 
their referents determined correctly. 
One possible application of this method in context 
processing would be to generate an abridged text based on a 
structural analysis of sentences in the entire article and 
categorization of contents of the articles focusing on the 
VSA of the fwst sentence in each text. 
In this report, the target sentences were limited to 
newspaper article lead paragraphs and comparatively short 
sentences. In the future, studies need to be made on changes 
in topic and sentences with a complicated iscourse 
structure. 
References 
Susumu Kuno. Danwa no Bunpoo (Grammar of Discourse), 
Taishukan Publ. Co.,Tokyo, 1978. 
Susumu Kuno. Identification of Zero-Pronominal Reference 
in Japanese. In ATR Symposium on Basic Research for 
Telephone Interpretation, 1989. 
Barbara J.Grosz, Aravind K.Joshi, and Scott Weinstein.. 
Providing a unified account of definite noun phrases in 
discourse. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 1983. 
Megumi Kameyama "A property-sharing constraint in 
centering." In Proceedings.of the 24th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1986. 
Marilyn Walker, Masayo Iida, and Sharon Cote. Centering 
in Japanese Discourse." In COLING'90, 1990. 
Kei Yoshimoto. "Identifying zero pronouns in japanese 
dialogue." In COLING'88, 1988. 
Satoru Ikehara, Satoshi Shirai, Akio Yokoo, and Hiromi 
Nakaiwa. Toward an MT System without Pre-Editing -
Effects of New Methods in ALT-J/E." In Proceedings of MT 
Summit-lll, 1990. 
Satoru Ikehara, Masahiro Miyazaki, Satoshi Shirai, and 
Akio Yokoo. "An approach to machine translation method 
based on constructive process theory. In Review of ECL, 
Vol.37, No.I, 1989 
Hiromi Nakaiwa. Case element completion in Japanese 
texts. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Conference of JSA1, 
1989. 
208
