Robust Processing of Real-World Natural-Language Texts 
J e r ry  R .  Hobbs ,  Doug las  E .  Appe l t ,  J ohn  Bear ,  and  Mabry  Tyson  
Art i f ic ia l  In te l l igence Center  
SR, I In ternat iona l  
Abst rac t  
I1. is often assumed that when natural anguage 
processing meets the real world, the ideal of 
aiming for complete and correct interpretations 
has to be abandoned. However, our experience 
with TACITUS; especially in the MUC-3 eval- 
uation, has shown that. principled techniques 
fox' syntactic and pragmatic analysis can be 
bolstered with methods for achieving robust- 
ness. We describe three techniques for mak- 
ing syntactic analysis more robust--an agenda- 
based scheduling parser, a recovery technique 
for failed parses, and a new technique called ter- 
minal substring parsing. For pragmatics pro- 
cessing, we describe how the method of ab- 
ductive inference is inherently robust, in that 
an interpretation is always possible, so that in 
the absence of the required world knowledge, 
performance degrades gracefully. Each of these 
techlfiques have been evaluated and the results 
of the evaluations are presented. 
1 In t roduct ion  
If automatic text processing is to be a useful enterprise, 
it. must be demonstrated that the completeness and ac- 
curacy of the information extracted is adequate for the 
application one has in nfind. While it is clear that cer- 
tain applications require only a minimal level of com- 
petence from a system, it is also true that many appli- 
cationsrequire a very high degree of completeness and 
a.ccuracy in text processing, and an increase in capability 
in either area is a clear advantage. Therefore we adopt 
an extremely lfigh standard against which the perfor- 
mance of a text processing system should be measured: 
it. should recover all information that is implicitly or ex- 
plicitly present in the text, and it should do so without 
making mistakes. 
Tiffs standard is far beyond the state of the art. It is 
an impossibly high standard for human beings, let alne 
machines. However, progress toward adequate text pro- 
cessing is best. served by setting ambitious goals. For this 
reason we believe that, while it may be necessary in the 
intermediate term to settle for results that are far short 
of this ultimate goal, any linguistic theory or system 
architecture that is adopted should not be demonstra- 
bly inconsistent with attaining this objective. However, 
if one is interested, as we are, in the potentially suc- 
cessful application of these intermediate-term systems 
to real problems, it is impossible to ignore the question 
of whether they can be made efficient enough and robust 
enough for application. 
1.1 The  TACITUS System 
The TACITUS text processing system has been under 
development at SRI International for the last six years. 
This system has been designed as a first step toward 
the realization of a system with very high completeness 
and accuracy in its ability to extract information from 
text. The general philosophy underlying the design oI 
this system is that the system, to the maximum extent 
possible, should not discard any information that might 
be semantically or pragmatically relevant o a full, cor- 
rect interpretation. The effect of this design philosophy 
on the system architecture is manifested in the following 
characteristics: 
* TACITUS relies on a large, comprehensive l xicon 
containing detailed syntactic subcategorization i - 
formation for each lexieal item. 
. TACITUS produces a parse and semantic interpre- 
tation of each sentence using a comprehensive gram- 
mar of English in which different possible predicate- 
argument relations are associated with different syn- 
tactic structures. 
? TACITUS relies on a general abductive reasoning 
meclmnism to uncover the implicit assumptions nec- 
essary to explain the coherence of the explicit text. 
These basic design decisions do not by themselves 
distinguish TACITUS from a number of other natural- 
language processing systems. However, they are some- 
what controversial given the intermediate goal of pro- 
ducing systems that are useful for existing applications 
Criticism of the overall design with respect to this goal 
centers on the following observations: 
? The syntactic structure of English is very complex 
and no grammar of English has been constructed 
that has complete coverage of the syntax one en- 
counters in real-world texts. Much of the text thai 
needs to be processed will lie outside the scope ol 
the best grammars available, and therefore canno! 
be understood by a. system that relies on a complet( 
186
syntactic analysis of each sentence as a prerequisite 
to other processing. 
? Typical sentences in newspaper articles are about 
25-30 words in length. Many sentences are much 
longer. Processing strategies that rely on producing 
a complete syntactic analysis of such sentences will 
be faced with a combinatorially intractable task, as- 
suming in the first place that the sentences lie within 
the language described by the grammar. 
? Any grammar that successfully accounts for the 
range of syntactic structures encountered in real- 
world texts will necessarily produce many alnbigt> 
ous analyses of most sentences. Assuming that the 
system can find the possible analyses of a sentence 
in a reasonable period of time, it is still faced with 
the problem of choosing the correct one from the 
many competing ones. 
Designers of application-oriented text processing sys- 
tems have adopted a number of strategies for (lea.l- 
ing with these problems. Such strategies involve de- 
emphasizing the role of syntactic analysis (Jacobs et al, 
1991), producing partial parses with stochastic or heuris- 
tic parsers (de Marcken, 1990; Weischedel et al1991) or 
resorting to weaker syntactic processing methods uch as 
conceptual or case-frame based parsing (e.g., Schank and 
Riesbeck, 1981) or template matching techniques (Jack- 
son et M., 1991). A common feature shared by these 
weaker methods is that they ignore certain information 
that is present in the text, which could be extracted by 
a more comprehensive analysis. The information that 
is ignored may be irrelevant o a particular application, 
or relevant in only an insignificant handful of cases, and 
thus we cannot argue that approaches to text process- 
ing based on weak or even nonexistent syntactic and se- 
mantic analysis are doomed to failure in all cases and 
are not worthy of further investigation. However, it is 
not obvious how such methods can scale up to handle 
fine distinctions in attachment, scoping, and inference, 
although some recent attempts have been made in this 
direction (Cardie and Lehnert, 1991b). 
In the development of TACITUS, we have chosen a 
design philosophy that assumes that a complete and ac- 
curate analysis of the text is being undertaken. In this 
paper we discuss how issues of robustness are approached 
from this general design perspective. In particular, we 
demonstrate that 
? useful partial analyses of the text can be obtained in 
cases in which the text is not grammatical English, 
or lies outside the scope of the grammar's coverage, 
? substantially correct parses of sentences can be 
found without exploring the entire search space for 
each sentence, 
? useful pragmatic interpretations can be obtained 
using general reasoning methods, even in cases in 
which the system lacks the necessary world knowl- 
edge to resolve all of the pragmatic problems posed 
in a sentence, and 
? all of this processing can be done within acceptable 
bounds on computational resources. 
Our experience with TACITUS suggests that exten- 
sion of the system's capabilities to higher levels of com- 
pleteness and accuracy can be achieved through incre- 
mental modifications of the system's knowledge, lexicon 
and grammar, while the robust processing techniques 
discussed in the following sections make the system us- 
able for intermediate term applications. We have eva.lu- 
ated the success of the various techniques discussed here, 
and conclude fi'om this eva.hlation that TAC1TUS offers 
substantiatioll of our claim that a text. processing system 
based on principles of complete syntactic, semantic and 
pragmatic analysis need not. be too brittle or computa- 
tionally expensive for practical applications. 
1.2 Eva luat ing  the  System 
SRI International participated in the recent M UC,-3 eval- 
uation of text-understanding systems (Sundheim, 1991). 
The methodolpgy chosen for this evaluation was to score 
a system's ability to fill in slots in tenlplates ,nnmariz- 
ing the content of short (approximately 1 page) newspa- 
per articles on Latin American terrorism. The template- 
filling task required identifying, among other things, the 
perpetrators and victims of each terrorist act described 
in the articles, the occupation of the victims, the typ~ 
of physical entity attacked or destroyed, the date, tile 
location, and the effect on the targets. Frequently, arti- 
cles described multiple incidents, while other texts were 
completely irrelevant. 
A set of 1,300 such newspaper articles was selected on 
the basis of the presence of keywords in the text, and 
given to participants as training data. Several hundred 
texts from the corpus were withheld for various phases 
of testing. Participants were scored on their ability to 
fill the templates correctly. Recall and precision mea- 
sures were computed as an objective performance evalu- 
ation metric. Variations in computing these metrics are 
possible, but intuitively understood, recall measures the 
percentage of correct fills a system finds (ignoring wrong 
and spurious answers), and precision measures the per- 
centage of correct fills provided out of the total number 
of answers posited. Thus, recall measures the complete- 
ness of a system's ability to extract information from a 
text, while precision measures it's accuracy. 
The TACITUS system achieved a recall of 44% with a 
precision of 65% on templates for events correctly iden- 
tiffed, and a recall of 25% with a precision of 48% on 
all templates, including spurious templates the system 
generated. Our precision was the highest among the 
participating sites; our recall was somewhere in tile mid- 
dle. Although pleased with these overall results, a sub- 
sequent detailed analysis of our performance on the first 
20 messages of the 100-message t st set is much more 
illuminating for evaluating the success of the particu- 
lax robust processing strategies we have chosen. In the 
remainder of this paper, we discuss the impact of the 
robust processing methods in the Tight of this detailed 
analysis. 
2 Syntact i c  Ana lys i s  
Robust syntactic analysis requires a very large gram- 
mar and means for dealing with sentences that do not 
187
parse, whether because they fall outside the coverage 
of the grammar or because they are too long for the 
parser. The gral-nnaar used in TACITUS is that of the 
I)IAI~OCIC system, deweloped in 1980-81 essentially by 
constructing the union of the Linguistic String Project 
G'ranmmr (Sager, 1981) and tile DIAGP~AM grammar 
(Robinson, 1982) which grew out of SRI's Speech Un- 
&:rst.anding System research in the 1970s. Since that 
t.imc il. has been consid~'l'ably enhanced. It consists of 
about 160 phrase structure rules. Associated with each 
rule is a "constructor" expressing the constraints on the 
applicability of that rule, and a "translator" for produc- 
ing the logical form. 
The grannnar is comprehensive and includes subcat- 
egorization, sentential complements, adverbials, relative 
clauses, complex determiners, the most common vari- 
eties of conjnnction and comparisou, selectional con- 
straints, some coreference resolution, and the most com- 
mon sentence fra.gments. The parses are ordered accord- 
ing to heuristics encoded in the grammar. 
The parse tree is translated into a logical representa- 
tion of the nleaning of the sentence, encoding predicate- 
argument relations and grammatical subordination re- 
lations. In addition, it regularizes to some extent the 
role assignments in the predicate-argument structure, 
and handles argnments inherited from control verbs. 
Our lexicon includes about 20,000 entries, including 
about 2000 personal names and about 2000 location, 
organization, or other names. This number does not 
include morphological variants, which are handled in a 
separate naorphological nalyzer. (In addition, there are 
special procedures for handling unknown words, includ- 
ing unknown names, described in Hobbs et al, 1991.) 
The syntactic analysis component was remarkably suc- 
cessful in the MUC,-3 evaluation. This was due primarily 
to three innovations. 
? An agenda-based scheduling chart parser. 
? A recovery heuristic for unparsable sentences that 
found the best sequence of gramnmtical fragments. 
? The use of "ternfina.l substring parsing" for very 
long sentences. 
Each of these techniques will be described in turn, with 
statistics on their i)erformance in the MUC-a evaluation. 
2.1 Per fo rmance  of  the  Schedu l ing  Parser  and  
the  Grammar  
Tile fastest parsing algorithms for context-free grammars 
make use of prediction based on left context to limit the 
nnmber of nodes and edges the parser must insert into 
tim chart. However, if robustness in the face of pos- 
sibly ungramlnatical input or inadequate grammatical 
coverage is desired, such algorithms are inappropriate. 
Although the heuristic of choosing tile longest possible 
substring beginning at the left, that can be parsed as a 
sentence could be tried (e.g. Grishman and Sterling, 
1989), solnetimes, the best fraglnentary analysis of a 
sentence can only be found by parsing an intermediate 
or terminal substring that excludes the leftmost words. 
For this reason, we feel that bottom-up arsing without 
strong constraints based on left context, are required for 
robust syntactic analysis. 
Bottom-up parsing is favored for its robustness, and 
this robustness derives from the fact that a bottom-up 
parser will construct nodes and edges in the chart that 
a parser with top-down prediction would not. The obvi- 
ous problem is that these additional nodes do not come 
without an associated cost. Moore and Dowding (1991) 
observed a ninefold increase ill time required to parse 
sentences with a straightforward C, KY parser as opposed 
to a shift-reduce parser. Prior to November 1990, TAC- 
ITUS employed a simple, exhaustive, bottom-up arser 
with the result that sentences of more than 15 to 20 
words were impossible to parse in reasonable time. Since 
the average length of a sentence in the MUC-3 texts is 
approximately 25 words, such techniqnes were clearly in- 
appropriate for the application. 
We addressed this problem by adding an agenda mech- 
anism to the bottom-up arser, based on Kaplan (1973), 
as described in Winograd (1983). The purpose of the 
agenda is to allow us to order nodes (complete con- 
stituents) and edges (incomplete constituents) in the 
chart for further processing. As nodes and edges are 
built, they are rated according to various criteria for 
how likely they are to figure in a correct parse. This 
allows us to schedule which constituents to work with 
first so that we can pursue only the most likely paths 
in the search space and find a parse without exhaus- 
tively trying all possibilities. The scheduling algorithm 
is simple: explore the ramifications of the highest scoring 
constituents first. 
In addition, there is a facility for pruning the search 
space. The user can set limits on the number of nodes 
and edges that are allowed to be stored in the chart. 
Nodes are indexed on their atomic grammatical cate- 
gory (i.e., excluding features) and the string position at 
which they begin. Edges are indexed on their atomic 
grammatical category and tim string position where 
they end. The algorithm for pruning is simple: Throw 
away all but the n highest scoring constituents for each 
category/string-position pair. 
It has often been pointed out that various stan- 
dard parsing strategies correspond to various scheduling 
strategies in an agenda-based parser. However, in practi- 
cal parsing, what is needed is a scheduling strategy that 
enables us to pursue only the most likely paths in the 
search space and to find the correct parse without ex- 
haustively trying all possibilities. The literature has not 
been as ilhnninating on this issue. 
We designed our parser to score each node and edge 
on the basis of three criteria: 
? The length of the substring spanned by the con- 
stituent. 
? Whether the constituent is a node or an edge, that 
is, whether the constituent is complete or not. 
? The scores derived from the preference heuristics 
that have been encoded in DIALOGIC over the 
years, described and systematized in Hobbs and 
Bear (1990). 
However, after considerable experimentation with var- 
188
ious weightings, we concluded that tile length and com- 
pleteness factors failed to improve the performance a.t 
all over a broad range of sentences. Evidence suggested 
that a score based on preference factor alone produces 
the best results. The reason a correct or nearly correct 
parse is found so often by this method is that these pref- 
erence heuristics are so effective. 
In the frst  20 messages of the test set., 131 sentences 
were given to the scheduling parser, after statistically 
based relevance filtering. A parse was produced for 81 
of the 131 sentences, or 62%. Of these, 4:3 (or 33%) 
were completely correct, and 30 more had three or fewer 
errors. Thus, 56% of the sentences were parsed correctly 
or nearly correctly. 
These results naturally vary depending oil the length 
of the sentences. There were 64 sentences of under 30 
naorphemes (where by "morpheme" we mean words plus 
inflectional affixes). Of these, 37 (58%) had completely 
correct parses and 48 (75%) had three or fewer errors. 
By contrast, the scheduling parser attempted only 8 sen- 
tences of more than 50 morphemes, and only two of these 
parsed, neither of them even nearly correctly. 
Of the 44 sentences that would not parse, nine were 
due to problems in lexical entries. Eighteen were due to 
shortcomings in the grammar, primarily involving adver- 
bial placement and less than fully general treatment of 
conjunction and comparatives. Six were due to garbled 
text. The causes of eleven failures to parse have not been 
determined. These errors are spread out evenly across 
sentence lengths. In addition, seven sentences of over 30 
lnorphemes hit the time limit we had set, and terminal 
substring parsing, as described below, was invoked. 
A majority of the errors in parsing can be attributed 
to five or six causes. Two prominent causes are the ten- 
dency of the scheduling parser to lose favored close at- 
tachments of conjuncts and adjuncts near the end of long 
sentences, and the tendency to misanalyze the string 
\[\[Noun Noun\]Np Verbt,.an, NP\]s 
as  
\[Noun\]Np \[Noun Verbditran8 0 NP\]s/Np, 
again contrary to the grammar's preference heuristics. 
We believe that most of these problems are due to the 
fact that the work of the scheduling parser is not dis- 
tributed evenly enough across the different parts of the 
sentence, and we expect that this difficulty could be 
solved with relatively little effort. 
Our results in syntactic analysis are quite encouraging 
since they show that a high proportion of a corpus of 
long and very complex sentences can be parsed nearly 
correctly. However, the situation is even better when 
one considers the results for the best-fragment-sequence 
heuristic and for terminal substring parsing. 
2.2 Recovery  f rom Fai led Parses  
When a sentence does not parse, we attempt to span 
it with the longest, best sequence of interpretable frag- 
ments. The fragments we look for are main clauses, verh 
phrases, adverbial phrases, and noun phrases. They are 
chosen on the basis of length and their preference scores, 
favoring length over preference score. We do not attempt 
to find fragments for strings of less than five morphemes. 
The effect of this heuristic is that even for sentences that 
do not parse, we are able to extract nearly all of the 
propositional content. 
For example, the sentence 
The attacks today come afl.er Shining Path 
attacks during which least 10 buses were 
burned throughout Lima on 24 Oct. 
did not parse because of the use of "least" instead of "a.t. 
least". Hence, the best. Dagment sequence was sought. 
This consisted of the two fragments "The attacks today 
come after Shining Path attacks" and "10 buses were 
burned thronghout Lima on 24 Oct." The parses for 
both these fragments were completely correct. Thus, the 
only information lost was from the three words "during 
which least". Frequently such information can be recap- 
tured by the pragmatics component. In this case, the 
burning would be recognized as a consequence of the at- 
tack. 
In tile first 20 messages of the test set, a best sequence 
of fragments was sought for the 44 sentences that did 
not parse for reasons other than timing. A sequence was 
found for 41 of these; the other three were too short, with 
problems in the middle. The average number of frag- 
ments in a sequence was two. This means that an average 
of only one structural relationship was lost. Moreover, 
the fragments covered 88% of the morphemes. That is, 
even in the case of failed parses, 88% of the proposi- 
tional content of the sentences was made available to 
pragmatics. Frequently the lost propositional content is 
from a preposed or postposed, temporal or causal adver- 
bial, and the actual temporal or causal relationship is 
replaced by simple logical conjunction of the fragments. 
In such cases, much useful information is still obtained 
fl'om the partial results. 
For .37% of the 41 sentences, correct syntactic analyses 
of the fragments were produced. For 74%, the analyses 
contained three or fewer errors. Correctness did not cor- 
relate with length of sentence. 
These numbers could probably be improved. We 
favored the longest fragment regardless of preference 
scores. Thus, frequently a high-scoring main clause was 
rejected because by tacking a noun onto the front of that 
fragment and reinterpreting the main clause bizarrely 
as a relative clause, we could form a low-scoring noun 
phrase that was one word longer. We therefore plan to 
experiment with combining length and preference score 
in a more intelligent manner. 
2.3 Termina l  Subst r ing  Pars ing  
For sentences of longer than 60 words and for faster, 
though less accurate, parsing of shorter sentences, we 
developed a technique we are calling lerminal subsiring 
parsing. The sentence is segmented into substrings, by 
breaking it at commas, conjunctions, relative pronouns, 
and certain instances of the word "that". The substrings 
are then parsed, starting with the last one and working 
back. For each substring, we try either to parse the 
substring itself as one of several categories or to parse 
the entire set of substrings parsed so far as one of those 
categories. The best such structure is selected, and for 
189
subsequent processing, that is the only analysis of that 
portion of the sentence allowed. The categories that we 
look for include main, subordinate, and relative clauses, 
infinitives, w'H) phrases, prepositional phrases, and noun 
p h rases. 
A simple exalnple is |,lie following, although we do not 
a.I)ply the technique to sentences or to fragments this 
short. 
(.h>org(~ \]}US\]l, l.lie president, held a press con- 
feren(:e yesterda.y. 
This sentellc(~ would be segmented a.t the conunas. First 
'<hehl a. press conference yesterday" would be recognized 
as a VP. We next try to parse both <<the president" and 
"the presidellt, VP". The string "the president, VP" 
would not be recognized as anything, but "the presi- 
dent" would be recognized as an NP. Finally, we try to 
parse both "George Bush" and <<George Bush, NP, VP". 
"George Bush, NP, VP" is recognized as a sentence with 
an appositive on t.he subject. 
This algorithm is superior to a more obvious a.lgorithnl 
we had been considering earlier, llamely, to parse each 
fragment individually in a left-to-right fashion and then 
to a.ttempt o piece the fi'agments together. The lat- 
ter algorithm would have required looking inside all but 
the last of tile fi'agments for possible attachment points. 
This problem of recombining parts is in general a diffi- 
culty that is faced by parsers thai, produce phrasal rather 
than sentential parses (e.g., Weischedel et al, 1991). 
ltowever, in terminal substring parsing, this recombining 
is not, necessary, since the favored analyses of subsequent 
seginents are already available when a given segment is 
being parsed. 
The effect of this terminal substring parsing technique 
is to give only short inputs to the parser, without los- 
ing the possibility of getting a single parse for the entire 
long sentence. Suppose, for exa.lnple, we are parsing a 
60-word seni.ence that can be broken into six 10-word 
segments. At. each stage, we will only be parsing a string 
of ten to fifteen "words", the ten words in the segment, 
phls the nonterminal symbols dominating the favored 
analyses of the subsequent segments. When parsing the 
sentence-initial 10-word substring, we are in effect pars- 
ing at most a "IS-word" string covering the entire sen- 
tence, consisting of the 10 words plus the nontermina.1 
symbols covering the best analyses of the other five sub- 
strings. In a. sense, rather than parsing one very long 
sentence, we are parsing six fairly short sentences, thus 
avoiding the combinatorial explosion. 
Although this algorithm has given us satisfactory re- 
suits in our development work, its nnmbers fl'om the 
MUC-3 evahiation do not look good. This is not sur- 
prising, given that tile technique is called on only when 
all else has already failed. In tile first 20 messages of the 
test set, terlninal substring parsing was applied to 14 
sentences, ranging fl'om 34 to 81 morphemes in length. 
Only one of these parsed, and that parse was not good. 
However, sequences of fragments were found for the other 
1:3 sentences. The average number of fragments was 2.6, 
and the sequences covered 80% of the morphelnes. None 
of the fragment sequences was without errors. However, 
eight of the 13 had three or fewer mistakes. The tech- 
nique therefore allowed us to make use of much of the 
information in sentences that have hitherto been beyond 
the capability of virtually all parsers. 
3 Robust  Pragmatic Interpretation 
When a sentence is parsed and given a semantic interpre- 
tation, the relationship between this interpretation and 
the information previously expressed in the text as well 
as the interpreter's general knowledge must be estab- 
lished. Establishing this relationship comes under tile 
general heading of pragmatic interpretation. The par- 
ticular problems that are solved during this step include 
* Making explicit information that is only implicit in 
the text. This includes, for example, explicating 
the relationship underlying a coinpound nominal, or 
explicating causal consequences of events or states 
mentioned explicitly ill the text. 
? Determining the implicit entities and relationships 
referred to metonymically in the text. 
? Resolving anaphoric references and implicit argu- 
lnents. 
? Viewing the text as an instance of a. schema that 
makes its various parts coherent. 
TACITUS interprets a sentence pragmatically by 
proving that its logical form follows fi'om general knowl- 
edge and the preceding text, allowing a lninimal set ot 
assumptions to be made. In addition, it is assuined that 
the set of events, abstract entities, and physical objects 
mentioned in the text is to be consistently minimized 
The best set of assumptions necessary to find such a 
proof can be regarded as an explanation of its truth, and 
constitutes the implicit information required to produce 
the interpretation (Hobbs, Stickel, et al, 1990). Th( 
minimization of objects and events leads to anaphore 
resolution by assuming that objects that share proper- 
ties are identical, when it is consistent o do so. 
In the MUC-3 domain, explaining a text involves view- 
ing it as an instance of one of a number of explanator) 
schemas representing terrorist incidents of various type, 
(e.g. bombing, arson, assassination) or one of severa: 
event types that are similar to terrorist incidents, bui 
explicitly excluded by the task requirements (e.g. an ex- 
change of fire between military groups of opposing fac- 
tions). This means that assumptions that fit into inci. 
dent schemas are preferred to a.ssun~ptions that do not 
and the schema that ties together the most assumption= 
is the best explanation. 
In this text interpretation task, the domain knowledg, 
performs two primary functions: 
1. It relates the propositions expressed in the text t< 
the elements of the underlying explanatory schemas 
2. It enables and restricts possible coreferences fo: 
anaphora resolution. 
It is clear that nmch domain knowledge may be re 
quired to perform these functions successfully, but it i~ 
not necessarily the case that more knowledge is alway 
better. If axioms are incrementally added to the systen 
to cover cases not accounted for in the existing domaiJ 
190
theory, it is possiMe that they can interact with the exist- 
ing knowledge in such a way that the reasoning process 
becomes computationally intractable, and the unhappy 
result would be failure to find an interpretation i cases 
in which the correct interpretation is entailed by the sys- 
tem's knowledge. In a. domain as broad and diffuse as 
the terrorist domain, it is often impossible to guarantee 
by inspection that a domain theory is not subject to such 
combinatorial problems. 
The goal of robustness in interpretation therefore re- 
quires one to address two problems: a system must per- 
mit a graceful degradation of performance in those cases 
in which knowledge is incomplete, and it must extract 
as much information as it can in the face of a possible 
combinatorial explosion. 
The general approach of abductive text interpretation 
addresses the first problem through the notion of a "best 
interpretation." The best explanation, given incomplete 
domain knowledge, can succeed at relating some propo- 
sitions contained in the text to the explanatory schemas, 
but may not succeed for all propositions. The combina- 
torial problems are addressed through a particular search 
strategy for abductive reasoning described as incremen- 
tal refinement of minimal.informalion proofs. 
The abductive proof procedure as employed by TAC- 
ITUS (Stickel, 1988) will always be able to find some in- 
terpretation of the text. In the worst cause--the absence 
of any commonseuse knowledge that would be relevant 
to the interpretation of a sentence--the explanation of- 
fered would be found by a.ssunaing each of the literals to 
be proved. Such a proof is called a "minimal informa- 
tion proof" because no schema recognition or explication 
of implicit relationships takes place. However, the more 
knowledge the system has, the more implicit information 
ca.n be recovered. 
Because a minimal information proof is always avail- 
able for any sentence of the text that is internally consis- 
tent, it provides a starting point for incremental refine- 
ment of explanations that can be obtained at next to no 
cost. TACITUS explores the space of abductive proofs 
by finding incrementally better explanations for each of 
the constituent literMs. A search strategy is adopted 
that finds successive xplanations, each of which is bet- 
ter than the minimal information proof. This process 
can be halted at any time in a state that will provide at 
least some intermediate results that are useful for sub- 
sequent interpretation and template filling. 
Consider the following example taken'fi'om the MUC-3 
text corpus: 
A cargo train running kom Lima to Lorohia 
was derailed before dawn today after hitting 
a dynamite charge. 
Inspector Eulogio Flores died in the explosion. 
The correct interpretation of this text requires recov- 
ering certain implicit information that relies on common- 
sense knowledge. The compound nominal phrase "dyna- 
mite charge" nmst be interpreted as "charge composed 
of dynamite." The interpretation requires knowing that 
dynamite is a substance, that substances can be related 
via compound nominal relations to objects composed of 
those substances, that things composed of dynamite are 
bombs, that hitting bombs causes them to explode, that 
exploding causes damage, that derailing is a type of clam- 
age, and that planting a bomb is a terrorist act. The sys- 
tem's commonsense knowledge base must be rich enough 
to derive each of these conclusions if it is to recognize 
the event described as a. terrorist act., since all derailings 
are not the result of' bombings. This example under- 
scores the need for fa.irly extensive world knowledge in 
the comprehension of text. If the knowledge is missing, 
the correct interpretation cannot be found. 
However, if there is Inissing knowledge, all is not nec- 
essarily lost. If, for example, the knowledge was miss- 
ing that lilt.ring a boml~ causes it to explode, the sys- 
rein could still hyl.mthesize the relationship between tile 
charge and tile (lynamite to reason that a bomb was 
placed. When processing the next sentence, the system 
may have trouble figuring out tile time and place of Flo- 
res's death if it can't associate the explosion with hitting 
the bomb. However, if the second sentence were "Tile 
Shining Path claimed that their guerrillas had planted 
the bomb," the partial infornm.tion would be sufficient o 
allow "bomb" to be resolved to dynamite charge, thereby 
connecting the event described in tile first, sentence with 
~che vent described ill the second. 
It is difficult to evahmte the pragmatic interpretation 
component individually, since to a great extent its suc- 
cess depends on the adequacy of the semantic analysis 
it operates on. Itowew~r, in examiuing the first, 20 mes- 
sages of the MUC-3 test set. in detail, we attempted to 
pinpoint the reason for each missing or incorrect entry 
in the required templates. 
There were 269 sucl~ mistakes, due to problems in 41 
sentences. Of these, 124 are attributable to pragmatic 
interpretation. We have classified their causes into a 
number of categories, and the results are as follows. 
l:{ea.son 
Simple Axiom Missing 49 
Combinatorics 28 
Unconstrained Identity Assumptions 25 
Complex Axioms or Theory Missing 14 
Underconstrained Axiom 8 
Mistakes 
An example of a missing simple axiom is that "bishop" 
is a profession. An exa.nlple of a. missing complex the- 
ory is one that assigns a default causality relationship 
to events that are simultaneous at the granularity re- 
ported in the text. An underconstrained axiom is one 
that allows, for examl)le, "damage to the economy" to 
be taken a.s a terrorist, incident. Unconstrained identity 
assumptions result from the knowledge base's inability 
to rule out identity of two different objects with similar 
properties, thus leading to incorrect anaphora resolution. 
"Combinatorics" simply means that the theorem-prover 
timed out, and the nfinimal-information proof strategy 
was invoked to obtain a. partial interpretation. 
It is difficult to evaluate the precise impact of the ro- 
bustness trategies outlined here. The robustness is an 
inherent feature of the overall al)proach, and we did not 
have a non-robust control to test. it against. However, the 
implementation of the mhlilnal information proof search 
191
strategy virtually eliminated all of our complete t'a.ilures 
due to lack of computational resources, and cut the error 
rate attributable to this cause roughly in half. 
4 Conclusion 
It is often assumed that when natural anguage process- 
tug meets the real world, the ideal of aiming for con> 
plete and correct interpretations has to be abandoned. 
llowcver, our experience with TACITUS, especially in 
the M UC-3 evaluation, has shown that principled tech- 
niques for syntactic and pragmatic analysis can be bol- 
stered with methods for achieving robustness, yielding a 
system with some utility in the short term and showing 
promise of more in tim long term. 
Acknowledgments 
This research has been funded by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency under Office of Naval Re- 
search contracts N00014-85-C-0013 and N00014-90-C- 
0220. 
References  
\[1\] Cardie, Claire and Wendy Lehnert, 1991. "A Cogni- 
tively Plausible Approach to Understanding Complex 
Syntax," Proceedings, Ninth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 117-124. 
\[2\] Grishman, R., and J. Sterling, 1989. "Preference 
Semantics for Message Understanding, Proceedings, 
DARPA Speech and Natural-Language Workshop, pp. 
71-74. 
\[3\] Bobbs, Jerry R., 1978. "Resolving Pronoun Refer- 
ences", Lingua, Vol. 44, pp. 311-338. Also ill Readings 
in Natural Language Processing, B. Grosz, K. Sparck- 
Jones, and B. Webber, editors, pp. 339-352, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Los Altos, Califonlia. 
\[4\] ltobbs, Jerry R., and John Bear, 1990. "Two Princi- 
ples of Parse Preference", in H. Karlgren, ed., Proceed- 
tags, Thirteenth International Conference on Compu- 
tational Linguistics, Helsinki, Finland, Vol. 3, pp. 162- 
167, August, 1990. 
\[5\] Hobbs, Jerry R., Mark Stiekel, Douglas Appelt, and 
Paul Martin, 1990. "Interpretation as Abduction", 
SRI International Artificial Intelligence Center Tech- 
nical Note 499, December 1990. 
\[6\] Jackson, Eric, Douglas Appelt, John Bear, Robert 
Moore, and Ann Podlozny, 1991. "A Template 
Ma.tcher for Robust NL Interpretation", Proceedings, 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
February 1991, Asilomar, California, pp. 190-194. 
\[7\] Jacobs, Paul S., George R. Krupka, and Lisa. F. Rau, 
1991. "Lexico-Sen~a.ntic Pattern Matching as a Com- 
panion to Parsing in Text Understanding", Proceed- 
tags, DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop, February 1991, Asilomar, California, pp. 337- 
341. 
\[8\] Kaplan, Ronald, 1973. "A General Syntactic Proces- 
sor," in Ra.ndM1 Rustin, (Ed.) Natural Language Pro- 
cessing, Algorithmics Press, New York, pp. 193-241. 
\[9\] de Marcken, C.G., 1990. "Parsing the LOB Corpus," 
Proceedings, 28th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 243-251. 
\[10\] Moore, R.C., and J. Dowding, 1991. "Efficient 
Bottom-Up Parsing," Proceedings, DARPA Speech 
and Natural Language Workshop, February 1991, 
Asilomar, California, pp. 200-203. 
\[11\] Robinson, Jane, 1982. "DIAGRAM: A Grammar for 
Dialogues", Communications ofthe A CM, Vol. 25, No. 
1, pp. 27-47, January 1982. 
\[I2\] Sager, Naomi, 1981. Natural Language Inform.a- 
lion Processing: A Computer Grammar of English. 
and Its Applications, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mas- 
sachusetts. 
\[13\] Sehank, Roger and C. Riesbeck, 1981. Inside Com- 
puter Understanding: Five Programs Plus Miniatures, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey. 
\[14\] Stickel, Mark E., 1988. "A Prolog-like Inference 
System for Computing Minimum-Cost Abductive 
Explanations in Natural-Language Interpretation", 
Proceedings of the International Computer Science 
Conference-88, pp. 343-350, Hong Kong, December 
1988. Also published as Technical Note 451, Artificial 
Intelligence Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, 
California, September 1988. 
\[15\] Sundheim, Beth (editor), 1991. Proceedings, Third 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-3), San 
Diego, California, May 1991. 
\[16\] Weisehedel, R., D. Ayuso, S. Boisen, R. Ingria, and 
J. Palmucci, 1991. "Partial Parsing: A Report on 
Work in Progress, Proceedings, DARPA Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, February 1991, Asilo- 
mar, California, pp. 204-209. 
\[17\] Winograd, Terry, 1983. Language as a Cognitive 
Process, Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, California. 
192
