Pract i ca l  I ssues  in Automat ic  Documentat ion  Generat ion  
Kathleen McKeown 
450 Computer Science Building 
Columbia University 
New York, NY 10027 
kathy@ca, columbia, odu 
Karen Kukich 
Bell Communication Research 
Morristown, NJ 07960-6438 
kukich@bellcore, com 
James Shaw 
450 Computer Science Building 
Columbia University 
New York, NY  10027 
shaw@cs, columbia, edu 
Abstract 
PLANDoc ,  a system under joint devel- 
opment by Columbia and Bellcore, docu- 
ments the activity of planning engineers 
as they study telephone routes. It takes 
as input a trace of the engineer's inter- 
action with a network planning tool and 
produces 1-2 page summary. In this pa- 
per, we describe the user needs analysis we 
performed and how it influenced the devel- 
opment of PLANDoc .  In particular, we 
show how it pinpointed the need for a sub- 
language specification, allowing us to iden- 
tify input messages and to characterize the 
different sentence paraphrases for realiz- 
ing them. We focus on the systematic use 
of conjunction i  combination with para- 
phrase that we developed for PLANDoc, 
which allows for the generation of sum- 
maries that are both concise-avoiding rep- 
etition of similar information, and fluent- 
avoiding repetition of similar phrasing. 
1 Motivat ion 
In a collaborative effort between academics and in- 
dustry, we have embarked on a project that uses text 
generation research in service of an industrial appli- 
cation. Bellcore and Columbia are jointly developing 
a system, PLANDoc ,  that will document the ac- 
tivity of planning engineers as they study telephone 
routes I. Telephone planning engineers currently use 
a software tool, the Bellcore LEIS2-PLAN system, 
that helps them derive 20-year capacity expansion 
plans based on growth forecasts and economic con- 
straints. PLANDoc  takes as input a trace of the en- 
gineer's interaction with LEIS-PLAN and produces 
IPLANDoc  is being developed collaboratively by 
Karen Kukich and Neal Morgan of Bellcore and Kathy 
McKeown, James Shaw, Jacques Robin, and Jong Lim 
of Columbia University. 
~LEIS is a registered trademark of Bell Communica- 
tions Research, Piscataway, NJ. 
a 1-2 page summary. The PLANDoc prototype is
currently being tested by development teams and 
will move into use by regional planners ometime 
this Fall. 
The role of documentation has gained increasing 
importance as businesses attempt to achieve higher 
levels of productivity, often with fewer employees. 
In such environments, work must be carefully doc- 
umented, both to make previous business decisions 
readily available to current employees, and to pro- 
vide management with information needed to autho- 
rize major expenditures, in the willlon dollar range. 
Network planning managers need justification for 
why a proposed plan is best and whether alterna- 
tives were investigated. Until recently this informa- 
tion was provided orally, if at all, due to time con- 
straints. But internal auditors and public regulators 
have increased the demand for formal documenta- 
tion. Indeed, lawsuits have made the lack of docu- 
mentation extremely costly. In a recent settlement, 
Pacific Bell promised to provide increased documen- 
tation in lieu of an 80 million dollar rebate to rate 
payers. PLANDoc  documentation also promises to 
be useful in training new planning engineers; it pro- 
vides a record of how experienced planning engineers 
arrive at their decisions, information which is not 
currently available. 
Because telephone network planning is currently 
done with an automated software system that pro- 
duces a trace, albeit cryptic, of the actions of both 
the system and the user, development of an au- 
tomated documentation system is quite practical; 
input to a report generator is automatically pro- 
duced and readily available. Our approach makes 
use of existing text generation tools; we adopted the 
FUF/SURGE package(FUF5; Elhadad 93), devel- 
oped and widely used at Columbia (Robin 93; McK-  
eown et al 90; McKeown & Feiner 90; Elhadad 
93; Paris 87; Wolz 92), which handles the genera- 
tion of individual sentences. Given the PLAN trace 
and the FUF/SURGE sentence generation tools, de- 
velopment of PLANDoc  requires bridging the gap 
between the two. The main research problems in- 
clude: 
7 
? organizing the content of the report, i.e., 
content planning, 
? mapping facts in the trace to sen- 
tence structures and choosing appropri- 
ate words, i.e., lexicalization. 
To handle these appropriately, we performed a
user needs analysis to gather details about the kinds 
of reports that users would find helpful. Our analysis 
revealed two overriding practical considerations for 
the design and implementation f the PLANDoc 
automatic documentation generator: 
? the need for user-centered design, and 
? the need for a bounded sublanguage. 
The first of these was motivated by the fact that 
the system would eventually be used in a live pro- 
duction setting. The second was mandated by the 
need for a concise, but fluent report. The analysis 
showed that reports must avoid repeating similar in- 
formation which occurs across input facts, while at 
the same time avoiding repeating exact phrasing. 
In this paper, we show how PLANDoc uses a 
systematic ombination of conjunction and para- 
phrasing power to achieve these goals. Further, we 
show how we bounded their different combinations 
to avoid a combinatoric explosion of possible phras- 
ings, while still maintaining fluency and conciseness 
in the generated reports. The systematic use of 
conjunction and ellipsis to achieve conciseness, com- 
bined with paraphrasing power, is a unique feature 
of the PLANDoc system. 
In the following sections, we first describe the user 
needs analysis, then turn to a description of the sub- 
language and the constrained use of conjunction and 
paraphrasing. We close with a discussion of our cur- 
rent directions. 
2 User -Centered  Des ign  
User-needs analysis is a common practice in the de- 
velopment of computer-human interface systems and 
other end-user software. Particularly in developing a 
large scale, practical system, the needs of the user 
must be studied if the resulting system is to be ac- 
cepted and effectively used by the users. In this sec- 
tion, we describe the user-needs analysis and system 
development methodology that we are using in our 
ongoing development of PLANDoc .  
Our analysis combined two complementary ap- 
proaches. First, we interviewed a variety of different 
groups of people involved in the telephone network 
planning task. Our goal was to identify potential 
users of PLANDoc and to solicit their views on 
how such a system could be most helpful. Second, 
we collected a set of manually-written narratives to 
inform the development of the generator, providing 
insights on report form and content, vocabulary and 
sentence structure. In this section we describe how 
user interviews and corpus analysis haped the de- 
sign of the documentation generator. But first we 
provide some brief background information on the 
problem domain. 
2.1 P rob lem Sett ing 
Voice and data service is carried to telephone cus- 
tomers through a complex network of routes con- 
sisting of copper or fiber cables supplemented by 
additional equipment such as Digital Loop Carrier 
(DLC) systems and fiber multiplexors. It is the tele- 
phone network planning engineer's job is to derive 
a capacity expansion (relief) plan specifying when, 
where, and how much new copper, fiber, multiplex- 
ing and other equipment to install in a route to avoid 
facilities exhaustion. This activity is an integral part 
of telephone operations. New installations are costly, 
but at the same time facilities exhaustion can lead to 
a disruption in telephone service. Currently, about 
1,000 planning engineers in 8 regional and indepen- 
dent telephone companies produce a total of about 
15,000 route studies per year. 
The engineer uses PLAN to compute an optimum, 
cost-effective base relief plan needed to meet forecast 
demand over the next twenty years. The base plan, 
however, may not always be realizable or desirable 
due to political, economical, practical and other fac- 
tors known to the engineer but not to the computer. 
The engineer uses PLAN's Interactive Refinement 
Module that allows 'what-if' modeling to explore the 
effects of various changes to the base plan. For ex- 
ample, an engineer might explore requesting a DLC 
activation for a given site, or changing a fiber acti- 
vation time. After comparing the effects of different 
refinement scenarios, the engineer ultimately decides 
on a realizable relief plan to recommend to manage- 
ment for project authorization. 
Overall interaction with PLAN thus includes an 
automatically generated base plan, a sequence of re- 
finements to explore the effects of different changes 
to the base, and a final proposed plan which may in- 
dude elements of the base plan along with a selected 
set of refinements. 
2.2 Interv iews 
With the help of Bencore Planning and Engineering 
staff 3 we formulated an initial proposal for PLAN- 
Doc and drafted preliminary target narratives. We 
then conducted a series of interviews with plan- 
ning engineers, managers, auditors and PLAN sup- 
port staff from several regional telephone compa- 
nies in their home offices and at two PLAN train- 
ing courses 4. The work experience of the engineers 
we interviewed ranged from beginner to expert. Our 
3Many thanks to M. Horwath, D. Imhoff and L. 
Tenet. 
4 Some of the helpful regional Planning and Engineer- 
ing personnel included P. MeNeill, J. Brunet, P. King, 
D. Kelly, I. MeNeill, T. Smith, C. Lowe, and G. Giles, 
goal was to determine how engineers actually used 
the PLAN system, whether they would find an au- 
tomated ocumentation facility to be helpful, and, 
if so, what the form and content of the narratives 
should be. 
We learned that novice planners often run 'bozo' 
refinements just to develop a feel for the process, 
while experienced planners sometimes run refine- 
ments they know will be suboptimal just for the 
record, i.e., for the benefit of managers, auditors 
and regulators who might ask "did you try such and 
such?". More critical to the need for documenta- 
tion, we also learned that experienced planners keep 
handwritten notes on paper, listing their refinements 
and why they tried them; they asked for a way to 
enter their notes on-line to keep track of their reason- 
ing. Inexperienced planners asked to see narratives 
written by experienced planners in order to learn 
from them; unfortunately few such narratives exist. 
Finally, all planners welcomed the idea of having 
the computer generate narratives that they could 
include in their documentation packages, especially 
if they could add to the narratives themselves. 
These findings haped the content of PLANDoc 
narratives and the design of the system. Specifically, 
they indicated that planners may not want all re- 
finements that they tried to appear in the narrative. 
For example, novice planners do not want to include 
their 'bozo' refinements, while experienced planners 
do want to include the suboptimal refinements hey 
ran to show that their final refinements were supe- 
rior. Thus, PLANDoc includes a facility that lets 
the planner select a subset of refinements o be in- 
cluded in the final narrative. Planners made it clear 
that they use knowledge not included in PLAN to 
make their decisions (e.g., corporate strategies) and 
they wanted a way to record that knowledge on-line, 
while they were working. This gave rise to PLAN- 
Doc's facility to prompt for manually-written gi- 
neer's notes at crucial points. We instituted only two 
user-visible changes to PLAN's original, successful 
interface, one to prompt for engineering notes and 
another to allow the engineer to request a narrative 
and select a subset of refinements o be included. 
Both options are presented using familiar PLAN in- 
terface commands and screen formats. Reports are 
generated off-line. 
2.3 Corpus Analysis 
We also arranged for an experienced retired planning 
engineer, Jim Phillips, who is also a PLAN expert, to 
write a corpus of target narratives based on PLAN 
runs of actual routes. Based on the findings from our 
interviews and on the target narratives, we arrived 
all from Pacific Bell, R. Riggs, D. Spiegel, S. Sweat, 
L. Doane, R. Tufts, and R. Ott, all from Southwestern 
Bell, S. Wasalinko from NYNEX, and C. Lazette from 
Ameritech. 
PART 1 Route Input Data Summary (Tabular) 
PART 2 Narrative (Text) 
? Base Plan Summary 
? Refinements Summary with Engineer's 
Notes 
? Proposed Plan Summary 
Figure 1: PLANDoc Report Format 
at the report format shown in Figure 1. It consists 
of two parts, a tabular summary of route input data 
and a narrative that integrates machine-generated 
text with the engineer's manually-entered notes. 
Our corpus of target narratives provided informa- 
tion on what should be included in the report and 
its overall structure. Thus, it directly influenced e- 
velopment of both the Lexicalizer and Content Plan- 
ner modules of PLANDoo. An analysis of PLAN's 
menu of refinement actions and the sentences in the 
target narratives allowed us to specify a set of 31 
different possible message types for refinement sen- 
tences including, for example, fiber extensions to 
CSAs (Carrier Serving Areas), or DLC (Digital Loop 
Carrier) equipment activations or denials for CSAs. 
We then systematically categorized the sentences 
in our corpus to reveal all the different phrasings for 
each message type. This categorization showed that 
there was tremendous variety in the possible sen- 
tences for each message type with respect to sentence 
structure and lexical choice. Indeed, our first imple- 
mentation of PLANDoc's sentence generator 5, re- 
suited in more than 150 paraphrases for some mes- 
sage classes. 
The target narratives also informed the design 
of PLANDoo's Content Planner. Our analysis re- 
vealed that choosing a specific paraphrase for use 
in a summary depends on what has already been 
mentioned (i.e., the choice is based on previous dis- 
course). Furthermore, the narratives provided ex- 
amples of how multiple messages were frequently 
combined to form complex compound sentences. In 
order to avoid a combinatorial explosion from com- 
bining many different sentences forms, we needed to 
specify a bounded sublanguage for PLAN's domain 
that ensured the sentence variety needed to main- 
tain discourse coherence and fluency while enabling 
the construction of complex sentences. Before dis- 
cussing this problem, we provide an actual sample 
of some PLANDoc output in Figure 2. 
2.4 Sample PLANDoc  Output  
At present, the tabular Input Summary generator 6 
and the textual Refinements Summary generator of 
the PLANDoc system are fully implemented. Fig- 
5written in FUF by J. Lira 
6written in C by N. Morgan 
9 
RUNID: REG1 
Run-ID REG1 started at the BASE plan. This saved re- 
finement activated DLC for CSAs 3122, 3130, 3134, 3208 
and 3420 in the third quarter of 1994. It demanded that 
PLAN use DLC system IDLC272 for all placements in
CSA 3122. The 20 year PWE was $2110.1K, a $198.6K 
savings over the BASE plan and the 5 year IFC was 
$1064.0K, a $64.5K penalty over the BASE plan. 
Engineer's note: 
These CSA's are beyond 28 kf and need range extenders 
to provide service on copper. Moving them to 1994 will 
negate a job adding a reg bay to the office. 
RUNID: 3234-2 
This saved refinement included all DLC changes in Run- 
ID REG1E. It requested the activation of DLC for CSA 
3234 in the second quarter of 1994 and for CSA 3233 in 
the fourth quarter of 1994. DLC systems DLC96SS and 
DLC96M2 were used for all placements in CSAs 3233 
and 3234. For this refinement, he 20 year route PWE 
was $1925.3K, a $383.4K savings over the BASE plan 
and the 5 year IFC was $833.9K, a $165.6K savings over 
the BASE plan. 
Engineer's note: 
I didn't need to demand the activation of these systems 
in the refinement as they were activated at this time in 
the BASE plan. The 'idlc272' was demanded because of 
the high demand. The non-integrated systems in CSA 
3234 because it is a business area. 
? . .  
Figure 2: PLANDoc Refinements Summary 
ure 2 is an abbreviated sample of a Refinements 
Summary generated by PLANDoc .  The incorpo- 
rated Engineering Notes were entered manually by 
the Planning Engineer at run time and automati- 
cally integrated into the narrative by PLANDoc .  
3 Sublanguage Specification 
In this section we first provide a brief overview of 
PLANDoc's architecture and functioning. We then 
illustrate the large number of possible sentence com- 
binations, describe the sublanguage specification so- 
lution and PLANDoc's paraphrasing and conjunc- 
tion capabilities. 
3.1 PLANDoc System Overv iew 
PLANDoc 's  architecture, which is shown in Fig- 
ure 3, draws on our previous text generation and 
report generation work (McKeown 85; Kukich 83). 
The PLANDoc  system consists of five sequen- 
tial modules: a Message Generator, an Ontologizer, 
a Content Planner, a Lexicalizer, and a Surface 
Generator. Since PLAN itself is implemented in C 
and PLANDoc 's  text generation modules are im- 
plemented in Lisp, a Message Generator module ~ 
serves as an interface between PLAN and PLAN-  
Doc.  Input to the Message Generator comes from 
~written in C by N. Morgan 
RUNID re81DLC 5/7/93 act yes 
CSU 3122 idlc272 idlc272 
SAT 3122 3 1994 3 1994 
SAT 330 3 1994 3 1994 
SAT 3134 3 1994 3 1994 
SAT 3208 3 1994 3 1994 
SAT 3420 3 1994 3 1994 
END. 2110.1 1064.0 
Figure 4: A portion of tracking file 
((cat message) 
(admtn ((PLANDoc-message-name RDA) 
(track-tag SAT) 
(seq-num 3) 
(runid r-regl) 
(prev-runid BASE) 
(status act) 
(saved yes))) 
(class refinement) 
(tel-type DLC) 
(action activation) 
(equipment-type all-dlc) 
(csa-site 3122) 
(date ((year 1994) (quarter 3)))) 
Figure 5: Output oftheMessage Generator 
PLAN tracking files which record the user's actions 
during a planning session. Figure 4 is a portion of 
a tracking file; it corresponds to the paragraph la- 
beled RUNID REG1 in the sample PLANDoc  nar- 
rative above. Shown below it (Figure 5) is a Lisp 
representation, ie., a message in attribute-value for- 
mat, for one refinement action in the tracking file 
produced by the Message Generator. Output mes- 
sages are first passed to an Ontologizer s. The com- 
plete set of enriched messages is then passed to a 
Content Planner 9 whose job is to determine which 
information in the messages hould appear in the 
various paragraphs and to organize the overall nar- 
rative. This involves combining individual messages 
to produce the input for complex sentences, choosing 
cue words and determining paraphrasing forms that 
maintain focus and ensure coherence. The output of 
the Content Planner is a 'condensed' set of complex 
messages, each still in hierarchical attribute-value 
format. 
We are using the FUF/SURGE package (FUF5; 
Elhadad 93; Kay 79; Halliday 85) for the Lexical- 
izer and Surface Generator modules of PLANDoc .  
We used FUF to write a lexicalization 8rammaz 
for PLAN's sublanguage. The task of the Lexical- 
SThe Ontologizer simply enriches each message with 
semantic knowledge from PLAN's domain of discourse. 
9written in Lisp by J. Robin and J. Shaw 
10 
PLAN 
(c) 
Message 
Generator 
(c) 
Ontologizer Content I J Surface PLANDoc Planner Lexicalizer Generator Narrative 
(FUF) (Lisp) (FUF) 1 1 (SURGE) ~ (text) 
Figure 3: PLANDoc  System Arch i tec ture  
izer module 1? is twofold: 1) to map the attributes 
of the messages into systemic/semantic case roles, 
such as agent, beneficiary, process, circumstance, 
etc., and 2) to select content words to express the 
values of the attributes, all the while maintaining 
constraints imposed by the Content Planner. Fi- 
nally, the FUF/SURGE Surface Generator takes 
the lexicalized messages, maps case roles into syn- 
tactic roles, builds the constituent structure of the 
sentence, fills in function words such as pronouns, 
prepositions, conjunctions, etc., ensures agreement, 
and ultimately realizes the structure as a linear sur- 
face sentence. 
8.2 Combinatorial  Explosion 
Two of the most salient characteristics of the text 
in our corpus are the great degree of paraphrasing 
found and the frequent use of conjunction and ellip- 
sis. Both characteristics arise from the fact that the 
domain of discourse is limited to 31 message types, 
but user interactions include many variations and 
combinations of those message types. Paraphrasing 
is used to avoid repetition and to maintain focus; 
conjunction and ellipsis are used to combine mes- 
sages with similar attributes to form concise sum- 
mary sentences. While the number of paraphrase 
combinations actually occurring in the target narra- 
tives was small, the different combinations the user 
might invoke was beyond our control and potentially 
quite large. 
The scope of naturally occurring paraphrasing is
illustrated by the sentences derived for one mes- 
sage class in terms of their mapping of semantic at- 
tributes to lexical roles n (such as agent, beneficiary, 
location, etc.) and syntactic roles (such as subject, 
direct object, object of preposition, etc.) It is the job 
of the PLANDoc lexicalizer to chose lexical roles for 
semantic attributes; the SURGE surface generator 
then maps lexical roles into syntactic roles. 
The main semantic attributes of the fiber-service- 
extension message are: 
(class refinement) 
(tel-type fiber) 
1?written in FUF by J. Shaw with input from J. Lim. 
J. Robin, M. Elhadad, D. Radev and D. Horowitz 
11Lexical roles are often referred to as semantic roles 
of a sentence, where sentence semantic roles are distinct 
from domain semantic attributes. We use "lexical roles" 
to avoid confusion. 
(action service-extension) 
(extension-type T-l) 
(from-fiber-hub 2113) 
(to-csa 211S) 
Some of the paraphrases derived from our corpus for 
this message are: 
1. "This refinement extended T-1 service from 
fiber hub 2113 to CSA 2115." 
2. "This refinement demanded that PLAN extend 
T-1 service from fiber hub 2113 to CSA 2115." 
3. "This refinement called for PLAN to extend T- 
1 service from fiber hub 2113 to CSA 2115." 
4. "This refinement requested a T-1 service xten- 
sion from fiber hub 2113 to CSA 2115." 
5. "This refinement called for a T-1 service xten- 
sion from fiber hub 2113 to CSA 2115." 
6. "This refinement served CSA 2115 by T-1 ex- 
tension from fiber hub 2113." 
7. "This refinement demanded that PLAN serve 
CSA 2115 by T-1 extension from fiber hub 
2113." 
8. "This refinement called for PLAN to serve CSA 
2115 by T-1 extension from fiber hub 2113." 
9. "This refinement demanded service to CSA 
2115 by T-1 extension from fiber hub 2113." 
10. "This refinement called for service to CSA 2115 
by T-1 extension from fiber hub 2113." 
Note that the lexical and syntactic roles filled by 
the semantic attributes in the message vary across 
paraphrases. For example, although the semantic 
attribute to-csa is most often realized in the lexi- 
cal role location which gets mapped to the syntac- 
tic role object of preposition (e.g., 1, 2, 3), in some 
paraphrases (e.g., 6, 7, 8) it appears in the lexical 
role beneficiary which gets mapped to the syntactic 
role direct object. More dramatically, two main lex- 
ical variants occur for the semantic attribute action, 
namely the head verbs 'extend' and 'serve'. These in 
turn give rise to a variety of syntactic onstructions, 
e.g., simple sentences, nominalizations of the head 
verbs in participial clauses, infinitive clauses, etc. 
Since passive is sometimes needed to maintain focus 
or coherence within a paragraph(McKeown 85), the 
number of possible paraphrases doubles. 
When paraphrasing is combined with conjunction, 
the problems compound. Complex messages arise 
because it is often necessary to combine multiple 
11 
1) "This refinement activated DLC for CSAs 2111, 
2112, 2113, 2114, 2115 and 2116 in 1996 QI." 
2) "This refinement activated DLC for CSA 2111 in 
1995 Q3, for CSAs 2112 and 2113 in 1995 Q4, and 
for CSAs 2114, 2115 and 2116 in 1996 QI." 
3) "It requested the placement of a 48-fiber cable from 
the CO to section 1103 and the placement of 24- 
fiber cables from section 1201 to section 1301 and 
from section 2201 to section 2301 in the second 
quarter of 1995." 
Figure 6: Conjunction Examples 
messages with some common and other distinct at- 
tributes into a single message in order to avoid re- 
peating similar information. For example, if a user 
activates six CSA sites for DLC in one refinement 
scenario, those six messages, with four common at- 
tributes and one distinct attribute, csa-slte, can be 
expressed succinctly using conjunction and ellipsis 
(example 1 Figure 6). Messages with two distinct 
attributes can also be easily conjoined depending 
on where in the sentence they occur (example 2). 
A group of messages with more than two distinct 
attributes results in a complex compound sentence 
(example 3). 
Each of PLANDoc 's  31 message types has five 
or more semantic features; six of those 31 message 
types are stand-alone messages; all of the remain- 
ing 25 messages can be combined to form compound 
messages with at least one distinct feature, half of 
those with at least two distinct features, and a few 
with three or four distinct features. Recall that there 
were at least ten active and ten passive sentence 
forms for the fiber-service-extension message, which 
is typical of most of the 31 message types. Given 
the number of possible message combinations multi- 
plied by the number of possible paraphrases for each 
message, the need to limit the paraphrasing power 
of the PLANDoc  generator should be clear. 
3.3 Sublanguage Solution 
Since many of the naturally occurring paraphrases 
involved minor variations in syntax or substitution 
of synonyms that formed valid collocations in some 
contexts but awkward phrases in others, we chose 
to constrain PLANDoc 's  paraphrasing power to the 
following four active sentence forms for most of the 
31 message types and their four corresponding pas- 
sive forms: 
1. simple sentence: "This refinement <verb-ed> 
<object-np>." 
2. nomlnalization: "This refinement requested the 
<action-nominalization> of <object-np>." 
3. participial: "This refinement demanded that 
PLAN <verb> <object-np>." 
4. infinitive: "This refinement called for PLAN to 
<verb> <object-np>." 
So, for example, the active and passive nominaliza- 
tion forms of the fiber-activation message are: 
? "This refinement requested the activation of fiber 
for CSA 2115 in 1996 QI." 
? "The activation of fiber for CSA 2115 in 1996 Q1 
was requested." 
Recall that the job of the PLANDoc Lexicalizer is 
to manage the mapping of semantic attributes to 
lexical roles for all possible combinations of com- 
mon and distinct attributes in compound and com- 
plex messages. Constraining the sublanguage to at 
most eight paraphrases greatly reduces the complex- 
ity of that mapping. It also eliminates the need to 
specify a complex set of collocation constraints for 
synonym substitutions. At the same time, eight po- 
tential paraphrases provide enough flexibility for the 
Lexicalizer to make choices that maintain focus and 
coherence and that avoid repetition. Similar sublan- 
guage specifications related to the use of names, pro- 
nouns and deictic expressions for subsequent refer- 
ences, modifier constructions for noun phrases (e.g., 
"This saved DLC refinement .. . '),  and discourse cue 
words (e.g., "also, finally", etc.), provide the same 
manageabil ity and flexibility benefits. 
3.4 Con junct ion  and  Paraphras ing  
Determining when conjunction is to be used and 
what type of paraphrasing is required are both han- 
dled by the Content Planner. The Content Planner 
is given as input a list of messages which form the full 
content of the report. Its task is to use knowledge 
of the overall semantic ontent to determine how to 
order messages and where to form sentence bound- 
aries. While it could generate a separate sentence for 
each input message, a common solution in many lan- 
guage generators, this would result in a verbose and 
repetitive report. In order to avoid repeating simi- 
lar information, PLANDoc uses conjunction, group- 
ing together semantically related attributes, to con- 
trol how messages are ordered in the report and to 
form sentence boundaries. Note that this approach 
to content planning, relying on opportunistic group- 
ing of information based on how it can be realized in 
concise linguistic form, is quite different from other 
systems which tend to use either rhetorical (McKe- 
own 85; Moore & Paris; Hovy 91; Wahlster et al 89) 
or domain dependent(Paris 87; R~mbow & Korelsky 
92) strategies to order information. 
To do this, the Content Planner first groups to- 
gether related messages and tries to find those with 
the maximum number of common attributes. It 
groups these by common action and within this, by 
common date. When all but one or two attributes 
are common, ellipsis can be used for every common 
attribute, resulting in a concise form that uses a list- 
like structure for one or two roles of the sentence. 
To generate this form, the Content Planner builds 
a message where one semantic role has as its value 
12 
1. "This refinement used a cutover strategy of 
ALL for CSAs 1111, 1112 and 1113, of MIN 
for CSAs 2221 and 2222 and of GROWTH 
for CSA 3331." 
2. *"A cutover strategy of ALL was used for 
CSAs 1111, 1112 and 1113, of MIN for CSAs 
2221 and 2222 and of GROWTH for CSA 
3331." 
Figure 7: Paraphrasing and Conjunction 
a list and the Lexicalizer selects conjunction for the 
lexical role. Examples 1 and 2 in Figure 6 illustrate 
these cases. 
However, the more messages that are grouped to- 
gether, the greater the number of potentially distinct 
attributes. PLANDoc  groups such long compound 
messages into several separate sentences, where each 
sentence has a different common partition. It then 
combines these compound sentences together into a 
single conjunction. Example 3, Figure 6, illustrates 
this case. To generate these complex forms, the 
Content Planner indicates for each message which 
attributes are common and which are distinct. It 
then indicates which common attributes hould be 
gapped; depending on the attribute and its position, 
sometimes only the first reference is ungapped, while 
in other cases all but the last is gapped. SURGE 
generates the full sentence for each message, but sup- 
presses the gapped constituents when linearizing the 
syntactic tree representing the sentence. While this 
approach is less efficient, it is highly general since 
it can handle any combination of attributes without 
specifically anticipating it. 
Conjunction and ellipsis cannot be generated 
blindly, however. When conjunction is used for 
certain paraphrases, ambiguity and/or invalid sen- 
tences can result. The examples in Figure 7 show 
how conjunction using one paraphrase form (active 
with verb "use") is appropriate for conjunction with 
two distinct attributes (cutover strategy and CSA 
site), but a passive paraphrase for the same in- 
put produces an infelicitous result. This is because 
one distinct attribute occurs to the left of the verb 
("ALL" in the first clause) and the other (CSA site) 
to the right of the verb. Unless no ellipsis at all is 
used (in which case there is no point in using con- 
junction), it is impossible to generate a reasonable 
sentence. Thus, while we have implemented a gen- 
eral algorithm, there are still cases that are excep- 
tions to our approach. By limiting paraphrasing we 
have also limited the number of these cases to a man- 
ageable amount. 
4 Re la ted  Work  
Other natural language text generation systems 
designed to summarize quantitative data include: 
13 
ANA (Kukich 83), SEMTEX (Roesner87), LFS 
(Iordanskaja et al 92), GOSSIP  (Iordanskaja et 
al. 91), STREAK (Robin 93), and FoG (Bourbeau 
et al 90). All were influenced by early work on sub- 
language definition (Kittredge et al 83). ANA, a 
stock market report generator, achieves a high de- 
gree of fluency for complex sentences by relying on 
a phrasal lexicon; SEMTEX and LFS each gen- 
erate bilingual summaries of labor force statistics, 
French/English by the former, German/English by 
the latter; GOSSIP  generates paragraph-length re- 
ports describing operating system usage using a se- 
mantic net formalism; STREAK generates basket- 
ball summaries, packing as much information into a 
single sentence as possible, using complex sentence 
structures uch as multiple modifiers of a noun or 
verb, conjunction and ellipsis; FoG generates ma- 
rine weather forecasts from meteorological data and 
remains to date the only generator in everyday in- 
dustrial use. However, none of these systems make 
extensive use of conjunction and paraphrasing in a 
systematic way. 
5 Future  work  
PLANDoc will move into actual use in Fall 1994. 
At this point, we will be able to fully evaluate how 
well its output meets user needs. Furthermore, we 
plan to augment he system so that it can produce 
summaries of both the base plan and the proposed 
plan. Of these, the proposed plan summary presents 
somewhat more of a challenge. It should be about a 
paragraph in length but succinctly summarize the 
recommendations made by the planning engineer. 
Thus, the system must work within tighter space 
constraints to include all information. A second 
problem for this summary is that it must include 
information from multiple sources. The proposed 
plan will include elements of the base plan as well 
as a subset of the refinements the engineer carried 
out. PLANDoc  must determine how to integrate 
these different pieces of information, with emphasis 
on the resulting plan and less information on how 
it was derived. While we can use some of the same 
techniques currently used to make the refinements 
summary both more concise and more fluent (i.e., 
the combined use of conjunction and paraphrase), 
more research will be required in discourse planning 
and selection of textual focus. 
6 Conc lus ion  
PLANDoc demonstrates how text generation tools 
developed in a research environment are ready 
for commercial use. A fully implemented system, 
PLANDoc generates 1-2 page summaries of interac- 
tions between planning engineers and a developed 
software tool. In this paper, we have shown how 
PLANDoc uses a systematic ombination of con- 
junction and paraphrase to avoid repetition both 
of information and of phrasing. The ability to sys- 
tematically combine and group together related sen- 
tences in a wide variety of ways is a unique feature 
of our automated ocumentation system. Finally, 
through a user needs analysis we identified and im- 
plemented features to improve usability of the result- 
ing system. In particular, by allowing engineers to 
add their own refinements notes and to modify sys- 
tem generated text, PLANDoc can also be viewed 
as an aid to documentation that will help engineers 
more quickly create needed justification of why in- 
creased expenditures are necessary. 
References 
Hourbeau, L. and Caxcagno, D. and Goldber8, E. 
and Kittredge, R. and A. Polguere. 1990. Bilin- 
gual generation of weather forecastes in an oper- 
ations environment. In Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics, COLING. 
Dale, R. 1992. Generating Referring Ezpressions. 
ACL-MIT Press Series in Natural Language Pro- 
cessing, Cambridge, Ma. 
Elhadad, Michael 1991. FUF: The universal unifier 
- user manual, version 5.0. Tech Report CUCS- 
038-91, Columbia University. 
Elhadad, Michael 1993. Using argumentation to 
control lexical choice: a unification-based imple- 
mentation. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Science De- 
partment, Columbia University. 
Halliday, M.A.K. 1985. An introduction to func- 
tional grammar. Edward Arnold, London. 
Hovy, Edward 1991. Approaches to the planning of 
coherent ext. In Paris, C. and Swartout, W. and 
Mann. W.C. (editors), Natural Language Genera- 
tion in Artificial Intelligence and Computational 
Linguistics, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Iordanskaja, L., R. Kittredge and A. Polguere 
1991. Lexical Selection and Prarphrase in a 
Meaning-TextGeneration Model. In Paris, C. 
and Swartout, W. and Mann. W.C. (editors), 
Natural Language Generation in Artificial Intel- 
ligence and Computational Linguistics, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, pp. 293-312. 
Iordanskaja, L., M. Kim, R. Kittredge, B. Lavoie 
and A. Polguere 1992. Generation of Extended 
Biligual Statistical Reports. In Proceedings of 
COLING-94, COLING, pp. 1019-1023. 
Kay, Martin 1979. Functional Grammar In Pro- 
ceedings of the 5th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley 
Linguistic Society. 
Kittredge, Richard and John Lehrberger 1983. Sub. 
languages: Studies of Language in Restricted Se- 
mantic Domains, Walter DeGruyter, New York. 
Kukich, Kaxen 1983. The design of a knowledge- 
based text generator. In Proceedings of the ~lst 
Conference of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Massachusetts Institute of Technol- 
ogy, Cambridge, Mass., pp 145-150. 
McKeown, K.R. 1985. Using Discourse Strate- 
gies and Focus Constraints to Generate Natu- 
ral Language Tezt, newblock Studies in Natural 
Language Processing series, Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press. 
McKeown, K., Elhadad, M., Fukumoto, Y., Lim, J., 
Lombardi, C., Robin, J., and Smadja, F. 1990. 
Text generation in COMET In Dale, R. and 
Mellish, C.S. and Zock, M. (editors), Current 
Research in Natural Language Generation. Aca- 
demic Press. 
McKeown, K.R., and Feiner, S. 1990. Interactive 
Multimedia Explanation for Equipment Mainte- 
nance and Repair. In Proceedings of the DARPA 
Speech and Natural Language Workshop, DARPA, 
Hidden Valley, Pa. 
Moore, J.D. and C.L. Paris 1989. Planning Text for 
Advisory Dialogues. In Proceedings of the ?7th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Vancouver, B.C., pp. 203-11. 
Paris, C.L. 1987. The Use of Explicit User Models 
in Text Generation: Tailoring to a User's Level of 
Expertise. Columbia University. 
Rainbow, O. and Korelsky, T. 1992. Applied Text 
Generation. In Proceedings of the $rd Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing. As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Ttento, 
Italy, pp. 40-47. 
Robin, Jacques 1993. A Revision-Based Generation 
Architecture for Reporting Facts in their Histor- 
ical Context. In Horacek, H. and Zock, M. (edi- 
tors), New Concepts in Natural Language Genera- 
tion: Planning, Realization and Systems. Frances 
Pinter, London and New York. 
Roesner, D. 1987. SEMTEX: A Text Generator 
for German. In Geraxd Kempen (editor), Natural 
Language Generation: New Results in Artificial 
Intellligence, Psychology and Linguistics. Marti- 
nus Ninjhoff Publishers, pp. 133-148. 
Wahlster, W., Andre, E., Hecking, M., and T. Rist 
1989. WIP: Knowledge-based Presentation of In- 
formation. German Research Center for Artificial 
Intelligence, Saarbruecken, FRG. 
Wolz, Ursula 1992. Extending User Expertise in In- 
teractive Environments Department of Computer 
Science, Columbia University. 
14 
