An :Evaluation of a Method to :Detect and Correct Erroneous 
Characters in Japanese input through an OCR using Markov 
Models 
Tetsuo Araki 
Fukui University 
3-9-1 Bunkyo, 
Fukui-shi,Japan 
Satoru Ikehara 
NTT Communication 
Science Laboratories 
1-2356 Take, 
Yokosuka-shi, Japan 
Abstract  
The "Selective Error Correction Method" 
to judge these three types of errors, and 
correct them, using ra-th order Markov 
chain model for Japanese 'kanji-kana' char- 
acters, has been proposed and shown to be 
useful to detect and correct errors gener- 
ated randomly (Araki et al, 1994). 
In this paper, this method is applied to 
detect and correct erroneous characters in 
Japanese text input through an OCR.. The 
method is confirmed to be also elfective to 
detect and correct he errors introduced by 
the OCR. 
1 Introduct ion 
In order to improve the computers' man-machine 
tares'faces, input devices uch as Optical Character 
Readers(OCR.) or speech recognition devices have 
been developed. However, text input through an 
OCR or a speech recognition device usually contains 
erroneous character strings. 
The erroneous characters can be classified into 
three types. The first is characters that have been 
recognized incorrectly, that is taken to be characters 
other than the correct characters. The second and 
the third are extra characters wrongly inserted and 
deleted (skipped) characters. Markov chain modeLs 
have been used to find and correct he first type of 
errors. 
Recently, the Selective Error Correction Method 
to judge the three types of the errors and correct 
correct hese errors, using m-th order Markov chain 
model for Japanese 'kanji-kana' characters, has been 
proposed (Arak iet  al., 1994). 
In this paper, the Selective Error Correction 
Method is applied to detect and correct erroneous 
characters in Japanese text input through an OCR. 
Nobuyuki Tsukahara Yasunori Komatsu 
Fukui University Fukui University 
3-9-1 Bunkyo, 3~9-1 Bunkyo, 
Fukui-shi, Japan Fukui-shi, Japan 
2 Experimental  Procedure and 
Condit ions 
An experimental procedure using the Selective Error 
Correction Method for erroneous Japanese phrases 
input through OCR is described in Fig.1. 
Japanese "kanffi-kana. 
Bunsetsu Data 
OCR 
Error Detect ion and 
Correction procedure 
using Markov Models 
Fig.1. An Exper imental  Procedure Using 
Japanese Phrase Input  Through OCR. 
Corrected Japanese 
"kanj i - kana" 
Bunsetsu Data 
Experimental Conditions are denoted as follows: 
(1) The number of phrases used for statistics: 70 
issues of a daily Japanese newspaper containing 
283,963 phrases. 
(2) The number of phrases input through the OCR: 
lOOO phrases 
(a) The average length of phrase (in 'kanji-kana' 
characters): 6 (b) The size of character fonts: 8 point 
(c) The input method to the OCR: Fax 
198 
3 Bas ic  Def in i t ions  and  the  Se lec t ive  
Er ror  Cor rect ion  Method us ing  
2nd-Order  Markov  Mode l  
A Japanese sentence can be separated into syntactic 
units called phrases ( usually called "bunsetsu" ). 
Japanese phrases in a text can be divided into two 
types: correct phrases, erroneous phrases. The set of 
correct Japanese phrases is represented by Fc. The 
set of erroneous phrases is denoted by FE, and it 
is further divided into three types: The first is er- 
roneous phrases which contain erroneous characters 
substituted wrongly in the phrase, and is denoted by 
Fs. The second and the third are erroneous phrases 
which have characters ommitted from them (denoted 
by FD) or inserted wrongly in them (denoted by FI). 
The accuracy ratios to detect and to correct the 
errors by a method are evaluated by the "Relevance 
Factor" P and the "Recall Factor" R. Here, P de- 
notes the ratio of errors detected or corrected by a 
method to the whole of FE. R denotes the ratio that 
the elements of FE can be detected or corrected by 
a method. 
Next, we introduce the following assumption 
based on previous experiments: "Each Markov prob- 
ability for erroneous chains o\] syllables and 'kanji- 
kana' characters is small compared to that of correct 
chains". 
According to this assumption, the procedure of 
detecting the location i and the length k of error 
chains is defined as followed: Namely, the procedure 
detects that k characters are wrongly substituted or 
inserted at the location i, if the m-th order Markov 
probability for a chain remains maller than the crit- 
ical value T just (k + m) times from the location i
to i+k+m-1.  
Similar),, the method of detecting the location 
of a chain wrongly deleted in F~ ) and the meth- 
ods of correcting the chains with wrongly substi- 
tuted, inserted or deleted dlaracters are described 
in Ref.(Araki et al, 1994). 
4 Exper imenta l  Resu l ts  Us ing  
Er roneous  Japanese  Phrase  Input  
Through OCR 
4.1 Exper imenta l  Resu l ts  
The critical value of the 2nd-order Markov probabil- 
ity T was determined so as to make the value of P 
x R maximum for erroneou~ phrases. The experi- 
mentM results are described as follows: 
\[1\] Error detection and error correction of correct 
phrases 
All of correct phrase are judged to be correct. 
\[2\] The Relation of P and R for erroneous phrases 
The maximum values of P and R for the location 
of erroneous 'kanji-kana' character strings using er- 
ror detection procedures and those of the errors cor- 
reefed using error correction procedures, are as fol- 
lows: (1) p(D) = 79.0% R (D) = 74.5% (2) p(C) = 
66.2% R (c) = 84.6% 
p(D) The values of R(s/9) and "s  mean that this 
method can find 74.5% of the erroneous phrases Fs 
(substitution type), and 21.0% of the errors detected 
by this method are errors detected wrongly. 
From these results, it is shown that the Selective 
Error Correction Method using 2nd-order Markov 
models is useful to detect and correct erroneous char- 
acters substituted wrongly in text input through an 
OCR. 
4.2 Discuss ion 
\[1\] The characteristics of Erroneous Strings input 
through OCR. 
Compared to the errors randomly generated 
(Araki et at., I994), the errors caused by OCR 
showed high occurrence in the following four types of 
errors: (1) mixed type (combination of three error 
types ), (2) errors located at the head and at end 
of phrases, (3) errors that length of an erroneous 
string in a phrase is greater than 3, and (4) errors 
distributed within a phrase. 
\[2\] The comparison of the value of P and R for error 
detection and error correction. 
The maximum values of P and R to detect and 
correct errors caused by an OCR are inferior to that 
of errors generated randomly by 20-40%. 
The main reasons why the maximum values of P 
and R are reduced can mainly be explained by tile 
characteristics of (2) and (4) above mentioned. 
However, regarding to (1) substitution errors, (2) 
errors located inside phrases, (3) errors of length 1 
and (4) errors connected in phrases, it is seen that 
the maximum values of P and R to detect and cor- 
rect errors by OCR, are nearly equal to those for 
errors generated randomly. 
5 Conc lus ion  
In this paper, the Selective Error Correction Method 
proposed recently, is applied to detect and correct er- 
roneous characters wrongly substituted, deleted and 
inserted in Japanese text input using an OCR, the 
method is shown to be effective, though the accu- 
racy ratios to detect and correct the OCR errors is 
inferior to those of random errors. 
Re ferences  
T.Araki, S.Ikehara nd N.Tukahara. 1994. An Eval- 
uation to Detect and Correct Erroneous Charac- 
ters Wrongly Substituted, Deleted and Inserted 
Japanese and English Sentences Using Markov 
Models. COLING 94, Vol.l,pp187-193. 
199 
