MULTIFUNCTION THESAURUS FOR RUSSIAN WORD 
PROCESSING 
Igor A. Bolshakov 
Institute of Russian Language 
Russian Academy of Science 
Volkhonka, 18/2, 121019, Moscow, Russia 
E-mail irlras@irl.msk.su 
Abstract 
A new type of thesaurus for word process- 
ing is proposed. It comprises 7 semantic 
and 8 syntagmatic types of links between 
Russian words and collocations. The orig- 
inal version now includes ca. 76,000 ba- 
sic dictionary entries, 660,000 semantic and 
292,000 syntagmatic links, English inter- 
face, and communication with any text edi- 
tor. Methods of delivery enriching are used 
based on generic and synonymous links. 
1 Introduction 
Thesauri for commercial text editors are reduced 
now to synonym dictionaries. Meanwhile, the users 
often need to know, how might the given meaning 
be expressed by other words, not obligatory strictly 
synonymous or of different parts of speech, and what 
words are steadily combinable with the given one 
in texts. So various semantic (i.e. synonymous, 
antonymous, derivative, generic, meronymic) and 
syntagmatic ( ombinatorial) links are of interest. 
Systematization f these links by A. Zholkovsky 
I. Mel'chuk \[1, 2\] as lexical functions did not solve 
problem of gathering specific LF values. This proved 
to be of tremendous complexity and solved by the 
school of Mel'chuk-Apresian with speed insufficient 
for immediate word processing applications. But 
grouping LF makes them simpler for a common user 
to comprehend and less laborious for a developer to 
compile. 
To get a friendly reference facility on links bet- 
ween Russian words, we have developed a prototype 
thesaurus named CrossLexica. 
2 Directions of thesaurus  use  
In non-Russian community, our thesaurus i for stu- 
dents of universities with Slavonic departments, pro- 
fessional translators and teachers of Russian. A com- 
petence of such users in Russian may be various. 
So in the abroad version, hard-copy documentation, 
commands names, on-line help, error messages, and 
built-in translation dictionary were supplied in En- 
glish. 
Modes of use are the same for all conditions and 
comprise references out of or within context. In the 
first mode, the user types in a keyword by himself 
and gets, say, a set of its governing verbs. In the sec- 
ond mode, a query is formed within a conventional 
text editor, with return of the available information 
to the editor. In perspective, there exist many other 
ways of use of thesaurus DB, e.g. for filtering in 
syntactic parser. 
The user might get through thesaurus following 
information: (1) synonyms; (2) antonym(s); (3) hy- 
peronym; (4) hyponyms; (5) holonym; (6) mero- 
nyms; (7) common attributes for a given key; (8) 
words typically attributed by a given key; (9) se- 
mantic derivatives, i.e. the group of words convey- 
ing the same meaning through words of diverse parts 
of speech or through the same p.o.s., reflecting an- 
other participant of the situation; (10) verbs, (11) 
nouns, (12) adjectives, and (13) adverbs managing 
and steadily combinable with a given key; (14) man- 
aging model (case frame) for a given key, with all 
examples available; (15) a complementary element 
of a steadily coordinated pair (e.g. prava i svobody 
'rights and liberties'). Consistently using this infor- 
mation, the user reaches valid and idiomatic texts. 
3 Compilation of linguistic DB 
The linguistic kernel of thesaurus i a dictionary con- 
sisting of words and phraseological collocations. It 
is between them the semantic and syntagmatic links 
are established. 
When choosing elements of the dictionary, noun 
lexemes as a whole seemed unacceptable, since many 
nouns have diverse sets of attributes and/or man- 
aging verbs for the two numbers. So, as a rule, 
the numbers (if exist) were taken separately. Simi- 
lary it is for two aspects of Russian verbs and verbs 
with reflexive particle -sja. Participles and adverbial 
participles are considered independently from their 
verbs, as exhibiting properties of adjectives and ad- 
verbs, correspondingly. 
200 
Homonyms, as usually, were numbered and sup- 
plied with short clear explanations. We deal sim- 
ilarly with polysemantic words such tee (drink Vs. 
grocery). The division took into account differences 
between sets of related words. 
Compiling the dictionary, we took words covering 
Russian texts not less than to 90 percent and widely 
used words from sci-tech field. When acquiring new 
word combinations, new constituents appeared. 
Methods of acquisition of word combinations were 
much more laborious: 
Adopt ion f rom pr inted material .  We disposed 
of only one dictionary of Russian word combin- 
ability with 2500 keyword entries, though. 
Introspect ion,  i.e. purposeful recollection of all 
stable combinations including the given word. 
Analogy, i.e. matching a given entry with key- 
words significantly intersecting by meaning. 
Systemity,  i.e. engaging both noun numbers, both 
verb aspects, verbs adjoining this noun both as 
an  object and a subject, etc. 
Automated  scanning of texts, i.e. the use of a 
program, moving a "window" along the text, 
and counting frequencies of joint falling into it 
of two or more relevant words \[3\]. This method 
is universal, even with a manual post-editing. 
Regretfully, we lack large corpora of Russian 
texts. 
Calculat ion of LFs~ i.e. intensive analysis, if 
there exist their explications for this key. 
Manual  scanning of texts turned to be the most 
productive. Different sei-tech papers, books, 
and abstracts on radar, electronics, computer 
science, automatic ontrol, business, and ap- 
plied linguistics were taken. Different Russian 
periodicals for 1988-1992 were also used. 
4 Generat ion  o f  on - l ine  DB 
The source files of the linguistic DB contain format- 
ted texts, such as for managing verbs: 
zabota 'care' 
okruzhaet 'surrounds' 
projavljae~sja 'is shown' 
blagodarit' zal -u 'to thank for' 
brat' na sebya "u 'to take on oneself' 
We restricted marking of these texts to numbers 
of dictionary and preposition homonyms and to 
episodic part-of-speech labels. 
At work, words/combinations should be automat- 
ically processed on entering to computer (normal- 
ization of inflectional forms) and on output (valid 
formation of gender, number, case, etc.). Thus, the 
dictionary entries hould be supplied with morpho- 
logical parameter(s). 
Usually, construction ofa morpho-dictionary con- 
sidered as a separate task to be solved beforehand, 
thus necessitating permanent updating and mor- 
phological classification of new acquisitions. We 
took another way. Several complex utilities were 
written for translation of the source files to an 
on-line form and automatic onstructing morpho- 
dictionary. These comprise automatic morpho- 
classification ofwords based on their final letters and 
short lists of peculiar lexemes, stems and prefixes, 
inserted irectly to texts of the utilities. 
Special codes were given to preposition-case com- 
binations. All prepositions, including composite 
ones, were gathered and sorted. A Russian case 
(nominative, genitive,...) corresponds to each of 
them, forming a pair (preposition string, required 
case). Usual cases are formally among them as pairs 
(empty string, required case). The entries of the 
united pair list were named generalized cases. Their 
total number eaches 250. With a nonempty prepo- 
sition, encoding of a word combination was thus 
evident, otherwise several heuristics were applied. 
Separate verb-noun combinations reflect subject- 
predicate pairs. For them, personal verb forms are 
used. 
5 De l ivery  fo rming  and  enr ichment  
The thesaurus is destined for 15 main functions, 
basically described above: 1) Synonyms, 2) 
Antonyms,  3) Genus, 4) Species, 5) Whole,  6) 
Parts,  7) SemGroup,  8) Att r ibut ing,  9) At- 
t r ibuted,  10) MngVerbs, 11) MngNouns,  12) 
CaseFrame, 13) Doublet,  14) MngAdjs,  15) 
MngAdvs.  In original version, the first twelve func- 
tions are implemented. 
Each query to the system is a pair (main function, 
relevant key). A sequential use of delivery elements 
for next queries is a navigation within linguistic DB, 
that could lead arbitrarily far away from an initial 
key. The idea of the system implies, that none of its 
element could be an isolated node of the navigation 
network. 
To perform specific functions, not only data of 
separate subsystems can be independently used (for 
direct delivery), but numerous links between subsys- 
tems (for enrichment of delivery), for example: 
? If DB doesn't contain managing verbs, man- 
aging nouns, or attributes for the given noun, 
then sequentially, till finding nonempty con- 
tents, there are examined: other number of the 
same noun; its synonymous dominant; he nea- 
rest described hyperonym. E.g. there is the 
word combination pick up berries in DB, but not 
pick up gooseberries. So, using the hyperonymic 
link gooseberries ~ berries, needed combina- 
tions are delivered. 
201 
? As attributes for a given word, additionally to 
directly kept attributes, all passive participles 
are output, recorded in DB as predicates at the 
given noun subject. So for abzats 'paragraph', 
besides bol'shoj ' large',...words like vydelennyj 
'chosen',... will be output. 
? If there is no data for this aspect for a given 
verb in the DB, then those of the same verb in 
another aspect are taken. 
6 So f tware  imp lementat ion  
As an operating environment, MS Windows ver. 3.1 
with Russifier (font former) was taken. The IBM- 
compatible computer must have processor 386 or 
higher, main memory 2 MB or more and 6.5 MB 
of free disk space. 
In the upper part of a working window, there 
is a menu of auxiliary functions. These are Edi t  
(link with editors), WordForms (morphological pa- 
radigm of the key), H is to ry  of current session, Dic- 
t ionary  (its fragment beginning by word closest to 
the input buffer contents), and Help. Below, the 
buttons with main functions are posed. Their in- 
scriptions have three variants of contrast: (1) direct 
delivery is available for this function; (2) indirect 
delivery is possible; (3) delivery is empty. 
Lower, the selected function and the input editing 
buffer are presented. An English translation of a 
highlighted word and a box for explanations of a 
homonymous key are also here. The input may be 
directly typed, as well as be taken from the Dic- 
t ionary  fragment, H is to ry  list, a previous delivery, 
or text Editor  message. 
The delivery, widely varying in size, is given at 
the lower part. For CaseFrame,  it is split to zones 
corresponding to relevant generalized cases and sup- 
plied with questions, to which their entries response. 
If an input string (as such or after automatic nor- 
malization) proved to be a dictionary entry, it is ac- 
cepted as a component of a query. But if it is not 
reducible to a single entry, it is subject to simple 
parsing, with extaction of both potential parts and 
maybe a preposition. If both parts are in the dic- 
tionary and the link between them is also known, a 
query is formed automatically. 
Though the thesaurus was developed for Russian, 
all its functions, run-time routines and the interface 
equally suit to other European languages. Only util- 
ities for encoding of DB heavily depend on a s )ecific 
language. 
derivative 44,200 5261tO0 
synonymous 23,500 119,600 
meronymous 3,200 6,400 
hyponymous 2,200 4,400 
antonymous 1,700 3,400 
Total: 73,800 659,900 
The second column counts all subsystems ele- 
ments only once, the third one takes stock of all 
reverse and mutual inks. 
The current numbers of word combinations are: 
managing verbs 149,800 
managing nouns 56,100 
attributes 85,600 
coordinat.pairs 1,000 
Total: 292,500 
The coverage of open texts (in percents to a total 
occurrence number) was roughly estimated for verb- 
noun combinations (without enrichment feature). It 
is given below for several development s eps, includ- 
ing the current (3rd) one and prognosis (4th) based 
on Zipf distribution. 
St. Num. Mean Text Num.of 
of ent. ent.size cov.,7, combs 
1 2,670 9.8 40 26,500 
2 3,870 17.1 50 66,100 
3 6,270 23.9 55 149,800 
i 4 7,000 30.0 60 210,000 
Source 
vol, K B 
419 
1051 
2408 
4OO0 
Laboriousness of acquisition of new DB elements 
is monstrous. But for users with not too deep knowl- 
edge in Russian, all necessary means for expression 
of the broadest specter of meaning through word 
combinations are already at hand. 
Acknowledgements .  I would like to thank Dr. 
P. Cassidy, USA, for sponsoring software develop- 
ment and primary system testing. 
8 References  
\[1\] Zholkovsky, A.K., I.A. Mel'chuk. On seman- 
tic synthesis. Problems of Cybernetics (in Russian). 
Moscow, Nauka Publ.- 1967.- v. 19.- pp. 117-238. 
\[2\] Mel'chuk, I.A. Semantic bases of linguistic de- 
scription (Meaning-Text theory). The Twelfth LA- 
CUS Forum, 1985.- Lake Bluff, Ill.: LACUS.- 1986.- 
p. 41-87. 
\[3\] Calzolari, N., R. Bindi. Acquisition of lexical 
information from a large textual Italian corpus. Pa- 
pers of 13th Int. Conf. Comp. Ling.- Helsinki.- 
1990.- v.3.- pp. 54-59. 
7 Quant i ta t ive  features  
The total size of the source text files of DB (with- 
out grammar tables) exceeds now 6.8 MB, while the 
volume of the dictionary is approximately 76,000. 
Semantic links are sized as follows: 
202 
