Termight: Ident i fy ing  and Trans la t ing  Technica l  Termino logy  
Ido Dagan* Ken Church 
AT&T Bell Laboratories 
600 Mountain Ave. 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974, USA 
dagan~bimacs, cs. biu. ac. il 
kwc@research, att. com 
Abstract 
We propose a semi-automatic tool, ter- 
might, that helps professional translators 
and terminologists identify technical terms 
and their translations. The tool makes 
use of part-of-speech tagging and word- 
alignment programs to extract candidate 
terms and their translations. Although the 
extraction programs are far from perfect, 
it isn't too hard for the user to filter out 
the wheat from the chaff. The extraction 
algorithms emphasize completeness. Alter- 
native proposals are likely to miss impor- 
tant but infrequent terms/translations. To 
reduce the burden on the user during the 
filtering phase, candidates are presented in 
a convenient order, along with some useful 
concordance evidence, in an interface that 
is designed to minimize keystrokes. Ter- 
might is currently being used by the trans- 
lators at ATT Business Translation Ser- 
vices (formerly AT&T Language Line Ser- 
vices). 
1 Terminology: An Application for 
Natural Language Technology 
The statistical corpus-based renaissance in compu- 
tational linguistics has produced a number of in- 
teresting technologies, including part-of-speech tag- 
ging and bilingual word alignment. Unfortunately, 
these technologies are still not as widely deployed 
in practical applications as they might be. Part-of- 
speech taggers are used in a few applications, such 
as speech synthesis (Sproat et al, 1992) and ques- 
tion answering (Kupiec, 1993b). Word alignment is 
newer, found only in a few places (Gale and Church, 
1991a; Brown et al, 1993; Dagan et al, 1993). It 
is used at IBM for estimating parameters of their 
statistical machine translation prototype (Brown et 
*Author's current address: Dept. of Mathematics 
and Computer Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 
52900, Israel. 
al., 1993). We suggest hat part of speech tagging 
and word alignment could have an important role in 
glossary construction for translation. 
Glossaries are extremely important for transla- 
tion. How would Microsoft, or some other soft- 
ware vendor, want the term "Character menu" to 
be translated in their manuals? Technical terms are 
difficult for translators because they are generally 
not as familiar with the subject domain as either 
the author of the source text or the reader of the 
target text. In many cases, there may be a num- 
ber of acceptable translations, but it is important 
for the sake of consistency to standardize on a single 
one. It would be unacceptable for a manual to use 
a variety of synonyms for a particular menu or but- 
ton. Customarily, translation houses make extensive 
job-specific glossaries to ensure consistency and cor- 
rectness of technical terminology for large jobs. 
A glossary is a list of terms and their translations. 1 
We will subdivide the task of constructing a glossary 
into two subtasks: (1) generating a list of terms, and 
(2) finding the translation equivalents. The first task 
will be referred to as the monolingual task and the 
second as the bilingual task. 
How should a glossary be constructed? Transla- 
tion schools teach their students to read as much 
background material as possible in both the source 
and target languages, an extremely time-consuming 
process, as the introduction to Hann's (1992, p. 8) 
text on technical translation indicates: 
Contrary to popular opinion, the job of 
a technical translator has little in com- 
mon with other linguistic professions, uch 
as literature translation, foreign correspon- 
dence or interpreting. Apart from an ex- 
pert knowledge of both languages..., all 
that is required for the latter professions i
a few general dictionaries, whereas a tech- 
nical translator needs a whole library of 
specialized ictionaries, encyclopedias and 
1The source and target fields are standard, though 
many other fields can also be found, e.g., usage notes, 
part of speech constraints, comments, etc. 
34 
technical literature in both languages; he 
is more concerned with the exact meanings 
of terms than with stylistic considerations 
and his profession requires certain 'detec- 
tive' skills as well as linguistic and literary 
ones. Beginners in this profession have an 
especially hard time... This book attempts 
to meet his requirement. 
Unfortunately, the academic prescriptions are of- 
ten too expensive for commercial practice. Transla- 
tors need just-in-time glossaries. They cannot afford 
to do a lot of background reading and "detective" 
work when they are being paid by the word. They 
need something more practical. 
We propose a tool, termight, that automates some 
of the more tedious and laborious aspects of termi- 
nology research. The tool relies on part-of-speech 
tagging and word-alignment technologies to extract 
candidate terms and translations. It then sorts the 
extracted candidates and presents them to the user 
along with reference concordance lines, supporting 
efficient construction of glossaries. The tool is cur- 
rently being used by the translators at AT&T Busi- 
ness Translation Services (formerly AT~T Language 
Line Services). 
Termight may prove useful in contexts other than 
human-based translation. Primarily, it can sup- 
port customization f machine translation (MT) lex- 
icons to a new domain. In fact, the arguments for 
constructing a job-specific glossary for human-based 
translation may hold equally well for an MT-based 
process, emphasizing the need for a productivity 
tool. The monolingual component of termigM can 
be used to construct erminology lists in other ap- 
plications, such as technical writing, book indexing, 
hypertext linking, natural anguage interfaces, text 
categorization and indexing in digital libraries and 
information retrieval (Salton, 1988; Cherry, 1990; 
Harding, 1982; Bourigault, 1992; Damerau, 1993), 
while the bilingual component can be useful for in- 
formation retrieval in multilingual text collections 
(Landauer and Littman, 1990). 
2 Monolingual Task: An Application 
for Part-of-Speech Tagging 
Although part-of-speech taggers have been around 
for a while, there are relatively few practical appli- 
cations of this technology. The monolingual task 
appears to be an excellent candidate. As has been 
noticed elsewhere (Bourigault, 1992; Justeson and 
Katz, 1993), most technical terms can be found by 
looking for multiword noun phrases that satisfy a 
rather estricted set of syntactic patterns. We follow 
Justeson and Katz (1993) who emphasize the impor- 
tance of term frequency in selecting ood candidate 
terms. An expert terminologist can then skim the 
list of candidates to weed out spurious candidates 
and cliches. 
Very simple procedures of this kind have been re- 
markably successful. They can save an enormous 
amount of time over the current practice of reading 
the document to be translated, focusing on tables, 
figures, index, table of contents and so on, and writ- 
ing down terms that happen to catch the translator's 
eye. This current practice is very laborious and runs 
the risk of missing many important terms. 
Termight uses a part of speech tagger (Church, 
1988) to identify a list of candidate terms which is 
then filtered by a manual pass. We have found, 
however, that the manual pass dominates the cost 
of the monolingual task, and consequently, we have 
tried to design an interactive user interface (see Fig- 
ure 1) that minimizes the burden on the expert er- 
minologist. The terminologist is presented with a 
list of candidate terms, and corrects the list with 
a minimum number of key strokes. The interface 
is designed to make it easy for the expert to pull 
up evidence from relevant concordance lines to help 
identify incorrect candidates as well as terms that 
are missing from the list. A single key-press copies 
the current candidate term, or the content of any 
marked emacs region, into the upper-left screen. 
The candidates are sorted so that the better ones 
are found near the top of the list, and so that re- 
lated candidates appear near one another. 
2.1 Candidate terms and associated 
concordance lines 
Candidate terms. The list of candidate terms 
contains both multi-word noun phrases and single 
words. The multi-word terms match a small set of 
syntactic patterns defined by regular expressions and 
are found by searching a version of the document 
tagged with parts of speech (Church, 1988). The 
set of syntactic patterns is considered as a parame- 
ter and can be adopted to a specific domain by the 
user. Currently our patterns match only sequences 
of nouns, which seem to yield the best hit rate in our 
environment. Single-word candidates are defined by 
taking the list of all words that occur in the docu- 
ment and do not appear in a standard stop-list of 
"noise" words. 
Grouping and sorting of terms. The list of 
candidate terms is sorted to group together all noun 
phrase terms that have the same head word (as in 
Figure 1), which is simply the last word of the term 
for our current set of noun phrase patterns. The 
order of the groups in the list is determined by de- 
creasing frequency of the head word in the docu- 
ment, which usually correlates with the likelihood 
that this head word is used in technical terms. 
Sorting within groups. Under each head word 
the terms are sorted alphabetically according to re- 
versed order of the words. Sorting in this order 
reflects the order of modification i  simple English 
noun phrases and groups together terms that denote 
different modifications of a more general term (see 
35 
F i le  Edit  Buffers Help 
software set t ings  
sett ings 
font  slze 
de@ault paper size 
paper size 
anchor point  
decimal po int  
end point  
hgphenatlon point  
inser t ion  point 
software sett ings 
spec i f i c  set t ings 
sett ings 
change slze 
~cnt size 
defau l t  paper size 
paper size 
umn size 
size 
anchor point  
decimal po int  
end point  
hgphenatlon point  
l l l s s r t lon  point  
~neertlon point  
po int  
5s t t lng  Advanced Options 
Ineer t lon  point  
117709: ourtd in gout Write document. To move the_ inser t ion  
I17894: Choose OK. The dialog box dleappears, and the Ineert lon 
66058: Chepter 2 Appl icat ion Baslce__2. Place the Ineert lon 
122717: Inden\[at lon o f  a paragraph:_ I .  Place the inser t ion  
122811: aragreph bw ualng the Ruler:_ I .  Place the inser t ion  
122909: _ To create a hanslng Indent : _ l .  Place the inser t ion  
i17546: In t lng  Inelde the window and_ where the Inaer t lon  
36195: nd date to ang Hotep6d document:_ Move the inser t ion  
35870: search fo r  text  in f lo tepad:_  1. Move the inser t ion  
46478: dest inat ion_ document are v l s lb le . _3 .  Move the inser t ion  
32436: into  which gou want to inser t  the text  Move the inser t ion  
67442: ext  l lne .  Press the 5tACEBAR to_ move the inser t ion  
44476: card._ I f  gou are using Write. move the inser t ion  
67667: f i r s t  character gou want to select  and drag the inser t ion  
35932: tch Case check box?_ 3. To search ?lom the inser t ion  
35957: defau l t  se t t ing  is  Oown. This searches from the 
12092g: inser t  a manual page break:_ Posit ion the 
~olnt. po int  to a locat ion in the docume 
~olnt moves to the_ selected pa 
~olnt at  the place you want the Informer 
~olnt inside the paragraph you "want to 
~olnt inside the paragraph @ou want to c 
~olnt Inelde the paragraph in "which gou 
oolnt w i l l  move to i f  gou c l i ck  a locat l  
oolnt to the place gou want the time and 
0olnt to the place gou want to s ta r t  the 
0olnt to the place gou want the package 
0olnt_ to the place gou want the text  
oolnt one space to the r ight . _  To 
oolnt to the place gou want the object_ 
3olnt to  the last_  character gou 
oolnt to the bes inr t ln  S of  the fde. sele 
insertion-- po int  to the end of  the f i l e , _  
inser t ion  point  where you want the page break and 
Figure 1: The monolingual user interface consists of three screens: (1) the input list of candidate terms 
(upper right), (2) the output list of terms, as constructed by the user (upper left), and (3) the concordance 
lines associated with the current term, as indicated by the cursor position in screen 1. Typos are due to 
OCR errors. Underscores denote line breaks. 
for example the terms default paper size, paper size 
and size in Figure 1). 
Concordance  l ines. To decide whether a can- 
didate term is indeed a term, and to identify multi- 
word terms that are missing from the candidate list, 
one must view relevant lines of the document. For 
this purpose we present a concordance line for each 
occurrence of a term (a text line centered around 
the term). If, however, a term, tl ,  (like 'point') is 
contained in a longer term, $2, (like 'insertion point' 
or 'decimal point') then occurrences of t2 are not 
displayed for tl .  This way, the occurrences of a gen- 
eral term (or a head word) are classified into dis- 
joint sets corresponding to more specific terms, leav- 
ing only unclassified occurrences under the general 
term. In the case of 'point', for example, five spe- 
cific terms are identified that account for 61 occur- 
rences of 'point', and accordingly, for 61 concordance 
lines. Only 20 concordance lines are displayed for the 
word 'point' itself, and it is easy to identify in them 
5 occurrences of the term 'starting point', which is 
missing from the candidate list (because 'starting' 
is tagged as a verb). To facilitate scanning, con- 
cordance lines are sorted so that all occurrences of 
identical preceding contexts of the head word, like 
'starting', are grouped together. Since all the words 
of the document, except for stop list words, appear 
in the candidate list as single-word terms it is guar- 
anteed that every term that was missed by the au- 
tomatic procedure will appear in the concordance 
lines. 
In summary, our algorithm performs the following 
steps: 
? Extract multi-word and single-word candidate 
terms. 
? Group terms by head word and sort groups by 
head-word frequency. 
? Sort terms within each group alphabetically in
reverse word order. 
? Associate concordance lines with each term. An 
occurrence of a multi-word term t is not associ- 
ated with any other term whose words are found 
in t. 
? Sort concordance lines of a term alphabetically 
according to preceding context. 
2.2 Eva luat ion  
Using the monolingual component, a terminologist 
at AT&T Business Translation Services constructs 
terminology lists at the impressive rate of 150-200 
terms per hour. For example, it took about 10 hours 
to construct a list of 1700 terms extracted from a 
300,000 word document. The tool has at least dou- 
bled the rate of constructing terminology lists, which 
was previously performed by simpler lexicographic 
tools. 
36 
2.3 Comparison with related work 
Alternative proposals are likely to miss important 
but infrequent terms/translations such as 'Format 
Disk dialog box' and 'Label Disk dialog box' which 
occur just once. In particular, mutual information 
(Church and Hanks, 1990; Wu and Su, 1993) and 
other statistical methods uch as (Smadja, 1993) 
and frequency-based methods uch as (Justeson and 
Katz, 1993) exclude infrequent phrases because they 
tend to introduce too much noise. We have found 
that frequent head words are likely to generate a
number of terms, and are therefore more important 
for the glossary (a "productivity" criterion). Con- 
sider the frequent head word box. In the Microsoft 
Windows manual, for example, almost any type of 
box is a technical term. By sorting on the frequency 
of the headword, we have been able to find many 
infrequent erms, and have not had too much of 
a problem with noise (at least for common head- 
words). 
Another characteristic of previous work is that 
each candidate term is scored independently of other 
terms. We score a group of related terms rather than 
each term at a time. Future work may enhance our 
simple head-word frequency score and may take into 
account additional relationships between terms, in- 
cluding common words in modifying positions. 
Termight uses a part-of-speech tagger to identify 
candidate noun phrases. Justeson and Katz (1993) 
only consult a lexicon and consider all the possible 
parts of speech of a word. In particular, every word 
that can be a noun according to the lexicon is con- 
sidered as a noun in each of its occurrences. Their 
method thus yields some incorrect noun phrases that 
will not be proposed by a tagger, but on the other 
hand does not miss noun phrases that may be missed 
due to tagging errors. 
3 B i l ingua l  Task :  An  App l i ca t ion  fo r  
Word  A l ignment  
3.1 Sentence and word alignment 
Bilingual alignment methods (Warwick et al, 1990; 
Brown et al, 1991a; Brown et al, 1993; Gale and 
Church, 1991b; Gale and Church, 1991a; Kay and 
Roscheisen, 1993; Simard et al, 1992; Church, 1993; 
Kupiec, 1993a; Matsumoto et al, 1993; Dagan et al, 
1993). have been used in statistical machine transla- 
tion (Brown et al, 1990), terminology research and 
translation aids (Isabelle, 1992; Ogden and Gonza- 
les, 1993; van der Eijk, 1993), bilingual lexicography 
(Klavans and Tzoukermann, 1990; Smadja, 1992), 
word-sense disambiguation (Brown et al, 1991b; 
Gale et al, 1992) and information retrieval in a 
multilingual environment (Landauer and Littman, 
1990). 
Most alignment work was concerned with align- 
ment at the sentence l vel. Algorithms for the more 
difficult task of word alignment were proposed in 
(Gale and Church, 1991a; Brown et al, 1993; Da- 
gan et al, 1993) and were applied for parameter es- 
timation in the IBM statistical machine translation 
system (Brown et al, 1993). 
Previously translated texts provide a major source 
of information about technical terms. As Isabelle 
(1992) argues, "Existing translations contain more 
solutions to more translation problems than any 
other existing resource." Even if other resources, 
such as general technical dictionaries, are available it
is important to verify the translation of terms in pre- 
viously translated ocuments of the same customer 
(or domain) to ensure consistency across documents. 
Several translation workstations provide sentence 
alignment and allow the user to search interactively 
for term translations in aligned archives (e.g. (Og- 
den and Gonzales, 1993)). Some methods use sen- 
tence alignment and additional statistics to find can- 
didate translations of terms (Smadja, 1992; van der 
Eijk, 1993). 
We suggest hat word level alignment is better 
suitable for term translation. The bilingual compo- 
nent of termight gets as input a list of source terms 
and a bilingual corpus aligned at the word level. We 
have been using the output of word_align, a robust 
alignment program that proved useful for bilingual 
concordancing of noisy texts (Dagan et al, 1993). 
Word_align produces a partial mapping between the 
words of the two texts, skipping words that cannot 
be aligned at a given confidence l vel (see Figure 2). 
3.2 Candidate translat ions and associated 
concordance lines 
For each occurrence of a source term, termight iden- 
tifies a candidate translation based on the alignment 
of its words. The candidate translation is defined as 
the sequence of words between the first and last tar- 
get positions that are aligned with any of the words 
of the source term. In the example of Figure 2 the 
candidate translation of Optional Parameters box is 
zone Parametres optionnels, since zone and option- 
nels are the first and last French words that are 
aligned with the words of the English term. Notice 
that in this case the candidate translation is correct 
even though the word Parameters i  aligned incor- 
rectly. In other cases alignment errors may lead to 
an incorrect candidate translation for a specific oc- 
currence of the term. It is quite likely, however, that 
the correct ranslation, or at least a string that over- 
laps with it, will be identified in some occurrences 
of the term. 
Termight collects the candidate translations from 
all occurrences ofa source term and sorts them in de- 
creasing frequency order. The sorted list is presented 
to the user, followed by bilingual concordances for all 
occurrences of each candidate translation (see Fig- 
ure 3). The user views the concordances to verify 
correct candidates or to find translations that are 
37 
You can type application parameters in the Optional Parameters box. 
Vous pouvez tapez les parametres d'une application dans la zone Parametres optionnels. 
Figure 2: An example of word_align's output for the English and French versions of the Microsoft Windows 
manual. The alignment of Parameters to optionnels is an error. 
missing from the candidate list. The latter task 
becomes especially easy when a candidate overlaps 
with the correct ranslation, directing the attention 
of the user to the concordance lines of this particular 
candidate, which are likely to be aligned correctly. 
A single key-stroke copies a verified candidate trans- 
lation, or a translation identified as a marked emacs 
region in a concordance line, into the appropriate 
place in the glossary. 
3.3 Evaluat ion 
We evaluated the bilingual component of termight 
in translating a glossary of 192 terms found in the 
English and German versions of a technical manual. 
The correct answer was often the first choice (40%) 
or the second choice (7%) in the candidate list. For 
the remaining 53% of the terms, the correct answer 
was always somewhere in the concordances. Using 
the interface, the glossary was translated at a rate 
of about 100 terms per hour. 
3.4 Related work and issues for future 
research 
Smadja (1992) and van der Eijk (1993) describe term 
translation methods that use bilingual texts that 
were aligned at the sentence level. Their methods 
find likely translations by computing statistics on 
term cooccurrence within aligned sentences and se- 
lecting source-target pairs with statistically signifi- 
cant associations. We found that explicit word align- 
ments enabled us to identify translations of infre- 
quent erms that would not otherwise meet statisti- 
cal significance criteria. If the words of a term occur 
at least several times in the document (regardless of 
the term frequency) then word_align is likely to align 
them correctly and termight will identify the correct 
translation. If only some of the words of a term are 
frequent then termight is likely to identify a transla- 
tion that overlaps with the correct one, directing the 
user quickly to correctly aligned concordance lines. 
Even if all the words of the term were not Migned 
by word_align it is still likely that most concordance 
lines are aligned correctly based on other words in 
the near context. 
Termight motivates future improvements in word 
alignment quality that will increase recall and preci- 
sion of the candidate list. In particular, taking into 
account local syntactic structures and phrase bound- 
aries will impose more restrictions on alignments of 
complete terms. 
Finally, termight can be extended for verifying 
translation consistency at the proofreading (editing) 
step of a translation job, after the document has 
been translated. For example, in an English-German 
document pair the tool identified the translation of 
the term Controls menu as Menu Steuerung in 4 out 
of 5 occurrences. In the fifth occurrence word_align 
failed to align the term correctly because another 
translation, Steuermenu, was uniquely used, violat- 
ing the consistency requirement. Termight, or a sim- 
ilar tool, can thus be helpful in identifying inconsis- 
tent translations. 
4 Conc lus ions  
We have shown that terminology research provides 
a good application for robust natural language tech- 
nology, in particular for part-of-speech tagging and 
word-alignment algorithms. Although the output of 
these algorithms i far from perfect, it is possible to 
extract from it useful information that is later cor- 
rected and augmented by a user. Our extraction al- 
gorithms emphasize completeness, and identify also 
infrequent candidates that may not meet some of 
the statistical significance criteria proposed in the 
literature. To make the entire process efficient, how- 
ever, it is necessary to analyze the user's work pro- 
cess and provide interfaces that support it. In many 
cases, improving the way information is presented 
to the user may have a larger effect on productivity 
than improvements in the underlying natural an- 
guage technology. In particular, we have found the 
following to be very effective: 
? Grouping linguistically related terms, making it 
easier to judge their validity. 
? Sorting candidates such that the better ones are 
found near the top of the list. With this sorting 
one's time is efficiently spent by simply going 
down the list as far as time limitations permit. 
? Providing quick access to relevant concordance 
lines to help identify incorrect candidates a  well 
as terms or translations that are missing from 
the candidate list. 
38 
Character menu 
menu Caracteres 4 
2 I ta l lque 2 
3 No translations available 1 
menu Caracteres 4 
121163: Formatting characters 
135073: ~orme des caracteres 
The commands on the Character menu control how you ?ormat the 
Lee commandes du menu Caracteree permettent de determiner la pr 
121294: 
135188: : 
Chooee the stgle gou want to use ?rom the Character menu, Tgpe gout tcx t .  The 
CholsIssez le stgle voulu dans le menu Caracteres. Tapez votre texte.  Le texte 
S: Card menu 
T: menu Fiche 
S: Character menu 
T: menu Caracteres 
S: Control menu 
T: 
S: Disk menu 
T: 
Figure 3: The bilingual user interface consists of two screens. The lower screen contains the constructed 
glossary. The upper screen presents the current term, candidate translations with their frequencies and a 
bilingual concordance for each candidate. Typos are due to OCR errors. 
? Minimizing the number of required key-strokes. 
As the need for efficient knowledge acquisition tools 
becomes widely recognized, we hope that this expe- 
rience with termight will be found useful for other 
text-related systems as well. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Pat Callow from AT&T 
Buiseness Translation Services (formerly AT&T 
Language Line Services) for her indispensable role 
in designing and testing termight. We would also 
like to thank Bala Satish and Jon Helfman for their 
part in the project. 
References 
Didier Bourigault. 1992. Surface grammatical nal- 
ysis for the extraction of terminological noun 
phrases. In Proc. of COLING, pages 977-981. 
P. Brown, J. Cocke, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, 
F. Jelinek, R.L. Mercer, and P.S. Roossin. 1990. 
A statistical approach to language translation. 
Computational Linguistics, 16(2):79-85. 
P. Brown, J. Lai, and R. Mercer. 1991a. Aligning 
sentences in parallel corpora. In Proc. of the An- 
nual Meeting of the ACL. 
P. Brown, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, and 
R. Mercer. 1991b. Word sense disambiguation 
using statistical methods. In Proc. of the Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, pages 264-270. 
Peter Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della 
Pietra, and Robert Mercer. 1993. The math- 
ematics of statistical machine translation: pa- 
rameter estimation. Computational Linguistics, 
19(2):263-311. 
L. L. Cherry. 1990. Index. In Unix Research Sys- 
tem Papers, volume 2, pages 609-610. AT&T, 10 
edition. 
Kenneth W. Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word 
association orms, mutual information, and lexi- 
cography. Computational Linguistics, 16(1):22- 
29. 
Kenneth W. Church. 1988. A stochastic parts pro- 
gram and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text. 
In Proc. of ACL Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing. 
Kenneth W. Church. 1993. Char_align: A program 
for aligning parallel texts at character level. In 
Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
Ido Dagan, Kenneth Church, and William Gale. 
1993. Robust bilingual word alignment for ma- 
chine aided translation. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora: Academic and 
Industrial Perspectives, pages 1-8. 
Fred J. Damerau. 1993. Generating and evaluating 
domain-oriented multi-word terms from texts. In- 
formation Processing ~ Management, 29(4):433- 
447. 
William Gale and Kenneth Church. 1991a. Identify- 
ing word correspondence in parallel text. In Proc. 
39 
of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural 
Language. 
William Gale and Kenneth Church. 1991b. A pro- 
gram for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. 
In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
William Gale, Kenneth Church, and David 
Yarowsky. 1992. Using bilingual materials to 
develop word sense disambiguation methods. In 
Proc. of the International Conference on Theoret- 
ical and Methodolgical Issues in Machine Trans- 
lation, pages 101-112. 
Michael I-Iann. 1992. The Key to Technical Transla- 
tion, volume 1. John Benjamins Publishing Com- 
pany. 
P. Harding. 1982. Automatic indexing and clas- 
sification for mechanised information retrieval. 
BLRDD Report No. 5723, British Library R & 
D Department, London, February. 
P. Isabelle. 1992. Bi-textual aids for translators. In 
Proc. of the Annual Conference of the UW Center 
for the New OED and Text Research. 
John Justeson and Slava Katz. 1993. Technical ter- 
minology: some linguistic properties and an algo- 
rithm for identification in text. Technical Report 
RC 18906, IBM Research Division. 
M. Kay and M. Roscheisen. 1993. Text-translation 
alignment. Computational Linguistics, 19(1):121- 
142. 
J. Klavans and E. Tzoukermann. 1990. The bicord 
system. In Proc. of COLING. 
Julian Kupiec. 1993a. An algorithm for finding 
noun phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. 
In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
Julian Kupiec. 1993b. MURAX: A robust linguistic 
approach for question answering using an on-line 
encyclopedia. In Proc. of International Confer- 
ence on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, SIGIR, pages 181-190. 
Thomas K. Landauer and Michael L. Littman. 
1990. Fully automatic ross-language document 
retrieval using latent semantic indexing. In Proe. 
of the Annual Conference of the UW Center for 
the New OED and Text Research. 
Yuji Matsumoto, Hiroyuki Ishimoto, Takehito Ut- 
suro, and Makoto Nagao. 1993. Structural match- 
ing of parallel texts. In Proc. of the Annual Meet- 
ing of the A CL. 
William Ogden and Margarita Gonzales. 1993. 
Norm - a system for translators. Demonstration 
at ARPA Workshop on Human Language Tech- 
nology. 
Gerard Salton. 1988. Syntactic approaches to au- 
tomatic book indexing. In Proc. of the Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, pages 204-210. 
M. Simard, G. Foster, and P. Isabelle. 1992. Us- 
ing cognates to align sentences in bilingual cor- 
pora. In Proc. of the International Conference on 
Theoretical and Methodolgical Issues in Machine 
Translation. 
Frank Smadja. 1992. How to compile a bilingual col- 
locational lexicon automatically. In AAAI Work- 
shop on Statistically-based Natural Language Pro- 
cessing Techniques, July. 
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations 
from text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 
19(1):143-177. 
R. Sproat, J. I-Iirschberg, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. 
A corpus-based synthesizer. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, pages 563-566, Banff, October. IC- 
SLP. 
Pim van der Eijk. 1993. Automating the acquisition 
of bilingual terminology. In EACL, pages 113- 
119. 
S. Warwick, J. ttajic, and G. Russell. 1990. Search- 
ing on tagged corpora: linguistically motivated 
concordance analysis. In Proc. of the Annual Con- 
ference of the UW Center for the New OED and 
Text Research. 
Ming-Wen Wu and Keh-Yih Su. 1993. Corpus- 
based compound extraction with mutual informa- 
tion and relative frequency count. In Proceedings 
of ROCLING VI, pages 207-216. 
40 
