Industrial Applications of Unification Morphology 
GSbor  P rdszdky  
MorphoLogic  
F6 u. 56-58. I /3.  
H-1011 Budapest ,  Hungary  
h6109pro@ella.hu 
Abst rac t  
Industrial applications of a reversible, 
string-based, unification approach called 
Humor (High-speed Unification Morphol- 
ogy) is introduced in the paper. It has 
been used for creating a variety of proofing 
tools and dictionaries, like spelling check- 
ers, hyphenators, lemmatizers, inflectional 
thesauri, intelligent bi-lingual dictionaries 
and, of course, full morphological nalysis 
and synthesis. The first industrialized ver- 
sions of all of the above modules work and 
licensed by well-known software companies 
for their products' Hungarian versions. De- 
velopment of the same modules for other 
agglutinative (e.g. Turkish, Estonian) and 
other (highly) inflectional anguages (e.g. 
Polish, French, German) have also begun. 
1 Suppor ted  Morpho log ica l  
Processes  
1.1 Morphological Analysis/Synthesis and 
Lemmatiz ing 
The morphological nalyser is the kernel module of 
the system: almost all of the applications derived 
from Humor based on it. It provides all the possible 
segmentations of the word-form in question cover- 
ing inflections, derivations, prefixations, compound- 
ing and creating basic lexical forms of the stems. 
Morphological synthesis is based on analysis, that 
is, all the possible morphemic ombinations built by 
the core synthesis module are filtered by the ana- 
lyzer. 
Lemmatizer is a simplified version of the morpho- 
logical analysis ystem. It provides all the possible 
lexical stems of a word-form, but does not provide 
inflectional and derivational information. 
1.2 Spell ing Checking and Correction 
Spelling checking of agglutinative languages cannot 
be based on simple wordlist based method because 
of the incredibly high number of possible word-forms 
of these languages. Algorithmic solutions, that is 
morphology based applications, are the only way to 
solve the problem (Solak and Oflazer 1992). The 
spelling checker based on our unification morphology 
method provides a logical answer whether the word- 
form in question can be constructed according to the 
actual morphological descriptions of the system, or 
not. In case of negative answer a correction strategy 
starts to work. It is based on orthographic, morpho- 
phonological, morphological nd lexical properties of 
the words. This strategy also works in real corpus 
applications where automatic orrections of some 
typical mis-typings have to be made. 
1.3 Hyphenation 
There are languages in which 100% hyphenation 
cannot be made without exact morphological seg- 
mentation of the words. Hungarian is a language of 
this type: boundaries between prefixes and stems, 
or between the components of compounds override 
the main hyphenation rules that cover around 85% 
of the hyphenation points. Our unification based 
hyphenator guarantees, in principle, perfect hyphen- 
ation (including the critical Hungarian hyphenation 
of long double consonants where new letters have to 
be inserted while hyphenated). 
1.4 Mono- and Bi-l ingual Dictionaries 
Besides the above described well-known types of 
applications there are two new tools based on 
the same strategy, the inflectional thesaurus called 
Helyette (Pr6sz4ky ~5 Tihanyi 1993), and the series 
of intelligent bi-lingual dictionaries called MoBiDic. 
Both are dictionaries with morphological knowledge: 
Helyette is monolingual, while MoBiDic - -  as its 
name suggests 1 - -  bi-lingual. Having analyzed the 
input word both systems look for the lemma in the 
main dictionary. The inflectional thesaurus tores 
the information encoded in the analyzed affixes, and 
adds to the synonym chosen by the user. The mor- 
phological synthesis module starts to work here, and 
provides the user with the adequate inflected form 
1 MorphoLogic's Bi-lingual Dictionary 
213 
of the word in question. This procedure has a great 
importance in case of highly inflectional languages. 
2 Imp lementat ion  Deta i l s  
Humor unification morphology systems have been 
fully implemented for Hungarian. The same pack- 
age for Polish, Turkish, German, French are under 
development. The whole software package is writ- 
ten in standard C using C++ like objects. It runs 
on any platforms where C compiler can be found. 2
The Hungarian morphological nalyzer which is 
the largest and most precise implementation needs 
around 100 Kbytes of core memory and 600 Kbytes 
disk space for spell-checking and hyphenation (plus 
300 Kbytes for full analysis and synthesis). The stem 
dictionary contains more than 90.000 stems which 
cover all (approx. 70.000) lexemes of the Concise 
Explanatory Dictionary of the Hungarian Language. 
Suffix dictionaries contain all the inflectional suf- 
fixes and the productive derivational morphemes of
present-day Hungarian. With the help of these dic- 
tionaries Humor is able to analyze and/or generate 
around 2.000.000.000 well-formed Hungarian word- 
forms. Its speed is between 50 and 100 words/s on 
an average 40 MHz 386 machine. The whole system 
can be tuned 3 according to the speed requirements: 
the needed RAM size can be between 50 and 900 
Kbytes. 
The synonym system of Helyette contains 40.000 
headwords. The first version of the inflectional the- 
saurus Helyette needs 1.6 Mbytes disk space and 
runs under MS-Windows. The size of the MoBiDic 
packages vary depending on the applied terminologi- 
cal collection. E.g. the Hungarian-English Business 
Dictionary needs 1.8 Mbytes space. 4
Humor-based lemmatizers support free text search 
in Verity's Topic and Oracle, and it is used by the 
lexicographers of the Institute of Linguistics of the 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences in their every-day 
work. That is, the corpus used in creation of Histor- 
ical Dictionary of Hungarian has been lemmatized 
by tools based on our unification morphology. 
Numerous versions of other Humor-based applica- 
tions run under DOS, OS/2, UNIX and on Macin- 
tosh systems. 5 
References  
Pr6sz4ky, G., Tihanyi, L. A Fast Morphological 
Analyzer for Lemmatizing Corpora of Agglutina- 
tive Languages. In: Kiefer, F., Kiss, G, 8J Pa- 
jzs, J. (eds.) Papers in Computational Lexicography 
-- COMPLEX 92. Linguistics Institute, Budapest: 
265-278. (1992) Pr6sz4ky, G., Tihanyi, L. Helyette: 
Inflectional Thesaurus for Agglutinative Languages. 
Proceedings of the 6th Conference of EA CL, Utrecht: 
473. (1993) 
Solak, A. and K. Oflazer. Parsing Agglutina- 
tive Word Structures and Its Application to Spelling 
Checking for Turkish. Proceedings of the COLING- 
92, Nantes: 39-45. (1992) 
3 Industrial applications 
There are several commercially available Humor sub- 
systems for different purposes: lemmatizers, hy- 
phenators, spelling checkers and correctors. They 
(called HelyesLem, Helyesel and Helyes-e?, respec- 
tively) have been built into several word-processing 
and full-text retrieval systems. 
Spelling checkers and hyphenators are available 
either as a part of Microsoft Word for Windows, 
Works, Excel, Lotus 1-2-3 and AmiPro, Aldus Page- 
Maker, WordPerfect, etc. or in stand-alone form for 
DOS, Windows and Macintosh. Microsoft and Lo- 
tus licensed the above proofing tool packages for all 
of their localized Hungarian products. 
2Up to now, DOS, Windows, OS/2, UNIX and Mac- 
intosh environments have been tested. 
3Even by the end-users. 
4Its language specific and not application specific 
parts cannot be multiplied if other vocabularies also need 
Hungarian and/or English. 
5For OEM partners there is a weU-defined API to 
Humor. 
214 
