An Inheritance-based Lexicon for Message Understanding 
Systems 
Lynne J. CahUl* 
School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences 
University of Sussex 
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK 
lynneca@cogs, susx .  ac .  uk 
Introduction 
POETIC (POrtable Extendable Traffic Information 
Collator)* (Gaizauskas et al, 1992) is a prototype system 
which analyses police reports of traffic incidents, builds a 
picture of the incident and broadcasts advisory messages 
automatically to motorists if necessary. The front end of 
the system can be viewed as a message understanding 
system, comprising two distinct components: a message 
analyser which is essentially a chart parser and which 
returns predicate calculus type semantic representations 
of fragmented parses of the input, and a discourse in- 
terpreter, which puts the fragmented parser output back 
together, and incorporates the new information into the 
knowledge it already has about the incident. 
The message understanding part of the system was 
adapted to the domain of commercial joint ventures 
(henceforth :IV) and enteredfor the fifth message under- 
standing conference competition, sponsored by ARPA 2 
(Gaizauskas et al, 1994). On the principal evaluation 
metric, the system fell in the third rank of seven statisti- 
caily significant rankings with only three of the thirteen 
systems in its group performing significantly better, a 
pleasing result given the short time spent on the conver- 
sion to a completely different domain. 
One of the main aims of the POETIC project was to 
develop an existing system (the TIC - Traffic Informa- 
tion Collator) to make it more readily portable to new 
police force sub domains, and increase xtendability thus 
improving ease of maintenance. The level of success of 
this aim was tested by the conversion to the :iV domain. 
The approach taken was to extract all domain specific 
knowledge into declarative knowledge bases and to de- 
velop these knowledge bases in such a way as to make 
them easily adaptable. 
Naturally, one of the main areas of domain specific 
knowledge was the lexicon, which had to provide the, 
occasionally very specialised, words and expressions spe- 
* I would like to acknowledge the contribution to this 
work of my colleagues on the project, Roger Evans and 
Robert Gaizauskas. 
IThe POETIC project was funded jointly by the UK 
SERC and the DTI, under grant number IED4/1/1834, 
with Racal Research Ltd, the Automobile Association 
and NTL. 
2Sussex participation supported by ARPA, the Uni- 
versity of Sussex, Racal Research Ltd. and Integral So- 
lutions Ltd. 
cific to the domain in question. In this paper, we discuss 
the lexicon system developed in POETIC and its con- 
version to use in the JV task. 
The input to the POETIC system was verbatim po- 
lice radio reports of traffic incidents, frequently in non- 
standard, ungrammatical or telegrammatic English, with 
extensive use of jargon and abbreviations. For the MUC- 
5 task, the input was "full" English newswire reports. 
The parsing process 
One of the novel aspects of the POETIC system is its 
overall approach to the parsing process. While a full 
parse of each input string is attempted, it is not required, 
or even expected. The parser returns fragmented analy- 
ses, which are then incorporated by a knowledge-based 
discourse interpreter into an overall picture of the inci- 
dent being analysed. This means that the grammar is 
not required be able to cope with all possible input con- 
structions, and that the lexicon does not have to have 
anything like total coverage. This was vital for the PO- 
ETIC task since the input is frequently not in grammat- 
ical English, and spelling errors and typos, as well as 
new/unknown words are likely to occur, but much less 
likely to be needed. 
The three-tier lexicon 
In POETIC, a three tier lexicon system was used, in or- 
der to maximise modularity and minimise lookup in very 
large wide coverage lexicons. The first and smallest of 
the tiers consisted of the lexicon specific to an individ- 
ual police force sublanguage. The language used by UK 
police forces is largely the same, but there are a few, of- 
ten crucial, differences. For instance, the Sussex police 
force use the word 'black' to describe a fatal accident; 
the Metropolitan police force, in contrast, use the word 
'black' to describe severe traffic congestion. 
The second tier contained words which were specific 
to the traffic domain but shared across police forces, such 
as ' r ta '  (road traffic accident) and 'hgv' (heavy goods ve- 
hicle). These first two tiers were consulted in the first 
stage of parsing, and all possible analyses with these 
words were found. Only then was the third tier con- 
sulted, a general English lexicon containing basic syntax 
for around 7000 common English words. In order to 
prevent excessive consultation of this lexicon, those very 
common words in the data were included in the second 
tier. 
211 
Porting to a new police force domain therefore meant 
just altering the first tier of the lexicon, which contained 
around 100 words. The second tier contained around 
1000 words. The total lexical coverage was relatively 
small, being around 8000, but this was because of the 
overall parsing strategy. 
For the JV domain, the three tier lexicon structure 
was not needed, simply two-tiers: domain specific and 
general English. After a simple word frequency analy- 
sis of the test corpus (around 400,000 words), all those 
words which appeared more than 100 times were in- 
cluded in the lexicon. Subsequently important words 
which had not reached that threshold were added. 
In addition to these lexicons, there were databases of 
road and place names in POETIC and place and com- 
pany names in the MUC-5 task. These had to be used 
with great care, due to their vastness and unreliability. 
Many important place names had several entries (e.g. 
Washington had 26) and some were the same as ordi- 
nary English words (e.g. 'Was', 'Of').  
The inheritance based lexicon 
The two domain specific tiers of the POETIC lexicon 
were written in DATR - an inheritance-based lexical 
representation language ((Evans and Gazdar, 1989a), 
(Evans and Gazdar, 1989b); for more about the devel- 
opment of the lexicon (Cahill and Evans, 1990), (Cahill, 
1993)). The reasons for this were three-fold. First, one 
aim was to see how well suited the DATR language was to 
a relatively large-scale practical application. Secondly, 
it permitted the use of the two tiers without any im- 
plications for processing, since the two DATR theories 
could be compiled into a single lexicon for use at run- 
time. Thus, the domain specific part of the lexicon could 
be maintainedseparately, while being accessed as part of 
the main traffic lexicon. Finally, and most importantly, 
due to its hierarchical structure and inheritance mecha- 
nisms, the DATR language permitted much easier exten- 
sion and adaptation of the lexicon, since changes affect- 
ing several entries could frequently be made at only one 
node at a high point in the hierarchy. Also, in a number 
of significant cases, it was possible to add a whole set of 
related entries very easily, only having to give minimal 
(sometimes even zero) individual information for each 
entry, all members of the set inheriting their main in- 
formation from a common abstract node. Examples of 
this sort of thing in the POETIC domain are makes of 
car (e.g. 'Volvo'), all of which inherit all of their infor- 
mation from a single "CAR" node. In the JV domain, 
currencies inherit most of their information from a sin- 
gle "CURRENCY" node, with the individual currency 
name being the only piece of individual information. 
Results 
The lexicons used in the message understanding tasks de- 
scribed were both very small by most people's tandards. 
The MUC-5 lexicon contained only 850 entries, while the 
POETIC lexicon contained just over 1000 entries. Even 
with the 7000-word general lexicon of English these are 
not large numbers by current hinking. The performance 
levels achieved with such small lexicons leads one to ask 
whether effort directed at constructing vast lexicons for 
NLP systems is genuinely worthwhile. Zipf's law states 
that, after a certain threshold, marginal cost (of increas- 
ing lexicon size) outweighs marginal utility (in terms of 
the frequency of occurrence of the additional entries). 
Although the 850 word lexicon for the MUC-5 task could 
undoubtedly be increased resulting in an improvement in
performance of the system overall, the precise amount 
that it is worth increasing it by is debatable. 
In the POETIC task, the question is even more glar- 
ing. There is a much broader range of information re- 
quired in the MUG-5 task, and even though a very wide 
(possibly infinite) range of information may show up in 
the police logs, the range with which the POETIC sys- 
tem is expected to deal is strictly limited. It is extremely 
unlikely, therefore, that any significant improvement in 
the system as a whole would result from a great increase 
in the size of the lexicon. 
What is clear is that far more important than the 
size and coverage of the lexicons used in such systems 
is the means of dealing with the cases of unrecognised 
words or phrases. The POETIC approach, fragmented 
parses pieced together by a knowledge driven discourse 
interpreter, can clearly be very effective. One advantage 
of such an approach is obvious - the time consuming 
and dreary task of adding thousands of lexical entries 
can be avoided. Even if automated lexical acquisition 
(which is not obviously feasible in many cases, such as 
the POETIC lexicon) can remove that problem, there is 
still the question of the efficiency of a system which must 
perform lexical lookup on a vast dictionary, followed by 
determining which of the possibly many anaiyses is the 
most appropriate. 
References 
Cahill, L. J. 1993. Some Reflections on the Conversion 
of the TIC lexicon to DATR. In Briscoe, de Paiva 
and Copestake (eds.) Inheritance, Defaults and the 
Lexicon. 
Cahill, L. J. and R. Evans. 1990. An Application of 
DATR: The TIC Lexicon. In Proceedings of the 9th 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 
120-125, Stockholm, 1990. 
Evans, R. and G. Gazdar. 1989. Inference in DATR. 
In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 1989. 
Evans, R. and G. Gazdar. 1989. The semantics of DATR. 
In A. Cohn (ed.) Proceedings of the Seventh Confer- 
ence of the Society for the Study of Artificial Intel- 
ligence and Simulation of Behaviour, pp. 79-87, Pit- 
man, London, 1989. 
Gaizausk_as, R., L. J. Cahill and R. Evans. 1994. Sussex 
University: Description of the Sussex System Used for 
MUC-5. In Proceedings of the Fifth Message Under- 
standing Conference (MUC-5), Morgan Kaufmann, 
1994. 
Gaizauskas, R. J. and R. Evans and L. J. Cahill. 1992. 
POETIC: A System for Gathering and Disseminating 
Traffic Information. In Proceedings of the Interna- 
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applica- 
tions in Transportation Engineering, San Buenaven- 
tufa, California, June 1992. 
212 
