I n tegrat ion  o f  example -based  t rans fer  and  ru le -based  generat ion  
Susumu AKAMINE, Osamu FURUSE and Hitoshi IIDA 
ATR Interpreting Telecommunications Research Laboratories 
2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-02, Japan 
{ akamine,furuse,iida} @itl.atr.co.j p
1 Introduction 
When we speak a foreign language, we use not 
only grammatical rules but also memorized expres- 
sions. Namely, translations are sometimes produced 
by mimicking translation examples. Example-Based 
Machine Translation(EBMT) adopts this strategy as 
follows: 1) Retrieves the translation example whose 
Source Expression (SE) is the same as or most sim- 
ilar to the input sentence, 2) Translates the input 
sentence using the Target Expression (TE) of the 
retrieved translation example. 
Since it is impossible to memorize all possible sen- 
tence patterns, the "chunking + best-matching + 
recombination" method is practical from the point 
of view of coverage. It provides translation examples 
at various linguistic levels, and decomposes an input 
sentence into chunks. For each chunk, the trans- 
lation example is retrieved by best-matching. The 
output sentence is obtained by recombining the TE 
parts of the retrieved translation examples. How- 
ever, this method suffers from translation quality 
lapses at the boundaries of the recombined chunks. 
These lapses are caused by serious gaps between lan- 
guages, such as between English and Japanese, that 
differ widely in their syntactic features. 
This paper proposes a method to solve the prob- 
lem of the structural gap by introducing a new 
generation module to the model of (Furuse, 92), 
that is able to handle the entire translation pro- 
cess within the example-based framework. This inte- 
grated method has been implemented in a prototype 
English-to-Japanese translation system. 
Figure 1 shows the proposed integrated method 
between example-based transfer and rule-based gen- 
eration. The transfer module decomposes an input 
sentence using the SE(English) part of translation 
examples, and converts each piece of the input sen- 
tence into the equivalent piece in the TE(Japanese) 
using translation examples. 
The rule-based generation part of the integrated 
method consists of a composition module and an ad- 
justment module. The composition module com- 
poses a structure from fragmentary examples by 
using Japanese grammatical constraint, and checks 
whether the structure is grammatically appropriate 
or not. The adjustment module refines the sentence 
output of the composition module so that the final 
output is as natural as colloquial Japanese. 
196 
I 
-q Transfer ~-~ Composition -,- Ad jus tment~ 
example-based , rule-based generation 
Figure 1: Integration of Transfer and Generation 
2 Example-based transfer 
The transfer module outputs the TE structure from 
an input sentences by using translation examples. 
In the proposed translation method, translation ex- 
amples are classified based on the string pattern of 
their SE and are stored as empirical transfer knowl- 
edge, which describes the correspondence b tween 
an SE and its TEs. The following is an example of 
the transfer knowledge about "X to Y" at the verb- 
phrase level. 
X to Y --~ Y' e X' ((go, Kyoto)...) 
Y' ni X' ((pay, account)...) 
Y' wo X' ((refer, announcement)...) 
The first possible TE is "Y' e X",  with the example 
set ((go, Kyoto)...). Within this pattern, X' is the 
TE of X, which expresses a variable corresponding 
to some linguistic onstituent. (go, Kyoto) are sam- 
ple bindings for "X to Y", where X ="go", and Y 
: "Kyoto". 
Patterns in transfer knowledge are classified into 
different levels according to the scale of their lin- 
guistic structure in order to restrict the explosion 
of structural ambiguity, and an input sentence is de- 
composed into chunks by applying SE parts of trans- 
fer knowledge in a top-down fashion. 
Suppose that an input sentence is "Please come to 
our company." SE parts of transfer knowledge are 
applied in the order, "please X" (simple sentence), 
"X to Y"(verb phrase), "our X" (compound noun), 
"come", "company" (surface word), yielding the fol- 
lowing SE structure: 
(Please ((come) to (our (company)))) 
For each chunk of the SE structure, the most ap- 
propriate TE is selected according to the calculated 
distance between the input words and the example 
words. The distance calculation method of (Sumita, 
91) is adopted here. The distance between words is 
defined as the closeness of semantic attributes in a 
thesaurus. 
The SE structure chunks of "Please come to our 
company" are transferred to "X' tekudasai", "Y' 
e X'", "watashi-tachi no X'", "kuru\[come\] 1, and 
"kaisha\[company\]". By combining these TE chunks, 
the following TE structure is obtained, which will 
be the input of the composition module of the rule- 
based generation model: 
(((watashi-tachi no (kaisha)) e (kuru)) tekudasai) 
In the above structure, the honorific word 
"irassharu\[come\]" is more adequate than the neu- 
tral word "kuru" from the point of view of polite- 
ness. The replacement of "kuru" with "irassharu" 
will be done in the adjustment module of the rule- 
based generation model. 
3 Rule-based generation 
3.1 Composi t ion 
The composition module checks whether a trans- 
ferred sentence is grammatically appropriate or not, 
and corrects grammatical errors produced by the 
structural gap. The composing method is almost 
the same as the syntactic analysis method. How- 
ever, the process is much simpler, because the input 
string has the correct Japanese structure and the 
corresponding English expressions. 
The procedure is as follows: 1) Divide the sen- 
tence into clauses, using not only Japanese gram- 
matical features but also the TE structure and its 
corresponding English expressions. 2) Analyze each 
clause using the Japanese syntax rule. 3) Check on 
Japanese grammatical constraints. If the process 
finds violations, it corrects them by using Japanese 
linguistic knowledge. 
Japanese sentences have a peculiar grammatical 
constraint. Some expressions cannot appear in a 
subordinate clause. For example, the postpositional 
particle "wa(topic marker)" cannot appear in a con- 
ditional clause. Table 1 gives examples of limita- 
tions on expressions. In Table 1, "masu" expresses 
an auxiliary verb, which indicates the level of polite- 
ness, and "darou" expresses an auxiliary verb, which 
indicates the speaker's supposition. 
The checking and correcting method is explained 
here, using the conditional clause "((anata wa ry- 
ohkin wo shiharau masu) baai) \[you TOPIC fee OB- 
JECT pay POLITE CONDITION\]." First, the pro- 
cess checks on limitations for conditional clauses 
by referring to Table 1, so it understands that 
neither "wa" nor "masu" can appear in a condi- 
tional clause(X baai). Second, the process ana- 
lyzes the clause, so it understands that the case of 
"anata\[you\]" is ga", and "masu" can be deleted. 
Finally, the process gets the right conditional clause 
"((anata ga ryohkin wo shiharau) baai)" 
3.2 Ad jus tment  
A sentence that is only grammatically appropriate, 
is not as natural as a colloquial sentence. The ad- 
justment module refines the sentence by changing, 
1 \[wl ... w,\] is the list of corresponding English words. 
Uppercase shows the meaning of a function word. 
Table h limitations on Japanese clauses 
example clause topic polite supposition 
"wa" "masu" "darou" 
X shite\[X, and\] Good Good Good 
X to(omou)\[that X\] Good N.G. Good 
X node\[because X\] Good Good N.G. 
X baai\[if X\] N.G. N.G. N.G. 
Table 2: honorific expression of verb 
agent recipient example for okuru\[send\] 
- -  hearer o-okuri-suru 
hearer speaker okut-tekudasaru 
hearer - -  o-okurini-naru 
adding, or deleting words. This module handles hon- 
orific expressions and redundant personal pronouns, 
which are important for generating natural Japanese 
sentences. 
Personal pronouns are usually redundant in 
Japanese conversations, because honorific expres- 
sions and modality expressions limit the agent of the 
action. The procedure is as follow: 1) Change the 
verb into the appropriate form based on the agent 
or the recipient, 2) Delete the redundant personal 
pronouns based on the verb form, or the modal, 3) 
Generate a final output by adjusting the morpholog- 
ical feature. 
This method is explained here, using the sen- 
tence "((anata wa watashi ni youshi wo okuru masu) 
ka) \[you TOPIC I OBJECT form OBJECT send 
POLITE INTERROGATIVE\]." First, the process 
changes the verb "okuru" into "okut-tekudasaru" 
by referring to Table 2. Second, it deletes the re- 
dundant pronouns "anata wa" and "watashi ni" . 
Finally, it generates the sentence "youshi wo okut- 
tekudasai masu ka \[form OBJECT send-RESPECT 
POLITE INTERROGATIVE\]." 
4 Evaluation 
The prototype system was evaluated by using model 
conversations between an applicant and a secretary 
about conference registration. The model conversa- 
tions consist of 607 sentences, and cover basic ex- 
pressions. The system provided an average transla- 
tion time of 2 seconds for sentences with an average 
length of 10 words, and produced atranslation result 
for all of the sentences. 480 of the results were as 
natural as colloquial sentences and giving a success 
rate of 79%. 
References 
Furuse, O. and Iida, H. 1992. Cooperation between 
Transfer and Analysis in example-based frame- 
work. In Proc. of Coling '92. 
Sumita, E. and Iida, H. 1991. Experiments and 
Prospects of Example-based Machine Translation. 
In Proc. of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 
197 
