IMPROVING CHINESE TOKENIZATION WITH LINGUISTIC 
FILTERS ON STATISTICAL LEXICAL ACQUISITION 
Dekai Wu Pascale Fung 
Department ofComputer Science Computer Science Department 
University of Science & Technology (HKUST) Columbia University 
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong New York, NY 10027 
dekai@cs, ust. hk pascale@cs, columbia, edu 
Abstract 
The first step in Chinese NLP is to tokenize or segment char- 
acter sequences into words, since the text contains no word 
delimiters. Recent heavy activity in this area has shown 
the biggest stumbling block to be words that are absent 
from the lexicon, since successful tokenizers to date have 
been based on dictionary lookup (e.g., Chang &Chen 1993; 
Chiang et al 1992; L inet  al. 1993; Wu & Tseng 1993; 
Sproat et al 1994). 
We present empirical evidence for four points concern- 
ing tokenization of Chinese text: (I) More rigorous "blind" 
evaluation methodology is needed to avoid inflated accuracy 
measurements; we introduce the nk-blind method. (2) The 
extent of the unknown-word problem is far more serious than 
generally thought, when tokenizing unrestricted texts in re- 
alistic domains. (3) Statistical lexical acquisition is a prac- 
tical means to greatly improve tokenization accuracy with 
unknown words, reducing error rates as much as 32.0%. (4) 
When augmenting the lexicon, linguistic onstraints can pro- 
vide simple inexpensive filters yielding significantly better 
precision, reducing error rates as much as 49.4%. 
HOW TO HANDLE DOUBLE STANDARDS 
Current evaluation practice favors overly optimistic accuracy 
estimates. Because partially-tokenized words are usually 
evaluated as being correctly tokenized, failures to tokenize 
unknown words can be overlooke d . For example, what makes 
~l~JJ~ (yufin zhh j~n, a charity) a single word when iBJ~llJJ and 
are both legitimate words.'? One answer is that translat- 
ing the partially-tokenized segments individually can yield 
"assistance gold" or "aid currency", instead of the unques- 
tionably correct "charity" or "charity fund". Another answer 
is that a speech synthesizer should never pause between the 
two segments; otherwise ~g)J is taken as a verb and ~i~ as a 
surname, changing the meaning to "help Gold". A blind eval- 
uation paradigm is needed that accommodates disagreement 
between human judges, yet does not bias the judges to accept 
the computer's output oo generously. 
We have devised a procedure called nk-blind that uses n 
blind judges' standards. The n judges each hand-segment 
the test sentences independently, before the algorithm is run. 
Then, the algorithm's output is compared against he judges'; 
for each segment produced by the algorithm, the segment is 
considered to be a correct oken if at least k of the n judges 
agree. Thus, more than one segmentation may be considered 
correct if we set k such that k _< \[~J. If k is set to 1, it is 
sufficient for any judge to sanction a segment. If k = n, all 
the judges must agree. Under the n/c-blind method aprecision 
rate can be given under any chosen (n, k) setting. 
The experiments below were conducted with 100 pairs of 
sentences from the corpus containing between 2,000 and 2,600 
words, sampled randomly with replacement. All results re- 
ported in Figure 1 give the precision rates for n = 8 judges 
with all values of k between 1 and n. Note the tendency of 
higher values of k to reduce precision estimates. The wide 
variance with different k (between 30% and 90%) underscores 
the importance of more rigorous evaluation methodology. 
EXPERIMENT I 
Tokenizing independently derived test data. The unknown 
word problem is now widely recognized, but we believe its 
severity is still greatly underestimated. As an "acid test", we 
tokenized a corpus that was derived completely independently 
of the dictionary that our tokenizer is based on. We used a 
statistical dictionary-based tokenizer designed to be represen- 
tative of current okenizing approaches, which chooses the 
segmentation that maximizes the product of the individual 
words' probabilities. The baseline dictionary used by the tok- 
enizer is the BDC dictionary (BDC 1992), containing 89,346 
unique orthographic forms. The text, drawn from the HKUST 
English-Chinese Parallel Bilingual Corpus (Wu 1994), con- 
sists of transcripts from the parliamentary proceedings of the 
Hong Kong Legislative Council. Thus, the text can be ex- 
pected to contain many references to subjects outside the do- 
mains under consideration by our dictionary's lexicographers 
in Taiwan. Regional usage differences are also to be expected. 
The results (see Figure 1) show accuracy rates far below the 
90-99% range which is typically reported. Visual inspection 
of tokenized output showed that an overwhelming majority of 
the errors arose from missing dictionary entries. Tokeniza- 
tion performance on realistic unrestricted text is still seriously 
compromised. 
EXPERIMENT II 
Tokenization with statistical lexicon augmentation. To al- 
leviate the unknown word problem, we next experimented 
with augmenting the tokenizer's dictionary using CXtract, 
a statistical tool that finds morpheme sequences likely to be 
Chinese words (Fung & Wu 1994). In the earlier work we 
found CXtract to be a good generator f previously unknown 
lexical entries, so overall token recall was expected to im- 
prove. However, it was not clear whether the gain would 
outweigh errors introduced by the illegitimate l xical entries 
that CXtract also produces. 
The training corpus consisted of approximately 2 million 
Chinese characters drawn from the Chinese half of our bilin- 
gual corpus. The unsupervised training procedure is described 
in detail in Fung & Wu (1994). The training suggested 6,650 
candidate l xical entries. Of these, 2,040 were already present 
1RCI 180
in the dictionary, leaving 4,610 previously unknown new en- 
tries. 
The same tokenization experiment was then run, using the 
augmented ictionary instead. The results shown in Fig- 
ure 1 bear out our hypothesis that augmenting the lexicon 
with CXtract's statistically generated lexical entries would 
improve the overall precision, reducing error ates as much as 
32.0% for k = 2. 
EXPERIMENT III 
Morphosyntactic filters for lexicon candidates. CXtract 
produces excellent recall but we wished to improve precision 
further. Ideally, the false candidates should be rejected by 
some automatic means, without eliminating valid lexical en- 
tries. To this end, we investigated a set of 34 simple filters 
based on linguistic principles. Space precludes a full listing; 
selected filters are discussed below. 
Our filters can be extremely inexpensive because CXtract's 
statistical criteria are already tuned for high precision. The 
filtering process first segments the candidate using the orig- 
inal dictionary, to identify the component words. It then 
applies morphological nd syntactic onstraints o eliminate 
(a) sequences that should remain multiple segments and (b) ill- 
formed sequences. 
Morphological constraints. The morphologically-based fil- 
ters reject a hypothesized lexical entry if it matches any fil- 
tering pattern. The particular characters in these filters are 
usually classified either as morphological ffixes, or as indi- 
vidual words. We reject any sequence with the affix on the 
wrong end (the special case of the genitive fl",j (de) is consid- 
ered below). Because morphemes such as the plural marker 
~ (m6n) or the instance marker -3k (d)  are suffixes, we can 
eliminate candidate sequences that begin with them. Simi- 
larly, we can reject sequences that end with the ordinal prefix 
(di) or the preverbial durative ~ (z/d). 
Filtering characters cannot be used if they are polysemous 
or homonymous and can participate in legitimate words in 
other uses. For example, the durative ~i~ (zhe) is not a good 
filter because the same character (with varying pronuncia- 
tions) can be used to mean "apply", "trick", or "touch", among 
others. 
Any candidate l xical entry is filtered if it contains the gen- 
itive/associative ~ (de). This includes, for example, both ill- 
formed boundary-crossing patterns like ~ j~ (de w6i xitin, 
danger of), and phrases like ~:~\ ]~ (xiang gang de qifm 
tti, Hong Kong's future) which should properly be segmented 
~:h~ fl'-,J ~J~,. In addition, because the compounding process 
does not involve two double-character words as frequently as 
other patterns, uch sequences were rejected. 
Closed-class yntactic onstraints. The closed-class filters 
operate on two distinct principles. Sequences ending with 
strongly prenominal or preverbial words are rejected, as are 
sequences beginning with postnominals and postverbials. A
majority of the filtering patterns match correct syntactic units, 
including prepositional, conjunctive, modal, adverbial, and 
verb phrases. The rationale for rejecting such sequences i
that these closed-class words do not satisfy the criteria for 
being bound into compounds, and just co-occur with some 
sequences by chance because of their high frequency. 
Results. The same tokenization experiment was run us- 
ing the filtered augmented dictionary. The filters left 5,506 
candidate l xical entries out of the original 6,650, of which 
3,467 were previously unknown. Figure 1 shows significantly 
improved precision in every measurement except for a very 
slight drop with k = 8, with an error rate reduction of 49.4% 
at k : 2. Thus any loss in token recall due to the filters is 
outweighed by the gain in precision. This may be taken as 
indirect evidence that the loss in recall is not large. 
CONCLUSION 
We have introduced a blind evaluation method that accom- 
modates multiple standards and gives some indication of how 
well algorithms' outputs match human preferences. 
We have demonstrated that pure statistically-based l xical 
acquisition on the same corpus being tokenized can signif- 
icantly reduce error rates due to unknown words. We also 
demonstrated mpirically the effectiveness of simple mor- 
phosyntactic filters in improving the precision of a hybrid 
statistical/linguistic method for generating new lexical en- 
tries. Using linguistic knowledge to construct filters rather 
than generators has the advantage that applicability conditions 
do not need to be closely checked, since the training corpus 
presumably already adheres to any applicability conditions. 
100 
90  
80  
70  
60  
50  
40  
30  
20  
m 
" l -base l ine"  - - - -  
: ......... "n -augmented"  - . . . . .  
......... \ ] "~ ............. = " I l l - f i l te red"  ..a .... 
-~- - -~ ...... ? ... ...... 
. , , , .  ..Q. 
-----, '.o. 
i . i i 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Figure 1. Comparison of nk-Blind Precision Percentages 
REFERENCES 
BDC. 1992. The BDC Chinese-English electronic dictionary (version 2.0). Behavior 
Design Corporation. 
CHANG, CHAO-HUANG & CHENG-DER CHEN. 1993. HMM-based part-of-speechtagging 
for Chinese corpora. In Proceedings ofthe Workshop on Very Large Corpora, 
40-47, Columbus, Ohio. 
CHIANG, TUNG-HUI, JING-SHIN CHANG, MING-YU LIN, & KEH-YIH SU. 1992. Statis- 
tical models for word segmentation a d unknown resolution. In Proceedings of
ROCLING-92, 121-146. 
FUNG, PASCALE & DEKAI WU. 1994. Statistical augmentation f a Chinese machine- 
readable dictionary. In Proceedings ofthe Second Annual Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, 69-85, Kyoto. 
LIN, MING-YU, TUNG-HUI CHIANG, & KEH-YIH Su. 1993. A preliminary study on 
unknown word problem in Chinese word segmentation. In Proceedings of 
ROCLING-93, 119-141. 
SPROAT, RICHARD, CHILIN SHIH, WILLIAM GALE, & NANCY CHANG. 1994. A stochastic 
word segmentation algorithm for a Mandarin text-to-speech system. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 66-72, Las Cruces, New Mexico. 
Wu, DEKAi. 1994. Aligning a parallel English-Chinese corpus tatistically with lexical 
criteria. In Proceedings ofthe 32nd Annual Conference ofthe Association for 
ComputationalLinguistics, 80-87, Las Cruces, New Mexico. 
Wu, ZIMIN  GWYNETH TSENG. 1993. Chinese text segmentation for text retrieval: 
Achievements and problems. Journal of The American Society for Information 
Science, 44(9):532-542. 
181 
