Developing a hybrid NP  parser 
Atro Vouti lainen 
Department of General Linguistics 
P.O. Box 4 
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki 
Finland 
avout ila@ling, helsinki, fi 
Llufs Padr6 
Dept. Llenguatges i Sistemes InformS, tics 
Universitat Polit~cnica de Catalunya 
C/Grail Capit~ s/n. 08034 Barcelona 
Catalonia 
padro@ls i ,  upc.  es 
Abstract 
We describe the use of energy function op- 
timisation in very shallow syntactic pars- 
ing. The approach can use linguistic 
rules and corpus-based statistics, so the 
strengths of both linguistic and statisti- 
cal approaches to NLP can be combined 
in a single framework. The rules are con- 
textual constraints for resolving syntactic 
ambiguities expressed as alternative tags, 
and the statistical language model consists 
of corpus-based n-grams of syntactic tags. 
The success of the hybrid syntactic dis- 
ambiguator is evaluated against a held-out 
benchmark corpus. Also the contributions 
of the linguistic and statistical language 
models to the hybrid model are estimated. 
1 Introduction 
The language models used by natural anguage an- 
alyzers are traditionally based on two approaches. 
In the linguistic approach, the model is based on 
hand-crafted rules derived from the linguist's gen- 
eral and/or corpus-based knowledge about the ob- 
ject language. In the data-driven approach, the 
model is automatically generated from annotated 
text corpora, and the model can be represented e.g. 
as n-grams (Garside t al., 1987), local rules (Hindle, 
1989) or neural nets (Schmid, 1994). 
Most hybrid approaches combine statistical infor- 
mation with automatically extracted rule-based in- 
formation (Brill, 1995; Daelemans et al, 1996). Rel- 
atively little attention has been paid to models where 
the statistical approach is combined with a truly lin- 
guistic model (i.e. one generated by a linguist). This 
paper reports one such approach: syntactic rules 
written by a linguist are combined with statistical 
information using the relaxation labelling algorithm. 
80 
Our application is very shallow parsing: identifi- 
cation of verbs, premodifiers, nominal and adverbial 
heads, and certain kinds of postmodifiers. We call 
this parser a noun phrase parser. 
The input is English text morphologically tagged 
with a rule-based tagger called EngCG (Voutilainen 
et al, 1992; Karlsson et al, 1995). Syntactic word- 
tags are added as alternatives (e.g. each adjective 
gets a premodifier tag, postmodifier tag and a nomi- 
nal head tag as alternatives). The system should re- 
move contextually illegitimate tags and leave intact 
each word's most appropriate tag. In other words, 
the syntactic language model is applied by a disam- 
biguator. 
The parser has a recall of 100% if all words retain 
the correct morphological nd syntactic reading; the 
system's precision is 100% if the output contains no 
illegitimate morphological or syntactic readings. In 
practice, some correct readings are discarded, and 
some ambiguities remain unresolved (i.e. some words 
retain two or more alternative analyses). 
The system can use linguistic rules and corpus- 
based statistics. Notable about the system is that 
minimal human effort was needed for creating its 
language models (the linguistic consisting of syn- 
tactic disambiguation rules based on the Constraint 
Grammar framework (Karlsson, 1990; Karlsson et 
al., 1995); the corpus-based consisting of bigrams 
and trigrams): 
Only one day was spent on writing the 107 syn- 
tactic disambiguation rules used by the linguis- 
tic parser. 
No human annotators were needed for annotat- 
ing the training corpus (218,000 words of jour- 
nalese) used by the data-driven learning mod- 
ules of this system: the training corpus was an- 
notated by (i) tagging it with the EngCG mor- 
phological tagger, (ii) making the tagged text 
syntactically ambiguous by adding the alterna- 
tive syntactic tags to the words, and (iii) re- 
solving most of these syntactic ambiguities by 
applying the parser with the 107 disambigua- 
tion rules. 
The system was tested against a fresh sample of five 
texts (6,500 words). The system's recall and pre- 
cision was measured by comparing its output to a 
manually disambiguated version of the text. To in- 
crease the objectivity of the evaluation, system out- 
puts and the benchmark corpus are made publicly 
accessible (see Section 6). 
Also the relative contributions of the linguistic 
and statistical components are evaluated. The lin- 
guistic rules seldom discard the correct ag, i.e. they 
have a very high recall, but their problem is remain- 
ing ambiguity. The problems of the statistical com- 
ponents are the opposite: their recall is considerably 
lower, but more (if not all) ambiguities are resolved. 
When these components are used in a balanced way, 
the system's overall recall is 97.2% - that is, 97.2% 
of all words get the correct analysis - and its preci- 
sion is 96.1% - that is, of the readings returned by 
the system, 96.1% are correct. 
The system architecture is presented in Figure 1. 
Ambiguous \[ ~ I Partially 
"training co ~ - ; :, dis.~, biguated 
Hybrid language model 
Ambiguous ~ Di.~mbig~t exl 
test c?rpus I ~ I test c?rpus 
Figure 1: Parser architecture. 
The structure of the paper is the following. First, 
we describe our general framework, the relaxation 
labelling algorithm. Then we proceed to the appli- 
cation by outlining the grammatical representation 
used in our shallow syntax. After this, the disam- 
biguation rules and their development are described. 
Next in turn is a description of how the data-driven 
language model was generated. The evaluation of 
81 
the system is then presented: first the preparation 
of the benchmark corpus is described, then the re- 
sults of the tests are given. The paper ends with 
some concluding remarks. 
2 The Relaxation Labelling 
Algorithm 
Since we are dealing with a set of constraints and 
want to find a solution which optimally satisfies 
them M1, we can use a standard Constraint Satis- 
faction algorithm to solve that problem. 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems are naturally 
modelled as Consistent Labeling Problems (Larrosa 
and Meseguer, 1995). An algorithm that solves 
CLPs is Relaxation Labelling. 
It has been applied to part-of-speech tagging 
(Padr6, 1996) showing that it can yield as good re- 
sults as a HMM tagger when using the same in- 
formation. In addition, it can deal with any kind 
of constraints, thus the model can be improved 
by adding any other constraints available, either 
statistics, hand-written or automatically extracted 
(Mhrquez and Rodrfguez, 1995; Samuelsson et al, 
1996). 
Relaxation labelling is a generic name for a family 
of iterative algorithms which perform function opti- 
misation, based on local information. See (Torras, 
1989) for a summary. 
Given a set of variables, a set of possible labels for 
each variable, and a set of compatibility constraints 
between those labels, the algorithm finds a combina- 
tion of weights for the labels that maximises "global 
consistency" (see below). 
Let V = {vl, v2, . . . ,  v,~} be a set of variables. 
Let tl {til ti2, i = , . . . , tmi  ) be the set of possible 
labels for variable vi. 
Let CS be a set of constraints between the labels 
of the variables. Each constraint C E CS  states a 
"compatibility value" Cr for a combination of pairs 
variable-label. Any number of variables may be in- 
volved in a constraint. 
The aim of the algorithm is to find a weighted 
labelling I such that "global consistency" is max- 
imised. Maximising "global consistency" is defined 
as maximising ~ j  p~. x Sij , Vvi, where p~. is the 
weight for label j in variable vi and Sij the support 
received by the same combination. The support for 
the pair variable-label xpresses how compatible that 
pair is with the labels of neighbouring variables, ac- 
cording to the constraint set. 
1A weighted labelling is a weight assignment for each 
label of each variable such that the weights for the labels 
of the same variable add up to one. 
The support is defined as the sum of the influence 
of every constraint on a label. 
Sij = ~ Inf(r) 
rER~j 
where: 
R~j is the set of constraints on label j for variable 
i, i.e. the constraints formed by any combination of 
variable--label pairs that includes the pair (vi, tj). 
r l  fd  Inf(r) = Cr x Pk,(m) x . . .  x Pkd(m), is the prod- 
uct of the current weights 2 for the labels appearing 
in the constraint except (vi,tj) (representing how 
applicable the constraint is in the current context) 
multiplied by Cr which is the constraint compatibil- 
ity value (stating how compatible the pair is with the 
context). 
Briefly, what the algorithm does is: 
1. Start with a random weight assignment. 
2. Compute the support value for each label of 
each variable. (How compatible it is with the 
current weights for the labels of the other vari- 
ables.) 
3. Increase the weights of the labels more compat- 
ible with the context (support greater than 0) 
and decrease those of the less compatible labels 
(support less than 0) 3 , using the updating func- 
tion: 
p~.(rn) x (1 + Sij) 
pj(m + 1) = 
? (1 + S,k) 
k=l  
where - l~S i j _~+l  
4. If a stopping/convergence criterion 4 is satisfied, 
stop, otherwise go to to step 2. 
3 Grammat ica l  representat ion  
The input of our parser is morphologically analyzed 
and disambiguated text enriched with alternative 
syntactic tags, e.g. 
"<others>" 
"other" PRON N0M PL @>N @NH 
2p~(m) is the weight assigned to label k for variable 
r at time m. 
SNegative values for support indicate incompatibility. 
4The usual criterion is to stop when there are no more 
changes, although more sophisticated heuristic proce- 
dures are also used to stop relaxation processes (Eklundh 
and Rosenfeld, 1978; Richards et al , 1981). 
"<moved>" 
"move" <SV> <SV0> V PAST VFIN @V 
"<away>" 
"away" ADV ADVL @>A @AH 
"<from>" 
"from" PREP @DUMMY 
"<tradit ional>" 
"traditional" A ABS @>N @N< @NH 
"<jazz>" 
"jazz" <-Indef> N NOM SG @>N @NH 
"<practice>" 
"practice" N N0M SG @>N @NH 
"practice" <SV0> V PRES -SG3 VFIN @V 
Every indented line represents a morphological 
reading; the sample shows that some morphological 
ambiguities are not resolved by the rule-based mor- 
phological disambiguator, known as the EngCG tag- 
ger (Voutilainen et al, 1992; Karlsson et al, 1995). 
Our syntactic tags start with the "@" sign. A 
word is syntactically ambiguous if it has more than 
one syntactic tags (e.g. practice above has three al- 
ternative syntactic tags). Syntactic tags are added 
to the morphological nalysis with a simple lookup 
module. The syntactic parser's main task is dis- 
ambiguating (rather than adding new information 
to the input sentence): contextuMly illegitimate al- 
ternatives should be discarded, while legitimate tags 
should be retained (note that also morphological m- 
biguities may be resolved as a side effect). 
Next we describe the syntactic tags: 
? @>N represents premodifiers and determiners. 
? @N< represents a restricted range of postmod- 
ifiers and the determiner "enough" following its 
nominal head. 
? @NH represents nominal heads (nouns, adjec- 
tives, pronouns, numerals, ING-forms and non- 
finite ED-forms). 
? @>A represents those adverbs that premodify 
(intensify) adjectives (including adjectival ING- 
forms and non-finite ED-forms), adverbs and 
various kinds of quantifiers (certain determin- 
ers, pronouns and numerals). 
? @AH represents adverbs that function as head 
of an adverbial phrase. 
? @A< represents the postmodifying adverb 
"enough". 
? @V represents verbs and auxiliaries (incl. the 
infinitive marker "to"). 
82 
? @>CC represents words introducing a coordi- 
nation (" either", "neither", "both" ). 
? @CC represents coordinating conjunctions. 
* @CS represents subordinating conjunctions. 
. @DUMMY represents all prepositions, i.e. the 
parser does not address the attachment of 
prepositional phrases. 
4 Syntact i c  ru les  
4.1 Ru le  fo rmal i sm 
The rules follow the Constraint Grammar formal- 
ism, and they were applied using the recent parser- 
compiler CG-2 (Tapanainen, 1996). The parser 
reads a sentence at a time and discards those 
ambiguity-forming readings that are disallowed by 
a constraint. 
Next we describe some basic features of the rule 
formalism. The rule 
R~.HOV~. (?>hi) 
(,ic <<< OR (?V) OR (~CS) BARRIER (@NH)); 
removes the premodifier tag @>N from an ambigu- 
ous reading if somewhere to the right (*1) there is 
an unambiguous (C) occurrence of a member of the 
set <<< (sentence boundary symbols) or the verb 
tag @V or the subordinating conjunction tag @CS, 
and there are no intervening tags for nominal heads 
(@NH). 
This is a partial rule about coordination: 
REMOVE (?>N) 
(NOT 0 (DET) OR (NUM) OR (A)) 
( l c  (cc) )  
(2C (DET)) ; 
It removes the premodifier tag if all three context- 
conditions are satisfied: 
? the word to be disambiguated (0) is not a de- 
terminer, numeral or adjective, 
? the first word to the right (1) is an unambiguous 
coordinating conjunction, and 
? the second word to the right is an unambiguous 
determiner. 
In addition to REMOVing, also SELECTing a read- 
ing is possible: when all context-conditions are sat- 
isfied, all readings but the one the rule was expressly 
about are discarded. 
The rules can refer to words and tags directly or 
by means of predefined sets. They can refer not only 
to any fixed context positions; also reference to con- 
textual patterns is possible. The rules never discard 
a last reading, so every word retains at least one 
analysis. On the other hand, an ambiguity remains 
unresolved if there are no rules for that particular 
type of ambiguity. 
4.2 Grammar  deve lopment  
A day was spent on writing 107 constraints; about 
15,000 words of the parser's output were proofread 
during the process. The routine was the following: 
1. The current grammar (containing e.g. 2 rules) 
is applied to the ambiguous input in a 'trace' 
mode in which the parser also indicates, which 
rule discarded which analysis, 
2. The grammarian observes remaining ambigui- 
ties and proposes new rules for disambiguating 
them, and 
3. He also tries to identify misanalyses (cases 
where the correct tag is discarded) and, using 
the trace information, corrects the faulty rule 
This routine is useful if the development time is 
very restricted, and only the most common ambigu- 
ity types have to be resolved with reasonable suc- 
cess. However, if the grammar should be of a very 
high quality (extremely few mispredictions, high de- 
gree of ambiguity resolution), a large test corpus, 
formally similar to the input except for the manually 
added extra information about the correct analysis, 
should be used. This kind of test corpus would en- 
able the automatic identification of mispredictions 
as well as counting of various performance statistics 
for the rules. However, manually disambiguating a 
test corpus of a few hundred thousand words would 
probably require a human effort of at least a month. 
4.3 Sample  output  
The following is genuine output of the linguistic 
(CG-2) parser using the 107 syntactic disambigua- 
tion rules. The traces starting with "S:" indicate 
the line on which the applied rule is in the grammar 
file. One syntactic (and morphological) ambiguity 
remains unresolved: until remains ambiguous due to 
preposition and subordinating conjunction readings. 
"<aachen>"  S :46  
"aachen" <*> <Proper> hl hiOM SG ~1~ 
"<remained>" 
"remain" <SVC/N> <SVC/A> V PAST VFIN @V 
"<a>" 
"a" <Indef> DET CENTRAL ART SG @>N 
"<free>" S:316, 49 
83 
"free" A ABS @>N 
"<imperial>" S:49, 57 
"imperial" A ABS @>N 
"<city>" S:46 
"city" N N0M SG @NH 
"<until>" 
"until" PREP @DUMMY 
"until" <**CLB> CS @CS 
"<occupied>" S: 116, 345, 46 
"occupy" <SVO> PCP2 @V 
"<by>" 
"by" PREP ~DUMMY 
"<france>" S :46 
"france" <*> <Proper> N N0M SG @NH 
"<in>" 
"in" PREP @DUMMY 
"<1794>" S:121, 49 
"1794" <1900> NUM CARD @NH 
,,<$.>,, 
5 Hybrid language model 
To solve shallow parsing with the relaxation labelling 
algorithm we model each word in the sentence as a 
variable, and each of its possible readings as a label 
for that variable. We start with a uniform weight 
distribution. 
We will use the algorithm to select the right syn- 
tactic tag for every word. Each iteration will in- 
crease the weight for the tag which is currently 
most compatible with the context and decrease the 
weights for the others. 
Since constraints are used to decide how compat- 
ible a tag is with its context, they have to assess 
the compatibil ity of a combination of readings. We 
adapt CG constraints described above. 
The REMOVE constraints express total incom- 
patibility 5 and SELECT constraints express total 
compatibil ity (actually, they express incompatibil ity 
of all other possibilities). 
The compatibil ity value for these should be at 
least as strong as the strongest value for a statisti- 
cally obtained constraint (see below). This produces 
a value of about -4-10. 
But because we want the linguistic part of the 
model to be more important than the statistical part 
and because a given label will receive the influence 
SWe model compatibility values using mutual infor- 
mation (Cover and Thomas, 1991), which enables us 
to use negative numbers to state incompatibility. See 
(PadrS, 1996) for a performance comparison between 
M.I. and other measures when applying relaxation la- 
belling to NLP. 
84 
of about two bigrams and three trigrams 6, a sin- 
gle linguistic constraint might have to override five 
statistical constraints. So we will make the compat- 
ibility values six times stronger, that is, =h60. 
Since in our implementation of the CG parser 
(Tapanainen, 1996) constraints tend to be applied 
in a certain order - e.g. SELECT constraints are 
usually applied before REMOVE constraints - we 
adjust the compatibil ity values to get a similar ef- 
fect: if the value for SELECT constraints is +60, 
the value for REMOVE constraints will be lower 
in absolute value, (i.e. -50) .  With this we ensure 
that two contradictory constraints (if there are any) 
do not cancel each other. The SELECT constraint 
will win, as if it had been applied before. 
This enables using any Constraint Grammar  with 
this algorithm although we are applying it more flex- 
ibly: we do not decide whether a constraint is ap- 
plied or not. It is always applied with an influence 
(perhaps zero) that depends on the weights of the 
labels. 
I f  the algorithm should apply the constraints in 
a more strict way, we can introduce an influence 
threshold under which a constraint does not have 
enough influence, i.e. is not applied. 
We can add more information to our model in the 
form of statistically derived constraints. Here we use 
bigrams and trigrams as constraints. 
The 218,000-word corpus of journalese from which 
these constraints were extracted was analysed using 
the following modules: 
* EngCG morphological tagger 
? Module for introducing syntactic ambiguities 
? The NP disambiguator using the 107 rules writ- 
ten in a day 
No human effort was spent on creating this train- 
ing corpus. The training corpus is partly ambigu- 
ous, so the bi / tr igram information acquired will be 
slightly noisy, but accurate nough to provide an al- 
most supervised statistical model. 
For instance, the following constraints have been 
statistically extracted from bi / t r igram occurrences 
in the training corpus. 
-0.415371 (@Y) 
(1 (e>N))  ; 
6The algorithm tends to select one label per variable, 
so there is always a bi/trigram which is applied more 
significantly than the others. 
4. 28089 (?>A) 
(-1 (~>A)) 
(1 (?AH)) ; 
The compatibility value is the mutual informa- 
tion, computed from the probabilities estimated 
from a training corpus. We do not need to assign 
the compatibility values here, since we can estimate 
them from the corpus. 
The compatibility values assigned to the hand- 
written constraints express the strength of these con- 
straints compared to the statistical ones. Modifying 
those values means changing the relative weights of 
the linguistic and statistical parts of the model. 
6 P reparat ion  o f  the  benchmark  
corpus  
For evaluating the systems, five roughly equal-sized 
benchmark corpora not used in the development of
our parsers and taggers were prepared. The texts, 
totaling 6,500 words, were copied from the Guten- 
berg e-text archive, and they represent present-day 
American English. One text is from an article about 
AIDS; another concerns brainwashing techniques; 
the third describes guerilla warfare tactics; the 
fourth addresses the assassination of J. F. Kennedy; 
the last is an extract from a speech by Noam Chom- 
sky. 
The texts were first analysed by a recent version 
of the morphological analyser and rule-based dis- 
ambiguator EngCG, then the syntactic ambiguities 
were added with a simple lookup module. The am- 
biguous text was then manually disambiguated. The 
disambiguated texts were also proofread afterwards. 
Usually, this practice resulted in one analysis per 
word. However, there were two types of exception: 
1. The input did not contain the desired alterna- 
tive (due to a morphological disambiguation er- 
ror). In these cases, no reading was marked 
as correct. Two such words were found in the 
corpora; they detract from the performance fig- 
ures. 
2. The input contained more than one analyses all 
of which seemed equally legitimate, even when 
semantic and textual criteria were consulted. 
In these cases, all the equal alternatives were 
marked as correct. The benchmark corpus con- 
tains 18 words (mainly ING-forms and nonfinite 
ED-forms) with two correct syntactic analyses. 
The number of multiple analyses could proba- 
bly be made even smaller by specifying the gram- 
matical representation (usage principles of the syn- 
85  
tactic tags) in more detail, in particular incorpo- 
rating some analysis conventions for certain appar- 
ent borderline cases (for a discussion of specify- 
ing a parser's linguistic task, see (Voutilainen and 
J~rvinen, 1995)). 
To improve the objectivity of the evaluation, the 
benchmark corpus (as well as parser outputs) have 
been made available from the following URLs: 
http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/-avoutila/anlp97.html 
http://www-lsi.upc.es/-l luisp/anlp97.html 
7 Exper iments  and  resu l ts  
We tested linguistic, statistical and hybrid language 
models, using the CG-2 parser (Tapanainen, 1996) 
and the relaxation labelling algorithm described in 
Section 2. 
The statistical models were obtained from a train- 
ing corpus of 218,000 words of journalese, syntac- 
tically annotated using the linguistic parser (see 
above). 
Although the linguistic CG-2 parser does not dis- 
ambiguate completely, it seems to have an almost 
perfect recall (cf. Table 1 below), and the noise in- 
troduced by the remaining ambiguity is assumed to 
be sufficiently lower than the signal, following the 
idea used in (Yarowsky, 1992). 
The collected statistics were bigram and trigram 
occur rences .  
The algorithms and models were tested against a 
hand-disambiguated benchmark corpus of over 6,500 
words. 
We measure the performance of the different mod- 
els in terms of recall and precision. Recall is the 
percentage of words that get the correct tag among 
the tags proposed by the system. Precision is the 
percentage of tags proposed by the system that are 
correct. 
C 
CG-2  parser  Rel.  Labe l l ing  
prec.  - recal l  prec.  - recal l  
90 .8%-  99.7% 93.3%-  98.4% 
Table 1: Results obtained with the linguistic model. 
Rel.  Labe l l ing  
prec.  - recal l  
B 87.4% - 88.0% 
T 87.6% - 88.4% 
BT  88 .1%-  88.8% 
Table 2: Results obtained with statistical models. 
Rel.  Labelling 
prec.  - recal l  
BC  96.0%-  97.0% 
TC 95.9%-  97.0% 
BTC 96.1%-  97.2% 
Table 3: Results obtained with hybrid models. 
Precision and recall results (computed on all 
words except punctuation marks, which are unam- 
biguous) are given in tables 1, 2 and 3. Models are 
coded as follows: B stands for bigrams, T for tri- 
grams and C for hand-written constraints. All com- 
binations of information types are tested. Since the 
CG-2 parser handles only Constraint Grammars, we 
cannot test this algorithm with statistical models. 
These results suggest he following conclusions: 
? Using the same language model (107 rules), the 
relaxation algorithm disambiguates more than 
the CG-2 parser. This is due to the weighted 
rule application, and results in more misanaly- 
ses and less remaining ambiguity. 
? The statistical models are clearly worse than the 
linguistic one. This could be due to the noise in 
the training corpus, but it is more likely caused 
by the difficulty of the task: we are dealing here 
with shallow syntactic parsing, which is prob- 
ably more difficult to capture in a statistical 
model than e.g. POS tagging. 
? The hybrid models produce less ambiguous re- 
sults than the other models. The number of 
errors is much lower than was the case with the 
statistical models, and somewhat higher than 
was the case with the linguistic model. The gain 
in precision seems to be enough to compensate 
for the loss in recall 7. 
? There does not seem to be much difference be- 
tween BC and TC hybrid models. The reason is 
probably that the job is mainly done by the lin- 
guistic part of the model - which has a higher 
relative weight - and that the statistical part 
only helps to disambiguate cases where the lin- 
guistic model doesn't make a prediction. The 
BTC hybrid model is slightly better than the 
other two. 
? The small difference between the hybrid models 
suggest hat some reasonable statistics provide 
enough disambiguation, and that not very so- 
phisticated information is needed. 
7This obviously depends on the flexibility of one's 
requirements. 
86 
8 Discuss ion 
In this paper we have presented a method for com- 
bining linguistic hand-crafted rules with statistical 
information, and we applied it to a shallow parsing 
task. 
Results show that adding statistical information 
results in an increase in the disambiguation ratio, 
getting a higher precision. The price is a decrease 
in recall. Nevertheless, the risk can be controlled 
since more or less statistical information can be used 
depending on the precision/recall tradeoff one wants 
to achieve. 
We also used this technique to build a shallow 
parser with minimal human effort: 
? 107 disambiguation rules were written in a day. 
? These rules were used to analyze a training cor- 
pus, with a very high recall and a reasonable 
precision. 
? This slightly ambiguous training corpus is used 
for collecting bigram and trigram occurrences. 
The noise introduced by the remaining ambigu- 
ity is assumed not to distort the resulting statis- 
tics too much. 
? The hand-written constraints and the statistics 
are combined using a relaxation algorithm to 
analyze the test corpus, rising the precision to 
96.1% and lowering the recall only to 97.2%. 
Finally, a reservation must be made: what we have 
not investigated in this paper is how much of the 
extra work done with the statistical module could 
have been done equally well or even better by spend- 
ing e.g. another day writing a further collection of 
heuristic rules. As suggested e.g. by Tapanainen 
and Voutilainen (1994) and Chanod and Tapanainen 
(1995), hand-coded heuristics may be a worthwhile 
addition to 'strictly' grammar-based rules. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank Timo J/irvinen, Pasi Tapanalnen 
and two ANLP'97 referees for useful comments on 
earlier versions of this paper. 
The first author benefited from the collaboration 
of Juha Heikkil~ in the development of the linguistic 
description used by the EngCG morphological tag- 
ger; the two-level compiler for morphological nMy- 
sis in EngCG was written by Kimmo Koskenniemi; 
the recent version of the Constraint Grammar parser 
(CG-2) was written by Pasi Tapanainen. The Con- 
straint Grammar framework was originally proposed 
by Fred Karlsson. 
References  
E. Brill. 1995. Unsupervised Learning of Disam- 
biguation Rules for Part-of-speech Tagging. In 
Proceedings of 3rd Workshop on Very Large Cor- 
pora, Massachusetts. 
J.-P. Chanod and P. Tapanainen 1995. Tagging 
French: comparing a statistical and a constraint- 
based method. In Proc. EACL'95. ACL, Dublin. 
T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas (Editors) 1991. Ele- 
ments of information theory. John Wiley & Sons. 
J. Eklundh and A. Rosenfeld. 1978. Convergence 
Properties of Relaxation Labelling. Technical Re- 
port no. 701. Computer Science Center. Univer- 
sity of Maryland. 
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel, P. Berck and S. Gillis. 
1996. MTB: A Memory-Based Part-of-Speech 
Tagger Generator. In Proceedings of ~th Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora. Copenhagen, Den- 
mark. 
R. Garside, G. Leech and G. Sampson (Editors) 
1987. The Computational Analysis of English. 
London and New York: Longman. 
D. Hindle. 1989. Acquiring disambiguation rules 
from text. In Proc. A CL'89. 
F. Karlsson 1990. Constraint Grammar as a Frame- 
work for Parsing Running Text. In H. Karlgren 
(ed.), Papers presented to the 13th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Vol. 3. 
Helsinki. 168-173. 
F. Karlsson, A. Voutilainen, J. HeikkilK and 
A. Anttila. (Editors) 1995. Constraint Grammar: 
A Language-Independent System for Parsing Un- 
restricted Text. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin and 
New York. 
C. Samuelsson, P. Tapanainen and A. Voutilainen. 
1996. Inducing Constraint Grammars. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 3rd International Colloquium on 
Grammatical Inference. 
H. Schmid 1994. Part-of-speech tagging with neu- 
ral networks. In Proceedings of15th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Kyoto, 
Japan. 
P. Tapanainen 1996. The Constraint Grammar 
Parser CG-2. Department ofGeneral Linguistics, 
University of Helsinki. 
P. Tapanainen and A. Voutilainen 1994. Tagging 
accurately - Don't guess if you know. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 4th Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, ACL. Stuttgart. 
C. Torras. 1989. Relaxation and Neural Learning: 
Points of Convergence and Divergence. Journal of 
Parallel and Distributed Computing, 6:217-244 
A. Voutilainen, J. HeikkilK and A. Anttila 1992. 
Constraint Grammar of English. A Performance- 
Oriented Introduction. Publications 21, De- 
partment of General Linguistics, University of 
Helsinki. 
A. Voutilainen and T. JErvinen. 1995. Specifying 
a shallow grammatical representation for parsing 
purposes. In Proceedings ofthe 7th meeting of the 
European Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics. 210-214. 
D. Yarowsky. 1992. Word-sense disambiguations us-
ing statistical models of Roget's categories trained 
on large corpora. In Proceedings of 14th Interna- 
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics. 
Nantes, France. 
J. Larrosa and P. Meseguer. 1995. An Optimization- 
based Heuristic for Maximal Constraint Satisfac- 
tion. In Proceedings of International Conference 
on Principles and Practice of Constraint Program- 
ming. 
L. Mhrquez and H. Rodriguez. 1995. Towards 
Learning a Constraint Grammar from Annotated 
Corpora Using Decision Trees. ESPRIT BRA- 
7315 Acquilex II, Working Paper. 
L. Padr6. 1996. POS Tagging Using Relaxation 
Labelling. In Proceedings of 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Copen- 
hagen, Denmark. 
J. Richards, D. Landgrebe and P. Swain. 1981. On 
the accuracy of pixel relaxation labelling. In IEEE 
Transactions on System, Man and Cybernetics. 
Vol. SMC-11 
87 
