An Improvement in the Selection Process of Machine 
Translation Using Inductive Learning with Genetic Algorithms 
Hiroshi Echizen-ya 
Division of Electronics and Information 
Hokkaido University 
Sapporo, 060 Japan 
ech iChudk,  hokuda i ,  ac.  jp  
Kenji Arak i  
Dept. of Electronics and Information 
Hokkai-Gakuen University 
Sapporo, 064 Japan 
araki~eli, hokkai-s-u, ac. jp 
Yoshikazu Miyanaga Koji Tochinai 
Division of Electronics and Information 
Hokkaido University Sapporo, 060 Japan 
{miyanaga,  toch ina i}?hudk ,  hokuda?, ac .  jp  
Abst rac t  
We proposed a method of machine transla- 
tion using inductive learning with genetic 
algorithms, and confirmed the effectiveness 
of applying genetic algorithms. However, 
the system based on this method produces 
many erroneous translation rules that can- 
not be completely removed from the dictio- 
nary. Therefore, we need to improve how 
to apply genetic algorithms to be able to re- 
move erroneous translation rules from the 
dictionary. In this paper, we describe this 
improvement in the selection process and 
the results of evaluation experiments. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Many studies have been carried out on machine 
translation and a number of problems has been rec- 
ognized. Rule-based machine translation (Hutchins 
and Somers, 1992) could not deal adequately with 
various linguistic phenomena due to the use of lim- 
ited rules. To resolve this problem, Example-based 
machine translation (Sato and Nagao, 1990) has re- 
cently been proposed. However, this method re- 
quires many translation examples to achieve a prac- 
tical and high-quality translation. 
Echizen-ya and others previously proposed a 
method of Machine Translation using Inductive 
Learning with Genetic Algorithms (GA-ILMT), and 
this method has been evaluated(Echizen-ya et l., 
1996). By applying enetic algorithms, we consider 
that our proposed method can effectively solve prob- 
lems that Example-based machine translation would 
require many translation examples. However, the 
results of the evaluation experiments show that this 
method has some problems. The main problem is 
that many erroneous translation rules are produced 
and these rules cannot be completely removed from 
the dictionary. Therefore, we need to improve how 
to apply genetic algorithms to be able to remove 
erroneous translation rules. In this paper, we de- 
scribe an improvement in the selection process of 
GA-ILMT, and confirm the effectiveness ofimprove- 
ment in the selection process of GA-ILMT. 
2 Out l ine  o f  T rans la t ion  Method  
Figure 1 shows the outline of our proposed transla- 
tion method. First, the user inputs a source sentence 
in English. Second , in the translation process, the 
system produces several candidates oftranslation re- 
sults using translation rules extracted in the learn- 
ing process. Third, the user proofreads the trans- 
lated sentences if they include some errors. Fourth, 
in the feedback process, the system determines the 
fitness value of translation rules used in the transla- 
tion process and performs the selection process of 
erroneous translation rules. In the learning pro- 
cess, new translation examples are automatically 
produced by crossover and mutation, and various 
translation rules are extracted from the translation 
examples by inductive learning. 
3 Improvement  in  Se lec t ion  P rocess  
In the previous method of selection process de- 
scribed in Section 2, translation rules are evaluated 
only when they are used in the translation process. 
These translation rules are part of all the translation 
rules in the dictionary. Therefore, many erroneous 
11 
Source Sentence 
\[ Translat i7 Pr?cess ~.,,.. ~ 
Translation Result - - - \ ]  ~(~ 
(P roofreadin~) \[ I . . . .  \[ 1 ~ \[ \] ~lC~lonary for I 
. . . .  ? . . . . . .  \[ \[Translation es\[ -r'rooIreaa lra~smuon rtesult\[ _~-  Rul 
J \[Feedback Process \ [ ' ~ f ~  
,\[Learning Process~ 
I 
Figure 1: Outline of the translation method 
translation rules cannot be completely removed from 
the dictionary. 
To resolve this problem, we propose an improve- 
ment in the selection process. Our proposed im- 
provement does not require any analytical knowl- 
edge as initial condition. Methods that use analyti- 
cal knowledge have some problems, such as difficulty 
in dealing with unregistered words. We consider 
that this problem can be resolved by the learning 
method without any analytical knowledge. There- 
fore, we consider that our proposed improvement 
can remove many erroneous translation rules by uti- 
lizing only the given translation examples without 
the requirement of analytical knowledge. 
The system evaluates the translation rules by 
utilizing the given translation examples directly. 
Namely, it determines whether a combination of the 
English word and the Japanese word in a translation 
rule is true or false by utilizing the given translation 
examples. The combination may be true when it ex- 
ists in a given translation example. For example, the 
combination of words which are "I" in English and 
" Watashi 1 (In Japanese "I")" in Japanese is true 
when this combination exists in a given translation 
example. On the other hand, the combination of 
words which are "volleyball" in English and "Ba- 
sukettoboru(In Japanese "basketball")" in Japanese 
is false when this combination does not exist in all 
given translation examples. In the all combinations 
of words in a translation rule, the system determines 
whether the each combination of words is true or 
false. And the system determines the rate of error 
based on the number of erroneous combinations, and 
removes the translation rules for which the rate of 
error is high. 
4 Exper iments  
In the experiments, 461 translation examples were 
used as data. The examples were taken from a text- 
book (Hasegawa et al, 1991) for first-grade junior 
1Italic means pronunciation of Japanese 
high school students. All of the translation exam- 
ples were processed by the method outlined in Fig- 
ure 1. The initial dictionary was empty. The exper- 
iments were carried out with and without the im- 
provement for the selection process described in Sec- 
tion 3. In the experiments, the precision increased 
from 87.5% to 93.7% and the recall increased from 
4.5% to 56.0%. 
5 Conc lus ion  
In the previous selection process, the translation 
rules are evaluated only when they are used in the 
translation process. Therefore, the translation rules 
which are not used in the translation process are 
never removed from the dictionary. However, the 
proposed improvement can evaluate all of the pro- 
duced translation rules by utilizing only the given 
translation examples. 
6 Acknowledgements  
The part of this research as been done during the 
second author Kenji Araki's stay at CSLI of Stan- 
ford University. We would like to express our special 
appreciation to the stuffs of CSLI. 
References  
W. John Hutchins and Harold L. Somers. 1992. 
An Introduction to Machine Translation. ACA- 
DEMIC PRESS. (London) 
Sato, S. and Nagao, M. 1990. Toward Memory- 
based Translation. In Proceedings of the Col- 
ing'90, pages 247-252, Helsinki, Finland, August. 
Echizen-ya, H., Araki, K., Momouchi, Y. and Tochi- 
nai, K. 1996. Machine Translation Method Us- 
ing Inductive Learning with Genetic Algorithms. 
In Proceedings of the Coling'96, pages 1020-1023, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, August. 
Hasegawa, K. et al, 1991. One World English 
Course 1 New Edition. Kyoiku Shuppan. (Tokyo). 
12 
