Us ing  SGML as a Bas is  for Data - In tens ive  NLP  
Dav id  McKe lv ie ,  Chr i s  Brew & Henry  Thompson 
Language Technology Group, Human Communicat ion  Research Centre, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland 
David .  McKelvie@ed. ac.  uk ~z Chr i s .  Brew@ed. ac.  uk & H. Thompson@ed. ac .  uk 
Abst rac t  
This paper describes the LT NSL sys- 
tem (McKelvie et al 1996), an architec- 
ture for writing corpus processing tools. 
This system is then compared with two 
other systems which address similar is- 
sues, the GATE system (Cunningham et 
al, 1995) and the IMS Corpus Workbench 
(Christ, 1994). In particular we address 
the advantages and disadvantages of an 
SGML approach compared with a non-SGML 
database approach. 
1 Introduction 
The theme of this paper is the design of software 
and data architectures for natural language process- 
ing using corpora. Two major issues in corpus-based 
NLP are: how best to deal with medium to large 
scale corpora often with complex linguistic annota- 
tions, and what system architecture best supports 
the reuse of software components in a modular and 
interchangeable fashion. 
In this paper we describe the LT NSL system (McK- 
elvie et al 1996), an architecture for writing corpus 
processing tools, which we have developed in an at- 
tempt to address these issues. This system is then 
compared with two other systems which address 
some of the same issues, the GATE system (Cun- 
ningham et al 1995) and the IMS Corpus Work- 
bench (Christ, 1994). In particular we address the 
advantages and disadvantages of an SGML approach 
compared with a non-SGML database approach. Fi- 
nally, in order to back up our claims about he merits 
of SGML-based corpus processing, we present a num- 
ber of case studies of the use of the LT NSL system 
for corpus preparation and linguistic analysis. 
2 The  LT  NSL  sys tem 
LT NSL is a tool architecture for SGML-based pro- 
cessing of (primarily) text corpora. It generalises 
the UNIX pipe architecture, making it possible to 
use pipelines of general-purpose tools to process an- 
notated corpora. The original UNIX architecture al- 
lows the rapid construction of efficient pipelines of 
conceptually simple processes to carry out relatively 
complex tasks, but is restricted to a simple model of 
streams as sequences ofbytes, lines or fields. LT NSL 
lifts this restriction, allowing tools access to streams 
which are sequences oftree-structured text (a repre- 
sentation of SGML marked-up text). 
The use of SGML as an I /0  stream format between 
programs has the advantage that SGML is a well de- 
fined standard for representing structured text. Its 
value is precisely that it closes off the option of a 
proliferation of ad-hoc notations and the associated 
software needed to read and write them. The most 
important reason why we use SGML for all corpus lin- 
guistic annotation is that it forces us to formally de- 
scribe the markup we will be using and provides oft- 
ware for checking that these markup invariants hold 
in an annotated corpus. In practise this is extremely 
useful. SGML is human readable, so that interme- 
diate results can be inspected and understood. It 
also means that it is easy for programs to access the 
information which is relevant to them, while ignor- 
ing additional markup. A further advantage is that 
many text corpora re available in SGML, for exam- 
ple, the British National Corpus (Burnage&Dunlop, 
1992). 
The LT NSL system is released as C source code. 
The software consists of a C-language Application 
Program Interface (API) of function calls, and a num- 
ber of stand-alone programs which use this API. The 
current release is known to work on UNIX (SunOS 
4.1.3, Solaris 2.4 and Linux), and a Windows-NT 
version will be released uring 1997. There is also 
an API for the Python programming language. 
One question which arises in respect to using 
SGML as an I /O  format is: what about the cost of 
229 
parsing SGML? Surely that makes pipelines too in- 
efficient? Parsing SGML in its full generality, and 
providing validation and adequate rror detection 
is indeed rather hard. For efficiency reasons, you 
wouldn't want to use long pipelines of tools, if each 
tool had to reparse the SGML and deal with the 
full language. Fortunately, LT NSL doesn't require 
this. The first stage of processing normalises the 
input, producing a simplified, but informationally 
equivalent form of the document. Subsequent tools 
can and often will use the LT NSL API which parses 
normalised SGML (henceforth NSGML) approximately 
ten times more efficiently than the best parsers for 
full SGML. The API then returns this parsed SGML 
to the calling program as data-structures. 
NSGML is a fully expanded text form of SGML in- 
formationally equivalent to the ESlS output of SGML 
parsers. This means that all markup minimisation 
is expanded to its full form, SGML entities are ex- 
panded into their value (except for SDATA entities), 
and all SGML names (of elements, attributes, etc) are 
normalised. The result is a format easily readable by 
humans and programs. 
The LT NSL programs consist of mknsg, a program 
for converting arbitrary valid SGML into normalised 
SGML 1 , the first stage in a pipeline of LT NSL tools; 
and a number of programs for manipulating nor- 
malised SGML files, such as sggrep which finds SGML 
elements which match some query. Other of our soft- 
ware packages uch as LT POS (a part of speech tag- 
ger) and LT WB (Mikheev&Finch, 1997) also use the 
LT NSL library. 
In addition to the normalised SGML, the mknsg 
program writes a file containing a compiled form 
of the Document Type Definition (DTD) 2, which 
LT NSL programs read in order to know what the 
structure of their NSGML input or output is. 
How fast is it? Processes requiring sequential ac- 
cess to large text corpora are well supported. It is 
unlikely that LT NSL will prove the rate limiting step 
in sequential corpus processing. The kinds of re- 
peated search required by lexicographers are more 
of a problem, since the system was not designed 
for that purpose. The standard istribution is fast 
enough for use as a search engine with files of up to 
several million words. Searching 1% of the British 
National Corpus (a total of 700,000 words (18 Mb)) 
is currently only 6 times slower using LT NSL sggrep 
than using fgl"ep, and sF~rre p allows more complex 
structure-sensitive queries. A prototype indexing 
mechanism (Mikheev&McKelvie, 1997), not yet in 
1Based on James Clark's SP parser (Clark, 1996). 
2SGML's way of describing the structure (or grammar) 
of the allowed markup in a document 
230  
the distribution, improves the performance ofLT NSL 
to acceptable l vels for much larger datasets. 
Why did we say "primarily for text corpora"? Be- 
cause much of the technology is directly applicable 
to multimedia corpora such as the Edinburgh Map 
Task corpus (Anderson et al 1991). There are tools 
which interpret SGML elements in the corpus text as 
offsets into files of audio-data, allowing very flexi- 
ble retrieval and output of audio information using 
queries defined over the corpus text and its annota- 
tions. The same could be done for video clips, etc. 
2.1 Hyper l ink ing  
We are inclined to steer a middle course between 
a monolithic omprehensive iew of corpus data, in 
which all possible views, annotations, tructurings 
etc. of a corpus component are combined in a sin- 
gle heavily structured ocument, and a massively 
decentralised view in which a corpus component is 
organised as a hyper-document, with all its informa- 
tion stored in separate documents, utilising inter- 
document pointers. Aspects of the LT NSL library 
are aimed at supporting this approach. It is neces- 
sary to distinguish between files, which are storage 
units, (SGML) documents, which may be composed 
of a number of files by means of external entity ref- 
erences, and hyper-documents, which are linked en- 
sembles of documents, using e.g. HyTime or TEI 
(Sperberg-McQueen&Burnard, 1994) link notation. 
The implication of this is that corpus compo- 
nents can be hyper-documents, with low-density (i.e. 
above the token level) annotation being expressed in- 
directly in terms of links. In the first instance, this 
is constrained to situations where element content 
at one level of one document is entirely composed 
of elements from another document. Suppose, for 
example, we already had segmented a file resulting 
in a single document marked up with SGML headers 
and paragraphs, and with the word segmentation 
marked with <w> tags: 
<p id=~> 
<w id=p4.wl>Time</w> 
<w id=p4.w2>flies</w> 
<w id=p4.w3>.</w> 
<Ip> 
The output of a phrase-level segmentation might 
then be stored as follows: 
? ? 
<p id=p4> 
<phr id=p4.phl type=n doe=file1 from='id p4.wl~> 
<phr id=p4.ph2 type=v from=~id p4.w2~> 
</p> 
Linking is specified using one of the available TEI 
mechanisms. Details are not relevant here, suffice it 
to say that doc=f i le l  resolves to the word level file 
and establishes a default for subsequent links. At 
a minimum, links are able to target single elements 
or sequences of contiguous elements. LT NSL imple- 
ments a textual inclusion semantics for such links, in- 
serting the referenced material as the content of the 
element bearing the linking attributes. Although the 
example above shows links to only one document, it
is possible to link to several documents, e.g. to a 
word document and a lexicon document: 
<word> 
<source doc=filel from=~id p4.wl ~> 
<lex doc=lexl from='id iex.40332'> 
</word> 
Note that the architecture is recursive, in that 
e.g. sentence-level segmentation could be expressed 
in terms of links into the phrase-level segmentation 
as presented above. 
The data architecture needs to address not only 
multiple levels of annotation but also alternative ver- 
sions at a given level. Since our linking mechanism 
uses the SGML entity mechanism to implement the 
identification of target documents, we can use the 
entity manager's catalogue as a means of managing 
versions. For our example above, this means that the 
connection between the phrase encoding document 
and the segmented document would be in two steps: 
the phrase document would use a PUBL IC  identi- 
fier, which the catalogue would map to the particular 
file. Since catalogue ntries are interpreted by tools 
as local to the directory where the catalogue itself 
is found, this means that binding together groups of 
alternative versions can be easily achieved by storing 
them under the same directory. 
Subdirectories with catalogue fragments can thus 
be used to represent both increasing detail of anno- 
tation and alternatives at a given level of annotation. 
Note also that with a modest extension of func- 
tionality, it is possible to use the data architecture 
described here to implement patches, e.g. to the to- 
kenisation process. If alongside an inclusion seman- 
tics, we have a special empty element <repl> which 
is replaced by the range it points to, we can produce 
a patch file, e.g. for a misspelled word, as follows 
(irrelevant details omitted): 
<nsl> 
<!-- to get the original header--> 
<repl doc=original from='id hdrl'> 
<text> 
<!-- the first swatch of unchanged text --> 
<repl from= ~id pl~ to= ~ id p324~ > 
<!-- more unchanged text --> 
<p ?d=p325> 
<repl from='id p325.t1' to='id p325.t15'> 
<!-- the correction itself --> 
<corr sic='procede' resp='ispell~> 
<token id=p325, t 16>proceed</t oken> 
</corr> 
<!-- more unchanged text--> 
<repl from=~id p325.t17 ~ to=~id p325.t96 '> 
<Ip> 
<!-- the rest of the unchanged text--> 
<repl from='id p326 ~ to=~id p402 ~> 
</text> 
</nsl> 
Whether such a patch would have knock-on effects 
on higher levels of annotation would depend, inter 
alia, on whether a change in tokenisation crossed any 
higher-level boundaries. 
2.2 sggrep and the LT NSL query  language 
The ie I  provides the program(mer) with two alter- 
native views of the NSGML stream: an object stream 
view and a tree fragment view. The first, lower level 
but more efficient, provides data structures and ac- 
cess functions such as GetNextBit  and Pr in tB i t ,  
where there are different ypes of B i t s  for start (or 
empty) tags with their attributes, text content, end 
tags, and a few other bits and pieces. 
The alternative, higher level, view, lets one 
treat the NSGML input as a sequence of tree- 
fragments. The API provides functions GetNextItem 
and Pr in t I tem to read and write the next com- 
plete SGML element. It also provides functionality 
GetNextQueryElement (infile, query, subquery, 
regexp,outfile) where query is an LT NSL query 
which allows one to specify particular elements on 
the basis of their position in the document struc- 
ture and their attribute values. The subquery and 
regexp allow one to specify that the matching ele- 
ment has a subelement matching the subquery with 
text content matching the regular expression. El- 
ements which do not match the query are passed 
through unchanged to outfile. Under both mod- 
els, processing is essentially a loop over calls to the 
API, in each case choosing to discard, modify or out- 
put unchanged each Bit or Element. 
Rather than define the query language here (de- 
tails can be found in (McKelvie et al 1996)), we will 
just provide an example. The call 
GetNext QueryElement (inf ,". */TEXT/. */P", 
"P/. */S", "th (eil ie)r", outf) 
would return the next <P> element dominated 
anywhere by <TEXT> at any depth, with the <P> 
element satisfying the additional requirement that 
it contain at least one <S> element at any depth 
with text containing at least one instance of 'their' 
(possibly misspelt). 
231 
3 Comparisons with other systems 
The major alternative corpus architecture which has 
been advocated is a database approach, where anno- 
tations are kept separately from the base texts. The 
annotations are linked to the base texts either by 
means of character offsets or by a more sophisticated 
indexing scheme. We will discuss two such systems 
and compare them with the LT NSL approach. 
3.1 GATE 
The GATE system (Cunningham et al 1995), 
currently under development at the University of 
Sheffield, is a system to support modular language 
engineering. 
3.1.1 System components  
It consists of three main components: 
? GDM - an object oriented database for stor- 
ing information about the corpus texts. This 
database is based on the T IPSTER document 
architecture (Grishman, 1995), and stores text 
annotations eparate from the texts. Annota- 
tions are linked to texts by means of character 
offsets 3. 
? Creole - A library of program and data resource 
wrappers, that allow one to interface xternally 
developed programs/resources into the GATE 
architecture. 
? GGI - a graphical tool shell for describing pro- 
cessing algorithms and viewing and evaluating 
the results. 
A MUC-6 compatible information extraction sys- 
tem, VIE, has been built using the GATE architec- 
ture. 
3.1.2 Eva luat ion  
Separating corpus text from annotations i a gen- 
eral and flexible method of describing arbitrary 
structure on a text. It may be less useful as a means 
of publishing corpora nd may prove inefficient if the 
underlying corpus is liable to change. 
Although T IPSTER lets one define annotations 
and their associated attributes, in the present ver- 
sion (and presumably also in GATE) these defini- 
tions are treated only as documentation and are 
not validated by the system. In contrast, the SGML 
parser validates its DTD, and hence provides ome 
check that annotations are being used in their in- 
tended way. SGML has the concept of content mod- 
els which restrict the allowed positions and nesting 
3More precisely, by inter byte locations. 
of annotations. GATE allows any annotation any- 
where. Although this is more powerful, i.e. one is not 
restricted to tree structures, it does make validation 
of annotations more difficult. 
The idea of having formalised interfaces for exter- 
nal programs and data is a good one. 
The GGI graphical tool shell lets one build, 
store, and recover complex processing specifications. 
There is merit in having a high level language to 
specify tasks which can be translated automatically 
into executable programs (e.g. shell scripts). This is 
an area that LT NSL does not address. 
3.1.3 Compar i son  wi th  LT NSL 
In (Cunningham et al 1996), the GATE archi- 
tecture is compared with the earlier version of the 
LT NSL architecture which was developed in the 
MULTEXT project. We would like to answer these 
points with reference to the latest version of our soft- 
ware .  
It is claimed that using normalised SGML implies 
a large storage overhead. Normally however, nor- 
malised SGML will be created on the fly and passed 
through pipes and only the final results will need to 
be stored. This may however be a problem for very 
large corpora such as the BNC. 
It is stated that representing ambiguous or over- 
lapping markup is complex in SGML. We do not 
agree. One can represent overlapping markup in 
SGML in a number of ways. As described above, 
it is quite possible for SGML to represent 'stand-off' 
annotation in a similar way to T IPSTER.  LT NSL 
provides the hyperlinking semantics to interpret this 
SGML. 
The use of normalised SGML and a compiled DTD 
file means that the overheads of parsing SGML in 
each program are small, even for large DTDs, such 
as the TEI. 
LT NSL is not specific to particular applications 
or DTDs. The MULTEXT architecture was tool- 
specific, in that its API defined a predefined set of ab- 
stract units of linguistic interest, words, sentences, 
etc. and defined functions such as ReadSentence. 
That was because MULTEXT was undecided about 
the format of its I/O. LT NSL in contrast, since we 
have decided on SGML as a common format, provides 
functions uch as GetNextItem which read the next 
SGML element. Does this mean the LT NSL architec- 
ture is application eutral? Yes and no. 
Yes, because there is in principle no limit on what 
can be encoded in an SGML document. In the TIP- 
STER architecture there is an architectural require- 
ment that all annotations be ultimately associated 
with spans of a single base text, but LT NSL imposes 
232 
no such requirement. This makes it easier to be clear 
about what happens when a different view is needed 
on fixed-format read-only information, or when it 
turns out that the read-only information should be 
systematically corrected. The details of this are a 
matter of ongoing research, but an important moti- 
vation for the architecture of LT NSL is to allow such 
edits without requiring that the read-only informa- 
tion be copied. 
No,  because in practice any corpus is encoded in a 
way which reflects the assumptions of the corpus de- 
velopers. Most corpora include a level of representa- 
tion for words, and many include higher level group- 
ings such as breath groups, sentences, paragraphs 
and/or documents. The sample back-end tools dis- 
tributed with LT NSL reflect this fact. 
It is claimed that there is no easy way in SGML to 
differentiate sets of results by who or what produced 
them. But, to do this requires only a convention for 
the encoding of meta-information about text cor- 
pora. For example, SGML DTDs such as the TEI 
include a 'resp' attribute which identifies who was 
responsible for changes. LT NSL does not require 
tools to obey any particular conventions for meta- 
information, but once a convention is fixed upon it 
is straightforward to encode the necessary informa- 
tion as SGML attributes. 
Unlike TIPSTER, LT NSL is not built around a 
database, so we cannot take advantage of built-in 
mechanisms for version control. As far as corpus 
annotation goes, UNIX rcs, has proved an adequate 
solution to our version control needs. Alternatively, 
version control can be provided by means of hyper- 
linking. 
The GATE idea of providing formal wrappers for 
interfacing programs is a good one. In LT NSL 
the corresponding interfaces are less formalised, but 
can be defined by specifying the DTDs of a pro- 
gram's input and output files. For example a part- 
of-speech tagger would expect <W> elements inside 
<S> elements, and a 'TAG' attribute on the output 
<W> elements. Any input file whose DTD satisfied 
this constraint could be tagged. SGML architectural 
forms (a method for DTD subsetting) could provide 
a method of formalising these program interfaces. 
As Cunningham et. al. say, there is no reason why 
there could not be an implementation of LT NSL 
which read SGML elements from a database rather 
than from files. Similarly, a T IPSTER architecture 
like GATE could read SGML and convert it into its 
internal database. In that case, our point would 
be that SGML is a suitable abstraction for programs 
rather than a more abstract (and perhaps more lim- 
233  
ited) level of interface. We are currently in discus- 
sion with the GATE team about how best to allow 
the interoperability of the two systems. 
3.2 The  IMS Corpus  Workbench  
The IMS Corpus Workbench (Christ, 1994) includes 
both a query engine (CQP) and a Motif-based user 
visualisation tool (xkwic). CQP provides a query lan- 
guage which is a conservative xtension of famil- 
ia~ UNIX regular expression facilities 4. XKWIC is a 
user interface tuned for corpus search. As well as 
providing the standard keyword-in-context facilities 
and giving access to the query language it gives the 
user sophisticated tools for managing the query his- 
tory, manipulating the display, and storing search 
results. The most interesting points of comparison 
with LT NSL are in the areas of query language and 
underlying corpus representation. 
3.2.1 The  CQP mode l  
CQP treats corpora s sequences of attribute-value 
bundles. Each attribute 5 can be thought of as a total 
function from corpus positions to attribute values. 
Syntactic sugar apart, no special status is given to 
the attribute word. 
3.2.2 The  query  language 
The query language of IMS-CWB, which has the 
usual regular expression operators, works uniformly 
over both attribute values and corpus positions. 
This regularity is a clear benefit o users, since only 
one syntax must be learnt. 
Expressions of considerable sophistication can be 
generated and used successfully by beginners. Con- 
sider: 
\[pos="DT" & word !="the"\] \[pos="JJ.*"\]? 
\[pos=0'N. +"\] 
This means, in the context of the Penn treebank 
tagset, "Find me sequences beginning with deter- 
miners other than the, followed by optional adjec- 
tives, then things with nominal qualities". The in- 
tention is presumably to find a particular sub-class 
of noun-phrases. 
The workbench as plainly achieved an extremely 
successful generalisation of regular expressions, and 
one which has been validated by extensive use in 
lexicography and corpus-building. 
There is only limited access to structural infor- 
mation. While it is possible, if sentence boundaries 
are marked in the corpus, to restrict the search to 
4Like LT NSL IMS-CWB is built on top of Henry 
Spencer's public domain regular expression package 
5In CQP terminology these are the "positional 
attributes". 
within-sentence matches, there are few facilities for 
making more refined use of hierarchical structure. 
The typical working style, if you are concerned with 
syntax, is to search for sequences of attributes which 
you believe to be highly correlated with particular 
syntactic structures. 
3.2.3 Data  representat ion  
CQP requires users to transform the corpora which 
will be searched into a fast internal format. This 
format has the following properties: 
. Because of the central role of corpus position it 
is necessary to tokenise the input corpus, map- 
ping each word in the raw input to a set of at- 
tribute value pairs and a corpus position. 
? There is a logically separate index for each at- 
tribute name in the corpus. 
? CQP uses all integerised representation, i  which 
corpus items having the same value for an at- 
tribute are mapped into the same integer de- 
scriptor in the index which represents that at- 
tribute. This means that the character data cor- 
responding to each distinct corpus token need 
only be stored once. 
? For each attribute there is an item list contain- 
ing the sequence of integer descriptors corre- 
sponding to the sequence of words in the corpus. 
Because of the presence of this list the storage 
cost of adding a new attribute is linear in the 
size of the corpus. If the new attribute were 
sparse, it would be possible to reduce the space 
cost by switching (for that attribute) to a more 
space efficient encoding 6 
3.2.4 Evaluat ion 
The IMS-CWB is a design dominated by the need 
for frequent fast searches of a corpus with a fixed an- 
notation scheme. Although disk space is now cheap, 
the cost of preparing and storing the indices for IMS- 
CWB is such that the architecture is mainly appro- 
priate for linguistic and lexicographic exploration, 
but less immediately useful in situations, such as 
obtain in corpus development, where there is a re- 
curring need to experiment with different or evolving 
attributes and representational possibilities. 
Some support is provided for user-written tools, 
but as yet there is no published API to the poten- 
tially very useful query language facilities. The in- 
dexing tools which come with IMS-CWB are less flexi- 
ble than those of LT NSL since the former must index 
61MS-CWB already supports compressed index files, 
and special purpose encoding formats would presumably 
save even more space. 
on words, while the latter can index on any level of 
the corpus annotation. 
The query language of IMS-CWB is an elegant and 
orthogonal design, which we believe it would be ap- 
propriate to adopt or adapt as a standard for corpus 
search. It stands in need of extension to provide 
more flexible access to hierarchical structure ~. The 
query language of LT NSL is one possible template 
for such extensions, as is the opaque but powerful 
tg rep  program (Pito, 1994) which is provided with 
the Penn Treebank. 
4 Case  s tud ies  
4.1 Creat ion  of  marked-up  corpora  
One application area where the paradigm of sequen- 
tial adding of markup to an SGML stream fits very 
closely, is that of the production of annotated cor- 
pora. Marking of major sections, paragraphs and 
headings, word tokenising, sentence boundary mark- 
ing, part of speech tagging and parsing are all tasks 
which can be performed sequentially using only a 
small moving window of the texts. In addition, all 
of them make use of the markup created by earlier 
steps. If one is creating an annotated corpus for pub- 
lic distribution, then SGML is (probably) the format 
of choice and thus an SGML based NLP system such 
as LT NSL will be appropriate. 
Precursors to the LT NSL so f tware  were used to an- 
notate the MLCC corpora used by the MULTEXT 
project. Similarly LT NSL has been used to recode 
the Edinburgh MapTask corpus into SGML markup, 
a process which showed up a number of inconsis- 
tencies in the original (non-SGML) markup. Because 
LT NSL allows the use of multiple I /O files (with dif- 
ferent DTDs), in (Brew&McKelvie, 1996) it was pos- 
sible to apply these tools to the task of finding trans- 
lation equivalencies between English and French. 
Using part of the MLCC corpus, part-of-speech 
tagged and sentence aligned using LT NSL tools, they 
explored various techniques for finding word align- 
ments. The LT NSL programs were useful in eval- 
uating these techniques. See also (Mikheev&Finch, 
1995), (Mikheev&Finch, 1997) for other uses of the 
LT NSL tools in annotating linguistic structures of 
interest and extracting statistics from that markup. 
4.2 T rans format ion  of  corpus  markup 
Although SGML is human readable, in practice once 
the amount of markup is of the same order of magni- 
7This may be a specialised need of academic linguists, 
and for many applications it is undoubtedly more im- 
portant to provide clean facilities for non-hierarchical 
queries but it seems premature to close off the option 
of such access. 
234 
rude as the textual content, reading SGML becomes 
difficult. Similarly, editing such texts using a normal 
text editor becomes tedious and error prone. Thus 
if one is committed to the use of SGML for corpus- 
based NLP, then one needs to have specialised soft- 
ware to facilitate the viewing and editing of SGML. 
A similar problem appears in the database approach 
to corpora, where the difficulty is not in seeing the 
original text, but in seeing the markup in relation- 
ship to the text. 
4.2.1 Batch transformations 
To address this issue LT NSL includes a num- 
ber of text based tools for the conversion of SGML: 
texton ly ,  sgmltrans and sgrpg. With these tools 
it is easy to select portions of text which are of inter- 
est (using the query language) and to convert hem 
into either plain text or another text format, such as 
1.4TEX or HTML. In addition, there are a large num- 
ber of commercial and public domain software pack- 
ages for transforming SGML. In the future, however, 
the advent of the DSSSL transformation language will 
undoubtably revolutionise this area. 
4.2.2 Hand correction 
Specialised editors for SGML are available, but 
they are not always exactly what one wants, because 
they are too powerful, in that they let al markup 
and text be edited. What is required for markup 
correction are specialised editors which only allow a 
specific subset of the markup to be edited, and which 
provide an optimised user interface for this limited 
set of edit operations. 
In order to support the writing of specialised ed- 
itors, we have developed a Python (vanRossum, 
1995) API for LT NSL, (Tobin&McKelvie, 1996). This 
allows us to rapidly prototype editors using the 
Python/Tk  graphics package. These editors can fit 
into a pipeline of LT NSL tools allowing hand cor- 
rection or disambiguation of markup automatically 
added by previous tools. Using this heI we are devel- 
oping a generic SGML editor. It is an object-oriented 
system where one can flexibly associate display and 
interaction classes to particular SGML elements. Al- 
ready, this generic editor has been used for a number 
of tasks; the hand correction of part-of-speech tags 
in the MapTask, the correction of turn boundaries 
in the Innovation corpus (Carletta et al 1996), and 
the evaluation of translation equivalences between 
aligned multilingual corpora. 
We found that using this generic editor framework 
made it possible to quickly write new editors for new 
tasks on new corpora. 
5 Conc lus ions  
SGML is a good markup language for base level an- 
notations of published corpora. Our experience with 
LT NSL has  shown that: 
? It is a good system for sequential corpus pro- 
cessing where there is locality of reference. 
? It provides a modular architecture which does 
not require a central database, thus allowing 
distributed software development and reuse of 
components. 
? It works with existing corpora without extensive 
pre-processing. 
? It does support the Tipster approach of sep- 
arating base texts from additional markup by 
means of hyperlinks. In fact SGML (HyTime) 
allows much more flexible addressing, not just 
character offsets. This is of benefit when work- 
ing with corpora which may change. 
LT NSL is not so good for: 
? Applications which require a database ap- 
proach, i.e. those which need to access markup 
at random from a text, for example lexico- 
graphic browsing or the creation of book in- 
dexes. 
? Processing very large plain text or unnormalised 
SGML corpora, where indexing is required, and 
generation of normalised files is a large over- 
head. We are working on extending LT NSL in 
this direction, e.g. to allow processing of the 
BNC corpus in its entirety. 
In conclusion, the SGML and database approaches 
are optimised for different NLP applications and 
should be seen as complimentary ather than as con- 
flicting. There is no reason why one should not at- 
tempt to use the strengths of both the database and 
the SGML stream approaches. It is recommended 
that future work should include attention to allow- 
ing interfacing between both approaches. 
6 Acknowledgements  
This work was carried out at the Human Commu- 
nication Research Centre, whose baseline funding 
comes from the UK Economic and Social Research 
Council. The LT NSL work began in the context of 
the LRE project MULTEXT with support from the 
European Union. It has benefited from discussions 
with other MULTEXT partners, particularly ISSCO 
Geneva, and drew on work at our own institution by 
235 
Steve Finch and Andrei Mikheev. We also wish to 
thank Hamish Cunningham and Oliver Christ for 
useful discussions. 
Re ferences  
A. H. Anderson, M. Bader, E. G. Bard, E. H. 
Boyle, G. M. Doherty, S. C. Garrod, S. D. Isard, 
J. C. Kowtko, J. M. McAllister, J. Miller, C. F. 
Sotillo, H. S. Thompson, and R. Weinert. The 
HCRC Map Task Corpus. Language and Speech, 
34(4):351-366, 1991. 
C. Brew and D. McKelvie. 1996. "Word-pair extrac- 
tion for lexicography". In Proceedings of NeM- 
LAP'96, pp 45-55, Ankara, Turkey. 
G. Burnage and D. Dunlop. 1992. "Encoding 
the British National Corpus". In 13th Interna- 
tional Conference on English Language research 
on computerised corpora, Nijmegen. Available at 
http ://www. sil. org/sgml/bnc-encoding2, html 
See also http://info, ox. ac. uk/bnc/ 
J. Carletta, H. Fraser-Krauss and S. Garrod. 1996. 
"An Empirical Study of Innovation in Manufac- 
turing Teams: a preliminary report". In Proceed- 
ings of the International Workshop on Commu- 
nication Modelling (LAP-96), ed. J. L. G. Dietz, 
Springer-Verlag, Electronic Workshops in Com- 
puting Series. 
O. Christ. 1994. "A modular and flexible archi- 
tecture for an integrated corpus query system". 
In Proceedings of COMPLEX '94: 3rd Conference 
on Computational Lexicography and Text Research 
(Budapest, July 7-10, 1994), Budapest, Hungary. 
CMP-LG archive id 9408005 
J. Clark. 1996 "SP: An SGML System Conforming 
to International Standard ISO 8879 - Standard 
Generalized Markup Language". Available from 
http ://www. j clark, com/sp/index, htm. 
R. Grishman. 1995. "TIPSTER Phase II 
Architecture Design Document Version 1.52". 
Technical Report, Dept. of Computer Sci- 
ence, New York University. Available at 
http ://www. cs. nyu. edu/t ipst er 
D. McKelvie, H. Thompson and S. Finch. 1996. 
"The Normalised SGML Library LT NSL ver- 
sion 1.4.6". Technical Report, Language Technol- 
ogy Group, University of Edinburgh. Available at 
http ://www. itg. ed. ac. uk/software/nsl 
A. Mikheev and S. Finch. 1995. "Towards a Work- 
bench for Acquisition of Domain Knowledge from 
Natural Language". In Proceedings ofthe Seventh 
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics (EA CL '95). 
Dublin, Ireland. 
A. Mikheev and S. Finch. 1997. "A Workbench for 
Finding Structure in Texts". in these proceedings. 
A. Mikheev and D. McKelvie. 1997. "Indexing 
SGML files using LT NSL". Technical Report, 
Language Technology Group, University of Edin- 
burgh. 
R. Pito. 1994. "Tgrep Manual Page". Available 
from 
http ://www. idc. upenn, edu/Idc/online/treebank/man/ 
G. van Rossum. 1995. "Python Tutorial". Available 
from http://www .python. org/  
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen & L. Burnard, eds. 1994. 
"Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and In- 
terchange". Text Encoding Initiative, Oxford. 
R. Tobin and D. McKelvie. 1996. "The 
Python Interface to the Normalised SGML Li- 
brary (PythonNSL)". Technical Report, Language 
Technology Group, University of Edinburgh. 
H. Cunningham, Y. Wilks and R. J. Gaizanskas. 
1996. "New Methods, Current Trends and Soft- 
ware Infrastructure for NLP". In Proceedings of 
the Second Conference on New Methods in Lan- 
guage Processing, pages 283-298, Ankara, Turkey, 
March. 
H. Cunningham, R. Gaizanskas and Y. Wilks. 1995. 
"A General Architecture for Text Engineering 
(GATE) - a new approach to Language Engineer- 
ing R&D". Technical Report, Dept of Computer 
Science, University of Sheffield. Available from 
http ://www. dcs. shef. ac. uk/research/groups 
/nlp/gate/ 
236 
