Name pronunciation in German text-to-speech synthesis 
Ste fan ie  Jannedy  
L inguist ics  Dept .  
Oh io  S ta te  Un ivers i ty  
Co lumbus ,  OH 43210, USA 
j annedy?ling, ohio-state, edu 
Bernd  MSbius  
Language Mode l ing  Research  
Bel l  Laborator ies  
Murray  Hil l ,  N J  07974, USA 
bmo?research ,  be l l - l abs ,  com 
Abst ract  
We describe the name analysis and pro- 
nunciation component in the German ver- 
sion of the Bell Labs multilingual text-to- 
speech system. We concentrate on street 
names because they encompass interest- 
ing aspects of geographical and personal 
names. The system was implemented in 
the framework of finite-state transducer 
technology, using linguistic criteria as well 
as frequency distributions derived from a 
database. In evaluation experiments, we 
compared the performances of the general- 
purpose text analysis and the name-specific 
system on training and test materials. The 
name-specific system significantly outper- 
forms the generic system. The error rates 
compare favorably with results reported in 
the research literature. Finally, we discuss 
areas for future work. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
The correct pronunciation of names is one of the 
biggest challenges for text-to-speech (TTS) conver- 
sion systems. At the same time, many current or en- 
visioned applications, such as reverse directory sys- 
tems, automated operator services, catalog ordering 
or navigation systems, to name just a few, crucially 
depend upon an accurate and intelligible pronuncia- 
tion of names. Besides these specific applications, 
any kind of well-formed text input to a general- 
purpose TTS system is extremely likely to contain 
names, and the system has to be well equipped to 
process these names. This requirement was the main 
motivation to develop a name analysis and pronunci- 
ation component for the German version of the Bell 
Labs multilingual text-to-speech system (GerTTS) 
(M6bius et al, 1996). 
Names are conventionally categorized into per- 
sonal names (first and surnames), geographical 
names (place, city and street names), and brand 
names (organization, company and product names). 
49  
In this paper, we concentrate on street names be- 
cause they encompass interesting aspects of geo- 
graphical as well as of personal names. Linguistic de- 
scriptions and criteria as well as statistical considera- 
tions, in the sense of frequency distributions derived 
from a large database, were used in the construction 
of the name analysis component. The system was 
implemented in the framework of finite-state trans- 
ducer (FST) technology (see (Sproat, 1992) for a 
discussion focussing on morphology). For evalua- 
tion purposes, we compared the performances of the 
generM-purpose t xt analysis and the name-specific 
systems on training and test materials. 
As of now, we have neither attempted to deter- 
mine the etymological or ethnic origin of names, nor 
have we addressed the problem of detecting names 
in arbitrary text. However, due to the integration of 
the name component into the general text analysis 
system of GerTTS, the latter problem has a reason- 
able solution. 
2 Some prob lems in name ana lys i s  
What makes name pronunciation difficult, or spe- 
cial, in comparison to words that are considered as 
regular entries in the lexicon of a given language? 
Various reasons are given in the research literature 
(Carlson, GranstrSm, and LindstrSm, 1989; Macchi 
and Spiegel, 1990; Vitale, 1991; van Coile, Leys, and 
Mortier, 1992; Coker, Church, and Liberman, 1990; 
Belhoula, 1993): 
? Names can be of very diverse etymological ori- 
gin and can surface in another language without 
undergoing the slow linguistic process of assim- 
ilation to the phonological system of the new 
language. 
? The number of distinct names tends to be very 
large: For English, a typical unabridged colle- 
giate dictionary lists about 250,000 word types, 
whereas a list of surnames compiled from an 
address database contains 1.5 million types (72 
million tokens) (Coker, Church, and Liberman, 
1990). It is reasonable to assume similar ratios 
for German, although no precise numbers are 
currently available. 
? There is no exhaustive list of names; and 
in German and some related Germanic lan- 
guages, street names in particular are usu- 
ally constructed like compounds (Rheins~ra~e, 
Kennedyallee) which makes decomposition both 
practical and necessary. 
? Name pronunciation is known to be idiosyn- 
cratic; there are many pronunciations contra- 
dicting common phonological patterns, as 
well as alternative pronunciations for certain 
grapheme strings. 
? In many languages, general-purpose grapheme- 
to-phoneme rules are to a significant extent 
inappropriate for names (Macchi and Spiegel, 
1990; Vitale, 1991). 
? Names are not equally amenable to morpho- 
logical processes, such as word formation and 
derivation or to morphological decomposition, 
as regular words are. That does not render such 
an approach unfeasible, though, as we show in 
this paper. 
? The large number of different names together 
with a restricted morphological structure leads 
to a coverage problem: It is known that a rel- 
atively small number of high-frequency words 
can cover a high percentage of word tokens in 
arbitrary text; the ratio is far less favorable 
for names (Carlson, GranstrSm, and LindstrSm, 
1989; van Coile, Leys, and Mortier, 1992). 
We will now illustrate some of the idiosyncra- 
cies and peculiarities of names that the analysis has 
to cope with. Let us first consider morphological 
issues. Some German street names can be mor- 
phologically and lexically analyzed, such as Kur- 
fiivst-en-damm ('electorial prince dam'), Kirche-n- 
weg ('church path'). Many, however, are not de- 
composable, such as Henmerich ('?') or Rimpar- 
stra~e ( '?Rimpar street'), at least not beyond ob- 
vious and unproblematic components (Stra~e, Weg, 
Platz, etc.). 
Even more serious problems arise on the phono- 
logical level. As indicated above, general-purpose 
pronunciation rules often do not apply to names. 
For instance, the grapheme <e> in an open stressed 
syllable is usually pronouned \[e:\]; however, in many 
first names (Stefan, Melanie) it is pronounced \[e\]. 
Or consider the word-final grapheme string <ie> 
in Batterie \[bat~r'i:\] 'battery', Materie \[mat'e:ri~\] 
'matter',  and the name Rosemarie \[r'o:zomari:\]. And 
word-final <us>: Mus \[m'u:s\] 'mush, jam' vs. Eras- 
mus \[er'asmus\]. A more special and yet typical ex- 
ample: In regular German words the morpheme- 
initial substring <chem> as in chemisch is pro- 
nounced \[?e:m\], whereas in the name of the city 
Chemnilz it is pronounced \[kcm\]. 
50  
Generally speaking, nothing ensures correct pro- 
nunciation better than a direct hit in a pronuncia- 
tion dictionary. However, for the reasons detailed 
above this approach is not feasible for names. In 
short, we are not dealing with a memory or storage 
problem but with the requirement to be able to ap- 
proximately correctly analyze unseen orthographic 
strings. We therefore decided to use a weighted 
finite-state transducer machinery, which is the tech- 
nological framework for the text analysis compo- 
nents of the Bell Labs multilingual TTS system. 
FST technology enables the dynamic combination 
and recombination of lexical and morphological sub- 
strings, which cannot be achieved by a static pronun- 
ciation dictionary. We will now describe the proce- 
dure of collecting lexically or morphologically mean- 
ingful graphemic substrings that are used produc- 
tively in name formation. 
3 P roduct ive  name components  
3.1 Database  
Our training material is based on publically avail- 
able data extracted from a phone and address di- 
rectory of Germany. The database is provided on 
CD-ROM (D-Info, 1995). It lists all customers of 
Deutsche Telekom by name, street address, city, 
phone number, and postal code. The CD-l~OM 
contains data retrieval and export software. The 
database is somewhat inconsistent in that informa- 
tion for some fields is occasionally missing, more 
than one person is listed in the name field, busi- 
ness information is added to the name field, first 
names and street names are abbreviated. Yet, due to 
its listing of more than 30 million customer ecords 
it provides an exhaustive coverage of name-related 
phenomena in German. 
3.2 C i ty  names  
The data retrieval software did not provide a way 
to export a complete list of cities, towns, and vil- 
lages; thus we searched for all records listing city 
halls, township and municipality administrations 
and the like, and then exported the pertinent city 
names. This method yielded 3,837 city names, ap- 
proximately 15% of all the cities (including urban 
districts) covered in the database. It is reasonable 
to assume, however, that this corpus provided suffi- 
cient coverage of lexical and morphological subcom- 
ponents of city names. 
We extracted graphemic substrings of different 
lengths from all city names. The length of the strings 
varied from 3 to 7 graphemes. Useful substrings 
were selected using frequency analysis (automati- 
cally) and native speaker intuition (manually). The 
final list of morphologically meaningful substrings 
consisted of 295 entries. In a recall test, these 295 
strings accounted for 2,969 of the original ist of city 
names, yielding a coverage of 2,969/3,837 = 77.4%. 
Mfinchen 
(south) 
component types 7,127 
morphemes 922 
recall 
residuals (abs.) 
residuals (rel.) 
2,387 
4,740 
66.5% 
I Berlin Hamburg 
(east) (north) 
7,291 8,027 
574 320 
2,538 4,214 
4,753 3,813 
65.0% 47.5% 
KJln Total 
(west) 
4,396 26,841 
124 1,940 
2,102 11,241 
2,294 15,600 
52.2% 58.1% 
Table 1: Extraction of productive street name components: quantitative data. 
3.3 First names  
The training corpus for first names and street names 
was assembled based on data from the four largest 
cities in Germany: Berlin, Hamburg, KJln (Cologne) 
and Miinchen (Munich). These four cities also pro- 
vide an approximately representative geographical 
and regional/dialectal coverage. The size and ge- 
ography criteria were also applied to the selection of 
the test material which was extracted from the cities 
of Frankfurt am Main and Dresden (see Evaluation). 
We retrieved all available first names from the 
records of the four cities and collected those whose 
frequency exceeded 100. To this corpus we added the 
most popular male and female (10 each) names given 
to newborn children in the years 1995/96, in both 
the former East and West Germany, according to an 
official statistical source on the internet. The cor- 
pus also contains interesting spelling variants (Hel- 
mut/Hellmuth) as well as peculiarities attributable 
to regional tastes and fashions (Maik, Maia). The 
total number of first names in our list is 754. 
No attempt was made to arrive at some form of 
morphological decomposition despite several obvious 
recurring components, such as <-hild>, <-bert>, 
<-fried>; the number of these components i very 
small, and they are not productive in name-forming 
processes anymore. 
3.4 St reets  
We retrieved all available street names from the 
records of the four cities. The street names were 
split up into their individual word-like components, 
i.e., a street name like Konrad-Adenauer-Platz cre- 
ated three separate ntries: Konrad, Adenauer, and 
Platz. This list was then sorted and made unique. 
The type inventory of street name components 
was then used to collect lexically and semantically 
meaningful components, which we will henceforth 
conveniently call 'morphemes'. In analogy to the 
procedure for city names, these morphemes were 
used in a recall test on the original street name com- 
ponent ype list. This approach was successively ap- 
plied to the street name inventory of the four cities, 
starting with Mfinchen, exploiting the result of this 
first round in the second city, Berlin, applying the 
combined result of this second round on the third 
51 
city, and so on. 
Table 1 gives the numbers corresponding to the 
steps of the procedure just described. The number 
of morphemes collected from the four cities is 1,940. 
The selection criterion was frequency: Component 
types occurring repeatedly within a city database 
were considered as productive or marginally produc- 
tive. The 1,940 morphemes recall 11,241 component 
types out of the total of 26,841 (or 41.9%), leaving 
15,600 types (or 58.1%) that are unaccounted for 
('residuals') by the morphemes. 
Residuals that occur in at least two out of four 
cities (2,008) were then added to the list of 1,940 
morphemes. The reasoning behind this is that there 
are component types that occur exactly once in a 
given city but do occur in virtually every city. To 
give a concrete xample: There is usually only one 
Hauptstrafle ('main street') in any given city but you 
almost certainly do find a Hauptstrafle in every city. 
After some editing and data clean-up, the final list 
of linguistically motivated street name morphemes 
contained 3,124 entries. 
4 Compos i t iona l  mode l  o f  s t reet  
names 
In this section we will present a compositional model 
of street names that is based on a morphological 
word model and also includes a phonetic syllable 
model. We will also describe the implementation of
these models in the form of a finite-state transducer. 
4.1 Naming  schemes for  s t reets  in German 
Evidently, there is a finite list of lexical items 
that almost unambiguously mark a name as a 
street name; among these items are Strafle, Weg, 
Platz, Gasse, Allee, Markt and probably a dozen 
more. These street name markers are used to 
construct street names involving persons (Stephan- 
Lochner-Strafle, Kennedyallee), geographical places 
(Tiibinger Allee), or objects (Chrysanthemenweg, 
Containerbahnho\]); street names with local, regional 
or dialectal peculiarities (Sb'bendieken, HJglstieg); 
and finally intransparent s reet names (Kriisistrafle, 
Damaschkestrafle). Some names of the latter type 
may actually refer to persons' names but the origin 
is not transparent to the native speaker. 
START ROOT {Eps} 
ROOT FIRST SyllModel 
ROOT FIRST''Al~ons{firstname}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST D'irk{firstname}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST D'ominik<{firstname}0.2> 
? ? ? ? 
ROOT FIRST b'urg{city} 
ROOT FIRST br'uck{city}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST d'orf{city} 
ROOT FIRST fl'eet{city}<0.2> 
ROOT FiRST'd'ach{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST h'ecke{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST kl'ar{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST kl'ee{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST kl'ein{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FIRST st'ein{street}<0.2> 
ROOT FiRST'all~ee{marker} 
ROOT FIRST g'arten{marker} 
ROOT FIRST pl'atz{marker} 
ROOT FIRST w'eg{marker} 
FIRST R00T'{++}<0.1> 
FIRST FUGE {Eps}<0.2> 
FIRST FUGE s<0.2> 
FIRST FUGE n<0.2> 
FIRST SUFFIX {Eps}<0.2> 
FIRST SUFFIX s<0.2> 
FIRST SUFFIX n<0.2> 
FUGE FIRST {Eps}<lO.O> 
FUGE ROOT {++}<0.5> 
SUFFIX END {name} 
END 
Figure 1: Parts of a grammar (in arclist format) for 
street name decomposition i German. 
4.2 Bui ld ing  a generat ive t ransducer  for 
street names 
The component types collected from the city, first 
name and street databases were integrated into a 
combined list of 4,173 productive name components: 
295 from city names, 754 from first names, 3,124 
from street names. Together with the basic street 
name markers, these components were used to con- 
struct a name analysis module. The module was im- 
plemented as a finite-state transducer using Richard 
Sproat's lexiools (Sproat, 1995), a toolkit for creat- 
ing finite-state machines from linguistic descriptions. 
The module is therefore compatible with the other 
text analysis components in the German TTS sys- 
tem (MSbius, 1997) that were all developed in the 
same FSM technology framework. 
One of the lextools, the program arclist, is par- 
ticularly well suited for name analysis. The tool 
facilitates writing a finite-state grammar that de- 
scribes words of arbitrary morphological complexity 
and length (Sproat, 1995). In the TTS system it is 
52 
also applied to the morphological analysis of com- 
pounds and unknown words. 
Figure 1 shows parts of the arclist source file for 
street name decomposition. The arc which describes 
the transition from the initial state "START" to the 
state "ROOT" is labeled with ? (Epsilon, the empty 
string). The transition from "ROOT" to the state 
"FIRST" is defined by three large families of arcs 
which represent the lists of first names, productive 
city name components, and productive street name 
components, respectively, as described in the previ- 
ous section. 
The transition from "ROOT" to "FIRST" which 
is labeled SyllModel is a place holder for a pho- 
netic syllable model. This syllable model reflects 
the phonotactics and the segmental structure of syl- 
lables in German, or rather their correlates on the 
orthographic surface. This allows the module to an- 
alyze substrings of names that are unaccounted for 
by the explicitly listed name components ( ee 'resid- 
uals' in the previous section) in arbitrary locations 
in a complex name. A detailed discussion of the syl- 
lable model is presented elsewhere (MSbius, 1997). 
From the state "FIRST" there is a transition 
back to "ROOT", either directly or via the state 
"FUGE' ,  thereby allowing arbitrarily long con- 
catenations of name components. Labels on the 
arcs to "FUGE" represent infixes ('Fugen') that 
German word forming grammar equires as inser- 
tions between components within a compounded 
word in certain cases, such as Wilhelm+s+platz or 
Linde+n+hof. The final state "END" can only be 
reached from "FIRST" by way of "SUFFIX". This 
transition is defined by a family of arcs which repre- 
sents common inflectional and derivational suffixes. 
On termination the word is tagged with the label 
'name' which can be used as part-of-speech informa- 
tion by other components of the TTS system. 
Most arc labels are weighted by being assigned 
a cost. Weights are a convenient way to describe 
and predict linguistic alternations. In general, such 
a description can be based on an expert's analy- 
sis of linguistic data and his or her intuition, or on 
statistical probabilities derived from annotated cor- 
pora. Works by Riley (Riley, 1994) and Yarowsky 
(Yarowsky, 1994) are examples of inferring models 
of linguistic alternation from large corpora. How- 
ever, these methods require a database that is anno- 
tated for all relevant factors, and levels on these fac- 
tors. Despite our large raw corpus, we lack the type 
of database resources required by these methods. 
Thus, all weights in the text analysis components of 
GerTTS are currently based on linguistic intuition; 
they are assigned such that after integration of the 
name component in the general text analysis ystem, 
direct hits in the general-purpose lexicon will be less 
expensive than name analyses (see Discussion). No 
weights or costs are assigned to the most frequently 
occurring street name components, previously intro- 
G 
SyllModel/l 0 
++/0.5 
Figure 2: The transducer compiled from the sub-grammar that performs the decomposition of the fictitious 
street name Dachsteinhohenheckenalleenplatz. 
duced as street name markers, making them more 
likely to be used during name decomposition. The 
orthographic strings are annotated with symbols for 
primary (') and secondary (") lexical stress. The 
symbol {++} indicates a morpheme boundary. 
The finite-state transducer that this grammar is 
compiled into is far too complex to be usefully dia- 
grammed here. For the sake of exemplification, let us 
instead consider the complex fictitious street name 
Dachsteinhohenheckenalleenplatz. Figure 2 shows 
the transducer corresponding to the sub-grammar 
that performs the decomposition of this name. The 
path through the graph is as follows: 
The arc between the initial state "START" and 
"ROOT" is labeled with a word boundary {##} 
and zero cost (0). From here we take the arc with 
the label d'ach and a cost of 0.2 to state "FIRST". 
The next name component that can be found in the 
grammar is stein; we have to return to "ROOT" by 
way of an arc that is labeled with a morph bound- 
ary and a cost of 0.1. The next known component is
hecke, leaving a residual string hohen which has to be 
analyzed by means of the syllable model. Applying 
the syllable model is expensive because we want to 
cover the name string with as many known compo- 
nents as possible. The costs actually vary depending 
upon the number of syllables in the residual string 
and the number of graphemes in each syllable; the 
string hohen would thus have be decomposed into a 
root hohe and the 'Fuge' n. For the sake of simplic- 
ity we assign a flat cost of 10.0 in our toy example. 
In the transition between hecke and allee a 'Fuge' 
(n) has to be inserted. The cost of the following 
morph boundary is higher (0.5) than usual in order 
to favor components that do not require infixation. 
Another Fuge has to be inserted after allee. The cost 
53 
of the last component, platz, is zero because this is 
one of the customary street name markers. Finally, 
the completely analyzed word is tagged as a name, 
and a word boundary is appended on the way to the 
final state "END". 
The morphological information provided by the 
name analysis component is exploited by the phono- 
logical or pronunciation rules. This component of 
the linguistic analysis is implemented using a mod- 
ified version of the Kaplan and Kay rewrite rule al- 
gorithm (Kaplan and Kay, 1994). 
5 Evaluat ion 
We evaluated the name analysis system by compar- 
ing the pronunciation performance of two versions 
of the TTS system, one with and one without the 
name-specific module. We ran both versions on two 
lists of street names, one selected from the training 
material and the other from unseen data. 
5.1 General-purpose vs. name-specific 
analysis 
Two versions of the German TTS system were in- 
volved in the evaluation experiments, differing in 
the structure of the text analysis component. The 
first system contained the regular text analysis mod- 
ules, including a general-purpose module that han- 
dles words that are not represented in the system's 
lexicon: typically compounds and names. This ver- 
sion will be refered to as the old system. The second 
version purely consisted of the name grammar trans- 
ducer discussed in the previous section. It did not 
have any other lexical information at its disposal. 
This version will be refered to as the new system. 
number of names 
at least one system wrong 
both systems wrong 
total error rate 
(no correct solution) 
Training Data Test Data 
631 206 
250/631 (39.6%) 82/206 (39.8%) 
72/250 (28.8%) 26/82  (31.7%) 
72/631 (11.1%) 26/206 (12.6%) 
Table 2: Performance of the general-purpose and the name-specific text analysis systems on training and 
test data sets. 
new system correct 
&& old system wrong 
old system correct 
&& new system wrong 
net improvement 
H Training Data Test Data \] 
138/163 (84.7%) 35/50 (70.0%) 
25/163 (15.3%) 15/50 (30.0%) 
II 113/163 
Table 3: Comparison between the general-purpose and the name-specific text analysis systems on training 
and test data sets. 
5.2 T ra in ing  vs. tes t  mater ia l s  
The textual materials used in the evaluation exper- 
iments consisted of two sets of data. The first set, 
henceforth training data, was a subset of the data 
that were used in building the name analysis gram- 
mar. For this set, the street names for each of the 
four cities Berlin, Hamburg, KSln and Miinchen were 
randomized. We then selected every 50th entry from 
the four files, yielding a total of 631 street names; 
thus, the training set alo reflected the respective 
size of the cities. 
The second set, henceforth test data, was ex- 
tracted from the databases of the cities Frankfurt am 
Main and Dresden. Using the procedure described 
above, we selected 206 street names. Besides be- 
ing among the ten largest German cities, Frankfurt 
and Dresden also meet the requirement of a bal- 
anced geographical and dialectal coverage. These 
data were not used in building the name analysis 
system. 
5.3 Resu l ts  
The old and the new versions of the TTS system 
were run on the training and the test set. Pronun- 
ciation performance was evaluated on the symbolic 
level by manually checking the correctness of the re- 
sulting transcriptions. A transcription was consid- 
ered correct when no segmental errors or erroneous 
syllabic stress assignments were detected. Multiple 
mistakes within the same name were considered as 
one error. Thus, we made a binary decision between 
correct and incorrect ranscriptions. 
Table 2 summarizes the results. On the training 
data, in 250 out of a total of 631 names (39.6%) at 
least one of the two systems was incorrect. In 72 
54 
out of these 250 cases (28.8%) both systems were 
wrong. Thus, for 72 out of 631 names (11.4%) no 
correct transcription was obtained by either system. 
On the test data, at least one of the two sys- 
tems was incorrect in 82 out of a total of 206 names 
(39.8%), an almost identical result as for the training 
data. However, in 26 out of these 82 cases (31.7%) 
both systems were wrong. In other words, no cor- 
rect transcription was obtained by either system for 
26 out of 206 names (12.6%), which is only slightly 
higher than for the training data. 
Table 3 compares the performances of the two 
text analysis systems. On the training data, the 
new system outperforms the old one in 138 of the 
163 cases (84.7%) where one of the systems was cor- 
rect and the other one was wrong; we disregard here 
all cases where both systems were correct as well 
as the 87 names for which no correct transcription 
was given by either system. But there were also 25 
cases (15.3%) where the old system outperformed 
the new one. Thus, the net improvement by the 
name-specific system over the old one is 69.4%. 
On the test data set, the old system gives the cor- 
rect solution in 15 of 50 cases (30.0%), compared to 
35 names (70.0%) for which the new system gives the 
correct transcription; again, all cases were excluded 
in which both systems performed equally well or 
poorly. The net improvement by the name-specific 
system over the generic one on the test data is thus 
40%. 
A detailed error analysis yielded the following 
types of remaining problems: 
? Syllabic stress: Saarbriicken \[za:~bR'Yk~n\] but 
Zweibriicken \[tsv'aibRYk~n\]. 
? Vowel quality: S'oest \[zo:st\], not \[zO:st\] or 
\[zo:ost\]. 
? Consonant quality: Chemnitz \[kcmnits\], not 
\[~e:mnits\] in analogy to chemisch \[~e:mIf\]. 
? Morphology: Erroneous decomposition of sub- 
strings (hyper-correction ver old system); e.g., 
Rim+par+strafle \[ri:mpa~\] instead of Rim- 
par+strafle \[rimpa~\]. 
? Pronunciation rules: "Holes" in the general- 
purpose pronunciation rule set were revealed by 
orthographic substrings that do not occur in the 
regular lexicon. It has been shown for English 
(van Santen, 1992) that the frequency distribu- 
tion of triphones in names is quite dissimilar to 
the one found in regular words. 
? Idiosyncrasies: Peculiar pronunciations that 
cannot be described by rules and that even na- 
tive speakers quite often do not know or do 
not agree upon; e.g., Oeynhausen \[?~:nhauzon\], 
Duisdorf \[dy:sd~f\] or \[du:sd~f\] or \[du:isd~f\]. 
6 D iscuss ion  and future  work 
After the evaluation, the name analysis transducer 
was integrated into the text analysis component of 
the German TTS system. The weights were adjusted 
in such a way that for any token, i.e., word or word 
form, in the input text an immediate match in the 
lexicon is always favored over name analysis which 
in turn is prefered to unknown word analysis. Even 
though the evaluation experiments reported in this 
paper were performed on names in isolation rather 
than in sentential contexts, the error rates obtained 
in these experiments (Table 2) correspond to the per- 
formance on names by the integrated text analysis 
component for arbitrary text. 
There are two ways of interpreting the results. On 
the one hand, despite a significant improvement over 
the previous general-purpose t xt analysis we have 
to expect a pronunciation error rate of 11-13% for 
unknown names. In other words, roughly one out of 
eight names will be pronounced incorrectly. 
On the other hand, this performance compares 
rather favorably with the results reported for the 
German branch of the European Onomastica project 
(Onomastica, 1995). Onomastica was funded by the 
European Community from 1993 to 1995 and aimed 
to produce pronunciation dictionaries of proper 
names and place names in eleven languages. The 
final report describes the performance of grapheme- 
to-phoneme rule sets developed for each language. 
For German, the accuracy rate for quality band I I I - -  
names which were transcribed by rule only--was 
71%; in other words, the error rate in the same sense 
as used in this paper was 29%. The grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion rules were written by experts, 
based on tens of thousands of the most frequent 
55 
names that were manually transcribed by an expert 
phonetician. 
However, the Onomastica results can only serve 
as a qualitative point of reference and should not 
be compared to our results in a strictly quantitative 
sense, for the following reasons. First, the percent- 
age of proper names is likely to be much higher in 
the Onomastica database (no numbers are given in 
the report), in which ease higher error rates should 
be expected ue to the inherent difficulty of proper 
name pronunciation. In our study, proper names 
were only covered in the context of street names. 
Second, Onomastica did not apply morphological 
analysis to names, while morphological decomposi- 
tion, and word and syllable models, are the core of 
our approach. Third, Onomastica developed name- 
specific grapheme-to-phoneme rul sets, whereas we 
did not augment he general-purpose pronunciation 
rules. 
How can the remaining problems be solved, and 
what are the topics for future work? For the 
task of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion, several ap- 
proaches have been proposed as alternatives to ex- 
plicit rule systems, particularly self-learning meth- 
ods (van Coile, 1990; Torkkola, 1993; Andersen and 
Dalsgaard, 1994) and neural networks (Sejnowski 
and Rosenberg, 1987; An et al, 1988). None of these 
methods were explored and applied in the present 
study. One reason is that it is difficult to construct 
or select a database if the set of factors that in- 
fluence name pronunciation is at least partially un- 
known. In addition, even for an initially incomplete 
factor set the corresponding feature space is likely to 
cause coverage problems; neural nets, for instance, 
are known to perform rather poorly at predicting 
unseen feature vectors. However, with the results of 
the error analysis as a starting point, we feel that a 
definition of the factor set is now more feasible. 
One obvious area for improvement is to add 
a name-specific set of pronunciation rules to the 
general-purpose one. Using this approach, Belhoula 
(Belhoula, 1993) reports error rates of 4.3% for Ger- 
man place names and 10% for last names. These re- 
sults are obtained in recall tests on a manually tran- 
scribed training corpus; it remains unclear, however, 
whether the error rates are reported by letter or by 
word. 
The addition of name-specific rules presupposes 
that the system knows which orthographic strings 
are names and which are regular words. The prob- 
lem of name detection in arbitrary text (see (Thie- 
lea, 1995) for an approach to German name tagging) 
has not been addressed in our study; instead, it was 
by-passed for the time being by integrating the name 
component into the general text analysis ystem and 
by adjusting the weights appropriately. 
Other areas for future work are the systematic 
treatment of proper names outside the context of 
street names, and of brand names, trademarks, and 
company names. One important consideration here 
is the recognition of the ethnic origin of a name and 
the application of appropriate specific pronunciation 
rules. Heuristics, such as name pronunciation by 
analogy and rhyming (Coker, Church, and Liber- 
man, 1990) and methods for, e.g., syllabic stress as- 
signment (Church, 1986) can serve as role models 
for this ambitious task. 
7 Acknowledgments 
We wish to acknowledge Richard Sproat who devel- 
oped and provided the lextools toolkit; this work also 
benefited from his advice. We also wish to thank an 
anonymous reviewer for constructive suggestions. 
References 
z. An, S. Mniszewski, Y. Lee, G. Papcun, and 
G. Doolen. 1988. Hiertalker: A default hierarchy 
of high order neural networks that learns to read 
English aloud. In Proceedings of the IEEE In- 
ternational Conference on Neural Networks, vol- 
ume 2, pages 221-228, San Diego, CA. 
Ove Andersen and Paul Dalsgaard. 1994. A 
self-learning approach to transcription of Dan- 
ish proper names. In Proceedings of the Inter- 
national Conference on Spoken Language Process- 
ing, ICSLP-94, volume 3, pages 1627-1630, Yoko- 
hama, Japan. 
Karim Belhoula. 1993. A concept for the synthesis 
of names. In ESCA Workshop on Applications of 
Speech Technology, Lautrach, Germany. 
Rolf Carlson, BjSrn GranstrSm, and Anders Lind- 
strSm. 1989. Predicting name pronunciation for 
a reverse directory service. In Proceedings of the 
European Conference on Speech Communication 
and Technology, Eurospeech-89, volume 1, pages 
113-116, Paris, France. 
Kenneth Church. 1986. Stress assignment in let- 
ter to sound rules for speech synthesis. In Pro- 
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Acoustics and Speech Signal Processing, ICASSP- 
86, volume 4, pages 2423-2426, Tokyo, Japan. 
Cecil H. Coker. 1990. Morphology and rhyming: 
Two powerful alternatives to letter-to-sound rules 
for speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the ESCA 
Workshop on Speech Synthesis, pages 83-86, Au- 
trans, France. 
D-Info. 1995. D-Info--Adress- und Telefonauskunft 
Deutschland. CD-ROM. TopWare, Mannheim, 
Germany. 
Ronald Kaplan and Martin Kay. 1994. Regular 
models of phonological rule systems. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 20:331-378. 
Marian Macchi and Murray Spiegel. 1990. Us- 
ing a demisyllable inventory to synthesize names. 
Speech Technology, pages 208-212. 
Bernd M6bius. 1997. Text analysis in the Bell Labs 
German TTS system. Technical report, Bell Lab- 
oratories. 
Bernd MSbius, Juergen Schroeter, Jan van Santen, 
Richard Sproat, and Joseph Olive. 1996. Recent 
advances in multilingual text-to-speech synthesis. 
In Fortschritte der Akustik--DA GA '96, Bad Hon- 
nef, Germany. DPG. 
Onomastica. 1995. Multi-language pronunciation 
dictionary of proper names and place names. 
Technical report, European Community, Ling. 
Res. and Engin. Prog. Project No. LRE-61004, 
Final Report, 30 May 1995. 
Michael Riley. 1994. Tree-based models of speech 
and language. In Proceedings of the IEEE-IMS 
Workshop on Information Theory and Statistics, 
Alexandria, VA. 
T. Sejnowski and C.R. Rosenberg. 1987. Parallel 
networks that learn to pronounce English text. 
Complex Systems, 1:144-168. 
Richard Sproat. 1992. Morphology and computa- 
tion. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Richard Sproat. 1995. Lextools: Tools for finite- 
state linguistic analysis. Technical report, AT&T 
Bell Laboratories. 
Christine Thielen. 1995. An approach to proper 
name tagging in German. In Proceedings of 
the EACL-95 SIGDAT Workshop: From Text to 
Tags, Dublin, Ireland. 
Kari Torkkola. 1993. An efficient way to learn En- 
glish grapheme-to-phoneme rul s automatically. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer- 
ence on Acoustics and Speech Signal Processing, 
ICASSP-93, volume 2, pages 199-202. 
Bert van Coile. 1990.  Inductive learning of 
grapheme-to-phoneme rul s. In Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, ICSLP-90, volume 2, pages 765-768, 
Kobe, Japan. 
Bert van Coile, Steven Leys, and Luc Mortier. 1992. 
On the development of a name pronunciation sys- 
tem. In Proceedings of the International Confer- 
ence on Spoken Language Processing, ICSLP-92, 
volume 1, pages 487-490, Banff, Alberta. 
Jan van Santen. 1992. Personal communication. 
Tony Vitale. 1991. An algorithm for high accuracy 
name pronunciation by parametric speech synthe- 
sizer. Computational Linguistics, 17:257-276. 
David Yarowsky. 1994. Homograph disambiguation 
in speech synthesis. In Proceedings of the Second 
ESCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis, pages 244- 
247, New Paltz, NY. 
56 
