Semi-Automatic Acquisition of 
Domain-Specific Translation Lexicons 
Ph i l ip  Resn ik  
Dept.  of Linguistics and UMIACS 
Univers i ty of Mary land 
College Park,  MD 20742 USA 
resn ik~umiacs ,  umd. edu 
I. Dan  Me lamed 
Dept.  of Computer  and Informat ion Science 
Univers i ty of Pennsy lvania  
Phi ladelphia,  PA 19104 USA 
melamed?unagi, cis. upenn, edu 
Abst ract  
We investigate the utility of an algo- 
rithm for translation lexicon acquisition 
(SABLE), used previously on a very large 
corpus to acquire general translation lexi- 
cons, when that algorithm is applied to a 
much smaller corpus to produce candidates 
for domain-specific translation lexicons. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Reliable translation lexicons are useful in many ap- 
plications, such as cross-language t xt retrieval. Al- 
though general purpose machine readable bilingual 
dictionaries are sometimes available, and although 
some methods for acquiring translation lexicons au- 
tomatically from large corpora have been proposed, 
less attention has been paid to the problem of ac- 
quiring bilingual terminology specific to a domain, 
especially given domain-specific parallel corpora of 
only limited size. 
In this paper, we investigate the utility of an algo- 
rithm for translation lexicon acquisition (Melamed, 
1997), used previously on a very large corpus to ac- 
quire general translation lexicons, when that algo- 
rithm is applied to a much smaller corpus to produce 
candidates for domain-specific translation lexicons. 
The goal is to produce material suitable for post- 
processing in a lexicon acquisition process like the 
following: 
1. Run the automatic lexicon acquisition algo- 
rithm on a domain-specific parallel corpus. 
2. Automatically filter out "general usage" entries 
that already appear in a machine readable dic- 
tionary (MRD) or other general usage lexical 
resources. 
3. Manually filter out incorrect or irrelevant en- 
tries from the remaining list. 
Our aim, therefore, is to achieve sufficient recall and 
precision to make this process - -  in particular the 
time and manual effort required in Step 3 - -  a viable 
alternative to manual creation of translation lexicons 
without automated assistance. 
The literature on cross-lingual text retrieval 
(CLTR) includes work that is closely related to this 
research, in that recent approaches emphasize the 
use of dictionary- and corpus-based techniques for 
translating queries from a source language into the 
language of the document collection (Oard, 1997). 
Davis and Dunning (1995), for example, generate 
target-language queries using a corpus-based tech- 
nique that is similar in several respects to the work 
described here. However, the approach does not at- 
tempt to distinguish domain-specific from general 
usage term pairs, and it involves no manual inter- 
vention. The work reported here, focusing on semi- 
automating the process of acquiring translation lexi- 
cons specific to a domain, can be viewed as providing 
bilingual dictionary entries for CLTR methods like 
that used by Davis in later work (Davis, 1996), in 
which dictionary-based generation of an ambiguous 
target language query is followed by corpus-based 
disambiguation f that query. 
Turning to the literature on bilingual terminology 
identification per se, although monolingual termi- 
nology extraction is a problem that has been previ- 
ously explored, often with respect o identifying rel- 
evant multi-word terms (e.g. (Daille, 1996; Smadja, 
1993)), less prior work exists for bilingual acquisi- 
tion of domain-specific translations. Termight (Da- 
gun and Church, 1994) is one method for analyzing 
parallel corpora to discover translations in techni- 
cal terminology; Dagan and Church report accuracy 
of 40% given an English/German technical manual, 
and observe that even this relatively low accuracy 
permits the successful application of the system in a 
translation bureau, when used in conjunction with 
an appropriate user interface. 
The Champollion system (Smadja, McKeown, and 
Hatzivassiloglou, 1996) moves toward higher accu- 
racy (around 73%) and considerably greater flex- 
ibility in the handling of multi-word translations, 
though the algorithm has been applied primarily to 
very large corpora such as the Hansards (3-9 mil- 
lion words; Smadja et al observe that the method 
has difficulty handling low-frequency cases), and no 
340 
attempt is made to distinguish corpus-dependent 
translations from general ones. 
Daille et al (1994) report on a study in which a 
small (200,000 word) corpus was used as the basis for 
extracting bilingual terminology, using a combina- 
tion of syntactic patterns for identifying simple two- 
word terms monolingually, and a statistical measure 
for selecting related terms across languages. Using a 
manually constructed reference list, they report 70% 
precision. 
The SABLE system (Melamed, 1996b) makes no 
attempt o handle collocations, but for single-word 
to single-word translations it offers a very accurate 
method for acquiring high quality translation lexi- 
cons from very large parallel corpora: Melamed re- 
ports 90+% precision at 90+% recall, when evalu- 
ated on sets of Hansards data of 6-7 million words. 
Previous work with SABLE does not attempt o ad- 
dress the question of domain-specific vs. general 
translations. 
This paper applies the SABLE system to a much 
smaller (approximately 400,000 word) corpus in a 
technical domain, and assesses its potential con- 
tribution to the semi-automatic a quisition process 
outlined above, very much in the spirit of Dagan and 
Church (1994) and Daille et al (1994), but begin- 
ning with a higher accuracy starting point and fo- 
cusing on mono-word terms. In the remainder of the 
paper we briefly outline translation lexicon acquisi- 
tion in the SABLE system, describe its application 
to a corpus of technical documentation, and provide 
a quantitative assessment of its performance. 
2 SABLE 
SABLE (Scalable Architecture for Bilingual LExi- 
cography) is a turn-key system for producing clean 
broad-coverage translation lexicons from raw, un- 
aligned parallel texts (bitexts). Its design is mod- 
ular and minimizes the need for language-specific 
components, with no dependence on genre or word 
order similarity, nor sentence boundaries or other 
"anchors" in the input. 
SABLE was designed with the following features 
in mind: 
? Independence from linguistic resources: SABLE 
does not rely on any language-specific resources 
other than tokenizers and a heuristic for iden- 
tifying word pairs that are mutual translations, 
though users can easily reconfigure the system 
to take advantage of such resources as language- 
specific stemmers, part-of-speech taggers, and 
stop lists when they are available. 
? Black box functionality: Automatic acquisition 
of translation lexicons requires only that the 
user provide the input bitexts and identify the 
two languages involved. 
Robustness: The system performs well even in 
the face of omissions or inversions in transla- 
tions. 
* Scalability: SABLE has been used successfully 
on input bitexts larger than 130MB. 
* Portability: SABLE was initially implemented 
for French/English, then ported to Span- 
ish/English and to Korean/English. The port- 
ing process has been standardized and docu- 
mented (Melamed, 1996c). 
The following is a brief description of SABLE's 
main components. A more detailed description of 
the entire system is available in (Melamed, 1997). 
2.1 Mapping Bitext Correspondence 
After both halves of the input bitext(s) have been 
tokenized, SABLE invokes the Smooth Injective Map 
Recognizer (SIMR) algorithm (Melamed, 1996a) and 
related components to produce a bitext map. A bi- 
text map is an injective partial function between the 
character positions in the two halves of the bitext. 
Each point of correspondence (x,y) in the bitext 
map indicates that the word centered around char- 
acter position x in the first half of the bitext is a 
translation of the word centered around character 
position y in the second half. SIMR produces bitext 
maps a few points at a time, by interleaving a point 
generation phase and a point selection phase. 
SIMR is equipped with several "plug-in" match- 
ing heuristic modules which are based on cognates 
(Davis et al, 1995; Simard et al, 1992; Melamed, 
1995) and/or "seed" translation lexicons (Chen, 
1993). Correspondence points are generated using 
a subset of these matching heuristics; the particular 
subset depends on the language pair and the avail- 
able resources. The matching heuristics all work at 
the word level, which is a happy medium between 
larger text units like sentences and smaller text units 
like character n-grams. Algorithms that map bitext 
correspondence at the phrase or sentences level are 
limited in their applicability to bitexts that have 
easily recognizable phrase or sentence boundaries, 
and Church (1993) reports that such bitexts are far 
more rare than one might expect. Moreover, even 
when these larger text units can be found, their 
size imposes an upper bound on the resolution of 
the bitext map. On the other end of the spectrum, 
character-based bitext mapping algorithms (Church, 
1993; Davis et al, 1995) are limited to language pairs 
where cognates are common; in addition, they may 
easily be misled by superficial differences in format- 
ting and page layout and must sacrifice precision to 
be computationally tractable. 
SIMR filters candidate points of correspondence 
using a geometric pattern recognition algorithm. 
The recognized patterns may contain non-monotonic 
sequences of points of correspondence, to account for 
341 
( ? point of correspondenceJ 
/ /  
} 
-~, - .- " ? '~.-'" 
f J  
character position in bitoxt half A 
Figure 1: Word token pairs whose co-ordinates 
lie between the dashed boundaries count as co- 
occt l r ' rence8 .  
word order differences between languages. The fil- 
tering algorithm can be efficiently interleaved with 
the point generation algorithm so that SIMR runs 
in linear time and space with respect o the size of 
the input bitext. 
2.2 Translation Lexicon Extraction 
Since bitext maps can represent crossing correspon- 
dences, they are more general than "alignments" 
(Melamed, 1996a). For the same reason, bitext 
maps allow a more general definition of token co- 
occurrence. Early efforts at extracting translation 
lexicons from bitexts deemed two tokens to co-occur 
if they occurred in aligned sentence pairs (Gale and 
Church, 1991). SABLE counts two tokens as co- 
occurring if their point of correspondence lies within 
a short distance 8 of the interpolated bitext map in 
the bitext space, as illustrated in Figure 1. To en- 
sure that interpolation is well-defined, minimal sets 
of non-monotonic points of correspondence are re- 
placed by the lower left and upper right corners of 
their minimum enclosing rectangles (MERs). 
SABLE uses token co-occurrence statistics to in- 
duce an initial translation lexicon, using the method 
described in (Melamed, 1995). The iterative filtering 
module then alternates between estimating the most 
likely translations among word tokens in the bitext 
and estimating the most likely translations between 
word types. This re-estimation paradigm was pi- 
oneered by Brown et al (1993). However, their 
models were not designed for human inspection, and 
though some have tried, it is not clear how to extract 
translation lexicons from their models (Wu and Xia, 
1995). In contrast, SABLE automatically constructs 
an explicit ranslation lexicon, the lexicon consisting 
1oooooo 
lOOOO 
:= \]000 
\[ ~ ,  3rd plateau 
:..3 ~ ~. . . .  ~ 2nd plateau 
loo ~ ......... 1st plateau 
10 ~ ? 
1|  i i i i 
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 
i 
1oooo 
Ent ry  Number  
12000 
Figure 2: Translation lexicon entries proposed by 
SABLE exhibit plateaus of likelihood. 
of word type pairs that are not filtered out during 
the re-estimation cycle. Neither of the translation 
lexicon construction modules pay any attention to 
word order, so they work equally well for language 
pairs with different word order. 
2.3 Thresholding 
Translation lexicon recall can be automatically com- 
puted with respect o the input bitext (Melamed, 
1996b), so SABLE users have the option of specify- 
ing the recall they desire in the output. As always, 
there is a tradeoff between recall and precision; by 
default, SABLE will choose a likelihood threshold 
that is known to produce reasonably high precision. 
3 Eva luat ion  in a Techn ica l  Domain  
3.1 Materials Evaluated 
The SABLE system was run on a corpus compris- 
ing parallel versions of Sun Microsystems documen- 
tation ("Answerbooks") in French (219,158 words) 
and English (191,162 words). As Melamed (1996b) 
observes, SABLE's output groups naturally accord- 
ing to "plateaus" of likelihood (see Figure 2). The 
translation lexicon obtained by running SABLE 
on the Answerbooks contained 6663 French-English 
content-word entries on the 2nd plateau or higher, 
including 5464 on the 3rd plateau or higher. Table 1 
shows a sample of 20 entries elected at random from 
the Answerbook corpus output on the 3rd plateau 
and higher. Exact matches, such as cpio/cpio or 
clock/clock, comprised roughly 18% of the system's 
output. 
In order to eliminate likely general usage entries 
from the initial translation lexicon, we automat- 
ically filtered out all entries that appeared in a 
French-English machine-readable dictionary (MRD) 
(Cousin, Allain, and Love, 1991). 4071 entries re- 
mained on or above the 2nd likelihood plateau, in- 
cluding 3135 on the 3rd likelihood plateau or higher. 
342 
French English 
constantes 
multi-fen~trage 
risque 
extensions 
exemple 
relhch6 
rw- r  
requs 
pr6aiable 
cpio 
sont 
defaults 
fn 
alphab6tique 
activ4e 
machine 
mettre 
connect6s 
bernard 
superutilisateur 
constants 
windows 
may 
extensions 
such 
released 
17 
received 
first 
cpio 
will 
defaults 
fn 
alphabetically 
activates 
workstation 
turns 
connected 
spunky 
root 
Table 1: Random sample of SABLE output on soft- 
ware manuals. 
In previous experiments on the Hansard corpus of 
Canadian parl iamentary proceedings, SABLE had 
uncovered valid general usage entries that  were not 
present in the Collins MRD (e.g. pointil lds/dotted). 
Since entries obtained from the Hansard corpus are 
unlikely to include relevant technical terms, we de- 
cided to test the efficacy of a second filtering step, 
deleting all entries that had also been obtained by 
running SABLE on the Hansards. On the 2nd 
plateau or higher, 3030 entries passed both the 
Collins and the Hansard filters; 2224 remained on 
or above the 3rd plateau. 
Thus in total, we evaluated four lexicons de- 
rived from all combinations of two independent vari- 
ables: cutoff (after the 2nd plateau vs. after the 3rd 
plateau) and Hansards filter (with filter vs. without). 
Evaluations were performed on a random sample of 
100 entries from each lexicon variation, interleaving 
the four samples to obscure any possible regularities. 
Thus from the evaluator's perspective the task ap- 
peared to involve a single sample of 400 translation 
lexicon entries. 
3.2 Evaluat ion Procedure  
Our assessment of the system was designed to rea- 
sonably approximate the post-processing that would 
be done in order to use this system for acquisition 
of translation lexicons in a real-world setting, which 
would necessarily involve subjective judgments. We 
hired six fluent speakers of both French and English 
at the University of Maryland; they were briefed on 
the general nature of the task, and given a data sheet 
containing the 400 candidate ntries (pairs contain- 
ing one French word and one English word) and a 
"multiple choice" style format for the annotations, 
along with the following instructions. 
1. If the pair clearly cannot be of help in 
constructing a glossary, circle "Invalid" 
and go on to the next pair. 
2. If the pair can be of help in constructing 
a glossary, choose one of the following: 1
V: The two words are of the "plain 
vanilla" type you might find in a bilin- 
gual dictionary. 
P: The pair is a case where a word 
changes its part of speech during 
translation. For example, "to have 
protection" in English is often trans- 
lated as %tre prot6g6" in Cana- 
dian parliamentary proceedings, so 
for that domain the pair protec- 
tion/prot6g6 would be marked P. 
I: The pair is a case where a direct 
translation is incomplete because the 
computer program only looked at sin- 
gle words. For example, if French 
"imm6diatement" were paired with 
English "right", you could select I be- 
cause the pair is almost certainly the 
computer's best but incomplete at- 
tempt to be pairing "imm4diatement" 
with "right away". 
3. Then choose one or both of the following: 
? Specific. Leaving aside the relation- 
ship between the two words (your 
choice of P, V, or I), the word pair 
would be of use in constructing a tech- 
nical glossary. 
? General .  Leaving aside the rela- 
tionship between the two words (your 
choice of P, V, or I), the word pair 
would be of use in constructing a gen- 
eral usage glossary. 
Notice that a word pair could make 
sense in both. For example, "cor- 
beille/wastebasket" makes sense in the 
computer domain (in many popular 
graphical interfaces there is a wastebas- 
ket icon that is used for deleting files), 
but also in more general usage. So in this 
case you could in fact decide to choose 
both "Specific" and "General". If you 
can't choose either "Specific" or "Gen- 
eral', chances are that you should recon- 
sider whether or not to mark this word 
pair "Invalid". 
i Since part-of-speech tagging was used in the version 
of SABLE that produced the candidates in this experi- 
ment, entries presented to the annotator also included a 
minimal form of part-of-speech information, e.g. distin- 
guishing nouns from verbs. The annotator was informed 
that these annotations were the computer's best attempt 
to identify the part-of-speech for the words; it was sug- 
gested that they could be used as a hint as to why that 
word pair had been proposed, if so desired, and otherwise 
ignored. 
343 
4. If you're completely at a loss to decide 
whether or not the word pair is valid, just 
put a slash through the number of the 
example (the number at the beginning of 
the line) and go on to the next pair. 
Annotators also had the option of working electron- 
ically rather than on hardcopy. 
The assessment questionnaire was designed to 
elicit information primarily of two kinds. First, 
we were concerned with the overall accuracy of the 
method; that is, its ability to produce reasonable 
candidate ntries whether they be general or domain 
specific. The "Invalid" category captures the sys- 
tem's mistakes on this dimension. We also explic- 
itly annotated candidates that might be useful in 
constructing a translation lexicon, but possibly re- 
quire further elaboration. The V category captures 
cases that require minimal or no additional effort, 
and the P category covers cases where some addi- 
tional work might need to be done to accommodate 
the part-of-speech divergence, depending on the ap- 
plication. The I category captures cases where the 
correspondence that has been identified may not ap- 
ply directly at the single-world level, but nonetheless 
does capture potentially useful information. Daille 
et al (1994) also note the existence of "incomplete" 
cases in their results, but collapse them together 
with "wrong" pairings. 
Second, we were concerned with domain speci- 
ficity. Ultimately we intend to measure this in an 
objective, quantitative way by comparing term us- 
age across corpora; however, for this study we relied 
on human judgments. 
3.3 Use  o f  Context 
Melamed (1996b) suggests that evaluation of trans- 
lation lexicons requires that judges have access 
to bilingual concordances showing the contexts in 
which proposed word pairs appear; however, out-of- 
context judgments would be easier to obtain in both 
experimental nd real-world settings. In a prelimi- 
nary evaluation, we had three annotators (one pro- 
fessional French/English translator and two gradu- 
ate students at the University of Pennsylvania) per- 
form a version of the annotation task just described: 
they annotated a set of entries containing the out- 
put of an earlier version of the SABLE system (one 
that used aligned sub-sentence fragments to define 
term co-occurrence; cf. Section 2.2). No bilingual 
concordances were made available to them. 
Analysis of the system's performance in this pi- 
lot study, however, as well as annotator comments 
in a post-study questionnaire, confirmed that con- 
text is quite important. In order to quantify its im: 
portance, we asked one of the pilot annotators to 
repeat the evaluation on the same items, this time 
giving her access to context in the form of the bilin- 
gual concordances for each term pair. These concor- 
dances contained up to the first ten instances of that 
pair as used in context. For example, given the pair 
d@lacez/drag, one instance in that pair's bilingual 
concordance would be: 
Maintenez SELECT enfoncd et d~placez  le 
dossier vers l' espace de travail . 
Press SELECT and drag  the folder onto the 
workspace background . 
The instructions for the in-context evaluation spec- 
ify that the annotator should look at the context 
for every word pair, pointing out that "word pairs 
may be used in unexpected ways in technical text 
and words you would not normally expect to be re- 
lated sometimes turn out to be related in a technical 
context." 
Although we have data from only one annota- 
tor, Table 2 shows the clear differences between the 
two results. 2 In light of the results of the pilot 
study, therefore, our six annotators were given ac- 
cess to bilingual concordances for the entries they 
were judging and instructed in their use as just de- 
scribed. 
4 Resu l t s  
4.1 Group Annotat ions 
A "group annotation" was obtained for each candi- 
date translation lexicon entry based on agreement 
of at least three of the six annotators. "Tie scores" 
or the absence of a 3-of-6 plurality were treated as 
the absence of an annotation. For example, if an en- 
try was annotated as "Invalid" by two annotators, 
marked as category V and Specific by two annota- 
tors, and marked as category P, Specific, and Gen- 
eral by the other two annotators, then the group an- 
notation would contain an "unclassified valid type" 
(since four annotators chose a valid type, but there 
was no agreement by at least three on the specific 
subclasification) and a "Specific" annotation (agreed 
on by four annotators). All summary statistics are 
reported in terms of the group annotation. 
4.2 P rec i s ion  
SABLE's precision on the Answerbooks bitext is 
summarized in Figure 3. 3 Each of the percentages 
being derived from a random sample of 100 observa- 
tions, we can compute confidence intervals under a 
normality assumption; if we assume that the obser- 
vations are independent, hen 95% confidence inter- 
vals are narrower than one twentieth of a percentage 
point for all the statistics computed. 
The results show that up to 89% of the translation 
lexicon entries produced by SABLE on or above the 
2Again, this sample of data was produced by an older 
and less accurate version of SABLE, and therefore the 
percentages should only be analyzed relative to each 
other, not as absolute measures of performance. 
3The exact numbers gladly provided on request. 
344 
~1~1~1 ~'l ~' i~ Entries Domain-Specific Only 
Out-of-Context 39.519.2515.5\[ 57.75 29.75 
In-Context 46 .75 \ [ \ [  1 5  13 69.5 38 
General Only Usage I B?th 
23.5 1 
23.25 3.5 
Table 2: Effect of in-context vs. out-of-context evaluation. All numbers are in ~o. n = 400. 
100 
75 
E 
o~ 
50 "5 
o~ 
25 
V ~ P ~ I r-- - \]  Unclassified valid type 
I 
::z:::: :::::::: 
iiiiiiii 
with no with no 
Hansard Hansard Hansard Hansard 
filter filter filter filter 
3rd plateau cutoff 2nd plateau cutoff 
Figure 3: Summary of filtered translation lexicon va- 
lidily statistics. 
3rd likelihood plateau "can be of help in constructing 
a glossary." Up to 56% can be considered useful es- 
sentially as-is (the V category alone). Including all 
entries on the 2nd plateau or higher provides better 
coverage, but reduces the fraction of useful entries 
to 81%. The fraction of entries that are useful as-is 
remains roughly the same, at 55%. At both recall 
levels, the extra Hansards-based filter had a detri- 
mental effect on precision. 
Note that these figures are based on translation 
lexicons from which many valid general usage en- 
tries have been filtered out (see Section 3). We can 
compute SABLE's precision on unfiltered transla- 
tion lexicons for this corpus by assuming that en- 
tries appearing in the Collins MRD are all correct. 4 
However, these are not the real figures of interest 
here, because we are mainly concerned in this study 
with the acquisition of domain-specific translation 
lexicons. 
4.3 Recal l  
Following Melamed (1996b), we adopt the following 
approach to measuring recall: the upper bound is de- 
fined by the number of different words in the bitext. 
Thus, perfect recall implies at least one entry con- 
taining each word in the corpus. This is a much more 
conservative metric than that used by Daille et al 
(1994), who report recall with respect o a relatively 
4Result: 88.4% precision at 37.0% recall or 93.7% 
precision at 30.4% recall. 
small, manually constructed reference set. Although 
we do not expect o achieve perfect recall on this cri- 
terion after general usage entries have been filtered 
out, the number is useful insofar as it provides a 
sense of how recall for this corpus correlates with 
precision. We have no reason to expect this corre- 
lation to change across domain-specific and general 
lexicon entries. For the unfiltered translation lexi- 
cons, recall on the 3rd likelihood plateau and above 
was 30.4%. When all entries on and above the 2nd 
plateau were considered, recall improved to 37.0%. 
100 
75 
Q_ 
E 
,o 50 
o 
25 
domain-specific only \ [~  both 1---\] general only 
with no with no 
Hansard Hansard Hansard Hansard 
filter filter filter filter 
3rd plateau cutoff 2nd plateau cutoff 
Figure 4: Summary of filtered translation lexicon 
domain-specificity statistics. 
Hansards 
Filter? 
% 
Plateau Domain 
Cutoff Specific 
% 
General 
Usage 
Yes 3rd 82 37 
No 3rd 71 53 
Yes 2nd 66 27 
No 2nd 81 47 
% 
Both 
35 
35 
22 
47 
Table 3: Domain-specificity of filtered translation 
lexicon entries. 
4.4 Domain  Specif icity 
Figure 4 demonstrates the effectiveness of the MRD- 
and corpus-based filters, with details in Table 3. If 
we assume that translation pairs in the Collins MRD 
are not specific to our chosen domain, then domain- 
specific translation lexicon entries constituted only 
345 
~-- \ ]A1  A2 A3 A4 A5 ~ 0.70 0.44 0.59 0.82 0.90 0.82 I 0.62 0.67 0.72 0.74 0.55 0.73 0.28 0.19 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.56 
0.67 0.69 0.68 0.74 0.61 0.81 
Table 4: Infer-annotator agreement. 
49% of SABLE's unfiltered output on or above the 
2nd plateau and 41% on or above the 3rd plateau. 
The MRD filter increased this ratio to 81% and 71%, 
respectively. As noted in Section 4.2, the second fil- 
ter, based on the Hansard bitext, reduced the overall 
accuracy of the translation lexicons. Its effects on 
the proportion of domain-specific entries was mixed: 
an 11% increase for the entries more likely to be cor- 
rect, but a 15% decrease overall. The corpus-based 
filter is certainly useful in the absence of an MRD. 
However, our results suggest hat combining filters 
does not always help, and more research is needed 
to investigate optimal filter combination strategies. 
4.5 Cons istency of  Annotat ions  
In order to assess the consistency of annotation, we 
follow Carletta (1996) in using Cohen's ~, a chance- 
corrected measure of inter-rater agreement. The 
statistic was developed to distinguish among levels 
of agreement such as "almost perfect, substantial, 
moderate, fair, slight, poor" (Agresti, 1992), and 
Carletta suggests that as a rule of thumb in the be- 
havioral sciences, values of g greater than .8 indicate 
good replicability, with values between .67 and .8 al- 
lowing tentative conclusions to be drawn. For each 
such comparison, four values of ~ were computed: 
~:1: agreement on the evaluation of whether or not a 
pair should be immediately rejected or retained; 
~2: agreement, for the retained pairs, on the type 
V, P, or I assigned to the pair; 
~a: agreement, for the retained pairs, on whether to 
classify the pair as being useful for constructing 
a domain-specific glossary; 
g4: agreement, for the retained pairs, on whether to 
classify the pair as being useful for constructing 
a general usage glossary. 
In each case, the computation of the agreement 
statistic took into account hose cases, if any, where 
the annotator could not arrive at a decision for this 
case and opted simply to throw it out. Resulting val- 
ues for inter-rater eliability are shown in Table 4; 
the six annotators are identified as A1, A2, . . .  A6; 
and each value of ~ reflects the comparison between 
that annotator and the group annotation. 
With the exception of ~3, these values of n indi- 
cate that the reliability of the judgments i generally 
reasonable, albeit not entirely beyond debate. The 
outlandish values for ~3, despite high rates of abso- 
lute agreement on that dimension of annotation, are 
explained by the fact that the ~ statistic is known 
to be highly problematic as a measure of inter-rater 
reliability when one of the categories that can be 
chosen is overwhelmingly ikely (Grove et al, 1981; 
Spitznagel and Helzer, 1985). Intuitively this is not 
surprising: we designed the experiment to yield a 
predominance of domain-specific terms, by means 
of the MRD and Hansards filters. Our having suc- 
ceeded, there is a very high probability that the 
"Specific" annotation will be selected by any two 
annotators, because it appears so very frequently; 
as a result the actual agreement rate for that anno- 
tation doesn't actually look all that different from 
what one would get by chance, and so the ~ values 
are low. The values of ~3 for annotators 4 and 5 
emphasize quite clearly that ~ is measuring not the 
level of absolute agreement, hut the distinguishabil- 
ity of that level of agreement from chance. 
5 Conc lus ion  
In this paper, we have investigated the application of 
SABLE, a turn-key translation lexicon construction 
system for non-technical users, to the problem of 
identifying domain-specific word translations given 
domain-specific corpora of limited size. Evaluated 
on a very small (400,000 word) corpus, the system 
shows real promise as a method of processing small 
domain-specific corpora in order to propose candi- 
date single-word translations: once likely general us- 
age terms are automatically filtered out, the system 
obtains precision up to 89% at levels of recall very 
conservatively estimated in the range of 30-40% on 
domain-specific terms. 
Of the proposed entries not immediately suitable 
for inclusion in a translation lexicon, many represent 
part-of-speech divergences (of the protect/protdgg 
variety) and a smaller number incomplete ntries 
(of the immddiatement/right variety) that would 
nonetheless be helpful if used as the basis for a bilin- 
gual concordance search - -  for example, a search for 
French segments containing immddiatemeut in the 
vicinity of English segments containing right would 
most likely yield up the obvious correspondence b - 
tween immgdiatement and right away. Going be- 
yond single-word correspondences, however, is a pri- 
ority for future work. 
6 Acknowledgments  
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of Sun 
Microsystems Laboratories, particularly the assis- 
tance of Gary Adams, Cookie Callahan, and Bob 
Kuhns, as well as useful input from Bonnie Dorr, 
Ralph Grishman, Marti Hearst, Doug Oard, and 
three anonymous reviewers. Melamed also acknowl- 
edges grants ARPA N00014-90-J-1863 and ARPA 
N6600194C 6043. 
346 
References  
Alan Agresti. 1992. Modeling patterns of agreement 
and disagreement. Statistical methods in medical 
research, 1:201-218. 
P. F. Brown, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, and 
R. Mercer. 1993. "The Mathematics of Statisti- 
cal Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation". 
Computational Linguistics 19:2. 
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on clas- 
sification tasks: the Kappa statistic. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 22(2):249-254, June. 
S. Chen. 1993. "Aligning Sentences in Bilingual 
Corpora Using Lexical Information". Proceedings 
of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Columbus, OH. 
K. W. Church. 1993. "Char_align: A Program for 
Aligning Parallel Texts at the Character Level". 
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Colum- 
bus, OH. 
P. H. Cousin, L. Sinclair, J. F. Allain, and C. E. 
Love. 1991. The Collins Paperback French Dic- 
tionary. Harper Collins Publishers, Glasgow. 
Ido Dagan and Ken W. Church. 1994. TERMIGHT: 
Identifying and translating technical terminology. 
In Proceedings of the Fourth ACL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing (13-15 Oc- 
tober 1994, Stuttgart). Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, October. 
I. Dagan, K. Church, and W. Gale. 1993. "Robust 
Word Alignment for Machine Aided Translation". 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Cor- 
pora: Academic and Industrial Perspectives, avail- 
able from the ACL. 
Bdatrice Daille. 1994. Combined approach for termi- 
nology extraction: lexical statistics and linguistic 
filtering. Ph.D. thesis, University Paris 7. 
Bdatrice Daille. 1996. Study and implementation 
of combined techniques for automatic extraction 
of terminology. In Judith Klavans and Philip 
Resnik, editors, The Balancing Act: Combining 
Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to Language. 
MIT Press. 
Mark Davis. 1996. "New experiments in cross- 
language text retrieval at NMSU's Computing Re- 
search Lab". Fifth Text Retrieval Conference 
(TREC-5). NIST. 
Mark Davis and Ted Dunning. 1995. "A TREC 
evaluation of query translation methods for multi- 
lingual text retrieval". Fourth Text Retrieval Con- 
ference (TREC-4). NIST. 
Mark Davis, Ted Dunning, and William Ogden. 
1995. Text alignment in the real world: improv- 
ing alignments of noisy translation using common 
lexical features, string matching strategies, and n- 
gram comparisons. In EACL-95. 
W. Gale and K. W. Church. 1991. "Identifying 
Word Correspondences in Parallel Texts". Pro- 
ceedings of the DARPA SNL Workshop, 1991. 
W. Grove, N. Andreasen, P. McDonald-Scott, 
M. Keller, and R. Shapiro. 1981. Reliability stud- 
ies of psychiatric diagnosis. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 38, April. 
I. Dan Melamed, 1995. Automatic evaluation and 
uniform filter cascades for inducing n-best trans- 
lation lexicons. In Proceedings of the Third Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora, Cambridge, Mas- 
sachusetts. 
I. Dan Melamed. 1996a. A geometric approach to 
mapping bitext correspondence. In Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process- 
ing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
I. Dan Melamed. 1996b. Automatic onstruction of 
clean broad-coverage translation lexicons. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 2nd Conference of the Association 
for Machine Translation in the Americas, Mon- 
treal, Canada. 
I. Dan Melamed. 1996c. Porting SIMR to new lan- 
guage pairs. IRCS Technical Report 96-26. Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania. 
I. Dan Melamed. 1997. A scalable architecture for 
bilingual lexicography. Dept. of Computer and 
Information Science Technical Report MS-CIS-97- 
01. University of Pennsylvania. 
Douglas W. Oard. 1997. "Cross-Language Text 
Retrieval Research in the USA". Third DELOS 
Workshop. European Research Consortium for In- 
formatics and Mathematics. March. 
M. Simard, G. F. Foster and P. Isabelle. 1992. "Us- 
ing Cognates to Align Sentences in Bilingual Cor- 
pora". In Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Is- 
sues in Machine Translation, Montreal, Canada. 
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations 
from text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 
19(1):143-177. 
Frank Smadja, Kathleen McKeown, and Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou. 1996. Translating collocations 
for bilingual lexicons: A statistical approach. 
Computational Linguistics, 22(1), March. 
E. Spitznagel and J. Helzer. "A proposed solution 
to the base rate problem in the kappa statistic". 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 42. July, 1985. 
D. Wu and X. Xia. 1994. "Learning an English- 
Chinese Lexicon from a Parallel Corpus". Pro- 
ceedings of the First Conference of the Associ- 
ation for Machine Translation in the Americas, 
Columbia, MD. 
347 
