A Spoken Language Interface to a Virtual Reality System (Video) 
Stephanie S. Everett, Kenneth Wauchope 
Navy Ctr.  for Appl ied Research in AI 
Naval Research Laboratory  
Washington,  DC 20375, USA 
everet t  I wauchope?aic ,  n r l .  navy .  mi l  
Manuel A. P f i rez  
Dept.  Electr ical  & Computer  Engineer ing 
Recinto Univers i tar io de Mayaguez,  UPR 
Mayaguez,  PR  00681 
mperez?exodo,  upr .  c lu .  edu 
1 Descr ip t ion  o f  video tape 
Format: VHS. Duration: 9 min. 15 sec. 
Immersive, interactive 3D computer display sys- 
tems (often called virtual reality systems, or virtual 
environments) are rapidly emerging as practical op- 
tions for training, command and control (C2), haz- 
ardous operations, visualization and other applica- 
tions. However, the need for improved control and 
navigation techniques i well recognized (Herndon 
et al, 1994). The Navy Center for Applied Re- 
search in Artificial Intelligence has developed NAU- 
TILUS (Navy AUTomated Intelligent Language Un- 
derstanding System), a general-purpose natural lan- 
guage processing system, which has previously been 
integrated with the graphical user interface of a 
simulation-based C2 system to illustrate the advan- 
tages to be gained by combining natural language 
understanding (NLU) and direct manipulation i a 
human-computer interface (Wauchope, 1994). Us- 
ing the NAUTILUS system in the interface to a vir- 
tual environment (VE) is a natural extension of this 
work. 
The purpose of the project documented in this 
video was to demonstrate and explore some of the 
capabilities of a NLU interface to a VE system, and 
to identify some of the research issues that need to 
be addressed in this area. It is important o rec- 
ognize that NLU is not simply speech recognition, 
where each individual utterance maps to a specific 
command. In a NLU system, a given sentence may 
have different meanings depending on the context, so 
a logical analysis of the utterance is required to de- 
termine the appropriate interpretation. This allows 
us to take advantage of certain powerful inguistic 
properties as described below. 
One major difficulty with interfaces to VE systems 
is that the user's hands and eyes are occupied in 
the virtual world, so standard input devices uch as 
mice and keyboards that require a physical support 
and/or visual attention are impractical. Joysticks, 
36 
gloves, and other manual input devices are useful 
for some types of control (pointing, manipulating ob- 
jects), but they are not well suited to more abstract 
input functions. Language, however, is ideally suited 
to abstract manipulations; it is also the most natu- 
ral form of communication for humans, and does not 
require the use of one's hands or eyes. It is especially 
useful for controlling things that do not have a phys- 
ical presence in the VE, such as object scale, display 
characteristics, and time. It also provides a pow- 
erful means to access the knowledge that underlies 
the VE by allowing the user to ask questions of the 
system. Using speech output in combination with 
speech recognition helps to avoid the use of textual 
displays which can be difficult to read on immer- 
sire presentation equipment, and which can interfere 
with the user's view and the "reality" of the virtual 
world. 
The prototype system shown in this film uses 
off-the-shelf speech recognition and synthesis tech- 
nology combined with the NAUTILUS system and 
VIEWER (Solan and Hill, 1993), a 3D tactical sce- 
nario playback system developed by NRL's Tactical 
Electronic Warfare Division for a separate project. 
Building the prototype involved the creation of an 
application-specific d tionary and lexical semantics 
for NAUTILUS, a few minor extensions to its En- 
glish grammar, and the development of two sets of 
code: one to translate the logical forms generated by 
NAUTILUS into messages for the application soft- 
ware, and one to interpret hese messages and in- 
struct VIEWER to produce the appropriate actions 
or responses. 
The interface supports two classes of spoken input: 
commands and questions. The commands allow the 
user to control the playback of the simulation and 
its speed, as well as various display characteristics, 
such as viewpoint (Show me lhe lop-down/ou~-the- 
window view) and overlays (Display the map rings). 
The user can also tell the system to hide or display 
individual objects (Show the Thunderbird) or sets of 
objects (Hide all the friendly aircraft that don't have 
missiles). Commands are also used to manipulate 
time (Run the simulation forward/backward; Set the 
clock to zero). In addition, the user can move from 
one object to another by name or by description, 
rather than by flying or pointing (Put me on the 
Doomsday; Put me on the hostile ship), or by speci- 
fying a particular location (Move me to 23 N, 40 E; 
lncrease my altitude to 4000 feet). 
Questions allow the user to access information 
contained in the knowledge base that underlies 
the simulation. He/she can ask for information 
about the virtual world (How many hostile ships 
are there?), or about a specific object (What is the 
Thunderbird's heading?; What is my viewing alti- 
tude?) or set of objects (Do any of the friendly 
ships have emitters on board?). The user can also 
ask about the state of various aspects of the simu- 
lation (Is the simulation running?, What is the time 
increment ?). 
NAUTILUS keeps a history of prior references and 
their denotations, which allows the use of anaphoric 
reference (pronouns like it or them). It also supports 
relative clauses (All the ships that have missiles on 
board), and elliptical follow-ups involving substitu- 
tion noun phrases (How about the Titanic?). 
User feedback is handled in one of two ways: 
changes in the graphical display in response to 
commands, and verbal answers output through the 
speech synthesizer in response to questions. In the 
film, the answers consist primarily of yes/no and 
short noun phrases. The addition of a natural 
language generation module to generate appropri- 
ate verbal responses would improve feedback and 
smooth the flow of the discourse. 
The grammar for the speech recognition module 
consists of a vocabulary of just over 300 words and 
a set of about 140 rules that support he recognition 
of approximately 1.2 million utterances. In order to 
make the interface flexible and easy to use, the rules 
have been designed to allow the user to phrase an 
utterance in a variety of ways, improving the nat- 
uralness of the interaction by taking advantage of 
the strong linguistic processing capabilities of NAU- 
TILUS. 
The use of natural language understanding in a 
human-computer interface can help provide the rich- 
ness of control required in complex interactive nvi- 
ronments. NLU provides a way to control abstract 
features uch as time without the need for manual 
controls, and enables the user to access information 
in the underlying knowledge base(s) by asking ques- 
tions. It also allows simulation objects to be referred 
37 
to by description, as sets, and generically rather than 
just individually. This film shows a demonstration 
of a prototype system that illustrates ome of the 
capabilities of NLU in an interface to a virtual envi- 
ronment system. However, it must be stressed that 
this area of HCI is still in its infancy, and there are 
a number of research issues that will need to be ad- 
dressed in order to realize the full potential of this 
technology. 
Re ferences  
Kenneth P. Herndon, Andries van Dam and Michael 
Gleicher. 1994. The challenges of 3D interaction. 
A CM SIGCHI Bulletin, 26:4, pages 36-43. 
Brian T. Solan and Tobin A. Hill 1993. An appli- 
cation of object-oriented problem solving in elec- 
tronic warfare simulation. NRL technical report 
NRL/FR/570%93-9551. 
Kenneth Wauchope. 1994. Eucalyptus: integrat- 
ing natural language input with a graphical user 
interface. NRL technical report NRL/FR/5510- 
94-9711. 
