Dutch Sublanguage Semantic Tagging combined with Mark-Up 
Technology 
P. Spyns  \[1\], NT .  Nhhn \[2\], E.  Baer t  \[1\], N .  Sager  \[2\], G.  De  Moor  \[1\] 
(1) Division of Medical Informatics, University Hospital  Gent 
De P inte laan 185 (5K3), B-9000 Gent,  Belgium 
(2) Courant  Inst i tute of Mathemat ica l  Sciences, New York Univers i ty 
251 Mercer Street, NY 10012, New York, USA 
{Peter. Spyns, Erik. Baert, Georges. DeMoor}@rug. ac. be, {nhan, sager}@cs, nyu. edu 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, we want to show how the 
morphological component of an existing 
NLP-system for Dutch (Dutch Medical 
Language Processor - DMLP) has been ex- 
tended in order to produce output that is 
compatible with the language independent 
modules of the LSP-MLP system (Linguis- 
tic String Project - Medical Language Pro- 
cessor) of the New York University. The 
former can take advantage of the language 
independent developments of the latter, 
while focusing on idiosyncrasies for Dutch. 
This general strategy will be illustrated by 
a practical application, namely the high- 
lighting of relevant information in a pa- 
tient discharge summary (PDS) by means 
of modern HyperText Mark-Up Language 
(HTML) technology. Such an application 
can be of use for medical administrative 
purposes in a hospital environment. 
1 Introduct ion 
Medical patient reports consist mainly of free text. 
While numerical data can be stored and processed 
(relatively) easily, free text is rather difficult to pro- 
cess by a computer, although in many cases it con- 
tains the most relevant information. 
The use of natural language does not facilitate the 
automation of. these tasks and hinders access to the 
wealth of medical information. However, natural lan- 
guage still is the most frequently used and easiest 
way to transmit complex messages (Scherrer et ah, 
1989). Hence, some authors consider the study and 
application of Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
in Medicine (Scherrer et" al., 1989), (McCray et ah. 
1995), (Chute, 1997) as one of the most challenging 
issues in the field of medical information retrieval 
(Baud et al, 1992a), (Friedman and Johnson, 1992). 
Up till now, not many NLP-driven systems have ac- 
tually been implemented (Spyns, 1996b). A concise 
overview of NLP-based information retrieval tech- 
niques for clinical narrative can be found in (Hersh, 
1996, chapter 11, pp. 211-323). 
A possible nvironment for (medical) information 
retrieval is the Medical Registration Department of 
a hospital, and more in particular the medical en- 
coding service. Clinical data in free text format are 
replaced by a set of numerical codes that summarise 
the content of the entire document. In general, the 
patient discharge summary (PDS), being a synthe- 
sis of the patient stay, is used for the encoding and 
abstracting task instead of the entire medical record 
(Duisterhout, 1996). An important aspect of med- 
ical encoding consists of a thorough review of the 
PDS in order to discover the relevant words (diag- 
noses, surgical deeds, interventional equipment etc.) 
(Bowman, 1996, p.216). The aim of the NLP-based 
HTML application presented below is to speed up 
the reviewing process by displaying a PDS and high- 
lighting the keywords. 
The following sections provide details about some 
aspects of NLP systems for medical English (section 
2.1: LSP-MLP) and Dutch (section 2.2: DMLP), and 
how results can be exchanged between them (sec- 
tion 2.3). Only some parts of the DMLP and LSP- 
MLP systems will be presented, namely those that 
are of importance for the experiment described be- 
low. Next to the NLP back-end, the user interface 
is described as well (section 2.4). The limitations 
of the current test are described in section 3 and 
some future directions for research are provided in 
the fourth and final section. 
2 Mater ia l  and  Methods  
2.1 The Linguistic String Project  - Medical 
Language Processor 
The Linguistic String Project. - Medical Language 
Processor (LSP-MLP) of the New York University 
182 
is the first (and up till now the longest lasting) large 
scale project about NLP in Medicine (Sager et al, 
1987), (Sager et al, 1995a). The LSP-MLP has 
also been ported to French and German, which il- 
lustrates the general applicability of its methodology 
and approach (Nhkn et al, 1989), (Oliver, 1992). 
The reason of its generality lies in the use of a well 
defined underlying linguistic theory (distributional- 
ism) (Harris, 1962), (Sager et al, 1981) and a scien- 
tifically based sublanguage approach (Grishman and 
Kittredge, 1986). 
Important for the present discussion is the seman- 
tic selection level of the LSP-MLP. All the words 
in the LSP dictionary are characterised by labels 
that indicate to which sublanguage word class(es) 
the words belong (e.g., H-TTCHIR: "contains general 
and specific surgical treatment or procedure words 
which imply or denote surgical intervention by the 
physician" (Sager et al, 1987, p.268); H-TXPlZOC: 
"contains medical test words designating procedures 
performed on the patient and not on a patient spec- 
iment. The patient must be present o undergo the 
test" (Sager et al, 1987, p.264) ). An overview 
of the actual set of labels and word classes can be 
found in (Sager et al, 1995a). The semantic se- 
lection module uses distributionally established co- 
occurrence patterns of medical word classes to im- 
prove the parse tree by resolving cases of structural 
ambiguity (Hirschman, 1986). Consider the sentence 
63 "operatieve procedure: vijfvoudige coronaire by- 
pass." 1 displayed in figure 4. The word "proce- 
dure" is semantically ambiguous because it has two 
semantic labels: H-TTCHIR ~: H-TXPROC. Thanks 
to the co-occurrence patterns for the medical sub- 
language, only the label that is valid in this context 
(H-TTCHIR) is ultimately selected. In another con- 
text (e.g.: test procedure: ...), another co-occurrence 
pattern will apply and select the H-TXPROC reading. 
Other examples of resolution of word sense ambigui- 
ties by means of co-occurrence patterns can be found 
in (Sager et al, 1987, pp.83, 95). 
The very latest work includes the use of Stan- 
dard Generalized Mark-up Language (SGML) and 
World Wide Web (WWW) Graphical User Interface 
(GUI) technology to access and visualise better the 
requested information i  the text (Sager et al, 1996). 
It focused on the use of static SGML or HTML-code 
2 for displaying the results of NLP-based checklist 
screening of clinical documents. 
1English: surgical procedure: quintuple coronary 
bypass. 
2 "Static" HTML code eliminates the need for an on 
the fly conversion of the HTML file ("dynamic" HTML 
code) as presented in section 2.4. 
2.2 The  Dutch Medical  Language Processor  
For the Dutch medical anguage, an NLP system of 
a medium sized coverage has been designed and im- 
plemented: the Dutch Medical Language Processor 
(DMLP) (Spyns, 1996c). With respect o the mor- 
phological level, there is a full form dictionary stored 
in the relational database format (currently some 
100.000 full forms that are mostly non-compound 
wordforms) (Dehaspe, 1993). If necessary, a recog- 
niser characterises the unknown word forms morpho- 
logically (Spyns, 1994). Subsequently, a contextual 
disambiguation component tries to reduce the num- 
ber of morphological readings (Spyns, 1995). 
As the syntactic level uses a "logic variant" of the 
LSP grammar formalism (Hirschman and Dowding, 
1990), the Dutch morpho-syntactic module (Spyns 
and Adriaens, 1992) can replace the LSP parser. 
Many of the LSP-MLP medical co-occurrence pat- 
terns are practically identical for English, French 
and German, so that the application of these pat- 
terns to Dutch parse trees can lead to interesting 
results, namely the feasibility of reusing the non lan- 
guage specific parts of the LSP-MLP for Dutch med- 
ical NLP (Spyns, 1996a). 
2.3 The  DMLP/LSP-MLP  connect ion  
The linguistic data are passed on from the DMLP to 
the LSP-MLP system via syntactic parse trees. This 
is due to the fact that the selection module takes syn- 
tactic relationships into account during the semantic 
disambiguating phase. 
The linguistic information of the DMLP and the 
LSP-MLP systems correspond in a high degree. Se- 
mantic word class labels, which were originally not 
foreseen in the Dutch lexicon, had to be added. A 
parse tree transducer delivers nearly genuine Dutch 
LSP-MLP trees (Spyns, 1996a). Although on the 
side of the LSP-MLP some new sublanguage seman- 
tic co-occurrence patterns had to be defined, the 
co-occurrence patterns are highly language indepen- 
dent. This was in line with results earlier achieved. 
An example (see figure 1) shows the output of the 
parse tree transducer that reshapes the DMLP tree 
into the required LSP-MLP format. The current 
state of the transducer allows to transform nearly 
all the parse trees. 
2.4 The  WWW inter face  
The basic idea was that when treating a patient, it 
is considered to be helpful to reread the admission 
history, the discharge summary, or other important 
parts of the medical record. 
183 
((SENTENCE 
(TEXTLET 
(OLDSENT 
(INTRODUCER 
(LN (TPOS (NULL)) 
(QPOS (NULL)) 
(APOS (AD.\]ADJ (LAR (LA (NULL)) 
(AVAR (ADJ='OPERATIEVE': ('OPERATIEF') "('OPERATIEF'))) 
(RA (NULL))))) 
(NPOS (NULL))) 
(N='PROCEDURE':(F SINGULAR) " ('PROCEDURE')) 
(,: ,=,:,:  (,:,) - (,:,))) 
(CENTER 
(FRAGMENT 
(SA (NULL)) 
(NSTGF 
(NSTG 
(LNR 
(LN (TPOS (NULL)) 
(QPOS (NULL)) 
(APOS (ADJADJ (EAR (LA (NULL)) 
(AVAR (ADJ='VIJFVOUDIGE': ('VIJFVOUDIG') " ('VIJFVOUDIG'))) 
(RA (NULL))) 
(ADJADJ (LAR (LA (NULL)) 
(AVAR (ADJ='CORONAIRE':('CORONAIR') " ('CORONAIR'))) 
(RA (NULL)))))) 
(NPOS (NULL))) 
(NVAR (N='BYPASS':(SINGULAR) " ('BYPASS'))) 
(RN (NULL))))) 
(SA (NULL)))) 
(ENDMARK ('.'='.': ('.') "('.')))) 
(MORESENT (NULL)))) 
\[ ((16 \[ SELECT-ATT \] H-TTCHIR) (21 \[SELECT-ATT \] H-TTCHIR H-TXPROC) 
(41 \[ SELECT-ATT \] H-TMREP) (49 \[ SELECT-ATT \] H-PTPART) (55 \[ SELECT-ATT \] H-TTCHIR)) \]) 
Figure 1: LSP like parse tree generated by the DMLP transducer for "operatieve procedure: vijfvoudige 
coronaire bypass." \[surgical procedure: quintuple coronary bypass\] 
The highlighting of medical concepts of 
interest makes it possible to scan a docu- 
ment quickly, focusing on a particular type 
of information, such as Symptoms and Di- 
agnoses, or Treatments resolved (?, p.26). 
Also for the medico-administrative activities, such 
a tool can also be helpful. Medical secretaries have to 
summarise patient discharge summaries by "trans- 
lating" them into a fixed set of numerical codes of 
a classification (ICD-9-CM (Commission of Profes- 
sional and Hospital Activities, 1978)). These codes 
(indirectly) serve for statistical and financial pur- 
poses. If the most important relevant terms for 
the encoding task (essentially the H-DIAG (diagno- 
sis) and the H-TTCHIR (surgical deed) words) are 
already highlighted, the human encoder is able to 
detect hem more rapidly so that the encoding speed 
can be improved. 
The documents are morphologically and syntacti- 
cally analysed by the DMLP first, the resulting parse 
trees being made conform to the LSP-format, and 
subsequently passed 3 on to the LSP-MLP. 
The LSP subselection module generates a pseudo- 
HTML file consisting of semantic labels and the ter- 
minal elements of the parse trees. The file with 
the pseudo-HTML codes (see figure 3) could eas- 
ily have been generated by the morphological com- 
ponent of the DMLP as well. In some occasions, 
it would be better to do so as the DMLP-LSP tree 
converter sometimes changes the word order. On the 
other hand, no advantage can then be taken from 
the sublanguage co-occurrence patterns for seman- 
tic disambiguation. Semantically ambiguous words 
will thus be highlighted more than once, which is 
bad for the precision score (more non relevant words 
are flagged). Without full fledged linguistic analysis, 
some ambiguities will not be resolved (?, p.27). As 
can be seen in figure 2 (and thus also in figure 3), 
the ambiguity for the word "procedure" in sentence 
63 is resolved. The node number 2 only has the label 
H-TTCHIR.  
3Currently, the files are transmitted by e-mail. 
184 
SENTENCE 
TEXTLET  
OLDSENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  MORESENT 
INTRODUCER 
LNR' 
CENTER . . . . .  ENDMARK 
i 
FRAGMENT "." 
LN 
TPOS- - -OPOS .... APOS . . . . .  NPOS 
I 
ADJADJ  
i 
LAR 
l 
LA- - -AVAR . . . . .  RA 
\[ 
* I *ADJ  
J 
OPERATIEVE 
*** Node  At t r ibutes  *** 
Node  ID: i:: SELECT-ATT  = H-TTCHIR  
Node ID: 2:: SELECT-ATT  = H-TTCHIR  
Node ID: 3:: SELECT-ATT  = H-TMREP 
Node ID: 4:: SELECT-ATT  = H-PTPART 
Node ID: 5:: SELECT-ATT  = H-TTCHIR  
NVAR- - -RN 
l 
*2*N 
i 
PROCEDURE 
NSTGF 
NSTG 
LNR 
LN 
TPOS- - -QPOS- - -APOS . . . . .  NPOS 
i 
ADJADJ  
l 
-NVAR---RN 
I 
*5*N 
I 
BYPASS 
LAR . . . . . . . . . . .  AD JADJ  
I I 
LA--AVAR--RA LAR 
I I 
*3*ADJ LA--AVAR--RA 
I I 
VIJFVOUDIGE *4*ADJ 
I 
CORONAIRE  
Figure 2: LSP-MLP parse tree generated after sublanguage processing for sentence of figure 1 
No actual HTML-codes were furnished but the se- 
mantic labels are noted according to the HTML-style 
(see figure 3). The NLP processing of a load of PDSs 
can be done in batch during the night so that the 
throughput of the encoder is not affected in the neg- 
ative sense. 
63 
< H - T I~HIR> operatieve </H - T I "CHIR> 
< H-  T I~HIR> procedure </H - T I~HIR> 
< H - TMREP> vijfvoudige </H-  TMREP> 
< H - PTPART> coronaire </H-  PTPART> 
< H-T ICHIR> bypass </H-TTCHIR> 
Figure3: pseudo-HTML code generated after joint 
DMLP/LSP-MLP processing for the sentence in fig- 
ure 1 
The GUI consists of two WWW-pages. The first 
page is conceived as a menu window. Two selection 
boxes allow the medical encoder to choose a text 
and the semantic labels. Currently, the set of PDSs 
is limited to nine texts. In the future, HTML-files 
for an unrestricted and varying number of PDSs will 
have to be produced. Before the encoder can start 
to view the NLP-processed PDSs, the HTML-code 
of the menu-page needs to be updated to include all 
the (path)names of the files concerned. This can 
easily be achieved by activating before each encoding 
session a C-shell script that scans a subdirectory and 
creates an actualised HTML-file for the menu page. 
Only the " < OPTION ></OPT ION >" lines of 
the first choice box need to be adapted. 
Through the HTML SUBMIT command, the op- 
tions selected by the medical encoder are passed (via 
a FORM and CGI-SCRIPT) to an external C-program. 
The C-program takes the filename and the requested 
sublanguage label(s) as parameters and generates 
185 
a new HTML-file by replacing the occurrences of 
the concerned label(s) by a genuine HTML-code 
(< STRONG > & </STRONG >) around the rel- 
evant words). This temporary file is directly fed into 
the browser and displayed as a second WWW-page 
("PDS-page"). The words marked (= belonging to 
the selected semantic sublanguage word class) are 
displayed in boldface. As the pseudo-HTML codes 
are ignored by the browser, the rest of the PDS is 
displayed in a "neutral" way. 
Figure 4 shows the menu-page and PDS-page in 
which words concerning the diagnosis (H-DIAG), the 
surgical procedure (tt-TTCHIR) and the bodypart (H- 
PTPART) are marked. The PDS-page is the bottom 
right part of the figure and partly overlaps the menu- 
page, which shows the selected PDS and labels 4. 
3 Evaluation & Results 
Before a large scale validation involving "a gold 
standard" and various statistical metrics (e.g. see 
(Hripcsak et al, 1995)) is set up and conducted, 
a modest formative evaluation (Hirschman and 
Thompson, 1995) allowed to rapidly assess the func- 
tionality of the application from the point of view of 
the actual user. A limited validation test has been 
set up. A sample of 100 Dutch sentences of varying 
length and syntactic omplexity was selected. All the 
words in the dictionary covering the 100 sentences 
were manually tagged with LSP semantic word class 
labels. The medical doctor supervising the medi- 
cal registration activities was asked to provide some 
combinations of semantic labels relevant from the 
4The translation of the document PDS6 is as follows: 
61 On 21/1/87 your patient has been operated in our 
cardiovascular surgery unit. 
62 Pre-operative diagnosis: coronary sclerosis. 
63 Operative procedure: quintuple coronary bypass. 
64 Reconstruction of the left arteria mammaria on the 
LAD. 
65 Venal jump graft from the aorta to the diagonalis, 
further to the LAD. 
66 Venal jump graft from the aorta to the first branch 
of the circumflexus, further to the second branch of 
the circumflexus, till the RDP . 
67 Single venal bypass from the aorta to the AV- 
Sulcusbranch. 
68 After the procedure, the patient has been admitted 
to the Intensive Care unit. 
69 Enclosed you can find the operation report. 
viewpoint of a medical encoder (using ICD-9-CM), 
and to evaluate the system's responses. 
For all the 100 sentences, pseudo-HTML code was 
generated. The recall was 100 % (all the labels con- 
cerned were flagged). The precision ranged from 
66% to 100 % depending on the label combination. 
Nevertheless, these figures are temporary as exami- 
nation of the sentences showed that very few words 
had more than one semantic label so that the medi- 
cal subselection stage did not have a big impact. A 
larger test set needs to be processed in order to pro- 
vide more conclusive results. Probably, recall will 
drop while precision could raise. Nevertheless, the 
experience did prove to be valuable as the collabo- 
rating doctor, who had never heard of NLP before, 
said he was "positively surprised and impressed" by 
the capabilities of the system. He also judged the 
tool to be an interesting utility and consented in set- 
ting up a larger experiment to measure xactly the 
impact of the tool on the daily routine of the medical 
encoders. The evaluation procedure of this large test 
will be organised to comply as much as possible with 
the evaluation criteria recently proposed by Fried- 
man and Hripcsak (Friedman and Hripcsak, 1997). 
4 Future  Research  
In order to demonstrate the full power of the LSP- 
MLP, the same sentences could be processed by 
the joint DMLP/LSP-MLP systems and stored in 
a RDB table - as is done in other experiments in- 
volving the LSP system (Hirschman et al, 1981). 
Specific SQL-queries can then return the ID-number 
of the sentence with the relevant information instead 
of the information itself. If the ID-number is added 
to the original document as a pseudo-HTML code, 
the same mechanism as mentioned above can be used 
to highlight he sentences containing the relevant in- 
formation. Several variants on this base scheme can 
be thought of. 
Following the line of research of Sager (Sager et 
al., 1995a) and Wingert (Wingert et al, 1989), clas- 
sification codes could already be generated automat- 
ically (see also (Lovis et al, 1995)) and presented on 
the screen next to the original text. But the human 
encoder would remain responsible for the ultimate 
selection of the exact codes. 
Another possibility is the creation of "views" or 
"masks". HTML files can be generated with "hard 
coded" instructions to emphasise fixed combinations 
of semantic labels. Buttons in the menu-page allow 
to display very rapidly the selected view on the PDS. 
Several experiments for English have already been 
successfully carried out (?) on the use of "static 
WWW-technology". Interesting as well is the cre- 
186 
ation of Document Type Definitions (DTD) that as- 
sociate a particular layout with a specific semantic 
label (see also (Zweigenbaum et al, 1997)). The 
DTDs can act as a locally defined view (GUI aspect) 
on common SGML data (NLP aspect). 
Other potential applications in the medical domain 
for the DMLP/LSP-MLP combination are e.g., the 
determination f patient profiles (Borst et al, 1991), 
quality assurance (Lyman et al, 1991) and extrac- 
tion of sign/syptom information for medication (Ly- 
man et al, 198.5). Overviews of the possible utili- 
sation in the healthcare area of NLP based systems, 
irrespective of their theoretical background, can be 
found in (Baud et al, 1992b) & (Sager et al, 1987, 
chapter2). 
But before any application of such an extent can 
be envisaged for Dutch, the words of the dictio- 
nary database all have to receive the appropriate 
semantic label(s). Luckily, this process can be au- 
tomated. The LSP-team has implemented such rou- 
tines (Hirschman et al, 1975) but other techniques 
could be applied as well (see (Habert et al, 1996)). 
From a technical point of view, it would be better 
to group all the involved software modules (NLP, 
RDBMS, WWW) on the same platform to opti- 
mally exploit he potentialities offered by the combi- 
nation of the components mentioned. Ultimately, a
client/server architecture (separating language spe- 
cific from domain specific issues and the linguistic 
aspects from user interface aspects) will be the best 
architecture for a real life application. 
We can conclude that the application presented 
above shows the feasibility to integrate Electronic 
Medical Record (EMR) systems with NLP appli- 
cations. This is the kernel message of the DOME 
project (Bouaud et al, 1996) that advocates the use 
of SGML - and HTML-technology for EMR systems. 
The above presented WWW-application could thus 
be integrated in such a hypertextuM EMR system. 
References  
R. Baud, A.-M. Rassinoux, and J.-R. Scherrer. 
1992a. Natural language processing and medi- 
cal records. In K.C. Lun, editor, Proc. of MED- 
INFO 92, pages 1362 - 1367. North-Holland. 
R. Baud, A.-M. Rassinoux, and J.-R. Scherrer. 
1992b. Natural anguage processing and Semanti- 
cal Representation f Medical Texts. Methods of 
Information in Medicine, (31): 117- 125. 
F. Borst, M. Lyman, N.T. Nh~n, L. Tick, N. Sager, 
and J.-R. Scherrer. 1991. Textinfo: A Tool for 
Automatic Determination f Patient Clinical Pro- 
files Using Text Analysis. In P. Clayton, editor, 
Proc. of SCAMC 91, pages 63 - 67. McGraw-Hill. 
New York. 
J. Bouaud, B. Sdroussi. and P. Zweigenbaum. 1996. 
An experiment towards a document centered hy- 
pertextual computerised patient record. In Proc. 
of MIE 96, pages 453 - 457, Amsterdam. IOS 
Press. 
E. Bowman. 1996. Coding and classification sys- 
tems. In M. Abdelhak, S. Grostick, M-A. Hanken, 
and E. Jacobs (eds.), editors, Health Information: 
Management of a Strategic Resource, pages 214 - 
235. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia. 
C. Chute, editor . 1997. Preprints of the IMIA 
WG6 Conference on Natural Language and Med- 
ical Concept Representation. Jacksonville. 
Commission of Professional and Hospital Activi- 
ties. 1978. The International Classification of 
Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modifications 
(1CD-9-CM}. Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
L. Dehaspe. 1993. Report on the building of the 
sc menelas lexical database. Technical Report 93- 
002, K.U. Leuven. 
J. Duisterhout. 1996. Coding and Classifications. 
In J. van Bemmel, editor, Handbook of Medical 
Informatics, pages 83 - 94. Bohn, Stafleu, Van 
Loghum, Houten/Diegem, preliminary version. 
C. Friedman and S. Johnson. 1992. Medical text 
processing: Past achievements, future directions. 
In M.J. Ball and M.F. Collen, editors, Aspects of 
the Computer-based Patient Record, pages 212 - 
228. Springer - Verlag, Berlin. 
C. Friedman and G Hripcsak. 1997. Evaluating Nat- 
ural Language Processors in the Clinical Domain. 
In (Chute, 1997), pages 41 - 52. 
R. Grishman and R. Kittredge, editors. 1986. An- 
alyzing Language in Restricted Domains: Sublan- 
guage Description and Processing. Lawrence Erl- 
baum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey. 
B. Habert, E. Naulleau, and A Nazarenko. 1996. 
Symbolic word classification for medium-size cor- 
pora. In Proc. of COLING 96, pages 490 - 495. 
Z. Harris. 1962. String Analysis of Sentence Struc- 
tures. Mouton, The Hague. 
W. Hersh. 1996. Information Retrieval, A Health 
Care Perspective. Springer Verlag, New York. 
L. Hirschman and J. Dowding. 1990. Restriction 
grammar: a logic grammar. In P. Saint-Dizier and 
S. Szpakowiez, editors, Logic and Logic Grammars 
for Language Processing, pages 141 - 167. Ellis 
Horwood. 
187 
L. Hirschman and H. Thompson. 1995. Overview 
of evaluation i  speech and natural language pro- 
cessing. In J. and Mariani, editor, State of the Art 
in Natural Language Processing, pages 475 - 518. 
L. Hirschman, R. Grishman, and N. Sager. 1975. 
Grammatically-based automatic word class forma- 
tion. Information Processing and Management, 
pages 39 - 57. 
L. Hirschman, G. Story, E. Marsh, M. Lyman, 
and N. Sager. 1981. An experiment in auto- 
mated health care evaluation from narrative medi- 
cal records. Computers and Biomedical Research, 
(14):447 - 463. 
L. Hirschman. 1986. Discovering sublanguage struc- 
tures. In (Grishman and Kittredge, 1986), pages 
211 - 234. 
G. Hripcsak, C. Friedman, P. Alderson, W. Du- 
Mouchel, S. Johnson, and P. Clayton. 1995. Un- 
locking Clinical Data from Narrative Reports: A 
Study of Natural Language Processing. Annals of 
Internal Medicine, vol. 122 (9): 681 - 688. 
C. Lovis, P.-A. Michel, R. Baud, and J.-R. Scher- 
rer. 1995. Use of a conceptual semi-automatic 
ICD-9 encoding system in an hospital environ- 
ment. In Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Proc. 
of AIME 95, pages 331 - 339. Springer-Verlag. 
M. Lyman, N. Sager, C. Friedman and E. Chi. 
1985. Computer-structured Narrative in Ambu- 
latory Care: Its Use in Longitudinal Review of 
Clinical Data. In Proc. of SCAMC 85, pages 82 - 
86. 
M. Lyman, N. Sager, L. Tick, N.T. Nhhn, Y. Su, 
F. Borst, and J.-R. Scherrer. 1991. The applica- 
tion of natural-language processing to healthcare 
quality assessment. Medical Decision Making, (11 
Suppl): $65 - $68. 
A. McCray, J.-R. Scherrer, C. Safran, and 
C. Chute (eds.). 1995. Special Issue on Concepts, 
Knowledge, and Language in Healthcare Informa- 
tion Systems. Methods of Information in Medicine 
(34) 1/2. 
N.T. Nhhn, N. Sager, M. Lyman, L. Tick, F. Borst, 
and Y. Su. 1989. A medical anguage proces- 
sor for two indo-european languages. In Proc. of 
SCAMC 89, pages 554 - 558. 
N. Oliver. 1992. A sublanguage based medical an- 
guage processing system for German. Ph.D. the- 
sis, Dept. of Computer Science. New York Univer- 
sity. 
N. Sager, C. Friedman, and M. Lyman. 1981. Natu- 
ral Language Information Processing: a computer 
grammar of English and its applications. Addison 
Wesley, Reading, Massachussets. 
N. Sager, C. Friedman, and M. Lyman. 1987. Medi- 
cal Language Processing: Computer Management 
of Narrative Data. Addison Wesley, Reading, 
Massachussets. 
N. Sager, M. Lyman, N. Nhhn, and L. Tick. 1995a. 
Medical language processing: Applications to pa- 
tient data representation a d automatic encoding. 
Methods of Information in Medicine, (34):140 -
146. 
N. Sager, N. Nhkn, M. Lyman, and L. Tick. 1996. 
Medical Language Processing with SGML display. 
In Proc. of the 1996 AMIA Annual Fall Sympo- 
sium, pages 547 - 551 . 
J.R. Scherrer, R. Cot~, and S. Mandil (eds.). 1989. 
Computerized Natural Medical Language Process- 
ing for Knowledge Representation. North Holland. 
P. Spyns and G. Adriaens. 1992. Applying and 
Improving the Restriction Grammar Approach for 
Dutch Patient Discharge Summaries. In Proe. of 
COLING 92, pages 1164 - 1168. 
P. Spyns. 1994. A robust category guesser for Dutch 
medical language. In Proc. of ANLP 94, pages 150 
- 155. ACL. 
P. Spyns. 1995. A contextual disambiguator for 
Dutch medical language. In Proc. of the BeNeLux 
Workshop on Logic Programming BENELOG 95, 
pages 20 - 24, Gent. 
P. Spyns. 19963. Medical language processing and 
reusability of resources: a case study applied to 
Dutch. In Proc. of MIE 96, pages 1147 - 1152, 
Amsterdam. IOS Press. 
P. Spyns. 1996b. Natural language processing in 
medicine: An overview. Methods of Information 
in Medicine, (35):285- 302 . 
P. Spyns. 1996c. Natural Language Processing in 
the bio-medical area: Design and Implementation 
of an Analyser for Dutch. Ph.D. thesis: Dept. of 
Computer Science, K.U. Leuven. 
F. Wingert, D. Rothwell, and R. Cbt~. 1989. Au- 
tomated indexing into SNOMED and ICD. In 
(Scherrer et al, 1989): pages 1 - 5.38. 
P. Zweigenbaum, J. Bouaud, B. Baehimont, 
J. Charlet, B. S6roussi, J.F. Boisvieux. 1997. 
From Text to Knowledge: a Unifying Document- 
Oriented View of Analyzed Medical Language. In 
(Chute. 1997). pages 21 - 30 . 
188 
~- . 7r \] m ... I' . " M 
i Rle Edit View Go Bookmarks Options Directory Window Help I ! 
t? 'tio":IIhttp:// ll e=v'=ug'a='be/'pspyns/tes'" J I ' ' |
i ......... 11 
Select a text to process: 
Le Pds.html 
PDSl.html 
PDS2.html 
PDS3.html 
PDS4.hfml 
PDSS.html 
m 
\[e p dsl,html 
\[e p ds2,h~n\] 
Select he semanl~c category: \[multiple selection is ~dlowed\] 
For afull d?scrip~on of the categories: see N. Sager, M. Lyman, N.T. Nhan, L J, 
Tick, Medical Language Processing: Applications to Patient Data 
Representation and Automatic Encoding, in Methods in Information in 
Medicine 34 (t/2): 140-157.  
Or go to the next paragraph containing a short definition of the labels (Reprinted 
from the above, me.nfionad referancal  
H-PTPALP  
I-PTPAR7 
H-PTSPEC 
H-PTVERB 
H-TXCL IN  
H-TXPROC 
H-TXSPEC 
~I-TXVAR 
H-TTCOMP 
i File Edit View Go Bookmarks Options Directory Window Help !~ 
The document: PD$6.html  was  searched using the labels: 
? H -PTPART 
? H -  TTCHIR  
? H-DIAG 
I .... 
61 UW PATIENTE WERD OP 21 i. 87 OPERAT IEF  BEHANDELD OP ONZE 
__~1 " DIENST VAN CARDIOVASCULAIRE HEELKUNDE. 
mmmmm~mmJ I 62 PREOPERATIEVE D IAGNOSE:  CORONAIRE  SCLEROSE.  
63 OPERATIEVE PROCEDURE VIJFVOUDIGE CORONAIRE  BYPASS.  
64 RECONSTRUCTIE  VAN DE L INKERARTERIA  MAMMARIA  OP DE LAD 
65 VENEUZE JUMP GRAFT VAN DE AORTA NAARDE DIAGONALIS, 
VERDER NAAR DE LAD.  
66 VENEUZE JUMP GRAFT  VAN DE AORTA NAARDE EERSTE 
C IRCUMFLEXTAK , VERDER NAARDE TWEEDE C IRCUMFLEXTAK , TOT 
DE RDP.  
67 ENKELVOUDIGE VENEUZE BYPASS VAN DE AORTA NAARDE 
AV- SULCUSTAK, 
68 DE PATIENTE WERD IN AANSLUIT ING MET DE PROCEDURE OP DE 
INTENSIEVE THERAPIE EENHEID OPGENOMEN.  
69 HIERBIJ INGESLOTEN VINDT U HET OPERATIEVERSLAG.  
back to start 
II 
il 
ii 
| ? 
189 
