Language Generation for Multimedia Healthcare Briefings 
Kath leen  R .  McKeown 
Sh imei  Pan  and James  Shaw 
Dept. of Computer  Science 
Columbia University 
New York, NY 10027, USA 
kathy, pan, shaw?cs, columbia, edu 
Abst rac t  
This paper identifies issues for language 
generation that arose in developing a
multimedia interface to healthcare data 
that includes coordinated speech, text 
and graphics. In order to produce brief 
speech for time-pressured caregivers, the 
system both combines related informa- 
tion into a single sentence and uses ab- 
breviated references in speech when an 
unambiguous textual reference is also 
used. Finally, due to the temporal nature 
of the speech, the language generation 
module needs to communicate informa- 
tion about the ordering and duration of 
references to other temporal media, such 
as graphics, in order to allow for coordi- 
nation between media. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In a hospital setting it can be difficult for care- 
givers to obtain needed information about patients 
in a timely fashion. In a Cardiac Intensive Care 
Unit (ICU), communication regarding patient sta- 
tus is critical during the hour immediately follow- 
ing a coronary arterial bypass graft (CABG). It 
is at this critical point, when care is being trans- 
ferred from the Operating Room (OR) to the ICU 
and monitoring is at a minimum, that the pa- 
tient is most vulnerable to delays in treatment. 
During this time, there are a number of care- 
givers who need information about patient status 
and plans for care, including the ICU nurses who 
must prepare for patient arrival, the cardiologist 
who is off-site during the operation, and residents 
and attendings who will aid in determining post- 
operative care. The only people who can provide 
this information are those who were present dur- 
ing surgery and they are often too busy attending 
Desmond A .  Jo rdan*  
Bar ry  A.  Al len** 
Dept. of Anesthesiology* and 
Medical Informatics Dept.** 
College of Physicians and Surgeons 
Columbia University 
New York, NY 10032 
to the patient o communicate much detail. 
To address this need, we are developing a mul- 
timedia briefing system, MAGIC (Multimedia Ab- 
stract Generation for Intensive Care), that takes 
as input online data collected uring the surgical 
operation as well as information stored in the main 
databases atColumbia Presbyterian Medical Cen- 
ter (Roderer and Clayton, 1992). MAGIC gener- 
ates a multimedia briefing that integrates speech, 
text, and animated graphics to provide an update 
on patient status (Dalal et al, 1996a). In this pa- 
per, we describe the issues that arise for language 
generation i this context: 
? Conciseness: The generation process must 
make coordinated use of speech and text to 
produce an overview that is short enough for 
time pressured caregivers to follow, but un- 
ambiguous in meaning. 
? Media specific tailoring: Generation must 
take into account that one output medium is 
speech, as opposed to the more usual writ- 
ten language, producing wording and sen- 
tence structure appropriate for spoken lan- 
guage. 
? Coordination with other media: The lan- 
guage generation process must produce 
enough information so that speech and text 
can be coordinated with the accompanying 
graphics. 
In the following sections, we first provide an 
overview of the full MAGIC architecture and then 
describe the specific language generation issues 
that we address. We close with a discussion of 
our current directions. 
2 System Overview 
MAGIC's architecture is shown in Figure 1. 
MAGIC exploits the extensive online data avail- 
277 
DatabaseMedzcal ~,~: \ [~ . . . . .  ~, ~ .... ~ ~ l ,  ;:',~::! ~:~:..::~:~*~. 
Figure 1: MAGIC system architecture. 
able through Columbia Presbyterian Medical Cen- 
ter (CPMC) as its source of content for its brief- 
ing. Operative vents during surgery are moni- 
tored through the LifeLog database system (Mod- 
ular Instruments Inc.), which polls medical de- 
vices (ventilators, pressure monitors and alike) ev- 
ery minute from the start of the case to the end 
recording information such as vital signs. In ad- 
dition, physicians (anesthesiologist and anesthe- 
sia residents) enter data throughout the course of 
the patient's urgery, including start of cardiopul- 
monary bypass and end of bypass as well as sub- 
jective clinical factors such as heart sounds and 
breath sounds that cannot be retrieved by med- 
ical devices. In addition, CPMC main databases 
provide information from the online patient record 
(e.g., medical history). 
From this large body of information, the data 
filter selects information that is relevant o the 
bypass surgery and patient care in the ICU. 
MAGIC's content planner then uses a multimedia 
plan to select and partially order information for 
the presentation, taking into account the caregiver 
the briefing is intended for (nurse or physician). 
The media allocator allocates content o media, 
and finally, the media specific generators realize 
content in their own specific media (see (Zhou and 
Feiner, 1997) for details on the graphics genera- 
tor). A media coordinator is responsible for en- 
suring that spoken output and animated graphics 
are temporally coordinated. 
Within this context, the speech generator re- 
ceives as input a partially ordered conceptual rep- 
resentation of information to be communicated? 
I m 
The generator includes a micro-planner, which is 
responsible for ordering and grouping information 
into sentences. Our approach to micro-planning 
integrates a variety of different types of operators 
for aggregation i formation within a single sen- 
tence. Aggregation using semantic operators is 
enabled through access to the underlying domain 
hierarchy, while aggregation using linguistic op- 
erators (e.g., hypotactic operators, which add in- 
formation using modifiers uch as adjectives, and 
paratactic operators which create, for example, 
conjunctions) is enabled through lookahead to the 
lexicon used during realization. 
The speech generator also includes a re- 
alization component, implemented using the 
FUF/SURGE sentence generator (Elhadad, 1992; 
Robin, 1994), which produces the actual anguage 
to be spoken as well as textual descriptions that 
are used as labels in the visual presentation? It 
performs lexical choice and syntactic realization? 
Our version of the FUF/SURGE sentence gener- 
ator produces entences annotated with prosodic 
information and pause durations. This output is 
sent to a speech synthesizer in order to produce 
final speech. (Currently, we are using AT&T Bell 
Laboratories' Text To Speech System). 
Our use of speech as an output medium pro- 
vides an eyes-free nvironment that allows care- 
givers the opportunity to turn away from the dis- 
play and continue carrying out tasks involving pa- 
tient care. Speech can also clarify graphical con- 
ventions without requiring the user to look away 
from the graphics to read an associated text. Cur- 
rently, communication between OR caregivers and 
278 
ICU caregivers is carried out orally in the ICU 
when the patient is brought in. Thus, the use 
of speech within MAGIC models current practice. 
Future planned evaluations will examine caregiver 
satisfaction with the spoken medium versus text. 
3 Issues for Language Generation 
In the early stages of system development, a pri- 
mary constraint on the language generation pro- 
cess was identified during an informal evalua- 
tion with ICU nurses and residents (Dalai et al, 
1996a). Due to time constraints in carrying out 
tasks, nurses, in particular, noted that speech 
takes time and therefore, spoken language output 
should be brief and to the point, while text, which 
is used to annotate the graphical illustration, may 
provide unambiguous references to the equipment 
and drugs being used. In the following sections, 
we show how we meet this constraint both in the 
speech content planner, which organizes the con- 
tent as sentences, and in the speech sentence gen- 
erator, which produces actual language. 
In all of the language generation components, 
the fact that spoken language is the output 
medium and not written language, influences how 
generation is carried out. We note this influence 
on the generation process throughout the section. 
An example showing the spoken output for a 
given patient and a screen shot at a single point 
in the briefing is shown in Figure 3. 
In actual output, sentences are coordinated 
with the corresponding part of the graphical illus- 
tration using highlighting and other graphical ac- 
tions. In the paper, we show the kinds of modifica- 
tions that it was necessary to make to the language 
generator in order to allow the media coordinator 
to synchronize speech with changing raphics. 
3.1 Speech  Micro-Planner 
The speech micro-planner is given as input a set 
of information that must be conveyed. In order to 
ensure that speech is brief and yet still conveys the 
necessary information, the speech micro-planner 
attempts to fit more information into individual 
sentences, thereby using fewer words. 
Out of the set of propositions given as input, 
the micro-planner selects one proposition to start 
with. It attempts to include as many other propo- 
sitions as it can as adjectives or other modifiers 
of information already included. To do this, from 
the remaining propositions, it selects a proposition 
which is related to one of the propositions already 
selected via its arguments. It then checks whether 
it can be lexicalized as a modifier by looking ahead 
~.  Jones  
MRN: 4455667 Hiztory':Ilyl~e\[tev.sk, n S~rgean: Dr,.'~mtlh 
Age: $0 D iab~ Op~r~,ti~: CABG 
Goader: F~m~a|c 
Voice: Ms. Jones is an 80 year old, hypertensive, dia- 
betic, female patient of Dr. Smith undergoing CABG. 
Presently, she is 30 minutes post-bypass and will ar- 
rive in the unit shortly. The existing infusion lines 
are two IVs, an arterial ine, and a Swan-Ganz with 
Cordis. The patient has received massive vasotonic 
therapy, massive cardiotonic therapy, and massive- 
volume blood-replacement therapy. Drips in proto- 
col concentrations are nitroglycerin, levophed, dobu- 
tamine, epinephrine, and inocor... 
Figure 2: Multimedia presentation generated by 
MAGIC 
to the lexicon used by the lexical chooser to deter- 
mine if such a choice exists. The syntactic con- 
straint is recorded in the intermediate form, but 
the lexical chooser may later decide to realize the 
proposition by any word of the same syntactic at- 
egory or transform a modifier and a noun into a 
semantic equivalent noun or noun phrase. 
The micro-planner uses information from the 
lexicon to determine how to combine the propo- 
sitions together while satisfying grammatical and 
lexical constraints. Semantic aggregation is the 
first category of operators applied to the set of re- 
lated propositions in order to produce concise ex- 
pressions, as shown in lower portion of Fig. 1. Us- 
ing ontological and lexical information, it can re- 
duce the number of propositions by replacing them 
with fewer propositions with equivalent meanings. 
While carrying out hypotactic aggregation opera- 
tors, a current central proposition is selected and 
the system searches through the un-aggregated 
propositions to find those that can be realized 
as adjectives, prepositional phrases and relative 
clauses, and merges them in. After hypotactic ag- 
gregation, the un-aggregated propositions are then 
combined using paratactic operators, such as ap- 
positions or coordinations. 
279 
X i s  a pat ient .  
X has proper ty  las t  name = Jones .  
X has proper ty  age = 80 years  o ld .  
X has proper ty  h i s to ry  = hyper tens ion  property .  
X has proper ty  h i s to ry  = d iabetes  proper ty .  
X has proper ty  gender  - female .  
X has proper ty  surgery  = CABG. 
X has proper ty  doctor  = Y. 
Y has  proper ty  las t  name = Smi th .  
Figure 3: propositions for the first sentence 
In the first sentence of the example output, the 
micro-planner has combined the 9 input proposi- 
tions shown above in Figure 3 into a single sen- 
tence: Ms Jones is an 80 year old hypertensive, 
diabetic female patient of Dr. Smith undergoing 
CABG. In this example this is possible, in part be- 
cause the patient's medical history (diabetes and 
hypertension) can be realized as adjectives. In 
another example, "Mr. Smith is a 60 year old 
male patient of Dr. Jordan undergoing CABG. 
He has a medical history of transient ischemic 
attacks, pulmonary hypertension, and peptic ul- 
cers.", the medical history can only be realized 
as noun phrases, thus requiring a second sentence 
and necessarily, more words. 
3.2 Speech  Sentence  Generator 
The speech sentence generator also contributes to 
the goal of keeping spoken output brief, but in- 
formative. In particular, through its lexical choice 
component, it selects references to medical con- 
cepts that are shorter and more colloquial than 
the text counterpart. As long as the text label 
on the screen is generated using the full, unam- 
biguous reference, speech can use an abbreviated 
expression. For example, when referring to the de- 
vices which have been implanted, speech can use 
the term "pacemaker" so long as the textual abel 
specifies it as "ventricular pacemaker". Similarly, 
MAGIC uses "balloon pump" in speech instead 
of "intra-aortic balloon pump", which is already 
shown on the screen. 
In order to do this, lexical choice in both me- 
dia must be coordinated. Lexical choice for text 
always selects the full reference, but lexical choice 
for speech must check what expression the text 
generator is using. Basically, the speech texical 
chooser must check what attributes the text gen- 
erator includes in its reference and omit those. 
Finally, we suspect hat the syntactic structure 
of sentences generated for spoken output should be 
simpler than that generated for written language. 
This hypothesis i in conflict with our criteria for 
generating as few sentences as possible, which of- 
ten results in more complex sentences. This is 
in part acceptable due to the fact that MAGIC's 
output is closer to formal speech, such as one 
might find in a radio show, as opposed to infor- 
mal conversation. It is, after all, a planned one- 
way presentation. In order to make the generated 
sentences more comprehensible, however, we have 
modified the lexical chooser and syntactic gener- 
ator to produce pauses at complex constitutions 
to increase intelligibility of the output. Currently, 
we are using a pause prediction algorithm which 
utilizes the sentence's semantic structure, syntac- 
tic structure as well as the linear phrase length 
constraint to predict the pause position and rela- 
tive strength. Our current work involves modify- 
ing the FUF/SURGE language generation package 
so that it can produce prosodic and pause infor- 
mation needed as input to a speech synthesizer, to 
produce a generic spoken language sentence gen- 
erator. 
3.3 Producing Information for Media 
Coordination 
Language generation in MAGIC is also affected 
by the fact that language is used in the context 
of other media as well. While there are specific 
modules in MAGIC whose task is concerned with 
utilizing multiple media, media coordination af- 
fects the language generation process also. In par- 
ticular, in order to produce a coordinated presen- 
tation, MAGIC must temporally coordinate spo- 
ken language with animated graphics, both tem- 
poral media. This means that spoken references 
must be coordinated with graphical references to 
the same information. Graphical references may 
include highlighting of the portion of the illustra- 
tion which refers to the same information as speech 
or appearance of new information on the screen. 
Temporal coordination i volves two problems: en- 
suring that ordering of spoken references to infor- 
mation is compatible with spatial ordering of the 
graphical actions and synchronizing the duration 
of spoken and graphical references (Dalai et al, 
1996b). 
In order to achieve this, language generation 
must provide a partial ordering of spoken refer- 
ences at a fairly early point in the generation pro- 
cess. This ordering indicates its preference for how 
spoken references are to be ordered in the output 
linear speech in accordance with both graphical 
and presentation constraints. For example, in the 
first sentence of the example shown in Figure 3, 
the speech components have a preference for med- 
ical history (i.e., "hypertensive, diabetic") to be 
280 
presented before information about he surgeon, as 
this allows for more concise output. It would be 
possible for medical history to be presented after 
all other information in the sentence by generat- 
ing a separate sentence (e.g., "She has a history 
of hypertension and diabetes.") but this is less 
preferable from the language point of view. In our 
work, we have modified the structure of the lexical 
chooser so that it can record its decisions about or- 
dering, using partial ordering for any grammatical 
variation that may happen later when the final 
syntactic structure of the sentence is generated. 
These are then sent to the media coordinator for 
negotiating with graphics an ordering that is com- 
patible to both. Details on the implementation 
of this negotiation are presented in (Dalal et al, 
1996b) and (Pan and McKeown, 1996). 
In order to synchronize duration of the spo- 
ken and graphical references, the lexical chooser 
invokes the speech synthesizer tocalculate the du- 
ration of each lexical phrase that it generates. By 
maintaining a correspondence b tween the refer- 
ential string generated and the concepts that those 
referential ctions refer to, negotiation with graph- 
ics has a common basis for communication. In 
order to provide for more flexible synchronization, 
the speech sentence generator includes facilities for 
modifying pauses if conflicts with graphics dura- 
tions arise (see (Pan and McKeown, 1996) for de- 
tails). 
4 Related Work 
There is considerable interest in producing fluent 
and concise sentences. EPICURE (Dale, 1992), 
PLANDOC(Kukich et al, 1994; Shaw, 1995), and 
systems developed by Dalianis and Hovy (Dalia- 
nis and Hovy, 1993) all use various forms of con- 
junction and ellipsis to generate more concise sen- 
tences. In (Horacek, 1992) aggregation is per- 
formed at text-structure level. In addition to con- 
joining VP and NPs, FLowDoc(Passonneau et 
al., 1996) uses ontological generalization to com- 
bine descriptions of a set of objects into a more 
general description. Based on a corpus analy- 
sis in the basketball domain, (Robin, 1994) cat- 
alogued a set of revision operators uch as adjoin 
and nominalization i his system STREAK. Un- 
like STREAK, MAGIC does not use revision to 
combine information i  a sentence. 
Generating spoken language from meanings or 
concepts (Meaning to Speech, MTS) is a new topic 
and only a few such systems were developed in 
recent years. In (Prevost, 1995) and (Steedman, 
1996), they explore a way to generate spoken lan- 
guage with accurate contrastive stress based on in- 
formation structure and carefully modeled omain 
knowledge. In (Davis and Hirschberg, 1988), spo- 
ken directions are generated with richer intonation 
features. Both of these systems took advantage of
the richer and more precise semantic information 
that is available during the process of Meaning to 
Speech production. 
5 Conclusions and Current 
Directions 
The context of multimedia briefings for access to 
healthcare data places new demands on the lan- 
guage generation process. Language generation i
MAGIC addresses its user's needs for a brief, yet 
unambiguous, briefing by coordinating spoken lan- 
guage with the accompanying textual references in
the graphical i lustration and by combining infor- 
mation into fewer sentences. It also must explicitly 
represent its decisions as it generates a sentence in
order to provide information to the media coordi- 
nator for negotiation with graphics. 
Our development of MAGIC is very much an 
ongoing research project. We are continuing to 
work on improved coordination of media, use of 
the syntactic and semantic structure of generated 
language to improve the quality of the synthesized 
speech, and analysis of a corpus of radio speech to 
identify characteristics of formal, spoken language. 
6 Acknowledgments 
MAGIC is a joint project which involves the Nat- 
ural Language Processing roup (the authors), 
the Graphics and User Interface group (Steve 
Feiner, Michelle Zhou and Tobias Hollerer), the 
Knowledge Representation group (Mukesh Dalal 
and Yong Feng) in the Department of Com- 
puter Science of Columbia University and Dr. 
Desmond Jordan and Prof. Barry Allen at the 
Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons (au- 
thors). This work is supported by DARPA Con- 
tract DAAL01-94-K-0119, the Columbia Univer- 
sity Center for Advanced Technology in High 
Performance Computing and Communications in 
Healthcare (funded by the New York State Sci- 
ence and Technology Foundation) and NSF Grants 
GER-90-2406. 
281 
References  
M. Dalai, S. Feiner, K. McKeown, D. Jordan, 
B. Allen, and Y. alSafadi. 1996a. Magic: An 
experimental system for generating multimedia 
briefings about post-bypass patient status. In 
Proceedings of American Medical Informatics 
Association 1996 Fall. 
M. Dalal, S. Feiner, K. McKeown, S. Pan, 
M. Zhou, T. Hollerer, J. Shaw, Y. Feng, and 
J. Fromer. 1996b. Negotiation for automated 
generation of temporal multimedia presenta- 
tions. In Proceedings of A CM Multimedia '96. 
R. Dale. 1992. Generating Referring Expressions: 
Constructing Descriptions in a Domain of Ob- 
jects and Processes. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA. 
H. Dalianis and E. Hovy. 1993. Aggregation in 
natural language generation. In Proceedings 
of the Fourth European Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation, pages 67-78, Pisa, Italy. 
J. Davis and J. Hirschberg. 1988. Assigning in- 
tonational features in synthesized spoken dis- 
course. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 187-193, Buffalo, New York. 
M. Elhadad. 1992. Using argumentation to con- 
trol lexical choice: A functional unification- 
based approach. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Sci- 
ence Department, Columbia University. 
H. Horacek. 1992. An integrated view of text 
planning. In Aspects of Automated Natural 
Language Generation, pages 29-44. Springer- 
Verlag. 
K. Kukich, K. McKeown, and J. Shaw. 1994. 
Practical issues in automatic documentation 
generation. In Proceedings of the 4th ACL 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro- 
cessing, pages 7-14, Stuttgart. 
S. Pan and K. McKeown. 1996. Spoken language 
generation i  a multimedia system. In Proceed- 
ings of ICSLP 96, volume 1, pages 374-377, 
Philadelphia, PA. 
R. Passonneau, K. Kukich, V. Hatzivassiloglou, 
L. Lefkowitz, and H. Jing. 1996. Gener- 
ating summaries of work flow diagrams. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Natural Language Processing and Industrial 
Applications, pages 204-210, New Brunswick, 
Canada, June. Univeristy of Moncton. 
S. Prevost. 1995. A Semantics of Contrast and In- 
formaiton Structure for Specifying Intonation 
in Spoken Language Generation. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania. 
J. Robin. 1994. Revision-Based Generation of 
Natural Language Summaries Providing His- 
torical Background. Ph.D. thesis, Computer 
Science Department, Columbia University. 
N. Roderer and P. Clayton. 1992. Iaims at 
columbia presbyterian medical center: Accom- 
plishments and challenges. In Bull. Am. Med. 
Lib. Assoc., pages 253-262. 
J. Shaw. 1995. Conciseness through aggregation 
in text generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd 
A CL (Student Session), pages 329-331. 
M. Steedman. 1996. Representing discourse in- 
formationn for spoken dialogue generation. In 
Proceedings of ISSD 96, pages 89-92, Philadel- 
phia, PA. 
M. Zhou and S. Feiner. 1997. Top-down hier- 
archical planning of coherent visual discourse. 
In Proc. IUI '97 (1997 Int. Conf. on Intelligent 
User Interfaces), Orlando, FL, January 6-9. 
282 
