Natural Language in Four Spatial Interfaces 
Kenneth Wauchope, Stephanie Everet t ,  Denn is  Perzanowsk i ,  E la ine  Marsh  
Navy Center  for Applied Research in Artificial Intell igence 
Naval Research Laboratory,  Code 5512 
4555 Overlook Avenue, S.W. 
Washington,  DC 20375-5337, USA 
\[wauchope \] severett \] dennisp I marsh\] ~aic. nrl. navy. mil 
Abst rac t  
We describe our experiences building spo- 
ken language interfaces to four demon- 
stration applications all involving 2- or 
3-D spatial displays or gestural interac- 
tions: an air combat command and control 
simulation, an immersive VR tactical sce- 
nario viewer, a map-based air strike sim- 
ulation tool with cartographic database, 
and a speech/gesture controller for mobile 
robots. 
1 Introduction 
The NAUTILUS natural language processor has 
been under development a our facility since about 
1988. During those years it has been used and 
tested in five different demonstration projects, four 
of which we describe in some detail in this report: an 
air combat command and control simulation, an im- 
mersive VR tactical scenario viewer, a map-based air 
strike simulation tool with cartographic database, 
and a speech/gesture controller for mobile robots. 
All four applications involve spatial displays or in- 
teractions, including 2D map-based graphical dis- 
plays (radar screen, geographic map), 3D perspec- 
tive scenes, and hand gesture input. 
2 NAUTILUS 
NAUTILUS is built around an early version of the 
PROTEUS chart parser from New York University's 
Courant Institute (Grishman, 1986). The three sub- 
sequent system components were developed at our 
own facility. 
2.1 PROTEUS 
PROTEUS syntactic grammars consist primarily of 
two rule types: context-free rules written in BNF no- 
tation, and restriction rules written in a high-level 
8 
algorithmic language. Each restriction rule is at- 
tached to a particular nonterminal in the right-hand 
side of one or more context-free rules. During pars- 
ing the restriction fires immediately after that non- 
terminal has been constructed, testing the subtree 
at that point for well-formedness, or attaching an 
attribute value for use later on. Nodes rejected by a 
restriction are not added to the active chart and so 
do not contribute to the remainder of the parse. 
2.2 T INSEL 
One of the attributes composed by PROTEUS dur- 
ing parsing is an operator-operand regularized form 
intended to serve as the representation to which 
semantic selection and interpretation rules can be 
applied. The TINSEL semantic interpreter (Wau- 
chope, 1990) applies case-frame rules and selection 
restrictions to the PROTEUS regularized output. 
The interpreter can either he invoked post-parse (ap- 
plied top-down to each candidate sentential regu- 
larization) or interleaved with PROTEUS, testing 
each individual clausal or noun phrase immediately 
upon construction. In interleaved mode, if a node's 
regularization does not pass the case-frame or se- 
lection criteria then the node is not added to the 
chart, which can prune the search space and reduce 
parsing time considerably. If the node does pass se- 
lection, its regularization is augmented with the rel- 
evant semantic lass and role information, becoming 
an intermediate s mantic representation suitable for 
further processing such as reference resolution and 
quantifier scoping. 
The TINSEL interpreter is primarily model- 
driven, which is to say that the case frame behavior 
of each predicate in the domain must be explicitly 
encoded in a declarative semantic representation. As 
a result we have not attempted to incorporate any 
generalized case-frame rules into the interpreter it- 
self, so TINSEL is not bound to any particular the- 
ory of thematic relations, giving the system devel- 
oper maximum flexibility in devising useful semantic 
representations. TINSEL does contain some general 
rules for handling noun phrases, however, such as 
automatically attempting to interpret certain prepo- 
sitional phrases as implicit BE-verb relative clauses 
(the hammer on the table ~ the hammer which is 
on the table), etc. 
2.3 FOCAL 
The FOCAL (FOCus ALgorithm) reference resolu- 
tion module was developed by visiting MIT grad- 
uate student Gina-Anne Levow. It resolves defi- 
nite, indefinite, and pronominal references as sub- 
sets of objects from a closed-world model developed 
for each application. Model objects have a TIN- 
SEL semantic lass attribute, permissable identify- 
ing specifiers (S.S. Loveboat, waypoint No. 2, NTDS 
icons), and a marker indicating if the object repre- 
sents a collection of unindividualized entities (map 
rings, aircraft trails). FOCAL uses semantic lass, 
number, recency, and constituent order within the 
sentence when choosing antecedents for anaphoric 
references. It assumes demonstratives (that fighter) 
to be anaphoric and attempts to resolve other def- 
inite references (the fighters) first as anaphoric and 
then as universal. Since none of our interfaces to 
date has involved declarative or hypothetical utter- 
ances, indefinite expressions (a fighter) are inter- 
preted strictly as closed-world references, i.e., one 
of the known fighters. 
2.4 FUNTRAN 
The FUNTRAN (FUNctional TRANslator) module 
takes TINSEL and FOCAL output and constructs 
a quantified logical form suitable for evaluation in 
the runtime environment to issue a command or 
query to the target application. The logical quan- 
tifiers and connectives (FORALL, EXISTS, NOT, 
AND, etc.) have generic procedural definitions as 
Lisp macros, so the system developer just needs to 
develop a so-called Translation Function (TF) for 
each of the TINSEL predicates in the domain. TFs 
are Lisp functions (defuns) of the same name as the 
predicate, taking keyword arguments corresponding 
to each of the predicate's emantic slots, and ex- 
changing appropriately coded information with the 
target application via so-called Interface Functions, 
described next. FUNTRAN also composes imple 
fragmentary English responses to database queries 
based on the results of the TF predicate valuation. 
2.5 Back End  Trans la tor  
At this point the generic NAUTILUS code ends 
and the system developer must hand-craft an 
application-specific interface layer between the 
Translation Functions and the target. The nature 
of that interface depends on whether NAUTILUS 
and the target are running in the same Lisp process 
or as separate Unix processes, possibly on different 
machines. In one of our projects (InterLACE), the 
target application is just a Lisp program running in 
the same process space as the NLP system, so the 
primitive Interface Functions (IFs) for communicat- 
ing between the two are just Lisp function calls. In 
two others (InterVR and InterROB), the target ap- 
plication runs on another Unix machine on the local 
net, so the IFs on the NAUTILUS side must encode 
and transmit message strings over an IPC socket to 
a corresponding decoder layer linked into the appli- 
cation. In the fourth project (Eucalyptus) we de- 
veloped versions for both approaches, one where the 
application object code (compiled from C) is loaded 
into Lisp and the IFs are foreign function calls, and 
the other doing IPC message passing. 
2.6 Speech I /O  
For speech input we use the Phonetic Engine 
(PE200) from Speech Systems Inc. with the speech 
recognition software running on a Sun workstation 
to which the PE200 hardware is connected by a serial 
line. Under various circumstances we have linked the 
software in with either NAUTILUS or the applica- 
tion, or have run it as a separate process commu- 
nicating with NAUTILUS via an IPC socket. For 
speech output, a DECtalk speech synthesizer is con- 
nected to the other Sun serial port and can be sent 
output from NAUTILUS either by Unix system calls 
or by writing data directly to the port. 
3 App l i ca t ion  Pro jec ts  
3.1 Euca lyptus  
NAUTILUS was first used in the Eucalyptus (Wau- 
chope, 1994) spoken language interface to the 
KOALAS Airborne Early Warning C2 simulation 
(Barrett and Aldrich, 1990). The original KOALAS 
interface consisisted of a mouse-sensitive simulated 
radar screen with a conventional graphical user in- 
terface composed of command pushbuttons, dialog 
boxes and scrolling display windows. Our objec- 
tive in Eucalyptus was to make the same command 
and data access functionality available via natural 
language, integrated as much as possible with the 
graphical interface to allow multimodal interactions. 
For example, a NL command to the system might re- 
sult in the display of the same dialog box used in the 
corresponding GUI command, but with the dialog's 
data fields fully or partially filled from the NL input; 
9 
the user can then fill in any remaining empty fields 
and issue final acceptance either graphically or ver- 
bally. To that end, the command-oriented Interface 
Functions in Eucalyptus consist largely of calls to 
the base functions underlying the KOALAS GUI. 
Eucalyptus also includes deictic reference, allow- 
ing the user to click on one or more radar blips or 
screen locations while speaking verbal references like 
this fighter or these CAP stations. When a mouse 
click occurs, NAUTILUS asks the application for the 
identities of all the objects located at or near the 
mouse vent, and then takes the subset of those ob- 
jects that match the semantics of the verbal phrase 
(which can be determined from predicate context as 
well: for example the word here in Have fighter I re- 
fuel here necessarily refers to a tanker aircraft). To 
avoid the problems of time-correlating speech with 
graphical input and distinguishing anaphora from 
deixis, we reserve the words this, these and here 
for deictic reference and that, those and there for 
anaphoric reference, and allow no more than one 
plural deictic reference per utterance. 
Database query is used both in answering explicit 
interrogatives (Which fighters aren't holding CAP 
station?) as well as dereferencing qualified NPs 
(moving aircraft). The system can also interpret NP 
sentence fragments as followup commands or queries 
by substituting the NP into the semantically rele- 
vant slot of the prior utterance's logical form. 
As originally designed, FOCAL expected a closed- 
world model of all domain objects to be available at 
startup time. This had to be modified somewhat in 
Eucalyptus ince the KOALAS world includes hy- 
pothetical objects (suspected threat aircraft) which 
the user and system can create and destroy at will. 
References to hypothetical entities are resolved by 
having FOCAL dynamically consult he application 
database for the current object population at the 
time the phrase was uttered. 
The core syntactic grammar of about 150 context- 
free rules and 50 restriction rules developed for Eu- 
calyptus has been re-used in all the other NAU- 
TILUS projects. Each one has augmented it with a 
few dozen additional rules for handling application- 
specific constructs like station two sector one (Euca- 
lyptus), latitude forty degrees north longitude ninety 
five degrees west (InterVR), the town of Leipzig (In- 
terLACE), and thirty degrees left (InterROB). 
The Eucalyptus lexicon totals about 425 words, 
many of them unused morphological variants gen- 
erated automatically by the PROTEUS lexical 
macros; by comparison, the vocabulary for the 
speech recognition front end is only 260 words. To- 
tal input coverage is on the order of 100 million ut- 
terances, deliberately high to test the speech sys- 
tem's ability to detect a wide variety of noun phrase 
determiners. Unlike the NAUTILUS grammar, the 
speech grammar excludes iteration and recursion 
(such as compounding) to maintain a reasonable 
level of recognition accuracy. An experimental d- 
dition of relative clauses to the speech grammar 
was "productive" only in the linguistic sense, since 
the resulting exponential increase in grammar size 
caused recognition rates to drop to unacceptable lev- 
els. 
3.2 I n te rVR 
We next used NAUTILUS in InterVR (Everett et al, 
1994), a spoken language controller for an immer- 
sive 3D or "Virtual Reality" tactical combat simula- 
tion viewer. Here the emphasis was on the utility of 
speech I/O in an eyes- and hands-busy virtual envi- 
ronment. Like Eucalyptus, InterVR supports com- 
mands, queries, complex reference and anaphora, 
and NP followups. A non-immersive d sktop version 
of the viewer allowed mouse selection of a platform 
and thus singular deictic reference (this helicopter), 
but the immersive display version did not include a 
dataglove or other pointing device. We did not have 
time or resources to tackle the problem of resolving 
referents based on visual context (for example hav- 
ing that helicopter refer to the one nearest the center 
of the user's field of view), but we are currently in- 
vestigating the interaction of vision and language in 
the InterROB project, to be discussed shortly. 
The InterVR speech component has a vocabu- 
lary comparable in size to that of Eucalyptus but 
a more constrained input range (about 1 million ut- 
terances) mainly due to a less liberal variety of NP 
determiners. The IPC code developed for Eucalyp- 
tus ported immediately to the new application, and 
NAUTILUS's modular architecture allowed speech 
modeling, NLP knowledge base development and 
IF coding to be pursued independently b different 
team members with a minimum of coordination. 
3.3  In terLACE 
InterLACE (Wauchope, 1996) is an integrated nat- 
ural language interface and graphical map display 
for the Air Force's LACE land/air combat simu- 
lation system (Anken, 1989). LACE includes a 
large object-oriented cartographic database of most 
of central Germany, containing a total of over 12,000 
objects such as towns, lakes, rivers, and railroads. 
Since the application is written in Common LISP 
and so can run in the same process environment as 
NAUTILUS, we dispensed with independently mod- 
eling FOCAL entities for the domain and just let the 
10 
LACE database objects serve as the extensions of 
referring expressions. To avoid having to enter hun- 
dreds of foreign proper names into the PROTEUS 
lexicon, we modified the PROTEUS lexical tagger 
to assume that any input word might be a proper 
name (applying that assumption only to non-English 
words failed the first time we encountered the river 
Main and the Czech towns of Most and As). Deictic 
reference operates imilarly to Eucalyptus: a mouse 
click can select a number of overlapping map objects 
at once, to be resolved by an accompanying verbal 
reference; for example What's the population here? 
would resolve to a town object whereas Does this 
cross the Elbe ? might resolve to a road. 
The InterLACE domain necessitated extending 
FUNTRAN to generate proper logical forms for spa- 
tial comparatives and superlatives (Is Wurzen closer 
than Grimma?, the closest lake to Eilenburg) and 
implicit and explicit reflexives (Do these roads cross 
\[each other\]?), and also introduced irect address 
(Tank 1, head north) and iterative arguments to nav- 
igation commands (Head north on road E2 for 2 km 
to Wurzen). An experimental study of NL inputs 
from novice InterLACE users showed that of 822 in- 
puts, 14 contained typos or misspellings and 30 con- 
tained ungrammaticalities, for an illformedness rate 
of 5%. Of the remaining 778 utterances NAUTILUS 
failed to understand 23 (3%) due to incomplete cov- 
erage. 
Since the PE200's phonetic rules are for American 
English and (unlike PROTEUS) the module cannot 
be tricked into recognizing unknown inputs as pos- 
sible proper names, a complete speech input com- 
ponent for InterLACE was impractical. For demo 
purposes we opted to implement a 160-word speech 
interface containing just fifty German proper names, 
few enough that the recognizer doesn't have too 
much trouble distinguishing them, for an input cov- 
erage of about 10 million utterances. Similarly for 
speech output we provided the same vocabulary to 
DECtalk along with phonetic transcriptions to pro- 
duce acceptable German pronunciations. 
3.4 In terROB 
InterROB is a new project exploring the integra- 
tion of spoken and gestural inputs to a pair of mo- 
bile robots with rangefinder vision capability. To 
date the system accepts commands only, using a 
66-word speech vocabulary with an input range of 
about 11,000 utterances. The robots currently rec- 
ognize two types of gesture: distance (hands held 
apart) and direction (wave left/right). Since the sys- 
tem does not yet query information from the robots, 
deictic reference must currently be resolved on the 
robot side rather than (as in the systems described 
earlier) by having NAUTILUS choose from a set of 
candidates provided by the application. This means 
that phrases like that waypoint or the waypoint over 
there must be assigned a special FOCAL extension 
(a pseudo-object alled a gesture-waypoint) which is 
not one of the four actual waypoint objects in the 
closed world, whereas with query capability NAU- 
TILUS might be able to obtain enough information 
from the robot to determine which of the four actual 
waypoints is being gestured toward. 
Another goal in InterROB is to go beyond the 
usual restriction of deictic reference to demonstra- 
tive or indexical references (that, here, there) and 
allow gestures to accompany any sort of definite or 
indefinite NP. This could then be extended to in- 
clude extralinguistic context in general, such as in- 
terpreting the waypoint to mean the one the robot is 
currently facing, or my right to mean 90 degrees per- 
pendicular to the way the robot perceives the opera- 
tor to be facing. We also plan to extend the robotic 
vision capabilities with additional hard/software to 
allow visual object recognition for lexical acquisition. 
References 
Ralph Grishman. 1986. PROTEUS parser reference 
manual. PROTEUS Project Memorandum #4, 
Department of Computer Science, Courant Insti- 
tute of Mathematical Sciences, New York Univer- 
sity, July. 
Kenneth Wauchope. 1994. Eucalyptus: integrat- 
ing natural language input with a graphical user 
interface. NRL technical report NRL/FR/5510- 
94-9711, February. 
Chris Barrett and Charles P~ldrich. 1990. Final re- 
port: KOALAS test planning tool concept demon- 
stration: users manual. Los Alamos National Lab- 
oratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico. 
Craig S. Anken. 1989. LACE: land air combat in 
ERIC. Rome Air Development Center RADC- 
TR-89-219, October. 
Kenneth Wauchope. 1990. A tandem semantic in- 
terpreter for incremental parse selection. NRL 
technical report 9288, September. 
Stephanie S. Everett, Kenneth Wauchope, and 
Manuel A. P~rez. 1994. A natural anguage inter- 
face for virtual reality systems. NCARAI techni- 
cal report AIC-94-046. 
Kenneth Wauchope. 1996. Multimodal interaction 
with a map-based simulation system. NCARAI 
technical report AIC-96-019. 
11 
