Building Effective Queries In Natural Language Information 
Retrieval 
Tomek Strzalkowski 1, Fang Lin 1, Jose Perez-Carballo 2 and Jin Wang 1 
1GE Corporate  Research  & Deve lopment  
1 Research  Circle,  N iskayuna,  NY  12309 
2School  o f  Communicat ion ,  In fo rmat ion  and L ibrary  Studies,  Rutgers  Un ivers i ty  
4 Hunt ington  Street, New Brunswick ,  N J  08903 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we report on our natural language informa- 
tion retrieval (NLIR) project as related to the recently 
concluded 5th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-5). 
The main thrust of this project is to use natural language 
processing techniques to enhance the effectiveness of 
full-text document retrieval. One of our goals was to 
demonstrate hat robust if relatively shallow NLP can 
help to derive a better epresentation f text documents 
for statistical search. Recently, we have turned our 
attention away from text representation issues and more 
towards query development problems. While our NLIR 
system still performs extensive natural language pro- 
cessing in order to extract phrasal and other indexing 
terms, our focus has shifted to the problems of building 
effective search queries. Specifically, we are interested 
in query construction that uses words, sentences, and 
entire passages to expand initial topic specifications in
an attempt o cover their various angles, aspects and 
contexts. Based on our earlier results indicating that 
NLP is more effective with long, descriptive queries, we 
allowed for long passages from related ocuments to be 
liberally imported into the queries. This method appears 
to have produced adramatic improvement in the perfor- 
mance of two different statistical search engines that we 
tested (Cornell's SMART and NIST's Prise) boosting 
the average precision by at least 40%. In this paper we 
discuss both manual and automatic procedures for query 
expansion within a new stream-based information 
retrieval model. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A typical (full-text) information retrieval (IR) task is to 
select documents from a database in response to a user's 
query, and rank these documents according to relevance. 
This has been usually accomplished using statistical 
methods (often coupled with manual encoding) that (a) 
select erms (words, phrases, and other units) from doc- 
uments that are deemed to best represent their content, 
and (b) create an inverted index file (or files) that pro- 
vide an easy access to documents containing these 
terms. A subsequent search process will attempt o 
match preprocessed user queries against term-based rep- 
resentations of documents in each case determining a
degree of relevance between the two which depends 
upon the number and types of matching terms. Although 
many sophisticated search and matching methods are 
available, the crucial problem remains to be that of an 
adequate representation of content for both the docu- 
ments and the queries. 
In term-based representation, a document (as well as a 
query) is transformed into a collection of weighted 
terms, derived directly from the document text or indi- 
rectly through thesauri or domain maps. The representa- 
tion is anchored on these terms, and thus their careful 
selection is critical. Since each unique term can be 
thought o add a new dimensionality to the representa- 
tion, it is equally critical to weigh them properly against 
one another so that the document is placed at the correct 
position in the N-dimensional term space. Our goal here 
is to have the documents on the same topic placed close 
together, while those on different topics placed suffi- 
ciently apart. Unfortunately, we often do not know how 
to compute terms weights. The statistical weighting for- 
mulas, based on terms distribution within the database, 
such as tf*idf, are far from optimal, and the assumptions 
of term independence which are routinely made are 
false in most cases. This situation is even worse when 
single-word terms are intermixed with phrasal terms and 
the term independence b comes harder to justify. 
The simplest word-based representations of content, 
while relatively better understood, are usually inade- 
quate since single words are rarely specific enough for 
accurate discrimination, and their grouping is often acci- 
dental. A better method is to identify groups of words 
299 
that create meaningful phrases, especially if these 
phrases denote important concepts in the database 
domain. For example, "joint venture" is an important 
term in the Wall Street Journal (WSJ henceforth) data- 
base, while neither "joint" nor "venture" are important 
by themselves. 
There are a number of ways to obtain "phrases" from 
text. These include generating simple collocations, ta- 
tistically validated N-grams, part-of-speech tagged 
sequences, yntactic structures, and even semantic on- 
cepts. Some of these techniques are aimed primarily at 
identifying multi-word terms that have come to function 
like ordinary words, for example "white collar" or 
"electric car", and capturing other co-occurrence idio- 
syncrasies associated with certain types of texts. This 
simple approach as proven quite effective for some 
systems, for example the Cornell group reported (Buck- 
ley et al, 1995) that adding simple bigram collocations 
to the list of available terms can increase retrieval preci- 
sion by as much as 10%. 
Other more advanced techniques of phrase extraction, 
including extended N-grams and syntactic parsing, 
attempt o uncover "concepts", which would capture 
underlying semantic uniformity across various surface 
forms of expression. Syntactic phrases, for example, 
appear easonable indicators of content, arguably better 
than proximity-based phrases, since they can adequately 
deal with word order changes and other structural varia- 
tions (e.g., "college junior" vs. "junior in college" vs. 
"junior college"). A subsequent regularization process, 
where alternative structures are reduced to a "normal 
form", helps to achieve a desired uniformity, for exam- 
ple, "college+junior" will represent a college for jun- 
iors, while "junior+college" will represent a junior in a 
college. A more radical normalization would have also 
"verb object", "noun rel-clause", etc. convened into col- 
lections of such ordered pairs. This head+modifier nor- 
malization has been used in our system, and is further 
described in this paper. It has to be noted, however, that 
the use of full-scale syntactic analysis is severely push- 
ing the limits of practicality of an information retrieval 
system because of the increased emand for computing 
power and storage. At the same time, while the gain in 
recall and precision has not been negligible (we 
recorded 10-20% increases in precision), no dramatic 
breakthrough has occurred either.l 
Currently, the state-of-the artstatistical nd probabilistic IR sys- 
tem perform at about 20-40% precision range for arbitrary ad-hoc 
retrieval tasks. 
This state of affairs has prompted us take a closer look 
at the term selection and representation process. Our 
earlier experiments demonstrated that an improved 
weighting scheme for compound terms, including 
phrases and proper names, leads to an overall gain in 
retrieval accuracy. The fundamental problem, however, 
remained to be the system's inability to recognize, in the 
documents searched, the presence or absence of the con- 
cepts or topics that the query is asking for. The main rea- 
son for this was, we noted, the limited amount of 
information that the queries could convey on various 
aspects of topics they represent. Therefore, we started 
experimenting with manual and automatic query build- 
ing techniques. The purpose was to devise a method for 
full-text query expansion that would allow for creating 
exhaustive search queries uch that: (1) the performance 
of any system using these queries would be significantly 
better than when the system is run using the original 
topics, and (2) the method could be eventually auto- 
mated or semi-automated so as to be useful to a non- 
expert user. Our preliminary results from TREC-5 eval- 
uations how that this approach is indeed very effective. 
In the rest of this paper we describe the overall organi- 
zation of our TREC-5 system, and then discuss some 
experiments hat we performed and their results, as well 
as our future research plans. 
2. STREAM-BASED INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL MODEL 
Our NLIR system encompasses several statistical and 
natural language processing (NLP) techniques for 
robust ext analysis. These has been organized together 
into a "stream model" in which alternative methods of 
document indexing are strung together to perform in 
parallel. Stream indexes are built using a mixture of dif- 
ferent indexing approaches, term extracting and weight- 
ing strategies, even different search engines. The final 
results are produced by merging ranked lists of docu- 
ments obtained from searching all stream indexes with 
appropriately preprocessed queries, i.e., phrases for 
phrase stream, names for names tream, etc. The merg- 
ing process weights contributions from each stream 
using a combination that was found the most effective in 
training runs. This allows for an easy combination of 
alternative retrieval and routing methods, creating a 
meta-search strategy which maximizes the contribution 
of each stream. Both Cornell's SMART version 11, and 
NIST's Prise search engines were used as basic 
engines .2 
Our NLIR system employs a suite of advanced natural 
language processing techniques in order to assist he sta- 
3O0 
tistical retrieval engine in selecting appropriate indexing 
terms for documents in the database, and to assign them 
semantically validated weights. The following term 
extraction methods have been used; they correspond to 
the indexing streams in our system. 
1. Eliminate stopwords: original text words minus cer- 
tain no-content words are used to index documents. 
2. Morphological stemming: we normalize across mor- 
phological word variants (e.g., "proliferation", pro- 
liferate", "proliferating") using a lexicon-based 
stemmer. 
3. Phrase extraction: we use various shallow text pro- 
cessing techniques, such as part-of-speech tagging, 
phrase boundary detection, and word co-occurrence 
metrics to identify stable strings of words, such as 
"joint venture". 
4. Phrase normalization: we identify "head+modifier" 
pairs in order to normalize across syntactic variants 
such as "weapon proliferation", "proliferation of 
weapons", "proliferate weapons", etc. into 
"weapon+proliferate". 
5. Proper names: we identify proper names for index- 
ing, including people names and titles, location 
names, organization ames, etc. 
Among the advantages of the stream architecture we 
may include the following: 
? stream organization makes it easier to compare the 
contributions of different indexing features or repre- 
sentations. For example, it is easier to design exper- 
iments which allow us to decide if a certain 
representation adds information which is not contrib- 
uted by other streams. 
? it provides a convenient testbed to experiment with 
algorithms designed to merge the results obtained 
using different IR engines and/or techniques. 
? it becomes easier to fine-tune the system in order to 
obtain optimum performance 
? it allows us to use any combination of IR engines 
without having to modify their code at all. 
While our stream architecture may be unique among IR 
systems, the idea of combining evidence from multiple 
sources has been around for some time. Several 
researchers have noticed in the past that different sys- 
tems may have similar performance but retrieve differ- 
ent documents, thus suggesting that they may 
2. SMART version 11 is freely available, unlike the more advanced 
version 12. 
complement one another. It has been reported that the 
use of different sources of evidence increases the perfor- 
mance of a system (see for example, Callan et al, 1995; 
Fox et a1.,1993; Saracevic & Kantor, 1988). 
3. STREAMS USED IN  NL IR  SYSTEM 
3.1 Head-Mod i f ie r  Pa i rs  S t ream 
Our most linguistically advanced stream is the 
head+modifier pairs stream. In this stream, documents 
are reduced to collections of word pairs derived via syn- 
tactic analysis of text followed by a normalization pro- 
cess intended to capture semantic uniformity across a 
variety of surface forms, e.g., "information retrieval", 
"retrieval of information", retrieve more information", 
"information that is retrieved", etc. are all reduced to 
"retrieve+information" pair, where "retrieve" is a head 
or operator, and "information" is a modifier or argu- 
ment. 
The pairs stream is derived through a sequence of pro- 
cessing steps that include: 
? Part-of-speech tagging 
? Lexicon-based word normalization (extended "stem- 
ming") 
? Syntactic analysis with the qq'P parser (cf. Strza- 
lkowski & Scheyen, 1996) 
? Extraction of head+modifier pairs 
? Corpus-based decomposition/disambiguation of l g 
noun phrases. 
Syntactic phrases extracted from T IP  parse trees are 
head-modifier pairs. The head in such a pair is a central 
element of a phrase (main verb, main noun, etc.), while 
the modifier is one of the adjunct arguments of the head. 
It should be noted that the parser's output is a predicate- 
argument structure centered around main elements of 
various phrases. The following types of pairs are consid- 
ered: (1) a head noun and its left adjective or noun 
adjunct, (2) a head noun and the head of its fight 
adjunct, (3) the main verb of a clause and the head of its 
object phrase, and (4) the head of the subject phrase and 
the main verb. These types of pairs account for most of 
the syntactic variants for relating two words (or simple 
phrases) into pairs carrying compatible semantic on- 
tent. This also gives the pair-based representation suffi- 
cient flexibility to effectively capture content elements 
even in complex expressions. Long, complex phrases 
are similarly decomposed into collections of pairs, using 
corpus statistics to resolve structural ambiguities. 
301 
3.2 Linguistic Phrase Stream 
We used a regular expression pattern matcher on the 
part-of-speech tagged text to extract noun groups and 
proper noun sequences. The major rules we used are: 
1. a sequence of modifiers (vbnlvbgljj) followed by at 
least one noun, such as: "cryonic suspend", air traf- 
fic control system"; 
2. proper noun(s) modifying anoun, such as: "u.s. citi- 
zen", "china trade"; 
3. proper noun(s) (might contain '&'), such as: "warren 
commission", national air traffic controller". 
In these experiments, the length of phrases was limited 
to maximum 7 words. 
sion, whereas lnc.ntc slightly sacrifices the average pre- 
cision, but gives better ecall (see Buckley, 1993). 
We used also a plain text stream. This stream was 
obtained by indexing the text of the documents "as is" 
without stemming or any other processing and running 
the unprocessed text of the queries against hat index. 
Finally, some experiments involved the fragments 
stream. This was the result of spliting the documents of 
the STEM stream into fragments of constant length 
(1024 characters) and indexing each fragment as if it 
were a different document. The queries used with this 
stream were the usual stem queries. For each query, the 
resulting ranking was filtered to keep, for each docu- 
ment, the highest score obtained by the fragments of 
that document. 
3.3 Name Stream 
Proper names, of people, places, events, organizations, 
etc., are often critical in deciding relevance of a docu- 
ment. Since names are traditionally capitalized in 
English text, spotting them is relatively easy, most of the 
time. Many names are composed of more than a single 
word, in which case all words that make up the name are 
capitalized, except for prepositions and such, e.g., The 
United States of America. It is important that all names 
recognized in text, including those made up of multiple 
words, e.g., South Africa or Social Security, are repre- 
sented as tokens, and not broken into single words, e.g., 
South and Africa, which may turn out to be different 
names altogether by themselves. On the other hand, we 
need to make sure that variants of the same name are 
indeed recognized as such, e.g., U.S. President Bill 
Clinton and President Clinton, with a degree of confi- 
dence. One simple method, which we use in our system, 
is to represent a compound name dually, as a compound 
token and as a set of single-word terms. This way, if a 
corresponding full name variant cannot be found in a 
document, its component words matches can still add to 
the document score. A more accurate, but arguably more 
expensive method would be to use a substring compari- 
son procedure to recognize variants before matching. 
3.4 Other  Streams used 
The stems stream is the simplest, yet, it turns out, the 
most effective of all streams, a backbone in our multi- 
stream model. It consists of stemmed non-stop single- 
word tokens (plus hyphenated phrases). Our early 
experiments with multi-stream indexing using SMART 
suggested that the most effective weighting of this 
stream is lnc.ltc, which yields the best average preci- 
Table 1 shows relative performance of each stream 
tested for this evaluation. Note that the standard 
stemmed-word epresentation (stems stream) is still the 
most efficient one, but linguistic processing becomes 
more important in longer queries. In this evaluation, the 
short queries are one-sentence s arch directives uch as 
the following: 
What steps are being taken by governmental or even pri- 
vate entities world-wide to stop the smuggling of aliens. 
The long queries, on the other hand, contain substan- 
tially more text as the result of full-text expansion 
described in section 5 below. 
TABLE 1. How different streams perform 
relative to one another (ll-pt avg. Prec) 
short long 
STREAM queries queries 
Stems 0.1682 0.2626 
Phrases 0.1233 0.2365 
H+M Pairs 0.0755 0.2040 
Names 0.0844 0.0608 
4. STREAM MERGING STRATEGY 
The results obtained from different streams are list of 
documents ranked in order of relevance: the higher the 
rank of a retrieved ocument, he more relevant it is pre- 
sumed to be. In order to obtain the final retrieval result, 
ranking lists obtained from each stream have to be com- 
bined together by a process known as merging or fusion. 
The final ranking is derived by calculating the com- 
bined relevance scores for all retrieved ocuments. The 
following are the primary factors affecting this process: 
302 
1. document relevancy scores from each stream 
2. retrieval precision distribution estimates within 
ranks from various streams, e.g., projected precision 
between ranks 10 and 20, etc.; 
3. the overall effectiveness of each stream (e.g. mea- 
sured as average precision on training data) 
4. the number of streams that retrieve aparticular docu- 
ment, and 
5. the ranks of this document within each stream. 
Generally, a more effective stream will more effect on 
shaping the final ranking. A document which is 
retrieved at a high rank from such a stream is more 
likely to end up ranked high in the final result. In addi- 
tion, the performance of each stream within a specific 
range of ranks is taken into account. For example, if 
phrases stream tends to pack relevant documents into 
top 10-20 retrieved ocuments (but not so much into 1- 
10) we would give premium weights to the documents 
found in this region of phrase-based ranking, etc. Table 
2 gives some additional data on the effectiveness of 
stream merging. Further details are available in a TREC 
conference article. 
TABLE 2. Precision improvements over stems- 
only retrieval 
short long 
queries queries 
Streams merged % change %change 
All streams +5.4 +20.94 
Stems+Phrases+Pairs +6.6 +22.85 
Stems+Phrases +7.0 +24.94 
Stems+Pairs +2.2 + 15.27 
Stems+Names +0.6 +2.59 
relationships, etc. Unfortunately, an average search 
query does not look anything like this, most of the time. 
It is more likely to be a statement specifying the seman- 
tic criteria of relevance. This means that except for the 
semantic or conceptual resemblance (which we cannot 
model very well as yet) much of the appearance of the 
query (which we can model reasonably well) may be, 
and often is, quite misleading for search purposes. 
Where can we get the right queries? 
In today's information retrieval systems, query expan- 
sion usually pertains content and typically is limited to 
adding, deleting or re-weighting of terms. For example, 
content terms from documents judged relevant are 
added to the query while weights of all terms are 
adjusted in order to reflect the relevance information. 
Thus, terms occurring predominantly in relevant docu- 
ments will have their weights increased, while those 
occurring mostly in non-relevant documents will have 
their weights decreased. This process can be performed 
automatically using a relevance feedback method, e.g., 
Roccio's (1971), with the relevance information either 
supplied manually by the user (Harman, 1988), or other- 
wise guessed, e.g. by assuming top 10 documents rele- 
vant, etc. (Buckley, et al, 1995). A serious problem with 
this content-term expansion is its limited ability to cap- 
ture and represent many important aspects of what 
makes some documents relevant to the query, including 
particular term co-occurrence patterns, and other hard- 
to-measure t xt features, such as discourse structure or 
stylistics. Additionally, relevance-feedback expansion 
depends on the inherently partial relevance information, 
which is normally unavailable, or unreliable. 
Other types of query expansions, including general pur- 
pose thesauri or lexical databases (e.g., Wordnet) have 
been found generally unsuccessful in information 
retrieval (cf. Voorhees & Hou, 1993; Voorhees, 1994) 
Note that again, long text queries benefit more from lin- 
guistic processing. 
5. QUERY EXPANSION EXPERIMENTS 
5.1 Why query expansion? 
The purpose of query expansion in information retrieval 
is to make the user query resemble more closely the 
documents it is expected to retrieve. This includes both 
content, as well as some other aspects uch as composi- 
tion, style, language type, etc. If the query is indeed 
made to resemble a "typical" relevant document, then 
suddenly everything about this query becomes a valid 
search criterion: words, collocations, phrases, various 
An alternative to term-only expansion is a full-text 
expansion which we tried for the first time in TREC-5. 
In our approach, queries are expanded by pasting in 
entire sentences, paragraphs, and other sequences 
directly from any text document. To make this process 
efficient, we first perform a search with the original, un- 
expanded queries (short queries), and then use top N 
(I 0, 20) returned ocuments for query expansion. These 
documents are not judged for relevancy, nor assumed 
relevant; instead, they are scanned for passages that con- 
tain concepts referred to in the query. Expansion mate- 
rial can be found in both relevant and non-relevant 
documents, benefitting the final query all the same. In 
fact, the presence of such text in otherwise non-relevant 
documents underscores the inherent limitations of distri- 
bution-based term reweighting used in relevance feed- 
303 
back. Subject o some further "fitness criteria", these 
expansion passages are then imported verbatim into the 
query. The resulting expanded queries undergo the usual 
text processing steps, before the search is run again. 
Full-text expansion can be accomplished manually, as 
we did initially to test feasibility of this approach, or 
automatically, as we tried in later with promising 
results. We first describe the manual process focussing 
on guidelines et forth in such a way as to minimize and 
streamline human effort, and lay the ground for eventual 
automation. We then describe our first attempt at auto- 
mated expansion, and discuss the results from both. 
The initial evaluations indicate that queries expanded 
manually following the prescribed guidelines are 
improving the system's performance (precision and 
recall) by as much as 40%. This appear to be true not 
only for our own system, but also for other systems: we 
asked other groups participating in TREC-5 to run 
search using our expanded queries, and they reported 
nearly identical improvements. At this time, automatic 
text expansion produces less effective queries than 
manual expansion, primarily due to a relatively unso- 
phisticated mechanism used to identify and match con- 
cepts in the queries. 
5.2 Guidelines for manual query expansion 
We have adopted the following guidelines for query 
expansion. They were constructed to observe realistic 
limits of the manual process, and to prepare ground for 
eventual automation. 
1. NLIR retrieval is run using the 50 original "short" 
queries. 
2. Top 10 documentss retrieved by each query are 
retained for expansion. We obtain 50 expansion 
sub-collections, one per query. 
3. Each query is manually expanded using phrases, 
sentences, and entire passages found in any of the 
documents from this query's expansion subcollec- 
tion. Text can both added and deleted, but care is 
taken to assure that the final query has the same for- 
mat as the original, and that all expressions added 
are well-formed English strings, though not neces- 
sarily well-formed sentences. A limit of 30 minutes 
per query in a single block of time is observed. 
4. Expanded queries are sent through all text process- 
ing steps necessary to run the queries against multi- 
ple stream indexes. 
5. Rankings from all streams are merged into the final 
result. 
There are two central decision making points that affect 
the outcome of the query expansion process following 
the above guidelines. The first point is how to locate text 
passages that are worth looking at -- it is impractical, if
not downright impossible to read all 10 documents, 
some quite long, in under 30 minutes. The second point 
is to actually decide whether to include a given passage, 
or a portion thereof, in the query. To facilitate passage 
spotting, we used simple word search, using key con- 
cepts from the query to scan down document text. Each 
time a match was found, the text around (usually the 
paragraph containing it) was read, and if found "fit", 
imported into the query. We experimented also with var- 
ious "pruning" criteria: passages could be either 
imported verbatim into the query, or they could be 
"pruned" of "obviously" undesirable noise terms. In 
evaluating the expansion effects on query-by-query 
basis we have later found that the most liberal expan- 
sion mode with no pruning was in fact the most effec- 
tive. This would suggest hat relatively self-contained 
text passages, such as paragraphs, provide a balanced 
representation f content, that cannot be easily approxi- 
mated by selecting only some words. 
5.3 Automat ic  Query Expans ion  
Queries obtained through the full-text manual expansion 
proved to be overwhelmingly better than the original 
search queries, providing as much as 40% precision 
gain. These results were sufficiently encouraging to 
motivate us to investigate ways of performing such 
expansions automatically. 
One way to approximate he manual text selection pro- 
cess, we reasoned, was to focus on those text passages 
that refer to some key concepts identified in the query, 
for example, "alien smuggling" for query 252 below. 
The key concepts (for now limited to simple noun 
groups) were identified by either their pivotal ocation 
within the query (in the Title field), or by their repeated 
occurrences within the query Description and Narrative 
fields. As in the manual process, we run a "short" query 
retrieval, this time retaining 100 top documents 
retrieved by each query. An automated process then 
scans these 100 documents for all paragraphs which 
contain occurrences, including some variants, of any of 
the key concepts identified in the original query. The 
paragraphs are subsequently pasted verbatim into the 
query. The original portion of the query may be saved in 
a special field to allow differential weighting. Finally, 
the expanded queries were run to produce the final 
result. 
304 
The above, clearly simplistic technique has produced 
some interesting results. Out of the fifty queries we 
tested, 34 has undergone the expansion. Among these 
34 queries, we noted precision gains in 13, precision 
loss in 18 queries, with 3 more basically unchanged. 
However, for these queries where the improvement did 
occur it was very substantial indeed: the average gain 
was 754% in 11-pt precision, while the average loss (for 
the queries that lost precision) was only 140%. Overall, 
we still can see a 7% improvement on all 50 queries (vs. 
40%+ when manual expansion is used). 
Our experiments how that selecting the right para- 
graphs from documents to expand the queries can dra- 
matically improve the performance of a text retrieval 
system. This process can be automated, however, the 
challenge is to devise more precise automatic means of 
"paragraph picking". 
6. SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
In this section we summarize the results obtained from 
query expansion and other elated experiments. 
An automatic run means that there was no human inter- 
vention in the process at any time. A manual run means 
that some human processing was done to the queries, 
and possibly multiple test runs were made to improve 
the queries. A short query is derived using only one 
section of a TREC-5 topic, namely the DESCRIPTION 
field. A full query is derived from any or all fields in 
the original topic. A long query is obtained through our 
full-text expansion method (manual, or automatic). An 
example TREC-5 query is show below; note that the 
Description field is what one may reasonably expect o 
be an initial search query, while Narrative provides 
some further explanation of what relevant material may 
look like. The Topic field provides a single concept of 
interest to the searcher; it was not permitted in the short 
queries. 
<top> 
<num> Number: 252 
<title> Topic: Combating Alien 
Smuggling 
<desc> Description: 
What steps are being taken by gov- 
ernmental oreven private ntities 
world-wide to stop the smuggling of
aliens. 
<narr> Narrative: 
To be relevant, a document must 
describe an effort being made (other 
than routine border patrols) in any 
country of the world to prevent the 
illegal penetration f aliens across 
borders. 
</top> 
Table 3 summarizes selected runs performed with our 
NLIR system on TREC-5 database using queries 251 
through 300. Table 4 gives the performance of Cornell's 
(now Sabir Inc.) SMART system version 12, using 
advanced Lnu.ltu term weighting scheme, and query 
expansion through automatic relevance feedback 
(rel.fbk), on the same database and with the same que- 
ries. Sabir used our long queries to obtain long query 
run. Note the consistently large improvements in 
retrieval precision attributed to the expanded queries. 
TABLE 3. Precision improvement in NLIR 
system 
PREC. 
llpt. avg 
%change 
@10 
docs 
%change 
@100 
doc 
%change 
Recall 
%change 
short 
queries 
0.1478 
0.1578 
0.0544 
0.59 
full 
queries 
0.2078 
+41.0 
0.2044 
+30.0 
0.0696 
+28.0 
0.65 
+10.0 
long 
queries 
auto. 
0.2220 
+50.0 
0.2089 
+32.0 
0.0709 
+30.0 
0.64 
+8.5 
long 
queries 
man. 
0.3176 
+115.0 
0.3156 
+100.0 
0.0998 
+83.0 
0.77 
+31.0 
TABLE 4. Results for Cornell's SMART 
PREC, 
l lpt.avg 
%change 
@5 docs 
%change 
@ 100 
docs 
%change 
short 
queries 
0.1499 
0.2178 
0.0578 
full 
queries 
0.2142 
+43.0 
0.2889 
+33.0 
0.0709 
+23.0 
full 
queries 
rel.fbk 
0.2416 
+62.0 
0.2756 
+27.0 
0.0771 
+33.0 
long 
queries 
man. 
0.2983 
+99.0 
013600 
+65.0 
0.0904 
+56.0 
Recall 0.58 0.64 0.70 0.73 
@change +10.0 +21.0 +26.0 
305 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented in some detail our natural language infor- 
mation retrieval system consisting of an advanced NLP 
module and a "pure' statistical core engine. While many 
problems remain to be resolved, including the question 
of adequacy of term-based representation f document 
content, we attempted to demonstrate hat the architec- 
ture described here is nonetheless viable. In particular, 
we demonstrated that natural anguage processing can 
now be done on a fairly large scale and that its speed 
and robustness have improved to the point where it can 
be applied to real IR problems. 
The main observation to make is that natural language 
processing is not as effective as we have once hoped to 
obtain better indexing and better term representations of 
queries. Using linguistic terms, such as phrases, head- 
modifier pairs, names, or even simple concepts does 
help to improve retrieval precision, but the gains 
remained quite modest. On the other hand, full text 
query expansion works remarkably well. Our main 
effort in the immediate future will be to explore ways to 
achieve at least partial automation of this process. An 
initial experiment in this direction has been performed 
as part of NLP Track (genlp3 run), and the results are 
encouraging. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. We would like to thank 
Donna Harman of NIST for making her PRISE system 
available to us since the beginning of TREC. Will Rog- 
ers and Paul Over provided valuable assistance in 
installing updated versions of PRISE. We would also 
like to thank Ralph Weischedel for providing the BBN's 
part of speech tagger. We acknowledge the following 
members of our TREC-5 team who participated in the 
query expansion experiments: Louise Guthrie, Jussi 
Karlgren, Jim Leistensnider, Troy Straszheim, and Jon 
Wilding. This paper is based upon work supported in 
part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency under 
Tipster Phase-2 Contract 94-FI57900-000, Tipster 
Phase-3 Contract 97-FI56800-000, and the National Sci- 
ence Foundation under Grant IRI-93-02615. 
REFERENCES 
Buckley, Chris. 1993. "The Importance of Proper 
Weighting Methods." Proc. of ARPA's Human Lan- 
guage Technology Workshop. pp. 349-352. 
Buckley, Chris, Amit Singhal, Mandar Mitra, Gerard 
Salton. 1995. "New Retrieval Approaches Using 
SMART: TREC 4". Proceedings of the Third Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-4), NIST Special Publ. 
Callan, James, Zhihong Lu, and Bruce Croft. 1995. 
Searching Distributed Collections with Inference Net- 
works." Proceedings of SIGIR-95. pp. 21-28. 
Fox, Ed, Prabhakar Kushik, Joseph Shaw, Russell Mod- 
lin and Durgesh Rao. 1993. "Combining Evidence from 
Multiple Searches.". Proc. of First Text Retrieval Con- 
ference (TREC-1). NIST Spec. Publ. 500-207. pp. 319- 
328. 
Harman, Donna. 1988. "Towards interactive query 
expansion." Proceedings of ACM SIGIR-88, pp. 321- 
331. 
Roccio, J. 1971. "Relevance Feedback in Information 
Retrieval." In G. Salton (ed), "The SMART Retrieval 
System. Prentice-Hall, pp. 313-323. 
Saracevic, T., Kantor, P. 1988. "A Study of Information 
Seeking and Retrieving. III. Searchers, Searches, and 
Overlap". Journal of the American Society for Informa- 
tion Science. 39(3):197-216. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek and Jose Perez-Carballo. 1994. 
"Recent Developments in Natural Language Text 
Retrieval." Proceedings of the Second Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC-2), NIST Special Publication 500- 
215, pp. 123-136. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, Jose Perez-Carballo and Mihnea 
Marinescu. 1995. "Natural Language Information Retir- 
ieval: TREC-3 Report." Proceedings of the Third Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-3), NIST Special Publica- 
tion 500-225, pp. 39-53. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, Jose Perez-Carballo and Mihnea 
Marinescu. 1996. "Natural Language Information Retir- 
ieval: TREC-4 Report." Proceedings of the Third Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-4), NIST Special Publ. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek. 1995. "Natural Language Infor- 
mation Retrieval" Information Processing and Manage- 
ment, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 397-417. Pergamon/Elsevier. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, and Peter Scheyen. 1996. "An 
Evaluation of TIP Parser: a preliminary report." In H. 
Bunt, M. Tomita (eds), Recent Advances in Parsing 
Technology, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 201-220. 
Voorhees, Ellen. 1994. "Query Expansion Using Lexi- 
cal-Semantic Relations." Proc. of SIGIR-94, pp. 61-70. 
Voorhees, Ellen, Yuan-Wang Hou. 1993. "Vector 
Expansion in a Large Collection." Proc of First Text 
Retrieval Conference (TREC-1). NIST Spec. Pub. 500- 
207. pp. 343-351. 
306 
