Two Mult imodal  Interfaces to Military Simulations 
Kenneth  Wauchope 
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intell igence 
Naval Research Laboratory,  Code 5512 
4555 Overlook Avenue, S.W. 
Washington,  DC 20375-5337, USA 
wauchope~aic, nrl. navy. mil 
1 In t roduct ion  
Eucalyptus and InterLACE are two projects inte- 
grating spoken atural language interaction with the 
already-developed graphical user interfaces of cur- 
rently existing military simulation systems. We take 
this approach (rather than developing new, fully in- 
tegrated systems from scratch) to facilitate the de- 
velopment of Navy demonstrations of NL technol- 
ogy applied to their own tools, as well as to explore 
the relative strengths and weaknesses of graphical 
vs. NL interfaces and how the two can be used in 
combination toyield more powerful interaction tech- 
niques. The natural anguage processing capability 
of the two systems i described in an accompanying 
Proceedings technical note (Wauchope t al. 1997); 
here we go into a bit more detail on the issues of 
multimodal integration with graphical interfaces. 
2 Euca lyptus  
Our first venture into multimodal interface devel- 
opment was Eucalyptus, a spoken natural language 
interface integrated with the graphical user inter- 
face of the KOALAS AEW Test Planning Tool, a 
simulation-based mockup of a hypothetical Naval air 
combat command and control system. Our objective 
was to have the functionality ofthe NL interface du- 
plicate and parallel that of the GUI, allowing com- 
parison of language-based and graphical approaches 
to predication and reference. We also sought for the 
two modalities to interact in a number of ways, such 
as deictic reference (combined pointing and speak- 
ing) and NL interaction with graphical dialog win- 
dows. 
2.1 Guidelines 
We adhered to the following guidelines and ap- 
proaches in developing Eucalyptus. 
? Spoken inputs are normative English utterances 
only, not just arbitrary individual words or 
phrases. Such utterances can include certain 
elliptical or fragmentary forms, but only those 
that people might normally use with each other 
under similar circumstances. As a result Euca- 
lyptus is a spoken NL system, not just a voice 
command system. This is not to say that voice 
commands are undesirable or that people pre- 
fer to use conversational l nguage when talking 
to a machine, but just represents our particular 
research interests. 
We address NL input only, not output. The 
NAUTILUS NLP processor does try to gener- 
ate brief and helpful English sentence fragments 
in response to user queries, but this is deliber- 
ately underdeveloped since we also have ongo- 
ing work in adapting a full-fledged NL gener- 
ation system for full-sentence query responses 
(integrated into our second demo system Inter- 
LACE, to be discussed later). 
We are careful not to provide the NL interface 
with any new domain functionality not already 
available in some way from the graphical inter- 
face. This ensures that any comparisons be- 
tween the two will be based strictly on syntax 
and convenience ofuse. 
We disallow "metalinguistic" NL references to 
the graphical interface itself (e.g. Open the 
advice explanation window, Push the 'Move 
Fighter' button) in favor of direct references to 
the task domain (Show the current advice, Move 
a fighter). This avoids the user treating the 
graphical interface as primary and speech as a 
subservient adjunct, a kind of "vocal mouse" as 
it were. Again this is not to deny that speech 
control of a GUI might be useful for handi- 
capped individuals or in extremely hands-busy 
situations, but just encourages the user's per- 
ception of the two interfaces as parallel and 
equal partners. 
21 
2.2 Mu l t imoda l  In tegrat ion  
To issue an order to a simulated fighter aircraft using 
the KOALAS graphical interface, the user first clicks 
a button labelled with the order type (e.g. Move, Re- 
call) which pops up a dialog window requesting that 
the user select the desired objects by mousing them 
on the radar screen, echoing the objects' names in 
text fields as they are selected, and finally requesting 
an accept/quit decision. The Move Fighter dialog 
box, for example, prompts first for the fighter and 
then for the new patrol station (optional parameters 
like speed are not prompted for but can be adjusted 
at any time). 
This rather specialized dialog box behavior is 
distinctly language-like in two ways: the resulting 
graphical syntax (Move, fighter, station) closely re- 
sembles NL imperative syntax (Move this fighter to 
this slation)~ and the prompting sequence resembles 
a natural language dialog. As a result we elected 
to use KOALAS dialog boxes both for accept/quit 
confirmation of completely specified NL commands 
(Move fighter 1 to station 4), as well as to prompt 
for remaining unspecified arguments (Move fighter 
1). In either case, speech can also be used to dis- 
miss the dialog (Okay, Cancel that) as well as to 
provide remaining arguments to the dialog (one of 
the fighters holding station 4). 
The second form of multimodal integration in Eu- 
calyptus is through deietic reference: phrases like 
this fighter accompanied by a mouse click. Since 
mouse clicks in the KOALAS graphical interface do 
not create a "current selected object" but rather re- 
port the closest object of the type being prompted 
for by the current dialog box prompt, this behav- 
ior was easy to modify for deictic reference: the 
mouse click identifies a set of possible objects and 
the accompanying NL context (this fighter, Move 
this here) provides the semantic presuppositions to
disambiguate he denoted object. 
Finally, we allow purely graphical interactions to 
have elliptical or anaphoric NL followups. For exam- 
ple after completing a fighter move using the GUI, 
the NL inputs Same with fighter 2 or Move fighter 3 
there also will be properly understood. 
3 In terLACE 
InterLACE is a multimodal interface to the Air 
Force's LACE land/air combat simulation sys- 
tem, containing an extensive real-world cartographic 
database of central Germany. Unlike KOALAS, 
LACE came to us with no graphical interface, al- 
though all the "hooks" were in place to implement 
a map display with animation of simulated objects. 
Since with LACE there was no graphical com- 
mand interface to mirror in natural language, we 
opted instead to focus on database query (also in- 
cluded in Eucalyptus) and the issuing of verbal on- 
road route instructions to a simulated tank unit. De- 
ictic reference was implemented similary to Eucalyp- 
tus, the difference being that we chose to implement 
the conventional notion of "current selected object": 
objects clicked by the mouse are highlighted and re- 
main so until deselected. The user can also select 
a set of closely adjacent objects with a double-click 
and then, as in Eucalyptus, use verbal context (this 
town, What's the population here?) to resolve the 
reference. 
3.1 Database  Query  
Because of the large size of the database (over twelve 
thousand objects) and the need to reduce the search 
space during information retrieval, we elected to con- 
strain the domain of NL discourse to only those 
objects currently visible in the map display, repre- 
senting about one-eighth of the entire database at 
any one time. Hence Does this road cross any small 
towns? only reports back towns that are currently 
visible in the display, based on the assumption that 
this is the user's current focus of attention (this con- 
straint applies only to quantified NPs and not proper 
names, i.e. Does this road cross Berlin? does not re- 
quire that Berlin be visible). 
3.2 Tank  Commands  
LACE provides for the instantiation of simulated 
ground vehicles (such as tank units and SAM missile 
carriers) and includes a number of routines for on- 
road navigation, including a route planner for com- 
puting paths between towns. Verbal instructions to 
the tank giving just a destination (Go to the near- 
est small town) invoke the route planner, but since 
the planner does not accept specification of means 
for getting to the destination, commands like Head 
north on road E2 for 5 km instead invoke an In- 
terLACE function called the "stretch selector" that 
tries to find a single stretch of road (a sequence of 
road segments between two adjacent linkage points) 
that reconciles every component of the means. The 
tank understands both cardinal (northeast) and rel- 
ative directions (left), and in ambiguous ituations 
chooses the stretch that bears the most closely in 
the specified irection. 
22  
