An Ef f ic ient  Two Stage  Approach  to Robust  Language 
In terpretat ion  
Carolyn Penstein Ros~ 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Baker Hall 135F 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
cprose@cs .cmu.edu 
1 Introduction 
The most basic task of a natural language interface 
is to map the user's utterance onto some meaning 
representation which can then be used for further 
processing. The three biggest challenges which con- 
tinue to stand in the way of accomplishing even this 
most basic task are extragrammaticality, ambiguity, 
and recognition errors. The system presented here, 
ROSE1: RObustness with Structural Evolution, re- 
pairs extragrammatical input in two stages. The 
first stage, Repair Hypothesis Formation, is respon- 
sible for assembling a set of hypotheses about the 
meaning of the ungrammatical utterance. This stage 
is itself divided into two steps, Partial Parsing and 
Combination. In the Combination step, the frag- 
ments from a partial parse are assembled into a set 
of meaning representation hypotheses. In ROSE's 
second stage, Interaction with the user, the system 
generates a set of queries and then uses the user's 
answers to these queries to narrow down to a single 
best meaning representation hypothesis. 
2 Comparison to Alternative 
Approaches 
Rather than placing the full burden of robustness on 
the parser itself, I argue that it is more economical 
for Partial Parsing and Combination to be separate 
steps in the Hypothesis Formation stage. Efforts 
towards solving the problem of extragrammatieality 
have primarily been in the direction of building flexi- 
ble parsers. In principle, Minimum Distance Parsers 
(Lehman, 1989; Hipp, 1992) have the greatest flex- 
ibility. They fit an extragrammatical sentence to 
the parsing grammar through a series of insertions, 
deletions, and transpositions. Since any string can 
be mapped onto any other string through a series 
of insertions, deletions, and transpositions, this ap- 
proach makes it possible to perform any desired re- 
pair. The underlying assumption behind the MDP 
approach is that the analysis of the string which de- 
viates the least from the input string is most likely 
1ROSE is pronounced Rosd, like the wine. 
3 
to be the best analysis. Thus, Minimum Distance 
Parsing appears to be a reasonable approach. 
In practice, however, Minimum Distance Parsing 
has only been used successfully in very small and 
limited domains. Lehman's core grammar, described 
in (Lehman, 1989), has on the order of 300 rules, 
and all of the inputs to her system can be assumed 
to be commands to a calendar program. Hipp's Cir- 
cuit Fix-It Shop system, described in (Hipp, 1992), 
has a vocabulary of only 125 words and a grammar 
size of only 500 rules. Flexible parsing algorithms 
introduce a great deal of extra ambiguity. This in 
turn may deem certain approaches impractical for 
systems of realistic scale. Therefore, an important 
question one must ask is whether the MDP approach 
can scale up to a larger system and/or domain. 
An example of a less powerful parsing algorithm 
is Lavie's GLR* skipping parser described in (Lavie, 
1995). This parser is capable of skipping over any 
portion of an input utterance that cannot be incor- 
porated into a grammatical nalysis and recover the 
analysis of the largest grammatical subset of the ut- 
terance. Partial analyses for skipped portions of the 
utterance are also returned by the parser. Thus, 
whereas MDP considers insertions and transposi- 
tions in addition to deletions, GLR* only considers 
deletions. The weakness of this and other partial 
parsing approaches (Abney, 1997; Nord, 1997; Srini- 
vas et al, 1997; Federici, Montemagni, and Pirrelli, 
1997) is that part of the original meaning of the ut- 
terance may be thrown away with the portion(s) of 
the utterance which are skipped if only the analy- 
sis for the largest subset is returned, or part of the 
analysis will be missing if the parser only attempts 
to build a partial parse. These less powerful algo- 
rithms trade coverage for speed. The idea is to in- 
troduce nough flexibility to gain an acceptable l vel 
of coverage at an acceptable computational expense. 
The goal behind ROSE and other two stage ap- 
proaches (Ehrlich and Hanrieder, 1997; Danieli and 
Gerbino, 1995) is to increase the coverage possible 
at a reasonable computational cost by introducing 
a post-processing repair stage, which constructs a
complete meaning representation out of the frag- 
ments of a partial parse. Since the input to the 
second stage is a collection of partial parses, the ad- 
ditional flexibility that is introduced at this second 
stage can be channeled just to the part of the anal- 
ysis that the parser does not have enough knowl- 
edge to handle straightforwardly. This is unlike the 
MDP approach, where the full amount of flexibility 
is unnecessarily applied to every part of the anal- 
ysis. Therefore, this two stage process is more ef- 
ficient since the first stage is highly constrained by 
the grammar and the results of this first stage are 
then used to constrain the search in the second stage. 
Additionally, in cases where the limited flexibility 
parser is sufficient, he second stage can be entirely 
bypassed, yielding an even greater savings in time. 
3 A S imple  Example  
The heart of the ROSE approach is the Combi- 
nation Mechanism, a genetic programming (Koza, 
1992; Koza, 1994) environment in which programs 
are evolved which combine the fragments ofa partial 
parse into a complete meaning representation struc- 
ture. I present a simple example in Figure 1 for the 
sake of clarity. This should not be taken to be an 
indication of the full potential of this approach. 
Chunks: 
1. Thursday 
((frame *simple-time) 
(day-of-week thursday)) 
2. I am out 
((frame *busy) 
(who ((frame *i)))) 
Ideal Repair Hypothesis: 
(my-comb 
((frame *busy) (who ((frame *i)))) 
((frame *simple-time) (day-of-week thursday)) 
when) 
An Alternative Repair Hypothesis: 
(my-comb 
((frame *busy) (who ((frame *i)))) 
((frame *simple-time) (day-of-week thursday)) 
why) 
Result of Ideal Hypothesis: 
((frame *busy) 
(who ((frame *i))) 
(when ((frame *simple-time) 
(day-of-week thursday)))) 
Figure 1: Combination Example 
The ideal repair hypothesis for this example is one 
4 
that specifies that the temporal expression should be 
inserted into the when slot in the *busy frame. Other 
hypotheses are also evolved and tested as the genetic 
programming system runs, such as the alternative 
example included in Figure 1. A fitness function 
ranks hypotheses, narrowing down on a small set. 
The final result is selected through interaction with 
the user. 
References  
Abney, S. 1997. Partial parsing via finite-state cas- 
cades. In Proceedings of the Eight European Sum- 
mer School In Logic, Language and Information, 
Prague, Czech Republic. 
Danieli, M. and E. Gerbino. 1995. Metrics for evalu- 
ating dialogue strategies in a spoken language sys- 
tem. In Working Notes of the AAAI Spring Sym- 
posium on Empirical Methods in Discourse Inter- 
pretation and Generation. 
Ehrlich, U. and G. Hanrieder. 1997. Robust speech 
parsing. In Proceedings of the Eight European 
Summer School In Logic, Language and Informa- 
tion, Prague, Czech Republic. 
Federici, S., S. Montemagni, and V. Pirrelli. 1997. 
Shallow parsing and text chunking: a view on un- 
derspecification i  syntax. In Proceedings of the 
Eight European Summer School In Logic, Lan- 
guage and Information, Prague, Czech Republic. 
Hipp, D. R. 1992. Design and Development of 
Spoken Natural-Language Dialog Parsing Systems. 
Ph.D. thesis, Dept. of Computer Science, Duke 
University. 
Koza, J. 1992. Genetic Programming: On the Pro- 
gramming of Computers by Means of Natural Se- 
lection. MIT Press. 
Koza, J. 1994. Genetic Programming II. MIT Press. 
Lavie, A. 1995. A Grammar Based Robust Parser 
For Spontaneous Speech. Ph.D. thesis, School of 
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Lehman, J . F .  1989. Adaptive Parsing: Self- 
Extending Natural Language Interfaces. Ph.D. 
thesis, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mel- 
lon University. CMU-CS-89-191. 
Nord, G. Van. 1997. Robist parsing with the head- 
corner parser. In Proceedings of the Eight Euro- 
pean Summer School In Logic, Language and In- 
formation, Prague, Czech Republic. 
Srinivas, B., C. Doran, B. Hockey, and A. Joshi. 
1997. An approach to robust partial parsing and 
evaluation metrics. In Proceedings of the Eight 
European Summer School In Logic, Language and 
Information, Prague, Czech Republic. 
