Software for Annotating Argument Structure 
Wojc iech  Skut ,  Br ig i t teKrenn,  Thors ten  Brants ,  HansUszkore i t  
Un ivers i t? t  des Saar landes  
66041Saarbr f i cken ,  Germany 
{skut,krenn,brants,uszkoreit}@coli.uni-sb.de 
Abst ract  
We present a tool developed for annota- 
ting corpora with argument structure re- 
presentations. The presentation focuses on 
the architecture of the annotation scheme 
and a number of techniques for increa- 
sing the efficiency and accuracy of annota- 
tion. Among others, we show how the as- 
signment of grammatical functions can be 
automatised using standard part-of-speech 
tagging methods. 
1 The  Annotat ion  Scheme 
Several features of the tool have been introduced to 
suite the requirements imposed by the architecture 
of the annotation scheme (cf. (Skut et al, 1997)), 
which can itself be characterised as follows: 
? Direct representation of the underlying argu- 
ment structure in terms of unordered trees; 
? Rudimentary, flat representations; uniform 
treatment of local and non-local dependencies; 
? Extensive ncoding of linguistic information in 
grammatical function labels. 
Thus the format of the annotations is somewhat 
different from treebanks relying on a context-free 
backbone augmented with trace-filter annotations of 
non-local dependencies. (cf. (Marcus et al, 1994), 
(Sampson, 1995), (Black et al, 1996)) Nevertheless, 
such treebanks can also be developed using our tool. 
To back this claim, the representation f structures 
from the SUZANNE corpus (cf. (Sampson, 1995)) 
will be shown in the presentation. 
2 User  In ter face  
A screen dump of the tool is shown in fig. 1. The lar- 
gest part of the window contains the graphical repre- 
sentation of the structure being annotated. The no- 
des and edges are assigned category and grammati- 
cal function labels, respectively. The words are num- 
bered and labelled with part-of-speech tags. Any 
change into the structure of the sentence being an- 
notated is immediately displayed. 
Extra effort has been put into the development 
of a convenient keyboard interface. Menus are sup- 
ported as a useful way of getting help on commands 
and labels. Automatic completion and error check 
on user input are supported. 
Three tagsets have to be defined by the user: part- 
of-speech tags, phrasal categories and grammatical 
functions. They are stored together with the corpus, 
which permits easy modification when needed. 
The user interface is implemented in Tcl /Tk Ver- 
sion 4.1. The corpus is stored in an SQL database. 
3 Automat ion  
To increase the efficiency of annotation and avoid 
certain types of errors made by the human annota- 
tor, manual and automatic annotation are combined 
in an interactive way. The automatic omponent of 
the tool employs a stochastic tagging model indu- 
ced from previously annotated sentences. Thus the 
degree of automation increases with the amount of 
data available. 
At the current stage of automation, the annotator 
determines the substructures to be grouped into a 
new phrase and assigns it a syntactic ategory. The 
assignment of grammatical functions is performed 
automatically. To do this, we adapted a standard 
part-of-speech tagging algorithm (the best sequence 
of grammatical functions is to be determined for a 
sequence of syntactic categories, cf. (Skut et al, 
1997)) 
The annotator supervises the automatic assi- 
gnment of function tags. In order to keep him from 
missing tagging errors, the grammatical function 
tagger is equipped with a function measuring the 
reliability of its output. On the basis of the diffe- 
rence between the best and second-best assignment, 
the prediction is classified as belonging to one of the 
following certainty intervals: 
Rel iable:  the most probable tag is assigned, 
Less rel iable: the tagger suggests a function tag; 
the annotator is asked to confirm the choice, 
27 
- Gen eral: 
corp. , :  iR~!co,pus tes~op~. .. I FI 
Editor: IThorsten IFI 
\[\] _.ar.r I-~---II _.?.o.d II ~_*,t I 
-Sentence: 
No.: 4 / 1269 
Comment: I 
Origin: refcorp.tt 
Last edited: Thorsten, 07102/97, 17:39:29 
i 
sog~ 
Es ? spielt 1 eben 's keine 3 Rolle 
511 
ob die Mus% gef"allig 9
I 
505 
+ 
14 Neues, s 16 mu",, /iStlo -i1 nur2 etwas13 
PPER VVFIN ADV PlAT NN $, KOUS ART NN ADJD VAFIN 
, - -Move:  
I " ' '  II " " '  I ~-? to: I I 
I :~0 11 ; ,o I\[\] ~_,,to. 
I :~?? II ;'?? I Mato"es:? 
-Dependency: 
Selection: | 
Command: I 
I Ex-ecute I 
$( ADV PlAT 
I , ,  
i F Parentlabel: 
IN?de  no.: I I 
/ Parent\[abel: I IR 
I Swi.!?hing to sentence .no. 4....Done. 
Figure 1: Screen dump of the annotation tool 
Unre l iab le:  the annotator has to determine the. 
function himself. 
The annotator always has the option of altering 
already assigned tags. 
The tagger rates 90% of all assignments as relia- 
ble. Accuracy for these cases is 97%. Most errors 
are due to wrong identification of the subject and 
different kinds of objects in S's and VP's. Accuracy 
of the unreliable 10% of assignments i  75%, i.e., the 
annotator has to alter the choice in 1 of 4 cases when 
asked for confirmation. Overall accuracy of the tag- 
ger is 95%. 
In several cases, the tagger has been able to ab- 
stract from annotation errors in training material, 
which has proved very helpful in detecting inconsi- 
stencies and wrong structures. 
This first automation step has considerably in- 
creased the efficiency of annotation. The average 
annotation time per sentence improved by 25%. 
References  
Ezra Black et al 1996. Beyond Skeleton Par- 
sing: Producing a Comprehensive Large-Scale 
General-English Treebank With Full Grammati- 
cal Analysis. In The 16th International Confe- 
rence on Computational Linguistics, pages 107-  
113, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Mitchell Marcus et al 1994. The Penn Treebank: 
Annotating Predicate Argument Structure. In 
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology 
Workshop, San Francisco. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Geoffrey Sampson. 1995. English for the Computer. 
The SUSANNE Corpus and Analytic Scheme. 
Wojciech Skut et al 1997. An Annotation Scheme 
For Free Word Order Languages. In The 7th Con- 
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
Washington, DC. 
28 
