Reading more into Foreign Languages 
J ohn  Nerbonne 
Alfa- informatica, BCN 
University of Groningen 
9700 AS Groningen 
The Nether lands 
nerbonne@let, rug .  nl 
Laur i  Kar t tunen 
Rank  Xerox 
6, Chemin de Mauper tus  
38240 Meylan, France 
Laur i .  Kar t tunen@grenob le .  rx rc .  xerox ,  com 
E lena  Paska leva  
Linguistic Model ing Lab 
Bulgar ian Academy of Sciences 
25A, Acad. G. Bonchev St. 
Sofia 1113, Bulgaria 
hellen@bgcict, acad. bg 
Gabor  P roszeky  
Morphologic 
Fo  U.  56-58  I /3  
H-1011 Budapest ,  Hungary  
h6109pro@el la ,  hu  
T i i t  Roosmaa 
Computer  Science 
University of Tartu  
2 J. Liivi St. 
EE2400 Tartu,  Estonia 
roosmaa@math, ut. ee 
Abst ract  
GLOSSER is designed to support read- 
ing and learning to read in a foreign lan- 
guage. There are four language pairs cur- 
rently supported by GLOSSER: English- 
Bulgarian, English-Estonian, English- 
Hungarian and French-Dutch. The pro- 
gram is operational on UNIX and Windows 
'95 platforms, and has undergone a pilot 
user-study. A demonstration (in UNIX) 
for Applied Natural Language Processing 
emphasizes components put to novel tech- 
nical uses in intelligent computer-assisted 
morphological nalysis (ICALL), including 
disambiguated morphological nalysis and 
lemmatized indexing for an aligned bilin- 
gual corpus of word examples. 
1 Mot ivat ion  
GLOSSER applies natural anguage processing tech- 
niques, especially morphological processing and cor- 
pora analysis, to technology for intelligent computer- 
assisted language learning (ICALL). 
The project vision foresees that intermediate lan- 
guage learners/users of e.g., English, perhaps a na- 
tive speaker of Bulgarian, might be reading on the 
screen, perhaps a software manual. We imagine such 
a user encountering an unknown word or an unfamil- 
iar use of a known word, e.g., reverts as in: 
"This action reverts the buffer to the form stored 
on disk" 
The user can click the mouse on a word to invoke 
online help (following a dynamically generated hy- 
perlink), which provides: 
1. a morphological parse, separating 'revert' and 
's', together with an explanation of the signifi- 
cance of the inflection ('s')--3rd person singular 
present ense; 
2. the entry to the word 'revert' in a bilingual 
English/Bulgarian dictionary or a monolingual 
English one; 
3. access to similar examples of the word in online 
bilingual corpora; and 
4. an audible pronunciation. (This is included 
only to demonstrate further capabilities, and is 
available only for a small number of words.) 
The example of English for Bulgarians is chosen 
for illustration. Software has also been devel- 
oped for English/Estonian, English/Hungarian and 
French/Dutch. 
If we assume a rudimentary level of instruction 
in foreign-language rammar, then a great deal of 
the learning required in order to read is simply vo- 
cabulary learning, which is best pursued in context 
(Krashen, 1989; Swaffar, Arens, and Byrnes, 1991). 
GLOSSER makes  this as easy and  accurate as pos- 
sible: vocabulary is always presented in context, 
moreover  in texts which the teacher or student may 
choose. Analyses, dictionary explanations and  fur- 
ther examples are but a mouse  click away. 
The  project has developed demonstrators  as a 
proof of concept, and, in order to promote  use, 
the demonstrators run on both UNIX  and  Windows 
'95. The prototypes have proven sufficiently robust 
to support reading of essentially all non-specialized 
135 
texts. They have further permited a pilot user-study 
which is being followed up by broader usability stud- 
ies at two sites. The initial results showed that 
users enjoyed the intelligent dictionary and were a 
bit faster in reading. 
The demonstrators have been tested by students, 
but they might also be put to use to support read- 
ing directly by people who are not engaged in formal 
language instruction, or perhaps not even primarily 
interested in improving their foreign langauge abil- 
ity. Given our emphasis on automatic methods ap- 
plicable to arbitrary texts, a spin-off in support for 
translations i conceivable. 
(Nerbonne and Smit, 1996) provides more on 
the ICALL background against which GLOSSER 
was developed. GLOSSER distinguishes itself from 
many ICALL programs by its emphasis on language 
use as opposed to drill and test, by its ability to 
support nearly any level of text difficulty, and by 
its emphasis on effectively removing the tedium of 
dictionary use from intermediate language learning. 
2 Techn ica l  Rea l i za t ion  
GLOSSER is designed with four major components, 
which are sketched in Figure 1. 
SENTENCE WITH SELE~ WORD 
" \[OU"~UT ON SCREEN} 
I 
I CORPORA SEARCH \['~ 
Figure 1: GLOSSER Architecture connects mod- 
ules for morphological nalysis and disambiguation, 
dictionary access, and (indexed) corpora search with 
an output module. The "suggestive" pronunciation 
module is not  shown. 
The core modules provide the information oted 
in Section 1, (1-3): morphology, bilingual dictio- 
nary entry, and examples from use. A fourth (user- 
interface and display) module controls interaction 
with the user and formats the information provided. 
Among other things, it allows the range of informa- 
tion to be tailored to individual preference. 
The usefulness of the first two sorts of information 
is evident. We Chose to include the third sort as well 
because corpora seemed likely to be valuable in pro- 
viding examples more concretely and certainly more 
extensively than other sources. They may provide a 
sense of collocation or even nuances of meaning. 
The realization of these design goals required ex- 
tensive knowledge bases about morphology and the 
lexicon. 
? Most crucially, the morphological knowledge 
base provides the link between the inflected 
forms found in texts and the "citation forms" 
found in dictionaries (Sproat, 1992). LEMMA- 
TIZATION recovers citation forms from inflected 
forms and is a primary task of morphological 
analysis. A substantial morphological knowl- 
edge base is likewise necessary if one is to pro- 
vide information about the grammatical signif- 
icance of morphological information. 
The only effective means of providing such a 
knowledge base is through morphological nal- 
ysis software. Even if one could imagine stor- 
ing all the inflected forms of a language such as 
French, the information associated with those 
forms is available today only from analysis oft- 
ware. The software is needed to create the store 
of information. 
Even apart from this: people occasionally cre- 
ate new words. Analysis programs can provide 
information about these, since most are formed 
according to very general and regular morpho- 
logical processes. 
? Obviously, the quality of the online dictionary is 
absolutely essential. The only feasible option is 
to use an existing dictionary. Our investigative 
user study indicates that the dictionary is the 
most important factor in user satisfaction. 
? The essential design questions vis-?-vis the cor- 
pus were (i) how large must the corpus be in 
order to guarantee a high expectation that the 
most frequent words would be found; and (ii) 
what sort of access techniques are needed on 
a corpus of the requisite size--given that access 
must succeed within at most a very few seconds. 
We tried to use texts from a variety of genres, 
and we attempted (with some limited success) 
to find bilingual English-Bulgarian, English- 
Estonian and French-Dutch texts. 
2.1 Morpho log ica l  Analys is  
As we have seen, morphological nalysis is necessary 
if one wishes to access an online dictionary. Since 
broad-coverage analysis packages represent very ma- 
jor development efforts, GLOSSER was fortunate in 
having use of Locolex, a state-of-the-art system from 
Rank Xerox (Bauer, Segond, and Zaenen, 1995). 
136 
A French example analysis (from Figure 2): 
? a t te ign issent  as 
att eindre+Subj I+PL+P3+FinV; 
The semi-regular form is recognized as a subjunc- 
tive, third-person plural finite form of the verb at- 
teindre. The information about the stem (lemma) 
from the morphological parse enables a dictionary 
lookup, and the grammatical information is di- 
rectly useful. Note that, in contrast to commer- 
cially available systems, the information is generated 
automatically--so that it is available on-line for any 
text. 
But there are also examples of words which could 
have different grammatical meanings. Locolex incor- 
porates a stochastic POS tagger which it employs 
to disambiguate. In case Locolex is wrong (which 
is possible, but quite unlikely), the user is free to 
specify an alternative morphological nalysis, which 
is then looed up in the dictionary and for which cor- 
pora examples are sought. 
2.2 D ic t ionary  
GLOSSER was likewise fortunate in obtaining the 
use of good online dictionaries: the Van Dale dictio- 
nary Hedendaags Frans (van Dale, 1993) is used for 
French-Dutch, and the Kernermann semi-bilingual 
dictionaries are used for mapping English to Bul- 
garian, Estonian, and Hungarian. Only the Esto- 
nian version is complete. Although there are no 
paper versions of the latter available, (Kernermann 
Publishing, 1993) demonstrates the basic concept for 
English-Finnish. 
2.3 Corpus  
We have relied on other projects, the ECI and MUL- 
TEXT for bilingual corpora, although this has in- 
volved some work in (re)aligning the texts. 
The results of disambiguation and morphological 
analysis erve not only as input to dictionary lookup 
but also to corpus search. The current implementa- 
tion of this search uses a LEXEME-based index for 
rapid and varied access to the corpus. 
In order to determine the size of corpus needed, 
we experimented with a frequency list of the 10,000 
most frequent word forms. A corpus of 2 MB con- 
tained 85% of these, and a corpus of 6 MB 100%. 
Our goal is 100% coverage of the words (lemmata) 
found in the 30,000-word ictionaries, and 1007o 
coverage of the most frequent 20,000 words. The 
current corpus size is 8 MB. 
As the corpus grows, the time for incremental 
search likwise grows linearly. When the average 
search time grew to several seconds (on a 70 MIPS 
UNIX server), it became apparent hat some sort 
of indexing was needed. This was implemented and 
is described in (van Slooten, 1995). The indexed 
lookup is most satisfactory--not nly has the abso- 
lute time dropped an order of magnitude, but the 
time appears to be constant when corpus size is var- 
ied between 1 and 10 MB. 
Lexeme-based search looks not only for further 
occurrences of the same string, but also for inflec- 
tional variants of the word. If the selected word is 
livre+Masc+SG+Noun, the search should find other 
tokens of this and also tokens of the plural form 
l ivres.  This is made possible by lemmatizing the 
entire corpus in a preprocessing step, and retaining 
the results in an index of lemmata. It is clear that 
this improves the chance of finding examples of a 
given lexeme immensely. 
2.4 User  In ter face 
The text the user is reading is displayed in the main 
window. Each of the three sorts of information is 
displayed in separate windows: MORPHOLOGY, the 
results of morphological nalysis; DICTIONARY, the 
French-Dutch dictionary entry; and EXAMPLES, the 
examples of the word found in corpora search. See 
Figure 2 for details. 
3 Using Glosser 
A pilot study involving 20 university-level students 
of French was conducted in Feb. 1996. Half of the 
students used GLOSSER, and the other half a pa- 
per version of the same dictionary and all read the 
same text and answered questions tested text com- 
prehension and satisfaction. The time needed for 
the task was also measured. The results of this pilot 
study were encouraging: although the level of stu- 
dent was too high (Dutch foreign language students 
have a high level of proficiency), so that no differ- 
nces in comprehension were noted, the GLOSSER 
users were faster, and reported enjoying the experi- 
ence and interested in using the system further. We 
have just completed a more careful replication with 
more students at a lower level of French proficiency, 
and the predictions of the pilot are borne out: there 
are very significant differences in speed, insignificant 
advantages in comprehension, and high overall sat- 
isfaction (Dokter et al, to appear 1997). 
4 Conc lus ions  
GLOSSER was developed with the philosophy of ex- 
ploiting available NLP technology wherever possi- 
ble. Morphological analysis (lemmatization) is ro- 
bust and accurate and more than up to the task 
137 
DE LA TERRE A LA LUNE 
Trajet Direct en 97 Heures 20 Minutes 
? par Jules Veme 
I 
LE GUN-CLUB 
sueme f(~'r ale de,, I~tats-Unis, un nouveau club tr~s influvnt 
tn~ la rifle de Bali/more, en ple~n Maryland. 
les Am~icains sutpas~rent ~i~gu l i~rement~s ,  ce 
ivnce de la bali~dque. Non que leurs urines 
de l~fea ion,  m~is e l l~ offri~ent des dimen*ions 
? rent par ?on~quent des port~es inconnues juglu'alors. 
tFedr] tS1 31 
ire bereiken -> geraken (tot), reiken (tot) 32 
-> halen, komen tot 0.2 taken -> treffen, 
3 fig. taken -> treffen, kwetsen 1.1 ~ 70arts 
len 1.1 ~ un l iwe sur l 'armoire bij een boek op 
nun 6.2 ~ qn. au bras iem. in de arm treffen 
~c. km.  met let~ raken 6.3 ~ qn. duns se~ 
lem. in zijn overtuigingen k~enken 
atteindre + Subjl + PL+ P3+ Pin V 
1972, la balar~e des ~roduits de laTI @tait encore exc~clentaJre. 
1980, le deficit utte~alait2 mill iards de dollars et, selon 
:aires ~ou~ces, labarre des 10 mil l iards a@t@ frar~hie en 1982. 
i.. ~'~'3 -" .';-r,'-.:.--~ "~'~'. 
Europe~ 
Union. Esprit Annotmc~e.ut (French) 
Figure 2: USER INTERFACE GLOSSER. On the left is a text in which in which information for the word 
atteignissent has been requested; on the right, from the top are windows for dictionary (Van Dale), morpho- 
logical analysis (Rank Xerox) and examples in bilingual corpora. 
of supporting instructional software. The text pro- 
cessing techniques employed in GLOSSER are not 
exotic, and likely robust enough to support quick 
access to corpora on the order of 10 MB in size. 
5 Acknowledgements  
The Copernicus program of the European com- 
mission supports the GLOSSER project in grant 
343. The authors are site coordinators; the project 
has been conducted by them and other members, 
including Mariana Damova, Duco Dokter, Margit 
Langemets, Auke van Slooten, Petra Smit, Maria 
Stambolieva, Tarmo Vaino and Ulle Viks. Valuable 
criticism has come from Poul Andersen, Susan Arm- 
strong and Serge Yablonsky. 
Re ferences  
Bauer, Daniel, Frederique Segond, and Annie Zae- 
nen. 1995. LOCOLEX: Translation rolls off your 
tongue. In Proceedings of the conference of the 
ACH-ALLC'95, Santa Barbara, USA. 
Dokter, Duco, John Nerbonne, Lily Schurcks- 
Grozeva, and Petra Smit. to appear, 1997. 
Glosser-RuG: A user study. In Arthur van Essen, 
Sake Jager, and John Nerbonne, editors, Language 
Teaching and Language Technology. to appear in 
proceedings of conference to be held 28-9 Apr 97. 
Kernermann Publishing. 1993. Password: English 
Dictionary for Speakers of Finnish. Porvoo, Finn- 
land: Kernermann. 
Krashen, S .D.  1989. We acquire vocabulary 
and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for 
the input hypothesis. Modern Language Journal, 
73(4):440-464. 
Nerbonne, John and Petra Smit. 1996. GLOSSER- 
RuG--in support of reading. In Proc. of COLING 
'96, pages 830-35, Copenhagen. 
Sproat, Richard. 1992. Morphology and Computa- 
tion. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Swaffar, Janet, Katherine Arens, and Heidi Byrnes. 
1991. Reading for Meaning : an Integrated Ap- 
proach to Language Learning. Englewood Cliffs, 
N.Y.: Prentice Hall. 
van Dale. 1993. Handwoordenboek Frans- 
Nederlands + Prisma, 2e druk. Van Dale Lexi- 
cografie b.v. 
van Slooten, Auke. 1995. Searching and quoting 
examples of word-usage in french language cor- 
pus. Technical report, Alfa-Informatica, Rijksuni- 
versiteit Groningen. 
138 
