Disambiguation of Proper Names in Text 
Nina Wacho lder"  
CR IA  
Co lumbia  Un ivers i ty  
New York ,  NY  10027 
nina@cs, columbia, edu 
Yael Ravin Misook Choi 
T J  Watson  Research  Center  T J  Watson  Research  Center  
IBM IBM 
Yorktown Heights ,  NY  10598 York town He ights ,  NY  10598 
yaelCwat son. ibm. com machoi@wat son. ibm. tom 
Abst ract  
Identifying the occurrences of proper 
names in text and the entities they refer to 
can be a difficult task because of the many- 
to-many mapping between ames and their 
referents. We analyze the types of ambi- 
guity - -  structural and semantic - -  that 
make the discovery of proper names dif- 
ficult in text, and describe the heuristics 
used to disambiguate names in Nomina- 
tor, a fully-implemented module for proper 
name recognition developed at the IBM 
T.J. Watson Research Center. 
1 P roper  Name Ident i f i ca t ion  in 
Natura l  Language Process ing  
Text processing applications, uch as machine trans- 
lation systems, information retrieval systems or 
natural-language understanding systems, need to 
identify multi-word expressions that refer to proper 
names of people, organizations, places, laws and 
other entities. When encountering Mrs. Candy Hill 
in input text, for example, a machine translation 
system should not attempt o look up the transla- 
tion of candy and hill, but should translate Mrs. to 
the appropriate personal title in the target language 
and preserve the rest of the name intact. Similarly, 
an information retrieval system should not attempt 
to expand Candy to all of its morphological variants 
or suggest synonyms (Wacholder et al 1994). 
The need to identify proper names has two as- 
pects: the recognition of known names and the dis- 
covery of new names. Since obtaining and maintain- 
ing a name database requires ignificant effort, many 
applications need to operate in the absence of such 
a resource. Without a database, names need to be 
discovered in the text and linked to entities they re- 
fer to. Even where name databases exist, text needs 
to be scanned for new names that are formed when 
entities, such as countries or commercial companies, 
are created, or for unknown names which become 
important when the entities they refer to become 
202 
topical. This situation is the norm for dynamic ap- 
plications uch as news providing services or Internet 
information indexing. 
The next Section describes the different ypes of 
proper name ambiguities we have observed. Sec- 
tion 3 discusses the role of context and world knowl- 
edge in their disambiguation; Section 4 describes the 
process of name discovery as implemented in Nomi- 
nator, a module for proper name recognition devel- 
oped at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center. Sec- 
tions 5-7 elaborate on Nominator's disambiguation 
heuristics. 
2 The  Ambigu i ty  o f  P roper  Names  
Name identification requires resolution of a subset of 
the types of structural and semantic ambiguities en- 
countered in the analysis of nouns and noun phrases 
(NPs) in natural anguage processing. Like common 
nouns, ((Jensen and Binot 1987), (Hindle and Rooth 
1993) and (Brill and Resnick 1994)), proper names 
exhibit structural ambiguity in prepositional phrase 
(PP) attachment and in conjunction scope. 
A PP may be attached to the preceding NP and 
form part of a single large name, as in NP\[Midwest 
Center PP\[for NP\[Computer Research\]\]\]. Alterna- 
tively it may be independent of the preceding NP, 
as in NP\[Carnegie Hall\] PP\[for NP\[Irwin Berlin\]\], 
where for separates two distinct names, Carnegie 
Hall and Irwin Berlin. 
As with PP-attachment of common oun phrases, 
the ambiguity is not always resolved, even in hu- 
man sentence parsing (cf. the famous example I saw 
the girl in the park with the telescope). The loca- 
tion of an organization, for instance, could be part 
of its name (City University of New York) or an 
attached modifier (The Museum of Modern Art in 
New York City). Without knowledge of the official 
name, it is sometimes difficult to determine the ex- 
act boundaries of a proper name. Consider examples 
such as Western Co. of North America, Commod- 
ity Ezchange in New York and Hebrew University in 
Jerusalem, Israel. 
Proper names contain ambiguous conjoined 
phrases. The components of Victoria and Albert 
Museum and IBM and Bell Laboratories look identi- 
cal; however, and is part of the name of the museum 
in the first example, but a conjunction joining two 
computer company names in the second. Although 
this problem is well known, a seazch of the computa- 
tional literature shows that few solutions have been 
proposed, perhaps because the conjunct ambiguity 
problem is harder than PP attachment (though see 
(Agarwal and Boggess 1992) for a method of con- 
junct identification that relies on syntactic ategory 
and semantic label). 
Similar structural ambiguity exists with respect 
to the possessive pronoun, which may indicate a re- 
lationship between two names (e.g., Israel's Shimon 
Peres) or may constitute a component of a single 
name (e.g., Donoghue's Money Fund Report). 
The resolution of structural ambiguity such as 
PP attachment and conjunction scope is required 
in order to automatical ly establish the exact bound- 
aries of proper names. Once these boundaries have 
been established, there is another type of well-known 
structural ambiguity, involving the internal struc- 
ture of the proper name. For example, Professor of 
Far Eastern Art John Blake is parsed as \[\[Professor 
\[of Fax Eastern Art\]\] John Blake\] whereas Professor 
Art Klein is \[\[Professor\] Art Klein\]. 
Proper names also display semantic ambiguity. 
Identification of the type of proper nouns resem- 
bles the problem of sense disambiguation for com- 
mon nouns where, for instance, state taken out of 
context may refer either to a government body or 
the condition of a person or entity. A name variant 
taken out of context may be one of many types, e.g., 
Ford by itself could be a person (Gerald Ford), an 
organization (Ford Motors), a make of car (Ford), 
or a place (Ford, Michigan). Entity-type ambiguity 
is quite common, as places are named after famous 
people and companies are named after their owners 
or locations. In addition, naming conventions are 
sometimes disregarded by people who enjoy creating 
novel and unconventional names. A store named Mr. 
Tall and a woman named April Wednesday (McDon- 
ald 1993) come to mind. 
Like common ouns, proper nouns exhibit system- 
atic metonymy: United States refers either to a geo- 
graphical area or to the political body which governs 
this area; Wall Street Journal refers to the printed 
object, its content, and the commercial entity that 
produces it. 
In addition, proper names resemble definite noun 
phrases in that their intended referent may be am- 
biguous. The man may refer to more than one male 
individual previously mentioned in the discourse or 
present in the non-linguistic ontext; J. Smith may 
similarly refer to more than one individual named 
Joseph Smith, John Smith, Jane Smith, etc. Se- 
mantic ambiguity of names is very common because 
of the standard practice of using shorter names to 
203 
stand for longer ones. Shared knowledge and con- 
text are crucial disambiguation factors. Paris, usu- 
ally refers to the capital of France, rather than a 
city in Texas or the Trojan prince, but in a particu- 
lar context, such as a discussion of Greek mythology, 
the presumed referent changes. 
Beyond the ambiguities that proper names share 
with common ouns, some ambiguities are particular 
to names: noun phrases may be ambiguous between 
a name reading and a common noun phrase, as in 
Candy, the person's name, versus candy the food, or 
The House as an organization versus a house refer- 
ring to a building. In English, capitalization usually 
disambiguates the two, though not at sentence be- 
ginnings: at the beginning of a sentence, the compo- 
nents and capitalization patterns of New Coke and 
New Sears are identical; only world knowledge in- 
forms us that New Coke is a product and Sears is a 
company. 
Furthermore, capitalization does not always dis- 
ambiguate names from non-names because what 
constitutes a name as opposed to a 'non-name is 
not always clear. According to (Quirk et al 1972) 
names, which consist of proper nouns (classified into 
personal names like Shakespeare, temporal names 
like Monday, or geographical names like Australia) 
have 'unique' reference. Proper nouns differ in their 
linguistic behavior from common ouns in that they 
mostly do not take determiners or have a plural 
form. However, some names do take determiners, 
as in The New York Times; in this case, they "are 
perfectly regular in taking the definite article since 
they are basically prernodified count nouns... The 
difference between an ordinary common noun and 
an ordinary common noun turned name is that the 
unique reference of the name has been institution- 
alized, as is made overt in writing by initial capital 
letter." Quirk et al's description of names seems to 
indicate that capitalized words like Egyptian (an ad- 
jective) or Frenchmen (a noun referring to a set of 
individuals) are not names. It leaves capitalized se- 
quences like Minimum Alternative Taz, Annual Re- 
port, and Chairman undetermined as to whether or 
not they are names. 
All of these ambiguities must be dealt with if 
proper names are to be identified correctly. In 
the rest of the paper we describe the resources 
and heuristics we have designed and implemented 
in Nominator and the extent to which they resolve 
these ambiguities. 
3 D isambiguat ion  Resources  
In general, two types of resources are available for 
disambiguation: context and world knowledge. Each 
of these can be exploited along a continuum, from 
'cheaper' to computationally and manually more ex- 
pensive usage. 'Cheaper' models, which include 
no context or world knowledge, do very little dis- 
ambiguation. More 'expensive' models, which use 
full syntactic parsing, discourse models, inference 
and reasoning, require computational nd human re- 
sources that may not always be available, as when 
massive amounts of text have to be rapidly processed 
on a regular basis. In addition, given the current 
state of the art, full parsing and extensive world 
knowledge would still not yield complete automatic 
ambiguity resolution. 
In designing Nominator, we have tried to achieve a
balance between high accuracy and speed by adopt- 
ing a model which uses minimal context and world 
knowledge. Nominator uses no syntactic ontextual 
information. It applies a set of heuristics to a list 
of (multi-word) strings, based on patterns of capi- 
talization, punctuation and location within the sen- 
tence and the document. This design choice differ- 
entiates our approach from that of several similar 
projects. Most proper name recognizers that have 
been reported on in print either take as input text 
tagged by part-of-speech (e.g., the systems of (Paik 
et al 1993) and (Mani et al 1993)) or perform syn- 
tactic and/or morphological analysis on all words, 
including capitalized ones, that are part of candi- 
date proper names (e.g., (Coates-Stephens 1993) and 
(McDonald 1993)). Several (e.g., (McDonald 1993), 
(Mani et al 1993), (Paik et al 1993) and (Cowie 
et al 1992)) look in the local context of the candi- 
date proper name for external information such as 
appositives (e.g., in a sequence such as Robin Clark, 
presiden~ of Clark Co.) or for human-subject verbs 
(e.g., say, plan) in order to determine the category 
of the candidate proper name. Nominator does not 
use this type of external context. 
Instead, Nominator makes use of a different kind 
of contextual information - -  proper names co- 
occuring in. the document. It is a fairly standard 
convention in an edited document for one of the first 
references to an entity (excluding a reference in the 
title) to include a relatively full form of its name. 
In a kind of discourse anaphora, other references to 
the entity take the form of shorter, more ambiguous 
variants. Nominator identifies the referent of the full 
form (see below) and then takes advantage of the 
discourse context provided by the list of names to 
associate shorter more ambiguous name occurrences 
with their intended referents. 
In terms of world knowledge, the most obvious re- 
source is a database of known names. In fact, this is 
what many commercially available name identifica- 
tion applications use (e.g., Hayes 1994). A reliable 
database provides both accuracy and efficiency, if 
fast look-up methods are incorporated. A database 
also has the potential to resolve structural ambigu- 
ity; for example, if IBM and Apple Computers are 
listed individually in the database but IBM and Ap- 
ple Computers i not, it may indicate a conjunction 
of two distinct names. A database may also con- 
tain default world knowledge information: e.g., with 
no other over-riding information, it may be safe to 
assume that the string McDonald's refers to an or- 
ganization. But even if an existing database is reli- 
able, names that are not yet in it must be discovered 
and information in the database must be over-ridden 
when appropriate. For example, if a new name such 
as IBM Credit Corp. occurs in the text but not in 
the database, while IBM exists in the database, au- 
tomatic identification of IBM should be blocked in 
favor of the new name IBM Credi~ Corp. 
If a name database exists, Nominator can take 
advantage of it. However, our goal has been to de- 
sign Nominator to function optimally in the absence 
of such a resource. In this case, Nominator con- 
sults a small authority file which contains informa- 
tion on about 3000 special 'name words' and their 
relevant lexical features. Listed are personal titles 
(e.g., Mr., King), organizational identifiers (includ- 
ing strong identifiers such as Inc. and weaker do- 
main identifiers such as Arts) and names of large 
places (e.g., Los Angeles, California, but not Scars- 
dale, N.Y.). Also listed are exception words, such 
as upper-case lexical items that are unlikely to be 
single-word proper names (e.g., Very, I or TV) and 
lower-case lexical items (e.g., and and van) that can 
be parts of proper names. In addition, the authority 
file contains about 20,000 first names. 
Our choice of disambiguation resources makes 
Nominator fast and robust. The precision and re- 
call of Nominator, operating without a database of 
pre-existing proper names, is in the 90's while the 
processing rate is over 40Mg of text per hour on a 
RISC/6000 machine. (See (Ravin and Wacholder 
1996) for details.) This efficient processing has been 
achieved at the cost of limiting the extent to which 
the program can 'understand' the text being ana- 
lyzed and resolve potential ambiguity. Many word- 
sequences that are easily recognized by human read- 
ers as names are ambiguous for Nominator, given the 
restricted set of tools available to it. In cases where 
Nominator cannot resolve an ambiguity with rela- 
tively high confidence, we follow the principle that 
'noisy information' is to be preferred to data omit- 
ted, so that no information is lost. In ambiguous 
cases, the module is designed to make conservative 
decisions, such as including non-names or non-name 
parts in otherwise valid name sequences. It assigns 
weak types such as ?HUMAN or fails to assign a 
type if the available information is not sufficient. 
4 The  Name D iscovery  P rocess  
In this section, we give an overview of the process 
by which Nominator identifies and classifies proper 
names. Nominator's first step is to build a list of 
candidate names for a document. Next, 'splitting' 
heuristics are applied to all candidate names for the 
purpose of breaking up complex names into smaller 
ones. Finally, Nominator groups together name vari- 
204 
ants that refer to the same entity. After information 
about names and their referents has been extracted 
from individual documents, an aggregation process 
combines the names collected from all the documents 
into a dictionary, or database of names, representa- 
tive of the document collection. (For more details 
on the process, see (Ravin and Wacholder 1996)). 
We illustrate the process of name discovery with 
an excerpt taken from a Wall Street Journal article 
in the T IPSTER CD-ROM collection (NIST 1993). 
Paragraph breaks are omitted to conserve space. 
. . .  The professional conduct of lawyers in other 
jurisdictions is guided by American Bar Association 
rules or by state bar ethics codes, none of which 
permit non-lawyers to be partners in law firms. The 
ABA has steadfastly reserved the title of partner and 
partnership erks (which include getting a stake of 
the firm's profit) for those with law degrees. But 
Robert Jordan, a partner at Steptoe & Johnson who 
took the lead in drafting the new district bar code, 
said the ABA's rules were viewed as "too restrictive" 
by lawyers here. "The practice of law in Washing- 
ton is very different from what it is in Dubuque," 
he said . . . .  Some of these non-lawyer employees are 
paid at partners' levels. Yet, not having the part- 
ner title "makes non-lawyers working in law firms 
second-class citizens," said Mr. Jordan of Steptoe & 
Johnson . . . .  
Before the text is processed by Nominator, it is 
analyzed into tokens - -  sentences, words, tags, and 
punctuation elements. Nominator forms a candidate 
name list by scanning the tokenized document and 
collecting sequences of capitalized tokens (or words) 
as well as some special lower-case tokens, such as 
conjunctions and prepositions. 
The list of candidate names extracted from the 
sample document contains: 
American Bar Association 
Robert Jordan 
Steptoe &= Johnson 
ABA 
Washington 
Dubuque 
Mr. Jordan of Steptoe & Johnson 
Each candidate name is examined for the presence 
of conjunctions, prepositions or possessive 's. A set 
of heuristics is applied to determine whether each 
candidate name should be split into smaller inde- 
pendent names. For example, Mr. Jordan of Steptoe 
Johnson is split into Mr. Jordan and Steptoe 8J 
Johnson. 
Finally, Nominator links together variants that 
refer to the same entity. Because of standard 
English-language naming conventions, Mr. Jordan 
is grouped with Robert Jordan. ABA is grouped 
with American Bar Association as a possible abbre- 
viation of the longer name. Each linked group is 
categorized by an entity type and assigned a 'canon- 
ical name' as its identifier. The canonical name is 
the fullest, least ambiguous label that can be used 
to refer to the entity. It may be one of the variants 
found in the document or it may be constructed from 
components ofdifferent ones As the links are formed, 
each group is assigned a type. In the sample output 
shown below, each canonical name is followed by its 
entity type and by the variants linked to it. 
American Bar Association (ORG) : ABA 
Steptoe & Johnson (ORG) 
Washington (PLACE) 
Dubuque (PLACE) 
Robert Jordan (PERSON) : Mr. Jordan 
After the whole document collection has been 
processed, linked groups are merged across docu- 
ments and their variants combined. Thus, if in 
one document President Clinton was a variant of 
William Clinton, while in another document Gover- 
nor Clinton was a variant of William Clinton, both 
are treated as variants of an aggregated William 
Clinton group. In this minimal sense, Nominator 
uses the larger context of the document collection 
to 'learn' more variants for a given name. 
In the following sections we describe how ambigu- 
ity is resolved as part of the name discovery process. 
5 Reso lu t ion  o f  S t ruc tura l  
Ambigu i ty  
We identify three indicators of potential structural 
ambiguity, prepositions, conj unctions and possessive 
pronouns, which we refer to as 'ambiguous oper- 
ators'. In order to determine whether 'splitting' 
should occur, a name sequence containing an am- 
biguous operator is divided into three segments - -  
the operator, the substring to its left and the sub- 
string to its right. The splitting process applies a 
set of heuristics based on patterns of capitalization, 
lexical features and the relative 'scope' of operators 
(see below) to name sequences containing these op- 
erators to determine whether or not they should be 
split into smaller names. 
We can describe the splitting heuristics as deter- 
mining the scope of ambiguous operators, by analogy 
to the standard linguistic treatment of quantifiers. 
From Nominator's point of view, all three operator 
types behave in similar ways and often interact when 
they co-occur in the same name sequence, as in New 
York's MOMA and the Victoria and Albert Museum 
in London. 
The scope of ambiguous operators also interacts 
with the 'scope' of NP-heads, if we define the scope 
of NP-heads as the constituents they dominate. For 
example, in Victoria and Albert Museum, the con- 
junction is within the scope of the lexical head 
Museum because Museum is a noun that can take 
PP modification (Museum of Natural History) and 
205 
hence pre-modification (Natural History Museum). 
Since pre-modifiers can contain conj unctions (Japan- 
ese Painting and Printing Museum), the conjunction 
is within the scope of the noun, and so the name 
is not split. Although the same relationship holds 
between the lexical head Laboratories and the con- 
junction and in IBM and Bell Laboratories, another 
heuristic takes precedence, one whose condition re- 
quires splitting a string if it contains an acronym 
immediately to the left or to the right of the am- 
biguous operator. 
It is not possible to determine relative scope 
strength for all the combinations of different opera- 
tors. Contradictory examples abound: Gates of Mi- 
crosoft and Gerstner of IBM suggests stronger scope 
of and over o k The Department of German Lan- 
guages and Literature suggests the opposite. Since 
it is usually the case that a right-hand operator 
has stronger scope over a left-hand one, we evalu- 
ate strings containing operators from right to left. 
To illustrate, New York's MOMA and the Victoria 
and Albert Museum in London is first evaluated for 
splitting on in. Since the left and right substrings 
do not satisfy any conditions, we proceed to the next 
operator on the left - -  and. Because of the strong 
scope of Museum, as mentioned above, no splitting 
occurs. Next, the second and from the right is eval- 
uated. It causes a split because it is immediately 
preceded by an all-capitalized word. We have found 
this simple typographical heuristic to be powerful 
and surprisingly accurate. 
Ambiguous operators form recursive structures 
and so the splitting heuristics apply recursively to 
name sequences until no more splitting conditions 
hold. New York's MOMA is further split a t ' s  be- 
cause of a heuristic that checks for place names on 
the left of a possessive pronoun or a comma. Victo- 
ria and Albert Museum in London remains intact. 
Nominator 's  other heuristics resemble those dis- 
cussed above in that they check for typographical 
patterns or for the presence of particular name types 
to the left or right of certain operators. Some heuris- 
tics weigh the relative scope strength in the sub- 
strings on either side of the operator. If the scope 
strength is similar, the string is split. We have ob- 
served that this type of heuristic works quite well. 
Thus, the string The Natural History Museum and 
The Board of Education is split at and because ach 
of its substrings contains a strong-scope NP-head (as 
we define it) with modifiers within its scope. These 
two substrings are better balanced than the sub- 
strings of The Food and Drug Administration where 
the left substring does not contain a strong-scope 
NP-head while the right one does (Administration). 
Because of the principle that noisy data is prefer- 
able to loss of information, Nominator does not split 
names if relative strength cannot be determined. As 
a result, there occur in Nominator's output certain 
'names' such as American Television ~ Commu- 
nications and Houston Industries Inc. or Dallas's 
MCorp and First RepublicBank and Houston's First 
City Bancorp. of Tezas. 
6 Reso lu t ion  o f  Ambigu i ty  a t  
Sentence  Beg inn ings  
Special treatment is required for words in sentence- 
initial position, which may be capitalized because 
they are part of a proper name or simply because 
they are sentence initial. 
While the heuristics for splitting names are lin- 
guistically motivated and rule-governed, the heuris- 
tics for handling sentence-initial names are based on 
patterns of word occurrence in the document. When 
all the names have been collected and split, names 
containing sentence-initial words are compared to 
other names on the list. If the sentence-initial candi- 
date name also occurs as a non-sentence-initial name 
or as a substring of it, the candidate name is as- 
sumed to be valid and is retained. Otherwise, it is 
removed from the list. For example, if White occurs 
at sentence-initiai position and also as a substring 
of another name (e.g., Mr. White) it is kept. If it 
is found only in sentence-initial position (e.g., White 
paint is ...), White is discarded. 
A more difficult situation arises when a sentence- 
initial candidate name contains a valid name that 
begins at the second word of the string. If the pre- 
ceding word is an adverb, a pronoun, a verb or a 
preposition, it can safely be discarded. Thus a sen- 
tence beginning with Yesterday Columbia yields Co- 
lumbia as a name. But cases involving other parts 
of speech remain unresolved. If they are sentence- 
initial, Nominator accepts as names both New Sears 
and New Coke; it also accepts sentence-initial Five 
Reagan as a variant of President Reagan, if the two 
co-occur in a document. 
7 Reso lu t ion  o f  Semant ic  Ambigu i ty  
In a typical document, a single entity may be re- 
ferred to by many name variants which differ in their 
degree of potential ambiguity. As noted above, Paris 
and Washington are highly ambiguous out of con- 
text but in well edited text they are often disam- 
biguated by the occurrence of a single unambiguous 
variant in the same document. Thus, Washington is
likely to co-occur with either President Washington 
or Washington, D.C., but not with both. Indeed, we 
have observed that if several unambiguous variants 
do co-occur, as in documents that mention both the 
owner of a company and the company named after 
the owner, the editors refrain from using a variant 
that is ambiguous with respect to both. 
To disambiguate highly ambiguous variants then, 
we link them to unambiguous ones occurring within 
the same document. Nominator cycles through the 
list of names, identifying 'anchors', or variant names 
206 
that unambiguously refer to certain entity types. 
When an anchor is identified, the list of name candi- 
dates is scanned for ambiguous variants that could 
refer to the same entity. They are linked to the an- 
chor. 
Our measure of ambiguity is very pragmatic. It is 
based on the confidence scores yielded by heuristics 
that analyze a name and determine the entity types 
it can refer to. If the heuristic for a certain entity 
type (a person, for example) results in a high con- 
difence score (highly confident hat this is a person 
name), we determine that the name unambiguously 
refers to this type. Otherwise, we choose the highest 
score obtained by the various heuristics. 
A few simple indicators can unambiguously deter- 
mine the entity type of a name, such as Mr. for a 
person or Inc. for an organization. More commonly, 
however, several pieces of positive and negative vi- 
dence are accumulated in order to make this judge- 
ment. 
We have defined a set of obligatory and optional 
components for each entity type. For a human name, 
these components include a professional title (e.g., 
Attorney General), a personal title (e.g., Dr.), a first 
name, middle name, nickname, last name, and suffix 
(e.g., Jr.). The combination of the various compo- 
nents is inspected. Some combinations may result in 
a high negative score - -  highly confident hat this 
cannot be a person name. For example, if the name 
lacks a personal title and a first name, and its last 
name is listed as an organization word (e.g., Depart- 
ment) in the authority list, it receives a high negative 
score. This is the case with Justice Department or 
Frank Sinatra Building. The same combination but 
with a last name that is not a listed organization 
word results in a low positive score, as for Justice 
Johnson or Frank Sinatra. The presence or absence 
of a personal title is also important for determining 
confidence: If present, the result is a high confidence 
score (e.g., Mrs. Ruth Lake); No personal title with 
a known first name results in a low positive confi- 
dence score (e.g'., Ruth Lake, Beverly Hills); and no 
personal title with an unknown first name results in 
a zero score (e.g., Panorama Lake). 
By the end of the analysis process, Justice De- 
partmen~ has a high negative score for person and 
a low positive score for organization, resulting in its 
classification as an organization. Beverly Hills, by 
contrast, has low positive scores both for place and 
for person. Names with low or zero scores are first 
tested as possible variants of names with high posi- 
tive scores. However, if they are incompatible with 
any, they are assigned a weak entity type. Thus in 
the absence of any other evidence in the document, 
Beverly Hills is classified as a ?PERSON. (?PER- 
SON is preferred over ?PLACE as it tends to be the 
correct choice most of the time.) This analysis of 
course can be over-ridden by a name database list- 
ing Beverly Hills as a place. 
Further disambiguation may be possible during 
aggregation across documents. As mentioned be- 
fore, during aggregation, linked groups from differ- 
ent documents are merged if their canonical forms 
are identical. As a rule, their entity types should 
be identical as well, to prevent a merge of Boston 
(PLACE) and Boston (ORG). Weak entity types, 
however, are allowed to merge with stronger entity 
types. Thus, Jordan Hills (?PERSON) from one 
document is aggregated with Jordan Hills (PER- 
SON) from another, where there was sufficient evi- 
dence, such as Mr. Hills, to make a firmer decision. 
8 Evaluat ion 
An evaluation of an earlier version of Nominator, 
was performed on 88 Wall Street Journal documents 
(NIST 1993) that had been set aside for testing. We 
chose the Wall Street Journal corpus because it fol- 
lows standard stylistic conventions, especially capi- 
talization, which is essential for Nominator to work. 
Nominator's performance deteriorates if other con- 
ventions are not consistently followed. 
A linguist manually identified 2426 occurrences 
of proper names, which reduced to 1354 unique to- 
kens. Of these, Nominator correctly identified the 
boundaries of 91% (1230/1354). The precision rate 
was 92% for the 1409 names Nominator identified 
(1230/1409). In terms of semantic disambiguation, 
Nominator failed to assign an entity type to 21% 
of the names it identified. This high percentage is
due to a decision not to assign a type if the confi- 
dence measure is too low. The payoff of this choice 
is a very high precision rate - -  99 % - -  for the as- 
signment of semantic type to those names that were 
disambiguated. (See (Ravin and Wacholder 1996) 
for details. 
The main reason that names remain untyped is 
insufficent evidence in the document. If IBM, for 
example, occurs in a document without Interna- 
tional Business Machines, Nominator does not type 
it; rather, it lets later processes inspect the local 
context for further clues. These processess form 
part of the Talent tool set under development at 
the T.:\]. Watson Research Center. They take as 
their input text processed by Nominator and fur- 
ther disambiguate untyped names appearing in cer- 
tain contexts, such as an appositive, e.g., president 
of CitiBank Corp. 
Other untyped names, such as Star Bellied 
Sneetches or George Melloan's Business World, are 
neither people, places, organizations nor any of the 
other legal or financial entities we categorize into. 
Many of these uncategorized names are titles of ar- 
ticles, books and other works of art that we currently 
do not handle. 
207 
9 Conclusion 
Ambiguity remains one of the main challenges in 
the processing of natural anguage text. Efforts to 
resolve it have traditionally focussed on the devel- 
opment of full-coverage parsers, extensive lexicons, 
and vast repositories of world knowledge. For some 
natural-language applications, the tremendous ef- 
fort involved in developing these tools is still re- 
quired, but in other applications, uch as informa- 
tion extraction, there has been a recent trend to- 
wards favoring minimal parsing and shallow knowl- 
edge (Cowie and Lehnert 1996). In its minimal use 
of resources, Nominator follows this trend: it relies 
on no syntactic information and on a small seman- 
tic lexicon - an authority list which could easily be 
modified to include information about new domains. 
Other advantages of using limited resources are ro- 
bustness and execution speed, which are important 
in processing large amounts of text. 
In another sense, however, development of a mod- 
ule like Nominator still requires considerable hu- 
man effort to discover eliable heuristics, particu- 
larly when only minimal information is used. These 
heuristics are somewhat domain dependent: dif- 
ferent generalizations hold for names of drugs and 
chemicals than those identified for names of people 
or organizations. In addition, as the heuristics de- 
pend on linguistic conventions, they are language 
dependent, and need updating when stylistic con- 
ventions change. Note, for example, the recent pop- 
ularity of software names which include exclamation 
points as part of the name. Because of these dif- 
ficulties, we believe that for the forseeable future, 
practical applications to discover new names in text 
will continue to require the sort of human effort in- 
vested in Nominator. 
Re ferences  
Agarwal R. and L. Boggess, 1992. A simple but 
useful approach to conjunct identification I  Pro- 
ceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the ACL, 
pp.15-21, Newark, Delaware, June. 
Brill E. and P. Resnick, 1994. A rule-based ap- 
proach to prepositional phrase disambiguation, 
URL: http://xxx.lanl.gov/list/cmp.lg/9410026. 
Coates-Stephens S., 1993. The analysis and acquisi- 
tion of proper names for the understanding of free 
text, In Computers and the Humanities, Vol.26, 
pp.441-456. 
Cowie J. and W. Lehnert., 1996. Information 
Extraction In Communications of the ACM , 
Vol.39(1), pp.83-92. 
Cowie J., L. Guthric, Y. Wilks, J. Pustejovsky and 
S. Waterman, 1992. Description of the Solomon 
System as used for MUC-4 In Proceedings of 
the Fourth Message Understanding Conference, 
pp.223-232. 
Jensen K. and Binot J-L, 1987. Disambiguating 
prepositional phrase attachments byusing on-line 
definitions, In Computational Linguistics, Vol. 13, 
3-4, pp.251-260. 
Hayes P., 1994. NameFinder: Software that finds 
names in text, In Proceedings of RIAO 94, 
pp.762-774, New York, October. 
Hindle D. and M. Rooth., 1993. Structural am- 
biguity and lexical relations, In Computational 
Linguistics, Vol.19, i, pp.103-119. 
Mani I., T.R. Macmillan, S. Luperfoy, E.P. Lusher, 
and S.J. Laskowski, 1993. Identifying unknown 
proper names in newswire text. In B. Boguraev 
and J. Pustejovsky, eds., Corpus Processing for 
Lexical Acquisition, pp.41-54, MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, Mass. 
McDonald D.D., 1993. Internal and external evi- 
dence in the identification and semantic atego- 
rization of proper names. In B. Boguraev and 
J. Pustejovsky, eds, Corpus Processing for Lezi- 
cal Acquisition, pp.61-76, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. 
NIST 1993. TIPSTER Information-Retrieval Text 
Research Collection, on CD-ROM, published by 
The National Institute of Standards and Technol- 
ogy, Gaithersburg, Maryland. 
Paik W., E.D. Liddy, E. Yu, and M. McKenna, 1993. 
Categorizing and standardizing proper nouns for 
efficient information retrieval, In B. Boguraev and 
J. Pustejovsky, eds, Corpus Processing for Lezi- 
cal Acquisition, pp.44-54, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass. 
Quirk R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. Svar- 
tik, 1972. A Grammar of Contemporary English, 
Longman House, Harlow, U.K. 
Ravin Y. and N. Wacholder, 1996. Extracting 
Names from Natural-Language T xt, IBM Re- 
search Report 20338. 
Wacholder N., Y. Ravin and R.J. Byrd, 1994. Re- 
trieving information from full text using linguis- 
tic knowledge, In Proceedings of the Fifteenth 
National Online Meeting, pp.441-447, New York, 
May. 
208 
