An Eng l i sh  Grammar  Checker  as a Wr i t ing  A id  
for S tudents  of  Eng l i sh  as a Second Language 
J ong  C.  Park  1, Mar tha  Pa lmer  1, and C lay  Washburn  2 
1 Computer  & In format ion  Science 
Un ivers i ty  of Pennsy lvan ia ,  PA 19104 
{park  ,mpa lmer}?l inc .  c i s .  upenn,  edu 
2 Engl ish Language Programs 
Un ivers i ty  of Pennsylvania. ,  PA 19104 
gwashbur@sas, upenn, edu 
1 I n t roduct ion  
We present a prototype grammar checker for En- 
glish as a Second Language (ESL) students, utilizing 
Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) written in 
SICStus Prolog. Instead of attempting to handle all 
possible grammatical errors, the grammar checker 
identifies certain specific types of grammatical mis- 
takes that appear more regularly than others in the 
present domain of application. 
2 Grammat ica l  M is takes  
The current project started as part of a collabora- 
tion between the Computer and Information Science 
department and the English Language Programs at 
the University of Pennsylvania n an effort to provide 
a computational tool for students who are learning 
English as a second language. As an initial attempt, 
the present implementation focuses on certain dom- 
inant types of syntactic mistakes, as identified from 
the available set of students' essays. 
The kind of mistakes that are detected by the 
current system includes: Wrong capitalization (sen- 
tence initial, wrong lowercase/uppercase initial let- 
ter), missing fragments (subjects, objects, some 
prepositions, complements, articles, clauses, the, 
than, ere), some extra elements (e.g., the infini- 
tive marker after auxiliary verbs), wrong agreement 
(number, case, etc), wrong verb form, and various 
mismatches (verb tense with adverbs, etc). 
3 Gra ln lnar  Formal i sm 
In order to handle ungrammatical expressions as 
well as grammaticM ones, we utilized the syntac- 
tic domain of locality implicit in categorial exi- 
ca l entries under the CCG framework, by includ- 
ing known variations of categorial association in the 
lexical entries. Multiple parts-of-speech are handled 
by putting all the assertions regarding rammatical 
parts-of-speech before those regarding ungrammati- 
cal ones. 
4 Categor ia l  Lex icon  
In constructing a categorial lexicon for the grammar, 
we used an existing grammar-independent lexicon 
that had been made available as part of the XTAG 
project at the University of Pennsylvania. The orig- 
inal public domain lexicon contains about 37K quin- 
tuples, (INDEX, ENTRY, POS, CAT, FS), where POS 
and CAT are associated with a part-of-speech (such 
as V or N) and a set of categories, respectively, for 
the lexical item associated with ENTRY.  The lexi- 
cal items are supplemented by a morphology table, 
which has about 317K entries for various grammati- 
cal inflections. We have also made use of public do- 
main word lists and consulted an on-line electronic 
dictionary for more commonly used lexical items. 
At the moment, the lexicon has about 18K nouns, 
6.5K adjectives, 4.5K transitive verbs, 2K intransi- 
tive verbs, among other categories. 
5 Engl ish  Gra ln lnar  Checker  
The user interface of the system includes a direct 
interaction with the Prolog interpreter, as well as an 
Internet interface. The Internet interface is written 
in HTML and CGI/PEt/L,  which invokes the run- 
time image of the Prolog code. 
The project is still at an initial stage and there are 
many other issues that need to be addressed, such as 
performance and coverage of the mistake types. We 
believe that the use of a standard linguistic theory 
such as CCG made it possible to develop a grammar 
checker in a very short time frame and limited man 
power, as the existing large standard lexicons are be 
made readily available for it. Pending further fund- 
ing, we believe that the prototype grammar checker 
can be brought up to an industry strength. 
Acknowledgements  
We appreciate the students who agreed to provide 
thei~ essays for the present project. We also thank 
our beta testers, especially Laura Siegel and Jinah 
Park, who have shared their time to test the system. 
24 
