An Annotat ion  Scheme for Free Word Order Languages 
Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants, Hans Uszkoreit 
Universit /~t des Saar landes  
66041 Saarbr f icken,  Germa,ny  
{ skut, krenn, brant s, uszkore?t }@col ?. un?- sb. de 
Abst ract  
We describe an annotation scheme and a 
tool developed for creating linguistically 
annotated corpora for non-configurational 
languages. Since the requirements for such 
a formalism differ from those posited for 
configurational languages, several featu- 
res have been added, influencing the ar- 
chitecture of the scheme. The resulting 
scheme reflects a stratificational notion of 
language, and makes only minimal assump- 
tions about the interrelation of the particu- 
Jar representational strata. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The work reported in this paper aims at provi- 
ding syntactically annotated corpora ('treebanks') 
for stochastic grammar induction. In particular, we 
focus on several methodological issues concerning 
the annotation of non-configurational l nguages. 
In section 2, we examine the appropriateness of
existing annotation schemes. On the basis of these 
considerations, we formulate several additional re- 
quirements. A formMism conrplying with these re- 
quirements i described in section 3. Section 4 deals 
with the treatment of selected phenomena. For a 
description of the annotation tool see section 5. 
2 Mot ivat ion  
2.1 L inguist ica l ly  In terpreted  Corpora  
Combining raw language data with linguistic intor- 
mation offers a promising basis for the development 
of new efficient and robust NLP methods. Real- 
world texts annotated with difihrent strata of lin- 
guistic information can be used for grarninar indue- 
tion. The data-drivenness of this approach presents 
a clear advantage over tile traditional, idealised no- 
tion of competence grammar. 
2.2 Ex is t ing  Treebank  Formats  
Corpora annotated with syntactic structures are 
commonly referred to as trt:tbauk.~. Existing tree- 
bank annotation schemes exhibit a fairly uniform 
architecture, as they all have to meet the same basic 
requirements, namely: 
Descr ip t iv i ty :  GrammaticM phenomena re to be 
described rather than explained. 
Theory - independence:  Annotations should not 
be influenced by theory-specific considerations. 
Nevertheless, different heory-specific represen- 
tations shMl be recoverable from the annota- 
tion, cf. (Marcus et al, 1994). 
Mu l t i - s t ra ta l  representat ion :  Clear separation 
of different description levels is desirable. 
Data -dr ivenness :  The scheme must provide repre- 
sentational means for all phenomena occurring 
in texts. Disambiguation is based on human 
processing skills (cf. (Marcus et at., 1994), 
(Sampson, 1995), (Black et al , 1996)). 
The typical treebank architecture is as follows: 
S t ructures :  A context-free backboI~e is augmented 
with trace-filler epresentations of non-local de- 
pendencies. The underlying argum~.nt s ructure 
is not represented directly, but can be recovered 
from the tree and trace-filler ammtations. 
Syntact i c  category  is encoded in node IM:,els. 
Gralnmatical  f inctioxls constitute a complex la- 
bel system (cf. (Bies et al, 1995), (Sampson, 
1995)). 
Par t -o f -Speech  is annotated at word level. 
Thus the context-li'ee constituent backbone plays 
a pivotal role in the annotation scherne. Due to 
the substantial differences between existing models 
of constituent structure, tile question arises of how 
the theory indcp~ndcnc~, requirement can be satis- 
fied. At this point the mlportance of the underlying 
argument struc~ur?: is emphasised (cf. (Lehmaim et 
al., 1996), (Marcus et al, 1994), (Sampson, 1995)). 
2.3 Language-Spec i f i c  Features  
Treebanks of the tbrmat described ill tile M)ove sec- 
tion have been designed tbr English. Tllereff)re, the 
88 
solutions they offer are not always optirnal for other 
language types. As for free word order languages, 
the following features may cause problems: 
? local a,nd ram-local dependencies tbrm a con- 
tinuum rather than clear-cut classes of pheno- 
mena; 
? there exists a rich inventory of discontinuous 
constituency types (topicalisation, scrambling, 
clause union, pied piping, extraposition, split 
NPs and PPs); 
? word order variation is sensitive to many fac- 
tors, e.g. category, syntactic flmction, focus; 
? the gramrn~ticMity of different word permuta- 
tions does not fit the tr~,ditional binary 'right- 
wrong' pattern; it, rather tbrms a gradual tran- 
sition between the two poles. 
In light of these facts, serious difficulties can be ex- 
pected arising from the structurM component of the 
existing formalisms. Due to the frequency of discon- 
tinuous constituents in non-eonfigurational l ngua.- 
ges, the filler-trace mechanism would be used very 
often, yielding syntactic trees fairly different from 
the underlying predicate-argument structures. 
Consider the German sentence 
(1) d;tra.n wird ihn Anna. erkennen, da.t\] er weint 
at-it will him Anita. recognise tha.t he cries 
'Anna. will recognise Iron a.t his cry' 
A sample constituent structure is given below: 
S 
~S#t 
Adv~ V NP#2 NP I I V / \ 
daran e#1 wird ihn Anna e#e e#.~ erkennen, dass erweint 
The fairly short sentence contains three non-local 
dependencies, marked by co-references between tra- 
ces and the corresponding nodes. This hybrid repre- 
sentation makes the structure less transparent, and 
therefore more difficult to annotate. 
Apart from this rather technical problem, two fur- 
ther arguments speak against phrase structure as the 
structural pivot of the annotation scheme: 
? Phrase structure models stipulated tbr non- 
configura.tionM languages differ strongly from 
each other, presenting a challenge to the inten- 
ded theory-independence of the schelne. 
? Constituent structure serves as an exl)la.natory 
device for word order variation, which is difficult 
to reconcile with the descriptivity requirement. 
Finally, the structural handling of free word or- 
der means stating well-formedness constraints on 
structures involving many trace-filler dependencies, 
which ha:s proved tedious. Since most methods of 
handling discontinuous constituents make the for- 
naalism more powerfifl, the efficiency of processing 
deteriorates, too. 
An Mternative solution is to make argurnent struc- 
ture the main structural component of the forma- 
lism. This assumption underlies a growing num- 
ber of recent syntactic theories which give up the 
context-free constituent ba.ckbone, cf. (McCawley, 
1987), (Dowty, 1989), (Reape, 1993), (Kathol and 
Pollard, 1995). These approaches provide an ade- 
quate explanation for several issues problematic ibr 
phrase-structure grammars (clause union, extrapo- 
sition, diverse second-position phenomena). 
2.4 Annotat ing  Argument  S t ructure  
Argument structure can be represented in terms of 
unordered trees (with crossing branches). In order to 
reduce their ambiguity potential, rather simple, 'flat' 
trees should be employed, while more information 
can be expressed by a rich system of function labels. 
Furthermore, the required theory-independence 
means that the form of syntactic trees should not 
reflect theory-specific assumptions, e.g. every syn- 
tactic structure has a unique hea.d. Thus, notions 
such as head should be distinguished at the level of 
syntactic flmctions rather than structures. This re- 
quirement speaks against he traditional sort of d~:- 
pendency  trees, in which heads are represented as 
non-terminal nodes, cf. (Hudson, 1984). 
A tree meeting these requirements i  given below: 
( , , ) - - -  
I 
Adv V NP NP V CPL NP V 
daran wird ihn Anna erkennen, &tss er weint 
Such a word order independent representation has 
the advantage of all structural ini'orrrlation being en- 
coded in a single data structure. A unifbrm repre- 
sentation of local and non-local dependencies makes 
the structure more transparent 1 . 
3 The  Annotat ion  Scheme 
3.1 Arch i tec ture  
YVe distinguish the tbllowmg levels of representation: 
1A context-Kee constituent backboIm ca.it still be re- 
covered fl'mn tile surfa,ce string a.nd a.rgmnent structure 
by rea, tta,ching 'extra.cted' structures to ;t higher node. 
89 
Argument  s t ruc ture ,  represented in terms of un- 
ordered trees. 
Grammat ica l  funct ions ,  encoded in edge labels, 
e.g. SB (subject), MO (modifier), HD (head). 
Syntact i c  categor ies ,  expresse(l by category la- 
bels assigned to non-terminal nodes and by 
part-of-speech tags assigned to terlninals. 
3.2 Argulnent St ructure  
A structure for (2) is shown in fig. 2. 
(2) schade, dM~ kein Arzt anwesend ist, tier 
pity that no doctor present is who 
sich auskennt 
is competent 
'Pity that no competent doctor is here' 
Note that the root node does not have a head de- 
scendant (HD) as the sentence is a predicative con- 
struction consisting of a subject (SB) and a predi- 
cate (PD) without a copula. The subject is itself a 
sentence in which the copula (is 0 does occur and is 
assigned the tag HD 2. 
The tree resembles traditional constituent struc- 
tures. The difference is its word order independence: 
structural units ("phrases") need not be contiguous 
substrings. For instance, the extraposed relative 
clause (RC) is still treated as part of the subject 
NP. 
As the annotation scheme does not distinguish dif- 
ferent bar levels or any similar intermediate catego- 
ries, only a small set of node labels is needed (cur- 
rently 16 tags, S, NP, AP . . . ) .  
3.3 Grammat ica l  Funct ions  
Due to the rudimentary character of the argument 
structure representations, a great deal of reformation 
has to be expressed by gramnlatical functions. Their 
further classification must reflect different kinds of 
linguistic information: morphology (e.g., case, in- 
flection), category, dependency type (complementa- 
tion vs. modification), thematic role, etc. 3 
However, there is a trade-off between the granu- 
larity of information encoded in the labels and the 
speed and accuracy of annotation. In order to avoid 
inconsistencies, the corpus is annotated in two sta- 
ges: basic annotalion and r'efincment. While in the 
first phase each annotator has to annotate structures 
as well as categories and functions, the refinement 
can be done separately for each representation level. 
During the first, phase, the focus is on almotating 
correct structures and a coarse-grained classification 
of grammatical  functions, which represent the follo- 
wing areas of information: 
2CP stands for conwlementizer, OA for accusative 
object and RC for relative clause. NK denotes a 'kernel 
NP' component (v. section 4.1). 
aFor an extensive use of gr;tnllnaticM functions Cf. 
(K~trlsson et al, 1995), (Voutilainen, 1994). 
Dependency  type: complemcnls are fllrther clas- 
sified according to features su(:h as category 
and case: clausal complements (OC), accusa- 
tive objects (OA), datives (DA), etc. Modifiers 
are assigned the label MO (further classification 
with respect to thematic roles is planned). Se- 
parate labels are defined for dependencies that 
do not fit the complement/modifier dichotomy, 
e.g., pre- (GL) and postnominal genitives (GR). 
Headedness  versus  non-headedness :  
Headed and non-headed structures are distin- 
guished by the presence or absence of a branch 
labeled HD. 
Morpho log ica l  in fo rmat ion :  Another set of la- 
bels represents morphological information. PM 
stands for moTThological partich, a label tbr 
German infinitival zu aml superlative am. Se- 
parable verb prefixes are labeled SVP. 
During the second annotation stage, the annota- 
tion is enriched with information about, thematic ro- 
les, quantifier scope and anaphoric ret)rence. As al- 
ready mentioned, this is done separately for each of 
the three information areas. 
3.4 St ructure  Shar ing  
A phrase or a lexical item can perform multiple func- 
tions in a sentence. Consider ~.qui verbs where the 
subject of the infinitival VP is not realised syntac- 
tically, but co-referent with the subject or object of 
the matrix equi verb: 
(3) er bat reich ZU kolnlnen 
he asked me to come 
(mich is the imderstood subject of komm~.u.). In such 
cases, an additional edge is drawn from tim embed- 
(led VP node to the controller, thus changing the 
syntactic tree into a graph. We call such additional 
edges secondary links and represent hem as dotted 
lines, see fig. 4, showing the structure of (3). 
4 Treatment  of Se lected Phenomena 
As theory-independence is one of our objectives, the 
annotation scheme incorporates a number of widely 
accepted linguistic analyses, especially ill the area 
of verbal, adverbial and adjectival syntax. However, 
some other s~andard analyse.s turn out to be proMe- 
marie, mainly due to the partial, idealised character 
of competence grammars, which often margmalise 
or ignore such important phenolnena s 'deficient' 
(e.g. headless) constructions, apl)ositions, temporal 
expressions, etc. 
In the following paragraphs, we give annotations 
for a number of such phenomena. 
4.1 Noun Phrases  
Most linguistic theories treat NPs as structures hea- 
(led by a unique lexical item (no,m) However, this 
90 
idealised model needs severa.l additional assumpti- 
ons in order to account for such important pheno- 
mena as complex norninal NP components (cf. (4)) 
or nominalised a.djectives (of. (5)). 
(4) my uncle Peter Smith 
(5) tier sehr (41iickliche 
the very lta.ppy 
'tire very ha.pl)y one' 
In (4), different theories make different headedness 
predictions. In (5), either a lexical nominalisation 
rule for the adjective Gliicklichc is stipulated, or the 
existence of an empty nominal head. Moreover, the 
so-called DP analysis views the article der as the 
head of the phrase. Further differences concern the 
a.ttachment of the degree modifier ,ehr. 
Because of the intended theory-independence of 
the scheme, we annotate only the cornmon rnini- 
mum. We distinguish an NP kernel consisting of 
determiners, a.djective phrases and nouns. All com- 
ponents of this kernel are assigned the label NK aml 
trea.ted as sibling nodes. 
The diff>rence between the particular NK's lies in 
the positional and part-of-speech information, which 
is also sufficient o recover theory-specific structures 
frorn our 'underspecified' representations. For in- 
stance, the first determiner among the NK's can be 
treated as the specifier of the phrase. The head of 
the phrase can be determined in a similar way ac- 
cording to theory-specific assumptions. 
In addition, a number of clear-cut NP components 
can be defined outside that juxtapositional kernel: 
pre- and postnorninal genitives (GL, GR), relative 
clauses (RC), clausal and sentential complements 
(OC). They are all treated as siblings of NK's re- 
gardless of their position (in situ or extraposed). 
4.2 At taeh lnent  A inbigui t ies  
Adjunct attachment often gives rise to structural 
ambiguities or structural uncertainty. However, fill 
or partial disambiguation takes place in context, and 
the annotators do not consider unrealistic readings. 
In addition, we have adopted a simple convention 
for those cases in which context information is insuf- 
ficient f~)r total disaml~iguat,ion: the highest possible 
attachment site is chosen. 
A similar convention has been adopted ibr con- 
structions in which scope ambiguities ha.ve syntac- 
tic effe, cts but a. one-to-one correspondence b tween 
scope a.nd attachment does not seem reasonable, cf. 
focus particles such a.s only or also. If the scope of 
such a word does not directly correspond to a tree 
node, the word is attached to the lowest node domi- 
nating all subconstituents a.pl)earing ill its scope. 
4.3 Coord inat ion  
A problem for the rudimentary a.rgument structure 
representations is tile use of incomplete structures 
in natural language, i.e. t)henornena such as coor- 
dination and ellipsis. Since a precise structural de- 
scription of non-constituent coordination would re- 
quire a rich inventor.), of incomplete phrase types, we 
have agreed on a sort of nnderspecified representa- 
tions: the coordinated units are assigned structures 
in which missing lexical material is not represented 
at the level of primary links. Fig. 3 shows the re- 
presentation of the sentence: 
(6) sie wurde van preuliischen Truppen besetzt 
site was by Prussiaa, troops occupied 
und 1887 dem preutlischen Staat angegliedert 
and 1887 to-the Prussia.n state incorporated 
'it was occupied by Prussian troops and incorpo- 
rated into Prussia i,t 1887' 
The category of the coordination is labeled CVP 
here, where C stands for coordination, and VP tar 
the actual category. This extra, marking makes it 
easy to distinguish between 'normal' and coordina- 
ted categories. 
Multiple coordination as well a.s enumerations are 
annotated in the same way. An explicit coordinating 
conjunction eed not be present. 
Structure-sharing is expressed using secondary 
links. 
5 The  Annotat ion  Too l  
5.1 Requirenlents 
The development of linguistically interpreted cor- 
pora, presents a laborious and time-consuming task. 
In order to make the annotation process more effi- 
cient, extra effort has been put into the development 
of an annotation tool. 
The tool supports immediate graphical feedback 
and automatic error checking. Since our scheme per- 
mits crossing edges, visualisa.tion as bracketing and 
indentation would be insufficient. Instead, the con> 
plete structure should be represented. 
The tool should also permit a convenient hand- 
ling of node and edge hd)els. In particular, variable 
tagsets and label collections hould be allowed. 
5.2 Imp lementat io l l  
As the need for certain flmctionalities becomes ob- 
vious with growing annota.tion experience, we have 
decided to iml)lement he tool in two stages. In the 
first phase, the ma.in flmctionality for buihling and 
displaying unordered trees is supplied. In the se- 
cond phase, secondary links and additional structu- 
ral flmctions are supported. The implementation f 
the first phase as described in the following para- 
graphs is completed. 
As keyboard input is rnore efficient than mouse 
input (cf. (Lehmalm et al, 1!)95)) rnost effort has 
been put in developing an efficient keyboard inter- 
lace. Menus are supported as a. usefld way of getting 
91 
help on commands and labels. In addition to pure 
annotation, we can attach conlments to structures. 
Figure 1 shows a screen dump of the tool. The 
largest part of the window contains the graphical re- 
presentation of tim structure being annot, ate(t. The 
tbllowing commands are available: 
? group words and/or phrases to a new phrase; 
? ungroup a phrase; 
? change the name of a phrase or an edge; 
? re-attach a node; 
? generate the postscript output of a sentence. 
The three tagsets used by the annotation tool 
(for words, phrases, and edges) are variable and are 
stored together with the corpus. This allows easy 
modification if needed. The tool checks the appro- 
priateness of the input. 
For the implementation, we used Tc l /Tk  Version 
4.1. The corpus is stored in a SQL database. 
5.3 Automat ion  
The degree of automation i creases with the amount 
of data available. Sentences annotated in previous 
steps are used as training material for further pro- 
cessing. We distinguish five degrees of automation: 
0) Completely manual annotation. 
1) The user determines phrase boundaries and 
syntactic ategories (S, NP, etc.). The program 
automatically assigns grammatical fimetion la- 
bels. The annotator can alter the assigned tags. 
2) The user only determines the conrponents of a 
new phrase, the program determines its syntac- 
tic category and the grammatical functions of 
its elements. Again, the annotator has the op- 
tion of altering the assigned tags. 
3) Additionally, the program performs simple 
bracketing, i.e., finds 'kernel' phrases. 
4) Tile tagger suggests partial or cornplete parses. 
So far, about 1100 sentences of our corpus have 
been annotated. This amount of data suffices as 
training material to reliably assign the grammatical 
functions if the user determines the elements of a 
phrase and its type (step 1 of the list above). 
5.4 Ass ign ing  GramInat ica l  Funct ion  
Labels 
Grammatical  functions are assigned using standard 
statistical part-of-speech tagging methods (cf. e.g. 
(Cutting et al, 1992) and (Feldweg, 1995)). 
For a phrase Q with children of type T . . . . . .  T~: 
and grammatical fimctions G , , . . . ,  (7~:, we use the 
lexical probabilities 
PO(GiITi) 
and the contextual (trigram) probabilities 
PQ(T; \[Ti-,, Ti-~ ) 
92 
The lexical and contextual probabilities are deter- 
mined separately for each type of phrase. During 
annotation, the highest rated granmlatical fimction 
labels Gi a.re calculated using the Viterbi algorithnr 
and a.ssigned to the structure, i.e., we. <'Mculate 
k 
argma.x H PQ(T, IT,-1, ~_~,) . PQ(G, IT,). 
G i=1 
To keep the human annotator from missing errors 
made by the tagger, we additionally calculate the 
strongest competitor for each label Gi. If its pro- 
bability is close to the winner (closeness is defined 
by a threshold on the quotient), the assignment is
regarded as unreliable, and the annotator is asked 
to confirm the assignment. 
For evaluation, the already annota.ted sentences 
were divided into two disjoint sets, one tbr training 
(90% of the corpus), the other one tbr testing (10%). 
The procedure was repeated 10 times with different 
partitionings. 
The tagger ates 90% of all assignments as reliable 
and carries them out fully automatically. Accuracy 
for these cases is 97%. Most errors are due to wrong 
identification of the subject and different kinds of 
objects in sentences and VPs. Accuracy of the unre- 
liable 10% of assignments i  75%, i.e., the annotator 
has to alter the choice in 1 of 4 cases when asked ibr 
confirmation. Overall accuracy of the tagger is 95%. 
Owing to the partial automation, the average an- 
notation efficiency improves by 25% (from around 4 
minutes to 3 minutes per sentence). 
6 Conc lus ion  
As the annotation scheme described ill this paper fo- 
cusses on annotating argunlent structure rather than 
constituent trees, it differs from existing treebanks in 
several aspects. These differences can be illustrated 
by a comparison with the Penn Treeba.nk annotation 
scheme. The following features of our fornlMisrn a.re 
then of particular importance: 
* simpler (i.e. 'fiat') representation structures 
? complete absence of ernl.)ty categories 
? no special nlechanisnls tbr handling disconti- 
nuous constituency 
The current tagset conlprises only 16 node labels 
and 34 function tags, yet a. finely grained cla.ssifica- 
tion will take place in the nea.r future. 
We have argued that the selected approach is bet- 
ter suited for producing higl, quality interpreted co l  
pora m languages exhil)iting free constituent order. 
In general, the resulting interpreted ata also are 
closer to semantic annotation and more netltra.l with 
respect o particular synta, ctic theories. 
As modern linguistics is a.lso becorning rnore aware 
of the irnportance of larger sets of m~turally occur- 
- General: 
_Corpus: \[RefCorpus Teslkopie. IE\] 
Editor: IThorsten JB 
, _Parser \ [ -~1 ~ei0ad 
- Sentence: 
No.: 4 / 1269 
Comment: I 
Origin: refcorp.tt 
Last edited: Thorsten, 07/02/97, 17:39:29 
l 
Es o spielt 
PPER VVFIN 
509\[~ 
S11 
eben 2 keine 3 Rolle 's ob die 7 MusR 8 gef"allig 9 ist -,~ nuq2 etwasa 
ADV PlAT NN $, KOUS ART NN ADJD VAFIN $( ADV PlAT 
6 10 
5O5 
+ 
Neues mu",, 14 15 16 
Move: 
Matches: 0 
F_Dependency: 
/ Selection: I ! 
/~ommand:L~i  .__1\[ ~\] 
I\[ i x.ou,, i
-- Paren tlabel: 
Node no.: 
Parent!abel:IlNext I I  Prey 1\ [ '~  JB 
\[ Switching to sentence no. 4... Done. J 
Figure 1: Screen dump of the annotation tool 
ring data, interpreted corpora, are a valuable re- 
source for theoreticzd and descriptive linguistic re- 
search. In a.ddition the a.t~proach provides empiri- 
cal material lot psycholinguistic investigation, since 
preferences for the choice of certain syntactic con- 
structions, linea.rizations, and atta.chments that have 
been observed in online experiments of language pro- 
duction and comprehension can now be put in rela- 
tion with the frequency of these alterna,tives m la.rger 
amounts of texts. 
Syntactically a.nnotated corpora of German haze 
been missing until now. In the second phase of the 
project Verbnmbi\] a. treebank for 30,000 German 
spoken sentences a.s well a.s for the S~tllle anlounl, of 
English ~md .\]apanese ntences will be created. We 
will closely coordinate the further develolmlent of 
our corpus with the annotation work in Verbmobil 
and with other German efforts in corpus annotation. 
Since the combinatorics of syntactic onstructions 
crea.tes a demand tbr very large corpora, efficiency of 
annotation is an important criterion tbr the success 
of the developed methodology a.nd tools. Our anno- 
tation tool supplies efficient ma.nipulation and im- 
mediate visualization of argument structures. Par- 
tial automation included it, the current version si- 
gnificantly reduces the manual effort. Its extension 
is subject to fllrther investigations. 
7 Acknowledgements 
This work is part of the DFG Somlerforschungs- 
bereich 378 Re.~o'urc~-Adaptrm Coguitiv~, Proc~:s.~e~, 
Project (;3 Conc,:r'r~',.t Gramm.ar Proces.~ug. 
We wish to thank Ta,nia, Avgustinova, Berthold 
Crysmann, La.rs Konieczny, Stephan Oepen, Karel 
Oliva, Christian Wei6 and two anonymous reviewers 
{'or their help:\[ul comments on the content of this 
paper. We also wish to thank Robert Maclntyre 
and Ann Taylor for valualde discussions on the Penn 
Treebank annotation. Special thanks go to Oliver 
93 
Plaehn, who implemented the annotation tool, and 
to our fearless annotators Roland Hendriks, Kerstin 
K15ckner, Thomas Schulz, and Bernd-Paul Simon. 
References 
Ann Bies et al 1995. BTuck~t, ing Guidelin~:.~ for 
Treebank H Slyh' Penn Treebank Project. Techni- 
cal report, University of Pennsylvania. 
Ezra Black et al 1996. Beyond Skeleton Par- 
sing: Producing a Comprehensive Large-Scale 
General-English Treehank With Full Grammati- 
cal Analysis. In Th.~: 16th Int.~:rnational Confe- 
rence on Computal, ional Linguistics, pages 107 - 
113, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Doug Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and Pe- 
nelope Sibun. 1992. A practical part-of-speech 
tagger. In Procteding~ o.f th( 3rd Confer~nc, ou 
Applied Natural Language Proc?.ssing (ACL), pa- 
ges 133-140. 
David Dowty. 1989. Towards a minimalist heory 
of syntactic structure. In Tilburg Conference on 
Discontinuous Constituency. 
Helmut Feldweg. 1995. Implementation a d evalua- 
tion of a German HMM for POS disambiguation. 
In Proceedings of EACL-SIGDAT-95 Workshop, 
Dublin, Ireland. 
Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil 
Blackwell Ltd. 
Fred Karlsson, Atro Voutilainen, J uha Heikkila, and 
Arto Anttila. 1995. (,'onstrai,.~ G'rammar. A 
Language-Independent System for Parsing Unre,- 
slricted Text. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New 
York. 
Kathol, Andreas and Carl Pollard. 1995. Extra.po- 
sition via Complex Domain Formation. In P~v- 
ceedings of the 33 ''~ Annual M~.eting of the: ACL, 
pages 174-180, C, ambridge, MA. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Sabine Lehmann et al 1996. TSNLP - Test Sui- 
tes for Natural Language Processing. In Th~ 16th 
lnle't'national (:onf~renc~ on Computational Li~.- 
guistics, pages 711 - 717, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Mitchell Marcus et al 1994. The Penn Treebank: 
Annotating Predicate Argument Structure. In 
Proceedings of lhe Haman Language Technolog:t I 
Workshop, San Francisco. Morgan Kaufmann. 
James McCawley. 1987. Some additional evidence 
for discontimfity. In Huck and Ojeda (eds.), Dis- 
continuous Const.iluency: Synl.a.v and Semanf.ies, 
pp 185-200. New York, Academic Press. 
Mike Reape. 1993. A Formal Theory o\] Word Or- 
d~:r: A Ca.s~ ,gtudy iTt W~st. G~.r'm.,nw. PhD. the- 
sis, University of Edinburgh. 
Geoffrey Sampson. 1995. E,gli.~h \]'or th~ Compu- 
ter. The SUSANNE Corp',..~ and Analytic 5'cheme. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Atro Voutilainen. 1994. Designing a Parsing Gram- 
mar. University of Helsinki, Dept. of General Lin- 
guistics. Publications No. 22. 
94 
Sie 
PPER 
E~ 
Schade 
ADJD 
wurde 
VAFIN 
E~ 
? 
da"s 
$. KOUS 
Figure 2: 
ff 
E E 
kein Arzl anwesend ist der sich 
PlAT NN ADJD VAFIN $, PRELS PRF 
Headed a,nd non-hea,ded structures, ext, ral.)osition 
auskennl 
VVFIN 
von preu'sischen 
APPR ADJA 
? 
Truppen besetzt und 
NN VVPP KON 
1887 dem preu"sischen 
CARD ART ADJA 
+ 
Staatsverband 
NN 
t 
angeglieded 
WPP 
Figure. 3: (',oordina,tion 
EF 
PPER 
bat 
VVFIN 
I 
I 
I 
I 
reich zu kommen 
PPER PTKZU VVINF 
Figure 4: Equi construction 
95 
