CATMORF: Multi two-level steps for Catalan morphology 
Ton i  Bad ia ,  _kngels Egea  & Anton i  Tue l l s  
IULA - -  Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
La Rambla  30-32; Barcelona 08002; Cata lunya - Spain 
tbadia@upf, es ANGELS@slc.ub.es tuells@upf, es 
1 An  Overv iew o f  the  sys tem 
CATMORF (Badia, Egea & Tuells, 1997) is the cen- 
tral module of a tagger intended to deal with free 
input. It operates on texts structurally marked with 
SGML tags and attaches SGML tags to every word 
of the text. 
text 
I THM \] 
CATMORF I 
I TAGGER "1 
unambiguously 
tagged text 
Figure 1: General overview of the system 
The text-handling module (THM) receives as in- 
put the plain text between SGML marks. It as- 
signs a tag to the textual items that be handled 
by CATMORF: numbers, dates, proper names...(i.e, 
the usual pre-process). The input to CATMORF is 
the set of textual items to which the text-handler 
has not been able to assign a tag. 
CA TMORF assigns as many tags to each word- 
form as morphological nalyses are allowed by its 
70000 items dictionary and its two-level and word- 
grammar rules. The output of CATMORF, in the 
form of a set of SGML tags, is returned to the mas- 
ter program which assigns a dummy tag to the still 
unrecognised words and passes over the tagged text 
to the third module. 
Currently the tagger is an adaptation to Catalan 
of the Multext tagger (Armstrong et al, 1996). 
2 In terna l  s t ruc ture  o f  CATMORF 
CATMORF's internal structure (figure 2) conforms 
to the two level paradigm. In the two-level frame- 
work, as it is well known, morphographemics is mod- 
elled in two-level rules (TLR) and morphotactics ei-
ther in continuation classes or in unification word 
grammars (WG). Our system models morphotac- 
tics in a (DCG-like) WG and morphographemics in 
SEGMORF (Badia & Tuells, 1997), a variant of the 
ALEP morphographemic formalism (CEC, 1994). 
2.1 The TLR modu le  
The main characteristics of the formalism is that 
it allows the linguist to express both the mor- 
phographemic and morphotacticai contexts thus 
constraining the application of TLRs. 
Thus a rule in CATMORF may make use of the 
following data structures: the Surface Left and Right 
morphographemic contexts; the Lexical Left and 
Right morphographemic contexts; the Morpholog- 
ical Left and Right contexts; and the Application 
context (i.e, a feature structure which keeps trace of 
the application of rules and which must unify with 
the application-FS associated to every morph found 
in the lexicon). 
As is customary the surface and lexical descrip- 
tions in rules are related by four types of operators. 
Note that some of the facilities in SEGMORF were 
not available in the Alep formalism: the specifica- 
tion of the morphotactical context, the possibility of 
mapping single characters onto multiple ones, and 
the ability to cross morpheme boundaries. 
2.2 The Word Grammar  
Due to the expressivity of the TLRs the WG can 
be very simple: it is a DCG-style grammar, which 
builds a word out of the morphemes into which the 
surface string has been divided and provides the 
morphosyntactic information at the word level. 
25 
string 
TLM 
I N-TLM. 
4 
I V-TLM 
set of morphs 
$ 
WGM 
appropriate 
lemmas 
+ 
ling in\]o 
EM 
appropriate 
taggs 
) 
LEXICA 
N-LEXICON 
V-LEXICON 
PREF-LEX 
Figure 2: Internal structure of CATMORF 
2.3 CATMORF 's  lexicon 
The items in our lexicon contain information on the 
word form and lemma; the inflection paradigm of 
verbs, nouns and adjectives (needed for both the WG 
and the TLR components); and the blocking of rules 
by several classes of stems. 
All this information, including the one concerning 
the inflection paradigms and the blocking of rules 
has been obtained semi-automatically from a MRD 
(a conventional "human-reader-in-mind" dictionary 
available in electronic form): the IEC dictionary 
(IEC, 1996), which is a recent normative dictionary 
for Catalan. 
3 Techn ica l  deta i l s  
The main technical characteristics of our analyzer: 
? The system has been written in Sicstus Prolog. 
? The system covers nominal and verbal inflection 
fully. A few nominal derivation processes are 
also covered. 114 rules cover nominal inflection; 
10 rules cover verbal inflection. 
? The WG has 1 rule for verbal inflection and 15 
rules for nominal processes. 
26 
? The original MRD contains 67567 entries. Our 
lexicon contains 70543 entries; 11092 verbs 
(around 9000 stems and 2000 lexicalized verb 
forms), 386 verbal suffixes, 56275 nouns and ad- 
jectives, 3 nominal suffixes and 2555 adverbs. 
The rest of the entries are prepositions, con- 
junctions, etc. 
? Only around 800 nouns and around 2000 verb 
forms have been added to the system by hand. 
The rest of the entries (around 60000) have been 
added automatically. 
? The system is currently being used in the anal- 
ysis of Catalan newspapers. 
4 The  Mu l t i  two- leve l  steps 
f ramework  
In Catalan, TL-rules depend on word formation pro- 
cesses. 114 rules cover nominal inflection and deriva- 
tion processes, whereas only 10 rules cover verbal 
inflection; thus, few rules can be considered as ap- 
plicable to both inflections. 
This shows that Catalan morphology can be more 
efficiently accounted for in a multi two-level steps 
framework, in which different TLR and WG rule sets 
are available, depending on the type of word forma- 
tion process to cover (as depicted in figure 2). Mor- 
phemes (prefixes, noun stems, verbal stems, etc.) do 
not direct to continuation classes (or sublexicons); 
instead, word formation processes (according to the 
WG) select their appropiate sublexicons. 
Note that this framework does not avoid the spec- 
ification of morpbotactical contexts for those mor- 
phographemic changes which involve interaction be- 
tween TLRs and the WG. It simply specifies that 
for some word formation processes only a subset of 
TLRs should be considered. See (Badia & Tuells, 
1997) for further considerations. 
References 
CEC. 1994. The Alep Linguistic System. 
Armstrong; Robert; and Bouillon 1996. Building a 
Language Model for POS Tagging (ms.). 
Badia; Egea & Tuells 1997. CATMORF: Multi- 
two-level steps for Catalan morphology IULA 
Working Paper. 
Badia & Tuells 1997. SEGMORF: An extension of 
the Alep morphographemic segmentation formal- 
ism. 3rd Alep User Workshop. Saarbriicken. 
Institut d'Estudis Catalans. 1996. Diccionari de la 
Llengua Catalana. 
