Automating NL Appointment Scheduling with COSMA* 
Stephan Busemann 
DFKI GmbH 
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, 66123 Saarbr/icken, Germany 
busemann@dfki, uni-sb, de 
Abstract  
Appointment scheduling is a problem faced 
daily by many individuals and organiza- 
tions. Cooperating agent systems have 
been developed to partially automate this 
task. In order to extend the circle of par- 
ticipants as far as possible we advocate the 
use of natural language transmitted by e- 
mail. We demonstrate COSMA, a fully im- 
plemented German language server for ex- 
isting appointment scheduling agent sys- 
tems. COSMA can cope with multiple di- 
alogues in parallel, and accounts for differ- 
ences in dialogue behaviour between human 
and machine agents. 
1 Motivat ion 
Appointment scheduling is a problem faced daily 
by many individuals and organizations, and typi- 
cally solved using communication i  natural lan- 
guage (NL) by phone, fax or by mail. In general, 
cooperative interaction between several participants 
is required. 
Systems available on the market alow for calendar 
and contact management. However, as (Busemann 
and Merget, 1995) point out in a market survey, all 
planning and scheduling activity remains with the 
user. Cooperative agent systems developed in the 
field of Distributed AI are designed to account for 
the scheduling tasks. Using distributed rather than 
centralized calendar systems, they not only guaran- 
tee a maximum privacy of calendar information but 
also offer their services to members or employees in 
external organizations. Although agent systems al- 
low users to automate their scheduling tasks to a con- 
This work has been supported by a grant from the 
German Federal Ministry of Education, Science, Re- 
search and Technology (FKZ ITW-9402). 
siderable degree, the circle of participants remains 
restricted to users with compatible systems. 
To overcome this drawback we have designed and 
implemented COSMA, a novel kind of NL dialogue 
system that serves as a German language front-end 
to scheduling agents. Human language makes agent 
services available to a much broader public. COSMA 
allows human and machine agents to participate in 
appointment scheduling dialogues via e-mail. We are 
concerned with meetings all participants hould at- 
tend and the date of which is negotiable. 
2 The  Systems 
COSMA is organized as a client/server architecture. 
The server offers NL dialogue service to multiple 
client agent systems. The scheduling agent systems 
act for their respective users. The agents systems 
use a calendar management system for displaying to 
their owners the results of the appointment negoti- 
ations. The users can enter their appointment con- 
straints via a graphical user interface and receive the 
results either by e-mail or via their electronic alen- 
dar. Agent systems are thus hooked up to e-mail, to 
a calendar manager and to the dialogue server. 
The server interface is command-driven. A client 
may connect to the server and open up a dialogue 
(see Figure 1 in (Busemann et al, 1997)). Dur- 
ing the dialogue, the client may request texts to be 
analyzed or semantic descriptions to be verbalized. 
When given a text, the server returns the semantic 
representation, and vice versa. The client ensures 
that the server has available to it linguistically rel- 
evant information about the interlocutors, such as 
names, sexes etc. 
The user agents may access the dialogue server 
via Internet. They use the server as their NL front 
end to human participants. Machine agents inter- 
act with each other in their own formal language. 
This interaction remains unnoticed by the dialogue 
server. As a consequence, the dialogues modeled 
within the server epresent only part of the complete 
multi-participant egotiation. More precisely, only 
utterances between a human and a machine agent 
are modeled. 
The agent system used is a further development of 
the PASHA system (Schmeier and Schupeta, 1996). 
NL analysis in the server is based on a shallow 
parsing strategy implemented in the SMES system 
(Neumann et al, 1997). The use of SMES in 
COSMA, semantic analysis and inference, the dia- 
logue model mapping between human and machine 
dialogue structures, utterance generation, the archi- 
tectural framework of the server, and the PASHA 
agent system are described in (Busemann et al, 
1997). Both papers can be found in the ANLP '97 
conference proceedings. 
We demonstrate extended versions of the systems 
described in (Busemann et al, 1997). In particular, 
the systems to be demonstrated can process counter- 
proposals, which form an important part of efficient 
and cooperative scheduling dialogues. 
3 The Demonstrat ion  Scenario 
The demonstration scenario includes three partici- 
pants. Two are using autonomous agent systems 
that partially automate the negotiation of appoint- 
ment scheduling and manage their users' private lec- 
tronic calendars. The third person plans his appoint- 
ments himself and interacts with other participants 
through NL e-mail messages. His calendar is man- 
aged outside the scope of the systems. 
Dialogues can be initiated by the human partici- 
pant or by one of the agent systems. In the former 
case, the users of the agent systems usually are not 
involved in the negotiation. They see the result :~hen 
it is entered into their electronic alendars. In the 
latter case, the user starts his agent by entering via 
a graphical interface the appointment constraints o 
be used in the negotiation. The basic constraints in- 
clude the time interval within which the appointment 
must be fixed, the duration of the meeting, and the 
participants. 
For demonstration purposes, e-mail is exchanged 
between different accounts on a local host, which 
the server is running on as well. In principle, each 
participant and the server could reside on a different 
site in the Internet. 
The NL server is implemented in Common Lisp 
and C with a graphical surface written in Tcl/Tk. 
The PASHA agent system is implemented in DFKI- 
Oz (Smolka, 1995). The systems are demonstrated 
on a Sun workstation under Unix. 
Acknowledgments 
The following persons have contributed significantly 
to the development and the implementation f the NL 
server system and its components: Thierry Declerck, 
Abdel Kader Diagne, Luca Dini, Judith Klein, and 
G/inter Neumann. The PASHA agent system has 
been developed and extended by Sven Schmeier. 
References 
Stephan Busemann and Iris Merget. 1995. Eine 
Untersuchung kommerzieller Terminverwaltungs- 
Software im Hinblick auf die Kopplung mit 
natiirlichsprachlichen Systemen. Technical Doc- 
ument D-95-11, DFKI, Saarbr/icken, September. 
Stephan Busemann, Thierry Declerck, Abdel Kader 
Diagne, Luca Dini, Judith Klein, and Sven 
Schmeier. 1997. Natural language dialogue ser- 
vice for appointment scheduling agents. In Proc. 
5th Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro- 
cessing, Washington, DC. 
G/inter Neumann, Rolf Backofen, Judith Baur, 
Markus Becker, and Christian Braun. 1997. An 
information extraction core system for real world 
german text processing. In Proc. 5th Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing, Wash- 
ington, DC. 
Sven Schmeier and Achim Schupeta. 1996. PASHA 
II - a personal assistant for scheduling appoint- 
ments. In Proc. Ist Conference on Practical Ap- 
plication of Multi Agent Systems, London, April. 
Gert Smotka. 1995. The Oz Programming Model. 
Research Report RR-95-10, DFKI, Saarbr/icken, 
Germany. 
