GATE - a Genera l  Arch i tec ture  for Text  Eng ineer ing  
Hamish Cunningham 
Dept. Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
211 Portobello St. 
Sheffield S10 4DP 
hamish@dcs, shef. ac. uk 
Kevin Humphreys 
Dept. Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
211 Portobello St. 
Sheffield S10 4DP 
kwh~dcs, shef. ac. uk 
Robert Gaizauskas 
Dept. Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
211 Portobello St. 
Sheffield S10 4DP 
robertg@dcs, shef. ac. uk 
Yorick Wilks 
Dept. Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
211 Portobello St. 
Sheffield S10 4DP 
yorick@dcs, shef .  ac. uk 
For a variety of reasons NLP has recently spawned 
a related engineering discipline called language en- 
gineering (LE), whose orientation is towards the ap- 
plication of NLP techniques to solving large-scale, 
real-world language processing problems in a robust 
and predictable way. Aside from the host of funda- 
mental theoretical problems that remain to be an- 
swered in NLP, language ngineering faces a variety 
of problems of its own. First, there is no theory of 
language which is universally accepted, and no com- 
putational model of even a part of the process of 
language understanding which stands uncontested. 
Second, building intelligent application systems, sys- 
tems which model or reproduce nough human lan- 
guage processing capability to be useful, is a large- 
scale engineering effort which, given political and 
economic realities, must rely on the efforts of many 
small groups of researchers, spatially and temporally 
distributed. The first point means that any attempt 
to push researchers into a theoretical or represen- 
tational straight-jacket is premature, unhealthy and 
doomed to failure. The second means that no re- 
search team alone is likely to have the resources to 
build from scratch an entire state-of-the-art LE ap- 
plication system. 
Given this state of affairs, what is the best prac- 
tical support hat can be given to advance the field? 
Clearly, the pressure to build on the efforts of others 
demands that LE tools or component technologies 
be readily available for experimentation a d reuse. 
But the pressure towards theoretical diversity means 
that there is no point attempting to gain agreement, 
in the short term, on what set of component tech- 
nologies hould be developed or on the informational 
content or syntax of representations that these com- 
ponents hould require or produce. 
Our response has been to design and implement 
a software environment called GATE (Cunninham 
et al, 1997), which we will demonstrate at ANLP. 
GATE attempts to meet the following objectives: 
1. support information interchange between LE 
modules at the highest common level possible 
without prescribing theoretical approach; 
2. support the integration of modules written in 
any source language on any common platform; 
3. support the evaluation and refinement of LE 
component modules, and of systems built from 
them, via a uniform, easy-to-use graphical in- 
terface which in addition offers facilities for vi- 
sualising data and managing corpora. 
Corresponding to the three key objectives identi- 
fied above GATE comprises three principal elements: 
GDM, the GATE Document Manager, based on the 
T IPSTER document manager; CREOLE, a Collec- 
tion of REusable Objects for Language Engineering: 
a set of LE modules integrated with the system; and 
GGI, the GATE Graphical Interface, a development 
tool for LE R&D, providing integrated access to the 
services of the other components and adding visual- 
isation and debugging tools. 
The GDM provides a central repository or server 
that stores all information an LE system generates 
about the texts it processes. All communication be- 
tween the components ofan LE system goes through 
GDM, which insulates these components from direct 
contact with each other and provides them with a 
uniform API for manipulating the data they produce 
and consume. The basic concepts of the data model 
underlying the GDM are those of the T IPSTER ar- 
chitecture, which is specified (Grishman, 1996). 
All the real work of analysing texts in a GATE- 
based LE system is done by CREOLE modules or 
objects (we use the terms module and object rather 
loosely to mean interfaces to resources which may be 
predominantly algorithmic or predominantly data, 
or a mixture of both). Typically, a CREOLE object 
will be a wrapperaround a pre-existing LE module 
or database - a tagger or parser, a lexicon or ngram 
index, for example. Alternatively, objects may be 
29  
developed from scratch for the architecture - in ei- 
ther case the object provides a standardised API to 
the underlying resources which allows access via GGI 
and I /O via GDM. Tile CREOLE APIs may also be 
used for programming new objects. 
When the user initiates a particular CREOLE ob- 
ject via GGI (or when a programmer does the same 
via the GATE API when building an LE applica- 
tion) the object is run, obtaining the information it
needs (document source, annotations from other ob- 
jects) via calls to the GDM API. Its results are then 
stored in the GDM database and become available 
for examination via GGI or to be the input to other 
CREOLE objects. 
GDM imposes constraints on the I /O format of 
CREOLE objects, namely that all information must 
be associated with byte offsets and conform to the 
annotations model of the T IPSTER architecture. 
The principal overhead in integrating a module with 
GATE is making the components use byte offsets, if 
they do not already do so. 
The GGI is a graphical tool that encapsulates the 
GDM and CREOLE resources in a fashion suitable 
for interactive building and testing of LE compo- 
nents and systems. The GGI has functions for creat- 
ing, viewing and editing the collections of documents 
which are managed by the GDM and that form the 
corpora which LE modules and systems in GATE 
use as input data. The GGI also has facilities to 
display the results of module or system execution - 
new or changed annotations associated with the doc- 
ument. These annotations can be viewed either in 
raw form, using a generic annotation viewer, or in an 
annotation-specific way, if special annotation view- 
ers are available. For example, named entity annota- 
tions which identify and classify proper names (e.g. 
organization ames, person names, location names) 
are shown by colour-coded highlighting of relevant 
words; phrase structure annotations are shown by 
graphical presentation of parse trees. Note that the 
viewers are general for particular types of annota- 
tion, so, for example, the same procedure is used for 
any POS tag set, Named-Entity markup etc. Thus 
CREOLE developers reuse GATE data visualisation 
code with negligible overhead. 
A central function of the GGI is to provide a 
graphical launchpad for the various LE subsystems 
available in GATE. To that end, the main panel 
of the GGI top-level display shows the particular 
tasks which may be performed by modules or sys- 
tems within the GATE system (e.g. parsing). Hav- 
ing chosen a task, a window appears displaying a 
connected graph of the modules that need to be run 
to achieve the task. In this graph, the boxes denot- 
ing modules are active buttons: clicking on them 
will, if conditions are right, cause the module to 
be executed. The paths through the graph indi- 
cate the dependencies amongst he various modules 
making up this subsystem. At any point in time, 
the state of execution of the system, or, more ac- 
curately, the availability of data from various mod- 
ules, is depicted through colour-coding of the mod- 
ule boxes. After execution, the results of completed 
modules are available for viewing by clicking again 
on the module box, and are displayed using an ap- 
propriate annotation viewer as described above. In 
addition, modules can be 'reset', i.e. their results 
removed from the GDM, to allow the user to pick 
another path through the graph, or re-execute hav- 
ing altered some tailorable data-resource (such as a 
grammar or lexicon) interpreted by the module at 
run-time. (Modules running as external executables 
might also be recompiled between runs.) 
To illustrate the process of converting pre-existing 
LE systems into GATE-compatible CREOLE sets 
we use as an example the creation of VIE (Vanilla 
Information Extraction system) from LaSIE (Large- 
Scale Information Extraction system) (Gaizauskas 
et al, 1995), Sheffield's entry in the MUC-6 sys- 
tem evaluations. LaSIE module interfaces were not 
standardised when originally produced and its CRE- 
OLEization gives a good indication of the ease of 
integrating other LE tools into GATE. The work 
took around 2 person-months. The resulting sys- 
tem, VIE, is distributed with GATE. 
References  
Cunninham, H., K. Humphreys, R. Gaizauskas, and 
Y. Wilks. 1997. Software Infrastructure for Nat- 
ural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 
Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing (ANLP-97), March. 
Gaizauskas, R., T. Wakao, K Humphreys, H. Cun- 
ningham, and Y. Wilks. 1995. Description of the 
LaSIE system as used for MUC-6. In Proceedings 
of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference 
(MUC-6). Morgan Kaufmann. 
Grishman, R. 1996. T IPSTER Architecture Design 
Document Version 2.2. Technical report, DARPA. 
Available at http: / /www, t ips ter ,  org/.  
30  
