Bui lding a Generat ion Knowledge Source using 
Internet-Accessible Newswire 
Dragomir  R .  Radev  and  Kath leen  R .  McKeown 
Depar tment  of Computer  Sc ience 
Co lumbia  Un ivers i ty  
New York ,  NY  10027 
{radev ,kathy}@cs .co lumbia .edu  
Abst rac t  
In this paper, we describe a method for 
automatic reation of a knowledge source 
for text generation using information ex- 
traction over the Internet. We present a 
prototype system called PROFILE which 
uses a client-server architecture to ex- 
tract noun-phrase descriptions of enti- 
ties such as people, places, and organiza- 
tions. The system serves two purposes: 
as an information extraction tool, it al- 
lows users to search for textual descrip- 
tions of entities; as a utility to generate 
functional descriptions (FD), it is used in 
a functional-unification based generation 
system. We present an evaluation of the 
approach and its applications to natural 
language generation and summarization. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
In our work to date on news summarization at 
Columbia University (McKeown and Radev, 1995; 
Radev, 1996), information is extracted from a se- 
ries of input news articles (MUC, 1992; Grishman 
et al, 1992) and is analyzed by a generation com- 
ponent o produce a summary that shows how per- 
ception of the event has changed over time. In this 
summarization paradigm, problems arise when in- 
formation needed for the summary is either miss- 
ing from the input article(s) or not extracted by 
the information extraction system. In such cases, 
the information may be readily available in other 
current news stories, in past news, or in online 
databases. If  the summarization system can find 
the needed information in other online sources, 
then it can produce an improved summary by 
merging information from multiple sources with 
information extracted from the input articles. 
In the news domain, a summary needs to refer 
to people, places, and organizations and provide 
descriptions that clearly identify the entity for the 
reader. Such descriptions may not be present in 
the original text that is being summarized. For ex- 
ample, the American pilot Scott O'Grady, downed 
in Bosnia in June of 1995, was unheard of by the 
American public prior to the incident. If a reader 
tuned into news on this event days later, descrip- 
tions from the initial articles may be more useful. 
A summarizer that has access to different descrip- 
tions will be able to select he description that best 
suits both the reader and the series of articles be- 
ing summarized. 
In this paper, we describe a system called 
PROFILE that tracks prior references to a given 
entity by extracting descriptions for later use in 
summarization. In contrast with previous work on 
information extraction, our work has the following 
features: 
? It builds a database of profiles for entities by 
storing descriptions from a collected corpus of 
? past news. 
? It operates in real time, allowing for connec- 
tions with the latest breaking, online news to 
extract information about the most recently 
mentioned individuals and organizations. 
? It collects and merges information from dis- 
tributed sources thus allowing for a more com- 
plete record of information. 
? As it parses and identifies descriptions, it 
builds a lexicalized, syntactic representation 
of the description in a form suitable for in- 
put to the FUF/SURGE language generation 
system (Elhadad, 1993; Robin, 1994). 
The result is a system that can combine de- 
scriptions from articles appearing only a few min- 
utes before the ones being summarized with de- 
scriptions from past news in a permanent record 
for future use. Its utility lies in its potential for 
representing entities, present in one article, with 
descriptions found in other articles, possibly com- 
ing from another source. 
Since the system constructs a lexicalized, syn- 
tactic functional description (FD) from the ex- 
tracted description, the generator can re-use the 
description in new contexts, merging it with other 
221 
descriptions, into a new grammatical sentence. 
This would not be possible if only canned strings 
were used, with no information about their inter- 
nal structure. Thus, in addition to collecting a 
knowledge source which provides identifying fea- 
tures of individuals, PROFILE also provides a lex- 
icon of domain appropriate phrases that can be in- 
tegrated with individual words from a generator's 
lexicon to flexibly produce summary wording. 
We have extended the system by semantically 
categorizing descriptions using WordNet (Miller et 
al., 1990), so that a generator can more easily de- 
termine which description is relevant in different 
contexts. 
PROFILE  can also be used in a real-time fash- 
ion to monitor entities and the changes of descrip- 
tions associated with them over the course of time. 
In the following sections, we first overview re- 
lated work in the area of information extraction. 
We then turn to a discussion of the system com- 
ponents which build the profile database, followed 
by a description of how the results are used in gen- 
eration. We close with our current directions, de- 
scribing what parameters can influence a strategy 
for generating a sequence of anaphoric references 
to the same entity over time. 
2 Re la ted  Work  
Research related to ours falls into two main cate- 
gories: extraction of information from input text 
and construction of knowledge sources for genera- 
tion. 
cal context surrounding the hypothesized proper 
nouns (McDonald, 1993; Coates-Stephens, 1991) 
and the larger discourse context (Mani et al, 1993) 
to improve the accuracy of proper noun extrac- 
tion when large known word lists are not available. 
Like this research, our work also aims at extract- 
ing proper nouns without the aid of large word 
lists. We use a regular grammar encoding part-of- 
speech categories to extract certain text patterns 
and we use WordNet (Miller et al, 1990) to pro- 
vide semantic filtering. 
Our work on extracting descriptions is quite 
similar to the work carried out under the DARPA 
message understanding program for extracting de- 
scriptions (MUC, 1992). The purpose for and the 
? scenario in which description extraction is done is 
quite different, but the techniques are very simi- 
lar. It is based on the paradigm of representing 
patterns that express the kinds of descriptions we 
expect; unlike previous work we do not encode se- 
mantic categories in the patterns ince we want to 
capture all descriptions regardless of domain. 
Research on a system called Murax (Kupiec, 
1993) is similar to ours from a different perspec- 
tive. Murax also extracts information from a text 
to serve directly in response to a user question. 
l~urax uses lexico-syntactic patterns, collocational 
analysis, along with information retrieval statis- 
tics, to find the string of words in a text that is 
most likely to serve as an answer to a user's wh- 
query. In our work, the string that is extracted 
may be merged, or regenerated, as part of a larger 
textual summary. 
2.1 In fo rmat ion  Ext rac t ion  
Work on information extraction is quite broad and 
covers far more topics and problems than the in- 
formation extraction problem we address. We 
restrict our comparison here to work on proper 
noun extraction, extraction of people descriptions 
in various information extraction systems devel- 
oped for the message understanding conferences 
(MUC, 1992), and use of extracted information 
for question answering. 
Techniques for proper noun extraction include 
the use of regular grammars to delimit and iden- 
tify proper nouns (Mani et al, 1993; Paik et al, 
1994), the use of extensive name lists, place names, 
titles and "gazetteers" in conjunction with par- 
tial grammars in order to recognize proper nouns 
as unknown words in close proximity to known 
words (Cowie et al, 1992; Aberdeen et al, 1992), 
statistical training to learn, for example, Spanish 
names, from online corpora (Ayuso et al, 1992), 
and the use of concept based pattern matchers 
that use semantic oncepts as pattern categories 
as well as part-of-speech information (Weischedel 
et al, 1993; Lehnert et al, 1993). In addition, 
some researchers have explored the use of both lo- 
2.2 Const ruct ion  of  Knowledge  Sources  
for  Generat ion  
The construction of a database of phrases for re- 
use in generation is quite novel. Previous work 
on extraction of collocations for use in genera- 
tion (Smadja and McKeown, 1991) is related in 
that full phrases are extracted and syntactically 
typed so that they can be merged with individual 
words in a generation lexicon to produce a full sen- 
tence. However, extracted collocations were used 
only to determine realization of an input concept. 
In our work, stored phrases would be used to pro- 
vide content that can identify a person or place 
for a reader, in addition to providing the actual 
phrasing. 
3 Creat ion  o f  a Database  o f  
P ro f i les  
Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of PRO- 
FILE and the two interfaces to it (a user interface 
on the World-Wide Web and an interface to a nat- 
ural language generation system). In this section, 
we describe the extraction component of PRO- 
FILE, the following section focuses on the uses of 
222 
PROFILE for generation, and Section 7 describes 
the Web-based interface. 
r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~ News retrieval ~ Entity Extraction I 
? .~  
PROFILE i 
I Weblnterface I I c ...... io?  s 1 
\[ Surface Generation I 
Figure 1: Overall Architecture of PROFILE. 
3.1 Ext rac t ion  of  ent i ty  names  f rom old 
newswi re  
To seed the database with an initial set of descrip- 
tions, we used a 1.4 MB corpus containing Reuters 
newswire from March to June of 1995. The pur- 
pose of such an initial set of descriptions i twofold. 
First, it allows us to test the other components of 
the system. Furthermore, at the time a descrip- 
tion is needed it limits the amount of online full 
text, Web search that must be done. At this stage, 
search is limited to the database of retrieved de- 
scriptions only, thus reducing search time as no 
connections will be made to external news sources 
at the time of the query. Only when a suitable 
stored description cannot be found will the sys- 
tem initiate search of additional text. 
? Ex t rac t ion  of  cand idates  for p roper  
nouns .  After tagging the corpus using the 
POS part-of-speech tagger (Church, 1988), 
we used a CREP (Duford, 1993) regular 
grammar to first extract all possible candi- 
dates for entities. These consist of all se- 
quences of words that were tagged as proper 
nouns (NP) by POS. Our manual analysis 
showed that out of a total of 2150 entities 
recovered in this way, 1139 (52.9%) are not 
names of entities. Among these are n-grams 
such as "Prime Minister" or "Egyptian Pres- 
ident" which were tagged as NP by POS. Ta- 
ble 1 shows how many entities we retrieve 
at this stage, and of them, how many pass 
the semantic filtering test. The numbers in 
the left-hand column refer to two-word noun 
phrases that identify entities (e.g., "Bill Clin- 
ton"). Counts for three-word noun phrases 
are shown in the right-hand column. We show 
counts for multiple and unique occurrences of 
the same noun phrase. 
? Weed ing  out  of  fa l se  cand idates .  Our 
system analyzed all candidates for entity 
names using WordNet (Miller et al, 1990) 
and removed from consideration those that 
contain words appearing in WordNet's dictio- 
nary. This resulted in a list of 421 unique 
entity names that we used for the automatic 
description extraction stage. All 421 entity 
names retrieved by the system are indeed 
proper nouns. 
3.2 Ext rac t ion  of  descr ip t ions  
There are two occasions on which we extract de- 
scriptions using finite-state techniques. The first 
case is when the entity that we want to describe 
was already extracted automatically (see Subsec- 
tion 3.1) and exists in PROFILE's database. The 
second case is when we want a description to be re- 
trieved in real time based on a request from either 
a Web user or the generation system. 
There exist many live sources of newswire on 
the Internet hat can be used for this second case. 
Some that merit our attention are the ones that 
can be accessed remotely through small client pro- 
grams that don't require any sophisticated proto- 
cols to access the newswire articles. Such sources 
include HTTP-accessible sites such as the Reuters 
site at www.yahoo.com and CNN Interactive at 
www.cnn.com, as well as others such as ClariNet 
which is propagated through the NNTP protocol. 
All these sources share a common characteristic 
in that they are all updated in real time and all 
contain information about current events. Hence, 
they are therefore likely to satisfy the criteria of 
pertinence to our task, such as the likelihood of the 
sudden appearance of new entities that couldn't 
possibly have been included a priori in the gener- 
ation lexicon. 
Our system generates finite-state representa- 
tions of the entities that need to be described. An 
example of a finite-state description of the entity 
"Yasser Arafat" is shown in Figure 2. These full 
expressions are used as input to the description 
finding module which uses them to find candidate 
sentences in the corpus for finding descriptions. 
Since the need for a description may arise at a 
later time than when the entity was found and 
may require searching new text, the description 
finder must first locate these expressions in the 
text. 
These representations are fed to CREP which 
extracts noun phrases on either side of the en- 
tity (either pre-modifiers or appositions) from the 
news corpus. The finite-state grammar for noun 
223 
Two-word entities Three-word entit ies 
Stage Entit ies Unique Entit ies Entit ies Unique Entit ies 
POS tagging only 9079 1546 2617 604 
After WordNet checkup 1509 395 81 26 
Table 1: Two-word and three-word entities retrieved by the system. 
SEARCH~TRING = (({NOUNSHRASE}{SPACE})+{SEARCH~})I({SEARCH~}{SPACE}{COI~qA}{SPACE}{NDUN~HRASE}) 
SEARCH_f09 = \[Yy\]asser{T~OUN}{SPACE}\[Aa\]rafat{T~OUN} 
SEARCH~ = {SEARCH_I}I{SEARCH~}I...I{SEARCH_I09}I... 
Figure 2: Finite-state representation of "Yasser Arafat". 
phrases that we use represents a variety of differ- 
ent syntactic structures for both pre-modifiers and 
appositions. Thus, they may range from a simple 
noun (e.g., "president Bill Clinton") to a much 
longer expression (e.g., "Gilberto Rodriguez Ore- 
juela, the head of the Cali cocaine cartel"). Other 
forms of descriptions, such as relative clauses, are 
the focus of ongoing implementation. 
Table 2 shows some of the different patterns 
retrieved. 
3.3 Categor i za t ion  of  descr ip t ions  
We use WordNet to group extracted escriptions 
into categories. For all words in the description, 
we try to find a WordNet hypernym that can re- 
strict the semantics of the description. Currently, 
we identify concepts uch as "profession", "nation- 
ality", and "organization". Each of these concepts 
is triggered by one or more words (which we call 
"triggers") in the description. Table 2 shows some 
examples of descriptions and the concepts under 
which they are classified based on the WordNet hy- 
pernyms for some "trigger" words. For example, 
all of the following "triggers" in the list "minister", 
"head", "administrator", and "commissioner" can 
be traced up to "leader" in the WordNet hierarchy. 
3.4 Organ izat ion  of  descr ip t ions  in a 
database of profiles 
For each retrieved entity we create a new profile 
in a database of profiles. We keep information 
about the surface string that is used to describe 
the entity in newswire (e.g., "Addis Ababa"),  
the source of the description and the date that 
the entry has been made in the database (e.g., 
"reuters95_06_25"). In addition to these pieces 
of meta-information, all retrieved escriptions and 
their frequencies are also stored. 
Currently, our system doesn't have the capa- 
bility of matching references to the same entity 
that use different wordings. As a result, we keep 
separate profiles for each of the following: "Robert 
Dole", "Dole", and "Bob Dole". We use each of 
these strings as the key in the database of descrip- 
tions. 
Figure 3 shows the profile associated with the 
key "John Major". 
KEY: john major 
SOURCE: reuters95~3-O6_.nws 
DESCRIPTION: british prime minister 
FREQUENCY: 75 
DESCRIPTION: prime minister 
FREQUENCY: 58 
DESCRIPTION: a defiant british prime minister 
FREQUENCY: 2 
DESCRIPTION: his british counterpart 
FREQUENCY: 1 
Figure 3: Profile for John Major. 
The database of profiles is updated every time 
a query retrieves new descriptions matching a cer- 
tain key. 
4 Generat ion  
We have made an attempt to reuse the descrip- 
tions, retrieved by the system, in more than a triv- 
ial way. The content planner of a language gener- 
ation system that needs to present an entity to the 
user that he has not seen previously, might want 
to include some background information about it. 
However, in case the extracted information doesn't 
contain a handy description, the system can use 
some descriptions retrieved by PROFILE.  
4.1 T rans format ion  of  descriptions into 
~nct iona l  Descriptions 
Since our major goal in extracting descriptions 
from on-line corpora was to use them in gener- 
ation, we have written a utility which converts 
finite-state descriptions retrieved by PROFILE 
into functional descriptions (FD) (Elhadad, 1991) 
that we can use directly in generation. A descrip- 
tion retrieved by the system from the article in 4 
is shown in Figure 5. The corresponding FD is 
shown in Figure 6. 
We have implemented a TCP/ IP  interface to 
Surge. The FD generation component uses this 
interface to send a new FD to the surface realiza- 
tion component of Surge which generates an En- 
glish surface form corresponding to it. 
224 
Example  
Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital 
South Africa's main black opposition leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi 
Boerge Ousland, 33 
maverick French ex-soceer boss Bernard Tapie 
Italy's former prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi 
Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army 
Trigger Term 
capital 
leader 
33 
boss 
minister 
arm 
Semant ic  Category  
location 
occupation 
age 
occupation 
occupation 
organization 
Table 2: Examples of retrieved escriptions. 
MILAN - A judge ordered Italy's former prime 
minister Silvio Berlusconi to stand trial in Jan- 
uary on corruption charges in a ruling that could 
destroy the media magnate's hope of returning to 
high office. 
Figure 4: Source article. 
Italy@NPNP 's@$ former@JJ prime@JJ 
minister@NN Silvio@NPNP Berlusconi@NPNP 
Figure 5: Retrieved description for Silvio Berlus- 
coni. 
((cat np) 
(complex apposition) 
(restrictive no) 
(distinct -(((cat common) 
(possessor ((cat common) 
(determiner none) 
(lex "Italy" ))) 
(classifier ((cat noun-compound) 
(classifier ((lex "former"))) 
(head ((lex "prime"))))) 
(head ((lex "minister")))) 
((cat person-name) 
(first-name ((lex "Silvio"))) 
(last-name ((lex "Berlusconi")))))))) 
Figure 6: Generated FD for Silvio Berlusconi. 
4.2 Lex icon  c reat ion  
We have identified several major advantages of 
using FDs produced by the system in generation 
compared to using canned phrases. 
? Grammat ica l i ty .  The deeper representa- 
tion allows for grammatical transformations, 
such as aggregation: e.g., "president Yeltsin" 
+ "president Clinton" can be generated as 
"presidents Yeltsin and Clinton". 
? Un i f i ca t ion  w i th  ex is t ing  onto logies .  
E.g., if an ontology contains information 
about the word "president" as being a realiza- 
tion of the concept "head of state", then un- 
der certain conditions, the description can be 
replaced by one referring to "head of state". 
? Generat ion  of  re fe r r ing  express ions .  In 
the previous example, if "president Bill Clin- 
ton" is used in a sentence, then "head of 
state" can be used as a referring expression 
in a subsequent sentence. 
? Enhancement  o f  descr ip t ions .  If we have 
retrieved "prime minister" as a description for 
Silvio Berlusconi, and later we obtain knowl- 
edge that someone else has become Italy's 
primer minister, then we can generate "for- 
mer prime minister" using a transformation 
of the old FD. 
? Lexica l  choice. When different descrip- 
tions are automatically marked for semantics, 
PROFILE can prefer to generate one over an- 
other based on semantic features. This is 
useful if a summary discusses events related 
to one description associated with the entity 
more than the others. 
? Merg ing  lexicons.  The lexicon generated 
automatically by the system can be merged 
with a domain lexicon generated manually. 
These advantages look very promising and we 
will be exploring them in detail in our work on 
summarization i the near future. 
5 Coverage and L imi ta t ions  
In this section we provide an analysis of the capa- 
bilities and current limitations of PROFILE. 
5.1 Coverage  
At the current stage of implementation, PROFILE 
has the following coverage. 
? Syntact i c  coverage.  Currently, the sys- 
tem includes an extensive finite-state gram- 
mar that can handle various pre-modifiers 
and appositions. The grammar matches arbi- 
trary noun phrases in each of these two cases 
to the extent hat the POS part-of-speech tag- 
ger provides a correct tagging. 
? P rec is ion .  In Subsection 3.1 we showed the 
precision of the extraction of entity names. 
Similarly, we have computed the precision of 
retrieved 611 descriptions using randomly se- 
lected entities from the list retrieved in Sub- 
section 3.1. Of the 611 descriptions, 551 
(90.2%) were correct. The others included 
a roughly equal number of cases of incorrect 
NP attachment and incorrect part-of-speech 
225 
assignment. For our task (symbolic text gen- 
eration), precision is more important than re- 
call; it is critical that the extracted escrip- 
tions are correct in order to be converted to 
FD and generated. 
? Length  o f  descr ipt ions .  The longest de- 
scription retrieved by the system was 9 lexical 
items long: "Maurizio Gucci, the former head 
of Italy's Gucci fashion dynasty". The short- 
est descriptions are 1 lexical item in length - 
e.g. "President Bill Clinton". 
? P ro toco l  coverage.  We have implemented 
retrieval facilities to extract descriptions us- 
ing the NNTP (Usenet News) and HTTP 
(World-Wide Web) protocols. 
5.2 L imi ta t ions  
Our system currently doesn't handle entity cross- 
referencing. It will not realize that "Clinton" and 
"Bill Clinton" refer to the same person. Nor will 
it link a person's profile with the profile of the 
organization of which he is a member. 
At this stage, the system generates functional 
descriptions (FD), but they are not being used in 
a summarization system yet. 
6 Cur rent  D i rec t ions  
One of the more important current goals is to 
increase coverage of the system by providing in- 
terfaces to a large number of on-line sources of 
news. We would ideally want to build a compre- 
hensive and shareable database of profiles that can 
be queried over the World-Wide Web. 
We need to refine the algorithm to handle cases 
that are currently problematic. For example, pol- 
ysemy is not properly handled. For instance, we 
would not label properly noun phrases such as 
"Rice University", as it contains the word "rice" 
which can be categorized as a food. 
Another long-term goal of our research is the 
generation of evolving summaries that continu- 
ously update the user on a given topic of inter- 
est. In that case, the system will have a model 
containing all prior interaction with the user. To 
avoid repetitiveness, such a system will have to re- 
sort to using different descriptions (as well as refer- 
ring expressions) to address a specific entity 1. We 
will be investigating an algorithm that will select a 
proper ordering of multiple descriptions referring 
to the same person. 
After we collect a series of descriptions for each 
possible entity, we need to decide how to select 
1Our corpus analysis supports this proposition - 
a large number of threads of summaries on the same 
topic from the Reuters and UPI newswire used up to 
10 different referring expressions (mostly of the type 
of descriptions discussed in this paper) to refer to the 
same entity. 
among all of them. There are two scenarios. In 
the first one, we have to pick one single descrip- 
tion from the database which best fits the sum- 
mary that we are generating. In the second sce- 
nario, the evolving summary, we have to generate 
a sequence of descriptions, which might possibly 
view the entity from different perspectives. We 
are investigating algorithms that will decide the 
order of generation of the different descriptions. 
Among the factors that will influence the selec- 
tion and ordering of descriptions, we can note the 
user's interests, his knowledge of the entity, the fo- 
cus of the summary (e.g., "democratic presidential 
candidate" for Bill Clinton, vs. "U.S.  president"). 
We can also select one description over another 
based on how recent they have been included in 
the database, whether or not one of them has been 
used in a summary already, whether the summary 
is an update to an earlier summary, and whether 
another description from the same category has 
been used already. We have yet to decide under 
what circumstances a description eeds to be gen- 
erated at all. 
We are interested in implementing existing al- 
gorithms or designing our own that will match dif- 
ferent instances of the same entity appearing in 
different syntactic forms - e.g., to establish that 
"PLO" is an alias for the "Palestine Liberation 
Organization". We will investigate using cooccur- 
rence information to match acronyms to full or- 
ganization ames and alternative spellings of the 
same name with each other. 
An important application that we are consid- 
ering is applying the technology to text available 
using other protocols - such as SMTP (for elec- 
tronic mail) and retrieve descriptions for entities 
mentioned in such messages. 
We will also look into connecting the current 
interface with news available to the Internet with 
an existing search engine such as Lycos (www.- 
lycos.com) or AltaVista (www.altavista.digital.- 
corn). We can then use the existing indices of 
all Web documents mentioning a given entity as 
a news corpus on which to perform the extraction 
of descriptions. 
Finally, we will investigate the creation of 
KQML (Finin et al, 1994) interfaces to the differ- 
ent components of PROFILE which will be linked 
to other information access modules at Columbia 
University. 
7 Cont r ibut ions  
We have described a system that allows users to 
retrieve descriptions of entities using a Web-based 
search engine. Figure 7 shows the Web interface 
to PROFILE. Users can select an entity (such as 
"3ohn Major"), specify what semantic lasses of 
descriptions they want to retrieve (e.g., age, posi- 
226 
tion, nationality) as well as the maximal number 
of queries that they want. They can also specify 
which sources of news should be searched. Cur- 
rently, the system has an interface to Reuters at 
www.yahoo.com, The CNN Web site, and to all 
local news delivered via NNTP to our local news 
domain. 
PROFILE 
s,,,~ I~=,~.~ .~ !'" 
Figure 7: Web-based interface to PROFILE. 
The Web-based interface is accessible publicly 
(currently within Columbia University only). All 
queries are cached and the descriptions retrieved 
can be reused in a subsequent query. We believe 
that such an approach to information extraction 
can be classified as a collaborative database. 
The FD generation component produces yn- 
tactically correct functional descriptions that can 
be used to generate English-language d scriptions 
using FUF and Surge, and can also be used in a 
general-purpose summarization system in the do- 
main of current news. 
All components of the system assume no prior 
domain knowledge and are therefore portable to 
many domains - such as sports, entertainment, 
and business. 
8 Acknowledgments  
This work was partially supported by NSF grant 
GER-90-2406 and by a grant from Columbia Uni- 
versity's Strategic Initiative Fund sponsored by 
the Provost's Office. 
Re ferences  
John Aberdeen, John Burger, Dennis Connolly, 
Susan Roberts, and Marc Vilain. 1992. Mitre- 
bedford: Description of the alembic system as 
used for muc-4. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-4), 
pages 215-222, McLean, Virginia, June. 
Damaris Ayuso, Sean Boisen, Heidi Fox, Herb 
Gish, Robert Ingria, and Ralph Weischedel. 
1992. Bbn: Description of the plum system as 
used for muc-4. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-4), 
pages 169-176, McLean, Virginia, June. 
Kenneth W. Church. 1988. A stochastic parts 
program and noun phrase parser for unre- 
stricted text. In Proceedings of the Second 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro- 
cessing (ANLP-88), pages 136-143, Austin, 
Texas, February. Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics. 
Sam Coates-Stephens. 1991. Automatic lexi- 
cal acquisition using within-text descriptions 
of proper nouns. In Proceedings of the Seventh 
Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the 
New OED and Text Research, pages 154-169. 
Jim Cowie, Louise Guthrie, Yorick Wilks, James 
Pustejovsky, and Scott Waterman. 1992. 
Crl/nmsu and brandeis: Description of the 
mucbruce system as used for muc-4. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Fourth Message Understanding 
Conference (MUC-~), pages 223-232, McLean, 
Virginia, June. 
Darrin Duford. 1993. Crep: a regular expression- 
matching textual corpus tool. Technical Re- 
port CUCS-005-93, Columbia University. 
Michael Elhadad. 1991. Fuf: The universal unifier 
- user manual, version 5.0. Technical Report 
CUCS-038-91, Columbia University. 
Michael Elhadad. 1993. Using argumentation to
control lexical choice: a unification-based im- 
plementation. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Science 
Department, Columbia University. 
Tim Finin, Rich Fritzson, Don McKay, and Robin 
McEntire. 1994. KQML - a language and pro- 
tocol for knowledge and information exchange. 
Technical Report CS-94-02, Computer Science 
Department, University of Maryland and Val- 
ley Forge Engineering Center, Unisys Corpora- 
tion. 
R. Grishman, C. Macleod, and J. Sterling. 1992. 
New york university: Description of the pro- 
teus system as used for muc-4. In Proceedings 
of the Fourth Message Understanding Confer- 
ence, June. 
Julian M. Kupiec. 1993. Murax: A robust lin- 
guistic approach for question answering using 
an on-line encyclopedia. In Proceedings, l#th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference 
on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval. 
227 
W. Lehnert, J. McCarthy, S. Soderlan, E. Riloff, 
C. Cardie, J. Peterson, and F. Feng. 1993. 
Umass/hughes: Description of the circus sys- 
tem used for muc-5. In Proceedings of the Fifth 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-5), 
pages 277-291, Baltimore, Md., August. 
Inderjeet Mani, Richard T. Macmillan, Su- 
sann Luperfoy, Elaine Lusher, and Sharon 
Laskowski. 1993. Identifying unknown proper 
names in newswire text. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge 
from Text, pages 44-54, Columbus, Ohio, June. 
Special Interest Group on the Lexicon of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
David D. McDonald. 1993. Internal and exter- 
nal evidence in the identification and semantic 
cateogrization of proper names. In Proceed- 
ings of the Workshop on Acquisition of Lexical 
Knowledge from Text, pages 32-43, Columbus, 
Ohio, June. Special Interest Group on the Lex- 
icon of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics. 
Kathleen R. McKeown and Dragomir R. Radev. 
1995. Generating summaries of multiple news 
articles. In Proceedings, 18th Annual In- 
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Re- 
search and Development in Information Re- 
trieval, pages 74-82, Seattle, Washington, July. 
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane 
Fellbaum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. 
Miller. 1990. Introduction to WordNet: An 
on-line lexical database. International Journal 
of Lexicography (special issue), 3(4):235-312. 
Message Understanding Conference MUC. 1992. 
Proceedings of the Fourth Message Under- 
standing Conference (MUC-4). DARPA Soft- 
ware and Intelligent Systems Technology Of- 
fice. 
Woojin Paik, Elizabeth D. Liddy, Edmund Yu, 
and Mary McKenna. 1994. Interpretation of 
proper nouns for information retrieval. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Human Language Technology 
Workshop, pages 309-313, Plainsboro, New 
Jersey, March. ARPA Software and Intelli- 
gent Systems Technology Office, Morgan Kauf- 
mann.  
Dragomir R. Radev. 1996. An architecture for dis- 
tributed natural language summarization. In 
Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop 
on Natural Language Generation: Demonstra- 
tions and Posters, pages 45-48, Herstmon- 
ceaux, England, June. 
Jacques Robin. 1994. Revision-Based Genera- 
tion of Natural Language Summaries Provid- 
ing Historical Background. Ph.D. thesis, Com- 
puter Science Department, Columbia Univer- 
sity. 
Frank Smadja and Kathleen R. McKeown. 1991. 
Using collocations for language generation. 
Computational Intelligence, 7(4), December. 
Ralph Weischedel, Damaris Ayuso, Scan Boisen, 
Heidi Fox, Robert Ingria, Tomoyoshi Mat- 
sukawa, Constantine Papageorgiou, Dawn 
MacLaughlin, Masaichiro Kitagawa, Tsutomu 
Sakai, June Abe, Hiroto Hosihi, Yoichi 
Miyamoto, and Scott Miller. 1993. Bbn: De- 
scription of the plum system as used for muc- 
5. In Proceedings of the Fifth Message Under- 
standing Conference (MUC-5), pages 93-108, 
Baltimore, Md., August. 
228 
