The effects of analys ing cohes ion  on document  summar isat ion  
Bran imi r  K. Boguraev  and  Mary  S. Nef f  
IBM ZJ. Watson Research Centel, P.O. Box 704, Yorktown Heights, NY  10598, USA 
bkb,nef f@watson ,  ibm. com 
Abstract 
We argue that in general, the analysis of lexical co- 
hesion factors in a document can drive a summarizer, 
as well as enable other content characterization tasks. 
More narrowly, this paper focuses on how one particular 
cohesion factol~simple l xical repetition--can enhance 
an existing sentence xtraction summarizer, by enabling 
strategies for overcoming some particularly jarring end- 
user effects in the summaries, typically due to coher- 
ence degradation, readability deterioration, and topical 
under-representation. Lexical repetition is instrumental 
to, among other things, the topical make-up of a text, and 
in our framework a lexical repetition-based model of dis- 
course segmentation, capable of detecting topic shifts, is 
integrated with a linguistically-aware summarizer utiliz- 
ing notions of salience and dynamically-adjustable sum- 
mary size. We show that even by leveraging lexical rep- 
etition alone, summaries are of comparable, and under 
certain conditions bette~, quality than the ones delivered 
by a state-of-the-art summarizer. This is encouraging for 
a broad research platform focusing on the recognition 
and use of cohesive devices in text for a range of content 
characterisation a d document management tasks. 
1 Introduction 
This paper add resses aparticular class of problems inher- 
ent to summaries derived by sentence xtraction, namely 
the related issues of coherence degradation, readability de- 
terioration, and topical under-representation. Fundamen- 
tally, these problems arise from unconstrained deletion 
of arbitrary amount of source material between two sen- 
tences which end up adjacent in the summary; this has 
unpredictable effects on the amount of potentially essen- 
tial information which may be lost in that deletion. Ex- 
amples like 'dangling' anaphors (with lost antecedents) 
have been cited often enougk and strategies like includ- 
ing the immediately preceding sentence in the summary 
lmve some effect. While intuitively plausible, these are 
still simple strategies, prone to misfiring; moreover, other 
effects like the reversal of a cote premise in an argument, 
or the introduction, and subsequent elaboration, of a new 
topic, are not easily handled by similar heuristics. 
We seek to leverage a mechanism for assessing the de- 
gree of cohesion between individual sentences in the source 
document, as well as having a notion of how these map 
onto the underlying themes in the document. Informally, 
cohesion--and lexical cohesion in particular--is manifest 
in the ways in which the words, or word patterns, of a 
sentence connect hat sentence to certain of its predeces- 
sors and successors. The intuition is that identifying, and 
preserving, some of these connections in the summary 
would improve its coherence. 
1.1 Lexical  cohesion and summarization 
Documents are coherent because of the continuity of 
their discourse. A number of rhetorical devices help 
achieve cohesion between related document fragments. 
Analysing such devices--or at the very least being sen- 
sitive to their manifestation and interplay---can bring a 
moderately refined degree of discourse awareness into 
the summarization process. In the absence of deep text 
understanding, this boils down to making extensive use 
of a formalized notion of lexical cohesion. 
Linguists have studied extensively how various cohe- 
sive devices operate, and interact, in order to account for 
certain properties of the overall organization ofa text dis- 
course. For (Halliday and Hasan, 1976), the organization 
of text derives from a variety of relationships (cohesive 
ties) among discourse ntities. More recently, (Wintel; 
1979) has focused on the devices that enforce lexical re- 
lationships and connect a discourse fragment with other 
discourse fragments. The underlying theme here is that 
cohesion can be best explained in terms of how repetition 
is manifested across pairs of sentences. Repetition car- 
ries informational va lue- -  it provides a reference point 
for interpreting what has changed, and thus, what is at 
the focus of attention of the discourse--and thus clearly 
goes well beyond the simple notion that discourse frag- 
ments with shared content will also share vocabulary. As 
(Phillips, 1985) points out, the lexical inventory of a text 
is tightly organized in terms of collocation; this makes 
it possible to get a handle on the overall organization of 
text, in general, and on the identification of topic introduc- 
tion and topic closure, in particular. 
A variety of linguistic devices act as vehicles for rep- 
etition: viewed at the level of interplay between words 
and phrases in the text, these include lexical repetition, tex- 
tual substitution and the use of a range of lexical relations, 
co-re~',rence and ellipsis, paraphrasing, colqunetion, and so 
forth. Analysing these would enable the identification of 
strong cohesive ties pulling together a chain of sentences 
which focus on (aspects of) the same discourse ntity or 
event; this would require carrying out, for instance, in- 
depth co-reference and ellipsis resolution, as well as lexi- 
cal relation determination. 
At the other end of the spectrum, just a lexical chaining 
procedure (like the one described in (Morris and I-1irst, 
1.991)) could be used to determine the degree of cohe- 
sion between adjacent pairs of sentences. Indeed, this has 
been the basis for an operational definition of linear dis- 
course segmentation, where segments in a document are 
defined to be contiguous blocks of text, roughly 'about 
the same thing', with segment boundaries indicative of 
topic shifts. 
The research reported here is just one aspect of a larger 
study into the recognition and use of cohesive devices 
for content characterisation tasks. It presupposes fine- 
grained methods for the identification of cohesive ties 
76 
between (sentence) units in a text; describing the com- 
putational basis for developing such methods is outside 
of the scope of this paper (howeveb see (Kennedy and 
Boguraev, 1996), (Fellbaum, 1999), (Kelleb 1994)), as is 
the complete framework for lexical cohesion analysis we 
have developed. Instead, in focusing on the effects of lex- 
ical cohesion on summarization, we limit ourselves here 
on the phenomenon of simple lexical repetition; it turns 
out that even this can be beneficially applied to enhanc- 
ing summarizatkm quality. 
Recent work (Barzilay and Elhadad, 1999) makes ex- 
plicit this intuition. "Lexical chains" are constructed by 
grouping together items related by repetition and cer- 
tain lexical relations derived via the WOI',DNET lexical 
database (Fellbaum, 1999). A sequence of items in a chain 
highlights a discussion focused on topic related to (an) 
ite, m(s) in the chain; a metric for scoring chains picks top- 
ically prominent ones; these are then taken as the basis of 
sentence xtractkm heuristics. A positive result of that 
work is that in an intrinsic evaluation against human- 
constructed summaries, the system outperformed at least 
one commercial summarizer. This highlights the poten- 
tial of a purely lexical chains-based appnmch; still, Barzi- 
lay and Elhadad remain frustrated by the high degree of 
polysemy in WORDNET (not to mention its limited cov- 
erage with respect o more specialized omains); fortu- 
nately, this does not concern us here. 
1.2 Discourse segmentation and summarization 
Unlike Barzilay and Elhadad, we start with a sentence- 
based summarizeb and are specifically seeking to im- 
prove upon what is already (by some measure; see 
Section 4.1 below) a good performance, judged in a 
discipline-wide evaluation initiative (Mani et al, 1999). 
This places certain constraints on how lexical cohesion 
analysis results, and in particular the identification of 
topically coherent segments, can be incorporated in the 
existing strategies and nmchanisms h~r sentence selec- 
tion, already deployed by the summarizer. Making cer- 
tain that a summary incorporates sentences from each 
segment intuitively seeks to ensure uniform representa- 
tion of all sub-stories ina document; he notion here is to 
avoid having inordinately large gaps between adjacent 
summary sentences, which would tend to lose essential 
inhmnation. Moreove,, a mechanism which would pick 
the sentence(s) in a segment most representative its main 
topic, would also carry over into the summary 'traces' of 
all the main topics in the original document. 
This is more than just an intuition. In the process of 
developing, and training, our base summarizer (see Sec- 
tion 2.2 below), an analysis was carried out to determine 
the causes of a certain class of failure. It turns out that 
30.7% of the failures could be prevented by a heuris- 
tic sensitive to the logical structure of documents, which 
would enforce that each (topical) section gets represented 
in the summary. Additional 15.2% of failures could also 
be avoided if the summarizer was capable of detecting 
sub-stories within a single section, leading/trailing oise 
(see below), and so forth. Thus ahnost half of the errors 
(in a certain summarization regime, at least) could have 
been avoided by using a segmentation component. 
This exemplifies how a document-wide analysis of a 
single lexical cohesion factor (simple repetition) can im- 
prove upon an existing sentence selection strategy-~eveu 
if such a strategy has been devised without prior knowl- 
edge of additional enhancements to come. The specific 
approaches to being sensitive to foci of attention within 
a segment, and topic shifts between segments, may vary; 
as we discuss this below (see Section 3.1), these will de- 
pend on other environment settings for the summarizer. 
Still, in the right operational environment even very sim- 
ple heuristics--take the first sentence from each segment, 
for instance--have r markably noticeable impact. 
We thus argue that a lexical repetition-based model of 
linear segmentation ffers effective schemes for deriving 
sentence-based summaries with certain discourse prop- 
erties, enhancing their quality. 
What follows is organized in three main sections. We 
outline some linguistic functions of the summarizel, and 
give details of the summarization a d segmentation com- 
ponents. We focus specifically on how higher level con- 
tent analysis uses lower level shallow linguistic process- 
ing, both to obtain a richer model of the document do- 
main, and to leverage cohesion analysis for sub-story 
identification. Next we discuss some strategies for op- 
timal ttse of discourse segments and topic shifts for sum- 
marization. We sketch our evaluation testbed environ- 
ment, and present experimental results comparing the 
t)erformance of sunnnarization alone to segmentation- 
enhanced summarizatkm. We conclude with an assess- 
ment of the overall utility of 'cheap' approximations to 
lexical cohesion measures, pecifically from the point of 
view of enhancing a fully operational summarizer. 
2 Techno logy  base 
As an integral component of an infrastructure for docu- 
ment analysis with a number of intercoimccted and mu- 
tually enabling linguistic filters, the summarization sys- 
teln discussed here makes use of'shallow' linguistic func- 
tions. The infrastructure is designed from the ground up 
to perform a variety of linguistic feature xtraction func- 
tions, ranging fl'om single pass tokenisation, lexical took- 
up and morphological analysis, to coinplex aggrega- 
tion of representative (salient) phrasal units across multi- 
doculnent collections. Given such a document processing 
environment, the design of our summarizer is based on 
sentence selection mechanisms utlilizing salience ranking 
of phrasal traits in individual documents, when viewed 
against a background of the distribution of phrasal vo- 
cabulary across a large multi-document collectkm. 
2.1 Linguistic filters 
In essence, we have a robust ext analysis ystem for iden- 
tification of proper nanms and technical terms, since these 
are most likely to carry the bulk of the semantic load 
in a document. Howeveb in addition to simple iden- 
tification of certain phrasal types, capabilities also ex- 
ist for identifying their variants (contractions, abbrevia- 
tions, colloquial uses, etc.) in individual documents in 
a multi-document collection. A collection vocabulary of 
canonical forms and variants, with statistical information 
about their distribution behaviom; are used in the sum- 
marizer's alience calculation. Salience, in turn, is a ma- 
jor component of the sentence-level score that selects the 
sentences for extraction (see 2.2 below). 
As a frequency-based system, our summarizer is ide- 
ally positioned to exploit linguistic analysis, filtering, and 
77 
normalization functions. Morphological processing al- 
lows us to link multiple variants of the same word, by 
normalizing to lemma forms. Proper name identification 
is enhanced with context disambiguation, amed entity 
typing, and variant normalisation; asa result he system's 
frequency analysis is more precise, and less sensitive to 
noise; ultimately, this leads to more robust salience cal- 
culation. Normalisation of different variants of the same 
concept o a canonical form is further facilitated by pro- 
cesses of abbreviations unscrambling, resolution of def- 
inite noun phrase anaphora, and aggregation across the 
entire document collection. The set of potentially salient 
phrases is enriched by the identification and extraction 
of technical terms; this enables the recognition of certain 
multi-word concepts mentioned in the document, with 
discourse properties indicative of high topicality value, 
which is also directly relevant to salience determination. 
Each document in a collection is analyzed individually. 
All 'content' (non-stop) words, as well as all phrasal units 
identified by the linguistic filters, are deemed to be vo- 
cabulary items, indexed via their canonical forms. With 
a view to future extensions of the base summarization 
function (see Section 5), these retain complete contextual 
information about the variants they have been encoun-- 
tered in, as well as the local context of each occurrence. 
The vocabulary items are counted and aggregated across 
documents to form the collection w)cabulary. In addition 
to all the canonical forms and variants, the collection vo- 
cabulary contains the composite frequency of each canoni- 
cal form, and its information quotient, a statistical measure 
of the distribution of a vocabulary item in the collection. 
Aggregating together similar items from different docu- 
ments (cross-document co-reference) is far from straight- 
forward for multi-word items; howeveb being able to 
carry out a process of cross-document coreference r solu- 
tion is clearly a further enabling capability for obtaining 
more precise collection statistics. A pronominal anaphora 
resolution function further contributes to the quality of 
the collection statistics. 
In addition to the domain vocabulary, the summarizer 
also has access to document structure information. A hi- 
erarchical representation f the document separates con- 
tent and layout metadata, and makes the latter explicit 
in a document structure tree. Encoded are data includ- 
ing: appearance and layout ags; document title; abstract, 
and other front matter; (sub-)section, etc. headings; para- 
graphs, themselves composed of sentences; 'floating' ob- 
jects like tables, figures, captions; side-bars and other text 
extraneous to the main document narrative; etc. Doc- 
ument structure is constructed by 'shadowing' markup 
parsing, as markup tags are used to construct he doc- 
ument structure tree; for documents without markup, 
structure determination is carried out on the basis of page 
layout cues. The document structure records additional 
discourse-level annotations, uch as cue phrases mark- 
ing rhetorical relations, quoted speech, and so forth. All 
of these elements both contribute directly to the summa- 
rizer's set of heuristics, as well as inform the discourse 
segmentation process. 
2.2 Sa l ience-dr iven  summar izat ion  
With its set of linguistic filters, our frequency-based sum- 
marizer can exploit linguistic dimensions beyond single 
word analysis; this is not unlike the approach of (Aone 
et al, 1997). Due to the sophistication and integration of 
the filters (see Section 2.1), we are able to exploit a richer 
source of domain knowledge than most other frequency- 
based systems. 
Frequency alone is poor indicator of salience, even 
when ignoring stop words. Unlike early frequency-based 
techniques for sentence selection, we utilize the more 
indicative inverse document frequency measure, adapted 
from information retrieval, in which the relative fre- 
quency of an item in a document is compared with its rel- 
ative frequency in a background collection. The trade-off, 
however, for more precise term salience is the summa- 
rizer's dependence on background collection statistics; 
we return to this issue below. 
Sentence selection is driven by the notion of salience; 
the summary is constructed by extracting the most salient 
sentences in the full document. The salience score of a 
sentence is derived partly from the salience of vocabu- 
lary items in the document and partly from its position 
in the document structure (e.g. section-initial, paragraph- 
internal, and so forth) and the salience of the surround- 
ing sentences. The calculation of inverse document fre- 
quency for a w)cabulary item t compares its relative fre- 
quency in the document with its relative frequency in the 
collection. We define the item's salience score to be this 
inverse document frequency measure (in the formula be- 
low, No'oft and Nlgo,., refer to, respectively, to the number 
of items in the collection, and document). 
Salience(t) = log2((N~:ott/fre~q(i,)c~oll)/(NDo~/J'rexl(t)D,,~:)) 
Salient items are items occurring more than once in the 
document, whose salience score is above an experimen- 
tally determined cutoff, or items appearing in a strategic 
position in the document structure (e.g. title, headings, 
etc.; see Section 2.1). All others are assigned zero salience. 
The score for a sentence is made up of two components. 
The salience component is the sum of the salience scores 
of the items in the sentence. The structure component 
reflects the sentence's proximity to the beginning of the 
paragraph, and its paragraph's proximity to the begin- 
ning and/or  end of the document. Structure score is sec- 
ondary to salience score; sentences with no salient items 
get no structure score. 
A set of heuristics address some of the coherence- 
related problems discussed earlier (see 1). For example, 
under certain conditions, a sentence might be selected for 
inclusion in the summary, even if it has low, or even zero, 
score: sentences immediately preceding higher scoring 
ones in a paragraph may get promoted by virtue of an 
'agglomeration rule'. Agglomeration is an inexpensive 
way of preventing dangling anaphors without having 
to resolve them. Another problem for sentence-based 
summarizers, that of thematic under-representation ( r, 
loosely speaking, coverage; see 1), is addressed by an 
'empty section' rule, which is of particular interest for this 
paper. Longer documents with multiple sections, or news 
digests containing several stories, may be unevenly rep- 
resented in a sentence-extracted summary. The 'empty 
section' rule aims to ensure that each section is repre- 
sented in the summary by forcing inclusion of its high- 
est scoring sentences, ob if all sentence scores are zero, its 
first sentence. 
As a general purpose summarize~, ours makes ex- 
tensive use of small scale linguistic information (term 
phrasal patterns) and large scale statistical information 
78 
(term distribution patterns). With the exception of tile 
heuristic rules outlined earlier in this section, tile summa- 
rizer is operating without any focused analysis of cohe- 
sion factors in tile input text. I lence the departure point 
for this work, as already discussed (in Section 1): can the 
summarizer's performance be improved, if we take into 
account lexical cohesion in the source? 
We address this question by making the summarizer 
aware of certain discourse-level f atures of the document, 
and in particular, by leveraging tile topic shifts in it; to 
this end, the infrastructure has been augmented with a 
function for linear discourse segmentation. 
2.3 Linear discourse segmentation 
Segmentation is a document analysis function which di- 
rectly exploits one of tile core text cohesion factors, pat- 
terras of h'xicaI repetition (see Section 1.1), for" identifying 
some baseline data concerning tile distribution of topics 
in a text. In particulal, discourse segmentation is driven 
by tile determination f points in the narrative where per- 
ceptible discontinuities in the text cohesion are detected. 
Such discontinuities are indicative of topic shifts, t%llow- 
ing the original idea of lexical chains (Morris and l lirst, 
1991), subsequently developed specifically for the pur- 
poses of segmentation f expository text (Hearst, 1994), 
we have adapted an algorithm for discourse segmenta- 
tion to our document processing environment. In par- 
ticulab while remaining sensitive to tile distribution of 
"terms" across tile docunlent, and calculating similarity 
between adjacent ext blocks by a cosine measure, our 
procedure differs from that in (Hearst, 1994) in several 
ways. 
We only take into account content words (as opposed 
to all terms yielded by a tnkenizatkm step). These are 
normalized to lemma forms. "Termhood" is addition- 
ally refined to take into account multi-word sequences 
(pcnper names, technical terms, and so forth, as discussed 
in Section 2.1 above), as well as a notion of co-reference, 
where different name variants get "aggregated" into the 
same canonical form. The cohesioi~ calculation (tll\]C- 
tion is biased towards different ypes of possible break 
points: thus certain cue phrases ("llowever", "On lhe olher 
ham/") unambiguously signal a topic shift; document 
structure lements--such as sentence beginnings, para- 
graph openers, and section heads--are exploited for their 
'pre-disposition' to act as likely segment boundaries; and 
so forth (see Section 2.1). The function is also adjusted to 
reduce the noise from block comparisons where the block 
bnundary--and thus a potential topic shift--falls at un- 
natural break points (such as tile middle of  a sentence). 
By making segmentation a other component within 
our  document processing environment, we are able to 
use, transparently, the results of processes such as lexical 
mM morl;hohNical lookup, docmnent structure identification, 
and cue I#trase detection. Likewise, segmentation results 
are naturally incorporated in an annotation superstruc- 
ture which records the various levels of document anal- 
ysis: discourse segments are just another type of a 'span' 
(annotation) over: a number of sentences, logically akin to 
a paragraph (Bird and Liberman, 1999). 
Apart from the adjustments and modifications out- 
lined above, we use essentially tearst's formnla for com- 
puting lexical similarity between adjacent blocks of text 
bl and b2 (t denotes a discourse lement term identified 
as such by prior processing, ranging over tim text span 
of the currently analyzed block; Wt,l,N is the normalized 
frequency of occurrence of the term in block b~\,): 
sim(bl,b2) :~ > tWl,btwt,b~ 
Unlike most applications ofsegmentatkm to date, which 
are concerned with the identification of segment bound- 
aries, we are primarily interested ira Ieveraging the con- 
tent of the segments, to the extent hat it is indicative 
of the focus of attention, and (indirectl3; at least) points 
at tile topical shifts to be utilized for surnmary genera- 
tion. We use tile segmentation results (together with the 
name and term identificatkm and salience calculation de- 
livered by other functions) in order to ensure that all the 
base data for inferring the topic stamps, and topic shifts, 
ix available to the user. 
3 Segmentation-assisted summaries 
What is tile relationsldp between segmentation a d sum- 
marizatkm: is segmentation a strictly "under the covers" 
function for tile summarizer, or might segmentation re- 
suits be of any interest, and use, to tile end nser? We 
fOCLIS ()l 1. SOIlle strategies for incorporating segmentation 
results in tile summary generation process. 1tmvever, un- 
like (Kan et al, 11998) (whose work also seeks to lever- 
age linear segmentation forthe explicit purposes of docu- 
ment summarization), we further take tile view that with 
an appropriate interface metaphor where the user has 
an overview of the relationships between a sunnnary sen- 
tence, the key salient phrases within it, and its enclosing 
discourse segment--a sequence of visually demarkated 
segments can impart a lot of information directly leading 
to in-depth perception of the summary, as it relates to the 
full docun~ent (Boguraev and Neff, 2000). 
3.1 Strategies for utilizing segments 
(_~ol'ln'llOll intuitions uggest a number of strategies for 
leveraging the results of linear discourse segmentation 
for enhancing stunmavizaLion. As topic shift points in 
tile text are 'published' into the document structure (see 
Section 2.3), by defining a segment as an additional type 
of document span (akin to sentence, paragraph, section, 
and so forth), the summarizer t ansparently, and imme- 
diately, becomes aware of the segmentation results. We 
also make arrangements for a mechanism whereby cer- 
tain strategies for incorporating segmentation results into 
the SUlnnlarization process were easy to cast in summa- 
rizer terms. 
Thus, for instance, a heuristic requMng that each seg- 
ment is represented in the summary can be naturally ex- 
pressed by treating segments as sections, and strictly en- 
forcing the 'empty section' rule (see 2.2). The selection 
of a segment-initial sentence for tile summary can be era- 
forced simply by boosting the salience score for that sen- 
tence above a known threshold. A decision to drop an 
anecdotal (or otherwise peripheral; see below) segment 
from consideration i  summary generation would be re- 
alised by setting, as a last step prior to sumlnary genera- 
tion, the sentence salience scores for all sentences in the 
segment to zeros. 
3.2 Other benefits of segmentation 
Such strategies are discussed in mnre detail atch as they 
naturally belong with their evaluation, llere we highlight 
79 
a few observations concerning the overall benefits that 
segmentation brings to summarization. Thus, in addition 
to facilitating sentence-based summaries with certain dis- 
course and rhetorical properties, it turns out that under 
certain conditions the summarizer can operate very ef- 
fectively without a need for background corpus statistics. 
This is a better solution than the highly genre-sensitive 
approach of supplying a 'generic' background collection, 
against which summaries could be generated even for 
documents which are not a priori part of the collection. 
Note that the derivation of a background collection and 
statistics for it might be impractical for a variety of rea- 
sons: lack of access to a sufficiently large and represen- 
tative data sample; no time for processing; sparse stor- 
age resources; and so forth. Clearly, being able to oper- 
ate without such statistics i an operational bonus for the 
summarizer. 
Another use for segmentation is for optimising the use 
of source input, as well as possibly maximising its re-use. 
Occasionally, the document contains 'noise'--possibly in 
the form of anecdotal leads, closing remarks tangential to the 
main points of the story, side-bars, and so forth--which 
are inappropriate sources for summary sentences. Lin- 
ear segmentation sensitive to topic shifts and document 
structure would identify such source fragments and re- 
move them from consideration by the summarizer. Con- 
versely, in certain news reporting enres a whole docu- 
ment fragment (typically towards the beginning or the 
end of the document) functions as a summary of the 
story: we would like to be able to use this fragment; 
clearly identifying it as a segment would help. 
We also use segmentation to handle long documents 
more effectively. While the collection-based salience 
determination works reasonably well for the average- 
length news story, it has some disadvantages. For 
longer documents, with requisite longer summaries, the 
notion of salience degenerates, and the summary be- 
comes just an incoherent collection of sentences. (Even 
if paragraphs, rather than sentences, are used to com- 
pose the summary--see .g. (Mitra et al, 1997)--the same 
problems of coherence degradation and topical under- 
representation, remain.) We use segmentation to iden- 
tify contiguous ub-stories in long documents, which are 
then individually passed on to the summarizer; the re- 
sults of sub-story summaries are 'glued' together. 
4 Evaluat ion 
For evaluating the effect of various strategies upon sum- 
marizer output quality, we used as baseline an evalua- 
tion corpus of full-length articles and their 'digests', from 
The New York Times. There are advantages, and disadvan- 
tages, to this approach. Setting aside whether task-based 
evaluation is appropriate for testing strictly the effect of 
one technology on another (see Section 4.1 below), such 
a decision ties us to a particular set of data. On the pos- 
itive side, this offers a realistic baseline against which to 
compare strategies and heuristics; on the negative side, if 
a certain type of data is missing from the evaluation cor- 
pus, there is little hard evidence for judging the effects of 
strategies and heuristics on such data. 
The remainder of this section describes our evalua- 
tion environment, and then looks at the results for small- 
to-average size documents (the collection comprises just 
over 800 texts, less than half of which are over 10K, 
and virtually none are over 20K; the byte count includes 
HTML markup tags; in terms of number of sentences per 
document, very few of these longer documents are over 
100 sentences long). 
4.1 Summar izat ion  eva luat iontes tbed  
Evaluating summarization results is not trivial, at least 
because there is no such thing as the best, or correct, 
summary--especial ly when the summary is constructed 
as an extract. The purposes of such extracts vary; so do 
human extractors. Sentence xtraction systems may be 
evaluated by comparing the extract with sentences e- 
lected by human subjects (Edmundson, 1969). This is 
a (superficial) objective measure that clearly ignores the 
possibility of multiple right answers. Another objective 
measure compares summaries with pre-existing abstracts 
using a suitable method for mapping a sentence in the 
abstract o its counterpart in the document. Subjective 
measures, even though still less satisfying, can also be de- 
vised: for instance, summary acceptability has been pro- 
posed as one such measure. Other evaluation protocols 
share the primary feature of being task-based, even though 
details may vary. Thus performance may be measured 
by comparing browsing and search time as summary ab- 
stracts and fulMength originals are being used (Miike et 
al., 1994); other measures look at recall and precision in 
document retrieval (Brandow et al, 1995); or recall, pre- 
cision, and time required in document categorization (i.e. 
assessing whether a document has been correctly judged 
to be relevant or not, on the basis of its summary alone) 
(Mani et al, 1999). 
We built an environment for baseline summarizer eval- 
uation, as part of its development/training cycle. This 
was also used in analyzing the impact of discourse seg- 
mentation on the summarizer's performance. A back- 
ground collection vocabulary statistics was derived from 
analyzing 2334 New York Times news stories. Sentences 
in digests for 808 stories and feature articles were auto- 
matically matched with their corresponding sentences in 
the full-length documents. Digests range in length from 
1 to 4 sentences. Since we were particularly interested 
in longer stories, as well as stories in which the first sen- 
tence in the document did not appear in the digest, their 
representation in the test set, 38%, is larger than their dis- 
tribution in the newspaper. 
Since digests are inherently short, this evaluation strat- 
egy is somewhat limited in its capability of fully assess- 
ing segmentation effects on summarization of long doc- 
uments. Nonetheless, a number of comparative analyses 
can be carried out against his baseline collection, which 
are indicative of the interplay of the various control op- 
tions, environment settings, and linguistic filters used. 
One parameter, in particular, isquite instrumental in tun- 
ing the summarizer's performance, to a large extent be- 
cause it is directly related to length of the original docu- 
ment: size of thesummary, expressed either as number of 
sentences, or as percentage of the full length of the origi- 
nal. In addition to a clear intuition (namely that the size 
of the summary ought to be related to the size of the orig- 
inal), varying the length of the summary offers both the 
ability to measure the summarizer's performance against 
baseline summaries (i.e. our collection of digests), and the 
potential of dynamically adjusting the derived summary 
size to optimally represent the full document content, de- 
80 
pending on the size of that document. 
Our experiments vary tile granularity of summary 
size. In principle, the performance of a system which 
does absolute sentence ranking, and systematically picks 
the N 'best' sentences for tlle summary, should not de- 
pend on the summary size. In our case, the additional 
heuristics for improving the coherence, readability, and 
representativeness of tile summary (see Section 2.2) in- 
troduce variations in overall summary quality, depend- 
ing on the compaction factor applied to the original doc- 
ument size. A representative spectrum for tlle test corpus 
we use is given by data points at: diqest size (i.e. sum- 
mary exactly the size, expressed as number of sentences, 
of tile digest); 4 sentem:es; I0% of the size of the full length 
document; and 20% of the document. Not surprisingly 
(for a salience-based system), the sumnlarization ftmc- 
tion alone, without discourse segmentation, benefits from 
larger summary size. Although tlle recall rate is higher 
still for longer summaries, it is not a measure of the over- 
all quality of tile summary because of tile inherently short 
length of tile digest. 
4.2 Segmentat ion effects on summar izat ion 
Our experiments compare the base summarization pro- 
cedure, which calculates object salience with respect o a 
background ocument collection (Section 2.2), with en- 
hanced procedures incorporating different strategies us- 
ing the notions of discourse segments and topic shifts. 
These elaborate tile intuitions underlying our ap- 
proach to leveraging lexical cohesion effects (see Sec- 
tion 1.2). The experiments fall in either of two categories. 
In an environment where a background collection, and 
statistics, cannot be assumed, a summarization proce- 
dure was defined to take selected (typically initial) sen- 
tences from each segment; this appeals to the intuition 
that segment-initial sentences would be good topic in- 
dicators for their respective segments, qhe other cate- 
gory of experiment focused on enriching the base sum- 
marization procedure with a sentence selection mecha- 
nism which is informed by segment botmdary identifica- 
tion and topic shift detection. 
In combining different sentence selection mechanisms, 
several variables need adjustment to account for relative 
contributions of the different document analysis meth- 
ods, especially where summaries can be specified to be 
of different lengths. Given the additional sentence selec- 
tion factors interacting with abso\]ute sentence ranking, 
we again set the granularity of summary size at three dis- 
crete steps, mirroring the evaluation of the original sum- 
marizer: summaries can be requested to be precisely 4
sentences long, or to reflect source compaction factor of 
10% or 20% (Sectkm 4.1). 
We experimented with two broad strategies for incor- 
porating topical informatkm into the sunnnary. One ap- 
proach aimed to bring 'topic openers' into the summars; 
by adding segment-initial sentences to those already se- 
lected via salience calculation. The other was to exert 
finer control over the number of sentences elected via 
salience, and 'pad' the summary to its requested size with 
sentences selected from segments by invoking the 'empty 
segment' (aka 'empty sectkm', see 2.2) rule. Special pro- 
visions accounted for the fact that segmentatkm would 
naturally always select he document-initial sentence. 
It turns out that the differences between a range of re- 
alisations of the above two strategies are not statistically 
significant over our test corpus; we thus use the label 
"SUM+SEG" to denote a 'composite' strategy and to rep- 
resent he whole family of variations. In contrast, "SUM" 
refers to the base smnmarization component, and "SEG" 
represents summarization by segmentation alone. Table 1 
below shows the recall rates for the three major summa- 
rization regimes defined by different summary granular- 
ities. Since segmentation effects are clearly very differ- 
ent across different sizes of source document, our experi- 
ments were additionally conducted at sampling the doc- 
ument collection at different sizes of the originals: the 
corpus was split into four sections, grouping together 
documents less than 7.5K characters long, 7.5-\]0K, 10- 
19K, and over 19K; for brevity, the table encapsulates a 
'composite' result (denoted by the label "All documents"). 
\[\[ 4 sents 10% 20?/,, 
All documents 
SEG 54.74 54.74 56.09 
SUM 46.85 49.71 66.47 
SUM+SEG 56.52 56.30 58.37 
All documents with > 1 digest sentence 
SEG 45.13 45.13 46.78 
SUM 36.34 39.84 58.66 
SUM+SEG 41.64 46.75 51.65 
All documents whose 1st sentence not in target digest 
SliG 31.12 32.73 33.99 
SUM 29.93 39.96 61.71 
SUM+SEG 32.53 41.45 47.96 
qhble 1: Sumn~ary data for segmentation effects 
lb  get a better sense for tile effects of different strategy 
mixes, we also show results for tile same summarization 
regimes, on subsets of the test corpus. "All documents with 
> I di,?esl senh'm:t'" represents documents whose digests 
are longer than a single sentence; "All documetHs whose 
1st sent is not in target d~qest" extracts a document set for 
which a baseline strategy automatically picking a repre- 
sentative sentence for inclusion in the summary would be 
inappropriate. These subset selection criteria explain the 
deterioration of overall results; howeveb what is more 
interesting to observe in the table is the relative perfor- 
mance of tile three summarization regimes. 
Overall, leveraging some of the segmentation a alysis 
is positively beneficial to summarization; the effects are 
particularly strong where short summaries are required. 
In addition, summarization driven by segmentation data 
alone shows recall rates comparable to, and in certain sit- 
uatkms even higher than, tlle baseline: this suggests that 
such a procedure is certainly usable in situations where 
background collection-based salience calculation is im- 
possible, or impractical. 
Finally, we emphasise a note of particular interest here: 
the complete set of data from these experiments makes it 
possible, for any given document, to select dynamically 
tile summarization strategy appropriate to its size, in or- 
der to get an optimal summary for it, in any given infor- 
mation compaction regime. 
5 Conclusion 
Starting from a class of problems inherent o summariza- 
tion by sentence xtraction, we have proposed a strat- 
81 
egy for alleviating some of the particularly jarring end- 
user effects in the summaries, which are due to coher- 
ence degradation, readability deterioration, and topical 
under-representation. Our approach is to aim for more 
cohesive summaries, by leveraging the lexical cohesion 
factors in the source document exts. As an initial ex- 
periment, we have looked at one particular facto1; lcxical 
repetition, and have developed a framework for integrab 
ing a discourse segmentation component capable of de- 
tecting shifts in topic, with a linguistically-aware summa- 
rizer which utilizes notions of salience and dynamically- 
adjustable size of the resulting summaries. By analyz- 
ing cohesion indicators in the discourse, segmentation 
identifies points in the narrative where sub-stories alter- 
nate; the summarization function uses the resulting set 
of discourse segments to derive more complete, informa- 
tive and faithful summaries than ones extracted solely on 
the basis of sentence salience (calculated with respect o 
a background ocument collection). 
A comparative evaluation of summarization with, and 
without, segmentation analysis shows that under cer- 
tain conditions, segmentation-enhanced summarization 
is better than the base segmentation technology: Some 
of these conditions can be expressed as a function of 
the original document length, and the document-to- 
summary ratio; thus, of particular interest is the fact that 
optimal strategy for combining the two technologies can 
be selected 'on the fly', depending on the type of input to 
be summarized. 
Furthemore, having access to a segmentation compo- 
nent makes it possible to alleviate a serious shortcom- 
ing of summarizers like ours, which crucially depend 
on the statistics of a background collection: in situa- 
tions where background collection-based salience calcu- 
latkm is impossible, or impractical, it is realistic to de- 
liver summaries--of  comparable quality, yet consider- 
ably cheaper to generate--derived by access to discourse 
segmentation i formation alone. 
The research reported here is part of a larger effort fo- 
cused on leveraging elements of the discourse structure 
for a variety of content characterisation tasks. Overall, 
we aim to build an infrastructure for recognizing and us- 
ing a broad range of cohesive devices in text. Document 
summarization is just one application in the larger space 
of document content management; our long term goal is 
to develop a framework where summarization and other 
applications would be enabled by a rich substrate of lin- 
guistic analysis of lexical cohesion. 
References 
Chinatsu Aone, Mary Ellen Okurowski, James Gorlinsky, 
and Bjornar Larsen. 1997. A scalable summarization 
system using robust NLP. In Intelligent Scalable Text 
Summarizathm, Proceedings ofWorkshop Sponsored by the 
Assochltion fi," Computational Linguistics, pages 66-73. 
Regina Barzilay and Michael Elhadad. 1999. Using lex- 
ical chains for text summarization. In Inderjeet Mani 
and Mark T. Maybury, editors, Advances in automatic 
text summarization, pages 111-121. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 
Steven Bird and Mark Liberman. :1999. Annotation 
graphs as a framework for multidimensional linguis- 
tic data analysis. In Proceedings ofa Workshop, "TowaMs 
Standards and Tools fin" Discourse Tagging", 37th Ammal 
Meeting of the AssochTtion for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 1-10, Baltimore, MD. 
Branimir Boguraev and Mary Neff. 2000. Lexical co- 
hesion, discourse segmentation and document sum- 
marization. In Proceedings ofRIAO-2000, Content-Based 
Multimedia Infi~rmation Access, Paris, France. 
R. Brandow, K. Mitze, and L. Rau. 1995. Automatic on- 
densation of electronic publications by sentence selec- 
tion. Informathm Processing & Management, 31(5). 
H.P. Edmundson. 1969. New methods in automatic ab- 
stracting. Journal of the ACM, 16(2):264-285. 
Christiana Fellbaum, editor. 1999. WORDNET: all elec- 
tronic lexical database and some of its applications. M1T 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
M.A.K. Hall iday and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohesion i  English. 
Longman, London. 
Marti Hearst. 1994. Multi-paragraph segmentation f ex- 
pository text. In 32nd Ammal Meeting of the Association 
fi~r Computational Linguistics, Las Cruces, New Mexico. 
Min-Yen Kan, Judith L. Klavans, and Kathleen R. McK- 
eown. 1998. Linear segmentation and segment signif- 
icance, in Eugene Charniak, editob Proceedings ofthe 
Sixth Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 197-205, 
Montreal, Canada, August. Sponsored by ACL and 
ACI 's  SIGDAT. 
Andrew Keller. 1994. Common topics and coherent situ- 
ations: interpreting ellipsis in the context of discourse 
inference. In Proceedinqs ofthe 32nd Annual Meeting ~ 
the Association for Comlmtational Linguistics, pages 50- 
57, Las Cruces, NM. 
Christopher Kennedy and Branimir Bogurae\: 1996. 
Anaphora for everyone: Pronominal anaphora reso- 
lution without a parser. In Proceedings ofCOLING-96 
(161h International Conference on Computathmal Linguis- 
tics), Copenhagen, DK. 
lnderjeet Mani, Therese Firmin, and Beth Sundheim. 
1999. The TIPSTER SUMMAC text summarization eval- 
uation. In Proceedings ofthe Ninth CoJ~rence of the Euro- 
wan Chapter of the ACL, pages 77-85, Bergen, Norway, 
June. Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Seije Miike, Etsuo ltho, Kenji Ono, and Kazuo Sumita. 
1994. A full text retrieval system with a dynamic ab- 
stract generation function. In Proceedings ofthe 17th An- 
m~al International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development i  Information Retrieval, pages 152-161. 
Mandar Mitra, Amit Singhal, and Chris Buckley. :1997. 
Automatic text summarisation by paragraph extrac- 
tion. In Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. Maybury, editors, 
Proceedings ~a Worksh W on Intelligent Scalable text Sum- 
marization, pages 39-46, Madrid, Spain. Sponsored by 
the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Jane Morris and Graeme Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion 
computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the 
structure of text. Computational Linguistics, 17:21-48. 
M. Phillips. 1985. Aspects of text structure: an investigation 
of the lexical organization oftext. North Holland, Ams- 
terdam. 
E.O. Winter 1979. Replacement as a fundamental func- 
tion of the sentence in context. Forum Linguistieum, 
4(2):95-133. 
82 
