Fertilization of Case Frame Dictionary
for Robust Japanese Case Analysis
Daisuke Kawahara? and Sadao Kurohashi??
?Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo
?PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST)
{kawahara,kuro}@kc.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper proposes a method of fertilizing a
Japanese case frame dictionary to handle com-
plicated expressions: double nominative sen-
tences, non-gapping relation of relative clauses,
and case change. Our method is divided into
two stages. In the first stage, we parse a large
corpus and construct a Japanese case frame dic-
tionary automatically from the parse results. In
the second stage, we apply case analysis to the
large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame
dictionary, and upgrade the case frame dictio-
nary by incorporating newly acquired informa-
tion.
1 Introduction
To understand a text, it is necessary to find out
relations between words in the text. What is
required to do so is a case frame dictionary. It
describes what kinds of cases each verb has and
what kinds of nouns can fill a case slot. Since
these relations have millions of combinations,
it is difficult to construct a case frame dictio-
nary by hand. We proposed a method to con-
struct a Japanese case frame dictionary auto-
matically by arranging large volumes of parse
results by coupling a verb and its closest case
component (Kawahara and Kurohashi, 2001).
This case frame dictionary, however, could not
handle complicated expressions: double nomi-
native sentences, non-gapping relation of rela-
tive clauses, and case change.
This paper proposes a method of fertiliz-
ing the case frame dictionary to handle these
complicated expressions. We take an iterative
method which consists of two stages. This
means gradual learning of what is understood
by an analyzer in each stage. In the first stage,
we parse a large raw corpus and construct a
Japanese case frame dictionary automatically
from the parse results. This is the method pro-
posed by (Kawahara and Kurohashi, 2001). In
the second stage, we apply case analysis to the
large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame
dictionary, and upgrade the case frame dictio-
nary by incorporating newly acquired informa-
tion.
We conducted a case analysis experiment
with the upgraded case frame dictionary, and
its evaluation showed effectiveness of the fertil-
ization process.
2 Japanese Grammar
We introduce Japanese grammar briefly in this
section.
Japanese is a head-final language. Word or-
der does not play a case-marking role. Instead,
postpositions function as case markers (CMs).
The basic structure of a Japanese sentence is as
follows:
(1) kare
he
ga
nom-CM
hon
book
wo
acc-CM
kaku
write
(he writes a book)
ga and wo are postpositions which mean nom-
inative and accusative, respectively. kare ga
and hon wo are case components, and kaku is a
verb1.
There are two phenomena that case markers
are hidden.
A modifying clause is left to the modified
noun in Japanese. In this paper, we call a
noun modified by a clause clausal modifiee.
A clausal modifiee is usually a case component
for the verb of the modifying clause. There is,
however, no case marker for their relation.
1In this paper, we call verbs, adjectives, and
noun+copulas as verbs for convenience.
(2) hon
book
wo
acc-CM
kaita
write
hito
person
(the person who wrote the book)
(3) kare
he
ga
nom-CM
kaita
write
hon
book
(a book which he wrote)
In (2), hito ?person? has ga ?nominative? rela-
tion to kaita ?write?. In (3), hon ?book? has wo
?accusative? relation to kaita ?write?.
There are some non case-marking postposi-
tions, such as wa and mo. They topicalize or
emphasize noun phrases. We call them topic
markers (TMs) and a phrase followed by one
of them TM phrase.
(4) kare
he
wa
TM
hon
book
wo
acc-CM
kaita
write
(he wrote a book)
(5) kare
he
ga
nom-CM
hon
book
mo
TM
kaita
write
(he wrote a book also)
In (4), wa is interpreted as ga ?nominative?. In
(5), mo is interpreted as wo ?accusative?.
3 Construction of the initial case
frame dictionary
This section describes how to construct the ini-
tial case frame dictionary. This is the first stage
of our two-stage approach, and is performed by
the method proposed by (Kawahara and Kuro-
hashi, 2001). In the rest of this section, we de-
scribe this approach in detail.
The biggest problem in automatic case frame
construction is verb sense ambiguity. Verbs
which have different meanings should have dif-
ferent case frames, but it is hard to disam-
biguate verb senses very precisely. To deal
with this problem, we distinguish predicate-
argument examples, which are collected from
a large corpus, by coupling a verb and its
closest case component. That is, examples
are not distinguished by verbs such as naru
?make/become? and tsumu ?load/accumulate?,
but by couples such as ?tomodachi ni naru?
?make a friend?, ?byouki ni naru? ?become
sick?, ?nimotsu wo tsumu? ?load baggage?, and
?keiken wo tsumu? ?accumulate experience?.
This process makes separate case frames
which have almost the same meaning or usage.
For example, ?nimotsu wo tsumu? ?load bag-
gage? and ?busshi wo tsumu? ?load supply? are
separate case frames. To merge these similar
case frames and increase coverage of the case
frame, we cluster the case frames.
We employ the following procedure for the
automatic case frame construction:
1. A large raw corpus is parsed by a Japanese
parser, and reliable predicate-argument ex-
amples are extracted from the parse re-
sults. Nouns with a TM such as wa or
mo and clausal modifiees are discarded, be-
cause their case markers cannot be under-
stood by syntactic analysis.
2. The extracted examples are bundled ac-
cording to the verb and its closest case com-
ponent, making initial case frames.
3. The initial case frames are clustered using
a similarity measure, resulting in the final
case frames. The similarity is calculated by
using NTT thesaurus.
We constructed a case frame dictionary from
newspaper articles of 20 years (about 20,000,000
sentences).
4 Target expressions
The following expressions could not be handled
with the initial case frame dictionary shown in
section 3, because of lack of information in the
case frame.
Non-gapping relation
This is the case in which the clausal modifiee
is not a case component of the verb in the modi-
fying clause, but is semantically associated with
the clause.
(6) kare ga
he
syudoken wo
initiative
nigiru
have
kaigi
meeting
(the meeting in which he has the initiative)
In this example, kaigi ?meeting? is not a case
component of nigiru ?have?, and there is no case
relation between kaigi and nigiru. We call this
relation non-gapping relation.
Double nominative sentence
This is the case in which the verb has two
nominatives in sentences such as the following.
(7) kuruma
car
wa
TM
engine ga
engine
yoi
good
(the engine of the car is good)
In this example, wa plays a role of nominative,
so yoi ?good? subcategorizes two nominatives:
kuruma ?car? and engine. We call this outer
nominative outer ga and this sentence double
nominative sentence.
Case change
In Japanese, to express the same meaning,
we can use different case markers. We call this
phenomenon case change.
(8) Tom ga
Tom
Mary
Mary
no
of
shiji wo
support
eta
derive
(Tom derived his support from Mary)
In this example, Mary has kara ?from? relation
to eta ?derive?. In this paper, we handle case
change related to no ?of?, such as (no, kara).
The following is an example that outer nom-
inative is related to no case.
(9) kuruma no
car
engine ga
engine
yoi
good
(the engine of the car is good)
The outer nominative of (7) can be nominal
modifier of the inner nominative like this ex-
ample. This is case change of (no, outer ga).
There is a different case from the above that
an NP with no modifying a case component
does not have a case relation to the verb.
(10) kare ga
he
kaigi no
meeting
syudoken wo
initiative
nigiru
have
(he has the initiative in the meeting)
In this example, kaigi ?meeting? has a no rela-
tion to syudoken ?initiative?, but does not have a
case relation to nigiru ?have?. This example is a
transformation of (6), and includes case change
of (no, non-gapping).
5 Fertilization of case frame
dictionary
We construct a fertilized case frame dictionary
from the initial case frame dictionary shown in
section 3, to handle the complicated expressions
described in section 4.
We apply case analysis to a large corpus using
the dictionary, collect information which could
not be acquired by a mere parsing, and upgrade
the case frame dictionary.
The procedure is as follows (figure 1):
1. The initial case frames are acquired by the
method shown in section 3.
2. Case analysis utilizing the case frames ac-
quired in phase 1 is applied to a large cor-
pus, and examples of outer nominative are
collected from case analysis results.
3. Case analysis utilizing the case frames ac-
quired in phase 2 is applied to the large
corpus, and examples of non-gapping rela-
tion are collected similarly.
4. Case similarities are judged to handle case
change.
5.1 Case analysis based on the initial
case frame dictionary
Case analysis of TM phrases and clausal modi-
fiees is indebted to a case frame dictionary. This
section describes an example of case analysis
utilizing the initial case frame dictionary.
(11) sono
that
hon
book
wa
TM
kare ga
he
tosyokan
library
de
in
yonda
read
(he read that book in the library)
Case analysis of this example chooses the fol-
lowing case frame ?tosyokan de yonda? ?read in
the library? (?*? in the case frame means the
closest CM.).
CM examples input
read
nom person, child, ? ? ? he
acc book, paper, ? ? ? book
loc* library, house, ? ? ? library
kare ?he? and tosyokan ?library? correspond to
nominative and locative, respectively, according
to the surface cases. The case marker of TM
phrase ?hon wa? ?book (TM)? cannot be under-
stood by the surface case, but it is interpreted
as wo ?accusative? because of the matching be-
tween ?hon wa? ?book (TM)? and the accusative
case slot of the case frame (underlined in the
case frame).
gano fueru
consumer
bank
company{ }outerga{ }corporationbankJapan { }effectresultprofit}{
(1) case frames based on
    parsing
(2) collection of
    outer nominative
(3) collection of
    non-gapping relation
(4) case similarity judgement
Figure 1: Outline of our method
5.2 Collecting examples of outer
nominative
In the initial case frame construction described
in section 3, the TM phrase was discarded, be-
cause its case marker could not be understood
by parsing. In the example (7), ?engine ga yoi?
?the engine is good? is used to build the initial
case frame, but the TM phrase ?kuruma wa?
?the car? is not used.
Case analysis based on the initial case frame
dictionary tells a case of a TM phrase. Corre-
spondence to outer nominative cannot be under-
stood by the case slot matching, but indirectly.
If the TM cannot correspond to any case slots of
the initial case frame, the TM can be regarded
as outer nominative. For example, in the case
of (7), since the case frame of ?engine ga yoi?
?the engine is good? has only nominative which
corresponds to ?engine?, the TM of ?kuruma
wa? cannot correspond to any case slots and is
recognized as outer nominative. On the other
hand, in the case of (11), the TM of hon wa
is recognized as accusative, because hon ?book?
is similar to the examples of the accusative slot.
We can distinguish and collect outer nominative
examples in this way.
We apply the following procedure to each sen-
tence which has both a TM and ga. To reduce
the influence of parsing errors, the collection
process of these sentences is done under the con-
dition that a TM phrase has no candidates of
its modifying head without its verb.
1. We apply case analysis to a verb which is a
head of a TM phrase. If the verb does not
have the closest case component and can-
not select a case frame, we quit processing
this sentence and proceed to the next sen-
tence. In this phase, the TM phrase is not
made correspondence with a case of the se-
lected case frame.
2. If the case frame does not have any cases
which have no correspondence with the
case components in the input, the TM can-
not correspond to any case slots and is
regarded as outer nominative. This TM
phrase is added to outer nominative exam-
ples of the case frame.
The following is an example of this process.
(12) nagai
long
sumo
sumo
wa
TM
ashi-koshi ni
legs and loins
futan ga
burden
kakaru
impose
(long sumo imposes a burden on legs and
loins)
Case analysis of this example chooses the fol-
lowing case frame ?futan ga kakaru? ?impose a
burden?.
CM examples input
impose nom* burden burdendat heart, legs, loins, ? ? ? legs and loins
futan ?burden? and ashi-koshi ?legs and loins?
correspond to nominative and dative of the case
frame, respectively, and sumo corresponds to no
case marker. Accordingly, the TM of ?sumo
wa? is recognized as outer nominative, and
sumo is added to outer nominative examples of
the case frame ?futan ga kakaru?.
This process made outer nominative of 15,302
case frames (of 597 verbs).
5.3 Collecting examples of non-gapping
relation
Examples of non-gapping relation can be col-
lected in a similar way to outer nominative.
When a clausal modifiee has non-gapping re-
lation, it should not be similar to any exam-
ples of any cases in the case frame, because the
constructed case frames have examples of only
cases except for non-gapping relation. From this
point of view, we apply the following procedure
to each example sentence which contains a mod-
ifying clause. To reduce the influence of pars-
ing errors, the collection process of example sen-
tences is done under the condition that a verb
in a clause has no candidates of its modifying
head without its clausal modifiee (?? ? ? [modify-
ing verb] N1 no N2? is not collected).
1. We apply case analysis to a verb which is
contained by a modifying clause. If the
verb does not have the closest case compo-
nent and cannot select a case frame, we quit
processing this sentence and proceed to the
next sentence. In this phase, the clausal
modifiee is not made correspondence with
a case of the selected case frame.
2. If the similarity between the clausal modi-
fiee and examples of any cases which have
no correspondence with input case com-
ponents does not exceed a threshold, this
clausal modifiee is added to examples of
non-gapping relation in the case frame. We
set the threshold 0.3 empirically.
The following is an example of this process.
(13) gyomu
business
wo itonamu
carry on
menkyo
license
wo syutoku-shita
get
(? got a license to carry on business)
Case analysis of this example chooses the follow-
ing case frame ?{gyomu, business} wo itonamu?
?carry on { work, business }?.
CM examples input
carry on nom bank, company, ? ? ? -acc* work, business business
Nominative of this case frame has no corre-
spondence with a case component of the in-
put, so the clausal modifiee, menkyo ?license?,
is checked whether it can correspond to nom-
inative case examples. In this case, the sim-
ilarity between menkyo ?license? and examples
of nominative is not so high. Consequently, the
relation of menkyo ?license? is recognized as non-
gapping relation, and menkyo is added to exam-
ples of non-gapping relation in the case frame
?{gyomu, business} wo itonamu?.
(14) ihouni
illegally
denwa
telephone
gyomu
business
wo
itonande-ita
carry on
utagai
suspect
(suspect that ? carried on telephone busi-
ness illegally)
In this case, the above case frame is also se-
lected. Since utagai ?suspect? is not similar to
the nominative case examples, it is added to
case examples of non-gapping relation in the
case frame.
This process made non-gapping relation of
23,094 case frames (of 637 verbs).
Collecting examples of non-gapping rela-
tion for all the case frames
Non-gapping relation words which have wide
distribution over verbs can be considered to
have non-gapping relation for all the verbs or
case frames. We add these words to examples
of non-gapping relation of all the case frames.
For example, 5 verbs have menkyo ?license? (ex-
ample (13)) in their non-gapping relation, and
381 verbs have utagai ?suspect? (example (14)).
We, consequently, judge utagai has non-gapping
relation for all the case frames. We call such a
word global non-gapping word.
We treated words which have non-gapping re-
lation for more than 100 verbs as global non-
gapping words. We acquired 128 global non-
gapping words, and the following is the exam-
ples of them (in English).
possibility, necessity, result, course, case,
thought, schedule, outlook, plan, chance,
? ? ?
5.4 Case similarity judgement
To deal with case change, we applied the fol-
lowing process to every case frame with outer
nominative and non-gapping relation.
1. A similarity of every two cases is calculated.
It is the average of similarities between all
the combinations of case examples. But
similarities of couples of basic cases are not
handled, such as (ga, wo), (ga, ni), (wo,
ni), and so on.
2. A couple whose similarity exceeds a thresh-
old is judged to be similar, and is merged
into one case. We set the threshold 0.8 em-
pirically.
The following example is the case when this
process is applied to ?{setsumei, syakumei} wo
motomeru? ?demand {explanation, excuse}?.
CM examples
demand
nom committee, group,
acc* explanation, excuse
dat government, president,
about progress, condition, state,
no progress, reason, content,
In this case frame, the examples of no ?of?2 are
similar to those of ni-tsuite ?about?, and the sim-
ilarity between them is very high, 0.94, so these
case examples are merged into a new case no/ni-
tsuite ?of/about?.
By this process, 6,461 couples of similar cases
are merged. An NP with no modifying a case
component can be analyzed by this merging.
6 Case Analysis
To perform case analysis, we basically employ
the algorithm proposed by (Kurohashi and Na-
gao, 1994). In this section, our case analysis
method of the complicated expressions shown
in section 4 is described.
6.1 Analysis of clausal modifiees
If an clausal modifiee is a function word such
as koto ?(that clause)? or tame ?due?, or a time
expression such as 3 ji ?three o?clock? or saikin
?recently?, it is analyzed as non-gapping rela-
tion.
2In no case in case frames, every noun which modifies
the closest case component of the verb is collected.
The other clausal modifiee can correspond
to ga ?nominative?, wo ?accusative?, ni ?dative?,
outer ga ?outer nominative?, non-gapping rela-
tion, or no ?of?. We decide a corresponding case
which maximizes the score3 of the verb in the
clause. If a clausal modifiee corresponds to ga,
wo, ni, or outer ga, the relation is decided as it
is. If it corresponds to non-gapping relation or
no, the relation is decided as non-gapping re-
lation. In the case of corresponding to no, the
clausal modifiee has no relation to the closest
case component of the verb.
A clausal modifiee can correspond to non-
gapping relation or no under the condition that
similarity between the clausal modifiee and case
examples of non-gapping relation or no is the
maximum value (which means two nouns locate
in the same node in a thesaurus). This is be-
cause a noun which is a little similar to case
examples of non-gapping relation may not have
non-gapping relation.
6.2 Analysis of TM phrases
If a TM phrase is a time expression, it is ana-
lyzed as time case. The other TM phrase can
correspond to ga ?nominative?, wo ?accusative?,
or outer ga ?outer nominative?. We decide a
corresponding case which maximizes the score
of the verb modified by the TM phrase. When
the verb has both a case component with ga and
a TM phrase, the case component with ga cor-
responds to ga in the selected case frame, and
its TM phrase corresponds to wo or outer ga. If
the correspondence between the TM phrase and
outer ga case components gets the best similar-
ity, the input sentence is recognized as a double
nominative sentence.
6.3 Analysis of case change
If the selected case frame of the input verb has
merged cases which include no ?of?, no case in
the input sentence is interpreted as the counter-
part of no between the merged cases. If not, the
no case is considered not to have a case relation
to the verb and has no corresponding case in
the case frame.
3This score is the sum of each similarity between an
input case component and examples of the corresponding
case in the case frame.
Table 1: Case analysis accuracy
clausal
modifiee TM
our method 301/358 307/345
84.0% 88.9%
baseline 287/358 305/345
80.1% 88.4%
Table 2: Non-gapping relation accuracy
precision recall F
our method 82/116 82/92
70.7% 89.1% 78.8%
baseline 88/148 88/92
59.5% 95.7% 73.3%
7 Experiment
We made a case analysis experiment on
Japanese relevance-tagged corpus (Kawahara et
al., 2002). This corpus has correct tags of
predicate-argument relations. We conducted
case analysis on an open test set which consists
of 500 sentences, and evaluated clausal modi-
fiees and TM phrases in these sentences. To
evaluate the real case analysis without influence
of parsing errors, we input the correct structure
of the corpus sentences to the analyzer.
The accuracy of clausal modifiees and TM
phrases is shown in table 1, and the accuracy of
non-gapping relation is shown in table 2. The
baseline of these tables is that if a clausal mod-
ifiee belongs to a non-gapping noun dictionary
in which nouns always having non-gapping re-
lation as clausal modifiees are written, it is an-
alyzed as non-gapping relation.
The accuracy of clausal modifiees increased
by 4%. This shows effectiveness of our fertil-
ization process. However, the accuracy of TM
phrases did not increase. This is because the ac-
curacy of TM phrases which were analyzed us-
ing added outer nominative examples was 4/6,
and its frequency was too low. The accuracy of
case change was 2/4.
8 Related work
There has been some related work analyzing
clausal modifiees and TM phrases. Baldwin et
al. analyzed clausal modifiees with heuristic
rules or decision trees considering various lin-
guistic features (Baldwin et al, 1999). Its ac-
curacy was about 89%. Torisawa analyzed TM
phrases using predicate-argument cooccurences
and word classifications induced by the EM al-
gorithm (Torisawa, 2001). Its accuracy was
about 88% for wa and 84% for mo.
It is difficult to compare the accuracy because
the range of target expressions is different. Un-
like related work, it is promising to utilize our
resultant case frame dictionary for subsequent
analyzes such as ellipsis or discourse analysis.
9 Conclusion
This paper proposed a method of fertilizing
the case frame dictionary to realize an analy-
sis of the complicated expressions, such as dou-
ble nominative sentences, non-gapping relation,
and case change. We can analyze these expres-
sions accurately using the fertilized case frame
dictionary. So far, accuracy of subsequent an-
alyzes such as ellipsis or discourse analysis has
not been so high, because double nominative
sentences and non-gapping relation cannot be
analyzed accurately. It is promising to improve
the accuracy of these analyzes utilizing the fer-
tilized case frame dictionary.
References
Timothy Baldwin, Takenobu Tokunaga, and
Hozumi Tanaka. 1999. The parameter-based
analysis of Japanese relative clause construc-
tions. In IPSJ SIJ Notes 1999-NL-134, pages
55?62.
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi. 2001.
Japanese case frame construction by coupling
the verb and its closest case component. In
Proceedings of the Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference, pages 204?210.
Daisuke Kawahara, Sadao Kurohashi, and Ko?iti
Hasida. 2002. Construction of a Japanese
relevance-tagged corpus. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pages 2008?
2013.
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao. 1994.
A method of case structure analysis for
Japanese sentences based on examples in
case frame dictionary. In IEICE Transactions
on Information and Systems, volume E77-D
No.2.
Kentaro Torisawa. 2001. An unsupervised
method for canonicalization of Japanese post-
positions. In Proceedings of the 6th Natural
Language Processing Pacific Rim Simposium,
pages 211?218.
