Complexity of Event Structure in IE Scenarios
Silja Huttunen, Roman Yangarber, Ralph Grishman
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
fsilja,roman,grishmang@cs.nyu.edu
Abstract
This paper presents new Information Extrac-
tion scenarios which are linguistically and struc-
turally more challenging than the traditional
MUC scenarios. Traditional views on event
structure and template design are not adequate
for the more complex scenarios.
The focus of this paper is to show the com-
plexity of the scenarios, and propose a way to
recover the structure of the event. First we
identify two structural factors that contribute
to the complexity of scenarios: the scattering
of events in text, and inclusion relationships
between events. These factors cause di?culty
in representing the facts in an unambiguous
way. Then we propose a modular, hierarchi-
cal representation where the information is split
in atomic units represented by templates, and
where the inclusion relationships between the
units are indicated by links. Lastly, we discuss
how we may recover this representation from
text, with the help of linguistic cues linking the
events.
1 Introduction
Information Extraction (IE) is a technology
used for locating and extracting specic pieces
of information from texts. The knowledge bases
are customized for each new topic or scenario,
as dened by ll rules that state which facts are
needed for constitution of an extractable event.
A scenario is a set of predened facts to be ex-
tracted from a large text corpus, such as news
articles, and organized in output templates.
Our experience with customizing our IE sys-
tem called Proteus (Grishman, 1997; Grishman
et al, 2002) to new scenarios suggests that the
lexical and structural properties of the scenario
aect the performance of the system. To make
an IE system exible for tasks of varying com-
plexity, it is essential to conduct a linguistic
analysis of the texts relating to dierent sce-
narios.
In this paper, we focus on the Infectious Dis-
ease Outbreak scenario (Grishman et al, 2002),
and the Natural Disaster scenario (Hirschman
et al, 1999) collectively called the \Nature" sce-
narios. During the customization of the IE sys-
tem to the Nature scenarios, we encountered
problems that did not arise in the traditional
scenarios of the Message Understanding Con-
ferences (MUCs). This included, in particular,
delimiting the scope of a single event and orga-
nizing the events into templates.
We identify two structural factors that con-
tribute to the complexity of a scenario: rst, the
scattering of events in text, and second, inclu-
sion relationships between events. These factors
cause di?culty in representing the facts in an
unambiguous way. We proposed that such event
relationships can be described with a modular,
hierarchical model (Huttunen et al, 2002).
The phenomenon of inclusion is widespread in
the Nature scenarios, and the types of inclusions
are numerous. In this paper we present prelim-
inary results obtained from our corpus analysis,
with a classication and distribution of inclu-
sion relationships. We discuss the potential for
recovery of these inclusions from text with the
help of the linguistic cues, of which we show
some examples.
This paper will argue that a thorough linguis-
tic analysis of the corpus is needed to help recov-
ery of the complex event structure in the text.
In the next section we give a brief description
of the scenarios we are investigating. In section
3 we review the problems of scattering, inclusion
and event denition, and propose a method for
representing template structure. In section 4
we present examples of the linguistic cues to
Disaster Date Location VictimDead Damage
tornado Sunday night Georgia one person motel
Disease Date Location VictimDead VictimSick
Ebola since September Uganda 156 people -
Table 1: Disaster Event and Disease Event
recover the complex event structure, followed
by discussion in section 5.
2 Background
2.1 Information Extraction
Our IE system has been previously customized
for several news topics, as part of the MUC
program, such as Terrorist Attacks (MUC,
1991; MUC, 1992) and Management Succession
(MUC, 1995; Grishman, 1995). Subsequently to
the MUCs, we customized Proteus to extract,
among other scenarios, Corporate Mergers and
Acquisitions, Natural Disasters and Infectious
Disease Outbreaks.
We contrasted the Nature scenarios with the
earlier MUC scenarios (Huttunen et al, 2002).
The \traditional" template structure is such
that all the information about the main event
can be presented within a single template. The
main events form separate instances, and there
are no links between them. Management Suc-
cession scenario presents a slightly more com-
plicated template structure, but it is still possi-
ble to present in one template. The traditional
representation is not adequate to represent the
complex structure of the Nature scenarios.
In the next section, we give a short descrip-
tion of the Nature scenarios.
2.2 Scenarios
For the Natural Disaster scenario, the task
is to nd occurrences of disasters (earthquakes,
storms, etc.) around the world, as reported in
newspaper articles. The information extracted
for each disaster should include the type of dis-
aster, date and location of the occurrence, and
the amount of human or material damage.
An example of a Natural Disaster template
is in table 1, extracted from the following news
fragment:
\[...] tornadoes that destroyed a Geor-
gia motel and killed one person in a
mobile home Sunday night."
For the Infectious Disease Outbreak sce-
nario, the task is to track the spread of epi-
demics of infectious diseases around the world.
The system has to nd the name of the disease,
the time and location of the outbreak, the num-
ber of victims (infected and dead), and type of
victims (e.g., human or animal). The next ex-
ample is a fragment of a disease outbreak report,
and the extracted facts are shown in table 1.
\Ebola fever has killed 156 people, [...],
in Uganda since September."
3 Structure of Events
The complex event structure in Nature scenar-
ios is partly due to the fact that the events are
reported in a scattered manner in the text.
By scattering of events we mean that their
components are not close to each other in the
text, and a typical text contains several related
events. This is partly because the articles are
often in a form of an update, where the latest
reported damages contribute to the total dam-
ages reported earlier, over several locations and
over dierent time spans.
The example in table 2 illustrates scattering
in the Disease scenario. It is a fragment of an
update about a cholera epidemic in Sudan, from
the World Health Organization's (WHO) web
report. The locations are highlighted in italics
and the victim counts are in boldface, to show
the scattering. In this example there are six
separate mentions|partial descriptions of the
event in text|giving the number of infected
and dead victims, in Sudan, and in two loca-
tions within Sudan. Paragraph (1) reports the
number of victims in Sudan, 2549 infected, and
186 dead. In paragraph (2), the focus is shifted
to another location in Sudan, and new numbers
are reported. Paragraph (3) gives the respective
(0) Meningococcal in Sudan
(1) A total of 2 549 cases of meningococcal disease, of which 186 were fatal, was reported to the
national health authorities between 1 January and 31 March 2000.
(2) Bahar aj Jabal State has been most aected to date, with 1 437 cases (including 99 deaths)
reported in the Juba city area.
(3) Other States aected include White Nile (197 cases, 15 deaths), [...]
Table 2: Example of a Disease Outbreak Report
Disease Location Infected Dead
Meningococcal Sudan 2549 186
Bahar aj Jabal State 1437 99
White Nile 197 15
Table 3: Facts from Disease Outbreak Report
numbers for yet another location in Sudan. The
mentions are summarized in table 3.
3.1 Inclusion Relationships
As we frequently observe in the Nature scenar-
ios, the information in the various mentions in
table 2 is overlapping, and the mentions par-
tially include each other.
For example, the numbers for infected victims
in paragraph (2) and (3), contribute to the total
number of infected cases in paragraph (1). The
extraction system should be able to extract all
the numbers for this text. The problem is how
to group these mentions into a template in an
unambiguous and coherent way. It is impossi-
ble to represent an event with overlapping in-
formation in a single template, since it consists
of multiple numbers of victims in several areas
and several time intervals.
For the purpose of handling this phenomenon,
we rst introduce a distinction between out-
breaks and incidents. An incident is a short de-
scription, or a mention, of one occurrence that
relates to an outbreak. It covers a single specic
span of time in a single specic area. An out-
break takes place over a longer period of time,
and possibly over wider geographical area: it
consists of multiple incidents.
In general, one incident may include others,
which give further detailed information.
Therefore, we analyze the news fragment in
table 2 as containing six incidents, with two
types of inclusions: rst, inclusion by status,
where the dead count contributes to the infected
count of the same area, and second, inclusion by
location, where the numbers of infected cases in
Bahar aj Jabal State, in paragraph (2), and in
White Nile, in (3), contribute to the infected
count in Sudan, in paragraph (1).
The Natural Disaster scenario poses further
complications for this schema. The scattering
is complicated by the relationship of causation:
the main disaster triggers derivative disasters
(sub-disasters), which in turn may cause dam-
ages that contribute to the overall damage. This
is illustrated by the news fragment in table 4,
from the New York Times. Names of disasters
are in bold, and the damages are italicized.
In table 4, paragraph (1), a disaster includes
rain and winds, which cause ooding. In para-
graph (3), the human damages caused by snow
are included in the total human damages caused
by the storm in (2). The derivative disasters
and their damages often take place in several lo-
cations, appearing relatively far in the text from
the rst mention of the main disaster. The -
nal logical representation of the event should be
such that the eects of the sub-disasters could
be traced back to the main event.
The following is a summary of the inclusion
relationships found in the two Nature scenarios:
 location: e.g, victim count in one city con-
tributes to the victim count in the whole
country.
 time: e.g. victim count for an update re-
port contributes to the overall victim count
since the beginning of the outbreak.
 status: dead or sick count is included in
(1) A brutal northeaster thrashed the Eastern Seaboard again Thursday with cold, slicing rain
and strong winds that caused ooding in coastal areas of New Jersey and Long Island. [...]
(2) Elsewhere along the East Coast, 19 deaths have been attributed to the storm since it began
on Monday.
(3) The 19 deaths include ve in accidents on snowy roads in Kentucky and two in Indiana. [...]
Table 4: Example of Disaster Reporting
the infected count, as in paragraph (2) of
table 2.
 victim type or descriptor: e.g., \people" in-
cludes \health workers", and \children".
 disease name (Disease scenario): e.g., the
number of Hepatitis C cases may be in-
cluded in the number of Hepatitis cases.
 disaster (Disaster scenario): e.g., damages
caused by rain may be included in the dam-
ages caused by rain and winds.
 causation (Disaster scenario): a disaster
can trigger derivative disasters.
3.2 Type and Distribution of Inclusions
To investigate the extent of inclusions and their
distribution by type, we analyzed 40 documents
related to Nature scenarios.
1
To conrm the feasibility and applicability of
this approach, we manually tagged the inclu-
sion relationships present in these documents.
Table 5 shows the number of incidents found in
the documents, as well as the number and the
types of inclusion. There are also multiple in-
clusions: e.g., infected health workers in a town
in Uganda are included in the total number of
infected people in the whole country: this is in-
clusion by both case-descriptor and location.
Multiple inheritance also occurs: in table 2,
the deaths in Bahar aj Jabal State contribute
to the infected count in that state, as well as to
the total number of deaths in Sudan. However,
in table 5, we show only the inclusion in the
immediately preceding parent.
3.3 Hierarchical Template Structure
Our proposed solution is to have a separate tem-
plate for each incident. Once we have broken
1
The training corpus was used to evaluate the per-
formance of our IE system on these tasks. For the Dis-
aster scenario we analyzed a total of 14 reports from
NYT, ABC, APW, CNN, VOA and WSJ. For Disease
Outbreaks, a total of 26 documents from NYT, Promed,
WHO, and ABC.
Scenario Disease Disaster
Documents 26 14
Words 9 500 6500
Incidents 125 112
Inclusions 57 81
time 6 6
location 19 20
status 19 1
case-descriptor 6 1
case-desc/location 3 {
disease 1 {
causation { 19
causation/location { 11
causation/time { 3
time/location { 7
disaster { 5
disaster/location { 2
damage { 4
others 3 2
Table 5: Type and Number of Inclusion
down the information into smaller incident tem-
plates, the inclusion relationship between them
is indicated by event pointers. This approach
makes it possible to represent the information
in a natural and intuitive way.
The nal template for the Infectious Disease
scenario is shown in table 6. Note that there is
a separate slot indicating the parent incident.
Disease Name
Date
Location
Victim Number
Victim Descriptor
Victim Status
Victim Type
Parent Event
Table 6: Infectious Disease Template
Figure 1: Infectious Disease Outbreak
Figure 2: Natural Disaster
Figure 1 is a graphical representation of the
inclusion relationships among the incidents ex-
tracted from the Disease report in table 2. The
gure shows the main incident with several sub-
incidents. Two of the sub-incidents have, in
turn, sub-incidents. The types of inclusions are
shown in the last row.
Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of
inclusion by causation in Natural Disaster sce-
nario. The incidents are extracted from ta-
ble 4.
2
There is a causation relationship be-
tween the incidents. It is important to recover
the long causation chains from the text.
As a result, the templates are simple, but
2
Note that the northeaster is not in causation rela-
tionship with storm, which began on Monday. The dam-
ages that the synonymous northeaster caused, are from
the following Thursday.
there are typically many templates per docu-
ment. The separation of incidents aects the
process of extraction, since we can now focus
on looking for smaller atomic pieces rst. Then
we must address the problem of linking together
related incidents as a separate problem in the
overall process of IE.
4 Linguistic cues
The process of tracking the inclusion relation-
ships between the incidents is not trivial. A
human reader uses the cohesive devices in the
text to construct the connections between parts
of text (see e.g., (Halliday and Hasan, 1976; Hal-
liday, 1985)). Finding the relationship between
incidents may be a less complex task than track-
ing cohesion through an entire text or discourse.
Our task is limited to nding the cohesive de-
vices connecting a small set of pre-dened facts,
that may occur nearby within one sentence, or
are separated by one or more sentence bound-
aries. Our goal is to locate the cues in the text,
and use them to automatically recover these re-
lationships.
An example of a linguistic cue is in the fol-
lowing fragment of an update from table 4:
Elsewhere along the East Coast, 19
deaths have been attributed to the
storm [...]
Elsewhere indicates a shift in the focus from
one location to another and there is probably
no inclusion between the following and immedi-
ately preceding mention of the damages.
We have identied several linguistic cues that
signal the presence or absence of an inclusion
relationship between two incidents. These cues
can be one of following types:
 Specic lexical items, which can be e.g.,
adverbs, verbs, prepositions, connectives.
Elsewhere in the previous example implies
that damages caused by the following dis-
aster do not contribute to the damages of
the immediately preceding disaster.
 Two expressions in separate incidents
which are related in the scenario-specic
concept hierarchy, may indicate the pres-
ence and also the direction of an inclusion,
e.g., health worker is included in people;
names of plants, animals and terms refer-
ring to human beings, are hyponyms of vic-
tim.
 Locative or temporal expressions that are
in a hierarchical relationship in a location
hierarchy or in the implicit time hierarchy,
often indicate presence or direction of in-
clusion.
 Elliptical elements create cohesion. Ellipsis
indicates the presence of a parent incident
earlier in the text. In paragraph (3) of table
4, in the parent incident we observe a case
descriptor, deaths, which is elided in the
two sub-incidents.
 Anaphora: anaphoric reference usually in-
dicates the absence of an inclusion between
two incidents, merging into one. For exam-
ple, in table 4, paragraph (3), the 19 deaths
is coreferential with 19 deaths caused by the
storm in paragraph (2).
 Coordination tends to indicate the absence
of inclusion relationship. For example,
when two incidents are conjoined by and
and do not share information about loca-
tion or time, there is typically no inclusion.
However, there are cases where other cues
override this general tendency.
These cues often do not appear in isolation,
and they may interact.
We give an example of three lexical items and
their role as an indicator of inclusion in the In-
fectious Disease Outbreak Scenario. Consider
the preposition with
3
, the participle including
and the nite verb include.
\More than 500 cases of dengue hem-
orrhagic fever were reported in Mexico
last year, with 30 deaths, Ruiz said."
The 30 deaths are included in the 500 cases.
The direction of the inclusion is reversed in the
following example:
"Disease has killed 10 persons, with
242 cases having already been re-
ported."
The latter incident includes the former. Here
additional cues are provided by the concept hi-
erarchy, and the numbers: a smaller number
cannot include a larger one.
The following illustrates the participle includ-
ing as cue:
Ebola fever has killed 156 people, in-
cluding 14 health workers, in Uganda
since September.
The incidents are connected by including,
which also indicates the direction explicitly. Ad-
ditional information is obtained from the case-
descriptors, related in the concept hierarchy.
The context for such \trigger" words as they
indicate inclusion, is that the trigger appears
between two incidents, preceding and preceded
3
In the case of with we look only at free prepositions,
that is, those not bound to a preceding verb (Biber et
al., 1999).
by a quantied NP
4
and optional phrases or
items from the concept hierarchy.
Q fcase-descriptor j statusg [reported
j get sick j time j location j disease] [,]
trigger Q fcase-descriptor j statusg
These triggers can indicate inclusion also in-
side a parenthetical phrase, preceding a quanti-
ed NP, as in table 2 in paragraph (2).
The trigger include (as a nite verb) functions
similarly, but can also occur between sentences:
[...] the Ugandan Ministry of Health
has reported [...] 370 cases and 140
deaths. This gure includes 16 new
conrmed cases in Gulu [...]
In our training corpus, when these cue words
occurred in this context, they consistently indi-
cated an event inclusion relation.
5 Discussion
Complexity of a scenario seems to depend of
multiple factors. The notion of complexity,
however, has not been investigated in great
depth. Some research on this was done by
(Bagga and Biermann, 1997; Bagga, 1997),
classifying scenarios according to di?culty by
counting distances between \components" of an
event in the text. In this way it attempts to ac-
count for variation in performance across the
MUC scenarios.
Our analysis suggests that the type and
amount of inclusion relationships depend on
the nature of the topic. In such scenarios as
Management Succession and Corporate Acqui-
sitions, an event usually occurs at one specic
point in time. By contrast, the Nature events
typically take place across a span of time and
space. As the event \travels" and evolves, its
manifestations are reported in a piecewise fash-
ion, sometimes on an hour-by-hour basis.
An extensive linguistic analysis of the cor-
pus is necessary to resolve these complex is-
sues. For evaluation and training, we are build-
ing test and training corpora, totaling 70 doc-
uments and annotated with inclusion relation-
ships.
4
Here the case descriptor or status can be elided:
however, one of quantiers should have a case descriptor
or a status.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency as part of the Translin-
gual Information Detection, Extraction and Sum-
marization (TIDES) program, under Grant N66001-
001-1-8917 from the Space and Naval Warfare Sys-
tems Center San Diego, and by the National Science
Foundation under Grant IIS-0081962.
This paper does not necessarily reect the posi-
tion or the policy of the U.S. Government.
References
A. Bagga and A. W. Biermann. 1997. Analyzing
the complexity of a domain with respect to an
information extraction task. In Proc. 10th Intl.
Conf. on Research on Computational Linguistics
(ROCLING X).
A. Bagga. 1997. Analyzing the performance of
message understanding systems. In Proc. Natu-
ral Language Processing Pacic Rim Symposium
(NLPRS'97).
D. Biber, S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad, and
E. Finegan. 1999. Longman Grammar of Spoken
and Written English. Longman.
R. Grishman, S. Huttunen, and R. Yangarber. 2002.
Real-time event extraction for infectious disease
outbreaks. In Proc. HLT 2002: Human Language
Technology Conf., San Diego, CA.
R. Grishman. 1995. The NYU system for MUC-
6, or where's the syntax? In Proc. 6th Message
Understanding Conf. (MUC-6), Columbia, MD.
Morgan Kaufmann.
R. Grishman. 1997. Information extraction: Tech-
niques and challenges. In M. T. Pazienza, editor,
Information Extraction. Springer-Verlag, Lecture
Notes in Articial Intelligence, Rome.
M.A.K. Halliday and R. Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in
English. Longman, London.
M.A.K. Halliday. 1985. Introduction to Functional
Grammar. Edward Arnold, London.
L. Hirschman, E. Brown, N. Chinchor, A. Douthat,
L. Ferro, R. Grishman, P. Robinson, and B. Sund-
heim. 1999. Event99: A proposed event indexing
task for broadcast news. In Proc. DARPA Broad-
cast News Workshop, Herndon, VA.
S. Huttunen, R. Yangarber, and R. Grishman. 2002.
Diversity of scenarios in information extraction.
In Proc. 3rd Intl. Conf. of Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC-2002, Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria, Spain.
1991. Proc. 3th Understanding Conf. (MUC-3).
Morgan Kaufmann.
1992. Proc. 4th Message Understanding Conf.
(MUC-4). Morgan Kaufmann.
1995. Proc. 6th Message Understanding Conf.
(MUC-6). Morgan Kaufmann.
