Summarizing Encyclopedic Term Descriptions on the Web
Atsushi Fujii and Tetsuya Ishikawa
Graduate School of Library, Information and Media Studies
University of Tsukuba
1-2 Kasuga, Tsukuba, 305-8550, Japan
{fujii,ishikawa}@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp
Abstract
We are developing an automatic method to
compile an encyclopedic corpus from the
Web. In our previous work, paragraph-style
descriptions for a term are extracted from
Web pages and organized based on domains.
However, these descriptions are independent
and do not comprise a condensed text as
in hand-crafted encyclopedias. To resolve
this problem, we propose a summarization
method, which produces a single text from
multiple descriptions. The resultant sum-
mary concisely describes a term from dif-
ferent viewpoints. We also show the effec-
tiveness of our method by means of experi-
ments.
1 Introduction
Term descriptions, which have been carefully orga-
nized in hand-crafted encyclopedias, are valuable
linguistic knowledge for human usage and compu-
tational linguistics research. However, due to the
limitation of manual compilation, existing encyclo-
pedias often lack new terms and new definitions for
existing terms.
The World Wide Web (the Web), which contains
an enormous volume of up-to-date information, is a
promising source to obtain new term descriptions.
It has become fairly common to consult the Web for
descriptions of a specific term. However, the use of
existing search engines is associated with the follow-
ing problems:
(a) search engines often retrieve extraneous pages
not describing a submitted term,
(b) even if desired pages are retrieved, a user has to
identify page fragments describing the term,
(c) word senses are not distinguished for polyse-
mous terms, such as ?hub (device and center)?,
(d) descriptions in multiple pages are independent
and do not comprise a condensed and coherent
text as in existing encyclopedias.
The authors of this paper have been resolving
these problems progressively. For problems (a) and
(b), Fujii and Ishikawa (2000) proposed an auto-
matic method to extract term descriptions from the
Web. For problem (c), Fujii and Ishikawa (2001)
improved the previous method, so that the multiple
descriptions extracted for a single term are catego-
rized into domains and consequently word senses are
distinguished.
Using these methods, we have compiled an ency-
clopedic corpus for approximately 600,000 Japanese
terms. We have also built a Web site called ?Cy-
clone?1 to utilize this corpus, in which one or more
paragraph-style descriptions extracted from differ-
ent pages can be retrieved in response to a user
input. In Figure 1, three paragraphs describing
?XML? are presented with the titles of their source
pages.
However, the above-mentioned problem (d) re-
mains unresolved and this is exactly what we intend
to address in this paper.
In hand-crafted encyclopedias, a single term is de-
scribed concisely from different ?viewpoints?, such
as the definition, exemplification, and purpose. In
contrast, if the first paragraph in Figure 1 is not
described from a sufficient number of viewpoints
for XML, a user has to read remaining paragraphs.
However, this is inefficient, because the descriptions
are extracted from independent pages and usually
include redundant contents.
To resolve this problem, we propose a summariza-
tion method that produces a concise and condensed
term description from multiple paragraphs. As a re-
sult, a user can obtain sufficient information about a
term with a minimal cost. Additionally, by reducing
the size of descriptions, Cyclone can be used with
mobile devices, such as PDAs.
However, while Cyclone includes various types
of terms, such as technical terms, events, and an-
imals, the required set of viewpoints can vary de-
pending the type of target terms. For example, the
definition and exemplification are necessary for tech-
nical terms, but the family and habitat are necessary
for animals. In this paper, we target Japanese tech-
nical terms in the computer domain.
Section 2 outlines Cyclone. Sections 3 and 4 ex-
plain our summarization method and its evaluation,
respectively. In Section 5, we discuss related work
and the scalability of our method.
1http://cyclone.slis.tsukuba.ac.jp/
Figure 1: Example descriptions for ?XML?.
2 Overview of Cyclone
Figure 2 depicts the overall design of Cyclone,
which produces an encyclopedic corpus by means of
five modules: ?term recognition?, ?extraction?, ?re-
trieval?, ?organization?, and ?related term extrac-
tion?. While Cyclone produces a corpus off-line,
users search the resultant corpus for specific descrip-
tions on-line.
It should be noted that the summarization
method proposed in this paper is not included in
Figure 2 and that the concept of viewpoint has not
been used in the modules in Figure 2.
In the off-line process, the input terms can be ei-
ther submitted manually or collected by the term
recognition module automatically. The term recog-
nition module periodically searches the Web for mor-
pheme sequences not included in the corpus, which
are used as input terms.
The retrieval module exhaustively searches the
Web for pages including an input term, as performed
in existing Web search engines.
The extraction module analyzes the layout (i.e.,
the structure of HTML tags) of each retrieved page
and identifies the paragraphs that potentially de-
scribe the target term. While promising descrip-
tions can be extracted from pages resembling on-line
dictionaries, descriptions can also be extracted from
general pages.
The organization module classifies the multiple
paragraphs for a single term into predefined domains
(e.g., computers, medicine, and sports) and sorts
them according to the score. The score is computed
by the reliability determined by hyper-links as in
Google2 and the linguistic validity determined by a
language model produced from an existing machine-
readable encyclopedia. Thus, different word senses,
which are often associated with different domains,
can be distinguished and high-quality descriptions
can be selected for each domain.
Finally, the related term extraction module
searches top-ranked descriptions for terms strongly
related to the target term (e.g., ?cable? and ?LAN?
for ?hub?). Existing encyclopedias often provide re-
lated terms for each headword, which are effective
to understand the headword. In Cyclone, related
terms can also be used as feedback terms to nar-
row down the user focus. However, this module is
beyond the scope of this paper.
3 Summarization Method
3.1 Overview
Given a set of paragraph-style descriptions for a sin-
gle term in a specific domain (e.g., descriptions for
?hub? in the computer domain), our summarization
2http://www.google.com/
Web
organization
retrieval
extraction
term(s)
encyclopedic
corpus
term recognition
related term extraction
descriptions related terms
Figure 2: Overall design of Cyclone.
method produces a concise text describing the term
from different viewpoints.
These descriptions are obtained by the organiza-
tion module in Figure 2. Thus, the related term
extraction module is independent of our summariza-
tion method.
Our method is multi-document summarization
(MDS) (Mani, 2001). Because a set of input docu-
ments (in our case, the paragraphs for a single term)
were written by different authors and/or different
time, the redundancy and divergence of the topics in
the input are greater than that for single document
summarization. Thus, the recognition of similarity
and difference among multiple contents is crucial.
The following two questions have to be answered:
? by which language unit (e.g., words, phrases, or
sentences) should two contents be compared?
? by which criterion should two contents be re-
garded as ?similar? or ?different??
The answers for these questions can be different de-
pending on the application and the type of input
documents.
Our purpose is to include as many viewpoints as
possible in a concise description. Thus, we com-
pare two contents on a viewpoint-by-viewpoint basis.
In addition, if two contents are associated with the
same viewpoint, we determine that those contents
are similar and that they should not be repeated in
the summary.
Our viewpoint-based summarization (VBS)
method consists of the following four steps:
1. identification, which recognizes the language
unit associated with a viewpoint,
2. classification, which merges the identified units
associated with the same viewpoint into a single
group,
3. selection, which determines one or more repre-
sentative units for each group,
4. presentation, which produces a summary in a
specific format.
The model is similar to those in existing MDS meth-
ods. However, the implementation of each step
varies depending on the application. We elaborate
on the four steps in Sections 3.2-3.5, respectively.
3.2 Identification
The identification module recognizes the language
units, each of which describes a target term from a
specific viewpoint. However, a compound or com-
plex sentence is often associated with multiple view-
points. The following example is an English trans-
lation of a Japanese compound sentence in a Web
page.
XML is an abbreviation for eXtensible
Markup Language, and is a markup lan-
guage.
The first and second clauses describe XML from the
abbreviation and definition viewpoints, respectively.
It should be noted that because ?XML? and ?eX-
tensible Markup Language? are spelled out by the
Roman alphabet in the original sentence, the first
clause does not provide Japanese readers with the
definition of XML.
To extract the language units on a viewpoint-by-
viewpoint basis, we segment Japanese sentences into
simple sentences. However, sentence segmentation
remains a difficult problem and the accuracy is not
100%. First, we analyze the syntactic dependency
structure of an input sentence by CaboCha3. Sec-
ond, we use hand-crafted rules to extract simple sen-
tences using the dependency structure.
The simple sentences excepting the first clause of-
ten lack the subject. To resolve this problem, zero
pronoun detection and anaphora resolution can be
used. However, due to the rudimentary nature of
existing methods, we use hand-crafted rules to com-
plement simple sentences with the subject.
As a result, we can obtain the following two simple
sentences from the above-mentioned input sentence,
in which the complement subject is in parentheses.
? XML is an abbreviation for eXtensible
Markup Language.
? (XML) is a markup language.
3.3 Classification
The classification module merges the simple sen-
tences related to the same viewpoint into a single
group. An existing encyclopedia for technical terms
uses approximately 30 obligatory and optional view-
points. We selected the following 12 viewpoints for
which typical expressions can be coded manually:
3
http://cl.aist-nara.ac.jp/?taku-ku/software/cabocha/
definition, abbreviation, exemplification,
purpose, synonym, reference, product, ad-
vantage, drawback, history, component,
function.
We manually produced 36 linguistic patterns used
to describe terms from a specific viewpoint. These
patterns are regular expressions, in which specific
morphemes are generalized into parts-of-speech or
the special symbol representing the target term.
We use a two-stage classification method. First,
the simple sentences that match with a pattern
are classified into the associated viewpoint group.
A simple sentence that matches with patterns for
multiple viewpoints is classified into every possible
group.
However, the pattern-based method fails to clas-
sify the sentences that do not match with any prede-
fined patterns. Thus, second we classify the remain-
ing sentences into the group in which the most simi-
lar sentence has already been classified. In practice,
we compute the similarity between an unclassified
sentence and each of the classified sentences. The
similarity between two sentences is determined by
the Dice coefficient, i.e., the ratio of content words
commonly included in those sentences. The sen-
tences unclassified through the above method are
classified into the ?miscellaneous? group.
In summary, our two-stage method uses prede-
fined linguistic patterns and statistics of words.
The following examples are English translations
of Japanese sentences extracted in the identification
module. These sentences can be classified into a spe-
cific group on the ground of the underlined expres-
sions, excepting sentence (e). However, in the second
stage, sentence (e) can be classified into the history
group, because sentence (e) is most similar to sen-
tence (c).
(a) XML is an extensible markup language.
? definition
(b) an abbreviation for eXtensible Markup Lan-
guage
? abbreviation
(c) was advised as a standard by W3C in 1998
? history
(d) XML is an abbreviation for Extensible Markup
Language
? abbreviation
(e) the standard of XML was advised by W3C
? ??? ? history
3.4 Selection
The selection module determines one or more rep-
resentative sentences for each viewpoint group. The
number of sentences selected from each group can
vary depending on the desired size of the resultant
summary.
We consider the following factors to compute the
score for each sentence and select sentences with
greater scores in each group.
? the number of common words included (W)
The representative sentences should contain
many words that are common in the group. We
collect the frequencies of words for each group,
and sentences including frequent words are pre-
ferred.
? the rank in Cyclone (R)
As depicted in Figure 2, Cyclone sorts the re-
trieved paragraphs according to the plausibility
as the description. Sentences in highly-ranked
paragraphs are preferred.
? the number of characters included (C)
To minimize the size of a summary, short sen-
tences are preferred.
Because these factors are different in terms of
the dimension, range, and polarity, we normalize
each factor in [0,1] and compute the final score as a
weighed average of the three factors. The weight of
each factor was determined by a preliminary study.
In brief, the relative importance among the three
factors is W>R>C.
However, because the miscellaneous group in-
cludes various viewpoints, we use a different method
from that for the regular groups. First, we select rep-
resentative sentences from the regular groups. Sec-
ond, from the miscellaneous group, we select the sen-
tence that is most dissimilar to the sentences already
selected as representatives. We use the Dice-based
similarity used in Section 3.3 to measure the dis-
similarity between two sentences. If we select more
than one sentence from the miscellaneous group, the
second process is repeated recursively.
3.5 Presentation
The presentation module lists the selected sentences
without any post-editing. Ideally, natural language
generation is required to produce a coherent text by,
for example, complementing conjunctions and gen-
erating anaphoric expressions. However, a simple
list of sentences is also useful to obtain knowledge
about a target term.
Figure 3 depicts an example summary produced
from the top 50 paragraphs for the term ?XML?. In
this figure, six viewpoint groups and the miscella-
neous group were formed and only one sentence was
selected from each group. The order of sentences
presented was determined by the score computed in
the selection module.
While the source paragraphs consist of 11,224
characters, the summary consists of 397 characters,
which is almost the same length as an abstract for a
technical paper.
The following is an English translation of the sen-
tences in Figure 3. Here, the words spelled out by
the Roman alphabet in the original sentences are in
italics.
Figure 3: Example summary for ?XML?.
? definition: XML is an extensible markup lan-
guage (eXtensible Markup Language).
? abbreviation: an abbreviation for Extensible
Markup Language (an extensible markup lan-
guage).
? purpose: Because XML is a standard specifi-
cation for data representation, the data defined
by XML can be reusable, irrespective of the up-
per application.
? advantage: XML is advantageous to develop-
ers of the file maker Pro, which needs to receive
data from the client.
? history: was advised as a standard by W3C
(World Wide Web Consortium: a group stan-
dardizing WWW technologies) in 1998,
? reference: This book is an introduction for
XML, which has recently been paid much at-
tention as the next generation Internet standard
format, and related technologies.
? miscellaneous: In XML, the tags are enclosed
in ?<? and ?>?.
Each viewpoint label or sentence is hyper-linked to
the associated group or the source paragraph, re-
spectively, so that a user can easily obtain more in-
formation on a specific viewpoint. For example, by
the reference sentence, a catalogue page of the book
in question can be retrieved.
Although the resultant summary describes XML
from multiple viewpoints, there is a room for im-
provement. For example, the sentences classified
into the definition and abbreviation viewpoints in-
clude almost the same content.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Methodology
Existing methods for evaluating summarization
techniques can be classified into intrinsic and extrin-
sic approaches.
In the intrinsic approach, the content of a sum-
mary is evaluated with respect to the quality of a
text (e.g., coherence) and the informativeness (i.e.,
the extent to which important contents are in the
summary). In the extrinsic approach, the evaluation
measure is the extent to which a summary improves
the efficiency of a specific task (e.g., relevance judg-
ment in text retrieval).
In DUC4 and NTCIR5, both approaches have
been used to evaluate summarization methods tar-
geting newspaper articles. However, because there
was no public test collections targeting term descrip-
tions in Web pages, we produced our test collection.
4http://duc.nist.gov/
5http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/index-en.html
As the first step of our summarization research, we
addressed only the intrinsic evaluation.
In this paper, we focused on including as many
viewpoints (i.e., contents) as possible in a summary,
but did not address the text coherence. Thus, we
used the informativeness of a summary as the evalu-
ation criterion. We used the following two measures,
which are in the trade-off relation.
? compression ratio
#characters in summary
#characters in Cyclone result
? coverage
#viewpoints in summary
#viewpoints in Cyclone result
Here, ?#viewpoints? denotes the number of view-
point types. Even if a summary contains multiple
sentences related to the same viewpoint, the numer-
ator is increased by 1.
We used 15 Japanese term in an existing computer
dictionary as test inputs. English translations of the
test inputs are as follows:
10BASE-T, ASCII, SQL, XML, accumu-
lator, assembler, binary number, crossing
cable, data warehouse, macro virus, main
memory unit, parallel processing, resolu-
tion, search time, thesaurus.
To calculate the coverage, the simple sentences
in the Cyclone results have to be associated with
viewpoints. To reduce the subjectivity in the evalu-
ation, for each of the 15 terms, we asked two college
students (excluding the authors of this paper) to an-
notate each simple sentence in the top 50 paragraphs
with one or more viewpoints. The two annotators
performed the annotation task independently. The
denominators of the compression ratio and coverage
were calculated by the top 50 paragraphs.
During a preliminary study, the authors and anno-
tators defined 28 viewpoints, including the 12 view-
points targeted in our method. We also defined the
following three categories, which were not considered
as a viewpoint:
? non-description, which were also used to anno-
tate non-sentence fragments caused by errors in
the identification module,
? description for a word sense independent of the
computer domain (e.g., ?hub? as a center, in-
stead of a network device),
? miscellaneous.
It may be argued that an existing hand-crafted
encyclopedia can be used as the standard sum-
mary. However, paragraphs in Cyclone often con-
tain viewpoints not described in existing encyclope-
dias. Thus, we did not use existing encyclopedias in
our experiments.
4.2 Results
Table 1 shows the compression ratio and coverage for
different methods, in which ?#Reps? and ?#Chars?
denote the number of representative sentences se-
lected from each viewpoint group and the number
of characters in a summary, respectively. We always
selected five sentences from the miscellaneous group.
The third column denotes the compression ratio.
The remaining columns denote the coverage on
a annotator-by-annotator basis. The columns ?12
Viewpoints? and ?28 Viewpoints? denote the case
in which we focused only on the 12 viewpoints tar-
geted in our method and the case in which all the
28 viewpoints were considered, respectively.
The columns ?VBS? and ?Lead? denote the cover-
age obtained with our viewpoint-based summariza-
tion method and the lead method. The lead method,
which has often been used as a baseline method in
past literature, systematically extracted the top N
characters from the Cyclone result. Here, N is the
same number in the second column.
In other words, the compression ratio of the VBS
and lead methods was standardized, and we com-
pared the coverage of both methods. The compres-
sion ratio and coverage were averaged over the 15
test terms.
Suggestions which can be derived from Table 1 are
as follows.
First, in the case of ?#Reps=1?, the average
size of a summary was 616 characters, which is
marginally longer than an abstract for a techni-
cal paper. In the case of ?#Reps=3?, the average
summary size was 1309 characters, which is almost
the maximum size for a single description in hand-
crafted encyclopedias. A summary obtained with
four sentences in each group is perhaps too long as
term descriptions.
Second, the compression ratio was roughly 10%,
which is fairly good performance. It may be argued
that the compression ratio is exaggerated. That is,
although paragraphs ranked higher than 50 can po-
tentially provide the sufficient viewpoints, the top 50
paragraphs were always used to calculate the domi-
nator of the compression ratio.
We found that the top 38 paragraphs, on average,
contained all viewpoint types in the top 50 para-
graphs. Thus, the remaining 12 paragraphs did not
provide additional information. However, it is dif-
ficult for a user to determine when to stop reading
a retrieval result. In existing evaluation workshops,
such as NTCIR, the compression ratio is also calcu-
lated using the total size of the input documents.
Third, the VBS method outperformed the lead
method in terms of the coverage, excepting the case
of ?#Reps=1? focusing on the 12 viewpoints by an-
notator B. However, in general the VBS method pro-
duced more informative summaries than the lead
method, irrespective of the compression ratio and
the annotator.
It should be noted that although the VBS method
Table 1: Results of summarization experiments.
Coverage by annotator A (%) Coverage by annotator B (%)
Compression 12 Viewpoints 28 Viewpoints 12 Viewpoints 28 Viewpoints
#Reps #Chars ratio (%) VBS Lead VBS Lead VBS Lead VBS Lead
1 616 5.97 56.62 52.84 49.49 44.84 50.00 53.61 49.49 47.56
2 998 9.61 73.43 57.23 59.26 53.70 64.50 62.96 60.75 57.37
3 1309 12.61 76.04 59.29 63.13 56.44 67.83 64.81 65.22 60.84
targets 12 viewpoints, the sentences selected from
the miscellaneous group can be related to the re-
maining 16 viewpoints. Thus, even if we focus on
the 28 viewpoints, the coverage of the VBS method
can potentially increase.
It should also be noted that all viewpoints are not
equally important. For example, in an existing en-
cyclopedia (Nagao and others, 1990) the definition,
exemplification, and synonym are regarded as the
obligatory viewpoints, and the remaining viewpoints
are optional.
We investigated the coverage for the three obliga-
tory viewpoints. We found that while the coverage
for the definition and exemplification ranged from
60% to 90%, the coverage for the synonym was 50%
or less.
A low coverage for the synonym is partially due
to the fact that synonyms are often described with
parentheses. However, because parentheses are used
for various purposes, it is difficult to identify only
synonyms expressed with parentheses. This problem
needs to be further explored.
5 Discussion
The goal of our research is to automatically compile
a high-quality large encyclopedic corpus using the
Web. Hand-crafted encyclopedias lack new terms
and new definitions for existing terms, and thus the
quantity problem is crucial. The Web contains un-
reliable and unorganized information and thus the
quality problem is crucial. We intend to alleviate
both problems. To the best of our knowledge, no
attempt has been made to intend similar purposes.
Our research is related to question answering
(QA). For example, in TREC QA track, definition
questions are intended to provide a user with the def-
inition of a target item or person (Voorhees, 2003).
However, while the expected answer for a TREC
question is short definition sentences as in a dic-
tionary, we intend to produce an encyclopedic text
describing a target term from multiple viewpoints.
The summarization method proposed in this pa-
per is related to multi-document summarization
(MDS) (Mani, 2001; Radev and McKeown, 1998;
Schiffman et al, 2001). The novelty of our research
is that we applied MDS to producing a condensed
term description from unorganized Web pages, while
existing MDS methods used newspaper articles to
produce an outline of an event and a biography of
a specific person. We also proposed the concept of
viewpoint for MDS purposes.
While we targeted Japanese technical terms in the
computer domain, our method can also be applied to
other types of terms in different languages, without
modifying the model. However, a set of viewpoints
and patterns typically used to describe each view-
point need to be modified or replaced depending the
application. Given annotated data, such as those
used in our experiments, machine learning methods
can potentially be used to produce a set of view-
points and patterns for a specific application.
6 Conclusion
To compile encyclopedic term descriptions from the
Web, we introduced a summarization method to our
previous work. Future work includes generating a
coherent text instead of a simple list of sentences
and performing extensive experiments including an
extrinsic evaluation method.
References
Atsushi Fujii and Tetsuya Ishikawa. 2000. Utilizing
the World Wide Web as an encyclopedia: Extract-
ing term descriptions from semi-structured texts.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
488?495.
Atsushi Fujii and Tetsuya Ishikawa. 2001. Organiz-
ing encyclopedic knowledge based on the Web and
its application to question answering. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 196?203.
Inderjeet Mani, 2001. Automatic Summarization,
chapter 7, pages 169?208. John Benjamins.
Makoto Nagao et al, editors. 1990. Encyclope-
dic Dictoinary of Computer Science. Iwanami
Shoten. (In Japanese).
Dragomir R. Radev and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1998. Generating natural language summaries
from multiple on-line sources. Computational Lin-
guistics, 24(3):469?500.
Barry Schiffman, Inderjeet Mani, and Kristian J.
Concepcion. 2001. Producing biographical sum-
maries: Combining linguistic knowledge with cor-
pus statistics. In Proceedings of the 39th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 450?457.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003. Evaluating answers to def-
inition questions. In Companion Volume of the
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 109?111.
