Lexicalisation Strategies in Cooperative Question-Answering Systems
Farah BENAMARA, Patrick SAINT-DIZIER
IRIT, 118 route de Narbonne
31062 TOULOUSE Cedex, FRANCE
benamara, stdizier@irit.fr
Abstract
In this project note, we present the main features of lex-
icalisation strategies deployed by humans in question-
answering (QA) tasks. We then show how these can be
reproduced in automated QA systems, in particular in In-
telligent Cooperative Question-Answering Systems.
1 Motivations
The framework of Advanced Question Answering
(QA) systems, including cooperative QA answer-
ing, as described in a recent road map (Voorees
2003), raises new challenges for language gener-
ation since answers are often produced via dedi-
cated inference mechanisms operating over various
knowledge sources, including conceptual ontolo-
gies. Producing well-formed and informative re-
sponses gives a whole new insight to language gen-
eration, and in particular to the difficult problem of
lexicalisation.
For example, the question:
A bungalow in Mege`ve for 15 persons ?
has the response:
There are no bungalows in Mege`ve, we can propose
you 2 close-by chalets or a country cottage for 15
persons in Mege`ve, or a 15 person bungalow in les
Houches (8kms) or in Acacias (12kms),
where closely related alternatives are proposed on:
(1) sister concepts of bungalow (the question fo-
cus): a country cottage or 2 close-by chalets (as-
suming a chalet capacity does not exceed 10 per-
sons) in the same village or (2) sister concepts of
the Mege`ve village (the strongest constraint on the
focus): close-by villages where bungalows meet the
15 person constraint. The response involves evalu-
ating village proximity and sorting responses, e.g.
by increasing distance from Mege`ve. The first part
of the response There are no bungalows in Meg`eve
is the direct response, which corrects the user false
presupposition, while the remainder of the response
reflects the cooperative know-how of the respon-
der. Cooperative know-how involves several forms
of responses that include relaxations, intensional
calculus, expression of restrictions, of warnings and
conditional responses (Benamara et al 2004).
This simple example shows that, if a direct re-
sponse cannot be found, several forms of knowledge
and reasoning schemas need to be used and that the
NL form of the response requires adequate and sub-
tle lexicalisations, often directed by the reasoning
schemas.
Lexicalisation is the operation that associates a
word or an expression to a concept. It is a major
parameter in response production (Reiter et Dale,
1997), (a good synthesis can be found in (Cahill,
1999)). Lexicalisation is often decomposed into two
different stages: lexical choice, which occurs dur-
ing content determination, where the lexical term
chosen, which may still be underspecified, is depen-
dent on reasoning procedures, the knowledge base
contents, and grammatical constraints; and lexical
variation which is the choice of a particular word
or form among possible synonyms or paraphrases.
Lexical variation occurs in the surface realizer, and
may have some pragmatic connotations, for exam-
ple an implicit evaluation via the language level
chosen (e.g. argotic entails low evaluation).
In this project note, we show the different facets
of lexicalisation in advanced QA, where the two
stages, lexical choice and variation, play crucial and
very distinct roles in the different parts of the re-
sponse. Our model is based on a detailed analysis
of QA pairs, and on annotation tasks, from which a
model emerged, suitable for NLG.
2 The WEBCOOP project and its
environment
This research is part of the WEBCOOP system (Be-
namara et al 2004), that makes a heavy use of a
rich domain ontology, which is a concept ontology
structured by means of several semantic relations
(Cruse 1986). To better understand the perspective
in which this work has been carried out, let us say a
few words about the WEBCOOP project, a system
designed to provide cooperative answers to queries
on the Web.
2.1 Typology of the domain ontology
The ontology on which our project is based is basi-
cally a conceptual ontology where nodes are associ-
ated with concept lexicalizations and essential prop-
erties, as it is now often the case in restricted domain
ontologies (http://www.daml.org/ontologies/). In
our implementation, each node is represented by
the predicate :
onto-node(concept, lex, prop)
where concept has properties prop, represented
as attribute-value pairs, and lexicalisations lex.
Most lexicalisations are entries in the lexicon,
where morphological and grammatical aspects are
described. For example, for hotel, we have (coded
in Prolog):
onto-node(hotel,
[[hotel], [residence, hoteliere]],
[night-rate= X: integer ,
nb-of-rooms= N: integer, facilities:
List]) .
There are several well-designed public domain
ontologies on the net. Our ontology is a synthesis
of two existing French ontologies, that we cus-
tomized: TourinFrance (www.tourinfrance.net)
and the bilingual (French and English) the-
saurus of tourism and leisure activities
(www.iztzg.hr/indokibiblioteka/THESAUR.PDF)
which includes 2800 French terms. We manually
integrated these ontologies in WEBCOOP (Be-
namara et al 2004a) and added ourselves most
properties by hand. We also revised slightly the
ontology by removing concepts which are either
too specific (i.e. too low level), such as some basic
aspects of ecology or rarely considered, as e.g.
the economy of tourism. We also removed quite
surprising classifications such as sanatorium under
tourist accommodation. We finally reorganized
some concept hierarchies, so that they ?look? more
intuitive for a large public. Finally, we found that
some hierarchies are a little bit odd, for example,
we found at the same level accommodation ca-
pacity and tourist accommodation whereas, in our
case, we consider that capacity is a property of the
concept tourist accommodation.
We have, at the moment, 1000 concepts in our
tourism ontology which describe the different as-
pects of accommodation and transportation and a
few other satellite elements (geography, health, im-
migration). Besides the traditional ?isa? relation, we
also coded the ?part-of? relation and the opposition.
We also have a few proportional series in order to
encode graduality. In the tourism domain there is
a reasonable number of part-of pairs, and a small
number of opposites and proportional series. Syn-
onymy is encoded via the list of lexicalizations. En-
coding these relations is straightforwardly realized
by introducing facts, which operate at the concept
level, not at the lexicalization one:
part-of(journey, trip).
As shall be seen below, this ontology is futher an-
notated for lexicalization tasks.
Finally, in (Benamara et al 2004), we define a
conceptual metrics that determines the distance be-
tween two concepts, evaluated in terms of distance
in the hierarchy between the two concepts and prop-
erty differences (nature of properties and values as-
sociated).
2.2 Outline of WEBCOOP
Following Grice?s maxims (Grice, 1975) and re-
lated works, e.g. (Searle, 1975), in the early 1990s,
a number of forms of cooperative responses were
identified. Most of the efforts in these studies and
systems focussed on the foundations and on the im-
plementation of reasoning procedures (Gal, 1988),
(Minock et al., 1996), while little attention was
paid to question analysis and NL response gener-
ation. An overview of these systems can be found
in (Gasterland et al, 1994) and in (Webber et al.,
2002), based on works by (Hendrix et al., 1978),
(Kaplan, 1982), (Mays et al., 1982), among oth-
ers. These systems include e.g. the identification
of false presuppositions and various types of misun-
derstandings found in questions. They also include
reasoning schemas based e.g. on constant relaxation
to provide approximate or alternative, but relevant,
answers when the direct question has no response.
Intensional reasoning schemas can also be used to
generalize over lists of basic responses or to con-
struct summaries.
The framework of Advanced Reasoning for
Question Answering (QA) systems, as described in
a recent road map, raises new challenges since an-
swers can no longer be only directly extracted from
texts (as in TREC) or databases, but require the use
of a domain knowledge base, including a concep-
tual ontology, and dedicated inference mechanisms.
Such a perspective, obviously, reinforces and gives
a whole new insight to cooperative answering.
In WEBCOOP, user questions may range from
keywords to comprehensive natural language ex-
pressions. Their parse produces a semantic logi-
cal representation that includes the question con-
ceptual category, the question focus and the ques-
tion contents. Responses are structured in two parts.
The first part contains explanation elements in nat-
ural language. It is a first level of cooperativity
that reports user misconceptions, if any, in rela-
tion with the domain knowledge. The second part
is the most important and the most original. It re-
flects the know-how of the cooperative system, go-
ing beyond the cooperative statements given in the
first part. It is based on intensional description tech-
niques and on intelligent relaxation procedures go-
ing beyond classical generalization methods used in
AI. This component also includes additional dedi-
cated cooperative rules that make a thorough use of
the domain ontology and of general knowledge. Re-
sponses provided to users are built in web style, by
integrating natural language generation (NLG) tech-
niques with hypertext links to produce ?dynamic?
responses. Hyperlinks are dynamically created at
generation time. This leaves up to the user the high-
level planning tasks inherent to NLG and improves
readability and information access. The standard
generation difficulties (lexicalisation, aggregation,
argumentation) remain crucial to generate cooper-
ative responses, but their web-style greatly reduces
the overall complexity.
The goal of the present contribution is to clarify
and model the lexicalization aspects, which are, in
fact, in close dependence with the aggregation func-
tions.
3 Investigating lexicalisations from
cooperative QA corpora
To carry out our study, we considered three
typical sources of cooperative discourses: Fre-
quently Asked Questions (FAQ), Forums, and email
question-answer pairs (EQAP), these latter obtained
by sending ourselves emails to relevant services
(e.g. for tourism: tourist offices, airlines, ho-
tels). Our study was carried out on 670 cooperative
question-answer pairs. We have about 50% pairs
coming from FAQ, 25% from Forums and 25% from
EQAP. The domains considered are basically large-
public applications: tourism (45%), health (22%),
sport, shopping and education (19%). In all these
corpora, no user model is assumed, and there is no
dialogue: QA pairs are isolated, with no context, in
a way similar to web search engine querying.
4 Lexicalisation strategies deployed by
humans
From the analysis of these QA pairs, we have identi-
fied the main lexicalisation strategies presented be-
low. Between parentheses are introduced XML-
type labels, used to annotate our corpora.
? Identity (ID): the term in the question is kept
unchanged in the response,
? Quasi-synonyms (SYN): under this term, we
observe a large spectrum of variations:
SYN(a) terms which are almost equivalent
(have/possess),
SYN(b) usages with a specific orientation or
connotation, such as the use of commercially
oriented terms to attract customers or of more
technical terms, possibly with slight nuances,
on the part of the responder (refund / finan-
cial compensation, breathing stops / respira-
tion pauses), quite typical of financial or health
corpora where the responder is often a profes-
sional,
SYN(c) transcategorial variations or short
paraphrases (international ? from the entire
world, from abroad, from all the countries in
the world). This latter subclass is much more
difficult to characterize, it often indicates a
form of insistence or stress, or the desire to
make information more explicit (e.g. interna-
tional is really from all the countries in the
world),
? Opposites (OPP): used on a limited scale to
account e.g. for the differences in point of view
between the questioner and the responder (e.g.
lend / borrow, pay/charge, stay/leave) (Cruse
1986).
? Subtypes (SUB): often subtypes in the ontol-
ogy (accommodation ? hotel, motel, bunga-
low, country cottage, etc.) or enumerations
of basic terms (e.g. different types of credit
cards). We have the following main subtypes:
SUB(a) lower-level elements in an ontology
(possibly terminal elements),
SUB(b) focuses on sub-events or sub-activities
of the larger event lexicalised in the question,
or (simple) procedure description instead of
the procedure name, and
SUB(c) subtyping via modification (official
guide, mountain guide).
? Sisters (SIS) are used when the response in-
troduces minor superficial corrections to the
terms used in the question (not as important as
false presuppositions), often related to ?lexical
approximations? (e.g. bungalow used instead
of hut, cabin in a camping), these should not
be confused with SYN(b). SIS is also useful in
negative responses, where the correct response
is a sister of the concept used in the query (is
my metro ticket valid on the bus ? no, you need
to buy a bus ticket).
? Generalizations (GEN): their main use is in in-
tensional answers, where generalizations are
realized to make the answer more compact.
Generalizations can also be used e.g. to insist
on a certain facet of the term (castle / building),
or to provide a certain form of help (where is
the Dominican Republic ? ? in the Antilles).
It is possible, in addition, to indicate the gener-
alization level w.r.t. the ontology.
? Metonymies (MET): are relatively frequent,
and focus on a particular ?facet? of the term
used in the question to better emphasize a par-
ticular aspect, such as a means or an instrument
of an action, or use of make for object, con-
tainer for containee.
? Fuzzy term interpretation (FTI): close inter-
preted as 50 meters.
These lexical variations are relatively well dis-
tributed over the above different categories, roughly
as follows (all situations included) in % :
ID SYN OPP SUB SIS GEN MET FTI
32% 21% 2% 21% 4% 5% 14% 2%
As the reader may note it, almost none of these
lexical variations are neutral. They convey a spe-
cific connotation, point of view, focus or they may
activate a concept property or facet usually in the
background.
To have a more systematic analysis of lexicali-
sation, we manually annotated lexicalisation forms
in QA pairs. The examples in Fig. 1, on the next
page, illustrate several forms frequently encoun-
tered. Terms considered are labelled as T1, T2, etc.
(including terms within the focus), a special annota-
tion is reserved for the whole structure identified as
the focus (FOC) and op= specifies the variation op-
eration at stake (e.g. SYN(a), SUB(b), etc.). Q1-R1
have several layers of lexicalisations: guided tour
is a subtype of visit, guided tours at fixed hours
11AM and 3 PM is a subtype of visit hours, while
building is a generalization of castle, necessary to
allow for the reference to town hall, since building
is the least upper bound in the ontology for castle
and town hall. Q2-R2 stresses on and makes more
explicit drinkable in water from the tap, while Q3-
R3 requires the GEN strategy, which is the simplest
way to locate a country or any object, via its rela-
tions with others.
5 Enriching the ontology for
lexicalisations tasks in NLG
Let us consider again the ontology presented in sec-
tion 2.1. It needs some refinements so that the lex-
icalization situations identified can be automated.
Let us consider the main cases.
SYN(a) is based on the set of lexicalizations
associated with the concept considered. SYN(b)
requires lexicalisations to be marked according to
their language level, in our case: slang, popular
term, standard term (the one chosen by default) and
technical term. SYN(c) requires another type of
notation: the category of the lexicalisation: word
versus expression + category. For example, possess
is marked technical (contrasted with have), and
from the entire world is identified as an expression
of type PP. In terms of coding, the last example is
coded as:
lex([from,the,entire,world],
standard, expr:pp).
Opposites are encoded via a specific set of facts in
the ontology at the concept level, same for SUB(b)
where subactivites of an activity are considered as
parts. Treating SIS is more delicate since all the
sisters of a node may not be appropriate. At this
level, we use the conceptual metrics advocated in
section 2.1, with a quite high threshold, that we pa-
rameterize to evaluate its best level. The metrics is
highly dependent on the number of properties en-
coded, but it seems hard to have another strategy,
since sampling methods would require too much
corpus work. As an example, hut and cabin are con-
sidered as close sisters of bungalow, but chalet and
country cottage are more remote. This aspect is cru-
cial when relaxing concepts to find alternative solu-
tions.
Finally, metonymies will not be treated at the mo-
ment and FTI are dealt with in a more or less ad?hoc
way, using simple and naive geometrical considera-
tions.
6 A lexicalisation model for QA
As shown in Fig. 2, lexicalisation strategies in
QA pairs occur at five levels: L1: between the
query and the direct response, L2: between the
question and the cooperative know-how part, L3:
within the direct response (insistence, paraphrases,
exclusions, etc.), L4: between the direct response
and the know-how part, and, finally, L5: within the
know-how part, which may be composed of several
components, as shown in (Benamara et al. 2004b).
It seems that L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5 are organized
hierarchically in the lexicalisation process.
6.1 The relation L1
Let us concentrate on the question focus, which is
the term the most sensitive to lexical variation (vari-
ations on other terms are essentially synonyms). Let
us first consider L1, the lexicalisation strategies be-
tween the question and the direct response. The
Q1: What are the < FOC >< T2 >< T 3 > visit < /T 3 > hours < /T 2 > of the < T 1 > castle ? < /T 1 ><
/FOC >
R1: This< T 1 op = GEN >building< /T 1 > being the town hall, there are only< T 2 op = SUB >< T3 op =
SUB > guided tours < /T 3 > at fixed hours: 11 AM and 3 PM < /T 2 >.
Q2: Is water < FOC > drinkable < /FOC > in the Dominican Republic ?
R2: No, you must not < FOC op = SY N(c) > drink water from the tap < /FOC >, always water from bottles.
Q3: < FOC > Where < /FOC > is the Dominican Republic ?
R3: It is in the very heart of < FOC op = GEN > the Caribbean < /FOC >, it is the second largest <
FOC op = GEN > island of the Antilles< /FOC >.
Figure 1: Lexicalisation annotations
Figure 2: Lexicalisation relations in a QA pair
main criterion turns out to be the ?conceptual? over-
lap, observed in the domain ontology, between the
response elements and the question focus. This is
determined by comparing the subtree ST1 in the do-
main ontology whose root is the concept associated
with the question focus, with the subtree ST2 as-
sociated with the response, or, in case of an enu-
meration, the smallest subtree that includes all the
solutions. We basically have four situations:
? Focus adequate w.r.t. the response: both sub-
trees coincide, or ST2 is a proper subtree of
ST1, (Q: what kind of tourist accommodation
in Chamonix? R: we have all kinds of hotels,
bungalows, chalets and campings),
? Focus too large: ST2 is only a portion of a
proper subtree of ST1 (Q: what kind of tourist
accomodation in La Trairie? we have only
cabins and bungalows),
? Focus too narrow: ST2 is larger than ST1, i.e.
ST2 dominates ST1 or has elements not in-
cluded into ST1, for example: (Q: An express
train to Marseille at 11.PM ? R: We have an
express train at 11.15, but also a TGV, which is
much faster, at 11.25., where there is a gener-
alization over the types of trains,
? Shifts: ST2 is not included into ST1 (but, in
some cases, a few solutions can be common)
(what hotel categories ? we only have camp-
sites and bungalows).
The above situations are categorized in terms of
the lexicalisation functions below, percentage per
focus situation is given for L1 only, more pragmatic
aspects are briefly commented:
Focus Lexicalisation Strategies
(1) Adequate, ID, SYN(a)
Response SYN(b) specific orientation
positive or SYN(c) for stress
negative (40%) SUB(a)(b) for a more refined
response via enumeration
(2) Too large SUB(c), MET,
(21%) SUB(a,b) for enumerations
(3) Too GEN
restricted (6%) reference to generic concepts
(4) Fuzzy or FTI,
needs an SYN not interpreted
interpretation (2%)
(5) Adequate SUB(a)(b) for enumerations
with
conditions (18%)
(6) Minor SIS for adjustments
shifts (13%)
In an NLG system, more schematic than real-life
corpora, the above strategies allow for the produc-
tion of adequate lexicalisations for the following sit-
uations, which seem to cover all the cases we found
for yes/no and entity (what is, who) questions:
illustration: Q: what kinds of hotels in Mege`ve?
? direct response, simple or complex, (ID,
SYN), we have all kinds of hotels in Mege`ve.
? response with restrictions (SYN, ID + SUB,
GEN + SUB), We have all kinds of tourist
accomodation except 4* hotels and huts, or
simple adaptations (SIS),
? response scoping on precise subtopics or
subtypes (SUB), response can be negative on
the query focus and then positive on a subtype:
We do not have hotels, but comfortable, high
standard, chalets,
? response with some form of generalization
(as in example Q1), We have all types of
tourist accomodation, from the cheapest to the
fanciest (GEN, least upper bound),
? response with interpretation of fuzzy term
(FTI),
? response with conditions, or case structures
(SUB), we have 2* hotels at 30-60 Euros, 3*
hotels at 50-80 Euros, etc.
? response with forms of stress, insistence, ex-
plicitation via enumerations or paraphrases
(SYN, SUB, OPP, GEN), we have all types of
hotels: 2*, 3*, 4* and even 5* hotels.
The implementation of L1 is functionally quite
straightforward. The reasoning component pro-
duces a logical formula, from which the NLG func-
tions (lexicalisation, but also aggregation and mi-
croplanning) operate. As indicated in the above ar-
ray, the generator evaluates the relative overlapp be-
tween the question focus and the response. It can
then activate, for the terms to generate, the rele-
vant lexicalisation function(s). The GEN function is
quite specific since it has also some stylistic motiva-
tions, it is described in depth in (Benamara 2004).
There are, at this level, several choices, that we
manage via preferences given a priori since we do
not have any user model. Stress and various ad-
ditional enumerations have essentially a pragmatic
motivation, as indicated above. At the implementa-
tion level, these can just be parameterized.
6.2 The relations L2, L3 and L4
Within the direct response, the most direct lexical-
isation forms (L3, Fig. 2), can be paired with cat-
egories like OPP, SUB, FTI or MET. OPP is used
within the response to reinforce some terms by say-
ing what they are not. MET is in general a form of
stress or focus on a particular point. MET is pro-
duced via the concept properties of the ontology.
SUB(a)(b) are also used as forms of elaborations, to
make more explicit a term (e.g. we accept all forms
of payments: cheques, credit cards, cash, money or-
ders, etc.), or to give a precision, possibly using FTI.
Such lexicalisations have a strong pragmatic basis.
However, in NLG, the use of OPP or of SYN(a)(b)
can be motivated either by the user model, or, if it
does not exist, by the need of some elaboration if
some concepts in the response are complex or quite
remote from the original question focus. The im-
plementation relies on the conceptual metrics, also
used for concept relaxation (Benamara et al2004a)
and also on manually marked really complex con-
cepts in the ontology. The lexicalization programme
is simply able to propose additional lexicalizations,
structured by the aggregation procedure, e.g. as a
list of SUB or OPP.
In the know-how part of the cooperative response,
lexicalisation strategies (L2) are more rigid, since
they are guided by the reasoning procedures. We
observe a large number of relaxations, involving
lexicalisations based on SUB, SIS or GEN, depend-
ing on how the ontology is traversed by relaxation.
Several intensional operations are also developed to
make the response more compact, involving lexical-
isations based on GEN (Benamara 2004). Lexical-
ization choices totally depend on the reasoning pro-
cedures and are just direct language realizations of
the concepts introduced by relaxation or generaliza-
tion inference schemas.
There are lexicalisation relations between the di-
rect response and the know-how part (L4, which has
some relations with L2) in particular when the direct
response is negative. The know how part involves
realisations which are in:
- GEN, SUB, SIS or FTI relation with the term used
in the direct response when relaxation or intentional
calculus is used in the know how part,
- SYN or SUB relation when the know-how part is a
warning or a restriction. Pronominal or other forms
of references are possible at this level (yes, we do
have cabins, but they can only be rent on a weekly
basis).
6.3 The relation L5
The relation L5 has a specific status, it covers a large
number of situations, we therefore simply evoke
prototypical situations here. Its motivation comes
from the fact that the know how part of a response
is composed, in general, of several segments, called
meaningful units. As explained in detail in (Bena-
mara et al. 2004b), the know-how part is in gen-
eral composed of a response elaboration (related to
constraint relaxation, or any other type of inference)
followed by a number of additional information un-
der the form of justifications, warnings, restrictions,
counter-proposals, etc.
For example, in the following example, we have
several segments:
Q: How can I get to the Borme castle ?
Direct response + elaboration: You must take the
GR90 from the old castle:
additional information - precision: walking dis-
tance: 30 minutes.
warning: There is no possibility to get there by car.
In this example, the warning segment uses a kind
of opposite of walking, namely driving, to warn the
user e.g. about the lack of alternative.
The following example has a know-how part
based on relaxation, and then proposes an alterna-
tive to cinemas by means of a sister concept:
Q: Is there a cinema in Borme ?
Direct response: No,
Know-how (relaxation on the localization): the
closest cinema is at Londes (8 kms) or at Hyeres,
Cinema Olbia (at 20 kms).
Additional information (counter-proposal on the ac-
tivity) : however, there is a niceopen air theater in
Borme.
In this latter example, we see that, again, the addi-
tional information segment introduces a sister con-
cept of cinema.
Implementing L5 is largely dependent on the rea-
soning procedures, on the knowledge found in the
database, and on the way the general form of the re-
sponse is planned. The role of lexicalisation here is
essentially choosing the appropriate terms, with the
appropriate level in the ontology.
7 Perspective
This study shows several original lexicalisation
strategies in advanced, cooperative QA forms. Lex-
ical choice, realized in the content determination
phase in conjunction with the cooperative inference
schemas, mainly involves the SIS, GEN, SUB, FTI
and ID functions, whereas lexical variation, realized
at the level of the surface realizer, along the five
relations L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5, mainly involves
SYN, OPP and MET, characterized by the produc-
tion of lists of potential candidate words. This latter
level interacts also with grammatical considerations
such as aggregation (Reiter and Dale 1997) or the
use of alternations.
These lexicalisations require a quite advanced do-
main model, necessary for the development of co-
operative functions, in particular a rich ontology.
These functions have been tested in the WEBCOOP
prototype, that cooperatively responds to queries on
the WEB, on the tourism domain (accommodation
and transportation).
This study can be applied to open generation, on
a purely conceptual representation basis, or to more
restricted forms of generation, such as underspeci-
fied templates with calls to lexicalisation.
Acknowledgements We thank the CNRS GDR
TCAN and Ve?ronique Moriceau for providing us
corpora and for helpful discussions. We also thank
the three reviewers for their useful comments.
References
Benamara, F, Saint Dizier, P., Advanced Relaxation
for Cooperative Question Answering, in New
Directions in Question Answering, Chapter 21.
Mark T. Maybury (ed.), AAAI/MIT Press, 2004a.
Benamara, F., Moriceau, V., Saint-Dizier, P.,
COOPML: Towards Annotating Cooperative
Discourse, in Workshop on discourse annotation,
ACL?04, Barcelona, July 2004b.
Benamara, F., AAAI.
Cahill, L., Lexicalisation in applied NLG systems,
Research report, ITRI-99-04, 1999.
Cruse, A., Lexical Semantics, CUP, 1986.
Gal, A., Cooperative Responses in Deductive
Databases, PhD Thesis, Univ. of Maryland,
1988.
Gaasterland, T., Godfrey, P., Minker, J., An
Overview of Cooperative Answering, Papers in
non-standard queries and non-standard answers,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994.
Grice, H., Logic and Conversation, in Cole and
Morgan (eds), Syntax and Semantics, Academic
Press, 1975.
Hendrix, G., Sacerdoti, E., Sagalowicz, D., Slocum,
J., Developing a Natural Language Interface to
Complex Data, ACM transactions on database
systems, 3(2), 1978.
Kaplan, J., Cooperative Responses from a Portable
Natural Language Query System, in M. Brady
and R. Berwick (ed), Computational Models of
Discourse, 167-208, MIT Press, 1982.
Lehnert, W., The Process of Question Answering:
a Computer Simulation of Cognition, Lawrence
Erlbaum, 1978.
Mays, E., Joshi, A., Webber, B., Taking the Ini-
tiative in Natural Language Database Interac-
tions: Monitoring as Response, EACL?82, Orsay,
France, 1982.
Minock M, Chu W, Yang H, Chiang K, Chow, G
and Larson, C, CoBase: A Scalable and Exten-
sible Cooperative Information System. Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, volume 6, num-
ber 2/3,pp : 223-259, 1996.
Reiter, R., Dale, R., Building Applied Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems, Journal of Natural
Language Engineering, volume 3, number 1,
pp:57-87, 1997.
Searle, J., Indirect Speech Acts, in Cole and Morgan
(eds), Syntax and Semantics III, Academic Press,
1975.
Voorees, E. M., Overview of the TREC 2002 Ques-
tion Answering Track. Proceedings of TREC-11,
NIST, 2003.
