Classifying Ellipsis in Dialogue: A Machine Learning Approach
Raquel FERNA?NDEZ, Jonathan GINZBURG and Shalom LAPPIN
Department of Computer Science
King?s College London
Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK
{raquel,ginzburg,lappin}@dcs.kcl.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a machine learning approach
to bare sluice disambiguation in dialogue. We ex-
tract a set of heuristic principles from a corpus-based
sample and formulate them as probabilistic Horn
clauses. We then use the predicates of such clauses
to create a set of domain independent features to an-
notate an input dataset, and run two different ma-
chine learning algorithms: SLIPPER, a rule-based
learning algorithm, and TiMBL, a memory-based
system. Both learners perform well, yielding simi-
lar success rates of approx 90%. The results show
that the features in terms of which we formulate our
heuristic principles have significant predictive power,
and that rules that closely resemble our Horn clauses
can be learnt automatically from these features.
1 Introduction
The phenomenon of sluicing?bare wh-phrases
that exhibit a sentential meaning?constitutes
an empirically important construction which
has been understudied from both theoretical
and computational perspectives. Most theoret-
ical analyses (e.g. (Ross, 1969; Chung et al,
1995)), focus on embedded sluices considered
out of any dialogue context. They rarely look
at direct sluices?sluices used in queries to re-
quest further elucidation of quantified parame-
ters (e.g. (1a)). With a few isolated exceptions,
these analyses also ignore a class of uses we refer
to (following (Ginzburg and Sag, 2001) (G&S))
as reprise sluices. These are used to request
clarification of reference of a constituent in a
partially understood utterance, as in (1b).
(1) a. Cassie: I know someone who?s a good kisser.
Catherine: Who? [KP4, 512]1
b. Sue: You were getting a real panic then.
Angela: When? [KB6, 1888]
Our corpus investigation shows that the com-
bined set of direct and reprise sluices constitutes
1This notation indicates the British National Corpus
file (KP4) and the sluice sentence number (512).
more than 75% of all sluices in the British Na-
tional Corpus (BNC). In fact, they make up ap-
prox. 33% of all wh-queries in the BNC.
In previous work (Ferna?ndez et al, to ap-
pear), we implemented G&S?s analysis of di-
rect sluices as part of an interpretation module
in a dialogue system. In this paper we apply
machine learning techniques to extract rules for
sluice classification in dialogue.
In Section 2 we present our corpus study of
classifying sluices into dialogue types and dis-
cuss the methodology we used in this study.
Section 3 analyses the distribution patterns we
identify and considers possible explanations for
these patterns. In Section 4 we identify a num-
ber of heuristic principles for classifying each
sluice dialogue type and formulate these prin-
ciples as probability weighted Horn clauses. In
Section 5, we then use the predicates of these
clauses as features to annotate our corpus sam-
ples of sluices, and run two machine learning
algorithms on these data sets. The first ma-
chine learner used, SLIPPER, extracts opti-
mised rules for identifying sluice dialogue types
that closely resemble our Horn clause principles.
The second, TiMBL, uses a memory-based ma-
chine learning procedure to classify a sluice by
generalising over similar environments in which
the sluice occurs in a training set. Both algo-
rithms performed well, yielding similar success
rates of approximately 90%. This suggests that
the features in terms of which we formulated our
heuristic principles for classifying sluices were
well motivated, and both learning algorithms
that we used are well suited to the task of dia-
logue act classification for fragments on the ba-
sis of these features. We finally present our con-
clusions and future work in Section 6.
2 Corpus Study
2.1 The Corpus
Our corpus-based investigation of bare sluices
has been performed using the ?10 million word
dialogue transcripts of the BNC. The corpus of
bare sluices has been constructed using SCoRE
(Purver, 2001), a tool that allows one to search
the BNC using regular expressions.
The dialogue transcripts of the BNC contain
5183 bare sluices (i.e. 5183 sentences consist-
ing of just a wh-word). We distinguish between
the following classes of bare sluices: what, who,
when, where, why, how and which. Given that
only 15 bare which were found, we have also
considered sluices of the form which N. Includ-
ing which N, the corpus contains a total of 5343
sluices, whose distribution is shown in Table 1.
The annotation was performed on two differ-
ent samples of sluices extracted from the total
found in the dialogue transcripts of the BNC.
The samples were created by arbitrarily select-
ing 50 sluices of each class (15 in the case of
which). The first sample included all instances
of bare how and bare which found, making up a
total of 365 sluices. The second sample con-
tained 50 instances of the remaining classes,
making up a total of 300 sluices.
what why who where
3045 1125 491 350
when which N how which
107 160 50 15
Total: 5343
Table 1: Total of sluices in the BNC
2.2 The Annotation Procedure
To classify the sluices in the first sample of our
sub-corpus we used the categories described be-
low. The classification was done by 3 expert
annotators (the authors) independently.
Direct The utterer of the sluice understands
the antecedent of the sluice without difficulty.
The sluice queries for additional information
that was explicitly or implicitly quantified away
in the previous utterance.
(2) Caroline: I?m leaving this school.
Lyne: When? [KP3, 538]
Reprise The utterer of the sluice cannot un-
derstand some aspect of the previous utterance
which the previous (or possibly not directly pre-
vious) speaker assumed as presupposed (typi-
cally a contextual parameter, except for why,
where the relevant ?parameter? is something
like speaker intention or speaker justification).
(3) Geoffrey: What a useless fairy he was.
Susan: Who? [KCT, 1753]
Clarification The sluice is used to ask for
clarification about the previous utterance as a
whole.
(4) June: Only wanted a couple weeks.
Ada: What? [KB1, 3312]
Unclear It is difficult to understand what
content the sluice conveys, possibly because the
input is too poor to make a decision as to its
resolution, as in the following example:
(5) Unknown : <unclear> <pause>
Josephine: Why? [KCN, 5007]
After annotating the first sample, we decided
to add a new category to the above set. The
sluices in the second sample were classified ac-
cording to a set of five categories, including the
following:
Wh-anaphor The antecedent of the sluice is
a wh-phrase.
(6) Larna: We?re gonna find poison apple and I
know where that one is.
Charlotte: Where? [KD1, 2371]
2.3 Reliability
To evaluate the reliability of the annotation, we
use the kappa coefficient (K) (Carletta, 1996),
which measures pairwise agreement between a
set of coders making category judgements, cor-
recting for expected chance agreement. 2
The agreement on the coding of the first
sample of sluices was moderate (K = 52).3
There were important differences amongst
sluice classes: The lowest agreement was on the
annotation for why (K = 29), what (K = 32)
and how (K = 32), which suggests that these
categories are highly ambiguous. Examina-
tion of the coincidence matrices shows that the
largest confusions were between reprise and
clarification in the case of what, and be-
tween direct and reprise for why and how.
On the other hand, the agreement on classi-
fying who was substantially higher (K = 71),
with some disagreements between direct and
reprise.
Agreement on the annotation of the 2nd sam-
ple was considerably higher although still not
entirely convincing (K = 61). Overall agree-
ment was improved in all classes, except for
2K = P (A)?P (E)/1?P (E), where P(A) is the pro-
portion of actual agreements and P(E) is the proportion
of expected agreement by chance, which depends on the
number of relative frequencies of the categories under
test. The denominator is the total proportion less the
proportion of chance expectation.
3All values are shown as percentages.
where and who. Agreement on what improved
slightly (K = 39), and it was substantially
higher on why (K = 52), when (K = 62) and
which N (K = 64).
Discussion Although the three coders may
be considered experts, their training and famil-
iarity with the data were not equal. This re-
sulted in systematic differences in their anno-
tations. Two of the coders (coder 1 and coder
2) had worked more extensively with the BNC
dialogue transcripts and, crucially, with the def-
inition of the categories to be applied. Leaving
coder 3 out of the coder pool increases agree-
ment very significantly: K = 70 in the first
sample, and K = 71 in the second one. The
agreement reached by the more expert pair of
coders was high and stable. It provides a solid
foundation for the current classification. It also
indicates that it is not difficult to increase an-
notation agreement by relatively light training
of coders.
3 Results: Distribution Patterns
In this section we report the results obtained
from the corpus study described in Section 2.
The study shows that the distribution of read-
ings is significantly different for each class of
sluice. Subsection 3.2 outlines a possible expla-
nation of such distribution.
3.1 Sluice/Interpretation Correlations
The distribution of interpretations for each class
of sluice is shown in Table 2. The distributions
are presented as percentages of pairwise agree-
ment (i.e. agreement between pairs of coders),
leaving aside the unclear cases. This allows
us to see the proportion made up by each in-
terpretation for each sluice class, together with
any correlations between sluice and interpreta-
tion. Distributions are similar over both sam-
ples, suggesting that corpus size is large enough
to permit the identification of repeatable pat-
terns.
Table 2 reveals interesting correlations be-
tween sluice classes and preferred interpreta-
tions. The most common interpretation for
what is clarification, making up 69% in the
first sample and 66% in the second one. Why
sluices have a tendency to be direct (57%,
83%). The sluices with the highest probability
of being reprise are who (76%, 95%), which
(96%), which N (88%, 80%) and where (75%,
69%). On the other hand, when (67%, 65%) and
how (87%) have a clear preference for direct
interpretations.
1st Sample 2nd Sample
Dir Rep Cla Dir Rep Cla Wh-a
what 9 22 69 7 23 66 4
why 57 43 0 83 14 0 3
who 24 76 0 0 95 0 5
where 25 75 0 22 69 0 9
when 67 33 0 65 29 0 6
which N 12 88 0 20 80 0 0
which 4 96 0 ? ? ? ?
how 87 8 5 ? ? ? ?
Table 2: Distributions as pairwise agr percentages
3.2 Explaining the Frequency Hierarchy
In order to gain a complete perspective on sluice
distribution in the BNC, it is appropriate to
combine the (averaged) percentages in Table 2
with the absolute number of sluices contained in
the BNC (see Table 1), as displayed in Table 3:
whatcla 2040 whichNrep 135
whydir 775 whendir 90
whatrep 670 whodir 70
whorep 410 wheredir 70
whyrep 345 howdir 45
whererep 250 whenrep 35
whatdir 240 whichNdir 24
Table 3: Sluice Class Frequency - Estim. Tokens
For instance, although more than 70% of why
sluices are direct, the absolute number of why
sluices that are reprise exceeds the total num-
ber of when sluices by almost 3 to 1. Explicating
the distribution in Table 3 is important in or-
der to be able to understand among other issues
whether we would expect a similar distribution
to occur in a Spanish or Mandarin dialogue cor-
pus; similarly, whether one would expect this
distribution to be replicated across different do-
mains. Here we restrict ourselves to sketching
an explanation of a couple of striking patterns
exhibited in Table 3.
One such pattern is the low frequency of when
sluices, particularly by comparison with what
one might expect to be its close cousin?where;
indeed the direct/reprise splits are almost
mirror images for when v. where. Another very
notable pattern, alluded to above, is the high
frequency of why sluices.4
The when v. where contrast provides one ar-
gument against (7), which is probably the null
4As we pointed out above, sluices are a common
means of asking wh?interrogatives; in the case of why?
interrogatives, this is even stronger?close to 50% of all
such interrogatives in the BNC are sluices.
hypothesis w/r to the distribution of reprise
sluices:
(7) Frequency of antecedent hypothesis:
The frequency of a class of reprise sluices
is directly correlated with the frequency of
the class of its possible antecedents.
Clearly locative expressions do not outnum-
ber temporal ones and certainly not by the
proportion the data in Table 3 would require
to maintain (7).5 (Purver, 2004) provides ad-
ditional data related to this?clarification re-
quests of all types in the BNC that pertain to
nominal antecedents outnumber such CRs that
relate to verbal antecedents by 40:1, which does
not correlate with the relative frequency of nom-
inal v. verbal antecedents (about 1.3:1).
A more refined hypothesis, which at present
we can only state quite informally, is (8):
(8) Ease of grounding of antecedent hy-
pothesis: The frequency of a class of
reprise sluices is directly correlated with
the ease with which the class of its possible
antecedents can be grounded (in the sense
of (Clark, 1996; Traum, 1994)).
This latter hypothesis offers a route towards
explaining the when v. where contrast. There
are two factors at least which make ground-
ing a temporal parameter significantly easier on
the whole than grounding a locative parameter.
The first factor is that conversationalists typi-
cally share a temporal ontology based on a clock
and/or calendar. Although well structured loca-
tive ontologies do exist (e.g. grid points in a
map), they are far less likely to be common cur-
rency. The natural ordering of clock/calendar-
based ontologies reflected in grammatical de-
vices such as sequence of tense is a second fac-
tor that favours temporal parameters over loca-
tives.
From this perspective, the high frequency of
why reprises is not surprising. Such reprises
query either the justification for an antecedent
assertion or the goal of an antecedent query.
Speakers usually do not specify these explicitly.
In fact, what requires explanation is why such
5A rough estimate concerning the BNC can be ex-
tracted by counting the words that occur more than 1000
times. Of these approx 35k tokens are locative in nature
and could serve as antecedents of where; the correspond-
ing number for temporal expressions and when yields
approx 80k tokens. These numbers are derived from a
frequency list (Kilgarriff, 1998) of the demographic por-
tion of the BNC.
reprises do not occur even more frequently than
they actually do. To account for this, one has
to appeal to considerations of the importance of
anchoring a contextual parameter.6
A detailed explication of the distribution
shown in Table 3 requires a detailed model of
dialogue interaction. We have limited ourselves
to suggesting that the distribution can be expli-
cated on the basis of some quite general princi-
ples that regulate grounding.
4 Heuristics for sluice
disambiguation
In this section we informally describe a set
of heuristics for assigning an interpretation to
bare sluices. In subsection 4.2, we show how
our heuristics can be formalised as probabilistic
sluice typing constraints.
4.1 Description of the heuristics
To maximise accuracy we have restricted our-
selves to cases of three-way agreement among
the three coders when considering the distri-
bution patterns from which we obtained our
heuristics. Looking at these patters we have
arrived at the following general principles for
resolving bare sluice types.
What The most likely interpretation is
clarification. This seems to be the case
when the antecedent utterance is a fragment, or
when there is no linguistic antecedent. Reprise
interpretations also provide a significant propor-
tion (about 23%). If there is a pronoun (match-
ing the appropriate semantic constraints) in the
antecedent utterance, then the preferred inter-
pretation is reprise:
(9) Andy: I don?t know how to do it.
Nick: What? Garlic bread? [KPR, 1763]
Why The interpretation of why sluices tends
to be direct. However, if the antecedent is a
non-declarative utterance, or a negative declar-
ative, the sluice is likely to be a reprise.
(10) Vicki: Were you buying this erm newspaper
last week by any chance?
Frederick: Why? [KC3, 3388]
Who Sluices of this form show a very strong
preference for reprise interpretation. In the
majority of cases, the antecedent is either a
proper name (11), or a personal pronoun.
6Another factor is the existence of default strategies
for resolving such parameters, e.g. assuming that the
question asked transparently expresses the querier?s pri-
mary goal.
(11) Patrick: [...] then I realised that it was Fennite
Katherine: Who? [KCV, 4694]
Which/Which N Both sorts of sluices ex-
hibit a strong tendency to reprise. In the
overwhelming majority of reprise cases for both
which and which N, the antecedent is a definite
description like ?the button? in (12).
(12) Arthur: You press the button.
June: Which one? [KSS, 144]
Where The most likely interpretation of
where sluices is reprise. In about 70% of
the reprise cases, the antecedent of the sluice
is a deictic locative pronoun like ?there? or
?here?. Direct interpretations are preferred
when the antecedent utterance is declarative
with no overt spatial location expression.
(13) Pat: You may find something in there actually.
Carole: Where? [KBH, 1817]
When If the antecedent utterance is a declar-
ative and there is no time-denoting expression
other than tense, the sluice will be interpreted
as direct, as in example (14). On the other
hand, deictic temporal expressions like ?then?
trigger reprise interpretations.
(14) Caroline: I?m leaving this school.
Lyne: When? [KP3, 538]
How This class of sluice exhibits a very strong
tendency to direct (87%). It appears that
most of the antecedent utterances contain an
accomplishment verb.
(15) Anthony: I?ve lost the, the whole work itself
Arthur: How? [KP1, 631]
4.2 Probabilistic Constraints
The problem we are addressing is typing of bare
sluice tokens in dialogue. This problem is anal-
ogous to part-of-speech tagging, or to dialogue
act classification.
We formulate our typing constraints as Horn
clauses to achieve the most general and declar-
ative expression of these conditions. The an-
tecedent of a constraint uses predicates corre-
sponding to dialogue relations, syntactic prop-
erties, and lexical content. The predicate of the
consequent represents a sluice typing tag, which
corresponds to a maximal type in the HPSG
grammar that we used in implementing our di-
alogue system. Note that these constraints can-
not be formulated at the level of the lexical en-
tries of the wh-words since these distributions
are specific to sluicing and not to non-elliptical
wh-interrogatives.7 As a first example, consider
the following rule:
sluice(x), where(x),
ant utt(y,x),
contains(y,?there?) ? reprise(x) [.78]
This rule states that if x is a sluice construction
with lexical head where, and its antecedent ut-
terance (identified with the latest move in the
dialogue) contains the word ?there?, then x is a
reprise sluice. Note that, as in a probabilistic
context-free grammar (Booth, 1969), the rule is
assigned a conditional probability. In the exam-
ple above, .78 is the probability that the context
described in the antecedent of the clause pro-
duces the interpretation specified in the conse-
quent.8
The following three rules are concerned with
the disambiguation of why sluice readings. The
structure of the rules is the same as before. In
this case however, the disambiguation is based
on syntactic and semantic properties of the an-
tecedent utterance as a whole (like polarity or
mood), instead of focusing on a particular lexi-
cal item contained in such utterance.
sluice(x), why(x),
ant utt(y,x), non decl(y) ? reprise(x) [.93]
sluice(x), why(x),
ant utt(y,x), pos decl(y) ? direct(x) [.95]
sluice(x), why(x),
ant utt(y,x), neg decl(y) ? reprise(x) [.40]
5 Applying Machine Learning
To evaluate our heuristics, we applied machine
learning techniques to our corpus data. Our
aim was to evaluate the predictive power of the
features observed and to test whether the intu-
itive constraints formulated in the form of Horn
clause rules could be learnt automatically from
these features.
5.1 SLIPPER
We use a rule-based learning algorithm called
SLIPPER (for Simple Learner with Iterative
Pruning to Produce Error Reduction). SLIP-
PER (Cohen and Singer, 1999) combines the
7Thus, whereas Table 2 shows that approx. 70% of
who-sluices are reprise, this is clearly not the case
for non-elliptical who?interrogatives. For instance, the
KB7 block in the BNC has 33 non-elliptical who?
interrogatives. Of these at most 3 serve as reprise ut-
terances.
8These probabilities have been extracted manually
from the three-way agreement data.
separate-and-conquer approach used by most
rule learners with confidence-rated boosting to
create a compact rule set.
The output of SLIPPER is a weighted rule
set, in which each rule is associated with a con-
fidence level. The rule builder is used to find
a rule set that separates each class from the re-
maining classes using growing and pruning tech-
niques. To classify an instance x, one computes
the sum of the confidences that cover x: if the
sum is greater than zero, the positive class is
predicted. For each class, the only rule with
a negative confidence rating is a single default
rule, which predicts membership in the remain-
ing classes.
We decided to use SLIPPER for two main
reasons: (1) it generates transparent, relatively
compact rule sets that can provide interesting
insights into the data, and (2) its if-then rules
closely resemble our Horn clause constraints.
5.2 Experimental Setup
To generate the input data we took all three-
way agreement instances plus those instances
where there is agreement between coder 1 and
coder 2, leaving out cases classified as unclear.
We reclassified 9 instances in the first sample as
wh-anaphor, and also included these data.9 The
total data set includes 351 datapoints. These
were annotated according to the set of features
shown in Table 4.
sluice type of sluice
mood mood of the antecedent utterance
polarity polarity of the antecedent utterance
frag whether the antecedent utterance is
a fragment
quant presence of a quantified expression
deictic presence of a deictic pronoun
proper n presence of a proper name
pro presence of a pronoun
def desc presence of a definite description
wh presence of a wh word
overt presence of any other potential
antecedent expression
Table 4: Features
We use a total of 11 features. All features are
nominal. Except for the sluice feature that in-
dicates the sluice type, they are all boolean, i.e.
they can take as value either yes or no. The
features mood, polarity and frag refer to syn-
tactic and semantic properties of the antecedent
9We reclassified those instances that had motivated
the introduction of the wh-anaphor category for the sec-
ond sample. Given that there were no disagreements in-
volving this category, such reclassification was straight-
forward.
utterance as a whole. The remaining features,
on the other hand, focus on a particular lexical
item or construction contained in such utter-
ance. They will take yes as a value if this ele-
ment or construction exists and, it matches the
semantic restrictions imposed by the sluice type.
The feature wh will take a yes value only if there
is a wh-word that is identical to the sluice type.
Unknown or irrelevant values are indicated by
a question mark. This allows us to express, for
instance, that the presence of a proper name is
irrelevant to determine the interpretation of a
where sluice, while it is crucial when the sluice
type is who. The feature overt takes no as value
when there is no overt antecedent expression. It
takes yes when there is an antecedent expres-
sion not captured by any other feature, and it
is considered irrelevant (question mark value)
when there is an antecedent expression defined
by another feature.
5.3 Accuracy Results
We performed a 10-fold cross-validation on the
total data set, obtaining an average success rate
of 90.32%. Using leave-one-out cross-validation
we obtained an average success rate of 84.05%.
For the holdout method, we held over 100 in-
stances as a testing data, and used the reminder
(251 datapoints) for training. This yielded
a success rate of 90%. Recall, precision and
f-measure values are reported in Table 5.
category recall precision f-measure
direct 96.67 85.29 90.62
reprise 88.89 94.12 91.43
clarification 83.33 71.44 76.92
wh anaphor 80.00 100 88.89
Table 5: SLIPPER - Results
Using the holdout procedure, SLIPPER gen-
erated a set of 23 rules: 4 for direct, 13
for reprise, 1 for clarification and 1 for
wh-anaphor, plus 4 default rules, one for each
class. All features are used except for frag,
which indicates that this feature does not play a
significant role in determining the correct read-
ing. The following rules are part of the rule set
generated by SLIPPER:
direct not reprise|clarification|wh anaphor :-
overt=no, polarity=pos (+1.06296)
reprise not direct|clarification|wh anaphor :-
deictic=yes (+3.31703)
reprise not direct|clarification|wh anaphor :-
mood=non decl, sluice=why (+1.66429)
5.4 Comparing SLIPPER and TiMBL
Although SLIPPER seems to be especially well
suited for the task at hand, we decided to run a
different learning algorithm on the same train-
ing and testing data sets and compare the re-
sults obtained. For this experiment we used
TiMBL, a memory-based learning algorithm de-
veloped at Tilburg University (Daelemans et
al., 2003). As with all memory-based machine
learners, TiMBL stores representations of in-
stances from the training set explicitly in mem-
ory. In the prediction phase, the similarity be-
tween a new test instance and all examples in
memory is computed using some distance met-
ric. The system will assign the most frequent
category within the set of most similar exam-
ples (the k-nearest neighbours). As a distance
metric we used information-gain feature weight-
ing, which weights each feature according to the
amount of information it contributes to the cor-
rect class label.
The results obtained are very similar to the
previous ones. TiMBL yields a success rate of
89%. Recall, precision and f-measure values are
shown in Table 6. As expected, the feature that
received a lowest weighting was frag.
category recall precision f-measure
direct 86.60 86.60 86.6
reprise 88.89 90.50 89.68
clarification 83.33 71.44 76.92
wh anaphor 100 100 100
Table 6: TiMBL -Results
6 Conclusion and Further Work
In this paper we have presented a machine
learning approach to bare sluice classification
in dialogue using corpus-based empirical data.
From these data, we have extracted a set of
heuristic principles for sluice disambiguation
and formulated such principles as probability
weighted Horn clauses. We have then used
the predicates of these clauses as features to
annotate an input dataset, and ran two dif-
ferent machine learning algorithms: SLIPPER,
a rule-based learning algorithm, and TiMBL,
a memory-based learning system. SLIPPER
has the advantage of generating transparent
rules that closely resemble our Horn clause con-
straints. Both algorithms, however, perform
well, yielding to similar success rates of approx-
imately 90%. This shows that the features we
used to formulate our heuristic principles were
well motivated, except perhaps for the feature
frag, which does not seem to have a signifi-
cant predictive power. The two algorithms we
used seem to be well suited to the task of sluice
classification in dialogue on the basis of these
features.
In the future we will attempt to construct
an automatic procedure for annotating a dia-
logue corpus with the features presented here,
to which both machine learning algorithms ap-
ply.
References
T. Booth. 1969. Probabilistic representation
of formal languages. In IEEE Conference
Record of the 1969 Tenth Annual Symposium
of Switching and Automata Theory.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on clas-
sification tasks: the kappa statistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2(22):249?255.
S. Chung, W. Ladusaw, and J. McCloskey.
1995. Sluicing and logical form. Natural Lan-
guage Semantics, 3:239?282.
H. H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
W. Cohen and Y. Singer. 1999. A simple, fast,
and effective rule learner. In Proc. of the 16th
National Conference on AI.
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel, K. van der Sloot, and
A. van den Bosch. 2003. TiMBL: Tilburg
Memory Based Learner, Reference Guide.
Technical Report ILK-0310, U. of Tilburg.
R. Ferna?ndez, J. Ginzburg, H. Gregory, and
S. Lappin. (to appear). SHARDS: Frag-
ment resolution in dialogue. In H. Bunt and
R. Muskens, editors, Computing Meaning,
volume 3. Kluwer.
J. Ginzburg and I. Sag. 2001. Interrogative
Investigations. CSLI Publications, Stanford,
California.
A. Kilgarriff. 1998. BNC Database and
Word Frequency Lists. www.itri.bton.ac.uk/
?Adam.Kilgarriff/ bnc-readme.html.
M. Purver. 2001. SCoRE: A tool for searching
the BNC. Technical Report TR-01-07, Dept.
of Computer Science, King?s College London.
M. Purver. 2004. The Theory and Use of Clari-
fication in Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, King?s Col-
lege, London, forthcoming.
J. Ross. 1969. Guess who. In Proc. of the 5th
annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics So-
ciety, pages 252?286, Chicago. CLS.
D. Traum. 1994. A Computational Theory of
Grounding in Natural Language Conversa-
tion. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester,
Department of Computer Science, Rochester.
