Coling 2010: Poster Volume, pages 570?578,
Beijing, August 2010
Using Syntactic and Semantic based Relations for Dialogue Act
Recognition
Tina Klu?wer, Hans Uszkoreit, Feiyu Xu
Deutsches Forschungszentrum fu?r Ku?nstliche Intelligenz (DFKI)
Projektbu?ro Berlin
{tina.kluewer,uszkoreit,feiyu}@dfki.de
Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to
dialogue act recognition employing multi-
level information features. In addition to
features such as context information and
words in the utterances, the recognition
task utilizes syntactic and semantic rela-
tions acquired by information extraction
methods. These features are utilized by
a Bayesian network classifier for our dia-
logue act recognition. The evaluation re-
sults show a clear improvement from the
accuracy of the baseline (only with word
features) with 61.9% to an accuracy of
67.4% achieved by the extended feature
set.
1 Introduction
Dialogue act recognition is an essential task for
dialogue systems. Automatic dialogue act clas-
sification has received much attention in the past
years either as an independent task or as an em-
bedded component in dialogue systems. Various
methods have been tested on different corpora us-
ing several dialogue act classes and information
coming from the user input.
The work presented in this paper is part of a
dialogue system called KomParse (Klu?wer et al,
2010), which is an application of a NL dialogue
system combined with various question answering
technologies in a three-dimensional virtual world
named Twinity, a web-based online product of the
Berlin startup company Metaversum1. The Kom-
Parse NPCs provide various services through con-
1http://www.metaversum.com/
versation with game users such as selling pieces
of furniture to users via text based conversation.
The main task of the input interpretation com-
ponent of the agent is the detection of the dialogue
acts contained in the user utterances. This classi-
fication is done via a cue-based method with var-
ious features from multi-level knowledge sources
extracted from the incoming utterance considering
a small context of the previous dialogue.
In contrast to existing systems using mainly
lexical features, i.e. words, single markers such as
punctuation (Verbree et al, ) or combinations of
various features (Stolcke et al, 2000) for the dia-
logue act classification, the results of the interpre-
tation component presented in this paper are based
on syntactic and semantic relations. The system
first gathers linguistic information coming from
different levels of deep linguistic processing sim-
ilar to (Allen et al, 2007). The retrieved informa-
tion is used as input for an information extraction
component that delivers the relations embedded in
the actual utterance (Xu et al, 2007). These rela-
tions combined with additional features (a small
dialogue context and mood of the sentence) are
then utilized as features for the machine-learning
based recognition.
The classifier is trained on a corpus originating
from a Wizard-of-Oz experiment which was semi-
automatically annotated. It contains automatically
annotated syntactic relations namely, predicate ar-
gument structures, which were checked and cor-
rected manually afterwards. Furthermore these re-
lations are enriched by manual annotation with se-
mantic frame information from VerbNet to gain an
additional level of semantic richness. These two
representations of relations, the syntax-based re-
570
lations and the VerbNet semantic relations, were
used in separate training steps to detect how much
the classifier can benefit from either notations.
A systematic analysis of the data has been con-
ducted. It turns out that a comparatively small set
of syntactic relations cover most utterances, which
can moreover be expressed by an even smaller set
of semantic relations. Because of this observation
as well as the overall performance of the classifier
the interpretation is extended with an additional
rule based approach to ensure the robustness of
the system.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides an overview about existing dialogue act
recognition systems and the features they use for
classification.
Section 3 introduces the original data used as ba-
sis for the annotation and the classification task.
In Section 4 the annotation that provides the nec-
essary information for the dialogue act classifi-
cation and involves the relation extraction is de-
scribed in detail. The annotation is split into three
main steps: The annotation of dialogue informa-
tion (section 4.1), the integration of syntactic in-
formation (section 4.2) and finally the manual an-
notation of VerbNet predicate and role informa-
tion in section 4.3.
Section 5 presents the results of the actual classifi-
cation task using different feature sets and in Sec-
tion 6 the results and methods are summarized.
Finally, Section 7 provides a brief description of
the rule-based interpretation and presents an out-
look on future work.
2 Related Work
Dialogue Acts (DAs) represent the functional
level of a speaker?s utterance, such as a greeting,
a request or a statement. Dialogue acts are ver-
bal or nonverbal actions that incorporate partic-
ipant?s intentions originating from the theory of
Speech Acts by Searle and Austin (Searle, 1969).
They provide an abstraction from the original in-
put by detecting the intended action of an utter-
ance, which is not necessarily inferable from the
surface input (see the two requests in the follow-
ing example).
Can you show me a red car please?
Please show me a red car!
To detect the action included in an utterance,
different approaches have been suggested in re-
cent years which can be clustered into two main
classes: The first class uses AI planning methods
to detect the intention of the utterance based on
belief states of the communicating agents and the
world knowledge. These systems are often part of
an entire dialogue system e.g. in a conversational
agent which provides the necessary information
about current beliefs and goals of the conversa-
tion participants at runtime. One example is the
TRIPS system (Allen et al, 1996). Because of the
huge amount of reasoning, systems in this class
generally gather as much linguistic information as
possible.
The second class uses cues derived from the
actual utterance to detect the right dialogue act,
mostly using machine learning methods. This
class gained much attention due to less computa-
tional costs. The probabilistic classifications are
carried out via training on labeled examples of
dialogue acts described by different feature sets.
Frequently used cues for dialogue acts are lexi-
cal features such as the words of the utterance or
ngrams of words for example in (Verbree et al,
), (Zimmermann et al, 2005) or (Webb and Liu,
2008). Although the performance of the classi-
fication task is difficult to compare, because of
the variety of different corpora, dialogue act sets
and algorithms used, these approaches do pro-
vide considerably good results. For example (Ver-
bree et al, ) achieve accuracy values of 89% on
the ICSI Meeting Corpus containing 80.000 ut-
terances with a dialogue act set of 5 distinct di-
alogue act classes and amongst others the features
?ngrams of words? and ?ngrams of POS informa-
tion?.
Another group of systems utilizes acoustic fea-
tures derived from Automatic Speech Recognition
for automatic dialogue act tagging (Surendran and
Levow, 2006), context features like the preceding
dialogue act or ngrams of previous dialogue acts
(Keizer and Akker, 2006).
However grammatical and semantic informa-
tion is not that often incorporated into feature sets,
with the exception of single features such as the
571
Dialogue Act Meaning Frequency
REQUEST The utterance contains a wish or demand 449
REQUEST INFO The utterance contains a wish or demand regarding information 154
PROPOSE The utterance serves as suggestion or showing of an object 216
ACCEPT The utterance contains an affirmation 167
REJECT The utterance contains a rejection 88
PROVIDE INFO The utterance provides an information 156
ACKNOWLEDGE The utterance is a backchannelling 9
Table 1: The used Dialogue Act Set
type of verbs or arguments or the presence or ab-
sence of special operators e.g. wh-phrases (An-
dernach, 1996). (Keizer et al, 2002) use among
others linguistic features like sentence type for
classification with Bayesian networks. Although
(Jurafsky et al, 1998) already noticed a strong
correlation between selected dialogue acts and
special grammatical structures, approaches using
grammatical structure were not very succesful.
While grammatical and semantic features are
not often incorporated into dialogue act recogni-
tion, they are a commonly used in related fields
like automatic classification of rhetorical rela-
tions. For example (Sporleder and Lascarides,
2008) and (Lapata and Lascarides, 2004) extract
verbs as well as their temporal features derived
from parsing to infer sentence internal temporal
and rhetorical relations. Their best model for
analysing temporal relations between two clauses
achieves 70.7% accuracy. (Subba and Eugenio,
2009) also show a significant improvement of a
discourse relation classifier incorporating compo-
sitional semantics compared to a model without
semantic features. Their VerbNet based frame se-
mantics yield in a better result of 4.5%.
3 The Data
The data serving as the basis for the relation iden-
tification as well as the training corpus for the di-
alogue act classifier is taken from a Wizard-of-Oz
experiment (Bertomeu and Benz, 2009) in which
18 users furnish a virtual living room with the help
of a furniture sales agent. Users buy pieces of fur-
niture and room decoration from the agent by de-
scribing their demands and preferences in a text
chat. During the dialogue with the agent, the pre-
ferred objects are then selected and directly put to
the right location in the apartment. In the exper-
iments, users spent one hour each on furnishing
the living room by talking to a human wizard con-
trolling the virtual sales agent. The final corpus
consists of 18 dialogues containing 3,171 turns
with 4,313 utterances and 23,015 alpha-numerical
strings (words). The following example shows a
typical part of such a conversation:
USR.1: And do we have a little side table for the TV?
NPC.1: I could offer you another small table or a side-
board.
USR.2: Then I?ll take a sideboard that is similar to my
shelf.
NPC.2: Let me check if we have something like that.
Table 2: Example Conversation from the Wizard-
of-Oz Experiment
4 Annotation
The annotation of the corpus is carried out in sev-
eral steps.
4.1 Pragmatic Annotation
The first annotation step consists of annotating
discourse and pragmatic information including di-
alogue acts, projects according to (Clark, 1996),
sentence mood, the topic of the conversation and
an automatically retrieved information state for
every turn of the conversations. From the anno-
tated information the following elements were se-
lected as features in the final recognition system:
? The dialogue acts which carry the intentions
of the actual utterance as well as the last pre-
ceding dialogue act. The set used for anno-
tation is a domain specific set containing the
dialogue acts shown in table 1.
? The sentence mood. Sentence mood was
annotated with one of the following values:
declarative, imperative, interrogative.
572
? The topic of the utterance. The topic value
is coreferent with the currently discussed ob-
ject. Topic can consist of an object class
(e.g. sofa) or an special object instance
(sofa 1836). The topic of the directly pre-
ceding utterance was chosen as a feature too.
4.2 Annotation with Predicate Argument
Structure
The second annotation step, applied to the ut-
terance level of the input, automatically enriches
the annotation with predicate argument structures.
Each utterance is parsed with a predicate argu-
ment parser and annotated with syntactic relations
organized according to PropBank (Palmer et al,
2005) containing the following features: Predi-
cate, Subject, Objects, Negation, Modifiers, Cop-
ula Complements.
A single relation mainly consists of a predi-
cate and the belonging arguments. Verb modi-
fiers like attached PPs are classified as ?argM?
together with negation (?argM neg?) and modal
verbs (?argM modal?). Arguments are labeled
with numbers according to the found information
for the actual structure. PropBank is organized in
two layers, the first one being an underspecified
representation of a sentence with numbered argu-
ments, the second one containing fine-grained in-
formation about the semantic frames for the predi-
cate comparable to FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998).
While the information in the second layer is sta-
ble for each verb, the values of the numbered ar-
guments can change from verb to verb. While
for one verb the ?arg0? may refer to the subject
of the verb, another verb may encapsulate a di-
rect object behind the same notation ?arg0?. This
is very complicated to handle in a computational
setup, which needs continuous labeling for the
successive components. Therefore the arguments
were in general named as in PropBank but con-
sistently numbered by syntactic structure. This
means for example that the subject is always la-
beled as ?arg1?.
Consider the example ?Can you put posters or
pictures on the wall??. The syntactic relation will
yield in the following representation:
<predicate: put>
<ArgM_modal: can>
<Arg1: you>
<Arg2: posters or pictures>
<ArgM: on the wall>
Predicate Argument Structure Parser The
syntactic predicate argument structure that consti-
tutes the syntactic relations and serves as basis for
the VerbNet annotation, is automatically retrieved
by a rule-based predicate argument parser. The
rules utilized by the parser describe subtrees of de-
pendency structures in XML by means of relevant
grammatical functions. For detecting verbs with
two arguments in the input, for instance, a rule
can be written describing the dependency struc-
ture for a verb with a subject and an object. This
rule would then detect every occurrence of the
structure ?Verb-Subj-Obj? in a dependency tree.
This sample rule would express the following con-
straints: The matrix unit should be of the part of
speech ?Verb? , The structure belonging to this
verb must contain a ?nsubj? dependency and an
?obj? dependency.
The rules deliver raw predicate argument struc-
tures, in which the detected arguments and the
verb serve as hooks for further information lookup
in the input. If a verb fulfills all requirements
described by the rule, in a second step all modi-
ficational arguments existing in the structure are
recursively acquired. The same is done for
modal arguments as well as modifiers of the ar-
guments such as determiners, adjectives or em-
bedded prepositions. After the generation of the
main predicate argument structure from the gram-
matical functions, the last step inserts the content
values present in the actual input into the structure
to get the syntactic relations for the utterance.
Before the input can be parsed with the predi-
cate argument parser, some preprocessing steps of
the corpus are needed. These include:
Input Cleaning The input data coming from the
users contain many errors. Some string
substitutions as well as the external Google
spellchecker were applied to the input before
any further processing.
Segmentation For clausal separation we apply a
simple segmentation via heuristics based on
punctuation.
POS Tagging Then the input is processed by
573
the external part-of-speech tagger TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994).
The embedded dependency parser is the Stan-
ford Dependency Parser (de Marneffe and Man-
ning, 2008), but other dependency parsers could
be employed instead. The predicate argument
parser is an standalone software and can be used
either as a system component or for batch process-
ing of a text corpus.
4.3 VerbNet Frame Annotation
The last step of annotation consists of the man-
ual annotation of semantic predicate classes and
semantic roles. Moreover, the automatically de-
termined syntactic relations are checked and cor-
rected if possible. VerbNet (Schuler, 2005) is uti-
lized as a source for semantic information. The
VerbNet role set consists of 21 general roles used
in all VerbNet classes. Examples of roles in
this general role set are ?agent?, ?patient? and
?theme?.
For the manual addition of the semantic frame
information a web-based annotation tool has been
developed. The annotation tool shows the utter-
ance which should be annotated in the context of
the dialogue including the information from the
preceding annotation steps. All VerbNet classes
containing the current predicate are listed as pos-
sibilities for the predicate classification together
with their syntactic frames. The annotators can se-
lect the appropriate predicate class and frame ac-
cording to the arguments found in the utterance.
If an argument is missing in the input that is re-
quired in the selected frame a null argument is
added to the structure. If the right predicate class
is existing, but the predicate is not yet a member
of the class, it is added to the VerbNet files. In
case the right predicate class is found but the fit-
ting frame is missing, the frame is added to the
VerbNet files. Thus during annotation 35 new
members have been added to the existing VerbNet
classes, 4 Frames and 4 new subclasses. Via these
modifications, a version of VerbNet has been de-
veloped that can be regarded as a domain-specific
VerbNet for the sales domain.
During the predicate classification, the annota-
tors also assign the appropriate semantic roles to
the arguments belonging to the selected predicate.
The semantic roles are taken from the selected
VerbNet frame.
From the annotated semantic structure, seman-
tic relations are inferred such as the one in the fol-
lowing example:
<predicate: put-3.1>
<agent: you>
<theme: posters or pictures>
<destination: on the wall>
5 Dialogue Act Recognition
Two datasets are derived from the corpus: The
dataset containing the utterances of the users
(CST) and one dataset containing the utterances
of the wizard (NPC), whereas the NPC corpus is
cleaned from the ?protocol sentences?. Protocol
sentences are canned sentences the wizard used
in every conversation, for example to initialize
the dialogue. For the experiments, the two sin-
gle datasets ?NPC? and ?CST? as well as a com-
bined dataset called ?ALL? are used. Unfortu-
nately from the original 4,313 utterances in total,
many utterances could not be used for the final ex-
periments. First, fragments are removed and only
the utterances found by the parser to contain a
valid predicate argument structure are used. After
protocol sentences are taken out too, a dataset of
1702 valid utterances remains. Moreover, 292 ut-
terances are annotated to contain no valid dialogue
act and are therefore not suitable for the recogni-
tion task. Of the remaining utterances, 171 predi-
cate argument structures were annotated as wrong
because of completely ungrammatical input. In
this way we arrive at a dataset of 804 instances for
the users and 435 for the wizard, summing up to
1239 instances in total.
The features used for dialogue act recognition
exploit the information extracted from the differ-
ent annotation steps:
? Context features: The last preceding dia-
logue act, equality between the last preced-
ing topic and the actual topic, sentence mood
? Syntactic relation features: Syntactic predi-
cate class, arguments, negation
? VerbNet semantic relation features: VerbNet
predicate class, VerbNet frame arguments,
negation
574
? Utterance features: The original utterances
without any modifications
Different sets of features for training and eval-
uation are generated from these:
DATASET Syn: All utterances of the specified
dataset described via syntactic relation and
context features.
DATASET VNSem: All utterances of the speci-
fied dataset described via VerbNet semantic
relations and context features.
DATASET Syn Only: All utterances of the
specified dataset only described via the
syntactic relations.
DATASET VNSem Only: All utterances of the
specified dataset only described via the Verb-
Net semantic relations.
DATASET Context Only: All utterances of the
specified dataset described via the context
features and negation without any informa-
tion regarding relations.
DATASET Utterances Context: The utterances
of the specified dataset as strings combined
with the whole set of context features without
further relation extraction results.
DATASET Utterances: Only the utterances of
the specified dataset as strings. This and the
last ?Utterances?-set serve as baselines.
Dialogue Act Recognition is carried out via
the Bayesian network classifier AOEDsr from the
WEKA toolkit. AODEsr augments AODE, an
algorithm averaging over all of a small space
of alternative naive-Bayes-like models that have
weaker independence assumptions than naive
Bayes, with Subsumption Resolution (Zheng and
Webb, 2006). Evaluation is performed using
crossfolded evaluation.
All results of the experiments are given in terms
of accuracy.
Results for the dataset ?All? comparing the syn-
tactic relations with VerbNet relations as well as
the pure utterances and context are shown in table
4.
Dataset Accuracy
All Syn 67.4%
All VNSem 66.8%
All Utterances Context 61.9%
All Utterances 48.1%
Table 4: Dialogue Act Classification Results for
the ?ALL? Datasets
The best result is achieved with the syntactic in-
formation, although the VerbNet information pro-
vides an abstraction over the predicate classifica-
tion. Both the set containing the VerbNet relations
as well as the syntactic relations are much better
than the set containing only the context and the
original utterances. The dataset containing only
the utterances could not reach 50%.
Although the experiments show much better re-
sults using the relations instead of the original ut-
terance, the overall accuracy is not very satisfying.
Several reasons for this phenomenon come into
consideration. While it can to a certain extend be
the fault of the classifying algorithm (see table 8
for some tests with a ROCCHIO based classifier),
the main reason might as well lie in the impre-
cise boundaries of the dialogue act classes: Sev-
eral categories are hard to distinguish even for a
human annotator as you can see from the wrongly
classified examples in table 3. Another possibil-
ity can be the comparatively small number of total
training instances.
For the NPC dataset the results are slightly bet-
ter and much better still for the set CST, which
is due to a smaller number (6) of dialogue acts:
The dialogue act ?PROPOSE?, which is the act
for showing an object or proposing a possibility,
was not used by any user, but only by the wizard.
Dataset Accuracy
CST Syn 73.1%
NPC Syn 68.5%
Table 5: Dialogue Act Classification Results for
Datasets ?CST? and ?NPC?
To find out if one sort of features is espe-
cially important for the classification we reorga-
575
Utterance Right Classification Classified As
What do you think about this one? request info propose
Let see what you have and where we can put it request info request
Table 3: Wrongly classified instances
nize the training sets to contain only the context
features without the relations (All Context Only)
on the one hand and only the relational informa-
tion without the context features on the other hand
(All Syn Only and All VNSem Only). Results
are shown in table 6.
Dataset Accuracy
All Context Only 56.6%
All VNSem Only 53.5%
All Syn Only 50.8%
Table 6: Dialogue Act Classification Results for
Context and Relation sets
Table 6 shows that the results are considerably
worse if only parts of the features are used. The
set with context feature performs 3,1% better than
the best set with the relations only. Furthermore
the VerbNet semantic relation set leads to nearly
3% better accuracy, which may mean that the ab-
straction of semantic predicates provides a better
mapping to dialogue acts after all if used without
further features which may be ranked more impor-
tant by the classifier.
Besides the experiments with the Bayesian net-
works, additional experiments are performed us-
ing a modified ROCCHIO algorithm similar to the
one in (Neumann and Schmeier, 2002). Three dif-
ferent datasets were tested (see table 7).
Dataset Accuracy
All Utterances 70.1%
All Utterances Context 73.2%
All Syn 74.4%
Table 8: Dialogue Act Classification Results using
the ROCCHIO Algorithm
Table 8 shows that the baseline dataset contain-
ing only the utterances already provides much bet-
ter results with the ROCCHIO algorithm, deliv-
ering 70.1% which is more than 10% more ac-
curacy compared to the 48.1% of the Bayesian
classifier. If tested together with the context fea-
tures the accuracy of the utterance dataset raises to
73.2% and, after including the relational informa-
tion, even to 74.4%. Thus, the results of this ROC-
CHIO experiment also prove that the employment
of the relation information leads to improved ac-
curacy of the classification.
6 Conclusion
This paper reports on a novel approach to auto-
matic dialogue act recognition using syntactic and
semantic relations as new features instead of the
traditional features such as ngrams of words.
Different feature sets are constructed via an
automatic annotation of syntactic predicate argu-
ment structures and a manual annotation of Verb-
Net frame information. On the basis of this infor-
mation, both the syntactic relations as well as the
semantic VerbNet-based relations included in the
utterances can be extracted and added to the fea-
ture sets for the recognition task. Besides the re-
lation information the employed features include
information from the dialogue context (e.g. the
last preceding dialogue act) and other features like
sentence mood.
The feature sets have been evaluated with a
Bayesian network classifier as well as a ROC-
CHIO algorithm. Both classifiers demonstrate the
benefits gained from the relations by exploiting
the additionally provided information. While the
difference between the best baseline feature set
and the best relation feature set in the Bayesian
network classifier yields a 5,5% boost in accuracy
(61.9% to 67.4%), the ROCCHIO setup exceeds
the boosted accuracy by another 1,5% , starting
from a higher baseline of 73.2%. Based on the
observed complexity of the classification task we
expect that the benefit of the relational informa-
576
Predicate Instances Example
see-30.1 59 I would like to see a table in front of the sofa
put-9.1 74 Can you put it in the corner?
reflexive appearance-48.1.2 80 Show me the red one
own-100 137 Do you have wooden chairs?
want-32.1 153 I would like some plants over here
Table 7: The Main Semantic Relations Found in the Data Sorted by Predicate
tion may turn out to be even more significant on
larger learning data.
7 Future Work
The results in section 5 show that the pure classifi-
cation cannot be used as interpretation component
in isolation, but additional methods have to be in-
corporated. In a preceding analysis of the data
it was found that certain predicates are very fre-
quently uttered by the users. In the syntactic pred-
icate scenario the total number of different predi-
cates is 80, whereas the semantic predicates build
up a total number of 66. The class containing the
predicates with one to ten occurrences constitutes
137 of 1239 instances. The remaining 1101 in-
stances are covered by only 21 different predicate
classes. These predicates together with their ar-
guments constitute a set of common domain re-
lations for the sales domain. The main domain
relations found are shown in table 7.
The figures suggest that the interpretation at
least for the domain relations can be established in
a robust manner, wherefore the agent?s interpreta-
tion component was extended to a hybrid module
including a robust rule based method. To derive
the necessary rules a rule generator was developed
and the rules covering the used feature set (includ-
ing the context features, sentence mood and the
syntactic relations) were automatically generated
from the given data.
Future work will focus on the evaluation of
these automatically derived rules on a recently
collected but not yet annotated dataset from a sec-
ond Wizard-of-Oz experiment, carried out in the
same furniture sales setting.
Additional experiments are planned for evalu-
ating the relation-based features in dialogue act
recognition on other corpora tagged with differ-
ent dialogue acts in order to test the overall per-
formance of our classification approach on more
transparent dialogue act sets.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was partially
supported through the project ?KomParse? funded
by the ProFIT program of the Federal State of
Berlin, co-funded by the EFRE program of the
European Union. Additional support came from
the project TAKE, funded by the German Min-
istry for Education and Research (BMBF, FKZ:
01IW08003).
577
References
Allen, James F., Bradford W. Miller, Eric K. Ringger,
and Teresa Sikorski. 1996. A robust system for nat-
ural spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of ACL 1996.
Allen, James, Mehdi Manshadi, Myroslava Dzikovska,
and Mary Swift. 2007. Deep linguistic processing
for spoken dialogue systems. In DeepLP ?07: Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Deep Linguistic Pro-
cessing, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Andernach, Toine. 1996. A machine learning ap-
proach to the classification of dialogue utterances.
CoRR, cmp-lg/9607022.
Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The berkeley framenet project. In
Proceedings of COLING 1998.
Bertomeu, Nuria and Anton Benz. 2009. Annotation
of joint projects and information states in human-
npc dialogues. In Proceedings of CILC-09, Murcia,
Spain.
Clark, H.H. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
de Marneffe, Marie C. and Christopher D. Manning.
2008. The Stanford typed dependencies repre-
sentation. In Coling 2008: Proceedings of the
workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain
Parser Evaluation, Manchester, UK.
Jurafsky, Daniel, Elizabeth Shriberg, Barbara Fox, and
Traci Curl. 1998. Lexical, prosodic, and syntactic
cues for dialog acts.
Keizer, Simon and Rieks op den Akker. 2006.
Dialogue act recognition under uncertainty using
bayesian networks. Nat. Lang. Eng., 13(4).
Keizer, Simon, Rieks op den Akker, and Anton Nijholt.
2002. Dialogue act recognition with bayesian net-
works for dutch dialogues. In Proceedings of the
3rd SIGdial workshop on Discourse and dialogue,
Morristown, NJ, USA.
Klu?wer, Tina, Peter Adolphs, Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszko-
reit, and Xiwen Cheng. 2010. Talking npcs in a
virtual game world. In Proceedings of the System
Demonstrations Section at ACL 2010.
Lapata, Mirella and Alex Lascarides. 2004. Inferring
sentence-internal temporal relations. In Proceed-
ings of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 153?160.
Neumann, Gu?nter and Sven Schmeier. 2002. Shal-
low natural language technology and text mining.
Ku?nstliche Intelligenz. The German Artificial Intel-
ligence Journal.
Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus
of semantic roles. Comput. Linguist., 31(1).
Schmid, Helmut. 1994. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing.
Schuler, Karin Kipper. 2005. Verbnet: a broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. the-
sis, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Searle, John R. 1969. Speech acts : an essay in
the philosophy of language / John R. Searle. Cam-
bridge University Press, London.
Sporleder, Caroline and Alex Lascarides. 2008. Using
automatically labelled examples to classify rhetori-
cal relations: A critical assessment. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 14(3).
Stolcke, Andreas, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky, Paul
Taylor, Rachel Martin, Carol Van, and Ess dykema
Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics, 26.
Subba, Rajen and Barbara Di Eugenio. 2009. An ef-
fective discourse parser that uses rich linguistic in-
formation. In NAACL ?09, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Surendran, Dinoj and Gina-Anne Levow. 2006. Di-
alog act tagging with support vector machines and
hidden markov models. In Interspeech.
Verbree, A.T., R.J. Rienks, and D.K.J. Heylen.
Dialogue-act tagging using smart feature selection:
results on multiple corpora. In Raorke, B., editor,
First International IEEE Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Technology SLT 2006.
Webb, Nick and Ting Liu. 2008. Investigating the
portability of corpus-derived cue phrases for dia-
logue act classification. In Proceedings of COLING
2008, Manchester, UK.
Xu, Feiyu, Hans Uszkoreit, and Hong Li. 2007. A
seed-driven bottom-up machine learning framework
for extracting relations of various complexity. In
Proceedings of ACl (07), Prague, Czech Republic.
Zheng, Fei and Geoffrey I. Webb. 2006. Efficient
lazy elimination for averaged one-dependence esti-
mators. In ICML, pages 1113?1120.
Zimmermann, Matthias, Yang Liu, Elizabeth Shriberg,
and Andreas Stolcke. 2005. Toward joint seg-
mentation and classification of dialog acts in mul-
tiparty meetings. In Proc. Multimodal Interaction
and Related Machine Learning Algorithms Work-
shop (MLMI05, page 187.
578
