2 
" 196 5 International Conference on Computational Linguistics" 
SUBCLASS IF ICAT ION OF  PARTS OF  SPEECH IN RUSS IAN:  VERBS ~ 
A. Andreyewsky 
Inte rnatlonal Busine s s Machine s Corporation 
Thomas  3. Watson Research  Center 
P. O. Box  Z18 
Yorktown Heights, New York, 10598 
/ , .~ ' . ,~  . . . .  ".'.,..-,~ \ 
? Thls work  was partly sponsored by the Information Processing Laboratory, 
Rome Air Deve lopment  Center, United States Air Force, under Contract 
AF 30(60Z)-3301 
Andreyewsky  I
Abst ract  
In a t r ia l  study, about 500 Russ ian  verbs  were  coded using 44 
potent ia l  c lass i f i ca tory  c r i te r ia .  Through sor t ing  and the in t roduct ion  
of a metr i c ,  numerous  group ings  were  obtained.  In i t ia l  resu l t s  suggest  
that,  with proper  re f inements ,  the approach  descr ibed  cab prov ide use-  
ful in fo rmat ion  that may be employed  in syntact ic  ana lys i s  and cer ta in  
in fo rmat ion  re t r ieva l  app l i ca t ions .  
0. 0 Introduction 
As par t  of a b roader  e f for t  to extend the ex is t ing  t rad i t iona l  par t -  
o f - speech  c lass i f i ca t ion  in modern  Russ ian ,  th is  study of verbs  is o r iented  
toward  deve lop ing  an improved bas is  for syntact i c  ana lys i s .  Moreover ,  
it is hoped that the re f inements  in t roduced wil l  be of in teres t  in content  
ana lys i s .  To th is  end, an extens ive  set of potent ia l  c lass i f i ca tory  c r i -  
te r ia  has been  se lec ted ,  in the hope that eventua l ly  th is  categor i za t ion  
can be opt imized  and extended to o ther  par ts  of speech.  
I. 0 The Exper iment  
The 514 verbs  analyzed came f rom two sources: (a) a randomized  
sample  of 370 entries ( I ) and (b) a list of the most  frequently used 
Russ ian  verbs  ( Z ) f rom wh ich  the first 144 entries were  selected. 
The  classificatory criteria, subdivided into two groups, are 
d iscussed in Section I. 1 below. General ly,  each  verb  was  taken in a 
par t i cu la r  mean ing  (s t i ra t ' ,  for ins tance ,  as "to e rase"  and not as "to 
launder" )  and Eng l i sh  equ iva lents  used  so le ly  for  purposes  of ident i f i ca -  
t ion. At the same t ime,  for reasons  of conven ience ,  p rov is ions  were  
made in coding to a l low for coex is t ing  a l te rnat ives .  Thus,  for p roper -  
t ies  A and B there  can  be four posBib i l i t ies  which  are  represented  by the 
following numer ica l  codes:  i - "A",  Z - "B", 3 - "AB" ,  0 - "neither 
applle s" 
Af ter  the verbs  and appropr ia te  codes  were  punched on cards ,  
verbs  with ident ica l  codes  were  compared .  To obta in addi t iona l  c lus ter -  
ing, a p rogram,  wr i t ten  by R. F. Hubbard  for the IBM 7040, compared  
the code vector  of each  card  aga inst  those of the res t  of the sample .  
The d i s tance  between any two ent r ies  was ca lcu la ted  by taking the 
square  root  of the sum of the squares  of d i s tance  between cor respond-  
ing pos i t ions  in the i r  code vectors  as def ined by the fo l lowing table: 
Andreyewsky  2 
0- -0  = 0 0 - -2= 4 I~ i  : 0 I~3  = i 2~3 = i 
0 - - I=40- -3 :6  l~Z=2 Z- -2=03~3:0  
i. i Tests  
S ince  one of the main  ob jec t ives  of th i s  s tudy  has  been to es tab-  
l i sh  the re levance  of var ious  c lass i f i ca tory  c r i te r ia ,  these  were  tes ted  
in two groups  as descr ibed  be low.  The se lec t ion  of c r i te r ia ,  based  on 
s tud ies  of ex is t ing  grammars  of Russ ian ,  was  d i rec ted  toward  d iscov-  
e r ing  so lu t ions  fo r  p rob lems ar i s ing  or  l i ke ly  to a r i se  in mach ine-  
ass i s ted  syntact i c  ana lys i s .  
I. i. i Test  I 
In th i s  tes t ,  the verbs  were  coded accord ing  to the i r  ab i l i ty  to 
combine  wi th  se lec ted  prepos i t iona l  phrases ,  cer ta in  adverbs ,  and the 
chto - in t roduced ob jec t  c lauses .  Most  of the examples  are  der ived  f rom 
the d iscuss ion  of s lovosochetan iye  (grammat ica l ly  bound word  group)  
prob lem in the Academy Grammar  ( 3 ). Whi le the Eng l i sh  mean ings  
supp l ied  do re f lec t  cer ta in  semant ic  d i f fe rences  the main  ob jec t ive  has  
been to tes t  not on ly  the ab i l i ty  of a g iven  verb  to co -occur  w i th  cer ta in  
types  of phrases  (examples  are  used  so le ly  fo r  i l l us t ra t ion)  o r  c lasses  
of adverbs  but  to t race  what  e f fec t  the verb  has  on the i r  syntact i c  func -  
t ion,  if  any .  
i. i. I. i Classificatory Criteria 
1) . . . do menya 4) . . . k mt t in~u 7) . . . u Zin)r 
(A) \]~efore me (A) fo r  the . . .  (A) at Z tna 's  
(B) as far as me (B) to the ... (B) f rom Zina 
Z)  . . . do rassveta meet ing  8) ... pod kapustu 
(A) before dawn 5) ... k nam (A) for ca-bbage 
(B) until dawn (A) to us (B) under  cab- 
3) ... iz-za stola (B) toward  us bage 
(A) because of . . .  6) . . . za  obedom 9) . . .za stol 
(B) f rom behind (A) after (to get)... (A) at the 
the table (B) during dinner table 
(B) be hind the 
table 
Andreyewsky  3 
10) . ? . za  bra ta  lZ) . . . yashchtk  15) . . . ch to  nap ishet*  
(A) in brother's i z -pod ,u~lya  that + (subject) + 
place (A) coal crate will wri te  
(B) for brother's (B) crate f rom 16) nadvoe* 
sake under the coal "'" in two (as in 
11) . . .  po o shibke 13) . . .o  stol*  cutt ing) 
(A) a mis take  aga ins t  the table 17) . . .  ochen'* 
apiece 14) . . . po vodu* very much 
(B) by mistake to get water  18) ...o sestre* 
about the sister 
1. 1. 1. Z Resu l ts  of Sort ing 
Sort ing revea led  some of the fo l lowing group ings  with ident ica l  
code s: 
A1 zak ipet '  nameknut '  A8 vbezhat '  
(to boil) (to hint) (to run in) 
p roso l i t ' sya  A4 raznuzdat '  yav i t ' sya  
(to turn  salty)  (to let  become (to appear)  
A2 vzdrognut '  und isc ip l ined)  A9 podumat '  
(to think) 
(to f l inch) vo spi tat '  b red i t '  
us tavat '  (to educate)  (to rave) 
(t0 become A5 vychest' okhat' 
tired) (to subtract) (to moan) 
ustat' Izderzhat' 
(to become (to spend) A I0  ~ordit's)ra 
tired) (to be proud) 
izz~rabnut' A6  otrubit' vesellt' sya 
(to become (to chop off) (to enjoy self) 
chilled) vskryt' voskhishchat sya 
(tO open up) \[to admire) 
A3  sovrat' 
(to tell a lie) A7 nabryz~at' Al l  verlt' 
soobrazlt' (to sprinkle on) (to believe) 
(to grasp) rasprostranit \[. to skovat' 
dogadat'sya (to spread) (to be sad, 
(to surmise) to pine) 
* Only tes t  ab i l i ty  to combine in the mean ing  ind icated.  
Andreyewsky  4 
AI2  
AI3 
A I4  
A I5  
grustit' 
(to be sad, 
to yearn) 
s kuc hat ' 
(to be bored) 
fantazlrovat' 
(to dream) 
volnovat' sya 
(to worry) 
opasat' sya 
(to be afraid) 
z apryat~at' 
(to h ide)  
vov le  kat '  
(to d raw in) 
berech '  
{to save)  
poberech '  
(to save) 
ude rzhat' 
(to withhold) 
vzgromozdit' sya 
(to perch self 
uglubit' s)ra 
(to go deep into) 
r as sazhivat' 
(to seat) 
A I6  
AI7 
A I8  
A I9  
AZ0 
nast ro i t '  
(to inc i te )  
bespoko i t '  
(to distt~rb) 
obizhat' 
(to offend) 
proklinat' 
(to damn) 
por t i t '  
(to spoil, ruin) 
bakhvalit' sTa 
(to brag) 
llkovat' 
(to rejoice) 
razr)rkhlyat' 
(to loosen) 
razdroblt' 
(to pulverize) 
be sedovat' 
(to converse)  
sore  shchat '  sya  
(to confer )  
razodrat '  
(to tear) 
rasshibit' 
(to break, bust) 
AZI  
AZZ 
AZ3 
AZ4 
AZ5 
AZ6 
AZ7 
morosit' 
(to drizzle) 
nakrapyvat' 
(to sprinkle) 
por o shit' 
(to snow) 
farshirovat' 
(to stuff) 
slnte zir ovat' 
(to synthe size) 
kla s slfit sir ovat' 
(to classify) 
razbivat' 
(to break) 
begat' 
(to run) 
prikhodit' 
(to come) 
ne sti 
(to carry) 
ve zt i  
(to cart) 
vol o c hit ' 
(to drag) 
tashchit' 
(to pull) 
(to reach, (walking)) 
doletet' 
(to reach (flying)) 
1. 1. 1. 3 l~esudts of the In t roduct ion  of the Met r i c  
On the bas is  of p re l iminary  resu l t s ,  the max imum d is tance  con-  
s idered  was  set  at 10. G iven  th is  a rb i t ra ry  l im i ta t ion ,  the metr i c  p roduced 
var ious  group ings .  The major i ty  of them conta ined  some "no ise"  - i. e. , 
apparent ly  incor rect  ent r ies  were  brought  together  o r  severa l  d i s t ince  
group ings  turned  out insu f f i c ient ly  d i f fe rent ia ted .  Par t ly  respons ib le  fo r  
th i s  a re :  the method employed ,  the d i s tances  se lec ted ,  and the occas iona l  
e r rors  that  c rept  in dur ing  the ana lys i s  and subsequent  process ing .  These  
fac tors  a re  d i scussed  in greater  deta i l  be low ( 1. 1. 1. 4). 
Andreyewsky  5 
AZ8 
AZ9 
A30 
A31. 
A3Z 
A33 
A34 
A35 
Some of the more  interesting outcomes were as follows: 
Groups A l l  (verlt', toskovat', srustit', skuchat', and fantazirovat'), 
A 17 (bakhvallt' sya and likovat'), A 1Z (volnovat' sya and opasat' sya), 
and the verb bespokoit'sya (to worry) 
Group A I6  (nastroit', bespokoit', obizhat', proklinat', portit')and 
the verb nenavidet' (to hate). 
Group A 10 (voskhishchyat' sya, ve selit' sya, ~ordlt' sya) and verbs 
vozmutlt' sya (to become disgusted) and boyat' s)ra (to be afraid). 
Group A8  (yavit'sya, vbezhat'), the following verbs: vernut'sya (to 
return), prlkhodit' (AZ4), begat' (AZ4), ~ (to step out), podyezzhat' 
(to drive up), ),ezdit' (to ride), vyekhat' (to go away), kinut'say (to 
lunge), vypolzti (to crawl out), doletet' (AZ7), and doyti (AZ7). 
sarantirovat' (to guarantee), pokazyvat' (to show), demonstrirovat' 
(to demonstrate) 
sovrat' (to lie), poverit' (to believe), uverlt' (to assure) 
znat' (to know), ozhldat' (to expect), videt' (to see). 
na~ryanut' (to come unexpectedly), zaekhat' (to stop by), probezhat'sya 
(to run), otstupit' (to retreat). 
i. i. I. 4 Comments  
The problems stemming f rom the application of the metric (th "num-  
bers game") mentioned in I. I. I. 3 reflect a characteristic of statistical infer- 
ence jocularly compared  by an anonymous author to a bikini bathing suit: 
being sufficiently suggestive, but not revealing. In this regard, alternative 
approaches have been considered and will be tried in the near future. As  
it turned out in practice, however, the metric did provide useful insights 
which can point the way toward developing a more  powerful set of classi- 
ficatory cr i te r ia .  Th is ,  in turn ,  can fos ter  inc reased  re l iance  on s imple  
sor t ing  procedures  based  on proper  rank ing  and group ing  of the c r i te r ia  
themse lves .  
While not unexpectedly, the verbs of motion in the broad sense of 
the term came out more  clearly in the classification than did any other 
groups, interesting subclasses of abstract verbs, exhibiting unexpected 
shades  of va luat ion  also emerged.  
Andreyewsky  6 
1. 1. Z Test II 
In contrast to Test I, this test placed a relatively lesser emphasis  
on syntagmatlc relationships and stressed a mixture of formal and seman-  
tic properties. On  the whole, except where noted, the two tests were 
developed independently of one another. While Test I was based on mater-  
ials derived f rom the Academy Grammar  of Russian ( 3 )0 Test II bene- 
fited f rom experience gained in dealing with the problems encountered in 
machine translation output and f rom studies conducted preparatory to 
launching syntactic analysis. 
1. 1. Z. 1 Classtf icato,ry Criteria 
In view of the extensive nature of this test,  the descr ipt ion of var i -  
our c r i te r ia  used is given here in abbreviated notation. 
I) (A) imperfective 
(B) perfe ctive 
Z) verb (I/3) or 
"verboid" (Z/0); 
"concrete" ( I /0) 
or "abstract" 
(Z/3): when "yes" 
answer is possible 
under I. i. I. I. 17. 
3) is ~ form 
(A) reflexive 
(B) non-reflexive 
4) generally: 
(A) non-reflexive 
(B) reflexive 
5) when reflexive, 
meaning: 
(A) active 
(B) passive 
6) participial forms: 
(A) active 
(B) passive 
7) passive part ic ip le:  
(A) past 
(B) present  
8) gerundial forms: 
(A) present 
(B) past 
9) action (gerund): 
(A) parallel 
(B) sequential 
I0) deverbal nouns: 
(A) in -enle, -ks 
(B) other forms 
II) deverbal nouns: 
(A) concrete 
(B) abstract  
1Z) verb used: 
(A) personally 
(B) impersonally 
13) verb function: 
(A) link, auxillary 
(B) other 
14) meaning affected by 
(A) governed inf init ive 
(B) object(s) 
15) subject preference:  
(A) inanimate 
(B) animate 
16) verb governs: 
(A) inf init ive s
(B) objects 
17) object preference: 
(A) animate 
(B) inanimate 
18) (A) motion verb 
(broad sense) 
(B) act ion perce ived 
19) verb descr ibes:  
(A) action 
(B) state 
Z0) (A) beginning 
(B) end of action 
Andreyewsky  7
21) verb is one of: 
(A) being 
(B) becoming 
ZZ. action described: 
(A) outward- 
(B) inward- 
directed 
23) action directed: 
(A) downward  
(away) 
(B) upward 
(toward) 
24) act ion in respect  
to object:  
(A) contacts 
(B) permeates  
ZS) reference to: 
(A) duration 
(B) intensity 
Z6) action produces: 
(A) decrease 
(B) increase 
g7) action describes: 
(A) gain 
(B) loss 
i. i. Z. Z Results of Sortln~ 
The following groupings had identical codes: 
BI skuchat' (All) 
(to be bored) 
to skovat' (A 1 I) 
(to be sad) 
BZ morosit 4 (AZI) B5 
(to drizzle) 
poroshit' (Agl) 
(to snow) 
B3 nakrap)rvat'  (AZI) 
(to sprinkle) 
mertsat '  B6 
(to twinkle) 
B4 i zderzhat '  
(to expend) 
Istratit t 
(to spend) 
nosit' 
(to car ry )  
ta shc hit ' 
(to pull) 
vol o c hit ' 
(to drag) 
podshivat' 
(to attach) 
B7 
navyazyvat' 
(to tie on) 
skladyvat' 
(to put together) 
ozhivit' 
(to vlvfy) 
uve rlt' 
(to assure) 
1. 1. Z. 3 Resu l t s  of the In t roduct ion  of the Met r i c  
Comments  made in I. I. I. 3 above, apply. Because of a greater 
number  of c lass i f i ca tory  c r i te r ia  the resu l t s  of in t roduc ing  the metr i c  were 
more  impor tant  in th is  test .  Numbers  in parentheses  preced ing  each verb  
ind icate d i s tances  f rom the f i rs t  verb  in the group. 
B8 pr, idavlt' B9 vosstat' BI0 prlche sat' 
(to squeeze) (to riot) (to comb) 
(I) p rishchemlt' (I) vystupit' (I) zaputat' 
(to pinch) (to appear)  (to tangle) 
Andreyewsky  8
BII vbezhat' B17 otkryt' B23 nestls' 
(to run in) (to open) (to dash) 
(I) vTpolztl (5) ubavlt' (7) bezhat' 
(to crawl  out) (to decrease)  (to run) 
B12 napevat' B18 vynestl B24 vydel it '  
(to hum) (to carry out) (to single out) 
(P.) veshchat' (5) vypustit' (7) vypisat' 
(to speak with (to let out) (to write out) 
authority) BI9 zheltet' BZ5 potusknet' 
BI3 temnet' '(to turn yellow) (to dull) 
(to grow:dark) (5) umirat' (7) zatverdet' 
(2) teplet' (to die) (to harden) 
(to grow warm) B20 terrorizirovat' B26 prikrepit' 
B l4 vyrabotat' (to terrorize) (to fasten) 
(to develop) (5) khvalit' (8) nav'yuchit' 
(3) vyuchlt' (to praise) (to pack on) 
(to learn) BZI viset' BZ7 vozvratit' 
B I5 khmurit'sya (to hang) (to return) 
(to frown) (6) lezhat' (8) dopolnlt' 
(3) tumanit'sya (to lie) (to augment) 
(to grow gloomy) B22 podognat' BZ8 vvesti 
B16 razbushevat'sya (to drive up) (to introduce) 
(to start raging) (6) navestit' (9) dobavlt' 
(4) uchastlt's)ra (to visit) (to add) 
(to become more 
f r e clue nt ) 
In addition to shor ter  groups descr ibed above, longer groupings 
were observed.  Thus, otdokhnut' (to rest)  (8) utikhnut' (to quiet down), and 
(10) ugasnut'  (to become extinguished} or nabryz~at '  (to sprinkle on), (Z) 
nakinut' (.to throw on), (3) vzval i t '  (to pile on), and (4) nastroc i t '  (to sew on) 
are some of the examples.  
In other cases, apparently incongruous groups llke the following: 
strekotat' (to chirr), (1) moshennlcat' (to swlndle), (5) fokusnlchat' (to juggle), 
(5) nakrapyvat' (to sprinkle), (5) mertsat' (to twinkle) (6) zvenet' (to ring) 
emerged. However, upon closer examination it became apparent that 
nakrapyvat', mertsat', and zvenet' fall in a group clearly distinguishable from 
the one containing the other verbs. Further, fokusnlchat' and zvenet' showed 
sufficient distance within re spective groups sugge sting at least four different 
basic groups in all. 
Andreyewsky  9 
1. 1. Z. 4 Comments  
Aside f rom the prob lems traceable to statistics, the sets of cr iterla 
selected for Test II are more  open to debate than those found in Test I. How-  
ever, correlations between both tests indicate that some of the criteria are 
relevant and that others are, at least, redundant. As  observed f rom minor  
differences in two versions of coding of nine verbs introduced six months 
apart ,  the resu l t s  of Tes t  II a re  less  re l iab le .  
I. 1.3 Compar i son  of Test I and Test II 
As noted in 1. 1. 2 above,  the two tests  d i f fer  in the base f rom which 
they  were  der ived .  Accord ing ly ,  the resu l t s  obta in ing f rom Test  I a re  both 
in tu i t ive ly  and actua l ly  more  re l iab le .  Yet, as suggested  in 1. 1. 1.4, to the 
extent  that the resu l t s  of the app l i ca t ion  of the metr i c  tend to supp lement  
sor t ing ,  the resu l t s  of Test  II tend to back  up many of the f indings of Test  I. 
Given a small sample, it is difficult to make  any generalizations. At 
the same time, the evidence emerg ing so far suggests some subtle differences 
in the two tests. Basically, in both cases the results of the metric applica- 
tion show little or no discrimination between antonyms. However,  the group= 
Ings resulting f rom Test II tend to be, if at all, held together by similarity 
of content ,  the resu l t s  of Tes t  I, in cont ras% have a pecu l ia r  sor t  of out-  
ward ,  fo rmal  s imi la r i ty  in the man i fes ta t ion  of p rocesses  descr ibed  by the 
verbs  in quest ion.  
Z. 0 The Outlook 
In the months ahead, it is hoped that the small corpus can be increased 
and the time required to code each entry reduced to reasonable proportions. 
While in many respects the results of:both tests are self-proving, rigorous 
evaluation criteria will have to be formulated in detail. 
As  far as potential application of the results obtained is concerned, 
especially the information derivable f rom Test I could be immediately put to 
use to improve (together with classification of nouns currently in progress) 
the t rans la t ion  of verb -governed  prepos i t iona l  phrases .  It is l i ke ly  that this 
syntagmat ic  pat tern ing  wi l l  extend to la rger  s t ruc tures  dominated  by the 
verb .  Fur ther ,  if the apparent  rends  pers i s t ,  some f ramework  of semant ic  
c lass i f i ca t ion  can be ant ic ipated .  To what extent  th is  wi l l  be poss ib le  to 
accompl i sh  by computers  alone and the degree  to which  such  ~t c lass i f i ca t ion  
Andreyewsky  10 
wi l l  sa t i s fy  the needs  of computer  p rocess ing  remains  to be es tab l i shed .  
While it can  be argued that  any c lass i f i ca t ion  is l i ke ly  to produce  some 
c lasses ,  we take so lace  in the fact  that  the methodo logy  employed  even  in 
such  c lass ics  as Roget ' s  Thesaurus  remains  unknown to th i s  day. 
Source  s 
. Th is  sample  was se lec ted  f rom the Daum and Schenck  D ic t ionary  in 
another  connect ion  and was genera l ly  random in i ts  in tent  more  than 
i ts  methodo logy .  
. A. K. Demidova, O. G. Motovilova, G. D. Shevchenko, E. P. Chaplygln, 
Naiboleye upotrebltel'nyye ~lagoly sovremennogo russko~o yazyka (The 
Most Frequently Used Verbs in Modern Russian), Moscow, USSR Academy 
of Sciences Publishlng House, 1963. 
. V. V. Vinogradov, ed. , Grammatika russkogo yazyra (Grammar  of the 
Russian Language) Moscow, USSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 
1960, Vol. II, Part I, pp. I13-2B0. 
