SEGMENTING NATURAL LANGUAGE BY ARTICULATORY FEATURES 
David Shillan 
Cambridge Language Research Unit, 
ENGLAND. 
I. For many purposes it is necessary to segment text 
into units convenient for handling. The sentence has 
been generally accepted as the natural unit, since 
there was no obvious alternative other than the word 
-wh ich  by itself tells us too little - or the para- 
graph - which is a vague and shifting unit, ~unless 
redefined. But the sentence is not satisfactory 
either: it ks very variable in length; studies of 
speech show that in its conventional form it is not 
always recognizably present I ; it may depend semant- 
ically upon its context up to at least paragraph 
length; and in any case what constitutes a sentence 
is not consistently defined (Fries 2 indicates more 
than 200 definitions). 
2. There is another way of segmenting text, which 
does not suffer from these limitations, being based 
upon the rhythmical features of articulated speech. 
This use of the term "articulated" results from a 
vlew of language as basically speech, that is as 
skilled bodily movement. We have found it possible 
to bridge the gap between spoken language and written 
language by using features which both the writer and 
the reader of language tend to adopt from speech. 
3. Studies of ?poken language, particularly in re- 
latiQn to foreign language teaching, show agreement 
on at least the terminal boundary of the "tone group" 
which Crystal & Quirk3 call "the most striking proso- 
dic unit in English speech", and on which they have 
found experimentally a high rate of agreement by 
informants. Many different teaching books* exemplify 
this agreed feature, despite the lack of satisfactory 
instrumental evidence on continuous speech (into which 
research is now being planned). 
4. Less agreement is found on the configuration of 
the whole unit which terminates in the "nucleus". 
Some authors refer to "tone groups" or "tone units", 
some to "sense groups", some use both terms: this 
overlapping category of tone and sense suggested a 
field for further study, which has been proceeding 
at C.L.R.U. for some time. Syntax is not usually 
brought into the treatment of this subject, since 
the approach is phonological; but among the authors 
* Work supported by Canadian National Research Council. 
.I. 
re fer red  to  4, MacOarthy do~nd icate  that  syntact i c  
c r i te r ia  determine  the  s$~ure  o f  h i s  " in tonat ion  
groups" .  Our s tud ies  suppor t  the  work o f  those  who 
suggest that what is commonly called "stress" has a 
semantic functionS, and what can be an~ysed in terms 
of intonation is the syntactic feature , - a kind of 
audible syntactic braketting. 
5. I t  i s  common pract i ce  in  the  teach ing  o f  Eng l i sh  
as  a fo re ign  language (see  Ba i rd7)  to  use  tone  groups  
o f  two s t resses  (head and nuc leus)  as  examples ,  but  
th i s  conf igurat ion  i s  not  usua l ly  fo rmal i zed .  In  my 
own use  o f  such dr i l l  mater ia l  fo r  the  fo re ign  learner ,  
I have fo r  many years  adopted  th i s  un i t ,  marked i t  
w i th  a mus ica l  p~rase-mark ,  and ca l led  i t ,  s ince  my 
1954 publication ?, a "phrasing". MY drill use of this 
un i t  g ives  a minimal  context  o f  not  less  than  one sen-  
tence  - a sentence  be ing  se~nentab le  in to  one or  more 
phrasim~s, the phrasing being thus aud i t  between the 
word and the sentence but not necessarily coterminous 
with the clause or grammatical phrase. (The musical 
analogy shows phrasing as a category distinct from the 
note, the bar, and the section.) 
6. Ten years after publication of these drills, my 
work was called upon by Margaret Masterman9 in re- 
lation to her own semantic approach, for which the two 
stress-points of the phrasing were seen to correspond 
to two information points. In the ~eantime I had been 
led by teaching experience to  consid6r the ~ifficulty 
of foreign lezrners with adequate vocabulary and 
adequate syntax but no adequate speech-experience of 
English. They were unable to read a piece of current 
English (e.g. a "Times" leading article) with under- 
standing, wherean the native English reader, even if 
momentarily puzzled by perhaps a hastily-worded sen- 
tence, would immediately feed back into his reading 
of it (i.e. "in his mind's ear") the natural speech 
form (i.e. the phrasing) with which the writer had 
written it. 
7. From this the conception of "stress-point" became 
differentiated from precise syllabic location of stress 
(which is itself a complex of amplitude, frequency, and 
duration) and was defined as the word or words centred, 
i n  s t ress -and- tone  prominence,  on the  nuc lear  tone ,  
~nd the  word or  words cent red  (in th  e same sense  o f  
,p rominence" )  on that  head t_one which predominates  
above any o ther  head or  heads  which might fo l low the  
preced in~ nuc leus .  
.2. 
r Th is  method o f  dea l ing  w i th  tone  groups which 
apparent ly  have more than  one head proves  to  be 
operationally satisfactory. It gives us a consis- 
tent phrasing of two beats, the second of which con- 
sists, in certain cases, of a "silent stress~ ( 
phenomenon vouched for by many phoneticianslO), a It 
also helps to meet~the difficulty of differently timed 
lan@nla~es, referred to in para. 13 below. 
8. It follows from the treatment of stress-points in- 
dicated in para. 7 above, that spread stress will occur 
in regular compounds, such as "semi+readiness", and it 
also occurs very frequently in cases of a noun with its 
qualifier, whether true adjective or noun acting as 
adjective, e.g. "political+requirements", or "staff+ 
planning", and in g~neral where we find intimately 
associated words on which the stress falls with vir- 
tually equal emphasis. 
9. The silent beat may or may not be a perceptible 
pause, but tends to occur in certain typical locations, 
e.g. where some expression of significant semantic 
content is about to follow. It would also be possible 
in many cases to imagine the phrasing re-written using 
relevant syllables instead of the silent beat, e.g. 
"in a review of progress" instead of 
"in a review () ". 
In marking phrasings on text two symbols are used in 
addition to the + sign for spread stress and the () 
sign for silent beat. They are the well-known tonetio 
m~rker ~ (originally representing a high falling tone) 
used for the nuclear stress, and the stress-mark' used 
for the head stress. These may also be referred to as 
primary and secondary stress-points, the nucleus being 
primary because in general it indicates the ~ of 
the utteraace and the head being secondary because in 
general i t  indicates the cqmment. Thus reading down 
all the nuclear stress-points of a text printed as a 
series of phrasings one below the other, we have an 
index of the topic of the whole text. 
10. A piece of text reading 
"Politically Canada is divided into ten provinces and 
two territories" can be phrased-up either as 
.3. 
"~o l i t i ca l l~  ( )" ~ Canada i s  "d iv ide~" in to  ' ten  "Prov ince6 
"and 'two ~er r l to r ie ' s  TM or  as 
~ol i t i ca l l y  ( ) 
'Canada i s  "d iv ided  
in to  ' ten  ~province8 
and ' two ~ter r i to r ies .  
The "quat ra in"  form in to  which th i s  fa l l s  proves  to  be 
very  f requent ,  par t i cu la r ly  a t  the  bU inn ing  o f  a 
passage .  Th is  passage cont inues  in  two more quat ra ins :  
'Each+prov ince i s  ~sovere ign 
in  i t s  ' own "sphere  
and 'admin is ters  i t s  ~own 
'natura l  ~resource8,  
and upon ' such  " resources  
as ' re la ted  to  ~topography,  
' pos i t ion  and "c l i l a te  
i8  'based  the  "economy?of?the?prov ince.  
A s t ra ight fo rward  text  o f  th i s  k ind  o f fe rs  i f  not  a word.  
fo r -word ,  a t  leas t  something l i ke  a phras ing- fo r -  
phras ing  poss ib i l i ty  in  t rans la t ion .  But the  t rans -  
la t ion  cor respondence ,  fo r  French fo r  example,  i s  o f ten  
not  d i rec t  but expanded (e .g .  2 or  more French fo r  1 
Eng l i sh ) ,  or  t ransposed  in  o rder .  Apart from these  
ocns iderat ions ,  there  a re  many cases  in  which the  
phras ing  s t ruc ture  reso lves  syntact i c  or semant ic  un-  
cer ta in ty .  Here i s  a case where the  lack  o f  such a 
means o f  segmentat ion  led  to  a ser ious  mls t rans la t ion :  
I t  'may be ?assumed 
that  an ' in ternat iona l  ~force  
on a ' s tandby  ~bas is  
w i l l  ' take+shape as a ? development 
out o f  'p rac t i ce  which has a l ready  "begun.  
The pub l i shed  t rans la t ion  has  tu rned  the  las t  two l ines  
in to  
"prendra  une fo r~e assez  s ingu l i~re ,  ce qu 'e l le  a d6Jh 
coneno6 h faire". 
1 1. Passages of text An various styles and of various 
lengths have been analyse~ by hand, and show a con- 
sistent tendency  fo r  th i s~hythm to  be found.  There 
may be phys io log ica l  reasons  fo r  th i s .  Neuro log ica l  
s tud ieseshow pers i s tence  of  tone and rhythm in  cases  
where normal  a r t i cu la t ion  i s  impaired1 . ~ood reasons  
fo r  th i s  rhythm to  be b inary  inc lude  the  fac t  that  the  
*For neurological literature I am indebted to Dr. 
Violet MacDermot. 
.4 .  
rhythm o f  the  motk~Ms hear t -beat  i s  p resent  even to  
the  unborn ch i ld ,  and the  in /out  rhythm o f  resp i ra t ion  
and the left/right rhythm of walking are basic to h~an 
life in general. Studies in articulatory phonetics 
support the belief that some form of kinaesthetic 
activity is involved in silent reading, as well as in 
listening to live speech, which is why we can legiti- 
mately refer to "the rhythm of the prose" in spite of 
the lack, up to the present, of acoustic instrumental 
documentat ion  of th i s .  
12. Though in tonat ion  supp l ies  the  contour  on which the  
phrasing is founded, the rhyth~of stress is the more 
essent ia l  fac tor .  As T ibb i t t s  '~ sayss  "The cor rect  
bas ic  s t ress ing  i s  mandator~ wh i le  the  in tonat ion  i s  
var iab le  w i th in  as  yet  undef ined  l im i ts" .  Th is  i s  the  
reason  wh~ She phras ing  hypothes is  i s  unaf fec ted  by 
d i f fe rences  o~ d ia lec t  o r  accent .  The quest ion  o f  
i sochromic i ty  in  Eng l i sh  prose  has  a l i te ra ture  s t r~tch-  
in~ back to  Joshua  Stee le  in  1775, th rough Covent ry  Pat -  
more in  1856, and on to  i t s  thorough exper imenta l  . .  
( though not  ins t rumenta l )  examinat ion  by  AndrT~Classe 
i n  1939 and d iscuss ion  by Abercrombie in  1951 o. There 
i s  ev idence  fo r  a t  leas t  a s t rong  tendency  towards  a 
normal  regu lar  per iod ic i ty  o f  s t ress -po in ts .  Our 
observat ions  suggest  that  a speaker  tends  to  se lec t  
and order  h i s  words so as  to  d i s t r ibute  them about  
these  pu lsat ions  o f  s t ress  in  such a way that  po in ts  
o f  emphasis  fa l l  natura l ly  upon them. 
13. The question of whether the phrasing can be equally 
well observed in languages other than English is not 
included in the present paper, except by the observa- 
tion that when parallel texts in English and ~rench are 
analysed in this way, the French equivalent of the 
English phrasing, as clearly delimited by the French 
nuc lear  tone  (and notw i ths tand ing  the  d i f fe rence  bT~ 
tween a sy l lab le - t imed and a s t ress - t~ed language ) 
supp l ies  a form o f  " t rans la t ion  un i t  " ' l  w i th l~ measur -  
ab le  ra te  o f  cor respondence  w i th  the  Eng l i sh  . 
13. Examination of given phrasings in a text of 377 
phrasings a followed by another of over 900 phrasings, 
led Dolby'9 to say: "Phrasing length, as measured by 
the number of syllables, appears to be a reasonably 
behaved statistic when viewed in isolation with routine 
statistical tools". (See Appendix I) 
14. A method o f  observ ing  the  phono log ica l  conf igura -  
t ion  o f  phras ings  i s  to  tu rn  wr i t ten  text  in to  spoken 
prose  on magnet ic  tape ,  pass  th i s  th rough a su i tab le  
p i tch  detector  and in tens i ty  detector  (such as  that  o f  
.5 .  
the University of Grenoble or the University of 
Copenhagen), and record the result on mlngograph 
scrolls. Research now being started at C.L.R.U. is 
comparing the output of these two sets of apparatus 
with that of apparatus developed in England, with a 
view to finding the best selection of acoustic data 
by which to observe the terminal point of the phrasing 
(frequently a steep fall or rise in pitch), and the two 
stress-points as peaks of frequency-plus-amplitude-plus- 
duration. 
15. An extension of the usefulness of this unit of 
segmentation can be seen in algorithmic production by 
computer of a form of phrasing, based on observation 
of the criteria used in making articulatory p~asings. 
This has beeh done at 0.L.R.U. by J.E. Dobson=Vin a 
form which while not in every single case identical 
with hand-marked phrasings nevertheless provides a 
new and operational segmentation of continuous text. 
As part of the work done under contract to the National 
Research Council of Canada, this programme is now being 
applied to the phrasing of a text of 20,000 words from 
the 0~uada Year Book of 1962. 
16. The normal rhythmical stress can also be provided 
algorithmically. This makes possible a computerized 
ordering of the phrasings of a text alphabetically 
according to four different valuations, i.e. 
(i) the primary Snuclear) stress! 
(ii) the secondary (=head) stress, 
(ill)pendants (= unstressed strings attached) to 
primary stress; 
(iv) pendants (= unstressed strings attached) to 
secondary stress. 
This gives a semantic concordance (called SE~O) from 
which statistical and other information can be derived. 
The computer can process text in this way as it could 
not do using the sentence as a unit, and both more 
economically and with more information than it could 
by merely cutting the text into lines of the length 
of the computer print-out. 
17. The patterning of stressed and unstressed words, 
i.e. of stress-points and unstressed words can be ex- 
pressed as a calculus of ordered pairs, on which 
research is proceeding. 
.6. 
Pm m c s 
I. C.C. Fries: "The Structure of English"; Harcourt 
Brace, 1952, Longmans Green, 1957. 
R. Quirk, A. Dmckworth, J. Svartvik, J.P.L. 
Rusiecki, A.V.T. 0olin: "Studies in the corres- 
pondence of prosodic to grammatical features  in  
Engl ish";  IXth In ternat iona l  Congress of L ingu is t i cs  
1962. 
2. See I. 
3. D. Crystal & R. Quirk: "Systems of prosodic and 
paralinguistic features in English"; Mouton, 1964, 
. Armstrong & Ward: "Handbook of English intonation"; 
Heffer, 1931. 
W.  Stannard Allen: "Living English Speech"; Long- 
mans Green, 1954. 
0'0onnor & Arnold: "Intonation of colloquial 
English"; Longmans Green, 1961. 
Arnold & Gimson: "English Pronunciation Practice", 
Lonaon Univ. Press, 1965. 
J.T. Pring: "Colloquial English Pronunciation", 
Longmans Green, 1959. 
R.A. Close: "Patterns of Spoken English"; Kenyusha 
(Tokyo), 1954. 
R. Kingdon: "The Groundwork of English Intonation"; 
Loh~mans Green, 1958. 
Lado & Fries: "English Pronunciation"; Ann Arbor, 
1954. 
L.A. Hill: "Stress and Intonation step by step"; 
Oxford, 1965. 
W.R. lee:"An English intonation reader"; Macmillan, 
1963. 
P. MacCarthy: "Endlish Pronunciation", Heffer, 
1944/50. 
D. Shillan: "Spoken English", Longmans Green, 
1954/65. 
5. e.g.R. Gunter: in Journal of Linguistics 2, 
2 Oct. 1966. 
. M.A.K. Halliday: "Some aspects of the thematic 
organisation of the English clause"; Rand 
Memorandum, Jam. 1967. 
. A. Baird: "Transformation and sequence in pro- 
nunciation", English Language Teaching XX, 2, J~n. 
1966. 
8. See 4. 
.7. 
9. Margaret Masterman: "Commentary oK the Guberina 
hypothes is . ;  Methodos 57-58, XV, 1963 
10. e .g .D .  Jones: "Outl ine of Engl ish Phonetics";  
Cambridge, 1932. 
D. Abercrombie: "Studies in Phonetics and 
Lingu/stics", Oxford, 1965. 
11. e .g .T .  AlaJouanine: "Verbal rea l i za t ion  ia  
aphasia";  Brain 79, part  I ,  March 1965. 
12. R.H. Stetson:  "Motor Phonetics";  Amsterdam, 1951. 
13. E.L. T ibb i t te :  in Engl ish Language Teaching XXI, 
1, Oct. 1966. 
14. A. Olasse: "The Rhythm of E~glish Prose"; 
Blackwell, 1939. 
15. See 10. 
16. K.L. Pike: "The Intonation of Americ" English"; 
Ann Arbor, 1946. 
17. D. Shill--: in Meta (Montreal) XI, 3, Sept. 1966. 
D. Shill--: in Eng l ieh~e Teaching XXI, 2, 
Jan. 1967. 
18. J.Y. Dolby: Reports to O.L.R.U. 1965-66. 
19. See 18. 
20. J .E.  Dobson: O.L.R.U. work paper ML 185, and 
la ter  developments. (see Appendix I I ) .  
.8 .  
APPENDIX IA: Histogram of phrasing frequency 
versus phrasing length in words. 
280 
260 
~0 
220 
2O0 
180 
140 
.,~ 1 20  
o 100 
3o 
o 
o 
o 60 
o 
g 2o 
o 
! 
0 
r -  
| ! l 
1 2 3 4 
m 
I w 
5 6 '7 8 9 10 
Phrasing length in words 
.9. 
APPENDIX IB: Histogram of phrasing frequency 
versus phrasing length in syllables. 
m 
al \[ 
O'l 
0 
m 
0 
Q 
0 
0 
0 
0 
g 
1 PO 
140 
130 
120 
110 
IO0 
90 
8O 
70 
60 
50 
4O 
30 
2O 
10 
0 
0 
--1 
i 
m 
i i . - ? I ! 
1 2 3 i 5 6 7 8 9 1'0 t 1'213 14151'6 1'718 
~hrasim~ len&~h in syllables. 
. tO  - 
APPENDIX II: 0omputer outpmt from phrasl~ program. 
\ 
WHILE THEy ARE WELL KNOWN AND ESTABLISHED, 
,I THOU3HT IT WOUL? BE APPROPiATE 
:To DRA'~ YOUR ATTE~TIO~ 
TO CERTAIN OF THE DEPARTMENTAL PROBRAM~ES 
THAT AXE ~ESS WELL KNE~WN 
IN RELATIOrJSHIP TC SERVICES 
FOR THE ABED, 
BuT wHiCH NEvERTH~ESS 
CAN CONTRIBUTE SIGNiFiCANTLY 
TO THEIR WELL BEI~6. 
ONE OF THESE I~ 
THE NATIONAL WELFARE GRANT PROGRA~!~E 
WHICH ~AS ESTABLISHED 
A9 LATE AS NINETEEN SIXTYTWO 
WITH CONSIDERABLE SUPFORT AND ENTHUSIASM 
FROM THE PROVINCIAL 60VERNMENTS, 
AND FROM THE NATICNAL AND LOCAL VO~UNCARY WELFARE 
AGENCIES. 
ONE MILLION DOLLARS 
I~ AVAILABLE 
UNDER THtS PROBRA~ME 
OURIN6 THE CURRENT FISCAL YEAR 
AND THAT AfJOUNT I~ TO iNCPEASE 
A~ THE RATE O~ HALF A ~ILLION DOLLAR3 
A YEAR 
.11. 
