Abstract 
AN APPLICATION OP COMPUTER TECHNIQUES TO ANALYSIS 
OF THE VERB PHRASE IN HINDI AND ENGLISH: 
A Preliminary Report 
Dr, LoM, Khubohandanl and WoW. Glover 
Authors worked on the Project at ~oona, India with 
the facilities of the computer CDC 3600-160A installed 
at the Tats Institute for Fundamental Research, Bombay. 
The Project uses two sets of data: a corpus of verbal 
phrases drawl1 from a modern Hindi play and a oomplet@para- 
digm of Engl isksentences generate6 from the kernel"he 
eats i%". The computer was programmed to group into 
classes the words occurring in identical contexts, and 
substitute in the data corpus for these words a reference 
to the class where they have been put. The classification 
and substitution thus produced suggested phrase patterns, 
with the filler class for each tagmeme defined as the class 
represented in the particular slot of the pattern. 
The results obtained with a criterion for classifica- 
tion of "identical context one-deep on both sides" were 
quite satisfactory. In Hindi 25 classes were formed from 
the corpus of 65 phrases. Atleast one word was classified 
in each 37 (62%) of the phrases and all words were classi- 
fied in 3 phrases (15%). \ With an increased sample of simi- 
lar data these percentages would be expected to increase. 
In English 24 patterns were obtained and 15 classes were 
formed from the full paradigm of ll2 sentences. 
However, as so~ of the classes contained grammatically 
dissimilar members, the criterion was altered to "identical 
context two-deep on both sides". The results with this 
criterion appear less promising in Hindi. The data sample 
was extended to 248 phrases of three words or more. The 
machine discovered 223 patterns and 13 classes, and in only 
29 patterns (13%) one word was replaced b~ a class refer- 
ence. This criterion, however, enjoyed some success in 
analysing the English paradigm which is, of course, highly 
restricted data. With the full paradigm, the machine dis- 
covered 30 patterns and 19 classes. 18 of them are quite 
homogeneous in membership and the sentences generatedby 
the patterns usir~ these classes are all legitimate. 
wou{~__ is felt a useful basis for further investigation 
be to refine the broad classes formed with a "one- 
deep" criterion in a subsequent run through the samm or 
new data ,  
19 
