1969 In ternat iona l  Conference on Computat iona l  L inguist ics  
5emant ica and the Syntact ic  C lass i f i ca t ion  of Words 
Ernst  von  G lasers fe ld  
(Georgia Inst i tute for Research, 
and Univers i ty  of Georgia) 
(*) 
In present ing some aspects  of our somewhat unusual  
grammar to a gather ing of qomputat iona l  l inguists ,  I feel 
just i f ied in taking two things for granted: f irst, that 
most people who have taken an act ive interest  both in com- 
puters and in natural  language have come to real ise that 
computers,  a l though impress ive ly  fast and re l iable in many 
tasks, are not very br i l l iant  when it comas to making in- 
duct ive decis ions on the basis of insuf f i c ient  or not tho- 
roughly de f ineddata ;  and, second, that what we l inguists  
know about the work ings of natural  ~anguage is by no means 
enough to supply computers,  as they are, with a sol id bas- 
is for the ful ly automat ic  handl ing of natural - language.  
data. 
This is not meant to be a d isparaging comment on pre- 
vious efforts in l inguist ics,  for, after  all, the cont in-  
gency that has opened our eyes to these shortcomings  did 
not exist unti l  a few years ago. Tradi t ional  linguists,. 
and espec ia l ly  grammarians,  could carry on their  bus iness 
quite happi ly  on the more or less expl ic i t  assumpt ion  that 
language - l ike so many things in the sti l l  w ide-spread 
P latonic  view of the world - could be separated into two 
levels:  the ideal, uncontaminated one of pure structure 
* The research reported in this paper was sponsored by the 
U.5.A i r  Force Off ice of Sc ient i f ic  Research (OAR), Inform- 
at ion 5ciences U i rectorate  (Srant AFOSR 1319-67) and act- 
ive ly  supported by the Univers i ty  of Georgia,  Athens,U5A.  
- 2 - 
o r  form that was inherent ly  general isable,  and the s l ight-  
ly messy, unsystemic,  and therefore far less interest ing 
one of ind iv idua l  content. This d ichotomy was possib le and 
workab le  as long as the use of language was restr icted to 
organ isms who, by the time they embarked on l inguist ic  act- 
iv i t ies,  had necessar i ly  absorbed a vast body of exper ien-  
t ial  and conceptuaI  knowledge,  on which, more or less con- 
sc ious ly ,  they could draw whenevez the formulat ion or com- 
prehens ion  of a l inguist ic  express ion required something 
beyond the rules of the ideal  grammar. 
With the advent of computers  the s i tuat ion was ~edical -  
ly changed. Suddenly  l inguists  could and would find them- 
se lves  committed,  for one reason or another, to transmit  
their  know-how to a potent ia l  language user who did not 
possess  any a pr ior i  exper ient ia l  or conceptual  knowledge 
whatsoever .  Thus there arose innumerable  quest ions which, 
h i therto,  no one had ever been compel led to answer, and it 
became painfu l ly  obvious that the appl icat ion of much of 
the l inguists '  cher ished theoret ica l  knowledge to actual  
language mater ia l  presupposed a cons iderab le  amount of as 
yet unexplored preprocess ing of that very material .  
I shal l  not try to cata logue the types of quest ion and 
the kinds of problem which have been thrust upon the l in- 
guist  by the appearance of computers  - every one of you 
is fami l iar  with some if not all of them; instead I should 
l ike to present  a few examples and show the d i rect ion in 
which, we bel ieve,  some solut ions can be found. 
By ' l inguist ic  act iv i t ies '  or 'handling language data' 
we mean, for instance,  formulat ing a given message in e 
spec i f ic  natura l  language; or recognis ing,  in a given 
piece of language,  the message intent iona l ly  formulated 
- 3 - 
in that way by an author; or t ranslat ing a formulat ion giv- 
en in one natural  language into a 'corresponding '(*) form- 
ulat ion in another  natural  language, etc. Since the 'pre- 
processing'  in all  these cases involves what, summari ly,  
is cal led semantics,  it is necessery to stress that in our 
view of language there is no unbr idgeable abyss or opposi -  
tion between semantics and syntax. In fact, we speak o f  
'relational'  semantics (a term already used by Ul lmann (I)) 
when we try to define that part of an expraseion's  meaning 
that is determined by specif ic  syntact ic  funct ions (or Co.~r- 
relators);  and we call ' lexical' semant ics the attempt - 
for instance the lex icographer 's  - to define the meaning 
of words as separate indiv idual  items. 
In tradit ional  grammars the lexical items of a natural  
language are c lass i f ied as 'parts of speech' accord ing to 
their generic syntact ic funct ions and/or their morpholog ic -  
al character ist ics ;  in corre lat ional  grammar (**) they are 
c lass i f ied exc lus ive ly  according to the actual  roles they 
can play in corre lat ional  structures; moreover, whi le tra- 
d i t ional  grammars operate with about a dozen di f ferent  ge- 
* Note that since we are interested, not in developing a ri- 
gid logical ly  formal ised theory of grammar, but in develop- 
ing a f lexible operat ional  system fwr the automatic inter-  
pretat ion and handl ing of natura l - language sentences and 
text, we do not require formal instruments for the determ- 
inat ion of 'meaning', ' inter l inguist ic  correspondence' ,  
'synonymy', etc.; for our empir ical  purposes the consensus 
of prof ic ient language speakers is the relevant and suf- 
f ic ient cr iter ion. 
** Although both theory and pract ice of Corre lat ional  Gram- 
mar have been drast ica l ly  modif ied in our empir ica l  appl i -  
cat ions, much of the terminology and the basic concep~ 
derive from the pioneer ing work of Si lvio Ceccato , whom I 
was fortunate enough to have as fr iend and teache~. 
- 4 - 
ner ic  syntact ic  funct ions,  our corre lat iona l  Engl ish gram- 
mar d is t ingu ishes  several  hundred corre lators  (in the pre- 
sent vers ion of our automat ic  parser  (3) there are 350). 
The l ist of these corre lators  is the result of intuit -  
ive analys is  of Engl ish tex~s, cont inual  ref inement by 
means of ins ights gained in the t rans lat ion of Engl ish sen- 
tence structures into other languages (*), and by experi -  
ments  with an automat ic  pars ing procedure whose output,  or 
lack of output,  inev i tab ly  demonstrates  the shortcomings 
or, as we p~efer  to put it, the degree o~ completeness 
reached by the system's grammar. In our terminology a 'cot- 
relator '  is a connect ive funct ion which l inks two pieces - 
e i ther  words or word combinat ions  - and thus forms a unit 
we cal l  'correlat ion' .  Corre lators  are div ided into sever- 
al types, the main d is t inct ion being made between impl ic i t  
cor re lators ,  which are ind icated in the sentence merely by 
the juxtapos i t ion  of the items they link, and expl ic i t  cot- 
re lators ,  which are ind icated by speci f ic  words (mostly 
prepos i t ions  and conjunct ions) .  
To serve as a val id tool in the parsing or interpreta-  
t ion of sentences,  a corre lator  must not only have an in- 
d iv idua l  code number ('Ic' or corre lat ion index) but the 
par t i cu la r  re lat ion it establ ishes,  between the two i tems 
it corre lates,  must be character ised or expl icated. This 
exp l i ca t ion  may be an ad hoc descr ipt ion,  an i l lust rat ive  
paraphrase,  a sui table t ransform ~ l a Chomsky (4) or Fi l l -  
more (5), or a symbol ic  express ion devised along the l ines 
(6) of funct ion symbols in log ica l  ca lcu lus  . 
* Trans la t ion  f requent ly  helps to p inpoint  re lat ional  ambi-  
gu i t ies  which, a l though re levant  in the d isambiguat ion  of 
other  structures,  are not immediate ly  perceived by the 
mono l ingua l  speaker  or reader. 
- 5 - 
As ~mples  o f  cor re la tor  exp l i ca t ion ,  here  are  two (one 
concerning an implicit correlator, the other an explicit 
one) taken from the correlator list which has been imple- 
mented in our operational system: 
Corr. No. Description 
3670 N generic type: verb phrase complemented by in- 
finitive; 
Explication: the gram. subject is the actor of the 
infinitive activity; the infinitive specifies 
the purpose of the subject's primary activity. 
e.g. "He works to live", 
"I braked to avoid the child"; 
but not: "He began to live" (3430 N), 
"I had to avoid the child" (3410 N); 
no__~r: "He was eager to live" (3350 N), 
"I was clever to avoid the child" (7012 N). 
0243 E generic type: ~Y, temporal limitation; 
Explication: the item on the right of  "by" speci- 
fies the point in time after which what is as- 
serted by the item on the left of "by" is to be 
considered an accomplished fact. 
e.g. "You will be paid by Christmas", 
"He had left by 1865"; 
but no__~t: "You will be paid by cheque" (~257 E), 
"He had left by the back door" (0251 ?); 
no._~r: "You will be paid by the treasurer"  (0247 E), 
"He had left by sheer determination" (0255 E). 
It should be clear that the 'Explication' is intended 
to describe as univocally as possible the relation Qua re- 
(*) 
lation witDout regard for the particular items that are 
" In practice it is, of course, not alweye easy to formu- 
late the explication without reference to particular items; 
but as long as the analyst remains scrupu lous ly  aware of 
the intention, this is not a serious impediment and, in 
our experience, a sufficiently general formulation can al- 
ways be found sooner or later. 
- 6 - 
e l ig ib le  to be l inked by that relat ion. Cor re la tor  analys is  
and the exp l i cat ions  this ana lyt ica l  invest igat ions  aims at 
are consequent ly  what we may cal l  'the semant ics  of rela- 
t ions' .  
The term 'correlat ion'  refers to the word -combinat ion  a 
cor re la tor  produces,  i.e. the ternary unit cons is t ing  of 
one spec i f ic  cor re la tor  and the two items (words or them- 
se lves  word -combinat ions )  that are l inked by it; and we re- 
p resent  cor re la t ions  - for instance the ones operat ive  in 
the f i rst  phrase sample) in this manner:  
works to l ive 
2230 N - j  1- -2310 N ~ 
I 367L N - - J  
which cor responds  to a convent iona l  t ree-s t ructure  with 
labe l led  nodes: 
~I . . (3670N)~ 
(2230N) (2310N) 
/ \ 
He works  to l ive 
In order  to "recognise this structure in the l inear in- 
put str ing of the sentence,  f irst each of the four word 
i tems must be character i sed  as a poss ib le  candidate for 
l inkage by cor re la tors  2230 N and 2310 N respect ive ly  (*)-, 
and both these corze la t ions  have then to be character i sed  
as poss ib le  cand idates  for l inkage by corre lator  3670 N. 
This  character i sa t ion  is ach ieved by cor re la t ion  indices 
(or Ic's) ass igned to the ind iv idua l  i tems and spec i fy ing  
(a) the code numbers  of the cor re la turs  by means of which 
? The cor re la tor  numbers  we use were o~ig ina i \ ]y  s ign i f i cant  
as to the kinds of re lat ion;  cont inua l  correct iLns  and ad- 
d i t ions,  however,  have thoroughly  ob l i terated thJ~ signi-  
f i cance and the numbers are now nei ther  consecut ive  nor 
character i s t i c .  
- 7 -  
the  i tem can be l inked to other items; and (b) whether  the 
i tem can occupy the r ight -hand (RH) or the lef t -hand (LH) 
place in the speci f ied corre lat ion.  
(The process of ass igning Ic's, obviously,  is of one 
type when the item to which the Ic's are to be ass igned is 
a pre -estab l i shed vocabulary  word, and of quite another  
when the item is a cor re la t ion  formed in the course of the 
analys is  procedure; in the f irst case the word's  str ing of 
Ic's is the result  of ~ pr ior i  ass ignat ion;  in the second 
case it is the result  of a dynamic process cal led 'reclas- 
s i f icat ion' ,  implemented by means of an intr icate system of 
rules which take into account  the cor re lator  respons ib le  
for the made corre lat ion  as wel l  as the indiv idual  charac-  
ter of the pieces corre lated in the par t icu lar  instance; 
for a full d iscuss ion of the operat iona l  rec lass i f i ca t ion  
procedure see ref. No.7). 
From the sample phrases given under cor re la tor  3670 N 
it is evident that the two part ia l  phrases const i tut ing  the 
r ight-hand piece of the l isted corre lat ions,  i.e. "to l ive" 
and "to avoid the child", must bear RH-Icts not only of 
corre lator  3670 N out also of curre lators  3430 N, 3410 N, 
3350 N, and 7012 N, whi le the part ial  phrases const i tut ing  
the lef t -hand piece of the two cor re la t ions  3670 N wil l  
bear only the LH-Ic of cor re lator  3670 N and not those re- 
ferr ing to the corre lators  operat ive in the remaining four 
samples. (In the sample phrases given under cor re lator  
0243 E, the s i tuat ion is symmetr ica l ly  inverted,  i.e. the 
two part ial  phrases on the left wi l l  bear only the LH- Ic  of 
cor re lator  0243 E, whi le the part ia l  phrases on the r ight 
must bear RH- Ic 's  of ~ the other four l isted corre lators  
as well .)  
This ass ignat ion of Ic's automat ica l ly  prec ludes the 
- 8 - 
fo rmat ion  of unacceptab le  phrase in terpretat ions ,  such as :  
He began to  l ive 
L2230 N ~ L2310 N - - - J  
t *3670 N - j  
or I was c lever  to avoid the chi ld 
i L42~0 N~ L2310 N ~ LSOiO N~ 
L 2oso N-J L - -4o lo  N~ 
I -367o N I 
which would  be roughly  equ iva lent  to "de began in order 
to l ive" or, respect ive ly ,  "I was c lever  in order  to avoid 
the ch i ld"  (Note that if we change the form of the LH-phrase 
in the second example and say "I was be inq c lever  to avoid 
the chi ld" ,  the 3670 N in terpretat ion  becomes acceptab le  
whi le  the 7012 N in terpretat ion  - equ iva lent  to "to avoid 
the ch i ld  was c lever  of me" - is no longer  poss ib le!) .  
T rad i t iona l  grammars  tend to cons ider  such in terpreta -  
t iona l  d i s t inc t ions  (if, indeed, they make them) as 'se- 
mant ic ' ;  for cor re la t iona l  grammar they are c lear ly  rela-  
t ional ,  beca~:se they are handled exc l~s ive ly  by the mechan-  
ism of Ic-~,~tching - and thi~; mechan ism is the operat iona l -  
ly imp lemented  syntax of the system. And there is another  
c r i te r ion  as well. In dll the ~bove cases, the ass ignat ion  
of Ic 's to vocabu lary  w~rds or cor re la t iona l  products  emerg-  
in 9 in the course  of the pars ing  procedure can be determin-  
ed by an examinat ion  of the indiv iOual  item with regard to 
the exp l i ca t ion  of the cor re la tor  whose Ic is being con- 
s idered  (i.e. w i thout  cons ider in  9 comple~nentary items); 
this examinat ion ,  in pr inc ip le ,  is s imi lar  to the examina-  
t ion - in t rad i t iona l  grammar - of a morpho log ica l ly  de- 
f i c ient  or indef in i te  word with regard to the poss ib i l i ty  
of its being for ins tance a vet0 or a noun; or, to put it 
in another  way, this examinat ion  is essent ia l ly  d i f fe rent  
- 9 - 
f rom the one required to decide whether  two given i tems are 
compat ib le  as RH and LH pieces in one par t icu lar  syntact ic  
structure(8!  
The quest ion of pred icab i l i ty  - espec ia l ly  if e laborated 
in the way suggested in an essay by f red -  5ommers 19;-" " is a 
case in point. Whether  phrases such as: 
"blue grass" or "cer ise ideas", 
"the ind igest ion of angels"  or "the wings of the morn- 
ing", 
are acceptable,  acceptable  only metaphor ica l ly ,  or not ac- 
ceptable  at all, is apparent ly  not a re lat iona l  quest ion;  
the re lat ion - a kind of 'appurtenance'  - does not seem to 
change, nor could we say that any of the four phrases is 
unacceptab le  because one of its i tems is such that it can 
never be related in that way; since we have no object ion 
when the same relat ion is asserted in "cer ise paper" o c 
"clear ideas", we can only conc ludethat  there are certa in 
items to which certa in propert ies  or th ingscannot  be said 
to apperta in and that, therefore,  it is a quest ion of le__~x- 
i ca l  semantics. 
If the semant ic  analyses in i t iated by Ceccato in the 
(-) 
195O's were pusneo further, it seems l ikely that a re- 
lat ion such as 'appurtenance' could be demonstrated to in- 
corporate (i.e. t~J have confused) a number of spec i f iab le  
subrelat ions~ and, once we had iso lated these subrelat ions,  
much if not al l  of what we now, for the lack of demonstrab-  
le d ist inct ions,  have to call  ' lexical ambiguity '  could 
perhaps be resolved re lat iuna l ly  in a sat i s factory  way. 
* cal led 'operational '  semantics,  by which was meant the 
analys is  uf the mental  opezat ions that lead to the forma- 
tion uf the items (or concepts)  des ignated by words (cf. 
ref. No. IO). 
- i0  - 
Thus  it may indeed be so, that our need to resort to a 
static, non-re lat ional  semantic c lass i f icat ion of items, 
in order to interpret  phrases and sentences, is only the 
measure  of our ignorance concerning the basic character  
and composi t ion of relations; and that, eventual ly,  it wil l  
become possible to der ive a comprehensive and foolproof 
general  semantics from the invest igat ion of relat ional  con- 
d i t ions as they mani fest  themselves in our actual use of 
language. 
Let me try to make these conjectures a l i tt le less ob- 
scure. Gne area of Engl ish grammar that has given consider-  
able trouble to analysts is that of a string of const i tuents 
which, in tradit ional  terms, would have the specif icat ion:  
nominal + to be + adject ive + inf in i t ive 
A survey of contemporary  text shows that this string, 
with d i f ferent  lexical  items and in di f ferent contexts, 
(*) 
gives rise to ten d i f ferent  relat ional  interpretat ions 
Expl icat ing the relevant relations, we get the fol lowing 
l ist ing: 
" John is easy to please" 
Paraphrase:  to please John is easy 
ExpI icat ion:  the gram. subject is the object of the in- 
f in i t ive activity; the adj. specif ies an~spect (ad- 
verbial) of the inf in i t ive act iv i ty  as enacted by 
the given subject. 
B " John is eager to please" 
Paraphrase:  to please is what John wants to do 
I 
* I do not wish to claim that ten is all and th~ no ot.~ezs 
are possible; but these ten ere the interpretat ions w,: ~ came 
across in one year's consc ious scanning of everythi~g con- 
temporary  we happened to read, 
- l l  - 
Explication: the gram.subject is the actor of the in- 
f init ive activity; the adj. specif ies the subject's 
disposit ion towards the inf init ive activity, and 
this activity is merely envisaged. 
"John was slow to understand" 
Paraphrase: John was slow abou.___~t understanding 
Explication: the gram. subject is the actor of the in- 
f init ive activity; the adj. specif ies an aspect of 
the subject's performance. 
"John is likely to leave" 
Paraphrase: that John leaves is l ikely 
Explication: the gram. subject is the actor of the in- 
f initive activity; the adj. specif ies an assess- 
ment of the activity's incidence (i.e. whether or 
not it will take place). 
"John is clever to leave" 
Paraphrase: to leave is clever o~f John 
Explication: the gram.subject is the actor of the in- 
f init ive activity; the adj. specif ies an assess- 
ment (regarding the subject) based on the subject's 
enacting the given activity. 
"John is young to go to school" 
Paraphrase: John is young fo_~r going to school 
Explication: the gram. subject is the actor of the in- 
f init ive activity; the adj. specif ies an assess- 
ment of the subject's adequacy (or inadequacy) as 
actor of the given activity. 
"John is heavy to lift" 
Paraphrase: John is heavy with reqard to be~nq lifted 
Explication: the gram.subject is the object of the in- 
f initive activity; the adj. specif ies an aspect 
(adjectival) of the subject as object of the given 
activity. (Note: the paraphrase given for type A 
is impossible here; and if an ambiguous adjective 
occurs in G, the construction determines its mean- 
ing; e.g. "mushrooms are good to eat" requires the 
interpretat ion "good"='pleasing',  since it does not 
mean "to eat mushrooms is good for you"p where 
- 12  - 
"good"='benef i c ia l ' ) .  
H "John is sad to  go away" 
Paraphrase:  to go away causes John to b.._~e sad 
Expl icat ion:  the gram. subject is the actor of the in- 
f in i t ive  act iv i ty;  the adj. spec i f ies the  subject 's  
state which is a react ion to the given activity.  
I " John was cr i t ica l  to upset the speaker" 
Paraphrase:  John was cr i t ica l  in order to upset the 
speaker  
Exp l icat ion:  the gram. subject is the actor of the in- 
f in i t i ve  act iv i ty;  the adj. spec i f ies  a de l iberate  
at t i tude of the subject 's ,  and the in f in i t ive  spe- 
c i f ies  the purpose of the subject 's  att i tude. 
(Note: there of ten is an i r reso lvab le  ambigu i ty  be- 
tween type I and type E; e .g." the dog was c lever  to 
get the b iscu i t"  may be interpreted as I, 'the dog 
was ~ c lever  in order to get the biscuit ' ,  or 
as E, 'it was c lever  o f  the dog to get the biscuit ' )  
J "It is sad to go away" 
Paraphrase:  to go away is sad 
Exp l icat ion:  the nomina l i sed  in f in i t ive  is the sub- 
ject of the sentence;  the "it" funct ions as sub- 
ject  marker; the adj. speci f ies  an eva luat ion of 
the given act iv i ty  as event. 
As far 'as re lat ional  ~naly~is  goes, this d i sc r iminat ion  
of types is fa i r \ ]y  sat i s factory  (~itnough, t~) be real ly 
sol id,  it would require the deta i led def in i t ion  ,~n~ coher-  
ent app l i cat ion  of the terms used in the exp l icat ions  , 
many of which,  e.g. 'aspect',  'assessment' ,  'at t i tude' ,etc . ,  
are st i l l  rather vague). ~hen we come to a sentence- in ter -  
pret ive  procedure,  however,  such a l ist ing of re lat ional  
poss ib i l i t i es  does not get us anywhere,  unless we are able 
to prov ide each type with some cr i ter ion by means of which 
we can recognise  it in the input text. 
In an at tempt to d iscover  some such cr i ter ion,  we as- 
- 13  - 
sembled  a corpus of about i00 re lat ive ly  frequent ad ject -  
(11) 
ives from a recent compendium of ?ngl ish word f requency 
and examined their ind iv idual  poss ib i l i t ies  to funct ion as 
acceptab le  const i tuents  in the ten types of const ruct ion  
(for a complete report  on our f indings, see ref. No.12). 
The results of this invest igat ion  were compi led in the form 
of a matrix, showing for each adject ive the types of con- 
struct ion in which it can occur. 
5ummaris ing some of the observat ions  that could be made 
regarding that matrix, we can say: 
a) the ad ject ives  that fit const ruct ion  type D (viz. ce_._~r- 
talon, expected, known, ~ ,  said, sure, unknow__~n, un l i ke -  
Iv) do not occur in any of the other construct ions.  
b) the adject ives that fit const ruct ion  type H (viz. co___nn- 
ten.~t, qlad, happy, ~ ,  sa_~d, sat is f ied,  sorry) do not oc- 
cur in any of the other const ruct ions  - with the except ion 
of sad, which can occur also in type J. 
c) the ad ject ives  that fit const ruct ion  type B (viz. 9.~h;~., 
afrai____~d, anxious,  careful  2, desirous, ~ ,  fi_._!t, m~id____~, 
prepared, sea_q_~, reluctant,  wild_._____~, ~ ,  unable) do not 
occur in any of the other construct ions  - with the except-  
ion of f i t  and ~ ,  which can occur also in type G. 
(Of the other ad ject ives of the corpus, approx imate ly  one 
quarter  fits only one construct ion,  one half fits two con- 
st~uctions,  and one quarter  f its three; but s ince many of 
these adject ives have more than one meaning - e.g. ~ood I = 
'pleasing',  ~ = 'benefic ial ' ,  qood 3 = 'moral' - the 
re lat ional  l ist ing of the indiv idual  meanings  is not an im- 
mediate  help in the d isambiguat ion  of a given string. Never-  
theiess, it is a step forward from the pos i t ion where every 
adject ive nan to be cons idered a potent ia l  candidate for all 
- 14  - 
ten  const ruct ions . )  
The groups of ad ject ives  given under (a), {b), and (c), 
on page 13, const i tu te  extens iona l  def in i t ions ,  wi th in  the 
se lected  corpus,  of ad.iective c lasses,  and we can now exam- 
ine each of these groups to see whether  an in tens iona l  de- 
f in i t ion  can be der ived from it. 
Group (a) obv ious ly  has e common semant ic  e lement  which 
cou ld  be descr ibed  as 'assessment of probab i l i ty  and/or  
actua l i ty '  (of the i tem to which the ad ject ive  is appl ied);  
Group (b) has a common semant ic  e lement which could be 
descr ibed  as 'a temporary  state of mind usual ly  assoc iated 
with a spec i f i c  cause';  
Group (c) has a common semant ic  e lement  which could be 
descr ibed  as 'att i tude or d ispos i t ion  towards an event'.  
I should l ike to stress that we are at the beginn ing of 
this kind of invest igat ion  and are presumably  sti l l  rather 
c lumsy  in fo rmulat ing  val id  def in i t ions  of semant ic  ele- 
ments  i what is re levant  in this context ,  however,  is not 
the e f f i c iency  or re i iab i l i ty  of the definitic~ns we tenta- 
t ive ly  formulate,  but the fact that semant ic  defif, i t ions 
c~__~n be der ived at al l  from word groups compi led on the 
~"rength  of re la t iona l  cons iderat ions .  What we are. in fact, 
~y ing  to show, is that the analys is  of the re lat ions found 
to obta in  between the i tems of phrases or sentences leads, 
f i rst,  to an extens iona l ,  and eventual ly ,  to an intens ion-  
al semant ic  c lass i f i ca t ion  of the lex ica l  i tems const i tut -  
ing these phrases or sentences.  
This par t i cu la r  sector  of ad ject ive  cunstrL~ction is, of 
I 
course,  not the only area of Engl ish grammar which makes it 
seem p laus ib le  that semant ic  c lass i f i ca t ions  of lexemes c~n 
be der ived  from empi r ica l  grouping accord ing to their  rela- 
- 15  - 
t i ona l  behaviour.  The range of re lat ions expressed in Eng- 
l ish by prepos i t ions  is extremely fert i le  in this regard, 
but since it is also extremely wide, we have not yet brought  
our survey of it to a def in i t ive conclusion.  Part ia l  re- 
sults (13) however,  indicate that, here too, re lat iona l  se 
mant ics  success fu l ly  absorbs a great deal of what, hitherto,  
was considered lexical  or unsystemic.  
A comprehens ive  study of the verb-object  re lat ions (a 
sti l l  poor ly  def ined area in our operat iona l  system) pro- 
mises to yield the perhaps most convinc ing conf i rmat ion  of 
our thesis. 
Even a very suPerf ic i~l  examinat ion of a t rans i t ive verb 
and the grammat ica l  objects  that occur  with it, shows that 
the way in which the two are related may vary widely. If, 
for instance, we take the verb "to pay", we find that= 
l) in "He paid the dr iver" the subject gives up some- 
thing of economic value (e.g. a sum of money); and 
the object  speci f ies the receiver; 
2) in "He paid his bi l l"  the subject gives up something 
of econ. value; the object impl ies a speci f ic  amount 
and that this amount is due to some not further spe- 
c i f ied (but speci f iable)  remote ent ity as the r ight-  
fu l  receive~; 
3) in "He paid f i f ty  do l la rs"  the subject  gives up some- 
thing of  econ. value; the ob ject  spec i f ies  the amount. 
Leaving aside the rarer and the more metaphor ica l  uses 
of the verb (such as= to pay attent ion,  homage, a visit ,  
etc . )  we can now take a corpus of  nouns, t ry  each one o f  
them as object of "to pay", and determine which of the 
three descr ibed re lat ions it fits. This Wil l  extens iona l ly  
def ine three noun c lasses (not necessar i ly  mutua l ly  exclus-  
ive, because some of our nouns may fit into more than one 
of the relat ions) for which we can then tentat ive ly  formu- 
late intens ive semantic def in i t ions= 
- 16  - 
l ' )  i tems that can act as receiver  of i tems having an 
economic  value; e.g. boy, butche___~r, col leqe, cour__.~t, 
dr iver,  ~ ,  tax col lector ,  tai lor,  etc.; 
2') i tems imply ing a def in i te  econ. value and the fact 
that the impl ied amount is due to someone; e.g. 
due.___~s, fare, fe._.~e; fin.~e, pos.taqe, ta._~x, etc.; 
3') i tems ind icat ing  a speci f ic  econ. value; e.g. any 
numeral  fo l lowed by an ind icat ion of currency,  
and pronomina l  express ions  such as "a lot n, " l i t t le",  
"much", etc. 
The verb " topay"  is also doubly transi t ive,  i.e. it can 
be const ruc ted  with a dat ive an._.~d an accusat ive object  in 
one phrase,  e.g. : 
4) "He paid the butcher  ten dol lars"  (in which "the 
butcher"  is the receiver) .  
If we now test our corpus of nouns in this const :uct ion,  
we find, f irst,  that only  the items l isted in group I' can 
be used as dat ive object  and that they cannot be used as 
accusat ive  object;  second, that if i tems of group 2' or 3' 
are used as d i rect  object ,  the dat ive object  always plays 
the part of ' receiver' ;  third~ we find that we have to con- 
s ide~ su~e new i tems (occurr ing only in con junct ion  with a 
det ive object)  which are not members of the three i isted 
c lasses  and which, moreover ,  change the role o ~ the dat ive 
object,  as for instance in: 
5) "He paid his dr iver  a hol iday" (where "his dr iver" 
is the benef ic ia ry  of the sub ject 's  act). 
We thus get a fourth group of possib le objects;  their 
in tens iona l  def in i t ion  iS..less obvious,  but we can tenta- 
t ive ly  put down: 
5') i tems intended for personal  ' " ; consumpt ion e.g. 
drin____~k, a term at col leqe,  a mea_______~/, a trip round the 
world,  a vacat ion,  etc. 
- 17  - 
One point that is of special interest  in these sti l l  very 
crude and incomplete results of re lat ional  analys is  and se- 
mantic c lass i f icat ion,  is the fact that, a l though the clas- 
ses of 'receiver' and 'beneficiary'  are co-extens ive in the 
corpus, they do not seem to create ambiguit ies,  since the 
part icu lar  role of an item that is ambivalent  in this re- 
spect, is, in any given example, determined by the c lass i -  
f icat ion of the direct object; in other words, if the di- 
rect object belongs to either group 2' or 3', the dat ive ob- 
ject plays the part of 'receiver'; if the direct object  be- 
longs to group 5', the dative object plays the part of 'be- 
nef ic iary' .  
This rule, incidentaI ly ,  seems rigid enough to deal with 
at least some phrases which, on a purely exper ient ia l  basis 
(i.e. 'knowledge of the world'),  would have to be rated ra- 
ther odd or unlikely. If, for instance, we came across the 
sentence "5he paid he~ lover a week of clams", we might be 
uncertain how to interpret  precisely "a week of clams", 
but we would have no doubt that it had to be something her 
lover could personal Iy  consume. - And there is consider-  
able reassurance to be got from the impl icat ion thot (at 
least in some cases) the logic of relat ional  semantics is 
more powerful  than the stat ist ics  of factual experience. 
~e could adduce many more examples of transit ive verbs 
and relevant object c lass i f icat ion,  but at the present stage 
of the analysis this wouid add little: the results are in- 
var iably suggest ive,  even indicat ive,  but they cannot be 
considered conclusive. Therefore, I shall merely summarise 
what we expect from tnese invest igat ions.  
On the basis of work accompl ished during the last 18 
months, it appears that the semantic c lasses der ived from 
relat ional  analys is  are recurs ive and that their  num-  
- IB  - 
bet wi l l  remain usefu l ly  smal ler  than the number of c lass i -  
f ied items. There wil l ,  of course, be many more semant ic  
c lasses  than grammars  have h i therto contemplated  - but giv- 
en the versat i l i ty  of natura l  language,  this should not 
rea l ly  surpr ise  us; nor is there any need to be par t icu lar -  
ly pess imis t i c  about the poss ib i l i ty  of imp lement ing  such 
a vo luminous  and in t r i cate  data base in a computer  system. 
We all have seen how the ear ly  computat iona l  l inguists '  
wor r ies  concern ing  storage capac i ty  and process ing speeds 
have ~ been made to appear  anachron is t i c  by techno log ic -  
al progress ,  and this progress  does not yet seem to be any- 
where  near its cei l ing.  
As to the theoret i ca l  imp l i ca t ions  of our kind of lan- 
guage analys is ,  I should l ike to put forward one suggest -  
ion. Assuming  that we can der ive (and the mater ia l  present -  
ed here does imply prec ise ly  this) a sa t i s fac tory  semant ic  
c lass i f i ca t ion  of lexical  i tems from their  re lat iona l  pro- 
per t ies  def ined in terms of an adequate ly  d i f fe rent ia ted  
syntax,  it may be more pro f i tab le  (and, perhaps, also more 
correct )  to v iew syntax and semantics,  not as a pair  of 
mutua l ly  exc lus ive  opposi tes ,  but rather as the axes of a 
cont inuum of meaning;  every semant ic  e lement,  part ic le,  
feature  (or howevec  we want to cal l  itl would, in such a 
f rame of reference,  have both a re lat iona l  and a lexical  
coord inate  - which would not only make it poss ib le  for us 
to d iscuss  one and the same item from two points of view 
w i thout  cont rad ic t ion ,  but, I bel ieve,  it would also be a 
use fu l  advance towards an economica l  representat ion  of l in- 
gu is t i c  data in computat iona l  procedures.  
J 
- 19  - 
R ? f e r e n c e s 
i) Stephen Ullmann, The Principles of Semantics, Blackwell, 
Cxford, 1957. 
2) 5 i l v io  Ceccato et a l . ,  L ingu is t i c  Analysis end Program- 
ming for Mechanical Translation, Feltrinelli, Milan, 
? 1960, and Gordon & Breach, New York, 1962. 
3) E.v.&lasersfeld and P.P.Pisani, The Multistore System 
MP-2, Georgia Inst.for Research, Athens (Georgia, 
U.5.A.), 1968, and 
The Multistore Parser for Hierarchical Syntactic 
Structures, to be published in the Communications 
of the ACM, 1969. 
4) Noam Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, M.I.T. 
Press, Cambridge (Mass.), 1965. 
5) Charles J. Fillmore, Entailment Rules in a Semantic 
Theory, Uhio State University, Columbus (Ohio), 
1965. 
6) Hans Reichenbach, Elements of Symbolic Logic, Free Press 
Paperback, New York, 1966. 
7) E.v. Glasersfeld, P.P.Pisani, J.Burns, B.Notarmarco, B. 
Dutton, Automatic English Sentence Analysis, Re- 
ports ILR5 T-If and ILR5 T-14, IDAMI Language Re- 
search Section, ~ilan (Italy), 1965/66. 
8) Jehane Burns? A 5cneme for Semantic Controls in Auto- 
matic Sentence Analysis, Literary and Linguistic 
Computing Centre, University of Cambridge (England), 
1968. 
Fred 5ommers, Predicability, in Max Black (editor), Phi- 
losophy in America, Cornell University Press, 1965. 
5ilvio Ceccato, Un Tecnico fra i Filosofi, vol. l and If, 
Marsilio Editore, Padova (Italy), 1964/66. 
Henry Ku~era and W.N.Francis, Computational Analysis of 
Present-Day American English, Brown University, Pro- 
vidence, R.I., 1967. 
E.v. Glasersfeld and B.Notarmarco, Some Adjective Clas- 
ses derived from Correlational Grammar, to be pub- 
lished in American Speech, 1969.  
E.v. Glasersfeld, An Approach to the Semantics of Pre- 
positions, Proceedings Of the Symposium on Computer- 
related Semantic Analysis (LaB Vegas, 1965), Wayne 
State University, Detroit, Mich,, 1967. 
9) 
10) 
1l)  
12) 
13) 
Semant ics  and the Syntact ic  C lass i f i ca t ion  of Words 
A B5  T R ACT 
Trad i t iona l  grammars c lass i fy  words according to gener-  
ic syntact ic  funct ions or morpho log ica l  character is t ics .  
For teaching humans and for descr ipt ive  l ingu is t ics  this 
seemed suff ic ient .  The advent of computers  has changed the 
s i tuat ion.  Since machines  are devoid of exper ient ia l  know- 
ledge, they need a more expl ic i t  grammar to handle natural  
language.  Cor re la t iona l  5rammar is an at tempt ?n that di- 
rect ion. The paper  descr ibes  parts of cor re la t iona l  syntax 
and shows how a h ighly  d i f fe rent ia ted  syntax can be used 
to estab l i sh  word c lasses  for which an intens iona l  semant-  
ic defJ.nition can then be found. It exempl i f ies  this ap- 
proach in two ares of grammar: pred icat ive  adj,~c~ives and 
transi~:ive verbs. The c lass i f i ca t ion  serves to e l iminate 
ambigu#ty  and spur ious computer  in terpreta t ion~ of natural 
language sentences.  
Author ' s  address:  Ernst yon G lasers fe ld  
Georgia ~nst i tute for Research 
711, C & 5 Bank Uldg. 
ATHENS, 5a., 30601, U.5.~. 
