INTRODUCTION 
For severa l  years  we have been invo lved  a t  MITRE in  the  deve lop-  
ment o f  an on- l ine  text -p rocess ing  sys tem in tended fo r  use  by in fo r -  
mat ion  ana lys ts  in  the  es tab l i shment  and man ipu la t ion  o f  the i r  own 
persona l  f i l es .  Our p r imary  mot ivat ion  in  th i s  program as in  i t s  
p redecessor  has  been to incorporate  l ingu is t i ca l l y  based techn iques  for  
ana lyz ing  the  in fo rmat ion  content  of  langusge  in  what we hope w i l l  be 
pract i ca l ,  use fu l  sys tems.  
The prev ious  program, the  "Eng l i sh  P reprocessor  P ro jec t , "  was 
d i rec ted  toward deve lop ing  a capab i l i ty  that  would a l low fo rmat ted  data  
f i l es  to  be accessed  by natura l  language quer ies  (Walker,  1965).  At 
the  t ime we began i t  in  1961, complex data  re t r ieva l  requests  cou ld  be 
fo~la ted  on ly  by programmers who were in t imate ly  fami l ia r  w i th  the  
s t ruc ture  Of the  data  base  in  quest ion .  Bo ls te red  by the  conv ic t ion  
that  computer -based  sys tems shou ld  be respons ive  d i rec t ly  to  the  people  
who were us ing  the i r  p roducts ,  we des igned  such  a sys tem,  concent ra t ing  
our  e f fo r ts  in  par t i cu la r  on i t s  " f ront  end . "  
Our in i t ia l  goa l  was the  development o f  a syntact i c  ana lys i s  
p rocedure  that  would process  both  the  query  sentences  and dec la ra t ive  
sentences  which cou ld  be used to update  the  data  base  i t se l f .  (We 
hoped a l so  to  be ab le  to  generate  we l l - fo rmed sentences  as  responses  to  
a query . )  S ince  our l ingu is t i c  insp i ra t ion  was (and s t i l l  i s )  Chomsky's 
t rans for~t iona l  approach (Chomsky, 1957, 1965~ etc . ) ,  our product  was a 
syntact i c  ana lys i s  p rocedure  fo r  t rans format iona l  gran~nars (Zwicky, 
e t  a l . ,  1965; Walker ,  e t  a l . ,  1966). 
-2- 
During the time it took to develop the MITRE Analysis Procedure, 
other groups had established English-llke query languages for data 
retrieval systems that did provide reasonable access for unso- 
phisticated users. However, during this period there was not a corre- 
sponding increase in complexity of the techniques for file manipulation 
which would have Jus t i f ied  fu r ther  work on natura l  language ana lyzers  
for  input  p rocess ing .  Consequent ly,  we sh i f ted  the emphasis of our 
program to work w i th  text  f i l es .  
( I t  i s  appropr ia te  to remark here ,  parenthet ica l ly ,  that  some new 
approaches to f i l e  access  and data base manipu lat ion  hold cons lderab le  
promise for  sus ta in ing  the use of natura l  language input  in  data 
re t r leva l .  I f ind par t l cu la r ly  in teres t ing  in re la t lon  to our o r lg lna l  
approach the recent  work of Woods (1968), Green and Raphael (196g), and 
Becket (1969), but for  more genera l  re ference ,  see the survey by glmmons 
(1969) on "Natura l  Language Quest ion Answering Systems : 1969.") 
Our work in  text -process ing  began as an at tempt  to  see how the NITRE 
Ana lys l s  Procedure could be used pract i ca l ly  fo r  ana lyz ing  textua l  data.  
We recognized then (and s t i l l  do) that  no grammar has been wr i t ten  w i th in  
any l ingu ls t l c  theory ,  t rans format iona l  or o therwise ,  which i s  adequate 
for  p rocess ing  random text  passages automat ica l ly .  Of course ,  only 
recently have these theories begun to inspire semantic research that is 
at all encouraging (e.g., for transformational theory: Fillmore, 1968; 
McCawley, 1968; Bierwisch, 1967). Consequently, our interest has been 
in designing an on-line system where the user could control the material 
to be analyzed, simplifying it where necessary, could supplement the 
-3- 
too ls  where that  was poss ib le ,  and, perhaps most impor tant ,  cou ld  
in terpret  the resu l t s  in  the context  of h i s  own problems even though 
the characterizations of these results might not be wholly justified 
theoretically. 
Our focus on personal files is a result of these considerations. 
We want to provide for a person working with textual data (who will be 
referred to hereafter as an "analyst") a set of techniques that will 
allow him to construct and manipulate his own files. Our intent is to 
design these techniques so that they have as much theoretical integrity 
as possible and so that eventually they will satisfy many analysts 
working on different kinds of problems. We hope that our text-processing 
system will provide a test-bed within which theoretical hypotheses can 
be tested and that through studies of the experience of a number of 
analysts we can arrive at procedures which have general value and 
validity. 
-4- 
THE TEXT-PROCESSING SYSTEM 
OVERVIEW 
The text-processing system is being implemented on an IBM 360/50 
computer with IBM 2260 display consoles. It is programmed in TREET 
(Haines, 1969), a list processing language and system which operates 
under OS. In its present form there are three major components. The 
first, chronologically as well as in sophistication, is a ling~istically 
based procedure called SAFARI. It allows surmnary statements about 
textual information content to be stored and retrieved in sentence form 
so that the syntactic relations among the lexical items are represented 
directly in the data base. 
The second component of the text-processing system is a set of 
procedures for editing textual materials. In addition to inserting and 
deleting data, the analyst can select or annotate lines, paragraphs, 
? or whole selections to create files and subfiles for temporary or 
long-term storage or for report generation. 
The third component of the text-processing system is a set of 
procedures for text-searching. Two methods have been provided to find 
simple patterns of characters, strings, words, or phrases. In the 
first, intended for smaller corpuses, the text is scanned directly. 
The other makes use of an index of the words in a text and is much more 
efficient for larger files. In both methods, synonym sets, which can 
be set up or modif ied on-line, allow for more complex search specifica- 
tions. 
These three kinds of text-processing capabilities wil l  be available 
to the analyst as he sits in front of his display console. They 
-5- 
constitute alternatives responsive to certain of his needs. We are 
interested in introducing additional options to provide a broader range 
of capabilities, but the present components are still being modified 
and refined to increase their efficiency and to provide for more 
effective interfaces between them. The brief descriptions that follow 
are intended only to indicate in somewhat more detail the operation of 
each component. 
SAFARI--A LINGUISTICALLY BASED PROCEDURE 
The first component of the text-processing system, SAFARI, was a 
direct outgrowth of our work with the MITRE Analysis Procedure. We 
adapted the Procedure so an analyst could use it to code statements 
about information from his text files or to process queries for 
searching in files consisting of analyzed statements. For input an 
analyst can scan through a text on a display scope and can select or 
prepare sentences which sun~arize items of interest. These sentences 
are analyzed syntactically and stored in the data base as tree structures. 
Questions about the data base, analyzed similarly, are matched against 
the stored structures. Relevant statements are retrieved and presented 
to the analyst, who also may recover the original text passages from 
which they were derived. 
The SAFARI procedure was progranlned initially for the I\]~M7030 
(Stretch) computer; that version has been described elsewhere (Walker, 
1967). SAFARI is now implemented on the IBM 3#0/50 computer with IBM 
2260 displays. A detailed discussion of the programs in this new 
version (except for the on-line interface) can be found in Norton (1968); 
portions of the present and subsequent descriptions are adapted from 
that report and from other project reports. 
-6- 
The procedure itself consists of four stages: (i) lexical cate- 
gorization together with morphological analysis of each word of the 
input sentence; (2) context-free parsing of the resulting string of 
lexical categorizations; (3) application of transformational (reversal) 
rules to the set of surface structures produced, which, in addition to 
rejecting inappropriate parsings and deriving the proper base structures, 
also standardizes the resulting tree in a canonical format; (4) (a) for 
declarative sentences, storage of the canonical representations in the 
data base; (b) for interrogative sentences, searching in the data base 
for structures matching their own canonical representations. 
The lexicon provides for a word or stem a list of its categoriza- 
tions, each of which contains a category label and a feature-value pair. 
Words not found in the lexicon are processed by a morphological analysis 
procedure into stems and affixes. Analysis rules determine possible 
stem-affix structures. A structure is acceptable if the stem is in the 
lexicon and its combination with that affix is in accord with a set of 
morpheme-combinatorial rules. Redundancy rules are applied to the 
structures to assign by default feature-value pairs for certain other- 
wise unmarked structures (e.g., nouns not marked plural are singular, 
nouns marked '%uman plus" are also "animate plus"). (Additional 
information about the morphological analysis procedure and about its 
linguistic basis can be found in Chapin and Norton (1968) and in Chapin 
(1967).) 
The parser is a bottom-to-top algorithm which produces for the 
string of (lists of) lexical categories (excluding the feature 
information) all  of the possible surface structures according to a 
-7- 
. . . .  :~cu lar  se t  of  context - f ree  phrase  s t ructure  ru les .  I t  i s  essent la l l y  
~ho one in  the  MITRE Ana lys i s  P rocedure ,  a l though the  imp lementat ion  i s  
more e f f i c ient .  
Be fore  the  t rans format iona l  ru les  a re  app l ied  to  the  set  o f  sur face  
t rees  fo r  the  sentence ,  the  feature -va lue  pa i rs  p rov ided  by the  lex ica l  
ana lys i s  a re  at tached to  the  appropr ia te  te rmina l  nodes .  The t rans for -  
mat ions  operate  substant ia l l y  as  in  the  MITRE Ana lys i s  P rocedure  to 
produce  base  t rees ,  except  that  here  feature  anomal ies  a l so  prov ide  
grounds  fo r  re jec t ion ,  thus  reduc ing  the  number o f  spur ious  ambigu i t ies .  
In add i t ion~ spec la l  t rans format ions  have  been added to  conver t  the  base  
s t ructure  in to  a canon ica l  form in  o rder  to  fac i l l ta te  search ing .  
Dec larat ive  sentences~ processed  in  the  manner descr ibed ,  a re  s tored  
in the data base as trees. Each tree is cataloged under those words 
(stems) that appear as terminal nodes under certain grarmmatlcal category 
labels, the choice of which can be specified (and easily changed) by the 
analyst. Subordinate clauses are stored so that they can be searched 
separately, but with a pointer to the full tree in which they appear. 
Questions, after processing, are matched against trees in the data base. 
The search is restricted to those trees which contain words appearing as 
terminal nodes under particular grammatical categories in the query 
sentence. Each node of the query is compared with the corresponding 
node of each tree in the recovered set. A comparison is successful if 
the two nodes are identical, if the node in the query is a question word, 
or if both nodes belong to the same equlvalence class (class membership 
can be defined by the analyst). Feature agreement also can be required 
for nodes whose values are on a special list (also under the analyst's 
control). 
-8 -  
Conjo ined phrases  are  handled so that  the  order  o f  occur rence  w i th in  a sen-  
tence  i s  immater ia l .  The quest ion  matches  a s tored  s ta tement  i f  a l l  o f  
the  nodes  in  the  query  compare  appropr ia te ly  w i th  those  in  the  t ree  fo r  
that  s ta tement .  Consequent ly ,  i t  i s  poss ib le  fo r  the  t rees  in  the  data  
base  to  have  add i t iona l  s t ructure  not  in  the  quest ion .  S ince  the  
par t i cu la r  match ing  a lgor i thm app l ies  recnrs ive ly  f rom le f t  to  r ight ,  
nodes  in  the  s tored  t rees  might  have  add i t iona l  daughters  o r  r ight  
s i s te rs .  Some o f  the  fo rmat t ing  t rans format ions  ment ioned above  i n t ro -  
duce  opt iona l  nodes  w i th  nu l l  va lues  to  guarantee  that  a l l  poss lb le  
le f t  s i s te rs  w i l l  be  present  in  a t ree .  
The grammat ica l  ru les  inc luded in  the  cur rent  vers ion  o f  SAFARI 
a re  not  o f  par t i cu la r  l ingu is t i c  in teres t .  Fur thermore ,  a l though they  
were  der ived  on the  bas is  o f  a par t i cu la r  text ' corpus ,  they  have  not  
been used enough to establish their utility even for that data base. 
The granmmr was written primarily for checking out the system, although 
it is worth investigating further to determine its practical value. 
It was written as a recognition graummr directly, rather than first 
defining a subset of sentences explicitly by generative rules and then 
establishing the corresponding set for the syntactic analysis procedure. 
The granunar allows statements and questions to be written, using simple 
relative clauses, adverbial and adjectival prepositional phrases, and 
a variety of conjoined constructions. The inclusion of a small number 
of syntactic features (inherent features on nouns, strict subcategoriza- 
tion and selectional features on verbs) has enabled us to assess their 
usefulness in the analysis procedure. By postponing the testing of 
context restrictions until the transformational rules have applied, a 
large amount of structural ambiguity is eliminated from the surface parsing. 
-9- 
The programs within the linguistically motivated parts of SAFARI 
(that is, the morphological analysis, context-free parsing, and trans- 
formational application) are designed so that the rules can be changed 
easily, allowing the procedure to be used for testing grammars (cf. 
Gross, 1967, 1968, and Gross and Walker, 1969 for related work on 
grarmmar testers using similar progranm~ing strategies). The trans- 
formational rules for establishing canonical trees for storage and 
retrieval can be changed as easily, allowing different formats to be 
tried. 
THE EDITING OPERATIONS 
In contrast to SAFARI, the editing procedures are more traditional. 
The major l imitation on their flexibility results from the display 
hardware we are using. The techniques available with the SAFARI 
implementation on the IBM 7030 computer, which used DD-13 graphic 
displays under lightgun control, were much more elegant (cf. Gross, 
1967). However, the actual editing operations were not substantially 
different. 
The analyst can modify text by typing over material displayed, by 
specifying a segment on a line and its replacement, by inserting or 
deleting lines, and by moving lines from one file to another. In these 
ways he can make additions to a file, correct it, format the data, make 
annotations, insert index terms. Or he can create a new file directly, 
or out of pieces from other files. A file, modif ied or new, can he 
rearranged or reformatted so that it is suitable for report generation. 
It also is possible to create a file that records actions taken by the 
analyst and to which he can refer on-line. 
-lO- 
TEXT-SEARCHING PROCEDURES 
SAFARI allows an analyst to recover complex relations among infor- 
mation elements relating to texts he has previously processed. However~ 
it is desirable to be able to identify new texts that might be worth 
analyzing in depth. In addition, often it is not necessary to provide 
such a deep analysis to discriminate relevant information for a given 
task; the occurrence of certain words or phrases may be a sufficient 
clue. Two procedures for searching text have been developed for these 
situations: one performing a direct character-by-character scan, the 
other using an index to locate potentially relevant sentences which 
then are scanned directly. Both procedures allow relatively complex 
patterns to be identified. 
For the direct scan, the text is considered to be separated, by the 
occurrence of blanks, into pseudowords, which may include punctuation 
or such coding as capitalization indicators. The search request can 
consist of sequences of constituents occurring within specifiable dis- 
tances of each other with or without the use of synonyms. In the 
standard search (without synonyms) a constituent can be a word--which 
wil l  match the letter portions of pseuodwords, a string--which wil l  
match any specified sequence of characters, or a disjunction of con- 
stituents--one or none of which may be required to match. Exclusion 
lists can be established in this standard search, but, because of their 
inefficiency, their use is not encouraged. Note that the string con- 
stituent wil l  allow capitalization codes, punctuation, and other non- 
alphanumeric elements to be included in a search request. 
-ll- 
The synonym search adds to the standard direct scan two extra 
features. First, phrases can be used as single constituents. Second, 
and more important~ synonym sets can be established so that for each 
constituent in a search request, all relevant synonyms are automatically 
included as disjunctions. These sets typically would be set up in 
advance, but they can be modif ied on-line. 
In both types of direct scan, pointers to the locations of match- 
ing'portions of text are accumulated. Upon completion the number of 
matches is presented to the analyst~ and he can view them successively 
in context on the page (i.e., ten-line segment of text) in which they 
appear. If the data base has been set up so that different categories 
of text are identified explicitly (e.g., title, author, source, body), 
searches can be restricted to specified categories. 
The index search retains most of the features of the direct scan 
searches but makes use of an index of the text to restrict the scope 
of the search to just those sentences which have the words contained in 
the search request. These sentences are then scanned directly for the 
requested pattern using the procedures described above. Since an index 
must be prepared, this kind of search is most appropriate for stable 
files. It is particularly appropriate for larger amounts of text or where 
a large number of synonyms are used. Words~ phrases, and arbitrary 
strings can figure in the search request, but the index will  be of value 
only for those strings whose left-most character corresponds to the 
beginning of a word (e.g., a stem without a pre~fix). Both standard and 
synonym searches can be made, substantially as in the direct scan 
approach, except that phrases can be used in the standard search as well. 
-12- 
In the index search, the actual sentences satisfying the search 
request are accumulated in a separate file together with information 
identifying the text in which they occur and the line number on which 
they begin. This answer file may be viewed, printed, or edited, and 
the text pages in which the answers appear may be retrieved. 
-13- 
DISCUSSION 
The three components of the text-processing system described in the 
preceding section are intended to provide a range of capabilities for 
an analyst working on-line with textual data. However, it should be 
noted that none of the components is in production status at this time, 
although the editor is being used for routine correction of input materials 
and exploratory work using other editing features and the text-searching 
programs is about to begin. Therefore, we cannot say anything informative 
about user satisfaction, nor is it meaningful to give program parameters 
or t iming s ta t i s t i cs ,  s ince  they are cer ta in  to change (hopefu l ly  fo r  the 
bet ter ,  par t i cu la r ly  as regards  t iming for  SAFARI). Cons ider ing the 
focus of th i s  Conference ,  what does seem appropr ia te  i s  some d iscuss ion  
of the re levance  of th i s  system to computat ional  l ingu is t i cs .  
I t  i s  obvious that  the SAFARI procedure fa l l s  under the scope of 
computat iona l  l ingu is t i cs ,  no mat ter  how narrowly def ined.  And i t  i s  
poss ib le  to l i s t  the morpholog ica l  and syntact i ca l  ana lyses  of SAFARI 
separately so that the plural reference in the title of this paper 
("Computational Linguistic Techniques...") is satisfied. However, 
although the necessity to be practical and sensitive to what analysts 
actually can use and need to use in processing text prompted our intro- 
duction and elaboration of text-editing and text-searching techniques, 
computational linguistic relevance is not wholly lacking. While some 
might argue that editing and searching are computational linguistic oper- 
ations, we do take the word "l inguistic"in that phrase quite seriously. 
Accordingly, we are trying to incorporate within these operations 
-14 -  
s t ra teg ies  mot ivated  by l ingu is t i c  cons lderat io~s .  So fa r ,  th i s  
in f luence  can be seen on ly  in  our work in  text  search ing .  
The text -search lng  procedures  we have deve loped emphasize the 
ident i f i ca t ion  of pat terns .  Whi le we cer ta in ly  want to  be ab le  to  
identify words and word co-occurrence groupings, we also want to 
recognize stems and affixes, on the one hand, and clause and phrase 
structures on the other. Thus, by specifying in the search request 
"computer" as a word with its synonyms, "center" as a stem to allow 
for  p lu ra l s ,  a d i s tance  de l imi te r  to  a l low three  or four  in terven ing  
words,  a d i s junct ion  of  " in"  and "a t " ,  and a cap i ta l i za t lon  symbol we 
hoped to  ident i fy  some (but cer ta in ly  not  a11) of the  computer centers  
~ent loned  in  our date  base that  were ident i f ied  w i th  cer ta in  Ins t l tu -  
t lons  or locat ions .  The c reat ion  of synonym sets  can be the product  
of a s tudy  of syntact i c  end semant ic  re la t ions ;  i t  need not  be ad hoc 
and arb i t ra ry .  In  t ry ing  to  unders tand  the l im i ta t ions  on synonym sub-  
s t i tu t ion  in  search  requests  we found we were a ided  s ign i f i cant ly  by an 
eva luat ion  of the  l ingu is t i cs  of  cer ta in  const ruct ion  types .  S imi la r ly ,  
we be l ieve  that  l ingu is t i c  ins ights  may he lp  to  o rgan ize  indexes  so that  
they are  most use fu l .  We hope that  i t  may prove poss ib le  to  in t roduce  
increas ing  amounts of l ingu is t i c  soph is t i ca t ion  in to  search  procedures  
in  these  ways.  
The po in t  be ing  made here  i s  that  i t  i s  not  necessary  to  reso lve  
the  quest ion  of  whether  text -search ing  procedures  a re  computat iona l  
l ingu is t i c  techn iques .  Rather ,  we are  in teres ted  in  determin ing  whether  
l ingu is t i c  cons iderat ions  can he ighten  the e f fec t iveness  of these  less  
soph is t i ca ted  hut  cur rent ly  much more pract i ca l  ways of hand l ing  
-15- 
textual data. We hope that further work with our text-processing system 
will enable us to make this evaluation. 
Acknowledgments 
The work described in this paper is a product of the following 
people whose ideas, implementations, and descriptions have significantly 
influenced its form and content: Carter Browne, Stanley Cohen, Jeanne 
Fleming, Richard Glantz, Louis Gross, Ted Haines, and Lewis Norton. 
REFERENCES 
Becker, J. D. The modeling of simple analogic and inductive processes 
in a semantic memory system. In D. E. Walker and L. M. Norton 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, 1969. In press. 
Bierwisch, M. Some semantic universals of German adjectivals. 
Foundations of Language, 1967, 3, 1-36. 
Chapin, P. G. On the syntax of word-derivation in English. MTP-68, 
The MITRE Corporation, September 1967. 
Chapin, P. G., and Norton, L. M. A procedure for morphological analysis. 
MTP-101, The MITRE Corporation, July 1968. 
Chomsky, N. Syntactic structures. Mouton, The Hague, 1957. 
Chomsky, N. Aspects of the theory of syntax. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1965. 
Fillmore, C. J. The case for case. In ~ Bach and R. T. Harms (Eds.), 
Universals in lin~uis tic theory. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, N. Y., 
1968. 
Green, C. C., and Raphael, B. The use of theorem-proving techniques in 
question-answering systems. Proceedings of 23rd ACId National 
Conference, 1968, 169-181. 
Gross, L. N. On-line programming system: user's manual. MTP-59, 
The MITRE Corporation, 1967. 
Gross, L. N. A computer program for testing grammars on-line. MTP-102, 
The MITRE Corporat ion ,  1968. 
Gross, L. N., and Walker, D. E. On-line computer aids for research in 
linguistics. In A. J. H. Morrell (Ed.), Information Processin~ 68. 
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969. 
Haines, E. C. TREET, a list processing language and system. MTP-I04, 
The MITRE Corporation, March 1969. 
McCawley, J. D. The role of semantics in a grammar. In E. Bach and 
R.  T. Harms, (Eds.), Universals in linguistic theory. Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, N. Y., 1968. 
Norton, L .M.  The SAFARI text-processing system: IBM 360 programs. 
MTP-103, The MITRE Corporation, September 1968. 
Simmons, R. F. Natural language question answering systems: 1969. 
TNN-87, University of Texas Computation Center, January 1969. 
Walker, D. E. (Ed.) English preprocessor manual. SR-132, The MITRE 
Corporation, May 1965. 
Walker, D. E. SAFARIj an on-line text-processing system, proceedings 
of the American Documentation Institute, 1967, 4, 144-147. 
Walker, D. E., Chapin, P, G., Gels, M. L., and Gross, L. N. Recent 
developments in the MITRE syntactic analysis procedure. MTP-11, 
The MITRE Corporation, June 1966. 
Woods, W. A. Procedural semantics for a question-answering machine. 
AFIPS Conference Proceedings: Fall Joint Computer Conference, 
1968, 33, 457-471. 
Zwicky, A. M., Friedman, J., Hall, B. C., and Walker, D. E. The MITRE 
syntactic analysis procedure for transformational grammars. 
AFIPS Conference Proceedings: Fall Joint Computer ConFerence, 
1965, 27, 317-326. 
