DISCOURSE REFEREFTS 
Lauri Karttunen 
Universl=y of Texas at Aust in 
Department of Linguistics 
Austin, Texas 78712 
Consider  an interoretive device that in some manner keeps track 
of indiv iduals  that have been mentioned iu a discourse and what has 
been said about them. One feature any such device must have is to he 
able to recognize wPen a novel individual aopears in so~e sentence. 
For examole, in Drocessin~ sentence (1), it N~st recognize that the 
NP a car refers to some yet unmentioned object, which in the fol lowing 
sentence may be referred to a~ain by any of tke alternative ways 
in (2). 
(a) It is black. 
(1) I have a car. (2) 
(b) .The car is black. 
However, the same noun phrase does not refer to any car in (3)o 
Consequently,  none of the al ternat ives in (4) is acceptable as a 
cont inuat ion of (3). 
(a) * I t  is black. 
(3) I don't have a car. (I~) u 
(b) *The car is black. 
The above examples show that sometimes the occurrence of an 
indef inite NP in the discourse establ ishes a 'discourse referent' 
- somethin~ that may'be referred back to by a pronoun or a definite 
noun phrase - and sometimes it does not. There are of course many 
other factors involved besldes negation. For example, (5) is ambiguous 
between two interpretat ions and only in one sense would it be accept- 
able to continue the discourse with (6). 
(5) Mary wants to marry a Swede. (6) H_ee is tall. 
Several  l inguists (e.g. LeRcy Baker, Janet Dean) have recently 
studied these constraints on coreferentlal l ty.  They have general ly 
invest igated the problem in the framework of Noam Chomsky's Aspects 
of the Theory of S.?ntax. It has been assumed that noun phrases are 
assoc iated with ' re~rent ia l  indices' and marked with respect to the 
feature \ [~sDec i f l c \ ] ,~hat  is relevant especial ly in the case of (5). 
In this paper I wi l l  argue that Chomsky's indices and the notion 
of soec i f ic i ty  are not adequate for han~l lng the problem of discourse 
referents and that we must adopt the more abstract analysis of noun 
phrases f i rst  put forth by Emmon Bach and James D. NcCawley. That is, 
noun phrases must be considered as having an under ly ing variable which 
is bound by a quant i f ier  s imi lar  to those in ordinary ~redlcate 
calculus. In this framework, it is a re lat ively sinple matter to 
descr ibe the c ircumstances under  which an indefinite NF establ ishes 
a d iscourse referent. - This happens in case the sentence bound by 
the ~uant l f ler  is asserted or presupposed to be true by the speaker. 
~owever, there are some special  cases that have to be recognized. 
These involve at least the following: (1) counterfactual  condit ional,  
(ii) modals,  and (iii) quant i f ler - l ike adverbs, such as always, 
often, etc. 
