Prepr in t  No. 5 Classi f icat ion:  D 1.2 
AN APPLICATION OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING TO THE 
RECONSTRUCTION OF A PROTO-LANGUAGE 
Stanton P. Durham and David Ellis Rogers 
University of Michigan 
l.Purpose. This paper illustrates the use of a computer 
program as a tool in linguistic research. The program 
under consideration produces a concordance on words ac- 
cording to phonological segments and environments. Pho- 
nological segments are defined as a predetermined aet of 
consonants and vowels. An environment is defined as the 
locus of occurrence of any of the phonological segments. 
The concordance facil itates the recognition of sound cor- 
respondances that lead to the reconstruction of a proto- 
language. 
2.0,Program Description. The program for production of 
the concordance was written in the SNOBOL4 programming 
language, which was selected because of its pattern match- 
1 ing capabilities. The summary Flow Chart of the program, 
found in ?7, should be adequate for the experienced rea- 
der. Nevertheless, a few general comments are in order. 
2.1.1nitlallzation. All patterns to be used in the pro- 
gram are created during the Initialization. As originally 
conceived, the program was composed of one long run where 
1For a full exposition of SNOBOL4, see Griswold, R.E., 
Page, J.F., and Polonsky, I.P., The SNOBOL4 Programming 
Lan_~.  Holmdel, New Jersey, Bell. 19~8. 
2 
all steps of the analysis were carried out. However, due 
to problems of internal storage caused by the numerous 
data, it was decided to run the program in two passes, 
each of which is explained below. 
2.2.Pass One. During the first pass of the program all 
cards of an item are read. An item is defined as the 
Classical Latin dictionary form, followed by the author's 
phonemicization of the Latin form according to the most 
conservative estimate of the maximal phonological system 
capable of giving rise to the various dialects of spoken 
Latin. These two elements are followed optionally by the 
modern ~eflexes in as many as eleven dialects from the 
area commonly subsumed under the heading Franco-Proven- 
cal. An optional comment concludes the item. 
As the items are read, determination is made of 
the largest size of each element for later column slign- 
ment in the print-out. Each item is then stored as a 
strlmE named after the sequential number assigned to the 
~tem, and the phonological form on which the concordance 
will be based is selected. The phonological form is then 
analyzed, ln order to retain the generic types and specific 
segment-environments occurring in that,phonological form, 
A generic type is defined as a consonant or vowel in a 
given environment, as for example, word-initial consonant 
3 
or tonic free vowel. A specific segment-environment is 
defined as one certain consonant or vowel in a given en- 
vironment, as for example, word-initial P or tonic free A. 
For each specific segment-environment found, a list is 
created composed of the numbers of the items containing 
that specific segment-envlronment. 
As all items are read and analyzed, errors in phono- 
logical form are outputted. After the analysis of all in- 
put items is completed, a generic type list is examined 
for a specific segment-environment. From the list named 
after that specific segment-environment the numbers of the 
items containing the specific segment-environment are ob- 
tained and the items are written onto tape in condensed 
form for accessing in Pass Two. 
2.3.Pass Two. During the second pass. the condensed lis- 
tings are accessed from the tape, along with the largest 
size of each element, and alignment of columns is made 
Just prior to printing for easier reading of the print-out. 
3.0.S~eclfication. The program is designed to list all 
words in a dialect (for example, Latin or a present-day 
dialect of Latin) containing a specific segment in a given 
environment. The order for the production of the lists is 
outlined in the following paragraphs. 
3 . 1 . ~  Consonants. All words containing single conson- 
4 
ants are listed according to two parameters: a predeter- 
mined order of those consonants and, within that parameter, 
according to the fol~owing environments: word-initial, ge- 
minate, syllable-initial, syllable-flnal, and word-flna~ 
position. A geminate consonant is defined as a long con- 
sonant, sometimes described as double, occurring across 
syllable boundaries. 
3.2.Ciu__ sters. A cluster is defined as the occurrence of 
two or more consonants in immediate succession in the same 
syllable. All words containing clusters of two consonants 
are l isted according to the parameters of ~3.1, but in re- 
verse order. This order of consonants is the same as the 
order used to list single consonants with the additional 
st ipulation that the value of the consonant In left-most 
position have precedence ever the one in rlght-most posi- 
tion, as in any dictionary order. 
Lists of words containing clusters of three or more 
consonants follow, according to the same parameters as 
those specified for two-consonant clusters. Where there 
are different numbers of consonants (three or more) in the 
clusters, the words are listed giving the highest value to 
the consonant in the n th position, followed by the conson- 
ant in the n ~ I th position (counting consonants from left 
to right), and according to the predetermined order of con- 
5 
sonants. For example, given the predetermined order KPWFS 
TDMNRBLJGQXZ, listings of words having the following clu- 
sters in word-inltial position would appear in this order: 
all words containing word-lnitial KLJ 
" ' . . . . .  KJ 
. . . . . . . .  STR 
" ' . . . . .  ST RJ 
. . . . . . . .  STJ 
" . . . . . . .  MJ. 
3.3.Sequences. A sequence is defined as the occurrence of 
two or more consonants in immediate succession across syl- 
lable boundaries, the syllable boundary always being indi- 
cated by a period. Words containing strong sequences, com- 
posed of a geminate consonant plus at least one additional 
consonant, are listed first, and the sequence is abbrevia- 
ted CI.CI Cn. The order of the listing is the same as that 
specified in ~3.1, except that there is only one environ- 
ment, "strong." For example, given the predetermined or- 
der KPWFSTDMNRBLJGQXZ, listings of words having the follow- 
ing strong sequences would appear in this orders K.KL, 
K.KJ, P.PJ, T.TJ, N.NTR, N.NTRJ. 
Following the words containing strong sequences, 
all other sequences are listed. The first words listed are 
those with two-consonant sequences! that is, sequences with 
only one consonant on either side of the syllable boundary, 
abbreviated C1.C 2. Then all words containing sequences 
of a single consonant followed by a syllable boundary, 
6 
by more than one consonant, abbreviated C1.C2Cn , fol lowed 
are listed! followed by words containing all other sequen- 
ces, abbreviated cnc.c(cn), where the parentheses indicate 
optlonality. In each of these listings the consonant or 
th syllable boundary in the n position has higher value 
than the consonant in the n v i th position (consonants 
being counted from left to right). For example~ if the 
fol lowing sequences were found, they would be listed in the 
fol lowing order: M.P, R.L, N.STJ, R.LJ, NT.T, NT.TJ. 
3.5.Vowels. Words containing vowe\]s are listed next, ac- 
cording to the fol lowing ordered parameters and subpara- 
meters: s t ress  (tonic, pre-tonlc, post-tonic), length 
(long, non-long), position (in free or checked syllable), 
and the predetermined order of vowels. For example, given 
the predetermined order ~EAOU, the listings would occur 
fn the fol lowing order: 
ail words containing long tonic free I 
, I  I !  I, I I  I~ f' E 
I I  I I  I I  Ig ~I f l  
I I  I I  Ig I I  I I  I I  
I I  ,e I I  I~ I I  I I  ~ f  
and so on, through the long tonic checked vowels, the non- 
long tonic free and checked vo~els, the long pre-tonlc free 
and checked vowels, the non-long pre-tonic free and checked 
vowels, etc., until all possible combinations of parame- 
ters have been listed. 
3.6.S~ecial Environments. Listed lastly are occurrences 
7 
of the so-called velar consonants /k g kw gw/ (symbolized 
in the program as K,G,Q,X) followed by a front vowel or 
/J/. These lists are called "special" and are printed as 
a separate portion of the print-out, because of the well- 
known phenomen of the palatalization of these Latin conson- 
ants plus a front vowel or /J/? 
3.7.Errors. Toward the end of the first pass, before the 
condensed listings are outputted onto the tape, certain 
errors are printed out. Errors may be errors in phonolo- 
gical form, as for example, use in the phonological form of 
a consonant symbol that has not been pre-defined, failure 
to punch a syllable boundary, or failure to punch length or 
stress symbols~ or the error may be the lack of occurrence 
of the phonological form for which the program is search- 
ing. 
3 .8 .A l i __~nt .  The second pass is almost entirely composed 
of the subroutine in which the elements of an Itam are 
aligned in columns in the listings on the basis of the num- 
ber of characters in the longest occurrence of that parti- 
cular element. 
4.0.1nstructions to User. A system of symbolization for 
vocalic and consonantal specific segments must be decided 
on. During the processing there must be only one computer 
character for each segment the computer will examine. If 
8 
it is necessary (because of the non-availabil lty of many 
customary linguistic symbols as characters in the computer 
alphabet) to encode the data with two symbols for one pho- 
nological segment, the program should have all the double 
symbols used and the corrseponding single computer symbols 
by which the program will process the data defined. Be- 
cause of peculiarit ies in the program it is also necessary 
to change any numbers, V, or C, that may be used as conson- 
antal or vocalic symbols in the phonological form to be 
concordanced on to some other unique computer symbol. For 
example, if theta a~d delta are encoded as TH and DH, and 
if the symbols C, V, and 5 are used in the input program 
and in the representation of a specific phonological seg- 
ment, then the fol lowing two statements should be inserted 
at the appropriate place in the program: 
EXT3 = 'TH DH C V ~ 
INT3 = 'a b c d e ' 
where a, ~b, c, d, and e are unique symbols belonging to the 
character set of the particular computer, and different 
from other symbols punched in the phonological form to be 
concordanced on. In the present program double symbols are 
freely used in the transcription of the dialect reflexes. 
I 
If a concordance is to be produced on the basis of one of 
the dialects, the above modifications must still apply. 
~.l.Restrictions. The present program is designed to con- 
9 
cordance on the second element of an item, the phonological 
representation of the spoken Latin form. To produce a con- 
cordance on a dialect, the phonological form to be concor- 
danced on must be redefined. 
A special environment may be searched for and listed 
separately by means of the insertatlon of a statement de- 
fining an appropriate pattern in the ~nitial ization of the 
program, and by the placement of a search for that pattern 
in the body of the program. If one is producing a concor- 
dance on a particular dialect, then special environments 
may be defined according to symbols used in that particu- 
lar dialect. 
4.2,Encoding of the Data. All cards will have information 
beginning in column one and may have information punched 
continuously through column seventy-five, Columns seventy- 
six through eighty may be unlque\]y sequentially numbered 
for each entry (column seventy-nlne having units position 
and column eighty being saved for insertions). A linguis- 
tic unit may be split between cards; in such cases no hy- 
phenation will be needed. That is, in all ~nstanees the 
information beginning in the first column of the second and 
subsequent cards of an entry will be abutted to the seven- 
ty-fifth column of the previous card. 
The first card of an item will begin in column one 
with the dictionary entry of the Latin word, with both 
I0 
vowel length and stress indicated, followed by two spaces. 
Indication of stress is redundant, stress being predictable 
in Classical Latin. However, stress is indicated in dic- 
tionary fashion, as an aid toward rapid recognition of the 
proper stress by the reader. Though the accusative singu- 
lar of Classical Latin nouns is the citation form, with 
few exceptions, for the first element, the final m has in 
all instances been omitted. Thus, where the noun nox is 
cited, it is spelled NO-CTE, rather than NO-CTEM, to save 
space, and because texts which cite spoken Latin nouns usu- 
ally cite such nouns without final 2. The asterisk is used 
to indicate an unattested Classical Latin form, in most in- 
stances taken from Wilhelm Meyer-Lubke's Romanishces Et Z- 
I, 
molo~isches Wortebuch, but in a few instances posited by 
the author. In all cases where words of Germanic or Celtic 
origin have been latinized in spelling, they are also pre- 
ceded by an asterisk. In Latin dictionary forms of more 
than one word, the words are separated by a plus, which is 
removedat  the end of the program. 
The second l inguistic information, the phonemiciza- 
tion of the spoken Latin word, is fol lowed by at least one 
space. The dialect entries follow, each composed of, 
first, the identifying abbreviation enclosed in parentheses 
and second, the reflex in that dialect, preceded by one 
space and fol lowed by at least one space. At least one 
11 
space is obligatory after each dialect entry, but more 
spaces facilitate correction of an erroneously punched 
form. An optional comment concludes the item; the abbre- 
viation for the co~Lment, (CON), must precede the comment 
and be followed by one space. When dialect identifying 
abbreviations are used in the comment, they must not be 
enclosed in parentheses, lest the computer mistake one of 
these abbreviations for the actual identifier. ~n end-of- 
item slash completes the item, and a single space is obli- 
gatory before the slash. 
5.Example. The examination of one item will suffice to 
illustrate the working of the program. Let us suppose the 
item currently under consideration by the computer is the 
Latin word alteru. The data cards containing this word and 
its reflexes w~11 have the followlng information: 
A-LTERU A-L.TRU (B) < :-.TRE (V) ?:-.TRO (O) 
A:-.TRO (A) O-TR (R) O-.TR@ (S)>: -TR  (P) 
O:-,TRU (N) A:-.TR> (COM) S IS PLU AND FINAL 
VOW OF R,P,N ALL SEMI-PRONOUNCED. B,V HAVE FEM 
<,-.TRA, >,-.TRA. / 000001 
where < stands for /~/I ?, /2%/I @, /8/~ and >, /D/. 
After the entire item has been read into computer 
memory, and determination has been made as to the size of 
each entry relative to the individual entries of all other 
12 
items, a search is made for the so-called "special" envir- 
onments, at Ci in the Flow Chart. None of these environ- 
ments are applicable in the case of alteru. Therefore, 
these searches will fail, and the next search will be for 
a word-lnit ial consonant or consonants, at C2 in the Flow 
Chart. In the case of alter~ this search, too, will fail, 
and the next search will be for a vowel, at A8 in the Flow 
Chart. A tonic vowel in a checked syllable will be found 
at A8.2 and A8.6, and in the subroutine Br tonic checked A 
will be queued to the string containing all tonlc checked 
vowels, and the item number will be queued to a string con- 
taining the numbers of all items having a tonic checked A. 
The next search will be for a consonant or consonants 
in all possible environments, beginning at  At0 in the Flow 
Char t .  Searches for a strong sequence or  a geminate con- 
~onant will fail. At Ai2 the search for a sequence will be 
successful, the  sequence found being L.TR. Once more, sub- 
routine B is entered, the sequence L.TR is queued to the 
string labeled "sequence C.CC" at BI.1, if this is the 
first occurrence of L.TR, and the item number is queued to 
the string containing the item numbers o f  all items having 
the sequence L.TR at B~2. Next, at A131 the syllable-final 
L, and at A14, the syllable-lnltial cluster TR, will be 
queued respectively to the strings containing syllable- 
final consonants and syllable-initial clhsters, and the 
13 
item number will be queued to the strings containing the 
numbers of all items having syllable-final L's in the one 
case, and to the string containing the item numbers of all 
items having syllable-initial TR in the other. 
The subsequent search for a post-tonic vowel will 
succeed at A8.3, and the vowel U in free syllable (in fact 
in word-final position) will, In subroutine B, be queued to 
the string of post-tonlc vowels in free syllables, the 
item number being queued to the string containing the item 
numbers of all items with post-tonic free U. At this point, 
return is made out of subroutine B to the beginning of the 
program for the reading of the next item. 
After all items have been read and operated on, the 
strings and their headings stored in computer memory are 
outputted in condensed form onto magnetic tape. The item 
alteru will be found under the following headings~ syl- 
lable-final L, syllable-initial TR, sequence L.TR, tonic 
checked A, and post-tonic free U. 
In Pass Two, the tape will be read, and the listings 
will be printed with the elements of each item aligned in 
columns. 
6?O?Li_~uistlc C0ncl~sions. During the course of recon- 
struction, one interesting question that arose was the 
following: do the so-called Franco-Provencal dialects 
14 
rea l ly  show f inal  (post-tonic)  vowels, as for example, in 
the above-ment ioned  Lat in  etymon, a l teru? With all items 
conta in ing  ref lexes of Lat in  post- tonic  free U in one con- 
ven ient  list, check ing the possible correspondances  is made 
much easier. Alteru, for  example, shows the fo l lowing cor- 
respondances  : 
d ia lect  B E 
" 0 0 
" P U 
" N > 
" H (unavai lable)  
" V 0 
" D (unavai lable)  
~' C it 
" A zero 
?? R @ 
" S zero, 
as do al l  examples of U after  a consonanta l  sequence. How- 
ever, for  most other examples of C lass ica l  Lat in post - tonic  
free U, al l  d ia lects  show zero. On the basis  of all exam- 
ples under  the heading "post-tonlc free U" one may conclude 
that there is a ref lex of Lat in  post - tonic  U in these dia- 
lects  as asuppor t  vowel  af ter  an otherwise unpronounceab le  
sequence. Furthermore,  this support  vowel keeps the qual i ty  
of its phonolog ica l  ancestor.  
Such quest ions  as this are capable  of much more ra- 
pid, if not surer, solution, by consu l ta t ion  of the l ist ings 
on the computer  print-out,  than s imply by means of the ex- 
aminat lon  of index cards, where examples might be skipped 
over. The number  of examples avai lab le  for  examinat ion  is 
15 
greatly increased as well. Since the data are so numerous 
wlth this method, very comprehensive analysis is required 
of the linguist. 
This program is general enough to be applicable in 
the compilation of a concordance for any group of related 
dialects for which such a concordance would be useful. For 
example, In a proposed reconstruction of Proto-Slavlc, pre- 
sent-day reflexes of a selected corpus could be encoded and 
the concordance produced on any one of the dialects selec- 
ted. 
The chief advantages of the use of the computer to 
produce such a concordance are the increased facil ity for 
the exhaustive handling of a large amount of data (as com- 
pared to the customary handling of data on index cards), 
and the avoidance of many time-consuming searches through 
many lists of forms for occurrences of a specific segment 
in a specific environment, since all such lists are rea- 
dily available on the prlnt-out. 
7.Flow Chart, 16 
~fr f~Mixt  J 
I / -h&~=S~ I 
IELwMmur l~'l 
I$ E L ~CT 
IFo~A4 ~'o 
ico.co~,~u 
? I 0'~ 
I~?~ sP~,~L~ 
I 
? 
I 
r s~r  VE,vV/A = "pRE. To a'/C. ) 
IS~r I ENv iR  - ,I 
17 
H SGr'~'o~r.ro~/c.'E'v'*'i'~ ="1 
I 
? ~L~rE ir I IV~TVVl~ 
kFRoM Fae,~, I I 
~g'.2 
~F_ t .Er ,  ff ,; T 
b~\ [ "  ENV) I~ ? 
S~r V~cv iR  = 
i T  
~f  T 
E~t'vf? = 
PR iNt  PRINT 
q 
1 
rnmm.  TO 
.a o ) 
V6 
r 
, ,  , /b )  
jQu.uu~ 1
.13 ~.ao)  
18 
19 
51~g?tF J  a" I 
5.?(r4f~NY AM~ I 
~ l .n l "  i r  I 
J, Ro~ FoR~ I 
\[S.r 
ENI,'/ R .~ 
\[ '6f.MiN~TE, ~ 
g 
(p~6-e /7) 
N'o 
J zA  
? E ,2o)  
SO~" jFi~. 
S E SA~EIV'r 
I SEr  EA/V/'R - -  
20 
sP~ci ~ic 
SE6-MB~ ~ql~ 
I $#r  =~:WViR *$Yi.L~gJ.?. 
~I.IFrE iT I 
IENVjR -" I 
(PAG?/7} 
NGMaMB~/~ 
SP~?I~IC  
EHViR = 
t wo l~p,  
p 
~-____.2 
CP.~&E ig} 
C P,~Ga tW') 
. i: ? ? 
21 
RouT"j~Z 
N'O 
ENViR  - 
P~ i F J  c - 
5 ~ ~-41~ Iv3 t" 
~t'S1" 
I-.,, 
,?oMa~ I"o. I 
k'~vi, v,..~,~cipl(.I 
~ J~r ,I 
