On the Use of  IAn6u is t i?  Quant i fy ing  0pera~ors  in  the 
Log ico-Semanttc  S t ruc ture  Representat ion  of  Ut te rances  
Irena Bellert 
Warsaw University 
I. Introduction 
By now i t  has become o lee~ to  most l insu is ts  that  sur face  
s t ruc tures  of  u t te rances  in  natura l  laD6uage are not  a su f -  
f i c ient  basis for the semantic interpretation, an~ that an 
abstTact ~eep structure representation has to be assumed in 
a lin6uistlc desc~Iption, whlch la supposed to correlate the 
surface strua~xre hierarchical representation of each utter- 
ance with its msaniDg (or meanings in case of homonimi~y)? 
Since the problem of what should be understood as the meanln6 
of an utterance is not clear, the question of how deep etTuc- 
tures should be represented remains open for linguists, even 
for those who have been known as adherents of the transforma- 
tional generative 5Tammar, where deep structures are deter- 
mined in terms of generalized phrase markers (or some other 
similar concepts which get modified in the course of work). 
The questions which arise in postulating deep structure 
representations are often due to the lack of a possible guide 
llne ?oncernin6 the division between the knowledge of l~a~e 
and knowled6e of the world, and thus between the information 
which should be included in a full description of a lan6ua~e 
a~ that which shoul~ or need not. The classical distinction 
between syntax, which concerns relations between lan~ua6e 
-2 -  
s igns ,  and semant ics ,  uh ich  co lumns  re la t ions  bergen  lan -  
~a6e s igns  and extra l iD6uis%- lc  "ob jec ts"  (o r  ext ra l i z~a is t -  
i c  re la t ions ) ,  has a l so  become b lur red  up by the fac t  of  in -  
t roduc inK in to  the l in~u is t i c  des~pt tem abst rac t  s t ruc -  
tu res  which are only ind i rec t ly  re la ted  to  the  sur face  s igns  
represent in~ the e lements  t2~at ac tua / ly  occur  in  u t te rances .  
However, even i f  we reckon the abst rac t  deep s t ruc ture  dee-  
c r ip~lons  as per ta in in6  to  syntact i ca l  re la t ions  - in  sp i te  
of cex~ain  a t tempts  tO the contreury 3 -  we w i l l  s t i l l  be le f t  
w i th  d i f f i cu l t ies  in  t ry ing  to  es tab l i sh  ~he scope of  semant- 
i c  re la t ions ,  that  i s ,  the re la t ions  between l ingu is t i c  s igns  
which occur in deep structure rep~esent~a~ions and extralln- 
Kuistio "objects" or relations. 
The difficulties whi=h arise in establiahln~ the scope of 
semant ics  are  before  a l l  due to  the  fac t  that  the  overhe l~n 6 
major i ty  Of u t te rances  conta in  s iKns mhich are  used in  re fe r -  
ence to  the  addresser ,  addressee ,  t~e t ime,  p lace  and s i tua -  
t ion  in  which a g iven  ut te rance  i s  produced2.  There fore ,  i f  
we wanted to  take s~tous ly  the requ izement  that  semant ic  re -  
la t ions  should cons is t  in  re la t~ S~DS wi th  extTa~st ic  
"ob jec ts" ,  such a task  would s~p ly  be unfeas ib le  fo r  a l in -  
~/s t  or  semant ic i s t ,  fo r  i t  i s  cleeur that  a~y two ident i ca l  
u t te rances  used a t  a d i f fe rent  t ime,  p lace ,  or  produced by a 
d i f fe rent  speaker ,  should be in te :pre ted  d i f fe rent ly  i f  they  
conta in  " token- re f lex ive"  s igns ,  ~ obv ious ly  they  are  re la t -  
ed to two d i f fe rent  ext r~st i c  s i tuat ions .  
-3- 
I t  i s  cer ta in~ much more reasonab le  to  fo l low a v iew he ld  
by  some ph i losophers ,  log ic ians  and l ingu is ts ,  wh ich  can  be  
br ie f ly  reca l led  by  means o f  a quotat ion  f rom Roman Jakobson:  
"the meanln~ of any linguistic sign is its translation into 
some further, alternative sign, especially a si@u "in mhich 
it is more fully developed" as Peirce, the deepest inquirer 
into the essence of signs, insistently stated "3. The gener- 
al i dea  i s  cer ta in ly  r ight ,  but  such  an  approach  leaves  much 
f reedom wi th  respect  to  var ious  poss ib le  ways of  p resent in~ 
" the  a l te rnat ive  s igns" .  Ne w i l l  not  d i scuss  here  the  d i f fe r -  
ent  p roposa ls  connected  w i th  such  an  approach  to  semant ics ,  
the i r  assets  and drawbacks ,  but  - accept ing  in  pr inc ip le  
the  thes is  that  a semant ic  model  fo r  natura l  language can  on-  
l y  be  es tab l i shed  by  means o f  "a l te rnat ive  s igns"  - we w i l l  
suggest one of the possible ways of descr ib i~ the semantic 
interpretation of utterances. 
Following a concept which has already a certain tradition 
in philosophy, semantics an~ logic ~, but has never been taken 
seriously by linguists, I will accept the view that the sem- 
antic interpretation c~ an utterance is the set of consequen- 
ces which can be derived from that utterance (or more strict- 
ly, from its deep structure description) on the basis of 
certain implicatienal rules that can be established for the 
given language. Accordingly, I attempt to search for such 
a description of deep structures for which it ,/ill be pos- 
sible to formulate the rules ~hich i call quasi implica- 
tions 5. In order to avoid confusion in using the term "deep 
s t ruc tures"  (which by now i s  employed in  d i f fe rent  senses ,  but  
should be reserved  fo r  t rans format iona l  deep s t ruc tures ,  fo r  
which i t  has been c lear ly  de f ined) ,  I w i l l  re fe r  to  the log i -  
co -semant ic  s t ruc ture  (LS s t ruc ture)  o f  u t te rances  6. 
The ident i f i ca t ion  of  the  semant ic  in terpreta t ion  of  an 
u t te rance  wi th  the  set  of  consequences or conc lus ions  which 
can be drawn on the grounds of that  u t te rance  i s  very  c lose  
to our in tu i t i ve  unders tand ing  of how we in terpret  u t te rances .  
To say that the addressee understands an utterancep only if he 
is able to draw all the conclusions implied by the given ut- 
terancep seems to be compatible with the ordinary th ink i~ and 
the estimation of a fully adequate understanding of an utter- 
ance. The fact that certain conclusions are based on prem- 
isses corresponding to the addressee's beliefs which belong 
to his knowledge of the world precisely reflects what has 
been mentioned earlier about the lack of a clearcut division 
between the knowledge of language and knowledge of the world. 
In fact such a division can only be arbitrarily established 
for a given description of language. For instance, in des- 
cribing a lexicon (or the rules of the lexicon in a theory 
of language), we have to make a decision as to Whether cer- 
tain information concerning a lexical item should be includ- 
ed in the lexicon~ or treated as encyclopaedic information, 
which pertains to such or other domain of science, speciali- 
zation, etc. The arbitrariness of this division ooncerns, 
l 
however, usually the boundary problems with respect to 
which such quest ions  a r i se ,  but  i t  does not  e f fec t  the  fac t  
-5- 
that in the majority of problems there is a general agreem- 
ent of lin6uists as to what syntactical and lexical inform- 
ation should be included in the linguistic description in 
some or other way. Once such a decision is made, and the in- 
formation is included in a lin6uistic description, we should 
be able to define clearly what consequences can be drawn on 
the basis of a given utterance and linguistic quasi iMplica- 
tions, and what ones require additional premisses which be- 
l on~ to  the  knowledge o f  the  wor ld .  
To g ive  an  example ,  we may say  that  a speaker  or  author  
uses  appropr ia te ly  7 the  u t terance  : 
(1 )  ~ ixon  has  le f t  the  Un i ted  States  
8 
only if his purported belief is that : 
(la) there is one and only "object" which is bein~ referred 
to bj him as "Nixon" 
(Ib) there is one and only "object" which is being referred 
to by him as "the United States" 
(1?) Nixon was in the United States before 
and if his purported claim is that : 
(1~)  N ixon i s  not  in  the  Un i ted  States  a t  that  t ime.  
The propos i t ions  ( la ,  lb ,  l c  and ld )  can  be  der ived  fo rmal -  
l y  from (I) on the basis of certain linguistic quasi i~pli- 
cations 9, and they be low,  among ethers, to the set of con- 
sequences which constitutes the interpretation of (I). On the 
other hand, the proposition 
(le) The President of the United States has left the United 
State s 
is a conclusion based on the premiss :"Nixon is the President 
Of the United States"~ which may belong to the speaker's and 
heater's knowledge of the wOrld, but if not included in the 
-6 -  
descr ip t ion  of  the  lex icon ,  i t  w i l l  not  be der ived  fo rmal -  
l y  as  a consequence .  
It is worth noting that the propositions (la, Ib, ic) 
concern the speaker's purported beliefs, whereas the pro- 
pOs i t ion  ( ld )  concerns  the  speaker ' s  purpor ted  c la im or 
assertion. The difference is significant, for if we con- 
vert (I) into a ~aestion, negation, wish, command, etc 
(Has Nixom left the United S~ates. E ~ixon has not left the 
Uni ted  States ,  I want Nixon to  leave  the  Un i ted  States ,  e tc )  
then the consequences pertaini~6 to the speaker's beliefs 
will remain the same, and it is only the consequence (Id) 
pertalnin6 to the speaker's assertion that will become 
oorrespomdln61y d/fferent. In general all the consequen- 
ces der ived  from an ut terance  can be accepted  on ly  as  a 
set  of  p ropos i t ions  which cor respond to  the  purpor ted  a t -  
t i tude  of the  speaker ,  n .~ as a set  of  p ropos i t ions  which 
ho ld  t rue .  The quest ion  of w~ether  such propos i t ions  are  
true or not is not a linguistic question, similarly as the 
problem of whether the "object" being referred to exists 
in reality or is to be assumed in the context of a novel 10 
In terms of the approach suggested here~ontological consld- 
erations have no beariD6 on the LS structure description 
of utterances, from which ~he same consequences can be 
d~awn~independently of whether the speaker is sayIn6 the 
l 
truth or lyin6, whether  he is re la t i~ his dream, tellln6 
a s tory  or  repcr t iDg  fac ts .  
In  th i s  paper  we w i l l  d i scuss  on ly  those  aspects  o f  the  
LS s t ructure  representat ion  which concern  cer ta in  l i z~ is t -  
- ? -  
i c  quant i fy iD~ operator2.  As in  genera l  we assume that  the  
LS s~ructure  could be represented  in  a language somehow an- 
a logous to that  of a modi f ied  pred icate  ca lcu lus ,  our aim 
in  the present  d i scuss ion  i s  to  suggest  a cer ta in  w~y of de f -  
in ing  the use of l ingu is t i c  quant i fy i~ ,  operators  which 
would be in  agreement with the in terpreta t ion  o f  u t te rances  
in  natura l  language ~ the present  paper i s  concerned with 
11 Eng l i sh  u t te rances  only.  
The problem of de f in ing  the use of  l ingu is t i c  quant i fy ing  
operators  in  the LS s t ruc ture  descr ip t ion  seems to  be one 
of  g reat  s ign i f i cance  fo r  the semant ic  in terpreta t ion  of 
the sur face  syntact i c  re la t ions ,  fo r  i t  appears that  i t  i s  
hard ly  poss ib le  to ass ign  an adequate semant ic  in terpreta -  
t ion  12 to an u t te rance ,  i f  i t s  LS s t ruc ture  i s  not  conce ived 
of in terms of at least one predlcate and its ars~ment (or 
arguments) prefixed by some linguistic quantl fyi~ operator. 
AD~thing we talk about~ that is~ any subject (or sub~ects) 
of predication, is either a particular "object", a particul- 
ar relation between "objects" of some sort, a particular si- 
tuatlon, event, stc~ or else it m~y be a certain number 13 of 
~'objects"p situations, etc which are such and such, or final- 
ly the subject of predication may be each "obJect"~ situation, 
ere, which is such and such. Generally speaki~, en utterance 
is analogous to a logical sentence or proposltion~ rather 
than to a propositional function with free variables~ and 
~hus the LS structure of an utterance may be best conceive~ 
as a fo~nula in which ~e make use of some sort of lin@~ulst~ 
Io quantlfyin~ operators. 
-8- 
The analogy with the language of predicate calculus is not 
very precise though, and - as we shall try to show - the lin- 
guistic quantifying operators must be defined differently than 
these defined in logic. In the first place, there is a great- 
er number of linguistic devices which function as quantifiers 
of some sort, and in the second place, even those devices which 
show an analogy with the operators used in logic have a slight- 
ly different semantic function and cannot be defined for our 
use in the same way as those defined in logic. In the pres- 
ent paper we shall discuss only two linguistic quantifying 
operators I@, one being analogous to the iota operator def- 
ined for the predicate calculus, the other one being analog- 
ous to the general quantifier. 
2- The linguistic iota operator 
The iota operator, as defined in logic 15  can he used in 
the expression (~x)~(x) ,on ly  if the propositional function 
is a unit function, that is, if it satisfies two con- 
ditions, one concerning the existence, the other the unique- 
ness of the "object" which is ~ . Such conditions ms2 be 
expressed formally as 
The express ion  (~x)~(x)  has the category of an argument 
(not of a statement), and may be interpreted as the English 
expression of the category of a nominal phrase, namely, :"that 
one and only ob jec t  which i s  ~ ".  
Now when comparing the express ions  in  Eng l i sh  which have 
-9- 
a similar semantic function as the un i t  function, namely, 
lingulstlc indices 16, it is immediately obvious that we 
are not in a position to prove that they satisfy the con- 
ditions of existence and uniqueness, on the contrary, it 
would be hard if not impossible to find a single lin6ulst~c 
i ndex  which ,  as  such,  would sat i s fy  such cond i t ions .  
~evertheless, it is an empirical fact quite evlden~ ~hat 
whenever  an addresser  uses  an u t te rance  conta in iDg  an in -  
dex  ~ in the normal ~ process of communicatlon, it 
is always in accordance with his purported belief that 
there is one and only "object" which is being referred to 
as ~ ? 
I n  cont rad is t inc t ion  to  a fo rmal  sys tem for  wh ich  we 
have  ~e def ine  the  ru les  and cond i t ions  of  cor rec t  use ,  
the  l ingu is t  works in  the  oppos i te  d i rec t ion .  For  we a l -  
rea~7 have a given system which we all use successfully 
fo r  the  purpose  of in tercommunAcat ion ,  and the  l ingu is t ' s  
or the semanticist's job is to detect the rules that make 
possible the achievement of mutual understandln 6 among 
~he competent  users  o f  the  g iven  language sys tem?  Thus 
in the first place we can analyse utterances only with 
the assumption that they are used appropriately - other- 
wise no consistent analysis would have been possible. 
The appropriate use of language, as defined for our pur- 
pOSeSD is nothing mere than a use which is consistent with 
~he rules of language and with the speaker's purported 
propositional attitudes. It would be thus unreasonable 
~o reject such an obvious assumption. 
- lO -  
We may t ry t then) to  es tab l i sh  quas i  imp l i ca t ions  ~ l i ch  w i l l  
he ld  t rue lTand thus  y ie ld  the  cor respond i~ consequences  fo r  
a l l  eases  o f  l in6u is t i c  use  in  the  process  of communicat ion .  
Accord in61y ,  we w i l l  show that  what  i s  de f ined  as  a cond i t ion  
of  cor rect  use  in  a fo rmal  sys tem,  w i l l  be  der ivab le  in  our  
oase  as  a consequence  o f  a g iven  ut terance .  
In  the  second p lace ,  we take  in to  account  the  fac t  that  
u t te rances  of  natura l  lan6uage are  never ,  so to  speak ,  hun6 
in  the  a i r ,  but  a re  a lways  in terpretab le  in  te rms of  what  we 
18 ca l l  the  propos i t iona l  a t t i tude  p or  moda l  f rame 19 when re fer -  
r iD6  to  i t s  exp l i c i t  representat ion .  For  no u t terance  used  
in  the  process  o f  communicat ion  can  be  fu l l y  in terpreted  
w i thout  our  unders tand iD6 i t  as  a propos i t ion  wh ich  expresses ,  
amoD6 other  th ings ,  the  speaker ' s  or  author ' s  p ropos i t iona l  
attitudes, which may be beliefs, assertions, doubts, requests 
( fo r  o ra l  o r  o ther  responses)  o r  any o ther  a t t i tudes .  
Accord in6  to  such  an  argumentat ion ,  the  propos i t ions  wh ich  
cor respond to  the  two cond i t ions  fo r  the  cor rect  use  of  a 
un i t  funct ion ,  (a )  and (b ) ,  w i l l  be accepted  in  our  case  as  
consequences  wh ich  be loD6 to  the  in terpretat ion  of  any ut ter -  
ance  ~ conta in in8  a l ingu is t i c  index  . Such propos i t ions  
cannot ,however ,  be  represented  as  ocour r in~ in  an  asser tor io  
modal frame, but in the modal frame :"The speaker believes 
that ... " (where the term "believe" is used in the sense of 
purported belief). The quasi implicational scheme on which 
such consequences are drawn is roughly speakin6 as follows: 
For any linguistic index ~ , the speaker uses appropriate- 
W ~ only if he believes that there is an "object" which ly 
- l l -  
i s  ~ , and  that  the  "ob jec t "  be ing  re fer red  to  as  ~ i s  
un i  que.  
S ince  the  consequent  o f  th i s  s ta tement  can  be  assumed to  
express  one o f  the  necessary  cond i t ions  fo r  the  antecedent  20,  
we ma~ cons ider  the  whole s ta tement  as  a quas i  iMp l i ca t i sn .  
Thus in  the  case  of  any  ut terance  which conta ins  a l in@uis t -  
accept  
i c  index ,  we may ~ a s ta tement  cor respon~ing  to  
the  antecedent  as  ho ld~ t rue  - by  v i r tue  of  our  genera l  
assumpt ion  of  appropr ia te  use  - end there fore  we can  a l -  
ways in fe r  the  cor respond ing  consequent  as  a consequence .  
We thus  preserve  the  un iqueness  of  the  purpor ted  "ob jec t "  
by  means of  inser t ing  in to  the  common (and  thus  in tersub Jee-  
t i re )  semant ic  in terpretat ion  of  ind ices  a parameter  wh ich  
i s r t token- re f lex iverPand wh ich  serves  i t s  purpose(a~ t ime an  
ut terance  i s  ac tua l ly  used~ in  re la t ing  s igns  to  ext ra l in -  
~st i c  "ob jec ts"  o r  re la t ions , throug~h the  ident i f i ca t ion  
o f  the  speaker ,  the  t ime,  p lace  and s i tuat ion  in  wh ich  ~he 
g iven  ut terance  i s  used .  Accord ing ly ; the  va lue  o f  the  argum-  
ent  - wh ich  in  the  case  under  d i scuss ion  i s  a l ingu is t i c  in -  
dex~ is understood in any particular case, without being 
possibly indicated in a general linguistic description. In 
refers 
other words~ the fact that the speaker ~ to  one 
am~ only "object"! each time he is using an imde~ belongs to 
the  semantic Interpretatlonpan~ is reflected in the  propose~ 
LS structure representation and the corresponding consequen- 
ces "which ere derivable from It, but the question of what 
"object" me~ actually be identified by means of such an ex- 
pression does not belong to the domain of lingaistics? 
- 12  - 
A~ such  "ob jec t "  m~y on ly  be  descr ibed  in  te rms of  l ingu is t -  
i c  express ions  - i t  may e i ther  be  po in ted  to  by  means  o f  
a name used  as  an  index ,  o r  descr ibed  in  te rms o f  the  lex -  
i ca l  i tems conta ined  in  the  de f in i te  descr ip t ion  used  as  an  
21 
index .  A l ingu is t  so lves  thus  the  prob lem of  how an  "ob-  
jec t "  i s  descr ibed  or  po in ted  to  in  o rder  to  be  ident i f ied ,  
and  he  ~ not  be  concerned  w i th  Iha___~t i t  i s .  
It thus appears that the  lin6uistic iota operator is a 
close analog to the iota operator as defined in logic, the 
d i f~erences  ly ing  in  our  t reat ing  the  cond i t ions  of  cor rect  
use  de f ined  in  log ic  as  the  consequences  of  the  ever -assumed 
appropriate use of utterances, and in our introducing the 
propositional attitudes into the LS structure description. 
As it will be argued below, the next linguistic quantifyin~ 
operator to be discussed in this paper, namely, the all-op- 
erator, will also be defined partly by analogy to the iota 
operator, for the reasons based on linguistic evidence. 
The all-operator 
In the preceding section we have discussed a certain type 
of ars~Ament prefixed by the iota operator. Such an argum- 
ent will be referred to as an argument of type I. Its ex- 
plicit exponent on the surface can only be a linguistic 
index, and its role is to indicate one and only "object" 
to which a given predicate applies. At present we will 
discuss another type of argument - which will be referred 
to as an argument of type 2 - whose role is to indicate all 
the "objects" to which a given predicate applies. The ex- 
plicit exponents on the surface of English utterances are 
usually nominal phrases preceded by "all", "every", "each". 
-13- 
However, i t  i s  not  a lways  the  case  that  such  nomina l  phrases  
are  to  be  in terpreted  as  a rguments  of  type  2 (cons ider  
phrases such as, for instance, "all the country", every sec- 
ond French man", "each time", etc). Let us now discuss the 
followln6 examples by means of which we will show the anal- 
ogy between arguments of type 1 and those of type 2. 
(2) John has awaken 
(3) JY father has awaken 
(4) Ky parents have awaEen 
(5) All the members of my family have awaken 
(6) All the inhabitants of this house have awaken 
(7) All the inhabitants of the moon have awaken 
Independently of other problems connected with the proper 
LS structure representation of utterances in which a pred i~ 
applies to each individual of a set determined by a given ~es- 
22 
cription, we have to admit that all the nominal phrases in 
our examples have a similar function ; they serve to identify 
either a single individual (utterances 2 and 2), or a certain 
number of individuals (utterances 4,5, 6 and 7), and thus 
serve to indicate the values of the argument used with the 
predicate "has awaken". Thus if we compare : 
(8) The boy standing in the doorway is tall 
with 
(9) All the boys standing in the ~oorw~7 are tall 
it seems clear that the difference between the t~ lies in 
that the nominal phrase in (8) serves to indicate or identify 
one indlvldual~ whereas the nominal phrase in (9) serves to in- 
dicate or identify a certain number of individuals, both n@~- 
inal phrases beinK used as "instructions" for identification, 
and as such correspond to the argument of the predicate "tall". 
Such "instructions " are used approprlatelyponly if the speak- 
er believes that there is a boy standing in the doorway (for 
8 ) and that  there  i s  more than one boy s tand in  6 in  the  door -  
way ( fo r  9) .  Consequent ly  by v i r tue  of  our Keneral  assmap- 
t ion  of appropr ia te  use,  i t  i s  poss ib le  to  in fe r  such pseudo-  
existential propositions in the model frame "The speaker be- 
lieves that ? ?.." 
One might object to this interpretation of all-statements 
and t ry ,  by ana logy  to log ica l  s ta tements  wi th a genera l  quan- 
t i f i e r ,  to  in terpret  them as imp l i ca t iona l  s ta tements  :For  a~ 
if x is ~ , then x is ~ . Under such an interpreta- xp 
t ion  the u t te rance  (9)  would be a paraphrase  of  -- 
(i0) If anythlng is a boy standing in the doorway it is tall 
If anybody is a boy stsnding in the doorway he is tall 
Anybody who is a boy standin6 in the doorway is tall 
Even if we ignore ~he awkwardness of utterances such as (i0), 
we cannot accept such utterances as paraphrases of (9) for 
reasons. First, (i0) could, then, equally well be taken as a 
paraphrase of (9) as that of (87, as there is no uention with 
respect to the plurality of the individuals being referred to. 
Thus (i0) could be accepted as one of the consequences from 
(9 ) ,  (and th i s  w i l l  be shown below to  be the case) ,  but  not  as 
an equivalent proposition. Second,, the speaker implies by (9) 
his purportecl belief that there are individuals who are boys 
standing in the doorw~7, whereas no such izplication bho lds  
for (10). To give a clearer example, if someone says 
(11) All the inhabitants of the moon must feel cold 
the heater's reaction might be expressed by ~'"~at are ~ou 
- 15 -  
ta lk lng  about. ~- There are no inhabitants on the moon." On the 
other hand, no such reaction would follow if someone says : 
(12) If anything is an inhabitant of the moon it must feel cold 
The response might then be : "Right you are, but fortunately 
there are no inhabitants on the moon". 
?nother  a rgument  suppor t in6  th i s  in terpretat ion  may be  prov id -  
ed  by  the  fo l low in6  tes t .  I f  we cons ider  the  u t terance :  
(13)  I doubt  whether  there  are  inhab i tants  on the  moon, but  
a l l  inhab i tants  o f  the  moon must  fee l  co ld  
it leaves the impression of a certain awkwardness, ~hich is a 
resu l t  o f  the  incons is tency  between the  expressed  doubt  and 
the  i~ l ied  be l ie f  concern ing  the  same propos i t ion .  On the  
o ther  hand,  the  u t terance  : 
(1~)  I doubt  whether  there  are  inhab i tants  on the  moon, but  i f  
anyth ing  i s  an  inhab i tant  oZ the  moon i t  must  fee l  co ld  
does  not  seem awkward, s ince  accord ing  to  our  a rgumentat ion  
implicational statements do not imply ext7 belief or assumption 
concernlng existence. Evidently there are different i~ l ioa -  
tional rules concerning the if.oothen-statements, and they 
depend on the tense used in the If-clauseo If we denote the 
if-clause by S~ the hea~er may infer, for instance~ that the 
speaker believes that S~ or believes that it is not the case 
that S~ or believes that it is probable that S~ etco 
In any case~ it seems clear for the reasons ~iven above 
that (I0) is not  a paraphrase of (9), nor (12) is a paraphrase 
of (11). In spite of the fact that implicational statements 
can be considered as truthfunctionally equivalent to the cor- 
responding all~statements (and this is the basis of the log~Ic- 
al equivalence)~ yet they cannot be represented by the same 
- 16 -  
LS  s t ructure ,  fo r  obv ious ly  the  la t te r  convey  add i t iona l  sem- 
ant ic  in fo rmat ion ,  that  i s ,  add i t iona l  consequences  can  be  in -  
fe r red  f rom them.  
A?cord in61y ,  ins tead  o f  mak ing  use  of  a genera l  quant i f ie r ,  
we w i l l  in t roduce  a quant i fy ing  operator  wh ich  we mal l  a l l -op -  
e ra tor .  The a l l -operator  i s  assumed to  be  an  argument - fo rming  
eperator ,  not  a s ta tement - fo rming  speratorp  as  in  the  case  o f  
a genera l  quant i f ie r  in  leg ic .  In  o ther  words ,  i t  i s  not  an  
operator  wh ich  makes  a s ta tement  when pre f ixed  to  a propos i -  
t iona l  fo rm,  but  one wh ich  makes an  argument  when pre f ixed  
to  a funct ion  represent ing  a nomina l  phrase  in  the  p lura l  
ro le  
form. It ~hus has the same ~ as the iota operator, which 
is used to make an expression of ~he category of an argument 23. 
We assume here that the all-operator belongs to a speclf- 
ic class of modifiers which we call ~ linguistic quantl- 
lying operators. Such operators will occur in the LS structure 
representation;always being prefixed to a variable x. 
A logical statement which is prefixed by a general quantifier 
with limited range ? 
is an abbreviation fo r  the i~l ieat ional  statement 
We will, however, use a different expression, provisionally 
denoted by (All x) ~ (x), which will not be interpreted as 
a statement equivalent to an impli'cati@nal statement, but 
- by analogy to the expression bound by the iota operator - 
it will be interpreted as an expression of the argument 
type : all the "objects" which are ~ . According to our 
i n te rpretat ion ,  the  cor respond ing  imp l i ca t iona l  s ta tement  
- 17  - 
will be accepted as one of the consequences which follow 
from a l l - s ta tements .  
By analogy to  the case of  the io ta  operator ,  we can 
here  a l so  es tab l i sh  a quasi  imp l i ca t ion  concern ing the 
use of  the a l l -operatorpon  the bas i s  of  ~he empi r i ca l l y  
g iven  cond i t ions  of  appropr ia te  use of a l l - s ta tements  
Consider the fo l low ing  propos i t iona l  schemes: 
(a) There is more than one "object" which is 
,or any "objeot-. if it i, . it is 
The two propos i t iona l  schemes correspond to propos i t ions  
which may be cons idered  only  in  terms of cer ta in  propos i -  
~ionsu% at t i tu?es  of the speaker  who i s  ut-ber iag an a l l -  
s ta tement .  We ma~ def ine  a genera l  quasi  impl icat ionsul  
scaeme whiCh, rough ly ,  w i l l  be as fo l lows :  
A speaker  uses  appropr ia te ly  an a l  ! s ta tementpon ly  i f  h i s  
purpoz~ed be l ie f  i s  that  there  i s  more than one "ob jec t "  
w~ich i s  ~ , and h i s  pu~or ted  c la im i s  that  any "ob-  
jec t "  which i s  ~ i s  ~ ? 
Now by our genera l  assumption that  we are concerned on ly  
wi th those u t te rances  which are appropr ia te ly  used, we can 
always der ive  a propos i t ion  cor respond ing  to (a)  as repre -  
sent ing  the  speaker ' s  be l ie f ,  and a propos i t ion  cor respond-  
tng to  (b)  as the speaker ' s  c la im or  asser t ion ,  and both 
belong to  the  set  of consequences of an a l l - s ta tement .  
The d i f fe rence  between the speaker ' s  p ropos i t iona l  a t t i -  
%-ude with z~spect to (a) and (b) is analogous ~hen ~e con- 
vert an all-sta~ement into a corresponding negation, question, 
\ 
~ ~8 m 
request ,  doubt ,  e tc ,  fo r  i t  w i l l  appear  that  the  propos i t ion  
~or respoD~l ing  to  (a )  in  t h e ~  f rame "The speaker  be l ieves  
that  . . . "  can  be  der ived  as  a consequence ,  whereas  the  propo-  
s i t ion  oor respond i~ to  (b ) la l thoug~a a lso  der ivab le  as  a con-  
sequence ,  w i l l  occur  in  each  ease  in  a d l f?erent  modal  f rame,  
~h ich  w i l l  express  cor respond ing ly  the  var ious  propos i t iona l  
a t t i tudes  o f  the  speaker  (The speaker  den ies  that  ? . . ,  q~ae 
speaker  wants  to  know i f  . ? . ,  e tc )  
For  ins tance ,  fo r  the  u t terance  wh ich  i s  a ~uest ion  : 
(17) ~e all the inhabitants of this house sick. ~ 
we have a set of consequences to which belong, among other 
propositions, the following two : 
(18) The speaker believes that there is more than one "object" 
whlch is an inhabitant of this house 
(19) The speaker wants to know if eu~ "object" which is an 
inllabitant of this house is sick. 
These aonsequsnces are obtained on the basis of a very ~ener- 
al quasi impllcational scheme conoerniD~ all-stateRents con- 
verted into this type of questions. 
In conclusion it may be ~r th  emphasizin~ that by intro- 
? uciDg propositional attitudes into the lin~Aistic desc~il>- 
tion,a~i by defining quasi i~plications in terms of proposi- 
tional attitudes, we are able to derive the correspondlng 
consequences not only from declarative sentences, but from 
all ~y~es of utterances. Thus the scope of our rules of in- 
l 
ference ~ is much wider than the scope of such rules 
in logic. Accordln~ly the identification of the semantic in~ 
terpretation of  an  utterance with the  set of its consequen- 
ces is possible for all types of utterances. 2~ 
- 19  - 
Footnotes  
1. See U. Wein~eich, Exp lora t ion  in  Semantic Theory, in  
Current  Trends in  L ingu is t i cs ,  Vol. 3, e4. T.A. Sebeok, 
Mouton, The Ha6ue, 1966, where the author  argues in  
favor  of an approach which makes no at tempt  "to fence 
off mutually exclusive domains for syntax and semantics" 
and thus he is against the assumption that semantics 
begins  where syntax ends.  Deep s t ruc tures  are con- 
ceived of by him in terms of both the syntactical and 
the semantic relations. 
2. Such signs have been widely discussed by logicians and 
llnguiets. They are referred to as token reflexive 
signs (by Hans Reichenbach), as egocentric particulars 
(by Bert rand Russe l l ) ,  and as sh i f te rs  (by Roman Jakob- 
son~. 
3- Roman Jakobson, On L ingu is t i c  Aspects of T rans la t ion ,  in  
On Translation, ed. R.A. Brower, Oxford University Press, 
New York, 1966, p. 232. 
@. See C.J. Lewis, The Models of HeaDing, Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, Vol. IV, No 2, 19~,  for his 
conoept of connotation or  intention, which bears an in- 
~an~l G. F rege '~ 
fluence of J.S. Uill~s ? ee a so R. Carnap, Em- 
piricimm, semantics and ontology, in Revue Internationale 
de Philosophie~ No @, 1950, where the author accepts the 
view that the set of consequences following from a sen- 
fence may be identified with the meaning of that sen- 
tence. Such an idea was also professed by H. Hi~ during 
his lectures on semantics (University of Pennsylvania, 
- 20  - 
? 1965). 
5- The conoept of quasi impl icat ions was Introduced in  my 
papers  : On a Cond i t ion  of %he Coherence of Texts ,  
paper  de l ivered  a t  the In ternat iona l  ~mposiue on 
Semiot i cs ,  Warsaw, Aueust, 1968 j On the Semantic  In -  
te rpreta t ion  of  Sub jec t -P red icate  Re la t ions  in  Sentences  
of  Par t i cu la r  Re ference ,  to  appea~ in  P rogress  in  L ln -  
~t i s t i cs ,  eds.  B ie~r l sch  and HeidolI~h, Mouton e t  Go., 
~he Hague ~ Ar~mente  and Pred icates  in  the  Log ico -  
8emanti@ St ructure  of Ut te rances ,  to  appear in Stud ies  
in  Syntax and Semant ics ,  ed.  F. K ie fe r ,  Foundat ions of 
Language Supplementamy Series, D. Reidel et Go., Dor- 
drecht-H elland. 
6. The term logico-semantic structure was used in my foa- 
mer papers (see footnote 5)- 
7- In 5eneral I say that a speaker uses appropriately an 
expression or an utterance, if he uses it consistently 
with the rules of languaKe an~ with hie purported be- 
liefs (see footnote 8, for the term "purported belief"). 
For a consistent semantic interpretation of utterances, 
we have to cons i4er  on ly  those u t te rances  which are 
used appropr ia te ly ,  as the  appropr ia te  use in  th i s  
sense of  the  term i s  noth in~ more than the assumpt ion 
~hat the speaker  knows the lan6uage he i s  us ing  and 
says only  what he in tends  to  gay  ( he makes a cor rec t  
use of  an u t te rance  accor~i~ 8 wi th  what he wants to  say) .  
8. From the point of view of the semantic interpretation, 
it is irrelevant whether the speaker in fact believes 
- 21  - 
o r  only pretends to believe that such and such is the 
case. I therefore use the term "purported belief", 
and ~nenever I use here the expression "The speaker 
believes that ..." it is only in this sense of the 
term. The same holds true of any other propositional 
attitudes. 
9- Linguistic quasi implications can be defined for the 
use of lexical items and for the use of certain struc- 
tures. In our example, the consequences (la) and (Ib) 
ere based on a quasi implication concerning the use 
jof linguistic indices (see Section 2, below), where- 
as the consequences (Ic) and (Id) are based on a quasi 
implication defined for the lexical item "to leave" 
(For more details, see the section on implicative 
terms in my paper On a Condition of the Coherence of 
Texts, op. cir.) 
10. The term "object" is used here also in the sense of 
"purported object", that is, for anything namable. 
Evidently the knowledge of the type of discourse 
(everyday, scientific~ literary, etc) may tell us 
whether the speaker or author believes that a given 
"object" exists in reality, or it is to be assumed 
as in a hypothetieal theory, or imagined as in a nov- 
el. But such n considerations have no bearing on 
our present discussion. 
11. In general, it seems that the concepts we are  discus- 
sing concern other languages as well. If in a given 
language there are no explicit exponents on the sur- 
face which would correspond to the interpretation 
we are assuming, for instance, for linguistic in- 
- 22  - 
d ices  used in English, the~e are probably some way to 
distinguish the utterances in terms of similar con- 
aepts, for it is hard to imagine how people could 
manage to communicate without maklr~ use of this rath- 
er general concept and others discussed here. 
12. By an adequate semantic interpretation I mean such 
an interpretation which is compatible with the lin- 
~alstic intuitions of coherent speakers, and testable 
a~ainst the practice of linguistic communication. Ex- 
amples of ? such semantic tests are given below (p.14,15), 
13. The number may be exactly specified by a numeral, or 
expressed in an indefinite way, for instance, by words 
such as "man~", "few", "the majority of", etc. 
14. See my paper, Arguments and Predicates...", op. clt. 
for a rough discussion of Other quantifying operators. 
15. The iota operator was first defined and used by Peano, 
then by Russell, Reichenbach, Mostowski and several 
other logicians. 
16. A lin~ulstio index was defined in my paper, On the Sem- 
antic Interpretation .. :, op. cir. Rou6hly, a liD6uist-- 
ic index is a personal pronoun, a proper name or a def- 
inite description (that is, a nominal phrase preceded 
by a definite determiner, used in an identifying role) 
17. In general the quasi implications which we define hold 
true by virtue of the empirically ~iven conditions. 
The truth of the consequent in our quasi ilpllcations 
always constitutes the necessary condition for the truth 
-2~- 
of the antecedent, and thus we may consider the mhole as 
a valid conditional (material implication). 
It may be interesting to compare the various approaches 
to the concept of"presupposltions" (as referred to in the 
literatu~re),which we describe here as consequences. (See 
G. Fre~e, Sinn und Bedeutung, Zeitschrift fur Philosophie 
und philosophische Kritik, 1892 ~ P.F. Strawson, On Refer- 
ring, ~ind, 1950; O. Ducrot, Los pr~supposSs, conditions 
d'emplo~ ou @l@ments de contenu, paper delivered at the In- 
ternational Symposium on Semiotics, Warsaw, 1968 ~ A. Wierz- 
bicka, 0 sp6jno~ci semantycznej tekst-u wielozdaniowego, 
paper delivered at the Conference on Semiotics, IBL, War- 
saw, 1968 ~ C.J. Fillmore, Types of Lexical Information, 
Working Papers in Linguistics, i~o 2, The Ohio State Univer- 
sity, november 1968~ ? In the present approach, presuppo- 
sitions are identified with those propositions which belong 
to the set of consequences following from a given utterance 
and are provided with the modal frame :"The speaker be- 
lieves that...': Such propositions belong accordingly to the 
semantic interpretation of a given utterance. This approach 
is close to that of O. Ducrot (Les presupposes..., op.cit.), 
who also treats such propositions as constituting part of 
the meaning of a given utterance, rather than as the requ- 
ired conditions of use9 or as propositions which are pre- 
supposed to be known by the hearer, etc. The difference 
beSween the two approaches (which have been developed in- 
dependently of each other) consists thus in my attempt to 
-24 -  
account  fo r  th i s  e lement of the man i~ of a Given ut -  
te rance  by scans  of  der iv in~ such propos i t ions  as con-  
sequences baaed on the cor responding quasi  i~ l i ca t ions  
defined for partlcule~ lexical items and particular 
structures. Such a treatment is consistent with the 
general proposal to identify ~he mean i~ ~ an utter~ 
ance with the set of its consequences. 
Fillmore, on the other hand, distinguishes between 
"the presupposltional aspect of the semantic structure 
of a predicate and the "meenln~" proper of the pred- 
icate". He identifies the presuppositions of a sen- 
tence as those conditions which must be satisfied be- 
fore the sentence can be used in an~ of its functions. 
Thus the sentence "Please open the door" according to 
Fillmore (Types of Lexlcal luformation, op. cit)"cen 
be used as a command only if the TL " (that is, the 
addressee) "is in a position to know what door has 
been mentioned a~l onl~ if that door is not at TLA" 
(that is, the time of producing the utterance) "open". 
According to my approach, such an utterance will be 
i n te rpreted  in  any case as a command, fo r  i t s  in ter -  
p re ta t ion  cannot be dependent on whether the above 
ment ioned cond i t ions  a re ,o r  are  notpsat ie f ied .  Sup- 
pose I hear  somebody r ing ing  the be l l  add I ask my 
s i s te r  P lease  open the door" .  I~ may happen that  the 
~oor i s  open a t  that  t~me, but  the s ta te  of the door 
( i t s  be i~ open or  c losed)  has no bea~i~ on the in -  
te rpreta t ion  of  th i s  u t te rance  - which in  any case 
10. 
19. 
20. 
- 25  - 
i s  intende& by the addresser, and interpreted by the 
addressee, as a command. Thus, as it appears from the 
evidence of fan .age use, it is only the addresser's 
purported belief :"The door is not open" which may 
be safely assumed with respect to the given utterance. 
The term "propositional attitude" is adopted from Ber- 
trand Russell, Inquiry into Meaning and Truth (Pen- 
guin Books, Baltimore-Maryland, 1962). 
The term "modal frame" has been coined by A. Wierzbicka 
(0 sp6jno~ci semantycznej..., op. cir, and her o~her 
papers). I use the term "propositional attitud~'when 
referring to the content oi" an utterance, and the term 
"modal frame", when referring to its explicit repres- 
entation (which in the present paper is only rendered 
i n  words ). 
This thesis is based on empirical evidence. If we 
seem to find apparent counterexamples, it always ap- 
pears that they are cases of linguistic misuse, and 
thus they do not falsify lu~ the quasi implication, 
in such oases the antecedent is false. We are con- 
cerned, of course, only with the normal use of utter- 
anoes in the process of communication, not with cases 
in which utterances are used as examples, when in- 
dices are not supposed to identify anything. 
There remains one more remark to be made in connection 
~ith our quasi implicational scheme. The copula "is" 
~aich is used in the consequent should be interpreted 
as, so to speak, tenseless, for its tense is dependent 
- 26  - 
the  tense of the verb in  the pred icate  which app l ies  
to the "ob jec t "  re fer red  to by ~ in  a g iven  ut ter  ~ 
a~lce .  
21. The definite description used as an index is best 
conceived of as an "instruction" for identlfieaticn. 
The linguist is thus concerned with what the "instruc- 
tion says, rather than with the problem of what a 
given "object" is. The "object" in our sense of the 
term mej be conceived of as just the value of the 
argument ? 
22. Notice incidentally that there is a differenae bet- 
ween utterances such as (4) and, for instance, "XY 
parents bought a house", where the desor lp~on "my 
parents" should be represented as a linguistic in- 
dex (argument of type I~ which has a unique value) 
by means of which we identify one and only neglect" 
(a couple of individuals as a ~hole ) to which the 
~iven predicate applies. The predicate is not used 
here distributively as in the case of (~), inhere it 
applies to each individual referred to by the des- 
cription "my parents". 
23. The expression (~ x )~(X)  is interprete~ as "that 
one and only object which is ~ ", add not as "there 
is one and only object which is V ". 
1 24. Finally, I wish to excuse myse f for a ratheE loose 
way I am using certain terms which are well defined 
in lo~ic (for instance, arE~,ment, value). I hope , 
\ 
- 27  - 
however, ~at  the reader will get from my rough 
presentation the underlying linguistic concepts 
which I a~temp~ed to submit for discussion. 
7 
