MONTE CARLO SIMULATION OF LANGUAGE CHANGE 
IN TIKOPIA & MAORI* 
by 
Sheldon Klein, Michael A. Kuppin 
& Kirby A. Meives 
Computer Sciences Department 
1210 W. Dayton Street 
University of Wisconsin 
Madison, Wisconsin 53706 
i. Introduction 
The use of Monte Carlo Simulation with micro socio- 
linguistic models permits testing of many hypotheses un- 
verifiable by any other known method. The methodology un- 
derlying the research described in th i spaper  in outlined, 
and, to some extent, justified in \[20-22\]. Basically, the 
technique requires a simulation model with the following 
subcomponents: 
a) A stochastic socio-demographic model of a speech 
community for the starting date of the simulation. 
This model governs the conversational interaction 
patterns among members. 
b) A metamodel of significant historical events and 
changes during the simulated time period for use 
in generating periodic revisions in the basic model 
mentioned above. 
Sponsored in part by the National Science Foundation 
and the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation. 
c) Individual  models  of members of the society in the 
form of dynamical ly  modi f iable inputs to the para- 
meters that serve as inputs to the rules of the 
basic model. The model of each individual also 
includes one or more grammars that may be f i l led 
with generat ive rules for several languages. 
d) A language learning component, both for chi ldren 
and adults. This module permits the generat ion and 
pars ing of sentences using rules from the grammars 
of speci f ied members of the simulation. The learn- 
ing component makes it possible for a chi ld born 
dur ing the s imulat ion to acquire the language or 
languages of his speech community through conver- 
sational interact ion with other members of the so- 
ciety, and permits an adult either to modi fy  one 
of his grammars in response to some contemporary 
l inguist ic  innovation, or to acquire a new lan- 
guage with rules stored in a separate list. The 
learning component to be used in the system is a 
great ly  improved vers ion of the AUTOLING system 
\[22 ,23 \]- 
? .t 
A pre l iminary test ing of the s lmulat lon method was success- 
ful ly carr ied out using a hypothet ica l  speech community con- 
ta in ing 15 adults and 5 children. \[ 21 \] The behavioral  
model  was extremely simple, as were the grammars (l imited 
to a tiny subset of English). The learning model was also 
simplistic, involving the actual borrowing of full-fledged 
rules rather than their synthesis from fundamental analytic 
heuristics. The goal of this test, to attain linguistic 
and social stability through several generations, was at- 
tained. It was important because it demonstrated control 
of the model as a preliminary to innovations that might 
introduce linguistic or social change. (The particular 
simulation used a different kind of phrase structure rule 
notation than we currently use.) 
Now our research is directed toward the testing of the 
methodology through simulation of language change in a real 
speech community, in sufficient depth and detail that the 
predictions of the simulation will be subject to emprical 
verification. In our preliminary search for a suitable test 
/ 
case we first selected the speech community on the island 
of Tikopia in the South Pacific. This community seemed 
ideal because of the existence of excellent functional 
ethnological studies by Raymond Firth that took place in 
1928-29, 1951 and 1962 \[ 7-11 \], and because Tikopia was 
virtually untouched by World War II. Both the pertinent 
detail of Firth's studies and the relatively restricted and 
documented foreign contacts during this period seemed ideal 
for our work, and we put some effort into desig~ling a simu- 
lation system that could handle Tikopian Society and yet 
4 
have a basic general ity.  Unfortunately,  F irth was unable 
to supply us with his l inguist ic f ield notes for T ikopia 
( l i tt le else of a suitable nature exists%. 
We then dec ided to switch to a s imulat ion of language 
change among the Maor i  of New Zealand. The documentat ion 
for this group is voluminous and covers several centuries. 
Of part icu lar  value is the existence of census data on the 
Mar io  dat ing back to the nineteenth century. The time 
scale and detai l  level of the Maori  model  must  
be of a coarser sort than for T ikopia because of computer 
t ime and space demands, for it must  account for a popula- 
t ion 40 to 90 t imes greater  than that of T ikopia over a 
t ime per iod of perhaps 150 years. However, we found that 
the des ign of our s imulat ion system needed l itt le or no 
modi f i cat ion  for the Maori. 
We expl icate the representat ion of both soci~l inguist ic  
s i tuat ions in Sect ion 3 to provide the reader with insight 
into the methodology.  
2. Language Learning Component  
The language learning logic of the AUTOLING System wil l  
furn ish the basis for the learning component of the simula- 
t ion system. AUTOLING is an automated l inguist ic  f ield- 
worker  capable of learning generat ive grammars through tele- 
type interact ion with a live human informant. The program 
5 
is operational on the Burroughs 5500 computer*, and has 
been successful ly tested on selected problems in English, 
Latin, Roglai, Indonesian, Thai and German. The discovery 
methods are heurist ic rather than algorithmic, and the 
system is under continued modif ication. One subcomponent 
is capable of learning context free phrase structure rules 
in response to informant inputs consist ing of sentences 
segmented into morphemes. An attempt is made to parse each 
informant input sentence on the basis of the current tenta- 
tive grammar. If the rules are adequate, the program prints 
the fact in a teletype message. If no~ it posits rules 
that might enable the parsing process to be completed. 
These rules, and their more general ramif icat ions for the 
grammar as a whole, are tested via productions offered to 
the informant for acceptabi l i ty verif ication. Rejected 
sentences cause the newly posited rules to be discarded. 
Acceptance of false rules through incomplete testing can 
occur. At the present time, the program tests for such a 
possibi l i ty by attempting to parse various known il legal 
sentences. The most recent ly recorded ones are tested every 
time a new rule is coined. All i l legal sentences are tested at 
periodic intervals. If the bad rules were coined too far in the 
Prel iminary programming is in ALGOL for the Burroughs 
5500 computer, eventual ly the program will  be shifted to 
the compatible Burroughs 6500. 
6 
past for correction, the program throws out its entire gram- 
mar, and reanalyses the entire corpus, using the i l legal 
sentence responsib le for the s i tuat ion as one of the key 
controls  on the new grammar. A later vers ion of AUTOLING 
wil l  make a stronger attempt to determine the specif ic cul- 
prit  rules, and take correct ive act ion in form of trans- 
formations or s imple context-sens i t ive phrase structure 
rules. In fact, eventual ly, the system wil l  learn a trans- 
formational  grammar consist ing of unordered phrase structure 
rules plus obl igatory transformat ions that operate whenever 
condit ions permit  dur ing the generat ion process. Also, a 
morpho logy learning component wi l l  be integrated int O the 
system. 
For the s imulat ion system, the human informant is re- 
p laced by another grammar associated with another member 
o~ the community. Whi le the system wil l  contain only one 
learning program with its associated parsing and generat ion 
routines, each grammar associated with each member of the 
community  might~on various occasions, serve as the grammar 
in which learning takes place, or as the grammar used to 
accept or reject the product ions of an 'embryonic ' grammar. 
Learning feedback in an adult -adult  conversat ion wi l l  not 
occur as often as in a chi ld-adult  context.  The exact 
c i rcumstances under which an indiv idual 's  grammar learns 
or teaches are determined by the soc io-demographic  model. 
Special features that must be added t~ or modif ied in 
the AUTOLING system include the following: 
a. Mult i l in~ual Dictionary: For Tikopia, a list of 
Tikopian, English and Melanesian Pidgin morpheme equivalents. 
Any individual audit ing new lexical items wil l  add a list 
l ink in his grammar (which references terminal e~lements 
only indirectly) to the appropriate entries. Links to 
corresponding morphemes (if any exist) in other languages 
wil l  be entered only if the person has actually been exposed 
to the form in conversation. 
For special ized vocabulary, the entries will also con- 
tain markers of the context in which the item is to be used. 
b. Sentence Generator: Both the Generator and the Parser 
use the same grammars. The generator selects non-terminal 
rewrite rules according to relative frequency parameters 
that are modif ied during the parsing process. Terminal 
elements are referred to by links to the dictionary. Some 
terminals are selected on the basis of the generation con- 
text, i.e., special ized vocabulary referring to items of 
material  culture. Under some conditions, a terminal 's 
translat ion equivalent in another language may be chosen. 
In the special ized case of normative learning, e.g., in 
a chi ld-parent relationship, the generator will test newly 
formed rules by pert inent test productions offered to the 
normative teacher for acceptance or rejection. 
c. Parser: The parsing component may modify the fre- 
quency parameters  pert inent to the generat ion process as a 
funct ion of a part icu lar  rule's use in recent parsings. 
3. Model l ing T ikop ia  and Maori  
Some genera l i ty  in the system design would be necessary 
even if one intended to model  only one society. In parti-  
cular, the rules governing the interact ion of members of 
%he populat ion would undoubtedly  be subject to frequent 
rev is ion dur ing the course of research as it might  become 
apparent that some var iables model led were not pert inent, 
ana that ommitted ones were signif icant.  A ful ly general  
system, capable of model l ing  any society, must  contain, 
impl ic it ly,  a universal  theory of soc io- l inguist ic  behavior. 
A basic assumpt ion of our system is that an indiv idual 's  
group membersh ips  const i tute the major  determinants of his 
conversat ion  behavior. Therefore it is essential  that the 
system provide an ef f ic ient  means of descr ibing an individ- 
ual 's age, sex, pol it ical ,  kin, work and social group member-  
ships as well  as data of a purely geographic nature. 
Speci f ical ly ,  for Tikopia, it seemed that age, sex, 
vi l lage, clan, rel igion, household, mar i ta l  state, work 
groups, and social status were the key var iables governing 
conversat ional  interact ion . We planned to s imulate 
a thirty or th i r ty- f ive year t ime span in a model  contain-  
ing a populat ion sample of about 120-165 people d istr ibuted 
9 
among three villages, representing about 1300 to 1800 people 
distr ibuted among approximately 25 vil lages. 
The decision to construct the model with a few vi l lages 
containing a large fraction of their real-world populat ion 
(as opposed to more vi l lages with fewer modeled people per 
village) was made on the basis of material  contained in 
Firth \[ 7-11 \] indicating the vi l lage as the 
largest pertinent unit for our purposes. The decision to 
model three vi l lages was based on the recognit ion of the 
subordinate, but real pert inence of inter-vi l lage relations. 
The problem of representing a complete mult i -generat ion 
kinship structure for each individual also set a lower bound 
on the number of people per village. 
The actual method of crea}ing an initial populat ion 
state is rather complex, and is descr ibed in Section 4. 
The researcher attempting to model Maori society is 
faced with the problem of f inding pert inent data in a vast 
l i terature of essential ly non-pert inent material. Fortu- 
nately, off icial government census information, dating back 
to the mid-ninteenth century, provide valuable demographic 
data. 
The populat ion size demands a dif ferent kind of sampling 
than in the Tikopia model. The population ranged from 
56,000 in 1857-8 to 167,000 in 1961. A study of the litera- 
ture suggestS that the Maori -Engl ish l inguistic acculturat ion 
i0 
phenomena might best be modelled in the following way: 
a. Population: Sample size ranging from i00 to 300 
Maori plus English speakers. 
b. Geographical Distribution: Two communities remote 
from white contact, plus the graduate creation of 
a city population group, and a group in an inter- 
mediate location. 
c. Key Social Variables: Tribe, hap~ or tribal sub- 
group, social class (aristocrat or commoner~ age group 
(child, young unmarried, young married to middle aged, 
elder) l ineag~ work groups or occupat io~ and relig- 
ion. The hap~, rather than the immediate family, 
appears to be the minimal significant social unit 
of organization for the goals of our simulation. 
In the case of city dwelling Maori, residence in 
the same city constitutes another group membership. 
d. Meta-model of Historical Change: Gradually in- 
creasing contact with English speakers, wars, grad- 
ual migrations to urban areas. 
4. Systgm Organization and Construction of the Data Base 
The learning program, as it stands, demands an inter- 
action between a live informant and teletype outputted 
questions. It is necessary, for the purpose of reducing 
the enormous computer time required for the successful 
ii 
s imulat ion of change in l inguist ic patterns, to be able to 
break the current program into two parts -- one part that 
can read sentences input to it without asking for immediate 
help, and another which wil l  generate sentences randomly, 
based on the rules that were formulated during the input 
stage. 
The port ion of the program that is responsible for the 
generat ion of random sentences wil l  also determine the con- 
text in which the sentence was spoken. Context is deter- 
mined by def ining the subclass of persons who would be 
l istening to this sentence, and placing an indicator of this 
subclass in the fi le of sentences which are generated. The 
sentences wil l  be placed in a file, that wil l  later be 
passed against all individuals in the sample in order that 
part icular aquaintances are able to "hear" what was said-- 
at the same time creating rules which shall be used in the 
next generat ion pass. 
At major  points in the process, events take place that 
need not be thought of during the normal cycl ic activity. 
These involve the life and death routines, marr iage cere- 
monies, arr ival-departures,  and recreation of the aquain- 
tance lists that descr ibe who is l istened to. Because of 
the one-to-many character of speeches, it is possible to 
keep the aquaintance lists to a manageable size by l ist ing 
only those persons whom one l istens to, and not those who 
12 
are spoken to. 
Before we examine the conversat ion process further let 
us d iscuss the general  problem of creat ing a sample for 
data that is avai lable only in aggregate form. 
4.1 Sample Generat ion 
For many groups to be studied by the process descr ibed 
in this paper, samples do not exist. If any information 
exists at al l  about these groups it is often in the form 
of c ross - tabu lat ion  tables publ ished as an indicat ion of 
census patterns, and is usual ly  not g iven in its raw form. 
*The problem of creat ing a k inship structure is not of 
this uype. In the case of T ikopia it is essent ia l  to keep 
urack of kin re lat ions wi th  contemporar ies  that may owe 
unelr or ig in  to l inks with common ancesters, perhaps 2 or 
3 qenerat ions  removed, who may be deceased at the start of 
the slmulation. The best  automated method we could devise 
involves running an accelerated,  prefatory, part ia l  simu- 
ia=Ion of the society beginning several generat ions before 
nhe of f ic ia l  start date. The only aspects model led would 
he those governing birth and death, residence change and 
marr lage rules. Init ial ly,  al l  indiv iduals would be assumed 
zc De unrelated, and marr iage would take place with rela- 
t lve freedom. As the prefatory  s imulat ion progreSSes through 
success ive generat ions,  kin t ies are createdjand the free 
choice of spouses disappears.  By the time the pres imulat ion 
is completed,  the or ig inal  start ing populat lon is aeao, and 
each member  of the main s imulat ion populat ion has a complete 
and cons istent  set of k insh ip  relations. The level of de- 
zail in the  Maori  s i tuat ion does no~ demand this micro-  
computat ion of k inship (see Sect ion 3). 
13 
To model groups of people where it is impossible to col lect 
raw data because of expense, time, or other compl icat ions 
such as the passage of time rendering the sample change 
(historical groups), it is often necessary to create a 
sample of people art i f ic ial ly.  Since any such attempt wil l  
result in an incorrect sample, it is important to real ize 
this beforehand and be on guard when viewing the results 
of the study against arr iving at conclusions which are in- 
valid. We can, however, obtain results that have some 
val id i ty by restr ict ing our discussion to those character-  
istics of the sample that we are able to insert into our 
sample creation process by the heurist ic methods descr ibed 
below. We real ize that heurist ic processes are just that-- 
there is no real guarantee of success in creating a sample 
which is total ly accurate. But by prefacing theresu l t s  
of our study with this disclaimer, and restr ict ing our 
stated conclusions to those populat ion character ist ics 
which we know to be true, useful research can be expected. 
We can i l lustrate the sample creation best by an immediate 
example. 
Suppose we are interested in the study of l inguist ic 
patterns as they are formed with respect to three var iables--  
age, sex, and marital  status. It is necessary f irst to des- 
cribe the catagories that are important to us for 
each of the variables in the model. 
14 
If we posit that age does not inf luence l inguist ic patterns 
except in major  catagories, we can break the ages into the 
three groups Young, Adult, and Elder. 
Since the other two var iables Sex and Mar i ta l  Status 
have well  def ined groupings (Male, Female; Married, Un- 
marr ied),  we can def ine our task with the fol lowing table: 
Mar i ta l  Percent of 
Age Se___xx Status 
Young Male Marr ied  
Adult  Male Marr ied 
Elder Male Marr ied 
Young Female Marr ied 
Adult  Female Marr ied 
Elder Female Marr ied 
Young Male Unmarr ied 
Adult  Male Unmarr ied 
Elder Male Unmarr ied 
Young Female Unmarr ied 
Adult  Female Unmarr ied 
Elder Female Unmarr ied 
Populat ion 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
? 
Def in ing a populat ion ar t i f i c ia l ly  for the requirements 
of the s imulat ion process involves the accurate choice of 
percentages of the total  populat ion for each of the above 
permuted catagories of variables.  This can be done in many 
ways. 
15 
i. By hand. The above percentages may be chosen by 
the researcher after careful reading of documents descri -  
bing populat ion characterist ics.  
2. By computer algorithm. There are often publ ished 
stat ist ics on populat ions that can be used to create appro- 
pr iate percentages. Cross-tabulat ion tables are the most 
fruitful  in this attempt, as they often contain all of the 
necessary information within them. If they do not, other 
populat ion statist ics such as correlat ion matr ices may be 
used ~.g., lacking a publ ished table displaying the rela- 
t ionship between Age and Income, a correlat ion coeff ic ient  
of .46 is useful). Since some of the information may be 
either contradictory or of d isproport ionate value, it is 
necessary that a decis ion be made on the actual ~istr ibut ion 
characterist ics.  If tables are avai lable showing the rela- 
t ionships, they should be used. But if tables are not avail-  
able, or if the only avai lable information about a part icular  
re lat ionship is in the form of another statistic, the prefer- 
able thing to do is to create the table by hand, based on 
research of the textaal  material.  
For example, assume that we wish to bui ld a fi le of per- 
sons as ment lon~d earlier. In reviewing the publ ished tables, 
however, we cannot f ind a table relat ing Ag4~and Marital  
S ta tus .  We do find, on the other hand, that the correlat ion 
between Age and Marital  Status is given as .43. Using this 
16 
information, together with research of the text, it may be 
possible to generate a table of the fol lowing form: 
Marr ied Unmarr ied 
Young 2% 28% 
Adult  46% 16% 
Elder 3% 5% 
If we make no use of the knowledge of the corre lat ion 
coef f ic ient  of .43 between Age and Marital  Status, we may 
generate a sample that has serious faults. Not making 
use of it in this case would be similar to creat ing a table 
of the form: 
Marr ied Unmarr ied 
Young 15% 15% 
Adult  32% 30% 
Elder 4% 4% 
(approximate corre lat ion coeff ic ient  r = 0) 
This table is c lear ly  incorrect, Mar i ta l  Status should 
l 
not be d istr ibuted evenly with respect to age. 
If a process of random select ion over the specif ied 
probabi l i ty  d istr ibut ions (the relat ive frequency tables) 
is used to create the persons in our sample, it should be 
17 
possible to run a cross-tabulat ion on this data with the 
result  being that we can reproduce the tables that we 
started with to create that data. 
After  the process of sample creat ion is finished, we 
may produce a table of the form: 
Percent of 
Marita l  Populat ion 
Age Se___xx Status (rounded) 
Young Male Marr ied 0% 
Adult  Male Marr ied 22% 
Elder Male Marr ied 2% 
Young Female Marr ied 2% 
Adult Female Marr ied 24% 
Elder Female Marr ied 1% 
Young Male Unmarr ied 13% 
Adult Male Unmarr ied 9% 
Elder Male Unmarr ied 2% 
Young Female Unmarr ied 15% 
Adult  Female Unmarr ied 7% 
Elder Female Unmarr ied 3% 
This table would imply the use, in part, of the marginal  
relat ive distr ibutions: 
18 
~ le  48% 
Female 52% 
Young 30% 
Adult  62% 
Elder 8% 
Marr ied  51% 
Unmarr ied 59% 
It can be seen that s ince there are few (the number is 
rounded to 0%) young marr ied  males, more information was 
used to arr ive at these values than merely  the use of the 
margina l  d istr ibut ions.  Their  use alone would imply that 
1 there should be approx imate ly  6~ % young marr ied males. 
4.2 Aqua intance Lists. 
To model  the l inguist ic  patterns as they occur in the 
real world, it is necessary  to account in some way for appro- 
pr iate d isseminat ion  of  informat ion by insist ing that each 
person speak for the most  part  wi th the same persons he 
spoke to in the past. This is a tedious process if done 
dynamica l ly  at the t ime the conversat ions are to take place 
in the computer simulation, we can show that it is par- 
s imonious to create an "acquaintance list" of those persons 
who are in frequent contact  with each individual,  and to change 
t 
this acquaintance l ist at more infrequent intervals. The 
acquaintance l ists may be updated together with other major  
act ions,  such as the b i r th and death routines, arr ivals  and 
departures,  and the occurance of natural  phenomena such as 
seasonal  change. 
19 
We may bui ld the acquaintance list by a technique close- 
ly approximat ing that which occurs natural ly by the "best 
fit" method in which two persons are said to be "acquain- 
tances" if they have various attr ibutes in common -- they 
may live near each other, work together, or belong to the 
same social group. If many attr ibutes are in common, then, 
these people wil l  be very l ikely to be forced to speak to 
one another whether or not they might be c lass i f ied correct-  
ly as "friends". 
More formally, we may def ine a person's attr ibutes by 
his posit ion in the sample space. For a sample of n 
variables, a person can be def ined by t:he n - tup le  (?I,V2,..., 
Vn). By a simple calculus, we can map this point from the 
integer n-space into the boolean m-space, where m is 
greater than or equal to n , and each var iable now has the 
value 1 if the persons can be character ized by the truth 
of this attribute, and 0 otherwise. For example, the 
var iable Ag~ in our example abov~ would be changed from one 
variable with three values to three var iables with two 
values each. From Age: l=Young, 2=Adult, 3=Elder, we 
would construct Young in Age: l=True, 0=False; Adult  in 
Age: l=True, 0=False; Elder in Age: l=True, 0=False. 
A person in our sample can now be character ized by the 
b~olean m-tuple (BI,B2,...,Bm). In order to determine which 
attr ibutes that two persons have in common, it is necessary 
20 
to ADD (mult iply) these  to boo lean  vectors  together .  The 
resu l tant  vector  has l 's in the pos i t ions  where  the two 
persons  or ig iona l ly  both  had had l's, and no p lace  e lse  
are there  l's. 
To account  for the d i spropor t ionate  impor t  of the fact  
that  two a t t r ibutes  are  in common,  and in some ins tances  
to cor rect  for the fact  that  persons  may be more  l ike ly  to 
be acqua in tances  if they do not  have two par t i cu la r  a t t r i -  
butes  in common (e.g., Sex),  the resu l tant  vector  is mu l t i -  
p l ied  by a th i rd  Weight  vector  W . 
The  Resu l tant  vector  is summed to a scalar ,  and th is  
number  is compared  to an externa l ly  spec i f ied  "hit" va lue  
"H" to determine  whether  these  two persons  are sa id  to be 
"acqua in tances" .  Example :  
= ( l ,0 ,0 ,1 ,0 ,1 ,1 ,0 ,1 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,1 ,0 ,1 ,1 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,1 ,1 )  
= (0 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,1 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,1 ,1 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,1 ,0 ,1 )  
A--B = (0 ,0 ,0 , i ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0~0,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 , i ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 , i )  
= (4 ,4 ,5 ,4 ,5 ,4 ,4 ,4 , -5 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,1 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 )  
R=ABW = (0 ,0 ,0 ,4 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,4 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,4 )  
m 
X = ~ R i=12 
i=l 
H = 35 
In th is  case  we see that  s ince  the va lue  of our  ca lcu -  
la t ion  X does  not  exceed or equa l  the hi t  va lue  H , we 
re jec t  these two persons  as be ing  acqua in tances .  Th is  re-  
21 
jec t ion  can be eas i ly  changed into a more  dynamic  techn ique  
by the use of  more  soph is t i ca ted  s tochast i c  methods ,  such 
as the re jec t ion  be ing cond i t ions  on a random number  ex-  
ceed ing  the d i f fe rence  between the numbers  X and H . 
Fur ther  se lec t ion  is necessary  to determine  one-s ided  re-  
la t ionsh ips .  It may be poss ib le  that  A is an acqua in tance  
of B (B l i s tens to A) but  B is not  an acqua in tance  of  
A (A does not  l i s ten to B), for ins tance  if A is a 
v i l l age  chief ,  and B is a non-dest ingu ished  v i l l age  mem-  
ber. 
4.3 Conversat ion  In teract ion  
The f low of the generat ion  and pars ing  process  is as 
fo l lows  (the on ly  except ions  are in the case of normat ive  
learn ing  were immediate  aud i to r  feedback  is requ i red) :  
a. Conversat ion  Creat ion:  
i. Generate  al l  u t te rances  f rom each grammar  at  
one t ime, by pass ing  the grammar  f i le  ser ia l ly .  
A. The number  of u t te rances  for each pass  is 
set as an externa l  parameter  ?'S" . 
B. Generate  "S" sentences  in context  C 1 . 
Generate  "S" sentences  in context  C 2 . 
Generate  "S" sentences  in context  C 3 . 
Generate  "S" sentences  in context  C n 
2. Enter  conversat ion  c reat ion  rout ine.  
22 
The conversat ion  c reat ion  rout ine  wi l l  peruse  
the acqua in tance  l is ts  of each  persons  to generate  
" l i s tens"  in  the form of o rdered  t r ip les  (a,b,c), 
where  
a = ID of l i s tener  
b = ID of Acqua in tance  
c = Context  of talk. 
Th is  t r ip le  (a,b,c) w i l l  be p laced  in a f i le  
ca l led  the " l is ten" f i le.  The " l is ten" f i le, when 
f in i shed,  w i l l  be a s tack  of ent r ies  in o rder  by 
the f i r s t  ent ry  a i . 
a I b I c 1 
a 2 b 2 c 2 
a 3 b 3 c 3 
: : : 
a b c n n n 
3. Enter  the rout ine  wh ich  parses  the sentence  
produced.  
b. The Pars ing  Process :  
For  any two persons  A and B, A Can l i s ten  to 
sentences  produced by B in on ly  one  context .  
i. B r ing  in the grammar  for person  A f rom 
second- leve l  memory  
2. Determine  the address  on second- leve l  memory  
of the conversat ion  spec i f ied  by the t r ip le  (a,b,c) 
23 
and bring it into f i rst- level  memory (core). 
3. Parse, or "listen" to the sentence. 
4. Iterate on step 2 until  all sentences are parsed. 
5. Put the new grammar for this person on second- 
level memory . . . . .  
6. Get the next grammar from second- level  memory 
and go to step 2. 
7. If no next grammar, increment the time counter. 
8. If t ime to recreate the acquaintance lists or 
other major  events such as birth/death rout ines and 
arr ivals/departures do so. 
9. Iterate on step 1 unti l  f in ished with ent ire 
s imulat ion process. 
5. Interpretat ion of Results 
The key problem is determining the success or fai lure 
of a simulation. Assuming everything else has gone well, 
how does one compare the grammars of the populat ion members 
to determine their mutual s imi lar i t ies and their re lat ion 
to the language situation in contemporary, real wor ld Maori  
Society? 
The design of the system offers a un iqu~ deta i ledsquan-  
t i tat ive method for determining the similar ity of the com- 
petence of speakers. Every legal sentence ever generated 
in the course of the simulat ion is saved by the system. At 
24 
the end of the s imulat ion (or some other time) each individ- 
ual must attempt to parse every legal sentence ever produced. 
Di f ferent  individuals may expect to have varying degrees of 
success in their  pars ing attempts. Analysis  of the results 
can offer a deta i le~ object ive picture of the dialect  situ- 
at ion on the basis of common success or fai lure in parsing 
part icu lar  sentences. These results may be correlated with 
any soc io-demographic  factors recorded in the data base of 
the model.  
Given these rssults, one may then send the same l ist of 
sentences to New Zealand, and have the analogous test per- 
formed on a sample of the Maori  population, asking informants 
to indicate the legal and i l legal sentences. 
The results of the l ive testing may then be compared 
with the s imulat ion results. Thus, the Monte Car lo simu- 
lat ion approach appears to of fer  L inguist ics a strong 
empir ica l  methodology for test ing otherwise unver i f iab le  
hypotheses.  
25 
References and Bibliography 
1. Ausubel, David: Maori Youth, Price Milburn, Wellington, 
1961. 
2. Best, Elsdon: The Maori, 2 vols., Memoirs of the Poly- 
nesian Society, No. 5, Wellington, 1924. 
3. Beaglehole, Ernest and Pearl: Some Modern Maoris, New 
Zealand Council for Educational Research, Wellington, 
1946. 
4. Biggs, Bruce: Maori Marria@e, Polynesian Society Maori 
Monographs No. i, Wellington, 1960. 
5. Biggs, Bruce: The Structure of New Zealand Maori, Re- 
prlnted from Anthropological Linguistics, Vol. 3, No. 3; 
En~lish-Maori Dictionary, Reed, Wellington, 1966. 
6. Buck, Peter: The Comin~ of the Maori, Maori Purposes 
Fund Board and Whitecombe and Tombs Ltd., Wellington, 
First Edition 1949. 
7. Firth, Raymond: Economics of the New Zealand Maori, 
Government Printer, Wellington, First Edition 1929, 
Second Edition 1959. 
8. Firth. Ravmond: We the Tikopia, George Allen & Unwin, 
London, ' 1936. 
9. Firth. Raymond: 'A Note on Descent-Groups in Polynesia', 
Man, Vol. 57, 1957, pp. 4-8. 
i0. Firthm Raymond: Social Chan~e in Tikopia, George Allen 
& Unwin, London, 1959. 
ii. Fi~th m Raymond: Primitive Polynesian Economy, 2nd 
Edition, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1965. 
12. Groube, L. M.: Settlement Pattern in Prehistoric New 
Zealand, M.A. Thesis, The University of Auckland, 1964. 
13. Hargreaves, R. P.: 'Changing Maori Agriculture in Pre- 
Waitange New Zealand', J.P.S~, Vol. 72, No. 2, 1963, 
pp. 101-17; 'Maori Agriculture of the Auckland Province 
in the Mid-Nineteenth Century', J.P.S., Vol. 68; No. 2 
1959, pp. 61-79; 'Maori Agriculture after the Wars 
(1871-1886)', J.P.S., Vol. 69, No. 4, 1960, pp. 354-67. 
14. Harre, John: 'The Relevance of Ancestry as a Factor 
in Social and Cultural Choice', J.P.S., Vcl. 74, No. i, 
1965, pp. 3-20. 
*Journal of the Polynesian Society. 
26 
15. |larre, John: Maori and Pakeha, Institute of Race 
Relations and Oxford University Press, 1966. 
16. Hawthorn, H. B.: The Maori: A Study in Acculturation, 
American Anthropology Association Memoir 46, 1944. 
17. Holst, Halvor: 'The Maori Schools in Maori Education', 
Education, Vol. 7, Department of Education, Wellington, 
March 1958, pp. 53-59. 
18. Hunn, J. K.: Report on Department of Maori Affiars 
24 August 1960, Government Printer, Wellington, 1961. 
19. Keesing, Felix: The Changing Maori, The Board of Maori 
Ethnological Research, New Plymouth, 1928. 
20. Klein, S.: Some Components of a Program for Dynamic 
Modelling of Historical Change in Language. Paper No. 
14 of Preprints of Invited Papers for 1965 International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, May 19-21, 
New York. \[To appear in Russian in a book on Language 
Contact edited by V. Rosentsveig\]. 
21. Klein, S.: Historical Change in Language Using Monte 
Carlo Techniques. Mechanical Translation, Vol. 9, 
Nos. 3 & 4, September & December, 1966 (Pub. May 1967). 
\[To appear in English in an English version of the 
above mentioned Rosentsveig book.\] 
22. Klein, S.: Current Research in the Computer Simulation 
of Eistorlcal Change in Language. In press, Proceedings 
of the Xth International Congress of Linguists, 1968, 
Romanian Government, Bucharest. (See papers presented). 
23. Klein, S., Fabens, W., Herriot, R., Katke, W., & Towster, 
A.: The AUTOLING System. University of Wisconsin Com- 
puter Sciences Department. Technical Report No. 43, Sept. 
1968. 
24. Maunsell, R.: Grammar of the New Zealand Language, 
Upton & Co. Auckland, 1894. 
25. Maori Affairs, Department of: The Maori Today, (a) First 
Edition 1949; (b) Third Edition 1964; Government Printer, 
Wellington. 
26. Merge, Joan: 'Marriage in Modern Maori Society', Man, 
Vol. 57, 1957, pp. 166-70. 
27. Metge, Joan: A New Maori Migration: Rural and Urban 
Relations in Northern New Zealand, London School of 
Economics Monographs in Social Anthropology No. 27, 
Athlone Press and Melbourne University Press, 1964. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
27 
Metge, Joan: The Maoris of New Zealand, Rutledge and 
Kegan Paul, London, 1967. 
Miller, John: Egrl~ Victorian New Zealand, Oxford 
University Press, 1958. 
Parr, C. J.: 'A Missionary Library, Printed Attempts 
to instruct the Maori', J.P.S., Vol. 70, No. 4, 1961, 
pp. 429-50; 'Maori Literacy 1843-1887, J.P.S., Vol. 72, 
No. 3, 1961, pp. 211-34. 
Sinclair, Keith: The Ori@in of the Maori Wars, New 
Zealand University Press, Wellington, 1957. 
Sorrenson, M. P. K.: 'Land Purchase Methods and their 
Effect on Maori Population 1865-1901', J.P.S., Vol. 65, 
No. 3, 1956, pp. 183-99; 'The Maori King Movement 1858- 
1885', Studies of a Small Democracy (edited by Robert 
Chapman and Keith Sinclair), Paul's Book Arcade for 
the University of Auckland, 1963. 
Williams, H. W.: A Dictionary of the Maori Language, 
6th edition, Revised and Augmented under the Auspices 
of the Polynesian Society, R. E. Owen, Government Printer, 
Wellington, 1957. 
Williams W. L. & Williams H. W., First Lessons in Maori, 
Trubner, London, 1862. 
Wright, Harrison M.: New Zealand 1769-1840: The Early 
Years of Western Contact, Harvard University Press, 1959. 
