N EXUS 
A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
FOR 
P RECOORDINAT ION 
R. A. Benson 
Convair Division of General Dynamics 
Graduate Student 
San Diego State College 
San Diego, CMifornia 
Abstract  
A method for automatical ly  precoordinat ing index te rms was devised to 
form combinat ions of te rms  which are  s tored as subject  headings.  A compu-  
ter  p rogram accepts l i s ts  of auto- indexed te rms and by applying l inguist ic 
and sequence rules combines appropr iate te rms ,  thereby effecting improved 
searchabi l i ty  of an information storage and retr ieval  sys tem.  
A ser ious  fal l ing ex ists  in many indexing sys tems in that index te rms 
author ized for use  are  too genera l  for use  by technical ly-knowledgeable 
searchers .  A search  conducted us ing these  te rms frequently produces too 
many documents not speci f ical ly related to the users '  requ i rements .  An 
indexing method using the language in which the document was wr i t ten cor -  
rects  this  fai l ing, but e l iminates the general i ty  of the prev ious  approach. A 
compromise  between indexing general i ty  and specif ic i ty is  offered by NEXUS 
precoord inat ion which combines specif ic  te rms  into sub ject -headings ,  e l imi -  
nating improper  coordination of te rms  when match ing search  requ i rements  
with document te rm sets .  
NEXUS examines  the suffix morpheme of each input te rm and determines  
whether  or not the te rm should be a member  of an index te rm combinat ion 
or  preeoordinat ion.  If insuff ic ient evidence is  p resent  o make  such a 
determination, a sequence rule goes into effect which combines terms based 
on their  syntax. 
A variety of corpora was used to test and develop the NEXUS precoordina- 
tot.  Data bases consisting of legal information, computer program descr ip-  
tions and NASA l inear tape system documentation were used. More variety 
was present  in the NASA documents which made the results of the application 
of NEXUS to this collection more  significant han the others.  Also, a fuller 
battery of rules was developed by this time, increasing the power of the pro -  
gram.  
Summary 
NEXUS is a research project which is concerned with input process ing 
of natural language for information retr ieval.  
The computer  program used to do this task consists of l inguistic rules 
that operate on the suffix portions of printed words, and the order  of these 
words as they appear in a sentence. 
NEXUS accepts l ists of index terms that have resulted from the applica- 
tion of an auto-indexer program to titles and abstracts.  Thcsc term l ists 
are  processed by NICKUS in order  to form combinations of terms which are 
J 
stored as subject headings. Such subject headings or  precoordinations aid 
the searcher  in finding information when they are used in a bibliographic 
printout.  As opposed to coordinate-indexed printouts, consisting of l ists 
of individual te rms and the accession umbers of the source documents, 
those printouts of NEXUS-processed terms contain word combinations that 
have been precoordinated, saving time and increasing accuracy for the 
searcher .  
It must  be s t ressed  that NEXUS operates on general rules. There are  
occur rences  in language that are not covetable by this method. Storage by 
individual terms is effected in conjunction wRh NEXUS so that nothing is 
missed because of rule exceptions. 
Comparison tests have been run using the full NEXUS program,  a part ial  
application of the program using sequence rules (SEQS), and human analysis 
of the same data. Although falling short  of human analysis in some respects  
(except for consistency), the NEXUS approach is more effective than SEQS 
in producing effective combinations. 
Although some suggestions arc made for applying this technique along 
with a possible output format for a bibliographic application, the chief value 
of this effort, however, has been to further study those aspects of language 
that are amenable to computerized analysis for the purpose of improving in- 
put and output functions in information retr ieval.  
SECTION 1 
Introduction 
Of all the various operations of an information retr ieval  system, the in- 
put function is the most  important. The decision of what to s tore  to best  
represent  the contents of a document involves predicting to a degree how 
this representation will be looked for by a user .  If a user  is not conversant 
with a subject he must be led into it by famil iar,  more general routes. If a 
user  is conversant with a subject and is perhaps a contributor to its l i tera-  
ture himself  he will be after specific details which he will request,  p re fer -  
ably in the language of his discipline. This dichotomy of users  probably 
exists, to some extent, in any information retr ieval situation, it is the in- 
tent of such research as NEXUS to help alleviate this paradox by permitting 
access to information by both general and specific indexing accomplished by
machine. 
The indexing process  is discussed in this paper starting at the point where 
it f i rs t  becomes necessary.  The qualifications for an expert indexer are then 
enumerated, and the activity of the indexer is examined. Generalized and 
specif ic indexing are compared and, finally, a suggestion is made for con- 
vett ing the results  of specific indexing into generalized subject headings, 
whiei~ is the purpose of the NEXUS programs.  
Operational tests have been conducted uring the stages of developing 
this approach, and a variety of data was used to allow testing across differ- 
ent types of information. 
Comparison tests were made using the full set of NEXUS rules vs. only 
the sequence rule, SEQS. The intent was to find out how more effective the 
program works using suffixal morphemes to combine te rms than to merely 
connect words that follow one another in sequence. 
The NEXUS-generated subject headings can be used in bibliographic 
pr intouts to aid in locating desired information. Combinations of te rms pre -  
pared in this way avoid the occurrence of incorrect  coordinations of te rms 
which somet imes happens when individual te rms are coordinated by the user .  
SECTION 2 
Indexing for  Information Retrieval 
An individual is faced with the prospect  of maintaining a growing col lec- 
tion of documentation. The documents in this collection contain information 
that will answer  frequently asked questions. When the collection consists of a 
few documents, this individual can read them all and be prepared to answer 
these questions. But, as the amount of documeqts increases,  he will be forced 
to find some method of recording clues to the information found in each docu- 
ment. These clues will have to be stored separately from the documents, 
on a l ist or  perhaps on file cards,  so that the maintainer of the documents 
can scan them easily. When he is asked a question, instead of trying to 
remember  which document or documents have the answer,  he goes to his 
l ist  of clues, and then selects the documents from the collection. The num-  
ber  assigned to each group of clues is the same as the number on the docu- 
ment. 
Let us assume that most  or even all of the questions asked of this indi- 
vidual are predictable. He is then in the fortunate posit ion of being able to 
look for specific answers to specific questions as he records the clues f rom 
each incoming document. He can then arrange the l ist of clues in whatever 
order  is most  convenient for him. He can arrange the clues by frequency of 
questions asked, he can classify the clues by hierarchical  relationship, by 
chronology or by any other convenient method that might best or most  quickly 
answer these stock questions. 
In some very fortunate cases,  a collection of documentation consists of 
documents that have been specifically designed to answer questions. Each 
document is constructed with a consistent number of information or  data blocks 
and the contents of these blocks vary to a predictable degree. The recording 
of information clues (we may as well now refer  to this function as indexing) 
then becomes a simple task. 
Collections of technical papers ,  the most common type of information 
collections, do not lend themselves to s imi lar  handling. One can predict 
only to a very small  degree, what questions will be asked of such a collection. 
Therefore,  the indexer must  select clues from each document based on his 
speculation of what questions will be asked in the future. It would seem that 
wearenow getting a vague picture of what an indexer looks like. He is able 
to pick up any highly technical paper,  most  of which are at the forefront of 
their  disciplines (otherwise why should they be publ ished?),  to understand 
the content of this document so expertly that he can predict the questions that 
will  be asked and then answered  by this  document,  and then to record the 
c lues  to i ts  contents in such a manner  that they will lead a searcher  direct ly 
to this  segment  of recorded knowledge at some unknown future date. This 
as tute  person  must  cer ta in ly  possess  knowlege equivalent o advanced egree 
level  in numerous  c ient i f ic  d isc ip l ines,  he must  have working knowledge of 
many  of the wor ld 's  languages,  sure ly  he must  possess  an advanced egree in 
L ib rary  Science {more popular  - Information Science), and the knowledge of 
p ract ica l  economics  to such an extent that he can subs is t  comfortably on six 
to seven thousand a year  (the going rate for indexers) .  A rmed with such a 
fo rmidab le  background this individual would render  better  serv ice,  at least  
to h imse l f ,  by doing the research  and writ ing the paper  h imsel f .  
Obviously, the indexing function must  be per fo rmed by someone less  
qual i f ied than the individual descr ibed above. 
In a normal  l ib rary  a tmosphere ,  the area  usual ly  given responsib i l i ty  
for  the important  endeavor  of mainta in ing documentat ion col lect ions,  there 
is  a t radit ional  way to process  such mater ia l .  Indexing is per fo rmed using 
such  aids as sub ject -heading l ists  or thesaur i .  The documenta l i s t / l i b ra r ian  
use  of the te rm,  thesaurus ,  re fers  to a d ic t ionary -order  l ist  of approved in-  
dexing te rms,  s imi la r  to a sub ject -heading l ist .  
The indexer ,  in the above-ment ioned nv i ronment ,  scans  a document,  
t r ies  to f igure it  out the best  he can, and then se lects  te rms  f rom these  
approved l i s ts  that he thinks best  descr ibe  the document.  Somet imes this 
works ,  somet imes  not. After  all, the indexer  cannot be expected to be 
exper t  in al l  technical  f ields. Anyway, the resul t ing te rms that a re  the c lues 
to the document ' s  content a re  genera l i zat ions  of this content. It goes without 
say ing,  ff a researcher  is  wr i t ing about a new usage of holography in patho-  
logical x - ray  appl icat ions,  th is  document sure ly  has someth ing to do with 
photographic  techniques in medic ine.  If holography i s  not an approved te rm,  
it will eventually be added to the l ist when approved. In the meantime, it can- 
not be used, of course.  But the term, x-ray,  has been around long enough to 
be acceptable, and the searcher  can hunt around at a higher (more general) 
level until he locates the document. 
The point is, such approved term l ists are designed to aid the partial ly 
knowledgeable ibrary user  (or l ibrary worker) who does not know the techni-  
cal vocabularies of special disciplines well enough to use them intelligently. 
The use of generalized terms s tems also from the attempt, on the part  of 
l ibrar ians,  to store their reading mater ials in related clumps within a 
l ibrary.  This is understandable in a public l ibrary or  even in a book col lec- 
tion of a technical ibrary.  A user  wants a book on computer programming,  
so he goes to the section of books that contains programming books. How- 
ever, if he wants to know the latest published research on a part icu lar  p ro -  
gramming technique he will find it in document or  journal article form. He 
will know, in his own terminology, what he wants at a considerably more 
specific level than "computer p rogramming, "  or say, than the approved 
L ibrary of Congress ubject heading, "Electronic digital computers - P ro -  
gramming.  " 
Why not use the te rms the researcher  uses?  Well, they are not con- 
trolled, you might say. A term might be in vogue today that is turned into 
something else tomorrow. You will clutter up your l ist of document clues 
(index) with variat ions of the same term. You may find some words that 
mean the same thing. The truth of the matter  is, that the actual synonym is 
not as common as you might think. Slight variat ions of meaning exist in 
many words that seem to be synonymous with others.  These slight var ia -  
t ions  may turn out to be highly significant in many contexts. If the words of 
actual technical jargon are used, some later editing may be in order ,  it is 
true, due to the high volatility of language in fast-moving technology, but 
the documents will be accessible to people who know this language, without 
translation for the benefit of the middle-man. 
The knowledgeable s archer  knows this language. He uses it every day, 
and keeps up with its variations. The collection of documents i for his bene- 
fit, not for the convenience of the l ibrary worker. 
What impact does all this have on documentation ? And specifically on 
indexing ? 
Let us assume, for just a minute, that we do not have a crew of super-  
intelligent people for indexers. Instead, we have a few competent clerical 
workers well-enough educated to spell words properly. They can't do foreign 
languages, so let us,  necessar i ly ,  eliminate those documents for the present. 
But they can read tit les; they know an author from a date; they can identify an 
abstract.  Within the latter, they are able to tell what words are being used 
to descr ibe some esoteric subject although they are unable to define the 
meanings of those words. 
If these people know enough to get them this far, they can eliminate the 
function words (is, an, the, but, etc. ) from the content words (holography, 
pathology, thorax, etc. ), copy down these latter content words and, in effect, 
perform indexing. This is indexing at the specific, not the general evel. 
To general ize these terms one would have to know that holography is related 
to photography, pathology is related to medicine, thorax is related to anatomy, 
and so on. We don't expect hat much sophistication from our clerical workers. 
We real ly can't afford to pay for that much knowledge. Actually, we don't want 
them to know that much. It could bias their indexing. 
This is exactly the way the KARDIAK 1 automated bibliography on art i -  
ficial heart  research was produced. Now that it has been released (almost 
three years  ago) and has received some acclaim throughout the world of medi-  
cal research  (e. g . ,  Harvard Medical School, National L ibrary of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, etc. ), we in Technical Data Systems (better 
known as IS&R), the compilers of this useful work, are still unable to use 
it! Why? Because we are not, nor should we be, conversant with the te rmi -  
nology used to index it. We just don't know that much about the technical 
specialty of cardiac medicine. When we are asked to demonstrate how 
KARDIAK works,  we must  use a standard search of two terms;  " t~ste in"  
and "Anomaly." During the production of this, Dr. Shafer, Artificial Heart 
Study Program leader, introduced us to Dr. Grey, an eminent cardiac 
special ist f rom India. At this point, KARDIAK was 50% compiled. We had 
about a thousand entries and had produced an inter im version. Dr. Grey 
was asked by Dr. Sharer to pose a question to this half-KARDIAK. He 
thought for a moment and then asked us if we had anything in the bibliography 
on "Ebste in 's  anomaly."  For  all we knew of this phenomenon, it could as 
well have been "EinsteinVs anachrony. " KARDIAK was queried with these 
terms,  however, and produced a sufficient quantity of answers,  to our re -  
lief and to the pleasant surpr i se  of Dr. Grey. (He later  asked for  copies.) 
Anyway, we now use this same query as a test query of the system, because 
we don't have the sophistication to ask anything else. 
We should add, however, for just ice's sake, that if the KARDIAK were 
on "Information Science" instead of "Cardiac Medicine", the situation would 
surely be reversed.  
The thesis,  so far,  has hopefully convinced the reader  that it is possible 
to index highly technical collections cheaply and accurately without super -  
intelligent, universal  men wielding the indexer's pencil. But we are stil l 
faced with the problem of some cross,  discipline communication. We cannot 
query a collection on "Cardiac Medicine", and they cannot query a collection 
on "Information Science. " Now then, how do we go about communicating to
one another through the medium of a general - information collection? That 
i s ,  how do we do this without getting too general and paying the pr ice for this 
general i ty?  
KARDIAK, once again, has giver us a clue to how this may be done. 
As we were feeding KARDIAK the te rms selected by our c lerk/ indexer,  
some of these te rms kept recurr ing;  recurr ing with such frequency that our 
computer  p rogram could not hold them all in storage. That is, there was 
not enough room set aside to hold all the document numbers  with which these 
te rms were  associated. The number of these terms was small,  only seven 
in all, but the number of documents that used these seven terms was exten- 
sive. Because of the physical impossibl ity of storing all these document 
numbers ,  these terms were rejected for storage. Oddly enough, perhaps 
serendipitously enough, if you will, these were the te rms that general ly 
descr ibed the collection: 
Artif icial 
Heart 
Cardiac 
Valve 
Extracorporeal  
Blood 
Circulation 
We have here, then, the general te rms to describe the KARDIAK col lec- 
tion, and we have them delivered automatically. If we were to decide that 
we must  have subject headings to communicate in a general fashion to other 
less knowledgeable searchers ,  in this case to ourselves,  these are doubt- 
less  the best candidates. Just for practice, let'~ make subject headings out 
of this l ist: 
Artif icial Heart 
Cardiac Valve 
10 
Extracorporeal  Blood Circulation. 
We don't need an approved list of te rms.  We couldn't have found one, 
nor  known how to use one, if we had had one. It has been said, "Let the 
documents themselves generate their own terms.  ,,2 One step further,  let 
the te rms rejected because of over-frequency be combined as subject-  
headings. These combinations can then be used as general descr iptors  for 
the part icular  collection. 
Tile KARDIAK is a closed collection. That is,  it was produced for a 
specific purpose, it served its purpose, and it is now a static piece of docu- 
mentation history. Of course, it can always be picked up at a later date and 
be added to; but we don't foresee this happening at the present  ime. This 
is all leading up to the fact that there is any amount of manipulation one can 
per form on a static collection that cannot be done on a growing one. When a 
collection is constantly being added to, one must f igure out away to main-  
tain control of it as it develops. If the collection is specialized enough, the 
term rejection factor, mentioned above, will stil l appear. But, as the col-  
lection grows, we certainly must  increase our storage capacity of the ratio of 
document numbers to terms.  This ratio probably remains  the same, but we 
cantt say so for sure unless we do some research on it. This is an area for 
further work with which we are not principally concerned in this report. 
What wewould now like to suggest is an inter im feature: an aid to in-  
dexing and searching that is in between a free, specific, individual key word 
system and a generalized, controlled subject-heading system. We have 
already shown an almost algorithmic way of doing indexing. The clerical 
worker identifies a title and an abstract,  and separates content words from 
function words.  The function words are then copied down, or  in the case of 
KARDIAK, are keypunched irectly on punched paper tape. I t 's  easy to 
11 
imagine a macMne doing essential ly the same operation, and this is what we 
have done. 
A program was written s imi lar  to one described in previous research 3 
which, using a function word deletion list, scans lines of text and records the 
content words that are  in the original syntactical order of the text. Such a 
method resembles  the well-known KWIC indexing system. These remaining 
content words can be used as index terms for searching the collection on a 
specific level. They can be stored on tape with each term added to pre -  
viously stored usages of the term by recording the document number under 
that term.  Or, in the case of a f i r s t - t ime usage of a term,  a new entry on 
tape is made. Now, so far, this is essential ly what was done by the clerical 
worker .  But now we have avoided her occasional human er rors ,  and since 
her  human judgment was previously discouraged we have lost very little, and 
have gained a great deal in speed and accuracy. 
At this point, let 's  switch over to the searching function. The searcher  
knows the te rms he is looking for, if he knows the technical specialty con- 
cerned. His query will be couched in these same terms.  Therefore, he 
proceeds in his search of the collection by combining te rms and looking for 
coordinating document numbers .  (This follows no matter  if he is doing it 
manually, such as with KARDIAK, or whether a computer search is made.) 
One element is miss ing,  however, and that is syntax. He must p resume 
that the hits he comes up with are of terms arranged in the same syntact i -  
cal o rder  as his search query. In other words,  he is attempting to regen- 
erate  sentence order .  This is successful  much of the t ime, but then again 
there are  t imes that it doesn't  work. 
If we had our cler ical  worker  again, we could show her  some lines of 
text and ask her to combine words that bear  relationship to one another. If 
she did a good job of making combinations, some of this miss ing syntax 
12 
would be recovered. Let's fake a title, for example: "Applications of Lin- 
guistic Experiments to the Industrial Community. " Our clerk would prob- 
ably make the following combinations: 
"Applications" (not combined) 
"Linguistic Experiments" (combined) 
"Industrial Community" (combined). 
These term combinations aid in restoring syntax, to some degree, where 
the free terms might be recalled out of order; for example, something like 
"Linguistic Community" or "hflustrial Experiments" or "Community Experi- 
ments, " all of which are entirely misleading in regard to the actual meaning 
of the title. Now, for the clerk to do term combining correctly, she uses some 
simple rules. The most obvious rule is that of sequence. There are other 
rules used that are not so obvious, even to her, because she may not know she 
is using them. These rules have to do with linguistics, specifically suffixal 
morph(~logy. This is to say that the suffixal morphemes ofthe words in this 
title are giving her clues about he relationship of one word to another. In 
other words, the presence ofone of a group of particles at the end of a content 
word in a line of text will give a clue to its relationship to the next content word. 
Of course, the next word in sequence must be examined for the presence ofa 
final particle, as well. Let's take "linguistic experiments" as an example. 
The two words are in sequence in the text line, even though this is not an 
absolute indication that they should be combined. The suffixal morpheme of
"linguistic" is "-ic, " an adjectival ending. And since there is no punctuation 
following "-ic," this indicates the proximity of some next entity to be modi- 
fied, some noun form coming up. In our example it is "experiments." But, 
if the suffixal morpheme of"experiments" were "-al" instead of "-s, " and 
there is still no following punctuation, we would have a clue that we don't yet 
13 
have a noun form to be modified. We have two adjectives tacking up, and the 
next following word may be the noun form we have been waiting for. However, 
the " - s "  morpheme is most  likely acceptable nough as a noun plural ending, 
and the combination "linguistic experiments" is a valid one. 
The application of such rules by our clerical worker is automatic because 
she does all these operations following the rules that are built into her knowledge 
of the language. She might possibly be able to explain the process but it is so 
ob~ous  and natural to her that she might not be able to. 
To do this function by machine ia another matter.  We must  not only ex- 
plain the process ,  but we must also instruct he computer precisely what to do 
and in what order  to do it. And also, unfortunately, we must  put up which 
occur rences  of letter construct ions that look like a legitimate suffixal morpheme, 
such as the plural " - s " ,  but are actually not; constructions which would be 
immediately obvious to our clerical worker.  
Succeeding sections of this report  will outline the method used (NEXUS) to 
precoordinate te rms during the automatic indexing process .  
All p rogramming of this research task was accomplished by James C. Moore 
and G. E. Sullivan, of Department 591-0, in FORTRAN lI. The computer used 
was the CDC 160G. 
SECTION 3 
NEXUS I 
The inspirat ion for NEXUS came from a part icular  collection compiled by 
IS&R on legal l i terature. 
The indexing was done by an individual highly trained in law but who had 
never  done any previous indexing. His indexing consistency, to begin with, was 
sl ightly errat ic  in that he occasionally repeated te rms in bound form that he had 
already noted down in f ree form. However, as he progressed  through the col lec- 
tion of 1742 documents his indexing became more stabilized. 
14 
Each document was given an accession umber.  The index terms,  
usually six or  seven of them, were l isted under the number.  The indexer 
wanted retr ieval by date at some future time, so he used the year the docu- 
ment was published as an index term in every case. 
The output of this project was a KARDIAK-type (or "busted. book", as 
it is known in IS&R) manual index, which was produced by computer.  The 
te rms were sorted alphabetically and the document numbers  of the documents 
indexed by the term listed beneath each term in ascending order.  
Precoordination of these terms would have aided the searcher ,  in the 
way pre~ous ly  indicated, as a t ime-saver  and a syntax safeguard. This 
would have prevented the searcher  from erroneously hooking together te rms 
that actually were not related. 
To begin with, the unsorted sets of index te rms were used as input to 
NEXUS. NEXUS was f i rst  put together in a very rudimentary form. The 
dates were isolated and the cr i ter ia  for  precoordination were  based on 
(1) sequence, (2) "-ed" suffixal morpheme in the f i rs t  position, and (3) "-s: '  
suffixal morpheme in the second position. The flow chart for NEXUS I, with 
the aforementioned legal collection in mind, is shown in F igure 3-1. The  
f i rs t  step (1) is to examine the f i rs t  term in the document term set under 
initial examination. If the f i rs t  term is a date (2), we don't want to couple it 
with another term, so we leave it as a single term and move on to the next 
word (3), if there is one. The next word is examined as a f i rst  word (4), and 
if it is not a date, it is tested (5) for  a final plural morpheme,  " - s " .  If it 
does end with " - s " ,  a preceding word is looked for  (6). If no preceding held 
word exists, the term is printed as a single term (7).. If the term does not 
have an " - s "  ending, it is held for pair ing (8) with the next word in the set  (9). 
If this held word is the last  in the set, it is also (7) pr inted as a single 
term.  But, if there is a next word (16), thenext  word is examined and (11) 
15 
O0 
o 
~1 ~ ~ 
O.I 
v 
.g 
t - I  
,--T 
t.~ 
16 
tested for being a date. If it is a date, it is printed (12) as a single term.  
If not, it receives a test for "-ed" (13) as the final morpheme.  This mor -  
pheme can only be allowed with the f i rst  word of a pair  (unless, of course,  
it is the last term in the set; in which case it is printed alone), ff "-ed" 
is present,  the held f i rst  word (14) is printed by itself, and the "-ed" 
word is held for f i rst -posit ion pairing. If " -ed" is not present,  the held 
word is printed with this word (15) as a coupled pair.  
Let 's go back to (5) where a word is tested for the presence of an " - s "  
final morpheme. The word does end with " - s " ,  so we check for a preceding 
word (6). In this case we will get "yes" for an answer,  and the next test is 
(16), "Does the preceding word end with " - s "?  If '~no" to this test (17), the 
word with " - s "  ending is printed in the second position of a pair ,  with the 
preceding word in f i rs t  position. If the answer to (16) is "yes",  the function 
(18) is activated, which checks the word preceding and (19) checks that word 
for a suffixal " -s" .  The program loops between (18) and (19) until a non-" -s "  
suffixal morpheme word is found. It then (20) prints the latter word in f i rs t  
position, followed by all " -s  "-ending words. This portion of the NEXUS I 
program can produce precoordinations of more  than two words. The re -  
mainder of the tests and functions on this flow chart are probably sel f -  
explanatory. If the program runs through the set of terms for one document, 
indicated by a "no" at test (3), the next test (21) asks " Is there a next record?" .  
If "yes",  the next set  of te rms for a document is brought up by function (22) 
and the process ing continues. If all document term sets have been processed.  
the answer to (21) is "no", and the program terminates.  
The NEXUS I program processed all 1742 document sets contained in the 
legal information system. The results of this processing produced 4078 com- 
binations. 3527 of these were good precoordinations. 154 t imes te rms with 
" - s "  suffixal morphemes were isolated and thereby avoided ambiguous 
17 
combinations. 397 precoordinat ions were unsuccessful .  The latter  quantity, 
however,  was the source of further  rules that will be applied to future ver-  
s ions of NEXUS. We knew that the development of this program would have to 
involve expansion of the rules step by step. So some of the bad coordinations 
showed us where more rules could have been applied to avoid them. Of course,  
some of these anomalies were unavoidable. They were mere ly  caused by 
character is t ics  of the language with which we have to live if we are going to 
continue to speak English. 
te rms:  
Ju r imet r i cs  
Committee 
Scientific 
For  example, one term set l isted the following 
Investigation 
Legal 
Problems.  
Because of our " - s "  rule in second position only, the program isolated 
" Ju r imet r i cs"  instead of making the obvious (to a human) coordination, 
" Ju r imet r i cs  Committee."  The rule must  be valid for  only one position, and 
the second position is the most  common one. Continuing the sequence, 
"Committee" was precoordinated with "Scientific" because of the sequence 
rule. This is also an,obvious er ror  to a human, because of the suffixal 
morpheme "- ic" ,  which is  part  of "Scientific. " In analyzing the production, 
so far,  " - ie"  seems like a good candidate for  a f i rst -post ion suffixal mor -  
pheme; so, it became one in the next version of the program.  The next com-  
bination, "Scientific Invest igat ion," turned out successful ly because of 
sequence, but "Investigation Legal" went bad; once again because of a suffixal 
morpheme cue that wasn' t  included in the program.  
This morpheme was the " -a l "  on the term ,"Legal" which was later 
included as a f i rst -pos i t ion rule. Finally, "Legal P rob lems"  was produced, 
meeting the requi rements  of both sequence and " -s "  rules. 
18 
Please bear in mind that the rules incorporated in this p rogram can 
never attain 100% effectivity. Natural language won't allow it. Still, NEXUS I 
delivered 90% correct  precoordinations, which is encouraging as the f i r s t  t ry 
of an experimental program. 
SECTION 4 
NEXUS II 
Based on the success (and the fai lures) of NEXUS I, an expanded vers ion 
of the program was written. NEXUS II was made more effective by adding 
rules principally affecting f i rst-posit ion qualification, and one rule affecting 
both f i rs t  and second position. 
The new f i rst -posit ion rules included the suffixal morphemes " -a l" ,  
" -e rn" ,  " -ese" ,  "- ic" ,  " - ive",  "- ly" and " -ous" .  The remaining rule was one 
that prevented two words with "- ing" endings f rom being paired together. 
As you may have noticed, the f i rst -posi t ion rule, " -ous"  conflicts with 
the second-posit ion rule, " - s " .  The latter rule looks for a final " - s "  only and 
when it finds one, qualifies the term for second position. Because of this, the 
" - s "  test must  also include a test for preceding "o" and "u". When these are 
present,  we have a f i rst -posit ion rule in effect; when absent, a second-posit ion 
rule. 
One of the NEXUS I rules was eliminated. The rule for stacking " - s "  
words and attaching the f i rst  non-" -s "  as a f i rst -posit ion word. This rule did 
not produce anything of value, and could possibly have contributed to ambiguity. 
However, a turnabout version of this rule was adopted. This rule, if it locates 
a sequence of f i rst -posit ion suffixal morphemes,  will stack them up until it 
finds a second-posit ion word. It then pr ints them all in combination. In this 
way, we have a method for creating str ings of terms in precoordination con- 
s ist ing of more  than two words.  "Three-dimensional  Holographic Techniques,"  
is an example of a production of this kind. 
19 
NEXUS I contained an overlapping feature which we haven't  ment ioned,  
but  which may have been obvious when we went through the " Ju r imet r i cs ,  
Commit tee ,  Scientif ic, and so on" example.  The purpose of overlapping was 
to le f t - just i fy  each te rm whether  combined or left alone, so that it could be 
s to red  alphabet ical ly  in an IS&R sys tem.  In this way, no te rm is hidden f rom 
the search  by reason of being fo rever  concealed in second posit ion in storage.  
We did insta l l  a jump switch in NEXUS II, so that we can e l iminate overlapping, 
if des i red.  If mere  subject -headings are  required,  overlapping is of no value; 
but  if the option for a f ree - te rm search  is  needed, the overlapping feature 
al lows s to rage  and search  exposure  of each individual term.  
Two very  di f ferent corpora  were run against  NEXUS II. The f i rst  was 
a col lect ion of computer  p rogram descr ipt ions  which was assembled  for  the 
Scientif ic Master  P rogramming  System (published as " Information Storage 
and Retr ieval  Computer  P rogram Index, GDC-DBA68-003). The second was 
a ser ies  of documents  f rom the NASA Tape System col lection. 
The program descr ipt ions  cons is ted  of abs t rac ts  of what each par t i cu lar  
p rogram was intended to do, and how it operated.  Each descr ipt ion also had 
a shor t  name,  a t it le, the computer  language used,  the name of the respons ib le  
p rogrammer  and the respons ib le  ng ineer ,  and a set  of te rms  used to index the 
descr ipt ion .  
The abst ract  port ion of each descr ipt ion was used to supply NEXUS II 
with mater ia l  to work with. The abst racts  were  f i r s t  p rocessed  through an 
auto - indexer  to produce l i s ts  of te rms .  These l is ts  were next presented  to 
NEXUS II and then pr inted out for  ana lys is  after  the term-b ind ing  operat ions 
were  per fo rmed.  NEXUS lI was run two ways; with and without the overlapping 
feature .  
The program worked well with this mater ia l ,  with one exception. The 
suff ixal  morpheme car r ied  by the third person  s ingular ,  p resent  tense  verb,  
20 
" - s " ,  has  the same physical  appearance as the p lura l  morpheme,  " - s " .  
Since the computer  can' t  tell the di f ference,  there  occur red  some bound 
te rms that were somewhat  loss  than ri fe with meaning;  for example,  
"P rogram Calculates" ,  "Computes" ,  "P rogram Generates" ,  "P rogram Uses" .  
Although these  odd combinat ions could be avoided by employing a di f ferent  
writ ing sty le  when producing the abst rac ts ,  we are  not concerned with pre -  
condit ioning a corpus,  rather  with handling it in whatever  fo rm we happen to 
f ind it. The above combinat ions can certa in ly  be tolerated,  however,  s ince 
they have no effect on the other precoord inat ions.  Still, the i r  value in a fu-  
ture search  may be predicted as sl ight. A NEXUS II p rocessed  record  of the 
computer  p rogram descr ipt ions hows: 
9916 Computes 
9916 Allowable Moments  
9916 Axial Loads 
9916 At las 
9916 Tank Skins 
9916 Compress ion  Capabil ity 
9916 St ructures  
9916 Tech Memo 
9916 5 Funct ion 
9916 Ullage 
9916 Hydrostat ic P ressure  
9916 Geometry 
The second corpus processed  through NEXUS II cons is ted of t i t les of 
documents  f rom the NASA Tape System. These  t i t les were  f i r s t  auto- indexed 
in the same way as the abst racts  of the computer  p rogram descr ipt ions.  The 
l i s ts  of te rms  derived in this way were then given the NEXUf~ II t reatment .  
21 
The rules applied were: 
" - s "  Final Position 
"-ed" 1st Position 
"- ie" i s t  Position 
"- ly" i s t  Position 
"-a l"  I s t  Position 
"- ing" I s t  Position 
"-able" 1st Position 
"- ive" 1st Position 
"-OUS" Ist Position 
" -a r "  1st Position 
" -ary"  I s t  Position 
"-ese" Ist Position 
" -ern"  1st Position 
Immediately following NEXUS II processing, the same NASA documenta- 
tion was run using only a sequencing rule, without suffixal morpheme xamina- 
tion. The results of this modified program, SEQS, were merged in alternation 
with the NEXUS II results ,  and printed out for analysis.  
The f i rst  twenty-five NASA documents resulted in I08 good precoordina- 
tlons out of 124 for NEXUS II, and 73 good precoordinations out of 113 for SEQS. 
Some term sets are shown using NEXUS II, SEQS, and human analysis: 
NEXUS II SEQS HUMAN 
9993 Developm e~t 9993 Development 9993 Development 
Thin-Fi lm Thin-Fi lm Thin-Fi lm Space- 
9993 Space-Charge 9993 Space-Charge Charge Limited 
9993 Limited Triode Limited Triode 
9993 Final Report 9993 Triode Final 9993 Final Report Mar. 
9993 Mar. 1965 9993 Report Mar. 1965 - Jun. 1966 
9993 Jun. 1966 9993 1965 Jun. 
9993 1966 
22 
NEXUS II SEQ~._ HUMAN 
9988 Electron Impact 9988 Electron Impact 9988 Electron Impact 
9988 Broadening 9988 Broadening Broadening 
Isolated Ion Isolated 9988 Isolated Ion Lines 
9988 Lines 9988 Ion Lines 
9996 Man System 9996 Man System 9996 Man System 
9996 Criter ia 9996 Criteria Extra- Criter ia 
9996 Extraterrestr ia l  ter restr ia l  9996 Extraterrestr ia l  
Roving Vehicles 9996 Roving Vehicles Roving Vehicles 
9996 Phase IB 9996 Phase IB 9996 Phase IB 
9996 Lunex II 9996 Lunex II 9996 Lunex II Simula- 
9996 Simulation Interim 9996 Simulation tion 
9996 Technical Report Interim 9996 Interim Teehni- 
9996 Technical Report eal Report 
9998 Bodies 9998 Bodies Maximum 9998 Bodies 
9998 Maximum Lift-  9998 Lift-to-Drag 9998 Maximum Lift-  
to-Drag Ratio to-Drag Ratio 
9998 Ratio 9998 Hypersonic Flow 9998 Hypersonic Flow 
9998 Hypersonic Flow 
Conclusions 
SECTION 5 
As an exercise in demonstrating the difficulties encountered in handling 
natural anguage for computerized information retrieval, the NEXUS experi -  
ments have been very successful .  
The intent has been to expand upon more or less  standard automatic 
indexing techniques by reestabl ishing a connection between te rms that, when 
combined, aid the searcher  in retrieving a document reference from storage. 
We have named this process precoordination because of its relationship to 
coordinate index systems.  In a coordinate index the searcher  combines 
terms,  looking for a common accession umber, thereby indicating their 
occurrence together in a document description. NEXUS has an application 
23 
in precoord inat ing these  te rms,  when applicable, to save t ime for  the 
searcher  and to ensure  a cor rec t  coordination and to prevent  coordinating 
te rms that give a mis lead ing  impl icat ion.  Precoord inated te rms are  then, 
in effect, equivalent to subject  headings insofar  as they part ia l ly express  a 
concept in one or  more  words  in a syntatic construct ion.  
The compar ison  of NEXUS, and its severa l  l inguist ica l ly -based rules,  
with SEQS, and i ts  s ingle rule for sequent ia l  l inking, has shown that NEXUS 
is the more  eff icient of the two approaches.  Neither,  of course ,  can compare  
with human decis ion power,  which has the abil ity to employ knowledge, past  
exper ience,  and heur i s t i cs .  Since we are  try ing to approach a human intel -  
lectual  act ivity us ing  a machine,  however,  the work of a human will probably 
a lways make  our resu l t s  look infer ior .  We arc  l imited to looking at words 
pr imar i l y  as  phys ica l  ent it ies and then re lat ing these  phys ica l  features  to 
semant ic  re lat ionsh ips .  There  is only so much to work with in Engl ish, and 
that much  is not 100% rel iable,  as we have seen. 
We have attempted to use  a s imple  a lgor i thm, and to add to it, o r  sub-  
t rac t  f rom it, through tr ia l  and er ror .  No doubt these rules can be expanded 
more  than they have been,  so the program is open to fur ther  additions at any 
t ime.  
The NEXUS II flow chart ,  F igure 5-1, with a nar rat ive  explanation, 
fol lows. 
The f i r s t  step at (1) is to read a record,  a document e rm set.  Step (2) 
examines  the f i r s t  te rm in the set  and if there  is one, moves  through the date 
tes t  (3), which is  a holdover f rom the legal data col lection. Next, the program 
makes  the f i r s t  suff ixal  morpheme test  (4). If tlie examined word does not 
end in ~-s  TT, it is  held for  pa i r ing  (5) and the T~-ed~t counter  is  se t  to zero.  
This  counter  is  used  for  all f i r s t -pos i t ion  suff ixal morpheme words,  not just  
for  those  that end in " -ed ' .  The counter  is  used to keep t rack of the amount  
24 
M 
H 
B 
,rl 
25 
of f i rst -posi t ion words that accumulate before a second-posit ion word appears,  
so that they can all be printed out in a str ing; e .g . ,  "BINARY DIGITAL 
CALCULATING MACHINE". 
The program then moves to (6) where a next word is looked for. If "no", 
the word held at (5) is printed as a single term (7) and a return to (2) is made, 
in turn going to (1) and the next record is begun. If (6) is "yes",  the NEXUS I 
date check is made (8) which results  in "yes"  back through (7) and then (2) 
again, or  "no", which is governed by Sense Switch 2 (9). Sense Switch 2 can 
be set to pass  an examined work through the tests for "- ing" in f i rs t  position 
(10) and in second position (11) in order  to prevent coupling of words bearing 
these suff ixes. These tests current ly have no value because "- ing" has been 
establ ished as a fairly reliable f i rst -posit ion suffixal morpheme and therefore 
must  be allowed to stack up with words bearing "-tug" or  any of the other * 
(* re fers  to NOTE - center of page, F igure 5-1) words. The test has been left 
in in case it ever appears to be of any future use. 
Assuming Sense Switch 2 to be in an "on" position, a "no" answer to (8) 
proceeds directly to (12) where the held f i rs t  word receives the f i rst -posit ion 
test for  " -ed".  If "yes",  the "-ed" counter is incremented and the second word 
is passed through an " -ed" test (14). A "no" at (12) passes  the program directly 
to (14). If (14} is "no", the second word is tested for  presence of any of the other 
suffixal morphemes qualifying a word for f i rs t  position (noted as *) (15). If (14) 
is "no", the second word is tested for presence of any of the other suffixal mor -  
phemes qualifying a word for f i rs t  position (noted as *) (15). If (14) is "yes",  
the f i r s t  word is tested for an * ending (16). A "no" at (15} moves the program 
to (17) where the f i rst  and second words are printed, the counter is set  to zero 
and a flag, 2, (for later  identification as a coupled pair) is placed at the end of 
the f i r s t  and second words.  This flag is externally suppressed.  
26 
Pass ing through an indexer (pointing to the last word of a combination} 
and moving further to {18}, there is a Sense Switch 1, that controls overlapping. 
This is the feature that assures  all te rms a left-justif ied accessibi l ity, by pr int -  
ing te rms indi~cidually as well as in combinations. With the sense switch off, 
the program moves to (7) and the last word in the combination is printed alone. 
With the sense switch on, the program returns to (2) and continues through the 
record. 
Backing up now, to (15}. If a "yes" answer is made at (15), the f i rst  
word is tested for * ending at (16}. If "no" at (16), the f i rst  word receives an 
"-ed" test (19} and upon receiving another "no" at (19) the f i rst  word is printed 
alone at (7). If "yes" at either (16) or  (19}, the "-ed" counter (20) (which also 
counts * words}, is incremented and a test for a next word is encountered at 
(21). If there is not a next word in the record under examination, each " -ed"  
{or *) word is printed individually (22) and the counter eset  to zero. The 
program then goes back to (2). If there is a next word in the record, the date 
test is made (23). If "yes" on (23), the pr int  instruction (22) is applied to all 
"~ed"/* words,  and then back to (2). If "no" on (23), the next word is checked 
for " -ed",  (24) and * (25). Failing both of these tests,  all "-ed" and * words 
are printed in a str ing (with the last member  of the str ing a non-" -ed"/*)  (26). 
If either of these tests (24}, (25) are posit ive, the program loops back through 
(2}, increments the "-ed" counter and cycles through (21), etc. ,  again. 
Let 's  now go back to the f i r s t  suffixal morpheme test, the last word " - s "  
test  at (4), and assume a "yes" answer.  We then must find out if it is a plural  
" - s " ,  o r  part  of an * ending, " -ous"  (27). If it is " -ous" ,  we then go to (5), 
and thence through the route just explained above. If it is not " -ous" ,  but a 
plural  " - s " ,  we move to {28} to check for a preceding word. If there is no 
preceding word, the " - s "  word is printed as a single word (29}, and back to (2). 
27 
If there is a preceding word, the date check (30) goes into effect. If positive, 
the program moves to (29) and the " - s "  word is printed as a single term. If 
"no" on (30) the test is made "Does preceding word end with ' - s '  ?" (31) which, 
when "no", moves the program to (32) "Is the preceding word part  of a coupled 
pair  ?". This is the reason for the flag put at the end of the 1st and 2nd words 
at (17}. 
If "yes" at (32) the program shifts to (29) where the " - s "  word is printed 
as a single word. If "no v' at (32), the program prints the preceding word with 
this " - s "  word (33). If "yes" at (31), there is a test for a preceding word (34). 
If "yes" at (34), the date test (35) takes place. If "no" at (34), the program 
shifts to (29) and prints the " - s "  word as a single word, and then goes back to 
(2). This also occurs when there is a "yes"  answer at (35). If "no" at (35), 
the program goes back to (29) where the " - s "  word is printed as a single word. 
This is the latest version of NEXUS II. The flow chart has superfluit ies 
that haven't been removed. Many instructions could be combined to save 
operations.  But, the intent has been to get this program operating and re -  
ported on. The flaws that are  obvious are  the combining of various rules that 
apply to "-ed" endings as well as * endings. These rules are to be treated 
the same.  No doubt, other things could be combined to make a more efficient 
p rogram.  
A few suggestions for  applying this method should be made. The pre -  
vious method for auto-iudexed terms has been to use them in a "busted-book" 
o r  computer-generatod coordinate index. The NEXUS-generated subject 
headings are  definitely not Suitable for this type of output. The best type of 
output format  would be something approaching v~hat was done for the Aero-  
medical Evacuation Study Bibliography. 4 That was a subject-heading listing, 
followed by a full bibl iographical entry: author, title, date, ser ies  number, 
and corporate author. Sample entries are  shown below: 
28 
BLOOD PRESSURE 
ROMAN J 
HENRY JP 
MEEHAN JP 
VAL ID ITY  OF FLIGHT BLOOD PRESSURE DATA, 
AEROSPACE NED 361436-41 j  SAY 65 
BLooD PRESSURE SENSOR 
RESEARCH + TECHNOLO~GY RESUHE (S) FOR THE DEVEL. 
OFt 
N) DOPPLER ULTRASONIC BLO00 PRESSURE SENSOR 
BLOOD VOLUHE 
GRABLE E 
LURUS A 
OSOFSRY H 
THE PREDICTABIL ITY  OF BLOOD VOLUHE IN NORHAL 
A IR  FORCE PERSONNEL AND THEIR DEPENDENTS. 
H IL IT  HED ~32,1t4 -8 ,  FEB 67 
BLOOD VOLUME 
RESEARCH + TECHNOLOGY RESUHE(S) FOR THE DEVEL. 
Q) INVESTIGATION OF BLOOD VOLUH\[ ? GAS 
ALTERATIONS MEASUREMENTS DURING AEROHEDICAL 
EVACUATION 
This bibl iography was machine processed  after  all input was subjected 
to human analys is .  
The final bibl iography cons isted of four sect ions:  by subject ,  by author,  
by tit le, and by source.  The la t ter  sect ion was an alphabetical  sor t  of the 
journals ,  books, papers ,  and manua ls  f rom which the mater ia l  was taken. 
A modif icat ion of th is  form of output has been suggested by Mr.  James  
Moore of 591-0, who was respons ib le  for NEXUS I and II p rogramming .  His 
suggest ion involves a sor t  and pr intout  of each auto- indexed te rm and beneath 
each such te rm is pr inted the N F2KUS preeoord inated set  of which the te rm is 
a member .  Beneath this te rm set would be the bibl iographic entry,  in ent i rety.  
Where  te rms are  not members  of a precoord inated set,  they are  pr inted alone, 
followed by the full bibl iographic entry.  A hand-generated xample of th is  
29 
format would appear like this: 
(in "S" portion of alphabet) 
SUPERSONIC 
COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT 
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT PROPOSAL, 
A-111, AIRCRAFT DESCRIPTION. 
D6-2400-9 THE BOEING CO. 15 JAN 64 
(in "C" portion Of alphabet) 
COMMERCIA L 
COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT 
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL  SUPERSONIC  TRANSPORT PROPOSAL,  A - i l l ,  A IRCRAFT 
DESCRIPT ION.  
D6-2400-9  THE BOEING CO.  15 JAN 64 
(in "T" portion of alphabet) 
T:RANSPORT 
COMMERCIAL  SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT 
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL  SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT PROPOSAL ,  
A-ill, A IRCRAFT  DESCRIPTION. 
D6-2400-9 THE BOEING CO. \]5 JAN 64 
(in "P" portion of alphabet) 
P ROP OSA L 
PROPOSAL  A-ill 
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL  SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT PROPOSAL,  
A-111, A IRCRAFT  DESCRIPTION. 
D6-2400-9 THE BOEING CO. 15 JAN 64 
(in "A" portion of alphabet) 
A IRCRAFT  
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL  SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT PROPOSAL,  
A-ill, A IRCRAFT  DESCRIPTION. 
D6-2400-9 THE BOEING CO. 15 JAN 64 
30 
(in "D" portion of alphabet) 
DESCRIPTION 
BOEING CO. 
COMMERCIAL SUPERSONIC TRANSPORT PROPOSAL, 
A-111, AIRCRAFT DESCRIPTION. 
D6-2400-9 THE BOEING CO.15 JAN 64 
Six subject entr ies per document reference may seem excessive at f i rst  
glance, and there may be more if an abstract is also processed,  but roughly 
this same approach was used for the Aeromedical Evacuation Bibliography and 
was found to be helpful. Unfortunately, the same human analysis that was 
employed in process ing the input to that program was not completely thorough 
in picking up all possible subject headings for sorting. A machine-analysis 
system would not suffer from this fallibility. 
SECTION (i 
Recommendations 
Linguistics is becoming more and more recognized as a basic research  
area in information retr ieval.  The problem of document analysis and index- 
term selection is the most  fundamental ctivity of all in the cycle of document- 
to-storage-to-document user ,  which is what information retr ieval  really 
amounts to. 
No matter  how sophisticated the storage medium might be, no matter  
how fast the computer can sift through a data bank searching for information, 
an information retr ieval  system is only as good as its contents. 
Linguistics, as applied to information retr ieval,  is concerned with 
improving the input function in the design of automatic indexing, abstracting 
and classif ication methods. The kind of l inquistics used in these applications 
is l imited to the written word or the analysis and manipulation of graphemes.  
Linquistics, in a general sense, concerns itself with speech sounds, from which 
a graphemic representat ion f a language is one step removed. If the day ever 
31 
comes that a computer can more  efficiently accept the spoken word than the 
written word l inguistics, in a ful ler sense, will be found applicable. There 
will probably be interim improvements in methods for computer .input that 
will predate voice input, however, 
Such input devices as optical scanners and page readers may make a 
long-awaited appearance, for practical purposes,  before people can talk to 
a computer in any application other than an experimental one. If there is 
any doubt of the super ior i ty of the spoken word over the written as an infor- 
mation car r ie r ,  one merely  has to read a television jingle or such a phrase 
as,  "very interestting~ " heard on a popular TV program, to real ize that the 
suprasegmental  phonemes of s t ress ,  pitch, juncture and even accent in the 
dialect sense,  completely lost in the written word, are very much present  
and necessary  in the spoken word. 
Getting back to the kind of l inguistics with which we have been directly 
concerned, we have been devising rules f i r  joining together two or more words 
to make up a phrase.  The rules are activated when one or more  characters  
(graphemes) are found at the ends of words (suffixal morphemes} that have an 
effect on the word's  connectability to other words in a sequence (syntax}. 
These rules work every time. There is no decision maker involved allowing 
a somet imes exemption to a rule. Since the rules are of a general -purpose 
kind, they are set up to operate on the most  frequent conditions. The excep- 
tions to these conditions that occur occasionally are merely  tolerated. No 
attempt has been made to set up ad hoc rules to cover them. It so happens, 
unfortunately, that the name "Information Retrieval" is one of these exceptions 
and would not be produced as a combination by the NEXUS program. 
Although the NEXUS method is far  f rom perfect, even in its present  
state it is reasonably workable as a subject-heading generator.  Its con- 
s istency of operation, of course,  exceeds human processing; an advantage 
32 
in some respects and a disadvantage in others,  as already pointed out. 
Research of this type is not intended to produce a panacea that will solve all 
natural- language-input roblems, but is intended to shed a little more light 
on language manipulation by computer and perhaps take a few tentative steps 
towards a solution of these problems.  Hopefully, this research as been 
successful to that extent. 
The following pages are S-C 4020 microf i lm hard copies showing a 
comparison between NF~US process ing and SEQS process ing of NASA Linear 
Tape System documents. 
5 
The NASA System has been previously converted to the IS&R format for 
more  efficient information searching. The titles of a 1000-document corpus 
were f i rst  auto-indexed using IS&R SIMPL programming techniques, The pro -  
duct of the auto-indexing operation is shown in .the f i rs t  column on the left of 
each page. It consists of a l ist of content words remaining after the function 
words were deleted from the title. 
The middle column is a l ist of the word combinations created by the 
NEXUS II p rogram employing l inguistic rules and sequence rules.  
The SEQS column l ists the combinations formed by using sequence rules 
alone. Here eve*T two terms are connected as they occur in syntactical order.  
33 
CORPUS OF 
NASA TAPE SYSTEH 
DOCUMENTS 
NEXUS 
A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
FOR 
PRECOORDINATION 
DEC 1968 
TITLE 'GEODETIC JUNCTION OF 
PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN FRON ECHO 
AUTO-INDEXED 
TERMS 
;,GEODETIC I,GEODETIC JUNCTION 
2.JUNCTION 2,FRANCE 
3.FRANCE 3.NORTH AFRICA 
4.NORTH 4.SYNCHRONIZED PHOTOGRAPHS 
S.AFRICA S.ECHO SATELLITE 
6oSYNCHRONIZED 
?.PHOTOGRAPHS 
8.ECHO 
9.SATELLITE 
FRANCE AND NORTH AFRICA BY SYNCHRONIZED 
I SATELLITE 
NEXUS SEQS 
1.GEOOETIC JUNCTION 
2.FRANCE NORTH 
3.AFRICA SYNCHRC4CIZED 
4.PHOTOGRAPHS ECHO 
S.SATELLITE 
TITLE 'L IMITS OF HEAD-WAVE AHPLITUDES FOR SI'IO~T ,SPREADS FROt4 VARIOUS CHARGE 
SIZESe BLASTING CAPSi AND 4S-KG WEIGHT DROP 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERMS 
I .L IMITS 
2 ? HEAD-WAVE 
3 ? AHPL I TUDES 
4 .SHORT 
5 ? SPREADS 
6 ? CHARGE 
7.SIZES 
8.DLASTING 
9.CAPS 
IO.45-KG 
Zl.WEIGHT 
12.DROP 
I . L IM ITS  I . L IM ITS  HEAD-WAVE 
2.HEAD-WAVE AMPLITUDES 2.AMPLITUDES SllO~T 
3.SI'IORT SPREADS 3.SPREADS CHARGE 
4.CHARGE SIZES 4,SIZES BLASTING 
S.BLASTING CAPS 5.CAPS 4S-KG 
6o4S-KG~cI~IGHT S.~/IE1GHT DROP 
7.DI~P 
CORPUS OF NEXUS 
NASA TAPE SYSTEM A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
D~UHENTS FOR 
PRECOORDINATION 
OEC 1968 
TITLE 'STRUCTURE AND COHPOSITION OF THE SOUTHERN COULEE, 
CALIFORNIA - A PUMICEOUS RHYOLITE FLOW 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS 
TERNS 
I .STRUCTURE 
2 .COHPOS I T ION 
3.SOUTHERN 
4. COULEE 
5 * t4'.~'~O 
6.CRATERS 
7.CALIFORNIA 
B.PUH ICEOUS 
9.RNYOL|TE 
1D.FL,Ob/ 
1.STRUCTURE COI4FOSlTlOfl 
2.SOUTHERN COULEE 
3.HONOCRATERS 
4.CALIFORNIA 
5.PUMICEOUS RHYOLITE 
6 .FL~ 
NONO CRATERS, 
SEQS 
I.STRUCTUR\[ COHPO$1TION 
2.SOUTHERN COULEE 
3.MONOCRATER8 
4.CALIFORNIA PUM|CEOUS 
5.RHYOLITE FL~ 
TITLE 'ON THE THE~RMK~OYNANICS (~ ELASTIC MATERIALS 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERNS 
I.THERHODYNANICS 1.THERI4ODYNANICS I.TI'I~RHOOYNANICS ELASTIC 
2.ELASTIC 2.ELASTIC MATERIALS Z.NATERIAL$ 
3.NATERIALS 
$ $ $ $ $ $ $ 
TITLE 'A FINITE DIFFERENCE NETHCO FOR COMPUTING UNSTEADYD INCOMPRESSIBLE, LAMINAR 
BOUNOARY LAYER FLCIb/S FINAL SCIENT|FIC REPORT 
AUTO-INDEXEO 
TEENS 
1.FINITE 
2.DIFFERENCE 
3.NETHC~ 
4?COHPUTZNG 
$.UNSTEADY 
6.1NCOHPRE$SIBL\[ 
7.LAHINAR 
8.BOUNDARY 
9.LAYER 
IO.FLC$/S 
11.FINAL 
IR*&CIENTIFIC 
13.REPORT 
NEXUS 5EQS 
1.FINITE DIFFERENCE 
2.NETMGO 
S.COHPUT|NG UNSTEADY 
4.1NCOHPR?$SIBLE LAMINAR BOUNOARY 
LAYER FLCIk/S 
$.FINAL 6CI?NT|FZC REPORT 
35 
I.FINIT? DIFFERENCE 
2.METHCO COMPUTING 
3?UNSTEADY 
INCOHPRESSIDL? 
4.LAMINAR BOUNDARY 
5.LAYER FLO|,/$ 
6.FINAL SCIENTIFIC 
7.REPORY 
CORPUS OF N?XUS 
NASA TAP? SYSTEM A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
OOCUNENT$ FOR 
PRECOORDINATIOH 
DEC 1968 
TITLE 'INTERPLANETARY NONITORING PLATFORM IMP I I I  - EXPLORER XXVl | l  INTERIM 
FLIGHT REPORT NO, 2 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQ$ 
TERMS 
1,INTERPLANETARY 
2.HONITORING 
3.PLATFORH 
4.IMP 
5.111 
6.EXPL~ER 
7.XXVIII 
8.1NTERIN 
9,FLIGHT 
IO,REPORT 
11.2 
I.INTERPLANETARY MONITORING PLATIrORH 
2. II4P 111 
3.EXPLORER XXVl I l  
4 ,  INTERIH FLIGHT 
S * REPORT 2 
1 . INTERPLANETARY 
NONITOR IHG 
2.PLATFORM INP 
3 ,1 I f  EXPLORER 
4,XXVI I I INTERIM 
$.FL|GHT REPORT 
6 .2  
? TITLE 'ELECTROt4AGNETIE SCATTERING CHARACTERISTICS CF A #,ICTEOROLOGICAL RADAR ANGEL 
NCsOEL BY HETHOOSOF PHYSICAL OPTICS 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERHS 
I.ELECTROHAGNETIC I,\[LECTROHAGNETIC SCATTERING 
2.SCATTERING CHARACTERIS~|CS 
3.CHARACTERISTIC8 Z.HETEOROLOG|CAL RADAR ANGEL 
4,METEOROLOGICAL 3,HOOEL NETI-IO08 
5.RADAR 4,PHYS|CAL(~PTICS 
6,ANGEL 
7.MOOEL 
B,HETHOOS 
9,PHYSICAL 
|O.OPTZC$ 
Z.ELECTEOHAGNET|C 
SCATTERING 
2,CHARACTERISTICS 
NETEOEOLOGIEAL 
3.RADAR ANGEL 
4.HOOEL METFIOOS 
5,PHY$1CAL OPTICS 
3~ 
CORPUS OF NEXUS 
NASA TAPE SYSTEN A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
DOCUMENTS FOR 
PRECOORDINAT|ON 
DEC lgSB 
TITLE 'EXTENSIONAL NECHAN|CAL PROPERTIES OF POLYESTER AND POLYETHER BASED 
FOLYURETHANES 
AUTO-INDEXED MEXUS SEQS 
TERM5 
I.?XT\[NSIONAL 
2,MECHANICAL 
3.FROPERTIES 
4,FOLYESTER 
5.POLY\[TH\[R 
G.PO(.YURETHAMES 
|.EXTENSIONAL MECHANICAL PI~PERTIES 
2.POLYESTER FOLYETH?R POLYURETHANE;S 
1.EXTENSIONAL HECHANICAL 
2.PROPERTIES POLYESTER 
3oPOLYETHER 
I~X.YURETHANES 
TITL\[ 'FR~AGATION ~r HARMONIC WAVES 1N ~4POSITE CIRCULAR CYLINDRICAL SHELLS, 
PART X - THEORETICAL INVESTIGATION 
AUTO-|NDEXEB NEXUS SEQS 
TERMS 
1.PROIPAGATION 
2.HARI~'Mq|C 
3.WAVES 
4.COHFOSIT\[ 
5.CIRCULAR 
6,CYLINDRICAL 
7,SHELLS 
8.PART 
9,THEORETICAL 
ID.INVEST|GATION 
2.PR(SPAGATION 
Z,HARMONIC WAVES 
3,?(~t.IF~)SITE 
4,C|RCULAR CYLINDRICAL 8HELL8 
5,PART 
G,THEORETICAL INVESTIGATiON 
1,PROPAGATION HARMONIC 
2,WAVES COHFOSlTE 
S,CIRCULAR CYLINDRICAL 
4,SHELLS PART 
S,TI'IEORETICAL 
INVESTIGATION 
TZTL\[ 'M?AN NOLECULAR MASS AND SCALE I II~iGHTS (~ THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEBS 
TERMS 
1,MEAN 1,MEAN 1,H\[AN MOLECULAR 
2.MOLECULAR 2.MOLECULAR MASS ~,MASS SCALE 
3,MASS 3,SCALE HEIGHTS 3,HEIGHTS UPPER 
4,SCALE 4,UPPER ATMO.~PI'I?RE 4,ATHOSPHERE 
$,HEIGHTS 
S,UPPER 
7,ATNOSPHI~RE 
37 
CORPUS OF" NEXUS 
NASA TAPE SYSTEM A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
DOCUMENTS FOR 
PRECOORDINATION 
DEC 1968 
TITLE 'MAGNETIC FIELD MEASUREMENTS IN INTERPLANETARY SPACE 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEaS 
TEEHS 
I.HAGNETIC I.HAGNETIC FIELD I.MAGNETIC FIELD 
2.FIELD 2oMEASUREMENTS 2?MEASUREMENTS 
3?HEASUREMENTS 3.INTERPLANETARY SPACE INTERPLANETARY 
4,1NTERPLANETARY 3.SPACE 
5.SPACE 
TITLE 'HEASUREMENTS OF MAGNETIC PRC~E~ES DURING TIm PREHEATING PHASE OF A SPINDLE 
CUSP EXPERIH~NT 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERHS 
1.HEASUREMENTS /.MEASUREMENTS 
a.MAGNETIC 2.MAGNETIC PRC~ES 
3,FROliCS 3oPREHEATING PHASE 
4.PREHEATING 4?SPINDLE CUSP 
5.PHASE S.EXPER|HENT 
6,SPINDLE 
7.CUSP 
8.EXPERIMENT 
1,MEASUREHENTS MAGNETIC 
2.PROISES PREHEATING 
3.PHASE SPINDLE 
4.CUSP EXPERIMENT 
TITLE 'THE EFFECTS OF THE LAUNCH VEHICLE ON ~PACECRAPT DESIGN 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS 
TERHS 
SEQS 
\].~FFECTS !.EFFECTS 
2.LAUNCH 2.LAUNCH VEH|CL~ 
3.VEHICLE 3.SPACECRAFT D?$|GN 
4oSPAC?CRAFT 
5.DESIGN 
1.EFFECTS LAUNCH 
2.VEHICLE SPACECRAFT 
3.DES|ON 
~8 
CORPUS OF" NEXUS 
NASA TAPE SYSTEM A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
DOCUMENTS FOR 
PRECOORDINATIGN 
DEC 196B 
TITLE 'A TWO-TEHPERATURE STATISTICAL HOOEL FOR PARTICLE PRODUCTION AT HIGH 
ENERG I ES 
AUTO- l NDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERHS 
l .  T~..~-TEMPERATURE 1 .TWO-TEMPERATURE 1 ? TWO-TEMPERATURE 
2.STATIST ICAL 2.STAT IST iCAL HOOEL STATISTICAL 
3.MODEL 3.PARTICLE PRODUCTION 2.HO~EL PARTICLE 
4.PARTICLE 4,HIGH ENERGIES S.PROOUCTIC~I HIGH 
S ? P RCOOUC T ION 4 ? ENERG I ES 
G.HIGH 
7.ENERGIES 
TITLE 'PRCJPAGATION OF SPHERICAL WAVES THROUGH AN INHOHOGENEOUS HEDIUH CONTAINING 
ANISOTROFIC IRREGULARITIES 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERMS 
|.PRC4:AGATION 
2.SPHERICAL 
3.WAVES 
4.INH~.'~.-~GENECXJS 
5.HEDIUH 
6.CONTAINING 
7.ANISOTROPIC 
8.1RREGULARIT|ES 
1.PROPAGATION 
2.SPHERICAL WAVES 
3.1NHOt4OGENEOUS HEDIUH 
4,CONTAINING ANISOTROPIC 
iRREGULARITIES 
1.PROPAGATION SPHERICAL 
2.WAVE8 INHC~,tOGENEOUS 
3.MEDIUM CONTAINING 
4.ANISOTROPIC 
IRREGULARITIES 
TITLE 'PULSED ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION FROH HAGNETICALLY LOADED EXPLOSIVES 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQ$ 
TERMS 
1.PULSED 
2.ELECTRICAL 
3.POWER 
4,GENERATION 
5,MAGNETICALLY 
6,LOADED 
7oEXPLOS~ES 
|.PULSED ELECTRICAL POI,~R GENERATION 
2.MAGNETICALLY LOADED EXPLOSIVES 
1.PULSED ELECTRICAL 
2.Pck/ER GENERATION 
S,HAGNETICALLY LOADED 
4,EXPLOS|VES 
3~ 
CORPUS OF NEXUS 
NASA TAPE SYSTEM A LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUE 
DOCUMENTS FOR 
PRECOORDINATION 
DEC 1968 
TITLE 'ELECTRICAL PULSES FROH HELICAL AND COAXIAL EXPLOSIVE GENERATORS 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS SEQS 
TERMS 
I.ELECTRICAL 
E.PULSES 
3.HELICAL 
4,COAXIAL 
S,EXPLOSIVE 
6.GENERATORS 
I,ELECTRICAL PULSES 
2.HELICAL COAXIAL EXPLOSIVE 
GENERATORS 
I.ELECTRICAL PULSES 
2.HELICAL COAXIAL 
5.EXPLOSIVE GENERATORS 
TITLE 'PLASMA COHPRESSION BY EXPLOSIVELY PR?OUCED MAGNETIC FIELDS 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS 
TERMS 
SEQS 
1,PLASHA 
2,CC)HPRES~I~I 
3?EXPLOSIVELY 
4.PROOUCED 
5.MAGNETIC 
6,FIELDS 
1.PLASMA COHPRE$SI~ 
goEXPLOSIVELY PROOUCED MAGNETIC 
FIELDS 
I,PLASHA COHPRESSION 
2,EXPLOSIVELY PRCOUCED 
3.MAGNETIC FIELDS 
TITLE 'EFFECTIVE FEEDING SYSTEMS FOR PULSE GENERATORS 
AUTO-INDEXED NEXUS 
TERHS 
SEQS 
I.EFFECTIVE 
2.FEEDING 
3.SYSTEMS 
4.PULSE 
S.GENERATORS 
I.EFFECTIVE FEEDING SYSTEMS 
2.PULSE GENERATORS 
t.EFFECTIVE FEEDING 
2.SYSTEHS PULSE 
3.GENERATORS 
40 
References 
1. M.A .  Newcomb, R. A. Benson, Technique for the Automatic Genera- 
tion of Bibliographies (A Biomedical Application), San Diego, General 
Dynamics/Convair, 1965. 
2. J .A .  Sanford and Frederick R. Theriault, Problems in the Application 
of Uniterm Coordinate Indexing, College and Research Libraries, 
January 1956, v. XVIII, pp. 19-23. 
3. R .A .  Benson, Linguistic Experiments at Convair, San Diego, General 
Dynamics/Convair, 1967, pp. 5-1 to 5-3. 
4. Medical Systems Analysis, Aeromedical Evacuation System, San Diego, 
General Dynamics Convair, 1 August 1968. 
5. W.F .  MacDonald, Conversion of Large-Scale IS&R Systems for General- 
Purpose Operations, Convair division of General Dynamics, San Diego,. 
December 1968. 
41 
