GERD LAU -HANS DIETER LUTZ 
AUTOMATIC  ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GkOUP 
AND SOME PROBLEMS 
O. Introduction. 
Since 1971 the research group "Maschinelle Syntaxanalyse" (MasA) 
has been working as a part of the project "Linguistische Datenverar- 
beittmg" (r~DV) at the "Institut fiJr deutsche Sprache ", supported by 
the "Bundesminister f'tir Forschung und Tectmologie" of the Federal 
Republic of Germany. 
The task of the MasA is to elaborate a system for analysing simple 
sentences of present-day-German. " Simple sentences ", in this case, 
means any type of sentence with only one finite verb in it. 
1. The scope of the analysis. 
The team works on the basis of a so-called verb grammar. In this 
type of grammar the verb represents the nucleus of a sentence, thus 
being opposed to the subject-predicate-grammar. Proposals for the 
elaboration of such a grammar have been presented by Helbig-Schenkel, 1 
Heringer 2 and Engel s 
This type of grammar is based on a verb lexicon, which describes 
all the obligatory and facultative objects that depend on the verb, 
e.g. 
treffen with two obligatory objects in 
Ich treffe ihn morgen 
1 G. HELBIG, Der BegriO" der Valenz als Mittel der strukturellen Sprachbeschreibung d
des Fremdsprachenunterrichts, n ~ Deutsch als Fremdsprache ~>, I (1965), pp. 10-23. 
H. J. ~gER,  Theorie der deutschen Syntax, Miinchen 1970. 
8 U. ENos, Bemerkungen zur Dependenzgrammatik, in ~Neue Grammatiktheorien 
und ihre Anwendung auf das heutige Deutsch. Sprache der Gegenwart~, XX (1971), 
pp. 111-155. 
250 GERD LAU- HANS DIETER LUTZ 
treffen with one obligatory object and one facultative object in 
Er trifft (den Ball) 
treffen auf with two obligatory objects in 
Die Mannschaft traf auf einen schwachen Gegner. 
After having detected the number of both the obligatory and fac- 
ultative objects and specified these objects according to their syntactical 
functions, one can group the verbs into classes, e.g. the class of all the 
verbs with one obligatory object (this class contains for example the 
verb laufen), the class of all the verbs with two obligatory objects 
(containing for example treffen), the class of all the verbs with three 
obligatory objects (containing for example anbieten), the class of all 
the verbs with one obligatory and one facultative object (containing 
for example treffen), and so on. Each of these classes represents a o-called 
"Satzbauplan " (SBP)." 
The systematic levels of the grammar are 
a) the word class-level (WK-level) 
b) the group-level (noun group (NG), verbal group (VG)) 
c) the complex-level (noun complex (NK), verb complex (VX)) 
d) the object-level (nominative object (0o), genitive object 
(o . )  . . . .  ). 
The following graph can be regarded as an illustration of these 
four systematic levels: 
Der a\[te Staatsmann 
DE T ~ N O M  
NG 
I 
NK 
I 
trf  selnen Nachf, olger im Amt 
VERB DET4 NOM PRAEP NOM WK-level 
I V 
NG j G  group-level 
VK NK complex-level 
I I 
object-level O~ Vol ~0~ 
4 U. EN~L, Die deutschen Satzbauplline, in  Wirkendes Wort ~, XX (1970), pp. 361- 
392. 
6 For the explanation f the word classes, especially DET2B, ADJ, NOM, DET4, 
and PRAEP see section 2; O~ stands for "nominative object ", O~ for "accusative 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 251 
The way of finding the word class of a given word form, i.e. the 
morpho-syntactical description of a word form, is delineated in the 
contribution of Werner Brecht. e
2. Description of NG-relevant word classes. 
The following word classes are relevant for the constitution of a 
NG: 
a) preposition (postposition) PRAEP, e.g. vor 
b) determinantia DET, e.g. allen 
c) adverbs ADV, e.g. sehr 
d) non-inflected adjectives ADJU, e.g. gut 
e) inflected adjectives ADJ, e.g. sichtbaren 
f) nouns NOM, e.g. Objekten 
g) pronouns PRON, e.g. uns. 
The word classes are defined by the following morphological 
and/or syntactical properties: 
Prepositions are collected in a catalogue and specified by their posi- 
tion (in front of, behind, in front of or behind, in front of and behind 
the nucleus ofa NG), by their government (accusative, genetive, dative) 
and by the sort of object that is introduced by the preposition (pre- 
positional object, situative object, directional object). 
Adverbs are listed, and the list only includes words that meet the 
following conditions: non-inflexional; no predicative use; certain 
regularities of position. 
Non-inflected adjectives are not listed; they are described by an 
algorithm, which is to find out the degree of comparison. 
Inflected adjectives are not listed, either. They, too, are described 
object "; Vot stands for the verb class with the" Satzbauplan" 01 (obligatory nominative 
object plus obligatory accusative object). Note: The example is ambiguous, and only 
one interpretation is given. The example is ambiguous because of the noun group im 
Amt. This noun group may be an attribute to the noun group seinen Nachfolger. It may 
also be a noun group without any relation to seinen Nachfolger, and therefore it must be 
interpreted as a separate noun complex, which does not depend on tre~n as a represen- 
tation of the verb class V m. In this case the sequence im Amt is regarded as a so-called 
"Angabe" (cf. U. ENO)~L, Linguistische Studieu I Regeln zur " Satzgliedfolge ". Zur Stel- 
lung der Elemente im einfaehen Verbalsatz, in <~ Sprache der Gegenwart ~, XIX (1972), 
pp. 17-75, esp. 24ff). 
6 In the first Volume of this book, pp. 9-21. 
252 GERD LAU- HANS DIETER LUTZ 
by an algorithm with respect o case, number, gender, degree of com- 
parison and kind of inflexion (strong, weak). 
Nouns are not listed in the present state of our work. There exists 
an algorithm that provides the description of those words according 
to case, number, and gender, v 
In general, the definition of the several word classes i  the common 
one, as found in the traditional grammars. But there are two excep- 
tions: the so-called determinantia and the pronouns. 
The so-called eterminantia are listed in a catalogue; they are grouped 
with respect to the possible arrangements of several determinantia 
within a NG, e.g. 
vor allen diesen meinen sch~snen Biichern. s 
The results of having found out certain regularities are both a num- 
ber of distinct subclasses ofdeterminantia and the formulation of context- 
sensitive rules for analysing arrangements of determinantia. 
First, there are 10 subclasses, namely 
DET1A 
DET IB  
DET1C 
DET2A 
DET2B 
DET2C 
DET2D 
containing 
containing 
conta in ing  
containing 
containing 
containing 
containing 
D E T3 containing 
D E T4 containing 
DET5 containing 
all, all-; 
manch, solch, welch; 
irgend, irgendwelch ; 
dies-, jen-; 
d-, d-jenig; 
ein- ; 
kein-, welch-, irgendein-, irgendwekh-, ebend-, 
ebend-selb-, ebendies-, d-selb; 
jed-, jeglich-, jedwed; 
mein-, dein-, sein-, uns(e)r-, eu(e)r-, ihr-; 
einig-, etlich-, manch-, mehrer-, ein paar. ?
Secondly, there are 5 rules for describing the regularities of deter- 
minantia arrangements within a biG having a noun as nucleus. For 
7 In future it will be possible to incorporate a more effective algorithm which re- 
verts to an almost complete lexicon of German nouns. This lexicon has been placed at 
our disposal by the research group for "Automatische Lemmatisierung" at the Univer- 
sity of Saarbriicken, W-Germany. 
s The subclassification f the determinantia is a modification of the one given in 
ENGZL, Regetn zur Worstellung, in <~ Forschungsberichte desInstituts fiir deutsche Sprache, 
Mannheim ~, V (1969), pp. 9-148, esp. 102ff. 
0 The catalogue contains all word forms of the listed stems (indicated by " -  "). 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 253 
the demonstration of these rules we will use a simplified NG-structure 
with an abbreviated notation. 
R I :  (DET1A) (DET2A) (DET4) (ADJ) NOM ~ NG 
R2: (DETIA) (DET2B) (ADJ) NOM ~ NG 
R3: (DET1B) (DET2C) (ADJ) NOM ~ NG 
R4: (DET1C)/(DET2D)/(DET5) (ADJ) NOM ~ NG 
R5: (DET2C) (DET3) (ADJ) NOM ~ NG. TM 
It is important hat there can be no iteration of  a subclass of  de- 
terminantia. 
The rules mentioned above can be illustrated by the diagram on 
the next page 
The pronouns are considered as pro-forms o fa  NG with a nominal 
nucleus. A part of  the pronouns can be grouped in several subclasses 
according to three significant features: possibility of using a preposition 
in front of  the pronoun, possibility of putting determinantia n front 
of  the pronoun, possibility of  using a genitive or prepositional ttribute 
in the post-nuclear field. 
There are 9 subclasses, namely 
PRON1 containing man; 
PRON2 containing du, er, es, ich, ihr, sie, wir; 
PRON3 containing dein(er), dick, dir, einander, euch, euer, ihr(er), 
ibm, ihn(en), mein(er), reich, mir, sein(er), 
sick, sie, uns(er); 
PRON4 containing all-, ebend-, ebend-selb, ebendies-, einig-, ein 
paar, etlich-, etwas, irgendein-, irgendetwas, 
irgendw-, irgendwelch-, jedermann-, jemand-, 
kein-, manck-, mekrer-, niemand-, nichts, w-, 
welch-; 
PRON5A containing d-, d-selb-, d-jenig-, dies-, jen-; 
PRONSB containing ein-; 
PRO NSC containing jed-, jedwed-, jeglick- ;
PRONSD containing dein-, eu(e)r-, ihr-, mein-, sein-, uns(e)r-; 
PRON6 containing selber, selbst. 
10 The brackets stand for " facultative "; the slash stands for "exclusive or ". A full 
description of the structure of a noun group with a nominal nucleus will be given in 
section 5. 
254 GERD LAU-  HANS DIETER LUTZ 
t~ t~ 
7~ 
~4 
7. 
Lq 
u~ 
?? 
~t 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 255 
But, there is another group of pronouns without the characteristics 
mentioned above, i.e. without pre-nuclear field, without a preposition 
in front of  them, without post-nuclear field. These pronouns do not 
differ at the NG- or NK-leveL But they differ at the O-level, when 
you try to detect if such a pronoun is a substitute for an object (depending 
on the verb) or a substitute for a so-called "Angabe " (which does not 
depend on a verb), n Furthermore, pronouns that can be substitutes 
for an object, can be differentiated according to the kind of these objects. 
So, there are six more subclasses, namely 
PRON7A containing 
PRON7B containing 
PRON7C containing 
PRON7D containing 
PRON7E containing 
PR ON8 containing 
wobei, wofiir, womit, wonach, woraus, worum, 
wovon; 
wo, wohinter, woneben; 
woher, woherauf, woheraus, woherein, woher- 
iiber, wohin, wohinaus, wohlnein, wohini~ber; 
woran, worauf, worin, woriiber, worunter; 
wogegen ; 
inwiefern, inwieweit, warm, warum, weshalb, 
weswegen, wie, wieso, wodurch. 
Pronouns of PRON7A are substitutes for prepositional objects (04) ; 
pronouns of PRON7B are substitutes for situative objects (05) ; pronouns 
of PRON7C are substitutes for directional objects (06); pronouns of 
PRON7D are substitutes for O4 or O5; pronouns of PRON7E are 
substitutes for O4 or O8; pronouns of PRON8 are substitutes for so- 
called "Angaben "
The final division of pronouns in 15 subclasses makes it possible 
to set up rules for detecting and describing NGs with a pronominal 
nucleus. For the demonstration of these rules we will use a simplified 
and abbreviated notation. 
R6: PRON1 / PRON2 ~ NCo 
R7: PRON6 ~ NG~ ~ NG~,,. 
R8: (PRAEP) (PRON3 \[ PRON4}-~ NG~ 
R9: (PRAEP) {{(DET1A) PRON5A} / {(DET1B) PRON5B} 
/ {(DET1C) PRONSC} / {(DETIA) (DET2A/ 
DET2B) PRON5D}} ~ NG~ 
n The reason for these pronouns not being included in PRON1 (which meets the 
same conditions atthe first glance) is that man of PRON1 covers always the position 
of a nominative object (0o), in contrast to the pronouns of PRONTA to PRON8. 
256 GERD LAU-  HANS DIETER LUTZ 
R10: PRON7A-+ ... 04 
Rl1: PRON7B-+ ... Os 
R12: PRON7C-,'-... O0 
R13: PRON7D-~ ... O4 / Os 
R14: PRON7E-+ ... 04 / Oo 
R15:PRON8 -+ ... A~. 1~ 
This collection of  rules shows the difference between PRON1 ... 
PRON6 and PRON7A ... PRON8.  A comparison with the rules R1 
to R5 illustrates that there are less possibilities to combine determinantia 
in front of the nucleus of  a pronominal NG. Other differences will 
be discussed in section 3. 
3. Two types of NGs. 
It is no new observation that there are at least two different ypes 
of  NGs in German. 
The ftrst type covers all NGs having a noun as nucleus of  the NG, 
e.g. die Mitbestimmung, 
the second type covers all NGs with a pronoun as nucleus of the 
NG, e.g. sie, die unsere, woran. 
The structure of  the NG depends on what kind of  nucleus appears. 
In a b ig  with a plonominal nucleus, there can be no adverbs, no 
non-inflected adjectives, and no adjective - in opposition to a NG 
with a noun as a nucleus. 
In a pronominal NG there are less possibilities of  arranging deter- 
minantia than in a nominal NG (see rules R1-R15). The reason is 
quite evident: by suppressing the noun (nucleus) in a nominal NG, 
the last determinans turns into a pronoun, i.e. it represents he nucleus 
in a pronominal NG. Compare the following two examples: 
alle diese Bircher vs. alle diese 
DET1A DET2A NOM DET1A PRON5A 
t t 
nucleus nucleus 
1~ The " ? " indicates that the case of the NG is not predictable in general. "A"  
is an abbreviation f" Angabe ". The braces are to denote larger units belonging toeach 
other. For the explanation f other signs ee footnote 10. 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 257 
There is another difference beween a nominal NG and a pronominal 
one: in nominal NGs one can find other NGs embedded: 
die Ansprachen haltenclen Parlamentarier, or (rather complex) 
die nach Marx alle menschlichen Handlungen wesentlich 
und zu aller Zeit zum Naehteil der Mehrheit der BevSlkerung bestim- 
menden Kapitatgesetze. 
In both cases the first die belongs to the last word, to Parlamentarier 
and Kapitalgesetze ; die Parlamentarier and die Kapitalgesetze form the 
hierarchically highest NG. If you transform the determinans of this 
highest NG into a pronoun such as sie, there is no possibility of embed- 
ding other NGs in this pronominal NG. This explains the difference 
between a nominal NG and a pronominal one, too. 
4. Criteria for the analysis. 
The different elements of a German NG tmderlie different kinds of 
syntagmatic relations. The number of these relations varies correspond- 
ing to the two types of NGs. 
Four kinds of relations are relevant for the nominal NG: 
congruity between adjectives and nouns (concerning case, num- 
ber, and gender) 
between determinantia and nouns (concerning case, 
number, and gender) 
between prepositions and nouns (concerning the case 
of a noun and the possible government of a 
preposition) 
between determinantia and adjectives (concerning case, 
number, and gender); 
inflectional relation between determinantia and adjectives (con- 
cerning the inflexion of a determinans and 
the inflexion of a following adjective; 
degree of comparison of the adjective of the nominal NG (pro- 
viding the connection with further parts of 
the syntactical analysis); 
compatibility of subclasses of determinantia ccording to the 
rules R1 to R5; the rule of compatibility of 
nominal NG has the form: 
17 
258 GERD LAU - HANS DIETER LUTZ 
((det = 1) =~ ((M(WK, I, n-i) = DET1A v (M(WK, I, n-i -t- 1) = 
= DET2A ,i DET2B v DET4)) v 
,i ((M(WK, I, n - i )=DET2A^ (M(WK, I, n - i+ 1)= 
=DETa) ) )v  
v ((M(WK, I ,  n-i) = DET1B  ^  (M(WK, I, n-i-{- 1) = 
=DET2C) ) )v  
v ((M(WK, I, n - i )=DET2C^ (M(WK, I, n - i+ 1)= 
v ((det = 2) ~ (M(WK, I, n-i) = DET1A  ^  (M(WK, I, n-i -t- 1) = 
= DET2A  ^  (M(WK, I, n-i + 2) = DET4))). ~8 
Only two kinds of relations are relevant for the pronominal NG: 
congruity between determinantia and pronouns (concerning case, 
number, and gender) 
between prepositions and pronouns (concerning the 
case of a pronoun and the possible govern- 
ment of a preposition); 
compatibility of subclasses of determinantia according to the 
rules R6 to R9; the rule of compatibility of 
a pronominal NG has the form: 
((det = 1) =~ ((M(WK, I, n-i) = DET1A) ^  (M(WK, I, n-i + 1) = 
= DET2A v DET2B))). 
Summing up, there are only two kinds of relations of the pro- 
nominal NG, but four kinds of relations of the nominal NG; the set 
of the various congruity relations noticeable at the nominal NG differs 
from the one noticeable at the pronominal NG; and the compatibility 
13 This notation is a conglomerate of matrix-notation, logical signs, and of pro- 
grammer's conventions. It can be read: " I f  the value of the counter "det"  equals 1, then 
the value of the place " WK" of the matr ix"  M"  at the level " I "  at the posit ion" n- i "  
must have been " DET1A " and the value of the place " WK" of the matrix "M"  at 
the level " I "  at the posit ion" n - -  + 1 " must have been DET2A or DET2B or DET4,  
or the villue of... " and so on. 
M is a three-dlmensional matrix which gets built up during the morphological na- 
lysis of an input sentence, and which contains all computed information of all the words 
of this sentence. " I "  stands for " interpretat ion" and is a variable, running from 1 to 
50. At the moment, " WK" stands for "word  class" with 40 different specifications. 
" n"  indicates the position of the noun in a given sentence, and"  i "  is a position counter; 
so, if n - 3 and i = 1, then n - -  i - 2, i.e. the position in question is the next to the 
noun on the left side. 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 259 
rule for the nominal NG si much more complex than that for the pro- 
nominal NG. 
5. An algorithm as representation f a hyperrule. 
The preceding outlines displayed the complexity of contextual 
restrictions concerning German noun groups. It sounds extremely 
clmnsy to talk about hese restrictions in a natural language. We there- 
fore developed a formal notation for the communication between 
linguists and programmers ofour team. It consists of a matrix-notation, 
sentential connectives, functions and flow chart conventions. The com- 
patibility rules were a small cut-out. For more details ee our forthcoming 
publication. TM 
In the following, we will discuss the nominal NG only, because 
its structure and its difficulties are more interesting than the structure 
of the pronominal NG. 
At the present state of our algorithm the following constructions 
have been excluded: coordination of adjectives, fusion of prepositions 
and certain determinantia (i.e. am being an + dem), postponed pre- 
positions, prepositions like um ... willen, and embedded participle con- 
structions. 
The reason for excluding embedded participle constructions is that, 
in our opinion, complex constructions like these can be analyzed after 
the successful interpretation of simple sentences only. The other re- 
strictions mentioned above are not so important, i.e. the solution of 
these problems are, more or less, not so difficult, and, in fact, one of 
our collegues has made a proposal for the treatment of all kinds of 
prepositions. 
At the moment, we will consider the following hyperrule and we 
will interprete it as a statement about the word order only: 
(1) (PRAEP) (DET) (DET) (DET) (((ADV*) ADJU*) 
ADJ)* NOM ~ NG. is 
14 Aa~ITSCROPPE MASA, Zur maschinellen Syntaxanalyse L Morphosyntaktische Vor- 
aussetzungen flit eine maschindle Sprachanatyse d s Deutschen, i n ,  Forschungsberichte d s 
Instituts fLir deutsche Sprache, Mannheim ~), XVIII, 1, XVIII, 2, 1974. 
15 The asterisk indicates the possibility of iterating. For the explanation of the other 
signs see footnote 10. 
260 GERD LAU-  HANS DIETER LUTZ 
The program that is intended to analyze nominal NGs ftrst looks for 
a NOM, proceeding from the left to the right. After having found 
a NOM, the whole algorithm will be called up in order to search an 
ADJ to the left of the NOM. ADV* and ADJU* can appear only in 
case an ADJ has been found. Otherwise the algorithm turns to DET, 
which tests the word order and compatibility of the DETs if there 
exists a DET. There are no more than three DETs admitted. PRAEP 
is the word class which stands at the extreme left in German NGs 
(according to our restrictions); it is the last one to be looked for. 
In many cases the output of this analysis depends on homography. 
An example may prove this as well as the fact that there remain lots 
of ambiguities at this level of analysis: 
(2) nahe so sehr griindlich vergifteten Wdldern 
I PRAEP ADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOM I description I 
VERB t ADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOM t description 2
VERB ADVIADV ADJU ADJ NOM I description 3
VERB ADV ADV IADJU ADJ NOM I description 4
VERB ADV ADV ADJU I ADJ NOM I description 5
VERB ADV ADV ADJU VERB I NOMI description 6
(3) vor so sehr griindlich vergifteten Wiildern 
I PRAEP ADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOM t description 1
If PRAEP is a homograph, ADV* and ADJU* may or may not 
be constituents of the nominal NG (see (2)). If PRAEP is no homo- 
graph and if'there is no DET, the whole string must be a NG (see (3)). 
As homographs may exist, the algorithm is constructed in the fol- 
lowing way: in a first step the longest nominal NG possible is built 
up, and in a second step this nominal NG is minimized in all possible 
interpretations (in the case of (2) there are five interpretations which 
cover shorter nominal NGs than the first one). 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 261 
6. Problems concerning the identification of a "nominal complex" (con- 
sisting of a NG or of a number of NGs). 
A nominal complex NK is a noun group or a string of  noun groups 
which are part of  a sentence. Yet, this gives no information about 
the role the NK plays in the sentence: a NK can be either an object 
which depends on the finite verb, or an "Angabe ". NKs in the nom- 
inative case can serve as objects only, i.e. as subjects of  sentences. 
The following schedule displays that any NK with an O-value between 
1 and 6 can be either an object or an "Angabe ": 
O Object "Angabe " 
1 Er wiegt zwe i  K i lo  Er ldufi zwe i  Meter  
2 Ergedenkt des  Morgens  Er ldufi des  Morgens  
3 Er gibt m i r Wein Er stelgt m i r auf den' Fu/3 
Er trdgt m i r den Koffer 
4 Er rechnet mi t  dem Vor -  Er verdient mi t  dem Vor -  
t rag des Bruders t r ag des Bruders 
5 Erwohnt im ers ten  Stock  Erschldft im ers ten  Stock  
6 Er geht i n s K i n o hinein Er schldfi i n d e n T a g hinein 
Thus we cannot derive any knowledge about a NK's function from 
its grammatical description only. But semantical criteria can provide 
some solutions at this level of  analysis: 
(4) Er rechnet mit dem Vortrag seines Bruders. 
(4) contains the verb rechnen mit + 1 with the " Satzbauplan" SBP 
134. But (4) contains also the verb rechnen with SBP O. As the semantic 
features of  Vortrag tell us that Vortrag is no means of calculating, the 
SBP ~ will be excluded as an incorrect derivation. 
262 GERD LAU-  HANS DIETER LUTZ 
(5) Er rechnet mit der Rechenmaschine. 
(5) contains the same verbs as (4). As Rechenmaschine is a means of  
calculating, the NK is also an "Angabe ". Therefore both SBP O and 
SBP 04 are possible analyses. 
But we do not yet follow semantics. We try to analyze with syn- 
tactic means as long as possible. 
If we combine two NGs in order to build a NK, the right NG 
serves as an attribute: 
der Vertrag seines Bruders 
I - I  I -I 
NG b ig  
I I 
NK 
An attribute is a big with one of  the following O-values: 
O = 2 .... genitive phrase: der Vortrag s e i n e s B r u d e r s 
0=4 .... prepositional phrase: der Mann mi t  dem Kropf  
O = 5 .... situative phrase: der Baum i m G a r t e n 
O = 6 .... directional phrase: die Fahrt i n d i e S t a d t 
The rules RR1 and RR2 define an algorithm which is to build 
NKs of NG-combinations. Further on, RR3 and RR5 change a NK 
into an object, and RR4 an NK into an " Angabe" 
L~ ... leftmost position o f  a NG~ or a NKj 
Ri ... rightmost position o f  a NG~ or a NK i 
Oi ... value of  the "object class" of  a NG~ or NK;. 
RR1: 
RR2: 
NG (L,, R,, O,)= 
NG (L,, R,, O,)+ 
on condition that 1) 
2) 
3) 
N~ (L,, R,, 03 
N~ (L~, R~, %) = NK~ (L,, G 0,) 
R,+I=Lj; 
0~.= either 2 or 4 or 5 or 6; 
NG~ does not contain a preposition be- 
hind the noun. 
RR3 : NKj (L~, R~, O j )= 0 i (Lj, Rj, Oj) (i.e. a derivation of  
on condition that Oj 4: O. an object.) 
AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 263 
RR4:  
RR5 : 
N~ (ti, Ri, o j ) :  Aj (L~., ~., 0i) 
on condition that O~ 4: ~. 
N~. (L;, R;, 0 ) :  Oj (Lj, R~, 0)  
(i.e. a derivation of 
an "Angabe ".) 
(i.e. the derivation of 
the subject.) 
Consider an example of a possible application of RR1-RR5 in 
order to combine three NGs and thus make a single NK: 
die Garage vor dem Haus des Freundes 
lye s, s) + NK (~, 7, 2) 
RR2 
1 
NC (1, 2, o) + NK (3, 7, 2) 
NK (1, 7, O) 
I 
RR5 
I 
o (1, 7, o) 
Exceptional case I: Prepositions in front of, and behind, a NG or 
NK. 
I 
(6) um des Freundes willen 
(7) um des Freundes in Paris willen 
Evidently (7) is no string of  two NGs. Therefore, RR1 and RR2 are 
not applicable to this type of NK, and we must construct a special 
algorithm for the analysis of it. 
Exceptional caseH: Preposition behind a NG or a NK. 
In German there are some prepositions which can appear in front 
of, or behind, a NG, for instance nach, wegen ... .  
Er zittert wegen des Kampfes or Er zittert des Kampfes wegen. 
When we consider (8), (9) and (10) we see that a postposition in a 
NG at the same time is a postposition of a NK. 
264 GERD LAU-  HANS DIET?R LUTZ 
(8) 
(9) 
(lO) 
des Kampfes wegen 
des Kampfes in der Sporthalle wegen 
des Kampfes in der Sporthalle in Bonn wegen 
We need a special algorithm for the analysis of NKs of the type (8)- 
(10). It must provide, for instance, the following analyses of (11): 
(11) Er entsinnt sich des Beifalls wegen des Gesanges. 
I -  II. I 
analysis a)... NG(4,5,2) NG (6, 8, 4) 
I I I. I 
analysis b) ... NC  (4, 6, 4) NG (7, 8, 2) 
It is possible to unite both NGs of a) into one NK by application of 
RR1 and RR2. But in b) this is impossible; condition 3. of RR2 is not 
met. Therefore both NGs in b) must be changed into separate NKs 
by RR1. 
Another quite complicated example: 
(12) 
analysis a) ... 
Er entledigt sich des Freundes des Boxens wegen des Messers 
I I I I I. .I 
NG(4,5,2) NG(6,7,2) NG (8, 10, 4) 
I .11 I 
NK (6, ~o, 2) 
1 I 
NK (4, 10, 2) 
(12) Er entledigt sich des Freundes des Boxens wegen des Messers 
I I I II. -I 
NG(4,5,2)  NG (6, 8, 4) NG(9,10,2) 
I II -I 
analysis b) ... NK (4, 8, 2) NK (9, 10, 2) 
RR1-RR5 and the special algorithms for exceptional case I and 
II are the theoretical basis to find all possible combinations of NGs 
and to derive objects and "Angaben " from NKs. 
Next we check the syntax for useful hints so as to achieve a correct 
analysis of NKs of a given sentence, and hints so as to decide, which 
NKs are objects and which are "Angaben "
AUTOMATIC  ANALYSIS OF THE GF.RMAN NOUN GROUP 265 
In (13) and (14) we find NGs of the same structure. But the correct 
analysis of (13) differs completely from that of (14). 
(13) well der Mann mit der Verletzung der Elle im linken Arm schliift 
I I I I I  . . . . .  II. 
NK (2, 11, O) 
I 
O (2, 11, O) 
(14) well der Mann mit der Frau des Morgens im alten Carl tanzt 
I II II I I .  
NK (2, 3, O)NK (4, 6, 4) NK (7, 8, 2) NK (9, 11, 5) 
I I I I 
O(2 ,3 ,~)  A(4,6,4)  A (7, 8, 2) A (9, 11, 5) 
As long as we do not find any hints, the rules must be applied in a 
systematic order, so as to have all possible analyses as a result. A semantic 
component then can choose the subset of reasonable analyses out of 
the whole set. Thus the analysis of (13) would have to be an analysis 
of (14), and vice versa. 
It would need too much space to print the set of theoretically poss- 
ible analyses of (15) here. The reader easily sees, in how many different 
ways RR1-RR5 can be applied. The whole set of possible analyses is 
greater than 100! We just show a single analysis. We note the rule 
being applied in the leftmost column. Now we try to use the " Satz- 
bauplan" as a means of improving the exhaustive analysis-procedure. 
In (15) wartete is the single finite verb. It has the SBP f~ 4 aufq- 1. 
That means, it takes both an object in the nominative case and a pre- 
positional object. Having found a certain SBP, our algorithm runs as 
follows: 
1. Look for a NG ( ,  , O) and make it an object. (According 
to RR1, RR5.) 
2. Look for a NG ( , , 4) which contains the preposition auf, 
and make it an object. (According to RR1, RR3.) 
3. Apply RR1, RR2 and RR4 to the NGs which are not objects. 
4. Try to analyze one of the NGs which are not objects as an 
attribute of an object. If this is possible, restart at 3. ; if not, stop! 
266 GERD LAU-  HAI~S DIETER LUTZ 
,.2,.2 
$ 
AUTOMATIC  ANALYSIS OP THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 267 
i 
~'~ 
0 
~ 0 _ _ 
v 
0 0 
0 
v 
0 0 
O0 
0 0 0 
o v 0 
0 
0 
o 
0 
268 GERD LAU-  HANS DIETER LUTZ 
In the case of (15), this algorithm produces no more than 8 analyses. 
That means that the unshortenend result of more than 100 analyses can 
be reduced to 8 by using an improved version of analysis. This shows 
that the SBP gives us the syntactical information which is necessary 
to make the correct analysis. 
On the opposite page we show that all 8 analyses are possible with 
the SBP 0 4 auf+ 1 and the structure of NGs as in (15). 
Sometimes one can find more than one finite verb in a sentence: 
(16) Er liebe bestimmte nahe 
verb1 verb~ verb3 
adj~ adj~ adj3 
prep1 
adju~ 
Wa'Ider 
In these cases one has to find out which of the verbs is the actual finite 
verb. In German the finite verb can appear at the first position in the 
sentence, at the second position, and at the end. It is easy to fill up 
the following matrix according to the verbs in (16): 
verb 
liebe 
bestimmte 
nahe 
1 "t position 
w 
2nq posizion 
+ 
+ 
+ 
end 
Neither verb1, verbs or verbs is standing at the first position or at 
the end of the sentence. From that we can conclude that each of them 
must be at the second position of the sentence. We still know another 
criterion to find the right verb: The string in front of it, at position 
1, must be an NK. In (16) only verb1 meets this condition. Therefore 
liebe is the finite verb. 
Only if one knows a lot of syntactical heuristics like these, one 
is able to decide at which level of sentence-analysis emantics hould 
be employed. We think there will be need for an interaction between 
a syntactical and semantical component. 
