_ w .  , -  
THOMAS M. PAIKEDAY 
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE INTERMEDIATE COP.PUS 
Sample studies of the five-million-word American Heritage In- 
termediate Corpus, the largest yet for English, show the inadequacies 
of computerized word counts for lexicographical purposes. Out of 
about 87,000 word types listed in the American Heritage Word Fre- 
quency Book (by JOHN B. C~RorI. et ali, Houghton Mifflin-American 
Heritage, New York, 1971), only about 40 % seem distinctive lexical 
items. On the other hand, 22 % of the vocabulary entries required by 
the 50,000-entry dictionary for which the Corpus was prepared id 
not occur even once among the five million word tokens. 
We first examined three randomly selected portions of the listing 
in the American Heritage Word Frequency Book (AHWFB).side by side 
with the corresponding entry lists of the American Heritage School Dic- 
tionary (AHSD), the Thorndike-Barnhart Intermediate Dictionary (TBID), 
the Merriam-Webster New Students Dictionary (WNSD), the Holt 
Intermediate Dictionary (HID), and the Random House School Dictionary 
(RHSD). Each of the three portions checked in AHWFB was based 
on a consolidated list of 100 entry words (300 in all), made up of the 
vocabulary entries in the dictionaries: (1) AFTER. to AHAB, (2) 
CABBAGE to CALEB, and (3) LAKE to LANOLIN. 
Our aim was to fred out how useful the Corpus was in assessing the 
vocabulary of Grades 3-9 and in adding new words to the lexicon of 
that level as presented in the dictionaries. 
Here are some of our findings: 
There are approximately 110 word types in each sample of the main 
AHWFB listings (once-occurring entries listed at bottom of pages 
were omitted) corresponding to each 100-entry-word portion from 
the dictionaries. 
Of the 110 word types, 36 % are lexically undistinctive items inad- 
missible as vocabulary entries in dictionaries. Such are: (a) hyphenated 
loose compounds, e.g. After-Shaving, agreedon, and air-breathing; (b) 
solid forms of hyphenated compounds; (c) spellings with tmdistinctive 
initial capital instead of lower-case letter, such as After, Against, Age, 
282 THOMAS M. PAIKEDAY 
and Ahead; (d) regular inflected forms of nouns, adjectives, verbs, and 
adverbs; (c) unusual word types, numbers, and other such "graphic 
types" 
Over 13 ?/o are lexical and non-lexical items inadmissible in any 
of the five dictionaries, including AHSD. The complete listing of such 
items is given below: 
afterhold cabildo lakeside 
Agard cabman Lamar 
Agatha Cabral Lambert 
Agba Cabrillo Lambu 
Agelaos Caccini lampshade 
Aggy Cadillac* Lamson 
ag'in Cadore Lanciotti 
Agnes Caecilian landcrab 
Agootuk Caemarvon Landry 
Agramonte Cahokia Landshort 
Caipira Langanes 
calamus Langelinie 
Calchas Langewiesche 
Calder Langley 
Caldwell Langmier 
Cale Langston 
Caleb 
In addition to the above, 
items (5 %): 
Agamemnon Cadi 
Agassiz Cadiz 
Agincourt Calais 
Agnew Calderon 
AHSD had to discard also the following 
lamplight 
Lamplighter 
Lancaster 
Lancastrian 
landfall 
landless 
landmass 
Summing up, according to the entry criteria used by AHSD alone, 
175 (54 ?/o ) out of a total word-type listing of 322 items in the AHWFB 
samples had to be discarded. 
* N.B. There seems no reason why  high-frequency items like Cadillac (72) and 
Ford (109) should not be entered in dictionaries, especially when they occur in senten- 
ces o f  this sort: ~ A Cadillac crashed into a Ford ~, in which Cadillac and Ford are used 
in a generic manner, not as proper names. 
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE INTERMEDIATE CORPUS 283 
In other words, only 46 % of the word types sampled from AHWFB 
were found to have been useful for AHSD, and these were already in the 
other dictionaries. 
On the other hand, out of the 300 entry words in the three conso- 
lidated lists based on dictionary entries, only 235 (about 78 %) were 
in AHWFB. The other 65 lexical items (22 ?//o) which the dictionaries 
collectively had, but did not occur even once in the Intermediate Cot- 
pUS, are:  
afterbirth cabby Laker 
aftercare cabdriver lain 
afterdeck cabriolet lamasery 
afterglow cacique lambda 
aftertaste cacomistle lambent 
ageratum cacophonous lambkin 
agglomerate caddish lambskin 
agglomeration Caddo lamentably 
agglutinate Caddoan lampoon 
agglutination Cadette lampoonery 
agglutinin cadge Lanai 
aggrandize Caduceus Lancashire 
aglitter Caesarea lancelet 
agnosticism Caesarean Lancelot 
agog caesium lancer 
agora caesura lancewood 
Agra caftan landau 
agt. cagey landsman 
cahoots landwards 
caitiff lankily 
cajolery lanolin 
calamine 
calash 
calcify 
calcine 
calculable 
In other words, 22 % of required ictionary entries are not in the sample 
of five-million word tokens (including 86,741 word types) drawn from 1045 
texts of grade 3-9 level fed into American Heritage computers. 
New words entered in AHSD that are not in the 300-word entry 
list based on the other dictionaries are the following two which seem 
rare birds occurring not even once in either the Intermediate Corpus 
or the Brown University corpus: 
284 THOMAS M. PAIKEDAY 
CACOMISTLE: A racoonlike animal of southwestern North 
America, having a long black-banded tail; 
LAKER-S: The national Basketball Association team from Los 
Angeles. 
Another study of the American Heritage Intermediate Corpus that 
we did was an analysis of its lexical components. 
We listed all the word types (including those of single occurrence) 
in the three portions used in our study of the usefulness of the corpus 
for lexicographical purposes, viz. (1) AFTER. to AHAB, (2) CABBAGE 
to CALEB, and (3) LAKE to LANOLIN. Then we grouped them 
under the following headings: 
a) Lexical items: Under this head we included all word types 
having lexical meaning, including also names of persons and places 
applicable to more than one individual. Thus Caesar was included but 
not Agnew. Spelling variants uch as Caddy/caddie/Caddie were counted 
as one, but irregular inflectional forms were counted separately. Ca- 
dillac was included for obvious reasons. 
b) Grammatical items: In this we counted all word types based on 
hxical items, such as spelling variants, regular inflectional forms, com- 
pounds and nonce forms having no more meaning than those of their 
parts, such as landloving, land-management, a d land-reform, etc. 
c) Non-lexical items: In this we included unusual word types 
to which we could not assign a meaning, and unique persons and places. 
A word type such as ah-h-h was counted as a lexical item, but lan' 
and Aggie were considered non-lexical. 
The following chart indicates the components of the lexicon, ac- 
cording to our sample study, of the Grade 3-9 vocabulary presented 
in the AHI Corpus. It must be mentioned here that non-lexical per- 
0 o 
? 20,1% LEXICAL 
~41'1% ~i~ 
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE INTERMEDIATE CORPUS 285 
sons and places of the type usually entered in dictionaries amounted to 
just over 1 ~o of the word types we sampled. 
Our studies seem to throw much light on the relations between 
frequency word counts and dictionaries. Dr. Carroll, the senior author 
of the America Heritage Word Frequency Book, has said: "My  mathe- 
matical analysis of the problem of sampling indicates that a truly erior- 
mous corpus, say on the order of 500 million words, would be required 
if the resulting list were to be expected to include all or nearly all items 
required for a dictionary of respectable size. " (Research in the Teaching 
of English, Fall 1972, N.C.T.E., Urbana, Illinois, pp. 236-237). 

