PIIOBLi~IS OF F01@biL REPRESENTAT ION OF TEXT STRUCTURE 
FROM THE POINT  OF VIEL{ OF AUTOMATIC  TitiNSLATION 
Z.M. Sha lyap ina  
Inst i tute  of 0r ien~al  Studies 
of tile Academy of Sc iences of tile USSR 
l.loscow, USSR 
Stumnary 
The paper  i s  devoted  to  l ingu is t i c  
problems of de f in ing  the basic  formal iz -  
ed representation of text in an automat ic  
t rans la t ion  system wi th in  the frsmlework 
of  the so-ca l led integra l  formal model  of 
tile tr~ulslation process,  the pr imary  re- 
qu i rement  for tills representat ion  consi-  
dered to be a compromise between its se- 
mal~ticity, super f ic ia l i ty~ a/id exhaust i -  
veness.  A representat ion  cover ing  f ive 
major aspects  of text s t ructure (its 
lexico-gra~\]matical  compos i$ ion;  its pre- 
dicate-ar~iment organ izat ion  on the se- 
mant ico -syntact i c  level; the syTitactic 
groupinz  ~ of its units;  the a/iaphoric re- 
lat ions between them; tile pecu l ia r i t ies  
of their  l inear  ar rmlgement)  and refer-  
red ~o as Combined Structura l  Represen-  
tat ion (CSR) of  text, is descr ibed  to 
show tile ways and means of  ach iev ing  
this compromise in the Japanese-Russ ian  
Automat ic  T rans la t ion  Project,  now under  
deve lopment  at tile Ins t i tute  of Or ienta l  
Studies of the Academy of Sc iences o? 
the USSR (Moscow). 
In t roduct ion  
Many prob lems of the automat ic  proces-  
s ing of  text require for their  effect- 
ive so lut ion  a prev ious  analys is  of the 
text processed,  a imed at tra/isforming 
this text into its intelnnediate formal i -  
zed representat ion  of some kind, more 
sui table for fur ther  p rocess ing  than the 
text itself .  I'~hen determin ing  tile conc- 
rete character i s t i cs  of such a represen-  
tat ion one must  obv ious ly  take into ac- 
count the operat ions  meant  to be app l ied  
to it, or to be per fo rmed on its bas is  
w i th in  the  f ramework  of the system ilivol- 
red. I f  it is the prob lem of automat ic  
tra~Islation that the system is to solve, 
the set of  tile cor respond ing  operat ions  
wil l  depend pr imar i l y  on the general  for- 
mal  model  of  the t rans lat ion  process  un- 
der ly ing  this system. One vers ion  of tlle 
model  in quest ion,  p roposed in I a/id dis- 
cussed in more deta i l  in 2, env isages 
the fo l lowing  main  groups of operat ions:  
1 ) ana lys is  and i n te rpreta t ion  of the 
in i t ia l  text, s imulat ing  the process  of 
perce iv ing  and unders tand ing  its s igni f i -  
cat ion and denotat ion;  ideal ly,  it pre- 
supposes a semantic  descr ip t ion  of tile 
text, as wel l  as a model  of the s i tuat ion  
("world" f ra~ment)  p resented  in it, being" 
const ruc ted  from this text (possibly, 
v ia a ,lumber of  intelnnediate represen-  
tat ions ) ; 
2) tra/islation proper,  which is per- 
formed at a level R of some formal re- 
presentation R i of the in i t ia l  text, de- 
r ived from its analys is ,  and 6ullounts to 
se lect ing  t rans la t ion  equ iva lents  for 
the un i ts  inc luded in l{i: the result  is 
an in termediate  representat ion  R t of tlle 
target text, this representation being 
usua l ly  (although not necessar i ly )  of 
the same level as Ri; 
3) ver i f i ca t ion  of the adequacy of 
the tr~ulslation performed, by means of 
a/lalyzili~' the resulta/it representat ion  
R t a/id compar ing  the semant ic  descr ip-  
t ion and the s i tuat iona l  model  obtained,  
with the sema/itic description alid the 
model  of  tlre s i tuat ion cor respond ing  to 
the in i t ia l  text.; 
I~) generation (synthesis)  of the 
tar,z'et text by tra/lsforming tlre inte~ne-  
d iate representat ion  R t formed dur ing  
translation proper  and assumed to be 
adequate by the ver i f i ca t ion  procedure,  
into a sequence of actual  word- forms 
azld punctuat ion  marks  mak ing  up the tar- 
tset l.a/i~age text; 
5) eva luat ion  of ~he target text 
with a v iew fie detect  undes i rab le  ambi- 
Ln/ities and inaccurac ies  that mi~-ht have 
s l ipped in dur ing  the synthes is  process;  
it impl ies  8/lalyzin~- the text back to 
the I{ level  and checking,whether tile re- 
su l t ing representat ion  R t co inc ides wi th  
the representat ion  R t from which  this 
text has been formed; 
6) ed i t ing  operations d ic ta ted  by the 
checks and compar isons  made: i f  the trans- 
lat ion is judged to be inadequate  tliey 
wi l l  consist  ill returning" to the phase 
of t rans la t ion  proper  and e i ther  subst i -  
tut ing a l te rnat ive  t rans la t ion  equiva-  , 
lents for some of the prev ious ly  select-  
ed ones,or recons ider ing  the ent i re pro- 
cedure %Ised and repeat ing  it at a d i f fe-  
rent ("deeper")  representation level or 
in a d i f fe rent  form (probab ly , resor t ing  ? 
to synonymous trsl\]sformations of" the ini- 
t ial text at the R i level);  i f  it is tile 
target text ambif~lities 6uld sty l is t ic  im- 
per fec t ions  that arc ~o be removed,bet ter  
express ive  means wil l  be sought chief ly  
by actuating9 the system of  synonymous 
tra/Isformations at the R t level. 
174 
It is read i ly  seen that the basic le- 
vel  of  formal  text representat ion  f rom 
the s tandpoint  of the above concept ion  
of the t rans la t ion  process  is level  R, 
d i rec t ly  concerned wi th  the most impor-  
tant t rans la t ion  operat ions,  pr imar i ly ,  
the operat ions  of t rans la t ion  proper,  
the scope of ~ l i ch  is p rac t i ca l l y  conf in-  
ed to the level in quest ion,  and the ope- 
rat ions of  synthes is  ensur ing  the tran- 
s i t ion from the R- leve l  representat ion  
of  a text to its more "super f ic ia l "  re- 
p resentat ions  up to the text as such. 
Some other  of  the operat ions  ment ion-  
ed invo lve also sw i tch ing  from the R-le- 
vel to "deeper" levels of in termed ia te  
formal text representat ion  and tak ing 
into cons iderat ion  such supp lementary  
factors  as the essence of the s i tuat ion  
descr ibed  by the text to be t rans lated,  
the semant ic  pecu l ia r i t ies  of  the vocabu-  
lary and the syntax of the two languages;  
the requ i rements  of  g r~nmat ica l i ty  and 
sty l i s t ic  normat iv i ty  ( regular i ty)  of the 
target text, and so on. The forego ing  
shows that these operat ions  are most ly  
aux i l i a ry  in nature,  the i r  main  purpose 
being to improve the content  adequacy  
and the l ingu is t ic  acceptab i l i ty  of the 
t rans la t ion  text formed through the use 
of the R- level  representat ion ;  in a con- 
crete automat ic  t rans la t ion  system based 
essent ia l l y  on ~he formal  model  we have 
out l ined,  they may be reduced or even al- 
together  omit ted for var ious  pract ica l  
reasons.  
However,  whether  these supp lementary  
operat ions  be inc luded in an AT system 
or not, it is c lear  that the system wil l  
depend largely  for its e f f i c iency  on the 
choice of the in termed ia te  level R. It 
is p rec i se ly  this bas ic  level that we 
are now Go ing  to consider.  
Genera l  Requ i rements  
From the point  of v iew of the purpos-  
es and pecu l ia r i t ies  of the t rans la t ion  
process,  there are two oppos i te  requi re-  
ments  that can be p laced  upon the inter-  
med ia te  formal ized representat ion  R in 
an automat ic  t rans la t ion  system. 
On the one hand, insofar  as transla-  
t ion bo i l s  down to t rans forming  the sur- 
face st ructure of  a text whi le  preserv-  
ing its content,  it seems safe to assu- 
me that i f  some ,components of  the text to 
be t rans lated~ some features  of these 
components ,  or l inks between them are re- 
levant for the content  s t ructure of this 
text, they may also prove of  impor tance  
for choos ing the correct  t rans la t ion  
equ iva lents  for the text units.  Conseque-  
ntly, the adequate representat ion  R used 
in au AT  system should be su f f i c ient ly  
"semant ic"  for  al l  the necessary  info~11a- 
t ion concern ing  the components ,  l inks 
and features  in quest ion  to be e i ther  
exp l i c i t l y  g iven in this representat ion  
Or, at least, to be eas i ly  obta inab le  
f rom it. To put it d i f ferent ly ,  represe-  
n ta t ion  R of a text p rocessed  must ref- 
lect its semant ic  st ructure wi th  suff i -  
c ient p rec i s ion  and in suf f ic ient  de- 
tail. 
On the other  hand, the s t ructures  of 
the source and the target l~ages  wil l ,  
as often as not, have certa in  features 
in co,non, this lead ing to an inev i tab le  
neut ra l i za t ion  of any ana lys is  t ransfor-  
mat ions  invo lv ing  such features,  by the 
inverse t rans fo~nat ions  dur ing  the syn- 
thesis  process.  Such t rans fo~nat ions  
wi l l  thus prove unnecessary  for t rans la-  
t ion purposes,  no mat ter  how in~ortant  
they might  be as regards  the ful l  seman- 
tic ana lys is  of the text. Accord ing ly ,  
representat ion  R must  be su f f i c ient ly  
"super f ic ia l "  for its const ruc t ion  to in- 
corporate  the min imum poss ib le  of such 
super f luous  t ransformat ions .  
As we see, the second requ i rement  pro- 
v ides a k ind of  l im i ta t ion  on the f i rst  
one, res t r i c t ing  the extent  and the me- 
thods of the exp l i ca t ion  necess i ta ted  by 
tile latterp of the semant ic  s t ructure  of  
the text. Tak ing into account  both  of 
these requ i rements  wi l l  most  l ike ly  re- 
sult in a k ind  of a compromise  so lut ion 
suggest ing  that in fo rmat ion  made expl i -  
cit in representat ion  R of  a cer ta in  text 
should not inc lude all  the e lements  of  
its semant ic  structure;  rather,  it should 
cover  only those of  them which  are apr io-  
ri known to be extens ive ly  used  in estab- 
l i sh ing  in ter - l~guage cor re la t ions  dur-  
ing t rans lat ion.  
With such a solut ion,  however,  one 
must  be fu l ly  aware that real  texts wi l l  
conta in  a substant ia l  p ropr t ion  of cases 
where some text in fo rmat ion  over looked 
by our  analys is  might  eventua l ly  turn out 
re levant  for t rans lat ion.  If we do not 
want to give up the idea of  adequate ly  
p rocess ing  such texts as impract i cab le  
in pr inc ip le ,  it seems usefu l  to impose a 
third requ i rement  on representat ion  R - 
the requ i rement  of "exhaust iveness"  which  
may be fo rmulated  as fol lows. Al l  infor-  
mat ion  conta ined in a natura l  language 
text and not made expl ic i t  in its inter-  
mediate  representat ion  must  be preserved  
wi th in  this representat ion;  i f  poss ib le,  
it should be preserved ful ly  and without  
chang ing  its or ig ina l  (natural  language) 
form, so that there might  be no acc iden-  
tal losses or d is tor t ions .  
I f  so, the subst i tu t ion  of the forma- 
l ized representat ion  R for the or ig ina l  
text wi l l  not exc lude the poss ib i l i ty  of 
175 
addi t iona l  analys is  ~llplifying the res- 
u l ts  of tile s tandard ana lyz ing  procedure  
and prov id ing  access  to some extra  infor-  
mat ion  that may be required. This  is to 
say that the l inguist  descr ib ing  the 
means of t rans la t ing  concrete language 
un i ts  w i th in  such a system wi l l  not  be 
subject  to the pressure  of too str ingent  
l im i ta t ions  o r ig inat ing  from the conven-  
t ions of  the system, ra ther  than from 
the nature  of  the mater ia l  he deals  with, 
and compl i ca t ing  h is  task (d i f f icu l t  
enough as it is). ~ leoret ica l ly ,  he wi l l  
be free to use any text in fo rmat ion  (bo~ 
"super f ic ia l "  and "deep") in  any way he 
may f ind l ingu is t i ca l l y  appropr iate :  
whether  as source uni ts  to be rep laced 
by t r~ is la t ion  equiva lents ,  or as condi-  
t ions determin ing  the equ iva lents  chos- 
en for some other  units,  or else as tra- 
ns la t ion  equ iva lents  themselves.  
The above pr inc ip les  are general  
enough to a l low of var ious  ways of  imp- 
lement ing  them in a concrete automat ic  
t rans la t ion  project .  We sl~all present  
here one attempt of  such imp lementat ion  
made in de f in ing  the so-ca l led Combined 
Structura l  Representat ion  to be used in 
the system of Japanese-Russ ian  automat ic  
t rans lat ion,  now under  deve lopment  at 
the Inst i tute  of Or ienta l  Studies of  the 
Academy of Sc iences of the USSR 
(~oscow)3. 
Combine d St, ruc, tural  Representat ion  (CSR), 
Tak ing  into account  the typo log ica l  
cor re la t ion  between the Japanese and the 
Russ lan  lan6~ages,  we cons ider  it neces-  
sary to speci fy  in the CSR of the in i t i -  
al Japanese texts, as well  as of their  
Russiax, t rans lat ions,  f ive main  aspects  
of  text structure:  the lexico-granmlati- 
cal compos i t ion  of the text processed,  
its p red icate -ar~ iment  o rgan izat ion  on 
the semant ico -syntact i c  level, the syn- 
tact ic  group ing  of its units,  the ~apho-  
tic re la t ions  between them, and the pecu- 
l iar i t ies  of their  l inear  arrangement .  
Wi th in  the CSR the cor respond ing  f ive 
types of  l ingu is t ic  in fo rmat ion  about the 
text form separate components  ~l ich  wi l l  
now be d i scussed  in turn, most ly  from the 
point  of v iew of their  cons i s tency  witll 
the general  requ i rements  stated above. 
Lexico-~|r~lati .cal  compos i t ion  
~e component  of the CSR concerned 
with the lexico-granm~atical compos i t ion  
of the text is in tended to conta in  expl i -  
cit descr ip t ions  of al l  lexemes present  
or impl ied (if e l l ips is  is the case) in 
the text under  cons iderat ion,  as wel l  as 
of al l  g rammat ica l  (morpho-syntaet ica l )  
e lements  accompany ing  them in the corres-  
pond ing  word forms or  quas i -word  forms 
(units taken to be funct iona l ly  ana logous  
to word forms). The descr ip t ions  requir -  
ed must include, apart  from the s~nbols 
of  the uni ts  involved,  in fo rmat ion  about 
their  mean ings  wi th in  the text in quest-  
ion and about their  re levancy  or i rrele-  
vancy as regards the process  of  its tra- 
ns lat ion.  
~le operat ions  necessary  to obta in  
this component  of the CSR ~len ana lyz ing  
the in i t ia l  Japanese text wi l l  ev ident ly  
compr ise i so la t ing  separate word forms 
and determin ing  their  internal  s t ructure 
(in terms of lexemes and morpho log ic  mar- 
kers),  reso lv ing  ~nb i~ i t ies  for all 
un i ts  establ ished;  e l im inat ing  synonymy 
where it is man i fes ted  as supp lementary  
d i s t r ibut ion  or free var ia t ion  of morpho-  
logic units;  detect ing  phraseo log ica l  
word combinat ions  ~d reduc ing  them to 
a one-word symbol; g iv ing  special  labels 
to those word forms or parts  of word 
forms which  p lay ~ aux i l ia ry  role in the 
text ana lyzed and requi re  no special  tran- 
s lat ion equiva lents ;  f i l l ing  in the uni ts  
omit ted in the source text i f  their  ab- 
sence obscures its s t ructure  and h inders  
the t rans la t ion  process  (due to the di f -  
ferences between the ru les of l inguist ic  
e l l ips is  in the two lmlguages) ,  etc. 
From this it fo l lows that the lexico-  
granm~atical compos i t ion  of a text cannot 
be de f in i t i ve ly  es tab l i shed in the course 
of  its analys is  wi thout  d rawing  upon in- 
fo rmat ion  about its s t ructura l  characte-  
r ist ics.  The same k ind  of  in fo rmat ion  is 
also needed ~en work ing  with this compo- 
nent  of the CSR in the synthes is  process  
(chief ly  in connect ion  with such means 
of express ing  structura l  re lat ions  as 
grammat ica l  agreement  and government ,  
typical  of the Russ ian  l~,guage).  
Therefore~ in dec id ing  what language 
un i ts  are to be descr ibed  as permiss ib le  
in the g iven con~onent  of the CSR, and 
~at  status is to be a t t r ibuted  to them 
wi th in  its framework,  spec i f ica l ly ,  wh ich  
un i ts  it is best to treat as ind iv idual  
words and ~l ich ones should rather  be 
regarded as mean ingfu l  parts  of words - 
morphemes  (the prob lem being of part icu-  
lar  importance for  Japanese where no re- 
gu lar  graphica l  means are used in writ -  
ing to separate words from each other),  
we bel ieve it adv isab le  to pay special  
a t tent ion  to the funct ions  of  the corres-  
pond ing un i ts  in the general  s t ructure of  
the text and in the system of operat ions  
used for  its process ing.  With this a im in 
view, we have dev ised  an operat iona l  cri- 
ter ion of  d is t ingu ish ing  words and their  
mean ingfu l  parts, based on the pr inc ip le  
of the homogene i ty  of the levels  of  text 
p rocess ing"  and on the requ i rement  that 
each level 's  uni ts  should have st ructura l -  
ly s ign i f i cant  funct ions wi th in  the level  
176 
i tself ,  whi le  there should also exist  a 
we l l -de f ined  (a l though not necessar i l y  
one-to-one)  cor respondence  between cer- 
tain subsets of uni ts  be long ing  to the 
adjacent  levels of process ing.  Accord ing  
to this cr i ter ion,  the status of  separ- 
ate words is just i f ied,  among others, 
for  such Japanese uni ts  as the so-ca l led 
"causat ive vo ice"  marker  -ser  u / - sas~ 
the "condi t ional  mood" marker  -~ ,  the 
negat ion  marker  -nai  (at least, in con- 
d i t ional  contexts~d some others. 
Ajnong uni ts  ftulctionally ana logous to in- 
dependent  word forms (and, consequent ly ,  
appear ing  as such wi th in  the CSR), are 
also c lass i f ied  punctuat ion  marks which  
are, to our mind, quite s imi lar  to words 
in that they can be mean ingfu l  and can 
cor respond to def in i te  t rans lat ion  equi- 
va lents  (or p lay  the role of such, cf. 
Japanese ka vs. Russ ian ?). 
In this way, so far as the pos i t ion  of 
a uni t  in text structure and in the sys- 
tem of t rans lat ion  t rans format ions  is re- 
lated to the mean ing  of this unit ,  our 
genera l  p r inc ip les  of descr ib ing  the le- 
x i co -grammat ica l  compos i t ion  of texts in 
their  CSR conform to the requi rement  of 
its "semant ic i ty" .  On the other  hand, the 
"exhaust iveness"  requi rement  is also met, 
s ince we mm/?e it a point  not to leave out 
of the CSR any text elements,  up to those 
that serve essent ia l ly  as surface mark-  
ers of other l inguist ic  units  made expl i -  
cit in this representat ion,  and do not 
themselves  par t i c ipate  to any s ign i f icant  
extent in the semant ic  operat ions  prov id-  
ed in the system (e.g. Japanese "case" 
part ic les;  Russ ian morpho log ica l  catego- 
r ies of case, gender  and number  of adjec- 
tives; "surface" l inguist ic  express ion 
of " lexical  funct ions"  and their  t ransla-  
t ion equivalents,  etc.). 
P red icate -argument  o rgan izat ion  of the 
text on the semant ico -syntact ie  leve l  
This component  of the CSR represents  
semant ico -syntact ic  l inks between words  
and/or  quas i -words  cor respond ing  to their  
p red icate -arz~ment  re lat ions and, accor-  
dingly,  const i tu t ing  meaningfu l  text 
units.  It is common knowledge that the 
surface express ion of these uni ts  is 
language-spec i f i c  whi le  their  semantic 
content  is genera l ly  assumed to be of a 
more or less un iversa l  nature. So in tra- 
ns la t ion  they must  e i ther  remain essen- 
t ia l ly  the same (natural ly,  wi th  all the 
necessary  mod i f i ca t ions  of their  surface 
markers)  or must  be t ransformed by cer- 
tain formal ru les depend ing  on the seman- 
tic in terpretat ion  of the l inks in ques- 
t ion and on their  re lat ion  with the mean- 
ing of the uni ts  l inked. 
The lexico-sy1~tactic t rans lat ion trans- 
format ions  ment ioned are most colmnonly 
used  where the source and the target 
languages have apprec iab le  typologica l  
d i f ferences.  This is p rec i se ly  the case 
wi th  the Japanese-Russ ian  cor re lat ion  
(a simple example: kate -we mannenhi tsu-  
o nusumaremash i ta ,  lit. "he was stolen 
a pen", transl. Y Hero yEpaa~ pyqEy 
"he had his pen stolen").  Bear ing this 
in mind we have chosen the dependency  
grammar  to represent  the pred icate -ar -  
gument  structure of texts in their  CSR, 
p re fer r ing  it to its a l ternat ive  - the 
immediate const i tuent  system, for accor- 
d ing to a number  of specia l ists ,  this 
type of t rans format ions  is eas ier  to 
descr ibe  in dependency  terms. 
One of the central  l ingu is t ic  prob- 
lems connected with  present ing  the pre- 
dicate-arL~nnent structure of a text in 
its CSR is which  among the var ious (~u~d 
often semant ica l ly  over lapping)  dependen-  
cies between the text un i ts  should be se- 
lected for expl ic i t  descr ipt ion.  In solv- 
ing this p rob lem we proceed from the 
pr inc ip le  of the poss ib i l i ty  of "imme- 
diate semantic substant iat ion"  of the 
dependenc ies  to be selected. It can be 
speci f ied as the fo l lowing  requi rement  
bear ing  on the ways and methods of des -  
cr ib ing words and grammat ica l  construc-  
t ions when compi l ing the l inguist ic  in- 
format ion for the automat ic  t rans lat ion  
system: 
- all syntact ic  dependenc ies  registe-  
red in the CSR of  a certa in text must  
rea l ize  some semant ico -syntact i c  valen-  
c ies  of the lexical  or grammat ica l  uni ts  
present  in it (and usua l ly  forming part  
of the lex ico -grammat ica l  compos i t ion  of 
the word forms or quas i -word  forms l ink- 
ed by the cor respond ing  dependenc ies) .  
These valencies,  in thei r  turn, must 
d i rec t ly  corre late with the semant ic  
character i s t i cs  of the un i ts  they are 
ascr ibed to, semantic  cons iderat ions  
v iewed as the major  factor  under ly ing  
their  ass ignment  to those units.  One im- 
portant  cons iderat ion  of this k ind con- 
sists in pre fer r ing  the descr ip t ions  
where the maximum poss ib le  of the valen-  
cies env isaged could be rea l i zed in con- 
crete texts by two-word combinat ions  and 
the maximum poss ib le  of such combinat ions  
could be checked for their  semant ic  ac- 
ceptab i l i ty  (cons istency)  wi thout  regard 
to any uni ts  outs ide them. 
Apart  f rom the s i tuat ions where some 
of the syntact ica l ly  l inked uni ts  perfoxna 
in the text processed aux i l ia ry  funct ions  
(thus hav ing  no independent  semantic  con- 
tent) the app l i cat ion  of the above cr ite- 
r ia can only be l imi ted for  reasons of  
economy and ef fect ive cont ro l lab i l i ty  of 
177 
the l in~ is t i c  descr ipt ion.  
From the above it can be in ferred that 
the l inguist ic  in fo rmat ion  used to reveal  
~u\]d/or process  the pred icate -argument  
structure of concrete texts should com- 
bine data  on the means of surface expres-  
sion of  the l inks invo lved (i.e. word or- 
der, funct ion words, etc.) w i th  fa i r ly  
deta i led  semant ic  descr ip t ions  of the 
words to be fin/ted and of their  combina-  
tor ia l  potent ia l i t ies .  To prov ide the 
formal tools necessary  for const ruc t ing  
such descr ip t ions  we have dev ised a spe- 
cial  fo rmal ized semantic  language SLS, 
the character i s t i c  p roper t ies  of which 
ca/l be br ie f ly  out l ined as fol lows. 
The vocabu lary  of SL compr ises  three 
categor ies  of the so-ca l led semantic  ele- 
ments: categor ia l  elements,  encyc lopae-  
dic e lements  and ident i fy ing  elements.  
Among these the lead ing role belongs to 
the catez'orial e lements  which are g iven 
special  descr ip t ions  const i tu t ing  a k ind 
of  formal ized semantic  ~'ra~nmar of the na- 
tural language. The sy~tax of SL, used 
to combine semant ic  e lements  into seman- 
tic formulae~ accounts  both for  the se- 
:**antic re lat ions es tab l i shed  between the 
components  of such a formula  and for i ts 
communicat ive  organ izat ion  determin ing  
the behav iour  of its components  as re- 
gards tile logic operat ions  tllat can be 
appl ied  to the formula  as a whole. From 
the formal point  of v iew a semant ic  for- 
mula  is a l inear  sequence of symbols, 
s t ructura l ly  equ iva lent  to a special  type 
of a dependency  tree where the nodes can 
be labeled by tile symbols not only of 
s ingle sems/~tic elements,  but also of 
their  combinat ions (subt rees)o f  8x~y length. 
Sema/2tic formulae caxl be employed to 
express: I) semant ic  de f in i t ions  of natu-  
ral l~u~G-uage tu~its (from a separate word 
up to a whole text); 2) their  parad igma-  
tic sem~mtic  features;  3) their  syntagma- 
tic semant ic  proper t ies  (semantic inter-  
pretat ions  of  their  syntact ic  va lenc ies) .  
An  important  d i s t ingu ish ing  characte-  
r is t ics  of SL is that it a f fords  formal 
der ivab i l i ty  of in fo rmat ion  about the se- 
max~tic paradiLnnatic and syntagm,atic fea- 
tures of ls/~guage uni ts  from their  seman- 
tic def in i t ions.  This helps to make the 
sema~tic descr ip t ions  of these uni ts  more 
compact  (by e l im inat ing  the unnecessary  
re i te ra t ion  of essent ia l l y  the sarape data) 
and to improve their  re l iab i l i ty ,  owing 
to tl~e poss ib i l i ty  of more ob jec t ive ly  
eva luat ing  the adequacy of  semant ic  def i -  
n i t ions  on the basis  of such a cr i ter ion  
as the degree of cor re la t ion  between the 
synta&~natic propert ies  of a unit  der iv-  
able from its def in i t ion,  on the one hand, 
and its actual  semantic  eombinab i l i ty  as 
observed in real texts, on the other  
ha/id. ~oreover,  it increases  the range 
of l ingu is t ic  facts exp la inab le  on seman- 
tic grounds. Thus, it becomes poss ib le  
to give un i form rules (unatta inable  if  
one stays with in  tile bounds of pure ly  le- 
x i co -syntact i c  phenomena)  for the select-  
ion of tile correct  morpho-syu~tact ical  
markers  (as well  as for  the appropr ia te  
synonymous t rans format ions  and logical  
deduct ions  - operat ions  commonly  used as 
t rans la t ion  devices)  when hand l ing  con- 
s t ruct ions  wi th  such Russ ian  verbs as 
FpO3HTB ("run the risk"), 0naCaTBCS 
("fear"), O~cM~aT~ ("expect"), ycneBaT~ 
("be in t ime"), etc., ta/<ing pred icate  
words as their  ar~'uments. These rules 
wi l l  enable us, for ex~uuple, to choose 
the correct  Russi6u\] sentence 
K paHeHO~,ly 0n0s~an~ o nomo~sD 
("IIelp c~une late to the wounded man"),  
ra ther  tha/l 
* PaHeHBI~ 0n0s~az c HOMOI~BD 
("The wounded man was late with help")  
as t rans la t ion  of the Japanese sentence 
Kegan in -wa teate-ga okurete shimatta.  
With senn~tic  de f in i t ions  of words 
fo rmulated  in the SL tel~ns, all syntac- 
tic dependenc ies  l ink ing these words in 
texts can be i n te rpreted  (for the most 
part, unsm, b i~uously)  as semant ic  relat-  
ions between certa in e lements  wi th in  
their  def in i t ions ,  and rep lac in  6' a word 
by  its semaxltic de f in i t ion  wi l l  not al- 
ter the general  form of the pred icate-  
argument  structure of the text. The ef- 
fect is that ill the f ramework  of the pre- 
dicate-arzulment component  of  the CSt{ tile 
cont rad ic t ion  between the "semant ic i ty"  
a/id the "super f i c ia l i ty"  requ i red  of its 
turns out Go be to a large extent el imi-  
nated. For  one thing, any fraG~nent of 
the pred icate -aruument  structure of a 
text Call be in terpreted  (developed) as 
a structure of sem~ultic e lements  and re- 
lat ions;  for ~other ,  the scope of such 
i n te rpreta t ion  does not  depend on any 
but l ingu is t ic  cons iderat ions ,  and if  no 
t rans format ions  a f fec t in~ the internal  
semaxltic structure of words or re lat ions  
between them are necessary  for t ranslat -  
ing a certa in  text fraglnent, the lat ter  
need not be semant ica l ly  interpreted,  no 
mat ter  whether  this k ind  of in terpreta-  
t ion be ind ispensab le  for some other  
frail'penis of the sane text. 
Syntact ic  group_in(~ of text un i ts  
This type of s t ructura l  in format ion  
about the text concerl, s the ~roupin  c of 
the words conta ined in it into larger  
combinat ions  possess ing  certa in  syntact ic  
and/or  sem6ultic independence,  which makes  
it adv isab le  to treat them as separate 
uni ts  at least at some stages of proces-  
sing' the text in quest ion.  In a way such 
178 
in fo~nat ion  is ~a logous  to the informa- 
t ion about the const i tuent  structure of 
the text. ~e  d i f fe rence  is, though, that 
the aspects  of syntact ic  word -group ing  
inc luded in the CSR of a text are l imited 
to those that carry semant ica l ly  re levant  
in format ion  lack ing in its dependency  
structure 6 (and, for tI~at matter,  not al- 
ways d i rect ly  express ib le  in the classi -  
cal const i tuent  marker  form, either).  
For the present,  the g iven component  
of the CSR of a text is supposed to spe- 
cify only the word groups estab l i shed 
with in  connected f ra~nents  of its depen-  
dency  tree in s i tuat ions ~ere  the compo- 
s i t ion of such groups and their  bounda-  
r ies are important  for some of the opera- 
t ions employed to process  it, such as 
ascer ta in ing  the domain of the quant i f i -  
ers; d i s t ingu ish ing  between descr ip t ive  
and rest r ic t ive  attr ibutes;  revea l ing  the 
ful l  form of some types of  e l l ipt ica l  con- 
s t ruct ions (e.g. ~hose with  co -ord inat ive  
reduct ion) ;  dec id ing  on whether  it would  
be safe to employ t rans format ions  d is jo i -  
n ing  e lements  of some word-combinat ions  
w i th in  the text 's  dependency  structure or 
l inear  representat ion  (it seems reasona-  
ble to mark the combinat ions  exc lud ing  
this k ind of lex ico -syntact ic  t ransforma-  
tions aS a special  type of syntyct ic  
word-groups) ,  etc. 
The re levancy of the data on syntact ic  
word -group ing  for t rans lat ion  purposes  
can be i l lus t rated  by the Japanese sen- 
~ence 
Watakush i tach i -no  tsukau nichi -  ~hin- 
:doen:olaw~in~da tsukatte me hera-ha l  
mean ing  "Among the things we use da i ly  
there are none that could be used for a 
long time and sti l l  remain as good as ne~ 
If the data in quest ion  is not taken 
into account  here we are l iable to dis- 
tort the presuppos i t iona l  st ructure of 
the sentence by g iv ing it the " l i teral"  
t ranslat ion:  
*Cpe~H nononssyeMMx HaME Be~e~ 10ia~- 
Hero 06zx0~a HOT TaEMx, EOTORMe 6N 
He ~3Ha~Ba~HcB, ~ame ecnH HM~ Hon~-  
30BaTBCS ~0nr0e BpeMa 
("Among the things we use da i ly  there 
are none that do not wear out, even 
i f  used for a long time"), 
hav ing  the ev ident ly  false impl icat ion  
that the longer  things are used  the less 
they wear  out (of.: HeT Be~e~, EOT0pNe 
6~ He MJHa~MBa~McB, ~axe ecnH HMH Hon~- 
BOBaTBC~ O~eH~ ~KKyp~THO"~ere  are no 
things that would not wear  out even if 
they are taken good care of"). 
The or ig in of this undes i rab le  impl i -  
cat ion can be exp la ined two-fold. The 
f irst  exp lanat ion  is that one of the word- 
group boundar ies  in the g iven Russ ian 
sentence separates the negat ion  He 
("not") f rom the whole of the fragment 
fo l lowing it in the l inear  sequence of 
this sentence :HaHa~HBa~Zeb 6~ ~a~e 
eom\[ m~M H0~BSOBQTBC2 ~0nr0e BpeMs 
("wear out even if they are used for a 
long time"), so that the f ragment c ited 
is in terpreted  as an integra l  seme/itieo- 
syntact ic  unit, this g iv ing r ise  to the 
impl icat ion  to be avoided. Accord ing  to 
the other  explanat ion,  the boundary  res- 
pons ib le  for the in terpretat ion  of the 
Russ ian sentence runs between the whole 
of its in i t ia l  f ragment Cpe~H HCH0~B3y- 
eMNX HaM~ Be~e~ ~0MamHer0 06~x0~a HeT 
TaEHX, KOT0pBIe 6BI He ~JHa~HBa~CB 
("Among the things we use da i ly  there 
are none that do not wear out") and the 
remain ing  sequence ~axe e0n~ HmH Hons-  
SOBaTBCa ~0zr0e BpeM~ ("even if they 
are used for a long time"). From this 
standpoint ,  the false impl icat ion  is ac- 
counted for by the poss ib i l i ty ,  sugges- 
ted by group ing the sentence uni ts  into 
the above two fragments,  of  in terpret ing  
and/or  t rans forming these independent ly  
of each other, thus obta in ing  
~ e  Hs ~CH0X~syeM~x HaM~ Beme~ ~0- 
MamHero o~xo~a ~sHamHBa~Tca, ~a~e 
eczH HMM HO~BSOBaTBCS ~onroe Bpems 
("All of  the things we use da i ly  wear 
out t even i f  used for a long time"). 
No matter  which  one of the two expla-  
nat ions be taken as true (the second one 
seeming more p laus ib le,  whi le the f irst 
one suggest ing  s impler  check-ups in pro- 
cess in G texts) it is c lear  that the tran- 
s lat ion prob lem is to achieve in Russ ian 
the same syntact ic  group ing as in the 
or iginal ,  by in t roduc ing  the correspond-  
ing lexical  and/or  pos i t iona l  ( l inear) 
modi f icat ions ,  e.g. : 
Cpe~ ~cn0a~syeM~x Ha~Z Beme~ ~0ia~- 
Her0 06Mx0~a HeT TaKMX, KOT0pNe 6B~ 
~aze np~ ~nI~Te~BHOM HO~BBOBSHMH OC- 
TaBa~HCB HeM3HO~eHHB~H. 
Another  (and, probably,  more ordina-  
ry)case of us ing  data on syntact ic  word- 
grouping in t rans lat ion  can be exempl i -  
f ied by the sentence: 
q - ~ F ' . ~ % ~  ~ewa-  
re-no seikatsu sui un -o  i tsumade-mo 
xoku saseru koto -~a d e ~ .  
Here it is essent ia l  that the negat ion  
marker,  as well  as the express ion  of con- 
dit ion,  which in the t rans lat ion  sentence 
must  take a pos i t ion  d i f ferent  from the 
one its Japanese counterpart  occupies in 
the or ig ina l  word-sequence,  should not 
interpose between the two members  of the 
co -ord inat lve - type  word-group present in 
the sentence (for clar ity,  we have enclo-  
sed tills group in brackets) .  That  is, 
the t rans lat ion  must be (l~iglish be ing 
s t ructura l ly  s imi lar  to Russ ian in this 
-179-- 
respect) :  
I f  the workers  do not  ~te  ~d ~ 
forward 2o l i t i ca l  ~emands l  we shal l  
never  be able to raise our l i fe level 
and not  
* I f  the workers  un i te  and do not put 
forward po l i t ica l  demands . . . "  
Genera l ly  speaking, the correct  tran- 
s lat ion of the last example (as well  as 
of other  const ruct ions  exp la inab le  in 
terms of co -ord inat ive  reduct ion)  could 
also be obta ined wi thout  recourse to tlle 
in fo rmat ion  about syntact ic  word-grouping.  
Instead, one could use a "deeper" descr i -  
pt ion of the text to be trans lated,  wi th  
e l l ip t ica l  const ruct ions  t ransformed into 
their  ful l  representat ions .  However,  this 
k ind of t rans format ion  would  be bas ica l ly  
superf luous,  for in the synthes is  process  
it would  be necessary  to reduce the con- 
s t ruct ions  in quest ion  back to their  el- 
l ipt ica l  form us ing  but s l ight ly  d i f fe-  
rent rules. It seems therefore pre ferab le  
for the operat ions  of  t rans la t ion  proper  
to result  d i rect ly  in axx e l l ip t ica l  con- 
s t ruct ion analogous to the or ig ina l  one 
a~d d i f fe r ing  only  in deta i l s  of its 
surface express ion  (such as the pos i t ion  
of negat ion  in the above example),  speci- 
f ied by the subsequent  synthes is  proce-  
dure. 
So we see that whi le  the  component  of 
the CSR under  d i scuss ion  reg is ters  only  
semant ica l l y  s ign i f i cant  phenomena of 
text structure,  the means of represent ing  
them in it remain  essent ia l l y  superf ic ia l ,  
so as to sat is fy  both the "semant ic i ty"  
and the "super f ic ia l i ty"  requi rements .  
Anaphor_ic re la t ions  between text  un i ts  
For  in terpret ing  texts in respect  of  
tlleir sicalification and espec ia l ly  deno- 
tation, the structure of  anaphor ic  rela-  
t ions between their  un i ts  is on the whole 
no less important  than their  pred icate-  
argument  structure.  However,  the anapho-  
ric s t ructure is expressed main ly  by le- 
x ical  repet i t ion,  and this can be eas i ly  
accounted for i f  we require that as long 
as one text is dealt  with, one and the 
same t rans lat ion  equ iva lent  should be se- 
lected, so far as possib le,  for al l  oc- 
currences of  one and the same lexeme (le- 
xeme being def ined as a word taken in one 
of its var ious lexical  meanings) .  G iven 
this requ i rement  (which appears  to be na- 
tural  enough and, but for some special  
cases, easy to comply  with),  there is no 
need to inc lude this st ructure in the 
CSR in its ful l  form. It seems suf f ic ient  
to ind icate it on ly  for  those types of 
language uni ts  which d i rec t ly  depend for  
their  t rans la t ion  on the proper t ies  of 
their  antecedents  in the text at hand. 
In Japanese (as also in other  langua-  
gas) there are two types of such units. 
The f irst type are pronouns:  when 
translat ing,  say, the pronoun sore, the 
choice of  one of tile words: th i~,  lle~ 
she, i ts  the ,  o~ etc. , -  as its text 
equiva lent  wi l l  be determined,  among 
other  things, by the syntact ic  class of 
the uni t  chosen as the equiva lent  of its 
saltecedent. If this unit  is a noun, one 
wil l  also need to \]~low its number  and 
(for Russia~l) gender. 
The second type of un i ts  which  can- 
not be t rans lated proper ly  wi thout  in- 
fo rmat ion  about their  antecedents  is 
more specif ic.  These are words which are 
graph ica l ly  ident ica l  wi th components  of 
more complex units,  also lex ica l i zed  
from the point  of v iew of their  semantic  
behaviour j  and which ca~1 funct ion  as 
s t ructura l  subst i tutes  for the latter. 
When used in this funct ion,  such words 
must  be rep laced e i ther  by the transla-  
t ion equ iva lents  of their  6uatecederlts I 
or by pronouns (with the data on these 
antecedents  used in the s~me fash ion as 
in t rans la t ing  usual  pronouns) .  Anyway, 
their  own tra/~slation equ iva lents  are 
ru led out. 
Thus, the word n imotsu,  mean ing  
"lu~'gage" if used independent ly ,  wil l  be 
t rans lated as "tllem" or "these parce ls"  
in the context  of the sentence 
Ko,limo t su-gakar i -  ~'a mazu nimo t su-no 
megata -o  hakar imasu,  
where~Izmotsu  is subst i tuted for kon imo-  
t su  ("parcel")  : 
The c lerk dea l ing  with )arcels f irst 
~i~s  ~e~ t t!~9_2~3e~3~ 
AS regards all  other  types of lexi-  
cal units,  our  approach is that the exis- 
tence of' anaphor ic  re lat ions  between them 
sllould be checked and the re lat ions them- 
selves reg is tered  in the CSR for fur ther  
p rocess ing  only in those in f requent  situ- 
at ions (due most ly  to d i ss imi la r i t ies  in 
the combinator ia l  p roper t ies  of the ori- 
g inal  language words and of their  tra/Is- 
la t ion equiva lents ,  this necess i ta t ing  
the use of synonymous transfor~nations) 
where it is imposs ib le  to ful f i l  the 
above requi rement  of t rans la t ing  di f fe-  
rent occur rences  of the same lexeme by 
the sa~,le equivalent ,  a/Id one has to make 
sure that employ ing  d i f ferent  equ iva lents  
in this case does not af fect  the or ig inal  
anaphor ic  st ructure of the traxlslated 
text. 
L inear  arranK~ement of text un i ts  
In dea l ing  with l inear  ar ra~'ement  
of un i ts  in a ~ext in the frs/nework of 
axl automat ic  tra~islation system, it is 
importalat to d i s t ingu ish  between two 
types of their  pos i t iona l  (word-order)  
180 " 
re la t ions  requ i r ing  d i f fe rent  p rocess ing  
dur ing  t rans lat ion.  
I f  the f irst type of  such re lat ions  
occurs between two text units,  the posi -  
t ion of one of them in respect  to the 
other  is mere ly  a sur face syntact ic  mar- 
ker  showing the presence (or absence) of, 
says some semantico-sy~Itact ic l ink be- 
tween the two, an anaphor ic  re la t ion  be- 
tween them, a syntact ic  word -group  boun- 
dary, and so on. In case of the second 
type such pos i t ion  is me~nillgul in it- 
sel~', i r respect ive  of whether  it should 
or should not be taken into accotult when 
es tab l i sh ing  cer ta in  syntact ic  l inks or 
boundar ies :  it shows the re lat ive posi -  
t ions of the un i ts  in quest ion in the 
co~mnunicative s t ructure  of the text (i.e. 
from the point  of v iew of its funct iona l  
perspect ive) .  
It should be noted  that the oppos i t ion  
of  these two types of pos i t iona l  rela- 
t ions is not  the same as that of r ig id 
(fixed) and free word order: whi le  free. 
word order  is a lways "semant ic"  to some 
extent,  r ig id  word order  ca/is to our 
mind, cor respond to both cases, depend-  
ing on whether  the g iven syntact ic  con- 
s t ruct ion wi th  r ig id word order  corre la-  
tes in the language under  considerat ion 
with any a l te rnat ive  const ruct ions  pro- 
v id ing  the same pred icate -argument  struc- 
ture alld/or syntact ic  g roup ing  of their  
Eomponents~ but ass ign ing  them a di f fe-  
rent l inear  arra/l~'ement (a poss ib le  exam- 
ple of such a l te rnat ive  const ruct ions  
which  can be cons idered as dependent  for 
their  se lect ion  on the word order  requi-  
red, ra ther  than vice versa, is furn ish-  
ed by pred icat ive  const ruc t ions  d i f fer -  
ing in their  vo ice value).  
Guided by the "ex/laustiveness" pr in-  
ciple, we judge it expedient  for the CSR 
to conta in  in fo rmat ion  both about the 
"mea/lingful" axld the "auxi l iary"  type of  
word -order  re lat ions,  thouz% represented  
and employed in d i f fe rent  ways. 
The sphere of employTnent of the "auxi- 
l iary word -order  in fo rmat ion  is pract i -  
ca l ly  l imi ted to the ana lys is  and synthe- 
sis procedures.  Dur ing the analys is  phase 
this in fo rmat ion  serves main ly  as a means 
of  revea l ing  and formal ly  represent ing  
uni ts  and construct ions per ta in ing  to 
o ther  components  of the CSR; in the syn- 
thesis  phase it is used to obta in the 
correct  form of the same type of un i ts  
and constxnlctions in the target language. 
The cor respond ing  facts of the l inear  ar- 
rangement  of the text do not p lay any in- 
dependent  role e i ther  in its semant ic  
p rocess ing  or in choos ing  t rans la t ion  
equ iva lents  for its units,  so it is per- 
fect ly  suf f ic ient  to regard them as just 
one of  the var ious  features of tile uni ts  
and const ruct ions  involved,  important  
enough to be reg is te red  in their  l ingui-  
stic descr ipt ions ,  but const i tu t ing  no  
separate objects  of descr ipt ion .  To in- 
corporate these facts in the CSi~, we re- 
sort to nuunbering the words in the text 
p rocessed  in the order  of their  succes- 
sive occurrence (tile resu l t ing  numbers  
used also, in combinat ion  with some other  
data, as their  ident i f ie rs  throughout  
the process ing) .  
If, on tile contrary,  a const ruct ion  
is character i zed  by a mean ingfu l  word- 
order  re la t ion  between its lex ica l  com- 
ponents,  it is g iven the status of a 
specia l  "pos i t ional  unit",  d i s t inct  from 
the const rnc t ion  i tse l f  and represented  
exp l i c i t l y  in ~he CSI~. Such a unit  di- 
rec t ly  par t i c ipates  in semantic  opera- 
tions, inc lud ing  those of t rans la t ion  
proper,  which means that it must  flare 
its own descr ip t ion  (in part icu lar ,  its 
o~I t rans la t ion  equiva lent) .  It stands 
to reason that the range of inter-lo/l~- 
uage cor respondences  invo lv ing  pos i t io -  
nal  un i ts  of e i ther  the source or the 
target laxlguage is not res t r i c ted  to this 
c lass of uni ts  alone, as the communicat -  
ive o rgan izat ion  of  text COjl a lso be con- 
veyed by some types of  syntact ic  const-  
ruct ions  and lex ica l  elements.  An exam- 
ple is the Japanese par t i c le~ as used 
in independent  sentences (or, sometimes,  
in the main c lauses of  complex senten- 
ces), where its best Russ ian  equiva lent  
(if the salne type of p red icat ive  const-  
ruct ion  is used) is the reverse order  of  
the subject  and the predicate.  
As we see, here also, as in the other 
components  of the CSR, there is a compro- 
mise between the "semant ic i ty"  and the 
"super f i c ia l i ty"  requi rements .  On the one 
ha/Id, expl ic i t  ind icat ion  of tile word- 
order  re la t ions  found to be meazlingful 
in the text processed  character i zes  some 
aspects  of  its semant ic  structure.  On 
the other  ha/~d, the forth of "pos i t iona l  
uni ts"  chosen to represent  them is ra- 
ther super f ic ia l  in that it does not dis- 
p lay the semantic  cor re la t ions  underlying- 
the interchs/M/eabi l i ty of these un i ts  
wi th other  st ructura l  text features (such  
as the se lect ion of the nexus vs. junc- 
t ion form of express ing  the pred icate-  
ar~ument  dependenc ies  between text units;  
the use of " re lat iona l"  words~ of the 
0per ,  or Funci  type and the like; the oc- 
currence of emphat ic  par t ic les  and con- 
struct ions,  etc.). 
Conc lus ion  
In the forego ing we have tr ied to 
show the way the Combined Structura l  Re- 
p resentat ion  of text re f lects  the requi-  
rements  of "semant ic i ty" ,  "super f ic ia l i -  
ty" and "exhaust iveness"  fo rmulated  at 
1'81 
tile beg inn ing  of the paper  as essent ia l  
for  the basic level  of  fonual ly  repre-  
sent ing  text st ructure in an automat ic  
t rans la t ion  system. We shall now br ie f ly  
recap i tu la te  ~he points.  
The "semant ic i ty  ' requ i rement  is ac- 
counted for in the CSR, in the f irst 
place, by the very  poss ib i l i ty  p rov ided  
in it of exp l ic i t ly  descr ib ing  the f ive 
most important  aspects  of text s t ructure 
and composi t ion,  as stated above. The 
quest for "semant ic i ty"  forms also the 
bas is  of the pr inc ip les  we employ in se- 
lec t ing  concrete in fo rmat ion  to be made 
expl ic i t .  Among these one can ment ion  
the cr i ter ion  of  s t ructura l  s ign i f i cance 
of the uni ts  to be represented  in the 
CSR as separate words or quas i -words;  the 
pr inc ip le  of " immediate sems/itic substa~- 
t iat ion" of  the predicate-arguJnent synta- 
ctic re lat ions  reg is tered  in it; the re- 
qu i rement  of supp ly ing  the e lements  of 
the lex ico -grammat ica l  compos i t ion  of 
the text under  cons iderat ion,  as well  as 
of  its l inear  ar rangement ,  with indica-  
t ions of  their  mean ingfu l  or aux i l i a ry  
role w i th in  this text; the employment  
of a special  formal  language to def ine 
the semantic  proper t ies  of words and 
word-combinat ions ,  etc. 
The "superficiality" of the CSR is 
seen, erelong other  things, in the fact 
that this level of  text representat ion  
env isages  the use of lex ico -syntact i c  
t rans la t ion  equ iva lents  and does not ne- 
cessar i ly  requi re  decompos i t ion  of lexe- 
rues into combinat ions  of smal ler  un i ts  
of mea/~ing, such decompos i t ion  cons ider-  
ed appropr ia te  but in comparat ive ly  rare 
cases  of descr ip t ive  and in terpreta t ive  
t rans lat ion.  Other  features of the CSR 
or ig inat ing  from the "super f i c ia l i ty"  
pr inc ip le  are absence of exhaust ive  in- 
format ion about the anaphor ic  s t ructure 
of the text, inc lus ion  of only  those da- 
ta on syntact ic  word -group ing  which  are 
of  importance for the t rans la t ion  pro- 
cess, d i rect  tr6u\]slation of e l l ip t ica l  
construct ions ,  wherever  possib le,  etc. 
F inal ly,  the "exhaust iveness"  require-  
ment  is spec i f ied  as  w:hat may be ca l led 
the " lose-noth ing"  pr inc ip le  of construc-  
t ing tlle CSR. It inca/is that when specia l  
labels  are fetched in it to exp l ic i t ly  
d i sp lay  var ious  st ructura l  e lements  im- 
p l i c i t l y  present  in the surface form of 
the text at hand, tile surface text mark-  
ers (such as the "auxi l iary"  type word 
order;  morpho log ica l  features  express ing  
t~rammatical agreement  or government;  
funct ion  words and punctuat ion  marks ha- 
v ing  no independent  t rans la t ion  equiva-  
lents, a~d so on), though hav ing  been 
used a l ready to reveal  those elements,  
are not e l iminated from the representa-  
tion being formed. They are mere ly  sup- 
p lemented  by the des ignat ions  of the elo- 
me\]its revealed, as wel l  as by formal in- 
d icat ions  of their  o~al aux i l ia ry  nature, 
and thus remain access ib le  for any fur- 
ther analys is  that might prove useful ,  
should it tur~ out that their  f~mct ions 
in the text are not l imited to just iden- 
t i fy ing tile uni ts  a l ready  made expl ic it .  
Notes  
1 3.M.~anan~?Ha. !< np0OneMe n0CTp0- 
eH~S ?0pManBH0~ M0~enM np0uecca nepeB0- 
~a. -B  EH. : Te0pMs nepeB0~a M HayqHBIe 
OCHOBH HO~FOTOBKH HepeBOAq~EOB. qaCTB 
~. M., \[975, C. 'I65-~72. 
2 Z.M. Shalyapina.  Automat ic  transla-  
tion as a model  of tlle human tra/islation 
act iv i ty.  - In te rnat iona l  Forum on Infor-  
mat ion  and Documentat ion,  1980, vol.5, 
No.2, p.13-23. 
3 An ear l ie r  vers ion  of text repre-  
sentat ion a imed at incorporat ing  the 
pr inc ip les  proposed had been deve loped 
in the f ramework  of all A/iglo-I{ussian au- 
tomatic  t rans la t ion  pro ject  a/id descr ib -  
ed br ief ly  in:3.M.Wa~HMHa. AHF~o~pyc- 
cE~ MHOFOaoneETH~ aBTOMaTZqecK~z cn0- 
Bap~ (APMAC). - MamHHH~ nepeB0~ 
np~Ena~HaS nHHFBMCTNKa. BS:H. \[7. M. 
\[974, C. 7-67. 
The not ion  of levels of  text pro- 
cess inz  is not ident ica l  with the not ion  
of levels of text representat ion  (al- 
though there certa in ly  exist  some strong 
correlations). L ingu is t ica l ly ,  the for- 
mar  cor responds  rather to tlle not ion  of 
la/16u/age t iers in t roduced in: ~.,D.Bap- 
~y~B. 0CHOBBI 0HM0aTeZBH0~ MHFBHCTMKM.  
M., "HayEa", ~977. 
5 A deta i led  formal de f in i t ion  of 
this la~ICuage and a descr ip t ion  of some 
of its l inguist ic  in terpreta t ions  are 
g iven in: 3.M.~aasHHHa. ~opMaaBH~I~ 2BME 
~22 3aHHOH TOJIEOBaHH~ CJIOB PI OZOBOOOqe-  
TaHOe. - \[Ip0OneMu EzOepHeT~EZ.  B~In. 36. 
M., \ [979, c. 247-278.  
6 There is also a paper  on a French-  
RussisJl automat ic  t rans lat ion  pro ject  
where a s imi lar  type of s t ructura l  infor-  
mat ion  is ment ioned  as necessary  (see: 
D.A.AnpecsH z Ap. H~HrBZCT~qecEoe 00ec- 
neqeH~e B cz~cweMe aBToMaT~qecE0r0 neDe- 
B0~a Tpew~er0 n0E0neHz~S. M.,\[978, c.~3). 
In our case of Japax, ese -Russ ian  traxlsla- 
rich, however,  such infor~nation seems to 
requi re  more at tent ion  due to wider  dif- 
ferences between pos i t iona l  and other  
rules of express in  C the cor respond ing  
const ruct ions  in the two 18/qguages. 
182 
