TOWARDS A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL FOR 
THE SEMANTICS  OF WHY-QUEST IONS 
W. Wahlster 
Germanisches Seminar 
Universitaet Hamburg 
Von-Melle-Park 6 
D-2000 Hamburg 13 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Summary. This paper discusses aspects of a 
computational model for the semantics of why-ques- 
tions which are relevant to the implementation of 
an explanation component in a natural language 
dialogue system. After a brief survey of all of 
the explanation components which have been imple- 
mented to date, some of the distinguishing features 
of the explanation component designed and imple- 
mented by the author are listed. In the first 
part of the paper the major types of signals which, 
like the word whV, can be used to set the expla- 
nation component into action are listed, and some 
ways of recognizing them automatically are con- 
sidered. In addition to these linguistic signals, 
communicative and cognitive conditions which can 
have the same effect are discussed. In the second 
part the various schemata.for argumentative dia- 
logue sequences which can be handled by the ex- 
planation component in question are examined, Par- 
ticular attention is paid to problems arising in 
connection with the iteration of why-questions 
and the verbalization of multiple justifications. 
Finally schemata for metacommunicative why-ques- 
tions and for why-questions asked by the user are 
investigated. 
Introduction 
The explanation component of a natural lan- 
guage AI system is that component whose job it is 
to generate, in response to a why-question an ex- 
planation which is both understandable to the 
user and appropriate to the current state of the 
dialogue. 
Although there has been relatively little 
research into the semantics and pragmatics of why- 
questions1,5,9, 17 and the cognitive processes un- 
derlying the answering of them, several AI systems 
do exist which are capable of handling certain 
types of why-questions. The practical value of 
the incorporation of an explanation component lies 
essentially in the fact that, as Stallman and 
Sussman have put it, '~such programs are more con- 
vincing when right and easier to debug when 
wrong".~5 
Figure I provides an overview and compari- 
son of the explanation components which have been 
implemented to date: BLAH 22, DIGITALIS ADVISOR 16, 
EL Is, EXPOUND ~, HAM-RPMI~, 21, LUIG113, MYCIN12, ~, 
NOAH 11, PROSPECTOR 7, SHRDLU ~,  TKP2 I? (The symbol 
"-" signifies that the attribute in question is 
not applicable to the given system). 
This paper presents some results of my experience 
in designing and implementing an explanation com- 
ponentS1; together, they represent a step toward 
a computational model for the semantics of why- 
questions. The explanation component was designed 
as a module which could in principle be incorpora- 
ted into any natural language AI system. It has 
been tested within the natural language dialogue 
system HAM-RPM 6, which converses with a human part- 
ner in colloquial German about limited but inter- 
changeable scenes. 
In implementing HAM-RPM we have taken into 
account the human ability to deduce useful infor- 
mation even in the case of fuzzy knowledge by ap-  
proximate reasoning. The model of fuzzy reasoning 
used in HAM-RPM can be characterized by the fol- 
lowing four properties2?: 
(a) A fuzzy inference rule represents a weak 
implication; a particular 'implication 
strength' must thus be associated with each 
such rule. 
(b) The premises of a fuzzy inference rule are 
often fulfilled only to a certain degree. 
(c) The applicability of a fuzzy inference rule 
in the derivation of a particular conclusion 
is likewise a matter of degree. 
(d) Several mutually independent fuzzy inference 
rules can corroborate each other in the de- 
rivation of a particular conclusion. 
The explanation component which I have developed 
differs from BLAH 22, one of the most advanced 
explanation components which have similar goals, 
in that on the one hand fuzzy inference rules and 
facts can be modified by appropriate hedges (in 
accordance with (a) through (c) above), and on the 
other hand the system is able in the course of a 
dialogue to generate multiple justifications for 
an explanandum (in accordance with (d) above). A 
further important difference between this expla- 
nation component and the other systems included 
in Figure I is that the system is equipped with 
a fairly sophisticated natural language generator, 
which is ATN-based and includes algorithms for 
generating pronouns and definite descriptions 19. 
Only two aspects of this explanation compo- 
nent will be discussed in this paper: The signals 
on the basis of which the explanation component 
generates an argumentative answer to a question 
asked by the user and the speech act schemata for 
the argumentative dialogue sequences which can be 
--144-- 
SYSTEM' S GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 
8 ~ ~ 
~ s. ~-_ :~  
'- 
BLAH 
U.S. in- AMORD 
AMORD come tax rules 
laws 
EXPLANATION COMPONENT 
LINGUISTIC \] COMMUNICATIVE AC~ 
CAPABILITIES 'I CAPABIL!TI ES , C 
=~ "- 88 ;~ -~ 'Z  ~ =  , 
- ~= .- o ~ "~ ~'~ ~ o= ~ : ~. 
~.~ ~ ?  ul c = 
COGNITIVE 
APABILITIES 
8 
~J 
No I schemata COLL MOD, DIA STR, DET 
asser t ions ,  
suggested a l -  
HYP ternat ives~ 
Idecls ions 
DIGITALIS 
ADVISOR 
medicine: OWL schemata, 
OWL digitalis procedures No canned TECH DIA DET 
therapy text 
system's 
questions, 
reasoning 
chain 
EL 
electrical ARS ARS circuit rules ana lys i s !  
No HYP system's 
conclusions 
EXPOUND 
HAM-RPM 
LUIGI 
MYCIN 
NOAH 
PROSPECTOR 
LISP 
logic: predicate simple 
formal calculus No case TECH - STR 
proofs formulas grammar 
t raf f ic  
FUZZY scene, DEDUCE ATN-based 
room- procedures Yes generatorp COLL MOD, DIA DET, STR FUZ 
booking schemata 
SOL kitchen SOL I specific I 
! Yes generation: COLL 
world procedures 0rocedures 
medicine:'iproductio n 
LISP bacter ia l  i Yes schemata TECH DIA DET FUZ rules ,rnfect ions I 
i 
repair of 
electro- SOUP No 
SOUP mechanical procedures 
equipment 
geology: rules in 
LISP mineral inference No schemata TECH 
explo-  net 
rat ion  
FUZ 
theorems 
system's ques- 
t ions and con- 
c|usJons, rea- 
soning, inc l .  
mu l t ip le  der- 
ivat ions  
simulated 
act ions 
system's ques- 
tions and con- 
ciusions, rea- 
soning chain, 
meta-infer- 
ences 
system's 
ins t ruct ions  
tO user 
system's 
questions 
SHRDLU 
TKP2 
MICRO- blocks consequent specific 
PLANNER world theorems Yes generatiOnmrocedures COLL 
logic: Ipredicate 
LISP formal calculus No schemata TECH 
proofs formulas I 
STR 
Figure I: Comparison of all explanation components implemented to date 
--145-- 
systemls 
simulated 
actions 
theorems 
realized in the system. 
A Formal Description of the Signals Suggesting an 
Argumentative Answer 
The purpose of the present section is to 
list the major types of signals which are capable 
of setting an explanation component into action. 
The resulting classification of linguistic expres- 
sions does not, of course, imply that all of the 
expressions in a given category are completely 
synonymous. 
Signals for Argumentative Answers in the User's 
Utterances 
From the point of view of algorithmic recognition, 
the simplest case is that in which the user elic- 
its an argumentative answer from the system by 
asking a direct question. The word why can often 
be interpreted as a signal for an argumentative 
answer. On the other hand, its exact meaning de- 
pends on the dialogue context and it can be used 
within speech acts which have nothing to do with 
explanation, such as making a suggestion or a 
comment 5. In spite of its ambiguity, the word 
why represents the only means of eliciting an 
argumentative answer in most AI systems which have 
an explanation component. 
Special idiomatic expressions such as those 
listed in (LI) can have the same function as the 
word why. In the system HAM-RPM expressions like 
(LI) How come, what ... for, how do you know 
these are recognized through pattern matching 
during lexical analysis 6. 
Indirect questions such as those in (LI) re- 
quire that the system be able to divide the ut- 
terance into matrix sentence and embedded sen- 
tence syntactically; only then can it process the 
latter using the same means as in the case of di- 
rect questions containing why or the questions in 
(L1). 
(L2) Please tell me why A, I'd like to know why A 
Further types of signals include direct (see LJ) 
and indirect (see L4) requests. The problem of 
(LJ) Please explain why A, prove that A 
(L4) I 'd be interested in hearing why you think 
that A, Are you prepared to justify your 
conclusion that A? 
how indirect speech acts such as the requests in 
(L4) can be recognized automatically is one which 
has recently been attracting much attention from 
natural language AI researchersJ, 8 
The word why and the expressions in (LI) 
needn't accompany the proposition to be explained 
within a single utterance, as they do in the ex- 
ample (El); they can also be used alone after the 
system has answered a question to elicit an expla- 
nation of the answer (cf. E2). 
(El) USER (U): Why is Glenbrook Drive closed? 
(E2.1) USER (U) : Is Olenbrook Drive closed? 
(E2.2) SYSTEM (S): Yes. 
(E2.3) USER (U): Hew do you explain that? 
The expressions in (LJ) and (L4) can also be used 
to achieve just the opposite: An argumentative 
answer is requested in advance, before the corres- 
ponding question has been asked of the system. 
(EJ) PLease explain your answer: Do you think 
that A? 
As the continuation of (E2.l) and (E2.2) represen- 
ted by (E2.4) and (E2.5) illustrates, a speaker 
often explains a previously given answer when 
the listener - perhaps using an expression such 
as the ones in (LS)  shows signs of doubt as to 
(L5) Really? Are you sure? That's strange. 
(E2.4) U: Really? 
(E2.5) S: Yeah, they're repaving it. 
the truth of the answer. 
A kind of signal which suggests an argumen- 
tative answer in a still more obvious manner is 
the category of utterances by the user which indi- 
cate an opinion contrary to that expressed by the 
system (cf. L6). The idiomatic expressions in (L5) 
(L6) I doubt that, That doesn't follow, I can't 
believe that..., Since when? 
and (L6) which always express doubt or a contrary 
opinion no matter what the current dialogue con- 
text may be, can be handled adequately if infor- 
mation concerning their implications is stored in 
the system's 'idiom lexicon '6. 
A further way in which the user can indi- 
rectly ask a why-question is by himself suggesting 
an explanation of what the system has just asser- 
ted, while at the same time indicating a desire 
to have the explanation confirmed by the system. 
For example, after the system has given the an- 
swer (E2.2), the user should be able, by asking 
the question (E2.6), to elicit an explanation like 
(E2.7) from the system. If this kind of behavior 
(E2.6) U: Because of an accident? 
(?2.7) S: No, because they're repaying it. 
is to be realized in a dialogue system, the pro- 
gram must be able to recognize (E2.6) as a pro- 
posed explanation. Algorithms which recognize 
explanations in certain contexts have been de- 
veloped, e.g., for the ICAI system ACE TM and the 
text-understanding system PAM 23. 
Leading and rhetorical questions which 
suggest an affirmative answer may be seen as con- 
taining an implicit request to justify the answer 
if it is negative. If the system's answer to (EJ.I) 
(E3.1) U: You aren't going to restrict me to 
40k of core today again, are you? 
(?3.2) S: Yes, in fact I am. I've got 47 jobs 
logged-in in the moment. 
is not something like (E3.2), but rather simply 
Yes, in fact I am, the system isn't exhibiting 
the sort of cooperative behavior which we would 
like to have in a natural language dialogue sys- 
tem. 
These last two types of speech acts cannot 
at present be handled adequately by AI systems. 
The same is true of explanations within the 
schema reproach-justification (cf. E4.1 and E4.2). 
-146- 
(E4.1) U: You erased my file COLING. TMP# 
(E4.2) S: Yeah, your log-out quota was exceeded. 
Communicative and Cognitive Conditions as Signals 
for Arj'umenEatliv ~ Answers 
Two further kinds of signals which suggest argu- 
mentative answers deserve mention in this section. 
In contrast to the preceding types they can be in- 
corporated without difficulty into existing AI 
systems, e.g. HAM-RPM 21. 
Both kinds of signal lead to the question s 
being oucr-~we2..?d in that they suggest an argu- 
mentative answer in the absence of any explicit 
or implicit request for such an answer in the 
user's question. 
On the one hand, the system may offer an 
unsolicited explanation for reasons of p(z.,utneA 
tae2./?~ if it has already noticed that the user 
seems to have a tendency to ask for explanations 
of answers 6. 
On the other hand, over-answering may even 
be reasonably expected of the system in the case 
where the answer is based on uncertain beliefs 
and approximate or hypothetical reasoning. This 
kind of behavior can be modelled to a limited 
extent if the system is programmed so as to at- 
tempt to generate an explanation as soon as its 
confidence in its own answer sinks below a cer- 
tain threshold, e.g., because the implication 
strength (see (a) above) of one of the inference 
rules it has used is low (cf. E5.1, E5.2)? The 
(E5?I) U: I wonder if the Mercedes is cheap. 
(E5.2) S: I imagine so -- .it's pretty old and 
rusty. 
generation of an argumentative answer in such a 
context falls outside the usual scope of lin- 
guistic analysis; it is a good example of an ap- 
plication of the AI paradigm in that the con- 
dition which gives rise to the generation of an 
argumentative answer is a certain property of a 
cognitive process, namely the inference process 
by which the answer is derived. 
Figure 2 summarizes the various signals for 
argumentative answers which have been discussed 
in this section (types of signals which have been 
implemented in HAM-RPM's explanation component 
are indicated by a *).  
,quest ion~_~_quest ion  word * 
idiomatic expression * 
__------direct * 
? request~_____~ind i rec t  * 
? evidence of doubt in user * 
? evidence of a contrary opinion in user * 
? inadequate explanation suggested by user 
? unexpected answer to a leading or rhetorical 
question 
? evidence of reproach in user 
? /par tner - tac t i cs  * 
"?ver-answer~ng"-~--uncertainty about own answer * 
Figure 2: Signals which can elicit an argumen- 
tative answer 
Speech Act Sch.emata for Ar@umentative Dijloju @ 
Sequences 
This section deals with argumentative dia- 
logue sequences and their reconstruction in AI 
systems. The speech act sequence depicted in 
schema I will serve as a starting point. 
($1.1) U: <yes-no-question> 
($1.2) S: <affirmat{ve answer> (with restric- 
ting hedge) 
($1.3) U: Why? 
($1.4) S: <argumentative answer> 
Interpretation of $1.3 by S: 
What is the basis for the assertion (be- 
lief) in $1.2 that A? 
Schema I: A simple argumentative dialogue sequence 
In schema I, as in the schemata to follow, the 
word why represents the entire class of signals 
in the user's utterances for argumentative answers 
which were discussed in the previous section. 
Here is an example of a simple argumentative 
dialogue sequence: 
(E6.1) U: Do you know if the Mercedes is cheap? 
(?6.2) S: I think so. 
(E6.3) U: What makes you think so? 
(E6.4) S: It's in need of repairs. 
Iterated Why-questions and Ultimate Explanations 
A sequence such as (E6.1) through (E6.4) may be 
continued by one or more repititions of schema 2, 
in which the user requests that the system's ar- 
gumentative answer itself be explained. 
($2.1) U: Why? 
($2.2) S: <argumentative answer> 
Schema 2: Iteration of a why-question 
The dialogue sequence (E6.5) through (E6.8) is a 
continuation of (E6) in which two further why- 
questions occur. The answer (E6.8) is an example 
(E6.5) U: Why? 
(E6.6) S: It's in need of repairs because its 
rear axle is bent. 
(?6.7) U: How come? 
(E6.8) S: That's just the way it is. 
of an u./_-t/mcc.tC cxpZ~noJCio~. Though it is debatable 
whether ultimate explanations in a philosophical 
sense are in fact possible, it is clear that par- 
ticipants in everyday dialogues frequently offer 
explanations which they are not in a position to 
explain further. Some typical formulations which 
are used in such cases are listed in (L7). 
(L7) It's obvious, That's the way it is, 
Can't you see it? 
The Ambiguity of Iterated Why-questions 
A further problem in connection with iterated 
why-questions is the ambiguity which they reg- 
ularly involve. Each of the why-questions after 
the first one can refer either to (a) the asser- 
tion which constituted the explanans, or (b) the 
--147 - 
inferential relationship between the explanans 
and the explanandum. 
($3.1) U: Why Q? 
($3.2) S: Because P. 
J % 
Why P? 
? Why (P ~ Q) ? 
Schema 3: The ambiguity of an iterated why-question 
If the second sort of interpretation is applied 
to the question (E6.7), an answer such as (E6.9) 
becomes appropriate. 
(E6.9) S: A machine is in need of repairs when 
one of its parts is in need of repairs. 
It is of course possible to eliminate this ambi- 
guity with a more precise formulation of the why- 
question, as when, for example, ($2.1) is re- 
placed with ($2.1'). 
(S2.1') U: I know that. But why does that make 
you think that Q7 
Although interpretation (a) is far more common 
than (b) in nontechnical dialogues, the occur- 
rence of questions such as ($2.1') shows that it 
is nonetheless worthwhile to provide an AI system 
with the ability to answer in accordance with 
either of the possible interpretations. For inter- 
pretation (b), this means that the system must be 
able,'like HAM-RPM al, to verbalize the inference 
rules it uses. 
Jf the system is requested, via a further 
why-question, to explain an inference rule that 
it has verbalized in this way, the existence of 
a third type of argument in addition to the pres- 
entation of factual evidence and the verbalisation 
of inference rules becomes evident: The system 
may supply a bacl./n9 Is for its inference rule. 
A backing usually refers to a convention, a theory, 
or observations. 
An explanation component which uses back- 
ings must have access to the corresponding meta- 
knowledge about its inference rules. 
The Elicitation of a Multiple dustific@tion 
A further variant of schema 2 can be used to ex- 
hibit the step-by-step elicitation of a multiple 
justification. Instead of simply asking another 
why-question, the user specifically requests 
further corroborating evidence for the explanan- 
dum. Some typical expressions are listed in (L8). 
(L8) IS that all? Any other reason? Just because 
of that? 
($4.1) U: <request for further evidence> 
($4.2) S: <corroborating evidence for SI.2> 
Schema 4: The elicitation of a muJtiple justifi- 
cation 
As the example (E6.10) through (E6.13) shows, 
schema 4 can be instantiated several times in 
succession. 
(E6.10) U: Is that the only reason? 
(?6.11) S: Well, it's pretty old and beat-up. 
(E6.12) U: Anything else? 
(E6.13) S: It's a bit rusty. 
.Djalo@ue Schemata with Metacommunicative Why-qua- 
tions 
in all of the dialogue schemata we have examined 
so far, a why-question asked by the user follow- 
ed an answer by the system to a previous question. 
In this section we shall discuss dialogue se- 
quences in which why-questions refer to questions 
or requests. In fact, of course, any kind of 
speech act, e.g. a threat or an insult, can give 
rise to a metacommunicative why-question; the 
two types to be discussed here are those most 
relevant to foreseeable applications of natural 
language AI systems. 
Schema 5 will serve as a starting point. In 
clarification dialogues schema 6,a variant of 
schema 5, can be instantiated. 
($5.1) S: <question>,<request> 
(55.2) U: Why? 
(55.3) S: <argumentative answer> 
($5.4) U: <response to S5.1> 
interpretation of $5.2 by S: 
What was the intention underlying the 
speech act in $5.1? 
Schema 5: A dialogue sequence with a metacommuni- 
cative why-question 
($6.1) U: <question> 
($6.2) S: <clarification question concerning 
S6.1>,<request for a paraphrase of 
$6.1> 
($6.3) U: Why? 
($6.4) S: <argumentative answer> 
(S6.5) U: <response to S6.2> 
(S6.6) S: <response to $6.1> 
Schema 6: A metacommunicative why-question with- 
in a clarification dialogue 
Here is a dialogue sequence containing a meta- 
communicative why-question asked by the user: 
(E7.1) U: Please list all articles since 1978 
on the subject of 'presposition'. 
(E7.2) S: Do you really mean 'presposition'? 
(E7.3) U: Why do you ask? 
(E7.4) S: I don't know this word. 
(E7.5) U: I meant 'presupposition' 
(E7.6) S: I have the fol lowing entries: ... 
Why-questions Asked by the System 
Although all of the why-questions considered so 
far have been asked by the user, the system can 
also ask why the user has made a particular input? 
This situation is described by schema 5 except 
that the roles of USER (U) and SYSTEM (S) are re- 
versed? 
Providing an application-oriented AI system 
with the ability to ask such why-questions is 
worthwhile because there are many situations in 
which the system requires further information 
about the user's intention to guide its search 
for an answer or to help to formulate its answer 
in a communicatively adequate manner? Of course, 
-148-- 
the system can only make use of the user's an- 
swer to such a why-question if it is equipped 
with the ability to analyse argumentative an- 
swers. The example (E8) might occur in one of 
HAM-RPM's dialogue situations, in which the sys- 
tem simulates a hotel manager who is anxious to 
rent a particular room to a caller who is in- 
quiring about it. It illustrates the way infor- 
mation about the dialogue partner's intentions 
can influence the way a particular state of af- 
fairs is described. 
(E8.1) U: Has the room got a big desk? 
(E8.2) S: Why do you ask? 
(E8.3) U: Because I've got a lot of work to do. 
(E8.4) S: Yes, the desk is fairly large. 
(E8.3') U: I hate big desks. 
(E8.4') S: It isn't particularly big. 
The schemata we have investigated in this and the 
previous sections can also be embedded in one an- 
other, as can be seen from schema 7. In this 
schema, (S7.4),but not ($7.3), is a metacommuni- 
cative why-question. 
($7.1) U: <yes-no-question> 
($7.2) S: <affirmative answer> (with restric- 
ting hedge) 
(S7.3) U: Why? 
($7.4) S: Why do you ask? 
($7.5) U: <argumentative answer to $7.4> 
($7.6) S: <argumentative answer to $7.3> 
Schema 7: Successive why-questions of different 
types 
In mixed-Z~.).2J.o.~..i_u? systems, in which either of 
the partners can initiate a dialogue sequence, 
the system must be able both to ask and to an- 
swer why-questions, including those of a meta- 
communicative nature. 
Summary and Integration of All Argumentative Dia- 
logue Schemata Relevant to AI Systems 
Figure 3 summarizes and integrates the schemata 
for argumentative dialogue sequences discussed 
in the preceding sections. The arrows joining the 
rectangles indicate that one speech act follows 
another in time. If arrows join two rectangles 
in both directions, loops such as those discussed 
in connection with iterated why-questions are 
possible. Double vertical lines on the left- or 
right-hand side of a rectangle indicate that the 
speech act in question can be the first or the 
last speech act in a sequence, respectively. The 
system's criteria for recognizing at each point 
which of the possible speech acts the user has 
performed and for selecting its own speech acts 
are not included in the diagram. 
If one extends Figure 3 by permitting the 
reversal of the roles of system and user, all 
schemata for argumentative dialogue sequences 21 
are included which are relevant for foreseeable 
applications in dialogue systems with mixed-ini- 
tiative. 
Technical Data 
A non-compiled version of HAM-RPM is run- 
ning on the DECsystem 1070 (PDP-10) of the Fach- 
bereich fuer Informatik of the University of Ham- 
burg under the TOPSI0 operating system. Compri- 
sing approximately 600 LISP/FUZZY procedures, the 
current version occupies 150K of 36-bit words and 
requires from one to Fifteen seconds for a re- 
sponse. 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank Anthony Jameson for care- 
ful reading of an earlier draft of this paper. 
' 1 ( I)  USER ' (2) SYSTEM , (,3) USER 
I I 
I I 
i I 
I I 
, \]Llariflcationl ' 
I AI question/ Ik~ I 
/~  request I~  
I I 
quest  ion  answer  why-quest  ion  
II/', 
; ~ rejection IF: 
i i :L ill 
i I 
(4) SYSTEM 
~r ultlmate explanat Ion 
il/ 
argumentat i ve \]'~I 
,3  onswor IL I I  
I II\ 
oference toll 
previous II 
explanat Ion II ) t ,, I 
(5) USER 
i 
~ request for 
further 
evidence 
response 
to  (2) 111 
(6) SYSTEM 
answer 
to (1) 
Figure 3: Schemata for argumentative dialogue sequences in Al systems 
-149-- 
References 
\[I\] Bromberger, S. (1966): Why-questions. In: 
Colodny, R. (ed.): Mind and Cosmos. 
Pittsburgh: Univ. Press, p. 86-111 
\[2\] Chester, D. (1976): The translation of for- 
mal proofs into English. In: Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, 7, 3, p. 261-278 
\[3\] Cohen, P.R. (1978): On knowing what to say: 
Planning speech acts. Univ. of Toron- 
to, Dept. of Computer Science, Tech- 
nical Report No. 118 
\[4\] Davis, R. (1976): Applications of meta level 
knowledge to the construction, main- 
tenance and use of large knowledge 
bases. Stanford Univ., Technical Re- 
port STAN-CS-76-562 
\[5\] Freeman, C. (1976): A pragmatic analysis of 
tenseless why-questions. In: Mufwene, 
S.S., Walker, C.A., Steeuer, S.B. 
(eds.): Papers of the twelfth region- 
al meeting of the Chicago Linguistic 
Society. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic 
Society, p. 208-219 
\[6\] v. Hahn, W., Hoeppner, W., Jameson, A., 
Wahlster, W. (1980): The anatomy of 
the natural language dialogue system 
HAM-RPM. In: Bolc, L. (ed.): Natural 
language based computer systems. 
Munich: Hanser/Macmillan 
\[7\] Hart, P.E., Duda, R.O. (1977): PROSPECTOR - 
A computer-based consultation system 
for mineral exploration. Stanford 
Research International, AI Center, 
Technical Note 155 
\[8\] Hayes, P., Reddy, R. (1979): An anatomy of 
graceful interaction in spoken and 
written man-machine communication. 
Carnegie-Mellon-Univ., Dept. of Com- 
puter Science, Technical Report CMU- 
CS-79-144 
\[9\] Heringer, H.J. (1974): Praktische Semantik. 
Stuttgart: Klett 
\[I0\] Nakamishi, M., Nagata, M., Ueda, K. (1979): 
An automatic theorem prover genera- 
ting a proof in natural language. In: 
IJCAI-79, Tokyo, p. 636-638 
\[11\] Sacerdoti, E.D. (1977): A structure for plans 
and behavior. N.Y.: Elsevier 
\[12\] Scott, C.A., Clancey, A., Davis, R., 
Shortliffe, E.H. (1977): Explanation 
capabilities of production-based con- 
sultation systems. In: American Jour- 
nal of Computational Linguistics, 
Microfiche 62 
\[13\] Scragg, G.W. (1974): Answering questions 
about processes. Univ. of California, 
San Diego, Ph.D. Thesis 
\[14\] Sleeman, D.H., Hendley, R.J. (1979): ACE: 
A system which analyses complex ex- 
planations. In: International Journal 
of Man-Machine Studies, 11, p. 125-144 
\[15\] Stallman, R.M., Sussman, G.J. (1977): For- 
ward reasoning and dependency-direc- 
ted backtracking in a system for com- 
puter-aided circuit analysis. In: 
Artificial Intelligence 9, P. 135-196 
\[16\] Swartout, W.R. (1977): A Digitalis therapy 
advisor with explanations. MIT Lab. 
for Computer Science, Technical Re- 
port TR-176 
\[17\] Tondl, L. (1969): Semantics of the question 
in a problem-solving situation. Czech 
Academy of Science, Prague 
\[18\] Tou\]min, S. (1969): The uses of argument, 
Cambridge: Univ. Press (Ist ed. 1958) 
\[19\] Wahlster, W., Jameson, A., Hoeppner, W. 
(1978): Glancing, referring and ex- 
planing in the dialogue system HAM-RPM. 
In: American Journal of Computational 
Linguistics, Microfiche 77, P. 53-67 
\[20\] Wahlster, W. (1980): Implementing fuzziness 
in dialogue systems. In: Rieger, B. 
(ed.): Empirical Semantics. Bochum: 
Brockmeyer 
\[21\] Wahlster, W. (1980): Automatic generation of 
natural language explanations for con- 
clusions based on fuzzy inferences. 
(in preparation) 
\[22\] Weiner, J.L. (1979): The structure of natural 
explanation: Theory and application. 
System Development Corporation, Santa 
Monica, Technical Report SP-4035 
\[23\] Wilensky, R. (1978): Why John maried Mary: 
Understanding stories involving re- 
curring goals. In: Cognitive Science, 
2, p. 235-266 
\[24\] Winograd, T. (1972): Understanding natural 
language. N.Y.: Academic 
--150-- 
