TERMINOLOGY DATA BANKS AS  A BAS IS  FOR H IGH-QUAL ITY  TRANSLAT ION 
Karl - Heinz B r inkmann 
Language Services Dept. 
S IEMENS AG 
Hofmannst r .  51 
D-8000 Munich  
W. Germany 
Abst rac t  
Cur rent ly  ex i s t ing  te rmino logy  data banks  
serve  var ious  purposes .  Two major  g roups ,  
i .e .  s tandard iza t ion -or iented  and t rans la t ion -  
o r iented  te rmino logy  data banks a re  of spec ia l  
s ign i f i cance .  This  paper  dea ls  exc lus ive ly  With 
t rans la t ion -or iented  banks  and uses  as an 
example  the TEAM termino logy  data bank sys -  
tem deve loped  by the Language Serv ices  
Depar tment  of S IEMENS.  
Some twe lve  years  ago  the Depar tment  rea l i zed  
that t rad i t iona l  work ing  methods  wou ld  not  be  
ef fect ive over  the long  te rm in meet ing  s tead i ly  
mount ing  demands  for  h igh -qua l i ty  t rans la t ion .  
These  demands  resu l t  f rom the fact that human 
knowledge  cont inues  to g row at an  ever  inc reas -  
ing rate, and  that a company  such  as  S IEMENS 
w i th  a lmost  350, 000  peop le  on  its payro l l  and  
more  than  50% of its sa les  resu l t ing  f rom 
expor ts  has  to p rov ide  its cus tomers  th rough-  
out  the wor ld  w i th  h igh-qua l i ty  t rans la t ions  of 
its p roduct  documentat ion .  
As  extensive tests have shown, fully automatic 
mach ine  translation is incapable of meeting the 
needs of our company  and, for that matter, of 
any company  or institution having to rely heavi- 
ly on high-quality translation. The correctness 
rates of currently marketed  mach ine  transla- 
tion systems are so low as to offset any advan- 
tages in speed that such systems may offer. 
The post-editing effort required to provide 
texts having a correctness rate of 75 or even 
80% with the corrections necessary to reach 
an acceptable standard of quality is unjustifiable 
as far as expenditure of money  and manpower  
is concerned. 
We therefore elected to explore the possibili- 
ties of mach ine  support for human translation, 
a path already taken earlier and being taken at 
present by other institutions. The result of 
our effort was the program system known as 
TEAM which is based on a terminology data 
bank which at present contains almost a million 
terminological units, i.e. lexical entries based 
on a defined concept and offering terms express- 
ing this concept in up to eight languages, these 
languages being German,  English, French, 
Spanish, Russian, Italian, /~ortuguese, and 
Dutch. The bank is at present being expanded 
to deal with further languages such as Arabic. 
The paper then explains the organization of the 
data bank, the character sets handled, and the 
various aids it offers its users. Particular 
emphas is  is given to the support the system 
offers by means  of special auxiliary programs 
to terminologists and lexicographers. A detail- 
ed explanation is given of the facilities the 
system provides when used in the inter-active 
mode with respect to information retrieval and 
updating routines. 
A special chapter of the paper is devoted to the 
hard-copy retrieval facilities of the system 
which range f rom simple lists output via high- 
speed printers having standard or extended 
character sets, to more  sophisticated glos- 
saries and dictionaries produced on micro -  
fiches or by way  of laser printers, to diction- 
aries and the like in printing-press quality 
produced by data-bank-controlled photo-type- 
setting equipment. The hard-copy retrieval 
facilities also include the possibility of supply- 
ing translators with text-related or text- 
synchronous lists. 
Finally the paper describes the amalgamation 
of the terminology data bank with a text pro- 
cessing system. In this combination the 
translator is shown the text he is to translate 
on a video display in a format hat leaves 
sufficient free space for his translation. In 
this space he is shown all target-language 
equivalents which the terminology data bank 
contains for the special-field terms that appear 
in the original text. The translator then com- 
pletes the translation text by using the text 
processing system in the inter-active mode. 
We have found this method faster than the use 
of a machine translation system requiring 
post-editing and even pre-editing in order to 
reach the high quality standard on which we 
have to insist if we want to remain  successful 
on the world markets.  
-- 463 .... 
