ON COMPUTATIONAL SENTENCE GENERATION FROM LOGICAL FORM 
Juen- t in  Wang 
Inst i tut  fur Angewandte  Informat ik ,  TU Ber l in  
Summary. 
This paper descr ibes  some computat iona l  
and l ingu is t ica l  mechan isms in our 
program wr i t ten  in S IMULA to generate  
natura l  language sentences from their  
under ly ing  logical  s t ructures  in an 
extended pred icate  logic. Af ter  the 
presentat ion  of the augumented logical  
fo rmal i sm to deal  wi th i l l ocut ionary  
acts,we expla in  then the basic devices 
used in the generat ion  process :semiot i c  
in terpreta t ion ,orders  of quant i f i ca t ions  
or der ivat iona l  const ra in ts , the  referen-  
t ial p roper ty  of var iab les  and the 
Le ibn iz -F rege  idea. Examples  from system 
output  wi l l  be given. 
1 . In t roduct ion  
Logica l  form is one ot  the most  used 
not ions in ph i losophy , log i  c and l inguis-  
tics. It goes back at least to Ar is tote -  
les in his l ingu is t ica l  and logical  ana- 
lysis of natura l  language sentences.  
This d i rect  re ference to the immediate 
sentence form which has been character i -  
stic for the logic of sy l log ism remains 
unchanged throughout  the whole per iod 
of scholast ic  logic unt i l  the deve lop-  
ment  of the formal pred icate  logic. Sin- 
ce then, th is  logical  formal ism, wi th  or 
wi thout  var ia t ion  and modi f i cat ion ,  has 
been w ide ly  used in the l inguist ic  phi-  
losophy to analyse and study the natura l  
language. And it is then the resu l ted 
representat ions  in logical  fo rmal i sm 
which wi l l  be taken as the logical  form 
of the analyzed natura l  language senten- 
ces. This  changed not ion of logical  form 
can be found everywhere  in the t ractatus 
of Carnap ,Qu ine ,Geach ,H in t ikka  and many 
others. And this not ion of logical  form 
wi l l  be now used universa l ly .  In recent  
times, a lot of log ica l ly  minded l ingui-  
ts l ike Lakoff ,  Harman,Keenan and Kar- 
t tunen have even at tempted to put logi- 
cal form into the re la t ionsh ip  wi th  the 
not ion of deep structure in connect ion  
with Chomsky~ theory of generat ive  gra- 
mmar. They hold the v iew that the seman- 
t ical  representat ion  of  natura l  language 
sentences can be obta ined from the for- 
mal logical  s t ructures and that these 
semant ica l  representat ions  can be adap- 
ted as a basis for sysntact ica l  genera-  
t ion of natura l  language sentences. 
However , th i s  school  of generat ive  gram- 
mar has not given any const ruc t ive  
demonst ra t ion  of their  assert ions.  
In this paper we do not concern wi th  
the quest ion  whether  this theory , the so- 
cal led generat ive  semant ics  ,will y ie ld 
a true grammar theory or a genuine the- 
ory of the semant ics  of natura l  language. 
We are rather  mot ivated  by real needs. 
We have a l ready at our d isposa l  a ques- 
t ion -answer ing  data base system which 
uses essent ia l ly  the language of predi-  
cate logic as the formal query language. 
We need to know how to express these 
logical  forms in natura l  language sen- 
tences. And Since we have to do with a 
quest ion -answer ing  system, we need not 
only to treat logical  forms under ly ing  
ind icat ive  sentences but ,more important,  
the logical  s t ructures  which  have been 
used by the system as the representa-  , 
t ions for in ter rogat ive  sentences. In the 
fo l lowing we present  at f irst the 
extended logical  formal ism. We descr ibe  
then the concept ions  and pr inc ip les  
being used in implementat ion.  The pro- 
gram is wr i t ten  in SIMULA. 
2 .Logica l  fo rmal i sm as semant ica l  rep- 
resentat ion  of natura l  language senten- 
ces 
The logical  fo rmal i sm which  we have used 
to represent  the sentence s t ructure  of 
a natura l  language is in its essence a 
many-sor ted  language of pred icate  logic. 
In the concept ion  of representat ion  we 
have adopted some ideas from the speech 
act theory  of Aust in  and Sear le .Accor -  
ding to this theory, the ut terance  of 
any sentences in a natura l  language is 
character i s t i ca l l y  per forming at least 
three d is t inct  kinds of acts:(1) the 
ut ter ing  of words,(2)  re fer r ing  and pre- 
d icat ing,  (3) stating, quest ion ing,  
commanding,  promis ing,etc .  The not ion 
of re fer r ing  and pred icat ing  should be 
thus detached from the not ions of such 
speech acts as asser t ing ,quest ion ing ,  
commanding,etc .  , s ince the same refe- 
rence and pred icat ion  can occur in the 
per formance of d i f fe rent  complete  speech 
acts. In tak ing account  of this d ist inc-  
t ion between propos i t ion  and i l locut io-  
nary act we make one addi t ion to the 
usual  logical  formal ism. We let the pro- 
--405-- 
pos i t ional  part  be represented by the 
usual logical  expression.  In addit ion,  
we have an aux i l iary  component  to repre- 
sent the d i f ferent  i l locut ionary  acts. 
This addi t ional  component  wi l l  be con- 
nected with  the left end of the logical  
express ion by a convent ion sign " = ", 
which ,by  the way, should not be read as 
"equal". A deta i led  descr ipt ion  of this 
extended logical  formal ism 'is g iven in 
Habe l ,Schmidt  and Schweppe (1977). Some 
examples can be given as fol lows: 
Assert ions:  
/true/=.all.x2 (.ex.x3 (city(x3) .eq. 
"~okyo ~.and. takeplacec i ty(x2,x3)) )  
(I) 
Requests  (Wh-questions) : 
conference(x2)=.ex .x3  (city(x3) .eq. 
"Tokyo .  .and. takeplacec i ty(x2,x3))  
(2) 
yes-no quest ions:  
=.a l l .x2 (.ex.x3 (city(x3) .eq: ~okyo " 
.and. takeplacec i ty(x2,x3)  )) 
(3) 
The i l locut ionary  indicators  l ike "con- 
ference(x2)" ,  which is i tself  a name 
function, can be compared with the de- 
s ignator  of Woods(1968) in his query 
language formal ism. In general ,  several  
such i l locut ionary  indicators can be 
a l lowed at the same time; they could 
then lead to the representat ion  of mul-  
t ip le quest ions as d iscussed by Hint i -  
kka. Here,however ,  we leave the quest ion 
open, whether  this proposed logical  
formal ism as a representat ion  symbol ism 
is complete and adequate for natura l  
language. For example, we do not consi~ 
der whether  WHY- and HOW-quest ion  can 
also be treated in the same framework. 
It is obvous that this proposal  for 
the semant ica l  representat ion  of natural  
language sentences does not fo l low 
Chomsky "s theory, accord ing to wh ich  
inter rogat ive  sentences should be deri -  
ved from non- in ter rogat ive  ones by the 
app l icat ion  of opt ional  t ransformat ions.  
This approach has rather some af f in i ty  
with the suggest ion of A jduk iewicz(1928)  
who has descr ibed the logica l  st ructure 
of a quest ion as cons is t ing of senten- 
t ial  mat r ix (a  sentence with one or more 
of its components  rep laced by var iables) 
preceded by an inter rogat ive  operator  
"for what x" (or "for what x,y ,z,..." ,if 
the matr ix  has more than one free var i -  
able). In such cases, we can take i l lo- 
cut ionary indicators  as in ter rogat ive  
operators  in the sense of A jdukiewicz.  
The proposed way of g iv ing semant ica l  
representat ions  both to ind icat ive and 
quest ion  sentences seems to have some 
advantages.  Above all, it enable us to 
deal with quest ion sentences d i rect ly  
wi thout  us ing the somehow art i f i c ia l  
method to paraphrase them as indicat ive 
sentences or spistemic statements,  as 
suggested by Hintikka. Any way, the 
suggested kind of semant ica l  representa-  
t ion of quest ion  sentences receives a 
quite natural  set - theoret ica l  interpre-  
tation. For example, the form (2) used 
for request  corresponds to the meaning 
of the set expression:  
{x2 I ex.x3(c i ty(x3)  "Tokyo" and. eq. Q O I 
takep lacec i ty (x2 ,x3) )  
J (4) 
In such cases, the inter rogat ive  opera-  
tors funct ion as quant i f iers;  they bind 
free var iab les  and thus t ransform con- 
d i t ions exhib i ted in sentent ia l  matr ix  
into complete c losed forms. 
3. Examples  
In order to let the reader have a rough 
impress ion of what the system can accom- 
pl ish at the present  stage, we give 
be low at f i rst  some output  examples,  
before we step into the scattered des- 
cr i t ion of the concept ions  and pr inci -  
ples to be used. The examples taken from 
output consists  of pairs of a g iven 
logical  form and its cor respond ing natu- 
ral language sentence generated. 
/ t rue /=.a l l . x2( .ex .x3(c i ty (x3) .eq .  
"Tokyo'.and. takep lacec i ty(x2,x3) ) )  
EVERY MEETING WILL BE HELD IN THE 
CITY'~okyo" 
/ t rue /=.a l l . x1( .ex .x2( ( .ex .x3(make-  
journeyc i ty (x l ,x3) .and.c i ty (x3) .eq .  
"tokyo')) . imp. (takepart(xl ,x2))))  
EVERYBODY WHO MAKES A JOURNEY TO THE 
CITY'~OKYO" TAKES PART AT SOME MEETING 
person(x l )=.ex .x2( ( .ex .x4( takep lace-  
country(x2 ,x4) .and.country(x4)  .eq. 
" japan')) .and. (takepart(xl ,x2)))  
WHO TAKES PART AT THE MEETING WHICH 
TAKES PLACE IN THE COUNTRY "JAPAN" 
conference(x2)=.ex .x3(c i ty (x3) .eq .  
"tokyo'.and. takeplacec i ty(x2,x3))  
WHICH MEETINGS WILL BE  HELD IN THE 
CITY "TOKYO" 
person(x l )=.ex .x2(conference(x2) .eq .  
"col l ing-8o' .and.  ( .ex.x3(takeplace-  
c i ty (x2 ,x3) .and .c i ty (x3) .eq . ' tokyo ' ) )  
.and.g ive lectureconf (x l ,x2) )  
WHO GIVES A LECTURE AT THE CONFERENCE 
"COLLING-8o" WHICH TAKES PLACE IN THE 
CITY "TOKYO" 
count ry (x4)=.ex .x2( takep lacecount ry  
(x2,x4) .and.conference(x2) .eq.  c?l l ing 
-80 ") 
IN WHICH COUNTRIES WILL THE MEETING 
---406-- 
"COLLING-8o'BE HELD 
person(x l )=.ex .x3(c i ty (x3) .eq . ' tokyo"  
.and. ( .ex .x2( takep lacec i ty (x2 ,x3) .and .  
conference(x2) .eq . ' co l l ing -8o ' ) ) .and .  
t rave l toc i ty(x l ,x3) )  
WHO TRAVELS TO THE CITY "TOKYO'IN 
WHICH THE MEETING "COLLING-8o" TAKES 
PLACE 
person(x l )=.ex .x2( ( .ex .x4( takep laceco-  
unt ry (x2 ,x4) .and .count ry (x4) .eq . ' j apan"  
) ) .and. ( takepar t (x l ,x2) ) )  
WHO TAKES PART AT THE MEET ING WHICH 
TAKES PLACE IN THE COUNTRY "JAPAN" 
4. Semiot ic  in terpreta t ion  as sentence 
generat ion  basis  
Let us proceed to cons ider  the devices 
for sentence generat ion  from the under-  
lying logica l  structure.  Essent ia l l y  
the generat ion  process wi l l  be based on 
the semiot ic  in terpreta t ion ,ca l led  by 
Scholz and Hasenjaeger ,  of the predica-  
tes and funct ions used in the logical  
structure.  Some of them are l isted as 
fol lows: 
Predicates:  
takepart (x l ,x2)  =def person xl takes 
part at meet ing  x2 
takeplacec i ty(x l ,x2)  =def meet ing  xl 
wi l l  be held in c ity x2 
takep lacecountry(x l ,x2)  =def meet ing  xl 
takes place in country  x2 
make journeyc i ty (x l ,x2)  =def person xl 
makes a journey to c ity x2 
Funct ions:  
c i ty (x ) .eq .y  =def the name of c ity x 
is y 
conference(x ) .eq .y  =def the name of 
meet ing  x is y 
pezson(x ) .eq .y  =def the name of person 
x is y 
The semiot ic  in terpreta t ion  str ings are 
the bu i ld ing basis  for surface senten- 
ces. In this respect  the semiot ic  inter-  
p retat ion  of pred icate  may be comparable  
wi th the under ly ing  str ing in the gene- 
rat ion tree or phrase-marker  which  is 
assumed both in the theory of Chomsky 
and in the theory of Montague as well.  
If we look at its actual  form more clos-  
ely, the str ings g iven as semiot ic  inter-  
pretat ions  d i f fer  in one essent ia l  
point  from the under ly ing  str ings adop- 
ted in the school  of generat ive  grammar. 
The under ly ing  str ing in the deep struc-  
ture for grammat ica l  t rans format ion  con- 
tains no var iab le  as used in the logic. 
On the ground of this essent ia l  d i f fer -  
ence  we can make no d i rect  compar ison 
between our approach and that of genera-  
t ive semantics.  
At the d isposa l  of semiot ic  interpreta-  
t ions of pred icates  and funct ions,  we 
could a l ready in pr inc ip le  implement  a 
program to generate  somehow quasi  natura l  
language sentences from the g iven logical  
structures.  Al l  what  we need to do is to 
fo l low the type of reading the logical  
formula which we have been taught at the 
class room. We have been taught, for ex- 
ample, to read the fo l lowing logical  
s t ructure 
/ t rue /=.a l l . x2( .ex .x3(c i ty (x3) .eq .  
" tokyo ' .and. takep lacec i ty (x2 ,x3) ) )  
as :  
for every meet ing  x2 it holds: 
there is a c i ty x3, for  which  it hold: 
the name of c ity x3 is "tokyo" 
and 
meet ing  x2 wi l l  be held in city x3 
This might  be cons idered as a quasi  natu- 
ral language sentence formulat ion.  It 
has above all  the advantage of being 
un iversa l  to the extent  that it can be 
appl ied to every kind of logical  struc- 
tures. And actua l ly  a program has worked 
in this style (Habe l ,Schmidt ,Schweppe 
1977). However , th i s  k ind of fo rmulat ion  
is not the usual  sur face sentence and 
it is also not so in te l l ig ib le  as it 
could. We need therefore  to f ind out an 
a l te rnat ive  which  might  give us a s imple 
and natura l  fo rmula t ion  . For eample, the 
logical  form given above has the mean ing  
which  can be expressed s imply as: 
"Every meet ing  wi l l  be held in the 
city "Tokyo" " 
It conta ins  no formal logical  quant i f ie rs  
and no free or bounded var iables.  We 
descr ibe  be low some main methods and 
pr inc ip les  which  we have used to achieve 
the generat ion  of such surface sentences 
computat ional ly .  
5. Quant i f i ca t ion  order  and der ivat iona l  
const ra int  
The prob lem of quant i f ie rs  const i tutes  
one of major  obstac les  in the computa-  
t ional  sentence generat ion  from logical  
structures.  As is wel l  known, the order 
of d i f fe rent  quant i f ie rs  has an inf lu- 
ence on the meanil~g of the express ion 
whether  it is in the case of natura l  
language or it is in the case of predi-  
--407- 
cate logic. Thus, Pe i rce has a l ready po- 
inted out that the sentences 
"some woman is adored by whatever  
spaniard may exist" 
and 
"whatever spaniard my exist  adores 
some woman" 
have quite d i f fe rent  meanings.  H int ikka 
and Lakoff  have made the same observa-  
t ion in their analys is  of natura l  lan- 
guage (but it seems that Chomsky has 
over looked this fact in his fo rmulat ion  
of Pass ive - t rans format ion) .Th is  pheno-  
menon that the order in which  un iversa l  
and par t icu lar  quant i f ie r  occur is mate-  
r ial  for the mean ing  is even more obvi-  
ous in the language of pred icate  logic. 
Let us cons ider  as example the pre- 
d icate 
personv is i tc i ty (x ,y )  
wi th the ass igned semiot ic  interpreta-  
tion: 
person x v is i ts  city y 
The two logical  express ions  
. a i l . x l ( .ex .x2(personv is i t c i ty (x l ,x2  
))) 
.ex .x2( .a l l . x l (personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2  
))) 
which d i f fe rs  f rom each o ther  jus t  in  
the  order  o f  quant i f i ca t ion  means qu i te  
di f ferent ly .  In the process of sentence 
generat ion  from logical  s t ructure we can 
thus not s imply take the semiot ic  inter-  
pretat ion  str ing and subst i tute for its 
var iab les  the cor respond ing  types of 
quant i f iers .  In other words,  the opera- 
t ion of "quant i f ie r - lower ing" ,  as Lakoff  
has cal led it, can not be appl ied in all  
cases wi thout  per t inent  d i f ferent iat ion .  
In our example, it can be appl ied in the 
f irst case and yields the correct  sen- 
tence: 
"every person v is i ts  some ci ty " 
However , i t s  d i rect  app l i ca t ion  would 
lead rather  to incorrect  sentence in 
respect  to the secand logical  form. It 
has rather  the meaning 
"some city wi l l  be v is i ted  by every 
person " 
The regu lar i ty  for the poss ib i l i ty  of 
subst i tu t ion  can be perce ived if we look 
at the semiot ic  in terpreta t ion  str ing 
and cons ider  the patterns of the fol low- 
ing logical  forms together:  
.a l l .x1( .ex.x2 
.ex.x1( .a l l .x2 
personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2)  
personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2)  
II. 
.a l l .x2(.ex.xl  
.ex.x2(.a l l .x l  
personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2)  
personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2)  
It is then obvious that only in cases, 
whi le  the order of logical  quant i f ie rs  
is in the same sequence in which  the cor- 
responding var iab les  occur in the g iven 
semiot ic  interpretat ion,  the operat ion  
of quant i f ie r - lower ing  can be d i rect ly  
carr ied out. And it y ie lds cor rec t  
sentences. In other cases such as in (II 
),it is w i thout  measures  not possible.  
This kind of regu lar i ty  has been also 
observed by Lakoff  in his d i scuss ion  of 
the not ion of der ivat iona l  ;it occurs 
in the t rans format iona l  der ivat ion  of 
surface sentences from the under ly ing  
deep structures.  Wi thout  going into the 
deta i ls  of his f inal  mod i f i ca t ions , the  
der ivat iona l  const ra in t  means roughly  
like this: if one quant i f ie r  commands 
another  in under ly ing  structure,  then 
that quant i f ie r  must  be lef tmost  in sur- 
face structure. He uses the der ivat iona l  
const ra int  as a means to rule out certa- 
in kind of t rans format iona l  generat ion  
of incorrect  sur face sentences. Our aim 
is ,however, not to b lock out but to 
obta in  correct  and mean ingfu l  surface 
sentences from mean ingfu l  logical  struc- 
tures. We thus try to f ind out means so 
that the cond i t ion  of der ivat iona l  con- 
straint  can a lways,or  at least  to a 
large part, be ful f i l led.  For this pur- 
pose we introduce the not ion of the 
assoc iated forms of the semiot ic  inter-  
pretat ion  of the g iven predicate.  We add 
for example to the or ig ina l  semiot ic  
in terpretat ion  
"person x v is i ts  c ity y" 
its assoc iated form l ike 
(5) 
"city y wi l l  be v is i ted  by person x" 
(6). 
It wi l l  be s imply stored. In dependence  
on the orders of quant i f ie rs  the corres-  
ponding semiot ic  in terpreta t ion  str ing 
wi l l  be selected. By this add i t iona l  
means, correct  sentences could then be 
computat iona l ly  generated from the lo- 
g ical  patters  ment ioned  in (II). 
The same prob lem occurs wi th  the trea- 
tment of logical  s t ructures  under ly ing  
Wh-quest ions  (which, who, etc.,) .  In our 
concept ion  and in accordance  also wi th  
the theory  of H in t ikka , the  in ter rogat ive  
operators  has the quant i f i ca t ion  nature. 
They subject  thus to the same der ivat -  
ional constra ints .  We use thus the asso- 
c iated semiot ic  in terpreta t ion  str ings 
in the requ i red cases. By this means, we 
can generate computat iona l ly  from the 
logical  s t ructures  
person(x l )=.a l l . x2(personv is i t c i ty  
(xl,x2)) 
c i ty (x2)=.a l l .x l  (personv is i tc i ty (x l ,x2  
--408 
)) 
the fo l lowing in ter rogat ive  sentences 
respect ive ly :  
"Who v is i ts  every city" , 
"Which c i t ies wi l l  be v i s i ted  by every 
person" 
It is of interest  to note that wi th  this 
device the topic of in ter rogat ive  sen- 
tences has been t reated and solved for 
the s imple cases at the same time. In 
general ,  the dev ice  of assoc iated forms 
of the semiot ic  in terpreta t ion ,wh ich  
from the l ingu is t ica l  v iewpo in t  re late 
to each other  t rans format iona l ly ,  wi l l  
be extens ive ly  used. Among others,  it 
wi l l  be appl ied  in the t reatment  of the 
re lat ive  sentences.  In other words ,asso -  
c iated form l ike 
"who makes a journey to c i ty  y " 
wi l l  be stored together  wi th  the g iven 
interpreted predicate;  and this asso- 
c iated for~ ~i l l  be used eventua l ly  for 
re lat ive  sentence fo rmat ion .We return 
to this prob lem below. 
6. Referent ia l  p roper ty  of var iable,  
re lat ive  sentence generat ion  and 
and proper ty  of connect iv i ty  
In computat iona l  sentence generat ion  
from the under ly ing  logica l  s t ructure  
we make an extens ive  use of the refe-  
rence nature of the var iables.  Var iab les  
have been ca l led by Quine as pronouns 
of logic and mathemat ics .  The referen-  
t ial  character  wi l l  be used by us as a 
kind of red thread in bu i ld ing  up the 
composed sentences.  This  feature shows 
c lear ly  in generat ing  sentences wi th  
re lat ive  clauses. Let us cons ider  as 
example the logical  s t ructure 
person(x l )=.ex .x2( ( .ex .x4( takep lace-  
count ry (x2 ,x4) .and .count ry (x4) .eq .  
" japan')) .and.  ( takepart(x l ,x2)))  
The var iab le  xl in the in ter rogat ive  
operator,  namely  person(x l ) ,  ind icates 
the topic of the quest ion  concerned. 
This topic is in genera l  spec i f ied by 
the compos i t ion  of pred icates  and func- 
t ions in a cer ta in  way which is expres-  
sed by the logical  matr ix.  The generat ion  
of the cor respond ing  in ter rogat ive  sen- 
tence means to express verba l ly  this 
compos i t ion  of pred icates  and funct ions 
after the g iven prescr ip t ion  in matr ix.  
In mak ing use of the re ferent ia l  pro- 
perty of var iav les ,  it is seen that the 
topic wi l l  be character i zed  at f irst by 
the pred icate  
takepart (x l ,x2)  
On this ground its assoc ia ted  form of 
semiot ic  interpretat ion,  namely 
"who takes part  at meet ing  x2" 
wi l l  be used as the main  bu i ld ing compo- 
nent of the quest ion  sentence to be 
generated.  By means of the var iable,  we 
can f ind that this pred icate  
takepart(x l ,x2)  
is connected d i rect ly  wi th  the pred icate  
takep lacecount ry (x2 ,x4)  . 
In other words, the var iab le  x2 contain-  
ed in the pred icate  
takepart (x l ,x2)  
is in its turn spec i f ied  by the predica-  
te takep lacecount ry (x2 ,x4) .  We use 
thus in cons iderat ion  of its modi f i ca -  
t ion character  the cor respond ing  associ -  
ated form of semiot ic  interpretat ion,  
namely 
"which takes place in country  x4" 
to bui ld  up the re lat ive  clause. In the 
same way, we find that  the var iab le  x4 
conta ined in the pred icate  
takep lacecount ry (x2 ,x4)  
is re ferred by the name funct ion 
country(x4) , 
whose funct ion va lue indicates the name 
Japan. This  constant  wi l l  be thus inser-  
ted at the place x4. The te rminat ion  of 
these connect ing  and insert ing processes  
lead then to the generat ion  of the sen- 
tence 
"Who takes part  at the meet ing  which  
takes p lace in the country  "Japan'" 
In connect ion  wi th  the re ferent ia l  fea- 
ture of var iab les  it is of interest  to 
note that all  the logical  s t ructures  
wh ich  we have used in our quest ion -ans -  
wer ing  system shows a remarkab le  proper-  
ty which  we have ca l led the proper ty  of 
connect iv i ty .  A logical  s t ructure  is 
ca l led to have the proper ty  of connec-  
t ivity, if in the case where it conta ins  
more than one pred icate  or funct ion  each 
of its pred icates  ~d funct ions shares 
some argument  wi th  others, i .e ,  has com- 
mon var iab les  wi th  other  funct ions or 
predicates.  
It is on the ground of the property  of 
this connect iv i ty  that we can even let 
the program process ing  under certa in  
c i rcumstances  be dr iven by var iables,  
such as exp la ined just above. On the 
contrary,  let us cons ider  the fo l lowing 
logical  structure:  
/true/=.ex.x1(.ex.x2(.ex.x3(city(x3) 
.eq. " tokyo ' .or . takepart (x l ,x2) ) ) )  
S ince the funct ion city(x3) and the 
pred icate  takepart (x l ,x2)  do not share 
any common argument,  this logical  form 
--409-- 
does not have the def ined property  of 
connect iv i ty .  Its cor respond ing  surface 
sentence can therefore  not be computed 
by the process dr iven by var iables ?  Ins- 
tead, a d i f fe rent  procedure  must  be ap- 
plied. At present  stage, we let, how- 
ever, such types of sentences out o f  
our cons iderat ion.  
The usefu lness  of var iab les  is not ex- 
hausted in re lat ive  sentence generat ion.  
In general ,  we intend to use it to dif-  
ferent iate  the var ied patterns of the 
logical  forms concerned. And as a result  
of this d i f ferent ia t ion ,  sentences of 
var ied patterns wi l l  be generated.  Let 
us cons ider  the fo l lowing s imple logical  
form: 
person(x l )=.ex .x2( takepar t (x l ,x2) .and .  
g ive lectureconf (x l ,x2) )  
For such pattern,  no at tempt to generate  
re lat ive sentence wi l l  be made. Instead, 
it t r ies to express the surface sentence 
as fol lows: 
"Who takes part at some meet ing  and 
gives a lecture at this meet ing  " 
Our program is thus in t ry ing to d iscern  
as much of logical  patterns as possible.  
It works after  them. 
7. Categor ica l  and hypothet i ca l  senten- 
ces, idea of Le ibniz  and Frege 
In our computat iona l  sentence generat ion  
we have made use of an old idea, which  
goes back at least to an observat ion  
made by Leibniz  in his famous nouveau 
essais sur l~ntendement  humain. In the 
c lass ica l  logic, one is customed namely 
to d iv ide the judgements  or asser t iona l  
ind icat ive  sentences into three major  
types: 
ca tegor ica l ,hypothet i ca l  and dis- 
junct ive 
Le ibniz  has remarked that in some cases 
an actual  hypothet i ca l  judgement  can be 
expressed in a categor ia l  form. This  
regu lar i ty  is d i scussed also by Frege 
on the re la t ion  between aux i l ia ry  sen- 
tences (Beis~tze) and cond i t iona l  sen- 
tences (Bed ingungss~tze) in  his essay 
0ber S inn und Bedeutung.  Accord ing  to 
Frege the c ind i t iona l  or hypothet i ca l  
sentence 
"Wenn eine Zahl k le iner  als I und 
gr~Ber  a l so  ist, so ist auch ihr 
Quadrat  k le iner  als I und gr6Ber  als 
O " 
can be expressed in a categor ia l  form: 
"Das Quadrat  e iner Zahl, die k le iner  
als I and gr~Ber a l so  ist, ist kle- 
iner als I und gr~Ber a l so  " 
In our system design, we have adopted 
this old concept ion.  From the under ly ing  
logical  impl icat ion  structure its sur- 
face sentence wi l l  not be generated in 
hypothet ica l ,  but rather  in categor ia l  
form.' This approach has its pract ica l  
and sty l is t ic  advantages.  It can be seen 
in cons iderat ion  of the fo l lowing logi- 
cal form: 
/ t rue/=.a l l .x l  ( .ex.x2(( .ex.x3 ( 
make journeyc i ty (x l  ,x3) .and.city(x3) 
? eq. "tokyo" ) ) . imp. (takepart (xl ,x2) ) ) ) . 
In fo l lowing this l ine of thought , the  
cor respond ing  surface sentence wi l l  be 
generated  by the system as fol lows: 
"Everybody who makes a journey to the 
c i ty '~okyo" takes part  at some 
meet ing  " 
It is natural  and simple. For its gene- 
rat ion we need no more add i t iona l  meth-  
ods than the ones which  have been at our 
d i sposa l : the  quant i f ie r - lower ing  and 
format ion of re lat ive  sentence. The only 
thing wh ich  we must take care of is to 
choose the semiot ic  in terpretat ion  str- 
ing of the conc lus ion  rather  than that 
of antecedent  as the main  bu i ld ing 
component.  Otherwise,  the meaning would 
be distorted.  
The usefu lness  of this concept ion  of 
Le ibniz  and Frege cons ists  for our pur- 
pose, above all, in the fact that it 
can be even extended to the t reatment  of 
logical  s t ructures  for in ter rogat ive  
sentences.  Wi thout  using this idea,the 
surface sentences to be computat iona l ly  
generated would have a cumbersome look. 
This  feature may appear c lear ly , i f  we 
try to deal  wi th the fo l lowing s imple 
logical  structure:  
conference(x2)=.a l l . x l  ((.ex.x3( 
make journeyc i ty (x l ,x3) .and .c i ty (x3)  
.eq. ' tokyo' ) ) . imp.  ( takepart(x l ,x2)))  
It is a logica l  form under ly ing  an in- 
te r rogat ive  sentence; it conta ins  the 
logical  form ment ioned  just above 
a lmost  as component.  In combinat ion  of 
this Le ibn iz -F rege  idea wi th  the other 
pr inc ip les  l ike re ferent ia l  property  of 
var iables,  topic handl ing  and format ion 
of re lat ive  sentence which  we have des- 
cr ibed above the system yie lds then 
w i thout  other  detour the in ter rogat ive  
sentence: 
"Which meet ings  wi l l  be v is i ted  by 
everyone who makes a journey to the 
c i ty "Tokyo" " 
--410-- 
8. General  remark and d iscuss ion  
We have above descr ibed some main  con- 
cept ions and pr inc ip les  upon which we 
have bui l t  up the program. The system 
works essent ia l ly  after logical  patterns,  
after certa in features of logical  struc- 
tures such as connect iv i ty ,  the occu- 
rence of impl icat ion sign and so on. It 
is thus proper t ies -o r iented  and not 
syntax-dr iven.  It is needless to say 
that our program can not deal wi th  all 
k inds of logical  structures.  This is 
also not our or ig ina l  aim, besides the 
fact that,as Chomsky makes remark about 
the nature of deep structures,  not all 
logical  s t ructure can under ly  or have 
a mean ingfu l  surface sentence. From the 
r ight beginning we have conf ined oursel f  
to just a spec i f ied set of logical  stru- 
ctures used as a formal query language. 
It is remarkab le  that for such a set of 
logical  fo rmscer ta in  regular i t ies  and 
patterns can be genera l ly  estab l i shed 
and be used to generate  meaningfu l  
surface sentences computat ional ly .  The 
progress wi l l  depend to a large extent 
on the careful  observat ion  of logical  
patterns and ins ight fu l  l inguist ic  ana- 
lyses. 
9. References 
Frege,G.:  
uber Sinn und Bedeutung,  Ztschr.f .  
Ph i los .u .phi los .  Kr i t ik ,NF 1oo,1892. 
Habe l ,Ch . ,Schmidt ,A . ,Schweppe,H . :  
On automat ic  paraphras ing of natural  
language express ions,  Semant ic  Net- 
work project  report  3/77, 1977, 
TU Berl in. 
Hint ikka, J . :  
The semant ics  of quest ions and the 
quest ions of semantics,  Amsterdam, 
North-Hol land,  1976. 
Lakoff ,G. 
On generat ive  semantics,  in: D.D. 
Ste inberg et aleds.) : Semantics,  
Cambr idge,un i .press ,1971 
Sear le, J .R. :  
Speech acts, Cambr idge,1969.  
411 
