TOPIC-COMMENT STRUCTURE OF TEXTS 
(AND ITS CONTRIBUT ION TO THE AUTOMATIC  PROCESSING OF TEXTS)  
Ferenc  K ie fe  r 
KVAL ,  S tockho lm,  
116  45, S6dermalmstorg  8 
Abst rac t  
In genera l ,  top ic  is in fo rmal ly  de f ined  as  that  
par t  o f  the sentence  wh ich  the sentence  is about  
and  comment  as  what  is sa id  in the sentence .  
Th is  is, of  course ,  not  a fo rmal  de f in i t ion  but  
so  fa r  noone  has  succeeded to prov ide  a v iab le  
fo rmal  de f in i t ion  fo r  these  not ions .  In the 
ana lys i s  of sentences  and  texts  these  not ions  
can  never the less  be  used  w i th  cons iderab le  
Success .  
Typically, topics are noun phrases and com-  
ments  are open sentences (that is, sentences 
containing a variable). For  example, the 
sentence John is writing a letter is about John 
and it says that he is writing a letter. Formal -  
ly, 
(i) Johnx: (x is writing a letter) 
where John is a variable binding expression and 
is writing a letter is an open sentence in 
which the variable x is bound by John. 
A sentence may have more  than one topic. The 
sentence John saw Mary  in the garden may be a 
statement about John and Mary  and what is said 
about them is that he saw her in the garden. 
Formally, 
(2) \ [ John  x ~ Marry \ ] :  (x saw y in the garden)  
If a sentence  has only one topic  this topic  is 
very  often (but not  a lways)  the sub jec t  of the 
sentence .  Cons ider  the sentence  John wants  to 
see  Mary  with heavy  s t ress  on John (the sen-  
tence can, fo r  example ,  be cons idered  as an 
answer  to the quest ion  Who wants  to see Mary? )  
This  sentence  is ev ident ly  about  Mary  and says  
that John wants  to see  her .  
Texts  a re  bu i l t  up f rom sentences  and the top ic -  
comment  s t ruc ture  of a text  wi l l  cons i s t  of the 
top ic -comment  s t ruc tures  of its const i tuent  
sentences .  The top ic -comment  s t ruc ture  of 
texts  is, however ,  not s imp ly  a cumulat ive  
funct ion  of the top ic -comment  s t ruc tures  of the 
const i tuent  sentences .  I sha l l  p resent  in my 
paper  a ser ies  of observat ion  concern ing  the 
top ic -comment  s t ruc ture  of  texts  on the bas i s  
of a lega,  text  (Rules  of the Arb i t ra t ion  Ins t i -  
tute of the S tockho lm Chamber  of Commerce) .  
(i) Each  text  has  a set  of  te rms wh ich  are  not  
de f ined  (not  in t roduced)  in the text: they  are  
taken  for  g ranted .  These  te rms be long  to the 
s tock  of common knowledge w i th  respect  to the 
given text (SCK). SCK defines the f rame of the 
text (or its scenario). Thus, for example, in 
the text in question the following terms belong 
to SCK:  Stockholm Chamber  of Commerce ,  
The Swedish Law of Arbitration, the parties, 
the arb i t ra tor (s ) ,  the (a rb i t ra l )  t r ibuna l ,  the 
c la imant ,  the respondent ,  the request  for  
a rb i t ra t ion .  It is a character i s t i c  feature  of  
texts  that  top ics  be long ing  to SCK are  empty  
(non- in format ive)  top ics .  If such  a top ic  is 
found it shou ld  in genera l  be  rep laced  by  a 
more  in fo rmat ive  top ics .  The  la t ter  can  be  
reconst ructed  on  the bas is  of  the preced ing  
text. For  example ,  
(3) Each  par ty  sha l l  be  g iven  an  oppor tun i ty  to 
s ta te  h is  v iews .  
Taken  in i so la t ion ,  this sentence  cou ld  be  
ana lyzed  as  hav ing  the top ic  each  par ty  and  the 
comment  it sha l l  be  g iven  . . . In the present  
context ,  however ,  the sentence  is about  the 
in terpretat ion  and  cor rect ion  of an  award .  
Sentence  (3) must  thus  be  reconst ructed  as  (4). 
(4) Each  par ty  sha l l  be  g iven  an  oppor tun i ty  to 
s ta te  h is  v iews  on  the award  (or  the in ter -  
p re ta t ion  of the award) .  
The  top ic  of  (6) is, then,  the v iews  on  the 
award  and  it is s ta ted  about  this top ic  that  each  
par ty  sha l l  be  g iven  an  oppor tun i ty  to express  
it. 
(ii) In several cases the topic of the sentence 
is given by the heading of the whole paragraph. 
On  the surface the topic of sentence (5) is 
the Institute. 
(5) The Institute may request a party to 
amplify any submission to the Institute. 
However,  as indicated by the heading of the 
paragraph, what is at stake here is the amplifi- 
cation. The question which one would as about 
(5) is (6): 
(6) What about  the ampl i f i ca t ion  of a submis -  
s ion?  
240 
(iii) Typically, the topic of a sentence is a 
definite noun phrase and a term introduced in 
the comment  is an indefinite noun phrase. 
Taken  in isolation this observation may lead to 
incorrect analyses. Consider, for example, 
(7) The claimant shall pay a registration fee 
and both parties shall deposit with the 
Institute a sum to cover the costs of the 
proceedings. 
In the given context, this sentence is not about 
the claimant and the parties but rather about 
the registration fee and the deposit. 
(iv) Conditional sentences raise special 
problems. Take 
(8) If an arbitrator appointed by a party dies, 
Such a sentence may be an answer  to the 
question (9). 
(9) What  happens if an arbitrator appointed by 
a party dies ? 
Formally, conditional sentences can often be 
analyzed as implications: A D B. In such 
sentences, as shown by (8) and (9), the if- 
clause (=A) is the topic and the comment  is that 
this clause (i.e. the underlying proposition) 
entails the consequent clause (i.e. the underly- 
ing proposition), that is, we get the structure 
(lO): 
(10) Ax: (x  ~ B)  
In connection with if-topics several problems 
must  be solved: the function of if-topics in 
texts, the domain  of if-topics, the internal 
structure of if-topics. Each  of these prob lems 
shall be given ample consideration in my paper. 
On  the basis of the above observations I am 
going to stipulate a general strategy for the 
determination of the top ic -comment  structure 
of texts. In addition, I shall briefly report on 
an experiment, made at KVAL ,  concerning the 
implementation of a mode l  based on topic- 
comment  structure. In this mode l  questions 
are answered  by means  of topics. Finally, I 
shall present some arguments  in favor of the 
approach chosen. 
241 - 
