PARSING AND SYNTACTIC THEORY 
Summary 
It is argued that many constraints on syntactic 
rules are a consequence of simple assumptions 
about parsing mechanisms. If generally true, 
this suggests an interesting new line of re- 
search for syntactic theory. 
Recent syntactic theory has aimed for a 
theory of grammar rich enough to be descrip- 
tively adequate, but restricted enough to make 
plausible claims about the acquisition of 3such 
systems. Thus in Chomsky's trace theory, 
sentences, their constituent structures and 
grammatical relations are determined by a few 
simple rules which in themselves would generate 
many non-sentences, but which are constrained 
by putatively universal principles marking the 
non-sentences as such. These principles are 
attributed to the human language faculty, but 
with no direct implications for models of per- 
ception or production,involving as they do many 
abstract concepts (empty nodes, traces etc.) for 
which there is no obvious psychological inter- 
pretation. 
Bresnan I presents an interesting alter- 
native: that proposals about the nature of 
grammar should be responsible to psycholinguis- 
tic evidence--to put it crudely, grammars 
should be 'psychologically real'. By this 
criterion, many constructions such as passives 
or infinitive phrases previously regarded as 
transformational are to be seen as generated 
directly by phrase-structure rules, with 
associated conditions on lexical insertion and 
relationships between lexical entries. Trans- 
formations for which there appears to be psy- 
cholinguistic evidence, like Wh-movement ll, 
remain, though under a different formulation 
than they receive under trace theory. 
Taken literally, the requirement of strong 
psychological reality for grammars makes no 
sense: I shall take it to mean that such a 
grammar is one which can be incorporated with 
little or no adjustment into a model of per- 
ception or production, and that the various 
subcomponents and divisions of labour in that 
model are both consistent with those implied by 
the grammar and not disconfirmed by experimental 
evidence. What sort of parsing model is implied 
by Bresnan's theory? Bresnan herself envisages 
realistic grammar being implemented directly as 
an Augmented Transition Network 1,11 with a 
HOLD analysis accounting for Wh-phrases. PS 
rules correspond directly to sections of net- 
work, and HOLD is Wh-movement in reverse, so to 
speak. However, there are at least two de- 
ficiencies in such a proposal: firstly, in all 
ATN models yet proposed, there are many points 
S.G. Pulman 
University of East Anglia, 
Norwich NR4 7TJ, England. 
where exits from a state are tried in a fixed, 
often arbitrary, order. As a claim about how 
humans parse this is desperately implausible, 
for it suggests that at such points we expect 
an A, look at the next word, find that it is 
not a possibility for A, revise our expectation 
to B, find that it is not ... until we have an 
expectation confirmed or arrive at a default 
value. There may be some points at which such 
a situation occurs but in general it does not 
seem to: more plausible is that we look ahead 
to the next word without any particular expect- 
ation and use the resulting information to 
decide which exit to take--we go 'bottom-up' 
in other words. Secondly, in the current 
generation of ATN proposals there is little or 
no facility for revising syntactic expectations 
on the basis of lexical (much less other types 
of semantic or pragmatic) information, though 
there is ample intuitive and experimental 
evidence that humans do this. However, this 
is probably a criticism of practice rather than 
of principle. 
A 'realistic' ~parser 
A better picture of a parser is one which 
works at two levels simultaneously: the lowest 
level mostly bottom up, assembling phrase level 
constituents NP VP PP etc., possibly incorporat- 
ing the 'l~te closure' and 'minimal attachment' 
principles o of Fodor and Frazier. The in- 
formation given by PS rules and the lexicon 
would be available to it and guide its opera- 
tion but would not necessarily correspond 
directly to portions of a network. The second, 
more 'top-down' routine would organise these 
phrases into functionally complete units-- 
roughly, a verb with its obligatory arguments 
and any optional arguments or modifers which 
might be present. This second stage uses 
whatever grammatical information is present in 
the input (presence of Wh-phrases, complement- 
isers, passive morphology etc.) along with 
lexical information (subcategorisation res- 
trictions, possibly semantic restrictions on 
arguments) to determine construction type and 
assign arguments to their grammatical (and 
possibly semantic) functions. It is also 
plausible, and in some cases necessary, to 
assume that it can guide the operation of the 
phrase level stage at various points. (A two 
stage model along somewhat different lines has 
already been proposed: U in support of the claim 
that functional completeness rather than sur- 
face clause segmentation or 'sentoids'~guides 
assembly into units see Carroll et al2). 
This is not the place to go into details 
of implementation; though a preliminary version 
54 
of a parser embodying these principles has run 
with some success, there is still much work to 
do. The present aim is rather to show how such 
a model could account for some of the range of 
phenomena which linguists are currently interes- 
ted in and of which any theoretical approach m 
must present a credible account. In particu- 
lar we want to know whether anything over and 
above the basic grammatical information re- 
presented in an extended lexicalist grammar of 
the type described by Bresnan will need to be 
made available to the parser. 
To simplify matters, let us ignore most 
types of complex sentence, and phenomena like 
ellipsis, anaphora, and conjunction. Most of 
the simple sentence types of English can then 
be summarised as follows, ignoring details: 
(1) NP Ibe  Adj ~ I  I 
V (Prep) (NP)( ) (PP) 
Sentences which do not have any of these 
structures must have undergone grammatical 
operations of various types,which, using a 
useful earlier frameworkW we can describe as: 
(2) i Root transformations: Subject verb 
inversion, Topicalisation etc. 
ii Wh-movements: Questions, relatives etc. 
iii Equi-NP-deletion: infinitive verb 
phrases etc. 
iv Structure-preserving NP movements: 
Passive, Raising, Tough-movement etc. 
or some combination of these. 
As well as assigning (phrase level) con- 
stituent structure, our parser must of course 
determine grammatical relations, both overt and 
covert, in the course of building functionally 
complete units. On sentences having any of 
the forms in (1) this is quite straightforward, 
as surface grammatical relations provide all 
the information needed. The following definit- 
ions will suffice: 
N~/u~es V (V in- (3) Subject (S) = tense 
c Auxiliaries) 
Direct Object (DO) = NP/V(Prep) 
Prepositional Object (~0)= NP~P-~-- 
Notoriously, though, in sentences resulting 
from (2)i-iv overt grammatical relations are 
often different from covert grammatical re- 
lations. How would we deal with these? For 
concreteness, and without any great warrant, 
let us assume that root transformations are 
'unwound', possibly by an extension of the 
HOLD mechanism for some cases, resulting in 
structures like (1). (3) can then be used 
on the result. Similarly, let us assume 
that something like the existing HOLD treatment 
of Wh-movements ll is adequate: a Wh-phrase is 
put in HOLD until a gap is found, either an 
obligatory one--a tensed V with no subject, an 
unfilled subcategorisation slot or stranded 
preposition; or an optional one--an optional 
subcategorisation slot or a modifier position. 
The Wh-phrase is then treated as if it were in 
the gap and (3) can apply directly. For the 
sentences in (iii) there is a simple, well- 
known generalisation: 
(4) The subject of an infinitive is the DO of 
the matrix verb if it has one, otherwise 
its subject. 
The equally well known exceptions to this 
( ro~,  a ~ ,  the indirect question sense 
of ask etc.) can be marked as such in the 
lexicon, as in all other treatments. For the 
structures in (iv), surface grammatical re- 
lations can be determined directly by (3)- 
Lexical information ~ la Bresnan is required to 
determine their underlying grammatical relations, 
and in the case of passive, grammatical infor- 
mation can be used: 
(5) In a structure ... be-V-en/ed ... the 
(surface) S of be (by rule (3)) is the 
(underlying) ~f  V. The underlying S of 
V is the PO of b~, if present (and a 
'possible agent'), or Indefinite (to be 
pragmatically interpreted) otherwise. 
This is essentially Bresnan's lexical redund- 
ancy rule. 
(4) will account directly for subject- 
raised sentences: 
(6) John seems to like Bill 
and (3) will account directly for their 
putative source: 
(7) It seems that John likes Bill. 
Presumably some semantic statement about the 
i_~_of such extraposed structures will be needed, 
as in any account. Other constructions are 
straightforwardly dealt with by (3) and (4) with 
the exception of Tough movements: 
(8) John is difficult to persuade 
The parser will go doubly wrong here, assigning 
John as S of persuade (by (4)) and marking the 
string as ungrammatical because of an unfilled 
gap after the verb. The obvious solution is 
to mark Tough movement adjectives lexically so 
that when they appear in these contexts they 
cause the parser to put the subject (John) 
in HOLD, and assign (in this case) Indefinite 
as the subject of persuade. John will then 
be correctly inserted in the gap. This 3 
treatment captures the many similarities to 
be found between Tough and Wh-movement. 
55 
Some examples will make the operation of 
(3) - (5) clearer. 
(9) The bo gave the book to Mary 
S 0? po 
(i0) John wanted to try to leave 
(by 3) 
(by 3& 4) 
(ll) John wanted Bill to t r\[ to leave(by 3 & 4) 
.ELL__J ) ~ s j . I  sj  
T 
(12) John wanted to be ignored (by 3,4 & 5) 
h? ~ . . . .  (13)W did John want Bill to try to be kissed by 
(by 3,4,5 and HOLD) 
We can define a 'functionally deviant' sentence 
as one in which obligatory arguments to verbs 
have not been found by either stage of the 
parser (using lexical information, (3) - (5) and 
HOLD) or where phrases are 'left over', unable 
to be consistently assigned as arguments to 
verbs. Such a definition follows naturally 
from the operation of the parser. 
Trace theor2 
In Chomsky's trace theory 3 all major struct- 
ures are generated by base rules. Rules in- 
serting lexical material are optional, and some 
rather simple transformational rules (Move NP, 
Move Wh-phrase) allow categories to be moved to 
any other (empty) slot of the same type, leav- 
ing behind a 'trace' which is interpreted as 
identical in reference to the moved category. 
Traces are used to indicate underlying grammati- 
cal relations (of the sort dealt with in 4, 5 
and HOLD), to assign aspects of interpretation, 
and they also function to block the application 
of syntactic and (some) phonological rules as if 
they were terminal elements. A sample deriva- 
tion is the following, where ~ = empty NP node: 
<14) i seemS Es B in  to like John7 
ii Bill seems t to like John 
Bill has been moved by Move NP to fill the empty 
node leaving behind a trace, ~ which is correct- 
ly interpreted as the subject of like, and 
identical in reference to Bill. If Move NP 
had not applied (i) would have been marked 
ungrammatical by a general convertion that no 
uninterpreted empty node can remain at the end 
of a derivation. If Move NP had moved John 
to replace the empty node, the result: 
(15) John seems Bill to like 
would have been declared ungrammatical since 
such an application violates an allegedly 
universal constraint, either at the stage at 
which John is moved or when an interpretation 
rule seeks to relate John to its trace. The 
constraint in question is the Specified Subject 
Constraint (SSC), and in the simplest cases it 
says that no rule can relate or involve positions 
which are on either side of a full subject: 
(16) ... X ... \[sNP ... Y "''l 
A parallel mechanism, the Tensed Sentence 
Constraint (TSC), says that no rule can relate 
a position inside a tensed sentence to one out- 
side that sentence, i.e. in (16), nothing can 
relate Y or NP to X if S contains Tense. This 
would correctly rule out the final stage of the 
derivation: 
(17) i we believe Is the dog is hungry by~-\]  
ii t I is believed \[ the dog is hungry by us 
iii the dog is believed L t is hungry by us 
If the embedded sentence had not contained a 
Tense, i.e. been ... to be ... the derivation 
would have been permitted. 
Obviously this is a very simplified and 
incomplete account. In particular it should 
be noted that Wh-movement, which looks like an 
exception to SSC and TSC, is not, on Chomsky's 
account of it. 3 For our purposes, what it is 
important to focus on is that it is not the 
rules of grammar themselves which characterise 
grammaticality, for they will over-generate 
massively, but the interaction of rules of 
grammar with constraints like TSC and SSC. 
In our framework, however, such constraints 
are unnecessary. Uninterpreted empty nodes 
correspond to unfilled gaps, and will be reject- 
ed via the functional completeness requirement. 
Cases like (15) are ungrammatical on two 
grounds: (3) automatically analyses Bill as 
DO of seems but this does not match any of its 
subcategorisation entries and so the sentence 
is rejected. Furthermore, like is subcategor- 
ised for either a DO or an infinitive: neither 
is present in (15) and so the sentence would 
56 
also be rejected on these grounds. All the 
cases in (17) would be excluded because they 
contain unfilled gaps (obviously traces and~ 
are not present in the input string): in (i) 
there is a stranded preposition demanding a PO, 
while in (ii) and (iii) is (believed) and is 
(hungry) respectively cannot be assigned s~-  
jects by (3) since there is no overt NP, nor 
by (4) since they are not infinitives. Thus 
they too are marked as functionally incomplete. 
As for as I can ascertain, all the syn- 
tactic effects of TSC and SSC as regards NP 
movement can be accounted for in a similar 
fashion, using only that information already 
required for the recognition of grammatical 
sentences. If this is true, it suggests a 
strong and interesting hypothesis: namely 
that all the syntactic effects of all the con- 
straints proposed at various times would also 
be automatic consequences of the operation of 
this type of parser. This has already been 
suggested for particular instances, 7, 5 if it 
should prove generally true this would be a 
fascinating discovery. 
More constraints 
Another major constraint in Chomsky's 
framework is known as Subjacency--the require- 
ment that no rules can relate positions separa- 
ted by two or more cyclic (i.e. NP or S) 
boundaries. The effects of Subjacency on NP 
movement result in nothing not accounted for 
by the earlier discussion but whereas Wh- 
movement is not affected by SSC and TSC it is 
not exempt from Subjacency. Subjacency sub- 
sumes, as well as other principles, Ross's lO 
Complex Noun Phrase Constraint (CNPC), which 
prohibits movements out o f~-NpNPS ~ structures, 
and some cases of the Co-ordi5~te Structure 
Constraint (CSC), which prohibits movements 
out of conjoined structures. These principles 
account for the unacceptability of: 
(18) (i) *Who did John see the man that Bill hit- 
(ii) *Who did John believe the claim that 
Bill hit - 
(iii) *Who did John see - and Bill 
Unlike TSC and SSC there is no chance of ruling 
out the sentences via subcategorisation res- 
trictions or 'functional deviance'--in other 
words we will have to rely on assumptions 
about the implementation of the parser. Never- 
theless, proposals have been made which will 
capture the effects of CNPC and CSC and which 
are in accordance with the logic of our app- 
roach,namely, that the most straightforward 
way of handling grammatical cases will auto- 
matically, without further stipulation, rule 
out the ungrammatical cases. As regards CSC, 
Winograd 12 has proposed that the simplest syn- 
tactic treatment of conjunctions is to inter- 
pret them as an instruction to look for a 
syntactic unit to the right of the conjunction 
of the same type as one which has been recog- 
nised ending immediately to the left of it. 
This is equivalent to the simple and pervasive 
generalisation about conjunctions that they 
conjoin like with like. Thus (18)iii would 
be ruled out because there is no NP immediately 
preceding and to match with Bill. This 
treatment allows for 'across the board' move- 
ments: 
(19) What does Bill like - and John detest - ? 
without qualification. Someelaboration has 
to be made to allow for anaphorically inter- 
preted deleted elements when dealing with con- 
joined sentences but otherwise the principle 
seems essentially correct and is presumably a 
'parsing universal' of a substantive kind. 
The only workable suggestion concerning 9 
the CNPC that I am aware of comes from Ritchie. 
He proposed an analysis of relative clauses and 
other Wh-movements similar in spirit to the 
HOLD analysis. In his programme, the Wh-phrase 
(presumably a copy of the head NP if no Wh- 
phrase is present) is stored in a register 
called WHSLOT which is a local variable. Since 
it is a local variable, if the relative clause 
procedure is called recursively, the contents of 
the register on any earlier call are unavail- 
able to the current call. As he points out, 
this is a simple and natural way of treating 
any construction capable of unlimited embedding. 
The results of this treatment (exactly the same 
as a HOLD list which is a push-down stack) of 
relative clauses is that in a sentence like 
(18)i, the analysis of the relative ... the man 
that Bill hit ... will invoke a use of the 
current incarnation of WHSLOT and will there- 
fore put that (or the head NP) into the gap it 
finds after hit, assigning it DO of hit 
(assimilating Ritchie's analysis now to ours). 
The WHSLOT in which the first who was placed 
is no longer accessible. (Alternatively, the 
who on the HOLD list is not 'first out'). 
Thus who could never be placed in the gap and 
the sentence will be deemed functionally 
deviant, since at the end of it there is still 
an unassigned Wh-phrase: all similar cases 
likewise fall out of this simple and natural 
(though refutable) principle concerning the 
treatment of embedded structures involving Wh- 
movement. 
Cases like (18)ii are somewhat more com- 
plex. Ritchie points out that at the point 
at which the parser is awarethat it is parsing 
a complex NP structure, sentences like (18)ii 
are always potentially ambiguous, between a 
true relative and a true complex NP reading: 
(19) i ... the claim that he made 
ii ... the claim that he made a mistake 
It seems plausible to assume that the parser 
postpones a decision until the ambiguity is 
57 
resolved. Again, the natural way to do this 
is to store that (or a copy of the head NP) 
in WHSLOT or in HOLD, and insert it into a gap 
if one is found, confirming the expectation that 
it is a relative clause, or revising the dec- 
ision ahmt construction type if no gap is 
found. Either way, no previously encountered 
Wh-phrase can be inserted into the gap, and so 
the parser rules out (18)ii as functionally 
deviant, on two counts in this particular in- 
stance: the claim will be marked as DO of hit, 
and presumably lexical information will show 
that such an assignment of argument type 
violates semantic restrictions (you can't hit 
claims). Secondly, since the gap at the end 
of the sentence has been filled there is an 
unassigned Wh-phrase left over. 
A further syntactic constraint yet to be 
accounted for is Ross's Left Branch Constraint 
(LBC). This prohibits movement of a NP which 
is the leftmost constituent of a longer NP. 
Most cases ruled out by this constraint fall 
under the kind of treatment discussed earlier 
for TSC and SSC but one class of cases, in 
which a determiner constituent is fronted, 
remain: 
(20) "Whose did you drink - beer 
The acceptability of sentences like: 
(21) Whose - did you drink? 
where the object of the possessive determiner 
is understood from context, suggests that when 
a possessive wh-phrase is encountered, if there 
is no NP immediately following, a dummy is 
inserted, to be pragmatically interpreted. In 
(20) no gap will be found, since beer can be DO 
of drink. There will thus be an unassigned 
Wh-phrase whose NP left over and the sentence 
will be marked functionally deviant. 
Clearly, there is much work left to do in 
exploring the hypothesis that all such con- 
straints can be accounted for by no extra 
mechanisms than are needed for grammatical 
sentences. Nevertheless, there seems ample 
evidence that this is a worthwhile avenue to 
pursue, and if it is true interesting questions 
can be raised. What, for example, is the 
status of TSC and SSC with respect to semantic 
rules? In Chomsky's framework, rules inter- 
preting reciprocals (each other), reflexives, 
and pronouns are constrained by TSC and SSC: 
~ourselves 
(22) i We expeC~each other% to win 
ha ~ourselves ~wi 1 ii ~We expect t t&each other~ 1 win 
(by TSC) 
~each other) 
iii "We expected Bill to warn~ourselves 
(by SSC) 
In our framework, specified subjects of 
infinitival sentences are regarded by (3) as 
direct objects. For sentences like (22), 
therefore, something similar to a clause-mate 
account will give the right results: reflex- 
ives and reciprocals must refer to a pre- 
ceding (agreeing) NP to which they are grammati- 
cally related via (3), (4) or (5). For pro- 
nouns, the reverse is the case: they cannot 
refer to a preceding NP to which they are 
grammatically related. 
A preliminary attempt to extend such an 
analysis has been made, ~ though it faces 
obvious problems with verbs like arrange, 
which can take a non-finite sentence as com- 
plement, and with non-finite relative clauses. 
If it can be carried through though, then the 
fact that the functional structures delivered 
by the parser's second stage provide the right 
kind of information to state such restrictions 
on would constitute further evidence that such 
an approach is on the right lines. Alter- 
natively, it might prove more accurate to 
retain TSC and SSC as purely semantic con- 
straints. 
Another question to be raised concerns the 
relationship between constraints, grammars and 
parsers. For Chomsky, constraints are part of 
the theory of grammar and do not have to be 
stated for individual grammars (though some 
language particular parameters might have to 
be specified). But there is a good sense in 
which the constraints proposed are arbitrary: 
it would be just as easy, for instance, to 
have a Non-Tensed S Constraint, or a Specified 
Non-Subject Constraint. This fact is what 
~ives plausibility to Chomsky's claim that the 
constraints are the result of as yet unknown 
innate mechanisms. But in our framework, if 
it is anything like correct, a good deal of 
this arbitrariness is removed. Our grammar 
uses only the same kind of distributional 
information as is used in trace theory, and yet 
does not over-generate to quite the same extent. 
If we now implement this grammar inside a 
parser with only such additional information as 
is required to accept and functionally encode 
grammatical sentences ((3)-(5), conjunctions, 
HOLD as a push down stack) it seems to auto- 
matically rule out ungrammatical sentences which 
require constraints in the alternative frame- 
work. If this proves to be generally true, 
the obvious next step is to devise psycho- 
logical tests to discover whether what seem to 
be simple and natural assumptions about parsing 
are in fact an accurate description of the 
human parsing system. The status of constraints 
changes radically: instead of being abstract 
properties of the language faculty to be in- 
vestigated by some future neurophysiologist 
they constitute valuable evidence concerning 
the operation of the human parsing system, and 
the kind of hypothesis that can be advanced 
k58 r 
should be accessible to more direct experimental 
testing. This, it seems to me, would con- 
stitute considerable progress in our under- 
standing of these phenomena. 
Footnote 
This is a condensed version of a longer paper 
currently under revision. Some of the ideas 8 
are sk etched out in an earlier working paper 
and I would like to thank R.A. Hudson and G. 
Ritchie for their comments on that. The usual 
disclaimers apply. 
References 
(1) J.Bresnan 1978 'A realistic transformational 
grammar' in M.Halle et al, 'Linguistic 
Theory and Psychological Reality' M.I.T. 
Press, Cambridge and London pp.l-59. 
(2) J. Carroll, M. Tanenhaus and T. Bever 1978 
'The perception of functional relations' in 
W. Levelt, F. d'Arcais eds., 'Studies in 
the perception of language' John Wiley and 
Sons, Chichester and New York, pp.187-218. 
(3) N. Chomsky 1977 'On Wh-movement' in P. 
Culicover et al 'Formal Syntax' Academic 
Press, New York and London. 
(4) J. Emonds 1976 'A transformational approach 
to Syntax' Academic Press, New York and 
London. 
(5) J.D.Fodor 1978 'Parsing strategies and 
constraints on transformations' Linguistic 
Inquiry Vol. 8 1978 pp.427-473. 
(6) J.D.Fodor and L. Frazier 1978 'The sausage 
machine' cognition Vol. 6 1978, pp.291-325. 
(7) M.Marcus 1977 'A theory of syntactic 
recognition for natural language' mimeo, 
M.I.T.A.I.Lab. 
(8) S.Pulman 1979 'Grammatical description and 
sentence processing' UEA Papers in 
Linguistics Vol. lO, University of FEast 
Anglia, Norwich. 
(9) G.Ritchie 1977 Edinburgh University Ph.D. 
Thesis. 
(10) J.Ross 1967 'Constraints on variables in 
syntax' excerpted in 'On Noam Chomsky' ed. 
G. Harman, Anchor Books 1974. 
(ll) E. Wanner and M. Maratsos 1978 'The 
comprehension of relative clauses' in M. 
Halle et al, op cit. pp.ll9-161. 
(12) T. Winograd 1972 'Understanding natural 
language' Edinburgh University Press. 
1 59- -  
