EMBEDDED SUBLANGUAGES AND NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
Richard Eittredge 
Universit~ de MontrEal  
Abstract 
Most  recent systems for the large-scale 
intelligent processing of natural language texts 
are designed to accept only a restricted variety 
of language. In certain cases this restricted 
subseto of the language constitutes a sublan- 
guage, for which it may  be possible to write a 
relatively precise and compact  sublanguage 
grammar .  Several research groups are cur- 
rently exploiting the restrictions in scientific 
and technical sublanguage grammars  for tasks 
such as information retrieval and automatic 
translation. 
At present the notion of sublanguage is rather 
loosely defined, or variously understood. 
There is no rigorous procedure for determin- 
ing whether an arbitrary corpus of texts belongs 
to the same sublanguage, or deciding what the 
limits of grammatical i ty and acceptability for a 
given sublanguage are. The tendency has been 
to assume that texts which are produced in 
similar communicat ive  situations and which 
refer to some delimited universe of discourse 
must  be f rom the same sublanguage. This 
assumpt ion is reinforced by the discovery of 
special structural properties, lexical colloca- 
tions, etc. in the sentences and texts of a 
functionally and semantically homogeneous  
corpus. Not only is the vocabulary of a spe- 
cialized sublanguage more  limited than the 
vocabulary of the general language, but the 
very special lexical co-occurrence restrictions 
are equivalent to a statement of the possible 
properties and relations between the objects of 
the universe which is the subject matter of the 
sublanguage in question. 
A detailed study of several sublanguages of 
English and French  has focussed on certain 
aspects of text structure and lexical selection 
which are important for automatic processing 
of sublanguage texts as well as for a clarifica- 
tion of the defining properties of sublanguage..  
It is known that a sublanguage text may have 
different subsections which differ sharply in 
their sentence structure, textual linking 
devices, etc. An  obvious case in the division 
in technical manuals  into descriptive and pro- 
cedural (maintenance) subsections. More  
elusive is the sub-division of certain scientific 
texts into (i) a science language component, 
describing the properties of objects and rela- 
tions between them in the domain  of scientific 
inquiry and (2) a meta-sc ience component, 
describing the relationship of the observer to 
his methods  and results. Such a division has 
been pointed out (but not studied in detail) both 
by Harris (1968) in his theoretical discussion of 
sublanguage and by Sager (197Z) in her study of 
the sublanguage of experimental pharmacology.  
The two components  may be present in the 
same sentence, as when a clause of science 
sublanguage is embedded under a rneta-science 
predicate. Such embeddings also show up in 
weather synopses. Their proper analysis is 
a prerequisite to the choice of proper parsing 
strategy and dictionary construction for the 
automatic analysis of these texts. 
A different kind of subdivision can be found in 
the language of stock market  reports where  a 
sublanguage describing the trading activity on 
various stock exchanges can be embedded in a 
much broader (sub)language describing the 
world of government  decisions, international 
events and the like, and their effects on the 
market.  The way  in which this embedding 
occurs is related to the level of user of the 
text. Typically, however, causal sentences are 
adjoined to the right of nar row sublanguage 
sentences under special conjunctions in a way  
suggestive of a right ideal in a ring, as out- 
lined in Harris' theoretical study. The nar row 
sublanguage portion of the text is distinct, both 
lexically and grammatically, f rom the right- 
adjoined sentences f rom the broader language 
set. A parser must  be able to recognize these 
junctures and exploit the restrictions found in 
the nar row (embedded) sublanguage without 
failing to parse the sentences of the loose 
matr ix .  
The  junctures  between embedded sub languages  
and  matr ix  por t ions  of text can  a l so  be  v iewed 
in te rms of the l ink ing proper t ies  found in both  
subsect ions .  The  scope  and  type of l ink ing 
found in each  subcomponent  may be  quite 
distinct. Ru les  of anaphora  mustbe  const ra in -  
ed  to operate  w i th in  a par t i cu la r  subcomponent .  
The  proposed  paper  wi l l  p resent  and  d iscuss  
severa l  of the above-ment ioned  proper t ies  
--209-- 
observed in the embedded sublanguages of 
stock-market reports, meteorological synopses 
and mathematics texts. Some conclusions will 
be drawn for the relationship between various 
types of sublanguages and the language as a 
whole, and implications discussed for the 
design of intelligent text-processors. 
-210-- 
