COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS OF PREDICATIONAL STRUCTURES IN ENGLISH 
V Henry Kucera 
Brown University 
Providence, R.I., U.S.A. 
Summary 
The results of a computational 
analysis of all predications, finite 
and non-finite, in a one-mil l ion-word 
corpus of present-day American English 
(the "Brown Corpus") are presented. 
The analysis shows the nature of the 
syntactic differences among the various 
genres of writ ing represented in the 
data base, especial ly between informa- 
tive prose and imaginative prose. The 
results also demonstrate that syntactic 
complexity, if defined as the number of 
predications per sentence, is not di- 
rectly predictable from sentence length. 
The purpose of this paper is to 
present an outline of the procedures 
and the summary of the results of a 
computational analysis of the structure 
of predications in a large and repre- 
sentative sample of English texts. This 
paper is thus intended both as a contri- 
bution to the discussion of computation- 
al techniques in l inguistics and as a 
study of l inguistic performance. 
The data base for this research was 
a one-mil l ion-word corpus of present-day 
American English, original ly assembled 
by W. N. Francis and Henry Ku~era at 
Brown University in the 1960's and thus 
commonly referred to by researchers in- 
terested in text analysis as the Brown 
Corpus. More recently, the compilers 
of the Brown Corpus have completed a 
grammatical annotation of the data base. 
The entire one mil l ion words of the 
Corpus have been "tagged", with each 
word given a specific grammatical sym- 
bol. The "tagging" procedure, which was 
semiautomatic, assigned to each running 
word an unambiguous symbol based on a 
taxonomy of 82 grammatical categories. 
The basic principle of our tagging is 
an expanded set of grammatical word 
classes; so, for example, modal verbs 
are identif ied by a unique tag, differ- 
entiating them from other verbs, as are 
each of the verbs be, have and do. The 
second principle of our tagging system 
is morphological, e.g. plurals of nouns 
are explicit ly coded and thus separately 
retrievable (as are singulars); the same 
is true of past tense forms of verbs, 
verbal participles, and so on. We have 
also introduced some syntactic factors 
into our coding; so, for example, coor- 
dinate conjunctions are differentiated 
from subordinate ones; sentence bound- 
aries are marked. Because of the system 
of grammatical annotations used, the 
retrieval of various types of syntactic 
information can now be accomplished 
algorithmically. Our research, partial- 
ly presented in this article, is con- 
cerned both with automatic parsing of 
the annotated text and with the study 
of l inguistic performance. Specifically, 
I shall report on the investigation of 
sentence length and its relation to 
sentence complexity in written English. 1 
If we disregard headlines and other 
headings (of chapters, sections, etc.), 
the Brown Corpus contains 54,724 sen- 
tences, with the mean sentence length of 
18 .49  words. However, both sentence 
length and sentence structure vary great- 
ly among the 15 genres of writ ing repre- 
sented in the Corpus. In general, sen- 
tence length differs signif icantly be- 
tween "informative" prose and "imagina- 
tive" prose, the former exhibi t ing a 
substantial ly higher mean sentence length. 
In the Brown Corpus, the term Informative 
Prose is applied to all those samples 
that have been selected from non-fiction 
sources. This section is divided into 
nine genres; for convenience of reference, 
each genre has been assigned a letter 
code: A. Press: reportage, B. Press: 
editorial, C. Press: reviews, D. Religion, 
E. Skills and hobbies, F. Popular lore, 
G. Belles lettres (biography, memoirs, 
etc.), H. Miscel laneous (documents and 
reports of various kinds), and J. Learned 
and scientific writings. There are alto- 
gether 374 samples of Informative Prose 
in the Corpus; with each sample being 
approximately 2,000 words long, this part 
of the Corpus consists of 755,010 words. 
imaginative Prose, on the other hand, 
includes samples taken from a variety of 
fiction sources and is represented by 
six genres: K. General fiction, L. Mys- 
tery and detective, M. Science fiction, 
N. Adventure and Western, P. Romance and 
love story, and R. Humor. There are 126 
samples of Imaginative Prose, again of 
about 2,000 words each, accounting for 
256,955 words. The entire Corpus thus 
consists of 500 samples of texts and 
contains 1,011,965 running words (word 
tokens), not counting headlines and other 
headings. 
32 
All genres of the Informative Prose 
portion have a higher mean sentence 
length than any of the genres in the 
Imaginative Prose section of the Corpus. 
The mean sentence length in Informative 
Prose ranges from a high of 24.23 words 
(in H. Miscellaneous) to 18.63 words 
(in E. Skills and hobbies). In Imagin- 
ative Prose, on the other hand, the 
highest mean is only 17.64 words (in 
R. Humor) and the low is 12.81 words 
(in L. Mystery and detective fiction). 
This difference is, to some extent, due 
to the percentage of quoted material in 
the two sections of the Corpus. While 
no genre of Informative Prose has more 
than 11.9% of quoted material, with 
Belles lettres having this highest per- 
centage and the learned samples the 
lowest of only 2.8%, the percentage of 
quoted material  in Imaginative Prose 
ranges from a low of 12.76% (Mystery 
and detective fiction) to a high of 
26.8% (Science fiction). Moreover, 
there is a difference in the nature of 
the quoted material: in Informative 
Prose it is a mixture of representations 
of spoken material and quotations from 
another written source; in Imaginative 
Prose, virtual ly all quoted material  is 
f ictional dialogue. Two facts should 
be noted in this regard, however: first, 
that no sample with more than 50% of 
quoted material  was included in the 
Brown Corpus; and second, that the 
correlation between sentence length and 
the percentage of dialogue is by no  
means exact. Several discrepancies in 
such correlation are given in the essay 
by Marckworth and Bell who studied sen- 
tence length distr ibution in the Brown 
Corpus in detail. 2 
Sentence length distribution, of 
course, is bound to have some effect on 
syntactic complexity of a text. Clearly, 
a sentence consist ing of two words can- 
not be considered to be syntactical ly 
complex by any conceivable standard of 
measurement. However, neither in theory 
nor -- as I shall demonstrate below -- 
in practice, can sentence length be 
viewed as a reliable indicator of some 
common sense notion of syntactic com- 
plexity which might be useful either in 
the study of performance in general or 
in stylistic syntactic characterizations. 
Consider, for example, the length in 
words and the syntactic properties of 
the following two sentences: 
(1) John's grandfather left all 
his oil paintings to the 
Metropol itan Museum of Fine 
Arts 
(2) Tom planned to ask Alice to 
dance 
The first sentence has fourteen 
words (by conventional graphic count), 
the second exactly half that, i.e. seven 
words. But while the first sentence has 
only one verbal form, left, the second 
has three, one finite, planned, and two 
infinitives, to ask and to dance. In 
the fairly conservative versions of 
transformational grammar of the 1960's 
(such as the 'standard theory'), the 
first sentence would have had an under- 
lying phrase marker (deep structure) 
consist ing of one S, and thus not very 
different from the actual sentence. The 
second sentence, on the other hand, would 
have had an underlying phrase marker con- 
sisting of three S's, supposed to repre- 
sent the three underlying predications 
which could be informally given as 'Tom 
PAST plan', 'Tom ask Alice', 'Alice 
dance' In other l inguistic theories, 
of course, the situation might be quite 
different, with a much more elaborate 
initial phrase marker in a generative 
semantic representation, for example. 
More recently, on the other hand, syntac- 
tic solutions have been proposed in which 
no sentential source at all is required 
for infinit ival phrases. In this kind 
of syntactic treatment, the infinitival 
phrases are then directly generated as 
VP's. 
The purpose of this article is not 
to discuss or evaluate such confl ict ing 
syntactic treatments. Rather, I want to 
discuss first the algorithm for the re- 
trieval of verbal constructions from the 
data base, and then summarize the results 
obtained in the analysis of sentential 
complexity in the entire Corpus as well 
as in the different genres represented 
in the data base. 
The data analyzed in this study are 
the actual sentences of the Corpus, which 
were encoded in the usual standard 
English graphic form. There is thus no 
direct information in the data base about 
"underlying" structure or even about any 
syntactic bracketing of the surface 
string. I will therefore avoid the use 
of the term "surface structure" entirely 
in referring to my data. Surface struc- 
ture, in all those l inguistic theories 
that have uti l ized this concept, includes 
at least some labeled bracketing of the 
terminal string. In the "revised ex- 
tended standard theory" (REST) of trans- 
formational grammar, surface structure 
actually refers to that level of repre- 
sentation which is not only enriched by 
the so-called traces, but has yet to pass 
through the deletion rules, the filter 
component of the grammar and, of course, 
the stylistic rules. 3 In our case, how- 
ever, the only information besides the 
actual sentences is the accompanying 
-33- 
sequence of grammatical tags, described 
above. 
My basic definit ion of sentence 
complexity in the present study will be 
simply the number of predications per 
sentence. I shall report these results 
for each of the 15 genres of the Corpus 
as well as for the Corpus as a whole. 
Given the form of the analyzed data, 
the reader should also be aware that my 
use of the term "predication" is broader 
than is usually the case in l inguistic 
l iterature or in general usage. As is 
customary, I shall consider a predica- 
tion to be, first of all, any verb or 
verbal group with a tensed verb that is 
subject to concord (for person and num- 
ber) with its grammatical subject. I 
will refer to these verbal constructions 
as finite predications. In addition to 
that, however, I will also include in 
my analysis what I shall call non-finite 
predications. These include infinitival 
complements, gerunds and participles. 
My basic taxonomy of verbal groups 
is thus quite similar to that adopted 
by structural!st l inguists in the anal- 
ysis of the English verb. All verbal 
groups exhibit ing concord with a subject, 
including the subject it (as in it 
rained) will be counted as finite predi- 
cations, as will interrogatives; those 
that do not satisfy these conditions 
will be considered to be non-finite. 
My only departure from some structural 
treatments lies in the inclusion of all 
imperatives in the class of finite pre- 
dications. This allows me to place 
imperatives with and without an overt 
subject (e.g. Don't worry! and Don't 
you worry!) in the same class of predi- 
cations. 
When it comes to complex verbal 
strings involving a quasi-auxi l iary plus 
infinitive (such as going to, supposed 
to, used to + infinitive), I shall fol- 
low here the consistent -- although per- 
haps somewhat controversial  -- approach 
of Joos. 4 Joos treats all quasi-auxil-  
iaries dif ferently from "true" auxil- 
iaries (such as will or may), pointing 
out that they exhibit dif ferent syntac- 
tic properties. Joos also argues that 
including only some of the quasi-auxi l-  
iaries with the class of auxil iary verbs 
would make the whole English verbal 
system 'incomprehensible'. My adoption 
of Joos' approach means that in my 
analysis a sentence such as He used to 
play tennis will have two pr~icat ions ,  
one finite and one non-finite. 
The retrieval and analysis of ver- 
bal forms, which is the subject of this 
report, represents only a segment of a 
larger parsing algorithm for the com- 
plete syntactic and stylistic analysis 
of the Brown Corpus. The retrieval has 
been made possible by the "tagging" 
system described above. As already 
mentioned, verbal constructions from 
all the sentences of the Corpus have 
been included in this analysis, with the 
exception of those occurring in headlines 
and other headings. Headlines and head- 
ings, which are identif ied by a special 
symbol in the tagged Corpus, were not 
included because of the particular na- 
ture of English "headline grammar", 
which often omits verbs entirely, e.g. 
Actor in Critical Condit ion after Explo- 
sion, or omits some verb form, particu- 
larly the finite one, e.g. President to 
Meet Brezhnev in Vienna. All sentences 
outside headlines are included, however, 
even those that do not contain any verb 
at all (e.g. Just our luck!). The num- 
ber of sentences with a "zero" predica- 
tion is small: there are 1869 of them 
in the entire Corpus, accounting for 
only 3.4% of the Corpus sentences. 
Nevertheless, they have been included 
in computing the statistics. 
Verbal constructions of both types, 
finite and non-finite, may consist of a 
single verbal form (e.g. likes or to 
like) or of one or more auxil iaries plus 
the main verb. The longest possible 
finite verbal group in English can have 
five elements, e.g. may (might) have 
been being considered; the longest 
active verbal group can have only four 
elements, e.g. may (might) have been 
considering. A non-f inite verbal group 
can consist of a maximum of four verbal 
elements, e.g. to have been being con- 
sidered. Of these, the maximum finite 
passive verbal group with five elements 
does not occur in the Corpus at all, nor 
does the maximum non-f inite group with 
four verbal elements. However, the 
maximum finite active group with four 
elements, i.e. the type may have been 
considerinH, occurs 8 times, and the 
second longest passive group, i.e. the 
type may have been considered, 68 times. 
The situation is similar with regard to 
non-finite groups: the one of maximum 
possible length, i.e. the type to have 
been being considered, does not occur 
at all. In three-element groups, i.e. 
the type to have been considered or to 
have been considering, only the first 
(passive) form occurs, 22 times; there 
are no occurrences of the active type of 
this three-element group. 
Complex verbal groups may be con- 
tinuous (i.e. not interrupted by a non- 
verbal element) or discontinuous, i.e. 
34 
so interrupted.  D iscont inuous  verbal  
const ruct ions  exhib i t  a d i f ferent  pat-  
tern in dec larat ive  sentences on one 
hand, and in wh-quest ions  and yes/no 
quest ions on the other. In dec lara-  
tives, the number of word-c lasses  that 
can interrupt  a complex verbal  group is 
re lat ive ly  small: it cons ists  pr imar i ly  
of adverbs, e.g. He wi l l  probably  con- 
sider ..., He has indeed been asked. 
In dec larat ive  sentences,  other word- 
classes, inc luding al l  the components  
of a noun phrase, const i tute  a def in i te  
clue that the verb group has terminated.  
Clues of this sort are of crucia l  impor- 
tance in any grammat ica l  ret r ieva l  or 
pars ing that uses annotated but other-  
wise unbracketed str ings as input. One 
of the important  facts that such an 
a lgor i thm has to cons ider  is that, due 
to var ious "delet ion" rules under con- 
d i t ions  of identity,  an Engl ish verbal  
group may appear in a t runcated form. 
Consider,  for example, the fo l lowing 
sentences: 
(3) Teddy could not be e lected 
but his cousin could (be) 
(4) Teddy could not have been 
e lected but his cous in  
could (have (been)) 
(The forms in parentheses  indicate 
opt ional  delet ions.)  
It is because of this poss ib le  
t runcat ion phenomenon that the ret r ieva l  
a lgor i thm needs to a l low for the poss i -  
b i l i ty  of a verbal  group ending in an 
auxi l iary.  
The s i tuat ion is more complex when 
it comes to the retr ieval  of verbal  
groups in wh-quest ions  and yes/no ques- 
tions. Because of the aux i l iary  inver- 
sion in such cases, a large number of 
word-c lass  representat ives ,  inc luding 
entire noun phrases, can be embedded 
with in  a verbal  group in such sentences.  
The ret r ieva l  of complex verb groups 
thus needs to take into account  a num- 
ber of var iables.  Part icu lar  at tent ion 
needs to be paid in the pars ing proce-  
dure to the fact that an incomplete ver-  
bal group may represent  e i ther a trun- 
cated str ing or a d i scont inuous  predi -  
cat ion which cont inues later in the 
sentence. 
The ret r ieva l  a lgor i thm for all 
verbal  groups, f in ite and non-f in i te,  
and cont inuous and d iscont inuous,  scan- 
ned the tag sequence in each sentence 
from left to right, w i thout  backtracking.  
The retr ieval  was thus essent ia l ly  
accompl ished by a f in i te -s tate  automaton 
(FSA). The complete FSA that can proper-  
ly handle both cont inuous and d iscont in -  
uous verbal  contruct fons  ( including trun- 
cated ones) is quite compl icated.  Pure- 
ly for i l lustrat ion,  I give be low a small  
f ragment o f  the FSA, which  wi l l  retr ieve 
only those verbal  groups that begin with 
a modal  or wi th  'have', and are cont inu-  
ous. 
F igure 1 
The arcs in the t rans i t ion d iagram 
in F igure 1 are labeled with the tag 
symbols of the appropr iate  c lasses of 
items that need to be present  for the 
automaton to reach a f inal state, and 
for the str ing to be thus accepted as 
a legi t imate verbal  group. Trans i t ion  
arcs labeled X, all of which terminate 
in the f inal  state of the automaton, 
make it poss ib le  for t runcated groups to 
be accepted. The symbol X, in this case, 
thus des ignates  any tag outs ide of those 
that may appear in a verba l  group. The 
meaning of the other tag symbols in 
F igure 1 is as fol lows: MD = modal;  
BE = 'be' (base form); BEG = 'being'; 
BEN = 'been'; H = any form of 'have'; 
HV = 'have' (base form); HVG = 'having'; 
HVN = 'had' (past par?ic ip le) ;  DO = 'do' 
(base'form); VB = main  verb (base form); 
VBG = present  part ic ip le  of main verb; 
VBN = past par t ic ip le  of main verb. 
The basic results, obta ined in my 
analysis,  are summarized in Table i. 
Three f igures are g iven for each of the 
f i f teen genres and for the Corpus as a 
whole: mean sentence length in graphic 
words (i.e. word tokens),  mean number of 
pred icat ions  per sentence, and the 
k35 
average number of words of text per 
predicat ion.  
TABLE 1 
Genre Words Pred. Words 
per per per 
Sent. Sent. Pred. 
A. Press, report. 20.81 
B. Press, edit. 19.73 
C. Press, reviews 21.i1 
D. Re l ig ion 21.23 
E. Ski l ls  18.63 
F. Pop. lore 20.29 
G. Bel les lett. 21.37 
H. Misc. 24.23 
J. Learned 22.34 
2 65 
2 74 
2 65 
2 90 
2 60 
2 82 
2 94 
2 82 
2 87 
7.85 
7.20 
7.96 
7.32 
7.17 
7.20 
7.27 
8.59 
7.78 
K. F ict ion,  gen. 13.92 2.41 5.78 
L. Mystery /detect .  12.81 2.29 5.59 
M. Science fict. 13.04 2.23 5.85 
N. Adv . /Western  12.92 2.30 5.62 
P. Romance 13.60 2.45 5.55 
R. Humor 17.64 2.84 6.21 
CORPUS 18.49 2.65 6.97 
The three sets of f igures, taken 
jointly, throw a cons iderab le  l ight on 
the nature of the pr inc ipa l  d i f ferences  
among the genres. Par t i cu lar ly  reveal-  
ing is the compar ison of the genres of 
In format ive Prose (A through J -- hence- 
forth INFO) as a group with  the group 
encompass ing Imaginat ive Prose (genres 
K through R -- hencefor th  IMAG). As 
a l ready ment ioned -- and cer ta in ly  not 
unexpected ly  -- the mean sentence length, 
measured in word tokens, is much larger 
in INFO than in IMAG. The reader  should 
not ice espec ia l ly  that all genres of 
INFO have their  sentence- length  mean 
above the Corpus mean, whi le all genres 
of IMAG are be low the Corpus mean. 
The s i tuat ion is d i f ferent ,  in 
in terest ing ways, when it comes to 
predicat ions.  Here, too, the number of 
pred icat ions  per sentence tends to be 
greater  in INFO than in IMAG, but not 
cons is tent ly  so and cer ta in ly  not to the 
extent  that the d i f ferences  in sentence 
length would lead one to expect. No 
longer are all INFO genres above Corpus 
mean and al l  IMAG below it. Wi th in  
INFO, genre E (Skil ls and hobbies) is 
below the Corpus mean, and A (Press, 
reportage) and C (Press, reviews) are 
exact ly  at the mean. On the other hand, 
in IMAG, genre R (Humor) is wel l  above 
the Corpus mean. 
The lack of cor re lat ion  between 
sentence length and the number of predi-  
cat ions per sentence, i.e. sentence 
complex i ty  in my def in i t ion,  is dis-  
played in a par t i cu lar ly  str ik ing 
manner  in the third set of f igures, 
which give the mean number of words per 
predicat ion.  In this case, all genres 
of INFO show a much larger number of 
words per pred icat ion  than the genres 
of IMAG. As a matter  of fact, all  
genres of INFO are above, and all 
genres of IMAG be low the Corpus mean 
in this instance. Table 2, wh ich  sum- 
mar izes  all the re levant  data for the 
two groups of prose and for the Corpus, 
shows these results  quite clearly. 
TABLE 2 
Measure INFO IMAG CORPUS 
Words/Sent.  21.12 13.55 18.49 
Pred./Sent.  2.80 2.38 2.65 
Words/Pred.  7.54 5.69 6.97 
Whi le  Table 2 s imply conf i rms that 
sentence length is h ighly genre depen- 
dent, it a lso shows that the predica- 
t ion /sentence f igure is not d i rect ly  
corre lated with sentence length. The 
words /pred icat ion  f igures show, in 
essence, that the number of words needed 
to express a pred icat ion  is cons iderab ly  
smal ler in those styles of wr i t ing in 
which sentences tend to be shorter. 
This fact also impl ies some interest ing 
facts about the overal l  s t ructure of 
sentences in INFO as compared to IMAG. 
Since, aside from the verbal  groups, 
the other major  const i tuents  of a sen- 
tence are the nominal  groups (i.e. NP's), 
the stat is t ics  presented in Table 2 
c lear ly  suggest  that nominal  groups in 
INFO genera l ly  tend to be longer (and, 
in some sense, thus more complex) than 
those in IMAG. Both cogni t ive  and 
automat ic  pars ing of texts of the infor-  
mat iona l  kind wi l l  thus put greater  
demands on noun-phrase processing.  
In order to invest igate the matter  
somewhat further and to see what  k ind 
of requi rements  the two groups of prose 
may impose on the process ing of verbal  
groups, I have also invest igated the 
d i f ferences  between the rat io of f inite 
vs. non- f in i te  pred icat ions  in the two 
groups of writ ing.  The results  are 
given in Table 3, where the symbol F 
and NF stand for f in ite and non- f in i te  
pred icat ions  respect ive ly .  
36 
TABLE 3 
Group Type No. Pred. Pct. 
per 
sent. 
INFO F 68,157 1.91 68.09% 
NF 31,935 0.89 31.91% 
100,092 2.80 100.00% 
IMAGE F 34,329 1.81 75.96% 
NF 10,866 0.57 24.04% 
45,195 2.38 100.00% 
CORPUS F 102,486 1.87 70.54% 
NF 42,801 0.78 29.46% 
145,287 2.65 100.00% 
A further examination of the infor- 
mation in Table 3 shows that the greater 
percentage of non-finite predications in 
INFO (31.91%) than in IMAG (24.04%) i s  
due largely, although not exclusively, 
to the greater frequency of gerunds and 
participles in the INFO texts. There 
are, on the average, 0.59 gerundival and 
participal predications per sentence in 
INFO and only 0.36 in IMAG; the mean for 
the Corpus is 0.51. This difference is 
less pronounced with regard to infini- 
tival complements: INFO has a mean of 
0.30 infinitives per sentence, IMAG 0.21; 
the Corpus mean is 0.27 infinitives per 
sentence. 
To summarize then, we can describe 
the syntactic style of Informative Prose, 
compared to Imaginative Prose, by at 
least these three characteristics: 
longer sentences, more complex nominal 
structures, and a larger proportion of 
non-finite predications. In contrast 
to this, the texts of Imaginative Prose 
exhibit shorter sentences, a signifi- 
cantly smaller number of word tokens per 
predication (pointing to less complex 
nominal groups) and a smaller percentage 
of non-finite predications. The research 
which we are now conducting with the 
Brown Corpus should provide us with fur- 
ther insights into the syntactic struc- 
ture of English texts and their stylis- 
tic properties, as well as into problems 
of automatic parsing in general. 
References 
1. The list of tags and the rationale 
for the grammatical annotation system 
is given in W.N. Francis and H. Ku~era, 
Manual of Information to Accompany a 
Standard Corpus of Present-Day American 
English (Department of Linguistics, 
Brown University, Providence, 1979). 
Much of the computer programming re- 
quired to produce the final form of the 
tagged Corpus, as well as the retrieval 
of the predications, was done by Andrew 
Mackie whose imaginative assistance is 
grateful ly acknowledged. 
2. Cf. Mary L. Marckworth and Laura M. 
Bell, "Sentence-Length Distribution in 
v the Corpus," in Henry Kucera and W. 
Nelson Francis, Computational Analysis 
of Present-Day American English (Brown 
~ivers i ty  Press, Providence, 1967). 
3. Cf., for example, Noam Chomsky and 
Howard Lasnik, "Filters and Controls," 
Linguistic Inquir Z, Vol. 8, No. 3 
(1977). 
4. Martin Joos, The English Verb (The 
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison 
1964). 
37  ?  ? 
