An in te l l igent  d iges ter  fo r  in teract ive  text  processings 
K. Hanakata  
Un ivers i ty  o f  S tu t tgar t  
Ins t i tu te  fo r  In fo rmat ics  
F ? R. Germany 
Abstract:Ihis paper outlines a practical approach to our project to design an 
intelligent system that supports an expert user for his understanding and 
representing news reports on a special world of the japanese computer industry. 
With the extensive help of the intelligent system the expert user purposefully 
assimilates new information in a knowledge data base of a frame-like 
representation through a multiple window interface. 
l . l n t roduet ion  
Recent computer appl icat ion to the 
so-cal led off ice automat ion is 
character ized by the increasing use of 
intel l igent software systems. These 
systems are often required to interface 
with textual informat ion via users who 
are more or less trained or expert ized 
to deal with the kinds of in format ion 
to be processed. The ideal goal of such 
a text process ing  system is to t rans fer  
all experts 'process ing tasks to the 
system. It must be well recognized,  
however, that even with regard to the 
most advanced knowledge-based natural  
language processing systems such as 
SOPHIE(1), SAM(Z), FRUMP(3), GUS(4), 
EXPIUS(5) this ideal goal seems to 5e 
s t i l l  far from the present state of the 
natural language (N\[) processing 
techn iques ,  though they  are  very  
promiss ing .  There are many reasons  why 
ex is t ing  Nl systems can hard ly  be 
app l ied  to the above goa l .  Two of  them 
may be fo rmulated  as fo l lows :  
(a) The present re lat ively robust NI 
systems have been basical ly  
des igned  to dea l  w i th  each separate  
sentence  and not  w i th  a set  o f  
semant ica l ly  related sentences.  
There are many research efforts 
aiming at this point (el. eg. 
approaches of the Yale Nl school).  
(b) Because the N\[ understand ing 
systems are general ly  concerned 
with deep understandings  of 
sentences, they often take care too 
much of genera l  relat ions and 
(common sense) reasonings in every 
detail ,  to which readers don't pay 
attent ions so much in understand ing 
them. Human readers sk i l l fu l ly  
control depth and detai ls  of 
unders tand ings  being conscious of 
their potent ia l  usefulness.  In 
short, the present N\[ systems are 
not enough expl ic i t ly  designed to 
extract purposeful  meaning of 
sentences (el.(4)).  
In this deve lop ing  s ta te  of Nl 
process ing and knowledge  representat ion  
techniques we set a pract ical  goal of 
our project to design an interact ive 
system which digests news and reports 
on the foreign computer  industry to 
support experts by s react ive knowledge 
data  base.  At the  moment such a 
knowledge  data  base i s  u rgent ly  needed 
fo r  exper ts  to  do the i r  tasks  such as 
wr i t ing  repor ts  to  be submi t ted  to some 
governmenta l  ins t i tu t ions ,  indust r ia l  
c red i t  bureaus  or agenc ies  and the  
l i ke .  
2 . In teract ive  ass imi la t ion  and abstract ion  
Typical experts' tasks in an industr ia l  
credit bureau above ment ioned are, for 
instance , to col lect information about 
a special world such as the news world 
of computer industry. They col lect 
c l ippings of news papers or journals,  
make memos from other news media and 
classi fy them according to their topics 
o r  themes. Their understanding of such 
informat ion means that they not only 
understand the meaning (surface 
semantics) of each art ic le l i teral ly  , 
but also ass imi late it into their 
related knowledge base (deep semantics) 
in such s way that  it can be 
e f fec t ive ly  used in  some fu ture  
contexts .  That i s ,  they  ident i fy  
re la t ions  of  the new in fo rmat ion  w i th  
This research was supported in part by Ostasien-Tnstitut,e.V., Bonn 
--504-- 
some parts of their knowledge and 
recognize its potential  usefulness for 
their new conceptua l i zat ion  to 
advocate ,  to  emphas ize  or bu i ld  up 
the i r  op in ions ,  judgements  or be l ie fs .  
The way of  summing-ups by abst rac t ion  
and ass imi la t ion  o f  suceess ive  
in fo rmat ion  to const ruc t  a spec ia l  
knowledge-base  s t rong ly  depends on the  
purposes ,  as i t  i s  genera l ly  s ta ted  in  
empir ical  ep is temology(15,15) .  In our 
pract i ca l  ease th i s  means that  the  
exper ts  purposefu l ly  'unders tand '  the  
news to wr i te  a eomprehens ive  repor t  on 
the  computer  indust ry  in  which  they  
draw from i t  conc lus ions  such as fu ture  
tendencies or proposals  for some 
industr ia l  pol icies, etc. 
Taking both avai lable teehn iques  and 
real ity of problems into account ,  we 
decided on the whole not to d irect ly  
apply N\[ process ing approaches to our 
exper t  suppor t  sys tem.  Ins tead ,  we 
extens ive ly  use N\[ techn iques  fo r  case 
by case. Start ing with the lowest 
inte l l igent  level of interact ion,  we 
hope that we could cont inuous ly  elevate 
the intel l igent level of the machine 
process ings in the recycl ing course of 
design and exper iences (5). 
The interface of the machine-expert  
interact ion is based on the mult ip le  
window display communicat ion (s.seet.5) 
and the mechanical  representat ion of 
experts knowledge is founded on the 
f rame- l ike formal ism (s.seet.3 and 4). 
In the interact ive text analysis  and 
meaning representat ion  an expert reads 
a news art icle from his special domain 
of computer industry and has var ious 
levels of understand ings  typical ly  
ref lect ing his special domain dependent 
knowledge and his evaluat ion of news 
values. Some part of his special  
knowledge is act ivated, new informat ion 
from the art ic le is eventual ly  added on 
it, a part of the exist ing knowledge is 
acknowledged,  refined, ampl i f ied or 
reversed, etc. 
In contrast to this expl ic it  flow of 
informat ion from texts to the expert 
user there is a implicit  counter flow 
of predict ive,  expect ive or focal 
informat ion which is feedbacked to the 
texts. In this sort of "backed-up" 
i n te ract ion  between text  source  and 
exper t ' s  knowledge ,  there  are rough ly  
two classes of informat ion to be 
represented:  
( i )Conceptual  information 
General ly  speaking, the content of a 
news art icle is expressed in text 
sentenses, ie a restr icted set of 
natural language in which they are 
written. However, for the expert of a 
special  news world texts are a set of 
key concepts mostly well def ined and 
structured within his knowledge, though 
they are organized by general syntact ic  
rules of the language on s surface 
level. These key concepts indicate for 
him how to use them. The methods of 
using his knowledge, are descr ibed in 
procedures and st ructura l ly  inherent in 
the concepts. The expert 's  responses to 
a key concept scanned from a given text 
are that  
(a) related concepts around a given key 
concept are st imulated 
(b) some concepts are expected in the 
subsequent scanning of the texts. 
(c) These st imulated or expected 
concepts interact with each other 
to constrain and fi lter their 
semantic roles. 
(ii) Control informat ion 
The interact ive flow of conceptual  
informat ion is contro l led by control 
informat ion which is partly invoked by 
the former. The experts responses (a) 
(b) (c) can be viewed as the evaluat ion 
results of the control information 
caused by understanding the eoneeptual  
information,  this means that conceputal  
informat ion impl ies the control 
information whieh speci f ies how the 
former should be processed or 
interpreted under which condit ions and 
what should be done when the former is 
to be perceived. For (a) the control  
information speci f ies the act ivat ion of 
all concepts  that  are  re la ted  to the  
--505-- 
key concepts in some way, for (b) it 
speci f ies  Lhe search of a term wh ich  
sat i f ies a given condit ion and for (c) 
it speci f ies the context to which all 
act ivated eoncepts in Lerma of a key 
concept must be subject. 
The cogn i t ive  in teract ion  between texts  
and exper t  can be ac t ive ly  suppor ted  by 
a system in  that  both  sor ts  ' o f  
in format ion are direct ly  or indirect ly  
t ransferred to the system in the course 
of data base organizat ion process. This 
tr iadic relat ion between texts, expert 
and system can be model led as a double 
product ion system (Fig.l), in which an 
TexLs 
I S T M 
I f 
- " I  E x p e r t  
I 
I 
I Knowledge  Data  Base I 
I 
. _ _  
I 
L.~M 
ST~'l 
(Fig l) A double product ion system 
Texts/User User/KDB 
expert user plays a double role of 
product ion rules in ITM against the 
scann ing  texts  and the  s tored  
knowledgte  data  base as Wel l .  However ,  
w i th  inc reas ing  amount o f  in fo rmat ion  
t rans fer  from the exper t  user  to the  
sys tem,  th i s  ro le  o f  the  exper t  user  as 
ITN aga ins t  the knowledge  data  base 
system i s  g radua l ly  changed to the ro le  
o f  STM. Then the  user ' s  cont ro l  
funct ion  of  in teract ive  process  i s  
taken  over  by the sys tem.  As a resu l t  
the  exper t  user  p lays  an in termed ia te  
ro le  fo r  making dec is ions  on long  term 
purposefu l  representat ions  o f  textua l  
meanings fol lowing advices and 
suggest ions from the system with the 
help of its control in format ion.The 
transit ion degree of theuser 's  role 
from \[TM to  STM is cont inuous and goes 
down to the extent that the expert user 
only takes  care of such tasks  as 
select ion of key terms or deep 
abstract ions with regard to the future 
appl icat ions,  those are too hard and 
time concuming for the system though 
not impossible.  
3.Frame- l i ke  Date base  
There are many reaso  ns why a 
f rame~l ike  s t ruc tured  data  base seems 
to be appropr ie te  fo r  our  purpose .  They 
are par t ly  ident ica l  to those  wh ich  are  
exp l i c i t l y  s ta ted  by the proponent  of  
f rame theory  (7)  or the des igners  of  
frame-like representat ion languages, 
Fo l low ing  reasons  are more or less  
spec i f i c  fo r  our  case :  
(1 )  Exper t ' s  knowledge  about  the 
computer  indust ry  and i t s  deve lopments  
are  o rgan ized  around the conceptua l  
units which are more or less 
standardized.  
E.g. "Main- f rame-makers"  is a concept 
for the expert that is used in 
conjunct ion with the computer-  
po l icy-making in Japan. 
(2) Roles of conceptual  objects are 
re lat ively clear and not much f lexible 
in the target information space. 
Eg. MBI i s  a r iva l  o f  a nat iona l  
main-frame-makers and the nat ional  
industr ia l  Ministry ITIM, which 
speci f ies  market strategic pol icies. 
(3) Because of the reason (2) control 
informat ion associated with each role 
of  a conceptua l  un i t  i s  we l l  
fo rmulated .  E .g .  I f  MBI announces  a new 
product  o f  H-Ser ies ,  the  exper t  expects  
the concept  o f  M-Ser ies  of  
main-frame-makers. 
(4) Those news and reports from a 
special world which are writ ten for 
interested readers are part ia l ly  
(5) The frame- l ike representat ion is 
d i rect ly  formulated to the form 
displayed in windows (s. sect.5) where 
the expert user interact ive ly  fi l ls 
slots with key words or modi f ies  
descr ipt ions.  
--506-- 
Other  reasons  are based on our  
p ragmat ic  a t t i tude  that  we cou ld  
eventua l ly  f ind  an ex is t ing  f rame- l i ke  
representat ion  system wh ich  f i t s  our  
spec ia l  ta rget  wor ld  and approach~ i f  
not complete ly ,  we could use it by 
minor mod i f i ca t ion ,  or in the worst  
case we could des ign a new one by using 
ex is t ing  system as a des ign guide l ine. 
Our home-made f rame- l i ke  representat ion  
language is cal led OBJTA\ [K  (8) which is 
character i zed  by the ob jec t -o r iented  
idea of SMA\ [ \ [TA\ [K  (9). Frames ca l led 
ob jects  are o rgan ized  into knowledge  
s t ruc tures  by message pass ings  which 
act ivate  procedura l  p roper t ies  of the 
rec ip ient  object .  In genera l i za t ion  
heterarch ies  of objects ,  slot 
p roper t ies  as wel l  as procedura l  
p roper t ies  of super ob jects  are 
inher i ted  by subord inate  ob jects .  
Fo l low ing  example  i l l us t ra tes  
i ns tant ia ted  concepts .  
Any ob jec ts  or the  user  can send a 
<message> to <ob ject>.  The above 
example of the ins tance MBI-JPN is 
c reated by sending to the object  
foreign-computer-industry. 
(ask ~reign-computer-industry 
make MBI- JPN with:  
<slot> . . . . .  
<slot> . . . .  ) 
( concept freign-computer-industry 
( i nd iv iduatea  computer-industry 
( generic-properties 
name : ( ca l ss  s t r ing)  
. . . . . . .  ) )  
By means of sending messages  to a 
object  we can create  a new object ,  
change it, act ivate  act ions of it, ask 
its p roper t ies  or find an object  which 
sat i s f ies  a given quant i f ied  cond i t ion .  
( concept  main-frame-makers 
( ind iv iduates  national-computer-industry 
( generic-properties 
p r o d u c e : Compuer-main-frame 
m e m b e r s : Fujitsu, Hitachi ,Mitsubishi, 
NEC, Toshiba, Oki 
r i v a \] : foreign-computer-industry 
suppor ted-by :  ITIM 
(method 
subvention: ? => (ask ITIM PD-budget: $!CPU))) 
(concept MBI- JPN 
instanciates fereign-computer-indust r y 
generic-properties 
a-par t -o f  : HBI -WTC 
products  : ((CPU (E-series H-series)) 
(periphery ( .... )) 
(FS)))) 
method 
(preis : ? => (a~ E-series preis : ?)) 
It is in teres t ing  to note that, 
p ract i ca l ly  the expert  user a lways tend 
to d i rect ly  def ine concrete  ins tances  
or ind iv idua ls  represent ing  his 
knowledge,  though f rame- l i ke  languages  
such as OBJTALK are  all des igned to be 
used in a top-down way, ie. before he 
descr ibes  MBI-JPN as an ins tance  of  a 
concept ,  he i s  supposed to de f ine  the  
data type of MBI-JPN, i s .  foreign- 
computer-industry. This top-down 
def in i t ion  requested  from the language 
s t ruc ture  doesn ' t  necessar i l y  
correspond with the natura l  verba l  
behaviour  of users ,  as i t  i s  s ta ted  in 
a genera l  learn ing  theory of languages .  
For bot tom-up  def in i t ions  of h igher  
level concepts  (super concepts)  we need 
some methods  for general izat ion and 
abstraction of  ind iv idua l  or ins tance  
ob jec ts  in tu i t i ve ly  de f ined  in  terms o f  
(p roduct :  ? =>(ask window write: (ask self ??))) rea l  data .  
OBJTA\ [K  of fers  a s imple 
language of the form 
massage (ask  <default class-name> genera l i ze  <instance-name>) 
(ask  <default class-name> abst rac t  <individual>) 
(ask  <ob ject> <message>) By genera l i z ing  a ins tance  or  
abst rac t ing  an ind iv idua l  we can c reate  
--507-- 
a class of instances or ind iv iduals  
according to their perspect ives ,  such 
that it prescr ibes property condi t ions 
to be sat is f ied by sample objects. This 
genera l i zed c lass  or abst rac t  c lass  
must be mod i f ied  by those  o ther  
ins tances  or ind iv idua ls  that  be long  to 
the same c lass .  
Theoret ica l  backgrounds  for this 
bottom-up genera l i zat ion  or abst ract ion  
process are  given by l earn ing  by 
examples (10) and grammat ica l  in ference 
(ll). 
Another pract ical  problem we have in 
direct appl icat ion of our object 
or iented language is that given a 
message of some propert ies  it is a very 
t ime consuming task to identi fy an 
object with them in its inher i tance 
hierarchy.  Part icu lar ly ,  it is hard to 
find some procedural  property in it, 
which is tr iggered by matching a 
pattern descr ibed as a prerequ is i te  
condi t ion in it. At the moment a 
pattern marcher of OBJTA\[K does this 
task. Start ing from the recipient 
object of a message the marcher  
searches through a inher i tance 
hierarchy of the object a procedure 
cal led method which can be matched with 
the message body. 
For s imple dese ipt ions  of passive 
propert ies  SRL (semantic epresentat ion  
l anguage)  o f  EXP\[US (5)  avo ided  th i s  
t ime consuming prob lem of  p roper ty  
inher i tance  by making an externa l  
b i t - tab le  which represents  a 
heraroh ica \ ]  property  re la t ions  ca l led  
semantic feature systems. For more 
compl icated property descr ipt ions  such 
as procedural  patterns we need a sort 
of global assoc iat ive  bit -map memory 
which mappes the procedura l  
proper ty -space onto the object space so 
that, given a procedural  property by a 
message, those objects assoc iated with 
this property can be retr ieved very 
fast without any searches.  This 
assoc iat ive  bit -map memory must 
dynamica l ly  store any new re lat ions 
between objects and propert ies.  Such a 
global assoc iat ive  memory contrad icts  
the fram-l ike ob jec t -o r iented  
representat ion  pr incip le which dictates 
the d is t r ibut ion  of propert ies  among 
objects.  The ph i losophica l  just i f i -  
cation of a pr par ty /ob ject  
assoc iat ions  are founded on the general 
theory of ob jec t -pred icate  rec iproc i ty  
(12) .  
4.Hierarchical scr ipt  frames for stereofiypicality 
Our human experts roughly c lass i fy  
co l lected news and reports on the 
computer industry according to their 
topics,eg,  I I IM vs .  MBI, ITIM po l i cy  
for in format ion industry promotion, new 
product announcements  from a computer 
industry, etc. 
A main topic is assigned to each class 
which may be character i zed  by s set of 
predicates to be sat is f ied by members 
of  the  c lass .  On th i s  g loba l  c lass  
leve l  our  news wor ld  i s  s te reotyp ica l .  
However ,  i f  we t ry  to  represent  many 
repor ts  o f  the same c lass  in  a 
stereotyp ica l  form, we get a large 
sparse table but items are local ly 
f i l led with var ious levels of 
deta i l s . (F ig .2) .  However,  if we look 
into the contents of each report of a 
class under the surface of its main 
topic, we find on local levels some 
other subtopics which are not always 
cons is tent ly  subord inate  to the main 
topic. 
This means first of all, there is no 
c lear  cut between c lasses ,  and each 
c lass  cannot be complete ly  formulated 
in a s tereotyp ica l  form. Secondly, i f  
we go down to the lower leve l  of main 
topic descr ipt ions  ie. subtopics,  we 
find that the s tereotp ica l i ty  is 
stronger within a subtopic.  Each 
subtopic is descr ibed in d i f ferent  
levels of detai ls.  We can come up with 
this s i tuat ion by using h ierarch ica l  
script frames (cf .(13)),  where a 
subord inate  script frames specify more 
detai led forms of the superord inate  
--508-- 
script frame. Those are connected to 
the latter in part-of  or isa re lat ions 
(Fig.3). By instant iat ing appropr iate  
script frames the user can 
interact ive ly  organize ..... into a 
frame structure which fits a given 
report on the whole. The instant iat ion 
process can be supported by the system 
receiv ing message patters or key words 
from the user. 
subtopic I 
subtopic 2 
subtopic  i 
subtopic  h 
I scr ipt frame m I 
script frame m 2 
. . . . , . . , ? . , , , . . . , . , . . . . ,  
' I I scr ipt frame m i 
I 
Q . , . , , . . o . . . . , . , . . . . . . , .  
script frame m h 
Fig.2) Script frames of d i f ferent detai ls  (Fig.3) H ierarehcha lsc r ip t  frames 
5 User in ter face by a window system 
A few number of AI research groups are 
using mult ip le window systems on a high 
resolut ion bit -map display such as ALTO 
(XEROX),the CADRs of \ [ ISP -maehine(MIT) ,  
PARQ (Three River), etc. There are some 
cogn i t ive -percept ive  reasons for using 
a mult ip le  window user interface. One 
of the most important reasons is that 
the user has a mult ip le  (or paral lel)  
contact with the machine, which offers 
him paral le l  decis ion a l ternat ives  as 
well as supports for short term memory 
during the course of interact ive 
processes.  In contrast with the act of 
scanning e newspaper through a pinhole 
the user can avoid back- t rack ings  of 
d ia log  l i s t ings  wh i le  keeping 
s imul taneous ly  var ious  k inds  o f  
in format ion each displayed in a window. 
This makes the user feel free from the 
labyr inth effects,  being always aware 
of what the machine is doing and in 
which state of interact ion he is. By 
reducing the labyr inth effects on the 
user, the machine offers him a better 
opportun i ty  to plan his imput 
behaviour.  The appl icat ion of a window 
sys tem to  our  in teract ive  text  
proeess ings  adds more cons is tency of 
representat ions  to the system. 
A window may display s whole frame for 
the user to fill in some slots whi le 
one other window shows the ether frame, 
whose name is just ment ioned by the 
first one. Another one contains only 
names of those frames which are 
direct ly or indirect ly  ment ioned in 
other frames. There are control windows 
which offer the user a set of control  
commandos and software tools such as 
editors (lISP editor, frame editor, 
kowledge editor),  by which he contro ls  
the interact ive process for embedding 
--509-- 
new in format ion ,  rev is ing  the old one 
or c reat ing  new frame scr ipts ,  etc. 
(F ig .4 )  
\ [M IN ISTERIDM 
Ca-k lnd-o f>:  behSrden 
<mi \ [MIT I  ( *ca l led -by  c fu l l -name> 'ZUS~N* = 
cpr  ca-k ind-o f>:mln is ter ium (&show-a l l  min is  
?.. <a-par t -o f~: reg i@rung(&show reg ierung)  
cantspr lcht>tBMWZ & BWM 
<m?Ais ter~:  sh i ina -saburo  
SKRIPTMODUL 
PROJEKTF~RDERUNG 
? anreger~ : MIT I  
<z ie l> : f6 rderung 
~v- indust .  
<etat~ : PROJEKTETAT 
cbeauf  t ragt ,  : 
. . . . . . . .  DV-P IRMEN 
<in format ion>:  / ~  
<energ ie~ : SUNSHINE TERMALGEN ( ?. ) 
<~mwel t  ? : O. 02PPM ..... \] 
CONTROL :ENU 
WINDOW 
DOCU.~LENT 
EDIT  
\]IISTORY 
BP~AK 
OPERATION 
\[NISTRY OF INTEP .NAT ION~ T~DE ~D EDIT  
T I -P rog  ACT IVATED FBA~S 'LM I:~SERT 
.. . . .  DV-F I  .~MEN APPEND 
METI  DELETN 
\ [P IPS PROEKTETAT REPLACE 
? c t r~ger> : ELECTROTECHNICAL-LA~ 
?etat~t 400 ,*llo DM 
<dauer  > : 5 - JAH~ 
<beauf t ragt  ? : TOSHIBA MITUBISHI  
\] 
h 
These i te l l igent  mach ine  responses  to 
the user on the w indow levels  are also 
cont ro l led  by t~ d is t r ibuted  cont ro l  
in fo rmat ion  embedded in f rames.  Some 
spec ia l  f rames such as w indow-agent  and 
f rame-agent  take  care  o f  mapp ing  
between w indows and in terna l  
representat ion  o f  f rames .  We cou ld  v iew 
these  agents  as a two  d imens iona l  
in teract ive  syntax ,  wh ich  ru les  what  
k ind  o f  in fo rmat ion  shou ld  be g iven  in  
which window,  depend ing  on its 
semant ics .  In this sense the 
in teract ive  representat ion  of mean ings  
through a mul t ip le  w indow system can be 
v iewed as more natura l  (ie. cogn i t ive ly  
e f f i c ient )  way to t rans fer  the exper t ' s  
knowledge to the mach ine .  A user 
in ter face  which d i s regards  this 
cogn i t ive  aspects  of user 's  man-mach ine  
communicat ion  behav iour  \ ]cads to a bad 
in teract ive  system which doesn ' t  serve 
as an e f f i c ient  exper t ' s  ass i s tant .  It 
is one of our goals  to invest igate  the 
ru les which under l ies  the exper t ' s  
behav iour  of represent ing  his text 
unders tand ing .  Embedd ing  these rules 
into a system, we could make the sys tem 
in te l l igent ly  react ive  to the exper t ' s  
in teract ive  behav iour .  
6 The State of the Imp lementat ion  
In order to make the present  task 
procedures  of the human exper ts  
cons is tent  to the mach ine  support ,  we 
are fo \ ] \ ]owing  the exper t ' s  task process  
by us ing  the  same data  and becoming  
ourse lves  a b i t  exper ts  o f  our  wor ld .  
For  s tandard izat ion  o f  te rmino log ies  to  
ident i fy  the  cor respond ing  concepts  we 
bind together  those te rmino log ies  in 
d i f fe rent  repor ts  which have the same 
mean ing .  This is the f i rst  step to 
unders tand  the wor ld  in v iew of a 
mach ine  but we find out this is not an 
easy task. Bes ide  this, there are many 
cont rad ic t ions  and mis takes  as it is 
well  known to our experts .  
Para l le \ ]  to thJ. s sor t  o f  the  wor ld  
ana lys i s ,  we now examine  our  f rame- l i ke  
language BBJTA\[K wh ich  i s  ava i \ ]ab le  in  
our  computer  a t  the  moment  bes ide  FRt ,  
to  dec ide  whether  i t  g ives  us a sound 
base for our approach  and if not 
exact ly ,  what should  be done to ta i lor  
the language for it. From our test 
example  we exper ience  what add i t iona l  
features  we need (see  sect ion  3 ) .  
Without  hav ing  a high reso lu ta t ion  
b i t -map-d isp lay  our imp lementat ion  of 
the mul t ip le  w indow system is 
res t r i c ted  to the d i sp lay  te rmina ls  
ava i lab le  to our computer .  Hoping to 
get such a termina l  in the near future  
a mul t ip le  w indow system has been 
s imu\ ]a ted  on the HDS- termina ls  in lOGO 
(14). 
--510-- 
7 Reference 
(1)Brown,J.S. and Burton,R.R.,Bell,A.G. ; 
SOPHIE: A step towards a reactive \]earning 
environment, International journal of man 
machine studies, Voi.7,1975, pp 675-696 
(2)Schank R.C. Abelson, P.R.;Scripts, Plans, 
Goals and Understanding, lawrence Erlbaum 
Press, 1977 
(5)DeJon,G.; Prediction and Substantiation: 
Process that comprise understanding, 
IJCAI,\]979,Tokyo, pp217-222 
(4)Bobrow,D.G.,Kaplan,R.M., Kay,M.Norman, 
D.A.Thompson,H.,Winograd,T.; GUS, A fram driven 
dialog system, Artificial Intelligence 
Vol.8,No\],1977 
(5)Tanaka, H.; EXP\[US- A semantic processing 
system for japanese sentenses, Trans. IECE, 
Japan, '78/8 Vol.61-D No.8 
(6)Bobrow,D.G.,Winograd,T.; An overview of KR\[, 
a knowledge representation language, XEROX, 
Palo Alto Research Center,tS\[-76-4,JUiY 4, 1976 
(7)Minsky,M.,; A framework for representing 
knowledge, in Th__ee psycholoqy of computer 
vision,by Winston P. (Ed),MeGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1975 
(8)laubsch,J. ; OBJTA\[K, mmk-memo 12, 
Universitaet Stuttgart, Institut fuer 
Informatik, \]979. 
(9)Ingalls,D.; The SMA\[tTA\[K-76 programming 
system: design and implementation, ACM 
SIGP\[AN,Tucson, Arizona 1978. 
(lO)Winston,P.; \[earning structural 
descriptions by exsamples,in The psychology of 
computer vision, by Winston,P.(Ed),McGraw-Hill, 
New York.1975. 
(ll)Feldman,J.; The first thought on 
grammatieak inference, Stanford AI memoNo.55, 
1967 
(12)Watanabe,M.S.; Knowing and Guessing, John 
Wiley & sons,lnc., New York,1969 
(l\])Cullingford,R.; Script application: 
computer understanding of news paper stories, 
Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT,1978 
(14)Boeeker,D.; Implementation of multiple 
window system on the HDS-terminals in IOGO, 
Ifl-report, Inst.f. Informatik, Universaitaet 
Stuttgart, 1980 
(15)\[orenz,F.; Die Rueckseite des Spiegels, 
Piper Verlag, Muenchen,1973 
(16)Csmpbell,D.T.; Evolutionary epistemology, 
in P.A.Schi\]p (Ed), The philosophy of Karl 
Popper, Open court, \[asalle, \].974 
--511-- 
