COLING 82, J. tIoreekp (eel) 
North-Holla~l Publilh~ Company 
@ Aca~?m~ 1982 
DIALOGIC: A CORE NATURAL-LANGUAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 
Barbara  Grosz ,  Norman Haas ,  1 Gary  Hendr ix ,  1 Je r ry  Hobbs,  Pau l  Mar t in ,  
Rober t  Moore,  Jane  Rob inson ,  S tan ley  Rosensche in  
Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l igence  Center  
SRI In ternat iona l  
Hen lo  Perk ,  Ca l i fo rn ia  94025 
U.S.A. 
The DIALOGIC system translates English sentences into 
representations of their literal meaning in the context of an 
utterance. These representations, or "lngical forms," are 
i n tended to  be a pure ly  fo rmal  language that  i s  as  c lose  as  
poss ib le  to  the  s t ructure  o f  natura l  language,  wh i le  prov id ing  
the  semant ic  compos i t iona l i ty  necessary  fo r  mean ing-dependent  
computat iona l  p rocess ing .  The des ign  o f  DIALOGIC (and of  i t s  
constituent modules) was influenced by the goal of using it as 
the core  language-process ing  component in  a var ie ty  of  
systems,  some o f  wh ich  are  t ranspor tab le  to  nee  domains  o f  
application. 
OVERVIEW 
The DIALOGIC system translates Engllsh sentences into representations of their 
literal meaning in the context of an utterance. These representations, or 
"logical forms," are intended to be a purely formal language that is as close as 
possible to the structure of natural language, while providing the semantic 
compositionality necessary for meanlng-dependent computational processing. The 
design of DIALOGIC (and of its constituent modules) was influenced by the goal of 
using it as the core language-processlng component in a variety of systems, some 
of which are transportable to new domains of application. 
Currently DIALOCIC is a core component of four systems being developed within 
severa l  d i f fe rent  research  pro jec ts  a t  SRI. One i s  the  TEAM pro jec t ,  ~ whose goa l  
I s  to  prov ide  natura l - language access  to  la rge  data  bases  through sys tems that  a re  
eas i ly  adaptab le  to  a wide range  o f  new app l i ca t ions .  Another ,  the  RLAUS 
pro jec t ,  ~ i s  a longer - range  e f fo r t  to  address  bas ic  research  prob lems in  natura l -  
l anguage semant ics ,  commonsense reason ing ,  and the  pragmat ics .  A th i rd ,pro jec t  i s  
invest igat ing  the  prob lem o f  p rov id ing  natura l - language access  to  text .  ~ A four th ,  
in  which ~IALOGIC a l so  p lays  an  impor tant  ro le ,  i s  examin ing  the  deve lopment  o f  
fo rmal  g rammars .  5 
DIALOGIC i s  d iv ided  in to  f i ve  modu les  coord inated  by the  DIAMOND execut ive  sys tem.  
DIAMOND is  a mod i f i ca t ion  o f  the  execut ive  sys tem used in  the  SRI speech-  
unders tand ing  pro jec t  \ [Walker  1978\]  and a l so  in  a task -d ia logue  in terpretat ion  
I Now working at Machine Intelllgence Corporation in Sunnyvale, California. 
2 Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract 
N00039-80-C-0645. 
3 Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract 
N00039-80-C-0575. 
4 Funded by the Nations1 Library of Medicine under Grant IROI-LM03611. 
5 Sponsored by the National Science Foundation under Grant IST-8103550. 
95 
96 B. GROSZ et .1. 
system \[A. Robinson, 1980\]. It provides the formal language for defining the 
grammar and the  cont ro l  fo r  pars ing  Eng l i sh  sentences  and t rans la t ing  them in to  
log lca l - fo rm express ions .  
The f ive  modu les  are  (1 )  the  DIAGRAM grammar;  (2 )  s se t  o f  semant ic  t rans la tors ;  
(3 )  a set  o f  bas ic  semant ic  funct ions ;  (4 )  a scop ing  a lgor i thm ( fo r  quant i f ie rs  
and  sentence  operators ) ;  (5)  a set  o f  bas ic  p ragmat ic  funct ions .  The remainder  o f  
th i s  paper  descr ibes  these  components  o f  DIALOCIC and presents  an  example  
i l lus t ra t ing  how they  coord inate  in  the  in terpretat ion  o f  an  ut terance .  A 
descr ip t ion  o f  the  log ica l  form that  i s  the  ta rget  o f  DIALOGIC's in terpretat ion  
processes  may be found in  \ [Moore,  1981\ ] .  
DIAGRAM 
DIAGRAM is a general grammar of English. It now contains about 125 rule schemata, 
equ iva lent  to  about  800 ind iv idua l  ru les .  These def ine  a l l  common sentence  typos ,  
complex  aux i l ia r ies  and mode ls ,  complex noun phrases ,  nomina l i zed  sentences ,  a l l  
the  common quant i f ie rs ,  re la t ive  c lauses ,  verbs  w i th  sentent ia l  complements ,  
comparat ive  and measure  express ions ,  subord inate  c lauses  and other  adverb ia l  
mod i f ie rs .  Con junct ion ,  however ,  i s  l im i ted  to  a few p lace-ho lders ,  pend ing  
fur ther  s tudy  o f  the  prob lems i t  poses  fo r  const ra in ing  the  number o f  syntact i c  
ana lyses .  A deta i led  descr ip t ion  o f  DIAGRAM is  conta ined  in  \ [ J .  Rob inson ,  1982\ ] .  
Formal ly ,  DIAGRAM i s  an  augmented  phrase-s t ructure  grammar .  The lex icon  
categor i zes  words  and assoc ia tes  a t t r ibutes  w i th  them that  a re  used  in  the  ru les .  
Each  ru le  has  assoc ia ted  w i th  i t  a const ructor  that  expresses  the  const ra in ts  on 
i t s  app l i ca t ion  and a l so  a t rans la tor  (descr ibed  in  the  next  sect ion)  that  
p roduces  the  cor respond ing  log ica l  fo rm.  
Phrases  inher i t  a t t r ibutes  f rom the i r  const i tuents  and acqu i re  a t t r ibutes  f rom the  
la rger  phrases  that  conta in  them.  These a t t r ibutes  are  used  to  impose context -  
sens i t ive  const ra in ts  upon the  acceptance  o f  an  ana lys i s .  Be fore  const ruct ing  a 
node in  the  parse  t ree  cor respond ing  to  the  app l i ca t ion  o f  a ru le ,  the  execut ive  
invokes  the  ru le ' s  const ructor  to  tes t  fo r  admiss ib i l i ty .  In  add i t ion  to  
accept ing  or  re jec t ing  a ru le  app l i ca t ion ,  the  const ructors  can  ass ign  scores  that  
a l low l i s t ing  a l te rnat ive  ana lyses  in  a pre fer red  order .  The resu l t  o f  app ly ing  
the  grammar to  ana lys i s  o f  an  input  i s  one or  more annotated  ~arse  t rees .  
A t t r ibutes  and annotat ions  are  not  l im i ted  to  syntact i c  in fo rmat ion .  The 
t rans la tors ,  descr ibed  next ,  spec i fy  bow the  t rans la t ion  o f  a phrase  in to  log ica l  
fo rm i s  to  be def ined  in  te rms o f  the  a t t r ibutes  o f  the  words  and phrases  that  
compose i t .  Th is  coup l ing  o f  syntax  and semant ics  ( fo r  wh ich  a t t r ibute  ~rammars 
\ [T ienar i  1980\ ]  were  or ig ina l ly  des igned)  i s  convergent  w i th  cur rent  fo rmal  
theor ies  b f  natura l  language that  advocate  const ruct ing  a syntax  and semant ics  
that  "work  in  tandem" \[Dowry e t  e l .  1981;  Kap lan  and Bresnan ( to  appear ) ;  Gazdar  
( to  appear ) ;  Landsbergen 1976. \ ]  
Future  work on DIAGRAM inc ludes  e f fo r ts  to  extend both  i t s  coverage  and i t s  
fo rmal i sm.  In  extend ing  the  fo rmal i sm,  our  dua l  ob jec t ive  i s  to  capture  cer ta in  
l ingu is t i c  genera l i za t ions  (e .g . ,  dat ive  movement)  and to  make the  task  o f  
deve lop ing  a la rge  grammar more manageab le .  To accompl i sh  th i s ,  we are  exp lor ing  
the  use  o f  metaru les  \ [Gazdar  to  appear \ ] .  
TRANSLATORS 
Fo l low lng  the  syntact i c  ana lys i s  o f  an  ut terance ,  a sequence  o f  semant ic  
t rans la tors  i s  invoked to  -bu i ld  the  log lca l  fo rm that  cor responds  to  a l l te ra l  
in terpretat ion  o f  the  u t terance  in  context .  The t rans la tor  fo r  each  phrase-  
s t ructure  ru le  spec i f ies  how the  var ious  const i tuents  o f  the  phrase  are  to  be 
combined to  fo rm an  in terpretat ion  o f  the  wbo l~ phrase .  I t  p rescr ibes  the  
pred icate -argument  s t ructures  that  cor respond to  the  grammat ica l  const ruct ion  or ,  
more genera l ly ,  the  operator -operand s t ructures .  
D1ALOGIc, A CORE-NATURAL-LANGUAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 97 
Although the t rans la tors  operate  top-down ( the  t rans la tor  for  each node inyokes 
the t rans la tors  for  i t s  ch i ld ren) ,  the t rans la t ion  i s  in  e f fec t  bu i l t  bottom-up- -  
s ince ,  typ ica l ly ,  the f i r s t  th ing  a t rans la tor  for  a nonterminal  node does i s  to 
invoke the t rans la tors  for  each of i t s  const i tuents ,  usua l ly  le f t  to r ight .  
However, the top-down nature  of the t rans la t ion  process i s  s ign i f i cant ,  because i t  
means that  in format ion  located  above a node and to i t s  le f t  i s  ava i lab le  when the 
node i s  t rans la ted .  In add i t ion  to producing the log ica l  form, the t rans la tors  
determine the syntact i c  const ra in ts  upon and pre ferences  fo r  e i ther  coreference or 
noncoreference of noun phrases ,  espec ia l l y  pronouns, fo l lowing an a lgor i thm 
descr ibed  in \[Hobbs, 1976\]. 
BASIC SEMANTIC FUNCTIONS 
To insu la te  changes in  the grammar from those that  occur in  log ica l  form, the 
construction of the latter is isolated from the translator procedures by calls on 
basic semantic functions \[Konollge, 1979\]). The actual construction of a logical 
form is done in two phases: (I) ioglcal-form fragments (iffs) are attached to the 
parse  t ree  by the bas ic  semantic funct ions ;  (2) the f ina l  l og ica l  form i s  
assembled from these by the scoplng algorithm. 
Lf fs  are ass igned only  to cer ta in"  nodes in  the parse t ree .  Usual ly  the i f f  a t  an 
NP node w i l l  encode the proper t ies  held by the ent i ty  the NP descr ibes  \ [e .g . ,  "X 
such that  EMPLOYEE(X) & OLD(X)" for  "old employee"\] and the fragment for  a c lause-  
level construction (e.g., a VP) will encode the predlcate-argument structure of 
the clause, 
The basic semantic functions also leave markers on the parse tree to indicate such 
things as the type of quantifier or deter~iner associated with a noun phrase. 
These markers are used by the scoplng algorithm to determine the final loglcal 
form for the utterance. (Note that the Iffs and markers left by the basic 
semantic functions may be viewed as further annotations to the parse tree.) 
DIALOGIC currently includes eleven basic semantic functions. Six of these do most 
of the work of buildlng lffs for standard noun phrases and clauses. The others 
are concerned with adding such things as mode, degree, and adverbial modification 
to clauses. As more precise specifications are defined for encoding these 
phenomena in logical form, we expect to collapse some of this latter group. 
SCOPING OF QUANTIFIERS AND OTHER SENTENTIAL OPERATORS 
The scoplng algorithm is designed to collect the loglcal-form fragments from the 
parse tree and produce the possible scoplngs of quantlflers and other scoped 
operators. The scoplng algorithm used in DIALOGIC (adapted from that in 
Hendrlx, 1978) produces all the scoplngs thnt do not vlolate the hard rules of 
Engllsh scoplng, and then ranks them according to a score computed by a set of 
speciallst critics. Each critic is a function that returns a score for some 
aspect of the conflicting rules of quantification in Engllsh; e.g., the left-rlght 
scope critic lowers the score of 8coplngs that involve permuting the left- 
outermost default ordering of quantlflers. All critics receive equal weight in 
the present implementation, but the design of the system does allow for 
d i f fe rent ia l  we ight ing .  
The current set of critics is concerned with such things as changes in sentence 
order and the relatlve scoplng of  quantlflers of different strengths. The scoplng 
of nonstandard quantlflers and of the generallzed negative ("not, .... no one," 
"nothing, .... none") remain to be done. 
BASIC PRAGMATIC FUNCTIONS 
Basic pragmatic functions are intended to fulfill several roles in DIALOGIC, all 
concerned with certain kinds of indetermlnacles in logical form whose resolution 
requires pragmatic information. The four primary uses of basic pragmatic 
98 B. GROSZ et -1. 
funct ions  in  the cur rent  system are  ( i )  ~o provide a context -spec l f l c  
interpretation of certain terms that have only vague meanings in themselves (e.g., 
prepositions llke "of" and "~n~" or Inherently vague verbs llke "have"); (2) to 
establlsh the specific relationship underlying any given noun-noun combination; 
(3) to identify the referents of pronouns; and (4) to interpret a limited range of 
metonymy (e.g., the use of "blonds" to mean "people with blond hair"). At 
present, only a small core of pragmatic functions is implemented, each of which 
handles only a subset of the cases it is intended to cover. 
EXAMPLE 
To illustrate how the different modules' of DIALOGIC contribute to the 
interpretation of an utterance, we shall consider the example, 
"What SRI employees have children older than 15 years?" 
The logical form for this query--the target for the interpretation processes--Is 
(lowercase is used to indicate variables, uppercase to indicate constants and 
predicates): 
\[QUERY (WH employeel (AND (EMPLOYEE employeel) 
(EMPLOYEES-COMPANY-OF employeel SRI)) 
(SOME child2 (CHILD child2) (AND (CHILD-0F employeel child2) 
((*MORE* OLD) child2 (YEAR 15\] 
This corresponds rou@hly to a formal representation for "who is each employee such 
that the company of the ~nployee is SRI and some child of the employee is older 
than fifteen years?" 
During DIAMOND'S parsing phase, the parse tree in Figure I is constructed. At 
this polnt~ the attributes annotating the tree encode such properties as the type 
of noun (count, mass~ unit) and syntactic number. These attrlbutes have been used 
during the parsing phase to rule out certain alternative structures. 
Once this structure is built, the translators are invoked. In combination with 
the basic semantic functions, the translators assign addltlonal attributes to 
nodes in the tree, encoding such information as the quantlflers (type~ strength, 
and the variables they bind) and heads of noun phrases. For example~ the head of 
the WHNP, "what SRI employees"m is a variable of type EMPLOYEE that 14 bound by a 
wiT-type quantifier. Attributes also encode the underlying predlcate-argument 
structures for verb phrases and adJectlves~ and the iffs to be used in 
constructing the flnal logical form for the utterance. 
In the sentence of Figure I, the nodes WHNP and S are annotated as being 
quantlfledp WHNP with a wh-type quantifier and S as a "query." Although every 
rule has an associated translator, only some of these result in iffs being 
attached to nodes. For this example~ the nodes marked with *e in the original 
parse tree are the only ones for which Iffs are produced. 
The fragment attached to each of these nodes is as follows: 
NOUN1 (*NN* employeel SRI) 
NOUN2 (EMPLOYEE employee1 ) 
PREDICATE (*HAVE employee1 ch i ld2)  
NOUN3 (CHILD child2) 
NCOMP ((*MORE* OLD) child2 (YEAR 15)) 
EMPLOYEE, CHILD, and OLD are" monadlc predicates that are part of the conceptual 
model of the domain. *MORE e maps a predicate into a comparative along the scale 
corresponding to the predicate. *NN* and *HAVE are dummy predicates that indicate 
the need tO invoke the basic pragmatic functions. 
After the translation process is complete, the final loglcal form is asseLbled by 
a procedure that considers alteruatlve quantifier scoplngs (using the quantifier- 
DIALOGIC, A CORE-NATURAL-LANGUAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 99 
/ 
I / - - - -  - - \  
MSDET NO~D 
I 
NOUHI ** 
I 
/ \ 
NHD NOUN2 ** 
\[ 
-S N 
/ 
VPT 
t 
V 
4 
J 
I 
\.WHAT SRI '-S B~q,OYEE HAVE -'8 
/ \ 
SNHQ ENDPUNCT 
J i 
? 
/ 
m 
t 
NorM3 ** 
f /----~ 
-S N 
PREDICATE ** 
t 
VP 
I \ 
NP \[ 
\ 
NCONFS 
t 
NCOMP *t 
f 
PREDADJ 
I /~  -------~ 
ADJT 
I i / \ /------ ~ \  
ER ADJ THAN 
f 
I 
I I 
I 
I / - -  
I I 
i I 
I I 
CHILD ER OLD THAN l$ 
HP 
f 
DETP 
J 
DEI'Q 
I 
ImUN 
i /---- ---~ 
? "-S B 
I i 
-..S YEAR 
Figure I Parse Tree for "What SRI employees have children older than 15 years?" 
related annotations left on the parse tree) and invokes the basic pragmatic 
funct ions  as  needed.  The bas ic  p ragmat ic  funct ions  use  in fo rmat ion  in  the 
conceptua l  model of the  domain to t rans form (*HN* employee l  SR I ) - - cor respond ing  to 
the  noun-noun compound "SRI employee" - - in to  (EMPLOYEE-OF employee l  SRI) and (*HAVE 
employee l  ch i ld2)  in to  (CHILD-OF employee l  ch i ld2) .  
The nodes with either quantifier or ioglcal-form markings are the only ones 
considered by the TEAM scoplng algorithm. Besides the WH quantifying employee1, 
TEAM recognizes that a default existential quantifier must be created for child2~ 
so SOME is added. The scope rules force QUERY to have the widest scope; this 
position 18 contested only if there are multiple sententlal markers. Both 
orderlngs of the WHAT and SOME quantlflers are generated. The two resultlng 
quantified statements correspon d to (WHAT employeel (SOME child ...)...) and 
(SOHE child (WHAT employee ...)...) 
Next the scope critic functions evaluate the different scoplngs; only three of the 
critics are relevant. One critic considers the left-right node ordering and 
prefers the first scoplng because it comes closer to the surface form, One critic 
prefers scoplngs in which WH outecopes an adjacent exlstential; it too upgrades 
the score of the first and downgrades the score of the second. The other critic 
knows that default existential quantlflers need the narrowest possible scope; it 
too selects the  first. 
100 B. GROSZ et al 
SUMMARY 
Because of the modularlzation in D~ALOGIC, changes in one part of the system 
reverberate very little in other components. Changes in the constraints imposed 
on the phrase-structure rules in the grammar have no effect on any other part of 
the system. A change in a rule itself necessitates a change in the corresponding 
translator, but the basic semantic functions do not need to be revised. 
Similarly, a change in the logical form or in the data structures within which it 
is implemented requires a corresponding change in the basic semantic functions, 
but not in the grammar or translators. 
In addition to extending DIALOGIC as mentioned in the foregoing sections, we are 
also investigating possible revisions of the translation phase (as currently 
performed by the translators and basic semantic functions) to allow translation 
into loglcal form to be specified declaratlvely. In this new approach 
\[Rosenscheln and Shleber (to appear)\[, loglcal types are associated with the 
phrasal categories, and the translation of a phrase is synthesized from the 
translations of its immediate constituents according to a local rule, which 
typically involves functional application. 
REFERENCES 
Dowty, D. R., Wall, R .E . ,  and Peters, S. \[1981\] Introduction to Montague 
Semantics (D.Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 1981). 
Gazdar, G. \[to appear\]. "Phrase Structure Grammar," in P. Jacobson and 
G. K. Pullum, eds. On the Nature of Syntactic Representation. 
Hendrix, G .G .  \[1978\[ "Semantic Aspects of Translation," in Understanding 
Language, D. E. Walker, ed., pp. 193-226 (Elsevier, New York, New York, 1978). 
Hobbs, J. \[1976\[ 'Pronoun Resolution," Research Report 76-1, Department of 
Computer Sciences, City College, City University of New York, New York, New 
York (August, 1976). 
Kaplan, R. M. and Bresnan, Jo W. \[to appear\] "Lexical-Functlonal Grammar: A 
Formal System for Grammatical Representation," Occasional Paper 13, Center for 
Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Konolige, K. G. \[1979\[ "A Framework for a Portable Natural Language Interface to 
Large Data Bases," Technical Note 197, Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, California (October, 1979). 
Landsbergen, S. P. J. \[1976\] "Syntax and Formal Semantics of English in PNLIQAI," 
in COLING 76~Preprints o f  th___ee 6thlnternational Conference on Computatlonal 
Linguistics, No. 21, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (June 28-July 2, 1976). 
Moore, R. C. \[1981\] "Problems in Logical Form," in Proceedings of the 19th Annual 
Meet lngof  the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 117-124, The 
Association for Computational Linguistics, SRI International, Menlo Park, 
California (July 1981). 
Robinson, Ann E. \[1980\] "Interpreting Natural-Language Utterances in Dialogs 
About Tasks," Technical Note 210, Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, California (March 1980). 
Robinson, J. J. \[1982\] "DIAGRAM: A Grammar for Dialogues," Communications of the 
ACM, Vol. 25, No. I, ppo 27-47 (January 1982). 
Rosenscheln, S. J. and Shieber, S .M.  \[To appear\] "Translating English into 
Logical Form," in Proceedlngs of 20th Annual Meetin~ of Association for 
Computational Linguistics Conference, Toronto, Canada (June 1982). 
Tienari, M. \[1980\] "On the Definition of an Attribute Grammar," in Nell D. Jones, 
ed., Semantic-Directed Compiler Generation. Proceedings of a Workshop, Aarhus, 
Denmark (January, 1980). G. Goos and J. Hartmanis, eds., Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science Vol. 94, pp. 408-414, (Sprlnger-Verlag, Berlln-Heldelberg-New 
York, 1980). 
Walker, D .E .  (ed.) \[1978\] Understandln~ Spoken Languag____~e (Elsevier North- 
Holland, New York, New York~ 1978). 
