COMPONENTS OF SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION 
A. E. Klbrik 
Kaf. strukturnoJ I prikladnoJ lingvlstiki 
MGU, 117 234 Moskva,  USSR 
The problem of the meaning of the text - the end and 
product of speech activity, Is a central one both for theoret- 
Ica l  linguistics, and for the applied fields connected with 
itp such as artificial intelligence, question answ6ring, 
man-machlne communication, etc. 
The meaning of the text or, speaking more technically, 
the semantic representation is not, as it has been considered 
until recently , a homogeneous entity, that is why a specific- 
ation of its main dissimilar components may be helpful for 
theoretical and applied investigations. 
Without striving for completeness and systematlcness 
I will enumerate some of thesecomponents. To avoid a possible 
misunderstanding it should be emphasized that I proceed from 
an assumption, which is far from being shared by everyone, 
that the semantic representation of an utterance has to re- 
flect the complete Info~nation pertaining to the proper 
interpretation of thls utterance, In connection with which I 
would regard the opposition of semantics and prsgmatlcs as 
invalid. 
a. Sltustlonal component is that part of the semantic 
representation which is intended (in the norm) of express the 
main information content mapping some external (in relation 
to the message as such and to the speech act) situation. This 
component, undoubtedly, occupies the most prestigious posit- 
ion in the hierarchy of the components. It is no mere chance 
- 154 - 
then  that  At constant ly  remains  In  the  cent re  o f  a t tent ion  
In  semant ic  Invest igat ions ,  or  that  the  main  un i t  o f  the  
syntactic level - the sentence, is adopted exactly for its 
expression. 
be Referential component is a relatlonal one; I ts  funct- 
ion As to co,relate the units of the text with the ideas 
about the units of reality, to identify these units and actual- 
ize the sentence. The semantic reprssentetlon, which lacks a 
referential component, cannot be Interpreted correctly. (The 
typical representatives of referential meanings are articles, 
the categor~of numberjdemonstratlve pronouns.) 
c. Mod~l component, being also relational# correlates a 
proposition with the sxtrallngulstlc situation. This correl- 
ation expresses the degree of the speaker's certainty of 
resllty/lrTealAty of the propositions thecharacter of this 
est imat ion  be ing ,  as  a mat ter  o f  fac t ,  cont inuous  but  not  
discrete. On the one end of the scale of modallty there is 
the meaning of reallty/irr~alityj on the other - that of un- 
certain~7~ in between them there are various estimations of 
the de~ee of the speaker's certainty in relatlon to reality/ 
/irTeality. (The typical representatlves of modal meanln~s ? 
are moods, modal verbs, parenthetic modal words.) 
d. Dalotlc oomDonen~ correlates the content of an utter- 
ance with  coord inates  o f  the  speech  act .  Owing to  the  anthro -  
pc- and egocentrlem of the natural language the orientation 
of an utterance towards the speaker As perceived as the speech 
norm. (The re~Is r  means for expressing deictlc meanings are 
the categories of person and tense, formulas of politeness, 
some categories of localization.) 
e. P~cka~ln~ component correlates each utterance as a 
part of the discourse with the whole of the discourse. The 
importance of this component is determined by the basically 
non-linear character of the meaning and bY the compositional 
problems connected wlth this. The non-linear meaning can be 
"stretched" Into s linear string by s great variety of ways, 
- 155  - 
J 
but the arb i t ra r iness  of such a choice Is extreemly problem- 
a t i c .  The packaglnE component must not  only cur rent ly  coord in -  
ate the generated message with the prev ious text ,  but s imul -  
taneous ly  as I f  cont ro l  the text  from the poInt  o f  view of 
the hearer?s  comfort in  I t s  percept ion .  This component par -  
t la l l y  eo inc ldes  with the so ca l led  ac tua l  d iv i s ion  of the 
sentence .  (The un i ts  of th i s  component ere theme-theme, 
o ld -new in fo rmat ion ,  cont ras t lveness ,  top ic ,  empathy, var ious  
k inds of anaphor lc  express ions ,  e tc .  ) 
f .  Lo~Igal component cor re la tes ,  or  coord inates ,  the 
text  with the speaker ' s  knowledge of  the world, prov ides  the 
t rans i t ion  from the old to the new knowledge, and I t  I s  
respons ib le  fo r  the meaningfu lness  of the text .  (The essent -  
Ia l  e lements of th i s  component are presuppos i t ions  and the 
asser t ive  par t  of an u t te rance . )  
g. EmQt~ve component cor re la tes  the content  with the 
persona l i ty  of the speaker ,  with h i s  wishes,  eva luat ions ,  h i s  
psychophyulca l  cond i t ion .  ( I t  I s  usua l ly ,  though not  alws.Ts, 
expressed by prosody. )  
h. l l l ocut lonary  component cor re la tes  the u t te rance  wl tk  
the speaker ' s  speech in tent ions ;  v i z .  to Inform the hearer ,  
to ln f luenee  h is  behavlour  and act ions ,  to s t imu la te  h i s  
emot iona l ,  verba l  or in te l lec tua l  react ion ,  e tc .  - @hat Is  
genera l ly  connected with the not ion  of l l l ocut lonery  fo rce .  
What can be  deduced from th is  apparent ly  Incomplete 
? numera t Ion? 
1. I t  seems that  the inab i l i ty  of natura l  languages to 
express ,  autonomously and on the sur face ,  var ious  components 
of  semantic representat ion  and the resu l t ing  necess i ty  to 
amalgamate them, become obvious.  I t  i s  what happens in  the 
funct ion ing  of a l l  natura l  languages,  a l though the degree of 
the autonomy of th i s  o r  that  component can vary .  The fac t  
that  components of semantic  representat ion  are not g iven  
- 156 .  
d i rec t ly  ?n the text~ exp la ins  why some of them have been 
d iscovered comparat ive ly  la te .  
2. This .extended in terpretat ion  of the meanAng of the 
text~ which leads to inc lud ing  In  the s t ruc ture  of semantic 
~epresentstAon the components enumerated above, proceeds 
f~om s preeumptAon that  At As In~ong to regsr~ the meaning of 
the text  as g iven to the speaker. ?n advance to be 'on l7  
verba l ly  expressed.  In  the process of  a thought-speech act  
the meaning A8 being c res ted ,  or formed, that  Is  fo~ the 
f~not?on?ng model of language the tezl J_nal components ar~ 
not  meaning and text ,  but  thought and (vocal) speech.  Unless 
th i s  po in t  of  view becomes axAomatAc, many fundamental  
cont rad ic t ions  ,of l lngu la tAc  theory as wel l  as obstac les  to 
8o lv ln~ a nuaber  of app l ied  problems, cannot be overcome. 
- 157 - 
