COLEVG 82, J. Horeckf/ (ed.) 
North-Holland Publishing Company 
? Academia, 1982 
FRAME BASED RECOGNIT ION OF THEME CONTINUITY 
James T. Cr itz 
Hewlet  t -Packard Company 
Palo Altow Cal i forn ia  
U.S .A 
The paper descr ibes a system which determines 
cont inu i ty  and shifts in Engl ish texts on the basis 
of sentent ia l  themes. The theme object  w i th in  the 
thematic  component  of a sentence is determined and 
a search is made to assoc iate  it with a frame 
shared with the previous theme or themes. If the 
theme object  cannot be assoc iated d i rect ly  with one 
of these frames, interpret ive rules are ~ppl ied to 
do so indirect ly  through one of the frames normal ly 
assoc iated with the object  but not yet with thetext .  
INTRODUCTION 
This paper descr ibes a system which interprets the semant ic  theme of 
a text as a mapping of the semant ic  network of states assoc iated in 
the text with one or more theme objects onto an establ ished semant ic  
frame. Theme objects are determined on the basis of the syntact ic  
d is t inct ion  of thematic  and rhematic  (topic - Comment) components  of 
a sentence. The concept of "a frame" as  used here is that of a 
semant ic  representat ion  of exper ience~ whose funct ional  roles are 
related, rather than of a psycholog ica l  representat ion,  where 
phys ica l  propert ies  of an object  which do not bear any funct ional  
re levance to the def in i t ion  of the object  and its re lat ionship  to 
other  components  of the frame are included. 
The prob lem of recogniz ing ccnt inu i ty  and shifts in text analys is  is 
genera l ly  def ined in terms of ident i fy ing the text's themes. It is 
apparent  from examples l ike (i - 2) that a system which tries to 
d iscover  cont inui ty  on the sole basis of searching for antecedent  
references for a pronoun or synonym is inadequate where a text is 
developed through the techniques of e laborat ion,  analogy, compar ison 
and other  styles involv ing impl ied dependency. 
(i) 
(2) 
The store was crowded. The market ing campaign had been a 
Success .  
Harold not i f ied hfs lawyer. A storm was brewing. 
In order to identi fy the implied theme object  in text samples such 
as these, the system descr ibed in this paper makes use of the 
d is t inct ion  ~f the syntact ic  categor ies  "theme" and "rheme" 
developed by the Prague School  of L inguist ics.  Once it has 
determined the sentent ia l  theme it further relates this th~me to a 
71 
72 J.T. CRITZ 
frame which can be reasonably  assoc iated with it in the g iven 
context  and l inks the frame with those extabl ished in the preceding 
text. The objects wh ich  are the pr imary referents  of a sentent ia l  
theme are ass igned the role of being major  nodes through which one 
frame is l inked d i rect ly  or, where more abstract  assoc iat ions  can be 
inferred, indirect ly with others re levant  to the cont inu i ty  of the 
text. The concept  of "frame" is that descr ibed in M. Minsky 
(1977). 
In the fo l lowing sect ions the concepts of "theme" and "frame" are 
def ined more exp l ic i t ly  and the manner  in which the system relates 
them to each other  is described. Whi le  the system is des igned to 
operate on Engl ish text, compar isons wi l l  be made to Czech. 
THEMES 
Wi th in  the grammat ica l  theory of the Prague School  of L inguist ics  a 
sentence is composed of a min imum of two major  const i tuents  - a 
"theme" ("topic") and a "rheme" ("comment").  (A sentence may also 
conta in  components which funct ion as a t rans i t ion between these two, 
but such components  wi l l  not be d iscussed here.) The theme - rheme 
d iv is ion  of a sentence typical ly  conforms, in non-contrast ive 
environments,  to the NP subject  and VP major  const i tuents  of a 
sentence, with the theme being the f i rst  of these to appear  in the 
surface word order  of the sentence. Because of its more restr ic t ive 
word order, the theme of a sentence in Engl ish  is normal ly  its 
subject.  In Czech, however,  a sentent ia l  subject  may more eas i ly  
appear  in the latter  part  of a sentence. 
In its at tempt  to assoc iate  the theme of a sentence with a frame, 
our system reduces the object  of its operat ion  to a "theme object",  
def in ing this for Engl ish as the referent  of the h ighest  noun wi th in  
the theme const i tuent :  normally,  the subject  head noun. Wi th in  VPs 
funct ion ing in Engl ish  sentences as theme the theme object  would be 
the d i rect  object 's  head noun, or, g iven other  contrast ive stress, 
the head noun of the phrase conta in ing the h ighest  peak of 
intonat ion were the sentence spoken. 
It is important  to note that the theoret ica l  basis for label l ing a 
sentence const i tuent  as theme does not necessar i ly  mean that the 
theme object  has been prev ious ly  ment ioned in the text. The 
immediate int roduct ion of new theme objects in Engl ish is obvious 
f rom the ex istence of non-def in i te  themes in examples l ike (3). 
(3) The old hotel  burned down last year. A new restaurant  
is to take its place. 
However,  unless some re lat ion can be found between contextua l ly  new 
themes and the exist ing context,  sentences with non-def in i te  themes 
would  be e i ther  make a text d iscont inuous or would mainta in  their  
cont inu i ty  only indirect ly  through the re lat ion  of the theme to 
another  noun in the same sentence which is anaphoric.  In e i ther  
case there would be l i t t le  just i f i cat ion  for ass ign ing a themat ic  
funct ion to non-def in i te  nouns, and the general  de f in i t ion  of theme 
proposed by the Prague School  would have to be great ly  a l tered or 
dropped. 
FRAME BASED RECOGNITION OF THEME CONTINUITY 73 
The assoc ia t ion  o f  themes w i th  frames provides cont inu i ty  wi thout  
the requirement for expl ic i t  previous mention. The c la im made in 
assoc iat ing themes and frames is that themes are not referent ia l ly  
simple: their meaning involves reference not only to some 
individual,  act, event, etc., but also reference to some structured 
set of these with which the noun referent  is associated. Cont inu i ty  
l ies in the existence of an assumed shared re lat ion hold ing between 
a theme and other  objects prev ious ly  mentioned. 
FRAMES 
A frame may be genera l ly  def ined as a l imited complex of objects, 
acts, events, and/or  states, whose assoc iat ion  is determined by 
convent ion or exper ience and is assumed and expected by a speaker  or 
author  to be known by his or her ~udience. S imple frames include: 
the assoc ia t ion  of the objects "the bathroom" ("koupelna"),  "the 
bedrooms" ("lo~nice"),  "the kitchen" ("kuchyn~"), "the roof" 
("st{echa"),  etc., with the frame "h)use", or the sequence "the 
morning" ("r~no" a "dopoledne"),  "noon" ("poledne"),  etc., as parts 
of the frame "day". Reference to one member of a frame suf f ices to 
make other  members of the frame avai lab le  as poss ib le  themes. For 
example,  ment ion  of "the k i tchen and bathroom" implies the frame 
"house", and this mention, if themes are assumed to be bound to 
frames, suf f ices to a l low the occurrence of "the house", "the 
garden" or other assoc iated object  as a theme in a later sentence. 
The pr imary character is t ics  of a frame, as def ined in our natural  
language system, and d is t ingu ish ing frames from other  re lat ional  
structures,  are that each member  of the frame must  be uniquely  
ident i f iab le  (This uniqueness a lso speci f ies the member 's  role in 
the frame.) and that the members share a common re lat ion or 
property which uniquely character izes  the frame to which they 
belong. Recogn i t ion  that a g iven object  is a unique member  of a 
frame is the at t r ibut ion  of the property of "def in i teness" to that 
object. A non-def in i te  theme is interpreted as a descr ip t ion  of a 
frame object, but the reference itself as definite.  
DETERMINING CONTINUITY 
Themes and frames are related to each other  through the fo l lowing 
process. The main components of the system include: 
- a parser  
- a lexicon, prov id ing not only the poss ib le  syntact ic  and 
semant ic  representat ions  of each lexical  item and 
cond i t ions  on their use, but also an index to the frames 
normal ly  assoc iated with the entry 
- a frame dict ionary,  stat ing the set types of the poss ib le  
members  for each frame and their  re lat ionsh ip  to each other  
w i th in  the frame 
- a set of logical  inference and interpret ive rules, which can 
be used to relate f rames in the const ruct ion  of a frame 
system represent ing changes in the cont inu i ty  and development  
of a text 
- a l ist  of frames current ly  act ivated by theme reference, 
in terpretat ion  or inference 
74 \]J.T. CRITZ 
During the parse of a sentence the head noun of the sentence is 
selected as the most likely candidate for being its theme and, 
provided that tests of the sentence and the onepreced ing  it do not 
indicate a contrastive environment requiring the selection of 
another noun as theme, declares it to be the theme. The frames 
indexed in the lexical entry for the theme noun are then searched 
and compared for identity with or inclusion within those frames 
currently active. Those frames most recently used and those which 
a~e associated with anaphoric noun phrases within the sentence are 
examined first. If the sentence being processed is the first 
sentence in the text or if a search of all active frames fails, the 
theme is associated with a "base" frame. The base frame for a text 
includes as its members the set types {AUTHOR}, {AUTHOR'S GOAL~, 
READER and other nodes which may be filled by objects or persons 
these as part of their immediate world. 
The frame system for the text is built of the relationships holding 
between all the activated frames and the base frame. 
The process is i l lustrated for (4). For reasons of space, the 
hierarchical relations which hold between members of each frame is 
not shown. An  AGENT frame is automatical ly assigned to persons 
mentioned in a text. The LOCATION, BUILDING and LOCK frames in (4) 
are interpreted. 
(4) John turned the key. The door still would not move. 
BASE { . . .  \[John\] \[author\] \[reader\] ...~ 
AGENT (... \[John\] \[LOCATION > BUILDING\] \[GOAL\] 
BUILDING {... \[door\] ..-7 
LOCK (... \[key\] \[bolt\] ...~ 
DOOR (... \[lock\] \[handle\] ...) 
} 
COMPARING ENGLISH AND CZECH TEXTS 
Comparing the processing of English and Czech texts, it is important 
to note that while most frames can be expected to be the same for 
both languages, frame membership and relations between frame members 
which are dependent on cultural, political, l inguistic and similar 
differences will cause frames to differ at least at the lower node 
levels. The "day" frame menti6ned earlier, in which English 
"morning" is paralleled by "r~no" and "dopoledne" in Czech, is one 
example. 
An even more signif icant difference is found in the effect of 
varying restrictions on word order in the two languages. Czech 
seems to indicate shifts to new frames by moving subject nouns which 
would b e thematic in the English equivalent of the sentence to the end 
of the sentence. Where the same frame or same samll set of frames 
can be associated with consequetive subjects in the text, the 
subject is thematic. An example of this can be seen in (5), 
where "cesta" ("trip") is associated with the general frame of a 
person's daily life and with Karel's in particular. In (6), 
FRAME BASED RECOGNITION OF THEME CONTINUITY 75 
however, where a shift is made from an AGENT frame to introduce an 
object which is not, on the basis of previous-themes, expected, 
although an association could be found, Czech makes the subject 
thematic, and uses as its theme an object more easily associated 
with existing frames. English may optionally keep "envelope" as the 
theme of its equivalent for (6) and allows interpretive rules to 
determine the frame it is associated with. 
(5) Karel se vcera prestehoval do nov~ho bytu. Cesta 
Karel himself yesterday moved to new apartment, trip 
do prace u{ bude krat{{. 
to work now will-be shorter. 
Karel moved to a new apartment yesterday. His trip 
to work now will be shorter. 
(6) Marie otev{ela dve{e. Na zemi le{ela velk~ obalka. 
Marie opened doors, on ground lay large envelope. 
Marie opened the door. I A large envelope lay on the ground.~ 
There was a large envelope laying \[ 
on the ground. J 
RLFERENCES 
\[i\] Critz, J., Definiteness and Knowledge Frames, Paper presented 
to the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, 
(December 1981). 
\[2\] Danes, F., Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective (Cesko- 
slovensko akademie red, Prague, 1974). 
\[3\] Hirst, G., Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution, American 
Journal of Computational Linguistics 7.2 (1981) 85-98. 
\[4\] Johnson-Laird, P. and Wason, P. (eds.), Thinking: readings 
in cognitive science (Cambridge University, New York, 1977) 
\[5\] Minsky, M., Frame System Theory, in: Johnson-Laird, P. and 
Wason, P. (eds.), Thinking: readings in cognitive science 
(Cambridge University, New York, 1977) 

