COL~G82, .r. Horec~ {ed.\] 
North-HoP.and PubficJ~g Company 
? Aca4enrla, 1982 
MACHINE TRANSLATION SYSTEMS AND COMPUTER DICTIONARIES 
IN THE INFORMATION SERVICE. WAYS OF THEIR 
DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION 
Ivan I. Oubine, Boris D. Tikhomirov 
The USSR Center for Translation of Scientific 
and Technical Literature and Documentation 
Moscow, USSR 
The paper outlines fields of application of 
machine translation systems and computer 
dictionaries in technical translation as well 
as possible ways of development and operation 
of computer dictionaries. Interaction between 
linguists and commercial machine translation 
system is described 
ON APPLICATION OF MACHINE TRANSLATION SYSTEMS AND COMPUTER 
DICTIONARIES 
Translation of scientific and technical l iterature is assuming these 
days growing importance in the information service in various branches 
of science and technology. The volume of translations done at the 
USSR Center for Translation has grown from 480 thousand pages in 1974 
up to 1440 thousand pages in 1980. The same trend iN evident in other 
translation bureaus of the couhtry. Traditional means of translation 
when the main tools of the translator trade are a type-writer and 
paper dictionaries do not permit anymore to cope with the avalanche 
information flow requiring translation. Machine translation systems 
(MT) and computer dictionaries (CD) are bound to become principal 
aids to technical translation. 
Solving one and the same problem MT systems and CD at the same time 
essentially differ in structure, aims and technological methods of 
their application in the information service. MT systems are intended 
for full translation of texts from one language into another and in 
principle are aimed at replacing a human translator with a computer 
working either in automatic mode or in the interactive mode with the 
human editor. Present day commercial MT Systems possess a number of 
distinctive features. Most important of them are the following: 
MT systems are bil ingual and assymetric (one-way translation), cover 
one subject field and have high speed of translation. It means that, 
as a rule, commercial MT systems are designed for translation of texts 
of a definite subject-field, from the source into the target language 
and they cannot be reversed or substituted with other languages 
without a great deal of additional l inguistic and programming work. 
Considerably surpassing the human translator in speed MT systems are 
substantially inferior to him in quality of translation, that is why 
machine translation in most cases requires post-editing. Taking into 
account these features of MT systems as well as the high cost of 
their development it is expedient to aim MT systems at translation 
of large volumes of one-subject-f ield standardized texts. But in 
practice a great part of technical translations do not meet these 
requirements. For example, the USSR Center for Translation does 
translations from 30 languages in 24 subject-fields~ and the volume 
of translations in different languages and subject-f ields varies 
from a dozen to dozens of thousands pages. Thus, languages and 
289~ 
290 I.I. OUBINE and B.D. TIKHOMIROV 
subject-f ields with small volumes of trarslations, texts of advahced 
complexity or of special importance drop out of the sphere of MT sys- 
tems employment. To develop MT systems for this purpose would be un- 
profitable. Nor will it be wise to use MT systems for translation of 
various kinds of word lists~ i.e. catalogues, invoices, lists of 
spare parts, etc. Suoh texts should be translated by CD or human 
translators with the help of CD. 
Contrary to MT systems eomputer dictionaries are designed for supply- 
ing a user with the target language equivalents and not for full 
translation of texts, and are essential ly aimed at a dialogue with 
a human translator to improve his output rather than replace him in 
the translat ion process. A technical translator spends half of his 
working time on dictionary look-up. If we relieve him of this time- 
consuming chore his productivity wil l  increase essentially. 
POSSIBLE WAYS OF CD DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION 
At present a number of computer dictionaries and terminological data 
banks are in  operation in different countries. Most important of 
them are: the computer dictionary of the Federal Language Service 
of FRG, terminological data bank EURODIC~JTOM of the European Commu- 
nity and TEAM terminology data bank of the Siemens AG. Computer dic- 
tionaries vary in structure, computer base, volume of information 
in the dictionary entry, purpose, subject-f ields and other features 
but at the same time they possess a number of common features which 
we consider fundamental for CD. Computer dictionaries are mostly 
multi l ingual, symmetric, dynamic and cover more than one subject- 
field. 
Taking into consideration wide range and specific character of its 
tasks the USSR Center for Translat ion is developing three MT systems 
(from English, German and French into Russian) and in cooperation 
with the Moscow State University - computer dictionary MULTILEX. It 
is designed as a mult i l ingual  (Russian~ English, German and French) 
and symmetric dict ionary (i.e. query and response are allowed in 
any of the included languages). Its software is oriented for the use 
within the framework of the ES computers ~ system in the following 
modes: 
- single or batch query and response via video display terminal; 
- single or batch query via video display ter~ninal~ from magnetic 
tape or cards , and response~in the form of a hard copy. 
The l inguistic form of a query is a very important feature of CD. 
The possibi l ity of making a query in any text form expands greatly 
the circle of CD potential users and ~le range of its applications. 
CD MULTILEX is designed for users with different language knowledge 
and can be used for processing standardized texts with ce?tain re- 
strictions in lexicon and syntax as well as texts without any re- 
strictions. In order to meet ~hese requirements CD MULTILEX provides 
for making queries in any text form for every language included . 
There are two basic approaches to solving the text-form-~query prob- 
lem: either to form a search file of word forms or a fi le of stems 
or morphs with morphological  analysis~ In order to achieve optimum 
performance of a CD the di lemma between a word-form dict ionary and 
a dictionary of stems should be solved with due regard to the gram- 
matical structure of the source language and the type of texts to 
be processed by CD. The stem dictiona1~y approach is more suitable 
for synthetic languages with high degree of inflexion (in o~r case~ 
it is Russian). The word'form dict ionaries would better suit 
analytical languages (in our ease~ it is English)? French and G~rman 
occupy, in this respeet~ an intermediate stage between Russian and 
THE COMPUTER IN THE TRANSLATION PROCESS 291 
English. 
In MULTILEX both approaches are used. For English, the word-form- 
file approach is used. It means that besides the dictionary forms of 
english entries (which may be uniterms, multiterms or collocations) 
all their word-forms, spelling variants and standard abbreviations 
with reference to dictionary forms are stored in the word-form file. 
Query defining is carried out by mapping the word'form realised in 
the text to the word-forms in th~ file. For Russian, the stem-file 
approach is used. Query defining in this case is done by segmentation 
of the requested word-form into its stem and inflexions. For French 
and German, we use a combined approach. The response in all the lan- 
guages  is given in the traditional dictionary form. 
CD potential is determined to a great extent by the type of informa- 
tion, its volume and composition of the CD entry.MULTILEX entry 
contains the following information: head word in the dictionary form; 
part-of-speech symbol; word-forms including spelling variants, 
abbreviations, or stem/stems; target language equivalents (T~); 
rel iabil ity index of TE; notations which help a user to choose the 
necessary TE of several registered in the entry; terminological nota- 
tions which specify the subject-field of the TE; definit ion of the 
head word; i l lustrative phrases; multiterms and collocations which 
include the head word. As MULTILEX will serve as a new terms bank, 
a special zone is forseen in its entry for the name of the author of 
a new term, source and date of registration in the bank. The follow- 
ing information is obligatory for all the entries: head-word, part- 
of-speech symbol, word forms or stems, subject-f ield notat ion ,  
target language equivalents and rel iabi l i ty index. 
As a rule, in a new field of science or technology a considerable 
time is required to form a terminology system and recognize, the 
necessity to issue bil ingual terminological dictionaries for this 
new subject-field. Meanwhile, l iterature on the subject is beeing 
translated from one language into another. This fact brings a touch 
of spontaneity to the process of forming target language terminology 
system. It leads to the growth of synonymy and polysemy which hampers 
communication between those working in the new field. The CD makers, 
as a rule, do not take the responsibi l i ty to standardize terminology. 
Notwifhstanding,this problem is not to be overlooked. Should the 
user trust CD, its every entry should be supplied with rel iabi l i ty 
index. Considering rigid time limits set for MULTILEX makers they 
should be provided with a rather simple procedure of determining the 
rel iabil ity index for any TE. Five degrees of rel iabi l ity have been 
chosen to suit the purpose. The highest rel iabil ity index is given 
to the TE which comply with the home and international standards. 
Next in line are the TE borrowed from reliable dictionaries. The TE 
rel iabi l ity index depends on the rel iabil ity of the source. The low- 
est reliabil ity index is given to TE which are not registered in any 
lexicographical source or any other written document. Reliabil ity of 
a TE source is determined separately for each case. One and the same 
lexicographical source may have different degrees of rel iabi l ity for 
different lexical strata borrowed from this source. The TE reliabi- 
lity index is not a fixed value and is subject to changes through 
MULTILEX operation. 
The users having different tasks and levels of language knowledge, 
different characteristics of the entry's structure are required. 
Thus, in traditional l ixicography a dictionary entry contains, 
besides TE, various information about the head word. As a rule, 
this information is redundant for the professional technical trans- 
lator who commands profound knowledge of the source language. On the 
other hand, the entry of a technical dictionary is not as rich and 
292 I.I. OUBINE and B.D. T~HOM~OV 
in most cases, contains practically no add.tional data besides TE. 
It is not sufficient for technical specialists whose knowledge of 
foreign languages is, as a rule, mediocre or poor. This dilemma 
between the level of foreign language eompetence of the user and his 
varied tasks, on the one hand, and the volume and type of data, on 
the other, cannot be solved in traditional lexicogralJgy because of 
the static nature of paper dictionaries. 
CD MULTILEX combines the qualities of general vocabulary and techni- 
cal dictionaries and solves the above mentioned dilemma by providing 
the user, in its f irst stage of development, with the following four 
variants of response:i) complete entry with the data registered in 
all zones; 2) entry without col location zone; 3) entry without col- 
locations and i l lustrative phrase~s (i.e. only TE and their notations) 
4) one TE only. For entries with more than one TE,the first one is 
given. We intend to enlarge potential versions of response volume 
with response variants by subject-f ield notations~ TE rel iabi l i ty 
index, definitions, etc. 
Selection of vocabulary units to a dictionary, CD included, largely 
depends on its purposes and potential users. CD MULTILEX is designed 
for off-staff and staff translators and editors, as well as technical 
specialists. Research shows that the main diff icult ies for profes- 
sional translators and editors occur when they are confronted with 
new, not yet registered in traditional dictionaries uniterms and 
multiterms, market names of new products, acronyms and abbreviations. 
Technical specialists consult dictionaries for general vocabulary 
and general scientif ic terms as well. Of particular dif f iculty for 
them is translation of verbs and verbal collocations. 
The first version of CD MULTILEX (English-Russian and Russian-Engl ish 
CD on eomputer and data processing) is now in operation at the USSR 
Center for Translat ion with about 35,000 entries for each language. 
Mult iterms and collocations constitute about 80% of MULTILEX body. 
The response speed via video display terminal is less thin 1 sec. for 
a single query, for batch processing with alphabetized queries in the 
form of a hard copy - about 2 min. for a 100 question batch. 
MULT ILEX has proved to be an efficient translation aid. But, in our 
view, the speeding up of technical translation process should be 
sought in optimum combination of MT systems and computer dictionaries. 
INTERACTION BETWEEN LINGUISTS AND MT SYSTEM IN THE PROCESS OF 
COMMERCIAL OPERATION 
MT systems designed for commercial use require, as a rule, constant 
upgrading of their l inguistic components. This is due to the emergence 
of new terms, expansion of subject-f ields and error-statist ic 
analysis. Consequently production team linguists should refine and 
perfect the system not only during its development, but in the process 
of operation as well. 
As is known, the development of commercial machine translation (CMT) 
systems differs considerably from that of experimental machine trans- 
lation (EMT) systems. The difference is conditioned by the following 
considerations: 
- in EMT restrict ions may be imposed on the phrase structure (e.g. 
syntactic similarity of source an~ target phrases may be demanded), 
whereas CMT allows no such restrictions; 
- CMT systems handle l inguistic data (dictionaries, tables, etc.) 
considerably larger in volume than that of EMT systems; 
CMT software package must ensure maximum language conversion 
rate because translation cost depends to a great extent on the time 
consumed; 
THE COMPUTER IN THE TRANSLATION PROCESS 293 
- in CMT systems amendment and correction of routines and linguist- 
ic components is carried out in the process of commercial operation; 
- target texts produced by CMT systems have to be post-edited to 
achieve the quality required by the customer; 
- the form of a hard-copy printout in CMT (page structure, titles, 
tables, etc.) must not differ considerably from the traditional one; 
- EMT systems usually handle a thoroughly pre-edited text, while 
in CMT a good deal of misprints occur while feeding texts into the 
computer~ 
It is evident that CMT systems require a m~e extensive and thorough- 
ly designed software with due eons iderat io~for  economic and techno- 
logical aspects of the problem. A unified software package has been 
developed in the USSR Center for Translation for the MT systems - 
AMPAR (English into Russian) and NERPA (German into Russian) - design- 
ed for commercial use. Considerable attention has been given to 
providing production team linguists with convenient means for develop- 
ing and upgrading the system. 
Since inter- and post-editing are used in the systems to improve the 
quality of translation, the process is ~ iv ided  into several stages: 
initial processing, inter-editing~ language conversion, post-editing~ 
and target text printout. Stages in their turn, are split into steps 
comprising the most essential algorithms of the system. Steps that 
are expected to undergo frequent alterations, are composed of step 
subroutines, each realizing ~ some specific parsing or synthesis pro- 
cedure. Step subroutines consist of operators performing definite 
linguistic functions. A special programming language for linguistic 
procedures has been devfsed in order to give linguists a means of 
maximum direct part ioipatio~ in development and improvement of the 
MT sys tems.  
Information files of the MT systems include dictionaries, tables, 
source and target texts, and a corpus of information cells where 
essential information about words or groups of words is stored. 
Subroutines compiled by production team linguists are fed into the 
computer and converted into a form convenient for futher use. In the 
process of translation they are called up from disk storage into the 
MOS memory and executed by the interpretation program. The assembly 
language has been used by programming engineers to develop programs 
not subject tO alterations (text feed-in, dictionary look-up, monitor- 
ing~ etc.) with the aim of minimizing operation time. 
The modular structure of the software package, where an algorithm is 
divided into several procedures each beeing executed by a separate 
program module, considerably facil itates program compiling. Informa- 
tion files (subject dictionaries, tables) are also characterized by 
modular structure. Due to relative independence of modules, the soft- 
ware package is flexible enough and can be easily revised by introduc- 
ing new modules, correcting or deleting the existing ones or reorder- 
ing the sequence of their operation; that is, the software makes it 
possible to generate different versions of the MT system during both 
running-in and commercial operation. 
The basic operation modes of the system are:file maintenance, monitor- 
ing and work. File maintenance mode serves to create, amend, correct, 
and print files used in processing source language texts. File main- 
tenance software package developed for this purpose acts autonomously 
of the text processing programs. The work mode implies mass transla- 
tion of texts by the operational version of the system in which the 
sequence of steps is fixed and work data files are used. The choice 
of subject-field dictionaries is determined by the control informa- 
tion accompanying each text. In addition to a target language text, 
some intermediate information is printed out in the work mode 
294 I.l. OUBINE and I* ,. TIKHOMIROV 
concerning errors, missing words, ~trad~ctory situations, etc. 
In some cases the intermediate inf, or:~ion is sufficient to determine 
the nature of the errors. In other CasJs,linguists can obtain 
additional information by rerunnin~ the defective fragments in the 
monitoring mode. While the same operational version of the system 
as for the work mode is used, a highly detailed selective printout 
is obtained by typing in special instructions. At request the follow- 
ing data can be printed out: the input text with a reference grid 
helping to select required fragments; the corpus of information cells 
accompanied by the corresponding so1~rce language and target language 
words or collocations (the latter after translation); information on 
subroutine operators and their sequ%nce of work; alterations produced 
by subroutine operators into the inlormation cells; entries selected 
from the source dictionary t9 match text wQrd-forms; target diction- 
ary entries selected for synthesis; ~ource and target language 
sentence pairs. The nature and volume of printed information is 
determined by the linguist depending on the problem facing him. 
The MT systems have two kinds of files: operational and upgrading. 
At the initial stage upgrading files are identical to the operation 
ones. Then, on the basis of error analysis, linguists correct and 
amend the upgrading files. As a sufficient number of alterations is 
introduced into the upgrading files, a duplicate version of the sys- 
tem is generated and all amendments are checked and tested in the 
monitoring mode. After a thorough checking the upgraded files re- 
place the old ones in the operational version of the system. The 
information in the operational files is rearranged so as to avoid 
degradation of the processing rate. 
As a result, production team linguists have the following opportuni- 
ties: to take part directly in developing and perfecting program 
modules; to obtain information on missing dictionary entries and 
typical errors; to promptly determine the nature of error and locate 
it; to produce diverse versions of the system by introducing new and 
altering the existing modules and their sequence without interfering 
with commercial operation of the system; to check the applicabil ity 
of newly produced version for singling out the most efficient one 
to be input as the operational version; to monitor the state of 
l inguistic data and program modules and correct them if necessary; 
to intervene in the process of translation at different stages in 
order to introduce corrections into the text being processed. 
Linguists interact with operational and service programs and define 
operation modes with the help of specific control language instruct- 
ions. Instructions are typed in before or during the performance. 
Thus, the described software package provides production team 
linguists with the means to develop and adjust step routines, to 
compile and upgrade linguistic data files, and to monitor the MT 
system without programmers' assistance. 
