COLING 82, J. Horeck~ (ed. )
North.Holland Publishing Company 
? Academia, 1982 
A MULTILAYERED APPROACH 
TO THE HANDLING OF WORD FORMATION 
Wol fgang Hoeppner 
Research Unit for Information Science and Artificial Intelligence 
University of Hamburg, Germanisches Semrnar 
Mi ttelweg 179 
D-2000 Hamburg 13 
Fed. Rep. of Germany 
The treatment of word formations has until recently been 
a neglected topic in natural language AI research. This 
paper proposes a multilayered approach to word formation 
which treats derivatives and compounds on several differ- 
ent levels of processing within a natural language dia- 
logue system. Analysis and generation strategies being 
developed for the dialogue system HAM-ANS are described. 
Identification of word formations, semantic interpretation, 
and evaluation in the context of a dialogue are the main 
? levels of analysis on which the system successively at- 
tempts to infer the implicit relations between word forma- 
tion components. Generation of word formations is viewed 
as a process comparable to the generation of elliptical 
utterances. 
I NTROI)UCT I ON 
Any linguistic theory has to account for word formation as a way of expressing 
complex relations, facts or situations, and nearly every theoretical approach con- 
tains at least suggestions as to how to handle word formation. Not until recently 
has word formation become a topic in natural language processing within the frame- 
work of artificial intelligence (cf. FININ 1980, McDONALD 1981). 
It is argued here that similar attention should be paid to word formation as has 
already been paid, for example, to sentence structure. This is justified not only 
because such phenomena as derivatives and compounds obviously do occur in natural 
language, but rather because natural language AI systems to a \]arge extent already 
contain the sort of knowledge needed to understand word formation, and therefore 
seem to be well suited for investigations in this field (cf. SAMLOWSKI 1975). 
Having been discarded in early days of AI research as too tedious and expensive a 
task (CERCONE 1974) the analysis of word formation, especially compounding, seems 
to be a major way to increase linguistic coverage and to reduce vocabulary errors, 
one of the most frequent sorts of errors in natural language systems (see 
? THOMPSON 1980) 
Generally speaking, the trouble with word formation is that in contrast to sen- 
tence structure the relations between constituents are not overtly marked in 
word formations. In addition, there are seldom explicit clues indicating whether 
a given word is lexicalized or analyzable, or how to interpret the latter ones. 
Furthermore, derived and compound words incorporate ambiguities on several differ- 
ent linguistic and cognitive levels. Therefore, it is a challenging task for 
natural language AI research to study how a system can identify, understand, and 
make use of word formation. 
133 
134 W. HOEPPNER 
ANALYSIS OF WORD FORMATION IN HAM-ANS 
The approach to the handling of word formation described in this paper is part of 
the development of the natural language system HAM-ANS (Hamburg Application-Orien- 
ted Natural Language System). HAM-ANS, which is based once  earl ier system HAM-RPM 
(see--v. HAHN et al 19~0) provides natural language access to other software sys- 
tems. "While a natural language interface to a large relational data-base system 
dealing with fishery data is currently being designed, the other two major appli- 
cation areas of HAM-ANS - a hotel-reservation system and a motion analysis system 
dealing with a street crossing (see JAMESON eta \ ] .  \]980, MARBURGER eta \ ] .  198\]) - 
are studied and further developed in an implemented version which covers the com- 
plete natura\] language dialogue. Analysis and generation of word formation has 
been integrated into the system in the context of these two domains of discourse 
and the examples given b~low are taken from dialogues about these domains. 
The main idea in our approach is that derivatives and compounds cannot be treated 
appropriately in a separable component whose output is a semantic interpretation 
(FININ \]980) or a paraphrase (BORGIDA 1975, McDONALD/HAYES-ROTH 1978). Instead, 
the question of how, or even whether, a word formation is to be analyzed should be 
decidable on different levels of processing covering the meaning of word consti- 
tuents, their interpretation in the context of utterances, and their interpreta- 
tion in situational context. 
It is quite a tradition in theoretical linguistics to discriminate between com- 
pounding and derivation as the two basic means of word formation. It is not our 
concern here to add new arguments in favour of or against such a simple distinc- 
tion; rather, we use it to delimit the broad field of word formation and to indi- 
cate the linguistic data our approach is designed to capture. Leaving aside the 
differentiation between Iexlcalized and analyzable words for the moment the over- 
all research objective is to handle those words which can be first segmented into 
semantically meaningful units and then interpreted by making use of knowledge 
sources and the inferential capacity of a natural language AI system. 
A common characterization of derived words is that they are formed by combining 
a free morphemic part with a bound one. The order of these morphemic parts yields 
the discrimination between prefixation and suffixation on purely structural 
grounds. There is, however, also a semantic difference between two types of deri- 
vation: It appears to be rather difficult to determine the meanings of prefixes 
and their semantic relation to the free morphemic part of the word in a general 
way. We will therefore exclude prefixes from our treatment of word formation with- 
in HAM-ANS for the time being and concentrate on derivation by means of suffixes 
and on composition. 
IDENTIFICATION OF DERIVATIVES AND COMPOUNDS 
In both English and German derivatives are written as one word delimited by blanks 
or punctuation marks. Compound words, in these languages are represented different- 
ly. A German compound is written as one string of letters, the segmental units of 
an English one are clearly indicated by a blank or a hyphen. This orthographic 
difference incorporates a difference in the problems of how to identify compounds 
in both languages. The ambiguity between English compounds and syntactic construc- 
tions, attribution in 'woman doctor', has to be handled within the syntactic anal- 
ysis (cf. MARCUS 1980) and does not occur in German because of its graphemlc rep- 
resentation of compounds. On the other hand a system analyzing German compounds 
has to identify the meaningful segments as a f i r s t  subtask; several approaches in 
the area of computational lingustics have dealt with the problem of ide~.~ifying 
segments in isolated compounds (cf. v.HAHN, FISCHER 1975, SCHOTT \]978). Th~ sys- 
tems rely heavily on graphemic and morphemic rules, the latter using addit ion~ 
lexical information. Characteristically the analysis of isolated compounds wil~ 'at 
best produce more than one segmentation, as e.g. for the word STAUBECKEN which 
MULTILAYERED APPROACH TO WORD FORMATION 135 
should be segmented in either STAU-BECKEN (reservoir) or in STAUB-ECKEN (dusty cor- 
ners), but the determination of the intended meaning lies beyond the scope of these 
approaches. 
In the system HAM-ANS the starting point of word-formation analysis is contained 
in the lexical analysis component, its main task being the reduction of inflected 
word forms and providing lexical information for the subsequent syntactic analy- 
sis. Whenever a word is not contained in the lexicon, the system removes possible 
inflectional suffixes before trying to recognize it as a derivative or a compound. 
Only if this attempt fails will the user be asked for information about the word. 
Employing the contents of the system's lexicon is certainly a simple way ~o define 
lexicalized formations. This sharp distinction between lexicalized and analyzable 
words, as used in the current implementation, does not do full justice to dlbserva- 
ble degrees of lexicalization; therefore it will yield to an improved conception. 
The segmentation of words not contained in the lexicon makes use of a table of 
derivative suffixes, a set of graphemic restrictions and the definitions of basic 
lexical items stored in the lexicon. Graphemic restrictions incorporate rules for 
the reduction of vowel mutation often cooccurring with suffixation and for the de- 
tection of juncture morphemes. 
In a first step, derivative suffixes are recognized by comparing final segments of 
the word under inspection with the entries of the suffix table. The analysis of 
derivatives in HAM-ANS is to a large extent based on work done for different pur- 
poses in the area of computational linguistics (HOEPPNER 1980), major deviations 
being the extensive use of a lexicon and a smaller selection of productive suf- 
fixes. Apart from the literal form of the suffixes the entries of the table contain 
information about gender (for nominal suffixes), part of speech of the derivative 
and the basic form being derived and expressions of the system's semantic repre- 
sentation language SURF, which later on is integrated into the semantic representa- 
tion of the whole word. The lexicon serves as a device for ascertaining that the 
remaining part is a lexical unit known or accessible to the system. 
Having ident i f ied  a der ivat ive  su f f ix  and thus determined the word to be a der iva -  
t i ve ,  the remaining par t ,  however, can recurs ive ly  turn  out  to be an ana lyzab le  
fo rmat ion ,  say a compound. So a second step ( in  the processing o f  a nonder ived 
word the f i r s t  step) is the attempt to sp l i t  the word in to  two components both of  
which have to be u l t imate ly  t rans formable  in to  canonical  forms, fo r  example by re- 
moving vowel mutat ion or  ana lyz ing  a der ivated  part  in the way descr ibed above. 
Search in the lex icon  is performed by const ruct ing  a hypothet ica l  f i r s t  const i tuent  
and look ing fo r  the most s imi la r  lex icon  ent ry .  This y ie lds  the second const i tuent  
as the remainder 'which by consu l t ing  the lex icon  leads to a rev is ion  of  the in i -  
t ia l  hypothet ica l  assumption or  conf i rms i t .  
In principle these two steps in identifying the structure of compounds and deriva- 
tives should interact recursively to allow for the handling of multiple compounding 
and derivation (for restrictions on multiple derivation see HOEPPNER 1980). In HAM- 
ANS the analytical capacity at the moment is restricted to compounds with two parts 
and to singular derivation. This limitation is not so much determined by the iden- 
tification process but rather by the state of elaboration of those processes which 
relate and integrate the semantic interpretation of a word formation into the 
knowledge already available to the system. 
After the system has successfully segmented an initially unknown word, the result 
of the identification is a structure containing the identified parts together with 
those grammatical features which in the course of further processing will guide the 
construction of a semantic interpretation and which provide grammatical information 
for the whole word. To illustrate this resulting \]exical structure, an example for 
the word 'STRASSENFEGER' (street cleaner) is given in Fig. I, indicating also the 
origin of the associated grammatical features (the features and their values are 
given here in English). 
136 W. HOEPPNER 
<constituent> <grammatical features> <knowledge sources> 
STRASSE part of speech: NOUN~...~_~__ ~ 
~-- - -~. .  -~ 
N JUNCTURE ~ ~ 
FEG part of speech: V E R B ~  
ER DERIVATIVE SUFFIX-~..~ 
gender: masculine~ ~ ~  
part of speech: noun~ 
basic form: verb 
Figure 1: Lexical representation of STRASSENFEGER 
SEMANTIC INTERPRETATION OF DERIVATIVES AND COMPOUNDS 
So that the system needn't analyze an unknown word each ti;,,e i t  occurs in an utter- 
ance, the information gathered so far could be stored in lexical memory, as is done 
with explicit information given by the user about unanalyzable words. The goal of 
word-formation analysis, however, is not completed with the segmentation of words 
and the assignment of features to their parts. A more important step is to relate 
structural knowledge about derivatives and compounds to conceptual knowledge and to 
transform lexical structures into semantic structures. The logic-oriented represen- 
tation language SURF (see JAMESON et al 1980) is the device in HAM-ANS which ex- 
presses semantic relations between parts of utterances and likewise between lexic- 
ally analyzed words. An interpretation process has accordingly been implemented 
which maps lexical representations of analyzed words onto expressions of SURF hav- 
ing the same type as that constructed by the parser for simple words of the same 
class. For example, a compound noun is represented by a 'description' in the same 
way as a simple noun in a noun phrase would leave the parser. The only difference 
is that the representation of a compound contains explicit relations between its 
constituents. An example interpretation of the German compound STUHLBEIN (chair 
leg) is given in fig. 2, the letter T in the last line standing for the whole-part 
relation in the system's conceptual semantic network. 
(d-o: AND 
(lambda: xl (af-a: ISA xl BEIN)) 
(d-o: AND 
(lambda: x2 (af-a: ISA x2 STUHL)) 
(lambda: x3 (af-a: T x2 xl)))) 
Figure 2: Semantic interpretation of STUHLBEIN 
The representation of the simple noun BEIN (leg) would correspond to the first 
argument of the outermost conjunction, which is likewise a 'description'. 
Let's now take a closer look ~t the way the transformation of a lexical representa- 
tion into a SURF representation is achieved. As mentioned above the table of deriv- 
ative suffixes includes one or more SURF~expressions for each suffix. The expression 
provided for the suffix -ER, in STRASSENFEGER, together with a verb stem leads to 
a case-frame instantiation with the agent being a male person and an objective case 
to be filled either by a genitive attribute or a compound constituent as in this 
example. 
Compounds require a more interesting transformation process to discover relations 
between their parts. Analyzing the lexical representation, different inference 
strategies are selected depending on the parts of speech of the constituents. For 
instance, a compound consisting of two adjectives activates processes trying to 
establish a coordination of the two concepts (e.g. DUNKELBRAUN (dark brown)). The 
transformation of nominal compounds applies the system's inferential capacity to 
detect possible links between the two concepts in the conceptual semantic network. 
In addition to the part-of relation the following relatlons are inspected and used 
MULTILAYERED APPROACH TO WORD FORMATION 137 
fo r  the semantic representat ion  in SURF: 
- phys ica l  ob jec t  and i t s  mater ia l ,  e .g .  HOLZTISCH (wooden tab le )  
- proper ty  o f  an ob jec t ,  e .g .  HAARFARBE (co lour  of  ha i r )  
- phys ica l  ob jec t  in i t s  p re fer red  locat ion ,  e .g .  COUCHTISCH (couch tab le )  
- combination o f  phys ica l  ob jec ts ,  e .g .  RADIOWECKER (c lock  rad io ) .  
F ina l ly ,  compounds w i th  a verbal  element are transformed by t ry ing  to f i t  the re- 
maining const i tuents  in to  the s lo ts  o f  the verb 's  case frame. The example STRASSEN- 
FEGER is represented as the ins tant ia ted  case frame o f  FEGEN ( to  sweep) w i th  the 
noun STRASSE (s t reet )  f i l l i ng  the ob jec t ive  s lo t .  
At th i s  stage the lex ica l  representat ion  and the semantic in terpretat ion  of  a com- 
pound or  a der ivat ive  are stored in the system's \ ]ex ica \ ]  memory fo r  several  reasons: 
- to e l iminate  the need fo r  repet i t ion  o f  the whole ana lys i s  each time the 
word occurs,  
- to form the basis fo r  ana logy-dr iven  reso}ut ion  of  word fo rmat ions ,  
- to enable the system to use understandable words wh i le  generat ing  ut ter -  
ances from semantic representat ions  (see below).  
An example o f  a semantic in terpretat ion  which is s t i l l  ambiguous at  th i s  process ing 
stage is the one fo r  BILDERRAHMEN (p ic ture  frame),  which besides a semantic repre-  
sentat ion  express ing a who le -par t  re la t ion  would, by reference to the case frame o f  
the German verb RAHMEN ( to  f rame),  be in terpreted  as an ob jec t -verb  nemina l i za t ion  
(the framing o f  p ic tures ) .  Once the appropr ia te  semantic in teroretat ions  have been 
in fer red ,  processing cont inues w i th  the pars ing of  the ent i re  input u t terance .  The 
ATN grammar o f  HAM-ANS t reats  compounds and der ivat ives  in the same way as o ther  
words of  the same class except that  they are more f requent ly  ambiguous, so that  the 
parser more o f ten  has to use knowledge of  case frame res t r i c t ions  or a t t r ibut ion  
congruency to se lec t  an appropr ia te  readin 9. 
EVALUATION OF WORD FORMATION IN D IALOGUE CONTEXT 
Trying to evaluate entire utterances is the ultimate processing phase for accepting, 
reinterpreting or rejecting interpretations of word formations in HAM-ANS. Suppose 
the client in the hotel-reservation situation already knows about a desk in the 
room being offered and asks whether the desk chair is a comfortable one. Having 
interpreted the compound SCHREIBTISCHSTUHL (desk chair) as a chair which is concep- 
tually located to a desk, the system would try to identify a referent with this 
property. According to the system's intentions (cf. JAMESON/WAHLSTER 1982) it might 
reject the existentially presupposed interpretation of 'desk chair', or it might 
find an appropriate referent and accept the interpretation. A third possibility, 
which is particular plausible in this communicative setting, is to take any chair 
in the neighbourhood of the desk and set it up as the object referred to. A similar 
case is the relaxation of one part of an additive compound, e.g. to agree to an 
object's property stated as 'dark brown', even if only 'brown' is a proper attribute 
according to the system's extensional knowledge and no contrary information relating 
to the obiect's brightness is available. 
It should be emphasized that the task of analyTing word formation in an ongoing 
dialogue is not finished when the system is able to interpret a compound or deriv- 
ative in utterances or even has given a satisfactory reply. The knowledge gained 
through the analysis and the commitments to the interpretation chosen have to be 
integrated into the knowledge sources. At present two consequences are associated 
with a successful analysis: First, the conceptual and referential semantic networks 
are updated to allow for subsequent reference. Second, the knowledge sources repre- 
senting the partner's assL:m!)tions about the domain of discourse are updated accord- 
ingly (cf. JAMESON/WAHLSTER 1982). 
The worst case conceivable appears to be misspelling in a way which allows the word 
138 W. HOEPPNER 
to be acceptable on structural  and semantic grounds but doesn't make sense in the 
context of the utterance and the dialogue. These cases, however, seem to be rare. 
GENERATION OF WORD FORMATIONS 
The unbalanced re lat ion between the analyt lc  capab i l i t ies  of natural language AI 
systems and the i r  generatlve capab i l i t ies  is found in the area of  word formation as 
we\]\].  In HAM-ANS, research in word formation generation has started with two ap- 
proaches. The f i r s t  is a rather simple one: By analyzing compounds and der ivat ives ,  
the system has created a semantic interpretat ion in terms of the language SURF and 
kept i t  in lexical  memory. The basis for  answer generation is a structure of the 
language SURF, which makes i t  possible to check agreement between certain parts of  
the answer and entr ies  in \]exical  memory. An example of  this method is the subst i -  
tut ion of  the descr ipt ion LAMPE AUF DEM SCHREIBTISCH (lamp on the desk) by SCHREIB- 
TISCHLAMPE (desk \]amp). 
The second approach enables the system to make use of word formations in i ts  own 
utterances without having previously analyzed a corresponding word. For those parts 
of utterances which might be verbalized using word formations, e.g. modified nouns 
or coordinate a t t r ibutes ,  a set of patterns is provided which, by means of a match- 
ing process bind re lat ion ident i f ie rs  and canonical word forms. These are handed 
to a generation component whose task i t  is to decide on der ivat ion,  compounding or 
no word formation at a l l ,  and to yield morphologically correct junctures.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: Research on HAM-ANS is currently being supported by the German 
Ministry for Research and Technology under contract 081T1503 8. 
REFERENCES 
\[I\] BORGIDA, A. T.: Topics in the Understanding of English Sentences by Computer. 
Dept. of Comp. Sc., University of Toronto, Technical Rep.78, Febr.1975 
\[2\] CERCONE, N.: Computer Analysis of English Word Formation. Dept. of Comp. Sc., 
University of Alberta, Technical Report TR74-6, April 1974 
\[3\] FININ, T. W.: The Semantic Interpretation of Compound Nominals. Coordinated 
Science Laboratory, University of I l l inois ,  Report T-96, June 1980 
\[4\] v.NAHN, W./FISCHER, H.: Ueber die Leistung von Morphologisierungsalgorithmen 
bei Substantiven. ZDL, Beiheft 13, 1975, 130-150 
\[5\] v.HAHN, W./HOEP~NER, W./JAMESON,.A./WAHLSTER, W.: The Anatomy of the Natural 
Language Dialogue System HAM-RPM. In: L.Bolc (ed.): Natural Language Based 
Computer Systems. Muenchen/London: Hanser/Macmillan 1980, 119-253 
\[6\] HOEPPNER, W.: Derivative WortbIldung der deutschen Gegenwartssprache und ihre 
algorithmische Analyse. Tuebingen: Narr 1980 
\[7\] JAMESON, A./HOEPPNER, W./WAHLSTER,W.: The Natural Language System HAM-RPM as 
a Hotel Manager: Some Representational Prerequisites. In: R.Wilhelm (ed.): 
GI-10. Jahrestagung, Saarbruecken; Berlin: Springer 1980, 459-473 
\[8\] JAMESON, A./WAHLSTER, W.: User Modelling in Anaphora Generation: Ellipsis and 
Definite Description. To appear in: Proc. of the ECAI-82, Orsay 1982 
\[9\] MARBURGER, H./NEUMANN, B./ NOVAK, H.-J.: Natural Language Dialogue about Motion 
in an Automatically Analysed Traffic Scene. In: Proc. of the 7th IJCAI, 
Vancouver 1981, 49-51 
\[10\] MARCUS, M. P.: A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural Language. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1980 
\ [ i i \ ]  McDONALD, D.: COMPOUND: A Program that Understands Noun Compounds. In: Proc. 
of the 7th IJCAI, Vancouver 1981, 1061 
\[12\] McDONALD, D./ HAYES-ROTH, F.: Inferential Searches of Knowledge Networks as an 
Approach to Extensible Language-Understanding Systems. In: D.A.Waterman, 
F.Hayes-Roth (eds.): Pattern-Directed inference Systems. N.Y. 1978, 431-453 
\[13\] SAMLOWSKI, W.: Deutsche Nomlnalkomposita in einem Sprachverstehensprogramm. 
In: G.Veenker (ed.): Zweites Treffen der GI-Fachgruppe Kuenstliche Intel- 
Iigenz. Abt. Informatik, Univ. Dortmund, Bericht 13/75, 1975, 90-109 
\[14\] SCHOTT, G.: Automatische Kompositazeriegung mit einem MinlmalwSrterbuch zur 
Informatlonsgewinnung aus beliebigen Fachtexten. In: F.Wingert (ed.): 
Klartextverarbeitung. Berlin: Springer 1978, 32-43 
\[15\] THOMPSON, B. H.: Linguistic Analysis of Natural Language Communication with 
Computers. In: Proc. of the 8th COLING, Tokyo 1980, 190-201 
