COI~G 82..I. Horeck~ {~ ) 
North-Holland Pub~ Comply 
? Aoa~ 1982 
PRAGMATIC8  IN BPEECH HNDERHTANDING - REV IS ITED 
Astrid Brietzmann 
Lehrstuhl fuer Informatik5 (Mustererkennung) 
Univ. Erlangen-Nuernberg, Erlangen, FRG 
Guenther Goerz 
RRZE 
Univ. Erlangen-Nuernberg, Erlangen, FRG 
and 
Neuropsychiatric Institute 
UCLA, Los Angeles, Calif., USA 
This paper reflects some thoughts on" pra@matic~ in'the 
context of a Speech Understanding'.System which i s  
cur rent ly  deve loped at the Un ivers i ty  E r langen-  
Nuernberg. After a brief outline of  the system,s ~struc- 
ture with an emphasis on the characteristics of the 
parser and the knowledge representation scheme we pre- 
sent some of the underlying theoretical considerations. 
The main part of the paper describes the design criteria 
for the SEMANTICS, PRAGMATICS, and DIALOG modules, and 
the structure of their interactions within a general 
discourse understanding framework, in particular the. 
role of a user/task model. 
1~ The Erlangen Speech Understanding System 
An experimental expert system for understanding continuous German 
speech is being developed at the Computer Science Department 
(Lehrstuhl Informatik 5, Mustererkennung), University Erlangen- 
Nuernberg \[8\]. Its main characteristics can be summarized as: 
- blackboard-oriented architecture (see \[5\]), 
- modularity through separate knowledge sources for ACOUSTICS- 
PHONETICS, LEXICON, SYNTAX, SEMANTICS, PRAGMATICS, DIALOG, 
RETRIEVAL, and STRATEGY, 
- ease of reconfiguration through clearly specified interfaces, 
so that modules can easily be exchanged, 
- parallelism (currently simulated), 
- ability to conduct flexible, adaptive dialogs featuring mixed 
initiative, interpretation of indirect answers, resolution of 
anaphoric references, handling of f ragments(e l l ipses)  and 
application specific dialog schemata and strategies, 
-.experimental in order to gain data on its performance and on 
its linguistic and epistemological adequacy which in turn can 
b~ used to calibrate the knowledge sources, in particular the 
strategy involved. 
In the following we concentrate on the higher level components; 
SEXANTICS, PRAGMATICS, and DIALOG, which in principle constltute 
491 
50 A. BRIETZMANN and G. GOERZ 
paral le l ,  in teract ing  processes.  As prerequ is i tes  for that we 
outline briefly the parser and the general underlying knowledge 
representation scheme. 
GLP: ~ parser. In our view syntactic knowledge plays an important 
role in natural language understanding. We agree with Bobrow and 
Webber \[2\] that there is a significant type of utterance descrip- 
t ion which is determined  by syntact ic  features  and categor ies ,  
and, part ia l ly ,  also by order ing  in format ion.  E lements  of this 
description are used to guide semantic, pragmatic, and discourse 
level  recovery  processes,  wh ich  in turn provide a feedback  to 
syntact ic  analysis.  Such processes include interpretat ion ,  
anaphora  resolut ion,  focus tracking, and e l l ips is  resolut ion.  
Syntax  gets  a f i r s t  cut in the log ica l  s t ruc ture  of the 
utterance. 
GLP \[6\] internally provides itself a mult iprocessing scheme. It 
uses two central  data structures,  the Chart - an act ive Wel l -  
Formed Subst r ing  Table -, and the Agenda - a l ist of processes,  
which allows task centered scheduling. The whole parsing process 
is controlled by a monitor, which triggers a grammar rule inter- 
~ reter. Its l ingu is t ic  data base cons ists  of a lex icon and a funct ional )  g rammar  (see 2). GLP's spec ia l  features  for speech 
analys is  include d i rec t ion - independent  is land parsing,  the 
ab i l i ty  to deal w i th  gaps in the input u t terance  and to handle 
quality scores for word and phrase hypotheses as well as incre- 
mental parsing by tying syntactic and semantic process ingc lose ly  
together.  The se lect ion  of tasks is contro l led  by a Scheduler ,  
which realizes a flexible strategy, so that bottom-up or top-down 
process ing  are not character i s t i c  for the analys is  as a whole,  
but only for parts of it. 
The knowledge  representat ion  scheme. The under ly ing  knowledge  
representation scheme, which will be used throughout the higher 
leve l  modu les  of the sys tem,  can be character i zed  by  the 
fundamenta l  d i s t inc t ions  of schema (prototype), ac tua l i za t ion  
(instance), and man i fes ta t ion  ( s i tuat ion -dependent  embedding) .  
Basically it is equivalent to an active semantic network with a 
clear separation of intension (general conceptual taxonomy) and 
extens ion  (s i tuat ion descr ipt ions) .  Its e lementary  Units or 
Frames representing Concepts are supposed to cover mainly three 
aspects for their attributes : 
- the role, which des ignates  the attr ibute's  funct ion  in the 
concept, 
- restrictions on possible values for the attribute, 
- modality, which indicates the importance of the attribute for 
the concept. 
The system i tsel f  incorporates  reason ing  capab i l i t i es  wi th  an 
emphasis on property inheritance and default reasoning. Currently 
we are exper iment ing  wi th  two d i f ferent  approaches:  FRL \[11\], 
wh ich  is a l ready avai lable,  and a new system in the spir i t  of KL-  
ONE \[3\], which is currently being implemented. 
The app l i ca t ion  domain. The f irst domain  of d iscourse to which  
speech unders-t-~1~ri-~ system will be applied, is travel plan- 
ning within the West German Intercity train system. This particu- 
PRAGMATICS IN SPEEC~I UNDEI~TANDING-REVISITED 51 
lar application area was chosen as it can easily be expanded from 
rather simple question, answering on time tables and train connec- 
t ions to more complex aspects  of discourse, inc luding p lanning 
and problem solving. 
2.  Some Theoret i ca l  Cons iderat ions  
The genera l  p r inc ip le  o f  our  approach  can  be character i zed  as  
"pragmat ics  first", i.e. we see the task of natural  language 
understanding from the viewpoint of communication as acting and 
interacting (see Kambartel 49\]). This implies that the underlying 
grammar  model  ought to be a funct iona l  one \[4, 10\], i.e., that 
the recovery of the st ructure of a natural  language ut terance 
must be seen as part of a larger process of ana lyz ing the 
meaning, intentions,  and goals under ly ing  its generat ion.  In 
part icular,  we adopt Hal l iday's taxonomy of the funct ions of 
language: 
- ideational, as related to the expression of content, 
- interpersonal, as related to the purpose of an utterance, 
- textual, as related to the coherence of language use. 
The structure of the d ic t ionary  with regard to these aspects  
represents 
- syntact i c  in fo rmat ion :  word  c lasses ,  morpho log ica l  
information, valencies as structuring syntactic information 
in relation to functional attributes, 
- semant lc /p ragmat ic  informat ion:  word mean ings  (based on a 
system of semantic primitives), case frames (with obligatory 
and opt ional  at t r ibutes like agent, object, etc.), and 
restrictions (also to be used as expectations). 
3- Textual Interpretation: SERANTICS 
Whereas the  parser's faci l it ies.for mapping structural descrip- 
tions into functional attributes are limited to matching opera- 
tions, in terpretat ion  requires reasoning. Based on purely  
linguistic knowledge, textual interpretation is the genuine task 
of the SEMANTICS module, which has to build general, situation- 
independent meaning structures. It provides content analysis by 
means of inferences using lexical semantic knowledge and applying 
case grammar rules as well as considering the cotext, i.e., the 
linguistic environment of the utterance. 
We make use of valency properties of the head words, especially 
the main verb as an intermediary level between surface structure 
and the under ly ing  case structure, thus fo l low ing  an extended 
not ion of Tesniere's dependency theory \[12S. Va lency does not 
only determine a typ~ical syntact ic  complement-structure for the 
govern ing words, e.g., ca l l ing for dependent noun groups and 
prepositional groups in certain surface cases; it also supplies 
cr i ter ia  for proper t reatment  of prepos i t iona l  phrases and 
modifier placement. 
Bes ides the reve lat ion of the under ly ing  pred icate -argument  
s~ructure, SEMANTICS' main tasks are word-sense disam~iguatiQn 
Q 
$2 A. BRIETZMANN and G. GOERZ 
and, in addit ion,  hand l ing  quant i f i ca t ion  and dea l ing  w i th  
general spatial and temporal concepts on the level of words, i.e. 
w i thout  re fer r ing  to factual  knowledge.  In detai l ,  it has to 
enforce 
- construction of dependency structures and their evaluation by 
checking their constituents for semantic compatibil ity, 
- analysis of the type and the modality of th~ utterance, 
- t rans format ion  of dependency  s t ructures  into a canonica l  
form, e.g., by complet ing  the propos i t ion  in in f in i t ive  
clauses, or converting passive sentences to active form, 
- ins tant ia t ion  of case f rames  over va lency  s t ructures  by 
test ing  the se lect iona l  res t r i c t ions  imposed on the case 
slots. 
The parser's s t rategy is to be mod i f ied  in such a way that seman-  
tic analysis at the constituent level can be started as soon as a 
local  const i tuent  is syntact i ca l l y  recognized.  The resul ts  of 
this interpretation step are semantic hypotheses containing pre- 
d ic t ions .  The parser  then  has to ver i fy  these  i s lands  
syntactically, to expand them and to concatenate them with other 
islands. 
4- Contextual Interpretation: PEAGMATICS and DIALOG 
The PRAGMATICS  and DIALOG modules  provide the second step in 
interpreting an utterance. The task of the PRAGMATICS module is 
to spec ia l i ze  case st ructures  into task spec i f ic  assoc ia t ion  
s t ructures  w i th in  the domain  of discourse.  These in turn are 
resolved and embedded into the d ia log context  by the D IALOG 
module. 
As mentioned above, we view language understanding as understan- 
ding goa l -d i rec ted  action, in this case speech acts. People in 
genera l  are capable of fo rming  and execut ing  plans to achieve 
goals and to infer plans of other agents by observat ion.  Hence, 
the PRAGMATICS module has to analyze the speaker's intentions, in 
particular 
- to establish points of correspondence between the speaker's 
and its own knowledge of the world, 
- to draw in ferences which  the speaker  intends the hearer  to 
draw, and 
- to match those with the particular domain of discourse. 
This knowledge on objects, events and abstractions is represented 
in a group of schemata, which define the concepts of time, space, 
causality, goals and plans in their pragmatic dimension, i.e. in 
their relation to acting. In addition, a second group of schemata 
then provides the necessary domain specific knowledge, largely by 
spec ia l i z ing  the genera l  knowledge  and augment ing  it by 
particular knowledge about acting in the application domain. The 
PHAGMATICS  modu le  const ructs  a task model  by s tar t ing  wi th  a 
description of the actual s i tuat io~-~d--a-~ni t ia l  goal, which is 
ref ined dur ing the fo l low ing  conversat ion  by knowledge  about 
PRAGMATICS IN SPEECH UNDERSTANDING-REVISITED 53 
actions, in particular their (pre)conditions and effects. As the 
conversation goes on, .it builds a plan in terms of a sequence of 
act ions to t rans form the descr ip t ion  of the s i tuat ion into the 
desired goal state. There are standard techniques for construct- 
ing plans like backward  chaining, but they do not provide a 
so lut ion to a wide class of act ions which can be descr ibed in 
natural  language (like standing still, prevent ing something,  
execut ing s impler  act ions in paral lel ,  etc.). To cover these 
phenomena,  a tempora l  logic must be incorporated into the task 
model schema \[lJ. Defining actions by using knowledge about how 
they can be performed is not sufficient to define their meaning, 
in particular with regard to the tasks the PRAGMATICS module has 
to achieve: 
- understanding the speaker's intention(s), 
- reasoning about its understanding in order to act, in parti- 
cular by  spec i fy ing all ( inc luding impl ic i t)  in fo rmat ion  
which f s  required to react appropriately (and smartly), and 
- situation dependent resolution of references. 
Considering what has been mentioned about our general approach on 
speech acts, PRAGMATICS has to interact closely with the DIALOG 
module, which incorporates knowledge about communication situa- 
t ions ( l ingu is t i c -pragmat ic  context, immediate processing con- 
text, psychological context) and standard patterns of discourse 
(convent ions  for in teract ions ,  reason ing  and estab l i sh ing  
coherence), augmented by a second level of schemata which specify 
these with regard to the chosen domain of discourse. Using this 
knowledge, DIALOG has 
- t~  draw inferences from the context, and 
- to draw inferences on the current state of the speaker, 
includihg his knowledge, 
in order to construct  and mainta in  a user model. This model, 
start ing with a rough idea of standard d iscourse schemata  and 
techniques tr ies to understand and to guide the speaker by 
success ive re f inements  through bu i ld ing d iscourse plans to 
achieve a sat i s factory  conc lus ion of the dialog. On the other 
hand, these plans are supposed to influence the overall behavior 
of the whole system in a larger range of interaction steps, e.g. 
with respect to its adaptivity and flexibility. 
The very s imi lar  layout and the proposed close interact ion 
between PRAGMATICS and DIALOG were influenced by results on task- 
or iented dialogs \[7\], wh ich  state a para l le l i sm between the 
dia log and the structure of a problem solution. This in turn 
should a l low the reso lut ion  of most of the references and a 
contextua l  res t r i c t ion  w i th in  cer ta in  log ica l ly  and 
methodo log ica l ly  character ized subdia logs (see the detai led 
discussion in Webber \[13\]). 
Indeed, the main d i f ference between both components  is in the 
kind of knowledge they represent and use, not in their  methods of 
reasoning. The main contribution of the PRAGMATICS module to the 
whole understanding process can be paraphrased as a specializa- 
tion of the general "referential potentiality" (lexical meaning) 
54 A. BRIETZMANIq and G. GOERZ 
of utterances into a particular thematic framework whereas the 
DIALOG module  prov ides a spec ia l i za t ion  with regard to a 
discourse framework, i.e. to knowledge how to conduct a success- 
ful dialog. 
References 
\[1\] 
\[2\] 
\[3\] 
\[4\] 
\[5\] 
\[8\] 
\[6\] 
\[7\] 
\[9\] 
\[10\] 
\[11\] 
\[12\] 
\[13\] 
Allen, J.F., What's Necessary to Hide?: Modeling Action 
Verbs, in: Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (Stanford, 1981). 
Bobrow, R.J. and Webber, B.L., Some Issues in Parsing and 
Natural Language Understanding, in: Proceedings of the 19th 
Annual Conference of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (Stanford, 1981). 
Brachman, R., On the Epistemological Status of Semantic 
Networks, in: Findler, N.V. (ed.), Associative Networks. 
Representation and Use of Knowledge by Computers (Academic 
Press, New York, 1979). 
Dik, S., Functional Grammar (North-Holland, Amsterdam 1978). 
Erman, L., The HEARSAY-II Speech-Understanding System: 
Integrating Knowledge to Resolve Uncertainty, Computing 
Surveys (12) 1980, 213-253. 
Goerz, G., GLP: A General Linguistic Processor, in: 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (Vancouver, 1981). 
Grosz, B., The Structure of Task Oriented Dialogs, in: 
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Speech Recognition 
(Pittsburgh, 1977). 
Hein, H.-W., Niemann, H., Expert Knowledge for Automatic 
Understanding of Continuous Speech, in: Kunt, M. and de 
Coulon, F. (eds.), S ignal  Process ing:  Theor ies  and 
Applications (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980). 
Kambartel, F., Pragmatische Grundlagen der Semantik, in: 
Gethmann, C.F. (ed.), Theorie des wissenschaftlichen Argu- 
mentierens (Suhrkamp Theorie, Frankfurt, 1980). 
Kay, M., Functional Grammar, in: Proceedings of the Fifth 
Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 
(Berkeley, 1979). 
Roberts, R.B., Goldstein, I.P., The PRL Manual, AI Memo 431, 
MIT (June 1977). 
Tesniere, L., Elements de syntaxe struc~urale (Klincksieck, 
Paris, 1965). 
Webber, B.L., Description Formation and Discourse Model 
Synthesis, in: Waltz, D.L. (ed.), Theoretical Issues in 
Natural Language Processing-2 (Univ. of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign, 1978). 
