COLING 82, J. Horeck~ (ed.) 
North.Holland Publialu'ng Company 
? Academ~ 1982 
Towards a mechan ica l  analys is  of French tense forms in texts. 
Chr is t ian Rohrer  
Un ivers i t~t  Stut tgar t  
I) 
In this paper we want  to present  a system that analyzes tense 
forms and temporal  adverbs in texts 2) . For reasons of ex- 
pos i t ion we restr ic t  the analys is  to narrat ive  texts. 
The system compri.:es the fo l lowing components: 
a) A parser  which ass igns a tree structure to sentences. 
The f ragment which the parser  can analyse corresponds roughly  
to the f ragment of Eng l i sh  descr ibed by R. Montague in 'The 
proper t reatment  of quant i f i ca t ion  in ord inary  Engl ish' .  Our 
f ragment conta ins  however  more tense forms, temporal  adverbs, 
and temporal  conjunct ions.  In part icu lar  we treat  the notor ious-  
ly d i f f i cu l t  pair of tense forms pass~ simple and imparfait ,  
frame adverb ia ls  l ike aujourd'hui ,  hier, demai____~n,ce lour - l~  , u_nn 
~our  plus tard, etc. ,as wel l  as the .zonjunctions quand,pendant  
~\[u_e,depuis que,a r ~ ~ .  
b) The syntact ic  analys is  const i tutes  the input to the rules that 
der ive the cor respond ing  d iscourse representat ions.  The syntac- 
tic s t ructure detezmines the d iscourse representat ion.  
Let D = S i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  , S n be a d iscourse of L. 
A D(iscourse) R(epresentat ion)  S(tructure) for D is con- 
st ructed by reduc ing the sentences S I . . . . . . . . . . .  , S n in the 
order in which  they occur in D. The reduct ion  of a sentence 
S i p roceeds  through the app l icat ion  of certa in DRS-con-  
st ruct ion rules which  operate on the syntact ic  ana lys is  of the 
sentence and work so to speak ' from the top down' (thus the 
syntact ic  analys is  imposes a part ia l  order on how the rules 
are to be appl ied).  
What DRS-const ruct ion  rule is to be appl ied depends on the 
par t icu lar  syntact ic  format ion rule that was used to form the 
syntact ic  compound that the appl icat ion of the rule is to re- 
duce. Where one of the immediate components  of the compound is 
a s ingular  term, moreover,  the choice of const ruct ion  rule 
wi l l  be determined by the type of this term; thus, for in- 
stance there is a d i f ferent  rule for proper  names, for inde- 
f in ite descr ip t ions  and for pronouns, xespect ive ly .  S imi lar ly  
there are d i f ferent  rules for each of the tenses cons idered 
here. 
331 
332 CH. ROHRER 
c) In o rd inary  t ru th -cond i t iona l  semant ics  truth cond i t ions  are 
stated for ind iv idua l  sentences:  A d iscourse  cons is t ing  of a 
set of sentences is true iff it cons ists  of noth ing but true 
sentences.  The order  in wh ich  the ind iv idua l  sentences occur 
in the d i scourse  is i r re levant  for the t ruth condit ions.  In 
this sys tem truth condi t ions  are fo rmulated  for a sequence 
of sentences D = $I, . . . . . . . . . . . .  , S n in such a way that the 
order  in wh ich  the sentences occur  in the text p lays a 
cruc ia l  role. The t ruth of a d iscourse  D in a mode l  M is de- 
f ined as the ex is tence  of a proper  embedd ing  into M of the 
representat ion  of D. 
A major  advantage of the present  system l ies in its ab i l i ty  to 
deal  w i th  cases of in tersentent ia l  and in t rasentent ia l  anaphora  
in exact ly  the same fashion. Tense  forms and tempora l  adverbs be- 
have in many respects  l ike anaphor ic  pronouns.  The DRS-con-  
s t ruct ion  ru les  handle  both tempora l  and pronomina l  anaphora.  The 
system ext racts  al l  the tempora l  in format ion  wh ich  is conta ined 
in the input text. A t  a later stage the in format ion  ext racted  
f rom the text wi l l  form the bas is  for a quest ion  - answer ing  
system. An implementat ion  of the system on a VAX 780/11 is in 
progress.  
1) The work  repor ted  in this paper  was suppor ted  by the 
Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaf t  grant  Ro 245/12. 
2) The system is based on the fo l lowing papers:  Kamp, H. (1980) 
' A theory of t ruth and semant ic  representat ion ' ,  in: 
Groenendi jk ,  J., Janssen,  T., Stokhof,  M. (eds.), Formal  
methods  in the study of language,Amsterdam,  p. 277 - 322. 
Kamp, H. (1981), 'Evenements,  representat ions  d i scurs ives  et 
r~f~rence  tempore l le ' ,  Langages  , p. 39 - 64. 
Kamp, H., Rohrer  C. (1981) 'Tense in texts' ,  Ms. S tut tgar t  
