COLAVG 82, Z Horeclcp (ed.) 
North-Holland Publishing Company 
? Academia, 1982 
MARKEDNESS AND FREQUENCY: A COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSIS 
Henry Ku~era 
f 
Brown University 
Providence, Rhode Island 
U.S.A. 
When the markedness analysis is extended to the lexical  and 
grammatical leve ls ,  the question arises whether an analogue 
of the markedness/frequency corre lat ion,  observed in phono- 
logy, also exists on these higher l ingu is t i c  levels.  This 
a r t i c le  presents evidence that in some interest ing cases, 
such as tense and aspect forms in English, the correlat ion 
does not hold and that this fa i lu re  is due not simply to 
superf ic ia l  s ty l i s t i c  factors but rather to the inab i l i ty  
of the markedness hypothesis to provide an adequate frame- 
work for the analysis of the English verbal system. 
Computational ingu is t ics  provides important potential  tools for the test ing of 
theoret ical  l i ngu is t i c  constructs and of the i r  power to predict actual language 
use. The present paper fa l l s  into this general area of inquiry.  The specif ic 
issue, which I shall deal with,  is the re lat ion of the so-called marked and un- 
marked categories which have been posited for d i f ferent  levels of l ingu is t i c  
description. Greenberg (1966) considers this concept to be one of the important 
notions in the study of language universals and devotes a long essay to this 
subject. He argues that the concept of the marked and unmarked can be shown 
"to possess a high degree of general i ty  in that i t  is applicable to the phonolo- 
g ical ,  the grammatical, and the semantic aspects of language." I t  is in par t i -  
cular this general i ty claim which I plan to address in my report. A considera- 
t ion of these questions seems especial ly appropriate at this COLING conference 
since the theory of markedness had i ts  home in Prague. 
The concept of markedness originated in phonology and is most systematical ly 
presented in the work of Trubetzkoy (1939). On this leve l ,  one can observe a 
clear and convincing correlat ion between the markedness property and the s tat i s -  
t ica l  facts of language use. The unmarked phonemes, e.g. short vowels, occur 
with considerably higher frequencies than the marked ones, e.g. long vowels, in 
a l l  languages where this bpposition has been investigated. Greenberg (1966:67-69) 
gives data from Icelandic, Sanskrit, Czech, Hungarian, Finnish, Karok and Chirichua 
to demonstrate this point. Similar s ta t i s t i ca l  relat ions can be found with refer-  
ence to other unmarked vs. marked oppositions, such as voiceless vs. voiced ob- 
struents, non-palatal ized vs. palatal ized consonants, non-nasal vs. nasal vowels, 
etc. (For some s ta t i s t i ca l  data in Czech, German, and Russian, cf. Ku~era and 
Monroe 1968.) This corre lat ion between structure and language s tat i s t i cs  is 
important since i t  supports the basic notion that the markedness re la t ion ,  in 
ref lect ing an informational economy in language coding, has the expected s tat i s -  
t ica l  effects. 
In the ear ly 1930's, the markedness re lat ion was extended, again in the work of 
the Prague school (pr imar i ly  by Jakobson 1932), to higher levels of language, 
spec i f i ca l ly  to the semantic analysis of the lexicon and the meaning of gramma- 
t ical  categories, such as case, number, person, tense and aspect. S ign i f i cant ly ,  
Jakobson's in i t ia l  example of this non-phonological markedness re lat ion was a 
167 
168 14. KUCERA 
lex ica l  one, the Russian words os~l 'donkey' and os~ica 'female donkey'. "Wenn 
ich os~l sage, bestimme ich n icht ,  ob es sich um ein ~nnchen oder ein Weibchen 
handelt, aber f ragt  man mich '~to osl ica?'  und ich antworte 'net,  os~l ' ,  so wird 
hier das m~nnliche Geschlecht angek6ndigt - das Wort is in verengter Bedeutung 
angewandt." As in the English contrast between man and woman, or l ion vs. l ioness, 
the crux of the issue is that the f i r s t  term, the unmarked one, has two possible 
usages, the general and the speci f ic  one, while the second term, the marked one, 
carr ies only a s ingle value with reference to the relevant semantic concept which, 
in a l l  the above lex ica l  examples, is the feature \[feminine\]. I t  is because of 
th is  dual function of the unmarked term that such sentences as Is th is  l ion a 
l ion or a l ioness? -- although perhaps somewhat unusual --  are cer~ ly  not 
semantTcall~incongruous. In his la te r  work, Jakobson (1971) provided a more 
formal de f in i t ion  of the markedness re lat ion on higher language levels :  "The 
general meaning of a marked category states the presence of a certain (whether 
pos i t ive  or negative) property A; the general meaning of the corresponding un- 
marked category states nothing about the presence of A, and is used ch ie f ly ,  
but not exc lus ive ly ,  to indicate the absence of A. The unmarked term is always 
the negative of the marked term, but on the level of general meaning the opposi- 
t ion of the contradictor ies  may be interpreted as 'statement of A' vs. 'no state-  
ment of A' ,  whereas on the level of 'narrowed', nuclear meanings, we encounter 
the opposit ion 'statement of A' vs. 'statement of non-A'."  
I t  is important to rea l i ze  that the markedness re la t ion ,  as given in this  de f in i -  
t ion ,  is a more complex one than Trubetzkoy's p r ivat ive  phonological opposit ion. 
This has certain interest ing consequences to which I w i l l  turn la ter  in my paper. 
At th is  juncture,  however, I want to consider the natural question of whether 
the corre lat ion between markedness and frequency also holds in non-phonological 
cases as, i t  might be reasonable to assume, the theory would predict .  
On the lex ica l  l eve l ,  the markedness/frequency corre lat ion seems to hold rather 
wel l .  In representative English texts ,  such as the one-mil l ion-word Brown Corpus, 
the frequencies of the unmarked members of the opposit ion in such pairs as man vs. 
woman, l ion vs. l ioness, or__he vs. she, are from 3.5 to 5.5 times greater than 
the frequencies of the marked members of each opposit ion. Since the unmarked 
member of such lex ica l  opposit ions does indeed have a broader semantic scope-- 
capable of both the generic and the spec i f ic  usage-- its higher frequency is 
hardly surpr is ing.  Even so, the corre lat ion  is not without interest  since i t  
points out that certain re lat ions (such as homonymy, hyponymy, as well as marked- 
ness proper), which are present in the design of a language system, make a more 
economical use of the avai lable formal d is t inct ions  possible. 
What is of par t i cu la r  interest  to us, however, is the claim of the adherents of 
the markedness analysis that the opposit ions within grammatical categories,  such 
as number, person, tense or aspect, also exh ib i t  the same logical  re lat ion and 
thus should be analyzed within th is  framework. The opposit ion of the s ingular 
number vs. the plural  number usually provides a ' c lass ica l '  i l l us t ra t ion  of the 
various propert ies that are supposed to support th is  analysis .(for deta i l s ,  cf. 
Greenberg 1966:73). The s ingular ,  being "unmarked", is said to have two potent ial  
functions, a general one (as in such generic usages as The beaver bui lds dams) as 
well as a speci f ic  one, indicat ing ind iv idua l i ty  (as in The beaver ran under the 
house). P lurals ,  on the other hand, are said to represent the marked member of 
the opposit ion and signal this speci f ic  plural  function only. Arguments referr ing 
to form are often given to support th is  kind of markedness analysis:  in many 
languages, singulars have no overt mark while the plural  is marked by an a f f i x ,  
so that the markedness re lat ion appears to be ref lected formal ly in a semiologi- 
~ l ly  diagrammatic manne~ Several other arguments as to the corre lat ion  between 
formal and functional marking have been given; Greenberg (1966) provides a 2ood 
summary. 
The question of whether an analogue to the frequency/markedness corre lat ion exists 
for  grammatical categories was raised already in Greenberg's essay. Greenberg 
MARKEDNESS AND FREQUENCY 169 
found the problem d i f f i cu l t ,  largely because there were very few studies avai lable 
to him which gave information about the frequency of grammatical categor ies.  Some 
examples which Greenberg col lected showed the expected frequency d is t r ibut ions:  
singulars more frequent than plurals,  or a greater frequency of so-called direct  
cases (nominative, accusative and vocative) than of oblique cases (genit ive,  
dative, ab lat ive,  locat ive,  instrumental, etc.) in a number of languages. In 
other instances, however, the evidence was e i ther  inconclusive or contrary to the 
putative markedness analysis. In Josselson's Russian word count (Josselson 1953), 
for example, the imperfective aspect of verbs (which is considered the unmarked 
member of the opposition) is s l ight ly  less frequent (46.9%) than the marked per- 
fect ive (53.1%). 
The ava i lab i l i ty  of new frequency data of grammatical categories now makes i t  
possible to reopenthe question and to see whether the results can shed l ight  on 
the adequacy of the markedness hypothesis in this area. The main source for my 
analysis is the one-mill ion-word Corpus of Present-day American English, assembled 
at Brown University in the 1960's and recently analyzed grammatically (cf.  Francis 
and Ku~era 1982). This data base does constitute a representative sample of 
printed American English, consisting of 500 samples of texts,  each about 2,000 
words long, drawn from a var iety of sources ranging from newspapers to learned 
ar t ic les  and f i c t ion .  The grammatical analysis of the corpus is based on a 
taxonomy of 87 grammatical classes or "tags" (including six syntact ica l ly  useful 
punctuation tags), representing an expanded and refined system of word-classes, 
supplemented by major morphological information and some syntactic information. 
In some re la t ive ly  straightforward cases, our English data c lear ly  support the 
expected frequency correlat ion that is consistent with the markedness analy~i.~.. 
The prevalence of singular over plural forms in common nouns shows, in sp i t1~ 
of some interest ing s ty l i s t i c  differences, an overal l  frequency rat io  s imi l~to  
that between unmarked and marked lexical  forms, namely about 3:1. The same is 
true of those case forms which are s t i l l  formally marked in English: roughly the 
same 3:1 rat io  holds for the nominative of personal pronouns ( i .e .  forms such 
"as ' I ,  he, she, we, they')  vs. object ive forms ( i .e .  'me, him, her, us, them'). 
With regard to the more interest ing cases, such as tense, the s ta t i s t i ca l  evidence 
from the Brown Corpus offers both greater problems and greater insight.  The 
adherents of the markedness hypothesis have often attempted to f i t  the notion 
of tense into the markedness framework. Tense in some Slavic languages, for 
example, has been generally analyzed into a binary opposition of the marked past 
vs. the unmarked nonpast, an analysis substantiated on the grounds that the 
present forms, too, serve a more general function than simply the loca l izat ion of 
the ac t iv i ty  as overlapping with the speech moment--such as that of the gnomic 
present, h istor ica l  present, or "programmed" future. Greenberg (1966) assumes 
the same kind of analysis for Latin and Sanskrit and presents figures which show 
that the "unmarked" present in both of these languages is more frequent than the 
"marked" past and the future,  although the differences between the present and 
past f igures, in the Sanskrit sample, are rea l ly  quite small. 
Let us assume, for a moment, that the past--nonpast re lat ion has some appeal as a 
l ingu is t i c  universal and assume that in English, too, the simple present i s  un- 
marked and the simple past is the marked member of this opposition. I f  one takes 
the frequency figures of the ent i re Brown Corpus into account, then the past tense 
predominates above the present; there are altogether 21391 occurrences of the 
simple present vs. 26172 occurrences of the simple past. The frequency data is 
thus the reverse of what one might have assumed under the markedness analysis. 
But the fact of real interest  is not this discrepancy alone but rather the fact 
that,  in looking at the individual genres of wr i t ing represented in the data base, 
and counting the present vs. past tense occurrences separately for each genre 
category, a quite id iosyncrat ic  pattern emerges, as the fol lowing table indicates. 
170 ~. KU~ERA 
DISTRIBUTION OF SIMPLE PRESENT AND PAST FORMS 
Genre Number of Percent of Number of Percent of 
Present Tense Occurrences Past Tense Occurrences 
A. Press: Reportage 1271 16.08 2526 31.97 
B. Press: Editorial 1405 26.77 700 13.34 
C. Press: Reviews 910 28.83 504 15.97 
D. Religion 934 27.41 511 14.99 
E. Skil ls and Hobbies 2262 34.15 617 9.31 
F. Popular Lore 1973 21.19 2272 24.40 
G. Belles Lettres 3302 21.96 3501 23.29 
H. Miscellaneous 1034 24.18 405 9.47 
J. Learned 3319 24.87 1481 I I . I0  
Subtotal: Informative 16410 24.03 12517 18.33 
K. General Fiction 995 13.17 3032 40.13 
L. Mystery/Detective 1052 15.47 2643 38.87 
M. Science Fiction 253 15.74 531 33.04 
N. Adventure/Western 1065 13.17 3702 45.77 
P. Romance 1206 14.65 3048 37.02 
R. Humor 410 18.89 699 32.21 
Subtotal: Imaginative 4981 14.46 13655 39.63 
CORPUS 21391 20.82 26172 25.47 
In six of the f i fteen genre categories, the simple present is more frequent than 
the past; in nine, the opposite is true. The s ty l i s t i c  reasons for this tense 
distr ibut ion are fa i r l y  clear from the characteristics of the genres involved: 
the present tense prevails in the descriptive genres, while the past predominates 
greatly in what might be called the narrative genres. Interestingly enough, 
this tense distr ibut ion groups al l  imaginative prose (Genres K through R) with 
A. Press: Reportage, in this narrative category. The other two newspaper genres 
(B. Press: Editorial  and C. Press: Reviews), on the other hand, are grouped to- 
gether with the descriptive genres. 
The genre dependency of the present and past tense forms makes a meaningful state- 
ment about their  possible markedness relation and their  frequency a rather hope- 
less enterprise. The same d i f f i cu l ty ,  as i t  turns out, is not l imited to the 
present/past opposition but encompasses al l  granTnatical categories, including 
other tense and aspect forms, such as the perfect and the progressive. The chi- 
square s tat is t ica l  test returns a highly signif icant value when calculated for 
the distr ibut ion of these forms over the f i f teen genres of the corpus. The chi- 
square for the perfect is 634.00, for the progressive aspect 806.70, for the 
simple present 840.35 and for the simple past 12391.56. All these figures are 
highly s ignif icant,  even at the I% level of significance (at P = 0:01 for 14 
degrees of freedom, the c r i t i ca l  value of chi-square = 29.1). Consequently, the 
null hypothesis that the uneven distr ibut ion of grammatical forms among the genres 
of the corpus is due to chance has to be rejected. 
The apparent impossibi l i ty of determining a stable frequency of such grammatical 
forms as tense and aspect in English dooms the attempts to find a correlation 
MARKEDNESS ANI ~ FREQUENCY 171 
between markedness and frequency, at least in these cases. The question arises, 
however, whether such problems bear only on this s tat i s t i ca l  correlation or 
whether the entire d i f f i cu l ty  is due to more fundamental causes. 
There are essentially two basic di f f icult ies that the markedness hypothesis faces 
in its analysis of grammatical categories: the f i rs t  is that i t  needs to assume, 
by virtue of the theory, the possibil ity of identifying some invariant element 
? in the meaning of the grammatical form, similar to the invariance notion that 
prevails in structuralist phonology. This, in essence, amounts to the advocacy 
of isomorphy between the set of grammatical forms and the set of corresponding 
meanings (often quite abstractly perceived), a claim which, in many instances, 
is real ist ical ly  untenable. I f  we look at the English tense system, the problem 
becomes quite pronounced. In English, the function of the individual tense forms 
depends crucially on the lexical character of the verb or the structure of the 
verb phrase. Taking Vendler's inf luential  c lassi f icat ion of English verha ~ con- 
structions as our point of departure (Vendler 1957), i t  can be shown that le 
simple present exists, in English, in natural usage only for states. Jack loves 
Ma_a~, Peter hates to shave, Charles knows German, The Charles Bridge spans the 
Vltava r iver ,  are a-l-I descriptions of states. S---o are simple present tenses-of 
ve--er-~---who--o-se-basic emantic function is to denote ac t iv i t ies :  such a verb as 
speak, for example, requires the progressive for a present ac t iv i ty  reading: 
Jane is s ea~French;  i ts simple present can denote only a habit or an 
a~ibu-te (forms o-f--a--stat.~): Jane speaks French, i .e . ,  has the sk i l l  of speak- 
ing the language. This is also the reason, of course, for the clear ac t iv i ty -  
state difference between such sentences as Jack is smokina and Jack smokes. 
Verbs and verb phrases that Vendler labeled accomplishments and achievements have 
no natural use of the simple present at a l l .  Accomplishments are te l i c  verbs 
which require a process to reach the intended goal, while achievements denote an 
instantaneous "leap" into a new state. Both, in their  simple English past tense 
forms, correspond to the Slavic perfect~ves, denoting complete events: Peter 
built a house, Jane bouou~hta new coat, Capek wrote many novels (accompl i~ts ) ,  
~yra~ed~- Jack  ~dt--t~e--pia-ne,--H~-s~fou--un-d-~_JC (achievements). 
N-ot-i~t-n-eTthe-r-~f these t~cas~asTes o-T-ve--r-b-s~a~ple present that would 
have the capacity of denoting an activity overlapping with the moment of speech: 
Peter builds a house, Jane bu~anew coat, The tyrant dies, His wife finds her 
ke-~,ar-ep-ossible only-ln-reportive style as des~ons  of comp~past  events. 
They can be used in a newspaper headline, a chapter heading, or "historical 
present" constructions but not as descriptions of ongoing activit ies. Note also, 
however, that some of the same verbs with a plural object again denote states: 
Peter builds houses designates Peter as a house builder. 
Even such a small set of examples, which could be greatly extended to other 
English verbal categories, such as the progressive, c learly demonstrates that the 
notion of form--meaning isomorphy, which seems essential to markedness analysis 
of these forms, is not tenable. The large differences in frequency that we have 
noticed in the occurrences of these tense forms in the Brown Corpus are thus not 
only "s ty l i s t i c "  in a superficial sense, but stylo-semantic: they occur because 
of the di f fer ing needs for the expression of states, act iv i t ies  or events, each 
of which requires some verbal tense forms and blocks others. 
The logical relation between marked and unmarked forms, predicted by the marked- 
ness theory, presents another d i f f i cu l ty  for the analysis. As I have already 
mentioned, the def init ion of markedness on the lexical and the grammatical level 
is not log ica l ly  the same as the so-called privative opposition in phonology. 
Rather, as Lyons (1977:305) has pointed out, the concept of markedness in the 
lexicon and granm~ar is a special case of the relation of hyponymy. The term 
hyponymy can be used as a more suitable designation for what, in logic, has been 
often discussed in terms of class inclusion. The hypon~ny relation can be best 
i l lustrated on examples involving the relation of simple lexical items: so 
the word rose is a hyponym of flower, for example, with flower being the 
172 H. KUCERA 
superordinate term of the relation. Hyponymy is definable in terms of unilateral 
implication. So, for example, the verb waltz can be established to be a hyponym 
of dance by virtue of the implication: She waltzed all night ~ She danced all 
ni__~_~_--~ut, of course, not the converse)~ 
As Lyons also suggests, the Praguian markedness re lat ion is ,  essent ia l ly ,  a 
special case of hyponymy. The principal difference is that the unmarked term 
has two meanings, the general (which gives i t  the usual status of a superordinate 
term) and the narrow or nuclear, which has a more specif ic sense, depending on 
context, and puts i t  in opposition to the marked term. Lyons suggests that the 
markedness re lat ion may d i f fe r  from the simple hyponymy re lat ion by i ts  potential  
of being re f lex ive:  Is that doqadog or a bitch? is meaningful, though rather 
odd (Lyons, 1977:308)~--The logical  basis of the morphological markedness re la-  
t ion thus c lear ly  requires that the unmarked term must have the potential  of ex- 
pressing the "general" meaning. There must therefore be at least some contexts 
in which the uni latera l  impl icat ion,  required by the theory, holds. However, 
with reference to the English tense system, the implications from one member of 
a tense opposition to another again vary in dependence on the lexical  character 
of the verb. Markedness theorists have proposed, for example, that the contrast 
between the progressive and non-progressive verbal forms i~ English be viewed as 
const i tut ing a marked vs. unmarked opposition (c f . ,  for example, Kope~ny 1948). 
Under this analysis,  entailments from the "marked" progressives to the "un- 
marked" simple forms should hold. In fact ,  however, we do get entailments from 
the past progressive to the simple past (or the present perfect) for  ac t iv i ty  
verbs, but not for accomplishment and achievement verbs: Jack was wa lk~ in 
the park-----> Jack walked (has walked) in the p_ark, but JaTwaTwalk ing  to-the 
park does not ~ i l  ~ wa-ik-ed ~ waTked-d)- to The park~ and Ma~ ~ s ~  
a dissertat ion does not entai l  Martha ~te~h~wr i t ten)  a d issertat ion.  
Thus we see again that a markedness ana lys~which  t r ies  to re late the simple and 
the progressive forms of the English system in a single re lat ion of potent ia l l y  
re f lex ive hyponymy is bound to fa i l .  
In conclusion, le t  me mention an example which i l l us t ra tes  how the frequency data 
may of fer  useful clues for an evaluation of theoret ical  constructs. Czech -- 
l i ke  other Slavic languages -- has two sets of verbs of motion, the so-called 
determinate, e.g. j{ t  ' to  go (on foot ) ' ,  j e t  ' to go (by veh ic le ) ' ,  and the 
indeterminate, e.g. chodit ' to  go (on foot-T T, jezd i t  ' to go (by veh ic le ) ' ,  etc. 
In the conventional markedness analysis, the determinate verbs are considered 
marked ( for  in tegr i ty  or d i rec t iona l i ty  of the act ion),  the indeterminate un- 
marked. Language s ta t i s t i cs . ind icate ,  however, that every single one of the 
determinate verbs is more frequent than the corresponding indeterminate. Over- 
a l l ,  the al legedly marked verbs are 4.38 times as frequent as the supposedly un- 
marked ones. (Cf. Jel{nek et a l . ,  1961). A closer analysis reveals that this 
ra t io ,  which of course is the exact reverse of what one would expect from the 
markedness re la t ion ,  ceases to be a mystery i f  one considers the semantics of 
these verbs more carefu l ly  (cf.  Ku~era 1980). While I cannot give the complex 
detai l  here, le t  me simply point out that the entailment re lat ions ,  which re- 
present the essence of the logical  re lat ions of markedness, never hold between 
these verbs. Sentences with the "marked" verbs do not entai l  the sentences 
with the "unmarked" ones under any circumstances: Bratr jde p_O_ulici 'Brother 
is walking down the street '  does not entai l  Bratr c~po u l i c i  'Brother is 
walking up and doyen the s t reet ' ;  Sestra je la~ra-h -y  'S ister  went (drove) to 
Prague' does not entai l  Sestra jezd i la  do Prahy 'S ister used to go (drive) 
to Prague'. The essence of the problem, as far  as a l l  the verbs of motion 
are concerned, l ies  in the fact that the re lat ion between the determinate and 
indeterminate sets is not one of markedness, i .e . ,  of logical  inclusion, but 
rather one of logical  exclusion. The determinate verbs denote an ac t iv i ty  
in a single d i rect ion,  the indeterminate a complex action. 
The evidence provided by computational nd statistical techniques, while not by 
MARKEDNESS AND FREQUENCY 173 
i t se l f  decisive, suggests the weak points of the application of the markedness 
framework to the analysis of grammatical categories, such as tense and aspect. 
A semantic reanalysis of the categories themselves then indicates that the rela- 
tions of these sets of forms is more complex than the invariance-oriented marked- 
ness hypothesis is able to accommodate and that the vagaries of the performance 
data are the net result of such complexities. 
REFERENCES: 
\[I\] Francis, WoN. and Ku~era, H., Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon 
and Grammar (Houghton Mi f f l in  Co., Boston, 1982). 
\[2\] Greenberg, J.H., Language universals, in: Sebeok, T.A. (ed.)., Curr~.~ 
Trends in Linguistics 3 (Mouton, Th e Hague, 1966). 
\[3\] Jakobson, R., Zur Struktur des russischen Verbums, in: Charisteria 
Gvilelmo Mathesio (Prague, 1932). 
\[4\] Jakobson, R., Shifters, Verbal Categories and the Russian Verb, in: 
Selected Writings 2 (Mouton The Hague, 1971). 
\[5\] JeIYnek, J., Be~ka, J.V., and T6~itelova, M., Frekvence slov, slovnich 
druhu a tvarb v ceskem jazyce (Statnfpedagogick6 nakladatelstvi ,  Prague, 1961). 
\[6\] Josselson, H.H., The Russian Word Count (Wayne University Press, Detroit ,  
1953). 
\[7\] Kopecny, F., Dva p~1~pe~ky k vidu a ~asu v de~tin~, Slovo a slovesnost, I0 
(1948) 151-158. 
\[8\] Ku{era, H., Markedness in Motion, in: Chvany, C.V. and Brecht, R.D. (eds.), 
Morphosyntax in Slavic (Slavica Publishers, Columbus, 1980). 
\[9\] Ku~era, H. and Monroe, G.K., A Comparative Quantitative Phonology of 
Russian, Czech, and German (American Elsevier, New York, 1968). 
\[I0\] Lyons, J . ,  Semantics l (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1977). 
\ [ I I \ ]  Trubetzkoy, N.S., GrundzUge der Phonologie. Travaux du Cercle L inguist i -  
que de Prague 7 (Prague, 1939). 
\[12\] Vendler, Z., Linguistics .q Philosophy J-Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 
1967). 

