COLING 82, 3". Horec?'~ (ed.) 
North-Holland Publizhing Company 
? Academia, 1982 
COGNIT IVE MODELS FOR COMPUTER VIS ION 
G.Adorni  A .Bocca la t te  M.Di Manzo 
INSTITUTE of ELECTROTECHNICS 
UNIVERSITY  of GENOA 
GENOA, ITALY 
This paper is focused on the relations existing between language and 
vision. Its goal is to discuss how linguistic informations about ob- 
jects,shapes,positions and spatial relations with other objects can 
be integrated into a cognitive model tailored to spatial inferencing 
operations. 
INTRODUCTION 
A common approach to the prob lem of scenes in terpretat ion  is to gen- 
erate hypothes is  about the pos i t ion  and size of  ob jects  and t ry  to 
use these expectat ions  to guide the search for p icture  areas wh ich  
exhib i t  the expected features 14,8,15\[. But where this expectat ion  
came from? If a robot operates  in a known envi ronment ,expectat ions  can 
be se l f -generated  on the bas is  of  bu i l t - in  knowledge and prev ious ly  
exper ienced situat ions.  Another  very  common source of in format ions  can 
be some k ind of external  input, o f ten based on natura l  language commu- 
nicat ion.  A p iece of conversat ion  as " look for the penc i l " , "where?" ,  
"on the table" conveys a lot of in format ions  about the presence of  a 
reference object  (table) and the character i s t i cs  of  a surface (top of 
table) wh ich  must  be located in order  to restr ict  the search for the 
target object  (pencil).  To take advantage of these l inguist ic  infor-  
mat ion  sources we must  be able to extract  f rom a qua l i tat ive  expres-  
sion like "on the table" all those quant i tat ive  const ra ints  wh ich  are 
relevant from a geometr ic  mode l l ing  point  of  v iew 121. These problems 
could seem much more re lated to the generat ion  of v isual  analog repre- 
sentat ions than to the unders tand ing  of a scene; but  what  does it mean 
exact ly  to "understand" a scene? When we analyze a scene, we use a I~  
of not geometr ic  knowledge;  we are not surpr ised to f ind smoken ciga- 
rettes into an ashtray, and a g lance is enaugh to c lass i fy  them, but 
we could have some troubles  to recognize that it conta ins  a company 
of goldf ishes,  and this surely  not only because of geometr ic  con- 
straints! Therefore the process ing  of v isual  knowledge must be based 
on cogni t ive models  that are able to handle  d i f ferent  k inds and sources 
of informations,  and in this sense we feel that there is not a c lear  
? cut between scene analys is  and scene generat ion  114,161. 
In the following we wil l  deal main ly  w i th  the representat ion  of objects 
and the fo rmal i zat ion  of spat ia l  re lat ionships,  t ry ing to point  out 
how l inguist ic  in format ions  can be re lated to v isual  ones. 
* Work supported by Italian National Research Council under grant 80.01142.07 
G. ADORNI, A. BOCCALATTE and M. 19I MANZO 
OBJECT DESCRIPT ION AND SPACE MODELL ING 
The knowledge of the structure of an object is often int imately relat- 
ed to our capabi l i ty  of understand ing the meaning of a spatial relat~n- 
ship; fop instance, the meaning of the sentence "the cat is under the 
car" is clear, even if it may depend on the state of the car, moving 
or parked; on the contrary, the sentence "the cat is under the wal l"  
is not clear, unless the wall  is crashed or it has a very par t icu lar  
shape. Every object model l ing  technique must deal at least with the 
fo l lowing issues 16,7\[ : 
l .Objeot must be descr ibed at several levels of deta i l .To  understand 
the sentence "put the chair  near the table" only a rough def in i t ion 
of chair  and table d imensions can be suf f ic ient ,whi le  to build a mod- 
el of "a man s i t t ing on a chair" a more sophis t icated knowledge a- 
baut the structure of a chair  and a man is requested. 
2.The ar t icu lat ion  of movable object parts must be proper ly  described. 
The sentences"open the door" and "open the drawer" have d i f ferent  
geometr ic  meanings  because the movements  of doors and drawers usual- 
ly obey d i f ferent  rules. 
3 .Character is t ic  features of objects must be po inted out .0f ten these 
features are free sur faces ,as  the top of a table , in  canonical  posi -  
tions. The recogni t ion of a feature al lows the generat ion of hypoth-  
esis about the presence of an object. 
4.Typical  re lat ions between objects must be descr ibed .When we look for 
a penci l  we do not start ana lyz ing a wal l  or a w indow,but  we look at 
f irst foP a table or some other piece of furn i ture in which or on 
which it is reasonable to f ind a pencil .  
0ur conceptual  def in i t ion language al low the def in i t ion of l ines,suP-  
face and sol id objects. Sol id objects are descr ibed by means of GENER- 
ALIZED CONES 19,101,at several  levels of deta i l .Cones  can be intercon- 
nected by means of f ixed or movable po in ts ,w i th  arb i t rary  constra ints  
on rotat ions and shift ing. Speci f ic  jo int ing e lements  are def ined to 
proper ly  descr ibe the surface of an ar t i cu la ted  object ;so we can cor- 
rect ly answer to the question: "is the fly on the snake?" indipenden~y 
of how the snake is actual ly  co i led.More detai ls  can he found in Ill. 
From a computat iona l  point  of v iew,the use of a system of coord inated 
axes represent  a very natural  way to descr ibe the pos i t ion  of an object. 
If we are able to t ransform l inguist ic  re lat ions into quantitat ive geo- 
metr ica l  ones,the well  knows methodo log ies  of anal~t ical  geometry  can 
be used as a s imple ,genera l  purpose set of in ferenc ing ru les.Hence the 
goal of descr ib ing objects and spatial  re lat ions by means a simple,non 
redundant n-tuple of coord inated axes is very appeal ing. Unfor tunate ly  
it seems quite far from the psycho logy  of language 121. 
Therefore we associate a redundant FRAME OF REFERENCE (FOR) to every 
ob ject ,cons is t ing  of : 
- an ax is ,Z ,hav ing  d i rect ion of the "maOor" axis of the coDe.Two points 
aPe spec i f ied on it,Zmi n and Zmax,COrrespond ing  to the extremit ies  
of this major  axis; 
- a point  0,on the Z ax is ,which is the or ig in of the frame; 
- an ax is ,X ,or thogonal  to Z,that speci f ies  a further pr iv i leged direc- 
t ion of the ob ject ; th is  axis is def in ib!e only for some objects(eg.  
COGNITIVE MODELS FOR COMPUTER VISION 
a man) in which a front and a back can be dist inguished.  Objects f(r 
which the X axis is def inable are to be cal led CLASS 1 objects; 
those for which the X. axis is not def inable (eg. a pole) are to be 
cal led CLASS 2 objects; 
an ax is ,Y ,or thogonal  to X and Z.The Y axis is obv ious ly  not defina- 
ble for class 2 objects; 
a radial coordinate ~ whose or ig in is at O; 
the coord inates ~ and ~ speci f ied on the X-Y plane; 
a curv i l inear  coordinate t or ig inat ing at point O. 
The use of cones s impl i f ies  the FOR;it  al lows a homogeneous represen-  
tation of an object shape and of its spatial re lat ions with the exter- 
nal wor ld ; i t  proves par t icu lar ly  useful  in s i tuat ions like "the bal l  
is inside the box". 
SPATIAL RELATIONS BETWEEN OBJECTS 
Let's now analyze some spatial  re lat ions between ob jects , in  order to 
discuss how they can be t rans lated in terms of geometr ica l  primitives. 
Spatial  re lat ions involv ing the Z axis genera l ly  use a "major" axis 
perpendicu lar  to the earth surface;th is  is the onl~ absolute reference 
used in language perhaps because the concept of "high" and "low" is 
d i rect ly  re lated to the line of act ion of the force of gravity. There- 
fore the sentence "the object A is above the obOect B" can be concep- 
tual ized as : 
// B P -po in t~CQNE(A) ,Q-po in t~ CONE(B) : X(P)=X(Q) ,Y(P)=Y(Q) ,  
Z (P )~ Z(Q) I FOR does not require further spec i f i cat ion  // 
Note that we can state condit ions only for pairs  of points  whose hor-  
izontal pro ject ions  are the same. In fact, even the"pure" meaning of 
"above" is much more const ra in ing 14,131,this re lat ionship  is used in 
a number of "impure" meanings , in  which we cannot say that the horizon- 
tal pro ject ion of A is included in the hor izontal  pro ject ion  of B(Fig. 
la), or Z (P )~Z(0)  for any pair  or points P~ C0NE(A) and QeCONE(B)  
(Fig.lb). 
The prepos i t ion  "on" is often synonymous of "above",but  in some cases 
it can mean "below", as in "on the cei l ing", or involve hor izonta l  re- 
lat ions as in "the lamp is on the wa l l " .Usua l ly  "A on B" requires B 
to support A against the act ion of grav i ty ,by means of some kind of 
physical  contact. Hence,the conceptua l i zat ion  of "a man on a chair" is 
the same as "a man above a cha~r~'~plus an assert ion about physical  
contact and Support ing act ion : 
// ~ P -po in t~ CONE(MAN) ,Q-po in t~CONE(CHAIR)  : X(P)=X(Q),  
Y (P )=Y(Q) ,Z(P )~Z(Q)  I CONE(CHAIR) appl i~sa force to the 
CONE(MAN) I FOR does not require further spec i f i cat ion  // 
Hor izontal  re lat ions ar~ much more ambigous. Somet imes FOR is expl~ity 
stated,as in " looking at the church,the post off ice is on your  right"; 
otherwise a default  assumpt ion is to use FOR assoc iated with the speak_ 
er or the l istener. 
If we cons ider  the sentence "the object A is beh ind the object B" , two 
interpretat ions  are poss ib le : 
a) FOR is the n- tup le  assoc iated with the object B; 
10 G. ADORNI, A. BOCCALATTE and M. DI MANZO 
b) FOR is external  to both objects A and B. 
Case a can be assumed only if B is a class 1 object ;case b is always 
assumed when B is a class 2 object ,but  it is not usual even when B is 
a class 1 object. In the ease a the previous sentence is conceptualized 
as fo l lows : 
// ~ P -po in t~CONE(A) ,Q-po in t~ CONE(B) : Y (P )=Y(Q) ,X(P )~ X(Q) I 
FOR assoc iated with CONE(B) (ie. FORcCONE(B)  // 
This definit ion and the next one al lowto handle situations as thoseshownin  F~. 
2a-b ; the s i tuat ion of Fig.2c does not represent  a proper  use of "be- 
h ind" ; i f  such a prepos i t ion  is used,more inferencing capabi l i t ies  are 
needed. In the case b the previous sentence means that B is (partially) 
h id ing A to an observer ,who can be assumed,to be one of the actors in 
the story;hence the conceptual  representat ion is : 
// ~ P -po in te  CONE(A) ,Q-po in t~CONE(B)  : Y (P )=Y(Q) ,X(P )> X(Q)I 
X (P ) ,X (Q) ?~ ,Y (P ) ,Y (Q)~@ I FORaK-po in t  ~ (CONE(A) or CONE(B)) / /  
a) 
Y E- \ ]  b 
Y - -? 
.,y 
--? 
x I b) 
FIG. 2 F IG. 1 
x 
X 
Let's now to cons ider  re lat ions as "on the edge of" ,"on the su~faoe of;' 
"in the middle of" and so on. For every point P on the surface of the 
cone which descr ibes  the object A, i ts  poss ib le to f ind the correspon- 
ding c ross -sect ion , that  is character ized by a value Z of the coordi -  
nate along the cone axis. The boundary  of this sect ion is descr ibed by 
a radial coord inate ~((~,~.).Therefore the sentence "the pen is in the 
middle of the table" can be conceptua l i zed  as fo l lows ,assuming as ref- 
erence the cross sect ion of the table cone which corresponds to the 
table top : 
// 3 P -po in tm CONE(PEN) ,Q-point eCONE(TABLE)  : &(~,Z)m~,  
Z(P)=Z (Q) I CONE(TABLE) a~l ies  a force to the CONE(PEN) I 
max FOR c C ONE ( TABLE ) // 
Let 's conclude looking at sentences as "the house is before the bridge',' 
"two mi les after the l ights" and so on. In these cases spatial  relations 
are referred to a path ,usua l ly  not s t ra ight .Th is  type of re lat ions can 
be conceptua l i zed using a curv i l inear  coordinate t assoc iated with a 
COGNITIVE MODELS FOR COMPUTER VISION II 
t ra jectory  s or ig inat ing in the center  of FOR. I f  the analyt ical  de- 
scr ipt ion of such a t ra jectory  is unknown,the robot wil l  be able to 
make inferences only about the relat ive pos i t ions of objects along the 
path;so , for  instance, f rom the sentence "the house is two mi les after 
the br idge along the ~oad t0 Florence" it is poss ib le to deduce that 
a man wolk ing towards F lorence wil l  meet at  f irst the br idge and then 
the house,a f ter  an evaluable time. If more informat ions are avai lable 
(eg. the path is a road and the map of the town is known) , the position 
relat ive to other FOR can be eva luated from the actual value of t, in 
order to infer that "two mi les after the bridge" means exact ly  "on the 
right of the stat ion" .The formal descr ipt ion of "the object A is after 
the object B", is : 
// ~ P -po in t~ CONE(A) ,Q-po in tg  CONE(B) : Pg  s-trajectory,  
Q~ s-trajectory,  t(P) ~t (0 )  I s - t ra jectory  s ta r ,  from CONE(B) / /  
F inal ly,we should discuss how to quant i fy  all the inequal i t ies  which 
result from the prev ious ly  analyzed conceptual izat ions.  Such a quanti-  
f icat ion can be cons idered as a special case of spatial  inference, 
which unfor tunate ly  we cannot introduce here because of lack of space. 
An attempt to c lass i fy  inferences can be found in Ill. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The'problem of robotic v is ion has been 0nly sketched in this paper. 
Even if more deta i led analys is  of some part icu lar  objects can be found 
in the l i terature 13,7,10,131,v is ion is yet a substant ia l ly  open prob~ 
lem. A number  of basic quest ions as, for  example,~the representat ion  of 
objects with var iable shapes,or the use of knowledge about the expected 
goals of an actor to infer its future movementyand the proper l inking 
of cogni t ion with image-process ing procedures ,are  sti l l  wai t ing fo ra  
suitable answer. However , these topics are rece iv ing more and more at- 
tent ion,both because of impact that an advanced , in tegrated  v is ion-  
manipu lat ion  system could have on the appl icat ions of robot ics ,and 
because art i f ic ia l  inte l l igence people are aware that there is a large 
number of l inguist ic  problem that cannot be solved if this percept ion  
capabi l i ty  is not achieved. 
The work descr ibed in this paper is part of a la rgo  pro ject ,whose goal 
is the development of a cognit ive background,based on conceptual  de- 
pendency and related concepts l l l ,121,for an integrated v i s ion -man ip~ 
lat ion system. 
z 
I A I 
Y 
F IG .  2 - c 
12 G. ADORNI, A. BOCCALATTE and M. DI MANZO 
REFERENCES 
I1 
12 
13 
14 
Is 
191 
I lo l  
I l l l  
112\[ 
1131 
ll41 
llSl 
1161 
Adorni,G.,Boccalatte,A.,Di Manzo,M., Object representation and 
spatial knowledge: an insight into the problem of men-robot com- 
munication, 7th.Conf. Canadian Man-Computer Communication Society, 
Waterloo,Canada (june 1981). 
Adorni,G.,Di Manzo,M., Some considerations about a conceptual mod 
el oriented to the representation of spatial relationship(in Ital_ 
ian), National Research Council ITD-O45,Genoa,Italy (march 1980). 
Agin,G.J., Vision systems for inspectation and for manipulation 
control, J.Automatic Control Conf.,S.Francisco,CA,USA (june 1977). 
Hanson,A.,Riseman,E.(eds.), Computer vision systems (Academic 
Press,New York,1978). 
Boggess,L.C., Computational Interpret'ation of english spatial 
preposition, Tech-Rep. T-75,Coordinated Science Laboratory,Univ. 
of Illinois (february 1979). 
Kuipers,B.J., Modelling spatial knowledge, 5th. Int.J.Conf. on A. 
I.,Cambridge,MA,USA (august 1977). 
Lehnert,W.G., Representing physical objects in memory,Res-Rep.131, 
Dept. of Comp. Sc.,Yale Univ. (may 1978). 
Mackworth,A.K.,Havens,W.S., Structuring domain knowledge for vis- 
ual perception, 7th. Int.J. Conf. on A.I.,Vancouver,Canada (au- 
gust 1981). 
Marr,D.,Nishihara,H.K., Representation and recognition of the 
spatial organization of 3-D shapes,Proc.Royal.Soc.Lond.B. (1978). 
Nevatia,R., Computer analysis of scene of 3-D curved objects, 
(Birkhauser Verlag,Basel,1976). 
Schank,R.C.(ed.), Conceptual information processing (North- 
Holland,Amsterdam,1975). 
Schank,R.C.,Abelson,R.P., Scripts Plans Goals and Understanding 
(Lawrence Erlbaum,Hillsdale,1977). 
Waltz,D.L., Relating images concepts and words, NFS Workshop on 
the representation of 3-D objects,Univ.of Pennsylvania,Phyladel- 
phia (1979). 
Waltz,D.L.,Boggess,L.C., Visual analog representation for na~ural 
language understanding, 6th. Int.J.Conf. on A.I.,Tokyo,Japan 
(august 1979). 
Weymounth,T.E., Experiments in knowledge-driven interpretation 
of natural scene, 7th.lnt.J.Conf. on A.I.,Vancouver,Canada (au- 
gust 1981). 
Winston,P.H.(ed.), The psychology of computer vision (Mc Graw 
Hill,New York,1975). 
