M REPRESENTATION OF SEMANTIC INFORMATION IN GMAN 
MACHINE READABLE DICTIONARIES 
Winf r ied  Lenders 
lns t l tu t  fu r  Komm~nikatlonsforschung u.  PhonetAk, Univ. Bonn 
Poppe lsdor fer  A l lee  47, D-5300 Bonn, 
The basis of this paper is a comparative stud~ on German 
machine readable dictionaries which has been conducted during 
the last two years In connection with a research project 
financed by the German minister for science and technology. 
The aim of this project was to compare and to describe about 
12 dictionaries, used in computer systems, in more or less 
conventional language analysis and synthesis systems as well 
as in understanding systems. The comparison and description 
was oriented to the data basis, the theoretical background, 
the field of application, and especially the microstructura 
of these dictionaries. In this paper we want to discuss a 
specific problem of lexAcal mlcrostructure which has arisen 
in the context of thls project, the problem of semantic In- 
formation. This problem Is most relevant since on the one 
side all of the exAstlng machine readable dictionaries are 
relatively restricted in their semantic dimension, and on the 
other side more detailed information about the semantics of 
words is extremely necessary for language analysis and synthes- 
Is programs as well as for understanding systems. 
The first point of my discussion is to explain how the 
meaning&of German words are actually represented in the 
mlcrostructure of the Intended dictionaries. My examples are 
taken from the dictionary components of the systems SUSY, 
LIMAS, HAM-RPM, PLIDIS, BEAST/BACONp from the German word data 
- 176  - 
bank "WahrAg" and from several other more theoretical 
approaches. 
My second point Is the question how far in these approach- 
es the general IAnguIatic problem of representation of word 
meanings has been solved and which elements of the semantic 
level are normally not to be found in these dictionaries. In 
the third point I want to advocate the thesis that in a mach- 
ine readable dActlonar~j the meaning of a word can be repres- 
ented by a set of semantic relations. In connection with this 
thesis recent developments An word semantics especially An the 
fields of frame theory and semantic network theory have to 
be d i scussed .  
The general assumption of this paper is that "dictionary" 
- this concept Is used synonymous with "lexicon" - desJ~nat- 
es an~ co l lec t ion  of  word elements o f  a spec i f i c  language; 
every  element o f  such a co l lec t ion  should be connected wi th  a 
cer ta in  se t  o f  l i ngu is t i c  In fo rmat ion .  This se t  o f  l i ngu is t i c  
Anforuat lon  I s  ca l led  the m/croat ructure  of the d ic t ionary .  
The mlc~ostmcture  should be cons idered  as an n - tupe l  o f  
descr ip t ive  e lements ,  each of  which cons is ts  of an In format ion  
f ie ld .  Examples are the f ie ld  of  morpholog ica l  In fo rmat ion ,  
the f ie ld  of  mox*phological in fo rmat ion ,  the f ie ld  of  phonolog-  
I ca l  An fomat ion  and the f ie ld  o f  semantic  In fo rmat ion .  The 
f ie ld  of semantic in fo rmat ion  aga in  may be regarded as a 
n - tupe l  of  In fo rmat ion .  The e lements  of th i s  n - tupa l  may be 
spec i f i c  re la t ions  which combine the concerned lex ica l  element 
wi th  o ther  lex ica l  e lements  o f  the Intended d ic t ionary .  - The 
ob jec t  of  th i s  paper I s  not to d i scuss  how the semant ic  d i -  
mension o f  an Ind iv idua ls  d ic t ionary  or  lex icon  may be organ-  
Iced but to show in  what way machine readable  d ic t ionar ies  
which are determined fo r  use in  d i f fe rent  computer systems 
could be const ruc ted  In  the i r  semantic  leve l  with respect  to 
the resu l t s  of recent  d i scuss ion  in  Computat ional  L ingu is t i cs  
and A~tifAcial Intelligence Research. 
- 177-  
