COLING 82, J. Horeclo) (ed.) 
North.Holland Publishing Company 
@ Aeodcm~ 1982 
NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING AND THE PERSPECTIVES 
OF QUESTION ANSWERING 
Petr Sgall 
Department of Appl ied Mathematics 
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 
Charles University 
Prague 
Czechoslovakia 
A method of automatic answering of questions in 
natural language, based only on input texts and 
a set of rules of inference, is described. A first 
experimental system including a grammatico-seman- 
tic analysis of the input texts and questions, a 
procedure of inferencing, a search for appropriate 
answers to individual questions and a synthesis 
of the answers are being implemented, mainly in 
the language Q and PL/I. The output of the ana- 
lysis, the underlying representations of the utter- 
ances of the input text, serves as a base of the 
knowledge representation scheme, on which the 
inference rules (mapping dependency trees into 
dependency trees\] operate. 
The important, though partial possibi l it ies of automatic under- 
standing of natural language gave rise to different kinds of experi- 
mental systems, ranging from sophisticated systems of machine trans- 
lation through various kinds of modell ing of dialogue (with robots, 
data bases, etc.\] to question answering. 1 From a l inguistic viewpoint 
the main challenge consists in attempting to transfer the burden of 
the communication between humans and computers to the latter, who 
should be able to react in an appropriate way to the user s input 
texts formulated in her or his native language, without serious re- 
strictions. The necessity of thousands of human beings preparing data 
"for computers" (not only encoding messages, but also compil ing data 
bases\] should be removed. 
This challenge constitutes one of the central tasks of modern 
linguistics; an explicit descript ion of the main features of the lan- 
guage system, which is necessary for these purposes, must be based on 
a sound theoretical framework suitable for the description of grammar 
as well as of the l inguist ical ly patterned aspects of semantics and 
pragmatics. A close cooperation of l inguistics with logic, computer 
science and cognit ive science has become urgent. This task presents 
also an effective way of checking the results of theoretical l inguis- 
tics in various important fields. 
These considerations have led the group of algebraic l inguistics 
in Prague (now belonging to the department of applied mathematics, 
faculty of mathematics and physics, Charles University) to start work- 
ing on an experimental system based on the approach called TIBAQ 
(Text-and-~nference Based Answering of Questions).2 Its four main pro- 
cedures are (I\] grammatico-semantic analysisi (2\] rules of inference, 
(3) identif ication of a full (direct\] Qr partial answer, and (4\] syn- 
thesis; see the overall  scheme in Fig. I. 
357 
358 P. SGALL 
input text 
+ 
LOOK-UP FOR 
RELEVANT STATEMENTS 
INFERENCE 
LOOK-UP FOR ANSWER 
SYNTHESIS 
~- ANALYSIS  m~eaning 
is it a quest ion? 
set of s tatements  
set of re levant  
statements  
enr iched set of 
re levant  statements 
~- answers  
Fig. 1 
An overa l l  scheme of a system based on the method T IBAQ 
(I) The automat ic  g rammat ico -semant ic  a n a 1 y s i s3  is be- 
ing prepare~ in such a form that it can handle Czech and Engl ish  
po ly techn ica l  texts (papers, reports,  monographs)  in their  usual  
shape, and also quest ions  formulated in Czech. Thus there wi l l  be no 
need for the user to "cope wi th  the needs of the computer  system". 
The procedure  of analys is  has the fo l lowing character i s t i c  propert ies  
d i s t ingu ish ing  it from a mere pars ing procedure:  
(i) The ana lys is  procedure  is based on a systemat ic  theoret ica l  
account  of the structure of natura l  language, the funct ional  generat -  
ive descr ipt ion;  this l ingu is t ic  approach,  e laborated in the Prague 
group of a lgebra ic  l inguist ics ,  4 makes use of the resu l ts  of the em- 
p i r ica l  research carr ied out in the frame of European structural  l in- 
guist ics,  and also of the methodo log ica l  requ i rements  formulated by 
Chomsky and the d i f fe rent  wings that deve loped from his school. The 
resu l t ing  l inguist ic  approach is used as a general  base ensur ing that 
the par t icu lar  pract ica l  so lut ions (in ambigu i ty  removal ,  etc.) chos-  
en for a rest r ic ted area can be rep laced by more genera l ly  val id  sets 
of rules, whenever  it appears  as necessary  to cross the boundar ies  of 
this narrow area Ce.g. when apply ing the method to a new kind of 
texts, to a new po ly techn ica l  domain, etc.).  This is ensured thanks 
to the un iversa l  character  of natura l  language and to the fact that 
the l inguist ic  f ramework  (if appropr ia te ly  chosen) prov ides means for 
an adequate descr ip t ion  of al l  its subdomains  Ccf. Haj i~ov~ and Sgall, 
198Oa). 
(ii) In connect ion  wi th  this requ i rement  the analys is  procedure  
is des igned to t ransfer  the input  sentences from their  outer form to 
a d i sambiguated  notat ion  of their  meanings  <which can be ident i f ied 
with their  under ly ing  structures,  in the f ramework of funct iona l  
LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING AND QUESTION ANSWERING 359 
generative description). The level of meaning of sentences includes 
such syntactic units as Actor, Objective, Addressee and other partic- 
ipants or cases, Manner, Instrument, Place, Direction and other free 
adverbial modifications, as well as lexical and morphological  meanings 
(the latter including e.g. number, tense, modalit ies>. This level is 
formulated as a l inguistic counterpart of intensional structure,which 
makes it possible to define the concept of strict synonymy of expres- 
sions and to ensure an algorithmic transit ion'to a postulated univer- 
sal formal language of intensional logic~<among the trends that start- 
ed with Montague, our account of meaning- stands close to that by Da- 
vid Lewis, though the form of formal language we prefer has much in 
common with Tich~'s framework>. The representations of the meanings 
of sentences serve as the main components of knowledge representation 
in the semantic networks of the systems based on the method TIBAQ. 
They can be i l lustrated by the representation in Fig. 2. 
<iii> As can be seen from this representation, our approach 
works with dependency trees as the form of meanings of sentences. 
This allows us to work with relatively simple underlying structures 
in which such notions as "head" and "modifier", or "noun" phrase vs. 
"verb" phrase, as well as the relations described by Fi l lmore as cases 
find an economical treatment. 
<iv> Not only the roles of the elements Of syntactic relations, 
but also the topic-focus art iculation of sentences finds its proper 
place in the representations yielded by this procedure of analysis. 
Also the whole pragmatical ly based interplay of topic, fccus, contex- 
tual boundness and communicative dynamism, as combined with the recur- 
sive properties of sentence structure can in principle be rendered in 
the chosen form of representations of the meanings of sentences. 6 
Analysis of written texts does not al low for a complete identif ication 
of all the items relevant for the topic-focus articulation, and the 
present form of our algorithms gives results which are not fully re- 
liable, but the errors appear to be neither too numerous nor too grave 
for the given purpose. The main rules consiat in understanding the 
parts of a sentence standing to the left of the finite verb as belong- 
ing to the topic, while the verb itself <if it is not  semantical ly 
void, as the copula, or become, carry out, etc.) and the elements 
following it are c lassed as belonging to the focus in the Czech poly- 
techpical texts. 7 Such a treatment appears as sufficient for ensuring 
that those cases in which the topic-focus art iculation is semantical ly 
relevant will be handled appropriately. This concerns the relative 
scopes of quantif iers in such sentences as Every car has several 
wheel_______ss and the "holistic ~ understanding of the topic e.g. in Smokin~ 
is dangerous, as well as Kuno s "exhaustive listing" and the difference 
between thetic and categorical judgements; even more important is the 
relevance of the boundary between topic and focus for the determina- 
tion of the scope Qf negation, and thus also for the identif ication 
of presupposit ions in some cases: Many ar rowsd~dn' t  hit the target 
does not imply that the target wasn-t hit by many arrows, and The 
king of France didn't come to COLING 82 does not presuppose th~-~x- 
istence of a king of France. The relevance of topic and focus for 
natura l  lanuuage understandinq is most clearly recognized in connect-. 
i on  with the assignment of reference to definite noun phrases <and 
other expressions>. 
Cv~ The procedure of analysis provides also for a treatment 
of the interconnections between the individual assertions <which are 
Stored in the shape of the meanings of sentences). This is done by 
means of two main devices: first, in the representation of each lex- 
ical meaning in the lexicon there is an indication of the relations 
360 P. SGALL 
of synonymy and hyponymy (subordinat ion,  su \ [erord inat ion> of the given 
item to others, and also semant ic  features are used (for a part ia l  
model l ing  of the object  domain pert inent  to the treated area of poly-  
technical  texts>; 8 second, the re lat ion between an object  and the oc- 
currences of express ions  re fer r ing  to it in the texts is handled by 
means of a reg ister  or concordance,  supply ing addresses  of all the 
occurrences of a g iven unit  in the whole  set of knowledge represen-  
tation. 
After  hav ing examined d i f fe rent  means of implementat ion  of the 
analys is  procedure,  esp. Kay's parser,  Wood's  ATN, the Grenoble  system 
and others, we dec ided that among the systems actua l ly  ava i lab le  to 
us the f ramework e laborated in the T.A.U.M. group, based on Colme-  
rauer s Q-systems,  can serve best  our aims. Thanks to the Canad ian  
co l leagues we got the poss ib i l i ty  to implement  Q-systems <through For-  
tran> on such computers  as IBM 360, EC 1040 (Robotron>and others (by 
means of a procedure  given at our d isposa l  by B. Thouin  who together  
wi th R .K i t t redge int roduced us to the int r icac ies  of their  systems>. 
It appeared that Q-systems are a means f lex ib le  enough to be used for 
our purposes,  in spite of the fact that several  major  d i f ferences  can 
be found between the or ig ina l  goals Q-systems were des igned for and 
between our goals: after a couple of years of exper ience our program- 
mers <first  of al l  Z .K i rschner  and K.Ol iva> are able to use Q-systems 
for a dependency-based  analys is  a t tempt ing  to penetrate  into the under-  
ly ing st ructures of sentences <which is necessary  also for t rans lat ion  
between typo log ica l ly  d i f fe rent  languages>. The trees Q-systems were 
des igned to operate on can be read i ly  interpreted as standing c lose 
to our dependency  trees <though instead of each of the nodes exempl i -  
f ied in F ig.2 it is necessary  to have a whole  subtree composed of sev- 
eral nodes, s ince Q- language works only wi th e lementary  node labels>. 
Moreover,  it became also clear that Q-systems are a sui table means to 
handle in f lect iona l  languages exh ib i t ing  compl icated  systems of mor-  
phemic ambigu i ty  and synonymy, 9 as wel l  as the so-ca l led free word 
order <which is not free at all, but determined by the top ic - focus  
art icu lat ion,  esp. by communicat ive  dynamism, in a much more stra ight-  
forward way than is the case in Engl ish>. It is not necessary  to work 
with ind iv idual  rules for the d i f ferent  permutat ions  of the e lements  
of a sentence, s ince an approach work ing - roughly  speaking - with an 
e lementary  dependency  tree for every tentat ive  c lause <a f inite verb 
and its ne ighbours  on both sides> is possible,  inc luding the use of 
l ist var iab les  for the i r re levant  parts of the tree. I0 
The strong combinator ic  power of Q-systems,  as well  as its re- 
lat ive t ransparency,  made it poss ib le  to formulate  a procedure  of 
analysis ,  which is by far not yet complete,  but which  accounts  a l ready 
for hundreds of k inds of phenomena from the syntax of Czech. These in- 
c lude a re la t ive ly  complete analys is  of the st ructure  of noun phrases,  
ach ieved by means of check ing the agreement  of an ad ject ive  with its 
govern ing noun, and pre fer r ing  a noun in the geni t ive case to be under-  
stood as an adjunct  of an immediate ly  preced ing noun, whenever  this 
is possible,  whi le  wi th the other ob l ique cases <simple and prepos i -  
t ional> there is a complex scale, e laborated by J .Panevov~, dec id ing  
whether  the given noun funct ions as an ad junct  of this or that preced-  
ing noun or as a modi f ier  of the verb <the indices of the given nouns, 
verbs and morphemic  means are used to determine the speci f ic  dependency  
re lat ion>. The par t ic ipants  mod i fy ing  the verb are ident i f ied  with the 
help of lexical  data concern ing  va lency  <obl igatory and opt ional  mod- 
i f icat ions and their  usual  morphemic  forms>. ~fe ment ioned a l rea Jy  the 
ident i f~cat fon  of topic and focus, ach ieved prec ise ly  on the base of 
the "fzee" word order. 
LANGUAGE'UNDERSTANDING AND QUESTION ANSWERING 361 
Thus it seems that a syntact ico-semant ic  analys is  of the texts 
of a l imited po lytechn ica l  domain (we started with texts on operat ion-  
al ampl i f iers> is feasible.  In other words, it is poss ib le  to obta in  
in an automat ic  way an image of the input text hav ing the shape of s 
set of d i sambiguated  under ly ing representat ions  of sentences <cal led 
statements in the seque l>, in terconnected by means of po inters  based 
on  the lexicon and on the paradigmat ic  re lat ions reg is tered there 
(hyponymy, etc.>. 
Whenever  a user 's  input quest ion is analyzed <by the same anal-  
ysis procedure as the statements are>, the system goes over to other 
procedures,  which operate on the set of statements gained by the 
grammat ico-semant ic  analysis.  
(2} F i rst  of all, the whole set of statements is searched through 
(by means of the concordance we ment ioned in (v> above>, to ident i fy  
the subset of statements poss ib ly  re levant  to the given quest ion <in 
the f irst exper iments,  a non-empty intersect ion of the two sets of 
autosemant ic  lexical  units being treated as a suf f ic ient  condi t ion  
for these statements>. The rules of i n f e r e n c e , which are 
then appl ied to this rest r ic ted set of statements,  are descr ibed (to- 
gether with the procedure of ident i f icat ion of appropr ia te  answers> 
in the short communicat ion  presented by P . J i rk~ and J .Haj i~,  who are 
the main authors of the respect ive  programmes;  we can l imit ourse lves 
here to a few i l lust rat ions  of these two procedures.  In the rules of 
inference such modi f i cat ions  of the statements are inc luded as the 
de let ion of an adverbia l  unde~ certa in condi t ions  <e.g. from "It is 
poss ib le  to mainta in  X wi thout  employ ing Y" it fe l lows that it is pos- 
sible to mainta in  X), or several  shifts of verbal  modal i t ies ,  a shift  
of Actor  and Instrument in some cases, and also a con juct ion or a sim- 
ilar connect ion  of two statements;  e.g. "X is a dev ice with the prop- 
erty Y" and "X can be appl ied to handle Z" are combined to yiel  d "X 
is a device that has the property  Y and can be appl ied to handle Z". 
In the f irst exper iment  the inference rules are appl ied only  
dur ing the handl ing of a g iven quest ion.  In case a procedure check ing 
all newly analyzed statements fo rcompat ib i l i ty  with the a l ready giv- 
en pieces of in format ion is formulated at a later stage of the re- 
search, then it wi l l  a lso be necessary  to decide which inference rules 
should be appl ied a l ready dur ing that procedure <i.e. independent ly  
on quest ions asked by the user>, and which types of consequences  should 
be inc luded permanent ly  in the stock of data. It wi l l  also be necesn 
sary, in further exper iments,  to use heur ist ic  s t rategies  for the 
choice of the inference rules to be appl ied at a g iven time point. The 
growth of the enr iched set of statements must be contro l led  and lim- 
ited. 
(3) The enr iched set of re levant  statements is then searched 
through by means of a procedure of the choice of an a n s w e r . The 
representat ion  of the quest ion is compared wSth the statements  belong-  
ing to the enr iched set, with three kinds of poss ib le  results:  
(a) the Statement is found to give a full  answer to the quest ion,  
if the two representat ions  d i f fer  only in that the answer includes 
speci f ic  lexical  units (perhaps a whole subtree> in the pos i t ion  oc- 
cupied by the quest ion word in the quest ion <this pos i t ion being shift-  
ed to the end of our representat ion  of the quest ion>; 
(b) the statement contains in format ion which probably  can be o9 
interest  to the user, though either some of the parts of the two re- 
presentat ions  are not identical ,  e.g. these representat ions  d i f fer  in 
what concerns hyponymy, or in semant ica l ly  re levant  aspeCts of their  
word order (com/nunicative dynamism>; 
362 P. SGALL 
<c) the statement is not relevant for the given question, if 
either the sequence of edges of the tree going from the root to the 
question word does not have a corresponding counterpart there, or if 
the two representations are radically different in their other parts. 
In case (b) the representation of the answer is assigned the 
prefix "I <only> know that ..." to point out that the answer is not 
complete. 
<43-An answer undergoes then the procedure of s y n t h e s i s, 
transducing the underlying representation to the graphemic shape of 
a Czech sentence. This procedure has been implemented in PL/I on the 
computer EC 1040 and is being checked within a rather broad system 
of random generation of Czech sentences, which encompasses several 
hundreds o f  rules covering most different grammatical phenomena of 
all levels (cf. Panevov~'s paper presented at this conference). 
The system prepared for the first experiments with the method 
TIBAQ is l imited in several respects. An enrichment concerning the 
linguistic aspects <broadening of the lexicon, inclusion of yes/no 
questions> does not seem to be too difficult, since the grammatical 
patterning has already been included in the algorithms to a rather 
large extent. Thus the two main problems that have to be solved in 
adapting the system to handle open texts from a chosen branch of pol- 
ytechnics or science in an appropriate way consist in 
(i) the relation of instantiation <or of different objects 
bearing tha same lexical denomination), i.e. of the assignment of 
reference to definite noun phrasesand other expressions has to be 
solved (in the texts processed in the first experiments only general 
concepts are present, so that up to now this step was not necessary); 
at least three kinds of means should be used here, namely the degrees 
of salience of the images of individual objects in the stock of know-  
ledge shared by the speaker and the hearer (see Haji~ov~ and Vrbov~, 
this volume, about preparatory studies in this direction), further an 
evaluation of the known tendency to keep the topic of an utterance in 
its function also in the next utterance of a connected text, and, 
thirdly, rules concerning the role of factual konwledge in the deter- 
mination of reference; this last point, which goes beyond the lin- 
guistic structuring, is probably restricted to a rather narrow domain 
in wel l - formulated technical t@xts; 
(ii) an enlargement of the rules of inference <from about thirty 
that were already formulated to hundreds of them); it may be necessary 
to add rules of new shapes and to have a procedure for checking what 
effect a specific rule of inference will have in connection with the 
individual lexical and grammatical phenomena; in this respect only 
the first steps have been done in the empirical research, so that 
when enriching the lexicon we may face new problems of checking all 
the already formulated rules Of inference. Only when more experience 
in these new fields in gained will  it be possible to formulate regular 
patterns and general procedures which could be adequate for these new 
areas of artif icial intell igence. Such an inquiry certainly belongs 
to most promising directions leading to a deeper insight into the re- 
lationships between communication and cognition. 
FOOTNOTES: 
1 We do not have in mind here the systems including only an 
elementary or marginal l inguistic equipment, though some of them can 
well serve the purposes of text information retrieval (cf. e.g. the 
method MOSAIC, intended for automatic indexing and for extracting, 
LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING AND QUESTION ANSWERING 363 
prepared by Z. Xirschner in the Prague group>, or of natural language 
front-end contact with data bases. Systems belonging to the domain of 
artif icial intel l igence and serving for man-machine communication in 
natural language need a much more complete linguistic elaboration. 
This concerns the systems intended for open set~ of instructions for 
a robot and for a dialogue with it (Winograd's SHRDLU>, with which 
the robot's reactions can serve as a criterion for checking whether 
the input was "understood" by the system. The investigations Of KRL 
by Bobrow, Winograd, Kay and others, the task oriented dialogue sys- 
tem prepared at SRI <Robinson, Hendrix, Hobbs, Grosz and others>, as 
well as e.g. the models of dialogues constructed by the group of 
W. yon Hahn in Hamburg may be classed with the systems of natural 
language understanding. However, these systems (and also those design- 
ed to analyze or generate narrative and other texts on the base of 
scripts, scenarios and similarly9 differ in the level and complete- 
ness of the linguistic approaches underlying them. As for machine 
translation, it is interesting that most of the l inguistical ly well 
equipped systems Cthose of Vauquois and his group, of Kulagina~ of 
Apresjan and of T.A.U.M.> concern French. 
2 The first characterization of a question-answering system of 
this kind was presented at the 6th International conference on com- 
putational l inguistics, Ottawa; see Haji~ov~ (1976). 
3 A prel iminary characteristics of this procedure can be found 
in Panevov~ and Sgali(1979); as for an account including il lustrat- 
ions of its technical aspects, see Panevov~ and Oliva (in press>. 
4 See Sgall et al (1969>; Haji~ov~ and Sgall (198Oa>; Sgall, 
Haji~ov~ and Panevov~ (in prep.>. 
5 Sgall, Haji~ov~ and Proch~zka (1977>; Sgall (i980>. 
6 For a short empirical and formal characterization of this 
interplay see Haji~ov~ and Sgall (1980b>; more details are given in 
Sgali, Haji~ov~ and Panevov4 (in prep.>. 
7 In English the situation is more difficult, since even in 
printed texts it is usual here that the intonation pattern of a sen- 
tence is marked, esp. with adverbials of time and place following 
the intonation centre (which cannot be readily recognized by an auto- 
matic analysis of the written sentence>; these adverbials in such a 
position belong to the topic: W e came to PRAGUE yesterday differs 
from We came to Praue YESTERDAY; see Haji~ovl and Sgall (1975;1980b>, 
where some"rules of thumb" for the identif ication of topic and 
focus in such sentences were given. 
8 For our example in Fig. 2 with the lexical unit device there 
are pointers to such subordinated units as operational amplif ier , 
filter, bandpass filter, stopband filter, etc.; all these units are 
assigned the semantic feature "device"; apply has a pointer to its 
synonym use; design has a semantic feature of an action noun and a 
pointer to its synonym ~ ,  while system is assigned a semantic 
feature of "intellectual category". 
9 The morphemic analysis of Czech was implemented in PL/I in 
the seventies, see Kr~llkov~, Weisheitelov~ and Sgall (1982). 
I0 Cf. Panevov~ and Oliva (1982); a German translation of 
Colmerauer's definit ion of Q-systems will appear in Prague Bull. of 
Mathematical Linguistics 38, 1982. 
364 P. SGALL 
REFERENCES: 
\[i\] Haji~ovl, E., Question and answer in l inguistics and in man-mach- 
ine communication, Statistical Methods in Linguistics (SMIL) 
(1976), No. i, 36-46. 
~2\] Haji~ov~, E. and Sgall, P., Topic and focus in transformational 
grammar, Papers in Linguistics 8 <1975) 3-58. 
\[3\] Haji~ov~, E. and Sgall, P., Linguisti~ j meaning and knowledge re- 
presentation in automatic understanding of natural language, 
in: COLING 80 - Proceedings of the 8th Int. Conference ok Comput- 
ational Linguistics (Tokio) 67-75; reprinted in P ragu~ Bull. of 
Mathematical Linguistics 34 (1980a) 5-21. i 
\[4\] Haji~ov~, E. and Sgall, P., Dependency-based spec i f~at ion  of 
topic and focus , Statistical Methods in LinguistiCs (SMIL) 
(198Ob), No.l-2, 93-140~ 
\[5\] Kr~ifkov~, K., Weisheitelov~, J. and Sgall, P., Automatic morph- 
emic analysis of Czech, Explizite Beschreibung der Sprache und 
automatische Textbearbeitung VII (P~ague, 1982). 
\[6\] Panevov~, J. and Sgall, p., Towards an automatic parser for Czech, 
Int. Review of Slavic Linguistics 4 <1979) 433-445. 
\[7\] Panevov~, J. and Oliva, K., On the use of Q-language for syntactic 
analysis of Czech, in: Explizite Beschreibung der Sprache und auto- 
matische Textbearbeitung VIII <Prague, 1982). 
\[8\] Sgall,P., Towards a pragmatical ly based theory of meaning, in: 
Searle, J.R., Kiefer, F. and Bierwisch, M. (eds.), Speech act 
theory and pragmatics (D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1980, 233-246). 
\[9\] Sgall,P., Haji~ov~,E. and Panevov~, J., The meaning of the senten- 
ce in its semantic and pragmatic aspects <Academia, Prague, in 
prep.). 
Sgall, P., Haji~ov~, E. and Proch~zka, 0., On the role of l inguist- 
ic semantics, Theoretical l inguistics 4 <1977) 31-59. 
Sgall, P., Nebesk~, L., Goral~fkov~, A. and Haji~ov~, E., A funct- 
ional approach to syntax in the generative description of language 
<American Elsevier, New York, 1969). 
\[lO\] 
\[11\] 
BE 
AMPLIFIER-b-Ag DEVICE-Pred 
OPERATIONAL-b-Det VERSATILE-Det SPAN-Det 
APPLY-b-Ag BC "CONDITION-Pat AND DESIGN-Pat 
GE.N-b-Ag DEVICE-b-Pat GEN-b-Ag SIGNAL-Pat GEN-b-Ag SYSTEM-Pat 
Fig. 2: A TR of "Operational amplifier is a versati le device with 
applications spanning signal conditioning and systems design" 
