COLING ~,  ~ Horec~ /~.) 
North-Holland PubltJhing Company 
Accdcm~ 1982 
PARSING GERMAN 
Ingeborg Steinacker,  Harald Trost 
Department  of Medical  Cybernet ics  
Univers i ty  of Vienna 
The first part of this paper is dedicated to an overv iew 
of the parser of the system VIE-LANG (Viennese Language 
Understanding System). The parser is a product ion 
system which uses an inter leaved method that combines 
syntax and semantics.  It parses d i rect ly  into the 
internal representat ion of the system, without producing 
an intermediate syntact ic  structure. The last part 
d iscusses the re lat ionship between some special  features 
of the German language, and propert ies  of the parser 
that or ig inate in the language. 
GENERAL APPROACH 
A sentence is parsed word per word, from left to right. The parser 
is largely a data-dr iven product ion system. Product ions involve the 
use of syntact ic  and semant ic  information at all major stages of the 
process. Noun phrases,  for example, are recognized by an ATN which 
ver i f ies  the result of syntact ic  analysis  semantical ly .  It returns 
semant ica l ly  valid NPs only. The parser belongs to the class of 
semantic parsers as suggested by \[I\], \[4\], \[7\]. It has two main 
sources of information: one is a semantic net, which propagates the 
information about select ional  restr ict ions,  the other is the 
pars ing- lex icon,  which for each word conta ins d i f ferent  senses 
associated with the information necessary to d ist inguish one sense 
from the others. Informat ion includes syntact ic  features of the 
sentence (infinit ive, sur face-cases  of dependent  noun phrases .... ), 
semant ic  restr ict ions and words that occur together with the 
input-word. 
The product ions make use of a correspondence between syntact ic  
information in the sentence and the roles of the net (see chapter 
internal representat ion for an explanat ion of roles). Product ions 
are used not only for generat ing the internal representat ion of 
const i tuents  but also as expectat ions  that guide the analys is  of the 
rest of the sentence. 
The generat ion of the internal structure corresponding to the 
sentence is centered around the verb. Since the representat ion of 
other const i tuents  can be init iated independent ly  of the verb, the 
parser bui lds a semant ic  structure immediate ly  after a const i tuent  
is recognized. These structures are stored in a list, until the 
main verb of the sentence has been found. Then the parser tr ies to 
fill the case-s lots  of the verb with the given structures.  The 
semant ic  categor ies  of the structures have to be matched against the 
value restr ict ions of the roles of the verb. 
INTERNAL REPRESENTATION 
The source of semant ic  informat ion 
Net \[2\]. This net formal ism has 
ep is temolog ica l ly  c lear and expl ic it .  
is a Structural  Inher i tance 
the advantage of being 
SI -Nets are based on a str ict  
365 
366 I. STEINACKER and H. TROST 
discr iminat ion between few structural  components,  and their content 
(what is represented).  Real world knowledge is represented in the 
form of concepts and roles. Roles explain re lat ionships between 
concepts.  A concept is def ined by its at t r ibutes  wh ich  consist  of 
two parts: the role and the value restr ict ion.  The value 
restr ict ion is a concept which def ines the range of poss ib le f i l lers 
for the attr ibute,  the role def ines the funct ion of a fi l ler with 
regard to the concept being defined. Ro le- f i l le r  concepts can be 
regarded as semantic categor ies.  
Gener ic  concepts are organized in a h ierarchy of super-  and 
subconcepts.  A subconcept  inherits the at t r ibutes  of the 
superconcept.  If a concept has more than one superconcept  it 
inherits the combined set of attr ibutes.  When process ing an input 
indiv iduals  of the addressed concepts are instant iated.  These 
indiv iduals  const i tute  the episodic  layer of the net. 
A word sense addresses either a concept or the attr ibute of a 
concept. If an input word relates to a concept,  as most nouns and 
verbs do, that concept is instant iated.  If it corresponds to a role 
both the concept and the attr ibute are instant iated,  i. e. the 
gener ic  concept,  the role def in ing the attr ibute and the value 
restr ict ion.  Most ad ject ives  and most prepos i t ions  are mapped into 
roles (size, colour, location, time, .... ) but also some nouns 
(e.g. father is the role of a person in the concept family). 
The net is structured in a way that fac i l i tates  the incorporat ion of 
results gained in l inguist ics:  attr ibutes of act ions are def ined in 
a way corresponding to cases of a case grammar.  This can  best be 
i l lustrated by an example: Act ions are represented as net-concepts ,  
e.g. DO. The concept DO is def ined by at t r ibutes  with roles like 
AGENT, OBJECT, GOAL, RESULT, that are restr icted by adequate 
ro le- f i l ler  concepts.  By def in ing at t r ibutes  in this way a 
correspondence between surface cases in a sentence and roles of the 
net can easi ly  be establ ished.  
THE PARSING-LEXICON 
In the pars ing- lex icon  each word-sense is associated with 
product ions.  These product ions  ref lect the correspondence between 
surface cases of the sentence and semant ic  cases within the net. 
The number of tests in a product ion corre lates  to the number of 
senses of a word. By execut ing these tests the parser gains the 
informat ion necessary  to choose the correct  reading of a word. 
Tests check the syntact ic  and the semant ic  context  in which an input 
word  is found. Somet imes morpholog ica l  informat ion and the 
occurrence of certa in words have to be taken into cons iderat ion  as 
well.  The range of tests ref lects our general  approach to parsing: 
combining syntax and semant ics  at all stages of the pars ing process 
\[8\]. 
Depending on the stage of the process the fai lure of a test is 
interpreted in two ways. If the end of the sentence has been 
encountered the result  is taken as false, if pars ing is in progress 
the test is repeated at later stages of the process. 
Act ions associated with the tests most ly  deal with semant ic  
s t ructure-bu i ld ing procedures.  Some act ions are used to control  the 
PARSING GERMAN 367 
pars ing process. Usual ly  the semantic st ructure for a const i tuent  
of the sentence is bui lt  after the const i tuent  is recognized but 
act ions can delay the creat ion of net-structures.  The reasons for 
such a delay are expla ined in the fol lowing chapter. 
A verb-sense is recognized by taking into cons iderat ion the 
syntact ic  surroundings of the verb and the semant ic  categor ies that 
match the select ional  restr ict ions def ined by the verb. After a 
verb-sense has been chosen expectat ions are bui lt  up regarding 
miss ing const i tuents.  The occurrence of certa in surface-structures 
also leads to the formation of expectat ions.  Therefore tests that 
are associated with verbs first check the surface structure of the 
sentence (cases, prepos i t ions. . . ) .  The const i tuents  that sat is fy 
these syntact ic  tests have to fulf i l l  semantic select ional  
restr ict ions.  After having passed these tests, act ions create the 
semantic representat ion for the verb and fill its roles with the 
selected const i tuents.  
Unless an entry in the lexicon includes a test regarding subject and 
object of a sentence the fol lowing default  act ions are executed 
automatically: the subject of a sentence is mapped onto the AGENT 
and the object (accusative) is mapped onto the OBJECT of the action. 
A Detai led Example 
The two senses of 'gehen' in the fol lowing example can be 
d isambiguated by using the entr ies in the pars ing- lex icon l isted 
below (parts of the entry which are irrelevant to the example are 
left out). These sample entr ies include important kinds of tests 
and actions. 
(i) 'Ich gehe in den Park.' (I walk into the garden.) 
(2) 'Der Bus geht nach Wien.' (The bus is bound for Vienna.) 
gehenl  (move along) 
C((CASE NOM) AND (RESTRICTION ANIMATE)) -> 
A(CRI LOCOMOTION) 
gehen2 (bound for) 
C((CASE NOM) AND (RESTRICTION PUBL.-TRANSPORT.))  -> 
A(CRI (PUBL.-TRANSPORT)) 
C(PLOC) -> 
A (CRV(+,DESTINATION,*)) .  
In the example the '+' parameter is an individual  of the concept 
PUBL. -TRANSPORT,  the '*' parameter is the locat ion expressed by the 
prepos i t ional  phrase, namely Vienna. The nounphrase 'Ich' (I) 
ful f i l ls  the restr ict ion ANIMATE, because speakers are always 
interpreted as humans. 
Surface-tests:  
Case-tests  search for an NP of the surface-case indicated by the 
second parameter.  If an NP is found that sat is f ies  the condit ion,  
the tests that are connected by AND or OR to the case-test  are 
executed. The const i tuent  of the sentence which sat is f ies the tests 
is referred to with an aster ix '*' in the assoc iated action(s).  
The test PLOC refers to a preposi t ional  phrase that indicates some 
location. It is a test which uses syntact ic  and semant ic  
368 I. STEINACKER and H. TROST 
information. 
Restr ict ion-tests :  
These semantic tests are used to check select ional  restr ict ions.  
They are often used in combinat ion with syntact ic  tests. If both 
tests are met by a const i tuent  this is a s ign i f icant  indicator,  that 
the correct interpretat ion has been selected. 
St ructure-bu i ld ing Actions: 
The act ion CRI(concept)  creates an individual  of the concept. The 
act ion CRV(pl ,p2,p3) indiv iduates an att r ibute of the concept pl. 
The concept pl, the role p2 and the concept P3 as va lue- res t r i c t ion  
are ins tant ia ted .  If pl or p3 are addressed by '+' the parameter 
refers to the first concept that was indiv iduated when process ing 
this part icular  entry in the pars ing- lex icon.  A '* ' -parameter 
refers to the semant ic  representat ion of the const i tuent  which 
sat is f ies  the first test of the product ion.  
SPECIAL FEATURES OF GERMAN 
Morpholog ica l  Ambigu i t ies  
We bel ieve that making use of the interact ion between syntax and 
semant ics  has many advantages over a s t r ic t ly  sequent ia l  approach to 
parsing. Introducing semantic informat ion helps to resolve some 
ambigui t ies  at an ear ly stage of the analys is  and thus to avoid 
unnecessary  backtrack ing.  Typical ly ,  morpho log ica l  ambigui t ies  can 
be resolved by such an interact ion.  
The German language is rich in inf lect ional  forms, therefore the 
morpholog ica l  component  often comes up with more than one poss ib le  
stem for an input word. These stems usual ly  belong to d i f ferent  
categor ies of words, e.g. 'meinen' can be interpreted as a verb (to 
suppose) or it can be reduced to the possess ive pronoun 'mein' (my). 
Syntax restr icts  the type of a const i tuent ,  which is expected at a 
given point in the analysis .  Usual ly  it is suf f ic ient  to use 
syntact ic  informat ion to d isambiguate morpho log ica l  ambigui t ies  of 
this kind. 
If a word is reduced to two d i f ferent  stems of the same category of 
words, se lect ional  restr ic t ions in the semant ic  net are used to 
choose one stem. The pars ing- lex icon re lates surface cases to 
semant ic  restr ic t ions of the at t r ibutes  of the action. In most 
cases this informaton is suf f ic ient  for disambiguation. 
The inf lected form 'gehoert' is reduced to the two verbs 'hoeren' 
(to hear) and 'gehoeren' (to belong to). 
(3) Dieses Buch gehoert  mir. (This is my book.) 
(4) Hast du dieses Geraeusch gehoert?  
(Did you hear that no ise? )  
In (3) the subject of the sentence has to be a 'POSSESSIBLE OBJECT' ,  
in (4) the object of has to be a subconcept  of 'SOUND'. A v io lat ion 
of se lect ional  restr ict ions,  is a clear indicator that the wrong 
interpretat ion of the verb has been chosen. 
PARSING GERMAN 369 
Disconnected Const i tuents  
Another character is t ic  feature of the German language is the verb 
second phenomenon. In German a verb can occupy three d i f ferent  
pos i t ions within a sentence: the first in quest ions  and commands, 
the second in main clauses,  and the last in subordinate clauses. 
Compound predicates  are div ided into two parts. The auxiliary or 
the modal verb hold %he place of the verb, and the rest of the 
predicate is put at the end of the sentence. One has to deal with a 
two-piece predicate whenever compound tenses are used, in st ructures 
involving the inf in i t ive etc. 
For a parser that uses a tradit ional  approach of sequent ia l  
syntact ic  and semant ic  process ing these features cause extensive 
backtracking.  The method of combinig syntact ic  and semant ic  
analysis  does not avoid backtracking complete ly  but it makes 
re- interpretat ion easier.  This claim is supported in the fol lowing 
paragraph using the example of a compound predicate.  
(5) Mein Bruder hat das Buch, yon dem du mir erzaehlt  hast, 
schon gelesen. 
(My brother a l ready read the book, which you told me about.) 
In (5) the object and a relat ive clause separate the two parts of 
the predicate.  One poss ib le  reading of the verb 'haben' is to 
possess. The object  'das Buch' sat isf ies the semantic restr ict ion 
'POSSESSIBLE-OBJECT' ,  therefore 'hat' is taken as the predicate and 
a possess relat ion is establ ished between the representat ions  for 
subject and object. When the past part ic ip le  'gelesen' is 
encountered at the end of the sentence this decis ion has to be 
revised in favour of the compound predicate 'hat gelesen' .  
The possess relat ion which was establ ished has to be replaced by the 
concept that is addressed by 'lesen, namely ' INFORMATION-TRANSFER' .  
The semantic representat ions  of the object book and the relat ive 
clause are not af f l ic ted by this change. Book also fits into the 
h ierarchy of ' INFORMATION-SOURCE'  and therefore sat isf ies the 
select ional  restr ict ions for the object of ' INFORMATION-TRANSFER'  
also. 
Separable pref ixes also add to the problem of f inding the right 
verb. Syntact ica l ly  verbadjuncts  are part ic les,  that are part of 
the verb. In some tenses a verbadjunct  becomes separated from the 
verb and is put at the end of the clause. Verbadjuncts  can speci fy  
the verb, but somet imes they change its sense complete ly  (aufhoeren 
= to stop, hoeren = to hear). 
(6) Das Kind hoert nach einer Stunde endl ich zu weinen auf. 
(After an hour the child f inal ly stops crying.) 
Such features either cause delay in th~ construct ion of the internal 
representat ion for a sentence, or they result  in backtrack ing 
because the correct meaning of the verb becomes apparant  at the end 
of the sentence. 
CONCLUSION 
The structure of the German language adds some d i f f icu l t ies  to the 
general  problem of pars ing natural  language. Flexib le word-order  
370 I. STEINACKER and H. TROST 
and multiple sources for ambiguities led us to choose a data-driven 
approach. Syntactic and semantic information are used for 
disambiguation of existing structures and for expectations that 
control processing of new input. 
Since backtracking is inevitable in some cases we tried to make it 
as efficient as possible. The integration of syntax and semantics 
facilitates backtracking to a large degree because semantic 
representations for all constituents are built independently. If 
backtracking occurs e.g. after having selected a wrong verb-sense, 
the parser has to destroy the existing semantic representation and 
replace it with the one indicated by the new verb. The slots of the 
instantiation of the concept for the new verb have to be filled with 
the already existing structures instead of having to start the parse 
all over again. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research is part of the project 'Development of a NLU System 
with regard to Medical Applications' (supervision R.Trappl), which 
is supported by the Austrian 'Fonds zur Foerderung der 
wissenschaftl ichen Forschung', grant #4158. 
REFERENCES 
\[I\] Boguraev, B.K., Automatic Resolution of Linguistic Ambiguities, 
University of Cambridge, (1979). 
\[2\] Brachmann, R.J., A Structural Paradigm for Representing 
Knowledge (Bolt Seranek and Newman, 1978). 
\[3\] Buchberger, E., Steinacker, I., Trappl, R., Trost, H., 
Leinfellner, E., A NLU System for Medical Applications, SIGART 
79 (1982), 146-147. 
\[4\] Gershman, A.V., Knowledge-Based Parsing, Yale Univ., 
RR-156,(1979). 
\[5\] .den, G., On the Use of Semantic Constraints in Guiding 
Syntactic Analysis, Univ. of Wisconsin, WR-3, (1978). 
\[6\] Palmer, M., A Case for Rul~-driven Semantic Processing, in: 
Proceedings of the 19th Ann. Meeting of the ACL, Stanford, 
(1981). 
\[7\] Riesbeck, C.K. and Schank, R.C., Comprehension by Computer: 
Expectation-based Analysis of Sentences in Context, Yale 
University, RR-78, (1976). 
\[8\] Steinacker, I., Parsing between Syntax and Semantics, 
Automatische Sprachverarbeitung 81, Potsdam, (1981). 
\[9\] Trost, H. and Steinacker, I., The Role of Roles, Some Aspects 
of World Knowledge Representation, in: Proc. of the 7th Int'l. 
Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, Vancouver, (1981). 
\[l@\]Wilks, Y., Processing Case, Am. J. of Computational 
Linguistics 4,(1976). 
