ADVERBS AND SEMANTIC INFERENCES 
Madis Sa luveer  
Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l igence  Laboratory ,  Tar tu  S ta te  Un ivers i ty ,  
78 T i i~  S t reet ,  202400 Tar tu ,  Es ton ia ,  USSR 
1. L. Kar t tunen (Kar t tunen 1970, 1971) demonstrated that  
in  Eng l i sh  there  ex is t  s ix  c lasses  of  p red icates  that  d i f fe r  
as fo r  the  re la t ionsh ips  ho ld ing  between the pred icate  and i t s  
sentent ia l  complement: fac t ives ,  pos i t i ve  and negat ive  two-way 
imp l ioat ives ,  pos i t i ve  and negat ive  one-way imp l i ca t ives ,  and 
non-determlnatlves. H. 8ira (~im 1974) validated the classific- 
ation for the Estonian lansuage. K & ~ drew their evidence 
from verbs and adjectives. Now a question poses itself: do the ? 
principles underlying their classification hold also for 
~dverbs ,  and i f  yes ,  do they exh ib i t  any d i f fe rences  in  com- 
par i son  w i th  verbs  and ad jec t ives .  
According to  Kart tunen the re la t ionsh ip  between the 
pred icate  and i t s  sentent ia l  complement i s  determined by the 
se~ant ics  of  the pred icate ,  and i t  can slwaye be computed i f  
the  semant ic  c lass  o f  the pred icate  i s  known. Together  wi th  
presuppos i t ions  emsnt ic  in fe rences  form a subc lass  of  in fe r -  
ences w i th  two d i s t inc t  character i s t i cs  ( Josh i ,  Weisohedel 
1976), 
i) they are inferences that need to be made when analys- 
ing a sentence, i.e. the problem of when and where to make 
what kind of inferences does not arise in case of them i 
ii) they do not exhibit a "chain" reaction so character- 
istic of other kind of inferences the reason being that they 
stem from e i ther  the semant ic  s t ruc ture  o f  ind iv idua l  words or  
- 247 - 
the  par t i cu la r  synt .act ic  const ruc ts  of the  sentence ,  and the 
re la t ionsh ips  hold w i th in  the cor respond ing  sentence .  
The problem of  making in fe rences  has always been a "sore"  
point in natural language understandin6 systems. The mechanism 
of inferences discussed in this paper enables to reduce the 
amount, of computation needed and to make the interpretation 
of sentences more reliable. 
2. With respect to their influence on the relationship 
between the pred icate  and i t s  sentent ia l  complement th ree  
c lasses  of  adverbs  may be d i f fe rent ia ted :  manner adverbs ,  
sentence  adverbs and complement -or iented  a verbs .  
2.1. The behavior of manner adverbs (MA) and sentence 
adverbs (SA) in the sentence is widely different: 
i) NA presuppose the truth of. the embedded sentence 
without the correspondin6 MAz 
(1) John ~ ordered the boy to leave 
(2) John ordered the boy to leave  
Some SA ( l i ke  "w ise ly" )  have the same facu l ty ,  some ( l i ke  
"probably" do not: 
(3) Wis_~2~, John ordered the boy to leave 
(4) Probabl.y John ordered the boy to leave 
ii) MA are within the scope of the sentence negation 
while SA have the negation always within their scope: 
(5) John did not answer the question quickly 
(6) John answered the question 
(7) Shortly, John did not answer the question 
(8) John did not answer the question 
Thus it can be seen that MA always behave like factives, 
whereas each SA must have an entry specifying whether i% be- 
haves like a fac~ive or like a non-determinative. 
- 248  - 
2.2 .  Complement-or iented a verbs (COA) do not funct ion  
on ly  to  mark the t ru th  va lue  of  the compliment (Lehrer  1975) 
but a l so  to change that  t ru th  va lue .  I f  from the sentence  (9) 
B i l l  accused John of  s tea l ing  the oar i t  cannot be in fe r red  
whether John rea l ly  d id so or  not ,  then from (10) i t  fo l lows  
that  he did so,  and from (11) that  he did not :  
(10) B i l l  ~ accused John of  s tea l ing  the oar  
(11) B i l l  e r roneous ly  accused John of  s tea l ing  the car  
COA are most ly  used wi th  non-determinat ive  pred icates  chang- 
in  8 the non-determined re la t ionsh ip  in to  a determined one: 
COA l i ke  cor rec t ly  and r ight ly  funct ion  as pos i t i ve  one-way 
Impllcatlves presupposlng the truth of the complement, COA 
llke erroneously and wrongly behave as negative one-way 
impllcatlves presupposing the falsehood of the complement, 
It must be noticed that not always COA trigger the 
change of relationship: triggering depends on the semantic 
structure of the predicate (selection restrictions) and 
should be given for every predicate separately. 
3. To wind up It must be said that adverbs do not poss- 
ess all the. features characteristic of verbs and adjectives: 
they may function as faotlves (MA and some SA) or as positive 
or negative one-way impllcatlves (COA), and even as such 
their paradi@u is defective, e.g. as one-way Impllcatives 
they do not have any "neutral" form as the corresponding 
verbs and adjectives have. 
References :  
Josh/ A.K. I Welsohedel R.M, Computation of a subclass of " 
inferences: presuppositions and entailment. TR N 74, 
Department of Information and Computer Science, Univer- 
sity of California at Irvine, 1976. 
- 249  - 
Kar t tunen.  L. The Lo~c of Eng l i sh  P red icate  Complemen~ 
Const ruct ion .  Non-Pub l i ca t ion  12 of the 1970 HSSB 
Mathematical  L tn~t i s t tcs  Seminar.  
Kar t tunen  L ! Imp l i ca t ive  Verbs. Langu~et  1971, vo l .  47, N 2. 
~ImH,  3emantlka. Tallinn, Val&~e, 1974. 
- 250 - 
