COLLOCATIONAL GRAMMAR AS A MODEL FOR H I NAN-COMPUTER 
INTERACTION 
W. Randolph Ford 
Prism Assoc ia tes  
? 7402 York Road, Su i t s  301 
Towson, Maryland 21204 
l~,cul N. Smith 
GTE Laborator ies ,  Inc .  
40 Sa lvan  Road 
Waltham, Massachuset ts  02254 
Contrary  to  the long-he ld  be l ie f  of  t rans fo~nat iona l  
E~mmarians fo r  communicat ion in  genera l ,  the major i ty  c f  
natural languaEe sentences which people actually use in oom- 
municat ing  with a co~puter ,  in  an unconst ra ined  mode, are not 
nove l .  As Thompson and Thompson 1981s660 obselwez "monotony 
of  s t ruc ture  i s  the ru le  ra the~ than the except ion  in  homan- 
-computer communicat ion."  Thompson 1981"41 repor ts  in  her  
study of such communications that 75 percent of the queries 
were wh-quest ions ,  1% percent  were commands, 5 percent  were 
s ta tements ,  and 1 percent  were yes /no  quest ions .  
The repet i t i ve  feature  o f  natura l  language i s  not a new 
concept .  S imi la r  observat ions  have been made bsforeo Damerau 
1971 used co l locat ion  of  lex ioa l  i tems as the bas i s  fo r  a 
Marker model in  an exper iment fo r  text  generat ion .  Becket  
c la ims  that  " the wonderfu l  feats  of  the homan in te l lec t . . ,  are  
based as much on memor izat ion  as on any impromptu problem- 
-solving" (1975:62). He posits a phrasal lexicon oonslstln~ 
of six major categories of lexioal phrases by which we "stitch 
tcgether  swatches of  text  that  we have hear~ before |  p roduct -  
i ve  processes  have the secondary ro le  of  adapt ing  the o ld  
phrases to the new situations" (1975z60)o 
All of these approaches to natural languaEe data rely 
heavily on the observation that many lexlcal items tend 
- 106  - 
co-occur .  This sur face  co -occur rence  i s  the resu l t  of  what 
may at  t imes be compl icated syntact i c  and semantic in ter re la t -  
ions  of  language un i te .  Unfor tunate ly ,  a sys temat ic  account -  
ing  of  these in ter re la t ions  has not been ach ieved in  any 
l ingu is t i c  theory .  The thrus t  of our  approach i s  that  the 
more of  language which can be handled lex ica l !y  , the eas ie r  
w i l l  homan language be ab le  to be mode l led .  
Actua l  data on the f requency  of  lex ica l  co l locat ion  are 
very  spares .  A study of  word sequences in  PANALOG text  has 
shown a surpr i s ing  amount of repet i t ion  of  word sequences 
(Bienstock and Smith in preparation). (PANALOG is a system 
for passing messages among small ~oups  in computer confer- 
enclng with telemall and calendar features. See Housman 1979. 
The data are of human-homan communication and not homan- 
-computer cc~.,nunication and are thematically restricted. They 
there fore  resemble Damerau's data . )  A study of par ts  of  the 
Brown Eng l i sh  Corpus has been undertaken in  order  to  get  less  
themat ica l ly  homogeneous mater ia l .  In  add i t ion ,  Wizard of  OZ 
exper iments  wi th unconst ra ined h,- .an-computer input  w i l l  be-  
g in  soon at  GTE Laborator ies  in  o rder  to gather  the more 
re levant  human-oomputeu~ data .  
A PANALOG text  of  16,133 words chosen fo r  s tudy .  The 
longest  s t r ing  which occurred more than once was a seven 
word quote from Ntetzsche .  Two s ix -word s t r ings  occur red  twice 
and at  length  f i ve ,  one occurred three  t imes and th i r teen  
were repeated  tw ice .  
An in teres t ing  feature  of  these  d i s t r ibut ions  i s  that  
the number of hapaxes ( those s t r ings  occur r ing  only  once at  
a g iven  s t r ing  length)  reaches  a peak at  length  th ree  (see 
Figure i). 
- I07  - 
No. of HAPAX 
(x .1o') 
12- 
ii- 
i0, 
9' 
8. 
?, 
6- 
5- 
4- 
3- 
2- 
i- 
0 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Figure i. String Length 
This i s  a revea l l~  measure of the Amount of repet i t ion  
in  a text  of th i s  length .  In  par t i cu la r ,  recur r ing  two word 
s t r ings  account fo r  40.8 percent  of the runn ing  text  and re -  
cu~r ing  three  word s t r ings  comprise 8.1 percent  of the text .  
The bas ic  assumpt ion of the f requent  occurrence of lex ic -  
a l  co l locat ion  in  natu l -a l  language texts ,  espec ia l l y  in  
h,- ,an-ocmputer communication, i s the bas is  fo r  the development 
of a new type of natura l  language processor .  Ford, 1981, has 
const ructed  a natura l  languaEe process ing  system for  database 
updat ing,  re t r ieva l ,  and man ipu la t iont  which re l ies  c r i t i ca l l y  
on the observat ion  that  rea l  users  tend to employ a very 
l im i ted  set  .of lex ica l  d t r i~  types in  query i~ databases .  
The Ford natura l  language processor  cons is ts  of a two 
s tage reduct ion  a lgor i thm for  ~rans la t ing  natura l  languaEs in -  
puts  in to  bas ic  funct ions  which are then used to perform the 
query.  The f i r s t  s tags  of the reduct ion  changes the input  words 
to meaning representat ions  usinE a l i s t  of lex ioa l  i tems and 
a meaning cor re la te  l i s t .  The second stage takes as input  
s t r ings  of these meaning cor re la tes  and oha~es  them in to  
bas ic  l l s t .  
409 numeric representat ions  fo r  words mapped down to 132 
unique meanings and 1328 canon ica l  sentence vectors  mapped down 
- 108  - 
to 19 funct ions .  This two stage reduct ion  scheme worked 
e f f i c ient ly  enough to respond to 93.8 percent  of the 1697 i n -  
put quer ies ,  inc lud ing  ungrammatical  ones from inexper ienced  
users ,  wi th  a response t ime of 1.5 seconds,  operat ing  in  an 
environment of 90K 8 -b i t  bytes .  This compares very favorab ly  
to  Thompson 1981 where only 67.7 percent  of REL quer ies  were 
cor rec t ly  parsed with  an average response time of 10 seconds.  
(Space requi rements  were not repor ted . )  S imi la r ly ,  Damerau 
1981 and Pat r i ck  1981 repor t  a success ra te  fo r  TQA of 65.1 
percent  inputs  cor rec t ly  parsed with  the time requ i red  to 
process a sentence typ ica l ly  being 10 seconds.  
The reason why the system works so we l l  in  terms of 
accuracy,  speed, and smal l  s torage reqa i rements  i  based on 
the two s tags  reduct ion  technique which, in  t~rn ,  i s  based on 
the fac t  that  a great  ma~v inputs  in  human-computer communic- 
a t ion  are repetitious syntactically, semantically, and lexl- 
~ally. Repetition is a principal characteristic of human- 
-computer communication. 
REFERENCES 
Becket, Joseph, 1975. "The Phrasal Lexicon," in Schank, Roger 
and Bonnie Nash-Webber,  eds. Theoret i ca l  I ssues  in  Natura l  
Language Process ing ,  ACL Workshop, Cambridge, HA, pp.38-41.  
Btenstook,  Danie l  and Raoul H .~n i th .  In  p reparat ion .  "Lex ica l  
Collocation in Three Types of Texts." 
Damerau, Freder ick  J .  1971. Marker Models and L ingu is t i c  
Theol. Janua linguarum series minor 95. Mouton: The Hague. 
Dsmerau, Frederick J. 1981. "Operating Statistics for the 
Transformational Question Answering System", AJCL 7.1. :30-42 
Ford,  W. Randolph. 1981. "Natural-Language Process ing  by 
Cemputer - A New Approach", Unpubl ished Ph .D .d iseer ta t ion ,  
The Johns Hopkins Un ivers i ty ,  Ba l t imore ,  Hary land,  
Hous~an, Edward. "Computer Mediated Communication,-  P ro f i le  3 
(1979)" 1-4. 
- 109  - 
Pet r iok ,  S tan ley .  1981. "F ie ld  Test ing the Transformational  
Question Answering (TQA) System," Proceedings of the Nine- 
teenth Annual Meetin 6 of the Assoc ia t ion  fo r  Computational 
~ ,  pP. 35-36. 
Reiger, Chuck. 1977. "Viewing Parsing as Word Sense Discrimin- 
ation," in Dinswall, Williem O. A Surve~ of Linguistic 
Science, Greylock Publishers. 
Small, Steven. 1980. "Word Expert Parsing" A Theory of 
Dis t r ibuted  Word-Based Natural  Language Understanding," 
University of Maryland Computer Science TR-954. 
Thompson, Bo~ena H. 1981. "Evaluation of Ratural Language 
I n ter faces  to Data Base Systems,"  Proceedin~m of the 
Nineteenth Annual Meeting of the Assoc ia t ion  fo r  Computat- 
ional Lin6uistics. Menlo Park, CA: Association for Canput- 
atlonal Linguistics, pp. 39-42. 
Thc|apson, Bo~ena H. and Frederick B. Thompson. 1981. "Shifting 
to a Higher Gear in a Natural Language System," Proceedln~s 
of the 1981 National Computer Conference Arlington, VA: 
APIPS Press, pp. 657-662. 
- 110  - 
