COLING 82, J. Horeck~ {eft.) 
North.Holland Publishing Company 
Cc~ Academt~ 1982 
NATURAL LANGUAGE ACCESS TO STRUCTURED TEXT 
J e r ry  R. Robbs, Donald E. Walker, and Robert A. Amsler 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, Callfornla 94025 
U.S.A. 
This paper d i scusses  the problem of prov id ing  natura l  language 
access to textual material. We are developing a system that 
re la tes  a request  in  Eng l i sh  to spec i f i c  passages in  a 
document on the bas i s  of correspondences between the log ica l  
representat ions  of the in format ion  in  the request  and in  the 
passages .  In add i t ion ,  we are deve lop ing procedures fo r  
automat ica l ly  generat ing  log ica l  representat ions  of text  
passages ,  d i rec t ly  from the text ,  by means of an ana lys i s  of 
the coherence s t ruc ture  of the passages.  
INTRODUCTION 
At SRI we are developing a system for  natura l  language access  to textua l  mater ia l ,  
The system i s  to provide access  to a textbook or  other  document of some 
importance,  by re turn ing  re levant  passages in  response to a user ' s  natura l  
language request .  Cur rent ly  we are us ing the Hepat i t i s  Knowledge Base, a 
compendium of cur rent  knowledge about hepat i t i s  compiled by the Nat iona l  L ib rary  
of  Medicine, a l though the techniques we are dev is ing  are  in no way par t i cu la r  to 
th i s  document \ [c f .  Walker, 1982\]. The pro jec t  has two phases.  In the f i r s t ,  we 
are  developing text  access  procedures fo r  t rans la t ing  a user ' s  request  in to  an 
under ly ing  log ica l  form and, in  order  to locate  the appropr ia te  passages ,  matching 
the log ica l  form with a Text S t ruc ture  which expresses  the s t ruc ture  of the 
document as a whole and summarizes the content  of ind iv idua l  passages in  terms of 
canon ica l  p red icates  (Walker and Hobbs, 1981\]. In the second, longer - te rm e f fo r t ,  
we are develop ing procedures for  automat ica l ly  generat ing  por t ions  of the Text 
S t ruc ture  d i rec t ly  from the text .  
THE TEXT ACCESS COMPO~NT 
In the text  access  component, a user ' s  request  i s  t rans la ted  into  log ica l  form by 
SRI 's  DIALOGIC system, descr ibed in another paper submitted to th i s  conference 
\[Grosz et  a l ,  1982\]. This log ica l  express ion  i s  then turned over to the 
ln fe renc ing  component DIANA \[Hobbs, 1980\], where var ious  d i scourse  problems are 
so lved and a match with the Text S t ruc ture  i s  sought.  
As an i l l us t ra t ion  of th i s  process ,  cons ider  the fo l lowing example query: 
During what per iod i s  immunopropbylaxis appropr ia te  fol lo~rlng 
exposure to type B hepat i t i s?  
DIALOGIC t rans la tes  the request  in to  the fo l lowing form: 
DURING (APPROPRIATE (IMMUNOPROPHYLAXIS (I, Xl, Y) I 
FOLLOW ( I ,  EXPOSE(X2, HEPATITIS-B))), 
?X \[ PERIOD (?X) )  
That i s ,  dur ing per iod ?X, the ?mmunoprophylaxis I of X1 aga ins t  Y, where I 
fo l lows an exposure event of X2 to hepat i t i s  B, i s  appropr ia te .  
Two k inds of d i scourse  problems are exempl i f ied  here .  F i r s t ,  there  i s  the problem 
of determin ing imp l i c i t  arguments.  We are not to ld  exp l i c i t l y  what 
127 
128 J.R. HOBBS et al 
Immunoprophy lax ls  i s  aga lns t ,  on ly  what exposure  was --t?" We need to  draw the  
in fe rence  that  exposure  to  so l t~thlng i s  typ lca l ly  fo l lowed by Immunoprophy lax ls  
aga ins t  i t .  Th is  prob lem must be so lved  i f  we are  to re t r ieve  the  proper  passages  
on immunizat ion  aga ins t  hepat i t i s  B v i rus  (HBV) ra ther  than  some other  agent .  
S imi la r ly ,  we are  not  to ld  exp l l c l t l y  that  the one who was exposed i s  the  one who 
w i l l  rece ive  immuooprophy lax ls ,  that  i s ,  that  X1 and X2 are  the same Ind lv ldua l .  
The second d iscourse  problem i l lus t ra ted  here  i s  that  of  metonymy. One may ta lk  
about  both  exposure  to HBV and exposure  to type B hepat i t i s .  In  the f i r s t  case  we 
are  ta lk ing  about  exposure  to a v i rus ,  in  the  second exposure  to  a d i sease .  The 
Text  S t ructure  i s  expressed  in  canon ica l  p red icates  in  a s tandard ized  form, and 
one of  the  s tandard izat ions  i s  in  the c lass  of  ent i t ies  that  can be the  argument  
o f  a p red icate .  We must dec ide ,  fo r  each pred icate ,  the  type o f  a rguments  i t  can 
take .  For example ,  i s  one exposed to  a v i rus  o r  a d i sease?  For var ious  reasons ,  
we have dec ided  that  one i s  exposed to a v i rus  and not  to a d i sease .  Thus the  
in fe reoc ing  procedures  have  to  ana lyze  the  ac tua l  query  in to  one invo lv ing  
exposure  to  the  v i rus  caus in~ type  B hepat i t i s ,  o r  to  HBV. Th is  coerc ion  i s  done 
by access lng- ln fo rmat lon  in a knowledge base  that  "expose"  requ i res  a v i rus  as i t s  
second argument ,  that  type  B hepat i t i s  i s  caused by HBV, and that  HBV i s  a v i rus .  
In  o rder  to  match the  request  w i th  the  Text  S t ructure ,  DIANA needs to t rans la te  
the  or ig ina l  request  in to  the  canon ica l  p red icates  in  which the  Text  S t ructure  i s  
expressed .  For example ,  s ince  " immunoprophy lax is "  i s  not  one of  the  canon ica l  
p red icates ,  we need to use the  axiom 
IHHUNOPROPHYLAXIS ( i ,p ,v )  i f f  I t~ JN IZg( i ,  p ,  PROPHYLAXIS(v)) 
that  i s ,  i i s  an immunoprophy lax is  event  o f  p aga ins t  v i f  and on ly  i f  I i s  an 
immunizat ion  event  o f  p fo r  p rophy lax is  aga ins t  v .  The resu l t  i s  a t rans la t ion  
in to  the  canon ica l  p red icates  " immunize" and "prophy lax is " ,  which are  used in  the  
summaries  o f  the  re levant  passages  in  the  Text  S t ructure .  
GENERATING TEXT STRUCTURE 
Our work  on the  automat ic  generat ion  of  the  Text  S t ructure  i s  a t  a more 
preliminary stage. Automatic summarization is a central aspect of this effort. A 
certain amount of work has been done in artlflclal intelllgence and psychology on 
the automatic construction of summaries, including work by Rumelhart \[1975\], 
Handler and Johnson \[1977\], Schank and his colleagues \[Schank et alj 1980\], and 
Lehnert et al \[1981\]. Host of this work has focused on narratives rather than 
expository discourse, however. 
There are two prlnclpal techniques that we have brought to bear on the problem. 
The most important involves a coherence analysis of the paragraph, in a manner 
descr ibed  in  deta i l  in  Hobbs \[1976, 1978\] and s imi la r  to work by Longacre  \[1976\] 
and Grimes \[1975\]. 
It can be argued that, in coherent discourse, one of a smull number of coherence 
relatlons~ such as ~arallel and elaboration, holds between successive segments of 
the text. The coherence relations can be defined in terms of the inferences that 
can be drawn from what is asserted by the segments being linked (called the 
assertions of the segments). Thus, very roughly~ two sentences are parallel if 
their assertions make the same predications about similar entities. 
These coherence relations allow one to build up a tree-like coherence structure 
for the whole text recurslvely, as follows: The coherence relations are defined 
between segments. A clause (perhaps elliptlcal) is a segment. When some 
coherence relation holds between two segments, the two together constitltute a 
co_.~posed segment, which can itself be related to other segments of the text. 
Since the coherence relations are defined in terms of the assertions of segments, 
we need to specify what the assertions of the composed segments are. For this 
purpose we use a number of heurlstlcs. For example, if two sentences are 
NATURAL LANGUAGE ACCESS TO STRUCTURED TEXT 129 
parallel, lt is because the same predication is made about similar entities. Then 
the assertion of the composed segment makes that same predication about the 
superset to which the similar entities belong. Thus, every node in the coherence 
structure has an asserti6n associated with it. Very frequently the assertion 
associated with the top node of the coherence structure of a passage can funbtion 
as the summary of the passage. 
As an illustration of this technique, consider the following passage: 
(PI) Blood probably contains the highest concentration of hepatitis B virus 
of any tissue except liver. Semen, vaginal secretions, and menstrual 
blood contain the agent and are infective. Saliva has lower 
concentrations than blood, and even hepatitis B surface antigen may be 
detectable in no more than half of infected individuals. Urine contains 
low concentrations at any given time. 
After a grammatical analysis, the sentences in this passage can be aligned as in 
Figure I. 1 Every clause considers some body material containing HBV in some 
concentration. They are thus linked by the parallel coherence relation, and the 
assertion (and the summary) of the passage is as follows: 
CONTAIN (BODY-MATERIAL, HBV, CONCENTRATION) 
Many paragraphs we have analyzed in this way turn out to have a parallel 
structure, and thus their summaries can often be constructed in a similar manner. 
blood 
semen 
vaginal secretions 
menstrual blood 
saliva 
(saliva of) 
infected 
individuals 
urine 
contains 
contain 
has 
in 
contains 
Figure 
highest concentration 
lower concentrations 
detectable ... no 
more than half 
low concentrations 
Parallels in Passage (PI) 
HBV 
agent 
HBsAg 
A second factor must also be taken into account in constructing the 
summarlzations. In addition to containing summaries of individual passages, the 
Text Structure contains a representation of the hierarchical organization of the 
document as a whole, as well as other aspects of its overall structure. The place 
of an individual passage within the hierarchical organization constrains what can 
function as a summary of the passage. A summary must distinguish a passage from 
other passages at the same level in the hierarchy. Top-down considerations 
frequently lead us to refine a Summary we arrive at solely by the bottom-up 
coherence analysis. 
As an example, consider the following passage: 
(P2) Generally blood donor quality is held high by avoiding commerclal 
donors, persons with alcoholic cirrhosis, and those practicing illlelt 
self-lnjectlon. Extremely careful selectlon of paid donors may provide 
safe blood sources in some instances. 
1 This diagram i s  s imi la r  to the formats developed by Sager and her col leagues 
\[Sager, 1981\]. 
130 J.R. HOBBS et al 
AVOID (DONOR I CONDITION (DONOR))  
/ I \ 
/ I \ 
I I \ 
Except ion :  " (avo id )  persons  " (avo id )  those  
AVOID(DONOR \[ w i th  a lcoho l i c  p ract i c ing  I l l i c i t  
COMMERCIAL(DONOR)) cirrhosis" self-lnjectlon" 
/ \ 
/ \ 
/ \ 
"avoid Second 
commercial Sentence 
donors" 
Figure 2 Coherence Structure of Paragraph (P2) 
A coherence analysis results in the structure show in Figure 2. "Selection" 
contrasts with "avoiding," so we can say that the second sentence expresses an 
exception to the first conjunct of the first sentence. Because the second 
sentence is hedged very heavily, the assertion of the composed segment is the 
assertion of the initial conjunct of the first sentence--"avoid commercial 
donors." The three assertions of the first sentence stand in a parallel relation 
since they imply the same proposition about similar entitles. They all imply 
(trivially) that certain classes of potential donors are to be avoided if blood 
quality is to be held high? Entities are similar if they share some common and 
reasonably specific property, that is, if they belong to some common and 
reasonably small superset. Our three classes of potential donors are similar in 
that they are all potential donors. The similarity would be stronger if there 
were some more specific property that characterized commercial donors, those with 
alcoholic cirrhosis, and illicit self-inJectors, but there does not seem to be 
such a property. The most we can say seems to be that they are potential donors, 
and we arrive at the following assertion for the paragraph as a whole. 
AVOID (DONOR I CONDITION (DONOR))  
However, such a summary fails to distinguish this paragraph from its siblings in 
the hierarchical structure of the HKB as a whole. The nodes most immediately 
dominating this section in the hierarchy of the HKB correspond to sections about 
the quality of blood products under varying conditions, with respect to the risk 
of hepatitis in transfusion. There are two broad classes of conditions that are 
discussed, first, conditions characterizing the donor, and second, conditions 
characterizing the type of 51ood product. Among the conditions characterizing the 
donor are a history of hepatitis, recent transfusions, and positive results on 
serologic tests, as well as the conditions described in the example. Thus, the 
structure of the summaries In the paragraphs should be something like that shown 
in Figure 3. 
It is therefore not sufficient for us to characterize the paragraph as being about 
avo id ing  potent ia l  donors  exh ib i t ing  some cond i t ion .  Thus ,  top -down 
cons iderat ions  lead  us to  re jec t  the  summary we came up w i th  so le ly  by the  bot tom-  
up coherence  ana lys i s .  We need someth ing  more spec i f i c ,  and the  best  we can  do i s  
s imply  to  have  a d i s junct ion  o f  p roper t ies  ss  the  cond i t ion  character i z ing  the  
donors :  
AVOID (DONOR \] COMMERCIAL(DONOR) or CIRRHOSIS(DONOR) 
or SELF-INJECTOR(DONOR) ) 
NATURAL LANGUAGE ACCESS TO STRUCTURED TEXT 131 
QUALITY (BLOOD-PRODUCT) 
QUALITY (BLOOD-PRODUCT I CONDITION (DONOR)) 
\[summary of our example\] 
CONDITION ffi history of hepatitis 
CONDITION - recent  transfusion 
CONDITION ~ positive serologic tests 
(BLOOD-PRODUCT I TYPE (BLOO PRODUCT) 
Figure 3 Hierarchical Structure of Paragraph Summaries 
CONCLUSION 
While these methods for the automatic generation of summaries of expository text 
seem promising, difficult problems remain--Including the problems of encoding and 
searching a very large knowledge base. In order to have practical milestone 
systems in the near term, we are working toward two scaled-down versions of the 
ultlmate system. First, we are experimenting with using a pre-existing Text 
Structure to aid in the construction of the summaries of modifications of a 
passage. Second, rather than fully automatic generation of summaries, we are 
experimenting with ways that interactlon~rlth the author of a passage can aid in 
the task. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been supported by the National Library of Medicine under Grant I- 
R01-LM03611. 
REFERENCES 
Grosz, B; Haas, N; Robbs, J; Martin, P; Moore, R; Robinson, J; Rosenseheln, S. 
1982. "DIALOGIC, A Core Natural Language Processing System." COLING 82: 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference o_~n Computational Lin~ulstlcs, 
Prague, Czechoslovakia. 
Grimes, J. 1975. The Thread of Discourse. The Hague: Houton. 
Robbs, JR. 1976. A Computational Approach to Discourse Analysis. Research 
Report 76-2, Department of Computer Sciences, City College, City University of 
New York (December 1976). 
Hobbs, JR. 1978. Why Is Discourse Coherent? Technical Note 176, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, Callfornia (November 1978). 
Hobbs, JR. 1980. Interpreting " Natural Language Discourse. Final Report, 
National Science Foundation Research Grant No. MCS 78-07121 (July 1980). 
Lehnert, WG; Black, JB; Reiser, BJ. 1981. "Summarizing Narratives." Proceedings 
of the Seventh Internatlonal Joint Conference on Artlflclal Intalli~ence 
pp.184-189. New Haven, Connecticutt: Yale University. 
Longacre, R. 1976. An Anatom\[ of Speech" Notions. Ghent: The Peter de Ridder 
Press. 
Mandler, J; Johnson, N. 1977. "~eme~nbrance of Things Parsed: Story Structure and 
Recall." Cognitive Psycholo~y'9:l11-151. 
Rumelhart, D. 1975. "Understanding and Summarizing Brief Stories." In: Basic 
Processing in Readln~_LPerception ~ and Comprehension, edited by D Laberge and 
S Samuels. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
132 J.R. HOBBS et al 
Sager,  N. 1981. Natura l  Language In format ion  Process ing:  A Co_~_puter Grammar of 
Eng l i sh  and I t s  App l i ca t ions .  Reading, Massachusetts :  Addison-Wesley. 
Schankj RC; Lebowltz, M; Birnhaum, L. 1980. "'An Integrated Understander." 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics 6:13-30. 
Walker, D. 1982. "Natural-Language-Access Systems and the Organization and Use 
of Information." COLING 82: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference 
o__nnComputatlonal Linguistics, Prague, Czechoslovakia. 
Walker, DE; Hobbs, JR. 1981. "Natural Language Access to Medical Text." 
Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Symposium o_~n ~App l l ca t lons  in Medical 
Care pp 269-273. New York: IEEE. 
