A PROCEDURE OF AN AUTOMATIC GRAPHE~E-TO-PHO~ 
TRANSFORHATION OF GERMAN 
Sabine Koch, Wolfgang Menzel, Ingrid Starke 
Zentralinstitut fur Sprachwissenschaft, AdW DDR, Berlin, DDR 
The automatic transformation of texts graphemically 
stored to the corresponding phonemic symbols will enable the 
speech synthesizer Rosy 4000 (.developed by VEB Robotron Dres~ 
den) to extend its field of application (application in  in- 
formation systems, development of reading machines for the 
blind). The texts for this kind of application cannot be limi~ 
ted in any way - a fact which had to be taken into account 
concerning the methods suitable for such a procedure. The use 
o f  the d_%ctionary method, that means storing the whole vocabu- 
lary needed together with the corresponding phonemic strings 
was impossible for this purpose. 
The procedure presented here can shortly be characteriz~ 
ed as a rule system. The transformation is done on the level 
of word forms not taking into consideration syntactic or 
semantic criteria. 
An important part of the procedure is thb analysis of 
the structure of word forms. The results of this analysis 
ix~luence the intended high quality of the transformation to 
a large extent. 
The problem of automatically identifying the boundaries 
between elements of compounds could not be solved havi~g in 
mind the aim to transform unlimited texts. As it is necessary 
for a correct phonemic transformation to know these boundar- 
- 158  - 
ies, all compounds are split by hand when the input text is 
s~ored. 
The presented procedure identifies graphemic Bubstrings 
in tb~ word form to be transformed on the basis of an unique 
deterministic analysis and it also check~ if the context of 
the string or the status of the system fulfil special condit- 
ions. In case these tests were successful the substring will 
be accepted, that means the corresponding phonemic transcript- 
ion as well as the stress information are added to the sub- 
string. In certain cases it is possible to postpone the traus- 
formation to one of the following steps. 
The graphemic substrings are contained in the informat- 
ion part of the procedure together with the conditions and the 
results of the transformation. The infommation part, that 
means the linguistic part, is strongly separated from the 
algorithm. This separation was of great advantage when work- 
ing out the procedure. 
The transformation is carried out in six stages, the 
most important of which are the analysis of the structure of 
word forms (the prefix and suffix strategy) and the transform- 
ation of graphemes by a set of rules. 
The analysis of the structure of word forms splits the 
regarded word form into morphemes and marks the morphemic 
bound~ries on the basis of lists "containing prefixes and suf- 
fixes together with the corresponding phonemic realizations 
and the stress information (marking of the stressed syllable 
or stress shifting to other syllables). These lists also con- 
rain exceptions. The exceptions are substrings of certain word 
forms which are identical with an affix on the graphemic level 
but they differ in pronounciation or stress or in both of 
them. 
All parts of the word form which are not treated by the 
prefix or suffix strategy (normally the basis) are to be trams- 
- 159  - 
o- 
formed by transformation rules. These are context sensitive 
rules which are applied from left to right. The word form is 
run trough only once. One part of the context conditions re- 
sult from word structure analysis : That is the marked morphe- 
mic boundaries which influence the transformation of graphemlc 
strings with regard to phenomena like the so-called final de- 
voicing and the so-called glottal stop as well as the length 
of vowels. Classes and subclasses of graphemes and phonemes 
(classes of consonants, vowels, plosives, etc . )are also used 
as context conditions for an adequate transformation. 
The s t ra te~ of stress as the last part in the procedure 
fixes the main stress in the word form by tak~ulg into consider- 
ation the stre~s i~formatlon supplied from the other strateg- 
ies. There exist three classes of prefences: the absolute 
stress infol~nation, the conditional stress i~formation (if 
there is no absolute stress information) and the stress in- 
formation without preference (if there is no conditional pre- 
ference information). 
For the r~m-~4~ unstressed word forms the main stress 
is fixed by stress patterns. The native German vocabulary can 
be handled by these patterns without large lists of except- 
ions. Most of the exceptions are foreign words. 
The first strategy before these mentioned main parts of 
the procedure is a lock-up in a list contalnlz~ about 250 of 
the most  f requent  German word forms (a r t i c les ,p ronouns)  which 
are  t rans formed as a whole w i thout  running through a l l  the 
s t ra teg ies  o f  the procedure .  This immediate t rans format ion  
saves  a lo t  o f  t ime.  
Purthermore there  i s  a l i s t  of  about 60 homographs, 
which could  be t rans formed unambig ious ly  only  by the a id  of  
syntact i c  or  semant ic  c r i te r ia .  The word forms of  th i s  l i s t  
a re  a l so  innnediate ly t rans formed to the cor respond ing  var iants .  
The advantage of  th i s  method i s  that  the fo l low iz~ par ts  o f  
- 160  - 
the procedure do not  have to handle ambigu i t ies .  
The paper  w i l l  conta in  in fo rmat ion  concern ing  the number 
and k ind of  t rans format ion  mis takes .  In  genera l  the German 
vocabu lary  can be t ransformed cor rec t ly  by regu lar i t ies  eas i -  
l y  to fo rmula te .  D i f f i cu l t ies  and a great  number o f  except -  
ions  to  the regu lar i t ies  resu l t  from fore ign  words which are  
very  f requent  in  German. The t rans format ion  o f  fo re ign  words 
cannot be exc luded from the procedure because they are o f ten  
used in  German and sometimes they even have no German equ ive / -  
ent  l i ke  Ingen ieur ,  Ce l lo ,  Charta,  Chaussee e tc .  
- 161  - 
