' TOWARDS D ISCOURSE-0R IENTED NONMONOTONIC  SYSTEM 
,Barbara Dunin-K~pl icz  Witold Lukaszewicz  
, Inst i tute of In fo rmat ics  
Warsaw Un ivers i ty  
P .O.Box  1210 
00-901 Warszawa,  POLAND 
ABSTRACT 
The  purpose  of this paper is to analyse the 
phenomenon of nonmonotonicity in a natural lan- 
guage  and ?o formulate a number  of general prin- 
ciples which  should be taken in%o consideration 
while constructing a discourse oriented nonmo-  
notonic formalism. 
INTRODUCTION 
F'or the  purpose  of th i s  paper  we  assume 
that to understand a discourse is to specify al l  
the  conc lus ions  der ivab le  from the  d i scourse  
i t se l f  knowledge  about  the  wor ld  and  knowledge  
of language use. 
To  complete d iscourse-connected conclusions, 
a number  of various linguistic phenomena must 
be resolved. The  solution of such  problems as 
anaphora, quantification, negation and  so on, 
should be regarded as full right conclusions. 
The  reason is that this purely linguistic informa- 
tion is necessary  for obtaining the essential 
one, describing the external world under  conside- 
ration. 
The  measure  of quality of any discourse 
analysis sys tem is the adequacy  of its inference 
capabilities to those of human language users. 
This  implies that any such  a high quality sys tem 
must  provide some mechan ism modelling common 
sense  reasoning. 
In everyday  l i fe we are continously forced 
to accept various conclusions which we are pre- 
pared to reject when our knowledge  increases. 
The  ability of drawing such  cancellableinferences, 
beliefs in AI terminology, makes  common sense  
reasoning nonmonoton ic  in the sense  that the set 
of derivable conclusions does  not increase mono-  
tonically with the set of premises, as in standard 
l og ics .  
Earlier exper iences have  proved that ad hoc 
nonmonotonic  tools were  ineffective. They  have  
seemed to work  fo r  the simplest cases  only. 
Since they lacked theoretical founds\[ions, the i r  
behav iour  has  been  unc lear  in more  complex  
situations. 
Recently there have  been  a number  of 
attempts to formalize various nonmonotonic  mech-  
an isms (see ( i I ,  1980) ,  (AAAI ,  1984\ [ ) ) .  
In this paper  we analyse the phenomenon of 
nonmonotonicity in a natural language. We also 
formulate a number  of general principles which  
should be taken into account while specifying 
a discourse-oriented nonmonotonic  formalism. 
It is well recognized that ordering of dis- 
course utterances i s  essential for its understand-  
ing~ On the other hand, logical sys tems lack 
mechan isms capturing this property. If follows, 
therefore~ that to mode l  the dynamic  nature of 
a discourse, some kind of struciuralization is 
needed. A very natural, both computationally and 
conceptually, d iscourse structuralization has been  
suggested by Kamp (Kamp,  1981). 
Accord ing  to Kamp,  a discourse is represented 
aS a D ( iscourse) R (epresentation) S ( t ructure) .  
Reugh ly  speaking, DRS is a sequence  of 
D ( iscourse)R (epresentat ions)~ DR is nothing 
else than a partial modeI~ describing discourse 
objects and their tel\[aliens. A ORS is constructed 
as follows. V~'e start with the empby DR. Each  
discourse utterance extends the actual DR by 
adding appropriate information contained in the 
utterance, qFo construct any DR,  some kind of 
reasoning mechan ism is needed. V~'e postulate 
the application of the nonmonoton ic  inference 
system for that purpose. 
NONMONOTONIC ITY  
IN D ISCOURSE UNDERSTANDING 
q~o show the  un iversa l i ty  of nonmonoton ic i ty  
in a natural language 5 we shall present a number  
of examples  concerning various linguistic phe- 
nomena commonly  occurring in  a discourse. 
One  should be aware  that  analogous treatment 
of such  different concepts as, for instance, 
anaphora  and presupposition is inappropriate. 
Anaphora ,  as well as quantification or negation 
are purely surface phenomena.  One  must resolve 
~them while processing a discourse, but their 
solutions lead to conclusions describing the 
discourse rather, than the external world under  
consideration. For  this reason  we shall refer ?o 
those conclusions as surface conclusions. 
Presupposition, on the other hand, as wel l  aS 
time line COnStruction, conditionals or various 
conversational rules, concerns  conclusions 
describing directly the world being represented 
by a discourse. Vge shall refer to those conclu- 
sions as .~eneral conclusions. 
Our  purpose  i s  not  to rev iew a l l  the  l ingu is t i c  
phenomena dea l ing  wi th  nonmonoton ic i ty ,  but  to 
demonstrate that 
(i) both kinds of conclusions are subject to 
i nva l idat ion ,  
( i i )  cance l iab le  conc lus ions  of both  types  can  
be supported either by semantic or pragmatic 
sources. 
This  leads to an important observation that 
nonmonotonicity exists on various levels of 
discourse understanding, viewing both process ing 
method and data to be processed. 
Surface conclusions 
The  fo l low ing  examples  of p ronoun anaphora  
and  quantification show that semant ic -based as 
well as progmatic-based surface conclusions 
can  be invalidated. 
Example  i (pronoun anaphora)  
(i) The  Vice-President entered the President's 
office. He  was  nervous  and clutching his 
briefcase. 
504 
"l~his example  is from (Ascher ,  1984) .  There  
are semant ic  reasons  support ing the conc lus ion  
that the V ice-Pres ident  is the one  who is nervous  
g iven  the information that he  has  a meet ing  with 
the President. "I'his conc lus ion  can  be, however ,  
over turned  by add ing  
(2) Af ter  a l l ,  he  cou ldn ' t  f i re  the  V ice -Pres ident  
w i thout  mak ing  t roub le  for h imse l f  wi th  the  
cha i rman of the  board .  
Example  2 (p ronoun anaphora)  
(3) Peter '  WaS s i t t ing  in  a room.  When J ohn  
entered the room he  seemed nervous .  
A l though there are  two possible referents of 
"he" in (3), it i s  p ragmat ica l ly  we l l  mot ivated  
that  "he"  re fers  to "Peter" ,  Th is  fo l lows  from 
Gr ice l s  Cooperat ive  P r inc ip le .  Assuming  that  the  
speaker  is obey ing  it, he  shou ld  rep lace (5) by  
the  unmis takab le  
(4 )  Peter  was  s i t t ing  in  a room.  Enter ing  the  
room, John  seemed nervous .  
if it were  the case  that John  had  been nervous .  
lqeverthelesm, this preferred core ference  is inval- 
idated if (4) is extended to 
(5) Peter  was s i t t ing  in a room.  When John  
entered the room he  seemed nervous .  He  
was a f ra id  of Peter. 
(quant i f i ca t ion)  
(6 )  There  are  th ree  men in a room.  Every  man 
loves a woman,  
~here  are  clearly two possible paraphrases  of (6): 
( ? )  "Phere  are  th ree  men in a room.  q?here  i s  
a woman such  that she  is loved by  each  
of them, 
(8) There  are  three  men in a room. For  each  
man there is a woman such  that he  loves 
her. 
App ly ing  his "ordering principles", based  on  the 
observat ion  that humans  are  used to hand le  infor- 
mat ion from left to r ight ,  I I i n t i kka  in ( I l i n t i kka ,  
1977)  conv inc ing ly  suggests  that  (8 )  i s  p rag-  
mat ica l ly  p re fer red  read ing  for  (6 ) .  Never the-  
less ,  th i s  conc lus ion  may be  over turned ,  lPor 
instance, it (6 )  i s  ex tended to 
(9) "l~here are  three men in a room.  Every  man 
loves  a woman.  Her  name is  Me l inda .  
Example  4: (quant i f i ca t ion)  
(10)  A r i f le  has  been  g iven  to a l l  so ld ie rs ,  
F rom among two poss ib le  read ings  of (10) ,  the  
one assert ing that  d i f fe rent  r i f l es  have been 
g iven  to different sotdiers shou ld  be semant ic -  
a l ly  p re fer red?  But  th i s  in terpreta t ion  i s  imme-  
d ia te ly  inv~l idated  when (10)  is  rep laced  by  
(11)  A r i f le  has  been  g iven  to a l l  so ld ie rs .  
It has  tu rned  out  to be  broken .  
Genera l  conc lus ions  
' l~he fo l low ing  examples  of presuppos i t ion il- 
lustrate that  semant ic -based  as  well as  prag-  
mat ic -based  genera l  conc lus ions  are subject to 
cance l la t ion .  
(p resuppos i t ion)  
(3.2) J ohn  regrets  that  he  d idn ' t  w in  the  pr i ze .  
(12) p resupposes  that John  did not w inthe  prize. 
Neverthe less ,  this genera l  conc lus ion  is imme-  
diately i nva l idated  when (12)  i s  extended to 
ed to 
(3.3) John  regrets that he  didn't win  the prize. 
In fact, he  doesn ' t  know that he did. 
Example 6_ (presupposition) 
(24)  "If I had  money I wou ld  buy  a rifle to de- 
fend yeu  from the Wolf", Red  Rid ing Hood 
maid to her  Grrandmother.  
(14) p resupposes  that RRH had no money.  
Th is  follows from the pragmat ic  rules of interpreta- 
tion of counterfactuals in English. "\]2he cance l~ 
ability of this conc lus ion  is easily seen,  if (14) 
is extended to 
(15) "If I had  money I wou ld  buy  a rifle to de-  
fend you  f rom the W'olf", RRH said to her 
CTrandmother.  In fact, RRH WaS cheat ing her. 
5he  had  money,  but she  wanted  to buy  
herself a new dress. 
Accord ing  to the presented  examples ,  nonmo-  
notonicity is not a local phenomenon.  It exists on  
var ious  levels of d i scourse  analysis. It seems,  
therefore, that no high quality d i scourse  under -  
s tanding sys tem can  i~nore this fact. 
q?OWARDS A D I~SCOURSE-ORIEN ' J ?ED 
NONMONOG)ONIC FORMALISM 
Al though a great  number  of var ious  nonmono-  
ton ic  (nm, for shor t )  fo rmal i sms  can  be  found i n  
AI  literature, none  of them seems to be fully 
appropriate for the purpose  of d i scourse  under -  
standing.  In our  op in ion ,  on ly  de fau l t  l og ic  pare  
t ia l l y  captures  the  express ive  power  of natura l  
l anguage.  \ ]Der iv ing  from Minsky 's  f rame concept ,  
this formal ism has  turned out to be useful for 
var ious  natura l  l anguage app l i ca t ions  ( see  (Dun in -  
-K~plicz,  1984) ,  (Mercer ,  Reiter, 1984) .  
Default logic has  been introduced by  Relier 
in (P.eiter, 1980)  to model  default reasonin_q, i.e., 
the  drawing  of p laus ib le  conc lus ions  from incom-  
p le te  in fo rmat ion  in  the  absence  of ev idence  to 
the contrary, f typ ica l  example  of default reason-  
ing is the inference rule "<Pypically birds fly". If 
"l~weety is  e bird, then  in the  absence  of ev i -  
dence  to the contrary, we normal ly  assume that  
q~weefy f l ies .  But  we  are  prepared  to re jec t  th i s  
conc lus ion ,  if we  learn  theft (Dweety  i s  a p ingu i ru  
In default logic the rule about  birds is repre- 
sen\ [ed  by  the  fo l low ing  de fau l t :  
b i rd (x )  : M f l i es (x )  / f l i es (x )  
wi th the  in tended in terpreta t ion :  "for each  ind iv id -  
ua l  x, if x is a b i rd  and i{ i s  consistent to as-  
sume that x flies, then it may be assumed that 
x flies". 
In default l og ic  lhe wor ld  under  cons iderat ion  
is represented  as  a default the~,  i.e. a pair 
consist ing of a set of first-order formulae, the 
ax ioms of the theory, and  a set of defaults. De-  
fau l t s  extend  the  in fo rmat ion  conta ined  in ax ioms 
by sanct ioning plausible, but not necessar i ly  
true, conclus ions.  
A set  of fo rmulae  der ivab le  from a g iven  de-  
faul t  theory  is; ca l led  an  extens ion  of the  theory  
and is i n te rpreted  as  a set of beliefs about  the 
wor ld  being *h~delled. ( see  (Relier, 3_980) fop details). 
505 
Spec i fy ing a nm d iscourse-or iented formal ism 
is a difficult problem. "\])he first step is to deter- 
mine  all its relevant properties. In this sect ion 
we shall try to accompl i sh  this point and  to dis- 
cuss  some weaknesses  of default logic in this 
respect. 
The  first p rob lem is to choose  an  appropr iate 
s tandard  logic as  a bas is  of the constructed 
system. A l though the majority of existing nm for- 
ma l i sms are based  on  classical first-order logic, 
it is well recogn ized  that to capture the struc- 
ture of natural languages ,  at least intensional 
logic, preferable with tense  operettors, is required. 
It shou ld  be, however ,  s t ressed  that for computa-  
tional reasons  some compromise  between ade-  
quacy  and  simplicity is necessary .  
The  next step is to add  a nonmonoton ic  de-  
ductive structure to the chosen  monoton ic  logic. 
Th is  amounts  to  the following task. G iven  a the- 
err A, i.e., a set of formulae descr ib ing relevant 
information about  a world, determine  a set  E(A)  
of conc lus ions  nonmonoton ica l ly  der ivable from 
A. The  genera l  idea is to identify this set with 
the set of conc lus ions  monotonical ly  derivable 
from some extens ion  of A. For  this reason lD(A)  
is called an  extens ion  of A,  and  is interpreted 
as  the set of plausible conc lus ions  about  the 
wor ld  under  consideration. 
Defining a language and nm deduct ive  struc- 
ture, determines  a nm system.  But to make the 
sys tem appl icable for d i scourse  process ing,  
a number  of additional factors shou ld  be  taken  
into consideration. 
~irst, a semant ics  mus \ [  be  specified. In par-  
ticular, a mode l  regarded as  a nm description of 
a real wor ld  under  considerat ion shou ld  be  
defined. 
Second,  a method of determining whether  a 
conc lus ion  can  be  inferred from a g iven  set of 
p remises  shou ld  be  specified. Because  nm deriv- 
ability depends  not only on  what  can  be  proved,  
but also on  what  cannot  be  proved,  there are 
technical  p rob lems involved here. In particular, 
even  if the sys tem is based  on  semi -dec idab le  
first-order logic, its proof theory is general ly 
undec idable .  "\])his means  that some kind of 
heuristics is necessary ,  and  the sys tem will 
somet imes  arrive at mistaken conclusions.  
Never the less ,  it is  often sufficient to cons ider  
only mode ls  with finite domains  limited to the 
individuals explicitely occur r ing  in the d iscourse.  
In such  a case,  the logic we are deal ing with 
is, in fact, the propositional one. "I~he nm formal- 
i sm based  on  propositional logic is, of course,  
decidable. 
"l~hird, belief___.~s \[evision~ that is  a method of 
reorgan iz ing  wor ld  model  when new information 
leads to incons is tency  shou ld  be  specified. (\['his 
very  difficult p rob lem has  been marginal ly t reat -  
ed  in  the  most  o f  ex is t ing  nm systems,  On the  
o ther  hand,  s ince  each  d iscourse  ut terance  mod-  
i f i es  the  actua l  wor ld  mode l ,  be l ie fs  rev is ion  
seems one  of  the  cent ra l  p rob lems of  d i scourse  
analysis. 
Fourth, the ex is tence of extens ions  shou ld  
be  guaranteed.  A l though this demand seems ob- 
vious, it iS not satisfied in many existing nm 
formal i sms,  in part icu lar~ in Re i te~s defaul t  logic,  
An example  of a discourse,  whose  representat ion 
in lqeiter's sys tem lacks an  extension, can  be  
found in (Lukaszewicz ,  1984) .  "l~his paper  pre~- 
sents also an  alternative formalization of default 
logic wh ich  satisfies the above  postulated proper -  
ty. 
Fifth, the sys tem shou ld  ~ mode l  com-  
mon sense  reasoning.  In te rms of extension, this 
means  that such  an  extens ion shou ld  contain 
those d iscourse -connected  conc lus ions  wh ich  
wou ld  be  drawn by  humans .  In our opinion, none  
of existing nm fo rmal i sms fully captures  this 
requirement. The  detailed d i scuss ion  of this hypo-  
thesis can  be  found in (Lukaszewicz ,  1986) .  
In the majority of nm systems the notion of an  
extens ion is def ined in a way  admitting the exist- 
fence  of many different extens ions  for a g iven 
theory, q~his poses  the quest ion of how to define 
the set of conc lus ions  derivable from such  a the- 
ory. 'l~here are  two possibilities. First, to v iew 
each  extens ion  as  an  alternative set of beliefs 
one  can  hold about  a wor ld  under  consideration. 
In fact, this solution has  been adopted  in default 
logic. Second,  to identify the set of conc lus ions  
with the intersection of all extensions.  Both  solu- 
tions are reasonab le  but have  different interpreta- 
tions, q~he first represents  what  an  agent  beliefs 
about  a world, the second,  wh~t an outside ob-  
server  wou ld  know about  the agent~ beliefs, 
g iven the set of the agent ' s  p remises  about  the 
world. 
In our opinion, the second solution is better 
motivated in d i scourse  process ing,  q~his follows 
from the fact that both the speaker '  and  the 
hearer  try to ach ieve  a common representat ion 
of a d iscourse.  "l~his wou ld  be impossible, if 
each  of them accepted  a different extension. 
REFERENCES 
AAAI  (1984)  Non-Monoton ic  Reason in f i  Workshof )  , 
New Paltz, NY ,  October  17-19,  1984.  
AI (1980)  Art i f ic ia l  In te l l igence .  Vol. 13/1,2. 
Ascher ,  N.) (1984)  L ingu is t i c  Unders tand ing  and  
Non-Monoton ic  Reason ing .  In AAAI -84 ,  
pp. 1-20.  
Dun in -Ktp l i cz  B., (1984)  Defau l t  Reason ing  in 
Anaphora  Reso lu t ion .  P rec .  6th ECA!,  
pp. 157-166.  
Hint ikka J., (1977)  Quant i f ie rs  in Natura l  
Languages :  Some Logical  P rob lems II. ~ -  
tics and  Ph i losophy  i, pp. 153-172.  
Kamp H., (1981)  A q?heor~ of T ruth  and  Semant ic  
Representat ion.  Formal  Methods  in th___ee Study  Of 
Language,  Amsterdam,  pp. 277-322.  
LukaszewiczW. ,  (1984~) Cons iderat ions  on  Default 
Logic. In AMI -84 ,  pp. 165-193.  
LukaszewiczW. ,  (1986)  Formal i za t ion  of Know-  
ledge and  Ignorance:  An  Introduction to Non-  
monoton ic  Reason ing ,  C___C A.__I\[~ to appear .  
Mercer  R., Reiter, R., (1982)  The  representat ion of 
P resuppos i t ions  Us ing  Defaults.B.g.University. 
~I'echnical Repor t  82-i. 
Reiter R., (1980)ALog ic  for Default Reason ing .  
Artificial Intelligence 13/i,2, pp. 81-132.  
506 
