Context  Ana lys i s  Sys tem for  Japanese  Text  
H i tosh i  I sahara  and  Shun I sh izak i  
E lec t ro techn ica l  Laboratory  
1-1-4,  Umezono,  Sakura -mura ,  N i ihar i -gun ,  
Ibarak i ,  Japan  305 
ABSTRACT 
A natural language understanding system is 
descr ibed which extracts contextual information 
from Japanese texts. It integrates syntactic, 
semantic and contextual processing serially. The 
syntactic analyzer obtains rough syntactic 
structures from the text. The semantic analyzer 
treats modify ing relations inside noun phrases 
and case relat ions among verbs and noun phrases. 
Then, the contextual analyzer obtains contextual 
information from the semantic structure extracted 
by the semantic analyzer. Our system understands 
the context using preceded contextual knowledge 
on terrorism and plugs the event information in 
input sentences into the contextual structure. 
i: Introduction 
Despite the advanced state of syntactic 
analysis research for natural language processing 
and the many useful results it has produced, 
there have been few studies involving contextual 
information, and many problems remain unsolved. 
The natural language understanding system 
described here employs a syntactic analyzer, a 
semantic analyzer treating modifying relations 
inside noun phrases and the relations among verbs 
and phrases, that is, word-level semantics, and a 
contextual analyzer (Fig. i). These analyzers 
operate in a serial ly integrated fashion. Though 
humans seem to understand natural language texts 
using these three analyzers simultaneously, we 
have made their methodology essential ly different 
from their human counterparts for more eff icient 
computing. Our system uses a context-free 
grammar parser named Extended-Lingol as a 
syntact ic analyzer to analyze the Japanese 
sentences and produce parsing trees. From an 
analysis of these, in turn, it obtains word-level 
semantic structures expressed in frame-l ike 
representations. Finally, it extracts contextual 
information, using our representation from the 
semantic structures. We remain far from certain 
at this stage whether this system represents the 
best real izat ion of an engineering-based natural 
language understanding system. Future plans 
include combining these three processes into one 
process and br inging the system closer to the 
human process. 
Because our system uses bottom-up analysis 
f irst ( including syntactic analysis and 
word- level  semantic analysis), it can obtain not 
only the outl ine of the input sentences but also 
their details, as necessary. This method is the 
best one in situations where the detai led 
information of texts are quite important, such as 
Machine-Translat ion systems and precise 
quest ion-answering systems. Of course, in this 
way, we must bui ld up a sizable dict ionary of 
precise word definitions. 
In our system, predict ive-style processing is 
not used in syntactic analysis and word-level 
semantic analysis. But, in the contextual 
analysis part, predict ions from the tree 
structure of the contextual information are used 
for instantiat ion of the contextual structure. 
We are now developing a system which can 
understand newspaper articles through contextual 
structure (see Fig. 2a). After applying the 
procedures out l ined above, the system obtains 
I Input sost0nces \] 
(Nouspa2er art ~cles| 
in Japanese) 
anal s s 
L . . ~ r a t ~  JM.._ s~te,, J 
Fig.l System flow chart of this paper and its applications. 
: i~ ~:  ~ 11::: 69 .::k: -~  "U (,~, 9~, I~1 ~'~ :b:~ -'5"= ~:~11 '
. L ,  "7 . 'a"  4 tc  ? . ~ ~Lv  
~-~ ~- " . ,~  " ~ . ~  
a: Original input (Morning edition of the 
Asahi Shimbun-- July 30, 1983). 
THE BOMB KILLS FOUR PEOPLE INCLUDING A JUDGE. 
\[Rome 29th = correspondent Hirano\] 
In the morning of the 29th, at Palermo, 
Sici ly in Italy, a parked car exploded, which 
ki l led 4 people including a judge who had 
directed an investigation into Mafia crimes, 
and injured about i0 people seriously or 
slightly. This is the fourth murder ease on 
judges at Palermo and is of the largest 
scale. 
Judge Rocco Chinnici, 58, the director of 
the Palermo prel iminary court, police 
bodyguards and others were murdered. At the 
moment when the judge left home, the bomb 
exploded which had been set in the car of 
Fiatt parked near there. The explosion 
involved the residents, windows of the 
apartment and about I0 cars near there. 
b: The translat ion of the example article (a) 
from Japanese into English. 
Fig. 2. An example of newspaper articles 
244 
contextua l  representat ions  expressed  as shown in 
Fig. 3. Some deta i l s  of the input  text  are 
abbrev ia ted  in the f igure. 
2: Syntact i c  and semant ic  analys is \ [2\]  
Let  us proceed to an exp lanat ion  of the 
methodo log ies  adopted by our system, us ing the 
newspaper  ar t ic le  in Fig. 2a as an example.  
First, the sys tem ana lyzed  each sentence 
syntact ica l ly ,  obta in ing  pars ing  trees. Next, 
the sys tem const ructs  a semant ic  s t ruc ture  for 
each phrase.  Word meanings  in our word 
d ic t ionary  ate descr ibed  in SRL (Semant ic  
Representat ion  Language) wh ich  uses f rame- l i ke  
express ion  as shown in Fig. 4. Each word mean ing  
shares a su i tab le  pos i t ion  in the h ie rarchy  of 
concepts .  SRL enab les  deep semant ic  ana lys is  in 
a f lex ib le  way. The formal de f in i t ion  of its 
syntax and semant ics  is not  s tated here. In our  
system, a word  mean ing  wr i t ten  in the lex ica l  
entry us ing  SRL p lays  an important  role in 
semant ic  analysis .  The in teract ion  between the 
word  mean ings  is the central  i ssue of the 
semant ic  analys is .  The mod i fy ing  re la t ions  
ins ide noun phrases  and the case re lat ions  among 
verbs and noun phrases  are determined in the 
word- leve l  semant ic  st ructure.  In Fig. 4, three 
scenes (explosion, death  and injury) are obta ined 
by ana lyz in  9 the f i rst  sentence of the ar t ic le  in 
Fig. 2a. "Human"  is a dummy node that means 
human beings.  Here, the people  who died inc lude 
a judge and some pol icemen.  
There  are severa l  types of ambigu i ty  in input  
text. In sNntact i c  analysis,  ambigu i ty  means  the 
ex is tanoe  of severa l  pars ing  trees. Word- leve l  
semant ics  o f ten  spec i fy  wh ich  shou ld  be selected.  
Here, we shou ld  use a k ind  of  predict ion.  For 
example, peop le  who are in author i ty  cou ld  be a 
? target of te r ror i sm (See Fig. 2a). These 
const ra in ts  are very  he lpfu l  in e l im inat ing  
ambiguity ,  as wel l  as sur face  syntact ic  
in format ion.  Some of this p rocess ing  is done in 
an in teract ive  way in our  system. Our sys tem 
asks the user  how to spec i fy  the re la t ions  
between events  in some dec is ion  points.  Even 
after  the e l iminat ion  of ambigu i ty  by the word 
semantics,  there may be unso lved  ambigui t ies .  
These wi l l  he e l iminated  by contextua l  ana lys is  
w i th  the contextua l  structure.  
3:  Features  of contextua l  representat ion  
Our contextua l  s t ruc ture  f i ts  into a tree 
s t ructure  w i th  one root node and a number  of leaf 
nodes. Re la t ions  between events  in a s tory  are 
de f ined  in the s t ructure  as "scenes", and the 
re la t ions  among our  s t ructure  are def ined by a 
tree structure.  Our  s t ructure  can share scenes 
wi th  others.  
Leaf nodes  w i th  a shared root  node have e i ther  
an "and" or  an "or" re la t ionsh ip  w i th  each other. 
The h ie rarchy  shown in Fig. 5 is an example. The 
node " ter ror ism invo lv ing  bomb" has, as in 
Fig. 5, three leaf  nodes  (scenes) - "explos ion,"  
"damage" and "rescue".  S ince those seem to occur  
ser ia l ly ,  the re la t ionsh ip  among them is an "and" 
re la t ionsh ip .  On the 'other hand, the root  node 
" ter ror is t  act ion" in Fig. 5 has several  leaf 
nodes - " te r ror i sm invo lv ing  bomb", "shoot ing" 
and so on. As on ly  one of these usua l ly  
cor responds  to the main  topic  in newspaper  
stor ies,  they  share an "or" re la t ionsh ip  wi th  
each other.  
Input  events  are matched not  on ly  d i rec t ly  
w i th  scenes  in the structure,  but also w i th  
h igher  concepts  in accordance  wi th  a predef ined  
t ree s t ruc ture  of  a concept  h ie rarchy  l lke that 
in Fig. 6. In o ther  words, the sys tem has a 
concept  thesaurus.  So, match ing  between the 
scene of  the s t ruc ture  and the input  events  
becomes  f lex ib le.  
(terrorism involving 
F ig .  3. An example of the contextua l  s t ruc ture ,  
STALE g :~|Up (varked) 
LOCATION )~ \[J)P-~ (Palermo) 
IDCATION "M'M I\] -- (Slclty) 
LOCATION 49  UY(Italy) 
TIM~ 29\[\]~J(on the ~orning of the 2Oth) 
SCA\[? 2~ ~ ~ (large) 
hCTOl{ JkJll\] (humall) 
NUNJEII 4 
INCLUS\]ON !l~.lJ ) ~ (judge) 
JOB ~ffJJlt:\]-~ (di rccO 
OBJI~'I' t~!L~'~. ( flu;pecl, lo n ) 
OlilM:;'r ,~\[~l! (or,h~O 
hCi?1~ -V74 7 (l~a\[ia) 
) l~ I tb  (J,Ljurcd ,';erlously or sHght;ly) 
AC'\[OI{ ),Jill (huJmn) 
NUff~,R{ ~?,JtO2k(about 10) 
lug. 4. \]'ho ~ord-level semantic structure extracted 
from the f i rst  sentence ill Fig. 2a. 
~(A~ori~t aeries ) C clo.~m o~ cri,.~ 
,.'::....o.r ,..'.'.-: . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
~rrori~m in~olvlng ~ 
~ism iovolving bo--a~ < claim of_ crime --) 
Fig. 5 The contextual  s t ruc ture  (upper diagram) 
and its reorganization (lower dlagram). 
245 
4: Contextua l  s t ruc ture  se lect ion  process  
Now we have imp lemented  two se lect ion  methods  
for the se lec t ion  of the contextual  structure,  a 
" two-event  method" and a " t i t le -based method".  
First, we wi l l  exp la in  the "two-event  method".  
In the " two-event  method",  t i t les  are not 
p rocessed  by the sys tem for select ion.  In 
sentence process ing,  after  two events  are 
obtained,  the system begins  a search for a 
s t ructure  invo lv ing  these two events  as the i r  
scenes. The use of two events helps decrease  the 
number  of poss ib le  s t ructures  dur ing the search. 
As ment ioned  prev ious ly ,  se lect ion  of su i tab le  
s t ructures  and scenes can be accompl i shed  
f lex ib ly  w i th  the concept  thesaurus.  
A f te r  deve lop ing  the "two-event  method",  we 
began to implement  the " t i t le -based method".  In 
the case of newspaper  art ic les,  t i t les  have 
impor tant  in fo rmat ion  for the se lec t ion  of 
su i tab le  contextua l  structures.  If there is a 
spec ia l  word  (noun or verb) in the tit le, 
contextua l  representat ion  ind icated by that  word  
is se lected.  In th is  way, the system can almost  
a lways se lect  su i tab le  structures.  Newspaper  
t i t les  shou ld  be wr i t ten  so that readers  can get 
enough in fo rmat ion  fo r  the se lec t ion  of the topic  
f rom its t i t le  only. The correct  se lec t ion  rate 
of our  " t i t le -based method" is shown in Table I. 
Der ivat ives  po int  to thei r  or ig ina l  words, and, 
th rough them, der ivat ives  can se lect  
su i tab le  structure.  
Wi th in  our  exper ience,  there are no 
d i f fe rences  in the correct  se lect ion  rates 
between these two methods.  In our system, at 
present,  we use the " t i t le -based method" because 
of its s imi la r i ty  to human behaviour.  
5: Contextua l  ana lys is  
Once a promis ing  s t ructure  is d iscovered,  
scenes cor respond ing  to the input events  are 
se lected  in the fo l lowing manner: if an event  in 
the input  sentence matches  one of the scenes 
a l ready act ivated  in the system, it ident i f ies  
the event  w i th  that  scene. 
For  example,  f rom the art ic le  shown in fig. 2a 
our sys tem ext racts  three events  - "explosion",  
"murder (death)" and "injury". The contextua l  
s t ruc ture  of " ter ror i sm invo lv ing bomb" is then 
se lected  us ing  its tit le, and the contextua l  
ana lys is  begins.  In the contextual  analysis,  
f irst, "explos ion" matches  d i rect ly  the f i rst  
scene (scenel) in the structure,  "explosion",  and 
this event  is p lugged into scenel.  Next, 
"murder" is checked compar ing  wi th  each scene. 
Here, there is no scene which  d i rec t ly  matches  
"murder" but one of the h igher  concept  of 
"murder" is "damage". So the system ident i f ies  
"murder" w i th  scene2, "damage" and p lugs that  
event  into scene2. In these cases there  are no 
events  a l ready  p lugged into the se lected  scene, 
so the sys tem can eas i ly  p lug the events  into the 
scenes. When process ing  the th i rd  event, 
" injury", it is qu i te  important  to determine  
whether  -this event  is the same or d i f fe rent  front 
"murder".  (Here, " injury" also has the h igher  
concept,  "damage".)  
The determinat ion  whether  th is  part  of the 
input  sentence is g iv ing abso lu te ly  new 
in format ion  about a new event  now be ing 
in t roduced or  more prec ise  in fo rmat ion  about the 
event a l ready  descr ibed  is accompl i shed  in the 
fo l lowing manner.  When the input event  is 
ident i f ied  w i th  one scene in the contextua l  
structure,  the contextua l  ana lyzer  beg ins  to 
search  for an event  a l ready p lugged into the 
se lected  scene that has the same concept  (or a 
h igher  concept)  as the input event. If there is 
no conf l i c t  between the va lues of the at t r ibutes  
(for example, ACTOR, OBJECT, TIME) in the input 
event  and the event  found by the search, the 
246 
Fig. 6. Concept thesaurus. 
Table 1. Topic se lec t ion  by the " t i t le -based  method". 
Successes 
Topic \] By title \ [By  subtitle Failures 
,,,to.~.io,L__. ! 7 6 1 = ~ _ _  
Shooting 2 2 i 0 
- - i  
llighjack~ 1 6 G 0 i 
_ Total J 1 5 0 2 1 _ 5 ~_~ 
i n fo rmat ion  obta ined  by the input  event  is 
t reated  as a deta i l  of a p redescr ibed  event. If 
th is  is not  the case, the input  event  is t reated  
as a para l le l  event  of the events  in that  scene. 
6: Conc lus ion  
In the above sect ions we have proposed  a 
sys tem for ext rac t ing  contextua l  in fo rmat ion  from 
natura l  language texts  us ing  a contextua l  
representat ion  s t ructure  as a knowledge 
structure.  Our  s t ructure  has proven  i tse l f  
usefu l  for  express ing  contents  of Japanese 
newspaper  art ic les.  Though we propounded the 
method used in our  system to unders tand  natura l  
language texts  in every field, some of its 
spec i f i ca t ions  such as the t reatment  of t i t les  
are o r iented  toward  special\[ features  of newspaper  
art ic les.  
At  present,  the app l i ca t ions  of this system 
are res t r i c ted  to s tor ies  deal ing wi th  terror ism. 
For these  l imits  to be extended, the number  of 
the contextua l  s t ruc tures  must  be increased  and 
the concept  thesaurus  scale enlarged.  We be l ieve  
-that the natura l  language unders tand ing  system 
descr ibed  in th is  paper  is f lex ib le  enough to 
a l low for such extension.  Computer  fac i l i t ies  
must, of course, a lso be taken into account.  
As our  sys tem is st i l l  in the deve lopment  
stage, some parts  are not yet complete.  Our  
d ic t ionary  is st i l l  ra ther  small.  For these 
reasons,  "the scope of th is  paper  has been l imi ted 
to process ing  ab i l i ty  for a res t r i c ted  category  
of newspaper  art ic les.  
Re ference  
i: Schank, R. C., "Dynamic Memory",  Cambr idge  
Univ.  Press (1983) 
2: Tanaka, H., "A Semant ic  P rocess ing  System for 
Natura l  Language Understand ing" ,  (in Japanese)  
Researches  of the Electro-technical Laboratory ,  
NOo797 (1979) 
3: Lyt inen,  S. L. and Schank, R. C., 
"Representat ion  and Trans lat ion" ,  Text  2:1/3 
Ya le  Research  Report  (1982) 
4: Ishizaki ,  S., Isahara, H. and K. Hands, 
"Natura l  Language Process ing  System wi th  
Deduct ive  Learn ing  Mechanism",  In ternat iona l  
Sympos ium on Language and Ar t i f i c ia l  
Inte l l igence,  March  16-21, 1986, Kyoto  
