A Compositional Semantics for Directional Modifiers 
- Locative Case Reopened - 
Erhard W. Hinrichs 
Bolt Beranek & Newman Laboratories 
I. Abstract 
This paper pre,'Jents a model-theoretic semantics for directional 
modifiers in English. The semantic theory presupposed for the 
analysis is that of Montague Grammar (cf. Montague 1970, 1973) 
which makes it possible to develop a strongly compositional 
treatment of directional modifiers, Such a treatment has 
significant computational advantages over case-based treatments 
of directional modifiers that are advocated in the A! literature. 
2. Case-based Treatments 
Among natural language processing systems which attempt to 
incorporate spatial information, the following strategy seems to 
prevail. Directional or locative modifiers are treated either as 
corresponding to slots in case "/rames in the canonical lexical 
representat ions  of verbs (cf. Celce 1972, Hendrix, Thompson and 
Slocum 1973), or as cor responding to conceptual  cases in the 
(meta - l ingu is t i c )  conceptua l i za t ion  of act ions (Schank 1975). 
Case based approaches  to the semantics of d i rect iona l  modif iers 
can be character i zed  as weak ly  compositional in the following 
sense: In a verb phrase  such as f l y  to Chicago the prepos i t iona l  
phrase  cont r ibutes  semant ica l ly  the meaning of the NP Chicago 
' as the d i rect iona l  or locat ive goal of the act ion assoc ia ted  with 
~.he verb phrase .  However, the d i rect iona l  prepos i t ion  to itself  
does not make a semantic  cont r ibut ion  at all to the meaning of 
the verb phrase  as a whole. Instead, to merely serves as a 
syntact ic  marker  for a semantic  ent ity,  namely a locat ive or 
d i rect iona l  case whose meaning cannot  be separated  from, but 
ra ther  is an in tegra l  par t  of a given verb frame or conceptua l  
s t ruc ture .  By cont rast ,  the semant ics  of d i rect iona l  modif iers 
that  I will be advocat ing in th is  paper  is strongly csmpositional 
in the sense that  d i rect iona l  prepos i t ions  serve as autonomous 
syntact ic  and semantic  units.  Consequently,  each word in a 
phrase  such as f l y  to Chicago cont r ibutes  its own, independent  
meaning to the meaning of the phrase as a whole. 
This strongly compositional analysis of directional modifiers has a 
number of crucial computational advantages over case-based 
approaches .  Consider how in ferences  between sentences  such as 
(1) and (2) can be hand led by the two types of approaches .  
(I) John went to New York. 
(2) John was in New York. 
In Schank (1975, p.53) sentence (I) corresponds to the 
conceptual structure in (3). 
(3) \ [ ~ N e w  York 
John ~-%-~ PIRAte ~ John e - ~ - ~  
L .X 
(3) be shou ld  read as: "John is at some time in the past  (p) 
engaged in an act  of physical  t rans fer  (PTRANS) whose object (o) 
is John and whose d i rect ion  (D) is from some locat ion X to New 
York." The fact  that  (1) implies (2) is expressed by a t tach ing  to 
the b i -d i rec t iona l  arrow in (3 ) . the  s t ruc ture  in (4). (of. Schank 
1975, p. 54) 
(4) J o h n ~  LOC(N.Y.) 
Schank calls the r-lin/c (v for result) between structures (3) and 
(4) an in ference.  However, the term in ference  is real ly  a 
misnomer because the assoc iat ion  between s t ruc tures  such as (3) 
and (4) is merely a mat ter  of s t ipu lat ion but does not follow from 
any genera l  pr inc ip les  or axioms that  would const ra in  the 
language of conceptua l  s t ruc tures .  For that  matter ,  there  is 
nothing in Schank's  system that  prevents  a l ink between (3) end 
a s t ruc ture  which expresses  that  John does not reach  the 
locat ion New York. In the analys is  we will develop below, on the 
other  hand, the in fe rence  between (1) and (2) follows logical ly 
from the semantics of motion verbs such as go in conjunction 
with the semantics of directional modifiers, 
Consider next the issue of how easy or difficult it is to upscale 
natura l  language systems whose t reatment  of di rect iona l  
modif iers is case -based .  Assume a case-based  system in which 
only those verba l  frames or conceptua l  s t ruc tures  are 
implemented that  re la te  locat ive or d i rect iona l  case to verbs of 
motion. Now imagine that  we! want to extend coverage to verbs 
such as wave which, as i l lus t rated  in (5), allow d i rect iona l  
modif iers such as to, 
(5) The Pres ident  waved to the repor ters .  
Since wave, unl ike verbs  of motion, does not enta i l  a change of 
locat ion for the agent  involved, a new verba l  frame or conceptua l  
s t ruc ture  would have to be int roduced into a system which only 
covers  motion verbs.  Moreover, locat ive or d i rect iona l  case 
would have to be re in t roduced into the system as well because in 
a case-based  system the specif ic effect of a given semant ic  case 
has to be determined for each mdividual  frame or conceptual  
s t ruc ture .  This is a d i rect  consequence of the weakly 
composit ional  semant ics  of suctl systems and in tu rn  leads to an 
highly redundant  method of upscal ing. Since my analysis of 
d i rect iona l  modif iers is, by cont rast ,  s t rongly composit ional,  
upscal ing becomes much easier.  In the case of extending 
coverage to a verb l ike wave, all that  needs to be added is the 
lexical  semant ics  for the w.~rb itself,  while the semantics of 
d i rec t iona l  modif iers can remain untouched.  
Finally, cons ider  how a case-based  approach  to d i rect ional  
modif iers fares  with respect  to phrases  such as the ones given m 
(6). 
(6) From Russia with Love 
To New York and then to Atlanta 
Since in case-based systems locative or directional case is a 
relational notion and is crucially dependent on a verbal frarae or 
conceptua l  s t ruc ture ,  it becomes impossible to assign an 
in terpretat ion  to verb less  phrases  as in (6). One s t ra tegy  for 
extending case-based  systems to such verb less  phrases  would 
consist  in supplement ing the re la t iona l  notion of d i rect iona l  or 
locat ive case by a non- re la t iona l  counterpar t  which does not 
depend on some verba l  frame or conceptua l  s t ruc ture .  But the 
resu l t ing account  of locat ive or d i rect iona l  case would once 
again be highly redundant  since essent ia l ly  all  of the cases in 
the system wouhi have to be spl it  into a re la t iona l  and a non-  
re la t iona l  vers ion.  
2, Motion Verbs as Location Predicates 
In their literal sense, locative use to and toZvavd typically modify 
motion verbs  such as wal~, ru~, drive, sl ither, move etc. An 
adequate  t reatment  of the d i rect iona l  modif iers themselves is, 
there fore ,  closely connected to a semantic  account  of such 
motion verbs.  In Hinrichs (1985) I argue that  motion verbs 
should be t reated  as stage level  predicates in the sense of 
Carlson (1977), namely as pred icates  whose arguments  refer  to 
s tages  of individuals.  Stages are connected  to individuals in 
Car lson's  ontology by a rea l i zat ion  re la t ion  R, which assoc iates  a
given indiv idual  with all of the (spo i l s - tempora l )  stages at which 
that  indiv idual  is present .  
Motion verbs such as move can be unders tood  as prototypica l  
examples of s tage- leve l  pred icates ,  since such verbs pred icate  
something about the spatio-.-temporal locat ion of one or more 
objects.  Following Hiurichs (1985), I in terpret  a motion verb l ike 
move in terms of a th ree-p lace  stage level p red icate  move + , 
whose first two argument positions range over individual stages 
rea l i z ing th~ re ferents  of the object and subject NPs, 
respect ive ly .  Fal lo~ing Davidson (1977), the r ightmcst  argument 
pos i t ion r ~n~,es over events,  or more speci f ical ly  over evenl 
347 
stages which realize the event that the referents of the subject 
and object NPs are engaged in. Thus, move+(xs) (ys ) (e  s )  should 
be read as: "the referents of x s and ys  are engaged in an event 
stage e s real iz ing an event of moving." As is customary in 
Montague Grammar, I express constra ints  on lexical meaning in 
terms of meaning postulates that  constra in the set of possible 
models of semantic in terpretat ion?  The meaning postulate in (7) 
states that  an event stage e s which real izes a moving event 
spat io - tempora l ly  includes (symbolized as K) at least the location 
of the referent  denoted by the object argument, i.e. yS K e s. 
This does not exclude the possibi l i ty that  the location of the 
referent of the subject NP can be contained in the event stage 
as well, but this is not required for move,  as (8) shows. 
(7) V xS,yS,e" \[ move+(xS)(yS)(e s) ---> yS ~ es\] 
(8) John moved the troops. 
Of course, different motion verbs will have different propert ies  
with respect  to how the locations of the event stages relate to 
the stages that  realize the individuals involved in these event 
stages. Consider verbs like s l i ther ,  wa lk ,  and run  which in my 
framework are analyzed as two-p lace stage level predicates.  For 
these predicates the location of the event stage is equal to the 
locat ion of the agent, i.e. the referent of the subject NP. This 
can be enforced by a meaning postulate as in (9). 
(9) V xS,e s \[8+(xS)(e s) --> xS=e s \], where ~ t rans lates  
s l i ther ,  wa lk ,  run ,  etc . .  
The lexical entai lment associated with the verb move to the effect 
that  the locat ion of the referent of the object NP changes can 
be captured by the meaning postulate in (10). (The symbols < 
and #~ used in (10) stand for temporal precedence and spat ial  
inequality, respectively.) 
(10) V eS,x~,y",x ? \[R(x~,x ?) & move+(x~)(y~)(e~) --> a x~ 
\[R(x~,x ?) & x~ < x~ & x~ ~. x~\] 
3, The Semantics of to and  toward  
Now I let a t0-phrase,  as a modifier of untensed verb phrases 
(IV*), operate semantical ly on the event stages in the denotat ion 
of the unmodified verb phrase in such way that  the event stages 
in the denotat ion of the result ing IV* phrase const i tute a 
spat io - tempora l  path (in the sense of Cresswell 1978) between 
some specified point of origin to the location of the term 
combining with to. The t rans lat ion of to is given in (11). 
(11) to t rans lates  as XPXPXllXXiP \[kyIS12\[R(12,Yi ) & 
PATH(il,lr,12) & P(xi)(l l)\]\] 
The formula following the lambda abstract ions in (11) introduces 
an individual  stage /2 realizing an individual object y i  which is 
the one bound by the noun phrase (NP) combining with to to 
form the IV* modifier. The second conjunct in the formula 
asserts  that  the denotat ion of the event stage located at l 1, 
which is to be bound by the t rans lat ion of the IV* phrase that  
the to -phrase  combines with, qualif ies as a spat io - tempora l  path  
(a not ion formally defined in Hinrichs 1985) between some point 
of or igin I r and the spat io - tempora l  location of the point of 
dest inat ion.  Finally, the th ird conjunct asserts  the t ru th  of the 
unmodif ied IV* phrase that  the to -phrase  combines with. It is 
this last  conjunct that  automatical ly guarantees the inference 
from sentences uch as (12) to sentences uch as (13). 
(12) Fangs s l i thered to the rock. 
(13) Fangs sl i thered. 
Using the t rans lat ion for to suggested in (11), sentence (12) 
receives the reduced t rans lat ion in (14) according to my 
analysis. 
1Al l  the meaning postu la tes  appear ing in th i s  paper ore formulated 
In the language of extensional logic developed in Hinrichs (1985), 
(14) ~Iea,e i \[R(eS,e i) & PAST(e 5) & 3x e \[R(xS,f) & 2x?Vz ? \[ 
roek'(z ?) & ~z a \[R(zS,z ?) & sl ither'(xe)(e s) & 
PXTH(eS,lr,ZS)\] ~ x ? = z?\]\] 
Paraphras ing (14), it  says that  there is an event stage realizing 
some indiv idual  event of Fangs' s l i ther ing such that  that  event 
stage l ies in the past and the spat io - tempora l  location of the 
event stage const i tutes a path between some implicit point of 
reference l r and the location of some unique rock object. The 
point of reference lr occurs as a free variable in the formula in 
(14); l r is to be understood as an indexical parameter similar to 
the not ion of a re fe rence  po in t  proposed by Reichenbach (1947) 
for the interpretat ion  of tenses in English. 
Notice that  the notion of a path in the translat ion of to in (11) 
and hence also in the t rans lat ion  for (12) given in (14) is defined 
to hold of the process making up a part icu lar  event. Moreover, 
due to the postulate in (9), the referent  of the subject NP, when 
it combines with a motion verb such as s l i ther  to the rock ,  is 
realized by a stage spat io - tempora l ly  co-extens ive  to the path 
denoted by the to phrase. This fact guarantees the inference 
between sentences uch as (12) and (15). 
(15) Fangs was at the rock. 
For other classes of verbs the same type of inference, namely 
identifying the path with the posit ion(s) of the referent of the 
subject NP, cannot be drawn. For sentences such as (16) we do 
not want to claim that  the stages real iz ing John make up a path 
to Boston. Rather it is the object NP, in this case an event 
term, that  const i tutes  the path. The same is t rue of (17); it  is 
the ball whose locat ions const i tute  a path to the locat ion 
specified in the to -phrase .  
(16) John made a phone call to Boston. 
(17) Carol set the ball to Lucy. 
Let us now turn  to the t reatment  of the preposi t ion toward  
whose lexical t rans lat ion  rule is given in (18). 
(18) toward  t rans la tes  as kPkPkeakxlP(ky I 31 \[R(l,y i) & 31' 
\ [PATH( I ' , l r , \ ] ) )  & e s _<, 1' & I r < e s & P (x i ) (eS) \ ] \ ] )  
The t rans lat ion for toward  constra ins the value of the event 
stage var iable s s in such a way that  e s has to be spat io -  
temporally contained in some init ial  segment of a path l '  from 
some implicit point of origin I r to the location I of the referent  .
of the NP with which toward .  The requirement hat  the value of 
e s has to be an init ial  segment of such a path follows from the 
condit ion that  the implicit point of origin I r has to be properly 
contained in e s. P roper  containment is necessary in order to 
avoid that  the value of e s could be equal to the point of origin, 
in which case an object could count as moving toward another 
object if the spat ial  location of the f i rst  object remains 
unchanged. 
Using (18), sentence (19) is translated as in (20). 
(19) Fangs slithered toward the rock. 
(20) 3eS,e i \[R(ee,e i) & PAST(e s) & 3x ~ \[R(xa,f) & ~x?\[Vz ? 
\[rock'(z ?) <--> xO=z o\] & 3z a \[R(ze,z ?) & sl ither'(xS,e s)
& 31 \[PATH(1,1r,Z s) & e s _~ 1 & 1 r < eS\]\]\]\]\] 
The t rans lat ion in (E0) says that  there is an event stage 
realizing some individual  event of Fangs' s l i ther ing such that  
that  event stage lies in the past and the spat io - tempora l  
location of the event stage const i tutes the init ial  par t  of a path 
between some implicit point of reference I r and the location of 
some unique rock object. Since es  in (20) is an init ia l  part  of a 
complete path  to the rock, the t ru th  of a sentence such as (12) 
entai ls the t ru th  of (19), but not vice versa. Moreover, (12), but 
not (19), entai ls  (15). 
4. The Aspeetua lE f fect  of to and toward 
Apart from support ing the re levant inference pat terns  between 
sentences uch as (12), (15) and (19), an adequate analysis of to 
and toward should also account for a systematic difference in 
348 
the aspectua l  behav ior  of these two d i rec t iona l  modifiers. 
Sentences  such as (21a) which involve the prepos i t ion  to descr ibe 
atelis events  or, in the terminology of Vendler (1967), activities. 
Sentences  such as (21b), on the o ther  hand, re fer  to te l ic  events 
or to accomplishments in Vendler's c lass i f icat ion,  
(21) a. John walked to the l ibrary.  
b. John walked toward the l ibrary.  
These aspeetua l  p roper t ies  can be demonst ra ted  by examining the 
cooccur renee  res t r i c t ions  of the sentences  in (21) with temporal  
modif iers such as in an hour as in (22) and with for  an hour as 
in (23). 
(22) a. John walked to tile l ib rary  in an hour.  
b. * John walked toward the l ib rary  in an hour. 
(23) a. Johu walked to the l ib rary  for an hour.  
b. Johu walked toward the l ib rary  for an hour.  
As first pointed out by Vendler, only relic events or 
accomplishments can occur with temporal modifiers such as in an 
hour. Modifiers such as for an hour can occur  with both 
act iv i t ies  and accomplishments. However, when modified by 
temporal  for,  only act iv i t ies  as in (23a) can be in terpreted  as 
descr ib ing a single event. If temporal  for  occurs  with sentences 
that  descr ibe  accompl ishments as in (23b), such sentences  have 
to be in terpreted  in some specia l  fashion to make them 
semant ical ly  acceptable ,  (23b), for example, can best be 
understood as re fer r ing  to an i te ra t ive  event,  namely of John's 
repeated ly  walking to the l ibrary during the per iod of one hour, 
Since doing something for x amount of time means doing 
something dur ing most if not all sub interva ls  of the in terva l  x, 
sentences  uch as (24), which re fer  to atel ic  events  or act iv i t ies,  
can be character i zed  as being temporal ly homogeneous. 
(24) Fangs s l i thered  toward the rock. 
To do something in  x amount of time, on the o ther  hand, means 
to do something at  some unique interva l  within x. Since relic 
events  or accompl ishments can be modified by temporal  in, they, 
in cont ras t  to act iv i t ies  or ate l ic  events,  can be descr ibed as 
being temporal ly  heterogeneous: te l ic  events  such as (25) come 
about  over t i le course of some unique time interva l  I', i,e. not at  
some sub in terva l  of I' or at some in terva l  p roper ly  conta in ing I'. 
(25) Fangs s l i thered  to the rock.  
If my analys is  of d i rect iona l  toward and to is an adequate  one, it 
should pred ic t  that  verb phrases  formed with d i rect iona l  toward 
re fer  to tempora l ly  homogeneous events,  while verb phrases  
formed with to re fer  to temporal ly hc terogenous  events, Due to 
the way in which I have defined toward as an init ia l  subpar t  of a 
path  to the pro jected  point of dest inat ion,  the re ference  
proper ty  of tempora l  homogeneity assoc ia ted  with toward can, in 
fact,  be reconst ructed  in the following way. Let us assume that  
there  is a locat ion I t which qual i f ies as an in i t ia l  segment of a 
path  from a putat ive  point of or igin r t to a dest inat ion d. 
Moreover, let  us assume that  r 2, the temporal ly  f inal bound of l / ,  
is in tu rn  the temporal ly  in i t ia l  bound for a locat ion 12 which 
forms the int ia l  par t  of a path from r 2 to d. Then it follows that  
l f+ l  2, the spat io - tempora l  sum of l t and l 2, is also an init ia l  
segment of a path from r I to d. This is precisely what is 
required to stake the semantics of toward homogeneous. 
Since my account of motion verbs and directional toward does 
predict that sentences such as (26) correspond to atelic and 
semant ica l ly  homogeneous events,  my analys is  can support  
in fe rences  from sentences  such as (26) to sentences  such as 
(27). 
(26) United Fl ight 342 has moved toward Logan Airport 
for the last  f i f teen minutes. 
(27) United Fl ight 342 moved toward Logan Airport ten 
minutes ago. 
Inference pat terns  between sentences  such as (26) and (27) are, 
in fact,  highly re levant  for data base in ter face  systems that  
process  spat ia l  information. Imagine that  sentence (26) is 
p resented  to a database  that  monitors p lane movements. If the 
system does not have the capabi l i ty  to infer that  the event 
descr ibed in (26) is t rue  at  any sub interva l  of the f i fteen 
minutes ment ioned in (26), the United f l ight in quest ion would 
er roneous ly  not be counted when the answer to a subsequent  
query such as (28) is computed. 
(28) How many planes moved toward Logan Airport ten 
minutes ago? 
If we compare the semantics of toward with the semantics of to 
as defined in (11), it turns out that to is heterogeneous in its 
re ference  in the same way as accomplishments.  Recall that  the 
semant ics  of to is defined in terms of a complete path between a 
point  of or igin and a point of dest inat ion,  Since for any given 
path  there  do not exist any sublocat ions within that  path that  
themselves would qualify as a path  between the same two 
locat ions,  the heterogeneons  re ference  property  of to follows 
automat ica l ly .  
5. Conclusion 
In order to make an even stronger case in favor of my analysis 
of d i rect iona l  modifiers, I would have to demonstrate  how it  can 
be genera l i zed  to locative prepos i t ions  other  than to and toward. 
Even though I cannot discuss this issue in detai l  in the present  
paper ,  I should l ike to point out in conclusion that  the not ion of 
a PATH plays an important  role in the t reatment  of o ther  
d i rec t iona l  prepos i t ions such as between, along and across. In 
the case of across the path  seems to be bounded by two 
locat ions on ti le per ipher ie  of the re ferent  of the NP across is 
combined with; i.e. across the meadow specif ies some path  
extending from one end of the meadow to the other, Notice, 
however,  that  the two locat ions that  mark the two endpoints of 
such a path  cannot  be chosen arb i t ra r i l y  but in some sense have 
to be "opposite each other".  Undoubtedly, var ious pragmat ic  
cons iderat ions  enter  the p ic ture  if one wants to make this  
requ i rement  of oppositeness formally more precise.  Thus, it 
appears  that  the notion of a path has to be complemented by 
addi t iona l  constra ints ,  if one wants to account  for semant ica l ly  
store complex prepos i t ions such as across, Even though I will 
have to leave the formulat ion of such addit ional  const ra in ts  to 
fu ture  research ,  it should be obvious from these brief remarks  
that  the not ion of a path is a cent ra l  not ion for the semantics of 
d i rect iona l  modifiers in general ,  
6. List of References 
Carlson, Gregory N. (1977). Reference to Kinds in ~ .  
University of Massachusetts dissertation. 
Celce-Murcia, M. (1972). P~rad~ for Sentence Recognition. 
Technical Report HRT-15092/7907. System Development 
Corporation. Santa Monica, CA. 
Cresswell, Maxwell (1978). 'Prepositions and Points of View'. 
Lin~istics and P hilosQp_hz Vol. 2.1, pp. 1-41. 
Davidson, Donald (1967). 'The Logical Form of Action Sentences'. 
In: Reacher, Nicholas ed. The Lo~ of Decision and Action. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 81-95. 
Hendrix, Gary, Craig Thompson, and Jonathan Slocum (1973). 
'Language Processing via Canonical Verbs and Semantic 
Models'. Proceedings of IJCAI-73. 
Hinrichs, Erhard (1985). A Compositional Semantics for 
Aktionsarten and NP Reference m ~ .  Ph.D. 
dissertation, Ohio State University. 
Montague, Richard (1970). 'Universal Grammar'. Theoria 38, pp. 
373-398. 
Montague, Richard (1973). 'The Proper  Treatment of 
Quant i f icat ion in Ordinary English', In: Hint ikka, J., 
J. Moravcsik, and P. Suppes ads, A~proaches to Natura l  
~ .  Reideh Dordrecht .  
Reichenbach,  Hans (1947). Elements of ~ ~ ,  Berkeley: 
University of Cal i fornia Press.  
Schank, Roger (1975). Con_~?'e~tual Information Processing.  
North-Hol land:  New York. 
Vendler, Zeno (1967). ~u is t i cs  in Philos____?op_hz. I thaca: Cornell  
Univers i ty Press.  
349 
