DEGREES OF UNDERSTANDING 
Eva Haj i~ov~ and Petr Sgal l  
Facul ty  of Mathemat ics  and Physics 
Charles Univers i ty  
Ma lost ransk@ n? 25 
Prague l, Czechos lovak ia  
i. IntroductiOno 
Along with "static" or "declarat ive" 
descr ipt ions  of language system, models of 
language use (the regular i t ies  of communica-  
t ive competence) are constructed.  One of the 
outstanding aspects of this transfer of at- 
tent ion consists in the efforts devoted to 
automatic comprehens ion of natural  language 
which, since Winograd's  SHRDLU, are presented 
in many d i f ferent  contexts. One speaks about 
understanding,  or comprehension,  a l though it 
may be not iced that the term is used in dif-  
ferent, and often rather unclear, meanings. 
In machine t rans lat ion systems, as the late 
B.Vauquois pointed out (see now Vauquois  and 
Boitet, 1985), a f lexible system combin ing 
d i f ferent  levels of automatic  analysis is nec- 
essary (i.e.the transfer component  should be 
able to operate at d i f ferent  levels). The hu- 
man factor cannot be complete ly  d ispensed of; 
it seems inevitable to include post-edit ion,  
or such a d iv is ion of labour as that known 
from the system METEO. Not only the semantico-  
pragmatic items present  in the source language 
structure should be ref lected, but also cer- 
tain aspects of factual  knowledge (see Slocum, 
1985, p.16). It was pointed out by Kirschner 
(1982, p.18) that, to a certa in degree, this 
requirement can be met by means of a system 
of semantic features. For NL comprehens ion 
systems the automatic  formulat ion of a part ia l  
image of the world often belongs to the cere 
of the system; such a task certa in ly  goes far 
beyond pure l inguist ic  analysis  and descr ip-  
tion. 
Winograd (1976) claims that a l inguist ic  
descr ipt ion should handle "the entire complex 
of the goals of the speaker" (p.269,275). It 
is then poss ib le to ask what are the main 
184 
features relevant for the pattern ing of this 
complex and what are the re lat ionsh ips  between 
understand ing all the goals of the speaker 
and having internal ized the system of a natu- 
ral language. It seems to be worth whi le to 
reexamine the d i f ferent  kinds and degrees of 
understanding.  
2. Understand ing the sentence. 
Segmentat ion r d isambiguat ion  and identi -  
f icat ion of units of the individual  levels 
are the main tasks of the e lementary  steps of 
understand ing an utterance. 
(i) The lowest step consists in the seg_i I 
mentat ion of the cont inuous f low of sound in- 
to individual  phones; their sequence can be 
understood as cons ist ing in subsequent points 
of a feature space, the indiv idual  feature 
values of the space corresponding to the dis-  
t inct ive features, which have to be identi -  
fied. D isturbances oi\] this level may be due 
to noise or to phys io log ica l  i r regular i t ies.  
On the phone, in a crowded room, the utterance 
I don~t understand you may mean that the 
hearer is unable to ident i fy  the uttered 
phones. 
(ii) - (iii) A phoneme may consist  of sev- 
eral phonic variants,  and a str ing of phonemes 
can be decomposed into morphs, each of which 
corresponds to a morpheme; the latter is a 
feature space again, the values of the fea- 
tures here being the semes (preterite, geni-  
hive, plural  .... ). Thus, if F (a sequence of 
phones) is (the phonet ic  shape of) an utter -  
ance, Phone, Phoneme,  Morph and Morpheme be- 
ing the sets of all phones, phonemes, morphs 
and morphemes, respect ively,  of the language 
1 descr ibed,  we can write: 
F ~ _ _ (f\] ~.?.,fn \] , where 1 ~ n, 
P is a l\[lapping of Phone onto Phoneme 
Morph  C Phoneme ~ ( i .e .Morph  is a proper 
subset of the set of all str ings 
of phonemes\] 
M C Morph  x Morpheme 
Phoneme ? '=  {x ~ Phoneme@;  
A,gm~ ..... .  ~ s ~orph(x  = ~l ..... mp) ;  
thus Phoneme ? is the set of str ings of phone- 
mes that const i tute str ings of morphs. The 
d isambiguat ion  ident i fy ing the str ing of mor- 
phemes conveyed by x can only be made, in the 
genera\]  case, after the syntact ic pattern ing 
of the sentence, its meaning and its f i t t ing 
into the co-text  and s i tuat ion has been 
grasped. The steps of understand ing thus can- 
not be performed in a un i form order; they are 
2 checked by means of tr ial  and error. 
(iv) If one is reading without  paying 
much attention, one "wakes up" when one's 
more or less subconsc ious interpretat ion en- 
counters an obstacle (e.g.with a garden-path 
sentence); one real izes that it is necessary 
to go back .i.n the text to where one's atten- 
t ion was derai led, and read again, paying due 
respect  not only to (surface) syntax, but 
also to understand ing on the higher degrees. 
(v) If the hearer understands the lin- 
guist ic (literal\] meaning (or, reaches a dis- 
ambiguat ion of the utterance),  s/he under-  
stands e.g. th i s  le t te r  as the Object ive of 
(i) and as the Actor of (2\]; further detours 
(using cr i ter ia  from higher degrees) decide 
on the role of p lanes  in a token of (3). 
(1) This letter I got only today. 
(2) This letter came only today. 
(3) F ly ing planes can be dangerous.  
The level of l inguist ic  meaning (tecto- 
grammatics,  under ly ing structure) is language 
specif ic and comprises the theta roles (deep 
cases, va lency slots\] as wel l  as the topic/ 
focus ar t icu lat ion (which is semant ica l ly  re- 
levant for the scopes of operators  and for 
presupposi t ions) ;  see Sgall  et a l . ( in  press\]. 
without knowing the s i tuat ion it is im o- 
poss ib le  to tell who is referred to by I in 
(1), what is.meant by th i s  le t te r ,  and so on. 
Thus, cons ider ing the sense of an utterance 
(i.e., of a token of sentence in a discourse\] 
to consist  in a combinat ion of the meaning of 
the sentence with the speci f icat ion of the 
reference oi_-- the express ions it contains, we 
come to a further degree of understanding,  
i l lustrated by Are  you speak ing  about  the le t -  
ter  you got  f rom my brother? .  This step leads 
us beyond the system of language, which has 
no means to identi fy the objects referred to. 
In the protctypica l  s i tuat ions of communica-  
t ion I is understood, since who hears the ut- 
terance \]knows who utters it. You,  here ,  now,  
we (and thus also your ,  up to now . . . .  ) are 
similar, a l though they are not del imited as 
for the range of reference. Without knowing 
the situation, the hearer also is unable to 
speci fy the reference of th i s  le t te r ,  the 
house ,  a f r iend  of  mine . . .  The sense of utter- 
ances can be ident i f ied only by means of non-- 
- l inguist ic  clues. 
3. Unders tand inq  in communicat ion.  
(vi\] The ident i f icat ion of reference is 
condit ioned by non- l inguist ic  factors, with 
all expressions not having a unique refer-  
ence. The main factor is the speaker's assump- 
tion concerning the h ierarchy of sal ience 
(prominence) of the items in the heater 's  mem- 
ory. As Haj i~ovl  et al (1982; 1984\] point 
out, it refers to the most sal ient item, the 
tab le  to the table act ivated by having occur-  
red in the focus (comment) of a preceding ut- 
terance (or by situation, common interest, .?. \]  
(vii) The next degree concerns habitual  
connotat ions,  a poss ib ly  intended inference, 
see Winograd (1976, 275\], regular cognit ive 
re lat ionships (cf. ~frames ~ and "scenarios'\], 
and issues connected with conversat ional  max-- 
ims and stone wall ing, see Joshi  et al (1984) 
(viii) Non-habi tual  inferences are placed 
along a scale of complexity,  cf. Hint ikka 
(1975), so that an e lementary use of intel- 
lect (proper to most human beings, though not 
qua users of a language\] may be d is t inguished 
3 from conscious intel lectual  effort. 
Another  h ierarchy of inferences, concern- 
ing the d i f ference between "what  I am told" 
and "why ,  starts with the d is t inct ion of di- 
rect and indirect speech acts, and cont inues 
with that between i l locut ion and per locut ion,  
inc luding further degrees of the type "He 
185 
wants me to react in this way; but why does 
he?" - "He wants to achieve this and this by 
my reaction; but for what purpose?", . . .  
4. Conclusions.  
The theory of language cannot be exclus ive-  
ly based on language understanding.  Coming 
back to the quest ion put in ? i, we find that 
among the degrees of understanding only those 
from ? 2 immediately concern the structure 
of language, and even with them factual knowl-  
edge plays a big role. The degrees (vi) to 
(viii\]i and thus also "the entire complex of 
goals" of the speaker goes far beyond the 
domain of l inguist ics,  contrary to Winograd. 
A theoret ical  account of language is a neces- 
sary ingredient of a model of comprehension;  
it al lows us not to use ad hoc solutions, 
which at a later stage could prevent a useful  
genera l izat ion of the comprehens ion system, 
its adaptat ion to new appl icat ions,  etc. 
When evaluat ing a l inguist ic theorv one 
should ask whether it can be embedded in a 
theory of communicat ion;  an economical  ac- - 
count of topic and focus makes it possible to 
descr ibe the meaning of a sentence as a pro- 
cedure instruct ing the hearer how to 
change the contents of her/his memory, and 
thus to connect the handl ing of sentence 
structure with that of the patterning of a 
discourse. 
Notes 
1 We neglect the cases where a phone func- 
t ions in d i f ferent  contexts as a var iant  of 
two di f ferent  phonemes. 
2 Disambiguat ion was discussed in the frame 
of neural -net  l inguist ics and cognit ive 
science by Schnel le (1984, esp.12); cf. his 
ex. Per  Pat ient  hat te  e inen  Wacht raum VS. 
Die  Kaserne . . .  
3 Other aspects of inferencing are studied as 
based on logical entai lment, leading from the 
sense of an utterance - cf. 2 Iv) - to the 
proposi t ion (a funct ion from possible worlds 
into truth values);  the spec i f icat ion of re- 
ference most ly  is tacit ly assumed to be pre- 
sent in a proposit ion.  For an analysis of 
bel ief sentences and other "proposit ional"  
att itudes, as wel l  as of such paradoxes, a~ 
that  of the Liar 's and for contradict ions 
such as those concerning round squares  and 
similar expressions it is indispensable to 
work with a clear d i f ference between (a) the 
level of l inguist ic  meaning (disambiguated 
under ly ing structure\],  (b\] the layer of sense 
(including the speci f icat ion of reference\] ,  
and (c\] the psychologica l  domain of context 
(requiring a descr ipt ion of the re lat ive 
sal ience of the items in the speaker's and 
heater 's memories\] ;  cf. Sgall et al (in 
press, Ch.l\]. 
References 
Haj i~ovl  E., Sgall P. and J .Vrbovl  (1984\], 
Topic, Focus and How to Identi fy Them, 
Groningen Arbei ten zur germanist ischen 
L inguist ik  25, 121-143 
Haj i~ovl  E. and J .Vrbovl  (1982\], On the Role 
of the Hierarchy of Act ivat ion,  in 
COLING 82 (ed.J .Horeck~), Prague, lO7-113 
Hint ikka J. \[1975\], Impossible Possible 
Worlds Vindicated,  Journal  of Phil. 
Logic 4, 475-484 
Joshi  A., B.Webber and R.M.Weischedel  \[1984), 
Prevent ing False Inferences, in Proceed-  
dings of Col ing 84, Stanford, 134-138 
Kirschner Z. (1982), A Dependency-Based Anal-  
ysis of Engl ish for the Purpose of Ma- 
chine Translat ion,  Expl iz i te  Beschrei-  
bung der Sprache und automat ische Text- 
bearbei tung IX, Prague 
Schnel le H. (1984), Programming of Net Lin- 
guist ic Processes, GENET 17a, Bochum 
Sgall P., Haj i~ov~ E. and J .Panevov~ (in 
press\], The Meaning of the Sentence in 
Its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects, Rei- 
del (Dordrecht\] and Academia (Prague\] 
Slocum J. (1985), A Survey of Machine Trans-  
lation, Computat ional  L inguist ics  Ii, 
1-17 
Vauquois  B. and C.Boitet  (1985\], Automated 
Trans lat ion at Grenoble Universitv,  Com- 
putat ional  L inguist ics  ii, 28-36 
Winograd T. (1976\], Towards a Procedural  
Understanding of Semantics, Revue inter- 
nat ionale de phi losophie,  260-303 
186 
