PRAGMATIC CONSIDERATIONS IN MAN-MACHINE DISCOURSE 
Walther v. Hahn 
Research Unit for 
Information Science and Artificial Intelligence 
UNIVERSITY OF HAMBURG 
D-2000 HAMBURG 13, West-Germany 
In t roduct ion 
This paper presents nothing that has not 
been noted prev ious ly  by research in 
Art i f ic ia l  Inte l l igence but seeks to gather 
together var ious ideas that have ar isen in 
the l i terature. It col lects those arguments 
which are in my v iew crucial for further 
progress and is intended only as a reminder 
of insights which might  have been forgotten 
for some time. 
Research on d iscourse has achieved 
remarkable results in the past decade. The 
standard has been raised from simple 
quest ion answer ing to d ia logue faci l i t ies; a 
fact which, as we all know, implies much 
more than only extending the border l ine of 
syntact ic analysis  tn the \]evp\] oF morn than 
one sentence and more than one speaker. 
However, at the same time we all know that 
the real i ty of d iscourse is near ly as far 
away as before from what we are able to 
model now. It's certa in ly  not worth 
enumerat ing all the def ic ienc ies  of current 
models and to l ist what the real goals are. 
It's a matter  of every-day exper ience to see 
the "blatant mismatch between superf ic ia l  
human ease and theoret ical  mechanical  
intractabi l i ty"  (Berwick (2)27). 
The s i tuat ion seems similar to that of 
modern l inguist ics,  "which has tr ied its 
best to avoid becoming entangled in the 
complexi ty  of conversat ion,  but has been 
gradual ly  forced in this d i rect ion by 
uncooperat ive data" (Power / dal Marte l lo  
(23). 
Though it is one of the so cal led "good old" 
t radi t ions of sc ience to e l iminate a lot of 
the most d i f f icu l t  quest ions by saying 'this 
is not our job', in AI, however, from the 
cognit ive point  of v iew we must real ize that 
everyth ing is our job. "Its d irty work, but 
somebody's got to do it" (Israel (18)). 
This seems rather contrary to what Berwick 
(2) shows in his 'Cook's tour' around the 
geography of dialogue, where everyth ing fits 
together in an overal l  map and where 
modular i ty  is a virtue: Our knowledge of 
natural d iscourse processes is highly 
insular wi thout  br idges in between; and: the 
real i ty  of d iscourse is complex in that 
everything is cont ingent  with everything 
else; in fact, nothing is 'modular' in this 
sense (see Fodor (ii)). 
What I wil l  do in this paper is to show all 
this as the patchwork it is and to 
encourage to approximate the a l ternat ives 
seen so far. In a lot of f ields of d ia logue 
research the d iscuss ion often is 
character ized by an 'e i ther-or ' -v iew whereas 
we should try to find a 'as-wel l -as' -  
solut ion or even another new path of 
research. 
Looking at the results of our work we have 
to accept at least three lines of progress 
which all have their own merits, namely 
(1) @evelo~ing new concepts, based on new 
integrat ing ideas, even if only l imited 
implementat ion or other proofs of 
feas ib i l i ty  might  be poss ib le at time, 
(2) the unfold ing of these ideas by 
theoret ical  background work and exper iment 
in all detail. The result  of this work could 
show the intractabi l i ty  of such approaches 
or prove that this approach can be mapped 
onto a known solut ion (as e.g. Johnson-La i rd  
(19) has tr ied to show for meaning 
postulates and decomposi t ional  semantics).  
(3) the explo i tat ion of the ideas in 
construct ing working systems which may show 
whether  or not the idea passes the 
feasib i l i ty  test. 
The general feel ing in Art i f ic ia l  
Inte l l igence now seems to be either 
res ignat ion or par t icu lar izat ion  of the 
problem of discourse. The a l ternat ive after 
all is not doing everything at the same time 
in one single ult imate system or doing 
nothing, but we must go on to fit together 
the great puzzle even if there are a lot of 
miss ing pieces in areas which we have 
already attacked. 
The first Challenge: 
Percept ion and Funct ion 
Inteqrat ion of 
The pract ical  v iew tends to be restr ict ive 
in its approachto percept ion because this is 
the world of the naive user of pract ical  
systems. People involved in natural d ia logue 
520 
obv ious ly  hear or read only  words,  move 
ob jec ts  or man ipu la te  symbols.  They know 
that the i \ [  in tu i t ions  about  the role and 
funct ion  of the symbols  might  be wrong,  but 
all cogn i t ive  ac t ions  are t r iggered  by more 
or less phys ica l  objects .  And, what  is even 
more important ,  na ive  users  are sure that 
the v i s ib le  words  or even cursor  pos i t ions  
co inc ide  w i th  tile funct ion  in tended by them. 
It is a lways  d i f f i cu l t ,  e.g. to demonst ra te  
users ambigu i t ies  in the i r  u t te rances .  
Peop le  are surpr i sed  when you exp la in  
ind i rec t  speech acts to them. 
Sc ient i s ts ,  on the other  hand, have to 
reconst ruct  a ser ies  of h ierarch J  ca\] 
abs t rac t  leve ls  and in terna l  representat ions  
and of ten enough they get lost in the i r  own 
symbo l i c  maze and have to invent  more and 
more ar t i f i c ia l  t r i cks  to c l imb out of the i r  
const ruct ions  and st i l l  meet  the sur face  of 
the ut terance.  
Of course,  it is hope less  "to seek mean ing  
in the phys ica l  p roper t ies  of u t te rances  and 
formal  p roper t ies  of language.  However ,  the 
s imple  :\[act is, that speech  is mere ly  no ise 
unt i l  its potent ia l  mean ing  is appec ia ted  by 
the cogn i t ive  ac t iv i ty  of a hearer"  
(Har r i s /Begg/Upfo ld  (\]6)) . 
There is a good example  wh ich  shows that 
there  are even cases in wh ich  you cannot  
dec ide  whether  you are ta lk ing  about  ob jects  
or words  or abst rac t  const ruct ions .  S idner  
(24) in t roduced  the not ion  of "~egni t lve 
cospec i f i ca t ion"  for the fo l low ing  example  
to show that some anaphors  cannot  be 
rep laced  by a l i tera l  antecedent  in any 
prev ious  sentence:  
"My ne ighbor  has a monster  Har ley  1200 
They are real ly huge but gas effJ c ient  
b ikes"  
Another  good example  for the non-un iqueness  
of v fsua l  percept ion :  Conc \ ] in  and Mc\])ona\]d 
( 7 ) t r ied to bu i l t  the i r  techn iques  of 
generat ing  image descr ip t ions  on their  
observat ions  what  peop\ ]e  found worth  
descr ib ing  in photographs .  But what  these 
ff n terv iewee found sa l ient  was h igh ly  
dependent  of the context  of the request  for 
descr ip t ion .  And this is a mat ter  of 
p ragmat ics  o "There is no sa l ience  in a 
vacuum" (7) . 
Th is  d i sc repancy  is ref\] coted a lso in 
But terwor th ' s  (5) 5. and  6. max ims for tile 
I \ ]ngu is t i c  s tudy of conversat ion  wh ich  
state: 
"5. Let the theory  do the work! 
6. Let the phenomena gu ide the theory!"  
In Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l igence  it Js not only  
the pract i ca l  po in t  that normal ly  
in teract ion  is res t r i c ted  to tile screen, the 
keyboard  and the mouse,  that  is, the sur face  
of sys tems is the only  v i s ib le  l ink for the 
user as wel l  as in p r inc ip le  for the 
knowledge  eng ineer .  Moreover ,  it is 
neccessary  to compare  a lways  the behav iour  
of a sys tem whi th  what  a user  expects  to 
see as an ind icat ion  of the expected  
funct ion,  because  it gu ides  the in tu i t ion  of 
the system' s par tner  anyway.  Carefu l  
concent ra t ion  on what  the user  sees and 
expects  to see even if the sys tem fa i ls  to 
react  p roper ly  is one of the best  means  of a 
p ragmat ica l ly  adequate  t reatment  of 
d i scourse  in Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l igence .  
Some of the addressed  prob lems can be 
re formulated  on another  level, as 
The 2nd Challenc~-- \ ]n t~rat ion  of In tu i t ion  
and Idea l i za t ion  
The representat ion  of knowledge,  espec ia l l y  
the way log ic ians  look at it, has o f ten  been 
the s tar t ing  po in t  of a long d i scuss ion ,  how 
natura l ,  how p laus ib le  a spec i f i c  
representat ion  is in compar i son  to 
under ly ing  cogn i t ive  processes .  Of course  
you can and shou ld  (at least to keep 
cons is tency)  map a\] l sys temat ic  
representat ions  onto  a logica l  notat ion .  But 
log ic ians  and l ingu is ts  all  re ly  on the i r  
in tu i t ion  i n  creat ing  their  s ign i f i cant  
examples  and counterexamples  for 
representat ion  prob lems.  Power  and Mar te l lo  
( 23 ) c r i t i z i s ing  e thnomethodo logy  say in 
the i r  max im (2) : "There is no reason why 
in tu i t ions  about  invented  examples  shou ld  be 
ru led out as a method  of invest igat  J ng 
conversat ion"  
Why do they argue w i th  in tu i t ion  J n respect  
to what  they represent  but not in respect  to 
how they represent  it? 
\]it :i s an accepted  :i deal. J zat ion  among 
l inguists ,  logic\] ans and Ar t i f i c ia l  
In te l l igence  researchers  that input  
sentences  must  f i rs t  be represented  in an 
interna l  language.  And than we are at home 
in our theor ies  and can start  our t r i cky  
a lgor i thms,  in syntact.ic ana lys is ,  e.g. we 
nora l ly  a t tach  the syntact i c  ca tegor ies  to 
the input  words  by means  of a "syntact i c  
lex icon" .  _It must  a lways  be c lear  that  all 
this is h igh ly  counter in tu i t i ve  for any 
na ive  speaker.  We have  in fact  no u l t imate  
reason for do ing  so except  the argument  that  
we see at the moment  no way to proceed  the 
input  in another  ru le -gu ided  way. 
Normal ly  we have no cogn i t ive  reasons  for 
choos ing  exact ly  the representat ions  we use. 
Cons ider  the J deas of Langacker  ' s ( 21 ) 
"cognit:ive grammer" .  I i Js  ideas, though he 
might  be fa l lac ious  about  d rawing  graph ics  
be ing bet ter  than wr i t ing  down pred icates  or 
operators ,  show that there are lots of 
p laus ib le  ways  to ta lk  about  semant ics  and 
grammar.  Doubt \ ]ess  we are o f ten bound to 
topograph ica l  or space-or iented  concepts  in 
our l ingu is t i c  in tu i t ion .  
\[t goes w i thout  say ing  that  we unders tand  
texts  and sentences  as the pr imary  units,  
not words  er morphemes  or quant i f J ca t ions .  
Our  unders tand ing  is suppor ted  by our visual 
memory,  by acoust i c  memor ies ,  and by other  
521 
complex exper ience in the past. Only when we 
are forced to understand tr icky l inguist ic 
or logical examples or must understand 
defect ive,  i l l formed or mistyped utterances, 
(and we have no opportuni ty  to init iate a 
c lar i f i cat ion  dialogue!),  only then we will 
start up our analyt ic  l inguist ic processor  
and check rules, endings, posi t ions of words 
e tc .  (cf. exper iments  with garden-path-  
sentences).  
There is no point in arguing with the 
incremental  understanding of sentences by a 
l istener as he hears each word. We certa in ly  
do not per form structural  analysis word by 
word. At best we check structural  
constra ints  for our semant ic /pragmat ic  
hypotheses. 
I would even go further. Presumably the 
intuit ions do not contain any clear concept 
of understanding as long as there are no 
misunderstandings  (I wil l  come to this point 
later). And even then, as Goodman (12) 
shows, "people must and do resolve lots of 
(potential) miscommunicat ion  in everyday 
conversat ion.  Much of it is resolved 
subconsc ious ly  with the l istener unaware 
that anything is wrong". 
El lman (8) even claims that "the 
c lass i f i cat ion of indirect  speech acts is 
pr imar i ly  for analyt ic  purposes and it is 
not stated anywhere that this c lass i f i cat ion 
is essential  to the understanding process" 
To overs impl i fy:  The basic intuit ion of a 
naive user refers to a SELF and a SYSTEM, 
which works by telepathy, superf ic ia l ly  
guided by the l inguist ic  utterance of the 
user. 
What you wil l  object  to is quite clear: 
" Intuit ion", as used here is a pre- 
sc ient i f ic  label for all the unsolved 
problems of complexi ty  ar is ing in every 
advanced implementat ion.  
In a sense you are right, because a lot of 
the unsolved problems might perhaps ar ise 
from the fact that the solut ions known so 
far are counter intui t ive.  But to be serious, 
the not ion of intuit ion alone is too vague. 
We must at least define: the intuit ion of 
whom? Grosz (13) showed that any appl icat ion 
or iented natural language interface must 
regard the intuit ions (diverging on 
d i f ferent  levels) of a potential  user as 
well  as of the database expert  (knowledge 
engineer).  
Much more general is the object ion that 
intuit ions concerning p laus ib i l i ty  of a 
system's surface exposed to the user is not 
a stat ic  affair. In the course of the work 
with a specif ic  system a user will change 
his intu i t ions about the appropr iateness  of 
its behaviour  and its interpretat ion of the 
user's utterances. As far as I know there is 
no comparat ive research on the dynamic 
pragmat ics  of long-term use of a system. 
A weighty reproach, however, comes from a 
methodolog ica l  point of view, expressed by 
Caroll  and Bever (6). In exper iments of 
semantic adequacy ratings one group of test 
persons were heavi ly  biased in their  
intuit ion by the fact of s itt ing in front of 
a mirror. This mere matter  of the sett ing 
changed the rat ings so much that the result  
of one group would fit well to hypotheses of 
general semantics whereas the other group's 
result  would rather back generat ive syntax. 
Such are intuit ions. 
But in any case l istening to what people 
think they are doing and the system is doing 
is one of the most surpr is ing heur ist ics and 
we def in i te ly  always need this correct ive 
instance to construct  systems which are 
pragmat ic ly  more adequate. 
Let us now have a c loser look to the 
process of sc ient i f ic  ideal izat ion:  we 
normal ly  do not only start with the 
translat ion of the data in a form which we 
can handle, but we also divide the whole 
problem of human discouse into subproblems 
and sub-subproblems. This is, s imi lar to the 
translat ion paradigm, another "good old" 
tradit ion which we tacit ly accepted; of 
course, we cannot do everyth ing at the same 
time. But this technical  routine has been 
internal ized in an extremely strong way and 
is not longer only a crutch of science. What 
I adress here is the opposi t ion of 
par t icu lar ism and holism. 
Israel (18) cr i t ic izes the ideal of 
modular i ty  as a concept beeing imported from 
tradit ional  l inguist ics and psychology. 
Their concept ions of correctness are 
modular, perhaps because of the lack of 
procedural  theories and the lower degree of 
formal complexi ty  in their models, because 
of the lack of procedural  representat ions of 
their models by means of implementat ions.  In 
Israel 's view the main fal lacy in discourse 
models is that "modular ists" try to solve 
syntact ic and semantic processing f irst and 
than see what they can do for pragmatics 
addit ional ly.  Even syntax in the theories of 
these hopeless "syntacto-semant ic  
imperial ists" (18) is c learly devided into 
sentence-by-sentence and level-by- level  
processes. And once we have cut the problem 
into pieces we forget even to try to fit it 
together again afterwards. 
In my opinion we are moreover  too 
accustomed to boxes and arcs for 
i l lustrat ing of our ideas in AI. F igures as 
the fo l lowing corrupt clear communicat ion:  
I sPoakerl----IE \]----I 'hearor 
t t 
I. po  o  ,oo I 
522 
In opposit ion to these s impl ist ic  views of 
language, neurol inguist ics  has shown that 
understanding is a sort of pattern 
(re)construct ion working freely through 
di f ferent levels of abstract ion between the 
level of physical percept ion and 
understanding or the react ion respectively.  
We can apply hol ist ic ideas anywhere: 
Appelt 's  (i) arguing for uni f icat ion in 
grammars as a very elegant way to pass 
pragmatic features through di f ferent levels 
of a language processing system is a good 
example. 
Another example might be the opportunist ic  
planning by Hayes-Roth and Hayes-Roth (17) 
which, from a cognit ive point of view, can 
model human planning behaviour in a very 
convincing way. The fact that they start 
with isolated tasks and then put together 
chunks of pre-planned actions is no 
argument for modular i ty  because there is no 
intermediate bui lt - in level of completed 
substructures. So the incremental  strategy 
of the HEARSAY I I -arehi tecture fits much 
better to the hol ism of the understanding 
process. 
Though there might be other good reasons for 
preferr ing modular  implementat ions in 
today's work: Let us try to achieve again a 
hol ist ic and intra intui t ive model of human 
dialogue processes. 
The 3rd Chal len eg~ Inteqrat ion of Dif ferent 
Sources of P laus ib i l i t \ [  
The main process of ideal iz ing the data is 
to evaluate the phenomena in respect to 
their importance for further treatment. But 
where do the cr i ter ia of this evaluat ion 
process come from? One poss ib i l i ty  is to 
rely on the background sciences e.g. 
l inguistics, psychology, sociology etc. 
In comparison to the 70's there is indeed 
much more cooperat ion with what I cal led the 
background\[ sciences. As Brady (3) remarkes, 
Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence has overcome the 
first years in which we thought that the 
very specif ic view and the methodological  
impl icat ions of Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence were 
so extremely di f ferent from everything in 
the past, that we had better start again 
thinking about language and cognit ion in our 
own paradigm. 
This has become better now even though I 
think that there is too l ittle cooperat ion 
with sociology e.g. in quest ions of partner 
modell ing, or mult i -user  effects. 
There is also a growing interest in AI from 
the other sciences in AI. Walton (27) 
expl ic i te ly states, that there is a new 
interest of logicians in a logical theory of 
discourse because of the representat ional  
work done in AI. There is hope that this 
contact will inf luence the disadvantageous 
tradit ion of logics to el iminate everything 
which is not regular enough as some sort of 
pragmatic pol lution. 
Cognit ive psychology, after decades in the 
declarat ive and microexper imental  paradigm 
(at least in Europe), is trying again to 
sketch more general and broader cognit ive 
models. 
However, there are f ields in which discourse 
analysis cannot rely on l inguist ics because 
of the miss ing expl ic i tness concerning 
procedural  aspects of language (see the 
Dresher/Hornste in  controversy in Cognit ion 
4,1976 ff). E.g. modern l inguist ics is just 
start ing to d iscover language generation. 
But we need even sketchy procedural  models 
of understanding, of generation, of 
anaphora, or of spatial percept ion and 
descr ipt ion today. 
And there is the same hol ist ic  reason why we 
cannot simply take the results of 
l inguist ics or psychology and program them: 
l inguists are not used to construct ing 
integral models. In their paper-and-penci l  
work there is no need for expl ic i te ly 
re lat ing e.g. the view of page 20 to that of 
page 200. Implementat ion of d iscourse 
understanding processes ,on the other hand, 
produces systems in which everything must 
fit together. 
A third argument, however, hits l inguist ics 
as well as AI: We have no wel l -deve loped 
l inguist ics of natural language man-machine-  
communicat ion.  This means: no theories about 
language acquisit ion, generation, 
understanding, partner model, pragmatics,  
etc. of man-machine-communicat ion.  
Evidence from mock-up systems, s imulated by 
persons, is methodolog ica l ly  vague and 
most ly  too isolated from real appl ication. 
Besides this it is restr icted to short - term 
results. Nobody will play the mock turt le 
for months with hundreds of test persons. 
Of course, l inguists concerned with man-man- 
interact ion have another interest in 
cognition. They do not implement their 
theories, or they do so for methodological  
reasons and not for the construct ion of 
working integrated software-systems. This 
has another result, namely that empir ical  
work in l inguist ics is concentrated more on 
very genera\] types of discouse (informal 
dialogues, party smal l - ta lk etc.) and not so 
much on dialogues in the f ields of 
appl icat ion in which practical  AI needs 
natural dialogue examples. 
Ki t tredge and Lehrberger (20) brought 
together l inguists and AI people under the 
not ion of "sublanguage". This volume could 
have referred, however, to all the research 
on "technical language" or "registers" done 
in Europe since the early Prague School. 
Meanwhi le there are avai lable a lot of 
detai led studies, some highly developed, 
though largely informal theories and a lot 
of stat ist ic material\[ about communicat ion in 
non-social  contexts and among experts (for a 
survey see v. Hahn (15). 
523 
This research invest igates what in AI is 
sometimes neglected: The semantic and 
syntact ic  restr ict ions in technical  
languages, the d i f ferences between wr i t ten 
and spoken language or the effects of 
communicat ion with non- indiv idual  
addressees.  
Wynn's PhD thesis (28) seems to be one of 
the few empir ical  studies for the american 
off ice setting. 
Empir ical  work in this f ield is necessary 
for p lausible performance of appl icat ion 
or iented systems. McKeown et al (22), 
a l though she did not invent the l inguist ic  
character is t ics  of their  system but based it 
on transcr ipts  of actual student advis ing 
sessions, admits, that "it would be 
desirable to have much larger set of plans, 
knowledge about their base rates and 
importance, and addit ional  cr i ter ia for 
tracking their re levance and l ikel ihood 
dur ing the interact ion".  
In the long run we need such research for 
pract ical  systems even in the start ing phase 
of des igning a system. We will be forced to 
start work with very clear functional 
spec i f icat ions and wil l  apply much more of 
the techniques of software engineering. 
Let me close this paragraph with a more 
heur ist ic  remark. Some remarkable progress 
in procedural  model l ing of human language 
abi l i t ies has been achieved by looking at 
the problems from the opposite side. 
I wil l  give some examples of this f igure- 
ground heurist ics:  
Falzon et al (9), invest igat ing the 
condit ions of "natural" technical  
communicat ion,  did not look at the 
understanding process of a hearer but at the 
techniques of communicat ive experts, how 
they guide the the partner in restr ic t ing 
his or her l inguist ic  activit ies. 
Wachtel (26) recommends looking at el l ipsis 
as the unmarked l inguist ic form whereas 
expl ic i t  full sentences are to be mot ivated 
by a specif ic  context. 
Webber and Mays (25) as well  as Goodman (12) 
started to do research on misunderstandings  
and misconcept ions  to get an idea of proper 
understanding;  instead of the f low of 
cont inuous coherent  interchanges Hayes-Roth 
and Hayes-Roth (17) Grosz and sidner (14) 
scrut in ized interrupt ions as "a sal ient 
feature of cognit ive process ing in general" 
(17). 
Harr i s /Beg/Upfo ld  regard semantic 
understanding not as a reconstruct ion 
process: "the hearer does not construct  a 
message from components extracted from 
speech but rather narrows down and ref ines a 
message by success ive ly  re ject ing an 
inappropr iate information from a general 
message" (16). 
524 
By the way, this heurist ics holds even for 
the style of publ icat ions:  It is a good 
tradit ion esp. in Amer ican reports to 
discuss the l imitat ions and the shortcomings 
of one's own approach, which is not often 
heeded in European papers. 
The 4th Chal len eg~ In q~rat ion  of P indinq 
Procedures, Representat ions,  a nnd Evaluat ion 
Processes 
In this last paragraph I wil l  fo l low another 
line of the hol ism argument: In contrast  to 
l inguist ics,  in AI every process must be 
def ined on at least three levels. 
I) how to find in the data those 
features addressed by the theory, 
2) how to represent them 
3) how to infer on them or to 
evaluate the representat ion 
In the intuit ion of the speaker/hearer  this 
is in fact one simple process. Meta- 
utterances of speakers never wil l  refer to 
only one of these processes. 
Too much work in d iscourse analysis  lacks 
one of these three levels. Of course, 
specif ic work may concentrate on one aspect 
without e laborat ing the others. But the 
arguments for the approach must come from 
all three processes. 
Some examples: 
You can represent the process of running a 
car ( a similar example was f irst indroduced 
by Faught (i0) as a sequence of choices, 
because one can observe all these actions 
and objects: 
- foot: left / r ight 
- hand: left / r ight 
- movement: put on / release / 
move 
- device: c lutch / accelerator  / 
gearshi f t  / brake 
But in real dr iv ing act ions you will never 
find a moment, when a driver has to choose 
between, say, the brake and the clutch 
directly. There are patternd sequences 
represent ing the plans of "go faster" or "go 
slower" etc. in which the e lementary act ions 
occur on di f ferent  places, but everything 
seems to be compi led in some way. 
Theoret ical  work often starts with 
statements like "Let (x(y)z(a)) be the 
representat ion of of the sentence (7c)" It 
is nowhere explained by which detect ion 
procedures this representat ion can be 
obtained or whether there is even the 
sl ightest chance of def in ing an analysis 
a lgor i thm which maps (7b) onto (x(y)z(a)) . Is  
cognit ively p lausib le reasoning poss ib le on 
this structure? 
Empi r i ca l  work  o f ten  s tar ts  w i th  s ta tements  
l ike "The speaker  is here s l ight ly  
in f luenced by the fact that  ..." Does that  
mean to in t roduce  some sort  of p red icate  
SL IGHTLY  INFLUENCED (x,y)? How can this 
spec i f i ca t ion  be found in the l ingu is t i c  
data and how can you infer  on that  
(Fo l lowing But terwor ths  (5) 4th max im 
"Remember  that  conversat iona l i s ts  ta lk" . )  
The t ight  connect ion  of ana lys is ,  
representat ion  and eva \ ]uat ion  is necessary ,  
among others ,  because  every  exp lanat ion  of 
the sys tem must  be based on some sort  of 
se l f - inspect ion  of the system. But a sys tem 
cannot  answer  to a request  for 
c la r i f i ca t ion :  "I cou ld  f ind a d i scourse  
const i tuent  un i t  but i was not able to 
const ruct  a d i scourse  un i t  out  of it". 
It is not reasonab le  to address  features  of 
data wh ich  cannot  be represented  in a 
t rac tab le  way and cannot  be eva luated  for 
p laus ib le  processes  on h igher  levels.  Or to 
invent  representat ions  for wh ich  you cannot  
f ind a mapp ing  f rom the data. 
what  is the use of an in fe rence  mechan isme 
for an natura l  language inter face,  if it 
cannot  hand le  vague natura l  language 
quant i f ie rs  detected  by the parser?  
We c r i t i c i ze  all these  par t ia l  v iews to 
d i scouse  unders tand ing  processes  a \ ]so  for 
another  reason:  
We must  show the p laus ib i l i ty  of the 
detect ion  procedures ,  the representat ion  and 
the in fe rences  a lso  under  the natura l  
cond i t ions  of mass  data, that: means  
e .g .mul t ip le  v iews on a subject ,  or 
remember ing  and forget t ing .  Most  of the 
proposa ls  for d ia \ ]ogue  s t ructures  never  have 
occup ied  wi th  the mass  phenomena.  What  wi l l  
happen, when all the heterogeneous  deta i l s  
are represented ,  when you wi l l  have severa l  
thousand non-un i fo rm in ference  ru les? 
Of course  we ever wi l l  d i scuss  thorough ly  
the very  features  of natura l  d ia logues  wh ich  
we cannot  hand le  today, and start  w i th  
f ragments .  But  to propose  e.g. any arb i t ra ry  
representat ion  w i thout  connect ion  forwards  
and backwards  is on ly  a t iny step towards  
the so lu t ion  of the d i scourse  problems.  Our 
knowledge of d i scourse  processes  is at \].east 
so that  we cannot  any longer  des ign  i so la ted  
s t ruc tura l  f ragments  of the ana lys i s  and 
generat ion  process .  
Let me summar ize :  Cogn i t ive ly  sound 
approaches  to d i scourse  processes  must  s tar t  
once aga in  to take ser ious ly  the user  and 
his in tu i t ions  about  man-mach ine-  
in teract ion .  We must  free our genera l  
concepts  f rom the shor tcomings  of 
modu lar i ty ,  that  means  to accept  the equal  
impor tance  of d i scovery  procedures ,  
representat ions ,  and eva luat ion .  The 
re l iab i l i ty  of one of these processes  can 
only  be jus t i f ied  by arguments  of both 
others.  We should  exp lo i t  the resu l ts  of the 
background sc iences  l ingu is t i cs ,  psycho logy  
and social  sc ience  as far as they  suppor t  a 
pragmat ic  and procedura l  v iew of d i scourse .  
All this to set out  a new pragmat ic  and 
ho l i s t i c  v iew of our natura l ,  f lex ib le ,  
e f \ [ i c ient  and " whatsoever  " way of 
communicat ion .  
Acknow i edgementzs_ 
I am grate fu l  to Tom Wachte \ ]  for essent ia l  
d i scuss ions  and for rev is ing  the Eng l i sh  
vers ion  of th is  paper.  
An inv i ta t ion  to the 'maison des sc iences  de 
l 'homme' at Par is  gave me the t ime to wr i te  
the paper.  
The preparat ion  of the paper  was suppor ted  
by the ESPRIT  pro jec t  LOKI .  
Re ferences :  
( \] ) Appe\]  t, D.E. , TELEGRAM.  A Grammar  
Formal i sm for Language P lanning.  In: Proc. 
I JCAI  1983. 595-599.  
(2) Berwick,  R.C.,  Computat iona l  Aspects  of 
D iscourse .  In: (4). 2"7-87. 
(3) Brady, J .M.,  Foreword  in (4). 
(4) Brady,  ,\].M. / Berwick,  R.C.,  
Computat iona l  Mode ls  of D iscourse .  Cambr idge  
(Mass.):  MIT  Press  1983. 
(5) But terwor th ,  B., Max ims for S tudy ing  
Conversat ion .  In: Semiot i ca  24 (1.978) 3/4. 
3\]7-339.  
(6) Caro l l ,  J .M. / Bever,  Th.B. ,  The Non-  
Un iqueness  of L\] ngu is t i c  Intuit\]  ons. IBM 
Research  D iv i s ion  Repor t  RC 6938. Oct 1978. 
(7) Conc l in ,  E.J. / McDona ld ,  D., Sa l ience:  
The Key to the Se lec t ion  Prob lem in Natura l  
Language Generat ion .  In: Proc. 20th ACL  
Meet ing  1982. 129-135.  
(8) E l lman,  J., An Ind i rec t  Approach  to 
Types  of Speech  Acts.  \]in: Proc. I JCAI  1983. 
600-602.  
(9) Fa \ ]zon  , P. / Amalber t i ,  R. / Carbone l l ,  
N., D ia logue  Contro l  S t ra teg ies  in Oral  
Communicat ion .  INRIA Repor t  377. Cent re  de 
Rocquencour t  Versa i \ ] les  March  1985. 
(\]0) Faught ,  W.S.,  Conversat Jona \ ]  Ac t ion  
Pat terns  in Dia logs.  In: Waterman / IIayes- 
Roth (eds.), Pat tern -D i rec ted  In ference  
Systems.  N.Y 1978. 383-397.  
(ll) Fodor,  J .A. ,  Modu lar i ty  of Mind. An 
Essay  on Facu l ty  Psycho logy .  Cambr idge  
(Mass.):  M IT  Press  1983. 
( \] 2 ) Goodman,  B.A. , Communicat ion  and 
Miscommu::dcat ion.  BBN Repor t  1984. 
525 
(13) Grosz, B.J., Transportable Natural 
Language Interfaces: Problems and 
Techniques. In: Proc. 20th ACL Meet ing 1982. 
46-50. 
(14) Grosz, B.J. / Sidner, C.L., Discourse 
Structure and the Proper Treatment of 
Interruptions. In: Proc. IJCAI 1985. 832- 
839. 
(15) v. Hahn, W., Faehkommunikat ion.  Berlin: 
de Gruyter 1983. 
(16) Harris, G. / Begg, J. / Upfold, D., On 
the Role of the Speaker's Expectat ions in 
Interpersonal  Communicat ion.  In: Journal for 
Verbal Lerning and Verbal Behaviour 19 
(1980). 597-607. 
(17) Hayes-Roth, B. / Hayes-Roth, F., A 
Cognit ive Model of Planning. In: Cognit ive 
Science 3 (1979). 275-310. 
(18) Israel, D., Preface in (4). 
(\].9) Johnson-Laird,  P.N., Mental Models of 
Meaning. In: Joshi / Webber / Sag (eds.), 
Elements of Discourse Understanding. 
Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press 1981. 106-126. 
(20) Kittredge, R. /Lehrberger,  J. (eds.), 
Sublanguage. Studies of Language in 
Restr ic ted Semantic Domains. Berlin: de 
Gruyter  1982. 
(21) Langacker, R., An Introduct ion to 
Cognit ive Grammar. In: Cognit ive Science i0 
(1986) 1-40. 
(22) McKeown, K. / Wish, M. / Matthews, K., 
Tai lor ing Explanat ions for the User. In: 
Proc. IJCAI 1985. 794-798. 
(23) Power, R. /dal Martel lo, M.F., Methods 
of Invest igat ing Conversat ion.  In: Semiot ica 
53 (1985) 1/3. 237-257. 
(24) Sidner, C., Focusing in the 
Comprehens ion of Def in i te Anaphora. In: (4). 
267-330. 
(25) Webber, B. / Mays, E., Var iet ies of 
User Misconcept ions:  Detect ion and 
Correction. In: Proc. IJCAI 1983. 650-652. 
(26) Wachtel,  Tom, Discourse Structure. 
LOEI-Report  NLI i.I Research Unit for 
Information Sc.and AI, Univ Hamburg. April  
1985. 
(27) Walton D. N., New Direct ions in the 
Logic of Dialogue. In: Synthese 63 (1985). 
259-274. 
(28) Wynn, E.H., Off ice Conversat ion as an 
Information Medium. PhD Univ. of Cal i fornia 
Berkeley 1979. Ann Arbor: UMI 1985. 
526 
