Learning the Space of Word Meanings 
for Information Retrieval Systems 
Ko ich i  HORI ,  Se inosuke  TODA and  H isash i  YASUNAGA 
Nat iona l  Ins t i tu te  of  Japanese  L i te ra ture  
1 -16-10  Yutakacho  Sh inagawaku Tokyo  142 Japan  
Abstract :  Several methods  to represent  mean ings  
of words have been proposed.  However ,  they are 
not  usefu l  for in fo rmat ion  retr ieval sys tems,  because 
they cannot  deal with the entit ies which cannot  be 
universal ly  represented  by symbols .  
In this paper, we propose a not ion of semanUe 
space. Semant ic  space is an Euel idean space where 
words and entit ies are put. A word is one point  in 
the space. The mean ings  of the word are represented  
as the spaee conf igurat ion around the word. The 
entit ies that  cannot  be represented  by symbols  can 
be identif ied in the space by the location tile entity 
shou ld  be sett led in. We also give a learning 
mechan ism for the space. We prove the 
ef fect iveness of the proposed method  by an experi- 
ment  on in format ion  retr ieval  for the study of 
Japanese l iterature. 
1. In t roduct ion  
There  have been no theor ies  of semant ics  we can 
rely on for bui lding a large in format ion  retr ieval  sys- 
tem. The defect in the ex is tent  theor ies  is the lack 
of explanat ion of the mechan ism for adjust ing to tile 
real world the formal  symbol ic  sys tems used in the 
theories;  the only tMng they explain is the relation 
between natura l  language and the formal  system.  
Those theor ies  assume the existence of f ixed and 
un iversa l  one- to -one  relat ions between the basic ele- 
ments  in the formal  sys tem and tile entit ies m tile 
real world. For example ,  both Montague  semant ics  
and the s ituat ion semant ics  assume that  we can 
represent  he dog named Morr is  in the real world as 
some symbol  like MORRIS  in the formal  sys tem and 
that the relat ion between Morr is  and MORRIS  is 
f ixed and un iversa l  \[3,2\]. 
However ,  when we consider  an in format ion  
retr ieval  system,  especially in the field of study on 
l i terature, we encounter  prob lems where the assump-  
tion does not  hold. One prob lem is that there are 
entit ies that  do not  have un iversa l  symbol ic  
representat ion.  For example ,  when a researcher  dis- 
covers a new ent i ty(or  not ion)  in l i terature and 
writes a paper on that entity, the paper must  be 
stored in the database but  we do not  have appropri- 
ate key words for that entity. When tile entity 
becomes  well known in later years, it may be named,  
for example ,  'over there i sm' .  However  at the t ime 
tile entity is d iscovered and does not  have the name 
'over there i sm' ,  we must  represent  ile entity by a 
fixed set of symbols ,  but  it is not  easy. Another  
prob lem is that the range of what is meant  by a sym-  
bol differs among the users  of an in format ion  
retr ieval  system.  For example,  we cannot  identify the 
fixed mean ing  of ' romant ic i sm' .  Every user  assumes  
di f ferent mean ings  of ' romant ic i sm'  and it is not  
easy to control  the meaning.  The latter problem has 
been cons idered in the studies of fuzzy mean ings ,  
but,  so far, the fo rmer  prob lem has not  been con- 
s idered m the studies on semant ics .  
In order to solve the above ment ioned  prob lems,  
we propose a not ion of semant ie  space and the learn- 
ing mechan ism of the space. Our assumpt ion  is that 
the entit ies which could not  be represented  by a 
fixed set of symbols  can be identif ied in some 
semant ic  space by the location the entity shou ld  be 
sett led in. A l though whether  this assumpt ion  is 
universal ly  valid is problemat ic ,  we have proved that 
this assumpt ion  is effective in in format ion  retr ieval  
sys tems in the field of studies on l iterature. We 
bel ieve that the fieht of l iterature inc ludes essential  
p rob lems and has jnst enough complex i ty  to give as 
ev idence for a general  d iscuss ion on semant ics .  
The semant ic  space is an Eucl idean space where 
entit ies and words are scattered. Tile crucial point of 
our idea is that  the axes of the space are not  given 
be forehand but  are generated through learning f rom 
374 
tile interact ion between a user' and the iu fo rmat ion  
retr ieval  sy:?tem. Since tile axes of t, he space are not  
given beforehand,  the sys tem can adjust  the 
configuration, of tile space for absorb ing  new entities. 
In chapter  2, we descr ibe in detail the not ion  of 
semant ic  space, expla in ing what  are the entit ies and 
words in an in fo rmat ion  retr ieval  sys tem for lit,era- 
Lure studies,  and we show how the mean ings  of 
words are represented  in the space. 
In chapter  3, we describe tile learlt ing mechan ism 
of the semant ic  space. Genera l ly  speaking,  in tile 
studies on mach ine  learning,  it. has been revea led 
that  the mechan ism for contro l l ing the learning pro- 
cess is impor tant ;  w i thout  such mect lan isms,  the 
resu l t  of tile learning becomes  Leo general  or too 
specific. Ill the learning process  proposed  ill this 
paper,  we use a user ' s  sat isfact ion as tile eontro l lh lg 
cr i ter ion for' learning. The resu l t  of the learning is a 
semant ic  space that  just  mi r rors  tile world of litera- 
ture exist ing in the user ' s  mind.  The reason we use 
the te rm ' learn ing '  instead of 'acquir ing '  is that  the 
in fo rmat ion  the sys tem gets is not  tile direct exprcs.- 
s ion of the mean ings  of words a user' has in his mind 
but  indirect and partial i~tformaLion giveu Lhrongh 
the interact ion between a user  and the in fo rmat ion  
retr ieval  system.  
Ill chapter  4, we evaluate Lhe ef fect iveness of the 
proposed  ideas through all exper iment .  IL is shown 
LhaL entit ies that  could not  be ret r ieved by conven-  
t ional key words can be rctrie.ved in our' system.  
In chapter  5, we refer  to related works  and sum-  
marize our  cont r ibut ion .  
2. Semant ic  Space  
Before giving fo rmal  d iscuss ion,  we first give an 
example  of semant ic  space. Fig.1 shows  an example  
of semant ic  space for  ph i losophica l  issues ill artificial 
intel l igence ( * ). 
We call f ind ill the space shown in F ig . l ,  the 
book  titled "Goede l ,  Escher ,  Bach"  written by Hofs-  
tadtcr,  as on.e entity. It has an internal  ID to po int  
to tire in fo rmat ion  actually s tored ill bibl iogr'aphieal 
database. Since whaL is ment ioned  in the book  t~as 
re lat ion with Goedel ,  l,~,seher and Bach, (~oedeI, 
F, sch.er and Bach are loeaLed near the book. It, must 
be noted tilaL tiler'e ha:!~ been no assurance, in previ- 
ous l ,heories, that Goedel  denotes  the famous  
maLhemaLician everyone  knows .  However ,  in our  
semant ic  space, Goede l  cannot  be arbitrm'y th ings 
because tile entity is bounded by other  entit ies,  some 
of which are po inted to actually s tored  in fo rmat ion  
ill database. 'File book  "(?,oedel Fischer Bach"  
descr ibes some new not ion .  Since tile not ion  was 
not  known before  the book  was pub l i shed,  tile 
not.toll does not  have a un iversa l  name.  We must. 
read the whole thick book  t,o kn.ow exactly what  the 
not ion is. In other  words,  symbo ls  t,o represent  t.hc 
not ion are ectual to the whole book  itself. However ,  
we can determine  tile pos i t ion of the uot ion ,  because 
we know the not ion  has re lat ion with who l i sm,  
redueLionism, mu,  Goedel ,  Es ther ,  l:laeh and so on. 
q l i l l~du? l i sm/  
Descartes 
 oppo, 
t~ / paradigm 
~. .. I monism / ~ s~entlflc, 
? / i r, evolution 
i / I i i / i i 
I / I? KLihn 
i ~ i i t  
E / I l l  
m LI 
? wholism 
re du ctionism ?Goed et 
i~ Esther 
Goedel~ Boch 
~1 Esch~ i t  
Bach  I ~ i 
i i 
procedm-ul 
9 
i 
t 
Pro log  J 
i i I I 
i 
f i 
i 
declorative 
f 
i 
I 
Fig.I An exomple of 
semontic spoce 
(*)Fig. 1 is an explanatory example for the readers who are 
not familiar with Japanese literature. The semantic space made 
by our system is for Japanese literature and is authorized by the 
researchers in that field. The real example is given in chapter 4 
375 
If the  not ion  gets  a name such  as 'Ho fs tadter i sm'  
later,  the  name will be put  in the  pos i t ion  jus t  above  
the  book  of Hofs tadter .  Unt i l  then ,  the  not ion  is 
ident i f ied  as Some b lank  space above  the  book .  
A user  who  wants  to get  a paper  or a book  on 
the  same not ion  as one  wr i t ten  in Hofs tadter ' s  book  
can f ind the  not ion  in the  space by look ing  at the  
conf igurat ion  of the  space.  
One  might  th ink  that  we can represent  the  new 
not ion  in tens iona l ly .  However ,  in pract ical  in fo rma-  
t ion  re t r ieva l  sys tems,  it is di f f icult  to fix the  set  of 
p r imi t ives  for  represent ing  in tens ion .  
One  might  also th ink  that  ident i f i cat ion  of the  
locat ion  is s imi la r  to mak ing  con junct ion  of severa l  
keywords  or to us ing  a thesaurus .  However ,  our  
semant ic  space has  the prominent  feature ,  wh ich  is 
absent  in us ing  keywords  er thesaurus ,  that  a user  
can embed his own ideas  of mean ings  in the  space.  
The  on ly  c r i te r ion  for  determin ing  the  space organi -  
za t ion  is a user ' s  sat i s fact ion .  Every  user  has  h is  own 
space in our  sys tem,  and  the sys tem des igner  doesn ' t  
care whether  one d i rect ion  in tile space denotes  ISA 
re la t ion  or synonymic  re la t ion  or else. Even  tile user  
h imse l f  may  not  know what  k ind  of re la t ion  tile axes  
represent  in the  space.  However ,  as far as the  user  
has  h is  own idea about  how one ent i ty  is re la ted  with 
o ther  ent i t ies ,  the semant ic  space mi r ro rs  ti le wor ld 
in the  user ' s  mind ,  and  the axes  (maybe in local 
subspace)  as a resu l t  p lay the  role of represent ing  the 
re la t ion  between the  ent i t ies  such  as ISA re la t ion ,  
synonymic  re la t ion ,  tempora l  re la t ion ,  spat ia l  rela-  
t ion,  or a more  complex  re lat ion.  
So far,  we have  a l ready descr ibed  the main  ideas 
of semant ic  space through an example .  Now we give 
fo rmal  d i scuss ion .  
The  f irst quest ion  is what  is the  d imens iou  of the  
space.  The  d imens ion  of the semant ic  space is not  
g iven  at f i rst  in pr inc ip le.  The  d imens ion  is deter -  
mi l led  as a resu l t  of space synthes i s .  Mathemat ica l  
theor ies  for  ca lcu lat ing  the d imens ion  are g iven  in 
theor ies  of mu l t i -d imens iona l  synthes i s  deve loped  in 
the  s tud ies  of stat ist ics.  In our  imp lementat ion ,  we 
l imi t  the  d imens ions  to th ree  for  the  sake of s impl i -  
c ity of the  sys tem.  Moreover ,  we give one f ixed 
mean ing  to one  d imens ion ,  that  is, we give tile 
mean ing  of symbo l i za t ion  to  the  vert ica l  axis.  A t  the  
bot tom of the  space,  t i t les and  authors  of papers  are 
a r ranged.  A t  the  top of ti le space,  words  wh ich  
users  use  are a r ranged.  A t  ti le midd le  of the  space,  
wr i ters  and  l i terary works  and  some cont ro l led  
not ions  such  as "styl ist ics'  are a r ranged.  The  reason  
we named tile vert ica l  ax is  "symbo l i za t ion '  is that  the  
upper  space is a more  symbo l i zed  wor ld f rom tile 
v iewpo in t  of a b ib l iograph ica l  database .  
The  second quest ion  is what  words  and  ent i t ies  
are. In our  semant ic  space,  we don ' t  make  c lear dis- 
t inet ion  among the  te rms "ent i ty ' ,  'no t ion '  and  
'word ' .  What  ex i s t  ill our  space are, in any  way, jus t  
symbo ls .  But  convent iona l ly ,  we call the  symbo ls  
that  are used  by users ,  'words ' ;  the  ones  that  are 
376 
po in ted  to b ib l iograph ica l  in fo rmat ion  
'ent i t ies (papers ) ' ,  the  ones  that  denote  wr i ters  
'ent i t ies (wr i te rs ) ' ,  the  ones  that  denote  works  
'ent i t ies (works ) ' ,  and  o thers ,  'no t ions ' .  As  for  the  
symbo ls  that  denote  wr i ters  and  works ,  they  are con-  
t ro l led by an  independent ly  deve loped  database  for  
authent ica t ion .  
The  th i rd  quest ion  is what  is mean ing .  We 
def ine the  mean ing  of one  symbo l  as the  space 
conf igurat ion  around the symbo l .  Moreover ,  we 
extend  tile not ion  of symbo l  to ally po in t  in semant ic  
space,  so that  we can  t reat  ent i t ies  for  wh ich  a sym-  
bol  is I~ot ass igned .  Ill o ther  words ,  we ident i fy  a 
symbo l  with a po in t  in space.  For  example ,  what  the  
locat ion for  'Ho fs tadter i sm'  means  is someth ing  
between who l i sm and  reduet ion ism.  You  can under -  
s tand  what  ' someth ing  between '  in the  prev ious  sei1- 
tence  means  by look ing  at the  conf igurat ion  of ti le 
ne ighbor  space.  For  example ,  if you  see ne ighbor  
"Pro log'  between 'dec la ra t ive '  and  'p rocedura l ' ,  you  
know that  "someth ing  between '  means  tile same k ind  
of re la t ion  as 'P ro log '  between "dec larat ive '  and  'pro-  
cedura l ' .  It must  be noted  here  that  tile same sym-  
bol can be put  in more  than  one locat ion.  Th is  a l lows 
a symbo l  to have  severa l  mean ings  depend ing  on 
context .  
The  last quest ion  on the  semant ic  space is what  
the  d is tance is. The  measure  of d i s tance  ex is ts  in 
the  user ' s  mind .  Th is  is not  e lus ion  but  essence .  
There  is no  exp la in ing  by what  measures  one 
researcher  on l i terature  judges  that. one ent i ty  is near  
another  ent i ty .  It is because  each researcher  has  his  
own measures  that  or ig inal  papers  can be wr i t ten 
\ [persona l  d i scuss ion  with some researchers  on l i tera- 
ture \ ] .  S ince the  semant ic  space is bu i l t  for  each 
user ,  the  papers  of the  authors  who have  a qu i te  
d i f fe rent  semant ic  wor ld  f rom that  of the  user  may 
not  have  "proper"  locat ion in the semant ic  space.  
Sut  that  causes  little p rob lem,  because  such  papers  
do not  in teres t  tile user  much.  
3. Learn ing  the Space 
The  out l ine  for  the  use  and  learn ing  of semant ic  
space for  an in fo rmat ion  re t r ieva l  sys tem is as fol- 
lows: 
1. A user  g ives  a query  to the  in fo rmat ion  
re t r ieva l  sys tem.  The  query  is recogn ized  as 
a sequence  of words.  Pars ing  of the  query  
sentence  is not  done .  So users  genera l ly  
give what  they  th ink  are key words  for  
search .  For  example ,  a user  who  wants  a 
paper  on the in f luence  of Goethe  oil 
modern  Japanese  l i terature  asks  the sys tem 
'Goethe  modern  Japanese  l i te rature ' .  
2. The  sys tem searches  in the  semant ic  space for  
the  same words  tile user  gave.  If such  words  
are found ,  the  sys tem presents  to the  user  
the  ne ighbor  spaces  of the  words.  If no such  
words  are found ,  the  sys tem presents  an 
overview of the whole space (main ly  the 
middle space, i.e. the  space for writers and 
works).  
3. The user  selects some subspaces that attract 
h im. 
4. The system shows the details of tile bot tom 
spaces of selected subspaces.  
5. The user  selects papers f rom among those 
shown in the bot tom spaces. 
6. The system re -const ructs  the semant ic  space 
so that  the selected papers in step 5 are 
located in shorter  distance and selected sub- 
spaces ill step 3 are located in shorter  dis- 
tance, and then th.e sys tem puts tile query 
words in the location above the selected 
papers. 
We have imp lemented  a sys tem called 
ML0(Mode l  Learner  vers ion0)  that real izes the 
above ment ioned  steps. Fig.2 shows the 
conf igurat ion of the system.  The system is written 
in Lisp and P\]\[,/I. 
Tile moni tor  mon i tors  all tile funct ions  of the 
system. It has special variables named * incons istent  
and *attention. 
qnconsistent is the variable for storing a pair' of 
entities for which the distance in the semantic space 
is different f rom the estimated distance. The estima- 
tion of the distance is done as follows. When the 
initial semantic space is built, the distanec between 
two papers is est imated,  with some normal izat ion,  by 
the inverse of the number  of occurrences of same 
words in tile titles, and the dist.anee between two 
~ n -m~ . . . .  ~user communicat ion~~ - ~T~ "\[ contro l ler  r ' L___ . . . . J~ ,~ 
i !  Ii "''-- ~ "' user 
I 
manipulator ~ r e c ons t r uctor \[ 
i 'T 
'I( semant ic  ) 
~_ space 
1: q 
dalaba se access 
control ler \] 
. . . .  '. f low of contrail 
Fig.?_ Configuration of the system 
entit ies (other  than papers) is es t imated  by the 
inverse of tile number  of the papers which include 
both entit ies in title. When tile semant ic  space is 
reconst ructed,  the distance between entit ies which a 
user  selected is es t imated  to some fixed smal l  value, 
and the distance between entit ies which the system 
presented,  but  only one of which the user  selected, 
is est imated to some fixed large value. The mon i to r  
judges that a user  is satisf ied if the real distance ill 
semant ic  space is tile same as the es t imated  istance. 
When the mon i to r  detects the user ' s  dissatisfaction, 
i.e. the difference between the real distance and the 
es t imated  distance, it registers  in * incons istent  the 
pair of entit ies which caused the problem.  
*attent ion is the w~riable for l imit ing the space 
for considerat ion.  The mon i to r  mon i tors  the spac.e 
only ill the scope of *attention. This improves  the 
efficiency of search and reconstruct ion.  
The moni tor  tr iggers the space reconst ructor  
after one sess ion of query and answer  if *incon- 
s istent  has value. 
The space reconst ructor  plays the role of recon-  
strucUng the semant ic  space so that the user  can be 
satisfied. It uses a heurist ic  procedure for space 
reconst ruct ion  ment ioned  below. 
1.Select one pair f rom * inconsistent .  (In the 
cur rent  vers ion of tile system,  the pair 
which caused tile largest incons is tency is 
selected.) 
2. Inspect tile density of the ne ighbor  space for 
each entity ill the pair, and decide to move  
tile entity with less dense neighbors .  
3 .Enumerate  the posiible new posit ions for the 
mov ing  entity. (Ill the cur rent  vers ion of 
the system,  there are eight new candidate 
posit ions around another  entity where the 
distance between the two entit ies is equal to 
the est imated value.)  
4.Select f rom among them one posit ion which 
causes  the least new inconsistency.  
5.Check new incons istenc ies  and register them 
in * inconsistent.  
6.Go to step 1. 
The moni tor  mon i tors  the whole reconst ruct ion  pro- 
cess and stops the process by raising the th resho ld  to 
judge the incons istency when it judges that the 
reconst rnet ion  takes too much t ime. 
Fig.3 shows an example  of the process of space 
reconstruct ion .  Ill F ig.3(a),  the distance between the 
entit ies A and B was 10. Let 's  assume that  a new 
est imat ion  for tile distance is 5. The reconst ructor  
looks a round the ne ighbors  of both  entit ies, and 
decides to move  tile entity B because the ne ighbors  
of B are less dense than those of A. The reconstruc-  
tor selects one posit ion that  causes the least new 
inconsistency,  f rom among eight posi t ions a round A, 
for B to be placed in. In F ig.g(b),  \]:3 is placed to the 
left of A. New incons istenc ies  ill the scope of *atten- 
tion such as incons istency about  B and G are 
checked and registered in * inconsistent.  Af ter  a few 
3"77 
C o oE o G 
I0 
O~ . . . . . . . . .  ~0 B 
Do A oF oH 
(a) 
C o o E o G 
5 
o, - -  - .,,o A 
B D ? o F o H 
(b) 
Go Co oE 
o B oA 
Ho OD ?F  
(c) 
Fig.5 An example of 
space reconstruction 
process 
Fig,4 An example of initial semantic space 
(a horizontal section) 
tr ial loops  to decrease  incons is tency ,  the  space set t les  
in the  conf igurat ion  shown in F ig .3 (c ) ,  wh ich  
inc ludes  no  incons is tency .  
Of course  we can  use  more  mathemat ica l  
methods  (e.g. mat r ix  t rans format ion  of d i s tance)  for  
space reconst ruc t ion .  However ,  the  above  men-  
t ioned  heur i s t i c  p rocedure  works  more  eff ic ient ly 
than  mathemat ica l  methods ,  because  so many  pairs 
caus ing  incons is tency  are not  detected  at once due to 
the  l im i ta t ion  of a t tent ion  and ra ther  smal l  dens i ty  of 
the  wor ld of l i terature .  
4. Eva luat ion  
F i rs t  of all, we es t imated  the  size of the  semant ic  
space.  The  number  of wr i ters  s tud ied  in the  f ield of 
research  on Japanese  l i terature  is about  1900. The  
number  of works  s tud ied  is about  2200. For tunate ly ,  
these  numbers  are a lmost  f ixed.  The  number  of 
papers  wr i t ten  in that  f ield in a year  is about  5000. 
However ,  in te res t  of one  researcher  is l im i ted  to less 
than  one tenth  of them.  
We then  conf i rmed,  by  ask ing  some researchers  
and by ana lyz ing  the  process  of manua l  ed i t ing  of 
research  paper  cata logues ,  that  a lmost  all not ions  in 
research  on Japanese  l i terature  can be p laced in posi-  
t i ons  among wr i ters  and  works.  For  the  not ions  that  
cannot  be p laced among wr i ters  and  works ,  about  
100 not ions  such  as d ia lecto logy were prepared  for 
bu i ld ing  an  init ial space.  
F ina l ly  we car r ied  out  an exper iment  by us ing  
the  imp lemented  sys tem.  Es t imat ing  the size of the  
semant ic  space for  one  user ,  we made an init ial  space 
in which  50 wr i ters  were reg is te red .  For  bu i ld ing  the 
init ial  space,  we made a 50*50 d is tance matr ix  for  
the  wr i ters  based  on tile in fo rmat ion  f rom tile t i t les 
of '53563 papers  wr i t ten in the  last ten  years.  The  
init ial  space made by tile sys tem is shown in F igA.  
'Pile initial space itself is in te res t ing  enough for' 
l i terature  s tudy.  We can know f rom tile space tile 
s t r ik ing fact  that  tile poet  named Bashou  in the  
seventeenth  century  has  a s t rong  re la t ion  with many  
modern  nove l i s t s .  We can also in fer  that  many  
researchers  have  special  in te res t  in female  wr i ters,  
f ind ing  tile subspaee  where  anc ient  and  modern  
female  wr i ters  are c lus tered .  
We asked  a researcher  on Japanese  l i terature  to 
search  papers  based  on a complex  query .  One  query  
was "on  the  process  of t rans format ion  of fab les  into 
wr i t ten fo rms ,  how fab les  were t rans fer red  among 
peop le ,  eco logy  of fab les" (* ) .  Look ing  at the  
semant ic  space,  he f irst rough ly  enc losed  in the  space 
about  ten  works  which he  thought  to be re la ted  to 
" fab les" .  G lanc ing  at the  bot tom space of them,  
where  1337 papers  (wr i t ten  in the last ten  years )  
were scat tered ,  he cou ld  po in t  out  112 papers  wh ich  
matched  the query .  
The  se lec ted  papers  which  inc luded  in tile t it les 
words  such  as nature ,  deve lopment ,  t rans fer ,  fabl iza-  
l ion,  or generat ion  were gathered  into one subspace  
by the sys tem after  the  sess ion ,  and  the user ' s  query  
was reg is te red  above  tile subspace .  Th is  means  that ,  
next  t ime,  the  sys tem can give the answers  to the  
(*)The query was given in Japanese. This is a tranMation 
made by the authors 
378 
same query  at once,  and  can reg is ter ,  in the  proper  
subspace ,  new papers  on tile same not ion .  
The  greates t  mer i t  of the  semant ic  space was that  
the  sys tem cou ld  tell ti le user  what  it knew about  the  
th ings  re la ted  to the  user ' s  request .  In convent iona l  
sys tems wh ich  depend on key  words,  users  must  
imag ine  what words  the sys tem knows;  in fact, tile 
sub jec t  of the  exper iment  cou ld  not  give proper  key 
words  for  the  complex  query .  In cont ras t  with th is ,  
the at~ility of the  user  to po in t  out  the  subspaccs  he 
wants  by jus t  g lanc ing  at the who le  presented  space 
was more  than  we expected .  
5. Related Works  
'?he most  re la ted  work  is R ieger ' s \ [7 ,8 \ ] .  He also 
made some k ind  of semant ic  space f rom the in fer  ~ 
mar ion  of re la t ions  among words.  However ,  he  made 
thc space based  on ly  oil tile f requency  of co- 
occur rences  of words  ill sentences .  Our  semant ic  
space carl have  more  realil,y about  meo, n ings  than  
his,  because  symbo ls  that  are actual ly connected  to 
ent i t ies  s to red  in tile database  ex is t  in our  st)ace. 
In the  sense  of t reat ing  ent i t ies  wh ich  do not  
have  symbo l i c  represeu l ,  at ion,  conneet ion is t  
mode ls \ [4 ,9 \ ]  have  some re la t ion  with our  approach .  
l l owever ,  it seems that  the eonneet ion is ts  have  not  
yet  rea l i zed  the process  of y ie ld ing  symbo ls  on con  ~ 
nect ion  networks  that  can represent  such  abst ract  
not ions  as deal t  with by our  sys tem.  
F rom the  methodo log ica l  po in t  of v iew, methods  
deve loped  in the s tud ies  of mu l t i -d imens iona l  syn-  
thes i s  in stat ist ics  are re la ted  to ours .  The  reason  we 
have  deve loped  methods  to ca lculate tile space 
independent ly  f rom those  methods  is s imi lar  to one 
menUoned by Lebowi tz \ [6 \ ] .  That  ix, we are noL 
in teres ted  in mathemat ica l  r ig idness  of the  process  of 
ana lyz ing  data, but  in mode l ing  what  occurs  m tile 
human mind .  
1,'rein the v iewpo in t  of in fo rmat ion  re t r ieva lsys -  
teens,  there  are many  more  requests  than  those  
answered  by our  approach .  They  inc lude t reat ing  
s t ruc tures  of key  words  more  expl ic i t ly ,  unders tand-  
ing tile user ' s  in tent ion  f rom his query \ [ l \ ] ,  or mak ing  
co -operat ive  responses \ [5 \ ] .  However ,  the  prev ious  
s tud ies  on those  prob lems s tar ted  ignor ing  tile most  
basic p rob lem of unders tand ing  and  learn ing  the 
mean ings  of one word. Our  work  can give an 
assured  s tar t ing  po in t  for' those  fu r ther  s tud ies .  
6. Conc lus ion  
We proposed  to represent  the  mean ings  of words  
in space.  We gave a learn ing  mechan ism for tile 
space.  We proved  tile e f fec t iveness  of the  proposed  
methods  in an in fo rmat ion  re t r ieva l  sys tem.  
One  of the  reasons  we chose  the f ield of 
Japanese  l i terature  was that  there  was s t rong  demmld  
f rom th.e researchers  in that  f ield to make  a use fu l  
sys tem;  sys tems based  on convent iona l  key  words  
did riot work  welt for  the f ield of l i terature .  
Another  reason  is that  the  f ie ld of fers  good  
examples  of ent i t ies  for  wh ich  un iversa l  symbo l i c  
representat ion  is diff icult. 
To apply our  method  to o ther  f ie lds,  we must  
so lve  on ly  two prob lems.  One  prob lem is to se lect  
symbo ls  to be put  ill tile init ial space.  In l i terature ,  
works  and  wr i ters  p layed tile role.  Ti~e o ther  p rob lem 
is to determine  cr i ter ia for  space conf igurat ion .  We 
used  a user ' s  sa t i s fac t ion  wittl the  answers  f rom the 
in fo rmat ion  re t r ieva l  sys tem as tile cr i ter ion.  If 
these  two prob lems are so lved ,  our  method  can be 
appl ied to any domain .  "l 'hcsc prob lems do uot  seem 
so diff icult. 
F rom the v iewpo in t  of artif icial in te l l igence ,  the. 
semant ic  space Rives a bas is  for  s tud ies  on abduet ion  
an.d ana logy.  The  d i seovery  of b lank  space snr.- 
rounded by symbo ls  carl lead to d i scover ing  of new 
ideas by mac\ ] t ines .  S iuce we can measure  semant ic  
s imi lar i ty  direct ly by d i s tance  in semant ic  space,  wc 
can make  analog ica l  reason ing  based  oil that  similar-. 
ity. For  the  same reason ,  f rom the  l inguist ic  po in t  of 
v iew,  the  semant ic  spac, e e~l  be use fu l  for  under. .  
s tand ing  metaphor ica l  express ion  such  as "Hofs . .  
tadter  is Pro log  between procedura l  semant ics  and  
dec larat ive  semant ics" .  
References  
\[llAllen,,L:Recognizing Intentions from Natural Language 
Utterances, in Brady,M,,Berwiek,R.C (eds.): CoTnputa- 
tlonal Models of Di~eou'me. MIT Press(1983) 
121Barwiz e, J., Perry. J. : Situaiians and A ltit, udes, M 1T 
Press(1983), 
\[3JDowty,D.R, et al: Introdw:tion to Monta que Sranantics, 
D. Rid el P ublishing ( 19111 ) 
\[41Feldman,J.A,:Conneetionist Models and Their Applications 
Introduction, Coynilive So.brace, Vol.9,pp. 1-3(1985). 
\[5\]Kaplan,J.:Cooperatiw. ? Responses from a Portable Natural 
Language Database Qury System, in 
Brady,M.,Berwick,R.C.(eds): Computational Models of 
Discourse, MIT Press(1983). 
\[6\]LebowiLz,M.:Categorizing Numeric Information for' General.. 
ization, Coffnlfive Science, Vol, 9,pp.285-308 (1985). 
\[?\]Rieger,B,B,:Procedural Meaning Representation by Connota- 
tive Dependency Struetures. An Empirical Approach to 
Word Semantics for Analogical Infereneing, Prec. COL- 
mc.a2 (1982) 
\[8\]Rieger,BB,:SemaaLie Rel vance and Aspect Dependency in a 
Given Subject i)omain; Contents-Driven Algorithmie 
Processing of Fu'zzy Wordmeanings to Form Dynamic 
Stereotype Repre~mntations, Prec. COLING84 (1984) 
\[9\]Rumelhart,D.E.:Feature Discovery by Competitive Learning, 
Cognitive Selence, Vel.9,pp.?5-112 (1985). 
37!) 
