TBMS: Domain Spec i f i c  
Text Management and Lexicon Deve\]opment* 
S. Goeser and E. Mergenthaler 
University of Ulm FRG 
Abstract 
The def in i t ion  of a Text Base Management System is 
introduced in terms of software engineering. That 
gives a basis for discussing pract ical  text  admini- 
s t rat ion ,  including questions on corpus properties 
and appropriate ret r ieva l  c r i te r ia .  F ina l ly ,  strate-  
gies for the derivat ion of a word data base from an 
actual TBMS wi l l  be discussed. 
l. Introduction 
Textual data are a sort of complex data object that 
is of growing importance in many appl icat ions.  
Research projects from such d i f fe rent  f ie lds  as 
h istory,  law, social sciences, humanities and l in -  
guist ics  but also commercial ins t i tu t ions  are dea- 
l ing with vast quan i t i t ies  of text .  At Ulm Universi- 
ty for instance, a machine-readable corpus of spoken 
language texts has been bu i l t  up, with the purpose 
of support For psychotherapeutic process research. 
The corpus is administered by a Text Base Manage- 
ment System (TBMS), that integrates the functions 
of archiving, processing and analyzing an arb i t rary  
amount of text (MERGENTHALER 1985). 
Several sysLmns sat is fy ing the TBMS def in i t ion  were 
conceived independently in the late seventies. 
THALLER (1983) reports a system CLIO, a TBMS with a 
highly d i f fe rent ia ted  data base component and a 
method base providing c~nputerized content analysis 
and comfortable ed i t ing.  LDVLIB (DREWEK and ERNI 
1982) is mainly a text  analysis package, where data 
base management and text  processing play a subordi- 
nate role.  A PC-suited TBM-system, ARRAS (SMITH 
1984), supports comfortable text  inquiry by concor- 
dance and index functions, but has no textbase 
component. F inal ly  there are two TBM-systems for 
commercial use, MIDOC (KOWARSKI and MICHAUX 1983) 
and MINDOK \[INFODAS 1983) which have a database 
component and al low extensive processing of text ,  
but no kind of text  analysis at a l l .  
2. Def in i t ion  of  a TBMS 
From the point of view of a TBMS-user, who is sup- 
posed to be a non-programming app l i ca t ion - f ie ld  
worker, the system is an instrument to take up, to 
control and/or to analyze his or her individual  
texts for domain-dependent purposes. Consequently, a 
system intended to manage a text  bank has the fo l -  
lowing tasks: 
1. Input and edit ing of texts according to numerous 
points of view. 
2. Management of an unlimited number of text  units 
on a suitably sized aux i l ia ry  storage device. 
3. Management of an unl imited amount of information 
concerning the text  units,  the i r  authors, and the 
related text  analyses. 
4. Management of an open quantity of methods for 
edi t ing and analyzing stored text  units .  
5. Assistance for interfaces to s ta t i s t i ca l  and 
other user packages. 
6. Assistance for a simple, dialogue-oriented user 
interface when the tasks mentioned in points I to 
5 are supplied or performed. 
The tasks mentioned in point 1 belong to the domain 
of text  processing. The term text  processing sys- 
tem can be used i f  su f f i c ient  user assistance is 
provided. 
235 
The task of managing an unlimited number of text 
units on an auxiliary storage (point 2) is the 
object of long-term data maintenance. The stored 
sets are grouped in f i les and put into magnetic 
storage. I f ,  in addition, i t  is possible to adminis- 
ter the data sets with the access methods provided 
by the operating system, then we wil l  speak of a 
data maintenance system or a f | \ ]e  management sys- 
tem (e.g., Archive with BS2000 from Siemens and 
Datatrieve with VMS from Digital Equipement)o 
The tasks mentioned in point 3 concern the manage- 
ment of a data base including all of its services. 
These tasks are fu l f i l led by general data base 
management systems; the classic functions of such 
systems are the description, handling, take up, 
manipulation, and retrieval of data. Data structures 
can be classified as hierarchic, network oriented, 
or relational. 
Point 4 refers to a collection of methods that, 
givencomputer assistance in the user's selection of 
methods, can be termed a method base. Further assis- 
tance, such as method documentation and parameter 
input, is provided by the method base management 
system. Point 5, on interfaces, is a subset of the 
tasks described by point 4. 
All of these tasks are collected in point 6 with 
regard to the user interface. Thus the TBMS is an 
integrated overall system consisting of 
f i le  management system FMS 
data base management system DBMS 
text management system TMS 
method base management system MBMS 
user 
rA . . . . . . . . . . .  data 
user 
acquisitionr~5 
user 
data base 
user inter- . 
face 
request data base 
outp~ut~ ex-~ ~ y s  3  man~egement 
of text 4 
text ~ ' " " "  
analysis 
package 
characte- analysis 
TBS 
text 
method 
base 
text 
acquisition 
text J ~ base } ~ output base 
Figure 1 
236 
Since the selection of the specif ic data to be 
managed by the DBMS and of the methods provided by 
the MBMS is made in accordance with the kind of 
texts managed by the FMS, i t  is leg i t imate to des- 
cribe the overal l  information system as tailo~nade. 
The following definition of the entire system is 
made, in analogy to the definitions of the indivi- 
dual components, in order to ensure that our termi- 
nology adequately reflects this state of affairs: 
?extbase management system = TBMS 
Branch: L inguist ic  data processing 
The TBMS is an information system that can 
administer texts and information on texts,  and 
that makes texts accessible by integrat ing 
techniques from l ingu is t i c  data processing and 
text  processing. I t  features a homogeneous user 
interface that assists in the take up, pro-. 
cessing, output, and analysis of text  units. 
A System Architecture I (top leve l ) ,  which represents 
one way of rea l i z ing  a TBMS is shown in Fig. I .  
The TBMS d i f fe rs  from document ret r ieva l  systons by 
containing i~o addit ional  components: text  process- 
ing and method base. I t  is true that the emphasis, 
as far as ret r ieva l  in the I BMS is concerned, is 
s t i l l  on data ret r ieva l  ( for  requests made according 
to the author of a text)  and on document ret r ieva l  
( for  text  references to be determined according to 
internal textual features).  Fact ret r ieva l  is none- 
theless an integral  component of a l l  the plans for a 
TBMS, even i f  systems able to cope with large quan- 
t i t ies  of material from col loquia\]  speech are s t i l l  
not ready for production. However, this  should not 
be a basis for d i f fe rent ia t ing  within a TBMS. ideal-  
ly  fact  and document ret r ieva l  are to be integrated 
in one system in order to provide sat is factory user 
assistance. 
3. Text Base Management 
The pract ical  management of texts can roughly be 
separated into management of texts or text  sets (as 
complex str ing objects) and of text - re la ted  informa- 
t ion usually not being part of the text .  This in for -  
mation may be pragmatical such as ident i f i ca t ion  and 
at t r ibutes  of the text  producer(s) or a description 
of the communicative s i tuat ion the text  or iginated 
from, or i t  may be semantical, specifying some 
mapping of the text on a formal representation. For 
both kinds the method base w i l l  provide adequate 
analysis procedures. 
A TBMS is ind i f fe rent  with regard to the complete- 
ness of a text  corpus, but i t  supports the more 
ambitious handling of an open corpus in a special 
way. 
The character is t ic  of an open corpus is that i t  is 
an excerpt from a parent population which is contin- 
uously being expanded without being t ied to the goal 
of completeness. An example is the co l lect ion of 
fu l l y  transcribed short psychotherapies. I t  is 
possible to expand this corpus to include every 
newly undertaken treatment without ever reaching a 
state of completeness or representativeness with 
respect to the text  type "short psychotherapy". The 
qual i ty  of completeness can only be approximated i f  
there are features l im i t ing  the composition of the 
corpus. Thus a co l lect ion oF diagnostic f i r s t  inter -  
views has a higher degree of completeness i f  i t  
consists of equal parts on the features "sex", 
"age", "diagnosis",  and "social s t rata" .  An example 
of a completely c losed corpus is the Bible (see 
PARUNAK 1982). 
The degree of completeness of a corpus also influen~ 
ces the strategies for handling the results of text  
analyses, such as a semantic mapping. There are two 
principal  approaches. In the one, a l l  the avai lable 
results of analyses are stored completely with the 
text  or in d i rect  re lat ion to the text .  In the 
other, parts of the corpus are processed a lgor i thmi-  
ca l ly  as needed. As detai led by PARUNAK (1982, 
p.150), users with open corpora tend to use the 
algorithmic version, while the storage of exist ing 
results from previous studies is often preferred for 
237 
closed corpora. 
Most of the text - re la ted  information, be i t  semanti- 
cal or pragmatical in nature, can be applied in 
d i f fe rent  ways. F i r s t ,  a l l  of them is c lear ly  of an 
immediate interest  to the system user, who is con- 
cerned with a given text .  For example, a psychia- 
t r i s t  examining the verbatim protocol of a treatment 
hour w i l l  be interested in i t s  content and in the 
pat ient 's  medical h is tory .  He or she might be pro- 
vided with a weighted semantic category l i s t ,  a high 
frequency word l i s t  and, as an a t t r ibute ,  the pa- 
t ient ' s  ICD-diagnesis. 
Secondly, text - re la ted  information can serve within 
TBMS as an addit ional c r i te r ion  (beside text  ident i -  
f i cat ion  and a suitable pre-segmentation) for re- 
t r iev ing texts from FMS. In our TBMS-implementation, 
the fol lowing features do have that ret r ieva l  func- 
t ion:  
text type Given a certain class of destination 
features a text  type can be defined by 
a set of at t r ibute-va lue pairs.  In tu i -  
t i v ly  a text  type d i f fe rent ia ted  that 
way corresponds to a communicative 
s i tuat ion.  
attributes For each part ic ipant  in a communica- 
t ion,  a set of feature-value pairs 
specifying relevant propert ies is 
reserved. 
4. Der iv ing  a Word Data Base 
A word data base (WDB) is ,  formally spoken, a re la-  
t ion ranging over lexicographical features. Every 
tupel in a WDB specif ies a class of feature values 
being character is t ic  for a single word form; one or 
several tupels may be organized in a subset of what 
has been cal led a lex ica l  entry (see HESS, BRUSTKERN 
and LENDERS 1983)o Lexical features to be considered 
here are word form, lemma name, word class, frequen- 
cy of the word form and some grammatical features, 
par t ia l l y  depending on the par t icu lar  word class. 
Empir ical ly,  a WDB is "based" on one or more commu- 
nicat ive s i tuat ions,  that is ,  i t  is accumulated with 
respect to an approprfately sized (see MERGENTHALER 
1985) text  corpus. Note that s i tuat ions l i ke ,  for 
instance, a psychoanalytic treatment do in fact 
l im i t  col loquial  lex ica l  domains to some degree, 
simply by imposing thematical res t r i c t ions  on the 
text  drawn from i t .  
text  un i t  
speaker 
text  s ize  
theme 
A text  seen as str ing object can be 
organized h ierarch ica l ly ,  containing 
(not necessarily continuous) substrings 
such as utterances or segments, which 
we cal l  text  units.  
selects among speakers of a given 
(d ia log ic)  text  
to be specif ied in current word forms 
on the basis of a semantic category 
l i s t ,  textual ident i f i ca t ion  units can 
be selected according to the weight of 
a category. 2 
The re lat ionship between such situation-based do- 
mains and the WDB derived from i t  w i l l  be worked out 
in more detai l  as fol lows. 
As lex ica l  TBMS-component, a WDB wi l l  usually sup- 
port the method base in analyzing textual proper- 
t ies .  We only mention, that most computerized con- 
tent analysis procedures w i l l  operate on raw and 
lemmatized text ,  y ie ld ing d i f fe rent  results .  The WDB 
in our TBMS-implementation (see Table I) is due to 
i t s  appl icat ion in psychotherapy protocol analysis. 
The most important procedure in deriving a WDB is 
automatic lemmatization, defined as providing one 
pair<lemma name, word class> and opt iona l ly  in- 
f lect ional  features for every word-form-in-text ,  
238 
using context for  disambiguation. Since TBMS are 
dealing with mass text ,  the primary objectives in 
l emmatization w i l l  be f i r s t ,  to have an e f f i c ient  
procedure, second, to have least  user assistance and 
th i rd ,  to minimize the error rate with respect to 
the resul t ing WDB. These objections are t ight ly  
l inked to a resolut ion of word class and lemma name 
ambiguities (homographies) by analyzing context. 
This seems to be obvious with regard to ef f ic iency 
and user support. We also stress upon a s ign i f i cant  
decrease in error rate,  in order to avoid interac- 
t ive  lemmatization that goes along with well-known 
consistency problems. 
All current lemmatization procedures (see e.g. 
KRAUSE and WILLEE 1982) combine s ta t i c  cmnponents 
designed for lexicon lookup and dynamic components 
try ing to analyze entr ies not yet contained in the 
lexicon. Stat ic lemmatization surely w i l l  work 
su f f i c ient ly  well in a l l  cases where an appropriate 
lexicon can be provided and a constant domain as- 
serts congruence between this lexicon and the on- 
coming vocabulary. Dynamic lemmatization, however 
may become a crucial  task in case of non-specif ic,  
' fuzzy' domains "like psychoanalytic ta lks .  This is 
simply a question of the size of vocabulary, which 
is up to a ~ime not covered by the lexicon. For any 
given lexicon, this uncovered vocabulary w i l l  be 
more extensive for fuzzy domains than for specif ic  
ones. 
While unconstrained lexicon access and morphological 
word analysis are c lear ly  determinist ic  in nature, 
context related lemnatization requires a sort of 
indeteminism on word leve l .  That is ,  some kinds of 
lexical  pattern 3 should be recognized by the lemma- 
t i za t ion  algorithm and become stored in the lexicon 
for la ter  access. This leads us to a matrix descrip- 
t ion of contextual le lmat izat ion (Table 2). 
The dynamic component is applied to those word fonns 
- plus a two sided context of several words - for 
which no corresponding pattern is avai lable in the 
WDB. In order to avoid mis-leading lemmatization a 
l inkage between dynamic and stat ic  component is 
bu i l t  up. A pair  <lemma name, word class>, is gener~ 
ated dynamically and w i l l  be accepted only 
i f  the lemma is element in the WDB. Otherwise, an 
interact ive procedure, the lemmatization dialog, 
w i l l  be in i t ia ted .  
appro-  
ach 
stat ic  
procedure 
determi- nondetermi- 
n i s t i c  n i s t i c  
WDB-entry: WDB-entry: 
word pattern 
dynamic morpholog, syntact. 
analysis analysis 
Table 2 
5. F~nal remark 
The current implementation of the TBMS ULM TEXTBANK, 
being f inished in 1986, is on a SIEMENS 7.550-D main 
frame under BS2000 operating system. Further work on 
the ULM TEXTBANK wi l l  include extensions of the 
method base by robust parsing and rule based content 
analysis methods. 
I) The i l lus t ra t ing  technique used here short ly is 
as fol lows: Individuals are represented by t r ian-  
gles, dynamic elements as rectangles and stat ic  
elements as e l l ipses .  The system detai l  is enclosed 
in a frame. Control l ing operations are indicated by 
a broken l ine ,  reading operations as uninterrupted 
l ines coming from above and wr i t ing  operations as 
going to below the frame. Comunicating elements are 
l inked with double l ines.  Lines extending to the 
frame indicate,  that a l l  the dynamic elements con- 
tained within i t  re late to the outside. See Mergen- 
thaler (1985) for  a more detai led descr ipt ion.  
2) The feature theme is actual ly  not a part of the 
retr ieva l  system but of the method base, since i t s  
239 
LEMMA NAME 
I lemma name 
2 var iant meanings ident i f i ca t ion  
3 reference to in f lected forms 
4 semantic descript ion (planned) 
5 frequency of occurrence 
6 grammatical features {as fol lowing) 
WORD KIND 
I noun 7 negation 
2 verb B ar t i c le  
3 adject ive 9 preposit ion 
4 adverb I0 conjunction 
5 pronoun 11 in ter jec t ion  
6 numeral 12 other 
MORPHOLOGY OF LEMMA 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
B 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
1.G 
16 
17 
IR 
simplex (s) 
compound (c) 
affixal derivation {a) 
s adjective derivation 
s verb derivation 
s nominal number 
s abbreviation 
s proper name 
c adjective derivation 
c verb derivation 
c nominal number 
c, abbreviation 
c, proper name 
c, adjective derivation 
c, verb derivation 
a, nominal number 
a, abbreviation 
a, proper name 
WORD ORIGIN GENDER PARTICIPLE 
I foreign I masculin I have 
2 d ia lect  2 feminine 2 he 
3 neutral 
INFLECTED FORMS 
I inflected form 
2 variant meanings identification 
3 reference to lemma names 
4 semantic description (planned) 
5 frequency of occurrence 
6 grammatical features (as following) 
RELATIVE FORMS NUMBERS 
i diminutive i singular 
2 comparative 2 plural 
3 superlat ive 3 plural only 
MORPHOLOGY CASE/MODE 
I pres .par t ic ip .  I nominat . / indicat .  
2 past par t i c ip .  2 genit ive/conjunct.  
3 pres.tense 3 dat ive/ imperat.  
4 past tense 4 accusative 
5 in f in i t i ve  
Table 1 
240 
3) Concerning the problem of differentiating homo- 
graphs contextually, the straightforward approach of 
rewrite rules operating on word-class categories 
won't work except the inventory of those categories 
is extremely differentiated. For example the rule AD 
+ X + NOUN ---> AD + AD + NOUN is correct  only i f  
NOUN is the head of an NP and X is not a present 
par t i c ip le  or (in English) a noun within that NP. We 
suppose that a su f f i c ient  d i f fe rent ia t ion  may be 
achieved only with some kind of semantic pattern.  
References 
Drewek, R. and Erni, M.: LDVLIB. A (new) Software 
Package for Text Research. Vortrag ALLC - Conferen- 
ce, Pisa 1982. 
Hem, K., Brustkern, J. and Wil lee, G.: Maschinen- 
lesbare deutsche W~rterb~cher. Niemeyer, T(~bingen 
1983. 
INFODAS: MINDOK. Ein Informationssystem auf Klein- 
rechnern zur Erfassung, Verwaltung und Retrieval yon 
Dokumenten und Daten. (Ausgabe 2.0) INFODAS GmbH, 
K~In 1983. 
Kowarski, I .  and Michaux, C.: MIDOC: A Microcomputer 
System for the Management of Structured Documents. 
Information Processing ~3:567 - 572 (1983). 
Krause, W. and Wil lee, G.: Lemmatizing German News- 
paper Texts with theA id  of an Algorithm. In: Com- 
puters and the Humanities 15:101-113 (1983). 
Mergenthaler, E.: Textbank Systems. Computer Science 
Applied in the Field of Psychoanalysis. Springer: 
Heidelberg New York (1985). 
Parunak, Dyke van, M.: Data Base Design for B ib l ica l  
Texts. In: Bailey, R.W. (Ed.): Computing in the 
Humanities: 149-161, North Holland, Amsterdam 1982. 
Smith, J . :  ARRAS User Manual. State University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hi l l  NC, 1984. 
Thal ler ,  M.: CLIO: EinfUhrung und SystemUberblick. 
Manual, G~ttingen 1983. 
*This work has been supported by the German Research 
Foundation within the Col laborative Research Program 
129, Projekt B2. 
Authors address: 
S. Goeser, l i c .ph i l  and Dr. E. Mergenthaler, D ip l . -  
Inform. 
Sektion Psychoanalytische Methodik 
Universit~t Ulm 
Am Hochstr~8 8 
D7900 ULM 
