Alan K. Melby 
Br igham Young Univers i ty  
Dept. of L inguist ics  
Provo, Utah 84602 
USA 
ABSTRACT 
One of the necessary tasks of a machine 
t rans lat ion  system is lexical transfer. In 
some cases there is a one-to-one mapping from 
source language word to target language word. 
What theoret ica l  model is fo l lowed when there 
is a one-to-many mapping? Unfortunately,  
none of the l inguist ic  models that have been 
used in machine t rans lat ion include a lexical  
t ransfer  component. In the absence of a 
theoret ica l  model, this paper wil l  suggest  a 
new way to test  lexical  t ransfer  systems. 
This test is being appl ied to an MT system 
under development.  One poss ib le  conc lus ion 
may be that further effort  should be expended 
develop ing models  of lexical transfer. 
i. An Ear ly Approach to Lexical Transfer  
Years before the machine t rans lat ion 
community  was burdened with gui l t  by the 
ALPAC report, David Hays, former chairman of 
the Internat ional  Committee on Computat ional  
L inguist ics,  proposed a procedure for lexical  
t ransfer  (Hays, 1963, pp 205-208). We wil l  
descr ibe it, quot ing pieces to preserve the 
or ig inal  flavor. 
i. a. Fi le of Equiva lent -Choice  Data 
"Most words . . .have uni form translat ions,  but 
not all ." "These except ions to the general  
rule must  be d iscovered and taken into 
account. The procedure is s imple and 
stra ightforward.  A f i le of equiva lent -cho ice  
data. . . i s  required."  This fi le is prepared 
us ina real text. When a word is encountered 
for the f irst time, one t rans lat ion is 
selected and entered into a b i l ingual  
glossary. When the same word is encountered 
again, the human t rans lator /ed i tor  attempts 
to use the t rans lat ion a lready in the 
glossary. Addi t ional  t rans lat ions are added 
only when the one(s) in the g lossary are not 
acceptable.  This procedure is supposed to 
avoid enter ing interchangeable a l ternat ives 
that are only sty l is t ic  variat ions. The fi le 
of equ iva lent -cho ice  data ment ioned above is 
a record of how many t imes each t rans lat ion 
was used. 
i. b. Category 
Once the equiva lent -cho ice  fi le has been 
compiled, the f irst step in analyz ing it is 
to ident i fy those words with two or more 
t rans lat ions  (i.e. equivalents) .  The next 
step is to ident i fy  whether  the t rans lat ion 
is governed by "grammatic category". 
i. c. Funct ion 
If there are two or more t rans lat ions  wi th in  
the same category, then the analyst  looks at 
"grammatic  function" (e.g. subject, object  of 
preposit ion,  etc). 
104 
I. d. Features 
"If there is any kind of re lat ion in which 
the word has two equivalents,  the analyst  
cont inues by examining each word that governs 
the mul t ip le -equ iva lent  word."  From the 
words that govern the word in question, the 
analyst  der ives "cr iter ial  c lasses" (i.e. 
features to mark on the govern ing words in 
the dict ionary) .  
i. e. End of Procedure 
But what  if test ing features on other words 
is not suf f ic ient  to determine the 
t rans lat ion?  Hays recognizes this 
poss ib i l i ty  by not ing "There is no certainty, 
of course, that the governors  and dependents  
of an occurrence determine its translat ion,  
but is seems p laus ib le  that they wi l l  often 
do so." Even fo l lowing this procedure of 
ass ign ing features may be anything but 
"s imple and stra ightforward",  and (even 
worse) it is not suff ic ient.  
2. Some Counterexamples  
Obvious counter -examples  to Hays' hope come 
to mind, such as "chip" in micro -e lect ron ics  
(=integrated circuit) and in gambl ing (=token 
to represent  money), or "buck" in hunt ing 
(=male deer) and in s lang (=dollar). Even 
older systems l ike SYSTRAN prov ide for this 
by pr io r i t i z ing  var ious domain-spec i f i c  
d ict ionar ies.  
The other  s i tuat ion where the Hays approach 
c lear ly  breaks down is when the word is part  
of a f ixed expression, such as "chip off  the 
old block" (=like his father) or "pass the 
buck" (=avoid responsibi l i ty) .  Al l  machine 
t rans lat ion systems provide for this by 
inc luding express ion d ict ionar ies  that 
overr ide word- for -word  lexical transfer. 
A var ia t ion  on the express ion d ict ionary  is 
to key a lex ica l -s t ructura l  t ransfer  from a 
s ingle word that af fects surrounding words. 
For example, the adject ive "hungry" 
st imulates a t ransfer  going into French that 
changes "x is hungry" to "x has hunger',. 
Unfortunate ly ,  somet imes all the tr icks 
l isted above combined sti l l  do not suf f ice to 
ident i fy  an acceptable translat ion.  The 
fo l lowing two examples and some of the 
subsequent  d iscuss ion are adapted from Melby 
(1985). 
2. a. The "plate" Example 
For example, cons ider  the word "plate" (which 
can mean a household item on which food is 
p laced to be eaten or a marker  on the ground 
in the game of baseball) in the sentence 
There was an egg on the plate 
in the context  of a d iscuss ion of a basebal l  
game in which an angry fan threw a raw eqq 
and it landed on home plate. 
Then consider the sentence 
She threw the food on the plate 
in the discussion of what a teenager did 
because she was in a hurry to fix her 
breakfast and get to school. 
Either of these sentences could occur in a 
narrative of the life of a young person (so a 
special dictionary Will not help), and there 
is apparently nothing in the syntactic or 
lexical environment of "plate" that 
determines the translation, and no idiomatic 
expressions are involved. 
2. b. The "rock" example 
Or consider the problem of "rock", which is a 
single lexical item in English with several 
specific translations in French ("pierre, 
roc, caillou", etc.), no one of which is as 
general as the English word "rock", which 
would be translated differently in each of 
the following sentences: 
She found the rock on the beach and 
placed it in her pocket. 
He climbed up and sat on the rock to get 
a better view. 
While watching the parade, she got tired 
and sat down, not seeing the sharp rock, and 
screamed from the pain. 
2. c. Opinions 
Some claim that the above examples are far 
fetched and that the identification of 
lexical category, grammatical function, 
general subject matter, and fixed expressions 
is sufficient to develop lexical transfer 
algorithms that produce acceptable 
translations. 
Others say that the dynamic nature of natural 
languages will often present a significant 
number of cases where lexical transfer is not 
handled adequate lyby  standard techniques. 
Consider, for example, the search for lexical 
transfer criteria for the English preposition 
"through" going into French found in 
Bourquin-Launey (1984). 
The facts are (i) that raw machine 
translation output, even after these many 
years of development, is seldom up to 
publication standards without post-editing; 
and (2) there has been little development of 
the models of lexical transfer beyond the 
stage described in section one (which was in 
place already in the mid 1960's). One reason 
is that the linguistic models that have been 
used do not include a lexical transfer 
component. This can be verified by looking at 
Hutchin's updated survey of linguistic models 
in machine translation (Hutchins, 1984). 
To summarize the discussion to this point, 
the fact is that work in lexical models has 
been neglected for the past twenty years; the 
question is whether that neglect is 
justified. 
It seems that it would be worthwhile to at 
least examine the nature of the problems in 
machine translation output. If it turns out 
that a significant portion of the problems 
are actually failures in lexical transfer, 
then further studies of lexical transfer in 
the computational linguistics community 
should be encouraged. 
The following section describes an on-going 
effort to test the lexical transfer component 
of a machine translation system currently 
under development. The method allows a test 
of lexical transfer even before the entire 
system is operational, thus providing 
feedback as early in the life of the project 
as possible, hopefully allowing design 
changes to be made, J f they are needed, 
before they become too costly. The method 
could also be adapted to studies in lexical 
transfer somewhat independent of a particular 
machine translation system. 
3. A Method of Testing Lexical Transfer 
3. a. Origin of the Testing Project 
The BSO Company is a systems house in 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. The BYU-HRC is a 
center which promotes research in the College 
of Humanities at Brigham Young University 
(BYU), in particular providing support for 
research involving language and computers. 
In 1984, the author replied to a request for 
comments on the then proposed BSO machine 
translation project. That reply led to 
discussions which resulted in an agreement 
between BSO and the BYU-HRC to create a text 
and translation data base as a joint 
venture. 
The specifications for the data base were 
that it would consist:: of paired texts in 
French and English, that it would include at 
least 500,000 words in each language, that 
the translations would be done by qualified 
professional translators, and that the text 
type would be straightforward modern English 
and French avoiding texts that are literary 
or intentionally ambiguous. 
BSO supplied the source documents, which were 
mostly public reports on agriculture, social 
conditions, etc., published by the 
European Economic Community (EEC) or the 
United Nations (UN). 
The documents were placed in machine readable 
form using the Kurzweil OCR device and 
transferred to a disk pack on an IBM 
370/138. 
Preliminary to the test, the data base was 
split into two parts. A smaller part (about 
200,000 words in each language) is accessible 
to BSO for syntactic studies. The larger 
part (about 300,000 words in each language) 
will be used for the lexical test, under 
105 
control  of BYU, and wi l l  not be access ib le  to 
BSO. The test wi l l  be executed in f ive 
steps. 
3. b. Secret se lect ion of sample texts 
From the lexical  part  of the data base 
(300,000 words of Engl ish and 300,000 words 
of French), BYU has selected 4 sample texts. 
Each of these samples is a coherent stretch 
of text of approx imate ly  300 word tokens. 
Unless otherwise indicated, we now refer to 
the Engl ish  vers ion of each sample text. 
From the 4 texts there were about 600 non- 
funct ion words. Adding some "misleaders" 
from other sect ions of the data base, a l ist 
of 800 words was sent to BSO. 
3. c. Construct ion  of tr ial lexicons 
BSO has received the a lphabet ica l ly  sorted 
l ist of 800 Engl ish words. They do not know 
the context  of any of the words, nor wi l l  
they know whether  a word is part  of one of 
the secret sample texts or merely  a 
"misleader".  
BSO is now bui ld ing an Engl ish to 
intermediate language (IL) lexicon and an IL 
to French lexicon. In the case of the BSO 
project, the intermediate representat ion is a 
formal ized Esperanto. The Engl ish- IL  lex icon 
wil l  have more "exits" than input words 
(estimate -- 1200). So the IL-French lexicon 
wi l l  have about 1200 entries. 
The Eng l i sh- IL  and IL-French lexicons wi l l  
each be separate ly  tested at BSO. For this 
purpose, BSO wil l  use Engl ish and IL tr ial  
input texts, espec ia l ly  wr i t ten for this 
purpose by external  consul tants  based on the 
800 and 1200 word lists. In addit ion to the 
800 words, BSO wi l l  add a few hundred 
funct ion words (articles, pronouns, 
preposit ions,  etc.). 
3. d. Trans lat ion  us ing the tr ial lexicons. 
After  complet ion of both tr ial lexicons by 
BSO, they wi l l  be sent to the USA for overal l  
test ing by BYU. Two t rans lat ion phases wi l l  
be d is t ingu ished as part  of the test ing 
procedure. 
First, monol ingual  students of Engl ish wi l l  
t rans late the four sample texts (see A) into 
IL by mechan ica l ly  fo l lowing the rules 
conta ined in the entr ies of the Eng l i sh- IL  
tr ial  lexicon. We emphasize that these 
students wi l l  have no knowledge of IL, which 
wi l l  help them apply the rules as 
mechan ica l ly  as possible. 
Second, a d i f ferent  group of students -- 
again Engl ish  monol ingua ls  -- wi l l  t rans late 
the IL-output  of phase I to French, by 
mechan ica l ly  apply ing the rules of the IL- 
French lexicon (without knowing IL or 
French). S ince the test  is d i rected at 
lexical  word-choice,  no complete sentences 
wi l l  be required for the French output. 
The presence of an IL -vers ion as in termediary  
between the two t rans lat ion phases wi l l  
require that the IL-output of phase I be 
converted into complete sentences before 
serving as input to phase If. 
3. e. Eva luat ing  the French output 
As a final part  of the whole procedure, BYU 
wil l  carefu l ly  compare the French output of 
the above descr ibed DLT tr ial  t rans lat ion 
with the h igh-qua l i ty  human t rans lat ion of 
the text samples in the database. Of course, 
this compar ison wi l l  concern only lexical  
elements, ignor ing case endings, word order, 
etc. 
Where the output d i f fers  from the t rans lat ion 
in the data base, a French-Engl ish  b i l ingual  
wi l l  decide whether  the output is an 
acceptable  a l ternat ive and if not wil l  note 
the d iscrepancy for further study by BSO. 
4. Conc lus ion 
Once the study is completed (which wil l  be 
years s ince the above procedure is only the 
f i rst  major  phase), we should know more about 
the types of problems to be encountered in 
lexical  t ransfer  at later stages when the 
ent i re machine t rans lat ion  system is in 
place. The results  should ident i fy  general  
problems in lexical  t ransfer  that are not 
speci f ic  to the BSO project. Based on the 
findings, we may recommend that further work  
in lexical  t ransfer  be pursued by the 
computat ional  l inguist ics  community. 
REFERENCES 
Bourquin-Launey,  M-C. (1984) Traduct ion 
Automat ique -- Aspects  Europ/eens. 
Paris: ADEC, 99, boulevard Sa int -Michel  
(5th arrondissement) ;  January 1984. 
Hays, David G. (1963) "Research Procedures in 
Machine Trans lat ion"  in Natural  Language 
and the Computer, edited by Paul L. 
Garvin, pp. 183-214. New York: McGraw-  
Hil l ;  1963. 
Hutchins, J. (1984) "Methods of L inguist ic  
Analys is  in Machine Trans lat ion"  in the 
proceedings of the Internat ional  
Conference on Machine Translat ion,  
Cranfield, England, February 1984. 
Melby, Alan K. (1985) "A Text and Trans lat ion  
Data Base", a paper  presented at the 
Internat ional  Conference on Data Bases 
in the Humani t ies  and Social  Sciences, 
Gr innel l  College, 1985. (Submitted for 
pub l icat ion  in the proceedings.)  
- -end of text  -m 
106 
