A COOPERATIVE YES-NO QUERY SYSTEM FEATURING DISCOURSE PARTICLES 
Kjell Johan S/EB~ 
Seminar fiJr nattJrllch-sprochllche Systeme 
T iJblngen* 
and 
Norges allmennvltenskopellge forsknlngsr~d 
Abstract 
Cooperative dialog systems will offer extended answers 
to questions, that is, they will volunteer information 
not expl ic i t ly  asked for. A complete response will be 
complex and the member sentences will evince an ex- 
tensive parallel, the indirect answer substitut ing an 
alternative for a focus in the question. Research on 
discourse particles has shown that they are necessary 
to ensure coherence between adjacent sentences evin- 
cing an extensive parallel, that is, that they reflect 
discourse relations as given in complex answers, so 
that such answers emerge as core contexts. Thus the 
proper mode of representation for discourse particles 
in a system coincides with the framework of coopera- 
t ive question-answering. The PASSAT system centers 
on the r61e of particles in characterizing and reflec- 
t ing relations such as underl ie complex response. 
Discourse Particle Semantics 
Discourse particles are meta expressions in a natural 
language: They express discourse relations, which are 
necessary properties of (complex) discourses, that is, 
they refer to things in the language and not to things 
in the world. It follows that they do not influence 
t ruth  conditions. Instead, they affect coherence: 
When occurring in a complex discourse such that 
the discourse relation "contradicts" its meaning, 
a discourse particle may cause incoherence. 
?Edison Invented the telegraph. 
Marconi also invented the phonograph. 
Conversely, discourse particles can cause coherence 
too: When one does not occur in a complex discourse 
such that the discourse relation "entails" its meaning, 
an incoherence comes about which the occurrence 
would prevent.  What causes that incoherence is the 
occurrence of the empty, or zero, par t i c le .  
So nonempty particles are sometimes necessary to 
reflect discourse relations, in other words, they 
substitute positive for  negative presuppositions. 
?Edison Invented the telegraph. 
He invented the phonograph. 
And, those presuppositions do not refer to the world 
but to the environment of discourse. On a classical 
t ruth  presupposit ion, enriched by a sensit iv i ty to 
context, the empty particle in the example presupposes 
that Edison did not invent the telegraph. But then, he 
in fact did not, so the incoherence is not explained. 
Similarly, on classical terms the particle in the former 
example presupposes that Marconi invented the 
telegraph, but then, he in fact did. 
* The paper Is based on research done In the project 
L/LOG, financed and supervised by IBM Germany. 
So discourse particles, empty or not, react not to 
what is or is not the case but to what is or is =lot 
supposed to be the case: To the context. The proper 
context category for the discourse particle rategory 
i s  a complex sentence: A sentence pair. Any two 
sentences in sequence occasion the empty or  some 
nonempty discourse particle in f ront  of or withirl the 
second sentence. Thus a language in a model theory 
o f  discourse particles will consist in a pair: 
L=<SP,  DP> 
SP is a set of sentence pairs sp, the individual con ~ 
stants, and DP is a set of discourse particles dp in- 
c lud ing  the empty particle dpO, the predicates; and 
fo r  any dp and sp, dp(sp) ,  the application of dp on 
sp, is to represent the occurrence of dp in sp. An 
interpretation rule is to state a necessary condition 
for the coherence of any dp(sp) in terms of ti le 
meaning of sp and the meaning of dp. Thus the 
model in the theory will consist in a tr ip le:  
M = < DR , S , h > 
DR is a set of discourse relations, # is ,~n assignm~n?; 
mapping constants, i .e. sentence pair~, onto member':, 
o f  DR, and I~ is an interpretation mapping predicate;:, 
i .e. discourse particles, onto subsets o~ DR. The, d~,- 
notation of any element of DP dp is defined as Lhe s~ 
of discourse relations b(dp) .  The interpre'~tion rtd.,:. 
states that for any sp, dp, dp(sp) is only coherent 
if S(sp) is not an element of b(dp')  for any dr '  
di f ferent from dp. 
It is assumed that the denotations of the discou~'.,;e 
particles - the elements of the picture of DP under' 
h - are all disjunct, i .e. that for any dp l ,  dp2. in 
DP, the intersection of P (dp l )  and P(dp2) is empty. 
Thus for any sp and dp such that ~e(sp) is in P(dp) ,  
dp ' ( sp)  is incoherent for any dp' di f ferent from dp~ 
This means that a sentence pair instantiaUng a di~ r 
course relation that belongs to the denotation of a 
particle is only coherent if occasioning the parUcle, 
in other words, that a particle is necessary wi~h 
respect to every discourse relation in its denota-~ion. 
As  DP contains the empty particle dpO, this principle 
corresponds to a negative presupposition. 
So there are discourses necessitating this particle 
or other in v i r tue of the relations they instantiate. 
A discourse relation is an abstraction on the v~ay the 
two members of the sentence pair compare to each 
other. Any two sentences can be segmented into a 
COl~rt, a depart, and a report, meaning the portion 
common to both sentences, the dist inct portion of ~tt~ 
f i rst  sentence, and the dist inct portion of tile second 
sentence. The common denominator of discourse 
relations in the denotation of any nonempty particle i~ 
that the de- and the report are minimal: That the two 
sentences di f fer  in only one description. Discourses 
necessitating nonempty particles are characterized 
by  an extensive parallel. Importantly,  polar i ty 
549 
change does not count as a de- or a repart  but 
serves as an extra parameter to di f ferent iate 
specific discourse relation classes. 
Marconi Invented the telegraph, 
?(but) he didn't Invent the phonograph. 
Discourse relations encode information on two other 
parameters: Whether the de- and the repart  are in a 
semantic relation (scalar i ty or hyponymy) such that 
one sentence entails the other (negation exempt),  and, 
if so, whether entailment is le f t - to - r ight  or reversely,  
and if not, whether they are in a semantic relation 
(exclusion) such that one sentence entails the negation 
of the other,  or the two sentences are compatible. 
These four features - polar i ty  d istr ibut ion accounts 
for  two - give rise to sixteen cases, thirteen 
prov id ing slots for  German discourse particles: 
/ 
<C,D> 
/ 
? 
\ 
+<C,R> sogor/ 
> </ und zwar  
-<C,R> abet 
+<C,R> also 
-<C, R> contradiction 
/ *<C,R> contradiction 
v^ < v ~< -<C,R> also 
*<C,R> auch 
^ 
-<C,R> abet 
~.+<C,R> ober 
~-<C,R> ouch 
V^ 
+<C,R> sondern 
-<C,R> ouch 
\ > / +<C,R> contradict ion >< / ~ -<C,R> erst recht 
\ +<C,R> aber 
-<C, R> elnmol/ 
Oberhaupt 
C = copart,  D = depart ,  R =repar t ;  
* / -  = pos i t ive/negat ive polar i ty ;  
>< = depart  and repart  are ordered:  
> = R>D (*<C,R> entails *<C,D>), 
< = R<D (?<C,D> entails +<C,R>); 
v^ = depart  and repart  are not ordered:  
v = D and R exclude each other 
(*<C,D> entails -<C,R>), 
^ = D and R do not exclude each other 
(*<C,D> and *<C,R> are compatible). 
Complex Response: The Basic DP Situation 
It is desirable to equip a computer system to execute 
the semantic theory sketched above. There are several 
possible approaches to this,  but one embodies decisive 
advantages. That is a part icu lar  generative approach. 
It is a cornerstone of the theory that discourse 
particles not only introduce requirements on contexts 
but also have a communicative necessity; that contexts 
require them in that the nonoccurrence can be as 
damaging to coherence as can the occurrence. In 
representing the model in an automatic process it 
is especially desirable to capture this aspect. 
One way to go is to have a program test surface-  
language inputs and give notices of er ror  whenever 
incoherence occurs. On this course, every piece of 
information is produced by the user, who must be 
acquainted with the theory in order  to obtain an 
interest ing reaction. Or one can have a program 
generate particles in accordance with the syntax 
and semantics of the contexts it generates. 
Again, there are more than one way to go: The 
input can be of a general nature, e.g.  a description 
of a discourse relation, or it can be specific, e.g.  
a pair  of discourse representation structures.  Either 
way, the user has to specify the context unit to be 
generated, a complex discourse with a parallel,  
as long as she addresses it d i rect ly  at some level. 
However, once such contexts are embedded in a 
communicative setting to motivate them independent ly,  
there is no need to prescr ibe anything.  There is 
another, Indirect generat ive approach which promises 
spontaneous and systematic generation of proper  
contexts,  and an interest ing application: Dialog 
systems capable of cooperative question answering. 
This is an independently motivated field of research 
in Art i f ic ial  Intell igence and in Computational 
Linguist ics,  seeking to simulate that crucial feature 
of human dialog behavior that answers are far  from 
always formed in str ict  accordance with the semantic 
structure of the question. Frequently in actual 
conversation, answerers are expected to elaborate, in 
part icu lar  on a yes or a no. A realistic yes-no query  
system will be prepared to offer additional information 
in the form of extended answers, and several systems 
in this sp i r i t  have recently been devised. 
As it happens, complex responses are key contexts 
for  discourse particles. A complete response consists 
in a sentence sequence. This means that the proper  
context category for  particles is given a pr ior i  in 
this framework. Moreover, the context unit as such, 
a con~plex discourse with an extensive parallel,  is 
given as well because a simple response is inadequate 
just  in case corresponding information on a relevant 
alternative to a focus in the query  is available to the 
responder. As far as wh- questions are concerned, 
the focus coincides with the wh- position. As regards 
yes-no questions, it may be any item suitable as a 
depart  in a part ic le scheme. It is adequate, then, to 
supplement the simple response by  the corresponding 
information. The sentence frame of the question car- 
ries over  from the direct to the indirect  answer as 
the focus (and possibly polar i ty  too) is exchanged. 
(Occasionally, the focus (depart)  is empty so that 
the alternat ive ( report )  adds a piece of information, 
typ ica l ly  an adjunct . )  Thus complex response creates 
discourse relations such as necessitate discourse 
particles in a systematic way and on independent 
grounds.  It may be considered the basic situation 
of utterance for discourse particles. 
550 
There is consensus that an extension to a response is 
appropr iate if and only if the information it conveys 
is relevant. The challenge consists in defining what 
constitutes relevance in each single case. It is a 
prime desideratum to develop general guidelines for  
selecting alternatives.  Relevant means relevant to the 
goal of the dialog, and any sensible approch will take 
Grice's Maxim of Quantity as a point of departure:  
Make your  contr ibut ion as informative as is required 
for the current  purpose of the exchange. There are 
various ways of exploi t ing this pr inciple.  One is to 
relate information to the assumed practical purpose of 
the query  so as to suggest surrogate courses of action 
in case the direct  answer is negative. Such a strategy 
is pursued by KAPLAN (1983). Alternat ives will be 
identif ied on the basis of a functional synonymy: 
- Do you hove a rnatchl 
- No, but  I hove a l ighter .  
Another approach, adopted by JOSHI et al (1984), 
is to focus on world knowledge so as to correct false 
default inferences licensed by the direct  answer by 
stating exceptions to normal courses of events. 
Alternat ives wi l l  be identif ied by  way of stereotypes: 
- Is Tweety a blrd~ 
- Yes, but  he cannot f ly .  
In the theory of scalar conversat ional  Impl lcature,  
applied to quest ion-answering by HIRSCHBERG (1985), 
the Maxim of Quant i ty is revised to refer to the 
s t rength  of an utterance: Make the strongest relevant 
claim just i f iable by evidence. The concept of relevance 
remains, but  it is anchored to l inguist ic knowledge by 
a semantic relation: Strength as surfacing in scalarity.  
~;uch a strategy embodies two clear advantages: 
A stronger version of a question, whether posit ive or 
negative, cannot rationally be known to the questioner 
in advance; and, the search for a stronger version 
can be guided by rules which must be represented in 
a reasonably intel l igent system anyhow, namely, 
lexical relations and meaning postulates. 
Semantic scales are defined by tuples of lexical items 
l inearly ordered by entailment. Consider as an example 
the pair  possible and probable and a query  Is It  
possible or Is It  probable for some proposit ion I t ,  
and assume the adjective to be the focus. The answer 
no to the former question will answer the other one 
too, as will the answer yes to the latter question. 
The answer yes to the former question will not, nor 
will the answer no to the latter,  yet a responder is 
required to make the strongest  relevant claim, and 
provided the other item counts as relevant,  there 
is a stra ightforward way to do so: 
- Yes, It  Is even probable.  
- No, It  Is not even possible. 
In fact, if the maxim is revised to require the 
responder to assess the strongest relevant proposit ion, 
two more responses emerge as adequate, again on the 
condition that the other item counts as relevant: 
- Yes, but  It  Is not probable.  
- No, but  i t  Is possible. 
In a wider sense, semantic scales are defined by 
tuples of lexical items arranged by entailment in a 
hierarchy of set inclusion and exclusion. Consider as 
an example the quadruple Scandinavian, Danish, Nor- 
wegian, and Swedish, and queries Is /t Scand/nav/an 
etc. for some referent I t ,  and assume the adjective to 
be  the focus. The answer no to the f i rst  quest ion will 
answer all the other questions too, as will the answer 
yes to any subsequent question. The converse is not 
the case, yet a responder is required to make the 
strongest relevant claim, and provided the other items 
count as relevant,  there is a stra ightforward way: 
- Yes, Cand In fact). Danish~Norwegian~Swedish. 
- No, (but~ Norwegian~Swedish~~ 
Danlsh/Swed/sh/ /Dan/sh/Norweg/on.  
- No, not Seandlnov/an at all.  
The proviso was made that the other items count as 
relevant,  as the responses were given on the maxim 
"Assert/assess the strongest proposit ion relevant".  
Note, however, that a certain measure of relevance is 
secured by the circumstance that that proposition is 
not the strongest proposition as such, corresponding 
to a contradict ion, or just any strong proposit ion, 
but one among a limited number stronger than another, 
in fact, exact ly one as polarities go, corresponding 
to a (true) sentence entail ing the question supplied 
with a sign and obtained by exchanging one item. 
So a l ink is established between the direct and the 
indirect  answer pr ior  to relevance considerations. 
Relevant alternat ive candidates are selected on the 
basis of independently accessible l inguist ic knowledge. 
The relevance question is reduced from What is rele- 
vant? to Is th/s relevant?;  the discovery procedure 
is transformed into a decision procedure, and this 
process is low-level and domain- independent.  
Items that are interconnected by a semantic relation 
such as scalar ity and hyponymy seem to tend to be 
mutually relevant so that irrelevance cases can be 
considered exceptions to the rule. It is not impossible 
that the assessment of a higher value is i r re levant 
once a value is confirmed or that the assessment of 
a lower value is uninterest ing once a value is denied, 
but it is as improbable as it is that items arr ived 
at on more pragmatic considerations are i rrelevant.  
Likewise, one cannot exclude that the confirmation of, 
say, a subkind once a superkind is confirmed or the 
confirmation of a s isterkind or the denial of a super- 
kind once a natural kind is denied is uninterest ing,  
but one can th ink it equally improbable. So regular ly 
- by  default  - when there is a scale or a hierarchy 
around the item in question, all items in that scale 
or h ierarchy will enter into the set of propositions 
at issue, then on meaning postulates, defining the 
interrelat ionships in terms of entailment, one al- 
ternat ive can be identif ied as the informative in de- 
pendence on the distr ibut ion of polarit ies in that set. 
With reference to the parametric discourse relations 
and particles paradigm presented above, the sl<etched 
cases of complex response cover f ive relation classes. 
Each of these is strongly motivated in ti le framework 
of cooperative response insofar as any complex answer 
patterned on it is appropr iate in principle.  Given a 
query  <C,D> where D is the focus, any complex 
response +/ - , * / -<C,R> where R is an alternative 
such that the parameters are chosen accordingly 
- and t ru th fu l l y  - is basically adequate. 
When moving upward on a scale, in case the stronger 
statement is ver i f ied,  the part ic le sogar applies; 
otherwise, if it  is falsi f ied, the part icle aber. 
When moving downward on a scale, in case the weaker 
statement is ver i f ied,  the part ic le abet applies again; 
otherwise, if it is falsi f ied, the part ic le elnmel. 
When moving d6wnward in a hierarchy and the state- 
ment is ver i f ied,  the specification part icle und zwar 
applies. When moving upward and the statement is 
falsif ied, the part ic le i Jberhaupt applies. Finally, 
moving sideways to ver i fy ,  sondern is the particle. 
551 
The PASSAT System 
The t iny  database query system PASSAT, consisting 
in one PROLOG II program comprising approximately 
100 clauses, is designed to demonstrate a register of 
rules regulating choices, of alternatives to lexical 
items and of particles of discourse, in accordance 
with semantic relations and in terms of polar i ty.  It 
is devised to imitate a natural performance in three 
respects : 
- Qual i ty ,  the search for the true response; 
- Quant i ty ,  the quest for the exhaustive response - 
information on a relevant alternative; 
- Coherence, the search for the discourse particle; 
and lexical entailments underl ie all three aspects. 
So while the system is pr imari ly intended as an 
i l lustration of a facet of centerpiece functions of 
German discourse particles, it is at the same time a 
smal l  but systematic model of complex response 
pr inc ip led on independently available knowledge. 
PASSAT exploits a sortal hierarchy of natural kinds 
and a scalar structure of ranked items to arr ive  at 
relevant alternative data and to select appropriate 
discourse particles to br idge the gaps, borrowing its 
terminology and database facts from shipping. Such 
computations rely on a var iety  of modules: 
- Lexicon. Here, semantic relations between and among 
lexical items, such as sortal sameness, "antonymy" 
(Dis junct iv i ty:  Difference and sortal sameness), 
hyponymy, intersect iv i ty  (cross concepts, un i t ing  
d i f ferent-sort  items), "synonymy" (comparabil ity in a 
str ict sense), and scalarity, are designated and 
defined in their  own terms. 
- Meaning postulates,  where semantic relations 
introduced in the lexicon are defined and interpreted 
by entailment, that is, in terms of (necessary) 
polar i ty in view of the sentence context. 
- A l ternat ive  relat ions,  stating conditions on which 
one item constitutes an alternat ive to another in 
terms of lexical relations and (simple) polar i ty  in 
view of the sentence context. 
- Part ic le relat ions,  stating sufficient conditions 
for the output of a certain particle in terms of 
alternat ive relations and (simple) polar i ty  in view 
of the sentence context. 
- Response ru les,  evaluat ing original queries and 
perceived and received substitute queries 
(alternatives in the sentence context) in terms of 
database facts or meaning postulates. 
- Knowledge bose, containing the minimal amount 
of pr imit ive fact (no facts that are deducible from 
other facts on meaning postulates), representing 
(predominantly posit ive) polar i ty.  
{ dampfschl f f ,  motorschl f f ,  segelschl f f  } 
{ schraubendampfer,  r a ~ d a m p ~  
{ bark ,  b r lgg ,  schoner,  vo l l sch l f f  } 
This is one of the two sortal hierarchies PASSAT is 
acquainted with. Questions to be understood by 
PASSAT are of the form 
- I s t  x P?  
where x is an individual name (that of a ship) and P 
is a predicate, e.g. a common noun, so throughout it 
is a question of a constant's membership in a set. 
First answers (ja or neln) are by a large measure 
calculated by way of meaning postulates defined on 
lexical relations like hyponymy or antonymy, and these 
same relations go in turn to compute second answers. 
Once a f i rst  response is found, PASSAT goes on to 
seek alternatives: Provided that answer was yes, it 
seeks to enhance the specificity of the predicate, 
e.g. to restr ict  the set denoted by the noun by 
moving downward in the sortal hierarchy: 
- Ist fo r tuna  segelsch l f f l  
- Jo, und zwor bark .  
I n  case polar i ty  is negative in the f i rst  run, the 
system seeks to increase informativ i ty by e.g.  
searching for the set to which the individual does 
belong (moving sideways in the sortal h ierarchy):  
- Ist preclosa bark? 
- nein,  sondern br lgg .  
These two basic principles are enriched and extended 
by a recurs lve mechanism: As soon as an alternative 
to the subject of interrogation has been determined, 
the search goes on for  an alternative to that alter-  
native, entering into the rble of the subject of 
interrogation, and so on: 
- Ist  concordla dampfsch l f f l  
- neln,  sondern segelschi f f ,  und zwar schoner.  
I I I I 
- Ist p rudent la  schoner? 
- neln,  
I 
I 
~berhaupt  n lcht  segelschl f f ,  
~ J  r 
sondern dampfschl f f  , 
I 
und zwar raddampfer.  
On the other hand, PASSAT is acquainted with an- 
other hierarchy too. The concept ship is subdivided 
on two equivalent points of view, the locomotion and 
the function :
{ f rachtsch l f f ,  possaglerschl f f ,  spezla lschl f f} 
\[ tanksch l f f ,  schi J t tgutschl f f ,  stt Jckgutschl f f  } 
552 
And composites are introduced which combine these 
two hierarchies: For a constant to be a member of 
such a set, it  must belong to both sets denoted by  
the two components: 
{ f rachtdompf er , I~ssoglerdompf  er  , motortonker  I 
And here, a context sensi t iv i ty  inside the complex 
answer has been installed (by  means of an extra 
var iable position in the al ternat ive relations) to 
permit a second and a th i rd  a l ternat ive to the f i rs t  
answer to be stalled until  the sequences of " lower- 
level" alternatives to the second and th i rd  answers 
( f i rs t  and second alternatives) are exhausted, to be 
readdressed with bocktrock lng:  
- /st p rudent io  motortonker? 
- neln,  
soneer, ch,rr. / 
und zwor roddompfer ,  \ 
t 
und ouch n lcht  tonksch l f f ,  
I 
i Jberhoupt n lcht  f rochtsch l f f ,  
I 
sondern possoglerschl f f ,  
also possoglerdompfer.  
- /st poseidon possoglerdompfer l  
- neln,  
zwor dampfsc~if f ,  I 
und zwor schroubendompfer ,  \ 
ober n lcht  possoglerschl f f ,  
I 
sondern f rochtsch l f f ,  
I 
und zwor s t i Jckgut f rachter  , 
elso f rochtdompfer .  
The conditions under which a cross-concept l ike 
f rochtdompfer  is an (ultimate) alternat ive to another 
are rather complex insofar as it requires numerous 
steps to come to a conclusion as to whether to draw 
a conclusion by use of Mso (approximating English 
so). It depends on the arrangement of both of the 
two intersected kinds, in casu, dompfschl f f  and 
f rochtsch l f f ,  in relation to the other pair ,  say, 
motorschl f f  and tonksch l f f  unit ing to motortonker .  
- /st pose/don motortonker? 
- neln,  
n lcht  motorschl f f  , 
sondern dompfsch/ f f ,  
und zwm' schroubendompfer  , 
und ouch n lcht  tonksch l f f ,  
sondern st i Jckgut f rachter .  
Thus f rochtdampfer  is no alternat ive to motortanker 
because the two corresponding component kinds 
tonksch l f f  and f rochtsch l f f  are downward specific (the 
former is more specific than the lat ter) ,  whereas the 
converse is not the case - motortonker does form an 
alternat ive to f rochtdompfer  as f rochtsch l f f  and 
tonkschl f f  are upward specific; the latter is more 
specific than the former. 
\[ gest rondet , gescheltert  \] 
This is one of two scales known to PASSAT. Again, 
comprehehsible queries are of the form Is? x P? where 
x is an individual  name and P a predicate, but this 
time the predicate is not a common noun but a (per-  
fect part ic iple) intransit ive verb.  Once a pr imary 
answer is given to a query ,  a search starts for" an 
alternat ive answer once over,  and given a posit ive 
pr imary response, the system seeks, again, to en- 
hance the specif ic ity of P, only now not by seeking 
to restr ict  the set by  downward movement with re- 
spect to a h ierarchy but by upward movement on 
the scale, to assess the next value i r respect ively 
of whether it is val id or not: 
- /st precloso gest rondet l  
- /o, sogor gescheitert .  
- /st fo r tune  gestrondet? 
- Jo, ober n lcht  gescheitert .  
Given a pr imary answer with polar i ty  negative, 
however, as before, PASSAT tries to increase the 
information value nevertheless through strengthening 
the statement, but not by searching for confirmation 
sideways or a more comprehensive denial upward in a 
hierarchy,  
- /st prudent /o  schoner? 
- neln,  f Jberhoupt n/cht sege/sch/ff ,  sondern 
dompf schl f f  . . . 
but  by assessing the next value in the downward 
direction on the scale induced by the verb:  
- Ist fo r tune  gescheltert? 
- neln,  abet gestrondet .  
- Ist  fel lc lo gescheltert? 
- neln,  n lcht  elnmol gestrondet .  
Now there is another scale known to the system: 
\ [gekenter t  , gesunken \] 
And the two scales are associated with one another in 
a structure which presents a pragmatic case of alter- 
nat iv i ty  (the only one in the system). More precisely, 
the items gekentert  and gestrandet  are in a symmetric. 
re lat ion termed syn as a pseudo-synonymy case, with 
the consequence (and purpose) that in case the - 
pr imary or secondary - answer to either one of the 
lower values - as a query  or a lternat ive - is 
negative - in the f i rs t  or the second instance, and 
the answer to the other lower value is posit ive, then 
that other lower value is treated as an alternative,  
on the consideration that in view of the higher goal 
of the query ,  i.t will be of interest: 
- Ist concordla gestrondet? 
- neln,  wohl ober gekenter t ,  sogor gesunken.  
- Ist  concordlo gescheltert? 
- nein,  n lcht  elnmol gestrondet ,  
wohl ober gekenter t ,  sogor gesunken.  
553 
Limitations 
The test of any natural- language system, whether 
generative or interpretat ive,  is in its measure of 
general i ty or f lex ib i l i ty ,  in its aptness for expansion 
and extension in various dimensions. As far as the 
present program is concerned, these dimensions can 
be identified with a range of l inguistic modules: 
Morphology (1), lexicon (2), syntax (3), semantics 
(4), and pragmatics (5). 
( I )  Deliberately, no morphology has been bui lt  into 
the system. Relevant items would have been (a) the 
indefinite article (e/n), (b) gender variants (e ln/-e)  
and (c) coherent forms (ke ln/ -e) .  These refinements 
are omitted in order not to pay undue complexity to 
such inessentials, though the implementation would be 
feasible. 
(2) The lexical items and relations are not casuistic 
in the sense that they are unrepresentative of 
hierarchies and scales in German. Parallel structures 
can be added or substituted without di f f iculty.  Only, 
real hierarchies and scales do not exist in isolation 
but in integration in a taxonomic superstructure.  One 
problem is that a concept (e.g.  sch/ff) may be open 
to specification in sequence (e.g.  Ja, und zwor segel'- 
schlff ,  und zwar vo/Ischiff) ,  another is that a con- 
cept (e.g. schiff)  may be open to specification in 
two directions (e.g.  \]o, und zwer possaglerschlff und 
motorschlff) .  Before the concept sch/ff enters into 
PASSAT in the obvious way, a method must be de- 
veloped to determine how far and which way relevance 
is to reach in each case in view of the user's interest. 
(3) Deliberately, only a minimal syntax has been built  
into the system. This is, again, to accentuate the 
central principles, but more to not create the 
impression that interesting syntax problems have been 
solved. Thus the rules of ellipsis have not been 
explored. PASSAT uses total ellipsis throughout = 
though not on del iberation, but by necessity. It could 
instead use partial ellipsis discriminately to put out 
answers like neln, zwer /st s/e eln x, und zwer eln y, 
abet s/e /st ke/n z, s/e /st iJberhaupt kein u, sondern 
e/n v = yet it would still do so not by f i r s t  
generating and then reducing complete structures but 
by producing those strings bl indly.  
{4) The system suffers a serious shortcoming in not 
assessing the lexical relations in meaning postulates 
and alternative relations in terms of the sentence 
context semantic structure. By accident, predicates 
(common nouns or verbs) occur in predicative position 
with the copula throughout,  so the semantic relation 
invar iably comes to the surface. As soon as contexts 
are introduced where the noun e.g. serves to restr ict 
quantif ication over a b inary relation, or,  as a 
simplification, it is an argument of a b inary relation, 
as in hat fortunotus e/ne br igg (compatible with 
fortunetus hot elne bark) ,  the relation ceases to 
carry semantic relevance, and the system must con- 
sider some semantic representation to judge whether 
meaning postulates and alternative relations apply. 
(5) The pragmatic open problem lies in where the 
focus lies, more exactly,  to which component of the 
question any alternative can be considered relevant 
in particle terms, what part is the plausible depart 
in the f i rst  instance. At the current  state of the 
system, the focus is located once and for all in the 
one-place predicate P, yet it is a commonplace that 
yes-no questions are systematically ambiguous insofar 
as their  topic-focus structure has consequences for 
what constitutes a proper substitute, namely, a 
sentence where the topic stays the same and the focus 
changes. Thus it could be that a question l ike Ist 
concordla elne bark is intended to, in the event of a 
negative response, elicit not a continuation like 
sondern eln schoner but an extension l ike ober 
fortuno Ist elne - for example, in case the higher goal 
of the query is to ascertain that there is a bark 
available for a higher purpose still. In principle 
there are means in a language to posit focus, and 
those means may be syntactical, l ike word order or 
clefting. Such are not, however, available to 
PASSAT, being a German-interfaced system, so 
without the phonology Germans use it is necessary 
to exploit  a memory of past exchange, so as to 
address the higher goal of the query direct ly.  
References 
HIRSCHBERG, J. (1985) A Theory of Scaler 
Impllcoture. Univ. of Pennsylvania diss. 
JOSHI, A./B.WEBBER/R.WEISCHEDEL. (1984) 
"Preventing False Inferences", in Proceedings 
of COLING 18tI. 
KAPLAN, J. (1983) "Cooperative Responses from a 
Portable Natural Language Database Query System". 
in Brady/Berwick (eds.) :  Computational Models of 
Discourse, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 167-208. 
SP~B~, K.J. (1988) A Model for Discourse Particles. 
LILOG Report n, Stuttgart :  IBM. 
554 
