Designing and testing linguistic development phases in a 
machine translation project 
........................... 
Bente Maegaard, 
Institute for applied 
and mathematical linguistics 
University of Copenhagen 
Njalsgade 96 
DK-2300 Copenhagen S 
Denmark 
In the first sections of the paper the design of a 
scheme for building up linguistic coverage in a 
multi-lingual machine translation project (EUROTRA) 
is discussed and a solution is proposed which also 
takes into account the extensibility of the system, 
and in the last section the aspect of testing is 
briefIy discussed. 
i~ The environment? 
This paper concerns a concrete project, EUROTRA, 
but the problems described are of a general nature. 
Those basic characteristics of EUROTRA, which are 
relevant here, are the following. 
EUROTRA aims at producing a pre-industrial 
prototype for machine translation between the 9 
languages of the European Community. The vocabulary 
to be covered is around 20.000 lexical items within 
specific text types a~ within a specific subject 
field. 
EUROTRA is divided into phases, each with their 
sub-goal. The goal of the second phase is the 
development of a small-scale translation system 
(all languages), for a limited vocabulary (2500 
items), based on a corpus text. The goal of the 
third (and final) phase is the development of a 
more general system (not corpus based, extenslhle) 
with the coverage mentioned above. 
NOTE: In this descr ipt ion  we have on ly  ment ioned 
the goa ls  of l in~_vistic deve lopment ,  and 
de l iberate ly  left out a l l  other aspects of the 
project (research, sof tware etc.). 
It should be mentioned as well, that the treatment 
of the Spanish and the Portuguese languages is a 
l ittle delayed, because Spain and Portugal joined 
the Community after EUROTRA had started. 
The project can thus be character ised by three 
important features: 
i) median-scale 
2) extensible 
3) imllti-iingual 
A fourth one is that it is corpus-based at one 
stage, but has to deve lop  into a more general  
system? 
The fact that the project is medium-s ized means 
that it is necessary to define various development 
phases for the linguistic coverage - it cannot be 
built in one single block. 
Furthermore such an approach whereby the full task 
is broken down into smal le r  tasks, supports the 
f inal  goal that the system should  be extensib le,  
because the extensibility is built-in and is being 
tested already during the development. 
The fact that the project is a mult i- l insual ma- 
chine t rans la t ion  project impl ies that for each 
language the same or equivalent phenomena should be 
treated at the same time, so that t rans la t ion  is 
possible. 
Below we wil l  describe the development of the lin- 
gu ist ic  coverage in the second phase of the pro- 
ject. 
In the second phase we are working with one single 
"corpus" text which exists in a l l  the 9 languages 
(Danish, Dutch, Engl ish,  French, Gerlaan, Greek, 
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish). In fact the goal of 
the second phase is to create a machine translation 
system which is ab le  to t rans late  this text. The 
text is the Commission of the European Communities" 
proposa l  for the ESPRIT programme, some sample 
texts are shown below, to g ive  an idea of the 
similarities and the differences. 
One can e.g. not ice that par t ic ip le  construct ions 
may correspond to re la t ive  c lauses  (in some 
languages, llke English, there is a choice between 
the two, in others, l ike Danish, on ly  one is 
possible),  one can a lso  notice the complex  use of 
future and modality in wi l l  need, devront (avoir), 
skal  (have), braucht. These are just typical  and 
wel l -known examples  of differences/slmilarities 
between the languages treated. 
Danish 
De, som er involveret i udvikling og anvendelse af 
programmel, skal have adgang til progranmleludvik- 
lingsverkt@jer i et gradvis mere integreret milj~, 
og de, som harmed datamatst@t~et  konstrukt ion 
(CAD) .... 
Those invo lved  with the deve lopment  and use of 
software wil l  need access to software development 
tools, in a progressively more integrated environ- 
ment, and those involved with computer aided design 
(CAD) .... 
French 
Les personnes s'occupant du d6ve loppement  et de 
l~t i l i sat ion du logiciel devront avoir ace,s aux 
outils de d~veloppemeut de plus in t~r~ et celles 
in t~ress~es  par la concept ion  ass i s t~e par 
ord inateur  (CAO) .... 
German 
Wer an der Entwicklung und dem Einsatz von Software 
beteiligt ist, braucht im Rahmen eines schrittweise 
starker integrierten Umfeldes den Zugriff zu Soft- 
ware-Entwieklungswerkzeugen. Wer slch mit dem 
rechnergest~tzten Entwurf (CAD) ... befasst ... 
2. The definition of linguistic coverage. 
======================================== 
A very obvious way of ensuring correspondence be- 
tween the phenomena treated in the various 
languages is of course to treat the first n (n = 
5/10/25) pages in each language (extensional defi- 
nition of coverage), because it is given that the 
texts are equivalent. But such a method would have 
nothing to do with designing, as one would get a 
random collection of linguistic phenomena. Further- 
more the extension to a greater coverage (e.g. next 
20 pages) can normally not be done in a systematic 
way (because the point of departure was not syste- 
matle). It is well-known that this working method 
has several disadvantages: it gets easily out of 
control, so that error correction becomes im- 
387 
possible, and secondly, the actual coverage of the 
system becomes unknown. 
Therefore we have made a description of what the 
grammars of the various sub-perlods should cover 
(an intensional definition). It follows from the 
discussion above that such a definition of the 
coverage of gray,mr and vocabulary has to meet the 
following conditions: 
I )  it has to describe equivalent phenomena In 
the various languages 
2) it should be possible to extend the 
linguistic coverage, without throwing away 
(too much of) the grammars and dictionaries 
already produced. 
Point 2) above led to suggesting that in the first 
period one should concentrate on developing a sys- 
tem contaning the sceleton of a sentence and its 
main building blocks. Therefore the first defini- 
tion of linguistic coverage covers main clauses 
with no dependents (with one exception). Such sen- 
tences are of course quite simple, but it should be 
noted that the main clauses may contain adverbials 
in all possible positions, and all arguments in all 
possible orders. The idea is that e.g. adverbial 
"slots" in a next version of the grammar is then 
expanded to be filled not only by adverbs, but by 
adverbial clauses. 
An overview of the scheme made for the development 
of the linguistic coverage in the second phase of 
EUROTRA is given in the appendix. In the following 
we will co~ent  on the reasoning behind it. 
At t~ constituent level we have first af ail the 
noun phrases. All types of noun phrases are treated 
in the first round, i.e. all types of modification 
of the noun itself or any of its modifiers inclu- 
ding participles. This inclusion of participles 
entails the inclusion of relative clauses in order 
to make translation possible, ef. translation from 
French into Danish of the above examples 
s'occupant, int~ress~es. 
In the first round no control verbs are treated, as 
this would add the complication of empty elements 
and co-indexing. By the same rule no modal verbs 
are treated in the first period. Auxiliary verbs 
however are accepted, as they together with the 
main verb form one unit at a later stage of analy- 
sis. 
The fact that modal verbs are excluded has led to 
exclude also the future tense, - as the fu ture  
auxiliary is in many languages a modal verb. As for 
other verb tenses the following are treated: only 
indicative, both active and passive, present and  
past tense, and tenses made by combination of pre -~ 
sent and past tense of auxiliaries with participles 
(~ perfect, pluperfect). We do not include sub- 
junctive, and not infinitives. 
In order to avoid co-indexing, also some of the 
pronouns have been omitted: personal and demonstra- ! 
tive. The pronouns included are: possessive, rela-! 
rive, ref lexive,  indefinite, and a l ladjec{ival  
pronouns (not because these do not involve co -  
indexing, but because missing co-indexing is hoped 
to be less damaging in these cases). 
In the second period the following complications 
are added: Subordinate clauses~ adverbial as well 
as nominal. These clauses may take the place o f  
simple adverbials or noun phrases of the first 
period. This means that the grammar rules speci- 
fying sentence patterns has to be slightly modi- 
fied. 
388 
Furthermore participle constructions with 
sentential function are added. As mentioned above 
participles modifying a noun were part of the first 
period. Control verbs and infinitives are also 
added, and simple coordination (coordination of 
noun phrases, adjective phrases, adverbs, preposi- 
tional phrases). 
Participles, control constructions and coordination 
all require empty eleraents and co-indexing. Correct 
treatment of relative and other pronouns also 
involve the use of a co-indexing mechanism. 
Furthermore, as a complication to noun phrases and 
adjective phrase@, sentential arguments for nouns 
and adjectives are added. 
The last type of grammatical construction, which is 
added in the second period, is verbless sentences 
(headlines, titles etc.). As sentences they have a 
different grammar, but also as noun phrases they 
may have a slightly different syntax. 
Finally, in the third period laodal verbs and other 
modal expressions are included, as well as various 
types of movement phenomena. It has been foreseen 
also to include treatment of parehthetical 
insertions and appositions, and a better treatment 
of pronominal reference, but this may have to be 
postponed to the third phase of EUROTRA. 
2a. Comment: Levels of description 
In the above short survey we have been using only 
syntactic and morpho-syntactic criteria. But as any 
other natural language project EUROTRA operates 
with deeper levels of description as well. 
The definition of the linguistic coverage has to 
take phenomena at these levels into account as 
well. Ilere we may take the verbal tense / verbal 
time as an example. 
In the first period only main clauses are treated 
and only some tenses and only at the morpho-syntac- 
tic level (awaiting a semantic legislation for the 
representation of time). In the second period the 
time legislation , i.e. the deep representation of 
the tenses, is implemented, and in the third period 
it is extended to subordinate clauses at the 
surface as well as the deep levels. 
This is of course one way of defining linguistic 
coverage. It could be argued that a more reasonable 
approach would be to start from the interface 
structure definitien which is common for all 
languages and define the coverage in terms of this. 
We find at least two arguments against this: first 
.of all the practical one that a full definition of 
the interface structure was not ready when the 
first implementation started. Secondly, the 
l%nguistic data which have to be treated are ex- 
pressed as surface text, and it seems more reason- 
able to define coverage systematically in terms of 
this surface representation, than in terms of the 
abstract representation. 
2b. Lexical coverage 
An aspect of linguistic coverage which has not been 
treated above is the lexical coverage. The lexical 
items are of course taken from the corpus of the 
second phase of EUROTRA. But a definition of lexi- 
cal coverage consists in more than just defining 
the vocabulary: it also consists in defining the 
content of the dictionary, the number of readings 
to be distinguished, the feature system to be used. 
The reason that the vocabulary and its number of 
readings cannot be seen as being defined by the 
corpus text itself is that this would be too spec i -  
fic and hence too unsystematic, i.e. not easily 
extensible. Here the question of extensibility may 
be a little different than for the grammar. Exten- 
sibility of a lexicon in terms of adding new items, 
using the same features as in an earlier version of 
the dictionary, presents no problem. But when the 
addition rather consists in adding new distinguish- 
ing features, i.e. new readings, all the relevant 
iexica\] entries have to be checked for modifica- 
tion. The only measures which can be taken to 
facilitate this type of extension of the dictionary 
is to use a reasonably well-structured set of 
:features, so that extensions may concern only one 
feature or a few features at a time. 
3. Concluding remarks on extensibility. 
======================= ....... 
While not claiming that the above defined scheme of 
progressively growing linguistic coverage is tile 
only possible one, we believe to have sllown that it 
is a reasonable one, with respect to the languages 
involved, and with respect to extensibility. The 
modifications of the grammar whicb are necessary 
when going from one period to the next can in most 
cases be made very locally. Take as an example the 
extension of a noun phrase to comprise sentential 
complement; this can be done almost solely by addi- 
tions to the grammar, but obviously a few modifica- 
tions a~ the existing grammar cannot be avoided. 
Furthermore we want to add some comments on the 
possible definition of the linguistic coverage in 
the third phase of EUROTRA (and maybe beyond). It 
may well be that, taking into account the complexi- 
ty of I:he system~ and the multitude of languages, 
it will be more revealing to define the linguistic 
coveragt~ in a negative way: by stating the phenome- 
na which are not treated. Internally however, in 
the project, and in particular in the language 
groups, the expllcit, intensional definition of 
coverage will always be needed, and will be tile 
basis ol the linguistic design. 
Before we leave this section on definition of 
linguistic coverage we coul.d add information on the 
actual status of implementation: the first period 
coverage was obtained for most imlguages during 
spring 1987, second period will be obtained early 
1988, and third period mid 1988, for all tile main 
modules: analysis, transfer and generation. 
4. Testing 
This is a very brief sketch of the types of testing 
needed to cheek tile linguistic coverage. The type 
of testing which is adequate is of course dependent 
on the way in which the coverage has been defined: 
If tile extensional definition of a corpus has been 
adopted, then tile testing is very simple: check if 
the corpus can be treated adequately. 
If an inteusional definition is adopted like the 
one suggested above, the question of testing be- 
comes less simple, because the claims of the system 
are more general: all sentences described by tile 
grmnmar and the lexicon should be treated adequate- 
ly, and such a set of sentences will normally be 
infinite. 
}\[ere it seems reasonable to combine two approaches: 
first of all, the conduction of a systematic test, 
whereby all types of constituents, and a reasonable 
amount of combinations of constituents are tested. 
And secondly, also to test tlle grammars and dletio~ 
naries developed against "real" text. This last 
testing allows for random combinations that were 
not takea into account by those devising the syste- 
matic test. All this testing should be done after 
the implementors" testing is performed, and by a 
different group of people. 
Ackn9wled~ement 
The definition of the linguistic coverage of the 
second phase of EUROTRA was made by Charlotte 
Touhro (then: EUROTRA-DK, now: ALPS, Switzerland) 
and the present author. 
We also want to thank the many collaborators in 
EUROTRA who consented on this definition, thereby 
improving it. 
Reference 
Alan Meiby 
p.104-106. 
(no title), Proceedings of COLING86, 
Appendix: schematic overview of the elements of the 
sub-periods. 
Period i. 
Sentences containing one main clause with a verb 
- in any tense except for morphologically ex- 
pressed future 
- in active or passive 
- in indicative. 
Constituents that are themselves not sentences, 
except for modifiers with verbal governor in a 
noun phrase (participles). 
Constituents that do not contain sentences, except 
for strictly subordinated, modifying relative 
clauses and partieipai constructions. 
Fully expanded noun phrases except for appositions 
(this includes all kinds of modification with 
adjectival phrases, numerals~ prepositional 
phrases etc.). 
All pronouns except for personal and demonstrative 
pronouns .  
All adjectives, including prouominal adjectives. 
All adverbs. 
Coordination, only for simple noun phrases. 
Period 2 (extensions). 
Subordinate clauses, adverbial and nominal. 
Infinitives governed by control verbs, and "free" 
infinitives (infinitives governed by modal verbs 
are excluded). 
Participles with sentential function. 
Sentential arguments for nouns and verbs. 
Coordination of noun phrases, adjective phrases, 
adverbs, prepositional phrases, but excluding verb 
phrases and clauses. 
Verbless sentences. 
Time in laain clauses 
Period 3 (extensions). 
Modality. 
Tilae in subordinate clauses. 
Hovement. 
Apposition, parenthetical insertion. 
Pronominal reference. 
389 
