MORPHO-ASSISTANT: 
The Proper Treatment of Morphological Knowledge 
Kir i l  S IMOV,  Ga l ia  ANGELOVA,  E lena  PASKALEVA 
L ingu is t ic  Mode l l ing  Laboratory ,  Center  for In for lnat ics  
and  Computer  Technology,  Bu lgar ian  Academy of Sciences 
Acad.  G. Bonchev  Str.  25a, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.  
1 Computer  Morphology of 
Slavonic Languages: State of 
the Art 
One of the main features of Slavonic languages i their 
complex morphological structure. Unfortunately, cur- 
rent industrial software in this field (e.g.morphologieal 
components ofspell checkers) supports only partial an- 
guage models (and reflects as a rule the more or less 
primitive level of the morphological knowledge of its de- 
velopers). In the authors' opinion, the time has come 
to develop advanced software products with the follow- 
ing capabilities: 
1. An exhaustive set of linguistic data. In this w~' 
the kernel of the products could serve as a com- 
puter  normat ive  morpho logy  and could even 
be built into professional laboratory systems de- 
veloped at Research Centers and Universities; 
2. Support of large and relatively complete machine- 
readable dictionaries. In this way the user would 
only have to add some specialized terms - if 
needed. 
The development of industrial products based on ex- 
austive morphological models will stop the stream of 
linguistically incomplete implementations. 
2 A Brief Descript ion of Bul- 
garian Morphology 
Like the other Slavonic languages, Bulgarian is a highly 
inflexional language - one lexeme produces an average 
of 10 different wordforms; in the discussed system there 
exist 58 types of alternation and 102 inflexional types 
(46 of them concern nouns). The verb paradigm is 
especially rich - up to 224 fbrms (synthetic and am 
alytic). The numerous defects of the paradigm create 
:special diificulties: for example, perfective verbs reduce 
their paradigm by either 10, or 19 members (depending 
on their transitivity). The numerous non-canonical de- 
fects, determined by the lexico-semantic characteristics 
of the individual lexicon unit can only be described ex- 
plicitly in the dictionary. The description of Bulgarian 
morphology becomes even more complicated because 
of the existence of boundary phenomena bet.ween word 
inflexion and derivation which are treated differently in 
various descriptions depending o.n the accepted volume 
of the paradigm. Such phenomena re the formation 
of participles in the verb paradigm, the formatioi~ of 
"semianalytical" comparison degrees of adjectives and 
the formation of aspectual pairs (grammaticalized and 
lexicalized). 
In our opinion, a computer model of such a com- 
plex morphology can be elaborated only by qualified 
linguists, as far as the architect.ure of morphological 
knowledge is concerned, and it s;houtd work on a sut;- 
fieiently large lexicon base. Since Bulgarian lexicog- 
raphy does not possess its own Zalizniak \[4\] so far. 
the morphological basis of the system is t'cmncted on 
all avalaible normative reference books on morphcA- 
ogy (orthographic dictionnaries, normative gramn,ars 
and works on Bulgarian inttexion). We hop,:, that the 
MORPHO-ASSISTANT system will serve as a basis for 
future implementations and research. 
3 A Brief Descript ion of 
MORPHO-ASS ISTANT 
MORPHO-ASSISTANT is based on a Bulgarian mor- 
phology model of a' classificational type where the 
morphological data are organized in three main sets 
(stem lexicon, endings lexicon and stem alternation 
patterns). The endings lexicon can be rebuilt as a 
li,~t of inflexional types as well, where every inflexional 
type is a list of letter values 0f the inflexions of ~ach 
member of the paradigm. The processing of Bulgariat~ 
word-inflexion is performed with the help of two basic 
455 
i 
operations - concatenation of the morphological and 
the lexical element (in inflexion) and eventual trans- 
formation of substrings within the lexical element (in 
alternation). 
MORPHO-ASSISTANT provides five main func- 
tions: 
1. Analysis (recognition) of an arbitrary wordform 
(certain types of mistakes, due to incorrect con- 
catenation and/or transformation of the letter 
substrings being processed; hypotheses about the 
source of incompleteness of user's knowledge are 
being built when the causes of the mistakes are 
analysed). 
2. Synthesis of an arbitrary form or a group of forms 
depending on parameters given by the user. 
3. An information-retrieval system in the area of Bul- 
garian morphology. In fact it reflects the classifi- 
cational principles which served as a basis for the 
creation of the morphological model. 
4. Support of user dictionaries. 
5. Test-creation facility. This function of the pack- 
age can assist teachers and professors in devis- 
ing and distributing drills in courses of second- 
language learning. This function of MORPHO- 
ASSISTANT is based on the kernel of the system 
realizing analysis and synthesis of arbitrary forms. 
4 MORPHO-ASS ISTANT - A 
Second Language Learning 
System 
Once such an adequate and complete model of the mor- 
phology is developed and a big basic dictionary is filled, 
one is tempted to model the acquisition and the usage 
of this knowledge for the purposes of teaching. It is on 
these principles that the teaching part of MORPHO- 
ASSISTENT is based. It works in two modes: 
? mode 1: the user of the system is a teacher prepar- 
ing a variety of tests for his students learning Bul- 
garian and Russian; 
? mode 2: the user of the system is a student per- 
forming ready test elements. 
\?e will consider here the first mode. 
The user is provided with two basic tools: the com- 
plete computer model of morphology realized by the 
first two basic functions of the system MORPttO- 
ASSISTANT (organized in an already determined part, 
of knowledge) and special test-generation riented tools 
which use undetermined knowledge in the designing. 
The former provide the basic building material and the 
latter provide the rules for its assembly when different 
types of tests are built according to its conception of 
the acquisition and testing of the morphological knowl- 
edge. Such are for example: 
? the simplest classical tasks on morphologicM anal- 
ysis or synthesis of a given form or a string of forms 
(which can be a sentence as well). This type of 
drills examines the student's ability to analyse or 
synthesize wordforms comparing directly the re- 
sults with those of the same operation, realized by 
the first two functions of MORPHO-ASSISTANT. 
For the testing of knowledge (in mode 2, which will 
not be discussed here), also used are the created 
diagnostic tools for pointing out the types of mis- 
takes when wordforms are generated incorrectly 
(see above III). Thus the computer has actually 
accepted the functions of a tester of knowledge. 
In the design o f  the testing part these functions 
can be enriched only by entering rammatical in- 
formation. We have in mind that the user may 
to some extent change the name of the grammat- 
ical categories (e.g. "present ense", "pres.tense", 
"present", "pres." or "pr.") and the order of their 
coocurence in the set of grammatical features for 
a given wordform. 
? a second typeof  drills tests the morphological 
knowledge(already situated in the framework of 
the given sentence). Thestandard method in this 
kind of testing is to give an inputsentence, in which 
certain wordforms are replaced by the basicforms. 
At the output hese wordforms hould be restored. 
These arethe well-known tasks of the type "Put 
the given words into thenecessary form." Here, as 
well, the computer entirely replaces the teacher in 
checking the student's work, because it restores 
theMready given wordforms in mode 1. To this 
kind of drills alsobelong the drills in which the 
student corrects the spellingmistakes deliberately 
made by the teacher. 
in a third type of drills certain morphological char- 
acteristics are replaced correctly by others (for 
example, achange in the grammaticM person or 
number of the narrator, achange of the verb tense 
in a given story). Similarly to the previous type 
of drills, the organisation of knowledge goes be- 
yond the framework of the first two functions of 
MORPHO-ASSISTANT, although an intelligent 
help-system for diagnostics and correction of mis- 
takes is provided, which can be considered as a. 
456 2 
superstructure over the diagnostics of MORPHO- 
ASSISTANT. 
? the :fourth type of drills differs in principle from 
the others in the degree of grammatical abstrac- 
tion ~ while the first three types deal with con- 
crete lexieal units and their grammatical charac- 
teristics, the fourth type of drills works with gram- 
matical models of characteristics of a certain series 
of words in the sentence connected through a cer- 
tain mechanism. These series form a so- called 
unification string consisting of two elements - uni- 
fying (input) and unified (output) elemenl; (they 
can consist of more than one word). The pattern 
which forms new unification strings is given by 
concrete wordforms and the test generating sys- 
tem itself finds the elements ubjected to unifica- 
tion. Such a word string can express phenomena 
such as syntactic agreement of any type, correct. 
generation of a pronoun from its antecedent etc. 
Such drills are usually formulated as follows: "Pill 
in the blanks with the suitable words". The drill 
can provide a list of lexemes in their basic forms 
or give the opportunity to choose freely the lexical 
units (relying on the :rich lexicon of the system). 
In fact, the mechanism connecting the elements of 
the unification string models phenomena from linguis- 
tic levels higher than morphology - syntax (as in the 
case with ~greement) and even semantics. In the latter 
we can imagine for example the connection between 
the verb tense and a given type of temporal adverbs 
(under the condition that the entry of the adverb in- 
eludes its type), the connection between some verbs 
and pronouns pointing near or distant objects. With 
the extension of the volume of the phenomena in the 
unification string it becomes more difficult to formulate 
them with the help of the grammatical categories of 
the wordform. The extension of the linguistic scope of 
these tasks depends to a great extent on the user's skill 
to formulate .g. the syntactic dependencies through 
the morphological categories. 
Providing the user only with the "shell" of the test el- 
ements, the system works with a kind of undetermined 
:morphological knowledge, tending to get adapted in 
this way to the cognitive model of the user who gen- 
erates the test. Thus its teaching effects directly de- 
pend on the teacher's ability to find the correspondence 
among the elements of the various levels of language. 
lexemes \[3\]. Our future aim is to develop a series of 
products assisting the use and the study of Slavonic 
morphology. An analogous product is being developed 
for Russian in cooperation with the Institute of l~us- 
sian language of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR; 
the basic dictionary of the system, based on Zalizniak's 
dictionary \[4\], contains nearly 100 000 lexemes. A pos- 
sibility for simultaneous work with both languages will 
also be supported. 
The test generation system doesn't require an orien- 
tation towards a concrete language. The only restric- 
tion on its reasonable application is that the processed 
language must have a sufllciently developed morphol- 
ogy of the inflexional type. 
We also plan to develop a computer model of the 
derivational morphology of Bulgarian based on the lex- 
icon of MORPttO-ASSISTANrC. 
References  
. Paskaleva,  E. Bulgarian Morphology in Logic 
Programming.- Sludies i~ Honor of BerTzard 
Vauquois. Linguistica Com.pulazionale, Pisa, 1989 
(to appear). 
2. Avgust inova,  T. and  Paskaleva,  E. Com- 
putational Modelling of lnflexional Morphology 
(Based on Bulgarian and /{ussian l_)ata).- ?'lavica 
Helsingienaia, 1989, Vol. 10. 
3. MOI{PHO-ASSISTANT (brief descript.ion). \] 9S9 
Humanities Computing Yearbook, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
4. 3aa~3Hgi~ A .A .  i'paMga'r~\[qec~Hi~ cJIo~:~l)F, 
pyccl<oro ~i3bI~a: CJiol~oI~3Menem~e. M., 1977. 
5 Future Developments 
MOI%PHO-ASSISTANT will be offered on the software 
market with a basic dictionary of 60 000 Bulgarian 
3 457 
