Ambiguity resolution and the retrieval of idioms: 
two approaches. 
Erik-Jan van der Linden Wessel Kraaij 
Inst i tute for  Language Techno logy  and A I  
T i lburg Un ivers i ty  
PO box 90153 
5000 LE  T i lburg 
The Nether lands  
E-mai l :  vd l inden@kub.n l  
Abstract 
When an idiomatic expression is encountered uring 
natural anguage processing, the ambiguity between its 
idiomatic ~md non-idiomatic meaning has to be resolved. 
Rather than including both meanings in further process- 
ing, a conventionality-principle could be applied. This 
results in best-first processing of the idiomatic analysis. 
Two models are discussed fot the lexical representation f 
idioms. One extends the notion continuation class from 
two-level morphology, the other is a localist, connec- 
tionist model. The connectionist model has an important 
advantage over the continuation class model: the conven- 
tionality principle follows naturally from the architecture 
of the conneetionist model. 
Keywords: idiom processing, ambiguity resulution, two- 
level morphology, conneetionism. 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we discuss the resolution of the ambiguity 
between the non-idiomatic and the idiomatic reading of a 
phrase that is possibly idiomatic. A choice between these 
readings can be made using various kinds of linguistic 
information, but we claim that it can be made on the basis 
of the mere fact that one of the analyses is idiomatic, and 
that this choice does not have to be stipulated explicitly, 
but follows naturally from the architecture of the lexicon 
and the retrieval process, if an appropriate model of the 
lexicon is used. 
In section (2), we firstly state our approach to natural 
language processing (NLP) in general. Next (3), we 
document he claim that idioms should be store'l in 
the lexicon as holistic lexical units, and discuss the 
processing of idioms (4). Then we present wo models 
for the lexical representation a d retrieval of idioms: one 
extends the notion continuation class of the two-level 
model (Koskenniemi 1983) (5); the other is a simple 
localist connectionist model (6). 
In this paper we limit ourselves to aspects relevant for 
our 'lexical' approach. We will not discuss such issues 
as semantic decomposability (Gibbs and Nayak 1989) of 
idioms (but see van der Linden 1989, for a model of 
incremental syntactic/semantic processing of idioms in 
Categorial Grammar, and a more elaborate discussion of 
the issues mentioned in (3.1)). 
2 Generalapproach to NLP 
In case of ambiguity, the NL processor has to choose 
between a number of possible analyses. In order to 
determine which one is most likely, all analyses can 
be examined using a breadth-first or depth-first strategy. 
However, this results in a time and space consuming pro- 
cess. Incremental best-first examination of 'promising' 
analyses eems more appropriate, and seems to be a prop- 
erty of human language processing (cf. Thibadeau, Just 
and Carpenter 1982). However, this approach leaves us 
with the question what criteria should be applied to select 
one of the analyses for further examination. In this paper 
we examine one aspect of this general question, namely 
the choice between an idiomatic and a non-idiomatic 
analysis. 
3 Idioms and the lexicon 
3.1 Linguistics 
Within the literature 'Traditional wisdom dictates that an 
idiom is by definition aconstituent orseries of constituents 
where interpretation is not a compositional function of the 
interpretation f its parts.' (G~dar et al 1985, p 327). 1 
Rather than giving a definition of idioms that states what 
the meaning of an idiom isn't, we prefer a definition that 
states what the meaning is (van tier Linden 1989). 
Idioms are multi-lexemic expressions, the 
meaning of which is a property of the whole 
expression. 
1cf. Wood (1986): an idiom is 'wholly non-compositional i  
meaning'. 
1 245  
Some attempts have, however, been made to assign the 
meaning of an idiom to the parts of the idiom. These can 
roughly be divided in two: 
- assignment of the idiomatic meaning of the expression 
to one of the parts of the idiom, and no meaning to the 
other part (Ruhl, cited in Wood 1986). In the case of 
kick the bucket, the meaning die is assigned to kick, and 
no meaning to the other part. This raises the question 
however, why one cannot say Pat rested the bucket o 
mean Pat rested (Wasow et al 1983). 
- assignment of idiomatic interpretations to all parts. 
Compositional combination of these meanings results in 
an idiomatic meaning for the whole expression (Gazdar 
et al 1985). This analysis has a number of problems. 
G~dar et al use partial functions to avoid combination 
of an idiomatic functor with a non-idiomatic argument, 
but do not explain how to avoid combination of a non- 
idiomatic functor with an idiomatic argument. In our view 
this can only be solved by introducing partial arguments, 
to our knowledge a non-existing notion, or by accepting 
that all functors are partial, which is not common in 
linguistics. 
We conclude that the meaning of an idiom is a property 
of the whole expression, and should be represented in the 
lexicon. 2 
3.2 Psycholinguistics 
The same observation arises from psycholinguistic re- 
search. Idioms are stored and accessed as lexical items, 
not from some special list that is distinct from the lexicon 3
(Swinney and Cutler 1979). Furthermore, idioms are 
stored as holistic entries in the mental exicon (Swinney 
and Cutler 1979; 'Lancker and Canter 1980; Lancker, 
Canter and Terbeek 1981; cf. the notion 'configuration' 
in Cacciari and Tabossi 1988). 
4 Processing idioms 
Phrases consisting of idioms can in most cases be in- 
terpreted non-idiomatically as well. a It has however 
frequently been observed that very rarely an idiomatic 
phrase should in fact be interpreted non-idiomatically 
(Koller 1977, p. 13; Chafe 1968, p. 123; Gross 1984, 
p. 278; Swinney 1981, p. 208). Also, psycholin- 
guistic research indicates that in case of an ambiguity, 
there is clear preference for the idiomatic reading (Gibbs 
1980; Schweigert and Moates 1988). We will refer to 
the fact that phrases hould be interpreted according to 
the idiomatic, non-compositional, lexical, conventional, 
meaning, as the 'conventionality' principle. 5 If this 
principle could be modeled in an appropriate way, this 
2Although other opinions exist (Pesetsky 1985). 
gAs has been defended by Bobrow and Bell (1973). 
4Exccptions are idioms that contain words that occur in idioms only 
(spin and span, queer the pitch), and ungrammatical idioms (trip the 
light fantastic). 
SThe same can be observed for compounds: these are not interpreted 
compositionally, but according to the lexical, conventional meaning 
(Swinney 198 |). 
would be of considerable help in dealing with idioms: 
as soon as the idiom has been identified, the ambiguity 
can be resolved and 'higher' processes do not have to 
examine the various analyses. 
There is one more issue, that requires ome consideration: 
when can and does an incremental processor start looking 
for idioms? From psycholinguistic research it appears 
that idioms are not activated when the 'first' (content) 
word is encountered (Swinney and Cutler 1979). There 
is, from the computational point of view, no need to start 
'looking' for idioms, when only the first word has been 
found 6: that would result in increase of the processing 
load at higher levels. 
Stock  In Stock's (1989) approach to ambiguity resolu- 
tion, firstly, the idiomatic and the non-idiomatic analysis 
are processed inparallel. An external scheduling function 
gives priority to one of these analyses. Secondly, Stock 
starts looking for idioms when the 'first' word has been 
encountered. As we have stated, both increase the load 
on higher processes. 
5 An extension of the notion 
continuation class 
Lex ica i  representat ion  Lexical entries in two-level 
morphology are represented in a trie structure, which 
enables incremental lookup of strings. A lexical entry 
consists of a lexical representation, linguistic" informa- 
tion, and a so-called continuation class, which is a list 
of sublexicons "the members of which may follow" 
(Koskenniemi 1983, p. 29) the lexical entry. In the 
continuation class of an adjective, one could for instance 
find a reference tO a sublexicon containing comparative 
endings (ibid. p. 57). An obvious extension is to 
apply this notion beyond the boundaries of the word. A 
continuation class of an entry A could contain references 
to the entries that form an idiom with A. An example is 
(la) (Note that we use a graphemic ode for the lexical 
representations). 
(1) 
(a) 
k-i-c-k*---b-u-c-k-e-t* 
h-a-b-i-t* 
\e-e-l-s* 
6One might argue that words that only occur in idioms could activate 
the idioms when encountered as 'first' word. There is however only 
psyeholinguistic evidence that this occurs in a highly semantically 
determined contexts (Cacciari and Tabossi 1988). 
246 2 
(b) 
DO read a le t te r  
IF word  has been  found THEN 
IF th is  word  forms an id iom 
wi th  prev ious  word(s)  
THEN make id iom in fo rmat ion  
ava i lab le  to syn /sem process  
ELSE make word  in fo rmat ion  
ava i lab le  to syn /sem process  
UNT IL  no more  le t te rs  in input.  
Algorithm A simple algorithm is used to find idioms (in 
(lb) the relevant fragment of the algorithm is represented 
in pseudocode). The result of the application of the 
algorithm is that linguistic inlbrmation associated with 
lhe idioms is supplied to the syntactic/semantic processor. 
The linguistic information includes the precise lorm of 
lhe idiom, the possibilities for modification etc. (cf. van 
tier Linden 1989). 
A toy implementation f the lexicon structure and the 
zdgorithm has been made in C. 
6 A connectionist model 
~l'he second model we present here for the lexieal rep- 
resentation and retrieval of idioms is an extension of a 
simple localist comlectionist model for the resolution of 
lcxic~d ambiguity (Cottrell 1988 7). The model (2) con- 
sists of four levels. Units at the lowest level represent 
the smallest units of form. These units activate units on 
the level that represents syntactic discriminations, which 
in turn activate units on the semantic level. The semantic 
features activate relational nodes in the semantic network. 
Within levels, inhibitory links may occur; between levels 
excitatory links may exist. However, there are no inn 
hibitory links within the semantic network. 
The meaning of idioms is represented as all other rela- 
tional nodes in the semantic network. On the level of 
semantic features, the idiom is represented by a unit that 
has a gate function similar to so-called SIGMA-PI units 
(Rumelhart and McClelland 1986, p. 73): in order for 
such a unit A to receive activation, all units excitating A
bottom-up should be active. If one of the units connected 
to a unit A is not active, A does not receive activation. 
Thus when lhe first word of an idiom is encountered, the 
idiom is not activated, because the other word(s) is (are) 
not active. However, once all relevant lexemes have 
been encountered in the input, it becomes active. Note 
that an external syntactic module excitates one of the 
nodes in case of syntactic ambiguity. Since there is more 
than one syntactic unit activating the idiom, the overall 
activation of the idiom becomes higher than competing 
r~odes representing non-idiomatic meanings. Or, to put it 
differently, the idiom represents the simplest hypothesis 
that accounts for the meaning of the lexemes in the input. 
7For all introduction to conncclionist models, see Rumclhart a.d 
McClelland (1986); for a critical evaluation see Fodor and Phylyshyn 
0988). 
The idiom is the strongest competitor, and inhibits the 
non-idiomatic readings. 
Without need for feedback from outside the model, the 
conventionality principle is thus modeled as a natural 
consequence of the architecture of the model. The con- 
nectionist model has been implemented in C with the use 
of the Rochester Connectionist Simulator (Goddard et al 
1989). In the appendix we give a description of technical 
details of this implementation. 
7 Concluding remarks 
Ambiguity in the case of idiomatic phrases can be resolved 
on the basis of the conventionality principle. When 
compared to strategies as used in Stock (1989), both 
models presented here have the advantage that they don't 
process idioms until all relevant lexical material has 
been encountered in the input and operate in a best-first 
fashion. Therefore they contribute to the efficiency of the 
parsing process. The conneetionist model has one further 
advantage: the conventionality principle results naturally 
from the architecture of the model, and does not have 
to be stipulated explicitely. The obvious disadvantage 
of this model is the necessity for parallel hardware for 
realistic implementations. Future research will include 
the true integration with a syntactic module. Then, it will 
also be able to take the precise syntactic form of idiomatic 
phrases into account. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Walter Daelemans and 
the visitors of the Colloquium "Computer and Lexicon" 
12 & 13 Oct, 1989, Utrecht for their useful comments. 
Wietske Sijtsma commented on English grammaticality 
and style. 
3 247 
References 
Bobrow, S. and Bell, S. 1973. On catching on to idiomatic 
expressions. Memory and Cognition 3,343-346. 
Cacciari, C. and Tabossi, E 1988. The comprehen- 
sion of Idioms. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 
668-683. 
Chafe, W. 1968. Idiomaticity as an anomaly in the 
Chomskyan Paradigm. Foundations ofLanguage 4,109- 
127. 
Cottrell, G. 1989 A model of lexic~d access of ambiguous 
words. In: Small, S., Cottrel, G., and Tanenhaus, M., 
1988. Lexical ambiguity resolution. San Mateo: Kauf- 
mann. 
Fodor, J. and Pylyshyn, Z. 1988. Connectionism and 
cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, 
1988, 1-2, p. 3- 70 
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G. and Sag, I. 1985 
Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar. Basil Black- 
well, Oxford. 
Gibbs, R., 1980. Spilling the beans on understanding 
and memory for idioms in conversation. Memory and 
Cognition 8, 149-156. 
Gibbs, R., and Nay,"& N. 1989. Psycholinguistic Studies 
on the syntactic behavior of Idioms. Cognitive Psychol- 
ogy 21,100-138. 
Goddard, N., Lynne, K., Mintz, T., and Bukys, L. 1989 
Rochester Connectionist Simulator. Technical Report. 
University of Rochester. 
Gross, M., 1984. Lexicon-grammar nd the synU~ctic 
analysis of French. In Proceedings COLING '84. 
Koller, W., 1977. Redensarten: linguistischeAspecte, 
Vorkommensanalysen. Sprachspiel. Ttibingen: Nie- 
meyer. 
Koskenniemi, K. 1983. Two-level morphology. PhD- 
thesis. University of Helsinki. 
Lancker, D. van and Canter, G. 1981. Idiomatic versus lit- 
eral interpretations of ditropically ambiguous sentences. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24, 64-69. 
Linden, E. van der, 1989. Idioms and flexible cate- 
gorical grammar. In Everaert and van der Linden (Eds.) 
1989.Proceedings of the First Tilburg Workshop on Id- 
ioms. Tilburg, the Netherlands, May 19, 1989. Tilburg: 
ITK. 
Pesetsky, D. 1985. Morphology and Logical form. Lin- 
guistic Inquiry, 16 193-246. 
Rumelhart, D. and McClelland, J. 1986. Parallel Dis- 
tributed processing. Explorations inthe microstucture of 
cognition. Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT press. 
Schweigert, W. and Moates, D. 1988. Familiar idiom 
comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 
17, pp. 281-296. 
Stock, O. 1989. Parsing with Flexibility, Dynamic Strateo 
gies, and Idioms in Mind. Computational Linguistics 1, 
1-19. 
Swinney, D. 1981. Lexical processing during sentence 
comprehension: effects of higher order constraints and 
implications for representation. I : T. Meyers, J. Laver 
and J. Anderson (eds.) The cognitive representation f 
speech. North-Holland. 
Swiney, D. and Cutler, A. 1979. The access and process? 
ing of idiomatic expressions. JVLVB 18,523-534. 
Thibadeau, R., Just, M., and Carpenter, P. 1982. A 
Model of the Time Course and Content of Reading. Cog- 
nitive Science 6, 157-203. 
Wasow, T., Sag, I., and Nunberg, G. 1983. Idioms: 
an interim report. In Shiro Hattori and Kazuko Inoue 
(Eds.) Proceedings of the Xlllth international congress 
of linguists. Tokyo: CIPL 102-115. 
Wood, M. McGee, 1986. A definition of idiom. Masters 
thesis, University of Manchester (1981). Reproduced by 
the Indiana University Linguistics Club. 
248 4 
8emar l l l?  network  
kick (ob~)  kick (~,dion) d~r, pa/I (objocl) 
ai  Pall 
Semant ic  foa lure8 
8yntact io  features  
Wordform 
Fig (2) Network representation 
: Un~ =im~ati~ exte*n i l  i~ l  from sy ~ ~lcl~ module 
: Unil s~a l~ o~lom~ k~put Irc~l ~J6 ~ Iov~ 
Fig (3) Unit structure 
Fig (4) Activation level of tile wordform and syntactic units 
1 ooo t IF .......... 
~1.; .iF ! ' \[iiiii..:.. ,,,.. 
750 ": . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~" .............. ,o0_,t l , . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . .  
0 5 10 15 20 
Cycles 
-El- kick 
bucket 
kick N 
~;;'~- kick V 
.~!~i;#.. bucket N 
"~ "I 000 
(I) 
? ? 750 
.> 
"6 < 500 
lg (.) Activation level of the semantic units and tile semantic network 
0 
"- l / t~ 
Y F f /"% "% ~'~ 
5 10 15 20 
Cycles 
kick as action 
die as idiom 
kick (action) 
die 
5 249 
Appendix 
The connectionist model for the retrieval of idioms as 
presented in section 6 is based on the mechanism of in- 
teractive activation and competition (IAC). An ideal IAC 
network consists of nodes that can take on continuous val- 
ues between aminimum and a maximum. The activation 
of the units is also supposed to change only gradually in 
time. This ideal is approximated by dividing time into a 
series of small steps. If we choose an activation function 
that cannot change very rapidly this discrete model acts 
as a good approximization for the ideal IAC-network. 
The network (Figure (2)) consists of a set of nodes 
that are connected with links which can be excitatory or 
inhibitory (with a negative weight value). Some units 
can receive xternal stimuli, e.g. input from the syntactic 
module. The internal structure of a unit is shown in 
Figure (3). The input links are connected to a site that 
corresponds to their type. So each unit has distinct sites 
for external, excitatory and inhibitory links. The gate unit 
also offers a separate gate site with a special site function. 
The site functions for the external, excitatory and 
inhibitory links simply compute the weighted sum of the 
input values Iv. 
Sv = ~ wiIvi 
The site function for the gate site is a kind of"weighted 
AND" function. Its behaviour is similar to the weighted 
sum function when all input links have a value different 
from zero. However if one of the input links connected 
to the gate site is zero, the output Sv of the gate site 
function is also zero. The output of each site is scaled in 
order to control the intluence of the different sites on the 
activation value. 
Ne~input  = ScinhSvi,~h + Sc,zcSvezc 
+Sc~=t Sv,zt  + Scgat, Svo,~t~ 
The activation value Av for a new timestamp t can now 
be computed: 
When Netinput is larger than zero: 
Av t = Av t - l  -4- (maz  - Avt -1 )Net input  
_decay(Av  t -  1 _ vest) 
When Netinput is less than zero: 
Avt = Av t -  1 + (Av t -  1 _ min)Net input  
_decay(  A v t -  1 _ ves~ ) 
We see that the influence of Netinput on Av decreases 
when Av reaches its minimum or maximum value. On 
the other hand the influence of the decay rate is high in 
the upper and lower regions. When Netinput becomes 
zero, the Activation value slowly decreases to its rest 
value. The output value of the unit is equal to its 
activation, but only if the activation level is above a 
predefined treshold value. Otherwise the output is zero. 
So a unit with maximum activation that does not receive 
input anymore, slowly decreases its output value and than 
suddenly drops to zero beacuse its activation is below 
treshold value. This non linear behaviour is at~ essential 
property of connectionist models. 
The bottom-up links are stronger than the top-down 
links because a unit may only be activated by bottom-up 
evidence. Top-down information may however influence 
the decision process at a lower level. 
The values of the parameters in the model are: 
Sci,,h 0.6 
Se, ,c  0.6 
Sc , , t  0.6 
Scaat~ 0.6 
treshold 0.5 
decay 0.1 
bottom-up weights 0.8 
top-down weights 0.25 
inhibitory weights -0.8 
external input weights 1.0 
max 1.0 
min -1.0 
rest 0 
A simulation consists of a number of cycles in which 
activation spreads through the network. In each cycle the 
output and activation values for a time t are calculated 
from the values on time t-1. Figure (4) and (5) show 
the activation levels of the active units in the model: 
only activation levels above treshold (500) are displayed. 
At the beginning of  the simulation all units are in rest 
state. We start the simulation for the disambiguation 
of "kick (the) bucket" by setting the output value of 
the external unit "kick" representing the output of a sub 
wordform level to 1. After three update cycles, the 
output of the external unit I I  (representing the fact that 
bucket is recognized) is set to 1. The duration of an 
external input is always one cycle. The availability 
of syntactic information is simulated by activating I I Ib  
and I I I c  before cycle seven. Figure (4) shows that the 
unit representing kick as a verb immediately follows this 
syntactic information and "kick as a noun" falls beneath 
activation treshold. After some more cycles a stable 
situation is reached (Figure (5)) which represents he best 
fitting hypothesis: the idiomatic reading. 
250 6 
