COMPUTATIONAL L INGUISTICS IN 1990 
Hans Kar lgren 
KVAL Research Inst i tute 
for Informat ion Science 
Skeppsbron 26 
S-Il l  30 Stockholm, Sweden 
co l ing@com.qz.se 
Coling's existence can today be measured in 
(reasonable fractions of) centuries. After twelve 
wel l - renowned international conferences arranged by 
the International Committee for Computat ional  
L inguist ics and after an increasing number of 
publ icat ions and local meetings dedicated to the 
topic one might assume that all of us who care 
would by now know exactly what computat ional  
l inguistics is about. We do not. Not only do we 
dif fer sl ightly on where we want to place the 
emphasis, the concept also evolves with each of us 
in the vague, successive way in which other words 
in human language so fruitful ly keep changing. 
Computat ional  l inguist ics is what we make it. 
No doubt computational l inguist ics is about 
computat ion and linguistics, with an emphasis on 
'and'. The key concepts are computation, not 
computer, and linguistics, not language processing. 
All agree that the scope does not extend to 
studies, however good, about computat ion applied to 
language material unless some l inguist ic insight is 
at issue or about computer support for l inguist ics 
unless the computational procedure has some 
non-tr ivial  l inguist ic aspect. 
What, then, is the core of the matter? I can 
give only a personal answer; let me do that. 
Thereafter I shall comment upon the harvest of 
papers offered to Coling 90. 
A great goal is to model computat ional ly  human 
l inguistic behaviour as a manner to better under- 
stand how we speak and listen, write and read, 
\[earn and unlearn, understand, store and re- 
structure information. An ult imate quest ion is to 
what extent these our most human act iv it ies can be 
~educed to mechanist ic operations: by teaching 
machines we can recognize what in us is machine- 
like. Whenever we can mechanize something which 
seems deeply human, we gather urgent, often 
painful, knowledge about ourselves; whenever we 
fail, we may learn even more. It is not only in 
thermodynamics that the great fai lures mark the 
great advances. Cf. the col loquium on The Un- 
f inished Language. 
Some col leagues would say computat ional  
model l ing of human l inguist ic behaviour is the 
goal. I think it is going too far to require that 
computat ional  models of human language must needs 
be valid as possible \[future components of\] models 
of the human intellect; that is a moot point of a 
:cather remote phi losophical  nature since we can as 
yet rarely ever verify claims about the similar ity 
or analogy between the working of our models and 
human "processing". 
One theme which I see as crucial in computa- 
tional l inguist ics at this part icular  point of time 
is machine learning; cf. my portion of the Summing- 
-Up-And-Look-Ahead session at Coling 88 in Buda- 
pest, subsequently publ ished along with the other 
~{tatements of that session in the Prague Bulletin 
No. 51, which was intended as a seed for COLING-90. 
Model l ing learuing is interest ing in itself 
but model ing language user's learning and adapta- 
I:ion also attacks one of the most salient features 
of natural languages and one which so far is 
conspicuously absent from invented languages: the 
:intriguing feature that human users understand 
utterances and texts by means of knowledge about 
the language system and that such knowledge is 
successively acquired from the utterances and texts 
we understand. 
To get a relevant model for human l inguist ic 
competence we must teach machines to learn: to 
update their grammar and lexicon from the very 
texts on which they apply them, treating the texts 
as operands for the analyzers and s imultaneously as 
operators that modify the analyzers. It is my 
belief that there are basic procedures, as yet 
poorly understood, which are common to language 
change over longer periods, language acquis it ion by 
an individual and the mutual adaptat ion between 
dialogue part ic ipants or the reader's adaptat ion to 
the author during and possibly merely for the 
purpose of the current dialogue or text. 
The important successful attempts to handle 
very large text corpora and huge lexical data bases 
might obscure this crucial issue and postpone its 
solution: I feel uneasy about some impressive 
analyses and syntheses based on sub-sub-subcategor-  
izations of words and situations in some microsl ice 
of our world. Close-ups on some instances are 
indispensible in serious empirical research, but 
continued fact col lect ing and algor i thm bui lding 
does not necessari ly bring us general izable 
insights or general izable procedures. The con- 
clusion when we have succeeded in mapping some 
detail, which turned out to be more complex than we 
could imagine, should not always be to find 
resources, ours or somebody else's, for every other 
detail  to be mapped with equal precision; but to 
model the procedure for such mapping. 
Details must be seen in a context and I 
believe that the most fruitful context at the very 
present is that of learning and adaptation. 
Art i f ic ial  intel l igence does study machine 
learning. But I expect that it is from linguistics, 
with its tradit ion of studying change and with an 
object which so obviously does not wait till the 
next authorized release before it changes, that a 
major break-through will come for l inguist ic 
adaptat ion and for learning at large. 
None of what I have now said should be taken 
to mean that applied computat ional  l inguist ics is 
unworthy of discussion at Coling. Appl icat ions can 
help us ask new questions, and the successes and, 
even more, the failures in practical tasks give us 
very valuable feedback, confirming and discon- 
firming our beliefs. But it should be clearly 
understood that practical appl icat ion is not the 
ult imate test of the value of what we are doing: I 
think it is absurd to see, say, the needs for 
off ice automation as a just i f icat ion for our study 
of human language. 
Thus, if somebody would have put together an 
automatic translator, actual ly producing readable 
output when given arbitrary economic or technical 
prose, the world would not have become a very 
di f ferent place, although quite a few organizat ions 
would have run more smoothly: the insights gathered 
from trying to translate mechanical ly  by mere 
dict ionary and syntax provide us with essential 
knowledge of translation, of language and hence of 
ourselves. In the case of machine translation, 
therefore, I prefer papers which i l luminate some 
feature of the task of translat ing which they claim 
to be (un)programmable to those which demonstrate 
hew well their tool works. 
An international conference can be seen as a 
st imulus-response sequence. The init iators of 
Coling emit a stimulus to a wide community of 
people who probe human language - and such as do 
not know they do - and get a response we can only 
part ia l ly  control: we set things in motion by 
97 
announcing the conference, we aim at an intended 
target area by f i l tering the contr ibut ions offered 
and we can to some little extent guide the missi les 
underway by giving direct ions and hints to the 
authors, speakers and discussants. 
How do we judge the result now when the 
contr ibut ions have arr ived? It is obviously 
premature to answer the question how Coling 90 will 
have amended our concept of computat ional  l inguist-  
ics or even to evaluate the papers, since much of 
their value lies in the debate and protests they 
provoke. We hope the readers will d isagree on a 
number of points argued in these volumes. In any 
case, there is a certain incubation time for really 
new ideas to have an effect. But some first- 
impression comments from the only one so far who 
has read - though in several cases certainly not 
yet digested - all the papers, those publ ished here 
and those which could not be accommodated, could 
make the col lect ion appear less amorphous to some 
reader, whether or not he sympathizes with the 
views proferred. See, however, my attempt at a 
selective subject index. 
I. The first observat ion about this year's Coling 
papers is that there are many of them. Computa- 
tional l inguist ics is no more an interdisc ip l inary 
oddity. It has grown into a discipline. 
2. The papers are on a whole on a high level. For 
purely quant itat ive reasons we could accommodate 
less than one in three. We have avoided to say that 
we haw9 rejected the rest, since many of them are 
val id and interesting contr ibutions to the field 
and would have been accepted for Coling had there 
been more time and space in our conference week. 
The quality was disturbingly good from the 
immediate viewpoint of the referees, who have had a 
more demanding task than foreseen. Unlike what has 
happened at earl ier Coling conferences, very few 
contr ibutions could be dismissed because they were 
trivial computer izat ions of l inguist ic studies or 
software engineering achievements with amateurish 
l inguist ic assumptions. We have seen very few 
papers this time which report on the rediscovery of 
the fact that nouns forms in some language can 
conveniently be categorized in number, gender and 
case or which specify file structure and computa- 
tional environment while leaving the l inguist ic 
issues undiscussed. Most computational l inguists 
today know what they are talking about and take 
appropriate professional hardware and software 
tools for granted. 
3. Like other establ ished domains, computational 
l inguist ics risks to become isolationistic. By far 
the most common critical comment by referees on any 
category of papers was that the authour had 
overseen or left unmentioned relevant earl ier work. 
It is a symptom of what Bertrand Russel cal led 
Provincia l ism in Time if for a topic of a general 
nature the list of references includes only items 
from the last decade. Such a narrow perspect ive may 
be natural if one discusses technical i t ies in a 
recently presented formalism or some implementat ion 
details, but not if one investigates, say, dia- 
logue, text planning, idioms, anacelutha or the 
lexicological  treatment of hapax legomena or non- 
canonical forms. 
4. The papers submitted to Coling 90 report on 
s ignif icant advances on many frontiers. 
4.1 Much work has been done on the ref inement and 
elaborat ion of the conceptual apparatus. I do not 
yet venture to point at innovation which will turn 
out to have provided real ly important new tools. 
It is conspicuous that the revival of categorial  
grammar continues, that uni f icat ion is a predomi- 
nant procedure that government-binding designs are 
in vogue - or let me more respectful ly say have 
proven fruitful - and that two-level models are 
used to such an extent and to a number of purposes 
which far exceeds mere pol iteness to our hosts. 
Tree-adjoining grammars seem to make some problems 
much more easy to treat. 
Experiments with connect ionist  models are also 
promising; it would be unfair to require that they 
should be more than that. 
4.2 The advances beyond full stop continue, though 
perhaps more laboriously than one might have hoped. 
Most attempts concern cohesion between neighbouring 
sentences - such as anaphoric phenomena - but 
interest ing results have also been gained in 
generat ive form for larger structures (text 
planning). - Styl ist ic studies are rare as are 
other studies l inking to l i terary theory. An 
attempt to identify text topics and one on concept 
analysis and terminology address issues direct ly 
relevant for document retrieval and topic analysis. 
4.3 New terr itor ies have been invaded in a more 
immediate sense. We have the pleasure of seeing 
contr ibut ions from geographical and l inguist ic 
regions from where we earl ier had no reports. Thus, 
we see an encouragingly large number of papers from 
the Chinese-speaking parts of the world. 
This expansion also means that our l inguist ic 
models and accepted ideas have been put to a test 
on more languages than before. The predominance of 
Engl ish examples in l inguistic research wor ld-wide 
introduces a bias, the amount of which we cannot, 
by nature, possibly estimate but which should worry 
us. 
4.4 Computat ional  l inguist ics is moving out of the 
laboratories. Today's computat ional  faci l i t ies - 
fast on-l ine operation, large data-bases, con- 
venient user- interfaces at prices afordable even to 
front- l ine research institutes - have made experi-  
ments much more life-like. Performance and elegance 
as reported in the Project Notes are often impress- 
ive. 
The abi l i ty to handle real ist ic vocabular ies 
has led to a revived interest in lexicology. In 
particular, the knowledge accumulated in dict ion- 
aries for human use is being recycled by using 
these dict ionar ies as raw data supplies, which with 
some ingenuity are automatical ly exploited, or, to 
a smaller extent, as sources of know-how and 
l inguist ic insight. 
While the translat ion tools are coming much 
closer to real life the pretensions have become 
more modest and more specific: systems are no 
longer designed to be omnivorous, when completed, 
but dedicated to part icular kinds of texts and 
situations. Ironically, the success of such 
intel l igent translat ion systems is almost cannibal-  
istic: the most renowned successful computer ized 
translat ion system, of weather reports, is reported 
to develop into a text generator. Is it so that the 
very mapping of the languiges and the subject- 
matter which are required to make translat ion 
programmable also threatens to make it unnecessary? 
4.5 Linguists have l ifted their gaze to see beyond 
the wr i t ten text. We catch a gl impse of the 
mult imedia society in, say, a report on automatic 
generat ion of an animated presentat ion from a 
written instruction manual. On the whole, however, 
image processing is not yet part of computat ional  
l inguistics. 
The interest in speech processing - both 
analysis and synthesis - is increasing. Some 
reports on ambitious investments in this field was 
left out of Coling 90 because the l inguist ic tools 
appl ied - or shall we say as yet appl icable? - were 
rather unsophist icated. More interdisc ip l inary 
efforts within computational l inguist ics may prove 
fruitful in a near future. - It may be relevant 
here to observe that while there are a few, not 
many, contr ibut ions on phonology, there is still 
none on phonetics. 
4.6 Some ventures beyond the map are reported: 
attempts to make an automatic system cope reason- 
ably with phenomena which are in some sense 
unexpected, except that the system was designed to 
expect unexpected things to happen. 
It is in the nature of things that some of 
these attempts are as yet more speculative; cf. the 
col loquium on "The Unf inished Language". 
98 
Automat ic  acqu is i t ion  of l ingu is t i c  knowledge  
is a topic of several  papers, par t i cu la r ly  for 
extens ion  of the lexicon, but a lso other  learn ing  
procedures  such as automat ic  der ivat ion  of rules 
from corpora  and the success ive  accumulat ion  of 
knowledge,  in a "knowledge base", for t rans la t ion .  
A very gra t i fy ing  extens ion  is the ana lys i s  of 
fau l ty  input. Or let us say non-canon ica l  input  
s ince it is nobody 's  faul t  that real  persons  do not 
comply  exact ly  wi th any canon. Not only  are 
'robust' systems necessary  to make computat iona l  
exper iments  more rea l i s t i c  (and man-mach ine  
in teract ion  in pract ica l  systems more human) but 
the under ly ing  d i s t rus t  in immacu la te  prec i s ion  in 
human behav iour  has also theoret ica l  impl icat ions .  
Very ser ious impl icat ions,  poss ib ly :  if there is 
more to it: than can be handled by a l i t t le  normal -  
iz ing f i lter, the doubt fu l  old d i s t inc t ion  between 
competence  and per fo rmance  must  be revised.  
4.7 Concur rent ly  wi th the renewed in teres t  in 
d i scovery  procedures  s ta t i s t i ca l  p rocedures  have 
become frequent.  Rare ly  have we seen so many 
numbers  in a co l lec t ion  of Co l ing  papers  as this 
time. An egocent r i c  remark: as one who spent  a 
good deal of energy in ear l ie r  years to promote  
:3tatistical methods in l ingu is t i cs  (and pub l i sh ing  
a sc ient i f i c  journal, SMIL, for the purpose)  I 
cannot  but feel p leased at this deve lopment ,  even 
though there is no ind icat ion  of any causal  
re la t ionsh ip  between those e f for ts  and the present  
\[:rend. 
Unfor tunate ly ,  the methodological  level  of the 
laajority of the quant i ta t ive  studies in l ingu is t i cs  
today is no h igher  than in s ta t i s t i ca l  l i ngu is t i cs  
30 years ago. L i t t le  ef forts  are spent  on the non- 
t r iv ia l  task of c reat ing  appropr ia te  s tochast i c  
models  for l ingu is t ics .  And, qu i te  unnecessar i ly ,  
the accumulated  knowhow of the s ta t i s t i ca l  p ro fess -  
ion is d is regarded:  'probabi l i ty '  and ' (relat ive) 
f requency'  are often used ind isc r iminate ly  as 
synonyms, a d i scuss ion  of es t imates  and sampl ing is 
most ly  consp icuous ly  absent  and the reader  is 
supp l ied  wi th  un in terpretab le  percentages .  
This methodo log ica l  weakness  is p robab ly  due 
not only  to an unders tandab le  unacqua in tance  with 
the trade. There is a lso a cu l tura l  barr ier :  
Computat iona l  l ingu is t i cs  has torn down an impor t -  
ant sect ion  of the wal l  between mathemat ics  and 
t rad i t iona l  humani t ies  but has inher i ted  another,  
that between mathemat ics  and stat is t ics .  Though 
theoret i ca l  s tat i s t ics  is a respected  part  of 
mathemat ics ,  very many top- leve l  mathemat ic ians  and 
log ic ians  remain  un in teres ted  in s tochast i ca l  
models,  un fami l ia r  wi th  s ta t i s t i ca l  p rac t i ce  and at 
bot tom host i le  towards tile under ly ing  a t t i tude  to 
look for a we l l -mot ivated  approx imat ion  - to l ive 
wi th uncer ta in ty  instead of wa i t ing  for an ideal 
l~olution. We need more in terd isc ip l inar i ty !  
5. To character i ze  computat iona l  l i ngu is t i cs  of 
i\[990 we must  a lso make a few remarks,  necessar i l y  
incomplete  and subject ive,  about  what  is lacking.  
5.1 Computer  s imulat ions,  as wel l  known in, say, 
modern  physics,  are rare. Of course, the who le  of 
our f ie ld may be seen as a k ind of s imulat ion.  A 
very hea l thy  trend is to make exper iments  more 
rea l i s t i c  - w i th  more than a toy d ic t ionary  and a 
res t r i c ted  grammar  and wi th  some amount  of ext ra-  
l ingu is t i c  knowledge.  But the oppos i te  t rend is 
absent:  to s impl i fy  down to the barest  minimum, 
i.e., not only to use res t r i c ted  grammars  but to 
in tent iona l ly  make false assumpt ions ,  as when a 
phys ic i s t  descr ibes  a gas as a dozen h igh ly  
idea l i zed  part ic les .  The rea l i s t i c  exper iments  are 
more fu l l y - f ledged than a few years ago, but the 
idea l i zed  exper iments  have *lot become simpler.  
I shal l  not e laborate  this po int  here but I 
be l ieve  we are sti l l  burdened by the humanis t i c  
de l ight  in complex i ty  and crav ing for fu l le r  
knowledge  - and lack of the mathemat ic ian 's  de l ight  
in f ru i t fu l  s impl i f i cat ion.  We have more bar r ie rs  
to break down: in this case the moral  bar r ie r  that 
keeps some of us from work ing  with in tent iona l  
fa l s i f i cat ion .  
5.2 In spite of the in terest  in d i scovery  pro-  
cedures,  computer -suppor ted  fac t f ind ing  seems rare. 
Thus, for t rans lat ion,  more and more schemes are 
proposed  on how to make mach ines  do th ings which  
need to be done but very l i t t le  in teres t  has been 
shown in invest igat ing  sys temat ica l ly  what  need to 
be done, for ins tance by record ing  in some more 
than super f i c ia l  manner  what  humans do. 
5.3 Language change has been left  out of d i scuss -  
ion, except  for comments  ill An Unf in i shed  Language.  
We have seen noth ing about  h i s to r i ca l  l ingu is t ics ;  
not even on d iachron ica l  phono logy  which  seemed 
promis ing  some years ago. I could think of no other  
reason than the inher i ted  soc io log ica l  s t ructure  in 
the scho lar ly  community,  and I expect  great  
progress  when top competence  in h i s to r i ca l  l ingu-  
ist ics  is combined with the ins ights  and tools of 
computat iona l  l ingu is t ics .  
5.4 For s imi lar  reasons,  probably,  we have seen 
noth ing in the ph i lo log ica l  f ield. The cha l leng ing  
f ie ld  of manuscr ip t  reconst ruct ion ,  for wh ich  we 
would  by now have bet ter  tools, has a t t rac ted  no 
computat iona l  l ingu is t  this time, nor has authour -  
ship a t t r ibut ion .  We have a l ready  remarked  on the 
emptyness  of the border land  between l ingu is t i c  and 
l i te rary  studies.  
5.5 No contr ibut ion,  as we a l ready  noted above, 
took up a phonet ica l  topic. This  gap is so much 
more remarkab le  as pl~onetic research  was heav i ly  
computer i zed  at an ear ly  stage. 
6. F ina l ly  a deeply  felt  appeal  to all Co l ing  
par t i c ipants  and all more - than-casua l  readers  of 
this publ icat ion:  Do not forget  that we are in the 
humani t ies!  Which  research  could be more humanis t i c  
than examin ing  the f ront ier  between what  in us is 
man and what  in us is mach ine when we per fo rm our 
most  human act iv i t ies?  
Many papers conta in  a trace of bad conscience: 
we know we should de l iver  app l i cab le  resul ts  which 
just i fy  what  we cost now and if soc iety  only a l lows 
us t ime for bas ic  p re l iminar ies  we shall  cer ta in ly  
del iver.  
This apo loget i c  a t t i tude is groundless ,  
un jus t i f i ed  and un just l f iab le .  Your a l leg iance  is 
not p r imar i l y  to investors.  True, if you have 
accepted  funding to per form pract ica l  tasks, you 
must  try to l ive up to your promises.  But most of 
the resources  ded icated  to onr f ie ld do not come 
from those who represent  future users or uses. 
In par t i cu la r  this is true for the resources  
which have gone into Col ing. The Co l ing  conferences  
are a r ranged by the In ternat iona l  Commit tee  for 
Computat iona l  L ingu is t i cs  which never rece ived  a 
penny from anybody and owes obed ience  to no 
po l i t i ca l  or commerc ia l  body, nat iona l  or inter-  
nat ional .  The support  prov ided to each conference  
by governments  and industry  is we lcome but re- 
presents  a minute  por t ion  of the total e f for t  in 
real terms, as do the par t i c ipat ion  fees. 
TO take one detai l  of wh ich  I have f i r s t -hand 
knowledge,  the manhours  spent by the referees,  at 
least  three of which examined and commented  upon 
each paper  submitted, wh ich  in turn outnumbered  
those now pub l i shed  by a factor  greater  than three, 
is a mi l l i on -do l la r  a f fa i r  if eva luated  at market  
pr ice for comparab le  consu l ta t ions  (an eva luat ion  
which  admi t ted ly  requi res  some st retch of imagina-  
tion); not one referee even asked whether  he or she 
wou ld  be paid or get a reduced par t i c ipat ion  fee. 
All resources  for the preparat ion,  work done by the 
in ternat iona l  committee,  our F inn ish  hosts and 
f i rs t  of all by the wri ters,  (and where  my own six 
manmouths,  unpa id  but h igh ly  rewarding,  is a small  
t r i f le  by compar ison) ,  absence (from product ion?)  
at home, travel  and accommodat ion  costs and all 
secondary  and ter t iary  expendi ture,  all these make 
a conference  of this k ind a mul t i -mi l l i on  venture  
whatever  cur rency  you choose to count  in, and a 
great  respons ib i l i ty .  These resources  - wh ich  if 
spent  for other  causes in 1990 represent  a power  
which  could readi ly  have rescued v i l l age fu l s  of 
s tarv ing people  from a pa infu l  death, bought  
thousands of minors  free f rom being sent to sexual 
slavery, saved large areas of v i rg in  forests  frora 
being forever  devasta ted  or bought  some under -  
p r iv i leged  country  an extra submar ine  to f ight  its 
enemies - were suppl ied to us for a cause. They 
were not in tended as subs id ies  to the computer  
industry  or to the admin is t ra t ions ,  wh ich  can no 
doubt  a f ford  to pay for the deve lopment  they need. 
So: Do not t r iv ia l \ ]ze  your  pursui t !  You have 
more ser ious bus iness  to do than bus iness.  
99 
