THE SELF-EXTENDING LEX ICON:  OFF-L INE  AND ON-L INE  DEFAULT ING 
OF  LEX ICAL  INFORMATION IN  THE METAL  MACHINE TRANSLAT ION SYSTEM (I) 
Geer t  Adr iaens  Maar ten  Lemmens  
Siemens CSL & 
Un ivers i ty  of Leuven 
Department  of L ingu is t i cs  
METAL Pro ject  
M. Theres ias t raat  21 
B-3000 Leuven, Be lg ium 
s iegeer t@cs .ku leuven.ac .be  
+ 32 16 285091 
Un ivers i ty  of Leuven 
Department  of L ingu is t i cs  
B \ ] i jde - Inkomsts t raat  21 
B-3000 Leuven, Be lg ium 
+32 16 284776 
0. INTRODUCTION 
The DEFAULTER component  of the METAl, MT 
system has been deve loped as a tool for 
extend ing  the ex is t ing  lex icons (off- l ine 
defaul t ing)  and is the bas is  for a category-  
guess ing  dev ice  for unknown words (on-l ine 
de \ [au l t ing) .  
i, SOME BACKGROUND FOR THE METAL  MT SYSTEM (2) 
I.I. METAL  MONOLINGUAL D ICT IONARIES  
METAL mono l ingua l  lex icon entr ies  are 
r(~presented as feature -va lue  structures,  
access ib le  by the i r  c i ta t ion  or "canonica l"  
form? For  each canonica l  form, the a ! lomorph ic  
va~\[iants (spel l ing var iants,  i r regu lar  forms, 
etc.) are stored. 
1,2. MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOSYNTACTIC  (ANALYSIS) 
RULES 
In METAL, morpho log ica l  ana lys is  is a 
recurs ive  process  of lookup and segmentat ion  
that scans input words  f rom left to r ight in 
search of thei r  component  parts. This resu l ts  
in a set of poss ib le  in terpretat ions  which 
cor respond to  acceptab le  sequences of morphemes 
recogn ized  in the word (3). Words  (or par ts  of 
complex  words) which are not in the d ic t ionary  
wi l l  be ass igned the category  UNK (for 
UNKnown).  The morphemes  that are the result  of 
morpho log ica l  ana lys is  are then put in a chart 
s t ructure  for fur ther  p rocess ing  by 
(morpho)synt~ct ic  rules. 
2 ?  OFF-L INE  DEFAULT ING 
2.1. GENERAL DESCRIPT ION 
The defau l te r  f irst checks whether  a word  is 
in the d ic t ionary  (level O). If not, it t r ies 
to f ind morpho log ica l ly  re lated entr ies,  so 
that the in fo rmat ion  for the new words  can be 
taken from those ex is t ing  entr ies  (level i). 
If no re la ted  ent r ies  can be found, the form of 
the word  can g ive ind icat ions  of its (mainly) 
phono log ica l  and morpho log ica l  character i s t i cs  
(level 2). Hence, the need to organize this 
knowledge in an exhaust ive,  modu lar  and eas i ly  
extendab le  way, so that at \].east part  of the 
in fo rmat ion  for new entr ies  can be generated  
automat ica l ly .  
2.2 DETAILED DESCRIPT ION 
The DEFAULTER system cons is ts  of three modules:  
(I) a BASIC modu le  conta in ing  language-  
independent  funct ions  (like tab le  manipulat ion,  
d ic t ionary  checking,  c reat ing  de fau l ted  entr ies  
in METAL format, genera l  s t r ing  manipulat ion,  
etc.).  Furthermore,  the bas ic  module  contains 
the necessary  in fo rmat ion  about what features 
(of the set de f ined  for METAL) should not be 
cop ied  from entr ies  that are a l ready in the 
d ict ionary,  but should  get new va lues  for the 
par t i cu la r  word  in quest ion.  
(2) for each lan~lage, a language-dependent  
module  conta in ing  funct ions  whose a lgor i thms 
depend on the language involved.  
(3) for each language, a set of tables 
conta in ing  language-dependent  in fo rmat ion  in a 
dec la ra t ive  way. The smartness  of the system 
depends large ly  on their  completeness  and 
degree of refinedness? There are three major 
types of tables:  
(3?1) STANDARD-ENTRIES-TABLES,  conta in ing  for 
each category  the min imal  feature-va lue  
in fo rmat ion  that has to be in the lexicon. 
(3.2) CONTROL-TABLES,  conta in ing  for each 
category  the funct ions  to be app l ied  for t ry ing 
to f ind a re la ted  root form in the lexicon? 
(3.3) ENDINGS-TABLES,  conta in ing  for each 
category  de fau l ted  the end ings  that a l low one 
to fi\]\] in the va lues  for spec i f ic  features 
(see Lemmens 1988). An ent ry  in the table has 
the fo l low ing  genera l  structure:  
(ENDING-PATTERN 
(ALO-PATTERNI  (FEATI (VALI .. VALm) 
FEATn (VALI .. VALn)))  
(ALO-PATTERN2 (FEAT1 (VALI .? VALm) 
FEATn (VALI .. VALn) ) ) 
(ALO-PATTERNn (FEAT1 (VALI .. VALm) 
? ? 
FEATn (VALI , .VALn))))  
(3.4) bes ide  these three major  tables, the 
system needs to know about the l ingu is t ica l ly  
mot ivated  ways to f ind the root form of a 
- 1 - 305 
morpho log ica l ly  complex  word. For  verbs, 
nouns, ad jec t ives  and adverbs (subject to 
product ive  morpho log ica l  processes) ,  the sys tem 
has exhaust ive  l ists  of der ivat iona l  pre f ixes  
it wi l l  t ry  to match  wi th  the word  to be 
defaul ted.  If these pre f ixes  require that 
cer ta in  de fau2ted  va lues  be changed, this wi l l  
be s tored in add i t iona l  convers ion  tab les  for 
over r id ing  defaul t  in fo rmat ion  (4). 
O f f - l ine  de fau l t ing  p lays  a major  role in 
the INTERCODER subsystem, a w indow and 
menu-based  in teract ive  cod ing tool  that h ides  
the interna l  representat ion  of in fo rmat ion  in 
the lex icons  f rom the user  ~nd presents  it in a 
more  f r iend ly  way. Secondly,  deve lopers  of the 
METAL sys tem can s imply  defaul t  f i les wi th  
words and create a new file with de fau l ted  
entr ies .  These f i les can then be ed i ted  with 
any type of ed i to r  to correct  and complete  the 
ent r ies  be fore  adding them to the lexicons.  
2.3. PROBLEMS WITH OFF-LINE DEFAULTING 
Most prob lems wi th  o f f - l ine  de fau l t ing  occur 
at level  i, when the word  takes over  cer ta in  
features  f rom its morpho log ica l ly  re lated bas ic  
form, wh i le  th is  is incorrect .  
Unfor tunate ly ,  these er rors  are hard  to 
predict .  At level  2 (when defau l t ing  can only 
resort  to the end ings- tab les ) ,  errors  are 
most ly  a mere consequence  of incompleteness  in 
these tables.  These errors  are usua l ly  eas ier  
to detect  because  they are more st r ik ing (e.g. 
when they  lead to the creat ion  of several  
imposs ib le  a l lomorphs  for a word).  
3. ON-LINE DEFAULTING 
3.1. GENERAL BACKGROUND 
Ins tead  of resor t ing  to ass ign ing  e i ther  one 
s ingle defau l t  ca tegory  (say, noun) to the UNK 
(the s ing le -category  approach),  or all  
open-c lass  lex ica l  ca tegor ies  (the 
a l l - ca tegor ies  approach) ,  we t r ied to deve lop  
an in termediate  solution, the some-categor ies  
approach.  The cha l lenge  is to f ind out if the 
form of a unknown word, in f lec ted  or net, can 
convey cruc ia l  categor ia l  in format ion.  Even if 
the at tempt  at on- l ine de fau l t ing  (using 
end ings  in fo rmat ion  and suf f ix -s t r ipp ing)  is 
incapab le  of d i sambiguat ing  categor ia l ly ,  at 
\].east par t ia l  d i sambiguat ion  may be possible,  
leav ing  the sys tem wi th  a min imum of acceptab le  
guesses  of a category  p lus  the assoc ia ted  
feature -va lue  in fo rmat ion  for the word  invo lved  
(noun and verb, for instance).  
3.2. ON-LINE DEFAULTING IN METAL: 
PAST AND PRESENT 
3.2.1. SINGLE-CATEGORY DEFAULTING 
The ear l ie r  on- l ine  de fau l t ing  approach 
cons is ted  of ca l l ing  a category -guess ing  
funct ion  in the test part  of three 
UNK- rewr i t ing  morphosyntaet ic  rules, viz. NO 
-> UNK, ADJ  -> UNK, and VB -> UNK. The 
category -guess ing  funct ion took the form of 
the unknown word  as input, and re turned  e i ther  
NO, ADJ, VB, or NIL, depend ing  on whether  it 
cou ld  pred ic t  the unknown to be a noun, 
ad jec t ive  or verb  respect ive ly  (using l ists of 
der ivat iona l  and in f lec t iona l  suf f ixes  in the 
process) .  If the guess -cat  funct ion  returned 
NIL, the word  was assumed to be a noun (the 
catcha l l  defaul t ) .  The funct ion app l ied  a 
s imp l i f ied  r ight - to - le f t  morpho log ica l  ana lys is  
a lgor i thm, t ry ing  to f ind an acceptab le  pa i r  of 
a der ivat iona l  and an in f lec t iona l  suf f ix  for a 
par t i cu la r  category.  This approach  has a few 
shortcomings:  (i) It is a s ing le -category  
de fau l t ing  scheme: the guess -cat  funct ion only 
returns  one guess, and leaves it at that. 
Furthermore,  the guess ing  process  wi l l  not be 
usefu l  for languages wi th  a h igh  degree of 
categor ia l  ambiguity .  (2) Guess-cat  only 
returns  the categor ia l  in fo rmat ion  and no 
spec i f i c  feature -va lue  informat ion,  whereas  the 
form of the unknown word  may reveal  much more 
spec i f i c  feature -va lue  in format ion.  (3) The 
parser  wi l l  a lways try the three UNK- rewr i t lng  
rules (and call the guess -cat  funct ion at least 
three t imes wi th  the same str ing),  though only 
one of the three rules can succeed. Moreover,  a 
poss ib ly  morpho log ica l ly  complex  word  is 
rewr i t ten  into a h igher - leve l  node wi thout  the 
grammar  knowing  about its component  morphemes.  
3.2.2. SOME-CATEGORIES DEFAULTING 
Unfor tunate ly ,  the ENDINGS-TABLES used in 
o f f - l ine  de fau l t ing  cou ld  not be used in their  
o r ig ina l  fo rm for on- l ine  defau l t ing.  F i rst  of 
all, they  are too unspec i f i c  to pred ic t  the 
category  of the word, and secondly,  they rely 
on the input word  be ing  a canonica l  (citation) 
form and conta in  no in fo rmat ion  about 
in f lec t iona l  morpho logy.  Hence, a un ique new 
table had  to be const ructed  that  conta ins  not 
only end ings  of s tem forms, but also 
in f lec t iona l  suf f ixes  that a l low one to 
d i sambiguate  an unknown word. Moreover,  
mu l t ip le  guesses  (two at most) are al lowed. 
The tab le  returns  one or more categor ies  p lus 
other  feature in format ion.  
(defvar *DEF-DUTCH-ON-LINE-ENDINGS* 
(def-aort-endings-table 
'(o.. 
("itGit" (NST (CAN "*") (ALO "*") (GD F) 
(CL S-0 P-EN) (DH DE)))) 
("liJks" (AST ((CAN "*") (ALO "*") 
(CL P -0  P -E ) ) ) )  
("ieel" ((NST ((CAN "*") (ALO "*") (GD N) 
(CL S-0) (DH HIT) ) ) 
(AST ( (CAN "*") (ALO "*") 
(CL S-0) (DG SU))))) 
("dt" (VST ((CAN "-on") (ALO "t") (CL PR-T)) 
(V -F~X 
(0 ((CAN t) (ALO T) (CL PR-T) 
? . .  ) ) ) ) )  
. . . ) ) )  
The a lgor i thm t r ies  to match  the unknown with 
the end ings  in the table, g radua l ly  s t r ipp ing  
off  potent ia l  in f lec t iona l  suf f ixes (as 
re t r ieved  from the lexicon).  The 
d i sambiguat ing  potent ia l  of these  suf f ixes  is 
a lso used  in this process .  If, for example, a 
word  ends in an ad jec t ive  morpheme and in 
the end ings - tab le  both  noun and ad jec t ive  are 
l i s ted as poss ib le  categor ies  for the st r ing 
w i thout  the morpheme,  only the AST category 
wil l  be defaul ted.  If the who le  s t r ip -and-match  
306 
- 2 - 
process  is unsuccess fu l ,  the catch-a l l  defau l t  
remains  the noun, wh ich  gets all poss ib le  
va lues  for its features  ((NU SG PL) (GD M F N) 
...). Ins tead  of invok ing  category  guess ing  
in the grammar  rules, we dec ided  to act ivate  
the guess ing  process  r ight af ter  the 
le f t - to - r ight  fu l l - f l edged morpho log ica l  
ana lys i s  has re turned  an UNK analysis .  The 
guess ing  process  wi l l  y ie ld  the r ight lexical  
ca tegor ies  and put these into the chart. This 
means that (I) the UNK category  d i sappears  as a 
" lex ica l"  ca tegory  and (2) all component  
morphemes  of a morpho log ica l ly  complex  unknown 
word  are added to the chart with all thei r  
assoc ia ted  in format ion.  The l ingu is t -devo loper  
cont ro ls  the guess ing  process  through the 
modu lar ly  access ib le  on- l ine de fau l t ing  table. 
3.3. ~q~OBLEMS WITH ON-L INE  DEFAULT ING 
The very nature  of the de fau l t ing  i tse l f  
impl ies  that it is not er ror - f ree.  Stil l, in 
many cases the number  of except ions  to cer ta in  
end ing  st r ings  was rather  l imited, and most ly  
they cou ld  be accounted  for by inc lud ing  a more 
spec i f i c  (that is, a longer) end ing  s t r ing  in 
the table. In some cases, such a so lut ion  was 
not feasible,  and the except ions  had to be 
entered  into the d ic t ionary .  
4. FURT}~.~R RESEARCH 
As far as fur ther  research  into o f f - l ine  
de fau l t ing  is concerned,  we wi l l  be look ing at 
the potent ia l  of the approach  for de fau l t ing  
t rans fer  lex icon  ent r ies  (and not only 
mono l ingua l  ones).  For  instance, we could  
suggest  ~ t rans la t ion  for a f f ixed words, i f  
thei r  heads  are a l ready  in the t rans fer  
d ic t ionary .  An example  can make c lear  what this 
means. Suppose  the t rans fer  d ic t ionary  for 
t rans la t ion  f rom Dutch to F rench  conta ins  an 
ent ry  ge lukk ig  -> heureux  (happy). Suppose now 
that we want  to de fau l t  the word  ONgelukk ig  
(UNhappy) in the Dutch mono l ingua l  d ic t ionary .  
If we knew about a cor respondence  between Dutch 
on- and a F rench  ad jec t lve -der iv ing  pre f ix  wi th  
the same mean ing  (say, mal-), we could  f irst 
defau l t  mono l ingua l  Dutch onge lukk ig  on the 
bas is  of gelukkig,  then look at the t rans fer  
for ge lukk ig  {heureux), and defaul t  the 
mono l ingua l  F rench  malheureux,  as wel l  as the 
t rans fer  ent ry  onge lukk ig  -> malheureux.  Of 
course, such an approach  re l ies  heav i ly  on 
un ique  mappings  of phenomena across  languages, 
wh ich  wi l l  rare ly  be the case. For  on-, for 
instance,  onju is t  ( incorrect) does not 
cor respond to *malcorrect ,  but incorrect .  
Even in these cases, a t rans la t ion  cou ld  be 
suggested,  poss ib ly  accompan ied  by a l te rnat ive  
pre f ixes  of the target  language wi th  the same 
meaning.  
As  to on- l ine defaul t ing,  the current  
approach  is more or less stable for Dutch and 
French, but we are st i l l  re f in ing  the 
s t r ip -and-match  a lgor i thm for opt imal  results.  
For  the other  languages  in the set of METAL 
l anguage-pa i rs  (German, Engl ish,  Spanish),  we 
wi l l  look into the use fu lness  and the 
feas ib i l i ty  of some-categor ies  on- l ine 
defaul t ing,  and see if in teres t ing  tab les  can 
be const ructed  for these languages  as well. 
- 3 - 
NOTES 
(I) We are great ly  indebted  to Michael  Thum for 
his carefu l  documentat ion  of the DEFAULTER 
system. 
(2) See e.g. Whi te  1987, Bennet t  & S loeum 1988, 
Thurmai r  1989 or Adr iaens  & Caeyers  1990 for 
full  d i scuss ions  of the d i f fe rent  aspects  of 
the METAL  system. 
(3) For  a full account  of the morpho log ica l  
process  in METAL, see Loomis  \]988. 
(4) A typ ica l  example  of de fau l t -over r id ing  for 
Dutch verbs is the fo l lowing.  If e.g. gaan 
(to go) has as one of its morpho log ica l  
character i s t i cs  that its past par t i c ip le  is 
formed with ge- (gegaan; the feature CL will 
have as one of its va lues  PP-GE), this 
in fo rmat ion  must be over r idden  for the re lated 
verb  vergaan (past par t i c ip le  is vergaan - not 
gevergaan, which means  CL must be PP-0). 
These regu lar i t ies  are s tored in the 
*DEF-DUTCH-VST-CL-CONV*  table (def ining the 
necessary  morpho log ica l  c lass  convers ions  for 
past  par t i c ip les ) .  
REFERENCES 
Adr ia~ns,  G. & H. CaeyQrs  (1990) - l~t automa- 
t isch ver taa lsys teem METAL: van onderzoek tot 
commerc iee l  produkt .  To appear  in Informatie,  
October  1990. 
Bennett ,  W.S.  & J. S !oeum (1988) - The LRC 
Mach ine  Trans la t ion  System. In S locum 1988, 
111-134. 
Boguraev,  B. & T. Br i seoe  (ads) (1989) - 
Computat iona l  Lex icography  for Natura l  Language 
Process ing.  Longman, London. 
Lemmens, M. (1988) - A Cr i t ica l  S tudy  of  the 
Defau l te rs  in the Be lg ian  Meta l -system,  and a 
Des ign of  a Morpho log ica l ly  Gu ided Category  
Guesser.  Master ' s  Thes is  in Germanic  Phi lology, 
Leuven 1988 (written in Dutch).  
Loomls,  T. (1988) - Morpho log ica l  ana lys is  in 
METAL. Internal  documentat ion  wr i t ten  at 
S iemens AG, K Systeme AP 323, Munich.  
Nebendahl ,  D. (ed) (1989) - Exper tensysteme.  
Tell  2: E r fahrungen aus der Praxis. 
(Engineer ing und Kommunikat ion . )  S iemens AG, 
M~nchen.  
Nirenbnrg,  S. (ed) (1987) Mach ine  
Translat ion.  Theoret ica l  and Methodo logfca l  
Issues. (Studies in Natura l  Language 
Process ing. )  Can~r idge  Un ivers i ty  Press, 
Cambr idge  UK. 
Nirenburg,  S. (1989) - Lex icons  for Computer  
P rograms and Lex icons  for  People.  CMU-CMT 
Paper. 
Sloc~Im, J. (ed) (1988) - Mach ine  Trans lat ion 
Systems. Studies  in Natura l  Language 
Process ing.  (Revised re issue of a special  
issue of Computat iona l  L ingu is t i cs  vol. II 
(1985), nos. 1-3.) Cambr idge  Univers i ty  
Press, Cambr idge  UK. 
Thum, M. (1986) - Documentat ion  of  the METAL 
DEFAULTER system. In terna l  documentat ion  
wr i t ten  at the Computer  Gese l l schaf t  Konstanz 
GmbH. 
Thurmair ,  G. (1989) - Au fgabentyp  L inguist ik :  
P ro jekt  MEI~L. In Nebendahl  1989, 169-195. 
White,  J. S. (1987) - l~e Research  Env i ronment  
in the METAL  Project .  In N i renburg  1987, 
225--246. 
Zernik, U. (ed) (1989) - Proceed ings  of  the 
F i rst  In ternat iona l  Lex ica l  Acqu is i t ion  
Workshop (Detroit, Michigan,  August  21). 
3 0 7  
