Advice-Giving Dialogue" An Integrated System 
Did ier  Bron isz ,  Thomas  Gross i ,  F rango is  Jean-Mar ie  
Cap Gemini Innovation 
Chemin du Vieux Chine 
38240 Meylan, France 
emai l :  {bron isz ,  g ross i ,  f ranco is}?capsoget i ,  f r  
Abst ract  
In this paper we present he implementation of an 
advice-giving system for financial investment for the 
final phase of the project ESTEAM-3 161. This sys- 
tem integrates multiple agents in a single architec- 
ture allowing cooperation between a natural lan- 
guage dialoguer, "~ltelligent" data base access mod- 
ules, and a problem solver in the financial domain. 
Using a user model, this system adapts the mixed ini- 
tiative dialogue during both the formulation of the 
problem and its resolution by the expert. A novice 
user thus has access to expert knowledge despite the 
weakness of his own knowledge. 
1 The  Demonst ra tor  
In its final phase, the project was oriented towards 
the development of a demonstration prototype, in- 
corporating various ESTEAM-3 16 research results 
and showing the feasibility of an AGES. The Coop- 
eration Architecture is a conceptual framework for 
AGES design and a set of mechanisms to support 
implementation of that design. It is a cooperation 
architecture because it supports the active cooper- 
ation of independent components or modules of the 
AGES; it is thus the means for integration. Further- 
more, it supports the integration of heterogeneous 
modules through encapsulation ofmodules as agents, 
and by providing module-module cooperation using 
any of three standard interaction models. 
Our dialogue module integrates various sub- 
systems, for example, a natural-language and in- 
tention recognition module, an expression genera- 
tion module and a dialogue planning and manage- 
ment module. Great advances have been made in 
each of these domains but at present we are deal- 
ing only with the tip of the iceberg. In the project 
ESTEAM- 3 1 6 we chose not to address pecific issues 
such as explanation in great detail (there are many 
researchers already addressing these problems), but 
to build a general integrated system aimed at recog- 
nizing the user's intentions and answering hhn in an 
1This work was supported in part by the Commission of 
the European Communities a  ESPRIT project 316 (ESTEAM- 3,~) 
understandable way with expert knowledge. We will 
show how this system is able to incorporate mod- 
ules which are more specialized in certain domains 
(problem solver or cooperative data base access). 
2 The  Agents  
The cooperation architecture 
To provide a design method and to support the effi- 
cient implementation f AGES, we have built a spe- 
cial architecture. The architecture aims to keep sepa- 
rate the design and implementation f internal Agent 
features from external features handling cooperative 
interaction. The architectural pproach to commu- 
nication allows Agents to share tasks by problem de- 
composition and to share knowledge by using special 
Agents for Data and Knowledge Base Management. 
The main problems tackled in defining the archi- 
tecture concern: 
? support for the integration of heterogeneous 
Agents; 
? control mechanisms for managing the interac- 
tions between Agents solving subproblems; 
? efficient communication between Agents which 
share or exchange information. 
The Problem Solver 
The Problem Solver citehanet incorporates the re- 
sults of two major research efforts: logic-based 
modeling and encoding, and explanation generation 
based on proof trees. The Problem Solver is the 
module which solves the user's problem{s) in a fi- 
nancial domain and provides proof trees that the Di- 
alogue Manager can use to generate xplanations. 
This Problem Solver module is based upon a knowl- 
edge representation formalism which integrates and 
object-oriented approach and logic, and is imple- 
mented in Prolog \[1,2\]. 
The Cooperative Answering Module 
In the context of traditional applications devoted 
to company management, like payroll computation, 
people or programs who have to access data in a 
1 
41  
Database have a very precise definition of the data  
they want to access. There are many other applica- 
tion.'~ where people want to access data  in order to 
make a decision, or to solve a problem whose solution 
cannot be found applying a simple algorithm. An 
important  feature of this context, from the point of 
view of data  retrieval, is that  users don' t  have a pre- 
cise idea of the data  which can help them to solve a 
problem, or to make a decision. The objective of the 
Cooperat ive Answering module is to simulate the be- 
havior of a person who wants to help as much as pos- 
sible an inter locutor who asks them a question. That  
is, to try to understand why this inter locutor asks 
this question, and to determine what addit ional  in- 
teresting information, not explicit ly requested, could 
be provided in addit ion to the answer\[3\]. 
the  D ia logue  Manager  
In the final integrated AGES demonstrator ,  the main 
problems are control l ing the cooperative functioning 
of several dist inct sources of knowledge, finding ways 
of representing and reasoning about diverse matters,  
and integrat ing the different contr ibut ions to per- 
form intel l igently a single task, namely advice-giving. 
The role of the Dialogue Manager is to provide a 
"friendly", comprehensible user interface that makes 
available to the user all the expertise of the various 
modules of the system in a flexible, uniform fash- 
ion \[4,6,7\]. We present in the next section a simple 
scenario in order to provide its functionahties. 
3 A sample dialogue 
Let us consider the following session. 
1 System : Hello, tel lme about your investment plan. 
2 User 
3 System : 
4 Vs,~r 
5 Syatem : 
6 Yse, r 
7 Sys tem : 
8 User 
9 System : 
10 User : 
11 System : 
12 User : 
I 'd like to buy a car in two years. 
Ok. An investment plan comprises three 
subparts: an emergency fund, a f ixed-term 
investment and a long-term investment. 
How much do you want to invest? 
$20,000. 
Let's begin with the emergency fund. 
How much do you want to put into an 
emergency fund? 
Let's talk about my car first. 
Ok. How much money do you want to put 
into the fixed-term investment? 
Oh, let's say $7,500. 
I recommend that you put the money into 
a liquid security. Would you like me to 
propose one? 
Yes. 
Put your money into a 4.5 % savings ac- 
count at Sofibanque. Let's return to the 
emergency fund, now. How much do you 
want to put in it? 
$5,000. 
13 System : 
14 User : 
15 System : 
16 User : 
17 System : 
18 User : 
19 System : 
20 User : 
21 System : 
22 User : 
23 System : 
24 User : 
25 System : 
26 User : 
27 System : 
28 User : 
29 System : 
30 User : 
31 System : 
32 User : 
33 System : 
Tell me also the delay. 
2 days. 
Ok. I recommend that you put the money 
into a liquid security. Would you like me 
to propose one? 
Are there any savings accounts with more 
than 4.5 % interest? 
B~rclay's has a savings account at 5 % 
interest, but it is in England 
Ok, I'll take Barclay's. 
So, that leaves you with $7,500 for your 
long-term investment, is this ok? 
I wanted $10,000. 
If you want an investment plan for $20,000 
with an emergency fund of $5,000 and a 
fixed-term investment of $7,500, it only 
leaves $7,500 for a long term investment. 
If you want to put $10,000, then you 
should modify something else in your 
plan. 
Could I put $2,500 into the emergency 
fund? 
Ok. I recommend for the emergency fund 
a bank account at Sofibanque earning 
4.5%, you can put $10,000 into the long- 
term investment. What risk-level would 
you like? 
What is the risk-level of a long-term in- 
vestment? 
The risk-level is represented by an integer 
between 1 to 10. It shows the risk you 
want to have for your portfolio. So, what 
risk do you choose? 
What if I put a risk-level of 5? 
In this case, I recommend . . .  
Do you accept? 
And if the risk-level is 2? 
In this case, I recommend . . .  
Which one do you prefer? 
The first one 
Ok. So, to sum up, you want to invest 
$20,000, with $2,500 in an emergency fund 
with a delay of 2 days, $7,500 in a fixed- 
term investment to buy a car in two years, 
and $10,000 in an long-term investment. 
Is that right? 
That's fine 
Ok. Goodbye!! 
Analysis 
From this dialogue, we can easily demonstrate  the 
different points we mentioned above. 
? In sentence 6 the user prefers to begin the dis- 
cussion with the f ixed-term investment, while 
the system began the discussion with the emer- 
gency fund. The system changes ti le order of 
the different topics according to the will of the 
user and the feasibi l ity of such an exchange. 
42  
2 
? In sentence 12, the user does not say "The 
amount of the emergency fund is $5000" but 
only "$5000". The system must understand 
such an elliptical response. In the same way, 
the system does not ask "Tell me tile delay of 
the emergency fund of your Investment plan?" 
but only "Tell me the delay?". Normally, the 
two pa~'ticipants hide a lot of information. They 
just give sufficient information to have an unam- 
biiguous dialogue. But having a partial knowl- 
edge necessitates being able to confirm some- 
times what has been understood. In sentence 7, 
the system asks the user for a confirmation of 
the value of the fixed-term investment (2 years) 
which was previously given by him in the sen- 
tence 2. The ~ystem has understood that buying 
a car is equivalent to having a fixed-term invest- 
ment, but it asks him to verify this supposition. 
* In sentence 24 the user begins a digression in 
order to have an explanation about a new term 
introduced by the system in asking for a value. 
The system has to recognize this new user's in- 
tention, cope with (it may be longer than a two- 
turn dialogue (User, system) as ha the discussion 
of a given solution) and come back to the previ- 
ous dialogue. 
* ht sentence 10 the user accepts the system's of- 
fer to come up with a detailed investment plan, 
while in sentence 16 he decides to find out about 
other possibilities. 
* In sentences 26 - 30 the system and the user 
explore the implications of a modification of one 
of the parameters. 
All these considerations appear in any discussions, 
independently of the topics. There is implicit infor- 
mation (abbreviations, peaking manner) used in a 
discussion in a given domain. The dialoguer we are 
building does not handle such implicit information. 
We focus our attention on the domain-independent 
aspect of the dialogue organization. However, the 
advice-giving system must be able to explain what it 
does and how it does it, and also what the other com- 
ponents it is interfaced with do. We added, therefore, 
these domain-functionalities n order to implement a
system able to help a novice user as well as an expe- 
rienced one. 
The system has to adapt its utterances and its ex- 
planations according to its perception of tile user's 
knowledge. For instance, when tile system presents a
portfolio, it hides irrelevant information for a novice 
user while it shows it for the experienced one. In the 
same way, the system tries to use the user's vocabu- 
lary. In the example given above, the system uses the 
word car rather than fixed-term investment in order 
to hell) the user's understanding. 
4 Conc lus ion  
The integrated system elaborated in the project 
ESTEAM-316 is a demonstrator incorporating as 
much of the technology developed within Esteam 
as possible. This experience comes from research 
in the areas of Knowledge Representation, Cooper- 
ative Answering, Intentional Answering, Deductive 
Databases and Mixed-Initiative interfaces (also see 
the deliverables and the prototypes issuing from the 
project). The imitation of human behavior in the do- 
main of the advice-giving remains very delicate and 
elaborate but we believe we have made a significant 
contribution. 
Acknowledgements 
We want to thank our partners within Esteam-316: 
CSELT in Torino, CERT in Toulouse and Phflips in 
Brussels. 
References  
\[1\] A. Bruffaerts and E. Henin, Proof 2?ees for 
Negation as Failure: Yet Another Prolog Meta- 
Interpreter, in: Logic Programming, Proe. of the 
Fifth International Conference and Symposium, 
Seattle, August 15-19, 1988. 
\[2\] A. Bruffaerts and E. Henin, Some Claims about 
Effective Explanation Generation in Expert Sys- 
tems, in: Proc. of the AAAI'88 Workshop on 
Explanation, Saint Paul, August 22, 1988, 83- 
86. 
\[3\] 
\[4\] 
\[51 
\[6\] 
\[7\] 
F.Cuppens, R.Demolombe. Cooperative An- 
swering : a methodology to to provide in- 
telligent access to a Database. Proceedings 
of 2d Int.Conf. on Expert Database Systems. 
The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Com- 
pany. 1988. 
P. Decitre, T. Grossi, C. Jullien, J.-P. Solvay, 
"Planning for Problem Formulation in Advice- 
Giving Dialogue." Proceedings of the Associa- 
tion of Computational Linguistics, 1987. 
M. Hanet, The Problem Solver, in: Deliverable 
no. 16, ESTEAM-316 Esprit Project, July 1989. 
C. 3ullien, 3.P. Solvay, "Person-Machine Dia- 
logue for Expert Systems : The Advice-Giving 
Case." Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Expert Systems 
~? their applications, Avignon, 1987. 
C. Jullien, J.C. Marty, "Plan Revision ill 
Person-Machine Dialogue." 4th conf. of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the Association of Computa- 
tional Linguistics, Manchester, April 1989. 
3 43 
