GENERATING CONNECTIVES 
Michael Elhadad 
Kathleen R. McKeown 
Department ofComputer Science 
450 Computer Science Building 
Columbia University 
New York, N.Y. 10027 
ELHADAD@CS.COLUMBIA.EDU 
MCKEOWN@CS.COLUlVlBIA.EDU 
ABSTRACT 
We present an implemented procedure to select an 
appropriate connective to link two propositions, which 
is part of a large text generation system. Each connec- 
tive is defined as a set of constraints between features of 
flxe propositions it connects. Ore' focus has been to 
identify pragmatic features flint can be produced by a 
deep generator to provide a simple representation f
connectives. Using these features, we can account for a 
variety of connective usages, and we can distinguish 
between similar connectives. We describe how a sur- 
fi~ee generator can produce complex sentences when 
given these features in input. The selection procedure is
irnplemented as part of a large functional unification 
gralmnar. 
1. INTROI )UCT ION:  MOTIVAT ION 
A language %~:.eration system that produces com- 
plex sentences must be able to determine which connec- 
tive (e.g., "but," "although/' "since," "because," 
"and," etc.) best links its embedded sentences. Pre- 
vious text generation systems (McKeown, 1985, Mann, 
1984, Davey, 1979, Hovy, 1987) 1 have generally used a 
notion similar to rhetorical relations to describe the con- 
nection between propositions. They make a one-to-one 
mapping from these relations to connectives for genera- 
tion (for example, the relation "opposition" would be 
realized by the connective "but"). In this approach it is 
difficult to distinguish between similar comlectives 
(e.g., because vs. since or but vs. although). These con- 
nectives can not be used interchangeably, however, and 
a generation system must be able to make the correct 
choice. 
In this paper, we describe a model for connective 
choice which distinguishes between similar connectives. 
It is based on a representation f utterances - called 
"interpretative fommt" (IF) (Elhadad & McKeown, 
1988) - which captures several dimensions of their 
usage. We present an implemented procedure to select 
an appropriate connective given IFs for two proposi- 
tions. We demonstrate how our surface generator uses 
I\]:s to choose between the four connectives but, 
although, since and because. 
1From published reports, we assume these are the primary genera- 
fion systems that make any attempts at connective g neration. 
Each connective is described as a set of constraints 
between the features of the propositions it connects. 
This allows for a simple representation f the connec- 
tive but one that captures a wide variety of different 
uses. An IF contains four pragmatic features in addition 
to the propositional content and speech act of the 
proposition: argumentative orientation (Duerot, 1983), 
the set of conclusions that the proposition supports; 
functional status (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975, Roulet et 
al, 1985), its structural relationship to the remaining dis- 
course segment; polyphonic features (Ducrot, 1983), in- 
dicating whether the speaker attributes the utterance to 
himself or to others; and a thematization procedure, 
which describes the connection between discourse n- 
tities in the propositions. Connective selection is im- 
plemented through constraint satisfaction using a func- 
tional unification grammar. 
2. PREVIOUS WORK ON CONNECTIVE  
DESCRIPT ION 
The most basic constraint on connection is often 
referred to as homogeneousness condition: two proposi- 
tions can be conjoined if "they have something in com- 
mon." Which features of the conjuncts must be 
homogeneous is a difficult question: (Chomsky, 1957, 
p.36) stated a constraint on syntactic homogeneousness 
(conjuncts must be "o f  the same type"); a purely syn- 
tactic constraint is, however, largely insufficient o 
satisfy the needs of a text generation system, since file 
decision to conjoin must be made before the syntactic 
structure of the conjuucts is determined. (Lakoff, 
1971) proposed a semantic approach to the problem of 
homogeneousness: conjuncts must have a "common 
topic" for conjunction to be possible (p. 118). Based on 
this definition of homogeneousness, she distinguished 
between a "semantic" meaning o f "but"  (to express a
semantic opposition) and a pragmatic usage of "but" 
(to deny expectations), for eases which would not 
satisfy the homogeneousness constraint (e.g., "John is 
rich but dumb"). Such a distinction between a semantic 
and a pragmatic analysis of connectors i criticized in 
(Abraham, 1979, p.104) (Lang, 1984, pp172ff) and 
(Ducrot et al 1980). Lang (1984) presents a general 
semantics for conjunction that does not distinguish be- 
tween pragmatic (or contextual) and semantic levels. 
Lang attributes to conjunctions an operative semantics: 
conjunctions' meanings are sets of "instructions" fbr 
"carrying out certain mental operations" (p. 96) 2. The 
~A similar operative approach is advocated in Ducrot, 1983) 
1 97 
meaning of connectors is a "program" that controls 
how a "common integrator" can be constructed from 
the meaning of each conjunct. In our work, we use a 
similar approach for the definition of connectives, but, 
since we work on generation (as opposed to interpreta- 
tion), we describe the meaning of connectives as sets of 
constraints hat must be satisfied between the conjuncts 
as opposed to "instructions." We use the notion of 
thematization procedure to account for the 
homogeneousness condition (of. Section 5). In this 
paper, we concentrate on the distinctions between 
similar connectives rather than on the general properties 
of the class of connectives. 
Work on the structure of discourse (Cohen, 1984, 
Reichman, 1985, Grosz & Sidner, 1986) has identified 
the role of connectives in marking structural shifts. This 
work generally relies on the notion that hearers maintain 
a discourse model (which is often represented using 
stacks). Connectives give instructions to the hearer on 
how to update the discourse model. For example, 
"now" (Hirschberg & Litman, 1987) can indicate that 
the hearer needs to push or pop the current stack of the 
model. When used in this manner, connectives are 
called "cue (or clue) words." This work indicates that 
the role of connectives i not only to indicate a logical 
or conceptual relation, but also to indicate the structural 
organization of discourse. The distinction between cue 
and non-cue usages is an important one, and we also 
attempt to capture cue usages, but the structural indica- 
tion (which often has the form of just push or pop) 
under-constrains the choice of a cue word -. it does not 
control how to choose among the many markers indicat- 
ing a pop. 
Halliday (Halliday, 1985) proposes that the connec- 
tion between clauses can be described on three dimen- 
sions: taxis, expansion and projection. This model is 
implemented in the Nigel system (Mann & Matthiessen, 
1983). It provides a fine-grained classification of a 
broad set of connectives. However, labels used to 
describe the type of relation between two propositions 
within the expansion system are similar to rhetorical 
relations and precise definitions of these relations, to 
date, have tended to be subjective. 
Like Halliday, we also attempt o provide a fine- 
grained characterization f connectives and our model 
has features that are similar to Halliday's tccds and 
projection systems. However, the use of argumentative 
features and a thematization procedure allows us to 
avoid reliance on rhetorical relations. 
Our work is influenced by work in pragmatics on 
implicature (Levinson, 1983, Karttunen & Peters, 
1979) which proposed a two-level representation f ut- 
terances (propositional content and implicatures). It is 
also based on a "multi-dimensional" description of ut- 
terances and describes connectives as devices acting on 
each pragmatic dimension. 
"But" and "although" can be distinguished by 
their influence on the discom~e structure in which they 
are embedded. We draw upon a theory of conversation 
organization common in conversation analysis (Sinclair 
& Coulthard, 1975, Taylor and Cameron, 1987~ Roulet 
et al 1985, Moeschler, 1986) to explain this distinction. 
The model describes conversation as a hierarchical 
structure and defines three levels of constituents: speech 
acts, move and exchange. A move correspond s to a turn 
of a speaker in a conversational exchange between two 
or more speakers. It is made up of several speech acts. 
In the structure of a move, one speech act is dh'ective; 
all others are subordinate - they modify or elaborate the 
directive act (Roulet et al 1985). Intuitively, the 
directive act is the reason why the speaker started 
speaking. It constrains what can follow the move in the 
discourse. While a move may consist of several sub~ 
ordinate speech acts in addition to the directive act, the 
directive controls the possibilities for successive ut- 
terances. Thus, it detemfines what is accessible in the 
structure of the preceding discourse. 
To see how this characterization f discourse can 
explain the distinction between "but" and "although," 
consider the following examples: 
(1) * He failed the exam, 
although e is smart. Let's hire him. 
(2) He failed the exam, 
but he is smart. Let's hire him. 
In both (1) and (2), the first sentence xpresses a
contrastive r lation between two propositions. But, the 
fill sequence (2) is coherent, whereas the sequence (1) 
sounds peculiar in most situations. This can be ex~ 
plained by the fact that in "P but Q" Q has directive 
status while in "P although Q," Q has subordinate 
status. In (2) then, "he is smart" has directive status, 
whereas in (1) it is subordinate. Therefore, the ar- 
gumentative o6entation of the complex sentence as a 
whole in (l) is the argumentative orientation of "he 
failed the exam" and it is the argumentative orientation 
of "he is smart" in (2). The conclusion (let's hire him) 
is only compatible with "he is sinai,." 
This distinction is similar to Halliday's taxis system 
(the classic subordinate/coordinate distinction) but 
operates at a different level. Although "but" is a con- 
junction, meaning that P and Q have the same syntactic 
status, P and Q have a different influence on the follow- 
ing discourse. We therefore require the input to the 
surface generator to indicate the "point" of a move, but 
to leave the syntactic status of each proposition un- 
specified. This more delicate decision is made by the 
surface generator. 
4. DISTINCTION BECAUSE/SINCE: 
POLYPHONIC FEATURES 
"Because" and "since ''3 have the same argumen- 
3? DISTINCTION BUT VS. ALTHOUGH: 
FUNCTIONAL STATUS 
3we consider only the causal meaning of"since" here 
98 2 
tative behavior and give the same fnnctional status to 
the propositions they connect. Their different usages 
can be explained using Ducrot's theory of polyphony 
(Duerot, 1983). Duerot distinguishes between the 
speaker and the utterers: in an utterance, some segments 
present beliefs held by the speaker, and others present 
beliefs reported by the speaker, but attributed to others -
the ntterers. 
Using this theory, the difference between "be- 
cause" and "since" is as follows: in the complex "P 
since Q," the segments P and Q can be attributed to 
different utterers ("since" is polyphonic), whereas in 
"P because Q," they must be attributed to the same 
utterer ("because" is monophonic). 
Others have described "because" and "since" by 
noting distributional differences such as: 
1. To answer a "why"  question, only "beo 
cause" works: 
Ai Why did Peter leave? 
B: Because he had to catch a train. 
B: *Since he had to catch a train. 
2. "Because" has a tendency to follow the 
main clause while "since" has a tendency 
to precede it (Quiak et al 1972, 11.37). 
3. "because"-elauses can be the focus of 
cleft sentences (Quirk et al 1972): 
It is because he helped you 
that I'm prepared to help him. 
*It is since he helped you 
that I'm prepared to help him. 
The given/new distinction gives one interpretation f 
these differences: "because" introduces new infor- 
mation, whereas "since" introduces given inibrmation 
(where given is defined as information that the listener 
already knows or has accessible to him (Halliday, 
1985)). Halliday also indicates that, in the umnarked 
ease, new information is placed towards the end of the 
clause. And indeed "because" appears towards the 
end, the nnmarked position of new intbnnation, and 
"since" towards the beginning. "Because" can be the 
focus of an It-cleft sentence which is also characteristic 
of new information (of (Prince, 1978) for example). 
' ' Because" can answer a why-question, thus providing 
new information to the asker. Presenting iven infor- 
mation in response could not serve as a direct answer. 
There are many different types of given information, 
however (Prince, 1981). Polyphony is one type of given 
information but it adds an additional parameter: each 
piece of given information is attributed to a particular 
utterer. That utterer can be one of the speakers (this is 
similar to indirect speech), or it can be a mutually 
known previous discourse. The ability to distinguish 
how the "since" clause is given (i.e., which utterer con- 
tributed iit) is crucial to correct use of sentences like (3). 
From a father to his child: 
(3) Since you are so tired, you must sleep. 
in (3), the speaker presents the hearer as the source 
of "you are tired," and uses the fact that the hearer has 
previously uttered this sentence as the argument for 
"you must sleep." If the hearer is not the source of the 
sentence, this strategy cannot convince him to go to 
sleep. Given/new in this ease is therefore a polyphonic 
distinction, and polyphony provides an added imension 
to the distinction. 
In summary, "because" and "since" have the same 
argumentative and functional status definitions, but they 
have different polyphonic definitions. "Because" re- 
quires P and Q to have the same utterers, while "since" 
does not. 
5;. THEMATIZAT ION PROCEDURE:  
CUE VS. NON-CUE USAGE 
As mentioned in Section 2, the most basic constraint 
on the use of all connectives, is that the two related 
propositions ay something about the same "thing" 
(Lakoff, 1971, p. l 18). It must be possible to find a dis- 
course entity that is mentioned in both P and Q for a 
connection PcQ to be acceptable. We call the set of 
discom~e ntities mentioned in an utterance the theme 
of a proposition. The constraint is that the themes of P 
and Q intersect. For example, in (2) "he failed the 
exam but he is smart," the entity in common is the 
person refelTed to by "he"  in both P and Q. In simple 
cases, this common entity can be found among the par- 
ticipants in the process described by the proposition. In 
many cases, however, the common entity cannot be 
found in the propositional contents of P and Q, and yet 
the connection is coherent as shown in (4), (5), and (6). 
(4) Are you going to the post office? 
- because I have some letters to send 
\[i.e., I ask this because ...\] (Quirk et al 1972, p.752) 
(5) He paid for the book, because I saw him 
\[i.e., I claim that because...\] 
(Quirk et al 1972, p.559) 
(6) A: where is she? 
B: She is sick, 
since you want to know everything. 
\[i.e., I talk because you insist...\] (Roulet et al 1985) 
We explain these connections by introducing the no- 
tion of thematization procedure. The elements of the 
theme are not limited to the entities mentioned in the 
propositional content of a proposition. They can also be 
derived from other aspects of an utterance. In (4) and 
(5), the theme contains the speech act realized in P: 
"because" justifies the fact that the locutor asked a 
question or asserted knowing something, and not the 
fact asserted or questioned. We say that "because" 
links on the speech act rather than on the propositional 
content. The SA thematization procedure adds the fea- 
ture Speech-Act:  to the theme of the proposition Q. In 
(6), "since" links on the Utterance Act: the fact that B 
utters "she is sick" is justified by A's insistence on 
knowing everything (note that "since" does not justify 
the assertion but the fact that B is speaking at all). 
It is characteristic of cei~ain connectives to allow 
3 99 
;; Polyphonic mention of a known principle: use since 
Since turning the switch to the left causes the power to decrease, 
the transmission capacity decreases. 
;; Explanat ion by a new fact: use because 
The transmission capacity decreases because you turn the switch to the left. 
;; Subordinate act is an imperative - use but 
Replace the battery, but keep the old battery. 
;; Subordinate act can be syntactical ly subordinate - use although 
Although you replaced the battery, keep the old battery. 
Figure6-1: System generated complex clauses 
linking on certain features or not - that is, to allow the 
use of a certain thematization procedure. (4) and (5) 
show that "because" allows the use of the Speech Act 
thematization procedure and (6) shows that "since" al- 
lows the use of the utterance act procedure. We cur- 
rently use the following thematization procedures in our 
implementation: Propositional Content, Argumentative 
Derivation, Functional Status, Speech Act and Utterance 
Act. 
In a complete text generation system, the "deep 
component ''4 given certain information to convey, 
decides when it is possible to make some of it implicit 
by using a certain thematization procedure. The effect 
is to remove certain discoupse ntities from the proposi- 
tional content to be generated. Using a non-PC 
thematization procedure therefore allows to implicitly 
discuss certain features of an utterance that may be dif- 
ficult to address explicitly. The deep module we are 
currently developing (Elhadad, 1990a) will use polite- 
ness constraints (Brown & Levinson, 1987) to decide 
which thematization is most appropriate. 
CUE VS. NON-CUE USAGE: Thematization procedures 
allow us to distinguish cue and non-cue usages of con- 
nectives. When a connective links on a feature that is 
not the propositional content, it does not affect he truth 
conditions of the propositions, at least in the traditional 
view. This suggests that non-content linking is in some 
ways similar to the cue/non-cue distinction discussed in 
section 2. Our approach does therefore capture this dis- 
tinction, but with several differences. It describes the 
structural move performed by the connective (whedler it 
is a push or a pop, for example) using features of the 
"nonnal" (i.e., non-cue) interpretation: if C introduces 
a directive act, it would work as a "pop," if it intro- 
duces a subordinate act, it would be a "push." Thus, a 
cue interpretation f a connective differs from non-cue 
by the thematization procedure; cue usage would be in- 
dicated by linking on the functional status, and possibly 
speech act or utterance act. 
It remains open whether cue connectives retain all 
4Generation systems are generally divided into two modules: a 
deep module decides what to say and a surface module decides how to 
say it. 
other features of non-cue usage: does a connective loose 
its normal meaning when used as a cue? Some resear- 
chers (Grosz & Sidner, 1986, Hirschberg & Litman, 
1987) seem to argue that it does: the cue and non-cue 
usages are actually two distinct words. If that is the 
case, it would be difficult for a generator to choose 
among the different cue words that can perform the 
same structural task. On the other hand, we have no 
evidence at this point that cue words are not inter- 
changeable ( .g., that "but" is used for one kind of pop 
and "now" another). 
6. IMPLEMENTATION 
The procedure for selecting connectives i part of 
FUF, a larger surface generator using the functional 
unification formalism (Elhadad, 1988, Elhadad, 1990b, 
McKeown&Elhadad, 1990). Each connective is 
represented as a functional description capturing the 
relations between the features of the segments it con- 
nects. Functional unification is well suited for our 
model because constraints on each pragqnatic dimension 
can be described separately and the formalism handles 
interaction between these dimensions. The generated 
sentences in Figure 6-1 typify the kind of sentences our 
system currently produces. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
We have presented a model that distinguishes be- 
tween similar connectives. This work synthesizes 
theoretical work in argumentation (Anscombre & 
Ducrot, 1983), conversation analysis (Sinclair & Coul- 
thard, 1975, Roulet et al 1985, Moeschler, 1985), 
polyphony and given/new studies (Duerot, 1983, Hal- 
liday, 1985, Prince, 1981) into a coherent computational 
framework. Connective choice is implemented using 
functional unification. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by DARPA under contract 
#N00039-84-C-0165 and NSF grant IRT-84-51438. 
100 4 
REFERENCES 
Abrahmn, Weruer. (1979). BUT. Studia Linguistica, 
XXX\[II(II), 89-119. 
Anseombre, J.C. & Ducrot, O. (1983). Philosophie et 
langage. L'argumentation clans la langue. 
Bruxelles: Pierre Mardaga. 
Brown, P. & Levinson, S.C. (1987). Studies in Inter- 
actional Sociolinguistics 4. Politeness : Some 
universals in language usage. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: 
Mouton. 
Cohen, R. (July 1984). A computational theory of the 
function of clue words in argument understand- 
ing. Coling84. Stanford, California: COLING, 
251-258. 
Davey, A. (1979). Discourse Production. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 
Ducrot, O. (1983). Le sens commun. Le dire et le dit. 
Paris: Les editions de Minuit. 
Duerot, O. et al (1980). Le sens commun. Les roots du 
discour~. Paris: Les editions de Minuit. 
Elhadad, M. (1988). The FUF Functional Unifier: 
User's manual. Technical Report CUCS-408-88, 
Columbia University. 
Michael Elhadad. (1990). Constraint-based Text 
Generation: Using local constraints and argumen- 
tation to generate a turn in conversation. Tech- 
nical Report CUCS-003-90, Columbia University. 
Elhadad, M. (1990). Types in Functional Unification 
Grammars. Proceedings of ACL '90. Pittsburgh. 
Elhadad, M and McKeown, K.R. (1988). What do you 
need to produce a 'but'. Technical Report 
CUCS-334-88, Columbia University. 
Grosz, B. and Sidner, C. (1986). Attentions, intentions, 
and the structure of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 12(3), 175-204. 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1985). An Introduction to Func- 
tional Grammar. London: Edward Arnold. 
Hirschberg, J. and Litman, D. (1987). Now let's talk 
about Now: identifying clue phrases intonation- 
ally. Proceedings of the 25th Conference oJ" the 
ACL. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
163-1'71. 
Eduard Hovy. (1987). Generating natural anguage un- 
der pragmatic onstraints. Doctoral dissertation, 
Yale University. 
Karttunen, L. & S. Peters. (1979). Conventional hn- 
plieature. In Oh & Dinneen (Ed.), Syntax and 
Semantics. Vol. 11: Presupposition. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Lakoff, R. (1971). IFs, ANDs and BUTs: about con- 
junction. In Fillmore & Laugendoen (Ed.), 
Studies ht Linguistic Semantics. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Lang, Ewald. (1984). SLCS. Vol. 9: The Semantics of 
Coordination. Amsterdam: John Benjamins B.V. 
Original edition: Semantic der koordinativen 
Verknupfung, Berlin, 1977. 
Levinson, S.C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
Mann, W.C. (1984). Discourse Structure for Text 
Generation. Teelmical Report ISI/RR-84-127, h- 
formation Sciences Institute. 
Mann, W.C. and Matthiessen, C. (1983). Nigel: a Sys- 
temic Grammar for Text Generation. Technical 
Report ISI/RR-83-105, USC/ISI. 
MeKeown, K.R. (1985). Text Generation: Using Dis- 
course Strategies" and Focus Constraints to 
Generate Natural Language Text. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
McKeown, K. and M. Elhadad. (1990). A Contrastive 
Evaluation of Functional Unification Grammar 
for Surface Language Generators: A Case Study 
in Choice of Connectives. In Cecile L. Paris, 
William R. Swartout and William C. Mann 
(Eds.), Natural Language Generation in Artificial 
Intelligence and Computational Linguistics. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. (to appear). 
Moeschler, J. (1985). LAL. Argumentation etConver- 
sation: Elements pour une analyse pragmatique 
du discours. Paris: Hatier~Credif. 
Moeschler, J. (1986). Connecteurs pragmatiques, lois 
de discours et strategies interpretatives: parce que 
et la justification enonciative. Cahiers de Linguis- 
tique Francaise, (7), pp. pages 149-168. 
Prince, E.F. (December 1978). A Comparison of Wh- 
Clefts and It-clefts in Discourse. Language, 54(4), 
883-906. 
Prince, E.F. (1981). Toward a Taxonomy of Given- 
New Infonnation. In Cole, P. (Ed.), Radical 
Pragmatics. New York: Academic Press. 
Quirk, R. et al (1972). A Grammar of Contemporary 
English. Longman. 
Reiclmmn, R. (1985). Getting computers to talk like 
you and me: discourse context, focus and seman- 
tics (an ATN model). Cambridge, Ma: MIT 
press. 
Roulet, E. et al (1985). L 'articulation du discours en 
fi'ancais contemporain. Lang: Berne. 
Sinclair and Coulthard. (1975). Towards an Analysis of 
Dbcourse. Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Taylor, T.J. and Cameron, D. (1987). Language & 
Communication Libraly. Vol. 9: Analysing Con- 
versation: Rules and Units in the Structure of 
Talk. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
5 101 
