TOWARDS A NEW GENERATION OF TERMINOLOGICAL RESOURCES: 
AN EXPERIMENT IN BUILDING A TERMINOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE BASE 
INGRID MEYER, DOUGLAS SKUCE, LYNNE BOWKER AND KAREN ECK 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada 
ixmal@acadvml.uottawa.ca 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes a project o construct a termi- 
nological knowledge base, called COGNITERM. 
First, we position our research framework in rela- 
tionship to recent developments in computational 
lexicology and knowledge ngineering. Second, 
we describe the COGNITERM prototype and dis- 
cuss its advantages over conventional term banks. 
Finally, we outline some of the methodological is- 
sues that have emerged from our work. 
0 INTRODUCTION 
The discipline of terminology I has received 
surprisingly little focussed attention i  the literature 
of computational linguistics - an unfortunate situa- 
tion given that NLP systems eem to be most suc- 
cessful when applied to specialized omains. We 
say focussed attention because when specialized 
lexical items are discussed in the literature, the re- 
search problems are often not clearly differentiated 
from the problems of non-specialized lexical items. 
A fundamental ssumption of our research is that, 
while terminology can certainly benefit from 
advances in computational exicology, it 
nonetheless has its own non-trivial research prob- 
lems, which are ultimately related to the quantity 
and types of specialized world knowledge that 
terminological repositories must contain. 
At the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of the 
University of Ottawa, we .are constructing a new 
type of terminological repository, COGNITERM, 
which is essentially a hybrid between a term bank 
and a knowledge base, or a terminological knowl- 
edge base (TKB). COGNITERM is a bilingual 
(French/English) TKB constructed using a generic 
knowledge ngineering tool (CODE) that has been 
used in terminology, software engineering and 
database design applications. The COGNITERM 
Project (1991-94) is focussing on the domain of 
optical storage technologies (e.g. optical discs, 
drives, processes, etc.). 
In Section 1 of the paper, we position our re- 
search in relation to recent developments in com- 
1 Slmce constraints preclude even a brief description ofthe 
discipline of terminology. Cf. Sager 1990. 
putational lexicology and knowledge ngineering; 
in Section 2, we describe the structure of 
COGN1TERM as well as some of its advantages 
over conventional term banks; in Section 3, we 
outline some methodological issues that have 
emerged from our work. 
1 RESEARCH ISSUES IN 
COMPUTATIONAL TERMINOLOGY 
1.1 Terminological vs .  Lexieal 
Knowledge Bases 
Much of the world's terminological data is 
stored in large terminological databases (TDBs) 
such as Canada's TERMIUM III, which contains 
over one million bilingual records. These TDBs 
are useful only to humans, and even then to only a 
small subset of potential users: translators remain 
the principal user category, even though TDBs 
have obvious applications in technical writing, 
management i formation and domain learning, not 
to mention awide variety of machine uses such as 
information retrieval, machine translation and ex- 
pert systems. A major weakness of TDBs is that 
they provide mainly linguistic information about 
terms (e.g. equivalents in other languages, mor- 
phological information, style labels); conceptual 
information is sparse (limited to definitions and 
sometimes contexts), unstructured, inconsistent 
and implicit. 
Given these problems, a growing number of 
terminology researchers are calling for the evolu- 
tion of TDBs into a new generation of terminologi- 
cal repositories that are knowledge-based. Since 
this vision of a TKB has been recently paralleled in 
computational lexicology by the vision of a lexical 
knowledge base or LKB (e.g. Atkins 1991, 
Boguraev and Levin 1990, Pustejovsky and 
Bergler 1991), we would like to briefly position 
our research framework in relation to these devel- 
opments. 
The LKB projected by Boguraev and Levin 
1990 differs from an LDB in two ways: 1) the 
LDB states lexical characteristics on a word-by- 
word basis, while the LKB permits generaliza- 
tions; and 2) the LKB permits inferencing, and 
thus the possibility of dynamically extending the 
Ac'rr~s DE COLING-92. NANTES. 23-28 AOt~T 1992 95 6 Paoc. OF COLING-92, NANTEs. AUG. 23-28, 1992 
lexicon to accommodate n w senses. Both charac- 
teristics are extremely important for the TKB as 
well: 1) a capacity for supporting eneralisations is 
particularly relevant to terminology since termino- 
logical repositories have an important eaching 
function2; and 2) the accommodation of new 
senses is even more crucial to terminology than to 
the general exicon since specialized languages 
grow so rapidly. While the TKB must share these 
characteristics, it differs from the LKB in one im- 
portant way, which derives from the fundamental 
difference between general and specialized lexical 
items. This difference can be summarized in the 
following two principles: 
? an LKB must make explicit what a native speaker 
knows about concepts denoted by general lexical 
items 
? a TKB must make explicit what a native speaker 
who is also a domain ex_oert knows about con- 
cepts denoted by specialized lexical iterrL~ 
While the lexicographer's ultimate source of 
lexieal knowledge is his/her own intuition, the 
terminologist's challenge is to model experts' ter- 
minological intuitions, which stem in large part 
from their domain knowledge. The acquisition of 
domain knowledge, therefore, has traditionally 
been the starting point for any practical terminol- 
ogy project; only when the knowledge structures 
of a domain are systematized to some degree can 
terminologists proceed with term extraction, defi- 
nition construction, analysis of synonymy and 
polysemy, identification of equivalents in other 
languages, etc. The crucial importance of model- 
ling domain knowledge in a TKB necessitates a 
conceptual framework and technology which, in 
our view, should derive partly from recent insights 
in knowledge ngineering. 
1.2 Terminology and Knowledge 
Engineering 
At the heart of the relationship between ter- 
minology and knowledge ngineering is the fact 
that practitioners of both disciplines function as 
intermediaries in a knowledge communication con- 
text involving experts on the one hand and a 
knowledge processing technology on the other. 
This type of knowledge communication context 
entails three principal activities: 
Knowledge acquis i t ion.  Acquisition of 
knowledge, whether by elicitation from a human 
2 Most TDB users are not domain experts, and thus hope to 
acquire some domain knowledge when they look up a term. 
expert or extraction from texts, is complicated by 
the fact that domain expertise consists of three el- 
ements - performance, understanding and com- 
munication - that require the expert to play the 
roles of practitioner, scientist and teacher, espec- 
tively (Gaines 1990). Unfortunately, experts vary 
widely in their teaching skills: they may not have 
the linguistic ability to express knowledge clearly; 
they may not provide xactly the knowledge that is 
required; etc. As well, they may vary in their un- 
derstanding of the field, presenting the knowledge 
engineer/terminologist w th problems of inconsis- 
tency and contradiction, 
Knowledge fo rmal i za t ion .  Knowledge 
does not come "off the shelf, prepackaged, ready 
for use" (Hayes-Roth 1987:293). As already men- 
tioned, it can be inconsistent and contradictory. It 
can be multidimensional, since experts' under- 
standing of a conceptual system can depend on 
their point of view. It may be hard to "capture", 
since it is constantly changing, and since emergent 
knowledge can be incomplete and unclear. Finally, 
from the knowledge ngineer/terminologist's point 
of view, it will exist in various degrees of"clarity" 
and "depth": since knowledge acquisition is 
incremental, certain concepts will be more clearly 
or deeply understood than others at any given 
time. 
Knowledge re f inement .  Once formal- 
ized, knowledge may be refined in two ways: 1) it 
may be validated by testing the knowledge-based 
system on the intended application, and/or 2) it 
may be periodically updated, for example, as the 
knowledge ngineer/terminologist's understanding 
of the field deepens or expands, when the field it- 
self changes, or when the system needs more 
knowledge due to changes in the application. 
Knowledge refinement may again entail knowl- 
edge acquisition and formalization, making the 
knowledge ngineering cycle a continuous pro- 
cess. 
Over the last three years, we have developed 
and tested a knowledge ngineering tool called 
CODE (Conceptually Oriented Description 
Environment), which is designed to assist a user 
who may or may not be a domain expert in acquir- 
ing, formalizing and refining specialized knowl- 
edge. Although genetic by design, CODE empha- 
sizes linguistic and particularly terminological sup- 
port, which we feel is crucial to all knowledge n- 
gineering applications. From 1987 to 1990, a 
working prototype was developed and tested in 
three terminology-intensive applications: term bank 
construction, software engineering and database 
ACIES DE COLING-92, NAbrlES, 23-28 AO~r 1992 9 S 7 PROC. OF COLING-92, NA/C~'ES, AUG. 23-2.8, 1992 
design 3. Our research as now entered a second 
three-year phase, with the goal of using CODE to 
help us develop a clearer concept of a TKB and of 
an associated methodology. 
2 COGNITERM: A 
TERMINOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE 
BASE 
2.1 General Description 
COGNITERM is essentially designed as a 
hybrid between aconventional TDB and a knowl- 
edge base. Each concept is represented in a frame- 
like structure called a concept descriptor (CD), 
which has two main information categories. The 
Conceptual Information category is the knowledge 
base component, listing conceptual characteristics 
and their values. CDs are normally, though not 
necessarily, arranged in inheritance hierarchies. 
The Linguistic Information category is the TDB 
component, providing all the strictly linguistic in- 
formation ormally found in conventional TDBs. 
The TKB can be visualized graphically in a 
variety of semantic net displays. Both hierarchical 
(e.g. generic-specific, part-whole) and non-hierar- 
chical relations can be graphed. Since knowledge 
acquisition typically proceeds one subdomain at a 
time, subwindows may show only a restricted part 
of the knowledge structure (i.e. a subtree). There 
is also a masking capability which, for example, 
can show only concepts that fall within a given 
"dimension" of reality. 
As an aid to definition construction, and 
specifically to assist in determining the differentiat- 
ing characteristics, CODE offers a Characteristic 
Comparison Matrix that presents the union of all 
characteristics of coordinate concepts 4, with the 
exclusion of those that are identical in all coordi- 
nates. 
Finally, navigation through COGNITERM is 
facilitated by CODE's Browser, which allows the 
knowledge to be accessed either by names of con- 
cepts or names of their characteristics, both of 
which can be presented in a conceptual (i.e. hierar- 
3 This first phase of our research has already been 
documented lsewhere: ageneral technical description of
CODE can be found in Skuce (in press b); an analysis of 
the relationship between terminology and knowledge 
engineering can be found in Meyer 1991 and (in press); the 
three terminology-intensive applications are described in 
Skuce and Meyer 1990a/b (term bank construction), Skuce 
(in preparation) (software ngineering), and Downs et al 
1991 (database d sign). 
4 By coordinate concepts we mean concepts hat share the 
same parent in a hierarchy. 
chical) or alphabetical order. A variety of masks 
can be applied to restrict the knowledge. 
2 .2  Advantages of a TKB over a TDB 
The differences between a conventional TDB 
and a TKB can be examined from three points of 
view: 1) the information itself, 2) support for ac- 
quiring and systematizing the information and 3) 
facilities for retrieving the information. A brief de- 
scription 5 of each is found below. 
The information. In a TDB, conceptual 
information is encoded implicitly in the form of 
definitions, contexts, indication of domain(s), etc. 
In a TKB, it is encoded explicitly. The resultant 
degree of structure imposed on the information has 
three important by-products. First, it allows for an 
explicit representation f conceptual relations (as 
opposed to implicit representations i  TDB defini- 
tions or contexts). Second, it facilitates consis- 
tency: since generic concepts are explicitly indi- 
cated, for example, definitions of all coordinate 
concepts must have the same genus term; since 
characteristics inherit to subeoncepts, they will 
correspond from one coordinate concept o an- 
other. Third, an explicit representation f concep- 
tual relations facilitates graphical representations of 
knowledge structures; this aspect is particularly 
emphasized in the COGNITERM Project since 
graphical representations aid learning, providing 
the kind of conceptual "map" advocated by numer- 
ous educational psychologists 6. 
Acquisit ion and systematization of 
information. Unlike conventional TDBs, a TKB 
such as COGNITERM provides not only a 
medium for storing information, but also mecha- 
nisms to assist in acquiring and systematizing the 
information in the fast place. Inheritance mecha- 
nisms play an important role in this regard: on the 
simplest level, they free the terminologist from re- 
peating information from one hierarchical level to 
another, and allow the possibility of "what-if" ex- 
periments; on a more interesting level, inheritance 
can be associated (as it is in CODE) with mecha- 
nisms for signalling conflicts when changes to one 
hierarchical level "percolate" through the knowl- 
edge structures. A browsing mechanism such as 
we have implemented provides additional support 
for acquisition, as it allows the kind of hypertext- 
like "navigation" through the knowledge structures 
that is needed to ferret out compatible knowledge 
"spaces" for a new concept. Other implemented 
5 A much more detailed description, illustrated with 
examples ofCOGNITERM output, can be found in Meyer 
et al 1992 (in press). 
6 C? Sowa 1991 (in press). 
AcrEs DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AOt3T 1992 9 5 8 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
user interface features, such as masks, the 
Characteristic Comparison Matrix, and a highly 
developed graphical display, are just some exam~ 
pies of the potential facilities of a TKB environ- 
ment designed to help terminologists "get the 
knowledge straight" throughout the acquisition 
process. 
Retrieval of information. Conventional 
TDBs are severely handicapped by their funda- 
mental term-to-concept orientation: knowing a 
teml, one can expect he TDB to indicate (to some 
degree, at least) what it means, what its synonyms 
are, etc. Terminological research, however, is very 
often concept-to-term oriented: for example, "real- 
life" terminology is typified by questions like 
"What do you call the machine with function W?", 
"What do you call the material that has physical 
characteristics X, Y, and Z?" The inability of con- 
ventional TDBs to answer these kinds of questions 
leads to the proliferation of synonyms and quasi- 
synonyms, one of the greatest impediments to 
communication i  specialized omains. Users of 
COGN1TERM can access its data through any 
conceptual characteristic todetermine whether the 
concept they have in mind already has a name. 
3 METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES 
In deciding on a preliminary methodology 
for our work, we naturally turned to the literature 
of both computational lexicology and knowledge 
engineering for inspiration, with little success. 
Even the world's largest knowledge acquisition 
project, CYC (Lenat and Guha 1990), provides 
only sparse methodological guidance (Skuce in 
press a). To date, our methodology has remained 
essentially grounded in that traditionally used by 
terminologists (Sager 1990), a reasonable starting 
point when one considers that, although terminol- 
ogists have traditionally not built TKBs, concep- 
tual analysis has always been a central part of theft 
work 7 nonetheless. Tenninologists are keenly 
aware of the importance of a certain depth of do- 
main knowledge, and many of the conceptual 
analysis techniques that are advocated in the 
knowledge ngineering literature - e.g. describing 
conceptual characteristics through attribute-value 
pairs, sketching concept networks - have been part 
of the terminological methodology for years. 
The methodology we have developed can be 
very superficially described as follows8: 1) After 
introductory reading on the domain, the principal 
7 A detailed analysis of the role of conceptual nalysis in 
terminology can be found in Meyer (in press). 
8 A detailed escription fthe methodology can be found in 
Meyer et al 1992 (in press). 
conceptual relations are sketched out, with the 
goals of establishing the boundaries of the domain 
and identifying the subdomains, from which the 
most fundamental is selected for further analysis. 
2) A template of conceptual characteristics is es- 
tablished for the selected subdomain; it is used as a 
guide to the knowledge acquisition process, and 
inherits to lower levels of the conceptual hierarchy, 
where it can also be specialized. 3) Conceptual nd 
linguistic information are entered into the system 
as they are acquired (mainly from the corpus). A 
concept is integrated into a hierarchy whenever its 
superconcept is known; when it is not, or when 
there is some doubt, the concept is labelled 
"unclassified" (unchtssified concepts can occur at 
any level in a hieraa~'hy, i.e. there can be different 
"degrees" of classification). 4) Intensional defini- 
tions are constructed with the help of the 
Characteristic Comparison Matrix. Steps 2-4 are 
then repeated for the next subdomain, until all sub- 
domains have been completed. 
A number of the more troublesome method- 
ological issues with which we are currently grap- 
pling are briefly outlined below. 
Knowledge acquisition "paths". 
Knowledge acquisition is not a journey down a 
straight path: there is no visible "goal". Although 
we have followed traditional terminology method~ 
ology in adopting asubdomain-oriented, top-down 
approach to acquisition, it often seems desirable to 
deviate from the principal subdomain when one 
encounters elated te.rms in a neighbouring subdo- 
main or field, and to work bottom-up as well as 
top-down within the principal subdomain. While 
the subdomains we have investigated so far (the 
majority of the concepts belonging to the semantic 
class of artefacts) are dominated by generic-spe- 
cific and part-whole relations, subdomains related 
to other semantic lasses may be more amenable to 
analysis based on different relations, as has been 
pointed out, for example, in the literature on the 
WordNet project (Miller 1991, Fellbaum 1991). 
Multidimensionality. While terminolo- 
gists are well aware that a given domain can be 
subdivided in different ways, depending on the 
expert's point of view, they have not traditionally 
attempted to account for it in any serious way, 
since this is difficult to do with pencil-and-paper 
techniques. Some problems that arise are how 
such "multidimensionality" affects knowledge ac- 
quisition "paths", how the technology can better 
support he maintenance of conceptual clarity as 
the number of dimensions grows (for example, 
through masking facilities of the kind we have 
implemented), how multidimensionality can be re- 
flected in definition construction, etc. 
ACRES DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 Ao~r 1992 9 S 9 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANq ES, Aua. 23-28, 1992 
Validation. Validation by experts and other 
terminologists, which has always been an impor- 
tant part of terminology work, is complicated in 
our approach by the fact that our TKB is very 
hypertext-like, and thus requires revision tech- 
niques that go beyond those normally applied to 
"flat" texts such as conventional terminology 
records. We need to investigate further at which 
points validators hould be consulted, what elicita- 
tion techniques should be used at each point, how 
to handle inconsistencies in opinion, etc. 
Increased automat ion.  To date, our re- 
search efforts are oriented towards facilitating (and 
not automating) the knowledge acquisition process 
for developing and implementing our concept of a 
TKB. This is consistent with the majority of 
knowledge acquisition projects in the world, in- 
cluding CYC. As the concept of a TKB becomes 
clearer, however, we hope that TKB and LKB re- 
searchers will collaborate in exploring possibilities 
for a more automated approach to acquisition. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The COGNITERM Project is supported by the 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council 
of  Canada (SSHRC) and Research Services of the 
University of Ottawa. Development of  CODE is 
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council  of  Canada (NSERC), the 
University Research Incentives Fund of the 
Government of Ontario, Bell Northern Research 
and Research Services o f  the University of  
Ottawa. 
REFERENCES 
ATKINS, B.T.S. 1991. "Building a Lexicon: The 
Contribution of Lexicography". International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol. 4, No. 3. 
BOGURAEV, Branimir and LEVIN, Beth. 1990. 
"Models for Lexical Knowledge Bases". Proceedings of the 
Sixth Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the New 
Oxford English Dictionary and Text Research. Waterloo: 
University of Waterloo. 
DOWNS, Mary, GREENE, Reid and RISHEL, 
Diane. 1991. "Conceptual Data Modeling in a Materials 
R&D Organization". 29th Annual Symposium of the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Washington, D.C. 
FELLBAUM, Christiane. 1991. "English Verbs as a 
Semantic Net". International Journal of Lexicography, Vol. 
3, No. 4. 
GAINES, Brian. 1990. "Knowledge Acquisition 
Systems". Knowledge Engineering (Vol. 1: Fundamentals), 
Ed. Hojjat Adeli. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
HAYES-ROTH, F. 1987. "Expert Systems". 
Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence. Ed. Stuart Shapiro. 
New York: John Wiley and Sons. 
LENAT, D. and GUHA, R. 1990. Building Large 
Knowledge-Based Systems. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. 
LEVIN, Beth. 1991. "Building a Lexicon: The 
Contribution of Linguistics". International Journal of 
Lexicography, Vol. 4, No. 3. 
MEYER, Ingrid. (in press). "Concept Management 
for Terminology: A Knowledge Engineering Approach". 
Proceedings of the Symposium on Standardizing 
Terminology for Better Communication: Practice, Applied 
Theory and Results (Cleveland, Ohio, June 1991). Special 
Technical Publication of the American Society for Testing 
Materials (ASTM). 
MEYER, Ingrid. 1991. "Knowledge Management for 
Terminology-Intensive Applications: Needs and Tools". 
Proceedings of the ACL SIG Workshop on Lexical 
Semantics and Knowledge Representation. (To appear as a 
book edited by J. Pustejovsky and S. Bergler and published 
by Springer Verlag.) 
MEYER, Ingrid, BOWKER. Lynne and ECK, Karen. 
1992 (in press). "COGNITERM: An Experiment in 
Building a Terminological Knowledge Base". Proceedings of
the Fifth Euralex International Congress. 
MILLER, George. 1991. "Nouns in WordNet: A 
Lexical Inheritance System". International Journal of 
Lexicography. Vol. 3, No. 4. 
PUSTEJOVSKY, James and BERGLER, Sabine 
(Eds.). 1991. Proceedings of the ACL SIG Workshop on 
Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation. fro 
appear as a book published by Springer Vetiag.) 
SAGER, Juan. 1990. A Practical Course in 
Terminology Processing. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
SKUCE, Douglas. (in press a). "A Review of: 
Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems (Leant and 
Guha)". The Journal of Artificial Intelligence. 
SKUCE, Douglas. (in press b). "A Wide Spectrum 
Knowledge Management System". Knowledge Acquisition. 
SKUCE. Douglas. (in preparation). "Managing 
Software Design Knowledge: A Too1 and an Experiment". 
SKUCE, Douglas and MEYER, lngrid. 1990a. 
"Concept Analysis and Terminology: A Knowledge-Based 
Approach to Documentation". Proceedings of the Tlu'rteenth 
International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 90). 
SKUCE, Douglas and MEYER, Ingrid. 1990b. 
"Computer-Assisted Concept Analysis: An Essential 
Component of a Terminologist's Workstation". Proceedings 
of the Second International Congress on Terminology and 
Knowledge Engineering Applications. Frankfurt: Indeks 
Verlag. 
SOWA, John. 1991 (in press). "Conceptual Analysis 
as a Basis for Knowledge Acquisition". In The Cognition of 
Experts: Psychological Research and Empirical .41, Ed. R. 
R. Hoffman. Berlin: Springer Vedag. 
ACTas DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AOtJT 1992 9 6 0 PROC. OF COL1NG-92, NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
