Generat ion of Informative Texts with Style 
Stephan M. Kerped j iev  
Institute of Mathematics 
Acad. G. Bonchev St., BI.8 
1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 
Abst ract :  An approach to the computational treatment 
of style is presented in the case of generation of informative 
texts. We regard the style mestly as a me,as of controlled 
selection of alternatives faced at each level of text generation. 
The generation technique, as well as the style specification, 
are considered at four levels - -  content production, discourse 
generation, surface structure development, and lexicai choice. 
A style is specified by the frequency of occurrence of certain 
features examined through observation of particular texts. 
The algorithm for text generation ensures efficient reatment 
of the style requirements. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
The manner of presentation, i.e. the repeating pattern 
of expression produced by a given subject or ill a certain 
community, is known as style. Thus each newspaper 
renders the weather information in n specific style by 
adopting n particular scheme of presentation. We as- 
sume that a text generator, like humans, should has its 
own style. Furthermore, we regard the style as a means 
to control the selection of particular constructs among 
the great variety provided by the language. In this pa- 
per, we study what defines a style and how a system 
could produce texts with style. 
The problem is tackled in the framework of text gener- 
ation created by some of the pioneering works in the field 
\[9,10\]. According to this framework, the process of gen- 
eration is considered at four levels: content production, 
discourse planning, surface structure generation and lex- 
ical choice. We trace out the features that characterize 
the texts generated from a given content portion in the 
case of informative texts (introduced in section 2) and 
show how they can be treated eomputationally. For illus- 
tration of our considerations we make use of the class of 
weather reports - -  informative texts about which a good 
deal of material has been collected, mostly through MF,- 
TEOVIS - -  an experimental system for handling multi- 
modal weather eports. 
The development of the METEOVIS project began 
with the transformation of weather forecasts from text 
to map \[5\]. Then we studied the conversion of weather 
forecast texts into texts with another discourse structure 
or in another language \[6\]. This year, the system was re- 
designed so that multimodal weather products could be 
generated from dntasets \[7\]. The domain specific knowl- 
edge was isolated in knowledge bases (terminological, 
rhetorical and grammatical), and the processing mod- 
ules were made independent from the subject domain 
as much as possible. At this point we became aware 
that additional information was necessary to produce 
high quality texts. Thus we came to the notion of style 
which was later on generalized to the ease of informative 
texts. 
2 I n fo rmat ive  texts  
The considerations in this paper refer to a particular 
category of texts which 1 call informative texts. Exam- 
pies, in addition to the weather eports, are war com- 
munique,  summaries on the ecological situation over a 
given region, etc. An informative text describes a phe- 
nomenon or a situation, either observed or predicted. It 
consists of assertions, each one relating an event, obser- 
vation or prediction to a given location and time period. 
Informative texts differ from descriptive texts (stud- 
ied in \[113\]) in that they are not intended to create per- 
manent long-term memory traces about certain concep- 
tual structures; instead, they draw a mental picture of 
a particular situation. Informative texts differ also from 
instructional (operative) texts in that they are not asso- 
ciated with particular actions on the part of the reader 
(a lot of studies on instructional texts have been car- 
ried out, consider e.g. \[8\]). Informative texts are a type 
of objective narrative texts well-classified by their sub- 
jeet domains (e.g. weather, ecology) and inheriting from 
those domains properly devised models. 
The source information for the generation of an infor- 
mative text is a dataset produced by an application pro- 
gram or collected by humans. The dataset encodes the 
situation comprehensively according to a certain model 
created to support he research and practical work in the 
corresponding field. Usually, that model defines the pa- 
rameters, both quantitative and qualitative, that char- 
acterize the phenomena concerned, as well as some rela- 
tions between parameters. 
Since each assertion specifies the value of a param- 
eter referred to a particular location and time period, 
territory aud time models are employed as well. They 
define the granularity of the territory and the time axis, 
and certain relations between time periods or regions 
(e.g. inclusion, partial order, neighbourhood, paths of 
regions). Depending on the size of grain, either tem- 
poral or spatial, the assertions are characterized with 
a certain degree of imprecision which, if greater than a 
given threshold, has to be explicitly stated in order to 
prevent he renders from getting mislead. 
The predictive character of some informative texts re- 
quires that the assertions are marked with the probabil- 
ity of their occurrence. Similarly to imprecision, this in- 
formation, called certainty, is necessary for the creation 
of a proper picture of the situation being presented. 
Acr~ DE COL1NG-92. NANT~, 23-28 ^ ot~" 1992 ifl 2 4 Puoc. OF COLING-92. NANTES. Ago. 23-28, 1992 
3 Style of informat ive texts 
The concept of style is fundamental in this work. In 
the light of NL generation systems, the style is a means 
of adapting the system to a particular manner of text 
formulation, thus making possible the expression of the 
same content portion as different exts, according to the 
available styles. 
In \[2\] an approach to tim computational treatment 
of style is suggested in the case of machine translation. 
The internal stylistics of the source language is used to 
determine the specilic goals of style such as clarity or 
concreteness; then the comparative stylistics for tile two 
languages i employed to infer tile corresponding style 
goals of the target text; anti finally, the internal stylis- 
tics of the target language says how to construct he 
target text so that the inferred goals be acbieved. The 
relationship between stylistic and syntactic features is 
expressed through stylistic grammars. 
Our approach to using style features in text generation 
is similar to tile approach in \[9\]. Both allow adopting one 
or another generation alternative on the basis of certain 
stylistic rules. Unlike our approach, however, their rules 
define the preferences explicitly (we use features distri- 
butions) and concern only the surface structure develop- 
ment (we cover all levels of text generation). 
"lb provide an evidence for the existence of styles in 
informative texts, we observed a number of weather 
forecasts published in different newspapers in three lan- 
guages --- Bulgarian, English and R.ussian. Samples of 
such texts are given below (the translations from Bul- 
garian and Russian into English preserve the features of 
the original texts as much as possible): 
qbday it will be cloudy. In many portions it will 
drizzle, turning into snow over the regions higher 
than 500 m above the sea level... 
Outlook for Friday: The rain will stop and it will 
clear gradually. 
Trud (translated from Bulgarian) 
ltaln in south-east England will soon clear anti with 
the rest of sonthern and central England and Wales 
the day will be mainly dry. floweret, further rain 
is likely in southernmost counties by midnight ... It 
will feel cool everywhere in the strong winds which 
will reach gale force in the seuth-east. 
~17te Times 
Much of Britain will be dry with sunny spells but 
south-west England, the Channel Islands and north 
and west Scotland will be nmstly cloudy with show- 
cry r~n ... Reasonably warm in sunnier parts of 
the West, but cool, especially on the east coast. 
Observer 
In Moscow, warm weather will remain with occa- 
sional rain. Temperatures in the night from 0 to -5 
Centigrade, in the day about 0. 
In Leningrad, occasional rain, temperatures in the 
night from -3 to +2 Centigrade, in the day 0 - 4. 
In Irkutsk region, snow, snowstorm, temperature~ 
in the day from -8 to -13 Centigrade. Towards the 
weekend the temperatures will fall by 4 - 6 degrees. 
lzvestia (translated front Russian) 
The Bulgarian weather forecasts are usually organized 
in two paragraphs corresponding to the first and the 
second day of the forecast. The sentences most often 
are simple. Complex and compound sentences occur 
rarely but in various types: complex sentences with 
a main and a relative clause connected by the adver- 
bial phrases 'where' and 'when'; compound sentences 
with co-ordinating co ,  unctions of addition 'and', co- 
occurrence 'with',  or contrast 'but ' .  The use of imper- 
sonal verbs ('it will be', 'it will rain') is typical whereas 
verbless entences are rather an exclusion than a norm. 
Ill English forecasts, impersonal verb phrases are 
rarely used; instead, the formal subject of the sentences 
most often is the region or the weather element, and 
less frequently - -  the time period. Compound sentences 
are used intensively for assertions with opposite weather 
values connected by tile co-ordinating conjunction for 
contrast 'but '  (cf. the forecast from Observer). 
In \]zvesfia, because of the large area of this country, 
tile text is almcet alays structured by regions and all 
the weather information about a given region is rendered 
in one long compound sentence tile constituents of which 
are laconic, verbless clauses divided by commas. Com- 
plex sentences rarely occur. 
The features of the observed weather forecast texts 
allow us to summarize the basic properties that charac- 
terize a style: 
w the extent to which details are provided; 
* text organization (by regions, time periods, etc.); 
o the prevalent ypes of sentences according to \[1\] 
(simple, complex, compound); 
, tile prevalent length of sentences (short, medium, 
long); 
, the most typical patterns of surface structures; 
, the lexical entries preferred in the expression of the 
assertions elements. 
Sittce style features are regarded as typical, prevalent, 
preferred, they should be defined through the frequencies 
of their occurrence rather than as obligatory character- 
istics. 
4 Text generat ion 
Ill this section we concisely introduce the principles and 
techniques of text generation employed in METEOVIS 
and, as I believe, relevant o other kinds of informative 
texts. Along with this, we show how one or another 
alternative is selected on the basis of certain stylistic 
rules. 
4.1 Content production 
The content production (CP) component generates the 
set of assertions from a dataset using domain-specific 
techniques. In METEOVIS, we employed weather veri- 
fication techniques that match the generated set of as- 
sertions with the dataset and evaluate the precision of 
the set as a whole. 
Although CP is not responsible for the logical consis- 
tency of tile set of assertions, it is guaranteed that there 
are no serious contradictions. An example of a weakly 
inconsistent set of two assertions is given below: 
Acrl.'.s Dl~ COLING-92, NANTEs, 23-28 AOt~r 1992 1 0 2 5 PROC. O1: COLING-92, N^I~q'ES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
<clouda=broken, ragion=Bul, tiae=today> 
<clouds=claar, og:Lon=\]Ig_Bul, tilau=noon> 
This type of inconsistency, easily resolved by the readers, 
is inevitable because of the roughness of the territory and 
time models. If we required that the generated set of 
assertions be absolutely uncontradictory, wemight loose 
completeness ( ome territories or time periods remain 
uncovered) or conciseness. 
A style feature at the CP level is the extent to which 
details are provided - -  from summary information only 
to the finest detail. It is specified by any of the terms 
summary, normal or detailed. In the case of summary 
information one assertion is extracted for each weather 
attribute. A detailed style requires that the set of as- 
sertions giving the highest precision rate is extracted, 
without any restrictions on the number of assertions. 
The extraction of normal information is limited to no 
more than (1 + d)/2 assertions giving the highest preci- 
sion rate, where d is the number of assertions that would 
be extracted if the style were detailed. 
4.2  D iscourse  generat ion  
The assertions generated can immediately be trans- 
formed into simple NL sentences, but the text obtained 
most probably will be awkward, unorganized and inefll- 
cient. In order to be coherent, a text has to be organized 
according to rhetorical schemas that take into account 
semantic relations between entities presented iu the text 
\[3,10\]. Thus the user will perceive the information with 
minimal cognitive ffort. 
For the generation of discourse structures, we employ 
seven rhetorical schemas based on certain semantic re- 
latious \[7\]: 
Parameter progression. An assertion about a given pa- 
rameter cannot interpose a sequence of assertions 
concerning another parameter. 
From a summary to details. An assertion with a region 
and a time period containing the regiou and the 
time period of another assertion is conveyed before 
the second assertion. 
Temporal progression. The assertions are ordered by the 
successive time intervals they pertain to. 
Spatial progression. The assertions are arranged in such 
a way that their regions, if taken in this order, make 
a path defined in the territory model. 
Coupling related values. Assertions with co-occurring 
values are rendered in a group. 
Contrast. Two assertions with opposite values are con- 
veyed together to contrast with each other. 
Value progression. The assertions about a given param- 
eter with an ordered domain are conveyed in suc- 
cessive groups relating to the particular values. 
For each rhetorical schema there is a rule which de- 
cides whether the schema is applicable to a given set 
of assertions, and if it is, structures the set accordingly. 
This is a hierarchical top-down process tarting from the 
original set of assertions and resulting in a complete dis- 
course structure of the text represented as a tree. The 
terminals correspond to the assertions and each node 
represents he discourse relation existing between its suc- 
cessors; hence the root represents he discourse structure 
at the highest level. We also regard the nodes as chunks 
of assertions that have to be rendered in a group. 
The following properties ay how the discourse struc- 
ture influences the surface structure: 
P roper ty  1. Each sentence presents all assertions of 
a given chunk. 
P roper ty  2. The order of tile sentences follows the 
left-to-right order of the chunks of the discourse 
tree. 
P roper ty  3. For each type ofdiscourse structure (tem- 
poral progression, related values, etc.), there are 
sentence grammars each of which can convert the 
corresponding set of assertions into a sentence sur- 
face structure. 
A style at the discourse level specifies the rhetorical 
schemas applicable at each level of discourse generation. 
For example, the following specification 
I sPSt-Progr( W-BuI, C-Bul, E-Bul) l 
1 : spat_progr(N_Bul, S_Bul) 
temp_progr( day_l , day_?) 
2 : relate 
3 : par-progr(clouds, precip, wind, temp) 
4 : any 
implies that at the highest level, one of the two spa- 
tial progressions (by the paths West, Central and East 
Bulgaria or North and South Bulgaria) or the temporal 
progression by the two days of the forecast, should be 
applied, depending on the set of assertions. Thus if it 
is better stratified by the time periods day_l and day_2 
than by the two paths of regions, then the temporal pro- 
gression will be applied, else - -  one of the two spatial 
progressions. At the second level, all assertions with 
related values will be coupled into indivisible chunks. 
At the next level, parameter progression should be em- 
ployed to further break down the chunks obtained as a 
result of the previous divisions. Finally, for each termi- 
nal chunk the schema that best applies to it will be used 
to complete the corresponding subtree. 
4 .3  Sur face  s t ructure  deve lopment  
One of the major problems in the creation of informative 
texts is how to avoid text monotony. Perhaps it is the 
poorly designed surface structure that most of all con- 
tributes to the monotony of a text. The ever repeating 
santo sentence pattern makes the text artificial, awkward 
and boring for the reader. Adversely, a text with diverse 
surface structure, expressive function words, alternating 
short and lout sentences helps the reader perceive the 
important elements quickly, extract and memorize the 
facts, and enjoy the proper pace of reading. 
Partially the surface structure of a sentence is pre- 
determined by the current discourse unit through the 
correspondence discourse structure ---, possible grammars 
introduced in Property 3, section 4.2. The main vehicle 
for the selection of one or another syntactic structure 
from the great variety offered by the grammar is the fo- 
cussing medlanism. The idea is that a sentence should 
ACRES DE COLING-92, NAN'n~s. 23-28 AO~" 1992 I 0 2 6 PROC. Or: COLING-92. NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
begin with some concepts or objects already introduced 
(topic) and end with new information about them (fo- 
cus) \[3,4,10\]. 
tlere we put forward a treatment of the focussing 
mechanism applicable to the generation of informative 
texts. According to the particular discourse structure, 
one of the assertion elements - -  parameter, time pe- 
riod or region - -  should be the topic of the current sen- 
tence. For example, in a spatial progression, it is the 
path of regions that is the common element of the asser- 
tions unified in the chunk and this path is represented 
in the separate assertions by their regions. Therefore, it 
is natural to construct the corresponding sentences with 
the regions being their topics. This decision puts addi- 
tional constraints on the possible grammars converting 
the chunk contents into a text surface structure. 
Even though the discourse structure and the focussing 
mechanism restrict o a large extent the po~ible surface 
structures provided by the grammar, still more than one 
alternatives may exist. At this point the style decides 
which alternative is most suitable as a surface structure 
of the current chunk. For example, a discourse structure 
of type contrast is a very appealing pre-condition for 
the creation of a compound sentence iu which the con- 
stituent clauses (correspmlding to the assertions linked 
by the contrast relation) are connected by the conjunc- 
tion 'but' .  However, the creation of two simple sentences 
without any function words is acceptable as well. It is 
just a question of style to make oue or another decision 
- whether a simple or a compound sentence is preferred 
at this point, if some of the potential surface structures 
have priority over the others, which function word is pre- 
ferred to lead a sentence or to connect wo clauses, etc. 
The style features at surface level supported by the 
system are sentence type, sentence length and syntactic 
roles of the assertions elements. These features charac- 
terize the style with different levels of detail. Thus a 
specification of the sentence type or length provides less 
detail than a specification of the syntactic roles. 
Sentence type is specified by the frequencies of the 
simple, compound and complex sentences. For example, 
the statement: 
simple : 0.5 \] 
sentence_type = compound : 0.3 
complex : 0.2 
is understood as an instruction for minimizing the func- 
tion: 
r : V~.= 0.5) ~ + (Y = 0.3) ~ + (z - 0.2) ~ 
where x, y, and z are the portions of the simple, com- 
pound anti complex sentences, respectively, in the ac- 
tually generated text. As a result, about half of the 
sentences in the final form should be simple, 3/10 - -  
compound, and 1/5 - -  complex. 
Sentence length is treated in a similar manner by spec- 
ifying the frequencies of the short, medimn attd long sen- 
tences. A sentence is considered short, if it contains at 
most 4 entities (parameter values, regions or time peri- 
ods); medium - -  between 5 and 8 entities; mid long - -  
more than 8 entities. 
Syntactic roles are specified by enumerating the al- 
lowed sentence patterns together with their relative fre- 
quencies as follows: 
syntactic_roles = g2 : f2 
g. : I .  
where f t ,h , . . . , f ,  are the relative frequencies for the 
grammars gl, g'~,..., g , ,  respectively. This specification 
makes the system minimize the function: 
r= ~- - f l )  ~+(x2- f2) 2+...+(zn-fn) 2 
where x I, x~,..., ~, are the portions of sentences actually 
generated by means of grammam gl,  g~, .--, gn. 
Only one of the features entence_type, sentence_length 
and syntactic_roles should be specified, for there are cer- 
tain co-relations between them mad the specifications of
two features may contradict each other. 
The following algorithm for surface structure genera- 
tion makes use of Properties 1, 2 and 3 of the discourse 
tree (ef. section 4.2), the focussing mechanism and the 
style requirements. 
The process begins with counting all grammars that 
implement the chunks of the discourse tree as sentences, 
using the correspondence discourse str icture ~ possible 
grammars. Those grammars form the current stock of 
candidates which in the process of generation of the sur- 
face structure is updated as specified in stelm 5 and 6 
below. The generation proceeds in a loop as follows. 
1. For each chunk on the path from the root to the 
left-most erminal, the grammars candidates to im- 
plement he chunk are considered. 
2. Those grammars that do not satisfy the focussing 
condition are left out of consideration. 
3. The final selection is performed taking into ac- 
count the style specification. Suppose that the 
style specifies n sentence type* with frequency rates 
f t ,  f2, ..., f ,  and the portions of these sentence types 
in the current stock are el, s2,..., sn, resp. Then the 
system ~lects from the remaining candidates the 
grammar of type k satisfying the conditions: 
fk - sk = max( f t  -- Sl ..... f .  -- an), 
f~ > O, sk > O. 
The heuristics behind this rule is "select the gram- 
mar that best compromises the frequency rate spec- 
ified by the style and the deficiency rate in the cur- 
rent stock". 
4. The set of assertions constituting the corresponding 
chunk is converted into the surface structure of a 
sentence through the selected grammar.  
5. The discourse tree is pruned by removing the sub- 
tree rooting at the chunk that  was converted into a 
surface structure and the grammars corresponding 
to this subtree are deducted from the current stock. 
6. The portion of grammar candidates deducted from 
the current stock is subtracted from the frequency 
rate f+ of the selected sentence grammar,  and the 
portions st,  s~, ..., sn ace re-calculated. 
Acids DE COLING-92, NANtl~S. 23-28 A?)~rf 1992 1 0 2 7 PROC. OF COLING-92. NANTES, AUG. 23-28. 1992 
7. Steps 1-6 are repeated until the discourse tree is 
exhausted. 
The selection of a surface structure as described above 
avoids the combinatorial explosion expected uring the 
examination of the minimizing conditions. This effi- 
ciency is achieved at the expense of a looser treatment of 
those conditions. Thus the technique nsures an actual 
distribution of the surface features that is sufficiently 
close but not necessary the closest o the distribution 
specified. The only drawback of the algorithm is ob- 
served when short texts are generated. Then the surface 
structures with low frequency rates either tend to ap- 
pear at the end of the text or are not generated at all. 
4.4 Lexical choice 
The last step in text generation is the linearization of the 
surface structure into a string. METEOVIS makes use of 
a phrasal exicon to replace the terminals of the surface 
structure tree with entries from the lexicon using the 
terminal's type and value as a key. The freedom given 
to the generator at this level of processing allows it to 
choose from two or more synonyms for the same entity. 
For example, the following strncture 
adv_region --~ 
prep(' in') reg_mod( much ) prep(' of') noun( Bul) 
can be linearized as 'in many portions of the country', 
'in much of Bulgaria ', etc. The style may give preference 
to one of these expressions specifying the frequency of 
each member of the synonymous groups reg_mod(much) 
and noun(Bul). 
Similarly to the selection of sentence grammars, the 
lexieal choice between synonyms is made on the basis of 
a distribution specified by the style. Thus the statement 
\ [much :0.5 \] 
tea_rood(much) = many portions : 0.25 
many parts : 0.25 
specifies a distribution of the elements of the synony- 
mous group representing the entity region modifier ac- 
cording to which the nmdifier 'much' will occur twice as 
frequently as any of the other two modifiers. Such kind 
of style specification can be made for each synonymous 
group. The default is even distribution. 
5 Conc lus ion  
The problem of text generation with style has been de- 
scribed in the case of informative texts. We stepped on 
tile platform of the experimental METEOVIS system 
designed to handle multimedia weather information. In 
order to get efficient control over the generated texts, 
we employed the concept of style, examined the features 
that make up a style, and adapted the technique of text 
generation to take into account hose features. This new 
opportunity makes po~ible the controlled generation of 
various texts from the same dataset. 
Style specification is feasible at the four levels of text 
generation - -  content production, discourse generation, 
surface structure development, and lexical choice. It 
drives the system to select from the many alternatives 
offered by the rhetorical knowledge, grammar and lexi- 
con those providing text features ufficiently close to the 
specified ones. The algorithm for text generation pro- 
vides efficient reatment of the style requirements. 
Acknowkedgement: This work was supported by 
the Ministry of Science and Education under grant 
I23/91 and by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences under 
grant 1001003. 
References  
\[1\] L. G. Alexander. Longman English Grammar. 
Longman, 1988. 
\[2\] C. DiMareo and G. Hirst. Stylistic Grammars in 
Language Translation. In: Proc. COLING 88, Vol.1, 
Budapest, 1988, 148-153. 
\[3\] N. E. Enkvist. Introduction: Coherence, Com- 
position and Text linguistics. In: Coherence and 
Composition: A Symposium, ed. N.E.Enkvist, Abo 
Academy, 1985, 11-26. 
\[4\] E. Hnji~ovA. Focussing - a Meeting Point of Linguis- 
tics and Artificial Intelligence. In: Artificial Intelli- 
gence 11: Methodology, Systems, Apphcations, eds. 
Ph.Jorrand and V.Sgurev, North-Holland, 1987, 
311-321. 
\[5\] S. Kerpedjiev. Transformation of Weather Fore- 
casts from Textual to Cartographic Form. Com- 
puter Physics Communications., 61(1990), 246-256. 
\[6\] S.Kerpedjiev, V.Noncheva. Intelligent IIandling of 
Weather Forecasts. In: Proc. COLING 90, vol. 3, 
Helsinki, 1990, 379-381. 
\[7\] S. Kerpedjiev. Automatic Generation of Multi- 
modal Weather Reports from Datasets. In: Proc. 
3rd Conf. on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
Trento, 1992, 48-55. 
\[8\] K. Linden et at. Using Systems Networks to Build 
Rhetorical Structures. In: Lecture Notes in Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, 587, 1992, 183-198. 
\[9\] D. McDonald and J. Pustejovsky. A Computational 
Theory of Prose Style for Natural Language Gener- 
ation. In: Proc. ~nd Conf. of the European Chapter 
of ACL, Geneva, 1985, 185-193. 
\[10\] K. R. MeKeown. Text Generation. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, 1985. 
ACRES DE COLING-92, NA~q'ES, 23-28 hot~'; 1992 1 0 2 8 PRO(:. OF COLING-92, NaN'rl~s, AUG. 23-28. 1992 
