SHAKE-AND-BAKE TRANSLAT ION 
P. Wh i te lock  
Sharp  Laborator ies  of  Europe  Ltd. 
Oxford  Science Park 
Oxford ,  U.K. 
pete@uk.ac .ox .prg  
1. In t roduct ion  
In this paper, I describe a view of Machine 
Translation (MT) that promises radical new 
solutions to some of the problems of structural 
approaches such as transfer and interlingua. The 
new approach is based on a lexicalist view of 
grammar in which lexical items are multi- 
dimensional signs. Translation equivalence is 
defined between bags (multi-sets) of lexical items. 
Source language analysis determines the bags on 
one side of the equivalence, and Shake-and-Bake 
generation combines the corresponding TL signs 
freely according to the grammar of the target 
language. The sharing of variables between the 
logical forms of the signs in the two languages 
realises the necessary semantic onstraints. It is 
easy to formulate statements of equivalence 
between expressions having widely divergent 
syntactic or logical structures, and apply this 
knowledge decidably for translation in either 
direction. 
2. S t ruc ture -Based  MT 
Perhaps the fundamental question in MT 
system design is the form in which information 
about the source text is passed to generation. Such 
information must include anything relevant for 
translation, but must be expressed in a form that 
generation can be guaranteed tomake sense of. The 
answer therefore has important implications for 
the extent to which the grammars of the 
languages in the system need be specifically tuned 
to one another. The ideal is a completely modular 
approach, with no influence of one monolingual 
grammar on another - modularity ensures that a 
system can be easily extended to new languages 
and language pairs. A satisfactory answer should 
also provide for reversibility, so that a single 
modular description of a language may be 
exploited by both parsing and generation 
algorithms. 
The standard assumption is that all textual 
information is organised into a sequence of one or 
more linguistic or logical structures. Transfer- 
based MT (e.g. Vauquois and Boitet (1985), Nagao 
et al (1985), Alshawi et al (1991), AUegranza et 
al. (1991) presupposes a language-pair specific 
module that transforms a structure which is the 
output of analysis into one that is the input to 
generation. An interlingual approach (e.g. 
Uchida and Sugiyama (1980), Lytinen and Shank 
(1982), R6sner (1986), Nirenburg et al (1991)) is 
characterised by the assumption that the output 
of analysis and the input to generation are 
isomorphic structures. 
The notion of a structure which carries all the 
information pertinent to translation is common to 
both transfer and interlingual approaches. In the 
case of transfer, this is normally a syntactic 
dependency structure nriched with various other 
relevant information. Since the syntactic 
structures of t ranslat ional ly  equivalent  
expressions (TLEs) may differ in many ways, 
transfer comprises a complex set of operations 
intended to transform source into target structures. 
If generation is to be under the control of the same 
grammatical knowledge as analysis, then the 
output of transfer from L to L' must correspond to a 
possible output from the analysis of some 
expression in L'. Unfortunately, the only way of 
achieving this is by careful hand-crafting of the 
transfer grammars. Furthermore, since the 
invocation of transfer operations is controlled by 
the structure of the source text, it is problematic to 
state structural transformations in a declarative, 
bidirectional manner. 
The interlingual approach is seen by its 
advocates as the solution to this sort of problem. 
An appropriate system of semantic representation 
is specified, with the assumption that TLEs will 
map to identical expressions of such a system. But 
as Ramsay (1991) points out, only a fraction of the 
possible sentences of a semantic representation 
language will correspond directly to natural 
language xpressions. There is ample evidence 
that the expressions of different natural 
languages may map to different subsets of the 
representation language. In particular, TLEs may 
be assoc iated with d ist inct  semant ic  
representations (cf. the subset problem of 
Landsbergen, 1987). At minimum, equivalent 
words may have overlapping or properly 
subsuming senses rather than identical senses (see 
e.g Tsujii and Fujita (1991)), but more radical, 
structural differences are commonplace. Even if 
TLEs map to logically equivalent expressions, the 
AcI~ DE COLING-92. NANTES. 23-28 AoI~rr 1992 7 8 4 PRec. OF COLING-92. NANTES. AUG. 23.28. 1992 
inference needed to compute one from the other is 
clearly undecidable in the general case for logics 
rich enough to represent linguistic meaning 
(Shieber, 1988), and intractable even in the 
s implest  cases, with associat iv i ty and 
commutativity of conjunction (Calder et al 1989). 
Heuristics to guide such inference can only be 
specific to the languages in the system, since it is 
these which determine the logical forms that 
actually occur. In this way, the functions of 
transfer merely devolve to analysis and 
generation, making the content of each grammar 
dependent on that of the other languages in the 
system. This weakens the standard argument for 
the interlingual approach, i.e. that the addition 
of new languages i facilitated by the absence of 
components specific to language pairs. 
In any approach to translation, it is necessary 
to state heuristic information concerning the 
differences in structure between TLEs. In transfer 
systems this is done explicitly, in interlingual 
systems it is implicit. I have suggested that in 
interlingual systems the need for such information 
has an adverse effect on the independence of
different grammars. In multi l ingual transfer 
systems, the need for minimal transfer (as 
advocated within Eurotra (e.g. Allegranza et al, 
1991)) also entails that the form of the 
monolingual components is sensitive to the 
particular languages in the system (cf. the notion 
of 'euroversar in Eurotra). So neither structure- 
based approach leads to a system in which the 
knowledge pertinent to the different languages i
clearly modularised. The transfer approach is 
preferable in this respect, but it suffers from the 
difficulty of formulating declarative statements 
of complex equivalences, such as those discussed 
by Kaplan et al (1989), Odijk (1989), Sadler et al 
(1989, 1990), Sadler and Thompson (1991). In ~4 
below we will look at how such examples are 
treated in the Shake-and-Bake approach. 
3. Shake-and-Bake  Trans la t ion  
The research described in this paper is an 
application to translation of a more general 
constraint-based view of language and language 
processing (e.g. Fenstad et al (1985), Pereira 
(1987), etc.). In such a view, linguistic structure is 
determined by the accumulation of constraints or 
descriptions, leading to compact and declarative 
grammars.  In Shake-and-Bake MT, we take 
advantage of the partiality inherent in such 
constraints by radically underspecifying the 
information about the source text's structure that 
is passed to generation. 
A precursor to this view can be identified in an 
approach to MT described by Landsbergen (1987). 
He suggested that the bilingual knowledge 
needed to compute TLEs should be stated as 
correspondances between grammars rather than 
between languages (that is, the inputs/outputs of 
grammars). Translation equivalence is stated 
between the meaningful e ements of two granmmrs 
- in Landsbergen's Montagovian framework, 
between lexical entries and between grammar 
rules. TLEs can be derived from equivalent lexical 
entries by applying equivalent rules in the same 
way. 
Rosetta's l inguistic basis in Montague 
grammar, with its stipulated pairings of syntactic 
and semantic rules, requires TLEs to have 
isomorphic derivations. For this reason, Rosetta is 
essentially an interlingual system, and the need 
for the monolingual grammars to be attuned to 
each other (as acknowledged by Landsbergen) has 
adverse ffects on modularity. 
Suppose, however, that the only meaningful 
elements of a grammar are its lexical items. In 
fact, much recent linguistic work assumes exactly 
this conception of a grammar - see e.g Uszkoreit 
(1986), Karttunen (1989), Pollard and Sag (1987), 
Zeevat et al (1987), Baschung et al (1987), Gunji 
(1987), Whitelock (1991b). in these frameworks, 
lexical entries are signs, that is, they 
simultaneously classify an expression in multiple 
dimensions (orthographic, syntactic, semantic, 
etc.), Signs are recursively combined by simple 
rules which do not themselves introduce lements 
of meaning, but merely equate appropriate 
variables in the logical forms of the combining 
signs. 
Therefore in such a grammar, the derivable 
logical forms in a language are constructed 
entirely from templates introduced by lexical 
items. We can represent sentence meaning as a 
combination of word meanings and a set of 
equational constraints on LF variables as 
determined by derivation. Now if we apply 
Landsbergen 's  methodo logy within this 
framework, knowledge of bilingual equivalence 
may be reduced to statements of equivalence 
between lexical items and their associated 
meanings. Such equivalences may be many to 
many, e.g. {pay, attention, to} ~ {faire, attention, 
a}, and may include multiple instances of the same 
lexical item, e.g. {as,as} m {aussi, que} 1. In the 
general case, therefore, equivalences are stated 
1 The bilingual exicon is also many-to-many in 
another sense. A single lexical item in L may appear in 
many different equivalences with signs in L', and each 
of the latter may appear in further equivalences with 
signs in L. 
Acq~s DE COLING-92. NANTES. 23-28 AO~q" 1992 7 8 5 PROC. OF COLING-92. NAbrrES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
between bags of lexical signs. The representation 
of a sentence is a bag of (extensions of) lexical 
items, called its base. Two bases are equivalent if
they are the union of equivalent bags. Two 
expressions are translation equivalents if they 
have derivations whose bases are equivalent bags 
and which obey the same constraints on LF 
variables. There is no isomorphism requirement on 
TLEs - the grammars of the two languages have 
been effectively deeoupled. 
(1) shows a Prolog definition of a simple 
translation algorithm based on these principles ( I 
is the path constructor for feature structures, and 
< = > is graph unif icat ion (with path 
evaluation)). 
(i) t rans la te  (Text, T rans la t ion)  : - 
SourceS ign lo r th  <=> Text,  
parse  (SourceSign,  SLBag) ,  
SourceS ign l  sem <=> Sem, 
sko lemise  (Sem) , 
equ iva lence  (SLBag, TLBag)  , 
generate  (TLBag, TargetS ign)  , 
TargetS ign \ ]  o r th  <=> Trans la t ion .  
translate can be glossed as follows: find the 
sign in SL whose orthography is the source string 
Text, i.e. parse it to SourceSign,  recording in 
SLBag the basic expressions (iexical entries) used 
in the parse. Find the value of semantics in 
SourceSign and Skolemise the variables. The 
elements of SLBag will be extended by their 
participation in the analysis stage. Alternative 
extensions may give rise to alternative 
equivalences. Compute the equivalent bag of TL 
expressions. Generate any TargetSign that can be 
built from TLBag - its orthography is a possible 
Translation of Text. 
The sharing of those constraints which equate 
LF variables is realised by Prolog sharing between 
the variables in Sere and the items in SLBag and 
TLBag. The Skolemisation step which replaces 
each distinct variable by a unique constant ensures 
that variables not equated in the course of 
analysis are prevented from being incorrectly 
equated during generation. Its ordering before 
bilingual lookup realises the restriction that a 
lexical entry is only applicable when its source 
language constraints strictly subsume those 
established by parsing. 
A simple backtracking Shake-and-Bake 
generation algorithm is given in (2). The bag is 
represented as a Prolog list. 
(2) generate (Bag ,  TSign)  :- 
shake  and  bake  ( \[ \], TS ign,  Bag, \[ \] ) . 
% te rminat ion  
shake  and  bake  ( \[Sign\] , Sign, \[\], \[l). 
% sh i f t  
shake  and  bake  (P0, Sign,  
\[Next \] Bag0 \], Bag) : - 
push  (Next, P0, P) , 
shake  and  bake  (P, Sign, Bag0, Bag) . 
% reduce  
shake  and  bake(P0 ,S ign ,Bag0,Bag)  :- 
pop  (First, P0, PI) , 
de le te  (Second, P 1, P2 ) , 
unordered_ru le  (Mom, F i rs t ,  Second)  , 
push  (Mom, P2, P), 
shake  and  bake  (P, S ign ,Bag0,Bag)  . 
shake_and bake is a slight but significant 
variation on a shift-reduce parser for binary 
grammars. In shift-reduce parsing, an element is 
repeatedly taken from the front of the input, 
looked up in the lexicon, and the result pushed 
onto a stack. The top two stack elements may be 
combined according to the grammar, the result 
pushed back on the stack, and the procedure 
called recursively. When the input has been 
consumed and the stack contains a single element, 
the parse terminates successfully. 
In shake_and_bake generation the role of the 
input string is played by the bag of target 
language signs. Unlike in parsing, the order of 
items in the bag is immaterial. Any two signs may 
be combined, with the combination determining 
the order of their orthographies in the result. A 
minimal complete algorithm requires random 
access to the erstwhile stack for one of the 
arguments to a reduction. This data structure is 
represented by the variables of the form P0, P1, P. 
The second element is not popped from the data 
structure, but non-deterministically deleted from 
it. Of course, such a move renders the algorithm 
intractable. Shift-reduce can complete a well- 
formed symbol table or chart in polynomial time 
for context-free grammars, but Shake-and-Bake is 
exponential even with a chart. I will mention 
ways of addressing this computational drawback 
below. Before this, however, I will try to show 
that an MT system organised in this way makes it 
considerably easier to correctly state constraints 
on translation equivalence when TLEs have 
divergent structures. Furthermore, such statements 
of equivalence may be exploited in either 
direction. 
4. Translation Equivalence in 
Shake-and-Bake  MT 
1 will use the PATR-II notation for equations 
(Shieber 1986), representing constraints on the 
elements of an equivalence rather than the 
categories in a grammar ule. The substantive 
theory could be any of the lexicalist grammars 
ACTES DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AOU'I" 1992 7 8 6 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES, AUO. 23-28, 1992 
mentioned above. I assume a morpheme-based 
lexicon in which each lexical entry (i.e. 
morpheme) has a feature cite whose value 
uniquely picks out that entry. This feature is used 
to distinguish words spoiled the same but with 
different syntax or semantics, in addition, where 
the orthographic form of a grammatical 
morpheme (such as past tense) is determined on a 
language internal basis (e.g. by conjugation type of 
a verb), all allomorphs will receive the same 
value of cite. In this way, the notion of 
equivalence may be extended to equivalence 
between closed-class grammatical morphemes. 
(3) shows  a basic one-to-one quivalence 
between the English verb stem love and the 
French aimer. 
(3) XE  m XF  
<X E c i te> = love  v 
<X F c i te> ~ a imer  
<X E sem index> = <X F sem index> 
<X E sem exp  index> = 
<x F sem exp  index> 
<XE sem obj  index> = 
<X F sem obj  index> 
I assume an event-based semantics with a neo- 
Davidsonian treatment of thematic relations (see 
e.g. Parsons (1980, 1991), Hobbs (1986), Dowty 
(1988)). The two monolingual signs presupposed by
(3) each introduce three LF variables, 
corresponding to the loving state itself (index), 
the lover (exp index) and the loved one (obj 
index). (3) states the simple pairwise quivalence 
between these. Despite the identical paths on 
both sides of the last two equations, the 
correctness of the method does not rely on 
thematic identity of equivalent roles. It may 
apply equally to grammars where thematic 
relations are verb-specific (e.g. love_argl, 
love arg2, aimer argl etc.) and hence language- 
specific (sidestepping consistency problems in the 
monolingual assignment of thematic relations). 
Furthermore, ven with a substantive theory of 
thematic relations applied consistently to two 
grammars, the thematic entailments of equivalent 
argument places may not be identical. Space 
precludes discussion of our treatment for such 
cases, which is based on the use of sorted LF 
variables as described in Moens et al (1989). 
Assuming equivalences such as (4) for proper 
names, translation between (5a) and (Sb) will be 
mediated by the equivalence between bags shown 
in (6), in which signs are abbreviated by their 
citation values. 
(4) X E -= X F 
<X E c i te> = Mary  
<X F c i te> = Mar ie  
<X E sem index> = <X F sem index> 
(Sa) Mary  loves  F rances  
(5b) Mar ie  a ime FranGo ise  
(6) (Mary, F rances ,  lover ,  p res}  
{FranGo ise ,  pres ,  a imer ,  Mar ie}  
Generation will produce (5a) as tile 
translation of (5b), and vice versa, not because 
that was the structure of the SL text, but because it 
is the only way of putting together the TL signs in 
(6) that is compatible with the TL grammar and 
the variable bindings established by parsing. 
This strategy extends straightforwardly to
the 'argument switching' cases of translation 
equivalence exemplified in (7a and To). 
(7a) Mary  l i kes  F rances  
(7b) F ranGo ise  p la i t  ~ Mar ie  
The equivalence between like and plaire ;1 is 
given in (8). 
(8) X E ~ X F & X F' 
<X E c i te> ~ l i ke  v 
<X F c i te> - p la i re  
<X F' c i te> = ~_I  
<X E sem index> = <X F aem index> 
<X E sem exp  index> 
<X F sem exp  index> 
<X E sem obj  index> = 
<x F sem obj  index> 
<X E sem exp  index> = <X F' aem index> 
1 have assumed that the path <XF sere obj> 
picks out the semantic object of the liking state, 
which is the semantics of plaire's syntactic 
subject, but as in the previous example, 
alternative monolingual assumptions could have 
been made with little import. 
One point to note here is the treatment of the 
preposition ~. We merely state that one lexical 
entry in English corresponds totwo in French. The 
appropriate preposition (<cite> = L I), is an 
element with 'identity semantics' (Calder et al 
1989), so its index is equated in the monolingual 
lexicon with that of its syntactic object. It is also 
necessary to equate this index with the 
experiencer of like and plaire as in the final 
equation. Then the strict subsumption 
interpretation of bilingual ookup will guarantee 
that the elements on the French side are not just 
unrelated elements of a larger phrase. 
A~E.S DE COL1NG-92. NANTES. 23-28 AOt~Z" 1992 7 8 7 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES. AUG. 23-28, 1992 
Examples of the argument-switching kind are 
standard in the transfer approach as illustrations 
of what it does best. Since a typical transfer MT 
system will process a functional structure by 
recursive descent, cases where the translation of 
arguments depends on the translation of heads are 
straightforward. However, a major source of 
problems for such transfer schemes are the so- 
called head-switching cases, in which the 
syntactic head-dependent structure in the 
translation equivalents is reversed (see refs. in 
?2). Such a case is illustrated for English/Dutch 
in (10). The just/venir de case in English/French is 
similar. 
(10a) Jan  zwemt  graag  
(10b) John  en joys  sw imming 
Once again, the Shake-and-Bake generation 
strategy will correctly compute such TLEs from 
statements of equivalence between simplex 
expressions, including that given in (11). The full 
bags are given in (12). 
(ii) X E & X E, E X N 
<X E c i te> - en joy  
<X E' c i te> - p respar t  
<X N c i te> = graag  
<X E sem index> = <X N sem index> 
<X E sem exp  index> = 
<X N sem exp  index> 
<x E sem obj  index> - 
<X N sem obj  index> 
<X E, sem index> - <X N sem index> 
(12) { jan ,pres ,zwemen,graag} m 
{ john ,pres ,en joy ,prespar t , sw im} 
The fact that equivalent ense morphemes 
(pres) occur on non-equivalent stems (enjoy 
/zwem+) follows immediately from the 
mechanics of generation. Whitelock (1991a) 
includes further discussion of these and other 
examples,  which include a further head 
switching case in Engl ish/French/ Iapanese 
equivalence (13a,b,c), and an example of distinct 
but equivalent logical forms in English/Japanese 
(14a,b) 
(13a) John  runs  up the  s t reet  
(13b) Jean  monte  la rue en courant  
(13c) Zyon wa has i te  toor i  wo  noboru  
John  TOP runn ing  s t reet  ACC goes  up 
(14a) (p -> q) Mar ia  eats  on ly  f i sh  
(14b) (~q -> -p) 
Mar ia  wa sakana  sh ika  tabe-na- i  
Mar ia  TOP f i sh  ? eat -NEG-PRES 
5. Conc lus ions  and  Fur ther  Research  
A small trilingual (English/French/Japanese) 
system based on the above ideas has been 
implemented and is currently under development. 
Beaven (1991) describes a similar implementation 
of an English/Spanish system. The modularity of 
the monolingual grammars remains uncom- 
promised even if TLEs have radically different 
syntactic and/or  logical structures, since all 
contrastive knowledge is clearly Iocalised in the 
bilingual lexicon. Although this paper has only 
touched on the question of complex equivalences, it 
is clear from our intial implementations that the 
declarative description of these is massively 
simplified by the adoption of a Shake-and-Bake 
approach. The bilingual lexicographer is not 
required to specify equivalences between abstract 
structures at a single (hybrid) level of 
representation, as in a transfer system. Instead, 
equivalence is stated between bags of multi- 
dimensional lexical signs. Constraints on any 
dimension of such signs may be included (cf. Tsujii, 
1986 for the necessity of such multi-dimensional 
constraints). We believe that the concrete nature 
of such a task offers interesting possibilities for 
the automated acquis it ion of bi l ingual 
correspondences from aligned corpora. We 
therefore also see Shake-and-Bake as a first step 
in the integration of traditional l inguistic 
(rationalist) and novel statistical (empiricist) 
approaches toMT (e.g. Brown et al (1990)). 
Since Shake-and-Bake generation is an NP- 
complete problem (see Brew, this conference), 
there is no tractable general algorithm. In order to 
improve average case performance, we need to be 
able to impose further structure on the bag which 
forms the input to generation. For example, the 
syntactic structure of the source text might be 
called upon to provide heuristic control 
information for generation. The resulting system 
would be similar in character to a transfer 
organisation, but avoiding the 'procedural 
seduction' of Kaplan (1987), that is, the 
temptation to allow or require a grammar writer 
to state detailed control information. While it 
seems that such a possibility would enable a 
grammar to be applied more efficiently, Kaplan 
argues that a computer is almost always better 
qualified to carry out the task of optimising the 
procedural interpretation of a large coverage 
grammar. In the current context, the procedural 
seduction is that the bilingual grammar writer is 
the one best qualified to define the structural 
'changes' contingent on the definition of particular 
ACRES DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AOI~I" 1992 7 8 8 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
lexical equivalences. One approach to the 
efficiency problem will therefore address the 
automatic determination of useful control 
information from the derivation of the source bag 
and the exploitation of this in generation. Brew 
(this conference) presents an alternative approach 
which extends van Benthem's Count Invariant for 
Categorial Grammars (see e.g. Moortgat, (1988)) 
to constraint grammars. In this way, fruitless 
branches of the search space may be pruned early, 
thus improving efficiency of generation using 
monolingual TL information. 
In the discussion so far, it has been assumed 
that the only functions of syntax in parsing have 
been a) to extend the lexical signs and thereby 
constrain the applicable quivalences, and bl to 
determine the bindings of LF variables and thus 
provide the semantic constraints that are the 
invariants for translation. We have not 
considered a class of invariants that may be 
grouped under the heading of discourse structure. 
In fact, logically equivalent discourse variants are 
typically associated with non-equivalent bags; 
for example, the passive morpheme may be 
present in one but not another; word order features 
may also be constrained in a bil ingual 
equivalence. So such invariants can be captured. 
On the other hand, a more elegant treatment 
might involve a computat ion of a set of 
interlingual discourse constraints on derivations to 
be used in generation in the same way as the 
semantic onstraints on LF variables. Clearly such 
an approach would be very similar to an 
interlingual system, but without the adverse 
consequences for grammatical  modular i ty 
characteristic of such systems. 
Acknowledgements  
The ideas and algorithms presented here were 
developed jointly with Mike Reape. John Beaven 
and Evelyn van de Veen in Edinburgh elped by 
exploring them in their PhD and MSc theses 
respectively. Sharp Laboratories of Europe gave 
me the opportunity to continue working on them, 
and 1 would like to acknowledge the help of all 
my colleagues there, especially ian Johnson, Chris 
Brew, Olivier Laurens and Tosh Nomura. 
References  
Allegranza, V. , P. Bennett, J. Durand, F. van 
Eynde, L. Humphries, P. Schmidt and E. Steiner 
(1991) "Linguistics for Machine Translation: The 
Eurotra Linguistic Specifications". Studies in MT 
and NLP, CEC. 
Alshawi, H. r D. M. Carter, B. Gambaeck and M. 
Rayner (1991) "Interactive Translation using 
Quasi-Logical Forms", Proceedings of the 29th 
ACL, Berkely. 
Baschung, K., G. Bes, A, Corluy and T. Guillotin 
(1987) "Auxiliaries and Clitics in French UCG 
Grammar", Proceedings of the Third European 
ACL, Copenhagen. 
Beaven, J.L. (1991) Lexicalist Unification-Based 
Machine Translation, PhD Thesis, submitted to 
Dept. of Artificial Intell igence, Univ. of 
Edinburgh. 
Brew, C.H. (1992) "Letting the cat out of the bag: 
Generation for Shake-and-Bake MT", this 
conference. 
Brown, P., J. Cocke, S. della Pietra, V.J. della 
Pietra, F. Jelinek, J.D.Lafferty, R.L. Mercer and P. 
S. Roossin (1990) "A Statistical Approach to 
Machine Translation", CL vol. 16, no 2. 
Calder, J. , M. Reape & H. Zeevat (1989l "An 
Algorithm for Generation in UCG", Proceedings of
the Fourth European ACL, Manchester. 
Dowty~ D. (1989) "On the Semantic Content of the 
Notion 'Thematic-Role'", in G. Chierchia, B. 
Partee and R. Turner (eds.) Property Theory, Type 
Theory and Natural Language Semantics, 
Dordrecht, Reidel. 
Fenstad, J.E., P.K. Halvorsen, T. Langholm and J. 
van Bentham (1985) Equations, Schemata nd 
Situations: A Framework for Linguistic Semantics. 
CSLI-85-29, Stanford. 
Gunji ,  T. (1987) Japanese Phrase Structure 
Grammar, Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Hobbs, J. (1986) "Ontological Promiscuity", 
Proceedings of the 25th ACL. 
Kaplan, R. M. (1987) "Three Seductions in 
Computat ional  Psychol inguist ics",  in P.J. 
Whitelock, M.M. Wood, H. Somers, P. Bennett, R. 
Johnson (eds.) Linguistic Theory and Computer 
Applications: Academic Press. 
Kaplan, R. M., K. Netter, J. Wedekind and A. 
Zaenen (1989) "Translation by Structural 
Correspondances", Proceedings of the Fourth 
European ACL, Manchester. 
Karttunen, Lauri (1989) '~Radical Lexicalism", in 
M.R. Baltin and A.S. Kroch (eds.), Alternative 
Conceptions of Phrase Structure, Chicago. 
Landsbergen, J. (1987) "Montagne Grammar and 
Machine Translation", in P.J. Whitelock, M.M. 
Wood, H. Somers, P. Bem~ett, R. Johnson (eds.) 
Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications: 
ACrEs DE COL1NG-92. NANTES, 23-28 AOt~T 1992 7 8 9 PROC. OF COLING-92. NANTES, AUtL 23-28. 1992 
Academic Press. 
Lytinen, S and R. Shank (1982) "Representation 
and Translation". TR 324, Dept. of Computer 
Science, Yale University. 
Moens, M., I. Calder, E. Klein, M. Reape and H. 
Zeevat (1989) "Expressing Generalisations in 
Unif ication-Based Grammar  Formalisms", 
Proceedings of the Fourth European ACL, 
Manchester. 
Moortgat, M. (1988) Categorial Investigations: 
Logical and Linguistic Aspects of the Lambek 
Calculus. Foris, Dordrecht. 
Nagao, M. J. Tsujii and J. Nakamura (1985) 'q'he 
Japanese Government Project for Machine 
Translation", Computational Linguistics, vol. 11 
#2-3 
Odijk, J. (1989) '"I'he Organisation of the Rosetta 
Grammars", Proceedings of the 4th European ACL, 
Manchester. 
Parsons, T. (1980) "Modifiers and Quantifiers in 
Natural  Language",  Canadian Journal of 
Philosophy, supp. vol. VI. 
Parsons, T. (1991) Events in the Semantics of 
English, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Pereira, F. C.N. (1987) "Grammars and Logics of 
Partial Information", in Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Logic Programming, 
Melbourne, Australia. 
Pollard, C and 1. Sag (1987)Information-based 
Syntax and Semantics: Vol 1: Fundamentals, CSLI 
Lecture Notes 13. 
Pollard, C and L Sag (forthcoming)Information- 
based Syntax and Semantics: Vol 2, CSLI. 
Ramsay, A (1991) "A common framework for 
analysis and generation", in Proceedings of the 
5th European ACL, Berlin. 
R~sner, D. (1986) "When Mariko talks to 
Siegfried: Experiences from a Japanese/German 
MT project". Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference in Computational Linguistics 
(COLING), Bonn. 
Sadler, L., I. Crookston and A. Way (1989) "Co- 
description, projection and 'difficult' translation", 
Working Papers in Language Processing #8, Dept. 
of Language and Linguistics, University of Essex. 
Sadler, L., I. Crookston, D. Arnold and A. Way 
(1990) "LFG and Translation", in Third 
International Conference on Theoretical and 
Methodological Issues in MT, Linguistics Research 
Centre, Austin, Texas. 
Sadler, L and H. S. Thompson (1991) "Structural 
Non-Correspondance in Translation", in 
Proceedings of the 5th European ACL, Berlin. 
Sheiber, S.M. (1986) An Introduction to 
Unification -Based Approaches to Grammar, 
University of Chicago Press. 
Shieber, S. M. (1988) A Uniform Architecture for 
Parsing and Generation", Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference in Computational 
Linguistics (COLING), Budapest. 
Tsujti, J. (1986) "Future Directions of Machine 
Trans la t ion" ,  Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference in Computational 
Linguistics (COLING), Bonn. 
Tsujii, J and K. Fujita (1991) "Lexieal Transfer 
based on Bilingual Signs", Proceedings of the 5th 
European ACL, Berlin, April 1991. 
Ushida, H and K. Sugiyama (1980) "A Machine 
Translation system from Japanese into English 
based on Conceptual Structure". Proceedings ofthe 
8th International Conference in Computational 
Linguistics (COLING), Tokyo. 
Uszkoreit, Hans (1986) "Categorial Unification 
Grammars", Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference in Computational Linguistics 
(COLING), Bonn. 
van de Veen, E. (1990) Parsing Free Word Order 
Languages, MSc Thesis, Dept. of Artificial 
Intelligence, University of Edinburgh. 
Vauquois, B. and Ch. Boitet (1985) "Automated 
Trans la t ion  at Grenoble  Univers i ty" ,  
Computational Linguistics, vol. 11 #1. 
Whitelock,  P. (1991a) "Shake-and-Bake 
Translation". in Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Constraint Propagation and Linguistic 
Description. ed. C.J. Rupp, M. Rosner and R. 
Johnson, IDSIA, Lugano. 
Whitelock, P. (1991b)A Lexicalist Unification 
Grammar of Japanese. PhD Thesis, submitted to 
Dept. of Language and Linguistics, UMIST. 
Zeevat, H., E. Klein and J. Calder (1987) "An 
Introduction to Unification Calegorial Grammar", 
in N.J. Haddock, E. Klein and G. Morrill (eds.) 
Edinburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science, 
vol. 1: Categorial Grammar, Unification Grammar 
and Parsing. Centre for Cog. Science, Edinburgh. 
Ac'u~s DE COLING-92. NANT1~S. 23-28 hotrr 1992 7 9 0 PROC. or: COLING-92. NANTES. AUG. 23-28. 1992 
SHAKE-AND-BAKE TRANSLATION 
P. Whitelock 
Sharp Laboratories of Europe Ltd. 
Oxford  Sc ience  Park 
Oxford ,  U .K .  
pete@uk.ae.ox.prg 
R~-um~ 
Dans cet article, je d&'ris une conception de la Traduction Automatique qui apporte deg'solutions 
nouvelles et radicales ~t quelquea uns des probl~mes rencontres par les approches ttucturales 
relies que les modules A transfert ou ~t hangue pivot. Cette nouveUe appreche st bas6e sur tree 
conception lexicaliste de la grammaire o~ les unit~ lexicales ont des signes multi-dimensionnels. 
La relation de traduction est d~qnie comme une &tuivalence ntre des "bags" (multi-ensembles) 
d 'un i t~ lexicales. L'analyse de la Langue Source d~ermine lea "bags" d'un c6t~ de l'&tuivalence 
et la g6n6ration par l'algorithme Shake and Bake combine librement lea signes correspondants en
fonction de ha grammaire de la Langue Cible. Le partage des variables entre ha forme logique des 
signea dans les deux hanguea fournit lea contraintes ,~mantiques nd, ceasaires. II eat facile de 
formu|er des d, quivalencea entre des expressions ayant des structures yntaxiquea ou logiques 
largement divergentes et d'utiliser ces connaissances de mani~re dacidable pour ~fectuer des 
traduction dans l'une ou l'autre direction. 
Acla~s DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 Ao(rr 1992 7 9 1 l'~oc. OF COL1NG-92, NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
