A TRANSLATOR'S WORKSTATION 
EUGENIO PICCHI 1, CAROL PETERS 2, ELISABETFA MARINAI 3 
llstituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa, Italy 
2Istituto di Elaborazione della Informazione, CNR, Pisa, Italy 
3ACQUILEX Project, Istimto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa, Italy 
ABSTRACT 
A description is given of the present state of 
development of a workstation that has been 
designed to provide the translator with efficient 
and easy-to-use computational tools. The aim is 
to offer translators fast and flexible on-line 
access to existing dictionary databases and 
bilingual text archives and also to supply them 
with facilities for updating, adding to and 
personalizing the system data archives with 
their own material. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Over the last few years, at the Institute for 
Computational Linguistics in Pisa, an open- 
ended modular set of tools, known as the 
PiSystem, has been designed and developed to 
meet the various requirements of literary and 
linguistic text processing and analyses. The core 
component of the system is the DBT, a textual 
database management and query system that has 
been implemented in different configurations to
perform specific text and dictionary processing 
tasks. Other components can be integrated with 
this system kernel as required, depending on the 
needs of a particular application. (For a detailed 
description of the DBT in its various 
configurations see Picchi, 1991.) Within this 
general framework, in the present paper we 
describe the construction of a Translator's 
Workstation. 
Translators need fast and flexible tools 
to assist hem in the task of rendering an L1 text 
in L2, as fluently and faithfully as possible. 
They also need tools that are easy-to-use, 
relatively economic and wherever possible 
portable, as many translators are free-lancers 
and much translating work is done at home. 
These requirements have been borne in mind in 
the design of the Workstation. 
The Workstation is being constructed 
around two main components: a bilingual lexical 
database system and a system that creates and 
manages bilingual text archives. In addition, 
procedures are being provided to permit the 
users to update the basic system archives with 
their own data. At present, the system 
languages are Italian and English; however, the 
procedures are designed to be generalizable: 
given the necessary lexical components, they 
could be transported toother pairs of languages. 
The user can also access monolingual LDBs, 
and invoke Italian and English morphological 
programs to query the dictionary and text 
databases or to check inflectional paradigms. 
The entire system is menu-driven; the translator 
is guided in his use of each component by a set 
of menus, and context sensitive Helps can be 
invoked to explain the functionality of each 
command. 
2. THE B IL INGUAL LEX ICAL  
DATABASE SYSTEM 
The bilingual exical database system was first 
described in Picchi et al(1990); it now forms 
part of the MLDB, a multilingual integrated 
texical database system implemented within the 
framework of the ACQUILEX project 1 and 
described in detail in Marinai et al (1990). The 
lexical components of the MLDB include the 
Italian Machine Dictionary ~ mainly based on the 
Zingarelli Italian Dictionary -, and LDBs 
derived from the Garzanti 'Nuovo Dizionario 
Italiano', and the Collins Concise Italian- 
English, English-Italian Dictionary; we hope to 
add an English LDB shortly. 
1 ACQUILEX is an ESPRIT Basic Research Action 
which is developing techniques and methodologies for
utilising both monolingual and bilingual machine- 
readable dictionary sources to construct lexical 
components fornatural language processing systems. 
AcrEs DE COLING-92, NANTF.S, 23-28 AOI3T 1992 9 7 2 PROC. OF COLING-92, NAN'rES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
2.1 Querying the Bilingual LDB 
The translator will primarily be interested in the 
bilingual dictionary data. Using the bilingual 
LDB system he can retrieve much valuable 
information for a given lexical item at all levels 
(e.g. translation equivalents, examples of 
usage, syntactic information, etc.) which is 
inaccessible using traditional dictionary lookup. 
The LDB query system offers dynamic search 
procedures that permit the user to navigate 
through the dictionary data and within the 
different fields of the entry in order to access 
and retrieve information i  whatever part of the 
dictionary it is stored, specifying the language 
on which the query is to operate. Any lexical 
item or combination of items entered as a value 
is searched in the database with reference to its 
particular function in the entry and the results 
(i.e. number of occurrences of the item) are 
displayed field by field. The user can then 
select, view and print those results that interest 
him. Morphological procedures can be used in 
order to search the entire inflectional paradigm 
of a word throughout the dictionary; this is 
particularly useful when looking for information 
on the usage of a given lexical item in the 
example fields. A full description of the LDB 
query language and it complete list of all the 
functions implemented is given in Marinai et at. 
(1990). 
The translator can also access and query 
the monolingual dictionaries maintained by the 
system. The different perspective on the data 
provided by a monolingual entry often gives a 
more complete view of a given lexical item and 
its usage than is provided by the bilingual entry 
alone. A procedure has thus been implemented 
to permit semi-automatic mapping between 
bilingual and monolingual.LDBs. Equivalent 
entries from the separate dictionaries can be 
combined and links are created between them 
semi-automatically at the sense level, mainly on 
the basis of information that can be extracted 
from definitions, examples and semantic labels. 
In this way, we create a more complete 
composite ntry which represents he sum of the 
information contained in the individual 
dictionaries (see Marinai et al forthcoming). 
The translator can use this procedure to access, 
compare and scan rapidly the lexical information 
given for the same item in different source 
dictionaries. 
2.2 Specializing the Bil ingual LDB 
In the version of the bilingual LDB that we are 
implementing in the Translator's Workstation, 
the user will also have functions available so 
that he can add his own information to the 
bilingual entry. This will be particularly useful 
for the translator working in a specific domain 
who may well accumulate information on the 
usage of particular terms and expressions within 
this discipline which is not registered in any 
dictionary. He can call the User Update 
Procedure which permits him to add to the data 
in the lexical entries as he wishes, as long as he 
respects the data representation schema. 
The procedure will work in interactive 
mode. The user calls the lexical entry to which 
he wishes to add information by entering the 
headword on the keyboard. The structured and 
tagged entry is displayed on the screen. The 
user then invokes a Help function to display the 
different functions that can be used to intervene 
on the entry. All the information added by the 
user is recorded in a special User Memo 
Section. Within this section, he is given a 
choice of fields in which he can enter his data. 
These fields are similar to those used in the rest 
of the Entry schema, and consist of fields for 
translations, examples, translations of 
examples, semantic indicators, and various 
kinds of semantic labels: subject, usage, 
geographic and register codes (for a detailed 
description of the data representation schema we 
use, see Calzolari et al, 1990). With the 
exception of a User Note field used for free 
comments by the translator, purpose-written, 
dynamic indexing procedures will then be 
executed on this new data so that it becomes 
directly accessible for subsequent querying. In 
this way, the translator is able to exploit and 
reuse information acquired as a result of his 
own experience and activity. 
3. PARALLEL TEXT RETRIEVAL 
The considerable attention ow being given to 
corpus-based studies means that there is also 
growing interest in the creation of bilingual 
reference corpora. Such corpora will be 
important sources of information in many 
studies of the linguistic phenomena involved in 
the process of transferring information, ideas, 
concepts from one language to another as they 
can provide large quantities of documented 
evidence on the possible realization of a concept 
in two languages, according to a number of 
contextual factors, e.g. usage, style, register, 
domain, etc.. The chance to access a corpus of 
this type would be of enormous help to the 
translator in his search for that elusive 'right' 
translation equivalent which is so often not 
found in the bilingual dictionary. 
ACRES DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AO~f 1992 9 7 3 PROC. OF COLING-92. NANTES. AtJc;. 23-28, 1992 
So far most of the systems tudied to 
manage bilingual corpora use statistically based 
procedures to align the texts at the sentence 
level. Such programs often request he user to 
supply not only an SL word but also a TL 
candidate translation in order to construct 
parallel concordances. Church and Gale (1991) 
present a system of this type and also describe a
word-based concordance tool in which the 
possible translations for a given word are 
discovered from the corpus on the basis of a 
pre-computed index indicating which words in 
one language correspond to which words in the 
other. Our approach to the problem is quite 
different. We use external evidence provided by 
a bilingual LDB to create links between pairs of 
bilingual texts on the basis of SL/TL translation 
equivalents. These links are then used by the 
bilingual text query system to construct parallel 
concordances for any form or cooccurrences of 
forms found in either of the two sets of texts. A 
preliminary version of this system is described 
in Marinai et al (1991). 
At the moment, the system runs on a 
small sample set of Italian/English texts chosen 
to be representative of different language styles 
and thus to provide a suitable test-bed for 
performance evaluation and the definition of 
bilingual corpus design criteria. It is now our 
intention to extend these archives. In the 
version of the system which has been 
implemented in the Translator's Workstation, 
the translator has the possibility of creating a
reference corpus from his own material and 
adding new texts to it as they become available. 
An easy-to-use interface has been prepared to 
guide the translator step-by-step as he inputs 
pairs of texts to the system. 
3.1 Creating a Bilingual Corpus 
Given a new pair of bilingual texts, the first 
stage is to structure them in text database format 
using the DBT procedures. The texts are 
scanned to recognize and identify the different 
elements composing them. For example, word 
forms are distinguished from the other tokens, 
such as punctuation marks, numbers, line and 
paragraph breaks; codes are added to 
distinguish between full stops and abbreviation 
marks, between dashes and hyphens, between 
the different use of the apostrophe in Italian and 
in English, etc.. This stage is simple, rapid, 
and once a few preliminary instructions have 
been given, automatic. 
Once a pair of texts is stored in DBT 
format, they must be input to the text 
"synchronization" procedure which establishes 
as many links as possible between translation 
equivalents in the two texts. This procedure is
totally automatic and operates as follows. Each 
word form in the text selected as the Source text 
is input to the morphological nalyzer for that 
language in order to identify its base lemma 
which is then searched in the bilingual LDB. 
All translations given for this lemma are read 
and input to the morphological generator for the 
TL; all the forms generated are then searched 
over the relevant zone in the target ext. If the 
procedure finds more than one possible base 
lemma for a given form the translations for each 
will be read as, in the case of grammatical 
homography, it is quite possible that the 
translation equivalent does not respect the 
category of the .source language and, in the case 
of lexical homography, it is presumed unlikely 
that the translations of the 'wrong' lemma will 
find a correspondence in the target text. A 
schema of the procedure is given in Figure 1. 
I DBT SYNCHRO J 
I D6T SYNCHRO QUERY SYSTEM ~ 
Figure 1. Parallel Text "Synchronization" 
Procedure 
AcrEs DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AOt3"r 1992 9 7 4 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES, AUG. 23-28, 1992 
Articles, pronouns, prepositions and a 
small list of stop words are excluded from this 
search procedure as of little significance to the 
matching procedure and liable to create noise. 
When one of the translation equivalent forms is 
found in the searched section of the L2 text, a 
link - consisting of a physical address which 
locates the equivalent word in the L1 text - will 
be created. When no entry for a word in the L1 
text is found in the dictionary, it may be that the 
form being examined is either a proper noun or 
a word from a highly specialised vocabulary 
not included in our bilingual LDB. An attempt 
is thus made to match such forms against any 
equivalent character strings in the relevant zone 
of the L2 text, ignoring the last characters to 
allow for morphological variations as, in the 
two languages in question, proper nouns and 
scientific terms frequently resemble ach other. 
The matching procedure continues, word by 
word, to the end of the L1 text. 
The execution of the "synchronization" 
procedure is rapid and totally transparent. 
When it is completed, the results are presented 
to the user in terms of the number of successful 
"matches" of translation equivalents between. 
the Source and Target exts. The procedure will 
be considered to have "failed" if the number of 
matches is less than a given percentage of the 
total text. This procedure must be executed just 
once for each pair of bilingual texts, when they 
are "added to the archives. 
3.2 Querying a Bilingual Corpus 
When the bilingual texts have been processed 
by the synchronization procedure, all the links 
obtained are memorized in the text archives o 
that they can be used by the parallel query 
system. The bilingual text system provides 
functions to query the bilingual archives and 
retrieve parallel contrastive contexts. The 
translator querying the corpus must first specify 
his "source" language, i.e. the language on 
which the search is to be performed. For each 
form or combination of forms he searches, the 
parallel source and target language contexts are 
constructed and displayed on the screen. The 
word(s) for which the contexts are being 
created will be highlighted and, where a direct 
link exists, the L2 matched word(s) will be 
highlighted in the same colour. Otherwise, the 
two directly linked forms which are closest o 
the point calculated as the middle of the L2 
context will be evidenced in a different colour, 
as indicators of the likely position in the TL text 
of the translation for the SL form(s) being 
searched. The user can either search for 
individual word forms or, using the 
morphological generator, for all the forms of a 
given lemma. The indicators help him to 
identify the TL equivalents rapidly. Figure 2 
gives examples of parallel concordances for the 
Italian adverbial expression plan piano / plan 
pianino which is used to attenuate or moderate 
the action of the verb; its translation i  English 
is thus context-dependent. 
DBT-Synchro  (Piechi) B i l ingual  Reference  Corpus V 
~I}P IAN & ({I}PIANINO I {I}PIANO) 
4 {I} est remo del campo. L' osserva i  con indolenza mast icando  uno di quei 
f i l l  d' erba col qual i  le ragazze pred icono il futuro. Camminava p lan 
p ian ino lungo la scarpata. Teneva una mano sul f ianco e nell' a l t ra aveva 
un bastone col quale saggiava il terreno erboso. I -Dubl in2.197 
{E}. I watched him lazi ly as I chewed one of those green stems on which 
~i~!~i~ tel l  fortunes. He came along by the bank slowly. He ~a!~!~ wi th  one 
hand upon his hip and in the other hand he held a st ick E -Dubl in2 .211 
5 {I} "C' ~ tempo" r ispose Corley. "Ci dovrebbe giA essere, ma la faccio 
sempre aspettare ."  Lenehan r idacch i6  p lan piano. "Accidenti ,  Cor ley,  sai 
sempre come t rat tar le"  disse. "Li conosco tutt i  i loro I -Dub l in6 .150 
{E} enough",  said Corley. "She' ii be there all r ight. I a lways let her 
wait  a bit ."  ~ laughed quiet ly.  "Ecod, ~ i~,  you know how to take 
them", he said~:i~:l~::m up to all their  E -Dubl~n6.170 
6 {I} si sarebbe aperta la strada. Sul tavolo davanta a lui g iaceva  un 
volume del la  poes ie  di Byron. L' apri p lan piano con la s in is t ra  per non 
svegl iare il b imbo e cominci6 a ieggere la prima: Tacc iono i vent i  e 
immoto l 'aer I -Dubl in8.493 
{E} might  open the way for him. A volume of Byron's  poems lay before 
him on the ~ i~.  He opened it caut ious ly  with his ~!~ft hand lost he 
should waken?~e chi ld and began to read the first poem in the book: 
"Hushed E -Dub l inS .536 co .~ ~i~t~rru~t Fl Help 
Figure 2 Parallel Concordances for pian piano/pianino from the Bilingual Text Archives 
ACrF.S DE COLING-92, NANTES, 23-28 AO6T 1992 9 7 5 PROC. OF COLING-92, NANTES. AUG. 23-28, 1992 
"Wrong" links between falsely recognized 
translation equivalents that disturb context 
calculation are identified and eliminated by the 
query system, which then recalculates the 
parallel contexts on the basis of those links 
recognised as valid. We are now considering 
ways to filter the results o that the user has the 
option of viewing only that part of them which 
most interests him, e.g. he could choose to 
view only those parallel contexts in which there 
is no direct (dictionary established) link for the 
SL word being searched. During a query 
session, bilingual concordances can be selected 
for printing or saved in a separate file for future 
reference. 
The bilingual text retrieval system is 
currently implemented for interactive 
consultation, e.g. by the lexicographer or 
translator. However, data derived from 
analyses on bilingual corpora should also 
provide valuable input for MT systems. For 
example, Nagao (forthcoming) stresses the 
importance of including detailed collocational 
information in the transfer dictionaries of such 
systems: there are many specific expressions 
which must be translated in a specific way in a 
given TL and knowledge of this sort improves 
the quality of an MT system greatly. To acquire 
it many collocational expressions with their 
translations must be accumulated and bilingual 
texts are important sources of such data. For 
this reason, we have begun to examine methods 
by which the results can be synthesized so that 
the most probable translation candidates for a 
given expression within the TL context can be 
identified (semi)automatically. 
4. FINAL REMARKS 
The components of the translator's workstation 
are in an advanced stage of implementation. We 
envisage a final integrated system in which the 
translator creates his document using one of the 
commercially available word processing 
packages from which he can access and query 
the bilingual (and monolingual) lexical 
databases or the bilingual text archives 
whenever the need arises. In this way, not only 
will he be able to consult much material 
otherwise inaccessible, but the speed of the 
system response times means that, to a large 
extent, it is possible to avoid that interruption to 
concentration so often involved when it is 
necessary to stop work to perform a manual 
look-up of a reference work. 
The rapid recent echnological progress 
in the computer hardware world means that it is 
increasingly possible to provide desk-top tools 
with large storage capacities at relatively low 
costs; the workstation is thus being 
implemented on personal computers and runs 
under the MS/DOS operating system. 
REFERENCES 
Calzolari N., Peters C., Roventini A. (1990), 
Computational Model of the Dictionary Entry: 
Preliminary Report, ACQUILEX, Esprit BRA 
3030, Six Month Deliverable, ILC-ACQ-1-90, 
Pisa, 90p. 
Church K., Gale W. (1991), Concordances for 
Parallel Text, in Using Corpora, Proc. 7th 
Annual Conference of the UW Centre for the 
New OED and Text Research, OUP, UK, pp 
40-62. 
Marinai E., Peters C., Picchi E. (1990), The 
Pisa Multilingual Lexical Database System, 
Esprit BRA 3030, Twelve Month Deliverable, 
ILC-ACQ-2-90, Pisa, 61p. 
Marinai E., Peters C., Picchi E., A prototype 
system for the semi-automatic sense linking and 
merging of mono- and bilingual LDBs, in 
N.Ide and S. Hockey (eds.), Research in 
Humanities Computing, OUP, forthcoming. 
Marinai E., Peters C., Picchi E. (1991), 
Bilingual Reference Corpora: A System for 
Parallel Text Retrieval in Using Corpora, Proc. 
of 7th Annual Conference of the UW Centre for 
the New OED and Text Research, OUP, UK, 
pp 63-70. 
Nagao M., Dict ionaries for Machine 
Translation, Linguistica Computazionale, Vol
VIII, forthcoming. 
Picchi E. (1991), D.B.T.: A Textual Data Base 
System, in L. Cignoni and C. Peters (eds.), 
Computational Lexicology and Lexicography. 
Special Issue dedicated to Bernard Quemada. 
H, Linguistica Computazionale, Vol VII, pp 
177-205. 
Picchi E., Peters C., Calzolari N. (1990), 
Implementing a Bilingual Lexical Database 
System, in T. Magay and J.Zig~iny (eds.), 
BUDALEX '88 Proceedings, Budapest, 1990, 
pp 317-329. 
ACq'Es DE COLING-92. NANTES, 23-28 ho~" 1992 976 PROC. OF COLING-92. NANTES. AUG. 23-28. 1992 
