A METHODOLOGY FOR AUTOMATIC  TERM RECOGNIT ION 
Soph ia  Anan ladou 
Department of Computing~ Manchester Metropolitan University 
John Dalton Building, Chester Street, Manchester, UK, M1 5GD 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The topic of automatic term recognition (ATR) 
is of great interest especially with the growth of 
NLP systems, which are passing from the develop- 
ment stage to the application stage. The application 
of NLP technology involves customlsing systems to- 
wards specific needs, particularly in specialised o- 
mains (sublanguages) which form the main target of 
the technology~ There is thus an urgent need for high 
quality, large scale collections of terminologies (with 
associated linguistic information) for use in NLP sys- 
tem dictionaries. 
The existence of coherently built terminologies 
leads to better performance for many interesting 
applications: translation, technical writing (in the 
mother tongue or in a foreign language), multilin- 
gual (multimedial) document production, classify- 
ing, indexing, archiving and retrieving docmnents 
(monolingual and multilingual), extracting, reorga- 
nizing and reformulating knowledge represented in
textual form (Iteid,U. and McNaught 1991). 
Given the amount of specialised texts that need 
to be processed in efforts to discover (potential) 
terms, keep track of the life-cycle of terms, etc., it is 
of interest o consider the design of (semi)automatic 
aids. A term recognition tool would be a great aid to 
special exicographers. It is only an aid~ however, if 
it incorporates linguistic and terminological knowl- 
edge such that it makes largely accurate proposals. 
It is with the design of such a tool that we have been 
particularly concerned and we report below on var- 
ious aspects with which we have had success. We 
do not claim to have solved the term recognition 
problem. As we shall see, there are many different 
kinds of term formations each of which calls for dif- 
ferent techniques and different knowledge: our work 
has concentrated on a subset of these. 
2 TERMS 
The main characteristic of terms is that they 
are monoreferential to a very great degree: a term 
typically refers to a specific concept in a partic- 
ular subject field. Subject field knowledge is con- 
veyed via naturally occurring sublanguages which 
demonstrate r strictions on the lexical, syntactic and 
semantic levels. Each sublanguage has its own set 
of concepts and a terminologist will structure these 
into a system organised according to relationships 
holding between concepts (generic, partitive, causal, 
etc.). Terms are therefore the linguistic realisation of 
the concepts of special communication and are or- 
ganised into systems of terms which ideally reflect 
the associated conceptual system. 
Terms differ from general language words primar- 
ily by their nature of reference. Nevertheless, it is not 
always an easy task to divide terms from words. The 
terminologist is often faced with cases where syn- 
onymy, homonymy or polysemy could be said to be 
playing a role. Also, the same wordform can refer to 
different concepts in different sublanguages, and be 
used differently in general language. 
In elaborating a terminology, we typically em- 
ploy texts and a set of tools (e.g. KWIC, inverse 
KWIC, etc.) which will facilitate the tasks of iden- 
tifying which words, phrases, acronyms, etc., of the 
corpus are functioning as terms with respect o the 
conceptual system of the subject field and of relating 
them appropriately via relationships and definitions. 
One important aspect in terminology is the creation 
of new terms (term formation) in response to a new 
concept - this may be by, say, an engineer (monolin- 
gually) or a translator (where a target equivalent is 
missing). 
Term formation follows certain guidelines (pro- 
cedures) which vary in sophistication depending on 
the subject domain. Some domains how evidence of 
mandatory adherence to strict term formation. Oth- 
ers may permit wide choice within recognized limits. 
We view term formation in our research from an an- 
alytical viewpoint, i.e. we investigate the linguistic 
form of known terms in order to identify productive 
means of forming terms, which is necessary in order 
to be able to recognize new terms~ 
3 A METHODOLOGY FOR AUTO-  
MATIC  TERM RECOGNIT ION 
We investigated the relevance of other disciplines 
to automatic term recognition, such as Information 
Science - especially techniques of automatic index- 
ing. We concluded that non-linguistic based tech- 
niques (statistical nd probability based ones), while 
~034 
providing gross means of characterizing texts and 
measuring the beilaviour and content-bearing poten- 
tial of words, are not refined enough for our purposes. 
In Terminology we are interested as much in word- 
forms occurring with high frequency as in rare ones 
or those of the middle frequencies. We are interested 
in all units that may be acting as terms in a col- 
lection of texts. IIowever, we do not deny the useflll 
role of such techniques. They have their place in that 
they may usefully complement o her techniques. 
We chose to concentrate on potential contribu- 
tions of Linguistics, especially from lexical morphol- 
ogy, and were interested in developing methodologies 
for term recognition that apply theoretically moti- 
vated ideas about term formation. Theoretical Lin- 
guistics deals exclusively with general language word 
structure. We designed an integrated model of word 
and term structure based on the results of an analysis 
of Immunology terms in the sublanguage of Medicine 
(for English) and on models to he found in the liter- 
ature on general language (Se\]kirk, 1982; Mohanan, 
1986). 
Medical terminology relies heavily on Greek 
(mainly) and Latin neoclassical elements for the cre- 
ation of terms such as 'erythroeyte' and 'angioneu- 
rotie'. In the literature of theoretical Linguistics 
there are no satisfactory accounts of the neoclassical 
vocabulary and no formal motivated classification of 
neoclassical wordforms exists. In Terminology, most 
accounts of term structure remain at an unformalised 
descriptive level and this is particularly true for dis- 
cussions of neoclassical vocabularies. 
The reason for this overall ack of formal descrip- 
tion of neoclassical elements appears to be due to 
their occupying a peripheral or ambiguous place in 
most analyses of word and term formation in En- 
glish. We found this to be unsatisfactory for the fol- 
lowing reason: it is anomalous to conceive of English 
word formation as being somehow separated from 
term formation, especially as terms constitute the 
majority of English words. Therefore, we strove to 
set up an integrated model of word and term struc- 
ture which would, importantly, account adequately 
for the neoclassical component. 
The word structure of English can be said to com- 
prise 3 category types, i.e. Word, Root and Affix 
(Selkirk, 1982) 1 
However, there is great confusion in the literature 
as to the morphological status of Greek and Latin 
neoclassical forms, i.e. whether they are roots, af- 
fixes or even both. Models which describe them as 
affixes allow the generation of forms such as *af- 
ffx+a{fix. Many models, including the unformalised 
ones of conventional dictionaries, charaeterise neo- 
classical elements vaguely as 'combining elements', 
1Selkirk is cited here only as a reference point:  we shal l  
develop our own model  as shall  be seen. 
which suggests ome kind of extra-morphologicM sta- 
tus (or wastebasket s atus). Such forms thus appar- 
ently defy attempts to provide an integrated account 
in terms of the accepted morphological categories. 
In our approach, we introduced a fourth category 
type comb, to help handle the neoclassical word- 
stock of English. This does not, in itself, resolve 
the problem of how to (sub)classify neoclassical el- 
ements: we will address this aspect below in detail. 
Firstly, though, we discuss our concomitant adop- 
tion of a level ordered approach to the morphological 
analysis of English words and terms. 
Level ordering places strong constraints on the 
cooccurrence ororder of classes of affix and hence is a 
powerful mechanism in helping to identify whether a 
wordform is well-formed or not, whether a wordform 
may be segmented in a particular way or not, etc. 
Numerous models incorporating level ordering have 
been proposed in morphology and morphophonology. 
There is debate on how many levels should be iden- 
tiffed and what the relationships between levels are. 
Level ordering has its critics also. We do not enter 
into these debates here, however we have found, in 
experiments over the years, that level ordering is of 
great use in a computational morphology environ- 
ment, as has been recently also suggested by (Sproat, 
1992) who, like us, has also found that there is a gain 
in grouping rules according to Level. 
There is nevertheless broad agreement that, in 
English, Level 1 and Level 2 are affixational levels 
dealing with latinate morphology (Class I affixation) 
and native morphology (Class II affixation), respec- 
tively. Level 1 feeds Level 2, therefore native affixa- 
tion must he attached outside latinate morphology. 
There is less agreement about the relationship be- 
tween Class II affixation and native compounding 
and whether one needs to identify a separate na- 
tive compounding level. For various reasons we do 
not have space to go into here, we choose to recog- 
nize a distinct native compounding Level 3. More- 
over, we importantly recognize a Level 0, which is 
reserved for non-native (i.e. neoclassical) compound- 
ing. In other words, compounding purely involving 
neoclassical elements must be completed before af- 
fixation takes place. 
Thus, the four distinct levels of our model are: 
1. Non-native compounding (neoclassical com- 
pounding) 
2. Class I affixation 
3. Class II affixation 
4. Native compounding 
Each level has two characteristics: it is cyclic and 
optional. Cyclicity accounts for recursive structures, 
i.e. we might find forms such as the following: 
1035 
prefix-II + word + suffix-I + sufflx-I ~' 
where Level 1 rules apply twice before Level 2 ones. 
To apply our model, we used the Edinburgh Cam- 
bridge Morphological Analyser and Dictionary Sys- 
tem (Ritchie, et al 1992), a component of the lgatu- 
ral Language Toolkit developed for the UK Alvey IT 
Programme. This offers a Koskeniemmi-type anal- 
yser (here restricted to handling morphographemic 
pt,enomena) and a general purpose unification based 
analyser which allows the morphologist to express 
her knowledge via feature bundles of attribute-value 
pairs in a context-flee grammar framework. 
Our model is instantiated in our computational 
wordform grammar as follows. The analysis trategy 
used by the wordform grammar parser is that of a 
bottom up chart parser. Each rule in our grammar 
is marked for level or levels. Lexical entries are also 
marked for level. Thus, a Class I suffix like 'ous' as 
in 'glorious' is marked for Level 1. Monomorphemic 
non-affix native lexical entries are also marked by 
default for Level 1. Thus, if we have the wordform 
'glorious', then, in a computational environment, 
string segmentation, morphographemic rule applica- 
tion and dictionary look-up will yield: 
glory((cat noun)(level l.)) and 
ous ((cat suffix)(leve\] 1)) 
These two representations are added to the data 
structure (a chart). Rules with Level 1 as their do- 
main may now apply, as the basic condition for their 
activation is present in the chart. They will match 
with these representations and yield: 
glory + ous ((cat adjective)(level 1)) 
which is still a Level 1 object. This is added to the 
chart and no further rules apply. This representa- 
tion may now be generated as a word of English. As 
Levels are optional, in this case the rules associated 
with higher Levels do not apply. If we take an nn- 
derived monomorphemie native wordform, this can 
be seen conceptually as passing through Levels 1-3, 
with vacuous rule application. All such wordforms 
are marked as Level 1 in the dictionary, thus will not 
be considered, as is correct, by Level 0 rules. The 
fact that an object is marked for some Level does 
not block it at that Level: it merely indicates that 
this is the first Level at which rules may apply - 
recall that we do not know, in bottom-up analysis, 
wbetber e.g. we are dealing with an underived form, 
until we have finished the analysis, thus we must al- 
low for underived forms to potentially combine with 
affixes or participate in compounding. 
Besides the use of four levels in our morpholog- 
ical analysis, we additionally introduced a diacritic 
feature which explicitly marks degrees of boundness 
for neoclassical roots. Analysis of a corpus of Im- 
munology texts, by various (semi-)automatic meth- 
ods, produced classifications of neoclassical elements 
2I~ II correspond to Class I afflxation and Class II affixa- 
tion, respectively. 
into roots and affixes. Neoclassical roots make up 
our new category comb and display three degrees of 
boundness: totally free (e.g. cyst), partially bound 
(e.g. myel- or -myel) and totally bound (e.g. ten) a, 
Totally bound forms cannot appear on their own and 
cannot appear in compound final root position with- 
out being suffixed. Partially bound forms cannot ap- 
pear on their own, but can stand in compound final 
root position without suffixation. Totally free forms 
can appear in any position, suffixed or not, and can 
stand on their own. All neoclassical roots are marked 
in the dictionary with level information level  0 and 
a value for the boundness feature 4. Those neoclassi- 
cal elements that we have classed as affixes are dealt 
with largely at Level 1~ 
In addition to level ordering and boundness in- 
formation, other characteristics of our implementa- 
tion are the use of morphosyntactic head, feature 
value percolation and rela~ivised head (Di Sciullo and 
Williams, 1987). The important issue for us was to 
determine whether a wordform is a general anguage 
word or a potential tenn. In our system, we demon- 
strafed how this could be achieved for affixed forms, 
neoclassical compounds and certain types of native 
compound. We labelled certain suffixes as typically 
term forming suffixes on the basis of a sublanguage 
corpus analysis, attaching the feature value (word-  
type  te rm)  to their dictionary entry (each affix has 
its own lexical entry). We can then ensure that a suf- 
fix with this feature percolates its value to the mother 
node. We used only two wordtype values in our sys- 
tem: te rm and word. Besides employing the notions 
of head and perco la t ion  from Lexicalist Morphol- 
ogy, we also used the notion of re la t iv i zed  head. 
This refinement of the notion of head helped us per- 
colate the relevant information in cases where the 
morpheme bearing tbe label (wordtype  te rm)  was 
not in syntactic head position according to the Right- 
band Itead Rule. 
Our wordfonn grammar rules generate the fol- 
lowing word and term forms involving sufllxation 
(note: prefixation is similar to suffixation thus is not 
shown): term -4 word + term_suffix 
term --~ term-{- term_suffix 
word -4 word -{- word suffix 
term .-* term -{- word_suffix, 
Compounding operates in a similar fashion: 
term -~ term + word 
term -+ term -I- term 
term --~ word -F term 
word -~ word -F word. 
Our use of a unification based word grammar 
3 We could have worked with three types of comb, however 
we prefer our current solution as it appears more flexible and 
expressive tous. 
4We only use two wlues for bound, however bonndness i
interpreted by a combination of bound and level values to 
give us our 3-way distinction. 
1036 
then allowed features associated with known termi- 
nological elements to be attached to overall word- 
forms, thus characterising them as potential terms 
for later assessment by the terminologist. The no- 
tion of ~erminoIogical head of a wordform is impor- 
tant in this respect: this refers to the element of a 
complex wordform which confers term-hood on the 
whole wordform, which may not be the same as the 
morphosyntactic head. 
As yet, we are only capable of determining termi- 
nological status for an mlknown word, or wordform 
containing an unknown morpheme, if it contains a 
known terminological e ement (revealed by prior co l  
pus analysis and coded appropriately in tile dictio- 
nary). For known morphemes there is no problem. 
By using notions of Level Ordering, we can fltrther- 
more impose strong constraints on the form a word 
(or term) may take. Thus, we can filter and reject 
as nonwords or nonterms wordforms where all anal- 
ysis without Level Ordering might postulate a valid 
wordfonn of English. 
We provide an anMysis of a potential term in the 
following. 
Pmal represen-tation 
leukaemia 
analysis: 1 
(((bound-) compound-) (level 1) (wordtype term) 
(category noun)) 
\]" This is the final representation which postulates 
that the word 'leukaemia' is a noun, term, Level 1, 
non compound lexical unit. 
L0-to-M-by-n-.or-a(b-suffixing 
T rule name 
(((compound-) (wordtype term) (bound -) (level 0) 
(category comb)) 
representation of lexical entry a data 
ENTRY 
(leuk ((category conrb) (level O) (bound -) (wor&ype 
term) (compound-)) ) 
1 lexical entry a 
(((wordtype term) (hound-) (tie q-) (level l) (makes 
noun) (suffixes comb) (category suffix)) 
I representation of lexical entry b data 
ENTRY 
(q aemia ((category suillx) (suffixes (noun verb ad- 
jective adverb comb))(t ie I) (bo,md-)  (level 1) 
(wordtype term) (makes noun)) ))) 
\[ lexieal entry b 
Relevant rule 
(L0-to-Ll.-by-n-or-adj-suffixing 
((category monn-or-adj) (wordtype term) (level 1) 
(compound-) (bound 4) 
q" 
((category n-v-adj-~dv-comh)(lovel O)(bound '9), 
((category .~umx)(sumxes _n-v-adj-adv-comb)(makes 
nonn-or-adj) (level l))) 
We have simplified tl, is example somewhat \~r 
exposition: in tile EdCam system, a dictionary end. 
try contains fields other than the two shown here 
(the orthographic form followed by associated mor- 
phosyntactic information). Underline denotes a fea- 
ture variahle, whose name indicates the set of possi- 
ble values taken by the feature. All Level 0 object, s 
1,ave terminological status in our corpus thus we may 
safely mark wordtype directly on the mother. The 
feature suffixes is used as a subcategorisation frame 
whose value must unify with that of the affixed ob- 
ject. The feature makes indicates what category the 
affix turns the object it attaches to into. Tlm value 
of this feature is the one that is percolated, via uniG 
cation of variable values, to the mother node, to give 
it its category specification. Subcategorisation a d 
makes information is stored in the morphosyntax 
tleld of an afflx's lexical entry. Our suffixing rules 
are basicMly all of this form with variants to take 
care of suffixation at different Levels. There are sev- 
eral rules that take care of mapping between Levels 0 
and I as in the above example. With prefixes, which 
are typically not category changing, we have a three- 
way unification. The use of the eompomM feature 
is used at two levels, the neoclassical level and the 
native level. Compounds are assigned one syntactic 
parse only, a left branching one, to avoid problems 
with overgeneration ~ 
A top-level filter takes care of allowing only word~ 
forms that are potential terms to be passed out as re- 
suits: ((category _any-cat)(bound-) (level _1-2-o>3) 
(wordtype term)). Note that no Level 0 objects can 
he so output a.nd that each object must be unbound, 
have a major lexical category (not suffix, pref ix or 
comb) and t)e of wordtype term.  
4 CONCLUI ) ING REMARKS 
We }lave implemented a computational morpho- 
logical grammar and lexicon that instanl;iates tile 
abovementioned 4 level ordered morphology of En- 
glish cal)at31e of handling both neoclassica.1 con> 
pmmding and other complex and simple wordforms 
m a theoreticMly s~tisfactory manner, and fllrther- 
more demonstrating that application of theoreticMly 
motivated lingnistic knowledge nhances term recog- 
nition. The identification of this new level is an orig- 
inM contribution to morphological theory and, for 
the first time, allows neoclassical elements to be in- 
tegrated in a theoretically satisfactory and elegant 
way in a model of term and word structure. 
Term formation is only one of tile factors involved 
in term recognition. Our research has focussed on 
'~It should he noticed that (compound t)  is serving two 
purposes in this analysis: a) as a strategic value I:o prevent 
multiple syntactic analyses of a compound and b) to mark an 
object, as a compounded form. Several features of our grammar 
are inspired by the simple grammar provided with the EdCam 
system, however we llave substantially altered and added to 
ghi-~ featnreset and ruleset. 
1037 
morphosyntactie aspects of term formation insofar 
as these appear to be more tractable than others, 
which we have also identified in the course of our 
research. 
Our work has focussed recently on the develop- 
ment of tools for sublanguage linguistic analysis to 
aid the process of word classification: e.g. to effect 
inversion of KWIC indexes and to apply techniques 
of gradual approximation to discover semantic ollo- 
cations between words (Sekine et.al, 1992a, 1992b). 
Future work will further investigate the appli- 
cation of such tools to automatic term recognition 
and will examine how techniques and research re- 
sults from the various fields given above in section 
3 can be applied to other aspects of term formation 
and thus term recognition. 
5 REFERENCES 
Di Sciullo, A.M.,and Williams, E.(1987). On the Def- 
inition of Word. Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 14, 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Ma. 
Heid, U., and McNaught, J. (1991). EUROTRA-7 
Study: Feasibility and Project Definition Study on 
the Reusability of Lexical and Terminological Re- 
sources in Computerised Applications. Final Report. 
Submitted to DGXIII-B, CEC, Luxembourg. 
Mohanan, K.P., (1986). The Theory of Lexical 
Phonology. Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Ritchie, G.D., Russell, G.J., Black, A.W. and Pul- 
man, S.G. (1992). Computational Morphology. The 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Ma. 
Sekine, S., Carroll, J.J., Ananiadou, S., and Tsujii, 
J. (1992a) Automatic Learning for Semantic Collo- 
cation. Proceedings of Third Conference on Applied 
NLP, Trento, Italy, pp. 104-110. 
Sekine S., Ananiadou, S., Carroll, J.J. and Tsujii, J. 
(1992b). Linguistic Knowledge Generator. Proceed- 
ings of lSth Coling, vol.If, pp.560-566. 
Selkirk, E., (1982). The Syntax of Words. Linguistic 
Inquiry Monograph 7, MIT Press. Ca. Mass. 
Sproat, R., (1992). Morphology and Computation. 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Ma. 
1038 
