Segmentation Standard for Chinese Natural Language Processing 
Chu-Ren Huang*, Keh-j iann Chen #' and Li-Li Chang # 
Instatute of History and Philology, and #Institute of Information Science 
Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan 115 
hschuren@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw, kchen@iis.sinica.edu.tw, lili@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
Abstract 
This paper proposes a segmentation stan- 
dard for Chinese natural language processing. 
The standard is proposed to achieve linguis- 
tic felicity, computational feasibility, and 
data uniformity. Linguistic felicity is main- 
tained by defining a segmentation unit to be 
equivalent to the theoretical definition of 
word, and by providing a set of segmentation 
principles that are equivalent o a functional 
definition of a word. Computational feasi- 
bility is ensured by the fact that the above 
functional definitions are procedural in na- 
ture and can be converted to segmentation 
algorithms, as well as by the implementable 
heuristic guidelines which deal with specific 
linguistic categories. Data uniformity is 
achieved by stratification of the standard 
itself and by defining a standard lexicon as 
part of the segmentation standard. 
I. Introduction 
One important feature of Chinese texts is 
that they are character-based, not word- 
based. Each Chinese character stands for one 
phonological syllable and in most cases rep- 
resents a morpheme. The fact that Chinese 
writing does not mark word boundaries poses 
the unique question of word segmentation i
Chinese computational linguistics (e.g. Sproat 
and Shih 1990, and Chert and Liu 1992). 
Since words are the linguistically significant 
basic elements that are entered in the lexicon 
and manipulated by grammar rules, no lan- 
guage processing can be done unless words 
are identified. In theoretical terms, the pri- 
macy of the concept of word can be more 
firmly established if its existence can be em- 
pirically supported in a language that does 
not mark it conventionally in texts (e.g. Bates 
et al 1993, Huang et al 1993). In computa- 
tional terms, no serious Chinese language 
processing can be done without segmenta- 
tion. No efficient sharing of electronic re- 
sources or computational tools is possible 
unless segmentation can be standardized. 
Evaluation, and thus comparisons and im- 
provements, are also impossible in Chinese 
computational linguistics without standard- 
ized segmentation. 
Since the proposed segmentation standard 
is intended for Chinese natural language 
processing, it is very important that it re- 
flects linguistic reality as well as computa- 
tional applicability. Hence we stipulate that 
the proposed standard must be linguistically 
felicitous, computationally feasible, and must 
ensure data uniformity. 
1.1.Components of the Sezmentation Standard 
Our proposed segmentation standard con- 
sists of two major components to meet the 
goals discussed above. The modularization of 
the components will facilitate revisions and 
maintenance in the future. The two major 
components of the segmentation standards 
are the segmentation criteria and the (stan- 
dard) lexicon. The tripartite segmentation 
criteria consist of a definition of the segmen- 
tation unit, two segmentation principles, and 
a set of heuristic guidelines. The segmenta- 
tion lexicon contains a list of Mandarin Chi- 
nese words and other linguistic units that the 
heuristic guidelines must refer to. 
II.Segmentation Standard Part I: 
Segmentation Criteria 
II.1. A Definition of the Segmentation Unit 
Given Bloomfield's (1933) definition of 
words as 'the smallest units of speech that 
can meaningfully stand by their own,' they 
are natural units for segmentation in lan- 
guage processing. However, as Chao (1968) 
observes, sociological words and linguistic 
words very often do not match up. In Eng- 
lish, a sociological word can be defined by 
the delimitation of blanks in writing. It is 
nevertheless possible for a linguistic word 
such as a compound to be composed of more 
than one sociological words, such as 'the 
White House.' Since these cases represent 
only a relatively small portion of English 
1045 
texts, sociological words are taken as the 
default standard for segmentation units as 
well as a reasonable approximation to lin- 
guistic words in English language processing. 
Chinese, on the other hand, defines its 
sociological words in terms of characters, in 
spite of the fact that grammatical words may 
be made up of one or more characters. In 
fact, one-character words represent slightly 
less than 10% of all lexical entries, while 
two-character words take up more than 65%. 
Similarly, one-character words are estimated 
to take up only 50% of all texts in Chinese 
(Chen et al, 1993). Since the notion of the 
one-word-per-character sociological word is 
not a good working hypothesis for linguistic 
words, and since there is no fixed length for 
words, a crucial issue is whether the notion 
of linguistic words can be directly used as 
the standard for segmentation unit. 
Computational inguistic works suggest 
that linguistic words are not the perfect units 
for natural language processing. For instance, 
the necessity for lemmatization attests to the 
fact that some linguistically dependent units 
may have independent grammatical function 
and meaning and need to be treated as basic 
units in language processing (e.g. Sproat 
1992). We follow the above findings and 
define the standard segmentation unit as a 
close approximation of linguistic words with 
emphasis on functional rather than phono- 
logical or morphological independency. 
1) Segmentation Unitde f is the smallest 
string of character(s) that has both an 
independent meaning and a fixed gra- 
mmatical category. 
There are two points worth remarking 
involving the above definition. First, non- 
technical terms are deliberately chosen such 
that even developers in information indus- 
tries with little or no linguistic background 
could follow this standard. Second, it follows 
from this definition that many of the so- 
called particles, which show various levels of 
linguistic dependencies but represent invari- 
ant grammatical functions, will be treated as 
segmentation units. They include le 'perfec- 
tive marker', and de 'relative clause marker'. 
II, 2, Segmentatign Principles 
We propose two segmentation principles 
to define the two basic concepts underlining 
the definition: independent meaning and 
fixed grammatical category. The principles 
also provide a functional/procedural go- 
rithm for identifying segmentation units. 
2) Segmentation Principles 
a) A string whose meaning cannot be de- 
rived by the sum of its components 
should be treated as a segmentation unit. 
b) A string whose structural composition 
is not determined by the grammatical re- 
quirements of its components, or a string 
which has a grammatical category other 
than the one predicted by its structural 
composition should be treated as a seg- 
mentation unit. 
Take note that characters are the basic pro- 
cessing units when segmentation is involved. 
Thus the two principles address the question 
of which strings of characters can be further 
combined to form a segmentation unit. Prin- 
ciples 2a) and b) elaborate on the semantic 
(independent meaning) and syntactic (fixed 
category) components of the definition of 
segmentation unit. 
Because of the procedural nature of the 
two principles, they provide the basis for 
segmentation algorithm. Since a character 
could be a lexical or sub-lexical element, the 
basic decision in segmentation is whether the 
relation between two characters are morpho- 
lexical or syntactic. For instance, with a VO 
sequence such as lai-dian come-electricity 
'to strike a chord with, to mutually attract', 
principle 2b) applies to predict that the string 
is a segmentation unit since lai is an intransi- 
tive verb and do not take an object. 
II.3.Segmentation Guidelines 
Even though the above principled defini- 
tion provides a broad direction for standard- 
ized segmentation, it lacks the nuance for 
guiding actual segmentation. The definition 
of segmentation units and the segmentation 
principles are essentially language indepen- 
dent formalizations of information units (i.e. 
words). Thus they will not vary with linguis- 
tic change, and need not be revised for spe- 
cific applications. However, this universal 
nature also prevents them from referring to 
specific details. Hence we propose that a set 
of Segmentation Guidelines be included in 
our segmentation standard to reflect heuristic 
knowledge that is dependent on actual lin- 
1046 
guistic data. These guidelines can be added, 
deleted, or altered as necessitated by the lin- 
guistic data we are dealing with. Since all 
essential inguistic knowledge is encoded in 
the lexicon, it follows that the guidelines will 
have to refer to a Mandarin lexicon. In con- 
trast, the broad linguistic concepts in the 
definition and principles do not refer to spe- 
cific lexical information. Last, we also envi- 
sion that the guidelines are quantifiable. 
They are quantifiable because more guide- 
lines a string satisfies, the more likely it is to 
be a segmentation u it. 
3) Segmentation Guidelines 
a) Bound morphemes hould be attached 
to neighboring words to form a seg- 
mentation unit when possible. 
b) A string of characters that has a high 
frequency in the language or high co- 
occurrence frequency among the com- 
ponents hould be treated as a segmen- 
tation unit when possible. 
c) Strings separated by overt segmenta- 
tion markers hould be segmented. 
d) Strings with complex internal struc- 
tures should be seglnented when possible. 
IlI. Segmentation Standard Part II: 
The Standard Lexicon 
We propose that a standard lexicon be in- 
cluded as part of the segmentation standard. 
This lexicon will list words as well as pro- 
ductive morpho-lexical affixes. It will also 
contain the list of mandatory segmentation 
markers, such as the end of sentence marker 
('), (o) etc. All derived words can be covered 
simply by firing all derivational rules gov- 
erning the list of bound morphemes. How- 
ever, non-derived words are trickier since 
they cannot be predicted with generative 
rules. The only way to verify that they are 
segmentation units is to consult a lexical list, 
which is finite and incomplete by nature. 
The incompleteness of the lexical list 
underlines the importance of conforming to 
the segmentation criteria while compiling the 
standard lexicon. An entry is entered in the 
lexicon only when it qualifies as a segmenta- 
tion unit. The segmentation guidelines 3a)- 
3c) are the same heuristic guidelines for se- 
lecting lexical entries. However, since all 
language lexicons are constantly changing, an 
entry in the lexicon is determined by its fre- 
quency and usage of the time. The standard 
lexicon will be updated and maintained reg- 
ularly to keep up with the evolution of the 
language. In addition, application of the seg- 
mentation standard in any specific domain 
may require a new special domain lexicon. 
IN. Three Levels of Segmentation Stm!d=ard 
A central concern in proposing any stan- 
dard is whether this standard can be success- 
fully and consistently followed. We took into 
consideration of the state of art of automatic 
segmentation i Chinese NLP as well as the 
technology level of information industries 
dealing with Chinese natural languages and 
proposed the following stratification of three 
levels of instantiations for the Segmentation 
Standard. It is hoped that this stratification 
will ensure successful standardization as well 
as lead to eventual identification of segmen- 
tation units with linguistics words. 
5) Levels of Segmentation Standard 
a) Faithful\[xin41: All segmentation 
units listed in the standard lexicon 
should be successfully segmented. 
b) Truthful\[da2\]: All segmentation 
units identified at the Faithful level as 
well as all segmentation units derivable 
by morphological rules should be suc- 
cessfully segmented. 
c) Graceful\[ya31: All linguistic words 
are successfully identified as segmenta- 
tion units. 
The goal of the Faithful level is to define 
a segmentation standard such that uniformity 
of electronic texts can be achieved even 
when they are prepared with the lowest pos- 
sible computational sophistication. In other 
words, the standard must be as easy to follow 
as the convention of inserting blanks at 
wordbreaks in English text processing. At 
this level, unless it matches a lexical entry, a 
string will simply be segmented into individ- 
ual characters. Notice that this is NOT a 
trivial level since possible ambiguous seg- 
ments take up as high as 25% of Chinese 
texts (Chen and Liu 1992). Various autonmtic 
segmentation programs reported over 99% 
precision rate when unknown words are not 
taken into account (e.g., Chiang et al 1992). 
This will be the default segmentation level 
for the exchange of electronic texts. 
The goal of the Truthful level is to de- 
1047 
fine a segmentation standard for most com- 
putational inguistic applications. The cover- 
age of the Faithful level is too low for most 
NLP applications. For instance, unknown 
words can be left unidentified for data ex- 
change but not for machine translation. Wang 
et al (1995) classified unknown words into 
three types. The first type are the words that 
are generated by morphological rules. They 
are productive and cannot be exhaustively 
listed in the lexicon. The second type are the 
words whose derivation is either context- 
dependent or cannot be captured by familiar 
morphological rules. A good example is the 
suoxie abbreviation where a character from 
each compound or phrase component is se- 
lected to form a new word (Huang et al 
1993), such as deriving hua2hang2 from 
zhonglhua2 hang2kongl 'China Airlines.' 
The third type are the unknown words which 
are not derived by any rules, such as proper 
names(Chert et al 1994). Only the first type 
of unknown words can be comfortably dealt 
with by current Chinese NLP technology. 
Thus, at the Truthful level of segmentation, 
we stipulate that all lexical entries as well as 
all morphologically derivable unknown words 
should be properly segmented. This level will 
offer a wide enough coverage for most NLP 
applications and yet a reasonably high con- 
sistency can still be achieved with current 
automatic segmentation technology. Since a 
finite state machine implementing the mor- 
phological rules on top of a finite lexicon 
listing can generate all the segmentation 
units, the only technical challenge would be 
to resolve ambiguities among the above units. 
Lastly, the Graceful level of segmenta- 
tion standard will have to deal with the two 
remaining types of unknown words. It may 
not be too long before reasonable consistency 
can be achieved at this level of standard for 
fully automated language understanding. 
V. Concluding Remarks 
In this paper, we propose a Segmentation 
Standard for Chinese language processing 
composed of two distinct parts: a) the lan- 
guage and lexicon-independent definition 
and principles, and b) the lexicon-dependent 
guidelines. The definition and principles 
offer the conceptual basis of segmentation 
and are the unifying idea behind resolution 
of heuristic conflicts. The lexicon-dependent 
guidelines, as well as the data-dependent 
lexicon, allows the standard to be easily ad- 
aptable to linguistic and sub-language 
changes. 
Bibliography 
Bates, E., S. Chert, P. Li, M. Opie, O. Tzeng. 
1993. Where is the Boundary between 
Compounds and Phrases in Chinese? Brain 
and Language. 45:94-107. 
Bloomfield, L. 1933. Language. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. 
Chao, Y. R. 1968. A Grammar of Spoken 
Chinese. Berkeley: U. of California Press. 
Chen, C., S. Tseng, C.-R. Huang and K.-J. 
Chen. 1993. Some Distributional Properties 
of Mandarin Chinese-A Study Based on the 
Academia Sinica Corpus. Proc. of the 1st 
PACFoCoL. 81-95. Taipei. 
Chen, H. and C. Li. 1994. Recognition of 
Text-based Organization Names in Chi- 
nese. \[in Chinese\] Communications of 
COLIPS. 4.2.131-142. 
Chert, K.-J. and S.-H. Liu. 1992. Word Iden- 
tification for Mandarin Chinese Sentences. 
COLING-92. 101- 105. Nantes, France. 
Chiang, T.-H., J.-S. Chang, M.-Y. Lin, and 
K.Y. Su. 1992. Statistical Models for Word 
Segmentation and Unknown Word Resolu- 
tion. Proc. of ROCLING V. 121-146. 
Huang, C.-R., K. Ahrens, and K.-J.  Chen. 
1993. A Data-driven Approach to Psycho- 
logical Reality of the Mental Lexicon: Two 
Studies in Chinese Corpus Linguistics. 
Proc. of the International Conference on 
the Biological Basis of Language. 53-68. 
Chiayi: Center of Cognitive Science, Na- 
tional Chung Cheng U. 
Sproat, R. 1992. Morphology and Computa- 
tion. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
and C. Shih. 1990. A Statistical Method 
for Finding Word Boundaries in Chinese 
Text. Computer Processing of Chinese and 
Oriental Languages. 4.4:336-351. 
Wang, M.-C., C.-R. Huang, and K.-J. Chen. 
1995. The Identification and Classification 
of Unknown Words in Chinese: A N-gram- 
Based Approach. In A. Ishikawa and Y, 
Nitta Eds. Proc. of the 1994 Kyoto Confer- 
ence. A Festschrift for Professor Akira 
lkeya. 113-123. Tokyo: The Logico-Lin- 
guistics Society of" Japan. 
1048 
