An ascription-based approach to Speech Acts 
Abstract: 
The two principal areas of natural language processing 
research in pragmatics are belief modelling and speech 
act processing. Belief modelling is the development of 
techniques to represent the mental attitudes of a dia- 
logue participant. The latter approach, speech act 
processing, based on speech act theory, involves view- 
ing dialogue in planning terms. Utterances in a dia- 
logue are modelled as steps in a plan where 
understanding an utterance involves deriving the com- 
plete plan a speaker is attempting to achieve. How- 
ever, previous peech act ba~sed approaches have been 
limited by a reliance upon relatively simplistic belief 
modelling techniques and their relationship to plan- 
ning and plan recognition. In particular, such tech- 
niques assume precomputed nested belief structures. 
In this paper, we will present an approach to speech 
act processing based on novel belief modelling tech- 
niques where nested beliefs are propagated on 
demand. 
1. Introduction 
The use of simplistic belief models has accompanied 
complex accounts of speech acts where highly nested belief 
sels accompany any speech act. We believe that by utilising 
a more sophisticated view of mental attitudes, asimpler and 
more elegant theory of speech acts can be constructed. Also, 
as previous work has pointed out (Wilks et al 1991) past 
models have failed to differentiate explicitly between the 
speaker's and hearer's belief sets. Such a failure causes 
problems in dealing with misconceptions and badly formed 
plans (Pollack, 1990). 
This paper augments ViewGen, a computer program 
originally developed by Ballim and Wilks (1991) to model 
the beliefs and meta-beliefs of a system using nested belief 
structures. ViewGen is able to reason about its own and 
other agent's beliefs using belief ascription and inference 
techniques, The current version of ViewGen is implemented 
in Quintus Prolog. 
The structure of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we 
review and discuss previous peech act approaches and their 
representation of mental attitudes. We argue that precom- 
puted highly nested belief structures aren't necessary. In
Section 3, we describe how ViewGen represents mental atti- 
tudes and computes nested structures by a process of ascrip- 
Mark Lee and Yorick Wilks 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Sheffield 
Regent Court, 211 Portobello Street 
Sheffield S 1 4DP, UK 
M.Lee@ dcs.shef.ac.uk 
Y Wilks @ dcs. shef. ac. uk 
tion and in Section 4, show how such techniques can be used 
to represent speech acts for use in planning and plan recog- 
nition. Finally, in Section 5, we discuss ome implications 
and future directions of our work 
2. Speech acts and mental attitudes 
It is clear that any understanding of an utterance must 
involve reference to the attitudes of the speaker. For exam- 
ple, the full understanding of the utterance "Do you know 
where Thomas is?" depends upon whether the speaker 
already knows where Thomas is and whether he or she 
believes the hearer knows. 
Speech act based AI approaches normally make refer- 
ence to mental attitudes and often provide links between the 
surface form of the utterance and the mental attitudes of both 
the speaker and hearer. For example, Appelt (1985) 
describes asystem which generates discourse from an inten- 
sional logic representation f a set of beliefs. However, as 
pointed out by Pollack (1990), they have typically used rela- 
tively simple models of such attitudes. In particular, previ- 
ous approaches have lacked any way to model the 
propagation of belief within the system itself and instead 
have made use of precomputed and fixed nestings of mental 
attitudes. 
One widely used concept in speech act accounts is 
mutual belief. Following work in philosophy by Lewis 
(1969), Clark and Marshall (1981) introduced the notion of 
mutual belief to account for hearer attitudes. A proposition P 
is a mutual belief if shared by two agents A and B such that: 
A believes P
B believes P
A believes B believes P
B believes A believes P
etc., ad infinitum 
There cannot be a logical imit to the number of levels of 
regression since, as Schiffer (1972) argued, for any level of 
nested belief, a dialogue xample can be constructed which 
requires an additional level of belief nesting. Because of this 
potentially infinite regression, ithas proven difficult to use 
an axiomatic definition of mutual belief based in terms of 
simple belief in computational implementations. Alternative 
approaches have either avoided efining axioms for mutual 
belief, e.g. Taylor and Whitehill (1981) or defined it as a 
primitive operator without reference to simple beliefs, e.g. 
Cohen and Levesque (1985). 
699 
Despite such work, it appears that the mutual belief 
hypothesis, i.e. that agents compute potentially infinite nest- 
ings of belief in comprehension, appears to be too strong a 
hypothesis to be realistic. It is impossible that agents per- 
form this kind of potentially infinite nesting during real dia- 
logue and no clear constraint can be given on how many 
iterations would be necessary in a real dialogue situation. 
Though examples can be artificially created which require n 
levels of nesting for large n, during a study of dialogue cor- 
pora, Lee (1994) found no need for highly nested belief 
models. In fact, it appears that no dialogue exchange 
required more than a two level belief nesting. Also, mistakes 
in assuming what was common to both agents in a dialogue 
occurred but were quickly repaired through the use of cor- 
rections and repetitions and other dialogue control acts. Sim- 
ilar results have been reported by Taylor and Carletta (1994) 
in analysing the HCRC Map Task corpus. 
Rather than compute nested beliefs to some fixed level 
during comprehension. It is far more plausible that agents 
compute nested representations on so that highly nested 
belief representations areonly constructed if required in the 
dialogue. This is the basic principle behind ViewGen. 
3. The ViewGen system 
ViewGen is a nested attitude model which constructs 
intensional environments to model the attitudes of other 
agents. Previous work on ViewGen has been concerned with 
only modelling belief attitudes (Wilks, Barnden and Ballim, 
1991). We have extended ViewGen to model and represent, 
in addition, goals and intentions. In this section, we briefly 
describe ViewGen's operation. 
3.1 ViewGen representations ofmental 
attitudes 
ViewGen assumes that each agent in a dialogue has a 
belief environment which includes attitudes about what 
other agents believe, want, and intend. Such attitudes are 
represented ina nested structure. Each nesting is an environ- 
ment which contains propositions which may be grouped by 
a particular topic or stereotype. The particular topic is given 
on the top left corner of the environment while the holder of 
a belief is given at the bottom of the environment. 
ViewGen represents all attitudes in environments with 
the attitude type labelled on the far right bottom of the box. 
Though different attitude types are separated by environ- 
ments, they can be nested so that agents can have beliefs, 
goals, and intentions about these attitudes. For example, 
suppose the System believes that John intends to buy a car, 
but wants to convince him otherwise by getting him to 
believe correctly that the car is a wreck. This is illustrated in 
Figure 1. 
In ViewGen, different attitudes have different ypes. 
Beliefs and goals refer to propositions which the agent either 
believes is true or wants to be true at some point in the 
future. Intentions, however, are represented as connected 
planning actions which represent the plans the agent intends 
to pursue to achieve his or her goals. 
3.2 Ascription of attitudes 
As noted above, ViewGen avoids using a concept of 
shared or mutual beliefs. Rather, ViewGen attributes beliefs, 
goals and intentions toother agents as required. This process 
is termed ascription. There are two methods of ascription: 
default ascription and stereotypical scription. Each method 
is briefly described below. 
3.2.1 Default Ascription 
Default ascription applies to common beliefs. Most 
beliefs in any set held by an agent are common beliefs about 
the world, and can be assumed to be common to any other 
rational agent unless marked otherwise. For example, an 
agent may believe that he world is round and therefore, 
without any evidence, guess that any other agent probably 
shares this belief. To model this, ViewGen uses a default 
ascription rule i.e. 
Default Ascription rule: 
Given a System belief, ascribe it to any other agent as 
required, unless there is contrary evidence. 
Such a rule results in beliefs being pushed from outer 
belief environments to inner belief environments. For exam- 
ple, Figure 2 illustrates ViewGen assuming that John shares 
its belief that he world is round. 
Evidence against ascription isnormally an explicit belief 
isa, arWrec , 
Belief 
Goal 
/~  buy(John,Car) 
John Intention 
System Belief 
System 
Figure h Meta-attitudes on other attitudes 
700 
John 
System 
round(world) 
round(world) 
Belief 
Belief - -  
System 
Figure 2: ViewGen default ascription 
that an another agent believes the opposite of the ascribed 
belief. For example, an agent might already be believed by 
ViewGen to believe the world is fiat and thus block any 
ascription of ViewGen's belief. It is important for ViewGen 
to reason about other agent's beliefs about other agents. For 
example, it is plausible that an agent who believes the world 
is round may well also believe by default hat other agents 
believe the same. 
Unlike beliefs, the assumption that other agents hare 
similar goals and intentions cannot be made by default. 
Goals and intentions are more dynamic than beliefs in that 
an agent will try to achieve goals and carry out intentions in 
the future which once achieved are dropped from the agent's 
attitude set. Also, goals and intentions are often highly stere- 
otypical. Therefore, adefault rule of ascription cannot be 
applied to such attitudes. However, acombination of stereo- 
typical ascription and plan recognition can be used to pro- 
vide sensible ascriptions of goals and intentions. 
Stereotypical ascription is discussed next while plan recog- 
nilion is discussed in 4.3. 
3.2.2 Stereotypical Ascription 
A stereotype is a collection of attitudes which are gener- 
ally applicable to a particular class of agent. For example, 
Doctors tend to have expert medical knowledge and have 
goals to diagnose diseases and cure patients. To model this 
ViewGen uses a stereotypical ascription rule: 
Stereotypical Ascription rule: 
Given a System stereotypical belief ascribe it m any 
other agent o which the stereotype applies 
as required, unless there is contrary evidence. 
In ViewGen, stereotypes consist of sets of attitudes 
which an agent who tits a particular stereotype might ypi- 
cally hold. Such stereotypical beliefs can be ascribed to an 
agent by default - i.e. unless there is explicit evidence that 
the agent holds a contrary belief. For example, in Figure 3, 
the System has a stereotypical set of beliefs for doctors and, 
since it believes John is a doctor, ascribes these to John. 
4. Ascription based Speech act rep- 
resentation 
In this section, we will outline our theory of speech acts. 
In 4. I, we outline a list of features which we believe any the- 
ory should possess and in 4.2 we describe a theory based on 
belief ascription. 
4.1 Desideratum for a theory of speech 
acts  
We believe that a theory of speech acts should have at 
least he following features: 
1, The theoly shouM be solipsist 
The notion of mutual knowledge was introduced to pro- 
vide a realistic account of the effects of a speech act on a 
hearer. However, as has argued above and elsewhere (Ballim 
and Wilks, 1991), mutual belief is too strong a notion to be 
used. Instead, a theory of speech acLs should be solipsistic in 
that it refers olely to finite belief representations of either 
the speaker or hearer of the dialogue act. 
~ John  
Doctor 
isa(pneumonia, bacteria) 
treatment(bacteria, anti-biotics) 
isa(pneumonia, bacteria)) 
treatment(bacteria, anti-biotics) 
Belief l 
Belief ~ 
Stereotype - -  
System 
isa(John,Doctor) 
System 
Figure 3: Stereotypical ascription of medical knowledge 
Belief b 
701 
2, The theory must provide separate interpretations for the 
speaker and hearer 
A theory must, however, take into account the attitudes 
of both the speaker and hearer by allowing the separate deri- 
vation of the effects of a speech act from the speaker's and 
the hearer's points of view. 
3, Speech acts should be minimalistic 
Any theory should assume only the minimal conditions 
for any utterance to be successful. This means avoiding the 
ascription of precomputed attitude nestings beyond the 
essential conditions of each act for the act to be achieved. 
4, Speech acts should be extendable 
Despite assuming only the minimal conditions and 
effects for any speech act, they should in principle be 
extendable todeal with problematic examples involving 
high degrees of belief nesting proposed by work in philoso- 
phy. 
5, The theory must provide a means to derive generalised 
effects f~'om each acts conditions 
As argued by Searle (1969), any classification ofspeech 
acts must be based on the conditions of each act and not its 
effects. However, we also want a principled way to derive 
the conventional effects of any act from its conditions. This 
is necessary so that we can then provide a clear distinction 
between an act's conventional il ocutionary effect and its 
context-specific perlocutionary effect. 
We believe that our account of speech acts satisfies the 
above criteria. In the next two sections we will outline how 
we represent speech acts in terms of belief ascription and 
how we use these in planning and plan recognition. 
4.2 An ascription based theory of speech 
acts 
We represent 20 different speech acts types in four 
classes: questions, answers, requests and inform acts. This 
set is partially based on Bunt's taxonomy of 24 speech acts 
(1989). While not claiming that such a set of acts is com- 
plete, we have found it sufficient for the dialogue corpora we 
have analysed. Every act is classified with respect to its pre- 
conditions which are the mental attitudes a speaker must 
adopt o felicitously perform the speech act. Acts are 
ordered by specificity: more specific speech acts inherit or 
strengthen the preconditions of more general ones. For 
example, an inform act requires that the speaker believes the 
proposition i question and has a goal that the hearer also 
believes the proposition, i.e.: 
Inform(Speaker, Hearer, Proposition) 
Preconditions: believe(Speaker, Proposition) 
goal(Speaker, believe(Hearer, Proposition) 
A correction act is a more specific type of informing 
and, therefore, inherits the preconditions of informing plus 
the condition that the speaker believes that the hearer 
believes the opposition of the proposition, i.e.: 
Correction(Speaker, Hearer, Proposition) 
Preconditions: believe(Speaker,Proposition) 
goal(Speaker, believe(Hearer, Proposition) 
believe(Speaker, believe(Hearer, 
not(Proposition))) 
Rather than specify individual effects for each dialogue 
act, we provide separate update rules based on belief ascrip- 
tion. Our update rule from the speaker's point of view is: 
Update on ~h? Sneaker's belief set 
For every condition C in dialogue act performed: 
default_ascribe(Speaker, H arer, believe(C)) 
That is, for every condition in the speech act, the speaker 
must ascribe abelief to the hearer that the condition is satis- 
fied. For example, Figure 4 shows the conditions for an 
inform act: the speaker believes the proposition to be com- 
municated and wants the hearer to believe it too. To achieve 
this goal, the speaker intends to use an inform speech act. 
After performing the inform act, the speaker can ascribe to 
the hearer the belief that each of the preconditions were met 
i.e. the speaker believes that the hearer believes the speaker 
believes the proposition and has the goal of getting the 
hearer to believe it too. The effects of the inform act on the 
speaker's attitude set are shown in Figure 5. Note that after 
the inform act is performed, the intention to perform it is 
dropped. However, the speaker's goal of getting the hearer 
to believe the proposition remains. This is because we 
assume only the minimal conditions for the act to be suc- 
cessful i.e. if the speaker can successfully ascribe ach 
speech act precondition tothe hearer. For the hearer to 
believe the proposition, he or she has to perform a mental 
L Speaker in form(Speaker, Hearer, on(coffee,stove)) Intention -~ 
 L on(coffee, stove) _~ 
Hearer Belief 
Speaker Goal 
on(coffee, stove) 
Speaker Belief 
Speaker 
Figure 4: Representation f a speaker's attitudes before performing an inform act 
J 
J 
702 
~\[~ on(coffee, stove) B e ~efal_~l 
Hearer 
Speaker 
 Speaker on(coffee, stove) Belief 
~~i i i ! ! !  on(coffee, stove) ~\ ]  
Belief -- 
on(coffee, stove) 
- -  Speaker Belief 
Speaker 
Figure 5: Representation of aspeaker's attitudes after perfin'ming an inform act 
act. Mental acts are detailed in the next section. The update 
rule for the heater is the converse of the speaker's: 
Update on the He.arer's belie, f set 
For every condition C in dialogue act performed: 
default ascribe(Hearer;Speaker, C) 
That is, given that he speaker has performed an infolxn 
act, the hearer can ascribe to the speaker the preconditions of 
the inform act assuming that he speaker isbeing coopera- 
tive. The effects of the inform act are shown in Figure 6. 
Note that he bearer's update rule is one level ess nested: the 
preconditions rather than beliefs about he preconditions are 
ascribed. 
4.3 Planning and plan simulation in nested 
belief environments 
ViewGen uses a non-linear POCL planner (McAllester 
and Rosenblatt, 1991) to plan actions to achieve goals. Such 
a planner is provably correct and complete so that it is guar- 
anteed to find a solution if one exists and only generates 
valid sohttions. 
Since ViewGen represents the attitudes of agents in 
nested environments, i  is able to use the planner to simulate 
other agent's planning. This simulation can be applied to any 
depth of nested belief e.g. ViewGen can simulate John simu- 
lating Mary generating a plan to achieve agiven goal by 
considering its beliefs of John's beliefs of Mary's beliefs, 
goals and intentions. 
Which plan is constructed depends on what the nested 
agent is believed to believe. Therefore, during nested plan- 
ning, ViewGen has to reason about which beliefs are held to 
be true at that level of nesting. However, as mentioned 
above, belief a~ription only is performed as requited: we 
cannot predict which beliefs will be relevant to a plan before 
the plan is constructed and therefore, aseription must be per- 
formed as the plan is generated. Toachieve this, both types 
~ ~ Hearer. 
Speaker 
~ Speaker 
on(coffee, stove) ~~ 
on(coffee, stove) 
Belief-- 
Hea~r 
Hea~r 
Belief - -  
Figure 6: Representation of abearer's attitudes after an inform act 
703 
of ascription are represented in plan operator notation as 
mental acts. For example, default belief ascription as 
detailed in section 3.2.1 is represented as: 
Default_belief_ascription(Agentl, Agent2, Proposition) 
Preconditions: belief(Agentl, Proposition) 
belief(Agentl, not(belief(Agent2, 
not(Proposition)))) 
Effects: belief(Agentl, belief(Agent2, Proposition)) 
In addition to pushing outer nested beliefs into inner 
environments, we require amethod of adopting other agent's 
beliefs by pushing inner nested beliefs into outer environ- 
ments. For this, we have an accept-belief operator: 
Accept belief(Agent 1, Agent2, Proposition) 
Preconditions: belief(Agentl, belief(Agent2, Proposition)', 
not(belief(Agent 1, not(Proposition))) 
belief(Agent 1,trustworthy(Agent2)) 
Effects: belief(Agentl,Proposition) 
That is, if an Agent2 has some belief and Agentl doesn't 
hold a contrary belief and believes that Agent2 is trustwor- 
thy, then it is acceptable for Agentl to also believe Agent2's 
belief. This plays a role in informing where a hearer must 
decide whether or not to believe the communicated proposi- 
tion. 
During planning, plans are constructed based on the 
beliefs, goals and intentions which are explicitly present at 
that level of nesting. However, if a proposition isn't repre- 
sented at this level of nesting, then the POCL planner must 
plan ascription actions to determine whether the simulated 
agent holds the relevant attitude. Therefore, simulated plan- 
ning involves two types of planning: planning by the agent 
simulated and planning by ViewGen itself to maintain its 
belief representation f the agent. 
In addition to plan simulation, we have extended the 
basic POCL algorithm to allow other agent's plans to be rec- 
ognised. This involves inferring from an agent's performed 
action, the agent's et of goals he or she is trying to achieve 
and the plan he or she intends to follow to achieve these 
goals. This is achieved by collecting together the ascribable 
goals at the particular level of nesting and attempting tofind 
a plan which achieves at least one of the ascribable goals. 
Once a plan is generated, any goals achieved by the plan are 
ascribed. 
In both simulation and recognition, once an acceptable 
plan is generated, the actions and goals in the plan are 
ascribed to the agent at that level of nesting. 
5. Conclusions and future work 
We have argued that the computation ofhighly nested 
belief structures during the performance orrecognition of a 
speech act is implausible. In particular, the concept of 
mutual belief seems too strong. Instead, we have put forward 
a theory of speech acts where only the minimal set of beliefs 
is ascribed at the time of the utterance. If further belief nest- 
ings are required then they can be derived using belief 
ascription techniques as required. 
We believe that, for the most part, during normal dia- 
logue, the minimal effects of any speech act are all that are 
required. However, our approach allows highly nested belief 
structures to be computed on demand if required, for exam- 
ple, to understand non-conventional l nguage use. 
Future work includes the attachment ofa robust dia- 
logue parser. We also intend to link ViewGen to the LaSie 
information extraction platform (Gaizaukas et al 1995) so 
as to develop atestable belief set empirically derived from a 
small medical domain corpus. 
References 
D. Appelt. (1985) Planning English Sentences. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
A. Ballim and Y. Wilks (1991). Artificial Believers. Law- 
rence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey. 
H.C. Bunt (1989). Information dialogues as communicative 
action in relation to partner modelling and information 
processing. In M.M. Taylor, E Neel, and D.G. Bouwhuis, 
editors, The Structure of Multimodal Dialogue. Elsevier Sci- 
ence Publishers, North Holland. 
H. Clark and C. Marshall (1981). Definite reference and 
mutual knowledge. In A. Joshi, B. Webber, and I. Sag, edi- 
tors, Elements of Discourse Understanding, pages 10 - 62. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
ER. Cohen and H. Levesque (1985). Speech acts and ration- 
ality. In Proceedings of the 23erd Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. University of 
Chicago Press. 
R. Gaizauskas, T. Wakao, K. Humphreys, H. Cunningham, 
and Y. Wilks (1995). University of sheffield: Description of 
lasie system as used. In Proceedings of the Sixth Message 
Understanding Conference (MUC-6), Columbia, Maryland. 
Morgan Kaufman Publishers Inc. 
M. Lee (1994). Conjunctive goals as a cause of conversa- 
tional implicature. Technical Report 94-10-05, Dept. of 
Computer Science, University of Sheffield. 
D.K. Lewis (1969). Convention. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
D.A. McAllester and D. Rosenblatt (1990). Systematic non- 
linear planning. In Proceedings of AAAI90, pages 634~639. 
M.E. Pollack (1990) Plans as complex mental attitudes. In
ER. Cohon, J. Morgan, and M.E. Pollack, editors, Intentions 
in Communication. Bradford/MIT press, Cambridge, Mass. 
S Schiffer (1972). Meaning. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
J.R. Searle (1969) Speech acts. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
G.B. Taylor and S.B. Whitehill (1981). A belief representa- 
tion for understanding deception. In Proceeding oflJCAl- 
81, pages 475-479, Los Altos, CA. 
J. Taylor and J. Carletta (1994). Limiting nested beliefs in 
cooperative dialogue. In A. Ram and K. Eiselt, editors, Pro- 
ceedings of the 16th annual conference ofthe cognitive sci- 
ence society, pages 858-863, Hillsdale, New Jersey. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Y. Wilks, J. Barnden, and A. Ballim (1991). Belief ascrip- 
tion, metaphor and intensional identity. Cognitive Science, 
15(1). 
704 
