Using sentence connectors for evaluating MT output 
Eric M. Visser ? and Masaru Fuji 
Fu j i tsu  Laborator ies  Ltd . ,  Med ia  In tegrat ion  Laboratory  
4-1-1 Kamikodanaka ,  Nakahara -ku ,  Kawasak i  211, Japan  
{ eric Ifuj i } @flab.fuj it su.co.j  p 
Abst ract  
This paper elaborates on the design of a 
machine translation evaluation method 
that aims to determine to what degree 
the meaning of an original text is pre- 
served in translation, without looking 
into the grammatical correctness of its 
constituent sentences. The basic idea 
is to have a human evaluator take the 
sentences of the translated text and, for 
each of these sentences, determine the se- 
mantic relationship that exists between 
it and the sentence immediately preced- 
ing it. In order to minimise evalua- 
tor dependence, relations between sen- 
tences are expressed in terms of the eon- 
juncts  that can connect them, rather 
than through explicit categories. For an 
n-sentence text this results in a list of 
n - 1 sentence-to-sentence relationships, 
which we call the text's conneetivlty 
profi le. This can then be compared to 
the connectivity profile of the original 
text, and the degree of correspondence 
between the two would be a measure for 
the quality of the translation. 
A set of "essential" conjuncts was ex- 
tracted for English and Japanese, and a 
computer interface was designed to sup- 
port the task of inserting the most fitting 
conjuncts between sentence pairs. With 
these in place, several sets of experiments 
were performed. 
1 Background 
Evaluation of MT results is generally tackled on 
a very detailed, linguistic-technical level. Typi- 
cally, a test set of sentences i prepared each of 
which is carefully designed to ascertain whether 
the MT system can handle a certain grammati- 
cal phenomenon - e.g. (Isahara, 1995). Other 
?The first author is currently at ATR Interpret- 
ing Telecommunications Research Laboratories; cur- 
rent e-mail address is (eric@itl.atr.co.jp). 
methods may concentrate on word choice, consis- 
tency in terminology, PP attachment, dependency 
relations, or other specific grammatical or lexical 
aspects. While such evaluation methods are cer- 
tainly necessary and useful for the MT developer, 
they do not necessarily give us a reliable indica- 
tion of user satisfaction. 
Especially now that MT systems are becoming 
widely available on the home user market and 
coming within the casuM user's reach, MT de- 
velopers need to pay more attention to this as- 
pect. Casual users might just not care all that 
much about grammatical correctness: as long as 
they can understand the output, they might be 
satisfied with the system. Moreover, such users 
are not likely to judge the system on a sentence- 
by-sentence basis: rather, they will be interested 
in the understandability of the text as a whole. 
The flurry of integrated WWW-browsers cum MT 
systems 1 to hit the (Japanese) market recently has 
added to the plausibility of this scenario. 
We conclude then that an MT evaluation 
method is called for which concentrates on whole 
texts rather than on single sentences, and which 
judges meaning and readability rather than gram- 
mar. In addition, we specify that evaluation 
results should be reproducible and evaluator- 
independent ( o a reasonable degree at least), and 
quantifiable. These additional requirements are 
necessary to ensure that results obtained at dif- 
ferent imes and/or by different evaluators (prefer- 
ably using different exts) are comparable. 
In (Suet  al., 1992) an interesting alternative 
evaluation method is proposed, in which the dis- 
crepancy is measured between raw MT output and 
the post-edited result. This method does work on 
whole texts, and could conceivably be adapted to 
judge meaning and readability (by adequately in- 
structing the post-editors); then again in "brows- 
ing" applications post-editing is not the norm, and 
it may be difficult to attain a good approximation 
of "browsable" MT output, in this paper, we try 
a different approach. 
1 These allow you to read English WWW-pages in 
Japanese, preserving the original page layout. 
1066 
2 Out l ine  o f  the  eva luat ion  method 
2.1 Compare salient properties 
To test whether the meaning of a translated text 
has come across, one could simply ask the evalu- 
ators questions about the translated text, or have 
them summarise it. Such methods however are 
either costly (for each new text a new set of ques- 
tions will have to be devised) or hard to quantify 
objectively, or even both. 
The method we will adopt involves constructing 
a profile of both ttre original and the translated 
text in terms of some salient semantic or prag- 
matic property of its constituent sentences. These 
profiles can then be compared to give an indica- 
tion of translation quality: if we assume that the 
original text's profile is "perfect", then the degree 
to which the profile of the translated text resem- 
bles tile perfect profile will correspond (in theory 
at least) to the quality of the translation. This 
approach assumes that the number and order of 
sentences are invariant in translation; luckily, for 
MT systems, this is almost always true. 
As for the salient property to be used in the pro- 
file, we settled on meaning relations of single sen- 
tences with previous text: this property seemed 
to us to be both fairly discriminating and imple- 
mentable. In summary, a profile will be an ordered 
list of meaning relations xi, i = 2 ... n which de- 
scribe the relation of sentence i with what came 
before. Moreover, the target of each relation is 
taken to be the previous entence, i.e. sentence i-1 
(see ? 4 for further discussion). 
2.2 Avoid (-ontrived def in i t ions 
A set of sentence-to-sentence relation categories 
will then have to be designed and defined; but 
the wide w~riety of proposed methods and solu- 
tions (see (Hovy and maier, 1993) for an overview) 
suggests that this is not an easy task. Indeed, the 
problem with categories and definitions is that the 
evaluator will always have to depend to a certain 
extent on his own personal understanding of these 
definitions; and the more categories there are, the 
greater the chance that their definitions will not 
always be clear and fixed in his mind. This natu- 
rally has a deleterious effect on the reliability and 
universality of evaluation results. 
We will get back to the design problem later, 
but with respect o the definition problem, our so- 
lution was to simply hide the definitions. We have 
sought to accomplish this by instructing the eval- 
uator to link sentences linguistically; more specif- 
ically, wc have opted to instruct the evaluator to 
choose a con junct  2 to be inserted between ev- 
ery pair of consecutive sentences. The conjuncts 
2A subclass of the adverbs, el. (Quirk et al, 1985) 
pg. 631-. For languages that do not recognise this 
class, surrogates can be concocted: for Japanese, a 
mixture of conjunctions and conjoining adverbs. 
themselves may be divided into categories, but 
these can remain hidden from the evaluator. This 
approach inges on the hope that straight linguis- 
tic knowledge comes more naturally to people and 
is less susceptible to person-to-person differences 
than contrived meaning categories. 
2.3 Standardise thinking methods 
Small-scale preliminary experiments (on paper) 
showed that in spite of the above refinements, 
evaluator differences were still larger than seemed 
reasonable. We surmised that this was due to dif- 
ferences in work methods (or thinking methods), 
and that therefore these needed to be equalised a
little more. We decided on two countermeasures. 
Recoguising that the class of eonjuncts was to() 
large for the evaluator to encompass at a glance, 
we decided to implement an interactive Q&A in- 
terface on the computer in order to gradually 
guide the evahlator to the optimal choice of a con- 
janet. Obviously this opens a whole new can of 
worms, in that the interface has to be designed 
(the kind and order of questions etc.); we will get 
back to that later (in ? 4). 
The other step was to instruct the evaluator 
to extract the top ic  and comment  of the sen- 
tence under consideration. Both topic and com- 
nlent were only loosely defined: in truth the topic 
and comment are not important as such, rather 
their extraction was intended as a means to force 
the evaluator to get a clearer picture of the mean- 
ing of the sentence under consideration (though 
we did not tell them this). 
3 Bas ic  assumpt ions  
At this point, it is useful to look back at the de- 
sign considerations outlined above and to clarify 
exactly what assumptions on sentences and rela- 
tions underlie them. With a little luck, our results 
can provide some support for these assumptions. 
The first of our assumptions is that it is al- 
ways possible to make explicit the relationship 
of a sentence to what has come before using a 
conjunct. The conjunct may be present in the 
sentence, but even if it is not, it can be added 
in a linguistically satisfactory way. We also as- 
sume that the assignment of acceptable conjuncts 
is reader-independent to a large degree. 
We assume that conjuncts (which form a closed 
class) can be divided into a limited number of cat- 
egories that are meaningful in terms of expressing 
the semantic relationship between sentences. 
Yet another assumption is that the meaning re- 
lationships between sentences of a text combine 
to form a characteristic feature (3 profile) of that 
text, and that this profile needs to be preserved 
in translation. Moreover, the ease with which this 
profile can be discerned in the translated text is 
assumed to be related to the readability or under- 
standability of the text as a whole. 
1067 
4 The implementation 
A prototype was implemented on a Macintosh 
computer using HyperCard. The evaluation pro- 
cess is made up of the following steps, which have 
to be executed for every sentence in the text. 
1. Extract the topic(s) and comment(s) of the 
sentence under consideration. 
2. If there is more than one topic/comment pair, 
order the pairs as seems best and determine 
(using the same method as for sentences) 
which conjuncts fit best between the pairs. 
3. Determine through a dialog with the system 
which conjnnct fits best at the start of the 
sentence under consideration. 
A backtrack function was implemented which al- 
lowed the subjects to come back on decisions made 
earlier in the dialog. The prototype keeps a very 
detailed log of what the evaluator does exactly. 
Without going into technical details, the follow- 
ing were the main tasks in the implementation. 
Categor is ing  the con juncts  
Our first categorisation of conjuncts was based on 
information concerning conjuncts and rhetorical 
structures that we patched together from author- 
itative grammars for English (Quirk et al, 1985), 
Japanese (Martin, 1975) e.a. We came up with 
9 categories; in a later redesign we took the con- 
juncts themselves as our starting point and, by 
tracing crossreferenees in dictionaries, were able 
to reduce the initial number of ? 220 to 32 "ba- 
sic" conjuncts, divided over 11 categories. 
Assist ing top ic /comment  ext ract ion  
Frankly we have been unable to find a foolproof 
method, and have settled for user-requested online 
help cued on linguistic aspects of the sentence. 
Def in ing the  scope of  mean ing  re lat ions 
We have established above that meaning relations 
hold between consecutive sentences; this is how- 
ever not self-evident. A sentence may relate to 
a more remote sentence @5, for instance), or to 
a block of sentences; ee (Kurohashi and Nagao, 
1995) for a more plausible model. We found how- 
ever that an online computer interface that would 
allow the user to specify the target of a relation 
to this extent would become prohibitively compli- 
cated. The evaluator's task would involve so much 
juggling with relations and attaining such a deep 
understanding of the text that it would in the end 
have a negative ffect on the reproducability and 
evaluator-independence of the results. 
Designing the dialog 
We believe that this is a trial-and-error process 
which will have to bc guided by the outcome of 
experiments; more about this will follow below. 
II AI HI c I 
mean 0.43 0.46 0.37 0.32 
time (re:s) 13:27 14:16 12:32 41:23 
backtracks 11,8 9.8 4.4 2.6 
Table \] : Results of the first experiment 
5 The  exper iments  
We decided that experiments needed to establish 
three qualities of this system. 
Eva luator - independence  Given a text in one 
language, different evaluators should produce 
the same connectivity profile. 
Language- independence  Given a "perfectly" 
translated text, its connectivity profile should 
turn out the same as that of the original. 
Quant i f iab i l i ty  Given translations of varying 
quality, the degree of correspondence in the 
connectivity profiles must be shown to corre- 
spond to the quality of the translation. 
But first we conducted a preliminary experiment. 
5.1 Exper iments  w i th  the  dialog 
Our first experiments (Japanese only) concerned 
the conjunct-determining dialogs. We imple- 
mented 3 interfaces, each comprising the same 
61 conjuncts spread over 9 categories: one (A) 
based on categories (the subjects got a list of cat- 
egories in the first screen, and if they clicked one 
they got the conjuncts in that category on the 
second screen); one (B) based on the conjuncts 
themselves (the subjects just got the whole list of 
conjuncts, spread over a couple of screens, with- 
out elaboration); and one (C) with questions (3 
answers to choose from on the first screen, one of 
these leads to a second question with 4 answers, 
all other links lead to sets of conjuncts). 
Subjects were assigned an interface, given a 9- 
sentence text and asked to connect he sentences, 
without however performing topic/comment ex- 
traction. A fourth group was asked to use inter- 
face C, but also to extract topic and comment 
before connecting the sentences (D). The results 
are given in table 1. The mean of the evaluators' 
choices was computed by transforming the results 
into numbers (if 7 out of 10 evaluators chose cate- 
gory X, 2 chose Y, and 1 Z, then this would result 
in the values {1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 3}), and inputting 
these numbers into the following formula. 
n 
1 ~(x i -  "2) 2 
i=I 
We might add that subjects using interfaces A and 
B were more likely to choose "safe" (ambiguous, 
vague) conjuncts uch as 'soshite' (and then), and 
also -- for what it's worth --- complained more. 
1068 
II 04)\[=B (13)I C (7) ID (7) I 
mean(cat) 0.52 0.60 0.89 0.69 
m-can(con) 1.99 2.66 2.20 1.76 
t-line (re:s) 15:44 19:38 13:40 14:42 
backtracks 4 .6  9.8 6.7 6.1 
NB: (C+D) mean(cat) = 1.65, mean(con) = 4.91. 
Table 2: Experiment results for the various texts 
F.- I IA+B A-bE A+D A+C+I ) \ ]  
~(cat )  0.73 0.98 1.02 1.5{) 
~(con)  4.62 4.50 4.29 7.91 
Tal)le 3: Combined experiment results 
To be quite honest his experiment was too small 
in scale to allow scientific conclusions (20 people 
participated), but we went ahead anyway and con- 
cluded that a) the projc('t showed pronfisc, b) in- 
terface C was the way to go, e) topic/cornmeal, ex- 
traction was important, but d) it was also costly 
(took three times as long!) so we'd stick to the 
qazy' evaluation tbr further exl)erinmnts. 
5.2 Va l idat ion exi )er i lnents  
For the second set of cxperhnents, we designed 
identical interfaces for English and Jai)anese. 
There was only one. question, with 6 answers, and 
all of these led to a screen with conjuncts to choose 
fl:om, never more than 8 on a screen. The set of 
conjuncts was designed to be minimal (no redun- 
dancies, no ambiguous conjmlcts); there were 32 
of them, spread over 11 categories (el. ~ 4). 
An originM English texl, was chosen (A); l.hen a 
"perfi;ct" (but aligned) .lapanese translation was 
produced (B); anti finally two "less-than-perfect" 
translations were contrived (C was raw MT out- 
put, D was output from a tuned MT system the 
understandability of which had been determined 
by independent ext)eriments to be halfway be- 
tween B and C - level 3 in (Fuji, 1996)). The 
sizes of the subject groups are given in table 2 be- 
tween parentheses. Distribution means were com- 
puted both for categories and for conjuncts. 
6 Discussion 
The category means basically follow expectations. 
Those of C and 1) come ont a bit h)w, lint the 
combined mean for C+D suggests that this may 
be partly due to the size of the sample. The (:on- 
junct mean of B is very high; it is not clear why. 
It must be noted that the evMuators were totally 
untrained; in the context of the intended use of 
this method, requiring a certain level of training 
seems acceptable and this would surely bring re- 
suits closer to tile goal of evaluator independence. 
llowever, we also observed several instances where 
the choice of a conjunct was dictated by the evah> 
ator's prior knowledge (or lack of it) of the subject 
area; this is a discrepancy we cannot resolve. 
The cross-linguistic category mean for A+B is 
significantly lower than that of A+C and A+I). 
The conjunct mean is rather high: this is proba- 
bly due to the unexplaine(\[ high conjunct mean for 
B. The conjunct means of A+C and A+I) seem 
to correlate with the number of unintelligible sen- 
tences in the machine-translated t xts. Again the 
means of" A+C+I)  are fairly enormous, indicating 
that size is still a factor. 
A rather unsettling result, however, was that 
the most-chosen sentence connector was identical 
across texts fur ahnost each of the sentence pairs. 
This suggests that redu(:ing evalnator dependence 
will lower all means, which would defeat he pur- 
pose of this research. 
In conclusion, we feel justified in hoping that, 
the goals of evalnatt)r-indei)endence, and language- 
imtependence are reachable through judicious tun- 
lug of the. current systenL The project has also 
been successflll in that it has yielded a wealth of 
interesting data about sentence connections. 1t 
is (toubtflfl however that the approach will give a 
useful indication of translation quality. 
References  
Masaru Fuji. 1996. Experiments to evaluate 
the reading comprehension of /,:-a machine- 
translated texts. In l)~vceedings of the 2nd 
Annual Meeting of the Ass. for NLP (Japan), 
pages 21 24. In Japanese.. 
Eduard It. Hovy and glisal)eth Maier. 1993. Par- 
simonious or prottigate: ltow many and which 
discourse structure relations? Technical re- 
port, Information Sciences Institute, University 
of Southern California. 
ltitoshi 1sahara. 1995. a EIDA's test-sets for qual- 
ity evaluation of MT systems: TechnicM eval- 
nation from the developer's point of view. In 
Proceedings of lhe M 7' Summit V. Luxembourg. 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao. 1995. Auto- 
marie detection of discourse structure by check- 
ing surface information in sentences. Journal of 
the Ass. for NLP, 1(1):3 20. In Japanese. 
Samuel E. Martin. 1975. A reference grammar of 
Japanese. Yale University Press, New llaven. 
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbanm, Geoffrey 
I,eech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A comprehen- 
sive grammar of the English language. Long- 
man, London. 
Keh-Yih Su, Ming-Wen Wu, and Jing-Shin 
Chang. 1992. A new quantitative quality mea- 
sure for machine translation systems. In Pro- 
ceedings of COLING-92, pages 433 -439. 
1069 
