Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pp. 496?505, Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Antecedent Selection Techniques for High-Recall Coreference Resolution
Yannick Versley
versley@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de
SFB 441 / Seminar fu?r Sprachwissenschaft
Universita?t Tu?bingen
Abstract
We investigate methods to improve the re-
call in coreference resolution by also trying
to resolve those definite descriptions where
no earlier mention of the referent shares the
same lexical head (coreferent bridging). The
problem, which is notably harder than iden-
tifying coreference relations among men-
tions which have the same lexical head, has
been tackled with several rather different ap-
proaches, and we attempt to provide a mean-
ingful classification along with a quantita-
tive comparison. Based on the different mer-
its of the methods, we discuss possibilities to
improve them and show how they can be ef-
fectively combined.
1 Introduction
Coreference resolution, the task of grouping men-
tions in a text that refer to the same referent in the
real world, has been shown to be beneficial for a
number of higher-level tasks such as information ex-
traction (McCarthy and Lehnert, 1995), question an-
swering (Morton, 2000) and summarisation (Stein-
berger et al, 2005).
While the resolution of pronominal anaphora and
tracking of named entities is possible with good
accuracy, the resolution of definite NPs (having a
common noun as their head) is usually limited to
the cases that Vieira and Poesio (2000) call direct
coreference, where both coreferent mentions have
the same head. The other cases, called coreferent
bridging by Vieira and Poesio1, are notably harder
because the number of potential candidates is much
1Because bridging (in the sense of Clark, 1975, or Asher and
larger when it is no longer possible to rely on surface
similarity.
To overcome the limit of recall that is encoun-
tered when only relying on surface features, newer
systems for coreference resolutions (Daume? III and
Marcu, 2005; Ponzetto and Strube, 2006; Versley,
2006; Ng, 2007, inter alia) use lexical semantic in-
formation as an indication for semantic compati-
bility in the absence of head equality. Most cur-
rent systems integrate the identification of discourse-
new definites (i.e., cases like ?the sun? or ?the man
that Ben met yesterday?, which are definite, but
not anaphoric) with the antecedent selection proper,
which implies that the gain obtained for new features
is dependent on the feature?s usefulness both in find-
ing semantically related mentions and for the use in
detecting discourse-new definites.
One goal of this paper is to provide a better under-
standing of these information sources by comparing
proposed (and partly new) approaches for resolv-
ing coreferent bridging by separately considering
the task of antecedent selection (i.e., presupposing
that discourse-new markables have been identified
beforehand). Although state of the art methods for
modular discourse-new detection (Uryupina, 2003;
Poesio et al, 2005) do not achieve near-perfect accu-
racy for discourse-new detection, the results we give
for antecedent selection represent an upper bound
on recall and precision for the full coreference task,
and we think that this upper bound will be useful for
Lascarides, 1998) is a much broader concept, the term ?corefer-
ent bridging? is potentially confusing, as many cases are exam-
ples of perfectly well-behaved anaphoric definite noun phrases.
Because we want to emphasise the important difference to the
more easily resolved cases of same-head coreference, we will
stick with ?coreferent bridging? as the only term that has been
established for this in the literature.
496
the design of features in both systems using a mod-
ular approach, such as (Poesio et al, 2005), where
the decision on discourse-newness is taken before-
hand, and those that integrate discourse-new classifi-
cation with the actual resolution of coreferent bridg-
ing cases. In contrast to earlier investigations (Mark-
ert and Nissim, 2005; Garera and Yarowsky, 2006),
we provide a more extensive overview on features
and also discuss properties that influence their com-
binability.
Several approaches have been proposed for the
treatment of coreferent bridging. Poesio et al (1997)
use WordNet, looking for a synonymy or hypernymy
relation (additionally, for coordinate sisters in Word-
Net). The system of Cardie and Wagstaff (1999)
uses the node distance in WordNet (with an upper
limit of 4) as one component in the distance measure
that guides their clustering algorithm. Harabagiu
et al (2001) use paths through Wordnet, using not
only synonym and is-a relations, but also parts, mor-
phological derivations, gloss texts and polysemy,
which are weighted with a measure based on the re-
lation types and number of path elements. Other ap-
proaches use large corpora to get an indication for
bridging relations: Poesio et al (1998) use a general
word association metric based on common terms oc-
curing in a fixed-width window, Gasperin and Vieira
(2004) use syntactic contexts of words in a large cor-
pus to induce a semantic similarity measure (similar
to the one introduced by Lin, 1998), and then use
lists of the n nouns that are (globally) most sim-
ilar to a given noun. Markert and Nissim (2005)
mine the World Wide Web for shallow patterns like
?China and other countries?, indicating an is-a rela-
tionship. Finally, Garera and Yarowsky (2006) pro-
pose an association-based approach using nouns that
occur in a 2-sentence window before a definite de-
scription that has no same-head antecedent.
1.1 Lexical vs. Referential Relations
One important property of these information sources
is the kind of lexical relations that they detect. The
lexical relations that we expect in coreferent bridg-
ing cases are:
? instance: The antecedent is an instance of the
concept denoted by the anaphor
Corsica . . . the island
? synonymy: The antecedent and the anaphor are
synonyms
the automobile . . . the car
? hyperonymy: The anaphor is a strict generali-
sation of the antecedent
the murderer . . . the man
? near-synonymy: The anaphor and antecedent
are semantically related but not synonyms in
the strict sense
the CD . . . the album
Of course, not all cases of coreferent bridging realise
such a lexical relation, as sometimes the anaphor
takes up information introduced elsewhere than in
the lexical noun phrase head (Peter was found dead
in his flat . . . the deceased), or the coreference rela-
tion is forced by the discourse structure, without the
items being lexically related.
As an illustrating example, in
(1) John walked towards [1 the house].
(2) a. [1 The building] was illuminated.
b. [1 The manor] was guarded by dogs.
c. [2 The door] was open.
Typical cases of coreference include cases like
1,2a (hypernym) or 1,2b (compatible but non-
synonymous term). The discourse in 1,2c is an
example of associative bridging between the NP
?the door? and its antecedent to ?the house?; it
is inferred that the door must be part of the house
mentioned earlier (since doors are typically part of
a house), which is not compatible with coreferent
bridging, but is also ranked highly by association
measures.
While hypernym relations (as found by hypernym
lookup in WordNet, or patterns indicating such rela-
tions in unannotated texts) are usually a strong in-
dicator of coreference, they can only cover some
of the cases, while the near-synonymous cases are
left undiscovered. Similarity and association mea-
sures can help for the cases of near-synonymy. How-
ever, while similarity measures (such as WordNet
distance or Lin?s similarity metric) only detect cases
of semantic similarity, association measures (such
as the ones used by Poesio et al, or by Garera
and Yarowsky) also find cases of associative bridg-
497
Lin98 RFF TheY TheY:G2 PL03
Land (country/state/land)
Staat Staat Kemalismus Regierung Kontinent
state state Kemalism government continent
Stadt Stadt Bauernfamilie Pra?sident Region
city city agricultural family president region
Region Landesregierung Bankgesellschaft Dollar Stadt
region country government banking corporation dollar city
Bundesrepublik Bundesregierung Baht Albanien Staat
federal republic federal government Baht Albania state
Republik Gewerkschaft Gasag Hauptstadt Bundesland
republic trade union (a gas company) capital state
Medikament (medical drug)
Arzneimittel Pille RU Patient Arzneimittel
pharmaceutical pill (a drug?) patient pharmaceutical
Pra?parat Droge Abtreibungspille Arzt Lebensmittel
preparation drug (non-medical) abortion pill doctor foodstuff
Pille Pra?parat Viagra Pille Pra?parat
pill preparation Viagra pill preparation
Hormon Pestizid Pharmakonzern Behandlung Behandlung
hormone pesticide pharmaceutical company treatment treatment
Lebensmittel Lebensmittel Pra?parat Abtreibungspille Arznei
foodstuff foodstuff preparation abortion pill drug
highest ranked words, with very rare words removed
?: RU 486, an abortifacient drug
Lin98: Lin?s distributional similarity measure (Lin, 1998)
RFF: Geffet and Dagan?s Relative Feature Focus measure (Geffet and Dagan, 2004)
TheY: association measure introduced by Garera and Yarowsky (2006)
TheY:G2: similar method using a log-likelihood-based statistic (see Dunning 1993)
this statistic has a preference for higher-frequency terms
PL03: semantic space association measure proposed by Pado? and Lapata (2003)
Table 1: Similarity and association measures: most similar items
ing like 1a,b; the result of this can be seen in ta-
ble (2): while the similarity measures (Lin98, RFF)
list substitutable terms (which behave like synonyms
in many contexts), the association measures (Garera
and Yarowsky?s TheY measure, Pado? and Lapata?s
association measure) also find non-compatible asso-
ciations such as country?capital or drug?treatment,
which is why they are commonly called relation-
free. For the purpose of coreference resolution, how-
ever we do not want to resolve ?the door? to the an-
tecedent ?the house? as the two descriptions do not
corefer, and it may be useful to filter out non-similar
associations.
1.2 Information Sources
Different resources may be differently suited for
the recognition of the various relations. Gener-
ally, it would be expected that using a wordnet
is the best solution if we are interested in an isa-
like relation between two words. On the other
hand, wordnets usually have limited coverage both
in terms of lexical items and in terms of relations
encoded (as their construction is necessarily labor-
intensive), and ? as Markert and Nissim remark
? they do not (and arguably should not) contain
context-dependent relations that do not hold gener-
ally but only in some rather specific context, for ex-
ample steel being anaphorically described as a com-
modity in a financial text. Context-dependent rela-
tions, Markert and Nissim argue, can be found using
shallow patterns (for example, steel and other com-
modities), since a use in such a context would mean
that the idiosyncratic conceptual relation holds in
that context. Wordnets also have usually have poor
(or non-existant) coverage of named entities, which
are especially relevant for instance relations; this
kind of instance relations can often be found in large
text corpora. The high-precision patterns that Mark-
ert and Nissim use only occur infrequently, but the
approach using shallow patterns allows to perform
498
the search of the World Wide Web, which somewhat
alleviates the sparse data problem.
While some near-synonyms can be found by look-
ing at the distance in a wordnet, they may be far
apart from each other because of ontological mod-
eling decisions, or lexical items not covered by the
wordnet. Similarity and association measures can
provide greater coverage for these near-synonym re-
lations.
The measures both of Lin (1998) and of Pado? and
Lapata (2003, 2007) are distributional methods; for
each word, they create a distribution of the contexts
they occur in, and similarity between two words is
calculated as the similarity of these distributions.2
The difference in these two methods is the repre-
sentation of the contexts. While Lin uses contexts
that are expected to determine semantic preferences
(like being in the direct object position of one verb),
Pado? and Lapata only use the co-occuring words,
weighted by syntax-based distance. For example, in
(3) Peter subj? likes dobj? ice-cream.
Lin?s approach would yield ?subj :like for Peter
and ?dobj :like for ice-cream, while Pado? and
Lapata?s approach would yield the contexts like
(with a weight of 1.0) and ice-cream (with a
weight of 0.5) for Peter. As a consequence, Pado?
and Lapata?s measure is more robust against data
sparseness but also finds related non-similar terms
(which are ultimately unwanted for coreference res-
olution). Pado? and Lapata show their dependency-
based measure to perform better in a word sense
disambiguation task than the measure of Lund et al
(1995), on which Poesio et al (1998) based their ex-
periments and which is based on the surface distance
of words.
We also reimplemented the approach of Gar-
era and Yarowsky (2006), who extract potential
anaphor-antecedent pairs from unlabeled texts and
rank these potentially related pairs by the mutual in-
formation statistic. As an example, in a text like
(4) Peter likes ice-cream.
The boy devours tons of it.
2Both measures use a weighted Jaccard metric on mutual
information vectors to calculate the similarity. See Weeds and
Weir (2005) for an overview of other measures.
we would extract the pairs ?boy,(person)? and
?boy,ice-cream?, in the hope that the former
pair occurs comparatively more often and gets a
higher mutual information value.
2 Experiments on Antecedent Selection
In a setting similar to Markert and Nissim (2005),
we evaluate the precision (proportion of correct
cases in the resolved cases) and recall (correct cases
to all cases) for the resolution of discourse-old def-
inite noun phrases. Before trying to resolve coref-
erent bridging cases, we look for compatible an-
tecedent candidates with the same lexical head and
resolve to the nearest such candidate if there is one.
For our experiments, we used the first 125 articles
of the coreferentially annotated Tu?Ba-D/Z corpus of
written newspaper text (Hinrichs et al, 2005), to-
talling 2239 sentences with 633 discourse-old defi-
nite descriptions, and the latest release of GermaNet
(Kunze and Lemnitzer, 2002), which is the German-
language part of EuroWordNet.
Unlike Markert and Nissim, we did not limit the
evaluation to discourse-old noun phrases where an
antecedent is in the 4 preceding sentences, but also
included cases where the antecedent is further away.
As a real coreference resolution system would have
to either resolve them correctly or leave them unre-
solved, we feel that this is less unrealistic and thus
preferable even when it gives less optimistic evalu-
ation results. Because overall precision is a mixture
of the precision of the same-head resolver and the
precision of the resolution for coreferent bridging,
which is lower than that for same-head cases, we
forcibly get less precision if we resolve more coref-
erent bridging cases. As it is always possible to im-
prove overall precision by resolving fewer cases of
coreferent bridging, we separately mention the pre-
cision for coreferent bridging cases alone (i.e., num-
ber of correct coreferent bridging cases by all re-
solved coreferent bridging cases), which we deem
more informative.
In our evaluation, we included hypernymy search
and a simple edge-based distance based on Ger-
maNet, as well as a baseline using semantic classes
(automatically determined by a combination of sim-
ple named entity classification and GermaNet sub-
sumption), as well as an evolved version of Markert
499
Prec Recl F?=1 Prec.NSH
same-head 0.87 0.50 0.63 ?
nearest(1) (only number check) 0.57 0.55 0.56 0.12
semantic class+gender check(1) 0.68 0.61 0.64 0.35
semantic class+gender check(2) 0.67 0.62 0.65 0.36
GermaNet, hypernymy lookup 0.83 0.58 0.68 0.67
GermaNet, node distance(1) 0.71 0.61 0.65 0.39
single pattern: ?Y wie X?(1) 0.83 0.54 0.66 0.55
TheY(1) (only number checking) 0.66 0.59 0.62 0.29
TheY(2) (only number checking) 0.66 0.60 0.63 0.31
Lin(1) (only number checking) 0.66 0.60 0.63 0.30
Lin(2) (only number checking) 0.69 0.64 0.66 0.39
PL03(1) (only number checking) 0.68 0.63 0.65 0.38
PL03(2) (only number checking) 0.70 0.64 0.65 0.42
15-most-similar(1) 0.82 0.54 0.65 0.50
100-most-similar(2,3) 0.73 0.60 0.66 0.42
Prec.NSH: precision for coreferent bridging cases
(1): consider candidates in the 4 preceding sentences
(2): consider candidates in the 16 preceding sentences
(3): also try candidates such that the anaphor is
in the antecedent?s similarity list
Table 2: Baseline results
and Nissim?s approach, which is presented in (Ver-
sley, 2007). For the methods based on similarity
and association measures, we implemented a simple
ranking by the respective similarity or relatedness
value. Additionally, we included an approach due to
Gasperin and Vieira (2004), who tackle the problem
of similarity by using lists of most similar words to a
certain word, based on a similarity measure closely
related to Lin?s. They allow resolution if either (i)
the candidate is among the words most similar to the
anaphor, (ii) the anaphor is among the words most
similar to the candidate, (iii) the similarity lists of
anaphor and candidate share a common item. We
tried out several variations in the length of the simi-
lar words list (Gasperin and Vieira used 15, we also
tried lists with 25, 50 and 100 items). The third pos-
sibility that Gasperin and Vieira mention (a common
item in the similarity lists of both anaphor and an-
tecedent) resolves some correct cases, but leads to a
much larger number of false positives, which is why
we did not include it in our evaluation.
To induce the similarity and association measures
presented earlier, we used texts from the German
newspaper die tageszeitung, comprising about 11M
sentences. For the extraction of anaphor-antecedent
candidates, we used a chunked version of the cor-
pus (Mu?ller and Ule, 2002). The identification of
grammatical relations, was carried out on a subset
of all sentences (those with length ? 30), with an
unlexicalised PCFG parser and subsequent extrac-
tion of dependency relations (Versley, 2005). For
the last approach, where dependency relations were
needed but labeling accuracy was not as important,
we used a deterministic shift-reduce parser that Foth
and Menzel (2006) used as input source in hybrid
dependency parsing.3
For all three approaches, we lemmatised the
words by using a combination of SMOR (Schmid
et al, 2004), a derivational finite-state morphology
for German, and lexical information derived from
the lexicon of a German dependency parser (Foth
and Menzel, 2006). We mitigated the problem of vo-
cabulary growth in the lexicon, due to German syn-
thetic compounds, by using a frequency-sensitive
unsupervised compound splitting technique, and
(for semantic similarity) normalised common person
and location names to ?(person)? and ?(location)?, re-
spectively.
Same-head resolution (including a check for
modifier compatibility) allows to correctly resolve
49.8% of all cases, with a precision of 86.5%.
The most simple approach for coreferent bridging,
just resolving coreferent bridging cases to the near-
est possible antecedent (only checking for number
agreement), yields very poor precision (12% for the
coreferent bridging cases), and as a result, the re-
call gain is very limited. If we use semantic classes
(based on both GermaNet and a simple classification
for named entities) to constrain the candidates and
then use the nearest number- and gender-compatible
antecedent4, we get a much better precision (35%
for coreferent bridging cases), and a much better
recall of 61.1%. Hyponymy lookup in GermaNet,
without a limit on sentence distance, achieves a re-
call of 57.5% (with a precision of 67% for the re-
solved coreferent bridging cases), whereas using the
best single pattern (Y wie X , which corresponds to
3Arguably, it would have been more convenient to use a sin-
gle parser for all three approaches, but differing tradeoffs be-
tween speed on one hand and accuracy for relevant information
and/or fitness of representation on the other hand made the re-
spective parser or chunker a compelling choice.
4In German, grammatical gender is not as predictive as in
English as it does not reproduce ontological distinctions. For
persons, grammatical and natural gender almost always coin-
cide, and we check gender equality iff the anaphor is a person.
500
the English Y s such as X), with a distance limit of
4 sentences5, on the Web only improves the recall
to 54.3% (with a lower precision of 55% for coref-
erent bridging cases). This is in contrast to the re-
sults of Markert and Nissim, who found that Web
pattern search performs better than wordnet lookup;
see (Versley, 2007) for a discussion. Ranking all
candidates that are within a distance of 4 hyper-
/hyponymy edges in GermaNet by their edge dis-
tance, we get a relatively good recall of 60.5%, but
the precision (for the coreferent bridging cases) is
only at 39%, which is quite poor in comparison.
The results for Garera and Yarowsky?s TheY al-
gorithm are quite disconcerting ? recall and the pre-
cision on coreferent bridging cases are lower than
the respective baseline using (wordnet-based) se-
mantic class information or Pado? and Lapata?s asso-
ciation measure. The technique based on Lin?s simi-
larity measure does outperform the baseline, but still
suffers from bad precision, along with Pado? and La-
pata?s association measure. In other words, the simi-
larity and association measures seem to be too noisy
to be used directly for ranking antecedents. The ap-
proach of Gasperin and Vieira performs compara-
bly to the approach using Web-based pattern search
(although the precision is poorer than for the best-
performing pattern for German, ?X wie Y ? ? X
such as Y , it is comparable to that of other patterns).
2.1 Improving Distributional Similarity?
While it would be na??ve to think that the methods
purely based on statistical similarity measures could
reach the accuracy that can be achieved with a hand-
constructed lexicalised ontology, it would of course
be nice if we could improve the quality of the se-
mantic similarity measure used in ranking and the
most-similar-word lists.
Geffet and Dagan (2004) propose an approach
to improve the quality of the feature vectors used
in distributional similarity measures: instead of
weighting features using the mutual information
value between the word and the feature, they pro-
pose to use a measure they call Relative Feature Fo-
cus: the sum of the similarities to the (globally) most
5There is a degradation in precision for the pattern-based
approach, but not for the GermaNet-based approach, which is
why we do not use a distance limit for the GermaNet-based ap-
proach.
similar words that share this feature.
By replacing mutual information values with RFF
values in Lin?s association measure, Geffet and Da-
gan were able to significantly improve the propor-
tion of substitutable words in the list of the most sim-
ilar words. In our experiments, however, using the
RFF-based similarity measure did not improve the
similarity-list-based resolution or the simple rank-
ing, to the contrary, both recall and precision are less
than for the Weighted Jaccard measure that we used
originally.6
We attribute this to two factors: Firstly, Geffet
and Dagan?s evaluation emphasises the precision in
terms of types, whereas the use in resolving coref-
erent bridging does not punish unrelated rare words
being ranked high ? since these are rare, the like-
lihood that they occur together, changing a reso-
lution decision, is quite low, whereas rare related
words that are ranked high can allow a correct res-
olution. Secondly, Geffet and Dagan focus on high-
frequency words, which makes sense in the context
of ontology learning, but the applicability for tasks
like coreference resolution (directly or in the ap-
proach of Gasperin and Vieira) also depends on a
sensible treatment of lower-frequency words.
Using the framework of Weeds et al (2004), we
found that the bias of lower frequency words for
preferring high-frequency neighbours was higher for
RFF (0.58 against 0.35 for Lin?s measure). Weeds
and Weir (2005) discuss the influence of bias to-
wards high- or low-frequency items for different
tasks (correlation with WordNet-derived neighbour
sets and pseudoword disambiguation), and it would
not be surprising if the different high-frequency bias
were leading to different results.
2.2 Combining Information Sources
The information sources that we presented earlier
and the corpus-based methods based on similarity
or association measures draw from different kinds of
evidence and thus should be rather complementary.
To put it another way, it should be possible to get
the best from all methods, achieving the recall of the
high-recall methods (like using semantic class in-
6Simple ranking with RFF gives a precision of 33% for
coreferent bridging cases, against 39% for Lin?s original mea-
sure; for an approach based on similarity lists, we get 39%
against 44%.
501
15-most-similar(2,3)
100-most-similar(2,3)
GWN5: hypernymy
Web (combined)
semclass+gend(2)
Lin similarity(2)
Lin(2)+sem+gend
TheY+sem+gend
Lin+Bnd
PL03+Bnd
GWN5?Web
GWN5?TheY+s+g
GWN5?Web?25-m.s.(2,3) ?LinBnd
all combined
Recall (total)
Pre
cisi
on
(No
n-
sa
m
e-h
ea
d)
0.550 0.600 0.650 0.7000.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
Prec Recl F?=1 Prec.NSH
sem. class+gender checking 0.68 0.61 0.64 0.35
GermaNet, hypernymy lookup 0.83 0.57 0.68 0.67
GermaNet ? ?Y wie X? 0.81 0.60 0.69 0.63
GermaNet ? all patterns 0.81 0.61 0.70 0.64
TheY(2)+semclass+gender 0.76 0.60 0.67 0.47
TheY+sem+gend+Bnd 0.78 0.59 0.67 0.50
Lin(2)+semclass+gender 0.71 0.63 0.67 0.43
Lin+sem+gend+Bnd 0.80 0.58 0.67 0.53
PL03(2)+semclass+gender 0.72 0.64 0.68 0.45
PL03+sem+gend+Bnd 0.80 0.59 0.68 0.57
GermaNet ? all patterns 0.81 0.62 0.70 0.64
? 25-most-similar(2,3) 0.79 0.65 0.72 0.62
? LinBnd 0.79 0.68 0.73 0.63
? Lin ? TheY+sem+gend 0.74 0.70 0.72 0.54
(2): consider candidates in the 16 preceding sentences
(3): also try candidates such that the anaphor is
in the antecedent?s similarity list
Table 3: Combination-based approaches
formation, or similarity and association measures),
with a precision closer to the most precise method
using GermaNet. In the case of web-based patterns,
Versley (2007) combines several pattern searches on
the web and uses the combined positive and nega-
tive evidence to compute a composite score ? with a
suitably chosen cutoff, it outperforms all single pat-
terns both in terms of precision and recall. First re-
solving via hyponymy in GermaNet and then using
the pattern-combination approach outperforms the
semantic class-based baseline in terms of recall and
is reasonably close to the GermaNet-based approach
in terms of precision (i.e., much better than the ap-
proach based only on the semantic class).
As a first step to improve the precision of the
corpus-based approaches, we added filtering based
on automatically assigned semantic classes (per-
sons, organisations, events, other countable objects,
and everything else). Very surprisingly, Garera and
Yarowsky?s TheY approach, despite starting out at a
lower precision (31%, against 39% for Lin and 42%
for PL03), profits much more from the semantic fil-
ter and reaches the best precision (47%), whereas
Lin?s semantic similarity measure profits the least.
Since limiting the distance to the 4 previous sen-
tences had quite a devastating effect for the approach
based on Lin?s similarity measure (which achieves
39% precision when all the candidates are avail-
able and 30% precision if it choses the most se-
mantically similar out of the candidates that are in
the last 4 sentences), we also wanted to try and ap-
ply the distance-based filtering after finding seman-
tically related candidates.
The approach we tried was as follows: we rank all
candidates using the similarity function, and keep
only the 3 top-rated candidates. From these 3 top-
rated candidates, we keep only those within the last
4 sentences. Without filtering by semantic class, this
improves the precision to 41% (from 30% for lim-
iting the distance beforehand, or 39% without lim-
iting the distance). Adding filtering based on se-
mantic classes to this (only keeping those from the
3 top-rated candidates which have a compatible se-
mantic class and are within the last 4 sentences), we
get a much better precision of 53%, with a recall
that can still be seen as good (57.8%). In compari-
son with the similarity-list-based approach, we get a
much better precision than we would get for meth-
ods with comparable recall (the version with the 100
most similar items has 44% precision, the version
with 50 most similar items and matching both ways
has 46% precision).
Applying this distance-bounding method to Gar-
era and Yarowsky?s association measure still leads
to an improvement over the case with only seman-
tic and gender checking, but the improvement (from
47% to 50%) is not as large as with the semantic
similarity measure or Pado? and Lapata?s association
measure (from 45% to 57%).
For the final system, we back off from the most
precise information sources to the less precise. Start-
ing with the combination of GermaNet and pattern-
based search on the World Wide Web, we begin
by adding the distance-bounded semantic similarity-
based resolver (LinBnd) and resolution based on
the list of 25 most similar words (following the
502
approach of Gasperin and Vieira 2004). This re-
sults in visibly improved recall (from 62% to 68%),
while the precision for coreferent bridging cases
does not suffer much. Adding resolution based on
Lin?s semantic similarity measure and Garera and
Yarowsky?s TheY value leads to a further improve-
ment in recall to 69.7%, but also leads to a larger
loss in precision.
3 Conclusion
In this paper, we compared several approaches to re-
solve cases of coreferent bridging in open-domain
newspaper text. While none of the information
sources can match the precision of the hypernymy
information encoded in GermaNet, or that of using
a combination of high-precision patterns with the
World Wide Web as a very large corpus, it is possi-
ble to achieve a considerable improvement in terms
of recall without sacrificing too much precision by
combining these methods.
Very interestingly, the distributional methods
based on intra-sentence relations (Lin, 1998;
Pado? and Lapata, 2003) outperformed Garera and
Yarowsky?s (2006) association measure when used
for ranking, which may due to sparse data problems
or simply too much noise for the latter. For the asso-
ciation measures, the fact that they are relation-free
also means that they can profit from added semantic
filtering.
The novel distance-bounded semantic similarity
method (where we use the most similar words in the
previous discourse together with a semantic class-
based filter and a distance limit) comes near the pre-
cision of using surface patterns, and offers better ac-
curacy than Gasperin and Vieira?s method of using
the globally most similar words.
By combining existing higher-precision informa-
tion sources such as hypernym search in GermaNet
and the Web-based approach presented in (Vers-
ley, 2007) together with similarity- and association-
based resolution, it is possible to get a large im-
provement in recall even compared to the combined
GermaNet+Web approach or an approach combin-
ing GermaNet with a semantically filtered version
of Garera and Yarowsky?s TheY approach.
In independent research, Goecke et al (2006)
combined the original LSA-based method of Lund
et al (1995) with wordnet relations and pattern
search on a fixed-size corpus.7 However, they eval-
uate only on a small subset of discourse-old definite
descriptions (those where a wordnet-compatible se-
mantic relation was identified and which were rea-
sonably close to their antecedent), and they did not
distinguish coreferent from associative bridging an-
tecedents. Although the different evaluation method
disallows a meaningful comparison, we think that
the more evolved information sources we use (Pado?
and Lapata?s association measure instead of Lund
et als, combined pattern search on the World Wide
Web instead of search for patterns in a fixed-size
corpus), as well as the additional information based
on semantic similarity, lead to superior results when
evaluated in a comparable task.
3.1 Ongoing and Future Work
Both the distributional similarity statistics and the
association measure can profit from more training
data, something which is bound by availability of
similar text (Gasperin et al, 2004 point out that us-
ing texts from a different genre strongly limits the
usefulness of the learned semantic similarity mea-
sure), and by processing costs (which are more se-
rious for distributional similarity measures than for
non-grammar-related association measures, as the
former necessitate parsed input).
Based on existing results for named entity coref-
erence, a hypothetical coreference resolver combin-
ing our information sources with a perfect detec-
tor for discourse-new mentions would be able to
achieve a precision of 88% and a recall of 83% con-
sidering all full noun phrases (i.e., including names,
but not pronouns). This is both much higher than
state-of-the art results for the same data set (Versley,
2006, gets 62% precision and 70% recall), but such
accuracy may be very difficult to achieve in prac-
tice, as perfect (or even near-perfect) discourse-new
detection does not seem to achievable in the near fu-
ture. Preliminary experiments show that the inte-
gration of pattern-based information leads to an in-
crease in recall of 0.6% for the whole system (or
46% more coreferent bridging cases), but the inte-
gration of distributional similarity (loosely based on
the approach by Gasperin and Vieira) does not lead
7Thanks to Tonio Wandmacher for pointing this out to me at
GLDV?07.
503
to a noticeable improvement over GermaNet alne;
in isolation, the distributional similarity information
did improve the recall, albeit less than information
from GermaNet did.
The fact that only a small fraction of the achiev-
able recall gain is currently attained seems to sug-
gest that better identification of discourse-old men-
tions could potentially lead to larger improvements.
It also seems that firstly, it makes more sense to com-
bine information sources that cover different rela-
tions (e.g. GermaNet for hypernymy and synonymy
and the pattern-based approach for instance rela-
tions) than those that yield independent evidence for
the same relation(s), as GermaNet and the Gasperin
and Vieira approach do for (near-)synonymy; and
secondly, that good precision is especially important
in the context of integrating antecedent selection and
discourse-new identification, which means that the
finer view that we get using antecedent selection ex-
periments (compared to direct use in a coreference
resolver) is indeed helpful.
Acknowledgements I am very grateful to Sabine
Schulte im Walde, Piklu Gupta and Sandra Ku?bler
for useful criticism of an earlier version, and to
Simone Ponzetto and Michael Strube for feedback
on a talk related to this paper. The research re-
ported in this paper was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) as part of Collab-
orative Research Centre (Sonderforschungsbereich)
441 ?Linguistic Data Structures?.
References
Asher, N. and Lascarides, A. (1998). Bridging. Jour-
nal of Semantics, 15(1):83?113.
Cardie, C. and Wagstaff, K. (1999). Noun phrase
coreference as clustering. In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Very Large Corpora
(EMNLP/VLC 1999), pages 82?89.
Clark, H. H. (1975). Bridging. In Schank, R. C. and
Nash-Webber, B. L., editors, Proceedings of the
1975 workshop on Theoretical issues in natural
language processing, pages 169?174, Cambridge,
MA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Daume? III, H. and Marcu, D. (2005). A large-
scale exploration of effective global features for
a joint entity detection and tracking model. In
HLT/EMNLP?05, pages 97?104.
Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1):61?74.
Foth, K. and Menzel, W. (2006). Hybrid pars-
ing: Using probabilistic models as predictors for
a symbolic parser. In ACL 2006.
Garera, N. and Yarowsky, D. (2006). Resolving and
generating definite anaphora by modeling hyper-
nymy using unlabeled corpora. In CoNLL 2006.
Gasperin, C., Salmon-Alt, S., and Vieira, R. (2004).
How useful are similarity word lists for indirect
anaphora resolution? In Proc. DAARC 2004.
Gasperin, C. and Vieira, R. (2004). Using word
similarity lists for resolving indirect anaphora. In
ACL?04 workshop on reference resolution and its
applications.
Geffet, M. and Dagan, I. (2004). Feature vector
quality and distributional similarity. In CoLing
2004.
Goecke, D., Stu?hrenberg, M., and Wandmacher, T.
(2006). Extraction and representation of seman-
tic relations for resolving definite descriptions. In
Workshop on Ontologies in Text Technology (OTT
2006). extended abstract.
Harabagiu, S., Bunescu, R., and Maiorano, S.
(2001). Text and knowledge mining for corefer-
ence resolution. In Proceedings of the 2nd Meet-
ing of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2001).
Hinrichs, E., Ku?bler, S., and Naumann, K. (2005). A
unified representation for morphological, syntac-
tic, semantic and referential annotations. In ACL
Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II:
Pie in the Sky, Ann Arbor.
Kunze, C. and Lemnitzer, L. (2002). Germanet ?
representation, visualization, application. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC 2002.
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proc. CoLing/ACL 1998.
Lund, K., Atchley, R. A., and Burgess, C.
(1995). Semantic and associative priming in high-
dimensional semantic space. In Proc. of the 17th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Soci-
ety, pages 660?665.
504
Markert, K. and Nissim, M. (2005). Comparing
knowledge sources for nominal anaphora resolu-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 31(3):367?402.
McCarthy, J. F. and Lehnert, W. G. (1995). Using
decision trees for coreference resolution. In IJCAI
1995, pages 1050?1055.
Morton, T. S. (2000). Coreference for NLP applica-
tions. In ACL-2000.
Mu?ller, F. H. and Ule, T. (2002). Annotating topo-
logical fields and chunks ? and revising POS tags
at the same time. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING 2002).
Ng, V. (2007). Shallow semantics for coreference
resolution. In IJCAI 2007, pages 1689?1694.
Pado?, S. and Lapata, M. (2003). Constructing se-
mantic space models from parsed corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2003.
Pado?, S. and Lapata, M. (2007). Dependency-based
construction of semantic space models. Compu-
tational Linguistics, to appear.
Poesio, M., Alexandrov-Kabadjov, M., Vieira, R.,
Goulart, R., and Uryupina, O. (2005). Does
discourse-new detection help definite description
resolution? In Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
national Workshop on Computational Semantics
(IWCS-6).
Poesio, M., Schulte im Walde, S., and Brew, C.
(1998). Lexical clustering and definite descrip-
tion interpretation. In AAAI Spring Symposium
on Learning for Discourse.
Poesio, M., Vieira, R., and Teufel, S. (1997). Re-
solving bridging descriptions in unrestricted text.
In ACL-97 Workshop on Operational Factors in
Practical, Robust, Anaphora Resolution For Un-
restricted Texts.
Ponzetto, S. P. and Strube, M. (2006). Exploiting
semantic role labeling, wordnet and wikipedia for
coreference resolution. In HLT-NAACL 2006.
Schmid, H., Fitschen, A., and Heid, U. (2004).
SMOR: A german computational morphology
covering derivation, composition and inflection.
In Proceedings of LREC 2004.
Steinberger, J., Kabadjov, M., Poesio, M., and
Sanchez-Graillet, O. (2005). Improving LSA-
based summarization with anaphora resolution.
In Proceedings of Human Language Technology
Conference and Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1?8.
Uryupina, O. (2003). High-precision identification
of discourse new and unique noun phrases. In
Proceedings of the ACL Student Workshop.
Versley, Y. (2005). Parser evaluation across text
types. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT 2005).
Versley, Y. (2006). A constraint-based approach
to noun phrase coreference resolution in German
newspaper text. In Konferenz zur Verarbeitung
Natu?rlicher Sprache (KONVENS 2006).
Versley, Y. (2007). Using the Web to resolve
coreferent bridging in German newspaper text.
In Proceedings of GLDV-Fru?hjahrstagung 2007,
Tu?bingen. Narr.
Vieira, R. and Poesio, M. (2000). An empirically
based system for processing definite descriptions.
Computational Linguistics, 26(4):539?593.
Weeds, J. and Weir, D. (2005). Co-occurrence re-
trieval: A flexible framework for lexical distri-
butional similarity. Computational Linguistics,
31(4):439?475.
Weeds, J., Weir, D., and McCarthy, D. (2004). Char-
acterizing measures of lexical distributional simi-
larity. In CoLing 2004.
505
