Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 773?782,
Honolulu, October 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Summarizing Spoken and Written Conversations
Gabriel Murray and Giuseppe Carenini
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4 Canada
Abstract
In this paper we describe research on sum-
marizing conversations in the meetings and
emails domains. We introduce a conver-
sation summarization system that works in
multiple domains utilizing general conversa-
tional features, and compare our results with
domain-dependent systems for meeting and
email data. We find that by treating meet-
ings and emails as conversations with general
conversational features in common, we can
achieve competitive results with state-of-the-
art systems that rely on more domain-specific
features.
1 Introduction
Our lives are increasingly comprised of multimodal
conversations with others. We email for business
and personal purposes, attend meetings in person
and remotely, chat online, and participate in blog or
forum discussions. It is clear that automatic summa-
rization can be of benefit in dealing with this over-
whelming amount of interactional information. Au-
tomatic meeting abstracts would allow us to prepare
for an upcoming meeting or review the decisions of a
previous group. Email summaries would aid corpo-
rate memory and provide efficient indices into large
mail folders.
When summarizing in each of these domains,
there will be potentially useful domain-specific fea-
tures ? e.g. prosodic features for meeting speech,
subject headers for emails ? but there are also un-
derlying similarites between these domains. They
are all multiparty conversations, and we hypothe-
size that effective summarization techniques can be
designed that would lead to robust summarization
performance on a wide array of such conversation
types. Such a general conversation summarization
system would make it possible to summarize a wide
variety of conversational data without needing to
develop unique summarizers in each domain and
across modalities. While progress has been made in
summarizing conversations in individual domains,
as described below, little or no work has been done
on summarizing unrestricted, multimodal conversa-
tions.
In this research we take an extractive approach
to summarization, presenting a novel set of conver-
sational features for locating the most salient sen-
tences in meeting speech and emails. We demon-
strate that using these conversational features in a
machine-learning sentence classification framework
yields performance that is competitive or superior
to more restricted domain-specific systems, while
having the advantage of being portable across con-
versational modalities. The robust performance of
the conversation-based system is attested via several
summarization evaluation techniques, and we give
an in-depth analysis of the effectiveness of the indi-
vidual features and feature subclasses used.
2 Related Work on Meetings and Emails
In this section we give a brief overview of previous
research on meeting summarization and email sum-
marization, respectively.
773
2.1 Meeting Summarization
Among early work on meeting summarization,
Waibel et al (1998) implemented a modified version
of the Maximal Marginal Relevance algorithm (Car-
bonell and Goldstein, 1998) applied to speech tran-
scripts, presenting the user with the n best sentences
in a meeting browser interface. Zechner (2002) in-
vestigated summarizing several genres of speech, in-
cluding spontaneous meeting speech. Though rele-
vance detection in his work relied largely on tf.idf
scores, Zechner also explored cross-speaker infor-
mation linking and question/answer detection.
More recently, researchers have investigated
the utility of employing speech-specific features
for summarization, including prosodic information.
Murray et al (2005a; 2005b) compared purely
textual summarization approaches with feature-
based approaches incorporating prosodic features,
with human judges favoring the feature-based ap-
proaches. In subsequent work (2006; 2007), they
began to look at additional speech-specific char-
acteristics such as speaker status, discourse mark-
ers and high-level meta comments in meetings, i.e.
comments that refer to the meeting itself. Galley
(2006) used skip-chain Conditional Random Fields
to model pragmatic dependencies between paired
meeting utterances (e.g. QUESTION-ANSWER re-
lations), and used a combination of lexical, prosodic,
structural and discourse features to rank utterances
by importance. Galley found that while the most
useful single feature class was lexical features, a
combination of acoustic, durational and structural
features exhibited comparable performance accord-
ing to Pyramid evaluation.
2.2 Email Summarization
Work on email summarization can be divided into
summarization of individual email messages and
summarization of entire email threads. Muresan et
al. (2001) took the approach of summarizing indi-
vidual email messages, first using linguistic tech-
niques to extract noun phrases and then employ-
ing machine learning methods to label the extracted
noun phrases as salient or not. Corston-Oliver et al
(2004) focused on identifying speech acts within a
given email, with a particular interest in task-related
sentences.
Rambow et al (2004) addressed the challenge of
summarizing entire threads by treating it as a binary
sentence classification task. They considered three
types of features: basic features that simply treat the
email as text (e.g. tf.idf, which scores words highly if
they are frequent in the document but rare across all
documents), features that consider the thread to be a
sequence of turns (e.g. the position of the turn in the
thread), and email-specific features such as number
of recipients and subject line similarity.
Carenini et al (2007) took an approach to thread
summarization using the Enron corpus (described
below) wherein the thread is represented as a
fragment quotation graph. A single node in the
graph represents an email fragment, a portion of
the email that behaves as a unit in a fine-grain
representation of the conversation structure. A
fragment sometimes consists of an entire email and
sometimes a portion of an email. For example, if a
given email has the structure
A
> B
C
where B is a quoted section in the middle of
the email, then there are three email fragments in
total: two new fragments A and C separated by
one quoted fragment B. Sentences in a fragment
are weighted according to the Clue Word Score
(CWS) measure, a lexical cohesion metric based
on the recurrence of words in parent and child
nodes. In subsequent work, Carenini et al (2008)
determined that subjectivity detection (i.e., whether
the sentence contains sentiments or opinions from
the author) gave additional improvement for email
thread summaries.
Also on the Enron corpus, Zajic et al (2008) com-
pared Collective Message Summarization (CMS)
to Individual Message Summarization (IMS) and
found the former to be a more effective technique
for summarizing email data. CMS essentially treats
thread summarization as a multi-document summa-
rization problem, while IMS summarizes individual
emails in the thread and then concatenates them to
form a thread summary.
In our work described below we also address the
task of thread summarization as opposed to sum-
774
marization of individual email messages, following
Carenini et al and the CMS approach of Zajic et al
3 Experimental Setup
In this section we describe the classifier employed
for our machine learning experiments, the corpora
used, the relevant summarization annotations for
each corpus, and the evaluation methods employed.
3.1 Statistical Classifier
Our approach to extractive summarization views
sentence extraction as a classification problem. For
all machine learning experiments, we utilize logistic
regression classifiers. This choice was partly moti-
vated by our earlier summarization research, where
logistic regression classifiers were compared along-
side support vector machines (SVMs) (Cortes and
Vapnik, 1995). The two classifier types yielded very
similar results, with logistic regression classifiers
being much faster to train and thus expediting fur-
ther development.
The liblinear toolkit 1 implements simple feature
subset selection based on the F statistic (Chen and
Lin, 2006) .
3.2 Corpora Description
For these experiments we utilize two corpora, the
Enron corpus for email summarization and the AMI
corpus for meeting summarization.
3.2.1 The Enron Email Corpus
The Enron email corpus2 is a collection of emails
released as part of the investigation into the Enron
corporation (Klimt and Yang, 2004). It has become
a popular corpus for NLP research (e.g. (Bekkerman
et al, 2004; Yeh and Harnly, 2006; Chapanond et al,
2005; Diesner et al, 2005)) due to being realistic,
naturally-occurring data from a corporate environ-
ment, and moreover because privacy concerns mean
that there is very low availability for other publicly
available email data.
39 threads have been annotated for extractive
summarization, with five annotators assigned to
each thread. The annotators were asked to select
30% of the sentences in a thread, subsequently la-
beling each selected sentence as either ?essential? or
1http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/?cjlin/liblinear/
2http://www.cs.cmu.edu/?enron/
?optional.? Essential sentences are weighted three
times as highly as optional sentences. A sentence
score, or GSValue, can therefore range between 0
and 15, with the maximum GSValue achieved when
all five annotators consider the sentence essential,
and a score of 0 achieved when no annotator selects
the given sentence. For the purpose of training a bi-
nary classifier, we rank the sentences in each email
thread according to their GSValues, then extract sen-
tences until our summary reaches 30% of the to-
tal thread word count. We label these sentences as
positive instances and the remainder as the negative
class. Approximately 19% of sentences are labeled
as positive, extractive examples.
Because the amount of labeled data available for
the Enron email corpus is fairly small, for our classi-
fication experiments we employ a leave-one-out pro-
ceedure for the 39 email threads. The labeled data as
a whole total just under 1400 sentences.
3.2.2 The AMI Meetings Corpus
For our meeting summarization experiments, we
use the scenario portion of the AMI corpus (Carletta
et al, 2005). The corpus consists of about 100 hours
of recorded and annotated meetings. In the scenario
meetings, groups of four participants take part in a
series of four meetings and play roles within a ficti-
tious company. While the scenario given to them is
artificial, the speech and the actions are completely
spontaneous and natural. There are 96 meetings in
the training set, 24 in the development set, and 20
meetings for the test set.
For this corpus, annotators wrote abstract sum-
maries of each meeting and extracted transcript dia-
logue act segments (DAs) that best conveyed or sup-
ported the information in the abstracts. A many-
to-many mapping between transcript DAs and sen-
tences from the human abstract was obtained for
each annotator, with three annotators assigned to
each meeting. It is possible for a DA to be extracted
by an annotator but not linked to the abstract, but for
training our binary classifiers, we simply consider a
dialogue act to be a positive example if it is linked
to a given human summary, and a negative example
otherwise. This is done to maximize the likelihood
that a data point labeled as ?extractive? is truly an
informative example for training purposes. Approx-
imately 13% of the total DAs are ultimately labeled
775
as positive, extractive examples.
The AMI corpus contains automatic speech
recognition (ASR) output in addition to manual
meeting transcripts, and we report results on both
transcript types. The ASR output was provided by
the AMI-ASR team (Hain et al, 2007), and the word
error rate for the AMI corpus is 38.9%.
3.3 Summarization Evaluation
For evaluating our extractive summaries, we imple-
ment existing evaluation schemes from previous re-
search, with somewhat similar methods for meet-
ings versus emails. These are described and com-
pared below. We also evaluate our extractive classi-
fiers more generally by plotting the receiver operator
characteristic (ROC) curve and calculating the area
under the curve (AUROC). This allows us to gauge
the true-positive/false-positive ratio as the posterior
threshold is varied.
We use the differing evaluation metrics for emails
versus meetings for two primary reasons. First,
the differing summarization annotations in the AMI
and Enron corpora naturally lend themselves to
slightly divergent metrics, one based on extract-
abstract links and the other based on the essen-
tial/option/uninformative distinction. Second, and
more importantly, using these two metrics allow us
to compare our results with state-of-the-art results
in the two fields of speech summarization and email
summarization. In future work we plan to use a sin-
gle evaluation metric.
3.3.1 Evaluating Meeting Summaries
To evaluate meeting summaries we use the
weighted f-measure metric (Murray et al, 2006).
This evaluation scheme relies on the multiple human
annotated summary links described in Section 3.2.2.
Both weighted precision and recall share the same
numerator
num =
M
?
i=1
N
?
j=1
L(si, aj) (1)
where L(si, aj) is the number of links for a DA
si in the machine extractive summary according to
annotator ai, M is the number of DAs in the ma-
chine summary, and N is the number of annotators.
Weighted precision is defined as:
precision = numN ? M (2)
and weighted recall is given by
recall = num
?O
i=1
?N
j=1 L(si, aj)
(3)
where O is the total number of DAs in the meeting,
N is the number of annotators, and the denominator
represents the total number of links made between
DAs and abstract sentences by all annotators. The
weighted f-measure is calculated as the harmonic
mean of weighted precision and recall. The intuition
behind weighted f-score is that DAs that are linked
multiple times by multiple annotators are the most
informative.
3.3.2 Evaluating Email Summaries
For evaluating email thread summaries, we follow
Carenini et al (2008) by implementing their pyra-
mid precision scheme, inspired by Nenkova?s pyra-
mid scheme (2004). In Section 3.2.1 we introduced
the idea of a GSValue for each sentence in an email
thread, based on multiple human annotations. We
can evaluate a summary of a given length by com-
paring its total GSValues to the maximum possible
total for that summary length. For instance, if in a
thread the three top scoring sentences had GSValues
of 15, 12 and 12, and the sentences selected by a
given automatic summarization method had GSVal-
ues of 15, 10 and 8, the pyramid precision would be
0.85.
Pyramid precision and weighted f-score are simi-
lar evaluation schemes in that they are both sentence
based (as opposed to, for example, n-gram based)
and that they score sentences based on multiple hu-
man annotations. Pyramid precision is very simi-
lar to equation 3 normalized by the maximum score
for the summary length. For now we use these two
slightly different schemes in order to maintain con-
sistency with prior art in each domain.
4 A Conversation Summarization System
In our conversation summarization approach, we
treat emails and meetings as conversations com-
prised of turns between multiple participants. We
follow Carenini et al (2007) in working at the finer
776
granularity of email fragments, so that for an email
thread, a turn consists of a single email fragment in
the exchange. For meetings, a turn is a sequence of
dialogue acts by one speaker, with the turn bound-
aries delimited by dialogue acts from other meet-
ing participants. The features we derive for summa-
rization are based on this view of the conversational
structure.
We calculate two length features. For each sen-
tence, we derive a word-count feature normalized
by the longest sentence in the conversation (SLEN)
and a word-count feature normalized by the longest
sentence in the turn (SLEN2). Sentence length has
previously been found to be an effective feature in
speech and text summarization (e.g. (Maskey and
Hirschberg, 2005; Murray et al, 2005a; Galley,
2006)).
There are several structural features used, in-
cluding position of the sentence in the turn (TLOC)
and position of the sentence in the conversation
(CLOC). We also include the time from the begin-
ning of the conversation to the current turn (TPOS1)
and from the current turn to the end of the conversa-
tion (TPOS2). Conversations in both modalities can
be well-structured, with introductory turns, general
discussion, and ultimate resolution or closure, and
sentence informativeness might significantly corre-
late with this structure. We calculate two pause-style
features: the time between the following turn and the
current turn (SPAU), and the time between the cur-
rent turn and previous turn (PPAU), both normalized
by the overall length of the conversation. These fea-
tures are based on the email and meeting transcript
timestamps. We hypothesize that pause features may
be useful if informative turns tend to elicit a large
number of responses in a short period of time, or if
they tend to quickly follow a preceding turn, to give
two examples.
There are two features related to the conversation
participants directly. One measures how dominant
the current participant is in terms of words in the
conversation (DOM), and the other is a binary fea-
ture indicating whether the current participant ini-
tiated the conversation (BEGAUTH), based simply
on whether they were the first contributor. It is hy-
pothesized that informative sentences may more of-
ten belong to participants who lead the conversation
or have a good deal of dominance in the discussion.
There are several lexical features used in these
experiments. For each unique word, we calculate
two conditional probabilities. For each conversation
participant, we calculate the probability of the par-
ticipant given the word, estimating the probability
from the actual term counts, and take the maximum
of these conditional probabilities as our first term
score, which we will call Sprob.
Sprob(t) = max
S
p(S|t)
where t is the word and S is a participant. For ex-
ample, if the word budget is used ten times in total,
with seven uses by participant A, three uses by par-
ticipant B and no uses by the other participants, then
the Sprob score for this term is 0.70. The intuition
is that certain words will tend to be associated with
one conversation participant more than the others,
owing to varying interests and expertise between the
people involved.
Using the same procedure, we calculate a score
called Tprob based on the probability of each turn
given the word.
Tprob(t) = max
T
p(T |t)
The motivating factor for this metric is that certain
words will tend to cluster into a small number of
turns, owing to shifting topics within a conversation.
Having derived Sprob and Tprob, we then calcu-
late several sentence-level features based on these
term scores. Each sentence has features related to
max, mean and sum of the term scores for the
words in that sentence (MXS, MNS and SMS for
Sprob, and MXT, MNT and SMT for Tprob). Us-
ing a vector representation, we calculate the cosine
between the conversation preceding the given sen-
tence and the conversation subsequent to the sen-
tence, first using Sprob as the vector weights (COS1)
and then using Tprob as the vector weights (COS2).
This is motivated by the hypothesis that informative
sentences might change the conversation in some
fashion, leading to a low cosine between the preced-
ing and subsequent portions. We similarly calculate
two scores measuring the cosine between the cur-
rent sentence and the rest of the converation, using
each term-weight metric as vector weights (CENT1
for Sprob and CENT2 for Tprob). This measures
777
Feature ID Description
MXS max Sprob score
MNS mean Sprob score
SMS sum of Sprob scores
MXT max Tprob score
MNT mean Tprob score
SMT sum of Tprob scores
TLOC position in turn
CLOC position in conv.
SLEN word count, globally normalized
SLEN2 word count, locally normalized
TPOS1 time from beg. of conv. to turn
TPOS2 time from turn to end of conv.
DOM participant dominance in words
COS1 cos. of conv. splits, w/ Sprob
COS2 cos. of conv. splits, w/ Tprob
PENT entro. of conv. up to sentence
SENT entro. of conv. after the sentence
THISENT entropy of current sentence
PPAU time btwn. current and prior turn
SPAU time btwn. current and next turn
BEGAUTH is first participant (0/1)
CWS rough ClueWordScore
CENT1 cos. of sentence & conv., w/ Sprob
CENT2 cos. of sentence & conv., w/ Tprob
Table 1: Features Key
whether the candidate sentence is generally similar
to the conversation overall.
There are three word entropy features, calculated
using the formula
went(s) =
?N
i=1 p(xi) ? ? log(p(xi))
( 1N ? ? log( 1N )) ? M
where s is a string of words, xi is a word type
in that string, p(xi) is the probability of the word
based on its normalized frequency in the string, N
is the number of word types in the string, and M is
the number of word tokens in the string.
Note that word entropy essentially captures infor-
mation about type-token ratios. For example, if each
word token in the string was a unique type then the
word entropy score would be 1. We calculate the
word entropy of the current sentence (THISENT),
as well as the word entropy for the conversation up
until the current sentence (PENT) and the word en-
tropy for the conversation subsequent to the current
sentence (SENT). We hypothesize that informative
sentences themselves may have a diversity of word
types, and that if they represent turning points in the
conversation they may affect the entropy of the sub-
sequent conversation.
Finally, we include a feature that is a rough ap-
proximation of the ClueWordScore (CWS) used by
Carenini et al (2007). For each sentence we remove
stopwords and count the number of words that occur
in other turns besides the current turn. The CWS is
therefore a measure of conversation cohesion.
For ease of reference, we hereafter refer to this
conversation features system as ConverSumm.
5 Comparison Summarization Systems
In order to compare the ConverSumm system with
state-of-the-art systems for meeting and email sum-
marization, respectively, we also present results us-
ing the features described by Murray and Renals
(2008) for meetings and the features described by
Rambow (2004) for email. Because the work by
Murray and Renals used the same dataset, we can
compare our scores directly. However, Rambow car-
ried out summarization work on a different, unavail-
able email corpus, and so we re-implemented their
summarization system for our current email data.
In their work on meeting summarization, Murray
and Renals creating 700-word summaries of each
meeting using several classes of features: prosodic,
lexical, structural and speaker-related. While there
are two features overlapping between our systems
(word-count and speaker/participant dominance),
their system is primarily domain-dependent in its
use of prosodic features while our features represent
a more general conversational view.
Rambow presented 14 features for the summa-
rization task, including email-specific information
such as the number of recipients, number of re-
sponses, and subject line overlap. There is again a
slight overlap in features between our two systems,
as we both include length and position of the sen-
tence in the thread/conversation.
6 Results
Here we present, in turn, the summarization results
for meeting and email data.
6.1 Meeting Summarization Results
Figure 1 shows the F statistics for each Conver-
summ feature in the meeting data, providing a mea-
sure of the usefulness of each feature in discriminat-
ing between the positive and negative classes. Some
778
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
CENT2
CENT1
CWS
BEGAUTH
SPAU
PPAU
THISENT
SENT
PENT
COS2
COS1
DOM
TPOS2
TPOS1
SLEN2
SLEN
CLOC
TLOC
SMT
MNT
MXT
SMS
MNS
MXS
f s
ta
tis
tic
feature ID (see key)
manual
ASR
Figure 1: Feature F statistics for AMI meeting corpus
System Weighted F-Score AUROC
Speech - Man 0.23 0.855
Speech - ASR 0.24 0.850
Conv. - Man 0.23 0.852
Conv. - ASR 0.22 0.853
Table 2: Weighted F-Scores and AUROCs for Meeting
Summaries
features such as participant dominance have very
low F statistics because each sentence by a given
participant will receive the same score; so while the
feature itself may have a low score because it does
not discriminate informative versus non-informative
sentences on its own, it may well be useful in con-
junction with the other features. The best individual
ConverSumm features for meeting summarization
are sentence length (SLEN), sum of Sprob scores,
sum of Tprob scores, the simplified CWS score
(CWS), and the two centroid measures (CENT1 and
CENT2). The word entropy of the candidate sen-
tence is very effective for manual transcripts but
much less effective on ASR output. This is due to
the fact that ASR errors can incorrectly lead to high
entropy scores.
Table 2 provides the weighted f-scores for all
summaries of the meeting data, as well as AUROC
scores for the classifiers themselves. For our 700-
word summaries, the Conversumm approach scores
comparably to the speech-specific approach on both
manual and ASR transcripts according to weighted
f-score. There are no significant differences accord-
ing to paired t-test. For the AUROC measures, there
are again no significant differences between the con-
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
TP
FP
lexical features
structural features
participant features
length features
Fea. Subset AUROC
Structural 0.652
Participant 0.535
Length 0.837
Lexical 0.852
Figure 2: AUROC Values for Feature Subclasses, AMI
Corpus
versation summarizers and speech-specific summa-
rizers. The AUROC for the conversation system
is slightly lower on manual transcripts and slightly
higher when applied to ASR output.
For all systems the weighted f-scores are some-
what low. This is partly owing to the fact that out-
put summaries are very short, leading to high pre-
cision and low recall. The low f-scores are also in-
dicative of the difficulty of the task. Human perfor-
mance, gauged by comparing each annotator?s sum-
maries to the remaining annotators? summaries, ex-
hibits an average weighted f-score of 0.47 on the
same test set. The average kappa value on the test set
is 0.48, showing the relatively low inter-annotator
agreement that is typical of summarization annota-
tion. There is no additional benefit to combining the
conversational and speech-specific features. In that
case, the weighted f-scores are 0.23 for both manual
and ASR transcripts. The overall AUROC is 0.85
for manual transcripts and 0.86 for ASR.
We can expand the features analysis by consid-
ering the effectiveness of certain subclasses of fea-
tures. Specifically, we group the summarization fea-
tures into lexical, structural, participant and length
features. Figure 2 shows the AUROCs for the fea-
ture subset classifiers, illustrating that the lexical
subclass is very effective while the length features
also constitute a challenging baseline. A weakness
779
System Pyramid Precision AUROC
Rambow 0.50 0.64
Conv. 0.46 0.75
Table 3: Pyramid Precision and AUROCs for Email Sum-
maries
of systems that depend heavily on length features,
however, is that recall scores tend to decrease be-
cause the extracted units are much longer - weighted
recall scores for the 700 word summaries are sig-
nificantly worse according to paired t-test (p<0.05)
when using just length features compared to the full
feature set.
6.2 Email Summarization Results
Figure 3 shows the F statistic for each ConverSumm
feature in the email data.The two most useful fea-
tures are sentence length and CWS. The Sprob and
Tprob features rate very well according to the F
statistic. The two centroid features incorporating
Sprob and Tprob are comparable to one another and
are very effective features as well.
 0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0.06
 0.07
 0.08
 0.09
CENT2
CENT1
CWS
BEGAUTH
SPAU
PPAU
THISENT
SENT
PENT
COS2
COS1
DOM
TPOS2
TPOS1
SLEN2
SLEN
CLOC
TLOC
SMT
MNT
MXT
SMS
MNS
MXS
f s
ta
tis
tic
feature ID (see key)
Figure 3: Feature F statistics for Enron email corpus
After creating 30% word compression summaries
using both the ConverSumm and Rambow ap-
proaches, we score the 39 thread summaries using
Pyramid Precision. The results are given in Table 3.
On average, the Rambow system is slightly higher
with a score of 0.50 compared with 0.46 for the con-
versational system, but there is no statistical differ-
ence according to paired t-test.
The average AUROC for the Rambow system is
0.64 compared with 0.75 for the ConverSumm sys-
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
TP
FP
lexical features
structural features
participant features
length features
Fea. Subset AUROC
Structural 0.63
Participant 0.51
Length 0.71
Lexical 0.71
Figure 4: AUROC Values for Feature Subclasses, Enron
Corpus
tem, with ConverSumm system significantly better
according to paired t-test (p<0.05). Random classi-
fication performance would yield an AUROC of 0.5.
Combining the Rambow and ConverSumm fea-
tures does not yield any overall improvement. The
Pyramid Precision score in that case is 0.47 while
the AUROC is 0.74.
Figure 4 illustrates that the lexical and length
features are the most effective feature subclasses,
though the best results overall are derived from a
combination of all feature classes.
7 Discussion
According to multiple evaluations, the ConverSumm
features yield competitive summarization perfor-
mance with the comparison systems. There is a clear
set of features that are similarly effective in both do-
mains, especially CWS, the centroid features, the
Sprob features, the Tprob features, and sentence
length. There are other features that are more ef-
fective in one domain than the other. For exam-
ple, the BEGAUTH feature, indicating whether the
current participant began the conversation, is more
useful for emails. It seems that being the first per-
son to speak in a meeting is not as significant as
being the first person to email in a given thread.
SLEN2, which normalizes sentence length by the
longest sentence in the turn, also is much more ef-
780
fective for emails. The reason is that many meet-
ing turns consist of a single, brief utterance such as
?Okay, yeah.?
The finding that the summary evaluations are
not significantly worse on noisy ASR compared
with manual transcripts has been previously attested
(Valenza et al, 1999; Murray et al, 2005a), and it is
encouraging that our ConverSumm features are sim-
ilarly robust to this noisy data.
8 Conclusion
We have shown that a general conversation summa-
rization approach can achieve results on par with
state-of-the-art systems that rely on features specific
to more focused domains. We have introduced a
conversation feature set that is similarly effective in
both the meetings and emails domains. The use of
multiple summarization evaluation techniques con-
firms that the system is robust, even when applied
to the noisy ASR output in the meetings domain.
Such a general conversation summarization system
is valuable in that it may save time and effort re-
quired to implement unique systems in a variety of
conversational domains.
We are currently working on extending our sys-
tem to other conversation domains such as chats,
blogs and telephone speech. We are also investigat-
ing domain adaptation techniques; for example, we
hypothesize that the relatively well-resourced do-
main of meetings can be leveraged to improve email
results, and preliminary findings are encouraging.
References
R. Bekkerman, A. McCallum, and G. Huang. 2004. Au-
tomatic categorization of email into folders: Bench-
mark experiments on Enron and SRI corpora. Tech-
nical Report IR-418, Center of Intelligent Information
Retrieval, UMass Amherst.
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of MMR,
diversity-based reranking for reordering documents
and producing summaries. In Proc. of ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval 1998, Melbourne, Australia, pages 335?
336.
G. Carenini, R. Ng, and X. Zhou. 2007. Summarizing
email conversations with clue words. In Proc. of ACM
WWW 07, Banff, Canada.
G. Carenini, X. Zhou, and R. Ng. 2008. Summarizing
emails with conversational cohesion and subjectivity.
In Proc. of ACL 2008, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
J. Carletta, S. Ashby, S. Bourban, M. Flynn, M. Guille-
mot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec, V. Karaiskos, W. Kraaij,
M. Kronenthal, G. Lathoud, M. Lincoln, A. Lisowska,
I. McCowan, W. Post, D. Reidsma, and P. Well-
ner. 2005. The AMI meeting corpus: A pre-
announcement. In Proc. of MLMI 2005, Edinburgh,
UK, pages 28?39.
A. Chapanond, M. Krishnamoorthy, and B. Yener. 2005.
Graph theoretic and spectral analysis of enron email
data. Comput. Math. Organ. Theory, 11(3):265?281.
Y-W. Chen and C-J. Lin. 2006. Combining SVMs
with various feature selection strategies. In I. Guyon,
S. Gunn, M. Nikravesh, and L. Zadeh, editors, Feature
extraction, foundations and applications. Springer.
S. Corston-Oliver, E. Ringger, M. Gamon, and R. Camp-
bell. 2004. Integration of email and task lists. In Proc.
of CEAS 2004, Mountain View, CA, USA.
C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks.
Machine Learning, 20(3):273?297.
J. Diesner, T. Frantz, and K. Carley. 2005. Communi-
cation networks from the enron email corpus ?it?s al-
ways about the people. enron is no different?. Comput.
Math. Organ. Theory, 11(3):201?228.
M. Galley. 2006. A skip-chain conditional random
field for ranking meeting utterances by importance. In
Proc. of EMNLP 2006, Sydney, Australia, pages 364?
372.
T. Hain, L. Burget, J. Dines, G. Garau, V. Wan,
M. Karafiat, J. Vepa, and M. Lincoln. 2007. The
AMI system for transcription of speech in meetings.
In Proc. of ICASSP 2007,, pages 357?360.
B. Klimt and Y. Yang. 2004. Introducing the enron cor-
pus. In Proc. of CEAS 2004, Mountain View, CA, USA.
S. Maskey and J. Hirschberg. 2005. Comparing lexial,
acoustic/prosodic, discourse and structural features for
speech summarization. In Proc. of Interspeech 2005,
Lisbon, Portugal, pages 621?624.
S. Muresan, E. Tzoukermann, and J. Klavans. 2001.
Combining linguistic and machine learning techniques
for email summarization. In Proc. of ConLL 2001,
Toulouse, France.
G. Murray and S. Renals. 2008. Meta comments for
summarizing meeting speech. In Proc. of MLMI 2008,
Utrecht, Netherlands.
G. Murray, S. Renals, and J. Carletta. 2005a. Extrac-
tive summarization of meeting recordings. In Proc. of
Interspeech 2005, Lisbon, Portugal, pages 593?596.
G. Murray, S. Renals, J. Carletta, and J. Moore. 2005b.
Evaluating automatic summaries of meeting record-
ings. In Proc. of the ACL 2005 MTSE Workshop, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA, pages 33?40.
781
G. Murray, S. Renals, J. Moore, and J. Carletta. 2006. In-
corporating speaker and discourse features into speech
summarization. In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL 2006,
New York City, USA, pages 367?374.
G. Murray. 2007. Using Speech-Specific Features for
Automatic Speech Summarization. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh.
A. Nenkova and B. Passonneau. 2004. Evaluating con-
tent selection in summarization: The Pyramid method.
In Proc. of HLT-NAACL 2004, Boston, MA, USA,
pages 145?152.
O. Rambow, L. Shrestha, J. Chen, and C. Lauridsen.
2004. Summarizing email threads. In Proc. of HLT-
NAACL 2004, Boston, USA.
R. Valenza, T. Robinson, M. Hickey, and R. Tucker.
1999. Summarization of spoken audio through infor-
mation extraction. In Proc. of the ESCA Workshop on
Accessing Information in Spoken Audio, Cambridge
UK, pages 111?116.
A. Waibel, M. Bett, M. Finke, and R. Stiefelhagen. 1998.
Meeting browser: Tracking and summarizing meet-
ings. In D. E. M. Penrose, editor, Proc. of the Broad-
cast News Transcription and Understanding Work-
shop, Lansdowne, VA, USA, pages 281?286.
J. Yeh and A. Harnly. 2006. Email thread reassembly
using similarity matching. In Proc of CEAS 2006.
D. Zajic, B. Dorr, and J. Lin. 2008. Single-document and
multi-document summarization techniques for email
threads using sentence compression. Information Pro-
cessing and Management, to appear.
K. Zechner. 2002. Automatic summarization of open-
domain multiparty dialogues in diverse genres. Com-
putational Linguistics, 28(4):447?485.
782
