Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 842?851,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
An Alternative to Head-Driven Approaches for
Parsing a (Relatively) Free Word-Order Language
Reut Tsarfaty Khalil Sima?an Remko Scha
Institute for Logic Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
{r.tsarfaty,k.simaan,r.scha}@uva.nl
Abstract
Applying statistical parsers developed for
English to languages with freer word-
order has turned out to be harder than
expected. This paper investigates the
adequacy of different statistical parsing
models for dealing with a (relatively)
free word-order language. We show
that the recently proposed Relational-
Realizational (RR) model consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art Head-Driven
(HD) models on the Hebrew Treebank.
Our analysis reveals a weakness of HD
models: their intrinsic focus on configu-
rational information. We conclude that the
form-function separation ingrained in RR
models makes them better suited for pars-
ing nonconfigurational phenomena.
1 Introduction
Parsing technology has come a long way since
Charniak (1996) demonstrated that a simple tree-
bank PCFG performs better than any other parser
(with F
1
75 accuracy) on parsing the WSJ Penn
treebank (Marcus et al, 1993). Treebank Gram-
mars (Scha, 1990; Charniak, 1996) trained on
large corpora nowadays present the best available
means to parse natural language text.
The performance curve for parsing the WSJ was
a steep one at first, as the incorporation of no-
tions such as head, distance, subcategorization
(Charniak, 1997; Collins, 1999) brought about
a dramatic increase in parsing accuracy to the
level of F
1
88. Discriminative approaches, Data-
Oriented Parsing (?all-subtrees?) approaches, and
self-training techniques brought further improve-
ments, and recent results are starting to level off at
around F
1
92.1 (McClosky et al, 2008).
As the interest of the NLP community grows
to encompass more languages, we observe efforts
towards adapting an English parser for parsing
other languages (e.g., (Collins et al, 1999)), or
towards designing a language-independent frame-
work based on principles underlying the mod-
els for parsing English (Bikel, 2002). The per-
formance curve for parsing other languages with
these models looks rather different. A case in point
is Modern Standard Arabic. Since the initial ef-
fort of (Bikel, 2002) to parse the Arabic treebank
(Maamouri et al, 2004), which yielded F
1
75 ac-
curacy, four years and successive revisions have
led to no more than F
1
79 (Maamouri et al, 2008).
This pattern from Arabic is not peculiar. The
level of state-of-the-art results for other languages
still lags behind those for English, even after
putting considerable effort into the adaptation.1
Given that these languages are inherently differ-
ent from English and from one another, it appears
that we cannot avoid a question concerning the ad-
equacy of the models used to parse them. That is,
given the properties of a language, which model-
ing strategy would be appropriate for parsing it?
Until recently, there has been practically
no computationally affordable alternative to the
Head-Driven (HD) approach in the development
of phrase-structure based statistical parsing mod-
els. Recently, we proposed the Relational-
Realizational (RR) approach that rests upon differ-
ent premises (Tsarfaty and Sima?an, 2008). The
question of how the RR model fares against the
HD models that have so far been predominantly
used has never been tackled. Yet, it is precisely
such a comparison that can shed new light on the
question of adequacy we posed above.
Empirically quantifying the effects of differ-
ent modeling choices has been addressed for En-
glish by, e.g., (Johnson, 1998; Klein and Manning,
2003), and for German by, e.g., (Dubey, 2004;
1Consider, e.g., ?The PaGe shared task on parsing Ger-
man? (Kubler, 2008), reporting F
1
75, F
1
79, F
1
83 for the
participating parsers.
842
Rafferty and Manning, 2008). This paper provides
an empirical systematic comparison of conceptu-
ally different modeling strategies with respect to
parsing Hebrew. This comparison is intended to
provide a first answer to the question of parser ad-
equacy in the face of word-order freedom.
Our two empirical results are unequivocal.
Firstly, RR models significantly outperform HD
models (about 2 points absolute improvement in
F
1
) in parsing the Modern Hebrew treebank. In
particular, RR models show better performance
in identifying the constituents for which syntactic
positions are relatively free. Secondly, we show
a novel variation of the HD model, incorporating
the Relational notions of the RR model, on the hy-
pothesis that this might bridge the gap. The RR
model remains superior.
Our post-experimental analysis shows that HD
modeling is inherently problematic for parsing a
language with freer word-order because of the
hard-wiring of notions such as left, right and dis-
tance from the head. RR models, taking a prin-
cipled approach towards capturing variable form-
function correspondence patterns, are better suited
for parsing nonconfigurational phenomena.
2 The Data
This section describes some properties of Modern
Hebrew (henceforth, Hebrew) that make it signifi-
cantly different from English. These properties af-
fect the syntactic representations found in the He-
brew Treebank and the kind of syntactic phenom-
ena a parser for Hebrew has to cope with.
Modern Hebrew is a Semitic language with a
canonical SVO word-order pattern,2 yet it allows
considerable freedom in the placement of syntac-
tic constituents in a clause. For example, linguistic
elements of any kind may be fronted, triggering
an inversion familiar from Germanic languages
as in (1b) (Triggered Inversion (TI) in (Shlonsky,
1997)). Under some information structuring con-
ditions, Verb Initial (VI) constructions are also al-
lowed, as in (1c) (Melnik, 2002). All sentences
in (1) thus mean ?Dani gave the present to Dina?,
despite their different word-ordering.
(1) a. dani natan et hamatana ledina
Dani gave ACC the-present to-Dina
b. et hamatana natan dani ledina
ACC the-present gave Dani to-Dina
2SVO is an abbreviation for the Subject-Verb-Object type
in the basic word-order typology of (Greenberg, 1963).
Word Order Frequency Relative Frequency
SV 1612 41%
VS 1144 29%
No S 624 16%
No V 550 14%
Table 1: Modern Hebrew Predicative Clause-
Types in 3930 Predicative Matrix Clauses in the
Training Set of the Modern Hebrew Treebank.
c. natan dani et hamatana ledina
gave Dani ACC the-present to-Dina
A corpus study we conducted on a fragment of
the Modern Hebrew treebank reveals that although
there is a significant number of subjects preceding
verbs in simple (matrix) clauses (41%), there are
also a fair number of sentences for which this or-
der is reversed (29%), and there is evidence for
other configurations, such as empty realization of
subjects (16%) and non-verbal realization of pred-
icates (14%).
In the face of such lack of consistency in its
configurational position, the grammatical function
Object in Hebrew is indicated by Differential Ob-
ject Marking (DOM) (Aissen, 2003). NP objects
in Hebrew are marked for accusativity (using the
marker et) if they are also marked for definiteness
(indicated by the prefix ha). So, in contrast with
(2a)-(2b), the indefinite object renders (2c) un-
grammatical, and the missing accusativity renders
(2d) awkward. The fact that marking NP objects
involves the joint contribution of multiple surface
elements (et, ha) contributing features to the NP
constituent is referred to as extended exponence
(Matthews, 1993, p. 182).
(2) a. dani natan matana ledina
Dani gave present to-Dina
?Dani gave a present to Dina?
b. dani natan et hamatana ledina
Dani gave ACC the-present to-Dina
?Dani gave the present to Dina?
c. *dani natan et matana ledina
Dani gave ACC present to-Dina
d. ??dani natan hamatana ledina
Dani gave the-present to-Dina
These data pose a challenge to generative pars-
ing models, as they would be required to gener-
ate alternative word-order patterns while maintain-
ing a coherent pattern of object marking, encom-
843
passing the contribution of multiple surface expo-
nents. The question this paper addresses is there-
fore what kind of modeling approach would be ad-
equate for modeling the interplay between syntax
and morphology in marking grammatical relations
in Hebrew, as reflected by the sentence-pair (3).
They both mean, roughly, ?Dani gave the present
to Dina yesterday; their word-order vary, but the
pattern of object marking is retained.
(3) a. dani natan etmol et hamatana ledina
Dani gave yesterday ACC the-present
to-Dina
b. et hamatana natan etmol dani ledina
ACC the-present gave yesterday dani
to-dina
3 The Models
The different models we experiment with are all
trained on syntactic structures annotated in the
Modern Hebrew Treebank (Sima?an et al, 2001).
The native representation of clause-level cate-
gories in the Treebank employs flat structures.
This choice was made due to the lack of empirical
evidence in Hebrew for grouping freely positioned
syntactic elements to form a constituent.3 In order
to compensate for the ambiguity in the interpreta-
tion of flat structures, additional information such
as morphological marking and grammatical func-
tion labels is added to the phrase-structure trees.
3.1 The State-Splits Approach
The simplest way to encode grammatical func-
tions information on top of the phrase-structure
representation in the treebank is by decorating
non-terminal nodes with morphological or func-
tional features, similarly to the rich representation
format of syntactic categories in GPSG. This is
the approach taken by the annotators of the He-
brew treebank in which information about mor-
phological marking appears at multiple levels of
constituency (Guthmann et al, 2009), and func-
tional features (such as subject, object, etc.) deco-
rate phrase-level constituent labels (Sima?an et al,
2001). The S-level representation of our example
sentences (3a)?(3b) then would be as we depict
in figure 1, which can be read off as feature-rich
3Such clauses are defined formally as exocentric in for-
mal theories of syntax, and are used to describe syntactic
structures in, e.g., Tagalog, Hungarian and Warlpiri (Bres-
nan, 2001, page 110). This flat representation format is char-
acteristic of treebanks for other languages with relatively-free
word-order as well, such as German (cf. (Kubler, 2008)).
PCFG productions. We refer to this approach as
the State-Splits (SP) approach, which serves as the
baseline for the rest of our investigation.
3.2 The Head-Driven Approach
Following the linguistic wisdom that the inter-
nal organization of syntactic constituents revolves
around their heads, Head-Driven (HD) models
have been proposed by (Magerman, 1995; Char-
niak, 1997; Collins, 1999). In a generative HD
model, the head daughter is generated first, con-
ditioned on properties of the mother node. Then,
sisters of the head daughter are generated condi-
tioned on the head, typically by left and right gen-
eration processes. Overall, HD processes have the
modeling advantage that they capture structurally-
marked positions that characterize the argument
structure of the sentence. The simplest possible
process uses unigram probabilities, but (Klein and
Manning, 2003) show that using vertical and hori-
zontal Markovization improves parsing accuracy.4
An unlexicalized generative HD model will
generate our two example sentences as we illus-
trate in figure 2. The generation of the context-
free events in figure 1 is then broken down to
seven different context-free parameters each, en-
coding head-parent and head-sister structural rela-
tionships ? the latter mediated with a structurally-
marked delta function (?
i
). The rich morpho-
logical representation of phrase-level NP objects
(+def/acc), for instance, is conditioned on the
head sister, its direction, and the distance from the
head (check, e.g., nodes ?
L
1
,?
R
2
).
3.3 The Relational-Realizational Approach
The Relational-Realizational (RR) parsing model
of (Tsarfaty and Sima?an, 2008) similarly decom-
poses the generation of the context-free events in
figure 1 into multiple independent parameters, but
does so in a conceptually different way. Instead of
decomposing a context-free event to head and sis-
ters, the RR model is best viewed as a generative
grammar that decomposes it to form and function.
The RR grammar first generates a set of gram-
matical functions depicting the Relational Net-
work (RN) (Perlmutter, 1982) of the clause. This
4The success of Head-Driven models (Charniak, 1997;
Collins, 2003) was initially attributed to the fact that they
were fully lexicalized, but (Klein and Manning, 2003) show
that an unlexicalized model combining Head-Driven Marko-
vian processes with linguistically motivated state-splits can
approach the performance of fully lexicalized models.
844
(3a) S
NP-SBJ
Dani
VP-PRD
natan
gave
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
NP
+D+ACC
-OBJ
et-hamatana
the-present
PP-COM
le-dina
to-Dina
(3b) S
NP
+D+ACC
-OBJ
et-ha-matana
the-present
VP-PRD
natan
gave
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
NP-SBJ
Dani
Dani
PP-COM
le-dina
to-Dina
Figure 1: The State-Splits Approach for Ex. (3)
(3a) S
V P@S
L,?
L
1
, V P@S
NP
Dani
Dani
HEAD,V P@S
VP
natan
gave
R,?
R
1
, V P@S
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
R,?
R
2
, V P@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-ha-matana
the-Present
R,?
R
3
, V P@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
(3b) S
V P@S
L,?
L1
, V P@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-ha-matana
the-present
HEAD,V P@S
VP
natan
gave
R,?
R
1
, V P@S
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
R,?
R
2
, V P@S
NP
Dani
Dani
R,?
R
3
, V P@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
Figure 2: The Head-Driven Approach for Ex. (3)
(3a) S
{SBJ,PRD,OBJ,COM}@S
SBJ@S
NP
Dani
Dani
PRD@S
VP
natan
gave
PRD : OBJ@S
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
OBJ@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-hamatana
the-present
COM@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
(3b) S
{SBJ,PRD,OBJ,COM}@S
OBJ@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-ha-matana
the-Present
PRD@S
VP
natan
gave
PRD : SBJ@S
ADVP@S
etmol
yesterday
SBJ@S
NP
Dani
Dani
COM@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
Figure 3: The Relational-Realizational Approach
RN provides an abstract set-theoretic representa-
tion of the argument structure of the clause.5 This
is called the projection phase. Then an ordering
of the grammatical relations is generated, includ-
ing reserved contextual slots for adjunction and/or
punctuation marks. This is called the configura-
tion phase. Finally, each of the grammatical func-
tion labels and adjunction slots gets realized as a
morphosyntactic representation (a category label
plus dominated morphological features) of the re-
spective daughter constituent. This is called the
realization phase.6
Figure 3 shows the generation of sentences
(3a)?(3b) following the projection, configuration
and realization phases corresponding to the top-
down context-free layers of the tree. In both
cases, the same relational network is generated,
capturing the fact that they have the same argu-
ment structure. Then the different orderings of
the grammatical elements are generated, reserving
an adjunction slot for sentential modification (la-
beled by short context). Interestingly, the HD/RR
models for our sentences are of comparable size
(seven parameters) but the parameter types en-
code radically different notions. Illustrative of the
difference is the realization of a morphologically
marked NP object. In the RR model this is con-
ditioned on a grammatical relation (check, for in-
stance, node OBJ@S) and in the HD model it is
conditioned on linear ordering or configurational
notions such as left, right and distance.
4 Experiments
Goal We set out to compare the performance
of the different modeling approaches for pars-
ing Modern Hebrew. Considerable effort was de-
voted to making the models strictly comparable,
in terms of preparing the data, defining statistical
events, and unifying the rules determining cross-
cutting linguistic notions (e.g., heads and predi-
cates, grammatical functions and subcat sets). We
spell out some of the setup considerations below.
Data We use the Modern Hebrew treebank
(MHTB) (Sima?an et al, 2001) consisting of 6501
sentences from news-wire texts, morphologically
analyzed and syntactically annotated as phrase-
5Unlike in HD models or dependency grammars, the head
predicative element has no distinguished status here.
6Realization of adjunction slots (but not of function la-
bels) may generate multiple sisters adjoining at a single
position.
845
GF Description Applicable to. . .
PRD Predicative Elements VP, PREDP
SBJ Grammatical Subjects NP, SBAR
OBJ Direct Objects NP
COM Indirect Objects NP, PP
FInite Complements SBAR
IC Infinitival Complements VP
CNJ A Conjunct within
a Conjunction Structure All
Table 2: Grammatical Functions in the MHTB
SP-PCFG Expansion P(C
l
n
, . . . , C
h
, . . . , C
r
n
|P )
HD-PCFG Head P(C
h
|P )
Left Branch? P(L:?
l
1
, H:?
h
|C
h
, P )
Right Branch? P(C
h
, R:?
r
1
|?
h
, C
h
, P )
Left Arg/Mod P(C
l
i
,?
l
i+1
| L ,?
l
i
, C
h
, P )
Right Arg/Mod P(C
r
i
,?
r
i+1
| R ,?
r
i
, C
h
, P )
Left Final? P(C
1
| L ,?
l
n?1
, C
h
, P )
Right Final? P(C
n
| R ,?
r
n?1
, C
h
, P )
RR-PCFG Projection P({gr
1
, . . . , gr
m
}|P )
Configuration P(?gr
1
, . . . , gr
m
?|{gr
1
, . . . , gr
m
}P )
Realization P(C
j
|gr
j
, P )
Adjunction P(C
j
1
, . . . , C
j
n
|gr
j
: gr
j+1
, P )
Table 3: PCFG Parameter Classes for All Models
structure trees. In our version of the MHTB, def-
initeness and accusativity features are percolated
from the PoS-tags level to phrase-level categories,
extending the procedure of (Guthmann et al,
2009). For all models, we applied non-terminal
state-splits distinguishing finite from non-finite
verb forms and possessive from non-possessive
noun phrases. We head-annotated the treebank,
and based on the ?subject?, ?object?, ?complement?
and ?conjunction? labels in the MHTB we devised
an automatic procedure to annotate all the gram-
matical functions indicated in table 2.7
Procedure For all models, we learn a PCFG by
reading off the parameters described in table 3,
in accordance with the trees depicted in figures
1?3.8 For all models, we use relative frequency
estimates. For lexical parameters, we use a sim-
ple smoothing procedure assigning probability to
unknown words using the per-tag distribution of
rare words (?rare? threshold set to < 2). The in-
put to our parser consists of morphologically seg-
mented surface forms, and the parser has to as-
7The enhanced corpus will be available at www.
science.uva.nl/
?
rtsarfat/resources.htm.
8Our training procedure is strictly equivalent to the
transform-detransform methodology of (Johnson, 1998), but
we implement a tree-traverse procedure as in (Bikel, 2002)
collecting all parameters per event at once.
sign the syntactic as well as morphological anal-
ysis to the surface segments.9 We use the stan-
dard development/training/test split as in (Tsarfaty
and Sima?an, 2008). Since our goal is a detailed
comparison and fine-grained analysis of the results
we concentrate on the development set. We use
a general-purpose CKY parser (Schmid, 2004) to
exhaustively parse the sentences, and we strip off
all model-specific information prior to evaluation.
Evaluation We use standard Parseval measures
calculated for the original, flat, canonical repre-
sentation of the parse trees.10 We report Pre-
cision/Recall for the coarse-grained non-terminal
categories. In addition to overall Parseval scores
we report the accuracy results Per Syntactic Cate-
gory. We further report model size in terms of the
number of parameters. As is well known in Ma-
chine Learning, models with more parameters re-
quire more data to learn, and are more vulnerable
to sparseness. In our evaluation we thus follow the
rule of thumb that (all else being equal) for mod-
els of equal size the better performing model is
preferred, and for models with equal performance,
the smaller one is preferred.
5 Results and Analysis
5.1 Overall Results
Table 4 shows the parsing results for the State-
Split (SP) PCFG, the Head-Driven (HD) PCFG
and the Relational-Realizational (RR) PCFG
models on parsing the Modern Hebrew Treebank,
with definiteness and accusativity marked on PoS-
tags as well as phrase-level categories. For all
models, we experiment with grandparent encod-
ing. For non-HD models, we also examine the
utility of a head-category split.11
9This setup is more difficult than, e.g., the Arabic parsing
setup of (Bikel, 2002), as they assume gold-standard pos-tags
as input. Yet it is easier than the setup of (Tsarfaty, 2006;
Goldberg and Tsarfaty, 2008) which uses unsegmented sur-
face forms as input. The decision to use segmented and un-
tagged forms was made to retain a realistic scenario. Mor-
phological analysis is known to be ambiguous, and we do
not assume that morphological features are known up front.
Morphological segmentation is also ambiguous, but for our
purposes it is unavoidable. When comparing different mod-
els on an individual sentence they may propose segmenta-
tion to sequences of different lengths, for which accuracy re-
sults cannot be faithfully compared. See (Tsarfaty, 2006) for
discussion.
10The flat canonical representation also allows for a fair
comparison that is not biased by the differing branching fac-
tors of the different models.
11In HD models, a head-tag is already assumed in the con-
ditioning context for sister nodes (Klein and Manning, 2003).
846
SP-PCFG
Grand-Parent ? ? + +
Head-Tag ? + ? +
Prec/Rec 70.05/72.40 71.14/72.03 74.66/74.35 71.99/72.17
(#Params) (4995) (8366) (7385) (11633)
HD-PCFG
Grand-Parent ? ? + +
Markov 0 1 0 1
Prec/Rec 66.87/71.64 70.40/74.35 73.04/71.94 73.52/74.84
(#Params) (6678) (10015) (19066) (21399)
RR-PCFG
Grand-Parent ? ? + +
Head Tag ? + ? +
Prec/Rec 69.90/73.96 72.96/75.73 74.19/75.03 76.32/76.51
(#Params) (3791) (7546) (7611) (13618)
Table 4: The Performance of Different Models
in Parsing Hebrew: Parsing Results Prec/Recall
for Sentences of Length ? 40.
For all models, grandparent encoding is help-
ful. For HD models, a higher Markovian order im-
proves performance. This shows that even in He-
brew there are linear-precedence tendencies that
help steer the disambiguation in the right direc-
tion, which is in line with our observation that
word-order patterns in Modern Hebrew are not
completely free (cf. table 1).
The best SP model performs equally or better
than all HD models. This might be due to the
smaller size of SP grammars, resulting in more ro-
bust estimates. But it is remarkable that, given the
feature-rich representation, such a simple treebank
grammar provides better disambiguation capacity
than linguistically articulated HD models. We at-
tribute this to the fact that parent-daughter rela-
tions have a stronger association with grammati-
cal functions than relations between neighbouring
nodes. For Hebrew, such adjacency relations may
be arbitrary due to word-order variability.
Overall, RR models show the best performance
for the set of all models with parent encoding, and
for the set of all models without. Our best RR
model shows 6.6%/8.4% Prec/Rec error reduction
from the best SP model. The Recall improvement
shows that the RR model is much better in gener-
alizing, recovering successfully more of the con-
stituents found in the gold representation. The
best RR model also outperforms HD models with
8.7%/6.7% Prec/Rec error reduction from the best
In our SP or RR models, head-information is used as yet an-
other feature-value pair rather than an object with a distin-
guished status during generation.
Model / SP-PCFG HD-PCFG RR-PCFG
Category
NP 77.39 / 74.32 77.94 / 73.75 78.96 / 76.11
PP 71.78 / 71.14 71.83 / 69.24 74.4 / 72.02
SBAR 55.73 / 59.71 53.79 / 57.49 57.97 / 61.67
ADVP 71.37 / 77.01 72.52 / 73.56 73.57 / 77.59
ADJP 79.37 / 78.96 78.47 / 77.14 78.69 / 78.18
S 73.25 / 79.07 71.07 / 76.49 72.37 / 78.33
SQ 36.00 / 32.14 30.77 / 14.29 55.56 / 17.86
PREDP 36.31 / 39.63 44.74 / 39.63 44.51 / 46.95
VP 76.34 / 80.81 77.33 / 82.51 78.59 / 81.18
Table 5: Per-Category Evaluation of Parsing
Performance for Different Models: Prec/Rec
Per Category Calculated for All Sentences.
HD model. The resulting precision improvement
of the RR relative to HD is larger than the im-
provement relative to SP, and the Recall improve-
ment pattern is reversed. So it seems that the HD
model generalizes better than the SP model, but
also gets generalizations wrong more often than
the SP model.
The RR model combines the generalization
advantage of breaking down context-free events
while it maintains the coherence advantage of
learning flat trees (cf. (Johnson, 1998)). The best
RR model obtains the best performance among
all models: F
1
76.41. To put this result in con-
text, for the setting in which the Arabic parser of
(Maamouri et al, 2008) obtains F
1
78.1, ? i.e.,
with gold standard feature-rich tags ? the best
RR model obtains F
1
83.3 accuracy which is the
best parsing result reported for a Semitic language
so far. RR models also have the advantage of re-
sulting in more compact grammars, which makes
learning and parsing with them much more com-
putationally efficient.
5.2 Per-Category Break-Down Analysis
To understand better the merits of the different
models we conducted a break-down analysis of
performance-per-category for the best performing
models of each kind. The break-down results are
shown in table 5. We divided the table into three
sets of categories: those for which the RR model
gave the best performance, those for which the SP
model gave the best performance, and those for
which there is no clear trend.
The most striking outcome is that the RR model
identifies at higher accuracy precisely those syn-
tactic elements that are freely positioned with re-
847
spect to the head: NPs, PPs, ADVPs and SBARs.
Adjectives, in contrast, have clear ordering con-
straints ? they always appear after the noun. S
level elements, when embedded, always appear
immediately after a conjunction or a relativizer.
In particular, NPs and PPs realize arguments and
adjuncts that may occupy different positions rela-
tive to the head. The RR model is better than the
other models in identifying those elements partly
because morphological information helps to dis-
ambiguate syntactically relevant chunks and make
correct attachment decisions about them.
Remarkably, predicative (verb-less) phrases
(PREDP), which are characteristic of Semitic lan-
guages, are hard to parse, but here too the RR does
slightly better than the other two, as it allows for
variability in the means to realize a (verbal or verb-
less) predicate. Both RR and HD models outper-
form SP for VPs, which is due to the specific na-
ture of VPs in the MHTB ? they exist only for
complement phrases with strict linear ordering.
6 Distances, Functions and
Subcategorization Frames
Markovian processes to the left and to the right of
the head provide a first approximation of the pred-
icate?s argument structure, as they capture trends
in the co-occurrences of constituents reflected in
their pattern of positioning and adjacency. But
as our results so far show, such an approxima-
tion is empirically less rewarding for a language
in which grammatical relations are not tightly cor-
related with structural notions.12
Collins (2003) attempted a more abstract for-
mulation of argument-structure by articulating left
and right subcat-sets. Each set represents those
arguments that are expected to occur at each side
of the head. Argument sisters (?complements?)
are generated if and only if they are required, and
their generation ?cancels? the requirement in the
set. Adjuncts (?modifiers?) may be freely gener-
ated at any position.
At first glance, such a dissociation of configura-
tional positions and subcategorization sets seems
to be more adequate for parsing Hebrew, because
it allows for some variability in the order of gen-
eration. But here too, since the model uses sets of
12Conditioning based on adjacency and distance is also
common inside dependency parsing models, and we conjec-
ture that this is one of the reasons for their difficulty in coping
with freer word-order languages, a difficulty pointed out in
(Nivre et al, 2007).
(3a) S
V P@S
L,{SBJ}, V P@S
NP
Dani
Dani
H,V P@S
VP
natan
gave
R,{OBJ,COM}, V P@S
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
R,{OBJ,COM}, V P@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-ha-matana
the-Present
R,{COM}, V P@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
(3b) S
V P@S
L,{OBJ}, V P@S
NP
+D+ACC
et-ha-matana
the-present
H,V P@S
VP
natan
gave
R,{SBJ,COM}, V P@S
ADVP
etmol
yesterday
R,{SBJ,COM}, V P@S
NP
Dani
Dani
R,{COM}, V P@S
PP
le-dina
to-Dina
Figure 4: The Relational Head-Driven Approach
constituent labels, it disambiguates the grammati-
cal functions of an NP solely based on the direc-
tion of the head, which is adequate for English but
not for Hebrew. In order to relax this association
further, we propose to replace constituent labels
in the subcat-sets with grammatical relations iden-
tical to the functional elements in the relational
network of the RR. This provides means to medi-
ate the cancellation of constituents in the sets with
their functions and correlate it with morphology.
To get an idea of the implications of such a
modeling strategy, let us consider our example
sentences in such a Relational-HD model as de-
picted in figure 4. Both representations share
the event of generating the verbal head. Sisters
are generated conditioned on the head and the
functional elements remaining to be ?cancelled?.
Each of the two trees consists of an event real-
izing an ?object?, one for an NP to the right of
the head, and the other for an NP to its left. In
both cases, an object constituent will be generated
jointly with the morphological features associated
with it. Evidently, when using sets of grammatical
relations instead of constituent-labels, correlation
of morphology and grammatical functions is more
straight-forward to maintain.
848
Model SP-PCFG HD-PCFG HD-PCFG HD-PCFG HD-PCFG RR-PCFG
Type of Distance ? Phrase-Level Intervening Left and Right Left and Right Left and Right Subcat Sets
or Subcategorization State-Splits Verb/Punc #Constituents Constituent Labels Function Labels Configuration
Precision/Recall 70.95/70.32 72.39 / 71.97 72.70 / 74.46 72.42 / 74.29 72.84/74.62 76.32/76.51
(#Params) (13884) (11650) (18058) (16334) (16460) (13618)
Table 6: Incorporating Distance and Grammatical Functions into Head-Driven Parsing Models
Reporting Precison/Recall (#Parameters) for Sentences Length < 40.
6.1 Results and Analysis
Table 6 reports the results of experimenting with
HD models with different instantiations of a dis-
tance function, starting from the standard notion
of (Collins, 2003) and ending with our proposed,
relational, function sets. For all HD models, we
retain the head, left and right generation cycle and
only change the conditioning context (?
i
) for sis-
ter generation.
As a baseline, we show the results of adding
grammatical function information as state-splits
on top of an SP-PCFG.13 This SP model presents
much lower performance than the RR model al-
though they are almost of the same size and they
start off with the same information. This result
shows that sophisticated modeling can blunt the
claws of the sparseness problem. One may ob-
tain the same number of parameters for two dif-
ferent models, but correlate them with more pro-
found linguistic notions in one model than in the
other. In our case, there is more statistical evi-
dence in the data for, e.g., case marking patterns,
than for association of grammatical relations with
structurally-marked positions.
For all HD variations, the RR model contin-
ues to outperform HD models. The function-set
variation performs slightly (but not significantly)
better than the category-set. What seems to be
still standing in the way of getting useful dis-
ambiguation cues for HD models is the fact that
the left and right direction of realization is hard-
wired in their representation. This breaks down a
coherent distribution over morphosyntactic repre-
sentations realizing grammatical relations to arbi-
trary position-dependent fragments, which results
in larger grammars and inferior performance.14
13The startegy of adding grammatical functions as state-
splits is used in, e.g., German (Rafferty and Manning, 2008).
14Due to the difference in the size of the grammars, one
could argue that smoothing will bridge the gap between
the HD and RR modeling strategies. However, the better
size/accuracy trade-off shown here for RR models suggests
that they provide a good bias/variance balancing point, es-
pecially for feature-rich models characterizing morphologi-
7 A Typological Detour
Hebrew, Arabic and other Semitic Languages are
known to be substantially different from English
in that English is strongly configurational. In
configurational languages word-order is fixed, and
information about the grammatical functions of
constituents (e.g., subject or object) is often cor-
related with structurally-marked positions inside
highly-nested constituency structures. Nonconfig-
urational languages (Hale, 1983), in contrast, al-
low for freedom in their word-ordering and infor-
mation about grammatical relations between con-
stituents is often marked by means of morphology.
Configurationality is hardly a clear-cut notion.
The difference in the configurationality level of
different languages is often conceived as depicted
in figure 7. In linguistic typology, the branch
of linguistics that studies the differences between
languages (Song, 2001), the division of labor be-
tween linear ordering and morphological marking
in the realization of grammatical relations is of-
ten viewed as a continuum. Common wisdom has
it that the lower a language is on the configura-
tionality scale, the more morphological marking
we expect to be used (Bresnan, 2001, page 6).
For a statistical parser to cope with nonconfig-
urational phenomena as observed in, for instance,
Hebrew or German, it should allow for flexibil-
ity in the form of realization of the grammati-
cal functions within the phrase-structure represen-
tation of trees. Recent morphological theories
employ Form-Function separation as a widely-
accepted practice for enhancing the adequacy of
models describing variability in the realization of
grammatical properties. Our results suggest that
the adequacy of syntactic processing models is re-
lated to such typological insights as well, and is
enhanced by adopting a similar form-function sep-
aration for expressing grammatical relations.
cally rich languages. A promising strategy then would be to
smooth or split-and-merge (Petrov et al, 2006)) RR-based
models rather than to add an elaborate smoothing component
to configurationally-based HD models.
849
configurational ?????? nonconfigurational
Chinese>English>{German,Hebrew}>Warlpiri
Figure 5: The Configurationality Scale
The HD assumptions take the function of a con-
stituent to be transparently related to its formal
position, which entails word-order rigidity. Such
transparent relations between configurational po-
sitions and grammatical functions are assumed by
other kinds of parsing frameworks such as the ?all-
subtrees? approach of Data-Oriented Parsing, and
the distinction between left and right application
in CCG-based parsers.
The RR modeling strategy stipulates a strict
separation between form ? parametrizing explic-
itly basic word-order (Greenberg, 1963) and mor-
phological realization (Greenberg, 1954) ? and
function ? parametrizing relational networks bor-
rowed from (Perlmutter, 1982) ? which makes
it possible to statistically learn complex form-
function mapping reflected in the data. This is
an adequate means to capture, e.g., morphosyn-
tactic interactions, which characterize the less-
configurational languages on the scale.
8 Conclusion
In our comparison of the HD and RR modeling
approaches, the RR approach is shown to be em-
pirically superior and typologically more adequate
for parsing a language exhibiting word-order vari-
ation interleaved with extended morphology. HD
models are less accurate and more vulnerable to
sparseness as they assume transparent mappings
between form and function, based on left and right
decompositions hard-wired in the HD representa-
tion. RR models, in contrast, employ form and
function separation which allows the statistical
model to learn complex correspondance patterns
reflected in the data. In the future we plan to in-
vestigate how the different models fare against one
another in parsing different languages. In particu-
lar we wish to examine whether parsing different
languages should be pursued by different models,
or whether the RR strategy can effectively cope
with different languages types. Finally, we wish
to explore the implications of RR modeling for
applications that consider the form of expression
in multiple languages, for instance Statistical Ma-
chine Translation (SMT).
9 Acknowledgements
We thank Jelle Zuidema, Inbal Tsarfati, David
McCloskey and Yoav Golderg for excellent com-
ments on earlier versions. We also thank Miles
Osborne and Tikitu de Jager for comments on the
camera-ready draft. All errors are our own. The
work of the first author is funded by the Dutch Sci-
ence Foundation (NWO) grant 017.001.271.
References
J. Aissen. 2003. Differential Object Marking: Iconic-
ity vs. Economy. Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory, 21.
D. M. Bikel. 2002. Design of a Multi-lingual, Parallel-
processing Statistical Parsing Engine. In Proceed-
ings of HLT.
J. Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax. Black-
well Textbooks in Linguistics. Blackwell.
E. Charniak. 1996. Tree-Bank Grammars. In
AAAI/IAAI, Vol. 2.
E. Charniak. 1997. Statistical Parsing with a Context-
Free Grammar and Word Statistics. In AAAI/IAAI.
M. Collins, J. Hajic?, E. Brill, L. Ramshaw, and C. Till-
mann. 1999. A Statistical Parser of Czech. In Pro-
ceedings ACL.
M. Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models for
Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Pennsylvania.
M. Collins. 2003. Head-Driven Statistical Models for
Natural Language Parsing. Computational Linguis-
tics.
A. Dubey. 2004. Statistical Parsing for German:
Modeling syntactic properties and annotation differ-
ences. Ph.D. thesis, Saarland University, Germany.
Y. Goldberg and R. Tsarfaty. 2008. A Single Frame-
work for Joint Morphological Segmentation and
Syntactic Parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.
J.H. Greenberg. 1954. A Quantitative Approach to
the Morphological Typology of Language. In R. F.
Spencer, editor, Method and Perspective in Anthro-
pology. University of Minessota Press.
J. H. Greenberg. 1963. Some Universals of Grammar
with Particular Reference to the Order of Meaning-
ful Elements. In Joseph H. Greenberg, editor, Uni-
versals of Language. MIT Press.
N. Guthmann, Y. Krymolowski, A. Milea, and Y. Win-
ter. 2009. Automatic Annotation of Morpho-
Syntactic Dependencies in a Modern Hebrew Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of TLT.
850
K. L. Hale. 1983. Warlpiri and the Grammar of Non-
Configurational Languages. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 1(1).
M. Johnson. 1998. PCFG Models of Linguistic Tree
Representations. Computational Linguistics, 24(4).
D. Klein and C. Manning. 2003. Accurate Unlexical-
ized Parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.
S. Kubler. 2008. The PaGe Shared task on Parsing
German. In ACL Workshop on Parsing German.
M. Maamouri, A. Bies, T. Buckwalter, and W. Mekki.
2004. The Penn Arabic Treebank: Building a Large-
Scale Annotated Arabic Corpus. In Proceedings of
NEMLAR.
M. Maamouri, A. Bies, and S. Kulick. 2008. Enhanced
Annotation and Parsing of the Arabic treebank. In
Proceedings of INFOS.
D. M. Magerman. 1995. Statistical Decision-Tree
Models for Parsing. In Proceedings of ACL.
M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. A. Marcinkiewicz.
1993. Building a Large Annotated Corpus of En-
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics.
P. H. Matthews. 1993. Morphology. Cambridge.
D. McClosky, E. Charniak, and M. Johnson. 2008.
When is self-training effective for parsing? In Pro-
ceedings of CoLing.
N. Melnik. 2002. Verb-Initial Constructions in Mod-
ern Hebrew. Ph.D. thesis, Berkeley, California.
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Ku?bler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz
Yuret. 2007. The Shared Task on Dependency Pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL Shared Task.
D. M. Perlmutter. 1982. Syntactic Representation,
Syntactic Levels, and the Notion of a Subject. In
Pauline Jacobson and Geoffrey Pullum, editors, The
Nature of Syntactic Representation. Springer.
S. Petrov, L. Barrett, R. Thibaux, and D. Klein. 2006.
Learning Accurate, Compact, and Interpretable Tree
Annotation. In Proceedings of ACL.
A. Rafferty and C. D. Manning. 2008. Parsing Three
German Treebanks: Lexicalized and Unlexicalized
Baselines. In ACL WorkShop on Parsing German.
R. Scha. 1990. Language Theory and Language Tech-
nology; Competence and Performance. In Q. A. M.
de Kort and G. L. J. Leerdam, editors, Computer-
toepassingen in de Neerlandistiek. Almere: LVVN.
H. Schmid. 2004. Efficient Parsing of Highly Am-
biguous Context-Free Grammars with Bit vectors.
In Proceedings of COLING.
U. Shlonsky. 1997. Clause Structure and Word Order
in Hebrew and Arabic. Oxford University Press.
K. Sima?an, A. Itai, Y. Winter, A. Altman, and N. Na-
tiv. 2001. Building a Tree-Bank for Modern He-
brew Text. In Traitement Automatique des Langues.
J. J. Song. 2001. Linguistic Typology: Morphology
and Syntax. Pearson Education Limited, Edinbrugh.
R. Tsarfaty and K. Sima?an. 2008. Relational-
Realizational Parsing. In Proceedings of CoLing.
R. Tsarfaty. 2006. Integrated Morphological and Syn-
tactic Disambiguation for Modern Hebrew. In Pro-
ceeding of ACL-SRW.
851
