Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1484?1492,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Discovery of Term Variation in Japanese Web Search Queries 
 
 Hisami Suzuki, Xiao Li, and Jianfeng Gao 
Microsoft Research, Redmond 
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
{hisamis,xiaol,jfgao}@microsoft.com 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper we address the problem of identi-
fying a broad range of term variations in Japa-
nese web search queries, where these varia-
tions pose a particularly thorny problem due to 
the multiple character types employed in its 
writing system. Our method extends the tech-
niques proposed for English spelling correc-
tion of web queries to handle a wider range of 
term variants including spelling mistakes, va-
lid alternative spellings using multiple charac-
ter types, transliterations and abbreviations. 
The core of our method is a statistical model 
built on the MART algorithm (Friedman, 
2001). We show that both string and semantic 
similarity features contribute to identifying 
term variation in web search queries; specifi-
cally, the semantic similarity features used in 
our system are learned by mining user session 
and click-through logs, and are useful not only 
as model features but also in generating term 
variation candidates efficiently. The proposed 
method achieves 70% precision on the term 
variation identification task with the recall 
slightly higher than 60%, reducing the error 
rate of a na?ve baseline by 38%.  
1 Introduction 
Identification of term variations is fundamental 
to many NLP applications: words (or more gen-
erally, terms) are the building blocks of NLP ap-
plications, and any robust application must be 
able to handle variations in the surface represen-
tation of terms, be it a spelling mistake, valid 
spelling variation, or abbreviation. In search ap-
plications, term variations can be used for query 
expansion, which generates additional query 
terms for better matching with the terms in the 
document set. Identifying term variations is also 
useful in other scenarios where semantic equiva-
lence of terms is sought, as it represents a very 
special case of paraphrase.  
This paper addresses the problem of identify-
ing term variations in Japanese, specifically for 
the purpose of query expansion in web search, 
which appends additional terms to the original 
query string for better retrieval quality. Query 
expansion has been shown to be effective in im-
proving web search results in English, where dif-
ferent methods of generating the expansion terms 
have been attempted, including relevance feed-
back (e.g., Salton and Buckley, 1990), correction 
of spelling errors (e.g., Cucerzan and Brill, 2004), 
stemming or lemmatization (e.g., Frakes, 1992), 
use of manually- (e.g., Aitchison and Gilchrist, 
1987) or automatically- (e.g., Rasmussen 1992) 
constructed thesauri, and Latent Semantic Index-
ing (e.g., Deerwester et al 1990). Though many 
of these methods can be applied to Japanese 
query expansion, there are unique problems 
posed by Japanese search queries, the most chal-
lenging of which is that valid alternative spel-
lings of a word are extremely common due to the 
multiple script types employed in the language. 
For example, the word for 'protein' can be spelled 
as ??????, ?????, ???, ???? 
and so on, all pronounced tanpakushitsu but us-
ing combinations of different script types. We 
give a detailed description of the problem posed 
by the Japanese writing system in Section 2. 
Though there has been previous work on ad-
dressing specific subsets of spelling alterations 
within and across character types in Japanese, 
there has not been any comprehensive solution 
for the purpose of query expansion.  
Our approach to Japanese query expansion is 
unique in that we address the problem compre-
hensively: our method works independently of 
the character types used, and targets a wide range 
of term variations that are both orthographically 
and semantically similar, including spelling er-
rors, valid alternative spellings, transliterations 
and abbreviations. As described in Section 4, we 
define the problem of term variation identifica-
1484
tion as a binary classification task, and build two 
types of classifiers according to the maximum 
entropy model (Berger et al, 1996) and the 
MART algorithm (Friedman, 2001), where all 
term similarity metrics are incorporated as fea-
tures and are jointly optimized. Another impor-
tant contribution of our approach is that we de-
rive our semantic similarity models by mining 
user query logs, which has been explored for the 
purposes of collecting related words (e.g., Jones 
et al, 2006a), improving search results ranking 
(e.g., Craswell and Szummer, 2007) and learning 
query intention (e.g., Li et al, 2008), but not for 
the task of collecting term variations. We show 
that our semantic similarity models are not only 
effective in the term variation identification task, 
but also for generating candidates of term varia-
tions much more efficiently than the standard 
method whose candidate generation is based on 
edit distance metrics.  
2 Term Variations in Japanese 
In this section we give a summary of the Japa-
nese writing system and the problem it poses for 
identifying term variations, and define the prob-
lem we want to solve in this paper.  
2.1 The Japanese Writing System 
There are four different character types that are 
used in Japanese text: hiragana, katakana, kanji 
and Roman alphabet. Hiragana and katakana are 
the two subtypes of kana characters, which are 
syllabic character sets, each with about 50 basic 
characters. There is a one-to-one correspondence 
between hiragana and katakana characters, and, 
as they are phonetic, they can be unambiguously 
converted into a sequence of Roman characters. 
For example, the word for 'mackerel' is spelled in 
hiragana as ?? or in katakana as ??, both of 
which can be transcribed in Roman characters as 
saba, which is how the word is pronounced. 
Kanji characters, on the other hand, are ideo-
graphic and therefore numerous ? more than 
5,000 are in common usage. One difficulty in 
handling Japanese kanji is that each character has 
multiple pronunciations, and the correct pronun-
ciation is determined by the context in which the 
character is used. For instance, the character ? is 
read as kou in the word ?? ginkou 'bank', gyou 
in ?  'column', and i or okona in ???  itta 
'went' or okonatta 'done' depending on the con-
text in which the word is used.1  Proper name 
readings are particularly difficult to disambiguate, 
as their pronunciation cannot be inferred from 
the context (they tend to have the same grammat-
ical function) or from the dictionary (they tend to 
be out-of-vocabulary). Therefore, in Japanese, 
computing a pronunciation-based edit distance 
metric is not straightforward, as it requires esti-
mating the readings of kanji characters.  
2.2 Term Variation by Character Type 
Spelling variations are commonly observed both 
within and across character types in Japanese. 
Within a character type, the most prevalent is the 
variation observed in katakana words. Katakana 
is used to transliterate words from English and 
other foreign languages, and therefore reflects 
the variations in the sound adaptation from the 
source language. For example, the word 
'spaghetti' is transliterated into six different 
forms (?????? supagetti, ???????
supagettii, ?????? supagettei, ?????
supageti, ?????? supagetii, ?????
supagetei) within a newspaper corpus (Masuya-
ma et al, 2004).  
Spelling variants are also prevalent across 
character types: in theory, a word can be spelled 
using any of the character types, as we have seen 
in the example for the word 'protein' in Section 1. 
Though there are certainly preferred character 
types for spelling each word, variations are still 
very common in Japanese text and search queries. 
Alterations are particularly common among hira-
gana, katakana and kanji (e.g. ??~??~ ? sa-
ba 'mackerel'), and between katakana and Roman 
alphabet (e.g. ??????  fedekkusu fedex). 
This latter case constitutes the problem of transli-
teration, which has been extensively studied in 
the context of machine translation (e.g. Knight 
and Graehl, 1998; Bilac and Tanaka, 2004; Brill 
et al, 2001).  
2.3 Term Variation by Re-write Categories 
Table 1 shows the re-write categories of related 
terms observed in web query logs, drawing on 
our own data analysis as well as on previous 
work such as Jones et al (2006a) and Okazaki et 
al. (2008b). Categories 1 though 9 represent 
strictly synonymous relations; in addition, terms 
in Categories 1 through 5 are also similar ortho-
graphically or in pronunciation. Categories 10 
                                                 
1 In a dictionary of 200K entries, we find that on average 
each kanji character has 2.5 readings, with three characters 
(?,?,?) with as many as 11 readings. 
1485
through 12, on the other hand, specify non-
synonymous relations.  
Different sets out of these categories can be 
useful for different purposes. For example, Jones 
et al(2006a; 2006b) target al of these categories, 
as their goal is to collect related terms as broadly 
as possible for the application of sponsored 
search, i.e., mapping search queries to a small 
corpus of advertiser listings. Okazaki et al 
(2008b) define their task narrowly, to focusing 
on spelling variants and inflection, as they aim at 
building lexical resources for the specific domain 
of medical text.  
For web search, a conservative definition of 
the task as dealing only with spelling errors has 
been successful for English; a more general defi-
nition using related words for query expansion 
has been a mixed blessing as it compromises re-
trieval precision. A comprehensive review on 
this topic is provided by Baeza-Yates and Ribei-
ro-Neto (1999). In this paper, therefore, we adopt 
a working definition of the term variation identi-
fication task as including Categories 1 through 5, 
i.e., those that are synonymous and also similar 
in spelling or in pronunciation.2 This definition is 
reasonably narrow so as to make automatic dis-
covery of term variation pairs realistic, while 
covering all common cases of term variation in 
Japanese, including spelling variants and transli-
terations. It is also appropriate for the purpose of 
query expansion: because term variation defined 
in this manner is based on spelling or pronuncia-
tion similarity, their meaning and function tend 
                                                 
2 In reality, Category 3 (Inflection) is extremely rare in Jap-
anese web queries, because nouns do not inflect in Japanese, 
and most queries are nominals.  
to be completely equivalent, as opposed to Cate-
gories 6 through 9, where synonymy is more 
context- or user-dependent. This will ensure that 
the search results by query expansion will avoid 
the problem of compromised precision.  
3 Related Work 
In information retrieval, the problem of vocabu-
lary mismatch between the query and the terms 
in the document has been addressed in many 
ways, as mentioned in Section 1, achieving vary-
ing degrees of success in the retrieval task. In 
particular, our work is closely related to research 
in spelling correction for English web queries 
(e.g., Cucerzan and Brill, 2004; Ahmad and 
Kondrak, 2005; Li et al, 2006; Chen et al, 2007). 
Among these, Li et al (2006) and Chen et al 
(2007) incorporate both string and semantic simi-
larity in their discriminative models of spelling 
correction, similarly to our approach. In Li et al 
(2006), semantic similarity was computed as dis-
tributional similarity of the terms using query 
strings in the log as context. Chen et al (2007) 
point out that this method suffers from the data 
sparseness problem in that the statistics for rarer 
terms are unreliable, and propose using web 
search results as extended contextual information. 
Their method, however, is expensive as it re-
quires web search results for each query-
candidate pair, and also because their candidate 
set, generated using an edit distance function and 
phonetic similarity from query log data, is im-
practically large and must be pruned by using a 
language model. Our approach differs from these 
methods in that we exploit user query logs to 
derive semantic knowledge of terms, which is 
Categories Example in English Example in Japanese 
1. Spelling mistake aple ~ apple ???? guuguru ~ ???? gu-guru 'google' 
2. Spelling variant color ~ colour ??~??~?; ?????~??????? (Cf. Sec.2.2) 
3. Inflection matrix ~ matrices ?? tsukuru 'make' ~ ??? tsukutta 'made' 
4. Transliteration  ?????? ~ fedex 'Fedex' 
5. Abbreviation/ 
Acronym 
macintosh ~ mac ???? sekaiginkou ~ ?? segin 'World Bank'; ???
??? makudonarudo ~ ??? makku 'McDonald's' 
6. Alias republican party ~ gop ???? furansu ~ ? futsu 'France' 
7. Translation ???????? pakisutantaishikan ~ Pakistan embassy 
8. Synonym carcinoma ~ cancer ? koyomi ~ ????? karendaa 'calendar' 
9. Abbreviation 
    (user specific) 
mini ~ mini cooper ??????? kuronekoyamato ~ ???? kuroneko 
(name of a delivery service company)  
10. Generalization nike shoes ~ shoes ???? ?? shibikku buhin 'Civic parts' ~ ? ?? ku-
ruma buhin 'car parts' 
11. Specification ipod ~ ipod nano ??? toukyoueki 'Tokyo station' ~ ?????? tou-
kyouekijikokuhyou 'Tokyo station timetable' 
12. Related windows ~ microsoft ??? toyota 'Toyota' ~ ??? honda 'Honda' 
Table 1: Categories of Related Words Found in Web Search Logs 
1486
used both for the purpose of generating a candi-
date set efficiently and as features in the term 
variation identification model.  
Acquiring semantic knowledge from a large 
quantity of web query logs has become popular 
in recent years. Some use only query strings and 
their counts for learning word similarity (e.g., 
Sekine and Suzuki, 2007; Komachi and Suzuki, 
2008), while others use additional information, 
such as the user session information (i.e., a set of 
queries issued by the same user within a time 
frame, e.g., Jones et al, 2006a) or the URLs 
clicked as a result of the query (e.g., Craswell 
and Szummer, 2007; Li et al, 2008). This addi-
tional data serves as an approximation to the 
meaning of the query; we use both user session 
and click-through data for discovering term vari-
ations.  
Our work also draws on some previous work 
on string transformation, including spelling nor-
malization and transliteration. In addition to the 
simple Levenshtein distance, we also use genera-
lized string-to-string edit distance (Brill and 
Moore, 2000), which we trained on aligned kata-
kana-English word pairs in the same manner as 
Brill et al (2001). As mentioned in Section 2.2, 
our work also tries to address the individual 
problems targeted by such component technolo-
gies as Japanese katakana variation, English-to-
katakana transliteration and katakana-to-English 
back-transliteration in a unified framework.  
4 Discriminative Model of Identifying 
Term Variation 
Recent work in spelling correction (Ahmed and 
Kondrak, 2005; Li et al, 2006; Chen et al, 2007) 
and normalization (Okazaki et al, 2008b) formu-
lates the task in a discriminative framework:  
??  = argmax??gen  ? ?(?|?) 
This model consists of two components: gen(q) 
generates a list of candidates C(q) for an input 
query q, which are then ranked by the ranking 
function P(c|q). In previous work, gen(q) is typi-
cally generated by using an edit distance function 
or using a discriminative model trained for its 
own purpose (Okazaki et al, 2008b), often in 
combination with a pre-complied lexicon. In the 
current work, we generate the list of candidates 
by learning pairs of queries and their re-write 
candidates automatically from query session and 
click logs, which is far more robust and efficient 
than using edit distance functions. We describe 
our candidate generation method in detail in Sec-
tion 5.1.  
Unlike the spelling correction and normaliza-
tion tasks, our goal is to identify term variations, 
i.e., to determine whether each query-candidate 
pair (q,c) constitutes a term variation or not. We 
formulate this problem as a binary classification 
task. There are various choices of classifiers for 
such a task: we chose to build two types of clas-
sifiers that make a binary decision based on the 
probability distribution P(c|q) over a set of fea-
ture functions fi(q,c). In maximum entropy 
framework, this is defined as:  
? ? ? =
exp ???? ?, ? 
?
?=1
 exp ???? ?, ? 
?
?=1?
 
where ?1,?, ?k are the feature weights. The op-
timal set of feature weights ?* is computed by 
maximizing the log-likelihood of the training 
data. We used stochastic gradient descent for 
training the model with a Gaussian prior.   
The second classifier is built on MART 
(Friedman, 2001), which is a boosting algorithm. 
At each boosting iteration, MART builds a re-
gression tree to model the functional gradient of 
the cost function (which is cross entropy in our 
case), evaluated on all training samples.  MART 
has three main parameters: M, the total number 
of boosting iterations, L, the number of leaf 
nodes for each regression tree, and v, the learning 
rate. The optimal values of these parameters can 
be chosen based on performance on a validation 
set.  In our experiments, we found that the per-
formance of the algorithm is relatively insensi-
tive to these parameters as long as they are in a 
reasonable range: given the training set of a few 
thousand samples or more, as in our experiments, 
M=100, L=15, and v=0.1 usually give good per-
formance. Smaller trees and shrinkage may be 
used if the training data set is smaller. 
The classifiers output a binary decision ac-
cording to P(c|q): positive when P(c|q) > 0.5 and 
negative otherwise.  
5 Experiments 
5.1 Candidate Generation 
We used a set of Japanese query logs collected 
over one year period in 2007 and 2008. More 
specifically, we used two different extracts of log 
data for generating term variation candidate 
pairs:  
Query session data. From raw query logs, we 
extracted pairs of queries q1 and q2 such that they 
are (i) issued by the same user; (ii) q2 follows 
within 3 minutes of issuing q1; and (iii) q2 gener-
ated at least one click of a URL on the result 
1487
page while q1 did not result in any click. We then 
scored each query pair (q1,q2) in this subset using 
the log-likelihood ratio (LLR, Dunning, 1993) 
between q1 and q2, which measures the mutual 
dependence within the context of web search 
queries (Jones et al, 2006a). After applying an 
LLR threshold (LLR > 15) and a count cutoff 
(we used only the top 15 candidate q2 according 
to the LLR value for each q1), we obtained a list 
of 47,139,976 pairs for the 14,929,497 distinct q1, 
on average generating 3.2 candidates per q1
3. We 
took this set as comprising query-candidate pairs 
for our model, along with the set extracted by 
click-through data mining explained below.  
Click-through data. This data extract is based 
on the idea that if two queries led to the same 
URLs being repeatedly clicked, we can reasona-
bly infer that the two queries are semantically 
related. This is similar to computing the distribu-
tional similarity of terms given the context in 
which they appear, where context is most often 
defined as the words co-occurring with the terms. 
Here, the clicked URLs serve as their context.  
One challenge in using the URLs as contex-
tual information is that the contextual representa-
tion in this format is very sparse, as user clicks 
are rare events. To learn query similarities from 
incomplete click-through data, we used the ran-
dom walk algorithm similar to the one described 
in Craswell and Szummer (2007). Figure 1 illu-
strates the basic idea: initially, document ?3 has 
a click-through link consisting of query ?2 only; 
the random walk algorithm adds the link from ?3 
to ?1 , which has a similar click pattern as ?2 . 
Formally, we construct a click graph which is a 
bipartite-graph representation of click-through 
data. We use  ?? ?=1
?  to represent a set of query 
nodes and  ??  ?=1
?
 a set of document nodes. We 
further define an  ? ? ? matrix ? in which ele-
ment ???  represents the click count associated 
with  ?? ,??  . This matrix can be normalized to 
be a query-to-document transition matrix, de-
                                                 
3 We consider each query as an unbreakable term in this 
paper, so term variation is equivalent to query variation. 
noted by ?, where ??? = ?
(1)(?? |??) is the prob-
ability that ??  transits to ??  in one step. Similarly, 
we can normalize the transpose of ?  to be a 
document-to-query transition matrix, denoted by 
?, where ?? ,? = ?
(1)(??|?? ). It is easy to see that 
using ? and ? we can compute the probability of 
transiting from any node to any other node in ? 
steps. In this work, we use a simple measure 
which is the probability that one query transits to 
another in two steps, and the corresponding 
probability matrix is given by ??.  
We used this probability and ranked all pairs 
of queries in the same raw query logs as in the 
query session data described above to generate 
additional candidates for term variation pairs. 
20,308,693 pairs were extracted after applying 
the count cutoff of 5, generating on average 6.8 
candidates for 2,973,036 unique queries. 
It is interesting to note that these two data ex-
tracts are quite complementary: of all the data 
generated, only 4.2% of the pairs were found in 
both the session and click-through data. We be-
lieve that this diversity is attributable to the na-
ture of the extracts: the session data tends to col-
lect the term pairs that are issued by the same 
user as a result of conscious re-writing effort, 
such as typing error corrections and query speci-
fications (Categories 1 and 11 in Table 1), while 
the click-though data collects the terms issued by 
different users, possibly with different intentions, 
and tends to include many spelling variants, syn-
onyms and queries with different specificity 
(Categories 2, 8, 10 and 11).  
5.2 Features 
We used the same set of features for the maxi-
mum entropy and MART models, which are giv-
en in Table 2. They are divided into three main 
types: string similarity features (1-16), semantic 
similarity features (17, 18), and character type 
features (19-39). Among the string similarity 
features, half of them are based on Levenshtein 
distance applied to surface forms (1-8), while the 
other half is based on Levenshtein and string-to-
string edit distance metrics computed over the 
Romanized form of the query, reflecting its pro-
nunciation. The conversion into Roman charac-
ters was done deterministically for kana charac-
ters using a simple mapping table. For Romaniz-
ing kanji characters, we used the function availa-
ble from Windows IFELanguage API (version 
 
Figure 1. Random Walk Algorithm 
1488
2).4 The character equivalence table mentioned in 
the features 3,4,7,8 is a table of 643 pairs of cha-
racters that are known to be equivalent, including 
kanji allography (same kanji in different graphi-
cal styles). The alpha-beta edit distance (11, 12, 
15, 16) is the string-to-string edit distance pro-
posed in Brill and Moore (2001), which we 
trained over about 60K parallel English-to-
katakana Wikipedia title pairs, specifically to 
capture the edit operations between English and 
katakana words, which are different from the edit 
operations between two Japanese words. Seman-
tic similarity features (17, 18) use the LLR score 
from the session data, and the click-though pair 
probability described in the subsection above. 
Finally, features 19-39 capture the script types of 
the query-candidate pair. We first defined six 
basic character types for each query or candidate: 
Hira (hiragana only), Kata (katakana only), Kanji 
(kanji only), Roman (Roman alphabet only), 
MixedNoKanji (includes more than one charac-
ter sets but not kanji) and Mixed (includes more 
than one character sets with kanji). We then de-
rived 21 binary features by concatenating these 
basic character type features for the combination 
                                                 
4 http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms970129.aspx. 
We took the one-best conversion result from the API. The 
conversion accuracy on a randomly sampled 100 kanji que-
ries was 89.6%.  
of query and candidate strings. For example, if 
both the query and candidate are in hiragana, 
BothHira will be on; if the query is Mixed and 
the candidate is Roman, then RomanMixed will 
be on. Punctuation characters and Arabic numer-
als were treated as being transparent to character 
type assignment. The addition of these features is 
motivated by the assumption that appropriate 
types of edit distance operations might depend 
on different character types for the query-
candidate pair.  
Since the dynamic ranges of different features 
can be drastically different, we normalized each 
feature dimension to a normal variable with zero-
mean and unit-variance. We then used the same 
normalized features for both the maximum en-
tropy and the MART classifiers. 
5.3 Training and Evaluation Data 
In order to generate the training data for the bi-
nary classification task, we randomly sampled 
the query session (5,712 samples) and click-
through data (6,228 samples), and manually la-
beled each pair as positive or negative: the posi-
tive label was assigned when the term pair fell 
into Categories 1 through 5 in Table 1; otherwise 
it was assigned a negative label. Only 364 (6.4%) 
and 244 (3.9%) of the samples were positive ex-
amples for the query session and click-through 
data respectively, which makes the baseline per-
String similarity features (16 real-valued features) 
1. Lev distance on surface form 
2. Lev distance on surface form normalized by q1 length 
3. Lev distance on surface form using character equivalence table 
4. Lev distance on surface form normalized by  q1 length using character equivalence table 
5. Lev distance on surface form w/o space 
6. Lev distance on surface form normalized q1 length w/o space 
7. Lev distance on surface form using  character equivalence table w/o space 
8. Lev distance on surface form normalized by q1 using character equivalence table  w/o space 
9. Lev distance on Roman 
10. Lev distance on Roman normalized by q1 length 
11. Alpha-beta edit distance on Roman 
12. Alpha-beta edit distance on Roman normalized by q1 length 
13. Lev distance  on Roman w/o space 
14. Lev distance  on Roman normalized by q1 length w/o space 
15. Alpha-beta edit distance on Roman w/o space 
16. Alpha-beta edit distance on Roman normalized by q1 length w/o space 
Features for semantic similarity (2 real-valued features) 
17. LLR score 
18. Click-though data probability 
Character type features (21 binary features) 
19. BothHira, 20. BothKata, 21. BothRoman, 22. BothKanji, 23. BothMixedNoKanji, 24. BothMixed,  
25. HiraKata, 26. HiraKanji, 27. HiraRoman, 28. HiraMixedNoKanji, 29. HiraMixed, 30. KataKanji, 
31.KataRoman, 32. KataMixedNoKanji, 33. KataMixed, 34. KanjiRoman, 35. KanjiMixedNoKanji,  
36. KanjiMixed, 37. RomanMixedNoKanji, 38. RomanMixed, 39. MixedNoKanjiMixed 
Table 2: Classifier Features 
1489
formance of the classifier quite high (always 
predict the negative label ? the accuracy will be 
95%). Note, however, that these data sets include 
term variation candidates much more efficiently 
than a candidate set generated by the standard 
method that uses an edit distance function with a 
threshold. For example, there is a query-
candidate pair q=???? kafuujouhou 'house-
style information' c= ? ? ? ?  kafunjouhou 
'pollen information') in the session data extract, 
the first one of which is likely to be a mis-
spelling of the second.5 If we try to find candi-
dates for the query ???? using an edit dis-
tance function naively with a threshold of 2 from 
the queries in the log, we end up collecting a 
large amount of completely irrelevant set of can-
didates such as ???? taifuujouhou 'typhoon 
information', ??? kabu jouhou 'stock informa-
tion', ???? kouu jouhou 'rainfall information' 
and so on ? as many as 372 candidates were 
found in the top one million most frequent que-
ries in the query log from the same period; for 
rarer queries these numbers will only be worse. 
Computing the edit distance based on the pro-
nunciation will not help here: the examples 
above are within the edit distance of 2 even in 
terms of Romanized strings.  
Another advantage of generating the annotated 
data using the result of query log data mining is 
that the annotation process is less prone to sub-
jectivity than creating the annotation from 
scratch. As Cucerzan and Brill (2004) point out, 
the process of manually creating a spelling cor-
rection candidate is seriously flawed as the inten-
tion of the original query is completely lost: for 
the query gogle, it is not clear out of context if 
the user meant goggle, google, or gogle. Using 
data mined from query logs solves this problem: 
an annotator can safely assume that if gogle-
goggle appears in the candidate set, it is very 
likely to be a valid term variation intended by the 
user. This makes the annotation more robust and 
efficient: the inter-annotator agreement rate for 
2,000 query pairs by two annotators was 95.7% 
on our data set, each annotator spending only 
about two hours to annotate 2,000 pairs.  
5.4 Results and Discussion 
In order to compare the performance of two clas-
sifiers, we first built maximum entropy and 
MART classifiers as described in Section 4 using 
                                                 
5 ???? does not make any sense in Japanese; on the 
other hand, information about cedar pollen is commonly 
sought after in spring due to widespread pollen allergy.  
all the features in Section 5.2. We run five expe-
riments using different random split of training 
and test data: in each run,  we used 10,000 sam-
ples for training and the remaining 1,940 samples 
for testing, and measured the performance of the 
two classifiers on the task of term variation iden-
tification in terms of the error rate i.e., 1?
accuracy. The results, average over five runs, 
were 4.18 for the maximum entropy model, and 
3.07 for the MART model. In all five runs, the 
MART model outperformed the maximum en-
tropy classifier. This is not surprising given the 
superior performance of tree-boosting algorithms 
previously reported on similar classification 
tasks (e.g., Hastie et al, 2001). In our task where 
different types of features are likely to perform 
better when they are combined (such as semantic 
features and character types features), MART 
would be a better fit than linear classifiers  be-
cause the decision trees generated by MART op-
timally combines features in the local sense. In 
what follows, we only discuss the results pro-
duced by MART for further experiments. Note 
that the baseline classifier, which always predicts 
the label to be negative, achieves 95.04% in ac-
curacy (or 4.96% error rate), which sounds ex-
tremely high, but in fact this baseline classifier is 
useless for the purpose of collecting term varia-
tions, as it learns none of them by classifying all 
samples as negative.  
For evaluating the contribution of different 
types of features in Section 5.2, we performed 
feature ablation experiments using MART. Table 
3 shows the results in error rate by various 
MART classifiers using different combination of 
features. The results in this table are also aver-
aged over five run with random training/test data 
split. From Table 3, we can see that the best per-
formance was achieved by the model using all 
features (line A of the table), which reduces the 
baseline error rate (4.96%) by 38%. The im-
provement is statistically significant according to 
the McNemar test (P < 0.05). Models that use 
string edit distance features only (lines B and C) 
did not perform well: in particular, the model 
that uses surface edit distance features only 
Features Error rate (%) 
A. All features (1-39 in Table 2) 3.07 
B. String features only (1-16) 3.49 
C. Surface string features only (1-8) 4.9 
D. No semantic feats (1-16,19-39) 3.28 
E. No character type feats (1-18) 3.5 
Table 3: Results of Features Ablation Experiments 
Using MART Model 
1490
without considering the term pronunciation per-
formed horribly (line C), which confirms the re-
sults reported by Jones et al (2006b). However, 
unlike Jones et al (2006b), we see a positive 
contribution of semantic features: the use of se-
mantic features reduced the error rate from 3.28 
(line D) to 3.07 (line A), which is statistically 
significant. This may be attributable to the nature 
of semantic information used in our experiments: 
we used the user session and click-though data to 
extract semantic knowledge, which may be se-
mantically more specific than the probability of 
word substitution in a query collection as a 
whole, which is used by Jones et al (2006b). 
Finally, the character type features also contri-
buted to reducing the error rate (lines A and E). 
In particular, the observation that the addition of 
semantic features without the character type fea-
tures (comparing lines B and E) did not improve 
the error rate indicates that the character type 
features are also important in bringing about the 
contribution of semantic features.   
Figure 2 displays the test data precision/recall 
curve of one of the runs of MART that uses all 
features. The x-axis of the graph is the confi-
dence score of classification P(c|q), which was 
set to 0.5 for the results in Table 3. At this confi-
dence, the model achieves 70% precision with 
the recall slightly higher than 60%. In the graph, 
we observe a familiar trade-off between preci-
sion and recall, which is useful for practical ap-
plications that may favor one over the other.  
In order to find out where the weaknesses of 
our classifiers lie, we performed a manual error 
analysis on the same MART run whose results 
are shown in Figure 2. Most of the classification 
errors are false negatives, i.e., the model failed to 
predict a case of term variation as such. The most 
conspicuous error is the failure to capture ab-
breviations, such as failing to capture the altera-
tion between ?????  juujoochuugakkou 
'Juujoo middle school' and ??? juujoochuu, 
which our edit distance-based features fail as the 
length difference between a term and its abbrevi-
ation is significant. Addition of more targeted 
features for this subclass of term variation (e.g., 
Okazaki et al, 2008a) is called for, and will be 
considered in future work. Mistakes in the Ro-
manization of kanji characters were not always 
punished as the query and the candidate string 
may contain the same mistake, but when they 
occurred in either in the query or the candidate 
string (but not in both), the result was destruc-
tive: for example, we assigned a wrong Romani-
zation on ??? as suiginnakari ?mercury lamp?, 
as opposed to the correct suiginntou, which caus-
es the failure to capture the alteration with ??
? suiginntou, (a misspelling of ???). Using 
N-best (N>1) candidate pronunciations for kanji 
terms or using all possible pronunciations for 
kanji characters might reduce this type of error. 
Finally, the features of our models are the edit 
distance functions themselves, rather than the 
individual edit rules or operations. Using these 
individual operations as features in the classifica-
tion task directly has been shown to perform well 
on spelling correction and normalization tasks 
(e.g., Brill and Moore, 2000; Okazaki et al, 
2008b). Okazaki et al?s (2008b) method of gene-
rating edit operations may not be viable for our 
purposes, as they assume that the original and 
candidate strings are very similar in their surface 
representation ? they target only spelling variants 
and inflection in English. One interesting future 
avenue to consider is to use the edit distance 
functions in our current model to select a subset 
of query-candidate pairs that are similar in terms 
of these functions, separately for the surface and 
Romanized forms, and use this subset to align 
the character strings in these query-candidate 
pairs as described in Brill and Moore (2000), and 
add the edit operations derived in this manner to 
the term variation identification classifier as fea-
tures.  
6 Conclusion 
In this paper we have addressed the problem of 
acquiring term variations in Japanese query logs 
for the purpose of query expansion. We generate 
term variation candidates efficiently by mining 
query log data, and our best classifier, based on 
the MART algorithm, can make use of both edit-
distance-based and semantic features, and can 
identify term variation with the precision of 70% 
at the recall slightly higher than 60%. Our next 
 
Figure 2: Precision/Recall Curve of MART 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
confidence
p
r
e
c
is
io
n
/
r
e
c
a
ll
 
(
%
)
precision
recall
1491
goal is to use and evaluate the term variation col-
lected by the proposed method in an actual 
search scenario, as well as improving the per-
formance of our classifier by using individual, 
character-dependent edit operations as features in 
classification.  
 
References  
Ahmad, Farooq, and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2005. Learn-
ing a spelling error model from search query logs. 
In Proceedings of EMNLP, pp.955-962.  
Aitchison, J. and A. Gilchrist. 1987. Thesaurus Con-
struction: A Practical Manual. Second edition. 
ASLIB, London. 
Aramaki, Eiji, Takeshi Imai, Kengo Miyo, and Kazu-
hiko Ohe. 2008. Orthographic disambiguation in-
corporating transliterated probability. In Proceed-
ings of IJCNLP, pp.48-55. 
Baeza-Yates, Ricardo, and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 
1999. Modern Information Retrieval. Addison 
Wesley. 
Berger, A.L., S. A. D. Pietra, and V. J. D. Pietra. 1996. 
A maximum entropy approach to natural language 
processing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1): 39-
72. 
Bilac, Slaven, and Hozumi Tanaka. 2004. A hybrid 
back-transliteration system for Japanese. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING, pp.597-603. 
Brill, Eric, Gary Kacmarcik and Chris Brockett. 2001. 
Automatically harvesting katakana-English term 
pairs from search engine query logs. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Natural Language Processing Pa-
cific Rim Symposium (NLPRS-2001), pp.393-399. 
Brill, Eric, and Robert C. Moore. 2000. An improved 
error model for noisy channel spelling. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, pp.286-293. 
Chen, Qing, Mu Li and Ming Zhou. 2007. Improving 
query spelling correction using web search results. 
In Proceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL, pp.181-189. 
Craswell, Nick, and Martin Szummer. 2007. Random 
walk on the click graph. In Proceedings of SIGIR. 
Cucerzan, Silviu, and Eric Brill. 2004. Spelling cor-
rection as an iterative process that exploits the col-
lective knowledge of web users. In Proceedings of 
EMNLP, pp.293-300. 
Deerwester, S., S.T. Dumais, T. Landauer and 
Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent semantic anal-
ysis. In Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science, 41(6): 391-407. 
Dunning, Ted. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(1): 61-74. 
Frakes, W.B. 1992. Stemming algorithm. In 
W.B.Frakes and R.Baeza-Yates (eds.), Information 
Retrieval: Data Structure and Algorithms, Chapter 
8. Prentice Hall. 
Friedman, J. 2001. Greedy function approximation: a 
gradient boosting machine. Annals of Statistics, 
29(5). 
Jones, Rosie, Benjamin Rey, Omid Madani and Wiley 
Greiner. 2006a. Generating query substitutions. In 
Proceedings of WWW, pp.387?396. 
Jones, Rosie, Kevin Bartz, Pero Subasic and Benja-
min Rey. 2006b. Automatically generating related 
aueries in Japanese. Language Resources and 
Evaluation 40: 219-232.  
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Fried-
man. 2001. The Elements of Statistical Learning. 
Springer. 
Knight, Kevin, and Jonathan Graehl. 1998. Machine 
transliteration. Computational Linguistics, 24(4): 
599-612. 
Komachi, Mamoru and Hisami Suzuki. 2008. Mini-
mally supervised learning of semantic knowledge 
from query logs. In Proceedings of IJCNLP, 
pp.358?365. 
Li, Mu, Muhua Zhu, Yang Zhang and Ming Zhou. 
2006. Exploring distributional similarity based 
models for query spelling correction. In Proceed-
ings of COLING/ACL, pp.1025-1032. 
Li, Xiao, Ye-Yi Wang and Alex Acero. 2008. Learn-
ing query intent from regularized click graphs. In 
Proceedings of SIGIR.  
Masuyama, Takeshi, Satoshi Sekine, and Hiroshi Na-
kagawa. 2004. Automatic construction of Japanese 
katakana variant list from large corpus. In Proceed-
ings COLING, pp.1214-1219. 
Okazaki, Naoaki, Mitsuru Ishizuka and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 
2008a. A discriminative approach to Japanese ab-
breviation extraction. In Proceedings of IJCNLP.  
Okazaki, Naoaki, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Sophia Ana-
niadou and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2008b. A discriminative 
candidate generator for string transformations. In 
Proceedings of EMNLP.  
Rasmussen, E. 1992. Clustering algorithm. In 
W.B.Frakes and R.Baeza-Yates (eds.), Information 
Retrieval: Data Structure and Algorithms, Chapter 
16. Prentice Hall. 
Salton, G., and C. Buckley. 1990. Improving retrieval 
performance by relevance feedback. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, 41(4): 
288-297. 
Sekine, Satoshi, and Hisami Suzuki. 2007. Acquiring 
ontological knowledge from query logs. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW, pp.1223-1224 
1492
