Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1493?1502,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Towards Discipline-Independent Argumentative Zoning:
Evidence from Chemistry and Computational Linguistics
Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University
sht25@cl.cam.ac.uk
Advaith Siddharthan
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University
as372@cl.cam.ac.uk
Colin Batchelor
Royal Society of Chemistry
Cambridge, UK
batchelorc@rsc.org
Abstract
Argumentative Zoning (AZ) is an anal-
ysis of the argumentative and rhetorical
structure of a scientific paper. It has been
shown to be reliably used by independent
human coders, and has proven useful for
various information access tasks. Annota-
tion experiments have however so far been
restricted to one discipline, computational
linguistics (CL). Here, we present a more
informative AZ scheme with 15 categories
in place of the original 7, and show that
it can be applied to the life sciences as
well as to CL. We use a domain expert
to encode basic knowledge about the sub-
ject (such as terminology and domain spe-
cific rules for individual categories) as part
of the annotation guidelines. Our results
show that non-expert human coders can
then use these guidelines to reliably an-
notate this scheme in two domains, chem-
istry and computational linguistics.
1 Introduction
Teufel et al (1999) define the task of Argumenta-
tive Zoning (AZ) as a sentence-by-sentence clas-
sification with mutually exclusive categories from
the annotation scheme given in Fig. 1. The reason-
ing behind the categories is inspired by the notion
of a knowledge claim (Myers, 1992; Luukkonen,
1992): the act of writing a paper corresponds to
an attempt of claiming ownership for a new piece
of knowledge, which is to be integrated into the
repository of scientific knowledge in the authors?
field by the process of peer review and publica-
tion. In the cause of this process, the authors
have to convince the reviewers that the knowledge
claim of the paper is valid (Swales, 1990; Hy-
land, 1998). What AZ aims to model, then, are
some of the relevant stages in this argument. We
divide the paper into zones, OTHER, OWN and
BACKGROUND. These are defined on the basis
of who owns the knowledge claim in the corre-
sponding segment. There are also two categories
which are defined by their relationship to existing
work, BASIS and CONTRAST. That means that
parts of the AZ scheme are similar to citation func-
tion classification schemes from the area of cita-
tion content analysis (Garfield, 1965; Weinstock,
1971; Spiegel-Ru?sing, 1977), and to automatic
citation function classification (Nanba and Oku-
mura, 1999; Garzone and Mercer, 2000; Teufel
et al, 2006). The remaining categories, AIM and
TEXTUAL, fulfil different rhetorical functions for
the presentation of the paper. AIM points out the
paper?s main knowledge claim, a rhetorical move
which may be repeated in the conclusion and the
introduction. TEXTUAL explains the physical lo-
cation of information, e.g., by giving a section
overview or presenting a summary of a subsec-
tion. On the basis of human-annotated training
material, AZ can be automatically classified using
supervised machine learning.
Category Description
AIM Statement of research goal.
BACKGROUND Description of generally accepted
background knowledge.
BASIS Existing KC provides basis for new
KC.
CONTRAST An existing KC is contrasted, com-
pared, or presented as weak.
OTHER Description of existing KC.
OWN Description of any other aspect of
new KC.
TEXTUAL Indication of paper?s textual
structure.
Figure 1: AZ Annotation Scheme (Teufel et al
1999).
Rhetorical information marking is useful for
1493
many novel information access tasks. For in-
stance, information retrieval can profit from
rhetorical information in the form of paradigm
shift statements (Chichester et al, 2005), as papers
containing such statements have a high impact in
an area. 75% of the ?Faculty of 1000 Biology?
papers (which are chosen by experts for their spe-
cial importance) contain paradigm shift sentences
(Agnes Sandor, personal communication).
AZ annotation allows the construction of multi-
and single document summaries which concen-
trate on differences and similarities to related
(cited) work. AZ can also be used for search in
a data base of scientific articles, in particular for
enhanced citation indexing. This has been pre-
viously explored in a task-based evaluation, were
users were asked to list positive and negative cita-
tions they would expect in a paper, given a short
extract (Teufel, 2001). In that task, AZ-based ex-
tracts outperformed other document surrogates.
Feltrim et al (2005) present a writing support
system which analyses students? drafts of sum-
maries for their PhD theses, performs an AZ anal-
ysis on them and critiques the rhetorical structure
of the students? draft on the basis of it.
The definition of the AZ categories is based
on rhetorical principles and should be decidable,
in principle, without specific domain knowledge
about what is discussed in detail in the paper. We
present here the first evidence that AZ categories
can be reliably recognised across scientific disci-
plines, using chemistry and computational linguis-
tics as our model disciplines for these experiments.
The categories just introduced are abstract and
depend on the annotators? interpretation of a
rhetorical argument. This means that there is
no guarantee that several independent annotators
would annotate similarly. It is therefore crucial
that all annotations at a high level of interpreta-
tion are backed up by human annotation with more
than one annotator. However, annotations of cita-
tion function classification typically use only the
untested annotation of a single human annotator
as gold standard, who is typically the designer of a
scheme (Spiegel-Ru?sing, 1977; Weinstock, 1971;
Nanba and Okumura, 1999; Garzone and Mercer,
2000). Teufel et al (2006) are the only exception
who test their citation function scheme using mod-
ern corpus-linguistic annotation methodology.
A study of human agreement on AZ annotation
exists (Teufel et al, 1999), but this uses articles
from only one discipline, namely computational
linguistics. In this paper, we use a similar method-
ology to Teufel et al, but with data from two disci-
plines. The preliminary conclusion from these ex-
periments is that annotation with chemistry papers
has resulted in higher agreement than annotation
with computational linguistics papers.
We extend the AZ annotation scheme to make
further distinctions, as will be discussed in sec-
tion 2. We also created an environment in which
domain knowledge that an annotator might have
about the science in a paper is systematically dis-
regarded. We will describe how this was done in
section 3, and then present the annotation experi-
ment itself in section 4.
2 Changes to the AZ Scheme
Argumentative Zoning II (AZ-II) is a new annota-
tion scheme, which is an elaboration of the orig-
inal AZ scheme. It is presented in Fig. 2. Our
annotation guidelines are 111 sides of A4 and con-
tain a decision tree, detailed description of the se-
mantics of the 15 categories, 75 rules for pairwise
distinction of the categories and copious examples
from both chemistry and computational linguis-
tics. During guideline development, 70 chemistry
papers and 20 CL papers were used, which are dis-
tinct from the ones used for annotation. It took 3
months part-time-work to prepare the guidelines
for CL, and substantially less time to adapt them
for chemistry. We have made them available at
www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/nl/sciborg.
The differences between the original AZ and
AZ-II are as follows:
? Category AIM remained the same.
? Category BACKGROUND was renamed
CO GRO, or common ground.
? Category OTHER was split into other peo-
ple?s work (OTHR) and the authors? own pre-
vious work (PREV OWN).
? Category BASIS was split into usage (USE)
and support (SUPPORT).
? Category CONTRAST was split into neu-
tral comparison (CODI), contradiction
(ANTISUPP), and a category combining
research gaps with criticism (GAP WEAK).
? Category OWN was split into description of
method (OWN MTHD), results (OWN RES)
and conclusions (OWN CONC), and a cate-
gory which specifies recoverable errors made
by the authors (OWN FAIL).
1494
Category Description Category Description
AIM Statement of specific research goal, or
hypothesis of current paper
OWN CONC Findings, conclusions (non-measurable)
of own work
NOV ADV Novelty or advantage of own approach CODI Comparison, contrast, difference to
other solution (neutral)
CO GRO No knowledge claim is raised (or knowl-
edge claim not significant for the paper)
GAP WEAK Lack of solution in field, problem with
other solutions
OTHR Knowledge claim (significant for paper)
held by somebody else. Neutral descrip-
tion
ANTISUPP Clash with somebody else?s results or
theory; superiority of own work
PREV OWN Knowledge claim (significant) held by
authors in a previous paper. Neutral de-
scription.
SUPPORT Other work supports current work or is
supported by current work
OWN MTHD New Knowledge claim, own work:
methods
USE Other work is used in own work
OWN FAIL A solution/method/experiment in the pa-
per that did not work
FUT Statements/suggestions about future
work (own or general)
OWN RES Measurable/objective outcome of own
work
Figure 2: AZ-II Annotation Scheme.
? Category TEXTUAL was discontinued, be-
cause it is less informative than the other cat-
egories.
? Two new categories were introduced,
NOV ADV (advantages of the new knowl-
edge claim) and FUT (declaration of
limitations or future work).
Our AZ-II categories are more fine-grained than
the original AZ categories. The reasons for this are
twofold: To bring AZ closer to contemporary cita-
tion function schemes, and to incorporate distinc-
tions recently found useful by other researchers.
For instance, Chichester et al (2005) argue that
ANTISUPP is particularly important. The finer
grain in AZ-II has been accomplished purely by
splitting existing AZ categories; hence, the coarser
AZ categories are recoverable (with the exception
of the TEXTUAL category). Annotation examples
are given in the appendix.
As in AZ, citations are an important but not nec-
essarily decisive cue for a sentence to belong to
a particular zone. The guidelines mention cita-
tions as one factor in deciding whether a knowl-
edge claim holds, and citations occur in several
examples, so it is likely that the presence of ci-
tations would have influenced annotators in their
decision.
Of the changes, the distinction which is likely
to have the greatest impact on the annotation is
the split of OWN according to the stage of the au-
thors? problem solving process ? into methods, re-
sults, conclusion or local failure. In most life sci-
ences, descriptions of research as a problem solv-
ing process are a dominant phenomenon, whereby
problem-solving descriptions can be of differing
length and embeddedness. For instance, in syn-
thetic chemistry, the starting compound for the
main synthesis in the paper may first have to be
synthesised itself (if it is not commercially avail-
able, for instance). In that case, arriving at the
compound is an intermediate, smaller problem-
solving process which enables the larger problem-
solving process that represents the new KC.
The original AZ scheme didn?t mark the dis-
tinction, possibly because it is not as easily ob-
servable in CL as it is in the life sciences, and
because problem-solving stages were not part of
the main analytic interest of AZ, which focused
on how scientific argumentation is related to de-
scriptions of own and other work. Also, neither of
the traditional AZ applications (summarisation or
citation indexing) had any direct use for the subdi-
vided categories. But in the life sciences, there
are applications which would make use of such
a subdivision. For instance, in chemistry there
is a niche for search applications which guide
searchers directly to the method and/or result sec-
tions in papers. Specifically, the OWN FAIL cat-
egory is motivated by the failure?and?recovery
search. In text, OWN FAILmarks cases where the
authors helpfully mention in passing steps which
were found not to work during a long synthetic
procedure (often the ?total synthesis? of a com-
pound which is found in nature). Such cases hap-
pen frequently, and are generally followed by a
?recovery? statement which explains how the prob-
lem can be avoided. Another possible applica-
tion that calls for a subdivision is Feltrim et al?s
1495
(2005) rhetorical writing system for novice writ-
ers. It trains novices in writing rhetorically well-
formed abstracts and therefore must have a way of
distinguishing, for instance, between methods and
results.
Note that several of the applications based on
AZ and AZ-II in general rely on the rare categories
much more than they rely on the more frequent
categories. OWN FAIL is an example of a rare but
important category, and so is AIM, which is central
to summarisation applications. The comparative
and contrastive categories CODI ANTISUPP and
GAP WEAK, on the other hand, are particularly
useful to citation-based search applications.
Other AZ-like schemes for scientific discourse
created for the biomedical domain (Mizuta and
Collier, 2004) and for computer science (Feltrim
et al, 2005) also made the decision to subdivide
OWN, in similar ways to how we propose here.
The current work, however, is the first experimen-
tal proof that humans can make this distinction ?
and the others encoded in AZ-II ? reliably, and in
two quite distinct disciplines.
3 Discipline-Independent Non-Expert
Annotation
An important principle of AZ is that its categories
can be decided without domain knowledge. This
rule is anchored in the guidelines: when choosing
a category, no reasoning about the scientific facts
is allowed. The avoidance of domain-knowledge
has its motivation in a strategy for a hypotheti-
cal automatic text-understanding system for unre-
stricted texts. Given the state of the art in text pro-
cessing and knowledge representation, text under-
standing systems should in our opinion use gen-
eral, rhetorical, and logical aspects of the text,
rather than attempting to recognise or represent the
scientific knowledge contained in the text. What
the human annotation ? the gold standard ? should
then do is to simulate the best possible output that
such a system could theoretically create.
Annotators may use only general, rhetorical or
linguistic knowledge; knowledge which is shared
by all proficient speakers of a language. The
guidelines spell out what is meant by these general
principles. For instance, one can use lexical and
syntactic parallelism in a text to infer that the au-
thors were setting up a comparison between them-
selves and some other approach.
There is, however, a problem with annotator ex-
pertise and with the exact implementation of the
?no domain knowledge? principle. This problem
does not become apparent until one starts work-
ing with disciplines where at least some of the an-
notators or guideline developers are not domain
experts (chemistry, in our case). Domain experts
naturally use scientific knowledge and inference
when they make annotation decisions. It would
be unrealistic to expect them to be able to disre-
gard their domain knowledge simply because they
were instructed to do so. Additionally, when all
annotators/scheme developers are domain experts,
it is hard to even notice the cases where they ?ac-
cidentally? use domain knowledge during anno-
tation. We therefore artificially created a situa-
tion where all annotators are ?semi-informed non-
experts?, which forces them to comply with the
principle, namely by the following rules:
Justification: Annotators have to justify all an-
notation decisions by pointing to some text-based
evidence, and by giving the section heading in the
guidelines that describes the particular reason for
assigning the category. General discipline-specific
knowledge an annotator may happen to have is ex-
cluded as justification. Annotators? justifications
have to be typed into the annotation tool and are
open to challenge during the training phase. Much
of the allowable justification comes in the form
of general and linguistic principles, e.g., an ex-
plicit cue phrase, the title, or the structural simi-
larity of textual strings. For instance, annotators
are allowed to infer that process-VPs in the title
are likely to be the contribution (knowledge of the
actual concrete contribution of a paper is a require-
ment for annotation of AIM).
Discipline-specific Generics: The guidelines
contain a section with high-level facts about the
general research practices in the discipline. These
generics constitute the only scientific knowledge
which is acceptable as a justification, and are
aimed to help non-expert annotators recognise
how a paper might relate to already established
scientific knowledge, so that they will be able
to avoid common mistakes about the knowledge
claim status of a certain fact. For instance, the bet-
ter they are able to distinguish what is commonly
known from what is newly claimed by the authors,
the more consistent their annotation will be.
Annotation with expert-trained non-expert an-
notators means that a domain expert must be avail-
able initially, during the development of the anno-
1496
tation scheme and the guidelines, either as a co-
developer or as an informant. The domain expert?s
job is to describe scientific knowledge in that do-
main in a general way, in as far as it is neces-
sary for the scheme?s distinctions, and to write the
domain-specific rules for the individual categories,
including the choice of example sentences. This
means that the guidelines are split into a domain-
general and a domain-specific part.
The discipline-specific generics in chemistry
come in the form of a ?chemistry primer?, a 10-
page collection of high-level scientific domain
knowledge. It contains: a glossary of words a non-
chemist would not have heard about or would not
necessarily recognise as chemical terminology; a
list of possible types of experiments performed
in chemistry; a list of commonly used machin-
ery; a list of non-obvious negative characterisa-
tions of experiments and compounds (?sluggish?,
?inert?); and a list of possible types of knowledge
claims. For instance, in chemistry each chemi-
cal substance mentioned can have in principle a
knowledge claim associated with its discovery or
invention ? with the exception of water, rock salt,
the metals known in prehistory and a few others.
If a compound or process is however considered to
be so commonly used that it is in the ?general do-
main? (e.g., ?the Stern?Volmer equation? or ?the
Grignard reaction?), it is no longer associated with
somebody?s knowledge claim, and as a result its
usage is not to be marked with category USE.
Descriptions of individual categories can have
domain-specific subsections, as well as the gen-
eral ones. For instance, if the text states that the
authors could not replicate a published result, the
guidelines describe the cases when this is the au-
thors? fault (OWN FAIL) in contrast to the cases
where this is an indirect accusation of the previ-
ous experiment (ANTISUPP).
Another potentially unclear distinction is
between results (OWN RES) and conclusions
(OWN CONC). The difference is defined on
the basis of how much reasoning is necessary
to be able to make the statement concerned. If
all the authors did was to read a measurement
off an instrument, the label OWN RES applies.
Reasoning points to OWN CONC; it is some-
times linguistically marked (?therefore?, ?we
conclude?, ?this means that?), but in many cases,
domain knowledge may be required to decide
whether reasoning was necessary to make a
certain statement. Possible OWN RES statements,
according to the chemistry primer, include: state-
ments of simple numerical result; descriptions of
graphs; descriptions of atoms? positions in three-
dimensional space; statements of trends, unless
a reason for these results is given; comparisons
of results of more than one experiment, unless a
reason for these results is given.
The chemistry primer also lists phenomena
which in a typical experiment would be read off
chemical machinery (e.g., ?Stark effect?). This list
gives the non-expert annotator an objective crite-
rion to answer the question how likely it is that a
certain statement by the authors was arrived at by
inference. We also found that our list of phenom-
ena which can be read off machinery, which was
compiled from the first 30 papers, generalised well
to the other 40 papers considered.
The chemistry primer is not an attempt to sum-
marise all methods and experimentation types in
chemistry; this would be impossible to do, cer-
tainly in a few pages. Rather, it tries to answer
many of the high-level questions a non-expert
would have to an expert, in the framework of AZ.
This methodology allows to hire expert and
non-expert annotators and bring them in line with
each other. We believe it could be expanded rel-
atively easily into many other disciplines, using
domain experts which create similar primers for
genetics, experimental physics, cell biology, but
re-using the bulk of the guidelines.
4 Annotation Experiments
The annotators were the co-developers of the an-
notation scheme and the authors of this paper.
Whereas all three annotators have good back-
ground knowledge in CL, the largest difference be-
tween them concerns their expertise in chemistry:
Annotator A is a PhD-level chemist, Annotator B
has two years? of undergraduate training in chem-
istry and can therefore be considered a chemical
semi-expert, and Annotator C has no specialised
chemistry knowledge.
As agreement measure we choose the Kappa
coefficient ? (Fleiss, 1971; Siegel and Castellan,
1988), the agreement measure predominantly used
in natural language processing research (Carletta,
1996). ? corrects raw agreement P (A) for agree-
ment by chance P (E):
? =
P (A)?P (E)
1?P (E)
1497
No matter how many items or annotators, or
how the categories are distributed, ? = 0 when
there is no agreement other than what would be
expected by chance, and ? = 1 when agreement
is perfect. If two annotators agree less than ex-
pected by chance, ? can also be negative. Chance
agreement P (E) is defined as the level of agree-
ment which would be reached by random anno-
tation using the same distribution of categories as
the real annotators. All work done here is reported
in terms of Fleiss? ?. 1 ? is also designed to ab-
stract over the number of annotators as its formula
relies on the proportion of expected vs. observed
pairwise agreements possible in a pool. That is,
? for k annotators will be an average of the val-
ues of ? taking all possible m-tuples of annota-
tors from the annotator pool (with m < k). As a
side effect of its definition of random agreement,
? treats agreement in a rare category as more sur-
prising, and rewards such agreement more than an
agreement in a frequent category. This is a desir-
able property, because we are more interested in
the performance of the rare rhetorical categories
than we are in the performance of the more fre-
quent zone categories.
4.1 Data
For chemistry, 30 random-sampled papers from
journals published between 2004 and 2007 by the
Royal Society of Chemistry were used for anno-
tation2. The papers cover all areas of chemistry
and some areas close to chemistry, such as climate
modelling, process engineering, and a double-
blind medical trial. The data used for the exper-
iment contains a total of 3745 sentences.
For computational linguistics, 9 papers were an-
notated, with a total of 1629 sentences. The papers
were published between 1998 and 2001 at ACL,
EACL or EMNLP conferences, and were taken
from the Computation and Language archive.
Both chemistry and CL papers were automatically
sentence-split, with manual correction of errors;
acknowledgement sections were disregarded. A
1Artstein and Poesio (2008) observe that there are several
version of ? which differ in how P (E) is calculated. In par-
ticular, Fleiss? (1971) ? calculates P (E) as the average ob-
served distribution of all annotators, whereas Cohen?s (1960)
? calculates P (E) only on the basis of the other annotator(s).
2100 papers across a spread of disciplines from the Jan-
uary 2004 issues of the RSC were selected blindly (but with
an attempt to cover most areas of chemistry). 30 out of these
were random sampled for annotation; the rest were used for
annotation development.
Category Chem CL Category Chem CL
OWN MTHD 25.4 55.6 SUPPORT 1.5 0.7
OWN RES 24.0 5.6 GAP WEAK 1.1 1.0
OWN CONC 15.1 10.7 FUT 1.0 1.4
OTHR 8.3 10.0 NOV ADV 1.0 0.8
USE 7.9 2.7 CODI 0.8 1.2
CO GRO 6.7 5.7 OWN FAIL 0.8 0.1
PREV OWN 3.4 1.7 ANTISUPP 0.5 0.6
AIM 2.3 1.8
Figure 3: Frequency of AZ-II Categories (in %).
web-based annotation tool was used for guideline
definition and for annotation.
Our choice of which data sets to use was ef-
fected by the relative length of papers more than
by the journal/conference distinction. Average
article length between chemistry journal articles
(3650 words/paper) and CL conference articles
(4219 words/paper) is comparable, so conference
articles in CL seem a much better choice for com-
parative work than journal publications, which are
often very long in CL. Additionally, conferences
have a high profile in CL, and we found the con-
ference publications to be of high editorial quality.
We are nevertheless interested in the structure of
longer journal articles, and plan to investigate CL
journals in the future.
The annotations were done using a web-based
annotation tool. Every sentence is assigned a cat-
egory. No communication between the annotators
was allowed.
4.2 Results
The inter-annotator agreement for chemistry
was ? = 0.71 (N=3745,n=15,k=3). For CL,
the inter-annotator agreement was ? = 0.65
(N=1629,n=15,k=3). For comparison, the
inter-annotator agreement for the original, CL-
specific AZ with 7 categories was ? = 0.71
(N=3420,n=7,k=3). Given the subjective nature
of the task and the fact that AZ-II introduces ad-
ditional distinctions, the AZ-II agreement can be
considered acceptable for CL and relatively high
for chemistry. Additionally, chemistry annota-
tion used one non-expert annotator, who had no
chemistry-specific domain knowledge apart from
that in the chemistry primer.
The distribution of categories for the two disci-
plines is given in Fig. 3. As expected, there is a
large discrepancy in frequency between the (rare)
rhetorical categories and the (much more fre-
quent) zone categories OWN MTHD, OWN RES,
1498
OWN CONC, OTHR and CO GRO. For supervised
learning, too few examples of any category can be
a problem. There are methods which attempt to re-
duce the annotation effort by using a trained clas-
sifier to suggest possible cases to a human. How-
ever, the classifier can only find examples similar
to the ones that have already been manually clas-
sified, when the real problem is a recall-problem,
i.e., the challenge is to find more new examples in
the multitude of possible sentences. To solve this
in a fundamentally sound way, there seems to be
no other way than to annotate more texts, at the
cost of more human effort.
If we consider the differences across disci-
plines, the most striking ones concern the distri-
bution of OWN MTHD, which is more than twice
as common in CL (56% v. 25%), and OWN RES,
which is far more common in chemistry overall
(24% v 5.6%). Usage of other people?s knowl-
edge claims or materials also seems to be more
common in chemistry, or at least more explicitly
expressed (7.9% vs 2.7%). With respect to the
shorter, rarer categories, there is a marked dif-
ference in OWN FAIL (0.1% in CL, but 0.8% in
chemistry3 and SUPPORT, which is more common
in chemistry (1.5% vs 0.7%). However, this effect
is not present for ANTISUPP (contradiction of re-
sults), the ?reverse? category to SUPPORT, (0.6%
in CL vs 0.5% in chemistry).
As far as the chemistry annotation is con-
cerned, it is interesting to find out whether Annota-
tor A was influenced during annotation by domain
knowledge which Annotator C did not have, and
Annotator B had to a lower degree4. We there-
fore calculated pairwise agreement, which was
?
AC
= 0.66, ?
BC
= 0.73 and ?
AB
= 0.73 (all:
N=3745,n=15,k=2). That means that the largest
disagreements were between the non-expert (C)
and the expert (A), though the differences are
modest. This might point to the fact that Anno-
tators A and B might have used a certain amount
of domain-knowledge which the chemistry primer
in the guidelines does not yet, but should, cover.
In an attempt to determine how well cate-
gories are defined, we first consider the binary dis-
3These are not large differences in absolute terms ? 55
items identified as OWN FAIL by at least one annotator in
chemistry, vs. 7 such items in CL, the relative difference is
large and confirms that in chemistry papers, particularly de-
scriptions of synthesis procedures, OWN FAIL cases appear
relatively frequently.
4This question does not arise in the case of CL, as all an-
notators can be considered experts in this respect.
tinction between zone categories (OWN MTHD,
OWN RES, OWN CONC, OWN FAIL, OTHR,
PREV OWN and CO GRO) and rhetorical cate-
gories (the other 8). This shows an inter-annotator
agreement of ?
binary
= 0.78 (N=3745, n=2, k=3)
for chemistry and ?
binary
= 0.65 (N=1629, n=2,
k=3) for CL, indicating that annotators find it rel-
atively easy (chemistry) or at least not more dif-
ficult than the overall distinction (CL) to distin-
guish these two types of categories. We next per-
form Krippendorff?s (1980) category distinctions
(Fig. 4). Here, all categories apart from the one
diagnosed are collapsed, and what is reported is
the difference of inter-annotator agreement when
compared to the overall distinctiveness (?=0.71
for chemistry, ?=0.65 for CL). Where the differ-
ence is positive, the annotators could distinguish
the given category better than they could distin-
guish all categories, and where they are negative,
correspondingly worse.5
The results confirm that categories USE, AIM,
OWN MTHD, OWN RES and FUT are particularly
well distinguished in both disciplines. This is a
positive result, as these categories are important
for several types of searches. In these cases the
guidelines seem to fully suffice for their descrip-
tion, but then again good performance of AIM,
FUT and USE is not that surprising, as they are
signalled clearly by linguistic and non-linguistic
cues. However, there are three categories with
particularly low distinguishability in both disci-
plines: ANTISUPP, OWN FAIL and PREV OWN.
As ANTISUPP and OWN FAIL are crucial for the
envisaged downstream tasks, the problems with
their definition should be identified and fixed. We
are in the process of systematically troubleshoot-
ing the guidelines for those categories.
The table also shows that category definition
has discipline-specific problems. For instance,
we believe that the fact that distinctiveness for
OWN FAIL is so bad for CL must be due to the
fact that we only encountered very few potential
OWN FAIL cases in this domain. The definition
of the categories SUPPORT and NOV ADV also
seem to be substantially more confusing for CL
than for chemistry. However, CODI is a category
which shows average distinctiveness for CL, but
much worse distinctiveness for chemistry. We be-
lieve this is due to the fact that comparisons of
5All ? values for chemistry were measured with N=3745,
n=2, k=3; for CL with N=1629, n=2, k=3.
1499
methods and approaches are more common in CL
and are clearly expressed, whereas in chemistry
the objects that are involved in comparisons are
more varied and at a lower grade of abstraction
(e.g., compounds, properties of compounds, coef-
ficients, etc.), which obviously has a negative ef-
fect on the distinctiveness of this category.
Category Chem CL Category Chem CL
USE +0.12 +0.00 NOV ADV -0.07 -0.23
AIM +0.09 +0.08 OWN CONC -0.08 -0.13
OWN MTHD +0.05 +0.05 GAP WEAK -0.08 -0.16
OWN RES +0.02 +0.04 PREV OWN -0.11 -0.15
FUT +0.01 +0.06 OWN FAIL -0.19 -0.43
CO GRO -0.01 -0.03 ANTISUPP -0.35 -0.32
SUPPORT -0.04 -0.12 CODI -0.36 +0.00
OTHR -0.06 +0.07
Figure 4: Krippendorff?s Diagnostics for Category
Distinction (?, relative to Overall Distinctiveness).
We also provide a direct comparison of our an-
notation results with those from the original AZ
scheme. Comparisons between two similar anno-
tation schemes can be made by collapsing those
categories in each scheme which are not distin-
guished in the other scheme. Such a comparison
can of course only ever approximate the smallest
common denominator between two schemes.
The AZ-II categories were collapsed into a set
of six categories that closely resemble AZ cate-
gories, as described in section 2 (with OWN simu-
lated by the union of OWN FAIL, OWN MTHD,
OWN RES, OWN CONC, FUT, and NOV ADV).
This created a 6-category AZ annotation.
As TEXTUAL is not marked up in AZ-II, the
original AZ annotation was also collapsed, by in-
corporating TEXTUAL examples into OWN. The
two 6-pronged AZ-annotations are now more di-
rectly comparable. Inter-annotator agreement for
the collapsed AZ-II showed ? = 0.75 (N=3745,
n=6, k=3). This compares favourably to the col-
lapsed AZ?s agreement of ? = 0.71 (N=3420, n=6,
k=3); but when comparing the raw numerical re-
sults one should consider that different data from
different disciplines is used (chemistry in AZ-II,
CL in AZ).
These results should be interpreted as a pos-
itive result for the domain-independence of AZ,
and also for the feasibility of using trained non-
experts as annotators. The additional work that
went into the guidelines has produced annotation
of a high consistency, even though AZ-II provides
more distinctions (15 categories vs. 7 in AZ).
There is also the faint possibility that discourse
annotation of chemistry is intrinsically easier than
discourse annotation of CL, because it is a more
established discipline and not despite of it. For
instance, it is likely that the problem-solving cat-
egories OWN FAIL, OWN MTHD, OWN RES and
OWN CONC are easier to describe in a discipline
with an established methodology (such as chem-
istry), than they are in a younger, developing dis-
cipline such as computational linguistics.
5 Conclusion
Argumentative Zoning is an analysis of the rhetor-
ical progression of the scientific argument in a pa-
per. In this paper, we have made the following
contributions to this analysis:
? We have presented a more informative
scheme, which additionally recognises the
structure of an experiment in terms of prob-
lem solving (method ? results ? conclusions)
and makes more fine-grained distinctions in
some of the sentiment-inspired relational cat-
egories (e.g., criticism and comparisons to
other approaches).
? We introduced an annotation methodology
which attempts to systematically exclude the
use of annotators? extraneous domain knowl-
edge from the annotation.
? We have experimentally shown that human
coders can independently annotate this new
AZ scheme in two distinct disciplines. Our
results show inter-annotator agreements of
?=0.65 and ?=0.71 for computational lin-
guistics and chemistry, respectively.
Overall, the outcome of this work indicates
that the phenomena described in AZ can be de-
fined in a domain-independent way. The experi-
ment also tested how realistic the ?expert-trained
non-expert? approach to domain-knowledge free
annotation is. The fact that the agreement be-
tween three annotators (an expert, a semi-expert,
and a non-expert) is acceptable overall vindicate
our task definition as domain-knowledge free (us-
ing the tools of justification and domain-specific
generic knowledge). However, the agreements in-
volving the semi-expert are higher than the agree-
ment between expert and non-expert. This prob-
ably means that the chemistry generics were not
fully adequate to ensure that the non-expert un-
derstood enough of the chemistry to achieve the
highest-possible agreement.
1500
The automation of AZ-annotation is underway.
This requires adaptation of the high-level features
used in AZ (Teufel and Moens, 2002) to chemistry.
We are also preparing an annotation experiment
with naive annotators. Another research avenue
is the expansion of the guidelines to other disci-
plines such as bio-medicine, and to longer journal
articles, e.g., in computational linguistics.
6 Acknowledgements
This work was funded by EPSRC project Sciborg
(EP/C010035/1).
Appendix: Annotation Examples6
AIM We now describe in this paper a synthetic route for the
functionalisation of the framework of mesoporous organosil-
ica by free phosphine oxide ligands, which can act as a tem-
plate for the introduction of lanthanide ions. (b514878b)
AIM The aim of this paper is to examine the role that train-
ing plays in the tagging process . . . (9410012)
NOV ADV Moreover, the simplicity and ease of application
of the electrochemical method [...] should also be emphasised
and makes it an interesting and valuable synthetic tool.
(b513402a)
NOV ADV Other than the economic factor, an important ad-
vantage of combining morphological analysis and error detec-
tion/correction is the way the lexical tree associated with the
analysis can be used to determine correction possibilities.
(9504024)
CO GRO A wide range of organosulfur compounds are bi-
ologically active and some find commercial application as
fungicides and bactericides1?4 . (b514441h)
CO GRO It has often been stated that discourse is an inher-
ently collaborative process . . . (9504007)
OTHR In their system, antibody immobilized on a solid sub-
strate reacts with antigen, which binds with another antibody
labelled with peroxidase. (b313094k)
OTHR But in Moortgat?s mixed system all the different re-
source management modes of the different systems are left in-
tact in the combination and can be exploited in different parts
of the grammar. (9605016)
PREV OWN As a program aimed at the applications of
imines(2a,g,5) we have studied the formation of carbanions
from imines and their subsequent reactions. (b200198e)
PREV OWN Earlier work of the author (Feldweg 1993;
Feldweg 1995a) within the framework of a project on corpus
based development of lexical knowledge bases (ELWIS) has
produced LIKELY . . . (9502038)
OWN MTHD In order for it to be useful for our purposes,
the following extensions must be made: (0102021)
OWN MTHD On the other hand, a tertiary amide can be an
excellent linking functional group. (b201987f)
6Corpus examples are taken from our chemistry and CL
data sets; indicated by their respective file numbers.
OWN FAIL Initial attempts to improve the dehydration of 4
via chemical or thermal means were unsuccessful; similarly,
attempts to couple the chlorosilane (Me3Si)2 (Me2ClSi)CH
with Ag2O failed. (b510692c)
OWN FAIL When the ABL algorithms try to learn with two
completely distinct sentences, nothing can be learned.
(0104006)
OWN RES While the acid 1a readily coupled to the olefin,
the corresponding boronic ester was surprisingly inert under
the reaction conditions. (b311492a)
OWN RES All the curves have a generally upward trend but
always lie far below backoff (51% error rate). (0001012)
OWN CONC It is unlikely that every VOC emit ted by plants
serves an ecological or physiological role . . . (b507589k)
OWN CONC Unless grammar size takes on proportionately
much more significance for such longer inputs, which seems
implausible, it appears that in fact the major problems do not
lie in the area of grammar size, but in input length. (9405033)
GAP WEAK Various methods of preparation have been de-
veloped, but they often suffer from low yield and tedious
separation.[16,17,28,31] (b200888m)
GAP WEAK Here, we will produce experimental evidence
suggesting that this simple model leads to serious overesti-
mates of system error rates. . . (9407009)
CODI However, the measured values of the dielectric con-
stant (? = 310) are lower than the values reported by Ganguli
and coworkers(21) for BSTO pellets sintered at 1100 degC . . .
(b506578j)
CODI Unlike most research in pragmatics that focuses on
certain types of presuppositions or implicatures, we provide a
global framework in which one can express all these types of
pragmatic inferences. (9504017)
SUPPORT This is in line with the findings of Martin and Illas
for inorganic solids (84,85) . (b515732c)
SUPPORT Work similar to that described here has been car-
ried out by Merialdo (1994), with broadly similar conclusions.
(9410012)
USE The diamine 10 was prepared following a previously
published procedure(4d) . (b110865b)
USE We use the framework for the allocation and transfer
of control of Whittaker and Stenton (1988). (9504007)
FUT Our further efforts are directed towards the above
goal,. . . and overcoming limitations pertaining to the electron-
poor arylboronic acids. (b311492a)
FUT An important area for future research is to develop
principled methods for identifying distinct speaker strategies
pertaining to how they signal segments. (9505025)
ANTISUPP Although purification of 8b to a de of 95percent
has been reported elsewhere[31], in our hands it was always
obtained as a mixture of the two [EQN]-diastereomers.
(b310767a)
ANTISUPP This result challenges the claims of recent dis-
course theories (Grosz and Sidner 1986, Reichman 1985)
which argue for a the close relation between cue words and
discourse structure. (9504006)
1501
References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder agree-
ment for computational linguistics. Computational Lin-
guistics, 34(4):555?596.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classification
tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Linguistics,
22(2):249?254.
Christine Chichester, Frdrique Lisacek, Aaron Kaplan, and
Agnes Sandor. 2005. Discovering paradigm shift patterns
in biomedical abstracts: application to neurodegenerative
diseases. In Proceedings of First International Sympo-
sium on Semantic Mining in Biomedicine.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nomi-
nal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
20:37?46.
V. Feltrim, Simone Teufel, Gracas Nunes, and S. Alu-
sio. 2005. Argumentative zoning applied to critiquing
novices? scientific abstracts. In Janyce Wiebe James
G. Shanahan, Yan Qu, editor, Computing Attitude and Af-
fect in Text: Theory and Applications, pages 233?245.
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
J. L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agreement
among many raters. Psychological Bulletin, 76:378?381.
Eugene Garfield. 1965. Can citation indexing be automated?
In M. et al Stevens, editor, Statistical Association Meth-
ods for Mechanical Documentation (NBS Misc. Pub. 269).
National Bureau of Standards, Washington.
Mark Garzone and Robert E. Mercer. 2000. Towards an au-
tomated citation classifier. In Proceedings of the 13th Bi-
ennial Conference of the CSCI/SCEIO (AI-2000), pages
337?346.
Ken Hyland. 1998. Persuasion and context: The pragmat-
ics of academic metadiscourse. Journal of Pragmatics,
30(4):437?455.
Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An Introduc-
tion to its Methodology. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills,
CA.
Terttu Luukkonen. 1992. Is scientists? publishing behaviour
reward-seeking? Scientometrics, 24:297?319.
Yoko Mizuta and Nigel Collier. 2004. An annotation scheme
for rhetorical analysis of biology articles. In Proceedings
of LREC?2004.
Greg Myers. 1992. In this paper we report...?speech acts
and scientific facts. Journal of Pragmatics, 17(4):295?
313.
Hidetsugu Nanba and Manabu Okumura. 1999. Towards
multi-paper summarization using reference information.
In Proceedings of the XXth International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-99), pages 926?931.
Sidney Siegel and N. John Jr. Castellan. 1988. Nonparamet-
ric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill,
Berkeley, CA, 2nd edition.
Ina Spiegel-Ru?sing. 1977. Bibliometric and content analy-
sis. Social Studies of Science, 7:97?113.
John Swales, 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Academic
and Research Settings. Chapter 7: Research articles in
English, pages 110?176. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summarising scien-
tific articles ? experiments with relevance and rhetorical
status. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):409?446.
Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta, and Marc Moens. 1999. An
annotation scheme for discourse-level argumentation in
research articles. In Proceedings of the 9th Meeting of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL-99), pages 110?117, Bergen, Norway.
Simone Teufel, Advaith Siddharthan, and Dan Tidhar. 2006.
Automatic classification of citation function. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP-06.
Simone Teufel. 2001. Task-based evaluation of summary
quality: Describing relationships between scientific pa-
pers. In Proceedings of NAACL-01 Workshop ?Automatic
Text Summarization?, Pittsburgh, PA.
Melvin Weinstock. 1971. Citation indexes. In Encyclopedia
of Library and Information Science, volume 5, pages 16?
40. Dekker, New York, NY.
1502
