Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 391?399,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009.
c
?2009 ACL and AFNLP
A Comparison of Model Free versus Model Intensive Approaches to
Sentence Compression
Tadashi Nomoto
National Institute of Japanese Literature
10-3 Midori Tachikawa
Tokyo 190-0014 Japan
nomoto@acm.org
Abstract
This work introduces a model free approach to
sentence compression, which grew out of ideas
from Nomoto (2008), and examines how it com-
pares to a state-of-art model intensive approach
known as Tree-to-Tree Transducer, or T3 (Cohn
and Lapata, 2008). It is found that a model free
approach significantly outperforms T3 on the par-
ticular data we created from the Internet. We also
discuss what might have caused T3?s poor perfor-
mance.
1 Introduction
While there are a few notable exceptions (Hori and
Furui, 2004; Yamagata et al, 2006), it would be
safe to say that much of prior research on sen-
tence compression has been focusing on what we
might call ?model-intensive approaches,? where
the goal is to mimic human created compressions
as faithfully as possible, using probabilistic and/or
machine learning techniques (Knight and Marcu,
2002; Riezler et al, 2003; Turner and Charniak,
2005; McDonald, 2006; Clarke and Lapata, 2006;
Cohn and Lapata, 2007; Cohn and Lapata, 2008;
Cohn and Lapata, 2009). Because of this, the
question has never been raised as to whether a
model free approach ? where the goal is not to
model what humans would produce as compres-
sion, but to provide compressions just as useful as
those created by human ? will offer a viable alter-
native to model intensive approaches. This is the
question we take on in this paper.
1
1
One caveat would be in order. By model free approach,
we mean a particular approach which does not furnish any
parameters or weights that one can train on human created
compressions. An approach is said to be model-intensive if it
does. So as far as the present paper is concerned, we might
do equally well with a mention of ?model free? (?model-
intensive?) replaced with ?unsupervised? (?supervised?), or
?non-trainable? (?trainable?).
An immediate benefit of the model-free ap-
proach is that we could free ourselves from the
drudgery of collecting gold standard data from hu-
mans, which is costly and time-consuming. An-
other benefit is intellectual; it opens up an alterna-
tive avenue to addressing the problem of sentence
compression hitherto under-explored.
Also breaking from the tradition of previous re-
search on sentence compression, we explore the
use of naturally occurring data from the Internet
as the gold standard. The present work builds on
and takes further an approach called ?Generic Sen-
tence Trimmer? (GST) (Nomoto, 2008), demon-
strating along the way that it could be adapted for
English with relative ease. (GST was originally
intended for Japanese.) In addition, to get a per-
spective on where we stand with this approach, we
will look at how it fares against a state-of-the-art
model intensive approach known as ?Tree-to-Tree
Transducer? (T3) (Cohn, 2008), on the corpus we
created.
2 Approach
Nomoto (2008) discusses a two-level model
for sentence compression in Japanese termed
?Generic Sentence Trimmer? (GST), which con-
sists of a component dedicated to producing gram-
matical sentences, and another to reranking sen-
tences in a way consistent with gold standard com-
pressions. For the convenience?s sake, we refer
to the generation component as ?GST/g? and the
ranking part as ?GST/r.? The approach is moti-
vated largely by the desire to make compressed
sentences linguistically fluent, and what it does
is to retain much of the syntax of the source sen-
tence as it is, in compression, which stands in con-
trast to Filippova and Strube (2007) and Filippova
and Strube (2008), who while working with de-
pendency structure (as we do), took the issue to be
something that can be addressed by selecting and
reordering constituents that are deemed relevant.
391
CD
E
B
A
F
G
H
P 1
P 2
P 3
Figure 1: Dependency Structure for ?ABCDEFGH?
Getting back to GST, let us consider a sentence,
(1) The bailout plan was likely to depend on
private investors to purchase the toxic assets
that wiped out the capital of many banks.
Among possible compressions GST/g produces
for the sentence are:
(2)
a. The bailout plan was likely to depend on
private investors to purchase the toxic assets.
b. The bailout plan was likely to depend on
private investors.
c. The bailout plan was likely to depend on
investors.
d. The bailout plan was likely.
Notice that they do not differ much from the
source sentence (1), except that they get some of
the parts chopped off. In the following, we talk
about how this could done systematically.
3 Compression with Terminating
Dependency Paths
One crucial feature of GST is the notion of Ter-
minating Dependency Paths or TDPs, which en-
ables us to factorize a dependency structure into
a set of independent fragments. Consider string
s = ABCDEFGH with a dependency structure as
shown in Figure 1. We begin by locating terminal
nodes, i.e., those which have no incoming edges,
depicted as filled circles in Figure 1. Next we find
a dependency (singly linked) path from each ter-
minal node to the root (labeled E). This would give
us three paths p
1
= A-C-D-E, p
2
= B-C-D-E, and
p
3
= H-G-F-E (represented by dashed arrows in
Figure 1).
C
D
E
B
#
C
D
E
A
#
G
F
E
H
#
@ %
Figure 2: TDP Trellis and POTs.
Given TDPs, we set out to find a set T of all
suffixes for each TDP, including an empty string,
which would look like:
T (p
1
) = {?A C D E?, ?C D E?, ?D E?, ?E?, ??}
T (p
2
) = {?B C D E?, ?C D E?, ?D E?, ?E?, ??}
T (p
3
) = {?G F E?, ?F E?, ?E?, ??}
Next we combine suffixes, one from each set T ,
while removing duplicates if any. Combining, for
instance, ?A C D E? ? T (p
1
), ?C D E? ? T (p
2
),
and ?G F E? ? T (p
3
), would produce {A C D
E G F}, which we take to correspond to a string
ACDEGF, a short version of s.
As a way of doing this systematically, we put
TDPs in a trellis format as in Figure 2, each file
representing a TDP, and look for a path across the
trellis, which we call ?POT.? It is easy to see that
traveling across the trellis (while keeping record
of nodes visited), gives you a particular way in
which to combine TDPs: thus in Figure 2, we have
three POTs, C-B-F, A-C-H, and A-B-F, giving rise
to BCDEF, ACDEFGH, and ABCDEF, respectively
(where ?&? denotes a starting node, ?%? an ending
node, and ?#? an empty string). Note that the POT
in effect determines what compression we get.
Take for instance a POT C-B-F. To get to a com-
pression, we first expand C-B-F to get {?C D E?
1
,
?B C D E?
2
, ?F E?
3
} (call it E(C-B-F)). (Note that
each TDP is trimmed to start with a node at a cor-
responding position of the POT.) Next we take a
union of TDPs treating them as if they were sets:
thus
?
E(C-B-F) = {B C D E F} = BCDEF.
4 N-Best Search over TDP Trellis
An obvious problem of this approach, however,
is that it spawns hundreds of thousands of possi-
ble POTs. We would have as many as 5
3
= 125
of them for the eight-character long string in Fig-
ure 1.
392
p l a n
w
a s
t o
d e
p
e
n
d
l i k
e
l y
t h
e
b
a i l
o u t
p
u r c h
a s
e
o
n
i n v
e
s
t o r
s
t o
t h
e
t o x
i
c
a s s
e
t
s
w
i p
e d
t h
a
t
o u t
b
a n k s
m a n y
c
a p i
t
a l
t h
e
o f
0
1
23
45
6
7
d e p t h
Figure 3: Dependency Structure
What we propose to deal with this problem is to
call on a particular ranking scheme to discriminate
among candidates we get. Our scheme takes the
form of Equation 3 and 4.
W (x) = idf(x) + exp(?depth(x)) (3)
S(p) =
?
x
0
,...x
n
?E(p)
W (x
i
) (4)
depth(x) indicates the distance between x and the
root, measured by the number of edges one need
to walk across to reach the root from x. Figure 3
shows how the depth is gauged for nodes in a de-
pendency structure. idf(x) represents the log of
the inverse document frequency of x. The equa-
tions state that the score S of a POT p is given as
the sum of weights of nodes that comprise
?
E(p).
Despite their being simple, equations 3 and 4
nicely capture our intuition about the way the trim-
ming or compression should work, i.e., that the
deeper we go down the tree, or the further away
you are from the main clause, the less important
information becomes. Putting aside idf(x) for
the moment, we find in Figure 3, W (assets) >
W (capital) > W (banks) > W (many). Also de-
picted in the figure are four TDPs starting with
many, the (preceding toxic), investors, and the
(preceding bailout).
Finally, we perform a best-first search over the
trellis to pick N highest scoring POTs, using For-
Table 1: Drop-me-not rules. A ?|? stands for or.
?a:b? refers to an element which has both a and b
as attributes. Relation names such as nsubj, aux,
neg, etc., are from de Marneffe et al (2006).
R1. VB ? nsubj | aux | neg | mark
R2. VB ? WDT | WRB
R3. JJ ? cop
R4. NN ? det | cop
R5. NN ? poss:WP (=?whose?)
R6. ? ? conj & cc
ward DP/Backward A* (Nagata, 1994), with the
evaluation function given by Equation 4. We
found that the beam search, especially when used
with a small width value, does not work as well
as the best first search as it tends to produce very
short sentences due to its tendency to focus on
inner nodes, which generally carry more weights
compared to those on the edge. In the experiments
described later, we limited the number of candi-
dates to explore at one time to 3,000, to make the
search computationally feasible.
5 ?Drop-me-not? Rules
Simply picking a path over the TDP trellis (POT),
however, does not warrant the grammaticality of
the tree that it generates. Take for instance, a de-
pendency rule, ?likely?plan, was, depend,? which
forms part of the dependency structure for sen-
tence (1). It gives rise to three TDPs, ?plan, likely?,
?was, likely?, and ?depend, likely?. Since we may
arbitrarily choose either of the two tokens in each
TDP with a complete disregard for a syntagmatic
context that each token requires, we may end up
with sequences such as ?plan likely,? ?plan was
likely,? or ?plan likely depend? (instances of a same
token are collapsed into one). This would obvi-
ously suggest the need for some device to make
the way we pick a path syntagmatically coherent.
The way we respond to the issue is by introduc-
ing explicit prohibitions, or ?drop-me-not? rules
for POTs to comply with. Some of the major
rules are shown in Table 1. A ?drop-me-not? rule
(DMN) applies to a local dependency tree consist-
ing of a parent node and its immediate child nodes.
The intent of a DMN rule is to prohibit any one of
the elements specified on the right hand side of the
arrow from falling off in the presence of the head
393
node; they will be gone only if their head node is.
R1 says that if you have a dependency tree
headed by VB with nsubj, aux, neg, ormark among
its children, they should stay with VB; R2 pro-
hibits against eliminating a WDT or WRB-labeled
word in a dependency structure headed by VB; R6
disallows either cc or conj to drop without accom-
panying the other, for whatever type the head node
assumes.
In Table 2, we find some examples that moti-
vate the kinds of DMN rules we have in Table 1.
Note that given the DMNs, the generation of ?was
likely depend,? or ?plan likely depend? is no longer
possible for the sentence in Figure 3.
6 Reranking with CRFs
Pipelining GST/g with CRFs allows us to tap into
a host of features found in the sentence that could
usefully be exploited toward generating compres-
sion, and requires no significant change in the way
it is first conceived in Nomoto (2008), in order to
make it work for English. It simply involves trans-
lating an output by GST/g into the form that al-
lows the use of CRFs; this could be done simply
by labeling words included in compression as ?1?
and those taken out as ?0,? which would produce
a binary representation of an output generated by
GST/g. Given a source sentence x and a set G(S)
of candidate compressions generated by GST/g ?
represented in binary format ? we seek to solve
the following,
y
?
= argmax
y?G(S)
p(y|x;?). (5)
where y
?
could be found using regular linear-
chain CRFs (Lafferty et al, 2001). ? stands for
model parameters. In building CRFs, we made use
of features representing lexical forms, syntactic
categories, dependency relations, TFIDF, whether
a given word appears in the title of an article, and
the left and right lexical contexts of a word.
7 T3
Cohn and Lapata (2008; 2009) are a recent attempt
to bring a machine learning framework known as
?Structured SVM? to bear on sentence compres-
sion and could be considered to be among the
current state-of-art approaches. Roughly speak-
ing, their approach or what they call ?Tree-to-Tree
Transducer? (T3) takes sentence compression to
be the problem of classifying the source sentence
Table 3: RSS item and its source
R Two bombings rocked Iraq today, killing at
least 80 in attacks at a shrine in Karbala
and a police recruiting station in Ramadi.
S Baghdad, Jan. 5 ? Two new suicide bomb-
ings rocked Iraq today, killing at least 80
in an attack at a shrine in the Shiite city of
Karbala and a police recruiting station in
the Sunni city of Ramadi.
with its target sentence, where one seeks to find
some label y, which represents a compression, for
a given source sentence x, that satisfies the follow-
ing equation,
f(x;w) = argmax
y?Y
F (y, x;w), (6)
and
F (y, x;w) = ?w,?(y, x)?, (7)
where w, a vector representing model parameters,
is determined in such a way that for a target class
y and a prediction y
?
, F (x, y;w) ? F (x, y
?
;w) >
?(y, y
?
) ? ?, ?y
?
?= y; ?(y, y
?
) represents a loss
function and ? a slack variable (Tsochantaridis et
al., 2005). ?(y, x) represents a vector of features
culled from y and x, and ??, ?? a dot product.
For each of the rules used to derive a source sen-
tence, T3 makes a decision on how or whether to
transform the rule, with reference to ??, ??, which
takes into account such features as the number
of terminals, root category, and lengths of fron-
tiers, which eventually leads to a compression via
a chart style dynamic programming.
8 Corpus
Parting ways with previous work on sentence com-
pression, which heavily relied on humans to create
gold standard references, this work has a particu-
lar focus on using data gathered from RSS feeds,
which if successful, could open a door to building
gold standard data in large quantities rapidly and
with little human effort. The primary objective of
the present work is to come up with an approach
capable of exploiting naturally occurring data as
references for compression. So we are interested
394
Table 2: Examples. a ?
r
b means that b stands in an r-relation to a.
rel, nsubj In defying the President, Bill Frist was veering to the political center in a year
during which he had artfully courted his party?s right wing.
couted ?
rel
during
veering?
nsubj
Bill Frist
neg Isaac B. Weisfuse says that the idea that a pandemic flu will somehow skip the 21st
century does not make any sense.
make?
neg
not
mark Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel lashed out at protesters as troops finished
clearing all but the last of the 21 Gaza settlements.
finished ?
mark
as
WDT The announcement offered few details that would convince protestants that they
should resume sharing power with the I.R.A.?s political wing.
convince ?
wdt
that
WRB Arbitron, a company best known for its radio ratings, is testing a portable, pager-
size device that tracks exposure to media throughout the day, wherever its wearer
may go.
go ?
wrb
wherever
cop Buildings in a semi-abandoned town just inside Mexico that is a haven for would-
be immigrants and smugglers will be leveled.
haven ?
cop
is
aux, poss:WP Harutoshi Fukui has penned a handful of best sellers whose common themes
resonate in a country shedding its pacifism and rearming itself.
resonate ?
poss:WP
whose
penned ?
aux
has
Table 4: RSS Corpus from NYTimes.com.
areas # of items
INTERNATIONAL 2052
NYREGION 1153
NATIONAL 1351
OBITUARIES 541
OPINION 1031
SCIENCE 465
SPORTS 1451
TECHNOLOGY 978
WASHINGTON 1297
in finding out how GST compares with T3 from
this particular perspective.
We gathered RSS feeds at NYTimes.com over a
period of several months, across different sections,
including INTERNATIONAL, NATIONAL, NYRE-
GION, BUSINESS, and so forth, out of which we
randomly chose 2,000 items for training data and
116 for testing data. For each RSS summary, we
located its potential source sentence in the linked
page, using a similarity metric known as Soft-
TFIDF (Cohen et al, 2003).
2
Table 4 gives a run-
down on areas items came from and how many of
them we collected for each of these areas.
For the ease of reference, we refer to a corpus of
the training and test data combined as ?NYT-RSS,?
and let ?NYT-RSS(A)? denote the training part of
2
SoftTFIDF is a hybrid of the TFIDF scheme and an edit-
distance model known as Jaro-Winkler(Cohen et al, 2003).
NYT-RSS, and ?NYT-RSS(B)? the testing part.
9 Experiments
We ran the Stanford Parser on NYT-RSS to extract
dependency structures for sentences involved, to
be used with GST/g (de Marneffe et al, 2006;
Klein and Manning, 2003). We manually devel-
oped 28 DMN rules out of NYT-RSS(A), some of
which are presented in Table 1. An alignment be-
tween the source sentence and its corresponding
gold standard compression was made by SWA or
a standard sequence alignment algorithm by Smith
and Waterman (1981). Importantly, we set up
GST/g and T3 in such a way that they rely on the
same set of dependency analyses and alignments
when they are put into operation. We trained T3
on NYT-RSS(A) with default settings except for
??epsilon? and ??delete? options which we turned
off, as preliminary runs indicated that their use led
to a degraded performance (Cohn, 2008). We also
set the loss function as was given in the default
settings. We trained both GST/r, and T3 on NYT-
RSS(A).
We ran GST/g and GST/g+r, i.e., GST/r
pipelined with GST/g, varying the compression
rate from 0.4 to 0.7. This involved letting GST/g
rank candidate compressions by S(p) and then
choosing the first candidate to satisfy a given com-
pression rate, whereas GST/g+r was made to out-
put the highest ranking candidate as measured by
p(y | x; ?), which meets a particular compression
rate. It should be emphasized, however, that in T3,
varying compression rate is not something the user
has control over; so we accepted whatever output
395
Table 5: Results on NYT-RSS. ?*?-marked figures
mean that performance of GST/g is different from
that of GST/g+r (on the comparable CompR) at
5% significance level according to t-test. The fig-
ures indicate average ratings.
Model CompR Intelligibility Rep.
GST/g+r 0.446 2.836 2.612
GST/g 0.469 3.095 2.569
GST/g+r 0.540 2.957 2.767
GST/g 0.562 3.069 3.026
?
GST/g+r 0.632 2.931 2.957
GST/g 0.651 3.060 3.259
?
GST/g+r 0.729 3.155 3.345
GST/g 0.743 3.328 3.621
?
T3 0.353 1.750 1.586
Gold Std. 0.657 4.776 3.931
T3 generated for a given sentence.
Table 5 shows how GST/g, GST/g+r, and T3
performed on NYT-RSS, along with the gold stan-
dard, on a scale of 1 to 5. Ratings were solicited
from 4 native speakers of English. ?CompR? in-
dicates compression rate. ?Intelligibility? means
how well the compression reads; ?representative-
ness? how well the compression represents its
source sentence. Table 6 presents a guideline for
rating, describing what each rating should mean,
which was also presented to human judges to fa-
cilitate evaluation.
The results in Table 5 indicate a clear supe-
riority of GST/g and GST/g+r over T3, while
differences in intelligibility between GST/g and
GST/g+r were found not statistically significant.
What is intriguing, though, is that GST/g produced
performance statistically different in representa-
tiveness from GST/g+r at 5% level as marked by
the asterisk.
Shown in Table 8 are examples of compression
created by GST/g+r, GST/g and T3, together with
gold standard compressions and relevant source
sentences. One thing worth noting about the ex-
amples is that T3 keeps inserting out-of-the-source
information into compression, which obviously
has done more harm than good to compression.
Table 6: Guideline for Rating
MEANING EXPLANATION SCORE
very bad For intelligbility, it means that the
sentence in question is rubbish; no
sense can be made out of it. As
for representativeness, it means that
there is no way in which the com-
pression could be viewed as repre-
senting its source.
1
poor Either the sentence is broken or fails
to make sense for the most part, or it
is focusing on points of least signifi-
cance in the source.
2
fair The sentence can be understood,
though with some mental effort; it
covers some of the important points
in the source sentence.
3
good The sentence allows easy compre-
hension; it covers most of important
points talked about in the source sen-
tence.
4
excellent The sentence reads as if it were writ-
ten by human; it gives a very good
idea of what is being discussed in the
source sentence.
5
Table 7: Examples from corpora. ?C? stands for
reference compression; ?S? source sentence.
NYT-RSS
C Jeanine F. Pirro said that she would abandon her
plans to unseat senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and
would instead run for state attorney general .
S Jeanine F. Pirro, whose campaign to unseat United
States senator Hillary Rodham Clinton was in up-
heaval almost from the start, said yesterday that she
would abandon the race and would instead run for
attorney general of New York.
CLwritten
C Montserrat, the Caribbean island, is bracing itself
for arrests following a fraud investigation by Scot-
land Yard.
S Montserrat, the tiny Caribbean island that once
boasted one bank for every 40 inhabitants, is brac-
ing itself this Easter for a spate of arrests following
a three-year fraud and corruption investigation by
Scotland Yard.
CLspoken
C This gives you the science behind the news, with top-
ics explained in detail, from Mad Cow disease to
comets.
S This page gives you the science behind the news,
with hundreds of topics explained in detail, from
Mad Cow disease to comets.
396
Table 8: form GST/g+r, GST/g, T3, and Gold standard. (?Source? represents a source sentence.)
GST/g+r The Corporation plans to announce today at the Game Show that it will begin selling the
Xbox 360, its new video console , on Nov 22.
GST/g The Microsoft Corporation plans to announce at the Tokyo Game Show that it will begin
selling Xbox 360, new video console , on Nov.
T3 The Microsoft Corporation in New York plans to announce today at the Tokyo Game
Show it will begin selling the Xbox 360 , its new video game console, on Nov 22.
Gold The Microsoft Corporation plans to announce Thursday at the Tokyo Game Show that it
will begin selling the Xbox 360 , its new video game console, on Nov. 22.
Source The Microsoft Corporation plans to announce today at the Tokyo Game Show that it will
begin selling the Xbox 360, its new video game console, on Nov 22.
GST/g+r Scientists may have solved the chemical riddle of why the SARS virus causes such pneu-
monia and have developed a simple therapy.
GST/g Scientists may have solved the chemical riddle of why the virus causes such a pneumonia
and have developed a simple therapy.
T3 The scientists may solved the chemical riddle of the black river of why the SARS virus
causes such a deadly pneumonia.
Gold Scientists may have solved the riddle of why the SARS virus causes such a deadly pneu-
monia.
Source Scientists may have solved the chemical riddle of why the SARS virus causes such a
deadly pneumonia and have developed a simple therapy that promises to decrease the
extraordinarily high death rate from the disease, according to a report in the issue of the
journal nature-medicine that came out this week.
GST/g+r A flu shot from GlaxoSmithKline was approved by American regulators and the Corpo-
ration vaccine plant, shut year because of, moved closer to being opened work to avoid.
GST/g A flu shot was approved by regulators yesterday and the Chiron Corporation vaccine
plant, shut , moved closer to being opened as officials work to avoid shortage.
T3 A flu shot from gaza was the Chiron Corporation?s Liverpool vaccine plant, shut last year
of a contamination shortage,, but critics suggest he is making it worse.
Gold The Chiron Corporation?s liverpool vaccine plant , shut last year because of contamina-
tion, moved closer to being opened as officials work to avoid another shortage.
Source A flu shot fromGlaxoSmithKline was approved by American regulators yesterday and the
Chiron Corporation?s Liverpool vaccine plant , shut last year because of contamination,
moved closer to being opened as officials work to avoid another shortage.
CLwritten
De
ns
it
y
?20 ?10 0 10 20 30
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
0.
06
0.
08
CLspoken
De
ns
it
y
?20 ?10 0 10 20 30
0.
00
0.
02
0.
04
0.
06
0.
08
NYT
De
ns
it
y
?10 0 10 20 30 40
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15
0.
20
Figure 4: Density distribution of alignment scores. The x-dimension represents the degree of alignment
between gold standard compression and its source sentence.
397
Table 9: Alignment Scores by SWA
NYT-RSS CLwritten CLspoken
-3.061 (2000) -1.882 (1629) 0.450 (4110)
10 Why T3 fails
It is interesting and worthwhile to ask what caused
T3, heavily clad in ideas from the recent ma-
chine learning literature, to fail on NYT-RSS, as
opposed to the ?CLwritten? and ?CLspoken? cor-
pora on which T3 reportedly prevailed compared
to other approaches (Cohn and Lapata, 2009).
The CLwritten corpus comes from written sources
in the British National Corpus and the American
News Text corpus; the CLspoken corpus comes
from transcribed broadcast news stories (cf. Ta-
ble 7).
We argue that there are some important dif-
ferences between the NYT-RSS corpus and the
CLwritten/CLspoken corpora that may have led to
T3?s poor record with the former corpus.
The CLwritten and CLspoken corpora were cre-
ated with a specific purpose in mind: namely to
assess the compression-by-deletion approach. So
their authors had a very good reason to limit gold
standard compressions to those that can be arrived
at only through deletion; annotators were care-
fully instructed to create compression by delet-
ing words from the source sentence in a way that
preserves the gist of the original sentence. By
contrast, NYT-RSS consists of naturally occurring
compressions sampled from live feeds on the In-
ternet, where relations between compression and
its source sentence are often not as straightfor-
ward. For instance, to arrive at a compression in
NYT-RSS in Table 7 involves replacing race with
her plans to unseat senator Hillary Rodam Clin-
ton, which is obviously beyond what is possible
with the deletion based approach.
In CLwritten and CLspoken, on the other hand,
compressions are constructed out of parts that ap-
pear in verbatim in the original sentence, as Ta-
ble 7 shows: thus one may get to the compres-
sions by simply crossing off words from the origi-
nal sentence.
To see whether there is any significant differ-
ence among NYT-RSS, CLwritten and CLspoken,
we examined how well gold standard compres-
sions are aligned with source sentences on each
of the corpora, using SWA. Table 9 shows what
we found. Parenthetical numbers represent how
many pairs of compression and source are found in
each corpus. A larger score means a tighter align-
ment between gold standard compression and its
source sentence: we find in Table 9 that CLspoken
has a source sentence more closely aligned with
its compression than CLwritten, whose alignments
are more closely tied than NYT-RSS?s.
Figure 4 (found in the previous page) shows
how SWA alignment scores are distributed over
each of the corpora. CLwritten and CLspoken
have peaks at around 0, with an almost entire
mass of scores concentrating in an area close to or
above 0. This means that for the most of the cases
in either CLwritten or CLspoken, compression is
very similar in form to its source. In contrast,
NYT-RSS has a heavy concentration of scores in
a stretch between -5 and -10, indicating that for
the most of time, the overlap between compres-
sion and its source is rather modest compared to
CLwritten and CLspoken.
So why does T3 fails on NYT-RSS? Because
NYT-RSS contains lots of alignments that are only
weakly related: in order for T3 to perform well,
the training corpus should be made as free of spu-
rious data as possible, so that most of the align-
ments are rated over and around 0 by SWA. Our
concern is that such data may not happen naturally,
as the density distribution of NYT-RSS shows,
where the majority of alignments are found far be-
low 0, which could raise some questions about the
robustness of T3.
11 Conclusions
This paper introduced the model free approach,
GST/g, which works by creating compressions
only in reference to dependency structure, and
looked at how it compares with a model intensive
approach T3 on the data gathered from the Inter-
net. It was found that the latter approach appears
to crucially rely on the way the corpus is con-
structed in order for it to work, which may mean a
huge compromise.
Interestingly enough, GST/g came out a winner
on the particular corpus we used, even outperform-
398
ing its CRFs harnessed version, GST/g+r in repre-
sentativeness. This suggests that we might gain
more by improving fluency of GST/g than by fo-
cusing on its representativeness, which in any case
came close to that of human at 70% compression
level. The future work should also look at how the
present approach fares on CLwritten and CLspo-
ken, for which T3 was found to be effective.
Acknowledgements
The author likes to express gratitude to the review-
ers of EMNLP for the time and trouble they took
to review the paper. Their efforts are greatly ap-
preciated.
References
James Clarke and Mirella Lapata. 2006. Models
for sentence compression: A comparison across do-
mains, training requirements and evaluation mea-
sures. In Proceedings of the 21st COLING and 44th
ACL, pages 377?384, Sydney, Australia, July.
William W. Cohen, Pradeep Ravikumar, and
Stephen E. Fienberg. 2003. A comparison of
string distance metrics for name-matching tasks. In
Subbarao Kambhampati and Craig A. Knoblock,
editors, IIWeb, pages 73?78.
Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Large mar-
gin synchronous generation and its application to
sentence compression. In Proceedings of the 2007
EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 73?82, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June.
Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Sentence
compression beyond word deletion. In Proceedings
of the 22nd COLING, pages 137?144, Manchester,
UK, August.
Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Sen-
tence compression as tree transduction. Draft at
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/tcohn/t3/.
Trevor Cohn. 2008. T3: Tree Transducer Toolkit.
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/tcohn/t3/.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
LREC 2006.
Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2007. Generating
constituent order in german clauses. In Proceedings
of the 45th ACL, pages 320?327, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June.
Katja Filippova and Michael Strube. 2008. Sentence
fusion via dependency graph compression. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 EMNLP, pages 177?185, Hon-
olulu, Hawaii, October.
C. Hori and Sadaoki Furui. 2004. Speech summa-
rization: an approach through word extraction and
a method for evaluation. IEICE Transactions on In-
formation and Systems, E87-D(1):15?25.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st ACL, pages 423?430, Sapporo, Japan, July.
Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summariza-
tion beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic ap-
proach to sentence compression. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 139:91?107.
John Lafferty, Andrew MacCallum, and Fernando
Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields: Prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the 18th ICML-2001.
Ryan McDonald. 2006. Discriminative sentence com-
pression with soft syntactic evidence. In Proceed-
ings of the 11th EACL, pages 297?304.
Masaaki Nagata. 1994. A stochastic japanese morpho-
logical analyzer using a forward-dp backward-a* n-
best search algorithm. In Proceedings of COLING-
94.
Tadashi Nomoto. 2008. A generic sentence trimmer
with CRFs. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
299?307, Columbus, Ohio, June.
Stefan Riezler, Tracy H. King, Richard Crouch, and
Annie Zaenen. 2003. Statistical sentence conden-
sation using ambiguity packing and stochastic dis-
ambiguation methods for lexical functional gram-
mar. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pages
118?125, Edmonton.
T. F. Smith and M. S. Waterman. 1981. Identifica-
tion of common molecular subsequence. Journal of
Molecular Biology, 147:195?197.
Ioannis Tsochantaridis, Thomas Hofmann, Thorsten
Joachims, and Yasemin Altun. 2005. Support vec-
tor machine learning for interdependent and struc-
tured output spaces. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 6:1453?1484.
Jenie Turner and Eugen Charniak. 2005. Supervised
and unsupervised learning for sentence compres-
sion. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACL, pages 290?
297, Ann Arbor, June.
Kiwamu Yamagata, Satoshi Fukutomi, Kazuyuki Tak-
agi, and Kzauhiko Ozeki. 2006. Sentence compres-
sion using statistical information about dependency
path length. In Proceedings of TSD 2006 (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4188/2006), pages
127?134, Brno, Czech Republic.
399
