Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1096?1104,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The Feature Subspace Method for SMT System Combination 
 
Nan Duan1, Mu Li2, Tong Xiao3, Ming Zhou2 
  1Tianjin University       2Microsoft Research Asia       3Northeastern University 
     Tianjin, China                    Beijing, China                     Shenyang, China 
{v-naduan,muli,v-toxiao,mingzhou}@microsoft.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Recently system combination has been shown 
to be an effective way to improve translation 
quality over single machine translation sys-
tems. In this paper, we present a simple and ef-
fective method to systematically derive an en-
semble of SMT systems from one baseline li-
near SMT model for use in system combina-
tion. Each system in the resulting ensemble is 
based on a feature set derived from the fea-
tures of the baseline model (typically a subset 
of it). We will discuss the principles to deter-
mine the feature sets for derived systems, and 
present in detail the system combination mod-
el used in our work. Evaluation is performed 
on the data sets for NIST 2004 and NIST 2005 
Chinese-to-English machine translation tasks. 
Experimental results show that our method can 
bring significant improvements to baseline 
systems with state-of-the-art performance. 
1 Introduction 
Research on Statistical Machine Translation 
(SMT) has shown substantial progress in recent 
years. Since the success of phrase-based methods 
(Och and Ney, 2004; Koehn, 2004), models 
based on formal syntax (Chiang, 2005) or lin-
guistic syntax (Liu et al, 2006; Marcu et al, 
2006) have also achieved state-of-the-art perfor-
mance. As a result of the increasing numbers of 
available machine translation systems, studies on 
system combination have been drawing more and 
more attention in SMT research. 
 There have been many successful attempts to 
combine outputs from multiple machine transla-
tion systems to further improve translation quali-
ty. A system combination model usually takes n-
best translations of single systems as input, and 
depending on the combination strategy, different 
methods can be used. Sentence-level combina-
tion methods directly select hypotheses from 
original outputs of single SMT systems (Sim et 
al., 2007; Hildebrand and Vogel, 2008), while 
phrase-level or word?level combination methods 
are more complicated and could produce new 
translations different from any translations in the 
input (Bangalore et al, 2001; Jayaraman and La-
vie, 2005; Matusov et al, 2006; Sim et al, 
2007). 
 Among all the factors contributing to the suc-
cess of system combination, there is no doubt 
that the availability of multiple machine transla-
tion systems is an indispensable premise. Al-
though various approaches to SMT system com-
bination have been explored, including enhanced 
combination model structure (Rosti et al, 2007), 
better word alignment between translations 
(Ayan et al, 2008; He et al, 2008) and improved 
confusion network construction (Rosti et al, 
2008), most previous work simply used the en-
semble of SMT systems based on different mod-
els and paradigms at hand and did not tackle the 
issue of how to obtain the ensemble in a prin-
cipled way. To our knowledge the only work 
discussed this problem is Macherey and Och 
(2007), in which they experimented with build-
ing different SMT systems by varying one or 
more sub-models (i.e. translation model or dis-
tortion model) of an existing SMT system, and 
observed that changes in early-stage model train-
ing introduced most diversities in translation 
outputs.  
In this paper, we address the problem of build-
ing an ensemble of diversified machine transla-
tion systems from a single translation engine for 
system combination. In particular, we propose a 
novel Feature Subspace method for the ensemble 
construction based on any baseline SMT model 
which can be formulated as a standard linear 
function. Each system within the ensemble is 
based on a group of features directly derived 
from the baseline model with minimal efforts 
(which is typically a subset of the features used 
in the baseline model), and the resulting system 
is optimized in the derived feature space accor-
dingly. 
We evaluated our method on the test sets for 
NIST 2004 and NIST 2005 Chinese-to-English 
1096
machine translation tasks using two baseline 
SMT systems with state-of-the-art performance. 
Experimental results show that the feature sub-
space method can bring significant improve-
ments to both baseline systems. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
The motivation of our work is described on Sec-
tion 2. In Section 3, we first give a detailed de-
scription about feature subspace method, includ-
ing the principle to select subspaces from all 
possible options, and then an n-gram consensus ?
based sentence-level system combination method 
is presented. Experimental results are given in 
Section 4. Section 5 discusses some related is-
sues and concludes the paper. 
2 Motivation 
Our motivations for this work can be described 
in the following two aspects. 
The first aspect is related to the cost of build-
ing single systems for system combination. In 
previous work, the SMT systems used in combi-
nation differ mostly in two ways. One is the un-
derlying models adopted by individual systems. 
For example, using an ensemble of systems re-
spectively based on phrase-based models, hierar-
chical models or even syntax-based models is a 
common practice. The other is the methods used 
for feature function estimation such as using dif-
ferent word alignment models, language models 
or distortion models. For the first solution, build-
ing a new SMT system with different methodol-
ogy is by no means an easy task even for an ex-
perienced SMT researcher, because it requires 
not only considerable effects to develop but also 
plenty of time to accumulate enough experiences 
to fine tune the system. For the second alterna-
tive, usually it requires time-consuming re-
training for word alignment or language models. 
Also some of the feature tweaking in this solu-
tion is system or language specific, thus for any 
new systems or language pairs, human engineer-
ing has to be involved. For example, using dif-
ferent word segmentation methods for Chinese 
can generate different word alignment results, 
and based on which a new SMT system can be 
built. Although this may be useful to combina-
tion of Chinese-to-English translation, it is not 
applicable to most of other language pairs. 
Therefore it will be very helpful if there is a 
light-weight method that enables the SMT sys-
tem ensemble to be systematically constructed 
based on an existing SMT system. 
 
Source 
sentence 
?? ?? ?? ? ?? ?? 
?? ?? ?? 
Ref 
translation 
China's largest sea water desalini-
zation project settles in Zhoushan 
Default 
translation 
China 's largest desalination  
project in Zhoushan 
??????  
translation 
China 's largest sea water  
desalination project in Zhoushan 
Table 1: An example of translations generated 
from the same decoder but with different feature 
settings. 
 Chinese English ? ? ?  
1 ?? ?? desalination 0.4000 
2 ?? sea water 0.1748 
3 ?? desalination 0.0923 
Table 2: Parameters of related phrases for exam-
ples in Table 1. 
The second aspect motivating our work comes 
from the subspace learning method in machine 
learning literature (Ho, 1998), in which an en-
semble of classifiers are trained on subspaces of 
the full feature space, and final classification re-
sults are based on the vote of all classifiers in the 
ensemble. Lopez and Resnik (2006) also showed 
that feature engineering could be used to over-
come deficiencies of poor alignment. To illu-
strate the usefulness of feature subspace in the 
SMT task, we start with the example shown in 
Table 1. In the example, the Chinese source sen-
tence is translated with two settings of a hierar-
chical phrase-based system (Chiang, 2005). In 
the default setting all the features are used as 
usual in the decoder, and we find that the transla-
tion of the Chinese word ??  (sea water) is 
missing in the output. This can be explained with 
the data shown in Table 2. Because of noises and 
word alignment errors in the parallel training 
data, the inaccurate translation phrase 
?? ?? ? ????????????  is assigned with a 
high value of the phrase translation probability 
feature ?(?|?). Although the correct translation 
can also be composed by two phrases ?? ?
??? ????? and ?? ? ????????????, its over-
all translation score cannot beat the incorrect one 
because the combined phrase translation proba-
bility of these two phrases are much smaller 
than  ?(????????????|?? ??) . However, if 
we intentionally remove the ?(?|?) feature from 
the model, the preferred translation can be gener-
ated as shown in the result of ??????  because in 
1097
this way the bad estimation of ?(?|?)  for this 
phrase is avoided. 
This example gives us the hint that building 
decoders based on subspaces of a standard model 
could help with working around some negative 
impacts of inaccurate estimations of feature val-
ues for some input sentences. The subspace-
based systems are expected to work similarly to 
statistical classifiers trained on subspaces of a 
full feature space ? though the overall accuracy 
of baseline system might be better than any indi-
vidual systems, for a specific sentence some in-
dividual systems could generate better transla-
tions. It is expected that employing an ensemble 
of subspace-based systems and making use of 
consensus between them will outperform the 
baseline system. 
3 Feature Subspace Method for SMT 
System Ensemble Construction 
In this section, we will present in detail the me-
thod for systematically deriving SMT systems 
from a standard linear SMT model based on fea-
ture subspaces for system combination. 
3.1 SMT System Ensemble Generation 
Nowadays most of the state-of-the-art SMT sys-
tems are based on linear models as proposed in 
Och and Ney (2002). Let ?? (?, ?) be a feature 
function, and ??  be its weight, an SMT model ? 
can be formally written as: 
?? = argmax
?
 ???? (?, ?)
?
 (1) 
Noticing that Equation (1) is a general formu-
lation independent of any specific features, tech-
nically for any subset of features used in ? , a 
new SMT system can be constructed based on it, 
which we call a sub-system. 
Next we will use ? to denote the full feature 
space defined by the entire set of features used 
in ?, and ? ? ? is a feature subset that belongs 
to ?(?), the power set of ?. The derived sub-
system based on subset ? ? ? is denoted by ?? . 
Although in theory we can use all the sub-
systems derived from every feature subset 
in ?(?), it is still desirable to use only some of 
them in practice. The reasons for this are two-
fold. First, the number of possible sub-systems 
(2 ? ) is exponential to the size of ?. Even when 
the number of features in ? is relatively small, 
i.e. 10, there will be up to 1024 sub-systems in 
total, which is a large number for combination 
task. Larger feature sets will make the system 
combination practically infeasible. Second, not 
every sub-system could contribute to the system 
combination. For example, feature subsets only 
containing very small number of features will 
lead to sub-systems with very poor performance; 
and the language model feature is too important 
to be ignored for a sub-system to achieve reason-
ably good performance. 
In our work, we only consider feature sub-
spaces with only one difference from the features 
in ?. For each non- language model feature ?? , a 
sub-system ??  is built by removing ??  from  ? . 
Allowing for the importance of the language 
model (LM) feature to an SMT model, we do not 
remove any LM feature from any sub-system. 
Instead, we try to weaken the strength of a LM 
feature by lowering its n-gram order. For exam-
ple, if a 4-gram language model is used in the 
baseline system ?, then a trigram model can be 
used in one sub-system, and a bigram model can 
be used in another. In this way more than one 
sub-system can be derived based on one LM fea-
ture. When varying a language model feature, the 
one-feature difference principle is still kept: if 
we lower the order of a language model feature, 
no other features are removed or changed.  
The remaining issue of using weakened LM 
features is that the resulting ensemble is no long-
er strictly based on subspace of ?. However, this 
theoretical imperfection can be remedied by in-
troducing ?? , a super-space of ? to include all 
lower-order LM features. In this way, an aug-
mented baseline system ??  can be built based 
on  ?? , and the baseline system ? itself can also 
be viewed as a sub-system of ??. We will show 
in the experimental section that ??  actually per-
forms even slightly better than the original base-
line system ?, but results of sub-system combi-
nation are significantly better that both ? and ?? . 
After the sub-system ensemble is constructed, 
each sub-system tunes its feature weights inde-
pendently to optimize the evaluation metrics on 
the development set. 
Let ? = {?1 ,? ,??} be the set of sub-systems 
obtained by either removing one non-LM feature 
or changing the order of a LM feature, and ??  be 
the n-best list produced by ?? . Then ?(?), the 
translation candidate pool to the system combi-
nation model can be written as: 
?(?) = ??
?
 (2) 
The advantage of this method is that it allows 
us to systematically build an ensemble of SMT 
systems at a very low cost. From the decoding 
1098
perspective, all the sub-systems share a common 
decoder, with minimal extensions to the baseline 
systems to support the use of specified subset of 
feature functions to compute the overall score for 
translation hypotheses. From the model training 
perspective, all the non-LM feature functions can 
be estimated once for all sub-systems. The only 
exception is the language model feature, which 
may be of different values across multiple sub-
systems. However, since lower-order models 
have already been contained in higher-order 
model for the purpose of smoothing in almost all 
statistical language model implementations, there 
is also no extra training cost. 
3.2 System Combination Scheme 
In our work, we use a sentence-level system 
combination model to select best translation hy-
pothesis from the candidate pool  ?(?) . This 
method can also be viewed to be a hypotheses re-
ranking model since we only use the existing 
translations instead of performing decoding over 
a confusion network as done in the word-level 
combination method (Rosti et al, 2007). 
The score function in our combination model 
is formulated as follows: 
?? = ??????
??? ? 
?????? ? + ??? + ?(?,?(?)) 
(3) 
where ??? ?  is the language model score for ?, 
? is the length of ?, and ?(?,?(?)) is a transla-
tion consensus ?based scoring function. The 
computation of ?(?,?(?))  is further decom-
posed into weighted linear combination of a set 
of n-gram consensus ?based features, which are 
defined in terms of the order of n-gram to be 
matched between current candidate and other 
translation in ?(?). 
Given a translation candidate  ? , the n-gram 
agreement feature between ?  and other transla-
tions in the candidate pool is defined as: 
??
+(?,? ? ) =  ?? ?, ?
? 
? ? ?? ? ,? ???
 (4) 
where the function  ?? ?, ?
?  counts the occur-
rences of n-grams of ? in ? ? : 
?? ?, ?
? = ?(??
?+??1, ? ?)
 ? ??+1
?=1
 (5) 
    Here ?(?,?)  is the indicator function - 
? ??
?+??1 , ? ?  is 1 when the n-gram ??
?+??1  ap-
pears in ? ? , otherwise it is 0. 
In order to give the combination model an op-
portunity to penalize long but inaccurate transla-
tions, we also introduce a set of n-gram disa-
greement features in the combination model: 
??
?(?,? ? ) =  ( ? ? ? + 1? ??(?, ?
?))
? ? ?? ? ,? ???
 
(6) 
Because each order of n-gram match introduc-
es two features, the total number of features in 
the combination model will be 2? + 2 if ? or-
ders of n-gram are to be matched in computing 
?(?,?(?)). Since we also adopt a linear scor-
ing function in Equation (3), the feature weights 
of our combination model can also be tuned on a 
development data set to optimize the specified 
evaluation metrics using the standard Minimum 
Error Rate Training (MERT) algorithm (Och 
2003). 
Our method is similar to the work proposed by 
Hildebrand and Vogel (2008). However, except 
the language model and translation length, we 
only use intra-hypothesis n-gram agreement fea-
tures as Hildebrand and Vogel did and use addi-
tional intra-hypothesis n-gram disagreement fea-
tures as Li et al (2009) did in their co-decoding 
method. 
4 Experiments 
4.1 Data 
Experiments were conducted on the NIST evalu-
ation sets of 2004 (MT04) and 2005 (MT05) for 
Chinese-to-English translation tasks. Both corpo-
ra provide 4 reference translations per source 
sentence. Parameters were tuned with MERT 
algorithm (Och, 2003) on the NIST evaluation 
set of 2003 (MT03) for both the baseline systems 
and the system combination model. Translation 
performance was measured in terms of case-
insensitive NIST version of BLEU score which 
computes the brevity penalty using the shortest 
reference translation for each segment, and all 
the results will be reported in percentage num-
bers. Statistical significance is computed using 
the bootstrap re-sampling method proposed by 
Koehn (2004). Statistics of the data sets are 
summarized in Table 3. 
 
Data set #Sentences #Words 
MT03 (dev) 919 23,782 
MT04 (test) 1,788 47,762 
MT05 (test) 1,082 29,258 
Table 3: Data set statistics. 
1099
We use the parallel data available for the 
NIST 2008 constrained track of Chinese-to-
English machine translation task as bilingual 
training data, which contains 5.1M sentence 
pairs, 128M Chinese words and 147M English 
words after pre-processing. GIZA++ toolkit (Och 
and Ney, 2003) is used to perform word align-
ment in both directions with default settings, and 
the intersect-diag-grow method is used to gener-
ate symmetric word alignment refinement. The 
language model used for all systems is a 5-gram 
model trained with the English part of bilingual 
data and Xinhua portion of LDC English Giga-
word corpus version 3. In experiments, multiple 
language model features with the order ranging 
from 2 to 5 can be easily obtained from the 5-
gram one without retraining. 
4.2 System Description 
Theoretically our method is applicable to all li-
near model ?based SMT systems. In our experi-
ments, two in-house developed systems are used 
to validate our method. The first one (SYS1) is a 
system based on the hierarchical phrase-based 
model as proposed in (Chiang, 2005). Phrasal 
rules are extracted from all bilingual sentence 
pairs, while hierarchical rules with variables are 
extracted from selected data sets including 
LDC2003E14, LDC2003E07, LDC2005T06 and 
LDC2005T10, which contain around 350,000 
sentence pairs, 8.8M Chinese words and 10.3M 
English words. The second one (SYS2) is a re-
implementation of a phrase-based decoder with 
lexicalized reordering model based on maximum 
entropy principle proposed by Xiong et al 
(2006). All bilingual data are used to extract 
phrases up to length 3 on the source side. 
    In following experiments, we only consider 
removing common features shared by both base-
line systems for feature subspace generation. 
Rule penalty feature and lexicalized reordering 
feature, which are particular to SYS1 and SYS2, 
are not used. We list the features in consideration 
as follows: 
? PEF and PFE: phrase translation probabili-
ties ? ? ?  and ? ? ?  
? PEFLEX and PFELEX: lexical weights 
????  ? ?  and ????  ? ?  
? PP: phrase penalty 
? WP: word penalty 
? BLP: bi-lexicon pair counting how many 
entries of a conventional lexicon co-
occurring in a given translation pair 
? LM-n: language model with order n 
    Based on the principle described in Section 
3.1, we generate a number of feature subspaces 
for each baseline system as follows:  
? For non-LM features (PEF, PFE, PEFLEX, 
PFELEX, PP, WP and BLP), we remove one 
of them from the full feature space each 
time. Thus 7 feature subspaces are generated, 
which are denoted as  ?????? , ?????? , 
????????? , ????????? , ????? , ?????  and 
??????  respectively. The 5-gram LM feature 
is used in each of them. 
? For LM features (LM-n), we change the or-
der from 2 to 5 with all the other non-LM 
features present. Thus 4 LM-related feature 
subspaces are generated, which are denoted 
as ?????2, ?????3 , ?????4  and ?????5 re-
spectively. ?????5 is essentially the full fea-
ture space of  baseline system. 
   For each baseline system, we construct a total 
of 11 sub-systems by using above feature sub-
spaces. The baseline system is also contained 
within them because of using ?????5. We call 
all sub-systems are non-baseline sub-systems 
except the one derived by using ?????5. 
    By default, the beam size of 60 is used for all 
systems in our experiments. The size of n-best 
list is set to 20 for each sub-system, and for base-
line systems, this size is set to 220, which equals 
to the size of the combined n-best list generated 
by total 11 sub-systems. The order of n-gram 
agreement and disagreement features used in 
sentence-level combination model ranges from 
unigram to 4-gram. 
4.3 Evaluation of Oracle Translations 
We first evaluate the oracle performance on the 
n-best lists of baseline systems and on the com-
bined n-best lists of sub-systems generated from 
each baseline system. 
The oracle translations are obtained by using 
the metric of sentence-level BLEU score (Ye et 
al., 2007). Table 4 shows the evaluation results, 
in which Baseline stands for baseline system 
with a 5-gram LM feature, and FS stands for 11 
sub-systems derived from the baseline system.  
 
 SYS1 SYS2 
 BLEU/TER BLEU/TER 
MT04 
Baseline  49.68/0.6411 49.50/0.6349 
FS 51.05/0.6089 50.53/0.6056 
MT05 
Baseline 48.89/0.5946 48.37/0.5944 
FS 50.69/0.5695 49.81/0.5684 
Table 4: Oracle BLEU and TER scores on base-
line systems and their generated sub-systems. 
1100
For both SYS1 and SYS2, feature subspace 
method achieves higher oracle BLEU and lower 
TER scores on both MT04 and MT05 test sets, 
which gives the feature subspace method more 
potential to achieve higher performance than the 
baseline systems. 
We then investigate the ratio of translation 
candidates in the combined n-best lists of non-
baseline sub-systems that are not included in the 
baseline?s n-best list. Table 5 shows the statistics. 
 
 MT04 MT05 
SYS1 69.71% 69.69% 
SYS2 59.07% 58.54% 
Table 5: Ratio of unique translation candidates 
from non-baseline sub-systems. 
From Table 5 we can see that only less than 
half of the translation candidates of sub-systems 
overlap with those the of baseline systems. This 
result, together with the oracle BLEU and TER 
score estimation, helps eliminate the concern that 
no diversities or better translation candidates can 
be obtained by using sub-systems. 
4.4 Feature Subspace Method on Single 
SMT System 
Next we validate the effect of feature subspace 
method on single SMT systems. 
Figure 1 shows the evaluation results of dif-
ferent systems on the MT05 test set. From the 
figure we can see that the overall accuracy of 
baseline systems is better than any of their de-
rived sub-systems, and except the sub-system 
derived by using ?????2, the performance of all 
the systems are fairly similar. 
 
 
Figure 1: Performances of different systems. 
We then evaluate the system combination me-
thod proposed in Section 3.2 with all the sub-
systems for each baseline system. Table 6 shows 
the results on both MT04 and MT05 data sets, in 
which FS-Comb denotes the system combination 
using 11 sub-systems.  
From Table 6 we can see that by using FS-
Comb we obtain about 1.1~1.3 points of BLEU 
gains over baseline systems. We also include in 
Table 6 the results for Baseline+mLM, which 
stands for the augmented baseline system as de-
scribed in Section 3.1 using a bunch of LM fea-
tures from bigram to 5-gram. It can be seen that 
both augmented baseline systems outperform 
their corresponding baseline systems slightly but 
consistently on both data sets. 
 
 MT04 MT05 
SYS1 
Baseline 39.07 38.72 
Baseline+mLM 39.34+ 39.14+ 
FS-Comb 40.43++ 39.79++ 
SYS2 
Baseline 38.84 38.30 
Baseline+mLM 38.95* 38.63+ 
FS-Comb 39.92++ 39.49++ 
Table 6: Translation results of Baseline, Base-
line+mLM and FS-Comb (+: significant better 
than baseline system with ? < 0.05; ++: signifi-
cant better than baseline system with ? < 0.01; *: 
no significant improvement). 
We also investigate the results when we in-
crementally add the n-best list of each sub-
system into a candidate pool to see the effects 
when different numbers of sub-systems are used 
in combination. In order to decide the sequence 
of sub-systems to add, we first evaluate the per-
formance of pair-wise combinations between 
each sub-system and its baseline system on the 
development set. That is, for each sub-system, 
we combine its n-best list with the n-best list of 
its baseline system and perform system combina-
tion for MT03 data set. Then we rank the sub-
systems by the pair-wise combination perfor-
mance from high to low, and use this ranking as 
the sequence to add n-best lists of sub-systems. 
Each time when a new n-best list is added, the 
combination performance based on the enlarged 
candidate pool is evaluated. Figure 2 shows the 
results on both MT04 and MT05 test sets, in 
which SYS1-fs and SYS2-fs denote the sub-
systems derived from SYS1 and SYS2 respec-
tively, and X-axis is the number of sub-systems 
used for combination each time and Y-axis is the 
BLEU score. From the figure we can see that 
although in some cases the performance slightly 
drops when a new sub-system is added, generally 
using more sub-systems always leads to better 
results.  
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
SYS1 SYS2
Baseline
FS-PEF
FS-PFE
FS-PEFLEX
FS-PFELEX
FS-PP
FS-WP
FS-BLP
FS-LM-2
FS-LM-3
FS-LM-4
1101
Next we examine the performance of baseline 
systems when different beam sizes are used in 
decoding. The results on MT05 test set are 
shown in Figure3, where X-axis is the beam size. 
In Figure 3, SYS1+mLM and SYS2+mLM de-
note augmented baseline systems of SYS1 and 
SYS2 with multiple LM features. 
From Figure 3 we can see that augmented 
baseline systems (with multiple LM features) 
outperform the baseline systems (with only one 
LM feature) for all beam sizes ranging from 20 
to 220. In this experiment we did not observe any 
significant performance improvements when us-
ing larger beam sizes than the default setting, but 
using more sub-systems in combination almost 
always bring improvements. 
 
 
Figure 2: Performances on different numbers of 
sub-systems.  
 
Figure 3: Performances on different beam sizes. 
 MT04 MT05 
SYS1-fs 44.63% 46.12% 
SYS2-fs 47.54% 44.73% 
Table 7: Ratio of final translations coming from 
non-baseline sub-systems. 
Finally, we investigate the ratio of final trans-
lations coming from the n-best lists of non-
baseline sub-systems only. Table 7 shows the 
results on both MT04 and MT05 test sets, which 
indicate that almost half of the final translations 
are contributed by the non-baseline sub-systems. 
4.5 The Impact of n-best List Size 
In order to find the optimal size of n-best list for 
combination, we compare the combination re-
sults of using list sizes from 10-best up to 500-
best for each sub-system. 
In this experiment, system combination was 
performed on the combined n-best list from total 
11 sub-systems with different list size each time. 
Figure 4 shows the results on the MT03 dev set 
and the MT04 and MT05 test sets for both SYS1 
and SYS2. X-axis is the n-best list size of each 
sub-system. 
 
 
Figure 4: Performances on different n-best sizes. 
    We can see from the figure that for all data 
sets the optimal n-best list size is around 50, but 
the improvements are not significant over the 
results when 20-best translations are used. The 
reason for the small optimal n-best list size could 
be that the low-rank hypotheses might introduce 
more noises into the combined translation candi-
date pool for sentence-level combination (Hasan 
et al, 2007; Hildebrand and Vogel, 2008).  
4.6 Feature Subspace Method on Multiple 
SMT Systems 
In the last experiment, we investigate the effect 
of feature subspace method when multiple SMT 
systems are used in system combination.  
Evaluation results are reported in Table 8. The 
system combination method described in Section 
3.2 is used to combine outputs from two baseline 
systems (with only one 5-gram LM feature) and 
sub-systems generated from both baseline sys-
tems (22 in total), with their results denoted as 
Baseline Comb (both) and FS Comb (both) re-
spectively. We also include the combination re-
sults of sub-systems based on one baseline sys-
tem for reference in the table. 
 
38.0
38.5
39.0
39.5
40.0
40.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
SYS1-fs-05
SYS2-fs-05
SYS1-fs-04
SYS2-fs-04
38.0
38.5
39.0
39.5
2
0
4
0
6
0
8
0
1
0
0
1
2
0
1
4
0
1
6
0
1
8
0
2
0
0
2
2
0
SYS1
SYS2
SYS1-mLM
SYS2-mLM
39.0
39.5
40.0
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
10 20 50 100 200 500
SYS1-fs-05
SYS2-fs-05
SYS1-fs-04
SYS2-fs-04
SYS1-fs-03
SYS2-fs-03
1102
On both MT04 and MT05 test sets, the results 
of system combination based on sub-systems are 
significantly better than those of baseline sys-
tems, which show that our method can also help 
with system combination when more than one 
system are used. We can also see that using mul-
tiple systems based on different SMT models and 
using our subspace based method can help each 
other: the best performance can only be achieved 
when both are employed. 
 
 MT04 MT05 
Baseline Comb (both) 39.98 39.43 
FS-Comb (SYS1) 40.43 39.79 
FS-Comb (SYS2) 39.92 39.49 
FS Comb (both) 40.96 40.38 
Table 8: Performances of sentence-level combi-
nation on multiple SMT systems. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have presented a novel and ef-
fective Feature Subspace method for the con-
struction of an ensemble of machine translation 
systems based on a baseline SMT model which 
can be formulated as a standard linear function. 
Each system within the ensemble is based on a 
subset of features derived from the baseline 
model, and the resulting ensemble can be used in 
system combination to improve translation quali-
ty. Experimental results on NIST Chinese-to-
English translation tasks show that our method 
can bring significant improvements to two base-
line systems with state-of-the-art performance, 
and it is expected that our method can be em-
ployed to improve any linear model -based SMT 
systems. There is still much room for improve-
ments in the current work. For example, we still 
use a simple one-feature difference principle for 
feature subspace generation. In the future, we 
will explore more possibilities for feature sub-
spaces selection and experiment with our method 
in a word-level system combination model. 
 
References  
Necip Fazil Ayan, Jing Zheng, and Wen Wang. 2008. 
Improving alignments for better confusion net-
works for combining machine translation systems. 
In Proc. COLING, pages 33-40. 
Srinivas Bangalore, German Bordel, and Giuseppe 
Riccardi. 2001. Computing consensus translation 
from multiple machine translation systems. In 
Proc. ASRU, pages 351-354. 
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based 
model for statistical machine translation. In Proc. 
ACL, pages 263-270. 
Xiaodong He, Mei Yang, Jianfeng Gao, Patrick 
Nguyen, and Robert Moore. 2008. Indirect-hmm-
based hypothesis for combining outputs from ma-
chine translation systems. In Proc. EMNLP, pages 
98-107. 
Almut Silja Hildebrand and Stephan Vogel. 2008. 
Combination of machine translation systems via 
hypothesis selection from combined n-best lists. In 
8th AMTA conference, pages 254-261. 
Tin Kam Ho. 1998. The random subspace method for 
constructing decision forests. In IEEE Transactions 
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
pages 832-844. 
Sasa Hasan, Richard Zens, and Hermann Ney. 2007. 
Are very large n-best lists useful for SMT? In 
Proc. NAACL, Short paper, pages 57-60. 
S. Jayaraman and A. Lavie. 2005. Multi-Engine Ma-
chine Translation Guided by Explicit Word Match-
ing. In 10th EAMT conference, pages 143-152. 
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for 
machine translation evaluation. In Proc. EMNLP, 
pages 388-395. 
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Phrase-based Model for SMT. 
In Computational Linguistics, 28(1): pages 114-
133. 
Mu Li, Nan Duan, Dongdong Zhang, Chi-Ho Li, and 
Ming Zhou. 2009. Collaborative Decoding: Partial 
Hypothesis Re-Ranking Using Translation Consen-
sus between Decoders. In Proc. ACL-IJCNLP. 
Adam Lopez and Philip Resnik. 2006. Word-Based 
Alignment, Phrase-Based Translation: What?s the 
link? In 7th AMTA conference, pages 90-99. 
Yang Liu, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-to-
String Alignment Template for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In Proc. ACL, pages 609-616. 
Daniel Marcu, Wei Wang, Abdessamad Echihabi, and 
Kevin Knight. 2006. SPMT: Statistical machine 
translation with syntactified target language phras-
es. In Proc. EMNLP, pages 44-52. 
Wolfgang Macherey and Franz Och. 2007. An Empir-
ical Study on Computing Consensus Translations 
from Multiple Machine Translation Systems. In 
Proc. EMNLP, pages 986-995. 
Evgeny Matusov, Nicola Ueffi ng, and Hermann Ney. 
2006. Computing consensus translation from mul-
tiple machine translation systems using enhanced 
hypotheses alignment. In Proc. EACL, pages 33-
40. 
Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2002. Discriminative 
training and maximum entropy models for statis-
1103
tical machine translation. In Proc. ACL, pages 295-
302. 
Franz Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proc. ACL, pages 
160-167. 
Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic 
comparison of various statistical alignment models. 
Computational Linguistics, 29(1): pages 19-51. 
Franz Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The alignment 
template approach to statistical machine transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 30(4): pages 417-
449. 
Antti-Veikko Rosti, Necip Fazil Ayan, Bing Xiang, 
Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, and Bonnie 
Dorr. 2007. Combining outputs from multiple ma-
chine translation systems. In Proc. NAACL, pages 
228-235. 
Antti-Veikko Rosti, Spyros Matsoukas, and Richard 
Schwartz. 2007. Improved Word-Level System 
Combination for Machine Translation. In Proc. 
ACL, pages 312-319. 
Antti-Veikko Rosti, Bing Zhang, Spyros Matsoukas, 
and Richard Schwartz. 2008. Incremental hypothe-
sis alignment for building confusion networks with 
application to machine translation system combina-
tion. In Proc. Of the Third ACL Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation, pages 183-186. 
K.C. Sim, W. Byrne, M. Gales, H. Sahbi, and P. 
Woodland. 2007. Consensus network decoding for 
statistical machine translation system combination. 
In ICASSP, pages 105-108. 
Deyi Xiong, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Max-
imum entropy based phrase reordering model for 
statistical machine translation. In Proc. ACL, pages 
521-528. 
Yang Ye, Ming Zhou, and Chin-Yew Lin. 2007. Sen-
tence level Machine Translation Evaluation as a 
Ranking Problem: One step aside from BLEU. In 
Proc. Of the Second ACL Workshop on Statistical 
Machine Translation, pages 240-247. 
1104
