Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 534?542,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The role of named entities in Web People Search
Javier Artiles
UNED NLP & IR group
Madrid, Spain
javart@bec.uned.es
Enrique Amig
?
o
UNED NLP & IR group
Madrid, Spain
enrique@lsi.uned.es
Julio Gonzalo
UNED NLP & IR group
Madrid, Spain
julio@lsi.uned.es
Abstract
The ambiguity of person names in the Web
has become a new area of interest for NLP
researchers. This challenging problem has
been formulated as the task of clustering
Web search results (returned in response
to a person name query) according to the
individual they mention. In this paper we
compare the coverage, reliability and in-
dependence of a number of features that
are potential information sources for this
clustering task, paying special attention to
the role of named entities in the texts to
be clustered. Although named entities are
used in most approaches, our results show
that, independently of the Machine Learn-
ing or Clustering algorithm used, named
entity recognition and classification per se
only make a small contribution to solve the
problem.
1 Introduction
Searching the Web for names of people is a highly
ambiguous task, because a single name tends to
be shared by many people. This ambiguity has
recently become an active research topic and, si-
multaneously, in a relevant application domain for
web search services: Zoominfo.com, Spock.com,
123people.com are examples of sites which per-
form web people search, although with limited
disambiguation capabilities.
A study of the query log of the AllTheWeb and
Altavista search sites gives an idea of the relevance
of the people search task: 11-17% of the queries
were composed of a person name with additional
terms and 4% were identified as person names
(Spink et al, 2004). According to the data avail-
able from 1990 U.S. Census Bureau, only 90,000
different names are shared by 100 million people
(Artiles et al, 2005). As the amount of informa-
tion in the WWW grows, more of these people are
mentioned in different web pages. Therefore, a
query for a common name in the Web will usually
produce a list of results where different people are
mentioned.
This situation leaves to the user the task of find-
ing the pages relevant to the particular person he
is interested in. The user might refine the original
query with additional terms, but this risks exclud-
ing relevant documents in the process. In some
cases, the existence of a predominant person (such
as a celebrity or a historical figure) makes it likely
to dominate the ranking of search results, compli-
cating the task of finding information about other
people sharing her name. The Web People Search
task, as defined in the first WePS evaluation cam-
paign (Artiles et al, 2007), consists of grouping
search results for a given name according to the
different people that share it.
Our goal in this paper is to study which doc-
ument features can contribute to this task, and in
particular to find out which is the role that can be
played by named entities (NEs): (i) How reliable
is NEs overlap between documents as a source of
evidence to cluster pages? (ii) How much recall
does it provide? (iii) How unique is this signal?
(i.e. is it redundant with other sources of informa-
tion such as n-gram overlap?); and (iv) How sen-
sitive is this signal to the peculiarities of a given
NE recognition system, such as the granularity of
its NE classification and the quality of its results?
Our aim is to reach conclusions which are are
not tied to a particular choice of Clustering or Ma-
chine Learning algorithms. We have taken two de-
cisions in this direction: first, we have focused on
the problem of deciding whether two web pages
refer to the same individual or not (page corefer-
ence task). This is the kind of relatedness measure
that most clustering algorithms use, but in this way
we can factor out the algorithm and its parameter
settings. Second, we have developed a measure,
Maximal Pairwise Accuracy (PWA) which, given
534
an information source for the problem, estimates
an upper bound for the performance of any Ma-
chine Learning algorithm using this information.
We have used PWA as the basic metric to study the
role of different document features in solving the
coreference problem, and then we have checked
the predictive power of PWA with a Decision Tree
algorithm.
The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. First, we examine the previous work in Sec-
tion 2. Then we describe the our experimental set-
tings (datasets and features we have used) in Sec-
tion 3 and our empirical study in Section 4. The
paper ends with some conclusions in Section 5.
2 Previous work
In this section we will discuss (i) the state of the
art in Web People Search in general, focusing on
which features are used to solve the problem; and
(ii) lessons learnt from the WePS evaluation cam-
paign where most approaches to the problem have
been tested and compared.
The disambiguation of person names in Web
results is usually compared to two other Natu-
ral Language Processing tasks: Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation (WSD) (Agirre and Edmonds, 2006)
and Cross-document Coreference (CDC) (Bagga
and Baldwin, 1998). Most of early research work
on person name ambiguity focuses on the CDC
problem or uses methods found in the WSD litera-
ture. It is only recently that the web name ambigu-
ity has been approached as a separate problem and
defined as an NLP task - Web People Search - on
its own (Artiles et al, 2005; Artiles et al, 2007).
Therefore, it is useful to point out some crucial
differences between WSD, CRC and WePS:
? WSD typically concentrates in the disam-
biguation of common words (nouns, verbs,
adjectives) for which a relatively small num-
ber of senses exist, compared to the hun-
dreds or thousands of people that can share
the same name.
? WSD can rely on dictionaries to define the
number of possible senses for a word. In the
case of name ambiguity no such dictionary
is available, even though in theory there is an
exact number of people that can be accounted
as sharing the same name.
? The objective of CDC is to reconstruct the
coreference chain for every mention of a per-
son. In Web person name disambiguation it
suffices to group the documents that contain
at least one mention to the same person.
Before the first WePS evaluation campaign in
2007 (Artiles et al, 2007), research on the topic
was not based on a consistent task definition, and
it lacked a standard manually annotated testbed.
In the WePS task, systems were given the top web
search results produced by a person name query.
The expected output was a clustering of these re-
sults, where each cluster should contain all and
only those documents referring to the same indi-
vidual.
2.1 Features for Web People Search
Many different features have been used to repre-
sent documents where an ambiguous name is men-
tioned. The most basic is a Bag of Words (BoW)
representation of the document text. Within-
document coreference resolution has been applied
to produce summaries of text surrounding occur-
rences of the name (Bagga and Baldwin, 1998;
Gooi and Allan, 2004). Nevertheless, the full
document text is present in most systems, some-
times as the only feature (Sugiyama and Okumura,
2007) and sometimes in combination with others -
see for instance (Chen and Martin, 2007; Popescu
and Magnini, 2007)-. Other representations use
the link structure (Malin, 2005) or generate graph
representations of the extracted features (Kalash-
nikov et al, 2007).
Some researchers (Cucerzan, 2007; Nguyen and
Cao, 2008) have explored the use of Wikipedia
information to improve the disambiguation pro-
cess. Wikipedia provides candidate entities that
are linked to specific mentions in a text. The obvi-
ous limitation of this approach is that only celebri-
ties and historical figures can be identified in this
way. These approaches are yet to be applied to the
specific task of grouping search results.
Biographical features are strongly related to
NEs and have also been proposed for this task
due to its high precision. Mann (2003) extracted
these features using lexical patterns to group pages
about the same person. Al-Kamha (2004) used a
simpler approach, based on hand coded features
(e.g. email, zip codes, addresses, etc). In Wan
(2005), biographical information (person name, ti-
tle, organisation, email address and phone num-
ber) improves the clustering results when com-
bined with lexical features (words from the doc-
535
ument) and NE (person, location, organisation).
The most used feature for the Web People
Search task, however, are NEs. Ravin (1999) in-
troduced a rule-based approach that tackles both
variation and ambiguity analysing the structure of
names. In most recent research, NEs (person, lo-
cation and organisations) are extracted from the
text and used as a source of evidence to calculate
the similarity between documents -see for instance
(Blume, 2005; Chen and Martin, 2007; Popescu
and Magnini, 2007; Kalashnikov et al, 2007)-
. For instance, Blume (2005) uses NEs coocur-
ring with the ambiguous mentions of a name as a
key feature for the disambiguation process. Sag-
gion (2008) compared the performace of NEs ver-
sus BoW features. In his experiments a only a
representation based on Organisation NEs outper-
formed the word based approach. Furthermore,
this result is highly dependent on the choice of
metric weighting (NEs achieve high precision at
the cost of a low recall and viceversa for BoW).
In summary, the most common document repre-
sentations for the problem include BoW and NEs,
and in some cases biographical features extracted
from the text.
2.2 Named entities in the WePS campaign
Among the 16 teams that submitted results for the
first WePS campaign, 10 of them
1
used NEs in
their document representation. This makes NEs
the second most common type of feature; only
the BoW feature was more popular. Other fea-
tures used by the systems include noun phrases
(Chen and Martin, 2007), word n-grams (Popescu
and Magnini, 2007), emails and URLs (del Valle-
Agudo et al, 2007), etc. In 2009, the second
WePS campaign showed similar trends regarding
the use of NE features (Artiles et al, 2009).
Due to the complexity of systems, the results
of the WePS evaluation do not provide a direct
answer regarding the advantages of using NEs
over other computationally lighter features such as
BoW or word n-grams. But the WePS campaigns
did provide a useful, standardised resource to per-
form the type of studies that were not possible be-
fore. In the next Section we describe this dataset
and how it has been adapted for our purposes.
1
By team ID: CU-COMSEM, IRST-BP, PSNUS, SHEF,
FICO, UNN, AUG, JHU1, DFKI2, UC3M13
3 Experimental settings
3.1 Data
We have used the testbeds from WePS-1 (Artiles et
al., 2007)
2
and WePS-2 (Artiles et al, 2009) eval-
uation campaigns
3
.
Each WePS dataset consists of 30 test cases: a
random sample of 10 names from the US Cen-
sus, 10 names from Wikipedia, and 10 names from
Programme Committees in the Computer Science
domain (ACL and ECDL). Each test case consists
of, at most, 100 web pages from the top search
results of a web search engine, using a (quoted)
person name as query.
For each test case, annotators were asked to or-
ganise the web pages in groups where all docu-
ments refer to the same person. In cases where
a web page refers to more than one person us-
ing the same ambiguous name (e.g. a web page
with search results from Amazon), the document
is assigned to as many groups as necessary. Doc-
uments were discarded when they did not contain
any useful information about the person being re-
ferred.
Both the WePS-1 and WePS-2 testbeds have
been used to evaluate clustering systems by WePS
task participants, and are now the standard testbed
to test Web People Search systems.
3.2 Features
The evaluated features can be grouped in four
main groups: token-based, n-grams, phrases and
NEs. Wherever possible, we have generated lo-
cal versions of these features that only consider
the sentences of the text that mention the ambigu-
ous person name
4
. Token-based features consid-
ered include document full text tokens, lemmas
(using the OAK analyser, see below), title, snip-
pet (returned in the list of search results) and URL
(tokenised using non alphanumeric characters as
boundaries) tokens. English stopwords were re-
moved, including Web specific stopwords, as file
and domain extensions, etc.
We generated word n-grams of length 2 to 5,
2
The WePS-1 corpus includes data from the Web03
testbed (Mann, 2006) which follows similar annotation
guidelines, although the number of document per ambiguous
name is more variable.
3
Both corpora are available from the WePS website
http://nlp.uned.es/weps
4
A very sparse feature might never occur in a sentence
with the person name. In that cases there is no local version
of the feature.
536
using the sentences found in the document text.
Punctuation tokens (commas, dots, etc) were gen-
eralised as the same token. N-grams were dis-
carded when they were composed only of stop-
words or when they did not contain at least one
token formed by alphanumeric characters (e.g. n-
grams like ?at the? or ?# @?). Noun phrases (us-
ing OAK analyser) were detected in the document
and filtered in a similar way.
Named entities were extracted using two dif-
ferent tools: the Stanford NE Recogniser and the
OAK System
5
.
Stanford NE Recogniser
6
is a high-performance
Named Entity Recognition (NER) system based
on Machine Learning. It provides a general im-
plementation of linear chain Conditional Ran-
dom Field sequence models and includes a model
trained on data from CoNLL, MUC6, MUC7, and
ACE newswire. Three types of entities were ex-
tracted: person, location and organisation.
OAK
7
is a rule based English analyser that in-
cludes many functionalities (POS tagger, stemmer,
chunker, Named Entity (NE) tagger, dependency
analyser, parser, etc). It provides a fine grained
NE recognition covering 100 different NE types
(Sekine, 2008). Given the sparseness of most of
these fine-grained NE types, we have merged them
in coarser groups: event, facility, location, person,
organisation, product, periodx, timex and numex.
We have also used the results of a baseline
NE recognition for comparison purposes. This
method detects sequences of two or more upper-
cased tokens in the text, and discards those that are
found lowercased in the same document or that are
composed solely of stopwords.
Other features are: emails, outgoing links found
in the web pages and two boolean flags that in-
dicate whether a pair of documents is linked or
belongs to the same domain. Because of their
low impact in the results these features haven?t re-
ceived an individual analysis, but they are included
in the ?all features? combination in Figure 7.
5
From the output of both systems we have discarded per-
son NEs made of only one token (these are often first names
that significantly deteriorate the quality of the comparison be-
tween documents).
6
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml
7
http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/oak . OAK was also used to detect
noun phrases and extract lemmas from the text.
4 Experiments and results
4.1 Reformulating WePS as a classification
task
As our goal is to study the impact of different fea-
tures (information sources) in the task, a direct
evaluation in terms of clustering has serious disad-
vantages. Given the output of a clustering system
it is not straightforward to assess why a document
has been assigned to a particular cluster. There are
at least three different factors: the document sim-
ilarity function, the clustering algorithm and its
parameter settings. Features are part of the doc-
ument similarity function, but its performance in
the clustering task depends on the other factors as
well. This makes it difficult to perform error anal-
ysis in terms of the features used to represent the
documents.
Therefore we have decided to transform the
clustering problem into a classification problem:
deciding whether two documents refer to the same
person. Each pair of documents in a name dataset
is considered a classification instance. Instances
are labelled as coreferent (if they share the same
cluster in the gold standard) or non coreferent (if
they do not share the same cluster). Then we
can evaluate the performance of each feature sep-
arately by measuring its ability to rank coreferent
pairs higher and non coreferent pairs lower. In the
case of feature combinations we can study them by
training a classifier or using the maximal pairwise
accuracy methods (explained in Section 4.3).
Each instance (pair of documents) is repre-
sented by the similarity scores obtained using dif-
ferent features and similarity metrics. We have
calculated for each feature three similarity met-
rics: Dice?s coefficient, cosine (using standard
tf.idf weighting) and a measure that simply counts
the size of the intersection set for a given feature
between both documents. After testing these met-
rics we found that Dice provides the best results
across different feature types. Differences be-
tween Dice and cosine were consistent, although
they were not especially large. A possible expla-
nation is that Dice does not take into account the
redundancy of an n-gram or NE in the document,
and the cosine distance does. This can be a cru-
cial factor, for instance, in the document retrieval
by topic; but it doesn?t seem to be the case when
dealing with name ambiguity.
The resulting classification testbed consists of
293,914 instances with the distribution shown in
537
Table 1, where each instance is represented by 69
features.
true false total
WePS1 61,290 122,437 183,727
WePS2 54,641 55,546 110,187
WePS1+WePS2 115,931 177,983 293,914
Table 1: Distribution of classification instances
4.2 Analysis of individual features
There are two main aspects related with the use-
fulness of a feature for WePS task. The first one is
its performance. That is, to what extent the simi-
larity between two documents according to a fea-
ture implies that both mention the same person.
The second aspect is to what extent a feature is or-
thogonal or redundant with respect to the standard
token based similarity.
4.2.1 Feature performance
According to the transformation of WePS cluster-
ing problem into a classification task (described
in Section 4.1), we follow the next steps to study
the performance of individual features. First, we
compute the Dice coefficient similarity over each
feature for all document pairs. Then we rank the
document pair instances according to these simi-
larities. A good feature should rank positive in-
stances on top. If the number of coreferent pairs
in the top n pairs is t
n
and the total number of
coreferent pairs is t, then P =
t
n
n
and R =
t
n
t
. We
plot the obtained precision/recall curves in Figures
1, 2, 3 and 4.
From the figures we can draw the following
conclusions:
First, considering subsets of tokens or lemma-
tised tokens does not outperform the basic token
distance (figure 1 compares token-based features).
We see that only local and snippet tokens perform
slightly better at low recall values, but do not go
beyond recall 0.3.
Second, shallow parsing or n-grams longer than
2 do not seem to be effective, but using bi-grams
improves the results in comparison with tokens.
Figure 2 compares n-grams of different sizes with
noun phrases and tokens. Overall, noun phrases
have a poor performance, and bi-grams give the
best results up to recall 0.7. Four-grams give
slightly better precision but only reach 0.3 recall,
and three-grams do not give better precision than
bi-grams.
Figure 1: Precision/Recall curve of token-based
features
Figure 2: Precision/Recall curve of word n-grams
Third, individual types of NEs do not improve
over tokens. Figure 3 and Figure 4 display the
results obtained by the Stanford and OAK NER
tools respectively. In the best case, Stanford per-
son and organisation named entities obtain results
that match the tokens feature, but only at lower
levels of recall.
Finally, using different NER systems clearly
leads to different results. Surprisingly, the base-
line NE system yields better results in a one to
one comparison, although it must be noted that
this baseline agglomerates different types of en-
538
Figure 3: Precision/Recall curve of NEs obtained
with the Stanford NER tool
Figure 4: Precision/Recall curve of NEs obtained
with the OAK NER tool
tities that are separated in the case of Stanford and
OAK, and this has a direct impact on its recall.
The OAK results are below the tokens and NE
baseline, possibly due to the sparseness of its very
fine grained features. In NE types, cases such as
person and organisation results are still lower than
obtained with Stanford.
4.2.2 Redundancy
In addition to performance, named entities (as well
as other features) are potentially useful for the task
only if they provide information that complements
(i.e. that does not substantially overlap) the basic
token based metric. To estimate this redundancy,
let us consider all document tuples of size four <
a, b, c, d >. In 99% of the cases, token similarity is
different for < a, b > than for < c, d >. We take
combinations such that < a, b > are more similar
to each other than < c, d > according to tokens.
That is:
sim
token
(a, b) > sim
token
(c, d)
Then for any other feature similarity
sim
x
(a, b), we will talk about redundant samples
when sim
x
(a, b) > sim
x
(c, d), non redundant
samples when sim
x
(a, b) < sim
x
(c, d), and
non informative samples when sim
x
(a, b) =
sim
x
(c, d). If all samples are redundant or
non informative, then sim
x
does not provide
additional information for the classification task.
Figure 5 shows the proportion of redundant, non
redundant and non informative samples for sev-
eral similarity criteria, as compared to token-based
similarity. In most cases NE based similarities
give little additional information: the baseline NE
recogniser, which has the largest independent con-
tribution, gives additional information in less than
20% of cases.
In summary, analysing individual features, the
NEs do not outperform BoW in terms of the clas-
sification task. In addition, NEs tend to be re-
dundant regarding BoW. However, if we are able
to combine optimally the contributions of the dif-
ferent features, the BoW approach could be im-
proved. We address this issue in the next section.
Figure 5: Independence of similarity criteria with
respect to the token based feature
539
4.3 Analysis of feature combinations
Up to now we have analysed the usefulness of in-
dividual features for the WePS Task. However,
this begs to ask to what extent the NE features can
contribute to the task when they are combined to-
gether and with token and n-gram based features.
First, we use each feature combinations as the in-
put for a Machine Learning algorithm. In particu-
lar, we use a Decision Tree algorithm and WePS-1
data for training and WePS-2 data for testing. The
Decision Tree algorithm was chosen because we
have a small set of features to train (similarity met-
rics) and some of these features output Boolean
values.
Results obtained with this setup, however, can
be dependent on the choice of the ML approach.
To overcome this problem, in addition to the re-
sults of a Decision Tree Machine Learning algo-
rithm, we introduce a Maximal Pairwise Accuracy
(MPA) measure that provides an upper bound for
any machine learning algorithm using a feature
combination.
We can estimate the performance of an individ-
ual similarity feature x in terms of accuracy. It
is considered a correct answer when the similarity
x(a, a
?
) between two pages referring to the same
person is higher than the similarity x(b, c) between
two pages referring to different people. Let us
call this estimation Pairwise Accuracy. In terms
of probability it can be defined as:
PWA = Prob(x(a, a
?
) > x(c, d))
PWA is defined over a single feature (similar-
ity metric). When considering more than one sim-
ilarity measure, the results depend on how mea-
sures are weighted. In that case we assume that
the best possible weighting is applied. When com-
bining a set of features X = {x
1
. . . x
n
}, a per-
fect Machine Learning algorithm would learn to
always ?listen? to the features giving correct in-
formation and ignore the features giving erroneous
information. In other words, if at least one feature
gives correct information, then the perfect algo-
rithm would produce a correct output. This is what
we call the Maximal Pairwise Accuracy estimation
of an upper bound for any ML system using the set
of features X:
MaxPWA(X) =
Prob(?x ? X.x(a, a
?
) > x(c, d))
Figure 6: Estimated PWA upper bound versus the
real PWA of decision trees trained with feature
combinations
Figure 7: Maximal Pairwise Accuracy vs. results
of a Decision Tree
The upper bound (MaxPWA) of feature combi-
nations happens to be highly correlated with the
PWA obtained by the Decision Tree algorithm (us-
ing its confidence values as a similarity metric).
Figure 6 shows this correlation for several features
combinations. This is an indication that the Deci-
sion Tree is effectively using the information in the
feature set.
Figure 7 shows the PWA upper bound estima-
tion and the actual PWA performance of a Deci-
sion Tree ML algorithm for three combinations:
(i) all features; (ii) non linguistic features, i.e.,
features which can be extracted without natural
language processing machinery: tokens, url, title,
snippet, local tokens, n-grams and local n-grams;
and (iii) just tokens. The results show that accord-
ing to both the Decision Tree results and the upper-
bound (MaxPWA), adding new features to tokens
improves the classification. However, taking non-
linguistic features obtains similar results than tak-
ing all features. Our conclusion is that NE features
are useful for the task, but do not seem to offer a
540
competitive advantage when compared with non-
linguistic features, and are more computationally
expensive. Note that we are using NE features in a
direct way: our results do not exclude the possibil-
ity of effectively exploiting NEs in more sophisti-
cated ways, such as, for instance, exploiting the
underlying social network relationships between
NEs in the texts.
4.3.1 Results on the clustering task
In order to validate our results, we have tested
whether the classifiers learned with our feature
sets lead to competitive systems for the full clus-
tering task. In order to do so, we use the output of
the classifiers as similarity metrics for a particu-
lar clustering algorithm, using WePS-1 to train the
classifiers and WePS-2 for testing.
We have used a Hierarchical Agglomerative
Clustering algorithm (HAC) with single linkage,
using the classifier?s confidence value in the nega-
tive answer for each instance as a distance metric
8
between document pairs. HAC is the algorithm
used by some of the best performing systems in the
WePS-2 evaluation. The distance threshold was
trained using the WePS-1 data. We report results
with the official WePS-2 evaluation metrics: ex-
tended B-Cubed Precision and Recall (Amig?o et
al., 2008).
Two Decision Tree models were evaluated: (i)
ML-ALL is a model trained using all the available
features (which obtains 0.76 accuracy in the clas-
sification task) (ii) ML-NON LING was trained
with all the features except for OAK and Stanford
NEs, noun phrases, lemmas and gazetteer features
(which obtains 0.75 accuracy in the classification
task). These are the same classifiers considered in
Figure 7.
Table 2 shows the results obtained in the clus-
tering task by the two DT models, together with
the four top scoring WePS-2 systems and the av-
erage values for all WePS-2 systems. We found
that a ML based clustering using only non linguis-
tic information slightly outperforms the best par-
ticipant in WePS-2. Surprisingly, adding linguis-
tic information (NEs, noun phrases, etc.) has a
small negative impact on the results (0.81 versus
0.83), although the classifier with linguistic infor-
mation was a bit better than the non-linguistic one.
This seems to be another indication that the use of
8
The DT classifier output consists of two confidence val-
ues, one for the positive and one for the negative answer, that
add up to 1.0 .
noun phrases and other linguistic features to im-
prove the task is non-obvious to say the least.
B-Cubed
run F-? =
0.5
Pre. Rec.
ML-NON LING .83 .91 .77
S-1 .82 .87 .79
ML- ALL .81 .89 .76
S-2 .81 .85 .80
S-3 .81 .93 .73
S-4 .72 .82 .66
WePS-2 systems aver. .61 .74 .63
Table 2: Evaluation on the WePS-2 clustering task
5 Conclusions
We have presented an empirical study that tries to
determine the potential role of several sources of
information to solve the Web People Search clus-
tering problem, with a particular focus on studying
the role of named entities in the task.
To abstract the study from the particular choice
of a clustering algorithm and a parameter set-
ting, we have reformulated the problem as a co-
reference classification task: deciding whether
two pages refer to the same person or not. We
have also proposed the Maximal Pairwise Accu-
racy estimation that establish an upper bound for
the results obtained by any Machine Learning al-
gorithm using a particular set of features.
Our results indicate that (i) NEs do not provide a
substantial competitive advantage in the clustering
process when compared to a rich combination of
simpler features that do not require linguistic pro-
cessing (local, global and snippet tokens, n-grams,
etc.); (ii) results are sensitive to the NER system
used: when using all NE features for training, the
richer number of features provided by OAK seems
to have an advantage over the simpler types in
Stanford NER and the baseline NER system.
This is not exactly a prescription against the use
of NEs for Web People Search, because linguistic
knowledge can be useful for other aspects of the
problem, such as visualisation of results and de-
scription of the persons/clusters obtained: for ex-
ample, from a user point of view a network of the
connections of a person with other persons and or-
ganisations (which can only be done with NER)
can be part of a person?s profile and may help as
a summary of the cluster contents. But from the
perspective of the clustering problem per se, a di-
rect use of NEs and other linguistic features does
not seem to pay off.
541
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the
Regional Government of Madrid, project MAVIR
S0505-TIC0267.
References
Eneko Agirre and Philip Edmonds, editors. 2006.
Word Sense Disambiguation: Algorithms and Appli-
cations. Springer.
Reema Al-Kamha and David W. Embley. 2004.
Grouping search-engine returned citations for
person-name queries. In WIDM ?04: Proceedings of
the 6th annual ACM international workshop on Web
information and data management. ACM Press.
Enrique Amig?o, Julio Gonzalo, Javier Artiles, and Fe-
lisa Verdejo. 2008. A comparison of extrinsic
clustering evaluation metrics based on formal con-
straints. Information Retrieval.
Javier Artiles, Julio Gonzalo, and Felisa Verdejo. 2005.
A testbed for people searching strategies in the
www. In SIGIR.
Javier Artiles, Julio Gonzalo, and Satoshi Sekine.
2007. The semeval-2007 weps evaluation: Estab-
lishing a benchmark for the web people search task.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007).
ACL.
Javier Artiles, Julio Gonzalo, and Satoshi Sekine.
2009. Weps 2 evaluation campaign: overview of
the web people search clustering task. In WePS 2
Evaluation Workshop. WWW Conference 2009.
Amit Bagga and Breck Baldwin. 1998. Entity-
based cross-document coreferencing using the vec-
tor space model. In Proceedings of the 17th inter-
national conference on Computational linguistics.
ACL.
Matthias Blume. 2005. Automatic entity disambigua-
tion: Benefits to ner, relation extraction, link anal-
ysis, and inference. In International Conference on
Intelligence Analysis.
Ying Chen and James H. Martin. 2007. Cu-comsem:
Exploring rich features for unsupervised web per-
sonal name disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ations. ACL.
Silviu Cucerzan. 2007. Large scale named entity
disambiguation based on wikipedia data. In The
EMNLP-CoNLL-2007.
David del Valle-Agudo, C?esar de Pablo-S?anchez, and
Mar??a Teresa Vicente-D??ez. 2007. Uc3m-13: Dis-
ambiguation of person names based on the compo-
sition of simple bags of typed terms. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations. ACL.
Chung Heong Gooi and James Allan. 2004. Cross-
document coreference on a large scale corpus. In
HLT-NAACL.
Dmitri V. Kalashnikov, Stella Chen, Rabia Nuray,
Sharad Mehrotra, and Naveen Ashish. 2007. Dis-
ambiguation algorithm for people search on the web.
In Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Data
Engineering (IEEE ICDE).
Bradley Malin. 2005. Unsupervised name disam-
biguation via social network similarity. In Workshop
on Link Analysis, Counterterrorism, and Security.
Gideon S. Mann and David Yarowsky. 2003. Unsuper-
vised personal name disambiguation. In Proceed-
ings of the seventh conference on Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL) at HLT-NAACL 2003. ACL.
Gideon S. Mann. 2006. Multi-Document Statistical
Fact Extraction and Fusion. Ph.D. thesis, Johns
Hopkins University.
Hien T. Nguyen and Tru H. Cao, 2008. Named En-
tity Disambiguation: A Hybrid Statistical and Rule-
Based Incremental Approach. Springer.
Octavian Popescu and Bernardo Magnini. 2007. Irst-
bp: Web people search using name entities. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations. ACL.
Y. Ravin and Z. Kazi. 1999. Is hillary rodham clinton
the president? disambiguating names across docu-
ments. In Proceedings of the ACL ?99 Workshop
on Coreference and its Applications Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Horacio Saggion. 2008. Experiments on semantic-
based clustering for cross-document coreference. In
International Joint Conference on Natural language
Processing.
Satoshi Sekine. 2008. Extended named entity on-
tology with attribute information. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC?08).
Amanda Spink, Bernard Jansen, and Jan Pedersen.
2004. Searching for people on web search engines.
Journal of Documentation, 60:266 ? 278.
Kazunari Sugiyama and Manabu Okumura. 2007.
Titpi: Web people search task using semi-supervised
clustering approach. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations.
ACL.
Xiaojun Wan, Jianfeng Gao, Mu Li, and Binggong
Ding. 2005. Person resolution in person search re-
sults: Webhawk. In CIKM ?05: Proceedings of the
14th ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management. ACM Press.
542
