Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 580?589,
Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Topic-wise, Sentiment-wise, or Otherwise?
Identifying the Hidden Dimension for Unsupervised Text Classification
Sajib Dasgupta and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
{sajib,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
While traditional work on text clustering
has largely focused on grouping docu-
ments by topic, it is conceivable that a user
may want to cluster documents along other
dimensions, such as the author?s mood,
gender, age, or sentiment. Without know-
ing the user?s intention, a clustering al-
gorithm will only group documents along
the most prominent dimension, which may
not be the one the user desires. To ad-
dress this problem, we propose a novel
way of incorporating user feedback into
a clustering algorithm, which allows a
user to easily specify the dimension along
which she wants the data points to be clus-
tered via inspecting only a small number
of words. This distinguishes our method
from existing ones, which typically re-
quire a large amount of effort on the part
of humans in the form of document an-
notation or interactive construction of the
feature space. We demonstrate the viabil-
ity of our method on several challenging
sentiment datasets.
1 Introduction
Text clustering is one of the most important appli-
cations in Natural Language Processing (NLP). A
common approach to this problem consists of (1)
computing the similarity between each pair of doc-
uments, each of which is typically represented as a
bag of words; and (2) using an unsupervised clus-
tering algorithm to partition the documents. The
majority of existing work on text clustering has
focused on topic-based clustering, where high ac-
curacies can be achieved even for datasets with a
large number of classes (e.g., 20 Newsgroups).
On the other hand, there has been relatively lit-
tle work on sentiment-based clustering and the re-
lated task of unsupervised polarity classification,
where the goal is to cluster (or classify) a set of
documents (e.g., reviews) according to the po-
larity (e.g., ?thumbs up? or ?thumbs down?) ex-
pressed by the author in an unsupervised man-
ner. Despite the large amount of recent work on
sentiment analysis and opinion mining, much of
it has focused on supervised methods (e.g., Pang
et al (2002), Kim and Hovy (2004), Mullen and
Collier (2004)). One weakness of these existing
supervised polarity classification systems is that
they are typically domain- and language-specific.
Hence, when given a new domain or language,
one needs to go through the expensive process of
collecting a large amount of annotated data in or-
der to train a high-performance polarity classifier.
Some recent attempts have been made to leverage
existing sentiment corpora or lexica to automati-
cally create annotated resources for new domains
or languages. However, such methods require
the existence of either a parallel corpus/machine
translation engine for projecting/translating anno-
tations/lexica from a resource-rich language to the
target language (Banea et al, 2008; Wan, 2008),
or a domain that is ?similar? enough to the target
domain (Blitzer et al, 2007). When the target do-
main or language fails to meet this requirement,
sentiment-based clustering or unsupervised polar-
ity classification become appealing alternatives.
Unfortunately, to our knowledge, these tasks are
largely under-investigated in the NLP community.
Turney?s (2002) work is perhaps one of the most
notable examples of unsupervised polarity classi-
fication. However, while his system learns the se-
mantic orientation of the phrases in a review in an
unsupervised manner, this information is used to
predict the polarity of a review heuristically.
Despite its practical significance, sentiment-
based clustering is a challenging task. To illus-
trate its difficulty, consider the task of clustering
a set of movie reviews. Since each review may
contain a description of the plot and the author?s
580
sentiment, a clustering algorithm may cluster re-
views along either the plot dimension or the senti-
ment dimension; and without knowing the user?s
intention, they will be clustered along the most
prominent dimension. Assuming the usual bag-
of-words representation, the most prominent di-
mension will more likely be plot, as it is not un-
common for a review to be devoted almost exclu-
sively to the plot, with the author briefly express-
ing her sentiment only at the end of the review.
Even if the reviews contain mostly subjective ma-
terial, the most prominent dimension may still not
be sentiment, due to the fact that many reviews are
sentimentally ambiguous. Specifically, a reviewer
may have negative opinions on the actors but at the
same time talk enthusiastically about how much
she enjoyed the plot. The presence of both posi-
tive and negative sentiment-bearing words in these
reviews renders the sentiment dimension hidden
(i.e., less prominent) as far as clustering is con-
cerned. Therefore, there is no guarantee that the
clustering algorithm will automatically produce a
sentiment-based clustering of the reviews.
Hence, it is important for a user to provide feed-
back on the clustering process to ensure that the
reviews are clustered along the sentiment dimen-
sion, possibly in an interactive manner. One way
to do this would be to ask the user to annotate
a small number of reviews with polarity infor-
mation, possibly through an active learning pro-
cedure to minimize human intervention (Dredze
and Crammer, 2008). Another way would be to
have the user explicitly identify the relevant fea-
tures (in our case, the sentiment-bearing words) at
the beginning of the clustering process (Liu et al,
2004), or incrementally construct the set of rele-
vant features in an interactive fashion (Bekkerman
et al, 2007; Raghavan and Allan, 2007; Roth and
Small, 2009). In addition, the user may supply
constraints on which pairs of documents must or
must not appear in the same cluster (Wagstaff et
al., 2001), or simply tell the algorithm whether
two clusters should be merged or split during the
clustering process (Balcan and Blum, 2008). It is
worth noting that many of these feedback mech-
anisms were developed by machine learning re-
searchers for general clustering tasks and not for
sentiment-based clustering.
Our goal in this paper is to propose a novel
mechanism allowing a user to cluster a set of docu-
ments along the desired dimension, which may be
a hidden dimension, with very limited user feed-
back. In comparison to the aforementioned feed-
back mechanisms, ours is arguably much simpler:
we only require that the user select a dimension
by examining a small number of features for each
dimension, as opposed to having the user gener-
ate the feature space in an interactive manner or
identify clusters that need to be merged or split. In
particular, identifying clusters for merging or split-
ting in Balcan and Blum?s algorithm may not be as
easy as it appears: for each MERGE or SPLIT de-
cision the user makes, she has to sample a large
number of documents from the cluster(s), read
through the documents, and base her decision on
the extent to which the documents are (dis)similar
to each other. Perhaps more importantly, our hu-
man experiments involving five users indicate that
all of them can easily identify the sentiment di-
mension based on the features, thus providing sug-
gestive evidence that our method is viable.
In sum, our contributions in this paper are three-
fold. First, we propose a novel feedback mecha-
nism for clustering allowing a user to easily spec-
ify the dimension along which she wants data
points to be clustered and apply the mechanism
to the challenging, yet under-investigated problem
of sentiment-based clustering. Second, spectral
learning, which is the core of our method, has not
been applied extensively to NLP problems, and we
hope that our work can increase the awareness of
this powerful machine learning technique in the
NLP community. Finally, we demonstrate the via-
bility of our method not only by evaluating its per-
formance on sentiment datasets, but also via a set
of human experiments, which is typically absent
in papers that involve algorithms for incorporating
user feedback.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents the basics of spectral clustering,
which will facilitate the discussion of our feedback
mechanism in Section 3. We describe our human
experiments and evaluation results on several sen-
timent datasets in Section 4, and present our con-
clusions in Section 5.
2 Spectral Clustering
When given a clustering task, an important ques-
tion to ask is: which clustering algorithm should
we use? A popular choice is k-means. Neverthe-
less, it is well-known that k-means has the major
drawback of not being able to separate data points
581
that are not linearly separable in the given feature
space (e.g., see Dhillon et al (2004) and Cai et al
(2005)). Spectral clustering algorithms were de-
veloped in response to this problem with k-means.
The central idea behind spectral clustering is to
(1) construct a low-dimensional space from the
original (typically high-dimensional) space while
retaining as much information about the original
space as possible, and (2) cluster the data points in
this low-dimensional space. The rest of this sec-
tion provides the details of spectral clustering.
2.1 Algorithm
Although there are several well-known spectral
clustering algorithms in the literature (e.g., Weiss
(1999), Shi and Malik (2000), Kannan et al
(2004)), we adopt the one proposed by Ng et al
(2002), as it is arguably the most widely-used. The
algorithm takes as input a similarity matrix S cre-
ated by applying a user-defined similarity function
to each pair of data points. Below are the main
steps of the algorithm:
1. Create the diagonal matrix D whose (i,i)-
th entry is the sum of the i-th row of S,
and then construct the Laplacian matrix L =
D
?1/2
SD
?1/2
.
2. Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of L.
3. Create a new matrix from the m eigenvectors
that correspond to the m largest eigenvalues.1
4. Each data point is now rank-reduced to a
point in the m-dimensional space. Normal-
ize each point to unit length (while retaining
the sign of each value).
5. Cluster the resulting data points using k-
means.
In essence, each dimension in the reduced space
is defined by exactly one eigenvector. The reason
why eigenvectors with large eigenvalues are used
is that they capture the largest variance in the data.
As a result, each of them can be thought of as re-
vealing an important dimension of the data.
2.2 Clustering with Eigenvectors
As Ng et al (2002) point out, ?different authors
still disagree on which eigenvectors to use, and
how to derive clusters from them?. There are two
common methods for deriving clusters using the
eigenvectors. These methods will serve as our
baselines in our evaluation.
1For brevity, we will refer to the eigenvector with the n-th
largest eigenvalue simply as the n-th eigenvector.
Method 1: Using the second eigenvector only
The first method is to use only the second eigen-
vector, e
2
, to partition the points. Besides reveal-
ing one of the most important dimensions of the
data, this eigenvector induces an intuitively ideal
partition of the data ? the partition induced by the
minimum normalized cut of the similarity graph2,
where the nodes are the data points and the edge
weights are the pairwise similarity values of the
points (Shi and Malik, 2000). Clustering in a one-
dimensional space is trivial: since we have a lin-
earization of the points, all we need to do is to
determine a threshold for partitioning the points.
However, we follow Ng et al (2002) and cluster
using 2-means in this one-dimensional space.
Method 2: Using m eigenvectors
Recall from Section 2.1 that after eigen-
decomposing the Laplacian matrix, each data
point is represented by m co-ordinates. In the
second method, we simply use 2-means to cluster
the data points in this m-dimensional space,
effectively exploiting all of the m eigenvectors.
3 Our Approach
As mentioned before, sentiment-based clustering
is challenging, in part due to the fact that the re-
views can be clustered along more than one di-
mension. In this section, we propose and incor-
porate a user feedback mechanism into a spec-
tral clustering algorithm, which makes it easy for
a user to specify the dimension along which she
wants to cluster the data points.
Recall that our method first applies spectral
clustering to reveal the most important dimensions
of the data, and then lets the user select the de-
sired dimension. To motivate the importance of
user feedback, it helps to understand why the two
baseline clustering algorithms described in Sec-
tion 2.2, which are also based on spectral meth-
ods but do not rely on user feedback, may not al-
ways yield a sentiment-based clustering. To be-
gin with, consider the first method, where only
the second eigenvector is used to induce the par-
tition. Recall that the second eigenvector reveals
the most prominent dimension of the data. Hence,
if sentiment is not the most prominent dimension
(which can happen if the non-sentiment-bearing
2Using the normalized cut (as opposed to the usual cut)
ensures that the size of the two clusters are relatively bal-
anced, avoiding trivial cuts where one cluster is empty and
the other is full. See Shi and Malik (2000) for details.
582
words outnumber the sentiment-bearing words in
the bag-of-words representation of a review), then
the resulting clustering of the reviews may not be
sentiment-oriented. A similar line of reasoning
can be used to explain why the second baseline
clustering algorithm, which clusters based on all
of the eigenvectors in the low-dimensional space,
may not always work well. Since each eigenvector
corresponds to a different dimension (and, in par-
ticular, some of them correspond to non-sentiment
dimensions), using all of them to represent a re-
view may hamper the accurate computation of the
similarity of two reviews as far as clustering along
the sentiment dimension is concerned. In the rest
of this section, we discuss the major steps of our
user-feedback mechanism in detail.
Step 1: Identify the important dimensions
To identify the important dimensions of the given
reviews, we take the top eigenvectors computed
from the eigen-decomposition of the Laplacian
matrix, which is in turn formed from the input sim-
ilarity matrix. We compute the similarity between
two reviews by taking the dot product of their fea-
ture vectors (see Section 4.1 for details on feature
vector generation). Following Ng et al, we set the
diagonal entries of the similarity matrix to 0.
Step 2: Identify the relevant features
Given the eigen-decomposition from Step 1, we
first obtain the second through the fifth eigenvec-
tors3, which as mentioned above, correspond to
the most important dimensions of the data. Then,
we ask the user to select one of the four dimen-
sions defined by these eigenvectors according to
their relevance to sentiment. One way to do this
is to (1) induce one partition of the reviews from
each of the four eigenvectors, using a procedure
identical to Method 1 in Section 2.2, and (2) have
the user inspect the four partitions and decide
which corresponds most closely to a sentiment-
based clustering. The main drawback associated
with this kind of user feedback is that the user may
have to read a large number of reviews in order to
make a decision. Hence, to reduce human effort,
we employ an alternative procedure: we (1) iden-
tify the most informative features for characteriz-
ing each partition, and (2) have the user inspect
just the features rather than the reviews.
While traditional feature selection techniques
such as log-likelihood ratio and information
3The first eigenvector is not used because it is a constant
vector, meaning that it cannot be used to partition the data.
gain can be applied to identify these informa-
tive features (see Yang and Pedersen (1997)
for an overview), we employ a more sophisti-
cated feature-ranking method that we call max-
imum margin feature ranking (MMFR). Recall
that a maximum margin classifier (e.g., a support
vector machine) separates data points from two
classes while maximizing the margin of separa-
tion. Specifically, a maximum margin hyperplane
is defined by w ? x ? b = 0, where x is a fea-
ture vector representing an arbitrary data point,
and w (a weight vector) and b (a scalar) are pa-
rameters that are learned by solving the following
constrained optimization problem:
argmin
1
2
?w?
2
+ C
?
i
?
i
subject to
c
i
(w ? x
i
? b) ? 1? ?
i
, 1 ? i ? n,
where c
i
? {+1,?1} is the class of the i-th train-
ing point x
i
, ?
i
is the degree of misclassification
of x
i
, and C is a regularization parameter that bal-
ances training error and model complexity.
We use w to identify the most informative fea-
tures for a partition. Note that a feature with a
large positive weight is strongly indicative of the
positive class, whereas a feature with a large neg-
ative weight is strongly indicative of the negative
class. In other words, the most informative fea-
tures are those with large absolute weight values.
We exploit this observation and identify the most
informative features for a partition by (1) training
an SVM classifier4 on the partition, where data
points in the same cluster belong to the same class;
(2) sorting the features according to the SVM-
learned feature weights; and (3) generating two
ranked lists of informative features using the top
and bottom 100 features, respectively.
Given the ranked lists generated for each of the
four partitions, the user will select one of the parti-
tions/dimensions as most relevant to sentiment by
inspecting as many features in the ranked lists as
needed. After picking the most relevant dimen-
sion, the user will label one of the two feature lists
associated with this dimension as POSITIVE and
the other as NEGATIVE. Since each feature list
represents one of the clusters, the cluster associ-
ated with the positive list is labeled POSITIVE and
4All the SVM classifiers in this paper are trained using
the SVMlight package (Joachims, 1999), with the learning
parameters set to their default values.
583
the cluster associated with the negative list is la-
beled NEGATIVE.
In comparison to existing user feedback mech-
anisms for assisting a clustering algorithm, ours
requires comparatively little human intervention:
we only require that the user select a dimension by
examining a small number of features, as opposed
to having the user construct the feature space or
identify clusters that need to be merged or split as
is required with other methods.
Step 3: Identify the unambiguous reviews
There is a caveat, however. As mentioned in the
introduction, many reviews contain both positive
and negative sentiment-bearing words. These am-
biguous reviews are more likely to be clustered
incorrectly than their unambiguous counterparts.
Now, since the ranked lists of features are derived
from the partition, the presence of these ambigu-
ous reviews can adversely affect the identification
of informative features using MMFR. As a result,
we remove the ambiguous reviews before deriving
informative features from a partition.
We employ a simple method for identifying un-
ambiguous reviews. In the computation of eigen-
values, each data point factors out the orthogo-
nal projections of each of the other data points
with which they have an affinity. Ambiguous data
points receive the orthogonal projections from
both the positive and negative data points, and
hence they have near zero values in the pivot
eigenvectors. We exploit this important informa-
tion. The basic idea is that the data points with
near zero values in the eigenvectors are more am-
biguous than those with large absolute values. As
a result, we posit 250 reviews from each cluster
whose corresponding values in the eigenvector are
farthest away from zero as unambiguous, and in-
duce the ranked list of features only from the re-
sulting 500 unambiguous reviews.5
Step 4: Cluster along the selected dimension
Finally, we employ the 2-means algorithm to clus-
ter all the reviews along the dimension (i.e., the
eigenvector) selected by the user, regardless of
whether a review is ambiguous or not.
5Note that 500 is a somewhat arbitrary choice. Under-
lying this choice is our assumption that a fraction of the re-
views is unambiguous. As we will see in the evaluation sec-
tion, these 500 reviews can be classified with a high accuracy;
consequently, the features induced from the resulting clus-
ters are also of high quality. Additional experiments reveal
that the list of top-ranking features does not change signifi-
cantly when induced from a smaller number of unambiguous
reviews.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Experimental Setup
Datasets. We use five sentiment classification
datasets, including the widely-used movie review
dataset [MOV] (Pang et al, 2002) as well as four
datasets containing reviews of four different types
of products from Amazon [books (BOO), DVDs
(DVD), electronics (ELE), and kitchen appliances
(KIT)] (Blitzer et al, 2007). Each dataset has
2000 labeled reviews (1000 positives and 1000
negatives). To illustrate the difference between
topic-based clustering and sentiment-based clus-
tering, we will also show topic-based clustering
results on POL, a dataset created by taking all the
documents from two sections of 20 Newsgroups,
namely, sci.crypt and talks.politics.
To preprocess a document, we first tokenize and
downcase it, and then represent it as a vector of
unigrams, using frequency as presence. In ad-
dition, we remove from the vector punctuation,
numbers, words of length one, and words that oc-
cur in only a single review. Following the common
practice in the information retrieval community,
we also exclude words with high document fre-
quency, many of which are stopwords or domain-
specific general-purpose words (e.g., ?movies? in
the movie domain). A preliminary examination
of our evaluation datasets reveals that these words
typically comprise 1?2% of a vocabulary. The de-
cision of exactly how many terms to remove from
each dataset is subjective: a large corpus typically
requires more removals than a small corpus. To be
consistent, we simply sort the vocabulary by doc-
ument frequency and remove the top 1.5%.
Evaluation metrics. We employ two evaluation
metrics. First, we report results in terms of the ac-
curacy achieved on the 2000 labeled reviews for
each dataset. Second, following Kamvar et al
(2003), we evaluate the clusters produced by our
approach against the gold-standard clusters using
the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI). ARI ranges from
?1 to 1; better clusterings have higher ARI values.
4.2 Baseline Systems
Clustering using the second eigenvector only.
As our first baseline, we adopt Shi and Malik?s ap-
proach and cluster the reviews using only the sec-
ond eigenvector, e
2
, as described in Section 2.2.
Results on POL and the five sentiment datasets are
584
Accuracy Adjusted Rand Index
System Variation POL MOV KIT BOO DVD ELE POL MOV KIT BOO DVD ELE
Baseline: 2nd eigenvector 93.7 70.9 69.7 58.9 55.3 50.8 0.76 0.17 0.15 0.03 0.01 0.01
Baseline: m eigenvectors 95.9 59.3 63.2 60.1 62.5 63.8 0.84 0.03 0.07 0.04 0.06 0.08
Our approach 93.7 70.9 69.7 69.5 70.8 65.8 0.76 0.17 0.15 0.15 0.17 0.10
Table 1: Results in terms of accuracy and Adjusted Rand Index for the six datasets.
shown in row 1 of Table 1.6 As we can see, this
baseline achieves an accuracy of 90% on POL, but
a much lower accuracy (of 50?70%) on the sen-
timent datasets. The same performance trend can
be observed with ARI. These results provide sup-
port for the claim that sentiment-based clustering
is more difficult than topic-based clustering.
In addition, it is worth noting that the base-
line achieves much lower accuracies and ARI val-
ues on BOO, DVD, and ELE than on the re-
maining two sentiment datasets. Since e
2
cap-
tures the most prominent dimension, these results
suggest that sentiment dimension is not the most
prominent dimension in these three datasets. In
fact, this is intuitively plausible. For instance,
in the book domain, positive book reviews typ-
ically contain a short description of the content,
with the reviewer only briefly expressing her sen-
timent somewhere in the review. Similarly for the
electronics domain: electronic product reviews are
typically aspect-oriented, with the reviewer talk-
ing about the pros and cons of each aspect of the
product (e.g., battery, durability). Since the re-
views are likely to contain both positive and nega-
tive sentiment-bearing words, the sentiment-based
clustering is unlikely to be captured by e
2
.
Clustering using top five eigenvectors. As our
second baseline, we represent each data point
using the top five eigenvectors (i.e., e
1
through
e
5
), and cluster them using 2-means in this 5-
dimensional space, as described in Section 2.2.
Hence, this can be thought of as an ?ensemble?
approach, where the clustering decision is collec-
tively made by the five eigenvectors.
Results are shown in row 2 of Table 1. In
comparison to the first baseline, we see improve-
ments in accuracy and ARI for the three datasets
on which the first baseline performs poorly (i.e.,
BOO, DVD, and ELE), with the most drastic
improvement observed on ELE. On the other
hand, performance on the remaining two senti-
6Owing to the randomness in the choice of seeds for 2-
means, these and all other experimental results involving 2-
means are averaged over ten independent runs.
ment datasets deteriorates. These results can be
attributed to the fact that for BOO, DVD, and
ELE, e
2
does not capture the sentiment dimension,
but since some other eigenvector in the ensemble
does, we see improvements. On the other hand, e
2
has already captured the sentiment dimension in
MOV and KIT; as a result, employing additional
dimensions, which may not be sentiment-related,
may only introduce noise into the computation of
the similarities between the reviews.
4.3 Our Approach
Human experiments. Unlike the two baselines,
our approach requires users to specify which of the
four dimensions (defined by the second through
fifth eigenvectors) are most closely related to sen-
timent by inspecting a set of features derived from
the unambiguous reviews for each dimension us-
ing MMFR. To better understand how easy it is
for a human to select the desired dimension given
the features, we performed the experiment inde-
pendently with five humans (all of whom are com-
puter science graduate students not affiliated with
this research) and computed the agreement rate.
More specifically, for each dataset, we showed
each human judge the top 100 features for each
cluster according to MMFR (see Tables 4?6 for
a snippet). In addition, we informed them of the
intended dimension: for example, for POL, the
judge was told that the intended clustering is Poli-
tics vs. Science. Also, if she determined that more
than one dimension was relevant to the intended
clustering, she was instructed to rank these dimen-
sions in terms of their degree of relevance, where
the most relevant one would appear first in the list.
The dimensions (expressed in terms of the IDs
of the eigenvectors) selected by each of the five
judges for each dataset are shown in Table 2. The
agreement rate (shown in the last row of the ta-
ble) was computed based on only the highest-
ranked dimension selected by each judge. As we
can see, perfect agreement is achieved for four of
the five sentiment datasets, and for the remaining
two datasets, near-perfect agreement is achieved.
585
Judge POL MOV KIT BOO DVD ELE
1 2,3,4 2 2 4 3 3
2 2,4 2 2 4 3 3
3 4 2,4 4 4 3 3
4 2,3 2 2 4 3 3,4
5 2 2 2 4 3 3
Agr 80% 100% 80% 100% 100% 100%
Table 2: Human agreement rate.
POL MOV KIT BOO DVD ELE
Acc 99.8 87.0 87.6 86.2 87.4 77.6
Table 3: Accuracies on unambiguous documents.
These results together with the fact that it took 5?
6 minutes to identify the relevant dimension, indi-
cate that asking a human to determine the intended
dimension based on solely the ?informative? fea-
tures is a viable task.
Clustering results. Next, we cluster all 2000
documents for each dataset using the dimension
selected by the majority of the human judges. The
clustering results are shown in row 3 of Table 1. In
comparison to the better baseline for each dataset,
we see that our approach performs substantially
better on BOO, DVD and ELE, at almost the same
level on MOV and KIT, but slightly worse on POL.
Note that the improvements observed for BOO,
DVD and ELE can be attributed to the failure of e
2
to capture the sentiment dimension. Perhaps most
importantly, by exploiting human feedback, our
approach has achieved more stable performance
across the datasets than the baselines, with accura-
cies ranging from 65.8% to 93.7% and ARI rang-
ing from 0.10 to 0.76.
Role of unambiguous documents. Recall that
the features with the largest MMFR were com-
puted from the unambiguous documents only. To
get an intuitive understanding of the role of unam-
biguous documents in our approach, we show in
Table 3 the accuracy when the unambiguous doc-
uments in each dataset were clustered using the
eigenvector selected by the majority of the judges.
As we can see, the accuracy of each dataset is
higher than the corresponding accuracy shown in
row 3 of Table 1. In fact, an accuracy of more than
85% was achieved on all but one dataset. This sug-
gests that our method of identifying unambiguous
documents is useful.
Note that it is crucial to be able to achieve a high
accuracy on the unambiguous documents: if clus-
tering accuracy is low, the features induced from
the clusters may not be an accurate representation
of the corresponding dimension, and the human
judge may have a difficult time identifying the in-
tended dimension. In fact, some human judges re-
ported difficulty in identifying the correct dimen-
sion for the ELE dataset, and this can be attributed
in part to the low accuracy achieved on the unam-
biguous documents.
Features as summary. Recall that the method
we proposed represents each dimension with a
small number of features and asks a user to se-
lect the desired dimension by inspecting the corre-
sponding feature lists. In other words, each feature
list serves as a ?summary? of its corresponding di-
mension, and inspecting the features induced for
each dimension can give us insights into the dif-
ferent dimensions of a dataset. Hence, if a user is
not sure how she wants the data points to be clus-
tered (due to lack of knowledge of the data, for
instance), our automatically induced features may
serve as an overview of the different dimensions
of the data. To better understand whether these
features can indeed provide a user with additional
useful information about a dataset, we show in Ta-
bles 4?6 the top ten features induced for each clus-
ter and each dimension for the six datasets. As an
example, consider the MOV dataset. Inspecting
the induced features, we can determine that it has
a sentiment dimension (e
2
), as well as a humor vs.
thriller dimension (e
4
). In other words, if we clus-
ter along e
2
, we get a sentiment-based clustering;
and if we cluster along e
4
, we obtain a genre-based
(humor vs. thriller) clustering.
User feedback vs. labeled data. Recall that our
two baselines are unsupervised, whereas our ap-
proach can be characterized as semi-supervised, as
it relies on user feedback to select the intended di-
mension. Hence, it should not be surprising to see
that the average clustering performance of our ap-
proach is better than that of the baselines.
To do a fairer comparison, we conduct another
experiment in which we compare our approach
against a semi-supervised sentiment classification
system, which uses transductive SVM as the un-
derlying semi-supervised learner. More specifi-
cally, the goal of this experiment is to determine
how many labeled documents are needed in or-
der for the transductive learner to achieve the same
level of performance as our approach. To answer
this question, we first give the transductive learner
access to the 2000 documents for each dataset as
586
POL MOV
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
serder beyer serbs escrow relationship production jokes starts
armenian arabs palestinians serial son earth kids person
turkey andi muslims algorithm tale sequences live saw
armenians research wrong chips husband aliens animation feeling
muslims israelis department ensure perfect war disney lives
sdpa tim bosnia care drama crew animated told
argic uci live strong focus alien laughs happen
davidian ab matter police strong planet production am
dbd@ura z@virginia freedom omissions beautiful horror voice felt
troops holocaust politics excepted nature evil hilarious happened
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
sternlight escrow standard internet worst sex thriller comic
wouldn sternlight sternlight uucp stupid romantic killer sequences
pgp algorithm des uk waste school murder michael
crypto access escrow net bunch relationship crime supporting
algorithm net employer quote wasn friends police career
isn des net ac video jokes car production
likely privacy york co worse laughs dead peter
access uk jake didn boring sexual killed style
idea systems code ai guess cute starts latest
cryptograph pgp algorithm mit anyway mother violence entertaining
Table 4: Top ten features induced for each dimension for the POL and MOV domains. The shaded columns
correspond to the dimensions selected by the human judges. e
2
, . . ., e
5
are the top eigenvectors; C
1
and C
2
are the clusters.
BOO ELE
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
history series loved must mouse music easy amazon
must man highly wonderful cable really used cable
modern history easy old cables ipod card card
important character enjoyed feel case too fine recommend
text death children away red little using dvd
reference between again children monster headphones problems camera
excellent war although year picture hard fine fast
provides seems excellent someone kit excellent drive far
business political understand man overall need computer printer
both american three made paid fit install picture
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
plot buy money boring working worked money phone
didn bought bad series never problem worth off
thought information nothing history before never amazon worked
boring easy waste pages phone item over power
got money buy information days amazon return battery
character recipes anything between headset working years unit
couldn pictures doesn highly money support much set
ll look already page months months headphones phones
ending waste instead excellent return returned sony range
fan copy seems couldn second another received little
Table 5: Top ten features induced for each dimension for the BOO and ELE domains. The shaded columns
correspond to the dimensions selected by the human judges. e
2
, . . ., e
5
are the top eigenvectors; C
1
and C
2
are the clusters.
unlabeled data. Next, we randomly sample 50 un-
labeled documents and assign them the true label.
We then re-train the classifier and compute its ac-
curacy on the 2000 documents. We keep adding
more labeled data (50 in each iteration) until it
reaches the accuracy achieved by our system. Re-
sults of this experiment are shown in Table 7. Ow-
ing in the randomness involved in the selection of
unlabeled documents, these results are averaged
over ten independent runs. As we can see, our
587
KIT DVD
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
e
2
e
3
e
4
e
5
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
C
1
love works really pan worth music video money
clean water nice oven bought collection music quality
nice clean works cooking series excellent found video
size work too made money wonderful feel worth
set ice quality pans season must bought found
kitchen makes small better fan loved workout version
easily thing sturdy heat collection perfect daughter picture
sturdy need little cook music highly recommend waste
recommend keep think using tv makes our special
price best item clean thought special disappointed sound
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
C
2
months price ve love young worst series saw
still item years coffee between money cast watched
back set love too actors thought fan loved
never ordered never recommend men boring stars enjoy
worked amazon clean makes cast nothing original whole
money gift months over seems minutes comedy got
did got over size job waste actors family
amazon quality pan little beautiful saw worth series
return received been maker around pretty classic season
machine knives pans cup director reviews action liked
Table 6: Top ten features induced for each dimension for the KIT and DVD domains. The shaded columns
correspond to the dimensions selected by the human judges. e
2
, . . ., e
5
are the top eigenvectors; C
1
and C
2
are the clusters.
POL MOV KIT BOO DVD ELE
# labels 400 150 200 350 350 200
Table 7: Transductive SVM results.
user feedback is equivalent to the effort of hand-
annotating 275 documents per dataset on average.
Multiple relevant dimensions. As seen from
Table 2, some human judges selected more than
one dimension for some datasets (e.g., 2,3,4 for
POL; 2,4 for MOV; and 3,4 for ELE). However,
we never took into account these ?extra? dimen-
sions in our previous experiments. To better un-
derstand whether these extra dimensions can help
improve accuracy and ARI, we conduct another
experiment in which we apply 2-means to clus-
ter the documents in a space that is defined by
all of the selected dimensions. The final accu-
racy turns out to be 95.9%, 70.9%, and 67.5% for
POL, MOV, and ELE respectively, which is con-
siderably better than using only the optimal di-
mension and suggests that the extra dimensions
contain useful information.
5 Conclusions
Unsupervised clustering algorithms typically
group objects along the most prominent di-
mension, in part owing to their objective of
simultaneously maximizing inter-cluster similar-
ity and intra-cluster dissimilarity. Hence, if the
user?s intended clustering dimension is not the
most prominent dimension, these unsupervised
clustering algorithms will fail miserably. To
address this problem, we proposed to integrate a
novel user feedback mechanism into a spectral
clustering algorithm, which allows us to mine
the intended, possibly hidden, dimension of the
data and produce the desired clustering. This
mechanism differs from competing methods in
that it requires very limited feedback: to select the
intended dimension, the user only needs to inspect
a small number of features. We demonstrated its
viability via a set of human and automatic experi-
ments with unsupervised sentiment classification,
obtaining promising results.
In future work, we plan to explore several ex-
tensions to our proposed method. First, we plan to
use our user-feedback method in combination with
existing methods (e.g., Bekkerman et al (2007))
for improving its performance. For instance, in-
stead of having the user construct a relevant fea-
ture space from scratch, she can simply extend
the set of informative features identified for the
user-selected dimension. Second, since none of
the steps in our method is specifically designed
for sentiment classification, we plan to apply it to
other non-topic-based text classification tasks.
588
Acknowledgments
We thank the three anonymous reviewers for their
invaluable comments on an earlier draft of the pa-
per. This work was supported in part by NSF
Grant IIS-0812261.
References
Maria-Florina Balcan and Avrim Blum. 2008. Clus-
tering with interactive feedback. In Proceedings of
ALT, pages 316?328.
Carmen Banea, Rada Mihalcea, Janyce Wiebe, and
Samer Hassan. 2008. Multilingual subjectivity
analysis using machine translation. In Proceedings
of EMNLP, pages 127?135.
Ron Bekkerman, Hema Raghavan, James Allan, and
Koji Eguchi. 2007. Interactive clustering of text
collections according to a user-specified criterion.
In Proceedings of IJCAI, pages 684?689.
John Blitzer, Mark Dredze, and Fernando Pereira.
2007. Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and
blenders: Domain adaptation for sentiment classi-
fication. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 440?447.
Deng Cai, Xiaofei He, and Jiawei Han. 2005. Doc-
ument clustering using locality preserving indexing.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering, 17(12):1624?1637.
Inderjit Dhillon, Yuqiang Guan, and Brian Kulis. 2004.
Kernel k-means, spectral clustering and normalized
cuts. In Proceedings of KDD, pages 551?556.
Mark Dredze and Koby Crammer. 2008. Active learn-
ing with confidence. In Proceedings of ACL-08:HLT
Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 233?236.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM
learning practical. In Bernhard Scholkopf and
Alexander Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Meth-
ods - Support Vector Learning, pages 44?56. MIT
Press.
Sepandar Kamvar, Dan Klein, and Chris Manning.
2003. Spectral learning. In Proceedings of IJCAI,
pages 561?566.
Ravi Kannan, Santosh Vempala, and Adrian Vetta.
2004. On clusterings: Good, bad and spectral. Jour-
nal of the ACM, 51(3):497?515.
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining
the sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of COL-
ING, pages 1367?1373.
Bing Liu, Xiaoli Li, Wee Sun Lee, and Philip S. Yu.
2004. Text classification by labeling words. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI, pages 425?430.
Tony Mullen and Nigel Collier. 2004. Sentiment
analysis using support vector machines with diverse
information sources. In Proceedings of EMNLP,
pages 412?418.
Andrew Ng, Michael Jordan, and Yair Weiss. 2002.
On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm.
In Advances in NIPS 14.
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification us-
ing machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 79?86.
Hema Raghavan and James Allan. 2007. An interac-
tive algorithm for asking and incorporating feature
feedback into support vector machines. In Proceed-
ings of SIGIR, pages 79?86.
Dan Roth and Kevin Small. 2009. Interactive feature
space construction using semantic information. In
Proceedings of CoNLL, pages 66?74.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. 2000. Normalized cuts
and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(8):888?
905.
Peter Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Se-
mantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages
417?424.
Kiri Wagstaff, Claire Cardie, Seth Rogers, and Ste-
fan Schro?dl. 2001. Constrained k-means cluster-
ing with background knowledge. In Proceedings of
ICML, pages 577?584.
Xiaojun Wan. 2008. Using bilingual knowledge and
ensemble techniques for unsupervised Chinese sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
553?561.
Yair Weiss. 1999. Segmentation using eigenvectors: A
unifying view. In Proceedings of ICCV, pages 975?
982.
Yiming Yang and Jan Pedersen. 1997. A comparative
study on feature selection in text categorization. In
Proceedings of ICML, pages 412?420.
589
