Automatic Annotation for All Semantic Layers in FrameNet
Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues
Department of Computer Science, Lund University
Box 118
SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden
{richard, pierre}@cs.lth.se
Abstract
We describe a system for automatic an-
notation of English text in the FrameNet
standard. In addition to the conventional
annotation of frame elements and their se-
mantic roles, we annotate additional se-
mantic information such as support verbs
and prepositions, aspectual markers, cop-
ular verbs, null arguments, and slot fillers.
As far as we are aware, this is the first sys-
tem that finds this information automati-
cally.
1 Introduction
Shallow semantic parsing has been an active area
of research during the last few years. Seman-
tic parsers, which are typically based on the
FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998) or PropBank for-
malisms, have proven useful in a number of NLP
projects, such as information extraction and ques-
tion answering. The main reason for their popular-
ity is that they can produce a flat layer of semantic
structure with a fair degree of robustness.
Building English semantic parsers for the
FrameNet standard has been studied widely
(Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002; Litkowski, 2004).
These systems typically address the task of identi-
fying and classifying Frame Elements (FEs), that
is semantic arguments of predicates, for a given
target word (predicate).
Although the FE layer is arguably the most cen-
tral, the FrameNet annotation standard defines a
number of additional semantic layers, which con-
tain information about support expressions (verbs
and prepositions), copulas, null arguments, slot-
fillers, and aspectual particles. This information
can for example be used in a semantic parser to
refine the meaning of a predicate, to link predi-
cates in a sentence together, or possibly to improve
detection and classification of FEs. The task of
automatic reconstruction of the additional seman-
tic layers has not been addressed by any previous
system. In this work, we describe a system that au-
tomatically identifies the entities in those layers.
2 Introduction to FrameNet
FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998; Johnson et al,
2003) is a comprehensive lexical database that
lists descriptions of words in the frame-semantic
paradigm (Fillmore, 1976). The core concept is
the frame, which is conceptual structure that rep-
resents a type of situation, object, or event, cou-
pled with a semantic valence description that de-
scribes what kinds of semantic arguments (frame
elements) are allowed or required for that partic-
ular frame. The frames are arranged in an ontol-
ogy using relations such as inheritance (such as the
relation between COMMUNICATION and COM-
MUNICATION_NOISE) and causative-of (such as
KILLING and DEATH).
For each frame, FrameNet lists a set of lemmas
or lexical units (mostly nouns, verbs, and adjec-
tives, but also a few prepositions and adverbs).
When such a word occurs in a sentence, it is called
a target word that evokes the frame. FrameNet
comes with a large set of manually annotated ex-
ample sentences, which is typically used by sta-
tistical systems for training and testing. Figure 1
shows an example of such a sentence. Here,
the target word eat evokes the INGESTION frame.
Three FEs are present: INGESTOR, INGESTIBLES,
and PLACE.
135
Often [an informal group]INGESTOR will eat
[lunch]INGESTIBLES [near a machine or other
work station]PLACE, even though a canteen is
available.
Figure 1: A sentence from the FrameNet example
corpus, with FEs bracketed and the target word in
italics.
3 Semantic Entities in FrameNet
The semantic annotation in FrameNet consists of
a set of layers. One of the layers defines the tar-
get, and the other layers provide additional infor-
mation with respect to the target. The following
layers are used:
? The FE layer, which defines the spans and se-
mantic roles of the arguments of the predi-
cate.
? A part-of-speech-specific layer, which con-
tains aspectual information for verbs; and
copulas, support expressions, and slot filling
information for nouns and adjectives.
? The ?Other? layer, containing special cases
such as null arguments.
The semantic entities that we consider in this
article are defined in the second and third of these
layers.
3.1 Support Expressions
Some noun targets, typically denoting events, are
often constructed using support verbs. In this case,
the noun carries most of the semantics (that is, it
evokes the frame), while the verb allows the slots
of the frame to be filled. Thus, the dependents
of a support verb are annotated as FEs, just like
for a verb target. Support verbs are annotated us-
ing the SUPP label on the Noun or Adjective layer.
In the following sentence, there is a support verb
(underwent) for the noun target (operation).
[Frances Patterson]PATIENT underwent an op-
eration at RMH today and is expected to be hos-
pitalized for a week or more.
The support verbs do not change the core se-
mantics of the noun target (that is, they bear no re-
lation to the frame). However, they may determine
the relation between the FEs and the target (?point-
of-view supports?, such as ?undergo an operation?
or ?perform an operation?) or provide aspectual
information (such as ?start an operation?).
The following sentence shows an example
where a governing verb is not a support verb of the
noun target. An automatic system must be able to
distinguish support verbs from other verbs.
A senior nurse observed the operation.
Although a large majority of the support expres-
sions are verbs, there are additionally some cases
of support prepositions, such as the following ex-
ample:
Secret agents of this ilk are at work all the time.
3.2 Copulas
Copular verbs, typically be, may be seen as a spe-
cial kind of support verb. They are marked us-
ing the COP label on the Noun or Adjective layer.
There are several uses of copulas:
? Class membership: John is a sailor.
? Qualities: Your literary masterpiece was delicious.
? Location: This was inside a desk drawer.
? Identity: Smithers is the vice-president of the arm-
chair division.
In FrameNet annotation, these uses of the cop-
ular verb are not distinguished.
3.3 Null Arguments
There are constructions that require special argu-
ments to be syntactically valid, but where these ar-
guments have no relation to the semantics of the
sentence. In the example below, it is an example
of this phenomenon.
I hate it when you do that.
Other common cases include existential con-
stuctions (?there are?) and subject requirement of
zero-place predicates (?it rains?). These null argu-
ments are tagged as NULL on the Other layer.
3.4 Aspectual Particles
Verb particles that indicate aspectual information
are marked using the ASPECT label. These parti-
cles must be distinguished from particles that are
parts of multiword units, such as carry out.
They just moan on and on about Fergie this and
Fergie that and I ?ve simply had enough.
136
3.5 Slot Fillers: GOV and X
FrameNet annotation contains some information
about the relation of predicates in the same sen-
tence when one predicate is a slot filler (that is,
an argument) of the other. This is most common
for noun target words, typically referring to natu-
ral kinds or artifacts.
In the following example, the target word
fingertips evokes the OBSERVABLE_BODYPARTS
frame, involving two FEs: POSSESSOR (?his?)
and BODY_PART (?fingertips?). This noun phrase
is also a slot filler (that is, an argument) of another
predicate in the sentence: cling on. In FrameNet,
such predicates are annotated using the GOV la-
bel. The constituent that contains the slot filler in
question is called (for lack of a better name) X.
Shares will boom and John Major will
[cling on]GOV [by [his]POSSESSOR
[fingertips]BODY_PART ]X.
If GOV and X are present, all FEs must be
contained in the span of the X node, such as
BODY_PART and POSSESSOR above. This may
be of use for automatic FE identifiers.
4 Identifying Semantic Entities
To find the semantic entities in the text, we used
the method that has previously been used for
FE detection: classification of nodes in a parse
tree. We divide the identification process into two
stages:
? The first stage finds SUPP, COP, and GOV.
? The second stage finds NULL, ASP, and X.
The reason for this division is that we expect
that the knowledge of the presence of SUPP, COP,
and GOV, which are almost always verbs, is use-
ful when detecting the other entities. The second
stage makes use of the information found in the
first stage. Above all, it is necessary to have infor-
mation about GOV to be able to detect X.
To train the classifiers, we selected the 150 most
common frames and divided the annotated exam-
ple sentences for those frames into a training set
of 100,000 sentences and a test set of 8,000 sen-
tences.
The classifiers used the Support Vector learning
method using the LIBSVM package (Chang and
Lin, 2001). The features used by the classifiers are
listed in Table 1. Apart from the features used by
Features for first and second stage
Target lemma
Target POS
Voice
Available semantic role labels
Position (before or after target)
Head word and POS
Phrase type
Parse tree path from target to node
Features for second stage only
Has SUPP
Has COP
Has GOV
Parse tree path from SUPP to node
Parse tree path from COP to node
Parse tree path from GOV to node
Table 1: Features used by the classifiers.
Stage 2, most of them are well-known from pre-
vious literature on FE identification and labeling
(Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002; Litkowski, 2004). For
all path features, we used both the traditional con-
stituent parse tree path (as by Gildea and Jurafsky
(2002)) and a dependency tree path (as by Ahn et
al. (2004)). We produced the parse trees using the
parser of Collins (1999).
5 Evaluation
We applied the system to a test set consisting of
approximately 8,000 sentences.
Because of inconsistent annotation, we did not
evaluate the performance of detection of the EX-
IST tag used in existential constructions. Prelim-
inary experiments indicated that the performance
was very poor.
The results, with confidence intervals at the
95% level, are shown in Table 2. They demon-
strate that the classical approach for FE identifica-
tion, that is classification of nodes in the parse tree,
is as well a viable method for detection of other
kinds of semantic information. The detection of
X shows the poorest performance. This is to be
expected, since it is very dependent on a GOV to
have been detected in the first stage.
The results for detection of aspectual particles
is not very reliable (the confidence interval was
?0.17 for precision and ?0.19 for recall), since
test corpus contained just 25 of these particles.
137
P R F?=1
SUPP 0.85 ? 0.046 0.64 ? 0.054 0.73
COP 0.90 ? 0.027 0.87 ? 0.030 0.88
NULL 0.76 ? 0.082 0.80 ? 0.080 0.78
ASP 0.83 ? 0.17 0.6 ? 0.19 0.70
GOV 0.79 ? 0.029 0.64 ? 0.030 0.71
X 0.59 ? 0.035 0.49 ? 0.032 0.54
Table 2: Results with 95% confidence intervals on
the test set.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have described a system that reconstructs all
semantic layers in FrameNet: in addition to the
traditional task of building the FE layer, it marks
up support expressions, aspectual particles, cop-
ulas, null arguments, and slot filling information
(GOV/X). As far as we know, no previous system
has addressed these tasks.
In the future, we would like to study how the
information provided by the additional layers in-
fluence the performance of the traditional task for
a semantic parser. FE identification, especially
for noun and adjective target words, may be made
easier by knowledge of the additional layers. As
mentioned above, if a support verb is present, its
dependents are arguments of the predicate. The
same holds for copular verbs. GOV/X nodes also
restrict where FEs may occur. In addition, support
verbs (such as ?perform? or ?undergo? an opera-
tion) may be beneficial when determining the re-
lationship between the FE and the predicate, that
is when assigning semantic roles.
References
David Ahn, Sisay Fissaha, Valentin Jijkoun, and
Maarten de Rijke. 2004. The university of Amster-
dam at Senseval-3: Semantic roles and logic forms.
In Proceedings of SENSEVAL-3.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In Proceed-
ings of COLING-ACL?98, pages 86?90, Montr?al,
Canada.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, 2001. LIBSVM:
a library for support vector machines.
Michael J. Collins. 1999. Head-driven statistical mod-
els for natural language parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and
the nature of language. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences: Conference on the Origin and
Development of Language, 280:20?32.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245?288.
Christopher Johnson, Miriam Petruck, Collin Baker,
Michael Ellsworth, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Charles
Fillmore. 2003. FrameNet: Theory and Practice.
Ken Litkowski. 2004. Senseval-3 task: Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. In Rada Mihalcea and
Phil Edmonds, editors, Senseval-3: Third Interna-
tionalWorkshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the
Semantic Analysis of Text, pages 9?12, Barcelona,
Spain, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
138
