Automatically Constructing a Lexicon of
Verb Phrase Idiomatic Combinations
Afsaneh Fazly
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
Canada
afsaneh@cs.toronto.edu
Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
Canada
suzanne@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
We investigate the lexical and syntactic
flexibility of a class of idiomatic expres-
sions. We develop measures that draw
on such linguistic properties, and demon-
strate that these statistical, corpus-based
measures can be successfully used for dis-
tinguishing idiomatic combinations from
non-idiomatic ones. We also propose
a means for automatically determining
which syntactic forms a particular idiom
can appear in, and hence should be in-
cluded in its lexical representation.
1 Introduction
The term idiom has been applied to a fuzzy cat-
egory with prototypical examples such as by and
large, kick the bucket, and let the cat out of the
bag. Providing a definitive answer for what idioms
are, and determining how they are learned and un-
derstood, are still subject to debate (Glucksberg,
1993; Nunberg et al, 1994). Nonetheless, they are
often defined as phrases or sentences that involve
some degree of lexical, syntactic, and/or semantic
idiosyncrasy.
Idiomatic expressions, as a part of the vast fam-
ily of figurative language, are widely used both in
colloquial speech and in written language. More-
over, a phrase develops its idiomaticity over time
(Cacciari, 1993); consequently, new idioms come
into existence on a daily basis (Cowie et al, 1983;
Seaton and Macaulay, 2002). Idioms thus pose a
serious challenge, both for the creation of wide-
coverage computational lexicons, and for the de-
velopment of large-scale, linguistically plausible
natural language processing (NLP) systems (Sag
et al, 2002).
One problem is due to the range of syntactic
idiosyncrasy of idiomatic expressions. Some id-
ioms, such as by and large, contain syntactic vio-
lations; these are often completely fixed and hence
can be listed in a lexicon as ?words with spaces?
(Sag et al, 2002). However, among those idioms
that are syntactically well-formed, some exhibit
limited morphosyntactic flexibility, while others
may be more syntactically flexible. For example,
the idiom shoot the breeze undergoes verbal inflec-
tion (shot the breeze), but not internal modification
or passivization (?shoot the fun breeze, ?the breeze
was shot). In contrast, the idiom spill the beans
undergoes verbal inflection, internal modification,
and even passivization. Clearly, a words-with-
spaces approach does not capture the full range of
behaviour of such idiomatic expressions.
Another barrier to the appropriate handling of
idioms in a computational system is their seman-
tic idiosyncrasy. This is a particular issue for those
idioms that conform to the grammar rules of the
language. Such idiomatic expressions are indistin-
guishable on the surface from compositional (non-
idiomatic) phrases, but a computational system
must be capable of distinguishing the two. For ex-
ample, a machine translation system should trans-
late the idiom shoot the breeze as a single unit of
meaning (?to chat?), whereas this is not the case
for the literal phrase shoot the bird.
In this study, we focus on a particular class of
English phrasal idioms, i.e., those that involve the
combination of a verb plus a noun in its direct ob-
ject position. Examples include shoot the breeze,
pull strings, and push one?s luck. We refer to these
as verb+noun idiomatic combinations (VNICs).
The class of VNICs accommodates a large num-
ber of idiomatic expressions (Cowie et al, 1983;
Nunberg et al, 1994). Moreover, their peculiar be-
337
haviour signifies the need for a distinct treatment
in a computational lexicon (Fellbaum, 2005). De-
spite this, VNICs have been granted relatively lit-
tle attention within the computational linguistics
community.
We look into two closely related problems
confronting the appropriate treatment of VNICs:
(i) the problem of determining their degree of flex-
ibility; and (ii) the problem of determining their
level of idiomaticity. Section 2 elaborates on the
lexicosyntactic flexibility of VNICs, and how this
relates to their idiomaticity. In Section 3, we pro-
pose two linguistically-motivated statistical mea-
sures for quantifying the degree of lexical and
syntactic inflexibility (or fixedness) of verb+noun
combinations. Section 4 presents an evaluation
of the proposed measures. In Section 5, we put
forward a technique for determining the syntac-
tic variations that a VNIC can undergo, and that
should be included in its lexical representation.
Section 6 summarizes our contributions.
2 Flexibility and Idiomaticity of VNICs
Although syntactically well-formed, VNICs in-
volve a certain degree of semantic idiosyncrasy.
Unlike compositional verb+noun combinations,
the meaning of VNICs cannot be solely predicted
from the meaning of their parts. There is much ev-
idence in the linguistic literature that the seman-
tic idiosyncrasy of idiomatic combinations is re-
flected in their lexical and/or syntactic behaviour.
2.1 Lexical and Syntactic Flexibility
A limited number of idioms have one (or more)
lexical variants, e.g., blow one?s own trumpet and
toot one?s own horn (examples from Cowie et al
1983). However, most are lexically fixed (non-
productive) to a large extent. Neither shoot the
wind nor fling the breeze are typically recognized
as variations of the idiom shoot the breeze. Simi-
larly, spill the beans has an idiomatic meaning (?to
reveal a secret?), while spill the peas and spread
the beans have only literal interpretations.
Idiomatic combinations are also syntactically
peculiar: most VNICs cannot undergo syntactic
variations and at the same time retain their id-
iomatic interpretations. It is important, however,
to note that VNICs differ with respect to the degree
of syntactic flexibility they exhibit. Some are syn-
tactically inflexible for the most part, while others
are more versatile; as illustrated in 1 and 2:
1. (a) Tim and Joy shot the breeze.
(b) ?? Tim and Joy shot a breeze.
(c) ?? Tim and Joy shot the breezes.
(d) ?? Tim and Joy shot the fun breeze.
(e) ?? The breeze was shot by Tim and Joy.
(f) ?? The breeze that Tim and Joy kicked was fun.
2. (a) Tim spilled the beans.
(b) ? Tim spilled some beans.
(c) ?? Tim spilled the bean.
(d) Tim spilled the official beans.
(e) The beans were spilled by Tim.
(f) The beans that Tim spilled troubled Joe.
Linguists have explained the lexical and syntac-
tic flexibility of idiomatic combinations in terms
of their semantic analyzability (e.g., Glucksberg
1993; Fellbaum 1993; Nunberg et al 1994). Se-
mantic analyzability is inversely related to id-
iomaticity. For example, the meaning of shoot the
breeze, a highly idiomatic expression, has nothing
to do with either shoot or breeze. In contrast, a less
idiomatic expression, such as spill the beans, can
be analyzed as spill corresponding to ?reveal? and
beans referring to ?secret(s)?. Generally, the con-
stituents of a semantically analyzable idiom can be
mapped onto their corresponding referents in the
idiomatic interpretation. Hence analyzable (less
idiomatic) expressions are often more open to lex-
ical substitution and syntactic variation.
2.2 Our Proposal
We use the observed connection between id-
iomaticity and (in)flexibility to devise statisti-
cal measures for automatically distinguishing id-
iomatic from literal verb+noun combinations.
While VNICs vary in their degree of flexibility
(cf. 1 and 2 above; see also Moon 1998), on the
whole they contrast with compositional phrases,
which are more lexically productive and appear in
a wider range of syntactic forms. We thus propose
to use the degree of lexical and syntactic flexibil-
ity of a given verb+noun combination to determine
the level of idiomaticity of the expression.
It is important to note that semantic analyzabil-
ity is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condi-
tion for an idiomatic combination to be lexically
or syntactically flexible. Other factors, such as
the communicative intentions and pragmatic con-
straints, can motivate a speaker to use a variant
in place of a canonical form (Glucksberg, 1993).
Nevertheless, lexical and syntactic flexibility may
well be used as partial indicators of semantic ana-
lyzability, and hence idiomaticity.
338
3 Automatic Recognition of VNICs
Here we describe our measures for idiomaticity,
which quantify the degree of lexical, syntactic, and
overall fixedness of a given verb+noun combina-
tion, represented as a verb?noun pair. (Note that
our measures quantify fixedness, not flexibility.)
3.1 Measuring Lexical Fixedness
AVNIC is lexically fixed if the replacement of any
of its constituents by a semantically (and syntac-
tically) similar word generally does not result in
another VNIC, but in an invalid or a literal expres-
sion. One way of measuring lexical fixedness of
a given verb+noun combination is thus to exam-
ine the idiomaticity of its variants, i.e., expressions
generated by replacing one of the constituents by
a similar word. This approach has two main chal-
lenges: (i) it requires prior knowledge about the
idiomaticity of expressions (which is what we are
developing our measure to determine); (ii) it needs
information on ?similarity? among words.
Inspired by Lin (1999), we examine the strength
of association between the verb and noun con-
stituents of the target combination and its variants,
as an indirect cue to their idiomaticity. We use the
automatically-built thesaurus of Lin (1998) to find
similar words to the noun of the target expression,
in order to automatically generate variants. Only
the noun constituent is varied, since replacing the
verb constituent of a VNIC with a semantically re-
lated verb is more likely to yield another VNIC, as
in keep/lose one?s cool (Nunberg et al, 1994).
Let
 
		ffflfiffi
be the set
of the
fi
most similar nouns to the noun
	
of the
target pair  "!$#
	&%
. We calculate the association
strength for the target pair, and for each of its vari-
ants,  '!$#
	

%
, using pointwise mutual informa-
tion (PMI) (Church et al, 1991):
(*),+

!$#
	.-/0 1325476

!$#
	 - 
6

!

6

	 - 
 13254
 89":;=<>
!$#
	.-/
<>
!$#@?
><A
?B#
	
-
 (1)
where C
EDFfi
and
	$G
is the target noun;
8
is
the set of all transitive verbs in the corpus;
:
is
the set of all nouns appearing as the direct object
of some verb;
<
!H#
	 - 
is the frequency of ! and
	
-
occurring as a verb?object pair; <> !$#@?  is the
total frequency of the target verb with any noun in
:
;
<
?B#
	
-

is the total frequency of the noun
	
-
in the direct object position of any verb in 8 .
Lin (1999) assumes that a target expression is
non-compositional if and only if its (I)J+ value
is significantly different from that of any of the
variants. Instead, we propose a novel technique
that brings together the association strengths ( (*),+
values) of the target and the variant expressions
into a single measure reflecting the degree of lex-
ical fixedness for the target pair. We assume that
the target pair is lexically fixed to the extent that
its
(*),+ deviates from the average (*),+ of its vari-
ants. Our measure calculates this deviation, nor-
malized using the sample?s standard deviation:
K>L3MONQPRNQSTSVUXWZY

!$#
	[0
(*),+

!$#
	>\
(*),+
]
(2)
(I)J+
is the mean and ] the standard deviation of
the sample;
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTSTUXWaY

!H#
	&bdc^\fe
#hg
eji
.
3.2 Measuring Syntactic Fixedness
Compared to compositional verb+noun combina-
tions, VNICs are expected to appear in more re-
stricted syntactic forms. To quantify the syntac-
tic fixedness of a target verb?noun pair, we thus
need to: (i) identify relevant syntactic patterns,
i.e., those that help distinguish VNICs from lit-
eral verb+noun combinations; (ii) translate the fre-
quency distribution of the target pair in the identi-
fied patterns into a measure of syntactic fixedness.
3.2.1 Identifying Relevant Patterns
Determining a unique set of syntactic patterns
appropriate for the recognition of all idiomatic
combinations is difficult indeed: exactly which
forms an idiomatic combination can occur in is not
entirely predictable (Sag et al, 2002). Nonethe-
less, there are hypotheses about the difference in
behaviour of VNICs and literal verb+noun combi-
nations with respect to particular syntactic varia-
tions (Nunberg et al, 1994). Linguists note that
semantic analyzability is related to the referential
status of the noun constituent, which is in turn re-
lated to participation in certain morphosyntactic
forms. In what follows, we describe three types
of variation that are tolerated by literal combina-
tions, but are prohibited by many VNICs.
Passivization There is much evidence in the lin-
guistic literature that VNICs often do not undergo
passivization.1 Linguists mainly attribute this to
the fact that only a referential noun can appear as
the surface subject of a passive construction.
1There are idiomatic combinations that are used only in a
passivized form; we do not consider such cases in our study.
339
Determiner Type A strong correlation exists
between the flexibility of the determiner preced-
ing the noun in a verb+noun combination and the
overall flexibility of the phrase (Fellbaum, 1993).
It is however important to note that the nature of
the determiner is also affected by other factors,
such as the semantic properties of the noun.
Pluralization While the verb constituent of a
VNIC is morphologically flexible, the morpholog-
ical flexibility of the noun relates to its referential
status. A non-referential noun constituent is ex-
pected to mainly appear in just one of the singular
or plural forms. The pluralization of the noun is of
course also affected by its semantic properties.
Merging the three variation types results in a
pattern set,  
 
, of  distinct syntactic patterns,
given in Table 1.2
3.2.2 Devising a Statistical Measure
The second step is to devise a statistical measure
that quantifies the degree of syntactic fixedness of
a verb?noun pair, with respect to the selected set
of patterns,  
 
. We propose a measure that com-
pares the ?syntactic behaviour? of the target pair
with that of a ?typical? verb?noun pair. Syntac-
tic behaviour of a typical pair is defined as the
prior probability distribution over the patterns in
 
 
. The prior probability of an individual pattern

b
 
 
is estimated as:
6
 	V0






<
!

#
	.-
#










ffflfiffi! #"
<
!

#
	 -
#
%$

The syntactic behaviour of the target verb?noun
pair  "!H#
	 %
is defined as the posterior probabil-
ity distribution over the patterns, given the particu-
lar pair. The posterior probability of an individual
pattern  is estimated as:
6
 	 &
#('
0 6

!$#
	
#


6

!H#
	

<>
!$#
	
#




ffflfiffi) #"
<>
!H#
	
#
%$

The degree of syntactic fixedness of the target
verb?noun pair is estimated as the divergence of
its syntactic behaviour (the posterior distribution
2We collapse some patterns since with a larger pattern set
the measure may require larger corpora to perform reliably.
Patterns
v det:NULL n *,+ v det:NULL n -.
v det:a/an n *,+
v det:the n *,+ v det:the n -.
v det:DEM n *,+ v det:DEM n -.
v det:POSS n *,+ v det:POSS n -.
v det:OTHER [ n
*,+0/
-. ] det:ANY [ n
*,+0/
-. ] be v -1
*,*
 23
Table 1: Patterns for syntactic fixedness measure.
over the patterns), from the typical syntactic be-
haviour (the prior distribution). The divergence of
the two probability distributions is calculated us-
ing a standard information-theoretic measure, the
Kullback Leibler (KL-)divergence:
KL^M_NQPR`NQS S54%67

!$#
	[
 8,
6



!H#
	[3
6


V



ffflfiffi! #"
6

%$

!$#
	O13254 6

9%$

!H#
	
6

%$
 (3)
KL-divergence is always non-negative and is zero
if and only if the two distributions are exactly the
same. Thus,
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTS:4%67

!H#
	[Ibdc
C_#hg
eji
.
KL-divergence is argued to be problematic be-
cause it is not a symmetric measure. Nonethe-
less, it has proven useful in many NLP applica-
tions (Resnik, 1999; Dagan et al, 1994). More-
over, the asymmetry is not an issue here since we
are concerned with the relative distance of several
posterior distributions from the same prior.
3.3 A Hybrid Measure of Fixedness
VNICs are hypothesized to be, in most cases, both
lexically and syntactically more fixed than literal
verb+noun combinations (see Section 2). We thus
propose a new measure of idiomaticity to be a
measure of the overall fixedness of a given pair.
We define K>L3MONQPRNQSTS<;=TW>? UXU

!H#
	
as:
K>L3MONQPRNQSTS5;=TW>? UXU

!$#
	[
 @
KL^MONQPHR N`QSTS54A67

!H#
	
g


\B@>
KL^M_NQPR`NQS SVUXWZY

!$#
	[ (4)
where
@
weights the relative contribution of the
measures in predicting idiomaticity.
4 Evaluation of the Fixedness Measures
To evaluate our proposed fixedness measures, we
determine their appropriateness as indicators of id-
iomaticity. We pose a classification task in which
idiomatic verb?noun pairs are distinguished from
literal ones. We use each measure to assign scores
340
to the experimental pairs (see Section 4.2 below).
We then classify the pairs by setting a threshold,
here the median score, where all expressions with
scores higher than the threshold are labeled as id-
iomatic and the rest as literal.
We assess the overall goodness of a measure by
looking at its accuracy (Acc) and the relative re-
duction in error rate (RER) on the classification
task described above. The RER of a measure re-
flects the improvement in its accuracy relative to
another measure (often a baseline).
We consider two baselines: (i) a random base-
line,  
RP
, that randomly assigns a label (literal
or idiomatic) to each verb?noun pair; (ii) a more
informed baseline, (*),+ , an information-theoretic
measure widely used for extracting statistically
significant collocations.3
4.1 Corpus and Data Extraction
We use the British National Corpus (BNC;
?http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/?) to extract verb?
noun pairs, along with information on the syn-
tactic patterns they appear in. We automatically
parse the corpus using the Collins parser (Collins,
1999), and further process it using TGrep2 (Ro-
hde, 2004). For each instance of a transitive verb,
we use heuristics to extract the noun phrase (NP)
in either the direct object position (if the sentence
is active), or the subject position (if the sentence
is passive). We then use NP-head extraction soft-
ware4 to get the head noun of the extracted NP,
its number (singular or plural), and the determiner
introducing it.
4.2 Experimental Expressions
We select our development and test expressions
from verb?noun pairs that involve a member of a
predefined list of (transitive) ?basic? verbs. Ba-
sic verbs, in their literal use, refer to states or
acts that are central to human experience. They
are thus frequent, highly polysemous, and tend to
combine with other words to form idiomatic com-
binations (Nunberg et al, 1994). An initial list of
such verbs was selected from several linguistic and
psycholinguistic studies on basic vocabulary (e.g.,
Pauwels 2000; Newman and Rice 2004). We fur-
ther augmented this initial list with verbs that are
semantically related to another verb already in the
3As in Eqn. (1), our calculation of PMI here restricts the
verb?noun pair to the direct object relation.
4We use a modified version of the software provided by
Eric Joanis based on heuristics from (Collins, 1999).
list; e.g., lose is added in analogy with find. The
final list of 28 verbs is:
blow, bring, catch, cut, find, get, give, have, hear, hit, hold,
keep, kick, lay, lose, make, move, place, pull, push, put, see,
set, shoot, smell, take, throw, touch
From the corpus, we extract all verb?noun pairs
with minimum frequency of  C that contain a basic
verb. From these, we semi-randomly select an id-
iomatic and a literal subset.5 A pair is considered
idiomatic if it appears in a credible idiom dictio-
nary, such as the Oxford Dictionary of Current Id-
iomatic English (ODCIE) (Cowie et al, 1983), or
the Collins COBUILD Idioms Dictionary (CCID)
(Seaton and Macaulay, 2002). Otherwise, the pair
is considered literal. We then randomly pull out
 C development and  C5C test pairs (half idiomatic
and half literal), ensuring both low and high fre-
quency items are included. Sample idioms corre-
sponding to the extracted pairs are: kick the habit,
move mountains, lose face, and keep one?s word.
4.3 Experimental Setup
Development expressions are used in devising the
fixedness measures, as well as in determining the
values of the parameters
fi
in Eqn. (2) and @ in
Eqn. (4). fi determines the maximum number of
nouns similar to the target noun, to be considered
in measuring the lexical fixedness of a given pair.
The value of this parameter is determined by per-
forming experiments over the development data,
in which
fi
ranges from  C to  C5C by steps of  C ;
fi
is set to  C based on the results. We also exper-
imented with different values of
@
ranging from C
to  by steps of   . Based on the development re-
sults, the best value for
@
is 	 (giving more weight
to the syntactic fixedness measure).
Test expressions are saved as unseen data for the
final evaluation. We further divide the set of all
test expressions, TEST
? UXU
, into two sets correspond-
ing to two frequency bands: TEST 
  contains  C
idiomatic and  C literal pairs, each with total fre-
quency between  C and BC (  C <` !$# 	 #? 
BC ); TEST 
 fffi consists of  C idiomatic and  C
literal pairs, each with total frequency of BC or
greater (<` !$# 	 #[? ffifl BC ). All frequency
counts are over the entire BNC.
4.4 Results
We first examine the performance of the in-
dividual fixedness measures, KL^MONQPHR N`QSTShUXWZY and
5In selecting literal pairs, we choose those that involve a
physical act corresponding to the basic semantics of the verb.
341
Data Set: TEST    
%Acc %RER
 50 -

	 64 28

  65 30
fiffffifl  70 40
Table 2: Accuracy and relative error reduction for the two
fixedness and the two baseline measures over all test pairs.
KL M^_NQPR N`QSTS54A67
, as well as that of the two baselines,
 
RHP
and (I)J+ ; see Table 2. (Results for the over-
all measure are presented later in this section.) As
can be seen, the informed baseline, (*),+ , shows a
large improvement over the random baseline (   !
error reduction). This shows that one can get rel-
atively good performance by treating verb+noun
idiomatic combinations as collocations.
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTSTUXWZY
performs as well as the informed
baseline ( " C ! error reduction). This result shows
that, as hypothesized, lexical fixedness is a reason-
ably good predictor of idiomaticity. Nonetheless,
the performance signifies a need for improvement.
Possibly the most beneficial enhancement would
be a change in the way we acquire the similar
nouns for a target noun.
The best performance (shown in boldface) be-
longs to
KL M^_NQPR`NQSTS<4A67
, with BC
!
error reduction
over the random baseline, and  C
!
error reduction
over the informed baseline. These results demon-
strate that syntactic fixedness is a good indicator
of idiomaticity, better than a simple measure of
collocation ( (I)J+ ), or a measure of lexical fixed-
ness. These results further suggest that looking
into deep linguistic properties of VNICs is both
necessary and beneficial for the appropriate treat-
ment of these expressions.
(I)J+
is known to perform poorly on low fre-
quency data. To examine the effect of frequency
on the measures, we analyze their performance on
the two divisions of the test data, corresponding to
the two frequency bands, TEST 
  and TEST 
 fffi .
Results are given in Table 3, with the best perfor-
mance shown in boldface.
As expected, the performance of (I)J+ drops
substantially for low frequency items. Inter-
estingly, although it is a PMI-based measure,
KL M^_NQPR N`QSTSVUXWaY
performs slightly better when the
data is separated based on frequency. The perfor-
mance of
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTS<4A67
improves quite a bit when
it is applied to high frequency items, while it im-
proves only slightly on the low frequency items.
These results show that both Fixedness measures
Data Set: TEST #%$ &(' TEST #%)fi* +,)
%Acc %RER %Acc %RER
-./ 50 - 50 -
0	 56 12 70 40
1
  68 36 66 32
1 ff2fl3 72 44 82 64
Table 3: Accuracy and relative error reduction for all mea-
sures over test pairs divided by frequency.
Data Set: TEST    
%Acc %RER
443
 5 65 30
443 ffffifl3
70 40
443
(6fi7
 
  74 48
Table 4: Performance of the hybrid measure over TEST     .
perform better on homogeneous data, while retain-
ing comparably good performance on heteroge-
neous data. These results reflect that our fixedness
measures are not as sensitive to frequency as
(*),+
.
Hence they can be used with a higher degree of
confidence, especially when applied to data that
is heterogeneous with regard to frequency. This
is important because while some VNICs are very
common, others have very low frequency.
Table 4 presents the performance of the hy-
brid measure, KL^MONQPHR N`QSTS:;=TW>? UXU , repeating that of
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTSTUXWZY
and KL^MONQPHR`NQSTS<4%67 for comparison.
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTS<;=TW>? UXU
outperforms both lexical and syn-
tactic fixedness measures, with a substantial im-
provement over
KL^M_NQPR`NQSTS UXWZY
, and a small, but no-
table, improvement over KL^M_NQPR`NQSTS4%67 . Each of
the lexical and syntactic fixedness measures is a
good indicator of idiomaticity on its own, with
syntactic fixedness being a better predictor. Here
we demonstrate that combining them into a single
measure of fixedness, while giving more weight to
the better measure, results in a more effective pre-
dictor of idiomaticity.
5 Determining the Canonical Forms
Our evaluation of the fixedness measures demon-
strates their usefulness for the automatic recogni-
tion of idiomatic verb?noun pairs. To represent
such pairs in a lexicon, however, we must de-
termine their canonical form(s)?Cforms hence-
forth. For example, the lexical representation of
 shoot, breeze
%
should include shoot the breeze
as a Cform.
Since VNICs are syntactically fixed, they are
mostly expected to have a single Cform. Nonethe-
less, there are idioms with two or more accept-
342
able forms. For example, hold fire and hold one?s
fire are both listed in CCID as variations of the
same idiom. Our approach should thus be capa-
ble of predicting all allowable forms for a given
idiomatic verb?noun pair.
We expect a VNIC to occur in its Cform(s) more
frequently than it occurs in any other syntactic pat-
terns. To discover the Cform(s) for a given id-
iomatic verb?noun pair, we thus examine its fre-
quency of occurrence in each syntactic pattern in
 
 
. Since it is possible for an idiom to have more
than one Cform, we cannot simply take the most
dominant pattern as the canonical one. Instead, we
calculate a   -score for the target pair  f!H#
	%
and
each pattern A$
b
 
 
:
 
$

!H#
	 
<>
!H#
	
#
%$
>\ <
]
in which
<
is the mean and ] the standard deviation
over the sample
T<>
!$#
	
#
9A$
[
%$
b
 
  ffi
.
The statistic   $

!$#
	[
indicates how far and in
which direction the frequency of occurrence of the
pair  !$#
	 %
in pattern
 
deviates from the sam-
ple?s mean, expressed in units of the sample?s stan-
dard deviation. To decide whether $ is a canon-
ical pattern for the target pair, we check whether
 
$

!$#
	[
, where
	
is a threshold. For eval-
uation, we set
	
to  , based on the distribution of

 and through examining the development data.
We evaluate the appropriateness of this ap-
proach in determining the Cform(s) of idiomatic
pairs by verifying its predicted forms against OD-
CIE and CCID. Specifically, for each of the  C5C
idiomatic pairs in TEST ? UXU , we calculate the pre-
cision and recall of its predicted Cforms (those
whose   -scores are above
 ), compared to the
Cforms listed in the two dictionaries. The average
precision across the 100 test pairs is 81.7%, and
the average recall is 88.0% (with 69 of the pairs
having 100% precision and 100% recall). More-
over, we find that for the overwhelming majority
of the pairs,  
!
, the predicted Cform with the
highest   -score appears in the dictionary entry of
the pair. Thus, our method of detecting Cforms
performs quite well.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
The significance of the role idioms play in lan-
guage has long been recognized. However, due to
their peculiar behaviour, idioms have been mostly
overlooked by the NLP community. Recently,
there has been growing awareness of the impor-
tance of identifying non-compositional multiword
expressions (MWEs). Nonetheless, most research
on the topic has focused on compound nouns and
verb particle constructions. Earlier work on id-
ioms have only touched the surface of the problem,
failing to propose explicit mechanisms for appro-
priately handling them. Here, we provide effective
mechanisms for the treatment of a broadly doc-
umented and crosslinguistically frequent class of
idioms, i.e., VNICs.
Earlier research on the lexical encoding of id-
ioms mainly relied on the existence of human an-
notations, especially for detecting which syntactic
variations (e.g., passivization) an idiom can un-
dergo (Villavicencio et al, 2004). We propose
techniques for the automatic acquisition and en-
coding of knowledge about the lexicosyntactic be-
haviour of idiomatic combinations. We put for-
ward a means for automatically discovering the set
of syntactic variations that are tolerated by a VNIC
and that should be included in its lexical represen-
tation. Moreover, we incorporate such information
into statistical measures that effectively predict the
idiomaticity level of a given expression. In this re-
gard, our work relates to previous studies on deter-
mining the compositionality (inverse of idiomatic-
ity) of MWEs other than idioms.
Most previous work on compositionality of
MWEs either treat them as collocations (Smadja,
1993), or examine the distributional similarity be-
tween the expression and its constituents (Mc-
Carthy et al, 2003; Baldwin et al, 2003; Ban-
nard et al, 2003). Lin (1999) and Wermter
and Hahn (2005) go one step further and look
into a linguistic property of non-compositional
compounds?their lexical fixedness?to identify
them. Venkatapathy and Joshi (2005) combine as-
pects of the above-mentioned work, by incorporat-
ing lexical fixedness, collocation-based, and distri-
butional similarity measures into a set of features
which are used to rank verb+noun combinations
according to their compositionality.
Our work differs from such studies in that it
carefully examines several linguistic properties of
VNICs that distinguish them from literal (com-
positional) combinations. Moreover, we suggest
novel techniques for translating such character-
istics into measures that predict the idiomaticity
level of verb+noun combinations. More specifi-
cally, we propose statistical measures that quan-
tify the degree of lexical, syntactic, and overall
fixedness of such combinations. We demonstrate
343
that these measures can be successfully applied to
the task of automatically distinguishing idiomatic
combinations from non-idiomatic ones. We also
show that our syntactic and overall fixedness mea-
sures substantially outperform a widely used mea-
sure of collocation,
(*),+
, even when the latter
takes syntactic relations into account.
Others have also drawn on the notion of syntac-
tic fixedness for idiom detection, though specific
to a highly constrained type of idiom (Widdows
and Dorow, 2005). Our syntactic fixedness mea-
sure looks into a broader set of patterns associated
with a large class of idiomatic expressions. More-
over, our approach is general and can be easily ex-
tended to other idiomatic combinations.
Each measure we use to identify VNICs cap-
tures a different aspect of idiomaticity: (I)J+ re-
flects the statistical idiosyncrasy of VNICs, while
the fixedness measures draw on their lexicosyn-
tactic peculiarities. Our ongoing work focuses on
combining these measures to distinguish VNICs
from other idiosyncratic verb+noun combinations
that are neither purely idiomatic nor completely
literal, so that we can identify linguistically plau-
sible classes of verb+noun combinations on this
continuum (Fazly and Stevenson, 2005).
References
Timothy Baldwin, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka, and
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An empirical model of
multiword expression decomposability. In Proc. of
the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions, 89?96.
Colin Bannard, Timothy Baldwin, and Alex Las-
carides. 2003. A statistical approach to the seman-
tics of verb-particles. In Proc. of the ACL-SIGLEX
Workshop on Multiword Expressions, 65?72.
Cristina Cacciari and Patrizia Tabossi, editors. 1993.
Idioms: Processing, Structure, and Interpretation.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Cristina Cacciari. 1993. The place of idioms in a lit-
eral and metaphorical world. In Cacciari and Ta-
bossi (Cacciari and Tabossi, 1993), 27?53.
Kenneth Church, William Gale, Patrick Hanks, and
Donald Hindle. 1991. Using statistics in lexical
analysis. In Uri Zernik, editor, Lexical Acquisition:
Exploiting On-Line Resources to Build a Lexicon,
115?164. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Mod-
els for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.
Anthony P. Cowie, Ronald Mackin, and Isabel R. Mc-
Caig. 1983. Oxford Dictionary of Current Idiomatic
English, volume 2. Oxford University Press.
Ido Dagan, Fernando Pereira, and Lillian Lee. 1994.
Similarity-based estimation of word cooccurrence
probabilities. In Proc. of ACL?94, 272?278.
Afsaneh Fazly and Suzanne Stevenson. 2005. Au-
tomatic acquisition of knowledge about multiword
predicates. In Proc. of PACLIC?05.
Christiane Fellbaum. 1993. The determiner in English
idioms. In Cacciari and Tabossi (Cacciari and Ta-
bossi, 1993), 271?295.
Christiane Fellbaum. 2005. The ontological loneliness
of verb phrase idioms. In Andrea Schalley and Di-
etmar Zaefferer, editors, Ontolinguistics. Mouton de
Gruyter. Forthcomming.
Sam Glucksberg. 1993. Idiom meanings and allu-
sional content. In Cacciari and Tabossi (Cacciari
and Tabossi, 1993), 3?26.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proc. of COLING-ACL?98.
Dekang Lin. 1999. Automatic identification of non-
compositional phrases. In Proc. of ACL?99, 317?24.
Diana McCarthy, Bill Keller, and John Carroll.
2003. Detecting a continuum of compositionality in
phrasal verbs. In Proc. of the ACL-SIGLEX Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions.
Rosamund Moon. 1998. Fixed Expressions and Id-
ioms in English: A Corpus-Based Approach. Ox-
ford University Press.
John Newman and Sally Rice. 2004. Patterns of usage
for English SIT, STAND, and LIE: A cognitively in-
spired exploration in corpus linguistics. Cognitive
Linguistics, 15(3):351?396.
Geoffrey Nunberg, Ivan Sag, and Thomas Wasow.
1994. Idioms. Language, 70(3):491?538.
Paul Pauwels. 2000. Put, Set, Lay and Place: A Cog-
nitive Linguistic Approach to Verbal Meaning. LIN-
COM EUROPA.
Philip Resnik. 1999. Semantic similarity in a taxon-
omy: An information-based measure and its appli-
cation to problems of ambiguity in natural language.
JAIR, (11):95?130.
Douglas L. T. Rohde. 2004. TGrep2 User Manual.
Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expres-
sions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Proc. of CI-
CLING?02, 1?15.
Maggie Seaton and Alison Macaulay, editors. 2002.
Collins COBUILD Idioms Dictionary. Harper-
Collins Publishers, 2nd edition.
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from
text: Xtract. CL, 19(1):143?177.
Sriram Venkatapathy and Aravid Joshi. 2005. Mea-
suring the relative compositionality of verb-noun (V-
N) collocations by integrating features. In Proc. of
HLT-EMNLP?05, 899?906.
Aline Villavicencio, Ann Copestake, Benjamin Wal-
dron, and Fabre Lambeau. 2004. Lexical encod-
ing of MWEs. In Proc. of the ACL?04 Workshop on
Multiword Expressions, 80?87.
Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 2005. Paradigmatic
modifiability statistics for the extraction of com-
plex multi-word terms. In Proc. of HLT-EMNLP?05,
843?850.
DominicWiddows and Beate Dorow. 2005. Automatic
extraction of idioms using graph analysis and asym-
metric lexicosyntactic patterns. In Proc. of ACL?05
Workshop on Deep Lexical Acquisition, 48?56.
344
