Structuring Knowledge for Reference Generation:
A Clustering Algorithm
Albert Gatt
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Scotland, United Kingdom
agatt@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper discusses two problems that arise
in the Generation of Referring Expressions:
(a) numeric-valued attributes, such as size or
location; (b) perspective-taking in reference.
Both problems, it is argued, can be resolved
if some structure is imposed on the available
knowledge prior to content determination. We
describe a clustering algorithm which is suffi-
ciently general to be applied to these diverse
problems, discuss its application, and evaluate
its performance.
1 Introduction
The problem of Generating Referring Expressions
(GRE) can be summed up as a search for the prop-
erties in a knowledge base (KB) whose combination
uniquely distinguishes a set of referents from their dis-
tractors. The content determination strategy adopted
in such algorithms is usually based on the assump-
tion (made explicit in Reiter (1990)) that the space of
possible descriptions is partially ordered with respect
to some principle(s) which determine their adequacy.
Traditionally, these principles have been defined via
an interpretation of the Gricean maxims (Dale, 1989;
Reiter, 1990; Dale and Reiter, 1995; van Deemter,
2002)1. However, little attention has been paid to con-
textual or intentional influences on attribute selection
(but cf. Jordan and Walker (2000); Krahmer and The-
une (2002)). Furthermore, it is often assumed that
all relevant knowledge about domain objects is repre-
sented in the database in a format (e.g. attribute-value
pairs) that requires no further processing.
This paper is concerned with two scenarios which
raise problems for such an approach to GRE:
1. Real-valued attributes, e.g. size or spatial coor-
dinates, which represent continuous dimensions.
The utility of such attributes depends on whether
a set of referents have values that are ?sufficiently
1For example, the Gricean Brevity maxim (Grice, 1975)
has been interpreted as a directive to find the shortest possible
description for a given referent
close? on the given dimension, and ?sufficiently
distant? from those of their distractors. We dis-
cuss this problem in ?2.
2. Perspective-taking The contextual appropriate-
ness of a description depends on the perspective
being taken in context. For instance, if it is known
of a referent that it is a teacher, and a sportsman, it
is better to talk of the teacher in a context where
another referent has been introduced as the stu-
dent. This is discussed further in ?3.
Our aim is to motivate an approach to GRE where
these problems are solved by pre-processing the infor-
mation in the knowledge base, prior to content deter-
mination. To this end, ?4 describes a clustering algo-
rithm and shows how it can be applied to these different
problems to structure the KB prior to GRE.
2 Numeric values: The case of location
Several types of information about domain entities,
such as gradable properties (van Deemter, 2000) and
physical location, are best captured by real-valued at-
tributes. Here, we focus on the example of location as
an attribute taking a tuple of values which jointly de-
termine the position of an entity.
The ability to distinguish groups is a well-
established feature of the human perceptual appara-
tus (Wertheimer, 1938; Treisman, 1982). Representing
salient groups can facilitate the task of excluding dis-
tractors in the search for a referent. For instance, the
set of referents marked as the intended referential tar-
get in Figure 1 is easily distinguishable as a group and
warrants the use of a spatial description such as the ob-
jects in the top left corner, possibly with a collective
predicate, such as clustered or gathered. In case of
reference to a subset of the marked set, although loca-
tion would be insufficient to distinguish the targets, it
would reduce the distractor set and facilitate reference
resolution2.
In GRE, an approach to spatial reference based
on grouping has been proposed by Funakoshi et al
2Location has been found to significantly facilitate reso-
lution, even when it is logically redundant (Arts, 2004)
321
e1
e4 e3
e2
e8
e9
e13e12
e10e11
e6 e7
e5
Figure 1: Spatial Example
(2004). Given a domain and a target referent, a se-
quence of groups is constructed, starting from the
largest group containing the referent, and recursively
narrowing down the group until only the referent is
identified. The entire sequence is then rendered lin-
guistically. The algorithm used for identifying percep-
tual groups is the one proposed by Thorisson (1994),
the core of which is a procedure which takes as input
a list of pairs of objects, ordered by the distance be-
tween the entities in the pairs. The procedure loops
through the list, finding the greatest difference in dis-
tance between two adjacent pairs. This is determined
as a cutoff point for group formation. Two problems
are raised by this approach:
P1 Ambiguous clusters A domain entity can be
placed in more than one group. If, say, the in-
put list is
?
{a, b}, {c, e}, {a, f}
?
and the great-
est difference after the first iteration is between
{c, e} and {a, f}, then the first group to be formed
will be {a, b, c, e} with {a, f} likely to be placed
in a different group after further iterations. This
may be confusing from a referential point of view.
The problem arises because grouping or cluster-
ing takes place on the basis of pairwise proxim-
ity or distance. This problem can be partially cir-
cumvented by identifying groups on several per-
ceptual dimensions (e.g. spatial distance, colour,
and shape) and then seeking to merge identical
groups determined on the basis of these differ-
ent qualities (see Thorisson (1994)). However, the
grouping strategy can still return groups which do
not conform to human perceptual principles. A
better strategy is to base clustering on the Near-
est Neighbour Principle, familiar from computa-
tional geometry (Prepaarata and Shamos, 1985),
whereby elements are clustered with their nearest
neighbours, given a distance function. The solu-
tion offered below is based on this principle.
P2 Perceptual proximity Absolute distance is not
sufficient for cluster identification. In Figure 1,
for example, the pairs {e1, e2} and {e5, e6} could
easily be consecutively ranked, since the distance
between e1 and e2 is roughly equal to that be-
tween e5 and e6. However, they would not natu-
rally be clustered together by a human observer,
because grouping of objects also needs to take
into account the position of the surrounding ele-
ments. Thus, while e1 is as far away from e2 as
e5 is from e6, there are elements which are closer
to {e1, e2} than to {e5, e6}.
The proposal in ?4 represents a way of getting
around these problems, which are expected to arise in
any kind of domain where the information given is the
pairwise distance between elements. Before turning to
the framework, we consider another situation in GRE
where the need for clustering could arise.
3 Perspectives and semantic similarity
In real-world discourse, entities can often be talked
about from different points of view, with speakers
bringing to bear world and domain-specific knowledge
to select information that is relevant to the current
topic. In order to generate coherent discourse, a gener-
ator should ideally keep track of how entities have been
referred to, and maintain consistency as far as possible.
type profession nationality
e1 man student englishman
e2 woman teacher italian
e3 man chef greek
Table 1: Semantic Example
Suppose e1 in Table 1 has been introduced into the
discourse via the description the student and the next
utterance requires a reference to e2. Any one of the
three available attributes would suffice to distinguish
the latter. However, a description such as the woman
or the italianwould describe this entity from a different
point of view relative to e1. By hypothesis, the teacher
is more appropriate, because the property ascribed to
e2 is more similar to that ascribed to e1.
A similar case arises with plural disjunctive descrip-
tions of the form ?x[p(x)?q(x)], which are usually re-
alised as coordinate constructions of the form the N?1
and the N?2. For instance a reference to {e1, e2} such
as the woman and the student, or the englishman and
the teacher, would be odd, compared to the alterna-
tive the student and the teacher. The latter describes
these entities under the same perspective. Note that
?consistency? or ?similarity? is not guaranteed simply
by attempting to use values of the same attribute(s) for
a given set of referents. The description the student
322
and the chef for {e1, e3} is relatively odd compared to
the alternative the englishman and the greek. In both
kinds of scenarios, a GRE algorithm that relied on a
rigid preference order could not guarantee that a coher-
ent description would be generated every time it was
available.
The issues raised here have never been systemati-
cally addressed in the GRE literature, although support
for the underlying intuitions can be found in various
quarters. Kronfeld (1989) distinguishes between func-
tionally and conversationally relevant descriptions. A
description is functionally relevant if it succeeds in dis-
tinguishing the intended referent(s), but conversational
relevance arises in part from implicatures carried by
the use of attributes in context. For example, describ-
ing e1 as the student carries the (Gricean) implicature
that the entity?s academic role or profession is some-
how relevant to the current discourse. When two enti-
ties are described using contrasting properties, say the
student and the italian, the listener may find it harder
to work out the relevance of the contrast. In a related
vein, Aloni (2002) formalises the appropriateness of an
answer to a question of the form Wh x? with reference
to the ?conceptual covers? or perspectives under which
x can be conceptualised, not all of which are equally
relevant given the hearer?s information state and the
discourse context.
With respect to plurals, Eschenbach et al (1989) ar-
gue that the generation of a plural anaphor with a split
antecedent is more felicitous when the antecedents
have something in common, such as their ontological
category. This constraint has been shown to hold psy-
cholinguistically (Kaup et al, 2002; Koh and Clifton,
2002; Moxey et al, 2004). Gatt and van Deemter
(2005a) have shown that people?s perception of the ad-
equacy of plural descriptions of the form, the N1 and
(the) N2 is significantly correlated with the seman-
tic similarity of N1 and N2, while singular descrip-
tions are more likely to be aggregated into a plural if
semantically similar attributes are available (Gatt and
Van Deemter, 2005b).
The two kinds of problems discussed here could be
resolved by pre-processing the KB in order to iden-
tify available perspectives. One way of doing this is
to group available properties into clusters of seman-
tically similar ones. This requires a well-defined no-
tion of ?similarity? which determines the ?distance? be-
tween properties in semantic space. As with spatial
clustering, the problem is then of how to get from
pairwise distance to well-formed clusters or groups,
while respecting the principles underlying human per-
ceptual/conceptual organisation. The next section de-
scribes an algorithm that aims to achieve this.
4 A framework for clustering
In what follows, we assume the existence of a set of
clusters C in a domain S of objects (entities or proper-
ties), to be ?discovered? by the algorithm. We further
assume the existence of a dimension, which is char-
acterised by a function ? that returns the pairwise dis-
tance ?(a, b), where ?a, b? ? S?S. In case an attribute
is characterised bymore than one dimension, say ?x, y?
coordinates in a 2D plane, as in Figure 1, then ? is de-
fined as the Euclidean distance between pairs:
? =
?
?
?x,y??D
|xab ? yab|2 (1)
where D is a tuple of dimensions, xab = ?(a, b) on di-
mension x. ? satisfies the axioms of minimality (2a),
symmetry (2b), and the triangle inequality (2c), by
which it determines a metric space on S:
?(a, b) ? 0 ?
(
?(a, b) = 0? a = b
) (2a)
?(a, b) = ?(b, a) (2b)
?(a, b) + ?(b, c) ? ?(a, c) (2c)
We now turn to the problems raised in ?2. P1 would
be avoided by a clustering algorithm that satisfies (3).
?
Ci?C
= ? (3)
It was also suggested above that a potential solution
to P1 is to cluster using the Nearest Neighbour Princi-
ple. Before considering a solution to P2, i.e. the prob-
lem of discovering clusters that approximate human
intuitions, it is useful to recapitulate the classic prin-
ciples of perceptual grouping proposed by Wertheimer
(1938), of which the following two are the most rele-
vant:
1. Proximity The smaller the distance between ob-
jects in the cluster, the more easily perceived it is.
2. Similarity Similar entities will tend to be more
easily perceived as a coherent group.
Arguably, once a numeric definition of (semantic)
similarity is available, the Similarity Principle boils
down to the Proximity principle, where proximity is
defined via a semantic distance function. This view
is adopted here. How well our interpretation of these
principles can be ported to the semantic clustering
problem of ?3 will be seen in the following subsec-
tions.
To resolve P2, we will propose an algorithm that
uses a context-sensitive definition of ?nearest neigh-
bour?. Recall that P2 arises because, while ? is a mea-
sure of ?objective? distance on some scale, perceived
323
proximity (resp. distance) of a pair ?a, b? is contingent
not only on ?(a, b), but also on the distance of a and
b from all other elements in S. A first step towards
meeting this requirement is to consider, for a given
pair of objects, not only the absolute distance (prox-
imity) between them, but also the extent to which they
are equidistant from other objects in S. Formally, a
measure of perceived proximity prox(a, b) can be ap-
proximated by the following function. Let the two sets
Pab, Dab be defined as follows:
Pab =
{
x|x ? S ? ?(x, a) ? ?(x, b)
}
Dab =
{
y|y ? S ? ?(y, a) 6? ?(y, b)
}
Then:
prox(a, b) = F (?(a, b), |Pab|, |Dab|) (4)
that is, prox(a, b) is a function of the absolute dis-
tance ?(a, b), the number of elements in S ? {a, b}
which are roughly equidistant from a and b, and the
number of elements which are not equidistant. One
way of conceptualising this is to consider, for a given
object a, the list of all other elements of S, ranked by
their distance (proximity) to a. Suppose there exists an
object b whose ranked list is similar to that of a, while
another object c?s list is very different. Then, all other
things being equal (in particular, the pairwise absolute
distance), a clusters closer to b than does c.
This takes us from a metric, distance-based concep-
tion, to a broader notion of the ?similarity? between two
objects in a metric space. Our definition is inspired
by Tversky?s feature-based Contrast Model (1977), in
which the similarity of a, b with feature sets A,B is
a linear function of the features they have in com-
mon and the features that pertain only to A or B, i.e.:
sim(a, b) = f(A ? B) ? f(A ?B). In (4), the dis-
tance of a and b from every other object is the relevant
feature.
4.1 Computing perceived proximity
The computation of pairwise perceived proximity
prox(a, b), shown in Algorithm 1, is the first step to-
wards finding clusters in the domain.
Following Thorisson (1994), the procedure uses
the absolute distance ? to calculate ?absolute proxim-
ity? (1.7), a value in (0, 1), with 1 corresponding to
?(a, b) = 0, i.e. identity (cf. axiom (2a) ). The proce-
dure then visits each element of the domain, and com-
pares its rank with respect to a and b (1.9?1.13)3, in-
crementing a proximity score s (1.10) if the ranks are
3We simplify the presentation by assuming the function
rank(x, a) that returns the rank of x with respect to a. In
practice, this is achieved by creating, for each element of the
input pair, a totally ordered list La such that La[r] holds the
set of elements ranked at r with respect to ?(x, a)
Algorithm 1 prox(a,b)
Require: ?(a, b)
Require: k (a constant)
1: maxD ? max?x,y??S?S ?(x, y)
2: if a = b then
3: return 1
4: end if
5: s? 0
6: d? 0
7: p(a, b)? 1? ?(a,b)maxD
8: for all x ? S ? {a, b} do
9: if |rank(x, a)? rank(x, b)| ? k then
10: s? s + 1
11: else
12: d? d + 1
13: end if
14: end for
15: return p(a, b)? sd
approximately equal, or a distance score d otherwise
(1.12). Approximate equality is determined via a con-
stant k (1.1), which, based on our experiments is set to
a tenth the size of S. The procedure returns the ratio of
proximity and distance scores, weighted by the abso-
lute proximity p(a, b) (1.15). Algorithm 1 is called for
all pairs in S ? S yielding, for each element a ? S, a
list of elements ordered by their perceived proximity to
a. The entity with the highest proximity to a is called
its anchor. Note that any domain object has one, and
only one anchor.
4.2 Creating clusters
The procedure makeClusters(S,Anchors),
shown in its basic form in Algorithm 2, uses the
notion of an anchor introduced above. The rationale
behind the algorithm is captured by the following
declarative principle, where C ? C is any cluster, and
anchor(a, b) means ?b is the anchor of a?:
a ? C ? anchor(a, b)? b ? C (5)
A cluster is defined as the transitive closure of the
anchor relation, that is, if it holds that anchor(a, b)
and anchor(b, c), then {a, b, c} will be clustered to-
gether. Apart from satisfying (5), the procedure also in-
duces a partition on S, satisfying (3). Given these pri-
mary aims, no attempt is made, once clusters are gen-
erated, to further sub-divide them, although we briefly
return to this issue in ?5. The algorithm initialises a
set Clusters to empty (2.1), and iterates through the
list of objects S (2.5). For each object a and its anchor
b (2.6), it first checks whether they have already been
clustered (e.g. if either of them was the anchor of an
object visited earlier) (2.7, 2.12). If this is not the case,
then a provisional cluster is initialised for each element
324
Algorithm 2 makeClusters(S, Anchors)
Ensure: S 6= ?
1: Clusters? ?
2: if |S| = 1 then
3: return S
4: end if
5: for all a ? S do
6: b? Anchors[a]
7: if ?C ? Clusters : a ? C then
8: Ca ? C
9: else
10: Ca ? {a}
11: end if
12: if ?C ? Clusters : b ? C then
13: Cb ? C
14: Clusters? Clusters? {Cb}
15: else
16: Cb ? {b}
17: end if
18: Ca ? Ca ? Cb
19: Clusters? Clusters ? {Ca}
20: end for
21: return Clusters
(2.10, 2.16). The procedure simply merges the cluster
containing a with that of its b (2.18), having removed
the latter from the cluster set (2.14).
This algorithm is guaranteed to induce a partition,
since no element will end up in more than one group.
It does not depend on an ordering of pairs a` la Tho-
risson. However, problems arise when elements and
anchors are clustered na?ively. For instance, if an el-
ement is very distant from every other element in the
domain, prox(a, b) will still find an anchor for it, and
makeClusters(S,Anchors) will place it in the same
cluster as its anchor, although it is an outlier. Before
describing how this problem is rectified, we introduce
the notion of a family (F ) of elements. Informally, this
is a set of elements of S that have the same anchor, that
is:
?a, b ? F : anchor(a, x) ? anchor(b, y)? x = y
(6)
The solution to the outlier problem is to calculate a
centroid value for each family found after prox(a, b).
This is the average proximity between the common an-
chor and all members of its family, minus one stan-
dard deviation. Prior to merging, at line (2.18), the
algorithm now checks whether the proximity value be-
tween an element and its anchor falls below the cen-
troid value. If it does, the the cluster containing an
object and that containing its anchor are not merged.
4.3 Two applications
The algorithm was applied to the two scenarios de-
scribed in ?2 and ?3. In the spatial domain, the al-
gorithm returns groups or clusters of entities, based on
their spatial proximity. This was tested on domains like
Figure 1 in which the input is a set of entities whose
position is defined as a pair of x/y coordinates. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates a potential problem with the proce-
dure. In that figure, it holds that anchor(e8, e9) and
anchor(e9, e8), making e8 and e9 a reciprocal pair.
In such cases, the algorithm inevitably groups the two
elements, whatever their proximity/distance. This may
be problematic when elements of a reciprocal pair are
very distant from eachother, in which case they are un-
likely to be perceived as a group. We return to this
problem briefly in ?5.
The second domain of application is the cluster-
ing of properties into ?perspectives?. Here, we use
the information-theoretic definition of similarity de-
veloped by Lin (1998) and applied to corpus data by
Kilgarriff and Tugwell (Kilgarriff and Tugwell, 2001).
This measure defines the similarity of two words as a
function of the likelihood of their occurring in the same
grammatical environments in a corpus. This measure
was shown experimentally to correlate highly with hu-
man acceptability judgments of disjunctive plural de-
scriptions (Gatt and van Deemter, 2005a), when com-
pared with a number of measures that calculate the
similarity of word senses in WordNet. Using this as
the measure of semantic distance between words, the
algorithm returns clusters such as those in Figure 2.
input: { waiter, essay, footballer, article, servant,
cricketer, novel, cook, book, maid,
player, striker, goalkeeper }
output:
1 { essay, article, novel, book }
2 { footballer, cricketer }
3 { waiter, cook, servant, maid }
4 { player, goalkeeper, striker }
Figure 2: Output on a Semantic Domain
If the words in Figure 2 represented properties of
different entities in the domain of discourse, then
the clusters would represent perspectives or ?covers?,
whose extension is a set of entities that can be talked
about from the same point of view. For example, if
some entity were specified as having the property foot-
baller, and the property striker, while another entity
had the property cricketer, then according to the output
of the algorithm, the description the footballer and the
cricketer is the most conceptually coherent one avail-
able. It could be argued that the units of representation
325
spatial semantic
1 0.94 0.58
2 0.86 0.36
3 0.62 0.76
4 0.93 0.52
mean 0.84 0.64
Table 2: Proportion of agreement among participants
in GRE are not words but ?properties? (e.g. values of
attributes) which can be realised in a number of differ-
ent ways (if, for instance, there are a number of syn-
onyms corresponding roughly to the same intension).
This could be remedied by defining similarity as ?dis-
tance in an ontology?; conversely, properties could be
viewed as a set of potential (word) realisations.
5 Evaluation
The evaluation of the algorithm was based on a com-
parison of its output against the output of human beings
in a similar task.
Thirteen native or fluent speakers of English volun-
teered to participate in the study. The materials con-
sisted of 8 domains, 4 of which were graphical repre-
sentations of a 2D spatial layout containing 13 points.
The pictures were generated by plotting numerical x/y
coordinates (the same values are used as input to the
algorithm). The other four domains consisted of a
set of 13 arbitrarily chosen nouns. Participants were
presented with an eight-page booklet with spatial and
semantic domains on alternate pages. They were in-
structed to draw circles around the best clusters in the
pictures, or write down the words in groups that were
related according to their intuitions. Clusters could be
of arbitrary size, but each element had to be placed in
exactly one cluster.
5.1 Participant agreement
Participant agreement on each domain was measured
using kappa. Since the task did not involve predefined
clusters, the set of unique groups (denoted G) gener-
ated by participants in every domain was identified,
representing the set of ?categories? available post hoc.
For each domain element, the number of times it oc-
curred in each group served as the basis to calculate
the proportion of agreement among participants for the
element. The total agreement P (A) and the agreement
expected by chance, P (E) were then used in the stan-
dard formula
k = P (A)? P (E)1? P (E)
Table 2 shows a remarkable difference between the
two domain types, with very high agreement on spa-
tial domains and lower values on the semantic task.
The difference was significant (t = 2.54, p < 0.05).
Disagreement on spatial domains was mostly due to
the problem of reciprocal pairs, where participants dis-
agreed on whether entities such as e8 and e9 in Figure 1
gave rise to a well-formed cluster or not. However, all
the participants were consistent with the version of the
Nearest Neighbour Principle given in (5). If an element
was grouped, it was always grouped with its anchor.
The disagreement in the semantic domains seemed
to turn on two cases4:
1. Sub-clusters Whereas some proposals included
clusters such as { man, woman, boy, girl, infant,
toddler, baby, child } , others chose to group {
infant, toddler, baby,child } separately.
2. Polysemy For example, liver was in some cases
clustered with { steak, pizza } , while others
grouped it with items like { heart, lung } .
Insofar as an algorithm should capture the whole range
of phenomena observed, (1) above could be accounted
for by making repeated calls to the Algorithm to sub-
divide clusters. One problem is that, in case only one
cluster is found in the original domain, the same cluster
will be returned after further attempts at sub-clustering.
A possible solution to this is to redefine the parameter
k in Algorithm (1), making the condition for proximity
more strict. As for the second observation, the desider-
atum expressed in (3) may be too strong in the semantic
domain, since words can be polysemous. As suggested
above, one way to resolve this would be to measure
distance between word senses, as opposed to words.
5.2 Algorithm performance
The performance of the algorithm (hereafter the target)
against the human output was compared to two base-
line algorithms. In the spatial domains, we used an
implementation of the Thorisson algorithm (Thorisson,
1994) described in ?2. In our implementation, the pro-
cedure was called iteratively until all domain objects
had been clustered in at least one group.
For the semantic domains, the baseline was a simple
procedure which calculated the powerset of each do-
main S. For each subset in pow(S) ? {?, S}, the pro-
cedure calculates the mean pairwise similarity between
words, returning an ordered list of subsets. This partial
order is then traversed, choosing subsets until all ele-
ments had been grouped. This seemed to be a reason-
able baseline, because it corresponds to the intuition
that the ?best cluster? from a semantic point of view is
the one with the highest pairwise similarity among its
elements.
4The conservative strategy used here probably amplifies
disagreements; disregarding clusters which are subsumed by
other clusters would control at least for case (1)
326
The output of the target and baseline algorithms was
compared to human output in the following ways:
1. By item In each of the eight test domains, an
agreement score was calculated for each domain
element e (i.e. 13 scores in each domain). Let
Us be the set of distinct groups containing e pro-
posed by the experimental participants, and let Ua
be the set of unique groups containing e proposed
by the algorithm (|Ua| = 1 in case of the target
algorithm, but not necessarily for the baselines,
since they do not impose a partition). For each
pair ?Uai , Usj ? of algorithm-human clusters, the
agreement score was defined as
|Uai ? Usj |
|Uai ? Usj |+ |Uai ? Usi |
,
i.e. the ratio of the number of elements on which
the human/algorithm agree, and the number of el-
ements on which they do not agree. This returns a
number in (0, 1) with 1 indicating perfect agree-
ment. The maximal such score for each entity was
selected. This controlled for the possible advan-
tage that the target alorithm might have, given
that it, like the human participants, partitions the
domain.
2. By participant An overall mean agreement score
was computed for each participant using the
above formula for the target and baseline algo-
rithms in each domain.
Results by item Table 3 shows the mean and modal
agreement scores obtained for both target and base-
line in each domain type. At a glance, the target alo-
rithm performed better than the baseline on the spatial
domains, with a modal score of 1, indicating perfect
agreement on 60% of the objects. The situation is dif-
ferent in the semantic domains, where target and base-
line performed roughly equally well; in fact, the modal
score of 1 accounts for 75% baseline scores.
target baseline
spatial mean 0.84 0.72
mode 1 (60%) 0.67 (40%)
semantic mean 0.86 0.86
mode 1 (65%) 1 (75%)
Table 3: Mean and modal agreement scores
Unsurprisingly, the difference between target and
baseline algorithmswas reliable on the spatial domains
(t = 2.865, p < .01), but not on the semantic domains
(t < 1, ns). This was confirmed by a one-way Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA), testing the effect of algorithm
(target/baseline) and domain type (spatial/semantic) on
agreement results. There was a significant main ef-
fect of domain type (F = 6.399, p = .01), while
the main effect of algorithm was marginally significant
(F = 3.542, p = .06). However, there was a reliable
type ? algorithm interaction (F = 3.624, p = .05),
confirming the finding that the agreement between tar-
get and human output differed between domain types.
Given the relative lack of agreement between partic-
ipants in the semantic clustering task, this is unsur-
prising. Although the analysis focused on maximal
scores obtained per entity, if participants do not agree
on groupings, then the means which are statistically
compared are likely to mask a significant amount of
variance. We now turn to the analysis by participants.
Results by participant The difference between tar-
get and baselines in agreement across participants was
significant both for spatial (t = 16.6, p < .01)
and semantic (t = 5.759, t < .01) domain types.
This corroborates the earlier conclusion: once par-
ticipant variation is controlled for by including it in
the statistical model, the differences between target
and baseline show up as reliable across the board. A
univariate ANOVA corroborates the results, showing
no significant main effect of domain type (F < 1,
ns), but a highly significant main effect of algorithm
(F = 233.5, p < .01) and a significant interaction
(F = 44.3, p < .01).
Summary The results of the evaluation are encour-
aging, showing high agreement between the output of
the algorithm and the output that was judged by hu-
mans as most appropriate. They also suggest frame-
work of ?4 corresponds to human intuitions better than
the baselines tested here. However, these results should
be interpretedwith caution in the case of semantic clus-
tering, where there was significant variability in human
agreement. With respect to spatial clustering, one out-
standing problem is that of reciprocal pairs which are
too distant from eachother to form a perceptually well-
formed cluster. We are extending the empirical study
to new domains involving such cases, in order to infer
from the human data a threshold on pairwise distance
between entities, beyond which they are not clustered.
6 Conclusions and future work
This paper attempted to achieve a dual goal. First, we
highlighted a number of scenarios in which the perfor-
mance of a GRE algorithm can be enhanced by an ini-
tial step which identifies clusters of entities or proper-
ties. Second, we described an algorithm which takes as
input a set of objects and returns a set of clusters based
on a calculation of their perceived proximity. The def-
inition of perceived proximity seeks to take into ac-
count some of the principles of human perceptual and
conceptual organisation.
In current work, the algorithm is being applied to
327
two problems in GRE, namely, the generation of spatial
references involving collective predicates (e.g. gath-
ered), and the identification of the available perspec-
tives or conceptual covers, under which referents may
be described.
References
M. Aloni. 2002. Questions under cover. In D. Barker-
Plummer, D. Beaver, J. van Benthem, and P. Scotto
de Luzio, editors, Words, Proofs, and Diagrams.
CSLI.
Anja Arts. 2004. Overspecification in Instructive
Texts. Ph.D. thesis, Univiersity of Tilburg.
Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational
interpretation of the Gricean maxims in the gener-
ation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
19(8):233?263.
Robert Dale. 1989. Cooking up referring expressions.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL-89.
C. Eschenbach, C. Habel, M. Herweg, and K. Rehkam-
per. 1989. Remarks on plural anaphora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, EACL-89.
K. Funakoshi, S. Watanabe, N. Kuriyama, and T. Toku-
naga. 2004. Generating referring expressions using
perceptual groups. In Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Natural Language Genera-
tion, INLG-04.
A. Gatt and K. van Deemter. 2005a. Semantic simi-
larity and the generation of referring expressions: A
first report. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Computational Semantics, IWCS-6.
A. Gatt and K. Van Deemter. 2005b. Towards a
psycholinguistically-motivated algorithm for refer-
ring to sets: The role of semantic similarity. Techni-
cal report, TUNA Project, University of Aberdeen.
H.P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole
and J.L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Semantics:
Speech Acts., volume III. Academic Press.
P. Jordan and M. Walker. 2000. Learning attribute
selections for non-pronominal expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, ACL-00.
B. Kaup, S. Kelter, and C. Habel. 2002. Represent-
ing referents of plural expressions and resolving plu-
ral anaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes,
17(4):405?450.
A. Kilgarriff and D. Tugwell. 2001. Word sketch: Ex-
traction and display of significant collocations for
lexicography. In Proceedings of the Collocations
Workshop in Association with ACL-2001.
S. Koh and C. Clifton. 2002. Resolution of the an-
tecedent of a plural pronoun: Ontological categories
and predicate symmetry. Journal of Memory and
Language, 46:830?844.
E. Krahmer and M. Theune. 2002. Efficient context-
sensitive generation of referring expressions. In
Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble, editors, In-
formation Sharing: Reference and Presupposition in
Language Generation and Interpretation. Stanford:
CSLI.
A. Kronfeld. 1989. Conversationally relevant descrip-
tions. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL89.
D. Lin. 1998. An information-theoretic definition of
similarity. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
L. Moxey, A. J. Sanford, P. Sturt, and L. I Morrow.
2004. Constraints on the formation of plural refer-
ence objects: The influence of role, conjunction and
type of description. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 51:346?364.
F. P. Prepaarata and M. A. Shamos. 1985. Computa-
tional Geometry. Springer.
E. Reiter. 1990. The computational complexity of
avoiding conversational implicatures. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL-90.
K. R. Thorisson. 1994. Simulated perceptual group-
ing: An application to human-computer interaction.
In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
A. Treisman. 1982. Perceptual grouping and attention
in visual search for features and objects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 8(2):194?214.
A. Tversky. 1977. Features of similarity. Psychologi-
cal Review, 84(4):327?352.
K. van Deemter. 2000. Generating vague descriptions.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Natural Language Generation, INLG-00.
Kees van Deemter. 2002. Generating referring expres-
sions: Boolean extensions of the incremental algo-
rithm. Computational Linguistics, 28(1):37?52.
M. Wertheimer. 1938. Laws of organization in per-
ceptual forms. In W. Ellis, editor, A Source Book of
Gestalt Psychology. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
328
