Towards Robust Animacy Classification Using Morphosyntactic
Distributional Features
Lilja ?vrelid
NLP-unit, Dept. of Swedish
Go?teborg University
SE-40530 Go?teborg, Sweden
lilja.ovrelid@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
This paper presents results from ex-
periments in automatic classification of
animacy for Norwegian nouns using
decision-tree classifiers. The method
makes use of relative frequency measures
for linguistically motivated morphosyn-
tactic features extracted from an automati-
cally annotated corpus of Norwegian. The
classifiers are evaluated using leave-one-
out training and testing and the initial re-
sults are promising (approaching 90% ac-
curacy) for high frequency nouns, however
deteriorate gradually as lower frequency
nouns are classified. Experiments at-
tempting to empirically locate a frequency
threshold for the classification method in-
dicate that a subset of the chosen mor-
phosyntactic features exhibit a notable re-
silience to data sparseness. Results will be
presented which show that the classifica-
tion accuracy obtained for high frequency
nouns (with absolute frequencies >1000)
can be maintained for nouns with consid-
erably lower frequencies (?50) by back-
ing off to a smaller set of features at clas-
sification.
1 Introduction
Animacy is a an inherent property of the referents
of nouns which has been claimed to figure as an
influencing factor in a range of different gram-
matical phenomena in various languages and it
is correlated with central linguistic concepts such
as agentivity and discourse salience. Knowledge
about the animacy of a noun is therefore rele-
vant for several different kinds of NLP problems
ranging from coreference resolution to parsing and
generation.
In recent years a range of linguistic studies have
examined the influence of argument animacy in
grammatical phenomena such as differential ob-
ject marking (Aissen, 2003), the passive construc-
tion (Dingare, 2001), the dative alternation (Bres-
nan et al, 2005), etc. A variety of languages are
sensitive to the dimension of animacy in the ex-
pression and interpretation of core syntactic argu-
ments (Lee, 2002; ?vrelid, 2004). A key general-
isation or tendency observed there is that promi-
nent grammatical features tend to attract other
prominent features;1 subjects, for instance, will
tend to be animate and agentive, whereas objects
prototypically are inanimate and themes/patients.
Exceptions to this generalisation express a more
marked structure, a property which has conse-
quences, for instance, for the distributional prop-
erties of the structure in question.
Even though knowledge about the animacy of
a noun clearly has some interesting implications,
little work has been done within the field of lex-
ical acquisition in order to automatically acquire
such knowledge. Ora?san and Evans (2001) make
use of hyponym-relations taken from theWord Net
resource (Fellbaum, 1998) in order to classify ani-
mate referents. However, such a method is clearly
restricted to languages for which large scale lexi-
cal resources, such as the Word Net, are available.
Merlo and Stevenson (2001) present a method for
verb classification which relies only on distribu-
tional statistics taken from corpora in order to train
a decision tree classifier to distinguish between
three groups of intransitive verbs.
1The notion of prominence has been linked to several
properties such as most likely as topic, agent, most available
referent, etc.
47
This paper presents experiments in automatic
classification of the animacy of unseen Norwe-
gian common nouns, inspired by the method for
verb classification presented in Merlo and Steven-
son (2001). The learning task is, for a given com-
mon noun, to classify it as either belonging to the
class animate or inanimate. Based on correlations
between animacy and other linguistic dimensions,
a set of morphosyntactic features is presented and
shown to differentiate common nouns along the
binary dimension of animacy with promising re-
sults. The method relies on aggregated relative fre-
quencies for common noun lemmas, hence might
be expected to seriously suffer from data sparse-
ness. Experiments attempting to empirically lo-
cate a frequency threshold for the classification
method will therefore be presented. It turns out
that a subset of the chosen morphosyntactic ap-
proximators of animacy show a resilience to data
sparseness which can be exploited in classifica-
tion. By backing off to this smaller set of features,
we show that we can maintain the same classifica-
tion accuracy also for lower frequency nouns.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 identifies and motivates the set of chosen
features for the classification task and describes
how these features are approximated through fea-
ture extraction from an automatically annotated
corpus of Norwegian. In section 3, a group of ex-
periments testing the viability of the method and
chosen features is presented. Section 4 goes on to
investigate the effect of sparse data on the clas-
sification performance and present experiments
which address possible remedies for the sparse
data problem. Section 5 sums up the main find-
ings of the previous sections and outlines a few
suggestions for further research.
2 Features of animacy
As mentioned above, animacy is highly correlated
with a number of other linguistic concepts, such
as transitivity, agentivity, topicality and discourse
salience. The expectation is that marked configu-
rations along these dimensions, e.g. animate ob-
jects or inanimate agents, are less frequent in the
data. However, these are complex notions to trans-
late into extractable features from a corpus. In
the following we will present some morphological
and syntactic features which, in different ways, ap-
proximate the multi-faceted property of animacy:
Transitive subject and (direct) object As men-
tioned earlier, a prototypical transitive rela-
tion involves an animate subject and an inan-
imate object. In fact, a corpus study of an-
imacy distribution in simple transitive sen-
tences in Norwegian revealed that approxi-
mately 70% of the subjects of these types
of sentences were animate, whereas as many
as 90% of the objects were inanimate (?vre-
lid, 2004). Although this corpus study in-
volved all types of nominal arguments, in-
cluding pronouns and proper nouns, it still
seems that the frequency with which a cer-
tain noun occurs as a subject or an object of
a transitive verb might be an indicator of its
animacy.
Demoted agent in passive Agentivity is another
related notion to that of animacy, animate be-
ings are usually inherently sentient, capable
of acting volitionally and causing an event to
take place - all properties of the prototypi-
cal agent (Dowty, 1991). The passive con-
struction, or rather the property of being ex-
pressed as the demoted agent in a passive
construction, is a possible approximator of
agentivity. It is well known that transitive
constructions tend to passivize better (hence
more frequently) if the demoted subject bears
a prominent thematic role, preferably agent.
Anaphoric reference by personal pronoun
Anaphoric reference is a phenomenon where
the animacy of a referent is clearly expressed.
The Norwegian personal pronouns distin-
guish their antecedents along the animacy
dimension - animate han/hun ?he/she? vs.
inanimate den/det ?it-MASC/NEUT?.
Anaphoric reference by reflexive pronoun
Reflexive pronouns represent another form
of anaphoric reference, and, may, in contrast
to the personal pronouns locate their an-
tecedent locally, i.e. within the same clause.
In the prototypical reflexive construction
the subject and the reflexive object are
coreferent and it describes an action directed
at oneself. Although the reflexive pronoun in
Norwegian does not distinguish for animacy,
the agentive semantics of the construction
might still favour an animate subject.
Genitive -s There is no extensive case system for
common nouns in Norwegian and the only
48
distinction that is explicitly marked on the
noun is the genitive case by addition of -s.
The genitive construction typically describes
possession, a relation which often involves an
animate possessor.
2.1 Feature extraction
In order to train a classifier to distinguish between
animate and inanimate nouns, training data con-
sisting of distributional statistics on the above fea-
tures were extracted from a corpus. For this end,
a 15 million word version of the Oslo Corpus, a
corpus of Norwegian texts of approximately 18.5
million words, was employed.2 The corpus is mor-
phosyntactically annotated and assigns an under-
specified dependency-style analysis to each sen-
tence.3
For each noun, relative frequencies for the dif-
ferent morphosyntactic features described above
were computed from the corpus, i.e. the frequency
of the feature relative to this noun is divided by
the total frequency of the noun. For transitive sub-
jects (SUBJ), we extracted the number of instances
where the noun in question was unambiguously
tagged as subject, followed by a finite verb and an
unambiguously tagged object.4 The frequency of
direct objects (OBJ) for a given noun was approx-
imated to the number of instances where the noun
in question was unambiguously tagged as object.
We here assume that an unambiguously tagged
object implies an unambiguously tagged subject.
However, by not explicitly demanding that the ob-
ject is preceded by a subject, we also capture ob-
jects with a ?missing? subject, such as objects oc-
curring in relative clauses and infinitival clauses.
As mentioned earlier, another context where an-
imate nouns might be predominant is in the by-
phrase expressing the demoted agent of a passive
verb (PASS). Norwegian has two ways of express-
ing the passive, a morphological passive (verb +
s) and a periphrastic passive (bli + past participle).
The counts for passive by-phrases allow for both
types of passives to precede the by-phrase contain-
ing the noun in question.
2The corpus is freely available for research purposes, see
http://www.hf.uio.no/tekstlab for more information.
3The actual framework is that of Constraint Grammar
(Karlsson et al, 1995), and the analysis is underspecified
as the nodes are labelled only with their dependency func-
tion, e.g. subject or prepositional object, and their immediate
heads are not uniquely determined.
4The tagger works in an eliminative fashion, so tokens
may bear two or more tags when they have not been fully
disambiguated.
With regard to the property of anaphoric ref-
erence by personal pronouns, the extraction was
bound to be a bit more difficult. The anaphoric
personal pronoun is never in the same clause as
the antecedent, and often not even in the same sen-
tence. Coreference resolution is a complex prob-
lem, and certainly not one that we shall attempt to
solve in the present context. However, we might
attempt to come up with a metric that approxi-
mates the coreference relation in a manner ade-
quate for our purposes, that is, which captures the
different coreference relation for animate as op-
posed to inanimate nouns. To this end, we make
use of the common assumption that a personal pro-
noun usually refers to a discourse salient element
which is fairly recent in the discourse. Now, if
a sentence only contains one core argument (i.e.
an intransitive subject) and it is followed by a sen-
tence initiated by a personal pronoun, it seems rea-
sonable to assume that these are coreferent (Hale
and Charniak, 1998). For each of the nouns then,
we count the number of times it occurs as a sub-
ject with no subsequent object and an immediately
following sentence initiated by (i) an animate per-
sonal pronoun (ANAAN) and (ii) an inanimate per-
sonal pronouns (ANAIN).
The feature of reflexive coreference is easier
to approximate, as this coreference takes place
within the same clause. For each noun, the num-
ber of occurrences as a subject followed by a
verb and the 3.person reflexive pronoun seg ?him-
/her-/itself? are counted and its relative frequency
recorded. The genitive feature (GEN) simply con-
tains relative frequencies of the occurrence of each
noun with genitive case marking, i.e. the suffix -s.
3 Method viability
In order to test the viability of the classification
method for this task, and in particular, the chosen
features, a set of forty highly frequent nouns were
selected - twenty animate and twenty inanimate
nouns. A frequency threshold of minimum one
thousand occurrences ensured sufficient data for
all the features, as shown in table 1, which reports
the mean values along with the standard deviation
for each class and feature. The total data points
for each feature following the data collection are
as follows: SUBJ: 16813, OBJ: 24128, GEN:
7830, PASS: 577, ANAANIM: 989, ANAINAN:
944, REFL: 558. As we can see, quite a few of
the features express morphosyntactic cues that are
49
SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL
Class Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
A 0.14 0.05 0.11 0.03 0.04 0.02 0.006 0.005 0.009 0.006 0.003 0.003 0.005 0.0008
I 0.07 0.03 0.23 0.10 0.02 0.03 0.002 0.002 0.003 0.002 0.006 0.003 0.001 0.0008
Table 1: Mean relative frequencies and standard deviation for each class (A(nimate) vs. I(nanimate))
from feature extraction (SUBJ=Transitive Subject, OBJ=Object, GEN=Genitive -s, PASS=Passive by-
phrase, ANAAN=Anaphoric reference by animate pronoun, ANAIN=Anaphoric reference by inanimate
pronoun, REFL=Anaphoric reference by reflexive pronoun).
Feature % Accuracy
SUBJ 85.0
OBJ 72.5
GEN 72.5
PASS 62.5
ANAAN 67.5
ANAIN 50.0
REFL 82.5
Table 2: Accuracy for the in-
dividual features using leave-
one-out training and testing
Features used Feature Not Used % Accuracy
1. SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL 87.5
2. OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL SUBJ 85.0
3. SUBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL OBJ 87.5
4. SUBJ OBJ PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL GEN 85.0
5. SUBJ OBJ GEN ANAAN ANAIN REFL PASS 82.5
6. SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAIN REFL ANAAN 82.5
7. SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN REFL ANAIN 87.5
8. SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL 75.0
9. OBJ PASS ANAAN ANAIN SUBJ GEN REFL 77.5
Table 3: Accuracy for all features and ?all minus one? using leave-one-out
training and testing
rather rare. This is in particular true for the passive
feature and the anaphoric features ANAAN, ANAIN
and REFL. There is also quite a bit of variation in
the data (represented by the standard deviation for
each class-feature combination), a property which
is to be expected as all the features represent ap-
proximations of animacy, gathered from an auto-
matically annotated, possibly quite noisy, corpus.
Even so, the features all express a difference be-
tween the two classes in terms of distributional
properties; the difference between the mean fea-
ture values for the two classes range from double
to five times the lowest class value.
3.1 Experiment 1
Based on the data collected on seven different fea-
tures for our 40 nouns, a set of feature vectors are
constructed for each noun. They contain the rel-
ative frequencies for each feature along with the
name of the noun and its class (animate or inan-
imate). Note that the vectors do not contain the
mean values presented in Table 1 above, but rather
the individual relative frequencies for each noun.
The experimental methodology chosen for the
classification experiments is similar to the one de-
scribed in Merlo and Stevenson (2001) for verb
classification. We also make use of leave-one-
out training and testing of the classifiers and the
same software package for decision tree learning,
C5.0 (Quinlan, 1998), is employed. In addition, all
our classifiers employ the boosting option for con-
structing classifiers (Quinlan, 1993). For calcula-
tion of the statistical significance of differences in
the performance of classifiers tested on the same
data set, McNemar?s test is employed.
Table 2 shows the performance of each individ-
ual feature in the classification of animacy. As
we can see, the performance of the features dif-
fer quite a bit, ranging from mere baseline per-
formance (ANAIN) to a 70% improvement of the
baseline (SUBJ). The first line of Table 3 shows the
performance using all the seven features collec-
tively where we achieve an accuracy of 87.5%, a
75% improvement of the baseline. The SUBJ, GEN
and REFL features employed individually are the
best performing individual features and their clas-
sification performance do not differ significantly
from the performance of the combined classifier,
whereas the rest of the individual features do (at
the p<.05 level).
The subsequent lines (2-8) of Table 3 show the
accuracy results for classification using all fea-
tures except one at a time. This provides an in-
dication of the contribution of each feature to the
classification task. In general, the removal of a
feature causes a 0% - 12.5% deterioration of re-
sults, however, only the difference in performance
caused by the removal of the REFL feature is sig-
nificant (at the p<0.05 level). Since this feature is
one of the best performing features individually, it
is not surprising that its removal causes a notable
difference in performance. The removal of the
50
ANAIN feature, on the other hand, does not have
any effect on accuracy whatsoever. This feature
was the poorest performing feature with a base-
line, or mere chance, performance. We also see,
however, that the behaviour of the features in com-
bination is not strictly predictable from their indi-
vidual performance, as presented in table 2. The
SUBJ, GEN and REFL features were the strongest
features individually with a performance that did
not differ significantly from that of the combined
classifier. However, as line 9 in Table 3 shows, the
classifier as a whole is not solely reliant on these
three features. When they are removed from the
feature pool, the performance (77.5% accuracy)
does not differ significantly (p<.05) from that of
the classifier employing all features collectively.
4 Data sparseness and back-off
The classification experiments reported above im-
pose a frequency constraint (absolute frequencies
>1000) on the nouns used for training and test-
ing, in order to study the interaction of the differ-
ent features without the effects of sparse data. In
the light of the rather promising results from these
experiments, however, it might be interesting to
further test the performance of our features in clas-
sification as the frequency constraint is gradually
relaxed.
To this end, three sets of common nouns each
counting 40 nouns (20 animate and 20 inanimate
nouns) were randomly selected from groups of
nouns with approximately the same frequency in
the corpus. The first set included nouns with an
absolute frequency of 100 +/-20 (?100), the sec-
ond of 50+/-5 (?50) and the third of 10+/-2 (?10).
Feature extraction followed the same procedure as
in experiment 1, relative frequencies for all seven
features were computed and assembled into fea-
ture vectors, one for each noun.
4.1 Experiment 2: Effect of sparse data on
classification
In order to establish how much of the generaliz-
ing power of the old classifier is lost when the fre-
quency of the nouns is lowered, an experiment was
conducted which tested the performance of the old
classifier, i.e. a classifier trained on all the more
frequent nouns, on the three groups of less fre-
quent nouns. As we can see from the first col-
umn in Table 4, this resulted in a clear deteriora-
tion of results, from our earlier accuracy of 87.5%
to new accuracies ranging from 70% to 52.5%,
barely above the baseline. Not surprisingly, the
results decline steadily as the absolute frequency
of the classified noun is lowered.
Accuracy results provide an indication that the
classification is problematic. However, it does not
indicate what the damage is to each class as such.
A confusion matrix is in this respect more infor-
mative. Confusion matrices for the classification
of the three groups of nouns, ?100, ?50 and?10,
are provided in table 5. These clearly indicate that
it is the animate class which suffers when data be-
comes more sparse. The percentage of misclas-
sified animate nouns drop drastically from 50%
at ?100 to 80% at ?50 and finally 95% at ?10.
The classification of the inanimate class remains
pretty stable throughout. The fact that a major-
ity of our features (SUBJ, GEN, PASS, ANAAN and
REFL) target animacy, in the sense that a higher
proportion of animate than inanimate nouns ex-
hibit the feature, gives a possible explanation for
this. As data gets more limited, this differentia-
tion becomes harder to make, and the animate fea-
ture profiles come to resemble the inanimate more
and more. Because the inanimate nouns are ex-
pected to have low proportions (compared to the
animate) for all these features, the data sparseness
is not as damaging. In order to examine the effect
on each individual feature of the lowering of the
frequency threshold, we also ran classifiers trained
on the high frequency nouns with only individual
features on the three groups of new nouns. These
results are depicted in Table 4. In our earlier exper-
iment, the performance of a majority of the indi-
vidual features (OBJ, PASS, ANAAN, ANAIN) was
significantly worse (at the p<0.05 level) than the
performance of the classifier including all the fea-
tures. Three of the individual features (SUBJ, GEN,
REFL) had a performance which did not differ sig-
nificantly from that of the classifier employing all
the features in combination.
As the frequency threshold is lowered, how-
ever, the performance of the classifiers employ-
ing all features and those trained only on individ-
ual features become more similar. For the ?100
nouns, only the two anaphoric features ANAAN
and the reflexive feature REFL, have a performance
that differs significantly (p<0.05) from the clas-
sifier employing all features. For the ?50 and
?10 nouns, there are no significant differences
between the classifiers employing individual fea-
51
Freq All SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL
?100 70.0 75.0 80.0 72.5 65.0 52.5 50.0 60.0
?50 57.5 75.0 62.5 77.5 62.5 57.5 50.0 55.0
?10 52.5 52.5 65.0 50.0 57.5 50.0 50.0 50.0
Table 4: Accuracy obtained when employing the old classifier on new lower-frequency nouns with leave-
one-out training and testing: all and individual features
?100 nouns
(a) (b) ? classified as
10 10 (a) class animate
2 18 (b) class inanimate
?50 nouns
(a) (b) ? classified as
4 16 (a) class animate
1 19 (b) class inanimate
?10 nouns
(a) (b) ? classified as
1 19 (a) class animate
20 (b) class inanimate
Table 5: Confusion matrices for classification of lower frequency nouns with old classifier
tures only and the classifiers trained on the feature
set as a whole. This indicates that the combined
classifiers no longer exhibit properties that are not
predictable from the individual features alone and
they do not generalize over the data based on the
combinations of features.
In terms of accuracy, a few of the individual fea-
tures even outperform the collective result. On av-
erage, the three most frequent features, the SUBJ,
OBJ and GEN features, improve the performance
by 9.5% for the ?100 nouns and 24.6% for the
?50 nouns. For the lowest frequency nouns (?10)
we see that the object feature alone improves the
result by almost 24%, from 52.5% to 65 % accu-
racy. In fact, the object feature seems to be the
most stable feature of all the features. When ex-
amining the means of the results extracted for the
different features, the object feature is the feature
which maintains the largest difference between the
two classes as the frequency threshold is lowered.
The second most stable feature in this respect is
the subject feature.
The group of experiments reported above shows
that the lowering of the frequency threshold for the
classified nouns causes a clear deterioration of re-
sults in general, and most gravely when all the fea-
tures are employed together.
4.2 Experiment 3: Back-off features
The three most frequent features, the SUBJ, OBJ
and GEN features, were the most stable in the
two experiments reported above and had a perfor-
mance which did not differ significantly from the
combined classifiers throughout. In light of this
we ran some experiments where all possible com-
binations of these more frequent features were em-
ployed. The results for each of the three groups of
nouns is presented in Table 6. The exclusion of the
less frequent features has a clear positive effect on
the accuracy results, as we can see in table 6. For
the?100 and?50 nouns, the performance has im-
proved compared to the classifier trained both on
all the features and on the individual features. The
classification performance for these nouns is now
identical or only slightly worse than the perfor-
mance for the high-frequency nouns in experiment
1. For the ?10 group of nouns, the performance
is, at best, the same as for all the features and at
worse fluctuating around baseline.
In general, the best performing feature com-
binations are SUBJ&OBJ&GEN and SUBJ&OBJ .
These two differ significantly (at the p<.05 level)
from the results obtained by employing all the fea-
tures collectively for both the ?100 and the ?50
nouns, hence indicate a clear improvement. The
feature combinations both contain the two most
stable features - one feature which targets the an-
imate class (SUBJ) and another which target the
inanimate class (OBJ), a property which facilitates
differentiation even as the marginals between the
two decrease.
It seems, then, that backing off to the most
frequent features might constitute a partial rem-
edy for the problems induced by data sparse-
ness in the classification. The feature combina-
tions SUBJ&OBJ&GEN and SUBJ&OBJ both sig-
nificantly improve the classification performance
and actually enable us to maintain the same accu-
racy for both the ?100 and ?50 nouns as for the
higher frequency nouns, as reported in experiment
1.
52
Freq SUBJ&OBJ&GEN SUBJ&OBJ SUBJ&GEN OBJ&GEN
?100 87.5 87.5 77.5 85.0
?50 82.5 90.0 70.0 77.5
?10 57.5 50.0 50.0 47.5
Table 6: Accuracy obtained when employing the old classifier on new lower-frequency nouns: combina-
tions of the most frequent features
4.3 Experiment 4: Back-off classifiers
Another option, besides a back-off to more fre-
quent features in classification, is to back off to
another classifier, i.e. a classifier trained on nouns
with a similar frequency. An approach of this kind
will attempt to exploit any group similarities that
these nouns may have in contrast to the mores fre-
quent ones, hopefully resulting in a better classifi-
cation.
In this experiment classifiers were trained and
tested using leave-one-out cross-validation on the
three groups of lower frequency nouns and em-
ploying individual, as well as various other fea-
ture combinations. The results for all features as
well as individual features are summarized in Ta-
ble 7. As we can see, the result for the classifier
employing all the features has improved somewhat
compared to the corresponding classifiers in ex-
periment 3 (as reported above in Table 4) for all
our three groups of nouns. This indicates that there
is a certain group similarity for the nouns of sim-
ilar frequency that is captured in the combination
of the seven features. However, backing off to a
classifier trained on nouns that are more similar
frequency-wise does not cause an improvement in
classification accuracy. Apart from the SUBJ fea-
ture for the ?100 nouns, none of the other clas-
sifiers trained on individual or all features for the
three different groups differ significantly (p<.05)
from their counterparts in experiment 3.
As before, combinations of the most frequent
features were employed in the new classifiers
trained and tested on each of the three frequency-
ordered groups of nouns. In the terminology em-
ployed above, this amounts to a backing off both
classifier- and feature-wise. The accuracy mea-
sures obtained for these experiments are summa-
rized in table 8. For these classifiers, the backed
off feature combinations do not differ significantly
(at the p<.05 level) from their counterparts in ex-
periment 3, where the classifiers were trained on
the more frequent nouns with feature back-off.
5 Conclusion
The above experiments have shown that the classi-
fication of animacy for Norwegian common nouns
is achievable using distributional data from a mor-
phosyntactically annotated corpus. The chosen
morphosyntactic features of animacy have proven
to differentiate well between the two classes. As
we have seen, the transitive subject, direct object
and morphological genitive provide stable features
for animacy even when the data is sparse(r). Four
groups of experiments have been reported above
which indicate that a reasonable remedy for sparse
data in animacy classification consists of back-
ing off to a smaller feature set in classification.
These experiments indicate that a classifier trained
on highly frequent nouns (experiment 1) backed
off to the most frequent features (experiment 3)
sufficiently capture generalizations which pertain
to nouns with absolute frequencies down to ap-
proximately fifty occurrences and enables an un-
changed performance approaching 90% accuracy.
Even so, there are certainly still possibilities for
improvement. As is well-known, singleton occur-
rences of nouns abound and the above classifica-
tion method is based on data for lemmas, rather
than individual instances or tokens. One possibil-
ity to be explored is token-based classification of
animacy, possibly in combination with a lemma-
based approach like the one outlined above.
Such an approach might also include a finer
subdivision of the nouns. We have chosen to clas-
sify along a binary dimension, however, it might
be argued that this is an artificial dichotomy. (Za-
enen et al, 2004) describe an encoding scheme
for the manual encoding of animacy informa-
tion in part of the English Switchboard corpus.
They make a three-way distinction between hu-
man, other animates, and inanimates, where the
?other animates? category describes a rather het-
erogeneous group of entities: organisations, an-
imals, intelligent machines and vehicles. How-
ever, what these seem to have in common is that
they may all be construed linguistically as ani-
53
Freq All SUBJ OBJ GEN PASS ANAAN ANAIN REFL
?100 85.0 52.5 87.5 65.0 70.0 50.0 57.5 50.0
?50 77.5 77.5 75.0 75.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0
?10 52.5 50.0 62.5 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0
Table 7: Accuracy obtained when employing a new classifier on new lower-frequency nouns: all and
individual features
Freq SUBJ&OBJ&GEN SUBJ&OBJ SUBJ&GEN OBJ&GEN
?100 85.0 85.0 67.5 82.5
?50 75.0 80.0 75.0 70.0
?10 62.5 62.5 50.0 62.5
Table 8: Accuracy obtained when employing a new classifier on new lower-frequency nouns: combina-
tions of the most frequent features
mate beings, even though they, in the real world,
are not. Interestingly, the two misclassified inani-
mate nouns in experiment 1, were bil ?car? and fly
?air plane?, both vehicles. A token-based approach
to classification might better capture the context-
dependent and dual nature of these types of nouns.
Automatic acquisition of animacy in itself is not
necessarily the primary goal. By testing the use of
acquired animacy information in various NLP ap-
plications such as parsing, generation or corefer-
ence resolution, we might obtain an extrinsic eval-
uation measure for the usefulness of animacy in-
formation. Since very frequent nouns are usually
well described in other lexical resources, it is im-
portant that a method for animacy classification is
fairly robust to data sparseness. This paper sug-
gests that a method based on seven morphosyntac-
tic features, in combination with feature back-off,
can contribute towards such a classification.
References
Judith Aissen. 2003. Differential Object Marking:
Iconicity vs. Economy. Natural Language and Lin-
guistic Theory, 21:435?483.
Joan Bresnan, Anna Cueni, Tatiana Nikitina and Har-
ald Baayen. 2005. Predicting the Dative Alterna-
tion. To appear in Royal Netherlands Academy of
Science Workshop on Foundations of Interpretation
proceedings.
Shipra Dingare. 2001. The effect of feature hierarchies
on frequencies of passivization in English. M.A.
Thesis, Stanford University.
David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and Argu-
ment Selection. Language, 67(3):547?619.
John Hale and Eugene Charniak. 1998. Getting Useful
Gender Statistics from English Text. Technical Re-
port, Comp. Sci. Dept. at Brown University, Provi-
dence, Rhode Island.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet, an elec-
tronic lexical database. MIT Press.
Fred Karlsson and Atro Voutilainen and Juha Heikkila?
and Atro Anttila. 1995. Constraint Grammar:
A language-independent system for parsing unre-
stricted text. Mouton de Gruyer.
Hanjung Lee. 2002. Prominence Mismatch and
Markedness Reduction in Word Order. Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory, 21(3):617?680.
Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson. 2001. Auto-
matic Verb Classification Based on Statistical Distri-
butions of Argument Structure. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(3):373?408.
Constantin Ora?san and Richard Evans. 2001. Learning
to Identify Animate References. in Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Natural Language
Learning, ACL-2001.
Lilja ?vrelid. 2004. Disambiguation of syntactic func-
tions in Norwegian: modeling variation in word or-
der interpretations conditioned by animacy and def-
initeness. in Fred Karlsson (ed.): Proceedings of
the 20th Scandinavian Conference of Linguistics,
Helsinki.
J. Ross Quinlan. 1998. C5.0: An Informal Tutorial.
http://www.rulequest.com/see5-unix.html.
J. Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for machine
learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Series in
Machine Learning.
Annie Zaenen, Jean Carletta, Gregory Garretson,
Joan Bresnan, Andrew Koontz-Garboden, Tatiana
Nikitina, M. Catherine O?Connor and Tom Wasow.
2004. Animacy encoding in English: why and how.
in D. Byron and B. Webber (eds.): Proceedings of
ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation, Barcelona.
54
