Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 309?317,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semitic Morphological Analysis and Generation
Using Finite State Transducers with Feature Structures
Michael Gasser
Indiana University, School of Informatics
Bloomington, Indiana, USA
gasser@indiana.edu
Abstract
This paper presents an application of finite
state transducers weighted with feature
structure descriptions, following Amtrup
(2003), to the morphology of the Semitic
language Tigrinya. It is shown that
feature-structure weights provide an effi-
cient way of handling the templatic mor-
phology that characterizes Semitic verb
stems as well as the long-distance de-
pendencies characterizing the complex
Tigrinya verb morphotactics. A relatively
complete computational implementation
of Tigrinya verb morphology is described.
1 Introduction
1.1 Finite state morphology
Morphological analysis is the segmentation of
words into their component morphemes and the
assignment of grammatical morphemes to gram-
matical categories and lexical morphemes to lex-
emes. For example, the English noun parties
could be analyzed as party+PLURAL. Morpho-
logical generation is the reverse process. Both
processes relate a surface level to a lexical level.
The relationship between these levels has con-
cerned many phonologists and morphologists over
the years, and traditional descriptions, since the
pioneering work of Chomsky and Halle (1968),
have characterized it in terms of a series of ordered
content-sensitive rewrite rules, which apply in the
generation, but not the analysis, direction.
Within computational morphology, a very sig-
nificant advance came with the demonstration that
phonological rules could be implemented as fi-
nite state transducers (Johnson, 1972; Kaplan
and Kay, 1994) (FSTs) and that the rule ordering
could be dispensed with using FSTs that relate the
surface and lexical levels directly (Koskenniemi,
1983). Because of the invertibility of FSTs, ?two-
level? phonology and morphology permitted the
creation of systems of FSTs that implemented both
analysis (surface input, lexical output) and gener-
ation (lexical input, surface output).
In addition to inversion, FSTs are closed un-
der composition. A second important advance in
computational morphology was the recognition by
Karttunen et al (1992) that a cascade of composed
FSTs could implement the two-level model. This
made possible quite complex finite state systems,
including ordered alternation rules representing
context-sensitive variation in the phonological or
orthographic shape of morphemes, the morpho-
tactics characterizing the possible sequences of
morphemes (in canonical form) for a given word
class, and one or more sublexicons. For example,
to handle written English nouns, we could create a
cascade of FSTs covering the rules that insert an e
in words like bushes and parties and relate lexical
y to surface i in words like buggies and parties and
an FST that represents the possible sequences of
morphemes in English nouns, including all of the
noun stems in the English lexicon. The key fea-
ture of such systems is that, even though the FSTs
making up the cascade must be composed in a par-
ticular order, the result of composition is a single
FST relating surface and lexical levels directly, as
in two-level morphology.
1.2 FSTs for non-concatenative morphology
These ideas have revolutionized computational
morphology, making languages with complex
word structure, such as Finnish and Turkish, far
more amenable to analysis by traditional compu-
tational techniques. However, finite state mor-
phology is inherently biased to view morphemes
as sequences of characters or phones and words
as concatenations of morphemes. This presents
problems in the case of non-concatenative mor-
phology: discontinuous morphemes (circumfix-
309
ation); infixation, which breaks up a morpheme
by inserting another within it; reduplication, by
which part or all of some morpheme is copied;
and the template morphology (also called stem-
pattern morphology, intercalation, and interdigi-
tation) that characterizes Semitic languages, and
which is the focus of much of this paper. The stem
of a Semitic verb consists of a root, essentially
a sequence of consonants, and a pattern, a sort
of template which inserts other segments between
the root consonants and possibly copies certain of
them (see Tigrinya examples in the next section).
Researchers within the finite state framework
have proposed a number of ways to deal with
Semitic template morphology. One approach is to
make use of separate tapes for root and pattern at
the lexical level (Kiraz, 2000). A transition in such
a system relates a single surface character to mul-
tiple lexical characters, one for each of the distinct
sublexica.
Another approach is to have the transducers at
the lexical level relate an upper abstract charac-
terization of a stem to a lower string that directly
represents the merging of a particular root and pat-
tern. This lower string can then be compiled into
an FST that yields a surface expression (Beesley
and Karttunen, 2003). Given the extra compile-
and-replace operation, this resulting system maps
directly between abstract lexical expressions and
surface strings. In addition to Arabic, this ap-
proach has been applied to a portion of the verb
morphology system of the Ethio-Semitic language
Amharic (Amsalu and Demeke, 2006), which is
characterized by all of the same sorts of complex-
ity as Tigrinya.
A third approach makes use of a finite set of
registers that the FST can write to and read from
(Cohen-Sygal and Wintner, 2006). Because it can
remember relevant previous states, a ?finite-state
registered transducer? for template morphology
can keep the root and pattern separate as it pro-
cesses a stem.
This paper proposes an approach which is clos-
est to this last framework, one that starts with
familiar extension to FSTs, weights on the tran-
sitions. The next section gives an overview of
Tigrinya verb morphology. The following sec-
tion discusses weighted FSTs, in particular, with
weights consisting of feature structure descrip-
tions. Then I describe a system that applies this
approach to Tigrinya verb morphology.
2 Tigrinya Verb Morphology
Tigrinya is an Ethio-Semitic language spoken by
5-6 million people in northern Ethiopia and central
Eritrea. There has been almost no computational
work on the language, and there are effectively no
corpora or digitized dictionaries containing roots.
For a language with the morphological complexity
of Tigrinya, a crucial early step in computational
linguistic work must be the development of mor-
phological analyzers and generators.
2.1 The stem
A Tigrinya verb (Leslau, 1941 is a standard ref-
erence for Tigrinya grammar) consists of a stem
and one or more prefixes and suffixes. Most of
the complexity resides in the stem, which can be
described in terms of three dimensions: root (the
only strictly lexical component of the verb), tense-
aspect-mood (TAM), and derivational category.
Table 1 illustrates the possible combinations of
TAM and derivational category for a single root.1
A Tigrinya verb root consists of a sequence of
three, four, or five consonants. In addition, as
in other Ethio-Semitic languages, certain roots in-
clude inherent vowels and/or gemination (length-
ening) of particular consonants. Thus among the
three-consonant roots, there are three subclasses:
CCC, CaCC, CC C. As we have seen, the stem of
a Semitic verb can be viewed as the result of the in-
sertion of pattern vowels between root consonants
and the copying of root consonants in particular
positions. For Tigrinya, each combination of root
class, TAM, and derivational category is charac-
terized by a particular pattern.
With respect to TAM, there are four possibili-
ties, as shown in Table 1, conventionally referred
to in English as PERFECTIVE, IMPERFECTIVE,
JUSSIVE-IMPERATIVE, and GERUNDIVE. Word-
forms within these four TAM categories combine
with auxiliaries to yield the full range of possbil-
ities in the complex Tigrinya tense-aspect-mood
system. Since auxiliaries are written as separate
words or separated from the main verbs by an
apostrophe, they will not be discussed further.
Within each of the TAM categories, a Tigrinya
verb root can appear in up to eight different deriva-
1I use 1 for the high central vowel of Tigrinya, E for the
mid central vowel, q for the velar ejective, a dot under a char-
acter to represent other ejectives, a right quote to represent a
glottal stop, a left quote to represent the voiced pharyngeal
fricative, and to represent gemination. Other symbols are
conventional International Phonetic Alphabet.
310
simple pas/refl caus freqv recip1 caus-rec1 recip2 caus-rec2
perf fElEt
?
tEfEl(E)t
?
aflEt
?
fElalEt
?
tEfalEt
?
af alEt
?
tEfElalEt
?
af ElalEt
?imprf fEl( 1)t
?
f1l Et
?
af(1)l( )1t
?
fElalt
?
f alEt
?
af alt
?
f ElalEt
?
af Elalt
?jus/impv flEt
?
tEfElEt
?
afl1t
?
fElalt
?
tEfalEt
?
af alt
?
tEfElalEt
?
af Elalt
?ger fElit
?
tEfElit
?
aflit
?
fElalit
?
tEfalit
?
af alit
?
tEfElalit
?
af Elalit
?
Table 1: Stems based on the Tigrinya root ?flt
?
.
tional categories, which can can be characterized
in terms of four binary features, each with partic-
ular morphological consequences. These features
will be referred to in this paper as ?ps? (?passive?),
?tr? (?transitive?), ?it? (?iterative?), and ?rc? (?re-
ciprocal?). The eight possible combinations of
these features (see Table 1 for examples) are SIM-
PLE [-ps,-tr,-it,-rc], PASSIVE/REFLEXIVE [+ps,-
tr,-it,-rc], TRANSITIVE/CAUSATIVE: [-ps,+tr,-it,-
rc], FREQUENTATIVE [-ps,-tr,+it,-rc], RECIPRO-
CAL 1 [+ps,-tr,-it,+rc], CAUSATIVE RECIPROCAL
1 [-ps,+tr,-it,+rc], RECIPROCAL 2 [+ps,-tr,+it,-
rc], CAUSATIVE RECIPROCAL 2 [-ps,+tr,+it,-rc].
Notice that the [+ps,+it] and [+tr,+it] combina-
tions are roughly equivalent semantically to the
[+ps,+rc] and [+tr,+rc] combinations, though this
is not true for all verb roots.
2.2 Affixes
The affixes closest to the stem represent subject
agreement; there are ten combinations of person,
number, and gender in the Tigrinya pronominal
and verb-agreement system. For imperfective and
jussive verbs, as in the corresponding TAM cate-
gories in other Semitic languages, subject agree-
ment takes the form of prefixes and sometimes
also suffixes, for example, y1flEt
?
?that he know?,
y1flEt
?
u ?that they (mas.) know?. In the perfec-
tive, imperative, and gerundive, subject agreement
is expressed by suffixes alone, for example, fElEt
?
ki
?you (sg., fem.) knew?, fElEt
?
u ?they (mas.) knew!?.
Following the subject agreement suffix (if there
is one), a transitive Tigrinya verb may also include
an object suffix (or object agreement marker),
again in one of the same set of ten possible combi-
nations of person, number, and gender. There are
two sets of object suffixes, a plain set representing
direct objects and a prepositional set representing
various sorts of dative, benefactive, locative, and
instrumental complements, for example, y1fElt
?
En i
?he knows me?, y1fElt
?
El Ey ?he knows for me?.
Preceding the subject prefix of an imperfective
or jussive verb or the stem of a perfective, imper-
ative, or gerundive verb, there may be the prefix
indicating negative polarity, ay-. Non-finite neg-
ative verbs also require the suffix -n: y1fElt
?
En i ?he
knows me?; ay 1fElt
?
En 1n ?he doesn?t know me?.
Preceding the negative prefix (if there is one),
an imperfective or perfective verb may also in-
clude the prefix marking relativization, (z)1-, for
example, zifElt
?
En i ?(he) who knows me?. The rel-
ativizer can in turn be preceded by one of a set
of seven prepositions, for example, kabzifElt
?
En i
?from him who knows me?. Finally, in the per-
fective, imperfective, and gerundive, there is the
possibility of one or the other of several conjunc-
tive prefixes at the beginning of the verb (with-
out the relativizer), for example, kifElt
?
En i ?so
that he knows me? and one of several conjunc-
tive suffixes at the end of the verb, for example,
y1fElt
?
En 1n ?and he knows me?.
Given up to 32 possible stem templates (com-
binations of four tense-aspect-mood and eight
derivational categories) and the various possi-
ble combinations of agreement, polarity, rela-
tivization, preposition, and conjunction affixes, a
Tigrinya verb root can appear in well over 100,000
different wordforms.
2.3 Complexity
Tigrinya shares with other Semitic languages com-
plex variations in the stem patterns when the
root contains glottal or pharyngeal consonants or
semivowels. These and a range of other regu-
lar language-specific morphophonemic processes
can be captured in alternation rules. As in other
Semitic languages, reduplication also plays a role
in some of the stem patterns (as seen in Table 1).
Furthermore, the second consonant of the most
important conjugation class, as well as the con-
sonant of most of the object suffixes, geminates
in certain environments and not others (Buckley,
2000), a process that depends on syllable weight.
The morphotactics of the Tigrinya verb is re-
plete with dependencies which span the verb stem:
(1) the negative circumfix ay-n, (2) absence of the
311
negative suffix -n following a subordinating prefix,
(3) constraints on combinations of subject agree-
ment prefixes and suffixes in the imperfective and
jussive, (4) constraints on combinations of subject
agreement affixes and object suffixes.
There is also considerable ambiguity in the sys-
tem. For example, the second person and third per-
son feminine plural imperfective and jussive sub-
ject suffix is identical to one allomorph of the third
person feminine singular object suffix (y1fElt
?
a) ?he
knows her; they (fem.) know?). Tigrinya is written
in the Ge?ez (Ethiopic) syllabary, which fails to
mark gemination and to distinguish between syl-
lable final consonants and consonants followed by
the vowel 1. This introduces further ambiguity.
In sum, the complexity of Tigrinya verbs
presents a challenge to any computational mor-
phology framework. In the next section I consider
an augmentation to finite state morphology offer-
ing clear advantages for this language.
3 FSTs with Feature Structures
A weighted FST (Mohri et al, 2000) is a fi-
nite state transducer whose transitions are aug-
mented with weights. The weights must be ele-
ments of a semiring, an algebraic structure with
an ?addition? operation, a ?multiplication? opera-
tion, identity elements for each operation, and the
constraint that multiplication distributes over ad-
dition. Weights on a path of transitions through
a transducer are ?multiplied?, and the weights as-
sociated with alternate paths through a transducer
are ?added?. Weighted FSTs are closed under the
same operations as unweighted FSTs; in particu-
lar, they can be composed. Weighted FSTs are fa-
miliar in speech processing, where the semiring el-
ements usually represent probabilities, with ?mul-
tiplication? and ?addition? in their usual senses.
Amtrup (2003) recognized the advantages that
would accrue to morphological analyzers and gen-
erators if they could accommodate structured rep-
resentations. One familiar approach to repre-
senting linguistic structure is feature structures
(FSs) (Carpenter, 1992; Copestake, 2002). A
feature structure consists of a set of attribute-
value pairs, for which values are either atomic
properties, such as FALSE or FEMININE, or fea-
ture structures. For example, we might repre-
sent the morphological structure of the Tigrinya
noun gEzay ?my house? as [lex=gEza, num=sing,
poss=[pers=1, num=sg]]. The basic operation over
FSs is unification. Loosely speaking, two FSs
unify if their attribute-values pairs are compati-
ble; the resulting unification combines the features
of the FSs. For example, the two FSs [lex=gEza,
num=sg] and [poss=[pers=1, num=sg]] unify to
yield the FS [lex=gEza, num=sg, poss=[pers=1,
num=sg]]. The distinguished FS TOP unifies with
any other FS.
Amtrup shows that sets of FSs constitute a
semiring, with pairwise unification as the multi-
plication operator, set union as the addition opera-
tor, TOP as the identity element for multiplication,
and the empty set as the identity element for ad-
dition. Thus FSTs can be weighted with FSs. In
an FST with FS weights, traversing a path through
the network for a given input string yields an FS
set, in addition to the usual output string. The FS
set is the result of repeated unification of the FS
sets on the arcs in the path, starting with an initial
input FS set. A path through the network fails not
only if the current input character fails to match
the input character on the arc, but also if the cur-
rent accumulated FS set fails to unify with the FS
set on an arc.
Using examples from Persian, Amtrup demon-
strates two advantages of FSTs weighted with
FS sets. First, long-distance dependencies within
words present notorious problems for finite state
techniques. For generation, the usual approach
is to overgenerate and then filter out the illegal
strings below, but this may result in a much larger
network because of the duplication of state de-
scriptions. Using FSs, enforcing long-distance
constraints is straightforward. Weights on the rel-
evant transitions early in the word specify val-
ues for features that must agree with similar fea-
ture specifications on transitions later in the word
(see the Tigrinya examples in the next section).
Second, many NLP applications, such a machine
translation, work with the sort of structured rep-
resentations that are elegantly handled by FS de-
scriptions. Thus it is often desirable to have the
output of a morphological analyzer exhibit this
richness, in contrast to the string representations
that are the output of an unweighted finite state
analyzer.
4 Weighted FSTs for Tigrinya Verbs
4.1 Long-distance dependencies
As we have seen, Tigrinya verbs exhibit vari-
ous sorts of long-distance dependencies. The cir-
312
cumfix that marks the negative of non-subordinate
verbs, ay...n, is one example. Figure 1 shows
how this constraint can be handled naturally us-
ing an FST weighted with FS sets. In place of
the separate negative and affirmative subnetworks
that would have to span the entire FST in the abs-
cence of weighted arcs, we have simply the nega-
tive and affirmative branches at the beginning and
end of the weighted FST. In the analysis direction,
this FST will accept forms such as ay 1fElt
?
un ?they
don?t know? and y1fElt
?
u ?they know? and reject
forms such as ay 1fElt
?
u. In the generation direc-
tion, the FST will correctly generate a form such
as ay 1fElt
?
un given a initial FS that includes the
feature [pol=neg].
4.2 Stems: root and derivational pattern
Now consider the source of most of the complex-
ity of the Tigrinya verb, the stem. The stem may
be thought of as conveying three types of infor-
mation: lexical (the root of the verb), derivational,
and TAM. However, unlike the former two types,
the TAM category of the verb is redundantly coded
for by the combination of subject agreement af-
fixes. Thus, analysis of a stem should return at
least the root and the derivational category, and
generation should start with a root and a deriva-
tional category and return a stem. We can repre-
sent each root as a sequence of consonants, sep-
arated in some cases by the vowel a or the gem-
ination character ( ). Given a particular deriva-
tional pattern and a TAM category, extracting the
root from the stem is a straightforward matter with
an FST. For example, for the imperfective pas-
sive, the CC C root pattern appears in the template
C1C EC, and the root is what is left if the two vow-
els in the stem are skipped over.
However, we want to extract both the deriva-
tional pattern and the root, and the problem for
finite state methods, as discussed in Section 1.2,
is that both are spread throughout the stem. The
analyzer needs to alternate between recording ele-
ments of the root and clues about the derivational
pattern as it traverses the stem, and the generator
needs to alternate between outputting characters
that represent root elements and characters that
depend on the derivational pattern as it produces
the stem. The process is complicated further be-
cause some stem characters, such as the gemina-
tion character, may be either lexical (that is, a root
element) or derivational, and others may provide
information about both components. For exam-
ple, a stem with four consonants and a separating
the second and third consonants represents the fre-
quentative of a three-consonant root if the third
and fourth consonants are identical (e.g., fElalEt
??knew repeatedly?, root: flt
?
) and a four-consonant
root (CCaCC root pattern) in the simple deriva-
tional category if they are not (e.g., kElakEl ?pre-
vented?, root klakl).
As discussed in Section 1.2, one of the familiar
approaches to this problem, that of Beesley and
Karttunen (2003), precompiles all of the combina-
tions of roots and derivational patterns into stems.
The problem with this approach for Tigrinya is
that we do not have anything like a complete list
of roots; that is, we expect many stems to be novel
and will need to be able to analyze them on the fly.
The other two approaches discussed in 1.2, that of
Kiraz (2000) and that of Cohen-Sygal & Wintner
(2006), are closer to what is proposed here. Each
has an explicit mechanism for keeping the root and
pattern distinct: separate tapes in the case of Kiraz
(2000) and separate memory registers in the case
of Cohen-Sygal & Wintner (2006).
The present approach also divides the work of
processing the root and the derivational patterns
between two components of the system. However,
instead of the additional overhead required for im-
plementing a multi-tape system or registers, this
system makes use of the FSTs weighted with FSs
that are already motivated for other aspects of mor-
phology, as argued above. In this approach, the
lexical aspects of morphology are handled by the
ordinary input-output character correspondences,
and the grammatical aspects of morphology, in
particular the derivational patterns, are handled by
the FS weights on the FST arcs and the unifica-
tion that takes place as accumulated weights are
matched against the weights on FST arcs.
As explained in Section 2, we can represent
the eight possible derivational categories for a
Tigrinya verb stem in terms of four binary features
(ps, tr, rc, it). Each of these features is reflected
more or less directly in the stem form (though dif-
ferently for different root classes and for differ-
ent TAM categories). However, they are some-
times distributed across the stem: different parts
of a stem may be constrained by the presence of
a particular feature. For example, the feature +ps
(abbreviating [ps=True]) causes the gemination of
the stem-initial consonant under various circum-
313
02SBJ11
[pol=neg]
:
[pol=aff]
3 4STEM SBJ2
ay:
5
OBJ
:
6
n:
:
[pol=neg]
[pol=aff]
Figure 1: Handling Tigrinya (non-subordinate, imperfective) negation using feature structure weights.
Arcs with uppercase labels represents subnetworks that are not spelled out in the figure.
stances and also controls the final vowel in the
stem in the imperfective, and the feature +tr is
marked by the vowel a before the first root con-
sonant and, in the imperfective, by the nature of
the vowel that follows the first root consonant (E
where we would otherwise expect 1, 1 where we
would otherwise expect E.) That is, as with the
verb affixes, there are long-distance dependencies
within the verb stem.
Figure 2 illustrates this division of labor for the
portion of the stem FST that covers the CC C root
pattern for the imperfective. This FST (including
the subnetwork not shown that is responsible for
the reduplicated portion of the +it patterns) han-
dles all eight possible derivational categories. For
the root ?fs. m ?finish?, the stems are [-ps,-tr,-rc,-
it]: f1s
?
1m, [+ps,-tr,-rc,-it]: f1s
?
Em, [-ps,+tr,-rc,-it]:
afEs
?
1m, [-ps,-tr,-rc,+it]: fEs
?
as
?
1m, [+ps,-tr,+rc,-
it]: f as
?
Em, [-ps,+tr,+rc,-it]: af as
?
1m, [+ps,-tr,-
rc,+it]: f Es
?
as
?
Em, [-ps,+tr,-rc,+it]: af Es
?
as
?
1m.
What is notable is the relatively small number of
states that are required; among the consonant and
vowel positions in the stems, all but the first are
shared among the various derivational categories.
Of course the full stem FST, applying to all
combinations of the eight root classes, the eight
derivational categories, and the four TAM cate-
gories, is much larger, but the FS weights still
permit a good deal of sharing, including sharing
across the root classes and across the TAM cate-
gories.
4.3 Architecture
The full verb morphology processing system (see
Figure 3) consists of analysis and generation FSTs
for both orthographic and phonemically repre-
sented words, four FSTs in all. Eleven FSTs are
composed to yield the phonemic analysis FST (de-
noted by the dashed border in Figure 3), and two
additional FSTs are composed onto this FST to
yield the orthographic FST (denoted by the large
solid rectangle). The generation FSTs are created
by inverting the analysis FSTs. Only the ortho-
graphic FSTs are discussed in the remainder of
this paper.
At the most abstract (lexical) end is the heart of
the system, the morphotactic FST, and the heart of
this FST is the stem FST described above. The
stem FST is composed from six FSTs, including
three that handle the morphotactics of the stem,
one that handles root constraints, and two that han-
dle phonological processes that apply only to the
stem. A prefix FST and a suffix FST are then con-
catenated onto the composed stem FST to create
the full verb morphotactic FST. Within the whole
FST, it is only the morphotactic FSTs (the yellow
rectangles in Figure 3) that have FS weights.2
In the analysis direction, the morphotactic FST
takes as input words in an abstract canonical form
and an initial weight of TOP; that is, at this point
in analysis, no grammatical information has been
extracted. The output of the morphotactic FST
is either the empty list if the form is unanalyz-
able, or one or more analyses, each consisting
of a root string and a fully specified grammat-
ical description in the form of an FS. For ex-
ample, given the form ?ayt1f1l et
?
un, the morpho-
tactic FST would output the root flt. and the FS
[tam=imprf, der=[+ps,-tr,-rc,-it], sbj=[+2p,+plr,-
fem], +neg, obj=nil, -rel] (see Figure 3). That
is, this word represents the imperfective, nega-
tive, non-relativized passive of the verb root ?flt.
(?know?) with second person plural masculine sub-
ject and no object: ?you (plr., mas.) are not
known?. The system has no actual lexicon, so it
outputs all roots that are compatible with the in-
put, even if such roots do not exist in the language.
In the generation direction, the opposite happens.
In this case, the input root can be any legal se-
quence of characters that matches one of the eight
2The reduplication that characterizes [+it] stems and the
?anti-reduplication? that prevents sequences of identical root
consonants in some positions are handled with separate tran-
sitions for each consonant pair.
314
C1
C2_
V2 C3
C
a:
C1_
_:
?:
V1
?:
?:
a:
C
?:
?:
[+ps]
[-ps]
C
[-ps,+it]
[-ps,-it]
<CaC:C>
[+it]
[-tr]
C2
aC1
_:
?:
_
[+ps]
[+rc,-it]
[-rc,+it]
[+tr,-ps]
0
a
[-it]
C
Figure 2: FST for imperfective verb stems of root type CC C. <CaC:C> indicates a subnetwork, not
shown, which handles the reduplicated portion of +it stems, for example, fes
?
as
?
1m.
root patterns (there are some constraints on what
can constitute a root), though not necessarily an
actual root in the language.
The highest FST below the morphotactic FST
handles one case of allomorphy: the two allo-
morphs of the relativization prefix. Below this are
nine FSTs handling phonology; for example, one
of these converts the sequence a1 to E. At the bot-
tom end of the cascade are two orthographic FSTs
which are required when the input to analysis or
the output of generation is in standard Tigrinya or-
thography. One of these is responsible for the in-
sertion of the vowel 1 and for consonant gemina-
tion (neither of which is indicated in the orthogra-
phy); the other inserts a glottal stop before a word-
initial vowel.
The full orthographic FST consists of 22,313
states and 118,927 arcs. The system handles
verbs in all of the root classes discussed by
Leslau (1941), including those with laryngeals
and semivowels in different root positions and the
three common irregular verbs, and all grammati-
cal combinations of subject, object, negation, rel-
ativization, preposition, and conjunction affixes.
For the orthographic version of the analyzer, a
word is entered in Ge?ez script (UTF-8 encoding).
The program romanizes the input using the SERA
transcription conventions (Firdyiwek and Yaqob,
1997), which represent Ge?ez characters with the
ASCII character set, before handing it to the ortho-
graphic analysis FST. For each possible analysis,
the output consists of a (romanized) root and a FS
set. Where a set contains more than one FS, the
interpretation is that any of the FS elements con-
stitutes a possible analysis. Input to the generator
consists of a romanized root and a single feature
??????? 
fl?; [tam=+imprf, der=[+ps,-tr,-it,-rc],
      sbj=[+2p,+plr,-fem], +neg]]
Allomorphy
Phonology
Orthography
.
 
.
 
.
M
o
r
p
h
o
t
a
c
t
i
c
s
SuffixesPrefixes
...'ayt?f?l_??un...
S
t
e
m
 
(
R
o
o
t
+
P
a
t
t
e
r
n
)
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
.o.
Figure 3: Architecture of the system. Rectangles
represent FSTs, ?.o.?composition.
structure. The output of the orthographic gener-
ation FST is an orthographic representation, us-
ing SERA conventions, of each possible form that
is compatible with the input root and FS. These
forms are then converted to Ge?ez orthography.
The analyzer and generator are pub-
licly accessible on the Internet at
www.cs.indiana.edu/cgi-pub/gasser/L3/
morpho/Ti/v.
315
4.4 Evaluation
Systematic evaluation of the system is diffi-
cult since no Tigrinya corpora are currently
available. One resource that is useful, how-
ever, is the Tigrinya word list compiled by
Biniam Gebremichael, available on the Internet at
www.cs.ru.nl/ biniam/geez/crawl.php. Biniam ex-
tracted 227,984 distinct wordforms from Tigrinya
texts by crawling the Internet. As a first step to-
ward evaluating the morphological analyzer, the
orthographic analyzer was run on 400 word-
forms selected randomly from the list compiled by
Biniam, and the results were evaluated by a human
reader.
Of the 400 wordforms, 329 were unambigu-
ously verbs. The program correctly analyzed 308
of these. The 21 errors included irregular verbs
and orthographic/phonological variants that had
not been built into the FST; these will be straight-
forward to add. Fifty other words were not verbs.
The program again responded appropriately, given
its knowledge, either rejecting the word or analyz-
ing it as a verb based on a non-existent root. Thir-
teen other words appeared to be verb forms con-
taining a simple typographical error, and I was un-
able to identify the remaining eight words. For the
latter two categories, the program again responded
by rejecting the word or treating it as a verb based
on a non-existent root.
To test the morphological generator, the pro-
gram was run on roots belonging to all 21 of the
major classes discussed by Leslau (1941), includ-
ing those with glottal or pharyngeal consonants or
semivowels in different positions within the roots.
For each of these classes, the program was asked
to generate all possible derivational patterns (in the
third person singular masculine form). In addition,
for a smaller set of four root classes in the sim-
ple derivational pattern, the program was tested on
all relevant combinations of the subject and object
affixes3 and, for the imperfective and perfective,
on 13 combinations of the relativization, negation,
prepositional, and conjunctive affixes. For each
of the 272 tests, the generation FST succeeded in
outputting the correct form (and in some cases a
phonemic and/or orthographic alternative).
In conclusion, the orthographic morphological
analyzer and generator provide good coverage of
3With respect to their morphophonological behavior, the
subject affixes and object suffixes each group into four cate-
gories.
Tigrinya verbs. One weakness of the present sys-
tem results from its lack of a root dictionary. The
analyzer produces as many as 15 different analyses
of words, when in many cases only one contains a
root that exists in the language. The number could
be reduced somewhat by a more extensive filter
on possible root segment sequences; however, root
internal phonotactics is an area that has not been
extensively studied for Tigrinya. In any case, once
a Tigrinya root dictionary becomes available, it
will be straightforward to compose a lexical FST
onto the existing FSTs that will reject all but ac-
ceptable roots. Even a relatively small root dictio-
nary should also permit inferences about possible
root segment sequences in the language, enabling
the construction of a stricter filter for roots that are
not yet contained in the dictionary.
5 Conclusion
Progress in all applications for a language such as
Tigrinya is held back when verb morphology is
not dealt with adequately. Tigrinya morphology
is complex in two senses. First, like other Semitic
languages, it relies on template morphology, pre-
senting unusual challenges to any computational
framework. This paper presents a new answer
to these challenges, one which has the potential
to integrate morphological processing into other
knowledge-based applications through the inclu-
sion of the powerful and flexible feature structure
framework. This approach should extend to other
Semitic languages, such as Arabic, Hebrew, and
Amharic. Second, Tigrinya verbs are simply very
elaborate. In addition to the stems resulting from
the intercalation of eight root classes, eight deriva-
tional patterns and four TAM categories, there are
up to four prefix slots and four suffix slots; various
sorts of prefix-suffix dependencies; and a range
of interacting phonological processes, including
those sensitive to syllable structure, as well as
segmental context. Just putting together all of
these constraints in a way that works is signifi-
cant. Since the motivation for this project is pri-
marily practical rather than theoretical, the main
achievement of the paper is the demonstration that,
with some effort, a system can be built that actu-
ally handles Tigrinya verbs in great detail. Future
work will focus on fine-tuning the verb FST, de-
veloping an FST for nouns, and applying this same
approach to other Semitic languages.
316
References
Saba Amsalu and Girma A. Demeke. 2006. Non-
concatenative finite-state morphotactics of Amharic
simple verbs. ELRC Working Papers, 2(3).
Jan Amtrup. 2003. Morphology in machine translation
systems: Efficient integration of finite state trans-
ducers and feature structure descriptions. Machine
Translation, 18:213?235.
Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Fi-
nite State Morphology. CSLI Publications, Stan-
ford, CA, USA.
Eugene Buckley. 2000. Alignment and weight in the
Tigrinya verb stem. In Vicki Carstens and Frederick
Parkinson, editors, Advances in African Linguistics,
pages 165?176. Africa World Press, Lawrenceville,
NJ, USA.
Bob Carpenter. 1992. The Logic of Typed Fea-
ture Structures. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.
Noam Chomsky and Morris Halle. 1968. The Sound
Pattern of English. Harper and Row, New York.
Yael Cohen-Sygal and Shuly Wintner. 2006. Finite-
state registered automata for non-concatenative mor-
phology. Computational Linguistics, 32:49?82.
Ann Copestake. 2002. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI Publications, Stanford,
CA, USA.
Yitna Firdyiwek and Daniel Yaqob. 1997. The sys-
tem for Ethiopic representation in ascii. URL: cite-
seer.ist.psu.edu/56365.html.
C. Douglas Johnson. 1972. Formal Aspects of Phono-
logical Description. Mouton, The Hague.
Ronald M. Kaplan and Martin Kay. 1994. Regu-
lar models of phonological rule systems. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 20:331?378.
Lauri Karttunen, Ronald M. Kaplan, and Annie Zae-
nen. 1992. Two-level morphology with compo-
sition. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, volume 14,
pages 141?148.
George A. Kiraz. 2000. Multitiered nonlinear mor-
phology using multitape finite automata: a case
study on Syriac and Arabic. Computational Linguis-
tics, 26(1):77?105.
Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level morphology: a
general computational model for word-form recog-
nition and production. Technical Report Publication
No. 11, Department of General Linguistics, Univer-
sity of Helsinki.
Wolf Leslau. 1941. Documents Tigrigna: Grammaire
et Textes. Libraire C. Klincksieck, Paris.
Mehryar Mohri, Fernando Pereira, and Michael Riley.
2000. Weighted finite-state transducers in speech
recognition. In Proceedings of ISCA ITRW on Auto-
matic Speech Recognition: Challenges for the Mil-
lenium, pages 97?106, Paris.
317
