Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Student Research Workshop, pages 61?69,
Athens, Greece, 2 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Comparison of Merging Strategies for Translation of German
Compounds
Sara Stymne
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linko?ping University, Sweden
sarst@ida.liu.se
Abstract
In this article, compound processing for
translation into German in a factored sta-
tistical MT system is investigated. Com-
pounds are handled by splitting them prior
to training, and merging the parts after
translation. I have explored eight merging
strategies using different combinations of
external knowledge sources, such as word
lists, and internal sources that are carried
through the translation process, such as
symbols or parts-of-speech. I show that
for merging to be successful, some internal
knowledge source is needed. I also show
that an extra sequence model for part-of-
speech is useful in order to improve the
order of compound parts in the output.
The best merging results are achieved by a
matching scheme for part-of-speech tags.
1 Introduction
In German, as in many other languages, com-
pounds are normally written as single words with-
out spaces or other word boundaries. Compounds
can be binary, i.e., made up of two parts (1a), or
have more parts (1b). There are also coordinated
compound constructions (1c). In a few cases com-
pounds are written with a hyphen (1d), often when
one of the parts is a proper name or an abbrevia-
tion.
(1) a. Regierungskonferenz
intergovernmental conference
b. Fremdsprachenkenntnisse
knowledge of foreign languages
c. See- und Binnenha?fen
sea and inland ports
d. Kosovo-Konflikt
Kosovo conflict
e. Vo?lkermord
genocide
German compounds can have English trans-
lations that are compounds, written as separate
words (1a), other constructions, possibly with in-
serted function words and reordering (1b), or sin-
gle words (1e). Compound parts sometimes have
special compound forms, formed by addition or
truncations of letters, by umlaut or by a combi-
nation of these, as in (1a), where the letter -s is
added to the first part, Regierung. For an overview
of German compound forms, see Langer (1998).
Compounds are productive and common in Ger-
man and other Germanic languages, which makes
them problematic for many applications includ-
ing statistical machine translation. For translation
into a compounding language, fewer compounds
than in normal texts are often produced, which can
be due to the fact that the desired compounds are
missing in the training data, or that they have not
been aligned correctly. Where a compound is the
idiomatic word choice in the translation, aMT sys-
tem can instead produce separate words, genitive
or other alternative constructions, or only translate
one part of the compound.
The most common way to integrate compound
processing into statistical machine translation is to
split compounds prior to training and translation.
Splitting of compounds has received a lot of focus
in the literature, both for machine translation, and
targeted at other applications such as information
retrieval or speech recognition.
When translating into a compounding language
there is a need to merge the split compounds af-
ter translation. In order to do this we have to
identify which words that should be merged into
compounds, which is complicated by the fact that
the translation process is not guaranteed to pro-
duce translations where compound parts are kept
together.
61
In this article I explore the effects of merging in
a factored phrase-based statistical machine trans-
lation system. The system uses part-of-speech as
an output factor. This factor is used as a knowl-
edge source for merging and to improve word
order by using a part-of-speech (POS) sequence
model.
There are different knowledge sources for
merging. Some are external, such as frequency
lists of words, compounds, and compound parts,
that could be compiled at split-time. It is also
possible to have internal knowledge sources, that
are carried through the translation process, such
as symbols on compound parts, or part-of-speech
tags. Choices made at split-time influence which
internal knowledge sources are available at merge-
time. I will explore and compare three markup
schemes for compound parts, and eight merg-
ing algorithms that use different combinations of
knowledge sources.
2 Related Work
Splitting German compounds into their parts prior
to translation has been suggested by many re-
searchers. Koehn and Knight (2003) presented an
empirical splitting algorithm that is used to im-
prove translation from German to English. They
split all words in all possible places, and consid-
ered a splitting option valid if all the parts are ex-
isting words in a monolingual corpus. They al-
lowed the addition of -s or -es at all splitting
points. If there were several valid splitting options
they chose one based on the number of splits, the
geometric mean of part frequencies or based on
alignment data. Stymne (2008) extended this al-
gorithm in a number of ways, for instance by al-
lowing more compound forms. She found that for
translation into German, it was better to use the
arithmetic mean of part frequencies than the geo-
metric mean. Using the mean of frequencies can
result in no split, if the compound is more frequent
than its parts.
Merging has been much less explored than split-
ting since it is common only to discuss translation
from compounding languages. However, Popovic?
et al (2006) used merging for translation into Ger-
man. They did not mark compound parts in any
way, so the merging is based on two word lists,
with compound parts and full compounds found
at split-time. All words in the translation output
that were possible compound parts were merged
with the next word if it resulted in a known com-
pound. They only discussed merging of binary
compounds. The drawback of this method is that
novel compounds cannot be merged. Neverthe-
less, this strategy led to improved translation mea-
sured by three automatic metrics.
In a study of translation between English and
Swedish, Stymne and Holmqvist (2008) suggested
a merging algorithm based on part-of-speech,
which can be used in a factored translation sys-
tem with part-of-speech as an output factor. Com-
pound parts had special part-of-speech tags based
on the head of the compound, and merging was
performed if that part-of-speech tag matched that
of the following word. When compound forms
had been normalized the correct compound form
was found by using frequency lists of parts and
words compiled at split-time. This method can
merge unseen compounds, and the tendency to
merge too much is reduced by the restriction that
POS-tags need to match. In addition coordinated
compounds were handled by the algorithm. This
strategy resulted in improved scores on automatic
metrics, which were confirmed by an error analy-
sis.
Koehn et al (2008) discussed treatment of hy-
phened compounds in translation into German by
splitting at hyphens and treat the hyphen as a sep-
arate token, marked by a symbol. The impact on
translation results was small.
There are also other ways of using compound
processing to improve SMT into German. Popovic?
et al (2006) suggested using compound splitting
to improve alignment, or to merge English com-
pounds prior to training.
Some work has discussed merging of not only
compounds, but of all morphs. Virpioja et al
(2007) merged translation output that was split
into morphs for Finnish, Swedish and Danish.
They marked split parts with a symbol, and
merged every word in the output which had this
symbol with the next word. If morphs were
misplaced in the translation output, they were
merged anyway, possibly creating non-existent
words. This system was worse than the baseline
on Bleu (Papineni et al, 2002), but an error analy-
sis showed some improvements.
El-Kahlout and Oflazer (2006), discuss merg-
ing of morphs in Turkish. They also mark
morphs with a symbol, and in addition normal-
ize affixes to standard form. In the merging
62
phase, surface forms were generated following
morphographemic rules. They found that morphs
were often translated out of order, and that merg-
ing based purely on symbols gave bad results. To
reduce this risk, they constrained splitting to allow
only morphologically correct splits, and by group-
ing some morphemes. This lead to less ordering
problems in the translation output and gave im-
provements over the baseline.
Compound recombination have also been ap-
plied to German speech recognition, e.g. by
(Berton et al, 1996), who performed a lexical
search to extend the word graph that is output by
the speech recogniser.
3 Compound Processing
German compounds are split in the training data
and prior to translation. After translation, the parts
are merged to form full compounds. The knowl-
edge sources available to the merging process de-
pend on which information is carried through the
translation process.
The splitting algorithm of Stymne (2008) will
be used throughout this study. It is slightly mod-
ified such that only the 10 most common com-
pound forms from a corpus study of Langer (1998)
are allowed, and the hyphen in hyphened com-
pounds is treated as a compound form, analogous
to adding for instance the letter s to a part.
The annotation of compound parts influences
the merging process. Choices have to be made
concerning the form, markup and part-of-speech
of compound parts. For the form two options
have been considered, keeping the original com-
pound form, or normalizing it so that it coincides
with a normal word. Three types of marking have
been investigated, no marking at all (unmarked), a
marking symbol that is concatenated to all parts
but the last (marked), or using a separate sym-
bol between parts (sepmarked). The sepmarked
scheme has different symbols for parts of coordi-
nated compounds than for other compounds. Parts
are normalized in the unmarked and sepmarked
schemes, but left in their compound form in the
marked scheme, since the symbol separates them
from ordinary words in any case.
There is also the issue of which part-of-speech
tag to use for compound parts. The last part of the
compound, the head, always has the same part-of-
speech tag as the full compound. Two schemes
are explored for the other parts. For the marked
and unmarked system, a part-of-speech tag that is
derived from that of the last part of the word is
used. For the sepmarked scheme the most com-
mon part-of-speech tag of the part from the tagged
monolingual corpus is used.
In summary, the three markup schemes use the
following combinations, exemplified by the result
of splitting the word begru??enswert (welcome, lit-
erally worth to welcome)
? Unmarked: no symbol, normalization, spe-
cial POS-tags
begru??en ADJ-PART wert ADJ
? Marked: symbol on parts, no normalization,
special POS-tags
begru??ens# ADJ-PART wert ADJ
? Sepmarked: symbol as separate token, nor-
malization, ordinary POS-tags
begru??en VV @#@ COMP wert ADJ
3.1 Merging
There is no guarantee that compound parts appear
in a correct context in the translation output. This
fact complicates merging, since there is a general
choice between only merging those words that we
know are compounds, and merging all occurrences
of compound parts, which will merge unseen com-
pounds, but probably also merge parts that do not
form well-formed compounds. There is also the
issue of parts possibly being part of coordinated
compounds.
The internal knowledge sources that can be used
for merging depends on the markup scheme used.
The available internal sources are markup sym-
bols, part-of-speech tags, and the special tags for
compound parts. The external resources are fre-
quency lists of words, compounds and parts, pos-
sibly with normalization, compiled at split-time.
For the unmarked and sepmarked scheme, re-
verse normalization, i.e., mapping normalized
compound parts into correct compound forms, has
to be applied in connection with merging. As in
Stymne and Holmqvist (2008), all combinations
of compound forms that are known for each part
are looked up in the word frequency list, and the
most frequent combination is chosen. If there are
no known combinations, the parts are combined
from left to right, at each step choosing the most
frequent combination.
Three main types of merging algorithms are in-
vestigated in this study. The first group, inspired
63
Name Description
word-list Merges all tokens that have been seen as compound parts with the next part if it results in a known
word, from the training corpus
word-list + head-pos As word-list, but only merges words where the last part is a noun, adjective or verb
compound-list As word-list, but for known compounds from split-time, not for all known words
symbol Merges all tokens that are marked with the next token
symbol + head-pos As symbol, but only merges words where the last part is a noun, adjective or verb
symbol + word-list A mix of symbol and word-list, where marked compounds are merged, if it results in a known word
POS-match Merges all tokens with a compound part-of-speech tag, if the tag match the tag of the next token
POS-match + coord As POS-match, but also adds a hyphen to parts that are followed by the conjunction und (and)
Table 1: Merging algorithms
by Popovic? et al (2006), is based only on exter-
nal knowledge sources, frequency lists of words
or compounds, and of parts, compiled at split-
time. Novel compounds cannot be merged by
these algorithms. The second group uses sym-
bols to guide merging, inspired by work on mor-
phology merging (Virpioja et al, 2007). In the
unmarked scheme where compound parts are not
marked with symbols, the special POS-tags are
used to identify parts instead1. The third group
is based on special part-of-speech tags for com-
pounds (Stymne and Holmqvist, 2008), and merg-
ing is performed if the part-of-speech tags match.
This group of algorithms cannot be applied to the
sepmarked scheme.
In addition a restriction that the head of the
compound should have a compounding part-of-
speech, that is, a noun, adjective, or verb, and a
rule to handle coordinated compounds are used.
By using these additions and combinations of the
main algorithms, a total of eight algorithms are ex-
plored, as summarized in Table 1. For all algo-
rithms, compounds can have an arbitrary number
of parts.
If there is a marked compound part that cannot
be combined with the next word, in any of the al-
gorithms, the markup is removed, and the part is
left as a single word. For the sepmarked system,
coordinated compounds are handled as part of the
symbol algorithms, by using the special markup
symbol that indicates them.
3.2 Merging Performance
To give an idea of the potential of the merging al-
gorithms, they are evaluated on the split test refer-
ence corpus, using the unmarked scheme. The cor-
pus has 55580 words, of which 4472 are identified
as compounds by the splitting algorithm. Of these
4160 are known from the corpus, 245 are novel,
1For the marked scheme using POS-tags to identify com-
pound parts is equivalent to using symbols.
and 67 are coordinated. For the methods based
on symbols or part-of-speech, this merging task is
trivial, except for reverse normalization, since all
parts are correctly ordered.
Table 2 shows the number of errors. The POS-
match algorithm with treatment of coordination
makes 55 errors, 4 of which are due to coordinated
compounds that does not use und as the conjunc-
tion. The other errors are due to errors in the re-
verse normalization of novel compounds, which
has an accuracy of 79% on this text. The POS-
match and symbol algorithms make additional er-
rors on coordinated compounds. The head-pos
restriction blocks compounds with an adverb as
head, which gave better results on translation data,
but increased the errors on this evaluation. The
word list method both merges many words that
are not compounds, and do not merge any novel
compounds. Using a list of compounds instead of
words reduces the errors slightly.
4 System Description
The translation system used is a factored phrase-
based translation system. In a factored transla-
tion model other factors than surface form can
be used, such as lemma or part-of-speech (Koehn
and Hoang, 2007). In the current system part-of-
speech is used only as an output factor in the target
language. Besides the standard language model a
sequence model on part-of-speech is used, which
can be expected to lead to better word order in the
translation output. There are no input factors, so
no tagging has to be performed prior to translation,
only the training corpus needs to be tagged. In ad-
dition, the computational overhead is small. One
possible benefit gained by using part-of-speech as
an output factor is that ordering, both in general,
and of compound parts, can be improved. This hy-
pothesis is tested by trying two system setups, with
and without the part-of-speech sequence model.
In addition part-of-speech is used for postprocess-
64
wlist wlist+head-pos clist symbol symbol+head-pos symbol+wlist POS-match POS-match+coord
2393 1656 2257 118 205 330 118 55
Table 2: Number of merging errors on the split reference corpus
Tokens Types
English baseline 15158429 63692
German
baseline 14356051 184215
marked 15674728 93746
unmarked 15674728 81806
sepmarked 17007929 81808
Table 3: Type and token counts for the 701157
sentence training corpus
ing, both for uppercasing German nouns and as a
knowledge source for compound merging.
The tools used are the Moses toolkit (Koehn et
al., 2007) for decoding and training, GIZA++ for
word alignment (Och and Ney, 2003), and SRILM
(Stolcke, 2002) for language models. A 5-gram
model is used for surface form, and a 7-gram
model is used for part-of-speech. To tune feature
weights minimum error rate training is used (Och,
2003), optimized against the Neva metric (Fors-
bom, 2003). Compound splitting is performed on
the training corpus, prior to training. Merging is
performed after translation, both for test, and in-
corporated into the tuning step.
4.1 Corpus
The system is trained and tested on the Europarl
corpus (Koehn, 2005). The training corpus is fil-
tered to remove sentences longer than 40 words
and with a length ratio of more than 1 to 7. The fil-
tered training corpus contains 701157 sentences.
500 sentences are used for tuning and 2000 sen-
tences for testing2. The German side of the train-
ing corpus is part-of-speech tagged using TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994).
The German corpus has nearly three times as
many types, i.e., unique tokens, as the English cor-
pus despite having a somewhat lower token count,
as shown for the training corpus in Table 3. Com-
pound splitting drastically reduces the number of
types, to around half or less, even though it is still
larger than for English. Marking on parts gives
15% more types than no marking.
2The test set is test2007 from the ACL 2008 Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, http://www.statmt.
org/wmt08/shared-task.html
5 Evaluation
Two types of evaluation are performed. The in-
fluence of the different merging algorithms on the
overall translation quality is evaluated, using two
automatic metrics. In addition the performance
of the merging algorithms are analysed in some
more detail. In both cases the effect of the POS
sequence model is also discussed. Even when the
POS sequence model is not used, part-of-speech
is carried through the translation process, so that it
can be used in the merging step.
5.1 Evaluation of Translation
Translations are evaluated on two automatic met-
rics: Bleu (Papineni et al, 2002) and PER, posi-
tion independent error-rate (Tillmann et al, 1997).
Case-sensitive versions of the metrics are used.
PER does not consider word order, it evaluates
the translation as a bag-of-word, and thus the sys-
tems without part-of-speech sequence models can
be expected to do well on PER. Note that PER is
an error-rate, so lower scores are better, whereas
higher scores are better for Bleu.
These metrics have disadvantages, for instance
because the same weight is given to all tokens,
both to complex compounds, and to function
words such as und (and). Bleu has been criticized,
see e.g. (Callison-Burch et al, 2006; Chiang et al,
2008).
Table 4 and 5 shows the translation results using
the different merging algorithms. For the systems
with POS sequence models the baseline performs
slightly better on Bleu, than the best systems with
merging. Without the POS sequence model, how-
ever, merging often leads to improvements, by up
to 0.48 Bleu points. For all systems it is advanta-
geous to use the POS sequence model.
For the baseline, the PER scores are higher
for the system without a POS sequence model,
which, compared to the Bleu scores, confirms
the fact that word order is improved by the se-
quence model. The systems with merging are
better than the baseline with the POS sequence
model. In all cases, however, the systems with
merging performs worse when not using a POS
sequence model, indicating that the part-of-speech
65
with POS-model without POS-model
unmarked sepmarked marked unmarked sepmarked marked
word-list 17.93 17.66 18.92 17.70 17.29 18.69
word-list + head-pos 19.34 19.07 19.60 19.13 18.63 19.38
compound-list 18.94 17.77 18.13 18.56 17.40 17.86
symbol 20.02 19.57 20.03 19.66 19.14 19.79
symbol + head-pos 20.02 19.55 20.01 19.75 19.12 19.78
symbol + word-list 20.03 19.72 20.02 19.76 19.29 19.79
POS-match 20.12 ? 20.03 19.84 ? 19.80
POS-match + coord 20.10 ? 19.97 19.85 ? 19.80
Table 4: Translation results for Bleu. Baseline with POS: 20.19, without POS: 19.66. Results that are
better than the baseline are marked with bold face.
with POS-model without POS-model
unmarked sepmarked marked unmarked sepmarked marked
word-list 29.88 28.64 28.19 30.27 29.94 28.71
word-list + head-pos 27.49 26.07 27.26 27.78 27.22 27.84
compound-list 26.92 27.99 29.25 27.46 29.07 29.74
symbol 27.21 26.13 26.95 27.70 27.40 27.61
symbol + head-pos 27.11 26.10 26.92 27.34 27.35 27.54
symbol + word-list 26.86 25.54 26.80 27.15 26.72 27.39
POS-match 26.99 ? 26.93 27.17 ? 27.53
POS-match + coord 27.10 ? 26.93 27.28 ? 27.53
Table 5: Translation results for PER. Baseline with POS: 27.22, without POS: 26.49. Results that are
better than the baseline are marked with bold face.
sequence model improves the order of compound
parts.
When measured by PER, the best results when
using merging are achieved by combining sym-
bols and word lists, but when measured by Bleu,
the POS-based algorithms are best. The simpler
symbol-based methods, often have similar scores,
and in a few cases even better. Adding treatment
of coordinated compounds to the POS-match al-
gorithm changes scores marginally in both direc-
tions. The word list based methods, however, gen-
erally give bad results. Using the head-pos restric-
tion improves it somewhat and using a compound
list instead of a word list gives different results in
the different markup schemes, but is still worse
than the best systems. This shows that some kind
of internal knowledge source, either symbols or
part-of-speech, is needed in order for merging to
be successful.
On both metrics, the marked and unmarked sys-
tem perform similarly. They are better than the
sepmarked system on Bleu, but the sepmarked sys-
tem is a lot better on PER, which is an indication
of that word order is problematic in the sepmarked
system, with its separate tokens to indicate com-
pounds.
5.2 Evaluation of Merging
The results of the different merging algorithms are
analysed to find the number of merges and the type
and quality of the merges. In addition I investigate
the effect of using a part-of-speech model on the
merging process.
Table 6 shows the reduction of words3 achieved
by applying the different algorithms. The word
list based method produces the highest number
of merges in all cases, performing many merges
where the parts are not recognized as such by the
system. The number of merges is greatly reduced
by the head-pos restriction. An investigation of the
output of the word list based method shows that
it often merges common words that incidentally
form a new word, such as bei (at) and der (the)
to beider (both). Another type of error is due to
errors in the corpus, such as the merge of umwelt
(environment) and und (and), which occurs in the
corpus, but is not a correct German word. These
two error types are often prohibited by the head-
pos restrictions. The compound list method avoids
these errors, but it does not merge compounds that
were not split by the splitting algorithm, due to a
high frequency, giving a very low number of splits
in some cases. There are small differences be-
tween the POS-match and symbol algorithms. Not
using the POS sequence model results in a higher
number of merges for all systems.
A more detailed analysis was performed of the
3The reduction of words is higher than the number of pro-
duced compounds, since each compound can have more than
two parts.
66
with POS-model without POS-model
unmarked sepmarked marked unmarked sepmarked marked
word-list 5275 5422 4866 5897 5589 5231
word-list + head-pos 4161 4412 4338 4752 4601 4661
compound-list 4460 4669 3253 5116 4850 3534
symbol 4431 4712 4332 5144 4968 4702
symbol + head-pos 4323 4671 4279 4832 4899 4594
symbol + word-list 4178 4436 4198 4753 4656 4530
POS-match 4363 ? 4310 4867 ? 4618
POS-match + coord 4361 ? 4310 4865 ? 4618
Table 6: Reduction of number of words by using different merging algorithms
with POS-model without POS-model
unmarked sepmarked marked unmarked sepmarked marked
Known 3339 3594 3375 3747 3762 3587
Novel
Good 168 176 105 104 245 93
Bad 20 97 8 10 64 7
Coordinated
Good 43 43 42 42 37 44
Bad 9 9 3 22 7 5
Single part
Good 6 ? 5 136 ? 33
Bad 11 ? 16 52 ? 46
Total 3596 3919 3554 4113 4115 3815
Table 7: Analysis of merged compounds
compounds parts in the output. The result of merg-
ing them are classified into four groups: merged
compounds that are known from the training cor-
pus (2a) or that are novel (2b), parts that were
not merged (2c), and parts of coordinated com-
pounds (2d). They are classified as bad if the com-
pound/part should have been merged with the next
word, does not fit into its context, or has the wrong
form.
(2) a. Naturschutzpolitik
nature protection policy
b. UN-Friedensplan
UN peace plan
c. * West- zulassen
west allow
d. Mittel- und Osteuropa
Central and Eastern Europe
For the unmarked and sepmarked systems, the
classification was based on the POS-match con-
straint, where parts are not merged if the POS-tags
do not match. POS-match cannot be used for the
sepmarked scheme, which has standard POS-tags.
Table 7 shows the results of this analysis. The
majority of the merged compounds are known
from the training corpus for all systems. There
is a marked difference between the two systems
that use POS-match, and the sepmarked system
that does not. The sepmarked system found the
highest number of novel compounds, but also have
the highest error rate for these, which shows that
it is useful to match POS-tags. The other two sys-
tems find fewer novel compounds, but also make
fewer mistakes. The marked system has more er-
rors for single parts than the other systems, mainly
beacuse the form of compound parts were not nor-
malized. Very few errors are due to reverse nor-
malization. In the unmarked system with a POS
sequence model, there were only three such errors,
which is better than the results on split data in Sec-
tion 3.2.
Generally the percentage of bad parts or com-
pounds is lower for the systems with a POS se-
quence model, which shows that the sequence
model is useful for the ordering of compound
parts. The number of single compound parts is
also much higher for the systems without a POS
sequence model. 80% of the merged compounds
in the unmarked system are binary, i.e., have two
parts, and the highest number of parts in a com-
pound is 5. The pattern for the other systems is
similar.
All systems produce fewer compounds than the
4472 in the German reference text. However, there
might also be compounds in the output, that were
not split and merged. These numbers are not di-
rectly comparable to the baseline system, and ap-
plying the POS-based splitting algorithm to trans-
lation output would not give a fair comparison.
An indication of the number of compounds in a
text is the number of long words. In the reference
text there are 351 words with at least 20 characters,
67
which will be used as the limit for long words. A
manual analysis showed that all these words are
compounds. The baseline system produces 209
long words. The systems with merging, discussed
above, all produce more long words than the base-
line, but less than the reference, between 263 and
307, with the highest number in the marked sys-
tem. The trend is the same for the systems with-
out a POS sequence model, but with slightly fewer
long words than for the systems with merging.
6 Discussion
The choice of merging method has a large impact
on the final translation result. For merging to be
successful some internal knowledge source, such
as part-of-speech or symbols is needed. The pure
word list based method performed the worst of
all systems on both metrics in most cases, which
was not surprising, considering the evaluation of
the merging algorithms on split data, where it was
shown that the word-list based methods merged
many parts that were not compounds.
The combination of symbols and word lists gave
good results on the automatic metrics. An advan-
tage of this method is that it is applicable for trans-
lation systems that do not use factors. However,
it has the drawback that it does not merge novel
compounds, and finds fewer compounds than most
other algorithms. The error analysis shows that
many valid compounds are discarded by this algo-
rithm. A method that both find novel compounds,
and that works well is that based on POS-match.
In its current form it needs a decoder that can han-
dle factored translation models. It would, how-
ever, be possible to use more elaborate symbols
with part-of-speech information, which would al-
low a POS-matching scheme, without the need of
factors.
The error analysis of merging performance
showed that merging works well, especially for
the two schemes where POS-matching is possi-
ble, where the proportion of errors is low. It
also showed that using a part-of-speech sequence
model was useful in order to get good results,
specifically since it increased the number of com-
pound parts that were placed correctly in the trans-
lation output.
The sepmarked scheme is best on the PER met-
ric it is worse on Bleu, and the error analysis
shows that it performs worse on merging than the
other systems. This could probably be improved
by the use of special POS-tags and POS-matching
for this scheme as well. It is hard to judge which
is best of the unmarked and marked scheme. They
perform similarly on the metrics, and there is no
clear difference in the error analysis. The un-
marked scheme does produce a somewhat higher
number of novel compounds, though. A disadvan-
tage of the marked scheme is that the compound
form is kept for single parts. A solution for this
could be to normalize parts in this scheme as well,
which could improve performance, since reverse
normalization performance is good on translation
data.
The systems with splitting and merging have
more long words than the baseline, which indi-
cates that they are more successful in creating
compounds. However, they still have fewer long
words than the reference text, indicating the need
of more work on producing compounds.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this study I have shown that the strategy used
for merging German compound parts in transla-
tion output influences translation results to a large
extent. For merging to be successful, it needs
some internal knowledge source, carried through
the translation process, such as symbols or part-
of- speech. The overall best results were achieved
by using matching for part-of-speech.
One factor that affects merging, which was not
explored in this work, is the quality of splitting.
If splitting produces less erroneously split com-
pounds than the current method, it is possible
that merging also can produce better results, even
though it was not clear from the error analysis that
bad splits were a problem. A number of more ac-
curate splitting strategies have been suggested for
different tasks, see e.g. Alfonseca et al (2008),
that could be explored in combination with merg-
ing for machine translation.
I have compared the performance of different
merging strategies in one language, German. It
would be interesting to investigate these meth-
ods for other compounding languages as well. I
also want to explore translation between two com-
pounding languages, where splitting and merging
would be performed on both languages, not only
on one language as in this study.
68
References
Enrique Alfonseca, Slaven Bilac, and Stefan Phar-
ies. 2008. Decompounding query keywords from
compounding languages. In Proceedings of ACL-
08: HLT, Short Papers, pages 253?256, Columbus,
Ohio.
Andre? Berton, Pablo Fetter, and Peter Regel-
Brietzmann. 1996. Compound words in large-
vocabulary German speech recognition systems. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), pages
1165?1168, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in
machine translation research. In Proceedings of the
11th Conference of EACL, pages 249?256, Trento,
Italy.
David Chiang, Steve DeNeefe, Yee Seng Chan, and
Hwee Tou Ng. 2008. Decomposability of transla-
tion metrics for improved evaluation and efficient al-
gorithms. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 610?619, Honolulu, Hawaii.
I?lknur Durgar El-Kahlout and Kemal Oflazer. 2006.
Initial explorations in English to Turkish statistical
machine translation. In HLT-NAACL 2006: Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 7?14, New York, NY.
Eva Forsbom. 2003. Training a super model look-
alike: featuring edit distance, n-gram occurrence,
and one reference translation. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Machine Translation Evaluation:
Towards Systemizing MT Evaluation, pages 29?36,
New Orleans, Louisiana.
Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored trans-
lation models. In Proceedings of the Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 868?876, Prague, Czech Republic.
Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
methods for compound splitting. In Proceedings of
the 10th Conference of EACL, pages 187?193, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
demonstration session, Prague, Czech Republic.
Philipp Koehn, Abhishek Arun, and Hieu Hoang.
2008. Towards better machine translation quality for
the German-English language pairs. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation, pages 139?142, Columbus, Ohio.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: a parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
MT Summit X, Phuket, Thailand.
Stefan Langer. 1998. Zur Morphologie und Seman-
tik von Nominalkomposita. In Tagungsband der
4. Konferenz zur Verarbeitung natu?rlicher Sprache
(KONVENS), pages 83?97, Bonn, Germany.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of ACL, pages 160?167, Sap-
poro, Japan.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 311?
318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Maja Popovic?, Daniel Stein, and Hermann Ney. 2006.
Statistical machine translation of German compound
words. In Proceedings of FinTAL ? 5th Interna-
tional Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 616?624, Turku, Finland. Springer Ver-
lag, LNCS.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, Manchester, UK.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (ICSLP), pages 901?904, Denver, Col-
orado.
Sara Stymne and Maria Holmqvist. 2008. Process-
ing of Swedish compounds for phrase-based statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Machine Translation Conference (EAMT08),
pages 180?189, Hamburg, Germany.
Sara Stymne. 2008. German compounds in factored
statistical machine translation. In Aarne Ranta and
Bengt Nordstro?m, editors, Proceedings of GoTAL ?
6th International Conference on Natural Language
Processing, pages 464?475, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Springer Verlag, LNCS/LNAI.
C. Tillmann, S. Vogel, H. Ney, A. Zubiaga, and
H. Sawaf. 1997. Accelerated DP based search for
statistical translation. In Proceedings of the 5 th Eu-
ropean Conference on Speech Communication and
Technology, pages 2667?2670, Rhodes, Greece.
Sami Virpioja, Jaako J.Va?yrynen, Mathias Creutz, and
Markus Sadeniemi. 2007. Morphology-aware sta-
tistical machine translation based on morphs in-
duced in an unsupervised manner. In Proceedings of
MT Summit XI, pages 491?498, Copenhagen, Den-
mark.
69
