Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 130?138,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Lexical Morphology in Machine Translation: a Feasibility Study 
 
Bruno Cartoni 
University of Geneva 
cartonib@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a feasibility study for im-
plementing lexical morphology principles in a 
machine translation system in order to solve 
unknown words. Multilingual symbolic treat-
ment of word-formation is seducing but re-
quires an in-depth analysis of every step that 
has to be performed. The construction of a 
prototype is firstly presented, highlighting the 
methodological issues of such approach. Sec-
ondly, an evaluation is performed on a large 
set of data, showing the benefits and the limits 
of such approach. 
1 Introduction 
Formalising morphological information to deal 
with morphologically constructed unknown 
words in machine translation seems attractive, 
but raises many questions about the resources 
and the prerequisites (both theoretical and practi-
cal) that would make such symbolic treatment 
efficient and feasible. In this paper, we describe 
the prototype we built to evaluate the feasibility 
of such approach. We focus on the knowledge 
required to build such system and on its evalua-
tion. First, we delimit the issue of neologisms 
amongst the other unknown words (section 2), 
and we present the few related work done in 
NLP research (section 3). We then explain why 
implementing morphology in the context of ma-
chine translation (MT) is a real challenge and 
what kind of aspects need to be taken into ac-
count (section 4), and we show that translating 
constructed neologisms is not only a mechanical 
decomposition but requires more fine-grained 
analysis. We then describe the methodology de-
veloped to build up a prototyped translator of 
constructed neologisms (section 5) with all the 
extensions that have to be made, especially in 
terms of resources. Finally, we concentrate on 
the evaluation of each step of the process and on 
the global evaluation of the entire approach (sec-
tion 6). This last evaluation highlights a set of 
methodological criteria that are needed to exploit 
lexical morphology in machine translation. 
2 Issues 
Unknown words are a problematic issue in any 
NLP tool. Depending on the studies (Ren and  
Perrault 1992; Maurel 2004), it is estimated that 
between 5 and 10 % of the words of a text writ-
ten in ?standard? language are unknown to lexi-
cal resources. In a MT context (analysis-transfer-
generation), unknown words remain not only 
unanalysed but they cannot be translated, and 
sometimes they also stop the translation of the 
whole sentence. 
Usually, three main groups of unknown words 
are distinguished: proper names, errors, and ne-
ologisms, and the possible solution highly de-
pends on the type of unknown word to be solved. 
In this paper, we concentrate on neologisms 
which are constructed following a morphological 
process. 
The processing of unknown ?constructed ne-
ologisms? in NLP can be done by simple guess-
ing (based on the sequence of final letters). This 
option can be efficient enough when the task is 
only tagging, but in a multilingual context (like 
in MT), dealing with constructed neologisms 
implies a transfer and a generation process that 
require a more complex formalisation and im-
plementation. In the project presented in this pa-
per, we propose to implement lexical morphol-
ogy phenomena in MT. 
3 Related work 
Implementing lexical morphology in a MT con-
text has seldom been investigated in the past, 
probably because many researchers share the 
following view: ?Though the idea of providing 
rules for translating derived words may seem 
attractive, it raises many problems and so it is 
currently more of a research goal for MT than a 
practical possibility? (Arnold, Balkan et al 
1994). As far as we know, the only related pro-
ject is described in (Gdaniec, Manandise et al 
2001), where they describe a project of imple-
mentation of rules for dealing with constructed 
words in the IBM MT system. 
130
Even in monolingual contexts, lexical mor-
phology is not very often implemented in NLP. 
Morphological analyzers like the ones described 
in (Porter 1980; Byrd 1983; Byrd, Klavans et al 
1989; Namer 2005) propose more or less deeper 
lexical analyses, to exploit that dimension of the 
lexicon. 
4 Proposed solution 
Since morphological processes are regular and 
exist in many languages, we propose an approach 
where constructed neologisms in source lan-
guage (SL) can be analysed and their translation 
generated in a target language (TL) through the 
transfer of the constructional information. 
For example, a constructed neologism in one 
language (e.g. ricostruire in Italian) should 
firstly be analysed, i.e. find (i) the rule that pro-
duced it (in this case <reiteration rule>) and (ii) 
the lexeme-base which it is constructed on 
(costruire, with all morphosyntactic and transla-
tional information). Secondly, through a transfer 
mechanism (of both the rule and the base), a 
translation can be generated by rebuilding a con-
structed word, (in French reconstruire, Eng: to 
rebuild). On a theoretical side, the whole process 
is formalised into bilingual Lexeme Formation 
Rules (LFR), as explained below in section 4.3. 
Although this approach seems to be simple 
and attractive, feasibility studies and evaluation 
should be carefully performed. To do so, we built 
a system to translate neologisms from one lan-
guage into another. In order to delimit the project 
and to concentrate on methodological issues, we 
focused on the prefixation process and on two 
related languages (Italian and French). Prefixa-
tion is, after suffixation, the most productive 
process of neologism, and prefixes can be more 
easily processed in terms of character strings. 
Regarding the language, we choose to deal with 
the translation of Italian constructed neologisms 
into French. These two languages are historically 
and morphologically related and are conse-
quently more ?neighbours? in terms of neolo-
gism coinage. 
In the following, we firstly describe precisely 
the phenomena that have to be formalized and 
then the prototype built up for the experiment. 
4.1 Phenomena to be formalized 
Like in any MT project, the formalisation work 
has to face different issues of contrastivity, i.e. 
highlighting the divergences and the similarities 
between the two languages. 
In the two languages chosen for the experi-
ment, few divergences were found in the way 
they construct prefixed neologisms. However, in 
some cases, although the morphosemantic proc-
ess is similar, the item used to build it up (i.e. the 
affixes) is not always the same. For example, to 
coin nouns of the spatial location ?before?, 
where Italian uses the prefix retro, French uses 
r?tro and arri?re. A deeper analysis shows that 
Italian retro is used with all types of nouns, 
whereas in French, r?tro only forms processual 
nouns (derived from verbs, like r?trovision, 
r?troprojection). For the other type of nouns 
(generally locative nouns), arri?re is used (ar-
ri?re-cabine, arri?re-cour). 
Other problematic issues appear when there is 
more than one prefix for the same LFR. For ex-
ample, the rule for ?indeterminate plurality? pro-
vides in both languages a set of two prefixes 
(multi/pluri in Italian and multi/pluri in French) 
with no known restrictions for selecting one or 
the other (e.g. both pluridimensionnel and multi-
dimensionnel are acceptable in French). For 
these cases, further empirical research have to be 
performed to identify restrictions on the rule. 
Another important divergence is found in the 
prefixation of relational adjectives. Relational 
adjectives are derived from nouns and designate 
a relation between the entity denoted by the noun 
they are derived from and the entity denoted by 
the noun they modify. Consequently, in a pre-
fixation such as anticostituzionale, the formal 
base is a relational adjective (costituzionale), but 
the semantic base is the noun the adjective is de-
rived from (costituzione). The constructed word 
anticostituzionale can be paraphrased as ?against 
the constitution?. Moreover, when the relational 
adjective does not exist, prefixation is possible 
on a nominal base to create an adjective (squadra 
antidroga). In cases where the adjective does 
exist, both forms are possible and seem to be 
equally used, like in the Italian collaborazione 
interuniversit? / collaborazione interuniversi-
taria. From a contrastive point of view, the pre-
fixation of relational adjectives exists in both 
languages (Italian and French) and in both these 
languages prefixing a noun to create an adjective 
is also possible (anticostituzione (Adj)). But we 
notice an important discrepancy in the possibility 
of constructing relational adjectives (a rough es-
timation performed on a large bilingual diction-
ary (Garzanti IT-FR (2006)) shows that more 
than 1 000 Italian relational adjectives have no 
equivalent in French (and are generally translated 
with a prepositional phrase).  
131
All these divergences require an in-dept analy-
sis but can be overcome only if the formalism 
and the implementation process are done follow-
ing a rigorous methodology. 
4.2 The prototype 
In order to evaluate the approach described 
above and to concretely investigate the ins and 
outs of such implementation, we built up a proto-
type of a machine translation system specialized 
for constructed neologisms. This prototype is 
composed of two modules. The first one checks 
every unknown word to see if it is potentially 
constructed, and if so, performs a morphological 
analysis to individualise the lexeme-base and the 
rule that coined it. The second module is the ac-
tual translation module, which analyses the con-
structed neologism and generates a possible 
translation. 
 
Figure 1: Prototype 
The whole prototype relies on one hand on 
lexical resources (two monolingual and one bi-
lingual) and on a set of bilingual Lexeme Forma-
tion Rules (LFR). These two sets of information 
helps the analysis and the generation steps. When 
a neologism is looked-up, the system checks if it 
is constructed with one of the LFRs and if the 
lexeme-base is in the lexicon. If it is the case, the 
transfer brings the relevant morphological and 
lexical information in the target language. The 
generation step constructs the translation equiva-
lent, using the information provided by the LFR 
and the lexical resources. Consequently, the 
whole system relies on the quality of both the 
lexical resources and the LFR. 
4.3 Bilingual Lexeme Formation Rules  
The whole morphological process in the system 
is formalised through bilingual Lexeme Forma-
tion Rules. Their representation is inspired by 
(Fradin 2003) as shown in figure 2 in the rule of 
reiterativity. 
Such rules match together two monolingual 
rules (to be read in columns). Each monolingual 
rule describes a process that applies a series of 
instructions on the different sections of the lex-
eme : the surface section (G and F), the syntactic 
category (SX) and the semantic (S) sections. In 
this theoretical framework, affixation is only one 
of the instructions of the rule (the graphemic and 
phonological modification), and consequently, 
affixes are called ?exponent? of the rule. 
 Italian French 
 input input 
(G) Vit Vfr 
(F) /Vit/ /Vfr/ 
(SX) cat :v cat :v 
(S) Vit'(...) Vfr'(...) 
 
 ?  
 output output 
(G) riVit reVfr 
(F) /ri/?/Vit/ /??/?/Vfr/ 
(SX) cat :v cat :v  
(S) reiterativity (Vit'(...)) reiterativity (Vfr'(...)) 
where Vit' = Vfr', translation equivalent 
This formalisation is particularly useful in a 
bilingual context for rules that have more than 
one prefix in both languages: more than one affix 
can be declared in one single rule, the selection 
being made according to different constraints or 
restrictions. For example, the rule for ?indeter-
minate plurality? explained in section 4.1 can be 
formalised as follows: 
 Italian French 
 input input 
(G) Xit Xfr 
(F) /Xit/ /Xfr/ 
(SX) cat :n cat :n 
(S) Xit'(...) Xfr'(...) 
 
 ?  
 output output 
(G) multi/pluriXit multi/pluriXfr 
(F) /multi/pluri/?/Xit/ /m?lti/plyri/?/Xfr/ 
(SX) cat :n cat :n  
(S) indet. plur. (Xit'(...)) indet. plur. (Xfr'(...)) 
where Xit' = Xfr', translation equivalent 
Figure 3: Bilingual LFR of indeterminate plurality 
In this kind of rules with ?multiple expo-
nents?, the two possible prefixes are declared in 
the surface section (G and F). The selection is a 
monolingual issue and cannot be done at the 
theoretical level. 
Such rules have been formalised and imple-
mented for the 56 productive prefixes of Italian 
(Iacobini 2004)1, with their French translation 
equivalent. However, finding the translation 
equivalent for each rule requires specific studies 
                                                
1
 i.e. a, ad, anti, arci, auto, co, contro, de, dis, ex, extra, in, 
inter, intra, iper, ipo, macro, maxi, mega, meta, micro, mini, 
multi, neo, non, oltre, onni, para, pluri, poli, post, pre, pro, 
retro, ri,  s, semi, sopra, sotto, sovra, stra, sub, super, trans, 
ultra, vice, mono, uni, bi, di, tri, quasi, pseudo. 
 
IT neologism 
FR neologism 
analysis 
LFR 
generation 
Lexica 
Figure 2: Bilingual LFR of reiterativity 
132
of the morphological system of both languages in 
a contrastive perspective. 
The following section briefly summarises the 
contrastive analysis that has been performed to 
acquire this type of contrastive knowledge. 
4.4 Knowledge acquisition of bilingual LFR 
As in any MT system, the acquisition of bilin-
gual knowledge is an important issue. In mor-
phology, the method should be particularly accu-
rate to prevent any methodological bias. To for-
malise translation rules for prefixed neologisms, 
we adopt a meaning-to-form approach, i.e. dis-
covering how a constructed meaning is morpho-
logically realised in two languages. 
We build up a tertium comparationis (a neu-
tral platform, see (James 1980) for details) that 
constitute a semantic typology of prefixation 
processes. This typology aims to be universal 
and therefore applicable to all the languages con-
cerned. On a practical point of view, the typol-
ogy has been built up by summing up various 
descriptions of prefixation in various languages 
(Montermini 2002; Iacobini 2004; Amiot 2005). 
We end up with six main classes: location, 
evaluation, quantitative, modality, negation and 
ingressive. The classes are then subdivided ac-
cording to sub-meanings: for example, location 
is subdivided in temporal and spatial, and within 
spatial location, a distinction is made between 
different positions (before, above, below, in 
front, ?).  
Prefixes of both languages are then literally 
?projected? (or classified) onto the tertium. For 
each terminal sub-class, we have a clear picture 
of the prefixes involved in both languages. For 
example, the LFR presented in figure 1 is the 
result of the projection of the Italian prefix (ri) 
and the French one (re) on the sub-class reitera-
tivity, which is a sub-class of modality. 
At the end of the comparison, we end up with 
more than 100 LFRs (one rule can be reiterated 
according the different input and output catego-
ries). From a computing point of view, con-
straints have to be specified and the lexicon has 
to be adapted consequently. 
5 Implementation 
Implementation of the LFR is set up as a data-
base, from where the program takes the informa-
tion to perform the analysis, the transfer and the 
generation of the neologisms. In our approach, 
LFRs are simply declared in a tab format data-
base, easily accessible and modifiable by the 
user, as shown below: 
 
Figure 4: Implemented LFRs 
Implemented LFRs describe (i) the surface 
form of the Italian prefix to be analysed, (ii) the 
category of the base, (iii) the category of the de-
rived lexeme (the output), (iv) a reference to the 
rule implied and (v) the French prefix(es) for the 
generation. 
The surface form in (i) should sometimes take 
into account the different allomorphs of one pre-
fix. Consequently, the rule has to be reiterated in 
order to be able to recognize any forms (e.g. the 
prefix in has different forms according to the ini-
tial letter of the base, and four rules have to be 
implemented for the four allomorphs (in, il, im, 
ir)). In some other cases, the initial consonant is 
doubled, and the algorithm has to take this phe-
nomenon into account.  
In (ii), the information of the category of the 
base has been ?overspecified?, to differentiate 
qualitative and relational adjectives, and deverbal 
nouns and the other ones (a_rel/a or 
n_dev/n). These overspecifications have two 
objectives: optimizing the analysis performance 
(reducing the noise of homographic character 
strings that look like constructed neologisms but 
that are only misspellings - see below in the 
evaluation section), and refining the analysis, i.e. 
selecting the appropriate LFR and, consequently, 
the appropriate translation. 
To identify relational adjectives and deverbal 
nouns, the monolingual lexicon that supports the 
analysis step has to be extended. Thereafter, we 
present the symbolic method we used to perform 
such extension. 
5.1 Extension of the monolingual lexicon 
Our MT prototype relies on lexical resources: it 
aims at dealing with unknown words that are not 
in a Reference lexicon and these unknown words 
are analyzed with lexical material that is in this 
lexicon. 
From a practical point of view, our prototype 
is based on two very large monolingual data-
arci a a 2.1.2 archi 
arci n n 2.1.2 archi 
[?] 
pro a_rel a 1.1.10 pro 
pro n a 1.1.10 pro 
[?] 
ri v v 6.1 re 
ri n_dev n 6.1 re 
[?] 
 
133
bases (Mmorph (Bouillon, Lehmann et al 1998)) 
for Italian and French, that contain only morpho-
syntactic information, and on one bilingual lexi-
con that has been built semi-automatically for the 
use of the experiment. But the monolingual 
lexica have to be adapted to provide specific in-
formation necessary for dealing with morpho-
logical process. 
As stated above, identifying the prefix and the 
base is not enough to provide a proper analysis 
of constructed neologisms which is detailed 
enough to be translated. The main information 
that is essential for the achievement of the proc-
ess is the category of the base, which has to be 
sometimes ?overspecified?. Obviously, the Ital-
ian reference lexicon does not contain such in-
formation. Consequently, we looked for a simple 
way to automatically extend the Italian lexicon. 
For example, we looked for a way to automati-
cally link relational adjectives with their noun 
bases. 
Our approach tries to take advantage of only 
the lexicon, without the use of any larger re-
sources. To extend the Italian lexicon, we simply 
built a routine based on the typical suffixes of 
relational adjectives (in Italian:  -ale,  -are, -ario, 
-ano, -ico, -ile, -ino, -ivo, -orio, -esco, -asco, 
-iero, -izio, -aceo (Wandruszka 2004)). For every 
adjective ending with one of these suffixes, the 
routine looks up if the potential base corresponds 
to a noun in the rest of the lexicon (modulo some 
morphographemic variations). For example, the 
routine is able to find links between adjectives 
and base nouns such as ambientale and ambiente, 
aziendale and azienda, cortisonica and cortisone 
or contestuale and contesto. Unfortunately, this 
kind of automatic implementation does not find 
links between adjectives made from the learned 
root of the noun, (prandiale  pranzo, bellico 
 guerra). 
This automatic extension has been evaluated. 
Out of a total of more than 68 000 adjective 
forms in the lexicon, we identified 8 466 rela-
tional adjectives. From a ?recall? perspective, it 
is not easy to evaluate the coverage of this exten-
sion because of the small number of resources 
containing relational adjectives that could be 
used as a gold standard. 
A similar extension is performed for the 
deverbal aspect, for the lexicon should also dis-
tinguish deverbal noun. From a morphological 
point of view, deverbalisation can be done trough 
two main productive processes: conversion (a 
command  to command) and suffixation. If the 
first one is relatively difficult to implement, the 
second one can be easily captured using the typi-
cal suffixes of such processes. Consequently, we 
considere that any noun ending with suffixes like 
ione, aggio,or mento are deverbal. 
Thanks to this extended lexicon, overspecified 
input categories (like a_rel for relational ad-
jective or n_dev for deverbal noun) can be 
stated and exploited in the implemented LFR as 
shown in figure 4. 
5.2 Applying LFRs to translate neologisms 
Once the prototyped MT system was built and 
the lexicon adapted, it was applied to a set of 
neologisms (see section 6 for details). For exam-
ple, unknown Italian neologisms such as arci-
contento, ridescrizione, deitalianizzare, were 
automatically translated in French: archi-content, 
redescription, d?sitalianiser. 
The divergences existing in the LFR of <loca-
tive position before> are correctly dealt with, 
thanks to the correct analysis of the base. For 
example, in the neologism retrobottega, the lex-
eme-base is correctly identified as a locative 
noun, and the French equivalent is constructed 
with the appropriate prefix (arri?re-boutique), 
while in retrodiffusione, the base is analysed as 
deverbal, and the French equivalent is correctly 
generated (r?trodiffusion). 
For the analysis of relational adjectives, the 
overspecification of the LFRs and the extension 
of the lexicon are particularly useful when there 
is no French equivalent for Italian relational ad-
jectives because the corresponding construction 
is not possible in the French morphological sys-
tem. For example, the Italian relational adjective 
aziendale (from the noun azienda, Eng: com-
pany) has no adjectival equivalent in French. The 
Italian prefixed adjective interaziendale can only 
be translated in French by using a noun as the 
base (interentreprise). This translation equivalent 
can be found only if the base noun of the Italian 
adjective is found (interaziendale, in-
ter+aziendale  azienda, azienda = entreprise, 
 interentreprise). The same process has been 
applied for the translation of precongressuale, 
post-transfuzionale by pr?congr?s, post-
transfusion. 
Obviously, all the mechanisms formalised in 
this prototype should be carefully evaluated. 
6 Evaluation 
The advantages of this approach should be care-
fully evaluated from two points of view: the 
134
evaluation of the performance of each step and of 
the feasibility and portability of the system. 
6.1 corpus 
As previously stated, the system is intended to 
solve neologisms that are unknown from a lexi-
con with LFRs that exploit information contained 
in the lexicon. To evaluate the performance of 
our system, we built up a corpus of unknown 
words by confronting a large Italian corpus from 
journalistic domain (La Repubblica Online 
(Baroni, Bernardini et al 2004)) with our refer-
ence lexicon for this language (see section 4.1 
above). We obtained a set of unknown words 
that contains neologisms, but also proper names 
and erroneous items. This set is submitted to the 
various steps of the system, where constructed 
neologisms are recognised, analysed and trans-
lated.  
6.2 Evaluation of the performance of the 
analysis 
As we previously stated, the analysis step can 
actually be divided into two tasks. First of all, the 
program has to identify, among the unknown 
words, which of them are morphologically con-
structed (and so analysable by the LFRs); sec-
ondly, the program has to analyse the constructed 
neologisms, i.e matching them with the correct 
LFRs and isolating the correct base-words. 
For the first task, we obtain a list of 42 673 
potential constructed neologisms. Amongst 
those, there are a number of erroneous words that 
are homographic to a constructed neologism. For 
example, the item progesso, a misspelling of 
progresso (Eng: progress), is erroneously ana-
lysed as the prefixation of gesso (eng: plaster) 
with the LFR in pro. 
In the second part of the processing, LFRs are 
concretely applied to the potential neologisms 
(i.e. constraints on categories and on over-
specified category, phonological constraints). 
This stage retains 30 376 neologisms. A manual 
evaluation is then performed on these outputs. 
Globally, 71.18 % of the analysed words are ac-
tually neologisms. But the performance is not the 
same for every rule. Most of them are very effi-
cient: among all the rules for the 56 Italian pre-
fixes, only 7 cause too many erroneous analyses, 
and should be excluded - mainly rules with very 
short prefixes (like a, di, s), that cause mistakes 
due to homograph. 
As explained above, some of the rules are 
strongly specified, (i.e. very constrained), so we 
also evaluate the consequence of some con-
straints, not only in terms of improved perform-
ance but also in terms of loss of information. In-
deed, some of the constraints specified in the rule 
exclude some neologisms (false negatives). For 
example, the modality LFRs with co and ri have 
been overspecified, requiring deverbal base-noun 
(and not just a noun). Adding this constraint im-
proves the performance of the analysis (i.e. the 
number of correct lexemes analysed), respec-
tively from 69.48 % to 96 % and from 91.21 % 
to 99.65 %. Obviously, the number of false nega-
tives (i.e. correct neologisms excluded by the 
constraint) is very large (between 50 % and 75 % 
of the excluded items). 
In this situation, the question is to decide 
whether the gain obtained by the constraints (the 
improved performance) is more important than 
the un-analysed items. In this context, we prefer 
to keep the more constrained rule. Un-analysed 
items remain unknown words, and the output of 
the analysis is almost perfect, which is an impor-
tant condition for the rest of the process (i.e. 
transfer and generation). 
6.3 Evaluation of the performance of the 
generation 
Generation can also be evaluated according to 
two points of view: the correctness of the gener-
ated items, and the improvement brought by the 
solved words to the quality of the translated sen-
tence. 
To evaluate the first aspect, many procedures 
can be put in place. The correctness of con-
structed words could be evaluated by human 
judges, but this kind of approach would raise 
many questions and biases: people that are not 
expert of morphology would judge the correct-
ness according to their degree of acceptability 
which varies between judges and is particularly 
sensitive when neologism is concerned. Ques-
tions of homogeneity in terms of knowledge of 
the domain and of the language are also raised. 
Because of these difficulties, we prefer to cen-
tre the evaluation on the existence of the gener-
ated neologisms in a corpus. For neologisms, the 
most adequate corpus is the Internet, even if the 
use of such an uncontrolled resource requires 
some precautions (see (Fradin, Dal et al 2007) 
for a complete debate on the use of web re-
sources in morphology). 
Concretely, we use the robot Golf (Thomas 
2008) that sends each generated neologism auto-
matically as a request on a search engine (here 
Google?) and reports the number of occurrences 
as captured by Google. This robot can be param-
135
eterized, for instance by selecting the appropriate 
language. 
Because of the uncontrolled aspect of the re-
source, we distinguish three groups of reported 
frequencies: 0 occurrence, less than 5 occur-
rences and more than 5. The threshold of 5 helps 
to distinguish confirmed existence of neologism 
(> 5) from unstable appearances (< 5), that are 
closed to hapax phenomena. 
The table below summarizes some results for 
some prefixed neologisms. 
 
Prefix tested forms 0 occ.  < 5 occ. > 5 occ. 
ri  391 8.2 % 5.6 % 86.2 % 
anti 1120 8.6 % 19.9 % 71.5 % 
de 114 2.6 % 3.5 % 93.9 % 
super 951 28 % 30 % 42 % 
pro 166 6.6 % 29.5 % 63.9 % 
?     
Table 1 : Some evaluation results 
Globally, most of the generated prefixed ne-
ologisms have been found in corpus, and most of 
the time with more than 5 occurrences. Unfound 
items are very useful, because they help to point 
out difficulties or miss-formalised processes. 
Most of the unfound neologisms were ill-
analysed items in Italian. Others were due to 
misuses of hyphens in the generation. Indeed, in 
the program, we originally implemented the use 
of the hyphen in French following the estab-
lished norm (i.e. a hyphen is required when the 
prefix ends with a vowel and the base starts with 
a vowel). But following this ?norm?, some forms 
were not found in corpus (for example antibra-
connier (Eng: antipoacher) reports 0 occur-
rence). When re-generated with a hyphen, it re-
ports 63 occurrences. This last point shows that 
in neology, usage does not stick always to the 
norm. 
The other problem raised by unknown words 
is that they decrease the quality of the translation 
of the entire sentence. To evaluate the impact of 
the translated unknown words on the translated 
sentence, we built up a test-suite of sentences, 
each of them containing one prefixed neologism 
(in bold in table 2). We then submitted the sen-
tences to a commercial MT system (Systran?) 
and recorded the translation and counted the 
number of mistakes (FR1 in table 2 below). On a 
second step, we ?feed? the lexicon of the transla-
tion system with the neologisms and their trans-
lation (generated by our prototype) and resubmit 
the same sentences to the system (FR2 in table 
2). 
For the 60 sentences of the test-suit (21 with 
an unknown verb, 19 with an unknown adjective 
and 20 with a unknown noun), we then counted 
the number of errors before and after the intro-
duction of the neologisms in the lexicon, as 
shown below (errors are underlined). 
IT Le defiscalizzazioni logiche di 17 Euro 
sono previste 
 
FR1 Le defiscalizzazioni logiques de 17 Euro 
sont pr?vus 
2 
FR2 Les d?fiscalisations logiques de 17 Euro 
sont pr?vues 
0 
Table 2: Example of a tested sentence 
For a global view of the evaluation, we classi-
fied in the table below the number of sentences 
according to the number of errors ?removed? 
thanks to the resolution of the unknown word. 
 
 0 -1 -2 -3 
Nouns  10 8 2 
Adjectives  18 1  
Verbs 2 14 3 2 
Table 3: Reduction of the number of errors/sentence 
Most of the improvements concern only a re-
duction of 1, i.e. only the unknown word has 
been solved. But it should be noticed that im-
provement is more impressive when the un-
known words are nouns or verbs, probably be-
cause these categories influence much more 
items in the sentence in terms of agreement. 
In two cases (involving verbs), errors are cor-
rected because of the translation of the unknown 
words, but at the same time, two other errors are 
caused by it. This problem comes from the fact 
that adding new words in the lexicon of the sys-
tem requires sometimes more information (such 
as valency) to provide a proper syntaxctic gen-
eration of the sentence. 
6.4 Evaluation of feasibility and portability 
The relatively good results obtained by the proto-
type are very encouraging. They mainly show 
that if the analysis step is performed correctly, 
the rest of the process can be done with not much 
further work. But at the end of such a feasibility 
study, it is useful to look objectively for the con-
ditions that make such results possible. 
The good quality of the result can be ex-
plained by the important preliminary work done 
(i) in the extension/specialisation of the lexicon, 
and (ii) in the setting up of the LFRs. The acqui-
sition of the contrastive knowledge in a MT con-
text is indeed the most essential issue in this kind 
of approach. The methodology we proposed here 
for setting these LFR proves to be useful for the 
136
linguist to acquire this specific type of knowl-
edge. 
Lexical morphology is often considered as not 
regular enough to be exploited in NLP. The 
evaluation performed in this study shows that it 
is not the case, especially in neologism. But in 
some cases, it is no use to ask for the impossible, 
and simply give up implementing the most inef-
ficient rules. 
We also show that the efficient analysis step is 
probably the main condition to make the whole 
system work. This step should be implemented 
with as much constraints as possible, to provide 
an output without errors. Such implementation 
requires proper evaluation of the impact of every 
constraint. 
It should also be stated that such implementa-
tion (and especially knowledge acquisition) is 
time-consuming, and one can legitimately ask if 
machine-learning methods would do the job. The 
number of LFRs being relatively restrained in 
producing neologisms, we can say that the effort 
of manual formalisation is worthwhile for the 
benefits that should be valuable on the long term. 
Another aspect of the feasibility is closely related 
to questions of ?interoperability?, because such 
implementation should be done within existing 
MT programs, and not independently as it was 
for this feasibility study. 
Other questions of portability should also be 
considered. As we stated, we chose two morpho-
logically related languages on purpose: they pre-
sent less divergences to deal with and allow con-
centrating on the method. However, the proposed 
method (especially that contrastive knowledge 
acquisition) can clearly be ported to another pair 
of languages (at least inflexional languages). It 
should also be noticed that the same approach 
can be applied to other types of construction. We 
mainly think here of suffixation, but one can 
imagine to use LFRs with other elements of for-
mation (like combining forms, that tend to be 
very ?international?, and consequently the mate-
rial for many neologisms). Moreover, the way 
the rules are formalised and the algorithm de-
signed allow easy reversibility and modification. 
7 Conclusion 
This feasibility study presents the benefit of im-
plementing lexical morphology principles in a 
MT system. It presents all the issues raised by 
formalization and implementation, and shows in 
a quantitative manner how those principles are 
useful to partly solve unknown words in machine 
translation. 
From a broader perspective, we show the 
benefits of such implementation in a MT system, 
but also the method that should be used to for-
malise this special kind of information. We also 
emphasize the need for in-dept work of knowl-
edge acquisition before actually building up the 
system, especially because contrastive morpho-
logical data are not as obvious as other linguistic 
dimensions. 
Moreover, the evaluation step clearly states 
that the analysis module is the most important 
issue in dealing with lexical morphology in mul-
tilingual context. 
The multilingual approach of morphology also 
paves the way for other researches, either in rep-
resentation of word-formation or in exploitation 
of multilingual dimension in NLP systems. 
References  
(2006) Garzanti francese : francese-italiano, italiano-
francese. I grandi dizionari Garzanti. Milano, Gar-
zanti Linguistica. 
Amiot, D. (2005) Between compounding and deriva-
tion: elements of word formation corresponding to 
prepositions. Morphology and its Demarcations. W. 
U. Dressler, R. Dieter and F. Rainer. Amsterdam, 
John Benjamins Publishing Company: 183-195. 
Arnold, D., L. Balkan, R. L. Humphrey, S. Meijer and 
L. Sadler (1994) Machine Translation.  An Intro-
ductory Guide. Manchester, NCC Blackwell. 
Baroni, M., S. Bernardini, F. Comastri, L. Piccioni, A. 
Volpi, G. Aston and M. Mazzoleni (2004) Introduc-
ing the "la Repubblica" corpus: A large, annotated, 
TEI(XML)-compliant corpus of newspaper Italian. 
Proceedings of LREC 2004, Lisbon: 1771-1774. 
Bouillon, P., S. Lehmann, S. Manzi and D. Petitpierre 
(1998) D?veloppement de lexiques ? grande 
?chelle. Proceedings of Colloque des journ?es LTT 
de TUNIS, Tunis: 71-80. 
Byrd, R. J. (1983) Word Formation in Natural Lan-
guage Processing Systems. IJCAI: 704-706. 
Byrd, R. J., J. L. Klavans, M. Aronoff and F. Anshen 
(1989) Computer methods for morphological analy-
sis Proceedings of 24th annual meeting on Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, New York, 
New York Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: 120-127  
Fradin, B., G. Dal, N. Grabar, F. Namer, S. Lignon, 
D. Tribout and P. Zweigenbaum (2007) Remarques 
sur l'usage des corpus en morphologie. Langages 
167. 
Gdaniec, C., E. Manandise and M. C. McCord (2001) 
Derivational Morphology to the Rescue: How It 
Can Help Resolve Unfound Words in MT. Procee-
dings of MT Summit VIII, Santiago Di Compostel-
la: 127-131. 
137
Iacobini, C. (2004) I prefissi. La formazione delle 
parole in italiano. M. Grossmann and F. Rainer. 
T?bingen, Niemeyer: 99-163. 
James, C. (1980) Contrastive analysis. Burnt Mill, 
Longman. 
Maurel, D. (2004) Les mots inconnus sont-ils des 
noms propres? Proceedings of JADT 2004, Lou-
vain-la-Neuve 
Montermini, F. (2002) Le syst?me pr?fixal en italien 
contemporain, Universit? de Paris X-Nanterre, Uni-
versit? degli Studi di Bologna: 355. 
Namer, F. (2005) La morphologie constructionnelle 
du fran?ais et les propri?t?s s?mantiques du lexi-
que: traitement automatique et mod?lisation. UMR 
7118 ATILF. Nancy, Universit? de Nancy 2. 
Porter, M. (1980) An algorithm for suffix stripping. 
Program 14: 130-137. 
Ren, X. and F. Perrault (1992) The Typology of Un-
known Words: An experimental Study of Two Cor-
pora. Proceedings of Coling 92, Nantes: 408-414. 
Thomas, C. (2008) "Google Online Lexical Frequen-
cies User Manual (Version 0.9.0)."   Retrieved 
04.02.2008, from 
http://www.craigthomas.ca/docs/golf-0.9.0-
manual.pdf. 
Wandruszka, U. (2004) Derivazione aggettivale. La 
Formazione delle Parole in Italiano. M. Grossman 
and F. Rainer. T?bingen, Niemeyer. 
 
 
138
