Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, pages 10?15,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 3 April 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
NLP and the humanities: the revival of an old liaison
Franciska de Jong
University of Twente
Enschede, The Netherlands
fdejong@ewi.utwente.nl
Abstract
This paper present an overview of some
emerging trends in the application of NLP
in the domain of the so-called Digital Hu-
manities and discusses the role and nature
of metadata, the annotation layer that is so
characteristic of documents that play a role
in the scholarly practises of the humani-
ties. It is explained how metadata are the
key to the added value of techniques such
as text and link mining, and an outline is
given of what measures could be taken to
increase the chances for a bright future for
the old ties between NLP and the humani-
ties. There is no data like metadata!
1 Introduction
The humanities and the field of natural language
processing (NLP) have always had common play-
grounds. The liaison was never constrained to lin-
guistics; also philosophical, philological and lit-
erary studies have had their impact on NLP , and
there have always been dedicated conferences and
journals for the humanities and the NLP com-
munity of which the journal Computers and the
Humanities (1966-2004) is probably known best.
Among the early ideas on how to use machines to
do things with text that had been done manually
for ages is the plan to build a concordance for an-
cient literature, such as the works of St Thomas
Aquinas (Schreibman et al, 2004). which was ex-
pressed already in the late 1940s. Later on hu-
manities researchers started thinking about novel
tasks for machines, things that were not feasible
without the power of computers, such as author-
ship discovery. For NLP the units of process-
ing gradually became more complex and shifted
from the character level to units for which string
processing is an insufficient basis. At some stage
syntactic parsers and generators were seen as a
method to prove the correctness of linguistic the-
ories. Nowadays semantic layers can be analysed
at much more complex levels of granularity. Not
just phrases and sentences are processed, but also
entire documents or even document collections in-
cluding those involving multimodal features. And
in addition to NLP for information carriers, also
language-based interaction has grown into a ma-
tured field, and applications in other domains than
the humanities now seem more dominant. The
impact of the wide range of functionalities that
involve NLP in all kinds of information process-
ing tasks is beyond what could be imagined 60
years ago and has given rise to the outreach of
NLP in many domains, but during a long period
the humanities were one of the few valuable play-
grounds.
Even though the humanities have been able
to conduct NLP-empowered research that would
have been impossible without the the early tools
and resources already for many decades, the more
recent introduction of statistical methods in lan-
gauge is affecting research practises in the human-
ities at yet another scale. An important explana-
tion for this development is of course the wide
scale digitisation that is taken up in the humani-
ties. All kinds of initiatives for converting ana-
logue resources into data sets that can be stored
in digital repositories have been initiated. It is
widely known that ?There is no data like more
data? (Mercer, 1985), and indeed the volumes of
digital humanities resources have reached the level
required for adequate performance of all kinds of
tasks that require the training of statistical mod-
els. In addition, ICT-enabled methodologies and
types of collaboration are being developed and
have given rise to new epistemic cultures. Digital
Humanities (sometimes also referred to as Com-
putational Humanities) are a trend, and digital
scholarship seems a prerequisite for a successful
research career. But in itself the growth of digi-
10
tal resources is not the main factor that makes the
humanities again a good testbed for NLP. A key
aspect is the nature and role of metadata in the hu-
manities. In the next section the role of metadata
in the humanities and the the ways in which they
can facilitate and enhance the application of text
and data mining tools will be described in more
detail. The paper takes the position that for the hu-
manities a variant of Mercer?s saying is even more
true. There is no data like metadata!
The relation between NLP and the humanities
is worth reviewing, as a closer look into the way
in which techniques such as text and link mining
can demonstrate that the potential for mutual im-
pact has gained in strength and diversity, and that
important lessons can be learned for other appli-
cation areas than the humanities. This renewed
liaison with the now digital humanities can help
NLP to set up an innovative research agenda which
covers a wide range of topics including semantic
analysis, integration of multimodal information,
language-based interaction, performance evalua-
tion, service models, and usability studies. The
further and combined exploration of these topics
will help to develop an infrastructure that will also
allow content and data-driven research domains in
the humanities to renew their field and to exploit
the additional potential coming from the ongoing
and future digitisation efforts, as well as the rich-
ness in terms of available metadata. To name a
few fields of scholarly research: art history, media
studies, oral history, archeology, archiving stud-
ies, they all have needs that can be served in novel
ways by the mature branches that NLP offers to-
day. After a sketch in section 2 of the role of
metadata, so crucial for the interaction between
the humanities and NLP, a rough overview of rel-
evant initiatives will be given. Inspired by some
telling examples, it will be outlined what could be
done to increase the chances for a bright future for
the old ties, and how other domains can benefit as
well from the reinvention of the old common play-
ground between NLP and the humanities.
2 Metadata in the Humanities
Digital text, but also multimedia content, can be
mined for the occurrence of patterns at all kinds
of layers, and based on techniques for information
extraction and classification, documents can be an-
notated automatically with a variety of labels, in-
cluding indications of topic, event types, author-
ship, stylistics, etc. Automatically generated an-
notations can be exploited to support to what is
often called the semantic access to content, which
is typically seen as more powerful than plain full
text search, but in principle also includes concep-
tual search and navigation.
The data used in research in the domain of
the humanities comes from a variety of sources:
archives, musea (or in general cultural heritage
collections), libraries, etc. As a testbed for NLP
these collections are particularly challenging be-
cause of the combination of complexity increas-
ing features, such as language and spelling change
over time, diversity in orthography, noisy content
(due to errors introduced during data conversion,
e.g., OCR or transcription of spoken word ma-
terial), wider than average stylistic variation and
cross-lingual and cross-media links. They are
also particularly attractive because of the avail-
able metadata or annotation records, which are the
reflection of analytical and comparative scholarly
processes. In addition, there is a wide diversity
of annotation types to be found in the domain (cf.
the annotation dimensions distinguished by (Mar-
shall, 1998)), and the field has developed mod-
elling procedures to exploit this diversity (Mc-
Carty, 2005) and visualisation tools (Unsworth,
2005).
2.1 Metadata for Text
For many types of textual data automatically gen-
erated annotations are the sole basis for seman-
tic search, navigation and mining. For human-
ities and cultural heritage collections, automati-
cally generated annotation is often an addition to
the catalogue information traditionally produced
by experts in the field. The latter kind of manu-
ally produced metadataa is often specified in ac-
cordance to controlled key word lists and meta-
data schemata agreed for the domain. NLP tag-
ging is then an add on to a semantic layer that in
itself can already be very rich and of high qual-
ity. More recently initiatives and support tools for
so-called social tagging have been proposed that
can in principle circumvent the costly annotation
by experts, and that could be either based on free
text annotation or on the application of so-called
folksonomies as a replacement for the traditional
taxonomies. Digital librarians have initiated the
development of platforms aiming at the integration
of the various annotation processes and at sharing
11
tools that can help to realise an infrastructure for
distributed annotation. But whatever the genesis is
of annotations capturing the semantics of an entire
document, they are a very valuable source for the
training of automatic classifiers. And traditionally,
textual resources in the humanities have lots of it,
partly because the mere art of annotating texts has
been invented in this domain.
2.2 Metadata for Multimedia
Part of the resources used as basis for scholarly
research is non-textual. Apart from numeric data
resources, which are typically strongly structured
in database-like environments, there is a growing
amount of audiovisual material that is of interest
to humanities researchers. Various kinds of multi-
media collections can be a primary source of infor-
mation for humanities researchers, in particular if
there is a substantial amount of spoken word con-
tent, e.g., broadcast news archives, and even more
prominently: oral history collections.
It is commonly agreed that accessibility of het-
erogeneous audiovisual archives can be boosted
by indexing not just via the classical metadata,
but by enhancing indexing mechanisms through
the exploitation of the spoken audio. For sev-
eral types of audiovisual data, transcription of the
speech segments can be a good basis for a time-
coded index. Research has shown that the quality
of the automatically generated speech transcrip-
tions, and as a consequence also the index quality,
can increase if the language models applied have
been optimised to both the available metadata (in
particular on the named entities in the annotations)
and the collateral sources available (Huijbregts et
al., 2007). ?Collateral data is the term used for
secondary information objects that relate to the
primary documents, e.g., reviews, program guide
summaries, biographies, all kinds of textual pub-
lications, etc. This requires that primary sources
have been annotated with links to these secondary
materials. These links can be pointers to source
locations within the collection, but also links to re-
lated documents from external sources. In labora-
tory settings the amount of collateral data is typi-
cally scarce, but in real life spoken word archives,
experts are available to identify and collect related
(textual) content that can help to turn generic lan-
guage models into domain specific models with
higher accuracy.
2.3 Metadata for Surprise Data
The quality of automatically generated content an-
notations in real life settings is lagging behind in
comparison to experimental settings. This is of
course an obstacle for the uptake of technology,
but a number of pilot projects with collections
from the humanities domain show us what can be
done to overcome the obstacles. This can be illus-
trated again with the situation in the field of spo-
ken document retrieval.
For many A/V collections with a spoken au-
dio track, metadata is not or only sparsely avail-
able, which is why this type of collection is often
only searchable by linear exploration. Although
there is common agreement that speech-based, au-
tomatically generated annotation of audiovisual
archives may boost the semantic access to frag-
ments of spoken word archives enormously (Gold-
man et al, 2005; Garofolo et al, 2000; Smeaton
et al, 2006), success stories for real life archives
are scarce. (Exceptions can be found in research
projects in the broadcast news and cultural her-
itage domains, such as MALACH (Byrne et al,
2004), and systems such as SpeechFind (Hansen
et al, 2005).) In lab conditions the focus is usu-
ally on data that (i) have well-known characteris-
tics (e.g, news content), often learned along with
annual benchmark evaluations,1 (ii) form a rela-
tively homogeneous collection, (iii) are based on
tasks that hardly match the needs of real users, and
(iv) are annotated in large quantities for training
purposes. In real life however, the exact character-
istics of archival data are often unknown, and are
far more heterogeneous in nature than those found
in laboratory settings. Language models for real-
istic audio sets, sometimes referred to as surprise
data (Huijbregts, 2008), can benefit from a clever
use of this contextual information.
Surprise data sets are increasingly being taken
into account in research agendas in the field focus-
ing on multimedia indexing and search (de Jong
et al, 2008). In addition to the fact that they are
less homogenous, and may come with links to re-
lated documents, real user needs may be available
from query logs, and as a consequence they are
an interesting challenge for cross-media indexing
strategies targeting aggregated collections. Sur-
1E.g., evaluation activities such as those organised by
NIST, the National Institute of Standards, e.g., TREC for
search tasks involving text, TRECVID for video search, Rich
Transcription for the analysis of speech data, etc. http:
//www.nist.gov/
12
prise data are therefore an ideal source for the de-
velopment of best practises for the application of
tools for exploiting collateral content and meta-
data. The exploitation of available contextual in-
formation for surprise content and the organisation
of this dual annotation process can be improved,
but in principle joining forces between NLP tech-
nologies and the capacity of human annotators is
attractive. On the one hand for the improved ac-
cess to the content, on the other hand for an inno-
vation of the NLP research agenda.
3 Ingredients for a Novel
Knowledge-driven Workflow
A crucial condition for the revival of the com-
mon playground for NLP and the humanities is
the availability of representatives of communities
that could use the outcome, either in the devel-
opment of services to their users or as end users.
These representatives may be as diverse and in-
clude e.g., archivists, scholars with a research in-
terest in a collection, collection keepers in libraries
and musea, developers of educational materials,
but in spite of the divergence that can be attributed
to such groups, they have a few important charac-
teristics in common: they have a deep understand-
ing of the structure, semantic layers and content
of collections, and in developing new road maps
and novel ways of working, the pressure they en-
counter to be cost-effective is modest. They are
the first to understand that the technical solutions
and business models of the popular web search en-
gines are not directly applicable to their domain
in which the workflow is typically knowledge-
driven and labour-intensive. Though with the in-
troduction of new technologies the traditional role
of documentalists as the primary source of high
quality annotations may change, the availability of
their expertise is likely to remain one of the major
success factors in the realisation of a digital in-
frastructure that is as rich source as the reposito-
ries from the analogue era used to be.
All kinds of coordination bodies and action
plans exist to further the field of Digital Hu-
manities, among which The Alliance of Dig-
ital Humanities Organizations http://www.
digitalhumanities.org/ and HASTAC
(https://www.hastac.org/) and Digital
Arts an Humanities www.arts-humanities.
net, and dedicated journals and events have
emerged, such as the LaTeCH workshop series. In
part they can build on results of initiatives for col-
laboration and harmonisation that were started ear-
lier, e.g., as Digital Libraries support actions or as
coordinated actions for the international commu-
nity of cultural heritage institutions. But in order
to reinforce the liaison between NLP and the hu-
manities continued attention, support and funding
is needed for the following:
Coordination of coherent platforms (both lo-
cal and international) for the interaction be-
tween the communities involved that stim-
ulate the exchange of expertise, tools, ex-
perience and guidelines. Good examples
hereof exist already in several domains,
e.g., the field of broadcast archiving (IST
project PrestoSpace; www.prestospace.
org/), the research area of Oral History, all
kinds of communities and platforms targeting
the accessibility of cultural heritage collec-
tions (e.g., CATCH; http://www.nwo.
nl/catch), but the long-term sustainability
of accessible interoperable institutional net-
works remains a concern.
Infrastructural facilities for the support of re-
searchers and developers of NLP tools; such
facilities should support them in finetuning
the instruments they develop to the needs
of scholarly research. CLARIN (http://
www.clarin.eu/) is a promising initia-
tive in the EU context that is aiming to cover
exactly this (and more) for the social sciences
and the humanities.
Open access, source and standards to increase
the chances for inter-institutional collabora-
tion and exchange of content and tools in
accordance with the policies of the de facto
leading bodies, such as TEI (http://www.
tei-c.org/) and OAI (http://www.
openarchives.org/).
Metadata schemata that can accommodate
NLP-specific features:
? automatically generated labels and sum-
maries
? reliability scores
? indications of the suitability of items for
training purposes
Exchange mechanisms for best practices e.g.,
of building and updating training data, the
13
use of annotation tools and the analysis of
query logs.
Protocols and tools for the mark-up of content,
the specification of links between collections,
the handling of IPR and privacy issues, etc.
Service centers that can offer heavy processing
facilities (e.g. named entity extraction or
speech transcription) for collections kept in
technically modestly equipped environments
hereof.
User Interfaces that can flexibly meet the needs
of scholarly users for expressing their infor-
mation needs, and for visualising relation-
ships between interactive information ele-
ments (e.g., timelines and maps).
Pilot projects in which researchers from vari-
ous backgrounds collaborate in analysing
a specific digital resource as a central
object in order to learn to understand
how the interfaces between their fields
can be opened up. An interesting ex-
ample is the the project Veteran Tapes
(http://www.surffoundation.nl/
smartsite.dws?id=14040). This
initiative is linked to the interview collection
which is emerging as a result for the Dutch
Veterans Interview-project, which aims at
collecting 1000 interviews with a represen-
tative group of veterans of all conflicts and
peace-missions in which The Netherlands
were involved. The research results will be
integrated in a web-based fashion to form
what is called an enriched publication.
Evaluation frameworks that will trigger contri-
butions to the enhancement en tuning of what
NLP has to offer to the needs of the hu-
manities. These frameworks should include
benchmarks addressing tasks and user needs
that are more realistic than most of the ex-
isting performance evaluation frameworks.
This will require close collaboration between
NLP developers and scholars.
4 Conclusion
The assumption behind presenting these issues as
priorities is that NLP-empowered use of digital
content by humanities scholars will be beneficial
to both communities. NLP can use the testbed
of the Digital Humanities for the further shaping
of that part of the research agenda that covers the
role of NLP in information handling, and in par-
ticular those avenues that fall under the concept of
mining. By focussing on the integration of meta-
data in the models underlying the mining tools and
searching for ways to increase the involvement of
metadata generators, both experts and ?amateurs?,
important insights are likely to emerge that could
help to shape agendas for the role of NLP in other
disciplines. Examples are the role of NLP in the
study of recorded meeting content, in the field of
social studies, or the organisation and support of
tagging communities in the biomedical domain,
both areas where manual annotation by experts
used to be common practise, and both areas where
mining could be done with aggregated collections.
Equally important are the benefits for the hu-
manities. The added value of metadata-based min-
ing technology for enhanced indexing is not so
much in the cost-reduction as in the wider usabil-
ity of the materials, and in the impulse this may
bring for sharing collections that otherwise would
too easily be considered as of no general impor-
tance. Furthermore the evolution of digital texts
from ?book surrogates? towards the rich semantic
layers and networks generated by text and/or me-
dia mining tools that take all available metadata
into account should help the fields involved in not
just answering their research questions more effi-
ciently, but also in opening up grey literature for
research purposes and in scheduling entirely new
questions for which the availability of such net-
works are a conditio sine qua non.
Acknowledgments
Part of what is presented in this paper has been
inspired by collaborative work with colleagues. In
particular I would like to thank Willemijn Heeren,
Roeland Ordelman and Stef Scagliola for their role
in the genesis of ideas and insights.
References
W. Byrne, D.Doermann, M. Franz, S. Gustman, J. Ha-
jic, D. Oard, M. Picheny, J. Psutka, B. Ramabhad-
ran, D. Soergel, T.Ward, andW-J. Zhu. 2004. Auto-
matic recognition of spontaneous speech for access
to multilingual oral history archives. IEEE Transac-
tions on Speech and Audio Processing, 12(4).
F. M. G. de Jong, D. W. Oard, W. F. L. Heeren, and
R. J. F. Ordelman. 2008. Access to recorded inter-
14
views: A research agenda. ACM Journal on Com-
puting and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), 1(1):3:1?
3:27, June.
J.S. Garofolo, C.G.P. Auzanne, and E.M Voorhees.
2000. The TREC SDR Track: A Success Story.
In 8th Text Retrieval Conference, pages 107?129,
Washington.
J. Goldman, S. Renals, S. Bird, F. M. G. de Jong,
M. Federico, C. Fleischhauer, M. Kornbluh,
L. Lamel, D. W. Oard, C. Stewart, and R. Wright.
2005. Accessing the spoken word. International
Journal on Digital Libraries, 5(4):287?298.
J.H.L. Hansen, R. Huang, B. Zhou, M. Deadle, J.R.
Deller, A. R. Gurijala, M. Kurimo, and P. Angk-
ititrakul. 2005. Speechfind: Advances in spoken
document retrieval for a national gallery of the spo-
ken word. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio
Processing, 13(5):712?730.
M.A.H. Huijbregts, R.J.F. Ordelman, and F.M.G.
de Jong. 2007. Annotation of heterogeneous multi-
media content using automatic speech recognition.
In Proceedings of SAMT 2007, volume 4816 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 78?90,
Berlin. Springer Verlag.
M.A.H. Huijbregts. 2008. Segmentation, Diarization
and Speech Transcription: Surprise Data Unrav-
eled. Phd thesis, University of Twente.
C. Marshall. 1998. Toward an ecology of hypertext
annotation. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM con-
ference on Hypertext and hypermedia : links, ob-
jects, time and space?structure in hypermedia sys-
tems (HYPERTEXT ?98), pages 40?49, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
W. McCarty. 2005. Humanities Computing. Bas-
ingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan.
S. Schreibman, R. Siemens, and J. Unsworth (eds.).
2004. A Companion to Digital Humanities. Black-
well.
A.F. Smeaton, P. Over, and W. Kraaij. 2006. Evalu-
ation campaigns and trecvid. In 8th ACM SIGMM
International Workshop on Multimedia Information
Retrieval (MIR2006).
J. Unsworth. 2005. New Methods for Humanities Re-
search. The 2005 Lyman Award Lecture. National
Humanities Center, NC.
15
