FALLIBLE RATIONALISM AND MACHINE TRANSLATION 
Geoffrey Sampson 
Department of L inguist ics  ~ Modern Engl ish Language 
Univers i ty  of Lancaster  
LANCASTER LAI-4YT, G.B. 
ABSTRACT 
Approaches  to MT have been heavi ly  inf luenced 
by changing trends in the phi losophy of language 
and mind. Because of the art i f ic ia l  h iatus which 
fol lowed the publ icat ion of the ALPAC Report, MT 
research in the 197Os and ear ly 198Os has had to 
catch up with major  developments  that have occurred 
in l inguist ic and phi losophical  thinking; current-  
ly, MT seems to be uncr i t ica l ly  loyal to a para- 
d igm of thought about language which is rapidly 
losing most of its adherents in departments  of 
l inguist ics and philosophy. I argue, both in 
theoretical terms and by reference to empir ical  
research on a part icu lar  t ranslat ion problem, that 
the Popperian "fa l l ib le rat ional ist"  view of mental  
processes which is winning acceptance as a more 
sophist icated a l ternat ive to Chomskyan "determin-  
ist ic rat ional ism" should lead MT researchers to 
redef ine their goals and to adopt certa in current-  
ly -neglected techniques in trying to ach ieve those 
goals. 
I. Since the Second World War, three rival views 
of the nature of the human mind have competed for 
the a l leg iance of ph i losophica l ly -minded people. 
Each of these views has impl icat ions for our 
understand ing of language. 
The 195Os and early 1960s were dominated by s 
behaviour ist  approach tracing its ancestry  to John 
Locke and represented recent ly e.g. by Leonard 
Bloomfield and B.F. Skinner. On this view, "mind" 
is mere ly  a name for a set of assoc iat ions that 
have been establ ished dur ing a person's l ife 
between external  st imul i  and behavioural  responses. 
The meaning of a sentence is to be understood not 
as the effect  it has on an unobservable  internal 
model of real ity but as the behaviour  it evokes in 
the hearer. 
Dur ing the 1960s this view lost ground to the 
rat ional ist  ideas of Noam Chomsky, work ing in an 
intel lectual  tradit ion founded by Plato and rein- 
augurated in modern times by Hone Descartes. On 
this view, stimuli  and responses are l inked only 
indirectly, via an immensely complex cognit ive 
mechanism having J ts own fixed pr inciples of oper-  
at ion which are independent of experience. A 
given behaviour is a response to an internal mental  
event which is determined as the resultant of the 
init ial state of the mental  apparatus together with 
the entire h istory of inputs to it. The meaning of 
a sentence must be expla ined in terms of the unseen 
responses it evokes in the cognit ive apparatus,  
which might take the form of successive modi f ic -  
at ions of an internal model  of real i ty that could 
be descr ibed as " inferencing".  
Chomskyan rat ional ism is undoubtedly  more 
sat is factory as an account  of human cognit ion than 
Skinner ian behaviourism. By the late 197Os, how- 
ever, the mechanica l  determin ism that is part of 
Chomsky's  view of mind appeared increas ingly  unre- 
a l is t ic  to many writers. There is l i tt le empir ica l  
support, for instance, for the Chomskyan assumpt-  
ions that the chi ld 's  acquis i t ion  of his f irst 
language, or the adult 's  comprehens ion of a given 
utterance, are processes that reach wel l -def ined 
terminat ions af ter  a given period of mental  pro- 
cess ing -- language seems typical ly to work in a 
more "open-ended" fashion than that. With in  
l inguist ics,  as documented e.g. by Moore ~ Car l ing  
(1982), the ChomsMyan parad i~ is hy now widely 
rejected. 
The view which is w inn ing widespread accept-  
ance as preserv ing the mer i ts  of rat ional ism 
whi le avo id ing its inadequacies is Karl Pepper's 
fa l l lb i l is t  vers ion of the doctr ine. On this 
account, the mind responds to exper ient ia l  inputs 
not by a determin ist ic  a lgor i thm that reaches a 
halt  state, but by creat ive ly  formulat ing fal l ib le 
conjectures which exper ience is used to test. 
Typical ly  the conjectures formulated are radical ly 
novel, in the sense that they could not be pre- 
dicted even on the basis of ideal ly complete 
knowledge of the person's prior state. This 
vers ion of rat ional ism is incompat ib le  with the 
mater ia l i s t  doctr ine that the mind is nothing but 
an arrangement  of matter  and whol ly  governed by 
the laws of physics; but, h istor ical ly,  mater ia l -  
ism has not commonly been regarded as an axiom 
requi r ing no argument to support  it (although it 
may be that the ethos of Ar t i f i c ia l  Inte l l igence 
makes pract i t ioners of this d isc ip l ine more than 
averagely favourable towards mater ia l ism).  
As a matter  of logic, fa l l ib le conjectures in 
any domain can be e l iminated by adverse exper ience 
but can never be decis ive ly  confirmed. Our 
react ion to l inguist ic  experience, consequently~ 
is for a Popper ian both non-determin ist ic  and 
open-ended. There is no reason to expect a person 
at any age to cease to improve his knowledge of 
his mother-tongue,  or to expect d i f ferent  members 
of a speech-community  to formulate identical  
internal ized grammars; and understand ing an indiv- 
idual ut terance is a process which a person can 
86 
execute to any desired degree of thoroughness -- 
we stop trying to improve our understanding of a 
part icular  sample of language not because we reach 
a natural stopping-place but because we judge that 
the returns from further effort  are l ikely to be 
less than the resources invested. 
For a Chomskyan linguist, d ivergences between 
individuals in the i r  l inguist ic  behaviour are to be 
expla ined either in terms of mixture of "dialects" 
or in terms of fai lure of pract ical  "performance" 
fully to match the abstract  "competence" possessed 
by the mature speaker. For the Popper ian such 
divergences require no explanation; we do not 
possess a lgor i thms which would lead to correct 
results if they were executed thoroughly. Indeed, 
since languages have no real i ty independent of 
their speakers, the idea that there exists a 
"correct" solut ion to the problem of acquir ing a 
language or of understanding an individual sent- 
ence ceases to apply except as an untheoret ica l  
approximation.  The super ior i ty  of the Popperian 
to the Chomskyan paradigm as a framework for 
interpret ing the facts of l inguist ic  behaviour is 
argued e.g. in my Making Sense (1980), Popperian 
L inguist ics (in press). 
2. There is a major  d i f ference in style between 
the MT of the 1950s and 1960s, and the projects of 
the last decade. This ref lects the di f ference 
between behaviour ist  and determin is t ic - rat iona l i s t  
paradigms. Speaking very broadly, ear ly MT 
research envisaged the problem of t ranslat ion as 
that of establ ish ing equivalences between observ-  
able, surface features of languages: vocabulary 
items, taxemes of order, and the like. Recent MT 
research has taken it as axiomat ic  that successful  
MT must incorporate a large AI component. Human 
translation, it is now realized, involves the 
understanding of source texts rather than mere 
transl i terat ion from one set of l inguist ic  con- 
ventions to another: we make heavy use of infer-  
encing in order to resolve textual ambiguit ies.  
MT systems must therefore simulate these inferenc- 
ing processes in order to produce human- l ike out- 
put. Furthermore, the Chomskyan paradigm incorp- 
orates axioms about the kinds of operat ion char- 
acter ist ic  of human l inguist ic  processing, and MT 
research inherits these. In particular, Chomsky 
and his  fol lowers have been host i le  to the idea 
that any interest ing l inguist ic rules or processes 
might be probabi l ist ic  or stat ist ical  in rmture 
(e.g. Chomsky 1957: 15-17, and of. the controversy 
about Labovian "variable rules"). The assumption 
that human language-process ing is invar iably an 
a l l -or -none phenomenon might well  be quest ioned 
even by someone who subscr ibed to the other tenets 
Of the Chomskyan paradigm (e.g. Suppes 1970), but 
it is consistent with the heavi ly  determinist ic  
f lavour of that paradigm. Correspondingly,  recent 
MT projects known to me seem to make no use of 
probabil i t ies, and anecdotal  evidence suggests 
that MT (and other AI)  researchers perceive pro- 
posals for the explo i tat ion of probabi l ist ic  tech- 
niques as defeat ist  ("We ought to be model l ing 
what the mind actual ly  does rather than using 
purely art i f ic ia l  methods to achieve a rough 
approximat ion to its output"). 
3. What are the impl icat ions for MT, and for AI 
in general, of a shift from a determin ist ic  to a 
fa l l ib i l ist  version of rat ional ism? (On the 
general issue see e.g. the exchange between 
Arav ind  Joshi and me in Smith 1982.) They can be 
summed Up as follows. 
First, there is no such thing as an ideal 
speaker's competence which, if s imulated mechanic-  
ally, would  const i tute perfect MT. In the case of 
" l i terary" texts it is general ly  recognised that 
d i f ferent  human translators may produce markedly  
d i f ferent translat ions none of which can  be con- 
s idered more "correct" than the others; from the 
Popper ian viewpoint l i terary texts do not d i f fer  
qual i tat ive ly  from other genres. (Referr ing to 
the translat ion requirements of the Secretar iat  of 
the Counci l  of the European Communit ies,  P.J. 
A r thern  (1979: 81) has said that "the only qual i ty  
we can accept  is i00~0 f idel i ty to the meaning of 
the original". From the fa l l ib i l ist  point of v iew 
that is l ike saying "the only kind of motors we 
are wi l l ing to use are perpetual -mot ion machines". )  
Second, there is no possibi l i ty of des igning 
an art i f ic ia l  system which s imulates the act ions 
of an unpredictably  creat ive mind, since any 
machine is a mater ia l  object governed by physical  
law. Thus it wil l  not, for instance, be possible 
to des ign an art i f ic ia l  system which regular ly 
uses inferencing to resolve the mean ing  of given 
texts in the same way as a human reader of the 
texts. There is no pr incipled barrier, of course, 
to an art i f ic ia l  system which appl ies logical 
t ransformations to der ive conclus ions from ~iven 
premisses. But an art i f ic ia l  system must be 
restr icted to some fixed, perhaps very large, data- 
base of premisses ("world knowledge").  It is 
central to the Popperian view of mind that human 
inferencing is not l imited to a fixed set of pre- 
misses but involves the frequent invent ion of new 
hypotheses which are not related in any logical 
way to the previous contents of mind. An MT 
system cannot aspire to perfect human performance. 
(But then, neither can a human.) 
Third: a s i tuat ion in which the behaviour of 
any individual  is only approximate ly  s imilar to 
that of other indiv iduals and is not in detai l  
predictable even in pr inciple is just the kind of 
s i tuat ion in which probabi l ist ic  techniques are 
valuable, i r respect ive of whether  or not the pro- 
cesses occurr ing wi th in  individual  humans are 
themselves intr ins ical ly  probabi l ist ic.  To draw 
an analogy: l i fe- insurance companies do not con- 
demn the actuar ia l  profess ion as a bunch of cop- 
outs because they do not attempt to predict the 
precise date of death of individual  pol icyholders.  
MT research ought to explo i t  any techniques that 
offer the possib i l i ty  of better approximat ions to 
acceptable translation, whether  or not it seems 
l ikely that human translat ion exploi ts  such tech- 
niques; and it is l ikely that useful  methods wi l l  
often be probabi l ist ic.  
Fourth: MT researchers wi l l  u l t imately need 
to appreciate that there is no natural  end to the 
process of improving the qual i ty of t ranslat ion 
(though it may be premature to raise this issue 
87 
at a stage when the best mechanical translation is 
still quite bad). Human translation always invol- 
ves a (usually tacit) cost-benefit analysis: it 
is never a question of "How much work is needed to 
translate this text 'properly'?" but of "Will a 
given increment of effort be profitable in terms 
of achieved improvement in translation?" Likewise, 
the question confronting MT is not "Is MT poss- 
ible?" but "What are the disbenefits Of translat- 
ing this or that category of texts at this or 
that level of inexactness, and how do the costs 
of reducing the incidence of a given type of 
error compare with the gains to the consumers?" 
4. The value of probabilistic techniques is 
sufficiently exemplified by the spectacular succ- 
ess of the Lancaster-Oslo-Bergen Tagging System 
(see e.g. Leech et al 1983). The LOB Tagging 
System, operational since 1981, assigns grammat- 
ical tags drawn from a highly-differentiated (134- 
member) tag-set to the words of "real-life" 
English text. The system "knows" virtually nothing 
of the syntax of English in terms of the kind of 
grammar-rules believed by linguists to make up the 
speaker's competence; it uses only facts about 
local transition-probabilities between form- 
classes, together with the relatively meagre clues 
provided by English morphology. By late 1982 the 
output of the system fell short of complete 
success (defined as tagging identical to that done 
independently by a human linguist) by only 3.4%. 
Various methods are being used to reduce this 
failure-rate further, but the nature of the tech- 
niques used ensures that the ideal of 100% success 
will be approached only asymptotically. However, 
the point i s  that no other extant automatic tagg-  
ing -sys tem known to me approaches the current 
success-level of the LOB system. I predict that 
any system which eschews probabilistic methods 
will perform at a significantly lower level. 
5.  In  the  remainder of this paper  I i l lustrate 
the argument that human language-comprehension 
involves inferencing from unpredictable hypothes- 
es, using research of my own on the problem of 
"referring" pronouns. 
My research was done in reaction to an 
article by Jerry Hobbs (1976). Hobbs provides an 
unusually clear example of the Chomskyan paradigm 
of AI research, since he makes his methodological 
axioms relatively explicit. He begins by defining 
a complex and subtle algorithm for referring pro- 
nouns which depends exclusively on the grammatical 
structure of the sentences in which they occur. 
This algorithm is highly successful: tested on a 
sample of texts, it is 88.3% accurate (a figure 
which rises slightly, to 91.7%, when the algorithm 
is expanded to use the simple kind of semantic 
information represented by Katz/Fodor "selection 
restrictions"). Nevertheless, Hobbs argues that 
this approach to the problem of pronoun resolution 
must be abandoned in favour of a "semantic algo- 
rithm", meaning one which depends on inferencing 
from a d@ta-base of world knowledge rather than on 
syntactic structure. He gives several reasons; 
the important reasons are that the syntactic 
approach  can  never  a t ta in  lOOTo success ,  and  that  
i t  does  not  cor respond to  the  method by  wh ich  
humans  reso lve  pronouns .  
However, unlike Hobbs's syntactic algorithm, 
his semantic algorithm is purely programmatic. 
The implication that it will be able to achieve 
i00~ success -- or even that it will be able to 
match the success-level of the existing syntactic 
algorithm -- rests purely on faith, though this 
faith is quite understandable given the axioms of 
deterministic rationalism. 
I investigated these issues by examining a 
set of examples of the pronoun it drawn from the 
LOB Corpus (a standard mil l ion-word computer-read- 
able corpus of modern written British English -- 
see Johansson 1978). The pronoun i t  is specially 
interesting in connexion with MT because of the 
problems of translation into gender-langu/ages; my 
examples were extracted from the texts in Category 
H of the LOB Corpus, which includes governmental 
and similar documents and thus matches the genres 
which current large-scale MT projects such as 
EUROTRA aim to  translate. I began with 338 
instances of it; after el iminating non-referential 
cases I was left with 156 instances which I exam- 
ined intensively. 
I asked the following questions: 
(i) In what proportion of cases do I as an educ- 
ated native speaker feel confident about the 
intended reference? . . . .  
(2) Where I do feel confident and Hobbs's syn- 
tactic algorithm gives a result which I believe to 
be wrong, what kind of reasoning enabled me to 
reach my solution? 
(3) Where Hobbs's algorithm gives what I believe 
to be the correct result, is it plausible that a 
semantic algorithm would give the same result? 
(4) Could the performance of Hobbs's syntactic 
algorithm be improved, as an alternative to 
replacing it by a semantic algorithm? 
It emerged that: 
(i) In about I0~ of all cases, human resolution 
was impossible; on careful consideration of the 
alternatives I concluded that I did not know the 
intended reference (even though, on a first 
relatively cursory reading, most of these cases 
had not struck me as ambiguous). An example is: 
The lower platen, which supports the leather, 
is raised hydraulically to bring i t  into contact 
with the rollers on the upper platen ... (H6.148) 
Does it refer to the lower platen or to the 
leather (la platina, il cuoio:)? I really don't 
know. In at least one instance (not this one) I 
reached different confident conclusions about the 
same case on different occasions (and this sugg- 
ests that there are likely to be other cases 
which I have confidently resolved in ways other 
than the writer intended). The implication is 
88 
that a system which performs at a level of success 
much above 90~ on the task of resolv ing referent-  
ial it would be outper forming a human, which is 
contradictory: language means what humans take it 
to mean. 
(2) In a number of cases where I judged the syn- 
tactic a lgor i thm to give the wrong result, the 
premisses on which my own decis ions were based 
were proposit ions that were not pieces of factual 
general knowledge and which I was not aware of 
ever having consciously enterta ined before pro- 
ducing them in the course of trying to interpret 
the text in question. It would therefore be 
quixot ic to suggest that these proposi t ions 
would occur in the data-base avai lable to a future 
MT system. Consider, for instance: 
Under the "permissive" powers, however, in 
the worst cases when the Ministry was right and 
the M.P. was right the local author i ty could sti l l  
dig its heels in and say that whatever the Mini-  
stry said it was not going to give a grant. (HI6. 
24) 
I feel sure that i_~t refers to the local author i ty 
rather than the Ministry, chief ly because it seems 
to me much more plausible that a lower- level  
branch of government would refuse to heed requests 
for act ion from a higher- level  branch than that it 
would accuse the higher- level  branch of deceit. 
But this general izat ion about the sociology of 
government was new to me when I thought it up for 
the purpose of interpret ing the example quoted 
(and I am not certain that it is in fact Univers-  
al ly true). 
(3) In a number of cases it was very di f f icul t  to 
bel ieve that introduct ion Of semantic consider-  
at ions into the syntactic a lgor i thm would not 
worsen its performance. Here, an example is: 
... and the Isle of Man. We do by these 
Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors instit-  
ute and create a new Medal and We do hereby direct 
that i__~t shall be governed by the fo l lowing rules 
and ordinances ... (H24.16) 
Hobbs 's  syntactic a lgor i thm refers it to Medal, 
I believe rightly. Yet before reading the text 
I was under the impression that medals, l ike other 
small concrete inanimate objects, could not be 
governed; whi le terr i tor ies l ike the Isle of Man 
can be, and indeed are. Syntax is more important 
than semantics in this case. 
(4) There are several syntactic phenomena (e.g. 
paral le l ism of structure between successive 
clauses) which turned out to be relevant to pro- 
noun resolut ion but which are ignored by Hobbs's  
algorithm. I have not undertaken the task of mod-  
i fy ing the syntactic a lgor i thm in order to exploit  
these phenomena, but it seems l ikely that the 
already-good performance of the a lgor i thm could be 
further improved. 
It is a lso worth point ing out that accept ing 
the legit imacy of probabi l ist ic  methods al lows one 
to exploit  many crude (and therefore cheaply- 
exploited) semantic considerat ions,  such as Katz/  
Fodor se lect ion restr ict ions,  which have to be 
left out of a determinist ic  system because in 
pract ice they are sometimes violated. As we have 
seen, Hobbs suggested that only a small percentage 
improvement in the performance of his pure syntac-  
tic a lgor i thm could be achieved by adding semantic 
se lect ion restr ict ions. Rules such as "the verb 
'fear' must have an \[+animate\] subject" almost 
never prove to be except ionless in real - l i fe usage: 
even genres of text that appear soberly l iteral 
contain many cases of f igurat ive or extended usage. 
This is one reason why advocates of a "semantic" 
approach to art i f ic ia l  language-process ing bel ieve 
in us ing relat ively e laborate methods involv ing 
complex inferent ia l  chains -- though they give us 
l i tt le reason to expect that these techniques too 
wi l l  not in pract ice be bedevi l led by d i f f icu l t ies  
s imi lar  to those that occur with stra ightforward 
select ion restr ict ions. However, whi le it may be 
that the subject of 'fear' is not a lways an anim- 
ate noun, it may also be that this is true with 
much more than chance frequency. If so, an art i -  
f icial language-process ing system can and should 
use this as one factor to be balanced against 
others in resolv ing ambigui t ies  in sentences con- 
taining 'fear'. 
6. To sum up: the determin ist ic - rat ional is t  
philosophical parad i~ has encouraged MT research- 
ers to attempt an impossible task. The fal l ib le-  
rat ional ist  paradigm requires them to lower their 
sights, but may at the same time al low them to 
atta in greater actual  success .  
REFERENCES 
Arthern, P.J. (1979) "Machine translat ion and 
computer ized terminology systems". In Bar- 
bara Snell, ed., Trans lat ing and the Computer.  
North-Hol land.  
Chomsky, A.N. (1957) Syntact ic  Structures. Mou- 
ton. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1976) "Pronoun resolution". Research 
Report 76-1. Department of Computer  Sciences, 
City College, City Univers i ty  of New York. 
Johansson, S. (1978) "Manual  of informat ion to 
accompany the Lancaster -Os lo /Bergen Corpus of 
Brit ish English, for use with digital  comput-  
ers". Department of English, Univers i ty  of 
Oslo. 
Leech, G.N., R. Garside, & E. Atwel l  (1983) "The 
automatic  grammatical  tagging of the LOB 
Corpus". ICAME News no. 7, pp. 13-33. Nor-  
wegian Comput ing Centre for the Humanit ies.  
Moore, T. & Chr ist ine Car l ing (1982) Understand-  
ing Language. Macmil lan. 
Sampson, G.R. (1980) Making Sense. Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 
Sampson, G.R. (in press) Popper ian Linguist ics.  
Hutchinson. 
Smith, N.V., ed. (1982) Mutual  Knowledge. Acad-  
emic Press. 
Suppes, P. (1970) "Probsbi l ist ic  grammars for 
natural  languages". Synthese vol. 22, pp. 
95-116. 
89 
