Rules for Pronominalization 
Franz Guenthner,  Hubert  Lehmann 
IBM Deutschland GmbH 
Heidelberg Science Center  
T ie rgar tenst r .  15, D-6900 Heide lberg,  FRG 
Abst ract  
Rigorous in terpretat ion  of pronouns is possible 
when syntax,  semantics, and pragmatics of a dis-  
course can be reasonably contro l led.  Interact ion 
wi th  a database provides such an env i ronment .  In 
the f ramework of the User Specialty Languages 
system and Discourse Representation Theory ,  we 
formulate st r ic t  and preferent ia l  rules for  pronomi-  
nal ization and out l ine a procedure to f ind proper  
assignments of referents to pronouns.  
1 Overv iew:  Relation to previous work  
One of the main obstacles of the automated process- 
ing of natural  language sentences (and a fo r te r io r i  
texts )  is the proper  t reatment of anaphor ic  re- 
lat ions.  Even though there is a p lethora of re- 
search attempt ing to specify (both on the 
theoret ica l  level as well as in connection with im- 
plementat ions) "strategies"  for  "pronoun 
reso lut ion" ,  it is fa i r  to say 
a) that  no uni form and comprehensive t reatment  of 
anaphora has yet been attained 
b) that  surpr i s ing ly  l i t t le e f for t  has been spent in 
app ly ing the results of research in l inguist ics  
and formal semantics in actual implemented sys- 
tems. 
A quick glance at Hirst  (1981) wil l  conf i rm that  
there  is a large gap between the kinds of theore-  
t ical  issues and puzzl ing cases that  have been con- 
s idered on the one hand in the sett ing of 
computational l inguist ics and on the other  in recent 
semantical ly or iented approaches to the formal 
analysis of natural  languages. 
One of the main aims of this paper is to br idge  
this  gap by combining recent ef forts  for thcoming in 
formal semantics (based on Montague grammar and 
Discourse Representation Theory)  with ex is t ing 
and re lat ive ly  comprehensive grammars of German 
and English constructed in connection with the Us- 
er  Specialty Languages (USL) system, a natural  
language database query  system br ie f ly  descr ibed 
below. 
We have drawn extensively  - -  as far  as 
ins ights ,  examples, puzzles and adequacy condi-  
t ions are concerned --  on the various "var iab le  
b ind ing"  approaches to pronouns (e. 9, work  in the 
Montague t rad i t ion ,  the i l luminat ing discussion by 
Evans (1980) and Webber (1978), as well as recent 
t ransformat ional  accounts).  Our  approach has 
however been most deeply inf luenced by those who 
have ( l ike Smaby (1979), (1981) and Kamp (1981)) 
advocated d ispensing with pronoun index ing on the 
one hand and by those ( l ike Chastain (1973), 
Evans (1980), and Kamp (1981)) who have empha- 
sized the " re ferent ia l "  funct ion of certain uses of 
indef in i te  noun phrases.  
2 Background 
Contrary  to what is assumed in most theories of 
pronominal izat ion (namely that  the most propi t ious  
way of deal ing with pronouns is to consider them as 
a k ind of indexed var iab le) ,  we agree with Kamp 
(1981) and Smaby (1979) in treating pronouns as 
bona fide lexical elements at the level of syntactic 
representation. 
Treatments of anaphora have taken place with in  
two quite d is t inc t  sett ings,  so it seems. On the 
one hand, l inguists  have pr imar i ly  been concerned 
with the specif ication of mainly syntact ic  cr i ter ia  in 
determining the proper  "b ind ing"  and 
"d is jo intness"  c r i ter ia  (cf.  be low) ,  whereas compu- 
tat ional l inguists  have in general paid more 
attent ion to anaphor ic  relations in texts ,  where se- 
mantic and pragmat ic  features play a much greater  
role. In t ry ing  to relate the two approaches one 
should be aware that  in the absence of any serious 
theory  of text  unders tand ing ,  any attempt to deal 
with anaphora in unrest r i c ted  domains (even if 
they are simple enough as for  instance ch i ldren's  
s tor ies) ,  wil l  encounter  so many d iverse problems 
which,  even when they inf luence anaphoric re- 
lations, are completely beyond the scope of a 
systematic t reatment  at the present  moment. We 
have thought  it to be important  therefore  to impose 
some constra ints  r ight  from the start  on the type of 
discourse with respect to which our  t reatment  of 
anaphora is to be val idated (or fa l s i f ied) .  Of 
course, what we are going to say should in pr inc i -  
ple be extend ib le  to more complex types of 
discourse in the fu ture .  
The context  of the present inqu i ry  is the query -  
in9 of relational databases {as opposed to say gen- 
eral discourse analys is) .  The type of discourse we 
are interested in are thus dialogues in the sett lng 
of a relational database (which may be said to rep- 
resent both the context  of queries and answers as 
well as the "wor ld" ) .  It should be clear that a 
wide var iety  of anaphoric expressions is avai lable 
in this kind of interact ion;  on the other  hand, the 
relevant knowledge we assume in resolv ing pronom- 
inal relations must come from the information 
144 
specif ied in the database (in the relat ions,  in the 
var ious dependencies and in tegr i ty  constra ints)  
and in the rules govern ing the language. 
We are making the fol lowing assumptions for  da- 
tabase query ing .  A query  dialogue is a sequence 
of pairs <query,answer>.  For the sake of s impl ic i -  
ty  we assume that the possible answers are of the 
form 
yes/no answer 
singleton answer 
(e .g .  Spain, to a query l ike "Who borders  Por- 
tugal?")  
set answer 
( \ [France,  Portugal 
ders Spain?") 
mult ip le answer 
( \[<France, Spain>, 
borders  who?) 
and 
refusal 
(when a pronoun cannot receive a proper  in ter -  
pretat ion)  
to a query  l ike "Who bor -  
? . I to a query  l ike "Who 
2.1 The User Specialty Languages system 
The USL system (Lehmann (1978), Ott  and Zoep- 
p r i t z  (1979), Lehmann (1980)) provides an in ter -  
face to a relational data base management system 
for  data ent ry ,  query ,  and manipulation via re- 
s t r ic ted natural  language. The USL System trans-  
lates input  queries expressed in a natural  language 
(cur rent ly  German (Zoeppr i tz  (1983), Engl ish, and 
Spanish (SopeSa (1982))) into expressions in the 
SQL query  language, and evaluates those ex- 
pressions through the use of System R (Astrahan 
&al (1976)). The prototype bui l t  has been val i -  
dated with real applications and thus shown its 
usabi l i ty .  The system consists of (1) a language 
processing component (ULG),  (2) grammars for  
German, English, and Spanish, (3) a set of 75 in- 
terpretat ion  rout ines,  (4) a code generator  for  
SQL, and (5) the data base management system 
System R. USL runs under VM/CMS in a v i r tua l  
machine of 7 MBytes, work ing set size is 1.8 
MBytes. ULG, interpretat ion rout ines,  and code 
generator  comprise approximately 40,000 lines of 
PL/I code. 
Syntact ic analysis 
The syntax component of USL uses the User 
Language Generator (ULG) which or ig inates from 
the Paris Scientif ic Center of IBM France and has 
been described by Bertrand 8al (1976). ULG con- 
sists of a parser ,  a semantic executer ,  the grammar 
META, and META interpretat ion rout ines.  META is 
used to process the grammar of a language. ULG 
accepts general phrase s t ructure  grammars wr i t ten  
in a modified Backus-Naur-Form.  With any rule it 
allows the specif ication of a rb i t ra ry ,  routines to 
control  its appl ication or to perform arb i t ra ry  ac- 
t ions,  and it allows sophist icated checking and 
sett ing of syntact ic  features.  Grammars for  Ger- 
man, English, and Spanish have been descr ibed in 
a form accepted by ULG. The grammars prov ide 
rules for  those fragments of the languages relevant 
for  communicating with a database. The USL 
grammars have been constructed in such a way that  
const i tuents correspond as closely as possible to 
semantic relat ionships in the sentence, and that  
pars ing is made as ef f ic ient  as possible. Where a 
t rue  representat ion of the semantic relat ionships in 
the parse tree could not be achieved, the burden 
was put on the in terpretat ion  routines to remedy 
the s i tuat ion.  
I n terpreta t ion  
The approach to interpretat ion in the USL sys- 
tem bui lds on the ideas of model theoret ic  
semantics. This implies that the meaning of s t ruc-  
tu re  words and syntact ic  construct ions is in ter -  
preted systematical ly and independent of the 
contents of a given database. Furthermore,  since 
a relational database can be regarded as a (par t ia l )  
model in the sense of model theory ,  the in terpreta -  
t ion of natural  language concepts in terms of 
relations is qui te natural .  (A more detai led dis-  
cussion can be found in Lehmann (1978).) 
In the USL system, extensions of concepts are 
represented as v i r tua l  relations of a relational da- 
tabase which are defined on physical ly  stored re- 
lations (base re lat ions) .  The set of v i r tua l  
relations represents the conceptual knowledge 
about the data and is d i rect ly  l inked to natural  
language words and phrases. This approach has 
the advantage that extensions of concepts can rela- 
t i ve ly  easily be related to objects of conventional 
databases. 
For i l lustrat ion of the connection between v i r tu -  
al relations and words,  consider the fo l lowing ex-  
ample. Suppose that  for  a geographical  appl icat ion 
someone has arranged the data in the form of the 
relation 
CO (COUNTRY,CAPITAL,  AREA, POPULATION) 
Now v i r tua l  relations such as the fo l lowing which 
correspond to concepts can be formed by simply 
pro ject ing out the appropr ia te  columns of CO: 
CAPITAL (NOM_CAPITAL, OF_COUNTRY) 
Standard role names (OF, NOM . . . .  ) establish the 
connection between syntact ic  construct ions and co- 
lumns of v i r tua l  relations and enable answering 
questions such as 
(1) What is Austr ia 's  capital? 
in a s t ra ight fo rward  and simple way. Standard 
role names are surface or iented because this makes 
it possible for  a user not t ra ined in l inguist ics to 
def ine his own words and relations. (For a com- 
plete l ist of standard role names see e .g .  Zoeppr i tz  
(1983).)  
We are cur rent ly  work ing on the integrat ion of 
the concepts under ly ing  the USL system with Dis- 
course Representation Theory which is descr ibed in 
the next section. We have already implemented a 
procedure which generates Discourse Represen- 
tat ion Structures  from USL's semantic trees and 
145 
which covers the ent i re  f ragment  of language de- 
scr ibed in Kamp (1981). 
2.2 Discourse Representat ion  Theory  (DRT)  
In this section we g ive  a br ie f  descr ipt ion  of 
Kamp's Discourse Representat ion Theory  (DRT) in 
as much as it relates to our  concerns with pronomi-  
na l izat ion.  For a more deta i led discussion of this 
theory  and its general  ramif icat ions for  natura l  
language process ing,  cf. the papers by Kamp 
(1981) and Guenthner  (1983a, 1983b). 
Accord ing  to DRT, each natura l  language sen- 
tence (or  d iscourse)  is associated wi th  a so-cal led 
Discourse Representat ion S t ructure  (DRS) on the 
basis of a set of DRS format ion rules.  These rules 
are sens i t ive to both the syntact ic  s t ruc ture  of the 
sentences in quest ion as well as to the DRS context  
in which in the  sentence occurs.  In the formu-  
lat ion of Kamp (1981) the la t ter  is rea l ly  of 
importance on ly  in connect ion with the  proper  anal-  
ysis of p ronouns .  We feel on the o ther  hand that  
the DRS env i ronment  of a sentence to be processed 
should determine much more than just  the anaphor -  
ic ass ignments.  We shall discuss th is  issue - in 
par t i cu la r  as i t  relates to problems of ambigu i ty  
and vagueness - in more depth in a fo r thcoming 
paper .  
A DRS K for  a d iscourse has the general  form 
K = <U, Con> 
where  U is a set of "d iscourse  re ferents"  for  K and 
Con a set of "cond i t ions"  on these ind iv idua ls .  
Condit ions can be e i ther  atomic or  complex.  An 
atomic condi t ion has the form 
P( t l  . . . . .  tn )  
or  
t l=c  
where  ti  is a d iscourse re ferent  and c a proper  
name and P an n-p lace pred icate .  
The on ly  complex condi t ion we shall discuss 
here is the one representing un iversa l ly  quant i f ied  
noun phrases or  condi t ional  sentences. Both are 
t reated  in much the same way.  Let us call these 
" impl icat ional"  condi t ions:  
K1 IMP K2 
where  K1 and K2 are also DRSs. With a d iscourse 
D is thus associated a Discourse Representat ion 
s t ruc ture  which represents  D in a quant i f ie r - f ree  
"c lausal"  form, and which captures the propos i -  
t ional  import  of the d iscourse by - among other  
th ings ,  estab l i sh ing the cor rect  pronominal  con- 
nect ions.  
What is important  for  the t reatment  of anaphora 
in the present  context  is the fo l lowing:  
a) Given a d iscourse with a pr inc ipa l  DRS Ko and a 
set of non-pr inc ipa l  DRSs (or  condi t ions)  Ki among 
its condit ions all d iscourse re ferents  of Ko are ad- 
missible re ferents  fo r  pronouns  in sentences or 
(phrases)  g iv ing  rise to the var ious  embedded 
Ki 's .  In par t i cu la r ,  all occurrences  of p roper  
names in a d iscourse wil l  a lways be associated with 
d iscourse re ferents  of the pr inc ipa l  DRS Ko. (This  
is on the (admi t ted ly  unrea l i s t ic )  assumption that  
p roper  names re fer  un ique ly . )  
b) Given an impl icat ional  DRS of the  form K1 IMP 
K2 occur r ing  in a DRS K, a re lat ion of re la t ive  ac- 
cess ib i l i ty  between DRSs is def ined as fo l lows:  
K1 is accessible from K2 and all K' accessible 
from K1 are also accessible f rom K2. 
In par t i cu la r ,  the pr inc ipa l  DRS Ko is accessible 
f rom its subord inate  DRSs ( fo r  a prec ise def in i t ion  
cf. Kamp (1981)) .  The import  of this de f in i t ion  
fo r  anaphora is s imply that  if  a p ronoun is being 
reso lved ( i .e .  in terpreted)  in the context  of a DRS 
K' f rom which a set K of DRSs is accessible,  then 
the union of all the sets of d iscourse re ferents  as- 
sociated with every  Ki in K is the  set of admissible 
candidates for  the in terpreta t ion  of the pronoun.  
The fo l lowing i l lus t ra t ions  wil l  make this  c lear:  
K (Every  count ry  imports a product  it needs) 
ul  u2 
count ry (u1)  IMP impor t (u l ,u2)  
p roduct (u2)  
need(u l ,u2)  
This  sentence (as well as its interrogative vers ion)  
al lows on ly  one in terpreta t ion  of the pronoun it  ac- 
cord ing  to DRT. I t  does not in t roduce  any dis-  
course re ferent  ava i lab le  for  pronomina l i zat ion  in 
la ter  sentences (or  quer ies ) .  But  in a DRS l ike 
the  fo l lowing ,  DRT does not - as it stands - ac- 
count  fo r  pronoun reso lut ion:  
K( John t i ck led  Bi l l .  He squ i rmed)  
l~u l  u2 
u l  = John  
u2 = Bill 
t i ck led(u l ,u2)  
At  this po int ,  the pronoun he has to be 
in terpreted .  There  are two admissible candidates ,  
ul and u2, but  DRT does not choose between them. 
So the DRS could be cont inued with e i ther  
squ i rm(u l )  
or  
squ i rm(u2)  
S imi lar ly ,  in the fo l lowing DRS 
146 
K( I f  Spain is a member of every  o rgan izat ion ,  
it has a member) 
1 I 
i'u~ j 
\[organ.!zation (u2) I 
IMP 
IMP 
\[ u3ember(u3' i t )  \] 
the  pronoun i t  could only  refer  to Spain (on con- 
f igurat iona l  g rounds) ,  and would have to be as- 
s igned that  object  if  no other  c r i te r ia  are assumed. 
Obv ious ly ,  as fa r  as this sentence and the intended 
database is concerned,  we should want  to ru le out  
such an assignment.  (This can be done via rule $1 
discussed be low. )  
In general ,  then,  g iven a sentence (or  dis-  
course)  represented in a DRS there  wil l  be more 
candidates for  admissible pronoun assignments as 
one should l ike to have avai lable when a par t i cu la r  
pronoun is to be in terpreted .  The rules descr ibed 
in Section 3 are meant to capture some of the regu-  
lar i t ies  that  ar ise in typical  database query ing  
in teract ions .  
c) F inal ly ,  g iven a DRS fo ra  d iscourse D we can 
say that  a pronoun is p roper ly  re ferent ia l  i f f  it  is 
represented by ( i .e .  el iminated in favor  of) a d is-  
course re ferent  ui occur r ing  in the domain of the 
pr inc ipa l  DRS represent ing  D. ( In the context  of 
the  const ruct ions  i l lust rated so far ,  this wi l l  be 
t rue  in par t i cu la r  of p roper  names as well as of in-  
de f in i te  noun phrases not in the scope of of a 
un iversa l  noun phrase or a cond i t iona l . )  
The main problem then for  the t reatment  of anapho-  
ra is to determine which possible d iscourse re fer -  
ents should be chosen when we come to the 
in terpreta t ion  of a par t i cu la r  pronoun occurrence 
pi in the format ion of the extension of the DRS in 
which we are work ing .  
We would l ike to suggest the fo l lowing s t ra tegy  
as a s tar t ing  po int .  Consider a query  d ia logue Q 
with  an a l ready  establ ished DRS K and the u t te r -  
ance of a query  S, where S contains occurrences of 
personal  p ronouns .  Suppose fu r ther  that  A(S)  is 
the  sole syntact ic  analysis avai lable for  S. Then 
we regard the construct ion  of the extens ion of the 
DRS obtained on the basis of S and K as the va lue 
of a part ia l  funct ion  f def ined on K and A(S) .  
More genera l ly  st i l l ,  as Kamp himself suggests,  we 
can regard the "meaning" (or in format ion content)  
of a sentence to be that  part ia l  funct ion from DRSs 
to DRSs. 
In a g iven d ia logue both the quer ies  and the an- 
swers wil l  have the side effect of in t roduc ing  new 
ind iv idua ls  and "pre ference"  or  "sal ience" or -  
der ings  on these ind iv idua ls ,  and we want to al low 
fo r  pronominal reference to these much in the same 
way that  in a text  preceding sentences may have 
determined a set of possible antecedents for  p ro -  
nouns in the curren~!y processed sentence. The 
DRS bu i l t  up in the process of a query ing  session 
wi l l  const i tute  the "mutual knowledge" avai lab le  to 
the  user in spec i fy ing  his fu r ther  quer ies  as well 
as in his uses of p ronouns .  It is on the ind iv idua ls  
in t roduced  in the DRSs that  the rules to be dis-  
cussed below are intended to operate .  
3 In terp lay  of syntax ,  semantics, and pragmat ics  in 
pronominalization 
The process of pronominal izat ion is governed  by  
rules invo lv ing  morphologica l ,  syntact ic ,  semantic,  
and pragmat ic  c r i te r ia .  These rules are discussed 
and i l lus t ra ted  with examples drawn from the con- 
text  of query ing  a geographica l  database. Then a 
procedure  is out l ined which uses these rules and 
appl ies them in the fo l lowing order :  
F i rst  morphological  c r i te r ia  are checked,  if they  
fai l  no fu r ther  tests are requ i red .  
Then syntact ic  (or  conf igurat iona l )  c r i te r ia  are 
tested.  Aga in ,  if  they  fai l ,  no fu r ther  tests are 
necessary.  
Next  semantic c r i ter ia  are appl ied,  and if they  
do not fa i l ,  
the pragmat ic  c r i te r ia  have to be tested.  If 
more than one candidate remains, the use of the 
pronoun was pragmat ica l ly  inappropr ia te  and 
must be noted as such. 
3.1 S t r i c t  factors determin ing  the admiss ib i l i ty  of 
anaphora 
3.1.1 Morphological  c r i te r ia  
Morphological  c r i ter ia  concern the agreement of 
gender  and number .  Complicat ions come in, when 
coord inated noun phrases occur ,  e .g .  
(2) John and Bil l  went  to Pisa. They  de l ivered  a 
paper .  
(3) * John and Bill went to  Pisa. He de l ivered  a pa- 
per .  
(4) John and Sue went to Pisa. He de l ivered  a pa- 
per .  
(5) * John or  Bil l  went to Pisa. They de l ivered  a 
paper .  
(6) * John or  Bill went  to Pisa. He de l ivered  a pa- 
per .  
(7) Ne i ther  John nor Bill went to Pisa. They went 
to Rome. 
(8) *E i ther  John or  Bill d id not go to Pisa. He went 
to Rome. 
The s tar red  examples contain inappropr ia te  uses of 
pronouns .  With and-coord inat ion ,  re ference to the 
complete NP is possible with a p lura l  p ronoun.  
When the members of the coord inat ion  are d is t inc t  
in gender  and/or  number,  reference to them is 
possible with the cor respond ing  pronouns .  
C lear ly ,  the same observat ions  hold for  in ter roga-  
t ive  sentences. 
3 .1 .2  Conf igurat iona l  c r i te r ia  
Syntact ic  c r i te r ia  operate  only  wi th in  the bounda-  
ries of a sentence, outs ide they  are useless. The 
conf igurat iona l  critp.ria stemming from DRT however  
work  independent  of sentence boundar ies .  
147 
Dis jo int  reference 
The rule of "d is jo int  reference" according to 
Reinhart  (1983) goes back to Chomsky and has 
been refined by Lasnik (1976) and Reinhart  (1983). 
It  is able to handle a var iety  of we l l -known cases, 
such as 
(9) When did it  join the UN? 
(10) Which countr ies that import  it ,  produce 
petrol? 
(11) *Does it entertain diplomatic relations with 
Spain's neighbor? 
( In the starred example, the use of " i t "  is inappro-  
p r ia te ,  if it is to be coreferential  wi th "Spa in" . )  
Rather than using c-command to formulate this 
c r i te r ion ,  which is elegant but  too s t r i c t  in some 
cases (as noted by Reinhart hersel f  and Bol inger  
(1979), we have chosen an admit ted ly  less elegant,  
but  hopeful ly rel iable,  approach to d is jo int  re fer -  
ence, in that  we specify the concrete syntact ic  
conf igurat ions  where dis joint reference holds. We 
do not rely here on the syntact ic  f ramework  of USL 
grammar,  but  use more or less t rad i t iona l ly  known 
terminology for  express ing our rules.  We need the 
terms "clause",  "phrase" ,  "matr ix" ,  "embedding" ,  
and " level" .  These can be made exp l ic i t ,  when a 
suitable syntact ic  f ramework is chosen. 
Now we can formulate our d is jo int  reference rule 
and some of its less obvious consequences. 
CI. The referent of a personal pronoun can never 
be within the same clause at the same phrase level. 
(Note that this rule does not hold for possessive 
pronouns,) 
C1 has a number of consequences which we now 
l ist :  
C la .  The ( impl ic i t )  subject of an in f in i tve  clause 
can never be referent  of a personal pronoun in that  
clause 
(12) Does the EC want to dissolve it? 
C lb .  Nouns common to coordinate clauses cannot 
be re ferred to from within these coordinate clauses 
(13) Which country  borders it and Spain? 
C lc .  Noun complements of nouns in the same 
clause can never be referred to. 
(14) Does it border  Spain's neighbors? 
The fol lowing rules have to do with phrases and 
clauses modify ing a noun. They too can be re- 
garded as consequences of C1. 
C2. Head noun of a phrase or clause can never be 
re ferent  of a personal pronoun in that  phrase or  
clause 
C2a. Head noun of part ic ip ia l  phrase 
(15) a country  expor t ing  petrol  to it 
C2b. Head noun of that-c lause 
(16) the t ru th  is that it fol lows from A. 
C2c. Head noun of relat ive clause 
(17) the count ry  it  exports  petrol  to 
The fo l lowing two rules deal with kataphor ic  p ron-  
ominal izat ion (sometimes called backward pronomi-  
na l izat ion) .  
C3a. Kataphora into a more deeply embedded 
clause is impossible 
(18) Did it  expor t  a product  that  Spain produces? 
C3b. Kataphora into a succeeding coordinate 
clause is impossible 
(19) Who did not belong to it  but  left  the UN? 
The access ib i l i ty  relation on DRSs 
C4. Only those discourse referents in the accessi- 
b i l i ty  relation defined in sec. 2.2 are avai lable as 
referents  to a pronoun.  
3.1 .3  Semantic criteria 
Widely used is the cr i ter ion of semantic compat ib i l i -  
ty .  It is usual ly implemented via "semantic fea- 
tu res" .  In the USL f ramework we can der ive  this 
information from relation schemata. We state the 
c r i te r ion  as fol lows: 
31. If s is a sentence containing a pronoun p and 
c a ful l  noun phrase in the context  of p. If p is 
subst i tu ted  by c in s to yield s' and s' is not se- 
mant ical ly  anomalous, i .e. does not imply a cont ra -  
d ic t ion ,  then c is semantically compatible with s 
and is hence a semantically possible candidate for  
the reference of p. 
(20) What is the capital of Austria? - Vienna. What 
does it export? 
If i t  is assumed that  only countr ies but  not capitals 
expor t  goods, then the only semantical ly possible 
re ferent  for  " i t "  is Austr ia .  
S2. Non- re ferent ia l ly  introduced nouns cannot be 
antecedents of pronouns.  
(21) Which countr ies does Italy have t rade with? 
How large is it? 
Since " t rade"  is used non- re ferent ia l l y ,  it cannot 
be antecedent of " i t " .  Unfor tunate ly ,  in many cas- 
es where this cr i ter ion could apply ,  there is an 
ambigu i ty  between referent ia l  and non- re ferent ia l  
use. 
Apar t  from the type of semantic compat ib i l i ty  
covered by rule S1, more complex semantic p roper -  
t ies are used to determine the re ferent  of a p ro -  
noun. The "task s t ructures"  descr ibed by Grosz 
(1977) i l lust rate  this fact. We hence formulate the 
rule 
148 
$3. The proper t ies  of and re lat ionships  between 
predicates  determine pronorn ina l i zab i l i ty .  
For an i l l us t ra t ion  of its ef fect ,  cons ider  the fo l low-  
ing query :  
(22) What count ry  is its ne ighbor?  
The i r re f lex iv i ty  of the ne ighbor - re la t ion  entai ls  
that  " i ts"  cannot be bound by "what  count ry"  in 
this case, but  has to re fer  to something ment ioned 
in the prev ious  context .  
Given a subject  domain, one can analyze the  
proper t ies  of the re lat ions and the re lat ionships  be- 
tween them and so bui ld  a basis fo r  dec id ing pro-  
noun reference on semantic g rounds .  In the 
f ramework  of the USL system, informat ion on the 
proper t ies  of re lat ions is avai lab le  in terms of 
" funct iona l  dependencies"  g iven in the database 
schema or as in tegr i ty  const ra ints .  
3 .2  Pragmatic c r i te r ia  
The generat ion of d iscourse is contro l led  by  two 
fac tors :  communicat ive intent ions  and mutual  
knowledge.  In the context  of database in teract ion ,  
we can assume that  the communicat ive intent ions  of 
a user  are simply to obtain factual answers to fac- 
tual quest ions.  His intent ions are expressed e i ther  
by  single quer ies  or  by sequences of quer ies ,  de- 
pending on how complex these intent ions  are or  
how closely they  cor respond to the informat ion in 
the database. As wil l  be shown below, in many 
cases the system wil l  not have a chance to deter -  
mine whether  a g iven query  is a "one-shot  query" ,  
or whether  it is par t  of a sequence of quer ies  wi th  
a common "theme".  For the resolut ion of p ronouns ,  
this means that  the system should ra ther  ask the 
user back than make wild guesses on what might  be 
the most "p laus ib le"  re ferent .  This is of course 
not possible when runn ing  text  is analyzed in a 
"batch mode", and no user is there  to be asked fo r  
c lar i f i cat ion.  
Mutual knowledge (see e .g .  C lark  and Marshal l  
(1981) fo r  a discussion) determines the rules fo r  
in t roduc ing  and re ferenc ing  ind iv idua ls  in the dis-  
course.  In the context  of database interact ion we 
assume the mutual knowledge to consist  in i t ia l l y  of:  
- the set of p roper  names in the database,  
- the  predicates whose extensions are in the data-  
base, 
- the  "common sense" re lat ionships between and 
proper t ies  of these predicates.  
It wi l l  be par t  of the design of a database to estab-  
lish what  these "common sense" re lat ionships  and 
proper t ies  a re , .e .g ,  whether  it is genera l ly  known 
to the user community ,  whether  "capi ta l "  expresses 
a one-one re lat ion.  Each quest ion -answer  pa i r  oc- 
cur r ing  in the discourse is added to the stock of 
mutual knowledge.  
It is a pragmat ic  pr inc ip le  of pronominal izat ion 
that  on ly  mutual knowledge may be used to deter -  
mine the re ferent  of a pronoun on semantic 
g rounds ,  and hence it may be legal to use the same 
sentence conta in ing a pronoun where  ear l ie r  in the 
d iscourse it  was i l legal ,  because the  mutual  know-  
ledge has increased in the meantime. 
3 .2.1 A f i r s t  a t tempt  using pre ference  ru les  
What the topic  of a d iscourse is, which of the ent i -  
t ies ment ioned in it are in focus,  is ref lected in the 
syntact ic  s t ruc ture  of sentences. This has been 
observed  for  a long time. It has also often been 
observed  that  d iscourse topic  and focus have an ef- 
fect on pronomina l i zat ion  where  morpho log ica l ,  con- 
f igurat iona l ,  and semantic rules fail to determine  a 
s ingle Candidate for  re ference.  However ,  it has 
not been possible yet  to formulate  prec ise rules ex -  
p la in ing  th is  phenomenon.  We have the impression 
that  such rules cannot  be abso lute ly  s t r i c t  ru les ,  
but  are of a p re ferent ia l  nature .  We have deve l -  
oped a set of such rules and tested them against  a 
corpus of text  conta in ing  some 600 pronoun occur -  
rences, and have found them to work  remarkab ly  
wel l .  Similar tests (wi th a s imi lar set of ru les)  
have been conducted by Hofmann (1976). 
In the sequel we formulate  and discuss our  l ist  
of ru les.  The i r  o rder ing  corresponds  to the order  
in which they  have to be appl ied.  
P1 (pr inc ip le  of p rox imi ty ) .  Noun phrases w i th in  
the sentence conta in ing  the pronoun are pre fer red  
over  noun phrases in prev ious  or  succeeding sen- 
tences.  
Cons ider  the sequence 
(23) What count ry  jo ined the EC a f ter  1980? 
Greece. 
(24) What count ry  consumes the wine it produces? 
One could argue that  "Greece" is jus t  as probab ly  
the intended re ferent  of " i t "  in th is  case as the 
bound in terpreta t ion  and that  hence the use of " i t "  
should be rejected as inappropr ia te .  However ,  
there  is no way to avoid the " i t " ,  if the bound var -  
iable in terpreta t ion  is in tended,  and one can use 
this as a ground to ru le out  the in terpreta t ion  whe-  
re " i t "  refers  to "Greece" .  
P la .  Noun phrases in sentences before  the  sen- 
tence conta in ing  the pronoun are pre fer red  over  
noun phrases in more d is tant  sentences. 
This c r i te r ion  is very  important  to l imit the search 
fo r  possible d iscourse re ferents .  
P2. Pronouns are pre fer red  over  fu l l  noun 
phrases.  
This ru le is found in many systems deal ing with 
anaphora.  One can mot ivate it by  say ing that  
pronominal izat ion establ ishes an ent i ty  as a theme 
which is then maintained unt i l  the chain of p ro -  
nouns is b roken by a sentence not conta in ing  a sui-  
table pronoun.  For an example cons ider :  
(25) W:lat =s the area of Aust r ia !  
(26) What is its capital? 
(27) What is its populat ion? 
149 
P3. Noun ~hrases in a matr ix  clause or  phrase are 
pre fer red  over  noun phrases in embedded clauses 
or  phrases. 
P3a. Noun phrases in a matr ix  clause are pre -  
fe r red  over  noun phrases in embedde~ clauses. 
Example: 
(28) What count ry  imports a product  that  Spain 
produces? - Denmark. 
(29) What does it export? 
Here " i t "  has to refer  to the ind iv idual  sat is fy ing 
"what count ry" ,  not to "Spain" which occurs in an 
embedded clause. 
P3b. Head nouns are pre fer red  over  noun comple- 
ments. 
Example: 
(30) What is the capital of Austr ia? - Vienna.  
(31) What is its population? 
"Vienna", not "Austria" becomes the referent of 
" i t s " ,  and the argument is analogous to that  for  
P3a. 
P4. Subject noun phrases are pre fer red  over  
non-subject  noun phrases. 
In dec larat ive contexts ,  this rule works  qui te  well .  
It corresponds essential ly to the focus rule of Sid- 
her (1981). In a quest ion-answer ing  situation it is 
hard ly  appl icable,  since especial ly in wh-quest ions  
subject posit ion and word order ,  which both play a 
role, tend to in ter fere .  We there fore  tend to not 
use this rule,  but  rather  to let the system ask back 
in cases where it would app ly .  For i l lus t rat ion  
consider  the fo l lowing examples: 
(32) Does Spain border  Portugal? What is its popu-  
lation? 
(33) Is Spain bordered by Portugal? What is its 
population? 
(34) Which country  borders  Portugal? What is its 
population? 
(35) Which country  does Portugal border? What is 
its population? 
P5. Accusat ive object noun phrases are pre fer red  
over  other  non-subject  noun phrases.  
P6. Noun phrases preceding the pronoun are pre -  
fe r red  over  noun phrases succeeding the pronoun 
(or:  anaphora is p re fer red  over  kataphora) .  
3.3 Out l ine of a pronoun resolut ion procedure  
We now out l ine a procedure for  " reso lv ing"  pro-  
nouns in the f ramework of the USL system and 
DRT. 
Let M = <U, Con> be the DRS represent ing  the 
mutual knowledge, in par t i cu la r  the past d iscourse.  
Let K(s) be the DRS represent ing the cur rent  sen- 
tence s and let p be a pronoun occur r ing  in s for  
which an appropr ia te  discourse re ferent  has to be 
found.  Let U be the set of d iscourse referents  a(p) 
accessible to p according to the accessibility re- 
lation given in sec. 2.2 
Let fu r ther  c be a funct ion that  a;)plies to U a(p) 
all the morphological, syntactic, and semantic cri- 
teria, given above and yields a set Uc(p) as result. 
Now three cases have to be distinguished: 
1. Uc(p)  is empty.  In this case the use of p was 
inappropr ia te .  
2. Card(Uc(p) )  is 1. In this case a re ferent  for  p 
has been uniquely  determined,  p is replaced by 
it in the DRS, and the procedure is f in ished.  
3. Card(Uc(p) )  is g reater  than 1. In this case the 
preference rules are appl ied.  
Let p be a funct ion that  applies to Uc(p) if the 
card ina l i ty  of Uc(p). is g reater  than 1 all the pre f -  
erence rules given above in the order  indicated 
there y ie ld ing the result  Up. Card(Up)  can never  
be 0, hence two cases are possible,  e i ther  the car-  
d ina l i ty  is 1, then a referent  has been un iquely  
determined and the pronoun p can be el iminated in 
K, o r  the card ina l i ty  is g reater  than 1, and then 
the use of p was inappropr ia te .  
It  can be in fer red  from the formulat ion of the 
pronominal izat ion rules given above, what morpho-  
logical and syntact ic  information has to be stored 
with the discourse referents  in the DRSs, and what 
semantic information has to be accessible from the 
schema of the database to enable the appl icat ion of 
the funct ions c and p. Hence, we wi l l  not spell out 
these detai ls here. 
4 Open questions and conclusions 
Many we l l -known and puzz l ing cases have not been 
addressed here, among them plura l  anaphora,  
so-cal led pronouns of laziness, one pronominal iza-  
t ion,  to name just  a few. 
We have not said anyth ing  about phenomena 
such as discourse topic ,  focus, or  coherence and 
the i r  inf luence on anaphora.  The i r  effects are cap- 
tu red  in our  preference rules to some degree,  but  
no one can prec ise ly  say how. Inspire of claims to 
the cont rary ,  we bel ieve that  much work  is st i l l  re- 
qu i red ,  before these notions can be used 
ef fect ive ly  in natural  language processing.  
By l imit ing ourselves to the re lat ive ly  
we l l -de f ined  communicative situation of database in- 
teract ion ,  we have been able to state prec ise ly ,  
what rules are appl icable in the f ragment  of lan- 
guage we are deal ing wi th .  We are cur rent ly  work -  
ing on the analysis of runn ing texts ,  but  again in a 
wel l -de l ineated domain, and we hope to be able to 
extend our  theory  on the basis of the exper ience 
gained.  
150 
We are convinced that serious progress in the 
understanding of anaphora and of discourse phe- 
nomena in general is only possible through a care- 
ful control of the environment, and on a solid 
syntactic and semantic foundation. 
References 
Astrahan, M. M., M. W. Blasgen, D. D. Chamber- 
lin, K. P. Eswaran, J. N. Gray, P. P. Gri f f i ths,  
W. F. King, R. A. Lorie, P. R. McJones, J. W. 
Mehl, (3. R. Putzolu, I. L. Traiger, B. W. Wade, 
V. Watson (1976): "System R: Relational Approach 
to Database Management", ACM Transactions on Da- 
tabase Systems, vol. 1, no. 2, June 1976, p. 97. 
Bertrand, O., J. J. D~udennarde, D. Starynke- 
r ich,  A. Stenbock-Fermor (1976): "User Applica- 
tion Generator", Proceedings of the IBM Technical 
Conference on Relational Data Base Systems, Bari, 
Italy, p. 83. 
Bolinger, D. (1979): "Pronouns in Discourse", in: 
T. Givon (ed,):  Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 12: 
Discourse and Syntax, Academic Press, New York, 
p. 289. 
Chastain, Ch. (1973): Reference and Context, 
Thesis, Princeton. 
Clark, H. H. and C. R. Marshall (1981): "Definite 
Reference and Mutual Knowledge", in: B. L. Web- 
ber, A. K. Joshi, and I . .A.  Sag (eds.):  Elements 
of Discourse Understanding, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, p. 10. 
Donnellan, K. S. (1978): "Speaker Reference, De- 
scriptions and Anaphora", in P. Cole (ed.) :  Syn- 
tax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics, Academic 
Press, New York, p. 47. 
Evans, O. (1980) : "Pronouns", Linguistic 
Inquiry,  vol. 11. 
(3rosz, B. J. (1977): "The Representation and Use 
of Focus in Dialogue Understanding", Technical 
Note 151, SRI International, Menlo Park, 
California. 
Guenthner, F. (1983a) "Discourse Representation 
Theory and Databases", forthcoming. 
(3uenthner, F. (1983b) "Representing Discourse 
Representation Theory in PROLO(3", forthcoming. 
Hirst, (3. (1981): Anaphora in Natural Language 
Understanding: A Survey, Springer, Heidelberg. 
Hofmann, J. (1976) : "Satzexterne freie 
nicht-referentiel le Verweisformen in juristischen 
Normtexten, unpublished dissertation, Univ. Re- 
gensburg. 
Kamp, H. (1981) "A Theory of Truth and Semantic 
Representation", in Groenendijk, J. et al Formal 
Methods in the Study of Language. Amsterdam. 
Lasnik, H. (1976): "Remarks on Coreference", 
Linguistic Analysis, vol. 2, hr. 1. 
Lehmann, H. (1978): " Interpretat ion of Natural 
Language in an Information System", IBM J. Res. 
Develop. vol. 22, p. 533. 
Lehmann, H. (1980): "A System for Answering 
Ouestions in German", paper presented at the 6th 
International Symposium of the ALLC, Cambridge, 
England. 
Ott, N. and M. Zoeppritz (1979): "USL - an Exper- 
imental Information System based on Natural Lan- 
guage", in L. Bolc (ed): Natural L~nguage Based 
Computer Systems, Hanser, Munich. 
Ott, N. and K. Horl~nder (1982): "Removing Re- 
dundant Join Operations in Queries Involving 
Views", TR 82.03.003, IBM Heidelberg Scientific 
Center. 
Reinhart, T. (1979): "Syntactic Domains for Se- 
mantic Rules", in F. (3uenthner and S. J. Schmidt 
(eds.):  Formal Semantics and Pragmatics for Na- 
tural Languages, Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Reinhart, T. (1983): "Coreference and Bound 
Anaphora: A Restatement of the Anaphora Ques- 
tions", Linguistics and Philosophy, vol. 6, p. 47. 
Sidner, C. L. (1981): "Focusing for Interpretation 
of Pronouns", AJCL, vol. 7, nr. 4, p. 217. 
Smaby, R. (1979): "Ambiguous Coreference with 
Quantif iers", in F. (3uenthner and S.J. Schmidt 
(eds)  Formal Semantics and Pragmatics for Na- 
tura| Languages, Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Smaby, R. (1981): "Pronouns and Ambiguity", in 
U. M6nnich (ed.) :  Aspects of Philosophical Logic, 
Reidel, Dordrecht. 
de Sope~a Pastor, L. (1982): "Grammar of Spanish 
for User Specialty Languages", TR 82.05.004, IBM 
Heidelberg Scientific Center. 
Webber, B. L. (1978): "A Formal Approach to Dis- 
course Anaphora", TR 3761, Bolt, Beranek & New- 
man, Cambr, idge, MA. 
Zoeppritz, M. (1983): Syntax for German in the 
User Specialty Languages System, Niemeyer, 
TObingen. 
151 
