TOWARDS BETTER UNDERSTANDING O15' ANAPHORA 
Barbara  Dun in -K@pH cz  
Institute of Informatics, Warsaw University 
P.O. Box  1210 
00-901 Warszawa,  Po land  
ABSTRACT 
Th is  paper  presents  a syntactical 
method of interpreting pronouns  in Polish, 
Us ing  the sur face structure of the sentence  
as  well as  grammat ica l  and  inflexional 
inlormation access ib le  dur ing syntactic 
analysis, an  area  of re ference is marked  out 
for each  persona l  and  possess ive  pronoun.  
Th is  a rea  consists of a few internal a reas  
inside the current sentence  and  an  external 
area, i.e. the part of the text p reced ing  it. 
In order  to determine that a rea  of re ference 
severa l  syntactic sentence- leve l  restrictions 
on  anaphora  interpretation are  formulated. 
Next, when looking at the area  of 
p ronoun 's  reference, all NPs  wh ich  number -  
-gender  agree  with the pronoun can  be 
selected and  this way  the set of sur face 
referents ol each  pronoun can  be  created. 
It can  be used  as  data for further semant ic  
analysis. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Reference  is one  of the central 
concepts  of any  linguistic theory. In recent 
research  into anaphora  the term "reference" 
has  been used  in three different senses  
( Szwedek ,  1981):  
(a )  as  a re la t ion  between the name and  the 
th ing  named (Ha l l  Par tee ,  1978)  
(b )  as  an  assoc ia t ion  between noun phrases  
and  menta l  ent i t ies  in  the language user ' s  
(Nash-%~ebber ,  1978)  
(c )  as  an  assoc ia t ion  between the  occur rence  
of phrases  in the  text  (Re inhar t ,  1981)  
However  the re fe rence  is  unders tood ,  
irl o rder  to in terpret  cor rec t ly  anaphora  on  the 
semant ic  leve l  ( (a )  and  (b ) ) ,  f i rs t  a s tage  
(C) is necessary .  
in this paper  I have  taken the point of 
v ie~ presented  under  (c). i shall d i scuss  the 
prob lem o~ onaphora  in Pol ish ser Atences. rvly 
altentioF, is focused  on  persona l  ond 
possess ive  pronouns  expt i c i te ly  occur r ing  in 
the text and  moreover  on  zero  pronouns ,  i.e. 
ellipsis of NP  in the subject position, specific 
for S lavon ic  languages .  
My  purpose  in the description of 
regularities of the re ference in the Pol ish 
language.  I shall express  them by defining the 
area  of p ronoun 's  references,  i.e. those  reg ions  
of the text where  its antecedents  shou ld  De 
found, q hese  sur face referents will be selected 
from among NPs  occurr ing in the sentence.  
The  research  on  anaphora  made for 
Engl ish has  led to the formulation of some 
structural rules us ing  such  relations as  
command,  c -command and  precede-and-command 
(Re inhar t ,  3.981). 
I have  been search ing  for ana logous  rules 
for Polish. But  two essential differences have  
to be considered:  
(i) grammat ica l  and  morpho log ica l  properties 
of Pol ish and  English; 
(ii) different grammat ica l  traditions. 
For  Engl ish  the rules concern ig  the 
core ference  of entities were  forrrulated on  the 
basis of generative-transformational g rammar .  
For  Pol ish the first prec ise description of 
Pol ish syntax  was  formulated only recently by  
Szpakowicz ,  who  based  his work  on  the 
f ramework  created  by  Sa lon i  (Saloni, 1976;  
Saloni and  Swidzinski ,  1981) .  It is a k ind of 
in,mediate-constituent g rammar ;  the grammat ica l  
categories (case, ~ender,  etc) are appl ied not 
only to single words ,  but also to compound 
phrases.  In my present  ~vork I have  limited my 
attention to the subset  of Pol ish descr ibed  
by Szpakowicz  (Szpako~Jvicz, 1983) .  
Folish is a highly inflexionat language and  
this fact has  many and  var ied consequences .  
Sur face  referents of the pronoun will be 
selected from among those NPs  wh ich  number -  
-gender  agree  with the pronoun.  Strictly 
speaking,  the grammat ica l  categories of the 
pronoun shou ld  be compatible with the 
categories of the NP ,  but in cases  of 
neutralization they cannot  be fully determined.  
My  method of determining the areas  of p ronoun 's  
reference is a syntachc  one, because  it is 
based  on  morpho log ica l  and  syntactical 
properties of the Pol ish language.  I assume 
139 
the availability of the sur face structure of the 
sentence  as  well as  grammat ica l  and  inflexional 
information access ib le  dur ing a syntactic 
analysis. I detiberately do  not make use  of 
any  semant ic  information, t ry ing  to get  the 
most  out of grammar,  ri'he feature I intend t O 
prov ide is a complete  definition of the area  
of p ronoun 's  reference. 
A. 
II AREA OF REFERENCE 
Internal and  external a reas  of re ference 
In the process  of determining the sur face  
referents of the pronoun,  first the area  of its 
re ference shou ld  be marked  out. Th is  area, 
i.e. those  reg ions of the text, where  its 
antecedents  shou ld  be  found, is usual ly made 
up  of severa l  internal re ference arehsp i.e. 
the appropr iate bits of the current sentence,  
and  an  external area, the part of the text 
p reced ing  the current sentence.  The  list of 
internal a reas  depends  on  the syntactic 
position of the pronoun in the sentence.  
q'o determine these areas  it is necessary  to 
formulate sentence- leve l  anaphora  restrictions 
for Polish.. These  rules will determine the 
conditions of both obligatory core ference  and  
0bii~atory non-core ference  of entities. Thus  
we have  two situations to consider:  
(i) in the case  of obligatory core ference  one  
internal area  of re ference containing the 
appropr iate referent shou ld  be marked  
out ;  
( i i )  in the  case  of  ob l igatory"  non-core ference  
the  e lements  wh ich  are  fo rb idden  as  
sur face  re ferents  o f  the  pronoun shou ld  
be exc luded  f rom the in terna l  a rea .  
The  core ference  of  ent i t ies  wh ich  is  qua l i f i ed  
on  the bas i s  of  some other  p remises  w i l l  be 
ca l led  admiss ib le  core ference .  
A t  our  d i sposa l  we  have  a mul t i l eve led ,  
h ie rarch ic  sur face  s t ruc ture  of  the sentence .  
Genera l ly ,  it seems that  in terna l  a reas  can  be 
ident i f ied  with the  const i tuents  on  the  h i~hest  
leve l :  sub jec t ,  ob jec ts ,  mod i f ie rs ,  regard less  
of their syntactic realization. Strictly speak ing,  
noun as  well as  NP  or any  sentential 
structures can  be instances  of internal a reas  
of re fe rence .  
The partitioning of sentence  (i) illustrates i%: 
(i) " (Ewa i Piotr) poszli (do niego) 
(z dz iewczynq,  kt6r~% w{a~nie  spotkali)". 
"Eva  and  Peter  went  to h im with a girl 
wh ich  j us t  fret". 
\[3. Ru les  ccncern in~ core ference  of 
entities in Pol ish 
i. The  basic criterion of exc lud ing 
core ference  
The  following rules of exc lud ing  the 
core ference  of entities concern  a level 
deeper  than that on  the surface, because  they 
refer to syntactical functions of phrases  in the 
sentence.  The  first rule presents  the prob lem 
of core ference  of the subject and  other nomina l  
groups,  i.e. objects and  nomina l  trodifiers, in 
short called objects. It concerns  reflexive 
pronouns ,  so  it shou ld  be noted first that they 
differ from those in English, eg.: 
- possess ive  pronoun "sw6j" may have  one  of 
the following mean ings :  his, her, its. 
- reflexive pronoun "siebie" can  mean:  himself, 
herself, itself, myself, ourself, yourself, 
themse lves .  
The  bas ic  criterion of exc lud in~ 
cor ference  I have  formulated from the 
analytical point of view: 
(R  I) If the ob jec t  is expressed  by  means  of 
a reflexive pronoun,  then it is 
coreferential with the subject; in other 
cases  the referential identity of the 
subject and  object ist exc luded.  
Th is  criterion is appl ied both to look for 
coreferents of objects - b locking the subject, 
and  in testing the possible antecedents  of the 
subject - b lock ing the objects. 
Let us  cons ider  some examples :  
Mean ing  of symbols :  
.~ ,- obligatory core ference  
, ./ r obligatory non-core ference  
~ --.- admiss ib le  core ference  
re ference to external a rea  
zero  pronoun 
(2) "Ewa zapyta{a i o to" 
"Eva  asked  her  about  it" 
4 (3) ~ ~ i . ~  o to" 
7~ - 
"Aske~e m her  about  it" 
(4 )  "Ona  zapyta{a  i o to"  
"She  asked  her  about  it" 
(5) "On zapyta~ Jana  o Piotra" 
"He  asked  John  about  Peter" 
(6) "P io t r  nala{ sobie piw" 
"Peter poured  himself beer" 
Rule R 1 ho lds  for possess ive  pronouns :  
(7) "Ewa uwielbia swo j~ przyjaci6~k~" 
"Eva  adores  her  friend" 
Now let us  have  a loo\[~ at the case  of the 
preposed  PPs  so difficult to interpret in 
English. The  basic criterion of exc lud ing  
core ference  covers  these phrases  too: 
(8) "ik'~.gle, obok  J ana, ~) zobaczy~ wqza"  
"Suddenly ,  near  John, saw a snake"  mast  
140 
(9) "Nagle, obok  niego, ~ zobaczy~ w@za"  
"Suddenly, near him, saw a snake"  
masc  
(10) "Nagle, obok  siebie, zobaczy{  w~-a"  
"Suddenly, near himself, saw a snake"  
(ii) "Nagle, obok  siebie, Jn  
masc  
- -  zobaczy~ w~za"  
"Suddenly, near himself, he saw a snake"  
In examples  (10) and  (13.) the reflexive 
pronoun has  appeared. These  are the only 
two cases  in wh ich  the coreference with the 
subject of the main sentence is permitted and  
even  obligator'y. Such  an interpretation is 
correct irrespective of the position of PP  in 
the sentence, i.e. it does  not depend on 
whether  this phrase  precedes  or follows the 
subject. 
The  basic criterion of excluding 
coreference works  as follows: 
(i) it is valid only for a simple clause, 
without blocking coreference between the 
elements of the main sentence and  the 
constituents of embedded clauses; 
(ii) it is obligatory on  every  level of the 
sentence, i.e. it concerns  all the 
sentence constructions irrespective of 
their position in the structure of the 
whole sentence. 
Examples  (12) to (14) illustrate this: 
12) "Piot"~ nie wiedzia~, czy '~ pdjdzie do 
kina" 
"Peter did not know, whether  would  go 
to the movies" 
13) "Jan zapomnia{, o co Pio?.F ~Q pyta{" 
"John forgot, what Peter asked  him aboulP 
. ~ 
14) Jan spotka{ ch*opca, kt6ry eo dawno 
ni e"o d~ e c~z'ii . . . . .  "4" 
"John met a boy, who  didn't visit him 
for lon~" 
The  interpretation of reflexive pronouns  
is not so easy  as the criterion R 1 suggests. 
These  pronouns  can  be i nvo lved  in  various 
compound phrases  which often are ambiguous.  
Especially infinitive phrases  are hard to 
interpret. In order to do this correctly, an 
imp l i c i t  agent  wh ich  w i l l  be ca l led  fu r ther  the  
deep sub jec t ,  shou ld  be obta ined .  It o f ten  
needs  a few hypotheses  to be formulated. 
Let us consider an example. The  sentence: 
(15) "Jan kaza{ s tuzqcemu umyd siq" 
can be translated in two ways  which exactly 
? . m ~lve the sense  of possible Polish 
interpretations: 
(15.1) "John told (the sevant) (to wash  him)" 
(15.2) "John told (the servant) (to wash  
himself )" 
In the infinitive phrase "umyd si@" ("to wash  
him" or "to wash  himself") which is standing 
in the object position, the reflexive pronoun 
"si~" is coreferential with the deep  subject of 
this phrase. Thus  its interpretation has  to be 
determined. Here  we have  two possibilities: 
(i) the previoux ob jec t -  "servant" - 
interpretation (15.1) 
(it) the subject of the main sentence - "John" 
- interpretation (15.2) 
One  of them is the referent of the deep  
subject. And  so we come to the next rule: 
(R 2) In order to interpret the infinitive 
phrase, the deep  subject of the phrase 
has  to be selected from among the 
previous object (if any) and  the 
subject of the main sentence. 
2. Exc ludin~ the coreference between 
objects 
The  next sentence-level restriction of 
anaphora  interpretation regulates the problem 
of coreference of l'4Ps other than a subject, 
i.e. objects, between them. 
(R 3 
(16) 
(18) 
) The  coreference of particular objets 
is excluded. This  in an  obligatory 
non-coreference. 
"Jan zapyta{ eo o Piotra 
"John asked  him about Peter" 
"Jan zapyta~ e_qo o nie~o' 
" Jo2  ~ a ~ u t  him" 
,, ja n zapyta, P i o ~ J ~ o  H 
"John asked  Peter about him" 
This rule does  not hold for possess ive  
pronouns  which  in Polish do not create NPs  
by themselves. If these pronouns  occur  in 
objects, they may be coreferential with objects 
preceding them Cadmissible coreference). 
(19) "JaD zapyta~ P io t~ o ieRo brata" 
/ - -~  
"John asked  Peter about his brother" 
Rule R 2 is only valid for a simple clause, ? 
but it concerns  all the sentence constructions 
irrespective of their position in the whole  
sentence. 
141 
3. Ru les  of interpretinq compound 
sentences  
"l~he next group of problems concerns  
the coreference of entities in a compound 
sentence, including the question of the subject. 
In a Polish sentence it needs  not be explicit. 
Ellipsis of the I'~P in the subject position, 
often called "the elided subject", is a natural 
way  of express ing "thematic cont,nu,ty' " and  
exemplifies an  unaccented  position in the 
sentence. On  the other hand, the pronoun as 
the subject stands in syntactic opposition to 
the elided subject (zero pronoun)  and  
exemplifies an  accented position in the 
sentence. 
~,'hile determining the antecedent of the 
subject of a simple sentence or a main  clause 
in a compound sentence (explicit or implicit) 
we  reach out to the external area of 
references. However ,  the basic criterion of 
excluding coreference is still valid. 
(20) "Oh zap~a{ ~.~ o Pio~ra' 
" H e ~ t  Peter" 
The  interpretation of compound sentences  is 
d~icult and  somet imes  leads to ambiguous  
results. The  following rules concern  mainly the 
coreference (or non-coreference) of elided 
subjects i n  co-ordinate and  aubordinate 
clauses. In the case  of co-ordinate clauses 
t~,o rules can  be formulated: 
(R 4) I~or each  two clauses in a sequence,  
if the elided subject is in the second 
clause, then the subject of the first 
clause should be extrapolated there 
(obliRatory coreference). 
"Piotr podszed~ do okna" (21) wsta~ od 
"Peter left the table and  approached the 
w indow"  
(R 5) 5"or each  two c lauses i n  a sequence,  
the pronoun or zero pronoun subject 
in the first clause cannot be 
coreferential with the non-pronoun 
subject of the second clause 
(obligatory non-coreference).  
(22) ? ~  od/to~,~-piot~ podszed~ do 
okna" 
"lie left the table and  Peter approached 
the w indow"  
Interpreting subordinate c lauses depends  on  
the relative position of the main  and  the 
embedded clause. 
(R 6) If the embedded clause precedes  the 
main clause and  if both have  elided 
subjects, these have  to be coreferential 
(obligatory coreference). 
(zJ) Zanim 4~.~2z~>~ zgasi~ ~wiat~o" 
"Before leftmasc, turned Offmasc the light" 
(24) "Poniewa~ % ~ ?  zapyta~ o to" 
"Because forgot , asked about it" masc  masc  
(R ?) The  elided subject in the embedded 
clause is a natural way  of indicating 
the nearest candidate - the  previous 
object (if it is there) or the subject 
of the main  sentence (admissible 
coreference ). 
" -  - -  "'--" - -  ze ' *~ p6jdzie do (25) "Jan zapewni~ Plotra, 
kina" "~ __ -#' 
(R 8 
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
"John promised Peter, that will go to 
the movies" 
) The pronoun or zero pronoun subject 
in the main sentence can be 
coreferential with the non-pronoun 
subject of the embedded clause which 
precedes the main sentence (admissible 
coreference),  but cannot be 
Coreferential with the non-pronoun 
subject of the embedded clause 
following the main sentence (obligatory 
non-coreference ). 
"Zanin Jan w-y-szed{, ~ zgasi{ ~wiat{o" 
"Before John left, turned off the light" masc  l 
"~ z ~gasi{ ~wiat~o, zanim J aan wyszed{"  
{ 
"Turned  off the light, before John left" masc  
,, O.~n-~ni e / _ _  wiedzia~, czy ~iot.r. 156jdzie do 
kina" 
"He didn't know,  whether  Peter will go 
to the movies" 
4. Interpretation of relative c lauses 
Relative c lauses are quite easy  to 
interpret in Polish. Either their subject or 
object is replaced with  pronoun "which" or 
"what" or their equivalents (only such  types 
of relative c lauses are descr ibed in the 
Szpakowicz  grammar). These  pronouns  
a lways  indicate the NP  next to which they 
stand and  inherit gender, number  and  person  
from it. rfhus the obligatory coreference of 
relative pronoun and  this NP  is determined. 
Let us have  a look at some examples: 
(29) "E~'a zaprosi~ca Ani@, kt6r~ ~ zna{a od 
dawna"  
"Eva  invited Ann  t which 
for lon~" 
had  known 
fem 
142 
(30) "Ewa zaprosi~a An~ro~'~'~ '~ jsA .  od 
dawn~'  
"Eva  inv i ted  Ann,  which  
(~ ' - J~ct )  
her for fang" 
had  known 
III CONCLUSION 
The  above  syntactic method of 
in terpret ing  pronouns  yields only partial results 
- the list of internal areas of reference or the 
external area, both with certain restrictions on 
coreference, are determined. Next, more  
detailed results can  be obtained. 1~'hen looking 
at the internal areas, all NPs  which number -  
-gender  agree with the pronoun should be 
selected and  a list of surface referents of 
p ronoun together with a list of elements 
blocked as the referents can  be drawn up. 
If no internal areas are marked  out, the 
external area with the list of b locked elements 
is the result of the method presented here. 
Similary, while only admissible coreference is 
determined, the external area is marked  out 
too and  the list of b locked elements remains 
valid. On  the other hand  the obligatory 
coreference makes  it possible to define the 
appropriate antecedent of the pronoun. The  
list of surface referents may be ordered by 
assunzin~ the specific method of traversing the 
parsin~ tree. I expext, that as  for English, 
recency  understood as a physical distance 
between the pronoun and  its antecedent can  be 
the first approximation of the probability. 
As  expected the results of the method 
applied here need  semantic verification. But at 
the same time they are a reasonable  data for 
further semantic analysis. Data arrived at in 
this way  make  this process  much easier. 
it seems that a similar procedure  can  
be carried out for other languages. Full 
grammatical information should be used  
wherever  it can  s impl i fy  such  complex  
process  as the semantic analysis. 
NASH-WEBBER,  Bonn ie  Lynn  (1978). 
A Formal  Approach  to 
D iscourse  Anaphora .  Phl) 
thesis, Harvard  University 
PARTEE,  Barbara  Hall (1978). Bound 
Variables and  Other Anaphors  in: 
Wal tz  1978, 79-85. 
RE INHART,  Tanya  (1981). Definite NP  
Anaphora  and  C-Command Domains.  
in: Linguistic Inquiry, Vol 12, No  4, 
Fall 1981. 
SALONI,  
SALONI 
Zygmunt  (1976). Cechy  sk{adniowe 
polskiego czasownika  (Syntax 
Properties of Polish Verb). 
Ossol ineum, P race  j~zykoznawcze ,  
1976. 
Zygmunt,  SWIDZINSK I  Marek  (1981). 
Skgadnia wsp6{czesnego  j~zyka 
polskiego (Syntax of Contemporary  
Polish Language) .  1~'ydawnictwa 
Uniwersytetu 9Varszawskiego,  1981. 
SZPAKOIA ' ICZ ,  Stanis{aw (1983). Formalny  
opis sk~adnio~y" zda6  polskich. 
(Formal  Syntactic Description of 
Polish sentences).  INydawnic twa 
Uniwersytetu "vVarszawskiego, 1983. 
SZWEDEK, Aleksander  (1981). Word Order ,  
Sentence, Stress and Reference  
in Engl ish and  Polish. WSP 
Bydgoszcz ,  1981. 
V ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to acknowledge  Janusz  
Bie6 and Stanistaw Szpakowicz  for their 
helpfuU comments  on  this paper. 
H IRST ,  
HOBBS,  
HOBBS,  
REFERENCES 
Oraeme (1979). Anaphora  in Natural 
Language Understanding: A Survey. 
I~ept. of Compute  Science, 
University of British Columbia. 
Jerry R (1976). Computational 
Approach  to D iscourse Analysis. 
Art i f i c ia l  In te l l igence Center,  
SRI  I n te rnat iona l  
Jerry lq (1978). Coherence  and  
Coreference. Technica l  note 168. 
Artificial Intelligence Center, 
SRI in ternat iona l  
143 
