THE RESOLUTION OF LOCAL SYNTACTIC  AMBIGUITY  
BY THE HUMAN SENTENCE PROCESSING MECHANISM. 
Gerry A l tmann 
Department  of L ingu is t ics  
Un ivers i ty  of Ed inburgh  
George Square 
Ed inburgh EH8 9LL. (GB) 
ABSTRACT 
The reso lut ion  of local syntact ic  
ambigu i ty  by the Human Sentence Process ing  
Mechan ism is a topic  which has provoked 
cons iderab le  interest  in recent years. At 
issue is whether  such ambigu i t ies  are 
resolved on the basis of syntact ic  
in format ion  a lone (cf. Min imal  A t tachment  
Frazier, 1979), or whether  they are 
reso lved on some other basis. Cra in  & 
Steedman (1982) suggest  that the 
reso lut ion  process is governed not by 
Min imal  At tachment  but instead by whether  
or not a re fer r ing  express ion  prov ides 
suf f ic ient  in format ion  with which to 
ident i fy  a unique referent.  Such an 
approach rel ies on the prov is ion  of 
adequate  contextua l  informat ion,  someth ing  
which has been lacking in exper iments  
which have been c la imed to support  Min imal  
Attachment.  In this paper I shal l  
cons ider  a number of such exper iments ,  and 
the d i f fe rent  patterns of results  which 
emerge once contextua l  in fo rmat ion  is 
provided. A l though the importance of 
contextual  in format ion  wil l  be stressed, I 
shall  br ief ly  cons ider  reasons why pars ing 
preferences  ar ise in the absence of any 
expl ic i t  pr ior context. The conc lus ion  is 
that computat iona l  models  of syntact ic  
ambigu i ty  reso lut ion  which are based on 
ev idence which has ignored contextua l  
cons iderat ions  are models  of someth ing 
other than natural  language processing.  
There has been much cont roversy  
recent ly  sur round ing  the processes 
respons ib le  for the "garden path" ef fect  
Ln the fo l lowing kind of example: 
The oil tycoon sold the o f f - shore  
oil tracts for a lot of money 
wanted to kil l  J.R. 
The garden path ef fect  ar ises here because 
the Human Sentence Process ing  Mechan ism 
("HSPM") encounters,  dur ing the process ing  
of this sentence, a local syntact ic  
ambiguity.  The word "sold" is ambiguous:  
it can be in terpreted  ei ther  as a s imple 
active, or it can be in terpreted  as a past 
part ic ip le,  in a reduced passive. The 
only way to make the whole str ing into a 
sentence is to in terpret  it as a reduced 
form of the passive. However, what seems 
to happen in this (and similar)  examples 
is that people tend to in terpret  the word 
"sold" as the main verb. This tendency  
leads them down a syntact ic  garden path. 
So the HSPM exhib i ts  a p re ference  for 
one analys is  over another  when faced with 
a local ambiguity .  But why? A number of 
suggest ions  have been made concern ing  
this. One suggest ion,  o r ig ina l ly  proposed 
by K imbal l  (1973) and fo l lowed up more 
recent ly  by Fraz ier  (1979) and Rayner, 
Carlson, & Fraz ier  (1983), is that the 
HSPM takes into account  the syntact ic  
s t ructure  of these sentences.  There are 
two poss ib le  s t ructures  which could be 
ass igned to the ambiguous  sentence 
f ragment  
The oil tycoon sold the o f f - shore  
oil t racts . . . 
The reduced pass ive in terpreta t ion  
requires  an extra NP node as compared to 
the main verb interpretat ion .  K imbal l  
(1975) and Fraz ier  suggest  that when more 
than one in terpreta t ion  is possible,  one 
pursues that in terpreta t ion  which creates 
the s t ructure  with fewest  nodes. This is 
what Fraz ier  cal ls the Pr inc ip le  of 
Min imal  At tachment .  
This s t ructura l  hypothes is  proposes, 
then, that an in i t ia l  dec is ion  is made on 
grounds of syntact ic  s t ructure  alone. If 
it subsequent ly  turns out to be the wrong 
dec is ion  (on grounds of " implaus ib i l i ty" ) ,  
the a l te rnat ive  ana lys is  (which is 
ident i f ied  on the basis of " themat ic  
se lect ion" - Rayner  et al, 1983) is then, 
and only then, attempted.  In support  of 
this claim, Rayner  et al co l lec ted  
reading t imes and eye movement  data for 
sentences which, syntact i ca l ly  speaking, 
a l low two a t tachment  sites for a 
prepos i t iona l  phrase: one attachment,  to 
an NP, requires an extra NP node as 
compared to the other attachment,  which is 
to a VP. 
123 
The burglar  b lew open the safe wi th  the 
dynamite  (Minimal a t tachment  to VP) 
The burglar  b lew open the safe with the 
d iamonds (Non-minimal  a t tachment  to NP) 
In the case of the non-min ima l ly  a t tached 
version, the correct  a t tachment  (to the 
NP) would be a t tempted  only  after  the 
minimal  a t tachment  to the VP had f i rst  
been tried. As they had predicted,  
read ing t imes to the non-min ima l ly  
a t tached vers ions were s ign i f i cant ly  
~onqer  than to the min ima l ly  a t tached 
vers ions.  
An a l te rnat ive  to Min imal  A t tachment  
is proposed by Ford, Bresnan, & Kaplan 
(1982), who suggest  that these pre ferences  
ar ise from the order in which 
lex ica l / syntact i c  rules in the grammar can 
be accessed (of. Wanner 's  
" implementat ion"  of Min imal  At tachment ,  
1980). Ford et al. 's  theory of Lexica l  
P re ference  is more powerfu l  than Min imal  
At tachment  because this o rder ing  can, in 
part, be determined  by the actual  lexical  
items which are involved. But these two 
proposa ls  are both, in effect,  
s t ruc tura l ly  based. They take no account  
of the re ferent ia l  funct ion  of the 
par t icu lar  const ruct ions  involved. 
Stephen Crain (Crain, 1980, d i scussed  
in Cra in  & Steedman, 1982) noted that what 
many of the garden-path  sentences  have in 
common is that of the two poss ib le  
analyses,  one is funct iona l ly  equ iva lent  
to, or ident ica l  with, a res t r i c t ive  
re lat ive clause. Nounphrases  are used by 
the speaker to refer to objects.  The 
funct ion of a res t r i c t ive  re la t ive  is to 
give add i t iona l  in fo rmat ion  as to who or 
what is being ta lked about. This 
add i t iona l  in format ion  is necessary  
because wi thout  it, there would  be 
insuf f i c ient  ev idence with which to 
determine  who or what was being re fer red  
to. So res t r i c t ive  re lat ives  are used 
because if we'd just heard the express ion  
"the oil tycoon" or "the safe" we would  
not have known just which cand idate  "oil 
tycoon" or which cand idate  "safe" was 
intended. But wi%ere do these d i f fe rent  
"candidate .... oil tycoons" and "safes" come 
from? Normally,  they must p resumably  be 
int roduced into the d i scourse  some time 
before these target  sentences are 
encountered,  and represented by speaker  
and hearer in some kind of model of the 
discourse.  There is a sense in which all 
of these examples are unnatura l  because 
each sentence is presented in isolat ion.  
We refer to "the oil tycoon" and "the 
o f f - shore  oil tracts",  but we've never 
ment ioned them before. To contro l  for 
this, we should real ly  present  these 
target sentences embedded in a context.  
S tephen Cra in  did just this: us ing an 
incrementa l  g rammat ica l i ty  judgement  task, 
and a c lass of ambigu i ty  which is 
d i f fe rent  in form but the same in 
pr inc ip le  (see below), he showed that  
garden path ef fects  could be overcome or 
induced depend ing  on the re ferent ia l  
nature  of the context  (i.e. depend ing  on 
whether  just one "oil tycoon" or more than 
one "oil tycoon" had been in t roduced in 
the preced ing  text). The work of Cra in  
suggests  that a major  methodo log ica l  
shor tcoming  in the work of Fraz ier  (1979), 
Rayner  et al (1983) and Ford et al 
(1982) is the absence of any context  
w i th in  which the par t i cu la r  syntact i c  
const ruct ions  they were s tudy ing could be 
a l lowed to function. There is thus a very 
de f in i te  sense in which the process ing  of 
these const ruct ions  wil l  have been 
abnormal .  It fo l lows that a su i tab le  test 
of Rayner  et a l . 's  c la ims is to rep l i ca te  
their  exper iment  us ing the same read ing  
t ime task, but with the prov is ion  of 
contexts  which are fe l i c i tous  with one or 
other  of the two vers ions  of the i r  
examples.  
The fo l lowing contexts  were dev ised  
for an exper iment  (Altmann, forthcoming,  
and A l tmann & Steedman, for thcoming) :  
T__oo ~nduce a t tachment  to NP 
A burg lar  car ry ing  some dynami te  
broke into an he i ress ' s  house. 
Once ins ide he found two safes. 
One of them had some d iamonds  
ins ide wh i l s t  the other had 
several  pr ice less  emeralds.  
To induce a t tachment  to VP 
A burg lar  car ry ing  some dynami te  
broke into an he i ress 's  house. 
Once ins ide he found a safe and a 
jewelry box. One of them had some 
d iamonds ins ide whi l s t  the other 
had several  pr ice less  emeralds.  
M in imal  (V_~P) a t tachment  
The burg lar  b lew open the safe 
with the dynamite.  
Non-min ima l  (NP) a t tachment  
The burg lar  b lew open the safe 
with the d iamonds.  
These examples  are "min ima l ly -d i f fe rent"  
to the extent  that the only d i f fe rence  
between them is the change from "two 
safes" to "a safe and a jewelry box". 
This is a change which, in theory, a f fects  
only the card ina l i ty  of the set of 
"safes". 
It was found that there was a s t rong 
124 
effect  of re ferent ia l  context  on the non- 
min imal ly  (NP) a t tached targets  (230 
msec) . Furthermore,  reading t imes to 
these were cons iderab ly  faster than 
reading t imes to the min imal ly  (VP) 
a t tached vers ions (there was a d i f fe rence  
of 348 msec in the "NP- inducing" 
condit ions,  and 190 msec overal l  I ). This 
is of course the reverse of what  would be 
expected on a Min imal  A t tachment  or 
I,exical P re ference  account.  Ne i ther  of 
these could account  for this ef fect  
w i thout  having to d iscount  the 
exper imenta l  ev idence which cur rent ly  
supports  them. 
However ,  it was also found that there 
was n__oo ef fect  of context  on the min imal ly  
(VP) at tached targets (the d i f fe rence  in 
reading time across the two context  
condi t ions  was only 78 msec). This was 
surpr is ing given that the "VP- inducing" 
context  should have been fe l ic i tous  wi th  
this target, and the "NP- inducing" context  
infe l ic i tous.  It became apparent,  
however, that ne i ther  of these contexts  
was in fact fe l ic i tous with VP-at tachment .  
The funct ion of a PP when at tached to 
an NP, in these examples, is to provide 
addi t iona l  and necessary  in format ion  with 
which to ident i fy  a par t icu lar  ob ject  in 
the d iscourse  model. As such it must be 
prov id ing GIVEN in format ion  (cf. C lark  & 
Haviland, 1977). The funct ion of a PP 
when attached to a verb, is to prov ide NEW 
informat ion about the act ion denoted by 
the verb: the burg lar  d idn ' t  s imply b low 
open the safe, he blew it open with the 
dynamite.  This in turn, presupposes  that 
the act ion denoted by the verb ("blow 
open") is GIVEN. In the so -ca l led  "VP- 
inducing" context, this was not the case: 
the co--text (that is, the preced ing text) 
was not fe l ic i tous with the VP~attachment .  
A second exper iment  was run in which the 
"blowing open" was known about  by subjects  
in advance of the target  sentence (i.e. 
was Given), and this time, strong ef fects 
of context  were found on both kinds of 
target  (113 msec for NP-at tached targets 
across the two condi t ions  of context, and 
358 msec for the VP-at tached targets) .  
Once again, the non-min ima l ly  at tached 
targets were s ign i f i cant ly  faster than the 
min imal ly  at tached targets (486 msec in 
the NP- induc ing  condit ion,  and 245 msec 
overal l ) .  
What seems to be important,  then, is 
not so much the s t ructure  of a 
construct ion,  but rather the 
presuppos i t ions  which are impl icated by 
its use. If these presuppos i t ions  have 
I All reported d i f fe rences  were 
f icant at least at p<O.05. 
s ign i -  
been sat is f ied  by the preced ing  d iscourse,  
then that const ruct ion  wil l  be favoured 
over a const ruct ion  whose assoc ia ted  
presuppos i t ions  have not been sat is f ied.  
This not ion is important  because its 
app l i ca t ion  to another  class of ambigu i ty  
phenomena suggests  that ev idence 
prev ious ly  thought  to favour lexical  or 
s t ructura l  accounts  of the reso lut ion  
process does not bear on the issue of 
ambigu i ty  reso lut ion  at all. 
In the fo l lowing ambiguous  example,  
the complement  c lause ana lys is  of the 
"that-c lause" is pre fer red  to the re la t ive  
c lause ana lys is  (e.g. Wanne~, Kaplan, & 
Shiner, 1974). 
The boy told the gir l  that he 
l iked the story 
Furthermore,  even when the re la t ive  c lause 
ana lys is  is in i t ia l ly  chosen, these 
examples  take longer to process  (via a 
reading t ime measure) than when the 
complement  ana lys is  is chosen (e.g. 
Wanner, Kaplan, & Shiner, 1974; Altmann, 
forthcoming) ,  In other words, the 
re lat ive  c lause analys is  is not just the 
least  preferred,  but is also the more 
"complex". The general  exp lanat ion  is 
that, in the example above, the noun 
phrase "the girl" is p re ferent ia l l y  
t reated as a s imple NP, and not as the 
f irst  NP const i tuent  in a complex NP. 
Wanner  et al (1974) and Wanner  (1980) 
model  these ef fects  using an ATN, and show 
that they can be made to ar ise from 
pecu l ia r i t ies  of the order in which arcs 
leave certa in  states. Fraz ier  & Fodor 
(1978) cite this observat ion  in support  of 
Min imal  At tachment ,  whi ls t  Ford et al 
(1982) would predict  this ef fect  on the 
basis of their  theory of lexical  and 
syntact ic  preferences,  in which the s imple 
NP expans ion  is ordered before the complex 
NP expansion.  
With regard to the pre ference  for 
complements  over relat ives,  Cra in 's  
or ig ina l  demonst ra t ion  of re ferent ia l  
context  ef fects  used examples which 
exh ib i ted  this same class of local 
ambiguity.  However, by the nature of the 
task he employed, Crain did not address  
the issue of complexi ty .  
Rest r i c t ive  re lat ives  prov ide Given 
informat ion,  and the in format ion  conta ined  
wi th in  the re lat ive  must there fore  be 
matched aga inst  in format ion  which a l ready 
exists  in the hearer 's  model of the 
universe.  This match ing process 
presumably  requires a cer ta in  amount of 
inferencing,  or "br idging" (of. Hav i land 
& Clark, 1974; Sanford & Garrod, 1981). 
Complement  c lauses requi re  no such 
match ing  process, and are there fore  less 
complex. The in ferenc ing  process can only 
125 
be contro l led  for if the mater ia l s  under 
study are preceded by fe l ic i tous co-texts.  
To assess the cont r ibut ion  of in fe renc ing  
to process ing time, an exper iment  was run 
(Altmann, forthcoming)  using the fo l lowing 
examples (which are s imi lar  to those used 
by Crain, 1980). 
" INFERENCING" 
A po l i ceman was quest ion ing  two 
women. He was susp ic ious  of one 
of them but not of the other. 
"MINIMAL INFERENCING" 
A po l i ceman was quest ion ing  two 
women. He had his d Qubt$ about  
one of them but not about  the oth- 
er. 
RELAT IVE  CLAUSE TARGET 
The po l i ceman told the woman that 
h_ee had his doubts  about  to tel l  
the truth. 
COMPLEMENT CLAUSE TARGET 
The po l i ceman told the woman that 
he had his doubts  about  her c lever  
alibi. 
(The under l in ing  was not present  in the 
exper imenta l  items.) The amount  of 
in ferenc ing  requi red to process the 
re lat ive target  was man ipu la ted  by 
changing the (under l ined) word ing  in the 
preceding co- text  from "was susp ic ious  of" 
(" inferencing")  to "had his doubts  about" 
("minimal in ferenc ing") .  Apart  from 
f inding strong ef fects  of context  ( thereby 
rep l icat ing Cra in 's  exper iment  but with a 
d i f fe rent  methodo logy  - read ing  time), it 
was found that there was n__q abso lute  
d i f fe rence  between complement  targets  and 
re lat ive  targets  once context  @nd 
in ferenc ing  were cont ro l led  for (only 31 
msec in the "minimal in ferenc ing"  
cond i t ion  vs. 385 msec in the 
" inferencing" condit ion) .  
It would appear, then, that much of 
the ev idence c i ted in the l i terature  
concern ing  the reso lut ion  of local 
syntact ic  ambigu i ty  has been 
mis in terpreted  because these studies have 
~ailed to cons ider  the re ferent ia l  
funct ion of the const ruct ions  in quest ion.  
An account  of syntact ic  ambigu i ty  
reso lut ion  has been a l luded to which is 
based on a not ion of re ferent ia l  context  
and d iscourse  models.  More spec i f ica l ly ,  
it is an account  based on the act of 
es tab l i sh ing  what is, and what  is not, 
a l ready known to the hearer. But a l though 
it can exp la in  pars ing pre ferences  when a 
target sentence is embedded in a 
d iscourse,  can it a lso account  for the 
preferences  exh ib i ted  in i so lated 
sentences  (the "null context"  cf. the 
or ig ina l  "oil tycoon" example)?  
In the absence of any preced ing  
discourse,  there can exist  no d i scourse  
model  w i th in  which to in tegrate  the 
in fo rmat ion  conta ined  wi th in  the iso lated 
sentence.  In such cases, noth ing  can be 
succes fu l ly  in terpreted  as Given 
in format ion.  It fo l lows that  all  incoming 
mater ia l  must  be t reated as if it p rov ides  
New informat ion.  If the incoming mater ia l  
is ambiguous,  between a reading which 
promises  New in fo rmat ion  (e.g. a 
complement  clause) and one which  promises  
G iven in fo rmat ion  (e.g. a re la t ive  
clause),  then in the null  context  the 
former in terpreta t ion  must  be chosen. In 
general ,  if there is a cho ice between a 
complex  NP analys is ,  wh ich  impl icates  
add i t iona l  G iven in fo rmat ion  by which to 
ident i fy  the in tended referent,  and a 
s imple NP analys is ,  then in the nul l  
context2the  s imple  NP ana lys is  must  be 
chosen. 
S t ruc tura l ly  based theor ies  of local  
syntact ic  ambigu i ty  reso lu t ion  can account  
for the null  context  data, but cannot  
account  for the data concern ing  contextua l  
e f fects  on ambigu i ty  reso lut ion.  The 
present  account  can be app l ied  to both 
sets of data. 
Many studies  have, in the past, 
v iewed syntax as being concerned with  the 
re la t ions  which hold w i th in  s ing le  
sentences.  Such a v iew is shor t -s ighted,  
however.  Wi th in  a dia logue,  the speaker ' s  
in tent ion  is to evoke a spec i f i c  set of 
2 A l though this exp la ins  the prefer -  
ence, in the nul l  context,  for complement  
c lauses over re la t ive  clauses,  it does not 
exp la in  the increased complex i ty  of rela- 
t ive clauses. This is exp la ined  as fol- 
lows: the re lat ive  c lause in tepretat ion  
v io la tes  more presuppos i t ions  (concern ing 
the state of the hearer 's  d i scourse  model)  
than does the complement  c lause in terpre-  
tat ion (see Cra in & Steedman, 1982, and 
A l tmann & Steedman, forthcoming,  for dis-  
cussion).  The reported exper iments  demon-  
st rated that such v io la t ions  lead to in- 
creased reading times. The re la t ive  
c lause in terpreta t ion  induces longer read- 
ing t imes because of the increased number 
of these v io lat ions.  
3 It is argued in A l tmann ( forthcoming)  
and A l tmann & Steedman ( forthcoming) ,  that 
an account  based on the d i s t inc t ion  
between what is and what is not a l ready  
known to the hearer / reader  (here de f ined  
as the d i s t inc t ion  between Given and New) 
wil l  a lso genera l i se  to the examples  wh ich  
have, on "structura l"  accounts,  been ex- 
p la ined by R ight  Assoc ia t ion  (Kimball ,  
1973) and Late C losure  (Frazier, 1979). 
126 
processes in the hearer. This is 
achieved, in part, by way of the syntact ic  
construct ions  which the speaker chooses to 
adopt. The role of these processes is to 
estab l i sh  a re la t ionsh ip  between the 
in format ion conveyed by the utterance, and 
the in format ion a l ready known to the 
hearer. Such processes must therefore  
address in format ion which is both internal  
and external  to the utterance. Studies 
which purport  either to invest igate  
syntact ic  process ing empir ical ly ,  or to 
model it computat ional ly ,  should not 
ignore the role or the requi rements  of 
these processes.  To do so is to study 
something other than natural  language 
processing.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work reported here was carr ied 
out whi lst  in the School of Ep is temics  on 
an S.E.R.C. postgraduate  research 
studentship.  My thanks to the Centre for 
Speech Technology Research and the A lvey 
Large Scale Demonst rator  Project, for 
provid ing addi t ional  f inancia l  support, 
and to my superv isors  El len Bard and Mark 
Steedman, for prov id ing addi t iona l  moral  
support. 
REFERENCES 
Altmann, G.T.M. Forthcoming.  Reference 
and the Reso lut ion  of Local Syntact ic  
Ambiguity:  The Effect of Context  dur ing 
Human Sentence Processing.  PhD Thesis. 
Univers i ty  of Edinburgh. To be 
Submitted. 
A\]tmann, G.T.M., & Steedman, M.J. The 
(\]arden Path in Context: Reference and 
the Reso lut ion  of Local Syntact ic  
Ambiguity. In preparat ion.  
Bresnan, J. 1982. The Mental  
Representat ion  o_~f Grammat ica l  Relat ions.  
MIT Press. 
Clark, H.H. & Havi land, S.E. 1977. 
Comprehens ion  and the G iven-New 
Contract.  In (ed.) R.O. Freedle 
Discourse Product ion  and Comprehension.  
Crain, S. 1980. Contextual  Const ra ints  
on Sentence Comprehension.  PhD Thesis. 
Un ivers i ty  of Connect icut .  
Crain, S. & Steedman, M.J. 1982. On not 
being led up the garden path: the use of 
context  by the psycho log ica l  parser. In 
(eds.) Dowty, D., Kartunnen, L., & 
Zwicky, A. Natural  Language Parsing: 
psychological ,  computat ional ,  and 
theoret ica l  perspect ives.  In press. 
Ford, M., Bresnan, J., & Kaplan, R.M. 
1982. A Competence-Based  Theory of 
Syntact ic  Closure. In J. Bresnan 
(1982). 
Frazier,  L. 1979. O__nn Comprehend ing  
Sentences: Syntact ic  Pars inq 
Strategies.  Ph.D. D issertat ion,  
Un ivers i ty  of Connect icut .  
Frazier, L. & Fodor, J.D. 1978. The 
Sausage Machine: A new 2-stage Pars ing 
Model. In Cognit ion, 6, 291-325. 
Havi land, S. & Clark, H.H. 1974. What 's  
New? Acqu i r ing  New In format ion as a 
Process in Comprehens ion.  J .V .L .V.B. ,  
13, 512-21. 
Kimball ,  J. 1973. 7 Pr inc ip les  of 
Surface St ructure  Parsing. Cognit ion, 
2, 15-47. 
Kimbal l ,  J. 1975. Pred ic t ive  Ana lys is  
and Over -The-Top  Parsing. In J. K imbal l  
(ed) Syntax and Semantics,  Vo lume 4. 
Rayner,  K., Carlson, M., & Frazier,  L. 
1983. The Interact ion  of Syntax and 
Semant ics  dur ing Sentence Process ing.  
In Journal  of Verbal  Learn ing and Verbal  
Behaviour,  22, 358-374. 
Sanford, A.J. & Garrod, S.C. 1981. 
Unders tand ing  Wr i t ten  Language. Wiley. 
Wanner, E. 1980. The ATN and the sausage 
Machine: which one is baloney? In 
Cognit ion, 8, 209-225. 
Wanner, E., Kaplan, R., & Shiner, S. 1974. 
Garden Paths in Re lat ive  Clauses. 
Unpub l i shed ms. Harvard Univers i ty.  
127 
