DISTRIBUTIVES, QUANTIFIERS AND A MULTIPLICITY OF EVENTS 
Lesley Stif l ing 
School of Epistemics & Department of Linguist ics 
University of Edinburgh 
2 Buccleuch Place 
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, U?K. 
ABSTRACT 
With the intention of indicating some 
temporal /event-theoret ic  characterist ics 
of distr ibutive clauses, a general isat ion 
is made over distr ibutives and clauses 
marked for iterative aspect: two kinds of 
semantic phenomena which have normally 
been confined to separate theoretical 
domains. It is shown that in particular, 
both give rise to an 'inferential set 
construction' problem. An informal 
outl ine is given of what might constitute 
such a generalisation. The general isat ion 
is proposed intially on grounds of prima 
facie plausibil ity, but its ult imate 
defensibi l i ty and explanatory value will 
depend on the val idity of its consequence, 
that distr ibutive clauses entail a 
mult ipl ic i ty of temporal entities or 
events. This proposal is considered with 
respect to two types" of discourse 
phenomena; anaphoric reference to event 
entities, and temporal binding. These 
provide further support for making the 
generalisation, clarify its nature and 
indicate in what respect the entai lment 
claim can be true of distributives. The 
set construction problem is of practical 
importance for computational models of 
natural language interaction, and since 
the concept of iterated action is central 
to planning, the general isat ion across 
iteration and distributives, along with 
the observations about their nature, have 
interesting implications for work in this 
area. 
I. DISTRIBUTIVES 
First, three points about the body of 
phenomena called 'distributives'. These 
are taken to be relatively 
uncontroversial,  and are simply assumed in 
the rest of this paper. 
(i) Examples (a) and (b) in (I) 
i l lustrate the distr ibut ive/col lect ive 
distinction. Essentially, sentences 
containing at least one plural or 
universal ly quantif ied NP, the denotation 
of which might be regarded as a set, "can 
either be read in terms of the individual 
members of this set  (as in la), or given a 
'group' reading in terms of the set as a 
whole (as in Ib). 
(1)a The three girls each had a 
pizza. (dist) 
b The three girls shared a 
pizza. (coll) 
(ii) It is distr ibut ive readings which 
give rise to the possibi l i ty of quanti f ier 
scope ambiguit ies - including 
interpretations which involve dependency 
relations between the NPs in the sentence. 
Dependency interpretations in turn al low 
'inferential set construction' Consider 
example (2). 
(2) Mary gave each boy ~ book 
a ...and told him to look after 
it. 
b They took them into the garden 
to read. 
On the most common reading of the 
distr ibut ive clause Mary gave each boy 
book, there is a dependency relat ion 
between the two object NPs such that 
book is in the scope of each boy and the 
interpretat ion of the former is relative 
to that of the latter. (2b) i l lustrates 
one type of anaphoric relation which 
distr ibut ive clauses may part ic ipate in: 
plural pronouns and definite NPs are used 
to refer to implicit  sets of entit ies 
which instantiate variables introduced in 
distr ibut ive clauses by just such singular 
indefinite NPs in the scope of 
distr ibut ive NPs. So in (2b) the 
underl ined NP they refers to the set of 
books such that Mary gave each one to some 
boy. 
As Webber (1979, 1983) has pointed 
out, this anaphoric possibi l i ty represents 
a practical problem for computational 
accounts of discourse, since a mechanism 
'is required for constructing as a 
16 
discourse  ent i ty a set wi th  the correct  
descr ipt ion,  on the basis of the semant ic  
representat ion  of the in i t ia l  d i s t r ibut ive  
sentence conta in ing the s ingular  
indef in i te  NP. 
temporal  binding. These support  the 
hypothes ised  genera l i sa t ion  and tel l  us 
something about  the temporal  or event-  
theoret ica l  s t ructure  of both 
d is t r ibut ives  and i terat ives.  
Not ice that s ingular  anaphora  (as in 
2a) is also possible: the s ingular  anaphor  
indicates the maintenance of a rhetor ica l  
mode of 'genera l isat ion through 
s ingular isat ion' ,  which is estab l i shed by 
the init ia l  d is t r ibut ive  sentence. The 
pronoun it acts as a placeholder,  
s ign i fy ing a representat ive  member of the 
set of books such that Mary gave each one 
to some boy, and it has the status of a 
'bound variable'  Such pronouns cannot be 
taken to refer and I descr ibe  the contrast  
between them and the plural  anaphors  as 
being that the plural  ones represent  a 
'referential '  or 'extensional'  cashing out 
of the init ia l  semantic value. 
(iii) Sentence (2b) also indicates the 
poss ib i l i ty  of us ing  a plural  pronoun - 
th@y - to refer to some re levant  set of 
boys (in contrast  to (2a) where the 
singular,  'bound variable'  pronoun him is 
used). However, it is not rea l ly  necessary  
to propose a second a lgor i thm to construct  
such sets because the init ial ,  
syntact ica l ly  s ingular  d is t r ibut ive  NPs, 
such as eac h bow, are arguably  a lmost  
a lways themselves 'referential '  and 
'anaphoric',  ~ust in the sense that the 
range of quant i f i cat ion  is rest r ic ted by 
context. Here, the quant i f ier  does not 
range over the set of al l  boys, but over 
some otherwise speci f ied subset \['host' or 
'witness set' - Barwise & Cooper, 1981\] of 
boys. It can be paraphrased with the 
part i t ive  expression: each of the bows. 
My intent ion in this paper is to 
explore a temporal,  event -or iented  
perspect ive  on d ist r ibut ives.  The 
quest ion at issue is: What are the 
consequences for the temporal  or event-  
theoret ica l  analys is  of a clause, of its 
being 'distr ibutive' in the sense def ined? 
F irst  I indicate s imi lar i t ies  between 
d is t r ibut ives  and c lauses marked with 
i terat ive aspect. I then make certa in 
observat ions  which apply to both 
d is t r ibut ives  and iterat ives,  concern ing 
two kinds of d iscourse phenomena: def in i te  
NP anaphora  to event entit ies, and 
one I 
aspectual  I 
parameter  I 
I 
The observat ions  made in this paper  
are conf ined to the past tense and to 
'telic' or 'bounded' s i tuat ion  types 
(Mourelatos, 1981). 
2. ITERATIVES 
The fo l lowing are examples 
i terat ive  c lauses in English: 
of 
(3)a Each day Mary wrote a letter 
to her sister. 
b Every t ime John went abroad 
he bought a souvenir.  
c Vesuv ius  erupted three 
times. 
I terat iv i ty  is an aspectua l  parameter  
which in Engl ish  is marked main ly  
adverbia l ly ,  wi th  the presence of what are 
cal led ' frequency adverbials '  or ' temporal 
quant i f ie rs '  (under l ined in the examples) .  
I terat ive markers  on a c lause indicate the 
repet i t ion  of the event descr ibed in the 
clause, and a lso prov ide in format ion  about  
the f requency of repet i t ion.  The key 
requ i rement  is couched in terms of an 
enta i lment  condit ion: i terat ives  entai l  
that there was more than one occas ion on 
each of which an event of type E occurred, 
where 'occasion' is def ined as 
spat iotempora l  location. So there is a 
necessary  requ i rement  of seauent ia l i ty :  
that the events in quest ion  occurred on 
d i f ferent  occasions,  in sequence. 
3. GENERAL ISAT ION 
On the basis of the descr ipt ions  g iven 
in sect ions I and 2 we can argue for a 
genera l i sat ion  over d is t r ibut ives  and 
i terat ives such as is represented in 
F igure I (cf. Forsyth, 1970: 154). 
I 
mult ip le  act ions (repet i t ion I 
of a s ituat ion) \] 
I 
single ac t ion /s i tuat ion  
i terat ive 
'd is t r ibut ive  
F igure I. Genera l i sa t ion  over d is t r ibut ives  and i terat ives.  
17 
There are a number of intuit ive 
arguments for the prima facie plausibi l i ty 
of such a generalisation, two of which 
will be considered here. 
First, it is clear that from one point 
of view, distr ibutives and iteratives 
differ just in the nature of what is 
quantif ied over: distributives, where the 
marking of repetit ion is normally on the 
NP, involve quantif icat ion over 
individuals, while the temporal adverbial 
expressions in the iterative examples are 
normally taken to involve quanti f icat ion 
over times or events. That is, the 
iterative markers can be seen as 
introducing distr ibutive quantif ication. 
Secondly, perhaps the strongest 
argument for general isat ion is that 
inferential set construction occurs with 
iteratives. Some iteratives, like 
distributives, contain indefinite NPs 
whose instantiations may vary across the 
repetit ion of the event. ~ sQuvenir in 
example (4), and a letter in example (5) 
are just such NPs. 
(4) EverYtime John went abroad he 
bought A souvenir. 
a Sometimes it was a silver tea- 
spoon, sometimes an antique vase. 
b They just lie around the house, 
cluttering it up. 
(5) Each day, Mary wrote ~ letter 
to her sister. 
a It was usually ten pages long. 
b They were chatty letters. 
The solution to the set construct ion 
problem should if possible be a general 
one, covering both distr ibut ive and 
iterative cases. 
The ult imate defensibil ity, and 
explanatory value, of making such a 
general isat ion will depend on whether it 
accurately reflects the facts about the 
temporal or event-theoretical  structure of 
distr ibut ive clauses. It was said that 
are customari ly defined as 
entail ing a seauence o_~f events, each 
associated with a di f ferent occasion or 
spatiotemporal location. A general isat ion 
of the kind envisaged would suggest that 
distr ibutives might be regarded as having 
such an entai lment as well, and the 
question we have to consider is whether 
this is so. 
Certainly, some distr ibutives clearly ? 
involve mult iple occasions, that is, 
spatiotemporal locations. For example 
(6a), where it's one and the same book 
which is lent, and (6b). 
(6)a Mary lent each boy the book. 
b John visited each of his 
aunts. 
On the other hand, take an example 
like (2) above (Mary gave each boy 
~9~)o  This could easily describe a 
single occasion of giving, taking place 
once only. One could even imagine Mary 
handing a book to each of two boys 
simultaneously, with either hand. Or 
consider (7), on the interpretat ion where 
it was the same message and I did it on 
one occasion. 
Iteratives such as these manifest the 
same scope ambiguit ies as distr ibutives 
and are open to the same mechanism of 'set 
construction' which as we saw operates in 
distr ibutive clauses on the NPs which are 
distr ibuted over. So in (4), ~ ~ 
is in the scope of a restricted universal 
quanti f icat ion over times, and the 
sentence in question could be fol lowed by 
(b) where they refers to the set of 
souvenirs such that John bought each one 
on some trip abroad. (4a) and (5a) show 
that something like the 'bound variable' 
anaphora of example (2a) is possible here 
too  \[I\] 
(7) Yesterday I sent each student 
a message via computer mail. 
Intuit ion is clearly not enough, and 
in sections 4 and 5 we shall consider 
evidence from the discourse phenomena 
mentioned earlier, but first, what would 
constitute such a general isat ion over 
iteratives and distr ibutives: a 
general isat ion which would indicate their 
similarit ies and differences, and provide 
a way in which the entai lment of mult iple 
temporal entit ies/events could be said to 
be true of distr ibutives? 
\[I\] The expression 'variable binding', 
tradit ional ly taken to describe an in- 
trasentential  phenomenon, is used with a 
less restrict ive sense in this paper. 
18 
event: --- 
*par t ic ipant  I 
*par t ic ipant  2 
*par t ic ipant  n 
*spat io tempora l  locat ion 
R 
\['daily' in 
interval  tr\] 
event: 'writing' 
*par t i c ipant  I 
*par t ic ipant  2 
'Mary' 
'her sister' 
l 'part ic ipant  3 'a letter' I  
I I 
l *spat iotempora l  locat ion t I 
I vl 
Figure 2. 'Case' spec i f i ca t ion  \[2\] 
We can regard a c lause as providing, 
at one level of descr ipt ion,  a natter~ or 
temnl~t@, with spec i f i ca t ion  of an event  
type with respect  to p laceho lders  for the 
fo l lowing elements: one or more 
part ic ipants ,  and spat io tempora l  location. 
F igure 2 is the ske leton of such templates  
or 'case spec i f icat ions ' ,  which wil l  be 
f leshed out for ind iv idual  clauses. 
D is t r ibut ive  and i terat ive  markers  a l ike 
then contr ibute  the fo l lowing informat ion:  
- first, that  there are mul t ip le  
ins tant ia t ions  of this pat tern  rather  than 
a s ingle instant iat ion;  
- and, in con junct ion  wi th  other  
grammat ica l  features of the clause, they 
provide in format ion  about  which of these 
elements  remain constant  across such 
ins tant ia t ions  and which are var iable.  
For example, take the sentence Each 
day, Mary wrote ~ letter  to her s ister  
(Figure 3). This spec i f ies  a 
event type which (as ind icated by 'R') is 
repeated ly  instant iated.  Two of the 
part ic ipants ,  Mary and her sister, remain  
constant  across these repet i t ions.  The 
other  part ic ipant,  the letter, var ies and 
wil l  be instant ia ted by a (possibly) 
d i f fe rent  ent i ty  on each occas ion  of 
repet i t ion.  There is a lso var ia t ion  in 
the spat io tempora l  element. This e lement  
is represented here by the t ime variable,  
~\[me whi le t represents  the re ference 
' ? r of the I terated complex as a whole. 
It is w~th r~spect  to this second kind 
of informat ion,  about  which of the 
e lements vary, that i terat ives  and 
d is t r ibut ives  differ. In i terat ive  but 
not in d i s t r ibut ive  c lauses the 
spat io tempora l  locat ion wil l  necessar i ly  
be among those e lements which are 
variable;  other e lements may a lso vary if 
they are introduced by express ions  in a 
scopal  dependency re lat ion  with the 
temporal  quant i f ier  phrase? In 
\[2\] 'Case' in the sense of Lewis 
(1975) rather than F i l lmorean Case Gram- 
mar. 
F igure 3. Case spec i f i ca t ion  fo r  
Each day, Mary wrote ~ letter  to her sister. 
d is t r ibut ives ,  at least one of the 
par t i c ipant  e lements  must  vary - the one 
in t roduced by the d i s t r ibut ive  NP - and in 
add i t ion  so may other elements,  inc lud ing 
spat io tempora l  location, if they are in a 
dependency  re lat ion  with this NP. If no 
other  par t i c ipant  e lement  is in a 
dependency  re lat ion with the d i s t r ibut ive  
NP, that  is if all other par t i c ipant  
elements  are held constant,  then var ia t ion  
in spat io tempora l  locat ion wil l  entai l ,  as 
in example (6a). Which  e lements  vary 
te l ls  us which in ferent ia l  sets to 
construct.  
The s imi lar i t ies  between the in formal  
proposal  which  has just been sketched and 
Lewis?s  (1975) account  of tempora l  
quant i f ie rs  in terms of cases wi l l  be 
obvious.  Lewis def ines a case as an n- 
tup le  of its par t ic ipants  (i.e. the values 
of free var iab les  in the sentence) and a 
t ime coord inate  \[the 'case spec i f icat ions '  
represented  above inc lude in add i t ion  an 
event  type label, such as 'writ ing'\].  He 
argues that i terat ive  markers  invo lve  
quant i f i ca t ion  over cases rather  than over 
t imes or events. My proposal  could be 
in terpreted as a c la im that we can extend 
some vers ion  of a case analys is  to inc lude 
d is t r ibut ives:  these, too, would be taken 
to invo lve quant i f i ca t ion  over cases. 
Quant i f i ca t ion  over t imes or par t i c ipants  
would then represent  par t icu lar  ways of 
rea l is ing the mul t ip le  ins tant ia t ion  of 
the case. The advantages of an account  
such as this are that it a l lows 
genera l i sa t ion  over a wide var ie ty  of 
phenomena, inc lud ing numerous ways of 
mark ing  i terat ion  or d i s t r ibut ion  on the 
clause, and that it prov ides an 
appropr ia te  level of descr ip t ion  to be 
referred to in account ing  for d i scourse  
anaphor ic  relat ions.  
The quest ion  of the ind iv iduat ion  of 
events is a cont rovers ia l  one, and the 
terms 'event' and 'event type' have so far 
been used rather  loosely. Suppose we 
f i rst  fo l low Moure latos  (1981) in making a 
d i s t inc t ion  between events and the 
spat io tempora l  locat ions with which they  
are assoc iated,  and secondly, suggest  that  
19 
events should be regarded as par t icu lar  
ins tant ia t ions  of case spec i f i cat ions  of 
the type descr ibed. Then i terat ives  
entai l  a mul t ip l i c i ty  of cases /events  + 
spat io tempora l  locat ions (which are in 
some isomorphic  re lat ionship) ,  whereas  
d is t r ibut ives  l ikewise entai l  a 
mul t ip l i c i ty  of cases/events ,  but mere ly  
a l low the poss ib i l i ty  of mul t ip le  
spat io tempora l  locat ions (i.e., events and 
spat io tempora l  locat ions may not be in an 
i somorph ic  re lat ionship)  - as we shal l  
see, in the case of any par t icu lar  
d istr ibut ive,  this quest ion  may be 
reso lved by fo l lowing anaphor ic  reference. 
v is i t  s ign i f ies  a representat ive  event  of 
the type descr ibed:  
(10) John v is i ted  each of his 
ma iden  aunts, but the v is i t  d idn ' t  
make h im popular  with any of them. 
A second type of s ingular  anaphora  
occurs, as in (11): in this case the 
anaphor ic  pronoun that  appears  to refer  to 
the whole  d i s t r ibut ive  episode, of John 
v is i t ing  each aunt, descr ibed  in the 
preced ing  clause. 
4. ANAPHORIC REFERENCE TO EVENTS 
(8) John v is i ted each of his 
great  aunts. 
a The v is i ts  were much apprec ia ted  
by the old ladies. 
b These ~ were a source of 
torment  to him. 
(9) Everyt ime John went to Namib ia  
he v is i ted an old friend. 
a He found the v is i ts  d ist ress ing.  
b He was upset on these Q~casions,  
Examples (8) and (9) ind icate  that 
after  a d i s t r ibut ive  or i terat ive  clause, 
speakers can refer us ing a p lura l  def in i te  
NP, to a set of ent i t ies  which are 
something l ike 'events' or 'occasions' and 
which appear to cor respond to the' 
d i s t r ibut ive  or i terated s i tuat ion  of the 
preceding clause. Note thetwo types of 
example (a and b): in the first, the 
common noun head of the anaphor ic  
express ion  is a nomina l i sa t ion  of the verb 
in the antecedent  sentence (such NPs are 
normal ly  taken to refer to event 
entit ies);  in the second the noun is a 
much more general  one. Both k inds of 
example appear to represent  a phenomenon 
of the same type as the in ferent ia l  set 
const ruct ion  descr ibed in sect ion I: it is 
as if the in i t ia l  d i s t r ibut ive  or 
i terat ive  c lause introduces an 'event' 
var iab le  and the anaphor ic  NPs represent  a 
re ferent ia l /ex tens iona l  cashing out of 
this. 
Cont inu ing the paral le l  wi th  anaphor ic  
reference to nomina l ly - in t roduced  
entit ies,  example (10) shows that  wi th  
respect  to event ent i t ies  too, s ingular  
anaphor ic  NPs occur which are of the 
'bound variable'  type. Thus in (10) the 
(11)  John v is i ted each of his 
aunts. Tha___~t was a thought fu l  th ing 
to do. 
F inal ly,  examples  (12) and (13) show 
that, a l though plural  def in i te  NPs can be 
used to access the set of events or 
occas ions  resu l t ing  from 
d is t r ibut ive / i te ra t ive  c lauses (as in (8) 
and (9)), p lural  pronouns cannot. In (12) 
they and ~hem can only be in terpreted  wi th  
re ference  to the aunts - compare the same 
sentences wi th  the pronouns rep laced by 
the NP the visits. Exp lanat ion  of this, 
wh ich  there is not space to e laborate  
here, must  take account  of the obvious 
fact  that  a requ i rement  of nomina l i sa t ion  
is involved. Meanwhi le  the impor tant  
point  to note  is the c lear  d i s t inc t ion  
between the d i s t r ibut ion  of de f in i te  NP 
and pronominal  anaphors.  
(12) John v is i ted each of his 
aunts. 
a * They were a d ismal  fai lure. 
b * He had a good t ime on al l  of 
them. 
c * Each of them went  well. 
(13) John f lew to Paris twice. 
a He en joyed both trips. 
b the enjoyed both of them. 
Example  (11) shows that  s inaular  
pronominal  re ference  does occur, but this 
seeming incons is tency  may be exp la ined in 
terms of the nature of the ent i ty  be ing 
referred to: the plural  NPs seem to refer 
to events whereas the s ingular  ones refer  
to 'facts' or 'proposit ions'  (in the sense 
of the d i s t inc t ion  argued for in Vend ler  
(1967)). \[3\] 
\[3\] There is c lear ly  much more to be 
20 
5. TEMPORAL B INDING PHENOMENA 
First  it is necessary  to rev iew some 
claims of theor ies of temporal  reference. 
Cons ider  the fo l lowing example: 
(14) When John made the cake, he 
broke the oven. 
Whe~, l ike other 'temporal 
connect ives'  such as before and after, 
ind icates a part icu lar  re la t ionsh ip  
between the two  c lauses it connects:  
normal ly  such re lat ionsh ips  are cons idered 
to consist  in spec i f i cat ion  of the 
re lat ive order ing in t ime of the two 
events descr ibe~ by these clauses. The 
basic  claim, then, is that such 
connect ives give a spec i f i cat ion  of a kind 
of 'temporal binding' between the two 
c lauses such that the reference t ime of 
one is dependent  on that of the other. 
This c la im is independent  of the 
part icu lar  nature of the order ing or 
b inding hypothesised.  (This idea is 
c lear ly  on a par wi th  c laims that  certa in  
temporal  phenomena should be understood on 
analogy with nominal  anaphora, for example 
that the (past) tense morpheme should be 
taken to refer to a time, and to receive 
its reference either from some antecedent  
tense morpheme in the text, or from some 
adverbia l  expression, or de ict ica l ly . )  
Kamp (1979), Hinr ichs (1982> and 
Partee (1984), who subscr ibe to a 
d iscourse theory of temporal  (ordering) 
relations, argue that (in narrat ive  
discourse) the reference t ime of any main 
c lause wil l  be dependent  on that of the 
preceding clause; that is, that just the 
same kinds of temporal  b inding 
dependenc ies  occur at the level of 
discourse, between clauses which are 
syntact ica l ly  independent  as wel l  as 
between those which are l inked by temporal  
connect ives.  
With this background, we can cons ider  
c l&uses which involve iteration, marked by 
temporal  quant i f icat ion,  in add i t ion  to 
temporal  connect ion of the type just 
descr ibed.  For example (15). 
(15) When Max left the office, he 
always turned the l ights off. 
It seems that such sentences 
said wi th  respect  to the phenomena exam- 
ined in this section; this wi l~ be dealt  
with in for thcoming work. 
const i tute  a b ind ing or dependency,  
between two c lauses descr ib ing  d is t inc t  
types of event, which puts a cond i t ion  on 
the pai rwise mapping of ins tant ia t ions  of 
such events. Thus, in this case, every  
event of Max leaving the of f ice  is said to 
have been pai red with (at least one) event  
of his turn ing the l ights off. This k ind 
of dependency  re lat ion  seems to be exact ly  
paral le l  to that which holds between the 
d is t r ibut ive  NP each qirl  and the 
indef in i te  NP ~ book in Mary qave each 
~ book. In terms of the schema in 
F igures 2 and 3, b ind ing is of the 
temporal  var iab le  t of c lause one, and v the t v of c lause two. 
Not ice  that the when c lause rest r ic ts  
the range of the i terat ive quant i f ie r  
a lways in the fo l lowing clause. Examples  
l ike (15) are a special  case of temporal  
quant i f i ca t ion  in that the condi t ion  on 
the range of quant i f i ca t ion  is exp l i c i t l y  
stated in the subord inate  clause. But it 
is true in general  that tempora l  
quant i f ie rs  l ike alwaTs or each t ime do 
not range over al l  of time, but over some 
contextua l ly  f ixed interval.  They thus 
conform to the c la im made in sect ion I 
that d i s t r ibut ive  NPs normal ly  have their  
range of quant i f i ca t ion  rest r ic ted  to some 
otherwise -spec i f ied  'witness set' The 
reference t ime t of F igure 3 represents  
this kind of wi tness set. 
The main point  to be made in this 
sect ion is that d is t r ibut ive  clauses, wi th  
no expl ic i t  temporal  quant i f icat ion,  can 
a lso act as sources for temporal  binding, 
~and rest r ic t  the  range  of subsequent  
temporal  quant i f icat ion,  in just the same 
way that the i terat i~e c lauses do. Hence 
we find examples l ike (16) and (17). 
(16) Mary gave each boy a book. 
Somet imes the boy thanked her, but 
more of ten he did not. 
(17) Harry inv i ted each of his 
re lat ives to stay. On each occa- 
s ion he bought  in enough food to 
feed an army. 
Here, the range of the quant i f ie r  
phrases sometimes, mote of ten and on each 
is rest r ic ted by the set of 
events determined by the preced ing  
d is t r ibut ive  c lause - that is, by 
someth ing l ike the set of ins tant ia t ions  
of the case speci f icat ion,  perhaps more 
speci f ica l ly ,  ins tant ia t ions  of the 
temporal  var iable  t . There is b ind ing 
between the  event~ descr ibed in the two 
sentences: in (16) some of the 'times' 
(occasions) on which Mary gave Some boy a 
21 
book are such that the boy in quest ion  
thanked her; in (17) each occas ion  on 
which Harry\ [s  re lat ives came to stay is 
paired with an event of his buying in lots 
of food. 
Example  (18), which is f rom a 
un ivers i ty  l ibrary photocopy ing machine, 
is exact ly  para l le l  to the tempora l ly  
quant i f ied  and connected example g iven in 
(15). Here, each plays the same role as 
a lways does in (15). 
(18) P lease wait  unt i l  mach ine  is 
complete ly  s i lent  before insert ing 
each 5p coin. 
This example is ( theoret ical ly)  
ambiguous in the scope of the d i s t r ibut ive  
marker:  does the f i rst  c lause represent  a 
condi t ion  for the i terated event, so that 
we are to wait  unt i l  the machine is s i lent  
and then insert  all the 5ps one after  
another, or is it part  of an iterated 
condi t ion  + event sequence, so that on 
each occas ion of inser t ing  5p, we must  
wait  unti l  the mach ine  is s i lent  f irst? 
(In actual i ty,  it is of course the second 
reading which is intended.)  
Now cons ider  the fo l lowing examples,  
wi th  another  temporal  connect ive,  then. 
(19) Mary gave each boy a book. 
a Then she marked his name Off 
her l ist ashav ing  rece ived it. 
b Then she d ismissed them. 
(20) Everyt ime John went  abroad he 
brought  back a souvenir.  
a Then he put it in the cupboard 
with the rest of them. 
b Then he stopped going abroad and 
threw them all  away. 
These examples ind icate  that  the 
in i t ia l  d i s t r ibut ive  or i terat ive  sentence 
can be v iewed ei ther  in terms of its uni ty  
as a complex situation, or in terms of the 
const i tuent  phases which that total  
compr ises (cf. examples (8) and (11) in 
sect ion 4). Hence in (19) the re ference 
t ime of (b), the dismissal ,  wi l l  be after  
the complet ion  of the complex event of 
g iv ing out books, (in terms of the case 
spec i f i ca t ion  in F igures 2 and 3 the t of 
(b) wi l l  be af ter  the t of the in i t ia l  
sentence).  In contrast,  t~e sequence in 
(19a) is such that the then c lause is 'in 
the scope of' the d i s t r ibut ive  and there 
is a pa i rwise  b ind ing between the event  
type of g iv ing out a book and the event  
type of mark ing  off a" name, such that each 
ins tant ia t ion  of the former wi l l  be 
fo l lowed by an ins tant ia t ion  of the 
latter. That  is, there i s  a tempora l  
o rder ing  cond i t ion  on the tempora l  
var iab les  t of the two clauses. The 
whole  sequence wi l l  have the same t ; 
overa l l  re ference t ime or 'witness set r. 
If we regard temporal  connect ives  as 
ind icat ing  a re la t ionsh ip  def ined over 
re ference  times, then we are put in the 
pos i t ion  of racogn is ing  two poss ib i l i t i es  
wi th  respect  to d i s t r ibut ive / i te ra t ive  
sentences:  these seem to invo lve 
someth ing l ike 'nested re ference  t imes',  
with the order ing re lat ion  being able to 
hold over e i ther  t v or t r, Cons ider  a lso 
examples  (21) and (22). 
(21) Mary gave each boy a book. 
a On each occas ion  the boy 
thanked her. 
b On that  occas ion they were 
gratefu l  to her. 
(22) John v is i ted each of his 
maiden aunts. Each one gave him a 
cup of tea. 
Example  (22) is par t i cu la r ly  
interest ing,  because we have a sequence of 
two c lauses which  are not syntact i ca l ly  
l inked by a temporal  connect ive,  and 
ne i ther  of wh ich  conta ins  a tempora l  
quant i f ie r  phrase. Yet there is an 
impl icat ion  that  there is a pa i rw ise  
dependency  re lat ion  between teas and 
vis its.  The genera l i sed  b ind ing  
re la t ionsh ip  appears  to hold across  the 
sentence boundary,  just as Kamp, H inr ichs  
and Partee postu lated wi th  respect  to 
order ing  re lat ions  between c lauses 
descr ib ing  s ingle rather than repeated 
s i tuat ions.  Any analys is  of this d i scourse  
which ass igns each sentence a s ing le  
re ference time, and which then, fo l lowing  
Hinr ichs  and Partee, requires that the 
re ference  t ime for the second fo l low that  
of the first, wi l l  g ive the wrong results.  
\[4\] 
The observat ions  which  have been made 
ev ince a c lose ana logy with the facts of 
\[4\] Their  response to this might  be 
that  we are not here dea l ing wi th  narra-  
t ive d iscourse,  a denial  which is more 
p laus ib ly  made of ear l ier  examples,  or 
even (19) or (20), than it is of (22). 
22, 
nominal  anaphora which were out l ined in 
sect ion 1 of the paper. The (a) examples 
in (19), (20) and (21) in each case 
represent  something l ike maintenance  of 
the binding: we are sti l l  spec i fy ing the 
type of the event sequence which is 
i terated, and all the c lauses in the 
sequence have the same t ; re ference t ime 
or witness set. In the (~) examples, on 
the other hand, the descr ip t ion  of the 
i terated event is f inished: there is a 
d iscourse- leve l  d iv is ion  between the 
init ia l  d i s t r ibut ive / i te ra t ive  sentence 
and sentence (b), represent ing the end of 
the rhetor ical  mode of genera l i sa t ion-  
through-s ingular isat ion,  and c losure of 
the interval  t . One ind icat ion of this 
is that any p~onouns occurr ing in the (b) 
sentence, and anaphor ic  to d is t r ibut ive  
NPs or their dependent  express ions in the 
f irst  sentence, wil l  necessar i ly  be 
plural. The use of a plural  NP, which as 
I have said represents ' referent ial  
cashing out', ind icates that the i terated 
sequence is over and we can now assume its 
complet ion  and move on. In contrast,  in 
the (a) sentences anaphor ic  pronouns 
referr ing to ent i t ies which were 
introduced by the nominals  in the 
d i s t r ibut ive / i te ra t ive  sentence, are 
normal ly  singular. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The anaphor ic  examples in sect ion 4 
show that both d is t r ibut ive  and i terat ive  
clauses enable subsequent  reference to 
sets of cases/events  using a def in i te  NP. 
This is c lear ly  paral le l  to the 
poss ib i l i ty  of using a plural  anaphor ic  NP 
to make reference to some set of 
ind iv iduals  (such as books), on the basis 
of an or ig inal  s ingular  NP introduct ion.  
It would seem to be des i rab le  to account  
for both kinds in terms of the same 
mechan ism of 'set construct ion' .  The 
anaphor ic  examples also indicate a 
qua l i tat ive  d i f ference between the 
d is t r ibut ion  of def in i te  NP and pronominal  
anaphora, and show that there is d iscourse  
anaphor ic  access not just to the subparts 
of the d is t r ibuted or i terated situation, 
but also to something l ike the whole 
d i s t r ibut ive  quant i f icat ion,  which may be 
an ent i ty of a d i f ferent  kind. 
The temporal  b inding phenomena of 
sect ion 5 give a d i f ferent  type of 
ev idence for the exp lanatory  value of 
making a genera l i sat ion  of the kind 
descr ibed. The observat ions  in this 
sect ion also show that, whereas past tense 
c lauses descr ib ing  a s ingle s i tuat ion have 
a reference t ime with some speci f ic  
temporal  referent,  d i s t r ibut ive  and 
i terat ive c lauses seem to require 'nested 
re ference times', w i th  temporal  o rder ing  
re lat ions def inab le  at two levels. The 
Kamp/H inr i chs /Par tee  account  needs to be 
modi f ied  before it is able to incorporate  
these phenomena. 
I 've said that the set const ruct ion  
problem is of pract ica l  importance for 
computat iona l  models  of natural  language 
interact ion.  In addit ion,  the concept  of 
i terated act ion is important  to planning,  
so that a genera l i sa t ion  across 
d is t r ibut ives  and i terat ives  plus what has 
been said about  their  temporal  nature 
should have in terest ing  impl icat ions  in 
this area. If i terat ion is handled 
computat iona l ly  by sett ing up a loop which 
embodies the inst ruct ion to repeat  an 
act ion under certa in  condit ions,  then 
d is t r ibut ives  may be handled the same way. 
D is t r ibut ive  and i terat ive  in terpretat ions  
may hold over stretches of d iscourse,  the 
de l imi ta t ion  of which is re levant  to the 
in terpretat ion  of temporal  connect ives,  
and as we saw with examples (19) to (21), 
in some cases anaphor ic  phenomena may give 
clues about  this de l imitat ion,  that ,is, 
ind icat ing when to turn off the i terat ive  
loop. The de l imi ta t ion  of such d iscourse  
chunks corresponds to the de l imi ta t ion  of 
the extent  of in f luence of the t or 
'witness set', and so anaphor~ in 
fo l lowing sentences may a l low us to c lose 
off this interval.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper results  from research 
towards a PhD which has been supported by 
a grant from the Assoc ia t ion  of 
Commonweal th  Univers i t ies .  The 
deve lopment  of the ideas presented here 
has benef i t ted  cons iderab ly  from the 
oppor tun i t ies  for s t imulat ing d iscuss ion  
prov ided by the School 'of  Ep is temics  Tense 
and Discourse Workshop. I am par t i cu la r ly  
gratefu l  to the fo l lowing people for 
helpful  comment on ear l ier  vers ions of the 
paper: Mark Steedman, Marc Moens, Henk 
Zeevat, Ewan Klein, Han Reichgelt ,  Barry 
Richards,  J im Mil ler, Jan de Vuyst, David 
McCarty, J im Hurford. 
23 
REFERENCES 
Barwise, Jon & Cooper, Robin (1981) 
'Generalised quantif iers and natural 
language' Linuuistics and Philosophy 4, 
159-219. 
Forsyth, J. (1970) A qrammar of  aspect. 
C.U.P. 
Hinrichs, Erhard (1982) 'Temporal 
anaphora in discourses of English' 
Unpublished. 
Kamp, Hans (1979) 'Events, instants and 
temporal reference' in Baeuerle et al
(eds) ~ from ~ points of  
view. Berlin: Springer, 277-322. 
Lewis, David ( 1975 ) ' Adverbs of 
quantification' in E.L. Keenan (ed) 
Formal ~ of natural  lanuuaae. 
C.U.P. , 3-15. 
Mourelatos, Alexander P.D. (1981) 
'Events, processes and states' in Syntax 
~pd s emantic~ vol 14: Tense and aspect. 
N.Y.: Academic Press, 191-212. 
Partee, Barbara Hall (1984) 'Nominal and 
temporal anaphora' Linuuistics and 
PhilosQphv 7, 243 - 86. 
Vendler, Zeno (1967) Linuuistics in 
philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell U.P. 
Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1979) ~ formal 
aPProaCh to ~ ~ .  The 
Hague: Mouton. 
Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1983) 'So what can 
we talk about next?' in M. Brady and R.C. 
Berwick (eds) Computational mo~els of 
discourse. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
331 - 71. 
24 
