DEALING WITH THE NOTION "OBLIGATORY" IN SYNTACTIC ANALYSIS  
Dorothee Reimann 
Zent ra l ins t i tu t  f~r Sprachwissenschaf t  
Akademie der Wissenschaf ten  der DDR 
Prenz lauer  Promenade 149-152 
Ber l in  
DDR - I I00 
ABSTRACT 
In the paper  the use of the not ion 
"obl igatory complement"  in syntact ic  
analysis  is discussed. In many theor ies  
which serve as bases for syntact ic  
analysis  procedures  there are devices  to 
express the d i f fe rence  between ob l igatory  
and opt ional  complements  on the rule 
level, i.e. v ia the lexicon the wordforms 
are connected with these rules where the 
f i t t ing propert ies  are expressed. I'll 
show that  such an approach leads to some 
problems, if we want to handle real texts 
in syntact ic  analysis. 
In the f irst  part  I'll out l ine the 
theoret ica l  f ramework  we work with. Then 
I'll d iscuss for which purpose the use of 
the not ion ob l igatory  has some advantages 
and in the last part  I'll show short ly  how 
we intend to use this not ion 
- in lexical entr ies (with respect  to 
morpho log ica l  analysis)  and 
- in the syntact ic  analys is  process. 
SOME THEORETICAL  PREREQUIS ITES  
The basis of our work is a special  
vers ion of a dependency  grammar  (Kunze 
1975). In this theory  a syntact ic  
s t ructure  of a sentence is represented as 
a tree, where the nodes correspond to the 
wordforms of the sentence and the edges 
express the dependenc ies  between the word- 
forms. The edges are marked by subord ina-  
t ion re lat ions (SR's) which descr ibe  the 
re lat ion between the subtree "under" the 
edge and the remain ing tree context. 
Bes ides the syntact ic  dependenc ies  
other connect ions  between the wordforms of 
the sentence remain which express certa in 
congruences and restr ict ions.  Here we have 
congruences - so-ca l led parad igmat ic  
connect ions - l ike (the l isted categor ies  
concern the German variant):  
from a noun to an at t r ibute  (gender, 
number, case) 
from a prepos i t ion  to the noun (case) 
f rom the subject  to the f in i te verb 
(number, person) 
and restr ic t ions  - se lect ive  connect ions - 
like: 
from the verb to the (deep) subject  
from the verb to the d i rect  object  etc. 
The se lect ive  connect ions  also apply  to 
all t rans format iona l  var iants  of the 
concerned phenomenon (let us take the 
SUBJ -connect ion) :  
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
John l iest ein Buch. 
(John reads a book. ) 
Ich sehe John ein Buch lesen. 
(I see John reading a book. ) 
Das Buch wird von John gelesen. 
(The book is read by John.) 
Das von John ge lesene Buch ... 
(The book read by John ...) 
Das Lesen des Buches durch John .. 
(The reading of the book by John .) 
Der ein Buch lesende John ... 
(John reading a book ...) 
314 
(7) John, der ein Buch l iest .... 
(John who reads a book .... ) 
It is easy to see that the tree 
property  would be dest royed if these 
connect ions were included as edges in the 
tree. To save the tree proper ty  Kunze 
introduced the mechan ism of paths of 
act ion for the parad igmat ic  and se lect ive  
connections. These paths run along the 
edges, i.e. they can be expressed also by 
the subord inat ion  relations. This is one 
essential  reason for d i f fe rent ia t ing  the 
SR's very strongly. 
For instance, it is necessary  to 
d i f fe rent ia te  between 
- the "normal" d i rect  object  and the 
d i rect  object  with subject  role: 
John reads a boo~. 
I see Joh~ reading a book. 
- an adject ive as at t r ibute  and a 
par t ic ip le  as attr ibute: 
The ~E book ... 
The r_~gding John ... 
- the subject in an act ive c lause and the 
subject  in a pass ive clause: 
John reads a book. 
A boQ~ is read by John. 
Besides the subord inat ion  re lat ions 
another central  concept  in Kunze's  theory  
are the h~les  (see also Reimann, 1982). 
A bundle is a subst ructure  of a dependency  
tree which contains exact ly  one top node 
and all nodes d i rect ly  subord inated to it 
together  with the edges between (and their  
markings - the subord inat ion  relations). 
The or ig inal  idea was to use the bundles 
as syntact ic  rules. For  this purpose, the 
bundle is regarded as a system of 
condit ions which have to be fu l f i l led by a 
set of nodes to construct  the st ructure 
which the bundle prescr ibed. 
But another poss ib i l i ty  to use bundles 
is the fol lowing: They can serve as 
descr ipt ions  for the dominance behav iour  
of wordforms (i.e. the surface form of 
valency). In this way, the approach is 
s imi lar  to other theories: In the lexical 
entr ies of the wordforms there is a 
pointer  to the rules which can be appl ied 
with the concerned wordform as top node. 
Our approach goes farther in the 
d i rect ion of dominance behaviour  
descr ipt ions.  Having in mind that, 
espec ia l ly  for nouns and verbs, the 
dominance behav iour  is a very complex one, 
i.e. many d i f fe rent  things can be sub- 
ordinated to nouns and verbs: many of them 
are optional, some of them stand in 
certa in relat ions to others, etc. Thus we 
concentrate  all these bundles by def in ing 
another form of a bundle, which consists, 
in general,  of many s imple bundles. 
For  instance: 
Peter  stiehlt. 
Peter  st iehlt  ein Auto. 
Peter  st iehlt  dam Bauern das Auto. 
Peter  st iehl t  dam Bauern das Auto vom 
Hof. 
Peter  st iehlt  das Auto vom Hof. 
* Peter  st iehl t  vom Hof. 
* Peter  st iehlt  dam Bauern. 
As we can see, only the subject  is 
ob l igatory  (in the act ive sentence), but 
the indirect  object  as well as the 
d i rect iona l  c i rcumstance are only used, if 
the d i rect  object  belongs to the sentence. 
These facts can be expressed by a logical 
formula l ike this: 
(SUBJ @a v ((IOBJ vD IR) -~DOBJ ) )  
That means we represent  the dominance 
behav icur  of wordforms by logical formulas 
(in subord inat ion  relat ions) - we call 
these formulas bundles. It is quite c lear 
that it is not so easy to use these 
bundles as rules for syntact ic  analysis, 
but to descr ibe  the dominance behaviour  of 
wordforms they seem to be quite 
appropriate. I won't  deal here with free 
modi f icat ions  (real adjuncts and other 
per iphera l  elements), a l though they 
belong, accord ing to the theory, also to 
the bundles. To handle them a special  
mechan ism is included in the analys is  
procedure. 
THE PHENOMENON OF OBL IGATORY COMPLEMENTS 
In the va lency theory  ob l igatory  
complements  are normal ly  regarded as 
special  parts of the concept  of the verb. 
On this level the not ion "obl igatory" has 
often been investigated. It is connected 
with the c lass i f i cat ion  "complement-  
adjunct", but there are also opt ional  
complements  and ob l igatory  adjuncts. 
For automat ic  process ing this 
c lass i f i cat ion  is not suff ic ient:  
H. Somers (1986) showed that a more 
f lex ib le  c lass i f i cat ion  lead to better  
results, espec ia l ly  with respect  to 
machine translat ion.  Somers referred also 
to the problem that ob l igatory  
complements can be "hidden" in the text: 
- E l l ipses and other phenomena lead to 
omiss ions which are hard to handle. 
- In modi f ied syntact ic  construct ions 
(passive, nominal isat ions)  complements 
can be omitted regularly. 
- In other construct ions  the complements  
stand in quite d i f ferent  relat ions to 
the form der ived from a verb (the 
phenomenon of control, a t t r ibut ive  
part ic ip les  etc.). In these cases the 
complements have to be found by special  
tools. 
Concerning the examples in the f irst 
paragraph regular omiss ions are poss ib le  
in (3), (4), (5) and (6) whi le  the 
315 
sentences (2), (6) and (7) belong to the 
third category. They all have to be 
handled in syntactic analysis, but the 
question arises: What is the advantage of 
using the notion obligatory under the 
named circumstances? 
Obligatory in syntactic analysis 
Normally we suppose that sentences to 
be analysed are correct. But, if we 
construct a set of bundles (with 
obligatory edges), we are defining a set 
of sentences which will never be complete. 
If there are no obl igatory edges, the 
described set is better covering the set 
of correct sentences. Only very simple 
demands have to be regarded like the 
necessity of the surface subject. In this 
way a parsing system can work quite well. 
In the $aarbrGcken MT-systems a 
dict ionary is used where all complements 
are entered in a cumulative way without 
the classif ication obl igatory-optional or 
other relations (Luckhardt, 1985). 
But I think, the possibi l i t ies to 
combine complements of verbs (and of 
derived forms) and thus also the notion 
obligatory can be very useful to solve 
ambiguities and to dist inguish different 
meanings of a verb. By the way, also in 
SaarbrGcken such mechanisms are used, but 
only in the so-called semantic analysis 
fol lowing the syntactic analysis. 
To show the advantages I'll take the 
fol lowing verbs as examples: 
a) E@chn@~ 
(I) Er rechnet (die Aufgaben). 
(He calculates (the exercices).) 
(2) Er rechnet ihn zu seinen Freunden. 
(He reckons him among his friends.) 
(3) Er rechnet mit ibm. 
(He takes him into account.) 
In the first case the direct object is 
optional, but the preposit ional objects in 
both other cases as well as the direct 
object in the second case are obligatory. 
If not, the first sentence would have all 
three meanings! Only the subject is not 
important for the dist inct ion of the 
meanings, and it is not as obligatory as 
the other complements, because it can be 
omitted by passive transformation. 
b) b_.~e s__~t eh en 
(I) Es besteht Hoffnung. 
(There is hope.) 
(2) Er besteht die PrGfung. 
(He passes the examination.) 
(3) Die Fabrik besteht seit 3 Jahren. 
(The factory has existed for ...) 
(4) Er besteht auf seiner Meinung. 
(He insists on his opinion.) 
(5) Die Wand besteht aus Steinen. 
(The wall consists of stones. 
(6) Das Wesen der Sache besteht darin,.. 
(The nature ... consists in ...) 
Here in (I) and (3) the subject is 
obligatory, but in (2) only the direct 
object. In the other cases the 
preposit ional objects are obligatory, thus 
the dist inction of the different meanings 
is possible without ambiguities. 
c) erw~rten 
(i) Er erwartet G~ste. 
(He is waiting for guests.) 
(2) Die Kinder erwarten (von den Eltern) 
ein Geschenk. 
(The children expect a gift (from 
their parents).) 
Because of the possibi l i ty to form a 
passive sentence from (I), the subject is 
not obligatory in this case. But in (2) it 
is obligatory. Unfortunately the 
dist inctive complement with yon is not 
obligatory, thus the dist inct ion of these 
two meanings requires also to take into 
consideration the selective properties of 
the direct object. 
The conclusion of this paragraph can be 
that the classif ication in obl igatory and 
optional complements is only important in 
a final stage of syntactic analysis to 
support the dist inct ion of dif ferent 
meanings of wordforms (especially verbal 
forms or forms derived from verbs). But 
this dist inct ion is very useful mainly 
with respect to machine translation, as we 
can see translating the different meanings 
of the examples. 
PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS 
As we have seen in the first paragraph 
the bundles (i.e. the logical formulas) 
have their place in the lexicon as 
description of the dominance behaviour of 
the wcrdforms. There is no problem, if a 
wordform lexicon (with full forms) is 
used. But in an extensive syntactic 
analysis system a morphological analysis 
has to be included. 
Obl igatory in the lexicon 
For a morphological analysis (not only 
an inflexion analysis) we need a lexicon 
of bases and a lexicon of affixes. In the 
lexicon of bases there must be a general 
descript ion of the grammatical properties 
and with the affixes rules have to be 
stated for calculating the properties of 
the derived wordforms. 
What does this mean for the descript ion 
of the dominance behaviour? To calculate 
with the logical formulas seems to be not 
very convenient. 
Therefore the dominance component is 
divided into two parts: The first one is a 
316 
cumulat ive list of the subord inat ion  
re lat ions and the second one contains the 
bundles. 
For the f irst  part  a sp l i t t ing of the 
subord inat ion  re lat ions is advantageous. 
The subord inat ion  re lat ions are very 
complex things cons is t ing of d i f fe rent  
kinds of information: 
- usual ideas about syntact ic  parts of 
sentences l ike subject, at t r ibute  . . . .  
- paths of act ion for se lect ive 
connections,  
- paths of act ion for parad igmat ic  
connections,  
- wordclass  condi t ions etc. 
The f irst  two express the wel l -known 
syntact ic  funct ions (SF's), the others 
their  a~pearances - so-ca l led morpho-  
syntact ic  re lat ions (MSR's) - which are 
only necessary  to recognize the syntact ic  
functions. If a syntact ic  funct ion is 
recognized, the used morpho-syntact i c  
re lat ion can be forgotten. 
Thus this part  of the dominance 
component  is a list of syntact ic  funct ions 
which have pointers  to the MSR's 
express ing this syntact ic  funct ion in case 
of the concerned wordform (SF-MSR-I ist).  
The rules for the der ivat ions  concern only 
this list, i.e. only the MSR's under the 
SF's can be changed. For instance: 
rechnen 
SF's MSR's 
SUBJ N-I noun in nominat ive  case 
DOBJ N-4 noun in accussat ive  case 
ZU P-ZU prepos i t ion  zu 
MIT P-MIT prepos i t ion  mit 
or S-DASS d_a~_-clause 
or I-ZU inf in i t ive with zu 
(S-DASS and I-ZU only with 
correlate) 
After the pass ive  t rans format ion  we 
have the fo l lowing list: 
SUBJ 
DOBJ 
ZU 
MIT 
P -PRACT prepos i t iona l  actor 
N-I noun in nominat ive  case 
see above 
see above 
A nomina l i sat ion  (die ~eQh~g)  leads 
to the fol lowing: 
SUBJ N-2 noun in geni t ive  case 
or P-PRACT prepos i t iona l  actor 
DOBJ N-2 noun in geni t ive case 
or P-VON prepos i t ion  yon 
ZU see above 
MIT see above 
Thus the bundles are not concerned by 
the rules connected with the der ivat ions.  
But the problem remains how to handle the 
property  "obl igatory" here. We have two 
possibi l i t ies:  
- Only  those complements  which are 
ob l igatory  in all der ived forms are 
marked by the sign OB. In this case, 
the subject  is not ob l igatory  for many 
verbs, espec ia l ly  for all t rans i t ive  
verbs. Choos ing this possibi l i ty,  the 
"surface obl igateness"  (e.g. of a 
sur face subject) has to be generated 
dur ing the process (depending on 
derivat ion).  
- All semant ica l ly  ob l igatory  complements  
are marked by OB. Then changes have to 
be per formed dur ing the analys is  
process, too. 
We intend to fo l low the f irst  way. At 
this point the quest ion arises how to deal 
with the omiss ions of the th ird category, 
where the complements are not real ly  
omitted, but have to be looked for at 
other places with in the sentence. That 
means that these complements  are not 
connected with the verbal  node by a d i rect  
edge (downward), but - in our theory - 
they are connected by a path of act ion for 
the corresponding se lect ive  connection. In 
this way it is poss ib le  to let these 
complements be ob l igatory  and to remark in 
the SF-MSR- I is t  that instead of a MSR a 
path af act ion leads to the concerned 
complement. 
Thus the SF-MSR- I i s t  for the inf in i t ive 
EeRhnen will have the fo l lowing form: 
SUBJ via SUBJ -path of act ion 
DOBJ N-4 
ZU see above 
MIT see above 
As result  of the d iscuss ion  we have the 
fo l lowing formulas for the d i f ferent  
meanings of rechnen: 
(I) (SUBJ v DOBJ) 
(2) (SUBJ v (ZU A DOBJ) oB) 
(3) (SUBJ v MITeS) 
Ob l igatory  in the analysis  process 
F ina l ly  I'll g ive a short survey of our 
syntact ic  analysis  system to show that the 
bundles and with them also the not ion 
ob l igatory  - are used only in the very 
f inal stage. 
The f irst step of the procedure is a 
sequent ia l  preanalys is  (performed by an 
ATN) which has the task to find the 
segments of the sentence and the verbal 
groups of each clause. 
The second step is a local analys is  
where only two nodes and the re lat ions 
between them are regarded. Here the SF- 
MSR- l is ts  are used to recognize the 
poss ib le  syntact ic  functions. 
But in the third step wrong readings 
from the f irst  two steps are f i l tered out 
us ing the bundles, i.e. the logical 
317 
formulas, together with the selective 
conditions (transported by the paths of 
action). A side effect of this so-called 
global bundle analysis is the selection of 
the actual verbal meaning. Only here the 
notion "obligatory" is used. 
To conclude this paper I'll emphasize 
once more the problems which have to be 
taken into consideration, if the notion 
"obligatory" is used for syntactic 
analysis: 
- The advantage of using such a concept 
is the possibi l i ty to solve ambiguities 
and to s.elect actual meanings of word- 
forms (especial ly verbal forms). 
This is the reason why it shall be used 
only in a final stage of analysis. 
- The different possibi l i t ies to omit 
obligatory complements have to be 
treated in an adequate way. Here 
special procedures during morphological 
analysis and the mechanism of selective 
connections (paths of action) can help 
to handle the regular cases. For other 
omissions (in ell ipses etc.) default 
solutions are proposed. 
REFERENCES 
Engel, U.; Schumacher, H. 1978 Kleines 
Valenzlexikon deutscher Verben. TBL 
Verlag Gunter Narr, THbingen. 
Helbig, G.; Schenkel, W. 1983 W~rterbuch 
zur Valenz und Distr ibution deutscher 
Verben. Verlag Enzyklop~die, Leipzig. 
Kunze, J~rgen. 1975 Abh~ingigkeitsgramma- 
tik. Studia Grsmmatica XIl, Akademie- 
Verlag, Berlin. 
Luckhardt, Heinz-Dirk. 1985 Valenz und 
Tiefenkasus in der maschinel len Ober- 
setzung. CL-Report No. 4, Sonderfor- 
schungsbereich I00, Universit~t des 
Saarlandes, Saarbr~cken. 
Reimann, Dorothee. 1982 B~sehel als syn- 
taktische Regeln. In: Kunze, J0rgen, 
Ed., Automatisehe Analyse des Deut- 
schen. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin. 
Somers, Harold L. 1988 The Need for MT- 
oriented Versions of Case and Valency 
in MT. In: Proceedings COLING'86, Bonn. 
318 
