DISCONTINUOUS CONSTITUENTS IN TREES, RULES, AND PARSING 
Harry Bunt, Jan Thesingh and Ko van der Sloot 
Computational Linguistics Unit 
Tilburg University, SLE 
Postbus 90153 
5000 LE TILBURG, The Netherlands 
ABSTRACT 
This paper discusses the consequences 
of allowing discontinuous constituents in 
syntact i c  represent ions  and  
phrase-structure rules, and the resulting 
complications for a standard parser of 
phrase-structure grammar. 
It is argued, first, that discontinuous 
const i tuents  seem inevitable in a 
phrase-s t ruc ture  grammar  wh ich  is 
acceptable from a semantic point of view. 
It is shown that tree-like constituent 
structures with discontinuit ies can be 
given a precise definition which makes 
them just as acceptable for syntactic 
representation as ordinary trees. However, 
the formulation of phrase-structure rules 
that generate such structures entails 
quite intricate problems. The notions .of 
l i near  precedence and adjacency are 
reexamined, and the concept of "n-place 
ad jacency  sequence"  is introduced. 
F ina l ly  , the resu l t ing  fo rm of 
phrase-s t ruc ture  grammar ,  ca l led  
"Discontinuous Phrase-Structure Grammar" 
is shown to be parsable by an algorithm 
for context-free parsing with relatively 
minor adaptations. The paper describes the 
adaptations in the chart parser which was 
implemented as part of the TENDUM dialogue 
system. 
I. Phrase -s t ruc ture  
discontinuity 
grammar  and 
Context-free phrase-structure grammars 
(PSGs) have always been popular in 
computational l inguistics and in the 
theory of programming languages because of 
their technical and conceptual simplicity 
and the i r  wel l -establ ished efficient 
parsabil ity (Shell, 1976; Tomita, 1985). 
In theoret i ca l  linguistics, i t  was 
generally believed until recently that 
natural language competence cannot be 
characterized adequately by a context-free 
grammar, especially in view of agreement 
phenomena and discontinuit ies (see e.g. 
Postal, 1964). However, in the early 
eighties Gazdar and others revived an 
idea,  due to Harman (1963) ,  of 
formulating phrase-structure rules not in 
terms of monadic category symbols, but in 
terms of feature bundles. With this 
richer conception of PSG it is not at all 
obvious whether natural languages can be 
described by context-free grammars (see 
e .g . Pu l lum,  1984) . Genera l i zed  
Phrase-Structure Grammar (GPSG; Gazdar et 
al., 1985), represents a recent attempt 
to provide a theoretical ly acceptable 
account of natural- language syntax in the 
form of a phrase-structure grammar. 
Apart from being important in its own 
r ight,  phrase-structure grammar also 
plays an important part in more complex 
grammar  fo rmal i sms  that have been 
developed in linguistics; in classical 
Transformational-Generative Grammar the 
base component was assumed to be a PSG; 
in Lexical-Functional Grammar a PSG is 
supposed to generate c-structures, and in 
Funct iona l  Un i  f i ca t ion  Grammar  
context-free rules generate the input 
structures for the unif ication operation 
(Kay, 1979). 
Phrase-structure grammar has one more 
a t t rac t ive  s ide ,  apar t  f rom its 
technical/conceptual simplicity and its 
computational efficiency, namely that it 
seems to fit the semantic requirement of 
compos i t iona l i ty  very  we l l .  The 
composit ional ity principle is the thesis 
that the meaning of a natural- language 
express ion  is determined  by the 
combination of (a) the meanings of its 
parts; (b) its syntactic structure. This 
entails, for a grammar which associates 
meanings with the expressions of the 
language,  the requirement that the 
syntactic rules should characterize the 
internal structure of every expression in 
a "meaningful" way, which allows the 
computation of its meaning. In this way, 
semantic considerations can be used to 
prefer one syntactic analysis to another. 
PSGs area useful tool for the formulation 
of syntactic rules that meet this 
requirement, as phrase-structure rules by 
their very nature provide a recursive 
description of the constituent structure 
203 
(I 
(2 
(3 
(4 
(5 
(6 Leo is harder gegaan dan ooit tevoren 
(= Leo has been going faster than 
ever before) 
(7) Ik hob een auto gekocht  met 5 deuren 
(= I have bought a car with 5 doors) 
(8) Ik hoot dat Jan Marie de k inderen de 
hond heeft helpen leren u i t laten 
(= I hear that John has helped Mary 
to teach the kids to walk the dog) 
John  ta lked ,  of  course, about 
pol i t ics 
Which chi ldren did Anne expect to get 
a present from? 
This was a better movie than I 
expected 
Wake me up at seven thirty 
~i-il one of your cousins come who 
moved to Denmark? 
These examples do not represent  a s ingle 
class of l inguist ic  phenomena, and it is 
doubtful  whether they should all be 
handled by means of the same techniques.  
(1o) 
Sentence (I), which has been d iscussed 
extens ive ly  in the l i terature,  presents a 
problem for any analys is  in terms of 
ad jacent  const i tuents ,  s ince  the 
parenthet ica l  "of course" div ides the verb 
phrase  "talked about pol i t ics"  into 
non-ad jacent  parts. This means that we are 
fo rc  e d to  e i the  r cons ider  the 
parenthet ica l  as part of the VP, as Ross 
(1973) has suggested, or as a const i tuent  
at sentence level, as has been suggested 
by Emonds (1976; 1979). In the latter 
case ,  the sentence is analysed as 
cons ist ing of the embedded sentence "John 
talked", with "of course" and "about 
pol i t ics"  as speci f iers  at sentence level. 
McCawley  (1982)  prov ides  deta i led  
arguments showing that both suggest ions 
are inadequate (which seems intu i t ive ly  
obvious, from a semant ic  point of view), 
and suggests, instead, the syntact ic  
representat ion (9). 
(9) 
John talked 
This is of course no longer an 
ordinary tree structure,  but should that 
be a reason to reject it? McCawley takes 
the view that we should s imply not be 
afraid of const i tuent  st ructures like 
(9). We wil l  return to this suggest ion 
below. 
Example (2) represents a d i f ferent  
c l a s s o f phenomena,  wh ich  are  
convenient ly  thought of in terms of 
movements of parts of phrases. In this 
example, the NP "which chi ldren" can be 
thought of as having moved out of the PP 
"from which chi ldren",  of which only the 
prepos i t ion  has been left behind. In 
order to deal with such cases, in GPSG a 
special  type of syntact ic  categor ies have 
be  e n i n t rod  uced ,  ca l led  "s lash  
categor ies"  For instance, the category 
PP/NP is ass igned to a prepos i t iona l  
phrase which "misses" an NP. In the 
present example, this category would be 
ass igned to "from". The assumpt ion that 
an NP is miss ing propagates to higher 
nodes in the syntact ic  tree which the 
phrase-s t ructure  rules construct  for the 
sentence, unti l  it is acknowledged at the 
top level. Diagram (10) i l lustrates this. 
S 
of complex express ions down to their 
smal lest meaningful  parts. However, PSG 
has  one  proper ty  that l imits its 
appl icabi l i ty  in descr ib ing const i tuent  
structure in natural  language, namely that 
phrase-s t ructure  ru les  assume the 
const i tuents  of an express ion  to 
correspond to adjacent substr ings.  In 
natural  language it happens quite often, 
however, that the const i tuents  of an 
express ion are not adjacent.  The Engl ish 
and  Dutch  example sentences ( I )-(8) 
i l l us t ra te  this. In (2)-(7) we see 
examples of major phrases, made up of 
parts that are not adjacent; so-cal led 
d i scont inuous  const i tuents .  We have 
d iscont inuous noun phrases in (5) and (7), 
a d iscont inuous ad ject ive phrase in (3), 
d iscont inuous verb phrases in (1) and (4), 
and a d iscont inuous adverb phrase in (6). 
NP\[+WH\] AUX NP V NP PREP NP/NP 
which chi ldren did Ann et ifts from 0 
If we want to do just ice to the 
intu i t ion that the sentence at surface 
level contains a const i tuent  made up by 
"which chi ldren" and "from", we would 
have to draw a const i tuent  d iagram like 
(11), which, l ike (9), is no longer an 
ord inary tree structure.  
204 
(11) S 
which chi ldren did nn get ifts fr m 
The technique of using phrases that 
miss some const i tuent  cannot be used for 
at least some of the examples (3)-(8), 
such as (5) and (7). In both these 
sentences the d iscont inuous NP contains a 
fu l l - f ledged NP, which cannot sens ib ly  be 
said to "miss" the re lat ive clause or 
preposi t ional  phrase that occurs later in 
the sentence. 
Whatever techniques may be invented to 
deal with such cases, it seems obvious 
that a grammar which recognizes and 
descr ibes  d iscont inu i t ies  in natural  
language sentences is a more sui table 
basis for semant ic  in terpretat ion  than one 
that squeezes const i tuent  structures in a 
form in which they cannot be represented.  
It therefore seems worth invest igat ing 
the v iab i l i ty  of t ree- l ike structures with 
d iscont inui t ies ,  l ike (9) and (11). 
2. Trees with d i scont inu i t ies  
If we want to represent  the s i tuat ion 
that a phrase P has const i tuents  A and C, 
whi le there is an intervening phrase B, we 
must al low the node corresponding to P to 
dominate the A and C nodes without  
dominat ing the B, even though this node is 
located between the A and C nodes: 
(12) P 
A B C 
One consequence  of a l lowing such 
d iscont inu i t ies  is that our st ructures get 
cross ing branches, if we sti l l  want all 
nodes to be connected to the top node; 
(10) and (11) i l lustrate this. In what 
respects exact ly  do these structures 
dif fer from ord inary trees? McCawley 
(1982) has tried to answer this question, 
suggest ing a formal def in i t ion  for trees 
with d iscont inu i t ies  by amending the 
def in i t ion of a tree. 
A tree is often def ined as a set of 
elements, cal led "nodes", on which two 
relat ions are defined, immediate  dominance 
(D) and l inear precedence (<), which are 
required to have certa in propert ies to 
the effect that a tree has exact ly one 
root node, which dominates every other 
node ( immediate ly  or indirect ly);  that 
every node in a tree has exact ly  one 
"mother" node, etc. (see e.g. Wall, 
1972). 
Given the re lat ions of immediate 
dominance  and  l inear  p recedence ,  
dominance is def ined as the ref lex ive and 
t rans i t ive c losure D' of D, and ad jacency 
as l inear precedence without intervening 
nodes. 
A node in a tree is cal led terminal  if 
it does not dominate any other node; the 
terminal nodes in a tree are total ly  
o rdered  by the  < re la t ion .  For 
nonterminal  nodes the precedence re lat ion 
sat is f ies  the requi rement  that x < y if 
and only if every node dominated by x 
precedes every node dominated by y. 
Formally: 
(13) for any two nodes x and y in the 
node set of a tree, x < y if and 
only if for all nodes u and v, if x 
dominates u and y dominates v, then 
u < v. 
Part of the def in i t ion  of a tree is 
also the s t ipu lat ion  that any two nodes 
either dominate or precede one another: 
(14) for any two nodes x and y in the 
node set of a tree, either x D' y, 
or y D' x, or x < y, or y < x. 
This s t ipu lat ion  has the effect  of 
exc luding d iscont inu i t ies  in a tree, for 
suppose a node x would dominate nodes y 
and z without  having a dominance re lat ion 
with node w, where y < w < z. By (14), 
either x < w or w < x. But x dominates a 
node to the r ight of w, so by (13) x does 
not precede w; and w is to the r ight of a 
node dominated by x, so w does not 
precede x either. 
McCawley's  def in i t ion  of trees with 
d iscont inu i t ies  comes down to dropping 
the condi t ion that any two nodes should 
either dominate one another or have a 
le f t - r ight  relat ion.  Instead, he proposes 
the weaker condi t ion that a node has no 
precedence re lat ion to any node that it 
dominates:  
(15) for any two nodes x and y in the 
node set of a tree, if x D' y then 
neither  x < y nor y < x. 
We shall  call a node u, s i tuated 
between daughters  of a node x without 
being dominated by x, internal  context  of 
X.  
205 
McCawley's  def in i t ion of trees with 
d iscont inu i t ies  is inaccurate  in several  
respects; however, his general  idea is 
cer ta in ly  cor rec t  : t rees  w i th  
d iscont inu i t ies  can be def ined essent ia l ly  
by re lax ing  condi t ion (14) in the 
def in i t ion of trees. 
However, this is only the beginning of 
what needs to be done. The next quest ion 
is how d iscont inuous  trees can be produced 
by phrase-s t ructure  rules. This question, 
which is not addressed by McCawley, is far 
from tr iv ial  and turns out to have 
interest ing consequences for the not ion of 
ad jacency in d iscont inuous  tre 
es. 
3. Ad jacency in phrase-s t ruc ture  rules for 
d iscont inuous  const i tuents  
A phrase-s t ructure  rule rewri tes a 
const i tuent  into a sequence of pa i rwise 
adjacent  const i tuents .  This means that we 
need a not ion  of  adjacency in 
d iscont inuous  trees, for which the obvious 
def in i t ion,  g iven the < relat ion, would 
seem to be: 
(16) two nodes x and y in the node set of 
a tree are ad jacent  if and only if x 
< y and there is no z such that x < 
z < y. 
We shall  wr i te "x + y" to indicate that 
x and y are ad jacent  (or "neighbours") .  A 
moment 's  re f lect ion  shows that this not ion 
of ad jacency unfor tunate ly  does not help 
us in formulat ing rules that could do 
a n y th i  n g w i t h in  t e rna l  context  
const i tuents .  The  fo l lowing example 
i l lustrates this. Suppose we want to 
generate  the d iscont inuous  tree structure:  
(17) VP /k 
Wake your fr iend up 
To generate the top node, we need a 
rule combin ing the V and the NP, like: 
(18) VP --> V + NP 
Since the V dominates nodes at e i ther 
side of the NP, however, there is no 
lef t - r ight  order between the NP and V 
nodes, leave alone a ne ighbour  relat ion.  
For the same reason there would be no 
le f t - r ight  re lat ion between over lapp ing  
d iscont inuous const i tuents,  as in (19). 
These def ic ienc ies  can be remedied by 
rep lac ing clause (14) in the def in i t ion  of 
a tree by the more general  c lause (20). 
(19) VP 
g NP 
Wake the man up who l ives next door. 
(20) A nontermina l  node x in a tree is 
to the left of a node y in the tree 
i f  and only if x's le f tmost  
daughter  is left of y's le f tmost  
daughter.  
(We refra in here from a formal 
def in i t ion  of " lef tmost  daughter"  node, 
which is in tu i t ive ly  obvious. )  
Note  that  (20)  is indeed a 
genera l i za t ion  of the usual not ion of 
precedence in trees, which could also be 
def ined by (20). The recurs ion in (20) 
comes to an end since the terminal  nodes 
are required to be tota l ly  ordered.  
It should also be noted that (20) is 
not cons is tent  with c lause (14): by (2@), 
we do get a precedence re lat ion between a 
node and its daughter  nodes (except the 
leftmost  one) and internal  context  nodes. 
This is not quite unreasonable .  In (21), 
for example, we do want that X < Y, and 
(21) X 
A B Y C 
s ince Y < C, that X < C, but not that X < 
B. We therefore adapt c lause (14) to the 
ef fect  that a mother  node only precedes 
internal  context  nodes and daughter  nodes 
which have internal  context  nodes to 
their  left. Formally: 
(22) For any nodes x and z in the node 
set N of a tree, if x D z and there 
are no nodes u,v in N such that x D 
u, not x D v, and u < v < z, then 
nei ther  x < z nor z < x. 
With the mod i f i ca t ions  (16) and (22), 
we have a cons is tent  de f in i t ion  of 
"d iscont inuous  trees" which al lows us to 
wr i te phrase-s t ruc ture  rules conta in ing  
d iscont inuous  const i tuents  as fol lows: 
(23) X --> A + B + \[Y\] + C 
where the square brackets  ind icate that 
the NP is not dominated by the X node, 
but is only internal  context.  The "+" 
symbo l  represents  the  not ion  of 
adjacency,  def ined as before but now on 
the basis of te revised precedence 
re lat ion "<": 
206 
(24) Two nodes x and y in a tree are 
adjacent if and only if x < y and 
there is no node z in the tree such 
that x < z < y. 
Upon closer inspection, the neighbour 
re la t ion  de f ined  in th i s  way is 
unsat isfactory,  however, as the fo l lowing 
example i l lustrates.  
Suppose  we want to generate the 
fo l lowing (part of a) tree structure: 
(25) S 
A B C D E 
To generate the S node, we would l ike 
to write a phrase-s t ructure  rule that 
rewrites S into its const i tuents,  l ike 
(26): 
(26) S --> P + Q + E 
However, this rule would be of no help 
here, since P, Q and E do not form a 
sequence of adjacency pairs, as Q and E 
are  not  ad jacent  according to our 
def init ion.  Rather, the correct rule for 
generat ing (25) would be (27): 
(27) S --> P + Q + \[C\] + \[D\] + E 
This is ugly, and even ugl ier rules are 
required in more complex trees with 
d i scont inu i t ies  at d i f ferent  levels. 
Moreover, there seems to be something 
fundamenta l ly  wrong, since the C and D 
nodes are on the one hand internal  context 
for the S node, according to rule (27), 
while on the other hand they are also 
dominated by S. That is, these nodes are 
both "real" const i tuents  of S and internal  
context of S. 
To remedy this, we introduce a new 
concept of ad jacency sequence, which 
general izes the t radi t ional  not ion of a 
sequence  of  ad jacency  pa i rs .  The 
def in i t ion goes as fol lows: 
(28) A sequence (a, b, ..., n) is an 
(n-place) adjacency sequence if and 
only if: 
(i) every  pa i r  ( i , j )  in the 
sequence is either an adjacency 
pair or is connected by a 
sequence of adjacency pairs of 
wh ich  a l l  members  are a 
const i tuent  of some element in 
the subsequence (a, b,..., i); 
(ii) the elements in the sequenc~ do 
not share any const i tuents.  .) 
For example, in the structure (25) the 
triple (P, Q, E) is an adjacency sequence 
since (P, Q) is an adjacency pair and Q 
and E are connected by the sequence of 
adjacency pairs Q-C-D-E, with C and D 
const i tuents  of P and Q, respect ively.  
Another example of an adjacency sequence 
in (25) is the tr iple (P, B, D). The 
tr iple (P, B, C), on the other hand, is 
not an adjacency sequence, since P and C 
share the const i tuent  C. 
The use of this not ion of adjacency 
sequence is now that the sequence of 
const i tuents,  into which a nonterminal  is 
rewr i t ten by a phrase-s t ructure  rule, 
forms an ad jacency sequence in this 
sense .  The phrase-s t ructure  grammar 
cons ist ing of rules of this kind we call 
Discont inuous Phrase-St ructure  Grammar or 
DPSG. ~j 
It may be worth emphas iz ing that this 
not ion of phrase-s t ructure  rule is a 
genera l i zat ion  of the usual notion, since 
an adjacency sequence as def ined by (28) 
subsumes the usual not ion of sequence of 
ad jacency pairs. We have also seen that 
t rees  w i th  d i scont inu i t ies  are a 
genera l i zat ion  of the tradit ional  tree 
concept .  There fore ,  phrase-s t ructure  
rules of the famil iar  sort coincide with 
DPSG ru les  w i thout  d i scont inuous  
const i tuents ,  and they produce the 
fami l ia r  sor t  of  t rees  w i thout  
d i scont inu i t ies  . In o ther  words ,  
DPSG-rules can simply be added to a 
c lass ical  PSG ( including GPSG ,-~'--~ith the 
result  that the grammar generates trees 
with d iscont inu i t ies  for sentences with 
d iscont inuous const i tuents,  whi le doing 
everyth ing else as before. 
4. DPSG and pars ing  
From a parser 's  point of view, a 
def in i t ion of ad jacency as given in (24) 
is not suff ic ient,  s ince it only appl ies 
to nodes within the context of a tree. A 
parser has the job of const ruct ing  such a 
set from a co l lect ion of substructures  
that may or may not fit together to form 
one or more trees for the entire 
sentence. Whether a number of subtrees 
fit together is not so easy if the end 
product  may be a t ree  w i th  
d i scont inu i t ies ,  since the adjacency 
relat ion def ined by (20) and (24) al lows 
ne ighbour ing  nodes to have common 
daughters.  This is c lear ly undesirable.  
We therefore modify the def in i t ion (20) 
of adjacency by adding the requirement 
that two substructures  (or their top 
nodes)  can only have a precedence 
relat ion if they do not share any 
const i tuents:  
207 
(29) A node x in a co l lect ion of 
substructures for a potent ia l  tree 
(possibly with d iscont inu i t ies)  is 
to the left of a node y in the same 
qol lect ion if and only if x's 
leftmost daughter  is left of y's 
lef tmost  daughter,  and there is no 
node z which is shared by x and y. 
If the nodes x and y in this def in i t ion 
belong to the same tree, the addi t iona l  
requirement that x and y do not share any 
const i tuent  is automat ica l ly  sat isf ied, 
due to the "single mother"  condit ion.  
A parser  for DPSG meets certa in 
compl icat ions  which do not ar ise in 
context - f ree  parsing. To see these 
compl icat ions,  we cons ider  what would 
happen when a char t  parser  fo r  
context - f ree  pars ing (see Winograd, 1983) 
is appl ied to DPSG. 
Context - f ree chart pars ing is a matter  
of f i t t ing ad jo in ing  pieces together  in a 
chart. For example, cons ider  the grammar: 
(30) S --> VP NP 
NP --> DET N 
VP --> V 
For the input "V DET N", a chart  parser 
begins by in i t ia l i z ing  the chart as 
fol lows: 
(31) 
1 2 3 4 
Given the arc V(1,2) in the chart, we look 
up all those rules which have a "free" V 
as the f irst  const i tuent .  These rules are 
placed in a separate list, the "act ive- 
rule l ist". We "bind" the V's in these 
rules to the V(1,2) arc, i.e. we estab l ish  
l inks between them. When all const i tuents  
in a rule are bound, the rule is appl ied.  
In this case, the VP(I ,2) wi l l  be built.  
This procedure is repeated for the new VP 
node. When noth ing more can be done, we 
move on in the chart. The final result  in 
this example is the chart (32). 
(32) 
VP NP 
I 2 3 4 
When we use DPSG rules and fo l low the same 
procedure, we run into d i f f icu l t ies .  
Consider the example grammar (33). 
(33) S --> VP + NP 
NP --> DET + N 
VP --> V + \[NP\] + PART 
For the input "V DET N PART" the f irst 
const i tuent  that can be built  is NP(2,4); 
the second is VP(I ,5).  The VP wil l  
act ivate the S rule, but this rule wil l  
not be appl ied since the NP does not have 
a binding. And even if it did, the rule 
would not be app l icab le  as the VP(I ,5) 
and the NP(2,4) are not ad jo in ing  in the 
t rad i t iona l  sense. 
In the next sect ion we descr ibe  the 
provis ions,  added to a standard chart  
parser in order to deal with these 
d i f f icu l t ies .  
5. A modi f ied  chart  parser  for DPSG 
5.1 F inding all app l i cab le  rules 
To make sure that the parser f inds all 
app l icab le  rules of a DPSG, the fo l lowing 
add i t ion  was made to the pars ing 
a lgor i thm. 
If a rule with internal  context  is 
appl ied, we f irst  fo l low the standard 
procedure;  subsequent ly  we go through all 
those rules that appear on the act ive-  
rule l ist as the result  of app ly ing  the 
s tandard procedure,  g iv ing  b indings to 
those free const i tuents  that correspond 
in category  to the context -e lement (s )  in 
the rule that was appl ied.  
In the case of (33), this means that 
just before app l i cat ion  of the VP rule 
(after the PART has been bound), we have 
the act ive- ru le  l ist (34). (Under l in ing 
indicates that a const i tuent  is bound).  
(34) VP --> V ? \[NP\] + PART 
VP --> \[ + \[NP\] + PART 
VP --> ~+ \[NT\] + PART 
w 
We now apply the rule bu i ld ing  the VP. 
The standard procedure wil l  add one rule 
to this list, namely S --> VP + NP. The 
VP is g iven a binding, so we obta in the 
fo l lowing act ive - ru le  list: 
(35) S --> VP + NP 
VP --> 9--+ \[NP\] + PART 
VP --> \[ ? \[NP\] + PART 
VP --> ~ + \[N~\] + PART 
Since the VP-bu i ld ing  rule conta ined 
an in terna l  context  e lement,  the 
addi t iona l  procedure ment ioned above is 
now appl ied; a b inding is g iven to the NP 
in (a copy of) the S rule. The S arc is 
now bui lt  in the chart, which does not 
cause any new rules to be added to the 
act ive - ru le  list. There are no free S's 
208 
in the old act ive rule list either, which 
should be given a binding. So, we can look 
for other rules conta in ing a free NP. 
There is one such rule, the second in 
(35), but this one will be neglected 
because it was already present in the rule 
list before; see (34). Note that it is 
essential  that this rule is neglected, as 
there is already a version of the VP-rule 
on the act ive-ru le  l ist contain ing an NP 
w i th  the  s a me b ind ing  as the  
context-e lement.  
It may also be noted that we have 
combined const i tuents  in this example that 
are not adjo in ing in the tradit ional  sense 
(i.e., in the sense of success ive vertex 
numbers).  In part icular,  we have appl ied 
the rule S --> VP(I,5) + NP(2,4). In a 
case like this, where the vertex numbers 
indicate that the const i tuents  in a rule 
are overlapping, we must test whether 
these const i tuents  form an adjacency 
sequence. This test is descr ibed below. 
5.2 The adjacency sequence test 
In order to make sure that only 
consi tuents are combined that form an 
adjacency sequence, the parser keeps track 
of daughter nodes and internal context in 
a so-cal led "construct ion list", which is 
added to each arc in the chart; internal  
context nodes are marked as such in these 
lists. Whether two (or more) nodes share a 
constituent,  in the sense of common 
domination, is easi ly detected with the 
help of these lists. 
By organ iz ing  these l ists in a 
part icular  way, moreover,  they can also be 
used to determine whether a sequence of 
const i tuents  is an adjacency sequence in 
the sense of def in i t ion (28). This is 
achieved by order ing the elements in 
construct ion l ists in such a way that an 
element is always either dominated by its 
predecessor  in the list, or is internal 
context of it, or is a r ight neighbour  of 
it. For instance, in the above example 
(25), P and Q have the construct ion lists 
(36): 
(36) P:(A, \[B\], C) 
Q:(B, \[C\], D). 
The rule S --> P + Q + E is now 
appl icable, since the construct ion list 
for S would be the result of merging P's 
and Q's l ists with that of E, which is 
simply E:(), with the result  S:(A, B, C, 
D, E). From this list, it can be concluded 
that the tr iple (P, Q, E) is an adjacency 
sequence, since (P, Q) is an adjacency 
pair (since P's leftmost daughter, i.e. A, 
is adjacent to Q's leftmost daughter, i.e. 
B, as can be seen also in the construct ion 
lists), and Q and E are separated in S's 
construct ion list by the adjacency pair 
(C, D), whose elemehts are both daughters 
of P. 
An example  where  the adjacency 
sequence test would give a negat ive 
result, is where the rule Y --> X + B + E 
is considered for a const i tuent  X with 
construct ion list X:(A, \[B\], \[C\], D). The 
rule is not appl icable,  since the tr iple 
(X, B, E) would not form an adjacency 
sequence according to the construct ion 
list that the node Y would get, namely: 
(37) Y:(A, B, \[C\], D, E). 
The const i tuents  B and E are separated 
in (37) by the sequence (\[C\], D), where C 
is marked as internal  context; therefore, 
C is not dominated by either X or B, and 
hence the test correct ly  fails. 
The current ly  implemented vers ion of 
the DPSG parser is in fact based on a 
more restr icted not ion of ad jacency 
sequence, where two const i tuents  are 
viewed as shar ing a const i tuent  z not 
only if they both dominate z, but also if 
one of them dominates z and the other has 
an internal  context node that dominates z 
(see note I). This means that structures 
like (38) are not generated, since P and 
T would share node B, and T and R would 
share node C. 
(38) T 
A B C D E 
Note that a st ructure like (38) would 
be an i l l - formed tree, since the nodes B 
and  C v io la te  the s ing le -mother  
condit ion, and the nodes Q and R, 
moreover,  are not connected to the root 
node. 
To deal with this more restr icted 
not ion  of ad jacency  sequence, the 
admin is t rat ion  in the construct ion l ists 
is actual ly  s l ight ly  more compl icated 
than descr ibed above. 
6. Conclus ions 
Our f indings concern ing the use of 
d iscont inuous const i tuents  in syntact ic  
representat ions,  phrase-s t ructure  rule, 
and parsers may be summarized as fol lows. 
I. T r  e e -  1 i ke  s t r uc tures  w i th  
d iscont inu i t ies  can be given a precise 
def in i t ion,  which makes them formal ly 
as acceptable  for use in syntact ic  
209 
representation as the familiar o rd~ 
tree structures. 
2. D iscont inuous  constituents can be 
a l lowed in phrase-structure rules 
generating trees with discontinuities, 
p rov ided  we g ive  a su i tab le  
genera l i za t ion  to the notion of 
adjacency. 
3. T rees  w i th  d i scont inu i t ies  are 
genera l i za t ions  of ordinary tree 
structures, and phrase-structure rules 
with discontinuous constituents are 
genera l i za t ions  o f  o rd inary  
phrase-structure rules. Both concepts 
can  be  added to  o rd inary  
phrase-structure grammars, including 
GPSG, with the effect that such 
grammars  generate  t rees  w i th  
d iscont inui t ies  for sentences with 
d i scont inuous  const i tuents ,  while 
everything else remains the same. 
4. Phrase -s t ruc ture  ru les  w i th  
discontinuit ies can be handled by a 
chart parser for context-free grammar 
by mak ing  two additions in the 
administration; one in the active-rule 
l i s t  fo r  ru les  conta in ing  a 
discontinuous element to make sure that 
no parse is overlooked, and one in the 
arcs in the chart to check the 
general ized adjacency relation. 
NOTES 
I) In this paper, sharing a constituent 
has been taken simply as common domination 
of that constituent. An interesting issue 
is whether we should take sharing a 
constituent to include the following 
s i tuat ion .  A node  x dominates  a 
constituent z, while another node y is 
related to z in such a way that z is 
dominated by a node w which is internal 
context for y. (And still more complex 
definit ions of constituent sharing are 
conceivable within the framework of DPSG.) 
Decisions on this point turn out to have 
fa r - reach ing  consequences  for  the 
generative capacity of DPSG. With the 
simple notion of sharing used in this 
paper, it is easily proved that DPSG is 
more powerful than context-free PSG, while 
further restrictions on the precedence 
relation in terms of constituent sharing 
may have the effect of making DPSG weakly 
equivalent to context-free grammar. 
2) For applications of DPSG and a 
predecessor, which was called "augmented 
phrase-const ruc t ion  grammar"  in 
syntactic/semantic analysis and automatic 
generation of sentences, the reader is 
referred to Bunt (1985; 1987). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Masaru Tomita 
for st imulating discussions about phrase- 
structure grammar and parsing in general, 
and DPSG in particular. 
REFERENCES 
Bunt, H.C. (1985) Mass terms and 
mode l - theoret i c  semantics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 
Bunt, H.C. (1987) Utterance generation 
from semantic representation augmented 
with pragmatic information. In G. Kempen 
(ed.)  Natura l  language generation. 
Kluwer/Nijhoff, The Hague. 
Bunt, H.C., Beun, R.J., Dols, F.J.H., 
Linden, J.A. van der, & Schwartzenberg, 
G.O. thoe (1985) The TENDUM dialogue 
system and its theoretical basis. IPO 
Annual Progress Report 19, 105-113. 
Emonds, J.E. (1976) A transformational 
approach to English syntax. Academic 
Press, New York. 
Emonds ,  J .E .  (1979)  Appos i t i ve  
relatives have no properties. Linguistics 
Inquiry 10, 211-243. 
Gazdar, G., Klein. E., Pullum, G.K. & 
Sag ,  I .A .  (1985)  Genera l i zed  
Phrase-St ruc ture  Grammar .  Harvard  
University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Harman, G. (1963) Generative grammars 
without transformaton rules: a defense of 
phrase structure. Language 39, 597-626. 
Kay, M. (1979) Functional grammar. In 
Proc.  -Fifth An~ual '  ~eeting of the 
Berkeley Linguistics Society. Berke ley ,  
CA, 142-158. ' 
McCag l~-  J.D. (1982) Parentheticals 
and Discontinuous Constituent Structure. 
Linguistic Inquiry 13 (I), 91-106 
Posta l ,  P .M (1964)  Const i tuent  
structure. Supplement to International 
Journal of American Linguistics 30. 
Pullum, G.K. (1984) On two recent 
attempts to show that English is not a 
CFL. Computational Linguistics 10 (3/4), 
182-187. 
Ross, J.R. (1973) Slifting. In M. 
Gross, M. Halle & M.P. Sch~tzenberger 
(eds.) The formal analysis of natural 
language. Mouton, The Hague. 
Sheil, B. (1976) Observations on 
context-free parsing. Statist ical Methods 
in Linguistics, 71-109. 
Tomita, M. (1986) Efficient parsing 
for natural language. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston/Dordrecht. 
Wall, R.E. (1972) Introduction to 
Mathemat ica l  L ingu is t i cs .  
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs. 
Winograd, T. (1983) Language as a 
cogn i t ive  process .  Add ison-Wes ley ,  
Reading, MA. 
210 
