REFTEX - A CONTEXT-BASED TRANSLATION AID 
Poul Soren Kjersgaard 
Univers i ty of Odense 
Campusvej 55 
DK-5230 Odense M 
ABSTRACT 
The system presented in this paper pro- 
duces bi l ingual  passages of text from an 
original (source) text and one (or more) 
of its t ranslated versions. 
The source text passage includes words 
or word compounds which a translator  wants 
to retr ieve for the current t rans lat ing of 
another text. The target text passage is 
the equivalent version of the source text 
passage. On the basis of a compar ison of 
the contexts of these words in the concor-  
ded passage and his own text, the transla- 
tor has to decide on the uti l i ty of the 
translat ion proposed in the target text 
passage. 
The program might become a component of 
t rans lator 's  work bench. 
I n t roduct ion  
Computers can contr ibute to t rans lat ion 
either automat ica l ly  or  as an aid to the 
human translator (machine-a ided transla-  
tion). The latter represents a large spec- 
trum of di f ferent approaches as to the de- 
gree of human intervent ion in the transla- 
tion process and to the method(s).  Some 
systems are semi-automat ic  in the sense 
that they only ask for human intervent ion 
for the resolut ion of ambiguit ies (Melby, 
1981). Other systems are designed to re- 
l ieve the human translator  of some tedious 
aspects (such as d ict ionary look-up) of 
the translat ion work, either interact ive ly  
via a terminal or by batch process ing 
overnight. As to method(s),  most systems 
are based on dict ionary look-ups - some- 
times combined with automatic insert ion of 
the retr ieved equivalents  (McNaught, So- 
mers, 1979). 
This paper will descr ibe an a l ternat ive 
method, REFTEX. A major d i f ference between 
REFTEX and most other machine-a ided trans- 
lation systems that I know of is that REF- 
TEX emphasises the context, whereas other 
systems rely on bi l ingual  d ict ionar ies 
contain ing translat ions (sometimes uncom- 
mented) and possibly def in i t ions or ex- 
planatory remarks. 
The system was first implemented on a 
CDC mainframe instal lat ion,  but has now 
been converted to an IBM XT-microcomputer .  
The primary scope of the program is to 
provide a supplemental  aid for human 
translators.  
The pr inc ip les of REFTEX 
The name of the system, REFTEX, is an 
acronym for reference text. Its main cha- 
racter ist ics  can be summsrised as follows: 
The system is meant to be used when the 
translator  comes across some word or word 
compound that cannot be looked up in a 
d ict ionary or the t rans lat ions of which 
do not seem relevant in the context of 
the actual translat ion.  The translator  
can then have recourse to texts that have 
already been translated, in order to try 
to retr ieve the wanted word(s) and its/ 
their t ranslat ion(s) .  Such texts exist in 
an or ig inal  (source language) version and 
one or more translated (target language) 
versions. In REFIEX, such texts are de- 
s ignated reference texts. During execu- 
tion of the program, the program will ac- 
cess passages (concordances) of the ori- 
ginal text that contain the word and the 
equivalent  passages of (one of) the trans- 
lated versions. The translator will then 
decide if the translat ion contained in the 
target language version is useful in the 
actual translat ion.  
It is an interact ive, screen-or iented 
system that can be used by a transistor  
during the transIat ion process. In the 
present version, the text to be transla-  
ted and its t rans lat ion are supposed to 
exist independent ly  on paper, but nothing 
prevents the implementat ion of an integra- 
ted version using windows (cf. last sec- 
tion). 
REFTEX can thus be conceived of as a 
computer ised combinat ion of bi l ingual  con- 
cordances used in phi lo logy (usually on 
ancient texts) and the manual use of trans- 
lated text as an aid for the translator.  
8ut in contrast to tradit ional  concordance 
making, the project does not aim at pro- 
ducing a f inished product of the works of 
an author, but at supplying the translator  
with an ad hoc tool. 
109 
The REFTEX system 
REFTEX has been implemented as a pro- 
gram package of two independent programs: 
ARBORAL and REFTEX. 
The former uses one or more s l ight ly 
pre-edi ted reference texts as input and 
transforms each into an equivalent data 
structure that contains both the or iginal  
information (thus permit t ing a reconstruc-  
tion of the or iginal  text) and some new 
informat ion which Faci l i tates the search- 
ing of words in the text and the concor-  
dance making. 
The data structure is organised as two 
records. The first one contains a node or 
an index for each diFFerent word of the 
text together with some satel l i te inForma- 
tion: absolute word Frequencies and point- 
ers to the First occurrence of the word. 
The second record is a list structure con- 
ta ining a reference for each indiv idual  
word of the reference text to its posit ion 
in the first record, and pointers to pos- 
sibly fo l lowing occurrences of the word 
and to the beginning of the paragraph 
(concordance) that contains the word. 
Once the f in ished data structure has 
been establ ished,  the program writes it on 
a file, from where it can be accessed by 
the main program REFTEX. 
The pre-edi t ing of the reference text 
that was ment ioned above consists of the 
insert ion in the source text of period 
markers (the number sign: #) together with 
a number that uneqivocal Iy  ident i f ies each 
passage. A passage normal ly consists  of 
one period, possibly two. Then, paral le l  
period markers and numbers are inserted 
into the target text(s) to ensure the re- 
tr ieval of paral le l  extracts (concordances)  
of the source and target texts. If this 
pre-edi t ing were not carr ied out, it would 
not be possib le to extract paral le l  pas- 
sages, if the source and target languages 
involved are st ructura l ly  d i f ferent  in re- 
spect to modes of expression.  And even for 
c losely related languages such as the Scan- 
dinavian languages, this would probably be 
the case. 
REFTEX is the part of the program pack- 
age that will be used by the translator  
during the process of translat ion.  
Program execut ion starts by asking the 
translator  to key in names of the pair of 
reference texts he/she wants to use for 
solving the problems of the actual trans- 
lation. The program then asks for the first 
key word to be searched in the reference 
text, whose equivalents  the translator  
wants to know. If the reference source text 
contains that word, the program will print 
out the passage conta in ing the first occur- 
fence of the'word together with the equi- 
valent passage of the target language ver- 
sion. On the basis of his world knowledge 
(pragmatics) and knowledge of the two lan- 
guages involved, the translator  now has to 
decide whether the source language passage 
is suf f ic ient ly  s imi lar to the context of 
the actual t rans lat ion to permit reusing 
the translat ion contained in the target 
language passage. The decis ion of course 
depends on the qual i ty of the t rans lated 
reference text and rel ies on the transla-  
tor's abi l i ty to detect possib le errors. 
If the first b i l ingual  concordance does 
not contain an acceptable translat ion,  the 
translator  can "scrol l" to the fo l lowing 
occurrence(s) ,  unti l  he finds an adequate 
t rans lat ion or the reference text is ex- 
hausted. If either the word does not exist 
in the reference text or it does not have 
appropr iate translat ions,  it will be saved 
in a special  array for non- ret r ieved words 
and can be searched in another reference 
text, after the  t ranslator  has f in ished 
the list of words or express ions that he 
wants to look up. In case that words have 
been saved in this array, the program will  
ask for another pair of reference texts. 
Supposing that they are avai lable,  the 
program will try to retr ieve passages con- 
taining the words that were saved. 
An addit ional  feature of REFTEX is a 
semi -automat ic  rout ine that enables the 
program to retr ieve inf lected forms of a 
word, for instance feminine and/or plural 
forms as in the Spanish word espaSol - 
espaSola, espa~oles,  espa~olas.  The rou- 
tine solely re l ies  on formal character i s -  
tics of words (such as word endings) and 
not on semantic or other markers that 
would imply some sort of "understanding"  
of the word (as is the case in many gram- 
mars). For the time being, the rout ine has 
been implemented for regular nouns, ad- 
jectives, verbs and part ic ip les  in French 
and Spanish. 
Computat iona l  concordance making 
Given that the REFTEX-approach rel ies 
on a b i l ingual  concordance,  this sect ion 
will br ief ly introduce two of the problems 
this causes: word- form di f fus ion and homo- 
form- insens i t iv i ty .  The former problem re- 
f lects the wish to group together dif fe-  
rent inf lected forms of the same word. The 
solut ion proposed in REFTEX is to depart 
from the pr imary form and consequent ly  ge- 
nerate inf lected forms automat ica l ly ,  when 
regular and manual ly,  when irregular.  
The latter problem ref lects the homo- 
graph or polysemy problem. To solve this 
problem completely,  one would need either 
a sort of tagging (requir ing extensive 
pre-edi t ing)  or some semantic analyzer.  
Neither of these solut ions has been chosen 
in the REFTEX-approach.  A "pragmatic"  so- 
lution, based on the immediate context, 
has been developed, thus reducing the a- 
mount of superf luous informat ion or "noise". 
I10 
An example will i l lustrate its function: 
The French word "appl icat ion" has mult ip le 
meanings, and may in some texts be quite 
frequent. If the key word to be looked up 
is the "compound preposi t ion "en appl icat ion 
de", the word takes on yet another meaning. 
In order to narrow the search field, REFTEX 
permits the translator to look for the word 
"appl icat ion" together with "en" and "de". 
In this way, a lot of, though not all, 
i rrelevant informat ion will be excluded. 
Methodologica l  cons iderat ions 
The use of b i l ingual  concordances im- 
plies that REFTEX can be character ised as 
a context -or iented translat ion aid in op- 
posit ion to the d ic t ionary-or iented ap- 
proach that most machine-a ided systems rely 
on. 
These two approaches both possess weak- 
nesses. The problem of a context -or iented 
approach can b~ restated as the quest ion 
of how re l iab le  the t rans la t ion  of the re-  
Ference source text  i s ,  whereas the pro- 
blem of a d ic t ionary -or iented  approach may 
be the d i f f i cu l t ies  of de f in ing  prec i se ly  
the words of a language (c f .  Wi t tgenste in ) .  
In fac t ,  the d i f fe rence  between the two ap- 
proaches comes down to the quest ion of 
whether words possess an independent mean- 
ing, defined at the " langue" - leve l  or the i r  
meaning is in f luenced by the actual  contex-  
tua l  use of the words, the "paro le" - leve l .  
The d i f fe rence  between the two approach- 
es may be i l l us t ra ted  by a well-known ex- 
ample from the MT- l i te ra ture :  the English 
verb " to  know", which is  rendered in many 
European languages by two d i f fe rent  verbs. 
Does th i s  verb have two d is t inc t  meanings 
which the lex icographer  can account for  or 
would i t  be pre ferab le  to le t  the t rans la -  
to r  decide the re levant  equ iva lent  on the 
basis of a ser ies  of b i l ingua l ly  concorded 
examples? A s imi la r  example would be the 
German word "Schlagsahne" which is rendered 
in to  Danish by two d i f fe rent  words: p iske-  
f lede (cream) and fledeskum (whipped cream). 
The strength of a b i l ingua l  d ic t ionary  
approach is of course i t s  ab i l i ty  in many 
cases to convey to the user a fa i r l y  good 
idea of the meaning of a word in another 
language. 
The strength of an context -o r iented  ap- 
proach is i t s  ab i l i ty  to help deciding 
( jus t )  which among a number of d i f fe rent  
proposals should be re ta ined for  the cur-  
rent t rans la t ion .  And, needless to say, in 
some s i tuat ions ,  i t  w i l l  cer ta in ly  be pos- 
s ib le  to combine the two approaches in or -  
der to make the best out of each. 
The be l ie f  that  the l ingu is t i c  context  
cont r ibutes  to determining the meaning of 
words is of course impl ied in the use of a 
context -o r iented  approach. Supposing that  
this holds true, another aspect of the ap- 
proach is to determine whether the impact 
of the context is equal ly strong for any 
sub-vocabulary.  In the negative, this would 
mean that a context - re lated approach would 
be less relevant in some cases. 
No conclus ive answer has been given to 
that question, but it seems fairly reason- 
able to suppose that the more specia l ised 
the vocabulary is the less the meaning of 
the word is inf luenced by the context. In 
such cases, the uti l i ty of the REFTEX ap- 
proach may be the poss ib i l i ty  to retr ieve 
newly coined compounds that have not yet 
been lexical ised, or "loose" co l locat ions 
that never appear in dict ionar ies.  
A l ternat ive appl icat ions 
The primary scope of the program - as 
was stated in the introduct ion - is to 
provide a supplemental  aid for human trans- 
lators. In that respect, it could probably 
become an integrated part of a t rans lator 's  
work bench Or amanuensis  (Kay, 1980), en- 
abl ing the translator  to carry out all 
parts (translat ion, d ict ionary and refe- 
rence text look-ups, text processing) of 
the translat ion process. This part of the 
project has not been completed. 
A context -or iented approach may also be 
an appropr iate tool for lex icographers  and 
other researchers because it can provide 
the "raw mater ia l"  for syntact ic  investi-  
gations as well. The system might thus 
prove useful for making "translat ion ruIes", 
i.e. rules stat ing how to transIate syn- 
tactic phenomena from one language into 
another. 
Relevant l i terature 
Arthernt Peter: Machine Translat ion and 
computer ized Terminology Systems; a Trans- 
lator 's .v iewpoint  pp. 77-109 in Snel l (ed.) :  
Translat ing and the Computer. North Hol- 
land. Den Haag 1979. 
Carest ia -Greenf ie ldt  Carest ia et Serain, 
Daniel: La traduct ion assist4e par ordina- 
teur: Des banques de terminologie  aux sy- 
stbmes interact i fs  de traduction. Paris 
1976. 
Kay~ Martin: The Proper Place of Men and 
Machines in Language Translat ion.  Xerox. 
Palo Alto/Cal.  1980. 
McNaught,  John and Somers~ H.L.: The Trans- 
lator as a Computer User. UMIST. Manches- 
ter  1979. 
111 
Melby~ Alan K.: Translators and Machines - 
Can They Cooperate? in L ' in format ique au 
service de la traduction. Num~ro special 
de META 26.1. Montreal  1981. 
112 
