A Mul t i -Purpose  In ter face  to an On- l ine D ic t ionary  
Branimir Boguraev and David Carter 
University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory 
Corn Exchange Street, Cambridge CB2 3QG, England 
Ted Briscoe 
Department of Linguistics, University of Lancaster 
Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 4YT, England 
Abst ract  
We argue that there are two qualitatively different 
modes of using a machine-readable dictionary in the 
context of research in computational linguistics: batch 
processing of the source with the purpose of collating 
information for subsequent use by a natural anguage 
application, and placing the dictionary on-line in an 
environment which supports fast interactive access to 
data selected on the basis of a number of linguistic 
constraints. While it is the former mode of dictionary 
use which is characteristic of most computational lin- 
guistics work to date, it is the latter which has the 
potential of making maximal use of the information 
typically found in a machine-readable dictionary. We 
describe the mounting of the machine-readable source 
of the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English 
on a single user workstation to make it available as a 
development tool for a number of research projects. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A growing mass of work at present, both within the 
narrower field of computational linguistics and in the 
wider context of building knowledge-based systems, 
is focussed on making use of the lexical resources to 
be found in a number  of (monolingual) dictionaries of 
the style exemplified by e.g. The Longman Dictionary 
of Contemporary English, The Collins English Dictio- 
nary, or Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary. 
These contain a wealth of information relevant o a 
wide range of natural anguage processing functions 
- -  a fact which is hardly surprising, given that such 
sources typically (and almost by definition) contain 
the results of substantial efforts to collate and analyse 
data about real language, to elicit collocational and 
distributional properties of words and to apply com- 
mon principles of defining their meaning. 
The availability of dictionary sources on-line, in 
the form of machine-readable dictionaries (henceforth 
MRDs) and encyclopaedias, makes it possible to view 
these as repositories of large amounts of information, 
linguistic and extra-linguistic, which can be brought o 
bear at various points of the natural anguage under- 
standing process. Developments in hardware, as well 
as research in computational linguistics, offer the tech- 
nology both to process lexical resources and to extract 
from them what is relevant to computer programs con- 
cerned with various natural anguage processing ac- 
tivities. A number of recent projects have extracted 
data from publishers' tapes and subsequently used it 
to support activities uch as syntactic parsing, speech 
synthesis, lexical disambiguation, semantic interpreta- 
tion in context, spelling correction and machine trans- 
lation. The common denominator in these projects is 
that the end product incorporates in some form appro- 
priate fragments derived from the machine-readable 
source. 
There are essentially two different modes in which 
MRDs can be used (see Boguraev, 1987, for more de- 
tails). The predominant technique to date involves an 
arbitrary amount of pro-processing, typically in batch, 
of the on-line source. Those parts of the dictionary 
entries which contain useful data for the task at hand 
are extracted and suitably represented in a form di- 
rectly usable by a client program. Such a model of 
dictionary use does not in any way rely on the original 
source being available at the time the language pro- 
cessing application is active, and thus a batch deriva- 
tion of the appropriate information is a suitable way 
of transforming the raw data into a usable repository 
of lexical knowledge. 
But the reality of trying to adapt information, 
originally packaged according to lexicographic and ty- 
pographic onventions for visual presentation and not 
at all intended for automated natural anguage pro- 
cessing, suggests a different model of dictionary use. 
The non-trivial task of developing suitable procedures 
for pre-processing of the machine-readable source typ- 
ically requires careful analysis of the properties of the 
particular MILD, and is best aided by having fast in- 
teractive access to appropriate fragments of it. 
In addition, many research projects of a more ex- 
perimental nature focus on investigating the ways in 
which the availability of an MRD can aid the devel- 
opment of particular natural language processing sys- 
tems. The assumption is that an analysis of the accu- 
mulated ata in the dictionary will reveal regularities 
which can then be exploited for the task at hand. Just 
one example, from a number of projects currently un- 
der way in Cambridge, illustrating this point is the 
work of Alshawi (1987), who has analysed efinition 
texts across an entire dictionary to produce a ~defini- 
tion grammar ~ together with an associated technique 
for parsing the natural language descriptions of words 
into semantic structures. 
Such projects depend critically not only on the 
availability of a machine-readable equivalent of a pub- 
lished dictionary, but also on a software system ca- 
pable of providing fast interactive access into the on- 
line source through various access routes. Operational 
natural anguage processing systems clearly will have 
well-defined requirements a far as their lexicons are 
concerned, and once the format of lexical resources has 
been settled, retrieval of individual entries can be im- 
plemented fairly efficiently using standard computa- 
tional and linguistic techniques ( ee e.g. Russell et al, 
1986). The placing of a dictionary on-line, however, 
with the intention of making it available to a number 
of different research projects which need to locate and 
63 
collate dictionary samples atisfying a wide range of 
constraints, requires an efficient and flexible system 
for management and retrieval of linguistic data. 
This is not the computationally straightforward is-
sue it appears to be, as conventional database man- 
agement systems (DBMS)  are not well suited for on- 
line dictionary support, particularly when the entire 
dictionary is viewed as a lezical knowledge b~e, more 
complex in structure and facing more taxing demands 
in a natural language research environment. This pa- 
per addresses the problem in greater detail, by placing 
it into the wider context of research into computa- 
tional linguistics and highlighting those issues which 
pose a challenge for the current DBMS wisdom. We 
propose a solution adequate to handle most of the lex- 
ical requirements of current systems, which is general- 
isable to a range of IVIRDs, and describe a particular 
implementation for single user workstations used in a 
number of on-going research projects at the universi- 
ties of Cambridge and Lancaster. 
2 The nature of the problem 
Several factors put the task of mounting a machine- 
readable dictionary as a proper development tool be- 
yond the scope of current DBMS practice and make 
its conversion into a database of e.g. a standard rela- 
tional kind quite difficult. 
Firstly, there is the nature of the data in a dictio- 
nary: typically, it contains far too much free text (def- 
initions, examples, cross-reference pointers, glosses on 
usage and so forth) to fit easily into the concept of 
structured ata. On the other hand, the highly struc- 
tured and formallsed encoding of other types of in- 
formation (found in e.g. the part of speech, syllab- 
ification or pronunciation fields) makes a dictionary 
equally unsuitable for on-line access by information 
retrieval methods. 
The second factor is due to the nature of the only 
source of machine-readable dictionaries so far available 
namely the publishers' typesetting tapes, originally 
constructed for the production of a printed version. 
The organisation of data there, aimed at visual pre- 
sentation, carries virtually no explicit structure; a tape 
is simply a character stream containing an arbitrary 
mixture of typesetting commands and real data. This 
not only introduces the difficult problem of ~parsing ~ 
a dictionary entry (addressed in detail by e.g. Kaz- 
man, 1986), but also raises the issue of devising a suit- 
able representation for the potentially huge amount of 
linguistic data; one which does not limit in any way 
the language processing functions that could be sup- 
ported or constrain the complexity of the computa- 
tional counterpart of a dictionary entry. 
Finally, there is the nature of the data structures 
themselves. A text processing application, typically 
written in Lisp or Prolog, requires that its lexicai data 
is represented in a compatible form, say Lisp s-expres- 
sions of arbitrary complexity. Therefore, even if we 
choose to remain neutral with respect o representa- 
tion details, we still face the problem of interfacing 
to a vast number of symbolic s-expressions, held in 
secondary storage. This problem arises from the un- 
suitability of conventional data models for handling 
the complex data structures underlying any sophisti- 
cated symbolic processing. Partly, this is due to the 
inherent restrictions such models impose on the class 
of data structure they can represent easily - -  namely 
records of fixed format. But more importantly, con- 
ventional database systems make strong assumptions 
about the status and use of data they have to hold: 
databases are taken to consist of a large number of 
data records taken from a small number of rigidly- 
defined classes. It is not clear that a lexical ~knowl- 
edge base ~, derived from a dictionary and intended to 
support a wide range of language processing applica- 
tions, fits this model well. 
Some solutions to these problems will no doubt 
be offered by dedicated efforts to develop special pur- 
pose data models, capable of computationally repre- 
senting a dictionary and amenable to flexible and eff- 
cient DBMS support. The work, at the University of 
Waterloo, on computerising the Ozford English Dictio- 
nary (Tompa, 1986) is a good example here; similarly, 
the desire to be able to mount computerised dictio- 
naries on-llne for in-house research motivates Byrd's 
work on a general purpose dictionary access method 
(Byrd etal., 1986). In the short run, alternative 
approaches reduce the complexity of the problem by 
limiting themselves to applying the machine readable 
source of a dictionary to a small class of similar tasks, 
and building customlsed interfaces offering relatively 
narrow access channels into the on-line data. Thus 
IBM's WordSmith system (Byrd and Chodorow, 1985) 
is concerned primarily with providing a browsing func- 
tionality which supports retrieval of words ~close ~ to 
a given word along the dimensions of spelling, mean- 
ing and sound, while a group at Bell Labs has sev- 
eral large dictionaries on-line used only for research 
on stress assignment (Church, 1985). Alshawi et al 
(1985) have used a machine-readable source directly 
for syntactic analysis of texts; however, the approach 
taken there -- namely that of simple pro-indexing by 
orthography -- does not generalise easily for applica- 
tions which require the rapid locating and retrieval of 
entries satisfying more than one selection criterion. 
3 System functionality 
The motivation for the design described here is di- 
vided equally between the diverse nature of MRD- 
based projects in Cambridge and Lancaster and the 
unique properties of the particular dictionary that they 
use. The suitability of the Longr~an Dictionarv of Con- 
temporary English (LDOCE) for research into compu- 
tationa~ linguistics has been discussed at length else- 
where (see, in particular, Michiels, 1982); below we 
will outline several projects undertaken in Cambridge 
as a context for highlighting its particularly useful 
characteristics insofar as they are relevant to this pa- 
per. 
LDOCE carries pecial exicai and linguistic infor- 
mation which is useful for a number of natural an- 
guage processing tasks. 
I. The dictionary is unique in tagging word senses 
with grammar code8 which provide very elabo- 
rate syntactic subcategorisation information; a 
procedure has been developed for mapping the 
grammar codes into feature clusters (in the style 
of e.g. Generalised Phrase Structure Grammar), 
subsequently to be used by a syntactic parser 
(Boguraev and Briscoe, 1987, describe this in 
detail). The transformation program is about 
to be integrated in a software system for gram- 
64 
mar support and development, both as a lexicon 
enerator and as a tool for grammar debugging 
oguraev and Ritchie, 1987). 
2. The pronunciation information in LDOCE has 
provided the basis for a study, in the larger con- 
text of speech recognition, of the implications 
of the phonetic structure of the English lexicon 
for different methods for lexical access (Carter, 
1986). Again in the context of speech recog- 
nition, we intend to tackle the problem of word 
identification from a lattice of phonemes by con- 
structing a parser that uses information about 
both phoneme collocations and syntactic pre- 
dictions derived from independent analyses of 
the phonetic and grammar coding fields in the 
dictionary. 
3. Furthermore, LDOCE carries pecial tags, known 
as subjecf, and boz codas, which encode semantic 
notions like the overall context in which a word 
sense is likely to appear (e.g. politics, religion, 
language) and selectional restrictions on verbs, 
nouns and compound phrases; we intend to use 
this information for further guidance during the 
word recognition process. Independently, anal- 
gorithm has been developed for analysing the se- 
mantic content proper of the dictionary entries 
by converting the definition texts in LDOCE 
into fragments of semantic networks (Alshawi, 
1987); this opens opportunities for building a 
comprehensive and robust semantic omponent 
which could then be incorporated into any of 
the projects mentioned above. 
It is clear that in order to make full use of the com- 
puterised LDOCE, we need a dictionary access ystem 
with proper DBMS functionality, capable of efficient 
retrieval of entries atisfying selection criteria pplying 
at various levels of linguistic description. The design 
of the system described here allows precisely such het- 
erogeneous requests. What we offer is a software nvi- 
ronment buffering the user from the typically baroque 
and idiosyncratic format of the raw dictionary source 
and allowing, via a carefully crafted interface, multi- 
ple entry points and arbitrarily complex access paths 
into the on-line lexical knowledge base. 
4 Requirements for the dictionary 
database 
Three main requirements can be identified if the data- 
base is to perform the functions intended for it. 
Firstly, the source tape of the dictionary must be 
converted into a format to which fast access can be 
coupled. This involves, at the very least, overall seg- 
mentation of the original character stream into records 
corresponding to gross lexical categories such as head 
word, pronunciation a d part of speech. This may be a 
highly complex task, as in Kazman's (1986) project o 
restructure the text of the OED, or it may be concep- 
tually fairly straightforward, asin the case of LDOCE 
where considerable segmentation is already present. 
But in either case, given that the on-line dictionary is 
intended to support more than one application, a more 
elaborate structuring of the entries' individual records 
might turn out to be unsuitable for further unforeseen 
use. Fortunately, it is clear from work with comput- 
erlsed dictionaries in general that once an application 
has located the relevant fragment of a dictionary en- 
try, local ~parsing ~ into whatever format is needed 
can be fast and reliable, and can therefore be done 
%n the fiy~ by functions which manipulate individual 
entries on demand and have no permanent effect on 
the underlying source. Thus we should aim at incorpo- 
rating the segmented version of the source intact into 
the database, to serve directly as its ~bottom layeff' 
in the sense that all access paths ultimately point to 
complete dictionary entries, which are then returned 
as the results of queries. 
Secondly, it should be possible to execute queries 
involving information of as many different types as 
possible. Even if the machine-readable source used 
is a comparatively structured one such as LDOCE, 
the creation of access paths will involve, for at least 
some types of information, the non-trivlal (but fast) 
construction of an intermediate and temporary repre- 
sentation by means of the local parsing already men- 
tioned. For example, subcategorisation nformation is
often specified in a rather elliptical form in LDOCE, 
for the sake of human readability; this must be made 
explicit by a parsing process, as described in Boguraev 
and Briscoe (1987). Also, it is desirable to impose a 
phonologically motivated structure on pronunciations, 
which are typically given as a string of phonemes and 
stress markers. This will allow the user to specify a 
constraint on, say, ~the onset of the second syllable of 
the word s , whose position in the phoneme string will 
not be the same for all words. The straight indexing 
approach used by e.g. Boguraev and Briscoe (1987) 
for headword-based access cannot in general provide 
sufficiently flexible access routes. 
Thirdly, the user or client program should be free 
to specify different ypes of constraint in any combina- 
tion. We cannot assume in advance that information 
of a given type will always be present in great enough 
quantities to allow efficient retrieval. For example, 
if the system is being used by an automatic speech 
recogniser, then at one point in the signal significant 
information on pronunciation may be available, but 
few syntactic or semantic onstraints may be present; 
at another point, the situation may be reversed, with 
the speech signal itself yielding little phonological in- 
formation but with an expectation-driven parser pro- 
viding quite specific higher-level constraints. In each 
case, the stronger, more specific constraints must be 
used for access, and the weaker ones only for check- 
ing the entries retrieved. To achieve this, the sys- 
tem must clearly be able to estimate in advance what 
the most efficient search strategy will be. This abil- 
ity to perform maximally efficient searches given many 
different kinds of constraint will also be important if
the database is being used interactively to investigate 
properties of the language. If the system's claim to be 
interactive is to be justified, it must be able to tell the 
user in advance roughly how long a prospective query 
would take to evaluate, and roughly how many entries 
would be returned as a result. 
5 Design and implementation 
The design and implementation f the database sys- 
tem described here reflects the three requirements just 
identified. 
The machine-readable source of LDOCE serves as 
the bottom layer of the database after undergoing a 
65 
"lispification s process described in detail in Boguraev 
and Briscoe (1987). This process preserves all the in- 
formation, lexical and typographic, on the tape, and 
involves little restructuring, serving primarily to re- 
format the source in a bracketed form in which it can 
be much more easily read by Lisp programs. The link 
between the user or client program and the lisplfied 
dictionary is provided by a pointer file and a constraint 
file whose nature and motivation will be described be- 
low. 
5.1 Ana lys ing  d ic t ionary  ent r ies  
Information of six different types is analysed for the 
construction of access paths: semantic features clas- 
sifying the meanings of words and their dependents; 
semantic subject area; grammatical part of speech; 
grammatical subcategorisation; British English pro- 
nunciations; and definition texts. All these types can 
be mixed together in constructing search queries. En- 
tries can also be accessed by spelling patterns. 
The codes used for the first three of these types 
of information have a fairly simple structure, and are 
hence trivial to extract. The fourth, subcategorisa- 
tion, is indicated by a complex and highly discrimina- 
tory set of codes; the extraction of these codes from 
the elliptical form in which they occur in LDOCE is 
described in Boguraev and Briscoe (1987). We will 
therefore discuss here only the structuring of pronun- 
ciations and the treatment of definition texts. 
Pronunciations are represented in the dictionary 
as strings of phonente8 and primary and secondary 
stress markers. Syllable boundaries are not reliably 
indicated. Therefore, in order to allow the syllable- 
based access that a speech recogniser would probably 
require, pronunciation fields are parsed into syllables 
and, within a syllable, into onset, peak and coda, usin~ 
the phonotactic constraints given in Gimson (1980} 
and employing a rnazintal onset principle (Selkirk, 1978) 
where these yield ambiguous syllable boundaries. Thus 
for example the internal syllable boundary in the pro- 
nunciation of ~constraint" is placed before the ~s ~. 
The parser used for analysing pronunciations is 
a special-purpose one whose (very simple) grammar 
is incorporated into its code. This allows pronun- 
ciations to be parsed many times faster than by a 
general-purpose parser with a declarative grammar. 
It also allows constraints on relationships between syl- 
lable constituents to be relaxed when necessary. For 
example, the LDOCE pronunciation of "bedouin" is 
?beduin~ which violates the constraint that a syllable 
whose peak is u (as in "put s) cannot have a null coda; 
this constraint is therefore relaxed to obtain a parse. 
The strategy used for indexing entries according to 
the words their definition texts was designed to reflect 
the fact that it is the semantic content of these words 
that is likely to be of interest to the user. This has 
two main consequences: 
(1) It is more appropriate to take root forms of 
words as keys than to treat inflectional variants dif- 
ferently, because it is the root that holds most of the 
semantic content. Indeed, the inflection used with a 
particular word often depends on the largely arbitrary 
choice of syntactic constructions used in the definition. 
Thus for example, entries whose definitions contain 
any of the words ~fllm ~, ~films ~ and "filmed ~ should 
all be indexed under "film s . 
(2) Closed class words are unlikely to be useful 
as keys because their semantic ontent is limited and 
often highly context-dependent. I  addition, many of 
them occur too often to be sufficiently discriminating 
for efficient lookup. Therefore only open class words 
are made available as keys. 
The task of deriving root forms of words is made 
much easier by the fact that LDOCE's definition texts 
are constructed largely from a set of two thousand 
basic words. When other words are used, they (or, in 
the case of inflectional variants, their root forms) are 
shown in a special font. Accurate root extraction for 
words not so marked can therefore be accomplished 
simply by stripping off affixes (which are themselves 
in the basic word list) and applying a few simple rules 
for spelling changes until a basic word is found. All 
irregular forms of basic words are stored explicitly. 
Distinguishing open and closed class words is also 
straightforward; a 1/st of closed class words was de- 
rived by performing a database lookup using those 
grammar codes and categories that represent closed 
classes. 
5.2 Const ruct ing  access  paths  
Once the relevant information has been extracted from 
an entry, constructing acess paths is straightforward 
in the grammatical, semantic and definition text cases: 
a list of entry pointers is constructed for every code 
and every suitable definition word found in the dictio- 
nary. Pronunciations, however, are treated ifferently. 
To achieve flexibility and efficiency, a pointer list is 
formed for every distinct syllable in every position in 
which it occurs (e.g. second syllable in a three-syllable 
word). 
When the whole dictionary has been analysed, a
pointer file is created containing all the entry pointer 
lists and, just before each llst, its length. As described 
below, this allows the system to estimate the work 
involved in evaluating a query without actually having 
to read the (sometimes very long) list itself. 
The next stage is to construct he constraint file. 
This file takes the form of a discrimination net which 
links every possible constraint on an entry (e.g. a sub- 
ject area, a grammar code or a constituent of a sylla- 
ble) to one or, in the pronunciation case, several lists 
in the pointer file. 
5.3 Const ruct ing  search  quer ies  
A menu-driven graphical interface isprovided by means 
of which the user can construct a search query in the 
form of a tree whose terminal nodes are constraint val- 
ues, dis\]unctions of them, or wild cards. The menus 
are derived automatically from the constraint file, so 
that only queries with some chance of being satisfied 
can be constructed. For example, if the user is con- 
structing a specification of a syllable, the tree at one 
point may be as in Figure 1. 
66 
WORD 
PRONUNC I AT I ON 
:'S" TRE3:~ 
? 
SYLLABLE 
\ "--.. 
ON3ET PEAK CODA 
* ANO * 
ltd.% 
/ 
z \ / 
?I0:~ - r  ourld 
Figure I 
If the user selects the CODA node, the resulting 
menu, shown in Figure 2, allows him to specify the 
coda ~pst ~, but not, for example ~psm ~. (In this 
menu, and in terminal nodes of the PRONUNCIA-  
T ION subtree of Figure 1, ~*~ matches any sequence 
of symbols; ~?" matches any single symbol; and all 
other symbols have the phonetic values defined for 
them in LDOCE). 
30~ 
? 
e 
3 
b 
g ~ 
m 
n 
f 
V 
X . 
x 9 
Figure 2 
A tree can be constructed either from a WORD 
node alone, or by instructing the system to build a tree 
from the entry for a specified word, and then editing 
it. Once the tree is built, either a partial search (to 
gather statistics) or a full search (to retrieve entries) 
can be requested. 
In a partial search, the system follows each con- 
straint to the pointer list(s) it leads to, and sums 
the lengths of these lists \[as recorded explicitly in 
the pointer file) to display the approximate number 
of dictionary entries that satisfy it. It also indicates 
which constraints it would use to look up candidate 
entries in a full search, which ones it would merely 
apply as tests to those candidates, and, to allow the 
user to decide whether or not to order a full search, 
about how long the process would take. It makes the 
lookup/test choice using figures for the expected time 
taken to read (a) a pointer from the constraint file 
and (b) a complete ntry from the dictionary. The 
most e~cient search strategy involves using the most 
specific few constraints as lookup keys (more specific 
keys ultimately ielding fewer entries). The optimal 
number of constraints o use is found by balancing the 
number of pointers that will have to be read, which 
increases with the number of lookup keys, against he 
expected number of entries that will have to be read, 
which decreases. (A.n entry will only be read if there 
is a pointer to it in every pointer list. Therefore if 
lookup keys are used, returning pointer lists of lengths 
LI, L=, ... L , ,  then the expected number of entries 
to be read, assuming statistical independence b tween 
lists, is LIL2...L,/D"-l, where D is the number of en- 
tries in the dictionary. This decreases with a because 
Li cannot exceed D, and is in fact normally very much 
smaller). 
In a full search, these statistics and choices are not 
only displayed but are also acted on. The pointer lists 
for the lookup constraints are intersected, the number 
of pointers resulting is displayed and, at the user's 
option, the corresponding entries are read from the 
dictionary, the test constraints are applied to them, 
and the surviving entries are displayed. Applying tests 
to a dictionary entry involves reanalysing the relevant 
parts of it in the same way as when the database is 
constructed. 
6 An example 
As an example, suppose the user wishes to see all 
entries for three-syllable nouns which describe mov- 
able solid objects, whose second syllable has a schwa 
as peak, and whose third syllable has a coda that is a 
voiced stop. He constructs the tree in Figure 3 over- 
leaf, and selects the ~partial search" option. This re- 
turns the information shown in Figure 4. 
Would look up on these constraint:s: 
,C*COOA* (OR b d g) / 3 3) 
-> 582  i tems 
~ould tes t  on these ones: 
? PEAK" E / 2 3) (-> 3829 items) 
@B 5 J) (-> 5?79 items) 
~NSYLL3* 3) (-> %0~68 items) 
l!C n) (-> 23835 items) 
Estimated pointer+entry reading time 
i~ .5 -65. .5 :~7.8  s~conds (5~2 ent r ies )  
Figure 4 
67 
~IORD 
__._-.---.~-" -------...._.._..... 
8EI~ANTIO8 8RAt, l IAR PRONUNCIATION 
_.___.._---~ ~- -~-~ 
OATESORY SYLLABLE 
rl * 
BOX 
5 J 
SYLLABLE 
. - /  / ",, - . .  
$TRE88 ONSET PEAK CODA 
I 
SYLLABLE 
.- / C'---. 
STRESS ONSET PEAK COOA 
I 
? * OR 
b d g 
F igure 3 
Because of the expected large number of entries 
in the result and the time that would be taken to 
read them, the user decides to look only at the en- 
tries for such words whose definitions contain the word 
"camera ~. He  adds the relevant constraint to the 
tree (the system checking, as he does so, that %am-  
era ~ is a valid key) and orders another partial search. 
This time, the statistics are more manageable. A full 
search is therefore ordered, in which the definition 
word %amera  ~ is used as the only lookup key, and 
the other constraints are this time all used as tests. 
This returns the entries for the words %lapperboard ~ 
and "Polaroid ~, shown in Figure 5. 
clztp.per.board /'l,.l~ep~ba:d II -ar~ora/ 
n (subj ~aP--, box .... #) (when starting to 
film a scene for the cinema) a board on 
which ttte ,letails of \[Ite scene to be 
f i lmed are written, held up in front of 
t~te camera 
Po.lar.oi4 /'p~ul~roid,:,~ t.z're~k i \[V\] 
(subj st--. box .... z---x'., a material :vith 
w~ic}t -g'ass ;.s trea:ed in or,~er ",o :na~.e 
ti~ht shine le~s br ight ly throw~h it, used 
in making 3ut\[,3L.~.~zEa.~.:ar '?,rifi,:l+3WS, 
etc. 2 \[C\] C:;u~j ~,3--. box ....  s---.~', also ( 
.,~,,~i,') Po l .~ro id  cam,e . r~t  / 0""  " "  / - -  
a type of camera that produces a
f in ished pl'totograpPt only se,:on,:ts after 
~he picture has been tal..e-t 
Figure 5 
7 Conclusion 
We have sketched the requirements for, and the design 
of, a flexible interface to an on-line dictionary, capable 
of supporting the lexical requirements of a number of 
active research projects and adaptable to a range of 
applications. The programs have been developed in 
Lisp, and make heavy use of the interactive graphic ca- 
pabilities of Xerox's Lisp workstations. Nothing, how- 
ever, depends critically on this; the Interllsp-D inter- 
active graphics simply make the task of constructing 
search specifications very easy for the end user. The 
design is sufficiently modular to allow easy modifica- 
tion, and the system would be capable of functioning 
on a conventional minicomputer or mainframe (as long 
as it supported random access to files) just as well as 
it does on a single user workstation. 
In order to make the lexical knowledge base avail- 
able to all the projects requiring access to it, the sys- 
tem had to be adapted to fit into the local environ- 
ment of networked workstations. The database man- 
ager was easily repackaged to reflect the model of one 
server catering for several clients over a network; the 
Remote Procedure Call Protocol (XSIS, 1981) pro- 
vided the necessary functionality to incorporate the 
manager  into a dictionar!t server node (of the kind 
discussed by Kay, 1984) -- this bypassed the need for 
costly flleservers and proved the integrity of the de- 
sign. We also plan to develop a version of the system 
running in Franz Lisp under UNIX  and accessing the 
M_RC dictionary database (Coltheart, 1981). 
While the system implements in effect a linguisti- 
cally motivated DBMS constructed round a suitable 
machine-readable source, it stops short of full brows- 
ing capability (even though such a capability could 
easily be added by fully integrating AlshawFs defini- 
tions analysis program into the overall design). In this 
sense the lexical knowledge base discussed here differs 
68 
from the concept of a lexical database as described in 
Calzolari (1986), or underlying Miller's WORDNET 
(1985). Nonetheless, the methodology described here 
is sufficiently flexible and powerful to satisfy a sub- 
stantial proportion of the needs of the computational 
linguistics community till a proper mix of database 
and browsing capabilities becomes available. 
8 Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by a research grant (Number 
GRID/4217.7) from the UK Science and Engineering 
Research Council. We are grateful to the Longman 
Group Limited for kindly allowing us access to the 
LDOCE typesetting tape for research purposes. We 
thank Graham Titmus for his assistance in bringing 
the dictionary server up. 
9 References  
Alshawi, H.; Boguraev, B.K. and Briscoe, E.J.(1985) 
'A dictionary support environment for real-time 
parsing', Proceedings of the Second Conference of 
the European Chapter of the ACL, Geneva, pp.171- 
178 
Alshawi, H.A.(1987,forthcoming) 'Processing dictio- 
nary definitions with phrasal pattern hierarchies', 
Computational Linguistics 
Boguraev, B.K.(1987,forthcoming) 'Machine-readable 
dictionaries and computational linguistics research' 
in Walker, D. and Zampolli, A. (eds.), Automatin 9 
the lezicon: theory and practice in a multilingual 
environment, Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge 
Boguraev, B.K. and Briscoe, E.J.(1987,forthcoming) 
'Large lexicons for natural language processing: 
utilising the grammar coding system of LDOCE', 
Computational Linguistics, vol.13 
Boguraev, B.K.; Ritchie, G.D. et al(1987,forthcoming) 
'The lexical component of a natural anguage tool- 
kit' in Walker, D. and ZampoLli, A. (eds.), Au- 
tomating the lezicon: theory and practice in a mul- 
tilingual environment, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
Byrd, R.J. and Chodorow, M.S.(1985) 'Using an on- 
line dictionary to tlnd rhyming words and pro- 
nunciations for unknown words', Proceedings of the 
eSth Annual Meeting of the ACL, Chicago, Illinois, 
pp.277-284 
Byrd, R.3.; Neumann, G. and Andersson, K.S.B.(1986) 
DAM--  a dictionary access method, IBM research 
report, in preparation 
Calzolari, N.(1986,forthcoming) 'Machine-readable dic- 
tionaries, lexical data bases and the lexical system' 
in Walker, D. and Zampolli, A. (eds.), Automating 
the lezicon: theory and practice in a multilingual 
environment, Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge 
Carter, D.M.(1986) An information-theoretic analysis 
of phonetic dictionary access, Computer Labora- 
tory, University of Cambridge (submitted to Com- 
puter Speech and Language). 
Church, K.(1985) 'Stress assignment in letter-to-sound 
rules for speech synthesis', Proceedings of the ~Sth 
Annual Meeting of the ACL, Chicago, IL, pp.246- 
254 
Coltheart, M.(1981) 'The MRC Psycholinguistic Data- 
base', Quarterly Journal of Ezperimental Psychol- 
ogy, vol.33A, 497-505 
Gimson, A.C.(1980) An introduction to the pronuncia- 
tion of English ($rd edition}, Edward Arnold, Lon- 
don 
Kay, M.(1984) 'The dictionary server', Proceedings of 
the 10th International Congress of Computational 
Linguistics, Stanford, California, pp.461-462 
Kazman, R.(1986) Structuring the tezt of the Ozford 
English Dictionary through finite state transduction, 
Technical Report TR-86-20, Department of Com- 
puter Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario 
Michiels, A.(1982) Ezploiting a large dictionary database, 
Ph.D. Thesis, Universit6 de Liege, Belgium 
Miller, G.(1985) WORDNET: a dictionary browser, In 
Proceedings of the First International Conference 
on Information in Data, University of Waterloo 
centre for the New OED, Waterloo, Ontario 
Russell, G.J. et a1.(1986) 'A dictionary and morpho- 
logical analyser for English', Proceedings of the 11th 
International Congress on Computational Linguis- 
tics, Bonn, pp.277-279 
Selkirk, E.O.(1978) On prosodic structure and its rela- 
tion to syntactic structure, Indiana University Lin- 
guistics Club, Bloomington, Indiana 
Tompa, F.(1986) Database design for a dictionary of 
the future, Preliminary report, Centre for the New 
Oxford English Dictionary, University of Water- 
loo, Waterloo, Ontario 
XSIS 038112(1981) Courier: the Remote Procedure Call 
protocol, Xerox Systems Integration Standard, Xe- 
rox Corporation, Stamford, Connecticut 
69 
