T 
INTEGRATING SEMANTICS kNO FLEXIBLE SYNTAX BY EXPLOITING 
ISONORPHISM BETWEEN GRAIelATICAL AND SEMANTICAL RELATIONS 
Norena Dan ie l i ,  Franco Fer rara ,  Rober to  Gemel lo ,  C1audio Ru l lent  
CSELT - Cent ro  S tud i  ? Laborator i  Te lecoaun icez lon i  - 
V ia  G .Re lss  Roao l i  274,  10148 Tor ino ,  ITALY 
? ABSTRACT 
This work concerns in tegrat ion  between syntax  
and semantics.  Syntact i c  and semantic ac t iv i t ies  
re ly  on separate bodies o f  knowledges. In tegrat ion  
is  obta ined by exp lo i t ing  the isomorphism between 
grammatical  re la t ions  (among immediate const i tu~ 
er rs )  and conceptual  re la t ions ,  thanks to  a l im i ted  
set  of  formal mapping ru les .  Syntact i c  ana lys i s  
does not const ruct  a l l  the exp l i c i t  parse t rees  but 
jus t  a graph that  represents  a l l  the p laus ib le  
grammatical  re la t ions  among immediate const i tuents .  
Such graph g ives  the semantic in terpreter ,  based on 
Conceptual Graphs formal ism,  the d i sc r iminat ive  
power requ i red  to es tab l i sh  conceptual  re la t ions .  
I .  INTRODUCTION 
In the f ie ld  of  automat ic  natura l  language 
understanding,  the problem of  connect ing syntax and 
semantics has been faced in th ree  d i f fe rent  ways. 
Some authors  are persuaded that  understanding 
natura l  language requ i res  no use of  syntact i c  know- 
ledge.  They c la im that  semantic representat ion  can 
be bu i l t  d i rec t ly  from the sur face s t r ing ,  w i thout  
the help of  almost any syntact i c  source (1) .  
Other authors  proposed h igh ly  syntact i c  sys-  
tems, s ta r t ing  from the idea that  the represen-  
ta t ion  of  the syntact i c  s t ruc ture  is  p re l iminary  to  
the understanding process (2) .  
While the work of this second group of resear- 
chers was concerned mainly with the understanding 
of individual sentences, the work of the partisans 
of semantics was about the understanding of whole 
texts .  
This sh i f t ing  of  a t tent ion  substa ined the idea 
that  syntax and semantics should be used in an 
in tegrated  way. Most researchers  have thought  that  
semantics and syntax  should be in tegrated  w i th  
respect  to both the representat ion  and the pro-  
cessing (3) ;  o thers  have c la imed that  i t  i s  more 
e f f i c ient  to  bu i ld  a fu l l -b looded syntact i c  repre -  
sentat ion  dur ing  the pars ing  process (4) .  
(1) See the system IPP \[Schank 80\] .  
(2) The LUNAR system \[Woods ?2\] is  a c lass ica l  
example. 
(3) An example is  the Conceptual Ana lyzer  \[Birnbaum 
81\] .  
(4) See MOPTRANS \ [Ly t inen  85\] ,  
Our approach shares some communal i t ies  w i th  the 
las t  pos i t ion .  We reckon that  semantic and syntac -  
t i c  processes should re ly  on separate knowledge 
bodies.  Uur e f fo r t  is  main ly  focused on the rea l i -  
za t ion  of  the in tegrat ion  by exp lo i t ing  the i so -  
morphism between syntact i c  s t ruc tures  and semantic 
representat ions ,  ra ther  than by making syntact i c  
and semantic processes in teract ,  as i t  happens in 
prev ious  in tegrated  parsers  (5) .  The idea of  i so -  
morphism is  not car r ied  out  through one- to -one  cor -  
respondence between syntact i c  ru les  and semantic 
ones - as in Montague- insp i red  parsers  (6) ,  but by 
mapping in a formal way grammatical  and conceptual  
re la t ions .  The use of  grammatical  re la t ions  as in -  
te rmed ia te  leve l  between syntax and semantics was 
a l so  adopted in the KING KONG parser  (7) ,  but th i s  
system is s t i l l  more near to  the pos i t ion  which 
wants the representat ion  of  syntax and semantics as 
we l l  as the i r  processes to in teract ,  wh i le  our 
choice is  to  ma inta in  separate  these d i f fe rent  
sources of  knowledge. 
The subsequent paragraphs descr ibe  how th i s  
hypothes is  works in SHEZLA (Syntax Help ing 
Expectat ions  In Language Ana lys i s ) ,  a p ro to type  
developed at  CSELT laborator ies  (Tur in ,  I ta ly ) .  The 
aim of  SHEILA is  to  ana lyze and to ext rac t  re levant  
information from news (coming from the I ta l ian  news 
agency "ANSA"). The system is in i t ia l l y  being 
applied to texts describing variations in the top- 
management of commercial societies; i t  has been 
fu l l y  implemented on a Symbolics Lisp machine. 
SHEILA takes advantage both from the use of expec- 
tations and from the combination of the results of 
a non-conventional syntactic analysis with the 
ac t iv i ty  of a surface semantic analysis, based on 
the formalism of conceptual graphs (8). In this 
paper we describe just the principles which guide 
the integration between syntax and semantics. 
SHEILA correct ly analyzes a set of th i r ty  news, 
generating for each of them a set of records for a 
re lat ional  data base. 
2. THE PROBLEM AND OUR PROPOSAL 
In text  understanding systems syntax and seman- 
t i cs  have almost always been dea l t  w i th  in tegra -  
t ion  of the i r  process ing.  Usua l ly  th i s  k ind  of  
(5) See PSLI3 \ [F rederk ing  85\ ] ,  FZDO \[Lesmo 85\] and 
WEDNESDAY-2 \ [Stock 86\ ] .  
(6) See ABSITY \ [H i rs t  84\ ] .  
(7) See \[BAYER 65\] 
(8) See \[Sowa 84\] and a l so  the four th  paragraph be-  
low. 
278 
systems are semantic driven and they do only local 
syntactic checks during analysis. Doing local syn- 
tactic checks only involves l i t t le  amount of syn- 
tactic knowledge and that is misleading in solving 
problems as anaphoric reference, prepositional 
attachment, conjunction and so on. 
In a d i f fe rent  approach the in tegrat ion  has 
been rea l i zed  dur ing  the syntact i c  s t ruc ture  repre -  
sentat ion  construction: the syntactic parser makes 
use of semantic information to handle structural 
ambiguities. 
The quest ion ing  done by the syntact i c  ana lyzer  
to the semantic component a~ms to cut  down the 
number of parse t rees ,  but very  many ru les  are 
requ i red  fo r  th i s  quest ion ing ,  which has always 
been the most domain-dependent par t  of  natura l  
language understanding systems. 
In designing SHEILA we chose another way of 
integrating syntax with semantics. The basic schema 
may look ra ther  c lass ic :  the system produces a syn- 
tac t i c  ana lys i s  of  the text ,  d r iven  on the basis  of  
pure ly  syntact i c  knowledge. The semantic ana lyzer  
checks the syntact i c  output  to see i f  the semantic 
re la t ions  among words are supported by i t .  
But a classical syntax-first analysis is highly 
ineff icient. I t  cannot solve structural ambiguities 
without the help of any semantic source and that 
leads to an explosion of the number of syntactic 
parse trees, some of them representing ar t i f i c ia l  
syntactic ambiguities. So there are two problems: 
reducing the explosion of ambiguities and deter- 
mining how semantic patterns for each word interact 
with syntax.  
Our proposal faces these problems through the 
original combination of two key ideas, i .e . :  
I) a f lexib le syntactic analysis, which is per- 
formed by constructing not a l l  the exp l ic i t  
parse trees but just a graph, representing al l  
the plausible grammatical relations among imme- 
diate constituents; 
2) a formal way of interaction between syntax and 
semantics exploiting the isomorphism between 
syntact i c  s t ruc tures  (grammatical  re la t ions  
among immediate const i tuents )  and semantic ones 
(conceptual  re la t ions ) .  
Such f lexible syntactic analysis gains a 
discriminative power (sufficient for aiding seman- 
tics in solving ambiguities) and avoids the explo- 
sion in the parse trees number. Furthermore, the 
mapping between grammatical and conceptual rela- 
tions can be defined through a limited set of for- 
mal rules. 
3. THE SYNTACTIC ANALYSIS 
Our system has the goal of generating a seman- 
t ic  structure that has to be consistent with the 
syntactic form used to convey i t  in the text. The 
aim of syntactic analysis is to support semantics. 
A f i r s t  act iv i ty  performed by the syntactic 
@nalyzer is the recognition of constituents of the 
phrase structure of text. This is done by applying 
a set of rewriting phrase structure rules for 
I tal ian language. These rules u t i l i ze  the output of 
a prev ious  morpholog ica l  ana lys i s  that  assigns to  
words morpholog ica l  and lex ica l  features  (gender,  
number, lex ica l  ca tegory  and so on) .  
In this analysis phase the application of the 
syntactic rules is limited to the recognition of 
the basic constituents of the phrase structure of 
the sentences. A basic constituent (BC, henceforth) 
is a NP, a PP or a VP described at a minimal level 
of complexity. At this level the grammar does not 
include rules of the form "S --> NP - VP" or 
"NP --> NP - PP", but i t  does include al l  the rules 
which describe the internal structures of BCs at 
the lowest level of recursion. 
Every BC has a head and may have one (or more) 
modifier. The head of a BC is the characteristic 
word, the word without which a group of words would 
fa i l  to be an instance of that particular BC. So 
the head of a NP is a noun, that of a PP is a pre- 
position, that of a VP is a verb, etc.(g). The head 
of a BC carries on al l  the morphological, syntac- 
t ical  and lexical features of the BC i t se l f  (10). 
Let us consider the sentence 
(I) "Arturo vide una commedia con Meryl Streep.". 
which may be interpreted both 
(1.a) Arthur and Meryl Streep saw a play together 
and 
(1.b) Arthur saw Meryl Streep while she was working 
in a play. 
At this f i r s t  level of analysis (I) is rewritten 
as 
PP 
v { { / \  
N V ART N PREP N N { { { { { { { 
ARTURO VIDE UNA COMMEDIA CON MERYL STREEP 
(9) The case of PP constitutes a partial  exception 
to this principle. In fact while for syntax is 
sufficient to know al l  the relevant informa- 
tion concerning the preposition, semantics 
also need to know the information con- 
cerning the head of the NP which forms the PP. 
(10) This definit ion of head encompasses al l  
constructions (endocentric and exocentric); 
i t  is closer to the tradit ional notion of 
governing categories than the definit ion given 
by Bloomfield \[Bloomfield 35\] in terms of 
distr ibution. See \[Mil ler 85\]. 
279 
The output  of  th i s  f i r s t  step of  syntact i c  ana lys i s  
is a s t ruc ture  that  inc ludes the syntact i c  ambi- 
gu i t ies  which w i l l  be proper ly  t reated  at  the 
second leve l  of  ana lys i s  (11).  
The second leve l  o f  syntact i c  ana lys i s  has the 
goal of  so lv ing  the problems about p repos i t iona l  
phrase attachment,  noun phrase mod i f i ca t ion  and 
con junct ion  and that  of  es tab l i sh ing  grammatical  
re la t ions  among BCs (12).  In the usual syntact i c  
approach th i s  ac t iv i ty ,  performed among more 
complex const i tuents ,  leads to the exp los ion  of  
s t ruc tura l  ambigu i t ies .  In our case the problem of  
handl ing ambigu i ty  s t rong ly  a r i ses :  in fac t  the 
syntact i c  ana lyzer  has been designed in o rder  to  
t reat  a la rge  var ie ty  of  rea l  texts  which conta in  
words out  of  the i r  p re fer red  grammatical  o rder  or 
which present  e l l ip t i ca l  const ruct ions  or ,  f ina l ly ,  
which present  very  complex grammatical  const ructs .  
To reach such an adequacy we re lax  the grammar 
const ra in ts ,  but that  may cause the generat ion  of  
a r t i f i c ia l  s t ruc tura l  ambigu i t ies  (13) .  In o rder  to 
so lve  th i s  problem, we see a l l  the groups of  BCs 
having the same head as be long ing to  an equ iva lence  
c lass  of const i tuents .  Let us cons ider  an example 
concerning th i s  important  po in t .  In I ta l ian  the 
phrase "I1 s indaco Rossi di  Tor ino"  ("The major 
Rossi of  Tur in" )  may invo lve  some s t ruc tura l  ambi- 
gu i ty  i f  i t  has to  be parsed w i thout  the help of  
semantic h in ts .  In fac t ,  th i s  noun phrase can mean 
both that  Rossi is  the major o f  Tur in  and that  
Rossi is  a major who comes from Tur in .  Performing a 
c lass ica l  ana lys i s  th i s  ambigu i ty  generates two 
d i f ferent structural descriptions. The f i r s t  
interpretation can be described as: 
NP 
NP pp 
f A A 
IL SINDACO ROSSI Ol TORINO 
(11) At this l eve l  we have not so many ambiguities 
because the linguis-tic phenomena which 
cause them are s t i l l  not faced.  In th i s  phase 
of  ana lys i s  lex ica l  ambigu i ty  ( invo lv ing  
uncer ta in ty  about the lex ica l  ca tegory  of  
a g iven word) on ly  a r i ses ;  th i s  k ind  of  
ambigu i ty  is  t reated  by tak ing  in to  account 
the syntagmat ic  re la t ionsh ips  of  the words 
in quest ion ;  the ana lyzer  keeps d i f fe rent  
in terpreta t ions  fo r  the ambigu i ty  which can 
not be so lved w i thout  semantics.  
(12) Grammatical relations are pr imit ive notions 
such as subject, object, complement and so 
on. 
(13) The constraining power is provided setting up 
a structural homology between syntactic and 
semantic levels and performing the formal map- 
ping between grammatical relations and concep- 
tual relations. 
while the second interpretation can be described 
as: 
NP 
NP NP 
A A 
I1 SINDACO ROSSI 
PP 
f 
DI TORINO 
In our analysis we handle this problem starting 
from the consideration that in both the interpreta- 
tions the NP "Rossi" is the head of the resulting 
structural unit. So the analyzer generates only one 
representation for the new construction in this 
way: 
SPECIFICATION 
NP NP PP 
A A 
IL SINDACO ('R~SSI~ Ol TORINO 
Now, let us consider this construction as being 
part of a sentence: 
(2) " I l  sindaco Rossi di Torino parte per Roma." 
"The major Rossi of Turin is leaving for Rome." 
The ascription of grammatical relations among the 
phrases of this sentence requires the recognition 
of the NP " l l  sindaco Rossi di Torino" as subject 
of the sentence and the PP "per Roma" as modifier 
of the VP. The detection of the subject re lat ion 
does not necessarily involve the problem of struc- 
tural ambiguity because this is l imited at the 
relations between the two NPs and the f i r s t  PP. So 
the analyzer gives the following description of the 
sentence: 
SPECIFIC. SUBJECT 
P ~ V  COMPLEM. 
N P~'"~ '~pp 
IL SINDACO C13;?~3 Ol TORINO PARTE PER ROMA 
Thanks to this treatment of ambiguity, the syn- 
tactic structure of this sentence can be described 
by on ly  one representation, while a c lass ica l  syn- 
tac t i c  analysis would generate at least two repre- 
280 
sentations. Our single representation consists of a 
graph of BCs connected by grammatical relations, 
which are established unless syntactic knowledge 
guarantees that no constituent in the two classes 
can be connected by such relations. In this way the 
processing is e f f i c ient  almost as in the case of 
complete parallelism between syntax and semantics 
and, in addition, there is complete compatibi l i ty 
with a paral lel  implementation. 
Note that  none of the poss ib le  in terpretat ions  
has been los t :  a l l  them are passed to the semantic 
in terpreter  which operates the reso lu t ion  of ambi- 
gu i ty  tak ing in to  account both the connections bet -  
ween the BCs pointed out by syntact i c  ana lys is  and 
the semantic p laus ib i l i ty  of the proposed connec- 
t ions .  
The resulting discriminative power of syntax is 
s t i l l  suff ic ient for helping semantics in 
establishing the correct semantic relations among 
concepts denoted by words. 
4. THE SEMANTIC ANALYSIS 
Our working hypothesis is that we can represent 
the meaning of a text start ing from the meanings of 
words and from the syntactic structure of the text.  
We represent the surface semantic s t ruc ture  by 
conceptual graphs (14). A conceptual graph is  an 
or iented  b ipar t i te  graph w i th  two kinds of nodes: 
concept nodes ( represent ing ent i t ies )  and concep- 
tual  re la t ion  nodes ( represent ing semantic re la -  
t ions  among concepts) .  A Type Hierarchy is  def ined 
over concepts. 
The semantic information is distr ibuted on 
words by means of canonical graphs, which describe 
concepts connoted by the words of the domain in 
terms of their  semantic context; they represent the 
impl ic i t  pattern of relationships necessary for a 
semantically well-formed text.  In each canonical 
graph we can distinguish a head (the main concept 
node of the canonical graph i t se l f )  and a semantic 
context (see figure I ) .  The Type Hierarchy is a 
taxonomy of domain concepts used to inher i t  seman- 
t ic  contexts and guide graph joins. 
The aim of surface semantic ana lys is  is  to 
es tab l i sh  semantic re la t ions  among the head nodes 
of canonical graphs connoted by the words of text .  
F i r s t ,  the canonical  graphs are ac t ivated  (copied 
in the working memory); then the act ivated  graphs 
are jo ined,  superimposing context  nodes on head 
nodes according wi th  the Type Hierarchy;  so re la -  
t ions  are estab l i shed among head concepts. 
When establishing a semantic re lat ion,  the 
mapping with syntax allows the evaluation of i ts 
syntact i c  soundness: the syntact i c  ana lys is  output 
(14) The theory of Conceptual Graphs is  presented 
by \[Sowa, 1984\]. This formalism is a genera l i -  
za t ion  of var ious previous approaches to the 
representat ion  of the semantic re la t ions  
hold ing among words such as frames, semantic 
networks and conceptual dependency. 
is checked to see i f  a grammatical relat ion sup- 
ports the proposed semantic one. Otherwise the 
semantic relat ion is not established. 
5. INTEGRATING SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS 
During semantic analysis relations between con- 
cept nodes are established only i f  they are sup- 
ported by the resu l t  of syntact i c  ana lys i s .  
Given a semantic re lat ion,  i t  is necessary to 
see i f  there is a corresponding grammatical rela- 
t ion. The correspondence between grammatical rela- 
tions and semantic relations (mapping) is solved 
through the notion of head which has been intro-  
duced both in syntax (heads of BCs) and in seman- 
t ics (heads of canonical graphs). 
The semantic relations and the grammatical 
relations must relate to the same couple of lexical  
items; in other words such lexical items must be 
both the heads of the BCs (involved by the gram- 
matical relat ion) and the heads of the conceptual 
graphs (involved by the semantic re lat ion) .  
A semantic relat ion SR between two head nodes 
HNi and HNj, having as heads the words Wi and Wj, 
can only be established i f :  
I) there is a grammatical relat ion GR between two 
BCs, BCi and BCj, whose heads are Wi and Wj 
respectively. 
2) semantic relat ion SR is compatible with the 
grammatical relat ion GR and with the set of 
features Fi and Fj associated to BCi and BCj. 
Conditions are ver i f ied through the application of 
a mapping rule among a l imited set. Each semantic 
relat ion inside a semantic context of a canonical 
conceptual graph is augmented with the indication 
of a mapping rule. 
A mapping rule is a l i s t  of plausible gram- 
matical relations that can correspond to the seman- 
t ic  re lat ion.  
In a mapping rule each grammatical relat ion can 
be constrained by an activation condition that 
relates to the morphologic and syntactic features 
of the involved BC classes. 
5.1 An example 
Let us consider the example of the figure 2. 
The join J1 of the head conceptual node HNI 
with the context node CN2,1 of the head node HN2 
causes a conceptual relat ion AGENT to be 
established between concept nodes HNI and HN2. Such 
head concept nodes correspond to words WI ("John") 
and W2 ("eats") at the lexical level.  
Such conceptual relat ion has an associated 
mapping rule which requires a grammatical relat ion 
of a certain kind (e.g. "subject"). Such gram- 
matical relat ion must have been established by syn- 
tact ic  analysis between two BCs having WI and W2 as 
their  heads. As that is the case of figure 2, the 
jo in J1 can be made. 
281 
Di f fe rent ly ,  j o in  J4 between HN3 and CN2,1 can 
not be es tab l i shed  as i t  would cause an AGENT re la -  
t ion  between conceptual  nodes HN2 ( "eat" )  and HN3 
( "ch icken" ) ;  such semantic re la t ion  is  not sup- 
ported by a su i tab le  grammatical  re la t ion .  In fac t  
there is a grammatical re lat ion between BC2 and 
BC3, but i t  is not the correct one because the 
grammatical relat ion "object" can not correspond to 
the semantic relat ion AGENT. 
To g ive  an idea of  the mapping ru les ,  the 
MR-AGENT mapping ru le  is sketched.  I t  is  used to 
map the conceptual  re la t ion  AGENT on the gram- 
mat ica l  re la t ion  "sub jec t "  i f  the analyzed sentence 
is  ac t ive  or  on the grammatical  re la t ion  "agent ive"  
i f  the sentence is  pass ive :  
MR-AGENT : sub jec t  i f  BC1 is ACTIVE and 
BCl and BC2 agree.  
agent ive  i f  BC1 is  PASSIVE and 
BC2 is  a "by-phrase"  
6. CONCLUSION 
The SHEILA system has been presented as an 
at tempt to so lve  the problem of  in tegrat ing  syntax 
and semantics.  The authors  propose that  syntact i c  
and semantic processes should re ly  on d i s t inc t  
bodies of  knowledge and that  the in teract ion  bet -  
ween syntax and semantics should be obta ined by 
exp lo i t ing ,  in a formal  way, the isomorphism bet -  
ween syntact i c  and semantic s t ruc tures .  In o rder  to  
avo id  the lack of e f f i c iency  character i z ing  a 
syntax - f i r s t  parser ,  the authors  have designed a 
f lex ib le  syntax which, w i thout  exp lod ing  the s t ruc -  
tu ra l  ambigu i t ies ,  supp l ies  semantic in terpreter  
w i th  knowledge about syntact i c  connect ions between 
the words occur r ing  in the text .  The isomorphism 
between syntax and semantics is accounted in to  a 
l im i ted  set  of  formal mapping ru les  and cond i t ions .  
P repos i t iona l  phrase attachment,  appos i t ion ,  deter -  
minat ion  of  con junct ion 's  scope and mod i f i ca t ion  of  
a NP through o ther  NPs are dea l t  in  a sa t i s fac tory  
way both from a syntact i ca l  and from a semant ica l  
po in t  of v iew.  Other complex l ingu is t i c  phenomena 
(as anaphora, quant i f i ca t ion  and e l l ips i s )  requ i res  
a more extens ive  use of  heur i s t i cs .  The fu ture  work 
w i l l  concentrate on these specific aspects in order 
to check the adequacy of the hypothesis of iso- 
morphism between syntactic and semantic structures 
to larger fragments of the I ta l ian  language. 
REFERENCES 
\[Bayer 85\] Bayer, S. ,  Joseph, L . ,  Ka \ ] i sh ,  C.,  
Grammatical Re la t ions  as The Basis fo r  NL Pars ing 
and Text Understanding.  Proc. 9th I JCAI,  Los 
Angeles, 1985, pp. ?98-?90. 
\[Birnbaum 81\] Birnbaum, L. and Se l f r idge ,  M., 
Conceptual Ana lys i s  fo r  Language. in Schank, R.C. 
and Riesbeck, C.K. ,  (eds) ,  Ins ide  Computers 
Understanding.  Lawrence Erlbaum Ass. ,  1981. 
\ [B loomf ie ld  35\] B loomf ie ld ,  Leonard, Language, 
A l len  & Unwin, London 1935. 
\ [F rederk ing  85\] F rederk ing ,  R.E. ,  Syntax and 
Semantics in NL Parsers.  Technical  Report 133, 
Carneg ie -Mel lon ,  Dept. of  Computer Science, May 
1985. 
\ [H i rs t  84\] H i rs t ,  G. J . ,  Semantic In terpreta t ion  
Against Ambigu i ty .  Brown Un ivers i ty ,  Ph.D.,  1984 
\[Lesmo 85\] Lesmo, L. and Torasso, P. Weighted, 
In teract ion  of  Syntax and Semantics in NL Ana lys i s .  
Pro?. 9th I JCAI,  Los Angeles,  1985, ?72-??8. 
\ [ Ly t inen  85\] Ly t inen ,  S .L . ,  In tegrat ing  Syntax 
and Semant ics . ,  Proc. Theoret i ca l  and 
Methodo log ica l  Issues in MT fo r  NLs, Hami l ton,  
1985, 167-178. 
\ [Mi l ler  85\] Mi l ler ,  J., Semantics and Syntax, 
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (U.K.), 1985. 
\[Stock 86\] Stock, 0., Dynamic Unif ication in 
Lexical ly Based Parsing., Proc. ?th ECAI, Brighton, 
1986, 212-221. 
\[Sowa 84\] Sowa, J . F . ,  Conceptual S t ruc tures .  
Addison Wesley, 1984. 
\[Woods ?2\] Woods, W.A., .An Exper imental  Pars ing 
System for  T rans i t ion  Network Grammars. Technical  
Report 2362, Bo l t  Beranek and Newman Inc . ,  1972. 
282 
CONCEPTS CANONICAL GRAPHS TYPE HIERARCHY 
( ~ "  ~' SEN. CONTEXT 
EAT H E ~ " ' ~  
~.Co, J)'-d POOO 1 .." "~,~ I I .~.s'  
PORK FORK4 INANIN-OBJ 
SEN. CONTEXT 
) ~CN2,1  22 \ 
SURFACE 
SEMANTIC 
LEVEL 
LEXICAL JOHN EATS CHICKEN FORK LEVEL 
W_ I 
J~ I~  I~  I~ SYNTACTIC 
I~ ~ I ~ ~ T  \ ]~ LEVEL 
COMPLEMENT 
I )  JOHN I) EATS I) ACHICKEN I) WITH A FORK 
2) A CHICKEN 
WITH A FORK 
Fig.1 -The  canonica\] graph of  "eat"  and that  of  
" fo rk" .  
F ig.2 - Mapping aspects fo r  the sentence "John eats 
a chicken w i th  the fo rk" .  The syntact i c  le -  
vel represents the graph of BCs that  con- 
s t i tu tes  the two syntact i c  s t ruc tures  of  
the sentence. At the semantic level  dotted 
arrows ( ~ )  stand fo r  a jo in  that  is  
supported by syntax.  The double arrows 
(C >)  instead represents a jo in  that  is  
not supposed by syntax. In fact  a mapping 
ru le  requ i res  that  the semantic re la t ion  
"agent"  must be supported by the grammati-  
cal re la t ion  "sub jec t "  ( in  an ac t ive  sen- 
tence) and not by the "ob jec t "  re la t ion ,  
283 
