FAIL-SOFT C"EMERGENCY") MEASURES IN A PRODUCTION-ORIENTED MT SYSTEM 
Eva Haji~ov~ and Zden~k Kirschner 
Fakulty of Mathematics and Physics, 
Charles University 
Malostransk4 n.25, 118 OO Praha i, Czechoslovakia 
ABSTRACT 
A system of fail-soft (emergency) meas- 
ures for a production-or iented MT system 
is discussed, stating first the specific 
purposes of such a system, and showing then, 
how these measures are being used in the 
system of Engl ish-to-Czech machine trans- 
lation as prepared by the group of mathe- 
matical l inguistics at Charles University 
in Prague. 
i. In view of a production-or iented system 
of machine translation, under the present- 
-day conditions, one should keep in mind 
that the end-user expects to have at his 
disposal a complete text rather than an al- 
ternating sequence of ~sentence) segments 
and blanks. On the other hand, everyone 
who has ever made even a perfunctory look 
at the problems involved in MT would agree 
that there is no such thing as a "complete" 
MT system, neither in the dict ionary nor 
in the grammar part of it. Also, as is com- 
monly accepted nowadays, any system with 
texts written in natural language at the 
input should provide measures for some kind 
of treatment of i l l -formed input. Thus it 
is inevitable to consider, first, what type 
and quality of translation can meet the 
demands of a prospective user and what kind 
of translat ion is real izable under the 
given conditions, and, second, to decide 
what is to be sacrif iced from, and what 
added to the system to make it work in a 
production enviroment. 
In the present paper we would like to 
outl ine one aspect of the approach taken 
up at the start of our experiment APAC3-2 - 
the En@lish-.~-Czech machine translat ion 
system for translat ing INSPEC abstracts 
from the field of microelectronics (for a 
descr ipt ion of the history of the MT ef- 
forts of our team, see Haji~ov~, 1986; 
the APAC series is described in full detai l  
in Kirschner, 1982; 1984; in press). We 
should emphasize that in the condit ions 
within our reach, we aim at a satisfacto- 
r i ly accurate rendering in target language 
of the contents of a relat ively simple 
text in source language, which would suf- 
fice for such a system to be appl icable in 
information acquisit ion and would be ca- 
pable to meet the main requirements set up 
by average users. 
2.1 The specific purposes of the system 
of fai l-soft C"emergency") measures to 
overcome anomalous input phenomena and 
partial fai lures of the MT system can be 
stated as follows: 
- The whole processing is divided into 
several stages to identify and treat more 
probable interpretations of some structures 
preferential ly - to make the "preferential" 
approach (see below, Sect.2.2) a reality. 
104 
The drawback is that in these circumstances 
the danger of a di lemmatic situation result- 
ing in a cul-de-sac impasse increases. A 
special device has been introduced to over- 
come such an abnormal end: instead of elimi- 
nating such a defective string, the appllca- 
tion of the phase in question is suspended - 
the program processing this string skips the 
phase and continues in the next one. The 
rules that compensate for the lacuna can be 
either the rules that in the framework of 
"preferential" approach take up the role 
of their more strict predecessors, or rules 
added particularly for this purpose - to 
deal with the most undesirable consequences 
of such an omission. 
- In the analysis, the emergency rules 
interpret unrecognized elements and inte- 
grate them into more complex structures. 
- In the synthesis, they help to produce 
an output that makes sense, corresponds to 
the source language, and is easier to post- 
-edit. 
- ~henever it is possible, they attempt 
at forming target language equivalents for 
the unidentif ied elements, either by adapt- 
ing international words or by "czechizing" 
English dict ionary forms by enduing them 
wlth qualit ies and forms proper to their 
presumptive Czech counterparts - e.g., 
gender, suffixes, etc. 
- With some classes of words, they serve 
as general dict ionary rules provided the 
sets of semantic features, frame informa- 
tion and other necessary outfit of individ- 
ual members of these classes correspond to 
the standard apparatus assigned to their 
representation in the framework of a gen- 
eral device, and their orthography ensures 
forming correct equivalents in Czech. 
2.2 The fail-soft measures can be charac- 
terized as consisting of three main parts: 
the first two concern elements not found 
in the basic dict ionaries and the third 
concerns failures to arrive at an accom- 
plished parse. \[We leave aside a discussion 
of the unif icat ion of orthography - such 
as American and Brit ish usage, different 
ways of spelling, use of hyphens etc. - 
which comes before the first device de- 
scribed here.) In a sense, there is a set 
of other rules of "emergency" character: 
general rules \[which can be called "sweep- 
ing rules") designed to operate after all 
more specific rules failed to apply - e.g., 
in the formation of compounds or in nominal 
syntax in general, etc.~ however, this 
being a constitutional component of what 
we call "preferential" approach, we shall 
confine ourselves to describing only the 
former three sets. To avoid a possible 
misunderstanding, we should make clear 
that when we call our approach "preferen- 
tial", it is only the name that it has in 
common with Wilks" "preferential semantics". 
In our system, we apply a rather trivial 
and simple principle with the aid of which 
the different probabi l i ty of interpreta- 
tion\[s) of some parts of a string is taken 
into account and exploited. The most prob- 
able solutions are covered by the rules 
first and with as detai led an accuracy as 
possible) the next probable solution is 
offered in some of the subsequent phases, 
etc., under more liberal conditions. The 
"sweeping rules" come last. That is also 
the reason why we write "preferential" 
with quotation marks. 
2.21 The first device aimed at intercept- 
ing and interpreting words that failed to 
be found in the basic dict ionaries is the 
co-called transducing dict ionary (TD). 
Its task is to interpret the still unre- 
cognized words according to their typical 
and (mostly) productive suffixes (the in- 
f lectional endings being detached and dic- 
t ionary forms reconstructed by morphemic 
analysis in the preceding steps), and to 
105 
assign to them part-ofmspeech and semantic 
information. Thus, e.g., words ending in 
-ER, -OR, -GRAPH, -ODE and some others are 
interpreted as nouns, concrete, instruments, 
capable of being substituted for human ac ~ 
tor; words ending in -CS, -CY, -ESS, -TUDE 
are supposed to be nouns, abstract, prop- 
erties and, as dist ict from those ending 
in -ITY, -ICS, -SM, -SHIP, -HOOD, -THM, 
which otherwise have the same semantic 
characteristics, they form adjectives in 
a regular manner in Czech; the endings 
-FY, -ATE, -ISE (-IZE), -DUCE indicate 
verbs that can be both transit ive and in- 
transitive, of causative and (semi) termi- 
nological character,yet not allowed to form 
adjectices of the purposive type. A number 
of adjectival suffixes is contained, too, 
viz. -ARY, -AL, -RSE, -IVE, -OUS, -IC, -BLE, 
-LESS, -ANARt -LEAR, -NEAR, -OLAR, -ULAR. 
In all, about 50 classes of nouns, 13 of 
adjectives and 4 of verbs are covered by 
the TD device. 
Two further pieces of information should 
be added, the first being probably super- 
fluous: i) All words having such suffixes 
but different properties as regards their 
part-of-speech category, semantic features, 
etc., are supposed to be contained in the 
basic dictionaries. 2) Most of the classes 
of words treated by the TD are internation- 
al words of Latin or Greek origin; they 
can easily be "transduced" to Czech by re- 
latively simple procedures; some of these 
procedures precede the TD operation as a 
part of a special morphemic analysis, but 
most of them operate in the synthesis, as 
an accessory to the Engl ish - Czech dict ion- 
ary. A set of recursively applied rules 
(in several cycles) takes over the words 
identified by TD, desintegrates them, re- 
places the Engl ish suffixes by the corre- 
sponding Czech ones, and scans the bases 
for spell ing configurations to be trans- 
formed or adapted to Czech orthography 
(replacing, e.g. PH by F, TH by T, C pre- 
ceding A,L,O,R,T,U by K; S preceded by A, 
E, I ,N,O,R,Y and followed by A,E, I ,O is re- 
placed by Z, etc.). Thus, e.g. PHOTOLITO- 
GRAPHIC changes into FOTOLITOGRAFICKE2, 
CYCLOTRON gives CYKLOTRON, ISOSMOTIC is 
transcribed as IZOSMOTICKE2. To give an 
example of solving similar problems, let 
us consider the word ISOSEISMIC: to pre- 
clude the second S situated at a morphemic 
juncture from becoming a Z, would require 
either a special entry in the main dict ion- 
ary - as one word or as combinat ion of the 
prefixal ISO + SEISMIC, in which case the 
adjective must be contained in the dict ion- 
ary - or some similar prel iminary treatment 
in the special morphemic analysis preceding 
the TD; the latter way of treatment would 
probably represent the best solution, which 
may be general ized for all or most of the 
typical terminological prefixes involving 
analogous problems as IZOSEISMICKE2 - e.g., 
A-, INFRA-, PRE-, PERI-, SEMI-, SYN-, MESO-, 
MONO-, HYPER-, POLY- etc. (needless to add 
that this time it would be such words as 
ISOSMOTIC that would require a specific 
treatment, e.g. to p roce~on ly  SMOTIC - 
- from ISO + SMOTIC - in the dictionary). 
It should be remarked that, in principle, 
this part of the transducing device - or- 
thographical changes - need not be sepa- 
rated from the front part operating in the 
analysis. 
2.22 Words that remain unaccounted for 
after passing the TD phases - i.e., not 
found in the dict ionaries and not belonging 
to any of the classes dealt with in the  
transducing device - are subjected to fur- 
ther analysis; those having typical verbal 
inf lectional endings C-ING, -ED) are re- 
garded as verbs, those ending in -LY are 
taken for adverbs provided that more than 
2 characters precede and their tentative 
status is syntactical ly corroborated. The 
106 
rest are f irst treated as proper names 
and if the subsequent analysis  fai ls to 
c~onfirm this conjecture - i.e., they are 
not in?egrated into wider nominal  complexes,  
e.g., as an apposi t ion - they become nouns 
(which, by the way, happens to the tenta- 
t ive adverbs, too). The words ident i f ied 
in this tentat ive manner are "czechized", 
which insome cases might result  in quite 
acceptable formations - e.g., if the or ig-  
inal words can be taken an " internat ional"  
or technica l ly  and termino log ica l ly  univ-  
ocal terms: GETTERING --~ GETEROVA2NI2,  
ABEND --) ABENDOVAT - in other cases in 
more or less comical  "macaronic" creat ions.  
In conclusion, it should be added that the 
or ig inal  more ambit ious idea of ass ign ing 
to each unrecognized word ~that does not 
carry any character is t ic  clue making the 
guess easier) three paral le l  tentat ive in- 
terpretat ions to let the syntact ic  analy-  
sis decide -noun, verb, adverb - had to be 
abandoned for reasons similar to those that 
led to the res ignat ion in the case of hy- 
persentent ia l  context.  Too many poss ib i l -  
ities, often combined with other paral le l  
solutions, led to combinator ia l  explos ion 
that Cthough often not assuming the char-  
acter of an inf inite loop) expanded the 
structures to such an extent that sooner 
or later an over f low became inevitable.  So 
far, there is no remedy for over f low in 
our system. 
2.23 The last, re lat ive ly  simple, measure 
concerns cases where a single parse \[or 
more paral le l  single parses) - i.e., trees 
cover ing individual  input str ings - fa i led 
to be formed in the last phase of the anal-  
ysis; usual ly  two or more part ia l  trees 
are formed instead, which fact may be caus-  
ed by anomalous structure of the input 
string, or owing to some part ia l  fa i lure 
in analyz ing one or more substr ings \[e.g., 
when some elementCs) or structure\[s~ were 
mis interpreted) ,  or as a result  of some 
subject ive shortcomings in the program - 
- omission,  error, etc. The synthesis pro- 
gram is able to process even such part ial  
and f ragmentary results  and attempt at 
compi l ing an acceptable output, only a 
special  character  (~  or } ) is placed in 
front of such output  str ings to s ignal ize 
that they had been formed on the basks of 
defect ive results  of the analysis.  If nec- 
essary, a set of rules of a more or less 
ad-hoc character  depr ives "underdone" 
(sub)trees of all auxi l iary  structures 
Ccategory labels, parentheses,  separators,  
features, etc.) leaving only !exical  vale 
ues, and performs thus the f in ishing 
touches to br ing the subst i tute output  as 
c lose to readable and acceptable results  
as possible.  
3. The outputs of indiv idual  phases can 
be obta ined in the l ist ing. Some of these 
phases, esp. the last -but -one phase f ix ing 
the state of things before the syntact ic 
measures have been appl ied, usual ly  pre- 
serve informat ion enough to recognize and 
examine the unretouched results  and to 
d ivulge the d iagnosis  of errors or short-  
comings necessary for further progress.  
This is to say that most of the "emergen- 
cy" devices operate at moments and in a 
manner  which permit  to examine the previ -  
ous state of things, so that their act ion 
does not obscure the regular  course of 
the process ing and al lows normal control  
of it. It should be added that a part of 
emergency devices has a temporary charac-  
ter deal ing with omiss ions and bugs proper 
to the system under development.  We are 
sure that at least some of them wi l l  be- 
come superf luons.  
107 
REFERENCES 
Haji~ovA, E. (1986) Machine Translation 
Research in Czechoslovakia, Proceedings 
of the Int.Conference on Translation 
Mechanization, August 20-22, 1986, Co- 
penhagen 
Kirschner, Z. (1982~ A Dependency-Based 
Analysis of English for the Purpose of 
Machine Translation, Explizite Beschrei- 
bung der SPrache und automatische Text- 
bearbeitung IX, Prague 
Kirschner, Z. (1984) On a Dependency Anal- 
ysis of English for Automatic Transla- 
tion. In: Contributions to Functional 
Syntax, Semantics and Language Compre- 
hension (ed.by P.Sgall), Prague, 335 - 
358 
Kirschner, Z. (in press), APAC3-2: An Eng- 
lish-to-Czech Machine Translation Sys- 
tem. Explizite Beschreibung der Sprache 
und automatische Textbearbeitung XIII, 
Prague 
108 
