MACHINE TRANSLATION, LINGUISTICS, AND INTERLINGUA 
Petr Sgall and Jarmila Panevov~ 
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, 
Charles University 
Malostransk4 n.25, 118 O0 Praha l, Czechoslovakia 
ABSTRACT 
An adequate, complete, and economical 
l inguistic theory is necessary for MT and 
the question is whether a consistent use 
of the often unduly neglected dependency 
syntax, including a systematic description 
of topic and focus, cannot serve as a re- 
liable base for the grammar of an inter- 
lingua, or of a set of interrelated inter- 
face structures. 
i. As Slocum (198~)conv inc~ly  shows, the 
attitude towards translation in general, 
and therefore also towards automatic trans- 
lation in the U.S.A. never has been based 
on urgent wide-spread needs of translating 
technical texts, and mostly has not been 
connected with broad interest in theoreti- 
cal background. Outside the U.S.A., with 
the exception of G.E.T.A., Grenoble, the 
research had the character of scattered 
projects carried out by relatively small 
groups; only in the recent years the EUROTRA 
project and, especially, the two Japanese 
projects bring some hope as for the possi- 
bi l ity of sufficiently concentrated re- 
search. 
The question whether l inguistics is able 
to offer a reliable theoretical basis for 
MT cannot be answered in a qualif ied way 
without examining such l inguistical ly based 
systems as Garvin~s'fulcrum" approach {which 
was abolished on external grounds, after 
the unfortunate ALPAC report~ or the sys- 
tems formulated by Kulagina and Apresyan. 
Certain features of their frameworks, as 
well as of Vauquois" (1975; Vauquois and 
Boitet, 1985~ are more closely connected to 
classical structural l inguistics than is 
the case with other MT systems. Also in 
Prague, the research group of MT and formal 
l inguistics at Charles University has de- 
voted much effort (starting at the end of 
the 1950"s~ to identify the positive results 
of classical European l inguistics and to 
reformulate them in a metalanguage that 
would make them usable in the context of 
Chomskyan (and Montaguean~ methodology and 
of automated language processing (now see 
Sgall et al, 1986~. 
2. The requirements on l in@uistic theory 
as a background for MT can be summarized as 
follows: 
(a~ Adequacy: The theory should underlie 
relatively complete descriptions reflecting 
the structure of language. Since humans dif- 
fer from computers (in freely combining fac- 
tual knowledge and other mental capacities 
with their knowledge and use of language, 
and in being able to develop their language 
while using itS, the correspondence between 
theory and its MT application cannot be im- 
mediate. The open-endedness of language 
makes it necessary to restrict the complete- 
ness of the description to a reasonably 
estimated core of language, leaving the 
~oss ib ly  not too large~ periphery inrthe 
application to postediting, etc. 
99 
(b) Testability! It follows from (a) 
that testabil ity also is limited: not every 
counterexample disqualif ies a theory. 
(c) Economy: To be applicable, the theo- 
ry cannot be too complex. It seems necessary 
to draw a boundary line between the system 
of language on the one side, and its use or 
its semantic interpretation on the other, 
although in several respects it may be use- 
ful for the applications not to follow this 
boundary quite exactly. 
(d) Modularity: Since huge programs are 
extremely diff icult to be handled (debugged, 
updated, etc.), priority will be given to 
such a theory that not only allows for a 
division of labour between the descript ion 
of l inguistic and communicative competence 
- see (c), - but makes also a cooperation 
between specialists in the different layers 
of language itself possible. 
The comparison of dif ferent approaches 
to l inguistic theory as to point (a) is a 
matter of the theory itself; let us only 
note that many theories seem not to be suf- 
f iciently adequate in that they do not 
properly dist inguish between the three di- 
mensions of the sentence structure (valency 
or theta roles, coordination and apposition, 
and also topic and focus, which often is 
almost altogether neglected I) and the mor- 
phological categories (tense, aspect, num- 
ber, definiteness, and so on); the latter 
occupy no immediate posit ions in the struc- 
ture of the sentence with its recursive 
properties, and thus it is not adequate to 
denote e.g. preposit ions as if they per- 
1 The relevance of the topic-focus ar- 
t iculation for translation and for other 
aims of language comprehension can be il lus- 
trated by the following examples: In the 
hallway one smokes should be dist inguished 
from One smokes in the  hallway similarly as 
Few books are read by many men from Many 
men read few books. 
mitted for unlimited complementation, as 
verbs do. 
For point (b) it is important that the 
theory uses operational criteria in delim- 
iting its units and oppositions, thus re- 
presenting a suitable starting point for 
implementable application systems. 
With regard to (c), the relative gener- 
ality of the formulations used by the the- 
ory is relevant; thus e.g. Chomsky's uni- 
versal principles are relatively econom- 
ical. On the other hand, the abundance of 
nodes in the P-markers (cf. what was just 
said on point (a)) brings along the ne- 
cessity to use tree pruning and to intro- 
duce devices making it possible to find an 
orientation in the unnecessari ly large 
trees. 
As for (d), it seems preferable to work 
with two levels of sentence structure and 
with a separate level of morphemic repre- 
sentations in the theory, although in the 
applications this pattern may be simplif ied 
(we are then aware what we have left out 
e.g. in our parser, and are able to restore 
a missing subpart, if this proves to be 
necessary, e.g. when the system is to be 
general ized to handle new kinds of texts). 
A systematic investigation into compar- 
ing different l inguistic theories from 
these viewpoints has resulted in our pre- 
ference for dependency grammar, based on 
valency or theta roles (see Sgall et al, 
1986, for a detai led discussion). A depend- 
ency based l inguistic descript ion is ade- 
quate in the quoted respect \[e.g. the mor- 
phological values are denoted here by parts 
of complex node labels); the theory is ful- 
ly testable and uses operational criteria, 
and it ensures both economy \[no non-termi- 
nal symbols are present in the representa- 
tions although as man N as necessary can be 
used during the derivation procedure) and 
modularity (the underlying representations 
contain all the semantically relevant in- 
100 
formation, since also the topic-focus ar- 
t iculation is denoted here). 
Bloomfield's ?exocentric ? constructions 
are often mistakenly understood as an ob- 
stacle for dependency syntax; however, as~ 
Robinson (1970):showed, they can be hanv 
dled without serious diff icult ies within 
dependency trees. Let us add that, if con- 
structions are analyzed in the terms of 
word classes (parts of speech), rather than 
in those of individual words, than the dis- 
tributional properties clearly show that 
e.g. your sister is a noun group (since 
e.g. Mother or syntax occur w i thouta  deter- 
miner), to hit the ball is a verb group 
(due to to read,...), and also a sentence 
has a verb as its governor, since in I_~t 
rains no subject (Actor/Bearer) is present 
at the level of meaning (or in the under- 
lying structure). 
A formal treatment combining dependency 
syntax with a descr ipt ion of coordinat ion 
and apposition, al lowing for an indefinite 
number of sister nodes, was presented by 
Pl~tek et al (1984). 
As one of the referrresofour papers has 
duly recalled, the number of publications 
concerning dependency grammar is much 
smaller than that on constituent structures, 
but the popularity of the model is not di- 
rectly relevant for its evaluation. There- 
fore it seems highly useful to notice the 
advantages of the less known model, a more 
intensive use of which might be of impor- 
tance for the further development of the 
field. 
3. An interl in@ua for MT can well be based 
on such a theory. Since the 1960"s - see 
e.g.Mel?~uk (1962), Vauquois (1962), Sgall 
(1963) - the research in this direction has 
been connected with theoretical investiga- 
tions. It has been clear that the formula- 
tion of an interl ingua is a practical task, 
for the underlying units differ from one 
language to the other, so that the struc- 
ture of interl ingua is based rather on the 
structural similarit ies (formal universals) 
of languages than on an assumed identity 
of their underlying structures, or their 
patternings of meaning. 
As for the known diff icult ies concerning 
e.g. the formulation of fail-soft rules or 
the presence of surface clues (see Slocum, 
1985,5; Vauquois and Boitet, 1985), it ap- 
pears that for a mult i l ingual system of MT 
these disadvantages have to be compared 
with those present in the large number of 
binary systems which are otherwise necess- 
ary. The difference between the use of an 
interl ingua and of a smaller number of 
"interfaces" (one for each language)appears 
not to be crucial. If, for a system includ- 
ing ~ languages, m among them display a 
certain opposit ion (that of dual versus 
plural number, or of gender with personal 
pronouns, etc.), then the degree of impor- 
tance of this opposit ion for the system 
depend& on the difference between n and m 
and on the importance of the languages dis- 
playing the opposition. Extremely marginal 
opposit ions will probably be ignored in a 
system using interfaces as well as in one 
with an interlingua. In this case, a trans- 
lation between two languages exhibit ing the 
marginal opposit ion will be faced with a 
similar problem as a translation from a 
"prototypical" language into a "marginal" 
one (e.g. the use of dual number will be 
determined - perhaps only for some cases - 
by contextual clues, rather than by the 
presence of dual in the input text). 
If the relative weight of such surplus 
dif f icult ies (and result ing mistakes) is 
considerable, then it may be useful to for- 
mulate interfaces, perhaps not always in a 
one-to-one correspondence to the processed 
languages, but relating to certain groups 
of them. Certain "dialectal" differences in 
the interl ingua would then be useful, each 
101 
of which would share some opposition(s) 
with a group of the processed languages. 
This may concern the differences between 
languages having and not having articles, 
verbal aspects, various moods, and so on. 
The substitution of a single interlingua by 
a set of closely related interface s t ruc -  
tures <see VauquoM and Boitet, 1985,32; as 
for its application in the EUROTRA project, 
Johnson e ta l . ,  1985,164) perhaps is also 
important with regard to handling the se- 
mantic relationships between the lexical 
units of the languages concerned. 
This  schematical view can be systemat- 
ically elaborated only on the basis of ex- 
perience with multi l ingual MT systems. 
4. A not quite negligible experience with 
MT systems based (at least to a great part~ 
on dependency syntax has been gained al- 
ready. The Grenoble group has used a graph 
grammar based on this approach within a sys- 
tem that is multi l ingual, though centred 
arotmd French (see Vauquois, 1975; Boitet 
and Nedobejkine, 1981; Vauquois and Boitet, 
1985,28f); although in this system the de- 
pendency relations are used along with a 
kind of phrase structure, the importance 
of complex node labels and of the syntactic 
relations (valency) has always been fully 
recognized. Also Nagao e ta l .  (1985,esp.98) 
point out that dependency tree structures 
are used in their project (which certainly 
belongs to those with the best traditions 
and results); in the Eurotra system the de- 
pendency relations and the notion of "gov 
(ernor)" play an important role (see e.g. 
Johnson e ta l . ,  1985). In Prague, especial ly 
the Engl ish-to-Czech translation project, 
the main author of which is Kirschner (1982; 
1984), is based on a dependency description. 
5. The perspectives of MT seem to be con- 
nected with two major conditions, in addi- 
tion to the choice of an appropriate under- 
lying l inguistic theory, which we discussed 
above: 
(a~ As is known, for the resolution of 
many lexical ambiguit ies and also for the 
identif ication of grammatical ly obl igatory 
values of the target language not present 
in the input text, a MT system has to in- 
clude not only a purely l inguistic descrip- 
tion. It has to be found out to what de- 
gree the practical purposes of MT can be 
achieved by systems "modell ing the world" 
by such elementary means as sets of seman- 
tic features. Where means of this kind 
wil l  be found to be insufficient, it is 
probable that neither data bases of the 
common types will do. It is then necessary 
to look for suitable kinds of knowledge 
representat ion systems. 
(b) The main perspective appears to be 
connected with the hope that a wider prac- 
tical application of MT will lead to a new 
situation, in which the construction of MT 
systems will no longer be a matter of 
small research groups scattered and more 
or less isolated in dif ferent countries, 
but there will emerge large-scale and well- 
-coordinated international projects based 
on the best results achieved and verif ied 
by widespread practical application. Under 
such new circumstances it wil l be possible 
not only to compile grammatical ly well . 
founded data on tens of thousands of lexi- 
cal units from different languages, but 
also to connect translation systems in an 
effective way with broadly based nets of 
knowledge representation. Effective ways 
of human-machine interaction can then be 
found, and the formulation of appropriate 
intermediate languag~wi l l  meet good con- 
ditions. Post-edit ing will certainly re~ 
main necessary, the main condit ion being 
that it should not be much more diff icult 
than it is with human translations of 
technical texts (although other kinds of 
mistakes will prevail). 
102 
REFERENCES 
Boitet Ch. and N. Nedobejkine (1981), Re- 
cent developments in Russian-French ma- 
chine translation at Grenoble, Linguis- 
tics 19, 199-271 
Johnson R., King M. and L.des Tombe (1985), 
EUROTRA~ A multilingual system under 
development, Computational Linguistics 
ii, 155-169 
Kirschner Z. ~1982), A dependency-based 
analysis of English for the purpose of 
Machine Translation, Explizite Beschrei- 
bung der Sprache und automatische Text- 
bearbeitung IX, Prague 
Kirschner Z. \[1984), On a dependency anal- 
ysis of English for machine translation. 
Zn Contributions to Functional Syntax, 
Semantics and Language Comprehension, 
ed. by P.Sgall, Prague - Amsterdam, 
335-358 
Mel'~uk I. \[1962), K voprosu o "grammati- 
~eskom" v jazyke-posrednike. In: Ma~in- 
nyj perevod i prikladnaja lingvistika 4, 
Moscow, 25-45 
Nagao M., Tsujii J. and J.Nakamura (1985), 
The Japanese government project for Ma- 
chine Translation, Computational Linguis- 
tics ll, 91-110 
Pl~tek M., Sgall J. and P.Sgall (1984), A 
dependency base for a linguistic descrip- 
tion. In: Contributions to Functional 
Syntax, Semantics, and Language Compre- 
hension, ed.by P.Sgall, Prague - Amster- 
dam, 63-98 
Robinson J. ~1970), Dependency structures 
and transformational rules, Language 46, 
259-285 
Sgall P. ~1963), The intermediate language 
in Machine Translation and the theory 
of grammar. In: American Documentation 
Institute, 26th Annual Meeting, Chicago, 
Ill., 41-42 
Sgall P., Haji~ov~ E. and J.Panevov~ ~1986), 
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Se- 
mantic and Pragmatic Aspects, Prague - 
Dordrecht, Holland 
Slocum J. (1985), A survey of Machine Trans- 
lation: its history, current status, 
and future prospects, Computational Lin- 
guistics ll, 1-17 
Vauquois B. (1962), Langages artificiels, 
syst~mes formels et Traduction Automa- 
tique. In: Cours ~ l'Et4 de I'OTAN, ed. 
by A.Ghizetti, Oxford, 1966, 211-236 
Vauquois B. (1975), La traduction automa- 
tique ~ Grenoble. Documents de linguis- 
t~que quantitative 24, Paris 
Vauquois B. and Ch.Boitet (1985), Automated 
translation at Grenoble University, 
Computational Linguistics ll, 18-36 
109 
