User studies and the design of Natural Language Systems 
Steve Whi t taker  and Phi l  Stenton 
Hewlett -Packard Laborator ies 
F i l ton Road,  Bristol BS12 6QZ, UK. 
email: s jw~hplb .hp l .hp .com 
Abstract  
This paper presents a critical discussion of the vari- 
ous approaches that have been used in the evaluation 
of Natural Language systems. We conclude that pre- 
vious approaches have neglected to evaluate systems 
in the context of their use, e.g. solving a task requir- 
ing data retrieval. This raises questions about the 
validity of such approaches. In the second half of the 
paper, we report a laboratory study using the Wizard 
of Oz technique to identify NL requirements for carry- 
ing out this task. We evaluate the demands that task 
dialogues collected using this technique, place upon 
a prototype Natural Language system. We identify 
three important requirements which arose from the 
task that we gave our subjects: operators specific to 
the task of database access, complex contextual refer- 
ence and reference to the structure of the information 
source. We discuss how these might be satisfied by 
future Natural Language systems. 
1 Int roduct ion  
1.1  Approaches  to  the  eva luat ion  o f  
NL  sys tems 
It is clear that a number of different criteria might 
be employed in the evaluation of Natural Language 
(NL) systems. It is also clear that there is no 
consensus on how evaluation should be carried out 
\[RQR*88, GM84\]. Among the different criteria that 
have been suggested are (a) Coverage; (b) Learnabil- 
ity; (c) General software requirements; (d) Compar- 
ison with other interface media. Coverage is con- 
cerned with the set of inputs which the system should 
be capable of handling and one issue we will discuss 
is how this set should be identified. Learnabi l i ty is
premised on the fact that complete coverage is not 
forseeable in the near future. As a consequence, any 
NL system will have limitations and one problem for 
users will be to learn to communicate within such 
limitations. Learnability is measured by the ease 
with which new users are able to identify these cov- 
erage limitations, and exploit what coverage is avail- 
able to carry out their task. The general software 
criteria of importance are speed, size, modifiabil- 
ity and installation and maintenance osts. Com- 
parison studies have mainly required users to per- 
form the same task using either a formal query lan- 
guage such as SQL or a restricted natural anguage 
and evaluated one against he other on such param- 
eters as time to solution or number of queries per 
task\[SW83, JTS*85\]. Our discussion will mainly ad- 
dress the problem of coverage: we shall not discuss 
these other issues further. 
Our concern here will be with interactive NL in- 
terfaces and not other applications of NL technology 
such as MT or messaging systems. Interactive inter- 
faces are not designed to be used in isolation, rather, 
they are intended to be connected to some sort of 
backend system, to improve access to that system. 
Our view is that NL systems should be evaluated with 
this in mind: the aim will be to identi fy the NL in- 
puts which a typical  user would want to enter 
in order to uti l lse that  backend system to carry 
out  a representat ive task. By representative task 
we mean the class of task that the back-end system 
was designed to carry out. In the case of databases, 
this would be accessing or updating information. For 
expert systems it might involve identifying or diag- 
nosing faults. ? 
I . I . I  Tes t  su i tes  
One method that is often used in computer science for 
the evaluation of systems i the use of test suites. For 
NL systems the idea is to generate a corpus of sen- 
tences which contains the major set of syntactic, se- 
- 116-  
mantic and pragmatic phenomena the system should 
cover \[BB84, FNSW87\]. One problem with this ap- 
proach is how we determine whether the test set is 
complete. Do we have a clear notion of what consti- 
tute the major phenomena of language so that we can 
generate test sentences which identify whether these 
have been analysed correctly? Theories of syntax are 
well developed and may provide us with a good tax- 
onomy of syntactic phenomena, but we do not have 
similar classifications of key pragmatic requirements. 
There are two reasons why current approaches may 
fail to identify the key phenomena. Current est sets 
are organised on a single-utterance basis, with certain 
exceptions such as intersentential anaphora nd ellip- 
sis. Now it may be that more complex discourse phe- 
nomena such as reference to dialogue structure arise 
when systems are being used to carry out tasks, be- 
cause of the need to construct and manipulate sets of 
information \[McK84\]. In addition, context may con- 
tribute to inputs being fragmentary or telegraphic 
in style. Unless we investigate systems being used 
to carry out tasks, such phenomena will continue to 
he omitted from our test suites and NL systems will 
have to be substantially modified when they are con- 
nected to their backend systems. Thus we are not 
arguing against he use of test suites in principle but 
rather are attempting to determine what methodol- 
ogy should be used to design such test suites. 
1.1.2 Field studies 
In field studies, subjects are given the NL  inter- 
face connected to some application and encouraged 
to make use of it. It would seem that these stud- 
ies would offer vital information about target re- 
quirements. Despite arguments that such studies are 
highly necessary \[Ten79\], few systematic studies have 
been conducted \[Dam81, JTS*85, Kra80\]. The prob- 
lem here may be with finding committed users who 
are prepared to make serious use of a fragile system. 
A major problem with such studies concerns the 
robustness of the systems which were tested and this 
leads to difficulties in the interpretation of the results. 
This is because a fragile system necessarily imposes 
limitations on the ways that a user can interact with 
it. We cannot therefore infer that the set of sentences 
that users input when they have adjusted to a frag- 
ile system, reflects the set of inputs that they would 
wish to enter given a system with fewer limitations. 
In other words we cannot infer that such inputs repre- 
sent the way that users would ideally wish to interact 
using NL. The users may well have been employing 
strategies to communicate within the limitations of 
the system and they may therefore have been using 
a highly restricted form of English. Indeed the exis- 
tence of strategies such as paraphrasing and syntax 
simplification when a query failed, and repetition of 
input syntax when a query succeeded has been doc- 
umented \[ThoS0, WW89\]. 
Since we cannot currently envisage a system with- 
out limitations, we may want to exploit this ability to 
learn system limitations, nevertheless the existence of 
such user strategies does not give us a clear view of 
what language might have been used in the absence 
of these limitations. 
1.1.3 Pen  and paper tasks 
One technique which overcomes some of the prob- 
lems of robustness has been to use pen and paper 
tasks. Here we do not use a system at all but rather 
give subjects what is essentially a translation task 
\[JTS*85, Mil81\]. This technique has also been em- 
ployed to evaluate formal query languages such as 
SQL. The subjects of the study are given a sample 
task: A list of alumni in the state of California has 
been requested. The request applies to those alumni 
whose last name starts with an S. Obtain such a list 
containing last names and first names. When the 
subjects have generated their natural language query, 
it is evaluated by judges to determine whether it 
would have successfully elicited the information from 
the system. 
This approach avoids the problem of using fragile 
systems, but it is susceptible to the same objections 
as were levelled at test suites: a potential drawback 
with the approach concerns the representativeness of 
the set of tasks the users are required to do when 
they carry out the translation tasks. For the tasks 
described by Reisner, for example, the queries are all 
one shot, i.e. they are attempts to complete a task 
in a single query \[Rei77\]. As a result the translation 
problems may fail to test the system's coverage of 
discourse phenomena. 
1.1.4 Wizard of  Oz 
A similar technique to pen and paper tasks has been 
the use of a method called the "Wizard of Or" (hence- 
forth WOZ)  which also avoids the problem of the 
fragility of current systems by simulating the opera- 
tion of the system rather than using the system itself. 
- 117-  
In these studies, subjects are told that they are in- 
teracting with the computer when in reality they are 
linked to the Wizard, a person simulating the opera- 
tion of the system, over a computer network. 
In Guindon's study using the WOZ technique, 
subjects were told they were using an NL  front- 
end to a knowledge-based statistics advisory package 
\[GSBC86\]. The main result is a counterintuitive one. 
These studies suggest that people produce "simple 
language" when they believe that they are using an 
NL  interface. Guindon has compared the WOZ dia- 
logues of users interacting with the statistics package, 
to informal speech, and likened them to the simplified 
register of "baby talk" \[SF7?\]. In comparison with 
informal speech, the dialogues have few passives, few 
pronouns and few examples of fragmentary speech. 
One problem with the research is that it has 
been descriptive: It has chiefly been concerned with 
demonstrating the fact that the language observed 
is "simple" relative to norms gathered for informal 
and written speech and the results are expressed at 
too general a level to be useful for system design. 
It is not enough to know, for example, that there 
are fewer fragments observed in WOZ type dialogues 
than in informal speech: it is necessary to know the 
precise characteristics of such fragments if we are to 
design a system to analyse these when they occur. 
Despite this, our view is that WOZ represents the 
most promising technique for identifying the target 
requirements of an NL interface. However, to avoid 
the problem of precision described above, we modified 
the technique in one significant respect. Having used 
the WOZ technique to generate a set of sentences that 
users ideally require to carry out a database retrieval 
task, we then input these sentences into a NL system 
linked to the database. The target requirements are 
therefore valuated against a version of a real system 
and we can observe the ways in which the system 
satisfies, or fails to satisfy, user requirements. 
We discuss semantics and pragmatics only insofar as 
they are reflected in individual lexical items. This 
is of some importance, given the lexical basis of the 
HPNL  system. It must also be noted that the evalua- 
tion took place against a prototype version of HPNL.  
Many of the lexical errors we encountered could be 
removed with a trivial amount of effort. Our inter- 
est was not therefore in the absolute number of such 
errors, but rather with the general classes of lexical 
errors which arose. We present a classification of such 
errors below. 
The task we investigated was database retrieval. 
This was predominantly because this has been a typ- 
ical application for NL  interfaces. Our initial inter- 
est was in the target requirements for an NL  system, 
i.e. what set of sentences users would enter if they 
were given no constraints on the types of sentences 
that they could input. The Wizard was therefore in- 
structed to answer all questions (subject to the limi- 
tation given below). We ensured that this person had 
sufficient information to answer questions about the 
database, and so in principle, the system was capable 
of handling all inputs. 
The subjects were asked to access information from 
the "database" about a set of paintings which pos- 
sessed certain characteristics. The database con- 
tained information about Van Gogh's paintings in- 
cluding their age, theme, medium, and location. The 
subjects had to find a set of paintings which together 
satisfied a series of requirements, and they did this 
by typing English sentences into the machine. They 
were not told exactly what information the database 
contained, nor about the set of inputs the Natural 
Language interface might be capable of processing. 
2 Method  
1.2 The  cur rent  s tudy  
The  current study therefore has two components: the 
first is a WOZ study of dialogues involved in database 
retrieval tasks. We then take the recorded ialogues 
and map them onto the capabilities of an existing 
system, HPNL \[NP88\] to look at where the language 
that the users produce goes beyond the capabilities 
of this system. The results we present concern the 
first phase of such an analysis in which we discuss 
the set of words that the system failed to analyse. 
2.1 Sub jec ts  
The 12 subjects were all familiar with using com- 
puters insofar as they had used word processors and 
electronic mail. A further 5 of them had used omce 
applications such as spreadsheets or graphics pack- 
ages. Of the remainder, 4 had some experience with 
using databases and one of these had participated in 
the design a database. None of them was familiar 
with the current state of NL  technology. 
- 118-  
2.2 Procedure hard copy. 
The experimenter told the subjects that he was in- 
terested in evaluating the efficiency of English as a 
medium for communicating with computers. He told 
them that an English interface to a database was run- 
ning on the machine and that the database contained 
information about paintings by Van Gogh and other 
artists. In fact this was not true: the information that 
the subjects typed into the terminal was transmitted 
to a person (The Wizard) at another terminal who 
answered the subject's requests by consulting paper 
copies of the database tables. 
The experimenter then gave the details of the two 
tasks. Subjects were told that they had to find a set of 
paintings which satisfied several requirements, where 
a requirement might be for example that (a) all the 
paintings must come from different cities; or (b) they 
must all have different themes. Having found this set, 
they had then to access particular information about 
the set of pictures that they had chosen, e.g the paint 
medium for each of the pictures chosen. 
3 Resu l ts  
3.1 Preliminary analysis and filtering 
This analysis is concerned with user input and so the 
Wizard's responses are not considered here. We be- 
gan by taking all the 384 subject utterances, entering 
them into the NL prototype and observing what anal- 
ysis the system produced. We found that by far the 
largest category of errors was unknown words, so we 
began by analysing the total of 401 instances of 104 
unknown words. 
Our interest here lay in the influence of the task 
on language use so we focus on 3 classes of unknown 
words which demonstrate this in different ways: these 
were operators and explicit reference to set proper- 
ties; references to context; and references to the in- 
formation source. 
Our interest was in the target set of queries input 
by people who wanted to use the system for database 
access. We therefore gave the Wizard instructions to 
answer all queries regardless of linguistic omplexity. 
There was however one exception to this rule: each 
task was expressed as a series of requirements and one 
possible strategy for the task was to enter all these 
requirements a  one long query. If the Wizard had an- 
swered this query then the dialogue would have been 
extremely short, i.e it would have been one query and 
a response which was the answer to the whole task. 
To prevent this, the .Wizard was told to reply to such 
long queries by saying Too much information to pro- 
cess. There were no other constraints on the type 
of input that the Wizard could process and answers 
were given to all other types of query. 
Subject and Wizard both used HP-Unix Worksta- 
tions and communicated by writing in networked X
windows. The inputs of both subject and Wizard 
were displayed in a single window on each of the ma- 
chines with the subject's entries presented in lower 
case and the Wizard's in upper case, so the con- 
tents of the display windows on both machines were 
identical. To avoid teaching the subjects kills like 
scrolling, we also provided them with hard copy out- 
put of the whole of the interaction by printing the 
contents of the windows to a printer next to the sub- 
jeet's machine. If they wanted to refer back to much 
earlier in the dialogue, the subjects could consult he 
3.1.1 Operators and the explicit specification 
of set propert ies 
The task of database access involves the construction 
and manipulation of answer sets with various prop- 
erties. 
The unknown words that were used for set con- 
struction and manipulation were mainly verbs. These 
we called operators. They can be further subclassi- 
fled into verbs which were used to select sets, those 
which were used to permute  already constructed 
sets and those which operate over a set of queries. 
The majority of operators invoked simple set selec- 
tion: these included for example, state and tell. There 
were also instances of indirect requests for selection, 
e.g. need and want. Subjects tried to permute the 
presentation of sets by using words like arrange. Fi- 
nally queries uch as All the conditions from now on 
will apply to . . .  show there were verbs which oper- 
ated over sets of queries. 
A second way in which these set manipulation op- 
erations appeared was in the subjects' explicit ref- 
erence to the fact that they were constructing sets 
with specific properties. Find paintings that satisfy 
the following criteria . . .  was an example of this. 
Altogether operators and explicit reference to set 
- 119-  
properties occurred on 102 occasions which accounted 
for 25% of the unknown words. 
3.1.2 References to context 
The task could not be accomplished in one query so 
we expected that this would necessitate our subjects 
making reference to previous queries. We therefore 
went on to analyse those unknown words that re- 
quired information from outside the current query 
for their interpretation. Among the unknown words 
which relied upon context, we distinguished between 
what we called pointers (N = 42 instances) and ex- 
clusion operators (N = 21 instances). Together 
they accounted for 16% of unknown words. 
Pointers ignalled to the listener that the reference 
set lay outside the current utterance. These could be 
further subdivided according to whether or not they 
pointed forwards, e.g. Give me the dates of the fol- 
lowing paintings . . .  or backwards in the dialogue, 
e.g. previous and above. There were two instances of 
forwards pointers following and now on. 
The backwards pointers could be subclassified ac- 
cording to how many previous answer sets they re- 
ferred to. The majority referred to a single answer 
set and this was most often the one generated by the 
immediately prior query. Other pointers referred to 
a number of prior answer sets, which could scope as 
far back as the beginning of the current subdialogue, 
or even the beginning of the whole dialogue. 
Exclusion operators applied to sets created ear- 
lier in the dialogue. They served to exclude lements 
of these sets from the current query. The simplest ex- 
amples of this occurred when people had (a) identified 
a set previously; (b) they had then selected a subset 
of this original set; and (c) they wanted all or part of 
the set of the original set which had not been selected 
by the second opergtion. These included words like 
another and more, as in Give me I0 more Van Gogh 
paintings. 
A more complex instance of this type of exclusion 
was when the word was used, not to exclude sub- 
sets from sets already identified, but to exclude the 
attributes of the items in the excluded subsets, e.g. 
Find me a painting with a theme that is different 
from those already mentioned. Here the system has 
first to generate the set of paintings already men- 
tioned, then it has to generate their themes and then 
finally it has to find a painting whose theme is differ- 
ent from the set of themes already identified. 
3.1.3 References to the informat ion source 
Our subjects believed that they were interacting with 
a real information source, in this case a database, also 
seemed to affect heir language use. We found 19 (5% 
of all unknown words) which seemed to refer to the 
database and its structure directly. 
There were words which seemed to refer to field 
names in the database, e.g. categories and infor- 
mation, e.g. What in format ion on each painting is 
there? There were also words which seemed to refer 
to values within a field, e.g. types as in List the me- 
dia types. In addition, there were references to the 
ordering of entities, e.g. first or second, as in What 
is the first painting in your list?. Finally, there were 
words which referred to the general scope or prop- 
erties of the database: e.g. database and represented, 
e.g. What different paint media are represented?. 
There were also 3 occasions on which reference 
is made both to database structure and to context. 
These are the instances of next being used to access 
entities in a column but also referring to context. The 
utterance List next 10 paintings, references 10 items 
in the sequence that they appear in the database, 
but excludes the 10 items already chosen. Finally 
there was one instance of a question which would 
have required inferencing based on the structure of 
the information source, Is a portrait the same as a 
self portrait?. Here the question was about the type 
relation. 
4 Conclus ions 
This paper had two objectives: the first was to eval- 
uate the use of the WOZ technique for assessing NL 
systems and the second was to investigate the effect 
of task on language use. 
One criticism we made of both test suites and tasks 
using pen and paper, was that they may attempt to 
evaluate systems against inadequate criteria. Specif- 
ically they may not evaluate the adequacy of NL sys- 
tems when users are carrying out tasks with specific 
software systems. The unknown words analysis eems 
to bear this out: we found 3 classes of unknown words 
which occurred only because our users were doing a 
task. Firstly our users wanted to carry out operations 
- 120  - 
involving the selection and permutation of answer 
sets and make explicit reference to their properties. 
Secondly, we found that our subjects wanted to use 
complex reference to refer back to previous queries in 
order to refine those queries, or to exclude answers 
to previous queries from their current query. Finally, 
we found that users attempted touse the structure of 
the information source, in this case the database, in 
order to access information. Together these 3 classes 
accounted for 45% of all unknown words. We be- 
lieve that whatever the task and software, there will 
always be instances of operators, context use and ref- 
erence to the information source. It would therefore 
seem that coverage of these 3 sets of phenomena is an 
important requirement for any NL interface to an ap- 
plication. The fact that other evaluation techniques 
may not have detected this requirement is, we be- 
lieve, a vindication of our approach. An exception to 
this is the work of Cohen et al \[CPA82\] who point 
to the need for retaining and tracking context in this 
type of application. 
Of course there are still problems with the WOZ 
technique. One such problem concerns the task rep- 
resentativeness and a difficulty in designing this study 
lay in the selection of a task which we felt to be typi- 
cal of database access. Clearly more information from 
field studies would be useful in helping to identify 
prototypical database access tasks. 
A second problem lies in the interpretation f the 
results with respect to the classification and fre- 
quency of the unknown word errors: how frequently 
must an error occur if it is to warrant system modi- 
fication? For example, references to the information 
source accounted for only 5% of the errors and yet 
we believe this is an interesting class of error because 
exploiting the structure of the database was a useful 
retrieval tactic for some users. The frequency prob- 
lem is not specific to this study, but is an instance of 
a general problem in computational linguistics con- 
cerning the coverage and the range of phenomena to
which we address our research. In the past, the field 
has focussed on the explanation oftheoretically inter- 
esting phenomena without much attention to their 
frequency in naturally occurring speech or text. It 
i s  clear, however, that if we are to be successful in 
designing working systems, then we cannot afford to 
ignore frequently occurring but theoretically uninter- 
esting phenomena such as punctuation ordates. This 
is because such phenomena will probably have to be 
treated in whatever application we design. Frequency 
data may also be of real use in determining priorities 
for system improvement. 
As a result of using our technique, we have iden- 
tified a number of unknown words. How should 
these words be treated? Some of the unknown words 
are synonyms of words already in the system. Here 
the obvious trategy is to modify the NL system by 
adding these. In other cases, system modification 
may not be possible because linguistic theory does 
not have a treatment of these words.h In these cir- 
cumstances, there are three possible strategies for fi- 
nessing the problem. The first two involve encour- 
aging users to avoid these words, either by gener- 
ating co-operative error messages to enable the user 
to rephrase the query and so avoid the use of the 
problematic word \[Adg88, Ste88\] or by user training. 
The third strategy for finessing the analysis of such 
words is to supplement the NL interface with another 
medium such as graphics, and we will describe an ex- 
ample of this below. 
We believe that the use of such finessing strategies 
will be important if NL systems are to be usable in 
the short term. Our data suggests that certain words 
are used frequently by subjects in doing this task. 
It is also clear that computational linguistics has no 
treatment ofthese words. If we wish to build a system 
which will enable our users to carry out the task, we 
must be able to respond in some way to such inputs. 
The above techniques may provide the means to do 
this, although the use of such strategies i still an 
under-researched area. 
For the unknown words encountered in this study, 
of the operators, many can be dealt with by sim- 
ple system modification because they are synonyms 
of list or show. Within the class of operators, how- 
ever, it would seem that new semantic interpretation 
procedures would have to be defined for verbs like ar- 
range or order. These would involve two operations, 
the first would be the generation ofa set, and the sec- 
ond the sorting of that set in terms of some attribute 
such as age or date. The unknown words relating to 
explicit reference to set properties would not be dif- 
ficult to add to the system, given that they can be 
paraphrased asrelative clauses. For example, the sen- 
tence Find Van Gogh paintings to include four dif- 
ferent themes can be paraphrased asFind Van Gogh 
paintings that have different hemes. 
The context words present a much more serious 
problem. Current linguistic theory does not have 
treatments of words like previously or already, in 
terms of how these scope in dialogues. On some oc- 
casions, these are used to refer to the immediately 
prior query only, whereas on other occasions they 
- 121  - 
might scope back to the beginning of the dialogue. 
In addition, words like more or another present new 
problems for discourse theory in that they require x- 
tensional representations of answers: Given the query 
Give me 10 paintingsfollowedby Now give me 5 more 
paintings, the system has to retain an extensional rep- 
resentation of the answer set generated to the first 
query, if it is to respond appropriately to the second 
one. Otherwise it will not have a record of precisely 
which 10 paintings were originally selected, so that 
these can be excluded from the second set. This ex- 
tensional record would have to be incorporated into 
the discourse model. 
One solution to the dual problems presented by 
context words is again to either finesse the use of such 
words or to use a mixed media interface of NL and 
graphics. If users had the answers to previous queries 
presented on screen, then the problems of determin- 
ing the reference set for phrases like the paintings al. 
ready mentioned could be solved by allowing the users 
to click on previous answer sets using a mouse, thus 
avoiding the need for reference resolution. 
For the references to the information source, 
it would not be difficult to modify the system so 
it could analyse the majority of the the specific in- 
stances recorded here, but it is not clear that all of 
them could have been solved in this way, especially 
those that require some form of inferencing based on 
the database structure. 
There are also a number of unknown words in the 
data that have not been discussed here, because these 
did not directly arise from the fact that our users were 
carrying out a task. Nevertheless, the set of strate- 
gies given above is also relevant o these. Just as 
with the task specific words, there are a number of 
words which can be added to the system with rel- 
atively little effort. The system can be modified to 
cope with the majority of the open class unknown 
words, e.g. common nouns, adjectives, and verbs, 
many of which are simple omissions from the domain- 
specific lexicon. Some of the closed class words such 
as prepositions and personal pronouns may also prove 
straightforward to add. 
There are also a number of these words which did 
not arise from the task, which are more difficult to 
add to the system. This is true for a few the open 
class words domain-independent words, including ad- 
jectives like same and different. The majority of the 
closed class words, may also be difficult to add to 
the system, including superlatives and various logi- 
cal connectives, then, neither, some quantifiers, e.g. 
only, as well as words which relate to the control of 
dialogue such as right and o.k.. These words indi- 
cate genuine gaps in the coverage of the system. For 
these difficult words, it might necessary to finesse the 
problem of direct analysis. 
In conclusion, the WOZ technique proved success- 
ful for NL evaluation. We identified 3 classes of 
task based language use which have been neglected 
by other evaluation methodologies. We believe that 
these classes exist across applications and tasks: For 
any combination ofapplication and task, specific op- 
erators will emerge, and support will have to be pro- 
vided to enable reference to context and information 
structure. In addition, we were able to suggest anum- 
ber of strategies for dealing with unknown words. For 
certain words, NL system modification can be easily 
achieved. For others, different strategies have to be 
employed which avoid direct analysis of these words. 
These finessing strategies are important if NL sys- 
tems are to usable in the short term. 
5 Acknowledgements  
Thanks to Lyn Walker, Derek Proudian, and David 
Adger for critical comments. 
References 
\[AdgS8\] 
\[BB84\] 
\[CPA82\] 
\[Dam81\] 
David Adger. Heuristic input redaction. 
Technical Report, Hewlett-Packard Lab- 
oratories, Bristol, 1988. 
Madeleine Bates and Robert J. Bobrow. 
What's here, what's coming, and who 
needs it. In Walter Reitman, editor, Ar- 
tificial Intelligence Applications for Busi- 
ness, pages 179-194, Ablex Publishing 
Corp, Norwood, N.J., 1984. 
Phillip R. Cohen, C. Raymond Perrault, 
and James F. Allen. Beyond question 
answering. In Wendy Lehnert and Mar- 
tin Ringle, editors, Strategies for Natu- 
ral Language Processing, pages 245-274, 
Lawrence Erlbaum Ass. Inc, Hillsdale, 
N.J., 1982. 
Fred J. Damerau. Operating statistics for 
the transformational question answering 
system. American Journal of Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 7:30-42, 1981. 
- 122 - 
\[FNSW87\] 
\[CM84\] 
\[aSBC86\] 
\[JTS*85\] 
\[Kra80\] 
\[McK84\] 
\[MilS1\] 
\[NP88\] 
\[Rei77\] 
\[RQR*88\] 
Daniel Fliekinger, John Nerbonne, Ivan 
Sag, and Thomas Wasow. Towards eval- 
uation of nip systems. 1987. Presented 
to the 25th Annual Meeting of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics. 
G. Guida and G. Mauri. A formal ba- 
sis for performance evaluation of natural 
language understanding systems. Amer- 
ican Journal of Computational Linguis- 
tics, 10:15-29, 1984. 
Raymonde Guindon, P. Sladky, H. Brun- 
ner, and J. Conner. The structure of 
user-adviser dialogues: is there method 
in their madness? In Proc. 24st An- 
nual Meeting of the ACL, Association 
of Computational Linguistics, pages 224- 
230, 1986. 
Matthias Jarke, Jon A. Turner, Ed- 
ward A. Stohr, Yannis Vassiliou, Nor- 
man H. White, and Ken Michielsen. A 
field evaluation of natural anguage for 
data retrieval. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, SE-11, No.1:97- 
113, 1985. 
Jurgen Kranse. Natural anguage access 
to information systems: an evaluation 
study of its acceptance byend users. In- 
formation Systems, 5:297-318, 1980. 
Kathleen R. MeKeown. Natural language 
for expert systems: comparisons with 
database systems. In COLING84: Proc. 
lOth International Conference on Compu- 
tational Linguistics. Stanford University, 
Stanford, Ca., pages 190-193, 1984. 
L. A. Miller. Natural anguage program- 
ming: styles, strategies and contrasts. 
IBM Systems Journal, 20:184- 215, 1981. 
John Nerbonne and Derek Proudian. The 
HPNL System Report. Technical Re- 
port STL-88-11, Hewlett-Packard Labo- 
ratories, Palo Alto, 1988. 
Phyllis Reisner. Use of psychological ex- 
perimentation as an aid to development 
of a query language. IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, SE-3, No.3:219- 
229, 1977. 
W. Read, A. Quiliei, J. Reeves, M. Dyer, 
and E. Baker. Evaluating natural an- 
guage systems: a sourcebook approach. 
\[SF77\] 
\[Ste88\] 
\[sw83\] 
\[Ten79\] 
\[Tho80\] 
\[ww891 
In COLING88: Proc. l~th International 
Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics, Budapest, Hungary, 1988. 
C. Snow and C. A. Ferguson. Talking 
to children. Cambridge University Press, 
1977. 
Phil Stenton. Natural Language: a 
snapshot aken from ISC January 1988. 
Technical Report HPL-BRC-TR-88-022, 
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Bristol, 
U.K., 1988. 
Duane W. Small and Linda J. Weldon. 
An experimental comparison of natural 
and structured query languages. Human 
Factors, 25(3):253-263, 1983. 
Harry R. Tennant. Evaluation of Natural 
Language Processors. PhD thesis, Uni- 
versity of Illinois Urbana, 1979. 
Bozena Henisz Thompson. Linguis- 
tic analysis of natural language com- 
munication with computers. In COL- 
ING80: Proc. 8th International Con- 
ference on Computational Linguistics. 
Tokyo, pages 190-201, 1980. 
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 
When Natural Language is Better than 
Menus: A Field Study. Technical Re- 
port, Hewlett Packard Laboratories, Bris- 
tol, England, 1989. 
- 123-  
