LEXICAL  ACQUIS IT ION IN THE 
CORE LANGUAGE ENGINE 
David M. Carter 
SRI International Cambridge Research Centre 
23 Millers Yard, Mill Lane 
Cambridge CB2 1RQ, U.K. 
Keywords:  computational lexicography; lexical acquisition 
ABSTRACT 
The SRI Core Language Engine (CLE) is 
a general-purpose natural anguage front 
end for interactive systems. It trans- 
lates English expressions into representa- 
tions of their literal meanings. This paper , 
presents the lexical acquisition component 
of the CLE, which allows the creation of 
lexicon entries by users with knowledge of 
the application domain but not of linguis- 
tics or of the detailed workings of the sys- 
tem. It is argued that the need to cater 
for a wide range of types of back end leads 
naturally to an approach based on elic- 
iting grammaticality judgments from the 
user. This approach, which has been used 
to define a 1200-word core lexicon of En- ? 
glish, is described and evaluated. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The SRI Core Language Engine (CLE; A1- 
shawi et al 1988a,b) is a domain indepen- 
dent system for translating English sen- 
tences into formal representations of their 
literal meanings which are capable of sup- 
porting reasoning. It is designed to be 
used as a major component of interac- 
tive advisor systems uch as interfaces to 
database management systems and diag- 
nostic expert systems. The main contri- 
bution of the CLE is intended to be sub- 
stantial coverage of English constructions 
in both syntax and semantics that is well 
motivated and hence extensible. 
The CLE makes use of three main types 
of lexicon entry. 
A syntactic entry for a word consists 
of one or more complex categories, 
each specified by a principal category 
symbol augmented by a set of con- 
straints on the values of syntactic fea- 
tures. Such categories also appear 
in the CLE's grammar, and match- 
ing and merging of the information 
encoded in them carried out by unifi- 
cation during parsing. 
Word sense entries for words are 
specified in the same way, but involve 
semantic as well as syntactic features. 
Semantic interpretation, which takes 
place in tandem with parsing, works 
by unification of feature values in 
word sense entries and semantic in- 
terpretation rules. 
Sortal (selectional) restrictions are 
defined for logical form predicates 
(i.e. word senses). After possi- 
ble semantic interpretations are con- 
structed, the CLE applies these re- 
strictions with reference to a user- 
definable hierarchy of sortal classes, 
to reject any interpretations in which 
the sort expected by some argument 
- 137  - 
of a predicate is inconsistent with 
that of the object filling that argu- 
ment. 
The CLE lexical acquisition tool VEX 
(for Vocabulary EXpander) allows the cre- 
ation of CLE lexicon entries by users with 
knowledge both of English and of the ap- 
plication domain, but not of linguistic the- 
ory or of the way lexical entries are rep- 
resented in the CLE. It asks the user for 
information on the grammaticality of ex- 
ample sentences, and for selectional re- 
strictions on arguments of predicates, and 
writes to disc a set of instructions that can 
immediately be used by the CLE to cre- 
ate appropriate lexical entries automati- 
cally in main memory. 
2 THE TASK OF LEX ICAL  
ACQUIS IT ION 
VEX's task is to aid in the creation of lexi- 
' cal entries that will allow the CLE to map 
certain English expressions into appropri- 
ate logical form predicates. These predi- 
cates are expected then to receive further 
application-specific processing. A crucial 
factor in designing VEX was that virtu- 
ally no assumptions can be made about 
the nature of this subsequent processing 
or about the representations, if any, into 
which predicates will be mapped; indeed, 
the main use of VEX so far, one which sug- 
gests its viability, has been to construct 
the CLE's 1200-word core lexicon, which 
is intended to be application-independent. 
This situation contrasts with that ob- 
taining in, for example, the TEAM system 
(Grosz et al 1987). Whereas the CLE is 
intended to interface to a range of back 
end systems, TEAM was designed specifi- 
cally as a front end for databases of a par- 
ticular kind. This means that lexical ac- 
quisition in TEAM is essentially a matter 
of determining the English counterparts 
of particular database relations, and that 
the possibilities for word behaviours are 
constrained by the kinds of relations that 
exist. Furthermore, TEAM's coverage of 
verb subcategorization is rather more lim- 
ited than that of the CLE. Thus TEAM is 
able to allow the user to volunteer a sen- 
tence from which, with the help of some 
hard-wired auxiliary questions, it infers 
the syntactic and semantic haracteristics 
of the way a verb and its arguments map 
into the database. 
However, because of the CLE's wide 
syntactic overage and the lack of con- 
straints from any known application, it 
is too risky to allow the user to volun- 
teer sentences to VEX. Instead, VEX it- 
self presents example sentences to the user 
and asks whether or not they are accept- 
able. In addition, the logical forms pro- 
duced are of a fairly neutral, conserva- 
tive nature, and correspond one-to-one to 
the individual surface syntactic subcate- 
gorization(s) that are identified; for exam- 
ple, related usages like the transitive and 
intransitive uses of "break" ("John broke 
the window" vs. "The window broke") will 
be mapped onto different predicates, leav- 
ing it to the back end to make whatever it
needs to of the relationship between them. 
Thus apart from eliciting selectional re- 
strictions, virtually all of VEX's process- 
ing is done at the level of syntax. 
3 THE STRATEGY ADOPTED 
VEX adopts a copy and edit strategy in 
constructing lexical entries. It is provided 
with pointers to entries in a "paradigm" 
lexicon for a number of representative 
word usages and declarative knowledge of 
the range of sentential contexts in which 
these usages can occur. For example, it 
knows that a phrasal verb such as "rely 
on" that takes a compulsory prepositional 
phrase complement can be the main verb 
- 138  - 
in a sentence of the form "np verb prep 
np" (e.g. "John relies on Mary") but not 
in one of the form "np verb np preI\]' 
(e.g. *"John relies Mary on"). Entries 
in the paradigm lexicon are distinguished 
not only by the type and number of argu- 
ments they take, but also by phenomena 
such as "tough-movement", subject rais- 
ing and equi-NP deletion. VEX elicits 
grammaticality judgments from the user 
to determine which paradigm (or set of 
paradigms) occurs in the same contexts 
as the word being defined, and then con- 
structs the new entries by making substi- 
tutions in these paradigm entries. Each 
use of a paradigm will give rise to one dis- 
tinct predicate. 
An alternative to this copy and edit 
strategy would be a more detailed, know- 
ledge-based method in which VEX was 
equipped with knowledge of the function 
of every feature and other construct in the 
representation, and asked the user ques- 
tions in order to build entries in a bottom- 
up fashion. However, such an approach 
has several drawbacks. 
The complexity of the representation 
would make a bottom-up approach un- 
wieldy and time-consuming, both for the 
builder of VEX ana for the user, who 
would have to answer an inordinately ong 
list of questions for every new entry. Fur- 
thermore, interaction at the level of indi- 
vidual inguistic features would allow gen- 
uinely novel entries to be created, which, 
given that the user is a non-linguist, Would 
almost certainly lead to inconsistencies. 
In addition, endowing VEX directly with 
knowledge of the representation would 
mean that as the representation devel- 
oped, VEX would continually have to be 
updated. 
The copy and edit approach, on the 
other hand, makes VEX independent of 
most changes to the representation. Fur- 
thermore, the fact that its knowledge is 
specified at the level of word behaviours, 
means that as the CLE's coverage in- 
creases, modifications to this knowledge 
are easy to make. It also makes robust 
and (relatively) succinct interaction with 
the user easier to achieve. 
4 ASSUMPTIONS BEHIND 
THE STRATEGY 
The appropriateness of VEX's strategy 
depends on a number of assumptions, in- 
cluding the following. 
Firstly, it assumes that the syntac- 
tic behaviours of arbitrary words are de- 
scribable in terms of a fixed, manageably 
small set of paradigms. The alternative 
view, which has been argued for by Gross 
(1975), is that in fact every word is in some 
way idiosyncratic. I offer no counterargu- 
ments to that position here, but merely 
observe that as far as copy-and-edit lexi- 
cal acquisition is concerned, it is a counsel 
of despair; if every word has its peculiari- 
ties, then every lexical entry must be con- 
structed from scratch by a trained linguist 
(either by hand or using a bottom-up lex- 
ical acquisition tool of the kind dismissed 
above for use by non-linguists). VEX's 
approach, on the other hand, can be ex- 
pected to work if the approzimate regular- 
ities that undoubtedly do exist are strong 
enough that the exceptions will not cause 
major problems, and this indeed seems to 
be the case for open class words. VEX 
does not attempt o deal with closed class 
words, as these are more idiosyncratic, 
and in any case are few enough for entries 
to be written for them by hand as part of 
the development of the CLE. 
Secondly, however, even once we accept 
the use of a finite paradigm set, there is 
the question of what those paradigms are. 
One might at first think that paradigms 
would be represented by "typical" tran- 
- 139  - 
sitive verbs, count nouns and so on; but 
in fact, such typical words are very hard 
to find, because in practice almost every 
word has a range of behaviours that it 
shares with various other words. If we 
imagine an ideal hand-coded lexicon for 
the whole language, then the entry for a 
word will consist of a set of categories, 
each of which allows a number of syn- 
tactic patterns of use. The mappings be- 
tween words and categories, and between 
categories and patterns, are both many- 
to-many; indeed, one category may allow 
the same set of patterns as a collection of 
other categories by virtue of leaving un- 
specified a feature value which the other 
categories collectively enumerate. 
We define a paradigm as any mini- 
mal non-empty intersection of entries, or, 
equivalently, as any maximal set of cate- 
gories with the same distribution among 
entries. That is, every category in a 
paradigm will occur in exactly the same 
set of entries in the ideal lexicon as every 
other category (if any) in that paradigm; 
and every entry will be a disjoint union of 
paradigms. The reason this "grain size" 
for paradigms is correct is as follows. Any 
smaller grain size would result in some 
pairs of paradigms always occurring to- 
gether in entries, thereby multiplying the 
number of distinct predicate names and 
losing generality. A larger grain size, how- 
ever, would mean that some words either 
could not be assigned a consistent set of 
paradigms, or would be assigned the same 
category more than once, leading to spu- 
rious multiple analyses. 
The third assumption on which VEX's 
strategy is based is that judgments of 
grammaticality are to a large extent 
shared between speakers of the language 
and tend to be absolute, binary ones. Ex- 
perience has shown, however, that dif- 
ferent users have different intuitions, and 
even the same user can give different an- 
swers on different occasions. To deal with 
this problem, if VEX receives a set of judg- 
ments from which it cannot form a con- 
sistent paradigm set, it offers the user a 
choice of ways in which he can change his 
mind; this process of negotiation usually 
arrives at a satisfactory conclusion. The 
user can also choose to backtrack at any 
time. 
In any case, although grammaticality 
judgments are sometimes variable and 
indeterminate, they are much less so 
than judgments of semantic acceptabil- 
ity, which do not play any part in VEX's 
main decision-making process. In or- 
der to remind the user to judge gram- 
maticality rather than semantic well- 
formedness, VEX presents example sen- 
tences containing "nonsense nouns" such 
as "thingummy" and "whatsit". 
5 EL IC IT ING SYNTACTIC  
INFORMATION 
The algorithm for defining a new word or 
phrase specified by the user is as described 
here; an example of its operation follows. 
First, the user is asked for the part(s) of 
speech of the new item (noun, verb, etc; 
no further grammatical knowledge is as- 
sumed). The rest of the definition pro- 
cess takes place separately for each part 
of speech. VEX majors on verb and 
adjective definitions, and knows about 
only very gross distinctions between oun 
types (e.g. count vs. mass nouns), because 
other distinctions, notably that between 
relational and non-relational nouns, ar- 
guably have as much to do with pragm_at- 
ics as with syntax and are therefore left 
for later back-end processing to deal with. 
After determining any irregular inflec- 
tional forms, VEX elicits grammaticality 
judgments from the user. In the most 
recently released version of the system, 
140- 
VEX knows about 52 different paradigms 
and their grammaticality in the context of 
52 different sentential patterns. 1 Its task 
is to discover the behaviour of the new 
word or phrase by presenting as few ex- 
ample sentences to the user as possible, 
and then to find the minimal subset of 
the paradigms that between them account 
for that behaviour. The sets of paradigms 
and sentences are progressively reduced as 
follows. 
? Paradigms for a different part of 
speech or number of words from those of 
the new phrase are eliminated. 
? VEX removes entence patterns which 
either do not correspond to any surviving 
paradigms, or whose grammaticality can 
be deduced from that of other patterns in 
the subset. For example: if sentence pat- 
tern S1 is grammatical when (and only 
when) a word or phrase with paradigm 
P1 is inserted in it; sentence pattern $2 
is grammatical only for paradigm P2; and 
sentence pattern $3 is grammatical only 
for P1 and P2: then there is no point 
in presenting $3 to the user if S1 and 
$2 are also to be presented, because $3 
will be grammatical when and only when 
either S1 or $2 (or both) are grammati- 
cal. Thus VEX orders the candidate sen- 
tence patterns according to the number 
of paradigms associated with them, and 
eliminates from the resulting list any pat- 
terns whose paradigm set is exactly the 
union of those of one or more later items. 
? The remaining sentence patterns, 
with forms of the item being defined sub- 
stituted in, are presented to the user, who 
states which of them are grammatical. Be- 
cause the number of possible word be- 
haviours is quite large, up to 18 sentences 
may be presented in this way; instead of 
immediately making a full choice, there- 
fore, VEX allows the user to make a par- 
1The equality of these numbers i coincidental. 
tial choice, and will then provide further 
guidance by specifying what paradigms 
might be implied by that choice, and what 
other sentences would need to be judged 
grammatical for those paradigms to be ac- 
ceptable. 
? Some of the user's approved sentences 
may be "false positives" in the sense that 
they are grammatical only by virtue of 
resulting from another grammatical sen- 
tence by an operation such as pronominal- 
ization or addition of an optional preposi- 
tional phrase. VEX detects any such sen- 
tence pairs and eliminates false positives, 
sometimes with reference to the user's an- 
swer to a yes/no question about any im- 
plications holding between the sentences. 
? VEX then tries to find a minimal set 
of paradigms which, together, occur in all 
and only the contexts the user has marked 
as grammatical. At this point, one of the 
following occurs: 
(a) There is exactly one minimal set. 
This set is accepted, and VEX moves on 
to consider semantic aspects of the new 
entry (see section 7 below). 
(b) There are no minimal sets, because 
every set of paradigms that together al- 
lows the sentences the user has said are 
grammatical also allows a sentence that 
was (by implication) judged ungrammat- 
ical. This occurs quite often because 
users frequently ignore sentences, mis- 
read them, or simply have different in- 
tuitions on them from those embodied in  
the CLE's data. VEX responds by asking 
the user to accept one of several additions 
to, or deletions from, the grammatical set. 
The user may either accept a revision or 
reconsider his assumptions and backtrack 
to some earlier point in the dialogue. The 
backtracking mechanism is in fact avail- 
able throughout a VEX session, and al- 
lows the user to restart the dialogue from 
a range of earlier points. 
- 141  - 
(c) There are several minimal sets of 
the same size. In this case, VEX prefers 
less ambiguous ets, i.e. those that min- 
imize the number of occasions that two 
paradigms in the set both account for the 
grammaticality of a sentence (and hence 
could lead to apparent ambiguity in pars- 
ing). If this does not select a unique 
paradigm set, VEX chooses a set at ran- 
dom and warns the user of the conflict; 
such conflicts almost always result from 
VEX being unable to separate two distinct 
behaviours for a phrase, a situation which 
can be remedied by the user presenting 
the behaviours to VEX in two separate 
dialogues. 
6 AN EXAMPLE 
Suppose the user wishes to define the 
phrasal verb "use up". After morpholog- 
ical information has been supplied, VEX 
presents the following list of sentences: 
I The thingummy used up. 
2 The thingummy used the whatsit 
up. 
3 The whatsit was used up by the 
thingummy. 
4 The thingummy used the boojum 
up very good. 
5 The boojum was used up the 
whatsit by the thingummy. 
6 The whatsit was used up for the 
boojumby the thingummy. 
7 The thingummy used up existing. 
8 The thingummy used up the whatsit 
that the boojum existed. 
% The whatsit was used up by the 
thingummy to exist. 
and invites the user to specify which ones 
are grammatical in the domain in ques- 
tion. The user would approve sentences 2, 
3 and 9 only. VEX then considers the pos- 
sibility that, because sentence 3 is gram- 
matical, sentence 9 is grammatical only 
when "to exist" is an optional modifier. 
This is in fact the case. It asks the user: 
Does "the whatsit was used up by 
the thingummy to exist" 
necessarily imply 
"the whatsit was used up by the 
thingummy IN ORDER TO exist"7 
When the user answers affirmatively, sen- 
tence 9 is dropped from consideration. 
(Contrast the case of "call on", where 
"The board called on the chairman to re- 
sign" can mean something quite different 
from "The board called on the chairman 
in order to resign"). 
VEX now has enough information to de- 
cide that "use up" behaves yntactically 
as a transitive particle verb. 
7 EL IC IT ING SEMANTIC  
INFORMATION 
Once a set of paradigms has been estab- 
lished, VEX asks for a name for the pred- 
icate corresponding to each one, and then 
for sortal restrictions on the predicate and 
its arguments. Sortal restrictions may be 
given to VEX directly as a list (interpreted 
conjunctively) of atoms occurring in the 
sort hierarchy currently in force, or indi- 
rectly as a pointer to sortal restrictions 
on another predicate or one of its argu- 
ments. If an explicit list is provided, they 
are checked for existence in the sort hi- 
erarchy currently in force and for mutual 
consistency in terms of that hierarchy (e.g. 
the list "male female" would normally be 
rejected), but no check is made for the 
existence of other predicates referred to, 
since these may not yet have been defined 
or incorporated into the system. 
VEX allows ~he user to specify any 
number of alternative sets of restrictions 
on a predicate. However, the use of more 
than one set is discouraged, because if the 
- 142  - 
alternative r strictions are assigned to dis- 
tinct predicates then the CLE will be able 
to provide the back-end system with more 
information than would otherwise be pos- 
sible. 
8 FURTHER PROCESSING 
When selectional restrictions have been 
acquired, VEX writes out to disc a set 
of "implicit" lexical entries. Implicit lex- 
ical entries are instructions interpreted 
by CLE code that makes substitutions, 
for words and predicate names, in en- 
tries for the paradigms that VEX knows 
about. The results of these substitutions 
are explicit, feature-based entries, which 
are then compiled directly into the for- 
mat used by the parser itself. Both ex- 
pansion and compilation happen automat- 
ically and are hidden from the user; thus 
as soon as a word is defined with VEX, it 
can be used in an input sentence. 
The are three main advantages in in- 
troducing this "implicit" level of represen- 
tation. Firstly, implicit entries are much 
smaller than explicit and compiled ones, 
which results in considerable saving of 
space since the latter are only generated 
on demand. Secondly, if the paradigm en- 
tries are later changed, for example be- 
cause of developments in the feature sys- 
tem, existing implicit entries will usually 
not need to be altered; their explicit and 
compiled forms will automatically come 
to reflect those of the paradigm entries 
when the system is recompiled. This has 
occurred many times during the develop- 
ment of the CLE. Thirdly, implicit entries 
are also rather shorter than explicit ones 
and are therefore asier to edit by hand 
where desired. Hand editing is appropri- 
ate on those occasions when VEX has not 
quite produced the desired results, either 
because of peculiarities in the phrase be- 
ing defined, or more commonly because 
the user changes his mind about what de- 
tailed responses to VEX are appropriate 
(for example, changing a predicate name) 
and does not wish to redefine the phrase 
from scratch. It can also be useful if, for 
example, the sort hierarchy is extended af- 
ter some entries have been defined, and it 
is necessary to update the sortal restric- 
tions on those entries to take full advan- 
tage of the extension. 
9 SUMMARY AND 
CONCLUSIONS 
The application-independence of the CLE 
leads to a style of lexical acquisition differ- 
ent from that of earlier, dedicated natural- 
language front ends. I have argued for a 
technique based on a limited number of 
syntactic paradigms, a subset of which are 
selected for the construction ofnew entries 
according to the user's judgments of sen- 
tence grammaticality. This allows the lex- 
ical acquisition component to avoid strong 
dependencies on the CLE's linguistic rep- 
resentation, the application domain, the 
nature of the back end system, or the 
user's knowledge of linguistics. 
VEX's concentration on syntac- 
tic paradigms allows a wide range of sub- 
categorization types to be recognised and 
dealt with, and also permits a non-trivial 
lexicon to be easily maintained while the 
system is under development. The use of 
VEX to define the CLE's 1200 word core 
lexicon is evidence for the practicality of 
the approach. 
The crucial factor in evaluating VEX, 
however, is its acceptability to the non- 
linguist (but application-expert) users for 
whom it was designed. No formal evalua- 
tion of this has been carried out, but in- 
formal feedback from members of the com- 
panies to whom a version of the CLE was 
delivered in the summer of 1988 has been 
- 143 - 
generally positive. It appears that, once 
they have studied the annotated VEX ses- 
sion transcript distributed with the CLE 
documentation, those who have so far 
used the system have had no great dif- 
ficulty with the idea of using nonsense 
words or with concepts uch as grammat- 
icality and paradigms. 
Perhaps the most difficult task faced by 
the VEX user is to decide which of the sen- 
tences presented are grammatical; how- 
ever, this task is significantly eased by the 
possibility of backtracking, by the consis- 
tency checker, and by the partial choice 
facility, all of which were implemented in
response to comments by users of earlier 
versions of the system. The difficulties 
that remain seem largely due to the fact 
that the CLE is intended to be usable in as 
wide as possible a range of hardware and 
software nvironments, o that the inter- 
face cannot assume any graphical facilities 
such as cursor-addressable displays. Were 
such facilities to be available, the system 
could provide step-by-step feedback on the 
consequences of individual grammaticality 
judgments. 
The fact that VEX is not specific to any 
one application domain or type of back- 
end system, and is relatively loosely cou- 
pled to the internal characteristics of the 
CLE, means that the techniques it em- 
bodies should in principle be applicable to 
(even if not always optimal or sufficient in) 
a wide range of natural anguage process- 
ing contexts. Indeed, it might be possible 
to produce a version of VEX with clearly- 
defined interfaces at morphological, syn- 
tactic and semantic levels that could sim- 
ply be "plugged in" to a range of existing 
systems to provide them with a lexical ac- 
quisition capability. 
10 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Development of the CLE has been carried 
out as part of a research programme in 
natural anguage processing supported by 
the UK Department ofTrade and Industry 
under Alvey grant ALV/PRJ/IKBS/105 
and by members of the NATTIE consor- 
tium (British Aerospace, British Telecom, 
Hewlett Packard, ICL, Olivetti, Philips, 
Shell Research, and SRI). I would like to 
thank the CLE development team, and 
various members of the consortium orga- 
nizations, for valuable criticisms and sug- 
gestions. 
11 REFERENCES 
Alshawi, Hiyan, David M. Carter, Jan van 
Eijck, Robert C. Moore, Douglas B. 
Moran, Fernando C.N. Pereira, Arnold 
G. Smith and Steve G. Pulman. 1988a. 
Interim Report on the SRI Core Lan- 
guage Engine. Report CCSRC-005, 
SRI International Cambridge Research 
Centre, Cambridge, England. 
Alshawi, Hiyan, David M. Carter, Jan van 
Eijck, Robert C. Moore, Douglas B. 
Moran and Steve G. Pulman. 1988b. 
Overview of the Core Language En- 
gine. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Fifth Generation Com- 
puter Systems, Tokyo, pp. 1108-1115; 
also Report CCSRC-008, SRI Inter- 
national Cambridge Research Centre, 
Cambridge, England. 
Gross, Maurice. 1975. M~thodes en Syn- 
taze, Hermann, Paris. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Douglas E. Ap- 
pelt, Paul Martin, and Fernando C.N. 
Pereira. 1987. TEAM: An Experiment 
in the Design of Transportable Natural- 
Language Interfaces. Artificial Intelli- 
gence, 32:173-243. 
- 144-  
