USING PLAUSIBLE INFERENCE RULES IN 
DESCRIPTION PLANNING 
Alison Cawsey* 
Computer  Laboratory ,  Univers i ty  of  Cambr idge  
New Museum~ Site, Pembroke  St, Cambr idge ,  Eng land .  
ABSTRACT 
Current approaches to generating multi-sentence t xt 
fail to consider what the user may infer from the dif- 
ferent statements in a description. This paper presents 
a system which contains an explicit model of the infer- 
ences that people may make from different statement 
types, and uses this model, together with assumptions 
about the user's prior knowledge, to pick the most ap- 
propriate sequence of utterances for achieving a given 
communicative goal. 
INTRODUCTION 
Examples, analogies and class identification are 
used in many explanations and descriptions. Yet 
current ext generation techniques all fail to tackle 
the problem of when an example, analogy or class 
is appropriate, what example, analogy or class is 
best, and exactly what the user may infer from 
a given example, analogy or class. McKeown, for 
example, in her identification schema (given in fig- 
ure 1) includes the 'rhetorical predicates' identi- 
fication (as an instance of some class), analogy, 
particular.illustration and attributive (McKeown, 
1985). From each of these, different information 
could be inferred by the user. In a human expla- 
nation they might be used to efficiently convey a 
great deal of information about the object, or to 
reinforce some information about an object so it 
may be better ecalled. Yet in McKeown's chema 
based approach the only mechanism for selecting 
between these different explanation options is the 
*This work was carried out while the author was at the  
department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Edin- 
burgh, funded by a post doctoral fellowship from the Science 
and Engineering Research Council. Thanks to Ehud Re- 
iter, Paul Brna and to the anonymous reviewers for helpful 
comments .  
Identification (class &: attribute/function) 
(Analogy/Constituence/At tributive/Renaming/ 
Amplification}* 
Particular-Illustration/Evidence+ 
{ Amplification/Analogy/At tributive) 
{Particular-Illustration/Evidence) 
Note: '()' indicates optionality, '/ '  alternatives, '+' 
that item may appear 1-n times, '*' 0-n times. 
Figure 1: McKeown's identification schema 
\[McKeown 851 
initial pool of knowledge available to be conveyed, 
and focus rules, which just enforce some local co- 
herence on the discourse. A particular example or 
analogy could perhaps be selected using the func- 
tions interfacing the rhetorical predicates to the do- 
main knowledge base, but this is not discussed in 
the theory. 
More recently, Moore has included examples, 
analogies etc. in her text planner (Moore, 
1990). She includes planning operators to deseribe- 
by-superclass, describe-by-abstraction, describe-by- 
ezample, describe-by-analogy and describe-by.parts- 
and.use. Two of these are illustrated in figure 2. 
But again there are no principled ways of selecting 
which strategy to use (beyond, for example, possi- 
bly selecting an analogy if the analogous concept 
is known), and the effect of each strategy is th~ 
same - that the relevant concept is 'known'. In re- 
ality, of course, the detailed effects of the different 
strategies on the hearer'e knowledge will be very 
different, and will depend on their prior knowl- 
119 - 
(def ine-text-p lan-operator  
:NAME describe-by-example 
:EFFECT (BEL ?hearer (CONCEPT ?concept)) 
:CONSTRAINTS (AND (ISA ?concept OBJECT) 
(IMMEDIATE-SUBCLASS 
?example ?concept)) 
:NUCLEUS ((FORALL ?example 
(ELABORATE-C0NCEPT-EXA~,~LE 
?concept ?example))) 
:SATELLITES n i l )  
( def ins - text  -plan- operat or 
: NAME descrlbe-by-analogy 
:EFFECT (BEL ?hearer CCONCEPT ?concept)) 
: CONSTRAINTS 
(AND (ISA ?concept OBJECT) 
(ANALOGOUS-CONCEPT 
?analogy-concept ?concept) 
(BEL ?hearer (CONCEPT 
?analogy-concept) ) 
:NUCLEUS (INFORM ?speaker ?hearer 
(SIMILAR ?concept 
?analogy- concept) ) 
:SATELLITES ((CONTRAST ?concept 
?analogy-concept)))) 
Figure 2: Moore's example and analogy text plan- 
ning operators 
edge. Failing to take this into account results in 
possible incoherent dialogues which don't address 
the speaker's real communicative goals. 
The rest of this paper will present an approach to 
the problem of selecting between different state- 
ment  types in a description, based on a set of in- 
' ference rules for guessing what the hearer could 
infer given a particular statement. These guesses 
are used to guide the choice of examples, analo- 
gies, class identification and attributes given par- 
ticular goals, and influence how the user model is 
updated after these kinds of statements are used. 
The paper first describes the overall framework for 
explanation generation. This is followed by a brief 
discussion of the inference rules and knowledge rep- 
resentation used, and a number of examples where 
the system is used to generate leading descriptions 
of bicycles. The approach is intended to be comple- 
mentary to existing approaches which emphasise 
the coherence of the text, and could reasonable be 
combined with these. 
OUTL INE OF 
'PLANNER'  
EXPLANATION 
The system described below 1 aims to show how 
plausible inference rules may be used to guide ex- 
planation planning given different communicative 
goals. The basic approach is to find some set of 
possible utterances, and select the one which - as- 
suming that the user makes certain plausible in- 
ferences - contributes most to the stated commu- 
nicative goal. This process is repeated until some 
terminating condition is met, such as the commu- 
nicative goal being satisfied. 
This explanation 'planning' strategy is a kind of 
heuristic search, using a modified best-first search 
strategy. The search space consists of the space of 
all possible utterance sequences, and the heuris- 
tic scoring function assesses how far each utter- 
ance would contribute to the communicative goal. 
Because this gives a potentially very large search 
space, only certain utterances are considered at 
each point. Currently these are constrained to be 
those which appear to make some contribution to 
the communicative goal - for example, the system 
might consider describing an object as an instance 
of some class if that class had some attributes 
which contributed to the target state. These pos- 
sible utterances are then scored by using the plau- 
sible inference rules to predict what might reason- 
ably be inferred by the user from this statement, 
given his current knowledge, and comparing that 
with the communicative goal. 
For example, if the communicative goal is for the 
user to have a positive impression of the object, and 
the system knows of some feature which the user 
believes is desirable in an object, then the system 
may select utterances which allow the user to plau- 
sibly infer this feature given their current assumed 
knowledge about this and other objects. 
The search space is defined by the range of possi- 
ble utterance types. Currently the following types 
(and associated plausible inference procedures) are 
allowed, where there may be many possible state- 
ments about a given object of each type: 
IReferred to from now on as the GIBBER system - Gen- 
erating Inference-Based Biased Explanatory Responses. 
120 - 
. The 
Identification, as an instance (or sub-class) of 
some class. 
Similarity, given some related object with 
many shared attributes 2. 
Examples, of instances or sub-classes, 
Attributes of that object. 
selection of possible utterances, and their scor- 
ing \[given the probable inferences which might be 
made) depends on the communicative goal set. In 
the current system, given some object to describe, 
two different ypes of communicative goal may be 
set. The system may either be given an explicit 
set of attribute values which should be inferrable 
from the generated escription, or it can be given 
a 'property' that the inferrable attributes hould 
have. This property can be, for example, that the 
user believes the attribute value to be a !desirable 
one, where an 'evaluation form' similar to Jame- 
son's (1983) is used to rate different values. Where 
a set of attribute values are given these Can be ei- 
ther specific values, or value ranges. 
This approach uses a set of rules which may be used 
to propose a possible move/statement (given the 
target/communicative goal), a set of rules which 
may be used to guess what would be inferred or 
learned from that statement, given the assumed 
current state of the user's knowledge, and a scor- 
ing function which assesses how far the 'guessed at' 
inferences would contribute to the target. State- 
ments are generated one at a time, with currently 3 
the only relation between the utterances being en- 
forced by the common overall communicative goal 
and by the fact that the statements are selected to 
incrementally update the user's model of the object 
described. 
Using plausible inference rules in this way is un- 
doubtedly error-prone, as assumptions about the 
user may be wrong and not all hearers will make 
the expected inferences. However, it is certainly 
better than ignoring these inferences entirely. So 
long as the user can ask follow-up questions in an 
explanatory dialogue (e.g., Cawsey, 1989; Moore, 
1990) any such errors are not crucial. 
~Note that full analogies, where a complex mapping is 
required between two conceptually distinct objects, are cur- 
rently not possible in the system. 
SAdding further coherences relations and global strate- 
gies may be the subject of further work. 
INFERENCE RULES AND 
KNOWLEDGE 
REPRESENTAT ION 
For this approach to text planning to be effective, 
the rules used for guessing what the reader might 
infer should correspond as far as possible to human 
plausible inference rules. There are a relatively 
small number of AI systems which attempt to 
model human plausible inferences {compared with 
those attempting tomodel efficient learning strate- 
gies in artificial situations). Zuckerman (1990) uses 
some simple plausible inference rules in her expla- 
nation system, in order to attempt o block in- 
correct plausible inferences, while a more compre- 
hensive model of human plausible reasoning is pro- 
vided by Collins and Michalski (1989). This latter 
theory is concerned with how people make plausible 
inferences given generalisation, specia|isation, sim- 
ilarity and dissimilarity relations between objects, 
using a large number of certainty parameters to in- 
fluence the inferences. The theory assumes a repre- 
sentation of human memory based on dynamic hi- 
erarchies, where, for example, given the statement 
colour(eyes( John)) fb lue then colour,  eyes, 
John and blue would all be objects in some hierar- 
chy. The theory is used to account for the plausible 
inferences made when people guess the answer to 
questions given uncertain knowledge. 
The GIBBER system uses inference rules some- 
what differently to Collins' and Michalski's. 
Whereas they are concerned with the competing 
inferences which may be made from existing knowl- 
edge to answer a single question, the GIBBER sys- 
tem is concerned with mutually supporting infer- 
ences from multiple given relationships in order 
to build up a picture of an object. So, although 
the basic knowledge representation a d relation- 
ship types (apart from dissimilarity) are borrowed 
from their work, the actual inference rules used are 
slightly different. 
It should be possible to use the inference rules to 
incrementally update a representation f what is 
currently known about an attribute, where gener- 
alisation, similarity and specialisation relationships 
may all contribute to the final 'conclusion'. In or- 
der to allow such incremental updates, the repre- 
sentation used in Mitchell's version space learn- 
ing algorithm is adopted (1977), where each at- 
tribute has a pointer to the most specific value 
that attribute could take, and to the most gen- 
121 - 
eral value, given current evidence. Positive ex- 
amples (or Oeneralisation relationships) are used 
to generallse the specific value (as in Mitchell's 
algorithm) 4 while class identification (specialisa- 
tion) is used to update the general value using 
the inherited attributes. Similarity transforms are 
done by first finding a common context for the 
transform (a common parent object), and then 
transferring those attributes which belong to that 
? context which are not ruled out by current evi- 
dence. Explicit statement of attribute values fix 
the attribute value, but further evidence may be 
used to increase the certainty of any value. 
The system also allows for other kinds of domain 
specific inference rules to be defined - for exam- 
ple, if a user has just been told that a bike has 
derailleur gears, a rule may be used to show that 
the user could probably guess that the bike had 
between 5 and 21 gears. The different kinds of in- 
ference rules are used to incrementally update the 
representation f the user's assumed knowledge of 
the object and the scoring function, discussed in 
the previous section, will compare that assumed 
knowledge of the object with the target. 
The knowledge representation is based on a frame 
hierarchy describing the objects in the domain, 
where the slot values may point to other objects, 
also in some hierarchy. In figure 4 a small section 
of a knowledge base of different kinds of bicycle 
is illustrated, along with some simple hierarchies 
of attribute values. In the GIBBER system sep- 
arate hierarchies are defined for the system's and 
for the user's assumed knowledge, where the latter 
is initialised from a user stereotype and updated 
following each query and explanation. 
Of course, the knowledge representation a d infer- 
ence rules described in this section are by no means 
definitive - there is no implied claim that people re- 
ally use these rules rather than others in learning 
from descriptions. They simply provide a start- 
ing point for exploring how explanation generation 
may take into account possible learning and infer- 
ence rules, and thus better select statements in a 
description given knowledge of the domain and of 
the user's knowledge. 
Partial Concept 
Hierarchy 
Attribute Hierarchies 
type(gears) 
Bicycle d ~ ~ u b  
no-of(gears)=l-21 no-of(wheels) = 2 shitnano-index 
O ~  \] ~n?'?i~gears) 
1-3 
m 
no-of(gears)=18-21 ~\ [  5-12 18-21 
weight --medium \ 
type(gears) =deraiUeur sports 
type~saddle) =anatomic weight=quite-light no-of(gears) = 5-12 
type\[tires) =knobby type(gears) =derailleur 
size(tires) =wide type(saddle) =narrow 
Cascade Trek-S00 
no-of(gears)=18 no-of(gears)=21 
type(gears) =shhnano-index type(gears)=shhnano-inde: 
weight=311b weight=311b 
7 
Alison's bike 
extras= \[mudguard,rack\] 
colour=black 
Figure 3: Partial Bicycle Hierarchies 
EXAMPLE DESCRIPT IONS 
This section will give two examples of how descrip- 
tions of bicycles may be generated using this ap- 
proach. We will assume that the system's knowl- 
edge includes the hierarchy given in figure 4, and 
(for simplification) the user's knowledge includes 
all the items except he 'Cascade', but includes the 
fact that Alison's bike has shimano indexed gears. 
The first example will show how the system will 
select utterances to economically convey informa- 
tion given some target attribute values, while the 
second will show how biased descriptions may be 
generated given a specification of the desired prop- 
erty of inferrable attributes. 
Suppose the user requests a description of the Cas- 
cade and that the communicative goal set by the 
system (by some other process) is to convey the 
following attributes: 
4Note that Collins' and Michalski's theory does not ap- 
pear to allow multiple xamples tobe used by generalising 
the inferred values. 
type_of(saddle) = anatomic 
type_of(tires) ffiknobby 
weight ~ 311b 
number_of(gears) ffi 18 
type_of(gears) ffi shimano_index 
- 122 - 
There are many possible statements which could 
be made about the Cascade. The user knows Ali- 
son's bike, so this example could be mentioned. It 
could be described as an instance of a mountain 
bike, or just as a bicycle; a comparison could be 
made with the Trek-800; or any one of the bikes 
attributes could be mentioned. In this case if it is 
identified as an instance of a mountain bike the sys- 
tem guesses that the user could infer the first two 
attributes, which gives the highest score given the 
target s. A comparison with the Trek-800 also gives 
two possible inferrable attributes, {though one in- 
correct value, which is currently allowed}, and this 
is the next choice. Finally the system informs the 
user of the number of gears, blocking the incorrect 
inference in the previous utterance. The resulting 
short description is the followingS: 
aThe Cascade is a kind of mountain bike. 
It is a bit like the Trek-800. 
It has 18 gears." 
If the scoring function is changed so that it is 
biased further towards highly certain inferences, 
rather than efficient presentation of information, 
then given the same communicative goal the de- 
scription may end up as an explicit list of all the 
attributes of the bike, or in a less extreme case, 
a class identification and three explicit attributes. 
This scoring function therefore allows for further 
variation in descriptions, given a communicative 
goal, and different scoring functions should be used 
depending on the type of description required. 
Suppose now that the same bike is to be described, 
but the communicative goal is that the user has 
a positive impression of the Cascade. If the user 
regards it to be good for a bike to be black with 21 
? shimano index gears then the following description 
will be generated. 
5The scoring function compares the plausibly inferred 
information with the target, preferring more certain infer- 
ences, and inferences bring the knowledge of the object 
closer to the target (given the attribute value hierarchy}. 
For example, an inference that the bike had 18-21 gears~ or 
an uncertain inference that it had 18, would be given a lower 
score than a certain inference that it had 18 gears. The to- 
tal score is the sum of the scores of each possibly inferred 
value. 
eOf course this description would be more coherent if a 
higher level cornpare-contra~t relation was used to generate 
the last two inferences, with resulting text: Ult is a bit like 
the Trek-800 but has 18 gears.". Allowing these higer level 
strategies within an inference-based approach is the subject 
of further work. 
aThe Cascade is a bit like the Trek-800. 
Alison's bike is a Cascade. 
The Cascade has Shimano Index Gears. ~ 
Here the system evaluates each statement by com- 
paring the plausible inferences against an evalua- 
tion form {Jameson, 1983). The evaluation form 
describes how far different attribute values are ap- 
preciated by different classes of user. Instead of 
comparing inferred values with some target at- 
tribute values the scoring function will score each 
against the evaluation form. For example, the first 
utterance (comparison with the Trek-800) is se- 
lected because the attributes which might be plau- 
sibly inferred from this statement by this user are 
rated highly on the evaluation form for that class 
of user. In this case the system assumes that this 
type of user will prefer a bike with a large number 
of indexed gears. Of course, one of the plausible in- 
ferences which can be made will be incorrect (the 
fact the Cascade has 21 gears). The system is not 
required to block such false inferences if they con- 
tribute to its goals {though the ethics of generating 
such leading descriptions might be doubted!). 
It should be clear f rom this that  the descr ipt ions 
generated by the system are very sensit ive to the 
assumpt ions  about  the user's pr ior  knowledge, and 
the inference rules and the scoring funct ion used, 
as well  as to the communicat ive  goal set. There 
is much poss ib i l i ty  for error (and further  research 
required) in each of these. However, the approach 
st i l l  seems to provide the potent ia l  for generat ing 
improveddescr ip t ions ,  and provides a new princi-  
pled way of mak ing  choices in a descr ipt ion which 
is absent, in schema-based (and RST-based) ap- 
proaches. It gives a simple example of how, given 
a model of how people update their beliefs, ut- 
terances may be strategically generated to change 
those beliefs. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper  has discussed how, by ant ic ipat ing the 
user 's  inferences, bet ter  exp lanat ions  may be gen- 
erated and assumpt ions  about  the user 's  knowledge 
updated  in a more pr inc ip led way. A l though there 
are problems with the approach  - par t i cu lar ly  the 
diff iculty of re l iably pred ict ing the user 's  inferences 
- it seems to provide a more pr inc ip led way of se- 
lect ing certain utterance types than existing multi- 
sentence 'text generation systems. Other question 
- 1 2 3  - 
answering systems have attempted to simulate the 
user's inferences in order to block false inferences 
(Joshi etal . ,  1984; Zuckerman, 1990), and par- 
ticular inferences have been considered in lexical 
choice (Reiter, 1990) and in generating narrative 
summaries (Cook et al, 1984). However, it has 
not been used previously as a general technique for 
selecting between different options in an descrip- 
tion. 
Considering what is implicitly conveyed in different 
types of description may also begin to explain some 
of the empirically derived results used in other sys- 
tems. For example, the GIBBER system generally 
chooses to begin a description with class identifi- 
cation or with a comparison, as most information 
may be inferred from these (compared with men- 
tioning specific attributes). This may be One of the 
principles influencing the organisation of the dis- 
course strategies developed by McKeown (1985). 
The general approach would also suggest hat ex- 
perts might prefer structural descriptions to pro- 
cess descriptions (Paris, 1988) because they can al- 
ready infer the process description from the struc- 
tural, the former therefore conveying more implicit 
information. 
By looking at possible plausible inferences when 
planning descriptions we attempt give a better so- 
lution to the problem of determining what to say 
given a particular communicative goal. The ap- 
proach has potential for generating more memo- 
rable descriptions, where different ypes of state- 
ment are used to re-inforce some information, as 
well showing us how to economically convey a great 
deal of information, where some of this information 
may be implicit. It does not provide a solution to 
the problem of determining how to structure this 
communicative content (considered in much other 
research), though we may find that by: consider- 
ing further how people incrementally learn from 
descriptions we may obtain better structured text. 
The prototype system has been fully implemented, 
but much further research is needed. The inference 
rules, user modelling and scoring functions need to 
be further developed, and other influences on text 
structure (such as focus and higher level rhetorical 
relations) incorporated into the overall model. 
REFERENCES 
Cawsey, Alison (1989), Generating Explanatory 
Discourse: A Plan-Based, Interactive Ap- 
proach, Unpublished PhD thesis, Department 
of Artificial Intelligence, University of Edin- 
burgh. 
Collins, Allan & Michalski, Ryssard (1989) The 
logic of plausible reasoning: A core theory. 
Cognitive Science, 14:1-49. 
Cook, Malcolm, E., Lehnert, Wendy, G. and Mc- 
Donald, David, D. (1984) Conveying Implicit 
Content in Narrative Summaries. In Proceed- 
ings of COLING-84, pages 5-7. 
Jameson, Anthony (1983), Impression monitoring 
in evaluation-oriented dialogue. In Proceed- 
ings of the 8th International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pages 616-620. 
Joshi, Aravind, Webber, Bonnie and Weiscedel, 
Ralph, M. (1984) Living up to expectations: 
computing expert responses. In Proceedings 
of the 7th National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 169-175. 
McKeown, Kathleen, R. (1985), Test Genera- 
tion : Using discourse strategies and focus 
constraints to generate natural anguage test. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Mitchell, Tom, M. (1977), Version spa~es: A can- 
didate elimination approaA:h to rule learn- 
ing. In Proceedings of 5th International Con- 
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 305- 
310. 
Moore, Johanna, D. (1990), A Reactive Approach 
to Ezplanation in Expert and Advice-Giving 
Systems. PhD thesis, Information Sciences 
Institute, University of Southern California 
(published as ISI-SR-90-251). 
Paris, Cecile. (1988), Tailoring Object Descrip- 
tions to a User's Level of Expertise. In Com- 
putational Linguistics (Special Issue on User 
Modelling), vol 14. 
Reiter, Ehud (1990), Generating descriptions that 
exploit a user's domain knowledge. In R. 
Dale, C. Mellish, a~d M. Zock, editors, Cur- 
rent Research in Natural Language Genera- 
tion, Academic Press. 
Zuckerman, Ingrid (1990), A Predictive Approach 
for the Generation of Rhetorical Devices. In 
Computational Intelligence, vol 6, issue 1. 
124 - 
