Prediction in Chart Parsing Algorithms for 
Categorial Unification Grammar 
Gosse Bouma 
Computat iona l  Linguistics Depar tment  
University of Groningen, P.O. box 716 
NL-9700 AS Groningen, The Nether lands 
e-mail:gosse@let.rug.nl 
Abstract 
Natural language systems based on Categorial Unifica- 
tion Grammar (CUG) have mainly employed bottom- 
up parsing algorithms for processing. Conventional 
prediction techniques to improve the efficiency of the 
? parsing process, appear to fall short when parsing CUG. 
Nevertheless, prediction seems necessary when parsing 
grammars with highly ambiguous lexicons or with non- 
canonical categorial rules. In this paper we present a 
lexicalist prediction technique for CUG and show thai 
this may lead to considerable gains in efficiency for both 
bottom-up and top-down parsing. 
1 Prel iminaries 
CATEGORIAL UNIFICATION GRAMMAR.. Unification- 
based versions of Categorial Grammar, known as CUG 
or UCG, have attracted considerable attention recently 
(see, for instance, Uszkoreit, 1986, Karttunen, 1986, 
Bouma, 1988, Bouma et al, 1988, and Calder et al, 
1988). The categories of Categorial Grammar (CG) 
can be encoded easily as feature-structures, in which 
the attribute < cat > dominates either an atomic value 
(in case of an atomic category) or a structure with at- 
tributes < val  >, < dir  > and < arg > (in case of 
a complex category). Morphosyntactic information can 
be added by introducing additional labels. An example 
of such a category represented as attribute-value matrix 
is presented below. 
N P \ [+nom\] /N \ [+nom,  +sg\] = 
val  : case : nora 
d i r  : r ight  
arg : case : nom 
hum : sg  
The combinatory rules of classical CG, A ~ A /B  B 
(rightward application) and A ---, B B \A  (leftward ap- 
plication), can be encoded as highly schematic rewrite 
rules associated with an attribute-value graph: 
Rightward Appl icat ion Rule : 
Xo ~ XI X2 
Xo:< 1> \[- 
Xl  : \] cat : 
1. 
X~ :<2> 
dir  : r ight  
arg :< 2 > 
Lef tward  App l i ca t ion  Ru le  : 
X0 --* X1 X2 
X0:< 1> 
X1 :<2> 
dir  : l e f t  
arg :< 2 > 
CUG is a lexicalist theory: language specific in- 
formation about word order, subcategorization, agree- 
ment, case-assignment, e c., is stored primarily in the 
lexicon. Whereas in classical CG functor-argument 
structure is the only means available for describing ling- 
uistic phenomena, in CUG additional features may be 
used to account for phenomena such as agreement and 
case-marking (see Bouma 1988). Also, whereas in clas- 
sical CG all rules are in principle universal (i.e. not 
language-specific), in CUG there is a tendency to sup- 
plement generic categorial rules with language or con- 
struction specific rules For instance, a rule 
N P ~ N \[+plu\] 
may be added to account for the occurence of bare 
plural NPs, and specific rules may be added to ac- 
count for unbounded ependency constructions (Bouma 
- 179  - 
1987). Finally, instead of fully instantiated category- 
structures, one may choose to work with polymorphic 
categories (Karttunen 1989, Zeevat et al 1987). Con- 
sequently, CUG not only shows resemblances with tra- 
ditional categorial grammar, but also with Head-driven 
Phrase Structure Grammar (Pollard &: Sag, 1987), an- 
other lexicalist and unification-based framework. 
CHART PARSING OF UNIFICATION GRAMMAR 
(UG). Parsing methods for context-free grammar can 
be extended to unification-based grammar formalisms 
(see Shieber, 1985 or Haas, 1989), and therefore they 
can in principle be used to parse CUG.  A chart-parser 
scans a sentence from left to right, while entering 
items, representing (partial) derivations, in a chart. 
Assume that items are represented as Prolog terms 
of the form item(Begin, End, LH S, Parsed, ToParse), 
where LHS is a feature-structure and Parsed 
and ToParse contain lists of feature-structures. 
An item(O, 1, \[S\],\[NP\], \[V  NP\] )  represents a partial 
derivation ranging from position 0 to 1 of a constituent 
with feature-structure S, of which a daughter NP has 
been found and of which daughters V and NP are 
still to be parsed. A word with lexical entry Word : 
Cat at position Begin, leads to addition of an item 
item(Begin, Begin + 1, Cat, \[Word\], \[ \]). Next, com- 
pletion and prediction steps are called until no further 
items can be added to the chart. 
Complet ion  step: I For each item(B, ". E, LHS, 
Parsed, \[NeztlToParse\]) and item(E, End, Next, 
Parsed, \[\]), add an item(B, End, LHS, 
Parsed+Next, ToParse). 
Bot tom-up Pred ic t ion  step: For each item(B, E, 
Next, Parsed, \[1), and each rule (LHS--~ \[Next I
RHS\]), add item(B, E, LHS, \[Next\], RHS). 
The prediction step causes the algorithm to work 
bottom-up. 
2 The Prob lem 
In a bottom-up chart parser, applicable rules are pre- 
dicted bottom-up, and thus, lexical information is used 
to constrain the addition of active items (i.e. items 
representing partial derivations). At first sight, this 
method appears to be ideal for CUG, as in CUG 
the lexical items contain syntactic information which 
is language and grammar specific, whereas the rules 
are generic in nature. Note, however, that although 
1 In these and following definitions, we assume, unless other- 
'wise indicated, that feature-structures d noted by identical prolog 
variables are unified by means of feature-unificatiom 
bottom-up parsing is certainly attractive for CUG, 
there are also a number of potential inefficiencies: 
In many cases useless items will be predicted. 
Consider, for instance, a grammar with a lexi- 
con containing only the categories NP/N, N, and 
NP\S, and with application as the only combina- 
tory rules. When encountering a determiner, pre- 
diction of an item(i,i, X, \[np/n\], \[(np/n)\X\]) is 
superfluous, ince there is simply no way that the 
grammar could ever produce a category (np/n)\X 
2 
If the lexicon is highly ambiguous, many useless 
(partial) derivations may take place. Consider, 
for instance, the syntax of NPs in German, where 
determiners and adjectives are ambiguous with 
respect to case, declension pattern, gender and 
number (see Zwicky, 1986, for an analysis in terms 
of GPSG). The sentence die junge Frau schldfl has 
only one derivation, but a bottom-up arser has to 
consider 11 possible analyses for the word junge, 
6 for the phrase junge Frau, 4 for die and 2 for 
die junge Frau. This example shows that even irk 
a pure categorial system, there may be situations 
where top-down prediction has its merits. 
If the grammar contains language or construction 
specific rules, bottom-up prediction may be less 
efficient. Relevant examples are the rule for form. 
ing bare plurals mentioned irk tile previous ection 
and rules which implement a categorial version of 
gap-threading (see Pereira & Shieber, 1986 : l l4 
if). The rule shemata below allow for the deriva- 
tion of sentences with a preposed element and for 
the extraction of arguments: 
Gap-elimination: S --* X S\[gap : X\] 
Gap-introduction: X\[gap : Y\] ~ X /Y  
X\[gap : Y\] ---* Y \X  
Oap-introduction will be used every time a func- 
for category is encountered. Again, some form of 
top-down prediction could improve this situation. 
In the following sections, we will consider top-down 
parsing, as an alternative for the bottom-up approach, 
and we will consider the possibility of improving the 
predictive capabilities of a bottom-up arser. 
~The example may suggest hat prediction should be elimi- 
nated Ml  together .  This option is feasible only if the rule set is 
restricted to application. 
- 180  - 
3 Top-down Parsing 
Top-down chart parsing differs from the algorithm de- 
scribed above only in the prediction-step, which pre- 
dicts applicable rules top-down. Contrary to bottom- 
up parsing, however, the adaptation of a top-down al- 
gorithm for UG requires some special care. For UGs 
which lack a so-called context-free back-bone, such as 
CUG, the top-down prediction step can only be guar- 
anteed to terminate if we make use of restriction, as 
defined in Shieber (1985). 
Top-down prediction with a restrictor R (where R 
is a (finite) set of paths through a feature-structure) 
amounts to the following: 
Rest r i c t ion  The restriction of a feature-structure F 
relative to a restrictor R is the most specific 
feature-structure F ~ E_ F, such that every path 
in F j has either an atomic value or is an element 
of R. 
P red ic tor  S tep  For each item(_ , End, LHS, Parsed, 
\[Next I ToParse\]) such that Rjve~, is the re- 
striction of Next relative to R, and each rule 
RNe~:t ~ RHS,  add item(i,i, Rge~:t, \[\], RHS). 
Restriction can be used to develop a top-down chart 
parser for CUG in which the (top-down) prediction step 
terminates. The result is unsatisfactory, however, for 
the following two reasons. First, as a consequence of 
the generic and language independent nature of cate- 
gorial rules, the role of top-down prediction as a con- 
straint on possible derivation steps is lost completely. 
Second, many useless items will be predicted due to 
the fact that the LHS of both rightward and leftward 
application always match with RJvext in the:prediction 
step (note that a bottom-up parser has a similar inef- 
ficiency for leftward application only). Therefore, the 
overhead which is introduced by top-down prediction 
does not pay-off. We conclude that, eventhough the in- 
troduction of restriction make it possible to parse CUG 
top-down, in practice, such a method has no advantages 
over a bottom-up approach. 
4 Lexicalist Prediction 
Instead of customizing existing top-down parsing algo- 
rithms for CUG, we can also try to take the opposite 
track. That  is, we will try to represent a CUG in such 
a way that non-trivial forms of top-down prediction are 
possible. 
Top-down prediction, as described in the previous 
section, relies wholly on the syntactic information en- 
coded in the syntactic rules. For CUG, this is an akward 
situation, as most syntactic information which could be 
relevant for top-down prediction is located in the lexi- 
con. tn order to make this information accessible to the 
parser, we precompile the grammatical rules into a set 
of instantiated rules. The instantiated rules are more re- 
strictive than the generic categorial rules, as they take 
lexical information into account. 
The following algorithm computes a set of instanti- 
ated syntactic rules, given a set of generic rules and a 
lexicon. 
Compi la t ion  For every category C, where C is either 
a lexical category or the LHS of an instantiated 
rule, and every (generic) rule GR, if C is utlifiable 
with the head-daughter of GR, add GR' (the re- 
sult of the unification) to the set of instantiated 
rules, a 
We assume that there is some way of distinguishing 
head-daughters from non-head daughters (for instance, 
by means of a feature). The head daughter should be 
the daughter which has the most ialluellce on the in- 
stantiation of the rule. For the application rules, for 
instance, the functor is the most natural choice, as the 
functor both determines the instantiation of the resul- 
tant category and of the argument category. 
The compilation step is correct and complete for 
arbitrary UGs, that is, a string is derivable using the 
instantiated rules if and only if it is derivable using 
the generic rules. Note, however, that the compila- 
tion procedure does not necessarily terminate. Con- 
sider for instance a categorial gramrnar with category 
raising (X / (Y \X)  ---, Y). In such a gramrnar, arbitrar- 
ily complex instantiations of this rule can be compiled. 
To avoid the creation of an infinite set of rules, we may 
again employ restriction: 
Compi la t ion  w i th  res t r i c t ion  Let R be a restrictor. 
For every category C, where C is either a lexical 
category or the LHS of art instantiated rule, and 
every (generic) rule GR, if the restriction of C 
relative to R is unifiable with the head-daughter 
of GR, add GR ~ (the result of the unification) to 
the set of instantiated rules. 
The compilation step is guaranteed to terminate a.s 
long as R is finite (cf. Shieber, 1985). The compi- 
lation procedure is not specific to a certain grammar 
formalism or rule set, and thus can be used to compile 
arbitrary UGs. Such a compilation step will give rise 
to a substantially more instantiated rule set in all cases 
3Note that for classical CG, an algorithm of this kind can 
be used to compute the phrase-structure eqtfivalent of the input 
granunax. 
181 - 
where schematic grammar ules are used in combination 
with highly structured lexical items. 
For the compiled grammar, a standard top-down al- 
gorithm (such as the one in section 3) can be used. Pre- 
diction for CUG is now significant, as only rules which 
have a functor category that is actually derivable by the 
grammar will be predicted. So, starting from a category 
S, we will not predict leftmost categories such as S/NP, 
(S/NP)/NP, if no such categories can be derived from 
the lexical categories. Also, a leftmost argument cate- 
gory A will only be predicted if the grammar contains 
a matching functor category A~S. Finally, since we are 
working with the instantiated rules, morphosyntactic 
information can effectively be predicted top-down. 
Restriction is not only useful to guarantee termi- 
nation of the compilation procedure. The precompi- 
lation procedure can in principle lead to an instanti- 
ated grammar that is considerably larger than the input 
grammar. For instance, given a grammar which distin- 
guishes between plural and singular and between first, 
second and third person NPs, six versions of the rule 
S --~ NP NP\S  might be derivable. Such a multipli- 
cation is unnecessary, however, as it does not provide 
any information which is useful for the top-down pre- 
diction step. Choosing a restrictor which filters out all 
distinctions that are irrelevant o top-down prediction, 
can prevent an explosion of the rule set. 
5 Bottom-Up Parsing with Pre- 
diction 
The compilation procedure described in section 4 was 
developed to improve the performance of top-down 
parsing-algorithms for lexicalist grammars of the CUG- 
variety. In this section, we argue that replacing a 
generic CUG with its instantiated.equivalent also has 
advantages for bottom-up arsing. There are two rea- 
sons to believe that this is so: first, predictions based on 
leftward application will be less frequent and second, to 
an instantiated grammar non-trivial forms of top-down 
prediction can be added. 
In section 2 we pointed out that a bottom-up arser 
will predict many useless instances of leftward applica- 
tion. This is due to the fact that the leftmost daughter 
of leftward application is completely general and thus, 
given an item(B, E, Cat, Parsed, I\]), an item(B,E, X, 
\[Cat\], \[Cat\X\]) will always be predicted. The compi- 
lation procedure presented in the previous section re- 
places leftward application with instantiated versions 
of this rule, in which the leftmost argument of the rule 
is instantiated. Although the instantiated rule set of a 
grammar is bound to be larger than the original rule 
set, which is a potential disadvantage, the chart will 
grow less fast if we use theinstantiated grammar. It is 
therefore worthwhile to investigate the performance of 
a bottom-up arser which uses a compiled grammar as 
opposed to a bottom-up arser working with a generic 
rule set. 
There is a Second reason for considering instan- 
tiated grammars. It is possible in bottom-up pars- 
ing to speed up the parsing process by adding top- 
down prediction. Top-down prediction is implemented 
with the help of a table containing items of the 
form left_corner(Ancestor, LeftCorner), which lists 
the left-corner elation for the grammar at hand. The 
left-corner relation is defined as follows: 
Le f t -corner  Category C1 is a left-corner of an ancestor 
category A if there is a rule A ---* C1 .... C,.  The 
relation is,transitive: if A is a left-corner of B and 
B a left-corner of C, A is a left-corner of C. 
Top-down filtering is now achieved by modifying the 
prediction step as follows : 
Bot tom-up Pred ic t ion  wi th  Top-down F i l ter ing:  
For each item(B, E, Cat, Parsed, \[\]), and each 
rule (Xo "-* \[Cat \[ RHS\]), such that there is an 
item(_, B, _, _, \[NeztlToParse\]) with Xo a left- 
corner of Next, add item(B, E, Xo, \[Cat\], RHS) 4. 
For CUG it makes little sense to compute a left- 
corner relation according to this definition, since any 
category X is a left-corner of any category Y (accord- 
ing to leftward application), and thus the left-corner 
relation can never have any predictive power. 
For an instantiated grammar, the situation is more 
promising. For instance, given the fact that only nom- 
irmtive NPs occur as left-corner of S, and that every 
determiner which is the left-corner of NP, has a case 
feature which is compatible (unifiable) with that NP, it 
can be concluded that only nominative determiners can 
be left-corners of S. 
Computing the left-corner elation mechanichally 
for a UG will not always lead to the most economic- 
a| representation of the left-corner table. For exam- 
pie, in German the left-corner of an NP with case and 
number features X will be a determiner with identi: 
cal features. If we compute this, using a sufficiently 
4The bottom-up arsing algorithm extended with left-corner 
prediction is closely related to the BUP-parser of Matsumoto et 
al. (1983). The BUP-parser is based on definite clause grammar 
and thus, may backtrack. Minimal use is made of a chart (in 
which successful and failed parse a t tempts  are stored). Our algo- 
rithm assigns amore important role to the chart and thus avoids 
backtracking. 
182 - 
instantiated grammar, we get 8 versions (i.e. 4 cases 
times 2 possible values for number) of this relation. 
Similar observations can be made for adjectives that 
are left-corners of N (where things are even worse, as 
we would like to take declension classes into account 
as well). This multiplication may lead to a needlessly 
large left-corner table, which, if used in the prediction 
step, may in fact lead to sharp decreases in parsing per- 
formanee (see also Haas, 1989, who encountered sim- 
ilar problems). Note that checking a left-corner table 
containing feature-structures is in general expensive, as 
unification, rather than identity-tests, have to be car- 
ried out. 
To avoid tMs problem we have found it necessary to 
construct he left-corner table by hand, using linguistic 
meta.knowledge about what is relevant, given a particu- 
lar left-corner elation, to top-down prediction to com- 
press the table to an absolute minimum. It turns out to 
be the case that only in this way the effect of top-down 
filtering will pay-off against the increased overhead of 
having to check the left-corner table. 
6 Some Results 
The performance of the parsing algorithms discussed 
in the preceding sections (a bottom-up parser for UG 
(BU), a top-down parser for UG (of Shieber, 1985) 
(TD), a top-down parser operating on an instantiated 
grammar (TD/1), and a bottom-up parser with top- 
down filtering operating on an instantiated grammar 
(BU/LC)) were tested on two experimental CUGs, one 
implementing the morphosyntactic features of German 
N Ps, and one implementing the syntax of WH-questions 
in Dutch by means of a gap-threading mechanism. 
Some illustrative results are listed in Tables 1 and 2. 
Sentencel Sentence2 
items sees items sees 
TD: 93 5.9 160 10.5 
TD/ I :  45 2.0 68 2.5 
BU:  68 2.0 120 3.0 
Bu/ c: 12 o.6 53 o .9  
Table1:  German 
For German, an ideal restrictor R was {< l* > II = 
cat,val, arg, or dir}. This restrictor effectively filters 
out all morphosyntactic information, in as far as it is not 
repeated in the categorial rules. The resulting precom- 
piled grammar is much smaller than in the case where 
no restriction was used or where morphosyntactic in- 
formation was not completely filtered out. A categorial 
lexicon for German, for instance, containing only deter- 
miners, adjectives, nouns, and transitive and intransi- 
tive verbs, will give rise to more than 60 instantiated 
rules if precompiled without restriction, whereas only 
four rules are computed if R is used (i.e. only two more 
than in the uncompiled (categorial) grammar). The 
improvement in efficiency of TD/ I  over TD is due to 
the fact that no useless instances of leftward applica- 
tion are predicted and to the fact that no restriction is 
needed during parsing with an instantiated grammar. 
Thus, prediction based on already processed material 
can be maximal. As soon as we have parsed a cate- 
gory N P/N\[+sg, +wk, +dat, +fern\], for instance, top- 
down prediction will add only those items that have 
N\[+sg, +wk, +dat, +fern\] as LHS. 
BU is almost, as efficient as TD/ I ,  eventhough it 
works with a generic grammar, and thus produces 
(significantly) more chart-items. Once we replace the 
generic grammar by an instantiated grammar, and add 
left-corner relationships (BU/LC), the predictive capac- 
ities of the parser are maximal, and a sharp decrease in 
the number of chart items and parse times occurs. 
Senteneel Sentence2 Sentence3 
items sees items sees items sees 
TD: 255 32.2 225 27.9 358 47.2 
TD/I :  48 3.2 71 6.0 \]29 11.9 
BU : 78 1.8 74  1.7 131 3.6 
BU/LC: 40 1.7 45 2.1 ~i9 3.9 
Tab le l :  Gap- thread ing  
For the grammar with gap-threading (table 2), 
we used a restrictor R = {< 1 ? > II = 
eat,val, arg,dir, gap, in or out}. The TD parser en- 
counters erious difficulties in this case, whereas TD/ I  
performs significantly better, but still is rather ineffi- 
cient. There is a distinct difference between BU and 
BU/LC if we look at the number of chart items, al- 
though the difference is less marked than in the case of 
German. In terms of parse times the two algorithms 
are almost equivalent. 
Comparing our results with those of Shieber (1985) 
and Haas (1989), we see that in all cases top-down fil- 
tering may reduce the size of the chart significantly. 
Whereas Haas (1989) found that top-down filtering 
never helps to actually decrease parse times in a 
bottom-up arser, we have found at least one example 
(German) where top-down filtering is useful. 
- 183  - 
7 Conclusions 
There is a trend in modern linguistics to replace gram- 
mars that are completely anguage specific by grammars 
which combine universal rules and principles with lan- 
guage specific parameter settings, lexicons, etc. This 
trend can be observed in such diverse frameworks 
as Lexical Functional Grammar, Government-Binding 
Theory, Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar and 
Categorial Grammar. In parsing with such formalisms, 
especially those formalisms that are unification-based, 
we find that traditional parsing-techniques, eventhough 
they may be applicable to UG, are no longer satisfac- 
tory. In particular, prediction techniques which may 
be efficient for phrase structure grammar do not always 
carry over easily to UG. The present paper shows that if 
a grammar uses only schematic combinatory principles 
instead of phrase-structure rules, prediction is only pos- 
sible if we replace the generic rules by grammar-specific 
instances of these rules. 
8 Literature 
Bourns, G. 1987. A Unification-based Analysis of Un- 
bounded Dependencies in Categorial Grammar, in J. 
Groenendijk, M. Stokhof, & F. Veltman (eds.) Proceed- 
ings of the sixth Amsterdam Colloquium, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1-19. 
Bourns, G., 1988, Modifiers and Specifiers in Categorial 
Unification Grammar, Linguistics, vol 26, 21-46. 
Bourns, G., E. KSnig, & H. Uszkoreit, 1988. A Flexi- 
ble Graph-Unification Formalism and its Application to 
Natural Language Processing, IBM Journal of Research 
and Development, 32, 170-184. 
Calder, J., E. Klein, & H. Zeevat 1988. Unification 
Categoriai Grammar: a concise, extendable grammar 
for natural anguage processing. Proceedings of Coling 
1988, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 83- 
86. 
Haas, A. 1989. A Parsing Algorithm for Unification 
Grammar. Computational Linguistics 15-4, 219-232. 
Karttunen, L. 1989. Radical Lexicalism. In M. Baltin 
& A. Kroch (eds.), Alternative Conceptions of Phrase 
Structure, Chicago University Press, Chicago, 43-66. 
Matsumoto, Y., H. Tanaka, H. Hirakawa, II. Miyoshi, 
& H. Yasukawa, 1983, BUP : A Bottom-Up Parser em- 
bedded in Prolog. New Generation Computing, vol 1, 
145-158. 
Pereira, F., & S. Shieber (1986). Proiog and Natural 
Language Analysis. CSLI Lecture Notes 10, University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Pollard, C.  I. Sag, 1987, Information-Based Syntax 
and Semantics, vol 1 : Fundamentals, CSLI Lecture 
Notes 13, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Shieber, S. 1985. Using Restriction to Extend Pars- 
ing Algorithms for Complex-Feature-Based Algorithms. 
Proceedings of the g2nd Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, 145-152. 
Uszkoreit, H. 1986. Categorial Unification Grammars. 
Proceedings of COLING 1985. Institut fiir angewandte 
Kommunikations- und Sprachforschung, Bonn, 187-194. 
Zeevat, H., E. Klein, & J. Calder, 1987. An Introduc- 
tion to Unification Categorial Grammar. In N. Had- 
dock, E. Klein, & G. Morill (eds.), Categorial Grammar, 
Unification grammar, and Parsing, Edinburgh Working 
Papers in Cognitive Science, Vol. 1. 
Zwicky, A. 1986. German Adjective Agreement in 
GPSG. Linguistics, vol 24,957-990. 
- 184  : 
