A. ZAMPOLLI 
Towards Reusable Linquistic Resources 
Abstract 
i. The paper will try to identify the various concurrent factors which, in 
the last years, have contributed to the increasing attention paid to the 
issue of reusable l inguistic resources for natural language processing. 
The role of various major Organisations (EEC, Council of Europe, DARPA, 
NEH, etc.) will be examined, taking into account the reasons which seem 
to have stimulated their active participation. The recognition of the need 
of reusable l inguistic resources by various sectors of "automated 
l inguistic data processing" will also be considered as a catalyzer for the 
recent trend towards the cooperation of various scientif ic and professional 
Associat ions (ACL, ALLC, ACH, etc.). 
2. Various interpretations of the term "reusability" have been proposed. We 
shall consider the relationships and differences between: 
the feasibil ity of the uti l ization of existing repositories of 
l inguistic information, as potential sources for the construction 
of NLP Components; 
the feasibil ity of constructing new large linguistic knowledge bases, 
expl ic it ly designed for mult i functional uses, in various research 
frameworks and development activities. 
In particular, we shall examine the connections between various core aspects of 
the construction of reusable l inguistic resources, and 
the general problems of the "evaluation" in the field of natural 
language processing, both at the general level of shareabil ity of 
the state-of-the-art knowledge, and at the level of specific NLP 
systems or l inguistic data collection; 
the design of "standards" at the level of representation formalisms 
and of the identif ication of l inguistic units and description 
categories. 
3. Examples will be taken by some of the various international projects 
nowadays underway in the field of lexica (ET7, Acquilex, Multilex, Genelex, 
The lexical Consortium, etc.), corpora (European Network of Textual 
Corpora, British National Corpus, Data Collection Initiative, etc.), and 
standards (Text Encoding Initiative). 
4. The paper will review and compare some of the results already acquired, 
and will state some problems, both at the scientif ic and organizational 
level which, in the opinion of the author, are still to be solved, and 
represent major controversial issues. It is expected that the round table, 
which will be held during the Conference with the participation of the 
representatives of some of those projects, will discuss these problems and 
indicate priorit ies for research, practicable ways towards their solution, 
and possible convergence of efforts. 
