Computational Aspects of M-grammars 
Joep Rous 
Phi l ips Research Laborator ies ,  P.O. Box 80.000 
5600 JA  Eindhoven, The Nether lands 
E-mail :  rous@rosetta.pr l .phi l ips.nl  (uucp) 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper M-grammars that are used in the Rosetta 
translation system will be looked at as the specifica- 
tion of attr ibute grammars. We will show that the 
attr ibute evaluation order is such that instead of the 
special-purpose parsing and generation algorithms in- 
troduced for M-grammars in Appelo et al(1987), also 
Earley-like context-free parsing and ordinary generation 
strategies can be used. Furthermore, it is i l lustrated 
that the attr ibute grammar approach gives an insight 
into the weak generative capacity of M-grammars and 
into the computational complexity of the parsing and 
generation process. Finally, the attr ibute grammar ap- 
proach will be used to reformulate the concept of iso- 
morphic grammars. 
M-grammars 
In this section we will introduce, very globally, the gram- 
mars that are used in the Rosett ,  machine translation 
system which is being developed at Philips Research 
Laboratories in Eindhoven. The original Rosetta gram- 
mar formalism, called M-grammars, was a computa- 
tional variant of Montague grammar. The formalism 
was introduced in Landsbergen(1981). Whereas rules 
in Montague grammar operate on strings, M-grammar 
rules (M-rules) operate on labelled ordered trees, called 
S-trees. The nodes of S-trees are labelled with syntac- 
tic categories and attribute-value pairs. Because of the 
reversibility of M-rules, it is possible" to define two al- 
gorithms: M-Parser and M-Generator . The M-Parser 
algorithm starts with a surface: structure in the form 
of an S-tree and breaks it down into basic expressions 
by recursive application of reversed M-rules. The result 
of the M-Parser algorithm is a syntactic derivation tree 
which reflects the history of the analysis process. The 
leaves of the derivation tree are names of basic expres- 
sions. The M-Generator algorithm generates a set of 
S-trees by bottom-up application of M-rules, the names 
of which are mentioned in a syntactic derivation tree. 
Analogous to Montague Grammar, with each M-rule a 
rule is associated which expresses its meaning. This al- 
lows for the transformation of a syntactic derivation tree 
into a semantic derivation tree by replacing the name of 
each M-rule by the name of the corresponding mean- 
ing rule. In Landsbergen (1982) it was shown that the 
formalism is very well fit to be :used in an interlingual 
machine translation system in which semantic derivation 
trees make up the interlingua. In the analysis part of 
the translation system an S-tree of the source language 
is mapped onto a set of semantic derivation trees. Next, 
each semantic derivation tree is mapped onto a set of 
S-trees of the target language. In order to guarantee 
that for a sentence which can be analysed by means of 
the source language grammar a translation can always 
be generated using the target language grammar, source 
and target grammars in the Rosetta system are attuned. 
Grammars, attuned in the way described in Landsber- 
gen (1982), are called isomorphic. 
Appelo et al(1987) introduces ome extensions of the 
formalism, which make it possible to assign more struc- 
ture to an M-grammar. The new formalism was called 
controlled M-grammars. In this new approach a gram- 
mar consists of ~ set of subgrammars. Each of the sub- 
grammars contains a set of M-rules and a regular ex- 
pression over the alphabet of rule names. The set of 
M-rules is subdivided into meaningful rules and trans- 
formations. Transformations have no semantic relevance 
and will therefore not occur in a derivation tree. The 
regular expression can be looked at as a prescription of 
the order in which the rules of the subgrammar have to 
be applied. Because of these changes in the formalism, 
new versions of the M-Parser and M-Generator algo- 
rithm were introduced which were able to deal with sub- 
grammars. These algorithms, however, are complex and 
result in a rather cumbersome implementation. In this 
paper we will show that they can be replaced by normal 
context-free parse and generation algorithms if we inter- 
pret an M-grammar as the specification of an attr ibute 
grammar (Knuth (1968), Deransart et al(1988)). 
M-grammars  as  a t t r ibute  grammars  
The control expression which is used in the definition of 
a Rosetta subgrammar specifies a regular language over 
the alphabet of rule names. Another way to define such 
a language is by means of a regular grammar. Let con- 
trol expression cei of subgrammar i define the regular 
language ?(i).  Then we can construct a minimal regu- 
lar grammar gi which defines the same language. The 
grammar gi will have the following form: 
? A set of non-terminals Ni = {~/ . . . . .  I/M' } 
? A set of terminals Ei. Ei is the smMlest set such 
that there is a terminal f EE i  for e~u:h M-rule r . 
? Start symbol I ? 
? 210  - 
? A set of production rules P~ containing the follow- 
ing type of rules: 
- I~ "* ~I~, where f E El 
_ _. 
We will use the regular grammar defined above as a 
starting point for the construction of an attr ibuted sub- 
grammar. An elegant view of attr ibute grammars can be 
found in Hemerik (1984). Hemerik defines an attr ibute 
grammar as a context free grammar with parametrized 
non-terminals and production rules. In general, non. 
terminals may have a number of parameters ,  attributes 
- associated with them. Production rules of an attr ibute 
grammar are pairs (rule form, rule condition). From a 
rule form, production rules can be obtained by means 
of substitution of values for the attr ibute variables that 
satisfy the rule condition. In the grammars presented 
in this paper, non-terminals have only one attr ibute of 
type S-tree. The attr ibute grammar ules that are used 
throughout this paper also have a very restricted form. 
A typical attr ibute grammar ule r with context free 
skeleton A - .  BC  will look like: 
A<o>- -*B<p>C<q> 
(o, (p, q)) ~ 
Here, A < o >--. B < p > C < q > is the rule form, 
o,p, q are the attributes and (o, (p,q)) E ~ is the rule 
condition, g defines a relation between the attributes at 
the left-hand side and the attr ibutes at the right-hand 
side of the rule form. 
For each subgrammar rgi, (1 < i < M) we will con- 
struct an attr ibuted subgrammar agi. Each constructed 
attr ibuted subgrammar agi will have a start symbol J'T/. 
First, however, we define two new attributed subgram- 
mars that have no direct relation with a subgrammar 
of a given M-grammar: the start subgrammar and the 
terminal subgrammar. The terminal subgrammar agt 
with start symbol ~ contains a rule of the form 
\[ ~<o>- -*~ 
O=Z 
for each basic expression z of the M-grammar. The start 
subgrammar ago with start symbol S contains a rule of 
the form 
\[ S < o >~/~.? <p> 
o = p A cat(p) E ezportcat$(i) 
for the start symbol of each attr ibuted subgrammar. 
The attr ibute condition in this rule means that S~trees 
that are exported by subgrammar i have a syntactic at- 
egory which is in the set ezportcats(i).  
For each subgrammar rgi specified by the M-grammar 
we can construct an attr ibuted subgrammar agi being 
the 5-tuple (/~, U {S), { I>, ra } U g , , Pi , \]~i , ( T , Fi ) ) as fol- 
lows: 
? ag~ has 'domain' (T, Fi), where T is the set of possi- 
ble S-trees and F~ is a collection of relations of type 
T m ? T, m > 0. F~ contains all relations defined by 
the M-rules of subgrammar i. 
s The set of production rules of a9i can be con- 
structed as follows: 
- If r9i contains a rule of the form I~ --* fI~, 
where f corresponds with an n-ary mean ing-  
ful M-rule r, agi contains the following at- 
tribute grammar ule: 
Ii <o  >-.~I~ <pl  > S<p2 >. . .  
? . .S<pn> I> 
(o,(P, .... ,P.)) e Rr 
Here, ~ and \[/k are non-terminals of the at- 
tributed sugrammar agi, S is the start sym- 
bol of the complete grammar, the terminal 
is the name of the M-rule and Rr is the binary 
relation between S-trees amd tuples of S-trees 
which is defined by M-rule t. The terminal 
symbol I:> marks the end of the scope of the 
production rule in the strings generated by 
the grammar. The variables o ,p l . . .p ,  are 
the attr ibutes of the rule. All attributes are 
of type S-tree. 
One possible interpretation of the attr ibute 
grammar ule is that the S-tree o is received 
from non-terminal ~'~ of the current subgram- 
mar. According to the relation defined by M- 
rule r, the S-tree o corresponds to the S-trees 
pl, ...,Pn. S-tree pl is passed to another non- 
terminal of the current subgrammar, whereas 
p2, ..., pn are offered to the start symbol of the 
attr ibute grammar. 
- If rgi contains a rule of the form I~ --* ~I~ 
where e corresponds with unary t rans forma-  
t ion r, agi contains the following attr ibute 
grammar ule: 
\[ ii < <p> 
(o,p) e lz, 
Notice that an attr ibute rule corresponding 
with a transformation r does not produce the 
terminal f. 
- If rgi contains a rule of the form lJl --. I~, the 
agl contains the following attr ibute grammar 
rule: 
\[ <p> 
omp 
-- If rgi contains a rule of the form I~ - .  ? then 
ags contains the following rule: 
\[ JJi ~o>- . .QS<p> 
o = p ^ cat(p) ~ headcats(i) 
Rules of this form mark the beginning of a 
subgrammar. The terminal symbol O is used 
for this purpose. The attr ibute relation is 
a restriction on the kind of S-trees that is 
allowed to enter the subgrammar. Only S- 
trees with a syntactic category in the set 
headcats(i) are accepted. 
-211  - 
The set of all attr ibuted subgrammars can be joined 
to one single attr ibute grammar (N, ~, P, S, (T, F) )  as 
follows: 
? The non-terminal set of the attr ibute grammar is 
the union of all non-terminals of all subgrammars, 
M 
i.e. N = U~=0 ~i .  
? The terminal set E of the attr ibute grammar is the 
union of all terminals of all subgrammars (including 
the terminal subgrammar): E = { I>, 13} U U~0 ~i. 
? The set of production rules is the union of all pro- 
M - duction rules of the subgrammaxs, P = Ui=0 P~. 
? The startsymbol f the composed grammar is iden- 
tical to the the startsymbol S of the start subgram- 
mar. The attr ibute of the start symbol of an at- 
tribute grammar is called the designated attr ibute 
(Engelfriet (1986)) of the attr ibute grammar. The 
output set of an attr ibu(e grammar is the set of all 
possible values of its designated attribute. 
? The composed grammar ha.s: domain (T, F)  where 
M F = Ui=0 Fi and T is the set of all possible S-trees. 
In the rest of the paper we call an attr ibute grammar 
which has been derived from an M-grammar in this way 
an attributed M-grammar or amg.  
Computat iona l  Aspects  
Because ach meaningful attr ibuted rule r produces the 
terminal symbol ~ and because ach terminal rule x pro- 
duces terminal symbol ~, the strings of ?(X) ,  the lan- 
guage defined by an arag X, will contain the deriva- 
tional history of the string itself. :The history is partial, 
because the grammar ules for transformations do not 
produce a terminal. Moreover, the form of the grammar 
rules is such that each string is a prefix representation 
of its own derivational history. 
Given an amg X, with 
function of type ?(X) 
MGen(d)----ac! {t 
a set of terminals ~, a recognition 
---, 2 T can be defined as: 
IS<t>~x dAdEE*} 
The reverse of MGen is the generation function of type 
T --* 2 ~x) ,  which can be defined as: 
MPars(t) =d,! {dl S<t>~x d ^  d ~ ~*} 
These functions can of course be defined for each at- 
tribute grammar in this form. However, in the case of 
amg's  the MPars and MGen functions are both com- 
putable because ach M-rule r defines both a computable 
function and its reverse: 
(o,(p, .... , v . ) )  ~ :~. 
o~f~(p ,  . . . . .  p. )  ~. 
(p,, ...,v.) ~ f;-'(o) 
Because of this property of the M-rules the grammar has 
two possible interpretations: 
? one for recognition purposes with only synthesized 
attributes, in which the rules can be written as: 
\[ i l  <T o >--. Hy <Tp~ > s <Tp~ > ... . . .S  <TP .  > t> 
o e A(p~,  ...,p-) 
This interpretation is to be used by MGen in the 
generation phase of the Rosetta system. 
? one for generation purposes with only inherited at- 
tributes containing the following type of rules: 
Ii <~o>- -H~ <lp~ > S<~w >. . .  
? . . .S  <~.p. > I> 
(p,  .... ,p.) ~ f~(o)  
The generative interpretation of the rules will be 
used by MPars in the analysis phase of the Rosetta 
translation system. 
From the definitions of MPars and MGen the reversibil- 
ity property of the grammar follows immediately: 
d E MPars(t) 4, t E MGen(d) 
The reversibility property which has always been one of 
the tenets of the Rosetta system (Landsbergen (1982)) 
has recently received the appreciation of other re- 
searchers in the field of M.T. as well (Isabelle (1989), 
Rohrer (1989), van Noord (1990)). 
In order to give the M-grammar formalism a place in 
the list of other linguistic formalisms like LFG, FUG, 
TG, TAG and GPSG x, we will investigate some com- 
putational aspects of amg's  in this section. Given an 
amg grammar X, we can calculate the value of the des- 
ignated attr ibute for an element of ?(X). For this cal- 
culation an ordinary context free recognition algorithm 
(Earley(1970), Leermakers(1.991)) can be used. Because 
the grammar may contain cycles of the form 
\[ r J<o>--. l~<p> 
\[o,p) e
its context-free backbone is not finitely ambiguous. 
Hence, an amg is not necessarily off-line parsable (
Pereira and Warren (1983), Haas (1989)). The term 
off-line parsable is somewhat misleading because a two- 
stage parse process for grammars which ate infinitely 
ambiguous is very well feasible. In the first stage of 
the parse process, in which the context free backbone is 
used, a finite representation f the infinitely many parse 
trees, e.g. in the form of a parse matrix, is determined. 
Next, in the second stage, the attr ibutes ate calculated. 
However, measure conditions on the attributes are nec- 
essary to guarantee termination of the parse process. 
These measure conditions are constraints on the size 
(according to a Certain measure) of the attr ibute val- 
ues that occur in each cycle of the underlying context 
free grammar. 
The generative interpretation of amg X can be used in a 
straight-forward language generator which generates all 
corresponding elements of ? (X)  for a given value of the 
designated at t r ibute .  Obviously, it can only be guaran- 
teed that the generation process will always terminate if
lcf. Perrault (1984) for a comparison of the mathematical 
properties of these formalisms. 
- 212  - 
the grammar satisfies ome restrictions. Suggestions for 
grammar constraints in the form of termination condi- 
tions for parsing and generation are given in Appelo et 
al.(1987). 
For an insight into the weak generative capacity of the 
formalism we have to examine the set of yields of the 
S-trees in the output set of an amg.  Let us call this 
set the output language defined by an amg. It is not 
possible to characterize xactly the set of output Inn. 
guages that can be defined by an amg without defining 
what the termination conditions are. The precise form 
of the termination conditions, however, is not imposed 
by the M-grammar formalism. The formalism merely 
demands that some measure on the attribute values is 
defined which garantuees termination of the recognition 
and generation process. In order to get an idea of the 
weak generative capacity of the formalism, we assume, 
for the moment, the weakest condition that guarantees 
termination. It can be shown that each deterministic 
Turing Machine can be implemented by means of an 
amg such that the language defined by the TM is the 
output language of that amg. Not all grammars that 
can be constructed in this way satify the termination 
condition, however. The termination condition is only 
satisfied by Turing Machines that halt on all inputs, 
which is exactly the class of machines that define the 
set of all recursive languages. Consequently, the output 
languages that can be defined by amg's  or M-grammars, 
in principle, are the languages that can be recognized by 
deterministic Taring Machines in finite time. 
At this point it is appropriate to mention the bifurca~ 
tion of grammatical formalisms into two classes: the 
formalisms designed as linguistic tools (e.g. PATR-II, 
FUG, DCG) and those intended to be linguistic theories 
(e.g. LFG, GPSG, GB) (cf. Shieber (1987) for a motiva- 
tion of this bifurcation). The goals of these formalisms 
with respect o expressive power are, in general, at odds 
with each other. While great expressive power is consid- 
ered to be an advantage of tool-oriented formalisms, it is 
considered to be an undesirable property of formalisms 
of the theory type. The M-grammax formalism clearly 
belongs to the category of linguistic tools. 
By strengthening the termination conditions it is pos- 
sible to restrict the class of output languages that can 
be defined by an amg. For instance, the class of out- 
put languages can be restricted to the languages that 
are recognizable by a deterministic TM in 2 c" time a if 
we assume that the termination conditions imposed on 
an amg are the weakest conditions that satisfy the con- 
stralnts formulated in Rounds (1973). A reformulation 
of these constraints for amg's  is as follows: 
, The time needed by an attribute evaluating func- 
tion is proportional to somepolynomial in the sum 
of the size of its arguments.: 
? There is a positive constant ), such that in each 
fully attributed erivation tree, the size of each at- 
tribute value is less than or equal to the size of 
2This includes all context sensitive languages (Cook 
09~I ) ) .  
the constant ,~ times the size of the value of the 
designated attribute. 
Rounds used these conditions to show that the languages 
recognisable in exponential time make up exactly the 
set which is characterized by transformational gram- 
mars (as presented in Chomsky (1965)) satisfying the 
termiaad-length non-decreasing condition. 
T~?~ power of the formalism with respect o generative 
capacity has of course its consequences for the compu- 
ttttoaa\] complexity of the generation and recognition 
~prQeess, Here too, the exact form of the termination 
condition is important. Obeying the termination condi- 
tions that we adhere to in the current Rosetta system, 
it can be proved that the recognition and the generation 
problems axe NP-hard, which makes them computation. 
ally intractable. In comparison with other formalisms, 
M-grammaxs axe no exception with respect o the com- 
plexity of these issues. LFG recognition and FUG gener- 
ation have both been proved to be NP-hard in Barton et 
ai, (1987) and Ritchie (1986) respectively. Recognition 
in GPSG has even been proved to be EXP-POLY-haxd 
(Barton et a\]. 1987). We should keep in mind, however, 
that the computational complexity analysis is a worst- 
ease analysis. The average-case behaviour of the parse 
and generation algorithm that we experience in the dally 
use of the Rosetta system is certainly not exponential. 
I somorph ic  Grammars  
The decidability of the question whether two M- 
grammars axe isomorphic is another computational s- 
pect related to M-grammars. Although this mathemati- 
cal issue appears not to be very relevant from a practical 
point of view, it enables us to show what grammar iso- 
morphy means in the context of stag's.  
According to the Rosetta Compositionality Principle 
(Landsbergen(1987)) to each meaningful M-rule r a 
meaning rule mr corresponds which expresses the se- 
mantics of r. Furthermore, there is a set of basic mean- 
ings for each basic expression of an M-grammar. We 
ea~ easily express this relation of M-grammar ules and 
basic expressions with their semantic ounterparts in an 
a~ag, Instead of incorporating the M-rule name e in 
the gttributed production rule as we did in the previous 
s~tlons, we now include the name of the corresponding 
meaning rule 6~r as follows: 
\[ !~ < o >--. ~,i~ <pl>S<p2> . . .S<p,> I> 
E 7zr 
The terminal subgrammar must be adapted in order to 
generate basic meanings instead of basic expressions. If
basic expression m corresponds with the basic mean- 
ings m~ . . . . .  mJ= . . . .  , mz" then we replace the original 
rule in the terminal subgrammar for z by n rules of 
the form: 
W~ will call a gra~mmar that has been derived in this way 
from azt amg a semantic amg, or suing. The strings 
- 213 ,  
of the language defined by an samg are prefix repre- 
sentations of semantic derivation trees. The language 
defined by an samg is called the set of strings which are 
well-\]ormed with respect o X. 
Let us repeat here what it means for two M-grammars 
to be isomorphic: 
"...Two grammars are isomorphic iff each semantic 
derivation tree which is welbformed with respect o one 
grammar is also well-formed with respect o the other 
grammar..." (Landsbergen (1987)). We can reformulate 
the original definition of isomorphic M-grammars in ~. 
very elegant way for samg's :  
Def in i t ion:  Two samg's  X~ and X2 are isomorphic iff 
they are equivalent, hat is iff ?(XI) = ?(X2) 
This definition says that writing isomorphic grammars 
comes down to writing two attr ibute grammars which 
define the same language. From formal language the- 
ory (e.g. Hopcroft and Ullman (1979)) we know that 
there is no algorithm that can test an arbitrary p~ir of 
context-free grammars G1 and G2 to determine whether 
?(G~) = ?(G2). It can also be shown that samg's  can 
define any recursive language. Consequently, checking 
the equivalence of two arbitrary samg's  will be an un. 
decidable problem. Rosetta grammars that are used for 
translation purposes, however, are not arbitrary samg's:  
they are not created completely independently. The 
strategy followed in Rosetta to accomplish the defini- 
tion of equivalent grammars, that is, grammars that de- 
fine identical languages, is to attune two samg's  to each 
other. This grammar attuning strategy is extensively de- 
scribed in Appelo et al(1987), Landsbergen (1982) and 
Landsbergen (1987) for ordinary M-grammars. Here, 
we will show what the attuning strategy means in the 
context of samg's ,  together with a few extensions. 
The attuning measures below must not be looked at as 
the weakest possible conditions that guarantee isomor- 
phy. The list merely is an enumeration of conditions 
which together should help to establish isomorphy. If 
two samg's  Xa and X2 have to be isomorphic, the fol- 
lowing measures are proposed: 
, The production rules of both samg's  must be con- 
sistent. ;. 
If both grammars have a production rule ii~ Which 
the name of the meaning rule m appears, then the 
right-hand side of the rules should contain the same 
number of non terminals, since m is a function with 
a fixed number of arguments, independent of the 
grammar it is used in. 
, The terminal sets o\] both samg's  should be ~uaP. 
In the context of the ord in~y M-grammar formal- 
ism this condition is formulated as: 
- for each basic expression in one M-grammar there 
has to be at least one basic expression in the other 
M-grammar with the same meaning (which comes 
aThis condition is equivalent to the attuning measures de- 
scribed in Appelo et al (1987), Landsbergen (1982)and 
Landsbergen(1987). 
down to the condition that the terminal set of the 
terminal subgrammars should be identical) 
- for each meaningful rule in one M-grammar there 
has to be at least one meaningful rule in the other 
M-graanmar which has the same meaning. 
? The underlying contezt Jree grammars oJ both 
samg's  should be equivalent. 
Equivalence of the underlying context free gram- 
mars can be established by putting an equivalenee 
condition on the underlying grammar of corre- 
sponding subgrammars of the samg's  in question. 
Suppose that for each subgrammar of an samg 
? X1 a subgrammar of another samg 3(2 would ex- 
ist that performs the same linguistic task and vice 
versa. Such an ideal situation could be expressed 
by a relation g on the sets of subgrammars of both 
samg's .  Let i and j be subgrammars of the samg's  
X1 and Xa respectively, such that (i, j )  E g ,  then 
the underlying grammars 4 Bi and B i have to be 
constructed in such a way that they define the same 
language. ( Notice that Bi and B i are regular 
grammars.) More formally: 
v( i , i )  e g:  c (B , )  = ~(o i ) .  ~ 
The three attuning conditions above guarantee that 
the underlying context free grammars of two attuned 
samg's  are equivalent. However, the language defined 
by an samg is a subset of the language defined by its un- 
derlying grammar. The rule conditions determine which 
elements are in the subset and which are not. Because 
of the great expressive power of M-rules, the attuning 
measures place no effective restrictions on the kind of 
languages an samg can define. Hence, it can be proved 
that: 
Theorem:  The question whether two attuned samg's  
are isomorphic is undecidable. 
Because of the equivalence between samg's  and M- 
grammars this also applies to arbitrary attuned M- 
gr~nmars. Future research is needed to find extensions 
for the attuning measures in a way that guarantees i o- 
m0tphy if grammar writers adhere to the attuning con- 
dil~ions. The extensions will probably include restric- 
tions on the form of the underlying grammar and on 
the expressive power of M-rules. Also formal attuning 
measures between M-rules or sets of M-rules of different 
grammars are conceivable. 
4Because we are dealing with a subgrammar, the non- 
terminal S is discarded from the production rules of the un- 
derlying rammar. 
SThis attuning measure sketches an ideal sittmtion. In 
practice for each subgrarnmar ofan samg there is not a cor- 
responding fully isomorphic subgrammar but only a partially 
isomorphic subgranunar of the other suing. However, the re- 
quirement of fully isomorphic subgranunars is not the weak- 
est attuning condition that guarantees the equivalence of the 
underlying context free grammars. F_,quivalence an also be 
guaranteed if XI and X~ satisfy the following condition which 
expresses partial isomorphy between subgranunars: 
U~x~ ~(nd = Uj~x~ L(B~) 
- 214  - 
The current Rosetts grammars obey the three previ- 
ously mentioned attuning measures. In practice these 
measures provide a good basis to work with. Therefore, 
the undecidability of the isomorphy question is not an 
urgent topic at the moment. 
Conc lus ions  
In thib paper we presented the interpretation of an M- 
grammar as a specification of an attribute grammar. 
We showed that the resulting attribute grammar is re- 
versible and that it can be used in ordinary context 
free recognition and generation algorithms. The gen- 
eration algorithm is to be used in the analysis phase of 
Rosetta, whereas the recognition algorithm should be 
used in the generation phase. With respect o the weak 
generative capacity it has been concluded that the set 
of languages that can be generated and recognized e- 
pends on the termination conditions that are imposed 
on the grammar. If the weakest ermination condition 
is assumed, the set of languages that can be defined by 
an M-grammar is equivalent to the set of languages that 
can be recognized by a deterministic Turin8 Machine 
in finite time. Using more realistic termination condi- 
tions, the computational complexity of the recognition 
and generation problem can still be classified as NP- 
hard and, consequently, as computationally intractable. 
Finally, it was concluded that the question whether two 
attuned M-grammars are isomorphic, is undecidable. 
Acknowledgements  
The author wishes to thank Jan Landsbergen, Jan 
Odijk, Andr~ Schenk and Petra de Wit for their helpful 
comments on earlier versions of the paper. The author 
is also indebted to Lisette Appelo for encouraging him 
to write the paper and to Ren6 Leermakers with whom 
he had many fruitful discussions on the subject. 
Re ferences  
Appelo, L. , C. Fellinger and J. Landsbergen (1987), 
'Subgrammars, Rule Classes and Control in the 
Rosetta Translation System', Philips Research 
M.S. 14.131, Proceedings of 3rd ACL Conference 
, European Chapter, pp. 118-133. 
Barton, G., R. Berwick and E. Ristad (1987), Com. 
putational Compi~ity and Natural Language, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Chomsky, N. (1965), Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Cook, S. A. (1971), Characterizations of Pushdown 
Machines in Terms of Time-bounded Computers, 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machin- 
ery 18, 1, pp. 4-18. 
Deransart, P., M. Jourdan, B. Lorho (1988), 'Attribute 
Grammars', Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
323, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Earley, J. (1970), 'An efficient context-free parsing al- 
gorithm', Commun. ACM 13 (1970), pp. 94-102. 
Engelfriet, J. (1986), 'The Complexity of Languages 
Generated by Attribute Grammars', SIAM Journal 
on Computing 15, l, pp. 70-86. 
Haas, A. (1989), 'A Generalization of the Offiine 
Parsable Grammars', Proceedings of the ~7th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 237-242. 
Hemerik, C. (1984), 'Formal definitions of program- 
ming languages as a basis for compiler construc- 
tion', Ph.D. th., University of Eindhoven. 
Hopcroft, J.E. and J.D. Ullman (1979), 'Introduction 
to Automata Theory, Languages and Computa- 
tion', Addison Wesley Publishing Company, Read- 
ing, Mass. 
Isabelle, P. (1989) , 'Towards Reversible M.T. Systems', 
MT Summit'lI, pp. 67-68. 
Knuth, D.E. (1968), 'Semantics of Context-Free Lan- 
guages', Math. Systems Theory ~, 2, pp. 127-145 
(June 1968). 
Landsbergen, J. (1981), 'Adaptation of Montague 
grammar to :the requirements of parsing', in: For- 
real Methods in the Study of Language Part ~, MC 
Tract 136, Mathematical Centre, Amsterdam. 
Landsbergen, J. (1982), 'Machine Translation based on 
logically isomorphic Montague grammars', Coling 
8~, North-H011and, Amsterdam, pp. 175-181. 
Landsbergen, J. (1987), 'Isomorphic grammars and 
their use in the Rosetta Translation system', Ma- 
chine Translation, the State of the Art, M. King 
(ed.), Edinburg University Press. 
Leermakers, R (1991), 'Non-deterministic recursive as- 
cent parsing', Proceedings of the 5th ACL Confer. 
ence, European Chapter, forthcoming. 
Noord, van G. (1990), 'Reversible Unification Based 
Machine ~l~anslation', i  Proceedings ofthe 13th In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics, Helsinki. 
Pereira, F., D. Warren (1983), 'Parsing as deduction', 
Proceedings .of the ~lth Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 137- 
144. :' 
Perrault, C.R. C1984), 'On the Mathematical Proper- 
ties of Linguistic Theories', Computational Linguis- 
tics 10, pp. 165-176. 
Ritchie, G. (1986), 'The computational complexity of 
sentence derivation in functional unification gram- 
mar', Proceedings of Coling'86, pp. 584-586. 
Rohrer, C. (1989), 'New directions in MT systems', 
MT Summit II, pp. 120-122. 
Rounds, W. (1975), 'A grammatical characterization 
of the exponential languages', Proceedings of the 
16th Annual Symposium on Switching Theory and 
Automata, IEEE Computer Society, New York, pp. 
135-143. 
Shieber, S. M. (!987), 'Separating Linguistic Analyses 
from Linguistic Theories', in Linguistic Theory and 
Computer Applications, Academic Press. 
- 215  - 
