A Computat ional  Treatment of 
Sentence-Final  'then' 
She i la  G lasbey  
Centre for Cognit ive Science 
Edinburgh University 
2 Buccleuch Place 
Edinburgh EH8 9LW 
UK 
Abst rac t  
We describe a computational system which 
parses discourses consisting of sequences of 
simple sentences. These contain a range 
of temporal constructions, including time 
adverbials, progressive aspect and various 
aspectual classes. In particular, the gram- 
mar generates the required readings, accor- 
ding to the theoretical nalysis of (Glasbey, 
forthcoming), for sentence-final 'then'. 
1 Sentence- f ina l  ' then '  
It is possible to follow: 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
with 
(lb) Fiona climbed Snowdon then. 
This is interpreted to mean that each climb took 
place at some time within the July in question. No- 
tice, however, that if we remove 'in July' from (la) 
to give: 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
the sequence (lc,lb) becomes harder to interpret and 
sounds rather odd. 1 The difference is, of course, that 
we have removed 'in July' and there is no longer an 
explicit reference to a "time". We will call such an 
explicitly mentioned time an explicit temporal  re- 
ferent (ETR). Thus, sentence-final 'then' appears, 
i We are not concerned here with the rather marginal 
reading, available to some speakers, where what is con- 
veyed by (lc,lb) is that Fiona's climb follows Emily's. 
This corresponds tothe "updating" reading normally as- 
sociated with sentence-initial 'then'. 
on the basis of this and other examples, to require 
explicit mention of a time. Being able to infer a 
time from the description of an event is clearly not 
enough. We would expect o be able to infer readily 
from (lc) that there was a time at which Emily's 
climb took place. However, it appears that we can- 
not use sentence-final 'then' here to refer back to such 
an inferred time. 
In order to make sense of the sequence (lc,lb) 
without he ETR, it seems we have to be able to see 
the two events as connected in some way. Consider: 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
(ld) She achieved her ambition then. 
which sounds fine, and: 
(2a) The children went to Wales. 
(2b) Fiona climbed Snowdon then. 
which is also perfectly acceptable. Note that in both 
these cases the second event is readily seen as connec- 
ted to the firstgby the kind of discourse relation that 
has often been called elaboration. 2 
Now consider: 
(3a) John went to France. 
(3b) Bill Clinton became president then. 
This sequence sounds odd, presumably because it is 
difficult to see any connection between the events 
described in (3a) and (3b). Consider also: 
(4a) John took the children to Aviemore. 
(4b) Mary wrote her paper then. 
which sounds odd if we do not know who Mary is, 
2See, for example, (Mann and Thompson, 1987). 
158 
but sounds fine if we are told that John and Mary 
are the parents and John took the children off to 
Aviemore to give Mary peace and quiet to write her 
paper. In other words, the sequence is acceptable if
we can envisage a connection between the events. 
On the basis of these examples, it appears that 
sentence-final 'then' either requires an ETR., or there 
must be some kind of connection, such as an elabo- 
ration relation, between the two events. 
The picture is still incomplete, however. The ex- 
amples considered so far have been accompl ish-  
ments  or ach ievements .  3 If the second sentence 
of the sequence is a lexical stative or a progressive 4, 
sentence-final 'then' becomes acceptable ven when 
the first sentence contains no ETR and there is no 
obvious connection between the eventualities. 5 
For example, (lc,le) and (lc, l f)  are both perfectly 
acceptable. 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
(le) Fiona was a girl then. 
(lf) Fiona was climbing Snowdon then. 
A detailed analysis of such sequences, which was 
carried out in (Glasbey, forthcoming) and (Glasbey, 
ms1), reveals the importance of the notion of di- 
scourse background ing .  Provided that the se- 
quence can be interpreted in such a way that the se- 
cond eventuality is presented as backgrounded with 
respect o the first, sentence-final 'then' is acceptable 
and the sequence (le,le), for example, conveys that 
Emily's climb is temporally included in the state of 
Fiona's being a girl. A similar notion in the litera- 
ture is that of the temporal overlap often conveyed 
when a stative (or progressive) follows a non-stative; 
see, for example, (Hinrichs, 1986). We will show in 
Section 2 how the notion of discourse backgrounding 
can be formalized in our theoretical framework. 
We have seen, too, that sentence-final 'then', in the 
absence of an ETR, is acceptable in eases where the 
second eventuality can be seen as an e laborat ion  of 
the first. This means that we have so far identified 
three uses of sentence-final 'then': 
1. The ETR use. 
2. The elaboration use. 
3. The background use. 
It would simplify matters if we could group (2) and 
(3) together--perhaps by saying that backgrounding 
is another way of expressing a connection between 
two events. 
In our formal analysis, to be described shortly, 
which uses the situation theory/discourse r presen- 
tation theory (ST/DRT) framework of (Barwise and 
aWe use the terminology of (Vendler, 1967). 
4 Or an iterative state or habitual state, using the ter- 
minology of (Moens, 1987). 
5 We use this term to include events and states, as in 
(Bach, .1986). 
Cooper, forthcoming), we model eventualities as si- 
tuations. We express the connection between even- 
tualities by means of the situation-theoretic relation 
par t -o f  (or ~),  from (Barwise, 1989). Par t -o f  is 
a relation 6 which holds between situations. In or- 
der for sentence-final 'then' to be acceptable in the 
absence of an ETR, the second eventuality must be 
par t -o f  the first. This intuitively covers the elabora- 
tion case, in that it makes sense to think, for exam- 
pie, of Fiona's climbing Snowdon as being part of the 
children's trip to Wales in (2a,2b). But how does it 
work in the backgrounding case? We will explain in 
Section 2, when we have introduced some notation, 
how the par t -o f  analysis can be used to cover this 
case too. 
If we take the part=of  analysis to cover both the 
backgrounding and elaboration eases, we can now 
say that there are two distinct uses of sentence-final 
'then'. The first involves reference back to a pre- 
viously introduced ETR and is only possible if such 
an explicit referent is present. The second does not 
refer to an explicit time, but rather conveys that the 
second eventuality is par t -o f  the first. This may be 
the case if the second sentence is stative or progres- 
sive. Of course, progressives have often been ana- 
lysed as stative in the literature (for example, by 
Vlach (1981)). Part of the motivation given for the 
progressive-as-stative analysis concerns facts about 
temporal overlap and updating. We prefer to say 
that an event described in the progressive is interpre- 
ted as backgrounded with respect o a previous (non- 
progressive) event in the discourse. 7 We thus keep 
separate the notions of stativity and backgrounding, 
which enables us to explore the relationship between 
the two concepts,  We adopt Smith's two-component 
theory of aspect (Smith, 1991) and regard progres- 
sive aspect as conveying an internal perspective or 
viewpoint on the described event. 
The par t -o f  relation between eventualities may 
also hold if the second eventuality can be read as 
an elaboration of the first. Of course, world know- 
ledge will often be required to decide this. Par t -o t i s  
therefore a relation between two eventualities which 
covers both the background and the elaboration" 
discourse relations. 
Thus we see that sentence-final 'then' can, if con- 
ditions are right, give rise to two readings. This 
is shown in sequences where the conditions for ETR 
'then' and those for par t -o f  'then' are both fulfilled. 
For example: 
Sin our formal treatment we will in fact treat <! as a 
type, but this is a technical detail. We will continue to 
refer to the '<1 relation' rather than the '<1 type', as the 
former conveys a clearer meaning. 
7Actually there are eases where a progressive does 
not convey backgrounding, but we will not discuss them 
here. They involve 'at the same time' and are discussed 
in ~Glasbey, ms1). 
?See (Glasbey, ms1, Glasbey, ms2) for details. 
159 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(If) Fiona was climbing Snowdon then. 
(la, lf) can either mean that Fiona's climb took 
place in July, or that it temporally included Emily's 
climb. World knowledge or context may sometimes 
favour one reading or the other. 
This analysis of sentence-final 'then' has impor- 
tant consequences for theories of temporal reference. 
It shows that, whatever theoretical framework is em- 
ployed, it is necessary to distinguish in some way 
between temporal discourse referents which are in- 
troduced into the discourse via explicit mention of 
a time, and those which are introduced via the in- 
ference of a time from the mention of an event or 
state. We explMn below a means of making this di- 
stinction in an ST/DlZT framework, and describe a 
computational implementation which embodies the 
distinction, s 
2 Grammar  and  Implementat ion  
The fragment contains sequences of sentences of a 
type similar to the ones given in Section 1. It inclu- 
des sentence-final 'then', together with other tempo- 
ral adverbials uch as for-adverbials, frame adverbi- 
als (e.g, 'in July') and completive/n-adverbials (e.g., 
'in two hours'). Sentence-initial 'then' and sentence- 
final 'at the time' and 'at the same time' are also 
included, although we do not discuss their analysis 
here. There is a range of verbs, transitive and intran- 
sitive, with various aspectual characteristics, and a 
range of noun types including count nouns, mass no- 
uns, bare plurals, definite and indefinite NPs. Pro- 
gressives are also included. We are thus concerned 
not merely with the analysis of 'then' but with mat- 
ters of aspectual composition/modification and the 
distribution of temporal adverbials. Space does not 
permit us to describe the full system in detail. We 
will concentrate here on those parts of it that are 
particularly relevant o the analysis of 'then'. 
As the system is concerned with temporal matters, 
we have not built into it a treatment of pronominal 
anaphora. However, it is designed in such a way, 
as will shortly become clear, that it could be exten- 
ded without undue difficulty to include pronoun ana- 
phora, using a treatment based on that in (Johnson 
and Klein, 1986). 
The system parses equences of sentences and pro- 
duces representations for the required readings for 
SWe discuss in (Glasbey, msl) how 'at the time' be- 
haves similarly to the part-of  use of 'then' (but conveys 
only backgrounding and not elaboration), while 'at the 
same time' appears to be acceptable in cases where the 
second eventuality is not a part of the first, i.e., where it 
can be seen as forming a distinct or separate vent. These 
are also included in the implemented grammar, but their 
treatment is not described here. 
sentence-final 'then'. It is based on a situation- 
theoretic grammar developed in (Cooper, 1991) and 
its computational implementation ProSit (Cooper, 
msl). ProSit is a definite clause grammar (DCG) 
with features. It parses single sentences and con- 
structs syntactic and semantic representations ex- 
pressed in situation-theoretic erms. We have ex- 
tended it firstly to deal with sentences containing a
range of tense and aspect constructions which were 
not present in Cooper's original fragment, and se- 
condly to allow the processing of discourse. To en- 
able us to do the former, we have built aspectual 
composition into the grammar using a theoretical 
approach based upon (Krifka, 1991) and described 
below. In order to process discourse, we have em- 
ployed the technique known as 'threading', used by 
Johnson and Klein (1986), whereby discourse refe- 
rents are carried from left to right among the consti- 
tuents of a sentence, and from one sentence to the 
next. 
Extended Kamp Notation 
The grammar is expressed in a combined 
DRT/situation theoretic formalism, employing the 
Extended Kamp Notation (EKN) developed in (Bar- 
wise and Cooper, forthcoming). These authors use a 
box notation for situation-theoretic objects such as 
infons, situations and propositions, based upon the 
graphical notation of DRT (Kamp and Reyle, forth- 
coming). However, in EKN the boxes directly repre- 
sent semantic objects, in contrast to DRT where the 
discourse representation structures (DRSs) are ex- 
pressions of a language which require interpretation 
in a model. Nevertheless, EKN boxes look rather 
like DRSs. One important difference, however, is 
that EKN boxes may contain situations. 
In situation theory, infons (which can be thought 
of as items of information or "possible facts") are 
supported by situations, which are parts of the world 
as individuated by agents. An infon consists of 
a relation 1? with its argument roles filled by ob- 
jects which may be individuals, parameters or other 
situation-theoretic objects. Propositions in EKN in- 
clude objects of the form: 
sl 
climb(X,Y) 
which is the proposition that a situation S supports 
an infon c l imb(X,Y) .  11 Situation-theoretic objects 
may have restrictions imposed on them. A proposi- 
tion with restrictions i  shown in Figure 1. 
The box in Figure 1 denotes an object only if the 
restrictions are true, i.e., in the above case, if X is 
1?Relations are primitives in situation theory. 
llS, X and Y are parameters, denoted by capital letters 
in situation theory. A parameter is a partially-specified 
object. 
160 
s--\] 
climb(X,Y) 
RI 
named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
Figure 1: An EKN restricted proposition. 
rl -,~ S, r~ --+ X, r3 --+ Y, r4 -+ R 
s l  
climb(X,Y) 
al  
named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
Figure 2: An EKN proposition abstract or 'type'. 
anchored to an individual named 'Emily' and Y to an 
individual named 'Ben Nevis'. R is the resource si- 
tuation supporting information about the naming of 
individuals) 2 A proposition containing parameters 
is known as a parametric proposition. It is possible 
to abstract (simultaneously) over one or more para- 
meters of a parametric proposition to give a type  of 
the form shown in Figure 2. 
Once a parameter has been abstracted over, it ef- 
fectively "disappears" and is no longer present in the 
type. What remains is the "role" corresponding to 
the abstracted parameter. These roles may be index- 
ed however we choose (for example, by the natural 
numbers, by rl to r, as above, or by utterance situa- 
tions as in (Cooper, 1991)). 
Cooper (ms2), in the development of situation- 
theoretic DRT (STDRT), sees a DRS as equivalent 
to the situation-theoretic ype obtained by abstrac- 
ting over the parameters of a proposition. The roles 
of such a type are equivalent to DRT discourse refe- 
rents, and the infons correspond to the conditions of 
the "main" situationJ 3
Process ing  o f  Sentences  
The system parses both individual sentences and se- 
quences of sentences forming a discourse. For a sen- 
tence such as: 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
it produces a syntactic parse tree, together with a 
semantic representation i  the form of a DRS/type 
as shown in Figure 3. The DRS/type is shown in 
slightly simplified form here. It will also contain in- 
12See (Cooper, forthcoming) for further explanation. 
lsOf course there are no precise DRT equivalents of the 
situation and the restrictions. 
r, -->S, r2 --~X, rz -+ Y, r4 -+R, rs -+T  
s l  
climb(X,Y) 
RI I 
i 
named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
Sl 
occ-time(S,T) ,\] 
i 
Figure 3: DRS/type for (lc). 
formation about aspectual class etc., as discussed be- 
low. 
Parsing of an individual sentence takes place 
in a top-down TM, left-to-right manner, causing a 
DRS/type like the one in Figure 3 to be gradually 
built up. The lexical entry for a verb introduces a
"skeletal" (partially instantiated) type, and further 
information is added to this by the remaining con- 
stituents as parsing proceeds. 
Although there is no explicit mention of a "time" 
in (lc), the representation for this sentence (Fi- 
gure 3) contains a parameter T corresponding to 
what we call the the "occurrence time" of the eventu- 
ality. This is the total temporal extent of the even- 
tuality. Although inclusion of the occurrence time 
is not strictly necessary in the representation for a 
single sentence with no ETR, it will be needed when 
we come to process discourse. We will see shortly 
that stative verbs do not introduce occurrence-times 
into the representations, whereas non-stative ones 
do, unless they are presented with progressive as- 
pect. 
Now compare the representation produced for the 
sentence: 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
In this case, the system produces the DRS/type" 
shown in Figure 4. 
Here we have a second temporal parameter T', cor- 
responding to to the explicit temporal referent 'July'. 
Note that the role corresponding to this parameter 
is indexed by 'pr'. This indicates that this time refe- 
rent, unlike the one corresponding to T, is phonolo- 
gically realised in the utterance. This distinction will 
be important when we come to process 'then'. Here 
we are exploiting the possibility afforded by situation 
theory of being able to include information about the 
utterance in our semantic representations. 15 
14However, top-down processing is not essential to the 
grammar, and a left-corner parser or chart parser could 
be used instead. 
tSWe have not taken the trouble here to mark non- 
161 
r, -+ S, r2 -+ X, ra -+ Y, r4 --~ R, r5 --~ T, \[r#,pr\] --~ T' 
s_J 
R1 
named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
named(T','July') 
climb(X,Y) 
sl 
occ-time(S,T) T C_ T' 
Figure 4: DRS/type for (la). 
The box: 
T \[- T' 
is another kind of EKN proposition--one that does 
not involve a situation. It expresses the information 
that T and T' are of type E, where this is a type 
of two times such that the second includes or equals 
the first. 
Process ing of  Discourse 
Now let us consider the semantic representation for 
a discourse. This consists of a proposition which is 
the conjunction of the propositions introduced by the 
individual sentences. Abstraction is carried out over 
the conjoined proposition as a whole, giving a list of 
discourse referents/roles for the discourse processed 
up to a given point. 
Thus for (la, lg): 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lg) Fiona climbed Snowdon. 
we get the representation shown in Figure 5.16 
Now let us consider the processing of discourse se- 
quences containing sentence-final 'then'. Consider 
(la,lb): 
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lb) Fiona climbed Snowdon then. 
The system parses (la), followed by (lb) as far as 
'then'. At this point in processing, the representa- 
tion built so far is that of Figure 5. The processing 
temporal discourse referents as phonologically realised, 
as this is not relevant o the analysis of 'then'--but it 
could of course be done. 
16The representation for (la, lg) will also contain in- 
formation about possible discourse relations between the 
two eventualities. We do not describe this feature of the 
system here except where it is relevant o 'then'. 
of 'then' causes the rules for ETR 'then' and par t -  
of  'then' to be invoked in turn. The rule for ETR 
'then' causes the system to "look for" a temporal re- 
ferent indexed 'pr' in the list of discourse referents 
introduced by the processing of the discourse up to 
this point. This list of discourse referents i  threaded 
from one sentence to the next (and from NP to VP 
within a sentence). In fact, what is threaded is not 
just the discourse referents but the overall DRS/type 
from the processing of the discourse up to this point. 
The threading is achieved at discourse level by means 
of the top-level rule of the grammar: 
dis(dis(SBar, Dis)),In, Out) --> 
sbar(SBar,Type .... ,In,Ned), 
dis(Dis,Ned,Out). 
The first argument to the predicate 'dis' is respon- 
sible for building the tree structure associated with 
the parse. The second and third arguments, the Pro- 
log variables 'In' and 'Out', enable threading of dis- 
course referents from the sentence just parsed to the 
remaining discourse. The input 'In' to the proces- 
sing of sbar consists of the overall DRS/type built 
up from processing the discourse up to this point. 
This includes a list of discourse referents generated 
so far. The grammar ules at sbar level and below 
cause the overall DRS/type to be updated to give a 
new type 'Med', which is the input DRS/type to the 
processing of the remainder of the discourse. The 
'Type' argument of sbar is the DRS/type obtained 
from parsing that individual sentence. The other ar- 
guments to sbar are not relevant o this discussion 
and have thus been omitted. 
Thus, at a given point in processing of discourse, 
the system can look for a temporal referent indexed 
'pr'. Looking at Figure 5, we see that an appropriate 
temporal referent indexed 'pr' is present. The rule 
for ETR 'then' therefore succeeds, and a proposition 
is introduced to the effect that T2 is temporally in- 
cluded in T', i.e. 
162 
rl -4 Si, r~ -4 X, r3 "--+ Y, 1"4 ---+ 1~1, r5 -+ T~, r6 -4 S~, r7 -4  U,  rs --+ V, r9 --+ R2, rl0 --). T2, rn --> T'  
climb(X,Y) 
named(X/Emily') 
named(Y/Ben Nevis') 
named(T', ' July') 
s, 1 
occ-time(S,, Tl ) Ta E_ T'  
-v \ ]  
climb(U,V) 
~~ ed(U,'Daniel' ed(V,'Snowdon') 
occ-time(S2, T2) 
Figure 5: Slightly simplified representation for ( la , lg)  and for ( la , lb )  at the point of processing 'then'.  
163 
T2 E T' 
This proposition is added to the restrictions of the 
lower box of Figure 5, to give the completed repre- 
sentation for (la, lb), which is not shown here for 
reasons of space. If there had been no such temporal 
referent marked 'pr' present, the rule for ETR 'then' 
would have failed. 
Now consider the part-of  reading for 'then'. 
We saw earlier that this requires an appro- 
priate discourse relation between the two described 
eventualities---one of ither backgrounding or ela- 
boration. Testing for whether an elaboration re- 
lation is possible requires world knowledge, and we 
have not attempted to build any of this into the sy- 
stem, although there appears to be no reason why 
this could not be done. The system in its present 
form therefore checks only for the background in- 
stance of the part -of  relation. 
Backgrounding is possible if the second eventua- 
lity is either a state or if it is presented with pro- 
gressive viewpoint. This means that, in order to 
test for backgrounding, the representations for indi- 
vidual sentences must contain information about the 
aspectual properties of the described eventualities-- 
for example, whether an eventuality is a state or a 
non-state (event), and whether it is presented with 
simple aspect (external viewpoint) or progressive as- 
pect (internal viewpoint). It is widely known that 
the aspectual properties of a described eventuality 
depend on certain properties of the verb 17 and also 
on other elements such as the referents of NP argu- 
ments. For example, the event described by: 
(5) Daniel climbed a mountain. 
is a Vendler accomplishment. Alternatively, we may 
characterise it in Krifka's terms as having the pro- 
perty +Q (quantized) or -CUM (non-cumulative), 
which are equivalent to the lack of a natural end- 
point or culmination. However, the event described 
by: 
(6) Daniel climbed mountains. 
is a Vendler activity, and in Krifka's terms has the 
property -Q/+CUM. Here we see what Krifka de- 
scribes as a "mapping" from the properties of the NP 
object is to the properties of the event. The referent 
of 'a mountain' is+Q, and so is the event of (5). The 
referent of 'mountains' is -Q,  and so is the event of 
(6). Such mapping from the properties of the object 
to the properties of the event only occurs for certain 
verbs, however--those where what Krifka calls the 
17E.g. 'basic aspectual type' in Moens' terms (Moens, 
1987) and semantic features in both Verkuyl's (1989) and 
Krifka's (1991) accounts. 
lSMore strictly the "patient", as it is thematic roles 
and not grammatical roles that are important here. 
"thematic relation" between the object and the event 
has an appropriate property. One such property that 
enables this mapping is what he calls gradual  pati- 
ent. In such cases, there is an intuitive relationship 
between the "progress" of the object and the pro- 
gress of the event. For example, in an eating event, 
the object is gradually consumed, and in a writing 
event, the object is gradually created. Both 'eat' and 
'write', as well as 'climb' thus have thematic relati- 
ons with the property gradual  pat ient.  Driving 
events do not, on the other hand, exhibit his corre- 
spondence between the progress of the event and the 
progress of the object. Thus the thematic relation 
between object and event for 'drive' does not have 
the gradual  pat ient  property, which explains why: 
(7) John drove the car. 
is +CUM/-Q even though 'the car' is -CUM/+Q. 19 
In our EKN account we encode Krifka's properties 
of thematic relations as types of situations and in- 
dividuals. For example, the lexical entry for 'climb' 
includes the following information: 
Z 
S,Y \] 
climb(X,Y) GRAD-PAT 
The grammar rules then make reference to this in- 
formation. For example, the rule: 
vbar( . . . .  ) --> v( . . . .  ), np( . . . .  ) 
contains a procedure which evaluates the Q-value of 
the predicate (vbar) according to the following algo- 
rithm: 
If: The thematic relation between S and Y is of type 
GRAD-PAT 
Then: Set the Q-value of the predicate (vbar) to be 
the same as that of Y 
Otherwise: Set the Q-value of the predicate to -Q.  
The Q-value of the agent 2? also affects that of the 
described eventuality. For example, the eventuality 
described by: 
(8) Emily climbed the mountain. 
is +Q, whereas that described by: 
(9) People climbed the mountain. 
is -Q. In (9), the -Q  value of the agent is transferred 
to the event. In order to deal with such examples, 
the rule 
s ( . . . )  --> r ip(. . . ) ,  vp( . . . )  
19A well-known test for the property +CUM/-Q of 
predicates i the ability to combine with a for-adverbial. 
2?Corresponding to the grammatical subject in these 
active sentences. 
164 
rl --~S, r~ -~X, r3 -~R 
named(X,'Fiona ) 
gi~l(x) 
l s l  
I STATE 
Figure 6: Representation for (le) at the point of pro- 
cessing 'then'. 
contains a similar algorithm to the one in the vbar 
rule. 
Thus the representation constructed by parsing a 
sentence includes information about the aspectual 
properties of the described eventuality. These in- 
clude the features +/ -STATE and +/ -Q  as already 
described, together with +/ -PROG depending on 
whether or not progressive aspect is present, and 
+/ -PUNCT which distinguishes punctual and non- 
punctual events (corresponding to the difference bet- 
ween achievements and accomplishments). 
Let us now consider the representation from the 
processing of: 
(le) Fiona was a girl then. 
up to the point where 'then' is reached. This is given 
(in slightly simplified form) in Figure 6. 
Now suppose we are processing (lc,le): 
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis. 
(le) Fiona was a girl then. 
The rule for par t -o f  'then' requires that the se- 
cond eventuality is either a state or it is described 
with progressive viewpoint. The former is true in 
this case, so the conditions for par t -o f  'then' are 
satisfied. The representation btained for (lc,le) is 
shown in Figure 7. 
The semant ics of  ~part-of '  
What exactly does it mean for the par t -o f  (~) re- 
lation to hold between two eventualities? The idea 
is that if $2 ~ $1, then any infon which is suppor- 
ted by $2 is also supported by $1. In other words, 
$2 adds further information to S1, causing it to be 
more fully specified. Here we exploit the partiality 
of situation theory. Situations may be only parti- 
ally specified: if we say that $1 supports ~, this does 
not tell us anything about what other information 
S1 does or does not support. It is thus possible for 
a later utterance to add further information about 
$1 and thereby specify it more fully. If the first ut- 
terance tells us that $1 supports the infon ~r, and the 
second tells us that $2 supports the infon 7" and also 
that $2 <1 $1, then we know that $1 supports both 
a and v. This is straightforward enough for the ela- 
boration case. We need to consider carefully what it 
means in a backgrounding case such as (la,le). 
According to our theoretical analysis, if an even- 
tuality is backgrounded then it does not introduce 
an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, the backgro- 
unded eventuality is of the same duration as that of 
the preceding event-- it "takes on" the time of that 
event. 21 Thus, in the representation f (lc,le) in Fi- 
gure 7, the backgrounded $2 has the same temporal 
extent as the event $1. This amounts to claiming 
that (le) describes only the part of the state that 
coincides with the preceding event. Of course we 
know that the state of Fiona's being a girl began 
before and continues after Emily's cl imb--there is a 
relationship of temporal inclusion between the "to- 
tal duration" of the state and the event. But we are 
saying that those parts of the state that are before 
and after the event are not described but are infer- 
red from our world knowledge about the duration of 
such states. 
Stative verbs are "natural backgrounders" in that 
they describe ventualities without making reference 
to the beginning and end points of the eventuality. 
They naturally describe a situation which can rea- 
dily be seen as a temporal "slice" of a more prolon- 
ged situation. For this reason, in the lexical entries 
for stative verbs in our grammar, there is no men- 
tion of the occurrence-time of the state. Progressives 
usually behave in a similar way. When an event de- 
scribed with progressive viewpoint follows one with 
simple (perfective) viewpoint, the relation between 
them is normally one of backgrounding. The effect of 
progressive viewpoint is to present he event from an 
internal perspective. An event described with inter- 
nal perspective is no longer temporally bounded-- it  
does not have an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, 
its duration is that of the preceding event, just as in 
the stative case. 
If we define two instances of the par t -o f  relation: 
. <1 bg for the backgrounding case 
* _ el for the elaboration case 
we can thus say: 
S2 ~ b s $1 ) T2 = Tz 
where T1,T2 are the temporal durations of $I and 
$2 respectively. And: 
S~ <l el $1 -'--+ T2 ___ T1 
Thus, for the general <l relation: 
$2 <I $1 ) T2 C T1 
21Evidence for this comes from an analysis of 'at the 
time' and 'at the same time'. See (Glasbey, ms2) for 
details. 
165 
r~ --+ $1, r2 ~ X, r3 --+ Y, r4 -~ R1, rs -> TI, r6 --~ $2, r7 --~ U, rs --~ R~ 
climb(X,V) 
IR, I 
I named(X,'Emily') 
named(Y,'Ben Nevis') 
Sl l  
occ-time(S1, T,) 
 rl(U) 
R2 I 
named(U,'Fiona') 
s2 I 
STATE $2 _<3 Sl 
Figure 7: Representation for (lc,le). 
Finally, let us consider (la,lf):  
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July. 
(lf) Fiona was climbing Snowdon then. 
In this case, an ETR is present and the second sen- 
tence has progressive aspect. This means that the 
conditions for both ETI~ 'then' and par t -o f  'then' 
are met.Our grammar will thus cause two represen- 
tations to be generated for (la, lf), corresponding to 
the two readings that we identified in Section 1. 
3 Genera l  remarks  
3.1 Fur ther  Deve lopments  
The system parses sequences of any length, keeping 
track of all the discourse referents/roles introduced 
so far. Thus, as it stands at present, it will find a 
temporal referent for 'then', irrespective of how far 
back in the discourse that referent was introduced. 
It may be desirable to refine this in some way--for 
example, to disallow anaphoric reference to an ETR 
that is more than a certain "distance" back in the 
discourse. Also, the system at present finds only 
the most recently introduce temporal referent. This 
could easily be modified--for example, in order to 
allow it to produce a set of alternatives. However, it 
appears that we would need to take discourse struc- 
ture into account here. 
3.2 Relat ion to other accounts of  temporal  
reference 
It is important to consider how our analysis fits with 
other work on temporal reference in discourse, and 
how readily our treatment of 'then' could be incorpo- 
rated into these accounts. Kamp and Reyle (forth- 
coming) present a DRT fragment which deals with 
temporal reference but does not include 'then'. In 
(Glasbey, forthcoming) and (Glasbey, 1992) we pre- 
sent a modification of Kamp and Reyle's fragment 
which incorporates our analysis of 'then'. We make 
the necessary distinction between what we call "ex- 
plicit" and "inferred" times by allowing a temporal 
referent o be introduced only when an explicit tem- 
poral referent is present. If there is no ETR, only an 
event referent may be introduced. This enables us to 
produce the correct readings for 'then'. We consider 
the ST/DRT account given in the present paper to 
be preferable, however, in that situation theory al- 
lows us to express information about the utterance 
in a way that traditional DRT does not. This enables 
us to make precisely the distinction we need between 
whether or not a particular eferent was phonologi- 
cally realised in the utterance. 
Lascarides and Asher (1991) present an account of 
temporal reference where discourse relations between 
eventualities are deduced by means of defeasible rea- 
soning. Their account is expressed in a version of 
166 
DRT and preliminary investigations suggest hat it 
could be extended to include 'then' in a similar way 
to the Kamp and Reyle fragment. 
4 Conc lus ion  
We have developed a computational gramlnar which 
parses discourse consisting of sequences of simple 
sentences containing a range of tense and aspect con- 
structions. In particular, it generates the required 
readings for sentence-final 'then'. We have also in- 
dicated how our analysis of 'then' could be incorpo- 
rated into some existing DRT accounts of temporal 
reference. The system appears to be capable of va- 
rious refinements involving more detailed theories of 
discourse structure, and as such may provide a basis 
for development of more extensive systems for dis- 
course analysis. 
Acknowledgments  
I would like to thank Robin Cooper, Max Cresswell, 
Elisabet Engdahl, Martin Mellor and Marc Moens 
for helpful advice and comments on this work. 
Re ferences  
\[Bach, 1986\] Emmon Bach. The algebra of events. 
Linguistics and Philosophy, 9:5-16, 1986. 
\[Barwise, 1989\] Jon Barwise. The Situation in Logic. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1989. 
\[Barwise and Cooper, forthcoming\] Jon Barwise 
and Robin Cooper. Extended Kamp Notation: 
a graphical notation for situation theory. In P. 
Aczel, D. Israel, Y. Katagiri and S. Peters (eds.) 
Situation Theory and its Applications, Vol. 3. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1993. 
\[Cooper, 1991\] Robin Cooper. Three lectures on si- 
tuation theoretic grammar. In Natural Language 
Processing. Proceedings of2nd Advanced School 
in Artificial Intelligence, Guarda, Portugal, Oc- 
tober 8-12, 1990. In series: Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence, Miguel Filgueiras (ed.). 
Springer Verlag, Berlin, London, 1991. 
\[Cooper, forthcoming\] Robin Cooper. Generalized 
quantifiers and resource situations. In P. Ac- 
zel, D. Israel, Y. Katagiri and S. Peters (eds.) 
Situation Theory and its Applications, Vol. 3. 
CSLI, Stanford, California, 1993. 
\[Cooper, msl\] Robin Cooper. Introduction to Situa- 
tion Semantics. Edinburgh University, Depart- 
ment of AI and Centre for Cognitive Science. In 
preparation. 
\[Cooper, ms2\] Robin Cooper. Situation theoretic di- 
scourse representation theory. Centre for Cogni- 
tive Science and Human Communication Rese- 
arch Centre, Edinburgh University, 1992. In pre- 
paration. 
\[Glasbey, 1992\] Sheila Glasbey. Sentence-final 
'then': a formal analysis. Edinburgh Research 
Papers in Cognitive Science, Centre for Cogni- 
m,e Science, Edinburgh University, 1992. 
\[Glasbey, forthcoming\] Sheila Glasbey. Events and 
times: the semantics of 'then'. To appear in a 
forthcoming issue of Natural Language Seman- 
tics, 1993. 
\[Glasbey, msl\] Sheila Glasbey. Event Structure in 
Natural Language Discourse. PhD thesis, Edin- 
burgh University. In preparation. 
\[Glasbey, ms2\] Sheila Glasbey. A formal analysis of 
'the X' and 'the same X' in discourse. Centre 
for Cognitive Science, Edinburgh University. In 
preparation. 
\[Hinrichs, 1986\] Erhard Hinrichs. Temporal ana- 
phora in discourses of English. Linguistics and 
Philosophy, 9:63-82, 1986. 
\[Johnson and Klein, 1986\] Mark Johnson and Ewan 
Klein. Discourse, anaphora nd parsing. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 11th COLING, 669-675, 1986. 
\[Kamp and Reyle, forthcoming\] Hans Kamp and 
Uwe Reyle. From Discourse to Logic. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1993. 
\[Krifka, 1991\] Manfred Krifka. Thematic relations 
as links between nominal reference and tem- 
poral constitution. In Ivan Sag and Anna Sa- 
bolcsi (eds.), Lexical Matters, Chicago Univer- 
sity Press, 1991. 
\[Lascarides and Asher, 1991\] Alex Lascarides and 
Nicholas Asher. Discourse relations and com- 
monsense entailment. In Hans Kamp (ed.), De- 
fault Logics for Linguistic Analysis, Dyana De- 
liverable R2.5B, 1991. 
\[Mann and Thompson, 1987\] W.C. Mann and S.A. 
Thompson. Rhetorical Structure Theory: A 
theory of text organization. Technical Report 
RR/87/190, Information Sciences Institute, Ma- 
rina del Rey, California, 1987. 
\[Moens, 1987\] Marc Moens. Tense, Aspect and Tem- 
poral Reference. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, 
Edinburgh University, 1987. 
\[Smith, 1991\] Carlota Smith. The Parameter of As- 
pect. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
1991. 
\[Vendler, 1967\] Zeno Vendler. Verbs and times. In 
Linguistics in Philosophy, Chapter 4, pages 97- 
121. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1967. 
\[Verkuyl, 1989\] Henk Verkuyl. Aspectual classes and 
aspectual composition. Linguistics and Philoso- 
phy, 12:39-94, 1989. 
\[Vlach, 1981\] Frank Vlach. The semantics of the 
progressive. In P. Tedeschi and A. Zaenen (eds.), 
Syntax and Semantics, Vol.14: Tense and As- 
pect. Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
167 
