A Probab i l i s t i c  Context - f ree  Grammar  
for D isambiguat ion  in Morpho log ica l  Pars ing  
Jos~e S. Heemskerk* 
Institute of Language Technology and Artificial Intelligence 
Tilburg University 
P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg 
The Netherlands 
E-mail: joseeh@kub.nl 
Abstract 
One of the major problems one is faced 
with when decomposing words into their 
constituent parts is ambiguity: the gen- 
eration of multiple analyses for one input 
word, many of which are implausible. In 
order to deal with ambiguity, the MOR- 
phological PArser MORPA is provided 
with a probabilistic ontext-free grammar 
(PCFG), i.e. it combines a "conventional" 
context-free morphological grammar to fil- 
ter out ungrammatical segmentations with 
a probability-based scoring function which 
determines the likelihood of each success- 
ful parse. Consequently, remaining analy- 
ses can be ordered along a scale of plausi- 
bility. Test performance data will show that 
a PCFG yields good results in morphologi- 
cal parsing. MORPA is a fully implemented 
parser developed for use in a text-to-speech 
conversion system. 
1 Introduction 
MORPA is a MORphological PArser developed for 
use in the text-to-speech conversion system for 
Dutch, SPRAAKMAKER \[van Leeuwen and te Lin- 
deft, 1993\]. An important step in text-to-speech on- 
version is the generation of the correct phonemic re- 
presentation o  the basis of the input text. As is well- 
known, phonemic transcriptions can not be derived 
*This work was carried out at the Phonetics Lab- 
oratory at Leiden University and supported by the 
Speech Technology Foundation, which is funded by 
the Netherlands Stimulation Project for Information 
Sciences, SPIN. 
directly from orthographic input in Dutch, as there 
is no one-to-one correspondence b tween graphemes 
and phonemes. Also, stress and the effects of most 
phonological rules are not reflected in orthography. 
A text-to-speech system therefore requires an intel- 
ligent method to convert the spelled words of the 
input sentence into a phonemic representation. 
As far as the pronunciation of words is concerned, 
it is impossible to list the entire vocabulary of the 
language, because language users have the ability to 
create new words and the vocabulary, as such, is in- 
definitely large. Daily newspapers, for instance, con- 
tain a large amount of newly formed words every day. 
Not all of these survive in the long run, but some of 
them do. Consider the examples in (1): 
(1) golfooriog 'gulf war' 
drugsbaron 'drugs baron' 
vredesmacht 'peacekeeping force' 
Because it is unfeasible to give the lexicon a daily 
update, this approach is not appropriate if the text- 
to-speech system is to convert unrestricted text. 
Assuming that newly created words will typically 
consist of already existing morphemes, and that new 
morphemes are added to the language only rarely, we 
can, however, use a lexicon in which all Dutch mor- 
phemes and their pronunciations are listed. Then 
complex words, such as the ones in (1), have to be 
decomposed into their constituent parts before their 
pronunciation can be looked up. 
Since the pronunciation ofa word does not always 
consists of the concatenation f the pronunciation of
the morphemes, because the pronunciation of mor- 
phemes can be modified in certain contexts, the text- 
to-speech system also has to be provided with phono- 
logical rules which adjust the pronunciation of mor- 
phemes according to their context \[Allen et aL, 1987; 
183 
Nunn and van tteuven, 1993\]. 
Dutch phonological rules are in several ways de- 
pendent on morphemic segmentation a d word class 
assignment. As is shown in (2a), for example, the 
grapheme d is pronounced voiceless when it occurs 
stem-finally, but voiced when it occurs tem-initially. 
Final devoicing, the phonological rule which affects 
the pronunciation f the d, depends on syllable struc- 
ture, and syllabification is sensitive to the morpho- 
logical structure of a word: compound boundaries 
are also syllable boundaries. This has serious con- 
sequences in Dutch, as Dutch compounds are usu- 
ally written as one word, i.e. without spaces or hy- 
phens in between the parts. Example (2b) shows 
that the stress in compounds differs from the stress in 
monomorphemic words. In (2c) it is shown that the 
stress in (predicatively used) adjectival compounds 
differs from the stress in nominal compounds: 
(2) a hoofdagent 
hoof\[t\] + agent 
loofdak 
Ioof + \[d\]ak 
b avonduur 
'avond + uur 
avontultr 
avonttuur 
c onecM 
on + lecht, A 
onrecht 
%n + recht, N 
So to be able to produce high quality speech on un- 
restricted text, the text- to-speech system SPRAAK- 
MAKER contains the morpheme l xicon-based mor- 
phological parser MORPA to recover the morphemic 
segmentation a d word class of the input word. The 
module MORPHON \[Nunn and van Heuven, 1993\] 
applies phonological rules which derive the pronun- 
ciation of the word by making use of the morpho- 
logical information. Also, the word class provided 
by MORPA feeds the module for sentence analysis 
which serves sentence prosody \[Dirksen and Quen~, 
1993\]. 
Our method of morphological nalysis comprises a
morpheme l xicon. Assuming that Dutch word for- 
mation is concatenative, word or word parts are rec- 
ognized by dividing the word into substrings that 
correspond to entries in the lexicon. The major prob- 
lem this method poses is ambiguity, i.e. the gen- 
eration of alternative segmentations and word class 
assignments for one input word, many of which are 
implausible. In a text-to-speech system, an incor- 
rect analysis is unacceptable, because it may lead to 
a wrong pronunciation \[Nunn and van IIeuven, 1993\]. 
In order to deal with ambiguity, MORPA has been 
provided with a probabilistic ontext-free grammar 
(PCFG), i.e. it combines a "conventional" context- 
free morphological grammar to filter out ungram- 
'police sergeant' 
'roof of foliage' 
'evening hour' 
'adventure' 
'unreal' 
'injustice' 
matical segmentations with a probability-based scor- 
ing function which determines the likelihood of each 
successful parse. Then, aiming at a system that gen- 
erates the "best" analysis first, the remaining anal- 
yses are ordered along a scale of plausibility. In this 
paper, I will separately describe the rule-based is- 
ambiguation techniques and probability-based scor- 
ing function. Illustrative performance data obtained 
from an evaluation will show that a probabilistic 
context-free grammar yields good results in morpho- 
logical parsing. 
2 Ru le -based  d i sambiguat ion  
Decomposition of the input word is carried out in 
two successive stages. First, all the possible seg- 
mentations of an input word into strings of stems 
and affixes are generated. Secondly, each segmenta- 
tion is tested for morpho-syntactic well-formedness. 
While the well-formedness i  tested, word class is de- 
termined. 
The task of recovering the morphemic segmentation 
with the help of a morpheme l xicon is very much 
complicated by the fact that a word can be seg- 
mented in more than one way. The number of alter- 
native segmentations for an input word grows with 
increasing lexicon size, decreasing average length of 
the lexical elements and increasing average length of 
the input word. Our lexicon contains 17,087 entries, 
among which there is a large number of very small in- 
flectional affixes. Furthermore, the input words may 
be very lengthy, as Dutch compounds are written 
as one word, and because nominal compounding, for 
instance, is a highly productive process. The result 
can be a combinatorial explosion, causing hundreds 
of segmentations to be generated. 
In order to restrict ambiguity in the segmentation 
stage, we employed a number of strategies. First, 
we made a pragmatic operalisation ofthe theoretical 
notion "morpheme", which is traditionally defined as 
"the smallest meaningful nit" in word formation: in 
our lexicon we only listed words and affixes. Along 
with all simplex words and productive affixes, we 
listed all the word formations that belong to closed 
classes, i.e. words which are not formed according 
to productive word formation processes. Thus, our 
parser only has to analyse words formed according 
to productive rules. 
Secondly, MORPA performs, if available, some 
tests on phonological nd phonetic restrictions on the 
recognition of morphemes in a specific context. The 
ultimate ffect of these tests is that incorrect recog- 
nition of highly frequent and very small inflectional 
suffixes, such as -e, -t, -d, -s, -r, -n, -en or -er, can 
be prevented in many cases. 
Finally, MORPA sees to it that words belonging 
to minor lexical categories ( uch as determiners, pro- 
nouns, conjunctions, etc.) are not recognised as word 
parts. They never take part in morphological pro- 
184 
cesses. By rejecting these, we prevent the parser 
from doing work which we know beforehand will be 
in vain. 
To illustrate the effect of the segmentation proce- 
dure, its output for the noun beneveling (intoxica- 
tion) is shown in (3)z: 
(3) a be + neef + eling 
b be+neef+e+l ing  
c be + nevel + ing 
d been + e + veel + ing 
e be+n +e+vee l+ ing  
f be +neef + eel + ing 
All of the parts in the segmentations under (3) are 
Dutch morphemes listed in the morpheme lexicon. 
Because the segmentation procedure analyses the in- 
put word into all possible strings of morphemes with- 
out any further grammatical knowledge, it generates 
along with the one and only plausible segmentation 
be + nevel + ing (3c), several alternative segmen- 
tations. Many of these violate grammatical nd/or 
semantic restrictions. 
In order to filter out ungrammatical segmenta- 
tions, each segmentation is checked for its morpho- 
syntactic well-formedness with the help of a cate- 
gorial grammar. Consequently, every segmentation 
that is not in accordance with the rules of Dutch 
morphology is rejected by the parser. While check- 
ing, the word class of the grammatical segmentations 
is determined. 
In accordance with the principles of Categorial 
Grammar, our parser does not make use of a set of 
explicitly represented word formation rules. Instead, 
the morphological subcategorisation information is 
encoded in the form of category assignments in the 
lexicon. That is, prefixes have been assigned a cat- 
egory of type A/B,  which means that they take a 
stem of category A on their right-hand side to yield 
a word of category B 2. For instance, the prefix be- 
with category N/V  requires a nominal stem to the 
right to form a verb. Likewise, suffixes of category 
A\B  look for a stem of category A on their left-hand 
side to yield a word of category B. Thus, the suffix 
-ing, V \N ,  requires a verbal stem to the left to form 
a noun. Free morphemes, uch as nevel, are assigned 
primitive categories, uch as V or N 3. 
1When segmenting, MORPA takes into account hat 
Dutch word stems, when inflected or used as the base of a 
derivation, may undergo spelling changes. It would take 
us too far to go into the spelling rules here, but in (3) the 
effect of rules such as 'vowel gemination' and 'devoicing 
of stem-final consonants' shows up. See for more detail 
\[Heemskerk and van Heuven, 1993\]. 
~Note that in the literature on categorial grammar the 
notational variant B/A is frequently used. 
SSince our parser only accounts for morphological sub- 
categorisation, the set of lexical categories does not equal 
the set of syntactic ategories. For example, all verbs are 
In a strictly bottom-up fashion, the parser itera- 
tively attempts to combine two adjacent elements, 
reducing them in accordance with their categorial 
specification with the help of three very general re- 
duction laws: 
(4) prefixation: A/B  . A ---. B 
suffixation: A.  A \B  --* B 
compounding: A.  B --~ B 
For pragmatic reasons, MORPA's rule for com- 
pounding is not a categorial rule, but a categorial-like 
rule: two adjacent stems AB may, according to the 
Right-Hand Head Rule be combined into a word of 
category B4. In addition to this general rule for com- 
pounding, the grammar contains a small set of rules 
defining productive compounding. An analysis fails 
as soon as a string of categories cannot be reduced 
to one single category. 
The examples in (5) illustrate how iterative cat- 
egorial reduction results in a successful parse. The 
structures how the derivation and determination f
the output category of (3c). Also, the examples in (5) 
illustrate that, while the categorial grammar flters 
out many ungrammatical segmentations and derives 
the word class of the input word, parsing introduces 
a new type of ambiguity: one segmentation can be 
assigned more than one structure. The ambiguity in 
(5) is due to the fact that the morphemes be- (en-) 
and nevel (mist) can belong to more than one lex- 
ical category and as a consequence can be reduced 
in more than one way. The ambiguity in (5a) and 
(5b), is spurious in the sense that it does not corre- 
late with a difference in pronunciation or word class 
assignment. The reduction in (5c) results in an in- 
correct word class assignment. 
Because the word syntax as such is not restric- 
tive enough, it was supplemented with a component 
which heavily restrains the parser in building struc- 
tures. This component, which is inspired by Lexical 
Phonology, imposes an ordering on the attachment of
affixes and stems. Consequently, it restricts the type 
or the complexity of the stem that an affix or other 
stem may attach to. Rejection of structures can re- 
sult in avoiding incorrect word class assignment and 
rejection of incorrect segmentations. 
In Lexical Phonology, the interaction between 
stress behaviour and affix order is explained. \[Chore- 
sky and Halle, 1968\] distinguished two classes of 
suffixes with different stress properties, and \[Siegel, 
1979\] observed that this distinction correlates with 
the order in which the suffixes attach. Over the 
years, theoretical linguists have become sceptical 
assigned category V, irrespective of (in)transitivity. The 
use of syntactic categories would complicate the grammar 
considerably. See \[Dowty, 1979\] and \[Moortgat, 1987\] for 
a discussion on this matter. 
4For more principled approaches see \[Hoeksema, 1984; 
Moortgat, 1987\] 
185 
of these "level theories", because of the so-called 
"bracketing paradoxes", i.e. constructions in which 
two distinct constituent structures (for instance a 
morphological nd a phonological one) have to be 
assigned to a word 5. Despite the occurrence of brack- 
eting paradoxes, however, the claims on level ordered 
morphology following from these theories are highly 
interesting: in checking the morphological claims 
which follow from one of the theories that have been 
developed for Dutch, \[van Beurden, 1987\], against 
a large database containing approximately 123,000 
Dutch words, relatively few counter-examples were 
found. 
(5) a N 
V V\N 
N/V N ing 
I I 
be nevel 
b N 
V V\N 
V/V V ing 
be nevel 
V 
N/V N 
be V V\N 
L .I 
nevel mg 
SSee for a recent discussion of this topic \[Spencer, 
1991\] 
Van Beurden claims that affix order does not de- 
pend on stress properties, but on categorial proper- 
ties. Thus, the major characteristic of this model 
is that each attachment level is associated with a 
specific lexical output category. The model seems 
particularly suitable for use in MORPA, because it 
is easy to integrate with our categorial parser. The 
model implemented in MORPA, shown in (6), is an 
extension of Van Beurden's model in a way which is 
consistent with its basic assumptions s. 
(6) 
Underived words, affixes 
Unproductive word formations 
L 
V-morphology 
I ,, A-morphology 
.1 
N-morphology 
On the basis of this model, the Dutch vocabulary can 
be divided into four levels. Each of the levels in (6) 
may be viewed as possible successive stages in word 
formation. The first level, or lexical level, comprises 
the lexicon of simplex words, affixes and irregular 
formations. This level also contains all (borrowed) 
Romance words. The elements of this lexical level 
may be successively developed on the second level 
on which V(erbal)-morphology takes place; the third 
level on which A(djectival)-morphology takes place 
and the fourth level on which N(ominal)-morphology 
takes place. The name of the level indicates the re- 
sulting word class. Each of these levels preserves 
the possibility for suffixation, compounding and pre- 
fixation. On the levels for V-morphology and A- 
morphology each of these processes may take place 
6In van Beurden's model each categorial level has a 
phonological level associated with it. As we are mainly 
interested in the morphological aspects, we leave the 
phonological claims for what they are: within SPRAAK- 
MAKER, MORPA and MORPHON (the phonological 
module) are autonomous modules, and as MORPA pre- 
cedes MORPHON, any interaction between the two sys- 
tems is one way. 
186 
only once. We assume that only the processes on the 
N-morphology level are recursive, i.e. may take place 
more than once (see \[Heemskerk, 1989\] for more de- 
tails). 
The model correctly predicts the derivation of the 
word onverdraagzaarnheid ( ntolerance). As shown 
in (7), first verbal prefixation yields the verbal stem 
verdraag (tolerate), then adjectival suffixation yields 
the adjective verdraagzaam (tolerant), adjectival pre- 
fixation yields the adjective onverdraagzaam (intoler- 
ant) and, finally, nominal suffixation yields the noun 
onverdraagzaamheid ( ntolerance): 
(7) N 
A A\N 
A/A A heid 
on V V\A 
V/V V zaam 
I I 
ver  draag 
Also, the level module rules out the analysis in (5c): 
the nominal suffix -ing must not be attached before 
the verbal prefix be-. Therefore the word cannot be 
analysed as a verb. 
(8) 
Segmentations 
be + neef + eling 
be + neef + e -}- ling 
be + nevel .+ ing 
be + neef + eel + ing 
word class 
assigned by 
categ, level 
grammar module 
N N 
N 
NV N-  
N 
If we return to the example of beneveling we find 
that of the six alternative segmentations in (3), only 
four are accepted by the categorial component. As 
is shown in (8) one of these segmentations has been 
assigned a wrong word class. In (8) it is also shown 
that, as a result of the level ordering, three of the as- 
signed word classes (and matching structures 7) were 
rejected. Consequently, two analyses remain .  
3 Probability-based scoring function 
Clearly, the ultimate handling of the remaining am- 
biguity in (8) demands recourse to semantics and 
world knowledge. For the large-scale domain we 
are dealing with, however, we considered it unfea- 
sible to implement semantic and pragmatic con- 
straints. Thanks to the availability of a large anno- 
tated corpus, the alternative of constructing a PCFG 
came within reach. The corpus, being a represen- 
tative sample of the past or existing vocabulary, 
is expected to capture implicitly various semantic 
and pragmatic onstraints. \[Fujisaki et al, 1989; 
Liberman, 1991\]. Empirical estimation of the proba- 
bility of a parse tree on the basis of the corpus enables 
us to order the competing analyses along a scale of 
plausibility and select he "best" parse out of the set 
of alternatives. 
A parse tree, such as (5a), is a series of applied pro- 
duction rule@. In a context-free grammar it is as- 
sumed that the application of a production rule is 
independent of previously applied rules. In a PCFG, 
each production rule r is assigned an estimated prob- 
ability of use and the probability of the parse tree t 
is the product of the constituting production rules 
r l ,  r2,  . . . ,  rm:  
(9) P(t)- -P(rz)  x P(r2) x ... x P(rm) 
The probability of each production rule in the gram- 
mar has been estimated by means of straightforward 
counting of appearances in the corpus, resulting in 
relative frequencies. Let G be any non-terminal sym- 
bol of the grammar; n(G) the number of productions 
rewriting G and P(ilG ) the probability that the ith 
of these productions takes place, then 
(10) P(iIG ) = n(G) 
It is assumed that for all i -- 1, 2 . . . .  , n(G), P(iIG ) 
is a positive number and that ~iP( i lG)  -- 1. 
7In (8), I abstract from hierarchical structures, ince 
they are irrelevant for pronunciation. Relevant for pro- 
nunciation are the morphemic segmentation and word 
class assignment. Consequently, the structures of (5) are 
represented asthe segmentation be + nevel + ing, which 
has been assigned two word classes N and V. 
Sin this section, I will give a top-down description 
of a parse tree and discuss production rules of the type 
"A --, B C a, rather than bottom-up reduction and rules 
of the sort "B C --+ A ~ used by the parser. 
187 
MORPA's grammar comprises three different ypes 
of production rules: 
(11) a w ~ T 
b T--~ N1 N2 
c N----*M 
In (11) w is the start symbol for words 9, T any mem- 
ber of the set of atomic categories which are possi- 
ble top nodes: 7- = {n, v, a, . . .},  N any member of 
the set of non-terminals containing both atomic and 
functor categories: Af = {n, n/v, v\n, v, . . .}, 7- C .hf, 
and M any member of the set of terminals: Jvf = 
{be, nevel, ing, . . .} .  
The probability of (5a) is then determined as in 
(12)1?: 
(12) P(\[n \[v \[n/v be\]\[v nevell\]\[v\n ing\]\]) =
P(w ~ n) x 
P(n ---, v v \n )  x 
P(v~ n/v n) x 
P(n/v  ---* be) x 
P(n -..-* nevel) x 
P(v \n  ~ ing) 
Thus, this simple PCFG provides general informa- 
tion on how likely a parse tree is going to appear. 
It is well-known that the accuracy of the empirical 
estimate of a probability function depends heavily on 
the appropriateness of the training set: for one thing, 
it must have a reasonable size and be representative 
of the domain that is being modelled. Our training 
set was the CELEX database which contains approx- 
imately 123,000 Dutch stems provided with syntactic 
information, a morphological decomposition and to- 
ken frequency information \[van der Wouden, 1988; 
Burnage, 1990\]. The token frequency information 
is based on a 44-million-word corpus. We collected 
from this database both type and token frequencies: 
type frequencies indicate how often a production rule 
occurs in the Dutch vocabulary (i.e. in the 123,000 
stems corpus); token frequencies indicate how often 
a production rule occurs in Dutch texts (i.e. in the 
44-million-word corpus). The underlying idea was 
that for tests on dictionary samples the empirical es- 
timate must be based on type frequencies, whereas 
for tests on text samples it must be based on token 
frequencies. 
Given the information in the database, we ex- 
pected the collection of frequency data to be a matter 
of straightforward counting: CELEX's morphologi- 
cal decomposition consists of hierarchical structures 
which are comparable to MORPA's structures (cf. 
9Although not in the grammar, this symbol is used 
to make it possible to describe the possibility of a word 
being of a certain category in terms of (5). 
10 For the reader's convenience, the probabilities denote 
the tree (in labelled bracketing) and production rules 
involved. 
the examples in (5)), the syntactic information con- 
sists of the word class, and because each stem in 
the stem corpus is provided with a token frequency, 
type and token frequencies could be collected simul- 
taneously: every time a production rule was encoun- 
tered in the stems corpus, 1 was added to its type 
frequency, and the token frequency of the word in 
which the rule was attested was added to its token 
frequency. 
Unfortunately, however, straightforward counting 
of all production rules contained in CELEX did not 
suffice to provide MORPA with the relevant informa- 
tion: it turned out that the set of production rules 
employed by MORPA was not contained in the set of 
production rules given by CELEX. For a very large 
part, the mismatch between the rules is caused by 
the fact that CELEX and MOR.PA yield different 
analyses. For example, because in MORPA all words 
formed according to unproductive rules are entirely 
listed in the lexicon, and the Dutch adjectival suffix - 
elijk '-ly' is considered to be unproductive, all words 
derived by this suffix are listed. In CELEX, how- 
ever, these words are decomposed. Now, in order to 
analyse the word vriendelijk (friendly), MORPA will 
employ the production rule (13a), whereas CELEX 
employed the rules in (13b): 
(13) a A --~ vriendelijk 
b A ~ N N\A  
N ~ vriend 
N\A  ~ elijk 
Consequently, straightforward counting of the pro- 
duction rules in CELEX, would result in overesti- 
mating the probability of the productions "A ---* 
N N\A"  and "N --~ vriend", and lack of frequency 
information for the production "A --* vriendelijk". 
Amongst the MORPA rules which were not con- 
tained in the set of CELEX rules, there were also 
all the rules introducing inflectional affixes and in- 
fleeted stems. Of course, this is due to the fact that 
the 123,000-entry corpus only contains stems. As 
CELEX stems are considered to be an abstract way 
of representing a whole inflectional paradigm, inflec- 
tional affixes and inflected stems were not included 
in the database, and the token frequency associated 
with a stem is the sum of the token frequencies of the 
stem and all its inflected forms. However, MORPA 
also contains inflectional rules of which the token 
frequencies should be available. For obtaining fre- 
quency information on inflectional affixes and stems, 
we had to use the CELEX corpus, containing ap- 
proximately 44 million words. Unfortunately, the 
morphological information in this corpus does not 
contain any production rules or information on the 
affixes. 
Thus, after all production rules in CELEX had 
been counted straightforwardly, we were only able 
to assign frequency information to a part of the 
MORPA rules. Moreover, we knew that some of 
188 
these frequencies were overestimated. Because we 
expected these facts to have a negative influence on 
the accuracy of the PCFG, we decided to put some 
effort in making the empirical estimate more reli- 
able. We had to be very creative in finding other 
ways to provide the rules which are not in CELEX 
with frequency information (from CELEX), but we 
finally managed to provide almost all production 
rules employed by MORPA with frequency informa- 
tion. Also, we put some effort into "repairing" the 
overestimated frequencies. Consequently, the data 
have become more complete and more reliable, but 
as a result of these problems, the collection of fre- 
quency information became a time-consuming and 
error-sensitive job: a lot of work had to be done by 
hand. Therefore, it is practically almost undoable to 
go over it all over again. 
With respect to the reliability of the frequency 
data, it turned out that the token frequencies are 
less reliable than the lexical frequencies. Most impor- 
tantly, this was due to the fact that in CELEX, the 
token frequencies were "string" counts, i.e. they in- 
dicate how many times each separate string of letters 
occurs in the 44-million-word corpus. Because some 
of these "separate strings of letters" may be ambigu- 
ous in word class, morphemic segmentation r mean- 
ing, they are assigned different entries in the stems 
corpus. Ideally, the token frequencies in the corpus 
are disambiguated for the different entries, but at 
the time we collected our data they were not 11. As 
a consequence, numerous tems were assigned over- 
estimated token frequencies. 
Consider, for example, the string rod, which can 
be linked to two entries in the stems database: the 
entry of the preposition met 'with', and the entry 
of the noun met 'minced pork'. Since the individ- 
ual frequencies of each of these entries have not been 
sorted out, the rules "P ---* met" and "N ---* met" 
have the same frequency, i.e. the frequency of the 
string met. Because the preposition is highly fre- 
quent and the noun hardly ever occurs, the latter 
rule has been assigned a frequency which is highly 
overestimated. Since in addition to that overesti- 
mation the rule "w ~ N" is more frequent han 
the rule "w --* P",  and to the frequency of the rule 
"N --* met" is added the frequency of the two com- 
pounds in which it takes part, MORPA will consider 
the noun to be the most likely analysis. Had the fre- 
quencies been sorted out, this would not be the case: 
the high probability of the rule "P ~ met" would 
have overweighted all other probabilities. 
The unreliability of token frequencies was beared 
out by some preliminary tests, in which we exper- 
imented using type and token frequencies on both 
dictionary and text test samples. When examining 
11By now, CELEX has disambiguated the token fre- 
quencies, but as the collection of reliable data was very 
time-consuming, we have not yet "repaired" our token 
frequencies. 
MORPA's output on a text test sample (for which to- 
ken frequencies were used), we discovered that many 
of the erroneous elections were indeed attributable 
to the lack ofdisambiguation of token frequencies. 
Especially if the sample contained highly frequent 
string ambiguous simplex words, such as met, which 
do not take part in derivation or compounding, 
MORPA's performance got worse. It turned out that 
MORPA's performance was best, when type frequen- 
cies were used in a dictionary test sample. 
MORPA first generates all possible parses and the 
associated probabilities, ordering them along a scale 
of plausibility afterwards. Thus, as yet, it is not a 
probabilistic parser in the sense that it :prunes the 
low probability parses in an early stage \[Fujisaki et 
al., 1989; Jelinek d aL, 1990\]. Adjusting the parser 
will speed it up considerably, but also pruning low- 
ranked analyses may lead to incompleteness. 
In conclusion, let us return to the example word 
beneveling. After likelihood determination and or- 
dering of the two remaining analyses in (8), the cor- 
rect analysis be + nevel + ing is in topmost position: 
(14) 1 be -t- nevel 4- ing N 
2 be 4- neef -t- eling N 
4 The  per fo rmance  o f  MORPA 
In order to evaluate the performance of our system 
a test was run on a dictionary test sample of 3,077 
words. The words contained in this sample were ran- 
domly taken from texts of the so-called "Bloemendal 
corpus" \[Bringmann, 1990\]. 
For a correct interpretation of the results, it is nec- 
essary to know that a word was considered to be 
correctly analysed, if it had been assigned the cor- 
rect morphemic segmentation and word class. The 
analysis in (15) is the correct analysis of the word 
beneveling: 
(15) \[- be\] \[o,.,. ,evel\] \[.-I l i. ins\]\] 
Thus, in the final output of MORPA, morphological 
information which is irrelevant for pronunciation is
eliminated: analyses which have the same segmenta- 
tion, but are ambiguous in their hierarchical struc- 
ture and/or categorial labelling of the morphemes, 
such as (5a) and (5b), become one as long as the 
morphemes have the same morphological c assifica- 
tion, e.g. ((non)-native) prefix, suffix or stem, and 
the word is assigned the same word class. 
As MORPA combines a conventional grammar with 
a probability-based scoring function, it is interest- 
ing to look at the effects of both the rule-based part 
and the probability-based ordering technique in their 
own right: the segmentation procedure and grammar 
determine the quality of the analyses and the num- 
ber of analyses generated, and the probability-based 
189 
scoring function enables MORPA to select the most 
likely analysis from a set of alternatives. 
The results in (16) show how well the segmenta- 
tion procedure and grammar succeeded in deriving 
the correct analysis for the test words: 
(16) 
words assigned Number  
n = 3,077 
a correct analysis 2,968 
no correct analysis 32 
no analysis at all 77 
% 
96 
MORPA assigned no analysis at all to 3% of the test 
words. For 1% of the test words, one or more anal- 
yses were generated, but the set of alternatives did 
not contain a correct analysis. In these cases, the 
word either contains an unknown morpheme, or the 
grammar is too restrictive. 96% of the test words 
were assigned a correct analysis. 
Given the problem of ambiguity, the number of 
analyses generated for one word is remarkably small: 
considering only the words which were correctly anal- 
ysed, MORPA assigned a single, correct analysis to 
46% of the test words. For 54%, the correct analysis 
was among alternatives: 
(17) 
words assigned a correct 
analysis, which is 
among alternatives 
unique 
Number % 
n = 2,968 
1,612 54 
1,356 46 
ing analyses along a scale of plausibility, it must be 
established how often MORPA succeeds in select- 
ing the correct analysis from a set of alternatives. 
MORPA was able to select the correct analysis as 
most likely member of a set of alternatives for 92% 
of the test words. For a proper judgement of this 
performance, the percentage must be compared with 
the chances of selecting the most likely analysis from 
the set of alternatives. This chance is determined at 
40%: 
(18) 
words assigned the best 
.analysis from a set of 
alternatives, by 
the probability-based 
ordering technique 
chance 
Number % 
n = 1,612 
1,483 92 
645 40 
It is not easy to tell which factors attributed to the 
fact that for 8% of the words the correct analysis was 
not selected as best analysis. The frequency data 
may be unreliable or the probability function may 
not be appropriate. Also, the correct analysis does 
not always have to be the most probable one. 
Most importantly however, is the overall perfor- 
mance of MORPA's PCFG on the Bloemendal cor- 
pus: 92% of the test words had been assigned a cor- 
rect analysis which was also the first analysis yielded. 
(19) 
words assigned 
a correct analysis in 
topmost position 
Number % 
n = 3,077 
2,835 92 
Although we did not keep track of the number of 
segmentations a signed to the input words, it can 
be generally assumed that the number of alternative 
segmentations is very much reduced by the gram- 
mar. Also, through converting output that contains 
hierarchical structures and categorial labels (cf. (5)a 
and (5)b) to linear structures and morpheme classi- 
fication (c/. (15)), a lot of unnecessary ambiguity is 
eliminated. 
In order to evaluate the probability-based scoring 
function, which enables MORPA to order compet- 
For the 8% of the test words which were not assigned 
a correct analysis in first position, MORPA either 
generated a correct analysis which was not in first 
position, or no correct analysis or no analysis at all. 
In order to establish the relevance for word level pro- 
nunciation, a test was run on a test file containing 
approximately 2000 isolated words. The test words 
were selected from different corpora to make sure the 
file contained both newspaper text, dictionary words 
190 
and words of frequency 112. The words of the test file 
were analysed by MORPA and the topmost analyses 
were used by MORPHON to derive a pronunciation 
transcription. A transcription was considered correct 
if it had the proper phonemic transcription, which 
means that all appropriate non-optional phonologi- 
cal rules must have been applied, and that the words 
must have the correct syllable structure and stress 
pattern. 
Fifteen percent of the words were assigned an er- 
roneous phonemic transcription 13. Twenty percent 
of the errors could be traced back to the phonolog- 
ical module, the remaining errors, 80%, are due to 
faulty morphological nalyses. Of the errors made 
by MORPA, 88% led to an incorrect pronunciation 
representation. As expected, segmentation errors al- 
most always led to an incorrect phonemic transcrip- 
tion. Category assignment errors also cause incorrect 
pronunciations, though less often. This bears out the 
importance of the category a word belongs to. 
5 Conclusion 
As the results how, this fully implemented system, 
running with a morpheme l xicon of 17,087 entries 
on a randomly selected 3,077 words test sample, is 
successful. This success may to a large extent be 
put down to the augmentation f the context-free 
grammar to a PCFG 14. 
As mentioned above, the accuracy of a PCFG de- 
pends heavily on the accuracy of the empirical es- 
timate of the probability function. We were lucky 
to have at our disposal a training set which was 
both large enough and representative, but due to the 
facts that, in some cases, MORPA and the training 
set yield different analyses, and token frequencies for 
string ambiguous words were not disambiguated, we
expect our estimate to have become less reliable. In 
order to improve MORPA's performance on text test 
samples, we will have to "repair" the token frequen- 
cies. 
It is often argued that a PCFG only provides poor 
estimates ofprobability, and that probabilistic gram- 
mars require more sensitivity to lexical context. Af- 
ter all, PCFGs only provide very general information 
on how likely a production rule is going to appear 
anywhere in a sample of the language, and produc- 
tion rules are not always context-free \[Magerman d 
a2For reasons I will not go into here, the newspaper 
and dictionary words did not comprise highly frequent 
words \[Nunn and van Heuven, 1993\]. 
13See for a comparison with a data-oriented system 
for Dutch grapheme-to-phoneme transcription \[van den 
Bosch and Daelemans, 1993\]. Note that in this compar- 
ison syllabification and stress assignment have not been 
taken into account. 
14Before this augmentation, the parser was enriched 
with some preliminary criteria imposing an order on the 
set of alternatives. Then, the performance ame up to 
85%. 
Marcus, 1991; Resnik, 1992\]. However, most of the 
work done on context-free probabilistic grammars i
done for syntax, and as I hope to have shown that a 
PCFG yields good results for morphology, it might 
be interesting to find out if, for one reason or another, 
PCFGs are more successful for morphology than for 
syntax. 
Acknowledgements  
I wish to thank my former colleagues of the Phonet- 
ics Laboratory at Leiden University who contributed 
to the work on MORPA. Furthermore, I am greatly 
indebted to Louis ten Bosch for his help with proba- 
bility theory and Emiel Krahmer and Wessel Kraaij 
for solving all my IbTEX problems. 
Re ferences  
\[Allen et al, 1987\] J. Allen, M.S. Hunnicutt, and 
D. Klatt. From Text to Speech: the MITalk Sys- 
tem. Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
\[van Beurden, 1987\] L. van Beurden. Playing level 
with Dutch morphology. In F. Beukema and 
P. Coopmans, editors, Linguistics is the Nether- 
lands 1987, pages 21-30, 1987. 
\[van den Bosch and Daelemans, 1993\] A. van den 
Bosch and W. Daelemans. Data-oriented meth- 
ods for grapheme-to-phoneme conversion. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth Conference of the European 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics., 1993. 
\[Bringmann, 1990\] E. Bringmann. Philip Bloemen- 
dal corpus. Internal Report 21, Analysis and Syn- 
thesis of speech, Utrecht 1990. 
\[Burnage, 1990\] Gavin Burnage. CELEX, a guide 
for users. CELEX Centre for Lexical Information, 
Nijmegen, 1990. 
\[Chomsky and Halle, 1968\] 
N. Chomsky and M. Halle. The sound pattern of 
English. Harper and Row, New York, 1968. 
\[Dirksen and Quen~, 1993\] 
A. Dirksen and H. Quen~. Prosodic analysis: the 
next generation. In V. van Heuven and L. Pols, 
editors, Analysis and Synthesis of Speech, Strate- 
gic Research Towards High-Quality Text.to-Speech 
Generation, pages 131-145. Mouton de Gruyter, 
Berlin, 1993. 
\[Dowty, 1979\] D. Dowty. Word meaning and Mon- 
tague Grammar. Foris Dordrecht, 1979. 
\[Fujisaki et al, 1989\] T. Fujisaki, 
F. Jelinek, J. Cocke, E. Black, and T. Nishino. A 
probabilistic parsing method for sentence disam- 
biguation. In International Workshop on Parsing 
Technologies, Pittsburgh P.A., 1989. 
\[Heemskerk and van Heuven, 1993\] 
J. Heemskerk and V. van Heuven. MORPA: a 
191 
morpheme l xicon-based morphological parser. In 
V. van Heuven and L. Pols, editors, Analysis and 
Synthesis of'Speech, Strategic Research Towards 
High-Quality Text-to-Speech Generation. Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin, 1993. 
\[Heemskerk, 1989\] J. Heemskerk. Morphological 
parsing and lexical morphology. In H. Bennis 
and A. van Kemenade, ditors, Linguistics in the 
Netherlands 1989, pages 61-70, 1989. 
\[Hoeksema, 1984\] J. Hoeksema. Categorial Morphol- 
ogy. PhD thesis, Groningen, 1984. 
\[Jelinek et al, 1990\] F. Jelinek, J.D. Lafferty, and 
R.L. Mercer. Basic methods of probabilistic 
context free grammars. Research Report R..C. 
16374(72684), IBM, 1990. 
\[van Leeuwen and te Lindert, 1993\] 
H.C. van Leeuwen and E. te Lindert. Speech- 
Maker: a flexible framework for constructing text- 
to-speech sytems. In V. van Heuven and L. Pols, 
editors, Analysis and Synthesis of Speech, Strate- 
gic Research Towards High-Quality Text-to-Speech 
Generation. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 1993. 
\[Liberman, 1991\] M.J. Liberman. The trend toward 
statistical models in natural anguage processing. 
In E. Klein and F. Veltman, editors, Natural Lan- 
guage and Speech. Springer Verlag:Berlin, 1991. 
\[Magerman d Marcus, 1991\] D. Magerman and 
M. Marcus. :Pearl: A probabilistic hart parser. 
In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, Berlin, 1991. 
\[Moortgat, 1987\] M. Moortgat. Compositionality 
and the syntax of words. In :l. Groenendijk, 
D. de Jongh, and M. Stokhof, editors, Foundations 
of Pragmatics and Lexical semantics, 1987. 
\[Nunn and van Heuven, 1993\] A. Nunn and V. van 
Heuven. MORPHON, lexicon-based text-to- 
phoneme conversion and phonological rules. In 
V. van Heuven and L. Pols, editors, Analysis and 
Synthesis of Speech, Strategic Research Towards 
High-Quality Text-to-Speech Generation. Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin, 1993. 
\[Resnik, 1992\] P. Resnik. Probabilistic tree- 
adjoining rammar as a framework for statistical 
natural anguage processing. In Proceedings In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics, Nantes, 1992. 
\[Siegel, 1979\] D. Siegel. Topics in English Morphol- 
ogy. Garland: New York, 1979. 
\[Spencer, 1991\] A. Spencer. Morphological Theory. 
Basil Blackwell, 1991. 
\[van der Wouden, 1988\] T. van der Wouden. Celex: 
? Building a multifunctional polytheoretical lexical 
database. In Proceedings Budalex, 1988. 
192 
