Abductive Explanation of Dialogue Misunderstandings 
Susan  McRoy  and Graeme Hi rs t  
Department  of Computer  Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada M5S 1A4 
Abst rac t  
To respond to an utterance, a listener must 
interpret what others have said and why 
they have said it. Misunderstandings oc-
cur when agents differ in their beliefs about 
what has been said or why. Our work com- 
bines intentional nd social accounts of dis- 
course, unifying theories of speech act pro- 
duction, interpretation, and the repair of 
misunderstandings. A unified theory has 
been developed by characterizing the gen- 
eration of utterances as default reasoning 
and using abduction to characterize inter- 
pretation and repair. 
1 In t roduct ion  
When agents participate in a dialogue, they bring 
to it different beliefs and goals. These differences 
can lead them to make different assumptions about 
one another's actions, construct different interpre- 
tations of discourse objects, or produce utterances 
that are either too specific or too vague for others 
to interpret as intended. As a result, agents may 
fail to understand some part of the dialogue--or 
unknowingly diverge in their understanding of it-- 
making a breakdown in communication likely. One 
strategy an agent might use to address the prob- 
lem of breakdowns i to try to circumvent them, 
for example, by trying to identify and correct appar- 
ent confusions about objects or concepts mentioned 
in the discourse \[Goodman, 1985; McCoy, 1985; 
Calistri-Yeh, 1991; Eller and Carberry, 1992\]. The 
work reported here takes a different, but complemen- 
tary, approach: it models how an agent can use what 
she or he knows about the discourse to recognize 
whether either participant has misunderstood some 
previous utterance to repair the misunderstanding. 
This strategy handles cases that the preventive ap- 
proaches cannot anticipate. It is also more general, 
because our system can generate repairs on the basis 
of the relatively few types of manifestations of mis- 
understanding, rather than the much broader (and 
hence more difficult o anticipate) range of sources. 
In this paper, we shall describe an abduetive ac- 
count of interpreting speech acts and recognizing 
misunderstandings (wediscuss the generation of re- 
pairs of misunderstandings in McRoy and Hirst, 
1992). This account is part of a unified theory 
of speech act production, interpretation, and re- 
pair \[McRoy, 1993\]. According to the theory, speak- 
ers use their beliefs about the discourse context and 
which speech acts are expected to follow from a 
given speech act in order to select one that accom- 
plishes their goals and then to produce an utter- 
ance that performs the chosen speech act. Interpre- 
tation and repair attempt o retrace this selection 
process abductively--when a hearer attempts to in- 
terpret an observed utterance, he tries to identify the 
goals, expectations, or misunderstandings that might 
have led the to produce it. Previous plan-based ap- 
proaches \[Allen, 1979; Allen, 1983; Litman, 1985; 
Carberry, 1985\] have had difficulty constraining this 
inference---from only a germ of content, potentially a 
tremendous number of goals could be inferred. A key 
assumption of our approach, which follows from in- 
sights provided by Conversation Analysis \[Garfinkel, 
1967; Schegloff and Sacks, 1973\], is that participants 
can rely primarily on expectations derived from so- 
cial conventions about language use. These expec- 
tations enable participants to determine whether 
the conversation is proceeding smoothly: if noth- 
ing unusual is detected, then understanding is pre- 
sumed to occur. Conversely, when a hearer finds 
277 
that a speaker's utterance is inconsistent with his 
expectations, he may change his interpretation of 
an earlier turn and generate a repair \[Fox, 1987; 
Suchman, 1987\]. Our approach differs from stan- 
dard CA accounts in that it treats Gricean inten- 
tions \[Grice, 1957\] as part of these conventions and 
uses them to constrain an agent's expectations; the 
work thus represents a synthesis of intentional and 
structural accounts. 
Recognizing misunderstanding is like abduction 
because hearers must explain why, given their knowl- 
edge of how differences in understanding are mani- 
fested, a speaker might have said what she did. At- 
tributions of misunderstanding are assumptions that 
might be abduced in constructing such an explana- 
tion. Recognizing misunderstanding also resembles a 
diagnosis in which utterances play the role of "symp- 
toms" and misunderstandings are "faults". Previ- 
ous work on diagnosis has shown abduction to be 
a useful characterization \[Ahuja and Reggia, 1986; 
Poole, 1986\]. 
An alternative approach to diagnosing discourse 
misunderstandings is to reason deductively from a 
speaker's utterances to his or her goals on the basis 
of (default) prior beliefs and then rely on belief revi- 
sion to retract inconsistent interpretations \[Cawsey, 
1991\]; however, this approach as a number of disad- 
vantages. First, any set of rules of this form will be 
unable to specify all the conditions (such as insincer- 
ity) that might also influence the agent's interpreta- 
tion; a reasoner will need also to assume that there 
are no "abnormalities" relevant o the participants 
or the speech event \[Poole, 1989\]. This approach 
also ignores the many other possible interpretations 
that participants might achieve through negotiation, 
independent of their actual beliefs. For example, an 
agent's response to a yes-no question might treat it 
as a question, a request, a warning, a test, an insult, 
a challenge, or just a vacuous tatement intended to 
keep the conversation going. If conversational par- 
ticipants can negotiate such ambiguities, then utter- 
ances are at most a reason for attributing a certain 
goal to an agent. That is, they are a symptom, not a 
cause. Any deductive account would thus be counter- 
intuitive, and very likely false as well. 
2 The  abduct ive  f ramework  
We have chosen to develop the proposed account 
of dialogue using the Prioritized Theorist frame- 
work \[Poole l ai., 1987; Brewka, 1989; van Arragon, 
1990\]. Theorist typifies what is known as a "proof- 
based approach" to abduction because it relies on a 
theorem prover to collect he assumptions that would 
be needed to prove a given set of observations and to 
verify their consistency. This framework was selected 
because of its first-order syntax and its support for 
both default and abductive reasoning. Within The- 
orist, we represent linguistic knowledge and the dis- 
course context, and also model how speakers reason 
about their actions and misunderstandings. 
We have used Poole's implementation of Theo- 
rist, extended to incorporate preferences among de- 
faults as suggested by Van Arragon \[1990\]. Poole's 
Theorist implements a full first-order clausal theo- 
rem prover in Prolog. It extends Prolog with a true 
negation symbol and the contrapositive forms of each 
clause. Thus, a Theorist clause a D/3 is interpreted 
as {/3 *-- a,-~a 4-- -~/3}. A Prioritized Theorist rea- 
soner can also assume any default d that the pro- 
grammer has designated as a potential hypothesis, 
unless it can prove -~d from some fact or overriding 
hypothesis. 
The reasoning algorithm uses model elimina- 
tion \[Loveland, 1978; Stickel, 1989; Umrigar and 
Pitchumani, 1985\] as its proof strategy. Like Pro- 
log, it is a resolution-based procedure that chains 
backward from goals to subgoals, using rules of the 
form goal 4-- subgoall A . . .  A subgoaln, to reduce the 
goals to their subgoals. However, unlike Prolog, it 
records each subgoal that occurs in the proof tree 
leading to the current one and checks this list before 
searching the knowledge base for a relevant clause; 
this permits it to reason by cases. 
3 The  fo rmal  language 
The model is based on a sorted first-order lan- 
guage, ?, comprising a denumerable set of predi- 
cates, variables, constants, and functions, along with 
the boolean connectives V, A,-,, D, and --, and the 
predicate =. The terms of ? come in six sorts: 
agents, turns, sequences of turns, actions, descrip- 
tions, and suppositions 1. ? includes an infinite num- 
ber of variables and function symbols of every sort 
and arity. We also define a number of special ones: 
do, mistake, intend, knowif, knowref, knows- 
BetterRef,  not, and and.  Each of of these func- 
tions takes an agent as its first argument and an ac- 
tion, supposition, or description for each of its other 
arguments; each of them returns a supposition. The 
function symbols that return speech acts each take 
two agents as their first two argument and an action, 
supposition, or description for each of their other ar- 
guments. 
For the abductive model, we define a correspond- 
ing language/~Th in the Prioritized Theorist frame- 
work. /:Th includes all the sorts, terms, functions, 
and predicates of /:; however, /:Tit lacks explicit 
quantification, distinguishes facts from defaults, and 
associates with each default a priority value. Vari- 
able names are understood to be universally quan- 
tified in facts and defaults (but existentially quan- 
tified in an explanation). Facts are given by "FACT 
w.", where w is a wff. A default can be given ei- 
ther by "DEFAULT (p, d)." or "DEFAULT (p, d) : w.", 
1Suppositions represent he propositions that speak- 
ers express in a conversation, independent of the truth 
values that those propositions might have. 
278 
where p is a priority value, d is an atomic symbol 
with only free variables as arguments, and w is a 
wtf. For example, we can express the default that 
birds normally fly, as: 
DEFAULT (2, birdsFly(b)) : bird(b) D .fly(b). 
If Y: is the set of facts and AP is the set of defaults 
with priority p, then an expression DEFAULT(p, d) : w 
asserts that d E A p and (d D w) E .~'. 
4 The  arch i tec ture  o f  the  mode l  
In the architecture that we have formulated, pro- 
ducing an utterance is a default, deductive process 
of choosing both a speech act that meets an agent's 
communicative and interactional goals and a utter- 
ance that will be interpretable as this act in the cur- 
rent context. Utterance interpretation is the com- 
plementary (abductive) process of attributing to the 
speaker communicative and interactional goals by at- 
tributing to him or her a discourse-level form that 
provides a reasonable explanation for an observed ut- 
terance in the current context. Social norms delimit 
the range of responses that a participant may pro- 
duce without becoming accountable for additional 
explanation. 2 The attitudes that speakers express 
provide additional constraints, because speakers are 
expected not to contradict themselves. We therefore 
attribute to each agent: 
? A theory T describing his or her linguistic 
knowledge, including principles of interaction 
and facts relating linguistic acts. 
? A set B of prior assumptions about the beliefs 
and goals expressed by the speakers (including 
assumptions about misunderstanding). 
? A set Ad of potential assumptions about misun- 
derstandings and meta-planning 3 decisions that 
agents can make to select among coherent alter- 
natives. 
To interpret an utterance u, by speaker s, the hearer 
h will attempt o solve: 
T O B U M t- utter(s, h, u, ts) 
for some set M C AJ, where ts refers to the current 
context. 
In addition, acts of interpretation and generation 
update the set of beliefs and goals assumed to be 
expressed uring the discourse. Our current formal- 
ization focuses on the problems of identifying how 
an utterance relates to a context and whether it has 
been understood. The update of expressed beliefs 
2These norms include guidelines uch as "If someone 
asks you a question, you should answer it" or "If someone 
offers their opinion and you disagree, you should let them 
know". 
3Our notion of "meta-planning ~ is similar to Lit- 
man's \[1985\] use of meta-plans, but we prefer to treat 
meta-planning as a pattern of inference that is part of 
the task specification rather than as an action. 
is handled in the implementation, but outside the 
formal language. 4 
4.1 Speech acts 
For simplicity, we represent utterances as surface- 
level speech acts in the manner first used by Perrault 
and Allen \[1980\]. For example, if speaker m asks 
speaker the question "Do you know who's going 
to that meeting?" we would represent his as: s- 
request (m,  r, in formi f ( r ,  m,  knowref ( r ,  w))). 
Following Cohen and Levesque \[1985\], we limit the 
surface language to the acts s-request,  s- inform, s- 
informref ,  and s- informif.  Discourse-level acts in- 
clude in form,  informif ,  in formref ,  askref,  askif, 
request ,  preteH 5, testref ,  tes t i f  and warn,  and 
are represented using a similar notation. 
4.2 Expressed a t t i tudes  
We distinguish the beliefs that speakers act as if they 
have during a course of a conversation from those 
they might actually have. Most models of discourse 
incorporate notions of belief and mutual belief to de- 
scribe what happens when a speaker talks about a 
proposition, without distinguishing the expressing of 
belief from believing (see Cohen et al 1990). How- 
ever, real belief involves notions of evidence, trust- 
worthiness, and expertise, not accounted for in these 
models; it is not automatic. Moreover, the beliefs 
that speakers as if they have need not match their 
real ones. For example, a speaker might simplify 
or ignore certain facts that could interfere with the 
accomplishment of a primary goal \[Gutwin and Mc- 
Calla, 1992\]. Speakers need to keep track of what 
others say, in addition to whether they believe them, 
because ven insincere attitudes can affect the inter- 
pretation and production of utterances. Although 
speakers normally choose to be consistent in the at- 
titudes they express, they can recant if it appears 
that doing so will lead (or has led) to conversational 
breakdown. 
Following Thomason \[1990\], we call the contents of 
the attitudes that speakers express during a dialogue 
suppositions and the attitude itself simply active. 6
Thus, when a speaker performs a particular speech 
act, she activates the linguistic intentions associated 
with the act, along with a belief that the act has 
been done. These attitudes do not depend on the 
4A related concern is how an agent's beliefs might 
change after an utterance has been understood as an act 
of a particulax type. Although we have nothing new to 
add here, Perrault \[1990\] shows how Default Logic might 
be used to address this problem. 
5A pretellingis apreannouncement that says, in effect, 
"I'm going to tell you something that will surprise you. 
You might think you know, but you don't." 
eSupposition differs from belief in that speakers need 
not distinguish their own suppositions from those of an- 
other \[Stalnaker, 1972; Thomason, 1990\]. 
279 
speakers' real beliefs. 7
The following expressions are used to denote sup- 
positions: 
? do(s, a) expresses that agent s has performed 
the action a; 
? mistake(s,  at, az) expresses that agent s has 
mistaken an act al for act a2; 
? in tend(s ,p)  expresses that agent s intends to 
achieve a situation described by supposition p; 
? knowif(s,p)expresses that the agent s knows 
whether the proposition amed by supposition 
p is true; 
? knowref(s ,  d) expresses that the agent s knows 
the referent of description d; 
? knowsBetterP~ef(st ,  2  d) expresses that 
agent sl has "expert" knowledge about the ref- 
erent of description d, so that if s2 has a different 
belief about the referent, then sz is likely to be 
wrong; s and 
? and(pl ,p2) expresses the conjunction of suppo- 
sitions Pl and P2; 
? not(p) expresses the negation of supposition p.9 
4.3 L ingu is t ic  knowledge re la t ions  
We represent agents' linguistic knowledge with three 
relations: decomp, a binary relation on utterance 
forms and speech acts; lintention, a binary rela- 
tion on speech acts and suppositions; lezpectation, a 
three-place relation on speech acts, suppositions, and 
speech acts. The decomp relation specifies the speech 
acts that each utterance form might accomplish. The 
lintention relation specifies the beliefs and intentions 
that each speech act conventionally expresses. The 
lexpectation relation specifies, for each speech act, 
which speech acts an agent believing the given con- 
dition can expect o follow. 
4.4 Bel iefs and  goals 
We assume that an agent's beliefs and goals are given 
explicitly by statements ofthe form believe(S, P) and 
hasGoal(S, P, TS), respectively, where S is an agent, 
P is a supposition and TS is a turn sequence. 
4.5 Act ivat ion  
To represent the dialogue as a whole, including re- 
pairs, we introduce the notion of a turn sequence and 
tit is essential that these suppositions name proposi- 
tions independent of their truth values, so that we may 
represent agents talking about knowing and intending 
without fully analyzing these concepts. 
8This specialization is needed to capture the prag- 
matic force of pretelling. 
9The function ot is distinct from boolean connective 
-~. It is used to capture the supposition expressed by an 
agent who says something negative, e.g., "I do not w~nt 
to go." 
the activation of a supposition with respect o a se- 
quence. A turn sequence represents the interpreta- 
tions of the discourse that a speaker has considered. 
Turn sequences are characterized by the following 
three relations: 
? tumOr(is, t) holds if and only if t is a turn in 
the sequence ts; 
? succ(tj, tl, ts) holds if and only if turnO\](ts, ti), 
turnOf(ts, tj), tj follows ti in ts, and there is no 
t~ such that turnOf(ts, tk), suce(tk,ti,ts), and 
succ(tj, tk, ts); 
? focus(ts, t) holds i ft  is a distinguished turn upon 
which the sequence is focused; normally this is 
the last turn of ts. 
We also define a successor relation on turn sequences. 
A turn sequence TS2 is a successor to turn sequence 
TS1 if TS2 is identical to TS1 except hat TS2 has 
an additional turn t that is not a turn of TS1 and 
that is the successor to the focused turn of TS1. 
The set of prior assumptions about the beliefs and 
goals expressed by the participants in a dialogue is 
represented as the activation of suppositions. For ex- 
ample, an agent nan  performing an in fo rmref (nan ,  
bob ,  theT ime)  expresses the supposition do(nan, 
i n fo rmref (nan ,  bob ,  theT ime) )  and the Gricean 
intention, 
and(knowref (nan ,  theT ime) ,  
in tend(nan ,  knowref (bob ,  theT i rne) ) )  
given by the lintention relation. We assume 
that an agent will maintain a record of both par- 
ticipants' suppositions, indexed by the turns in 
which they were expressed. It is represented as 
a set of statements of the form expressed(P, T) or 
expressedNot(P, T) where P is a simple supposition 
and T is a turn. 
Beliefs and intentions that participants express 
during a turn of a sequence tSl become and remain 
active in all sequences that are successors to tsl, un- 
less they are explicitly refuted. 
DEFINITION 1: If, according to the interpretation of
the conversation represented by turn sequence 
TS with focused turn T, the supposition P was 
expressed uring turn T, we say that P becomes 
active with respect to that interpretation and 
the predicate active(P, TS) is derivable: 
FACT expressed(p, t) A focus (ts, t) 
D active(p, ts). 
FACT ezpressedNot(p, t) A focus(ts, t) 
aaiveCnot(p), t ). 
FACT -,(active(p, ts) A active(not(p), ts)). 
If formula P is active within a sequence TS, it 
will remain active until not (P )  is expressed: 
280 
FACT expressed(p, t) A focns(ts, t) 
D -~aetivationPersists(not (p), t). 
FACT ezpressedNot(p, t) A focns( ts, t) 
D -.aetivationPersists(p, t).
DEFAULT (1, aetivationp ersists(p, t) ) : 
active(p, tsi ) 
A sueeessorTS(tsnow, tsi) 
A foeus(tsno~, t) 
D adive(p, ts.o~). 
4.6 Expectat ion 
The following definition captures the notion of "ex- 
pectation". 
DEFINITION 2: A discourse-level action R is ez- 
pected by speaker S in turn sequence TS when: 
? An action of type A has occurred; 
? There is a planning rule corresponding to 
an adjacency pair A-R  with condition C; 
? S believes that C; 
? The linguistic intentions expressed by R axe 
consistent with TS; and 
? R has not occurred yet in TS. 
DEFAULT (2, ezpectedReply(Pdo, p, do(Sl,  a2), ts)): 
active(pdo , is) 
A lezpectation(pdo, p, dO(Sl, a2)) 
A believe(sx, p) 
A iintentionsOk(sl, az, ts) 
D expected(s1, a2, ts). 
FACT active(pdo, ts) 
D ",ezpectedReply(pdo, p, preply, ts). 
The predicate xpectedReply is a default. Although 
activation might depend on default persistence, acti- 
vation always takes precedence over expectation be- 
cause it has a higher priority (on the assumption that 
memory for suppositions i stronger than expecta- 
tion). 
The predicate l intentionsOk(S, A, TS) is true if 
speaker S expresses the linguistic intentions of the 
act A in turn sequence TS, and these intentions are 
consistent with TS. 
We also introduce a subjunctive form of expecta- 
tion, which depends only on a speaker's real beliefs: 
FACT lezpectation(do(sl, al), p, do(s2, a2)) 
A believe(s1, p) 
D wouldEz(sl, al, a2). 
4.7 Recognizing misunderstandings 
When a dialogue proceeds normally, a speaker's ut- 
terance can be explained by abducing that a dis- 
course action has been planned using one of a known 
range of discourse strategies: plan adoption, accep- 
tance, challenge, repair, or closing. (Figure 1 in- 
cludes ome examples in Theorist.) In cases of appax- 
ent misunderstanding, the same explanation process 
suggests a misunderstanding, rather than a planned 
act, as the reason for the utterance. To handle these 
cases, the model needs a theory of the symptoms of 
a failure to understand \[Poole, 1989\]. For example, 
a speaker $2 might explain an otherwise unexpected 
response by a speaker $1 by hypothesizing that $2 
has mistaken some speech act by $1 for another with 
a similar decomposition r $2 might hypothesize that 
$1 has misunderstood (see Figure 2). We shall now 
consider some applications. 
5 Some app l i ca t ions  
This first example (from \[Sehegloff, 1992\]) illustrates 
both normal interpretation and the recognition of an 
agent's own misunderstanding: 
T1 Mother:  Do you know who's going to that 
meeting? 
T2 Russ: Who? 
T3 Mother:  I don't know. 
T4 Russ: Oh. Probably Mrs. McOwen and 
probably Mrs. Cadry and some of 
the teachers. 
The surface-level representation f this conversation 
is given as the following: 
T1 m: s-request(m, r
informif(r, m,knowref(r ,  w)))  
T2 r: s-request(r ,  m, informref(m, r, w)) 
T3 m: s- inform(m, r, not(knowref(m,  w))) 
T4 r: s- informref(r,  m, w) 
5.1 Russ's interpretation of T1 in the 
meet ing example 
~,From Russ's perspective, T1 can be explained as a 
pretelling, an attempt by Mother to get him to ask 
her who is going. Russ's rules about the relationship 
between surface forms and speech acts (decomp) in- 
clude that: 
FACT decomp( s-request ( s l , s2, 
informif(s2, sl, knowref(s2, p))), 
pretell(sl,  s2, p)). 
FACT decomp( s-request ( s l , s2 , 
informif(s2, sl, knowref(s2, p))), 
askref(sl, s2, p)). 
FACT decomp( s-request ( s l , s2 , 
informit~s2, sl, knowref(s2, p))), 
askif(sx, s2, knowref(s2, p))). 
Russ has linguistic expectation rules for the ad- 
jacency pairs pretell-askref, askref-inforraref, and 
askif-informif (as well as for pairs of other types). 
Russ also has believes that he knows who's going to 
the meeting, that he knows he knows this, and that 
Mother's knowledge about the meeting is likely to be 
281 
Utterance Explanation 
FACT decomp( u, al ) 
^ try(s l ,s2,al , ts)  
D utter(s1, s2, u, ts). 
Planned Actions 
DEFAULT (2, intendact(sl, s2, al , ts) ) : 
shouldTry(sl, s2, al, ts) 
:D try(sl ,s2,al ,ts) .  
Plan Adopt ion 
DEFAULT (3, adopt(a1, s2, al ,  a2, ts)): 
hasGoal(sl, do(s2, a2 ), ts) 
^ wouldEx(sl, do(s1, aa), do(s2, a2)) 
^ iintentionsOk(sl, al, ts) 
D shouldTry(sl, s2, al, ts). 
Acceptance 
DEFAULT (2, ts)): 
expected(s1, a, ts) 
D shouldTry(sl, s2, a, is). 
"If agent $1 intends that agent S$ perform the action A~ 
and A2 is the expected reply to the action A1, and it 
would be coherent for SI to perform A1, then $1 should 
do so." 
"If agent $1 believes that act A is the expected next 
action, then $1 should perform A." 
Figure 1: Theorist rules for producing and interpreting utterances 
Failure to understand 
DEFAULT (3, seafMis(s~, s2,p, a2, is)) : 
aai  (do(s , aM), 
^ ambiguous(aM, al) 
^ lintention(a2,pli) 
^ lintention(aM, pli2) 
^ inconsistentLl(ptl, P i2) 
^ p = mistake(s2, at, aM)) 
D try(s1, s2, a2, ts). 
Failure to be understood 
DEFAULT (3, otherMis(sl, s2, p, a~, ts)) : 
active(do(s2, at), ts) 
A ambiguous(at, aM) 
^  o ZdE (sl, do(s2, aM), do(s1, a2)) 
A p = mlstake(sl, ai, aM)) 
D try(s1, s2, a2, ts). 
"Speaker S might be attempting action A in discourse TS 
if: S was thought o have performed action AM; but, the 
linguistic intentions of AM are inconsistent with those of 
A; acts A1 and AM have a similar surface form (and hence 
could be mistaken); and, H may have made this mistake." 
"Speaker S might be attempting action A in discourse 
TS if: speaker H was thought o have performed ac- 
tion At; but, acts AI and AM have a similar surface 
form; if H had performed AM, A would be expected; 
S may express the linguistic intentions of A; and, S 
may have made the mistake." 
Figure 2: Rules for diagnosing misunderstanding 
better than his own. We assume that he can make 
default assumptions about what Mother believes and 
wants: 
FACT believe(r, knowref ( r ,  w)).  
FACT believe(r, knowi f ( r ,knowref ( r ,w) ) ) .  
FACT believe(r, knowsBet terRef (m, r ,w) ) .  
DEFAULT (1, credulousB(p)) : believe(in, p). 
DEFAULT (1, credulousg(p, ts)) : hasGoal(in, p, ts). 
Russ's interpretation of T1 as a pretelling is pos- 
sible using the meta-plan for plan adoption and the 
rule for planned action. 
1. The proposition 
hasGoal(in, do(r ,  askref ( r ,  In, w)), ts(0)) 
may be explained by abducing 
credulousH(do(r,askref(r,  m, w)) , ts (0) ) .  
2. An askre f  by Russ would be the expected reply 
to a prete l l  by Mother: 
wouldEz( in,do( in,pretel l (m, r, w)) ,  
do(r,askref(r, In, w))) 
It would be expected by Mother because: 
? The lezpectation relation suggests that she 
might try to pretell in order to get him to 
produce an askref: 
lezpec~ation( do( in,prete l l ( in , r ,w ) ), 
knowsBet  e rRef ( in , r ,w) ,  
do( r ,askre f ( r ,m,w) ) )  
? Russ may abduce 
cred aousB(knowsnetterRef(in, r, w ) ) 
to explain 
believe ( in ,knowsBet terRef ( in ,  r w)) .  
3. The discourse context is empty at this point, 
so the linguistic intentions of pretelling satisfy 
l intentionsOk. 
282 
4. Lastly, Russ may assume 1?
adopt(m, r, pretell(m, r, w), 
askref(r, m, w), ts(0)) 
Thus, the conditions of the plan-adoption 
meta~rule are satisfied, and Russ can explain 
shouldTry(m, r pretell(m, r, w), ts(0)). This 
enables him to explain 
try(m, r, pretell(m, r, w), ts(0)) 
as a planned action. Once Russ explains the 
pretelling, his decomp relation and utterance expla- 
nation rule allow him to explain the utterance. 
5.2 Russ's detection of his own 
misunderstanding i  the meeting 
example 
~From Russ's perspective, the inform-not-knowref 
that Mother performs in T3 signals a misunderstand- 
ing. Assuming T1 is a pretelling, just prior to T3, 
Russ's model of the discourse corresponds to the fol- 
lowing: 
expressed(do(m, pretell(m, r, w)), 1) 
expressed(knowref(m, w), 1) 
expressed(knowsBetterItef(m, r, w), 1) 
expressed(intend(m, 
do(m, informref(m, r w))), 1) 
expressed(intend(m, knowref(r, w)), 1) 
expressed(do(r, askref(r, m, w)), 2) 
expressedNot(knowref(r, w), 2) 
expressed(intend(r, knowref(r, w)), 2) 
expressed(intend(r, 
do(m, informref(m, r w))), 2) 
T3 does not demonstrate acceptance b cause in- 
form(m, r, not(knowref(m, w))) is not coherent 
with this interpretation f the discourse. This act is 
incoherent because not(knowref(m, w)) is among 
the linguistic intentions of this inform, while accord- 
ing to the model active(knowref(m, w),ts(2)). 
Thus, it is not the case that: 
lintentionsOk (m, 
inform(m, r, not(knowref(m, w))), 
ts(2)) 
As a result, Russ cannot attribute to Mother any 
expected act, and must attribute a misunderstanding 
to himself or to her. 
Russ may attribute T3 to a self-misunderstanding 
using the rule for detecting failure to understand. 
We sketch the proof below. 
1. According to the Context, 
expressed( o(m,pretell(m,r,w) ),O). 
And, Russ may assume that the activation of 
1?The only constraint on adopting aplan, is that the 
result not yet be achieved: 
FACT active(do(a, az), ts) 
D -~adopt(sl, 2, al, a2, ts). 
this supposition persists: 
activationPersists(do(m,pretell(m,r,w) ),O) 
activationPersists( do m,pretell(m,r,w) ),l 
Thus, 
active(do(m, pretell(m, r, w)), ts(2)). 
2. The acts pretell and askrefhave a surface form 
that is similar, 
s-request (m,r,informif(r,m,knowref(r,w))) 
So, 
ambiguous(pretell(m,r,w), askref(m,r,w)). 
3. The linguistic intentions of the pretelling are: 
and(knowref(m, w), 
and(knowsBetterRef(m, r, w), 
and( 
intend(m, 
do(m, informref(m, r w))), 
intend(m, knowref(r, w))))) 
The linguistic intentions of inform-not-knowref 
are  
and(not (knowref(m, w)), 
intend(m, 
knowif(r,not (knowref(m, w))))). 
But these intentions are inconsistent. 
4. Russ may assume 
selfMis(m,r, 
mistake(r,askref(m, r, w), 
prete|l(m, r w)), 
inform(m, r, not(knowref(m, w))), 
ts(2)). 
Once Russ explains the inform-not-knowref, his
deeomp relation and utterance explanation rule al- 
low him to explain the utterance. 
5.3 A case of other-misunderstanding: 
Speaker A finds that speaker B has 
misunderstood 
We now consider a new example (from McLaugh- 
lin \[1984\]), in which a participant A recognizes that 
a another participant, B, has mistaken a request in 
T1 for a test: 
T1 A: When is the dinner for Alfred? 
T2 B: Is it at seven-thirty? 
T3 A: No, I'm asking you. 
T4 B: Oh. I don't know. 
The surface-level representation f this conversation 
is given as the following: 
T1 a: s-request(a, b informref(b, a, d)) 
T2 b: s-request(b, a informif(a, b, p)) 
T3 a: s-lnform(a, b, 
intend(a, do(a, askref(a, b, d)))) 
T4 b: s-inform(b, a, not(knowref(b, d))) 
283 
A has linguistic expectation rules for the adjacency 
pairs pretell-askref, askref-informref, askif-informif, 
and testref-askif. A also believes that she does not 
know the time of the dinner, that B does know the 
time of the dinner. 11 We assume that A can make de- 
fault assumptions about what B believes and wants: 
FACT believe(a, not(knowref(a,d))) .  
FACT believe(a, knowref(b,d)).  
FACT hasGoal( a,do(b,informref(b,a,d ) ),ts( O ) ). 
DEFAULT (1, credulousB(p) ) : believe(b, p). 
DEFAULT (1, credulousH(p, ts)) : hasGoal(b, p, ts). 
/,From A's perspective, after generating T1, her 
model of the discourse is the following: 
ezpressed(do(a, skref(a, b, d)), 1) 
e p,e,sedgot(knowref(a, d), 1) 
expressed(intend(a, knowref(a, d)), 1) 
expressed(intend(a, 
do(b, informref(b, a, d))), 1) 
According to the decomp relation, T2 might be in- 
terpretable as askif(b, a, p). However, T2 does not 
demonstrate acceptance, because there is no askref- 
askif adjacency-pair from which to derive an expec- 
tation. T2 is not a plan adoption because A does not 
believe that B believes that A knows whether the din- 
ner is at seven-thirty. However, there is evidence for 
misunderstanding, because both information-seeking 
questions and tests can be formulated as surface re- 
quests. Also, T2 is interpretable as a guess and re- 
quest for confirmation (represented asaskif), which 
would be expected after a test. We sketch the proof 
below. 
1. According to the context: 
ezpressed(do(a, skref(a, b, d)), 0). 
A may assume that the activation of this sup- 
position persists: 
activationPersists(do(a, askref(a, b, d)), 0). 
Thus, aaive( do( a,askref( a,b,d )),ts(1) . 
2. The acts askref and testrefhave a surface form 
that is similar, namely 
s-request (a,b, lnformref(b,a,knowref(b,d))).  
So, 
ambiguous( askref( a,b,d ), testref(a,b,d)).  
3. An askif by B would be the expected reply to a 
testref  by A: 
wouldEx(b,do(a,testref(a, b, d)), 
do(b,asklf(b, a, p))) 
From A's perspective, it would be expected by 
B because: 
? The iezpectation relation suggests that A 
might try to produce a testref  in order to 
get him to produce an askif: 
11A must believe that B knows when the dinner is for 
her to have adopted a plan in T1 to produce an askref 
get B to perform the desired informref. 
lexpectation( do( a,testref( a,b,d )), 
and(knowref(b,d) ,  
and(knowlf(b,p),  
and(pred(p,X) ,  
pred(d,X))) ,  
do(b,asklf(b,a,p))) 
The condition of this rule requires that B 
believe he knows the referent of descrip- 
tion d and that p asserts that the de- 
scribed property holds of the referent hat 
he knows. For example, if we represent "B 
knows when the dinner is" as the descrip- 
tion 
knowref(b, the(X, t ime(dinner ,  X))), 
then the condition requires that 
knowif(b, t ime(dlnner ,  q)) for some q. 
This is a gross simplification, but the best 
that the notation allows. 
A may assume that B believes the condition 
of this lezpecta~ion by default. 
6 Conclusion 
The primary contribution of this work is that it 
treats misunderstanding and repair as intrinsic to 
conversants' core language abilities, accounting for 
them with the same processing mechanisms that un- 
derlie normal speech. In particular, it formulates 
both interpretation and the detection of misunder- 
standings as explanation problems and models them 
as abduction. 
We have implemented our model in Prolog and 
the Theorist framework for abduction with Priori- 
tized defaults. Program executions on a Sun-4 for 
four-turn dialogues take 2 cpu seconds per turn on 
average. 
Directions for future work include extending the 
model to handle more than one communicative act 
per turn, misunderstood reference \[Heeman and 
Hirst, 1992\], and integrating the account with sen- 
tence processing and domain planning. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the University of 
Toronto and the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council of Canada. We thank Ray Reiter 
for his suggestions regarding abduction; James Allen 
for his advice; Paul van Arragon and Randy Goebel 
for their help on using Theorist; Hector Levesque, 
Mike Gruninger, Sheila McIlraith, Javier Pinto, and 
Steven Shapiro for their comments on many of the 
formal aspects of this work; Phil Edmonds, Stephen 
Green, Diane ttorton, Linda Peto, and the other 
members of the natural language group for their com- 
ments; and Suzanne Stevenson for her comments on 
earlier drafts of this paper. 
284 
References  
\[Ahuja nd Reggia, 1986\] Sanjiev B. Ahuja and 
James A. Reggia. The parsimonious covering 
model for inexact abductive reasoning in diagnos- 
tic systems. In Recent Developments in the The. 
ory and Applications of Fuzzy Sets. Proceedings 
of NAFIPS '86 - 1986 Conference of the North 
American Fuzzy Information Processing Society, 
pages 1-20, 1986. 
\[Allen, 1979\] James F. Allen. A Plan-Based Ap- 
proach to Speech Act Recognition. PhD thesis, 
Department of Computer Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 1979. Published as 
University of Toronto, Department of Computer 
Science Technical Report No. 131. 
\[Allen, 1983\] James F. Allen. Recognizing inten- 
tions from natural language utterances. In Michael 
Brady, Robert C. Berwick, and James F. Allen, ed- 
itors, Computational Models of Discourse, pages 
107-166. The MIT Press, 1983. 
\[Brewka, 1989\] Gerhard Brewka. Preferred subthe- 
ories: An extended logical framework for default 
reasoning. In Proceedings of the 11th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 
1043-1048, Detroit, MI, 1989. 
\[Calistri-Yeh, 1991\] Randall J. Calistri-Yeh. Utiliz- 
ing user models to handle ambiguity and miscon- 
ceptions in robust plan recognition. User Mod- 
elling and User Adapted Interaction, 1(4):289-322, 
1991. 
\[Carberry, 1985\] Sandra Carberry. Pragmatics Mod- 
eling in Information Systems Interfaces. PhD the- 
sis, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, 
1985. 
\[Cawsey, 1991\] Alison J. Cawsey. A belief revision 
model of repair sequences in dialogue. In Ernesto 
Costa, editor, New Directions in Intelligent Tutor- 
ing Systems. Springer Verlag, 1991. 
\[Cohen and Levesque, 1985\] Philip R. Cohen and 
Hector J. Levesque. Speech acts and rationality. In 
23th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Confer- 
ence, pages 49-60, 1985. 
\[Cohen et aL, 1990\] Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan, 
and Martha Pollack, editors. Intentions in Com- 
munication. The MIT Press, 1990. 
\[Eller and Carberry, 1992\] Rhonda Eller and Sandra 
Carberry. A meta-rule approach to flexible plan 
recognition i  dialogue. User Modelling and User 
Adapted Interaction, 2(1-2):27-53, 1992. 
\[Fox, 1987\] Barbara Fox. Interactional reconstruc- 
tion in real-time language processing. Cognitive 
Science, 11:365-387, 1987. 
\[Garfinkel, 1967\] Harold Garfinkel. Studies in Eth- 
nomethodology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1967. (Reprinted: Cambridge, England: 
Polity Press, in association with Basil Blackwell, 
1984.). 
\[Goodman, 1985\] Bradley Goodman. Repairing ref- 
erence identification failures by relaxation. In The 
23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics: Proceedings of the Confer- 
ence, pages 204-217, Chicago, 1985. 
\[(\]rice, 1957\] H. P. Grice. Meaning. The Philosoph- 
ical Review, 66:377-388, 1957. 
\[Gutwin and McCalla, 1992\] Carl Gutwin and Gor- 
don McCalla. Would I lie to you? Modelling con- 
text and pedagogic misrepresentation n tutorial 
dialogue. In 30th Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of 
the Conference, pages 152-158, Newark, DE, 1992. 
\[Heeman and Hirst, 1992\] Peter Heeman 
and Graeme Hirst. Collaborating on referring ex- 
pressions. Technical Report 435, Department of 
Computer Science, University of Rochester, 1992. 
\[Litman, 1985\] Diane J. Litman. Plan Recogni- 
tion and Discourse Analysis: An Integrated Ap- 
proach for Understanding Dialogues. PhD the- 
sis, Department of Computer Science, University 
of P~chester, Rochester, NY, 1985. Published as 
University of Rochester Computer Science Techni- 
cal Report 170. 
\[Loveland, 1978\] D. W. Loveland. Automated The- 
orem Proving: A Logical Basis. North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1978. 
\[McCoy, 1985\] Kathleen F. McCoy. The role of per- 
spective in responding to property misconceptions. 
In Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 2, 
pages 791-793, 1985. 
\[McLanghlin, 1984\] Margaret L. McLaughlin. Con- 
versation: How Talk is Organized. Sage Publica- 
tions, Beverly Hills, 1984. 
\[McRoyandHirst, 1992\] Susan W. McRoy and 
Graeme Hirst. The repair of speech act misunder- 
standings by abductive inference. 1992. Submitted 
for publication. 
\[McRoy, 1993\] Susan W. McRoy. Abductive Inter- 
pretation and Reinterpretation of Natural Lan- 
guage Utterances. PhD thesis, Department 
of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada, 1993. In preparation. 
\[Perrault and Allen, 1980\] C. Raymond Per- 
fault and :lames F. Allen. A plan-based analysis 
of indirect speech acts. Computational Linguistics, 
6:167-183, 1980. 
\[Perrault, 1990\] C. Raymond Perrault. An appli- 
cation of default logic to speech act theory. In 
Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan, and Martha Pol- 
lack, editors, Intentions in Communication, pages 
285 
161-186. The MIT Press, 1990. An earlier version 
of this paper was published as Technical Report 
CSLI-87-90 by the Center for the Study of Lan- 
guage and Information. 
\[Poole l al., 1987\] David Poole, Randy Goebel, and 
Romas Aleliunas. Theorist: A logical reasoning 
system for defaults and diagnosis. In Nick Cer- 
cone and Gordon McCalla, editors, The Knowl- 
edge Frontier: Essays in the Representation of 
Knowledge, pages 331-352. Springer-Verlag, New 
York, 1987. Also published as Research Report 
CS-86-06, Faculty of Mathematics, University of 
Waterloo, February, 1986. 
\[Poole, 1986\] David Poole. Default reasoning and 
diagnosis as theory formation. Technical Report 
CS-86-08, Department ofComputer Science, Uni- 
versity of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 1986. 
\[Poole, 1989\] David Poole. Normality and faults in 
logic-based iagnosis. In Proceedings of the 11th 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel- 
ligence, pages 1304-1310, 1989. 
\[Schegloff and Sacks, 1973\] Emanuel A. Schegloff 
and Harvey Sacks. Opening up closings. Semi- 
otica, 7:289-327, 1973. 
\[Schegloff, 1992\] Emanuel A. Schegloff. Repair af- 
ter next turn: The last structurally provided e- 
fense of intersubjectivity in conversation. Ameri- 
can Journal of Sociology, 97(5):1295-1345, 1992. 
\[Stalnaker, 1972\] Robert C. Stalnaker. Pragmatics. 
In Semantics of Natural Language, pages 380-397. 
D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1972. 
\[Stickel, 1989\] M. E. Stickel. A Prolog technology 
theorem prover. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 
4:353-360, 1989. 
\[Suchman, 1987\] Lucy A. Suchman. Plans and Sit- 
uated Actions. Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge, UK, 1987. 
\[Thomason, 1990\] Pdchmond H. Thomason. Propa- 
gating epistemic coordination through mutual de- 
faults I. In Rohit Parikh, editor, Proceedings, 
Third Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Rea- 
soning about Knowledge (TARK 1990), pages 29- 
39, Pacific Grove, CA, 1990. 
\[Umrigar and Pitchumani, 1985\] Zerksis D. Umri- 
gar and Vijay Pitchumani. An experiment in pro- 
gramming with full first-order logic. In Symposium 
of Logic Programming, Boston, MA, 1985. IEEE 
Computer Society Press. 
\[van Arragon, 1990\] Paul van Arragon. Nested De- 
fault Reasoning for User Modeling. PhD thesis, 
Department of Computer Science, University of 
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 1990. Published by 
the department as Research Report CS-90-25. 
286 
