A Morphological Analysis Based Method for Spelling Correction 
Aduriz I., Agirre E., Alegria I., Arregi X., Arriola J.M, Artola X., Diaz de Ilarraza A., 
Ezeiza N., Maritxalar M., Sarasola K., Urkia M.(*) 
Informatika Fakultatea, Basque Country University. P.K. 649. 20080 DONOSTIA (Basque Country) 
(*) U.Z.E.I. Aldapeta, 20. 20009 DONOSTIA (Basque Country) 
1 Introduction 
Xuxen is a spelling checker/corrector f r Basque which 
is going to be comercialized next year. The checker 
recognizes a word-form if a correct morphological 
breakdown is allowed. The morphological nalysis is 
based on two-level morphology. 
The correction method distinguishes between ortho- 
graphic errors and typographical errors. 
? Typographical errors (or misstypings) are uncogni- 
tive errors which do not follow linguistic riteria. 
? Orthographic errors are cognitive rrors which occur 
when the writer does not know or has forgotten the 
correct spelling for a word. They are more persistent 
because of their cognitive nature, they leave worse 
impression and, finally, its treatment is an interest- 
ing application for language standardization purposes. 
2 Correction Method in Xuxen 
The main problems found in designing the 
checking/correction strategy were: 
? Due to the high level of inflection of Basque, it is 
impossible to store every word-form in a dictionary; 
therefore, the mainstream checking/correction 
methods were not suitable. 
? Because of the recent standardization a d widespread 
dialectal use of Basque, orthographic errors are more 
likely and therefore their treatment becomes critical. 
? The word-forms which are generated without 
linguistic knowledge must be fed into the spelling 
checker to check whether they are correct or not. 
In order to face these issues the strategy used is 
basically the following (see also Figure 1). 
Handling orthographic errors 
The treatment of orthographic errors is based on the 
parallel use of a two-level subsystem designed to detect 
misspellings previously typified. This subsystem has 
two main components: 
? Additional two-level rules describing the most likely 
changes that are produced in the orthographic errors. 
Twenty five new rules have been defined to cover the 
most common orthographic errors. For instance, the 
rule h: 0 => V:V V:V describes that between 
vowels the h of the lex-:cal level may dissapear in the 
surface. In this way bear ,  typical misspelling of 
behar  (to need), will be detected and corrected. 
? Additional morphemes linked to the corresponding 
correct ones. They describe particular errors, mainly 
dialectal forms. Thus, using the new entry t i kan ,  
dialectal form of the ablative singular, the system is 
able to detect and correct word-forms as e txe -  
t i kan ,  ka le t ikan  .... (vm4ants of e txet ik  
(from me home), ka le t ik  (from me s~eeO .... ) 
~ I~ L --,,~'~', J '=='= 
Figure 1 - Correcting strategy in Xuxen 
When a word-form is not accepted by the checker the 
orthographic error subsystem is added and the system 
retries the morphological checking. If the incorrect form 
can be recognized now (1) the correct lexical evel form 
is directly obtained and, (2) as the two-level system is 
bidirectional, the corrected surface form will be 
generated from the lexical form. 
For example, the complete correction process of the 
word-form bear tzet ikan  (from the need), would be 
the following: 
beart zet ikan 
$ (t) 
behar tze tikan(tik) 
~L (2) 
behartzetik 
Handling tyPographical errors 
The treatment of typographical errors is quite 
conventional nd performs the following steps: 
? Generating proposals to typographical errors using 
Damerau's classification. 
? Trigram analysis. Proposals with trigrams below a 
certain probability treshold are discarded, while the 
rest are classified in order of trigramic probability. 
? Spelling checking of proposals. 
To speed up this treatment the following techniques 
have been used: 
? If during the original morphological checking of the 
misspelled word a correct morpheme has been found, 
the criteria of Damerau are applied only to the unre- 
cognized part. Moreover, on entering the proposals 
into the checker, the analysis tarts from the state it 
was at the end of the last recognized morpheme. 
? The number of proposals is also limited by filtering 
the words containing very low frequency u'igrams. 
463 
