LFG Semant ics  v ia  Const ra in ts  
Mary Dalrymple John Lamping Vijay Saraswat 
{dalrymple, lamping, saraswat}@parc.xerox.com 
Xerox PARC 
3333 Coyote Hill Road 
Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA 
Abstract 
Semantic theories of natural language as- 
sociate meanings with utterances by pro- 
viding meanings for lexical items and 
rules for determining the meaning of 
larger units given the meanings of their 
parts. Traditionally, meanings are com- 
bined via function composition, which 
works well when constituent structure 
trees are used to guide semantic com- 
position. More recently, the functional 
structure of LFG has been used to pro- 
vide the syntactic information ecessary 
for constraining derivations of meaning 
in a cross-linguistically uniform format. 
It has been difficult, however, to recon- 
cile this approach with the combination 
of meanings by function composition. In 
contrast o compositional pproaches, we 
present a deductive approach to assem- 
bling meanings, based on reasoning with 
constraints, which meshes well with the 
unordered nature of information in the 
functional structure. Our use of linear 
logic as a 'glue' for assembling meanings 
also allows for a coherent reatment of 
modification as well as of the LFG re- 
quirements of completeness and coher- 
ence. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In languages like English, the substantial scaffold- 
ing provided by surface constituent s ructure trees is 
often a useful guide for semantic omposition, and 
the h-calculus is a convenient formalism for assem- 
bling the semantics along that scaffolding \[Montague, 
1974\]. This is because the derivation of the mean- 
ing of a phrase can often be viewed as mirroring the 
surface constituent structure of the English phrase. 
The sentence Bill kissed Hillary has the surface con- 
stituent structure indicated by the bracketing in 1: 
(1) \[s \[NF Bill\] \[ve kissed \[NP Hillary\]\]\] 
The verb is viewed as bearing a close syntactic rela- 
tion to the object and forming a constituent with it; 
this constituent then combines with the subject of 
the sentence. Similarly, the meaning of the verb can 
be viewed as a two-place function which is applied 
first to the object, then to the subject, producing the 
meaning of the sentence. 
However, this approach is not as natural for lan- 
guages whose surface structure does not resemble 
that of English. For instance, a problem is presented 
by VSO languages such as Irish \[McCloskey, 1979\]. 
To preserve the hypothesis that surface constituent 
structure provides the proper scaffolding for seman- 
tic interpretation i VSO languages, one of two as- 
sumptions must be made. One must assume ither 
that semantic omposition is nonuniform across lan- 
guages (leading to loss of explanatory power), or that 
semantic omposition proceeds not with reference to 
surface syntactic structure, but instead with refer- 
ence to a more abstract (English-like) constituent 
structure representation. This second hypothesis 
seems to us to render vacuous the claim that surface 
constituent structure is useful in semantic omposi- 
tion. 
Further problems are encountered in the seman- 
tic analysis of a free word order language such as 
Warlpiri \[Simpson, 1983; Simpson, 1991\], where sur- 
face constituent s ructure does not always give rise to 
units that are semantically coherent or useful. Here, 
an argument of a verb may not even appear as a 
single unit at surface constituent structure; further, 
97 
arguments of a verb may appear in various different 
places in the string. In such cases, the appeal to an 
order of composition different from that of English 
is particularly unattractive, since different orders of 
composition would be needed for each possible word 
order sequence. 
The observation that surface constituent struc- 
ture does not always provide the optimal set of con- 
stituents or hierarchical structure to guide semantic 
interpretation has led to efforts to use a more ab- 
stract, cross-linguistically uniform structure to guide 
semantic omposition. As originally proposed by 
Kaplan and Bresnan \[1982\] and Halvorsen \[1983\], the 
functional structure or f-structure of LFG is a rep- 
resentation of such a structure. However, as noted 
by Halvorsen \[1983\] and Reyle \[1988\], the A-calculus 
is not a very natural tool for combining meanings 
of f-structure constituents. The problem is that the 
subconstituents of an f-structure are not assumed to 
be ordered, and so the fixed order of combination ofa 
functor with its arguments imposed by the A-calculus 
is no longer an advantage; in fact, it becomes a disad- 
vantage, since an artificial ordering must be imposed 
on the composition of meanings. Furthermore, the 
components of the f-structure may be not only com- 
plements but also modifiers, which contribute to the 
final semantics in a very different way. 
Related approaches. In an effort to solve the 
problem of the order-dependence imposed by stan- 
dard versions of the A-calculus, Reyle \[1988\] pro- 
poses to extend the A-calculus to reduce its sequen- 
tial bias, assembling meanings by an enhanced ap- 
plication mechanism. However, it is not clear how 
Reyle's ystem can be extended to treat modification 
or complex predicates, phenomena which our use of 
linear logic allows us to handle. 
Another means of overcoming the problem of the 
order-dependence of the A-calculus is to adopt se- 
mantic terms whose structure resembles f-structures 
\[Fenstad et al, 1985; Pollard and Sag, 1987; 
Halvorsen and Kaplan, 1988\]. On these approaches, 
attribute-value matrices are used to encode seman- 
tic information, allowing the syntactic and semantic 
representations to be built up simultaneously and 
in the same order-independent manner. However, 
when expressions of the A-calculus are replaced with 
attribute-value matrices, other problems arise: in 
particular, it is not clear how to view such attribute- 
value matrices as formulas, since issues such as the 
representation f variable binding and scope are not 
treated precisely. 
These problems have been noted, and remedies 
have been proposed. Sometimes, for example, an 
algorithm is given which globally examines a se- 
mantic attribute-value matrix representation to con- 
struct a sentence in a well-defined logic; for in- 
stance, Halvorsen \[1983\] presents an approach in 
which attribute-value matrices are translated into 
formulas of intensional logic. However, the compu- 
ration involved is concerned with manipulating these 
representations in procedural ways: it is hard to see 
how these procedural mechanisms translate to mean- 
ing preserving manipulations on the formulas that 
the matrices represent. In sum, such approaches 
tend to sacrifice the semantic precision and declara- 
tive simplicity of logical approaches (e.g. A-calculus 
based approaches), and seem difficult o extend gen- 
erally or motivate convincingly. 
Our approach. Our approach shares the order- 
independent features of approaches that represent 
semantic information using attribute-value matrices, 
while still allowing a well-defined treatment of vari- 
able binding and scope. We do this by identifying 
(1) a language of meanings and (2) a language for 
assembling meanings. 
In principle, (1) can be any logic (e.g., Montague's 
higher-order logic); for the purposes of this paper all 
we need is the language of first-order terms. Because 
we assemble the meaning out of semantically pre- 
cise components, our approach shares the precision 
of the A-calculus based approaches. For example, the 
assembled meaning has precise variable binding and 
scoping. 
We take (2) to be a fragment of first-order (linear) 
logic carefully chosen for its computational proper- 
ties, as discussed below. In contrast o using the 
h-calculus to combine fragments of meaning via or- 
dered applications, we combine fragments of mean- 
ing through unordered conjunction, and implication. 
Rather than using )~-reduction to simplify mean- 
ings, we rely on deduction, as advocated by Pereira 
\[1990; 1991\]. 
The elements of the f-structure provide an un- 
ordered set of constraints, expressed in the logic, 
governing how the semantics can fit together. Con- 
straints for combining lexically-provided meanings 
can be encoded in lexical items, as instructions for 
combining several arguments into a result. 1
In effect, then, our approach uses first order logic 
as the 'glue' with which semantic representations are 
assembled. Once all the constraints are assembled, 
deduction in the logic is used to infer the mean- 
ing of the entire structure. Throughout this process 
we maintain a sharp distinction between assertions 
about he meaning (the glue) and the meaning itselfi 
To better capture some linguistic properties, we 
make use of first order linear logic as the glue with 
which meanings are assembled \[Girard, 1987\]. ~ One 
a Constraints may also be provided as rules govern- 
ing particular configurations. Such rules are applicable 
when properties not of individual lexical items in the con- 
struction but of the construction as a whole are responsi- 
ble for its interpretation; these cases include the seman- 
tics of relative clauses. We will not discuss examples of 
configurationally-defined rules in this paper. 
2Specifically, we make use only of the tensor\]ragment 
of linear logic. The fragment isclosed under conjunction, 
universal quantification and implication (with atomic an- 
98 
way of thinking about linear logic is that it intro- 
duces accounting of premises and conclusions, o that 
deductions consume their premises to generate their 
conclusions. It turns out that this property of linear 
logic nicely captures the LFG requirements of co- 
herence and consistency, and additionally provides 
a natural way to handle modifiers: a modifier con- 
sumes the unmodified meaning of the structure it 
modifies and produces from it a new, modified mean- 
ing. 
In the following, we first illustrate our approach 
by discussing a simple example, and then present 
more complex examples howing how modifiers and 
valence changing operations are handled. 
2 Theoret i ca l  p re l iminar ies  
In the following, we describe two linguistic assump- 
tions that underlie this work. First, we assume that 
various aspects of linguistic structure (phonological, 
syntactic, semantic, and other aspects) are formally 
represented as projections and are related to one an- 
other by means of functional correspondences. We 
also assume that the relation between the thematic 
roles of a verb and the grammatical functions that 
realize them are specified by means of mapping prin- 
ciples which apply postlexically. 
Pro ject ions .  We adopt the projection architec- 
ture proposed by Kaplan \[1987\] and Halvorsen and 
Kaplan \[1988\] to relate f-structures to representa- 
tions of their meaning: f-structures are put in func- 
tional correspondence with semantic representations, 
similar to the correspondence b tween odes of the 
constituent structure tree and f-structures. The se- 
mantic projection of an f-structure, written with a 
subscript ~r, is a representation of the meaning of 
that f-structure. 
Thus, the notation 'Ta' in the lexical entries given 
in Figure 1 stands for the semantic projection of the 
f-structure 'T'; similarly, '(T svBJ)a' is the seman- 
tic projection of (i" StTBJ). The equation T,= Bill 
indicates that the semantic projection of 1", the f- 
structure introduced by the NP Bill, is Bill. The 
lexical entry for Hillary is analogous. When a lexical 
entry is used, the metavariable '~" is instantiated and 
replaced with an actual variable corresponding to an 
f-structure f,~ \[Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982, page 183\]. 
Similarly, the metavariable 'T~' is instantiated to a 
logic variable corresponding to the meaning of the 
f-structure. In other words, the equation T~,= Bill 
is instantiated as fna = Bill for some logic variable 
fna- 
tecedents). It arises from transferring to linear logic the 
ideas underlying the concurrent constraint programming 
scheme of Saraswat \[1989\] - -  an explicit formulation for 
the higher-order version of the linear concurrent con- 
straint programming scheme is given in Saraswat and 
Lincoln \[1992\]. A nice tutorial introduction to linear logic 
itself may be found in Scedrov \[1990\]. 
We have used the multiplicative conjunction ? and 
linear implication -o connectives of linear logic, 
rather than the analogous conjunction A and impli- 
cation ~ of classical logic. For the present, we can 
think of the linear and classical connectives as being 
identical. Similarly, the of course connective '!' of 
linear logic can be ignored for now. Below, we will 
discuss respects in which the linear logic connectives 
have properties that are crucially different from their 
counterparts in classical logics. 
Mapp ing  principles.  We follow Bresnan and 
Kanerva \[1989\], Alsina \[1993\], Butt \[1993\] and oth- 
ers in assuming that verbs specify an association be- 
tween each of their arguments and a particular the- 
matic role, and that mapping principles associate 
these thematic roles with surface grammatical func- 
tions; this assumption, while not necessary for the 
treatment of simple examples uch as the one dis- 
cussed in Section 3, is linguistically well-motivated 
and enables us to provide a nice treatment of com- 
plex predicates, to be discussed in Section 5. 
The lexical entry for kiss specifies the denotation 
of (T PRED): it requires two arguments which we 
will label agent and theme. Mapping principles en- 
sure that each of these arguments i associated with 
some grammatical function: here, the SUBa of kiss 
(Bill) is interpreted as the agent, and the OBa of kiss 
(Hillary) is interpreted as the theme. The specific 
mapping principles that we assume are given in Fig- 
ure 2. 
The function of the mapping principles is to spec- 
ify the set of possible associations between gram- 
matical functions and thematic roles. This is done 
by means of implication. Grammatical functions al- 
ways appear on the left side of a mapping princi- 
ple implication, and the thematic roles with which 
those grammatical functions are associated appear 
on the right side. Mapping principle (1), for exam- 
ple, relates the thematic roles of agent and theme 
designated by a two-argument verb like kiss to the 
grammatical functions that realize these arguments: 
it states that if a suBJ and an osa are present, this 
permits the deduction that the thematic role of agent 
is associated with the suBJ and the thematic role of 
theme is associated with the oBJ. (Other associa- 
tions are encoded by means of other mapping prin- 
ciples; the mapping principles given in Figure 2 en- 
codes only two of the possibilities.) 
We make implicit appeal to an independently- 
given, fully-worked-out theory of argument mapping, 
from which mapping principles such as those given 
in Figure 2 can be shown to follow. It is impor- 
tant to note that we do not intend any claims about 
the correctness of the specific details of the map- 
ping principles given in Figure 2; rather, our claim 
is that mapping principles hould be of the general 
form illustrated there, specifying possible relations 
between thematic roles and grammatical functions. 
In particular, no theoretical significance should be 
99 
Bill 
kissed 
Hillary 
NP (T PRED) "- 'BILL' 
T. = Bill 
V (I" PP~ED)'- KISS' 
VX, Y. agent(( T PRED)a, X) ? theme(( T FRED)o, Y) ---o To-- kiss(X, Y) 
NP (~ PRED) = 'HILLARY' 
T. = Hil larv 
Figure 1: Lexical entries for Bill, kissed, l:Iillary 
(i) !(Vf, X,Y. ((f SUBJ). = X) ? ((f OBJ). = Y) -0  agent(( I PRED).,X) ?theme((f PRED).,Y)) 
(2) I(VI, X, Y, Z. ((f  SUB.I). = X) ? ((f OBJ). = Y) ? ((f onJ2). = Z) -o 
permitter((f PRED)., X) ? agellt((f PRED)., Z) ? theme(( I PRED)., Y)) 
Figure 2: Argument mapping principles 
bill: (f2o = Bill) 
hil lary : (fa. = Hillarv) 
kiss: (VX, Y. agent(f1., X )  ? theme(f1.,  Y )  --0 f4. = kiss(X, g ) )  
mapping l  : (VX, Y. (f2. = X)  ? (f3. = Y)  --o agent(f1., X )  ? theme(f1. ,  g ) ) )  
(bill ? hil lary ? kissed ? mappingl )  
--o agent(ft . ,  Bill) ? ~heme(f l . ,  H illarv) ? kissed 
--o f4. = kiss(Bill, Hil larv) 
(Premises.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
Figure 3: Derivation of Bill kissed Hiilary 
attached to the choice of thematic role labels used 
here; for the verb kiss, for example, labels such as 
'kisser' and 'kissed' would do as well. We require 
only that the thematic roles designated in the lexical 
entries of individual verbs are specified in enough de- 
tail for mapping principles uch as those illustrated 
in Figure 2 to apply successfully. 
3 A simple example of semantic 
composition 
Consider sentence 2 and the lexieM entries given in 
Figure 1: 
(2) Bill kissed Hillary. 
The f-structure for (2) is: 
(3) \[PRED fl :'KISS' 
f,: SUBJ f2: \[ PRED 'BILL'\] 
OSJ f3: \[ PRED 'HILLARY' \] 
The meaning associated with the f-structure may be 
derived by logical deduction, as shown in Figure 3. a 
?An alternative derivation, not using mapping princi- 
ples, is also possible. In that case, the lexical entry for 
kissed would require a SUBJ and an OBJ rather than an 
agent and a theme, and the derivation would proceed in 
The first three lines contain the information con- 
tributed by the lexical entries for Bill, tIillarv, and 
kissed, abbreviated as bill, hillary, and kissed. The 
verb kissed requires two pieces of information, an 
agent and a theme, in no particular order, to produce 
a meaning for the sentence, f4,. The mapping prin- 
ciple needed for associating the syntactic arguments 
of transitive verbs with the agent/theme argument 
structure is given on the fourth line and abbreviated 
as mapping1. Mapping principles are assumed to 
be a part of the background theory, rather than being 
introduced by particular lexical items. Each map- 
ping principle can, then, be used as many or as few 
times as necessary. 
The premises--i.e., the lexical entries and map- 
ping principle are restated as the first step of the 
derivation, labeled 'Premises'. The second step is 
derived from the premises by Universal Instantia- 
tion and Modus Ponens. The last step is then de- 
rived from this result by Universal Instantiation and 
Modus Ponens. 
To summarize: a variable is introduced for the 
meaning corresponding to each f-structure in the 
this way: 
((f~ = Bill) 
?(13o = Hillary) 
?(?X,Y.I2. = X ? Ia. = Y --o h,, = kiss(X, Y))) 
--0 f4~, = kiss(Bill, Hillary) 
100 
syntactic representation. These variables form the 
scaffolding that guides the assembly of the meaning. 
Further information is then introduced: information 
associated with each lexical entry is made available, 
as are all the mapping rules. Once all this informa- 
tion is present, we look for a logical deduction of a 
meaning of the sentence from that information. 
The use of linear logic provides certain advantages, 
since it allows us to capture the intuition that lexical 
items and phrases contribute uniquely to the mean- 
ing of a sentence. As noted by Klein and Sag \[1985, 
page 172\]: 
Translation rules in Montague semantics 
have the property that the translation of 
each component of a complex expression 
occurs exactly once in the translation of 
the whole . . . .  That is to say, we do not 
want the set S \[of semantic representa- 
tions of a phrase\] to contain all meaning- 
ful expressions of IL which can be built 
up from the elements of S, but only those 
which use each element exactly once. 
Similar observations underlie the work of Lambek 
\[1958\] on categorial grammars and the recent work 
of van Benthem \[1991\] and others on dynamic logics. 
It is this 'resource-conscious' property of natural 
language semantics - a meaning is used once and 
once only in a semantic derivation - that linear logic 
allows us to capture. The basic insight underlying 
linear logic is to treat logical formulas as finite re- 
sources, which are consumed in the process of de- 
duction. This gives rise to a notion of linear impli- 
cation --o which is resource-conscious: the formula 
A --o B can be thought of as an action that can con- 
sume (one copy of) A to produce (one copy of) B. 
Thus, the formula A? (A --o B) linearly implies B -  
but not A ? B (because the deduction consumes A), 
and not (A --o B) ? B (because the linear implica- 
tion is also consumed in doing the deduction). The 
resource consciousness not only disallows arbitrary 
duplication of formulas, but also arbitrary deletion 
of formulas. This causes the notion of conjunction we 
use (?) to be sensitive to the multiplicity of formu- 
las: A?A is not equivalent to A (the former has two 
copies of the formula A). For example, the formula 
A ? A ? (A -o B) does linearly imply A ? B (there is 
still one A left over) - -  but does not linearly imply B 
(there must still be one A present). Thus, linear logic 
checks that a formula is used once and only once in 
a deduction, reflecting the resource-consciousness of 
natural anguage semantics. Finally, linear logic has 
an of course connective ! which turns off accounting 
for its formula. That is, !A linearly implies an arbi- 
trary number copies of A, including none. We use 
this connective on the background theory of map- 
ping principles to indicate that they are not subject 
to accounting; they can be used as often or seldom 
as necessary. 
A primary advantage of the use of linear logic is 
that it enables a clean semantic definition of com- 
pleteness and coherence. 4 In the present setting, the 
feature structure f corresponding to the utterance 
is associated with the (?) conjunction ? of all the 
formulas associated with the lexical items in the ut- 
terance. The conjunction is said to be complete and 
coherent iff Th t- ? --o fa = t (for some term t), 
where Th is the background theory containing, e.g., 
the mapping principles. Each t is to be thought of 
as a valid meaning for the sentence. This guarantees 
that the entries are used exactly once in building up 
the denotation of the utterance: no syntactic or se- 
mantic requirements may be left unfulfilled, and no 
meaning may remain unused. 
4 Mod i f i ca t ion  
Another primary advantage of the use of linear logic 
'glue' in the derivation of meanings of sentences i  
that it enables a clear treatment o f  modification. 
Consider the following sentence, containing the sen- 
tential modifier obviously: 
(4) Bill obviously kissed Hillary. 
We make the standard assumption that the verb 
kissed is the main syntactic predicate of this sen- 
tence. The following is the f-structure for example 
4: 
(5) \[PRED fl :'KISS' 
SUBJ f~: \[ PRED 'BILL'\] 
h" OBJ /3: \[ PRED 'HILLARY' \] 
Mo,s  P ED 'OBVIOUSLY' \]} 
We also assume that the meaning of the sentence can 
be represented by the following formula: 
(6) obviously(kiss(Bil l ,  Hi l lary)) 
It is clear that there is a 'mismatch' of sorts between 
the syntactic representation a d the meaning of the 
sentence; syntactically, the verb is the main functor; 
while the main semantic functor is the adverb. 5
Consider now the lexical entry for obviously given 
in Figure 4. The semantic equation associated with 
4'An f-structure is locally complete if and only if it 
contains all the governable grammatical functions that 
its predicate governs. An f-structure is complete if and 
only if all its subsidiary f-structures are locally complete. 
An f-structure is locally coherent if and only if all the gov- 
ernable grammatical functions that it contains are gov- 
erned by a local predicate. An f-structure is coherent if 
and only if all its subsidiary f-structures are locally co- 
herent.' \[Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982, pages 211-212\] 
5The related phenomenon of head switching, discussed 
in connection with machine translation by Kaplan et al 
\[1989\] and Kaplan and Wedekind \[1993\], is also amenable 
to treatment along the lines presented here. 
101 
Bill NP (T PLIED) ---- 'BILL' 
To = Bill 
obviously ADV (T PliED) -- 'OBVIOUSLY' 
VP. (MODS T)o = P --o (MODS T)? = obviously(P) 
kissed V (T FliED).-- 'KISS' 
VX, Y. agent((T PliED)a, X) ? therlle((T PliED)a, Y) --o To---- kiss(X, Y) 
Hillary NP (T PliED) = 'HILLAIIY' 
To = Hillary 
Figure 4: Lexical entries for Bill, obviously, kissed, ttillary 
bil l :  (f2a = Bill) 
hil lary : (f3o = Hillary) 
kiss : (VX, Y. agent(f1?, X) ? theme(rio, Y) --o f4a = kiss(X, Y)) 
obvious ly:  (VP. f4? = P -o f4q -- obviously(P)) 
mapping l  : (VX, Y. (f2a - X) ? (f3o = Y) -o agent(flu, X) ? theme(rio, Y))) 
(bill ? hil lary ? kissed ? obviously ? mapping l )  
-o agent(flu, Bill) ? theme(flu, gillary) ? kissed ? obviously 
-o f4a = kiss(Bill, Hillary) ? obviously 
-o ho -" obviously(kiss(Bill, H illary) ) 
Figure 5: Derivation of Bill obviously kissed Hillary 
(Premises.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
obviously makes use of 'inside-out functional uncer- 
tainty' \[Halvorsen and Kaplan, 1988\]. The expres- 
sion (MODS T) denotes an f-structure through which 
there is a path MODS leading to T. For example, if 
T is the f-structure labeled f5 above, then (MODS T) 
is the f-structure labeled f4, and (MODS T)a is the 
semantic projection of f4- Thus, the lexical entry for 
obviously specifies the semantic representation f the 
f-structure that it modifies, an f-structure in which 
it is properly contained. 
Recall that linear logic enables acoherent notion of 
consumption and production of meanings. We claim 
that the semantic function of adverbs (and, indeed, 
of modifiers in general) is to consume the meaning of 
the structure they modify, producing anew, modified 
meaning. Note in particular that the meaning of 
the modified structure, (MOPS T)a, appears on both 
sides of -o ; the unmodified meaning is consumed, 
and the modified meaning is produced. 
The derivation of the meaning of example 4 is 
shown in Figure 5. The first part of the derivation is 
the same as the derivation shown in Figure 3 for the 
sentence Bill kissed Hillary. The crucial difference 
is the presence of information introduced by obvi- 
ously, shown in the fourth line and abbreviated as 
obviously. In the last step in the derivation, the 
linear implication introduced by obviously consumes 
the previous value for f4a and produces the new and 
final value. 
By using linear logic, each step of the derivation 
keeps track of what 'resources' have been consumed 
by linear implications. As mentioned above, the 
value for f4? is a meaning for this sentence only if 
there is no other information left. Thus, the deriva- 
tion could not stop at the next to last step, because 
the linear implication introduced by obviously was 
still left. The final step provides the only complete 
and coherent meaning derivable for the utterance. 
5 Va lence-chang ing  operat ions  
We have seen that modifiers can be treated as 'con- 
suming' the meaning of the structure that they mod- 
ify, producing a new, modified meaning. A simi- 
lar, although syntactically more complex, case arises 
with complex predicates, as Butt \[1990; 1993\] shows. 
Butt discusses the 'permissive construction' in 
Urdu, illustrated in 7: 
(7) Hillary-ne diyaa \[vP Bill-ko xat 
Hillary-ERG let BilI-DAT letter-NOM 
likhne \] 
write-PART 
'Hillary let Bill write a letter.' 
She shows that although the permissive construction 
is seemingly biclausal, it actually involves a com- 
plex predicate: a syntactically monoclausal predicate 
formed in the presence of the verb diyaa 'let'. In 
the case at hand, the presence of diyaa requires an 
102 
Hillary NP (T PRED) ---- 'HILLARY' 
To = Hillary 
Bill NP (T PRED) ---- 'BILL' 
To : Bill 
xat N (~ PRED) = 'LETTER' 
T~ = letter 
likhne V (T PRED)= 'WRITE' 
VX, Y. agent(  T PRED)o, X) ? theme( ( T FRED)o, Y) --o To = write(X, Y) 
diyaa V VX, P. permitter((T PREO)o, X)? To= P --o T~= let(X, P) 
Figure 6: Lexical entries for Hillary, Bill, zat, likhne, diyaa 
hil lary : (f2~ = Hillary) 
bill: (f3o = Bill) 
letter  : (f4a = letter) 
write:  (VX, Y. agent(rio, X) ? theme(rio, Y) --o/so = write(X, Y ) ) 
let : (VX, P. permitter(fbo, X) ? fso = P --o = f6~ = let(X, P) 
mapplng2 : (VX, Y, Z. (f~o = X) ? ( f~ = Y) ? (f4~ = Z) --o 
permitter(rio, X) ? agent(rio, Y) ? theme(rio, Z) ) 
(bill ? hil lary ? letter ? write ? let ? mapplng2) 
--o permitter(fx?, Hillary) ? agent(rio, Bill) ? theme(rio, letter) ? write ? let 
--o permitter(f~, H illary) ? let ? (fbo = write(Bill, letter)) 
--o fb~ = let(Hillary, (write(Bill, letter)) 
Figure 7: Derivation of Hillary let Bill write a letter 
(Premises.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
(UI, Modus Ponens.) 
additional argument which we will label 'permitter', 
in addition to the arguments required by the verb 
likhne 'write'. In general, the verb diyaa 'let' modi- 
fies the argument structure of the verb with which it 
combines, requiring in addition to the original inven- 
tory of arguments he presence of a permitter. The 
f-structure for example 7 is: 
(8) rPRED fl: 'LET(WRITE)' 
I | SUBJ f2: \[ PRED 'HILLARY' \] 
fS:lOBj2l f3:\[PRED 'BILL'\] 
\[ OBJ f4: \[ PRED 'LETTER'\] 
As Butt points out, the verbs participating in the 
formation of the permissive construction eed not 
form a syntactic onstituent; in example 7, the verbs 
likhne and diyaa are not even next to each other. 
This shows that complex predicate formation can- 
not be analyzed as taking place in the lexicon; a 
method of dynamically creating a complex predicate 
in the syntax is needed. That is, sentences such as 7 
have, in essence, two syntactic heads, which dynami- 
cally combine to produce asingle syntactic argument 
structure. 
We claim that the function of a verb such as per- 
missive diyaa is somewhat analogous to that of a 
modifier: diyaa consumes the meaning of the origi- 
nal verb and its arguments, producing a new permis- 
sive meaning and requiring an additional argument, 
the permitter. Mapping principles apply to this new, 
augmented argument structure to associate the new 
thematic argument structure with the appropriate 
set of syntactic roles. We illustrate the derivation of 
the meaning of example 7 in Figure 7. 
The lexical entries necessary for example 7 can be 
found in Figure 6. The instantiated information from 
these lexical entries appears in the first five lines of 
Figure 7. Mapping principle (2) in Figure 2, ab- 
breviated as mapping2, links the permitter, agent, 
and theme of the (derived) argument s ructure to the 
syntactic arguments ofa permissive construction; the 
mapping principle is given in the sixth line of Figure 
7. 6 
The premises of the derivation are, as above, infor- 
mation given by lexical entries and the mapping prin- 
ciple. By means of mapping principle mapping2, in- 
formation about the possible array of thematic roles 
required by the complex predicate let-write can be 
eRecall that in our framework, all the mapping prin- 
ciples are present to be used as needed. In the derivation 
of the meaning of example 7, shown in Figure 7, we have 
omnisciently provided the one that will be needed. 
103 
derived; this step uses Universal Instantiation and 
Modus Ponens. 
Next, a (preliminary) meaning for f-structure fs, 
write(Bill, letter), is derived by Universal Instan- 
tiation and Modus Ponens. At this point, the re- 
quirements imposed by diyaa 'let', labeled let, are 
met: a permitter (Hillary) is present, and a com- 
plete meaning for f-structure f5 has been produced. 
These meanings can be consumed, and a new mean- 
ing produced, as represented in the final line of the 
derivation. Again, this meaning is the only one avail- 
able, since completeness and coherence obtains only 
when all requirements are fulfilled and no extra infor- 
mation remains. As with the case of modifiers, the 
final step provides the only complete and coherent 
meaning derivable for the utterance. 
Notice that the meaning of the complex predi- 
cate is not derived by composition of verb meanings: 
the permissive verb diyaa does not combine with 
the verb likhne 'write' to form a new verb mean- 
ing. Instead, permissive diyaa requires a (prelim- 
inary) sentence meaning, write(Bill, letter) in the 
example above, in addition to the presence of a per- 
mitter argument. 
More generally, this approach treats linguistic phe- 
nomena such as modification and complex predicate 
formation function by operating on semantic enti- 
ties that have combined with all of their arguments, 
producing a modified meaning and (in the case of 
complex predicate formation) introducing further ar- 
guments. While it would be possible to extend our 
approach to operate on semantic entities that have 
not combined with all their arguments, we have not 
yet encountered a compelling reason to do so. Our 
current restriction is not so confining as it might ap- 
pear; most operations that can be performed on se- 
mantic entities that have not combined with all their 
arguments have analogues that operate on fully com- 
bined entities. In further esearch, we plan to explore 
this characteristic of our analysis more fully. 
6 Conclusion 
Our approach results in a somewhat different view of 
semantic omposition, compared to h-calculus based 
approaches. First of all, notice that both in ~- 
calculus based approaches and in our approach, there 
is not only a semantic level of meanings of utterances 
and phrases, but also a glue level or composition level 
responsible for assembling semantic level meanings of 
constituents oget a meaning for an entire utterance. 
In h-calculus based approaches, the semantic level 
is higher order intensional logic. The composition 
level is the rules, often not stated in any formal sys- 
tem, that say what pattern of applications to do to 
assemble the constituent meanings. The composition 
level relies on function application in the semantic 
level to assemble meanings. This forces some confla- 
tion of the levels, because it is using a semantic level 
operation, application, to carry out a composition 
level task. It requires functions at the semantic level 
whose primary purpose is to allow the composition 
level to combine meanings via application. For exam- 
ple, in order for the composition level to work right, 
the semantic level meaning of a transitive verb must 
be a function of two arguments, rather than a rela- 
tion. This rather artificial requirement ~sa symptom 
of some of the work of the composition level being 
done at the semantic level. 
Our approach, on the other hand, better segre- 
gates the two levels of meaning, because the com- 
position level uses its own mechanism (substitution) 
to assemble semantic level meanings, rather than re- 
lying on semantic level operations. Thus, the linear 
logic operations of the composition level don't appear 
at the semantic level and the classical operations of 
the semantic level don't appear at the composition 
level. 7 
Our system also expresses the composition level 
rules in a formal system, first order linear logic. The 
composition rules are expressed by relations in the 
lexical entries and the mapping rules. There is no 
separate process of deciding how the meanings of 
lexical entries will be combined; the relations they 
establish, together with some background facts, just 
imply the high level meaning. All the necessary 
connections between phrases are made at the com- 
position level when lexical entries are instantiated, 
through the shared variables of the sigma projec- 
tions. From then on, logical inference at the com- 
position level assembles the semantic level meaning. 
These examples illustrate the capability of our 
framework to handle the combination of predi- 
cates with their arguments, modification, and arity- 
affecting operations. The use of linear logic provides 
a simple treatment of the requirements of complete- 
ness and consistency and of complex predicates. Fur- 
ther, our deduction framework enables us to use lin- 
ear logic to state such operations in a formally well- 
defined and tractable manner. 
In future work, we plan to explore more fully the 
semantics of modification, and to pursue the addi- 
tion of a type system to the logic to treat quantifiers 
analogously to Pereira \[1990; 1991\]. 
7 Acknowledgments 
We are grateful to Ron Kaplan, Stanley Peters, John 
Maxwell, Joan Bresnan, and Stuart Shieber for help- 
ful comments on earlier versions of this paper. We 
would particularly like to thank Fernando Pereira for 
extensive and very helpful discussion of the issues 
presented here. 
rThis separation is not a necessary consequence of 
using deduction to assemble meanings; the composition 
logic could call for semantic level operations. But we 
have so far been able to maintain the separation, and the 
question of whether the separation can be maintained 
seems to be linguistically interesting and worthy of fur- 
ther pursuit. 
104 
References 
\[Alsina, 1993\] Alex Alsina. Predicate Composition: A 
Theory of Syntactic Function Alternations. PhD the- 
sis, Stanford University, 1993. 
\[Bresnan and Kanerva, 1989\] Joan Bresnan and 
Jonni M. Kanerva. Locative inversion in Chiche@a: 
A case study of factorization i grammar. Linguistic 
Inquiry, 20(1):1-50, 1989. Also in E. Wehrli and T. 
Stowell, eds., Syntax and Semantics 26: Syntax and 
the Lexicon. New York: Academic Press. 
\[Butt et ai., 1990\] Miriam Butt, Michio Isoda, and Pe- 
ter Sells. Complex predicates in LFG. MS, Stanford 
University, 1990. 
\[Butt, 1993\] Miriam Butt. The Structure of Complex 
Predicates. PhD thesis, Stanford University, 1993. In 
preparation. 
\[Fenstad et ai., 1985\] Jens Erik Fenstad, Per-Kristian 
Halvorsen, Tore Langholm, and Johan van Benthem. 
Equations, schemata nd situations: A framework 
for linguistic semantics. Technical Report 29, Center 
for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford 
University, 1985. 
\[Girard, 1987\] J.-Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical 
Computer Science, 45:1-102, 1987. 
\[Halvorsen and Kaplan, 1988\] Per-Kristian Halvorsen 
and Ronald M. Kaplan. Projections and semantic de- 
scription in Lexical-Functional Grammar. In Proceed- 
ings of the International Conference on Fifth Gener- 
ation Computer Systems, pages 1116-1122, Tokyo, 
Japan, 1988. Institute for New Generation Systems. 
\[Halvorsen, 1983\] Per-Kristian Halvorsen. Semantics 
for Lexical-Functional Grammar. Linguistic Inquiry, 
14(4):567-615, 1983. 
\[Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982\] Ronald M. Kaplan and 
Joan Bresnan. Lexical-Functional Grammar: A 
formal system for grammatical representation. In 
Joan Bresnan, editor, The Mental Representation 
of Grammatical Relations, pages 173-281. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1982. 
\[Kaplan and Wedeldnd, 1993\] Ronald M. Kaplan and 
Jfirgen Wedekind. Restriction and correspondence- 
based translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth Meet- 
ing of the European ACL, University of Utrecht, April 
1993. European Chapter of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics. 
\[Kaplan et al, 1989\] Ronald M. Kaplan, Klaus Netter, 
Jurgen Wedekind, and Annie Zaenen. Translation 
by structural correspondences. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth Meeting of the European ACL, pages 272- 
281, University of Manchester, April 1989. European 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics. 
\[Kaplan, 1987\] Ronald M. Kaplan. Three seductions 
of computational psycholinguistics. In Peter White- 
lock, Harold Somers, Paul Bennett, Rod Johnson, 
and Mary McGee Wood, editors, Linguistic The- 
ory and Computer Applications, pages 149-188. Aca- 
demic Press, London, 1987. 
\[Klein and Sag, 1985\] Ewan Klein and Ivan A. Sag. 
Type-driven translation. Linguistics and Philosophy, 
8:163-201, 1985. 
\[Lambek, 1958\] Joachim Lambek. The mathematics of
sentence structure. American Mathematical Monthly, 
65:154-170, 1958. 
\[McCloskey, 1979\] James McCloskey. Transformational 
syntax and model theoretic semantics : a case study 
in modern Irish. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1979. 
\[Montague, 1974\] Richard Montague. Formal Philoso- 
phy. Yale University Press, New Haven, 1974. Rich- 
mond Thomason, editor. 
\[Pereira, 1990\] Fernando C. N. Pereira. Categorial se- 
mantics and scoping. Computational Linguistics, 
16(1):1'10, 1990. 
\[Pereira, 1991\] Fernando C. N. Pereira. Semantic inter- 
pretation as higher-order deduction. In Jan van Eijck, 
editor, Logics in AI: European Workshop JELIA '90, 
pages 78-96, Amsterdam, Holland, 1991. Springer- 
Verlag. 
\[Pollard and Sag, 1987\] Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 
Information.Based Syntax and Semantics, Volume \]. 
Number 13 in CSLI Lecture Notes. CSLI/The Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press, Stanford University, 1987. 
\[Reyle, 1988\] Uwe Reyle. Compositional semantics for 
LFG. In Uwe Reyle and Christian Rohrer, editors, 
Natural language parsing and linguistic theories. D. 
Reidel, Dordrecht, 1988. 
\[Saraswat nd Lincoln, 1992\] Vijay A. Saraswat and 
Patrick Lincoln. Higher-order, linear concurrent con- 
straint programming. Technical report, Xerox Palo 
Alto Research Center, August 1992. 
\[Saraswat, 1989\] Vijay A. Saraswat. Concurrent 
Constraint Programming Languages. PhD thesis, 
Carnegie-Mellon University, 1989. To appear, Doc- 
toral Dissertation Award and Logic Programming Se- 
ries, MIT Press, 1993. 
\[Scedrov, 1990\] A. Scedrov. A brief guide to linear logic. 
Bulletin of the European Assoc. for Theoretical Com- 
puter Science, 41:154-165, June 1990. 
\[Simpson, 1983\] Jane Simpson. Aspects of Warlpiri 
Morphology and Syntax. PhD thesis, MIT, 1983. 
\[Simpson, 1991\] Jane Simpson. Waripiri Morpho- 
Syntax. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
1991. 
\[van Benthem, 1991\] Johan van Benthem. Language 
in Action: Categories, Lambdas and Dynamic Logic. 
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991. 
105 
