Criteria for Measuring Term Recognition 
Andy Lauriston 
Department ofLanguages and Linguistics 
University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology 
P.O. Box 88 
Manchester M60 1QD 
United Kingdom 
andyl@ccl.umist.ac.uk 
Abstract 
This paper qualifies what a true term- 
recognition systems would have to recog- 
nize. The exact bracketing of the maximal 
termform is then proposed as an achieve- 
able goal upon which current system per- 
formance should be measured. How recall 
and precision metrics are best adapted for 
measuring term recognition is suggested. 
1 Introduction 
In recent years, the automatic extraction of terms 
from running text has become a subject of grow- 
ing interest. Practical applications such as dictio- 
nary, lexicon and thesaurus construction and main- 
tenance, automatic indexing and machine transla- 
tion have fuelled this interest. Given that concerns 
in automatic term recognition are practical, rather 
than theoretical, the lack of serious performance 
measurements in the published literature is surpris- 
ing. 
Accounts of term-recognition systems ometimes 
consist of a purely descriptive statement of the ad- 
vantages of a particular approach and make no at- 
tempt o measure the pay-off the proposed approach 
yields (David, 1990). Others produce partial fig- 
ures without any clear statement of how they are 
derived (Otman, 1991). One of the best efforts to 
quantify the performance ofa term-recognition sys- 
tem (Smadja, 1993) does so only for one processing 
stage, leaving unassessed the text-to-output perfor- 
mance of the system. 
While most automatic term-recognition systems 
developed to date have been experimental or in- 
house ones, a few systems like TermCruncher (Nor- 
mand, 1993) are now being marketed. Both the 
developers and users of such systems would benefit 
greatly by clearly qualifying what each system aims 
to achieve, and precisely quantifying how closely the 
system comes to achieving its stated aim. 
Before discussing what a term-recognition system 
should be expected to recognize and how perfor- 
mance in recognition should be measured, two un- 
derlying premises hould be made clear. Firstly, 
the automatic system is designed to recognize seg- 
ments of text that, conventionally, have been man- 
ually identified by a terminologist, indexer, lexicog- 
rapher or other trained individual. Secondly, the 
performance of automatic term-recognition systems 
is best measured against human performance for the 
same task. These premises mean that for any given 
application - terminological standardization a d vo- 
cabulary compilation being the focus here - it is pos- 
sible to measure the performance of an automatic 
term-recognition system, and the best yardstick for 
doing so is human performance. 
Section 2 below draws on the theory of terminol- 
ogy in order to qualify what a true term-recognition 
system must achieve and what, in the short term, 
such systems can be expected to achieve. Section 
3 specifies how the established ratios used in infor- 
mation retrieval - recall and precision - can best be 
adapted for measuring the recognition of single- and 
multi-word noun terms. 
2 What is to be Recognized? 
Depending upon the meaning given to the expres- 
sion "term recognition", it can be viewed as either a 
rather trivial, low-level processing task or one that 
is impossible to automate. A limited form of term 
recognition has been achieved using current tech- 
niques (Pcrron, 1991; Bourigault, 1994; Normand, 
1993). To appreciate what current limitations are 
and what would be required to achieve full term 
recognition, it is useful to draw the distinction be- 
tween "term" and "termform" on the one hand, and 
"term recognition" and "term interpretation" on the 
other. 
2.1 Term vs Termform 
Particularly in the computing community, there is a 
tendency to consider "terms" as strictly formal en- 
tities. Although usage among terminologists varies, 
a term is generally accepted as being the "designa- 
tion of a defined concept in a special language by a 
linguistic expression" (ISO, 1988). A term is hence 
17 
II Concept II 
II II 
II I TERM I II 
I Termform I 
f I 
Figure 1: Term vs Termform 
the intersection between a conceptual realm (a de- 
fined semantic content) and a linguistic realm (an 
expression or termform) as illustrated in Figure 1. 
A term, thus conceived, cannot be polysemous al- 
though te rmforms can, and often d% have several 
meanings. As terms precisely defined in information 
processing, "virus" and "Trojan Horse" are unam- 
biguous; as termforms they have other meanings in 
medicine and Greek mythology respectively. 
This view of a term has one very important con- 
sequence when discussing term recognition. Firstly, 
term recognition cannot be carried out on purely 
formal grounds. It requires some level of linguis- 
tic anMysis. Indeed, two term-formation processes 
do not result in new termforms: convers ion and 
semant ic  dr i f t  1. A third term-formation process, 
compress ion,  can also result in a new meaning be- 
ing associated with an existing termform 2.
Proper attention to capitalization can generally 
result in the correct recognition of compressed forms. 
Part-of-speech tagging is required to detect new 
terms formed through conversion. This is quite 
feasible using statistical taggers like those of Gar- 
side (1987), Church (1988) or Foster (1991) which 
achieve performance upwards of 97% on unrestricted 
text. Terms formed through semantic drift are the 
wolves in sheep's clothing stealing through termino- 
logical pastures. They are well enough conceMcd to 
allude at times even the human reader and no au- 
tomatic term-recognition system has attempted to 
distinguish such terms, despite the prevalence ofpol- 
ysemy in such fields as the social sciences (R.iggs, 
1993) and the importance for purposes of termi- 
nological standardization that "deviant" usage be 
tracked. Implementing a system to distinguish new 
1Conversion occurs when a term is formed by a 
change in grammatical category. Verb-to-noun conver- 
sion commonly occurs for commands in programming or
word processing (e.g. Undelete works if you catch your 
mistake quickly). Semantic drift involves a (sometimes 
subtle) change in meaning without any change in gram- 
matical category (viz. "term" as understood in this pa- 
per vs the loose ~Jsage of "~etm" to mc~n "termform"). 
2Compression is the shortening of (usually complex) 
termforms to form acronyms or other initialisms. Thus 
PAD can either designate a resistive loss in an electrical 
circuit or a "packet assembler-disassembler'. 
meanings of established termforms would require an- 
alyzing discourse-level clues that an author is assign- 
ing a new meaning, and possibly require the appli- 
cation of pragmatic knowledge. Until such advanced 
levels of analysis can be practically implemented, 
"term recognition" will largely remain "termform 
recognition" and the failure to detect new terms in 
old termforms will remain a qualitative shortcoming 
of all term-recognition systems. 
2.2 Term Recogn i t ion  vs Term 
I n te rpretat ion  
The vast majority of terms in published technical 
dictionaries and terminology standards are nouns. 
Furthermore, most terms have a complex termform, 
i.e. they are comprise~t of more than one word. 
Sublanguages create series of complex termforms in 
which complex forms serve as modifiers (natural lan- 
guage ~ \[natural anguage\] processing) and/or are 
themselves modified (applied \[\[natural language\] pro- 
cessing\]). In special language, complex termforms 
containing nested termforms, or significant subex- 
pressions (Baudot, 1984), have hundreds of possi- 
ble syntagmatic structures (Portelance, 1989; Lau- 
riston, 1993). The challenge facing developers of 
term-recognition systems consists in determining the 
syntactic and conceptual unity that complex nomi- 
nals must possess in order to achieve termhood 3
Another, and it will be argued far more ambitious, 
undertaking is te rm in terpreta t ion .  Leonard 
(1984), Finen (1985) and others have attempted to 
devise systems that can produce a gloss explicat- 
ing the semantic relationship that holds between the 
constituents of complex nominals (e.g. family es- 
tate ~ estate owned by a family). Such attempts 
at achieving even limited "interpretation" result in 
large sets of possible relationships but fail to ac- 
count for all compounds. Furthermore, they have 
generally been restricted to termforms with two con- 
stituents. For complex termforms with three or more 
constituents, merely identifying how constituents are 
nested, i.e., between which constituents here exists 
a semantic relationship, can be difficult to automate 
(Sparck-:lones, 1985). 
In most cases, however, term recognition can be 
achieved without interpreting the meaning of the 
term and without analyzing the internal structure 
of complex termforms. Many term-recognition sys- 
tems like TERMINO (David, 1990), the noun-phrase 
detector of LOGOS (Logos, 1987), LEXTER (Bouri- 
gault, 1994), etc., nevertheless attempt o recognize 
nested termforms. Encountering "automatic protec- 
tion switching equipment", systems adopting this 
Sin this respect, complex termforms, unlike colloca- 
tions, must designate definable nodes of the conceptual 
system of an area of specialized human activity. Hence 
general trend may be as strong a collocation as general 
election, and yet only the latter be considered a term. 
18 
approach would produce as output several nested 
termforms (switching equipment, protection switch- 
ing, protection switching equipment, automatic pro- 
tection, automatic protection switching) as well as 
the maximal termform automatic protection switch- 
ing equipment. Because such systems list nested 
termforms in the absence of higher-level analysis, 
many erroneous "terms" are generated. 
It has been argued previously on pragmatic 
grounds (Lauriston, 1994) that a safer approach is 
to detect only the maximal  termform. It could 
further be said that doing so is theoretically sound. 
Nesting termforms i a means by which an author 
achieves transparency. Once nested, however, a 
termform no longer fulfills the naming function. It 
serves as a mnemonic device. In different languages, 
different nested termforms are sometimes selected to 
perform this mnemonic function (e.g. on-line credit 
card checking, for which a documented French equiv- 
alent is vdrification de crddit au point de vente, lit- 
erally "point-of-sale credit verification"). Only the 
maximal termform refers to the designated concept 
and thus only recognition of the maximal termform 
constitutes term recognition 4. 
Term interpretation may be required, however~ to 
correctly delimit complex termforms combined by 
means of conjunctions. Consider the following three 
conjunctive xpressions taken from telecommunica- 
tion texts: 
(1) buffer content and packet delay distributions 
(2) mean misframe and frame detection times 
(3) generalized intersymbol-interference and jitter- 
free modulated signals 
Even the uninitiated reader would probably be in- 
clined to interpret, correctly, that expression (1) is a 
combination of two complex termforms: buffer con- 
tent distribution and packet delay distribution. Syn- 
tax or coarse semantics do nothing, however, to pre- 
vent an incorrect reading: buffer content delay dis- 
tribution and buffer packet delay distribution. Ex- 
pression (2) consists of words having the same se- 
quence of grammatical categories as expression (1), 
but in which this second reading is, in fact, correct: 
mean misframe detection time and mean frame de- 
tection time. Although rather similar to the first 
two, conjunctive xpression (3) is a single term, 
sometimes designated by the initialism GIJF. 
Complex termforms appearing in conjunctive x- 
pressions may thus require term interpretation for 
proper term recognition, i.e. reconstructing the con- 
juncts. If term recognition is to be carried out inde- 
pendently of and prior to term interpretation, asis 
'This does not imply that analyzing the internal 
structure of complex termforms is valueless. It has the 
very important, but distinct, value of prodding clues to 
paradigmatic relationships between terms. 
presently feasible, then it can only be properly seen 
as "maximal termform recognition" with the mean- 
ing of "maximal termform" extended to include the 
outermost bracketing of structurally ambiguous con- 
junctive expressions like the three examples above. 
This extension in meaning is not a matter of theo- 
retical soundness but simply of practical necessity. 
In summary, current systems recognize termforms 
but lack mechanisms to detect new terms resulting 
from several term-formation processes, particularly 
semantic drift. Under these circumstances, it is best 
to admit that "termform recognition" is the cur- 
rently feasible objective and to measure performance 
in achieving it. Furthermore, since the nested struc- 
tures of complex termforms perform a mnemonic 
rather than a naming function, it is theoretically un- 
sound for an automatic term-recognition system to 
present them as terms. For purposes of measurement 
and comparison, "term recognition" should thus be 
regarded as "maximal termform recognition". Once 
this goal has been reliably achieved, the output of 
a term-recognition system could feed a future "term 
interpreter", that would also be required to recog- 
nize terms in ambiguous conjunctive xpressions. 
3 How Can Recognit ion be 
Measured? 
Once a consensus has been reached about what is to 
be recognized, there must be some agreement con- 
cerning the way in which performance is to be mea- 
sured. Fortunately, established performance mea- 
surements used in information retrieval - recall and 
precision - can be adapted quite readily for mea- 
suring the term-recognition task. These measures 
have, in fact, been used previously in measuring 
term recognition (Smadja, 1993; Bourigault, 1994; 
Lauriston, 1994). No study, however, adequately 
discusses how these measurements are applied to 
term recognition. 
3.1 Recall and  Precision 
Traditionally, performance in document retrieval is 
measured by means of a few simple ratios (Salton, 
1989). These are based on the premise that any 
given document in a collection is either pertinent or 
non-pertinent to a particular user's needs. There 
is no scale of relative pertinence. For a given user 
query, retrieving a pertinent document constitutes a 
hit, failing to retrieve a pertinent document consti- 
tutes a miss, and retrieving a non-pertinent docu- 
ment constitutes a false hit. Recall, the ratio of 
the number of hits to the number of pertinent doc- 
uments in the collection, measures the effectiveness 
of retrieval. Precision, the ratio of the number of 
hits to the number of retrieved documents, measures 
the e~iciency of retrieval. The complement of recall 
is omission (misses/total pertinent). The comple- 
ment of precision is noise (false hits/total retrieved). 
19 
Ideally, recall and precision would equal 1.0, omis- 
sion and noise 0.0. Practical document retrieval in- 
volves a trade-off between recall and precision. 
The performance measurements in document re- 
trieval are quite apparently applicable to term recog- 
nition. The basic premise of a pertinent/non- 
pertinent dichotomy, which prevails in document re- 
trieval, is probably even better justified for terms 
than for documents. Unlike an evaluation of 
the pertinence of the content of a document, he 
term/nonterm distinction is based on a relatively 
simple and cohesive semantic ontentS.User judge- 
ments of document pertinence would appear to be 
much more subjective and difficult to quantify. 
If all termforms were simple, i.e. single words, 
and only simple termforms were recognized, then us- 
ing document retrieval measurements would be per- 
fectly .straightforward. A manually bracketed term 
would give rise to a hit or a miss and an automati- 
cally recognized word would be a hit or a false hit. 
Since complex termforms are prevalent in sublan- 
guage texts, however, further clarification is neces- 
sary. In particular, "hit" has to be defined more 
precisely. Consider the following sentence: 
The latest committee draft reports progress toward 
constitutional reform. 
A terminologist would probably recognize two 
terms in this sentence: commiLtee draft and consti- 
tutional reform. The termform of each is complex. 
Regardless of whether symbolic or statistical tech- 
niques are used, "hits" of debatable usefulness are 
apt to be produced by automatic term-recognition 
systems. A syntactically based system might have 
particular difficulty with the three consecutive cases 
of noun-verb ambiguity draft, reports, progress. A 
statistically based system might detect draft reports, 
since this cooccurrence might well be frequent as a 
termform elsewhere in the text. Consequently, the 
definition of "hit" needs further qualification. 
3.2 Perfect and Imperfect Recognit ion 
Two types of hits must be distinguished. A per- 
fect hit occurs when the boundaries assigned by 
the term-recognition system coincide with those of 
a term's maximal termform (\[committee draft\] and 
\[constitutional reform\] above). An imperfect hit 
occurs when the boundaries assigned o not coincide 
with those of a term's maximal termform but contain 
at least one wordform belonging to a term's maximal 
termform. A hit is imperfect if bracketing either in- 
dudes spurious wordforms (\[latest committee draft\] 
Sln practice, terminologists have some difficulty 
agreeing on the exact delimitation of complex termforms. 
Still five experienced terminologists scanning a 2,861 
word text were found to agree on the identity and bound- 
sties of complex termforms three-quarters of the time 
(Lauriston, 1993). 
TARGET 
TERMFORMS 
misses 
RECOGNIZED TEKMFOKMS 
~ false 
perfect Jl hits 
hits II 
?<=limperfect hitst=>? 
II 
recall = 
hits: perfect (+ imperfect?) 
target termforms 
precision = 
hits: perfect + (imperfect?) 
recognized t ermforms 
Figure 2: Recall, Precision and Imperfect Hits 
or \[committee draft reports\]), fails to bracket a term 
constituent (committee \[draft\])or both (committee 
\[draft reports\]). Bracketing a segment containing no 
wordform that is part of a term's maximal termform 
is, of course, a false hit (\[reports progress\]). 
The problematic case is clearly that of an imper- 
fect hit. In calculating recall and precision, should 
imperfect hits be grouped with perfect hits, counted 
as misses, or somehow accounted for separately (Fig- 
ure 2)? How do the perfect recall and precision ra- 
tios compare with imperfect recall and precision (in- 
cluding imperfect hits in the numerator) when these 
performance measurements are applied to real texts? 
Counting imperfectly recognized termforms as hits 
will obviously lead to higher ratios for recall and 
precision, but how much higher? 
To answer these questions, a complex-termform 
recognition algorithm based on weighted syntactic 
term-formation rules, the details of which are given 
in Lauriston (1993), was applied to a tagged 2,861 
word text. The weightings were based on the analy- 
sis of a 117,000 word corpus containing 11,614 com- 
plex termforms as determined by manual bracketing. 
The recognition algorithm includes the possibility of 
weighting of the terminological strength of particu- 
lar adjectives. This was carried out to produce the 
results hown in Figure 3. 
Recall and precision, both perfect and imperfect, 
were plotted as the algorithm's term-recognition 
threshold was varied. By choosing a higher thresh- 
old, only syntactically stronger links between ad- 
jacent words are considered "terminological links". 
Thus the higher the threshold, the shorter the av- 
erage complex termform, as weaker modifiers are 
20 
1.0+ 
0 .9+ 
08+ 
O7+ 
06+ 
05+ 
04+ 
03+ 
02+ 
01+ 
00+ 
r r 
r r r r 
r r r r p 
r r r p r p 
r r r p r p 
r r r p r p 
Rr Rr p r p r p 
Rr p Rr p r p r p 
Rr p Rr p r p r p 
Rr p Rr p r p r p 
Rr p Rr p r p r p 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp r p 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp r p 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp r p 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp 
Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp Rr Pp 
+ + + + 
0.05 0.40 0.75 0.95 
term-recognit ion threshold 
KEY: 
R perfect recall (perfect hits only) 
r imperfect recall (imperfect also) 
P perfect precision (perfect hits only) 
p imperfect precision (imperfect also) 
Figure 3: Effect of Imperfect Hits of Performance 
Ratios 
stripped from the nucleus. Lower recall and higher 
precision can be expected as the threshold rises since 
only constituents hat are surer bets are included in 
the maximal termform. 
This Figure 3 shows that both recall and precision 
scores are considerably higher when imperfect hits 
are included in calculating the ratios. As expected, 
raising the threshold results in lower recall regardless 
of whether the ratios are calculated for perfect or im- 
perfect recognition. There is a marked reduction in 
perfect recall, however, and only a marginal reduc- 
tion in imperfect recall. The precision ratios provide 
the most interesting point of comparison. As the 
threshold is raised, imperfect precision increases just 
as the principle of recall-precision tradeoff in docu- 
ment retrieval would lead one to expect. Perfect pre- 
cision, on the other hand, actually declines lightly. 
The difference between perfect and imperfect pre- 
cision (between the P-bar and p-bar in each group) 
increases appreciably as the threshold is raised. This 
difference is due to the greater number of recognized 
complex termforms either containing spurious words 
or only part of the maximal termform. 
Two conclusions can be drawn from Figure 3. 
Firstly, the recognition algorithm implemented is
poor at perfect recognition (perfect recall ~, 0.70; 
perfect precision ~, 0.40) and only becomes poorer 
as more stringent rule-weighting is applied. Sec- 
ondly, and more importantly for the purpose of this 
paper, Figure 3 shows that allowing for imperfect 
bracketing in term recognition makes it possible to 
obtain artificially high performance ratios for both 
recall and precision. Output that recognizes almost 
all terms but includes spurious words in complex 
termforms or fails short of recognizing the entire 
termform leaves a burdensome filtering task for the 
human user and is next to useless if the "user" is an- 
other level of automatic text processing. Only the 
exact bracketing of the maximal termform provides 
a useful standard for measuring and comparing the 
performance of term-recognition systems. 
4 Conclusion 
The term-recognition criteria proposed above - mea- 
suring recall and precision for the exact bracketing of 
maximal termforms- provide a basic minimum of in- 
formation eeded to assess ystem performance. For 
some applications, it is useful to further specify how 
these performance ratios differ for the recognition of 
simple and complex termforms, how they vary for 
terms resulting from different term-formation pro- 
cesses, what the ratios are for termform types as op- 
posed to tokens, or how well the system recognizes 
novel termforms not already in a system lexicon or 
previously encountered in a training corpus. Pre- 
cision measurements might usefully state to what 
extent errors are due to syntact ic  noise (bracket- 
ing crossing syntactic onstituents) as distinguished 
from terminological noise (bracketing including 
nonclassificatory modifiers or omitting classificatory 
ones). 
Publishing such performance results for term- 
recognition systems would not only display their 
strengths but also expose their weaknesses. Doing 
so would ultimately benefit researchers, developers 
and users of term-recognltion systems. 
References 
Baudot, Jean, and Andr4 Clas (1984). A model 
for a bilingual terminology mini-bank. In Lebende 
Sprachen, Vo1.19, No.2, pp.283-298. 
Black, Ezra, Roger Garside, and Geoffrey Leech 
(1993). Statistically-driven computer grammars of 
English: the IBM/Lancaster approach. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. 
Bouriganlt, Didier (1992). LEXTER, un Logi- 
ciel d'EXtraction de TERminologie. In Colloque 
sur le repdrage de l'information teztuelle, Montr4al, 
Qu4bec, Hydro-Quebec, March, pp.15-25. 
Bouriganlt, Didier (1994). Extraction et struc- 
turation automatique de terminologie pour l'aide 
l'acquisition des connaissances ~ partir de textes. In 
Reconnaissance d s formes et intelligence artificielle 
(RFIA '9~), Paris, January. 
21 
Church, Kenneth W. (1988). A stochastic parts 
program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted 
text. In Proceedings of the Second Conference 
on Applied IVatural Language Processing, Austin, 
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Morristown, New Jersey, pp.136-143. 
Daille, B~atrice (1994). Approche mizte pour 
l'eztraction automatique de terminologie : statis- 
tique lezicale et filtres linguistiques. Universit~ de 
Paris 7 (PhD Thesis), Paris, January. 
David, Sophie and Pierre Plante (1990). De la 
n~cessitE d'une approche morphosyntaxique en anal- 
yse de textes. In Intelligence artificielle et sci- 
ences cognitives au Qudbec, Vol.3 No.3, September, 
pp.140-155. 
Finin, Timothy W. (1986). Constraining the in- 
terpretation ofnominM compounds ina limited con- 
text. In Ralph Grishman and Richard Kittredge, 
editors, Analyzing language in restricted domains, 
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Asso- 
ciates, pp.163-173. 
Foster, George F. (1991). Statistical lezical dis- 
ambiguation. McGill University (MSc Thesis), 
MontrEal, Quebec. 
Gaxside, Roger, Geoffrey Leech, and Geoffrey 
Sampson, editors (1987). The computational nal- 
ysis of English: a corpus-based approach, London, 
Longman. 
Gaussier, \]~ric and Jean-Marc Lang~ (1994). Some 
methods for the extraction of bilingual terminol- 
ogy. In Proceedings of the International Confer- 
ence on New Methods in Language Processing (NeM- 
LAP), Manchester, England, University of Manch- 
ester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), 
September, pp.242-247. 
International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) (1988). Terminolgy- vocabulary. (ISO/DIS 
1087), Geneva, Switzerland. 
Jones, Leslie, Edward W. Gassie, and Sridhar 
Radhakrishnon (1990). INDEX: the statistical basis 
for an automatic conceptual phrase-indexing system. 
In Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, Vol.41, No.2, pp.87-97. 
Lauriston, Andy (1993). Le rep~rage automa- 
tique des syntagmes terminologiques. UniversitE du 
Quebec ~ Montreal (MA Thesis), MontrEal, Qutbec. 
Lauriston, Andy (1994). Automatic recognition 
of complex terms: problems and the "Termino" so- 
lution. In Terminology: applications in interdisci- 
plinary communication, Vol.1, No.l, pp.147-170. 
Leonard, Rosemary (1984). The interpretation of 
English noun sequences on the computer, Amster- 
dam, North-Holland. 
Logos Corporation (1987). LOGOS English 
Source Release 7.0, Dedham, Mass., Logos Corpo- 
ration. 
Normand, Diane (1993). Quand la terminologie 
s'automatise: du nouveau en terminotique: Term 
Cruncher, un logicel de d~pouillement. In Circuit, 
No.42, December, pp.29-30. 
Otman, Gabriel (1991). Des ambitions et des 
performances d'un syst~me de d~pouillement termi- 
nologique assist~ pax ordinateur. In La Banque des 
roots (special issue on terminology software), No.4, 
pp.59-96. 
Perron, Jean (1991). Presentation du progiciel de 
d~pouillement terminologique assistE par ordinateur: 
TerminG. In Les industries de la langue: perspec- 
tives des armies 1990, Mont~al, Quebec, Office de la 
langue fran~aise/SociEtd des traducteurs du Qudbec, 
pp.715-755. 
Portelance, Christine (1989). Les formations yn- 
tagmatiques en langues de sp~cialitd. Universit~ de 
Montreal, (PhD Thesis), Montreal, Quebec. 
Riggs, Fred (1993). Social science terminology: 
basic problems and proposed solutions. In Helmi B. 
Sonneveld and Kurt T. Loening, editors, Terminol- 
ogy: applications in interdisciplinary communica- 
tion, Amsterdam, John Benjamins, pp.195-222. 
Salton, Gerard (1989). Automatic tezt process- 
ing: the transformation, analysis, and retrieval of 
inforraation by computer, Reading, Mass., Addison- 
Wesley. 
Smadja, Frank (1993). Retrieving collocations 
from text: Xtract. In Computational linguistics, 
Vo1.19, No.1. 
Spark-Jones, Kaxen (1985). Compound Noun 
Interpretation Problems. In Frank Fallside and 
William A. Woods, editors, Computer Speech Pro- 
cessing, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice- 
Hall, pp.363-381. 
Van der Eijk, Pik (1993). Automating the acqui- 
sition of bilingual terminology. Proceedings of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics (EA CL), pp.ll3-119. 
22 
