Text Alignment in the Real World: Improving Alignments of Noisy 
Translations Using Common Lexical Features, String Matching Strategies 
and N-Gram Comparisons ~ 
Mark W. Davis, Ted E. Dunning and William C. Ogden 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Box 30001/3CRL 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 
USA 
{ madavis,ted,ogden } @crl.nmsu.edu 
Abstract 
Alignment methods based on byte-length 
comparisons of alignment blocks have been 
remarkably successful for aligning good 
translations from legislative transcriptions. 
For noisy translations in which the parallel 
text of a document has significant structural 
differences, byte-alignment methods often 
do not perform well. The Pan American 
Health Organization (PAHO) corpus is a 
series of articles that were first translated by 
machine methods and then improved by pro- 
fessional translators. Many of the Spanish 
PAHO texts do not share formatting conven- 
tions with the corresponding English docu- 
ments, refer to tables in stylistically different 
ways and contain extraneous information. A
method based on a dynamic programming 
framework, but using a decision criterion 
derived from a combination of byte-length 
ratio measures, hard matching of numbers, 
string comparisons and n-gram co-occur- 
rence matching substantially improves the 
performance of the alignment process. 
1 Introduction 
Given texts in two languages that are to some degree 
translations of one another, an alignment of the texts 
associates entences, paragraphs or phrases in one 
document with their translations in the other. Success- 
ful approaches to alignment can be divided into two 
primary types: those that use comparisons of lexical 
elements between the documents (Wu, 1994; Chen 
1993; Catizone, Russell and Warwick, 1989), and 
IThis research was funded under DoD Contract 
#MDA 904-94-C-E086 
those that use a statistical decision process derived 
from byte-length ratios between alignment blocks 
(Wu, 1994; Church, 1993; Gale and Church, 1991). 
Methods vary for the former approach, hut in the lat- 
ter approach, a dynamic programming framework is 
used to sequentially align blocks as the alignment pro- 
cess proceeds. Under this model, blocks are compared 
only with nearby blocks as the alignment proceeds, 
substantially reducing the computational overhead 
\[O(n 2) ~ O(n!)\] of the alignment process. 
In the primary literature on alignment, he texts are 
typically well-behaved. In byte-length ratio 
approaches, the presence of long stretches of blocks 
that have roughly similar lengths can be problematic, 
and some improvement can be achieved by augment- 
ing the byte-length measure by scores derived from 
lexical feature matching (Wu, 1994). When combined 
with radical formatting departures between docu- 
ments that often arise in text translations, the difficul- 
ties of producing ood alignments are exacerbated by 
the presence of untranslated segments, textual rear- 
rangements and other problematic text features. The 
dynamic programming framework makes long runs of 
segments that have no translation i  their parallel text 
difficult to ignore because the limited window size 
prevents passing over those segments to reach appro- 
priate areas of the document further downstream. 
Taken together, these difficulties can be catastrophic 
to the alignment process. Our experience shows that 
the fraction of correct alignments can drop to less than 
5%. 
Noisy translations of this sort do reflect human 
error and the preferences of translators, and they are 
probably much more prevalent than alignment work 
on legislative transcriptions has indicated. The pur- 
pose of this research was to ascertain what types of 
information contained in a document could be used to 
improve the alignment process, while not making 
gross assumptions about the source text format con- 
67 
ventions and peculiarities. The Pan American Health 
Organization (PAHO) corpus was used as a test cor- 
pus for evaluating the performance of the modified 
alignment algorithm. The PAHO texts are a series of 
documents on Latin American health issues and our 
test segment consisted of 180 documents that ranged 
from 20 to 3825 lines in length. From these docu- 
ments, several of the more problematic texts were 
hand aligned for analysis and comparison with the 
results of automatic alignment methods. 
2 A General Approach 
The byte-length ratio methods are very general in that 
they rely only upon a heuristic segmentation proce- 
dure to divide a text into sentence-level chunks. 
Although determining sentence boundaries can be 
problematic across languages, simple assumptions 
appear to work well even for comparisons between 
European and Oriental anguages, primarily because 
the segmentation heuristic is uniformly applied to 
each document and therefore an "undersegmented" 
section can combine together to match with single 
blocks in the opposite language as necessary. 
Less general would be a method that relied on deep 
analysis of the source texts to determine appropriate 
boundaries for alignment blocks. A model that 
accounted for all of the formatting discrepancies, 
comparative r scalings of sentence or phrase length 
due to the economy of the language xpression, and 
other properties that may define a corpus, will not 
necessarily be appropriate to other corpora or to text 
in general. 
We chose to remain as general as possible with our 
investigations of alignment methods. In particular, the 
heuristics for text segmentation regarded periods fol- 
lowed by a space, a newline (paragraph boundaries) 
or a tab as a sentence boundary for both English and 
Spanish texts (Figure 1). Multiple periods separated 
by spaces were ignored for alignment segmentation to 
XXXV Meeting 
Washington, D,C, 
? XLIIt Meeting 
l/ 
the 
. - - ,  . . . ? . 
It describes the situation of malaria in 
Region in 1990, summarizing the information obtained 
from the 
Governments in response to the questionnaire sent to them 
annually. 
INTRODUCCION 
El presente documento es el XXXIX lnforme sobre la 
Situaei6n 
La situaci6n de la malaria en el mundo se refiere a 1989, 
Y 
ha sido tomada de publieaciones dela Organizaei6n Mun- 
dial de la 
Salud, 
~ S1TUACIN DE LA MALARIA EN EL MUNDO 
Poblaei6nen fiesgo 
Mils de140% de la poblaci6n mundial, o sea, mils de 
2,000 
millones de personas, pemmncccn expuestas  diversos gra- 
dos de 
riesgo do malaria en unos 100 paises o territorios (Mapa 1). 
Figure 1: Sample English and Spanish texts with contiguous grey areas indicating alignment 
blocks. 
68 
allow for ellipsis. This approach did not, therefore, 
regard many abbreviations a a unique class of tex- 
tual event. The end result was an extremely simplis- 
tic segmentation. 
3 The PAHO Corpus: Noisy, 
Problematic Texts 
The PAHO texts serve as an important counter- 
part to our translator's workstation, Norm (Ogden, 
1993). During the translation process, translators 
can access many different resources including a 
variety of on-line dictionaries, reference works and 
parallel texts. The parallel texts include examples 
of translations that different ranslators have com- 
piled in the past and serve as a series of examples of 
how to translate words and phrases for a particular 
context. The PAHO texts also serve as a basis for 
our multi-lingual information retrieval system 
(Davis and Dunning, 1995; Dunning and Davis, 
1993a, 1993b). The need for robust strategies to 
process and align large parallel corpora automati- 
cally is therefore a critical component of our ongo- 
ing research. 
In the PAHO corpus, many of the texts are well- 
behaved, with similar tokenization at the bound- 
aries delineating paragraphs. But some are 
extremely noisy, with added text in the English or 
Spanish document hat lacks a counterpart in the 
parallel document. Formatting conventions differ in 
many cases, with multiple periods delimiting con- 
tents listings in one, while spaces serve a similar 
role in the other, or tables and reference formats dif- 
fering between the two texts. Another formatting 
problem is the addition of significant runs of 
whitespace and newlines that simply do not occur 
in the parallel text. The document pair shown in 
Figure 1 is representative of the quality of the 
PAHO texts. 
4 Features and Alignment 
One of the most striking features of English-Span- 
ish translations i the fact that native English speak- 
ers with little knowledge of Spanish appear able to 
identify parallel texts with remarkable accuracy. 
The reason appears to be the large number of cog- 
nate terms that Spanish and English translations 
share, especially technical terms, and other lexical 
features such as numbers and proper names that 
may appear with similar placement and frequency 
across two parallel texts. The work by Simard, Fos- 
ter and Isabelle (1993) as well as Church (1993) 
demonstrated that cognate-matching strategies can 
be highly effective in aligning text. Native English 
speakers with limited Spanish appear to be capable of 
aligning even noisy texts like many of the PAHO doc- 
uments, with difficulty causing a decrease in speed of 
alignment, rather than decreased accuracy of the 
alignment. From these observations, we examined 
five different sources of information for alignment 
discrimination: 
? Byte-length ratios 
? Unordered character n-gram comparisons 
? Simple ordered string-matching 
? Number matching 
? Bilingual-dictionary translations 
The analyses of each of these information sources are 
presented in sections 5.1 through 5.5. 
For each method, a hand-aligned ocument from 
PAHO corpus that was problematic for byte-ratio 
methods was used for evaluation, first for comparing 
the method's score distribution between random 
blocks and the hand-aligned set, then for performing 
realignments of the documents. The document was 
quite long for the PAHO set, containing about 1400 
lines of text and 360 alignment blocks in the English 
document and 1000 lines and 297 blocks in the Span- 
ish text. In these particular documents, the English 
text had nearly 400 lines of extraneous data abutted to 
the end of it that was not in the Spanish document, 
increasing the error potential for byte-length methods. 
5 Improving Alignments 
We used a modified and extended version of Gale and 
Church's byte-ratio algorithm (199l) as a basis for an 
improved alignment algorithm. The standard algo- 
rithm derives a penalty from a ratio of the byte lengths 
of two potential aligned blocks and augments the pen- 
alty with a factor based on the frequency of matches 
between blocks in one language that equate to a block 
or blocks in the second language. The byte-ratio pen- 
alty is the measurement-conditioned or a posteriori  
probability of a match while the frequency of block 
matches gives the a priori  probability of the same 
match. Our version of the basic algorithm differs in 
the mechanics of memory management (we use skip- 
lists to improve performance of the dynamic program- 
ming, for example), includes both positive and nega- 
tive information about the probability of a given 
match and fuses multiple sources of information for 
evaluating alignment probabilities. 
For two documents, Dl and D 2 , consisting ofn and 
m alignment blocks, respectively, a i < n and by ~ m' an 
alignment, A, is a set consisting of 
ai '"  "ai + l ~-4 b j . . .b j  +p pairs. For compactness, we will 
write this as cti, l *~ flj, p. 
69 
p(AIDvD2) = 1-'I p(ai, t~-->f3j, plSp82 ..... 8k) 
(0ti.i ?,-> 13j,~) ~ A 
P (ai, l <'-> Dj, plSv 82 ..... 8k) = p(51 ' 52 . . . . .  5k ) 
(Eq 1) 
(Eq2) 
P(a i ,  l<'-'>~j, pl51, 5 2 . . . . .  5k) 
P (5,, 5 2 ..... 5,l~i, t ~ f3j, p) p (~i,l ~ ~j,p) 
(Eq 3) 
P (51 , 5 2 . . . . .  5klO~i, 1 ~--> \[~j,p) P (o~i, 1 <--) \[~j,p) + P (51 , 5 2 . . . . .  5kl---~ ( o~i, l <--> \[~j,p)  P (-.-1 (o~i, 1 ??-.-> \[~j,p) 
(Eq 4) 
01 = logP(Sk\[Oti, l ~ ~j,p) 
0 2 = log\[P(Sk\]ai, l<--->\[~j,p) e(o~i,l<--->~j.p)+P(Skl~(ai, l~->~j,p))P(~(ai, t~--~j,p))\] 
03 = logP(a/ ,  l ~ ~j,p) 
argmaxe(AIDpD2) = ~ ~-01  +02-03 
A (a,.,~fb. .) cA k 
(Eq 5) 
(Eq 6) 
(Eq 7) 
(Eq 8) 
Figure 2. Equations. 
Following the Gale and Church approach, we 
choose an alignment that maximizes the probability 
over all possible alignments: 
arg r~ax \[P(A IDv D2)\] 
If we assume that the probabilities of individually 
aligned block pairs in an alignment are independent, 
the above equation becomes: 
p(AIDI, D2 ) = I-I e(eti, t~\[ij, plOpO2) 
(ai.t <'-> ~j,p) ~ A 
Further assuming that the individual probabilities of 
aligning two blocks, e(ai, t~-~fJj, pIDvD2), are 
dependent on features in the text described by a series 
of feature scores, 8 k, the above equations expands 
into Equation 1 in figure 2. 
Now, for each of the feature scoring functions, the a 
posteriori probabilities can be calculated from Bayes' 
Rule as shown in Equation 2, Figure 2 which, given 
an approximation of the joint a posteriori probabili- 
ties by assuming independence, produces Equation 3, 
Figure 2. 
Note that the term in the denominator fEquation 3 
reflects both the statistics of the positive and negative 
information for the alignment. In Gale and Church's 
original work, the denominator term was assumed to 
be a constant over the range of 8, and therefore could 
be safely ignored during the maximization of proba- 
bilities over the alignment set. In reality, this assump- 
tion is true only in the case of a uniform distribution 
of P (Sk\]~ (0~ i l ~ \[~j p) ) ' and is perhaps not even true 
in that Case due to ti{e scaling properties of the loga- 
rithm when the maximization problem above is con- 
verted to a minimization problem (below). 
In any case, the probability of a given value of fi 
occurring is not merely dependent on the probability 
of that score in the hand-aligned set, but is dependent 
on the comparative probabilities of the score for the 
hand aligned set and a set of randomly chosen align- 
ment blocks. Clearly, if a value of 5 is equally likely 
for both the hand aligned and random sets, then the 
measurement cannot contribute to the decision pro- 
cess. Equation3 presents a very general approach to 
the fusion of multiple sources of information about 
alignment probabilities. Each of the sources contrib- 
utes to the overall probability of an alignment, but is 
in turn scaled by the total probability of a given score 
occurring over the entire set of possible alignments. 
We can convert he maximization of probabilities 
into a minimization of penalties taking the negative 
logarithm of Equation 2 and substituting Equation 3, 
70 
where 01 , 0 2 and 03 are as given in figure 2, Equa- 
tions 5, 6 and 7. Equation 8 in the same figure is the 
result. 
The feature functions, 5 k , are derived from esti- 
mates of the probability of byte length differences, 
number matching score probabilities and string match 
score probabilities in our approach. 
The Bayesian prior, P(O~i,l<--.->~j,p), can  be esti- 
mated as per Gale and Church (1991) by assuming 
that it is equal to the frequency of distinct n-m 
matches in the training set. 
5.1 Byte-length Ratios, 5 I 
The probability of an alignment based on byte-length 
ratios is P(51 Ctl t ~-~ 13j p) = P(Sl(l(ct I t) l(~j p))), 
I . ", ', ~ , 
where l ( ) is the byte-length function. The distribu- 
tion is assumed to be a Gaussian random variable 
derived from the block length differences in the hand 
aligned set. Following Gale and Church (1991), the 
slope of the average of the length differences 
describes the average number of Spanish characters 
generated per English character. Assuming that the 
distribution is approximately Gaussian, we can nor- 
malize it to mean 0 and variance 1, resulting in: 
~il(/(?~i, t), l(pj p)) = l(pj, p) - l(txi, t)c 
' ~/(~i, t) 02 
where c = E(I(~j, p)/l(o~i, l) ) = 0.99 and 02 ~ O. 16 is the 
observed variance. The histogram in Figure 3a shows 
the actual distribution of the hand-aligned ata set. 
The shape of the histogram is approximately Gauss- 
ian. The distribution of the corresponding random 
segments in shown in Figure 3b. Note that the distri- 
bution of the random set has significantly higher stan- 
dard deviation than the corresponding hand aligned 
set. This diagram, as well as Figure 4 for the n-gram 
approach on the following page, indicate the statisti- 
cal quality of the information provided by the scores. 
Good sources of information would produce amarked 
difference between the two distributions. For compar- 
atively poor sources of information, the distributions 
would show little or no differences. 
5.2 4-gram Matching, 5 2 
Cognates in English and Spanish often have short 
runs of letters in common. A measure that counts the 
number of matching n-grams in two strings is an 
unordered comparison of similarities within the 
strings. In this way, runs of letters in common 
between cognate terms are measured. We used an effi- 
cient n-gram matching algorithm that requires a sin- 
gle scan of each string, followed by two sorts and a 
linear-time list comparison to count matches. The 
resulting score was normalized by the total number of 
n-grams between the strings. Formally, for two strings 
elee....e p and sls2...s q, the n-gram match count, K n, is 
given by: 
Kn = 1 ~, ~<qm(eiei+ 1 n,~+l.. .Sj+n) p-q i<p j ""el+ 
where mO is the matching function. The function, 
m(), is equal to 1 only for equivalent n-grams, else it 
is 0. 
We chose to use 4-gram scores for the alignment 
algorithm, 52 = K 4 . The distributions of the 4-gram 
Dis t r ibut ion  o f  Byte - length  Rat io  Scores  fo r  the  Hand A l igned  Set  
70,0O 
65 ,00  
60 ,00  
55,O0 
50,00 
45.00 
,IO,OO 
~:~ 35,00 
30,00 
25,0O 
2O.OO 
15.00 
IO.OO 
_~.00 
-40 .00  -20 .00  0 .00  
8 1 
110.00 
100.00 
9O.OO 
80.OO 
70.OO 
~ 6O.0O 
~ 5o .oo  
4o .oo  
30 .oo  
2o .oo  
lo .oo  
o .oo  
Dis t r ibut ion  o f  Byte - length  Rat ios  fo r  the  Randomly  A l igned  Set  
0.oo  500.00  
8 t 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3. Distribution of 51 for (a) hand aligned and (b) randomly aligned blocks 
71 
Dis t r ibut ion  of  4 -Gram Match  Scores  fo r  Hand A l igned  Set  
55.00  . . . . . . . . .  ~' . . . . . . . . .  -: . . . . . . . . . .  :- . . . .  
5O.00  
45 .0O 
40 .00  
35 ,O0 
30 .00  
25 .00  
2O.00  
15 ,OO 
10 .OO 
5 .00  
0 .00  50 .00  IOO.00  150.OO 
82x 1~ 3 
Dis t r ibut ion  o f  d -Gram Match  Scores  fo r  the  Random Set  
9O.O0 
80 .OO 
7o .oo  
60 .0o  
o?o  
5o .oo  
~ 4o .o0  
30 .00  
20 .o0  
10 .00  
o .oo  
 iiiiiiiiiiiiiii  
o .oo  20 .00  40 .oo  
82x l~ 3 
(a) (b) 
Figure 4. 4-gram matching score distributions, 8 2 , for (a) hand aligned and (b) randomly aligned 
blocks. 
counts were computed for both the hand-aligned and 
random alignment blocks. Figure 4 shows the result- 
ing distributions. The results suggest hat, on the 
whole, the use of n-gram methods hould be consid- 
ered for improving alignments that contain lexically 
similar cognates. Being unordered comparisons, how- 
ever, they cannot exploit any intrinsic sequencing of 
lexical elements. 
5.3 Ordered String Comparisons, 8 3 
The value of unordered comparisons like the n-gram 
matching may be enhanced by ordered comparisons. 
An ordered comparison can reduce the noise associ- 
ated with matching unrelated n-grams at opposite 
ends of parallel alignment blocks. We chose to evalu- 
ate a simple string-matching scheme as a possible 
method for improving alignment performance. The 
scheme compares the two alignment blocks character- 
by-character, skipping over sections in one block that 
do not match in the opposite, thus primarily penaliz- 
ing the inclusion of dissimilar text segments in either 
block. The resulting sum of the matches is scaled by 
the sum of the lengths of the two blocks. In compari- 
son with the random block scoring, the distribution of 
the hand aligned data set had a greater number of 
matches with high string-match scores. 
5.4 Number Matching, 8 4 
The PAHO texts are distinguished by a number of tex- 
tual features, especially the fact that they are all in 
some way related to Latin American health issues. 
The preponderance of the documents are technical 
reports on epidemiology, proceedings from meetings 
and conferences, and compendiums of resources and 
citations. Within these documents, numbers occur 
regularly. The string-matching technique suggested 
that if a class of lexical distinction could be matched 
directly, the alignments might be significantly 
improved. Numbers are sufficiently general that we 
felt we were not violating the spirit of the restriction 
on generality by using a number-matching scheme. 
For each alignment block pair, the number match- 
ing algorithm extracted all numbers. The total number 
of exact matches between the number sets from each 
alignment block was then normalized by the sizes of 
both sets of numbers. This approach as several draw- 
backs, such as the differences in the format of num- 
bers between Spanish and English. In Spanish, for 
example, commas are used instead of decimal points. 
These distinctions were ignored, however, to preserve 
the generality of the algorithm. This generality will 
potentially extend to other languages, including Asi- 
atic languages, which tend to use Arabic numerals to 
represent numbers. The distributions of both the hand 
and random block scoring both showed a substantial 
mass of very low scores. 
It should be noted that numbers are simply a special 
case of cognates and certainly contribute to the n- 
gram scores. Adding in number matching strategies 
therefore only enhances the n-gram results. 
5.5 Translation Residues 
Despite the fact that non-Spanish speakers can often 
achieve success at aligning English documents with 
Spanish texts, the added knowledge of someone with 
both Spanish and English language understanding is 
an added benefit and should facilitate alignment. To 
evaluate the role of translation-based alignment scor- 
72 
Table 1. Performance comparisons between byte-length ratio methods and the improved algorithm. 
Document 1
Document 2 
Byte-length Ratio Method 
#HAND #FOUND #CORRECT 
281 196 65 
787 440 3 
Improved Method 
#HAND #FOUND #CORRECT 
281 222 138 
787 614 553 
ing, the Collins Spanish-English and English-Spanish 
bilingual dictionaries were used to produce a score 
equal to the residue from a translation attempt of the 
terms in potential aligning blocks. 
Given a set of English terms, e i, Spanish terms, sj, 
from two blocks, the translation operation, T(I), gen- 
erates aset of terms in the opposite language by stem- 
ming each term and retrieving the terms that the 
stemmed word translates to in Collins. The residue, R, 
is then a penalty equal to the (normalized) number of 
terms in each translation set that do not have a match 
in the opposite translation set: 
R =1 EkllZ?lPc tgll 
ZUT(lk) UlkU 
In comparison test, the distributions of scores 
between random Spanish blocks and English blocks, 
and between the hand-aligned sets, were surprisingly 
similar, making a statistical discrimination of proper 
alignments difficult. We believe that dictionary-based 
discrimination performs poorly primarily due to the 
noisy nature of the dictionary we used. It was initially 
thought hat subsenses and usage patterns for each 
term would be an aid to discrimination by providing a
stronger basis for matches between true parallel 
blocks. The added terms beyond the critical primary 
sense in the dictionary had high hit rates with usage 
terms throughout the dictionary. The result was a 
noisy translation set that robbed the residue measure 
of discriminatory power. The results discouraged us 
from including the R measure in the error function for 
the dynamic programming system, although we sus- 
pect that improved dictionaries may ultimately pro- 
vide better discrimination. It may also be possible to 
apply a kill list to the dictionary to reduce the number 
of high frequency terms in each definition, increasing 
the relevancy of the overall residue measure. 
6 Implementation 
The fact that our formulation of the alignment proba- 
bility for two blocks is dependent on both the positive 
and negative information about the alignment proba- 
bility means that the probability density functions can 
be used directly in the algorithm. Specifically, the dis- 
tributions hown in Figures 3 and 4, as well as the dis- 
tributions for ordered string comparisons and number 
comparisons, were loaded into the algorithm as histo- 
grams. During the dynamic programming operation, 
probability scores were determined by direct look-up 
of the 8 scores in the appropriate histogram, with 
some weighted averaging performed for values 
between the boundaries of the histogram bars for 
smoothing. This approach eliminated the necessity of 
estimating a distribution function for the rather non- 
Gaussian functions that are assumed to underlay the 
experimental data. Using this approach, the byte- 
length ratios could be simplified by not assuming a
Gaussian-like distribution and directly using the his- 
tograms of byte-length probabilities. For comparison, 
however, we chose to use the Gale and Church deriva- 
tion without modifying 81 . 
7 Performance 
Table 1 shows the performance of the original align- 
ment algorithm compared to the improved algorithm. 
The results are for two documents. #HAND is the 
number of alignment blocks found in the hand aligned 
set. #FOUND is the number of alignment blocks 
found by the algorithms. Values of #FOUND lower 
than the value of #HAND indicates that alignment 
blocks that contain multiple segments have been 
found by the algorithm (e.g., a 3-3 match has sup- 
planted three 1-1 matches). #CORRECT is the num- 
ber of the found blocks which exactly match blocks in 
the hand aligned set. Note that the number of exact 
matches is a conservative estimate of the number of 
73 
acceptable alignments, as different ranslators may, 
for example, differ about whether a 2-2 match can 
take the place of two 1-1 matches and still be consid- 
ered aligned. 
In general, the performance of the improved align- 
ment algorithm was very good, improving the hit 
rates from 23% to 49% on Document 1 and from 
0.00381% to 70% on Document 2. The abysmal per- 
formance of the byte-length method on Document 2
can be attributed to the massive amounts of header 
information, significant added whitespace and incon- 
sistent able and list formats that occurred in one doc- 
ument but not the other. The algorithm encountered 
only 1 hit (the document start) in the first quarter of 
the document. The training texts for these runs were 
the texts themselves, and therefore the results must be 
reviewed with care. The statistics of just two docu- 
ments, applied directly to those two documents for 
evaluation does not necessarily provide a direct esti- 
mate of the same statistics to a broader spectrum of 
documents. 
8 Conclusions 
In the real world, poor-quality translations are com- 
mon due to the preferences of individual translators, 
lack of formal format guidelines for translations and 
outright mistakes. Our method combines four feature 
scores into a simple measure of the probability of two 
textual segments aligning. The algorithm is fairly 
general in that all of the feature scores used are more 
or less applicable to a wide range of Spanish and 
English translations and are also applicable to a 
degree to other European languages. It is further 
likely that the methods we used can improve align- 
ments between many non-European languages by 
exploiting the increasingly common English phrases 
and Arabic number occurrences in professional and 
public communications throughout the world. 
Our alignment algorithm presents a new formula- 
tion of Bayesian methods combined with a direct 
approach to data fusion for multiple sources of infor- 
mation. This approach should work well with a wide 
range of data sources, including direct comparisons of 
co-occurrence probabilities for specific lasses of lex- 
ical elements. 
References 
CATIZONE, ROBERTA, GRAHAM RUSSELL & 
SUSAN WARWICK. 1989. Deriving Translation Data 
from Bilingual Texts. In Proceedings of the First 
International Acquisition Workshop, Detroit, MI. 
CHEN, STANLEY F. 1993. Aligning Sentences in 
Bilingual Corpora Using Lexical Information. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Associ- 
ation of Computational Linguistics, 9-16, Columbus, 
OH. 
CHURCH, KENNETH W. 1993. Char-align: A Pro- 
gram for Aligning Parallel Texts at the Character 
Level. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference 
of the Association of Computational Linguistics, 1-8, 
Columbus, OH. 
DAVIS, MARK W. & TED E. DUNNING. 1995. 
Query TransLation using Evolutionary Programming 
for Multi-lingual Information Retrieval. To appear in 
Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Conference on 
Evolutionary Programming, San Diego, CA. 
DUNNING, TED E. & MARK W. DAVIS. 1993a. A 
Single Language Evaluation of a Multi-Lingual Text 
Retrieval System. NIST Special Publication 500-207." 
The First Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-1), D.K. 
Harman, Ed., Computer Systems Laboratory, NIST. 
DUNNING, TED E. & MARK W. DAVIS. 1993b. 
Multi-Lingual Information Retrieval. Memoranda in 
Computer and Cognitive Science, MCCS-93-252, 
Computing Research Laboratory, New Mexico State 
University. 
GALE, WILLIAM m. & KENNETH W. CHURCH. 
1991. A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual 
Corpora. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Confer- 
ence of the Association of Computational Linguistics, 
177-184, Berkeley, CA. 
OGDEN, WILLIAM C. 1993. Norm - A System for 
Translators. Demonstration at ARPA Workshop on 
Human Language Technology, Merill-Lynch Confer- 
ence Center, Plainsboro, NJ. 
SIMARD, M., G. FOSTER & P. ISABELLE. 1992. 
Using Cognates to Align Sentences in Bilingual Cor- 
pora. Fourth International Conference on Theoretical 
and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation. 
Montreal Canada. 
WU, DEKAI. 1994. Aligning a Parallel English-Chi- 
nese Corpus Statistically with Lexical Criteria. In 
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 80-87, 
Las Cruces, NM. 
74 
