Group ing  Words  Us ing  Stat is t ica l  Context  
Christopher C. Huckle * 
Department ofPsychology, 
7 George Square, 
Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, 
Scotland, 
U.K. 
cch@cast le ,  ed. ac. uk 
Abstract 
This paper describes the use of statistical 
analyses of untagged corpora to detect 
similarities and differences in the mean- 
ing of words in text. This work is mo- 
tivated by psychological as well as by 
computational issues. The limitations 
of the method of cluster analysis in as- 
sessing the success of such analyses are 
discussed, and ongoing research using an 
alternative unsupervised neural network 
approach is described. 
Introduction 
There has been considerable recent interest in the 
use of statistical methods for grouping words in 
large on-line corpora into categories which capture 
some of our intuitions about the reference of the 
words we use and the relationships between them 
(e.g. Brown et al, 1992; Schiitze, 1993). 
Although they have received most attention 
from within computational linguistics, such ap- 
proaches are also of interest from the point of view 
of psychology. The huge task of developing con- 
cepts of word meanings is one that human beings 
readily achieve; we are all generally aware of the 
similarities and differences between the meanings 
of words, despite the fact that in many cases these 
meanings are not amenable to rigourous defini- 
tion. Whilst supervision may enable children to 
learn the meanings of a limited number of com- 
mon words, it seems extremely unlikely that the 
greater part of our understanding of word mean- 
ings is achieved in this way. Experimental evi- 
dence shows (Harris, 1992) that the occurrence of 
words in young children's language is strongly in- 
fluenced by the appearance of those words in the 
speech they hear around them, and it may be that 
this process continues indefinitely. Such a process 
would seem to be particularly important when ac- 
counting for our understanding of abstract words, 
such as 'similar' and 'justice', which lack concrete 
*The author is supported by the Carnegie Trust for 
the Universities of Scotland 
referents. Despite our difficulty in being able to 
provide clear definitions for such words, we have 
strong intuitions about their usage and can read- 
ily categorize them on the basis of similarity in 
meaning. This process of developing concepts for 
abstract words is one which psychological research 
has tended to ignore. 
This situation suggests that the learning of the 
meanings of many words, and their relation to the 
meanings of other words, may be achieved in an 
unsupervised fashion, and that our ability to de- 
velop a categorization for words may be driven, at 
least in part, by structure latent in the language 
being learned. Recent work in computational lin- 
guistics which makes use of statisticM methods to 
cluster words into groups which reflect heir mean- 
ing is attractive in this context as it potentially 
provides a means for developing conceptual struc- 
ture without supervision, without giving any prior 
information about the language to the system, and 
without making a priori distinctions between con- 
crete and abstract words. 
Supervision and knowledge of syntax (much 
useful information about which, as Finch and 
Chater (1992) have argued, is also contained in 
simple distributional statistics) arc two additional 
factors which are likely to assist in the process of 
developing concepts of word meanings. However, 
by focusing on the single; intralinguistic, source of 
information provided by the language data alone, 
we may be able to obtain useful insights regarding 
its influence on our conceptual structure. 
Approaches to Semantic Clustering 
A number of analyses were carried out on text 
corpora to examine the sorts of semantic group- 
ings that can be achieved using simple statistical 
methods. Using an approach similar to that of 
Brown et al (1992), each 'target word '1 wi in 
the corpus was represented as a vector in which 
each component j is the probability that any one 
1 For convenience, target words were taken as the n 
most frequent words in the corpus, with n often equal 
to 1000 
278 
word position in a 'context window' will be occu- 
pied by a 'context word' wj, given that the win- 
dow is centred on word wi. The length of the 
window used can be varied. The basic outline of 
the moving window used is shown in figure 1. As 
figure 1 indicates, the portion of the moving win- 
dow in which the context words are contained may 
exclude a small number of word positions imme- 
diately adjacent o the target word. This is to 
weaken the effects of syntax, although the analy- 
ses described here do not make use of this facility. 
Following the creation of these vectors, heirarchi- 
Figure 1: Design of the Moving Window 
word or immediately following the target word. 
Whilst it seems reasonable to suppose that chil- 
dren acquiring word meanings would be able to 
make use of more than this limited amount of con- 
text information, the analyses were carried out to 
investigate performance of the system under such 
crude conditions. 
It was found on examination of the dendro- 
grams resulting from the cluster analyses that 
even using this extremely impoverished source of 
information about the target words did permit a 
limited number of semantically coherent group- 
ings of words to be created. The members of some 
of these groups were selected following inspection 
of the relevant dendrograms and are listed in table 
1. Despite the existence of the groupings hown 
C.~lte~ Wolds ~ ~ WC~S 
D/revtion of Moving Window Through Text 
cal cluster analysis was carried out over them, us- 
ing Euclidean distance between vectors as a sim- 
ilarity metric. Analyses were also carried out in 
which, as with Finch and Chater (1992), the dis- 
tance metric used was the Spearman Rank Cor- 
relation coefficient. The approach described here 
differs from that of Brown et al (1992) in that 
context words both preceding and following the 
target word are considered (although information 
about the ordering of the context was not used), 
and in that Euclidean distance, rather than aver- 
age mutual information, is used for clustering. 
Each of the methods described here represents 
each target word in the same manner, regardless of 
the syntactic or semantic designation which might 
conventionally be assigned to it. Thus any differ- 
ences or similarities between words must be de- 
tected purely from the statistics of the usage of 
the words, which are in turn determined by the 
characteristics of the contexts in which they oc- 
cur. 
Results 
The methods outlined above were used to clus- 
ter words appearing in the Lund corpus (470,000 
words), a corpus created from issues of the Wall 
Street Journal (1.1 million words), and a corpus 
created from the works of Anthony Trollope (1.7 
million words). 
Initial analyses were carried out on the Lund 
and Trollope corpora using a short window length 
of only one word position either side of the target 
word. That is, target words were represented by 
vectors whose components reflected the (bigram) 
statistics of occurrence of context words at the 
word position immediately preceding the target 
Table 1: Semantic Groupings 
Possible Designatiou 
c~ Group 
Mental States 
O~ur~ Corpus) 
Days c/the Week 
(Lurid Cori~s) 
Measures 
(Lurid CoraLs) 
People 
Numbers 
mono W c~q~) 
Unite of Time " 
(Trollope Cor/~s) 
Paris c~ the body 
(Tronope Corpus) 
Humen'Fan'~Lly 
Members 
(Trollope Corpus) 
i Group Members 
want, wanted, tried, went, derided, think, thousht, 
hope, believe, knew, feel, felt, expect, wish, forget. 
Eriday, thursday, saturday, sunday, monday, 
wednesday, tuesday. 
ninety, pounds, years, days, minutes, hours, double, 
~es. 
boy, girl, man, woman. 
six, twelve, twice, twenty, two, three, fottr, ten, five, seven. 
mcxtths, Tears, days, hours, o'ckx:k, times. 
arm, mouth, pocket, arms, chair, sister, thoughts, feet, 
eye, heart, father, face, head, eye~ hand, eats, hands, 
bosom. 
aunt, mind, uncle, husband, cousin, motheT, daughter, 
brother, niec~ 
in ~able 1 and a small number of others like them, 
they represent only a small proportion of the 1000 
target words subjected to the analysis. Besides 
those shown above, a number of other types of 
groupings were evident which appeared to reflect 
syntactic rather than more specific semantic har- 
acteristics. This is perhaps not surprising if one 
regards the problem of grouping words on the ba- 
sis of similarity as one of prediction; given statis- 
tical information only about those words immedi- 
ately adjacent o a particular target word, it may 
be possible to say with reasonable confidence that 
the target word is a noun, a verb, or an adjective, 
but information about wider context is likely to 
be needed in order to provide more specific predic- 
tions about the particular noun, verb, or adjective 
in question. Since this information is not present, 
the dendrograms resulting from the analysis how 
groupings of prepositions, adjectives, verbs, and 
so on. Also present are groups of words whose 
members all commonly precede or follow a partic- 
ular particle. 
Further analyses were carried out in which the 
length of the context window was extended to 5 
279 
words either side of the target word. The den- 
drograms resulting from these analyses did not 
show any marked improvement over those ob- 
tained from the earlier analyses, and even when 
the window length was increased to 25 words each 
side of the target word, clear differences were not 
easy to detect from the dendrograms, although the 
sorts of groupings noted earlier were still identifi- 
able. 
Future  D i rec t ions  
The use of cluster analysis and related techniques 
has been popular for presenting the results of re- 
cent statistical anguage work within computa- 
tional linguistics. However, such methods clearly 
have a number of limitations. Firstly, it is diffi- 
cult to compare dendrograms rigourously, which 
means that it can be difficult to determine which 
of a number of alternative approaches or sets of 
parameters i  turning out to be the most success- 
ful. Secondly, the lack of an objective measure 
of the clusters obtained means that assessments 
of the success of a particular technique for cat- 
egorizing language may well be unreliable; it is 
quite possible to focus on the .attractive looking 
groupings revealed in a dendrogram whilst ignor- 
ing what may be a very large number of less at- 
tractive ones. 
These criticisms arise largely because cluster 
analysis is a purely descriptive statistical method, 
and strongly suggest that alternative methods 
must be found which can provide a more objec- 
tive measure of the success of the technique being 
used. Of these, word sense disambiguation is at- 
tractive. Since we can obtain from native speakers 
an assessment ofthe correct senses of target words 
in different contexts, we do have a means for de- 
termining how often a particular technique is able 
to give the correct sense for a particular target 
word. In other words, the evaluation of a native 
speaker can potentially be used to assess perfor- 
mance each time the system encounters a target 
word in context and assigns that word to a par- 
ticular sense class. Whilst such assessments might 
also be applicable to the analysis of dendrograms, 
word sense disambiguation is of interest since it 
constitutes the task that continually meets human 
language users when reading text or listening to 
speech. 
For these reasons, current work is focusing on 
the problem of disambiguating words given sta- 
tistical context. To achieve this, an unsupervised 
competitive neural network is being used. This 
has several features which appear to be desirable. 
Firstly, as in the human case, learning proceeds 
on-line, without any need for a separate stage of 
statistical analysis. Such a system has the poten- 
tial to begin developing clusters from the very first 
exposure to the linguistic input, and the clusters 
into which the input words are placed evolve con- 
tinuously during the learning process. Thus one 
can usefully examine the state of the clusters at 
any point during learning. Secondly, it is straight- 
forward to allow any given word to be clustered 
into as many separate clusters as the system dic- 
tates (subject o the maximum number of output 
units available). Thus, the neural network ap- 
proach, unlike that described above, has the po- 
tential to allow separate senses of a word to be 
distinguished on the basis of their context. This 
is not to say that non-neural network approaches 
could not permit a word to belong to more than 
one cluster (e.g. Pereira et al, 1993), but rather 
that this is a very natural and attractive conse- 
quence of trsing the unsupervised neural network 
approach. 
At present, work is being undertaken to exam- 
ine how well a simple competitive neural network 
can perform on such a task. Preliminary work 
has been undertaken using a simple competitive 
neural network similar to that described by Finch 
and Chater (1992). Unlike them, though, provi- 
sion was made for presenting words along with 
context during the test phase as well as the train- 
ing phase. This potentially allows disambigua- 
tion performance to be examined at any time. 
Initial work using the very simple artificial cor- 
pus devised by Elman (1988) has been encourag- 
ing, with the network demonstrating near-perfect 
performance in distinguishing between ouns and 
verbs in the corpus. 
Re ferences  
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Peter V. 
deSouza, Jenifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. 
1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural lan- 
guage. Computational Linguistics, 18(4):467-479. 
Jeffrey L. Elman. 1988. Finding Structure in 
Time. CRL Technical Report 8801. Center for 
Research in Language, University of California, 
San Diego. 
Steven P. Finch and Nicholas 3. Chater. 1992. 
Bootstrapping syntactic categories. In Proceed- 
ings of the l~th Annual Conference of the Cogni- 
tive Science Society Of America, pages 820-825. 
Bloomington, Indiana. 
Margaret Harris. 1992. Language Experience 
and Early Language Development. Lawrence Erl- 
baum, Hove, U.K. 
Fernando Pereira, Naftali Tishby, and Lilian Lee. 
1993. Distributional Clustering of English Words. 
In Proceedings of the Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics, volume 31, pages 183-190. 
ACL. 
Hinrich Schfitze. 1993. Part-of-speech-induction 
from scratch. In Proceedings of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, volume 31, pages 
251-258. ACL. 
280 
