Corpus-based Method for Automat ic  Identif ication of 
Support Verbs 
for Nominal izat ions 
Gregory Grefenstette Simone Teufel 
Rank Xerox Research Centre Universit?t Stuttgart 
38240 Meylan, France Institut ffir maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung 
grefen?xerox.fr D 70174 Stuttgart 1 
s imone~ ims. uni- stuttgart, de 
Abstract 
Nominalization is a highly pro- 
ductive phenomena in most lan- 
guages. The process of nominaliza- 
tion ejects a verb from its syntactic 
role into a nominal position. The 
original verb is often replaced by a 
semantically emptied support verb 
(e.g., make a proposal). The choice 
of a support verb for a given nomi- 
nalization is unpredictable, causing 
a problem for language learners as 
well as for natural language pro- 
cessing systems. We present here 
a method of discovering support 
verbs from an untagged corpus via 
low-level syntactic processing and 
comparison of arguments attached 
to verbal forms and potential nom- 
inalized forms. The result of the 
process is a list of potential support 
verbs for the nominalized form of a 
given predicate. 
1 Introduction 
Nominalization, the transformation of a ver- 
bal phrase into a nominal form, is possible 
in most languages (Comrie and Thompson, 
1990). Nominalizations are used for a vari- 
ety of stylistic reasons: to avoid repetitions 
of a verb, to avoid awkward intransitive uses 
of transitive verbs, in technical descriptions 
where passive is commonly used, etc. 
Though, as a result of nominalization, the 
original verb is ejected from its syntactic po- 
sition, it often retains many of its thematic 
roles. The original agents and patients can 
reappear as genitival or adjectival modifiers 
of the nominalized predicate. In the syntactic 
place of the original verb can appear a seman- 
tically impoverished verb. 
The semantically impoverished verb, often 
called a support verb, to be used with a nom- 
inalized predicate structure is unpredictable. 
Allerton (1982)\[p. 76\] writes: 
Perhaps the most serious prob- 
lem for these structures is that 
there is no constant selection of 
the empty verb: sometimes we find 
have, sometimes take, sometimes 
give, and rarely pay; sometimes 
we have a choice between two or 
more empty verbs e.g. have/take 
a look . . .  We have little choice but 
to record such irregularities in the 
lexicon . . .  
For this reason, the collocational choice of a 
support verb for a given nominalization is a 
difficult problem for language learners, as well 
as for natural language processor implemen- 
tation. 
We present here a method of deriving prob- 
able support verbs for nominalized predicates 
from corpora using low-level syntactic anal- 
ysis and simple frequency statistics over its 
results. This automatic procedure may be 
looked upon as an aid to lexicographers, as an 
independent extraction tool, or as a verifica- 
tion of lexical collocation information stored 
in a machine-based lexicon. 
Since nominalized predicates can semanti- 
cally drift over time to become concrete nouns 
having lost all their thematic role, our method 
first attempts to distinguish true nominaliza- 
tions from concrete uses of the nominalized 
surface form. This is done by comparing ap- 
proximations to the argument/adjunct struc- 
tures of verbal predicates to those of candi- 
date nominalized forms in a large corpus. For 
each selected nominalized form, syntactically 
supporting verb information is extracted from 
the corpus and then collated, providing the 
candidates for support verbs. 
98 
1.1 The  rqomina l i zat ion  Cl ine 
The phenomenon of nominalization in En- 
glish happens when a verb is replaced by a 
noun construction using a gerundive or nomi- 
nal form of the verb. The original subject and 
objects of the verb can reappear as Saxon or 
Norman genitives modifying the nominalized 
form. 
Quirk et al (Quirk et al, 1985) distin- 
guish nominalizations between deverbal and 
verbal nouns. Examples of these are advice vs. 
killing. Deverbal nouns are defined as records 
of the action having taken place rather than 
as description of the action itself. This ac- 
counts for the contrast between their arriving 
for a month and .their arrival for a month. 
Deverbal nouns can be replaced by regu- 
lar count nouns in any context, for exam- 
ple painting as a deverbal noun in Brown's 
paintings of his daughter can be replaced by 
photograph whereas this is not the case with 
the verbal noun painting in The painting of 
Brown is as skillful as that of Gainsborough 
which describes the action of painting itself 
(Quirk et al, 1985)\[p.1291\]. 
As the following evidence shows, the se- 
mantics of the verb and much of its syntactic 
structure can be retained by either of its nom- 
inalized forms: 
She was surprised that the enemy de- 
stroyed the city. 
She was surprised by the enemy('s) de- 
stroying the city. 
She was surprised by the enemy's de- 
struction of the city. 
The cline of nominalization can be seen in 
the morphological changes 1 that some predi- 
cate undergo as they move from an inflected 
verb (e.g. destroyed) to non-inflected verbal 
noun (destroying) to a deverbal noun (de- 
struction). 
In this article we shall consider only dever- 
bal nouns 2since these are the nominalizations 
involving the collocational phenomena ofsup- 
port verbs. 
A remaining problem with the deverbal 
nouns is that the meaning of such nouns 
can become concretized over time, by a 
aThe morphological processes involved in 
transforming verbs into nominalizations are de- 
scribed in (Quirk et at., 1985), Sections 1.43 (con- 
version) and 1.30 (suffixation). See also 17.52 for 
discussion of this cline. 
2On a practical evel, we will also accept as 
deverbal nouns those forms ending in -ing which 
are marked as nouns in our lexicon, e.g. warning. 
metonymic association. Compare the uses of 
proposal in : 
He made his formal proposal to the full 
committee. 
He put the proposal in the drawer. 
The concrete uses of deverbal nouns are not 
involved in support verb constructions since 
they have lost the semantics of actions, and 
their attending thematic roles. 
2 A very simple approach and 
its problems 
Looking for support verbs for nominalizatious 
might seem an easy problem at first, given 
that these support verbs are always the main 
verb for which the nominalization is the direct 
object. What is needed is a low-level parser 
that extracts verb-object relations from cor- 
pora. Given such a parser, one might be 
tempted to extract all the main verbs for a 
given nominalized form and consider tile most 
frequent of these verbs the expected support 
verbs. 
As will be seen below, this approach is too 
simple. The examples given above for pro- 
posal show that a given word form may be 
used with a meaning anywhere along the cline 
from true nominalization to concrete nouns. 
Counting verbs of which these concrete nouns 
are direct objects will create noise hiding the 
true support verbs. 
Since real nominalizations are those that 
still have verbal character, i.e. they have 
retained the semantic roles from the verb, 
we will try to recognize true nominalized 
uses by comparing the most frequent argu- 
ment/adjunct structures found in the corpus 
around verbal uses of a given predicate to 
those syntactic structures found around tile 
candidate nominalized forms 3. 
We will define true nominalizations as 
those which have a parallel syntactic structure 
to the original verb. This is also in keeping 
with the definition of nominalizations given in 
(Quirk et al, 1985)\[p. 1288\]: 
A noun phrase .. .which has a 
systematic orrespondence with a 
clause structure will be termed a 
3Since these argument/adjunct structures are 
difficult to recognize precisely without an elabo- 
rate parser incorporating semantic analysis, we 
decided to identify heuristically the structures 
fulfilling these roles, for example, taking the most 
frequently occurring prepositional phrases after 
verbal sequences as adjuncts or arguments. 
99 
Nomina l i za t ion .  The noun head 
of such a phrase is normally related 
morphologically to a verb, or to an 
adjective (i.e., a deverbal or dead- 
jectival noun). 
In this article we have been restricting the 
term nominalization to the noun heading the 
noun phrase. 
3 Method  
In this section we explain our method for 
extracting support verbs for nominalizations. 
We suppose that we are given a pair of words: 
ayerb and its nominalized form. As explained 
in the previous section, we are interested in 
extracting only nominalized forms which have 
not become concrete nouns, and that this will 
be done by comparing syntactic structures at- 
tached to the verb and noun forms. In order 
to extract corpus evidence related to these 
phenomena, we proceed as follows: 
1. We generate all the morphologically 
related forms of the word pair using a 
lexical transducer for English 
(Karttunen et al, 1992). This list of 
words will be used as corpus filter. 
2. The lines of the corpus are tokenized 
(Grefenstette and Tapanainen, 1994), 
and only sentences containing one of 
the word forms in the filter are retained. 
3. The corpus lines retained are 
part-of-speech tagged (Cutting et al, 
1992). This allows us to divide the 
corpus evidence into verb evidence and 
noun evidence. 
4. Using a robust surface parser 
(Grefenstette, 1994), we derive the local 
syntactic patterns involving the verbal 
form and the nominalized form. 
5. Considering that nominalized forms 
retain some of the verbal characteristics 
of the underlying predicate, we want to 
extract the most common 
argument/adjunct structures found 
around verbal uses of the predicate. As 
an approximation, we extract here all 
the prepositional phrases found after 
the verb. 
6. For nominal forms, we select only those 
uses which involve argument/adjunct 
structures imilar to phrases extracted 
in the previous step. For these selected 
nominalized forms, we extract the verbs 
of which these forms are the direct 
frequency 
458 million 
438 billion 
296 accord 
260 increase 
239 call 
201 year 
198 change 
178 support 
154 proposal 
154 percent 
143 money 
142 plan 
139 cut 
130 aid 
124 program 
122 people 
Figure 1: The most common nouns preced- 
ing the most common prepositions following 
'propose', and appearing in the same environ- 
ment. 
object. We sort these verbs by 
frequency. 
7. This sorted list is the list of candidate 
support verbs for the nominalization. 
This method assumes that the verb and 
the nominalized form of the verb are given. 
We have experimented with automatically ex- 
tracting the nominalized form by using the 
prepositional patterns extracted for the verb 
in step 5. We extracted 6 megabytes of news- 
paper articles containing a form of the verb 
propose: propose, proposes, proposed, propos- 
ing. Since one use of nominalization is to 
avoid repetition of the verb form, we suppose 
that the nominalization of propose is likely to 
appear in the same articles. We extracted the 
three most common prepositions following a 
form of propose (step 5). We then extracted 
the nouns appearing in these same artigles 
and which preceded these prepositions.~oThe 
results 4 appear in figure 1. Since a nomilml- 
ized form is normally morphologically related 
to the verb form, almost any morphological 
comparison method will pick proposal from 
this list. 
4Further experimentation has confirmed these 
results, but indicate that it may sufficient to 
simply tag a text, and perform morphological 
comparison with the most commonly cooccurring 
nouns in order to extract he nominalized forms 
of verbs. 
100 
frequency 
167 reject 
127 hear 
114 make 
81 file 
Figure 2: Most common verbs of which 'ap- 
peal' is marked as direct object. 
4 Experiment with 
appeal-appeal 
We have taken for example the case of the 
verb appeal which was interesting since its 
corresponding deverbal noun shares the same 
surface form appeal. In order to extract cor- 
pus evidence, we used a lexical transducer of 
English that, given the surface word appeal, 
produced all the inflected forms appeal, ap- 
peal's, appealing, appealed, appeals and ap- 
peals '. 
Using these surface forms as a filter, we 
scanned 134 Megabytes of tokenized Asso- 
ciated Press newswire stories from the year 
19895. As a result of filtering, 6704 sen- 
tences (1 Mbyte of text) were extracted. This 
text was part-of-speech tagged using the Xe- 
rox HMM tagger (Cutt ing et al, 1992). The 
lexical entries corresponding to appeal were 
tagged with the following tags: as a noun 
(3910 times), as an active or infinitival verb 
(1417), as a progressive verb (292), and as a 
past participle (400). 
This tagged text was then parsed by a 
low-level dependency parser (Grefenstette, 
1994)\[Chap 3\]. From the output of the de- 
pendency parser we extracted all the lexically 
normalized verbs of which appeal was tagged 
as a direct object. The most common of these 
verbs are shown in Figure 2. 
Our speaker's intuition tells us that the 
support verb for the nominalized use of ap- 
peal is make. But this data does not give us 
enough information to make this judgement, 
since concrete versions as a separate entity 
are not distinguishable from nomlnalizations 
of the verb. 
In order to separate nominalized uses of 
the predicate appeal from concrete uses, we 
will refer to the linguistic discussion presented 
in the introduction that says that nominal- 
izations retain some of the argument/adjunct  
structure of the verbal predicate. This is ver- 
ified in the corpus since we find many parallel 
SThis corresponds to 20 million words of text. 
structures involving appeal both as a verb and 
as a noun, such as: 
Vice President Salvador Laurel said 
today that an ailing Ferdinand Mar- 
cos may not survive the year and 
appealed to Pres ident  Corazon 
Aqu ino  to allow her ousted predeces- 
sor to die in his homeland. 
Mrs. Marcos made a publ ic  appeal  
to Pres ident  Corazon Aqu lno  to 
allow Marcos to return to his home- 
land to die. 
Indeed, if we examine a common nominal- 
ization transformation, i.e. that of transform- 
ing the direct object of a verb into a Norman 
genitive of the nominalized form, we find a 
great overlap in the lexical arguments 6. 
VERB FORM NOMINALIZATION 
22 appeal of conv ic t ion  67 appeal dec is ion  
61 appeal ru l ing  
35 appeal conv ic t ion  
29 appeal verd ic t  
23 appeal case 
22 appeal sentence  
21 appeal o rder  
7 appeal judgment 
10 appeal of ru l ing  
9 appeal of o rder  
6 appeal of dec is ion  
4 appeal of verd ic t  
4 appeal of sentence  
4 appeal of plan 
4 appeal of.inmate 
The parser's output allowed us to extract 
patterns involving prepositional phrases fol- 
lowing noun phrases headed by appeal as 
well as those following verb sequences headed 
by appeal. The most common prepositional 
phrases found after appeal as a verb began 
with the prepositions7: Lo (466 times), for 
(145), in (18), on (12), wilh (5), etc. The 
prepositional phrases following appeal as a 
noun are headed by to (321 times), for (253), 
in (200), of (134), from (78), on (34), etc. 
The correspondence between the most fre- 
quent prepositions allowed us to consider that 
the patterns of a noun phrase headed by 
appeal followed by one these prepositional 
phrases (i.e., begun with to, for, and in) con- 
stituted true nominalizations s. There were 
6We decided not to use this type of data in our 
experiments because matching lexical arguments 
requires much larger corpora than the ones we 
had extracted for the other verbs tested. 
rWe ignored prepositionM phrases headed by 
by as being probable passivizations, since our 
parser does not recognize passive patterns involv- 
ing by. 
SHere we used only part of the corpus evidence 
that was available. Other patterns of nominM- 
izations of appeal, e.g. Saxon genitives like the 
criminal's appeal, may well exist in the corpus. 
101 
frequency 
63 make 
16 have 
15 issue 
Figure 3: Most common verbs supporting the 
structure NP PP where 'appeal '  heads the NP 
and where one of {to, for, in} begins the PP. 
774 instances of these patterns. 
The parser's output further allowed us to 
extract the verbs for which these nominaliza- 
tions were considered as the direct objects. 
318 of these nominal syntactic patterns in- 
cluding to, for and in were found. Of these 
patterns, the main verb supporting the objec- 
tive nominalizations are shown in Figure 3. 
These results suggest hat the support verb 
for the nominalization of appeal is make. 
5 Other Predicate Examples 
and Discussion 
When the same filtering technique is applied 
to subcorpora derived for other nominaliza- 
tion pairs, we obtain the results given in Fig- 
ure 4. For each verb-noun pair all sentences 
containing any form of the words were ex- 
tracted from the AP corpus. The sentences 
were processed as explained in section 3. For 
each verbal use, the most frequent preposi- 
tional phrases following the verbs were tab- 
ulated and the three most frequent preposi- 
tions were retained. For example, the most 
frequent prepositions beginning prepositional 
phrases following verb uses of the lemma of- 
fer were for, in and to. These prepositions 
were used to select probable nominalizations 
by extracting noun uses of the predicates 
that were immediately followed by preposi- 
tional phrases headed by one of the three most 
frequent verbal prepositions. For these ex- 
tracted noun phrases, when they were found 
in a direct object position, the main verbs 
were tabulated which gives the results in Fig- 
ure 4. 
Some of the results in Figure 4 correspond 
to our naive intuitions of collocational sup- 
port verbs, such as make an offer. For dis- 
cussion, both have and hold appear equally 
frequently. But other words show the limita- 
tions of this method, we would expect make 
a demand where we find meet a demand. In 
the same subcorpus, although we find make 
a demand 77 times, meet a demand is two- 
and-a-half times more common. Could this be 
because, in a newswire corpus, meeting a de- 
mand is more newsworthy than making one? 
If we just look at the cases where demand 
is modified by the indefinite article; which 
might correspond to the more generic nom- 
inalizations one spontaneously creates when 
generating examples, we find that in the cor- 
pus make a demand occurs slightly more often 
than meet a demand, ten times vs. six times, 
but this is too rare to use as a criterion. 
In other cases, such as with proposal and 
assertion we find make and reject with almost 
equal frequency, and though make might well 
be considered a support verb, it is hard to 
accept reject as semantically empty. Though 
reject is more a consequence than an antonym 
of make a proposal, this raises the question, to 
which we have no answer, of whether support 
verbs have an equally empty antonym. 
A more interesting case is the appearance 
of issue for order and warning where we 
would expect give. Looking into the corpus 
evidence, we find issue a restraining order 
46 times, and give any type of order only 
16 times. This evidence suggest a limita- 
tion of our word-based approach. Multi-word 
phrases, such as the nominalized phrase re- 
straining order, might take a different support 
verb than the simple unqualified word forms, 
such as order. 
6 Conc lus ions  
Nominalization is a very productive process. 
The proper choice of collocational support 
verbs for nominalizations in English is a dif- 
ficult task for language learners given the 
unpredictability of the semantically emptied 
verb that fulfills the syntactic role. Given 
a robust parser and large corpus, the sim- 
ple technique of extracting the most common 
verbs for which the nominalized form is the di- 
rect object is not always sufficient, since com- 
pletely deverbal concrete noun uses share the 
same lexical surface form. Comparing argu- 
ment/adjunct structures involving the verbal 
uses of the predicate and using the most com- 
mon of these structures as filters on the sur- 
face forms possibly corresponding to nominal- 
izations captures the linguistic fact that nom- 
inalizations retain the syntactic structures of 
their underlying predicate. When these fil- 
ters are applied, the most common supporting 
verb in the corpus for the recognized nominal- 
ized patterns seems to correspond to native 
speakers' intuition of the support verb asso- 
ciated with the nominalization. 
The experiment described here on a 134 
102 
nominalization 
offer-offer 
discuss-discussion 
demand-demand 
propose-proposal 
order-order 
complain-complaint 
warn-warning 
confirm-confirmation 
assert-assertion 
suggest-suggestion 
preps 
for(ll6), in(100), to(98) 
with(127), in(85), at(54) 
for(37), in(28), of(22) 
in(103), for(77), to(46) 
of(91), to(50), in(33) 
about(183), of(155), to(91) 
of(140), against(46), in(44) 
in(30), of(28), to(10) 
in(12), at(3), to(2) 
to(60), in(57), of(27) 
most common main verbs 
make (116 cases), begin(37), launch(36) 
have (42), hold(42), begin(9) 
meet(58), press(34), increase(22) 
make(28), reject(26), submit(19) 
issue (24), give(8), bring(7) 
receive (20), file(12), have(10) 
issue (17), receive(5), make(4) 
win (6), recommend(5), have(4) 
make (3), repeat(l), dispute(l) 
make(5), reject(5), offer(2) 
Figure 4: Most common verbs supporting the structure found for other nominalization pairs 
using the syntactic structure filtering mechanism. 
megabyte corpus of newspaper text from 
which was extracted evidence for appeal 
and other predicates hows how this auto- 
mated procedure can be applied to any verb- 
nominalization pair given a large corpus and a 
robust parser. Other work in automated sup- 
port verb discovery using bilingual dictionar- 
ies as a source has been reported in Fontenelle 
(1993). 
It remains to be seen whether these statis- 
tical results are more useful to lexicographers 
than their more traditional tools of key-word- 
in-context files and T-score measures. Human 
experiments would be necessary to demon- 
strate this. Another useful test of the re- 
sults would be to compare the results given 
by this technique against machine-readable 
dictionary-derived data. 
In conclusion, the interest of this technique 
is its general approach to corpus linguistics as 
one of multiple passes over the same corpus 
material, using results of previous passes to 
filter and refine data extracted on subsequent 
passes. We believe that this approach, cou- 
pled with lexical resources and robust parsers, 
offers much promise for the future of corpus 
exploitation. 
References 
D. J. Allerton. 1982. Valency and the English 
verb. Academic Press, London. 
Bernard Comrie and Sandra A. Thompson. 
1990. Lexical nominalization. In Tim- 
othy Shopen, editor, Language Typology 
and Syntactic Description, volume 3. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Doug Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, 
and Penelope Sibun. 1992. A practical 
part-of-speech tagger. Proceedings of the 
Third Conference on Applied Natural Lan- 
guage Processing, April. 
Thierry Fontenelle. 1993. Using a bilingual 
computerized ictionary to retrieve sup- 
port verbs and combinatorial information. 
Acta Linguistica Hungaraica, 41(1-4):109- 
121. 
G. Grefenstette and P. Tapanainen. 1994. 
What is a word, what is a sentence? Prob- 
lems of tokenization. In 3rd Conference 
on Computational Lexicography and Text 
Research, Budapest, Hungary, 7-10 July. 
COMPLEX'94. 
Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in 
Automatic Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer 
Academic Press, Boston. 
Lauri Karttunen, Ronald M. Kaplan, and An- 
nie Zaenen. 1992. Two-level morphology 
with composition. In Proceedings COLING 
'92, pages 141-148, Nantes, France, August 
23-28. 
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geof- 
frey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A 
Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman Group, Inc., New 
York. 
103 
