On Learn ing  more  Appropr ia te  Se lec t iona l  Rest r i c t ions  
Francesc Ribas* 
Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informktics 
Universitat Polit~cnica de Catalunya 
Pau Gargallo, 5 
08028 Barcelona 
Spain 
r ibas?isi,  upc. es 
Abstract 
We present some variations affecting the 
association measure and thresholding on 
a technique for learning Selectional Re- 
strictions from on-line corpora. It uses 
a wide-coverage noun taxonomy and a 
statistical measure to generalize the ap- 
propriate semantic classes. Evaluation 
measures for the Selectional Restrictions 
learning task are discussed. Finally, an 
experimental evaluation of these varia- 
tions is reported. 
Sub jec t  Areas:  corpus-based language 
modeling, computational lexicography 
1 Introduction 
In recent years there has been a common agree- 
ment in the NLP research community on the im- 
portance of having an extensive coverage of selec- 
tional restrictions (SRs) tuned to the domain to 
work with. SRs can be seen as semantic type con- 
straints that a word sense imposes on the words 
with which it combines in the process of seman- 
tic interpretation. SRs may have different ap- 
plications in NLP, specifically, they may help a 
parser with Word Sense Selection (WSS, as in 
(Hirst, 1987)), with preferring certain structures 
out of several grammatical ones (Whittemore t 
al., 1990) and finally with deciding the semantic 
role played by a syntactic complement (Basili et 
al., 1992). Lexicography is also interested in the 
acquisition of SRs (both defining in context ap- 
proach and lexical semantics work (Levin, 1992)). 
The aim of our work is to explore the feasibil- 
ity of using an statistical method for extracting 
SRs from on-line corpora. Resnik (1992) devel- 
oped a method for automatically extracting class- 
based SRs from on-line corpora. Ribas (1994a) 
*This research as been made in the framework of 
the Acquilex-II Esprit Project (7315), and has been 
supported by a grant of Departament d'Ensenyament, 
Generalitat de Catalunya, 91-DOGC-1491. 
performed some experiments using this basic tech- 
nique and drew up some limitations from the cor- 
responding results. 
In this paper we will describe some substantial 
modifications to the basic technique and will re- 
port the corresponding experimental evaluation. 
The outline of the paper is as follows: in section 
2 we summarize the basic methodology used in 
(Ribas, 1994a), analyzing its limitations; in sec- 
tion 3 we explore some alternative statistical mea- 
sures for ranking the hypothesized SRs; in sec- 
tion 4 we propose some evaluation measures on 
the SRs-learning problem, and use them to test 
the experimental results obtained by the different 
techniques; finally, in section 5 we draw up the 
final conclusions and establish future lines of re- 
search. 
2 The basic technique for learning 
SRs 
2.1 Descr ip t ion  
The technique functionality can be summarized 
as :  
I nput  The training set, i.e. a list of 
complement co-occurrence triples, (verb- 
lemma, syntactic-relationship, noun-lemma) 
extracted from the corpus. 
P rev ious  knowledge  used  A semantic hierar- 
chy (WordNet 1) where words are clustered in 
semantic lasses, and semantic lasses are or- 
ganized hierarchically. Polysemous words are 
represented as instances of different classes. 
Output  A set of syntac- 
tic SRs, (verb-lemma, syntactic-relationship, 
semantic-class, weight). The final SRs must 
be mutually disjoint. SRs are weighted ac- 
cording to the statistical evidence found in 
the corpus. 
Learn ing  process  3 stages: 
1. Creation of the space of candidate 
classes. 
1WordNet is a broad-coverage lexieal database, see  
(Miller et al, 1991)) 
112 
Acquired SR Type Assoc 
< suit, suing > Senses 0.41 
< suit_of_clothes > Senses 0.41 
< suit > Senses 0.40 
< group > l~Abs 0.35 
< legal_action > Ok 0.28 
<person, individual> Ok 0.23 
< radical> Senses 0.16 
<city> Senses 0.15 
< admin._district > Senses 0.14 
< social_cont rol > Senses 0.11 
< status > Senses 0.087 
< activity > Senses -0.01 
< cognition > Senses -0.04 
Examples of nouns in Treebank 
suit 
suit 
suit 
administration, agency, bank, ... 
suit 
advocate, buyer,carrier, client, ... 
group 
proper_name 
proper_name 
administration ,government 
government, leadership 
administration, leadership, provision 
concern, leadership, provision, science 
Table 1: SRs acquired for the subject of seek 
2. Evaluation of the appropriateness of the 
candidates by means of a statistical mea- 
sure. 
3. Selection of the most appropriate subset 
in the candidate space to convey the SRs. 
The appropriateness of a class for expressing 
SRs (stage 2) is quantified from tile strength of 
co-occurrence of verbs and classes of nouns in the. 
corpus (Resnik, 1992). Given the verb v, the 
syntactic-relationship s and the candidate class c, 
the Association Score, Assoc, between v and c in 
s is defined: 
Assoc(v,s,c) = p(clv, s)I(v;cls )
= p(clv, s)log p( lv, s._____)) 
p(cls) 
The two terms of Assoc try to capture different 
properties: 
1. Mutual information ratio, l(v; cls), measures 
the strength of the statistical association be- 
tween the given verb v and the candidate 
class c in the given syntactic position s. It 
compares the prior distribution, p(cls), with 
the posterior distribution, p(clv, s). 
2. p(elv, s) scales up the strength of the associ- 
ation by the frequency of the relationship. 
Probabilities are estimated by Maximum Likeli- 
hood Estimation (MLE), i.e. counting the relative 
frequency of the considered events in the corpuQ. 
However, it is not obvious how to calculate class 
frequencies when the training corpus is not seman- 
tically tagged as is the case. Nevertheless, we take 
a simplistic approach and calculate them in the 
following manner: 
f req(v,s ,c)  = ~f req(v ,s ,n )  ? w (1) 
r tEc  
2The utility of introducing smoothing techniques 
on class-based istributions is dubious, see (Resnik, 
1993). 
Where w is a constant factor used to normalize 
the probabilities 3 
W .~ 
~vEV ~sqS ~nqAf freq( v, S, n)lsenses(n)l 
(2) 
When creating the space of candidate classes 
(learning process, stage 1), we use a threshold. 
ing technique to ignore as much as possible the 
noise introduced in the training set. Specifically, 
we consider only those classes that have a higher 
number of occurrences than the threshold. The 
selection of the most appropriate classes (stage 3) 
is based on a global search through the candidates, 
in such a way that the final classes are mutually 
disjoint (not related by hyperonymy). 
2.2 Eva luat ion  
Ribas (1994a) reported experimental results ob- 
tained from the application of the above technique 
to learn SRs. He performed an evaluation of the 
SRs obtained from a training set of 870,000 words 
of the Wall Street Journal. In this section we sum- 
marize the results and conclusions reached in that 
paper. 
For instance, table 1 shows the SRs acquired 
for the subject position of the verb seek. Type indi- 
cates a manual diagnosis about the class appropri- 
ateness (Ok: correct; ~Abs: over-generalization; 
Senses: due to erroneous senses). Assoc cor- 
responds to the association score (higher values 
appear first). Most of the induced classes are 
due to incorrect senses. Thus, although suit was 
used in the WSJ articles only in the sense of 
< legal_action >, the algorithm not only consid- 
ered the other senses as well (< suit, suing >,< 
aResnik (1992) and Ribas (1994a) used equation 
1 without introducing normalization. Therefore, the 
estimated function didn't accomplish probability ax- 
ioms. Nevertheless, their results should be equivalent 
(for our purposes) to those introducing normalization 
because it shouldn't affect the relative ordering of As- 
soc among rival candidate classes for the same (v, s). 
113 
suit_of_clothes >, < sugt >) , but the Assoc score 
ranked them higher than the appropriate sense. 
We can also notice that the l~Abs class, < group >, 
seems too general for the example nouns, while 
one of its daughters, < people > seems to fit the 
data much better. 
Analyzing the results obtained from different 
experimental evaluation methods, Ribas (1994a) 
drew up some conclusions: 
a. The technique achieves a good coverage. 
b. Most of the classes acquired result from the 
accumulation of incorrect senses. 
c. No clear co-relation between Assoc and the 
manual diagnosis is found. 
d. A slight tendency to over-generalization exists 
due to incorrect senses. 
Although the performance of the presented 
technique seems to be quite good, we think that 
some of the detected flaws could possibly be ad- 
dressed. Noise due to polysemy of the nouns in- 
volved seems to be the main obstacle for the prac- 
ticality of the technique. It makes the association 
score prefer incorrect classes and jump on over- 
generalizations. In this paper we are interested 
in exploring various ways to make the technique 
more robust to noise, namely, (a) to experiment 
with variations of the association score, (b) to ex- 
periment with thresholding. 
3 Var ia t ions  on  the  assoc ia t ion  
s ta t i s t i ca l  measure  
In this section we consider different variations on 
the association score in order to make it more ro- 
bust. The different techniques are experimentally 
evaluated in section 4.2. 
3.1 Var ia t ions  on the  pr io r  p robab i l i ty  
When considering the prior probability, the more 
independent of the context it is the better to mea- 
sure actual associations. A sensible modification 
of the measure would be to consider p(c) as the 
prior distribution: 
Assoc'(v,s,c) =p(c,v,s) logP(;'(;; s) 
Using the chain rule on mutual information 
(Cover and Thomas, 1991, p. 22) we can mathe- 
matically relate the different versions of Assoc, 
mssoc'(v, s c) = p(clv, s)log ~+Assoc(v ,  s, c) 
The first advantage of Assoc' would come from 
this (information theoretical) relationship. Specif- 
ically, the AssoF takes into account the prefer- 
ence (selection) of syntactic positions for partic- 
ular classes. In intuitive terms, typical subjects 
(e.g. <person, individual, ...>) would be preferred 
(to atypical subjects as <suit_of_clothes>) as SRs 
on the subject in contrast o Assoc. The second 
advantage is that as long as the prior probabili- 
ties, p(c), involve simpler events than those used 
in Assoc, p(cls), the estimation is easier and more 
accurate (ameliorating data sparseness). 
A subsequent modification would be to estimate 
the prior, p(c), from the counts of all the nouns ap- 
pearing in the corpus independently of their syn- 
tactic positions (not restricted to be heads of ver- 
bal complements). In this way, the estimation of 
p(c) would be easier and more accurate. 
3.2 Es t imat ing  class probab i l i t i es  f rom 
noun f requenc ies  
In the global weighting technique presented in 
equation 2 very polysemous nouns provide the 
same amount of evidence to every sense as non- 
ambiguous nouns do -while less ambiguous nouns 
could be more informative about the correct 
classes as long as they do not carry ambiguity. 
The weight introduced in (1) could alternatively 
be found in a local manner, in such a way that 
more polysemous nouns would give less evidence 
to each one of their senses than less ambiguous 
ones. Local weight could be obtained using p(cJn). 
Nevertheless, a good estimation of this probabil- 
ity seems quite problematic because of the lack of 
tagged training material. In absence of a better 
estimator we use a rather poor one as the uniform 
distribution, 
c) =  (cln) = e el 
Is ,,ses(,,)l 
Resnik (1993) also uses a local normalization 
technique but he normalizes by the total number 
of classes in the hierarchy. This scheme seems 
to present two problematic features (see (Ribas, 
1994b) for more details). First, it doesn't take 
dependency relationships introduced by hyper- 
onymy into account. Second, nouns categorized in 
lower levels in the taxonomy provide less weight 
to each class than higher nouns. 
3.3 Other  s ta t i s t i ca l  measures  to  score 
SRs 
In this section we propose the application of other 
measures apart from Assoc for learning SRs: log- 
likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993), relative entropy 
(Cover and Thomas, 1991), mutual information 
ratio (Church and Hanks, 1990), ?2 (Gale and 
Church, 1991). In section (4) their experimental 
evaluation is presented. 
The statistical measures used to detect associ- 
ations on the distribution defined by two random 
variables X and Y work by measuring the devia- 
tion of the conditional distribution, P(XJY), from 
the expected distribution if both variables were 
considered independent, i.e. the marginal distri- 
bution, P(X). If P(X) is a good approximation 
114 
e 
v_s p(clv-s) 
~v_s p( cl-.v_s ) 
p(c) 
"~C 
p(-~clv~) 
p(-,cl-,v-s) 
p(-~c) 
Table 2: Conditional and marginal distributions 
of P(X IY) ,  association measures hould be low 
(near zero), otherwise deviating significantly from 
zero .  
Table 2 shows the cross-table formed by the con- 
ditional and marginal distributions in the case of 
X = {e, ~e} and Y = {v_s,-,v_s}. Different asso- 
ciation measures use the information provided in 
the cross-table to different extents. Thus, Assoc 
and mutual information ratio consider only the 
deviation of the conditional probability p(c\[v,s) 
from the corresponding marginal, p(c). 
On the other hand, log-likelihood ratio and ?2 
measure the association between v_s and c con- 
sidering the deviation of the four conditional cells 
in table 2 from the corresponding marginals. It is 
plausible that the deviation of the cells not taken 
into account by Assoc can help on extracting use- 
ful Sits. 
Finally, it would be interesting to only use the 
information related to the selectional behavior of 
v_s, i.e. comparing the conditional probabilities 
of c and -~c given v_s with the corresponding 
marginals. Relative entropy, D(P(XIv_s) I IP(X))  ,
could do this job. 
4 Eva luat ion  
4.1 Eva luat ion  methods  of  SRs 
Evaluation on NLP has been crucial to fostering 
research in particular areas. Evaluation of the SR 
learning task would provide grounds to compare 
different echniques that try to abstract SRs from 
corpus using WordNet (e.g, section 4.2). It would 
also permit measuring the utility of the SRs ob- 
tained using WordNet in comparison with other 
frameworks using other kinds of knowledge. Fi- 
nally it would be a powerful tool for detecting 
flaws of a particular technique (e.g, (Ribas, 1994a) 
analysis). 
However, a related and crucial issue is which 
linguistic tasks are used as a reference. SRs are 
useful for both lexicography and NLP. On the one 
hand, from the point of view of lexicography, the 
goal of evaluation would be to measure the quality 
of the SRs induced, (i.e., how well the resulting 
classes correspond to the nouns as they were used 
in the corpus). On the other hand, from the point 
of view of NLP, StLs should be evaluated on their 
utility (i.e., how much they help on performing 
the reference task). 
4.1.1 Lex icography-or iented  va luat ion  
As far as lexicography (quality) is concerned, 
we think the main criteria SRs acquired from cor -  
pora  should meet are: (a) correct categorization 
-inferred classes hould correspond to the correct 
senses of the words that are being generalized-, 
(b) appropriate generalization level and (c) good 
coverage -the majority of the noun occurrences in
the corpus should be successfully generalized by 
the induced SRs. 
Some of the methods we could use for assessing 
experimentally the accomplishment of these crite- 
ria would be: 
? In t rospect ion  A lexicographer checks if the 
SRs accomplish the criteria (a) and (b) above 
(e.g., the manual diagnosis in table 1). Be- 
sides the intrinsic difficulties of this approach, 
it does not seem appropriate when comparing 
across different techniques for learning SRs, 
because of its qualitative flavor. 
? Quant i f i ca t ion  of  genera l i za t ion  level 
appropr ia teness  A possible measure would 
be the percentage of sense occurrences in- 
cluded in the induced SRs which are effec- 
tively correct (from now on called Abstraction 
Ratio). Hopefully, a technique with a higher 
abstraction ratio learns classes that fit the set 
of examples better. A manual assessment of 
the ratio confirmed this behavior, as testing 
sets With a lower ratio seemed to be inducing 
less ~Abs cases. 
? Quant i f i ca t ion  of  coverage It could be 
measured as the proportion of triples whose 
correct sense belongs to one of the SRs. 
4.1.2 NLP  eva luat ion  tasks  
The NLP tasks where SRs utility could be eval- 
uated are diverse. Some of them have already 
been introduced in section 1. In the recent lit- 
erature ((Grishman and Sterling, 1992), (Resnik, 
1993), ...) several task oriented schemes to test 
Selectional Restrictions (mainly on syntactic am- 
biguity resolution) have been proposed. However, 
we have tested SRs on a WSS task, using the 
following scheme. For every triple in the testing 
set the algorithm selects as most appropriate that 
noun-sense that has as hyperonym the SR class 
with highest association score. When more than 
one sense belongs to the highest SR, a random 
selection is performed. When no SR has been ac- 
quired, the algorithm remains undecided. The re- 
sults of this WSS procedure are checked against a 
testing-sample manually analyzed, and precision 
and recall ratios are calculated. Precision is cal- 
culated as the ratio of manual-automatic matches 
/ number of noun occurrences disambiguated by 
the procedure. Recall is computed as the ratio 
of manual-automatic matches / total number of 
noun occurrences. 
115 
Technique 
Assoc & All nouns 
Assoc & P(cls) 
Assoc& Head-nouns 
D 
log - likelihood 
Assoc& Normalizing 
?2 
1 
Coverage (%) 
95.7 
95.5 
95.3 
93.7 
92.9 
92.7 
88.2 
74.1 
Table 3: Coverage Ratio 
4.2 Exper imenta l  resu l ts  
In order to evaluate the different variants on the 
association score and the impact of thresholding 
we performed several experiments. In this section 
we analyze the results. As training set we used 
the 870,000 words of WSJ material provided in 
the ACL/DCI version of the Penn Treebank. The 
testing set consisted of 2,658 triples corresponding 
to four average common verbs in the Treebank: 
rise, report, seek and present. We only considered 
those triples that had been correctly extracted 
from the Treebank and whose noun had the cor- 
rect sense included in WordNet (2,165 triples out 
of the 2,658, from now on, called the testing- 
sample). 
As evaluation measures we used coverage, ab- 
straction ratio, and recall and precision ratios on 
the WSS task (section 4.1). In addition we per- 
formed some evaluation by hand comparing the 
SRs acquired by the different echniques. 
4.2.1 Compar ing  d i f ferent  techn iques  
Coverage for the different echniques is shown 
in table 3. The higher the coverage, the better the 
technique succeeds in correctly generalizing more 
of the input examples. The labels used for re- 
ferring to the different echniques are as follows: 
"Assoc & p(cls)" corresponds to the basic associ- 
ation measure (section 2), "Assoc & Head-nouns" 
and "Assoc & All nouns" to the techniques intro- 
duced in section 3.1, "Assoe & Normalizing" to 
the local normalization (section 3.2), and finally, 
log-likelihood, D (relative entropy) and I (mutual 
information ratio) to the techniques discussed in 
section 3.3. 
The abstraction ratio for the different tech- 
niques is shown in table 4. In principle, the higher 
abstraction ratio, the better the technique suc- 
ceeds in filtering out incorrect senses (less tAbs). 
The precision and recall ratios on the noun WSS 
task for the different echniques are shown in ta- 
ble 5. In principle, the higher the precision and 
recall ratios the better the technique succeeds in 
inducing appropriate SRs for the disambiguation 
task. 
As far as the evaluation measures try to account 
for different phenomena the goodness of a partic- 
ular technique should be quantified as a trade-off. 
Technique 
I 
log - likelihood ?2 
Assoc & All nouns 
Assoc & Head-nouns 
Assoc & p(cls) 
D 
Assoc & Normalizing 
Abs Ratio (%) 
66.6 
64.6 
64.4 
64.3 
63.9 
63 
62.3 
58.5 
Table 4: Abstraction Ratio 
Technique 
Assoc & All nouns 
Assoc & p(cls) 
Assoc & Head-nouns 
log - likelihood 
D 
Assoc & Normalizing 
I 
Guessing Heuristic 
Prec. (%) 
80.3 
79.9 
78.5 
77.2 
75.9 
75.9 
67.8 
50.4 
62.7 
Rec. (%) 
78.5 
77.9 
76.7 
74.4 
74.1 
73.3 
63 
45.7 
62.7 
Table 5: Precision and Recall on the WSS task 
Most of the results are very similar (differences 
are not statistically significative). Therefore we 
should be cautious when extrapolating the results. 
Some of the conclusions from the tables above are: 
1. 4) 2 and I get sensibly worse results than 
other measures (although abstraction is quite 
good). 
2. The local normalizing technique using the 
uniform distribution does not help. It seems 
that by using the local weighting we mis- 
inform the algorithm. The problem is the 
reduced weight, that polysemous nouns get, 
while they seem to be the most informative 4. 
However, a better informed kind of local 
weight (section 5) should improve the tech- 
nique significantly. 
3. All versions of Assoc (except the local nor- 
malization) get good results. Specially the 
two techniques that exploit a simpler prior 
distribution, which seem to improve the ba- 
sic technique. 
4. log-likelihood and D seem to get slightly worse 
results than Assoc techniques, although the 
results are very similar. 
4.2.2 Thresho ld lng  
We were also interested in measuring the impact 
of thresholding on the SRs acquired. In figure 1 
we can see the different evaluation measures of 
the basic technique when varying the threshold. 
Precision and recall coincide when no candidate 
4In some way, it conforms to Zipf-law (Zipf, 1945): 
noun frequency and polysemy are correlated. 
116 
% 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
I I I 
Precision ~' 
Recall + '  
Coverage o 
Abstraction Ratio -?-- 
Z 
_x ~(54.x ?<.x 
I K'X  *X.)j( ~ 'X  k 'X  ~ 'X  ~.v  ~7 
0 5 10 15 20 
Threshold 
Figure 1: Assoc: Evaluation ratios vs. Threshold 
classes are refused (threshold = 1). However, as 
it might be expected, as the threshold increases 
(i.e. some cases are not classified) the two ratios 
slightly diverge (precision increases and recall di- 
minishes). 
Figure 1 also shows the impact of thresholding 
on coverage and abstraction ratios. Both decrease" 
when threshold increases, probably because when 
the rejecting threshold is low, small classes that 
fit the data well can be induced, learning over- 
general or incomplete SRs otherwise. 
Finally, it seems that precision and abstrac- 
tion ratios are in inverse co-relation (as precision 
grows, abstraction decreases). In terms of WSS, 
general classes may be performing better than 
classes that fit the data better. Nevertheless, this 
relationship should be further explored in future 
work. 
5 Conc lus ions  and  fu ture  work  
In this paper we have presented some variations 
affecting the association measure and thresholding 
on tile basic technique for learning SRs fi'om on- 
line corpora. We proposed some evaluation mea- 
sures for the SRs learning task. Finally, experi- 
mental results on these variations were reported. 
We can conclude that some of these variations 
seem to improve the results obtained using the 
basic technique. However, although the technique 
still seems far from practical application to NLP 
tasks, it may be most useful for providing exper- 
imental insight to lexicographers. Future lines of 
research will mainly concentrate on improving the 
local normalization technique by solving the noun 
sense ambiguity. We have foreseen the application 
of the following techniques: 
? Simple techniques to decide the best sense 
c given the target noun n using estimates 
of the n-grams: P(e), f(eln), P(clv, s) and 
P(cJv, s,n), obtained from supervised and 
un-supervised corpora. 
? Combining the different n-grams by means of 
smoothing techniques. 
? Calculating P(elv ,s,n) combining P(nle )
and P(clv ,s), and applying the EM Algo- 
rithm (Dempster et al, 1977) to improve the 
model. 
? Using the WordNet hierarchy as a source of 
backing-off knowledge, in such a way that if 
n-grams composed by c aren't enough to de- 
cide the best sense (are equal to zero), the 
tri-grams of ancestor classes could be used 
instead. 
References  
R. Basili, M.T. Pazienza, and P. Velardi. 1992. 
Computational lexicons: the neat examples and 
the odd exemplars. In Procs 3rd ANLP, Trento, 
Italy, April. 
K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word associa- 
tion norms, mutual information and lexicogra- 
phy. Computational Linguistics, 16(1). 
T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas, editors. 1991. El- 
ements of Iuformation Theory. John Wiley. 
A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Ru- 
bin. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incom- 
plete data via the em algorithm. Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society, 39(B):1-38. 
T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the 
statistics of surprise and coincidence. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 19(1):61-74. 
W. Gale and K. W. Church. 1991. Identify- 
ing word correspondences in parallel texts. In 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop, Pacific Grove, California, February. 
R. Grishman and J. Sterling. 1992. Acquisition 
of selectional patterns. In COLING, Nantes, 
France, march. 
G. Hirst. 1987. Semantic interpretation and the 
resolution of ambiguity. Cambridge University 
Press. 
B. Levin. 1992. Towards a lexical organization of 
English verbs. University of Chicago Press. 
G. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, 
and K. Miller. 1991. Five papers on wordnet. 
International Journal of Lexicography. 
P. S. Resnik. 1992. Wordnet and distributional 
analysis: A class-based approach to lexieal dis- 
covery. In AAAI Symposium on Probabilistic 
Approaches to NL, San Jose, CA. 
P. S. Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information: A 
Class-Based Approach to lexical relationships. 
Ph.D. thesis, Computer and Information Sci- 
ence Department, University of Pennsylvania. 
F. Ribas. 1994a. An experiment on learning ap- 
propriate selectional restrictions from a parsed 
corpus. In COLING, Kyoto, Japan, August. 
F. Ribas. 1994b. Learning more appropriate 
selectional restrictions. Technical report, ES- 
PRIT BRA-7315 ACQUILEX-II WP, 
G. Whittemore, K. Ferrara, and H. Brunner. 
1990. Empirical study of predictive powers 
of simple attachment schemes for post-modifier 
prepositional phrases. In Procs. ACL, Pennsyl- 
vania. 
G. K. Zipf. 1945. The meaning-frequency rela- 
tionship of words. The Journal of General Psy- 
chology, 33:251-256. 
(Aequilex-II Working Papers can be obtained 
by sending a request o cide~cup.cam.uk) 
' 440  
% 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
I I I ! 
Precision 
Recall + - 
Coverage \[\] 
Abstraction Ratio "?'" 
_ . . . .  
-?  ~(*X.? 
~'? ~('? ~'? ~'? ~'? 4"? ~.v ~.. 
0 5 10 15 20 
Threshold 
Figure 1: Assoc: Evaluation ratios vs. Threshold 
classes are refused (threshold = 1). However, as 
it might be expected, as the threshold increases 
(i.e. some cases are not classified) the two ratios 
slightly diverge (precision increases and recall di- 
minishes). 
Figure 1 also shows the impact of thresholding 
on coverage and abstraction ratios. Both decrease" 
when threshold increases, probably because when 
the rejecting threshold is low, small classes that 
fit the data well can be induced, learning over- 
general or incomplete SRs otherwise. 
Finally, it seems that precision and abstrac- 
tion ratios are in inverse co-relation (as precision 
grows, abstraction decreases). In terms of WSS, 
general classes may be performing better than 
classes that fit the data better. Nevertheless, this 
relationship should be further explored in future 
work. 
5 Conc lus ions  and  fu ture  work  
In this paper we have presented some variations 
affecting the association measure and thresholding 
on the basic technique for learning SRs from on- 
line corpora. We proposed some evaluation mea- 
sures for the SRs learning task. Finally, experi- 
mental results on these variations were reported. 
We can conclude that some of these variations 
seem to improve the results obtained using the 
basic technique. However, although the technique 
still seems far from practical application to NLP 
tasks, it may be most useful for providing exper- 
imental insight to lexicographers. Future lines of 
research will mainly concentrate on improving the 
local normalization teclmique by solving the noun 
sense ambiguity. We have foreseen the application 
of the following techniques: 
? Simple techniques to decide the best sense 
c given the target noun n using estimates 
of the n-grams: P(e), P(e\[n), P(e\[v,s) and 
P(c\[v, s,n), obtained from supervised and 
un-supervised corpora. 
? Combining the different n-grams by means of 
smoothing techniques. 
? Calculating P(clv, s,n ) combining P(nlc) 
and P(e\[v,s), and applying the EM Algo- 
rithm (Dempster et al, 1977) to improve the 
model. 
? Using the WordNet hierarchy as a source of 
backing-off knowledge, in such a way that if 
n-grams composed by c aren't enough to de- 
cide the best sense (are equal to zero), the 
tri-grams of ancestor classes could be used 
instead. 
References  
R. Basili, M.T. Pazienza, and P. Velardi. 1992. 
Computational lexicons: the neat examples and 
the odd exemplars. In Procs 3rd ANLP, Trento, 
Italy, April. 
K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1990. Word associa- 
tion norms, mutual information and lexicogra- 
phy. Computational Linguistics, 16(1). 
T.M. Cover and J.A. Thomas, editors. 1991. El- 
ements of Information Theory. John Wiley. 
A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Ru- 
bin. 1977. Maximum likelihood from incom- 
plete data via the em algorithm. Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society, 39(B):1-38. 
T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the 
statistics of surprise and coincidence. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 19(1):61-74. 
W. Gale and K. W. Church. 1991. Identify- 
ing word correspondences in parallel texts. In 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop, Pacific Grove, California, February. 
R. Grishman and J. Sterling. 1992. Acquisition 
of selectional patterns. In COLING, Nantes, 
France, march. 
G. Hirst. 1987. Semantic interpretation and the 
resolution of ambiguity. Cambridge University 
Press. 
B. Levin. 1992. Towards a lexical organization of 
English verbs. University of Chicago Press. 
G. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, 
and K. Miller. 1991. Five papers on wordnet. 
International Journal of Lexicography. 
P. S. Resnik. 1992. Wordnet and distributional 
analysis: A class-based approach to lexical dis- 
covery. In AAAI  Symposium on Probabilistic 
Approaches to NL, San Jose, CA. 
P. S. Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information: A 
Class-Based Approach to lexical relationships. 
Ph.D. thesis, Computer and Information Sci- 
ence Department, University of Pennsylvania. 
117 
F. Ribas. 1994a. An experiment on learning ap- 
propriate selectional restrictions from a parsed 
corpus. In COLING, Kyoto, Japan, August. 
F. Ribas. 1994b. Learning more appropriate 
selectional restrictions. Technical report, ES- 
PRIT BRA-7315 ACQUILEX-II WP. 
G. Whittemore, K. Ferrara, and H. Brunner. 
1990. Empirical study of predictive powers 
of simple attachment schemes for post-modifier 
prepositional phrases. In Proes. ACL, Pennsyl- 
vania. 
G. K. Zipf. 1945. The meaning-frequency rela- 
tionship of words. The Journal of General Psy- 
chology, 33:251-256. 
(Acquilex-II Working Papers can be obtained 
by sending a request o cide?cup, caaa.uk) 
118 
