Cooperative Error Handling and Shallow Processing 
Tanya Bowden 
Computer Laboratory 
University of Cambridge 
Pembroke St. 
Cambridge CB2 3QG 
U.K. 
Tanya. Bow den @ cl. cain. ac. uk 
Abstract 
This paper is concerned with the de- 
tection and correction of sub-sentential 
English text errors. Previous spelling 
programs, unless restricted to a very 
small set of words, have operated as 
post-processors. And to date, gram- 
mar checkers and other programs which 
deal with ill-formed input usually step 
directly from spelling considerations to 
a full-scale parse, assuming a complete 
sentence. Work described below is aimed 
at evaluating the effectiveness of shal- 
low (sub-sentential) processing and the 
feasibility of cooperative rror checking, 
through building and testing appropri- 
ately an error-processing system. A sys- 
tem under construction is outlined which 
incorporates morphological checks (us- 
ing new two-level error rules) over a di- 
rected letter graph, tag positional tri- 
grams and partial par~tng. Intended 
testing is discussed. 
Unless a keyboard user is particularly proficient, 
a frustrating amount of time is usually spent back- 
tracking to pick up mis-typed or otherwise mis- 
taken input. Work described in this paper started 
from an idea of an error processor that would sit 
on top of an editor, detecting/correcting errors 
just after entry, while the user continued with 
further text, relieved from tedious backtracking. 
Hence 'co-operative' rror processing. But if a 
program is to catch such errors very soon after 
they are entered, it will have to operate with less 
than the complete sentence. 
Work underway focuses on shallow processing: 
how far error detection and correction can proceed 
when the system purview is set to a stretch of text 
which does not admit complete sentential nalysis. 
To date, grammar checkers and other programs. 
which deal with illformed input usually step di- 
rectly from spelling considerations to a full-scale 
sentence parse. However treating the sentence as 
a basic unit loses meaning when the 'sentence' is
incomplete or illformed. Shallow processing is also 
interesting because it should be cheaper and faster 
than a complete analysis of the whole sentence. 
To investigate issues involved in shallow pro- 
cessing and cooperative rror handling, the pet 
(processing errors in text) system is being built. 
The focus is on these two issues; no attempt is 
being made to produce a complete product 1. Pet 
operates over a shifting window of text (it can be 
attached simply and asynchronously to the Emacs 
editor). One word in this purview is in focus at a 
time. Pet will give one of three responses to this 
word; it will accept the word, suggest a correc- 
tion, or indicate that it found an error it couldn't 
correct. Below follow an outline and discussion of 
the (linguistic) components of pet and discussion 
of testing and evaluation of the system. 
: /Pet  Sys tem 
Morphological Processing ~ Spelling Checking 
The word in focus is first passed through a two- 
level morphological analysis stage, based on an 
adaption of (Pulman, 1991). Two purposes are 
served here: checking the word is lexica\] (i.e. in 
the lexicon or a permissible inflection of a word in 
the lexicon) and collecting the possible categories, 
which are represented as sets of feature specifica- 
tions (Grover, 1993). 
This morphological lookup operates over a char- 
acter trie which has been compressed into a (di- 
rected) graph. Common endings are shared and 
category information is stored on the first unique 
transition. The advantages of this compression 
are that (1) a word/morpheme is recognised (and 
category affixation rules (Grove L 1993) checked) 
as soon as the initial letters allow uniqueness, 
rather than at the end of the word, and (2) there 
is an immense saving of space. There was a reduc- 
tion of over half the transitions on the trie formed 
from the Alvey lexicon. 
If the word is unknown, the system reconsiders 
analysis from the point where it broke down with 
1In particular, there axe many HCI issues associ- 
ated with such a system, which are beyond the scope 
of this paper. 
297 
the added possibility of an error rule. There are 
currently four error rules, corresponding to the 
four Damerau transformations: omission, inser- 
tion, transposition, substitution (Damerau, 1964) 
- considered in that order (Pollock, 1983). The 
error rules are in two level format and integrate 
seamlessly into morphological nalysis. 
~k_ X_  $_..+ ~__  ? 
This says that any letter ('X') can be inserted, with 
asterisks indicating that it can occur in any context 
(compare with (Pulman, 1991)). The right hand side 
represents the 'error surface' and the left hand side 
the surface with error removed. 
If this doesn't succeed, it backtracks to try an er- 
ror rule at an earlier point in the analysis. At 
present it will not apply more than one error rule 
per word, in keeping with findings on error fre- 
quencies (Pollock, 1983). 
As an alternative, a program was developed 
which uses positional binary trigrams (Rise- 
man,1974) (p.b.t.'s) to spot the error position and 
to check candidate corrections generated by re- 
verse Damerau transformations. This should have 
the advantage over the two level error rules in that 
it uses a good method of calculating likely error 
positions and because a set of correction possibil- 
ities can be generated fairly cheaply. (Correction 
possibilities are ranked using frequency informa- 
tion on Damerau errors and by giving preference 
to very common words.) However initial tests over 
a small file of constructed errors showed that the 
error rules did just as well (slightly better in fact) 
at choosing the 'correct correction'. 
The error rules are applied when ordinary mor- 
phological rules fail - which is usually a place 
p.b.t.'s would mark as in error - but the rules 
don't ignore error locations p.b.t.'s accept as al- 
lowable letter combinations. Most importantly, 
the error rules operate over a letter graph of the 
lexicon, so only ever consider lexical words (un- 
known letters are instantiated to the letters as- 
sociated with the transition options). The dis- 
advantage remains that generating many correc- 
tion possibilities (with SICStus backtracking) is
time-consuming. At present his phase postulates 
only one grapheme at a time, although all its 
possible categories are passed along together to 
later stages. If all of these categories eventually 
fail analysis, backtracking to alternative correc- 
tion candidates (different graphemes) will occur. 
Tag Checking 8J Partial Parsing 
The Alvey features are mapped on to the 
CLAWS tagset used in the LOB corpus (Garside, 
1987). Tag transitions are checked against an oc- 
currence matrix of the tagged LOB corpus using 
positional binary trigrams imilar to those used in 
the spelling checks mentioned above. Tag checks 
though the current set of categories top when 
one category passes, but backtrack and continue 
if parsing then fails. 
The Core Language Engine (CLE) is an ap- 
plication independent, unification based "general 
purpose device for mapping between atural an- 
guage sentences and logical form representations" 
(Alshawi, 1992). Its intermediate syntactic stages 
involve phrasal parsing followed by full syntactic 
analysis (top-down, left-corner). If the latter stage 
fails, CLE invokes partial parsing. 
The phrasal phase and partial parsing have 
been extracted and are being adapted to the 
present purpose. After mapping onto CLE 
tags, application of the phrasal phase, which im- 
plements bottom-up arsing, is straightforward. 
CLE partial parsing, using left-corner analysis 
combined with top-down prediction on the results 
of the phrasal phase, looks for complete phrases 
and breaks down a wordstring into maximal seg- 
ments. 
(a) the the brown bear ~ the I the brown bear 
(b) ate the nice friendly --~ ate I the I nice \] friendly 
For example, (a) produces 1 segment and (b) pro- 
duces 4 segments- whereas "ate the nice friendly 
cat" would produce 1 segment. 
Partial parsing needs to be adapted to support 
the idea of the pet purview; partial parsing that 
accepts any string likely to constitute part of a 
sentence. To achieve this the ends of the word- 
string delimited by the purview need to be treated 
differently. On the right hand end, 'can start rule' 
possibilities of words can be considered, using the 
prediction facility already built into the parsing 
process. The left hand side could be treated by 
'can end' possibilities, but a better idea should 
be to keep within the purview ('remember') pre- 
viously derived constituents hat involve current 
words. 
There is a phase to be added after detection 
of a tag or partial parsing error. Currently pro- 
cessing will just backtrack to the intraword cor- 
rection level, but particularly if there has been no 
correction yet made, pet should consider here the 
possibility of a simple phrase error. Examples are 
word doubling and omission of a common function 
word. 
Various Extensions 
Damerau transformations involving the space 
character (e.g. splitting a word) have not been 
implemented yet. Handling deletion of a space, 
or substitution of another character for a space, 
are straightforward additions to the morpholog- 
ical process. Transposition of a space could be 
dealt with by setting up an expectation upon dis- 
covering deletion of the last character of a word 
that the 'deleted' character may be attached to 
the beginning of the next word. Addition of a 
space is trickier because of the focus on the word 
as a processing unit, e.g. corrections for "the re" 
298 
could include "there" or "the red", but the present 
system will not generate the former possibility. 
At present the word in focus is always the 
newest word in the purview. Altering this would 
provide some right hand context information, 
which would among other things facilitate han- 
dling space addition. Allowing this change would 
necessitate a more complex backtracking mecha- 
nism, as there would be a focus lag between mor- 
phological processing and later phases. 
It would be sensible to keep a reference to the 
wider context, i.e. be able to refer to earlier de- 
tections/corrections. With respect o the editor 
that pet is attached to, this could correspond to 
a log of errors already encountered in the file be- 
ing edited. A recent Microsoft product 2 keeps a 
record of personal habitual mistakes. Either could 
be a valuable aid in choosing the correct correc- 
tion. 
The system could possibly make better use of 
the graph state of its lexicon. Word transforma- 
tion implies either implicit or explicit string com- 
parison. The advantage of a graph over a trie is 
that it allows for comparison from the end of the 
word and well as the beginning. 
Testing and Evaluation 
With the aim of evaluating the effectiveness of 
shallow processing, tests will be carried out to 
see what proportion of different ypes of errors 
can be dealt with elegantly, adequately and/or 
efficiently. Under examination will be the num- 
ber of errors missed/caught and wrongly/rightly 
corrected. Different components and configura- 
tions of the system will be compared, for example 
the error rules v. p.b.t.'s. Parameters of the sys- 
tem will be varied, for example the breadth of the 
purview, the position of the purview focus, the 
number of correction candidates and the timing 
of their generation. Will shallow processing miss 
too many of the errors cooperative error process- 
ing is aimed at? 
There are two significant difficulties with col- 
lecting test data. The central difficulty is finding 
a representative sample of genuine rrors by na- 
tive speakers, in context, with the correct version 
of the text attached. Apart from anything else, 
'representative' is hard to decide - spectrum of er- 
rors or distribution of errors ? Secondly, any cor- 
pus of text usually contains only those errors that 
were left undetected in the text. Cooperative pro- 
cessing deals with errors that one backtracks to 
catch; if not a different class or range, these at 
least might have a different distribution of error 
types. 
The ideal data would be records of peoples' 
keystrokes when interacting with an editor while 
creating or editing a piece of text. This would 
2Microsoft Word 6.0 Autocorrect Wizard 
allow one measure of the (linguistic) feasibility 
of cooperative error processing: the effectiveness 
of shallow processing over errors revealed by the 
keystroke-record data. There does not appear to 
be an English source of this kind, so it is planned 
to compile one. 
For comparison, a variety of other data has been 
collected. Preliminary tests used generated errors, 
from a program that produces random Damerau 
slips according to an observed istribution (Pol- 
lock, 1983), using confusion matrices where ap- 
propriate (Kernighan, 1990). Assembled ata in- 
cludes the Birkbeck corpus (Mitton, 1986) and 
multifarious misspelling lists (without context). 
Suggestions have been made to look for low fre- 
quency words in corpora and news/mail archives, 
and to the Longmans learner corpus (not native 
speakers). 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to all who offered advice on finding data, 
and to Doug Mcllroy, Sue Blackwell and Neil 
Rowe for sending me their misspelling lists. 
This work is supported by a British Tele- 
com Scholarship, administered by the Cambridge 
Commonwealth Trust in conjunction with the For- 
eign and Commonwealth Office. 
References 
Hiyan Alshawi. 1992. The Core Language Engine. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 
Fred J. Damerau. 1964. "A Technique for Com- 
puter Detection and Correction of Spelling Er- 
rors", 
Roger Garside, Geoffrey Leech and Geoffrey 
Sampson, eds. 1987. The Computational Anal- 
ysis of English. Longman. Commun. A CM, 
7(3):171-176. 
Claire Grover, John Carroll and Ted Briscoe. 
1993. "The Alvey Natural Language Tools 
Grammar (4th Release)", Tech. Rep. 284, Com- 
puter Lab, University of Cambridge. 
Mark D. Kernighan, Kenneth W. Church and 
William A. Gale. 1990. "A Spelling Correction 
Program Based on a Noisy Channel Model", 
Proc. Coling-90, pp 205-210. 
Roger Mitton, ed. 1986. A Col- 
lection of Computer-Readable Corpora of En- 
glish Spelling Errors (vet. 2). Birkbeek College, 
University of London. 
Joseph J. Pollock and Antonio Zamora. 1983. 
"Collection and Characterization of Spelling 
Errors in Scientific and Scholarly Text", J. Am. 
Soc. Inf. Sci., 34(1):51-58. 
299 
Stephen G. Pulman and Mark R. Hepple. 1993. "A 
feature-based formalism for two-level phonol- 
ogy: a description and implementation", Com- 
pufer Speech and Language, 7(4):333-358. 
Edward M. Riseman and Allen R. Hanson. 1974. 
"A Contextual Postprocessing System for Er- 
ror Correction Using Binary n-Grams", IEEE 
Trans. Comput, C-23(5):480-493. 
300 
