Col locat ion Map for Overcoming Data Sparseness 
Moonjoo Kim, Young S. Han, and Key-Sun Choi 
Department of Computer Science 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Taejon, 305-701, Korea 
mj0712~eve.kaist.ac.kr, yshan~csking.kaist.ac.kr, kschoi~csking.kai~t.ac.k~ 
Abstract 
Statistical anguage models are useful 
because they can provide probabilis- 
tic information upon uncertain decision 
making. The most common statistic is 
n-grams measuring word cooccurrences 
in texts. The method suffers from data 
shortage problem, however. In this pa- 
per, we suggest Bayesian networks be 
used in approximating the statistics of 
insufficient occurrences and of those that 
do not occur in the sample texts with 
graceful degradation. Collocation map 
is a sigmoid belief network that can be 
constructed from bigrams. We compared 
the conditional probabilities and mutual 
information computed from bigrams and 
Collocation map. The results show that 
the variance of the values from Colloca- 
tion map is smaller than that from fre- 
quency measure for the infrequent pairs 
by 48%. The predictive power of Col- 
location map for arbitrary associations 
not observed from sample texts is also 
demonstrated. 
1 Introduction 
In statistical language processing, n-grams are bar 
sic to many probabilistic models including Hidden 
Markov models that work on the limited depen- 
dency of linguistic events. In this regard, Bayesian 
models (Bayesian etwork, Belief network, Infer- 
ence diagram to name a few) are not very different 
from ItMMs. Bayesian models capture the con- 
ditional independence among probabilistic vari- 
ables, and can compute the conditional distribu- 
tion of the variables, which is known as a prob- 
abilistic inferencing. The pure n-gram statistic, 
however, is somewhat crude in that it cannot do 
anything about unobserved events and its approx- 
imation on infrequent events can be unreliable. 
In this paper we show by way of extensive x- 
periments that the Bayesian method that also can 
be composed from bigrams can overcome the data 
sparseness problem that is inherent in frequency 
counting methods. According to the empirical re- 
sults, Collocation map that is a Bayesian model 
for lexical variables induced graceful approxima- 
tion over unobserved and infrequent events. 
There are two known methods to deal with the 
data sparseness problem. They are smoothing and 
class based methods (Dagan 1992). Smoothing 
methods (Church and Gale 1991) readjust he dis- 
tribution of frequencies of word occurrences ob- 
tained from sample texts, and verify the distri- 
bution through held-out exts. As Dagan (1992) 
pointed out, however, the values from the smooth- 
ing methods closely agree with the probability of 
a bigram consisting of two independent words. 
Class based methods (Pereira et al 1993) 
approximate the likelihood of unobserved words 
based on similar words. Dagan and et al (1992) 
proposed a non-hierarchical class based method. 
The two approaches report limited successes of 
purely experimental nature. This is so because 
they are based on strong assumptions. In the case 
of smoothing methods, frequency readjustment is 
somewhat arbitrary and will not be good for heav- 
ily dependent bigrams. As to the class based 
methods, the notion of similar words differs across 
different methods, and the association of proba- 
bilistic dependency with the similarity (class) of 
words is too strong to assume in generM. 
Collocation map that is first suggested in (Itan 
1993) is a sigmoid belief network with words as 
probabilistic variables. Sigmoid belief network is 
extensively studied by Neal (1992), and has an effi- 
cient inferencing algorithm. Unlike other Bayesian 
models, the inferencing on sigmoid belief network 
is not NP-hard, and inference methods by reduc- 
ing the network and sampling are discussed in 
(Han 1995). Bayesian models constructed from 
local dependencies provide formal approximation 
among the variables, thus using Collocation map 
does not require strong assumption or intuition to 
justify the associations among words produced by 
the map. 
The results of inferencing on Collocation map 
are probabilities among any combinations of 
words represented in the map, which is not found 
53 
in other models. One significant shortcoming of 
Bayesian models lies in the heavy cost of inferenc- 
ing. Our implementation f Collocation map in- 
cludes 988 nodes, and takes 2 to 3 minutes to com- 
pute an association between words. The purpose 
of experiments i to find out how gracefully Col- 
location map deals with the unobserved cooccur- 
rences in comparison with a naive bigram statistic. 
In the next section, Collocation map is reviewed 
following the definition in (Flail 1993). In section 
3, mutual information and conditional probabili- 
ties computed using bigrams and Collocation map 
are compared. Section 4 concludes the paper by 
summarizing the good and bad points of the Col- 
location map and other methods. 
2 Collocation Map 
In this section, we make a brief introduction on 
Collocation map, and refer to (ttan 1993) for more 
discussion on the definition and to (ttan 1995) on 
infi~rence methods. 
Bayesian model consists of a network and prob- 
ability tables defined on the nodes of the network. 
The nodes in the network repre.sent probabilis- 
tic variables of a problem domain. The network 
can compute probabilistic dependency between 
an)" combination of the variables. The model is 
well documented as subjective probability theory 
(Pearl 1988). 
Collocation map is an application model of sig- 
mold belief network (Neal 1992) that belongs to 
belief networks which in turn is a type of Bayesian 
model. Unlike belief networks, Collocation map 
does not have deterministic variables thus consists 
only of probabilistic variables that correspond to 
words in this case. 
Sigmoid belief network is different from other 
belief networks in that it does not have probabil- 
ity distribution table at each node but weights on 
the edges between the nodes. A node takes binary 
outcomes (1, -1) and the probability that a node 
takes an outcome given the vector of outcomes of 
its preceding nodes is a sigmoid function of the 
outcomes and the weights of associated edges. In 
this regard, the sigmoid belief network resembles 
artificial neural network. Such probabilities used 
to be stored at nodes in ordinary Bayesian mod- 
els, and this makes the inferencing very difficult 
because the probability table can be very big. Sig- 
moid belief network does away with the NP-hard 
complexity by avoiding the tables at the loss of 
expressive generality of probability distributions 
that can be encoded in the tables. 
One who works with Collocation map has to 
deal with two problems. The first is how to con- 
struct the network, and the other is how to com- 
pute the probabilities on the network. 
Network can be constructed irectly from a set 
of bigrams obtained from a training sample. Be- 
cause Collocation map is a directed a~yclic graph, 
P( profit I investment ) = 0.644069 
P( risk-taking I investment ) = 0.549834 
P( stock } investment ) = 0.546001 
P( high-income I investment ) = 0.564798 
P( investment I high-income ) = 0.500000 
P( high-income I risk-taking profit ) = 0.720300 
P( investment I portfolio high-income risk-taking ) 
= 0.495988 
P( portfolio I blue-chip ) = 0.500000 
P( portfolio stock I portfolio stock ) = 1.000000 
Figure 1: Example Collocation map and example 
inferences. Graph reduction method (Hall 1995) 
is used in computing the probabilities. 
cycles are avoided by making additional node of a 
word when facing cycle due to the node. No more 
than two nodes for each word are needed to avoid 
the cycle in any case (ltan 1993). Once the net- 
work is setup, edges of the network are assigned 
with weights that are normalized frequency of the 
edges at a node. 
The inferencing on Collocation map is not dif- 
ferent from that for sigmoid belief network. The 
time complexity of inferencing by reducing raph 
on sigmoid belief networks is O(N a) given N 
nodes (Han 1995). It turned out that inferencing 
on networks containing more than a few hundred 
nodes was not practical using either node reduc- 
tion method or sampling method, thus we adopted 
the hybrid inferencing method that first reduces 
the network and applies Gibbs sampling method 
(Hall 1995). Using the hybrid inferencing method, 
computation of conditional probabilities took less 
than a second for a network with 50 nodes, two 
seconds for a network with 100 nodes, about nine 
seconds for a network with 200 nodes, and about 
two minutes for a network with about 1000 nodes. 
Conditional and marginal probabilities can be 
approximated from Gibb's sampling. Some con- 
ditional probabilities computed from a small net- 
work are shown in figure 1. Though the network 
may not be big enough to model the domain of fi- 
nance, the resulting values from the small network 
composed of 9 dependencies seem useful and intu- 
itive. 
54 
20 
15 
Mutual  in 
Information ~v 
o 
o 
e~ 
o 
o o 
o 
O 
~-~?o?  ~,, oo. ~? . '~ :~.  "o 
o o w o o ~@ oee .~dr 'ee~ 
0 ~ ? 0 C 
o ???  Po Oo ? ieo?~' 
0 
average MI * 
variance o 
e ~o 
o g Do ~ ? oq  
50 I00 150 200 
Frequency ofbigrams 
Figure 2: Average MI's and variances. 378,888 unique bigrams are classified according to frequency. 
55 
The computation i  figure 1 was done by using 
graph reduction method. As it is shown in the 
example inferences, the association between any 
combination of variables can be measured. 
3 Exper iments  
The goal of our experiment is first to find how data 
sparseness is related with the frequency based 
statistics and to show Collocation map based 
method gives more reliable approximations. In 
particular, from the experiments we observed the 
variances of statistics might suggest he level of 
data sparseness. The less frequent data tended to 
have higher variances though the values of statis- 
tics (mutual information for instance) did not dis- 
tinguish the level of occurrences. The predictive 
account of Collocation map is demonstrated by 
observing the variances of approximations on the 
infrequent events. 
The tagged Wall Street Journal articles of Penn 
Tree corpus were used that contain about 2.6 mil- 
lion word units. In the experiments, about 1.2 
million of them was used. Programs were coded 
in C language, and run on a Sun Spare 10 work- 
station. 
For the first 1.2 million words, the bigrams con- 
sisting of four types of categories (NN, NNS, IN, 
J J) were obtained, and mutual information of each 
bigram (order insensitive) was computed. The bi- 
grams were classified into 200 sets according to 
their occurrences. Figure 2 summarizes the the 
average MI value and the variance of each fre- 
quency range. From figure 3 that shows the oc- 
currence distribution of 378,888 unique bigrams, 
about 70% of them occur only one time. One in- 
teresting and important observation is that those 
of 1 to 3 frequency range that take about 90% of 
the population have very high MI values. This re- 
sults also agree with Dunning's argument about 
overestimation on the infrequent occurrences in 
which many infrequent pairs tend to get higher 
estimation (Dunning 1993). The problem is due 
to the assumption of normality in naive frequency 
based statistics according to Dunning (1993). Ap- 
proximated values, thus, do not indicate the level 
of data quality. Figure 3 shows variances can sug- 
gest the level of data sufficiency. From this obser- 
vation we propose the following definition on the 
notion of data sparseness. 
A set of units belonging to a sample of 
ordered word units (texts) is cz data- 
sparse 
if and only if the variance of measurements 
on the set is greater than ~.  
The definition sets the concept of sparseness 
within the context of a focused set of linguistic 
units. For a set of units unoberved from a sam- 
ple, the given sample text is for sure data-sparse. 
The above definition then gives a way to judge 
with respect o observed units. The measurement 
of data sparseness can be a good issue to study 
where it may depend on the contexts of research. 
Here we suggest a simple method perhaps for the 
first time in the literature. 
Figure 4 compares the results from using Col- 
location map and simple frequency statistic. The 
variances are smaller and the pairs in frequency 
1 class have non zero approximations. Because 
computation on Collocation map is very high, we 
have chosen 2000 unique pairs at random. The 
network consists of 988 nodes. Computing an ap- 
proximation (inferencing) took about 3 minutes. 
The test size of 2000 pairs may not be sufficient, 
but it showed the consistent endency of grace- 
ful degradation of variances. The overestimation 
problem was not significant in the approximations 
by Collocation map. The average value of zero fre- 
quency class to which 50 unobserved pairs belong 
was also on the line of smooth degradation, and 
figure 4 shows only the variance. 
Table 1 summarizes the details of performance 
gain by using Collocation map. 
4 Conc lus ion  
Corpus based natural language processing has 
been one of the central subjects gaining rapid at- 
tention from the research community. The ma- 
jor virtue of statistical approaches i in evaluating 
linguistic events and determining the relative im- 
portance of the events to resolve ambiguities. The 
evaluation on the events (mostly cooccurrences) in
many cases, however, has been unreliable because 
of the lack of data. 
Data sparseness addresses the shortage of data 
in estimating probabilistic parameters. As a re- 
sult, there are too many events unobserved, and 
even if events have been found, the occurrence is 
not sufficient enough for the estimation to be re- 
liable. 
In contrast with existing methods that are 
based on strong assumptions, the method using 
Collocation map promises a logical approximation 
since it is built on a thorough formal argument of 
Bayesian probability theory. The powerful feature 
of the framework is the ability to make use of the 
conditional independence among word units and 
to make associations about unseen cooccurrences 
based on observed ones. This naturally induces 
the attributes required to deal with data sparse- 
ness. Our experiments confirm that Collocation 
map makes predictive approximation and avoids 
overestimation of infrequent occurrences. 
One critical drawback of Collocation map is the 
time complexity, but it can be useful for applica- 
tions of limited scope. 
56 
Percentage 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
0 2 4 6 8 10 
Frequency of bigrams 
Figure 3: The distribution of 378,888 unique bigrams. First ten classes are shown. 
1 5.1 12.2 57% 
10 2.28 4.28 46% 
20 1.29 5.29 75% 
30 1.51 3.51 56% 
40 2.18 3.18 31% 
50 1.52 2.87 47% 
average 2.04 4.5 45% 
Table 1: Comparison of variances between frequency based and Collocation map based MI computations. 
57 
12 
10 
fre, luency based ? 
Col\[ocatic n ma\[ o 
MI 
variance 
? q  
4 ? ? O . ?  ? w ? 
0 0 ro  ? 
o ? 
o o 0 ? 
o :o  uO ? oo  ~ o 
o o o o 0 o ~?  
o Ug 
0 ? 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 o 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 5 I0 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Frequency of bigrams 
Figure 4: Variances by frequency based and Collocation map based MI  computations for 2000 unique 
bigrarns. 
58 
References  
Kenneth W. Church, and William A. Gale. 1991. 
A comparison of the enhanced Good-Turing 
and deleted estimation methods for estimat- 
ing probabilities of English bigrams. Computer 
Speech and Language. 5. 19-54. 
Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the 
statistics of surprise and coincidence. Compu- 
tational Linguistics. 19 (1). 61-74. 
Ido Dagan, Shaul Marcus, and Shaul Markovitch. 
1992. Contextual word similarity and estima- 
tion from sparse data. In Proceedings of AAAI 
fall symposium, Cambridge, MI. 164-171. 
Young S. Han, Young G. Han, and Key-sun Choi. 
1992. Recursive Markov chain as a stochastic 
grammar. In Proceedings of a SIGLEX work- 
shop, Columbus, Ohio. 22-31. 
Young S. Han, Young C. Park, and Key-sun Choi. 
1995. Efficient inferencing for sigmoid Bayesian 
networks, to appear in Applied Intelligence. 
Radford M. Neal. 1992. Connectionist learning of 
belief networks. J of Artificial Intelligence. 56. 
71-113. 
Judea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in In- 
telligent Systems. Morgan Kaufmann Publish- 
ers. 
Fernando Pereira, Naftali Tishby, and Lillian 
Lee. 1993. Distributional clustering of English 
words. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of 
the A CL. 
59 
