Proceedings of EACL '99 
Representing a System of Lexical Types Using Default 
Unification 
Al ine  V i l l av icenc io  
Computer  Laboratory 
University of Cambridge 
New Museums Site 
Pembroke Street 
Cambridge CB2 3QG 
ENGLAND 
Aline.Vil lavicencio@cl.cam.ac.uk 
Abst rac t  
Default inheritance is a useful tool for 
encoding linguistic generalisations that 
have exceptions. In this paper we show 
how the use of an order independent 
typed default unification operation can 
provide non-redundant highly structured 
and concise representation to specify a 
network of lexical types, that encodes 
linguistic information about verbal sub- 
categorisation. The system of lexical 
types is based on the one proposed by 
Pollard and Sag (1987), but uses the 
more expressive typed default feature 
structures, is more succinct, and able to 
express linguistic sub-regularities more 
elegantly. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Several authors have highlighted the importance 
of using defaults in the representation f linguistic 
knowledge, in order to get linguistically adequate 
descriptions for some natural anguage phenom- 
ena ((Gazdar, 1987), (Bouma, 1992), (Daelemans 
et al 1992), (Briscoe, 1993)). Defaults have been 
used in the definition of inflectional morphology, 
specification of lexical semantics, analysis of gap- 
ping constructions and ellipsis among others. In 
this paper we use defaults to structure the lexicon, 
concentrating onthe description of verbal subcat- 
egorisation i formation. 
The issue of how to organise lexical informa- 
tion is especially important when a lexicalised for- 
malism like Categorial Grammar (CG) or Head- 
Driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG) is em- 
ployed, since the burden of linguistic description 
is concentrated in the lexicon and if lexical en- 
tries are organised as unrelated lists, there is a 
significant loss of generalisation a d an increase 
in redundancy. Alternatively, it is possible to use 
inheritance networks, which provide representa- 
tions that are able to capture linguistic regulari- 
ties about classes of items that behave similarly. 
This idea is employed in Pollard and Sag's (1987) 
sketch of an HPSG lexicon as a monotonic mul- 
tiple orthogonal inheritance type hierarchy. How- 
ever, this work fail to make use of defaults, which 
would significantly reduce redundancy in lexical 
specifications and would enable them to elegantly 
express sub-regularities (Krieger and Nerbonne, 
1993). In this paper we demonstrate hat using 
default unification, namely the order-independent 
and persistent version of default unification de- 
scribed in (Lascarides et al 1996b) and (Las- 
carides and Copestake, 1999), to implement a de- 
fault inheritance network results in a fully declar- 
ative specification of a lexical fragment based on 
Pollard and Sag's (1987), but that is both more 
succinct and able to express elegantly linguistic 
sub-regularities, such as the marked status of sub- 
ject control of transitive subject-control verbs. 
In section 2, a brief description of the use of de- 
faults and YADU is given. In section 3, we present 
the results of representing the proposed lexical 
fragment in terms of default multiple inheritance 
networks. Finally, we discuss the results achieved 
and future work. 
2 Defau l t  Inher i tance  and  YADU 
In this work, a default multiple orthogonal inher- 
itance network is used to represent lexical infor- 
mation. Thus, with different subnetworks used to 
encode different kinds of linguistic knowledge, the 
idea is that linguistic regularities are encoded near 
the top of the network, while nodes further down 
the network are used to represent sub-regularities 
or exceptions. Such an approach to representing 
the lexicon has some advantages, like its ability 
to capture linguistic generalisations, conciseness, 
uniformity, ease of maintenance and modification, 
and modularity (Daelemans et al 1992). 
This default multiple inheritance network is im- 
261 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
plemented using YADU (Lascarides and Copes- 
take, 1999), which is an order independent default 
unification operation on typed feature structures 
(TFS). YADU uses an  extended efinition of TFSS 
called typed default feature s t ructures  (TDFSs), to 
explicitly distinguish the non-default information 
from the default one, where a TDFS is composed 
by an indefeasible TFS ( I ) ,  which contains the 
non-default information and a defeasible TFS (D), 
which contains the default information, with a '/ '  
separating these two TFSS (I on the left-hand and 
D on the right-hand). As a consequence, during 
default unification on-default information can al- 
ways be preserved and only consistent default in- 
formation is incorporated into the defeasible TFS. 
Another important point is that default unifica- 
tion of two feature structures is deterministic, al- 
ways returning a single value. Moreover, default 
specifications can be made to act as indefeasible 
information, using YADU's DefFill operation (Las- 
carides and Copestake, 1999), that has a TDFS as 
input and returns a TFS by incorporating all the 
default information into the indefeasible TFS, say 
at the interface between the lexicon and the rest of 
the system. YADU also provides the possibility of 
defining defaults that are going to persist outside 
the lexicon, with the p operator (Lascarides et al 
1996b), which was already shown to be significant, 
for example, for the interface between the lexicon 
and pragmatics, where lexically encoded semantic 
defaults can be overridden by discourse informa- 
tion (Lascarides et al 1996a). Furthermore, YADU 
supports the definition of inequalities, which are 
used to override default reentrancies when no con- 
flicting values are defined in the types involved 
(Lascarides and Copestake, 1999). 
YADU (~'~) can be informally defined as an op- 
eration that takes two TDFSS and produces a new 
one, whose indefeasible part is the result of uni- 
fying the indefeasible information defined in the 
input TDFSs; and the defeasible part is the result 
of combining the indefeasible part with the maxi- 
mal set of compatible default elements, according 
to type specificity, as shown in the example below. 
Throughout this paper we adopt the abbreviatory 
notation from (Lascarides et al 1996b) where In- 
defensible/De feasible is abbreviated to Indefeasi- 
ble if Indefeasible = Defensible and T/Defeasible 
is abbreviated to ~Defensible. 
t'~-t 
? I=  ~ n = 
? D= :~  
For a more detailed introduction to YADU see 
(Lascarides and Copestake, 1999). 
3 The  proposed  lex ica l  network  
The proposed verbal subcategorisation hierar- 
chy 1, which is based on the sketch by Pollard and 
Sag (1987) is shown in figure i. In this hierarchy, 
types are ordered according to the number and 
type of the subcategorisation arguments they 
specify. The subcategorisation arguments of a 
particular category 2 are defined in its SUBCAT 
feature as a difference-list. Thus, the verbal 
hierarchy starts with the intrans type, which 
by default specifies the need for exactly one 
argument, the NP subject, where e-list is a type 
that marks the end of the subcategorisation list: 
(1) intrans type: 
\[SuBCAT: <HEAD: np, TAIL: /e- l ist>\].  
Now all the attributes pecified for the sub- 
categorised subject NP in intrans are inherited 
by instances of this type and by its subtypes 3,
namely, trans and intrans-control. However, since 
these types subcategorise for 2 arguments, they 
need to override the default of exactly one argu- 
ment, specified by the e-list value for TAIL, and 
add an extra argument: an NP object for trans, 
and a predicative complement for intrans-control. 
In this way, the specification of the trans type is: 
(2) trans type: 
\[SUBCAT:<TAIL: 
/e~list>\]. 
HEAD: r ip ,  TAIL: TAIL: 
Similarly, the instances and subtypes of trans 
inherit from intrans all the attributes for the 
subject NP and from trans the attributes for the 
object NP, in addition to their own constraints. 
With the use of defaults there is no need for 
specifying a type like strict-trans, as defined in 
Pollard and Sag's hierarchy, since it contains 
exactly the same information as their trans type, 
except that the former specifies the SUBCAT 
For reasons of space we are only showing the parts 
of the lexical hierarchy that are relevant for this paper. 
2Linguistic information is expressed using a sim- 
plified notation for the SUBGAT list, and for reasons of 
clarity, we are only showing categories in an atomic 
form, without the attributes defined. 
3In this paper, we are not assuming the coverage 
condition, that any type in a hierarchy has to be re- 
solvable to a most specific type. 
262 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
inlrans 
lntrans-control tmns walk 
in~ans-rai d i~ 'ans '~~ ..... ) ike 
? trans-control 
mtra.ns-equi\]try ~-equi\[,,,,N 
trans-raising / "~ super-equi 
give //subject-control 
believe . /  " . ask  
..." promtse 
persuade 
Figure 1: The Proposed Hierarchy 
attribute as containing exactly two arguments: 
(3) Pollard and Sag's strict-trans type: 
\[SUBCAT: <HEAD: rip, TAIL: HEAD: np, TAIL: 
TAIL: e-list>\], 
while the latter works as an intermediate type, 
where SUBGAT contains at least two arguments, 
as shown in (4), offering its subtypes the possibil- 
ity of adding extra arguments. 
(4) Pollard and Sag's trans type: 
\[SUBCAT: <HEAD: rip, TAIL: HEAD: np>\], 
Defaults automatically provide this possibility, 
by defeasibly marking the end of the subcat- 
egorisation list, which defines the number of 
arguments needed, avoiding the need for these 
redundant specifications, where the information 
contained in one lexical sign is repeated in others. 
Furthermore, these defaults are used to capture 
lexical generalisations, but outside the lexicon, 
we want them to act as indefeasible constraints; 
therefore, we apply the DefFill operation to these 
default specifications, except where marked as 
persistently default. In this way, a type like 
trans, after DefFill, has the consistent defaults 
incorporated and specifies, indefeasibly the need 
for exactly two arguments, as Pollard and Sag's 
strict-trans hown in (3): 
(5) trans type DefFilled: 
\[SUBCAT: <HEAD: np, TAIL: HEAD: np, TAIL: 
TAIL: e-list>\]. 
Apart from supporting this kind of gen- 
eralisation, defaults are also used to express 
sub-regularities, as, for example, in the case of 
super-equi and subject-control verbs, which are 
both exceptions to the general case specified 
by trans-equi. The type trans-equi encodes 
transitive-equi verbs by specifying that the 
predicative complement of the transitive verb 
is by default controlled by the object (e.g. The 
teacher persuaded the doctor to go): 
(6) trans-equi type: 
\[SUBCAT: <TAIL: HEAD: np/ \ [ \ ] ,  TAIL: TAIL: 
HEAD: vp( INF, SUBCAT:<HEAD: np/ \ [ \ ]  >), 
TAIL: TAIL: TAIL: e-list>\]. 
For super-equi verbs, the predicative comple- 
ments can be controlled by either the object or 
the subject. Therefore, the default object-control 
in the super-equi type, inherited from trans-equi, 
should be explicitly marked with the p operator 
to persist until discourse interpretation, as shown 
in (7), since all other features are made indefeasi- 
ble prior to parsing. 
(7) super-equi type: 
\[SUBCAT: ~TAIL: HEAD: np/v \['~, TAIL: 
TAIL: HEAD: Yp( INF, SUBCAT: ~HEAD: 
np/v \[\] >) >\]. 
This default would only survive in the absence 
of conflicting discourse information (as in e.g.: 
They needed someone with medical training. So, 
the teacher asked the doctor to go (since she had 
none), which is object-controlled). Otherwise, 
if there is conflicting information, this default is 
rejected (as in e.g.: They needed someone with 
teaching experience. So, the teacher asked the 
doctor (to be allowed) to go, where the control 
is by the subject). A description of the precise 
mechanism to do this can be found in (Las- 
carides et al 1996a). Transitive subject-control 
verbs follow the pattern specified by trans-equi, 
but contrary to this pattern, it is the subject 
that controls the predicative complement and 
not the object (e.g. The teacher promised to go): 
(8) subject-control type: 
\[SUBCAT: <HEAD: np \ [ \ ] ,  TAIL: HEAD: np/ff \ ] ,  
TAIL: TAIL: HEAD: vp( INF, SUBCAT: <HEAD: 
rip\[\] >) >, \[\] ~ \[~\]. 
In this case, the constraint on subject-control 
specifies that the coindexation is determined by 
the subject, and as it does not conflict with the de- 
fault coindexation by the object-control, inequal- 
ities (~) are used to remove the default value. 
263 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
As a result of using default inheritance to repre- 
sent information about verbal subcategorisation, 
it is possible to obtain a highly structured and 
succinct hierarchy. In comparison with the hier- 
archy defined by Pollard and Sag (1987), this one 
avoids the need of redundant specifications and 
associated type declarations, like the strict-trans 
type, which are needed in a monotonic encoding. 
In this way, while Pollard and Sag's hierarchy is 
defined using 23 nodes, this is defined using only 
19 nodes, and by defining 2 more nodes, it is possi- 
ble to specify subject-control and super-equi types. 
By avoiding this redundancy, there is a real gain in 
conciseness, with the resulting hierarchy extend- 
ing the information defined in Pollard and Sag's, 
with the addition of sub-regularities, in a more 
compact encoding. 
4 Conc lus ion  
In this paper we demonstrated how the use of de- 
fault unification in the organisation of lexical in- 
formation can provide non-redundant description 
of lexical types. In this way, we implemented a 
default inheritance network that represents ver- 
bal subcategorisation nformation, using YADU. It 
resulted in a significant reduction in lexical re- 
dundancy, with linguistic regularities and sub- 
regularities defined by means of TDFSS, in a lexi- 
con that is succinctly organised, and that is also 
easier to maintain and modify, when compared to 
its monotonic ounterpart. The resulting verbal 
hierarchy is able not only to encode the same in- 
formation as Pollard and Sag's but also to spec- 
ify more sub-regularities, in a more concise way. 
Such an approach as the advantage ofoptionally 
allowing default specifications to persist outside 
the lexicon, which is important for the specifica- 
tion of control in super-equi verbs and for lexical 
semantics. Moreover, as an order independent op- 
eration, it provides a declarative mechanism for 
default specification, with no cost in formal ele- 
gance. Finally, as YADU operates directly on fea- 
ture structures, defaults are allowed as a fully in- 
tegrated part of the typed feature structure sys- 
tem, and, as a consequence YADU integrates well 
with constraint-based formalisms. Further work 
will complement these results by comparing the 
adequacy of different default unification oPera- 
tions, like the one used in DATR, for this kind 
of linguistic description. This work is part of a 
larger project concerned with the investigation of
grammatical cquisition within constraint-based 
formalisms. 
5 Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Ted Briscoe, Ann Copes- 
take and Fabio Nemetz for their comments and 
advice on this paper. Thanks also to the anony- 
mous reviewers for their comments. The research 
reported on this paper is supported by doctoral 
studentship from CAPES/Brazil. 
References  
Bouma, Gosse. 1992. Feature Structures and Non- 
monotonicity. Computational Linguistics, 18.2. 
Briscoe, Ted. 1993. Introduction. Inheritance, De- 
faults and the Lexicon. Ted Briscoe, Ann Copes- 
take and Valeria de Paiva eds. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, Cambridge. 
Daelemans, Walter, Koenraad De Smedt and Ger- 
ald Gazdar. 1992. Inheritance in Natural Lan- 
guage Processing. Computational Linguistics, 
18.2. 
Gazdar, Gerald. 1987. Linguistic Applications 
of Default Inheritance Mechanisms. Linguis- 
tic Theory and Computer Applications. Pete 
Whitelock, Mary M. Wood, Harold Somers, 
Rod Johnson and Paul Bennett eds. 
Krieger, Hans-Ulrich. and John Nerbonne. 1993. 
Feature-Based Inheritance Networks for Com- 
putational Lexicons. Inheritance, Defaults and 
the Lexicon. Ted Briscoe, Ann Copestake and 
Valeria de Paiva eds. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Lascarides, Alex, Ann Copestake and Ted Briscoe. 
1996a. Ambiguity and Coherence. Journal of 
Semantics, 13.1, 41-65. 
Lascarides, Alex, Ted Briscoe, Nicholas Asher and 
Ann Copestake. 1996b. Order Independent Per- 
sistent Typed Default Unification. Linguistics 
and Philosophy, 19.1, 1-89. 
Lascarides, Alex and Ann Copestake. 1999. 
Default Representation i  Constraint-based 
Frameworks. To appear in Computational Lin- 
guistics, 25.2. An earlier version of the paper 
is available at http://www.csli.stanford.edu/ 
,-~aac/papers/yadu.gz 
Pollard, Carl. and Ivan A. Sag. 1987. Information- 
Based Syntax and Semantics, CSLI lecture notes 
series, Number 13. 
264 
