Proceedings of EACL '99 
Des ign ing  spel l ing correctors for inf lected languages  us ing 
lexical t ransducers  
I .  A ldezaba l ,  I .  A legr ia ,  O .  Ansa ,  J .  M .  Ar r io la  and N .  Eze iza  
Univers i ty  of  the Basque Count ry  
649 postakutxa ,  20080 Donost ia .  Basque Count ry  
i .a legria@si.ehu.es 
I. Aduriz A. Da Costa 
UZEI Hizkia 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the components used in 
the design of the commercial Xuxen I I  spelling 
checker/corrector f Basque. It is a new version 
of the Xuxen spelling corrector (Aduriz et al, 97) 
which uses lexical transducers to improve the pro- 
cess. A very important new feature is the use of 
user dictionaries whose entries can recognise both 
the original and inflected forms. In languages 
with a high level of inflection such as Basque 
spelling checking cannot be resolved without ad- 
equate treatment of words from a morphological 
standpoint. In addition to this, the morphologi- 
cal treatment has other important features: cov- 
erage, reusability of tools, orthogonality and secu- 
rity. The tool is based in lexical transducers and 
is built using the fst library of Inxight 1. A lexi- 
cal transducer (Karttunen, 94) is a finite-state au- 
tomaton that maps inflected surface forms to lex- 
ical forms, and can be seen as an evolution of two- 
level morphology (Koskenniemi, 83) where the use 
of diacritics and homographs can be avoided and 
the intersection and composition of transducers 
is possible. In addition, the process is very fast 
and the transducer for the whole morphological 
description can be compacted in less than 1Mbyte. 
The design of the spelling corrector consists of four 
main modules: 
? the standard checker, 
? the recogniser using user-lexicons, 
? the corrector of linguistic variants -proposals 
for dialectal uses and competence errors- 
. the corrector of typographical errors 
An important feature is its homogeneity. The 
different steps are based on lexical transducers, far 
from ad-hoc solutions. 
lInxight Software, Inc., a Xerox New Enterprise 
Company (www.inxight.com) 
2 The Spelling Checker 
The spelling checker accepts as correct any word 
which allows a correct standard morphological 
breakdown. When a word is not recognised by 
the checker, it is assumed to be a misspelling and 
a warning is given to the user who has different 
options, being one of most interesting including 
its lemma in the user-lexicon. 
2.1 The  user lexicons 
The user-lexicon is offered in order to increase the 
coverage and to manage specific terminology. Our 
tool recognises all the possible inflections of a root. 
The use of a lexical transducer for this purpose is 
difficult because it is necessary to compile the new 
entries with the affixes and the rules to update it 
but this process is slow. The mechanism we have 
implemented has the following two main compo- 
nents in order to be able to treatment declensions: 
1. a general transducer which use standard rules 
but totally opened lexicon. The result of the 
analysis is not only if the word is known or 
not, but also all the possible lemmas corre- 
sponding to this word-form and the gram- 
matical category of each one. The resulting 
lexical transducer is very compact and fast. 
2. a searcher of these hypothetical lemmas in 
the user-lexicons. If one of them is found, 
the checker will accept he word, otherwise it 
will suppose that it has to be corrected. 
For this process the system has an interface to 
update the user lexicon because the part of speech 
of the lemmas is necessary when they are added 
to the user lexicon. 
3 The  Spe l l ing  Cor rector  
Although there is a wide bibliography about the 
problem of correction (Kukich, 92), it is significa- 
tive that almost all of them do not mention the 
265 
Proceedings ofEACL '99 
relation with morphology and assume that there 
is a whole dictionary of words or that the sys- 
tem works without lexical information. Oflazer 
and Guzey (1994) face the problem of correcting 
words in agglutinative languages. 
3.1 Correcting Competence Errors 
The need of managing competence errors -also 
named orthographic errors- has been mentioned 
and reasoned by different authors (van Berkel &: 
de Smedt, 88). When we faced the problem of cor- 
recting misspelled words the main problem found 
was that because of the recent standardisation and 
the widespread ialectal use of Basque, compe- 
tence errors or linguistic variants are more likely 
and therefore their treatment becomes critical. 
When we decided to use lexical transducers for 
the treatment of linguistic variants, the following 
procedure was applied to build the transducer: 
1. Additional morphemes are linked to the stan- 
dard ones using the possibility of expressing 
two levels in the lexicon. 
2. Definition of additional rules for competence 
errors that do not need to be integrated with 
the standard ones. It is possible and clearer 
to put these rules in other plane near to the 
surface and compose them with the standard 
rules, because most of the additional rules are 
due to phonetic hanges. 
When a word-form is not accepted the word is 
checked against his second transducer. If the in- 
correct form is recognised now -i.e. it contains 
a competence error- the correct lexical level form 
is directly obtained and, as the transducers are 
bi-directional, the corrected surface form will be 
generated from the lexical form using only stan- 
dard transducer. 
For example, the word-form beartzetikan, mis- 
spelling of behartzetik (from the need) can be cor- 
rected although the edit-distance is three. The 
process of correction is the following: 
? Decomposition i to three morphemes: behar 
(using a rule to guess the h), tze and tikan. 
? tikan is a non-standard use of tik and as they 
are linked in the lexicon is chosen. 
* The standard generation of behar+tze+tik 
obtains the correct word behartzetik. 
3.2 Handling Typographical Errors 
The treatment of typographical errors is quite 
conventional nd performs the following: 
? Generating proposals to typographical errors 
using Damerau's classification (edit distance 
of one). These proposals are ranked in order 
of trigramic probability. 
? Spelling checking of proposals. 
3.3 Results 
The results are very good in the case of compe- 
tence errors and not so good for typographical er- 
rors because in the last case only errors with an 
edit-distance of one have been planned. In 89right 
proposal is generated and in 71possible to gener- 
ate and test all the possible words with an edit- 
distance higher, but the number of proposal would 
be very high. The corrector has been integrated 
in several tools. A demonstration can be seen in 
http://ixa.si.ehu.es. 
Acknowledgements This work has had partial 
support from the Culture Department ofthe Gov- 
ernment of the Basque Country. We would like to 
thank to Xerox for letting us using their tools, and 
also to Lauri Karttunen for his help. 
References 
Aduriz I., Alegria I., Artola X., Ezeiza N., Sara- 
sola K., Urkia M. (1997), A spelling corrector 
for Basque based on morphology. Literary & 
Linguistic Computing, Vol. 12, No. 1. Oxford 
University Press. Oxford. 
Alegria I., Artola X., Sarasola K (1997). Improv- 
ing a Robust Morphological AnaIyser using Lex- 
ical Transducers. Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing. Current Issues in Linguis- 
tic Theory (CILT) series. John Benjamins pub- 
lisher company. Vol. 136. pp 97-110. 
Karttunen L. (1994). Constructing Lexical Trans- 
ducers, Proc. of COLING'94, 406-411. 
Koskenniemi, K. (1983). Two-level Morphology: 
A general Computational Model for Word- 
Form Recognition and Production, University 
of Helsinki, Department ofGeneral Linguistics. 
Publications No. 11. 
Kukich K. (1992). Techniques for automatically 
correcting word in text. ACM Computing Sur- 
veys, vol. 24, No. 4, 377-439. 
Oflazer K, Guzey C. (1994). Spelling Correction 
in Aglutinative Languages, Proc. of ANLP-94, 
Sttutgart. 
Van Barkel B, De Smedt K. (1988). Triphone anal- 
ysis: a combined method \]or the correction o\] 
orthographic and typographical errors. Proced- 
ings of the Second Conference ANLP (ACL), 
pp.77-83. 
266 
