Proceedings of EACL '99 
Determinants of Adjective-Noun Plausibil ity 
Maria Lapata and Scott McDonald and Frank Keller 
School of Cognitive Science 
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh 
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK 
{mlap, scottm, keller} @cogsci.ed.ac.uk 
Abstract 
This paper explores the determinants of 
adjective-noun plausibility by using cor- 
relation analysis to compare judgements 
elicited from human subjects with five 
corpus-based variables: co-occurrence fre- 
quency of the adjective-noun pair, noun fre- 
quency, conditional probability of the noun 
given the adjective, the log-likelihood ra- 
tio, and Resnik's (1993) selectional asso- 
ciation measure. The highest correlation is
obtained with the co-occurrence frequency, 
which points to the strongly lexicalist and 
collocational nature of adjective-noun com- 
binations. 
1 Introduction 
Research on linguistic plausibility has focused mainly 
on the effects of argument plausibility during the pro- 
cessing of locally ambiguous entences. Psycholin- 
guists have investigated whether the plausibility of 
the direct object affects reading times for sentences 
like (1). Here, argument plausibility refers to "prag- 
matic plausibility" or "local semantic fit" (Holmes et 
al., 1989), and judgements of plausibility are typi- 
cally obtained by asking subjects to rate sentence frag- 
ments containing verb-argument combinations (as an 
example consider the bracketed parts of the sentences 
in (1)). Such experiments typically use an ordinal scale 
for plausibility (e.g., from 1 to 7). 
(1) a. \[The senior senator regretted the decision\] 
had ever been made public. 
b. \[The senior senator regretted the reporter\] 
had ever seen the report. 
The majority of research as focussed on investigating 
the effect of rated plausibility for verb-object ombi- 
nations in human sentence processing (Garnsey et al, 
1997; Pickering and Traxler, 1998). However, plausi- 
bility effects have also been observed for adjective- 
noun combinations in a head-modifier relationship. 
Murphy (1990) has shown that typical adjective- 
noun phrases (e.g., salty olives) are easier to in- 
terpret in comparison to atypical ones (e.g., sweet 
olives). Murphy provides a schema-based xplana- 
tion for this finding by postulating that in typical 
adjective-noun phrases, the adjective modifies part of 
the noun's schema nd consequently it is understood 
more quickly, whereas in atypical combinations, the 
adjective modifies non-schematic aspects of the noun, 
which leads to interpretation difficulties. 
Smadja (1991) argues that the reason people prefer 
strong tea to powerful tea and powerful car to strong 
car is neither purely syntactic nor purely semantic, but 
rather lexical. 
A similar argument is put forward by Cruse (1986), 
who observes that the adjective spotless collocates 
well with the noun kitchen, relatively worse with the 
noun complexion and not all with the noun taste. Ac- 
cording to Cruse, words like spotless have idiosyn- 
cratic collocational restrictions: differences in the de- 
gree of acceptability ofthe adjective and its collocates 
do not seem to depend on the meaning of the individ- 
ual words. 
1.1 Motivation 
Acquiring plausibility ratings for word combinations 
(e.g., adjective-noun, verb-object, noun-noun) can be 
useful in particular for language generation. Consider 
a generator which has to make a choice between spot- 
less kitchen and flawless kitchen. An empirical model 
of plausibility could predict hat spotless kitchen is a 
plausible lexical choice, while flawless kitchen is not. 
Adjective-noun combinations can be hard to gen- 
erate given their collocational status. For a generator 
which selects words solely on semantic grounds with- 
out taking into account lexical constraints, the choice 
between spotless kitchen and flawless kitchen may 
look equivalent. Current work in natural language gen- 
eration (Knight and Hatzivassiloglou, 1995; Langk- 
ilde and Knight, 1998) has shown that corpus-based 
knowledge can be used to address lexical choice non- 
compositionally. 
30 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
In the work reported here we acquire plausibility 
ratings for adjective-noun combinations by eliciting 
judgements from human subjects, and examine the ex- 
tent to which different corpus-based models correlate 
with human intuitions about he "goodness of fit" for 
a range of adjective-noun combinations. 
The research presented in this paper is similar 
in motivation to Resnik's (1993) work on selec- 
tional restrictions. Resnik evaluated his information- 
theoretic model of selectional constraints against hu- 
man plausibility ratings for verb-object ombinations, 
and showed that, in most cases, his model assigned 
higher selectional association scores to verb-object 
combinations which were judged more plausible by 
human subjects. 
We test five corpus-based models against human 
plausibility judgements: 
1. Familiarity of adjective-noun pair. We opera- 
tionalise familiarity as co-occurrence frequency 
in a large corpus. We calculate the co-occurrence 
frequency of adjective-noun pairs in order to ex- 
amine whether high corpus frequency is corre- 
lated with plausibility, and correspondingly low 
corpus frequency with implausibility. 
2. Familiarity of head noun. We compare rated 
plausibility with the corpus frequency of the head 
noun, the motivation being that highly frequent 
nouns are more familiar than less frequent ones, 
and consequently may affect the judged plausi- 
bility of the whole noun phrase. 
3. Conditional probability. Our inclusion of the 
conditional probability, P(noun I adjective), as 
a predictor variable also relies on the predic- 
tion that plausibility is correlated with corpus fre- 
quency. It differs from simple co-occurrence fre- 
quency in that it additionally takes the overall ad- 
jective frequency into account. 
4. Coliocational status. We employ the log- 
likelihood ratio as a measure of the collocational 
status of the adjective-noun pair (Dunning, 1993; 
Daille, 1996). If we assume that plausibility dif- 
ferences between strong tea and powerful tea or 
guilty verdict and guilty cat reflect differences in
collocational status (i.e., appearing together more 
often than expected by their individual occur- 
rence frequencies), as opposed to being semantic 
in nature, then the log-likelihood ratio may also 
predict adjective-noun plausibility. 
5. Selectional association. Finally, we evaluate 
plausibility ratings against Resnik's (1993) mea- 
sure of selectional association. This measure 
is attractive because it combines statistical 
and knowledge-based methods. By exploiting a 
knowledge-based taxonomy, it can capture con- 
ceptual information about lexical items and hence 
can make predictions about word combinations 
which have not been seen in the corpus. 
In the following section we describe our method for 
eliciting plausibility judgements for adjective-noun 
combinations. Section 3 reports the results of using the 
five corpus-based models as predictors of adjective- 
noun plausibility. Finally, section 4 offers some dis- 
cussion of future work, and section 5 concluding re- 
marks. 
2 Collecting Plausibi l i ty Rat ings 
In order to evaluate the different corpus-based mod- 
els of adjective-noun plausibility introduced above, 
we first needed to establish an independent measure 
of plausibility. The standard approach used in ex- 
perimental psycholinguistics is to elicit judgements 
from human subjects; in this section we describe our 
method for assembling the set of experimental materi- 
als and collecting plausibility ratings for these stimuli. 
2.1 Method 
Materials and Design. The ideal test of any of 
the proposed models of adjective-noun plausibility 
will be with randomly-chosen materials. We chose 
30 adjectives according to a set of minimal crite- 
ria (detailed below), and paired each adjective with 
a noun selected randomly from three different fre- 
quency ranges, which were defined by co-occurrence 
counts in the 100 million word British National Cor- 
pus (BNC; Burnard (1995)). The experimental design 
thus consisted of one factor, Frequency Band, with 
three levels (High, Medium, and Low). 
We chose the adjectives to be minimally ambigu- 
ous: each adjective had exactly two senses according 
to WordNet (Miller et al, 1990) and was unambigu- 
ously tagged as "adjective" 98.6% of the time, mea- 
sured as the number of different part-of-speech tags 
assigned to the word in the BNC. The 30 adjectives 
ranged in BNC frequency from 1.9 to 49.1 per million. 
We identified adjective-noun pairs by using Gsearch 
(Corley et al, 1999), a chart parser which detects yn- 
tactic patterns in a tagged corpus by exploiting a user- 
specified context free grammar and a syntactic query. 
Gsearch was run on a lemmatised version of the BNC 
so as to compile a comprehensive corpus count of all 
nouns occurring in a modifier-head relationship with 
each of the 30 adjectives. Examples of the syntac- 
tic patterns the parser identified are given in Table 1. 
From the syntactic analysis provided by the parser 
we extracted a table containing the adjective and the 
head of the noun phrase following it. In the case of 
compound nouns, we only included sequences of two 
31 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
nouns, and considered the rightmost occurring noun as 
the head. 
From the retrieved adjective-noun pairs, we re- 
moved all pairs where the noun had a BNC frequency 
of less than 10 per million, as we wanted to reduce 
the risk of plausibility ratings being influenced by the 
presence of a noun unfamiliar to the subjects. Finally, 
for each adjective we divided the set of pairs into three 
"bands" (High, Medium, and Low), based on an equal 
division of the range of log-transformed co-occurrence 
frequency, and randomly chose one noun from each 
band. Example stimuli are shown in Table 2. The mean 
log co-occurrence frequencies were 3.839, 2.066 and 
.258, for the High, Medium, and Low groups, respec- 
tively. 
30 filler items were also included, in order to en- 
sure subjects produced a wide range of plausibility 
ratings. These consisted of 30 adjective-noun combi- 
nations that were not found in a modifier-head relation 
in the BNC, and were also judged highly implausible 
by the authors. 
Procedure. The experimental paradigm was mag- 
nitude estimation (ME), a technique standardly used 
in psychophysics to measure judgements of sensory 
stimuli (Stevens, 1975), which Bard et al (1996) and 
Cowart (1997) have applied to the elicitation of lin- 
guistic judgements. The ME procedure requires ub- 
jects to estimate the magnitude of physical stimuli by 
assigning numerical values proportional to the stimu- 
lus magnitude they perceive. In contrast to the 5- or 
7-point scale conventionally used to measure human 
intuitions, ME employs an interval scale, and therefore 
produces data for which parametric nferential statis- 
tics are valid. 
ME requires ubjects to assign numbers to a series 
of linguistic stimuli n a proportional fashion. Subjects 
are first exposed to a modulus item, which they assign 
an arbitrary number. All other stimuli are rated pro- 
portional to the modulus. In this way, each subject can 
establish their own rating scale, thus yielding maxi- 
mally fine-graded ata and avoiding the known prob- 
lems with the conventional ordinal scales forlinguistic 
data (Bard et al, 1996; Cowart, 1997; Schfitze, 1996). 
In the present experiment, subjects were presented 
with adjective-noun pairs and were asked to rate the 
degree of adjective-noun fit proportional to a modulus 
item. The experiment was carried out using WebExp, 
a set of Java-Classes for administering psycholinguis- 
tic studies over the Word-Wide Web (Keller et al, 
1998). Subjects first saw a set of instructions that ex- 
plained the ME technique and included some exam- 
pies, and had to fill in a short questionnaire including 
basic demographic nformation. Each subject saw all 
120 items used in the experiment (3 x 30 experimental 
items and 30 fillers). 
Subjects. The experiment was completed by 24 un- 
paid volunteers, all native speakers of English. Sub- 
jects were recruited via postings to local Usenet news- 
groups. 
2.2 Results and Discussion 
As is standard in magnitude estimation studies, statis- 
tical tests were done using geometric means to nor- 
malise the data (the geometric mean is the mean of 
the logarithms of the ratings). An analysis of vari- 
ance (ANOVA) indicated that the Frequency Band ef- 
fect was significant, in both by-subjects and by-items 
analyses: FI(2, 46) = 79.09, p < .001; F2(2, 58) = 
19.99, p < .001. The geometric mean of the ratings 
for adjective-noun combinations in the High band was 
2.966, compared to Medium items at 2.660 and Low 
pairs at 2.271.1 Post-hoc Tukey tests indicated that the 
differences between all pairs of conditions were sig- 
nificant at o~ = .01, except for the difference between 
the High and Medium bands in the by-items analysis, 
which was significant at o~ = .05. These results are 
perhaps unsurprising: pairs that are more familiar are 
rated as more plausible than combinations that are less 
familiar. In the next section we explore the linear re- 
lationship between plausibility and co-occurrence fre- 
quency further, using correlation analysis. 
3 Corpus-based Modell ing 
3.1 Method 
We correlated rated plausibility (Plaus) with the 
following five corpus-based variables: (1) log- 
transformed co-occurrence frequency (CoocF), mea- 
sured as the number of times the adjective-noun pair 
occurs in the BNC; (2) log-transformed noun fre- 
quency (NounF), measured as the number of times the 
head noun occurs in the BNC; (3) conditional prob- 
ability (CondP) of the noun given the adjective s- 
timated as shown in equation (2); (4) collocational 
status, 2 estimated using the log-likelihood statistic 
(LLRatio); and (5) Resnik's measure of selectional s- 
sociation (SelAssoc), which measures the semantic fit 
of a particular semantic lass c as an argument to a 
predicate pi. The selectional ssociation between class 
c and predicate Pi is given in equations (3) and (4). 
More specifically, selectional association represents 
the contribution of a particular semantic lass c to the 
total quantity of information provided by a predicate 
about the semantic lass of its argument, when mea- 
sured as the relative ntropy between the prior distri- 
I For comparison, the filler items had a mean rating of 
.998. 
2Mutual information, though potentially of interest as a 
measure of collocational status, was not tested due to its 
well-known property of overemphasising the significance of 
rare events (Church and Hanks, 1990). 
32 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Pattern Example 
adjective noun educational material 
adjective specifier noun usual weekly classes 
adjective noun noun environmental health officers 
Table 1: Example of noun-adjective patterns 
Co-occurrence Frequency Band 
Adjective High l Medium I Low 
hungry animal 1.79 pleasure 1.38 application 0 
guilty verdict 3.91 secret 2.56 cat 0 
temporary job 4.71 post 2.07 cap .69 
naughty girl 2.94 dog 1.6 lunch .69 
Table 2: Example stimuli (with log co-occurrence fr quencies in the BNC) 
bution of classes p(c) and the posterior distribution 
p(c I pi) of the argument classes for a particular pred- 
icate Pi. 
f (adjective, noun) 
(2) P(noun l adjective) = f (adjective) 
(3) A(pi, c) = I .  e(c I Pi)" log P(c I Pi_______~) 
rli P(c) 
(4) rli=~-~P(clpi).logP(Cplc;i) 
C 
In the case of adjective-noun combinations, the se- 
lectional association measures the semantic fit of an 
adjective and each of the semantic lasses of the 
nouns it co-occurs with. We estimated the probabilities 
P(c I Pi) and P(c) similarly to Resnik (1993) by us- 
ing relative frequencies from the BNC, together with 
WordNet (Miller et al, 1990) as a source of taxo- 
nomic semantic lass information. Although the se- 
lectional association is a function of the predicate and 
all semantic classes it potentially selects for, following 
Resnik's method for verb-object evaluation, we com- 
pared human plausibility judgements with the max- 
imum value for the selectional association for each 
adjective-noun combination. 
Table 3 shows the models' predictions for three 
sample stimuli. The first row contains the geometric 
mean of the subjects' responses. 
3.2 Results 
The five corpus-based variables were submitted to a 
correlation analysis (see Tables 5 and 4). The highest 
correlation with judged plausibility was obtained with 
the familiarity of the adjective-noun combination (as 
operationalised by corpus co-occurrence frequency). 
Three other variables were also significantly corre- 
lated with plausibility ratings: the conditional prob- 
ability P(noun \[ adjective), the log-likelihood ratio, 
and Resnik's electional ssociation measure. We dis- 
cuss each predictor variable in more detail: 
I. Familiarity of adjective-noun pair. Log- 
transformed corpus co-occurrence frequency 
was significantly correlated with plausibility 
(Pearson r = .570, n = 90, p < .01). This 
verifies the Frequency Band effect discovered 
by the ANOVA, in an analysis which compares 
the individual co-occurrence frequency for each 
item with rated plausibility, instead of collapsing 
30 pairs together into an equivalence class. 
Familiarity appears to be a strong determinant of
adjective-noun plausibility. 
2. Familiarity of head noun. Log frequency of 
the head noun was not significantly correlated 
with plausibility (r = .098), which suggests 
that adjective-noun plausibility judgements are 
not influenced by noun familiarity. 
3. Conditional probability. The probability of the 
noun given the adjective was significantly cor- 
related with plausibility (r = .220, p < .05). 
This is unsurprising, as conditional probability 
was also correlated with co-occurrence fr quency 
(r = .497, p < .01). 
4. Collocational status. The log-likelihood statis- 
tic yielded a significant correlation with plausi- 
bility (r = .350, p < .01), a fact that supports 
the collocational nature of plausible adjective- 
noun combinations. The log-likelihood ratio was 
in turn correlated with co-occurrence frequency 
(r = .725, p < .01) and conditional probability 
(r = .405, p < .01). 
5. Selectional ssociation. Resnik's measure of se- 
lectional association was also significantly corre- 
lated with plausibility (r = -.269, p < .05). 
33 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Plaus 
CoocF 
NounF 
CondP 
LLRatio 
SelAssoc 
1\[ hungry animal hungry application hungry pleasure 
3.02 
i .79 
9.63 
.003 
26.81 
.5 
1.46 
1.38 
9.69 
.002 
14.33 
.5 
1.31 
0 
8.67 
.0005 
2.9 
.22 
Table 3: Models' prediction for hungry and its three paired noun heads 
However, it should be noted that selectional s- 
sociation was negatively correlated with plausi- 
bility, although Resnik found the measure was 
positively correlated with the judged plausibil- 
ity of verb-object ombinations, consistent with 
its information-theoretic motivation. Resnik's 
metric was also negatively correlated with co- 
occurrence frequency (r = -.226, p < .05), but 
there was no correlation with noun frequency, 
conditional probability, or log-likelihood ratio. 
Since several of the corpus-based variables were in- 
tercorrelated, we also calculated the squared semipar- 
tial correlations between plausibility and each corpus- 
based variable. This allows the unique relationship be- 
tween each predictor and plausibility (removing the 
effects of the other independent variables) to be deter- 
mined. Co-occurrence frequency accounted uniquely 
for 15.52% of the variance in plausibility ratings, 
while noun frequency, conditional probability, log- 
likelihood ratio, and selectional ssociation accounted 
for .51%, .53%, .41% and 1.7% of the variance, re- 
spectively. This confirms co-occurrence frequency as 
the best predictor of adjective-noun plausibility. 
One explanation for the negative correlation be- 
tween selectional association and plausibility, also 
pointed out by Resnik, is the difference between 
verb-object and adjective-noun combinations: com- 
binations of the latter type are more lexical than 
conceptual in nature and hence cannot be accounted 
for on purely semantic or syntactic grounds. The 
abstraction provided by a semantic taxonomy is at 
odds with the idiosyncratic (i.e., lexical) nature of 
adjective-noun co-occurrences. Consider for instance 
the adjective hungry. The class (entity) yields the 
highest selectional association value for the high- 
est rated pair hungry animal. But (entity) also 
yields the highest association for the lowest rated pair 
hungry application (A(hungry, (ent i ty})  = .50 
in both cases). The highest association for hungry 
pleasure, on the other hand, is given by the class 
(act)  (A(hungry, (act))  = .22). This demonstrates 
how the method tends to prefer the most frequent 
classes in the taxonomy (e.g., (ent i ty ) ,  (act))  over 
less frequent, but intuitively more plausible classes 
(e.g., (feeling) for pleasure and (use} for appli- 
cation). 
This is a general problem with the estimation of the 
probability of a class of a given predicate in Resnik's 
method, as the probability is assumed to be uniform 
for all classes of a given noun with which the predicate 
co-occurs. Although the improvements suggested by 
Ribas (1994) try to remedy this by taking the different 
senses of a given word into account and implement- 
ing selectional restrictions in the form of weighted is- 
junctions, the experiments reported here indicate that 
methods based on taxonomic knowledge have difficul- 
ties capturing the idiosyncratic (i.e., lexicalist) nature 
of adjective-noun combinations. 
Finally, idiosyncrasies in WordNet itself influence 
the performance of Resnik's model. One problem 
is that sense distinctions in WordNet axe often too 
fine-grained (Palmer (1999) makes a similar observa- 
tion). Furthermore, there is considerable r dundancy 
in the definition of word senses. Consider the noun 
application: it has 27 classes in WordNet which in- 
clude (code), (coding system), (software), 
(communication}, (writing) and (written 
communication}. It is difficult o see how (code} 
or (coding system} is not (software} or 
(writing) is not (written communication). 
The fine granularity and the degree of redundancy in
the taxonomy bias the estimation of the frequency of a 
given class. Resnik's model cannot distinguish classes 
which are genuinely frequent from classes which are 
infrequent but yet overly specified. 
4 Future Work 
Although familiarity of the adjective-noun combina- 
tion proved to be the most predictive measure of 
judged plausibility, it is obvious that this measure will 
fail for adjective-noun pairs that never co-occur at all 
in the training corpus. Is a zero co-occurrence ount 
merely the result of insufficient evidence, or is it a 
reflection of a linguistic constraint? We plan to con- 
duct another rating experiment, this time with a selec- 
tion of stimuli that have a co-occurrence frequency of 
zero in the BNC. These data will allow a further test 
of Resnik's electional ssociation measure. 
34 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
II Plaus t CoocF I NounF I CondP I 
Min .770 0 6.988 .0002 
Max 3.240 5.037 11.929 .2139 
Mean 2.632 2.054 9.411 .0165 
Std Dev .529 1.583 1.100 .0312 
LLRatio SelAssoc 
.02 .100 
1734.88 !.000 
176.24 .288 
334.23 .170 
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for the six experimental variables 
CoocF 
NounF 
CondP 
LLRatio 
SelAssoc 
Plaus 
.570** 
.098 
.220* 
.350** 
-.269* 
CoocF 
.221" 
.497** 
.725** 
-.226* 
NounF I CondP 
.008 
.001 
-.191 
.405** 
-.097 
LLRatio 
.015 
*p < .05 (2-tailed) **p < .01 (2-tailed) 
Table 5: Correlation matrix for plausibility and the five corpus-based variables 
We also plan to investigate the application of 
similarity-based smoothing (Dagan et ai., 1999) to 
zero co-occurrence ounts, as this method is specif- 
ically aimed at distinguishing between unobserved 
events which are likely to occur in language from 
those that are not. Plausibility ratings provide a suit- 
able test of the psychological validity of co-occurrence 
frequencies "recreated" with this method. 
5 Conclusions 
This paper explored the determinants of linguistic 
plausibility, a concept hat is potentially relevant for 
lexical choice in natural language generation systems. 
Adjective-noun plausibility served as a test bed for a 
number of corpus-based models of linguistic plausi- 
bility. Plausibility judgements were obtained from hu- 
man subjects for 90 randomly selected adjective-noun 
pairs. The ratings revealed a clear effect of familiarity 
of the adjective-noun pair (operationalised by corpus 
co-occurrence frequency). 
In a correlation analysis we compared judged plau- 
sibility with the predictions of five corpus-based vari- 
ables. The highest correlation was obtained with the 
co-occurrence frequency of the adjective-noun pair. 
Conditional probability, the log-likelihood ratio, and 
Resnik's (1993) selectional ssociation measure were 
also significantly correlated with plausibility ratings. 
The correlation with Resnik's measure was negative, 
contrary to the predictions of his model. This points to 
a problem with his technique for estimating word class 
frequencies, which is aggravated by the collocational 
nature of noun-adjective combinations. 
Overall, the results confirm the strongly lexicalist 
and collocational nature of adjective-noun combina- 
tions. This fact could be exploited in a generation 
system by taking into account corpus co-occurrence 
counts for adjective-noun pairs (which can be obtained 
straightforwardly) during lexical choice. Future re- 
search as to identify how this approach can be gener- 
alised to unseen data. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge the support of the Alexan- 
der S. Onassis Foundation (Lapata), the UK Economic 
and Social Research Council (Keller, Lapata), the Nat- 
ural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada, and the ORS Awards Scheme (McDonald). 
References 
Ellen Gurman Bard, Dan Robertson, and Antonella 
Sorace. 1996. Magnitude stimation of linguistic 
acceptability. Language, 72(1):32-68. 
Lou Burnard, 1995. Users Guide for the British Na- 
tional Corpus. British National Corpus Consor- 
tium, Oxford University Computing Service. 
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. 
Word association norms, mutual informations, 
and lexicography. Computational Linguistics, 
16(1):22-29. 
Martin Corley, Steffan Corley, Matthew W. Crocker, 
Frank Keller, and Shari Trewin, 1999. Gsearch 
User Manual. Human Communication Research 
Centre, University of Edinburgh. 
Wayne Cowart. 1997. Experimental Syntax: Applying 
Objective Methods to Sentence Judgments. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
D. A. Cruse. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cam- 
bridge Textbooks in Linguistics. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, Cambridge. 
35 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Ido Dagan, Lillian Lee, and Fernando Pereira. 1999. 
Similarity-based models of word cooccurrence 
probabilities. Machine Learning, 34(1). 
B6atrice Daille. 1996. Study and implementation 
of combined techniques for automatic extraction of 
terminology. In Judith Klavans and Philip Resnik, 
editors, The Balancing Act: Combining Symbolic 
and Statistical Approaches to Language, pages 49- 
66. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis- 
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational 
Linguistics, 19( 1 ):61-74. 
Susan M. Garnsey, NeaI J. Pearlmutter, Elisabeth M. 
Myers, and Melanie A. Lotocky. 1997. The contri- 
butions of verb bias and plausibility to the compre- 
hension of temporarily ambiguous sentences. Jour- 
nal of Memory and Language, 37(1 ):58-93. 
V. M. Holmes, L. Stowe, and L. Cupples. 1989. 
Lexical expectations in parsing complement-verb 
sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 
28(6):668-689. 
Frank Keller, Martin Corley, Steffan Corley, Lars 
Konieczny, and Amalia Todirascu. 1998. Web- 
Exp: A Java toolbox for web-based psychological 
experiments. Technical Report HCRC/TR-99, Hu- 
man Communication Research Centre, University 
of Edinburgh. 
Kevin Knight and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 1995. 
Two-level, many paths generation. In Proceedings 
of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 252-260, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 
Irene Langkilde and Kevin Knight. 1998, Gener- 
ation that exploits corpus-based statistical knowl- 
edge. In Proceedings of the 17th International Con- 
ference on Computational Linguistics and 36th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 704-710, Montr6al. 
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane 
Fellbaum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 
1990. Introduction to WordNet: an on-line lexical 
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 
3(4):235-244. 
Gregory L. Murphy. 1990. Noun phrase interpreta- 
tion and noun combination. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 29(3):259-288. 
Martha Palmer. 1999. Consistent criteria for sense 
distinctions. Computers and the Humanities, to ap- 
pear. 
Martin J. Pickering and Martin J. Traxler. 1998. Plau- 
sibility and recovery from garden paths: An eye- 
tracking study. Journal of Experimental Psychol- 
ogy: Learning Memory and Cognition, 24(4):940- 
961. 
Philip Stuart Resnik. 1993. Selection and Informa- 
tion: A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relation- 
ships. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania. 
Francesc Ribas. 1994. On learning more appropri- 
ate selectional restrictions. In Proceedings of the 
32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, Las Cruces, NM. 
Carson T. Schiitze. 1996. The Empirical Base of Lin- 
guistics: Grammaticality Judgments and Linguis- 
tic Methodology. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago. 
Frank Smadja. 1991. Macrocoding the lexicon 
with co-occurrence knowledge. In Uri Zernik, ed- 
itor, Lexical Acquisition: Using Online Resources 
to Build a Lexicon, pages 165-189. Erlbaum, Hills- 
dale, NJ. 
Stanley S. Stevens, editor. 1975. Psychophysics: 
Introduction to its Perceptual Neural and Social 
Prospects. John Wiley, New York. 
36 
