Proceedings of EACL '99 
Compar i son  and  C lass i f i ca t ion  of  D ia lec ts  
J ohn  Nerbonne and  Wi lber t  Heer inga  and  Peter  K le iweg 
Alfa- informatica, BCN, University of Groningen 
9700 AS Groningen, The Nether lands 
{nerbonne, heeringa, kleiweg}@let, rug. nl 
Abstract 
This project measures and classifies lan- 
guage variation. In contrast o earlier 
dialectology, we seek a comprehensive 
characterization f (potentially gradual) 
differences between dialects, rather than 
a geographic delineation of(discrete) fea- 
tures of individual words or pronuncia- 
tions. More general characterizations of 
dialect differences then become available. 
We measure phonetic (un)relatedness 
between dialects using Levenshtein dis- 
tance, and classify by clustering dis- 
tances but also by analysis through mul- 
tidimensional scaling. 
1 Data and Method 
Data is from Reeks Nederlands(ch)e Dialectat- 
lassen (Blancqua~rt and P6e, 1925 1982)). It con- 
tains 1,956 Netherlandic and North Belgian tran- 
scriptions of 141 sentences. We chose 104 dialects, 
regularly scattered over the Dutch language area, 
and 100 words which appear in each dialect ext, 
and which contain all vowels and consonants. 
Comparison is based on Levenshtein distance, 
a sequence-processing algorithm which speech 
recognition has also used (Kruskal, 1983). It cal- 
culates the "cost" of changing one word into an- 
other using insertions, deletions and replacements. 
L-distance (sl, s2) is the sum of the costs of the 
cheapest set of operations changing sl to s2. 
s~agIrl delete r 1 
s~agIl replace I/0 2 
saag?l insert r 1 
sarag?l 
Sum distance 4 
The example above illustrates Levenstein distance 
applied to Bostonian and standard American pro- 
nunciations of saw a girl. Kessler (1995) applied 
Levenshtein distance to Irish dialects. The ex- 
ample simplifies our procedure for clarity: refine- 
ments due to feature sensitivity are omitted. To 
obtain the results below, costs are refined based 
on phonetic feature overlap. Replacement costs 
vary depending on the phones involved. Differ- 
ent feature systems were tested; the results hown 
are based on Hoppenbrouwers' (SPE-like) features 
(Hoppenbrouwers and Hoppenbrouwers, 1988). 
Comparing two dialects results in a sum of 100 
word pair comparisons. Because longer words 
tend to be separated by more distance than 
shorter words, the distance of each word pair is 
normalized by dividing it by the mean lengths 
of the word pair. This results in a halfmatrix of 
distances, to which (i) clustering may be applied 
to CLASSIFY dialects (Aldenderfer and Blashfield, 
1984); while (ii) multidimensional scaling may be 
applied to extract he most significant dimensions 
(Kruskal and Wish, 1978). 
2 Results 
We have validated the technique using cross- 
validation on unseen Dutch dialect data (Ner- 
bonne and Heeringa, 1999). The map in Fig- 
ure 1 distinguishes Dutch "dialect area" in a way 
which nonstatistical methods have been unable to 
do (without resorting to subjective choices of dis- 
tinguishing features). Ongoing work applies the 
technique to questions of convergence/divergence 
of dialects using dialect data from two different 
periods. Finally, the MDS analysis gives math- 
ematical form to the intuition of dialectologists 
in Dutch (and other areas) that the material is 
best viewed as a "continuum". The map is ob- 
tained by interpreting MDS dimensions as col- 
ors and mixing using inverse distance weighting. 
Further information on the project is available at 
x~r~. le t .  rug. n l /a l fa / ,  "Projects." 
3 Acknowledgements 
Joseph Kruskal's advice has been invaluable. 
281 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Oost -V l i~  
Hollum Nes ~ermon~koog 
Renesse 
? .L? 
late ',i q 
,~ = , Kerkrade 
Bael~ 
Figure 1: The most significant dimensions in average Levenshtein distance, as identified by multi- 
dimensional scaling, are colored red, green and blue. The map gives form to the dialectologist's intuition 
that dialects exist "on a continuum," within which, however significant differences emerges. The Frisian 
dialects (blue), Saxon (dark green), Limburg (red), and Flemish (yellow-green) are clearly distinct. 
Re ferences  
Mark S. Aldenderfer and Roger K. Blashfield. 
1984. Cluster Analysis. Quantitative Applica- 
tions in the Social Sciences. Sage, Beverly Hills. 
E. Blancquaert and W. P@e.  1925-1982. 
Reeks Nederlandse Dialectatlassen. De Sikkel, 
Antwerpen. 
Cor Hoppenbrouwers and Geer Hoppenbrouwers. 
1988. De featurefrequentiemethode en de clas- 
sificatie van nederlandse dialecten. TABU: Bul- 
letin voor TaaIwetensehap , 18(2):51-92. 
Brett Kessler. 1995. Computational dialectology 
in Irish Gaelic. In Proc. of the European ACL, 
pages 60-67, Dublin. 
Joseph Kruskal and Myron Wish. 1978. Multidi- 
mensional Scaling. Sage, Beverly Hills. 
Joseph Kruskal. 1983. An overview of sequence 
comparison. In David Sankoff and Joseph 
Kruskal, editors, Time Warps, String Edits 
and Macromolecules: The ory and Practice 
of Sequence Comparison, pages 1-44. Addison- 
Wesley, Reading, Mass. 
-John Nerbonne and Wilbert Heeringa. 1999. 
Computational comparison and classification of 
dialects. Zeitschrift fiir Dialektologie und Lin- 
guistik. Spec. iss. ed. by Jaap van Marie and Jan 
Berens w. selections from 2nd Int'l Congress of 
Dialectologists and Geolinguists, Amsterdam, 
1997. 
282 
