Proceedings of EACL '99 
Parsing with an Extended Domain of Locality 
J ohn  Car ro l l ,  N ico las  N ico lov ,  O lga  Shaumyan,  Mar t ine  Smets  &: Dav id  Wei r  
School  of  Cogn i t ive  and  Comput ing  Sciences 
Un ivers i ty  of  Sussex 
Br ighton ,  BN1 9QH,  UK 
Abst ract  
One of the claimed benefits of Tree Ad- 
joining Grammars is that they have an 
extended omain of locality (EDOL). We 
consider how this can be exploited to 
limit the need for feature structure uni- 
fication during parsing. We compare 
two wide-coverage l xicalized grammars 
of English, LEXSYS and XTAG, finding 
that the two grammars exploit EDOL in 
different ways. 
1 In t roduct ion  
One of the most basic properties of Tree Adjoining 
Grammars (TAGS) is that they have an extended 
domain  o f  local i ty  (EDOL) (Joshi, 1994). This 
refers to the fact that the elementary trees that 
make up the grammar are larger than the cor- 
responding units (the productions) that are used 
in phrase-structure ule-based frameworks. The 
claim is that in Lexicalized TAGS (LTAGS) the el- 
ementary trees provide a domain of locality large 
enough to state co-occurrence r lationships be- 
tween a lexical item (the anchor  of the elemen- 
tary tree) and the nodes it imposes constraints 
on. We will call this the extended domain  of  
local i ty hypothes is .  
For example, wh-movement can be expressed 
locally in a tree that will be anchored by a verb 
of which an argument is extracted. Consequently, 
features which are shared by the extraction site 
and the wh-word, such as case, do not need to be 
percolated, but are directly identified in the tree. 
Figure 1 shows a tree in which the case feature 
at the extraction site and the wh-word share the 
same value3 
1The anchor~ substitution and foot nodes of trees 
are marked with the symbols o, $ and. ,  respectively. 
Words in parenthesis are included in trees to provide 
examples of strings this tree can derive. 
Much of the research on TAGS tail be seen as 
illustrating how its EDOL can be exploited in vari- 
ous ways. However, to date, only indirect evidence 
has been given regarding the beneficial effects of 
the EDOL on parsing efficiency. The argument, 
due to Schabes (1990), is that benefits to parsing 
arise from lexicalization, and that lexicalization is
only possible because of the EDOL. A parser deal- 
ing with a lexicalized grammar needs to consider 
only those elementary structures that can be as- 
sociated with the lexical items appearing in the 
input. This can substantially reduce the effective 
grammar size at parse time. The argument that 
an EDOL is required for lexicalization is based on 
the observation that not every set of trees that 
can be generated by a CFG can be generated by 
a lexicalized CFG. But does the EDOL have any 
other more direct effects on parsing efficiency? 
On the one hand, it is a consequence of the 
EDOL that wide-coverage LTAGS are larger than 
their rule-based counterparts. With larger ele- 
mentary structures, generalizations are lost re- 
garding the internal structure of the elementary 
trees. Since parse time depends on grammar size, 
this could have an adverse ffect on parsing effi- 
ciency. However, the problem of grammar size in 
TAG has to some extent been addressed both with 
respect o grammar encoding (Evans et al, 1995; 
Candito, 1996) and parsing (Joshi and Srinivas, 
1994; Evans and Weir, 1998). 
On the other hand, if the EDOL hypothesis holds 
for those dependencies that are being checked by 
the parser, then the burden of passing feature val- 
ues around during parsing will be less than in a 
rule-based framework. If all dependencies that 
the parser is checking can be stated directly within 
the elementary structures of the grammar, they 
do not need to be comPuted ynamically during 
the parsing process by means of feature percola- 
tion. For example, there is no need to use a slash 
feature to establish filler-gap dependencies over 
unbounded istances across the tree if the EDOL 
269 
Proceedings ofEACL '99 
Thus, passive sentences such as The scheme was 
singled out by a recent Government report are 
found difficult 3, despite the presence of the syn- 
tactic cues was, -ed and by. We therefore replace 
passive constructions with corresponding active 
forms. We are currently integrating further rules 
to split conjoined sentences and extract embedded 
clauses. Syntactic simplification operates itera- 
tively until a configuration is reached that cannot 
be simplified. This approach is broadly similar to 
that proposed by (Chandrasekar et al, 1996). 
One of the many challenges in syntactic simplifi- 
cation is the observed effect of the total length of a 
text being increased when longer sentences are re- 
placed by multiple shorter ones. Also, the removal 
of cohesive devices such as conjunctions may re- 
sult in anaphora crossing sentence boundaries. To 
maintain text coherence and cohesion (Grodzin- 
sky et al, 1993) an anaphor is replaced by its ref- 
erent if the containing sentence is split. 
Lexica l  Simpl i f ier The lexical simplifier 
(based on (Devhn, 1999; Devlin and Tait, 1998)) 
replaces content words with simpler synonyms. 
It first retrieves a set of synonyms for each word 
from WordNet (Miller et al, 1993), then, accord- 
ing to the user's desired level of simplification, the 
original word plus a percentage of the synonym 
list are looked up in the Oxford Psycholinguistic 
Database (Quinlan, 1992) for the corresponding 
Kucera-Francis frequencies. The word with the 
highest frequency is selected. 
Morpho log ica l  Generator  Simplification 
works on the inflectionally analysed text, so 
the last stage is morphological generation. The 
generator is simply an inverted version of the 
morphological analyser described above. The 
inversion is performed automatically (Minnen and 
Carroll, Submitted), so any improvements made 
to the analyser are reflected in the generator at 
no extra cost. Finally, inter-word spelling changes 
(e.g. a apple ---* an apple), auxiliary reduction, 
etc. are performed. 
3 Eva luat ion  
We will perform an experimental evaluation of the 
system with the help of aphasic participants who 
are matched to the extent hat none display visu- 
ally related reading difficulties, which would con- 
found the results, and all possess a sufficiently 
high reading ability--determined at the time of 
the experiment by using an aphasia assessment 
battery. As the system is a general tool aimed at 
3Semantically reversible sentences such as The boy 
was kissed by the girl are even more difficult, since 
either noun phrase could be the subject. 
all aphasics, the participants will not be screened 
for aphasia type. The readability of the simpli- 
fied text and the usability of the system will be 
assessed by observation and interview; questions 
will be posed to gauge subjects' comprehension f 
both explicit and implicit material. 
References  
B. Baldwin. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision coref- 
erence with limited knowledge and linguistic re- 
sources. In Proceedings of a Workshop sponsored 
by the A CL (Operational Factors in Practical, Ro- 
bust Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts), 
Universidad Nacional de Educacion a Distancia, 
Madrid, Spain. 
E. Briscoe and J. Carroll. 1995. Developing and eval- 
uating a probabilistic LR parser of part-of-speech 
and punctuation labels. In Proceedings of the ~th 
A CL/SIGPARSE International Workshop on Pars- 
ing Technologies, pages 48-58. 
J. Carroll and E. Briscoe. 1996. Apportioning de- 
velopment effort in a probabilistic LR parsing sys- 
tem through evaluation. In Proceedings of the 
A CL/SICDA T Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, pages 92-100. 
R. Chandrasekar, C. Doran, and B. Srinivas. 1996. 
Motivations and methods for text simplification. 
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Compu- 
tational Linguistics (COLING-96). 
H. Cunningham, Y. Wilks, and R. Gaizauskas. 1996. 
CATE--a general architecture for text engineering. 
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Computa- 
tional Linguistics (COLINC-96). 
S. Devlin and J. Tait. 1998. The use of a psy- 
cholinguistic database in the simplification of text 
for aphasic readers. In J. Nerbonne. Linguistic 
Databases. Lecture Notes. Stanford, USA: CSLI 
Publications. 
S. Devlin. 1999. Simplifying natural language text for 
aphasic readers. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of 
Sunderland, UK. 
D. Elworthy. 1994. Does Baum Welch re-estimation 
help taggers? In Proceedings of the 4th ACL Con- 
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
pages 53-58. 
Y. Grodzinsky, K. Wexler, Y. Chien, S. Marakovitz, 
and J. Solomon. 1993. The breakdown of binding 
relations. Brain and Language, 45(3):396-422. 
G. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Cross, 
K. Miller, and R. Tengi. 1993. Five papers on 
WordNet. Technical report, Princeton University, 
Princeton, N.J. 
G. Minnen and J. Carroll. Submitted. Fast and ro- 
bust morphological generation in a practical NLP 
system. 
M. Osborne. Submitted. Minimum description 
length-based models for practical grammar induc- 
tion. 
P. Quinlan. 1992. The Oxford Psycholinguistic 
Database. Oxford University Press. 
270 
