Proceedings ofEACL '99 
Determinat ion  of Syntact i c  Funct ions  in Es ton ian  Const ra in t  
Grammar  
Kaili Mfifirisep 
Inst i tute of Computer  Science 
University of Tartu  
Liivi 2, 50409 Tar tu  
ESTONIA 
kai l i~ut.ee 
Abstract 
This article describes the current state 
of syntactic analysis of Estonian using 
Constraint Grammar. Constraint Gram- 
mar framework divides parsing into two 
different modules: morphological disam- 
biguation and determination of syntac- 
tic functions. This article focuses on the 
last module in detail. If the morphologi- 
cal disambiguator achieves the precision 
more than 85% and error rate is smaller 
than 2% then 80-88% of words becomes 
syntactically unambiguous. The error 
rate of parser is 1-4% depending on the 
ambiguity rate of input. The main goal 
of this work is to elaborate an efficient 
parser for Estonian and annotate the 
Corpus of Estonian Written Texts syn- 
tactically. It is the first attempt to write 
a parser for Estonian. 
1 Introduction 
The main idea of the Constraint Grammar (Karls- 
son, 1990) is that it determines the surface-level 
syntactic analysis of the text which has gone 
through prior morphological nalysis. The process 
of syntactic analysis consists of three stages: mor- 
phological disambiguation, identification ofclause 
boundaries, and identification of syntactic func- 
tions of words. This article focuses on the last 
module in detail. Grammatical features of words 
are presented in the forms of tags which are at- 
tached to words. The tags indicate the inflectional 
and derivational properties of the word and the 
word class membership, the tags attached uring 
the last stage of the analysis indicate its syntactic 
functions. The underlying principle in determin- 
ing both the morphological interpretation a d the 
syntactic functions is the same: first all the pos- 
sible labels are attached to words and then the 
ones that do not fit the context are removed by 
applying special rules or constraints. Constraint 
Grammar consists of hand written rules which by 
checking the context decide whether an interpre- 
tation is correct or has to be removed. 
Constraint Grammar seemed to suit best for the 
analysis of Estonian texts because its mechanism 
is simple and easily implementable, it can be well 
adapted for the Estonian language, it is at the 
same time sufficiently reliable (robust) and the re- 
sulting syntactic analysis that the Grammar gives 
suits various practical applications. 
2 Syntactic Analysis of Estonian 
The Estonian language is a Finno-Ugric language 
and has got a rich structure of declensional nd 
conjugational forms. The order of sentence con- 
stituents in Estonian is relatively free and influ- 
enced more by semantic and pragmatic factors. 
For morphological nalysis of Estonian, we use 
the morphological nalyser ESTMORF (Kaalep, 
1997) that assigns adequate morphological de- 
scriptions to about 98% of tokens in a text. Mor- 
phologically analysed text is disambiguated by 
Constraint Grammar disambiguator f Estonian. 
The development of disambiguator is in process 
but 85-90% of words become morphologically un- 
ambiguous and the error rate of this disambigua- 
tot is less than 2% (Puolakainen, 1998). 
All the syntactic information isgiven by syntac- 
tic tags in constraint grammar framework. The 
syntactic tags of Estonian Constraint Grammar 
(ESTCG) are derived from tag set of English 
Constraint Grammar (ENGCG) (Voutilainen et 
al., 1992) with some modifications considering the 
specialities of Estonian. These tags are attached 
to words by 175 morphosyntactic mapping rules. 
After this step of parsing there are approximately 
3.8 tags per word. 
After the mapping operation syntactic con- 
straints are applied. ESTCG contains 800 syntac- 
tic constraints. In fact, nearly half of them treat 
291 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
the attributes. It can be explained by the fact that 
there are 12 types of attributes in ESTCG and the 
attribute tags are also added to almost every word 
in sentence (except finite verbs and conjunctions). 
3 Resul ts  
To evaluate the performance of parser I use two 
types of corpora. Training corpus is used for for- 
mulating rules and preliminary testing. After test- 
ing I improve rules so that most errors will be 
fixed next time. Benchmark corpus is used only 
for evaluating parser. Both types of corpora con- 
sist of fiction texts. The training corpus contains 
4 texts of 2000 words from different Estonian writ- 
ers. Benchmark corpus consists of 2000 word. I 
used these corpora in two experiments. In the first 
experiment (experiment A) I tested only the syn- 
tactic function detecting part of grammar and I 
supposed that the input text is ideally morpho- 
logically analysed and disambiguated, this means 
that all words are morphologically correct and 
unambiguous. For this experiment both corpora 
were manually morphologically disambiguated. In 
the second experiment (experiment B) I used the 
same corpora but they were disambiguated au- 
tomatically. In this case the disambiguator made 
2% errors and left 13% of words ambiguous, 1% of 
words were unknown for morphological nalyser. 
The precision and recall of ESTCG parser are 
shown in table 1. 
Table 1. Recall and precision. 
Corpus Recall Precision 
A Training 99,12% 83,76% 
A Benchmark 98,12% 85,00% 
B Training 95,76% 74,34% 
B Benchmark 96,58% 76,52% 
The big number of errors in B experiment can 
be explained by the fact that I wrote prelimi- 
nary grammar ules using only manually disam- 
biguated corpora nd the work on correcting rules 
using more ambiguous input is still in process. As 
I mentioned before the input was ambiguous and 
erroneous in this experiment and this caused error 
rate of 3%. 
The errors in manually disambiguated corpora 
are mostly caused by ellipsis, some errors occurred 
during determination f apposition and the third 
biggest group of errors exists in sentences there 
one clause divides the other into two parts. 
In experiment A, 86-88% of words become syn- 
tactically unambiguous, and in experiment B, the 
.corresponding umbers are 80-82%. In both ex- 
periment less than 0,5% of words have 5-6 syntac- 
tic tags. 
It is very difficult to distinguish adverbial at- 
tributes and adverbials. Approximately 6% of 
analysed words have both labels. This is almost 
the same problem as PP-attachment in English 
but additionally it is possible to use both premod- 
ifying and postmodifying adverbial attributes in 
Estonian. Of course the PP-attachment problem 
is also existent. The other hard problem is the dis- 
tinction of genitive attributes and objects. If two 
or more nouns in genitive case are situated side by 
side then these words remain usually ambiguous, 
e.g . . . .  siis vabastab kohus tema vara hooldaja 
j~irelevalve alt. / ... then free-SG3 court-NOM 
he-GEN property-GEN trustee-GEN supervision- 
GEN from-POSTP / '... then the court frees his 
property from the supervision of trustee.' 
4 Conc lus ions  
In this paper I described my work on the syntac- 
tic part of Estonian Constraint Grammar parser. 
The error rate of parser is 1-4% depending on am- 
biguity rate of input. 80-88% of words become 
syntactically unambiguous. 
The most exhaustive Constraint Grammar is 
written for English. Timo J~rvinen, the author of 
syntactic part of ENGCG, reported that the er- 
ror rate is 2 - 2,5% and ambiguity rate ca 15% 
(J~rvinen, 1994). Of course the Estonian and 
English are too different languages and the com- 
parison of performance of parsers do not help to 
draw any fundamental conclusions. But I really 
hope that the Estonian parser achieves nearly the 
same performance very soon. The further work 
will focus on decreasing the error rate and using 
statistical analysis for generating new rules. 
References 
Timo J~irvinen. 1994. Annotating 200 Million 
Words: The Bank of English Project. In Proceed- 
ings of COLING-94. Vol. 1,565-568, Kyoto. 
Heiki-Jaan Kaalep. 1997. An Estonian Mor- 
phological Analyser and the Impact of a Corpus 
on its Development. Computers and Humanities, 
31(2):115-133. 
Fred Karlsson. 1990. Constraint Grammar as a 
framework for parsing running text. Proceedings 
of COLING-90. Vol. 3, 168-173, Helsinki. 
Tiina Puolakainen. 1998. Developing Con- 
straint Grammar for Morphological Disambigua- 
tion of Estonian. Proceedings of DIALOGUE'98. 
Vol. 2, 626-630, Kazan. 
Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkil~i and Arto 
Anttila. 1992. Constraint Grammar of English. A 
Performance Oriented Introduction. Publications 
21, Department ofGeneral Linguistics, University 
of Helsinki. 
292 
