Proceedings of EACL '99 
A Corpus-Based Approach to Deriving Lexical Mappings 
Mark  Stevenson  
Depar tment  of Computer  Science, 
University of Sheffield, 
Regent Court,  211 Portobel lo  Street,  
Sheffield S1 4DP 
United K ingdom 
marks?dcs,  he f .  ac .  uk 
Abst ract  
This paper proposes a novel, corpus- 
based, method for producing mappings 
between lexical resources. Results from 
a preliminary experiment using part of 
speech tags suggests this is a promising 
area for future research. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Dictionaries are now commonly used resources in 
NLP systems. However, different lexical resources 
are not uniform; they contain different ypes of 
information and do not assign words the same 
number of senses. One way in which this prob- 
lem might be tackled is by producing mappings 
between the senses of different resources, the "dic- 
tionary mapping problem". However, this is a 
non-trivial problem, as examination of existing 
lexical resources demonstrates. Lexicographers 
have been divided between "lumpers', or those 
who prefer a few general senses, and "splitters" 
who create a larger number of more specific senses 
so there is no guarantee that a word will have the 
same number of senses in different resources. 
Previous attempts to create lexical mappings 
have concentrated on aligning the senses in pairs 
of lexical resources and based the mapping de- 
cision on information in the entries. For ex- 
ample, Knight and Luk (1994) merged WordNet 
and LDOCE using information in the hierarchies 
and textual definitions of each resource. 
Thus far we have mentioned only mappings 
between dictionary senses. However, it is possible 
to create mappings between any pair of linguistic 
annotation tag-sets; for example, part of speech 
tags. We dub the more general class lexical map- 
pings, mappings between two sets of lexical an- 
notations. One example which we shall consider 
further is that of mappings between part of speech 
tags sets. 
This paper shall propose a method for produ- 
cing lexical mappings based on corpus evidence. It 
is based on the existence of large-scale xical an- 
notation tools such as part of speech taggers and 
sense taggers, several of which have now been de- 
veloped, for example (Brill, 1994)(Stevenson a d 
Wilks, 1999). The availability of such taggers 
bring the possibility of automatically annotating 
large bodies of text. Our proposal is, briefly, to 
use a pair of taggers with each assigning annota- 
tions from the lexical tag-sets we are interested in
mapping. These taggers can then be applied to, 
the same, large body of text and a mapping de- 
rived from the distributions of the pair of tag-sets 
in the corpus. 
2 Case  Study  
In order to test this approach we attempted to 
map together two part of speech tag-sets. We 
chose this form of linguistic annotation because 
it is commonly used in NLP systems and reliable 
taggers are readily available. 
The tags sets we shall examine are the set used 
in the Penn Tree Bank (PTB) (Marcus et al, 
1993) and the C5 tag-set used by the CLAWS 
part-of-speech tagger (Garside, 1996). The PTB 
set consists of 48 annotations while the C5 uses a 
larger set of 73 tags. 
A portion of the British National Corpus 
(BNC), consisting of nearly 9 million words, was 
used to derive a mapping. One advantage ofusing 
the BNC is that it has already been tagged with 
C5 tags. The first stage was to re-tag our corpus 
using the Brill tagger (Brill, 1994). This produces 
a bi-tagged corpus in which each token has two an- 
notations. For example ponders/VBZ/VVZ, which 
represents he token is ponders assigned the Brill 
tag VBZ and VVZ C5 tag. 
The bi-tagged corpus was used to derive a pair 
of mappings; the word mapping and the tag map- 
ping. To construct he word mapping from the 
PTB to C5 we look at each token-PTB tag pair 
285 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
and found the C5 tag which occurs with it most 
frequently. The tag mapping does not consider 
tokens so, for example, the PTB to C5 tag map- 
ping looks at each PTB tag in turn to find the C5 
tag with which it occurs most frequently in the 
corpus. The C5 to PTB mappings were derived 
by reversing this process. 
In order to test our method we took a text 
tagged with one of the two tag-sets used in our 
experiments and translate that tagging to the 
other. We then compare the newly annotated text 
against some with "gold standard" tagging. It is 
trivial to obtain text annotated with C5 tags us- 
ing the BNC. Our evaluation of the C5 to PTB 
mapping shall operate by tagging a text using the 
Brill tagger, using the derived mapping to trans- 
late the annotations to C5 tags and compare the 
annotations produced with those in the BNC text. 
However, it is more difficult to obtain gold stand- 
ard text for evaluating the mapping in the reverse 
direction since we do not have access to a part of 
speech tagger which assigns C5 tags. That is, we 
cannot annotate a text with C5 tags, use our map- 
ping to translate these to PTB tags and compare 
against he manual annotations from the corpus. 
Instead of tagging the unannotated text we use 
the existing C5 tags and translate those to PTB 
tags. Each approach to producing old standard 
data has problems and advantages. The Brill tag- 
ger has a reported error rate of 3% and so cannot 
be expected to produce perfectly annotated text. 
However, when we tag the text with PTB tags and 
use the mapping to translate these taggings to C5 
annotations we have no way to determine whether 
erroneous C5 tags were produced by errors in the 
Brill tagging or the mapping. 
Our test corpus was a text from the BNC con- 
sisting of 40,397 tokens. Both word and tag map- 
pings were created in each direction (PTB to C5 
and C5 to PTB). To apply the tag mapping we 
simply used it to convert he assigned annotation 
from one tag-set o the other. However, when the 
word mapping is applied there is the danger that 
a word-tag pair may not appear in the mapping 
and, if this is the case, the tag mapping is used as 
a default map. 
The results from our evaluation are shown in 
Table 1. We can see that the C5 to PTB word 
mapping produces impressive results which are 
close to the theoretical upper bound of 97% for 
the task. In addition the word mapping in the 
opposite direction is correct for 95% of tokens. 
Although the results for the word mappings in 
each direction are quite similar, there is a signific- 
ant difference in the performances of the default 
\[ Type l 
Word 
Tag 
Direction 
C5toPTB PTBtoC5 
97% 95% 
86% 74% 
Table 1: Mapping results 
mappings, 86% and 74%. Analysis suggests that 
the PTB to C5 default mapping is less successful 
than the one which operates in the opposite dir- 
ection because it attempts to reproduce the tags 
in a fine-grained set from a more general one. 
3 Conc lus ion  and Future  Work  
This paper considered the possibility of producing 
mappings between dictionary senses using auto- 
matically annotated corpora. A case-study using 
part of speech tags suggested this may be a prom- 
ising area for future research. 
Our next step in this research shall be to extend 
our approach to map together dictionary senses. 
The reported experiment using part of speech tags 
assumed a one-to-one mapping between tag sets 
and, while this may be reasonable in this situ- 
ation, it may not hold when dictionary senses are 
being mapped. Future research is planned into 
ways of deriving mappings without this restric- 
tion. In addition, we will also explore methods 
for deriving mappings when corpus data is sparse. 
References 
E. Brill. 1994. Some advances in transformation- 
based part of speech tagging. In AAAI-94, 
Seattle, WA. 
R. Garside. 1996. The robust tagging of unres- 
tricted text: the BNC experince. In J. Thomas 
and M. Short, editors, Using corpora for lan- 
guage research: Studies in Honour of Geoffrey 
Leach. 
K. Knight and S. Luk. 1994. Building a large 
knowledge base for machine translation. In 
AAAI-94, Seattle, WA. 
M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. Marcinkiewicz. 
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of Eng- 
lish: The Penn Tree Bank. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 19. 
M. Stevenson and Y. Wilks. 1999. Combining 
weak knowledge sources for sense disambigu- 
ation. In IJCAI-99, Stockholm, Sweden. (to 
appear). 
286 
