Proceedings of EACL '99 
Encoding a Parallel Corpus for Automat ic  Terminology 
Extract ion 
Johann Gamper 
European Academy Bolzano/Bozen 
Weggensteinstr. 12/A, 39100 Bolzano/Bozen, Italy 
j gamper@eurac, edu 
Abstract 
We present a status report about an 
ongoing research project in the field 
of (semi-)automatic terminology acquisi- 
tion at the European Academy Bolzano. 
The main focus will be on encoding a
text corpus, which serves as a basis for 
applying term extraction programq. 
1 Introduction 
Text corpora are valuable resources in all areas 
dealing with natural anguage processing in one 
form or another. Terminology is one of these 
fields, where researchers explore domain-specific 
language material to investigate rminological is-
sues. The manual acquisition of terminological 
data from text material is a very work-intensive 
and error-prone task. Recent advances in auto- 
matic corpus analysis favored a modern form of 
terminology acquisition: (1) a corpus is a col- 
lection of language material in machine-readable 
form and (2) computer programs can the cor- 
pus for terminologically relevant information and 
generate lists of term candidates which have to 
be post-edited by humans. The following project 
CATEx adopts this approach. 
2 The CATEx Project 
Due to the equal status of the Italian and the Ger- 
man language in South Tyrol, legal and admin- 
istrative documents have to be written in both 
languages. A prerequisite for high quality trans- 
lations is a consistent and comprehensive bilingual 
terminology, which also forms the basis for an in- 
dependent German legal language which reflects 
the Italian legislation. The first systematic effort 
in this direction was initiated a few years ago at 
the European Academy Bolzano/Bozen with the 
goal to compile an Italian/German legal and ad- 
ministrative t rminology for South Tyrol. 
The CATEx (C_omputer A_.ssisted Terminology 
E___~raction) project emerged from the need to sup- 
port and improve, both qualitatively and quan- 
titatively, the manual acquisition of terminologi- 
cal data. Thus, the main objective of CATEx is 
the development of a computational framework for 
(semi-)antomatic erminology acquisition, which 
consists of four modules: a parallel text corpus, 
term-extraction programs, a term bank linked to 
the text corpus, and a user-interface for browsing 
the corpus and the term bank. 
3 Building a Parallel Text Corpus 
Building the text corpus comprises the following 
tasks: corpus design, preprocessing, encoding pri- 
mary data, and encoding linguistic information. 
3.1 Corpus Design and Preprocessing 
Corpus design selects a collection of texts which 
should be included in the corpus. An important 
criteria is that the texts represent a realistic model 
of the language to be studied (Bowker, 1996). In 
its current form, our corpus contains only one sort 
of texts, namely the bilingual version of Italian 
laws such as the Civil Code. A particular feature 
of our corpus, which contains both German and 
Italian translations, is the structural equivalence 
of the original text and its translation down to the 
sentence level, i.e. each sentence in the original 
text has a corresponding one in the translation. 
The corpus is one of the largest special anguage 
corpora. It contains ca. 5 Mio. words and 35,898 
(66,934) different Italian (German) word forms. 
In the preprocessing phase we correct (mainly 
OCR) errors in the raw text material and produce 
a unified electronic version in such a way as to 
simplify the programs for consequent annotation. 
3.2 Encoding Pr imary Data and 
Linguistic Annotation 
Corpus encoding successively enriches the raw 
text material with explicitly encoded informa- 
275 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
tion. We apply the Corpus Encoding Standard 
(CES), which is an application of SGML and pro- 
vides guidelines for encoding corpora that are used 
in language ngineering applications (Ide et al, 
1996). CES distinguishes primary data (raw text 
material) and linguistic annotation (information 
resulting from linguistic analyses of the raw texts). 
Primary data encoding covers the markup of 
relevant objects in the raw text material. It com- 
prises documentation i formation (bibliographic 
information, etc.) and structural information 
(sections, lists, footnotes, references, etc.). These 
pieces of information are required to automati- 
cally extract the source of terms, e.g. "Codice 
Civile, art. 12". Structural information helps also 
to browse the corpus; this is important in our case, 
since the corpus will be linked to the terminolog- 
ical database. 
Encoding linguistic annotation enriches the pri- 
mary data with information which results from 
linguistic analyses of these data. We consider the 
segmentation of texts into sentences and words, 
the assignment/disambiguation of lemmas and 
part-of-speech (POS) tags, and word alignment. 
Due to the structural equivalence of our paral- 
lel texts, we can easily build a perfectly sentence- 
aligned corpus which is useful for word alignment. 
The above mentioned linguistic information is re- 
quired for term extraction, which is mainly in- 
spired by the work in (Dagan and Church, 1997). 
The monolingual recognition of terms is based on 
POS patterns which characterize valid terms and 
the recognition of translation equivalents i based 
on bilingual word alignment. Lemmas abstract 
from singular/plural variations, which is useful for 
alignment and term recognition. 
4 D iscuss ion  
The general approach we adopted in the prepro- 
cessing and primary data encoding phases was 
to pass the raw texts through a sequence of fil- 
ters. Each filter adds some small pieces of new 
information and writes a logfile in case of doubt. 
The output and the logfile in turn are used to 
improve the filter programs in order to minimize 
manual post-editing. This modular bootstrapping 
approach as advantages over huge parameteriz- 
able programs: filters are relatively simple and can 
be partially reused or easily adapted for texts with 
different formats; tuning the filters becomes less 
complex; when recovering from a previous tage 
the loss of work is minimized. The filters have 
been implemented in Perl which, due to its pat- 
tern matching mechanism via regular expressions, 
is a very powerful language for such applications. 
For the linguistic annotation we use the MUL- 
TEXT tools available from http://www.lpl.univ- 
aix.fr/projects/multext. We already have exten- 
sive experience with the tokenlzer MtSeg which 
distinguishes 11 classes of tokens, such as abbrevi- 
ations, dates, various punctuations, etc. The cus- 
tomization of MtSeg via language-specific resource 
files has been done in a bootstrapping process im- 
ilar to the filter programs. An evaluation of 10% 
of the Civil Code (~ 28,000 words) revealed only 
one type of tokenization error: a full stop that is 
not part of an abbreviation and is followed by an 
uppercase letter is recognized as end-of-sentence 
marker, e.g. in "6. Absatz". This kind of error is 
unavoidable in German if we refuse to mark such 
patterns as compounds. 
Currently we are preparing the lemmatization 
and the POS tagging by using MtLex. MtLex is 
equipped with an Italian and a German lexicon 
which contain 138,823 and 51,010 different word 
forms respectively. To include the 15,013 (58,217) 
new Italian (German) word forms in our corpus 
the corresponding lexicons have been extended. 
The creation of the Italian lexicon took 2 MM. 
Future work will include the completion of the 
linguistic annotation. The MULTEXT tagger Mr- 
Tag will be used for the disambiguation of POS 
tags. Word alignment still requires the study 
of various approaches, e.g. (Dagan et al, 1993; 
Melamed, 1997). Finally, we are working on a so- 
phisticated interface to navigate through parallel 
documents to disseminate the text corpus before 
terminology extraction has been completed. 
References  
Lynne Bowker. 1996. Towards a corpus- 
based approach to terminography. Terminol- 
ogy, 3(1):27-52. 
Ido Dagan and Kenneth W. Church. 1997. Ter- 
might: Coordinating humans and machines 
in bilingual terminology acquisition. Machine 
Translation, 12:89-107. 
Ido Dagan, Kenneth W. Church, and William A. 
Gale. 1993. Robust bilingual word alignment 
for machine aided translation. In Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora: Aca- 
demic and Industrial Perspectives, pages 1-8. 
Nancy Ide, Greg Priest-Dorman, and Jean 
V~ronis. 1996. Corpus encoding standard. See 
http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES/. 
I. Dan Melamed. 1997. A portable algorithm for 
mapping bitext correspondence. In Proceedings 
of ACL/EACL-97, pages 302-312. 
276 
