Proceedings of EACL '99 
Robust and Flexible Mixed-Initiative Dialogue 
for Telephone Services 
Relafio Gil, Jos~ ~ and Tapias, Daniel and Gancedo, Mar ia C. 
Charfuelan, Marcela ~ and Hern?ndez, Luis A. 
Speech Technology Group, Telefdnica Investigacihn y Desarrollo, S.A. 
C. Emilio Vargas, 6 28043 - Madrid (Spain) 
Teh34.1.549500. Fax:34.1.3367350. e-mail:jretanio@gaps.ssr.upm.es 
Abstract 
In this work, we present an experimental 
analysis of a Dialogue System for the au- 
tomatization of simple telephone services. 
Starting from the evaluation of a preliminar 
version of the system we 1 conclude the ne- 
cessity to desing a robust and flexible system 
suitable to have to have different dialogue 
control strategies depending on the charac- 
teristics of the user and the performance of
the speech recognition module. Experimen- 
tal results following the PARADISE frame- 
work show an important improvement both 
in terms of task success and dialogue cost 
for the proposed system. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In this contribution we present some improve- 
ments on the design of a Dialogue Management 
System for the automatization of simple telephone 
tasks in a PABX environment (automatic name 
dialing, voice messaging, ... ). From the point 
of view of its functionality, our system is a very 
simple one because there is no need of advanced 
Plan Recognition strategies or General Problem 
Solving methods. However we think that even for 
these kind of dialogue sytems there is still a long 
way to demonstrate their usability in real situa- 
tions by the "general public". 
In our work we will concentrate on systems 
designed for the telephone line and for a wide 
range of potential users. Therefore our evalua- 
tions will be done taking into account different lev- 
els of speech recognition performance and user be- 
haviours. In particular we will propose and eval- 
uate strategies directed to increase the robustness 
against recognition errors and flexibility to deal 
with a wide range of users. We will use the PAR- 
ADISE evaluation framework (Walker et al, 1998) 
to analyze both task success and agent dialogue 
behaviour elated to subjective user satisfaction. 
1~ Dep. SSR. ETSIT-UPM Spain 
2 ROBUST AND FLEXIBLE  
SYSTEM 
Following the classification of Dialogue Systems 
proposed by Allen (Allen, 1997), our baseline clia- 
logue system could be described as a system with 
topic-based performance capabilities, adaptive 
single task, a minimal pair clarification/correction 
dialogue manager and fixed mixed-initiative. 
One of the most important objectives of our di- 
alogue manager has been the implementation of a 
collaborative dialogue model. So the system has 
to be able to understand all the user actions, in 
whatever order they appear, and even if the focus 
of the dialogue has been changed by the user. In 
order to achieve this, we organize the information 
in an information tree, controlled by a task knowl- 
edge interpreter and we let the data to partici- 
pate in driving the dialogue. However, to control 
a mixed-initiative strategy we use three separate 
sources of information: the user data, the world 
knowledge mbedded in the task structure and the 
general dialogue acts. 
Therefore, from this preliminar evaluation of 
the system we found that in order to increase 
its permormance two major points should be ad- 
dressed: a) robustness against recognition and 
parser errors, and b) more flexibility to be able 
to deal with different user models. We designed 
four complementary strategies to improve its per- 
formance: 
1. To estimate the performance of the speech recog- 
nition module. This was done from a count on 
the number of corrections during previous inter- 
actions with the same user. 
2. To classify each user as belonging to group A or B 
that will be described later in the Experimental 
Results section. This was done combining a nor- 
malized average number of utterances per task 
and the amount of information in each utterance, 
especially at some particular dialogue points (for 
example when answering to the question of our 
previous example). 
287 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
3. To include a control module that from the re- 
sults of steps 1 and 2 defines two different kinds 
of control management allowing a flexible mixed- 
initiative strategy: more user initiative for Group 
A users and high recognition rates, and more 
restictive strategies for Group B users and/or low 
recognition performance. 
All of these strategies have been included in our 
system as it is depicted in Figure 1. 
3 EXPERIMENTAL  RESULTS 
In order to test the improvements over our original 
system (described in (Alvarez et al, 1996)) we de- 
signed a simulated evaluation environment where 
the performance of the Speech Recognition Mod- 
ule (recognition rate) was artificially controlled. 
A Wizard of Oz simulation environment was de- 
signed to obtain different levels of recognition per- 
formance for a vocabulary of 1170 words: 96.4% 
word recognition rate for high performance and 
80% for low performance. A pre-defined single 
fixed mixed-initiative strategy was used in all the 
cases. 
We used an annotated ata base composed of 
50 dialogues with 50 different novice users and 6 
different simple telephone tasks in each dialogue: 
25 dialogues were simulated using 94.6% recogni- 
tion rate and 25 with 80%. Performance results 
were obtained using the PARADISE evaluation 
framework (Walker et al, 1998), determining the 
contributions of task success and dialogue cost to 
user satisfaction. Therefore as task success mea- 
sure me obtained the Kappa coefficient while dia- 
logue cost measures were based on the number of 
users turns. In this case it is important o point 
out that as each tested dialogue is composed of a 
set of six different asks which have quantify differ- 
ent number of turns, the number of turns for each 
task was normalized to it's N(x)  = ~+----~ score 
O" x 
Both Group High ASR 
Lo ASR Hi ASR 
0.68 0.81 1 0.61 
User Turn 7.3 5.4 4.2 6.9 
Satisf 26.4 30.1 35 .4  25.2 
Table 1: Shows means results for both group in low 
and high ASR. And separately for each Group A and 
B, only in high ASR situation 
User satisfaction in Table 1 was obtained as a 
cumulative satisfaction score for each dialogue by 
summing the scores of a set of questions imilar 
t,o those proposed in (Walker et al, 1998). The 
ANOVA for Kappa, the cost measure and user sat- 
isfaction demostrated a significant effect of ASR 
performance. As it could be predicted, we found 
that in all cases a low recognition rate corresponds 
to a dramatical decrease in the absolute number 
of suscessfully completed tasks and an important 
increase in the average number of utterances. 
However we also found that in high ASR situ- 
ation the task success measure of Kappa was sur- 
prisingly low. 
A closer inspection of the dialogues in Table 1 
revealed that this low performance under high 
ASR situations was due to the presence of two 
groups of users. A first group, Group A, showed 
a "fluent" interaction with the system, similar to 
the one supposed by the mixed-initiative strategy 
(for example, as an answer to the question of the 
system "do you want to do any other task?", these 
users could answer something like "yes, I would 
like to send a message to John Smith"). While 
the other group of users, Group B, exibited a very 
restrictive interaction with the system (for exam- 
ple, a short answer "yes" for the same question). 
As a conclusion of this first evaluation we found 
that in order to increase the permormance of our 
baseline system, two major points should be ad- 
dressed: a) robustness against recognition and 
parser errors, and b) more flexibility to be able 
to deal with different user models. 
Therefore we designed an adaptive strategy to 
adapt our dialogue manager to Group A or B of 
users and to High and Low ASR situations. The 
adaptation was done based on linear discrimina- 
tion, as it is ilustrated in Figure 2, using both the 
average number of turns and recognition errors 
from the two first tasks in each dialogue. 
Low ASR 
Both Gr. 
0.71 
User Turn 7.2 
Satisfaction 26.9 
High ASR 
1 0.83 
5.3 6.1 
32.1 29.4 
Table 2: Shows means results for each Group in high 
ASR situations and for both in low ASR. 
Table 2 shows mean results for each Group A 
and B of users for High ASR performance, and 
for all users in Low ASR situations. These results 
show a more stable behaviour of the system, that 
is, less difference in performance between users of 
Group A and Group B and, although to a lower 
extend, between high and low recognition rates. 
4 CONCLUSIONS 
The main conclusion of the work is the necessity 
to design adaptive dialogue management strate- 
gies to make the system robust against recogniton 
performance and different user behaviours. 
288 
Proceedings ofEACL '99 
References  
James Allen. 1997. Tutorial: Dialogue Modeling. 
uno, ACL/ERACL Workshop on Spoken Dia- 
logue System, Madrid, Spain. 
J. Alvarez, J. Caminero, C. Crespo, and 
D. Tapias. 1996. The Natural Language Pro- 
cessing Module \]or a Voice Asisted Operator at 
Tele\]oniea I?D. uno, ICSLP '96, Philadelphia, 
USA. 
M. Walker, D. Litman, C. Kamm, and A. Abella. 
1998. Evaluating spoken dialog agents with 
PARADISE: Two case studies, uno, Computer 
speech and language. 
289 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
\[ 
PARSER 
TRAKER 
BASIC ACTS 
USERS GROUPS 
SELECTOR 
SYSTEM 
DEFINED 
DIALOG 
GROUPS STRATEG~ 
SELECTOR 
BASIC ACTS 
BACKWARD USER INTENTIONS 
CO-REFERENCE PROCESSOR 
< y PROCESSOR 
\[ SE~'NTIC y 
> GATHERINGS 
PROCESSOR 
>\[ CORRECTION \] 
DETECTOR 
I BEHAVIOUR USER 
ACTS 
\[ = I" 
KNOWLEDGE 
> INTERPRETER 
TASK ACTS 
DIALOG ~ - - - -  
ACTS 
INTERPRETER 
DIALOG ACTS 
L f Historic } 
? REQUEST-REPLY INFOP,$L~TIOF 
? ACTUALIZATION OF DIALOG'S INFORMATION: 
'\\ 
\] 
* REQU~T.REpLy DATA INFO~T~ON 
? STORE DATA INFOI~MATION 
TELEPHONE \] 
APLICATION 
Figure 1: Modules of Robust and Flexible Mixed-Iniciative Dialogue 
r~ 
12 
I0  
. : : .  ~,:: . , . ' o  , .~ : : ; .  ~ . . . .  
I F i 
5 i0  15  20 % ERROR 
RATE 
Figure 2: User clasification 
290 
