! 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
TERM EXTRACTION + TERM CLUSTERING: 
An Integrated Platform for Computer-Aided Terminology 
Didier Bourigault 
ERSS, UMR 5610 CNRS 
Maison de la Recherche 
5 all4es Antonio Machado 
31058 Toulouse cedex, FRANCE 
didier ,  bourigault @wanadoo. f r
Christian Jacquemin 
LIMSI-CNRS 
BP 133 
91403 ORSAY 
FRANCE 
j acquemin@limsi, fr 
Abstract 
A novel technique for automatic the- 
saurus construction is proposed. It is 
based on the complementary use of two 
tools: (1) a Term Extraction tool that 
acquires term candidates from tagged 
corpora through a shallow grammar of 
noun phrases, and (2) a Term Cluster- 
ing tool that groups syntactic variants 
(insertions). Experiments performed on 
corpora in three technical domains yield 
clusters of term candidates with preci- 
sion rates between 93% and 98%. 
1 Computat iona l  Termino logy  
In the domain of corpus-based terminology two 
types of tools are currently developed: tools 
for automatic term extraction (Bourigault, 1993; 
Justeson and Katz, 1995; Daille, 1996; Brun, 
1998) and tools for automatic thesaurus construc- 
tion (Grefenstette, 1994). These tools are ex- 
pected to be complementary in the sense that 
the links and clusters proposed in automatic the- 
saurus construction can be exploited for structur- 
ing the term candidates produced by the auto- 
matic term extractors. In fact, complementarity 
is difficult because term extractors provide mainly 
multi-word terms, while tools for automatic the- 
saurus construction yield clusters of single-word 
terms. 
On the one hand, term extractors focus on 
multi-word terms for ontological motivations: 
single-word terms are too polysemous and too 
generic and it is therefore necessary to provide 
the user with multi-word terms that represent 
finer concepts in a domain. The counterpart of 
this focus is that automatic term extractors yield 
important volumes of data that require structur- 
ing through a postprocessor. On the other hand, 
tools for automatic thesaurus construction focus 
on single-word terms for practical reasons. Since 
they cluster terms through statistical measures 
of context similarities, these tools exploit recur- 
ring situations. Since single-word terms denote 
broader concepts than multi-word terms, they ap- 
pear more frequently in corpora and are therefore 
more appropriate for statistical clustering. 
The contribution of this paper is to propose 
an integrated platform for computer-aided term 
extraction and structuring that results from the 
combination of LEXTER, a Term Extraction tool 
(Bouriganlt et al, 1996), and FASTR 1, a Term 
Normalization tool (Jacquemin et al, 1997). 
2 Components of the Platform for 
Computer-Aided Terminology 
The platform for computer-aided terminology is 
organized as a chain of four modules and the cor- 
responding flowchart is given by Figure 1. The 
modules are: 
POS tagging First the corpus is processed by 
Sylex, a Part-of-Speech tagger. Each word is 
unambiguously tagged and receives a single 
lemma. 
Term Ext ract ion  LEXTER, the term extrac- 
tion tool acquires term candidates from the 
tagged corpus. In a first step, LEXTER ex- 
ploits the part-of-speech categories for ex- 
tracting maximal-length noun phrases. It re- 
lies on makers of frontiers together with a 
shallow grammar of noun phrases. In a sec- 
ond step, LEXTER recursively decomposes 
these maximal-length noun phrases into two 
syntactic onstituents (Head and Expansion). 
Term Cluster ing The term clustering tool 
groups the term candidates produced at the 
* FA  STR can be downloaded 
www. limsi, fr/Individu/j acquemi/FASTK. 
from 
15 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Raw corpus 
P-O-Ssy/exTagging ~ \] 
I 
L,emmatizcd and tagged corpus 
Term Extraction 
LEXTER 
I 
Network of term candidates 
Term Clustering 
FASTR 
J Expert 
\[ Interlace I 
Structured ~rminology ~dal~ 
Figure 1: Overview of the platform for computer- 
aided terminology 
preceding step through a self-indexing proce- 
dure followed by a graph-based classification. 
This task is basically performed by FASTR, 
a term normalizer, that has been adapted to 
the task at hand. 
~F- : !e t ion  The last step of thesaurus construc- 
tion is the validation of automatically ex- 
tracted clusters of term candidates by a ter- 
minologist and a domain expert. The vali- 
dation is performed through a data-base in- 
terface. The links are automatically updated 
through the entire base and a structured the- 
saurus is progressively constructed. 
The following sections provide more details 
about the components and evaluate the quality 
of the terms thus extracted. 
3 Term Ext ract ion  
3.1 Term Ext ract ion  for the  French 
Language 
Term extraction tools perform statistical or/and 
syntactical analysis of text corpora in special- 
ized technical or scientific domains. Term can- 
didates correspond to sequences of words (most 
of the time noun phrases) that are likely to be 
terminological units. These candidates are ulti- 
mately validated as entries by a terminologist in 
charge of building a thesaurus. LEXTER, the 
term extractor, is applied to the French language. 
Since French is a Romance language, the syntac- 
tic structure of terms and compounds i very sim- 
ilar to the structure of non-compound and non- 
terminological noun phrases. For instance, in 
French, terms can contain prepositional phrases 
with determiners such as: paroiNoun deprep /'Det 
uret~reNoun (ureteral wall). Because of this simi- 
larity, the detection of terms and their variants in 
French is more difficult than in the English lan- 
guage. 
The input of our term extraction tool is an un- 
ambiguously tagged corpus. The extraction pro- 
cess is composed of two main steps: Splitting and 
Parsing. 
3.2 Spl i t t ing 
The techniques of shallow parsing implemented 
in the Splitting module detect morpho-syntactical 
patterns that cannot be parts of terminological 
noun phrases and that are therefore likely to in- 
dicate noun phrases boundaries. Splitting tech- 
niques are used in other shallow parsers such as 
(Grefenstette, 1992). In the case of LEXTER, the 
noun phrases which are isolated by splitting are 
not intermediary data; they are not used by any 
other automatic module in order to index or clas- 
sify documents. The extracted noun phrases are 
term candidates which are proposed to the user. 
In such a situation, splitting must be performed 
with high precision. 
In order to process correctly some problem- 
atic splittings, such as coordinations, attribu- 
tive past participles and sequences preposition 
+ determiner, the system acquires and uses 
corpus-based selection restrictions of adjectives 
and nouns (Bourigault et al, 1996). 
For example, in order to disambiguate PP- 
attachments, the system possesses a corpus- 
based list of adjectives which accept a preposi- 
tional argument built with the preposition h (at). 
These selectional restrictions are acquired through 
Corpus-Based Endogenous Learning (CBEL) as 
follows: During a first pass, all the adjectives in a 
predicative position followed by the preposition h
are collected. During a second pass, each time a 
splitting rule has eliminated a sequence beginning 
with the preposition el, the preceding adjective is 
discarded from the list. Empirical analyses con- 
firm the validity of this procedure. More complex 
procedures of CBEL are implemented into LEX- 
TER in order to acquire nouns sub-categorizing 
the preposition h or the preposition sur (on), ad- 
jectives sub-categorizing the preposition de (of), 
past participles ub-categorizing the preposition 
de (of), etc. 
Ultimately, the Splitting module produces a set 
of text sequences, mostly noun phrases, which we 
16 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
refer to as Maximal-Length Noun Phrases (hence- 
forth MLNP). 
3.3 Pars ing 
The Parsing module recursively decomposes the 
maximal-length noun phrases into two syntac- 
tic constituents: a constituent in head-position 
(e.g. bronchial cell in the noun phrase cylindri- 
cal bronchial cell, and cell in the noun phrase 
bronchial cell), and a constituent in expansion po- 
sition (e.g. cylindrical in the noun phrase cylin- 
drical bronchial cell, and bronchial in the noun 
phrase bronchial cell). The Parsing module ex- 
ploits rules in order to extract wo subgroups from 
each MLNP, one in head-position and the other 
one in expansion position. Most of MLNP se- 
quences are ambiguous. Two (or more) binary 
decompositions compete, corresponding to several 
possibilities of prepositional phrase or adjective 
attachment. The disambiguation is performed by 
a corpus-based method which relies on endoge- 
nous learning procedures (Bouriganlt, 1993; Rat- 
naparkhi, 1998). An example of such a procedure 
is given in Figure 2. 
3.4 Network  of  term candidates  
The sub-groups generated by the Parsing module, 
together with the maximal-length noun phrases 
extracted by the Splitting module, are the term 
candidates produced by the Term extraction tool. 
This set of term candidates is represented as a 
network: each multi-word term candidate is con- 
nected to its head constituent and to its expansion 
constituent by syntactic decomposition links. An 
excerpt of a network of term candidates i given 
in Figure 3. Vertical and horizontal links are syn- 
tactic decomposition links produced by the Term 
Extraction tool. The oblique link is a syntactic 
variation link added by the Term Clustering tool. 
The building of the network is especially im- 
portant for the purpose of term acquisition. The 
average number of multi-word term candidates i
8,000 for a 100,000 word corpus. The feedback 
of several experiments in which our Term Extrac- 
tion tool was used shows that the more structured 
the set of term candidates i , the more efficiently 
the validation task is performed. For example, 
the structuring through syntactic decomposition 
allows the system to underscore lists of terms that 
share the same term either in head position or in 
expansion position. Such paradigmatic series are 
frequent in term banks, and initiating the valida- 
tion task by analyzing such lists appears to be a 
very efficient validation strategy. 
This paper proposes a novel technique for en- 
riching the network of term candidates through 
cell 
N 3 
"0 
bronchial cell 
1 
A2N 3 l 
\[ Expansion link 
~ l cylindrical bronchial cell 
cylindrical ell 
- I 
AIN 3 
Expansion link 
bronchial 
A2 
I::>- 
cyf i~cal  
At 
1:>.- 
Figure 3: Excerpt of a network of term candidates. 
the addition of syntactic variation links to syntac- 
tic decomposition links. 
4 Term C lus ter ing  
4.1 Adapt ing  a Normal i za t ion  Too l  
Term normalization is a procedure used in au- 
tomatic indexing for conflating various term oc- 
currences into unique canonical forms. More or 
less linguistically-oriented techniques are used in 
the literature for this task. Basic procedures 
such as (Dillon and Gray, 1983) rely on function 
word deletion, stemming, and alphabetical word 
reordering. For example, the index library cat- 
alogs is transformed into catalog librar through 
such simplification techniques. 
In the platform presented in this paper, term 
normalization is performed by FASTR, a shal- 
low transformational parser which uses linguistic 
knowledge about the possible morpho-syntactic 
transformations of canonical terms (Jacquemin et 
al., 1997). Through this technique syntactically 
and morphologically-related occurrences, uch as 
stabilisation de prix (price stabilization) and sta- 
biliser leurs prix (stabilize their prices), are con- 
tinted. 
Term variant extraction in FASTR differs from 
preceding works such as (Evans et al, 1991) be- 
cause it relies on a shallow syntactic analysis of 
term variations instead of window-based measures 
of term overlaps. In (Sparck Jones and Tait, 1984) 
a knowledge-intensive technique is proposed for 
extracting term variations. This approach has 
however never been applied to large scale term ex- 
traction because it is based on a full semantic anal- 
ysis of sentences. Our approach is more realistic 
because it does not involve large-scale knowledge- 
intensive interpretation of texts that is known to 
be unrealistic. 
Our approach to the clustering of term can- 
17 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Parsing rule 
Noun1 Prep Noun2 Adj -~ 
Parse (1) 
Head: Noum 
Exp.: Nouns Adj 
Head: Nouns 
Exp.: Adj 
Parse (2) 
Head: Noun1 Prep Nouns 
Head: Noun1 
Exp.: Nouns 
Exp.: Adj 
Disambiguation procedure: 
Look in the corpus for non ambiguous occurrences of the sub-groups: 
(a) Noun2 Adj (b) Noun1 Adj (c) Noun1 Prep Noun2 
Then choose: 
if the sub-group (a) has been found, then choose Parse (1) 
else if the sub-groups (b) or (c) have been found, then choose Parse (2) 
else choose Parse (1) 
Figure 2: An ambiguous parsing rule and associated isambiguation procedure 
didates is to group the output of LEXTER, by 
conflating term candidates with other term can- 
didates instead of confiating corpus occurrences 
with controlled terms. Our technique can be seen 
as a kind of self-indexing in which term candidates 
are indexed by themselves through FASTR, for 
the purpose of conflating candidates that are vari- 
ants of each other. Thus, the term candidate cel- 
lule bronchique cylindrique (cylindrical bronchial 
cell) is a variant of the other candidate cellule 
cylindrique (cylindrical cell) because an adjecti- 
val modifier is inserted in the first term. Through 
the self-indexing procedure these two candidates 
belong to the same cluster. 
4.2 Types  of  Syntactic Variation Rules 
Because of this original framework, specific vari- 
ations patterns were designed in order to capture 
inter-term variations. In this study, we restrict 
ourselves to syntactic variations and ignore mor- 
phological modifications. The variations patterns 
can be classified into the following two families: 
Internal insertion of modifiers The insertion 
of one or more modifiers inside a noun phrase 
structure. For instance the following trans- 
formation NAInsAj: 
Noun1 Adj2 
--+ Noun1 ((Adv ? Adj) 1-3 Adv ?) Adj2 
describes the insertion of one to three adjec- 
tival modifiers inside a Noun-Adjective struc- 
ture in French. Through this transforma- 
tion, the term candidate cellule bronchique 
cylindrique (cylindrical bronchial cell) is rec- 
ognized as a variant of the term candidate 
cellule cylindrique (cylindrical cell). Other 
internal modifications account for adverbial 
and prepositional modifiers. 
Preposi t ion switch 8? determiner insertion 
In French, terms, compounds, and noun 
phrases have comparable structures: gen- 
erally a head noun followed by adjectival 
or prepositional modifiers. Such terms may 
vary through lexical changes without signif- 
icant structural modifications. For example 
NPNSynt: 
Noun1 PreI~2 Nouns 
--4 Noun1 ((Prep Det?) ?) Noun3 
accounts for preposition suppressions uch 
as fibre de collaggne/fibre collaggne (colla- 
gen fiber), additions of determiners, and/or 
preposition switches such as rev~tement de 
surface / rev~tement en surface (surface coat- 
ing). 
The complete rule set is shown in Table 1. Each 
transformation given in the first column conflates 
the term structure given in the second column and 
the term structure given in the third column. 
4.3 Clustering 
The output of FASTR is a set of links between 
pairs of term candidates in which the target can- 
didate is a variant of the source candidate. In 
order to facilitate the validation of links by the ex- 
pert, this output is converted into clusters of term 
candidates. The syntactic variation links can be 
considered as the edges of an undirected graph 
whose nodes are the term candidates. A node nl 
representing a term tl is connected to a node n2 
representing t2 if and only if there is a transfor- 
mation T such that T(tl) = t2 or T(t2) = tl ? 
Each connected subgraph Gi of G is considered as 
a cluster of term candidates likely to correspond 
to similar concepts. (A connected subgraph Gi is 
18 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Table 1: Syntactic variation rules exploited by the Term Clustering tool. 
Ident. Base term Variant 
NAInsAv Noun1 Adj2 
NAInsAj Noum Adj2 
NAInsN Noun1 Adj2 
Noun, ((Adv ? Adj) 0-s Adv) Adj2 
Noun1 ((Adv ? Adj) 1-3 Adv ?) Adje 
Noun1 ((Adv ? hdj) ? 
(Prep ? Det ? (Adv ? Adj) ? Noun) (Adv ? Adj) ? Adv ?) Adj2 
ANInsAv Adjl Noun2 (Adv) Adjl Noun2 
NPNSynt 
NPNInsAj 
NPNInsN 
Noun1 Prep2 Noun3 
Noun1 Prep2 Noun3 
Noun1 Prep2 Noun3 
Nounl ((Prep Det?) ?) Noun3 
Noun1 ((Adv ? Adj) ?-3 Prep Det ? (Adv ? Adj)0-3 ) Nouns 
Noun, ((Adv ? Adj) ?-3 (Prep Det?) ? (Adv ? Adj) ?-s Noun 
(Adv ? Adj) ?-3 (Prep Det?) ? (Adv ? Adj)0-3 ) Noun3 
NPDNSynt 
NPDNInsAj 
NPDNInsN 
Noun, Prep2 Det4 Nouns 
Noun, Prep2 Det4 Noun3 
Noun, Prep2 Det4 Noun3 
Noun, ((Prep Det?) ?) Nouns 
NOunl ((Adv ? Adj) ?-3 Prep Det ? (Adv ? Adj)0-3 ) Noun3 
Noun1 ((Adv ? Adj) ?-3 (Prep Det?) ? (Adv ? Adj) ?-3 Noun 
(Adv ? Adj) ?-3 (Prep Det?) ? (Adv ? Adj)0-3 ) Noun3 
nucl~ole souvent pro~minent nucl~ole c ntral pro~minent 
t 3e" '~ nsAv NAInsAj.~'~ t2 
nucldole pro t~~v 
t4 
nucldole parfois pro~rainent 
Figure 4: A sample 4-term cluster. 
such that for every pair of nodes (nl,n2) in Gi, 
there exists a path from nl to n2.) 
For example, tl =nucldole prodminent (promi- 
nent nucleolus), t2 =nucldole central prodminent 
(prominent central nucleolus), t3 =nucldole sou- 
vent prodminent (frequently prominent nucleo- 
lus), and t4 =nucl~ole parfois prodminent (some- 
times prominent nucleolus) are four term candi- 
dates that build a star-shaped 4-word cluster il- 
lustrated by Figure 4. Each edge is labelled with 
the syntactic transformation T that maps one of 
the nodes to the other. 
5 Experiments 
Experiments were made on three different corpora 
described in Table 2. The first two lines of Table 2 
report the size of the corpora and the number 
of term candidates extracted by LEXTER from 
these corpora. The third and fourth lines show 
the number of links between term candidates ex- 
tracted by FASTR and the number of connected 
subgraphs corresponding to these links. Finally, 
the last two lines report statistics on the size of the 
clusters and the ratio of term candidates that be- 
Table 3: Frequencies of syntactic variations. 
\[Menel.\] \[Brouss.\] \[DER\] 
NAInsAv 21% 30% 1% 
NAInsAj 33% 25% 5% 
NAInsN 23% 21% 13% 
ANInsAv 3% 3% 0% 
NPNSynt  2% 2% 18% 
NPNInsAj 6% 11% 8% 
NPNInsN 1% 2% 11% 
NPDNSynt 1% 2% 22% 
NPDNInsAj  8% 2% 11% 
NPDNInsN 2% 2% 11% 
Total 100% 100% 100% 
long to one of the subgraphs produced by the clus- 
tering algorithm. Although the variation rules im- 
plemented in the Term Structuring tool are rather 
restrictive (only syntactic insertion has been taken 
into account), the number of links added to the 
network of term candidates i noticeably high. An 
average rate of 10% of multi-word term candidates 
produced by LEXTER belong to one of the clus- 
ters resulting from the recognition of term variants 
by FASTR. 
Frequencies of syntactic variations are reported 
in Table 3. A screen-shot showing the type of 
validation that is proposed to the expert is given 
by Figure 5. 
6 Expert Evaluation 
Evaluation was performed by three experts, one in 
each domain represented by each corpus. These 
experts had already been involved in the con- 
19 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Table 2: The three corpora exploited in the experiments. 
\[Broussals\] \[DER\] \[Menelas\] 
Domain anatomy pathology nuclear engineering coronarian diseases 
Type of documents medical reports technical reports medical files 
Number of words 40,000 
Number of multi-word term 3,439 
candidates 
Number of variation links 240 
Number of clusters 168 
Maximal size of the clusters 10 
Number of term candidates 438 (12.7%) 
belonging to one cluster 
230,000 110,000 
14,037 10,155 
785 634 
556 448 
13 13 
1,349 (9.6%) 1,173 (11.6%) 
Figure 5: The expert interface for cluster validation 
20 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
struction of terminological products through the 
analysis of the three corpora used in our ex- 
periments: an ontology for a case-memory sys- 
tem dedicated to the diagnosis upport ~n pathol- 
ogy (\[Broussais\]), a semantic dictionary for the 
Menelas Natural Language Understanding sys- 
tem (\[Menelas\]), and a structured thesaurus for a 
computer-assisted t chnical writing tool (\[DER\]). 
The precision rates are very satisfactory (from 
93% to 98% corresponding to error rates of 7% and 
2% given in the last line of Table 4), and show that 
the proposed method must be considered as an 
important progress in corpus-based terminology. 
Only few links are judged as conceptually irrele- 
vant by the experts. For example, image d'embole 
tumorale (image of a tumorous embolus) is not 
considered as a correct variant of image tumorale 
(image of a tumor) because the first occurrence 
refers to an embolus while the second one refers 
to a tumor. 
The experts were required to assess the pro- 
posed links and, in case of positive reply, they 
were required to provide a judgment about the 
actual conceptual relation between the connected 
terms. Although they performed the validation in- 
dependently, the three experts have proposed very 
similar types of conceptual relations between term 
candidates connected by syntactic variation links. 
At a coarse-grained level, they proposed the same 
three types of conceptual relations: 
Synonymy Both connected terms are consid- 
ered as equivalent by the expert: embole 
tumorale (tumorous embolus) / embole vascu- 
laire tumorale (vascular tumorous embolus). 
The preceding example corresponds to a fre- 
quent situation of elliptic synonymy: the no- 
tion of integrated metonymy (Kleiber, 1989). 
In the medical domain, it is a common knowl- 
edge that an embole tumorale is an embole 
vasculaire tumorale, as everyone knows that 
sunflower oil is a synonym of sunflower seed 
oil. 
Gener ic /spec i f i c  re lat ion One of the two 
terms denotes a concept that is finer than 
the other one: cellule dpithdliale cylindrique 
(cylindrical epithelial cell) is a specific type 
of cellule cylindrique (cylindrical cell). 
A t t r ibut ive  re lat ion As in the preceding case, 
there is a non-synonymous semantic relation 
between the two terms. One of them denotes 
a concept richer than the other one because it
carries an additional attributes: a noyau vo- 
lumineux irrdgulier (large irregular nucleus) 
is a noyau irrdgulier (irregular nucleus) that 
is additionally volumineux (large). 
7 Future  Work  
This study shows that the clustering of term can- 
didates through term normalization is a powerful 
technique for enriching the network of term can- 
didates produced by a Term Extraction tool such 
as LEXTER. 
In our approach, term normalization is per- 
formed through the conflation of specific term 
variants. We have focused on syntactic vari- 
ants that involve structural modifications (mainly 
modifier insertions). As reported in (Jacquemin, 
1999), morphological nd semantic variations are 
two other important families of term variations 
which can also be extracted by FASTR. They will 
be accounted for in order to enhance the number 
of clustered term candidates. It is our purpose to 
focus on these two types of variants in the near 
future. 
Acknowledgement  
The authors would like to thank the experts 
for their comments and their evaluations of 
our results: Pierre Zweigenbaum (AP/HP) on 
\[Menelas\], Christel Le Bozec and Marie-Christine 
Janlent (AP/HP) on \[Broussais\], and Henry 
Boccon-Gibod (DER-EDF) on \[DER\]. We are also 
grateful to Henry Boccon-Gibod (DER-EDF) for 
his support o this work. This work was partially 
funded by l~lectriciti@ de France. 
Re ferences  
Didier Bourigault, Isabelle Gonzalez-Mullier, and 
C@cile Gros. 1996. Lexter, a natural anguage 
processing tool for terminology extraction. In 
Seventh EURALEX International Congress on 
Lexicography (EURALEX96), Part II, pages 
771-779. 
Didier Bouriganlt. 1993. An endogeneous corpus- 
based method for structural noun phrase disam- 
biguation. In Proceedings, 6th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics (EA CL '93), pages 81-86, 
Utrecht. 
Caroline Brun. 1998. Terminology finite-state 
preprocessing for computational lfg. In Proceed- 
ings, 36th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 196-200, Mon- 
treal. 
21 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Table 4: Results of the validation. 
\[Broussais\] \[Menelas\] \[DER\] 
Number of variation links proposed by the system 240 634 785 
Number of variation links validated by the expert 240 227 344 
Types of conceptual relation given by the expert 
synonymy 44 (18%) 14 (,6%) 136 (40%) 
generic/specific 96 (40%) 147 (6.5%) 121 (35%) 
attributive 96 (40%) 61 (2'7%) 62 (18%) 
non relevant 4 (2%) 5 (2%) 25 (7%) 
B6atrice Daille. 1996. Study and implementa- 
tion of combined techniques for automatic ex- 
traction of terminology. In Judith L. Klavans 
and Philip Resnik, editors, The Balancing Act: 
Combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches 
to Language, pages 49-66. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 
Martin Dillon and Ann S. Gray. 1983. FASIT: 
A fully automatic syntactically based indexing 
system. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 34(2):99-108. 
David A. Evans, Kimberly Ginther-Webster, 
Mary Hart, Robert G. Lefferts, and Ira A. 
Monarch. 1991. Automatic indexing using se- 
lective NLP and first-order thesauri. In Pro- 
ceedings, Intelligent Multimedia Information 
Retrieval Systems and Management (RIA 0'91), 
pages 624-643, Barcelona. 
Gregory Grefenstette. 1992. A knowledge-poor 
technique for knowledge xtraction from large 
corpora. In Proceedings, 15th Annual Inter- 
national A CM SIGIR Conference on Research 
and Development in Information Retrieval (SI- 
GIR '92), Copenhagen. 
Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in 
Automatic Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Aca- 
demic Publisher, Boston, MA. 
Christian Jacquemin, Judith L. Klavans, and Eve- 
lyne Tzoukermann. 1997. Expansion of multi- 
word terms for indexing and retrieval using 
morphology and syntax. In Proceedings, 35th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics and 8th Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics (ACL - EACL'97), pages 
24-31, Madrid. 
Christian Jacquemin. 1999. Syntagmatic and 
paradigmatic representations of term varia- 
tion. In Proceedings, 37th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(ACL'99), University of Maryland. 
John S. Justeson and Slava M. Katz. 1995. Tech- 
nical terminology: some linguistic properties 
and an algorithm for identification i  text. Nat- 
ural Language Engineering, 1(1):9-27. 
George Kleiber. 1989. Paul est bronzd versus la 
peau de paul est bronzde. Contre une approche 
r6f~rentielle analytique. In Harro Stammerjo- 
harm, editor, Proceedings, Ire colloque interna- 
tional de linguistique slavo-romane, pages 109- 
134, Tiibingen. Gunter Narr Verlag. Reprinted 
in Nominales, A. Colin, Paris, 1995. 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Statistical models 
for unsupervised prepositional phrase attach- 
ment. In Proceedings, 36th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics 
and 17th International Conference on Compu- 
tational Linguistics (COLING-ACL'98), pages 
1079-1085, Montreal. 
Karen Sparck Jones and John I. Tait. 1984. Auto- 
matic search term variant generation. Journal 
of Documentation, 40(1):50-66. 
22 
