Proceedings of EACL '99 
An annotation scheme for discourse-level argumentation 
in research articles 
S imone Teufe l  t and Jean  Car le t ta  f and  Marc  Moens  ~ 
tHCRC Language Techno logy  Group and  
tHuman Communicat ion  Research Cent re  
Div is ion of  In fo rmat ics  
Univers i ty  of Ed inburgh  
S. Teufel@ed. ac. uk, J. Carletta@ed. ac. uk, M. Moens@ed. ac. uk 
Abst ract  
In order to build robust automatic ab- 
stracting systems, there is a need for bet- 
ter training resources than are currently 
available. In this paper, we introduce 
an annotation scheme for scientific ar- 
ticles which can be used to build such 
a resource in a consistent way. The 
seven categories of the scheme are based 
on rhetorical moves of argumentation. 
Our experimental results show that the 
scheme is stable, reproducible and intu- 
itive to use. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
Current approaches to automatic summariza- 
tion cannot create coherent, flexible automatic 
summaries. Sentence selection techniques (e.g. 
Brandow et al, 1995; Kupiec et al 1995) pro- 
duce extracts which can be incoherent and which, 
because of the generality of the methodology, 
can give under-informative r sults; fact extrac- 
tion techniques (e.g. Rau et al, 1989, Young and 
Hayes, 1985) are tailored to particular domains, 
but have not really scaled up from restricted texts 
and restricted omains to larger domains and un- 
restricted text. Sp~irck Jones (1998) argues that 
taking into account the structure of a text will 
help when summarizing the text. 
The problem with sentence selection is that it 
relies on extracting sentences out of context, but 
the meaning of extracted material tends to depend 
on where in the text the extracted sentence was 
found. However, sentence selection still has the 
distinct advantage of robustness. 
We think sentence selection could be improved 
substantially if the global rhetorical context of the 
extracted material was taken into account more. 
Marcu (1997) makes a similar point based on 
rhetorical relations as defined by Rhetorical Struc- 
ture Theory (RST, (Mann and Thompson, 1987)). 
In contrast o this approach, we stress the impor- 
tance of rhetorical moves which are global to the 
argumentation of the paper, as opposed to local 
RST-type moves. For example, sentences which 
describe weaknesses of previous approaches can 
provide a good characterization f the scientific 
articles in which they occur, since they are likely 
to also be a description of the problem that pa- 
per is intending to solve. Take a sentence like 
"Un\]ortunately, this work does not solve problem 
X": if X is a shortcoming in someone lse's work, 
this usually means that the current paper will try 
to solve X. Sentence xtraction methods can lo- 
cate sentences like these, e.g. using a cue phrase 
method (Paice, 1990). 
But a very similar-looking sentence can play a 
completely different argumentative role in a sci- 
entific text: when it occurs in the section "Future 
Work", it might refer to a minor weakness in the 
work presented in the source paper (i.e. of the au- 
thor's own solution). In that case, the sentence is
not a good characterization f the paper. 
Our approach to automatic text summarization 
is to find important sentences in a source text by 
determining their most likely argumentative role. 
In order to create an automatic process to do so, 
either by symbolic or machine learning techniques, 
we need training material: a collection of texts (in 
this case, scientific articles) where each sentence 
is annotated with information about the argumen- 
tative role that sentence plays in the paper. Cur- 
rently, no such resource is available. We developed 
an annotation scheme as a starting point for build- 
ing up such a resource, which we will describe in 
section 2. In section 3, we use content analysis 
techniques to test the annotation scheme's relia- 
bility. 
2 The  annotat ion  scheme 
We wanted the scheme to cover one text type, 
namely research articles, but from different pre- 
sentational traditions and subject matters, so that 
110 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
we can use it for text summarization i  a range of 
fields. This means we cannot rely on similarities 
in external presentation, e.g. section structure and 
typical inguistic formulaic expressions. 
Previous discourse-level annotation schemes 
(e.g. Liddy, 1991; Kircz, 1991) show that infor- 
mation retrieval can profit from added rhetorical 
information in scientific texts. However, the def- 
initions of the categories in these schemes relies 
on domain dependent knowledge like typical re- 
search methodology, and are thus too specific for 
our purposes. 
General frameworks of text structure and argu- 
mentation, like Cohen's (1984) theoretical frame- 
work for general argumentation and Rhetorical 
Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1987), 
are theoretically applicable to many different 
kinds of text types. However, we believe that re- 
stricting ourselves to the text type of research ar- 
ticles will give us an advantage over such general 
schemes, because it will allow us to rely on com- 
municative goals typically occurring within that 
text type. 
STales' (1990) CARS (Creating a Research 
Space) model provides a description at the right 
level for our purposes. STales claims that the 
regularities in the argumentative structure of re- 
search article introductions follow from the au- 
thors' primary communicative goal: namely to 
convince their audience that they have provided 
a contribution to science. From this goal follow 
highly predictable subgoals which he calls argu- 
mentative moves ("recurring and regularized com- 
municative vents"). An example for such a move 
is "Indication of a gap", where the author argues 
that there is a weakness in an earlier approach 
which needs to be solved. 
STales' model has been used extensively by dis- 
course analysts and researchers in the field of En- 
glish for Specific Purposes, for tasks as varied as 
teaching English as a foreign language, human 
translation and citation analysis (Myers, 1992; 
Thompson and Ye, 1991; Duszak, 1994), but al- 
ways for manual analysis by a single person. Our 
annotation scheme is based on STales' model but 
we needed to modify it. Firstly, the CARS model 
only applies to introductions of research articles, 
so we needed new moves to cover the other paper 
sections; secondly, we needed more precise guide- 
lines to make the scheme applicable to reliable an- 
notation for several non-discourse analysts (and 
for potential automatic annotation). 
For the development of our scheme, we used 
computational linguistics articles. The papers in 
our collection cover a challenging range of sub- 
ject matters due to the interdisciplinarity of the 
field, such as logic programming, statistical lan- 
guage modelling, theoretical semantics and com- 
putational psycholinguistics. Because the research 
methodology and tradition of presentation is so 
different in these fields, we would expect the 
scheme to be equally applicable in a range of dis- 
ciplines other than those named. 
Our annotation scheme consists of the seven 
categories shown in Figure 1. There are two ver- 
sions of the annotation scheme. The basic scheme 
provides a distinction between three textual seg- 
ments which we think is a necessary precondi- 
tion for argumentatively-justified summarization. 
This distinction is concerned with the attribution 
of authorship to scientific ideas and solutions de- 
scribed in the text. Authors need to make clear, 
and readers need to understand: 
? which sections describe generally accepted 
statements (BACKGROUND); 
? which ideas are attributed to some other, spe- 
cific piece of research outside the given paper, 
including own previous work (OTHER); 
? and which statements are the authors' own 
new contributions (OWN). 
The/u l l  annotation scheme consists of the ba- 
sic scheme plus four other categories, which are 
based on STales' moves. The most important of 
these is AIM (STales' move "Explicit statements 
of research goal"), as these moves are good char- 
acterizations of the entire paper. We are inter- 
ested in how far humans can be trained to con- 
sistently annotate these sentences; imilar experi- 
ments where subjects elected one or several 'most 
relevant' sentences from a paper have traditionally 
reported low agreement (Rath et al, 1961). There 
is also the category TEXTUAL ( STales' move "In- 
dicate structure"), which provides helpful infor- 
mation about section structure, and two moves 
having to do with attitude towards previous re- 
search, namely BASIS and CONTRAST. 
The relative simplicity of the scheme was a com- 
promise between two demands: we wanted the 
scheme to contain enough information for auto- 
matic summarization, but still be practicable for 
hand coding. 
Annotation proceeds entence by sentence ac- 
cording to the decision tree given in Figure 2. No 
instructions about the use of cue phrases were 
given, although some of the example sentences 
given in the guidelines contained cue phrases. The 
categorisation task resembles the judgements per- 
formed e.g. in dialogue act coding (Carletta et al, 
111 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
BASIC 
SCHEME 
BACKGROUND 
OTHER 
Sentences describing some (generally accepted) background 
knowledge 
Sentences describing aspects of some specific other research in a 
neutral way (excluding contrastive or BASIS statements) 
OWN Sentences describing any aspect of the own work presented in
this paper - except what is covered by AIM or TEXTUAL, e.g. 
details of solution (methodology), limitations, and further work. 
AIM Sentences best portraying the particular (main) research goal of 
the article 
TEXTUAL Explicit statements about the textual section structure of the 
paper 
CONTRAST Sentences contrasting own work to other work; sentences point- 
ing out weaknesses in other research; sentences stating that the 
research task of the current paper has never been done before; 
direct comparisons 
BASIS Statements that the own work uses some other work as its basis 
or starting point, or gets support from this other work 
Figure 1: Overview of the annotation scheme 
FULL 
SCHEME 
1997; Alexandersson et al, 1995; Jurafsky et al, 
1997), but our task is more difficult since it re- 
quires more subjective interpretation. 
3 Annotat ion  exper iment  
Our annotation scheme is based on the intuition 
that its categories provide an adequate and in- 
tuitive description of scientific texts. But this 
intuition alone is not enough of a justification: 
we believe that our claims, like claims about any 
other descriptive account of textual interpreta- 
tion, should be substantiated by demonstrating 
that other humans can apply this interpretation 
consistently to actual texts. 
We did three studies. Study I and II were de- 
signed to find out if the two versions of the an- 
notation scheme (basic vs. full) can be learned by 
human coders with a significant amount of train- 
ing. We are interested in two formal properties of 
the annotation scheme: stability and reproducibil- 
ity (Krippendorff, 1980). Stability, the extent to 
which one annotator will produce the same classi- 
fications at different imes, is important because 
an instable annotation scheme can never be re- 
producible. Reproducibility, the extent to which 
different annotators will produce the same clas- 
sifications, is important because it measures the 
consistency of shared understandings (or mean- 
ing) held between annotators. 
We use the Kappa coefficient K (Siegel and 
Castellan, 1988) to measure stability and repro- 
ducibility among k annotators on N items: In 
our experiment, he items are sentences. Kappa 
is a better measurement of agreement than raw 
percentage agreement (Carletta, 1996) because it 
factors out the level of agreement which would 
be reached by random annotators using the same 
distribution of categories as the real coders. No 
matter how many items or annotators, or how the 
categories are distributed, K--0 when there is no 
agreement other than what would be expected by 
chance, and K=I  when agreement is perfect. We 
expect high random agreement for our annotation 
scheme because so many sentences fall into the 
OWN category. 
Studies I and II will determine how far we can 
trust in the human-annotated training material 
for both learning and evaluation of the automatic 
method. The outcome of Study II (full annota- 
tion scheme) is crucial to the task, as some of the 
categories pecific to the full annotation scheme 
(particularly AIM) add considerable value to the 
information contained in the training material. 
Study III tries to answer the question whether 
the considerable training effort used in Studies I
and II can be reduced. If it were the case that 
coders with hardly any task-specific training can 
produce similar results to highly trained coders, 
the training material could be acquired in a more 
efficient way. A positive outcome of Study III 
would also strengthen claims about the intuitivity 
of the category definitions. 
112 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
Does this sentence r fer to own 
work (excluding previous work 
of the same author)? 
Does this sentence contain material 
that describes the specific aim 
described in the paper? 
Does this sentence make 
reference to the structure 
of the paper? 
I TEXTUAL \] 
Does the sentence describe general 
background, including phenomena 
to be explained or linguistic example sentences? 
t\[ BACKGROUND 1 Does it describe anegative aspect 
J of the other work, or a contrast 
or comparison of the own work to it? 
Y ~ N O  
\[ CONTRAST I Does this sentence mention 
the other work as basis of 
or support for own work? 
Figure 2: Decision tree for annotation 
Our materials consist of 48 computational lin- 
guistics papers (22 for Study I, 26 for Study II), 
taken from the Computation and Language E- 
Print Archive (h t tp : / /xxx .  lan l .  gov/cmp-lg/). 
We chose papers that had been presented at COL- 
ING, ANLP or ACL conferences (including stu- 
dent sessions), or ACL-sponsored workshops, and 
been put onto the archive between April 1994 and 
April 1995. 
3.1 Studies I and II 
For Studies I and II, we used three highly trained 
annotators. The annotators (two graduate stu- 
dents and the first author) can be considered 
skilled at extracting information from scientific 
papers but they were not experts in all of the sub- 
domains of the papers they annotated. The anno- 
tators went through asubstantial mount of train- 
ing, including the reading of coding instructions 
for the two versions of the scheme (6 pages for the 
basic scheme and 17 pages for the full scheme), 
four training papers and weekly discussions, in 
which previous annotations were discussed. How- 
ever, annotators were not allowed to change any 
previous decisions. For the stability figures (intra- 
annotator agreement), annotators re-coded 6 ran- 
domly chosen papers 6 weeks after the end of the 
annotation experiment. Skim-reading and anno- 
tation of an average length paper (3800 words) 
typically took the annotators 20-30 minutes. 
During the annotation phase, one of the pa- 
pers turned out to be a review paper. This paper 
caused the annotators difficulty as the scheme was 
not intended to cover reviews. Thus, we discarded 
this paper from the analysis. 
The results show that the basic annotation 
scheme is stable (K=.83, .79, .81; N=1248; k=2 
for all three annotators) and reproducible (K=.78, 
N=4031, k=3). This reconfirms that trained an- 
notators are capable of making the basic dis- 
tinction between own work, specific other work, 
and general background. The full annotation 
scheme is stable (K=.82, .81, .76; N--1220; k=2 
for all three annotators) and reproducible (K=.71, 
N=4261, k=3). Because of the increased cogni- 
tive difficulty of the task, the decrease in stability 
and reproducibility in comparison to Study I is 
acceptable. Leaving the coding developer out of 
the coder pool for Study II did not change the re- 
sults (K=.71, N=4261, k=2), suggesting that the 
training conveyed her intentions fairly well. 
We collected informal comments from our an- 
notators about how natural the task felt, but did 
not conduct a formal evaluation of subjective per- 
ception of the difficulty of the task. As a general 
approach in our analysis, we wanted to look at the 
trends in the data as our main information source. 
Figure 3 reports how well the four non-basic at- 
egories could be distinguished from all other cat- 
egories, measured by Krippendorff's diagnostics 
for category distinctions (i.e. collapsing all other 
distinctions). When compared to the overall re- 
producibility of .71, we notice that the annota- 
tors were good at distinguishing AIM and TEx- 
113 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0,5 
K 0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
,; i::!i,i!ii 
: . : : : . :  
I ~:~:i;it i i::~i:!::}i 
Iz!!~;is!l :::.;.i:~:! 
CONTRAST AIM BASIS TEXTUAL 
Figure 3: Reproducibility diagnostics: non-basic 
categories (Study II) 
.,o4 
~-3 
r~ 
~2 
~? 1 
0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
K 
Figure 4: Distribution by reproducibility (Study 
II) 
TUAL. This is an important result: as AIM sen- 
tences constitute the best characterization f the 
research paper for the summarization task we are 
particularly interested in having them annotated 
consistently in our training material. The anno- 
tators were less good at determining BASIS and 
CONTRAST. This might have to do with the loca- 
tion of those types of sentences in the paper: AIM 
and TEXTUAL are usually found at the beginning 
or end of the introduction section, whereas CON- 
TRAST, and even more so BASIS, are usually in- 
terspersed within longer stretches of OWN. As a 
result, these categories are more exposed to lapses 
of attention during annotation. 
If we blur the less important distinctions be- 
tween CONTRAST, OTHER, and BACKGROUND, 
the reproducibility of the scheme increases to 
K=.75. Structuring our training set in this way 
seems to be a good compromise for our task, be- 
cause with high reliability, it would still give us 
the crucial distinctions contained in the basic an- 
notation scheme, plus the highly important AIM 
sentences, plus the useful TEXTUAL and BASIS 
sentences. 
The variation in reproducibility across papers is 
large, both in Study I and Study II (cf. the quasi- 
bimodal distribution shown in Figure 4). Some 
hypotheses for why this might be so are the fol- 
0.9 
0.8 
K 0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
none low high 
Figure 5: Effect of self-citation ratio on repro- 
ducibility (Study I) 
lowing: 
? One problem our annotators reported was a 
difficulty in distinguishing OTHEa work from 
OWN work, due to the fact that some authors 
did not express a clear distinction between 
previous own work (which, according to our 
instructions, had to be coded as OTHEa) and 
current, new work. This was particularly the 
case where authors had published several pa- 
pers about different aspects of one piece of 
research. We found a correlation with self ci- 
tation ratio (ratio of self citations to all cita- 
tions in running text): papers with many self 
citations are more difficult to annotate than 
papers that have few or no self citations (cf. 
Figure 5). 
? Another persistent problematic distinction 
for our annotators was that between OWN 
and BACKGROUND. This could be a sign that 
some authors aimed their papers at an expert 
audience, and thus thought it unnecessary to 
signal clearly which statements are commonly 
agreed in the field, as opposed to their own 
new claims. If a paper is written in such a 
way, it can indeed only be understood with 
a considerable amount of domain knowledge, 
which our annotators did not have. 
? There is also a difference in reproducibil- 
ity between papers from different conference 
types, as Figure 6 suggests. Out of our 25 pa- 
pers, 4 were presented in student sessions, 4 
came from workshops, the remaining 16 ones 
were main conference papers. Student session 
papers are easiest o annotate, which might 
be due to the fact that they are shorter and 
have a simpler structure, with less mentions 
of previous research. Main conference pa- 
pers dedicate more space to describing and 
114 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
0.8 
0.7 
0,5 
:!!i~?: 
? i : ; .  :L: 
Mai~ conf. Student  Wad(shop 
Figure 6: Effect of conference type on repro- 
ducibility (Study II) 
criticising other people's work than student 
or workshop papers (on average about one 
fourth of the paper). They seem to be care- 
fully prepared (and thus easy to annotate); 
conference authors must express themselves 
more clearly than workshop authors because 
they are reporting finished work to a wider 
audience. 
3.2  S tudy  I I I  
For Study III, we used a different subject pool: 
18 subjects with no prior annotation training. All 
of them had a graduate degree in Cognitive Sci- 
ence, with two exceptions: one was a graduate 
student in Sociology of Science; and one was a sec- 
retary. Subjects were given only minimal instruc- 
tions (1 page A4), and the decision tree in Fig- 
ure 2. Each annotator was randomly assigned to a 
group of six, all of whom independently annotated 
the same single paper. These three papers were 
randomly chosen from the set of papers for which 
our trained annotators had previously achieved 
good reproducibility in Study II (K=.65,N=205, 
k=3; K=.85,N=192,k=3; K=.87,N=144,k=3, re- 
spectively). 
Reproducibility varied considerably between 
groups (K=.35, N=205, k=6; K=.49, N=192, 
k=6; K=.72, N=144, k=6). Kappa is designed 
to abstract over the number of coders. Lower reli- 
ablity for Study III as compared to Studies I and 
II is not an artefact of how K was calculated. 
Some subjects in Group 1 and 2 did not un- 
derstand the instructions as intended - we must 
conclude that our very short instructions did not 
provide enough information for consistent anno- 
tation. This is not surprising, given that human 
indexers (whose task is very similar to the task 
introduced here) are highly skilled professionals. 
However, part of this result can be attributed to 
the papers: Group 3, which annotated the pa- 
per found to be most reproducible in Study II, 
performed almost as well as trained annotators; 
Group 1, which performed worst, also happened 
to have the paper with the lowest reproducibil- 
ity. In Groups 1 and 2, the most similar three 
annotators reached a respectable reproducibility 
(K=.5, N=205, k=3; K=.63, N=192, k=3). That, 
together with the good performance of Group 3, 
seems to show that the instructions did at least 
convey some of the meaning of the categories. 
It is remarkable that the two subjects who had 
no training in computational linguistics performed 
reasonably well: they were not part of the circle 
of the three most similar subjects in their groups, 
but they were also not performing worse than the 
other two annotators. 
4 D iscuss ion  
It is an interesting question how far shallow (hu- 
man and automatic) information extraction meth- 
ods, i.e. those using no domain knowledge, can be 
successful in a task such as ours. We believe that 
argumentative structure has so many reliable lin- 
guistic or non-linguistic orrelates on the surface 
- physical layout being one of these correlates, 
others are linguistic indicators like "to our knowl- 
edge" and the relative order of the individual ar- 
gumentative moves - that it should be possible to 
detect he line of argumentation f a text without 
much world knowledge. The two non-experts in 
the subject pool of Study III, who must have used 
some other information besides computational lin- 
guistics knowledge, performed satisfactorily - a 
fact that seems to confirm the promise of shallow 
methods. 
Overall, reproducibility and stability for trained 
annotators does not quite reach the levels found 
for, for instance, the best dialogue act coding 
schemes (around K=.80). Our annotation re- 
quires more subjective judgments and is possi- 
bly more cognitively complex. Our reproducibility 
and stability results are in the range which Krip- 
pendorff (1980) describes as giving marginally sig- 
nificant results for reasonable size data sets when 
correlating two coded variables which would show 
a clear correlation if there were prefectly agree- 
ment. That is, the coding contains enough signal 
to be found among the noise of disagreement. 
Of course, our requirements are rather less 
stringent han Krippendorff's because only one 
coded variable is involved, although coding is ex- 
pensive enough that simply building larger data 
sets is not an attractive option. Overall, we find 
the level of agreement which we achieved accept- 
able. However, as with all coding schemes, its 
usefulness will only be clarified by the final appli- 
115 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
cation. 
The single most surprising result of the experi- 
ments is the large variation in reproducibility be- 
tween papers. Intuitively, the reason for this are 
qualitative differences in individual writing style 
- annotators reported that some papers are bet- 
ter structured and better written than others, and 
that some authors tend to write more clearly than 
others. It would be interesting to compare our re- 
producibility results to independent quality judge- 
ments of the papers, in order to determine if our 
experiments can indeed measure the clarity of sci- 
entific argumentation. 
Most of the problems we identified in our stud- 
ies have to do with a lack of distinction between 
own and other people's work (or own previous 
work). Because our scheme discriminates based 
on these properties, as well as being useful for 
summarizing research papers, it might be used for 
automatically detecting whether a paper is a re- 
view, a position paper, an evaluation paper or a 
'pure' research article by looking at the relative 
frequencies of automatically annotated categories. 
5 Conclusions 
We have introduced an annotation scheme for re- 
search articles which marks the aims of the pa- 
per in relation to past literature. We have ar- 
gued that this scheme is useful for building better 
abstracts, and have conducted some experiments 
which show that the annotation scheme can be 
learned by trained annotators and subsequently 
applied in a consistent way. Because the scheme 
is reliable, hand-annotated data can be used to 
train a system which applies the scheme automat- 
ically to unseen text. 
The novel aspects of our scheme are that it ap- 
plies to different kinds of scientific research arti- 
cles, because it relies on the form and meaning 
of argumentative aspects found in the text type 
rather than on contents or physical format. As 
such, it should be independent of article length 
and article discipline. In the future, we plan 
to show this by applying our scheme to journal 
and conference articles from a range of disciplines. 
Practical reasons have kept us from using journal 
articles as data so far (namely the difficulty of cor- 
pus collection and the increased length and subse- 
quent time effort of human experiments), but we 
are particularly interested in them as they can be 
expected to be of higher quality. As the basic ar- 
gumentation is the same as in conference articles, 
our scheme should be applicable to journal arti- 
cles at least as consistently as to the papers in our 
current collection. 
6 Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank our annotators, Vasilis 
Karaiskos and Ann Wilson, for their patience and 
diligence in this work, and for their insightful, crit- 
ical, and very useful observations. 
The first author is supported by an EPSRC stu- 
dentship. 
References 
Jan Alexandersson, Elisabeth Mater, and Norbert Re- 
ithinger. 1995. A robust and efficient hree-layered 
dialogue component for a speech-to-speech transla- 
tion system. In Proceedings of the Seventh Euro- 
pean Meeting of the ACL, pages 188-193. 
Ronald Brandow, Karl Mitze, and Lisa F. Rau. 1995. 
Automatic ondensation of electronic publications 
by sentence selection. Information Processing and 
Management, 31(5):675-685. 
Jean Carletta, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, Jacque- 
line C. Kowtko, Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon, and 
Anne H. Anderson. 1997. The reliability of a dia- 
logue structure coding scheme. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 23(1):13-31. 
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classi- 
fication tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational 
Linguistics, 22(2):249-254. 
Robin Cohen. 1984. A computational theory of the 
function of clue words in argument understanding. 
In Proceedings of COLING-8~, pages 251-255. 
Anna Duszak. 1994. Academic discourse and intellec- 
tual styles. Journal of Pragmatics, 21:291-313. 
Daniel Jurafsky, Elizabeth Shriberg, and Debra Bi- 
asca, 1997. Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL Shallow- 
Discourse-Function Annotation Coders Manual. 
University of Colorado, Institute of Cognitive Sci- 
ence. TR-97-02. 
Joost G. Kircz. 1991. The rhetorical structure of sci- 
entific articles: the case for argumentational analy- 
sis in information retrieval. Journal of Documenta- 
tion, 47(4):354-372. 
Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content analysis: an in- 
troduction to its methodology. Sage Commtext se- 
ries; 5. Sage, Beverly Hills London. 
Julian Kupiec, Jan O. Pedersen, and Francine Chen. 
1995. A trainable document summarizer. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 18th ACM-SIGIR Conference, Asso- 
ciation for Computing Machinery, Special Interest 
Group Information Retrieval, pages 68-73. 
Elizabeth DuRoss Liddy. 1991. The discourse-level 
structure of empirical abstracts: an exploratory 
study. Information Processing and Management, 
27(1):55-81. 
116 
Proceedings of EACL '99 
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1987. 
Rhetorical structure theory: description and con- 
struction of text structures. In G. Kempen, edi- 
tor, Natural Language Generation: New Results in 
Artificial Intelligence, Psychology and Linguistics, 
pages 85-95, Dordrecht. Nijhoff. 
Daniel Marcu. 1997. From discourse structures to 
text summaries. In Inderjeet Mani and Mark T. 
Maybury, editors, Proceedings of the workshop on 
Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization, in associ- 
ation with A CL//BA CL- 97. 
Greg Myers. 1992. In this paper we report... - speech 
acts and scientific facts. Journal of Pragmatics, 
17(4):295-313. 
Chris D. Paice. 1990. Constructing literature ab- 
stracts by computer: techniques and prospects. 
Information Processing and Management, 26:171- 
186. 
G.J Rath, A. Resnick, and T. R. Savage. 1961. The 
formation of abstracts by the selection of sentences. 
American Documentation, 12(2):139-143. 
Lisa F. Rau, Paul S. Jacobs, and Uri Zernik. 1989. 
Information extraction and text processing using 
linguistic knowledge acquisition. Information Pro- 
cessing and Management, 25(4):419-428. 
Sidney Siegel and N.J. Jr. Castellan. 1988. Non- 
parametric statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. 
McGraw-Hill, second edition edition. 
Karen Sp~ixck Jones. 1998. Automatic summarising: 
factors and directions. In ACL/EACL-97 Work- 
shop 'Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization'. 
John Swales. 1990. Genre analysis: English in aca- 
demic and research settings. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Geoff Thompson and Yiyun Ye. 1991. Evaluation in 
the reporting verbs used in academic papers. Ap- 
plied Linguistics, 12(4):365-382. 
Sheryl R. Young and Phillip J. Hayes. 1985. Auto- 
matic classification and summarization of banking 
telexes. In Proceedings of the Second Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence Applications. 
117 
