Answering What-Is Questions by Virtual Annotation 
 
John Prager  
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 10598 
(914) 784-6809 
jprager@us.ibm.com 
Dragomir Radev 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 
(734) 615-5225 
radev@umich.edu 
Krzysztof Czuba  
Carnegie-Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
(412) 268 6521 
kczuba@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
We present the technique of Virtual Annotation as a specialization 
of Predictive Annotation for answering definitional What is 
questions.  These questions generally have the property that the 
type of the answer is not given away by the question, which poses 
problems for a system which has to select answer strings from 
suggested passages.  Virtual Annotation uses a combination of 
knowledge-based techniques using an ontology, and statistical 
techniques using a large corpus to achieve high precision. 
 
Keywords 
Question-Answering, Information Retrieval, Ontologies 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Question Answering is gaining increased attention in both the 
commercial and academic arenas.  While algorithms for general 
question answering have already been proposed, we find that such 
algorithms fail to capture certain subtleties of particular types of 
questions.  We propose an approach in which different types of 
questions are processed using different algorithms.  We introduce a 
technique named Virtual Annotation (VA) for answering one such 
type of question, namely the What is question. 
 
We have previously presented the technique of Predictive 
Annotation (PA) [Prager, 2000], which has proven to be an 
effective approach to the problem of Question Answering.  The 
essence of PA is to index the semantic types of all entities in the 
corpus, identify the desired answer type from the question, search 
for passages that contain entities with the desired answer type as 
well as the other query terms, and to extract the answer term or 
phrase.  One of the weaknesses of PA, though, has been in dealing 
with questions for which the system cannot determine the correct 
answer type required.  We introduce here an extension to PA 
which we call Virtual Annotation and show it to be effective for 
those ?What is/are (a/an) X? questions that are seeking hypernyms 
of X.  These are a type of definition question, which other QA 
systems attempt to answer by searching in the document collection 
for textual clues similar to those proposed by [Hearst, 1998], that 
are characteristic of definitions.  Such an approach does not use 
the strengths of PA and is not successful in the cases in which a 
deeper understanding of the text is needed in order to identify 
the defining term in question. 
 
We first give a brief description of PA.  We look at a certain 
class of What is questions and describe our basic algorithm.  
Using this algorithm we develop the Virtual Annotation 
technique, and evaluate its performance with respect to both the 
standard TREC and our own benchmark.  We demonstrate on 
two question sets that the precision improves from .15 and .33 to 
.78 and .83 with the addition of VA. 
2.  BACKGROUND 
For our purposes, a question-answering (QA) system is one 
which takes a well-formed user question and returns an 
appropriate answer phrase found in a body of text.  This 
generally excludes How and Why questions from consideration, 
except in the relatively rare cases when they can be answered by 
simple phrases, such as ?by fermenting grapes? or ?because of 
the scattering of light?.  In general, the response of a QA system 
will be a named entity such as a person, place, time, numerical 
measure or a noun phrase, optionally within the context of a 
sentence or short paragraph.  
 
The core of most QA systems participating in TREC [TREC8, 
2000 & TREC9, 2001] is the identification of the answer type 
desired by analyzing the question.  For example, Who questions 
seek people or organizations, Where questions seek places, 
When questions seek times, and so on.  The goal, then, is to find 
an entity of the right type in the text corpus in a context that 
justifies it as the answer to the question.  To achieve this goal, 
we have been using the technique of PA to annotate the text 
corpus with semantic categories (QA-Tokens) prior to indexing. 
 
Each QA-Token is identified by a set of terms, patterns, or 
finite-state machines defining matching text sequences.  Thus 
?Shakespeare? is annotated with ?PERSON$?, and the text 
string ?PERSON$? is indexed at the same text location as 
?Shakespeare?.  Similarly, ?$123.45? is annotated with 
?MONEY$?.  When a question is processed, the desired QA-
Token is identified and it replaces the Wh-words and their 
auxiliaries.  Thus, ?Who? is replaced by ?PERSON$?, and 
?How much? + ?cost? are replaced by ?MONEY$?.  The 
resulting query is then input to the search engine as a bag of 
words.  The expectation here is that if the initial question were 
?Who wrote Hamlet?, for example, then the modified query of 
?PERSON$ write Hamlet? (after lemmatization) would be a 
 
 
 
 perfect match to text that states ?Shakespeare wrote Hamlet? or 
?Hamlet was written by Shakespeare?. 
 
The modified query is matched by the search engine against 
passages of 1-2 sentences, rather than documents.  The top 10 
passages returned are processed by our Answer Selection module 
which re-annotates the text, identifies all potential answer phrases, 
ranks them using a learned evaluation function and selects the top 
5 answers (see [Radev et al, 2000]). 
 
The problem with ?What is/are (a/an) X? questions is that the 
question usually does not betray the desired answer type.  All the 
system can deduce is that it must find a noun phrase (the QA-
Token THING$).  The trouble with THING$ is that it is too 
general and labels a large percentage of the nouns in the corpus, 
and so does not help much in narrowing down the possibilities.  A 
second problem is that for many such questions the desired answer 
type is not one of the approximately 50 high-level classes (i.e. QA-
Tokens) that we can anticipate at indexing; this phenomenon is 
seen in TREC9, whose 24 definitional What is questions are listed 
in the Appendix.  These all appear to be calling out for a 
hypernym.  To handle such questions we developed the technique 
of Virtual Annotation which is like PA and shares much of the 
same machinery, but does not rely on the appropriate class being 
known at indexing time.  We will illustrate with examples from the 
animal kingdom, including a few from TREC9. 
 
3.  VIRTUAL ANNOTATION 
If we look up a word in a thesaurus such as WordNet [Miller et al, 
1993]), we can discover its hypernym tree, but there is no 
indication which hypernym is the most appropriate to answer a 
What is question.  For example, the hypernym hierarchy for 
?nematode? is shown in Table 1.  The level numbering counts 
levels up from the starting term.  The numbers in parentheses will 
be explained later. 
 
Table 1.  Parentage of ?nematode? according to WordNet. 
 
Level Synset 
0 {nematode, roundworm} 
1 {worm(13)} 
2 {invertebrate} 
3 {animal(2), animate being, beast, brute, creature, 
fauna} 
4 {life form(2), organism(3), being, living thing} 
5 {entity, something} 
 
 
At first sight, the desirability of the hypernyms seems to decrease 
with increasing level number.  However, if we examine ?meerkat? 
we find the hierarchy in Table 2. 
 
We are leaving much unsaid here about the context of the question 
and what is known of the questioner, but it is not unreasonable to 
assert that the ?best? answer to ?What is a meerkat? is either ?a 
mammal? (level 4) or ?an animal? (level 7).  How do we get an 
automatic system to pick the right candidate? 
 
 
 
Table 2.  Parentage of ?meerkat? according to WordNet 
 
Level Synset 
0 {meerkat, mierkat} 
1 {viverrine, viverrine mammal} 
2 {carnivore} 
3 {placental, placental mammal, eutherian, eutherian 
mammal} 
4 {mammal} 
5 {vertebrate, craniate} 
6 {chordate} 
7 {animal(2), animate being, beast, brute, creature, 
fauna} 
8 {life form, organism, being, living thing} 
9 {entity, something} 
 
 
It seems very much that what we would choose intuitively as the 
best answer corresponds to Rosch et al?s basic categories 
[Rosch et al, 1976].  According to psychological testing, these 
are categorization levels of intermediate specificity that people 
tend to use in unconstrained settings.  If that is indeed true, then 
we can use online text as a source of evidence for this tendency.  
For example, we might find sentences such as ??  meerkats and 
other Y ? ?, where Y is one of its hypernyms, indicating that Y 
is in some sense the preferred descriptor. 
 
We count the co-occurrences of the target search term (e.g. 
?meerkat? or ?nematode?) with each of its hypernyms (e.g. 
?animal?) in 2-sentence passages, in the TREC9 corpus.  These 
counts are the parenthetical numbers in Tables 1 and 2.  The 
absence of a numerical label there indicates zero co-occurrences.  
Intuitively, the larger the count, the better the corresponding 
term is as a descriptor. 
 
3.1  Hypernym Scoring and Selection  
Since our ultimate goal is to find passages describing the target 
term, discovering zero co-occurrences allows elimination of 
useless candidates.  Of those remaining, we are drawn to those 
with the highest counts, but we would like to bias our system 
away from the higher levels.  Calling a nematode a life-form is 
correct, but hardly helpful.   
 
The top levels of WordNet (or any ontology) are by definition 
very general, and therefore are unlikely to be of much use for 
purposes of definition.  However, if none of the immediate 
parents of a term we are looking up co-occur in our text corpus, 
we clearly will be forced to use a more general term that does.  
We want to go further, though, in those cases where the 
immediate parents do occur, but in small numbers, and the very 
general parents occur with such high frequencies that our 
algorithm would select them.  In those cases we introduce a 
tentative level ceiling to prevent higher-level terms from being 
chosen if there are suitable lower-level alternatives.   
 
We would like to use a weighting function that decreases 
monotonically with level distance.  Mihalcea and  Moldovan 
[1999], in an analogous context, use the logarithm of the number 
of terms in a given term?s subtree to calculate weights, and they 
claim to have shown that this function is optimal.  Since it is 
approximately true that the level population increases 
 exponentially in an ontology, this suggests that a linear function of 
level number will perform just as well. 
 
Our first step is to generate a level-adapted count (LAC) by 
dividing the co-occurrence counts by the level number (we are 
only interested in levels 1 and greater).  We then select the best 
hypernym(s) by using a fuzzy maximum calculation.  We locate 
the one or more hypernyms with greatest LAC, and then also select 
any others with a LAC within a predefined threshold of it; in our 
experimentation we have found that a threshold value of 20% 
works well.  Thus if, for example, a term has one hypernym at 
level 1 with a count of 30, and another at level 2 with a count of 
50, and all other entries have much smaller counts, then since the 
LAC 25 is within 20% of the LAC 30, both of these hypernyms 
will be proposed.   
 
To prevent the highest levels from being selected if there is any 
alternative, we tentatively exclude them from consideration 
according to the following scheme: 
 
If the top of the tree is at level N, where N <= 3, we set a tentative 
ceiling at N-1, otherwise if N<=5, we set the ceiling at N-2, 
otherwise we set the ceiling at N-3.  If no co-occurrences are found 
at or below this ceiling, then it is raised until a positive value is 
found, and the corresponding term is selected.  
 
If no hypernym at all co-occurs with the target term, then this 
approach is abandoned:  the ?What? in the question is replaced by 
?THING$? and normal procedures of Predictive Annotation are 
followed. 
 
When successful, the algorithm described above discovers one or 
more candidate hypernyms that are known to co-occur with the 
target term.  There is a question, though, of what to do when the 
question term has more than one sense, and hence more than one 
ancestral line in WordNet.  We face a choice of either selecting the 
hypernym(s) with the highest overall score as calculated by the 
algorithm described above, or collecting together the best 
hypernyms in each parental branch.  After some experimentation 
we made the latter choice.  One of the questions that benefitted 
from this was ?What is sake?.  WordNet has three senses for sake: 
good (in the sense of welfare), wine (the Japanese drink) and 
aim/end, with computed scores of 122, 29 and 87/99 respectively.  
It seems likely (from the phrasing of the question) that the ?wine? 
sense is the desired one, but this would be missed entirely if only 
the top-scoring hypernyms were chosen. 
 
We now describe how we arrange for our Predictive Annotation 
system to find these answers.  We do this by using these 
descriptors as virtual QA-Tokens; they are not part of the search 
engine index, but are tagged in the passages that the search engine 
returns at run time. 
 
3.2 Integration 
Let us use H to represent either the single hypernym or a 
disjunction of the several hypernyms found through the WordNet 
analysis.  The original question Q =  
?What is (a/an) X? 
is converted to Q? =  
?DEFINE$ X H? 
where DEFINE$ is a virtual QA-Token that was never seen at 
indexing time, does not annotate any text and does not occur in the 
index.  The processed query Q? then will find passages that 
contain occurrences of both X and H; the token DEFINE$ will 
be ignored by the search engine.  The top passages returned by 
the search engine are then passed to Answer Selection, which re-
annotates the text.  However, this time the virtual QA-Token 
DEFINE$ is introduced and the patterns it matches are defined 
to be the disjuncts in H.  In this way, all occurrences of the 
proposed hypernyms of X in the search engine passages are 
found, and are scored and ranked in the regular fashion.  The 
end result is that the top passages contain the target term and one 
of its most frequently co-occurring hypernyms in close 
proximity, and these hypernyms are selected as answers. 
 
When we use this technique of Virtual Annotation on the 
aforementioned questions, we get answer passages such as 
  
?Such genes have been found in nematode worms 
but not yet in higher animals.? 
and 
?South African golfer Butch Kruger had a good 
round going in the central Orange Free State trials, 
until a mongoose-like animal grabbed his ball with 
its mouth and dropped down its hole. Kruger wrote 
on his card: "Meerkat."? 
 
4 RESULTS 
4.1 Evaluation 
We evaluated Virtual Annotation on two sets of questions ? the 
definitional questions from TREC9 and similar kinds of 
questions from the Excite query log (see 
http://www.excite.com).  In both cases we were looking for 
definitional text in the TREC corpus.  The TREC questions had 
been previously verified (by NIST) to have answers there; the 
Excite questions had no such guarantee.   We started with 174 
Excite questions of the form ?What is X?, where X was a 1- or 
2-word phrase.  We removed those questions that we felt would 
not have been acceptable as TREC9 questions.  These were 
questions where: 
o The query terms did not appear in the TREC corpus, 
and some may not even have been real words (e.g. 
?What is a gigapop?).1  37 questions. 
o The query terms were in the corpus, but there was no 
definition present (e.g ?What is a computer 
monitor?).2  18 questions. 
o The question was not asking about the class of the 
term but how to distinguish it from other members of 
the class (e.g. ?What is a star fruit?).  17 questions. 
o The question was about computer technology that 
emerged after the articles in the TREC corpus were 
written (e.g. ?What is a pci slot?).  19 questions. 
o The question was very likely seeking an example, not 
a definition (e.g. ?What is a powerful adhesive?).  1 
question plus maybe some others ? see the Discussion 
                                               
1 That is, after automatic spelling correction was attempted.   
2 The TREC10 evaluation in August 2001 is expected to contain 
questions for which there is no answer in the corpus 
(deliberately).   While it is important for a system to be able to 
make this distinction, we kept within the TREC9 framework for 
this evaluation. 
 section later.  How to automatically distinguish these 
cases is a matter for further research. 
 
Of the remaining 82 Excite questions, 13 did not have entries in 
WordNet.  We did not disqualify those questions. 
 
For both the TREC and Excite question sets we report two 
evaluation measures.  In the TREC QA track, 5 answers are 
submitted per question, and the score for the question is the 
reciprocal of the rank of the first correct answer in these 5 
candidates, or 0 if the correct answer is not present at all.  A 
submission?s overall score is the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) over 
all questions.  We calculate MRR as well as mean binary score 
(MBS) over the top 5 candidates; the binary score for a question is 
1 if a correct answer was present in the top 5 candidates, 0 
otherwise.  The first sets of MBS and MRR figures are for our base 
system, the second set the system with VA. 
 
Table 3.  Comparison of base system and system with VA on 
both TREC9 and Excite definitional questions. 
 
Source No. of 
Questions 
MBS 
w/o 
VA 
MRR 
w/o 
VA 
MBS 
with 
VA 
MRR 
with 
VA 
TREC9  
(in WN) 
20 .3 .2 .9 .9 
TREC9  
(not in WN) 
4 .5 .375 .5 .5 
TREC9 
Overall 
24 .333 .229 .833 .833 
Excite 
(in WN) 
69 .101 .085 .855 
 
.824 
Excite  
(not in WN) 
13 .384 .295 .384 .295 
Excite 
Overall 
82 .146 .118 .780 .740 
 
 
We see that for the 24 TREC9 definitional questions, our MRR 
score with VA was the same as the MBS score.  This was because 
for each of the 20 questions where the system found a correct 
answer, it was in the top position. 
 
By comparison, our base system achieved an overall MRR score of 
.315 across the 693 questions of TREC9.  Thus we see that with 
VA, the average score of definitional questions improves from 
below our TREC average to considerably higher.  While the 
percentage of definitional questions in TREC9 was quite small, we 
shall explain in a later section how we plan to extend our 
techniques to other question types. 
 
4.2  Errors 
The VA process is not flawless, for a variety of reasons.  One is 
that the hierarchy in WordNet does not always exactly correspond 
to the way people classify the world.  For example, in WordNet a 
dog is not a pet, so ?pet? will never even be a candidate answer to 
?What is a dog?. 
 
When the question term is in WordNet, VA succeeds most of the 
time.  One of the error sources is due to the lack of uniformity of 
the semantic distance between levels.  For example, the parents 
of ?architect? are ?creator? and ?human?, the latter being what 
our system answers to ?What is an architect?.  This is 
technically correct, but not very useful.   
 
Another error source is polysemy.  This does not seem to cause 
problems with VA very often ? indeed the co-occurrence 
calculations that we perform are similar to those done by 
[Mihalcea and Moldovan, 1999] to perform word sense 
disambiguation ? but it can give rise to amusing results.  For 
example, when asked ?What is an ass? the system responded 
with ?Congress?.  Ass has four senses, the last of which in 
WordNet is a slang term for sex.  The parent synset contains the 
archaic synonym congress (uncapitalized!).  In the TREC corpus 
there are several passages containing the words ass and 
Congress, which lead to congress being the hypernym with the 
greatest score.  Clearly this particular problem can be avoided 
by using orthography to indicate word-sense, but the general 
problem remains.  
 
5  DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK 
5.1  Discussion 
While we chose not to use Hearst?s approach of key-phrase 
identification as the primary mechanism for answering What is 
questions, we don?t reject the utility of the approach.  Indeed, a 
combination of VA as described here with a key-phrase analysis 
to further filter candidate answer passages might well reduce the 
incidence of errors such as the one with ass mentioned in the 
previous section.  Such an investigation remains to be done. 
 
We have seen that VA gives very high performance scores at 
answering What is questions ? and we suggest it can be 
extended to other types ? but we have not fully addressed the 
issue of automatically selecting the questions to which to apply 
it.  We have used the heuristic of only looking at questions of 
the form ?What is (a/an) X? where X is a phrase of one or two 
words.  By inspection of the Excite questions, almost all of those 
that pass this test are looking for definitions, but some - such as 
?What is a powerful adhesive? - very probably do not.  There 
are also a few questions that are inherently ambiguous 
(understanding that the questioners are not all perfect 
grammarians):  is ?What is an antacid? asking for a definition or 
a brand name?  Even if it is known or assumed that a definition 
is required, there remains the ambiguity of the state of 
knowledge of the questioner.  If the person has no clue what the 
term means, then a parent class, which is what VA finds, is the 
right answer.  If the person knows the class but needs to know 
how to distinguish the object from others in the class, for 
example ?What is a star fruit?, then a very different approach is 
required.  If the question seems very specific, but uses common 
words entirely, such as the Excite question ?What is a yellow 
spotted lizard?, then the only reasonable interpretation seems to 
be a request for a subclass of the head noun that has the given 
property.  Finally, questions such as ?What is a nanometer? and 
?What is rubella? are looking for a value or more common 
synonym.   
 
 5.2 Other Question Types 
The preceding discussion has centered upon What is questions and 
the use of WordNet, but the same principles can be applied to other 
question types and other ontologies.  Consider the question ?Where 
is Chicago?, from the training set NIST supplied for TREC8.  Let 
us assume we can use statistical arguments to decide that, in a 
vanilla context, the question is about the city as opposed to the 
rock group, any of the city?s sports teams or the University.  There 
is still considerable ambiguity regarding the granularity of the 
desired answer.  Is it:  Cook County?  Illinois?  The Mid-West?  
The United States?  North America?  The Western Hemisphere? ?  
 
There are a number of geographical databases available, which 
either alone or with some data massaging can be viewed as 
ontologies with ?located within? as the primary relationship.  Then 
by applying Virtual Annotation to Where questions we can find 
the enclosing region that is most commonly referred to in the 
context of the question term.  By manually applying our algorithm 
to ?Chicago? and the list of geographic regions in the previous 
paragraph we find that ?Illinois? wins, as expected, just beating out 
?The United States?.  However, it should be mentioned that a more 
extensive investigation might find a different weighting scheme 
more appropriate for geographic hierarchies. 
 
The aforementioned answer of ?Illinois? to the question ?Where is 
Chicago?? might be the best answer for an American user, but for 
anyone else, an answer providing the country might be preferred.  
How can we expect Virtual Annotation to take this into account?  
The ?hidden variable? in the operation of VA is the corpus.  It is 
assumed that the user belongs to the intended readership of the 
articles in the corpus, and to the extent that this is true, the results 
of VA will be useful to the user.    
 
Virtual Annotation can also be used to answer questions that are 
seeking examples or instances of a class.  We can use WordNet 
again, but this time look to hyponyms.  These questions are more 
varied in syntax than the What is kind;  they include, for example 
from TREC9 again: 
?Name a flying mammal.? 
?What flower did Vincent Van Gogh paint?? 
and 
?What type of bridge is the Golden Gate Bridge?? 
 
6.  SUMMARY 
We presented Virtual Annotation, a technique to extend the 
capabilities of PA to a class of definition questions in which the 
answer type is not easily identifiable.  Moreover, VA can find text 
snippets that do not contain the regular textual clues for presence 
of definitions.  We have shown that VA can considerably improve 
the performance of answering What is questions, and we indicate 
how other kinds of questions can be tackled by similar techniques. 
 
7.  REFERENCES 
[1] Hearst, M.A. ?Automated Discovery of WordNet Relations? 
in WordNet: an Electronic Lexical Database, Christiane 
Fellbaum Ed, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1998. 
[2] Mihalcea, R. and Moldovan, D. ?A Method for Word Sense 
Disambiguation of Unrestricted Text?.  Proceedings of the 
37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL-99), pp. 152-158, College Park, MD, 1999. 
[3] Miller, G. ?WordNet: A Lexical Database for English?, 
Communications of the ACM 38(11) pp. 39-41, 1995. 
[4] Moldovan, D.I. and Mihalcea, R. ?Using WordNet and 
Lexical Operators to Improve Internet Searches?, IEEE 
Internet Computing, pp. 34-43, Jan-Feb 2000.  
[5] Prager, J.M., Radev, D.R., Brown, E.W. and Coden, A.R. 
?The Use of Predictive Annotation for Question-Answering 
in TREC8?, Proceedings of TREC8, Gaithersburg, MD, 
2000. 
[6] Prager, J.M., Brown, E.W., Coden, A.R., and Radev, D.R. 
"Question-Answering by Predictive Annotation", 
Proceedings of SIGIR 2000, pp. 184-191, Athens, Greece, 
2000. 
[7] Radev, D.R., Prager, J.M. and Samn, V. ?Ranking 
Suspected Answers to Natural Language Questions using 
Predictive Annotation?, Proceedings of ANLP?00, Seattle, 
WA, 2000. 
[8] Rosch, E. et al ?Basic Objects in Natural Categories?, 
Cognitive Psychology 8, pp. 382-439, 1976. 
[9] TREC8 - ?The Eighth Text Retrieval Conference?, E.M. 
Voorhees and D.K. Harman Eds., NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, 
2000. 
[10] TREC9 - ?The Ninth Text Retrieval Conference?, E.M. 
Voorhees and D.K. Harman Eds., NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, 
to appear. 
 
APPENDIX 
What-is questions from TREC9 
617: What are chloroplasts?  (X) 
528: What are geckos? 
544: What are pomegranates?   
241: What is a caldera?  (X) 
358: What is a meerkat? 
434: What is a nanometer?  (X) 
354: What is a nematode? 
463: What is a stratocaster? 
447: What is anise? 
386: What is anorexia nervosa? 
635: What is cribbage? 
300: What is leukemia? 
305: What is molybdenum? 
644: What is ouzo? 
420: What is pandoro?  (X) 
228: What is platinum? 
374: What is porphyria? 
483: What is sake? 
395: What is saltpeter? 
421: What is thalassemia? 
438: What is titanium? 
600: What is typhoid fever? 
468: What is tyvek? 
539: What is witch hazel? 
 
Our system did not correctly answer the questions marked with 
an ?X?.  For all of the others the correct answer was the first of 
the 5 attempts returned. 
 
