Domain Portability in Speech-to-Speech Translation
Alon Lavie, Lori Levin, Tanja Schultz, Chad Langley, Benjamin Han
Alicia Tribble, Donna Gates, Dorcas Wallace and Kay Peterson
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
alavie@cs.cmu.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
Speech-to-speech translation has made significant advances over
the past decade, with several high-visibility projects (C-STAR, Verb-
mobil, the Spoken Language Translator, and others) significantly
advancing the state-of-the-art. While speech recognition can cur-
rently effectively deal with very large vocabularies and is fairly
speaker independent, speech translation is currently still effective
only in limited, albeit large, domains. The issue of domain porta-
bility is thus of significant importance, with several current research
efforts designed to develop speech-translation systems that can be
ported to new domains with significantly less time and effort than
is currently possible.
This paper reports on three experiments on portability of a speech-
to-speech translation system between semantic domains.1 The ex-
periments were conducted with the JANUS system [5, 8, 12], ini-
tially developed for a narrow travel planning domain, and ported
to the doctor-patient domain and an extended tourism domain. The
experiments cover both rule-based and statistical methods, and hand-
written as well as automatically learned rules. For rule-based sys-
tems, we have investigated the re-usability of rules and other knowl-
edge sources from other domains. For statistical methods, we have
investigated how much additional training data is needed for each
new domain. We are also experimenting with combinations of
hand-written and automatically learned components. For speech
recognition, we have conducted studies of what parameters change
when a recognizer is ported from one domain to another, and how
these changes affect recognition performance.
2. DESCRIPTION OF THE INTERLINGUA
The first two experiments concern the analysis component of our
interlingua-based MT system. The analysis component takes a sen-
tence as input and produces an interlingua representation as output.
We use a task-oriented interlingua [4, 3] based on domain actions.
Examples of domain actions are giving information about the on-
set of a symptom (e.g., I have a headache) or asking a patient
1We have also worked on the issue of portability across languages
via our interlingua approach to translation [3] and on portability of
speech recognition across languages [10].
.
to perform some action (e.g., wiggle your fingers). The interlin-
gua, shown in the example below, has five main components: (1) a
speaker tag such as a: for doctor (agent) and c: for a patient (cus-
tomer), (2) a speech act, in this case, give-information (3)
some concepts (+body-state and+existence), and (4) some
arguments (body-state-spec= andbody-location=), and
(5) some sub-arguments (identifiability=no and
inside=head).
I have a pain in my head.
c:give-information+existence+body-state
(body-state-spec=(pain,identifiability=no),
body-location=(inside=head))
3. EXPERIMENT 1:
EXTENSION OF SEMANTIC GRAMMAR
RULES BY HAND AND BY AUTOMATIC
LEARNING
Experiment 1 concerns extension of the coverage of semantic
grammars in the medical domain. Semantic grammars are based
on semantic constituents such as request information phrases (e.g.,
I was wondering : : : ) and location phrases (e.g., in my right arm)
rather than syntactic constituents such as noun phrases and verb
phrases. In other papers [12, 5], we have described how our mod-
ular grammar design enhances portability across domains. The
portable grammar modules are the cross-domain module, contain-
ing rules for things like greetings, and the shared module, contain-
ing rules for things like times, dates, and locations. Figure 1 shows
a parse tree for the sentence How long have you had this pain? XDM
indicates nodes that were produced by cross-domain rules. MED in-
dicates nodes that were produced by rules from the new medical
domain grammar.
The preliminary doctor-patient grammar focuses on three med-
ical situations: give-information+existence ? giving
information about the existence of a symptom (I have been get-
ting headaches); give-information+onset ? giving infor-
mation about the onset of a symptom (The headaches started three
months ago); and give-information+occurrence ? giv-
ing information about the onset of an instance of the symptoms
(The headaches start behind my ears). Symptoms are expressed
as body-state (e.g., pain), body-object (e.g., rash), and
body-event (e.g., bleeding).
Our experiment on extendibility was based on a hand written
seed grammar that was extended by hand and by automatic learn-
ing. The seed grammar covered the domain actions mentioned
above, but did not cover very many ways to phrase each domain
action. For example, it might have covered The headaches started
[request-information+existence+body-state]::MED
( WH-PHRASES::XDM
( [q:duration=]::XDM ( [dur:question]::XDM ( how long ) ) )
HAVE-GET-FEEL::MED ( GET ( have ) ) you
HAVE-GET-FEEL::MED ( HAS ( had ) )
[super_body-state-spec=]::MED
( [body-state-spec=]::MED
( ID-WHOSE::MED
( [identifiability=]
( [id:non-distant] ( this ) ) )
BODY-STATE::MED ( [pain]::MED ( pain ) ) ) ) )
Figure 1: Parser output with nodes produced by medical and cross-domain grammars.
Seed Extended Learned
IF 37.2 37.2 31.3
Domain Action 37.2 37.2 31.3
Speech Act
Recall 43.3 48.2 49.3
Precision 71.0 75.0 45.8
Concept List
Recall 2.2 10.1 32.5
Precision 12.5 42.2 25.1
Top-Level Arguments
Recall 0.0 7.2 29.6
Precision 0.0 42.2 34.4
Top-Level Values
Recall 0.0 8.3 29.8
Precision 0.0 50.0 39.2
Sub-Level Arguments
Recall 0.0 28.3 14.1
Precision 0.0 48.2 12.6
Sub-level Values
Recall 1.2 28.3 14.1
Precision 6.2 48.2 12.9
Table 1: Comparison of seed grammar, human-extended grammar, and machine-learned grammar on unseen data
three months ago but not I started getting the headaches three months
ago. The seed grammar was extended by hand and by automatic
learning to cover a development set of 133 utterances. The re-
sult was two new grammars, a human-extended grammar and a
machine-learned grammar, referred to as the extended and learned
grammars in Table 1. The two new grammars were then tested on
132 unseen sentences in order to compare generality of the rules.
Results are reported only for 83 of the 132 sentences which were
covered by the current interlingua design. The remaining 49 sen-
tences were not covered by the current interlingua design and were
not scored. Results are shown in Table 1.
The parsed test sentences were scored in comparison to a hand-
coded correct interlingua representation. Table 1 separates results
for six components of the interlingua: speech act, concepts, top-
level arguments, top-level values, sub-level arguments, and sub-
level values, in addition to the total interlingua, and the domain
action (speech act and concepts combined). The components of the
interlingua were described in Section 2.
The scores for the total interlingua and domain action are re-
ported as percent correct. The scores for the six components of the
interlingua are reported as average percent precision and recall. For
example, if the correct interlingua for a sentence has two concepts,
and the parser produces three, two of which are correct and one of
which is incorrect, the precision is 66% and the recall is 100%.
Several trends are reflected in the results. Both the human-ex-
tended grammar and the machine-learned grammar show improved
performance over the seed grammar. However, the human extended
grammar tended to outperform the automatically learned grammar
in precision, whereas the automatically learned grammar tended to
outperform the human extended grammar in recall. This result is to
be expected: humans are capable of formulating correct rules, but
may not have time to analyze the amount of data that a machine can
analyze. (The time spent on the human extended grammar after the
seed grammar was complete was only five days.)
Grammar Induction: Our work on automatic grammar induc-
tion for Experiment 1 is still in preliminary stages. At this point,
we have experimented with completely automatic induction (no in-
teraction with a user)2 of new grammar rules starting from a core
grammar and using a development set of sentences that are not
parsable according to the core grammar. The development sen-
tences are tagged with the correct interlingua, and they do not stray
from the concepts covered by the core grammar ? they only cor-
respond to alternative (previously unseen) ways of expressing the
same set of covered concepts. The automatic induction is based
on performing tree matching between a skeletal tree representation
obtained from the interlingua, and a collection of parse fragments
2Previous work on our project [2] investigated learning of grammar
rules with user interaction.
[give-information+onset+symptom]
[manner=]
[sudden]
suddenly
[symptom-location=]
DETP
DET
POSS
my
BODYLOCATION
BODYFLUID
[urine]
urine
became [adj:symptom-name=]
ADJ-SYMPTOM
FUNCTION-ADJ-VALS [attribute=]
[color_attribute]
colored
[abnormal]
dis
Parse chunk #1 Parse chunk #2 Parse chunk #3
Original interlingua:
give-information+onset+symptom
(symptom-name=(abnormal,attribute=color_attribute),symptom-location=urine,
manner=sudden)
Learned Grammar Rule:
s[give-information+onset+symptom]
( [manner=] [symptom-location=] *+became [adj:symptom-name=] )
Figure 2: A reconstructed parse tree from the Interlingua
that is derived from parsing the new sentence with the core gram-
mar. Extensions to the existing rules are hypothesized in a way that
would produce the correct interlingua representation for the input
utterance.
Figure 2 shows a tree corresponding to an automatically learned
rule. The input to the learning algorithm is the interlingua (shown
in bold boxes in the figure) and three parse chunks (circled in the
figure). The dashed edges are augmented by the learning algorithm.
4. EXPERIMENT 2:
PORTING TO A NEW DOMAIN
USING A HYBRID RULE-BASED AND
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS APPROACH
We are in the process of developing a new alternative analysis
approach for our interlingua-based speech-translation systems that
combines rule-based and statistical methods and we believe inher-
ently supports faster porting into new domains. The main aspects
of the approach are the following. Rather than developing com-
plete semantic grammars for analyzing utterances into our interlin-
gua (either completely manually, or using grammar induction tech-
niques), we separate the task into two main levels. We continue to
develop and maintain rule-based grammars for phrases that corre-
spond to argument-level concepts of our interlingua representation
(e.g., time expressions, locations, symptom-names, etc.). However,
instead of developing grammar rules for assembling the argument-
level phrases into appropriate domain actions, we apply machine
learning and classification techniques [1] to learn these mappings
from a corpus of interlingua tagged utterances. (Earlier work on
this task is reported in [6].)
We believe this approach should prove to be more suitable for
fast porting into new domains for the following reasons. Many of
the required argument-level phrase grammars for a new domain are
likely to be covered by already existing grammar modules, as can
be seen by examining the XDM (cross-domain) nodes in Figure 1.
The remaining new phrase grammars are fairly fast and straightfor-
ward to develop. The central questions, however, are whether the
statistical methods used for classifying strings of arguments into
domain actions are accurate enough, and what amounts of tagged
data are required to obtain reasonable levels of performance. To
assess this last question, we tested the performance of the current
speech-act and concept classifiers for the expanded travel-domain
when trained with increasing amounts of training data. The results
of these experiments are shown in Figure 3. We also report the
performance of the domain-action classification derived from the
combined speech-act and concepts. As can be seen, performance
reaches a relative plateau at around 4000-5000 utterances. We see
these results as indicative that this approach should indeed prove to
be significantly easier to port to new domains. Creating a tagged
database of this order of magnitude can be done in a few weeks,
rather than the months required for complete manual grammar de-
velopment time.
5. EXPERIMENT 3:
PORTING THE SPEECH RECOGNIZER
TO NEW DOMAINS
When the speech recognition components (acoustic models, pro-
nunciation dictionary, vocabulary, and language model) are ported
across domains and languages mainly three types of mismatches
Speech Act Classification Accuracy for 16-fold 
Cross-Validation
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
500 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6009
Training Set Size
M
ea
n 
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Concept Sequence Classification Accuracy for 16-
fold Cross-Validation
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
500 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6009
Training Set Size
M
ea
n 
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Dialog Act Classification Accuracy for 16-fold 
Cross-Validation
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
500 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6009
Training Set Size
M
ea
n 
A
cc
ur
ac
y
Figure 3: Performance of Speech-Act, Concept, and Domain-Action Classifiers Using Increasing Amounts of Training Data
Baseline Systems WER on Different Tasks [%]
BN (Broadcast News) h4e98 1, all F-conditions 18.5
ESST (scheduling and travel planning domain) 24.3
BN+ESST 18.4
C-STAR (travel planning domain) 20.2
Adaptation!Meeting Recognition
ESST on meeting data 54.1
BN on meeting data 44.2
+ acoustic MAP Adaptation (10h meeting data) 40.4
+ language model interpolation (16 meetings) 38.7
BN+ESST on meeting data 42.2
+ language model interpolation (16 meetings) 39.0
Adaptation! Doctor-Patient Domain
C-STAR on doctor-patient data 34.1
+ language model interpolation ( 34 dialogs) 25.1
Table 2: Recognition Results
occur: (1) mismatches in recording condition; (2) speaking style
mismatches; as well as (3) vocabulary and language model mis-
matches. In the past these problems have mostly been solved by
collecting large amounts of acoustic data for training the acoustic
models and development of the pronunciation dictionary, as well
as large text data for vocabulary coverage and language model cal-
culation. However, especially for highly specialized domains and
conversational speaking styles, large databases cannot always be
provided. Therefore, our research has focused on the problem of
how to build LVCSR systems for new tasks and languages [7, 9]
using only a limited amount of data. In this third experiment we
investigate the results of porting the speech recognition component
of our MT system to different new domains. The experiments and
improvements were conducted with the Janus Speech Recognition
Toolkit JRTk [13].
Table 2 shows the results of porting four baseline speech recog-
nition systems to the doctor-patient domain, and to the meeting do-
main. The four baseline systems are trained on Broadcast News
(BN), English SpontaneousScheduling Task (ESST), combined BN
and ESST, and the travel planning domain of the C-STAR consor-
tium (http://www.c-star.org). The given tasks illustrate
a variety of domain size, speaking styles and recording conditions
ranging from clean spontaneous speech in a very limited domain
(ESST, C-STAR) to highly conversational multi-party speech in an
extremely broad domain (Meeting). As a consequence the error
rates on the meeting data are quite high but using MAP (Maximum
A Posteriori) acoustic model adaptation and language model adap-
tation the error rate can be reduced by about 10.2% relative over the
BN baseline system. With the doctor-patient data the drop in error
rate was less severe which can be explained by the similar speaking
style and recording conditions for C-STAR and doctor-patient data.
Details about the applied recognition engine can be found in [10]
for ESST and [11] for the BN system.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research work reported here was funded in part by the DARPA
TIDES Program and supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under Grant number 9982227. Any opinions, findings
and conclusions or recomendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation (NSF) or DARPA.
7. REFERENCES
[1] W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel, K. van der Sloot, and A. van den
Bosch. TiMBL: Tilburg Memory Based Learner, version 3.0
Reference Guide. Technical Report Technical Report 00-01,
ILK, 2000. Avaliable at http://ilk.kub.nl/ ilk/papers/ilk0001.ps.gz.
[2] M. Gavalda`. Epiphenomenal Grammar Acquisition with
GSG. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Conversational
Systems of the 6th Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing and the 1st Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ANLP/NAACL-2000), Seattle, U.S.A, May 2000.
[3] L. Levin, D. Gates, A. Lavie, F. Pianesi, D. Wallace,
T. Watanabe, and M. Woszczyna. Evaluation of a Practical
Interlingua for Task-Oriented Dialogue. In Workshop on
Applied Interlinguas: Practical Applications of Interlingual
Approaches to NLP, Seattle, 2000.
[4] L. Levin, D. Gates, A. Lavie, and A. Waibel. An Interlingua
Based on Domain Actions for Machine Translation of
Task-Oriented Dialogues. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP?98),
pages Vol. 4, 1155?1158, Sydney, Australia, 1998.
[5] L. Levin, A. Lavie, M. Woszczyna, D. Gates, M. Gavalda`,
D. Koll, and A. Waibel. The Janus-III Translation System.
Machine Translation. To appear.
[6] M. Munk. Shallow statistical parsing for machine translation.
Master?s thesis, University of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe,
Germany, 1999. http://www.is.cs.cmu.edu/papers/
speech/masters-thesis/MS99.munk.ps.gz.
[7] T. Schultz and A. Waibel. Polyphone Decision Tree
Specialization for Language Adaptation. In Proceedings of
the ICASSP, Istanbul, Turkey, 2000.
[8] A. Waibel. Interactive Translation of Conversational Speech.
Computer, 19(7):41?48, 1996.
[9] A. Waibel, P. Geutner, L. Mayfield-Tomokiyo, T. Schultz,
and M. Woszczyna. Multilinguality in Speech and Spoken
Language Systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue
on Spoken Language Processing, 88(8):1297?1313, 2000.
[10] A. Waibel, H. Soltau, T. Schultz, T. Schaaf, and F. Metze.
Multilingual Speech Recognition, chapter From Speech Input
to Augmented Word Lattices, pages 33?45. Springer Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, artificial Intelligence edition,
2000.
[11] A. Waibel, H. Yu, H. Soltau, T. Schultz, T. Schaaf, Y. Pan,
F. Metze, and M. Bett. Advances in Meeting Recognition.
Submitted to HLT 2001, January 2001.
[12] M. Woszczyna, M. Broadhead, D. Gates, M. Gavalda`,
A. Lavie, L. Levin, and A. Waibel. A Modular Approach to
Spoken Language Translation for Large Domains. In
Proceedings of Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas (AMTA?98), Langhorn, PA,
October 1998.
[13] T. Zeppenfeld, M. Finke, K. Ries, and A. Waibel.
Recognition of Conversational Telephone Speech using the
Janus Speech Engine. In Proceedings of the ICASSP?97,
Mu?nchen, Germany, 1997.
