Improved Cross-Language Retrieval
using Backoff Translation
Philip Resnik,1;2 Douglas Oard,2;3 and Gina Levow2
Department of Linguistics,1
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies,2
College of Information Studies,3
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
fresnik,ginag@umiacs.umd.edu, oard@glue.umd.edu
ABSTRACT
The limited coverage of available translation lexicons can pose a se-
rious challenge in some cross-language information retrieval appli-
cations. We present two techniques for combining evidence from
dictionary-based and corpus-based translation lexicons, and show
that backoff translation outperforms a technique based on merging
lexicons.
1. INTRODUCTION
The effectiveness of a broad class of cross-language information
retrieval (CLIR) techniques that are based on term-by-term transla-
tion depends on the coverage and accuracy of the available trans-
lation lexicon(s). Two types of translation lexicons are commonly
used, one based on translation knowledge extracted from bilingual
dictionaries [1] and the other based on translation knowledge ex-
tracted from bilingual corpora [8]. Dictionaries provide reliable ev-
idence, but often lack translation preference information. Corpora,
by contrast, are often a better source for translations of slang or newly
coined terms, but the statistical analysis through which the trans-
lations are extracted sometimes produces erroneous results. In this
paper we explore the question of how best to combine evidencefrom
these two sources.
2. TRANSLATION LEXICONS
Our term-by-term translation technique (described below) requires
a translation lexicon (henceforth tralex) in which each word f is as-
sociated with a ranked set fe
1
; e
2
; : : : e
n
g of translations. We used
two translation lexicons in our experiments.
2.1 WebDict Tralex
We downloadeda freely available, manually constructedEnglish-
French term list from the Web1 and inverted it to French-English
1http://www.freedict.com
.
format. Since the WebDict translations appear in no particular or-
der, we ranked the e
i
based on target language unigram statistics
calculated over a large comparable corpus, the English portion of
the Cross-LanguageEvaluation Forum (CLEF) collection, smoothed
with statistics from the Brown corpus, a balanced corpus covering
many genres of English. All single-word translations are ordered by
decreasing unigram frequency, followed by all multi-word transla-
tions, and finally by any single-word entries not found in either cor-
pus. This ordering has the effect of minimizing the effect of infre-
quent words in non-standard usages or of misspellings that some-
times appear in bilingual term lists.
2.2 STRAND Tralex
Our second lexical resource is a translation lexicon obtained fully
automatically via analysisof parallel French-Englishdocuments from
the Web. A collection of 3,378 document pairs was obtained using
STRAND, our technique for mining the Web for bilingual text [7].
These document pairs were aligned internally, using their HTML
markup, to produce 63,094 aligned text ?chunks? ranging in length
from 2 to 30 words, 8 words on average per chunk, for a total of
500K words per side. Viterbi word-alignments for these paired
chunks were obtained using the GIZA implementation of the IBM
statistical translation models.2 An ordered set of translation pairs
was obtained by treating each alignment link between words as a
co-occurrence and scoring each word pair according to the likeli-
hood ratio [2]. We then rank the translation alternatives in order of
decreasing likelihood ratio score.
3. CLIR EXPERIMENTS
Ranked tralexes are particularly well suited to a simple ranked
term-by-term translation approach. In our experiments, we use top-
2 balanced document translation, in which we produce exactly two
English terms for each French term. For terms with no known trans-
lation, the untranslated French term is generated twice (often appro-
priate for proper names). For French terms with one translation, that
translation is generated twice. For French terms with two or more
translations, we generate the first two translations in the tralex. Thus
balanced translation has the effect of introducing a uniform weight-
ing over the top n translations for each term (here n = 2).
Benefits of the approachinclude simplicity and modularity ? no-
tice that a lexicon containing ranked translations is the only require-
ment, and in particular that there is no need for access to the in-
ternals of the IR system or to the document collection in order to
2http://www.clsp.jhu.edu/ws99/projects/mt/
perform computations on term frequencies or weights. In addition,
the approach is an effective one: in previous experiments we have
found that this balancedtranslation strategy significantly outperforms
the usual (unbalanced) technique of including all known translations [3].
We have also investigated the relationship between balanced trans-
lation and Pirkola?s structured query formulation method [6].
For our experiments we used the CLEF-2000 French document
collection (approximately 21 million words from articles in Le Monde).
Differences in use of diacritics, case, and punctuation can inhibit
matching between tralex entries and document terms, so we normal-
ize the tralex and the documents by converting characters to low-
ercase and removing all diacritic marks and punctuation. We then
translate the documents using the process described above, index
the translated documentswith the Inquery information retrieval sys-
tem, and perform retrieval using ?long? queries formulated by group-
ing all terms in the title, narrative, and description fields of each
English topic description using Inquery?s #sum operator. We report
mean average precision on the 34 topics for which relevant French
documentsexist, basedon the relevancejudgments provided by CLEF.
We evaluated several strategies for using the WebDict and STRAND
tralexes.
3.1 WebDict Tralex
Since a tralex may contain an eclectic mix of root forms and mor-
phological variants, we use a four-stage backoff strategy to maxi-
mize coverage while limiting spurious translations:
1. Match the surface form of a document term to surface forms
of French terms in the tralex.
2. Match the stem of a document term to surface forms of French
terms in the tralex.
3. Match the surface form of a document term to stems of French
terms in the tralex.
4. Match the stem of a document term to stems of French terms in
the tralex.
We used unsupervisedinduction of stemming rules basedon the French
collection to build the stemmer [5]. The process terminates as soon
as a match is found at any stage, and the known translations for that
match are generated. The process may produce an inappropriate
morphological variant for a correct English translation, so we used
Inquery?s English kstem stemmer at indexing time to minimize the
effect of that factor on retrieval effectiveness.
3.2 STRAND Tralex
One limitation of a statistically derived tralex is that any term has
some probability of aligning with any other term. Merely sorting
translation alternatives in order of decreasing likelihood ratio will
thus find some translation alternatives for every French term that ap-
peared at least once in the set of parallel Web pages. In order to limit
the introduction of spurious translations, we included only transla-
tion pairs with at least N co-occurrences in the set used to build the
tralex. We performed runs with N = 1; 2; 3, using the four-stage
backoff strategy described above.
3.3 WebDict Merging using STRAND
When two sources of evidence with different characteristics are
available, a combination-of-evidence strategy can sometimes out-
perform either source alone. Our initial experiments indicated that
the WebDict tralex was the better of the two (see below), so we adopted
a reranking strategy in which the WebDict tralex was refined ac-
cording a voting strategy to which both the original WebDict and
STRAND tralex rankings contributed.
Condition MAP
STRAND (N = 1) 0.2320
STRAND (N = 2) 0.2440
STRAND (N = 3) 0.2499
Merging 0.2892
WebDict 0.2919
Backoff 0.3282
Table 1: Mean Average Precision (MAP), averaged over 34 top-
ics
For each French term that appeared in both tralexes, we gave the
top-ranked translation in each tralex a score of 100, the next a score
of 99, and so on. We then summed the WebDict and STRAND scores
for each translation, reranked the WebDict translations based on that
sum, and then appendedany STRAND-only translations for that French
term. Thus, although both sourcesof evidence were weighted equally
in the voting, STRAND-only evidence received lower precedence
in the merged ranking. For French terms that appeared in only one
tralex, we included those entries unchangedin the merged tralex. In
this experiment run we used a threshold of N = 1, and applied the
four-stage backoff strategy described above to the merged resource.
3.4 WebDict Backoff to STRAND
A possibleweaknessof our merging strategy is that inflected forms
are more common in our STRAND tralex, while root forms are more
common in our WebDict tralex. STRAND tralex entries that were
copied unchangedinto the merged tralex thus often matched in step
1 of the four-stage backoff strategy, preventing WebDict contribu-
tions from being used. With the WebDict tralex outperforming the
STRAND tralex, this factor could hurt our results. As an alterna-
tive to merging, therefore, we also tried a simple backoff strategy in
which we used the original WebDict tralex with the four-stage back-
off strategy described above, to which we added a fifth stage in the
event that fewer than two WebDict tralex matches were found:
5. Match the surface form of a document term to surface forms
of French terms in the STRAND tralex.
We used a threshold of N = 2 for this experiment run.
4. RESULTS
Table 1 summarizes our results. Increasing thresholds seem to
be helpful with the STRAND tralex, although the differences were
not found to be statistically significant by a paired two-tailed t-test
with p < 0:05. Merging the tralexes provided no improvement
over using the WebDict tralex alone, but our backoff strategy pro-
duced a statistically significant 12% improvement in mean average
precision (at p < 0:01) over the next best tralex (WebDict alone).
As Figure 1 shows, the improvement is remarkably consistent, with
only four of the 34 topics adverselyaffected and only one topic show-
ing a substantial negative impact.
Breaking down the backoff results by stage (Table 2), we find
that the majority of query-to-document hits are obtained in the first
stage, i.e. matches of the term?s surface form in the document to a
translation of the surface form in the dictionary. However, the back-
off process improves by-token coverage of terms in documents by
8%, and gives a 3% relative improvement in retrieval results; it also
contributed additional translations to the top-2 set in approximately
30% of the cases, leading to the statistically significant 12% relative
improvement in mean averageprecision as compared to the baseline
using WebDict alone with 4-stage backoff.
Figure 1: WebDict-to-tralex backoff vs. WebDict alone, by
query
Stage (forms) Lexicon matches
1 (surface-surface) 70.38%
2 (stem-surface) 3.18%
3 (surface-stem) 0.46%
4 (stem-stem) 0.98%
5 (STRAND) 8.34%
No match found 16.66%
Table 2: Term matches in 5-stage backoff
5. CONCLUSIONS
There are many ways of combining evidence from multiple trans-
lation lexicons. We use tralexes similar to those usedby Nie et al [4],
but our work differs in our use of balanced translation and a back-
off translation strategy (which produces a stronger baseline for our
WebDict tralex), and in our comparisonof merging and backoff trans-
lation strategies for combining resources. In future work we plan to
explore other combinations of merging and backoff and other merg-
ing strategies, including post-retrieval merging of the ranked lists.
In addition, parallel corpora can be exploited for more than just
the extraction of a non-contextualized translation lexicon. We are
currently engagedin work on lexical selection methods that take ad-
vantage of contextual information, in the context of our research on
machine translation, and we expect that CLIR results will be im-
proved by contextually-informed scoring of term translations.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by Department of Defense
contract MDA90496C1250 and TIDES DARPA/ITO Cooperative
Agreement N660010028910,
7. REFERENCES
[1] L. Ballesteros and W. B. Croft. Resolving ambiguity for
cross-language retrieval. In W. B. Croft, A. Moffat, and C. V.
Rijsbergen, editors, Proceedings of the 21st Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 64?71. ACM
Press, Aug. 1998.
[2] T. Dunning. Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and
coincidence. Computational Linguistics, 19(1):61?74, March
1993.
[3] G.-A. Levow and D. W. Oard. Translingual topic tracking
with PRISE. In Working Notes of the Third Topic Detection
and Tracking Workshop, Feb. 2000.
[4] J.-Y. Nie, M. Simard, P. Isabelle, and R. Durand.
Cross-language information retrieval based on parallel texts
and automatic mining of parallel texts from the web. In
M. Hearst, F. Gey, and R. Tong, editors, Proceedings of the
22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pages
74?81, Aug. 1999.
[5] D. W. Oard, G.-A. Levow, and C. I. Cabezas. CLEF
experiments at Maryland: Statistical stemming and backoff
translation. In C. Peters, editor, Proceedings of the First
Cross-Language Evaluation Forum. 2001. To appear.
http://www.glue.umd.edu/oard/research.html.
[6] D. W. Oard and J. Wang. NTCIR-2 ECIR experiments at
Maryland: Comparing structured queries and balanced
translation. In Second National Institute of Informatics (NII)
Test Collection Information Retrieval (NTCIR) workshop.
forthcoming.
[7] P. Resnik. Mining the Web for bilingual text. In 37th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL?99), College Park, Maryland, June 1999.
[8] P. Sheridan and J. P. Ballerini. Experiments in multilingual
information retrieval using the SPIDER system. In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Aug. 1996.
