Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 579?586, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Emotions from text: machine learning for text-based emotion prediction
Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm?
Dept. of Linguistics
UIUC
Illinois, USA
ebbaalm@uiuc.edu
Dan Roth
Dept. of Computer Science
UIUC
Illinois, USA
danr@uiuc.edu
Richard Sproat
Dept. of Linguistics
Dept. of Electrical Eng.
UIUC
Illinois, USA
rws@uiuc.edu
Abstract
In addition to information, text con-
tains attitudinal, and more specifically,
emotional content. This paper explores
the text-based emotion prediction prob-
lem empirically, using supervised machine
learning with the SNoW learning archi-
tecture. The goal is to classify the emo-
tional affinity of sentences in the narra-
tive domain of children?s fairy tales, for
subsequent usage in appropriate expres-
sive rendering of text-to-speech synthe-
sis. Initial experiments on a preliminary
data set of 22 fairy tales show encourag-
ing results over a na??ve baseline and BOW
approach for classification of emotional
versus non-emotional contents, with some
dependency on parameter tuning. We
also discuss results for a tripartite model
which covers emotional valence, as well
as feature set alernations. In addition, we
present plans for a more cognitively sound
sequential model, taking into considera-
tion a larger set of basic emotions.
1 Introduction
Text does not only communicate informative con-
tents, but also attitudinal information, including
emotional states. The following reports on an em-
pirical study of text-based emotion prediction.
Section 2 gives a brief overview of the intended
application area, whereas section 3 summarizes re-
lated work. Next, section 4 explains the empirical
study, including the machine learning model, the
corpus, the feature set, parameter tuning, etc. Sec-
tion 5 presents experimental results from two classi-
fication tasks and feature set modifications. Section
6 describes the agenda for refining the model, before
presenting concluding remarks in 7.
2 Application area: Text-to-speech
Narrative text is often especially prone to having
emotional contents. In the literary genre of fairy
tales, emotions such as HAPPINESS and ANGER and
related cognitive states, e.g. LOVE or HATE, become
integral parts of the story plot, and thus are of par-
ticular importance. Moreover, the story teller read-
ing the story interprets emotions in order to orally
convey the story in a fashion which makes the story
come alive and catches the listeners? attention.
In speech, speakers effectively express emotions
by modifying prosody, including pitch, intensity,
and durational cues in the speech signal. Thus, in
order to make text-to-speech synthesis sound as nat-
ural and engaging as possible, it is important to con-
vey the emotional stance in the text. However, this
implies first having identified the appropriate emo-
tional meaning of the corresponding text passage.
Thus, an application for emotional text-to-speech
synthesis has to solve two basic problems. First,
what emotion or emotions most appropriately de-
scribe a certain text passage, and second, given a text
passage and a specified emotional mark-up, how to
render the prosodic contour in order to convey the
emotional content, (Cahn, 1990). The text-based
emotion prediction task (TEP) addresses the first of
these two problems.
579
3 Previous work
For a complete general overview of the field of af-
fective computing, see (Picard, 1997). (Liu, Lieber-
man and Selker, 2003) is a rare study in text-
based inference of sentence-level emotional affin-
ity. The authors adopt the notion of basic emotions,
cf. (Ekman, 1993), and use six emotion categories:
ANGER, DISGUST, FEAR, HAPPINESS, SADNESS,
SURPRISE. They critique statistical NLP for being
unsuccessful at the small sentence level, and instead
use a database of common-sense knowledge and cre-
ate affect models which are combined to form a rep-
resentation of the emotional affinity of a sentence.
At its core, the approach remains dependent on an
emotion lexicon and hand-crafted rules for concep-
tual polarity. In order to be effective, emotion recog-
nition must go beyond such resources; the authors
note themselves that lexical affinity is fragile. The
method was tested on 20 users? preferences for an
email-client, based on user-composed text emails
describing short but colorful events. While the users
preferred the emotional client, this evaluation does
not reveal emotion classification accuracy, nor how
well the model generalizes on a large data set.
Whereas work on emotion classification from
the point of view of natural speech and human-
computer dialogues is fairly extensive, e.g. (Scherer,
2003), (Litman and Forbes-Riley, 2004), this ap-
pears not to be the case for text-to-speech synthe-
sis (TTS). A short study by (Sugimoto et al, 2004)
addresses sentence-level emotion recognition for
Japanese TTS. Their model uses a composition as-
sumption: the emotion of a sentence is a function of
the emotional affinity of the words in the sentence.
They obtain emotional judgements of 73 adjectives
and a set of sentences from 15 human subjects and
compute words? emotional strength based on the ra-
tio of times a word or a sentence was judged to fall
into a particular emotion bucket, given the number
of human subjects. Additionally, they conducted an
interactive experiment concerning the acoustic ren-
dering of emotion, using manual tuning of prosodic
parameters for Japanese sentences. While the au-
thors actually address the two fundamental problems
of emotional TTS, their approach is impractical and
most likely cannot scale up for a real corpus. Again,
while lexical items with clear emotional meaning,
such as happy or sad, matter, emotion classifica-
tion probably needs to consider additional inference
mechanisms. Moreover, a na??ve compositional ap-
proach to emotion recognition is risky due to simple
linguistic facts, such as context-dependent seman-
tics, domination of words with multiple meanings,
and emotional negation.
Many NLP problems address attitudinal mean-
ing distinctions in text, e.g. detecting subjective
opinion documents or expressions, e.g. (Wiebe et
al, 2004), measuring strength of subjective clauses
(Wilson, Wiebe and Hwa, 2004), determining word
polarity (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997) or
texts? attitudinal valence, e.g. (Turney, 2002), (Bai,
Padman and Airoldi, 2004), (Beineke, Hastie and
Vaithyanathan, 2003), (Mullen and Collier, 2003),
(Pang and Lee, 2003). Here, it suffices to say that
the targets, the domain, and the intended application
differ; our goal is to classify emotional text passages
in children?s stories, and eventually use this infor-
mation for rendering expressive child-directed sto-
rytelling in a text-to-speech application. This can be
useful, e.g. in therapeutic education of children with
communication disorders (van Santen et al, 2003).
4 Empirical study
This part covers the experimental study with a for-
mal problem definition, computational implementa-
tion, data, features, and a note on parameter tuning.
4.1 Machine learning model
Determining emotion of a linguistic unit can be
cast as a multi-class classification problem. For
the flat case, let T denote the text, and s an em-
bedded linguistic unit, such as a sentence, where
s ? T . Let k be the number of emotion classes E =
{em1, em2, .., emk}, where em1 denotes the special
case of neutrality, or absence of emotion. The goal
is to determine a mapping function f : s ? emi,
such that we obtain an ordered labeled pair (s, emi).
The mapping is based on F = {f1, f2, .., fn}, where
F contains the features derived from the text.
Furthermore, if multiple emotion classes can
characterize s, then given E? ? E, the target of the
mapping function becomes the ordered pair (s,E?).
Finally, as further discussed in section 6, the hier-
archical case of label assignment requires a sequen-
580
tial model that further defines levels of coarse ver-
sus fine-grained classifiers, as done by (Li and Roth,
2002) for the question classification problem.
4.2 Implementation
Whereas our goal is to predict finer emotional mean-
ing distinctions according to emotional categories in
speech; in this study, we focus on the basic task of
recognizing emotional passages and on determining
their valence (i.e. positive versus negative) because
we currently do not have enough training data to ex-
plore finer-grained distinctions. The goal here is to
get a good understanding of the nature of the TEP
problem and explore features which may be useful.
We explore two cases of flat classification, us-
ing a variation of the Winnow update rule imple-
mented in the SNoW learning architecture (Carl-
son et al, 1999),1 which learns a linear classifier
in feature space, and has been successful in sev-
eral NLP applications, e.g. semantic role labeling
(Koomen, Punyakanok, Roth and Yih, 2005). In
the first case, the set of emotion classes E consists
of EMOTIONAL versus non-emotional or NEUTRAL,
i.e. E = {N,E}. In the second case, E has been
incremented with emotional distinctions according
to the valence, i.e. E = {N,PE,NE}. Experi-
ments used 10-fold cross-validation, with 90% train
and 10% test data.2
4.3 Data
The goal of our current data annotation project is
to annotate a corpus of approximately 185 children
stories, including Grimms?, H.C. Andersen?s and B.
Potter?s stories. So far, the annotation process pro-
ceeds as follows: annotators work in pairs on the
same stories. They have been trained separately and
work independently in order to avoid any annota-
tion bias and get a true understanding of the task
difficulty. Each annotator marks the sentence level
with one of eight primary emotions, see table 1, re-
flecting an extended set of basic emotions (Ekman,
1993). In order to make the annotation process more
focused, emotion is annotated from the point of view
of the text, i.e. the feeler in the sentence. While the
primary emotions are targets, the sentences are also
1Available from http://l2r.cs.uiuc.edu/?cogcomp/
2Experiments were also run for Perceptron, however the re-
sults are not included. Overall, Perceptron performed worse.
marked for other affective contents, i.e. background
mood, secondary emotions via intensity, feeler, and
textual cues. Disagreements in annotations are re-
solved by a second pass of tie-breaking by the first
author, who chooses one of the competing labels.
Eventually, the completed annotations will be made
available.
Table 1: Basic emotions used in annotation
Abbreviation Emotion class
A ANGRY
D DISGUSTED
F FEARFUL
H HAPPY
Sa SAD
Su+ POSITIVELY SURPRISED
Su- NEGATIVELY SURPRISED
Emotion annotation is hard; interannotator agree-
ment currently range at ? = .24 ? .51, with the ra-
tio of observed annotation overlap ranging between
45-64%, depending on annotator pair and stories as-
signed. This is expected, given the subjective nature
of the annotation task. The lack of a clear defini-
tion for emotion vs. non-emotion is acknowledged
across the emotion literature, and contributes to dy-
namic and shifting annotation targets. Indeed, a
common source of confusion is NEUTRAL, i.e. de-
ciding whether or not a sentence is emotional or
non-emotional. Emotion perception also depends on
which character?s point-of-view the annotator takes,
and on extratextual factors such as annotator?s per-
sonality or mood. It is possible that by focusing
more on the training of annotator pairs, particularly
on joint training, agreement might improve. How-
ever, that would also result in a bias, which is prob-
ably not preferable to actual perception. Moreover,
what agreement levels are needed for successful ex-
pressive TTS remains an empirical question.
The current data set consisted of a preliminary an-
notated and tie-broken data set of 1580 sentence, or
22 Grimms? tales. The label distribution is in table
2. NEUTRAL was most frequent with 59.94%.
Table 2: Percent of annotated labels
A D F H
12.34% 0.89% 7.03% 6.77%
N SA SU+ SU.-
59.94% 7.34% 2.59% 3.10%
581
Table 3: % EMOTIONAL vs. NEUTRAL examples
E N
40.06% 59.94%
Table 4: % POSITIVE vs. NEGATIVE vs. NEUTRAL
PE NE N
9.87% 30.19% 59.94%
Next, for the purpose of this study, all emotional
classes, i.e. A, D, F, H, SA, SU+, SU-, were com-
bined into one emotional superclass E for the first
experiment, as shown in table 3. For the second ex-
periment, we used two emotional classes, i.e. pos-
itive versus negative emotions; PE={H, SU+} and
NE={A, D, F, SA, SU-}, as seen in table 4.
4.4 Feature set
The feature extraction was written in python. SNoW
only requires active features as input, which resulted
in a typical feature vector size of around 30 features.
The features are listed below. They were imple-
mented as boolean values, with continuous values
represented by ranges. The ranges generally over-
lapped, in order to get more generalization coverage.
1. First sentence in story
2. Conjunctions of selected features (see below)
3. Direct speech (i.e. whole quote) in sentence
4. Thematic story type (3 top and 15 sub-types)
5. Special punctuation (! and ?)
6. Complete upper-case word
7. Sentence length in words (0-1, 2-3, 4-8, 9-15,
16-25, 26-35, >35)
8. Ranges of story progress (5-100%, 15-100%,
80-100%, 90-100%)
9. Percent of JJ, N, V, RB (0%, 1-100%, 50-
100%, 80-100%)
10. V count in sentence, excluding participles (0-1,
0-3, 0-5, 0-7, 0-9, > 9)
11. Positive and negative word counts ( ? 1, ? 2,
? 3, ? 4, ? 5, ? 6)
12. WordNet emotion words
13. Interjections and affective words
14. Content BOW: N, V, JJ, RB words by POS
Feature conjunctions covered pairings of counts of
positive and negative words with range of story
progress or interjections, respectively.
Feature groups 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14 are ex-
tracted automatically from the sentences in the sto-
ries; with the SNoW POS-tagger used for features
9, 10, and 14. Group 10 reflects how many verbs
are active in a sentence. Together with the quotation
and punctuation, verb domination intends to capture
the assumption that emotion is often accompanied
by increased action and interaction. Feature group
4 is based on Finish scholar Antti Aarne?s classes
of folk-tale types according to their informative the-
matic contents (Aarne, 1964). The current tales
have 3 top story types (ANIMAL TALES, ORDINARY
FOLK-TALES, and JOKES AND ANECDOTES), and
15 subtypes (e.g. supernatural helpers is a subtype
of the ORDINARY FOLK-TALE). This feature intends
to provide an idea about the story?s general affective
personality (Picard, 1997), whereas the feature re-
flecting the story progress is hoped to capture that
some emotions may be more prevalent in certain
sections of the story (e.g. the happy end).
For semantic tasks, words are obviously impor-
tant. In addition to considering ?content words?, we
also explored specific word lists. Group 11 uses
2 lists of 1636 positive and 2008 negative words,
obtained from (Di Cicco et al, online). Group 12
uses lexical lists extracted from WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998), on the basis of the primary emotion words
in their adjectival and nominal forms. For the ad-
jectives, Py-WordNet?s (Steele et al, 2004) SIMI-
LAR feature was used to retrieve similar items of
the primary emotion adjectives, exploring one addi-
tional level in the hierarchy (i.e. similar items of all
senses of all words in the synset). For the nouns and
any identical verbal homonyms, synonyms and hy-
ponyms were extracted manually.3 Feature group 13
used a short list of 22 interjections collected manu-
ally by browsing educational ESL sites, whereas the
affective word list of 771 words consisted of a com-
bination of the non-neutral words from (Johnson-
Laird and Oatley, 1989) and (Siegle, online). Only a
subset of these lexical lists actually occurred.4
3Multi-words were transformed to hyphenated form.
4At this point, neither stems and bigrams nor a list of ono-
matopoeic words contribute to accuracy. Intermediate resource
processing inserted some feature noise.
582
The above feature set is henceforth referred to as
all features, whereas content BOW is just group 14.
The content BOW is a more interesting baseline than
the na??ve one, P(Neutral), i.e. always assigning the
most likely NEUTRAL category. Lastly, emotions
blend and transform (Liu, Lieberman and Selker,
2003). Thus, emotion and background mood of im-
mediately adjacent sentences, i.e. the sequencing,
seems important. At this point, it is not implemented
automatically. Instead, it was extracted from the
manual emotion and mood annotations. If sequenc-
ing seemed important, an automatic method using
sequential target activation could be added next.
4.5 Parameter tuning
The Winnow parameters that were tuned included
promotional ?, demotional ?, activation threshold
?, initial weights ?, and the regularization parame-
ter, S, which implements a margin between positive
and negative examples. Given the currently fairly
limited data, results from 2 alternative tuning meth-
ods, applied to all features, are reported.
? For the condition called sep-tune-eval, 50%
of the sentences were randomly selected and
set aside to be used for the parameter tuning
process only. Of this subset, 10% were subse-
quently randomly chosen as test set with the re-
maining 90% used for training during the auto-
matic tuning process, which covered 4356 dif-
ferent parameter combinations. Resulting pa-
rameters were: ? = 1.1, ? = 0.5, ? = 5,
? = 1.0, S = 0.5. The remaining half of
the data was used for training and testing in the
10-fold cross-validation evaluation. (Also, note
the slight change for P(Neutral) in table 5, due
to randomly splitting the data.)
? Given that the data set is currently small, for the
condition named same-tune-eval, tuning was
performed automatically on all data using a
slightly smaller set of combinations, and then
manually adjusted against the 10-fold cross-
validation process. Resulting parameters were:
? = 1.2, ? = 0.9, ? = 4, ? = 1, S = 0.5. All
data was used for evaluation.
Emotion classification was sensitive to the selected
tuning data. Generally, a smaller tuning set resulted
in pejorative parameter settings. The random selec-
tion could make a difference, but was not explored.
5 Results and discussion
This section first presents the results from exper-
iments with the two different confusion sets de-
scribed above, as well as feature experimentation.
5.1 Classification results
Average accuracy from 10-fold cross validation for
the first experiment, i.e. classifying sentences as ei-
ther NEUTRAL or EMOTIONAL, are included in ta-
ble 5 and figure 1 for the two tuning conditions on
the main feature sets and baselines. As expected,
Table 5: Mean classification accuracy: N vs. E, 2 conditions
same-tune-eval sep-tune-eval
P(Neutral) 59.94 60.05
Content BOW 61.01 58.30
All features except BOW 64.68 63.45
All features 68.99 63.31
All features + sequencing 69.37 62.94
degree of success reflects parameter settings, both
for content BOW and all features. Nevertheless, un-
der these circumstances, performance above a na??ve
baseline and a BOW approach is obtained. More-
over, sequencing shows potential for contributing
in one case. However, observations also point to
three issues: first, the current data set appears to
be too small. Second, the data is not easily separa-
ble. This comes as no surprise, given the subjective
nature of the task, and the rather low interannota-
tor agreement, reported above. Moreover, despite
the schematic narrative plots of children?s stories,
tales still differ in their overall affective orientation,
which increases data complexity. Third and finally,
the EMOTION class is combined by basic emotion
labels, rather than an original annotated label.
More detailed averaged results from 10-fold
cross-validation are included in table 6 using all
features and the separated tuning and evaluation
data condition sep-tune-eval. With these parame-
ters, approximately 3% improvement in accuracy
over the na??ve baseline P(Neutral) was recorded,
and 5% over the content BOW, which obviously did
poorly with these parameters. Moreover, precision is
583
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
same-tune-eval
sep-tune-eval
Tuning sets
% Accuracy
P(Neutral) Content BOWAll features except BOW All featuresAll features + sequencing
Figure 1: Accuracy under different conditions (in %)
Table 6: Classifying N vs. E (all features, sep-tune-eval)
Measure N E
Averaged accuracy 0.63 0.63
Averaged error 0.37 0.37
Averaged precision 0.66 0.56
Averaged recall 0.75 0.42
Averaged F-score 0.70 0.47
higher than recall for the combined EMOTION class.
In comparison, with the same-tune-eval procedure,
the accuracy improved by approximately 9% over
P(Neutral) and by 8% over content BOW.
In the second experiment, the emotion category
was split into two classes: emotions with positive
versus negative valence. The results in terms of pre-
cision, recall, and F-score are included in table 7, us-
ing all features and the sep-tune-eval condition. The
decrease in performance for the emotion classes mir-
rors the smaller amounts of data available for each
class. As noted in section 4.3, only 9.87% of the
sentences were annotated with a positive emotion,
and the results for this class are worse. Thus, perfor-
mance seems likely to improve as more annotated
story data becomes available; at this point, we are
experimenting with merely around 12% of the total
texts targeted by the data annotation project.
5.2 Feature experiments
Emotions are poorly understood, and it is espe-
cially unclear which features may be important for
their recognition from text. Thus, we experimented
Table 7: N, PE, and NE (all features, sep-tune-eval)
N NE PE
Averaged precision 0.64 0.45 0.13
Averaged recall 0.75 0.27 0.19
Averaged F-score 0.69 0.32 0.13
Table 8: Feature group members
Word lists interj., WordNet, affective lists, pos/neg
Syntactic length ranges, % POS, V-count ranges
Story-related % story-progress, 1st sent., story type
Orthographic punctuation, upper-case words, quote
Conjunctions Conjunctions with pos/neg
Content BOW Words (N,V,Adj, Adv)
with different feature configurations. Starting with
all features, again using 10-fold cross-validation for
the separated tuning-evaluation condition sep-tune-
eval, one additional feature group was removed un-
til none remained. The feature groups are listed in
table 8. Figure 2 on the next page shows the accu-
racy at each step of the cumulative subtraction pro-
cess. While some feature groups, e.g. syntactic, ap-
peared less important, the removal order mattered;
e.g. if syntactic features were removed first, accu-
racy decreased. This fact also illustrated that fea-
tures work together; removing any group degraded
performance because features interact and there is
no true independence. It was observed that fea-
tures? contributions were sensitive to parameter tun-
ing. Clearly, further work on developing features
which fit the TEP problem is needed.
6 Refining the model
This was a ?first pass? of addressing TEP for TTS.
At this point, the annotation project is still on-going,
and we only had a fairly small data set to draw on.
Nevertheless, results indicate that our learning ap-
proach benefits emotion recognition. For example,
the following instances, also labeled with the same
valence by both annotators, were correctly classified
both in the binary (N vs. E) and the tripartite polar-
ity task (N, NE, PE), given the separated tuning and
evaluation data condition, and using all features:
(1a) E/NE: Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and
besought them to let him take her away; but they said, ?We will
not part with her for all the gold in the world.?
584
Cumulative removal of feature groups
61.81
63.31
62.57
57.95
58.30
58.93
59.56
55
60
65
All features
- Word lists
- Syntactic
- Story-related
- Orthographic
- Conjunctions
- Content words
% A
ccur
acy
All features P(Neutral) BOW
Figure 2: Averaged effect of feature group removal, using sep-tune-eval
(1b) N: And so the little girl really did grow up; her skin was as
white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and her hair as
black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.
(2a) E/NE: ?Ah,? she answered, ?have I not reason to weep?
(2b) N: Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took a stone
in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it.
Cases (1a) and (1b) are from the well-known FOLK
TALE Snowdrop, also called Snow White. (1a)
and (1b) are also correctly classified by the sim-
ple content BOW approach, although our approach
has higher prediction confidence for E/NE (1a); it
also considers, e.g. direct speech, a fairly high verb
count, advanced story progress, connotative words
and conjunctions thereof with story progress fea-
tures, all of which the BOW misses. In addition, the
simple content BOW approach makes incorrect pre-
dictions at both the bipartite and tripartite levels for
examples (2a) and (2b) from the JOKES AND ANEC-
DOTES stories Clever Hans and The Valiant Little
Tailor, while our classifier captures the affective dif-
ferences by considering, e.g. distinctions in verb
count, interjection, POS, sentence length, connota-
tions, story subtype, and conjunctions.
Next, we intend to use a larger data set to conduct
a more complete study to establish mature findings.
We also plan to explore finer emotional meaning dis-
tinctions, by using a hierarchical sequential model
which better corresponds to different levels of cog-
nitive difficulty in emotional categorization by hu-
mans, and to classify the full set of basic level emo-
tional categories discussed in section 4.3. Sequential
modeling of simple classifiers has been successfully
employed to question classification, for example by
(Li and Roth, 2002). In addition, we are working
on refining and improving the feature set, and given
more data, tuning can be improved on a sufficiently
large development set. The three subcorpora in the
annotation project can reveal how authorship affects
emotion perception and classification.
Moreover, arousal appears to be an important
dimension for emotional prosody (Scherer, 2003),
especially in storytelling (Alm and Sproat, 2005).
Thus, we are planning on exploring degrees of emo-
tional intensity in a learning scenario, i.e. a prob-
lem similar to measuring strength of opinion clauses
(Wilson, Wiebe and Hwa, 2004).
Finally, emotions are not discrete objects; rather
they have transitional nature, and blend and overlap
along the temporal dimension. For example, (Liu,
Lieberman and Selker, 2003) include parallel esti-
mations of emotional activity, and include smooth-
585
ing techniques such as interpolation and decay to
capture sequential and interactive emotional activity.
Observations from tales indicate that some emotions
are more likely to be prolonged than others.
7 Conclusion
This paper has discussed an empirical study of the
text-based emotion prediction problem in the do-
main of children?s fairy tales, with child-directed ex-
pressive text-to-speech synthesis as goal. Besides
reporting on encouraging results in a first set of com-
putational experiments using supervised machine
learning, we have set forth a research agenda for
tackling the TEP problem more comprehensively.
8 Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the annotators, in particular A.
Rasmussen and S. Siddiqui. We also thank two
anonymous reviewers for comments. This work was
funded by NSF under award ITR-#0205731, and NS
ITR IIS-0428472. The annotation is supported by
UIUC?s Research Board. The authors take sole re-
sponsibility for the work.
References
Antti Aarne. 1964. The Types of the Folk-Tale: a Classification
and Bibliography. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.
Cecilia O. Alm, and Richard Sproat. 2005. Perceptions of emo-
tions in expressive storytelling. INTERSPEECH 2005.
Xue Bai, Rema Padman, and Edoardo Airoldi. 2004. Sen-
timent extraction from unstructured text using tabu search-
enhanced Markov blankets. In MSW2004, Seattle.
Philip Beineke, Trevor Hastie, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2004. The sentimental factor: improving review classifi-
cation via human-provided information. In Proceedings of
ACL, 263?270.
Janet Cahn. 1990. The generation of affect in synthesized
Speech. Journal of the American Voice I/O Society, 8:1?19.
Andrew Carlson, Chad Cumby, Nicholas Rizzolo, Jeff Rosen,
and Dan Roth. 1999. The SNoW Learning Architecture.
Technical Report UIUCDCS-R-99-2101, UIUC Comp. Sci.
Stacey Di Cicco et al General Inquirer Pos./Neg. lists
http://www.webuse.umd.edu:9090/
Paul Ekman. 1993. Facial expression and emotion. American
Psychologist, 48(4), 384?392.
Christiane Fellbaum, Ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexi-
cal Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Kathleen McKeown. 1997.
Predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL, 174?181.
Philip Johnson-Laird, and Keith Oatley. 1989. The language
of emotions: an analysis of a semantic field. Cognition and
Emotion, 3:81?123.
Peter Koomen, Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, and Wen-tau Yih.
2005. Generalized inference with multiple semantic role la-
beling systems. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on
Computational Language Learning (CoNLL), 181?184.
Diane Litman, and Kate Forbes-Riley. 2004. Predicting stu-
dent emotions in computer-human tutoring dialogues. In
Proceedings of ACL, 351?358.
Xin Li, and Dan Roth. 2002. Learning question classifiers: the
role of semantic information. In Proc. International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 556?562.
Hugo Liu, Henry Lieberman, and Ted Selker. 2003. A model of
textual affect sensing using real-world knowledge. In ACM
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 125?132.
Tony Mullen, and Nigel Collier. 2004. Sentiment analy-
sis using support vector machines with diverse information
sources. In Proceedings of EMNLP, 412?418.
Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental education: sen-
timent analysis using subjectivity summarization based on
minimum cuts. In Proceedings of ACL, 271?278.
Rosalind Picard. 1997. Affective computing. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
Dan Roth. 1998. Learning to resolve natural language ambigu-
ities: a unified approach. In AAAI, 806?813.
Klaus Scherer. 2003. Vocal communication of emotion: a
review of research paradigms. Speech Commununication,
40(1-2):227?256.
Greg Siegle. The Balanced Affective Word List
http://www.sci.sdsu.edu/CAL/wordlist/words.prn
Oliver Steele et al Py-WordNet
http://osteele.com/projects/pywordnet/
Futoshi Sugimoto et al 2004. A method to classify emotional
expressions of text and synthesize speech. In IEEE, 611?
614.
Peter Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
In Proceedings of ACL, 417?424.
Jan van Santen et al 2003. Applications of computer gen-
erated expressive speech for communication disorders. In
EUROSPEECH 2003, 1657?1660.
Janyce Wiebe et al 2004. Learning subjective language. Jour-
nal of Computational Linguistics, 30(3):277?308.
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa. 2004. Just
how mad are you? Finding strong and weak opinion clauses.
In Proceedings of the Nineteenth National Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AAAI), 761?769.
586
