Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 923?930, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multi-Perspective Question Answering Using the OpQA Corpus
Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
{ves,cardie}@cs.cornell.edu
Janyce Wiebe
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
We investigate techniques to support the
answering of opinion-based questions.
We first present the OpQA corpus of opin-
ion questions and answers. Using the cor-
pus, we compare and contrast the proper-
ties of fact and opinion questions and an-
swers. Based on the disparate characteris-
tics of opinion vs. fact answers, we argue
that traditional fact-based QA approaches
may have difficulty in an MPQA setting
without modification. As an initial step
towards the development of MPQA sys-
tems, we investigate the use of machine
learning and rule-based subjectivity and
opinion source filters and show that they
can be used to guide MPQA systems.
1 Introduction
Much progress has been made in recent years in
automatic, open-domain question answering (e.g.,
Voorhees (2001), Voorhees (2002), Voorhees and
Buckland (2003)). The bulk of the research in this
area, however, addresses fact-based questions like:
?When did McDonald?s open its first restaurant??
or ?What is the Kyoto Protocol??. To date, how-
ever, relatively little research been done in the area
of Multi-Perspective Question Answering (MPQA),
which targets questions of the following sort:
? How is Bush?s decision not to ratify the Kyoto Protocol
looked upon by Japan and other US allies?
? How do the Chinese regard the human rights record of the
United States?
In comparison to fact-based question answering
(QA), researchers understand far less about the prop-
erties of questions and answers in MPQA, and have
yet to develop techniques to exploit knowledge of
those properties. As a result, it is unclear whether
approaches that have been successful in the domain
of fact-based QA will work well for MPQA.
We first present the OpQA corpus of opinion ques-
tions and answers. Using the corpus, we compare
and contrast the properties of fact and opinion ques-
tions and answers. We find that text spans identi-
fied as answers to opinion questions: (1) are approx-
imately twice as long as those of fact questions, (2)
are much more likely (37% vs. 9%) to represent par-
tial answers rather than complete answers, (3) vary
much more widely with respect to syntactic cate-
gory ? covering clauses, verb phrases, prepositional
phrases, and noun phrases; in contrast, fact answers
are overwhelming associated with noun phrases, and
(4) are roughly half as likely to correspond to a sin-
gle syntactic constituent type (16-38% vs. 31-53%).
Based on the disparate characteristics of opinion
vs. fact answers, we argue that traditional fact-based
QA approaches may have difficulty in an MPQA
setting without modification. As one such modifi-
cation, we propose that MPQA systems should rely
on natural language processing methods to identify
information about opinions. In experiments in opin-
ion question answering using the OpQA corpus, we
find that filtering potential answers using machine
learning and rule-based NLP opinion filters substan-
tially improves the performance of an end-to-end
MPQA system according to both a mean reciprocal
rank (MRR) measure (0.59 vs. a baseline of 0.42)
923
and a metric that determines the mean rank of the
first correct answer (MRFA) (26.2 vs. a baseline of
61.3). Further, we find that requiring opinion an-
swers to match the requested opinion source (e.g.,
does <source> approve of the Kyoto Protocol) dra-
matically improves the performance of the MPQA
system on the hardest questions in the corpus.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In the next section we summarize related
work. Section 3 describes the OpQA corpus. Sec-
tion 4 uses the OpQA corpus to identify poten-
tially problematic issues for handling opinion vs.
fact questions. Section 5 briefly describes an opin-
ion annotation scheme used in the experiments. Sec-
tions 6 and 7 explore the use of opinion information
in the design of MPQA systems.
2 Related Work
There is a growing interest in methods for the auto-
matic identification and extraction of opinions, emo-
tions, and sentiments in text. Much of the relevant
research explores sentiment classification, a text cat-
egorization task in which the goal is to assign to
a document either positive (?thumbs up?) or nega-
tive (?thumbs down?) polarity (e.g. Das and Chen
(2001), Pang et al (2002), Turney (2002), Dave et
al. (2003), Pang and Lee (2004)). Other research
has concentrated on analyzing opinions at, or below,
the sentence level. Recent work, for example, indi-
cates that systems can be trained to recognize opin-
ions, their polarity, their source, and their strength
to a reasonable degree of accuracy (e.g. Dave et
al. (2003), Riloff and Wiebe (2003), Bethard et al
(2004), Pang and Lee (2004), Wilson et al (2004),
Yu and Hatzivassiloglou (2003), Wiebe and Riloff
(2005)).
Related work in the area of corpus development
includes Wiebe et al?s (2005) opinion annotation
scheme to identify subjective expressions ? expres-
sions used to express opinions, emotions, sentiments
and other private states in text. Wiebe et al have
applied the annotation scheme to create the MPQA
corpus consisting of 535 documents manually an-
notated for phrase-level expressions of opinion. In
addition, the NIST-sponsored TREC evaluation has
begun to develop data focusing on opinions ? the
2003 Novelty Track features a task that requires sys-
tems to identify opinion-oriented documents w.r.t. a
specific issue (Voorhees and Buckland, 2003).
While all of the above work begins to bridge
the gap between text categorization and question
answering, none of the approaches have been em-
ployed or evaluated in the context of MPQA.
3 OpQA Corpus
To support our research in MPQA, we created the
OpQA corpus of opinion and fact questions and an-
swers. Additional details on the construction of the
corpus as well as results of an interannotator agree-
ment study can be found in Stoyanov et al (2004).
3.1 Documents and Questions
The OpQA corpus consists of 98 documents that ap-
peared in the world press between June 2001 and
May 2002. All documents were taken from the
aforementioned MPQA corpus (Wilson and Wiebe,
2003)1 and are manually annotated with phrase-
level opinion information, following the annotation
scheme of Wiebe et al (2005), which is briefly
summarized in Section 5. The documents cover
four general (and controversial) topics: President
Bush?s alternative to the Kyoto protocol (kyoto); the
US annual human rights report (humanrights); the
2002 coup d?etat in Venezuela (venezuela); and the
2002 elections in Zimbabwe and Mugabe?s reelec-
tion (mugabe). Each topic is covered by between 19
and 33 documents that were identified automatically
via IR methods.
Both fact and opinion questions for each topic
were added to the OpQA corpus by a volunteer not
associated with the current project. The volunteer
was provided with a set of instructions for creat-
ing questions together with two documents on each
topic selected at random. He created between six
and eight questions on each topic, evenly split be-
tween fact and opinion. The 30 questions are given
in Table 1 sorted by topic.
3.2 Answer annotations
Answer annotations were added to the corpus by two
annotators according to a set of annotation instruc-
1The MPQA corpus is available at
http://nrrc.mitre.org/NRRC/publications.htm.
The OpQA corpus is available upon request.
924
Kyoto
1 f What is the Kyoto Protocol about?
2 f When was the Kyoto Protocol adopted?
3 f Who is the president of the Kiko Network?
4 f What is the Kiko Network?
5 o Does the president of the Kiko Network approve of the US action concerning the Kyoto Protocol?
6 o Are the Japanese unanimous in their opinion of Bush?s position on the Kyoto Protocol?
7 o How is Bush?s decision not to ratify the Kyoto Protocol looked upon by Japan and other US allies?
8 o How do European Union countries feel about the US opposition to the Kyoto protocol?
Human Rights
1 f What is the murder rate in the United States?
2 f What country issues an annual report on human rights in the United States?
3 o How do the Chinese regard the human rights record of the United States?
4 f Who is Andrew Welsdan?
5 o What factors influence the way in which the US regards the human rights records of other nations?
6 o Is the US Annual Human Rights Report received with universal approval around the world?
Venezuela
1 f When did Hugo Chavez become President?
2 f Did any prominent Americans plan to visit Venezuela immediately following the 2002 coup?
3 o Did anything surprising happen when Hugo Chavez regained power in Venezuela after he was
removed by a coup?
4 o Did most Venezuelans support the 2002 coup?
5 f Which governmental institutions in Venezuela were dissolved by the leaders of the 2002 coup?
6 o How did ordinary Venezuelans feel about the 2002 coup and subsequent events?
7 o Did America support the Venezuelan foreign policy followed by Chavez?
8 f Who is Vice-President of Venezuela?
Mugabe
1 o What was the American and British reaction to the reelection of Mugabe?
2 f Where did Mugabe vote in the 2002 presidential election?
3 f At which primary school had Mugabe been expected to vote in the 2002 presidential election?
4 f How long has Mugabe headed his country?
5 f Who was expecting Mugabe at Mhofu School for the 2002 election?
6 o What is the basis for the European Union and US critical attitude and adversarial action toward
Mugabe?
7 o What did South Africa want Mugabe to do after the 2002 election?
8 o What is Mugabe?s opinion about the West?s attitude and actions towards the 2002 Zimbabwe elec-
tion?
Table 1: Questions in the OpQA collection by topic.
f in column 1 indicates a fact question; o, an opinion
question.
tions.2 Every text segment that contributes to an
answer to any of the 30 questions is annotated as
an answer. In particular, answer annotations include
segments that constitute a partial answer. Partial an-
swers either (1) lack the specificity needed to consti-
tute a full answer (e.g., ?before May 2004? partially
answers the question When was the Kyoto protocol
ratified? when a specific date is known) or (2) need
to be combined with at least one additional answer
segment to fully answer the question (e.g., the ques-
tion Are the Japanese unanimous in their opposition
of Bush?s position on the Kyoto protocol? is an-
swered only partially by a segment expressing a sin-
gle opinion). In addition, annotators mark the min-
imum answer spans (e.g., ?a Tokyo organization,?
vs. ?a Tokyo organization representing about 150
Japanese groups?).
4 Characteristics of opinion answers
Next, we use the OpQA corpus to analyze and com-
pare the characteristics of fact vs. opinion questions.
Based on our findings, we believe that QA systems
based solely on traditional QA techniques are likely
2The annotation instructions are available
at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/ ves/
Publications/publications.htm.
to be less effective at MPQA than they are at tradi-
tional fact-based QA.
4.1 Traditional QA architectures
Despite the wide variety of approaches implied by
modern QA systems, almost all systems rely on the
following two steps (subsystems), which have em-
pirically proven to be effective:
? IR module. The QA system invokes an IR subsystem that
employs traditional text similarity measures (e.g., tf/idf)
to retrieve and rank document fragments (sentences or
paragraphs) w.r.t. the question (query).
? Linguistic filters. QA systems employ a set of filters
and text processing components to discard some docu-
ment fragments. The following filters have empirically
proven to be effective and are used universally:
Semantic filters prefer an answer segment that matches
the semantic class(es) associated with the question type
(e.g., date or time for when questions; person or organi-
zation for who questions).
Syntactic filters are also configured on the type of ques-
tion. The most common and effective syntactic filters se-
lect a specific constituent (e.g., noun phrase) according to
the question type (e.g., who question).
QA systems typically interleave the above two
subsystems with a variety of different processing
steps of both the question and the answer. The goal
of the processing is to identify text fragments that
contain an answer to the question. Typical QA sys-
tems do not perform any further text processing;
they return the text fragment as it occurred in the
text. 3
4.2 Corpus-based analysis of opinion answers
We hypothesize that QA systems that conform to
this traditional architecture will have difficulty han-
dling opinion questions without non-trivial modifi-
cation. In support of this hypothesis, we provide
statistics from the OpQA corpus to illustrate some of
the characteristics that distinguish answers to opin-
ion vs. fact questions, and discuss their implications
for a traditional QA system architecture.
Answer length. We see in Table 2 that the aver-
age length of opinion answers in the OpQA corpus
3This architecture is seen mainly in QA systems designed
for TREC?s ?factoid? and ?list? QA tracks. Systems competing
in the relatively new ?definition? or ?other? tracks have begun
to introduce new approaches. However, most such systems still
rely on the IR step and return the text fragment as it occurred in
the text.
925
Number of answers Length Number of partials
fact 124 5.12 12 (9.68%)
opinion 415 9.24 154 (37.11%)
Table 2: Number of answers, average answer length
(in tokens), and number of partial answers for
fact/opinion questions.
is 9.24 tokens, almost double that of fact answers.
Unfortunately, longer answers could present prob-
lems for some traditional QA systems. In particu-
lar, some of the more sophisticated algorithms that
perform additional processing steps such as logi-
cal verifiers (Moldovan et al, 2002) may be less ac-
curate or computationally infeasible for longer an-
swers. More importantly, longer answers are likely
to span more than a single syntactic constituent, ren-
dering the syntactic filters, and very likely the se-
mantic filters, less effective.
Partial answers. Table 2 also shows that over 37%
of the opinion answers were marked as partial vs.
9.68% of the fact answers. The implications of par-
tial answers for the traditional QA architecture are
substantial: an MPQA system will require an an-
swer generator to (1) distinguish between partial
and full answers; (2) recognize redundant partial an-
swers; (3) identify which subset of the partial an-
swers, if any, constitutes a full answer; (4) determine
whether additional documents need to be examined
to find a complete answer; and (5) asemble the final
answer from partial pieces of information.
Syntactic constituent of the answer. As discussed
in Section 4.1, traditional QA systems rely heav-
ily on the predicted syntactic and semantic class of
the answer. Based on answer lengths, we specu-
lated that opinion answers are unlikely to span a sin-
gle constituent and/or semantic class. This specula-
tion is confirmed by examining the phrase type as-
sociated with OpQA answers using Abney?s (1996)
CASS partial parser.4 For each question, we count
the number of times an answer segment for the ques-
tion (in the manual annotations) matches each con-
stituent type. We consider four constituent types
? noun phrase (n), verb phrase (v), prepositional
phrase (p), and clause (c) ? and three matching cri-
teria:
4The parser is available from
http://www.vinartus.net/spa/.
Fact OpinionQues- # of Matching Criteria syn Ques- # of Matching Criteria syn
tion answers ex up up/dn type tion answers ex up up/dn type
H 1 1 0 0 0 H 3 15 5 5 5 c
H 2 4 2 2 2 n H 5 24 5 5 10 n
H 4 1 0 0 0 H 6 123 17 23 52 n
K 1 48 13 14 24 n K 5 3 0 0 1
K 2 38 13 13 19 n K 6 34 6 5 12 c
K 3 1 1 1 1 c n K 7 55 9 8 19 c
K 4 2 1 1 1 n K 8 25 4 4 10 v
M 2 3 0 0 1 M 1 74 10 12 29 v
M 3 1 0 0 1 M 6 12 3 5 7 n
M 4 10 2 2 5 n M 7 1 0 0 0
M 5 3 1 1 2 c M 8 3 0 0 1V 1 4 3 3 4 n V 3 1 1 0 1 cV 2 1 1 1 1 n V 4 13 2 2 2 cV 5 3 0 1 1 V 6 9 2 2 5 c nV 8 4 2 4 4 n V 7 23 3 1 5
Cov- 124 39 43 66 Cov- 415 67 70 159
erage 31% 35% 53% erage 16% 17% 38%
Table 3: Syntactic Constituent Type for Answers in
the OpQA Corpus
1. The exact match criterion is satisfied only by answer seg-
ments whose spans exactly correspond to a constituent in
the CASS output.
2. The up criterion considers an answer to match a CASS
constituent if the constituent completely contains the an-
swer and no more than three additional (non-answer) to-
kens.
3. The up/dn criterion considers an answer to match a
CASS constituent if it matches according to the up crite-
rion or if the answer completely contains the constituent
and no more than three additional tokens.
The counts for the analysis of answer segment
syntactic type for fact vs. opinion questions are sum-
marized in Table 3. Results for the 15 fact ques-
tions are shown in the left half of the table, and
for the 15 opinion questions in the right half. The
leftmost column in each half provides the question
topic and number, and the second column indicates
the total number of answer segments annotated for
the question. The next three columns show, for each
of the ex, up, and up/dn matching criteria, respec-
tively, the number of annotated answer segments
that match the majority syntactic type among an-
swer segments for that question/criterion pair. Us-
ing a traditional QA architecture, the MPQA sys-
tem might filter answers based on this majority type.
The syn type column indicates the majority syntac-
tic type using the exact match criterion; two values
in the column indicate a tie for majority syntactic
type, and an empty syntactic type indicates that no
answer exactly matched any of the four constituent
types. With only a few exceptions, the up and up/dn
matching criteria agreed in majority syntactic type.
Results in Table 3 show a significant disparity be-
tween fact and opinion questions. For fact ques-
926
tions, the syntactic type filter would keep 31%, 35%,
or 53% of the correct answers, depending on the
matching criterion. For opinion questions, there is
unfortunately a two-fold reduction in the percentage
of correct answers that would remain after filtering
? only 16%, 17% or 38%, depending on the match-
ing criterion. More importantly, the majority syntac-
tic type among answers for fact questions is almost
always a noun phrase, while no single constituent
type emerges as a useful syntactic filter for opinion
questions (see the syn phrase columns in Table 3).
Finally, because semantic class information is gener-
ally tied to a particular syntactic category, the effec-
tiveness of traditional semantic filters in the MPQA
setting is unclear.
In summary, identifying answers to questions in
an MPQA setting within a traditional QA architec-
ture will be difficult. First, the implicit and explicit
assumptions inherent in standard linguistic filters are
consistent with the characteristics of fact- rather than
opinion-oriented QA. In addition, the presence of
relatively long answers and partial answers will re-
quire a much more complex answer generator than
is typically present in current QA systems.
In Sections 6 and 7, we propose initial steps to-
wards modifying the traditional QA architecture for
use in MPQA. In particular, we propose and evaluate
two types of opinion filters for MPQA: subjectiv-
ity filters and opinion source filters. Both types of
linguistic filters rely on phrase-level and sentence-
level opinion information, which has been manually
annotated for our corpus; the next section briefly de-
scribes the opinion annotation scheme.
5 Manual Opinion Annotations
Documents in our OpQA corpus come from the
larger MPQA corpus, which contains manual opin-
ion annotations. The annotation framework is de-
scribed in detail in (Wiebe et al, 2005). Here we
give a high-level overview.
The annotation framework provides a basis for
subjective expressions: expressions used to express
opinions, emotions, and sentiments. The framework
allows for the annotation of both directly expressed
private states (e.g., afraid in the sentence ?John is
afraid that Sue might fall,?) and opinions expressed
by the choice of words and style of language (e.g.,
it is about time and oppression in the sentence ?It is
about time that we end Saddam?s oppression?). In
addition, the annotations include several attributes,
including the intensity (with possible values low,
medium, high, and extreme) and the source of the
private state. The source of a private state is the per-
son or entity who holds or experiences it.
6 Subjectivity Filters for MPQA Systems
This section describes three subjectivity filters
based on the above opinion annotation scheme. Be-
low (in Section 6.3), the filters are used to remove
fact sentences from consideration when answering
opinion questions, and the OpQA corpus is used to
evaluate their effectiveness.
6.1 Manual Subjectivity Filter
Much previous research on automatic extraction of
opinion information performed classifications at the
sentence level. Therefore, we define sentence-level
opinion classifications in terms of the phrase-level
annotations. For our gold standard of manual opin-
ion classifications (dubbed MANUAL for the rest of
the paper) we will follow Riloff and Wiebe?s (2003)
convention (also used by Wiebe and Riloff (2005))
and consider a sentence to be opinion if it contains
at least one opinion of intensity medium or higher,
and to be fact otherwise.
6.2 Two Automatic Subjectivity Filters
As discussed in section 2, several research efforts
have attempted to perform automatic opinion clas-
sification on the clause and sentence level. We in-
vestigate whether such information can be useful for
MPQA by using the automatic sentence level opin-
ion classifiers of Riloff and Wiebe (2003) and Wiebe
and Riloff (2005).
Riloff and Wiebe (2003) use a bootstrapping al-
gorithm to perform a sentence-based opinion classi-
fication on the MPQA corpus. They use a set of high
precision subjectivity and objectivity clues to iden-
tify subjective and objective sentences. This data
is then used in an algorithm similar to AutoSlog-
TS (Riloff, 1996) to automatically identify a set of
extraction patterns. The acquired patterns are then
used iteratively to identify a larger set of subjective
and objective sentences. In our experiments we use
927
precision recall F
MPQA corpus RULEBASED 90.4 34.2 46.6
NAIVE BAYES 79.4 70.6 74.7
Table 4: Precision, recall, and F-measure for the two
classifiers.
the classifier that was created by the reimplemen-
tation of this bootstrapping process in Wiebe and
Riloff (2005). We will use RULEBASED to denote
the opinion information output by this classifier.
In addition, Wiebe and Riloff used the RULE-
BASED classifier to produce a labeled data set for
training. They trained a Naive Bayes subjectivity
classifier on the labeled set. We will use NAIVE
BAYES to refer to Wiebe and Riloff?s naive Bayes
classifier.5 Table 4 shows the performance of the
two classifiers on the MPQA corpus as reported by
Wiebe and Riloff.
6.3 Experiments
We performed two types of experiments using the
subjectivity filters.
6.3.1 Answer rank experiments
Our hypothesis motivating the first type of exper-
iment is that subjectivity filters can improve the an-
swer identification phase of an MPQA system. We
implement the IR subsystem of a traditional QA sys-
tem, and apply the subjectivity filters to the IR re-
sults. Specifically, for each opinion question in the
corpus 6 , we do the following:
1. Split all documents in our corpus into sentences.
2. Run an information retrieval algorithm7 on the set of all
sentences using the question as the query to obtain a
ranked list of sentences.
3. Apply a subjectivity filter to the ranked list to remove all
fact sentences from the ranked list.
We test each of the MANUAL, RULEBASED, and
NAIVE BAYES subjectivity filters. We compare the
rank of the first answer to each question in the
5Specifically, the one they label Naive Bayes 1.
6We do not evaluate the opinion filters on the 15 fact ques-
tions. Since opinion sentences are defined as containing at least
one opinion of intensity medium or higher, opinion sentences
can contain factual information and sentence-level opinion fil-
ters are not likely to be effective for fact-based QA.
7We use the Lemur toolkit?s standard tf.idf implementation
available from http://www.lemurproject.org/.
Topic Qnum Baseline Manual NaiveBayes Rulebased
Kyoto 5 1 1 1 1
6 5 4 4 3
7 1 1 1 1
8 1 1 1 1
Human 3 1 1 1 1
Rights 5 10 6 7 5
6 1 1 1 1
Venezuela 3 106 81 92 35
4 3 2 3 1
6 1 1 1 1
7 3 3 3 2
Mugabe 1 2 2 2 2
6 7 5 5 4
7 447 291 317 153
8 331 205 217 182
MRR : 0.4244 0.5189 0.5078 0.5856
MRFA: 61.3333 40.3333 43.7333 26.2
Table 5: Results for the subjectivity filters.
ranked list before the filter is applied, with the rank
of the first answer to the question in the ranked list
after the filter is applied.
Results. Results for the opinion filters are compared
to a simple baseline, which performs the informa-
tion retrieval step with no filtering. Table 5 gives the
results on the 15 opinion questions for the baseline
and each of the three subjectivity filters. The table
shows two cumulative measures ? the mean recip-
rocal rank (MRR) 8 and the mean rank of the first
answer (MRFA). 9
Table 5 shows that all three subjectivity filters out-
perform the baseline: for all three filters, the first
answer in the filtered results for all 15 questions is
ranked at least as high as in the baseline. As a result,
the three subjectivity filters outperform the baseline
in both MRR and MRFA. Surprisingly, the best per-
forming subjectivity filter is RULEBASED, surpass-
ing the gold standard MANUAL, both in MRR (0.59
vs. 0.52) and MRFA (40.3 vs. 26.2). Presum-
ably, the improvement in performance comes from
the fact that RULEBASED identifies subjective sen-
tences with the highest precision (and lowest recall).
Thus, the RULEBASED subjectivity filter discards
non-subjective sentences most aggressively.
6.3.2 Answer probability experiments
The second experiment, answer probability, be-
gins to explore whether opinion information can be
8The MRR is computed as the average of 1/r, where r is
the rank of the first answer.
9MRR has been accepted as the standard performance mea-
sure in QA, since MRFA can be strongly affected by outlier
questions. However, the MRR score is dominated by the results
in the high end of the ranking. Thus, MRFA may be more ap-
propriate for our experiments because the filters are an interme-
diate step in the processing, the results of which other MPQA
components may improve.
928
sentence
fact opinion
Manual fact 56 (46.67%) 64 (53.33%)
opinion 42 (10.14%) 372 (89.86%)
question Naive Bayes fact 49 (40.83%) 71 (59.17%)
opinion 57 (13.77%) 357 (86.23%)
Rulebased fact 96 (80.00%) 24 (20.00%)
opinion 184 (44.44%) 230 (55.56%)
Table 6: Answer probability results.
used in an answer generator. This experiment con-
siders correspondences between (1) the classes (i.e.,
opinion or fact) assigned by the subjectivity filters to
the sentences containing answers, and (2) the classes
of the questions the answers are responses to (ac-
cording to the OpQA annotations). That is, we com-
pute the probabilities (where ans = answer):
P(ans is in a C1 sentence | ans is the answer to a C2 ques-
tion) for all four combinations of C1=opinion, fact and
C2=opinion, fact.
Results. Results for the answer probability experi-
ment are given in Table 6. The rows correspond to
the classes of the questions the answers respond to,
and the columns correspond to the classes assigned
by the subjectivity filters to the sentences contain-
ing the answers. The first two rows, for instance,
give the results for the MANUAL criterion. MANUAL
placed 56 of the answers to fact questions in fact
sentences (46.67% of all answers to fact questions)
and 64 (53.33%) of the answers to fact questions in
opinion sentences. Similarly, MANUAL placed 42
(10.14%) of the answers to opinion questions in fact
sentences, and 372 (89.86%) of the answers to opin-
ion questions in opinion sentences.
The answer probability experiment sheds some
light on the subjectivity filter experiments. All three
subjectivity filters place a larger percentage of an-
swers to opinion questions in opinion sentences than
they place in fact sentences. However, the differ-
ent filters exhibit different degrees of discrimination.
Answers to opinion questions are almost always
placed in opinion sentences by MANUAL (89.86%)
and NAIVE BAYES (86.23%). While that aspect of
their performance is excellent, MANUAL and NAIVE
BAYES place more answers to fact questions in opin-
ion rather than fact sentences (though the percent-
ages are in the 50s). This is to be expected, because
MANUAL and NAIVE BAYES are more conservative
and err on the side of classifying sentences as opin-
ions: for MANUAL, the presence of any subjective
expression makes the entire sentence opinion, even
if parts of the sentence are factual; NAIVE BAYES
shows high recall but lower precision in recognizing
opinion sentences (see Table 4). Conversely, RULE-
BASED places 80% of the fact answers in fact sen-
tences and only 56% of the opinion answers in opin-
ion sentences. Again, the lower number of assign-
ments to opinion sentences is to be expected, given
the high precision and low recall of the classifier.
But the net result is that, for RULEBASED, the off-
diagonals are all less than 50%: it places more an-
swers to fact questions in fact rather than opinion
sentences (80%), and more answers to opinion ques-
tions in opinion rather than fact sentences (56%).
This is consistent with its superior performance in
the subjectivity filtering experiment.
In addition to explaining the performance of
the subjectivity filters, the answer rank experiment
shows that the automatic opinion classifiers can be
used directly in an answer generator module. The
two automatic classifiers rely on evidence in the sen-
tence to predict the class (the information extraction
patterns used by RULEBASED and the features used
by NAIVE BAYES). In ongoing work we investigate
ways to use this evidence to extract and summarize
the opinions expressed in text, which is a task simi-
lar to that of an answer generator module.
7 Opinion Source Filters for MPQA
Systems
In addition to subjectivity filters, we also define an
opinion source filter based on the manual opinion
annotations. This filter removes all sentences that
do not have an opinion annotation with a source that
matches the source of the question10. For this filter
we only used the MANUAL source annotations since
we did not have access to automatically extracted
source information. We employ the same Answer
Rank experiment as in 6.3.1, substituting the source
filter for a subjectivity filter.
Results. Results for the source filter are mixed.
The filter outperforms the baseline on some ques-
tions and performs worst on others. As a result the
MRR for the source filter is worse than the base-
10We manually identified the sources of each of the 15 opin-
ion questions.
929
line (0.4633 vs. 0.4244). However, the source fil-
ter exhibits by far the best results using the MRFA
measure, a value of 11.267. The performance im-
provement is due to the filter?s ability to recognize
the answers to the hardest questions, for which the
other filters have the most trouble (questions mu-
gabe 7 and 8). For these questions, the rank of the
first answer improves from 153 to 21, and from 182
to 11, respectively. With the exception of question
venezuela 3, which does not contain a clear source
(and is problematic altogether because there is only
a single answer in the corpus and the question?s
qualification as opinion is not clear) the source filter
always ranked an answer within the first 25 answers.
Thus, source filters can be especially useful in sys-
tems that rely on the presence of an answer within
the first few ranked answer segments and then in-
voke more sophisticated analysis in the additional
processing phase.
8 Conclusions
We began by giving a high-level overview of the
OpQA corpus. Using the corpus, we compared the
characteristics of answers to fact and opinion ques-
tions. Based on the different characteristics, we sur-
mise that traditional QA approaches may not be as
effective for MPQA as they have been for fact-based
QA. Finally, we investigated the use of machine
learning and rule-based opinion filters and showed
that they can be used to guide MPQA systems.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Di-
ane Litman for her work eliciting the questions for
the OpQA corpus, and the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments.This work was supported
by the Advanced Research and Development Activ-
ity (ARDA), by NSF Grants IIS-0208028 and IIS-
0208798, by the Xerox Foundation, and by a NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship to the first author.
References
Steven Abney. 1996. Partial parsing via finite-state cascades.
In Proceedings of the ESSLLI ?96 Robust Parsing Workshop.
S. Bethard, H. Yu, A. Thornton, V. Hativassiloglou, and D. Ju-
rafsky. 2004. Automatic extraction of opinion propositions
and their holders. In 2004 AAAI Spring Symposium on Ex-
ploring Attitude and Affect in Text.
S. Das and M. Chen. 2001. Yahoo for amazon: Extracting mar-
ket sentiment from stock message boards. In Proceedings of
the 8th Asia Pacific Finance Association Annual Conference.
Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David Pennock. 2003. Min-
ing the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction and semantic clas-
sification of product reviews. In International World Wide
Web Conference, pages 519?528.
D. Moldovan, S. Harabagiu, R. Girju, P. Morarescu, F. Laca-
tusu, A. Novischi, A. Badulescu, and O. Bolohan. 2002.
LCC tools for question answering. In Proceedings of TREC
2002.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental education: Sen-
timent analysis using subjectivity summarization based on
minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 271?278.
Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. 2002.
Thumbs up? sentiment classification using machine learning
techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
E. Riloff and J. Wiebe. 2003. Learning extraction patterns for
subjective expressions. In Proceesings of EMNLP.
Ellen Riloff. 1996. Automatically generating extraction pat-
terns from untagged text. Proceedings of AAAI.
V. Stoyanov, C. Cardie, J. Wiebe, and D. Litman. 2004. Eval-
uating an opinion annotation scheme using a new Multi-
Perspective Question and Answer corpus. In 2004 AAAI
Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text.
Peter Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 417?424.
E. Voorhees and L. Buckland. 2003. Overview of the
TREC 2003 Question Answering Track. In Proceedings of
TREC 12.
Ellen Voorhees. 2001. Overview of the TREC 2001 Question
Answering Track. In Proceedings of TREC 10.
Ellen Voorhees. 2002. Overview of the 2002 Question Answer-
ing Track. In Proceedings of TREC 11.
Janyce Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. 2005. Creating subjective
and objective sentence classifiers from unannotated texts. In
Proceedings of CICLing.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005. An-
notating expressions of opinions and emotions in language.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 1(2).
Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Annotating opinions
in the world press. 4th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and
Dialogue (SIGdial-03).
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and R. Hwa. 2004. Just how mad are you?
Finding strong and weak opinion clauses. In Proceedings of
AAAI.
H. Yu and V. Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards answering opin-
ion questions: Separating facts from opinions and identi-
fying the polarity of opinion sentences. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
930
