Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 483?490, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Mining Key Phrase Translations from Web Corpora 
 
Fei Huang       Ying Zhang       Stephan Vogel 
 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
{fhuang, joy, vogel}@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Key phrases are usually among the most 
information-bearing linguistic structures. 
Translating them correctly will improve 
many natural language processing appli-
cations. We propose a new framework to 
mine key phrase translations from web 
corpora. We submit a source phrase to a 
search engine as a query, then expand 
queries by adding the translations of 
topic-relevant hint words from the re-
turned snippets. We retrieve mixed-
language web pages based on the ex-
panded queries.  Finally, we extract the 
key phrase translation from the second-
round returned web page snippets with 
phonetic, semantic and frequency-
distance features. We achieve 46% phrase 
translation accuracy when using top 10 re-
turned snippets, and 80% accuracy with 
165 snippets. Both results are signifi-
cantly better than several existing meth-
ods. 
1 Introduction 
Key phrases such as named entities (person, loca-
tion and organization names), book and movie ti-
tles, science, medical or military terms and others 
1, are usually among the most information-bearing 
linguistic structures. Translating them correctly 
will improve the performance of cross-lingual in-
formation retrieval, question answering and ma-
chine translation systems. However, these key 
phrases are often domain-specific, and people con-
                                                                                                                    
1 Some name and terminology is a single word, which could 
be regarded as a one-word phrase. 
stantly create new key phrases which are not cov-
ered by existing bilingual dictionaries or parallel 
corpora, therefore standard data-driven or knowl-
edge-based machine translation systems cannot 
translate them correctly. 
 As an increasing amount of web information be-
comes available, exploiting such a huge informa-
tion resource is becoming more attractive. (Resnik 
1999) searched the web for parallel corpora while 
(Lu et al 2002) extracted translation pairs from 
anchor texts pointing to the same webpage. How-
ever, parallel webpages or anchor texts are quite 
limited, and these approaches greatly suffer from 
the lack of data.  
However, there are many web pages containing 
useful bilingual information where key phrases and 
their translations both occur. See the example in 
Figure 1. This example demonstrates web page 
snippets2 containing both a Chinese key phrase ??
??? and its translation, ?Faust?. 
We thus can transform the translation problem 
into a data mining problem by retrieving these 
mixed-language web pages and extracting their 
translations. We propose a new framework to mine 
key phrase translations from web corpora. Given a 
source key phrase (here a Chinese phrase), we first 
retrieve web page snippets containing this phrase 
using the Google search engine. We then expand 
queries by adding the translations of topic-relevant 
hint words from the returned snippets. We submit 
the source key phrase and expanded queries again 
to Google to retrieve mixed-language web page 
snippets.  Finally, we extract the key phrase trans-
lation from the second-round returned snippets 
with phonetic, semantic and frequency-distance 
features.  
2A snippet is a sentence or paragraph containing the key 
phrase, returned with the web page URLs. 
483
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Returned mixed-language web page snip-
pets using source query 
 
We achieve 46% phrase translation accuracy 
when using 10 returned snippets, and 80% accu-
racy with 165 snippets. Both results are signifi-
cantly better than several existing methods. 
   The reminder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: cross-lingual query expansion is discussed in 
section 2; key phrase translation extraction is ad-
dressed in section 3. In section 4 we present ex-
perimental results, which is followed by relevant 
works and conclusions. 
2 Retrieving Web Page Snippets through 
Cross-lingual Query Expansion 
For a Chinese key phrase f, we want to find its 
translation e from the web, more specifically, from 
the mixed-language web pages or web page snip-
pets containing both f and e. As we do not know e, 
we are unable to directly retrieve such mixed-
language web page using (f,e) as the query.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Returned mixed-language web page snip-
pets using cross-lingual query expansion 
However, we observed that when the author of a 
web page lists both f and e in a page, it is very 
likely that f' and e' are listed in the same page, 
where f? is a Chinese hint word topically relevant 
to f, and e? is f?s translation. Therefore if we know 
a Chinese hint word f?, and we know its reliable 
translation, e?, we can send (f, e?) as a query to re-
trieve mixed language web pages containing (f, e).    
For example, to find web pages which contain 
translations of ?????(Faust), we expand the 
query to ????+goethe? since ???? (Goethe) 
is the author of ?????(Faust). Figure 2 illus-
trates retrieved web page snippets with expanded 
queries. We find that newly returned snippets con-
tain more correct translations with higher ranks. 
   To propose a ?good? English hint e' for f, first we 
need to find a Chinese hint word f' that is relevant 
to f. Because f is often an OOV word, it is unlikely 
that such information can be obtained from exist-
ing Chinese monolingual corpora. Instead, we 
484
query Google for web pages containing f. From the 
returned snippets we select Chinese words f' based 
on the following criteria: 
 
1. f' should be relevant to f based on the co-
occurrence frequency. On average, 300 
Chinese words are returned for each query 
f. We only consider those words that occur 
at least twice to be relevant. 
2. f' can be reliably translated given the cur-
rent bilingual resources (e.g. the LDC 
Chinese-English lexicon 3  with 81,945 
translation entries). 
3. The meaning of f' should not be too am-
biguous. Words with many translations 
are not used. 
4. f' should be translated into noun or noun 
phrases. Given the fact that most OOV 
words are noun or noun phrases, we ig-
nore those source words which are trans-
lated into other part-of-speech words. The 
British National Corpus4 is used to gener-
ate the English noun lists. 
 
For each f, the top Chinese words f' with the 
highest frequency are selected. Their correspond-
ing translations are then used as the cross-lingual 
hint words for f. For example, for OOV word f = 
??? (Faust), the top candidate f's are ???
(Goethe)?, ? ?? (introduction)?, ???
(literature)? and ???(tragedy)?. We expand 
the original query ????? to ???? + 
goethe?, ???? + introduction?, ???? + lit-
erature?, ???? + tragic?, and then query Google 
again for web page snippets containing the correct 
translation ?Faust?. 
3 Extracting Key Phrase Translation 
When the Chinese key phrase and its English hint 
words are sent to Google as the query, returned 
web page snippets contain the source query and 
possibly its translation. We preprocess the snippets 
to remove irrelevant information. The preprocess-
ing steps are: 
1. Filter out HTML tags; 
                                                          
3http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogI
d=LDC2002L27 
4 http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/ 
2. Convert HTML special characters (e.g., 
?&lt?) to corresponding ASCII code (?>?); 
3. Segment Chinese words based on a maxi-
mum string matching algorithm, which is 
used to calculate the translation probability 
between a Chinese key phrase and an Eng-
lish translation candidate. 
4. Replace punctuation marks with phrase sepa-
rator ?|?; 
5. Replace non-query Chinese words with 
placeholder mark ?+?, as they indicate the 
distance between an English phrase and the 
Chinese key phrase. 
For example, the snippet  
? <b>???? </b>? (the bridges of 
madison county)[review]. ????anjing | 
?????2004-01-25 ??? 02:13 | ?
????? 
is converted into 
| <b> ?  ?  ?  ? </b> | 
the_bridges_of_Madison_county | review | 
++ + | anjing | ++ ++  | 2004-01-25 +++ 02 
13 | + + ++ ++, 
where ?<b>? and ?</b>? mark the start and end 
positions of the Chinese key phrase. The candidate 
English phrases, ?the bridges of madison county?, 
?review? and ?anjing?, will be aligned to the 
source key phrase according to a combined feature 
set using a transliteration model which captures the 
pronunciation similarity, a translation model which 
captures the semantic similarity and a frequency-
distance model reflecting their relevancy. These 
models are described below. 
3.1 Transliteration Model 
The transliteration model captures the phonetic 
similarity between a Chinese phrase and an Eng-
lish translation candidate via string alignment. 
Many key phrases are person and location names, 
which are phonetically translated and whose writ-
ten forms resemble their pronunciations. Therefore 
it is possible to discover these translation pairs 
through their surface strings. Surface string trans-
literation does not need a pronunciation lexicon to 
map words into phoneme sequences; thus it is es-
pecially appealing for OOV word translation. For 
non-Latin languages like Chinese, a romanization 
485
script called ?pinyin? maps each Chinese character 
into Latin letter strings. This normalization makes 
the string alignment possible. 
     We adopt the transliteration model proposed in 
(Huang, et al 2003). This model calculates the 
probabilistic Levinstein distance between a roman-
ized source string and a target string. Unlike the 
traditional Levinstein distance calculation, the 
character alignment cost is not binary (0/1); rather 
it is the logarithm of character alignment probabil-
ity, which ensures that characters with similar pro-
nunciations (e.g. `p` and `b`) have higher 
alignment probabilities and lower cost. These 
probabilities are automatically learned from bilin-
gual name lists using EM. 
Assume the Chinese phrase f has J Chinese 
characters, , and the English candidate 
phrase e has L English words, . The 
transliteration cost between a Chinese query and 
an English translation candidate  is calculated as: 
Jfff ,..., 21
Leee ,...,, 21
f
e
 
 
where is the pinyin of Chinese character ,  
is the i th letter in , and and are their 
aligned English letters, respectively.  
is the letter transliteration probability. The translit-
eration costs between a Chinese phrase and an 
English phrase is approximated by the sum of their 
letter transliteration cost along the optimal align-
ment path, which is identified based on dynamic 
programming.   
jy jf
ijy , jy jae ),( ijae
)|( ,),( jiji yep
3.2 Translation Model 
The translation model measures the semantic 
equivalence between a Chinese phrase and an Eng-
lish candidate. One widely used model is the IBM 
model (Brown et al 1993). The phrase translation 
probability is computed using the IBM model-1 as: 
  
 
 
where is the lexical translation probabili-
ties, which can be calculated according to the IBM 
models. This alignment model is asymmetric, as 
one source word can only be aligned to one target 
word, while one target word can be aligned to mul-
tiple source words. We estimate both  
and , and define the NE translation 
cost as: 
)|( lj efp
)|( efPtrans
)|( fePtrans
).|(log)|(log),( efPfePfeC transtranstrans +=
3.3 Frequency-Distance Model 
The more often a bilingual phrase pair co-occurs, 
or the closer a bilingual phrase pair is within a 
snippet, the more likely they are translations of 
each other. The frequency-distance model meas-
ures this correlation.  
   Suppose S is the set of returned snippets for 
query , and a single returned snippet isf Ssi ? . 
The source phrase occurs in si as  ( since f 
may occur several times in a snippet). The fre-
quency-distance weight of an English candidate 
is  
jif , 1?j
e
??=
i jis f ji efd
ew
,
),(
1
)(
,
 
 
.)|(log)|(log),( ,),(??? =?
j i
jia
j
jatrl yepyepfe where is the distance between phrase   
and e, i.e., how many words are there between the 
two phrases (the separator `|` is not counted).  
),( efd jif ,
3.4 Feature Combination 
Define the confidence measure for the translitera-
tion model as: 
 
 
where e and e? are English candidate phrases, and 
m is the weight of the distance model. We empiri-
cally choose m=2 in our experiments. This 
measure indicates how good the English phrase e is 
compared with other candidates based on translit-
eration model. Similarly the translation model con-
fidence measure is defined as: 
 
 
 
 
   The overall feature cost is the linear combination 
of transliteration cost and translation cost, which 
are weighted by their confidence scores respec-
tively: 
 
 
C
jij
,
)'()],'(exp[
)()],(exp[
)|(
'
?=
e
m
trl
m
trl
trl ewfeC
ewfeC
fe?
.
)'()],'(exp[
)()],(exp[
)|(
'
?=
e
m
trans
m
trans
trans ewfeC
ewfeC
fe???
= =
=
J
j
L
l
ljJtrans efpL
efP
1 1
)|(
1
)|(
486
 ???? the Bridges of Madison-
County                                                                                   
where the linear combination weight ?  is chosen 
empirically. While trl? and trans?  represent the rela-
tive rank of the current candidate among all com-
pared candidates, C and  indicate its 
absolute likelihood, which is useful to reject the 
top 1 incorrect candidate if the true translation does 
not occur in any returned snippets.  
trl transC
                                                          
4 Experiments 
We evaluated our approach by translating a set of 
key phrases from different domains. We selected 
310 Chinese key phrases from 12 domains as the 
test set, which were almost equally distributed 
within these domains. We also manually translated 
them as the reference translations. Table 1 shows 
some typical phrases and their translations, where 
one may find that correct key phrase translations 
need both phonetic transliterations and semantic 
translations. We evaluated inclusion rate, defined 
as the percentage of correct key phrase translations 
which can be retrieved in the returned snippets; 
alignment accuracy, defined as the percentage of 
key phrase translations which can be correctly 
aligned given that these translations are included in 
the snippets; and overall translation accuracy, de-
fined as the percentage of key phrases which can 
be translated correctly. We compared our approach 
with the LiveTrans5 (Cheng et.al. 2004) system, an 
unknown word translator using web corpora, and 
we observed better translation performance using 
our approach. 
4.1 Query Translation Inclusion Rate 
In the first round query search, for each Chinese 
key phrase f, on average 13 unique snippets were 
returned to identify relevant Chinese hint words f?, 
and the top 5 f's were selected to generate hint 
words e?s. In the second round f and e?s were sent 
to Google again to retrieve mixed language snip-
pets, which were used to extract e, the correct 
translation of f. 
Figure 3 shows the inclusion rate vs. the number 
of snippets used for three mixed-language web 
page searching strategies: 
                                                          
5 http://livetrans.iis.sinica.edu.tw/lt.html 
 Table 1. Test set key phrases 
? Search any web pages containing f (Zhang 
and Vines 2004); 
? Only search English web pages6 contain-
ing f (Cheng et al 2004); 
? Search any web pages containing f and 
hint words e?, as proposed in this paper.  
 
   The first search strategy resulted in a relatively 
low inclusion rate; the second achieved a much 
higher inclusion rate. However, because such Eng-
lish pages were limited, and on average only 45 
unique snippets could be found for each f, which 
resulted in a maximum inclusion rate of 85.8%. In 
the case of the cross-lingual query expansion, the 
search space was much larger but more focused 
and we achieved a high inclusion rate of 89.7% 
using 32 mixed-language snippets and 95.2% using 
165 snippets, both from the second round retrieval.  
6 These web pages are labeled by Google as ?English? web 
pages, though they may contain non-English characters. 
Movie Title 
????            Forrest Gump 
Book Title 
???   Dream of the Red Mansion 
???    La Dame aux camellias 
Organization 
Name 
????   University of Notre Dame  
??????????? David and 
Lucile Packard Foundation  
Person 
Name 
???          Ludwig Van Beethoven 
????? Audrey Hepburn 
Location 
Name 
????? Kamchatka 
??????? Taklamakan desert 
Company /
Brand 
???? Lufthansa German 
Airlines 
???? Estee Lauder 
Sci&Tech 
Terms 
???? genetic algorithm 
???? speech recognition  
Specie Term 
??               Aegypius monachus 
???              Manispentadactyla 
Military 
Term 
???              Aegis  
???              Phalcon 
Medical 
Term 
?????? SARS 
???? Arteriosclerosis 
Music Term 
????     Bird-call in the Mountain 
???        Bassoon 
Sports Term 
?????? Houston Rockets 
?????? Tour de France 
)]()|()( ff?? exp[1
)],(exp[)|(),(
eCe
feCfefeC
transtrans
trltrl= ?? +
,?
487
Table 2. Alignment accuracies using different features 
 
These search strategies are further discussed in the 
section 5. 
4.2 Translation Alignment Accuracy 
We evaluated our key phrase extraction model by 
testing queries whose correct translations were in-
cluded in the returned snippets. We used different 
feature combinations on differently sized snippets 
to compare their alignment accuracies. Table 2 
shows the result. Here ?Trl? means using the trans-
literation model, ?Trans? means using the transla-
tion model, and ?Fq-dis? means using Frequency-
Distance model. The frequency-distance model 
seemed to be the strongest single model in both 
cases (with and without hint words), while incor-
porating phonetic and semantic features provided 
additional strength to the overall performance. 
Combining all three features together yielded the 
best accuracy. Note that when more candidate 
translations were available through query expan-
sion, the alignment accuracy improved by 30% 
relative due to the frequency-distance model. 
However, using transliteration and/or translation 
models alone decreased performance because of 
more incorrect translation candidates from returned 
snippets. After incorporating the frequency-
distance model, correct translations have the 
maximum frequency-distance weights and are 
more likely to be selected as the top hypothesis. 
Therefore the combined model obtained the high-
est translation accuracy. 
4.3 Overall Translation Quality  
The overall translation qualities are listed in Table 
3, where we showed the translation accuracies of  
 
No Hints 
(Inc = 44.19%) 
With Hints 
(Inc = 95.16%) 
Table 3. Overall translation accuracy 
the top 5 hypotheses using different number of 
snippets. A hypothesized translation was consid-
ered to be correct when it matched one of the ref-
erence translations.  Using more snippets always 
increased the overall translation accuracy, and with 
all the 165 snippets (on average per query), our 
approach achieved 80% top-1 translation accuracy, 
and 90% top-5 accuracy. 
We compared the translations from a research 
statistical machine translation system (CMU-SMT, 
Vogel et al 2003) and a web-based MT engine 
(BabelFish). Due to the lack of topic-relevant con-
texts and many OOV words occurring in the source 
key phrases, their results were not satisfactory. We 
also compare our system with LiveTrans, which 
only searched within English web pages, thus with 
limited search space and more noises (incorrect 
English candidates). Therefore it was more diffi-
cult to select the correct translation. Table 4 lists 
some example key phrase translations mined from 
web corpora, as well as translations from the Ba-
belFish.  
5 Relevant Work 
Both (Cheng et al 2004) and (Zhang and Vines 
2004) exploited web corpora for translating OOV 
terms and queries. Compared with their work, our 
proposed method differs in both webpage search 
                                                          
7 http://babelfish.altavista.com/ 
Features (avg. snippets = 
10) 
(avg. snip-
pets=130) 
Trl 51.45 17.97 
Trans 51.45 40.68 
Fq-dis 53.62 73.22 
Trl+Trans 63.04 51.36 
Trl+Trans+ 
Fq-dis 65.94 86.73 
Accuracy of the Top-N Hyp. (%) Snippets 
Used Top1 Top2 Top3 Top4 Top5 
10 46.1 55.2 59.0 61.3 62.3 
20 57.4 64.2 69.7 72.6 72.9 
50 63.2 74.5 77.7 79.7 80.6 
100 75.2 84.5 85.8 87.4 87.4 
165 80.0 86.5 89.0 90.0 90.0 
Babel-
Fish7 MT 31.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A 
CMU-
SMT 21.9 N/A N/A N/A N/A 
LiveTrans
(Fast) 20.6 30.0 36.8 41.9 45.2 
LiveTrans
(Smart) 30.0 41.9 48.7 51.0 52.9 
488
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Inclusion rate vs. the number of snippets used 
 
Examples Category 
Chinese Key Phrase Web-Mining Translation BabelFish? Result 
Movie  
Title ???? 
the Bridges of Madison 
County 
*Love has gone and only good 
memory has left in the dream 
Book  
Title ????? Sense and Sensibility *Reason and emotion 
Organization 
Name 
Woodrow Wilson National 
Fellowship Foundation 
*Wood the Wilson nation gets to-
gether the foundation 
??????????
?? 
Person  ???? Seiji Ozawa *Young Ze drafts you Name 
Location 
Name ????? Tsaidam Basin Qaidam Basin 
Company / ?? Clinique *Attractive blue Brand 
Sci&Tech 
Terms ????? Bayesian network *Shell Ye Si network 
Specie  ?? walrus walrus Term 
Military 
Term ????? stratofortress stratofortress 
Medical 
Term ??? glaucoma glaucoma 
Music  ??? bassoon bassoon Term 
Sports  ?????? Km Tour de France *Link law bicycle match Term 
*: Incorrect translations 
 
Table 4. Key phrase translation from web mining and a MT engine 
 
489
space and translation extraction features. Figure 4 
illustrates three different search strategies. Suppose 
we want to translate the Chinese query ?????. 
(Cheng et al 2004) only searched 188 English web 
pages which contained the source query, and 53% 
of them (100 pages) had the correct translations.  
(Zhang and Vines 2004) searched the whole 
55,100 web pages, 10% of them (5490 pages) had 
the correct translation. Our approach used query 
expansion to search any web pages containing ??
??? and English hint words, which was a larger 
search space than (Cheng et al 2004) and more 
focused compared with (Zhang and Vines 2004), 
as illustrated with the shaded region in Figure 4. 
For translation extraction features, we took advan-
tage of machine transliteration and machine trans-
lation models, and combined them with frequency 
and distance information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Web search space strategy comparison 
6 Discussion and Future Work 
In this paper we demonstrated the feasibility of 
the proposed approach by searching for the English 
translation for a given Chinese key phrase, where 
we use punctuations and Chinese words as the 
boundary of candidate English translations. In the 
future we plan to try more flexible translation can-
didate selection methods, and apply them to other 
language pairs. We also would like to test our ap-
proach on more standard test sets, and compare the 
performance with other systems.  
Our approach works on short snippets for query 
expansion and translation extraction, and the com-
putation time is short. Therefore the search en-
gine?s response time is the major factor of 
computational efficiency.  
 
 
7 Conclusion 
We proposed a novel approach to mine key phrase 
translations from web corpora. We used cross-
lingual query expansion to retrieve more relevant 
web pages snippets, and extracted target transla-
tions combining transliteration, translation and fre-
quency-distance models. We achieved significantly 
better results compared to the existing methods.  
8 References  
P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra and 
R.L. Mercer. The Mathematics of Machine Translation: 
Parameter Estimation. In Computational Linguistics, vol 
19, number 2. pp.263-311, June, 1993. 
 
P.?J. Cheng, J.-W. Teng, R.-C. Chen, J.-H. Wang, W.-H. 
Lu, and L.-F. Chien. Translating unknown queries with 
web corpora for cross-language information retrieval. In 
the Proceedings of 27th ACM SIGIR, pp146-153. ACM 
Press, 2004. 
 
F. Huang, S.Vogel and A. Waibel. Automatic extraction 
of named entity translingual equivalence based on 
multi-feature cost minimization. In the Proceedings of 
the 41st ACL. Workshop on Multilingual and Mixed-
language Named Entity Recognition, pp124-129, Sap-
poro, Japan, July 2003. 
 
W.-H. Lu, L.-F. Chien, H.-J. Lee. Translation of web 
queries using anchor text mining. ACM Trans. Asian 
Language Information Processing  (TALIP) 1(2): 159-
172 (2002) 
 
P. Resnik and N. A. Smith, The Web as a Parallel Cor-
pus, Computational Linguistics 29(3), pp. 349-380, Sep-
tember 2003 
 
S. Vogel, Y. Zhang, F. Huang, A. Tribble, A. Venogu-
pal, B. Zhao and A. Waibel.  The CMU statistical ma-
chine translation system. In Proceedings of the MT 
Summit IX Conference New Orlean, LA, September, 
2003. 
 
Y. Zhang and P. Vines. Detection and Translation of 
OOV Terms Prior to Query Time, In the Proceedings of 
27th ACM SIGIR. pp524-525, Sheffield, England, 2004. 
 
Y. Zhang and P. Vines 2004, Using the Web for Auto-
mated Translation Extraction in Cross-Language Infor-
mation Retrieval, In Proceedings of 27th ACM SIGIR, 
pp.162-169, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2004. 
 
Y. Zhang, F. Huang and S. Vogel, Mining Translations 
of OOV Terms from the Web through Cross-lingual 
Query Expansion, in the Proceedings of the 28th ACM 
SIGIR, Salvador, Brazil, August 2005. 
490
