Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 827?834, Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Parallelism in Coordination as an Instance of Syntactic Priming:
Evidence from Corpus-based Modeling
Amit Dubey and Patrick Sturt and Frank Keller
Human Communication Research Centre, Universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
{adubey,sturt,keller}@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Experimental research in psycholinguis-
tics has demonstrated a parallelism effect
in coordination: speakers are faster at pro-
cessing the second conjunct of a coordi-
nate structure if it has the same internal
structure as the first conjunct. We show
that this phenomenon can be explained by
the prevalence of parallel structures in cor-
pus data. We demonstrate that parallelism
is not limited to coordination, but also ap-
plies to arbitrary syntactic configurations,
and even to documents. This indicates that
the parallelism effect is an instance of a
general syntactic priming mechanism in
human language processing.
1 Introduction
Experimental work in psycholinguistics has pro-
vided evidence for the so-called parallelism prefer-
ence effect: speakers processes coordinated struc-
tures more quickly when the two conjuncts have
the same internal syntactic structure. The processing
advantage for parallel structures has been demon-
strated for a range coordinate constructions, includ-
ing NP coordination (Frazier et al, 2000), sentence
coordination (Frazier et al, 1984), and gapping and
ellipsis (Carlson, 2002; Mauner et al, 1995).
The parallelism preference in NP coordination
can be illustrated using Frazier et al?s (2000) Exper-
iment 3, which recorded subjects? eye-movements
while they read sentences like (1):
(1) a. Terry wrote a long novel and a short poem
during her sabbatical.
b. Terry wrote a novel and a short poem dur-
ing her sabbatical
Total reading times for the underlined region were
faster in (1-a), where short poem is coordinated with
a syntactically parallel noun phrase (a long novel),
compared to (1-b), where it is coordinated with a
syntactically non-parallel phrase.
These results raise an important question that the
present paper tries to answer through corpus-based
modeling studies: what is the mechanism underlying
the parallelism preference? One hypothesis is that
the effect is caused by low-level processes such as
syntactic priming, i.e., the tendency to repeat syntac-
tic structures (e.g., Bock, 1986). Priming is a very
general mechanism that can affect a wide range of
linguistic units, including words, constituents, and
semantic concepts. If the parallelism effect is an in-
stance of syntactic priming, then we expect it to ap-
ply to a wide range of syntactic construction, and
both within and between sentences. Previous work
has demonstrated priming effects in corpora (Gries,
2005; Szmrecsanyi, 2005); however, these results
are limited to instances of priming that involve a
choice between two structural alternatives (e.g., da-
tive alternation). In order to study the parallelism ef-
fect, we need to model priming as general syntac-
tic repetition (independent of the structural choices
available). This is what the present paper attempts.
Frazier and Clifton (2001) propose an alternative
account of the parallelism effect in terms of a copy-
ing mechanism. Unlike priming, this mechanism is
highly specialized and only applies to coordinate
structures: if the second conjunct is encountered,
then instead of building new structure, the language
processor simply copies the structure of the first con-
junct; this explains why a speed-up is observed if
the second conjunct is parallel to the first one. If
the copying account is correct, then we would ex-
pect parallelism effects to be restricted to coordinate
structures and would not apply in other contexts.
In the present paper, we present corpus evidence
that allows us to distinguish between these two com-
peting explanations. Our investigation will proceed
as follows: we first establish that there is evidence
827
for a parallelism effect in corpus data (Section 3).
This is a crucial prerequisite for our wider inves-
tigation: previous work has only dealt with paral-
lelism in comprehension, hence we need to establish
that parallelism is also present in production data,
such as corpus data. We then investigate whether
the parallelism effect is restricted to coordination, or
whether it also applies also arbitrary syntactic con-
figurations. We also test if parallelism can be found
for larger segments of text, including, in the limit,
the whole document (Section 4). Then we investi-
gate parallelism in dialog, testing the psycholinguis-
tic prediction that parallelism in dialog occurs be-
tween speakers (Section 5). In the next section, we
discuss a number of methodological issues and ex-
plain the way we measure parallelism in corpus data.
2 Adaptation
Psycholinguistic studies have shown that priming
affects both speech production (Bock, 1986) and
comprehension (Branigan et al, 2005). The impor-
tance of comprehension priming has also been noted
by the speech recognition community (Kuhn and
de Mori, 1990), who use so-called caching language
models to improve the performance of speech com-
prehension software. The concept of caching lan-
guage models is quite simple: a cache of recently
seen words is maintained, and the probability of
words in the cache is higher than those outside the
cache.
While the performance of caching language mod-
els is judged by their success in improving speech
recognition accuracy, it is also possible to use an
abstract measure to diagnose their efficacy more
closely. Church (2000) introduces such a diagnostic
for lexical priming: adaptation probabilities. Adap-
tation probabilities provide a method to separate the
general problem of priming from a particular imple-
mentation (i.e., caching models). They measure the
amount of priming that occurs for a given construc-
tion, and therefore provide an upper limit for the per-
formance of models such as caching models.
Adaptation is based upon three concepts. First is
the prior, which serves as a baseline. The prior mea-
sures the probability of a word appearing, ignoring
the presence or absence of a prime. Second is the
positive adaptation, which is the probability of a
word appearing given that it has been primed. Third
is the negative adaptation, the probability of a word
appearing given it has not been primed.
In Church?s case, the prior and adaptation prob-
abilities are estimated as follows. If a corpus is di-
vided into individual documents, then each docu-
ment is then split in half. We refer to the halves as the
prime set (or prime half) and the target set (or target
half).1 We measure how frequently a document half
contains a particular word. For each word w, there
are four combinations of the prime and target halves
containing the word. This gives us four frequencies
to measure, which are summarized in the following
table:
fwp,t fwp?,t
fwp,?t fwp?,?t
These frequencies represent:
fwp,t = # of times w occurs in prime set
and target set
fwp?,t = # of times w occurs in target set
but not prime set
fwp,?t = # of times w occurs in prime set
but not target set
fwp?,?t = # of times w does not occur in either
target set or prime set
In addition, let N represent the sum of these four
frequencies. From the frequencies, we may formally
define the prior, positive adaptation and negative
adaptation:
Prior Pprior(w) =
fwp,t + fw p?,t
N
(1)
Positive Adaptation P+(w) =
fwp,t
fwp,t + fwp,?t
(2)
Negative Adaptation P?(w) =
fw p?,t
fw p?,t+ fw p?,?t
(3)
In the case of lexical priming, Church observes that
P+  Pprior > P?. In fact, even in cases when Pprior
quite small, P+ may be higher than 0.8. Intuitively,
a positive adaptation which is higher than the prior
entails that a word is likely to reappear in the target
set given that it has already appeared in the prime
set. We intend to show that adaptation probabilities
provide evidence that syntactic constructions behave
1Our terminology differs from that of Church, who uses ?his-
tory? to describe the first half, and ?test? to describe the second.
Our terms avoid the ambiguity of the phrase ?test set? and coin-
cide with the common usage in the psycholinguistic literature.
828
similarity to lexical priming, showing positive adap-
tation P+ greater than the prior. As P? must become
smaller than Pprior whenever P+ is larger than Pprior,
we only report the positive adaptation P+ and the
prior Pprior.
While Church?s technique was developed with
speech recognition in mind, we will show that
it is useful for investigating psycholinguistic phe-
nomenon. However, the connection between cogni-
tive phenomenon and engineering approaches go in
both directions: it is possible that syntactic parsers
could be improved using a model of syntactic prim-
ing, just as speech recognition has been improved
using models of lexical priming.
3 Experiment 1: Parallelism in
Coordination
In this section, we investigate the use of Church?s
adaptation metrics to measure the effect of syntac-
tic parallelism in coordinated constructions. For the
sake of comparison, we restrict our study to several
constructions used in Frazier et al (2000). All of
these constructions occur in NPs with two coordi-
nate sisters, i.e., constructions such as NP1 CC NP2,
where CC represents a coordinator such as and.
3.1 Method
The application of the adaptation metric is straight-
forward: we pick NP1 as the prime set and NP2 as
the target set. Instead of measuring the frequency of
lexical elements, we measure the frequency of the
following syntactic constructions:
SBAR An NP with a relative clause, i.e.,
NP ? NP SBAR.
PP An NP with a PP modifier, i.e., NP ? NP PP.
NN An NP with a single noun, i.e., NP ? NN.
DT NN An NP with a determiner and a noun, i.e.,
NP ? DT NN.
DT JJ NN An NP with a determiner, an adjective
and a noun, i.e., NP ? DT JJ NN.
Parameter estimation is accomplished by iterating
through the corpus for applications of the rule NP
? NP CC NP. From each rule application, we create
a list of prime-target pairs. We then estimate adap-
tation probabilities for each construction, by count-
ing the number of prime-target pairs in which the
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 1: Adaptation within coordinate structures in
the Brown corpus
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 2: Adaptation within coordinate structures in
the WSJ corpus
construction does or does not occur. This is done
similarly to the document half case described above.
There are four frequencies of interest, but now they
refer to the frequency that a particular construction
(rather than a word) either occurs or does not occur
in the prime and target set.
To ensure results were general across genres, we
used all three parts of the English Penn Treebank:
the Wall Street Journal (WSJ), the balanced Brown
corpus of written text (Brown) and the Switchboard
corpus of spontaneous dialog. In each case, we use
the entire corpus.
Therefore, in total, we report 30 probabilities: the
prior and positive adaptation for each of the five con-
structions in each of the three corpora. The primary
objective is to observe the difference between the
prior and positive adaptation for a given construction
in a particular corpus. Therefore, we also perform a
?2 test to determine if the difference between these
two probabilities are statistically significant.
829
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 3: Adaptation within coordinate structures in
the Switchboard corpus
3.2 Results
The results are shown in Figure 1 for the Brown cor-
pus, Figure 2 for the WSJ and Figure 3 for Switch-
board. Each figure shows the prior and positive
adaptation for all five constructions: relative clauses
(SBAR) a PP modifier (PP), a single common noun
(N), a determiner and noun (DT N), and a determiner
adjective and noun (DT ADJ N). Only in the case of
a single common noun in the WSJ and Switchboard
corpora is the prior probability higher than the posi-
tive adaptation. In all other cases, the probability of
the given construction is more likely to occur in NP2
given that it has occurred in NP1. According to the
?2 tests, all differences between priors and positive
adaptations were significant at the 0.01 level. The
size of the data sets means that even small differ-
ences in probability are statistically significant. All
differences reported in the remainder of this paper
are statistically significant; we omit the details of in-
dividual ?2 tests.
3.3 Discussion
The main conclusion we draw is that the parallelism
effect in corpora mirrors the ones found experimen-
tally by Frazier et al (2000), if we assume higher
probabilities are correlated with easier human pro-
cessing. This conclusion is important, as the experi-
ments of Frazier et al (2000) only provided evidence
for parallelism in comprehension data. Corpus data,
however, are production data, which means that the
our findings are first ones to demonstrate parallelism
effects in production.
The question of the relationship between compre-
hension and production data is an interesting one.
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 4: Adaptation within sentences in the Brown
corpus
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 5: Adaptation within sentences in the WSJ
corpus
We can expect that production data, such as corpus
data, are generated by speakers through a process
that involves self-monitoring. Written texts (such as
the WSJ and Brown) involve proofreading and edit-
ing, i.e., explicit comprehension processes. Even the
data in a spontaneous speech corpus such as Swtich-
board can be expected to involve a certain amount
of self-monitoring (speakers listen to themselves and
correct themselves if necessary). It follows that it is
not entirely unexpected that similar effects can be
found in both comprehension and production data.
4 Experiment 2: Parallelism in Documents
The results in the previous section showed that
the parallelism effect, which so far had only been
demonstrated in comprehension studies, is also at-
tested in corpora, i.e., in production data. In the
present experiment, we will investigate the mech-
anisms underlying the parallelism effect. As dis-
cussed in Section 1, there are two possible explana-
830
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 6: Adaptation between sentences in the
Brown corpus
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 7: Adaptation between sentences in the WSJ
corpus
tion for the effect: one in terms of a construction-
specific copying mechanism, and one in terms of
a generalized syntactic priming mechanism. In the
first case, we predict that the parallelism effect is re-
stricted to coordinate structures, while in the second
case, we expect that parallelism (a) is independent of
coordination, and (b) occurs in the wider discourse,
i.e., not only within sentences but also between sen-
tences.
4.1 Method
The method used was the same as in Experiment 1
(see Section 3.1), with the exception that the prime
set and the target set are no longer restricted to
being the first and second conjunct in a coordi-
nate structure. We investigated three levels of gran-
ularity: within sentences, between sentences, and
within documents. Within-sentence parallelism oc-
curs when the prime NP and the target NP oc-
cur within the same sentence, but stand in an ar-
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 8: Adaptation within documents in the Brown
corpus (all items exhibit weak yet statistically signif-
icant positive adaptation)
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 9: Adaptation within documents in the WSJ
corpus
bitrary structural relationship. Coordinate NPs were
excluded from this analysis, so as to make sure that
any within-sentence parallelism is not confounded
coordination parallelism as established in Experi-
ment 1. Between-sentence parallelism was measured
by regarding as the target the sentence immediately
following the prime sentence. In order to investi-
gate within-document parallelism, we split the doc-
uments into equal-sized halves; then the adaptation
probability was computed by regarding the first half
as the prime and the second half as the target (this
method is the same as Church?s method for measur-
ing lexical adaptation).
The analyses were conducted using the Wall
Street Journal and the Brown portion of the Penn
Treebank. The document boundary was taken to be
the file boundary in these corpora. The Switchboard
corpus is a dialog corpus, and therefore needs to
be treated differently: turns between speakers rather
831
than sentences should be level of analysis. We will
investigate this separately in Experiment 3 below.
4.2 Results
The results for the within-sentence analysis are
graphed in Figures 4 and 5 for the Brown and WSJ
corpus, respectively. We find that there is a paral-
lelism effect in both corpora, for all the NP types
investigated. Figures 6?9 show that the same is true
also for the between-sentence and within-document
analysis: parallelism effects are obtained for all NP
types and for both corpora, even it the parallel struc-
tures occur in different sentences or in different doc-
ument halves. (The within-document probabilities
for the Brown corpus (in Figure 8) are close to one
in most cases; the differences between the prior and
adaptation are nevertheless significant.)
In general, note that the parallelism effects un-
covered in this experiment are smaller than the
effect demonstrated in Experiment 1: The differ-
ences between the prior probabilities and the adap-
tation probabilities (while significant) are markedly
smaller than those uncovered for parallelism in co-
ordinate structure.2
4.3 Discussion
This experiment demonstrated that the parallelism
effect is not restricted to coordinate structures.
Rather, we found that it holds across the board: for
NPs that occur in the same sentence (and are not part
of a coordinate structure), for NPs that occur in ad-
jacent sentences, and for NPs that occur in differ-
ent document halves. The between-sentence effect
has been demonstrated in a more restricted from by
Gries (2005) and Szmrecsanyi (2005), who investi-
gate priming in corpora for cases of structural choice
(e.g., between a dative object and a PP object for
verbs like give). The present results extend this find-
ing to arbitrary NPs, both within and between sen-
tences.
The fact that parallelism is a pervasive phe-
nomenon, rather than being limited to coordinate
structures, strongly suggests that it is an instance of
a general syntactic priming mechanism, which has
been an established feature of accounts of the human
sentence production system for a while (e.g., Bock,
2The differences between the priors and adaptation proba-
bilities are also much smaller than noted by Church (2000). The
probabilities of the rules we investigate have a higher marginal
probability than the lexical items of interest to Church.
1986). This runs counter to the claims made by Fra-
zier et al (2000) and Frazier and Clifton (2001), who
have argued that parallelism only occurs in coordi-
nate structures, and should be accounted for using a
specialized copying mechanism. (It is important to
bear in mind, however, that Frazier et al only make
explicit claims about comprehension, not about pro-
duction.)
However, we also found that parallelism effects
are clearly strongest in coordinate structures (com-
pare the differences between prior and adaptation
in Figures 1?3 with those in Figures 4?9). This
could explain why Frazier et al?s (2000) experi-
ments failed to find a significant parallelism effect
in non-coordinated structures: the effect is simply
too week to detect (especially using the self-paced
reading paradigm they employed).
5 Experiment 3: Parallelism in
Spontaneous Dialog
Experiment 1 showed that parallelism effects can be
found not only in written corpora, but also in the
Switchboard corpus of spontaneous dialog. We did
not include Switchboard in our analysis in Experi-
ment 2, as this corpus has a different structure from
the two text corpora we investigated: it is organized
in terms of turns between two speakers. Here, we
exploit this property and conduct a further experi-
ment in which we compare parallelism effects be-
tween speakers and within speakers.
The phenomenon of structural repetition between
speakers has been discussed in the experimental
psycholinguistic literature (see Pickering and Gar-
rod 2004 for a review). According to Pickering
and Garrod (2004), the act of engaging in a dia-
log facilitates the use of similar representations at
all linguistic levels, and these representations are
shared between speech production and comprehen-
sion processes. Thus structural adaptation should be
observed in a dialog setting, both within and be-
tween speakers. An alternative view is that produc-
tion and comprehension processes are distinct. Bock
and Loebell (1990) suggest that syntactic priming
in speech production is due to facilitation of the
retrieval and assembly procedures that occur dur-
ing the formulation of utterances. Bock and Loebell
point out that this production-based procedural view
predicts a lack of priming between comprehension
and production or vice versa, on the assumption that
832
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 10: Adaptation between speakers in the
Switchboard corpus
production and parsing use distinct mechanisms. In
our terms, it predicts that between-speaker positive
adaptation should not be found, because it can only
result from priming from comprehension to produc-
tion, or vice versa. Conversely, the prodedural view
outlined by Bock and Loebell predicts that positive
adaptation should be found within a given speaker?s
dialog turns, because such adaptation can indeed be
the result of the facilitation of production routines
within a given speaker.
5.1 Method
We created two sets of prime and target data to
test within-speaker and between-speaker adaptation.
The prime and target sets were defined in terms of
pairs of utterances. To test between-speaker adapta-
tion, we took each adjacent pair of utterances spo-
ken by speaker A and speaker B, in each dialog, and
these were treated as prime and target sets respec-
tively. In the within-speaker analysis, the prime and
target sets were taken from the dialog turns of only
one speaker?we took each adjacent pair of dialog
turns uttered by a given speaker, excluding the in-
tervening utterance of the other speaker. The earlier
utterance of the pair was treated as the prime, and
the later utterance as the target. The remainder of
the method was the same as in Experiments 1 and 2
(see Section 3.1).
5.2 Results
The results for the between-speaker and within-
speaker adaptation are shown in Figure 10 and Fig-
ure 11 for same five phrase types as in the previous
experiments.
PP SBAR N DT N DT ADJ N0
0.5
1
Pr
ob
ab
ili
ty
Prior
Adaptation
Figure 11: Adaptation within speakers in the Switch-
board corpus
A positive adaptation effect can be seen in the
between-speaker data. For each phrase type, the
adaptation probability is greater than the prior. In the
within-speaker data, by comparison, the magnitude
of the adaptation advantage is greatly decreased, in
comparison with Figure 10. Indeed, for most phrase
types, the adaptation probability is lower than the
prior, i.e., we have a case of negative adaptation.
5.3 Discussion
The results of the two analyses confirm that adap-
tation can indeed be found between speakers in di-
alog, supporting the results of experimental work
reviewed by Pickering and Garrod (2004). The re-
sults do not support the notion that priming is due
to the facilitation of production processes within a
given speaker, an account which would have pre-
dicted adaptation within speakers, but not between
speakers.
The lack of clear positive adaptation effects in
the within-speaker data is harder to explain?all
current theories of priming would predict some ef-
fect here. One possibility is that such effects may
have been obscured by decay processes: doing a
within-speaker analysis entails skipping an interven-
ing turn, in which priming effects were lost. We in-
tend to address these concerns using more elaborate
experimental designs in future work.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we have demonstrated a robust, perva-
sive effect of parallelism for noun phrases. We found
the tendency for structural repetition in two different
corpora of written English, and also in a dialog cor-
833
pus. The effect occurs in a wide range of contexts:
within coordinate structures (Experiment 1), within
sentences for NPs in an arbitrary structural config-
uration, between sentences, and within documents
(Experiment 2). This strongly indicates that the par-
allelism effect is an instance of a general processing
mechanism, such as syntactic priming (Bock, 1986),
rather than specific to coordination, as suggested
by (Frazier and Clifton, 2001). However, we also
found that the parallelism effect is strongest in co-
ordinate structures, which could explain why com-
prehension experiments so far failed to demonstrate
the effect for other structural configurations (Frazier
et al, 2000). We leave it to future work to explain
why adaptation is much stronger in co-ordination:
is co-ordination special because of extra constrains
(i.e., some kind of expected contrast/comparison be-
tween co-ordinate sisters) or because of fewer con-
straints (i.e., both co-ordinate sisters have a similar
grammatical role in the sentence)?
Another result (Experiment 3) is that the paral-
lelism effect occurs between speakers in dialog. This
finding is compatible with Pickering and Garrod?s
(2004) interactive alignment model, and strengthens
the argument for parallelism as an instance of a gen-
eral priming mechanism.
Previous experimental work has found parallelism
effects, but only in comprehension data. The present
work demonstrates that parallelism effects also oc-
cur in production data, which raises an interesting
question of the relationship between the two data
types. It has been hypothesized that the human lan-
guage processing system is tuned to mirror the prob-
ability distributions in its environment, including the
probabilities of syntactic structures (Mitchell et al,
1996). If this tuning hypothesis is correct, then the
parallelism effect in comprehension data can be ex-
plained as an adaptation of the human parser to the
prevalence of parallel structures in its environment
(as approximated by corpus data) that we demon-
strated in this paper.
Note that the results in this paper not only have an
impact on theoretical issues regarding human sen-
tence processing, but also on engineering problems
in natural language processing, e.g., in probabilistic
parsing. To avoid sparse data problems, probabilistic
parsing models make strong independence assump-
tions; in particular, they generally assume that sen-
tences are independent of each other. This is partly
due to the fact it is difficult to parameterize the many
possible dependencies which may occur between
adjacent sentences. However, in this paper, we show
that structure re-use is one possible way in which
the independence assumption is broken. A simple
and principled approach to handling structure re-use
would be to use adaptation probabilities for prob-
abilistic grammar rules, analogous to cache proba-
bilities used in caching language models (Kuhn and
de Mori, 1990). We are currently conducting further
experiments to investigate of the effect of syntactic
priming on probabilistic parsing.
References
Bock, J. Kathryn. 1986. Syntactic persistence in language pro-
duction. Cognitive Psychology 18:355?387.
Bock, Kathryn and Helga Loebell. 1990. Framing sentences.
Cognition 35(1):1?39.
Branigan, Holly P., Marin J. Pickering, and Janet F. McLean.
2005. Priming prepositional-phrase attachment during com-
prehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition 31(3):468?481.
Carlson, Katy. 2002. The effects of parallelism and prosody on
the processing of gapping structures. Language and Speech
44(1):1?26.
Church, Kenneth W. 2000. Empirical estimates of adaptation:
the chance of two Noriegas is closer to p/2 than p2. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics. Saarbru?cken, Germany, pages 180?186.
Frazier, Lyn, Alan Munn, and Chuck Clifton. 2000. Processing
coordinate structures. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
29(4):343?370.
Frazier, Lyn, Lori Taft, Tom Roeper, Charles Clifton, and Kate
Ehrlich. 1984. Parallel structure: A source of facilitation in
sentence comprehension. Memory and Cognition 12(5):421?
430.
Frazier, Lynn and Charles Clifton. 2001. Parsing coordinates
and ellipsis: Copy ?. Syntax 4(1):1?22.
Gries, Stefan T. 2005. Syntactic priming: A corpus-based ap-
proach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 35.
Kuhn, Roland and Renate de Mori. 1990. A cache-based natural
language model for speech recognition. IEEE Transanctions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 12(6):570?
583.
Mauner, Gail, Michael K. Tanenhaus, and Greg Carlson. 1995.
A note on parallelism effects in processing deep and surface
verb-phrase anaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes
10:1?12.
Mitchell, Don C., Fernando Cuetos, Martin M. B. Corley, and
Marc Brysbaert. 1996. Exposure-based models of human
parsing: Evidence for the use of coarse-grained (non-lexical)
statistical records. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research
24(6):469?488.
Pickering, Martin J. and Simon Garrod. 2004. Toward a mech-
anistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences 27(2):169?225.
Szmrecsanyi, Benedikt. 2005. Creatures of habit: A corpus-
linguistic analysis of persistence in spoken English. Corpus
Linguistics and Linguistic Theory 1(1):113?149.
834
