Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 36?37,
Vancouver, October 2005.
POSBIOTM/W: A Development Workbench For Machine Learning
Oriented Biomedical Text Mining System ?
Kyungduk Kim, Yu Song, Gary Geunbae Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science & Technology (POSTECH)
San 31, Hyoja-Dong, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea
{getta, songyu, gblee}@postech.ac.kr
Abstract
The POSBIOTM/W1 is a workbench for
machine-learning oriented biomedical text
mining system. The POSTBIOTM/W is
intended to assist biologist in mining use-
ful information efficiently from biomed-
ical text resources. To do so, it pro-
vides a suit of tools for gathering, manag-
ing, analyzing and annotating texts. The
workbench is implemented in Java, which
means that it is platform-independent.
1 Introduction
Large amounts of biomedical literature exist and the
volume continues to grow exponentially. Following
the increase of literature, there is growing need for
appropriate tools in support of collecting, managing,
creating, annotating and exploiting rich biomedical
text resources.
Especially, information on interactions among bi-
ological entities is very important for understanding
the biological process in a living cell (Blascheke et.
al., 1999). In our POSBIOTM/W workbench, we
use a supervised machine learning method to gen-
erate rules automatically to extract biological events
from free texts with minimum human effort. And we
adopt the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) model
(Lafferty et. al.,2001) for the biomedical named-
entity recognition (NER) task. Finally, to reduce the
? The research was supported by Brain Neuro Informatics
Research program by MOCIE.
1POSBIOTM/W stands for POSTECH Bio-Text Mining
System Workbench
labeling effort in a larger extent we incorporate an
active learning idea into the workbench.
2 System Description
The POSBIOTM/W comprises a set of appropriate
tools to provide users a convenient environment for
gathering, managing and analyzing biomedical text
and for named-entity annotation. The workbench
consists of four components: Managing tool, NER
tool, Event Extraction Tool and Annotation Tool.
And we adopt an active learning idea into the work-
bench to improve the NER and the Event Extraction
module?s performance. The overall design is shown
in Figure 1.
POSBIOTM W client/ ( ) POSBIOTM Syst erverem s( )
NER Module
Event ExtractionModule
NER Tool
Event Extraction Tool
ManagingTool AnnotatingTool TrainingData ActiveearningL
Figure 1: Overview of POSBIOTM/W
2.1 Managing tool
Main objective of the Managing tool is to help biolo-
gists search, collect and manage literatures relevant
to their interest. Users can access to the PubMed
database of bibliographic information using quick
searching bar and incremental PubMed search en-
gine.
36
2.2 NER tool
The NER tool is a client tool of POSBIOTM-
NER module and able to automatically annotate
biomedical-related texts. The NER tool provides
access to three target-specific named entity mod-
els - GENIA-NER model, GENE-NER model and
GPCR-NER model. Each of these model is trained
based on GENIA-Corpus (Kim et. al., 2003),
BioCreative data (Blaschke et. al., 2004) and POS-
BIOTM/NE corpus2 respectively. In POSBIOTM-
NER system, we adopt the Conditional Random
Fields (CRF) model (Lafferty et. al., 2001) for the
biomedical NER task.
2.3 Event Extraction tool
The Event Extraction tool extracts several biologi-
cal events from texts using automatically generated
rules. We use a supervised machine learning method
to overcome a knowledge-engineering bottleneck by
learning event extraction rules automatically. We
modify the WHISK (Soderland, 1999) algorithm to
provide a two-level rule learning method as a divide-
and-conquer strategy. In two-level rule learning, the
system learns event extraction rules which are inside
of the noun chunk at first level, and then it learns the
rules for whole sentence.
Since the system extracts biological events using
automatically generated rules, we can not guarantee
that every extracted event is always correct because
many different rules can be applied to the same sen-
tence. Therefore we try to verify the result with a
Maximum Entropy (ME) classifier to remove incor-
rectly extracted events. For each extracted event,
we verify each component of the event with the ME
classifier model. If one component is contradicted
to the class assigned by the classification model, we
will remove the event. For detail event extraction
process, please consult our previous paper (Kim et.
al., 2004).
2.4 Annotation tool
Our workbench provides a Graphical User Interface
based Annotation tool which enables the users to
annotate and correct the result of the named-entity
recognition and the event extraction. And users can
2POSBIOTM/NE corpus, our own corpus, is used to identify
four target named entities: protein, gene, small molecule and
cellular process.
upload the revised data to the POSBIOTM system,
which would contribute to the incremental build-up
of named-entity and relation annotation corpus.
2.5 Active learning
To minimize the human labeling effort, we employ
the active learning method to select the most infor-
mative samples. We proposed a new active learning
paradigm which considers not only the uncertainty
of the classifier but also the diversity of the corpus,
which will soon be published.
References
Christian Blaschke, Andrade, M.A., Ouzouis, C., Valen-
cia, A.. 1999. Automatic extraction of biological in-
formation from scientific text : protein-protein interac-
tions. Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology 60-
67.
Christian Blaschke, L. Hirschman, and A.
Yeh, editors. 2004. Proceedings of the
BioCreative Workshop, Granda, March.
http://www.pdg.cnb.uam.es/BioLINK/
workshop BioCreative 04/handout/
Eunju Kim, Yu Song, Gary Geunbae Lee, Byoung-Kee
Yi. 2004. Learning for interaction extraction and ver-
ification from biological full articles. Proceedings of
the ACM SIGIR 2004 workshop on search and discov-
ery in bioinformatics, July 2004, Sheffield, UK
J.-D. Kim, T. Ohta, Y. Tateisi and J. Tsujii 2003. GE-
NIA corpus - a semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics, Vol 19 Suppl. 1 2003,
pages i180-i182
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum and F. Pereira 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labelling sequence data. International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Soderland S. 1999. Learning information extraction
rules for semi-structured and free text. Machine
Learning, volume 34, 233-272.
37
