Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Demonstration Abstracts, pages 26?27,
Vancouver, October 2005.
Japanese Speech Understanding Using Grammar Specialization
Manny Rayner, Nikos Chatzichrisafis, Pierrette Bouillon
University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO
40 bvd du Pont-d?Arve, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
mrayner@riacs.edu
{Pierrette.Bouillon,Nikolaos.Chatzichrisafis}@issco.unige.ch
Yukie Nakao, Hitoshi Isahara, Kyoko Kanzaki
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 619-0289
yukie-n@khn.nict.go.jp, {isahara,kanzaki}@nict.go.jp
Beth Ann Hockey
UCSC/NASA Ames Research Center
Moffet Field, CA 94035
bahockey@riacs.edu
Marianne Santaholma, Marianne Starlander
University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO
40 bvd du Pont-d?Arve
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
Marianne.Santaholma@eti.unige.ch
Marianne.Starlander@eti.unige.ch
The most common speech understanding archi-
tecture for spoken dialogue systems is a combination
of speech recognition based on a class N-gram lan-
guage model, and robust parsing. For many types
of applications, however, grammar-based recogni-
tion can offer concrete advantages. Training a
good class N-gram language model requires sub-
stantial quantities of corpus data, which is gen-
erally not available at the start of a new project.
Head-to-head comparisons of class N-gram/robust
and grammar-based systems also suggest that users
who are familiar with system coverage get better re-
sults from grammar-based architectures (Knight et
al., 2001). As a consequence, deployed spoken dia-
logue systems for real-world applications frequently
use grammar-based methods. This is particularly
the case for speech translation systems. Although
leading research systems like Verbmobil and NE-
SPOLE! (Wahlster, 2000; Lavie et al, 2001) usu-
ally employ complex architectures combining sta-
tistical and rule-based methods, successful practical
examples like Phraselator and S-MINDS (Phrasela-
tor, 2005; Sehda, 2005) are typically phrasal trans-
lators with grammar-based recognizers.
Voice recognition platforms like the Nuance
Toolkit provide CFG-based languages for writing
grammar-based language models (GLMs), but it is
challenging to develop and maintain grammars con-
sisting of large sets of ad hoc phrase-structure rules.
For this reason, there has been considerable inter-
est in developing systems that permit language mod-
els be specified in higher-level formalisms, normally
some kind of unification grammar (UG), and then
compile these grammars down to the low-level plat-
form formalisms. A prominent early example of this
approach is the Gemini system (Moore, 1998).
Gemini raises the level of abstraction signifi-
cantly, but still assumes that the grammars will be
domain-dependent. In the Open Source REGULUS
project (Regulus, 2005; Rayner et al, 2003), we
have taken a further step in the direction of increased
abstraction, and derive all recognizers from a sin-
gle linguistically motivated UG. This derivation pro-
cedure starts with a large, application-independent
UG for a language. An application-specific UG is
then derived using an Explanation Based Learning
(EBL) specialization technique. This corpus-based
specialization process is parameterized by the train-
ing corpus and operationality criteria. The training
corpus, which can be relatively small, consists of ex-
amples of utterances that should be recognized by
the target application. The sentences of the corpus
are parsed using the general grammar, then those
parses are partitioned into phrases based on the op-
erationality criteria. Each phrase defined by the
operationality criteria is flattened, producing rules
of a phrasal grammar for the application domain.
This application-specific UG is then compiled into
26
a CFG, formatted to be compatible with the Nuance
recognition platform. The CFG is compiled into the
runtime recognizer using Nuance tools.
Previously, the REGULUS grammar specialization
programme has only been implemented for English.
In this demo, we will show how we can apply the
same methodology to Japanese. Japanese is struc-
turally a very different language from English, so it
is by no means obvious that methods which work
for English will be applicable in this new context:
in fact, they appear to work very well. We will
demo the grammars and resulting recognizers in the
context of Japanese ? English and Japanese ?
French versions of the Open Source MedSLT medi-
cal speech translation system (Bouillon et al, 2005;
MedSLT, 2005).
The generic problem to be solved when building
any sort of recognition grammar is that syntax alone
is insufficiently constraining; many of the real con-
straints in a given domain and use situation tend to
be semantic and pragmatic in nature. The challenge
is thus to include enough non-syntactic constraints
in the grammar to create a language model that can
support reliable domain-specific speech recognition:
we sketch our solution for Japanese.
The basic structure of our current general
Japanese grammar is as follows. There are four main
groups of rules, covering NP, PP, VP and CLAUSE
structure respectively. The NP and PP rules each as-
sign a sortal type to the head constituent, based on
the domain-specific sortal constraints defined in the
lexicon. VP rules define the complement structure
of each syntactic class of verb, again making use of
the sortal features. There are also rules that allow
a VP to combine with optional adjuncts, and rules
which allow null constituents, in particular null sub-
jects and objects. Finally, clause-level rules form a
clause out of a VP, an optional subject and optional
adjuncts. The sortal features constrain the subject
and the complements combining with a verb, but the
lack of constraints on null constituents and optional
adjuncts still means that the grammar is very loose.
The grammar specialization mechanism flattens the
grammar into a set of much simpler structures, elim-
inating the VP level and only permitting specific pat-
terns of null constituents and adjuncts licenced by
the training corpus.
We will demo several different versions of the
Japanese-input medical speech translation system,
differing with respect to the target language and
the recognition architecture used. In particular, we
will show a) that versions based on the specialized
Japanese grammar offer fast and accurate recogni-
tion on utterances within the intended coverage of
the system (Word Error Rate around 5%, speed un-
der 0.1?RT), b) that versions based on the original
general Japanese grammar are much less accurate
and more than an order of magnitude slower.
References
P. Bouillon, M. Rayner, N. Chatzichrisafis, B.A. Hockey,
M. Santaholma, M. Starlander, Y. Nakao, K. Kanzaki,
and H. Isahara. 2005. A generic multi-lingual open
source platform for limited-domain medical speech
translation. In In Proceedings of the 10th Conference
of the European Association for Machine Translation
(EAMT), Budapest, Hungary.
S. Knight, G. Gorrell, M. Rayner, D. Milward, R. Koel-
ing, and I. Lewin. 2001. Comparing grammar-based
and robust approaches to speech understanding: a case
study. In Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001, pages
1779?1782, Aalborg, Denmark.
A. Lavie, C. Langley, A. Waibel, F. Pianesi, G. Lazzari,
P. Coletti, L. Taddei, and F. Balducci. 2001. Ar-
chitecture and design considerations in NESPOLE!:
a speech translation system for e-commerce applica-
tions. In Proceedings of HLT: Human Language Tech-
nology Conference, San Diego, California.
MedSLT, 2005. http://sourceforge.net/projects/medslt/.
As of 9 June 2005.
R. Moore. 1998. Using natural language knowledge
sources in speech recognition. In Proceedings of the
NATO Advanced Studies Institute.
Phraselator, 2005. http://www.phraselator.com/. As of 9
June 2005.
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and J. Dowding. 2003. An
open source environment for compiling typed unifica-
tion grammars into speech recognisers. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th EACL (demo track), Budapest, Hun-
gary.
Regulus, 2005. http://sourceforge.net/projects/regulus/.
As of 9 June 2005.
Sehda, 2005. http://www.sehda.com/. As of 9 June 2005.
W. Wahlster, editor. 2000. Verbmobil: Foundations of
Speech-to-Speech Translation. Springer.
27
