Research  and Development in Natural  Language Process ing 
at BBN Laborator ies  
in the St rateg ic  Computing Program 
BBN Laborator ies ,  Inc. 
Cambridge, MA 02238 
STAFF: Ralph Weischedel (Principal Investigator), Remko Scha, Edward Walker, Damaris 
Ayuso, Andrew Haas, Erhard Hinrichs, Robert Ingria, Lance Ramshaw, Varda Shaked, 
David Stallard 
1 Background 
BBN's respons ib i l i ty  is to conduct  research  and development  in natura l  language 
in ter face  technology.  This respons ib i l i ty  has three  aspects:  
o to demonst ra te  s ta te -o f - the -ar t  techno logy in a Strateg ic  Computing 
appl icat ion,  col lect ing data regard ing  the ef fect iveness  of the demonst rated  
heur is t ics ,  
! 
o to conduct  research  in natura l  language in ter face  technology,  as itemized in 
the descr ipt ion  of JANUS la ter  in this note,  and 
o to in tegrate  techno logy  from other  natura l  language in ter face  cont ractors ,  
including USC/ Informat ion Sc iences Inst i tute,  the Univers i ty  of Pennsylvania,  
and the Univers i ty of Massachuset ts .  
Of the three  init ial  app l icat ions  descr ibed in the overview, the Fleet Command 
Center  Batt le Management Program (FCCBMP) has been the appl icat ion providing the 
domain in which our  work is being car r ied  out. The FCCBMP encompasses the 
development  of exper t  system capab i l i t ies  at the Pacif ic Fleet Command Center in 
Hawaii, and the development  of an in tegrated  natura l  language in ter face  to these new 
capabi l i t ies as well as to the exist ing data  bases and graphic  display faci l it ies. BBN is 
developing a ser ies of inc reas ing ly  soph is t icated natura l  language unders tand ing  
systems which will serve as an in tegrated  in ter face  to severa l  faci l i t ies at the Pacif ic 
F leet Command Center:  the In tegrated  Data Base (IDB), which conta ins  information 
about  ships, the i r  read iness  s tates ,  the i r  capabi l i t ies,  etc.; the Operat ions Support  
Group Prototype  (OSGP), a graph ics  system which can display locat ions and i t inerar ies  
of ships on maps; and the Force  Requirements  Expert  System (FRESH) which is being 
bui l t  by Texas Inst ruments .  
The ta rget  users  for this appl icat ion are naval  of f icers  involved in decis ion 
1 
BBN Laboratories Incorporated 
making at  the Paci f ic  F leet Command Center ;  these  are  execut ives  whose e f for t  is 
bet te r  spent  on navy  prob lems and dec is ion  making than  on the  deta i ls  of which 
so f tware  system of fers  a g iven in fo rmat ion  capabi l i ty ,  how a prob lem shou ld  be d iv ided 
to make use of the var ious  systems,  or how to synthes ize  the  resu l t s  from severa l  
sources  into the des i red  answer .  Cur rent ly  they  do not  access  the  data  base or OSGP 
app l i ca t ion  programs themse lves ;  ins tead ,  on a round- the-c lock  basis ,  two operators  
ac t  as in termed iar ies  between the  Navy staf f  and  the computers .  The ut i l i ty  of a '  
natura l  l anguage in ter face  in such  an env i ronment  is c lear .  
The s tar t ing  po in t  for  deve lopment  of the  natura l  l anguage in ter face  system at 
the  Paci f ic  F leet  Command Center  was the  IRUS system,  wh ich  has  been under  
deve lopment  at BBN for  a number  of years .  A new vers ion  of th is  system, IRUS-86,  
has  been  ins ta l led  in the  FCCBMP tes tbed  area  at the Paci f ic  F leet  Command Center  for  
demonst ra t ion .  Fur ther  bas ic  research  on the  prob lems of natura l  l anguage 
in ter fac ing  is cont inu ing ,  and  the  resu l t s  of th is  and fu ture  research  will be 
incorporated  into  a next  generat ion  natura l  l anguage in ter face  sys tem cal led JANUS, to 
be de l ivered  to the Paci f ic  F leet  Command Center  at a la ter  date.  JANUS will share  
most  of its domain -dependent  data  with IRUS-86,  and it will share  o ther  modules  as 
well; IRUS-86  will there fore  be able  to evolve gradua l ly  into the  f inal  vers ion  of JANUS. 
2 IRUS-86:  The In i t ia l  Test  Bed System 
The arch i tec ture  of IRUS \ [Bates  83\] is a cascade  cons is t ing  of a sequence  of 
t rans la t ion  modules:  
o An ATN parser  which produces  a syntact i c  t ree.  
o A semant ic  in terpreter  which produces  a fo rmula  of the meaning 
representat ion  language MRL. 
o A postprocessor  for  reso lv ing  anaphora  and el l ipsis. 
o A t rans la t ion  module which produces  a fo rmula  of the  re la t iona l  data  base  
language ERL ( "Extended Re lat iona l  Language") .  
o A t rans la t ion  module which produces  a sequence  of commands  for  the  
under ly ing  data  base  access  system.  
IRUS-86,  the vers ion  of IRUS which is now ins ta l led  at the  Pac i f ic  F leet Command 
Center ,  is a vers ion  of IRUS which is extended in severa l  ways.  Two of these  
extens ions  are  espec ia l l y  wor th  ment ion ing:  
o IRUS-86  uses  the  NIKL sys tem \[Moser 83\] to  represent  i ts domain  model, i.e., 
the  re la t ionsh ips  between the  pred icates  and re la t ions  of the  meaning 
representat ion  language MRL. The NIKL domain model suppor ts  the  sys tem's  
t reatment  of semant ic  anomaly,  anaphora ,  and  nomina l  compounds .  
BBN Laborator ies  Incorporated  
o IRUS-86 conta ins  a new module which exploi ts  this NIKL domain model to 
simplify MRL express ions;  this makes it possible to t rans la te  complex MRL- 
express ions  into ERL constants ,  thus  allowing for s igni f icant d ivergences 
between the input  English and the s t ructure  of the under ly ing data base 
\ [Sta l lard 86\]. 
In addition to accessing the NIKL domain model, the parser, semantic interpreter 
and MRL- to -ERL  translator access other knowledge sources which contain domain-  
dependent information: 
o the lexicon, 
o the semant ic  in terpretat ion  rules for individual  concepts ,  
o the MRL- to -ERL  mapping rules for individual MRL  constants, which introduce 
the details of underlying system structure, such as file and field names. 
To por t  IRUS to the navy domain, the re levant  domain -dependent  data  had to be 
suppl ied to the system. This task  is being accompl ished by personne l  at the Naval 
Ocean Systems Center  (NOSC). In August, 1985, BBN prov ided NOSC with an initial 
p ro to type  system conta in ing small example sets of lexical  entr ies,  semant ic  
in terpretat ion  rules,  and MRL-to-ERL rules; using acquis i t ion tools provided by BBN, 
NOSC personne l  have been enter ing  the res t  of the data. 
IRUS-86 was del ivered to the FRESH deve lopers  at Texas Ins t ruments  in January  
1986, was instal led in a test  bed area of the Pacif ic Fleet Command Center  in April 
1986, and will be demonst ra ted  in June 1986. Current ly ,  the lexicon and the domain -  
dependent  ru les of the system only cover  a re lat ive ly  small par t  of the OSGP 
capabi l i t ies and the files and a t t r ibutes  of the In tegrated  Data Base. Once enough 
data have been entered  so that  the system covers  a suf f ic ient ly  large par t  of the data 
base, it will be t r ied out in actual  use by Navy personne l .  This will enable us to 
gather  data about  the way the system per forms in a real  environment,  and to f ine -  
tune the system in var ious  respects .  For instance,  IRUS-86 makes use of shallow 
heur is t ic  methods to address  some aspects  of natura l  language unders tand ing  such as 
anaphora  and ellipsis for which genera l  so lut ions are sti l l  research  issues. The 
FCCBMP appl icat ion prov ides a test  bed in which such heur i s t i c  methods can be 
evaluated,  and enhancements  to them developed and tested,  as par t  of the 
evo lut ionary  technolog ica l  growth in tended to cont inue throughout  the Natural  
Language Technology ef fort  of the Strategic  Computing Program. 
3 
BBN Laboratories Incorporated 
3 Funct iona l  Goals for JANUS 
The IRUS-86 system excels by its clean, modular structure, its broad 
syntactic/semantic coverage, its sophisticated domain model, and its systematic 
treatment of discrepancies between the English lexicon and the data base structure. 
We thus expect that it will demonstrate considerable utility as an interface component 
in the FCCBMP application. Nevertheless, IRUS-86 shares with other current systems 
several limitations which should be overcome if natural language interfaces are to 
become truly "natural". In developing JANUS, the successor of IRUS-86, we shall 
attempt to overcome some of those limitations. The areas of increased functionality 
we are considering are: semantics and knowledge representation, ill-formedness, 
discourse, cooperativeness, multiple underlying systems, and knowledge acquisition. 
3.1 Semantics and Knowledge Representation 
IRUS-86, like most o ther  cur rent  systems, represents  sentence  meanings as 
formulas of a logical language which is a sl ight extens ion  of f i r s t -o rder  logic. As a 
consequence ,  many impor tant  phenomena in English have no equivalent  in the meaning 
representat ion  language,  and cannot  be dealt  with cor rect ly ,  e.g., modalit ies, 
p ropos i t iona l  a t t i tudes ,  gener ics ,  col lect ive quant i f icat ion,  and context -dependence .  
Thus, one foregoes  one of the most important  potent ia l  assets  of a natura l  language 
in ter face:  the capac i ty  of express ing complex semantic  s t ruc tures  in a succ inct  and 
comfortab le  way. 
In JANUS, we will there fore  adopt  a new meaning representat ion  language which 
combines features  from PHILIQAI's enr iched  lambda-ca lcu lus  \[Scha 76\] with ideas 
under ly ing Montague's Intens ional  Logic \[Montague 70\], and possibly a d i s t r ibuted  
quote -operator  \[Haas 86\]. It will have suf f ic ient  express ive  power to incorporate  a 
vers ion  of Car lson's t reatment  of gener ics  \[Carlson 79\], a vers ion  of Scha's t reatment  
of quant i f i cat ion  \[Scha 81\], Montague's t reatment  of modality, and var ious possib le 
approaches  to propos i t iona l  a t t i tudes  and context -dependence .  
In adopting a higher order logic as proposed, one confronts problems of formula 
simplification and the need to apply meaning postulates to reduce the semantic 
representation of an input sentence to an expression appropriate to the underlying 
system, e.g., a relational algebra expression in the case that the underlying system is 
a data base. To do this, we will investigate the limited inference mechanisms of KL-  
TWO \[Moser 83, Vilain 85\], following up on our previous work \[Stallard 86\]. The 
advantage of these inference mechanisms is their tractability; discovering their power 
and limitations in this complex problem domain should be an interesting result. 
4 
BBN Laborator ies  Incorporated  
3.2 Discourse 
The mean ing  of a sentence  depends  in many ways  on the  context  which has  been  
set  up by the  preced ing  d i scourse .  IRUS and  o ther  sys tems,  however ,  cur rent ly  ignore  
most  of these  dependenc ies ,  and  employ  a ra ther  sha l low model  of d i scourse  s t ruc ture .  
To al low the  user  to exp lo i t  the  ful l  express ive  potent ia l  of a natura l  language 
in teract ion ,  the  sys tem must  t rack  top ics ,  re fe rence  t imes,  poss ib le  antecedents  for  
anaphora ,  etc. ;  it  must  be able to recogn ize  the  const i tuent  un i ts  of a d i scourse  and 
the  subord inat ion  or  coord inat ion  re la t ions  obta in ing  between them.  A substant ia l  
amount  of work  has  been  done a l ready  on severa l  of these  i ssues ,  much of it by  BBN 
researchers  \ [S idner  85, H inr i chs  81, Po lany i  84, Grosz  86\]. Research  in th is  a rea  
cont inues  under  a separate  DARPA- funded cont ract .  We.expect  to be able to in tegrate  
some of the  resu l t s  of that  research  in the  JANUS sys tem.  
3.3 M-formedness 
A natura l  in ter face  sys tem shou ld  be fo rg iv ing  of a user ' s  dev ia t ions  f rom its 
expectat ions ,  be they  misspe l l ings ,  typograph ica l  e r ro rs ,  unknown words ,  poor  syntax ,  
incor rect  p resuppos i t ions ,  f ragmentary  forms,  or  v io la ted  se lec t ion  res t r i c t ions .  
Empi r i ca l  s tud ies  show that  as much as 25% of the  input  to data  base  query  sys tems is 
i l l - fo rmed.  
IRUS cur rent ly  hand les  some c lasses  of i l l - fo ' rmedness  by us ing  a combinat ion  of 
sha l low heur i s t i cs  and  user  in teract ion .  It  can  cor rec t  for  typograph ica l  misspe l l ings ,  
for  omi t ted  determiners  or  p repos i t ions ,  and  for  some ungrammat ica l i t ies ,  l ike 
determiner -noun and  sub jec t -verb  d i sagreement .  The JANUS sys tem will employ  a 
more  genera l  approach  to i l l - fo rmedness  that  will hand le  a la rger  c lass  of 
ungrammat ica l  const ruct ions  and  a la rger  c lass  of word  se lec t ion  prob lems,  and that  
will a lso exp lore  cor rec t ing  severa l  types  of semant ic  i l l - fo rmedness .  
These  capab i l i tes  have  major  imp l i ca t ions  for  the  cont ro l  of the  unders tand ing  
process ,  s ince  cons ider ing  such  poss ib i l i t i es  can  exponent ia l l y  expand the  search  
space .  Ma inta in ing  cont ro l  will requ i re  care  in in tegrat ing  the  i l l - fo rmedness  
capab i l i ty  in to  the  res t  of the  sys tem,  and  a lso mak ing  maximal  use  of the  gu idance  
that  can  be  der ived  f rom a model  of the  d i scourse  and  user ' s  goa ls  to const ra in  the  
search .  
3.4 Cooperativeness 
A t ru ly  he lp fu l  sys tem shou ld  not  react  to the  l i te ra l  meaning of a sentence ,  but  
to i ts  perce ived  in tent .  If in the  context  of a g iven  app l i ca t ion  it is poss ib le  to 
character i ze  the  goa ls  that  a user  may be expected  to be pursu in$  through his 
in teract ion  with the  sys tem,  the  sys tem shou ld  t ry  to  in fe r  f rom the  user - input  what  
the  under ly ing  goa l  cou ld  be. A sys tem can  do th i s  by  access ing  a goa l - subgoa l  
5 
BBN Laboratories Incorporated 
hierarchy which links the speech acts expressed by individual utterances to the global 
goals that the user may have. This strategy has been applied successfully to rather 
small domains \[Allen 83, Sidner 85\]. We wish to investigate whether it carries over to 
the FCCBMP applications. 
3.5 Modelling the Capabilities o_.f Multiple System 
The way in which IRUS-86 decides whether an input sentence translates into an 
IDB query or an OSGP command may be refined. There is a need for work on what 
kind of knowledge would be necessary to interface smoothly and intelligently to 
multiple underlying systems. A reasoning component is needed that can determine 
which underlying system or systems can best fulfill a user's request. Such a 
reasoning component would have to combine a model of the capabilites of the 
underlying systems with a model of the user goals and current intentions in the 
discourse context in order to choose the correct system(s). Such a model would also 
be useful for providing supporting information to the user. 
3.8 Knowledge Acquisition 
Fur ther  research  is also ca l led for  to expand the  power  of the  knowledge 
acqu is i t ion  too ls  that  a re  used  in add ing to the  lex icon,  the  set  of case  f rame ru les ,  
the~mode l  of domain  pred icates ,  and  the set  of t rans format ion  ru les  between the  
Meaning Representat ion  Language and the languages  of the  under ly ing  systems.  The 
acqu is i t ion  too ls  ava i lab le  in IRUS, un l ike those  in some other  systems,  are  not  t ied  to 
the spec i f ic  f ie lds and re la t ions  in the  under ly ing  database .  The acqu is i t ion  too ls  
shou ld  work  on the  h igher  level of the  domain  model, s ince that  p rov ides  a more 
genera l  and t ranspor tab le  resu l t .  The knowledge acqu is i t ion  fac i l i t ies  for  JANUS will 
also need  to be redes igned  to suppor t  and to make maximal use of the  power  of the  
new mean ing  representat ion  language based  on in tens iona l  logic. 
4 New Underlying Technologies 
4.1 Coping with Ambigui ty  
The new funct iona l i t ies  we descr ibed  in the  prev ious  sect ion ,  and  the  techn iques  
we in tend  to use to ach ieve  them, ra i se  an i ssue  which has  impor tant  consequences  
for  the  des ign  of JANUS: we will be faced  with an exp los ion  in the  number  of 
in terpreta t ions  that  the  system will have  to process ;  every  sentence  will be mani fo ld  
ambiguous .  One source  of th is  phenomenon is the improvement  of the  semant ic  
coverage  and  the  broaden ing  of the d i scourse  context .  D is t inc t ions  and ambigu i t ies  
which so far  were ignored  will be dea l t  with: for  ins tance ,  d i f fe rent  in terpreta t ion  and  
6 
BBN Laborator ies  Incorporated  
scopes  of quant i f ie rs  will be cons idered ,  and  d i f fe rent  antecedents  for  pronouns. Even 
more ser ious  is the  process ing  of i l l - fo rmed sentences ,  which may requ i re  t ry ing  out  
all par t ia l  in te rpreta t ions  to see which one can  be extended to a complete  
in terpreta t ion  a f te r  re lax ing  one or more const ra in ts .  
To cut down on the processing of spurious interpretations, it is very important 
that interpretations of sentences and their constituents be tested for plausibility at 
an early stage. Different techniques must probably be used in conjunction: 
o Simplification transformations may show that an interpretation is absurd, by 
reducing it to TRUE or FALSE or the empty set. 
o The d i scourse  context  and the model of the  user ' s  goals  impose const ra in ts  
on expected  sentences .  
4.2 Para l le l  Parsing 
Since some of the techn iques  that  we in tend  to use to f ight the ambigu i ty  
exp los ion  are  themse lves  ra ther  computat ion - in tens ive ,  it is c lear ly  unavo idab le  that  
the  improved  sys tem funct iona l i ty  that  we aim for  will lead to a cons iderab le  inc rease  
in the  amount  of p rocess ing  requ i red .  To avoid a ser ious  decrease  of the new 
sys tem's  response  t imes, we will there fore  move it to a su i tab le  para l le l  mach ine  such  
as BBN's But ter f ly  or  Monarch,  runn ing  a para l le l  Common Lisp. This in i tself  has  
ra ther  ser ious  consequences  for  the so f tware  design.  It means that  from the  outset  
we will keep  para l le l i zab i l i ty  of the so f tware  in mind. 
We have  begun to address  th is  issue in the  area  of syntax .  A new dec la ra t ive  
grammar  is being wr i t ten ,  which will u l t imate ly  have a coverage  of Engl ish la rger  than  
the  cur rent  RUS grammar ;  the grammar  is wr i t ten  in a s ide -e f fec t - f ree  formal ism (a 
context - f ree  grammar  with var iab les )  so that  d i f fe rent  pars ing  a lgor i thms may be 
exp lored  which are  eas i ly  para l le l i zab le .  The f i rs t  such  a lgor i thm was implemented in 
May 1986 on BBN's Butter f ly .  
5 Contributions from Other Sites 
5.1 ISI/UMass: Generation 
We shou ld  not  expect  that  JANUS will a lways be able to assess  cor rec t ly  which 
in terpreta t ion  of a sentence  is the in tended one. In l ight of such  s i tuat ions ,  it is 
very  impor tant  that  the  system can give a paraphrase  of the input  to the user ,  which 
shows the  sys tem's  in terpreta t ion .  This may be done  e i ther  expl ic i t ly  or as par t  of 
the  answer .  To be able to deve lop such  capab i l i t ies ,  work on Natura l  Language 
Generat ion  is needed.  At USC/ISI a p ro jec t  d i rec ted  by William Mann and  Norman 
7 
BBN Laborator ies  Incorporated  
Sondheimer  is underway to develop the generat ion  system PENMAN, using the NIGEL 
systemic grammar. PENMAN will be in tegrated  to become the generat ion  component  of 
JANUS. PENMAN itself consists  of severa l  subcomponents .  Some of these,  specif ical ly 
the " text  planning" component,  will be developed through joint work between USC/ISI 
and David McDonald at the Univers i ty  of Massachusetts ,  based on the far ter 's  
exper ience  with the MUMBLE system. 
5.2 UPenn: Cooperat ion and Clar i f icat ion 
Under  the d i rect ion of Aravind Joshi and Bonnie Webber at the Univers i ty of 
Pennsy lvan ia ,  several  focussed s tud ies  have been car r ied  out to invest igate var ious 
aspects  of cooperat ive  system behav iour  and c lar i f icat ion in teract ions .  (For more 
detai l ,  see the i r  paper  in this issue.)  As par t  of the St rateg ic  Computing Natural  
Lanauge effort ,  UPenn will eventua l ly  develop this into a module which can be 
in tegrated  into JANUS to fu r ther  enhance  its capabi l i t ies.  
BBN Laborator ies Incorporated 
References  
[Allen 83] 
[Bates 83] 
[Carlson 79] 
[Grosz 86] 
[Haas 86] 
[Hinrichs 81] 
[Montague 70] 
[Moser 83] 
[Polanyi 84] 
Allen, J.F. 
Recognizing Intent ions from Natural  Language Utterances.  
In M. Brady and R.C. Berwick (editors),  Computational Models of 
Discourse, pages 107-166. Massachusetts  Inst i tute Technology 
Press, 1983. 
Bates, M. and Bobrow, R.J. 
A Transportable Natural Language Inter face for Information Retrieval. 
In Proceedings of the 6th Annual  In ternat iona l  ACM SIGIR Conference. 
ACM Special Interest  Group on Information Retrieval and American 
Society for Information Science, Washington, D.C., June, 1983. 
Carlson, G. 
Reference to Kinds in English. 
Garland Press, New York, 1979. 
Grosz, B.J. and Sidner, C.L. 
The St ructures  of Discourse St ructure .  
In L. Polanyi (editor), Discourse St ructure .  Ablex Publishers, Norwood, 
NJ, 1986. 
Haas, A.R. 
A Syntact ic  Theory of Belief and Action. 
Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence , 1986. 
Forthcoming. 
Hinrichs, E. 
Temporale Anaphora im Englischen. 
1981. 
Unpublished ms., University of Tuebingen. 
Montague, R. 
Pragmatics and Intensional  Logic. 
Synthese  22:68-94, 1970. 
Moser, M.G. 
An Overview of NIKL, the New Implementat ion of KL-ONE. 
In Sidner, C. L., et al (editors),  Research in Knowledge Representat ion 
for  Natura l  Language Unders tand ing  - Annual  Report, f September 
1982 - 31 August  1983, pages 7-26.  BBN Laborator ies Report No. 
5421, 1983. 
Polanyi, L. and Scha, R. 
A Syntact ic  Approach to Discourse Semantics. 
In Proceedings of Int'l. Conference on Computational L inguist ics.  
Stanford University, Stanford,  CA, 1984. 
BBN Laborator ies  Incorporated 
\[Scha 76\] 
\[Scha 81\] 
\[Sidner 85\] 
\ [Stal lard 86\] 
\[Vilain 85\] 
Scha, R.J.tI. 
Semantic Types in PHLIQA1. 
In Proceedings of the 6th In ternat iona l  Conference on Computational 
L inguist ics.  1978. 
Scha, R.J.H. 
Distributive, Collective and Cumulative Quanti f icat ion. 
Formal Methods in the S tudy  of Language, Part  2. 
Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam, 1981, pages 483-512.  
Reprinted in: J.A.G. Groenendijk,  T.M.V. Janssen and M.B.J. Stokhof 
(editors).  Truth, In terpretat ion  and Information. GRASS 3. 
Dordrecht,  Foris, 1984. 
Sidner, C.L. 
Plan parsing for in tended response recognit ion in discourse.  
Computational Intel l igence 1(1):1-10, February,  1985. 
Stal lard, D.G. 
A Terminological Simplif ication Transformat ion for Natural  Language 
Quest ion-Answering Systems. 
In Proceedings of the 24th Annual  Meeting of the Associat ion for  
Computational L inguist ics .  Associat ion for Computat ional  
Linguistics, June, 1986. 
Vilain, M. 
The Restr icted Language Arch i tecture  of a Hybrid Representat ion  
System. 
In Proceedings of IJCAI85, pages 547-551. In ternat iona l  Joint 
Conferences on Artif icial Intel l igence, Inc., Morgan Kaufmann 
Publ ishers,  Inc., Los Angeles, CA, August, 1985. 
10 
