Analysis and Symbolic Processing of Unrestricted Speech 
XEROX PALO ALTO I~ESEARCH CENTER 
M. Margaret Withgott and Ronald M. Kaplan, Principal Investigators 
Our objective is to develop methods and computational models for the perception and under- 
standing of sensory data. The theories and computational technologies we develop will result 
in information interpretation for multi-media documents and database retrieval. 
We have developed a theoretical ccount of variation and perceptual constancy in spoken lan- 
guage, and have developed tools and techniques for modeling phonetic variation. Machine learn- 
ing and statistical techniques have been adapted for use in organizing data into structures rep- 
resenting the contextual factors associated with phonetic variation. This is useful for evaluating 
theories of variation and for the design of word models in recognition systems. We are able to au- 
tomatically generate rules that create variant pronunciations, which we then can compare with 
our large multiple-pronunciation dictionaries. Studies of American English speech ave also ad- 
vanced our understanding of what information to include in recognition models. For instance, 
results from an investigation ofpalatal sounds (with M. Peet, MITRE) argue for a particular use 
of duration, since the acoustic haracteristics of spectrally-similar sounds differ temporally as 
correlated with their distinct underlying sources. 
We have developed word prediction and verification techniques using unrestricted text as input. 
To take advantage ofdiscourse context for word prediction, we use a dynamic ache of recently 
encountered words in a Markov model to characterize the phenomenon f word recurrence as- 
sociated with the topic of discourse. This reduces the average rank of correct word hypotheses 
by 10 percent in our electronic mail corpus. A related implementation has been developed for 
automatically tagging text. To take advantage of local, intra-word context, we use morphologi- 
cal analysis tools and are investigating the use of dynamically-created word-segment models for 
verification. 
Most current approaches tothe problem of speech recognition i the presence ofcompeting speech 
are based on the assumption that the co-channel speech streams can be separated using local 
waveform characteristics such as amplitude or fundamental frequency, independent of linguistic 
content. In our alternative paradigm, target-interference separation and target recognition oc- 
cur simultaneously, driven by a model of the recognition vocabulary. The basis of the method is a 
spectral similarity measure which allows a reference spectrum to match only a subset of the input 
spectral features. We have evaluated the method through a set of speaker-dependent isolated- 
word recognition experiments in which the co-channel interference onsisted of sentences drawn 
at random from the DARPA TIMIT database. Results indicate a50-70 percent reduction i  recog- 
nition error rates at low signal-to-noise ratios relative to those observed with a conventional 
whole-spectrum cepstral distance metric. 
In concert with work supported by Xerox and NSF, we plan to study the integration of explicit 
signal knowledge representation with information-theoretic approaches to recognition. We 
intend to use language models (both categorical and statistical) to constrain the recognition. 
The work will involve development of a speaker-independent phonetic lassification system 
for continuous speech as well as text-based recognition studies. 
283 
