Natural Language with Integrated Deictic and 
Graphic Gestures' 
J.G. NeaF, C.Y. Thielman 2, Z. Dobes ~ 
S.M. Haller :~, S.C. Shapiro 3
Calspan-UB Research Center (CUBRC) 
P.O. Box 400, 4455 Genesee Street 
Buffalo, NY 14225 
ABSTRACT 
People frequently and effectively integrate deictic and graphic gestures with their natural 
language (NL) when conducting human-to-human dialogue. Similar multi-modal commu- 
nication can facilitate human interaction with modern sophisticated information processing 
and decision-aiding computer systems. As part of the CUBRICON project, we are develop- 
ing NL processing technology that incorporates deictic and graphic gestures with simultane- 
ous coordinated NL for both user inputs and system-generated outputs. Such multi-modal 
language should be natural and efficient for human-computer dialogue, particularly for pre- 
senting or requesting information about objects that are visible, or can be presented visibly, 
on a graphics display. This paper discusses unique interface capabilities that the CUBRI- 
CON system provides including the ability to: (1) accept and understand multi-media input 
such that references to entities in (spoken or typed) natural anguage sentences can include 
coordinated simultaneous pointing to the respective ntities on a graphics display; use si- 
multaneous pointing and NL references to disambiguate one another when appropriate; infer 
the intended referent of a point gesture which is inconsistent with the accompanying NL; 
(2) dynamically compose and generate multi-modal language that combines NL with deictic 
gestures and graphic expressions; synchronously present he spoken natural language and 
coordinated pointing gestures and graphic expressions; discriminate between spoken and 
written NL. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
One of the strong arguments in favor of using Natural Language (NL) processing systems as 
front-ends to sophisticated application systems is that if human-computer communication is 
conducted in an NL that most users know, then the cost of training a user to use the system 
1This research was supported, inpart, by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and monitored 
by the Rome Air Development Center under Contract No. F30603-87-C-0136 and the National Science 
Foundation grant No. SES-88-10917 toThe National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis 
2 Calspan Corporation 
3State University of New York at Buffalo 
410 
should be greatly reduced. Human-computer communication can be made even more nat- 
ural and effective for the user if deictic gestures and drawing expressions are incorporated 
into the language, since people very commonly and effectively augment their NL with deic- 
tic gestures, drawing, and other modes of communication when engaged in human-human 
dialogue. As part of the CUBRICON project, we are developing NL processing technology 
that incorporates deictic and graphic gestures with simultaneous coordinated NL for both 
user inputs and system-generated outputs. 
The CUBRICON project \[Nea188a, Nea188b, Neal89\] is devoted to the development of 
knowledge-based interface technology that integrates peech input, speech output, natural 
language text, geographic maps, tables, graphics, and pointing gestures for interactive dia- 
logues between human and computer. The objective is to provide both the user and system 
with modes of expression that can be combined and used in a natural and efficient manner, 
particularly when presenting or requesting information about objects that are visible, or can 
be presented visibly, on a graphics display. The goal of the project is to develop interface 
technology that uses its media/modalities intelligently in a flexible, highly integrated manner 
modelled after the manner in which humans converse in simultaneous coordinated multiple 
modalities. 
The interface technology developed as part of this project has been implemented in the form 
of a prototype system, called CUBRICON (the CUBRC Intelligent CONversationalist). Al- 
though the application domain used to drive the research for the CUBRICON project is that 
of tactical Air Force mission planning, the interface technology incorporated in CUBRICON 
is applicable to domains with similar communication characteristics and requirements. 
This paper discusses the research effort within the CUBRICON project that has focused 
on integrating NL with deictic and graphic gestures for user inputs and system-generated 
outputs. The unique interface capabilities that have been developed and implemented in
the CUBRICON system include the ability to: (1) accept and understand multi-media in- 
put such that references to entities in (spoken or typed) natural anguage sentences can 
include coordinated simultaneous pointing to the respective ntities on a graphics display; 
use simultaneous pointing and NL references to disambiguate one another when appropriate; 
infer the intended referent of a point gesture which is inconsistent with the accompanying 
NL; (2) dynamically compose and generate multi-modal language that combines NL with 
deictic gestures and graphic expressions; ynchronously present he spoken natural anguage 
and coordinated pointing gestures and graphic expressions; discriminate between spoken and 
written NL. 
2 SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The CUBRICON design provides for the use of a unified multi-media language, by both 
the user and system, for communication i  a dialogue setting. Input and output streams 
411 
are treated as compound streams with components corresponding to different media. This 
approach is intended to imitate, to a certain extent, the ability of humans to simultaneously 
accept input from different sensory devices (such as eyes and ears), and to simultaneously 
produce output in different media (such as voice, pointing motions, and drawings). 
An overview of the CUBRICON software system and hardware I/O devices is presented in 
Figure 1. CUBRICON accepts input from three input devices: speech input device, key- 
board, and mouse. CUBRICON produces output for three output devices: high-resolution 
color-graphics display, high-resolution monochrome display, and speech production device. 
The primary path that the input data follows is indicated by the modules that are num- 
bered in the figure: (1) Input Coqrdinator , (2) Multi-Media Parser Interpreter, (3) Execu- 
tor/Communicator to Target System, (4) Multi-Media Output Planner, and (5) the Coor- 
dinated Output Generator. The Input Coordinator module accepts input from the three 
input devices and fuses the input streams into a single compound stream, maintaining the 
temporal order of tokens in the original streams. The Multi-Media Parser/Interpreter is a 
generalized augmented transition etwork (GATN) that has been extended to accept the 
compound stream produced by the Input Coordinator and produce an interpretation of this 
compound stream. Appropriate action is then taken by the Executor module. This action 
may be a command to the mission planning system, a database query, or an action that 
entails participation of the interface system only. An expression of the results of the action 
is then planned by the Multi-Media Output Planner for communication to the user. The 
Output Planner uses a GATN that produces a multi-media output stream representation 
with components targeted for the different output devices. This output representation is 
translated into visual/auditory output by the Output Generator module. This module is 
responsible for producing the multi-media output in a coordinated manner in real time (e.g., 
the Planner module can specify that a certain icon on the color-graphics display must be 
highlighted when the entity represented by the icon is mentioned in the simultaneous natural 
language output). 
The CUBRICON system includes several knowledge sources that are used for both under- 
standing input and composing output. The knowledge sources include: a lexicon, a grammar 
defining the multi-modal language used by the system for input and output, a discourse 
model, a user model, and a knowledge base of task domain and interface information. The 
latter knowledge sources are discussed briefly in the following paragraphs. 
The knowledge base consists of information about the task domain of tactical Air Force 
mission planning. This knowledge base includes information about concepts uch as SAMs, 
air bases, radars, and missions as well as related HCI concepts uch as verbal/graphical 
expressions for the domain concepts. 
The discourse model is a representation f the attentional focus space \[Grosz86\] of the dia- 
logue carried out in multi-modal language. It consists of (1) a main focus list that includes 
those entities and propositions that have been explicitly expressed (by the user or by CUBRI- 
412 
SPEECH INPUT DEVICE 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
II II . . . . .  \] \[ ...... K~YBOARO POINTING GRAPHICS DEVICE DEVICE DISPLAY 
KNOWLEDGE SOURCES 
LJEXICON 
GRAMMAR 
DISCOURSE 
MODEL 
6 \ [  USER 
- I . . . . . . . . . . . .~  
PLANNJNO STRATEGIES 
KNOWLEDGE 
~ ~ OF 
_ ~  DOMAIN-SPECIFI, , KNOWLEDGE 
COMMUNICATOR 
TO 
TARGET SYSTEM ? 
I' TARGET APPL,.I"-CA-TION SYSTEM I 
I , ' 
t 
i- J COORDINATOR ? 
MULTI-MEDIA 
PARSER I~  
INTERPRETER ~ 
? 
INTELLJGENT MULTIMEDIA 
iNTERFACE 
COORDINATED 
OUTPUT 
GENERATOR ? 
SPEECH \] OUTPUT DEVICE 
OUTPUT 
PLANNER 
Figure 1: System Overview 
CON) via natural language and/or graphic/pointing gestures and (2) a display model that 
includes a representation of all the objects (windows and their contents) that are "in focus" 
because they are visible on one of the two CRT screens. 
The user model \[Kobsa88\] consists of an entity rating module that includes a task-dependent 
representation of the relative importance of all the entity types known to the system and an 
algorithm for modifying these ratings depending on task and dialogue activity. 
Key features of the CUBRICON design, discussed in this paper, include the integration 
of NL and graphics in a unified language that is defined by a multi-modal grammar and 
the generation of synchronized speech and graphics in real time. The integration of NL 
and graphics in a unified language distinguishes this research from other approaches to 
multi-modal interface technology \[Sullivan88, Arens89\]. The Integrated Interface system 
\[Arens88\] and the XTRA system \[Kobsa86, Allgayer89\] are two of the most relevant. The 
Integrated Interface system is a multi-modal system in that it uses both maps and NL for the 
presentation of information to the user. The system provides information about the status 
and movements of naval platforms and groups in the Pacific Ocean. The system displays 
NL in text boxes positioned on a map display near the relevant objects. The system does 
not use a multi-modal language, however. The language generated is purely NL with no 
integrated graphics. The XTRA system is a multi-modal interface system which accepts 
and generates NL with accompanying point gestures for input and output, respectively. In 
contrast to the XTRA system, however, CUBRICON supports a greater number of different 
413 
types of pointing gestures and does not restrict he user to pointing at form slots alone, but 
enables the user to point at a variety of objects uch as windows, table entries, icons on maps, 
and geometric points. In added contrast o XTRA, CUBRICON provides for multiple point 
gestures per NL phrase and multiple point-accompanied phrases per sentence during both 
user input and system-generated output. CUBRICON also includes graphic gestures (i.e., 
certain types of simple drawing) as part of its multi-modal language, in addition to pointing 
gestures. Furthermore, CUBRICON addresses the problem of coordinating NL (speech) and 
graphic gestures during both input and output. 
CUBRICON software is implemented on a Symbolics Lisp Machine using the SNePS semantic 
network processing system \[Shapiro79, Shapiro87\], a GATN parser-generator \[Shapiro82\], 
and Common Lisp. Speech recognition is handled by a Dragon Systems VoiceScribe 1000. 
Speech output is produced by a DECtalk speech production system. 
As stated previously, CUBRICON is a multi-modal system that integrates the following 
modalities: geographic maps, tables, forms, printed text, and NL with graphic and deictic 
gestures. Subsequent sections of this paper present example sentences that include simul- 
taneous coordinated pointing gestures to objects on the graphics displays. Figure 2 shows 
example CUBRICON displays containing a form, geographic map, table, part-whole decom- 
position. 
The following sections discuss CUBRICON's input understanding and output composition 
processes and their use of the knowledge sources discussed above. 
3 MULT I -MODAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING 
People commonly and naturally use coordinated simultaneous natural anguage and graphic 
gestures when working at graphic displays. These modes of communication combine synergis- 
tically to form an efficient language for expressing definite references and locative adverbials. 
One of the benefits of this multi-modal language is that it eliminates the need for the lengthy 
definite descriptions that would be necessary for unnamed objects if only natural anguage 
were used. Instead, a terse reference such as "this SAM" (surface-to-air missile system) 
accompanied bya  point to an entity on the display can be used. CUBRICON accepts uch 
NL accompanied by simultaneous coordinated pointing gestures. The NL can be input via 
the keyboard, the speech recognition system, or a mixture of both. CUBRICON provides 
? variety in the object types that can be targets of point gestures; these object types 
include windows, form slots, table entries, icons, and geometric points; 
? variety in the number of point gestures allowed per phrase; each noun phrase can be 
accompanied by zero or more point gestures; such a phrase may contain no words, just 
the pointing gestures; 
414 
PACKAGE WC3F4KSHEET 
. . . .  1 . . . .  I~1  ' " r" ' "  . . . . .  I Pi:~l " . . . . . .  r .... I I~1  " ' " ' r  I 
OFF?NSIV? COUNTES AIS MISSIONS 
........... I l l  cLr I l l ]  
?~5 Or l j l s  TOD #kC AC T~p AC Peel SVC# STNI Start Dii. OJ~b.I. 
! 34~ rt~rol~er9 F~9~ter e*,e e&:ee ,gtr . -~-z 
J 
? . TAP.GET STAIK? MISSION FOST'-TAAG[T REFUELING 
Ml~slea Aim Pellt  TOT SVCl STN# Stltt  0.1. Oi lb | r .  
1 ~o24-~,,a.~ e~.~ e~:o2 3,S ~44 0~;4~ DO:ZO 20942 lb .  
O&:So 445 24e 8~:25 ee:le 219b0 I~. It b-24-P~ l lbcr  9 R~av 
3 
4 
ItI~FUELING MISSION 
RFL,  ] 3,~ I,~ ~,::1 TOD J II?:lill I :: : l  AC Type I Kc-]35 [:':'~, I Led  I 
Stallt?a n STN# Stale Time Seat Time Olb l l  L l? i t le i  
244 0?:26 O?:~S SG,~,S rl Llzt~uoef 13.,~5 ( Longitude 
AIR ?SCORT MISSIONS 
"'~ . . . . . . . .  1 ? ' ' '  '?? F~I '~TI '~ 1' ...... 
Ml! . . . . . . . .  I OHI I .  [ . . . . .  C IACT  I . . . . .  , let  
] , I o , ,d l .  I h , . . . , .  ~ ,~t .  e . . .  
I TOT 
=)) Make PF.G0023 the cmtam? package. 
I ~'l?lefstln~l, 1$$19r,~,ng newly ere&ted mission (PKC~023) i s  ~he ?ursent palck.lge, 
n*y 12:0~:25} ~ey.boud CL f~.P$: USe._~. Input 
Figure 2: Example CUBRICON Displays 
415 
? variety in the number of multi-modal phrases allowed per sentence; deictic gestures 
can accompany more than one phrase per sentence. 
Just as natural language used alone has shortcomings, o also does the use of pointing 
gestures alone. Pointing used alone has the following problems: (1) a point gesture can be 
ambiguous if the point touches the area where two or more graphical figures or icons overlap 
or (2) the user may inadvertently miss the object at which he intended to point. To handle 
these pointing problems, some systems use default echniques such as having a point handler 
return the entity represented by (a) the "top" or "foremost" icon where the system has a 
data structure it uses to remember the order in which icons are "painted" on the display (i.e., 
which are further in the background and which are foremost in the foreground) or (b) the 
icon whose "center" is closest o the location on the screen/window touched by the point. 
A serious disadvantage of such default point-interpretation techniques i  that it is difficult, 
if not impossible, for certain icons to be selected via a point reference. 
CUBRICON's acceptance of dual-media input (NL accompanied by coordinated pointing 
gestures) overcomes the limitations of the above weak default techniques and provides an 
efficient expressive referencing capability. The CUBRICON methodology for handling dual- 
media input is a decision-making process that depends on a variety of factors such as the 
types of candidate objects being referenced, their properties, the sentential context, and 
the constraints on the participants or fillers of the semantic ase frame for the verb of any 
given sentence. CUBRICON's decision-making process draws upon it's knowledge sources 
discussed briefly in Section 2. 
We present a few brief examples to illustrate CUBRICON's referent determination process. 
This process handles the problems listed above: ambiguous point gestures and point gestures 
that are inconsistent with the accompanying NL. First we discuss ambiguous point gestures. 
In each of the following examples, assume that the <point> represents a point gesture with 
a device such as a mouse and each point gesture can be ambiguous (i.e., it can touch more 
than one icon). 
Example 1: USER: "What is the status of this <point> airbase?" 
From the icons touched by the point, the display model is searched for the semantic repre- 
sentation of the objects which were graphically represented by the touched icons. From the 
hierarchy of the knowledge base, the system determines which of the objects selected by the 
point gesture are of the type mentioned in the accompanying verbal phrase ("airbase" in the 
example sentence) and discards the others. 
Example 2: USER: "What is the mobility of these <point>l <point>2 <point>:~?" 
Example 2 illustrates that CUBRICON enables the user to use more than one point ges- 
ture per phrase. Also, in contrast o Example 1, no object type is mentioned in the noun 
phrase corresponding to the point gestures. In this case, CUBRICON can use a mentioned 
416 
property (e.g., mobility) to select from among the candidate referents of the point gesture. 
CUBRICON accesses the display model to retrieve the semantic representations of the ob- 
jects touched by each of the user's point gestures, and then determines which of these objects 
have property "mobility" using the knowledge base of application information. 
Example 3: USER: "Enter this <point-map-icon> here <point-form-slot>." 
Example 3 illustrates that CUBRICON enables the user to use point gestures in conjunction 
with more than just one phrase of a sentence and that the point gestures may access different 
types of windows, even on different CRTs. In Example 3, the user's first point gesture touches 
an object on a map display on the color-graphics CRT and the second selects a slot of the 
mission planning form on the monochrome CRT. Two of CUBRICON's features are critical to 
its ability to process the sentence of Example 3: First, the display model contains emantic 
representations of all the objects displayed visually in each of the windows of each CRT, 
and second, all objects and concepts in the CUBRICON system are represented in a single 
knowledge representation language, namely the formalism of the SNePS knowledge base. 
This knowledge base is shared by all the modules of the CUBRICON system. Suppose that 
the <point-map-icon> selects the Nuernberg airbase on the map and the <point-form-slot> 
touches the "origin airbase" slot on the mission planning form. CUBRICON's response to 
the input of Example 3 would be to build the knowledge base structure which represents the 
assertion that Nuernberg is the airbase from which the particular mission will be flown. 
As mentioned previously in this section, in addition to being ambiguous, another problem 
that can arise with point gestures is that the user may inadvertently miss the object at which 
he intended to point. In this case, the point gesture will be inconsistent with the accompany- 
ing natural anguage phrase, meaning that the natural anguage part of the expression and 
the accompanying point cannot be interpreted as referring to the same object(s) (e.g., the 
user says "this airbase" and points to a factory or points at nothing, missing all the icons). 
CUBRICON includes methodology to infer the intended referent in this case. CUBRICON 
uses the information from the sentence, parsed and interpreted thus far, as filtering criteria 
for candidate objects. The system performs a bounded incremental search around the loca- 
tion of the user's point to find the closest object(s) that satisfy the filtering criteria. If one 
is found, then the system responds to the user's input (e.g., command or request) and also 
issues an advisory statement concerning the inconsistency. In the event that no quafified 
object is found in the vicinity of the user's point, then a response is made to the user to this 
effect. 
4 MULT I -MODAL LANGUAGE GENERATION 
Just as CUBRICON accepts NL accompanied by deictic and graphic gestures during input, 
CUBRICON can generate multi-modal language output that combines NL with deictic ges- 
tures and graphic expressions. An important feature of the CUBRICON design is that NL 
417 
and graphics are incorporated in a single language generator providing a unified multi-modal 
language with speech and graphics synchronized in real time. 
Another important aspect of the CUBRICON system is that it distinguishes between spoken 
and written (to a CRT display) NL. CUBRICON uses graphic and deictic gestures with 
spoken NL only (not with written NL), since a pointing or graphic gesture needs to be 
temporally synchronized with the corresponding verbal phrase, allowing for multiple graphic 
gestures within any individual sentence. The coordination between a graphic gesture and its 
co-referring verbal phrase is lost if printed text is used instead of speech. As mentioned in 
Section 3, a pointing gesture can be used very effectively with a terse NL phrase (e.g., "this 
SAM") to reference an object that is visible on one of the displays (by the system as well 
as the user). When CUBRICON generates written NL, however, deictic/graphic expressions 
are not used, but, instead, definite descriptions are generated as noun phrases with sufficient 
specificity to hopefully avoid ambiguous references. CUBRICON's use of deictic gestures 
and graphic expressions are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
Deictic gestures are combined with appropriate NL during output to guide the user's visual 
focus of attention. During language generation, in order to compose a reference for an object, 
1. if the object is represented by an icon on the display, then CUBRICON generates a NL 
expression for the object and a simultaneous coordinated graphic gesture that points 
to its icon. 
. 
If the object has an individual name or identifier, then CUBRICON uses its name or 
identifier (e.g., "the Merseberg airbase") as the NL expression 
else CUBRICON generates an expression consisting of a demonstrative pronoun fol- 
lowed by the name of an appropriate class to which the object belongs (e.g., "this 
SAM", "these SAMs") as the NL expression. 
if the object (call it X) is not represented by an icon on the display, but is a component 
of such a visible object (call it Y), then CUBRICON generates a phrase that expresses 
object X as a component of object Y and uses a combined deictic-verbal expression 
for object Y as described in the above case. For example, if CUBRICON is generating 
a reference for the runway of an airbase called Merseberg and an icon for the airbase 
is visible on the map (the airbase as a whole is represented visiblyl but not its parts), 
then CUBRICON generates the phrase "the runway of the Merseberg Airbase" with a 
simultaneous point gesture that is directed at the Merseberg airbase icon on the map. 
It is frequently the case that an object to which CUBRICON wants to point has a visible 
representation i  more than one window on the CRTs. Therefore the system must select 
the visual representation(s) of the object (e.g., an icon, table entry, form slot entry) that it 
will use in its point gesture(s) from among the several candidates. The current CUBRICON 
418 
methodology is to point out all the object's visible representations, but to use a strong 
pointing gesture (e.g., blink the icon to attract he user's attention and add a pointing text- 
box) for the most significant or relevant representations and weak non-distracting gestures 
(e.g., just highlight he visible representation) for the less significant ones. In order to select 
the most relevant visible representations from among all the candidates, CUBRICON: 
. 
2. 
3. 
. 
selects all the windows which contain a visible representation f the object. 
filters out any windows which are not active or not exposed. 
if there are exposed windows containing a visible representation of the object, then 
CUBRICON uses all of these representations a objects of weak diectic gestures and 
selects the visible representation in the most important or salient window \[Nea189b\] as
the target of a strong diectic gesture. 
if there are no exposed windows displaying the object's visible representation, then 
CUBRICON determines the most important active de-exposed window \[Neal89b\] dis- 
playing the object. CUBRICON exposes this window and uses the representation of 
the object in this window in a strong deictic gesture. 
CUBRICON combines graphic expressions with NL output when the information to be ex- 
pressed is, at least partially, amenable to graphic presentation. In the current CUBRICON 
implementation, the type of information that falls in this category includes (1) locative in- 
formation and (2) path traversal information. We discuss only the locative case in this 
paper. 
When generating locative information about some object (call it the figure object \[Her- 
skovits85\]), CUBRICON selects an appropriate landmark as the ground object \[Herskovits85\], 
determines a spatial relationship between the figure and ground object, and generates a
multi-modal expression for the locative information including the spatial relationship. When 
selecting the ground object, CUBRICON selects a landmark such as a city, border, or re- 
gion, that is within the current map display (i.e., does not require a map transformation). 
If possible, CUBRICON uses a landmark that is in focus by virtue of its having been al- 
ready used recently as a ground object. CUBRICON's discourse model, discussed briefly in 
Section 2, includes a representation f the attentional focus space of the dialogue, including 
a main focus list of entities and propositions that have been expressed by CUBRICON or 
by the user via multi-modal language. If a new landmark must be used as a ground ob- 
ject, then CUBRICON selects the landmark that is nearest he figure object. CUBRICON 
derives a spatial relation between the ground object and figure object that it represents in 
its knowledge base. This relation includes (1) the direction from the ground object to the 
figure object and (2) the distance if the distance is greater than 0.04 of the window width. 
If the distance is less than 0.04 of the window width, then the figure object appears to be 
419 
right next to the ground object. This criterion for deciding whether to include distance as 
part of the relation reflects the tendency for people to omit a distance measure when the 
distance is small relative to the geographic area under discussion and to say something like 
"just northeast of" instead of stating a distance xplicitly. 
As an illustrative xample, the user may ask about the location of a particular object, such 
as the Fritz Steel plant. The system then uses the steel plant as the figure object, selects 
a ground object, and derives a spatial relation between ground object and figure object as 
discussed above. The multi-modal response is given below. 
USER: "Where is the Fritz Steel plant?" 
CUBRICON: "The Fritz Steel plant is located here <point>, 45 miles southwest of Dresden 
< graphic-expression >."
The <point> consists of a gesture that points out the Fritz Steel plant icon to the user 
via a gesture that uses a combination of blinking, highlighting, circling the icon and the 
attachment of a pointing label-box that identifies the icon. The <graphic-expression> is a
visual presentation of the spatial relation between the figure object (Fritz steel plant) and 
the ground object (Dresden city), consisting of an arrow drawn from the Dresden city icon 
to the steel plant icon, a label stating the distance, and a label identifying the city (the steel 
plant should already be labeled). 
CUBRICON's multi-modal language generation is also discussed in \[Nea189\]. 
5 FUTURE D IRECT IONS 
There are numerous worthwhile areas and ideas to be investigated and developed to advance 
this research. We briefly discuss two of these areas: 
CUBRICON is currently being extended so that it accepts a larger vocabulary of graphic 
drawing gestures as part of the user's multi-modal input. An integrated language consisting 
of both verbal and graphic "tokens" can be used for both referencing objects that the system 
already knows about as well as explaining and defining new concepts to the system. Such 
a multi-modal input language should be especially useful for the definition and explanation 
of geographical nd spatial concepts to a system that would then use the concepts for geo- 
graphical applications. We are currently focusing on adding polylines to tile set of graphic 
gestures that CUBRICON accepts. Polylines can be used to approximate free-hand rawing 
and thereby give the user great expressive power. 
We are also planning to conduct a research program to investigate the problem of user 
gestures that are not synchronized with their corresponding NL phrases. We are interested 
in the characteristics of the phenomenon: to what degree are gestures of different types 
not synchronized with their corresponding NL phrase, how frequently does the phenomenon 
420 
occur, is there a correlation between characteristics of the phenomenon and characteristics 
of the corresponding natural anguage? We also plan to investigate methods that would 
enable the system to decide which phrase of the accompanying natural anguage input is 
the co-referring phrase for any pointing gesture that is not synchronized with its co-referring 
phrase. 
6 SUMMARY 
People frequently augment heir NL with deictic gestures, drawing, and other modes of 
communication when engaged in human-human dialogue. The CUBRICON project is de- 
voted to the development of knowledge-based interface technology that integrates peech 
input, speech output, natural anguage text, geographic maps, tables, graphics, and point- 
ing gestures for interactive communication between human and computer. The objective is 
to provide both the user and system with modes of expression that are combined and used 
in a natural and efficient manner, particularly when presenting or requesting information 
about objects that are visible, or can be presented visibly, on a graphics display. 
As part of the CUBRICON project, we are developing NL processing technology that inte- 
grates deictic and graphic gestures with simultaneous coordinated NL to form a multi-modal 
language for human-computer dialogues. CUBRICON's main I/O processing modules have 
access to several knowledge sources or data structures, including one modeling each of (1) 
the application domain, (2) the discourse, and (3) the user. 
This paper discussed the unique interface capabilities that the CUBRICON system provides 
including the ability to: (1) accept and understand multi-media input such that references to 
entities in (spoken or typed) natural language sentences can include coordinated simultaneous 
pointing to the respective ntities on a graphics display; use simultaneous pointing and NL 
references to disambiguate one another when appropriate; infer the intended referent of a 
point gesture which is inconsistent with the accompanying NL; (2) dynamically compose 
and generate multi-modal language that combines NL with deictic gestures and graphic 
expressions; ynchronously present he spoken natural anguage and coordinated pointing 
gestures and graphic expressions; discriminate between spoken and written NL. 
7 REFERENCES 
\[Allgayer89\] Allgayer, J., Jansen-Winkeln, R., Reddig, C., & Reithinger, N. 1989. Bidi- 
rectional Use of Knowledge in the Multi-Modal NL Access System XTRA. Proc. of 
IJCAI-89, Detroit, MI, pp. 1492-1497. 
\[Arens88\] Arens, Y., Miller, L., & Sondheimer, N.K. 1988. Presentation Planning Using 
an Integrated Knowledge Base, in Architectures for Intelligent Interfaces: Elements 
and Prototypes, J.W. Sullivan & S.W. Tyler (eds.), Addison-Wesley, pp. 93-108. 
421 
\[Arens89\] Arens, Y., Feiner, S., Hollan, J., & Neches, R. (eds.) 1989. A New Generation 
of Intelligent Interfaces, IJCAI-8g Workshop, Detroit, MI. 
\[Grosz86\] Grosz, B.J. 1986. The Representation a d Use of Focus in a System for Under- 
standing Dialogs, in Readings in Natural Language Processing, B.J. Grosz, K.S. Jones, 
& B.L. Webber (eds.), Morgan Kaufmann Pub., pp. 353-362. 
\[Hailer89\] Hailer, S.M. 1989. Technical Report: Spatial Relations and Locative Phrase 
Generation in a Map Context. Computer Science Department, State University of 
New York at Buffalo. 
\[Herskovits85\] Herskovits, A. 1985. Semantics and Pragmatics of Locative Expressions. 
Cognitive Science, 9:341-378. 
\[Kobsa86\] Kobsa, A., Allgayer, J., Reddig, C., Reithinger, N., Schmauks, D., Harbusch, K., 
& Wahlster, W. 1986. Combining Deictic Gestures and Natural Language for Referent 
Identification, Proc. of the 11th International Conf. on Computational Linguistics, 
Bonn, FR Germany. 
\[Kobsa88\] Kobsa, A. & Wahlster, W. (eds.), 1988. Computational Linguistics, Special 
Issue on User Modeling, MIT Press. 
\[Nea188a\] Neal, J.G. & Shapiro, S.C. 1988. Intelligent Multi-Media Interface Technology, 
in Architectures for Intelligent Interfaces: Elements and Prototypes, J.W. Sullivan & 
S.W. Tyler (eds.), Addison-Wesley, pp. 69-91. 
\[Neal88b\] Neal, J.G., Dobes, Z., Bettinger, K.E., & Byoun, J.S. 1988. Multi-Modal Refer- 
ences in Human-Computer Dialogue, Proc. AAAI-88, St. Paul, MN, pp. 819-823. 
\[Nea189a\] Neal, J.G., Thielman, C.Y., Funke, D.J., & Byoun, J.S. 1989. Multi-Modal 
Output Composition for Human-Computer Dialogues. Proc. of the AI Systems in 
Government Conference, George Washington Univ., Wash. D.C., pp. 250-257. 
\[Nea189b\] Neal, J.G. et. al. 1989. The CUBRICON Multi-Modal Interface System. (Jour- 
nal paper in preparation). 
\[Shapiro79\] Shapiro, S.C. 1979. The SNePS Semantic Network Processing System, in 
Associative Networks - The Representation and Use of Knowledge by Computers, N. 
Findler (ed.), Academic Press, pp. 179-203. 
\[Shapiro82\] Shapiro, S.C. 1982. Generalized Augmented Transition Network Grammars 
for Generation from Semantic Networks. AJCL, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 12-25. 
422 
\[Shapiro87\] Shapiro, S.C. & Rapaport, W.J. 1987. SNePS Considered as a Fully Inten- 
sional Propositional Semantic Network, in The Knowledge Frontier, Essays in the Rep- 
resentation of Knowledge, N. Cercone & G. McCalla (eds.), Springer-Verlag, pp. 263- 
315. 
\[Sullivan88\] Sullivan, J.W. & Sherman, W.T. (eds.) 1988. Architectures for Intelligent 
Interfaces: Elements and Prototypes, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. 
423 
