Speech Research at Carnegie Mellon 
Principal Investigator: Raj Reddy 
Camegie Mellon has been active in speech recognition research for over 20 years. Research in the 70's 
led to important systems uch as Hearsay, Harpy, and Dragon. Since 1980, the Carnegie Mellon speech 
group has been exploring techniques for speaker-independent r cognition. Various avenues have been 
explored, including a knowledge ngineering approach to identify robust speech features that are 
independent of speaker and environment, and a statistical learning system that utilizes human knowledge 
and detailed speech modeling. 
The latter system, Sphinx, was demonstrated in 1987. It was the first recognition system that can 
accurately recognize continuous speech from a large vocabulary by any speaker, without raining. This 
was accomplished through the availability of ample training, the use of a powerful earning algorithm, 
and the design of detailed speech models. In 1988, Sphinx was ported to the Beam search acceleration 
machine, which made real-time recognition a reality. In 1988, the Minds System was demonstrated. 
Minds uses Sphinx and Beam, and demonstrates the utility of dialog and semantic knowledge in 
improving recognition accuracy. 
The overall goal of speech research at Carnegie Mellon is to develop new technologies that address the 
major problems currently inhibiting automatic speech recognition in realistic environments. Areas for 
future work include: 
? Improved Recognition Techniques - -  We are developing a 5000- to 20,000-word 
vocabulary, speaker independent, connected speech, spoken English recognition system with 
perplexity of approximately 200. To obtain a high accuracy on such a difficult ask, we must 
improve Sphinx substantially. We plan to investigate better subword modeling, improved 
learning algorithms, and rapid configuration for new vocabularies and tasks. 
? Fluent Human/Machine Interfaces - -  We will investigate, measure, and improve the utility 
of speech in several day-to-day interactive tasks that involve collaborative, human/computer 
problem solving. 
? Acoustical and Environmental Robustness - -  We are working to improve the robustness 
of Sphinx against changes in microphone, noise characteristics, and environmental acoustics. 
Areas of research include employing multiple microphones, noise-subtracting, and 
homomorphic filtering. 
? Understanding Spontaneous Spoken Language - -  We are work on the problematic 
phenomena associated with spontaneous speech, such as repetitions and restarts, speech-like 
noise ("um"s and "ah"s), and interruptions. The "missing science" includes techniques 
for understanding fragmentary input and for parsing in the presence of errors. 
? Task Semantics and Pragmatics - -  Our recent research on the Minds system has shown 
that effective use of knowledge from dialogue, task-level semantics, and user models can 
reduce perplexity over ten fold. In the future, we intend to demonstrate he utility of such 
techniques in a wide range of domains. 
We are also working on spoken language applications in several domains, including office 
management, form-filling, and travel management. We hope the fusion of the above technology will lead 
to a new generation of accurate and robust spoken language systems 
448 
