INITIAL DRAFT GUIDELINES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE NEXT-GENERATION SPOKEN LANGUAGE SYSTEMS 
SPEECH RESEARCH DATABASE 
George R. Doddington, 
TI Senior Fellow and Chief Speech Scientist 
Computer Science Center 
Texas Instruments 
OBJECTIVE 
To best serve the strategic needs of the DARPA SLS research program by 
creating the next-generation speech database(s). 
To promote progress on the important SLS research problems: 
-- phonetic modeling (acoustic-phonetic decoding) 
-- higher level modeling of the speech mechanism 
-- language modeling (above the level of speech) 
To be adequate, practical, and timely 
-- comprehensive enough to support true learning 
-- limited enough to be accomplished 
-- soon enough to be valuable 
BACKGROUND 
The DARPA speech research program has made significant progress in the 
development of speech recognition technology. This progress has led to an 
increase in the overall scope of the program, from "speech recognition" to 
"spoken language recognition". This change in the nature of the research 
effort requires that a new speech database be developed to better support the 
new research objectives. 
The value of establishing a few well-designed databases, shared by all of the 
research contributors, was demonstrated in the f i rs t  phase of the DARPA speech 
research program. Such databases integrate the various research efforts by 
providing a common research medium which affords a shared understanding of the 
problem and by self-direction of technical efforts through unequivocal 
demonstrations of the strengths/weaknesses of competing approaches. 
DATABASE REQUIREMENTS 
Primary requirements: 
-- "natural" (task-oriented) speech, unconstrained 
vocabulary or fixed syntax 
-- support for all speech recognition problem areas 
-- emphasis on speaker independent recognition 
by fixed 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
256 
Implied requirements: 
-- comprehensive 
-- large vocabulary 
-- unconstrained -- large vocabulary, 
formal language specification 
-- support for performance measurement 
-- relevant to DoD needs 
connected speech, no 
Efficiency: 
-- low cost per second of speech 
-- high value per second of speech -- emphasis on problem areas 
-- rapid development cycle 
Amount of speech: 
-- 100 hours 
Number of speakers: 
-- 1000 speakers 
Data documentation: 
-- orthographic transcription 
-- speaker description 
The desiderata for the next-generation spoken language system speech database 
include the following: 
First, the speech must be "natural". This implies that the speech be 
spontaneous as well as unconstrained by vocabulary or syntax. 
Second, the speech should involve or simulate interactive man/machine 
problem solving. This implies that the speaker's focus of attention 
is not on the speech act i t se l f  but rather on the task which the 
speech serves. 
Third, the database should be suff iciently representative and general 
so that i t  can support SLS technology development hat is useful in 
general, beyond the specific task domain of the database. 
Fourth, the database development effort must be doable, with the data 
available to the researchers soon enough to drive the research 
effort.  
Fifth, the database should be relevant to DARPA needs and should 
demonstrate a high intr insic value of spoken language systems for DoD 
applications. 
There is one other important consideration in the creation of an SLS database. 
The database should not be so d i f f i cu l t  that i t  discourages the enthusiasm so 
essential for strong effort and steady progress in SLS technology research and 
development. This wi l l  be d i f f i cu l t  for a spontaneous SLS database. Perhaps 
the database might be graded into categories of d i f f i cu l ty ,  thus allowing a 
gradual progress toward solutions for the most d i f f i cu l t  problems. 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
257 
ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF DATA 
"Read" speech 
-- Naval Battle Management 
-- Acoustic-phonetic database (TIMIT) 
"Performance task" simulation, task-oriented naturally elicited (TONE) 
-- NOSC naval battle management 
-- Personnel database 
-- Spread sheet 
-- Other less well-defined task domains 
-- Pilot's associate 
-- Search & Rescue 
-- Navigation Aid by Phone 
"Natural task" data collection 
-- ATC operations 
-- Travel planning and reservations 
-- Theater ecordings 
-- Dictation 
-- office correspondence 
-- medical transcriptions 
From among the three general categories of speech data, namely "read" speech, 
"performance task" speech, and "natural task" speech, probably the most 
satisfactory candidate is "natural task" speech. A discussion of the problems 
with the different categories of speech databases follows: 
I) "Read" speech database problems: The principal objection to "read" speech 
data is that i t  does not support the development of technology to 
recognize natural spoken language. The argument hat transcripts of 
spoken language could be read is weak. I t  is not even clear that a 
reasonable representation of natural speech could be presented to the 
subjects to be read. Most agree that "read" speech is not suitable, 
and so I wil l  not argue further against this category. 
2) "Performance task" simulation problems: Several factors contribute to 
make "performance task" simulation impractical. First, the effort 
to create a meaningful simulation would be d i f f icu l t  at best. An 
affordable effort could not support the creation of a target 
application, and would necessarily be limited to creating a simulation 
of a spoken language interface. But working within existing target 
applications wil l  l imit the effective language domain, because few i f  
any existing applications have the large domain and vocabulary that 
the SLS effort proposes to study. How to support a large meaningful 
language with this simulation is a crit ical challenge. Second, there 
would be a large effort required to create meaningful task scenarios 
for the subjects, to find (or train) a sufficient number of 
knowledgeable subjects, and to orient and interest the subjects in the 
specifics of the assigned task. Third, the need to use a trained and 
skilled human translator (to listen to the subjects and input 
appropriate commands to the system simulation), wil l  l imit the amount 
of data that can be collected to a level that wil l  not supply the 
needed amount of data for productive research. 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
258 
3) "Natural task" speech database problems: There are several negative aspects 
to a "natural task" speech database, mostly related to the di f f iculty 
of the recognition task: Because of the in situ nature of the speech, 
there wil l  be significant additional dimensions of variation in the 
speech signal. These wil l  include such things as greater acoustic 
variation, and less or no conscious control of a subject on his 
speech. Further, the usage of vocabulary and syntax wil l  be highly 
skewed, with rare forms occurring just often enough to maximize the 
error rate through insufficient exposure to training data. (All 
spontaneous speech databases wil l  be subject to such skewing.) 
The benefits of a "natural task" database, however, may outweigh or 
overcome the shortcomings. Most important, a natural task database 
allows study of the underlying principles that govern natural spoken 
language without the risk of corruption or bias of the language which 
might be caused by artifacts induced by simulation or data collection 
constraints. Also, the "natural task" scenario wil l  support a higher 
level language, in terms of intelligent command/control dialog, than 
could be expected from a database query system such as spread sheet 
or personnel database. Finally, a most important benefit of the 
"natural task" scenario is that i t  can much more eff iciently provide 
a large speech database. This can help to overcome the skewed 
distribution of vocabulary and syntax. 
Of the candidate tasks listed above, the f i rs t  two, ATC operations and 
travel planning, probably f i t  the SLS database objectives best. They 
are both highly interactive and relatively well controlled. (ATC 
controllers use head-mounted microphones, and travel planning uses 
the telephone.) Also, they are both highly interactive and, at least 
in principle, support easy and efficient speech data collection. (ATC 
already record their data, although the bandwidth is typically limited 
to less than 4 kHz.) Dictation would be a good candidate, except that 
i t  is really not an interactive speech task, and therefore i t  does not 
support the SLS objective directly. 
EVALUMION ISSUES 
? Development/evaluation partition 
Performance definition 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
phones correctly recognized 
words correctly recognized 
sentences correctly recognized 
sentences correctly understood 
tasks correctly accomplished 
increase in productivity 
Error classification -- 
-- acoustic (simple decoding error) 
-- lexical (word not in lexicon) 
-- syntactic (ungrammatical or insufficient grammar) 
-- semantic (misunderstood) 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
259 
In progressing from "speech recognition" to "spoken language systems", two new 
dimensions wi l l  be added to performance valuation. First, "coverage" wi l l  be 
an important, perhaps dominant, factor in system performance. Although this 
has always been an important issue in the practical use of speech recognition, 
i t  has typically been ignored, and evaluation has considered only speech data 
that fal ls within the formal language model. Second, i t  wi l l  no longer be 
adequate to evaluate speech at the level of orthographic transcription. I t  
wi l l  be necessary to "understand" the speech suff iciently to determine the 
appropriate response to i t .  This is the greatest strategic challenge facing 
the SLS research effort, and one for which there wi l l  be no general near-term 
solution. The hope is that technology may be developed to support specific 
task-domain applications. The immediate challenge is to define an evaluation 
methodology for spoken language understanding. 
IMPORTANT PROBLEM DIMENSIONS IN THE DATABASE 
Acoustics 
-- microphone 
-- noise 
-- channel 
Speaker 
- -  sex  
-- other physiological variables 
-- speech patterns 
Accent/dialect 
Domain 
task 
lexicon 
dialog 
RELEVANCE OF CURRENT DATABASES (STRENGTHS/WEAKNESSES(LESSONS LEARNED) 
? Acoustic-phonetic database 
Strengths: 
-- lasting general value for phonetic recognition research 
-- large number of speakers 
Weaknesses: 
-- expensive and time-consuming phonetic transcription 
-- small amount of data 
? Naval battle management task domain 
Strengths: 
-- supported evelopment of speaker independent recognition 
-- low perplexity 
-- good demonstration impact 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
260 
Weaknesses: 
- -  small language model 
- -  low perp lex i ty  
"Robust" database 
Weaknesses: 
- -  over ly  ambit ious 
- -  two-stage co l lec t ion /computer i za t ion  
- -  extremely expensive to develop 
- -  too large 
DARPA / FEBRUARY 1989 
261 
