SRI International, Speech Research Program, Menlo Park, CA 
Principal Investigators: Jared Bemstein and Hy Murveit 
Objectives: 
SRI's Speech Research Program focuses on developing useful speech-based systems and 
components for enhariced and efficient communication between human users and 
machines. The success of such development depends on accurate modeling of human 
speech and language, and the application of these models in system designs. SRI's Speech 
Research Program, therefore, pursues both empirical and theoretic research to gain a more 
comprehensive understanding of the acoustic, phonological, prosodic, lexical and syntactic 
nature of speech and language. SRI works on system internals such as improved 
performance of component technologies, as well as system-level design such as appropriate 
architectures and human factors solutions. Our specific technical goal is the tight 
integration of speech recognition and natural anguage understanding to create real-time 
systems for interactive problem solving. 
Recent Accomplishments: 
? SRI has developed the DECIPHER speaker-independent speech recognition system, a 
hidden Markov model (HMM)-based system that achieves tate-of-the-art recognition 
performance through accurate modeling of phonetic and phonological detail. 
SRI has completed basic studies of the range and structure of variability in the 
pronunciation of English. In particular, SRI has shown significant differences between 
read speech and the spontaneous speech observed unng interactive problem solving. 
? SRI has designed ahardware architecture for real-time recognition of continuous peech 
for vocabularies as large as 20,000 words. SRI is currently implementing a subset of 
that architecture as a prototype accelerator with several special-purpose integrated circuits. 
1989-90 Plans: 
? Hardware: Complete the implementation of a prototype accelerator for real-time 
continuous peech recognition. The accelerator will use HMMs and finite state grammars 
to recognize a 3000-word vocabulary. Fabricate two of these accelerators for use in 
related sponsored research at other sites. Begin the design and fabrication of the next 
generation of this hardware. 
? Integration of Speech Recognition and Natural Language Understanding: Develop a 
computationally efficient natural anguage parser that incrementally generates a state 
transition etwork that can be used in place of a finite state grammar in an HMM-based 
speech recognizer. 
? Spoken LanGuage System: Design and implement a spoken language interface for 
interactive problem solving in the domain of air travel planning. 
? Speech Synthesis: Improve the potential efficiency and reliability of voice displays by the 
synthesis of very distinct alker identities and the synthesis of audibly different urgency 
levels in a meaning-to-speech generation system. 
? N~ural-Net-Based Speech Recognition: Compare the relative ffectiveness of neural net, 
HMM-based, and hybrid approaches for specific speech recognition processes uch as 
feature xtraction and pattern classification. 
237 
