PORTING TO NEW DOMAINS USING THE LEARNER *m 
Rober t  J. P. Ingna  
Lance Ramshaw 
BBN Systems and Techno log ies  Corporat ion  
Cambr idge ,  MA 02138 
ABSTRACT 
Acquiring syntactic and semantic information about a 
new application domain for a natural anguage process- 
ing system is often a time-consuming task. To address 
this problem, various researchers have developed ac- 
quisition tools to speed the process. While such tools 
are very useful, they are typically tied to particular sys- 
tems and so their benefits cannot be shared by other 
researchers. 
In this paper, we discuss an experiment using the 
Leamer--a software tool for acquiring information about 
a new task domain for Parlance, l an ATN-based natural 
language system---to configure a quite different natural 
language system, the BBN ACFG, a unification-based 
system. 
We have used the Learner to produce information in 
three major areas: syntactic and semantic information 
about the lexical items used in the new domain; transla- 
tion rules from the parser output to the application sys- 
tem; and a class grammar for use in the speech recog- 
nition component of HARC, the BBN spoken language 
system. 
Initial results are encouraging: 1499 lexical items have 
been acquired, of which 91% were directly usable, with- 
out any manual editing; all of the translation rules are 
usable; and a speech vocabulary of 2170 items, with an 
associated class grammar with a perplexity of 89, has 
been acquired with a small amount of manual editing. 
INTRODUCTION 
A major problem that restricts the usefulness of natural 
language processing systems is the cost, in time and ef- 
fort, of porting a system to a new domain. Typically, the 
1 Learner and Parlance are trademarks of Bolt Beranek and Newman 
Inc. 
system designers are not experts in the application do- 
main in which their system will be used, although they 
have the knowledge of syntax, semantics, and knowledge 
representation to configure the system. The end users, 
on the other hand, are experts in the application domain, 
but are almost always unversed in computational linguis- 
tics. Thus, the people who can most efficiently modify 
the system do not know what is necessary for a given 
domain, while the experts in that domain do not have the 
linguistic knowledge to perform the modifications them- 
selves. Typically, then, the system designers pend long 
periods of time, on the order of months or even years, 
trying to acquire expertise in a domain and "tweaking" 
their systems to perform well in it, or else they try to 
impart just enough knowledge of syntax and semantics 
to the end users to allow them to do the configuration 
themselves. At best, these approaches result in a work- 
ing version of the system, but at enormous cost; at worst, 
the end product is a not very usable system. 
This problem is sometimes referred to as the "knowl- 
edge acquisition bottle neck": how can the knowledge 
of an application area be combined with the knowledge 
of a working system and its component technologies to 
produce a useful system without placing heavy burdens 
on either the end users or the system designers? 
THE LEARNER 
Some researchers have addressed this problem by devel- 
oping acquisition tools targeted for end users, to allow 
them to provide the syntactic and semantic information 
necessary for the NL system, but without requiring them 
to become xperts in these areas. Such tools usually take 
the burden of providing detailed syntactic and semantic 
analyses off the user through a guided acquisition pro- 
ccedure (either with menus or questions) and through the 
use of queries couched in terms of actual examples of 
language usage, rather than in terms from syntactic or se- 
mantic analysis (e.g. by asking "Can you say 'Someone 
241 
deployed something?'" rather than "Is 'deploy' tran- 
sitive?") Such acquisition tools include the acquisition 
component of TEAM (Grosz, 1983), the LapltUp lexical 
acquisition package for the JANUS system (Cumming 
and Albano, 1986), and the TELI system's emantic ac- 
quisiton facility (Ballard and Stumberger, 1986). 
BBN has developed a software package, the Learner, as 
a porting tool for non-expert users (Bates, 1989; BBN 
Parlance Learner Manual, 1989). The Learner creates a 
number of files that are used to configure the Parlance 
natural anguage processing system for a new applica- 
tion domain in a short time. Like the tools already men- 
tioned, it uses an interactive, guided procedure to acquire 
syntactic and semantic information from the user. It also 
acquires information about the structure and content of 
the database directly from the database itself. Previous 
work with the Learner (Bates, 1989) has demonstrated 
a speed-up of ten times or more, compared to manual 
acquisition of the same information. 
Recently, we have begun porting our ACFG natural 
language system (Boisen, et al 1989b) to a personnel 
database domain, a domain for which Parlance had been 
configured using the Learner. This raised the possibility 
of using the output files created by the Learner as knowl- 
edge sources for components of the ACFG system. This 
is a particularly interesting test, since the Learner is not 
designed to be a general acquisition tool for arbitrary 
natural language processing systems, but is optimized 
to produce information ecessary for the Parlance sys- 
tem. While Parlance is an ATN-based system, the BBN 
ACFG utilizes a unification grammar formalism, similar 
to a Definite-Clause Grammar; the two systems, then, 
are quite different. If, despite this difference, the same 
Learner output could be used to configure the ACFG 
system, this would suggest hat the speed-up of using 
the Learner to port to a new domain already demon- 
strated for the Parlance system, could be extended to the 
ACFG system and, perhaps, to similar unification based 
grammars. 
USING LEARNER OUTPUT 
We have taken the output files produced by the Learner 
and developed software tools to convert hem into forms 
usable by the ACFG system. We have experimented 
with acquiring three kinds of knowledge: 
? Syntactic and Semantic Information 
? Database Information 
? Words and Word Classes 
In the rest of this section, we discuss in somewhat more 
detail the information provided by the Learner in each 
of these areas. In the next section, we discuss the results 
of our efforts. 
SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC INFORMATION 
We have used Learner output to acquire lexical entries 
for the open class categories: nouns (both common and 
proper), adjectives, and verbs, that include both syntac- 
tic and semantic information. For each of these cate- 
gories, the Learner provides any necessary molphologi- 
cal information, such as inflectional paradigm (e.g. that 
city forms its plural by affixing -es), associated irregular 
forms (e.g. that got is the past tense of get), etc. In ad- 
dition, the Learner outputs information specific to each 
category: 
Nouns: For ordinary entity type nouns, such as pro- 
grammer, the Learner provides information about 
the semantic type of the noun and of the underly- 
ing concept with which it is associated (e.g. that 
a programmer is one of type person whose area of 
expertise is programming). For relational nouns, 
such as salary, the Learner provides information 
about the underlying relation associated with the 
noun, the domain of the relation, and the range of 
the relation (e.g. that the underlying relation of 
salary is salary-of, which applies to a person and 
produces a monetary-amount). 
Adjectives: For adjectives, the Learner provides infor- 
marion about he type of noun to which the adjective 
can be applied and about the underlying function 
with which the adjective is associated (e.g. the ad- 
jective asian american is applied to nouns of type 
person and is true of those whose ethnic group is 
asian-american). 
Verbs: For verbs, the Learner provides information 
about the underlying relation associated with the 
verb, the type restrictions associated with its noun 
phrase arguments, as well as any prepositions that 
the verb may select; for example, for the verb grad- 
uate, a noun of type person does the graduating, 
242 
the preposition from is used to mark the place from 
which the graduation took place, which is a noun 
of type school. 
In addition to information about specific lexical items, 
the Learner produces information about the underlying 
concepts of the domain; for example, that there is a 
relation gender-of that applies to persons and produces 
a result of type genders. We have also used the Learner 
output o acquire this information. 
DATABASE INFORMATION 
As part of its output, the Learner produces a file of pat- 
tern transformation rules, which map from concepts in 
the semantic domain model---and, so, ultimately, from 
words associated with those concepts--to fields in the 
data base. This file contains the information that al- 
lows the associated natural anguage system to actually 
obtain an answer from the database. Since the database 
system used in the ACFG system--described in (Boisen, 
1989)---is essentially a modified version of that used by 
Parlance, these rules are straightforwardly usable. 
WORDS AND WORD CLASSES 
We have also used the Learner to acquire a set of vo- 
cabulary items and word classes for a class grammar 
(Derr and Schwartz, 1989) for use in HARC, the BBN 
Spoken Language System (Boisen, et al 1989a), which 
incorporates the ACFG system as its natural anguage 
component. Though the Learner does not directly pro- 
duce a class grammar, we used the syntactic ategories, 
semantic lasses, and inflectional paradigms and forms 
which it provides to produce a class grammar. To cre- 
ate a complete set of words for our speech recognition 
system, we did not use the Learner output directly, since 
it only contains the base and irregularly inflected forms 
of words, but a lexicon that was created on the basis of 
the Learner output and which included inflected forms, 
as well. 
RESULTS 
Since our experiment in obtaining information from ex- 
isting Learner output was performed at the same time 
that we were writing the code to perform the necessary 
translations, we cannot measure the efficiency of using 
the Learner output in terms of elapsed time or person 
weeks. Therefore, as a rough measure of the benefits of 
using Learner output as a source, we propose to compare 
the number of items obtained from the translation pro- 
gram which were usable without further manual modifi- 
cation with the number that required some hand editing. 
SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC INFORMATION 
A total of 1499 lexical items were acquired from the 
Learner output; of these 1379 (91%) were directly us- 
able, without any human intervention. Since there were 
many proper nouns in the lexicon obtained, and since 
proper nouns typically did not need to be edited, we 
also present he percentage of lexical items that were 
immediately usable excluding the proper nouns, so that 
their presence does not bias the result; in this case, 74% 
of the derived lexicai items were directly usable. These 
results are shown in the following table: 
Total # "As Is" % "As Is" 
All Words 1499 1379 91% 
- Proper Nouns 504 375 74% 
Some comments are in order about he manual editfing 
required. In the case of nouns and adjectives, some 
editting was required for syntactic and morphological 
features, owing to differences between the grammars of 
the Parlance and ACFG systems. All of the semantic 
information for nouns and adjectives, however, was left 
untouched. In the case of verbs, on the other hand, the 
difference between the Learner and ACFG semantic rep- 
resentations was too great o allow automatic acquisition 
of semantic information; for verb entries, the semantic 
portion was written by hand. However, even in the case 
of verbs, the semantic information was not written from 
scratch; rather, the semantic entry for each verb was 
a manual translation of the information in the Learner 
output. 
We also obtained a total of 109 semantic oncepts from 
the Parlance output, which were used in the semantic en- 
tries of lexical items. These concepts required no manual 
editting at all. 
DATABASE INFORMATION 
For this domain, the Learner produced 65 translation 
rules, all of wMch were usable unedited. 
243 
WORDS AND WORD CLASSES 
The lexicon derived from the Learner was used to create 
a speech vocabulary of 2170 items, with an associated 
class grammar of 637 classes with a perplexity of 89, 
with a small amount of manual editing. 
CONCLUSION 
We have demonstrated that it is possible to use Learner 
output o produce information that is usable in the BBN 
ACFG system. This result is remarkable for a number of 
reasons. First, it suggests that the great boost in produc- 
tivity reported in (Bates, 1989) by using the Learner to 
port the Parlance system may be extended to the ACFG 
system. Since the ACFG system is based on a unifica- 
tion grammar and parser, this, in turn, suggests that the 
Learner might be useful for other unification-base ys- 
tems. Since the Learner was designed with the Parlance 
system in mind, the fact that its output is usable by a 
system based on a radically different grammar formal- 
ism and parsing algorithm may indicate that there has 
been a sufficient convergence in syntactic and analytic 
techniques, at least in the database retrieval area, to al- 
low tools developed for one framework or system to be 
useful to others, as well. 
Acknowledgments 
The work reported here was supported by the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and was monitored by the Of- 
fice of Naval Research under Contract No. N00014-89- 
C-0008. The views and conclusions contained in this 
document are those of the authors and should not be in- 
terpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, 
either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency or the United States Govern- 
ment. 
References 
BBN Parlance Learner Manual (1989) BBN Systems 
and Technologies Corporation, Cambridge, Mas- 
sachusetts. 
B. Ballard and D. Stumberger (1986) 
"Semantic Acquisition in TELI: A Transportable, 
User-Customized Natural Language Processor" In 
24th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics: Proceedings of the Conference, 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Morris- 
town, NJ, pages 20--29. 
Madeleine Bates (1989) "Rapid Porting of the Parlance 
Natural Language Interface" In Proceedings of the 
Speech and Natural Language Workshop February 
1989, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Ma- 
teo, California, pages 83-88. 
Sean Boisen (1989) The SLS Personnel Database (Re- 
lease 1), SLS Notes No 2, BBN Systems and Tech- 
nologies Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
S. Boisen, Y. Chow, A. Haas, R. Ingria, S. Roucos, 
R. Scha, D. StaUard and M. Vilain (1989a) Integra- 
tion of Speech and Natural Language: Final Report, 
Report No. 6991, BBN Systems and Technologies 
Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Sean Boisen, Yen-Lu Chow, Andrew Haas, Robert In- 
gria, Salim Roukos, and David Stallard (1989b) 
"The BBN Spoken Language System" In Proceed- 
ings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop 
February 1989, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 
San Mateo, California, pages 106--111. 
Susanna Cumming and Robert Albano (1986) A Guide 
to Lexical Acquisition in the JANUS System ISI 
Research Report ISI/RR-85-162, ISI, Marina del 
Rey/California. 
Alan Derr and Richard Schwartz (1989) 
"A Simple Statistical Class Grammar for Measur- 
ing Speech Recognition Performance" In Proceed- 
ings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop 
October 1989, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 
San Mateo, California. 
Barbara J. Grosz (1983) "TEAM: A Transportable 
Natural-language Interface System" In Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing: Proceed- 
ings of the Conference, Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, pages 39-45. 
244 
