RESEARCH IN CONTINUOUS SPEECH RECOGNITION 
PIs: John Makhoul and Richard Schwartz 
BBN STC, 10 Moulton St., Camridge, MA 02138 
makhoul@bbn.com, schwartz@bbn.com 
The primary goal of this basic research is to develop improved methods and models for acoustic 
recognition of continuous peech. The work has focussed on developing accurate and detailed mathemat- 
ical models of phonemes and their coarticulation for the purpose of large-vocabulary continuous peech 
recognition. Important goals of this work are to achieve the highest possible word recognition accuracy in 
continuous peech and to develop methods for the rapid adaptation of phonetic models to the voice of a 
new speaker. 
Major Accomplishments 
? Developed context-dependent phonetic models based on the hidden Markov modeling (HMM) for- 
malism to describe the acoustic variability of speech due to coarticulafion with neighboring phonemes. 
The method resulted in a reduction of the word error rate by a factor of two over using context- 
independent models. 
? Developed and demonstrated the effectiveness of the "time-synchronous" search strategy for finding 
the most likely sequence of words, given the input speech. 
? incorporated the various techniques in a complete continuous peech recognition system, called 
BYBLOS, and demonstrated it first in 1986. It was, and continues to be, the highest-pertbrming 
continuous recognition system tor large vocabularies. The basic methodology of BYBLOS has since 
been adopted by other DARPA sites. 
? Developed a new formalism for phonetic modeling, called "stochastic segment modeling", which 
can model the correlation between different parts of a phoneme directly. Initial experiments with this 
model on context-independent phonetic units reduced the recognition error by a factor of two com- 
pared to the corresponding context-independent HMM models. However, the new method requires 
significantly more computation. 
? Developed a novel "probabflistic spectral mapping" technique for rapid speaker adaptation whereby 
the phonetic models of a new speaker are estimated by performing a transformation  the phonetic 
models of a prototype speaker, using only a small amount of speech from the new speaker. Using this 
technique, the recognition accuracy with only 2 minutes of training from the new speaker is equal 
to that usually achieved with 20 minutes of speaker-dependent training or with speaker-independent 
training (which requires peech from over 100 speakers). 
442 
