Eva luat ing  the  Use  o f  P rosod ic  In fo rmat ion  in  Speech  
Recogn i t ion  and  Unders tand ing  
Mari Ostendorf Patti Price 
Boston University SRI International 
Objective: 
The goal of this project is to investigate the use of different levels of prosodic information in 
speech recognition and understanding. The work will involve determining which aspects of 
prosody are useful in speech recognition and understanding, developing reliable algorithms 
for analysis of prosodic information, and incorporating these into a Spoken Language System 
(SLS) being developed at SRI. Our approach is multi-disciplinary: combining linguistic 
theory, speech knowledge and statistical modeling techniques. This research is sponsored 
jointly by DARPA and NSF, and is coordinated with another NSF project entitled "Prosody 
Analysis/Synthesis U ing Probabilistic Models and Linguistic Theory." 
Summary of Accomplishments: 
? Specified conventions for labeling prosodic phenomena and hand-labelled several min- 
utes of speech with this convention. 
? Developed a method to automatically phonetically label and align speech data given 
the orthographic transcription using the SRI HMM word recognition system. 
? Conducted perceptual experiments with phonetically ambiguous entences to examine 
the role of prosody in parsing. 
? Developed a formalism for providing prosodic information - phrase boundaries (or 
word connectivity) and lexical stress - to a parser. 
? Developed and evaluated algorithms for automatically extracting word connectivity 
values based on duration and pause cues, and predicting lexical stress from duration 
cues. 
Plans: 
? Analyze recognition and parsing errors to understand what aspects of prosody will be 
most important to a spoken language system and what components of the system could 
use this information. 
Develop a phrase boundary detection algorithm using breaths, pauses, boundary tones 
and duration information and evaluate accuracy with respect o hand-labelled ata. 
Develop a formalism for incorporating phrase boundary information into a parser and 
evaluate the usefulness of hand-labeled and automatically detected boundary informa- 
tion in the SRI spoken language system. 
445 
