Univers i ty  o f  Pennsy lvan ia  
Title: Natura l  Language Research 
Principal Investigators: Aravind Joshi, Mitch Marcus (Co-PI) ,  Mark Steedman (Co-H) ,  
Bonnie Webber  (Co-PI)  
Project Summary: The main objective is the development ofnatural anguage interactive systems. Based on 
our earlier work on cooperative systems for interaction through language, further significant contributions 
were made in the following major areas: (1) development of linguistic formalisms (syntax, semantics, and 
pragmatics) and the corresponding algorithms; (2) extensions of deterministic parsing; (3) some aspects of 
discourse coherence; (4) some aspects of tense and anaphora; (5) a theory of response structure and response 
generation; and (6) initiation of research in information carried by intonation and its role in spoken language 
systems. 
The basic research and system development is expected to lead to: (1) characterization f information 
carried by (a) syntax, semantics, and discourse structure, (b) their relationship to information carried by 
intonation, (c) development of methods for applying their information in generation and understanding; 
(2) development of architecture for integration of utterance planning, lexical, syntactic, and intonational 
choice; (3) development of incremental strategies for applying syntactic, semantic and pragmatic knowledge 
in understanding and generating language, especially spoken language. 
Summary of accomplishments: 
Accomplishments before FY 88: 
? Preliminary design of a modular architecture for system integration for cooperative r sponses; 
? Integration of RTM (Rus-Text-Mumble) with DECTALK, providing output for RTM; 
? Completed pilot system for converting machine fficient proofs as input to natural anguage generation 
systems. 
Accomplishments for FY88: 
? Completed the design and development of a flexible architecture for a multi-functional cooperative 
response system; 
? Development oflinguistic formalisms for integrating syntax and semantics. Preliminary implementation 
of the algorithms. Established convergence of several formalisms; 
? Characterization of tense and anaphora in discourse; 
? Extension of deterministic parsing; 
? Development of an architecture for interaction between the strategic and tactical components of a 
generation system. 
Objectives for FY89: 
? Characterization f the information carried by syntax, semantics, discourse, and intonation and its use 
in generation and understanding; 
? Further development and implementation f deterministic parsing systems; 
? Pilot implementation of the multi-functional cooperative response systems; 
? Design and integration of a sizable grammar in the TAG parsing algorithms. Development of new 
strategies based on 'lexicalized' grammars; 
? Development of incremental strategies for language processing (understanding and generation), espe- 
cially in spoken language. 
209 
