A Real-Time Spoken-Language System 
Interactive Problem-Solving 
Patt i  Price and Robert  C. Moore 
SRI Internat ional  
for 
Objective: 
SRI is developing a system to improve complex problem- 
solving through tile use of interactive spoken language in 
conjunction with other media. This requires real-time 
performance, large vocabulary, high semantic accuracy 
and habitability, as well as robustness to expected and 
unexpected variability. SRI's spoken-language system is 
being developed in the air travel planning domain along 
two overlapping research and development lines, one fo- 
cussed on an SLS kernel for database query, and tile 
other on the full interactive system. 
Recent  Accompl i shments  
? Improved natural language understanding in the air 
travel planning domain (about 90% of a test-set of 
319 sentences collected at T1 now parse, 64% re- 
ceive a semantic interpretation, over 25% retrieve 
the correct answer from the database. 
? Implemented corrective training to improve recogni- 
tion performance; on the standard training set this 
improves peaker-independent perplexity 60 perfor- 
mance from 6.7% error to 5.1% error, and for a 
larger training set (about 11,000 sentences), im- 
proves speaker-independent recognition from 5.3% 
error to 4.1% error. 
? Evaluated the effects on performance oflarger train- 
ing sets: using about 11,000 training sentences com- 
pared to about 4000 training sentences improves 
from 6.7% error to 5.3% error. 
? Started initial experiments in consistency modeling: 
showed significant improvement for separate model- 
ing of male and female speech for both the standard 
and the large training sets (performance improves 
from 6.7e~ error to 5.7% error on the standard train- 
ing and from 5.3% error to 4.3% error on the large 
training set). Speaker- independent perplexity 60 
performance can be expected to improve still fur- 
ther when gender-specific modeling with corrective 
training on large data sets is implemented. 
? Started implementing procedures for porting to new 
vocabularies, including the ATIS vocabulary, in- 
cluding the automatic generation of baseforms, ap- 
plications of rules and the creation of word-models 
based on existing training data from other domains 
(currently about 9000 verified words are i, the dic- 
tionary and another 20,000 from tile Brown corpus 
most frequent words in process). 
Incorporated in the SRI Speech Understanding Sys- 
tem techniques (developed under all NSF contract) 
that use statistical information about ile speech sig- 
nal to improve recognition accuracy in noisy envi- 
ronments; started the real-time implementation f 
these algorithms. 
Started port of phonology software from LISP to 
C, and demonstrated performance improvement 
through the use of more detailed, statistically 
trained phonological models. 
With help from TI, implemented a functional equiv- 
alent of the TI data-collection mechanism; collected 
and transcribed ata from 10 subjects using the 
TI protocols. Designed experiments for variations 
on this mechanism and started data collection and 
analysis. 
P lans  
. Continue ATIS development. 
* Expand effort in consistency modeling and training 
on larger data sets. 
* Continue development of software for easy porting 
to new vocabularies. 
? Begin effort to detect out-of-vocabulary items and 
design and evaluate an appropriate interface. 
? Collect and analyze more human-machine data un- 
der various conditions in order to guide the design 
and evaluation of the SRI SLS. 
424 
