Recent Results from the ARM 
Continuous Speech Recognition Project 
Martin Russell  and Keith Ponting 
Speech Research Unit 
RSKE, Malvern, Worcs WR14 3PS, UK 
Introduct ion 
This paper describes ome of the most recent work 
on continuous peech recognition using phoneme- 
level hidden Markov models (HMMs) which has 
been conducted at the UK Speech Research Unit 
as part of the ARM (Airborne Reconnaissance Mis- 
sion) project \[11\]. The goal of the project is au- 
tomatic recognition of spoken airborne reconnais- 
sance reports. The project draws on many years of 
research undertaken i the UK by the Joint Speech 
Research Unit and the current RSRE Speech Re- 
search Unit, and also on the work on continuous 
speech recognition using sub-word HMMs which 
has been conducted under the current DAttPA pro- 
gramme, particularly at MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
\[5\] and Carnegie Mellon University \[3\], and by the 
speech groups at IBM and BBN. 
The project began with the definition, implemen- 
tation and evaluation of a simple speaker-dependent 
"baseline" system. This was then systematically 
improved and assessed in order to measure the per- 
formance gain resulting from each enhancement. 
The most recent version of the speaker-dependent 
ARM system scores an average 86.8% word accu- 
racy with no syntax on the 497 word vocabulary 
ARM task. An overview of the development of 
the speaker- dependent AlUM system is presented 
in \[11\] and more detailed information about partic- 
ular stages in the evolution of the system can be 
found in a set of separate reports \[7, 6, 10, 8, 9\]. 
For completeness, the ARM task and the most re- 
cent version of the speaker- dependent AttM sys- 
tem are both described in the present paper. The 
paper goes on to report work in progress in two 
areas: initial work towards the development of a 
speaker-independent version of the ARM system, 
and a study of the performance of versions of the 
speaker-dependent ARM system from the viewpoint 
of the number of system parameters. 
The development of a speaker-independent ver- 
sion of the ARM system is a current goal of the 
project. This has necessitated the collection of 
a new 340 speaker speech corpus which includes 
recordings of ARM reports for each subject. Or- 
thographic annotation of this corpus is proceed- 
ing in parallel with the development of a baseline 
speaker-independent version of the recognition sys- 
tem through a process of "annotation by forced 
recognition". At the time of writing over 2000 sen- 
tences from 120 speakers have been labelled in this 
way and systems trained on 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 
60 male speakers have been evaluated. This work 
is described in more detail below. 
For a fixed size of training set, the number of sys- 
tem parameters i clearly an important considera- 
tion in the design of any statistically based speech 
recognition system. The final section presents a 
study of some of the systems which have been evalu- 
ated as part of the ARM project from the perspec- 
tive of number of parameters. The results show 
a range of sizes of parameter set which are large 
enough to fully exploit the training data in terms 
of accurate modelling of speech patterns and at the 
same time small enough to be supported by the 
training set. Experiments using clustered triphones 
with state-specific covariance matrices, which were 
stimulated by these results, are also reported. 
The Airborne Reconnaissance 
Mission Task 
Texts of simulated airborne reconnaissance r ports 
were created using an automatic sentence generator 
based on a finite state syntax (perplexity 6) and 497 
word vocabulary, defined by the Royal Aerospace 
Establishment (RAE), Farnborough UK. A typical 
ARM report is as follows: 
397 
"Inflight report 1-alpha/268. Target map ref fox- 
trot kilo 9012, correction 2435. Sighting at zero one 
oh eight zulu. New target defended strip. Less than 
13 helicopters, type possibly hip. Runways heading 
northwest wholly damaged, SAM defences to west 
intact. TARWI 7/Sths at 2000, end of message" 
The start (first four sentences) and end (final sen- 
tence) of the report specify a mission reference num- 
ber, target location, time of sighting, target cate- 
gory and weather conditions respectively and are 
tightly structured. The remaining central part of 
the report, which describes what can be seen from 
the aircraft, is relatively free format. 
The Speaker-Dependent ARM 
System 
The development of the speaker-dependent ARM 
system is described in detail in \[11\]. This section 
is concerned with a description of its most recent 
version (ARM version 7 of \[11\]). 
The acoustic front-end for the ARM system is 
based on a conventional fi terbank analyser with 27 
critical band spaced filters covering frequencies up 
to 10kHz and producing 10O frames per second. The 
mean channel amplitude of each filterbank frame 
is subtracted from all components of that frame, 
and a cosine transform is then applied. The 17 di- 
mensional representation consisting of cosine coef- 
ficients 1 to 16 and mean filterbank channel ampli- 
tude forms the acoustic front-end parameterisation 
for the ARM system (see \[8\]). The frame-rate is 
reduced by approximately 50% using the variable 
frame rate technique described in \[7, 6\]. 
Acoustic-phonetic processing in the current 
speaker-dependent version of the system uses a set 
of approximately 1500 HMMs (the precise number 
depends on the speaker) consisting of: 
? Four single state "non-speech" HMMs to model 
non-speech sounds in regions of the test data 
between spoken sentences. 
? Six word-level HMMs for the commonly occur- 
ing short words "air", "at", "in", "of", "oh" 
and "or". The number of states in these word- 
level HMMs is equal to three times the number 
of phonemes in the baseform transcription of 
the corresponding word. 
? Approximately 1490 three-state HMMs, one for 
each word-internal triphone \[12\] which occurs 
in the ARM vocabulary. Since the baseform 
pronunciations of ARM vocabulary words vary 
between speakers in the speaker dependent sys- 
tem, the precise number of triphone HMMs is 
different for each speaker. 
All HMM states are identified with single multivari- 
ate Gaussian state output probability density func- 
tions with diagonal (co)variance matrices. A single 
"grand" covariance matrix is shared by all states 
\[4,9\]. 
Words in the ARM vocabulary are related to 
phonemes through a dictionary of "baseform" 
phonemic transcriptions (one transcription per 
word). In the current, speaker-dependent, system 
this dictionary is modified for each speaker. The 
modifications are concerned with broad differences, 
for example between "northern British English" and 
"southern British English", rather than with fine 
details of the speakers pronunciation. 
Parameter estimation is based on standard sub- 
word HMM training procedures in which sentence 
level HMMs are constructed from phoneme-level 
HMMs (using the dictionary of baseform pronoun- 
ciations). These are then mapped onto the sentence 
level acoustic data using the forward- backward al- 
gorithm to obtain contributions to the new model 
parameter estimates. Training is done in 3 stages: 
estimation of the parameters of context-insensitive 
monophone-HMMs, estimation of the parameters of
context-sensitive triphone-HMMs (using the mono- 
phone HMM parameters as initial statistics), and 
estimation of the grand (co)variance matrix. 
Per fo rmance  o f  the  speaker -dependent  
ARM sys tem 
The system was trained and evaluated separately on 
three speakers. For each speaker, 37 spoken ARM 
reports (224 sentences, approximately 15 minutes 
of speech), labelled orthographically at the sen- 
tence level, were used to estimate the parameters 
of the phoneme-hvel HMMs, and 10 reports (540 
words) were used as a test set. Recognition is per- 
formed using a one-pass dynamic programming al- 
gorithm with beam search and partial-traceback \[1\]. 
In experiments conducted in autumn 1989 the sys- 
tem scored an average 86.8% word-accuracy with- 
out syntax (93.8% words correct) \[11\]. 
398 
The "baseline" speaker indepen- 
dent ARM system 
A current goal of the ARM project is to develop a 
speaker-independent version of the system. This 
will involve two stages: the creation of a set of 
speaker-independent triphone HMMs, and the de- 
velopment of adaptation techniques, uch as those 
described in \[2\], which will enable the parameters 
of these models to be adapted for new speakers. 
This section reports on the first of these two stages. 
As in the speaker-dependent work, this phase of 
the project has started with the implementation 
of a simple "baseline" speaker-independent system. 
This is obtained by training the system described 
in the previous section using a corpus of AtLM re- 
ports spoken by a number of speakers. This has 
necessitated the recording of a new speech corpus 
which includes recordings of ARM reports spoken 
by a large number of speakers. 
The  "Speaker  Independent"  S IA  Speech  
Corpus  
The SIA corpus contains recordings of 340 speakers, 
each speaking the following material: 
? 3 ARM reports 
6 extracts from ARM reports. These extracts 
consist of the centre sections of the reports 
which describe what the "observer" can see 
from the aircraft. These sections of the reports 
are less constrained than the initial and final 
parts, and consequently contain a richer vari- 
ety of phonemic ontexts. 
? 10 sentences generated from an air-traffic con- 
trol application 
? 10 "TIMIT like" English sentences. 
Only the first two sets of recordings are used in 
the current phase of the project, the remainder 
are intended for future work. As with the ear- 
lier speaker-dependent database, all recordings were 
made digitally on video cassette (44kHz sample 
rate) in a sound proof room using a Shure SM10 
head-mounted microphone. 
Annotat ion  o f  the  S IA  corpus  
Although it is possible to estimate triphone HMM 
parameters using speech labelled at the report level, 
in practice it desirable that the training material 
should be labelled at a finer level. In the present ex- 
periments annotation is nominally at the sentence 
level, however segments of speech which are sepa- 
rated by long portions of non-speech are labelled 
as distinct items. Thus if a subject speaks reports 
as a sequence of fluent sentences, the data will be 
labelled at the sentence l vel, but if a long pause oc- 
curs in the middle of a sentence, that sentence will 
be labelled as two separate segments. Labelling of 
the speech corpus is proceeding in parallel with the 
development of the baseline speaker- independent 
ARM system through a process of "forced recog- 
nition". New reports are labelled by the ARM 
recognition software using the current best speaker- 
independent models in conjunction with a report- 
specific syntax which allows non-speech models to 
occur between words but ensures recognition of the 
correct word sequence. The results of this auto- 
matic labelling process are checked manually and 
corrected if necessary. Thus, reports spoken by 
the first ten training speakers were labelled us- 
ing speaker-dependent triphone HMMs, and reports 
spoken by subsequent groups of training speakers 
were labelled using triphone HMMs trained on all 
previous peakers. 
At the time of writing 360 reports from 120 speak- 
ers have been labelled in this way and recognition 
systems trained on 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 male 
speakers have been evaluated. For each speaker in 
the training set, all three ARM reports were used 
as training material. 
Per fo rmance  o f  the  base l ine  speaker  inde-  
pendent  ARM sys tem 
Figure 1 shows percentage word accuracy with no 
syntax as a function of number of training speakers 
for a set of ten test subjects, none of whom were in 
the training set. The training and test speakers are 
all male. It is clear from the figure that there are 
two modes of performance. 
For the eight best speakers, recognition accuracy 
increases with number of training speakers for train- 
ing sets with up to 40 speakers, after which it is 
approximately constant. The average word accu- 
racy for these 8 subjects with models trained on 60 
speakers is 59.2%, with individual scores ranging 
from 38.5% to 76.5%. 
For the remaining 2 speakers the performance 
of the system is badly degraded, with an average 
word accuracy of -38.6%. No obvious reason for 
this poor performance is apparent from listening to 
the recordings, for example the speaking styles of 
399 
100 - 
~o Word  
Accuracy 
90-  
80-  
70-  
60-  
50-  
40-  
30-  
20-  
10-  
-10  - 
-20  - 
-30  - 
-40  - 
-50  - 
-60  - 
-70  - 
I I | I I I 
10 20 30 40 50 60 
Number  o f  Speakers  
Figure 1: Speaker-independent word accuracy with- 
out syntax as a function of number of  training 
speakers for 10 male test speakers using HMMs 
trained on male speakers. 
these two speakers are, subjectively, no more atyp- 
ical than  those of the other 8 speakers. Current  
investigations are concentrat ing on the possibi l ity 
that  some components  of the ARM system are more 
sensitive to speaker diffences than was anticipated. 
Performance as a Function of Size 
of Parameter  Set 
During the development of the speaker dependent 
ARM system several factors were varied which 
change the number of system parameters. These in- 
clude the acoustic front-end parameterisation, the 
number of HMMs and their topologies, and the use 
of shared or state-specific covariance matrices. Al- 
though the effect on performance which results from 
a particular change is normally attributed to its 
appropriateness in terms of speech pattern mod- 
elling, there will also be effects due to the ability 
of the training set to support dhTerent numbers of 
parameters. For example, early results showed that 
for monophone HMMs there was sufficient training 
material to support state-specific covariance matri- 
ces and that the introduction of a shared "grand" 
covariance matrix resulted in poorer performance 
\[8\]. By contrast the introduction of triphone HMMs 
with state-specific covariance matrices resulted in 
either a sma\]_l increase or a significant decrease in 
performance, because of the large number of system 
parameters, and large improvements in recognition 
accuracy were not observed until a shared covari- 
ance matrix was used \[9\]. In terms of number of 
parameters these two cases represent extremes in 
the development of the system, but the results sug- 
gest that it would be fruitful to look at the perfor- 
mance of a range of versions of the system from the 
perspective of number of parameters. 
Figure 2 shows %word accuracy with no syntax as 
a function of number of system parameters for 22 
speaker- dependent systems which were evaluated 
as part of the ARM project. To a first approxima- 
tion stoat1, med ium and large numbers of parame- 
ters correspond to monophone HMM systems with 
alternative acoustic front-end parameterisations \[8\], 
clustered triphone systems \[I0\], and triphone sys- 
teins with state-specific covariance matrices \[9\] re- 
spectively. No distinction has been made between 
means, variances and transition probabilities in the 
calculation of parameter set size. The figure clearly 
suggests an underlying effect of parameter set size, 
with poor performance resulting both from small 
numbers of parameters, which do not permit suffi- 
ciently accurate modelling of the speech patterns, 
and large numbers of parameters which cannot be 
supported by the training set. The figure indicates 
that an acceptable balance between detailed mod- 
elling and trainability is achieved with sets of be- 
tween 20,000 and I00,000 parameters. 
400 
I00 100 
%Word 
Accuracy 
90 
?O0  80 ? 
70 -  
% 
60-  
50-  
40-  
30-  
20-  
I0 -  
0 i 
0 40 
? O0 
I I I I I 
80 120 160 200 240 
lO00s o f  Parameters  
Figure 2: Performance of various versions of  the 
ARM system for speaker SJ  as a function of  size of 
parameter set. 
Fur ther  Exper iments  w i th  C lus tered  Tr i -  
phones  
The results of the previous ection suggest a mod- 
ification to the triphone clustering experiments de- 
scribed in \[10\], which demonstrate hat the number 
of triphone HMMs in the ARM system can be re- 
duced from 1500 to 300 by clustering with no signif- 
icant drop in performance. The HMM sets in these 
experiments have a single shared covariance matrix. 
If state-specific covariance matrices had been used, 
the number of parameters for sets of 280 and 480 tri- 
phones would have been 47,317 and 79,917 respec- 
tively. According to the previous ection, these sizes 
of parameter set can be supported by the training 
data. Hence one would predict that improved per- 
formance would result from the use of state-specific 
covariance matrices for sets of 280 and 480 triphone 
HMMs. 
The dotted line in figure 3 is taken from \[10\] 
and shows %word accuracy as a function of num- 
ber of triphones for sets of triphones with shared 
covariance matrices. The solid line shows new re- 
sults and is the corresponding graph for sets of tri- 
Word 
Accuracy  
50 o 
?'0 ? 
' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I 
0 500 1000 1500 
Number  of  Tr iphones 
Figure 3: Word accuracy with no syntax as a func- 
tion of number of triphones averaged over 3 speak- 
ers. Shared (dotted //ne) and state-specific (solid 
line) covariance matrices. 
phones with state-specific covariance matrices. As 
predicted by figure 2, the overall best performance 
is obtained from sets of 280 and 480 triphones with 
state-specific covariance matrices. The poorer per- 
formance obtained with sets of 80, 680 and 880 
triphones with state specific covariance matrices is 
also consistent with the results shown in figure 2. 
The fact that the superior performance of the sets 
of 280 and 480 triphone HMMs with state specific 
covariance matrices was predicted from figure 2 con- 
firms that an understanding of the size of parameter 
set which can be supported by a given training set 
is important in the design of this type of system. 
Acknowledgement 
The author wishes to acknowledge the contributions 
to the ARM project which have been made by all 
members of staff at the Speech Research Unit. 
References 
\[1\] J S Bridle, M D Brown and R M Chamber- 
lain, "A one-pass algorithm for connected word 
401 
recognition", IEEE-ICASSP, 899-902, 1982. 
[2] S J Cox and J S Bridle, "Unsupervised 
speaker adaptation by probabilistic spectrum 
fittlng',ICASSP 89, Glasgow, Scotland, 1989. 
[3] K-F Lee, "Large vocab- 
ulary speaker-independent continuous peech 
recognition: the SPHINX system", PhD The- 
sis, Carnegie Mellon University, 1988. 
[4] D B Paul, "A speaker-stress resistant iso- 
lated word recognizer", ICASSP'87, Dallas, 
TX, 1987. 
[5] D B Paul, "The Lincoln robust continu- 
ous speech recognizer", ICASSP 89, Glasgow, 
Scotland, 1989. 
[6] S M Peeling and K M Ponting, "Further experi- 
ments in variable frame rate analysis for speech 
recognition", RSRE memorandum 4336, 1989. 
[7] K M Ponting and S M Peeling, "Experiments 
in variable frame rate analysis for speech recog- 
nition', RSRE memorandum 4330, 1989. 
[8] M J Russell, D Lowe, M D Bedworth and K 
M Ponting, "Improved Front-End Analysis in 
the ARM System: Linear Transformations of 
SKUbank", RSRE memorandum 4358, Febru- 
ary 1990. 
[9] M J Russell and K M Ponting, "Experiments 
with Grand Variance in the ARM Continuous 
Speech Recognition System", RSttE memoran- 
dum 4359, February 1990. 
[10] M J Russell, K M Ponting, S tt Browning, S 
Downey and P Howell, "Triphone Clustering in 
the ARM System", ItSitE memorandum 4357, 
February 1990. 
[11] M J Russell, K M Ponting, S M Peeling, 
S It Browning, J S Bridle, It K Moore, I 
Galiano and P Howell, "The ARM Continu- 
ous Speech Recognition System", ICASSP'90, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 1990. 
[12] It M Schwartz, Y L Chow, O A Kim- 
ball, S Roucos, M Krasner and J Makhoul, 
"Context-Dependent Modelling for acoustic- 
phonetic recognition of continuous peech", 
ICASSP 85, Tampa, April 1985. 
402 
