The Use of Relative Duration 
in Syntactic Disambiguation 
M. Ostendorf  t P. J. Prices J. Bear:  C .W.  Wightmant  
t Boston University 
44 Cummington St. 
Boston, MA 02215 
Sl:tI International 
333 Ravenswood Ave. 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
Abstract 
We describe the modification of a grammar to take ad- 
vantage of prosodic information automatically extracted 
from speech. The work includes (1) the development 
of an integer "break index" representation f prosodic 
phrase boundary information, (2) the automatic detec- 
tion of prosodic phrase breaks using a hidden Markov 
model on relative duration of phonetic segments, and 
(3) the integration of the prosodic phrase break informa- 
tion in SRI's Spoken Language System to rule out alter- 
native parses in otherwise syntactically ambiguous sen- 
tences. Initial experiments using ambiguous sentences 
read by radio announcers achieved good results in both 
detection and parsing. Automatically detected phrase 
break indices had a correlation greater than 0.86 with 
hand-labeled data for speaker-dependent models; and, 
in a subset of sentences with preposition ambiguities, 
the number of parses was reduced by 25% with a simple 
grammar modification. 
Introduction 
"Prosody," the suprasegmental information in speech, 
i.e., information that cannot be localized to a specific 
sound segment, can mark lexical stress, identify phrasing 
breaks and provide information useful for semantic inter- 
pretation. Although all of these aspects may be useful 
in spoken language systems, particularly important are 
prosodic phrase breaks which can provide cues to syntac- 
tic structure to help select among competing hypotheses, 
and thus help to disambiguate otherwise ambiguous sen- 
tences. In speech understanding applications, informa- 
tion such as prosody that aids disambiguation, is par- 
ticularly important, since speech input, as opposed to 
text, introduces a vast increase in the amount of am- 
biguity a parser must face. For example, Harrington 
and Johnstone \[7\] found that even when all phonemes 
are correctly identified, the indeterminancy of phoneme 
sequences when word boundaries are unknown yields in 
excess of 1000 word string parses for many of their 4 to 10 
word sentences. Moreover, these estimates rise dramati- 
cally as indeterminancy is introduced in the phoneme se- 
quences: only 2% of the same sentences had fewer than 
1,000 parses when phonetically similar phonemes were 
clustered together (e.g., voiced stops). This indetermi- 
nancy vastly increases the work for a parser. 
The work reported here focuses on the use of rela- 
tive duration of phonetic segments in the assignment of
syntactic structure, assuming a known word sequence. 
Specifically, relative duration of phonemes i estimated 
by a speech recognizer constrained to recognize the cor- 
rect string of words. These duration values are then used 
to compute phrase break indices, which are in turn used 
to rule out alternative parses in otherwise syntactically 
ambiguous sentences. In this paper, we begin by pro- 
viding some theoretical background on prosodic phrase 
breaks, and by describing a numerical representation f 
phrase breaks for use in speech understanding. Next we 
describe algorithms for automatic recognition of these 
break indices from speech for known text, and the mod- 
ification of a grammar to use these indices in parsing. 
Finally, we present experimental results based on am- 
biguous entences from three speakers, howing that the 
use of prosodic information can significantly reduce the 
number of candidate syntactic parses by pruning mis- 
matches between prosody and syntax. 
Prosodic Phrase Breaks 
In recent years, there have been significant advances in 
the phonology of prosodic phrases. While this work is 
not yet explicit enough to provide rules for automatically 
determining the prosodic phrase boundaries in speech, it 
is useful as a foundation for our computational models. 
Several researchers in linguistics have proposed hierar- 
chies of prosodic phrases \[9, 12, 10\]. Although not all lev- 
els of these hierarchies are universally accepted, our data 
appear to provide vidence for prosodic words as individ- 
ual words or clitic groups, groupings of prosodic words, 
intermediate phrases, intonational phrases, groupings of 
intermediate phrases as in parenthetical phrases, and 
sentences. Since it is not clear how many of these levels 
will be useful in speech understanding, we have repre- 
sented all seven possible types of boundaries, but focus 
initially on the information in the highest levels, sen- 
tences and intonational phrases. 
In order to utilize this information in a parser, we 
developed a numerical representation f this hierarchy 
25 
using a sequence of break indices between each word. A 
break index encodes the degree of prosodic decoupling 
between eighboring words. For example, an index of 0 
corresponds to cliticization, and an index of 6 represents 
a sentence boundary. 1 We found that these break indices 
codld be labeled with very high consistency within and 
across labelers. We anticipate that the strongest bound- 
aries (highest level of the hierarchy) will be both easiest 
to detect and most useful in parsing, and will refer to 
these boundaries (4-6) as major phrase boundaries. 
The acoustic ues to prosodic breaks vary according to 
the different levels of the hierarchy. For example, there 
are phonological rules that apply across some boundaries 
of the hierarchy but not others (e.g., \[12, 18\]). Into- 
nation cues mark intermediate and intonational phrase 
boundaries \[15, 3\]. Pauses and/or breaths may also mark 
major phrase boundaries. Our initial data indicate that 
duration lengthening is a fairly reliable cue to phrase 
boundaries. Prepausal engthening is observed in En- 
glish and many, but not all, other languages (see \[16\] for 
a summary). Lengthening without a pause has been ob- 
served in English in clause-final position (e.g., \[5\]) and 
in phrase-final position, though lengthening of phones at 
the ends of words is disputed in the literature (see \[8\]). 
The typical representation f syntactic structure is not 
identical to prosodic phrase structure. 2 There is some 
work suggesting methods for predicting rhythmic struc- 
ture from syntactic structure, but not vice versa \[13, 6\]. 
These results are complicated by the complex relation- 
ship between intonation and rhythm and the influence 
of semantics on intonation. Although people disagree on 
the precise relationship between prosody and syntax, it 
is generally agreed that there is some relationship. We 
have shown, for example, that prosody is used by listen- 
ers to choose the appropriate meaning of otherwise am- 
biguous sentences with an average accuracy of 86% \[11\]. 
Although listener performance varied as a function of 
the type of syntactic ambiguities, reliability was high for 
left vs. right attachment and particle/preposition ambi- 
guities, both difficult problems in parsing. An example 
illustrates how the break indices resolve syntactic and 
word sequence ambiguities for two phonetically identicM 
sentences: 
? Marge 0 would 1 never 2 deal 0 in 2 any 0 guys 6 
? Marge 1 would 0 never 0 deal 3 in 0 any 0 guise 6 
Note that the break index between "deal" and "in" 
provides an indication of how tightly coupled the two 
words are. For "in" as a particle, we expect ighter con- 
nection to the preceding verb whose meaning is modified 
than to the following phrase which is the object of that 
verb. For "in" as a preposition, we expect a tighter con- 
1 We have changed our scale f rom our previously reported six 
levels to the present  seven levels to achieve a more natura l  mapp ing  
between our  levels and  those descr ibed in the l inguist ics l i terature. 
2 Steedman,  however, \[14\] had  made some interest ing arguments  
concerning the appropr iateness  of categorial  g rammar  for reflecting 
prosodic s t ructure .  
nection to the following object of the preposition than 
to the preceding verb. 
Use of Phrase Breaks in Parsing 
With the goal of using prosodic phrase breaks to reduce 
syntactic ambiguity in a parser, we have developed an al- 
gorithm for automatically computing break indices, and 
we have modified the structure of the grammar to in- 
corporate this information. The current effort is focused 
on demonstrating the feasibility of this approach; there- 
fore the problem is restricted in scope. The techniques 
we have developed are extensible to more general cases; 
the positive results encourage us to relax some of these 
restrictions. In the next section we describe the basic ap- 
proach, which is based on the following simplifications. 
? We assume knowledge of the orthographic word 
transcription of a sentence and the sentence bound- 
ary. Word boundary ambiguities complicate the in- 
tegration architecture and were not considered in 
this study, although this is an important issue to 
address in future work. 
? Only relative duration is currently used as a cue for 
detecting the break indices, though we expect o im- 
prove performance in later versions of the algorithm 
by utilizing other acoustic ues such as intonation. 
? Only preposition ambiguities were investigated. 
The focus on preposition ambiguities was motivated 
by the following facts: 
1. Prepositions are very frequent: 80-90% of the 
sentences in our radio news database, in the 
resource management sentences, and in the. 
ATIS database contain at least one preposi- 
tional phrase. 
2. Sentences with prepositions are usually syntac- 
tically ambiguous. 
3. Our perceptual experiments suggest that 
prosody could be used effectively in many sen- 
tences with preposition ambiguities. We be- 
lieve that the techniques developed can be 
adapted to more general attachment ambigui- 
ties. 
? The sentences examined were read by professional 
FM radio announcers, o the prosody is somewhat 
more exaggerated and probably easier to recognize 
than it would be with nonprofessional speakers. 
Phrase  Break  Detect ion  
Using a known word sequence as a tightly constrained 
grammar, a speech recognizer can be used to provide 
time Mignments for the phone sequence of a sentence. 
We have used the speaker-independent SRI DECIPHER 
system \[17\], which uses phonologicM rules to generate 
bushy pronunciation etworks that provide a more ac- 
curate phonetic transcription and alignment. 
2"7 
In earlier work \[11\], each phone duration was normal- 
ized according to speaker- and phone-dependent means 
and variances. Raw break features were generated by 
averaging the normalized duration over the final sylla- 
ble coda of each word and adding a pause factor. Lex- 
ically stressed and non-stressed vowels were separated 
in the computation of means and variances. Finally, 
these features were normalized (relative to the observed 
phone durations in the current sentence) to obtain inte- 
ger break indices with a range of 0 to 5. These indices 
had a high correlation with hand-labeled data (0.85) and 
were successfully used in a parser to reduce the number 
of syntactic parses by 25% \[2\]. However, the normal- 
ization algorithm required knowledge of the raw break 
features for the entire sentence, which has the disad- 
vantages that the algorithm is non-causal and may not 
reflect sentence-internal changes in speaking rate. In ad- 
dition, the algorithm used the full scale of break indices, 
so every sentence was constrained to have at least one 0 
break index. 
A new algorithm, using a hidden Markov model 
(HMM), was investigated for computing the break in- 
dices from the raw break features described above. The 
algorithm is not strictly causal (in the same sense that 
the HMM recognizer is not causal - decisions are not 
made until sometime after a word has been observed), 
but does not require any ad hoc scaling. We anticipate 
the time delay associated with HMM prosody decoding 
to be similar to delays associated with a speech recog- 
nizer. In a slight variation from previous work, the raw 
break indices were computed from the rhyme (vowel nu- 
cleus + coda) of the final syllable instead of the coda 
alone. This change did not have an effect on the cor- 
relation with hand labels. A second, more important 
difference is that the phone duration means are adapted 
according to a local speaking rate. Local speaking rate 
is given by the average normalized durations over the 
last M phones, excluding pauses, where M -- 50 was 
determined experimentally. The mean duration for each 
phone is adjusted with each new observed phone accord- 
ing to 
fia m ~a ? ar /N  
where r is the speaking rate, N is a feedback coeffi- 
cient that is equal to 5000 at steady state, but varies 
at start-up for faster initial adaptation, g is the stan- 
dard deviation of the phone's duration, unadapted, and 
~ua represents the mean duration for phone a. 
A fully connected seven-state HMM is used to recog- 
nize break indices, given the raw break feature. Each 
HMM state corresponds to a break index (state number 
= break index) and the output distribution in each state 
describes the raw indices observed while in that state. 
In this work, we investigated the use of Gaussian output 
distributions of the scalar break feature, but joint use of 
several features in multivariate output distributions will 
best utilize the power of the tIMM approach. Viterbi 
decoding was used to obtain the state sequence for an 
utterance, corresponding to the break index sequence. 
The parameters of the break HMM were estimated in 
two different ways, involving either supervised or unsu- 
pervised training. By supervised training, we mean that 
the hand-labeled break indices are given, so the state 
sequence is fully observable and simple maximum likeli- 
hood estimation (as opposed to the Estimate-Maximize, 
or forward-backward, algorithm) is used. In unsuper- 
vised training, no hand-labeled ata is used. Mean out- 
put distributions of the states are initialized to values 
on a scale that increases with the corresponding break 
index, and the transition probabilities were initialized 
to be essentially uniform. The forward-backward algo- 
r ithm was then run, effectively clustering the states, to 
estimate the final output distribution paramaters. A sur- 
prising and very encouraging result was that the unsu- 
pervised HMM correlated as well with the hand-labeled 
data as did the HMM with supervised parameter esti- 
mates. 
In tegrat ion  Wi th  a Parser  
The question of how best to incorporate prosodic in- 
formation into a grammar/parser  is a vast area of re- 
search. The methodology used here is a novel approach, 
involving automatic modification of the grammar ules 
to incorporate the break indices as a new grammatical 
category. We modified an existing, and reasonably large 
grammar, the grammar used in SRI's spoken language 
system. The parser used is the Core Language Engine 
developed at SRI in Cambridge. 
Several steps are involved in the grammar modifica- 
tion. The first step is to systematically change all of the 
rules of the form A ~ B C to the form A ~ B L ink  C, 
where L ink  is a new grammatical  category, that of the 
prosodic break indices. Similarly all rules with more 
than two right hand side elements need to have L ink  
nodes interleaved at every juncture, e.g., a rule A 
B C D is changed into A ~ B Link1 C Link2 D. 
Next, allowance must be made for empty nodes, de- 
noted e. It is common practice to have rules of the form 
NP --~ e and PP  --+ e in order to handle wh-movement 
and relative clauses. These rules necessitate the incor- 
poration into the modified grammar of a rule L ink  ~ e; 
otherwise, the sentence will not parse, because an empty 
node introduced by the grammar will either not be pre- 
ceded by a link, or not followed by one. 
The introduction of empty links needs to be con- 
strained to avoid the introduction of spurious parses. 
If the only place the empty NP or PP could go is at 
the end of the sentence, then the only place the empty 
L ink  could go is right before it and no extra ambiguity 
is introduced. However, if an empty wh-phrase could 
be posited at a place somewhere other than the end of 
the sentence, then there is ambiguity as to whether it is 
preceded or followed by the empty link. 
For instance, for the sentence, "What did you see on 
Saturday?" the parser would find both of the following 
possibilities: 
? What L did L you L see L empty-NP empty-L on L 
Saturday? 
28 
? What L did L you L see empty-L empty-NP L on L 
Saturday? 
Hence the grammar must be made to automatically rule 
out half of these possibilities. This can be done by con- 
straining every empty link to be followed immediately 
by an empty wh-phrase, or a constituent containing an 
empty wh-phrase on its left branch. It is fairly straight- 
forward to incorporate this into the routine that au- 
tomatically modifies the grammar. The rule that in- 
troduces empty links gives them a feature-value pair: 
empty-link = y. The rules that introduce other empty 
constituents are modified to add to the constituent the 
feature-value pair: trace-on-left-branch = y. The links 
0 through 6 are given the feature-value pair empty- 
link = n. The default value for trace-on-left-branch 
is set to n so that all words in the lexicon have that 
value. Rules of the form Ao ~ At  Link1 . . .  An are mod- 
ified to insure that A0 and A1 have the same value for 
the feature trace-on-left-branch. Additionally, if Linkl  
has empty-link = y then Ai+l must have trace-on-left- 
branch = y. These modifications, incorporated into the 
grammar modifying routine, suffice to eliminate the spu- 
rious ambiguity. 
Additional changes to the grammar were necessary to 
actually make use of the prosodic break indices. In this 
initial endeavor, a very conservative change was made af- 
ter examining the break indices on a set of sentences with 
preposition ambiguities. The rule N ~ N L ink  PP  was 
changed to require the value of the link to be between 0 
and 2 inclusive for the rule to apply. A similar change 
was made to the rule VP ~ V L ink  PP ,  except that 
the link was required to have the value of either 0 or 1. 
Experimental Results 
We have achieved encouraging results both in detection 
of break indices and in their use in parsing. The au- 
tomatic detection algorithm yields break labels having 
a high correlation with hand-labeled ata for the vari- 
ous algorithms described. In addition, when we chose a 
subset (14) of these sentences exhibiting prepositional 
phrase attachment ambiguities or preposition/particle 
ambiguities, we found that the incorporation of the 
prosodic information in the Sl:tI grammar esulted in a 
reduction of about 25% in the number of parses, without 
ruling out any correct parses. For sentences to which the 
prosodic constraints on the rules actually applied, the 
decrease in number of parses was about 50%. In many 
cases the use of prosodic information allowed the parser 
to correctly identify a unique parse. Below we describe 
the results in more detail. 
Corpus 
The first corpus we examined consisted of a collection 
of phonetically ambiguous, structurally different pairs 
of sentences. The sentence pairs were read by three 
female professional radio announcers in disambiguating 
contexts. In order to discourage unnatural exaggerations 
Correlation with Hand Labels 
Speaker SD super. SD unsup. SI unsup. 
F1A 0.89 0.88 0.89 
F2B 0.86 0.87 \] 0.85 
Table 1: Average correlation between automatically a- 
beled break indices and hand-labeled break indices, us- 
ing different methods of training. SD,SI = speaker- 
(in)dependent; super. = supervised training with hand- 
labeled data; unsup. = unsupervised training. 
of any differences between the sentences, the materials 
were recorded in different sessions with several days in 
between. In each session only one sentence of each pair 
occurred. Seven types of structural ambiguity were in- 
vestigated: parentheticals, apposition, main-main versus 
main-subordinate clauses, tags, near versus far attach- 
ment, left versus right attachment, and particles versus 
prepositions. Each type of ambiguity was represented by 
five pairs of sentences. 
Detection Algorithm 
In finding break indices for the ambiguous sentence pairs, 
the seventy sentences were concatenated together as 
though the speaker read them as a paragraph. Con- 
catenation allowed the algorithm to avoid initialization 
for every sentence, but since the speaking rate is then 
tracked across several sentences that were not actually 
read in connection, there was probably some error as- 
sociated with estimating the speaking rate factor. The 
HMM was used to generate break indices, and the re- 
sults were evaluated according to how highly correlated 
the automatically generated labels were with the hand- 
labeled data. The correlation reported here is the av- 
erage of the sample correlation for each sentence. The 
experiments yielded good accuracy on the detected break 
labels, but also some important results on unsupervised 
training and speaker-independence. 
In comparing the supervised and unsupervised param- 
eter estimation approaches for the ttMM, we found that 
both yielded break indices with similar correlation to the 
hand labeled indices (Table 1). In addition, the indices 
obtained using the two training approaches were very 
highly correlated with each other (> 0.92). This is a 
very important result, because it suggests that we may 
be able to automatically estimate models without requir- 
ing hand-labeled ata. Results for speaker-dependent 
training on two speakers are summarized in Table 1. 
For the moment, we are mainly interested in detect- 
ing major phrase breaks (4-6) and not the confusions 
between these levels, since the parser uses major breaks 
as constraints on grammar ules. Using supervised pa- 
rameter estimation, the false rejection/false acceptance 
rates are 14%/3% for speaker F1A and 21%/6% for 
speaker F2B. The unsupervised parameter estimation 
algorithm has a bias towards more false rejections and 
29 
fewer false acceptances. The most important confusions 
were between minor phrase breaks (2,3) and intonational 
phrases (4). Since a boundary tone is an important cue 
to an intonational phrase, we expect performance to im- 
prove significantly when intonation is included as a fea- 
ture. 
In the experiments comparing supervised to unsuper- 
vised training, speaker-dependent phone means and vari- 
ances were estimated from the same data used to train 
the HMM as well as to evaluate the correlation, because 
of the limited amount of speaker-dependent data avail- 
able. Though the speaker-dependent experiments were 
optimistic in that they involved testing on the training 
data, the results are meaningful in the sense that other 
speaker-independent experiments howed the parame- 
ters were robust with respect to a change in speakers. 
Using unsupervised training with two speakers to esti- 
mate both HMM parameters and duration means and 
variances for normalization for a different speaker, the 
correlation of the resulting automatically detected break 
indices with the hand-labeled indices was close to the 
speaker-dependent case (Table 1). Also, the speaker- 
dependent predictions and speaker-independent predic- 
tions were highly correlated with each other (0.96). We 
conclude that, at least for these radio news announcers, 
the algorithm seems to be somewhat robust with respect 
to different speakers. Of course, the news announcers 
had similar reading styles, and the hand-labeled ata 
for two speakers had a correlation of 0.94. 
Overall, the HMM provided improvement over the pre- 
viously reported algorithm, with a correlation of 0.90 
compared to 0.86 for six levels. On the other hand, there 
was a small reduction in the correlation when using seven 
levels of breaks (0.87) compared to six levels (0.90). 
Use  in  Pars ing  
A subset of 14 sentences with preposition ambiguities 
was chosen for evaluating the integration of the break 
indices in the parser. We evaluated the results by com- 
paring the number of parses obtained with and with- 
out the prosodic constraints on the grammar ules, and 
noted the differences in parse times. On average, the in- 
corporation of prosody resulted in a reduction of about 
25% in the number of parses found, with an average in- 
crease in parse times of 37%. The fact that parse times 
increase is due to the way in which prosodic information 
is incorporated. The parser does a certain amount of 
work for each word, and the effect of adding break in- 
dices to the sentence is essentially to double the number 
of words that the parser must process. It may be pos- 
sible to optimize the parser to significantly reduce this 
overhead. 
The sentences were divided into those to which the 
additional constraints would apply (type 'a') and those 
about which the constraints had nothing to say (type 
'b'). Essentially the constraints block attachment if
there is too large a break index between a noun and 
a following prepositional phrase or between a verb and 
Sentence Humans 
% correct 
la 81 
2a 94 
3a 94 
4a 87 
5a 100 
6a 56 
7a 100 
TOTAL 87 
Number of Parses Parse Time 
No With No With 
Pros. Pros. Pros. Pros. 
10 4 5.3 5.3 
10 7 3.6 4.3 
2 1 2.3 2.7 
2 1 3.2 4.7 
2 1 1.7 2.5 
2 1 2.5 2.8 
2 1 0.8 1.3 
30 16 19.4 23.6 
Table 2: Sample of sentences to which the added con- 
straints applied. Parse times are in seconds 
a following particle. Thus the 'a' sentences had more 
major prosodic breaks at the sites in question than did 
the 'b' sentences. 
The results, shown in Tables 2 and 3, indicate that 
for the 'a' sentences the number of parses was reduced, 
in many cases to a unique parse. The 'b' sentences, as 
expected, showed no change in the number of parses. No 
correct parses were eliminated through the incorporation 
of prosodic information. 
This corpus was also used in perceptual experiments 
to determine which types of syntactic structures humans 
could disambiguate using prosody. It is interesting to 
note that in many cases, sentences which were automat- 
ically disambiguated using the added constraints were 
also reliably disambiguated by humans. The fact that 
the perceptual results and parsing results are not more 
correlated than they are may be due to the fact that 
humans use other prosodic cues such as prominence, in 
addition to duration, for disambiguation. 
Discuss ion 
We are encouraged by these initial results and believe 
that we have found a promising and novel approach for 
Sentence Humans 
% correct 
lb 61 
2b 81 
3b 75 
4b 94 
5b 100 
6b 78 
7b 100 
TOTAL 84 
Number of parses Parse Time 
No With No With 
Pros. Pros. Pros. Pros. 
10 10 5.3 7.7 
10 10 3.6 4.O 
2 2 2.3 3.7 
2 2 3.2 5.5 
2 2 1.6 2.9 
2 2 2.5 4.1 
2 2 O.8 1.5 
30 30 19.3 29.4 
Table 3: Sample of sentences to which the added con- 
straints did not apply. Parse times are in seconds. 
3O 
incorporating prosodic information into a natural lan- \[7\] 
guage processing system. The break index representa- 
tion of prosodic phrase levels is a useful formalism which 
can be fairly reliably detected and can be incorporated 
into a parser to rule out prosodically inconsistent syn- 
tactic hypotheses. \[8\] 
The results reported here represent only a small study 
of integrating prosody and parsing, and there are many 
directions in which we hope to extend the work. In de- \[9\] 
tection, integrating duration and intonation cues offers 
the potential for a significant decrease in the false re- 
jection rate of major phrase boundaries, and previous 
work by Butzberger on boundary tone detection \[4\] pro- \[10\] 
vides a mechanism for incorporating intonation. As for 
integration with the parser, investigation of other types 
of structural ambiguity should lead to similar improve- 
ments in the reduction of the number of parses. Finally, \[11\] 
we hope to verify and extend these results by considering 
a larger database of speech and as well as the prosody of 
nonprofessional speakers. We are already evaluating the 
techniques on the ATIS database. \[12\] 
Acknowledgements  
The authors gratefully acknowledge the help and advice \[13\] 
from Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, forher role in defining 
the prosodic break representation, and from Hy Murveit, 
for his assistance in generating the phone alignments. \[14\] 
This research was jointly funded by NSF and DARPA 
under NSF grant number IRI-8905249, and in part by 
DARPA under the Office of Naval Research contract 
N00014-85-C-0013. \[15\] 
References  
\[1\] H. Alshawi, D. M. Carter, J. van Eijck, R. C. Moore, 
D. B. Moran, F. C. N. Pereira, S. G. Pulman and 
A. G. Smith (1988) Research Programme in Natu- 
ral Language Processing: July 1988 Annual Report, 
SRI International Technical Note, Cambridge, Eng- 
land. 
\[2\] J. Bear and P. J. Price (1990) "Prosody, Syntax and 
Parsing," Proceedings of the ACL Conference. 
\[3\] M. Beckman and J. Pierrehumbert (1986) "Intona- 
tional Structure in Japanese and English," Phonol- 
ogy Yearbook 3, ed. J. Ohala, pp. 255-309. 
\[4\] J. Sutzberger (1990) Statistical Methods for Anal- 
ysis and Recognition of Intonation Patterns in 
Speech, M.S. Thesis, Boston University. 
\[5\] J. Gaitenby (1965) "The Elastic Word," Status Re- 
port on Speech Research SR-2, Haskins Laborato- 
ries, New Haven, CT, 1-12. 
\[6\] J. P. Gee and F. Grosjean (1983) "Performance 
Structures: A Psycholinguistic and Linguistic Ap- 
praisal," Cognitive Psychology, Vol. 15, pp. 411-458. 
\[16\] 
\[17\] 
\[18\] 
J. Harrington and A. Johnstone (1987) "The Effects 
of Word Boundary Ambiguity in Continuous Speech 
Recognition," Proc. of X I  Int. Congr. Phonetic Sci- 
ences, Tallin, Estonia, Se 45.5.1-4. 
D. Klatt (1975) "Vowel Lengthening is Syntactically 
Determined in a Connected Discourse," J. Phonet- 
ics 3, 129-140. 
M. Y. Liberman and A. S. Prince (1977) "On Stress 
and Linguistic Rhythm," Linguistic Inquiry 8,249- 
336. 
D. R. Ladd, (1986) "Intonational Phrasing: the 
Case for Recursive Prosodic Structure," Phonology 
Yearbook, 3:311-340. 
P. Price, M. Ostendorf and C. Wightman (1989) 
"Prosody and Parsing," in Proc. Second DATIPA 
Workshop on Speech and Natural Language, Octo- 
ber 1989, pp.5-11. 
E. Selkirk (1980) "The Role of Prosodic Categories 
in English Word Stress," Linguistic Inquiry, Vol. 11, 
pp. 563-605. 
E. Selkirk (1984) Phonology and Syntax: The Rela- 
tion between Sound and Structure, Cambridge, MA, 
MIT Press. 
M. Steedman (1989) "Intonation and Syntax in Spo- 
ken Language Systems," presented at the BBN Nat- 
ural Language Symposium. 
L. Streeter, "Acoustic Determinants of Phrase 
Boundary Perception," Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, Vol. 64, No. 6, pp. 1582-1592 
(1978). 
J. Vaissiere (1983) "Language-Independent 
Prosodic Features," in Prosody: Models and Mea- 
surements, ed. A. Cutler and D. R. Ladd, pp. 53-66, 
Springer-Verlag. 
M. Weintraub, H. Murveit, M. Cohen, P. Price, 
J. Bernstein, G. Baldwin and D. Bell (1989) "Lin- 
guistic Constraints in Hidden Markov Model Based 
Speech Recognition," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, pages 699-702, 
Glasgow, Scotland. 
A. Zwicky (1970) "Auxiliary Reduction in English," 
Linguistic Inquiry, Vol. 1,323-336. 
31 
