Evaluating the Use of Prosodic Information 
in Speech Recognition and Understanding 
Mari Ostendorf Patti Price 
Boston University SRI International 
Objective: 
The goal of this project is to investigate the use of different levels of prosodic information in 
speech recognition and understanding. In particular, the current focus of the work is the use of 
prosodic phrase boundary information in parsing. The research involves determining a repre- 
sentation of prosodic information suitable for use in a speech understanding system, developing 
reliable algorithms for detection of the prosodic cues in speech, investigating architectures for 
integrating prosodic ues in a parser, and evaluating the potential improvements of prosody in 
the context of the SRI Spoken Language System. This research is sponsored jointly by DARPA 
and NSF. 
Summary of Accomplishments: 
Developed algorithms for the automatic detection of breaths and silences; the initial breath 
detection algorithm missed only 7% of all breaths with one insertion in 6 minutes of 
speech. 
Implemented and evaluated several methods for automatically detecting prosodic break 
indices based on relative duration; the current algorithm has a con'elation coefficient of 
0.85 with the labels produced by expert listeners and can handle changes in speech rate 
within a sentence. 
Integrated the prosodic information with the SRI natural language component by modifying 
the grammar to use the indices to rule our prosodically inconsistent syntactic hypotheses; 
this integration reduces the number of syntactic parses by about 25% and yields a unique 
parse for many otherwise ambiguous sentences. 
Plans: 
Evaluate the break index detection algorithms in a speaker-independent context, and on 
new corpora, such as paragraphs of speech (as opposed to sentences) and spontaneous 
speech. 
? Improve the break index algorithms by combining different acoustic ues, including as 
duration, intonation and pauses/breaths. 
? Develop a scoring algorithm for ranking parses according to the correlation of prosodic 
and syntactic information. 
408 
