Real-Time Speech Recognition Systems 
Hy Murveit and Mitch Weintraub 
SRI International 
Objective: 
SRI and U.C. Berkeley have begun a cooperative ffort 
to develop a new architecture for real-time implemen- 
tation of spoken language systems (SLS). Our goal is to 
develop fast speech recognition algorithms, and support- 
ing hardware capable of recognizing continuous peech 
from a bigram or trigram based 20,000 word vocabulary 
or a 1,000 to 5,000 word SLS systems. 
Recent Accompl ishments 
? We have designed eight special purpose VLSI chips 
for the HMM board, six chips at U.C. Berkeley for 
HMM beam search and viterbi processing, and two 
chips at SRI for interfacing to the grammar board. 
? SRI and U.C. Berkeley have completed simulations 
of each of the special purpose VLSI chips. 
? U.C. Berkeley has completed the fabrication of one 
printed circuit board, for the HMM output proba- 
bility computation. 
? By reimplementing SRI's Natural Language Parser 
from PROLOG to C, SRI was able to decrease the 
parse time by a factor of three. 
? SRI modified SRI's language processing algorithms 
to implement a continuum between SRI's Dynamic 
Grammar Network (DGN) and BBN's N-best algo- 
rithm, to balance the computational load between 
the HMM speech recognizer and the SLS parser. 
? SRI completed the implementation of SRI's 
standard VQ front-end on the Berkeley dual 
TMS320C25 board, and in C. 
? Implemented corrective training to improve recogni- 
tion performance; on the standard training set this 
improves peaker-independent perplexity 60 perfor- 
mance from 6.7% error to 5.1% error, and for a 
larger training set (about 11,000 sentences), im- 
proves speaker-independent recognition from 5.3% 
error to 4.1% error. 
Plans 
? Complete the construction of the current hardware 
design, and develop software tools to support, this 
architecture. 
? Develop a large vocabulary recognizer to fully use 
the capabilities of this design. 
? Design, implement, and evaluate algorithms for 
real-time grammar processing computation. 
? Evaluate the current architecture to determine the 
computational nd algorithmic bottlenecks. 
? Replicate the system and port to a DARPA and 
NASA site. 
425 
