Session 5: Overview of the ATIS System 
David S. Pallett, Chair 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Bldg. 225, Rm A216 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Two Sessions were devoted to introducing the DARPA 
SLS Common Task: the Air Travel Information System 
(ATIS). The first of these (in the late afternoon) provided 
an overview of the ATIS task and presented a summary of 
results reported to NIST in the first of a projected series of 
ATIS benchmark tests, while the second (immediately after 
dinner) served to describe different approaches in im- 
plementing the common task at several sites: BBN, CMU, 
MIT/LCS, SRI and Unisys. The two sessions were filled 
with a sense of excitement and appreciation of the 
precedent-setting nature of these tests, and revealed strong 
differences of opinion over details of implementation f the 
common task and implementation f the test, as well as 
frustration with the limitations on available time and the 
amount of ATIS domain material at the present time. 
The Chairperson oted that in some sense the DARPA 
SLS community has recently been involved in a "construc- 
tion project" - -  building a common task domain that is to 
rely on a common relational (knowledge) database for 
database queries, building a speech corpus that is to be 
used for system development and evaluation, and (perhaps 
most significantly in the context of these sessions) building 
an evaluation methodology for DARPA spoken language 
systems. Such a construction project is not without pres- 
sures of scheduling, various constraints and unknown 
dangers! 
The first paper, presented by Patti Price of SRI, outlined 
some of the issues and rationale behind selection of the air 
travel domain for a DARPA SLS common task. One im- 
portant function of the common task is to serve to limit the 
domain-specific-sub-language for the DARPA spoken lan- 
guage systems. Patti noted that choice of air travel plan- 
ning makes use of data derived from the on-line Official 
Airline Guide put into a relational format. It offers the 
advantages ofhaving been used by "hundreds of thousands 
of people, providing a wide pool of users familiar with the 
domain, and the domain is rich, interesting, and can be 
scaled with the technology" \[1\]. 
Charles Hemphill, the "Wizard" at TI responsible for 
collection of the ATIS Pilot Corpus, next described the 
process of corpus collection at TI. Spontaneous speech 
was collected using a Wizard-of-Oz" simulation. Follow- 
ing collection of the speech, TI developed transcriptions, 
classified the queries, generated reference SQL expres- 
sions, and obtained reference answers, prior to sending the 
corpus to NIST for distribution to the SLS community. 
Charles noted that our collective xperience with the ATIS 
Pilot Corpus has demonstrated that "objective valuation of 
spoken language systems is both possible and beneficial" 
\[2\]. 
Lyn Bates, of BBN, presented a paper describing the 
development of the evaluation methodology proposed for 
spoken language systems and implemented for this meeting 
\[3\]. Boisen et al had outlined such a procedure at the 
October 1989 DARPA Workshop \[4\], and Lyn outlined 
some of the details of the present implementation for the 
ATIS domain. Strengths of the methodology noted in- 
clude: (1) forcing agreement on the meaning of critical 
terms, (2) being objective \[with some caveats\], (3) being 
\[largely\] automated, and (4) extendibility to other domains 
and to account for context-dependency and limited 
dialogue. Weaknesses that have been noted include: (1) 
not distinguishing between "acceptable" answers and "very 
good answers", (2) potentially crediting systems that "over- 
answer" for answers to specific questions (by virtue of 
providing what some have termed "the kitchen sink" in 
response to some questions - -  in the hope that the correct 
answer will be found somewhere in the response), and (3) 
not being able to tell if the right answer was gotten for the 
wrong reason. 
Lynnette Hirschman outlined a proposal for automatic 
evaluation of discourse \[5\]. The proposal, termed "Beyond 
Class A", suggests procedures that might be used to permit 
evaluation of context-dependent queries. To extend the 
present sconng methodology to evaluate context-dependent 
sentences, a "canonical display format" could be defined, 
with reference to this display as an additional input for 
"resynchronization" of the SLS systems by providing "the 
full context". 
Prior to this meeting, NIST had distributed a set of 93 
test ATIS domain queries and received results (more-or- 
less in "canonical answer format") for a total of 7 systems 
from 5 sites. These results had been scored at NIST. In the 
last presentation before dinner, results were distributed by 
NIST for the preliminary scoring of these results \[6\]. Bill 
Fisher reviewed NIST's experience in administering these 
tests. Bill noted some inconsistencies in different sites' 
implementations of the tests, and outlined steps NIST had 
taken to make the scoring software more tolerant of format- 
related errors. Several sites had opined that hree of the test 
queries were ambiguous, and NIST agreed to delete these 3 
from the original test set of 93, leaving a set of 90 "official 
test queries". 
89 
Following the NIST presentation, a break for dinner 
took place. 
REFERENCES 
\[1\] Price, P., Evaluation of Spoken Language Systems: the 
ATIS Domain (in this Proceedings). 
\[2\] Hemphill, C. T., Godfrey, J. J. and Doddington, G. R., 
The ATIS Spoken Language Systems Pilot Corpus (in this 
Proceedings). 
\[3\] Bates, M. and Boisen, S., Developing an Evaluation 
Methodology for Spoken Language Systems (in this 
Proceedings). 
\[4\] Boisen, S. et al, A Proposal for SLS Evaluation in 
Proceedings of the Second DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop (Cape Cod, MA) October, 1989. 
\[5\] Hirschman, L. et al, Beyond Class A: A Proposal for 
Automatic Evaluation of Discourse (in this Proceedings). 
\[6\] Pallett, D. S. et al, DARPA ATIS Test Results: June 
1990 (in this Proceedings). 
90 
