Adaptive Natural Language Processing 
Ralph Weischedel 
BBN Systems and Technologies Corporation 
10 Moulton St. 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
1 Objectives 
Current NLP technology is very weak at understanding ew 
words, novel forms, or input containing errors. The objec- 
tive of this project is a pilot study of several new ideas for the 
automatic adaptation and improvement of natural anguage 
processing (NLP) systems. The effort focuses particularly on 
automatically inferring the meaning of new words in context 
and on developing partial interpretations of language that is 
either fragmentary or beyond the capability of the NLP sys- 
tem to understand. The techniques are being evaluated in 
a message processing domain, such as automatic data base 
update based on articles from The Wall Street Journal on 
corporate takeover bids. 
The NLP system wit use large annotated corpora, such 
as those being developed under the DARPA-funded TREE- 
BANK project at the University of Pennsylvania, to adapt 
by acquiring syntactic and semantic information from the 
annotated examples. Large knowledge bases of common 
facts will contribute to adaptability by providing informa- 
tion necessary for semantic analysis and discourse analysis. 
Statistical language modeling, based on probability estimates 
derived from the large corpora, will provide a means of rank- 
ing alternative interpretations of fragments. 
This pilot study is designed to test the feasibility of such 
a new approach. 
3 
? In a preliminary experiment, we obtained areduction in 
the error rate in predicting part of speech of an unknown 
word by a factor of two, compared to random choice. 
? We found that he probabflistic language model is useful 
in indicating which parses containing an unknown word 
should be used for inferring the new word's properties. 
? We installed and evaluated available software that could 
contribute to this effort, including the Proteus natural 
language system from New York University and the 
SMART information retrieval software from Comell 
University. 
Plans 
? Implement and test procedures for ranking partial in- 
terpretations when the system cannot fully interpret the 
input. 
? Revise probability models and inference strategies to 
improve system performance. 
? Explore automatic methods for learning semantic infor- 
mation of unknown words. 
2 Summary of Accomplishments 
In the three months since this project began, we have run 
pilot experiments on the effectiveness of probability models 
for (1) ranking interpretations of sentences, (2) predicting 
the part of speech of known but ambiguous words, and (3) 
predicting the part of speech of unknown words. Addition- 
ally, we are experimenting with using unification algorithms 
to infer properties of an unknown word from examples. 
In preliminary experiments, we obtained a reduction in 
the error rate in selecting the correct interpretation f a 
sentence by a factor of from two to four, depending on 
the test material. 
Using supervised training for a tri-tag probabilistic 
model, we achieved a 3-5% error rate on a test set 
m picking the correct part of speech. 405 
