Session 12: Speech Recognition II
Jordan Cohen, Chair 
IDA Center for Communication Research 
Thanet Road 
Princeton, NJ 08540 
This session was the final formal meeting, and con- 
tained the "et cetera" papers. These all discussed speech 
recognition algorithms, but these differed from the standard 
HMM's reported uring most of the meeting. Each of 
these papers comes to grips with an aspect of training data, 
uncertainty in the recognition, and number of parameters to
be set. 
In the first paper, Jim Glass sketched some of the 
avenues pursued in the MIT SUMMIT work. They have 
been working on input normalization, different segmental 
representations, and issues in experimental phonetics. The 
auditory model requires careful normalization (acondition 
also explored by IBM in several ICASSP papers), and a 
non-linear adaptive technique was described without 
results. Boundary classification was discussed, and a 
modified metric for computing edges was shown to give 
improved phonetic recognition. In addition, an MLP clas- 
sifter was developed and tested using an augmented bound- 
ary representation. Every time additional information was 
included in the MLP classifier performance improved, but 
overall the best classification was not as good as that 
reported by Phillips in JASA. 
Ron Cole then presented his recent work on spoken al- 
phabet recognition using MLP techniques and a variety of 
acoustical and segmental features. He reported reasonable 
error rates, and success in performing name retrieval from a 
database using spelled input. Secondary networks were 
used to resolve acoustic ambiguity, and were not univer- 
sally successful in this task. Unfortunately Ron did not 
present performance figures on Brown's substantial E-set 
corpus, so it is difficult o calibrate his work with previous 
results. 
Matt Lennig presented a review of the INRS work with 
large vocabulary recognition for isolated English using 
HMM techniques. He outlined the development of trigram 
models, microsegmental models, and duration models in 
the traditional framework. The most important recent 
development was switching from a VQ front end to a mix- 
ture of Gaussians. Performance was in the range of 7% 
word error with the best system using an 86,000 word 
vocabulary. 
The final paper was a presentation by Martin Russell 
reviewing the RSRE results on the Airborne Reconnais- 
sance Task. The speaker dependent task uses HMM tech- 
niques with highly stylized text. The most interesting ob- 
servations from this work were observed variations in per- 
formance as a function of the number of free parameters in 
the model - an obvious peak in performance an be seen at 
40-80 thousand parameters. Martin observes that with 
fewer parameters the system cannot capture the speech 
variability, while with more parameters the training data in 
his corpus is inadequate oset the model. 
These papers taken together were a refreshing look at 
non-ARPA funded speech recognition projects, together 
with a few novel ideas from MIT. The audience was quiet 
and undemanding. 
Charles Wayne ended the session on a positive note, 
remarking that there continued to be progress in speech 
recognition, and that the natural language ffort had passed 
an historic milestone in its quantitative t sts of the tAG 
data. He wished everyone more success in the future. 
379 
