Interactive Multimedia Explanation for 
Equipment Maintenance and Repair 
Kathteen McKeown and Steven Feiner 
Depar tment  o f  Computer  Sc ience 
450 Computer  Sc ience Bu i ld ing  
Co lumbia  Un ivers i ty  
New York ,  N.Y .  10027 
PROJECT GOALS 
We are developing COMET, an interactive system that 
generates multimedia explanations of how to operate, maintain, 
and repair equipment. Our research stresses the dynamic genera- 
tion of the content and form of all material presented, addressing 
issues in the generation of text and graphics, and in coordinating 
text and graphics in an integrated presentation. 
COMET contains a static knowledge base describing objects 
and plans for maintenance and repair, and a dynamic knowledge 
source for diagnosing failures. Explanations are produced using 
a content planner that determines what information should be 
communicated, a media coordinator that determines which infor- 
marion should be realized in graphics and which in text, and 
separate t xt and graphics generators. The graphics and text for a 
single explanation are laid out on the screen by a media layout 
component. A menu interface allows users to request explana- 
tions of specific procedures or to specify failure symptoms that 
will invoke a diagnostic omponent. The diagnostic omponent 
can ask the user to carry out procedures that COMET will explain 
if requested. In contrast o hypermedia systems that present 
previously authored material, COMET has underlying models of 
the user and context hat allow each aspect of the explanation 
generated tobe based on the current situation. 
Our focus in the text generation component has been on the 
development of the Functional Unification Formalism (FFUF) for 
non-syntactic tasks, of a large syntactic grammar in FUF, of 
lexical choice in FUF using constraints from underlying 
knowledge sources and from past discourse, and of models of 
constraints on several classes of word? choice. Important results 
in knowledge-based graphics generation include the automated 
design of 3D technical illustrations that contain nested insets, 
algorithms for and rule-based application of illustrative tech- 
niques such as cutaway views, a design-grid--based methodology 
? for display layout, and development of a testbed for knowledge- 
based animation. 
Finally, we have had significant results in the development of
our media coordinator which, unlike other systems, features a 
common description language that allows a fine-grained division 
of information between text and graphics. The media coordinator 
maps information to media specific resources, and allows infor- 
marion expressed in one media to influence realization in the 
other. This allows for tight integration and coordination between 
different media. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Incorporated user model constraints on word selection in 
order to use words appropriate ouser's vocabulary level. 
This includes both word substitution and replanning of 
sentence content when there is no word that can be sub- 
stituted for unknown word (e.g., "Check the polarity." is 
replaced by "Make sure the plus lines up with the plus.") 
? Completed sentence-picture coordination, allowing longer 
sentences to be broken into shorter ones that can 
separately accompany each generated picture when neces- 
sal T . 
? Added all m&r procedures for the radio from the manual 
to the knowledge base and augmented the lexicon to in- 
elude new words for the procedures. 
? Continued implementation of cross-references between 
text and graphics, including query facilities for the 
graphics representation that allow the text generator to 
determine where and how an object is displayed, use of 
these facilities along with the underlying knowledge base 
to construct cross-references ( .g., "The battery is shown 
in the cutaway view of the radio."), and development of a 
lexicon for such cross-references. 
? Extended the graphics generator to support the main- 
tenanee of visibility constraints through a set of illustra- 
tive techniques modeled after those used by technical 
illustrators. These involve detecting objects that obscure 
those that must remain visible and rendering the obscur- 
ing objects using transparency, cutaway views, and 
"ghosting" effects. The effects are invoked automati- 
cally as the graphics generator designs its illustrations. 
? Developed facilities for dynamic llustrations that are in- 
erementally redesigned to allow users to explore the 
generated pictures by choosing viewpoints different from 
those selected by the system. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
We plan to finish implementation f cross references between 
text and graphics, to increase the ways in which the user model 
can influence lexical choice, and to incorporate all extensions as 
part of our demo system. Following that, we will move to a new 
contract, where we will begin work on identifying usage con- 
straints on a variety of lexical classes through automatic and 
manual examination of large text corpora. 
413 
