SESSION 1: SPEECH AND NATURAL LANGUAGE 
EFFORTS IN THE U. S. AND ABROAD 
Mark Y. Liberman, University of Pennsylvania 
Patti Price, SRI International 
We see two purposes for this first session: increased communi- 
cations among research communities in some danger of drifting 
apart, and a comparison of alternative goals and organizational 
structures for such communities. Obviously, a single hour-long 
session is no more than a symbolic gesture in this direction, even 
ff the time had not been truncated further by schedule overruns 
pressing against an inflexible dinner hour, but we feel that the 
symbol was nevertheless a worthwhile and important one. 
Recently, programs of research in speech and natural language 
have been increasing in number and size all around the world. At 
the same time, workshops like those sponsored by DARPA have 
become increasingly important, as research communities develop 
around the thrust of each funding agency's program. Inevitably, 
increasing cohesion within these communities raises the possibil- 
ity of fragmentation among them, especially since the sheer num- 
ber and complexity of new efforts make it hard to stay informed 
about everything. 
We have the impression that many researchers in the DARPA 
community have an increasing number of blank spots for over- 
seas research projects, even for major efforts like ESPRIT SUN- 
DIAL, or EDRI in Japan, or the German ASL project. So far, 
there does not seem to be much divergence in the underlying 
technologies, except that the communications channel for techni- 
cal details is narrower and slower across the oceans than it is 
within each of the three major communities. However, there is an 
increasing divergence in goals. 
For instance, the European efforts ee spoken dialogue systems 
as involving natural language generation and speech synthesis, as 
well as speech recognition and natural language understanding, 
while the DARPA community has generally seen the problem as 
"speech in, something else out;" thus there is tittle American 
effort on generation, and less on speech synthesis. Another 
example is a lively European interest, mentioned by several of 
the panelists in this session, in "multimodal dialogue; systems," a 
fascinating concept whose future seems likely to be more con- 
cretely elaborated than its present. An important difference in 
focus is that all the European efforts are multilingual in essence 
and by necessity, while most American work is on English only. 
In addition, the European, Japanese and American communi- 
ties have developed different styles and approaches in organizing 
large research projects, at least in the speech and natural an- 
guage area. For instance, the Europeans have emphasized coop- 
eration among laboratories in developing common modules that 
fit together into a single overall system, in contrast to the main 
DARPA pattern of encouraging researchers toengage in a quan- 
titatively-scored competition on a well-defined common task. 
The European projects also tend to stress university-industry 
cooperation i projects aimed at particular commercial pplica- 
tions, rather than pushing competitive technology development 
as motivated by military goals, with possible civilian commer- 
cialization left to market forces. 
Overall, these divergences seem quite healthy. It would be a 
bad thing if all researchers around the world were working on 
exactly the same problems in exactly the same way for exactly 
the same reasons. However, it is possible for these differences in
goals and modes of organization tocreate organizational and cul- 
tural barriers that make the transfer of ideas increasingly slower 
and more difficult across community boundaries. It is fikely that 
a freer trade in ideas leads to faster technical advances and to 
ultimate benefits for everyone. We appreciate he participation f
our European colleagues in this workshop, and we strongly 
encourage continued invitations to prominent European and Jap- 
anese researchers. 
The panefists included: Louis Boves, Nijmegen University, 
Netherlands; Rolf Carlson, Royal Institute of Technology, Stock- 
holm, Sweden; Jeremy Peckham, Logica Cambridge LTD, Cam- 
bridge, England; Keith Ponting, Royal Signals & Radar 
Establishment, Malvern, England; Christel Sorin, CNET, Lan- 
nion, France; Wolfgang Wahlster, German Research Center for 
AI, Saarbruecken, Germany; and Susan Warwick-Armstrong, 
University of Geneva, Switzerland. Unfortunately, Sadaoki Furui 
of NTr in Japan was unable to attend ue to travel restrictions, 
and we were unable to benefit from an overview of the vast 
amount of speech and natural anguage research and develop- 
merit being undertaken i  Japan. Due to time constraints, the 
planned iscussion period did not occur; we apologize to the pan- 
elists. We greatly appreciate he participation i  this workshop of 
all our foreign guests, and thank them for their participation i
many informal discussions, which, though not documented in
this proceedings, form an important component of the workshop. 
Peckham described similarities and differences between the 
ESPRIT program and the DARPA program, concentrating onthe 
Sundial project, of which he is the project director. He stressed 
several of the general points made above, while observing that 
the underlying technologies remain very close indeed. His paper 
in this volume provides an overview of the SUNDIAL project, 
which includes an interactive flight reservation application in 
French and in English. This application has notable similarities 
to ATIS, while providing acomplementary approach (more focus 
on dialogue, on the interactive system, and on expert, as opposed 
to naive, users). 
Wolfgang Wahlster, of the DFKI in Saarbruecken, discussed 
speech and natural language research in Germany. All European 
countries have their own locally-funded research programs, in 
addition to EEC-wide efforts uch as ESPRIT, but Germany has a 
particularly large amount of such work. For instance, the German 
Ministry for Research and Technology is putting 15 million DM 
per year into "Verbmobil", aproject o develop speech-to-speech 
translation in the context of multimodal interaction. This is only 
one of several specific projects or basic research programs of 
three to six years each, which cover a range of topics including: 
syntax and semantics, multi-modal access to expert systems, bi- 
directional NL models (generation and understanding), models 
of uncooperative dialogue, prosody, and the integration of speech 
recognition and natural language understanding. 
Susan Warwick-Armstrong, of ISSCO at the University of 
Geneva, discussed European efforts in machine translation, and 
especially the various Eurotra projects. She stressed the eco- 
nomic, cultural and political centrality in Europe of multi-lingual 
projects in general, and of translation i  particular, and the level 
of on-going commitment tomaking progress in this area. Appli- 
cations of the research, in addition to machine translation, 
include multilingual abstracting and indexing, document genera- 
tion, computer aided instruction and training. A corresponding 
paper is included in tMs volume. 
Finally, Christel Sorin, of CNET in Lannion, described speech 
research in France. She stressed the French interest in high-qual- 
ity text-to-speech synthesis as an important component ofspeech 
technology, and also their interest in multimodal dialogue sys- 
tems. She also pointed out that some years ago French research- 
ers collaborated to produce a rather large speech database for 
research, but that little use has been made of it yet, compared to 
the crucial role of speech databases in common task definition for 
the DARPA community. She stressed that this is an area where 
they intend to follow the American example in the future, 
observing that hey had been ahead in forming the idea of gather- 
ing such data, but behind in making efficient use of the data once 
gathered. 
In addition to the communications mentioned above, this volume 
contains additional related papers: a summary of the ESPRIT 
project Polyglot, by Louis Boves; an overview of research and 
development a KTH in Stockholm, by Rolf Carlson; and a general 
overview of ESPRIT. 
As outlined in the paper by Boves, the ESPRIT project POLY- 
GLOT aims to develop multi-lingual speech-to-text and text-to- 
speech in a number of prototype applications, including dictation, 
office automation and teaching aids. The project includes compo- 
nents focussed on (1) speaker-adaptive solated word recognition 
for very large vocabularies, (2) continuous speech recognition for 
mid-sized vocabularies (1000-5000 words), and (3) text-to-speech 
conversion 
The paper by Roll Carlson describes the research and develop- 
ment effort at the Department ofSpeech Communication a d Music 
Acoustics of the Royal Institute of Technology, focussing on the 
speech effort. These activities include the study of individual 
speaker characteristics, peaking styles, text-to-speech synthesis, 
knowledge-based recognition for large vocabularies, voice source 
characteristics (including modeling of speech production for recog- 
nition), and artificial neural networks for speech recognition. Appli- 
cations efforts have been aimed at air traffic control, the process 
industry, devices for the disabled, and mobile telephony. 
With the help of Patrick Van Hove, of the ESPRIT program, we 
have compiled a complete list of the various ESPRIT projects, 
including contact points for each. Surveying the list should make it 
clear that there is a good deal of activity in Europe that is very sim- 
ilar in aims and in methods to the DARPA program. It is also clear 
that there are differences in focus, most notably a stronger focus on 
multi-lingual work in Europe compared to the US. We hope this 
compilation will serve as a reference for US researchers and as a 
means for initiating future trans-Atiantic communication. We hope 
that European and Japanese researchers will continue to be invited 
to these workshops, and that more American researchers will be 
invited to comparable gatherings overseas. 
