Microphone-Array Systems for Speech Recognition Input 
Harvey  F. S i l verman 
Laboratory for Engineering Man/Machine Systems (LEMS) 
Division of Engineering 
Brown University 
Providence, RI 02912 
Ob ject ive  
An understanding of algorithmic and engineering tech- 
niques for the construction of a high-quality micro- 
phone array system for speech input to machines i the 
goal of this project; it implicitly assumes that wearing 
a head-mounted microphone, or sitting at a fixed lo- 
cation in front of a table microphone is most often an 
unacceptable imposition for a user of a speech recog- 
nizer. Rather, the array system should electronically 
track a particular talker in a small room having other 
talkers and noise sources and should provide a signal 
of quality comparable to that of the head-mounted mi- 
crophone. In particular,the project is focused on the 
measurement of small-room acoustic properties and 
the derivation of underlying mathematical lgorithms 
for the acoustic field, for talker tracking and character- 
ization, for array layout, correlated and uncorrelated 
noise elimination, and for beamforming. Simultane- 
ously, digital array systems are being designed, built, 
and used. 
Approach 
The current approach is one in which many of the 
issues for these systems are being investigated sim- 
ulataneously. We are using our version 2 system to 
gather real data for both online and offiine experi- 
mentation with beamforming, location, tracking, and 
"talker elimination" algorithms. At the same time, 
new one- and two-dimensional rrays are in design, 
allowing us to gather data from larger numbers of 
microphones. Through the use of a sound-field mea- 
surement robot, which is now operational, the diffi- 
cult acoustics properties of the small room are being 
measured and appropriate real models are being for- 
mulated. Ultimately, these models will lead to algo- 
rithms which, implemented in real-time, will give us a 
robust and useful speech recognition input system. 
Recent  Accompl i shments  
The last eight-month period has seen a 100% upgrade 
in our experimental facility. New (reliable) hardware 
for an eight microphone linear array system has been 
completed and installed. Using this, long intervals -
say about 10 seconds (10 x 8 mikes x 40,000 bytes/sec 
= 3.2Mbytes) - may now be recorded for offiine algo- 
rithm experimentation. I  addition, a room-size robot 
has been completed which allows the accurate place- 
ment of sources, as well as the taking of acoustic mea- 
surements. We are now in the process of measuring 
and understanding our environment. Also, an algo- 
rithm for the separation of talkers - elimination of 
an intrusive talker - has been proposed and investi- 
gated. To date, the algorithm works perfectly on real 
speech in a simulated environment, although it fails 
pretty badly for real speech taken from our real en- 
vironment. We are on the learning curve and should 
have some explanations for this soon. 
P lans  for the Coming  In terva l  
Continue to measure the properties of the room, 
transducers, and electronics using the sound- 
field robot so that models for various algorithms 
may be designed. 
Continue the implementation f new electronics 
for a 128-microphone multiple 1-D or 2-D sys- 
tem. This will allow isolation of a volume in 
space as well as give insight into the reverbera- 
tion problem for the 2-D system. 
Continue the development of better algorithms 
for location, tracking, beamforming, and talker 
elimination. 
Develop simple mechanisms, (filtering etc.) for 
the current real-time array for cleaning the sig- 
nal for recognition. Use these to take data for 
training and testing our talker-independent, HMM 
alphadigit recognizer, comparing performance to
the head-mounted microphone input case. 
Continue to use and gain understanding into the 
SRC nonlinear minimization algorithm. 
410 
