The Penman Natural Language Project 
Systemics -Based  Mach ine  Trans la t ion  
Eduard Hovy 
Information Sciences Institute of USC 
4676 Admiralty Way 
Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
OBJECTIVE 
The development of an integrated knowledge- 
based machine-aided translation system based 
on Systemic Linguistics. Parts of the system 
are to function as modules to be incorporated 
in the MAT system being codeveloped with 
CMU and CRL. Our work involves the enhance- 
ment of Penman's existing parsing technology 
to match the level of the language generation 
system; the development of ancillary knowledge 
sources and software (such as bilingual lexicons 
and interlingua/transfer st uctures); the main- 
tenance and continued istribution of the sen- 
tence generator; and the embedding of all these 
parts into the joint system. 
PROGRESS AND RECENT ACCOMPLISH- 
MENTS 
The past few months saw the beginning of a 
new three-year collaboration i  Machine-Aided 
Translation with CMU and CRL. 
We have held the first meeting to discuss 
questions of evaluation, representational Inter- 
lingua, protocols for communication between 
modules developed at the three sites, etc. Work 
on the German grammar is continuing (at our 
German partner institution) and an early ver- 
sion will be incorporated into the system next 
month. Work is underway to implement the 
prototype parser to full-fledged form. The 
parser is being applied, debugged, and tested 
on increasingly arger portions of the grammar. 
Since it uses classification i stead of unification 
as the primary inference mechanism, the parser 
required that the Loom knowledge representa- 
tion language be given the ability to perform 
classificatory inference over disjunction. This 
has been completed. In addition, Loom's facil- 
ity to manage alternative worlds has been com- 
pleted and is being used for the treatment of 
ambiguity. 
In addition, we are hosting Dr. Kenneth Church 
of AT&T Bell Laboratories this year. He has 
completed the first phase in a project to au- 
tomatically construct large multilingual dictio- 
naries from parallel multilingual texts, using 
trilingual banking texts from Switzerland and 
the bilingual Canadian Parliamentary Hansard. 
Aspects of this work is reported in this Proceed- 
ings. 
Under separate funding, members of the project 
have also been involved in the development of
a new text planner (based on Rhetorical Struc- 
ture Theory and extensions) to plan out coher- 
ent multisentence t xts. Several visitors from 
Europe are participating in this project. 
The maintenance and distribution of the Pen- 
man sentence generator continues. The system 
incorporates one of the most extensive compu- 
tational grammars of English for generation i  
the world, being the result of over 25 person- 
years' effort. Penman has been adapted to 
MacIntosh-II, Sun 3, TI Explorer and Symbol- 
ics computers, and has been distributed to over 
50 research sites in the US, Europe, Canada, 
and Australia. 
432 
