SPOKEN-LANGUAGE RESEARCH AT CARNEGIE MELLON 
Raj Reddy, Principal Investigator 
School  o f  Computer  Science 
Carnegie Mel lon Univers i ty 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of speech research at Carnegie Mellon continues to 
be the development of spoken language systems that effectively 
integrate speech processing into the human-computer interface in 
a way that facilitates the use of computers in the performance of
practical tasks. Component technologites are being developed in 
the context of spoken language systems in two domains: the 
DARPA-standard ATIS travel planning task, and CMU's office 
management task. Research in spoken language is currently 
focussed in the following areas: 
? Improved speech recognition technologies. Research is 
directed toward increasing the useful vocabulary of the speech 
recognizer, using better subword models and vocabulary- 
independent recognition techniques, providing for rapid con- 
figuration for new tasks. 
? Fluent human/machine interfaces. The goal of reserach in 
the spoken language interface is the development of an under- 
standing of how people interact by voice with computer sys- 
tems. Specific development systems such as the Office 
Manager are used to study this interaction. 
? Understanding spontaneous poken language. Actual 
spoken language is ill-formed with respect to grammar, syntax, 
and semantics. We are analyzing many types of spontaneous 
speech phenomena and developing appropriate syntactic and 
semantic representations of language that enable spontaneous 
speech to be understood ina robust fashion. 
? Dialog modeling. This goal of this research is to identify 
invariant properties of spontaneous spoken dialog at both the 
utterance and dialog level, and to apply constraints based on 
dialog, semantic, and pragmantic knowledge to enhance speech 
recognition. These knowledge sources can also be used to 
learn new vocabulary items incrementally. 
? Acoustical and environmental robustness. The goal of this 
work is to make speech recognition robust with respect o 
variability in acoustical ambience and choice of microphone, 
so that recognition accuracy using desk-top or bezel-mounted 
microphones in office environments will become comparable 
to performance using close-talking microphones. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Incorporation of semi-continuous HMMs and speaker adap- 
tation has produced speaker-adaptive recognition performance 
that is comparable to speaker-dependent performance r ported 
previously by other sites. Speaker-adaptation algorithms using 
neural networks have also been developed with encouraging 
preliminary r~ults. 
? A vocabulary-independent speech recognition system has been 
developed. Improvements including the use of second order 
cepstra, between-word triphones and decision-tree clustering 
have produced a level of vocabulary-independent p rformance 
that is better than the corresponding vocabulary-dependent p r-
formance. 
? A dynamic recognition-knowledge base has been incorporated 
into the Office Manager system, as well as models of noise 
phenomena. The natural anguage and situational knowledge 
capabilities of the system have also been extended. 
? The ATIS system has been augmented by incorporating the 
use of padded bigrams and models for non-lexical events, 
providing for increased coverage at reduced perplexity. These 
changes have produced major improvements in accuracy using 
both speech and transcripts of ATIS dialogs as input. 
? Six principles of dialog that characterize spontaneous speech 
at the pragmatic and semantic levels were identified. Al- 
gorithms were developed to invoke these principles at the 
utterance l vels to constrain the search space for speech input 
and transcripts of ATIS dialogs. 
? Pre-processing algorithms that normalize cepstral coefficients 
to compensate for additive noise and spectral tilt have been 
made more efficient. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? We will continue to investigate neural-network-based peaker 
nonnalization and its application to speaker-independent 
speech recognitiorL 
.The vocabulary-independent system will be improved by 
refinements in decision-tree clustering, pruning strategies, and 
selection of contextual questions. Non-intrusive task and en- 
vironmental normalization will be introduced. 
? We will continue refining the Office Manager system and 
begin using it as a testbed for the development of error repair 
strategies and intelligent interaction management. 
? The constraints imposed by dialog models will be extended to 
allow more dialog and pragmatic knowledge to be used by the 
ATIS system in the understanding process. The ATIS system 
will be improved by the addition of out-of-vocabulary models 
and an improved rejection capability and user interface. 
? Dialog-level knowledge will be applied to incremental word 
learning. 
? Passive nvironmental adaptation will be incorporated into the 
speech recognizer in the Portable Speech Library. We will 
measure the extent to which processing using multiple 
microphones and physiologically-motivated front ends comple- 
ments the robustness provided by acoustical pre-processing. 
411 
