Robust Speech Recognition Technology 
Program Summary 
Cl i f fo rd  J .  We ins te in  and  Doug las  B .  Pau l ,  P r inc ipa l  Invest igators  
Lincoln Laboratory,  M.I .T.  
Lexington, MA 02173-9108 
Program Goals 
The major objective of this program is to de- 
velop and demonstrate robust, high-performance on- 
tinuous speech recognizer (CSR) techniques and sys- 
tems focused on application in spoken language sys- 
tems (SLS). A key supporting objective is to de- 
velop techniques for integration of CSR and natural 
language processing (NLP) systems in SLS applica- 
tions. The CSR techniques are based on a continuous- 
observation Hidden Markov Model (HMM) approach. 
Efforts are focused on improved HMM training and 
recognition for high performance and robustness in 
advanced SLS environments which include variabil- 
ities due to spontaneous speech, noise, and task- 
induced stress. Robustness i also being addressed 
through a new effort in comparison and development 
of auditory model front ends for HMM recognizers. 
The effort in CSR/NLP integration is focused on de- 
velopment of a structured CSR/NLP interface, which 
will allow effective collaboration with and between 
other groups developing NLP and/or CSR systems. 
Background 
The Lincoln program began with a focus on 
improving speaker stress robustness for the fighter 
aircraft environment. A robust HMM isolated- 
word recognition (IWR) system was developed with 
99% accuracy under stress conditions, representing 
more than an order-of-magnitude r duction in er- 
ror rate relative to a baseline HMM system. A 
robust CSR system was then developed and inte- 
grated into a voice-controlled flight simulator - -  a 
simple, but complete SLS involving a stressing, real- 
time task. The robust HMM recognition system was 
then adapted and extended to large vocabulary CSR. 
This effort has included development of a number 
of new modeling and recognition techniques, includ- 
ing parameter models based on tied Gaussian mix- 
tures, which have resulted in state-of-the-art perfor- 
mance for both speaker-dependent (SD) and speaker- 
independent (SI) recognition on the DARPA Re- 
source Management (RM) database. 
Recent Accomplishments 
Recent accomplishments include: (1) develop- 
ment of a new adaptive training strategy, improved 
semiphone models, and an improved uration model 
for the tied-mixture HMM recognizer; (2) develop- 
ment and application of stochastic bigram backoff 
language models to obtain new results on both the 
resource management (RM) and the Air Travel In- 
formation System (ATIS) tasks; (3) modification of 
the recognizer to work with bigram backoff language 
models; (4) conversion of a version of the HMM CSR 
to use a stack decoder controlled search with stochas- 
tic language models; and (5) development and imple- 
mentation of a structured CSR/NLP interface sys- 
tem, with CSR and NLP simulators, and delivery of 
the interface system software to several other sites in 
the DARPA SLS community. 
Plans 
Plans for the current program include: (1) 
continued development of the tied-mixture HMM 
CSR system, including adaptive training techniques, 
mixture weight smoothing, and improved speaker- 
independent techniques; (2) further development of 
the stack-decoder-based HMM, for integration with 
the CSR/NLP interface system and with NLP sys- 
tems developed at other sites; (3) a comprehensive 
comparison of auditory model front ends in quiet, 
noise, and stress conditions, with the goal of develop- 
ing a more robust front end; and (4) participation in 
the design of a new CSR corpus with larger vocabu- 
lary and higher perplexity than the RM corpus. 
417 
