NATURAL LANGUAGE RESEARCH 
Aravind K. Joshi (PI), Mitch Marcus (Co-PI), 
Mark Steedman (co-PI), and Bonnie Webber (co-PI) 
Department of Computer  and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
PROJECT GOALS 
Our main objective is basic research and system develop- 
ment lea~cling to: (1) characterization f information carried 
by (a) syntax, semantics, and discourse structure, (b) their 
relation to information carried by intonation, and (c) devel- 
opment of methods for using this information for generation 
and understanding; (2) development of architectures for in- 
tegration of utterance planning with lexical, syntactic and 
intonational choice; (3) development of incremental strate- 
gies for using syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic knowledge 
in understanding and generating language; and (4) inves- 
tigating how structural and statistical information can be 
combined, both for processing, as well as for acquisition. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Recently we have developed and implemented a new 
predictive left-to-right parser for tree adjoining gram- 
mars (TAG). This parser does not preserve the so- 
called valid prefix property and thereby ~hieves ef- 
ficiency. A key discovery was that the valid prefix 
property does not necessarily hold for a parser for non- 
context-free grammars, although it holds trivially for 
context-free grammars (CFG). 
? A new shift reduce parser for CFG, based on the 
shared forest approach, was designed and implemented. 
This is the first such parser whose performance can be 
precisely defined. Previous approaches to parsing by 
the use of the shared forest approach by other inves- 
tigators elsewhere have not been successful in giving 
a precise characterization. 
? TAGs are tree-based systems and have a domain of 
locality larger than CFGs. It was always understood 
that a compositional semantics can be defined for a 
TAG based on the object language trees, but there is 
no point in doing this because this approach ignores 
the TAG derivation tree completely. Hence, a formal- 
ism, called synchronous TAG, for integrating syntax 
and semantics using the derivation trees of TAG, was 
developed. This work was carried out in collaboration 
with Stuart Shieber (Harvard University). 
? Categorial theory has been successfully applied to the 
problem of computer synthesis of contextually appro- 
priate intonation in spoken language. 
? Implementation of the theory of tense and aspect us- 
ing an event calculus was initiated. 
? Extension of a formal theory unifying intonational 
structures, discourse information structures and sur- 
face syntactic structures within a categorial frame- 
work to a wide range of coordinate and relativized 
constructions. 
? The distribution of verb phrase ellipses with respect 
to antecedent location as preface to a focus analysis 
of the phenomenon was carried out using the Brown 
corpus. 
? A study of free-adjunct-and purpose clauses was car- 
ried out in a corpus of natural anguage instructions as 
a first step in developing an adequate representational 
formalism for action description in natural anguage. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Complete implementation of the shift reduce parser 
for TAG, based on the shared forest approach. 
? Complete the work on coordination i  TAG and begin 
implementation of this approach in the TAG parser. 
? Implement he synchronous TAG formalism for inte- 
grating syntax and semantics of TAG and develop a 
small maxhine translation system. 
? Begin exploration of statistical techniques for both 
parsing and acquisition of TAGs. 
? Further development of the event calculus implemen- 
tation of tense and aspect. 
? Continue development of the categorial grammar- 
driven theory of computer synthesis of contextually 
appropriate intonation. 
? Develop an algorithm for resolving instances of verb 
phrase ellipses. This algorithm will be focus-based 
and will build up our earlier work on centering which 
was developed for the interpretation of definite noun- 
phrases in discourse. 
429 
