Evaluating Text Categorization I 
David D. Lewis 
Computer  and  In fo rmat ion  Science Dept .  
Un ivers i ty  of  Massachuset ts  
Amhers t ,  MA 01003 
ABSTRACT 
While certain standard procedures are widely used for evalu- 
ating text retrieval systems and algorithms, the sarne is not true 
for text categorization. Omission of important data from reports 
is common and methods of measuring effectiveness vary widely. 
This \]'ms m~de judging the relative merits of techniques for text 
categorization dif~.cult and has disguised important research is- 
sues .  
In this paper I discuss a variety of ways of evaluating the  
effectiveness of text categorization systems, drawing both on re- 
ported categorization experiments and on methods used in eval- 
uating query-driven retrieval. I also consider the extent o which 
the same evaluation methods may be used with systems for text 
extraction, a more complex task. In evaluatlng either kind of 
system, the purpose for which the output is to be used is crucial 
in choosing appropriate valuation methods. 
INTRODUCTION 
Text classification systems, i.e. systems which can make 
distinctions between meaningful classes of texts, have been 
widely studied in information retrieval and natural  anguage 
processing. The major i ty  of information retrieval research 
has been devoted to a part icular form of text classif ication-- 
~ext raft/eva/. Text  retrieval systems find or route texts in 
response to arbitrary user queries or interest profiles. Eval- 
uation has been a focus of research in text retrieval since 
the beginning, and standard evaluation methods are in wide 
use. 
A smaller, but significant, body of  work has examined a 
task variously known as machine-aided indexing, automated 
indexing, authority control, or text categorization. Text cat- 
egorization is the assignment of texts to one or more of a 
pre-existing set of categories, rather than classifying them 
in response to an arbitrary query. Categorization may be 
performed for a wide range of reasons, either as an end in 
itself or as a component of a larger system. 
i Current Address: Center for Information and Language Studies; 
University of Chicago; Chicago, IL 60637; le~ig@tira.uchicago.edu 
The l i terature on text categorization is widely scattered 
and shows l ittle agreement on evaluation methods. This 
makes it very difficult to draw conclusions about the relative 
effectiveness of techniques o that, unlike the situation in 
query-driven retrieval, there is no consensus on a set of basic 
evaluation methods for text categorization. 
In this paper I discuss measures of effectiveness for text 
categorization systems and algorithms. Effectiveness refers 
to the abil ity of a categorization to supply information to 
a system or user that wants to access the texts. Measuring 
effectiveness i just one of several kinds of evaluation that 
should be considered \[Spa81a, CH88, PFg0\]. 
After considering effectiveness evaluation for text cate- 
gorization we will turn to a related task, text  extraction, 
and consider what role the effectiveness measures discussed 
for categorization have there. A common theme is the need 
to consider in an evaluation the purpose for which informa- 
tion is generated from the text. 
I will have occasion in the following to repeatedly refer 
to a chapter by Tague \[Tag81\] in Sparck Jones'  collection on 
information retrieval exper imentat ion \[Spagla\]. This collec- 
tion discusses a wide range of evaluation issues, and is an 
important  resource for anyone interested in the evaluation 
of text-based systems. 
EFFECT IVENESS MEASURES 
While a number of different effectiveness measures have 
been used in evaluating text categorization i  the past, al- 
most all have been based on the same model of decision mak- 
ing by the categorization system. I begin by discussing this 
contingency table model, which motivates a small number 
of simple and widely used effectiveness measures. Complex- 
ities arise, however, in how to compute and interpret hese 
measures in the context of a text categorization experiment. 
The bulk of the discussion concerns these complexities. 
312 
Decides Yes 
Decides No 
a+b 
c+d 
~z+b+e+d=~ 
Table it Contingency Table for a Set of Binary Decisions 
The Cont ingency  Tab le  
Consider a system that is required to make n binary de- 
cisions, each of which has exactly one correct answer (either 
Yes or No). The result of n such decisions can be summa- 
rized in a contingency table, as shown in Table 1. Each 
entry in the table specifies the number of decisions of the 
specified type. For instance, a is the number of times the 
system decided Yes, and Yes was in fact the correct answer. 
Given the contingency table, three important measures 
of the system's effectiveness are: 
(1) recall = ~/(~ + c) 
(2) precision = ~/(~ + b) 
(3) fallout = ~/(~ + d) 
Measures equivalent to recall and fallout made their first 
appearance in signal detection theory \[Swe64\], where they 
play a central role. Recall and precision are ubiquitous in 
information retrieval, where they measure the proportion 
of relevant documents retrieved and the proportion of re- 
trieved documents which are relevant, respectively. Fallout 
measures the proportion of nonrelevant documents which 
are retrieved, and has also seen considerable use. 
A decision maker can achieve very high recall by rarely 
deciding No, or very high precision (and low fallout) by 
rarely deciding Yes. For this reason either recall and pre- 
cision, or recall and fallout, are necessary to ensure a non- 
trivial evaluation of a decision maker's effectiveness under 
the above model. 
Another measure sometimes used in categorization ex- 
periments i overlap: 
(4) overlap = a/(a + b + c) 
This measure is symmetric with respect o b and c, and 
so is sometimes used to measure how much two categoriza- 
tions are alike without defining one or the other to be cor- 
rect. 
It is appropriate at this point to mention some of the 
limitations of the contingency table model. It does not take 
into account he possibility that different errors have differ- 
ent costs; doing so requires more general decision theoretic 
models. The contingency table also requires all decisions to 
be binary. It may be desirable for category assignments o
be weighted rather than binary, and we will discuss later 
one approach to evaluation i  this case. 
Def in ing  Dec is ions  and  Averag ing  E f fec -  
t i veness  
The contingency table model presented above is appli- 
cable to a wide range of decision making situations. In this 
section, I will first consider how query-driven text retrieval 
has been evaluated under this model, and then consider how 
text categorization can be evaluated under the same model. 
In both cases it will be necessary to interpret he system's 
behavior as a set of binary decisions. 
In a query-driven retrieval systems, the basic decision 
is whether or not to retrieve a particular document for a 
particular query. For a set of q queries and d documents 
a total of n = qd decisions are made. Given those qd de- 
cisions, two ways of computing effectiveness are available. 
Microaueraging considers all qd decisions as a single group 
and computes recall, precision, fallout, or overlap as defined 
above. Macroaveraging computes these effectiveness mea- 
sures separately for the set of d documents associated with 
each query, and then computes the mean of the resulting q
effectiveness values. 
Macroaveraging has been favored in evaluating query- 
driven retrieval, partly because it gives equal weight o each 
user query. A microaveraged recall measurement, for in- 
stance, would be disproportionately affected by recall per- 
formance on queries from users who desired large numbers 
of documents. 
An obvious analogy exists between categories in a text 
categorization system and queries in a text retrieval system. 
The most common view taken of categorization is that an 
assignment decision is made for each category/document 
pair. A categorization experiment will compare the cate- 
gorization decisions made by a computer system with some 
standard of correctness, usually human category assignment. 
In contrast o evaluations of query-driven retrieval, evalu- 
ations of categorization have usually used microaveraging 
rather than macroaveraglng. Many ad hoc variants of both 
forms of averaging have also been used. 
Whether microaveraging or macroaveraging is more in- 
formative depends on the purpose for the categorization. 
For instance, if categorization is used to index documents 
for text retrieval, and each category appears in user queries 
at about the same frequency it appears in documents, then 
313 
Category Set Cor~ Assigned ~ b F 0  
ABCDEFGHIJKL A C 
Table 2: Recall (R), Precision (P), and Fallout (F) of Catego- 
rlzer X on One Document 
microaveraging seems very appropriate. On the other hand, 
if categorization were used to route documents to divisions 
of a company, with each division viewed as being equally im- 
portant, then macroaveraging would be more informative. 
The choice will often not be clearcut. I assume microaverag- 
ing in the following discussion unless otherwise mentioned. 
Precision Versus Fallout 
Precision and fallout both measure (in roughly inverse 
ways) the tendency of the categorizer to assign incorrect cat- 
egories. However, in doing so they capture different prop- 
erties of the categorization. 
In the context of query-driven retrieval, Salton has pointed 
out how systems which maintain constant precision react 
differently to increasing numbers of documents than those 
which maintain constant fallout \[Sal72\]. Similar effects can 
arise for categorizers as the number or nature of categories 
changes. 
Table 2 shows the hypothetical performance of catego- 
rizer X as the category set is expanded to include new top- 
ics. Decreasing fallout suggests that the categorizer X in- 
correctly assigns categories in proportion to the number of 
correct categories to be assigned. A different categorizer, 
Y, might show the pattern in Table 3, suggesting categories 
are incorrectly assigned in proportion to the total number 
of incorrect categories (or in proportion to the total number 
of all categories). 
In extreme cases a system could actually improve on pre- 
cision while worsening on fallout, or vice versa. Having both 
measures, plus recall, available is useful in quickly apprais- 
ing a method's behavior under changing circumstances. 
Partitioning of Results 
The basic tools of microaveraging and macroaveraging 
can be applied to arbitrary subsets of categorization deci- 
sions. Subsets of decisions can be defined in terms of sub- 
CategorYABcD Set ~ A Assignedc ~~bF0 
ABCDEFGH A CEF 5150 125 150 
ABCDEFGHIJKL A CEFIJK 
Table 3: Recall (R), Precision (P), and Fallout (F) of Catego- 
rlzer Y on One Document 
sets of categories, subsets of documents, or gradations in 
the correctness standard. 
Categories can be partitioned by importance, frequency, 
similarity of meaning, or strategy used in assigning them. 
Presenting effectiveness measures averaged over category 
groups defined by frequency in the training set would be 
extremely informative, but does not appear to have been 
done in any published study. If the number of categories i
small enough, effectiveness can be presented separately for 
each category \[HKC88\]. 
Subsets of the set of test documents can be defined as 
well, particularly if the behavior of the system on texts of 
different kinds is of interest. Maron grouped documents on 
? the basis of the amount of evidence they provided for mak- 
ing a categorization decision, and showed that effectiveness 
increased in proportion to the amount of evidence \[lVlar61\]. 
Finally, it is sometimes appropriate to partition results 
by degree of correctness of a category/document pair. While 
the contingency table model assumes that an assignment de- 
cision is either correct or incorrect, the standard they are 
being tested against may actually have gradations of cor- 
rectness. The model can still be used if gradations are par- 
titioned into two disjoint classes, for instance correct and 
marginal being considered correct, and ineffective and in- 
correct being considered incorrect. In this circumstance, it 
may be desirable to present results under several plausible 
partitions. 
The appropriate partitions to make will depend on many 
factors that cannot be anticipated here. A crucial point to 
stress, however, is that care should be taken to partition 
supporting data on the task and system in the same fashion 
\[Lew91\]. For instance, if effectiveness measures are pre- 
sented for subsets of documents, then statistics uch as av- 
erage number of words per document, etc. should be given 
for the same groups of documents. 
Arithmetic Anomal ies 
The above discussion assumed that computing the ef- 
fectiveness measures is always straightforward. Referring 
to equations (1) to (3) shows that 0 denominators arise 
when there exist no correct category assignments, no in- 
correct category assignments, or when the system never as- 
signs a category. All these situations are extremely unlikely 
when microaveraging is used, but are quite possible under 
macroaveraging. 
For evaluating query-drlven retrieval, Tague suggests ei- 
ther treating 0/0 as 1.0 or throwing out the query, but says 
neither solution is entirely satisfactory. For a categoriza- 
tion system, we also have the option of partitioning the 
categories and macroaveraging only over the categories for 
which these anomalies don't arise. As discussed above, the 
314 
same partitioning should be used for any background ata 
presented on the testset and task. 
One Category or Many? 
Evaluations of systems which assign multiple categories 
to a document have often been flawed, particularly for cate- 
gorizers which use statistical techniques. For instance, some 
of the results in \[Mar61\] and ~KW75\] were obtained under 
assumptions equivalent o the categorizer knowing in ad- 
vance how many correct categories each test document has. 
This knowledge is not available in an operational setting. 
Better attempts to both produce and evaluate multi- 
ple category assignments are found in work by Fuhr and 
Knorz, and by Field. Field uses the strategy of assigning 
the top k categories to a document, but unlike the above 
studies does this without knowledge of the proper number 
of categories for any particular document. He then plots 
the recall value achieved for variations in the number of 
categories assigned \[Fie75\]. Fuhr and Knorz plot a curve 
showing tradeoff between recall and precision as a category 
assignment threshold varies \[FK84\]. 
When categories are completely disjoint and a catego- 
rizer always assigns exactly 1 of the M categories to a 
text, we really have a single M-ary decision, rather than 
M binary decisions. The contingency table model provides 
one way of summarizing M-ary decision effectiveness, but 
other approaches, uch as confusion matrices \[Swe64\], may 
be more revealing. 
Standard of Correctness 
The effectiveness measures described above require that 
correct categorizations are known for a set of test docu- 
ments. In cases where an automated categorizer is being 
developed to replace or aid manual categorization, catego- 
rizations from the operational human system may be used 
as the standard. Otherwise, it may be necessary to have 
human indexers categorize some texts specifically for the 
purposes of the experiment. 
Many studies have found that even professional bibli- 
ographic indexers disagree on a substantial proportion of 
categorization decisions \[Bor64, Fie75, HZ80\]. This calls 
into question the validity of human category assignment as 
a standard against which to judge mechanical assignment. 
One approach to this problem has been to have an especially 
careful indexing done \[Fie75, HZS0\]. Sometimes evaluation 
is done against several indexings \[Fie75, HKC88\]. 
Another approach is to accept that there will always 
be some degree of inconsistency in human categorization, 
and that this imposes an upper limit on the effectiveness of
machine categorization. The degree of consistency between 
several human indexers can be measured, typically using 
overlap, as defined in Equation (4), or some variant of this. 
How measures of consistency between human indexers 
might best aid the interpretation of machine categoriza- 
tion effectiveness is unclear. Overlap between the machine- 
assigned categories and each human indexers' categories can 
be measured and compared to overlap among humans. It is 
less clear how to interpret recall, precision, or fallout in the 
presence of a known level of inconsistency. 
The possibility also exists that machine categorization 
could be better than human categorization, making consis- 
tency with human categorization a questionable measure 
under any circumstance. Indirect evaluation, discussed in 
the next section, is the best way to address this possibility. 
Indirect Evaluation 
The output of a text categorization system is often used 
by another system in performing text retrieval, text extrac- 
tion, or some other task. When this is the case, it is possible 
to evaluate the categorization i directly, by measuring the 
performance of the system which uses the categorization. 
This indirect evaluation of the categorization can be an im- 
portant complement to direct evaluation, particularly when 
multiple categorizations are available to be compared. 
How an indirect evaluation is done depends on the kind 
of system using the categorized text. Most categorizers have 
been intended to index documents for query-driven text re- 
trieval. Despite this, there have been surprisingly few stud- 
ies \[Hat82, FK84\] comparing text retrieval performance un- 
der different automatic ategory assignments. 
The focus on manual categorization as a standard ap- 
pears to have led categorization researchers to ignore some 
promising research directions. For instance, I know of no 
study that has evaluated weighted assignment of categories 
to documents, despite early recognition of the potential of 
this technique \[Mar61\] and the strong evidence that weight- 
ing free text terms in documents improves retrieval perfor- 
mance \[Sa186\]. 
Categorization of documents may be desired for other 
purposes than supporting query-driven retrieval. Separa- 
tion of a text stream by category may allowing packaging of 
the text stream as different products \[Hay90\]. Some com- 
parison of average retrieval effectiveness across text streams 
might be an appropriate measure in this case. 
Categorization may also be used to select a subset of 
texts for more sophisticated processing, such as extraction 
of information or question answering \[JR90\]. Evaluating the 
quality of the extracted information may give some insight 
into categorization performance, though the connection can 
be distant here. 
315 
There are drawbacks to indirect evaluation, of course. 
Tague questions why any particular set of queries should 
serve as a test of an indexing. Cleaxly, if a categorization 
is to be evaluated by text retrieval performance, the query 
set needs to be as large as possible, and representative of 
the actual usage the system will experience. When cate- 
gorization is used as a component in a complex language 
understanding system, that system itself may be difficult to 
evaluate \[21190\] or differences in categorization quality may 
be hard to discern from overall system behavior. A single 
categorization may also be intended to serve several pur- 
poses, some possibly not yet defined. Using both direct and 
indirect evaluation will be the best approach, when practi- 
cal. 
Other Issues 
The evaluation of natural anguage processing (NLP) 
systems is an area of active research \[PF90\], and a great 
deal remains to be learned. Much more could be said even 
about evaluating categorization systems. In particular, I 
have focused entirely on numerical measures. Carefully cho- 
sen examples, examined in detail, can also be quite revealing 
\[HKC88\]. However, the numerical measures described above 
provide a useful standard for understanding the differences 
between methods under a variety of conditions. 
Comparison between categorization methods would be 
aided by the use of common testsets, something which has 
rarely been done. (An exception is \[BB64\].) Development 
of standard collections would be an important first step to 
better understanding of text categorization. 
Categorization is an important facet of many kinds of 
text processing systems. The effectiveness measures defined 
above may be useful for evaluating some aspects of these 
systems. In the next section we consider the evaluation of 
text extraction systems from this standpoint. 
IMPL ICAT IONS FOR EVALUATING 
TEXT EXTRACTION 
Systems for test e.ztraction generate formatted ata from 
natural anguage text. Some forms of extraction, for in- 
stance specifying the highest level of action in a naval report 
\[Sun89\], are in fact categorization decisions. Other forms of 
extraction are very different, and do not fit well into the 
contingency table model. 
In the following I briefly consider evaluation of text ex- 
traction systems using the effectiveness measures described 
for categorization. Two perspectives are taken--one focus- 
ing on the type of data extracted and the other focusing on 
the purpose for which extraction is done. 
Types of Extracted Data 
Extracted ata can include binary or M-axy categoriza- 
tions, quantities, and templates or database records with 
atomic or structured fillers \[Sun89, McC90, Hal90\]. The 
number of desired records per text may depend on text con- 
tent, and cross references between fillers of record fields may 
be required. 
Using the effectiveness measures described above requires 
interpreting the system output in terms of a set of binary 
decisions which can be either correct or incorrect. The mea- 
sures become less meaningful as the extraction task becomes 
less a matter of making isolated ecisions with easily defined 
correctness, and more a matter of generating a legal expres- 
sion from some potentially infinite language. 
Binary data, either as the sole output of extraction or as 
the filler of a fixed subpart of a larger structure, fits easily 
into the contingency table model of evaluation. This in- 
cludes the case where a slot can have 0 or more fillers from 
a fixed set of possible fillers. Each pair of the form (slot, 
possible filler) can be treated as a category in the catego- 
rization model. Micro- or macroaveraging across slot/filler 
pairs for a single slot or for all slots in a template can be 
done. The situation where exactly one of a fixed set of M 
fillers must fill a slot is an M-ary decision, as mentioned 
above for categorization. 
Another common extraction task is to recognize all hu- 
man names in a piece of text, and produce a canonical string 
for each name as part of the extracted ata. Effectiveness 
measures from categorization begin to break down here. 
Treating the assignment of each possible canonical name 
as a binary decision is likely to be uninformative, given the 
very large set of legal names. (And is impossible if instead 
of a fixed set of canonical names there axe rules defining an 
unbounded number of them.) The situation is even more 
difficult when arbitrary strings may be slot fillers. 
The MUC-3 evaluation \[HalP0\] has taken the approach 
of retaining the contingency table measures but redefining 
the set of possible decisions. Rather than taking the cross- 
product of the set of all fillers and the set of all documents, 
the set of decisions is implicitly considered to be the union 
of all correct string/document assignments and all system- 
produced string/document assignments. This is equivalent 
to setting cell d of the contingency table to 0, while re- 
taining the others. Fallout is thus eliminated as a measure 
but recall, precision, and overlap can still be computed. A 
scheme for assigning partial credit is also used. 
While this approach as been quite useful, it may not 
be ideal. Two processes are being evaluated at once-- 
recognition of an extractable concept, and selection of a 
string (canonical or arbitrary) to represent that concept. 
It may be preferable, for instance, to evaluate these pro- 
cesses eparately. This approach also requires ubtle human 
316 
judgments of the relative correctness ofvarious trings that 
might be extracted. Finally, when comparing systems using 
this approach, the underlying decision spaces may be differ- 
ent for each system, making interpreting the effectiveness 
measures more diffcult. 
When a system goes beyond string fills to filling slots 
with arbitrary structures, the contingency table model be- 
comes very difficult to apply. At best there may be some 
hopes of capturing some parts of the task in this way, such 
as getting the right category of structure in a slot. More 
research on evaluation is clearly needed here. 
Purposes for Extracted Data  
The data type of extracted information affects what ef- 
fectiveness measures can be computed. Even more impor- 
tant, however, is the purpose for which information is being 
extracted. This issue has been given surprisingly little at- 
tention in published iscussions of text extraction systems. 
In the following, I give three examples to suggest hat ex- 
plicit consideration of how extracted ata will be used is 
crucial in choosing appropriate ffectiveness measures. 
Statistical Analysis of Real-World Events A data- 
base of extracted information may be meant to support 
queries about real-world events described in the texts. An 
analyst might want to check for correlations between um- 
bers of naval equipment failures and servicing in certain 
ports, or list the countries where plastic explosives have 
been used in terrorist bombings, to give examples. 
Accurate answers to questions about numbers of events 
depend on recognizing when multiple event references in 
the same or in different documents in fact refer to a sin- 
gle real world event, and on proper handling of phenomena 
such as plurals, numbers, and quantification. High preci- 
sion and low fallout may be favored over high recall. If it is 
expected that the same event will be described by multiple 
sources, a single failure to recognize it may not be impor- 
tant. Evaluation might focus on effectiveness in extracting 
details necessary to uniquely identify each event. On the 
other hand, if support of arbitrary existence queries (Has 
plastic ee~plosive b en used...) is important, then recall for 
all recognizable details of events may be the most important 
thing to evaluate. 
The degree of connection between reports of events and 
actual events will vary from reliable (intra-agency traffc) 
to dubious (political propaganda). This makes it likely that 
the extraction system will at best be an aid to a human 
analyst, who will need to make judgment calls on the tell- 
ability of textual descriptions. The most useful evaluation 
may be of the analyst's performance with and without the 
extraction system. 
Content Analysis Content a,alysi8 has been defined 
in many different ways (\[Ho169\], pp. 2-3) but here I focus 
particularly on the analysis of texts to gain insight into the 
motivations and plans of the texts' authors. In its simplest 
form content analysis involves counting the number of oc- 
currences of members of particular linguistic classes. For 
instance, one might count how often words with positive or 
negative connotations are used in referring to a neighboring 
country. The great potential of the computer to aid with 
the drudgery of analyzing large corpora of text has long 
been recognized, as has the potential for NLP to improve 
the effectiveness of this process. 
In content analysis, faithfulness to the text rather than 
faithfulness to the world may be the primary concern. Of 
particular importance is that the number of instances of 
a particular linguistic item extracted is not a~ected by ex- 
traneous variables. Consider a comparison of the number of 
references to a particular border skirmish in political broad- 
casts from two countries. In this case, one would want con- 
fidence that extraction effectiveness was about the same for 
texts from the two countries and was not affected by, for 
instance, differing capitalization conventions. The absolute 
level of e/Fectiveness might be a lesser concern. 
Indexing for Query-Drlven Text Retrieval In this 
case, the extracted ata is used only indirectly. An an- 
alyst will use either a text retrieval system or a conven- 
tional database system to retrieve documents indexed by 
extracted ata. The analyst may want the documents for 
any of a number of purposes, including the ones described 
above. The difference is that extracted information partici- 
pates in the analysis only to the extent of influencing which 
documents the analyst sees. No numeric values are derived 
directly from the extracted ata. 
In evaluating formatted ata extracted for this purpose, 
a number of results from information retrieval research are 
important to consider. One is the fact, mentioned earlier, 
that document-specific weighting of indexing units is likely 
to substantially increase performance. Since NLP systems 
can potentially use many sources of evidence in deciding 
whether to extract a particular piece of information, there 
is a rich opportunity for such weighting. 
Another lesson from IK research is that people find it 
very difficult o judge the quality of indexing in the absence 
of retrieval data. Strongly held intuitions about the relative 
effectiveness of indexing languages and indexing methods 
for supporting document retrieval have often been shown 
by experiment to be incorrect \[Spaglb\]. If the primary pur- 
pose of extracted information is to support querying, then 
indirect evaluation, i.e. testing with actual queries, is very 
important. 
317 
CONCLUSION 
Text categorization plays a variety of roles in text-based 
systems. Evaluation of categorization effectiveness i  im- 
portant, both for confidence in operational systems and for 
progress in research. Several good measures, based on a 
model of binary decision making, are available for evaluat- 
ing the effectiveness of a categorization. I have discussed 
some of the issues to consider in using these measures, and 
stressed that the purpose for which categorization is being 
done needs to be considered. The use of both indirect and 
direct evaluation is preferable. I also discussed how some 
of the work done by text extraction systems can be viewed 
as categorization and evaluated in a similar fashion, though 
new measures are needed as well. 
Acknowledgments 
The author is preparing a longer article on this topic 
ILew91\] so comments on the above would be most welcome. 
This research as already greatly benefited from discussions 
with Laura Balcom, Nancy Chinchor, Bruce Croft, Ralph 
Grishman, Jerry Hobbs, Adele Howe, Lisa R.au, Penelope 
Sibun, Beth Sundheim, and Carl Weir. The research as 
been supported by AFOSIt  under grant AFOSR-90-0110, by 
the NSF under grant IRI-8814790, and by an NSF Graduate 
Fellowship. 
REFERENCES 
\[BB64\] Harold Borko and Myrna Bernlck. Automatic document 
classificatlonpart II. additional experiments. 3 Association 
for Computing Machinery, 11(2):138-151, April 1964. 
\[Bor64\] Harold Borko. Measuring the reliability of subject clas- 
sification by men and machines. American Documentation, 
pages 268--273, October 1964. 
\[CH88\] Paul Ft. Cohen and Adele E. Howe. How evaluation 
guides AI research. AI Magazine, pages 35-43, Winter 1988. 
\[Fie75\] B. J. Field. Towards automatic indexing: Automatic as- 
signment of controlled-language indexing and classification 
from free indexing..IT. Documentation, 31(4):246-265, De- 
cember 1975. 
\[FK84\] N. Fuhr and G. E. Knorz. Retrieval test evaluation of 
a rule based automatic indexing (AIR/PHYS). In C. J. 
van Rijsbergen, editor, Research and Development in In- 
formation Retrieval, pages 391--408, Cambridge. Cambridge 
University Press. 
\[Hal90\] Peter C. Halverson. MUC scoring system: user's man- 
ual. Edition 1.5, General Electric Corporate Ftesearch and 
Development, Schenectady, N'Y', November 2 1990. 
\[Har82\] P. Harding. Automatic Indexing and Classification for 
Mecha.nised Information Ftetrieval. BLRDD Fteport No. 
5723, British Library Ft & D Department, London, February 
1982. 
\[HKC88\] Philip J. Hayes, Laura E. Knecht, and Monica J. Cellio. 
A news story categorization system. In Second Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Proceuing, pages 9--17, 1988. 
\[Hay90\] Philip J. Hayes. Intelligent hlgh-volume t xt processirq~ 
using shallow, domaln-speciflc techniques. In P. S. Jacobs, 
editor, Tezt*Based Intelligent Systems, pages 70---74, Sch- 
enectady, NY, 1990. GE Ft & D Center. Report Number 
90CFtD198. 
\[Ho169\] Ole Ft. Hoist.i. Content Analysis for the Soci?l Sciences 
and Humanities. Addison-Wesley, Fteadlng, MA, 1969. 
\[HZS0\] Harsh A. Ham;l\] and Antonio Zaraora. The use of titles 
for automatic document c~ssificatlon. J. American Society 
for Information Science, pages 396-402, 1980. 
\[JFt90\] Paul S. Jacobs and Lisa F. Ftau. SCISOFt: Extracting in- 
formation from on-llne news. Communications of the A C~/~, 
33(11):88--97, November 1990. 
\[KW75\] B. Gautam Kar and L. J. White. A distance measure for 
automatic sequentisd document classification. Technical Re- 
port OSU-CISFtC-TR,-75-7, Computer end Information Sci- 
ence Ftesearch Center; Ohio State Univ., Col'umbus, Ohio, 
August 1975. 
\[Lew91\] David D. Lewis. Evaluating text classification systems. 
In preparation., 1991. 
\[Mar61\] M. E. March. Automatic indexing: An experimental 
inquiry. J. of the Association for Computing Machinery, 
8:404--417, 1961. 
\[McC90\] Rite McCarden. Evaluating natural anguage gener- 
ated database records. In Proceedings of Speech and Nat- 
ural Language Workshop, pages 64-70. Defense Advanced 
Ftesearch Projects Agency, Morgan Kaufmann, June 1990. 
\[PFg0\] Martha Palmer and Tim Finin. Workshop on the evalua- 
tion of natural language processlng syst eros. Computational 
Linguistics, 16:175-181, September 1990. 
\[Sal72\] G. Salton. The "generality" effect and the retrieval eval- 
uation for large collections. J American Societ# for Infor- 
mation Science, pages 11-22, January-February 1972. 
\[Ss186\] Gerard Salton. Another look at automatic text-retrieval 
systems. Communications offthe A CM, 29(7):648-656, July 
1986. 
\[Spa81a\] Karen Sparck Jones, editor. Information Retrieral Ez- 
pertinent. Butterworths, London, 1981. 
\[Spa81b\] Karen Sparck Jones. Ftetrleval system teats 1958-1978. 
In Karen Sparck Jones, editor, Information Retrierai Exper- 
iment, chapter 12. Butterworths, London, 1981. 
\[Sun89\] Beth M. Sunclhelm. Plans for task-oriented evaluation 
of natural langx~ge understanding systems. In Proceedings 
of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 197- 
202. Defeuse Advanced Ftesearch Projects Agency, Morgan 
Kaufmmm, February 1989. 
\[Swe64\] John A. Swets, editor. Signal Detection and Recognition 
by Human Obserrers. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1964. 
\[Tag81\] Jean M. Tague. The pragmatlcs of information retrieval 
experimentation. I  Karen Sparck Jones, editor, Informs. 
tion Retrieral Ezperiment, chapter 5. Butterworthe, Lon- 
don, 1981. 
318 
