BBN HARC and DELPHI  Results on the 
ATIS Benchmarks  - February 1991 
S. Austin, D. Ayuso, M. Bates, R. Bobrow, R. Ingria, 
J. Makhoul, P. Placeway, and R. Schwartz, D. Stallard 
BBN Systems and Technologies 
10 Moul ton  Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents the test results of running BBN's HARC spoken 
language system and DELPHI natural language understanding system on 
the ATIS benchmarks. 
We give a brief system overview, and review the major changes that have 
been made in Delphi since the last DARPA SLS workshop. We will 
briefly discuss the development a d training process, and then present our 
test results and an analysis of their meaning. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
Delphi is BBN's research NL system, which is based on a 
unification grarnrnar and which incorporates semantics into the 
unification framework. Delphi s the NL component of the BBN 
HARC (Hear and Respond to Continuous Speech) system; 
integrated with the BYBLOS speech recognition system using an 
N-best architecture \[1,2\]. 
Figure 1 shows the relationships among the components of
HARC, and their inputs and outputs. 
~ Speech 
BYBLOS 
Speech 
Recognition 
N-best 
Delphi 
Natural 
Language 
Processing  MRL 
Database 
Translator 
 SQL 
Figure 1: The BBN HARC System 
RECENT CHANGES IN  DELPHI  
The BBN Delphi natural language understanding system which 
was reported in June, 1990 \[3\] has been changed and improved in a 
number of ways: 
1. The addition of statistical agenda capabilities to the parser. 
This achieved a considerable r duction i  parse times while at 
the same time producing a desirable parse as the first 
interpretation i  most cases. It is reported on in detail 
elsewhere in this volume \[4\]. 
2. A streamlined semantic processor. This component ow uses 
"mapping units" to handle a number of phenomena that 
would otherwise result in a combinatorial explosion of rules. 
This allows the rules to be expressed more simply, with less 
possibility of forgetting to include a particular syntactic 
pattern. It also makes possible a more general treatment of
the kinds of metonomy which occur most frequently in the 
ATIS domain. Mapping units are described elsewhere in this 
volume \[5\]. 
3. An extended and improved ialogue component. In addition to 
covering domain-independent discourse phenomena, this 
component ow also utifizes a domain-dependent frame-like 
representation of the discourse state, which makes it possible 
for Delphi to recognize implicit references toprior context as 
well as explicit reference. Implicit reference is frequent in the 
ATIS domain (e.g., "Show the flights from Boston to Dallas. 
What meals are served?"). 
4. An N-best integration of speech recognition output with 
Delphi's NL processing. Our initial results in using this 
architecture for integration have been very positive. 
5. A military application task. We began to apply HARC to a 
demonstration task involved with military logistical 
planning. This system, called DART (Dynamic Analytical 
Replanning Tool), our initial integration of speech 
understanding with it, and an outline of our plans to expand 
that integration are described elsewhere in this volume \[6\]. 
112 
Source 
Total # of 
Sentences 
Class A 
Sentences 
>3431 
Class A 
Answers 
924 
Class D1 
Pairs 
861 
Class D1 
Answers 
108 
June '90 to Feb '91 
S R I 77 177 220 20 20 
TI - .w. 106 88 44 
MIT 1647 not classified not classified 
C M U 632 not classified not classified 
Up to June '90 
TI 776 551 551 
TI (June '90 test data) 93 90 90 
Total 64 
Figure 2: Common Training Data 
NL TRAINING 
Training data for this phase of the SLS program was primarily 
the 551 queries of training data that were available before the 
evaluation i June, 1990. A summary of the training data is given 
in figure 2. 
Figure 2 also shows that although over 3400 queries were 
collected from all sources, fewer than 900 Class A queries with 
reference answers are available for training purposes, and only 64 
Class D1 dialogue pairs with reference answers are available. 
The data from MIT and CMU, although initially promising 
because of its volume, proved not to be very useful, because the 
queries were not classified (as Class A, Class D1, ete,), and 
reference SQL and answers were not provided. This meant that it 
was not possible during the development period to run these 
queries through our system and automatically determine whether 
the answers that were produced were correct or not. 
PERFORMANCE 
Figure 3 gives the results of BBN's performance on various 
benchmark NL and SLS tests, as of the February 19, 1991, the 
date of the workshop. 
These results are comparable toDelphi's performance last June 
as reported by NIST \[7\]. Had the currrent scoring metric been in 
place then, Delphi would have scored 57.8% on Class A. 
Notes  
S~stem 
Test set size 
Date submitted 
RI ht 
Wron 
NA (not answered~ 
Wel hted Error 
Score 
NL . NL tS, tN, IN, tS,S Class A iClass A Class D1 Class D1 Class D1 Class A 
1 L_______ 1, 3 1, 3 2,4 1 
Delphi Delohi Delphi Delphi HARC 
145 S's 
2/7/9 1 
145 S's 
2/16/91 2/7/91 ~13/91 2/16/91 
145 S's 
2/7/91 
_',imp;. .-~llil, am'l, :~%I, '~l .~ _iili,z 
l i l t ; ,  ~_~l,e.~. I;tllEl,, ~lll,. l ' ,  l l i l t : ,  " l ' t l t ;  
Figure 3: BBN's ATIS Benchmark Results, February 1991 
Notes: 
l. These results were scored by NIST before the workshop; these numbers reflect he rescoring NIST did after the workshop. 
2. These results were submitted toNIST before the workshop, but were not scored. The only change made to the system between 
the first NL run and the second was to fix a minor bug in the SNOR translator which formats the input data for the parser. 
3. The first class D1 test uncovered a problem in our system's backend translator, which was fixed for the second run. See the 
discussion section below for more information. 
4. The difference between this and the previous run involved how to score pairs which gave NA for Q1. See discussion below. 
113 
DISCUSSION NL Class D1 
There are several global points to make before discussing each 
test separately. 
As was the case last June, some problems howed up in the 
test set itself. Several queries that were not actually Class A were 
included in the original test set; their removal resulted in the 145 
item test. (More items may have been removed before the final 
official scoring.) Also, the reference answers for several queries 
had to be augmented during the scoring, to account for ambiguities 
that had gone unnoticed during the preparation f the test set. 
We believe that such problems are unavoidable, but minor and 
easy to fix, so we do not recommend any major change in the 
evaluation methodology, but recommend that sufficient time for 
sites to check the reference answers be allocated in the schedule for 
the next evaluation. 
A system which performs well on Class A but less well than 
expected on Class D might be using rather brittle techniques to
deal with Class A which do not generalize effectively to discourse. 
It is also interesting tonote that this is not at all a problem for us. 
In fact, the best versions of our system did better on Class D 
than Class A, which is counterintuitive. One would expect hat 
the probability of getting aD1 pair correct is less than the product 
of the probability of getting a Class A sentence correct, because 
not only must two sentences be processed, but the processing of 
the second is likely to be harder than a simple Class A sentence, 
since it must involve reference resolution or other discourse 
processing. This is best explained by the fact that the D1 test set 
was short, rather easy, and involved more repetition of similar 
query types than the Class A test. 
Out of Vocabulary Words 
One of the main reasons for the relatively high number of NA 
answers to Class A utterances was simply vocabulary: Nineteen 
of the test utterances (13% of the test set) contained vocabulary 
outside Delphi's lexicon. The lack of training data clearly had an 
impact here, since one of the great benefits of training data is 
increased vocabulary. 
It is worthy of note that since there is no control vocabulary 
among the various systems, it is very difficult to meaningfully 
compare the performance ofmultiple systems. Using the official 
data presented, it is impossible to tell the difference between a
system that simply lacks some vocabulary entries and one that has 
a larger lexicon but which cannot syntactically or semantically 
process many of the test utterances. 
NL  C lass  A 
The only difference between the original score and the second 
one is that a small problem in the formatting of SNOR input for 
the parser was fixed. The understanding component (syntax, 
semantics, and discourse processing), which is what the Class A 
test is attempting tomeasure, was completely unchanged. 
The initial results of our D1 evaluation were shocking, but a 
quick investigation revealed several interesting facts: 
1. Sixteen of the utterances that yielded a NA response were in 
fact understood perfectly correctly by the syntactic, semantic, 
and discourse components of Delphi, and produced correct 
MRL expressions (refer to figure 1). But there was a simple 
bug in the backend translator that turns MRL expressions 
into SQL expressions, and all 16 utterances tickled that bug. 
2. Of those 16 utterances, 14 of them were extremely similar in 
words, syntactic form, and semantic mport. That is, 37% of 
the test pairs has this single form. The fact that the test set 
was significantly skewed toward one particular type of second 
utterance normously magnified the effect of what was 
actually avery small problem. 
3. Fixing that one problem resulted in all 16 of those utterances 
going through to SQL, and producing the correct answer. 
Because the problem was not in the language understanding 
component of Delphi, because the test set was so skewed, and 
because the purpose of the D1 test at this stage was to test he test 
methodology more than to test the dialogue systems, we fixed the 
problem and resubmitted the results to NIST. The resulting score 
(60.5%) is much more representative of the true capabilities ofour 
dialogue component than the original score. 
An additional problem with scoring D1 surfaced uring this 
evaluation. In a case where Q1 of a Q1-Q2 pair is not answered by 
the system, what should be done with Q2? We allowed our 
system to run Q2 as a context-independent query if possible, but 
expected that the scoring software would treat it as NA, since it is 
never possible to get a correct answer to a context-dependent query 
ff the context is not understood. But the scoring package counted 
such answers as wrong. The final run (66%) of our Class D test 
produces NA for these cases. 
SLS  C lass  A 
It is remarkable, and quite unexpected, that the score for the 
speech test of Class A should be so close to the NL test on exactly 
the same set of utterances. This indicates that the N-best strategy 
for integrating speech and NL processing seems to be working. 
Because the speech recognition component is currently producing 
about 16.2% and a sentence rror rate of about 54.1% \[2\], it is 
obvious that the natural language component is making up for 
some of the errors made by the speech recognition component 
Some interesting results emerged from our analysis of how the 
speech and NL components worked together. The following 
statistics are from the original 148 utterance Class A test set 
(which was later educed to 145 by NIST after removal of 3 queries 
which were not actually Class A). 
In 58.8% of the cases, NL chose the 1-best utterance. Of these, 
72.2% were correct speech ypotheses. 
14.9% had the correct speech ypothesis nthe N-best. 
12.6% didn't have the correct speech ypothesis n the N-best. 
114 
In 20.3% of the cases, NL chose one of the N-best utterances. 
26.7% of these were correct speech ypotheses. 
6.7% had the correct speech ypothesis n the N-best. 
66.7% didn't have the correct speech ypothesis n the N-best. 
In 20.9% of the cases, NL chose none of the utterances. 
Looking at the correctness of the answers produced by the 
HARC SLS system, we find the following (again, from 148 Class 
A utterances): 
In 58.5% of the cases, NL chose the 1-best hypothesis. 
77.0% of these were T 
19.5% of these were F 
3.5% of these were NA. 
In 20.3% of the cases, NL chose one of the N-best utterances. 
50% of these were T 
30% of these were F 
20% of these were NA. 
In 20.9% of the cases, NL chose none of the N-best, so 
100% of these were NA. 
CONCLUSIONS 
After the last evaluation, our primary conclusion was 
follows \[3\], p 126.: 
"There is evidence that intra-speaker variability in 
linguistic structure is fairly low, but that inter-speaker 
variability is very high. In other words, a given speaker, 
at least in a single session, tends to use the same forms 
over and over again (e.g., "tickets flying"), and each new 
speaker (at least so far:) tends to use locutions different 
from previous peakers. 
as  
This leads us to conclude that much more training data 
is needed in order to adequately prepare for evaluation..." 
Our experience in this evaluation only serves to underscore and 
reinforce our original conclusion. Large amounts (several 
thousand queries) of adequately prepared training data (classified, 
with reference SQL and reference answers) must be available in 
time for sites to use it for several months of development before a 
truly meaningful evaluation can be conducted. 
We have also developed some additional suggestions for 
dialogue valuation, which are detailed in a separate paper \[8\]. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work reported here was supported by the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and was monitored by the Office of 
Naval Research under Contract No. N00014-89-C-0008. The 
views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the 
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing 
the official poficies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense 
Advanced Research projects Agency or the United States 
Government. 
REFERENCES 
1.Chow, Y.L.., et al, "BYBLOS: The BBN Continuous Speech 
Recognition System", IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing, Dallas TX, April 1987, pp89-92, Paper 
No. 3.7. 
2. Kubala, F., et al, "BYBLOS Speech Recognition Benchmark Results", 
(in this proceedings). 
3. Bates, M., Boisen, S., Ingria, R. and Stallard, D. "BBN ATIS System 
Progress Report - June 1990", Proceedings of the Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop (June, 1990), Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 
1990. 
4. Bobrow, R. "Statistical Agenda Parsing", (in this proceedings). 
5. Bobrow, R., Ingfia, R., Stallard, D, "The 'Mapping Unit' Approach to 
Subcategofization", (in this proceedings). 
6. Bates, M., Ellard, D., Peterson, P., and Shaked, V. "Using Spoken 
Language to Facilitate Military Transportation Planning", (in this 
proceedings). 
7. Pallett, D.S, et al "DARPA ATIS Test Results June 1990", in 
Proceedings Speech and Natural Language Workshop, June 1990, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., June, 1990. 
8. Barns, M., and Ayuso, D., "A Proposal for Incremental Dialogue 
Evaluation", (in this proceedings). 
115 
