Machine Translation Using Abductive Inference 
Jerry R. Hobbs and Megumi Kameyama 
SI:LI International 
333 Ravenswood Ave. 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
Mach ine  Trans lat ion  and  Wor ld  Knowledge.  
Many existing approaches to machine translation take 
for granted that the information presented in the output 
is found somewhere in the input, and, moreover, that 
such information should be expressed at a single rep- 
resentational level, say, in terms of the parse trees or of 
"semantic" assertions. Languages, however, not only ex- 
press the equivalent information by drastically different 
linguistic means, but also often disagree in what dis- 
tinctions should be expressed linguistically at all. For 
example, in translating from Japanese to English, it is 
often necessary to supply determiners for noun phrases, 
and this in general cannot be done without deep under- 
standing of the source text. Similarly, in translating from 
English to Japanese, politeness considerations, which in 
English are implicit in the social situation and explicit in 
very diffuse ways in, for example, the heavy use of hypo- 
theticals, must be realized grammatically in Japanese. 
Machine translation therefore requires that the appro- 
priate inferences be drawn and that the text be inter- 
preted to some depth. Recently, an elegant approach to 
inference in discourse interpretation has been developed 
at a number of sites (e.g., Charniak and Goldman, 1988; 
Hobbs et al, 1990; Norvig, 1987), all based on the notion 
of abduction, and we have begun to explore its potential 
application to machine translation. We argue that this 
approach provides the possibility of deep reasoning and 
of mapping between the languages at a variety of levels) 
In terpreta t ion  as Abduct ion .  Abductive inference 
is inference to the best explanation. The easiest way to 
understand it is to compare it with two words it rhymes 
with--deduction and induction. Deduction is when from 
a specific fact p(A) and a general rule (V x)p(z) D q(x) 
we conclude q(A). Induction is when from a number of 
instances of p(A) and q(A) and perhaps other factors, 
we conclude (Vz)p(z) D q(z). Abduction is the third 
possibility. It is when from q(A) and (Vz)p(z) D q(z), 
we conclude p(A). Think of q(A) as some observational 
evidence, of (Vz)p(z) D q(z) as a general law that could 
1 The authors have profited from discussions about this work 
with Stu Shieber, Mark Stickel, and the participants in the Trans- 
lation Group at CSLI. The research was funded by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency under Office of Naval Re- 
search contract N00014-85-C-0013, and by a gift from the Systems 
Development Foundation. 
explain the occurrence of q(A), and of p(A) as the hid- 
den, underlying specific cause of q(A). Much of the way 
we interpret he world in general can be understood as 
a process of abduction. 
When the observational evidence, the thing to be in- 
terpreted, is a natural anguage text, we must provide 
the best explanation of why the text would be true. 
In the TACITUS Project at SRI, we have developed a
scheme for abductive inference that yields a significant 
simplification in the description of interpretation pro- 
cesses and a significant extension of the range of phenom- 
ena that can be captured. It has been implemented in
the TACITUS System (Hobbs et ah, 1990; Stickel, 1989) 
and has been applied to several varieties of text. The 
framework suggests the integrated treatment of syntax, 
semantics, and pragmatics described below. Our prin- 
cipal aim in this paper is to examine the utility of this 
framework as a model for translation. 
In the abductive framework, what the interpretation 
of a sentence is can be described very concisely: 
To interpret a sentence: 
(1) Prove the logical form of the sentence, 
together with the constraints that 
predicates impose on their 
arguments, 
allowing for coercions, 
Merging redundancies where possible, 
Making assumptions where necessary. 
By the first line we mean "prove from the predicate cal- 
culus axioms in the knowledge base, the logical form that 
has been produced by syntactic analysis and semantic 
translation of the sentence." 
In a discourse situation, the speaker and hearer both 
have their sets of private beliefs, and there is a large over- 
lapping set of mutual beliefs. An utterance stands with 
one foot in mutual belief and one foot in the speaker's 
private beliefs. It is a bid to extend the area of mutual 
belief to include some private beliefs of the speaker's. 
It is anchored referentially in mutual belief, and when 
we prove the logical form and the constraints, we are 
recognizing this referential anchor. This is the given in- 
formation, the definite, the presupposed. W\] ere it is 
141 
necessary to make assumptions, the information comes 
from the speaker's private beliefs, and hence is the new 
information, the indefinite, the asserted. Merging redun- 
dancies is a way of getting a minimal, and hence a best, 
interpretation. 
An  Example .  This characterization, elegant hough 
it may be, would be of no interest if it did not lead to 
the solution of the discourse problems we need to have 
solved. A brief example will illustrate that it indeed 
does. 
(2) The Tokyo office called. 
This example illustrates three problems in "local prag- 
matics", the reference problem (What does "the Tokyo 
office" refer to?), the compound nominal interpretation 
problem (What is the implicit relation between Tokyo 
and the office?), and the metonymy problem (How can 
we coerce from the office to the person at the office who 
did the calling?). 
Let us put these problems aside, and interpret the 
sentence according to characterization (1). The logical 
form is something like 
(3) (3 e,x, o, b)caU'(e, x) A person(x) 
A rel(x, o) A office(o) A nn(t, o) 
A Tokyo(t) 
That is, there is a calling event e by a person x related 
somehow (possibly by identity) to the explicit subject of 
the sentence o, which is an office and bears some unspec- 
ified relation nn to t which is Tokyo. 
Suppose our knowledge base consists of the following 
facts: We know that there is a person John who works 
for O which is an office in Tokyo T. 
(4) person(J), work-for(J,O), office(O), 
in(O, T), Tokyo(T) 
Suppose we also know that work-for is a possible coer- 
cion relation, 
(5) (Vx,y)work- for(x,y)  D ret(x,y) 
and that in is a possible implicit relation in compound 
nominals, 
(6) (V y, z)in(y, z) D nn(z, y) 
Then the proof of all but the first conjunct of (3) is 
straightforward. We thus assume (3e)call'(e, J), and 
this constitutes the new information. 
Notice now that all of our local pragmatics problems 
have been solved. "The Tokyo office" has been resolved 
to O. The implicit relation between Tokyo and the office 
has been determined to be the in relation. "The Tokyo 
office" has been coerced into "John, who works for the 
Tokyo office." 
This is of course a simple example. More complex ex- 
amples and arguments are given in Hobbs et al, (1990). 
A more detailed description of the method of abductive 
inference, particularly the system of weights and costs 
for choosing among possible interpretations, i  given in 
that paper and in Stickel, (1989). 
The  In tegrated  Framework .  The idea of inter- 
pretation as abduction can be combined with the older 
idea of parsing as deduction (Kowalski, 1980, pp. 52- 
53). Consider a grammar written in Prolog style just 
big enough to handle sentence (2). 
(7) (Vi, j ,k)np(i, j) A v(j,k) D s(i,k) 
(8) (Vi, j, k, l)det(i,j) A n(j, k) A n(k,1) 
np(i, l) 
That is, if we have a noun phrasefrom "inter-word point" 
i to point j and a verb from j to k, then we have a 
sentence from i to k, and similarly for rule (8). 
We can integrate this with our abductive framework 
by moving the various pieces of expression (3) into these 
rules for syntax, as follows: 
(9) (V i, j, k, e, x, y, p)np(i, j, y) A v(j, k, p) 
A p'(e, x) ^ Req(p, x) A rel(., y) 
s(i, k, e) 
That is, if we have a noun phrase from i to j referring to 
y and a verb from j to k denoting predicate p, if there 
is an eventuality e which is the condition of p being true 
of some entity x (this corresponds to call'(e, x) in (3)), 
if x satisfies the selectional requirement p imposes on 
its argument (this corresponds to person(x)), and if x is 
somehow related to, or coercible from, y, then there is an 
interpretable sentence from i to k describing eventuality 
e .  
(lO) (V i, j, k, l, wl, w2, z, y)det(i, j, the) 
A n(j, k, wl) A n(k, l, w~) A Wl(Z) A w2(y) 
A .n(z, y) np(i, l, y) 
That is, if there is the determiner "the" from i to j ,  a 
noun from j to k denoting predicate wl, and another 
noun from k to l denoting predicate w2, if there is a 
z that wl is true of and a y that w2 is true of, and if 
there is an nn relation between z and y, then there is an 
interpretable noun phrase from i to l denoting y. 
These rules incorporate the syntax in the literals like 
v(j, k, p), the pragmatics in the literals like p'(e, x), and 
the compositional semantics in the way the pragmatics 
expressions are constructed out of the information pro- 
vided by the syntactic expressions. 
To parse with a grammar in the Prolog style, we prove 
s(0, N) where N is the number of words in the sentence. 
To parse and interpret in the integrated framework, we 
prove (3 e)s(O, N, e). 
An appeal of such declarative frameworks is their us- 
ability for generation as well as interpretation (Shieber, 
1988). Axioms (9) and (10) can be used for generation as 
well. In generation, we are given an eventuality E, and 
we need to find a sentence with some number n of words 
that describes it. Thus, we need to prove (3 n)s(O, n, E). 
Whereas in interpretation it is the new information that 
142 
is assumed, in generation it is the terminal nodes, like 
v(j,k,p), that are assumed. Assuming them constitutes 
uttering them. 
Translation is a matter of interpreting in the source 
language (say, English) and generating in the target lan- 
guage (say, Japanese). Thus, it can be characterized as 
proving for a sentence with N words the expression 
(11) (Je, n)SE(O,N,e) A sj(O,n,e) 
(14) (Vi,j,k,l,e,p)pp(i, j ,e) A pp(j,k,e) 
^ v(k, l, p) ^ p(e) D s(i, t, 
(15) (Vi, j ,k,x,e,part)np(i, j ,x) 
A particle(j, k, part) A part(z, e) 
pp( i, k, e) 
(16) (Vi, j, k, l, x, y)nP(i, j, y) A particle(j, k, no) 
A up(k, l, x) A no(y, x) 
D np(i, l, z) 
(!7) (Vi, j ,w,x)n( i , j ,w)  ^  w(z) D np(i,j,x) 
where sE is the root node of the English grammar and 
sj  is the root node of the Japanese. 
Actually, this is not quite true. Missing in the logical 
form in (3) and in the grammar of (9) and (10) is the "rel- 
ative mutual identifiability" relations that are encoded 
in the syntactic structure of sentences. For example, the 
office in (2) should be mutually identifiable once Tokyo is 
identified. In the absence Of these conditions, the genera- 
tion conjunct of (11) only says to express omething true 
of e, not something that will enable the hearer to iden- 
tify it. Nevertheless, the: framework as it is developed so 
far will allow us to address ome nontrivial problems in 
translation. 
This point exhibits a general problem in translation, 
machine or human, namely, how literal a translation 
should be produced. We may think of this as a scale. 
At one pole is what our current formalization yields--a 
translation that merely says something true about the 
eventuality asserted in the source sentence. At the other 
pole is a translation that translates explicitly every prop- 
erty that is explicit in the source sentence. Our trans- 
lation below of example (2) lies somewhere in between 
these two poles. Ideally, the translation should be one 
that will lead the hearer to the same underlying situa- 
tion as an interpretation. It is not yet clear how this can 
be specified formally. 
The Example  Trans lated.  An idiomatic transla- 
tion of sentence (2) is 
pp(i, j, e) means that there is a particle phrase from i to 
j with the missing argument e. part is a particle .and 
the predicate it encodes. 
If we are going to translate between the two languages, 
we need axioms specifying the transfer elations. Let us 
suppose "denwa" is lexicMly anabiguous between the tele- 
phone instrument denwal and the calling event denwa2. 
This can be encoded in the two axioms 
(18) (Vx)denwal(z) D denwa(z) 
(19) (Vx)denwa2(z) D denwa(z) 
Lexical disambiguation occurs as a byproduct of inter- 
pretation in this framework, when the proof of the logical 
form uses one or the other of these axioms. 
"Denwa ga aru" is an idiomatic way of expressing a
calling event in Japanese. This can be expressed by the 
axiom 
(20) (re, (Jd)  .wa2(d) 
A ga(d, e) A aru(e) 
The agent of a calling event is also its source: 
(21) (Ve,z)call '(e,z) D Source(~,e) 
We will need an axiom that coarsens the granularity of 
the source. If John is in Tokyo when he calls, then Tokyo 
as well as John is the source. 
(22) (V ,y, )Source( ,e) ^  
D Source(y, e) 
(12) Tokyo no office kara denwa ga ari-mashita. 
Tokyo's office from call Subj existed 
If x works for y, then z is in y: 
(23) (Vx,y)work-for(z,y) D in(z,y) 
Let us say the logicM form is as follows: 
(13) aru(e) A ga(d,e) A denwa(d) A kara(o,e) 
A office(o) A no(t, o) A Tokyo(t) 
A toy grammar plus pragmatics for Japanese, corre- 
sponding to the grammar of (9)-(10) is as follows2: 
2For simplicity in this example,  we are assuming  the words of 
the  sentences are given; in practice, th is  can be carr ied down to 
the level of characters.  
Finally, we will need axioms specifying the equivalence 
of the particle "kara" with the deep case Source 
(24) (V y, e)Source(y, e) ~ kate(y, e) 
and the equivalence between the particle "no" and the 
implicit relation in English compound nominals 
(25) (v y)n.(x, y) -= y) 
Note that these "transfer" axioms encode world knowl- 
edge (22 and 23), lexical ambiguities (18 and 19), direct 
relations between the two languages (20 and 25), and 
relations between the languages and deep "interlingual" 
predicates (21 and 24). 
143 
The proof of expression (11), using the English gram- 
mar of (9)-(10), the knowledge base of (4)-(6), the 
Japanese grammar and lexicon of (14)-(19), and the 
transfer axioms of (20)-(25), is shown in Figure 1. Boxes 
are drawn around the expressions that need to be as- 
sumed, namely, the new information in the interpreta- 
tion and the occurrence oflexical items in the generation. 
The axioms occur at a variety of levels, from the 
very superficial (axiom 25), to very language-pair specific 
transfer ules (axiom 20), to deep relations at the inter- 
lingual evel (axioms 21-24). This approach thus permits 
mixing in one framework both transfer and interlingual 
approaches to translation. One can state transfer ules 
between two languages at various levels of linguistic ab- 
straction, and between different levels of the respective 
languages. Such freedom in transfer is exactly what is 
needed for translation, especially for such typologically 
dissimilar languages as English and Japanese. It is thus 
possible to build a single system for translating among 
more than two languages in this framework, incorporat- 
ing the labor savings of interlingual approaches while al- 
lowing the convenient specificities of transfer approaches. 
We should note that other translations for sentence (2) 
are possible in different contexts. Two other possibilities 
are the following: 
(26) Tokyo no office ga denwg shimashita. 
Tokyo's office Subj call did-Polite 
The Tokyo office made \[a/the\] call. 
(27) Tokyo no office kara no denwa ga arimashita. 
Tokyo's office from's call Subj existed-Polite 
There was the call from the Tokyo office (that 
we were expecting). 
The difference between (12) and (26) is the speaker's 
viewpoint. The speaker takes the receiver's viewpoint 
in (12), while it is neutral between the caller and the 
receiver in (26). (27) is a more specific version of (12) 
where the call is mutually identifiable. All of (12), (26) 
and (27) are polite with the suffix "-masu". Non-polite 
variants are also possible translations. 
On the other hand, in the following sentence 
(28) Tokyo no office kara denwa shimashita. 
Tokyo's office from call did-Polite 
\[\] made \[a/the\] call from the Tokyo office. 
there is a strong inference that the caller is the speaker or 
someone lse who is very salient in the current context. 
The use of "shimashita" ( did") in (26) and (28)indi- 
cates the description from a neutral point of view of an 
event of some agent in the Tokyo office causing a tele- 
phone call to occur at the recipient's end. This neutral 
point of view is expressed in (26). In (28), the subject 
is omitted and hence must be salient, and consequently, 
the sentence is told from the caller's point of view. In 
(12) "ari-mashita" ( existed")is used, and since the tele- 
phone call exists primarily, or only, at the recipient's end, 
it is assumed the speaker, at least in point of view, is at 
the receiver's end. 
Although we have not done it here, it looks as though 
these kinds of considerations can be formalized in our 
framework as well. 
Hard  P rob lems:  If a new approach to machine 
translation is to be compelling, it must show promise 
of being able to handle some of the hard problems. We 
have identified four especially hard problems in translat- 
ing between English and Japanese. 
1. The lexical differences (that occur between any two 
languages). 
2. Honorifics. 
3. Definiteness and number. 
4. The context-dependent "information structure". 
The last of these includes the use of "wa" versus "ga", 
the order of noun phrases, and the omission of argu- 
ments. 
These are the areas where one language's morphosyn- 
tax requires distinctions that are only implicit in the 
commonsense knowledge or context in the other lan- 
guage. Such problems cannot be handled by existing 
sentence-by-sentence translation systems without unnec- 
essarily complicating the representations for each lan- 
guage. 
In this short paper, we can only give the briefest indi- 
cation of why we think our framework will be productive 
in investigating the first three of these problems. 
Lexical Differences. Lexical differences, where they 
can be specified precisely, can be encoded axiomatically: 
(Vx)water(x) A cool~cold(x) ~ mizu(x) 
(Vx) a er(x) A wa,'m/hot(x) _= yu(x) 
(Vx)watch(x) ~ tokei(x) A worn(x) 
(V x)clock(x) ~ tokei(x) A ~worn(x) 
Information required for supplying Japanese numeral 
classifiers can be specified similarly. Thus the equiva- 
lence between the English "two trees" and the Japanese 
"hi hon no ki" can be captured by the axioms 
(V x)tree(x) D cylindrical(x) 
(Vx)cylindr ea(x) hon(x) 
Honorif ics.  Politeness is expressed in very different 
ways in English and Japanese. In Japanese it is gram- 
maticized and lexicalized in sometimes very elaborate 
ways in the form of honorifics. One might think that the 
problem of honorifics does not arise in most practical 
translation tasks, such as translating computer manu- 
als. English lacks honorifics and in Japanese technical 
literature they are conventionalized. But if we are trans- 
lating business letters, this aspect of language becomes 
very important. It is realized in English, but in a very 
different way. When one is writing to one's superiors, 
there is, for example, much more embedding of requests 
in hypotheticals. Consider for example the following En- 
glish sentence and its most idiomatic translation: 
144 
Would it perhaps be possible for you to lend 
me your book? 
Go-hon o kashite-itadak-e-masu ka. 
Honorific-book Obj lending-receive-can-Polite? 
In Japanese, the object requested is preceded by the hon- 
orific particle "go", "itadak" is a verb used for a receiv- 
ing by a lower status person from a higher status person, 
and "masu" is a politeness ending for verbs. In English, 
by contrast, the speaker embeds the request in various 
modals, "would", "perhaps", and "possible", and uses 
a more formal register than normal, in his choice, for 
example, of "perhaps" rather than "maybe". 
The facts about the use of honorifics can be encoded 
axiomatically, with predicates uch as HigherStatus, 
where this information is known. Since all knowledge in 
this framework is expressed uniformly in predicate calcu- 
lus axioms, it is straightforward to combine information 
from different "knowledge sources", such as syntax and 
the speech act situation, into single rules. It is therefore 
relatively easy to write axioms that, for example, restrict 
the use of certain verbs, depending on the relative status 
of the agent and object, or the speaker and hearer. For 
example, "to give" is translated into the Japanese verb 
"kudasaru" if the giver is of higher status than the re- 
cipient, but into the verb "sashiageru" if the giver is of 
lower status. Similarly, the grammatical fact about the 
use of the suffix "-masu" and the fact about the speech 
act situation that speaker wishes to be polite may also 
be expressed in the same axiom. 
Def in i teness and Number .  The definiteness and 
number problem is illustrated by the fact that the 
Japanese word "ki" can be translated into "the tree" or 
"a tree" or "the trees" or "trees". It is not so straight- 
forward to deal with this problem axiomatically. Nev- 
ertheless, our framework, based as it is on deep inter- 
pretation and on the distinction between given and new 
information, provides us with what we need to begin to 
address the problem. A first approximation of a method 
for translating Japanese NPs into English NPs is as fol- 
lows: 
1. Resolve deep, i.e., find the referrent of the Japanese 
NP. 
2. Does the Japanese NP refer to a set of two or more? 
If so, translate it as a plural, otherwise as a singular. 
3. Is the entity (or set) "mutually identifiable"? If so, 
then translate it as a definite, otherwise as an indef- 
inite. 
"Mutually identifiable" means first of all that the de- 
scription provided by the Japanese NP is mutually 
known, and secondly that there is a single most salient 
such entity. "Most salient" means that there are no other 
equally high-ranking interpretations of the Japanese sen- 
tence that resolve the NP in some other way. (Generic 
definite noun phrases are beyond the scope of this pa- 
per.) 
Conclusion.  We have sketched our solutions to the 
various problems in translation with a fairly broad brush 
145 
in this short paper. We recognize that many details need 
to be worked out, and that in fact most of the work in 
machine translation is in working out the details. But 
we felt that in proposing a new formalism for translation 
research, it was important o stand back and get a view 
of the forest before moving in to examine the individual 
trees. 
Most machine translation systems today map the 
source language text into a logical form that is fairly 
close to the source language text, transform it into a 
logical form that is fairly close to a target language text, 
and generate the target language text. What is needed 
is first of all the possibility of doing deep interpretation 
when that is what is called for, and secondly the possibil- 
ity of translating from the source to the target language 
at a variety of levels, from the most superficial to levels 
requiring deep interpretation and access to knowledge 
about the world, the context, and the speech act sit- 
uation. This is precisely what the framework we have 
presented here makes possible. 
Re ferences  
\[1\] Charniak, Eugene, and Robert Goldman, 1988. "A 
Logic for Semantic Interpretation", Proceedings, 26th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 87-94, Buffalo, New York, June 1988. 
\[2\] Hobbs, Jerry R., Mark Stickel, Douglas Appelt, and 
Paul Martin, 1988. "Interpretation as Abduction", 
SRI Technical Note 499, SRI International, Menlo 
Park, California. December 1990. 
\[3\] Kowalski, Robert, 1980. The Logic of Problem. Solv- 
ing, North Holland, New York. 
\[4\] Norvig, Peter, 1987. "Inference in Text Understand- 
ing", Proceedings, AAAL87, Sixth National Confer- 
ence on Artificial In~eUigence, Seattle, Washington, 
July 1987. 
\[5\] Shieber, Stuart M., 1988. "A Uniform Architecture 
for Parsing and Generation", Proceedings, 12?h In- 
lerna~ional Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 614-619, Budapest, Hungary. 
\[6\] Stickel, Mark E. 1989. "A Prolog Technology Theo- 
rem Prover: A New Exposition and Implementation in 
Prolog", Technical Note No. 464. Menlo Park, Calif.: 
SRI International. 
