SESS ION 5:  NATURAL LANGUAGE I 
James F. Allen 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Rochester 
Rochester, NY 14627 
INTRODUCTION 
The first natural language session concentrates on 
issues of parsing sentences into representation 
structure. Roughly, there are two parts to this 
problem: 
? finding a description of the structure of a natural 
language such as English, namely specifying a
grammar that adequately describes the structures 
in the language; and 
? assigning structure to sentences according to this 
grammar, namely the parsing process. 
This session contains papers that address certain 
issues from both the perspective of defining better 
grammars and developing better parsing 
algorithms. 
Figure 1 outlines the space of problems. There are 
three particular problems that are being addressed 
here. The first, which involves work in both 
grarnrnatical development and parsing, is dealing 
with Robustness. How can we specify a system that 
does not collapse in the face of disfluencies, 
unknown words, and structures and words that are 
simply not known to the system. The second 
concerns grammatical coverage. Almost any 
formalism can cover the simple sentences in 
English, but none can handle complex 
constructions such as co-ordination and ellipsis 
very well. The third issue concerns parser 
efficiency. How can we develop arsing algorithms 
that can operate in a reasonable amount of time. 
Each of these issues are discussed below in more 
detail, and the papers that concern them will be 
identified. 
By far, one of the most pressing issues in parsing is 
the issue of robustness. In some sense, every paper 
in this session has a contribution to make to this 
issue. There are two issues that need to be dealt with. 
We need to generalize the notion of a "grammar" so 
that they can describe a wider range of sentences, 
including many traditionally viewed as "ill-formed", 
and we need to develop arsing algorithms that can 
handle such generalized grammars and introduce 
additional techniques for handling sentences that 
the grammar still does not "accept". 
The first paper in this session concerns 
generalizing the notion o f  a grammar. Bobrow, 
Ingria and Stallard introduce a mechanism called 
Mapping Units, which allow one to more concisely 
describe the possible variations in word order found 
in English, and which use semantic onstraints 
rather than syntactic onstraint to define the notion 
of "well-formedness". 
Jackson, Appelt, Bear, Moore and Podlozny, on the 
other hand, attack robustness by introducing a
system based on domain specific template matching 
that can be used to interpret sentences that may not 
be parsable by a traditional grammar. Rather than 
replacing the traditional parsing approach, they 
view this as an additional mechanism that can be 
used when the traditional techniques fail. This 
template matching approach was shown to be 
highly successful in the last evaluation i  the ATIS 
task. 
Weischedel, Ayuso, Bobrow, Boisen, Ingria and 
Palmucei also address robustness by considering 
techniques that can be used if traditional methods 
fail. In this case, they are considering techniques of 
extracting phrase fragments from the text and using 
semantic techniques to attempt o interpret he 
utterance from the interpretation f the fragments. 
Joshi & Sehabes' paper present a new formalism for 
handling co-ordination, this is a particularly 
difficult area for grammar writers. If co-ordination is 
handled at all in a system, it is usually done by a rule 
that says two constituents of the same type can be 
conjoined to form a new constituent of that same 
type. This runs into problems with sentences such 
as (John likes) and (Bill hates) beans. Traditional 
syntactic theories do not have constituents 
corresponding to the bracketing parts of this 
sentence. To handle this, some researchers such as 
Steedman have generalized the notion of 
constituent. Joshi and Schabes have taken a 
different approach, they retain the traditional 
classification i to constituents, and generalize the 
co-ordination rule with the TAG framework, 
producing an elegant approach to this difficult 
problem. 
183 
The structure of Language Processing Language 
(grammatical formalisms) (Parsing formalisms) 
Figure 1: The space of research issues in this session 
Finally, Moore & Dowding describe a series of 
experiments in trying to produce an efficient 
bottom-up arsing algorithm. In order to handle 
robustness, it seems that bottom-up parsing 
techniques are needed for top-down approaches may 
produce little partial analysis for sentences that fall 
beyond the scope of the grammar. They describes a
series of techniques for speeding up bottom-up 
techniques, and then introduce a new technique that 
uses some prediction techniques (i.e. some "top- 
down" information) that produces a considerable 
faster algorithm. 
Summary of the Discussion 
The most important issue that came up in the 
discussion was the role of limited "ad-hoe" 
techniques such as the template matcher and their 
role in research. It is clear, looking at the latest 
evaluation results, the the systems that use template 
matching in the ATIS domain are more successful. 
Yet most everyone is in agreement that such 
techniques are limited and that there are many 
examples where it will simply fail. As the test 
domain becomes more complicated, these 
deficiencies may eventually show through. But 
because these techniques are so effective on 
sentence fragments and ungrammatical utterances, 
they are clearly here to stay. From an engineering 
standpoint, hese techniques currently ield the best 
results. But a more interesting possibility should 
also be considered. These techniques are clearly 
filling a gap that current syntactically-based 
formalisms can't address. Interpretation strategies 
that are strongly driven by semantics and domain 
expectations about he domain probably will always 
play a role in a fully robust system. 
As a result, an important research issue involves 
finding methods of combining the more general 
syntactic models with the domain-specific template 
matching techniques. The syntactically-based 
models can handle the more complex relationships 
that need to be found in some sentences, while the 
template matching techniques can handle sentence 
fragments and garbled input. I expect hat there will 
be several papers on this very issue at the next 
workshop. 
184 
