SRI'S REAL-TIME SPOKEN LANGUAGE SYSTEM 
Patti Price and Robert C. Moore 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
This project involves the integration of speech and natural- 
language processing for spoken language systems (SLS). The 
goal of this project, to develop a multi-modal interface to the 
Official Airline Guide database, is being developed along two 
overlapping research and development lines: one focussed on an 
SLS kernel for database query, and the other on the full interac- 
tive system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Speaker-dependent andspeaker-independent mos to illus- 
trate the combined recognition/natural language system and 
accompanying graphical user interfaces. 
Improved robustness through the development of a template 
matcher for generating database queries; the template 
matcher has a tunable parameter tocontrol how much con- 
straint is ignored, so that wrong answers can be traded with 
no answers. 
Implementation f a bottom-up arser for CLE-formalism 
grammars; the new parser is about wice as fast as our origi- 
nal left-corner parser, and about 17 times faster than an ini- 
tial bottom-up arser. 
Exploration of two schemes to integrate the recognizer and 
current NL schemes: N-best recognition with a statistical 
grammar, and recognition guided by a probabilistic finite- 
state representation f the templates. 
Evaluation of SRI's NL, SLS, and speech recognition tech- 
nologies. SRI's February-91 weighted sentence rror rate 
for ATIS Class A sentences was 33.8% (NL) and 44.1% 
(SLS); word error rate for the Resource Management 
speaker independent speech recognition evaluation was 
17.6% with no grammar and 4.8% with the standard word- 
pair grammar. 
Improvements in the CLE grammar: extended coverage of 
numerical expressions, ATIS domain sortal restrictions, and 
conjoined noun phrases. 
Implementation of tied-mixture hidden Markov models, 
which resulted in a 20% reduction in the word-error rate 
compared to the discrete-density version. 
Training of a discrete-density DECIPHER using 20,000 
sentences of read and spontaneous speech from Resource 
Management, TIMIT, and ATIS corpora. We achieved 10% 
word error on the June-90 ATIS test set. 
New techniques for statistical language models: a back-off 
estimation algorithm, Good-Turing estimates, and interpola- 
tion of word-based grammars with class-based grammars. 
Current est-set perplexity ranges from 15 to 30. 
Initial implementation f fast-search recognition algorithms 
for near eal-time recognition. 
Initial implementation of speaker-adaptation using tied- 
mixture codebook adaptation. 
Implementation f an HMM reject-word model for dealing 
with noises and out-of-vocabulary items in digit recognition 
tasks; we plan to incorporate his in our ATIS SLS. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Continue data collection and analysis and expand the ATIS 
domain. 
Implement a new architecture tocombine the advantages of
the robust emplate matcher with the new bottom-up arser. 
The parser will feed individual constituents o the template 
mateher, even if it cannot find a complete interpretation f 
an utterance, and will also form the basis of a phrase-level 
statistical language model to guide recognition (see Jackson 
et aL, this volume). 
Continue efforts in statistical language modeling: Deter- 
mine why low perplexity systems do not always improve 
accuracy; Develop means for making efficient use of lan- 
guage-model training data, and for using out-of-task train- 
ing data; Combine statistical language modeling with 
finguistic models of syntax and semantics. 
Improve acoustic modeling performance: consistency mod- 
eling, speaker-adaptation, rejection modeling (including 
alternative topologies and training techniques), spontaneous 
speech phenomena (variations in phonology and speaking 
rate), corrective training; Implement a continuous-distribu- 
tion version of DECIPHER. 
425  
