Spoken Language Recognition and Understanding 
Victor W. Zue and Lynette Hirschman 
Spoken Language Systems Group 
Laboratory  for Computer  Science 
Massachuset ts  Inst i tute  of Technology" 
Cambr idge,  Massachusetts  02139 
OBJECT IVE  
The goal of this research is to develop a spoken language 
system that will demonstrate he usefulness of voice input 
for interactive problem solving. The system will accept con- 
tinuous speech, and will handle multiple speakers without 
explicit speaker enrollment. Combining SUMMIT, a segment- 
based speech recognition system, and TINA, a probabilistic 
natural anguage system, to achieve speech understanding, 
the system will be demonstrated in an application domain 
relevant o the DoD. 
SUMMARY OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS: 
? Developed a procedure for determining context-dependent 
models for lexical labels in the SUMMIT speech recog- 
nition system. Reduced word error rate by almost a 
factor of two on the 1,000 word Resource Management 
task. 
PLANS: 
Improve SUMMIT recognition performance by incorpo- 
rating more complex context-dependent models and ex- 
perimenting with alternative classification algorithms. 
Provide tighter coupling of TINA and SUMMIT in or- 
der to exploit speech and natural anguage symbiosis. 
In particular, investigate how parse probability can be 
affected by discourse context. 
Investigate he modelling of discourse and dialogue, in- 
cluding the use of error and clarification messages, to 
improve both recognition performance and the interac- 
tive nature of spoken language systems. 
Collect additional speech ~nd text data during actual 
problem solving for system development and evaluation 
in the ATIS domain. 
Performed experiments investigating the integration of 
syntax and semantics with acoustic evidence to improve 
system performance. Achieved a 33% improvement on 
performance score in the VOYAGER domain. 
? Performed signal representation comparisons on the task 
of speaker-independent vowel classification. Demon- 
strated the robustness of the auditory model over other 
signal representations, particularly in the presence of 
noise. 
? Developed a data collection procedure within the ATIS 
domain, and collected nearly 3,700 spontaneously gen- 
erated sentences from over 100 speakers. Performed 
comparative analyses on the data collection at TI and 
MIT. 
? Developed a preliminary version of the MIT ATIS sys- 
tem and participated in the common evaluation with 
both speech and text input. 
416 
