Evaluating the Use of Prosodic Information 
in Speech Recognition and Understanding 
Marl Ostendorf Patti Price 
Boston University SRI International 
Boston, MA 02215 Menlo Park, CA 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to investigate the use of differ- 
ent levels of prosodic information in speech recognition 
and understanding. In particular, the current focus of 
the work is the use of prosodic phrase boundary infor- 
mation in parsing. The research involves determining a 
representation of prosodic information suitable for use 
in a speech understanding system, developing reliable 
algorithms for detection of the prosodic cues in speech, 
investigating architectures for integrating prosodic cues 
in a parser, and evaluating the potential improvements 
of prosody in the context of the SRI Spoken Language 
System. This research is sponsored jointly by DARPA 
and NSF. ? 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Developed an algorithm for recognizing intonational 
cues (pitch accents or prominences and boundary 
tones) using a modified version of our previously de- ? 
veloped break detection algorithm. Improved break 
detection performance by including probability of 
boundary tone as an additional feature. ? 
? Extended previous work in analysis/synthesis parse 
scoring by introducing a new probabilistic scot- . 
ing technique that uses a decision tree to pre- 
dict prosodic phrase breaks. Disambiguation re- 
sults show that this automatically trainable synthe- 
sis technique yields performance comparable to the 
rule-based synthesis algorithms previously investi- 
gated, even though the syntactic structures repre- 
sented in the training corpus were quite different * 
from those in the testing corpus. 
? Investigated, in conjunction with Sl:tI's SLS project, 
acoustic attributes of hypothesized repair locations, 
finding that relative durations of two repeated words 
and existence and duration of an intervening pause 
can be reliable cues to repairs. 
? Discovered that pause fillers in spontaneous speech 
were a frequent source of recognition errors, ana- 
lyzed acoustic ues to pause fillers, and found a sig- 
nificant difference between the pitch of a pause filler 
and that of its local context, suggesting a simple de- 
tection algorithm. 
Played a major role in organizing and leading 
a workshop aimed at developing a common core 
prosodic transcription standard; the impending 
availability of large corpora of data including syn- 
tactic annotations makes the need for agreement on 
prosodic standards especially critical. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Evaluate the break index and prominence recogni- 
tion algorithms on paragraphs of speech (as opposed 
to sentences) and on spontaneous speech as opposed 
to read speech. Investigate new acoustic features for 
improving recognition results. 
Extend parse scoring algorithm to include promi- 
nence information making use of tree-based promi- 
nence prediction algorithms. 
Utilize the parse scoring algorithm in speech under- 
standing. 
Continue study of acoustic ues to repairs and other 
spontaneous speech effects; specifically, analyze the 
proportion of such events in different SLS configu- 
rations, the effect of such events on types of errors 
in different SLS configurations, and the role of into- 
nation and duration patterns in their detection. 
Coordinate project with research on prosody at 
IPO, Eindhoven; this laboratory is the research cen- 
ter for the largest group in the world focussed in 
prosody. Dr. Price will spend three months at this 
institution working on the current project half-time. 
466 
