Spoken Language Recognition and Understanding 
Victor Zue and Lynette Hirschman 
Spoken Language Systems Group 
Laboratory  for Computer  Science 
Massachusetts  Inst i tute of Technology 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts  02139 
1. PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this research is to demonstrate spoken lan- 
guage systems in support of interactive problem solving. 
The system accepts continuous speech input and handles 
multiple speakers without explicit speaker enrollment. 
The MIT spoken language system combines SUMMIT, a 
segment-based speech recognition system, and TINA, a 
probabilistic natural anguage system, to achieve speech 
understanding. The system engages in interactive dia- 
logue with the user, providing output in the form of tab- 
ular displays, as well as spoken and written output. The 
system has been demonstrated on several applications, 
including travel planning and direction assistance. 
2. RECENT RESULTS 
? Reduced spontaneous speech recognition word er- 
ror rate by more than a factor of two since the 
February 1991 evaluation through the use of low 
perplexity language models and context-dependent 
phonetic models. 
? Reduced natural anguage weighted error by almost 
a factor of 2 on class A sentences through the use 
of a robust parsing mechanism, which integrates 
parsed phrases into a single semantic representation, 
using a slight extension of the existing discourse pro- 
cessing. 
? Demonstrated a near real-time interactive spoken 
language system, running on a Sun SPARCstation 
or an IBM RX6000. 
? Developed and experimented with alternative met- 
rics for the evaluation of interactive spoken language 
systems, including use of task completion and time- 
to-completion for air travel planning tasks, as well 
as a log file based evaluation procedure. 
? Collected nearly 20,000 sentences for the Wall Street 
Journal pilot corpus in support of research and de- 
velopment in large-vocabulary speech recognition 
systems. 
? Chaired the MADCOW multi-site ATIS data collec- 
tion effort, contributed over 5000 sentences of spon- 
taneous ATIS data, and participated in the common 
evaluation for speech, spoken language and text in- 
put. 
3. PLANS FOR THE COMING 
YEAR 
Improve SUMMIT recognition performance by devel- 
oping phonetic and language models for silence and 
filled pauses, and mechanisms todetect and "repair" 
false starts and repeats. 
Continue experimentation on low perplexity lan- 
guage models (N-gram, LR parser, probablistic 
parsing) to improve speech recognition performance. 
Model discourse and dialogue, including the use of 
error and clarification messages, to improve both 
recognition performance and the interactive nature 
of spoken language systems. 
Develop evaluation metrics for interactive spoken 
language systems based on experiments using the 
real-time ATIS spoken language system. 
Experiment with alternative user interaction strate- 
gies using near real-time data collection system. 
474 
