Vocabulary and Environment Adaptation 
in Vocabulary-Independent Speech Recognition 
Hsiao-Wuen Hon Kai-Fu Lee 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 
Speech & Language Group 
Apple Computer, Inc. 
Cupertino, CA 95014 
1 Abstract 
In this paper, we are looking into the adaptation issues of 
vocabulary-independent (VI) systems. Just as with speaker- 
adaptation i  speaker-independent system, two vocabulary 
adaptation algorithms \[5\] are implemented in order to tailor 
the VI subword models to the target vocabulary. The first 
algorithm is to generate vocabulary-adapted clustering de- 
cision trees by focusing on relevant allophones during tree 
generation and reduces the VI error rate by 9%. The second 
algorithm, vocabulary-bias training, is to give the relevant 
allophones more prominence by assign more weight o them 
during Baum-Welch training of the generalized allophonic 
models and reduces the VI error ate by 15%. Finally, in order 
to overcome the degradation caused by the different acoustic 
environments u ed for VI training and testing, CDCN and 
ISDCN originally designed for microphone adaptation are in- 
corporated into our VI system and both reduce the degradation 
of VI cross-environment recognition by 50%. 
2 Introduction 
In 89' and 91' DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shops \[8, 7\], we have shown that accurate vocabulary- 
independent (VI) speech recognition is possible. However, 
there are many anatomical differences between tasks (vocab- 
ularies), such as the size of the vocabulary and the frequency 
of confusable words., which might affect he acoustic model- 
ing techniques toachieve optimal performance in vocabulary- 
dependent (VD) systems. For example, whole-word models 
are often used in small-vocabulary tasks, while subword mod- 
els must be used in large-vocabulary tasks. Moreover, within 
a limited vocabulary, it is possible to design some special fea- 
tures to separate the confusable models. Therefore, discrimi- 
native training techniques, uch as neural networks \[10\], and 
maximum utual information estimator (MMIE) \[4\], have so 
much success in small-vocabulary tasks. 
Just as with speaker adaptation in speaker-independent 
systems, it is desirable to implement vocabulary adapta- 
tion to make the VI system tailored to the target vocabulary 
(task). Our first vocabulary adaptation algorithm is to build 
vocabulary-adapted allophonic lustering decision trees for 
168 
the target vocabulary based on only the relevant allophones. 
The adapted trees would only focus on the relevant contexts 
to separate the relevant allophones, thus give the resulting 
allophonic lusters more discriminative power for the target 
vocabulary. In an experiment of adapting allophone cluster- 
ing tree for the Resource Management task, this algorithm 
achieved an 9% error reduction. 
Our second vocabulary adaptation algorithm is to focus 
on the relevant allophones during training of generalized allo- 
phonic models, instead of focusing on them during generation 
of allophonic lustering decision trees. To achieve that, we 
give the relevant allophones more prominence by assigning 
more weight o the relevant allophones during Baum-Welch 
training of generalized allophonic models. With vocabulary- 
bias training we are able to reduce the VI error rate by 15% 
for the Resource Management task. 
We have found that different recording environments be- 
tween training and testing (CMU vs. TI) will degrade the per- 
formance significantly \[6\], even when the same microphone 
is used in either case. Based on the framework of semi- 
continuous HMMs, we proposed to update codebook proto- 
types in discrete HMMs in order to fit speech vectors from 
new environments \[5\]. Moreover, codebook-dependent cep- 
stral normalization (CDCN) and interpolated SNR-dependent 
cepstral normalization (ISDCN) proposed by Acero et al \[2\] 
for microphone adaptation are incorporated into the our VI 
system to achieve environmental robustness. CDCN uses 
the speech knowledge represented in a codebook to estimate 
the noise and spectral equalization correction vectors for en- 
vironmental normalization. In ISDCN, the SNR-dependent 
correction vectors are obtained via EM algorithm to minimize 
the VQ distortion. Both algorithms reduced the degradation 
of VI cross-environment recognition by 50%. 
In this paper, we first describe our two vocabulary adap- 
tation algorithms , vocabulary-adapted decision trees and 
vocabulary-bias training. Then we describe the codebook 
adaptation algorithm and two cepstral normalization tech- 
niques, CDCN and ISDCN for environmental robustness. We 
will also present results with these vocabulary and environ- 
ment adaptation algorithms. Finally, we will close with some 
concluding remark about his work and future work. 
3 Vocabulary Adaptation 
Unlike most speaker adaptation techniques, our vocabulary 
adaptation algorithms only take advantage of analyzing the 
target vocabulary and thus do not require any additional 
vocabulary-specific data. Two terminologies which play an 
essential role in our algorithms are defined as follows. 
relevant allophones Those allophones which occur in the 
target vocabulary (task). 
irrelevant allophones Those allophone which occur in the 
VI training set, but not in the target vocabulary 
(task). 
In 91' DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop 
\[7\], we have shown the decision-tree based generalized allo- 
phone is a adequate VI subword model. Figure 1 is an example 
of our VI subword unit, generalized allophone, which is ac- 
tually an allophonic luster. The allophones in the white area 
are relevant allophones and the rest are irrelevant ones. 
Figure 1: A generalized allophone (allophonic luster) 
3.1 Vocabulary.Adapted Decision Tree 
Our first vocabulary adaptation algorithm is to change the 
allophone clustering (the decision trees) so that the brand 
new set of subword models would have a more discriminative 
power for the target vocabulary. Since the clustering decision 
tree was built on the entire VI training set, the existence of the 
enormous irrelevant aUophones might result in sub-optimally 
clustering of allophones for the target vocabulary. 
To reveal such facts, let's look at the following scenario. 
Figure 2 is a split in the original decision tree for phone 
/ k / generated from vocabulary-independent training set and 
the associated question for this split is "Is the left context a 
vowel". Suppose all the left contexts for phone/k /  in the 
target vocabulary are vowels. Thus, the question for this split 
is totally unsuitable for the target vocabulary because the split 
assigns all the allophones for /k /  in the target vocabulary 
to one branch and discrimination among those allophones 
becomes impossible. 
On the other hand, if only the relevant ailophones are con- 
sidered for this split, the associated split question would turns 
out to be the one of relevant questions which separates the 
relevant allophones appropriately and therefore possesses the 
greatest discriminative ability among the relevant allophones. 
Figure 3 just shows uch optimal split for relevant allophones. 
The generation of the clustering decision trees are recursive. 
The existence of enormous irrelevant allophones would pre- 
vent he generation ofthe decision trees from concentrating on
those relevant allophones and relevant questions, and results 
in sub-optimal trees for those relevant allophones. 
Left = Vowel? 
IN! irrelevant allophones 
relevant allophnones 
Figure 2: An split(question) in the original decision tree for 
phone / k / 
Right = Liquid? 
NN 
\[~\] relevant allophnones 
irrelevant allophones 
Figure 3: the correspondent optimal split(question) for rele- 
vant allophones of phone / k / 
Based on the analysis, our first adaptation algorithm is to 
build vocabulary-adapted (VA) decision trees by using only 
relevant allophones during the generation of decision trees. 
The adapted trees would not only be automatically generated, 
but also focus on the relevant questions to separate the relevant 
allophones, therefore give the resulting allophonic lusters 
more discriminative power for the target vocabulary. 
Three potential problems are brought up when one exam- 
ining the algorithm closely. First of all, some relevant allo- 
phones might not occur in the VI training set since we can't 
expect 100% allophone coverage for every task, especially 
for large-vocabulary task. Nevertheless, it is essential to have 
all the models for relevant allophones ready before generating 
the VA decision trees because we need the entropy informa- 
tion of models for each split. It is trivial for those relevant 
allophones which also occur in VI training set. The correspon- 
dent allophonic models trained from the training data can be 
169 
used directly. Because of the nature of decision trees, every 
allophone could find its closest generalized allophonic luster 
by traw~rsing the decision trees. Therefore, the correspondent 
generalized allophonic models could be used as the models 
for those relevant allophones not occurring in the VI training 
set during the generation of the VA clustering trees. 
Secondly, if only the part of VI training set which con- 
rains the relevant allophones i used to train new generalized 
allophonic models, the new adapted generalized allophonic 
models would be under-trained and less robust. Fortunately, 
we can retain the entire training set because of the the nature 
of decision trees. All the allophones could find their gener- 
alized allophonic lusters by traversing the new VA decision 
trees, so the entire VI training set could actually contribute 
to the training of new adapted generalized allophonic models 
and make them well-trained and robust. 
The entropy criterion for splitting during the generation of 
decision trees is weighted by the counts (frequencies) ofallo- 
phones \[6\]. By preferring to split nodes with large counts (al- 
lophones appearing frequently), the counts of the allophonic 
cluster will become more balanced and the final generalized 
allophonic models will be equally trainable. Since the VA de- 
cision tress are generated from the set of relevant allophones 
which is not the same as the set of allophones to train the 
generalized allophonic models. The balance feature of those 
models will be no longer valid. Some generalized allophonic 
models might only have few (or even none) examples in the VI 
training set and thus cannot be well-trained. Fortunately, we 
can enhance the trainability of VA subword models through 
gross validation with the entire VI training set. The gross 
validation for VA decision trees is somehow different than the 
conventional cross validation which uses one part of the data 
to grow the trees and the other part of independent data to 
prune the trees in order to predict new contexts. Since rele- 
vant allophones i already only a small portion of the entire VI 
training set, further dividing it will prevent the learning algo- 
rithm from generating reliable VA decision trees. Instead, we 
grow the VA decision trees very deeply; replace the entropy 
reduction information of each split by traversing through the 
trees with all the allophones (including irrelevant ones); and 
finally prune the trees based on the new entropy informa- 
tion. This will prune out those splits of nodes without enough 
training support (too few examples) even though they might 
be relevant to the target vocabulary. Therefore the resulting 
generalized allophonic models will become more trainable. 
The vocabulary-adapted d cision tree learning algorithm, 
emphasizing the relevant allophones during growing of the 
decision trees and using the gross validation with the entire VI 
training set provides an ideal mean for finding the equilibrium 
between adaptability for the target vocabulary and trainability 
with the VI training database. 
3.2 Vocabulary-Bias Training 
While the above adaptation algorithm tailors the subword 
units to the target vocabulary by focusing on the relevant al- 
lophones during the generation of clustering decision trees, 
it treated relevant and other irrelevant allophones equally in 
the final training of generalized allophonic models. Our next 
adaptation algorithm is to give the relevant allophones more 
prominence during the training of generalized allophonic 
models. 
Since the VI training database is supposed to be very large, 
it is reasonable to assume that the irrelevant allophones are 
the majority of almost every cluster. Thus, the resulting allo- 
phonic luster will more likely represent the acoustic behavior 
of the set of irrelevant allophones, instead of the set of relevant 
allophones. 
In order to make relevant allophones become the majority of 
the allophonic luster without incorporating ew vocabulary- 
specific data, we must impose a bias toward the relevant al- 
lophones during training. Since our VI system is based on 
HMM approach, it is trivial to give the relevant allophones 
more prominence by assigning more weight o them during 
Baum-Welch training. The simplest way is to multiply a 
prominent weight o the parametric re-estimation equations 
for relevant allophones. 
The prominent weight can be a pre-defined constant, like 
2.0 or 3.0, or a function of some variables. However, it is 
better for the prominent weight to reflect the reliability of 
the relevant allophones toward which we imposed a bias. 
If a relevant allophone occur rarely in the training set, we 
shouldn't assign a large weight o it because the statistics of 
it is not reliable. On the other hand, we could assign larger 
weights to those relevant allophones with enough examples 
in the training data. In our experiments, we use a simple 
function based on the frequencies of relevant allophones. All 
the irrelevant allophones have the weight 1.0 and the weight 
for relevant allophones i given by the following function: 
1 + loya(Z) where x is the frequency of relevant allophones 
a is chosen to be the minimum number of training examples 
to train a reasonable model in our configuration. 
Imposing abias toward the relevant allophones i similar to 
duplicating the training data of relevant allophones. For ex- 
ample, using aprominent weight of 2.0 for an training example 
in the Baum-Welch re-estimation is like observing the same 
training example twice. Therefore, our vocabulary-bias train- 
ing algorithm is identical to duplicating the training exam- 
ples of relevant allophones according to the weight function. 
Based on the same principle, this adaptation algorithm can be 
applied to other non-HMM systems by duplicating the train- 
ing data of relevant allophones to make relevant allophones 
170 
become the majority of the training data during training. The 
resulting models will then be tailored to those relevant aUo- 
phones. 
4 Environment Adaptat ion 
It is well known that when a system is trained and tested under 
different environments, he performance ofrecognition drops 
moderately \[8\] However, it is very likely for training and test- 
ing taking place under different environments in VI systems 
because the VI models can be used for any task which could 
happen anywhere. Even if the recording hardware r mains un- 
changed, e.g., microphones, A/D converters, pre-amplifiers, 
etc, the other environmental f ctors, e.g. the room size, back- 
ground noise, positions of microphones, reverberation from 
surface reflections, etc, are all out of the control realm. For ex- 
ample, when comparing the recording environment ofTexas 
Instruments (TI) and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), a 
few differences were observed although both used the same 
close-talk microphone (Sennheiser HMD-414). 
? Recording equipment - TI and CMU used different A/D 
devices, filters and pre-amplifiers which might change 
the overall transfer function and thus generate different 
spectral tilts on speech signals. 
? Room - The TI recording took place in a sound-proof 
room, while the CMU recording took place in a big labo- 
ratory with much background noise (mostly paper ustle, 
keyboard noise, and other conversations). Therefore; 
CMU's data tends to contain more additive noise than 
TI's. 
? Input level - The CMU recording process always ad- 
justed the amplifier's gain control for different speak- 
ers to compensate he varied sound volume of speakers. 
Since the sound volume of TI's female speakers tends to 
be much lower, TI probably didn't adjust he gain control 
like CMU did. Therefore, the dynamic range of CMU's 
data tends to be larger. 
4.1 Codebook Adaptat ion 
The speech signal processing of our VI system is based on a 
characterization of speech in a codebook of prototypical moO- 
els \[7\]. Typically the performance of systems based on a code- 
book degrade over time as the speech signal drifts through en- 
vironmental changes due to the increased istortion between 
the speech and the codebook. 
Therefore, two possible adaptation strategies include: 
1. continuously updating the cooebook prototypes tofit the 
testing speech spectral vectors xt. 
2. continuously transforming the testing speech spectral 
vectors x, into normalized vectors Yi, so that the dis- 
tribution of the y~ is close to that of the training data 
described by the codebook prototypes. 
Our first environment adaptation algorithm belongs to the first 
strategy, while two cepstral normalization algorithms which 
will be described in Section 4.2 belongs to the second strategy. 
Semi-continuous HMMs (SCHMMs) or tied mixture con- 
tinuous HMMs \[9, 3\] has been proposed to extend the dis- 
crete HMMs by replacing discrete output distributions with a 
combination of the original discrete output probability distri- 
butions and continuous pdf's of codebooks. SCHMMs can 
jointly re-estimate both the codebooks and HMM parameters 
to achieve an optimal codebook/model combination according 
to a maximum likelihood criterion during training. They have 
been applied to several recognition systems with improved 
performance over discrete HMMs \[9, 3\]. 
The cooebooks of our vocabulary-independent system can 
be modified to optimize the probability of generating data 
from new environment bythe vocabulary-independent HMMs 
according to the SCHMM framework. Let #i denote the mean 
vector of cooebook index i in the original codebook, then the 
new vector ~ can be obtained from the following equation 
- E (cT=  (1) 
where 7~ (t) denotes the posterior probability observed the 
codeword i at time t using HMM m for speech vector xt. 
Note that we did not use continuous Gassian pdf's to rep- 
resent he cooebooks in the Equation 1. Each mean vec- 
tor of the new codebook is computed from acoustic vector 
xt associated with corresponding posterior probability in the 
discrete forward-backward algorithm without involving con- 
tinuous pdf computation. The new data from different envi- 
ronment, xt, can be automatically aligned with corresponding 
codeword in the forward-backward t aining procedure. If the 
alignment is not closely associated with the corresponding 
codeword in the HMM training procedure, reestimation of
the corresponding codeword will then be de-weighted by the 
posterior probability 7~ n(t) accordingly inorder to adjust he 
new cooebook to fit the new data. 
4.2 Cepst ra l  Normal i za t ion  
The types of environmental f ctors which differ in TI's and 
CMU's recording environments can roughly be classified into 
two complementary categories : 
1. additive noise - noise from different sources, like paper 
rustle, keyboard noise, other conversations, etc. 
171 
2. spectral equalization - distortions from the convolution 
of the speech signal with an unknown channel, ike posi- 
tions of microphones, reverberation from surface reflec- 
tions, etc. 
Acero at al. \[1,2\] proposed a series of environment ormal- 
ization algorithms based on joint compensation for additive 
noise and equaliTation. They has been implemented success- 
fully on SPHINX to achieve robustness to different micro- 
phones. Among those algorithms, codeword-dependent cep- 
stral normalization (CDCN), is the most accurate one, while 
interpolated SNR-dependent cepstral normalization (ISDCN) 
is the most efficient one 1. In this study, we incorporate hese 
two algorithms to make our vocabulary-independent sys em 
more robust o environmental variations. 
x = z -  w(q ,n )  (2) 
Equation 2 is the environmental compensation model, 
where x, z, w, q and n represent respectively the normalized 
vector, observed vector, correction vector, spectral equaliza- 
tion vector and noise vector. The CDCN algorithm attempts 
to determine q and n that provide an ensemble of compen- 
sated vectors x being collectively closest to the set of locations 
of legitimate VQ codewords. The correction vector w will 
be obtained using MMSE estimator based on q, n and the 
codebook. In ISDCN, q and n were determined by an EM 
algorithm aiming at minimizing VQ distortion. The final cor- 
rection vector w also depends on the instantaneous SNR of 
the current input frame using a sigmoid function. 
Condition Error Rate Error Reduction 
Baseline 5.4% N/A% 
+VA decision trees 4.9% 9.3% 
+VB training 4.6% 14.8% 
+VA trees & VB training 4.6% 14.8% 
Table 1: The results for Resource Management using 
vocabulary-adapted d cision trees and vocabulary-bias train- 
ing algorithms 
to further tailor the vocabulary-independent models to the 
Resource Management task, no compound improvement was 
produced. It might be because ither both algorithms are 
learning the similar characteristics of the target ask, or the 
combination ofthese two algorithms already reaches the limi- 
tation of adaptation capability within our modeling technique 
without he help of vocabulary-specific data. 
Adaptation Sentence CMU-TEST TI-TEST 
Baseline 5.4% 7.4% 
100 N/A 7.1% 
300 N/A 7.0% 
1000 N/A 7.0% 
2000 N/A 6.9% 
Table 2: The vocabulary-independent r sults on TI-TEST by 
adapting the codebooks for TI's data 
5 Experiments and Results 
All the experiments are evaluated on the speaker-independent 
DARPA resource management task. This task is a 991-word 
continuous task and a standard word-pair grammar with per- 
plexity 60 was used throughout. The test set, TI .TEST, con- 
sists of 320 sentences from 32 speakers (a random selection 
from June 1988, February 1989 and October 1990 DARPA 
evaluation sets). 
In order to isolate the influence of cross-environment recog- 
nition, another identical same test set, CMU-TEST, from 
32 speakers (different from TI speakers) was collected at 
CMU. Our baseline is using 4-codebook discrete SPHINX 
and decision-tree based generalized allophones as the VI sub- 
word units\[7\]. Table 1 shows that about 9% error reduction 
is achieved by adapting the decision trees for Resource Man- 
agement task, while about 15% error eduction is achieved by 
using vocabulary-bias training for the same task. Neverthe- 
less, when we try to combine these two adaptation algorithms 
1The reader isreferred to\[1\] for detailed CDCN and ISDCN algorithms 
172 
In codebook adaptation experiments, the 4 codebooks used 
in our HMM-based system are updated according Equation 
1. We randomly select 100, 300, 1000, 2000 sentences from 
TIRM database to form different adaptation sets. Two iter- 
ation were carried out for each adaptation sets to estimated 
the new codebooks for TI's data, while the HMM parameters 
are fixed. Table 2 shows the adaptation recognition result on 
TI testing set. It is indicated that only marginal improvement 
by adapting codebook for new environment even with lots of 
adaptation data. The result suggested that the adaptation of 
codebook alone fail to produce adequate adaptation because 
the HMM statistics used by recognizer have not been updated. 
Table 3 shows the recognition error rate on two test sets for 
VI systems incorporated with CDCN and ISDCN. Be aware 
that our VI training set was recorded at CMU. The degradation 
of cross-environment recognition with TI -TEST is roughly 
reduced by 50%. Like most environment ormalization al- 
gorithms, there is also a minor performance degradation for 
same-environment recognition when gaining robustness to 
other environments. 
Test Set CMU-TEST TI-TEST 
Baseline 5.4% 7.4% 
CDCN 5.6% 6A% 
ISDCN 5.7% 6.5% 
Table 3: The results for environment ormalization using 
CDCN & ISDCN 
6 Conclusions 
In this paper, we have presented two vocabulary adaptation 
algonthms, including vocabulary-adapted decision trees and 
vocabulary-bias training, that improve the performance of 
the vocabulary-independent system on the target ask by tai- 
loring the VI subword models to he target vocabulary. In 
91' DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop \[7\], we 
have shown that our VI system is already slightly better than 
our VD system. With these two adaptation algorithms which 
led to 9% and 15% error reduction respectively on Resource 
Management task, the resulting VI system is far more ac- 
curate than our VD system. In \[8\], we have demonstrated 
improved vocabulary-independent r sults with vocabulary- 
specific adaptation data. In the future, we plan to extend our 
adaptation algorithms with the help of vocabulary-specific 
data to achieve further adaptation with the target vocabulary 
(task). 
CDCN and ISDCN have been successfully incorporated 
to the vocabulary-independent system and reduce the degra- 
dation of VI cross-environment recognition by 50%. In the 
future, we will keep investigating new environment ormal- 
ization techniques to further educe the degradation and ulti- 
mately achieve the full environmental robustness across dif- 
ferent acoustic environments. Moreover, environment adap- 
tation with environment-specific data will also be explored 
for adapting the VI system to the new environment once we 
have more knowledge about it. 
To make the speech recognition system more robust for 
new vocabularies and new environments is essential to make 
the speech recognition application feasible. Our results have 
shown that plentiful training data, careful subword model- 
ing (decision-tree based generalized allophones) and suit- 
able environment ormalization have compensated for the 
lack of vocabulary and environment specific training. With 
the additional help of vocabulary adaptation, the vocabulary- 
independent system can be further tailored to any task quickly 
and cheaply, and therefore facilitates peech applications 
tremendously. 
173 
Acknowledgements 
This research was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DOD), Arpa Order No. 5167, under contract 
number N00039-85-C-0163. The authors would like to express their 
gratitude to Professor Raj Reddy and CMU speech research group 
for their support. 
References 
\[1\] Acero, A. Acoustical and Environmental Robustness inAuto- 
matic Speech Recognition. Department ofElectrical Engineer- 
ing, Carnegie-Mellon University, September 1990. 
\[2\] Acero, A. and Stem, R. Environmental Robustness inAuto- 
matic Speech Recognition. in: IEEE International Confer- 
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. 1990, 
pp. 849-852. 
\[3\] Bellegarda, I. and Nahamoo, D. Tied Mixture Continuous Pa- 
rameter Models for Large Vocabulary Isolated Speech Recog- 
nition, in: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing. 1989, pp. 13-16. 
\[4\] Brown, P. The Acoustic-Modeling Problem in Automatic 
Speech Recognition. Computer Science Department, Carnegie 
Mellon University, May 1987. 
\[5\] Hon, H. Vocabulary-lndependentSpeech Recognition: : The 
VOCIND System. School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mel- 
lon University, February 1992. 
\[6\] Hon, H. and Lee, K. CMU Robust Vocabulary-Independent 
Speech Recognition System. in: IEEE International Confer- 
ence on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Toronto, 
Ontario, CANADA, 1991, pp. 889-892. 
\[7\] Hon, H. and Lee, K. Recent Progress in Robust Vocabulary- 
Independent Speech Recognition. in: DARPA Speech and 
Language Workshop. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Asilo- 
mar, CA, 1991. 
\[8\] Hon, H. and Lee, K. Towards Speech Recognition Without 
Vocabulary-Speci~c Training. in: DARPA Speech and Lan- 
guage Workshop. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Cape Cod, 
MA, 1989. 
\[9\] Huang, X., Lee, K., and Hon, H. On Semi-Continuous Hidden 
Markov Modeling. in: IEEE International Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Albuquerque, 
NM, 1990, pp. 689-692. 
\[10\] Walbel, A., Hanazawa, T., Hinton, G., Shikano, K., and Lang, 
K. Phoneme Recognition using Time-Delay Neural Networks. 
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro- 
cessing, vol. ASSP-28 (1989), pp. 357-366. 
