SESS ION lOb: CORE NL  LEX ICON AND GRAMMAR 
Mark Liberman, Chairperson 
Department ofLinguistics 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6305 
ABSTRACT 
The value of generally-available speech and text corpora in 
facilitating research is clear--these resources are simply too 
expensive for each site to gather individually, and fair com- 
parative evaluation of approaches requires shared training 
and testing material. 
Similar considerations apply in the case of lexicons and gram- 
mars for broad-coverage NLP applications. Lexicons and 
grammars are very expensive to build, and it seems wasteful 
for every site to have to build them over again, especially in 
cases where no new invention is intended. Also, fair com- 
parative valuation of other components in modular systems 
seems to require combining them with a shared lexicon and 
grammar. 
However, it is unclear whether the community of researchers 
can agree that a particular design is appropriate, and that 
a large-scale ffort to implement i will converge on a result 
of fairly general utility. This session aimed to raise these 
issues, and to begin a discussion that we hope will result in 
a recommendation for action in the near futu~. The newly- 
formed Linguistic Data Consortium has a mandate to serve 
the community's needs in this area, and it will start from the 
ideas presented in this session by the panelists (Jerry Hobbs, 
Ralph Grishman, Paul Jacobs, Bob Ingria, Louise Guthrie, 
and Ken Church) and the audience. 
1. Summary of Panelists' 
Presentations 
Six panelists made brief individual presentations. Three 
of these dealt with lexical issues. 
? Louise Guthrie (NMSU) presented a suggested from 
Yorick Wilks for a "core lexicon" that would be 
application-independent a deasy to adapt o a wide 
range of parsers. 
? Bob Ingria (BBN) discussed his experience with the 
similarities and differences in the form and content 
of the lexical entries used by different systems. 
? Ken Church (AT&T) ,  playing devil's advocate, ar- 
gued that the effort to turn lexical raw materials 
into a shared computational lexicon might better 
be spent on more raw materials. 
Three other panelists dealt with grammatical issues. 
Jerry Hobbs (SKI) argued for a project to produce 
a "National Resource Grammar," an extensible, ef- 
ficient broad-coverage English grammar that could 
be distributed generally to the DARPA community 
and to other researchers. 
Ralph Grishman (NYU) suggested that we need to 
know where our grammars and parsers stand, and 
that an on-going program of comparative quantita- 
tive evaluation would define the state of the art, and 
should also lead to significant improvements. 
Paul Jacobs (GE) discussed his experience in com- 
bining components from earlier systems imple- 
mented at GE and CMU, doing the computational- 
linguistics equivalent of putting a Ford engine into 
a GM chassis; the fact that such "transplants" are 
feasible increases the credibility of of an effort to 
produce common lexical and grammatical compo- 
nents. 
2. Discussions and Conclusions 
The panelists and the audience touched on a spectrum 
of resources ranging from "raw materials" such as cor- 
pora to "finished components" such as computational 
grammars and lexicons. In between are such things as 
annotated corpora, pronouncing dictionaries, specialized 
word lists such as gazeteers, thesaurus-like structures 
such as George Miller's WordNet, part-of-speech taggers, 
lexical materials uch as lists of verb subcategorization 
frames, and partial parsers of various kinds. 
The proposals from Guthrie/Wilks, Hobbs, and Grish- 
man evoked both sympathetic responses and skeptical 
ones. One point that emerged was that the DARPA com- 
munity should have a Written Language Coordinating 
Committee, to complement the Spoken Language Coor- 
dinating Committee, and to enhance interchange among 
DARPA WL contractors. The WLCC has since been or- 
ganized, with Ralph Grishman as chair, and will provide 
a forum for further discussion and action on these issues. 
351 
