THE CONSORTIUM FOR LEX ICAL  RESEARCH 
Y. Wilks, Principal Investigator 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, New Mexico 88003 
PROJECT GOALS 
Work in computational linguistics has reached the point 
where the performance of many natural anguage pro- 
cessing systems i limited by a "lexical bottleneck". That 
is, such systems could handle much more text and pro- 
duce much more impressive application results were it 
not for the fact that their lexicons are too small. 
The Association for Computational Linguistics has es- 
tablished the Consortium for Lexical Research (CLR), 
with DARPA funding at the Computing Research Lab- 
oratory. The Consortium is advised by an ACL steer- 
ing committee consisting of Roy Byrd, Ralph Grishman, 
Mark Liberman and Don Walker. 
The task of the CLR is to facilitate research, making 
available to the whole natural language processing com- 
munity certain resources now held only by a few groups 
that have special relationships with companies or dic- 
tionary publishers. The CLR intends that agreements 
are set up with "providers" on reassuring and advan- 
tageous terms to both suppliers and researchers. The 
CLR will as far as is practically possible accept contri- 
butions from any source, regardless of theoretical orien- 
tation, and make them available as widely as possible for 
research. 
RECENT RESULTS 
The Consortium project officially started in January 
1991. Since then, an infrastructure for distribution and 
receipt of materials has been set up and contacts with 
researchers and major publishers have been established. 
We have now reached a stage where memberships are 
being accepted and resources are being acquired and dis- 
tributed. 
Our current status can be summarized as follows: 
Distr ibut ion Secure ftp procedures have been set up 
for three kinds of materiMs: free, members only, and 
restricted (by a fee or additional contract or both) 
Collection A group of public domain resources have 
been obtained and cataloged and acquisitions ofsoftware 
and data from publishers and researchers is ongoing. 
Contracts Together with our university lawyers, we 
have developed contracts for members and providers. 
These are now undergoing final revision incorporating 
changes uggested by several publishers. 
Membership We have had inquiries from over 500 sites. 
The first membership agreements have now been re- 
ceived. 
Documentat ion We have prepared several types of in- 
formation related to the CLR holdings: A catalog of 
short (paragraph) descriptions of each holding, a catalog 
of where to find the holding (via ftp), and an individual 
detailed descriptions of the software and data for each 
holding. 
Publ ic i ty The Consortium has been announced through 
email network news, in the ACL journal, and at various 
conferences in the U.S., Europe and Japan. 
In January 1992, the Consortium hosted a workshop 
where publishers, researchers from academia, govern- 
ment and industry, and lexicographers gathered to dis- 
cuss their needs and plans. The feeback from the work- 
shop was positive and is now shaping the development 
of the CLR in its second year of existence. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Provisional agreements have been established with Long- 
man and Harper-Collins for allowing us to act as a broker 
for their electronic materials. These agreements will be 
finalized in the first part of this year. This will be a 
major milestone for the Consortium. The form of the 
agreements hat they will sign with the members till 
remains to be settled. Once this is finalized, we hope 
this will provide a model which will allow us to complete 
agreements more easily with other publishers. 
We plan to expand membership and holdings steadily 
over the year, and progress toward our long term goal of 
establishing the Consortium as a self-supporting entity. 
? For information on the CLR, contact lexical@nmsu.edu. 
481 
