One Sense Per  D iscourse  
William A. Gale 
Kenneth W. Church 
David Yarowsky 
AT&T Bell Laboratories 
600 Mountain Avenue 
Murray Hill NJ 07974-0636 
1. ABSTRACT 
It is well-known that there are polysemous words like 
sentence whose "meaning" or "sense" depends on the 
context of use. We have recently reported on two new 
word-sense disambiguation systems, one trained on bilin- 
gual material (the Canadian Hansards) and the other 
trained on monolingual material (Roget's Thesaurus and 
Grolier's Encyclopedia). As this work was nearing com- 
pletion, we observed a very strong discourse ffect. That 
is, if a polysemous word such as sentence appears two 
or more times in a well-written discourse, it is extremely 
likely that they will all share the same sense. This paper 
describes an experiment which confirmed this hypothesis 
and found that the tendency to share sense in the same 
discourse is extremely strong (98%). This result can be 
used as an additional source of constraint for improving 
the performance of the word-sense disambiguation algo- 
rithm. In addition, it could also be used to help evaluate 
disambiguation algorithms that did not make use of the 
discourse constraint. 
2. OUR PREVIOUS WORK ON 
WORD-SENSE D ISAMBIGUATION 
2.1. Data  Deprivation 
Although there has been a long history of work on 
word-sense disambiguation, much of the work has been 
stymied by difficulties in acquiring appropriate testing 
and training materials. AI approaches have tended to 
focus on "toy" domains because of the difficulty in ac- 
quiring large lexicons. So too, statistical approaches, 
e.g., Kelly and Stone (1975), Black (1988), have tended 
to focus on a relatively small set of polysemous words 
because they have depended on extremely scarce hand- 
tagged materials for use in testing and training. 
We have achieved considerable progress recently by using 
a new source of testing and training materials and the 
application of Bayesian discrimination methods. Rather 
than depending on small amounts of hand-tagged text, 
we have been making use of relatively large amounts of 
parallel text, text such as the Canadian Hansards, which 
are available in multiple languages. The translation can 
often be used in lieu of hand-labeling. For example, con- 
sider the polysemous word sentence, which has two ma- 
jor senses: (1) a judicial sentence, and (2), a syntactic 
sentence. We can collect a number of sense (1) examples 
by extracting instances that are translated as peine, and 
we can collect a number of sense (2) examples by extract- 
ing instances that are translated as phrase. In this way, 
we have been able to acquire a considerable amount of 
testing and training material for developing and testing 
our disambiguation algorithms. 
The use of bilingual materials for discrimination deci- 
sions in machine tranlation has been discussed by Brown 
and others (1991), and by Dagan, Itai, and Schwall 
(1991). The use of bilingual materials for an essentially 
monolingual purpose, sense disambiguation, is similar in 
method, but differs in purpose. 
2.2. Bayesian Discrimination 
Surprisingly good results can be achieved using Bayesian 
discrimination methods which have been used very suc- 
cessfully in many other applications, especially author 
identification (Mosteller and Wallace, 1964) and infor- 
mation retrieval (IR) (Salton, 1989, section 10.3). Our 
word-sense disambiguation algorithm uses the words in 
a 100-word context 1 surrounding the polysemous word 
very much like the other two applications use the words 
in a test document. 
Information Retreival (IR): 
Pr(wlret) 
I1  'r(wlirrd) 
w in  doe 
l i t  is common to use very smal l  contexts  (e.g., 5-words) based 
on the observat ion that  people do not  need very much context in 
order to performance the d isambiguat ion  task. In contrast ,  we use 
much larger contexts  (e.g., 100 words). A l though people may be 
able to make do with much less context,  we believe the machine 
needs all the help it can get, and  we have found that  the larger 
context  makes  the task much easier. In fact, we have been able 
to  measure  in format ion at extremely large d istances (10,000 words 
away from the po lysemous word in quest ion),  though obviously 
most  of the useful in format ion appears  relatively near  the poly- 
semous word (e.g., within the first 100 words or so). Needless to 
say, our 100-word contexts  are considerably larger than  the smal ler 
5-word windows that  one normal ly  f inds in the l i terature. 
233 
Author Identification: 
Pr(w\[authorl) 
rI Pr(wlauthor2) 
w in  doe 
Word-Sense Disambiguation: 
Pr(wlsensel) 
~I Pr(wlsense2) 
w in  contes t  
This model treats the context as a bag of words and ig- 
nores a number of important linguistic factors such as 
word order and collocations (correlations among words 
in the context). Nevertheless, even with these over- 
simplifications, the model still contains an extremely 
large number of parameters: 2V ~ 200,000. It is a 
non-trivial task to estimate such a large number of pa- 
rameters, especially given the sparseness of the training 
data. The training material typically consists of approx- 
imately 12,000 words of text (100 words words of context 
for 60 instances of each of two senses). Thus, there are 
more than 15 parameters to be estimated from each data 
point. Clearly, we need to be fairly careful given that we 
have so many parameters and so little evidence. 
2.3. Parameter Estimation 
In principle, the conditional probabilities Pr(toklsense ) 
can be estimated by selecting those parts of the entire 
corpus which satisfy the required conditions (e.g., 100- 
word contexts urrounding instances of one sense of sen- 
fence, counting the frequency of each word, and dividing 
the counts by the total number of words satisfying the 
conditions. However, this estimate, which is known as 
the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE), has a number 
of well-known problems. In particular, it will assign zero 
probability to words that do not happen to appear in 
the sample, which is obviously unacceptable. 
We will estimate Pr(toklsense ) by interpolating between 
local probabilities, probabilities computed over the 100- 
word contexts, and global probabilities, probabilities 
computed over the entire corpus. There is a trade-off be- 
tween measurement error and bias error. The local prob- 
abilities tend to be more prone to measurement error 
whereas the global probabilities tend to be more prone 
to bias error. We seek to determine the relevance of the 
larger corpus to the conditional sample in order to find 
the optimal trade-off between bias and measurement er- 
ror. 
The interpolation procedure makes use of a prior expec- 
tation of how much we expect the local probabilities to 
differ from the global probabilities. In their author iden- 
tification work Mosteller and Wallace "expect\[ed\] both 
authors to have nearly identical rates for almost any 
word" (p. 61). In fact, just as they had anticipated, 
we have found that only 2% of the vocabulary in the 
Federalist corpus has significantly different probabilities 
depending on the author. In contrast, we expect fairly 
large differences in the sense disambiguation application. 
Approximately 20% of the vocabulary in the Hansards 
has a local probability that is significantly different from 
its global probability. Since the prior expectation de- 
pends so much on the application, we set the prior for a 
particular application by estimating the fraction of the 
vocabulary whose local probabilities differ significantly 
from the global probabilities. 
2.4. A Small Study 
We have looked at six polysemous nouns in some de- 
tail: duty, drug, land, language, position and sentence, 
as shown in Table 1. The final column shows that per- 
formance is quite encouraging. 
Table 1: Six Polysemous Words 
English French sense N % 
duty droit tax 1114 97 
devoir obligation 691 84 
drug m~dicament medical 2992 84 
drogue illicit 855 97 
land terre property 1022 86 
pays country 386 89 
language langue medium 3710 90 
langage style 170 91 
position position place 5177 82 
poste job 577 86 
sentence peine judicial 296 97 
phrase grammatical 148 100 
These nouns were selected because they could be disam- 
biguated by looking at their French translation in the 
Canadian Hansards (unlike a polysemous word such as 
interest whose French translation inter~1 is just as am- 
biguous as the English source). In addition, for test- 
ing methodology, it is helpful that the corpus contain 
plenty of instances of each sense. The second condition, 
for example, would exclude bank, perhaps the canoni- 
cal example of a polysemous noun, since there are very 
few instances of the "river" sense of bank in our corpus 
of Canadian Hansards. We were somewhat surprised 
to discover that these two conditions are actually fairly 
stringent, and that there are a remarkably small number 
of polysemous words which (1) can be disambiguated by
looking at the French translation, and (2) appear 150 or 
more times in two or more senses. 
234 
Table 2: Automatic Sense Tagging Using Roget's Categories 
Input  Output 
Treadmills attached to cranes were used to lift heavy objects TOOLS/MACHINERY (348) 
and for supplying power for cranes, hoists, and lifts. The centrifug TOOLS/MACHINERY (348) 
Above this height, a tower crane is often used. This comprises TOOLS/MACHINERY (348) 
elaborate courtship rituals cranes build a nest of vegetation on ANIMALS/INSECTS (414) 
are more closely related to cranes and rails. They range in length ANIMALS/INSECTS (414) 
low trees..PP At least five crane species are in danger of extincti ANIMALS/INSECTS (414) 
2.5. Tra in ing on Monolingual Material 
At first, we thought that the method was completely de- 
pendent on the availability of parallel corpora for train- 
ing. This has been a problem since parallel text remains 
somewhat difficult o obtain in large quantity, and what 
little is available is often fairly unbalanced and unrepre- 
sentative of general language. Moreover, the assumption 
that differences in translation correspond to differences 
in word-sense has always been somewhat suspect. 
Recently, Yarowsky (1991) has found a way to train on 
the Roget's Thesaurus (Chapman, 1977) and Grolier's 
Encyclopedia (1991) instead of the Hansards, thus cir- 
cumventing many of the objections to our use of the 
Hansards. Yarowsky's method inputs a 100-word con- 
text surrounding a polysemous word and scores each of 
the 1042 Roget Categories by: 
H Pr(wlRoget Categoryi) 
w in  contes t  
Table 2 shows some results for the polysemous noun 
crane. 
Each of the 1042 models, Pr(wlRoget Categoryl), is 
trained by interpolating between local probabilities and 
global probabilities just as before. However, the local 
probabilities are somewhat more difficult to obtain in 
this case since we do not have a corpus tagged with 
Roget Categories, and therefore, it may not be obvi- 
ous how to extract subsections of the corpus meeting 
the local conditions. Consider the Roget Category: 
TOOLS/MACHINERY (348). Ideally, we would extract 
100-word contexts in the 10 million word Grolier En- 
cyclopedia surrounding words in category 348 and use 
these to compute the local probabilities. Since we don't 
have a tagged corpus, Yarowsky suggested extracting 
contexts around all words in category 348 and weighting 
appropriately in order to compensate for the fact that 
some of these contexts hould not have been included in 
the training set. Table 3 below shows a sample of the 
30,924 concordances for the words in category 348. 
Table 3: Some Concordances for TOOLS/MACHINERY 
CARVING .SB The gutter 
equipment such as a hydraulic 
Resembling a power 
equipment, valves for nuclear 
8000 BC, flint-edged wooden 
el-penetrating carbide-tipped 
heightens the colors .SB 
traditional ABC method and 
center of rotation .PP A tower 
marshy areas .SB The crowned 
adz has a concave blade for form 
shovel capable of lifting 26 cubic 
shovel mounted on a floating hull, 
generators,  oil-refinery turbines, 
sickles were used to gather wild 
dri l ls  forced manufacturers to find 
Dr i l l s  live in the forests of 
dri l l  were unchanged, and 
crane is an assembly of fabricated 
crane, however, occasionally nests 
Note that some of the words in category 348 are polyse- 
mous (e.g., drill and crane), and consequently, not all of 
their contexts hould be included in the training set for 
category 348. In particular, lines 7, 8 and 10 in Table 3 
illustrate the problem. If one of these spurious enses was 
frequent and dominated the set of examples, the situa- 
tion could be disastrous. An attempt is made to weight 
the concordance data to minimize this effect and to make 
the sample representative of all tools and machinery, not 
just the more common ones. If a word such as drill oc- 
curs k times in the corpus, all words in the context of 
drill contribute weight 1/k to frequency sums. Although 
the training materials still contain a substantial level of 
noise, we have found that the resulting models work 
remarkably well, nontheless. Yarowsky (1991) reports 
93% correct disambiguation, averaged over the following 
words selected from the word-sense disambiguation liter- 
ature: bow, bass, galley, mole, sentence, slug, star, duty, 
issue, taste, cone, interest. 
3. A HYPOTHESIS :  ONE SENSE 
PER DISCOURSE 
As this work was nearing completion, we observed that 
senses tend to appear in clumps. In particular, it ap- 
peared to be extremely unusual to find two or more 
senses of a polysemous word in the same discourse. 2 A 
simple (but non-blind) preliminary experiment provided 
some suggestive evidence confirming the hypothesis. A
random sample of 108 nouns was extracted for further 
2This hypothes is  might  help to expla in some of the long-range 
effects ment ioned in the previous footnote.  
235 
study. A panel of three judges (the authors of this pa- 
per) were given 100 sets of concordance lines. Each set 
showed all of the instances of one of the test words in a 
particular Grolier's article. The judges were asked to in- 
dicate if the set of concordance lines used the same sense 
or not. Only 6 of 300 w,-ticle-judgements were judged to 
contain multiple senses of one of the test words. All 
three judges were convinced after grading 100 articles 
that there was considerable validity to the hypothesis. 
With this promising preliminary verification, the follow- 
ing blind test was devised. Five subjects (the three au- 
thors and two of their colleagues) were given a ques- 
tionnaire starting with a set of definitions elected from 
OALD (Crowie et al, 1989) and followed by a number 
of pairs of concordance lines, randomly selected from 
Grolier's Encyclopedia (1991). The subjects were asked 
to decide for each pair, whether the two concordance 
lines corresponded to the same sense or not. 
antenna 
1. jointed organ found in pairs on the heads 
of insects and crustaceans, used for feeling, 
etc. ~ the illus at insect. 
2. radio or TV aerial. 
lack eyes, legs, wings, antennae and distinct mouthparts 
The Brachycera have short antennae and include the more evol 
The questionnaire contained a total of 82 pairs of concor- 
dance lines for 9 polysemous words: antenna, campaign, 
deposit, drum, hull, interior, knife, landscape, and ma- 
rine. 54 of the 82 pairs were selected from the same 
discourse. The remaining 28 pairs were introduced as a 
control to force the judges to say that some pairs were 
different; they were selected from different discourses, 
and were checked by hand as an attempt o assure that 
they did not happen to use the same sense. The judges 
found it quite easy to decide whether the pair used the 
same sense or not. Table 4 shows that there was very 
high agreement among the judges. With the exception 
of judge 2, all of the judges agreed with the majority 
opinion in all but one or two of the 82 cases. The agree- 
ment rate was 96.8%, averaged over all judges, or 99.1%, 
averaged over the four best judges. 
Table 4: Strong Agreement 
Judge n % 
1 82 100.0% 
2 72 87.8% 
3 81 98.7% 
4 82 100.0% 
5 80 97.6% 
Average 96.8% 
Average (without Judge 2) 99.1% 
As we had hoped, the experiment did, in fact, confirm 
the one-sense-per-discourse hypothesis. Of 54 pairs se- 
lected from the same article, the majority opinion found 
that 51 shared the same sense, and 3 did not. ~ 
We conclude that with probability about 94% (51/54), 
two polysemous nouns drawn from the same article will 
have the same sense. In fact, the experiment tested a 
particularly difficult case, since it did not include any 
unambiguous words. If we assume a mixture of 60% un- 
ambiguous words and 40% polysemous words, then the 
probability moves from 94% to 100% x .60 + 94% x .40 
98%. In other words, there is a very strong tendency 
(98%) for multiple uses of a word to share the same sense 
in well-written coherent discourse. 
One might ask if this result is specific to Grolier's or 
to good writing or some other factor. The first author 
looked at the usage of these same nine words in the 
Brown Corpus, which is believed to be a more balanced 
sample of general language and which is also more widely 
available than Grolier's and is therefore more amenable 
to replication. The Brown Corpus consists of 500 dis- 
course fragments of 2000 words, each. We were able to 
find 259 concordance lines like the ones above, show- 
ing two instances of one of the nine test words selected 
from the same discourse fragment. However, four of the 
nine test words are not very interesting in the Brown 
Corpus antenna, drum, hull, and knife, since only one 
sense is observed. There were 106 pairs for the remain- 
ing five words: campaign, deposit, interior, landscape, 
and marine. The first author found that 102 of the 106 
pairs were used in the same sense. Thus, it appears that 
one-sense-per-discourse tendency is also fairly strong in 
the Brown Corpus (102/106 ~ 96%), as well as in the 
Grolier's Encyclopedia. 
4. IMPL ICAT IONS 
There seem to be two applications for the one-sense-per- 
discourse observation: first it can be used as an ad- 
ditional source of constraint for improving the perfor- 
mance of the word-sense disambiguation algorithm, and 
3In contrast, of the 28 control pairs, the majority opinion found 
that only 1 share the same sense, and 27 did not. 
236 
secondly, it could be used to help evaluate disambigua- 
tion algorithms that did not make use of the discourse 
constraint. Thus far, we have been more interested in the 
second use: establishing a group of examples for which 
we had an approximate ground truth. Rather than tag- 
ging each instance of a polysemous word one-by-one, we 
can select discourses with large numbers of the polyse- 
mous word of interest and tag all of the instances in one 
fell swoop. Admittedly, this procedure will introduce 
a small error rate since the one-sense-per-discourse ten- 
dency is not quite perfect, but thus far, the error rate 
has not been much of a problem. This procedure has 
enabled us to tag a much larger test set than we would 
have been able to do otherwise. 
Having tagged as many words as we have (all instances 
of 97 words in the Grolier's Encyclopedia), we are now 
in a position to question some widely held assumptions 
about the distribution of polysemy. In particular, it is 
commonly believed that most words are highly polyse- 
mous, but in fact, most words (both by token and by 
type) have only one sense, as indicated in Table 5 below. 
Even for those words that do have more than one possi- 
ble sense, it rarely takes anywhere near log2senses bits 
to select the appropriate sense since the distribution of 
senses is generally quite skewed. Perhaps the word-sense 
disambiguation problem is not as difficult as we might 
have thought. 
Table 5: Distribution of Polysemy 
senses types tokens avg. entropy 
1 67 7569 0 
2 16 2552 0.58 
3 7 1313 0.56 
4 5 1252 1.2 
5 1 1014 0.43 
6 1 594 1.3 
5. CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, it appears that our hypothesis correct; 
well-written discourses tend to avoid multiple senses of 
a polysemous word. This result can be used in two basic 
ways: (1) as an additional source of constraint for im- 
proving the performance ofa word-sense disambiguation 
algorithm, and (2) as an aide in collecting annotated test 
materials for evaluating disamhiguation algorithms. 
6. REFERENCES 
1. Black, Ezra (1988), "An Experiment in Computa- 
tional Discrimination ofEnglish Word Senses," IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, v 32, pp 185- 
194. 
2. Brown, Peter, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della 
Pietra, and Robert Mercer (1991), "Word Sense Dis- 
ambiguation using Statistical Methods," Proceed- 
ings off the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp 264-270. 
3. Chapman, Robert (1977). Roger's International 
Thesaurus (Fourth Edition), Harper and Row, New 
York. 
4. Dagan, Ido, Alon Itai, and Ulrike Schwall (1991), 
"Two Languages are more Informative than One," 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Asso- 
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp 130-137. 
5. Gale, Church, and Yarowsky, 1992, "Discrimination 
Decisions for 100,000-Dimensional Spaces" AT&T 
Statistical Research Report No. 103. 
6. Grolier's Inc. (1991) New Grolier's Electronic En- 
cyclopedia. 
7. Hirst, G. (1987), Semantic Interpretation and the 
Resolution of Ambiguity, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
8. Kelly, Edward, and Phillip Stone (1975), Com- 
puter Recognition of English Word Senses, North- 
Holland, Amsterdam. 
9. Mosteller, Fredrick, and David Wallace (1964) In- 
ference and Disputed Authorship: The Federalist, 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts. 
10. Sutton, G. (1989) Automatic Text Processing, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 
11. Yarowsky, David (1991) "Word-Sense Disamhigua- 
tion Using Statistical Models of Roget's Categories 
Trained on Large Corpora", submitted to COLING- 
92. 
237 
