The Design for the Wall Street Journal-based 
CSR Corpus* 
Douglas B. Paul 
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT 
Lexington, Ma. 02173 
and Janet M. Baker 
Dragon Systems, Inc. 
320 Nevada St. 
Newton, Ma. 02160 
ABSTRACT 
The DARPA Spoken Language System (SLS) community 
has long taken a leadership osition in designing, imple- 
menting, and globally distributing significant speech corpora 
widely used for advancing speech recognition research. The 
Wall Street Journal (WSJ) CSR Corpus described here is 
the newest addition to this valuable set of resources. In 
contrast o previous corpora, the WSJ corpus will provide 
DARPA its first general-purpose English, large vocabulary, 
natural anguage, high perplexity, corpus containing signif- 
icant quantities of both speech data (400 hrs.) and text 
data (47M words), thereby providing a means to integrate 
speech recognition and natural anguage processing in ap- 
plication domains with high potential practical value. This 
paper presents the motivating oals, acoustic data design, 
text processing steps, lexicons, and testing paradigms incor- 
porated into the multi-faceted WSJ CSR Corpus. 
INTRODUCTION 
As spoken language technology progresses and goals expand, 
progressively larger, and more challenging corpora need to 
be created to support advanced research. The SLS DARPA 
1994 goals are ambitious, focusing on cooperative speak- 
ers, generating goal-directed, spontaneous continuous speech, 
in speaker-adaptive and speaker-independent modes, for ex- 
pandable vocabularies (5000 or more words active), moder- 
ate perplexity (100-200), with integrated speech and natural 
language processing, for speakers in a moderate noise envi- 
ronment, using multiple types of microphones, engaged in  
command/database nd dictation applications. In contrast 
to typical command/database pplications, dictation (i.e. in- 
teractive speech-driven word processing) tasks focus on coop- 
erative speakers (e.g. speaker dependent/adaptlve sustained 
usage) who generate continuous peech (usually in a some- 
what careful fashion to facilitate accurate transcription) ver- 
balizing their words and sentence punctuation. The existing 
Resource Management\[15\] andsubsequent Air Travel Infor- 
mation System\[16\] corpora target specific database inquiry 
tasks, characterized by medium vocabularies (<1500 words) 
with language model perplexities ranging from 9 to 60. The 
WSJ corpus described here is designed to advance CSR tech- 
nology and support he 1994 SLS research goals. A similar 
read speech corpus in the French language has been success- 
*This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency. The views expressed are those of the authors and 
do not reflect he official policy or position of the U.S. Government. 
fully completed using text from the newspaper Le Monde\[5\]. 
Commencing with serious contractor concerns regarding suit- 
able CSR corpora\[12\] starting in the mid 1980's, the DARPA 
SLS Coordinating Committee started considering new cor- 
pora requirements in early 1990, with the subsequent for- 
mation of the CSR Corpus Committee, culminating in the 
WSJ Corpus design. The CSR Corpus Committee mem- 
bers include J.M. Baker (Dragon, chair), F. Kubala (BBN), 
D. Pallett (NIST), D. Paul (LL), M. Phillips (MIT), M. 
Picheny (IBM), R. Rajasekran (TI), B. Weide (CMU), M. 
Weintraub (SRI), and 3. Wilpon (ATT). A survey taken 
of the DARPA contractors for CSR research interests dis- 
closed highly diverse, often opposing views of research in- 
terest. All contractors, however, cited a common inter- 
est in pursuing research on "Domain-independent Acous- 
tic Models", "Domain-independent Language Models", and 
"Speaker-adaptation". 
The outcome of lively meetings and discussions resulted 
in the definition and preliminary authorization of a ma- 
jor (>400 hrs.) corpus with materials based primarily on 
WSJ material (backed by WSJ text from 1987-89 provided 
by the ACL/DCI\[9\] to enable statistical language modeling) 
and supplemented by other material (spontaneous dictation, 
Hansard, etc., shown in Table 1). This corpus will provide 
a uniquely rich resource, in a carefully crafted structure de- 
signed to elicit a highly productive flow of diagnostic research 
information with an array of comparative t st paradigms. 
Although this WSJ corpus is large relative to many other 
available corpora, it should be cautioned that insofar as most 
research experiments continue to show marked improvement 
with the increased availability of training data, it is likely 
that this corpus also will fail to allow us to find or achieve 
asymptotic performance. Most systems continue to be under- 
trained or constrained to work in suboptimal lower dimen- 
sional spaces, due to their data-starvation. I deed, this result 
is not really surprising in light of the much larger amounts of 
speech data to which young children must be exposed before 
gaining recognition proficiency of even modest size vocabu- 
laries. 
The structure, features, and dimensions of this corpus con- 
stitute the outcome of a heavily debated consensus process, 
which satisfies the basic (though certainly not all) different 
requirements of the different research loci of all parties in- 
volved. There are significant portions of this corpus which 
357 
will be more heavily used by one or more research groups, 
and not at all by others. Nonetheless, the common basis and 
careful structuring of these materials hould allow for highly 
informative intra- and inter-group comparisons. The mem- 
bers of this committee are to be commended and should take 
pride in their success in jointly exercising a rare "statesman- 
like" cooperation to support he legitimate diversity of expert 
research interests in this field (often overcoming strong pres- 
sures of both personal and political convictions to support 
only their own narrower esearch interests). 
THE WSJ -CORPUS STRUCTURE 
AND CAPABIL IT IES  
Specifically, the WSJ corpus is scalable and built to 
accommodate variable size large vocabularies (SK, 20K, 
and larger), variable perplexities (80, 120, 160, 240, and 
larger), speaker dependent (SD) and independent (SI) train- 
ing with variable amounts of data (ranging from 100 to 
9600 sentences/speaker), including equal portions of ver- 
balized and non-verbalized punctuation (to reflect both 
dictation-mode and non-dictation-mode applications), sepa- 
rate speaker adaptation materials (40 phonetically rich sen- 
tences/speaker), simultaneous tandard close talking and 
multiple secondary microphones, variable moderate noise en- 
vironments, equal numbers of male and female speakers cho- 
sen for diversity of voice quality and dialect. In order to 
collect large quantities of speech data very cost-effectively, it 
was decided to collect the majority of the recorded speech 
in a "read" speech mode, whereby speakers are prompted 
by newspaper text paragraphs. The presentation of coher- 
ent paragraph blocks of text provides emantically meaning- 
ful material, thereby facilitating the production of realistic 
speech prosodies. Small amounts of unprompted "sponta- 
neous" speech are provided for comparison (utilizing some 
naive speakers as well as some who are experienced at dicta- 
tion for human transcription). 
Testing paradigms were carefully constructed to accommo- 
date efficient comparisons of SI and SD performance and 
variable size vocabulary "open" and "closed" tests to per- 
mit evaluation both with and without "out-of-vocabulary" 
lexical items. The value of variable amounts of training set 
materials can be directly assessed both within and across 
speakers. Well-trained speaker-dependent performance pro- 
vides an upper bound against which the success of different 
speaker-independent modeling and speaker-adaptive m thod- 
ologies may be rigorously compared. 
Adaptive acoustic and language modeling is easily sup- 
ported through the following simple though rigorous auto- 
matic paradigm: 1) Recognition of a sentence is performed 
and assessed as usual against existing system acoustic and 
language models. 2) The system commences to adapt using 
(supervised) or not using (unsupervised) the correct "clear 
text" to modify its internal acoustic and language models 
automatically before proceeding to recognition of the next 
utterance. 
Recognition performance with this kind of automatic axlapta- 
tion is assessable with standard scoring routines. This mode 
provides an easy means to maximize performance for speakers 
by tracking and accommodating to speaker and environmen- 
tal changes in a dynamic fashion, also simulating (in a repro- 
ducible fashion) an interactive system mode where speakers 
correct system recognition errors, and using systems which 
can utilize this feedback to improve performance, in a contin- 
uous automatic fashion. The results of automatic adaptation 
can be assessed in an on-going "dynamic" fashion, or stopped 
after varying amounts of adaptation, for subsequent "static" 
testing on materials to which the system is not subsequently 
adapted\[I,2,3\]. 
The availability of large amounts of machine-readable text 
from nearly three years of the Wall Street Journal enables 
meaningful statistical benchmark language models (including 
bigrams and trigrams) to be generated, and the results from 
these to be easily contrasted. By varying the types of lan- 
guage models chosen, the effect on recognition performance 
of variable perplexities for the same textual materials can be 
assessed. The availability of this text provides a valuable re- 
source enabling novel language models and language models 
adapted from other tasks to be developed and evaluated as 
well. 
THE WSJ -P ILOT DATABASE 
It was judged to be too ambitious to immediately record a 
400 hour recognition database. Therefore, a smaller pilot 
database built around the WSJ task was designed. A joint 
BBN/Lincoln proposal for the pilot was adopted by the CSR 
committee. In an attempt o "share the shortage" this pro- 
posal provided equal amounts of training data for each of 
three popular training paradigms. This proposal was also 
rich enough that it provided for "multi-mode" use of the data 
to allow many more than just three paradigms to be explored. 
The original plan was for about a 45 hour database, but 
the three recording sites, (MIT, SRI, and TI), each recorded 
about a half share for a total of 80 hours. The resultant 
database is shown in Table 4 and described below. (About 
1.5K additional SI training sentences are not shown in the 
table.) 
THE WSJ  TEXT PREPROCESSING 
It is important o be able to train a language model that 
is well matched to the (text) source to be used as a control 
condition to isolate the performance of the acoustic model- 
ing from the language modeling\[12\]. (It is always possible 
to train a mismatched language model, but its effects cannot 
be adequately assessed without a control matched language 
model.) Ideally, one would have access to many (tens to 
hundreds of millions of words) of accurately transcribed spo- 
ken speech. Such was not available to us. Therefore, this 
condition was simulated by preprocessing the WSJ text in 
a manner that removed the ambiguity in the word sequence 
that a reader might choose. (This preprocessing is similar 
to that which might be used in a text-to-speech system\[4\].) 
This ensures that the unread (and unchecked) text used to 
train the language model is representative of the spoken test 
358 
material. 
The original WSJ text data were supplied by Dow Jones, 
Inc. to the ACL/DCI\[9\] which organized the data and dis- 
tributed it to the research community in CD-ROM format. 
The WSJ text data were supplied as 313 1MB files from the 
years 1987, 1988 and 1989. The data consisted of articles 
that were paragraph and sentence marked by the ACL/DCI.  
(Since automatic marking methods were used, some of the 
paragraphs and sentence marks are erroneous.) The article 
headers contained a WSJ-supplied ocument-control number. 
The preprocessing began with integrity checks: one file from 
1987 and 38 from 1988 were discarded due to duplication 
of articles in the same file (1987) or duplication of data 
found in other files (1988). 274 files were retained, which 
yielded 47M with-verbalized-punctuation w rds from 1.8M 
sentences. (The yield is on the order of 10% fewer words in 
the non-verbalized-punctuation version.) Each file contain a 
scatter of dates, usually within a few days, but sometimes up 
to six months apart. Each file was characterized by its most 
frequent date (used later to temporally order the files). 
Since the CSR Committee had decided to support both with 
and without verbalized punctuation modes, it was necessary 
to produce four versions of each text: with/without verbal- 
ized punctuation x prompt/truth texts. (A prompt text is 
the version read by the speaker and the truth text is the 
version used by the training, recognition, and scoring algo- 
rithms.) The preprocessing consisted of a general prepro- 
cessor (GP) followed by four customizing preprocessors to 
convert he GP output in the four specific outputs. The tra- 
ditional computer definition of a word is used--any white- 
space separated object is a word. Thus, a word followed by a 
comma becomes a word unless that comma is separated from 
the word. (Resolution of the role of a period or an apostro- 
phe/single quote can be a very difficult problem requiring full 
understanding of the text.) 
The general preprocessor started by labeling all paragraphs 
and sentences using an SGML-Iike scheme based upon the file 
name, document-control number, paragraph number within 
the article, and sentence number within the paragraph. This 
marking scheme, which was carried transparently though all 
of the processing, made it very easy to locate any of the text 
at any stage of the processing. A few bug fixes were applied 
for such things as common typos or misspellings. Next the 
numbers are converted into orthographics. "Magic numbers" 
(numbers uch as 386 and 747 which are not pronounced nor- 
mally because they have a special meaning) are pronounced 
from an exceptions table. The remaining numbers are pro- 
nounced by rule--the algorithms cover money, time, dates, 
"serial numbers" (mixed digits and letters), fractions, feet- 
inches, real numbers, and integers. Next sequences of let- 
ters are separated: U.S.---~U. S., Roman numerals are written 
out as cardinals or ordinals depending on the left context, 
acronyms are spelled out or left as words according to the 
common pronunciation, and abbreviations (except for Mr., 
Mrs., Ms., and Messrs.) are expanded to the full word. Fi- 
nally, single letters are followed by a "." to distinguish them 
from the words "a" and "I". This output is the input to the 
four specific preprocessors. 
The punctuation processor is used in several modes. In 
its normal mode, it is used to produce the with-verbalized- 
punctuation texts. It resolves apostrophes from single quotes 
(an apostrophe is part of the word, a single quote is not), 
resolves whether a period indicates an abbreviation or is a 
punctuation mark, and separates punctuation into individ- 
ual marks separate from the words. This punctuation is 
written out in a word-like form (eg. ,GOMMA) to ensure 
that the speaker will pronounce it. This output is the with- 
punctuation prompting text. Until this point, the text retains 
the original case as suppled on the CD-ROM. If one wishes 
to perform case-sensitive r cognition (ie. the language model 
predicts the case of the word), this same text can be used 
as the with-punctuation truth text or if one wishes to per- 
form case-insensitive recognition, the text may be mapped to 
upper-case. (A post-processor is supplied with the database 
to perform the case mapping without altering the sentence 
markings.) Initial use of the database will center on case- 
insensitive recognition. 
The without-punctuation prompting text is very similar to 
the GP output. Only a few things, such as mapping "%" 
to "percent", need to be performed. This text contains the 
mixed case and normal punctuation to help the subject speak 
the sentence. (The subject is instructed not to pronounce any 
of the punctuation in this mode.) The punctuation processor 
is used in a special mode to produce the without-punctuation 
truth-text. It performs all of the same processing as described 
above to locate the punctuation marks, but now, rather than 
spelling them out, eliminates them from the output. (Since 
the punctuation marks do not appear explicitly in the acous- 
tics, they must be eliminated from the truth texts. Pre- 
dicting punctuation from the acoustics has been shown to 
be impractical--human transcribers don't punctuate consis- 
tently, and, in an attempt to perform punctuation predic- 
tion by the language model in a CSR, IBM found a high 
percentage of their errors to be due to incorrectly predicted 
punctuation\]14\]. People dictating to a human transcriber 
verbalize the punctuation if they feel that correct punctua- 
tion is important: e.g. lawyers. They also verbally spell un- 
common words and issue formatting commands where appro- 
priate.) This without-punctuation truth text is again mixed 
case and can be mapped to upper case if the user desires. 
WSJ  TEXT SELECT ION INTO 
DATABASE PARTS 
Next it was necessary to divide the text into sections for 
the various parts of the database. Since the plan called for 
the pilot to become a portion of the full database, all text 
processing and selection were performed according to criteria 
that were consistent with the full database. 
Ninety percent of the text, including all of the Penn 
Treebank\[17\] (about 2M words) were reserved for training, 
5% for development testing, and the remaining 53~ for eval- 
uation testing. The non-treebank text files were temporally 
359 
ordered (see above) and 28 were selected for test ing--the odd 
ordinal files for development testing and the even ordinal flies 
for evaluation testing. (The Treebank included the 21 most 
recent files so it was not possible to simulate the real case--  
train on the past and test on the "present"). 
All of the non-test data, with the exception of the sentences 
recorded for acoustic training, is available for training lan- 
guage models. The acoustic training data is eliminated to 
allow a standard sanity check: CSR testing on the acoustic 
training data without also performing a closed test on the 
language model. 
WSJ  TEXT SELECT ION FOR 
RECORDING 
Next the recording sentences were selected. Separate sen- 
tence "pools" were selected from the appropriate text sec- 
tions for SI train (10K sentences), SD train (20K sentences), 
20K-word vocabulary test (4K development test and 4K eval- 
uation test sentences), and 5K-word vocabulary test (2K de- 
velopment est and 2K evaluation test). It was originally 
hoped that the 5K vocabulary test set could be formed as a 
subset of the 20K test set, but this was not possible---thus 
the 4 test sets are completely independent. 
The recording texts were filtered for readability. (The WSJ 
uses a lot of uncommon words and names and uses com- 
plex sentence structures that were never intended to be read 
aloud.) The first step was to form a. word-frequency list 
(WFL) (ie. a frequency-ordered unigram list) from all of 
the upper-case with-punctuation truth texts. This yielded a 
list of 173K words. (For comparison, mixed case yields 210K 
words). Next, a process of automated "quality filtering" was 
devised to filter out the majority of the erroneous and un- 
readable paragraphs. This filtering is applied only to the 
recorded texts, not to the general anguage model training 
texts. Since many typos, misspellings and processing (both 
ACL-DCI and preprocessing) errors map into low frequency 
words, any paragraph which contained an out-of-top-64K- 
WFL word or was shorter than 3 words was rejected. (The 
top 64K WFL words cover 99.6% of the frequency-weighted 
words in the database.) Any paragraph containing less than 
three sentences or more than eight sentences was rejected 
to maintain reasonable selection unit sizes. Any paragraph 
containing a sentence longer than 30 words was rejected as 
too difficult to read 1. Because the WSJ contains many in- 
stances of certain "boiler-plate" figure captions which would 
be pathologically over represented in the test data, duplicate 
sentences were removed from the test sentence pools. Finally 
human checks verified the high overall quality of the chosen 
sentences. Note that this does not mean perfect--there were 
errors in both the source material and the preprocessing. 
1 One of the authors (dbp) has recorded about 2500 WSJ sen- 
tences. The most difficult sentences to record were the longest 
ones. After a little practice, verbalized punctuation sentences were 
only slightly harder to read than the non-verbalized punctuation 
ones. This slight additional difficulty can be accounted for by the 
fact that the verbalized punctuation sentences average about 10% 
longer than the non-verbalized punctuation ones. 
The 20K test pools were produced by randomly selected 
quality-filtered paragraphs until 8K (4K dev. test and 4K 
eval. test) sentences were selected. This produced a realized 
vocabulary of 13K words. Since this data set was produced 
in a vocabulary insensitive manner, it can be used without 
bias for open and closed recognition vocabulary testing at 
any vocabulary size up to 64K words. (However, using it 
for open vocabulary testing at any vocabulary size less than 
20K will yield a large number of out-of-vocabulary errors--  
the top-20K of the WFL (the 20K open vocabulary) has a 
frequency weighted coverage of 97.8% of the data.) 
Attempts to produce the 5K vocabulary test pools by the 
same method produced too few sentences to be useful 
(,-,1200). Thus it was necessary to use a vocabulary sen- 
sitive procedure--paragraphs were allowed to have up to 1 
out-of-top-5.6K-WFL words. This produced the highest yield 
(~4K sentences with a realized vocabulary of 5K words) and 
reduces, but does not completely eliminate the tail of the 
word frequency distribution. This test set alows open and 
closed vocabulary testing at a 5K-word vocabulary, but would 
be expected to yield somewhat biased test results if used at 
larger test vocabularies\[10,14\]. The top-5K of the WFL (the 
5K open vocabulary) has a frequency weighted coverage of 
91.7% of the data. 
Finally, the evaluation test paragraphs were broken into four 
separate groups. This was done to provide four independent 
evaluation test sets. 
The recording sites selected a randomly chosen subset of the 
paragraphs from the pool corresponding to the database sec- 
tion being recorded (with replacement between subjects) for 
each subjects to read. The sentences were recorded one per 
audio file. All subjects recorded one set of the 40 adaptation 
sentences. 
OTHER WSJ  DATABASE 
COMPONENTS 
The above describes the selection and recording of the 
acoustic portion of the WSJ-pi lot database. Additional 
components--such as a dictionary and language models--  
are required to perform recognition experiments. Dragon 
Systems Inc., under a joint license agreement with Ran- 
dom House, has provided a set of pronouncing dictionaries-- 
totaling 33K words--to cover the training and 5K and 20K- 
word open and closed test conditions. This dictionary also 
includes the 1K-word Resource Management\[15\] vocabulary 
to allow cross-task tests with an existing database. MIT Lin- 
coln Laboratory, as part of its text selection and preprocess- 
ing effort, has provided baseline open and closed test vocab- 
ularies based upon the test-set realized-vocabularies and the 
WFL for the 5K and 20K test sets. Lincoln has also provided 
8 baseline bigram back-off\[8,11\] language models (5K/20K 
words ? open/closed vocab. ? verbalized/non-verbalized 
punct.) for research and cross-site comparative valuation 
testing. Finally language model training data and utilities 
for manipulating the processed texts have been made avail- 
able to the recording and CSR research sites. 
360 
NIST compiled the data from the three recording sites (MIT, 
SRI, and TI), formatted it, and shipped it to MIT where 
WORM CD-ROMS were produced for rapid distribution to 
the CSR development sites. 
CONCLUSION 
The WSJ Corpus and its supporting components have been 
very carefully and efficiently designed by the joint efforts 
of the DARPA SLS CSR Committee to support advanced 
strategic CSR research of many different ypes. It is hoped 
that eventually, these materials will be instrumental in facil- 
itating the speech recognition research community to create 
spoken language technology capabilities suited to broad prac- 
tical application. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. M. Baker, "DragonDictate-30K: Natural Lan- 
guage Speech Recognition with 30,000 Words," EU- 
ROSPEECH 89, Paris, September 1989. 
2. J. M. Baker, Presentation at ESCA Workshop on Per- 
formance Evaluation and Databases Noordwijkerhout, 
Netherlands, September. 1989. 
3. J. M. Baker, Presentation at the Kobe Workshop 
on Performance Evaluation and Databases,Kobe Japan 
November 1990 
4. J. Allen., M. S. Hunnicutt, and D. Klatt, "From Text 
to Speech: The MITalk System, Cambridge University 
Press, New York, 1987. 
5. J. L. Gauvain, L. F. Lamel, and M. Esk~nazi, "Design 
Considerations and Text Selection for BREF, a large 
French Read-Speech Corpus," ICSLP 90, Kobe, Japan, 
November 1990. 
6. H. W. Hon and K. F. Lee, "On Vocabulary-Independent 
Speech Modeling," Proc. ICASSPg0, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, April 1990. 
7. F. Jelinek and R. Mercer, personal communication. 
8. S. M. Katz, "Estimation of Probabilities from Sparse 
Data for the Language Model Component of a Speech 
Recognizer," ASSP-35, pp 400-401, March 1987. 
9. M. Liberman, "Text on Tap: the ACL/DCI," Proceed- 
ings October, 1989 DARPA Speech and Natural Lan- 
guage Workshop, Morgan Kanfmann Publishers, Octo- 
ber, 1989. 
10. R. Mercer, personal communication. 
11. D. B. Paul, "Experience with a Stack Decoder-Based 
HMM CSR and Back-Off N-Gram Language Models," 
Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Feb. 1991. 
12. D. B. Paul, J. K. Baker, and J. M. Baker, "On the In- 
teraction Between True Source, Training, and Testing 
Language Models," Proceedings June 1990 Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, Morgan Kaufmann Pub- 
lishers, June, 1990. 
13. D. B. Paul, CSR results presented at the October 91 
SLS Mid-Term Workshop, CMU, October 1991. 
14. M. Picheny, personal communication. 
15. P. Price, W. Fisher, J. Bernstein, and D. Pallett, "The 
DARPA 1000-Word Resource Management Database 
for Continuous Speech Recognition," ICASSP 88, New 
York, April 1988. 
16. P. Price, The ATIS Common Task: Selection and 
Overview," Proceedings June 1990 Speech and Natu- 
rM Language Workshop, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
June, 1990. 
17. B. Santorini, "Annotation Manual for the Penn Tree- 
bank Project," Technical Report, CIS Department, Uni- 
versity of Pennsylvania, May 1990. 
WSJ -spon  Spontaneously spoken data. The subjects 
simulate dictating a short WSJ-like article. 
(Included in the WSJ-pilot database.) 
Hansard - read  Read data from the Hansard database. 
Rad io logy- read  Read radiology (medical) reports. 
CALS- read  (Computer-aided Acquisition & Logistic 
Support) Read repair manuals. 
DART- read  (Database Query for Material Routing) 
Read database queries. 
USENET- read  Read computer bulletin board mes- 
sages. 
NPR- read  (National Public Radio) Read transcrip- 
tions of radio programs. 
B l ind - read  Taped recordings for the blind. 
Table 1. Proposed complementary datasets for the Large 
Vocabulary CSR database. 
I Vocab \[ Word Coverage 
5K 91.7% 
20K 97.7% 
64K 99.6% 
173K 100.0% 
Table 2. Frequency-weighted upper-case word coverage 
(from the word-frequency list). 
361 
TRAINING: SI-160 SI-16/SD-2400 LSD-9600 
Train 160a .  260 = 41600 16b * 2400 = 38400 
Adaptation 160a* 40 = 6400 16b* 40 = 640 
4b' * 7200 = 28800 
Est. total training data: SI-160:86 hrs, SI-16:79 hrs, SD-2400:5 hrs/spkr, LSD-9600:20 hrs/spkr 
DEVELOPMENT TEST: SI SD 
Read text, 5K 32c .  100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Read text, 20K 32c .  100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Spontaneous 32c .  100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Read spontaneous 32c .  100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Adaptation 32c .  40 = 1280 
EVALUATION TEST: SI SD 
Read text, 5K 32d .  100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Read text, 20K 32d * 100 = 3200 16b .  100 = 1600 
Spontaneous 32d .  100 = 3200 16b .  100 = 1600 
Read spontaneous 32d * 100 = 3200 16b * 100 = 1600 
Adaptation 32d* 40 = 1280 
Table 3. The plan for the WSJ portion of the full database. Format: no. spkr * no. sent = total no. sent. The letters 
following the number of speakers indicate the speaker sets (b t is a subset of b). The data in all sections, except for 
adaptation, is half verbalized punctuation and half non-verbalized punctuation. Training times do not include the 
adaptation data. Times based on 7.4 sec/sentence. Total database size: 157K sentences=323 hrs=37 GB. 
TRAINING: SI-84 SI-12/SD-600 LSD-2400 
Train 84a .  100~ = 7240 12b * 600 = 7200 
Adaptation 84a .  40 = 3660 8b*  40 = 320 
3b ~ . 1800 = 5400 
Total training data: SI-84:15.3 hrs, SI-12:14.3 hrs, SD-600 ..~1.2 hrs/spkr, SD-2400:--~4.8 hrs/spkr 
tSome speakers recorded 50 sentences. 
DEVELOPMENT TEST: 
Read text, 5K 
Read text, 20K 
Spontaneous 
Read spontaneous 
Adaptation 
SI SD 
10c .  80 = 800 
10c * 80 = 800 
10c * 80 = 800 
10c * 80 = 800 
lOc * 40 = 400 
12b .  80 = 960 
12b .  80 = 960 
12b .  80 = 960 
12b .  80 = 960 
EVALUATION TEST: SI SD 
Read text, 5K 10d * 80 = 800 12b .  80 = 960 
Read text, 20K 10d .  80 = 800 12b .  80 = 960 
Spontaneous 10d * 80 = 800 12b * 80 = 960 
Read spontaneous 10d * 80 = 800 12b * 80 = 960 
Adaptation 10d * 40 = 400 
Table 4. The WSJ-Pilot database. Format: no. spkr .  no. sent = total no. sent. The letters following the number 
of speakers indicate the speaker sets (b ~ is a subset of b). The average sentence length is .-,7.4 sec. (Verbalized 
punctuation sentences tend to be somewhat longer than average and non-verbalized punctuation sentences somewhat 
shorter.) The data in all sections, except for adaptation, is half verbalized punctuation and half non-verbalized 
punctuation. Training times do not include adaptation data. Total database size: 39K sent=80 hrs=9.2 GB. 
362 
