SESS ION 8B: ROBUST SPEECH PROCESSING 
Jordan R. Cohen, Chair 
Center  for Communicat ions  Research  
Thanet  Road 
Pr inceton ,  N J  08540 
ABSTRACT 
Four papers are briefly reviewed. 
1. The  Papers  
This session consists of two types of papers. The first 
two, "Multiple approaches to robust speech recognition" 
and "Reduced channel dependence for speech recogni- 
tion" present computational methods for minimizing the 
acoustic and speaker differences in particular ecogniz- 
ers. The third paper, " Experimental results for base- 
line speech recognition performance ..." presents pre- 
liminary experiments in using an array of microphones 
for acoustic focusing, while the last, Phonetic classi- 
fication on wide-band and telephone quality speech", 
presents a baseline phonetic recognition result for tele- 
phone TIMIT. 
In the first paper, the Carnegie Mellon gang define sev- 
eral algorithms for jointly compensating for noise and 
linear filtering in incoming data. Codeword Dependent 
Cepstral Normalization was found to be advantageous 
when training with one microphone and testing with an- 
other. It was also helpful when used with data from a 
microphone array. Results were less clear when the al- 
gorithm was applied to an auditory front end, but work 
is continuing. 
The SRI paper introduced a long-term filtering algo- 
rithm to adjust for acoustic differences between training 
and test. The best results were found using highpass 
filtering on channel energies in conjunction with simple 
noise removal. It was interesting to note that, even after 
these algorithms, simultaneous recordings through dif- 
ferent microphones were quite different. 
The Brown paper reports early results on a microphone 
beam-steering array. They report a series of interest- 
ing problems, some solved (microphone mounting), and 
some not (ceiling reflections). The search for an effective 
array continues. 
Finally, the NYNEX paper reports on comparative pho- 
netic recognition of TIMIT vs NTIMIT. The telephone 
version of TIMIT appears to induce 1.3 times as many 
errors as TIMIT, with a frequency distribution of errors 
which is expected from the inherent power of the under- 
lying phonemes. This work is offered as a benchmark 
against which to measure future systems. 
2. D iscuss ion  
Discussion was congenial and to the point. More work 
in this area will appear in future meetings. 
273 
