Extracting Constraints on Word Usage 
from Large Text Corpora 
Kathleen McKeown, Diane Litman, and Rebecca Passonneau 
Department of ComputerScience 
450 Computer Science Building 
Columbia University 
PROJECT GOALS 
Our research focuses on the identification of word usage 
constraints from large text corpora. Such constraints are 
important for natural language systems, both for the 
problem of selecting vocabulary for language generation 
and for disambiguating lexical meaning in interpretation. 
The first stage of our research involves the development of
systems that can automatically extract such constraints 
from corpora and empirical methods for analyzing text. 
Identified constraints will be represented in a lexicon that 
will be tested computationally as part of a natural anguage 
system. We are also identifying lexical constraints for 
machine translation using the aligned Hansard corpus as 
training data and are identifying many-to-many word 
alignments. 
One primary class of constrmnts we will examine is lex- 
ical; that is, constraints on word usage arriving from col- 
locations (word pairs or phrases that commonly appear 
together). We will also look at constraints deriving from 
domain scales, which influence use of scalar adjectives and 
determiners, constraints on temporal markers and tense, 
constraints on reference over text, and constraints on cue 
words and phrases that may be used to convey explicit 
information about discourse structure. We also plan to ex- 
amine corpora of prosodically labeled transcribed speech 
in order to identify intonational constraints on word usage. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Added syntactic parser to Xtract, a collocation extrac- 
tion system, to further filter collocations produced, 
eliminating those that are not consistently used in the 
same syntactic relation. This increased precision from 
40% to 80%. Recall of this stage was evaluated at 94%. 
? Developed and implemented a method for retrieving the 
elements of adjectival scales, using mutual information 
between adjective-noun collocations and clustering tech- 
niques to group them. 
? Designed a system to compile a list of candidate trans- 
lations between English and French words using an 
evaluation of mutual information between words in the 
aligned Hansard corpus. 
? Performed empirical analysis of advising transcripts 
identifying a class of adjectives used evaluatively (as 
opposed to adjectives conveying objective information) 
and constraints on their use. Developed and im- 
plemented new control tools in FUF to use lexical con- 
straints in text generation. 
? Identified semantic and syntactic onstraints on histori- 
cal information in statistical reports through partially 
automated analysis using Xtract ools. 
? Completed an empirical study of discourse segmen- 
tation, assessing the ability of naive subjects to assign 
segment boundaries based on the notion of intention 
used in Grosz/Sidner's definition of discourse segment. 
? Selected and obtained several corpora for analysis: the 
AP news wire (for finding scalar and other relations); 
the Brown corpus (for anaylzing temporal adverbs and 
morphological units); and the Pear stories (for inves- 
tigating the role of tense, cue phrases, and intonation). 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
In the area of machine translation, we are extending our 
system to identify collocations using Xtract in both the 
French and English corpora nd then produce a translation 
score based on the mutual information of the individual 
words they contain. We will complete implementation f
this technique and evaluate it through large scale ex- 
perimentation. We will improve the accuracy of our 
method for retrieving scalar adjectives by experinaenting 
with other clustering techniques and will begin looking at 
methods for ordering the scales retrieved. We are also 
applying the technique used for adjectives to identify topi- 
cally related groups of nouns to aid identification of dis- 
course segments. In addition, using the segment boun- 
daries found empirically as a baseline, we will develop 
automatic methods for identifying such boundaries, based 
on the analysis of usage constraints on referring expres- 
sions, tense, and lexical cohesion. We will evaluate preci- 
sion and recall of automatic segmentation methods. We 
are extending Xtract to find collocations between tenses 
and temporal adverbials. Finally, we are also testing con- 
straints on evaluative adjectives and historical information 
in a generation system. 
470 
