SESS ION 11: CONTINUOUS SPEECH 
RECOGNIT ION AND EVALUATION I* 
Clifford J. Weinstein, Chair 
Lincoln Laboratory, M.I.T. 
Lexington, MA 02173-9108 
This was the first of two companion sessions which marked 
an important transition in the continuous peech recogni- 
tion (CSR) component of the DARPA Spoken Language 
Program. Since 1987, DARPA CSR systems have been 
developed and evaluated on the Resource Management 
(RM) CSR corpus, which has become a de .facto standard 
for comparison of speech recognizers, widely accepted and 
used both within and outside the DARPA research com- 
munity, and internationally. The RM corpus has served 
the community well, but due to its limitations (e.g., 1000- 
word vocabulary, restricted task domain), it has become 
clear that more challenging tasks were needed to drive 
CSR research. The papers in this session reported on the 
design and preliminary development and analysis of a new 
large-vocabulary CSR corpus for the 90s, which is aimed 
at meeting the needs of CSR research, and at serving in 
a complementary ole to the corpora being collected in 
the interactive Air Travel Information System (ATIS) do- 
main. 
The first major component of the new speech corpus is 
based on a very large Wall Street Journal (WSJ) text cor- 
pus, and supports recognition vocabularies of 5,000 and 
20,000 words and higher. Actual corpus collection began 
in October 1991, and by the time of this February 1992 
workshop, not only had a pilot WSJ corpus of 80 hours 
of speech (under varied conditions) been collected and 
distributed, but also a dry run evaluation of a number 
of CSR systems had been conducted; the papers in Ses- 
sion 12 describe those systems, tests, and results. This 
is a very significant accomplishment on such a short time 
scale, which was achieved through a multi-site ffort fea- 
turing strong and effective cooperation in the context of 
multiple, sometimes conflicting oals, and some outstand- 
ing individual efforts. 
The first paper in Session 11, presented by Janet Baker 
and Doug Paul, reported on the design of the WSJ-based 
CSR corpus, and of the pilot portion of the WSJ cor- 
pus. The paper described the efforts of the CSR Corpus 
*This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency. The views expressed are those of the 
author and do not reflect he official policy or position of the 
U.S. Government. 
Committee (chaired by Janet Baker, and including repre- 
sentatives from all the participating sites) in working out 
a design to meet multiple research goals. Key elements of 
the design which were outlined include: variable vocabu- 
lary sizes and perplexities; variable amounts of data per 
speaker to support speaker-dependent, speaker-adaptive, 
and speaker independent recognition paradigms; speech 
collected both with and without verbalized punctuation; 
simultaneous close-talking microphones and multiple sec- 
ondary microphones; and numerous additional features. 
The paper described the text-processing steps performed 
at Lincoln on the original WSJ text CD-ROM to produce 
the texts and the language models which were delivered 
to the recording and testing sites. The paper summarized 
the materials delivered to the collecting and testing sites, 
which included: prompting texts for recording; truth texts 
for training, recognition, and scoring; a 33,000-word ic- 
tionary, provided by Dragon Systems, to cover training 
and test sets; a specification of training and test sets; and 
baseline language models for research and cross-site com- 
parative testing. 
The next paper, presented by George Doddington, de- 
scribed the work of the continuous peech corpus coor- 
dinating committee (CCCC), which was formed in Octo- 
ber 1991 to oversee the actual development of the cor- 
pus and the subsequent test and evaluation. Doddington, 
chair of the CCCC, described the efforts of the commit- 
tee and acknowledged the specific efforts of the individuals 
and sites involved. The February 1992 goals for the pi- 
lot corpus were met and exceeded. The collecting sites 
(MIT, SRI, and TI) had an initial target of about 45 
hours, but actually collected a total of about 80 hours 
of read speech, while SRI collected a substantial corpus 
of spontaneous speech in the general WSJ domain. At the 
close of his talk, Doddington outlined several corpus is- 
sues to be reviewed, based on the pilot corpus experience, 
in proceeding with the full corpus collection and evalua- 
tion. These issues included: verbalized punctuation (VP) 
vs non-verbalized punctuation (NVP); natural vs prepro- 
cessed prompting text; mix of spontaneous v  read speech; 
and multiplicity of evaluation conditions. The discussion 
of these issues was tabled until the end of Session 12. 
355 
The next paper, presented by Jim Glass, described collec- 
tion and analyses of WSJ-CSR data at MIT. Close atten- 
tion was paid to development of an easy-to-use computer 
interface which enabled efficient data collection with min- 
imal supervision of users. This interface was quite suc- 
cessful, and is currently being used by SRI and by NIST, 
as well as MIT. MIT collected 33 hours of speech and 
delivered the data to other sites on in-house-produced 
CD-ROM-compatible WORM disks. Experiments were 
described to investigate the effects of the text preprocess- 
ing performed on the WSJ text, by comparing sentences 
spoken with and without text preprocessing. The results 
showed a substantial variation in the readings of the un- 
processed text, relative to the processed prompting text. 
Finally, Jared Bernstein described experiments at SRI In- 
ternational in collection of spontaneous speech for the 
CSR corpus. The methods proved sufficient o collect flu- 
ent spontaneous speech, although at significantly greater 
cost and with significantly greater variation than the read 
speech. In particular, good subjects were hard to find. 
The paper described the procedures and quantified the 
effects. A number of interesting and entertaining samples 
of spontaneous renditions of news articles were played. 
A few of the items raised in discussion were: 
1. How about recording a paragraph at a time? 
D. Paul :  The recording of sentence-at- 
a-time within paragraphs was more con- 
venient for collection and for current re- 
search recognizers which are oriented to 
one sentence-per-file. 
V. Zue: Subjects were presented 
with highlighted paragraphs, and moved 
quickly from sentence to sentence. 
2. Short discussion on verbalized punctuation. 
Janet  Baker :  People who dictate, do 
punctuate. Would like to see some data 
collected in a realistic dictation task (e.g., 
tell a reporter that a story due tomorrow 
morning must be dictated). 
3. Roger  Moore :  Can Europeans get this data and 
tools? 
General encouragement on sharing the 
data, and on cooperative fforts. 
4. P. Pr ice:  How about a description of the TI collec- 
tion effort? 
R.  Ra jasekaran:  TI used automatic 
endpointing rather than push-to-talk; 
most subjects didn't like verbalized punc- 
tuation. 
Rest of discussion tabled till after dinner. 
An unscheduled video presentation following Bernstein's 
talk entertained the group with Victor Borge's rendition 
of the sounds of punctuation. This video, courtesy of Rich 
Schwartz of BBN, was an excellent lead-in to the dinner 
break. 
356 
