A Real-Time Spoken-Language System 
for Interactive Problem Solving 
Patti Price and Robert C.Moore 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project, to develop a spoken-language 
interface to the Official Airline Guide database, is being 
developed along two overlapping research and develop- 
ment lines: one focussed on an SLS kernel for database 
query, and the other on the full interactive system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Evaluation of SRI's NL, SLS, and speech recognition 
technologies. SRI's February-92 weighted error rate 
for ATIS class A and D utterances combined was 
31.0% for NL and 45.4% for SLS. SRI's February-92 
SPREC word error rate for all ATIS utterances was 
11.0%. For the speaker-independent, closed 5K vo- 
cabulary CSR task, SRI achieved a 16.6% word error 
rate in the verbalized punctuation test and a 17.1% 
word error rate in the non-verbalized-punctuation 
test, using the standard bigram language model. 
? Encouraging initial results in a study of verbal re- 
pairs in the ATIS MADCOW corpus; the study in- 
cluded analysis and classification of the repairs in 
the corpus as well as a method using both pattern 
matching techniques and acoustic evidence to detect 
and correct he repairs. 
? Implementation of RASTA filtering (high-pass fil- 
tering in the Log Spectral domain to remove time- 
invariant or slow moving linear channel effects) to 
improve channel robustness. 
? Experiments howing differences between sponta- 
neous and read speech and the need for including 
spontaneous speech in trainir/g, development, and 
test sets. 
? Development of infrastructure necessary for dealing 
with very large vocabularies and language models 
such as those associated with the CSR corpus. 
? Improvement in GEMINI natural-language process- 
ing system's linguistic coverage of a 2100-utterance 
ATIS traning corpus to 92% syntactic overage, 77% 
semantic overage. 
? Development ofalgorithms for tracking evolving dis- 
course structure. On the development set of the 
ATIS corpus, we find these algorithms correctly de- 
termine the discourse context with greater than 90% 
accuracy. 
? Improvements o the template matcher: new tem- 
plates, improved portability, more linguistic knowl- 
edge incorporated, reduced overgeneration, im- 
proved context handling, improved coverage of 
databas'e retrieval component, all without signifi- 
cantly increasing response time, which is still less 
than a second. 
? Analysis of data on human-machine problem solving 
using our SLS ATIS system: we have analyzed the 
effect on user satisfaction and system performance 
of system errors, user experience, and instructions 
to users. We have also explored trade-offs of time 
vs.speed and user satisfaction. 
? Collection of data (speech, transcriptions, and log- 
files) using our SLS ATIS system. To date this in- 
cludes 72 speakers, 2301 utterances, and 134 scenar- 
ios. 
? Improvements in the SLS ATIS demo system, in- 
cluding better paraphrasing ofsystemn's understand- 
ing, easier to read displays, improved system error 
messages, impler control of context mechanism. 
? Development with MIT of a method for end-to-end 
evaluation that takes into account he whole inter- 
action; implementation f the method is in progress. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Fully integrate GEMINI into SRI's ATIS system. 
? Explore tighter integration of speech and NL pro- 
cessing for better overall SLS performance. 
? Improve speech recognition computational and 
word-accuracy performance for the ATIS and CSR 
domains with better models of the channel, speaker, 
and spontaneous speech effects. 
487 
