Session 10: Large Vocabulary CSR 
George R. Doddington, chairman 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, CA 
OVERVIEW 
This session comprised four papers on various topics in 
speech recognition, followed by a general discussion. The 
first two papers covered computational search techniques, 
while the last two papers addressed phonetic modeling 
issues. 
The first paper, "Rapid Match Training for Large Vocabu- 
laries", was presented by Larry Gillick of Dragon Systems. 
This paper described an improved algorithm for building 
rapid match models for computational efficiency in contin- 
uous speech recognition. The technique, designed to 
accommodate variation in model parameters and phone 
duration, was demonstrated to provide significant improve- 
ment in the miss rate for the correct word. The miss rate 
remains relatively high however, about 5 percent for a list 
length of 250 words and a vocabulary size of 5000 words. 
During the discussion on this paper, a question was raised 
regarding the use of a language model in the rapid match. 
The answer was that, yes, a unigram word probability was 
used. 
The second paper, "An A* Algorithm for Very Large 
Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition", was pre- 
sented by P. Kenny of INRS. This paper described a new 
A* stack search algorithm that is only about en times more 
computationally expensive than isolated word recognition. 
Using a 60,000 word vocabulary, the CPU time required to 
run a perplexity 700 task was 120 times real time on an HP 
720 workstation. 
During the discussion on this paper, a question was raised 
regarding the manner in which the search path is extended. 
The answer explained that he phone ndpoints were known 
and were independent ofthe search path. 
The third paper, "Modeling Spontaneous Speech Effects in 
Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition Applications", was 
presented by John Butzberger of SRI. This paper described 
an analysis of speech recognition errors on spontaneous 
speech and concluded that he increased error rate on spon- 
taneous peech is attributable todisfluencies and that fluent 
spontaneous speech exhibits the same recognition perfor- 
mance as read speech. It was also concluded that he use of 
spontaneous speech in training the recognition system is 
important for best performance. 
During the discussion on this paper, a question was raised 
regarding how 70 percent of all errors could be labeled as 
disfluencies. The answer was that he notion of disfluency 
also comprehended natural phenomena such as vowel elon- 
gation and spontaneous speech grammatical constructs 
(low bigram probabilities). 
327 
The last paper, "Speaker-Independent Phone Recognition 
Using BREF", was presented by Jean-Luc Gauvain of 
LIMSI. This paper described a series of experiments on 
speaker-independent phone recognition using the BREF 
corpus of read speech as prompted using the French news- 
paper Le Monde. Phone-level performance of31 percent 
error was achieved, which is comparable with results 
achieved on the English TIMIT corpus. 
During the discussion on this paper, a question was raised 
regarding the use of a grammar on this task. The answer 
was that a grammar was tried but that he error rate was 
very high. (The perplexity of the grammar was about 500.) 
D ISCUSSION 
The general discussion deviated from the topics covered by 
the papers and addressed instead pitfalls and issues related 
to the idiosyncrasies ofspeech corpora nd their impact on 
speech recognition results and technology. 
The SLS ATIS corpus was "attacked" by noting that results 
were a strong function of the identity of the site which sup- 
plied the data. The question was raised multiple times of 
what was the cause of these differences. Various ources 
were suggested, including consistent differences in speak- 
ers, differences inthe acoustics and digitizing system, and 
differences inthe task. Of these three, the last seems most 
likely, with even primitive measures ( uch as the number of 
words per sentence) showing striking differences from site 
to site. 
A general complaint was lodged regarding the imbalance 
of training data between sites for the MADCOW corpus, 
with MIT supplying an inordinate fraction of such data. In 
a mitigating reply to this complaint, itwas noted that he 
M1T sentences are significantly shorter than sentences from 
other sites, and therefore the imbalance (in tenus of the 
amount of speech data) is not as great as is indicated by the 
sentence count. 
One astute comment categorized speech signal variability 
as being of two distinct ypes -- systematic (modelable) and 
nonsystematic (random). It was further noted that he sys- 
tematic variability is not handled properly by HMM tech- 
nology and must be built into the system as a model of the 
speech process. Nonsystematic variability on the other 
hand can only be modeled as noise and the only way to 
handle such variation is through training with large 
amounts of data. A plea was made to isolate the systematic 
effects and model them explicitly, so that we don't continue 
to need more and more data. 
