SESSION 5a: ACOUSTIC MODEL ING 
Hy Murveit, Chair 
SRI International 
Speech Research and Technology Program 
Menlo Park, CA, 94025 
1. SUMMARY OF PAPERS 
The session focused on acoustic modeling for speech rec- 
ognition; which can be segmented into three broad sub- 
areas: (1) feature xtraction, (2) modeling the features for 
the speech source, and (3) estimation of the model parame- 
ters. The papers in this session touched on all of these areas. 
Huang focuses on the feature representation. Furui et al, 
Austin et al, and Kimbal et al discuss new models for the 
speech source. Hon and Lee, Hwang and Huang, and 
Gauvain and Lee focus on parameter stimation issues. 
In "Minimizing Speaker Variation Effects for Speaker- 
Independent Speech Recognition," Huang discusses a fea- 
ture representation forspeech recognition that is less sensi- 
tive to the speaker. It is a cepstral mapping technique where 
the mapping is done with neural networks. A codeword- 
dependent cepstral-mapping etwork is estimated for each 
of a group of different speaker types. This cepstral mapping 
improves the speaker-independent performance of the 
CMU system. 
In "Recent Topics in Speech Recognition Research at NTT 
Laboratories," Furui et al discuss three topics. This first 
topic focuses on an improved model for speech. Typical 
HMM recognition systems make flame-to-frame indepen- 
dence assumptions. Furui presented a technique aimed at 
minimizing this effect, using bigram-constrained HMMs, 
and showed an improvement when using this technique. He 
also discussed two issues in language modeling, one spe- 
cific to Japanese, and another showing how task-indepen- 
dent language models can be adapted to a task at hand. 
Austin et al ("Improving State-of-the-Art Continuous 
Speech Recognition Systems Using the N-Best Paradigm 
with Neural Networks") and Kimbal et al ("Recognition 
Using Classification and Segmentation Scoring") discuss 
segment-level models for the speech source. Austin points 
out that neural networks can be combined with HMMs to 
automatically derive segment-level acoustic models that 
reduce the effect of frame-to-frame independence assump- 
tions in standard HMMs. He shows that proper parameter 
estimation techniques are key for these models and presents 
a technique called N-best raining which improves the per- 
formance of his segmental model. Kimbal focuses on the 
segmentation aspects of segmental models. He shows that 
incorporating a probabilistic segmentation model improves 
the performance of the Boston University speech recogni- 
tion system. 
The following three papers discuss the area of parameter 
estimation. "Vocabulary and Environment Adaptation in 
Vocabulary-Independent Speech Recognition" by Hun and 
Lee revisits the area of task independence, but this time 
from an acoustic point of view. Traditional HMM-based 
speech-recognition systems work much better if their 
acoustic training data use the same task/vocabulary as the 
testing data. Hon and Lee look at techniques for making the 
training data more general. In particular, they examine 
novel techniques that improve vocabulary-independent 
performance by making the parameter-estimation tech- 
nique focus on the testing vocabulary. 
Hwang and Huang, in "Subphonetic Modelling for Speech 
Recognition," discuss another parameter-estimation issue-, 
the issue of fled models. Most large-vocabulary speech-rec- 
ognition systems must tie together estimates of certain 
parameters that would not otherwise have sufficient train- 
ing data to be estimated accurately. Often this is done in a 
phonetic way. For instance, the same allophone or allo- 
phone-in-context in different words would share parame- 
ters. Hwang and Huang describe atechnique (similar to the 
IBM phenome technique) for automatically deriving the 
units to be tied. 
In "MAP Estimation of Continuous Density HMM: Theory 
and Applications," Gauvain and Lee discuss a parameter 
estimation technique based on Bayesian learning. They 
show that it is useful for parameter smoothing as well as for 
speaker adaptation and discriminative training. In speaker 
adaptation, speaker-independent models can be moved to a 
speaker using a small amount of training since the speaker- 
independent models are used as priors. Adapted speaker- 
independent performance never performed worse than 
speaker-dependent systems given the same amount of 
speaker-dependent training data. 
161 
