Spontaneous Speech Effects In Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition Applications 
John Butzberger, Hy Murveit, Elizabeth Shriberg, Patti Price 
SRI International 
Speech Research and Technology Program 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
ABSTRACT 
We describe three analyses on the effects of spontaneous 
speech on continuous speech recognition performance. We 
have found that: (1) spontaneous speech effects ignifi- 
cantly degrade recognition performance, (2) fluent sponta- 
neous speech yields word accuracies equivalent to read 
speech, and (3) using spontaneous speech training data can 
significantly improve performance for recognizing sponta- 
neous speech. We conclude that word accuracy can be 
improved by explicitly modeling spontaneous effects in the 
recognizer, and by using as much spontaneous speech train- 
ing data as possible. Inclusion of read speech training data, 
even within the task domain, does not significantly improve 
performance. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Recognition of spontaneous speech is an important feature 
of database-query spoken-language systems (SLS). How- 
ever, most speech recognition research as focussed on 
acoustic and language modeling developed for recognition 
of read speech \[1\]. Read speech as been used extensively 
in the past for both training and testing speech recognition 
systems because it is significantly less expensive to collect 
than spontaneous speech, and because the lexical and syn- 
tactic content of the data can be controlled. 
The multi-site data collection effort \[3\] has provided achal- 
lenging corpus for research and development in the Airline 
Travel Information System (ATIS) domain. We have 
observed a significant increase in word error rate compared 
to the previous task domain, the read-speech naval 
Resource Management (RM) task \[2,6\]. Word error rates 
for RM systems have typically been in the 5% range, 
whereas ATIS word error rates have exceeded 10% \[4\], for 
comparable perplexities. 
The speaking style typically exhibited in the RM domain 
had a very consistent rate and articulation, within and 
across entences, and across speakers. There were no dis- 
fluencies, such as word fragments, hesitations, or self-edits, 
since utterances containing these effects were removed 
from the corpus. The utterances tended to be short and 
direct (3.3 seconds long, on average). No pause fillers (uh, 
um), false starts, repairs, or excessively long pauses 
occurred. The speakers were able to concentrate on speech 
production, rather than query formation or problem solv- 
ing. Furthermore, the training and testing texts were gener- 
ated using a fixed vocabulary, and with the same, known 
language model, which quite adequately represented the 
source and target languages. 
The speaking style typically exhibited in the ATIS domain 
differs from that in the RM domain all of the above aspects. 
The speaking rate is highly inconsistent, both within utter- 
ances, across utterances within a session, and across ses- 
sions and speakers. The articulation is highly variable, with 
stressed forms of function words and reduced forms of con- 
tent words typically not observed in read speech. The sen- 
tence lengths vary widely, and are typically longer than RM 
sentences (7.5 seconds long, on average). Some words in 
ATIS sentences may not exist in the recognizer's lexicon, 
and an appropriate language model must be developed. 
Most importantly, however, ATIS speech contains ponta- 
neous effects and disfluencies: filled pauses, stressed or 
lengthened function words, false-starts and self-edits, word 
fragments, breaths, long pauses, and extraneous noises 
such as paper ustling and beeps. Data collected using sys- 
tems containing automatic speech recognition and natural 
language components contain frequent occurrences of 
hyperarticulated words, elicited by the subjects in an 
attempt to overcome recognition or understanding errors 
\[5\]. Additionally, the data have been collected in normal 
office conditions (rather than in a soundproof booth), and 
recording quality and conditions vary across ites \[3\]. 
2. ERROR ANALYSIS 
We begin by analyzing the errors that occurred in the Feb- 
ruary 1991 evaluation set of 148 Class-A sentences, for 
which our recognition word error rate exceeded 18%. 
These sentences are examined because they are believed to 
be a particularly difficult sampling of ATIS speech. 
339 
Phonetic alignments were automatically generated corre- 
sponding to both the reference and recognized word strings, 
and we: listened to each utterance was listened to very care- 
fully. The acoustic and language model scores were com- 
pared, and a subjective judgment was made as to the likely 
source of the error (the acoustic model, the language model, 
the articulation quality of the segment, or other effects uch 
as breaths, out-of-vocabulary words, or extraneous noise). 
We found that 30% of the errors (Table 1) could be attrib- 
uted to poor articulation or poorly modeled articulation 
(usually reductions, emphatic stress, or speaking rate varia- 
tions), 20% were due to out-of-vocabulary words or poor 
bigram probabilities, 20% were due to urnnodeled pause- 
fillers (uh, um, breaths), and the remaining portion unex- 
plainable, but probably due to inadequate acoustic-phonetic 
modeling. 
We see that 70% of the errors are due to effects observed in 
the ATIS domain, but not in the RM domain. If these rrors 
were removed, we would approach an error rate typically 
seen in a comparable RM system (with a perplexity 60 
wordpair grammar). 
Corpus 
ATIS only 
Cause for Error 
Poor Articulation 
Portion 
30% 
Vocabulary and Grammar 20% 
Pause Fillers 20% 
ATIS and RM Other 30% 
Table 1: Summary of error sources for the Class-A 
Feb91 ATIS evaluation set (148 sentences). 
3. READ VS. SPONTANEOUS SPEECH 
To deterrnme the impact of spontaneous versus read speak- 
ing styles on recognition performance given a fixed training 
condition, arecognition experiment with two test sets was 
constructed. The first set contained spontaneous speech 
utterances; the second set contained read versions of those 
same utterances, given later by the same subjects. 
The training data consisted ofRM, TIMIT, and pilot-corpus 
ATIS utterances (with the read-spontaneous and spontane- 
ous test data held out). This left rather little ATIS-specific 
data for training, almost none of it spontaneous. The recog- 
nition was run without a grammar (perplexity 1025) to 
remove any corrective ffects of the grammar, so that only 
the acoustic effect of the spontaneous speech could be eval- 
uated. The spontaneous test sentences were categorized as 
either fluent or disfluent based on the existence of special 
markings in their corresponding SRO* files. 
We found that the primary difference in error rates between 
the read and spontaneous test sets was due directly to disflu- 
encies in the spontaneous speech (Table 2). Non-disfluent 
spontaneous speech ad the same error rate as read speech. 
The disfluencies include pause-fillers, word fragments, 
overly lengthened oroverly stressed function words, self- 
edits, mispronunciations, and overly long pauses. This list 
of disfluency types is derived from the special markings 
used in the SRO transcriptions. The observation that non- 
disfiuent spontaneous speech error rate approaches read 
speech error rate is consistent with the fact that the test 
speech much more closely resembles the training data. The 
training data was fluently and consistently articulated, just 
as was the non-disfluent spontaneous speech. 
Characteristic 
Read 
Spontaneous 
Spontaneous - Disfluent 
Spontaneous - Fluent 
Num Word 
Sents Error 
241 33% 
241 43% 
97 56% 
144 32% 
Table 2: Error rate versus peaking style. Read 
speech and fluent spontaneous speech ave equivalent 
error rates. 
The breakdown of error rate versus disfluency type (Table 
3) shows that a significant portion of the errors were due to 
filled pauses, long pauses, lengthenings, and stress. Sen- 
tences with these disfluencies had twice the word error rate 
of fluent speech. The filled pause rrors happened because 
there were no models for breath/uh/um events in this partic- 
ular recognizer's lexicon. The stress and lengthening errors 
happened (most likely) because of the lack of sufficient 
observations of these events in the training data, and 
because of the lack of explicit models for these ffects. The 
long pauses usually caused insertions within the pause 
regions neighboring the phrase-initial nd phrase-final 
words. 
From these observations, we conclude that more training 
data containing these effects would improve the match 
between the acoustic models and the spontaneous test 
speech, and therefore would improve the recognition per- 
formance. Furthermore, these ffects hould be explicitly 
modeled m the recognizer's lexicon, once sufficient training 
data is obtained. However, this process depends on the reli- 
ability of the SRO labeling across ites, which tends to be 
subjective and inconsistent. 
*The SRO transcription contains adetailed 
description of all the acoustic events occurring in a 
utterance. 
340 
Disfluency Num Disfluency 
Type Sents Causes Error 
Self-Edit 7 71% 
Filled Pause 24 92% 
Long Pause 17 94% 
Lengthening 36 81% 
Stress 22 59% 
Mispronunciation 2 100% 
Fragment 5 100% 
Table 3: Number of sentences afflicted with each 
disfluency type, and the percentage ofoccurrences 
where the disfluency causes an error. 
4. TRAINING DATA VARIATIONS 
Further evidence for the importance of modeling spontane- 
ous phenomena is found by manipulating the content of the 
training data sets that are used for acoustic-phonetic model- 
ing. In this experiment, we compare spontaneous speech 
recognition performance given different combinations of 
read, spontaneous, ATIS, and non-ATIS training subsets. 
The training subsets (Table 4) consist of the standard RM 
and TIMIT training data, and read and spontaneous subdi- 
visions of all the ATIS and MADCOW data available as of 
October 1, 1991. The "Breaths" corpus refers to an inter- 
nally collected atabase of inhalations and exhalations, 
used to train a breath model, which is allowed to occur 
optionally between words during recognition. Much of the 
ATIS-read data was also collected intemally at SRI. 
Corpus 
ATIS-Read 
Size 
7,932 
ATIS-Spontaneous 6,745 
TIMIT 4,200 
Resource Management 3,990 
Breaths 800 
Table 4: Training data subsets, which are combined 
in various ways to determine the impact of read and 
spontaneous training data on recognition of spontaneous 
speech. 
Recognition was conducted using a development test-set of 
447 spontaneous MADCOW utterances \[3\], with a perplex- 
ity 20 bigram grammar trained on all the available sponta- 
neous peech transcriptions (roughly 10,000 sentences). All 
of the experiments outlined below use discrete-distribution 
HMMs, and every training set combination i cludes the 800 
breath utterances. 
Using all the available ATIS and MADCOW data yielded a 
system with a word error rate of 9.6% (Table 5). Using only 
spontaneous ATIS speech reduced performance by only 6%, 
to 10.2% word error. Training with a roughly equivalent 
quantity of read ATIS speech increased the error rate signif- 
icantly, by 58% to 15.2%. This suggests that having gaining 
data which is consistent in speaking mode with the test data 
can significantly improve performance. However, the effect 
of lexical and phonetic overage in the training sets might 
be a factor in causing this performance difference. This 
issue is discussed inSection 5. 
Training Set Size Error 
ATIS-Read 8,732 15.2% 
ATIS-Spontaneous 7,545 10.2% 
ATIS-All 15,477 9.6% 
Table 5: Training set variations for ATIS-only systems. 
This table indicates that having speaking-mode-consistent 
data is a major contributor to performance improvement. 
We also look at the impact of using non-ATIS read speech 
for additional training data (Table 6). Using successively 
more training data gives the expected result, an improve- 
ment in performance. However, when using all the available 
data (RM, TIMIT, ATIS and MADCOW), the performance 
matches that of the system gained exclusively on ATIS and 
MADCOW data. Furthermore, the performance ofthe sys- 
tem trained using all the available read speech (16,922 sen- 
tences) performed much worse than the system gained only 
on spontaneous speech (7,545 sentences). 
Training Set 
TIMIT 
Size 
5,000 
Error 
26.9% 
TIMIT + RM 8,990 20.5% 
TIMIT + RM + ATIS-Read 16,922 14.6% 
TIMIT + RM + ATIS-All 23,667 9.6% 
Table 6: Training set variations using non-ATIS data. 
The error rates is reduced when ATIS-read data is added, 
and is reduced further when ATIS-spontaneous data is 
added. 
341 
We can conclude from these xperiments hat having speak- 
ing-mode-consistent training data is more important than 
simply having a large quantity of training data. However, 
we cannot be certain that the phonetic ontent of the ATIS- 
spontaneous training set better matches the development set 
than the ATIS-read training set. This issue is addressed in
the next section. 
We compared the errors of two different recognizers used 
on the same test set of spontaneous speech. Both recogniz- 
ers were trained on a comparable number of utterances, but 
one recognizer was trained on read speech only (TIM1T+R- 
M+ATIS-Read), and the other on spontaneous speech only 
(ATIS-Spontaneous). We found that substitutions of one 
function word for another form a significant portion of the 
errors in both test sets, and in roughly the same proportions. 
However, there were significantly fewer substitutions of 
content words for other content words for the recognizer 
trained on spontaneous speech compared to the recognizer 
trained on read speech. 
Similarly, the recognizer trained on spontaneous speech 
manifested significantly fewer errors in substitution of a 
pause filler for a function word. "Homophone" errors, 
which can lead to understanding errors, formed a significant 
portion of the errors in the recognizer trained on read 
speech, although almost none of these appeared for the rec- 
ognizer trained on spontaneous speech. We believe that this 
is because many words that can be homophonous in read 
speech ("for"-"four" and "to"-"two", for example) are no 
longer homophones in spontaneous speech ("fer"-"four" 
and "tuh"-"two"). 
5. Phonetic Coverage Analysis 
One potential reason for the dramatic performance varia- 
tions could be that the phonetic ontent of the development 
test-set is better covered by the ATIS-Spontaneous subset 
than the ATIS-Read subset. In this section, we attempt to 
disprove that theory, giving further strength to the argument 
that speaking-mode consistency is the primary factor affect- 
ing performance. 
We reason that the more detailed (more context-dependent) 
acoustic-phonetic models there are available for testing, the 
more adequate the training data has been in representing 
this dimension (the better the phonetic overage). There- 
fore, for this analysis, we determine the average context 
level (or detail) of HMM states that each frame of test data 
visits during recogmtion. This is computed by assigning an 
integer-valued number to each model type (increasing as 
context level increases), then computing the percentage of
all frames of data visiting states corresponding toa particu- 
lar level of context. 
The series of context-dependent model types used in the 
DECIPHER system is listed in Table 7. A model with a par- 
ticular context level will be generated by the DECIPHER 
trainer if there is sufficient data to train that model. 
Model Type Context Level 
Monophone 1 
Left-general biphone 2 
Right-general biphone 2 
Left biphone 3 
Right biphone 3 
General triphone 4 
Left-general triphone 5 
Right-general triphone 5 
Triphone 6 
Word-specific 7 
Table 7: Assignments of an integer-valued context 
level to each context-dependent model type. Models 
with increasing detail are assigned higher context level 
values. 
The expectation is that the higher the average context level 
encountered during recognition, the better the performance. 
This trend is indeed captured in Table 8, where the system 
with the least task-specific training data (TIMIT) had the 
least average context level (and the lowest performance), 
and the system with the most training data (TIMIT+RM+ 
ATIS-All) had the highest average context level (and the 
highest performance). 
The important point to note is that the average context level 
of the best-trained read speech system (TIMIT+RM+ATIS- 
Read) was roughly equal to that of the best spontaneous- 
only system (ATIS-Spontaneous), but the error rate was sig- 
nificantly higher (14.6% versus 10.2%, respectively). This 
suggests that although models of equivalent detail are being 
used for recognition, the performance difference is due to 
the spontaneous speaking-mode of the training set, which is 
consistent with the speaking-mode of the test set. 
342 
Training Sets 
TIMIT+RM+ATIS-All 
Error 
Rate 
9.6% 
Context 
Level 
6.31 
ATIS-All 9.6% 6.26 
ATIS-Spontaneous 10.2% 6.03 
TIMIT+RM+ATIS-Read 14.6% 6.14 
ATIS-Read 15.2% 5.96 
TIMIT+RM 20.5% 5.06 
TIMIT 26.9% 4.56 
Table 8: Context level versus word error. This table 
indicates that despite similar model detail (context 
level), the spontaneous-trained system significantly out- 
performs the best read-trained system. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, R.Stem 
(ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 1990. 
MADCOW, "Multi-Site Data Collection for a Spoken Lan- 
guage System," Prec. DARPA Speech and Natural Lan- 
guage Workshop, M. Marcus (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 
1992. 
Murveit, H., J. Butzherger, and M. Weintraub, "Perfor- 
mance of SRI's DECIPHER Speech Recognition Systems 
on DARPA's ATIS Task," Prec. DARPA Speech and Natu- 
ral Language Workshop, M. Marcus (ed.), Morgan Kauf- 
mann, 1992. 
Shriberg, E., E. Wade, and R Price, "Human-Machine 
Problem Solving Using Spoken Language Systems (SLS): 
Factors Affecting Performance and User Satisfaction," 
Prec. DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, M. 
Marcus (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. 
Murveit, H., J. Butzherger, and M. Weintrauh, "Speech 
Recognition i SRI's Resource Management and ATIS 
Systems," Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, P.Price (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 1991. 
6. CONCLUSION 
These studies have convinced us of the importance of using 
as much spontaneous speech material as possible in training 
our system. Furthermore, we have found that spontaneous 
speech effects can significantly degrade recognition perfor- 
mance, although fluent spontaneous speech yields word 
accuracies equivalent to read speech. 
Word accuracy can be improved by using as much sponta- 
neous speech training data as possible, and by explicitly 
modeling such effects in the recognizer's lexicon (such as 
optional interword breath and pause-filler models). Inclu- 
sion of read speech training data did not significantly 
improve performance, given that the phonetic overage of 
the training sets were roughly equivalent. 
Acknowledgments  
We gratefully acknowledge support for this work from 
DARPA through the Office of Naval Research contract 
N00014-90-C-0085. The govemrnent has certain rights in 
this material. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect he view of the gov- 
ernment funding agencies. 
REFERENCES 
I. 
2. 
Price, P., W. Fisher, J. Bernstein, and D. Pallet, "The 
DARPA 1000-Word Resource Management Database for 
Continuous Speech Recognition," Prec. ICASSP, 1988. 
Pallet, D., J. Fiscus, and J. Garofolo, "DARPA Resource 
Management Benchmark Test Results June 1990", Prec. 
343 
