CSR DATA COLLECTION PILOT 
Denise Danielson, Project Leader 
Jared Bernstein, Principal Investigator 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
The objective of the CSR Corpus Development is to collect 
and deliver a large corpus of continuous speech data to sup- 
port DARPA research efforts in continuous speech recogni- 
tion (CSR). The CSR corpus is intended to be task 
independent and to consist of speech that is similar to that 
which would be expected from eventual users of real world 
CSR systems. Toward these ends, the current pilot collec- 
tion effort was designed to minimize controls on vocabu- 
lary, background noise, and microphones. CSR is also 
designed to incorporate spontaneous speech. 
SRI was one of three sites to participate in a CSR pilot col- 
lection effort in 1991. The primary goals of the pilot effort 
were to: 
? establish tools and procedures for CSR collection, 
? experiment with various collection methods, includ- 
ing those for spontaneous speech, 
? collect enough data for CSR tests in February 1992, 
? estimate the cost and test the suitability of the data 
before proceeding with a full-scale CSR corpus 
RECENT RESULTS 
Between October and December 1991, SRI completed its 
portion of the pilot CSR Corpus collection. The full design 
of the pilot CSR data collection is described in the paper 
"CSR Corpus Development" by George Doddington that 
appears in this volume, In SRI's portion of the task, a total 
of 13160 sentences from 36 speakers were collected, tran- 
scribed and delivered to NIST. This includes 1280 sponta- 
neously produced sentences from 12 different speakers. 
All data was collected simultaneously through two micro- 
phones. One microphone, a Sennheiser headset-mounted 
microphone, remained constant throughout all data collec- 
tion. The second microphone varied across speakers and 
collection sessions. Depending on the type of data being 
collected, the second microphone was selected from one of 
two disjoint sets of microphones designated as either train- 
ing or test. Thus, SRI's part of the CSR pilot corpus sup- 
ports the development of "microphone independent" 
speech recognition systems. SRI's recordings take about 
6.4 GBytes of storage for the two microphone channels, or 
about 3.2 GBytes per channel. 
In each cell of the overall design, 50% of the subjects were 
male and 50% female. Half of the data in each condition 
includes verbalized punctuation, and half is without verbal- 
ized punctuation. 
SRI has performed initial evaluations of the costs of col- 
lecting spontaneous speech data versus read speech data. In 
terms of subject ime, spontaneous speech takes two to 
three times as long to produce as read speech. Because of 
the additional costs for transcription and materials prepara- 
tion, the ratio in terms of data collection personnel time is 
closer to 6:1. In addition, since the task of creating and dic- 
tating news-style stories pontaneously requires pecialized 
skills, cost per hour of subject time can be higher. 
SRI is currently in the process of collecting an additional 
set of 8 test speakers. The current work includes experi- 
mentation with different materials and instructions for elic- 
iting spontaneous speech. The goal of these xperiments is 
to identify spontaneous collection methods that are rela- 
tively easy for the subject while yielding data that is truly 
spontaneous and useful for the system development efforts. 
PLANS FOR TIlE COMING YEAR 
Work with DARPA and NIST to identify any 
changes necessary inthe data collection procedures 
used during the pilot study. 
? Proceed with a larger scale data collection effort. 
Perform more extensive analyses of the cost/benefit 
ratio of spontaneous speech data versus read speech 
data. Assuming these analyses show spontaneous 
speech to be cost effective in the long nm, collect a 
larger proportion of spontaneous speech. 
Continue to experiment with various methods of 
elicifing spontaneofls speech and identify those 
methods most appropriate for meeting the ultimate 
goals of the CSR corpus development project. 
485 
