Evaluation and Analysis of Auditory Model Front Ends 
for Robust Speech Recognition 
Program Summary* 
Richard  P.  L ippmann,  P r inc ipa l  Invest igator  
Lincoln Laboratory,  M.I .T.  
Lexington, MA 02173-9108 
Program Goals 
The purpose of this work is to integrate anumber 
of auditory model front ends into a high-performance 
HMM recognizer, to test and evaluate these front 
ends on noisy speech, and to analyze the results in 
order to develop a more robust front end which may 
combine features of a number of the current auditory 
model-based systems. 
Background 
This project was motivated by the need for im- 
proved speech recognition in noise, and by expec- 
tation that auditory model front ends could make 
recognition more robust to noise, microphone vari- 
ation, and speaking style. The project began in 
FY91 with the initial goal of implementing, evalu- 
ating, and comparing four promising auditory front 
ends: (1) the mean-rate and synchrony outputs of 
S. Seneff's auditory model; (2) the ensemble interval 
histogram (EIH) model developed by O. Ghitza; (3) 
the IMELDA model due to M. Hunt; and (4) an audi- 
tory model developed by J. Cohen. The initial effort 
has included implementation and integration of the 
first three models with a Lincoln HMM recognizer, 
and testing with speech in white noise and in a back- 
ground of speech babble. 
with white noise and speech babble background. As 
compared with the mel-cepstrum technique, the au- 
ditory models have similar performance at high SNR 
and slightly better performance at low SNR. In order 
to select the best features from each front end, di- 
mensionality reduction techniques, including Linear 
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and Principal Compo- 
nents Analysis (PCA) have been implemented. LDA 
has been applied to obtain a transformation matrix 
for IMELDA, with the transformation matrix devel- 
oped using 100,000 labeled speech frames (1,000 sen- 
tences) from the TIMIT corpus. Testing of IMELDA 
is about to begin on the TI-105 corpus. 
Plans 
Plans include: (1) experiments on the TI-105 
corpus in noise using IMELDA; (2) obtaining Cohen's 
front end and integrating it with the HMM system; 
(3) experiments with all front ends on the effect of 
spectral variability due to talking style in TI-105; (4) 
exploring the effect of dimensionality reduction in all 
the front ends; and (5) continuous speech recognition 
experiments on the Resource Management corpus. 
Recent Accomplishments 
The Seneff and EIH front ends have been im- 
plemented and integrated with an HMM system, and 
have yielded promising results on the TI-105 stressed 
speech corpus (a 105-word vocabulary isolated-word 
corpus which was collected at Texas Instruments), 
*This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency. The views expressed are those of the 
author  and  do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
U.S. Government.  
475 
