SESS ION 4: STAT IST ICAL  LANGUAGE MODEL ING 
Aravind K. Joshi, Chair 
Department ofComputer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6389 
1. Introduction 
Corpus based Natural Language Processing (NLP) is 
now a well established paradigm in NLP. The availabil- 
ity of large corpora, often annotated in various way has 
led to the development ofa variety of approaches to sta- 
tistical language modeling. The papers in this session 
represent many of these important approaches. I will 
try to classify these papers along different dimensions, 
thus providing the reader an overview as well as some 
understanding of the future directions of the work in 
this area. 
There are two major motivations for research in statisti- 
cal NLP, which are not necessarily independent of each 
other. 
1. Robust Parsing: For processing free texts, hand 
crafted grammars are neither practical nor reliable. 
Statistical techniques are necessary both for robust- 
ness and efficiency. The use of statistical techniques 
for part of speech tagging and parsing is clearly mo- 
tivated by these considerations. 
2. Automatic Acquisition of Linguistic Structure: 
Here the goal is to use statistical techniques to dis- 
cover linguistic structure by processing large corpus. 
The two motivations are clearly not independent, 
however the latter is more concerned with the ex- 
tent to which the structure can be discovered statis- 
tically and the extent o which it has to be provided 
from outside. 
2. Adaptive Stochastic Modeling 
Improvements in stochastic language modeling can be 
obtained by using adaptive techniques. Della Pietra et 
al. describe an algorithm to adapt a n - g ram language 
model to a document as it is dictated. Rosenfeld and 
Huang describe an adaptive technique which uses infor- 
mation about within-document word sequence correla- 
tions, where one word sequence triggers another, caus- 
ing its estimated probability to be raised. Such adaptive 
techniques are essential as the vocabulary size increases. 
3. Part of Speech Tagging 
Statistical techniques have been very successful in the 
task of part of speech tagging. There are two papers 
in this session dealing with part of speech tagging, rep- 
resenting two different perspectives. Black et al de- 
scribe the use of decision trees to estimate probabilities 
of words appearing with various parts of speech, given 
the context in which the word appears. Decision trees 
are used to take care of some of the problems of modeling 
long-distance dependencies. 
Statistical techniques were introduced for part of speech 
have been more successful than the rule based techniques 
for the task of part of speech tagging. These rules are, of 
course, hand crafted. Brill presents a rule based tagger 
which automatically acquires its rules and tags from a 
corpus based analysis. Its accuracy is comparable to 
stochastic taggers. Brill's paper is an example of how 
statistical techniques can be used to acquire structure, 
thus opening possibilities for overcoming the limitations 
of usual rule based approaches to language processing. 
4. Grammar Inference and Probabil istic 
Parsing 
Grammar inference is a challenging problem for statis- 
tical approaches to natural anguage processing because 
the standard techniques based on finite-state models are 
incapable to represent hierarchical structure of natural 
language. 
The parameter estimation methods have already been 
extended by Baker to stochastic ontext-free grammars. 
Pereira nd Schabes describe some of the difficulties with 
the inside-outside algorithm, in particular the growth of 
local maxima as the number of nonterminals increases 
and the possible divergence between the structure in- 
ferred and the qualitative linguistic judgments. They 
propose an extension of the inside-outside algorithm us- 
ing a partially parsed corpus in order to provide a tighter 
connection between the hierarchical structure and the in- 
ferred grammar. 
Stochastic approaches togrammar inference and parsing 
i01 
are significantly enhanced by combining lexical, struc- 
tural, and contextual information. Several papers in 
this session describe different echniques for achieving 
this combination. Magerman and Weir describe a proba- 
bilistic agenda based chart parsing algorithm which uses 
a probabilistic technique for modeling where edges in 
the chart are likely to occur in the agenda-based chart- 
parsing process, enabling the parser to avoid the worst 
case behavior. 
Mark et al use a stochastic context-free grammar (CFG) 
combined with the n-  gram statistics, which provide 
some 'local' contextual information. They then describe 
techniques for parameter stimation. 
Black et al describe a history based approach for com- 
bining some lexical, syntactic, semantic, and structural 
information. They use the leftmost derivation of the 
parse tree to specify the context. Although they de- 
scribe their approach using a CFG, it appears that the 
approach is more general and not necessarily imited to 
CFGs. 
Schabes describes tochastic Lexicalized Tree-adjoining 
Grammars(LTAG). He shows how the inside-outside 
reestimation algorithm for stochastic CFGs can be ex- 
tended to stochastic LTAGs. The LTAGs provide a 
framework for integrating hierarchical, syntactic, and 
lexical information in the grammar formalism itself, 
thereby allowing the specification of co-occurrence r - 
lationships directly. 
Hindle also presents a parser that combines lexical and 
grammatical constraints into a uniform grammatical rep- 
resentation. In this sense, the papers by Schabes and 
Hindle are closely related~ A new aspect of Hindle's 
parser is that it uses analogy to guess the likelihood of 
constructions outside the grammar. 
The paper by BrUl and Marcus, although I have classified 
it in the general category of grammar inference and prob- 
abilistic parsing, has a somewhat different flavor. Brill 
and Marcus present an algorithm for the acquisition of 
phrase structure grammar in an unsupervised manner. 
Their approach isbased on the well-known distributional 
analysis techniques proposed by Zellig Harris in the early 
50's. These techniques were not actively pursued earlier 
as it was not possible to work with large corpora in those 
days. Now it is possible to do so. Brill and Marcus use 
the entropy measure to evaluate the distributional sim- 
ilarity of items, something that can be carried out with 
the help of large corpora. The techniques as proposed 
by Harris were meant o be used by linguists doing the 
field work, judging the distributional similarity by ques- 
tioning informants in the field. 
5. Summary 
I have identified the current trends in statistical language 
modeling by classifying the papers in the categories de- 
scribed above. The trend of combining statistical and 
grammatical information in some uniform manner will 
definitely continue and we should expect both theoreti- 
cal and experimental results in the near future. 
There is no reason to suppose that these statistical tech- 
niques are applicable only at the sentence l vel. It is very 
likely that these techniques will be applicable to certain 
aspects of discourse also. Again, it is important here to 
combine statistical information with information about 
discourse structure in a uniform fashion. Unlike gram- 
matical structure, we still know little about discourse 
structure. Hence, research on discourse structure is cru- 
cial if successful application of statistical techniques i
to be achieved. 
102 
