Spoken Language Processing in the Framework of Human-Mach ine  
Communicat ion  at LIMSI 
J. Mariani 
L IMSI -CNRS,  BP  133 
91403 Orsuy cedex, FRANCE 
mar ian i@fr t im51.b i tnet  or mar ian iQ l ims i . f r  
ABSTRACT 
The paper provides an overview of the research conducted at 
LIMSI in the field of speech processing, but also in the related ar- 
eas of Human-Machine Communication, i cluding Natural Lan- 
guage Processing, Non Verbal and Multimodal Communication. 
Also presented are the commercial pplications ofsome of the re- 
search projects. When applicable, the discussion is placed in the 
framework of international collaborations. 
INTRODUCTION 
The initial work on Text-to-Speech synthesis and Word- 
Based recognition resulted in the development of software 
and hardware (including an Asic) systems which have since 
been marketed, and used in different applications uch as 
cockpit design. Some of the problems encountered in their 
practical use are discussed. The development of a speaker 
verification system presently under test field trials is also 
presented. 
Our speech research program is now oriented along two 
main axes: Voice Dictation and Spoken Dialog. The suc- 
cessive steps of the voice dictation project are presented, 
and the difficulties pecific to the French language in this 
task are highlighted. For the dialog project, the integra- 
tion of linguistic and pragmatic information with continuous 
speech recognition in the context of air controller training is 
described. 
While this paper focuses on our speech processing 
projects, other efforts in related areas, such as character 
recognition and computer vision with algorithms derived 
from those developed for speech processing are mentioned. 
Speech processing is placed in the general framework of 
Human-Machine Communication. This is reflected in the 
structure of the laboratory, by the relationship of the Speech 
Communication group with the two other components of 
the Human-Machine Communication department: he Lan- 
guage ~ Cognition and Non- Verbal Communication groups. 
When applicable, the projects of the laboratory are situated 
in the general context of European/international coopera- 
tive actions. Perspectives on the directions of research are 
given. 
L IMS I  & CNRS 
The LIMSI laboratory is a "full" CNRS (French National 
Research Agency) laboratory. The acronym stands for "Lab- 
oratoire d'Informatique pour la M6canique t les Sciences 
de t'Ing6nieur" (Laboratory of Informatics for Mechanical, 
Chemical and Electrical Engineering). 
CNRS is the French National Research Agency. It was 
created in 1939. With 12,000 permanent researchers and 
15,000 permanent technical and administrative staff, it is 
probably the largest research institution in Europe. It has 
375 full laboratories, and 1000 academic "associated" labo- 
ratories. The 1991 budget of CNRS was 2,000 M$ (74% for 
salaries). CNRS has a general director, and is divided into 
6 different scientific departments, each having a scientific 
director. LIMSI is attached to the "Engineering Sciences" 
department, with a secondary attachment to the "Social and 
Human Sciences" Department. 
There are also 40 advisory committees, forming the "Na- 
tional Committee for Scientific Research", and correspond- 
ing to general research areas. Those committees are respon- 
sible for evaluating the quality of each laboratory and of 
each researcher. LIMSI is principally attached to the com- 
mittee 7 (Information Sciences and Technologies: Computer 
Science, Control and Signal Processing), but has secondary 
attachments o sections 10 (Chemical and Mechanical Engi- 
neering), 34 (Language Sciences), and may in the near future 
be attached to section 29 (Cognition and Psychology). 
For 1991, the laboratory staff comprised approximately 
180 members, with a total budget of 6 MS (60% for salaries). 
With J. Mariani as director, the laboratory is structured in 
Departments, Groups and Research Topics, each with its 
own manager. It has two departments: Human-Machine 
Communication, headed by J. Mariani and Mechanical and 
Chemical Engineering, headed by P. Le Qu6r6, which will 
not be presented here. 
THE HUMAN-MACHINE COMMUNICAT ION 
DEPARTMENT 
The Human-Machine Communication department has a 
total of about 100 persons (38 permanent researchers (CNRS 
and University, including 30 PhDs), 3 technical and adminis- 
trative staff, 38 PhD students and 36 postdoctoral, contrac- 
tual, associate and visiting researchers, or Master Thesis stu- 
dents). There are 3 research groups: the Speech Communi- 
cation group, headed by F. N6el, the Language ?J Cognition 
group, headed by G. Sabah, and the Non-Verbal Commu- 
55 
nication group, headed by D. Teil. The groups are divided 
in research topics, each being headed by a researcher. This 
structure is flexible, and researchers may participate in dif- 
ferent, research topics (see Appendix). 
The activities in Speech Communication i  the laboratory 
were initiated in 1968 by Dr J.S. Li~nard. The group itself 
was created in 1981. The Natural Language Processinggroup 
was created in 1985, when a group headed by Dr G. Sabah 
at University Paris VI joined a group already situated at 
University Paris XI, the location of LIMSI. The Non-verbal 
Communication group was created in Fall 1989, by merging 
teams in the laboratory already working on 3D modeling, 
Computer Vision and Robotics. 
The Human-Machine Communication Department con- 
ducts research in closely related areas: Speech, Language, 
Vision and other means of communication between humans 
and machines. These areas use common methodologies and, 
having them studied in the same laboratory, allows for an in- 
depth study of the different communication modes, which, 
we believe, is mandatory for the development of multimodal 
communication systems. The research activities are multi- 
disciplinary, and deal with Computer Science, Linguistics, 
Cognitive Psychology and Neuro-Sciences, and have both 
theoretical and applied aspects. 
The communication process is studied as a triplet Percep- 
tion - Production - Cognition: Perception by the machine 
of speech (that could be enlarged to any sound), of vision 
(with reading as a subpart), of touch or gesture; Production 
of speech or text, image synthesis (that could be enlarged to 
Solid Modeling); And all the cognitive aspects related to di- 
alogue, reasoning, knowledge representation a d integration 
of different communicatitm odes. We try as much as possi- 
ble to :link the studies of production and perception (i.e. the 
emission and reception of information), as it can be observed 
in speech recognition and synthesis, text analysis and gener- 
ation, scene analysis and image synthesis, movement sensing 
and effort feedback. 
The relationship between Language and Image processing 
is becoming more and more important, with the concept of 
"Intelligent Images", where the different parts of the image 
are in agreement with their mutual constraints, and with 
the constraints of the real physical world (Newton Law of 
gravity, phenomena which occurs in an explosion ...). Those 
images need advanced Human-Machine Communication, as
the task is complex with commands like "Put the ball on 
the table and make it bounce back". 
This opens the perspective of a true multimodal commu- 
nication system, including oral, written, visual and gestual 
communication, with the typical problems of multireference 
processing (like a voice message accompanied by a gesture). 
It can even be thought hat processing multiple communi- 
cation modes simultaneously is mandatory for each of the 
modes, as it is a necessity for knowledge acquisition in train- 
ing within self-organizing approaches. 
We find common methodologies in the different domains: 
signal processing techniques, tatistical or structural coding, 
Vector or Matrix Quantization i  Speech and Vision. Pat- 
tern recognition techniques such as Hidden Markov Models, 
Markov Random Fields, Multi Layer Perceptrons, Boltz- 
mann Machines are used in speech, language and vision. 
Morphological, Lexical, Grammatical, Syntactic, Semantic 
or Pragmatic analysis are applicable to written and spoken 
language, with specifics for speaking or writing. 
Finally, these domains also have the commonality of re- 
quiring a study of Human Factors (Ergonomics) for design 
of acceptable systems. 
THE SPEECH COMMUNICATION GROUP 
The Speech Communication group produced very early a 
Text-to-Speech stand-alone synthesis system in French (Ico- 
phone). The Icophone V system was marketed in 1975 (and 
appeared in Electronics, June 1975) by the TITN company, 
and a single unit of this one cubic meter TTS system was 
sold (to the Iranian Minister of Education...) at that time. 
The TTS system used a battery of 44 analog oscillators to 
produce diphone-based synthesis (using 427 diphones). In 
1980, it was replaced by a single board digital version, Icolog, 
which is marketed by the Vecsys company. The grapheme- 
to-phoneme conversion algorithm uses about 1,000 rules. It 
has to take into account he difficult problem of liaisons be- 
tween words in French. 
Another early application was formant synthesis with a 
first synthesizer designed in 1975 (Icophone VI). A paral- 
lel formant synthesizer based on segmental rules is now be- 
ing developed in the framework of the CEC/Esprit Poly- 
glot project, and should be adapted for 7 different languages 
within the consortium. 
Together with the Text-to-Speech effort, research was con- 
ducted on segmentation f continuous speech into phonemes 
and speech recognition. An analog speech segmentator, us- 
ing a 32 analog filters bank was presented in 1974 (J.S. Li~- 
nard et al, 1974). The speech recognition work addressed 
both analytical phoneme recognition, in the design of a 
"Speech Understanding System" comparable to those de- 
veloped in the ARPA-SUR project (J. Mariani et al, 1978), 
and word-based recognition. 
The first approach was also aimed at designing a 
"phoneme vocoder', with a 50 b/s rate. The experiments 
conducted in this project showed that a phoneme recogni- 
tion rate of at least 85%, with no major recognition errors 
(like vowel/consonant substitutions), was necessary in order 
to transmit a message that can be understood by the human 
listener (J.S. Li~nard et al, 1977). 
The word-based approach took advantage of the idea that 
the stationary parts of the signal convey less, and more 
variable information than transition parts (3.L. Gauvain, J. 
Mariani, J.S. Li~nard, 1983). This led us to non-linear fixed- 
length compression for isolated word recognition (Morse sys- 
tem in 1980), and non-linear variable-length compression for 
connected word recognition (Mozart system in 1982) (J.L. 
Gauvain, 3. Mariani, 1982). Both systems used template 
matching via dynamic programming. Both systems resulted 
in single-board products which were marketed by the Vecsys 
company. 
56 
Theses systems were the first IWR and CWR systems 
made in France and have been used in several applications, 
like Voice-activated telephone dialing (Jeumont-Sehneider, 
1985), or packet sorting (NMPP, 1983). Most of these ap- 
plications provided the opportunity for experimenting with 
voice input as a new communication means, and the market 
stayed limited to a few units. The application where most 
efforts have been devoted was pilot-plane dialog. In col- 
laboration with the Crouzet company, a program was con- 
ducted for the "Research and Technology Agency" (Dret) 
of the French DoD. A flight with an IWR voice command 
system with actual commands to the plane was made in 
July 1982, and was reported as the first voice-controlled 
flight. The conclusions of the flight trials specified the need 
of continuous peech recognition, the necessity of a stable 
level of performances, whoever the pilot, and that voice in- 
put was especially interesting in critical conditions (high Gs, 
stress), which unfortunately correspond to adverse nviron- 
ments which tend to lower the recognition rates. 
The computing power needed for the Dynamic Program- 
ming algorithm led us to develop an Asic chip. The MuPCD 
(Microprocessor for Dynamic Programming) was developed 
at Limsi, together with the Bull company on a contract of 
the Ministry of Telecommunications. It was available in 1989 
(G. Qudnot et al, 1989). It has 120,000 transistors in Cmos 
2 micron technology, and a power of 70 MOPS. It allows for 
the recognition of up to 5,000 isolated words, or 300 con- 
nected words. This chip is used in the last generation of 
Vecsys Datavox recognition systems. 
The work on Language modeling was also an early project 
at LIMSI. It started with a set of experiments on the problem 
of phoneme-to-grapheme conversion in French. A casual 9 
phoneme string can generate more than 32,000 possible com- 
binations of segmentation i to words, and spelfing of those 
words. In many cases, the absence of pronunciation of the 
mark of the plural (-s at the end of the nouns, -nt at the end 
of verbs), generates many of those homophones. First, a 
simple heuristic was tried with a 20,000 word lexicon which 
segmented the phoneme string into the smallest number of 
words. It gave good results for the segmentation task, but 
also demonstrated the necessity of using a language model to 
improve the quality. This resulted in a collaboration with re- 
searchers using stochastic language modeling based on gram- 
matical categories for document retrieval, and results were 
reported in 1979 on phoneme-to-grapheme conversion with a 
270,000 word full-form lexicon (A. Andreewski et al, 1979). 
This approach was also applied to stenotype-to-grapheme 
couversion. 
Another area of research is speaker verification (J. Mariani 
et al, 1983). The algorithm used for word-based recognition 
was adapted to speaker verification, with dynamic adapta- 
tion of the reference templates of the speaker to their daily 
variations. The Sesame system was tested "live" at the Ma- 
chines Parlantes exhibition in 1985, and had an impostor 
acceptance of 4 per 1000 obtained with informal test condi- 
tions. The system is currently in use in everyday operational 
conditions as the entry system at LIMSI by about 100 users 
since 1987. 
PRESENT PROJECTS 
In the Speech Communication group, work is now con- 
ducted around two main projects: the Dictation project, 
and the Dialog project. 
In the dictation project, several steps have been taken in 
the design of a Voice-Activated typewriter (VAT) in French 
since the beginning of the project 10 years ago. Continuing 
the study on phoneme-to-grapheme conversion, for contin- 
uous, error-free phonemic strings, using a large vocabulary 
and a natural anguage syntax, LIMSI participated in the 
ESPRIT project 860 "Linguistic Analysis of the European 
Languages". In this framework, the approach for language 
modeling developed at LIMSI has been extended to 7 Eu- 
ropean languages. The link between the language model 
and the acoustic recognition was made, and resulted in a 
complete system (Hamlet), for a limited vocabulary (2,000 
words), pronounced in isolation, and then to a 5,000 word 
VAT system taking advantage of the existence of the spe- 
cialized MuPCD DTW chip. The complete system was 
demonstrated in Spring 1988. Now, work is being conducted 
within the ESPRIT Polyglot project, with the goal of de- 
signing speech-to-text and text-to-speech systems for the 7 
languages. In this framework, the methods first developed at 
Olivetti for dictation in isolated mode is adapted to French, 
and other methods are being developed, based on discrete 
& tied-mixture HMMs, and TDNNs & TDNNs-HMMs com- 
binations, for continuous peech recognition. Comparative 
tests are being conducted on part of the DARPA Resource 
Management Database. 
We have recorded BREF, a large read-speech corpus for 
French, containing over 36 GBytes of speech data from 120 
speakers. The text materials were selected verbatim from 
the French newspaper Le Monde, so as to provide a large 
vocabulary (over 20,000 words) and a wide range of phonetic 
environments. Separate text materials, with similar distri- 
butional properties, were selected for training, development 
test and evaluation purposes. A series of experiments for vo- 
cabulary independent phone recognition has been recently 
carried out using this corpus. A baseline phone accuracy 
of 60% was obtained with context-independent phone mod- 
els, and no phone grammar, and a phone accuracy of 68.6% 
with context dependent phone models and a bigram phone 
language model (J.L. Gauvain, L. Lamel, this conference). 
The dialog project has been explored within the frame- 
work of the application of air-controller t aining. Currently, 
the training sessions are limited by the availability of the 
human instructor who plays the role of a pilot. Our goal 
is to replace him by a spoken dialog system. This allows 
for more availability of the system, and also to have several 
voices corresponding todifferent pilots in the synthesis mod- 
ule. In this project, speech understanding uses speech recog- 
nition in conjunction with a representation f the semantic 
and pragmatic knowledge related to the task. While the 
language is supposed to follow a pre-defined "phraseology", 
it is not the case most of the time. The language model 
is a bigram model based on grammatical categories. The 
57 
probabilities for word successions are changed epending on 
the previous step in the dialog (prediction), and corrections 
of the recognized sentence can be made, using redundancy 
within the sentence, and a word confusion matrix. An evalu- 
ation test involving 6 speakers, and 5 scripts of an average of 
20 sentences each, prediction improved the results by 10%, 
and correction added an extra 18.5% (the sentence under- 
standing rate improved from 68% to 96.5%) (A. Matrouf et 
al., 1991). Prior to this work, large "Wizard of Oz" experi- 
ments were conducted (D. Luzzati, 1984), and the linguistic 
analysis of the resulting corpus in a train timetable nquiry 
system simulation was realized (D. Luzzati, 1987). In gen- 
eral, all the implementations u ed linguistic analysis of real 
corpora in order to meet the user's needs. The recording of 
a spontaneous speech database (Spot) has also been started. 
Other research topics concern speech signal processing, 
with both basic research on wavelet analysis, and develop- 
ment oil a real time PC-Based speech analysis tools (the 
Unice package which is marketed by Vecsys). The study 
of phonological variations has been pursued on a text ("La 
Bise et le Soleil") pronounced by several speakers, and will 
continue with the analysis of BREF. Another area of in- 
terest is the use of symbolic coding for improving cochlear 
implants. Also, apart from the classical Multilayer percep- 
tron or TDNN approaches, an original "Guided Propaga- 
tion" connectionist model is experimented. In the hardware 
domain, the use of several MuPCD Asic chips in parallel 
is now being implemented, and the design of a new chip, 
taking advantage of improved technology is envisioned. 
APPL ICAT ION OF THE ALGORITHMS 
DEVELOPED FOR SPEECH TO OTHER 
AREAS 
The algorithms developed for speech recognition have 
been appfied in other areas. The DP matching process de- 
veloped for connected word recognition, with the MuPCD 
Asic, has been adapted to the problem of optical character 
recognition. Instead of considering the recognition of indi- 
vidual characters after segmentation (including eventually 
segmentation errors), the complete line of characters i con- 
sidered, and segmentation is included in the recognition pro- 
cess (M. Khemakhem, 1987). The algorithm has also been 
extended successfully in 2 dimensions in Computer Vision 
for matching similar images, with application to stereovi- 
sion, and to movement analysis (G. Qu~not, 1992). Prelim- 
inary studies for gesture recognition (throwing away, tak- 
ing, hoMing tight...) using a Data GloveTM have also been 
conducted. It is expected that the increase of quality ob- 
tained by stochastic modeling instead of template matching 
in speech recognition can also be obtained in the fields of 
character ecognition and computer vision, and we are now 
considering applying these techniques. 
THE LANGUAGE & COGNIT ION 
GROUP 
The activities of the Language ~ Cognition group have 
of course many interactions with the Speech Communica- 
tion group. Several common research projects have been, or 
are being, conducted, such as the use of Conceptual Graphs 
to represent semantic information in a speech understand- 
ing system, or stochastic modeling of semantic informa- 
tion. Also, the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion software 
has been used to correct errors. There are also many in- 
teractions between the Connectionist Systems and the Con- 
nectionist Models research topics in the two groups. The 
"Time 8z Space representation" topic has also close rela- 
tionship with the Non-verbal Communication group. 
A new activity is now starting in the field of cognitive 
psychology. A group is being created, integrating the for- 
mer Center for Cognitive Psychology (Cepco), a university 
Paris XI laboratory within Limsi. It includes researchers 
in the field of the psychology of reading and text compre- 
hension, visuo-spatial mental representation and cognitive 
ergonomics. 
SPEECH IN THE FRAMEWORK OF 
MULTIMODAL COMMUNICAT ION 
Speech can be used with other communication modes in 
order to obtain the more versatile and reliable means for 
human-machine communication. A study on automated 
telematic (voice ? text) switchboard has been conducted 
by both the Speech Communication and the Language 8J 
Cognition groups. Speech recognition together with gesture 
(touch screen) showed that using both together allows for 
better efficiency and better comfort (D. Teil et al, 1991), 
with gestual communication being preferable anytime there 
is a need to give a low level analogous information. Timing 
and co-reference are the difficult problems to solve with the 
integrated system. 
PERSPECT IVES FOR FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
A more ambitious project is now starting, including com- 
puter vision and 3D modeling, natural anguage and knowl- 
edge representation, and speech and gestual communication. 
This project aims at examining the theoretical problems of 
model training in the framework of multimodal information, 
how non-verbal (visual, gestual) information can be used in 
building a language model, and how linguistic information 
can help in order to build models of objects. 
REFERENCES 
"French Ready terminal that speaks English", Electron- 
ics, June 26, 1975. 
A. Andreewski, J.P. Binquet, F. Debili, C. Fluhr, Y. Hlal, 
B. Pouderoux, J.S. Li~nard, J. Mariani, "Les dictionnalres 
en forme complete et leur utilisation dans la transforma- 
tion lexicale et syntaxique de cha\[nes phon6tiques correctes', 
10~mes JEP du GALF, Grenoble, Mai-Juin 1979 
J.L. Gauvaln, J. Mariani, "A method for connected word 
recognition and word spotting on a microprocessor.", Proc. 
IEEE ICASSP 82. Paris, 3-5 mal 1982. 
J.L. Gauvaln, J. Mariani, J.S. Li~nard, "On the use of 
time compression for word-based recognition.", ICASSP 83. 
Boston, April 14-16, 1983. 
58 
3.L. Gauvain, L.F. Lamel, "Speaker-Independent Phone 
Recognition using BREF", DARPA Speech and Language 
Workshop, Arden House, February 1992 
M. Khemakhem, J.L. Gauvain, J. Rivaillier, "Reconnais- 
sance de caract~res imprim6s par comparaison dynamique.", 
6~me Congr~s AFCET-INRIA "Reconnaissance d s Formes 
et Intelligence Artificielle". Antibes, 16-20 novembre 1987. 
J.S. Li6nard, M. Mlouka, J. Mariani, J. Sapaly, "Time 
segmentation of speech", Speech Communication Seminar, 
Stockholm, Aofit 1974 
J.S. Li6nard, J. Mariani, G. Renard, "Intelligibilit6 de 
phrases ynth6tiques altdr6es : application ~t la transmission 
phon6tique de la parole", ICA, Madrid, Juillet 1977 
D. Luzzati, "ORSO. Projet pour la constitution et 
l'6tude de dialogues homme-machine.", LIMSI internal re- 
port, Septembre 1984. 
D. Luzzati, "ALORS : a skimming parser for spontaneous 
speech processing.", Computer Speech and Language, Vol.2, 
1987 
J. Mariani, J.S. Li6nard, "ESOPE 0 : un pro- 
gramme de compr6hension de la parole continue procddant 
par pr6diction-vdrification aux niveaux phondtique, lexi- 
cal et syntaxique", ler Congr~s AFCET "Reconnaissance 
des formes et Intelligence Artificielle, Chatenay-Malabry, 
F6vrier 1978 
J. Mariani, J.L. Gauvain, J.L. Soury, "Un syst~me de v6ri- 
fication du locuteur", 13~mes JEP du GALF, 28-30 Mai 1984 
K. Matrouf, F. N6el, "Use of Upper Level Knowledge 
to Improve Human-Machine Interaction", Venaco Work- 
shop & ETRW on "The structure of MultimodaJ Dialogue", 
Maratea, September 1991 
G. Qu6not, J.L. Gauvain, J.J. Gangolf, J.J. Mariani, "A 
Dynamic Programming Processor for Speech Recognition", 
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 24, N. 2, Avril 
1989 
G. Qu6not, "The "Orthogonal Algorithm" for optical flow 
detection using Dynamic Programming", IEEE ICASSP'92, 
San Francisco, March 1992 
D. Teil, Y. Bellik, "Multimodal Dialogue interface on a 
workstation", Venaco Workshop & ETRW on "The struc- 
ture of Multimodal Dialogue", Maratea, September 1991 
APPENDIX  
Speech Communicat ion  Group (Head:  F. N6el)  
17 permanent researchers, 17 Phd thesis students 
6 Research topics: 
Speech Analysis and Synthesis: This topic includes Short 
term analysis, Wavelets, Instantaneous frequency analysis, 
Speech signal editor (Unice product marketed by Vecsys) 
and coding (SNCF contract), Recognition in noisy envi- 
ronments (Dret (MoD) contract), Text-to-speech synthesis, 
High-quality synthesis, Multivoice and multidialect synthe- 
sis (cooperation with Montreal University (MoFA), CEC- 
Esprit Polyglot project), Models in Prosodies and diagnostic 
(paralinguistic) aspects. 
Assessment and Variability: In this topic, Recording of 
large vocabulary recognition evaluation data base (Gdr- 
Prc CHM "Bref" project) and spontaneous speech database 
(Spot), Standardization of speech recognition systems as- 
sessment (contribution to Afnor), Use of phonotactic on- 
straints, Grapheme-to-phoneme conversion with phonolog- 
ical variations, Regrouping of wavelets, improvement of 
cochlear implants. 
Recognition: Word-based recognition (hardware and 
software) (Vecsys Datavox product, Sextant-Dret con- 
tract), Syllable-based recognition, Diphone-based recogni- 
tion, Large vocabulary recognition (10,000 words), Contin- 
uous and discrete HMMs, Custom Dynamic Programming 
VLSI (DGT-DGA/ Bull (VTI) contract), Application to 
printed character ecognition, Speaker-independent recog- 
nition, Vocabulary-independent recognition, Discriminant 
recognition, Speaker adaptation, Recognition in adverse n- 
vironments (DRET/Sextant contract), Speaker verification 
(MRT contract with Fichet-Bauche and Vecsys), Evaluation 
of speech recognition systems (participation i CEC/Esprit- 
SAM project). 
Dialog Structures: Models for dialogue structures 
(Gdr/PRC CHM programme), Speaker models, Task- 
oriented oral dialogue system for air controller training (Ste- 
tin/Sextant Avionique/Vecsys contract for C6NA), Linguis- 
tic study of man-machine dialogues, Selective syntax parser, 
Multimodal dialogue (Pilot's assistant application (Dret / 
Sextant) and Simulation of a telephone operator. 
Spoken language modeling: Linguistic Models (Esprit 
Polyglot project), Phoneme-to-grapheme conversion (Esprit 
291/860 project), Stenotype-to-grapheme conversion (Ccett- 
Systex project), Continuous peech automatic phonetic la- 
belling and recognition through learning (Inserm collabora- 
tion), Morphosyntactic analysis, Automatic syntactic lassi- 
fication, Use of linguistic models for handwritten character 
recognition. 
Connectionist systems: Guided Propagation Models 
(CEC-Stimulation Brain programme, Dret (MoD) contract), 
Application to noisy speech analysis (cocktail party ef- 
fect), to continuous speech recognition (contract with French 
Philips Research Labs (LEP)) and to the modeling of 
reading activity, Back Propagation Models, Application to 
character recognition and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion, 
Feature Maps, Parallel architectures, Integration of the con- 
nectionist approach and of the symbolic approach (AI) into 
the same formalism, Perception-to-Action modeling (Dret 
contract). 
Langage & Cogn i t ion  Group (Head:  G. Sabah)  
14 Permanent Researchers, 13 PhD Thesis students 
8 Research topics: 
Automatic analysis of sentences and texts: Study and im- 
plementation of a general architecture for automatic lan- 
guage processing (Distributed AI: communicating multi- 
expert system structure); Application to the automatic on- 
59 
struction of internal representations, Trope and anaphora 
processing, Semantic flexibility and context influence, Prag- 
matics (CEC/Esprit PLUS project). 
Written Dialog: Implementing a real dialogue in question- 
answer processes, Speaker modeling, Direct and indirect 
speech act processing, Adapting an answer to the speaker, 
Application to computer-aided education (chess playing), 
and to documentation database query (MRT contract with 
the Resoudre company). 
Flexibility: Elaborated lexical search, Justification or op- 
position to presupposed concepts (question-answer systems), 
Interpretation of unforeseen events (orthographic, syntactic 
errors... (Mannesman-Tally prize)). 
Generation: Development of a Computer-Aided language 
training system (SWIM (See What. I Mean)), Development 
of a multilingual sentence generator: Arabic-French-Russian 
(Collaboration between France and Bulgaria), Development 
of a text generator which produces cene descriptions ac- 
cording to psycholinguistic principles. 
Learning: Automatic parsing rules creation from exam- 
ples, Syntactic and semantic aspects, Automatic pragmatic 
knowledge learning from texts using frames, Fine grain par- 
allel architecture (connection machine) for knowledge repre- 
sentation. 
Connectionist Models: Neural networks for Natural Lan- 
guage Processing, Disambiguation and syntactic structure, 
Relationship with symbolic approaches, Epistemology of 
connectionism. 
Semantic representations: Study of the most adequate 
lexical representations for automatic processing, Relation- 
ship between semantic and connectionist networks, Text se- 
mantics. 
Time and space representation: Modeling time and space 
in text analysis, Temporal Logic, Use of generalized inter- 
vals, Parallel complexity of temporal constraint networks. 
Non-Verba l  Communicat ion  Group  (Head:  D. 
Tell) 
7 Permanent Researchers, 8 PhD Thesis students 
6 Research Topics: 
Tri-dimensional Modeling: 3D Modeling software "Sculp- 
tor", Steady and animated image synthesis. Multiparamet- 
ric varieties, Application to acquisition and modeling for life 
and earth sciences and for cartoons; Human Factor study of 
interactivity in graphic interfaces. 
Computer Vision: Stereo Vision, Neural and Symbolic 
learning in computer vision, Application of Genetic Algo- 
rithms to image analysis, Scene analysis (contours and tex- 
ture). Use of a parallel architecture (Transputers). Appli- 
cation to the analysis of road traffic (Inrets contract). 
Real 'Time Architecture: Medium and fine grain parallel 
architecture. Use of Object Oriented Languages, Hardware 
specialised for image synthesis. Representation of multi- 
modal knowledge, learning, decision making. Use of AI tech- 
niques; link with mobile robots, and Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing, Real Time modeling and formulation. 
Character recognition and coding: Graphic encoding of 
characters (Eco system, Anvar licence), Printed character 
recognition by training and template matching (using the 
MuPCD VLSI chip). 
Gestual and m.ulti-modal Communication: Use of tactile 
screens, touch analysis, mouvement analysis and synthesis, 
Effort feedback (3D mouse, Data GIoVeTM). Integration of 
different communication means, perceptive sensor fusion. 
Human Factors: Human Factors for system design, Study 
of the vocal interface for dialog and voice-activated dicta- 
tion. Study of multimodal communication. Application to 
Air Traffic Control, to the Pilot's Associate, to an automated 
telecommunication switchboard. 
Industrial  Cooperation: Amd, Bull, Cap-Gemini, 
Ccett, Cral, Cselt, Daimler-Benz, Erli, Fichet-Bauche, 
Hewlett-Packard, Jutland Telephone, Logica, Olivetti- 
Syntax, Philips, Resoudre, Sextant Avionique, Siemens, Ste- 
ria, Systex, Vecsys. 
International Cooperation: Universities of Aalborg, 
Amsterdam, Athens, Bochum, Cambridge, Copenhagen, 
Delft, Dublin, Edinburgh, Hamburg, Madrid, McGill, Ni- 
jmegen, Patras, Pisa, Rabat, Roskilde, Saarlandes, Sheffield, 
Stuttgart, Tilburg, UCL London, Umist, Inesc, IUT Luxem- 
bourg, IPO-Eindhoven, DRA (RSRE), TNO. 
LIMSI is a Managing node in the "Speech and Language" 
Esprit Basic Research Network of Excellence. This network 
has the goal to promote the integration of Speech and Nat- 
ural Language. It has now about 40 nodes around Europe. 
LIMSI is also a node in the French Coordinated Research 
Project (Prc/Gdr) on "Human-Machine Communication." 
The Prc has 4 poles on Speech Communication, Natural 
Language Processing, Vision and Multimodal Communica- 
tion. 
60 
