PROSODIC  STRUCTURE,  PERFORMANCE 
STRUCTURE AND PHRASE STRUCTURE 
Steven Abney 
Bell Communications Research 
445 South St., Morristown, NJ 07962-1910 
ABSTRACT 
It is natural to expect phrase structure to be important in 
predicting prosodic phrasing. Yet there appears to be a 
concensus that syntactic phrases do not correspond well to 
prosodic phrasing, and independent s ructures have been pro- 
posed to account for prosody. 
I propose that the problem with phrase structure lies with 
the particular measures of boundary strength applied to syn- 
tactic structures, and with the fact that phrase structure is 
viewed as an immediate constituency tree exclusively. I pro- 
pose viewing phrase structure as a composite of immediate 
constituency and dependency relations, and present an alter- 
native measure of boundary strength. I show that boundary 
strength according to this measure corresponds much more 
closely to empirical prosodic (and psycholinguistic) boundary 
strength than does syntactic boundary strength according to 
a standard measure. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
It  is natural to expect phrase structure to be impor- 
tant in predicting prosodic phrasing. Hence it is some- 
what unsettling that the relationship between prosodic 
and syntactic structure appears o tenuous, as for exam- 
ple in Selkirk's account \[10, 11, 12\]. Selkirk's prosodic 
structure differs from standard phrase structure on sev- 
eral counts, but most notably because it is much flatter 
than standard phrase structure, which is heavily right- 
branching in English: 
U 
I ! 
I I 
l I I I 
t f I I I 
The absem..minded pmfemm has beeo avidly m~ling sbom the lalesl bielpzphy of Man~ ~ 
In a similar vein, some psycholinguists have concluded 
that syntactic structure provides an inadequate model of 
the performance structures reflected in linguistic behav- 
ior. Martin, Grosjean, and others have explored exper- 
imental measures of the relative prominences of bound- 
aries between words, and conclude that the syntactic 
prominence of a boundary is not the best predictor of its 
empirical prominence \[4, 6, 7, 8, 9\]. 
If prosodic structures and performance structures differ 
from phrase structure, however, they appear to corre- 
spond well to each other. For example, Gee and Gros- 
jean \[6\] use Selkirk's prosodic phrases in an algorithmic 
model of their experimental data. And turnabout being 
fair play, Bachenko and Fitzpatrick \[3\] adapt Gee and 
Grosjean's algorithm to predict prosodic structure for 
speech synthesis. 
However, I believe the perceived inadequacy of syn- 
tactic structure is at least in part an artifact of mea- 
sures of syntactic boundary prominence that are based 
on immediate-constituency trees alone. I would like to 
show that we can obtain a measure of syntactic bound- 
ary prominence that corresponds better to prosodic and 
psycholinguistic boundary prominence if we view phrase 
structure as a composite of immediate constituency and 
dependency relations. 
2. CHUNKS AND DEPENDENCIES  
I propose that the structure relevant for prosody and 
performance is a composite of immediate-constituency 
and dependency relations. Usually, dependency gram- 
mar is an alternative for representing phrase structure, 
in competition with immediate constituency. However, 
there is often a systematic orrespondence b tween de- 
pendencies and immediate constituency. I will assume 
such a correspondence, and define dependency in terms 
of immediate constituency, as follows: 
Y depends on X iff 
X is a word, and 
Y is an immediate constituent of a phrase 
headed by X 
Graphically: ! 
425 
Dependencies are combined with immediate con- 
stituency in the relation is licensed by. X may license 
Y either by dependency or by immediate constituency: 
X licenses Y by dependency iff 
Y depends on X, and 
X is a major-category head 
(N, V, Adj, or Adv), and 
X precedes Y
X licenses Y by immediate constituency iff 
Y is an immediate constituent of X, and 
there is no node that licenses Y by dependency 
Consider, for example, the following sentence (adapted 
from \[10\]): 
the absent-minded professor from Princeton 
was reading a biography of Marcel Proust 
The major-category heads are absent-minded, professor, 
Princeton, reading, biography, Marcel Proust. The PP 
from Princeton follows, and depends on, professor; hence 
from Princeton is licensed by dependency. Likewise for 
a biography (depends on reading), and of Marcel Proust 
(depends on biography). These three phrases are licensed 
by dependency; all the other phrases are licensed by im- 
mediate constituency. We can represent he licensing 
structure as follows, where the arrows represent licensing 
by dependency, and the straight lines represent licensing 
by immediate constituency: 
S 
There is a certain similarity between this structure and 
Selkirk's prosodic structure. In particular, if we consider 
only the relation licenses by immediate constituency, and 
excise the clausal node (S), the remaining connected 
pieces of phrase structure--which I call chunks---are 
Selkirk's C-phrases. Gee and Grosjean also base their 
algorithm on C-phrases. The correspondence between 
chunks and C-phrases uggests that licensing structure 
might do better than standard phrase structure in pre- 
dicting prosodic and performance-structure boundary 
prominence. 1 
1 An analysis in which phrase structure consists of a series 
of strata--words, chunks, simplex clauses--also proves useful for 
3. MEASURING SYNTACTIC  
BOUNDARY STRENGTH 
Given phrase structure trees, we also require a method 
for computing boundary prominence. The method that 
I take to be "standard" is the one assumed in the 
performance-structure lit rature, by which the promi- 
nence of a boundary b is the number of non-terminal 
nodes in the smallest constituent spanning b. For exam- 
ple: 
I I I I 
3 2 1 6 1 2 
I would like to propose an alternative measure. The 
general idea is as follows: 
1. Clause boundaries > chunk boundaries > word 
boundaries 
2. "Strong" dependencies between immediately adjacent 
chunks/clauses weakens the boundary between them 
3. Phonologically weak chunks "cliticize" to the 
adjacent chunk 
Phonologically weak chunks are chunks containing a sin- 
gle word whose category is pronoun, particle, auxiliary, 
conjunction, or complementizer. The following are spe- 
cific boundaries weakened by "cliticization": 
verb - (indirect) object pronoun 
verb - particle 
subject pronoun - verb 
wh pronoun - auxiliary 
inverted auxiliary - subject 
conjunction - subject 
complementizer- subject 
The "strong" dependencies are these: 
verb - any dependent 
noun - of phrase 
noun - restrictive relative clause 
subject - verb 
rapid, robust parsing of unrestricted text \[1, 5\]. The parsing ad- 
vantages of chunks provided my original motivation for considering 
them. I undertook the work described here in order to make good 
on earlier hand-waving about a possible relation between chunks 
and prosodic phrases. 
426 
I also relax the adjacency requirement to permit one in- 
tervening phonologically weak chunk. In particular, if a 
particle or indirect object pronoun intervenes between a
verb and its following dependent, he boundary before 
the dependent is still weakened. 
I assign the following heuristic values to boundaries. 
What is important for my purposes i the relative values, 
not the absolute values. 
3 Unweakened clause boundary 
2 Unweakened chunk boundary 
2 Weakened clause boundary, governor is noun 
1 Weakened clause boundary, governor is verb 
1 Weakened chunk boundary 
0 Weakened chunk boundary involving phono- 
logically weak chunk 
0 Intra-chunk word boundaries 
To illustrate the measure, consider the following example 
from Martin \[9\]: 
To illustrate, consider again sentence (1), with theoreti- 
cal and empirical boundary prominences: 
?h~.i~ who ~ mgulady 
I JI $0 
1 
JO 
2 
110 
2 
IS0 
The top numbers are the boundary prominences accord- 
ing to the chunks-and-dependencies model; the bottom 
numbers (in italic) are empirical values obtained by Mar- 
tin \[9\] in a naive-parsing experiment. The length of the 
vertical ines corresponds to the theoretical prominence 
of each boundary. The horizontal lines represent the lo- 
cM relative prominence domain of each boundary: the 
solid lines according to the model, the dotted lines ac- 
cording to the data. In this case, the theoretical and 
empirical domains match exactly. 
This is the same sentence, using the standard model: 
' J I I I taw' 'el I I 
2 0 1 3 1 2 
The bold arrows mark dependencies that induce weaken- 
ing. The first boundary is a clause boundary, weakened 
from 3 to 2. The second boundary is a chunk bound- 
ary. Since who is phonologically weak, the boundary is 
weakened to 0. The third boundary is a chunk bound- 
ary weakened from 2 to 1. The fourth boundary is an 
unweakened clause boundary, value 3. The next to last 
boundary is a weakened chunk boundary, and the final 
boundary is an unweakened chunk boundary. 
4. COMPARING THE MODELS 
To compare the chunks-and-dependencies model to the 
standard model, we need to compare both models to 
boundary-prominence data. I am primarily interested in
the local relative prominence ofboundaries. A boundary 
" b is defined to be locally more prominent than boundary 
c iff b is more prominent than c and every intervening 
boundary is less prominent than c. In comparing theo- 
retical and empirical prominences, each inversion counts 
as an error. An inversion arises wherever bis locally more 
prominent than c according to the model, but c is locally 
more prominent than b according to the data. 
cl~klren 
110 
2 
3O 
~r'~m I ~ss?ns Igrut~ 6o ' 
'2 
120 
6 
In this case, there is an inversion: the second bound- 
ary is more prominent than the third, according to the 
model, but the third is more prominent than the second, 
according to the data. The inversion is reflected in the 
line crossing. 
5. DATA 
To compare the models, I examined two sets of data: 
performance structure data reported by Grosjean, Gros- 
jean and Lane \[7\]; and a set of sentences with hand- 
marked prosodic boundaries, kindly provided by Julia 
Hirschberg of AT&T Bell Laboratories. 
Grosjean, Grosjean and Lane conducted two experi- 
ments, one examining pauses when subjects read sen- 
tences at various peeds, and one examining parsing by 
linguistically-naive subjects. They report only the data 
on the pausing experiment, though they claim that the 
parsing data is highly correlated with the pausing data. 
The data consists of 14 sentences, containing 55 oppor- 
427 
tunities for inversions. (An opportunity for inversion 
is a boundary that, according to the model, is locally 
more prominent than at least one other boundary). In 52 
cases the model makes the correct prediction (5% error). 
The three inversions all involved unexpectedly promi- 
nent boundaries around multisyllabic pre-head modifiers 
at sentence nd, hence they arguably reflect a single un- 
? modelled effect. Using the standard measure gives us 42 
inversions out of 102 opportunities for inversion, or 41% 
error, dramatically worse than the licensing measure's 
5% error rate. (There are more opportunities for inver: 
sion because the standard model typically makes more 
distinctions in boundary prominence.) 
The second data set consists of 127 sentences from 
the Darpa ATIS task, with prosodic boundary mark- 
ings added by Julia Hirschberg. She distinguished three 
boundary strengths: strong, weak, and no boundary. 
A complication in the prosodic data is the presence of 
hesitation pauses, which I do not expect a syntactic 
model to capture. As a primitive xpedient, I formulated 
a rule that I could apply mechanically to distinguish es- 
itation pauses from "genuine" prosodic boundaries, and I 
eliminated those boundaries that were hesitation pauses 
according to the rule. Namely, I eliminated any prosodic 
boundary immediately following a preposition, conjunc- 
tion, infinitival to, or a prenominal modifier. 
After eliminating hesitation pauses, I applied the 
licensing-structure measure and the standard measure. 
Using the licensing measure, there were 363 opportuni- 
ties for inversions, and 12 observed (3% error). Apply- 
ing the standard model to 16 sentences drawn at random 
from the data gives 38 inversions out of 114 opportuni- 
ties, or 33% error. 
Caution is in order in interpreting these results, in that 
I have not controlled for all factors that may be rel- 
evant. For example, the standard measure generally 
has a greater ange of distinctions in boundary promi- 
nence, and that may lead to a larger proportion of errors. 
Also, the method I use to eliminate hesitation bound- 
aries may help the chunks-and-dependencies model more 
than it helps the standard model. In short, these are 
exploratory, rather than definitive results. Nonetheless, 
they strongly suggest hat the chunks-and-dependencies 
model corresponds to empirical prominences better than 
the standard model does, hence that syntactic structure 
may be a better predictor of prosodic and performance 
structures than previously thought. 
Re ferences  
1. Steven Abney. Rapid Incremental Parsing with Repair. 
Proceedings ofthe 6th New OED Conference: Electronic 
Text Research. University of Waterloo, Waterloo, On- 
taxio. 1990. 
2. Steven Abney. Chunks and Dependencies: Bringing Pro- 
cessing Evidence to Bear on Syntax. Paper presented at 
the Workshop on Linguistics and Computation, Univer- 
sity of Illinois, Urbana/Champaign. 1991. 
3. J. Bachenko ~ E. Fitzpatrick. A Computational Gram- 
mar of Discourse-Neutral Prosodic Phrasing in English. 
Computational Linguistics 16(3), 155-170. 1990. 
4. Jean-Yves Dommergues & Franqois Grosjean. Perfor- 
mance structures in the recall of sentences. Memory F~ 
Cognition 9(5), 478-486. 1981. 
5. Eva Ejerhed. Finitary and Stochastic Methods of Clause 
Parsing. 
6. James Paul Gee & Franqois Grosjean. Performance 
Structures: A Psycholinguistic and Linguistic Appraisal. 
Cognitive Psychology 15, 411-458. 1983. 
7. F. Grosjean, L. Grosjean, & H. Lane. The patterns of 
silence: Performance structures in sentence production. 
Cognitive Psychology 11, 58-81. 1979. 
8. W.J.M. Levelt. Hierarchial chunking in sentence process- 
ing. Perception ~ Psychophysics 8(2), 99-103. 1970. 
9. Edwin Martin. Toward an analysis of subjective phrase 
structure. Psychological Bulletin 74(3), 153-166. 1970. 
10. Elisabeth O. Selkirk. On prosodic structure and its rela- 
tion to syntactic structure. In T. Fretheim (ed.), Nordic 
Prosody 11. Tapir, Trondheim. 1978. 
11. Elisabeth O. Selkirk. Prosodic Domains in Phonology: 
Sanskrit Revisited. In M. Aronoff and M.-L. Kean (eds.), 
Juncture. Anma Libri, Saratoga, CA. 1980. 
12. Elisabeth O. Selkirk. On the Nature of Phonological 
Representations. In T. Myers, .J. Laver, J. Anderson 
(eds.), The Cognitive Representation f Speech. Nortli- 
Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam. 1981. 
13. Elisabeth O. Selkirk. Phonology and Syntax: The Rela- 
tion between Sound and Structure. The MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 1984. 
428 
