Segment-Based Acoustic Models with Multi-level Search 
Algorithms for Continuous Speech Recognition 
Marl Ostendorf J. Robin Rohlicek 
Boston University BBN Inc. 
Boston, MA 02215 Cambridge, MA 02138 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to develop improved acoustic 
models for speaker-independent recognition of continu- 
ous speech, together with efficient search algorithms ap- 
propriate for use with these models. The current work 
on acoustic modelling is focussed on stochastic, segment- 
based models that capture the time correlation of a se- 
quence of observations (feature vectors) that correspond 
to a phoneme. Since the use of segment models is compu- 
tationally complex, we are investigating multi-level, iter- 
ative algorithms to achieve a more efficient search. Fur- 
thermore, these algorithms will provide a formalism for 
incorporating higher-order information. This research is 
jointly sponsored by DARPA and NSF. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? Developed methods for robust context modeling for 
the stochastic segment model (SSM) using tied co- 
variance distributions, and investigated different re- 
gions of tying using clustering techniques. On the 
RM Oct 89 test set, improvements reduced the error 
rate of the SSM by a factor of two (9.1% to 4.8% 
word error), and the current BBN-ItMM/BU-SSM 
combined system achieves 3.3% word error. 
* Determined that linear models have predictive 
power similar to non-linear models of cepstra within 
segments, and explored different models of the sta- 
tistical dependence of cepstral coefficients in the 
context of a dynamical system (DS) model. 
? Evaluated the dynamical system model in phoneme 
recognition (as opposed to classification i  previous 
work) using the split-and-merge s arch algorithm. 
The DS model outperforms the independent-frame 
model on the TIMIT corpus. 
? Reformulated the recognition problem as a classi- 
fication and segmentation scoring problem, which 
allows more general types of classifiers and non- 
traditional feature analysis. Demonstrated that 
for equivalent feature sets and context-independent 
models, the two methods give similar results. 
? Investigated duration models conditioned on speak- 
ing rate and pre-pausM location, and improved per- 
formance by increasing the weight of duration by in- 
eluding the duration probabilities separately in the 
N-best score combination. 
? Analyzed the behavior of recognition error over the 
weight space for HMM and SSM scores in the N-best 
rescoring paradigm. Addressed the problem of local 
optima with a grid-based search, determined that 
the relative weights for the HMM and SSM scores 
are similar, and discovered a significant mismatch 
problem between training and test data. 
? Extended Bayesian techniques for speaker adapta- 
tion and evaluated these in the RM word recogni- 
tion task, achieving 16% reduction in error using 
3 minutes of speech with simple mean adaptation 
techniques. Covariance adaptation techniques seem 
to require more speakers for training the priors. 
? Developed a multi-level stochastic model of speech 
that can take advantage of multi-rate signal analy- 
sis; evaluating the model for the two-level case with 
cepstral features hows improved performance over 
a single-level model. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
The plans for the coming year reflect the fact that this 
grant ends in summer 1992. 
? Continue work in the classification and segmenta- 
tion scoring paradigm: demonstrate improvements 
associated with novel models and/or features, and 
extend the probabilistic framework to allow context- 
dependent models. 
? Extend context modeling through further explo- 
ration of clustering and to recently developed DS 
or multi-level variations. 
? Implement different auditory-based signal process- 
ing algorithms, and evaluate their usefulness for 
recognition through a series of experiments on the 
TIMIT corpus. 
467 
