SESS ION 12: CONTINUOUS SPEECH 
RECOGNIT ION AND EVALUATION II* 
Clifford J. Weinstein, Chair 
Lincoln Laboratory, M.I.T. 
Lexington, MA 02173-9108 
This session featured a summary of the first dry run 
benchmark tests on the new Wall Street Journal (WSJ) 
continuous peech recognition (CSR) pilot corpus, and a 
description of the techniques used and lessons learned by 
the four sites who conducted the large vocabulary CSR 
tests. 
For the first presentation, Dave Pallett distributed a 
handout with system descriptions and results. He 
credited the people involved, and indicated the tight 
schedule which was met. The tests included three 
training paradigms: speaker-dependent (SD); longitudi- 
nal speaker-dependent (LSD), with much more training 
speech; and speaker-independent (SI). Tests included 5K 
and 20K vocabularies, bigram and trigram language mod- 
els, and recognition on speech collected with verbalized 
punctuation (VP) and with no verbalized punctuation 
(NVP). Data was shown indicating special difficulties with 
a few of the speakers. Results were presented on signal- 
to-noise ratios for both the primary and secondary mi- 
crophones. The data are summarized in Pallett's Pro- 
ceedings paper. Some comments on the results are given 
below. 
The next four papers, on recognition of the WSJ data at 
Dragon, CMU, Lincoln Laboratory, and SKI, included the 
common theme that extending a CSR system to a much 
larger vocabulary and more general task domain required 
more than a new dictionary and language model. In par- 
ticular, major increases in search time, computation for 
matching, and memory utilization required each site to 
make compromises or revise strategies in acoustic mod- 
elling, search, and matching strategies. Despite the pre- 
liminary nature of the work on this corpus, encouraging 
results were obtMned and important issues were rMsed. 
The Dragon paper was presented by Francesco Scattone, 
and described two recognition approaches that were de- 
veloped and tested. The first method utilized unimodal 
phonetic elements (PELs), and the second a variation of 
tied mixtures very recently implemented at Dragon, which 
*This work was sponsored by the Defense Advanced lq.e- 
search Projects Agency. The views expressed axe those of the 
author and do not reflect he official policy or position of the 
U.S. Government. 
was used in Dragon's dry run evaluation test on the 5,000 
word SD portion of the corpus. The tied-mixture mod- 
els proved very effective in modelling the multi-modality 
of parameter distributions, and generally ielded better 
recognition results. Scattone indicated that future work 
will focus on further development of the tied-mixture 
techniques, including efforts to develop high-performance 
speaker-independent recognition techniques. 
Next, Fil Alleva discussed the application of CMU's 
SPHINX-II system to the WSJ CSR task. An important 
change to SPHINX-II which was made to reduce running 
time was to use only left-context-dependent cross word 
models; in addition, a number of changes were made to 
the Viterbi search to reduce running time. Tests were 
run on a variety of conditions, including the spontaneous 
speech, and results are summarized in the paper. 
The next paper, by Doug Paul, described substantial 
changes made to the Lincoln Tied-Mixture HMM CSR, 
to achieve effective operation for the large-vocabulary 
CSR task. The recognizer, which had previously used 
a time-synchronous beam-pruned search, was converted 
to a stack-decoder-based arch strategy with an acoustic 
fast match. Cross-word models had not yet been included. 
The stack decoder strategy was shown to perform effec- 
tively for the larger vocabularies, and a variety of develop- 
ment test and evaluation test results were presented. In 
addition, a rapid speaker enrollment procedure was de- 
scribed, and positive (but preliminary) results on rapid 
adaptation (using the standard WSJ 40 adaptation sen- 
tences) were presented. A discussion followed, focusing 
on the language modelling, and on perplexity for closed 
and open vocabularies. 
Hy Murveit described the application of SRI's DECI- 
PHER system to the WSJ CSR task. He focused primar- 
ily on performance, since the CSR system used was essen- 
tially identical to the system used in ATIS. He acknowl- 
edged help from Dragon (Lexicon) and Lincoln (Language 
Models) in porting to the WSJ task. He described how 
DECIPHER was stripped down to reduce computation 
for the task. Tests on the secondary microphone were de- 
scribed, with about 40% increase in error rate. An experi- 
ment was described to investigate the effects of additional 
379 
SI training data. The experiment indicated that substan- 
tial increases in SI training data could produce significant 
reductions in error rate relative to those reported in the 
dry run evaluation tests. 
The chairman initiated the discussion period which fol- 
lowed this final presentation by presenting a plot of error 
rate vs perplexity for the WSJ dry run tests, the pre- 
vious best resource management (RM) results, and CSR 
dictation results which had been presented by IBM at 
ICASSP-89 (Bahl, et.al., Large Vocabulary Natural Lan- 
guage Continuous Speech Recognition). For perplexity- 
80, the WSJ error rates ranged from 9.0% (LSD) to 12.9% 
(best SO) to 16.6% (best SI). These error rates were con- 
siderably higher than the most recent perplexity 60 RM 
results (1.8% for SD) and (3.8% for SI), but not as much 
higher than the perplexity-90 SD IBM results (an 11% er- 
ror rate was reported in the ICASSP-89 Proceedings pa- 
per, and an improved error rate of about 5% was presented 
at the ICASSP-89 talk). With the understanding that 
results obtained in these different tests are not directly 
comparable, still a fair conclusion which could be drawn 
is that the WSJ corpus is a sufficiently-chailenging one 
(especially when 20K vocabularies, pontaneous speech, 
and secondary microphones are considered), and that the 
results of the first dry run test were quite encouraging. 
Most of the ensuing discussion focused on the WSJ corpus 
and evaluation issues which George Doddington had listed 
in his earlier CCCC talk. These are summarized below by 
topic. 
In summarizing the discussion, an attempt is made to 
sample the range of comments and issues raised. 
MULT IPLE  EVALUATION CONDIT IONS 
The issue was raised of whether the large number of eval- 
uation conditions was a good idea. 
Doug Paul :  The multiple conditions added richness and 
were appropriate for a pilot and for covering the varied 
goals of different sites. 
F ranc is  Kuba la :  The sampling of conditions had worked 
out well; the number of conditions hould probably be 
narrowed a bit over the next few months. 
V ic tor  Zue: There is a concern over too much splitting 
of the corpus into multiple parts to support the different 
tests. 
Pat t i  Pr ice :  Expressed concern about too many base- 
lines. 
R ich Stern :  Suggested settling on a few common condi- 
tions. 
VERBAL IZED PUNCTUATIONS VS  
NON-VERBAL IZED PUNCTUATION 
First, a sampling of the comments in favor of continuing 
to collect data with a split between VP and NVP. 
Janet  Baker :  People using real dictation systems use 
VP, so any recognition system for dictation must handle 
VP. 
Doug Paul :  Both NVP and VP are needed to support 
both general recognition and dictation; reading with VP 
may be awkward at first, but not hard to get used to. 
M ichae l  P icheny:  Might as well use VP since it is easier 
for the recognizer, and people who dictate do not seem to 
mind. Emphasized his strong support for VP. 
Second, a sampling of comments generally against a lot 
more collection of VP data. 
R ich Schwartz :  Given recording problems with VP, 
would be happier with NVP for general recognition. 
Dave Pa l le t t :  Doesn't like the split; would like to reduce 
handling costs. 
R ich Stern :  Doesn't see value in perpetuating VP. 
V ic tor  Zue: The VP speech, based on his listening ex- 
perience, is highly distorted; also people hate to read it. 
General follow-up comments. 
George  Dodd ington :  SRI (Jaret Bernstein) is going to 
ask people to dictate naturally; let's see what they do. 
Pat t i  Pr ice:  All test data should be spontaneous speech. 
John  Makhou l :  Would the recognition techniques we 
develop depend on whether we collect VP or NVP speech? 
If not, who cares. 
PROMPTING TEXTS:  PREPROCESSED VS 
NATURAL 
Francis Kubala: Questioned the idea that the acoustic 
training data must match the language model. 
Doug Paul :  Acoustic modelling is a priority of this CSR 
effort, so it's very important scientifically to have a correct 
language model, as shown in paper by Paul, Baker, and 
Baker at the 1990 Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop. Prompting texts are a pragmatic way to do this. 
Jo rdan  Cohen:  Prompting should be an empirical issue 
- -  do real dictation experiment and see what people do. 
Bob  Moore :  Preprocessing is a small effect in the 20K 
language model, so it should be possible to generate lan- 
guage models from text without constrMning the prompts. 
380 
Vic tor  Zue:  Cited the MIT study which showed the vari- 
ability of responses from unpreprocessed prompts; also 
raised the issue (not discussed further) of selection of lim- 
ited vocabulary. 
SPONTANEOUS VS READ SPEECH 
Many agree that real interactive data and testing is 
needed, but expensive. Many also agree that it is im- 
portant o continue collecting read speech. 
Roger  Moore :  Relates study showing that 2% error 
drives dictation users to isolated words. 
Mike  Picheny:  Concurs - -  accuracy  is more important 
for CSR. 
George  Dodd ington :  Suggests simulating error-free 
dictation system. 
John  Makhou l :  Let's concentrate on read speech now, 
while keeping alive the effort on exploring paradigms for 
spontaneous speech collection. 
Janet  Baker :  Emphasizes that interactive simulations 
are expensive, and that collection of read speech is valu- 
able and cost-effective. 
V ic tor  Zue: Agrees with John Makhoul. 
F INAL  REMARKS 
At this point, Charles Wayne noted that two great land- 
marks had been achieved: the collection of the pilot cor- 
pus and the dry run evaluation, and that both were major 
accomplishments for the Spoken Language Program. 
381 
