REAL-TIME SPEECH RECOGNITION SYSTEM 
Mitchel Weintraub 
SRI International 
Speech Research and Technology Program 
Menlo Park, CA, 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
SRI and U.C.Berkeley are developing hardware for a real- 
time implementation f spoken language systems (SLS). 
Our goal is to develop fast speech recognition algorithms 
and supporting hardware capable of recognizing continuous 
speech from a bigram or trigram based 10,000 word vocab- 
ulary or a 1,000 to 5,000 word SLS system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
The special-purpose ystem achieves its high computation 
rate by using special-purpose memories and data paths, and 
is made up of the following several components: 
? A special-purpose HMM-board with eight newly 
designed integrated circuits that does the HMM 
inner-loop rocessing to implement the word-recog- 
nition algorithms. 
? An output-distribution board made of off-the-shelf 
components for computing HMM discrete-density 
state-output probabilities. 
? A multi-processor TMS32030 board for computing 
the statistical language processing. This board has a 
custom high-speed interface to the HMM-board. 
? A general-purpose CPU board to perform system 
control. 
? A DSP board with A/D convertor for computing the 
feature xtraction. 
? A Sun workstation for computing the spoken lan- 
guage system database r trieval and human machine 
interface. 
SRI and U.C. Berkeley's recent accomplishments onthis 
project include: 
? Completed the construction ofa working hardware 
prototype. This prototype has been demonstrated 
running the Resource Management (RM) task as 
well as the Airline Travel Information System 
(ATIS) task. 
? Began intensive use of the hardware for a real-time 
Airline Travel Information System (ATIS) task. 
? Completed the design and construction of a second 
generation multiprocessor TMS32030 grammar pro- 
cessing board. Testing is currently in progress. 
? Revised and corrected errors in several of the cus- 
tom VLSI chips that are used for the HMM word- 
recognition processor. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Complete the construction and testing of the second 
generation multiple-processor TMS32030 board 
with a high I/O bandwidth to interface with the spe- 
cial-purpose HMM-board. 
? Implement multiple types of grammars using this 
hardware. 
? Collect data about man-machine speech interactions 
using the real-time hardware. 
? Integrate the real-time recognizer into our research 
to shorten the development cycle for new systems 
? Evaluate the current architecture to determine the 
computational nd algorithmic bottlenecks. 
? Deliver a hardware prototype to DARPA. 
486 
