Pangloss:  A Knowledge-based  Mach ine  Ass i s ted  
Translat ion Research  Pro ject  - Site 2 
Y. Wilks, Principal Investigator 
Computing Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico 88003 
PROJECT GOALS 
The Computing Research Laboratory (CRL) at New 
Mexico State University, jointly with the Center for 
Machine Translation (CMT) at Carnegie Mellon Uni- 
versity and the Information Sciences Institute (ISI) 
at the University of Southern California, are develop- 
ing a Translator's Workstation to assist a user in the 
translation of newspaper articles in the area of finance 
(mergers and acquisitions) in one language (Spanish ini- 
tially) into a second language (English). At its core 
is a multilingual, knowledge-based, interlingual, interac- 
tive, machine-assisted translation system consisting of a 
source language analysis component, an interactive aug- 
mentor, and a target language generation component. 
In the initial phase, the CRL's objectives are to develop 
tools for constructing lexical items and ontological en- 
tries automatically from on-line resources, to develop 
the initial Spanish analysis component, and, jointly with 
CMT and ISI, to establish the infrastructure for the 
three site project, develop the formats and initial content 
of the interlingua, the ontology, and the knowledge base, 
and to prepare design documents for the second phase 
versions of the analysis and generation components, the 
augmentor, and the translator's workstation. 
With respect o developing tools for extracting informa- 
tion from on-line resources, during the first year we are 
focusing on providing general classificatory information 
for use in constructing the lexicons of the Spanish anal- 
ysis and English generation components. Here we are 
building on work on automatically constructing interlin- 
gual word sense specifications from Longman's which we 
are extending and adapting to language particular lexi- 
cal entries. With respect o the Spanish analysis compo- 
nent, the objective is to modify and extend the Spanish 
component of the CRL's multilingual machine transla- 
tion system both in terms of coverage and robustness. 
RECENT RESULTS 
At this point, the three sites have established the central 
infrastructure for the Pangloss project. For the first year 
system, the formats of the interlingua, the ontology, and 
the knowledge base have been set and initial design of 
the interlingua for the second phase version is underway. 
As a preliminary to the work on extracting information 
from on-line resources, we continue to gather esources in 
the form of monolingual and bilingual dictionaries and 
monolingual and bilingual corpora. We have obtained 
Collins English Dictionary, Collins Bilingual Spanish- 
English Dictionary and are looking into a Spanish mono- 
lingual dictionary and Japanese monolingual and bilin- 
gual dictionaries. We have identified a source for Span- 
ish texts in the financial domain and are seeking further 
sources as well as sources of Japanese texts. 
The central resource to date, however, is the Longman 
Dictionary of Contemporary English and the informa- 
tion being extracted relates to word formation, syntactic 
category, syntactic subcategorization, and semantic se- 
lection restrictions. Procedures are currently being de- 
veloped to provide this information in a form that can 
be used directly by the generation component and indi- 
rectly by the analysis component. 
The effort to develop the Spanish component has primar- 
ily focussed on the analysis of sample Spanish newspaper 
articles in the financial domain in order to identify, first, 
the lexical items and constructions that are currently be- 
yond the scope of the system, and, secondly, the types 
of "ill-formedness" which we are likely to face. Work 
on modifying and extending the core system began in 
December along with the development of procedures for 
diagnosing "ill-formedness" in the input string prior to 
analysis and for relaxing constraints during processing. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
In the coming year, our intention is to produce a proto- 
type workbench for testing and evaluation in September. 
That will be follow by the extension of the prototype to a 
second source language (Japanese). In addition, greater 
amounts of automation will be introduced into each of 
the components of the MAT system and into the pro- 
cess of constructing lexical items and ontological entries. 
Lastly, in phase 2 we will be introducing pragmatics into 
the analysis and generation components. 
480 
