SPOKEN-LANGUAGE RESEARCH AT CARNEGIE MELLON 
Raj Reddy, Principal Investigator 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of speech research at Carnegie Mellon continues 
to be the development of spoken language systems that 
effectively integrate speech processing into the human- 
computer interface in a way that facilitates the use of com- 
puters in the performance of practical tasks. Research in 
spoken language is currently focussed in the following 
areas:  
? Improved speech recognition technologies: Extend- 
ing the useful vocabulary of of SPHINX-II by use of bet- 
ter phonetic models and better search techniques, 
providing for rapid configuration for new tasks. 
? Fluent human/machine interfaces: Developing an 
understanding of how people interact by voice with 
computer systems, in the context of Office Management 
and other domains. 
? Understanding spontaneous spoken language: 
Developing flexible parsing strategies to cope with 
phenomena peculiar to the lexical and grammatical 
structure of spoken language. Development ofautomatic 
training procedures for these grammars. 
? Dialog modeling: Applying constraints based on 
dialog, semantic, and pragmatic knowledge to identify 
and correct inaccurate portions of recognized utterances. 
? Acoustical and environmental robustness: Develop- 
ing procedures to enable good recognition in office en- 
vironments with desktop microphones and a useful evel 
of recognition i  more severe nvironments. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? The SPHINX-II system incorporated sex-dependent 
semi-continuous hidden Markov models, a speaker- 
normalized front end using a codeword-dependent 
neural network, and shared-distribution phonetic 
models. 
? Vocabulary-independent r cognition was improved by 
introducing vocabulary-adapted decision trees and 
vocabulary-bias training, and by incorporating the 
CDCN and ISDCN acoustical pre-processing al- 
gorithms. 
? SPHINX-II has been extended to the Wall Street Journal 
CSR task by incorporating a practical form of between- 
469 
word co-articulation modeling in the context of a more 
efficient beam search. 
? The Carnegie Mellon Spoken Language Shell was 
reimplemented and additional applications for the Office 
Management domain were developed, including a 
telephone dialer and voice editor. 
? Grammatical coverage in the ATIS domain was ex- 
tended. An initial set of tools was developed to create 
the grammar in a semi-automatic fashion from a labelled 
corpus. 
? The MINDS-II system was developed which identifies 
and reprocesses mis-recognized portions of a spoken ut- 
terance using semantics, pragmatics, inferred speaker in- 
tentions, and dialog structure in the context of a newly- 
developed finite-state recognizer. 
? Acoustical pre-processing algorithms for environmental 
robustness were extended, made more efficient, and 
demonstrated in the ATIS domain. Pre-processing was 
combined microphone arrays and with auditory models 
in pilot experiments. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? We will extend shared-distribution models to produce 
senonic baseforms, addressing the problem of new word 
learning and pronunciation optimization, and the the 
decision-tree-based none will be made more general. 
The CDNN-based approach will be extended for both 
speaker and environment normalization. The use of 
long-distance semantic orrelations in language models 
to improve the prediction capability will be explored. 
? We will incorporate confidence measures, audio feed- 
back, and the latest recognition technologies into the 
Office Manager system. We will investigate the be- 
havior of multi-modal systems that incorporate speech 
recognition. 
? We will develop architectures and automatic learning 
algorithms for SLS systems with greater integration of 
recognition, parsing, and dialog and pragmatics. Work 
will be initiated on the identification of misunderstood 
portions of a complete utterance, and the use of partial 
understanding and clarification dialogs. 
? We will continue to develop parallel strategies for 
robust speech recognition, and we will demonstrate 
these methods in more adverse acoustical environments. 
