The Acquisition of Lexical Semantic 
Knowledge from Large Corpora 
James Pustejovsky 
Computer  Sc ience Depar tment  
Brande is  Un ivers i ty  
Wal tham,  MA 02254 
ABSTRACT 
Machine-readable dictionaries provide the raw material from 
which to construct computationaily useful representations of 
the generic vocabulary contained within it. Many sublan- 
guages, however, are poorly represented in on-line dictionar- 
ies, ff represented at all. Vocabularies geared to specialized 
domains are necessary for many applications, such as text  
categorization and information retrieval. In this paper I de- 
scribe research devoted to developing techniques for build- 
ing sublanguage l xicons via syntactic and statistical corpus 
analysis coupled with analytic techniques based on the tenets 
of a generative l xicon. 
1. In t roduct ion  
Machine-readable dictionaries provide the raw material 
from which to construct computationally useful repre- 
sentations of the generic vocabulary contained within it. 
Many sublanguages, however, are poorly represented in
on-line dictionaries, if represented at all (cf. Grishman 
et al(1986)). Yet vocabularies geared to specialized o- 
mains are necessary for many applications, uch as text 
categorization and information retrieval. In this paper 
I describe research devoted to developing techniques for 
building sublanguage l xicons via syntactic and statis- 
tical corpus analysis coupled with analytic techniques 
based on the tenets of a generative theory of the lexicon 
(Pustejovsky 1991). 
Unlike with purely statistical collocational analyses, the 
framework of a lexical semantic theory allows the auto- 
matic construction of predictions about deeper seman- 
tic relationships among words appearing in collocational 
systems. I illustrate the approach for the acquisition of 
lexical information for several exical classes, and how 
such techniques can fine tune the lexical structures ac- 
quired from an initial seeding of a machine-readable 
dictionary, i.e. the machine-tractable v rsion of the 
LDOCE (Wilks et al(1991)). 
The aim of our research is to discover what kinds of 
knowledge can be reliably acquired through the use of 
these methods, exploiting, as they do, general inguis- 
tic knowledge rather than domain knowledge. In this 
respect, our program is similar to Zernik (1989) and 
Zernik and Jacobs (1990), working on extracting verb 
semantics from corpora using lexical categories. Our 
research, however, differs in two respects: first, we 
employ a more expressive lexical semantics; secondly, 
our focus is on all major categories in the language, 
and not just verbs. This is important since for full- 
text information retrieval, information about nominals 
is paramount, as most queries tend to be expressed as 
conjunctions of nouns. From a theoretical perspective, 
I believe that the contribution of the lexical semantics 
of nominals to the overall structure of the lexicon has 
been somewhat neglected, relative to that of verbs (cf. 
Pustejovsky and Anick (1988), Bogutaev and Puste- 
jovsky (1990)). Therefore, where others present ambi- 
guity and metonymy as a potential obstacle to effective 
corpus analysis, we believe that the existence of moti- 
vated metonymic structures actually provides valuable 
clues for semantic analysis of nouns in a corpus. To 
demonstrate these points, I describe experiments per- 
formed within the DIDEROT Tipster Extraction project 
(of Brandeis University and New Mexico State Univer- 
sity), over a corpus of joint venture articles. 
2. P ro jec t ing  Syntact i c  Behav ior  f rom 
Deep Semant ic  Types  
The purpose of the research is to experiment with au- 
tomatic acquisition of semantic tags for words in a sub- 
language, tags which are well beyond that available from 
the seeding of MRDs. The identification of semantic tags 
for a word associated with particular lexical forms (i.e. 
semantic ollocations) can be represented as that part 
of the lexical structure of a word called the projective 
conclusion space (Pustejovsky (1991))). 
For this work, we will need to define several semantic no- 
tions. These include: type coercion, where a lexical item 
requires a specific type specification for its argument, 
and the argument is able to change type accordingly 
- - this  explains the behavior of logical metonymy and 
the syntactic variation seen in complements o verbs and 
nominals; cospecification, a semantic tagging of what col- 
locationM patterns the lexical item may enter into; and 
contextual opacity/transparency, which characterizes ofa 
243 
word just how it is used in particular contexts. Formally, 
we will identify this property with specific cospecification 
values for the lexical item (cf. Pustejovsky (forthcom- 
ing)). 
Metonymy, in this view, can be seen as a case of the 
"licensed violation" of selectional restrictions. For ex- 
ample, while the verb announce selects for a human 
subject, sentences like The Dow Corporation announced 
third quarter losses are not only an acceptable para- 
phrase of the selectionally correct form Mr. Dow arr. an- 
nounced third quarter losses for Dow Corp, but they are 
the preferred form in the corpora being examined (i.e. 
the ACL-DCI WSJ and T IPSTER Corpora). This is an 
example of subject type coercion, where the semantics 
for Dow Corp. as a company must specify that there 
is a human typically associated with such official pro- 
nouncements (Bergler (forthcoming)). 
2.1. Coercive Envi ronments  in Corpora 
Another example of type coercion is that seen in the com- 
plements of verbs such as begin, enjoy, finish, etc. That 
is, in sentences such as "John began the book", the nor- 
mal complement expected is an action or event of some 
sort, most often expressed by a gerundive or infinitival 
phrase: "John began reading the book", "John began to 
read the book". In Pustejovsky (1991) it is argued that 
in such cases, the verb need not have multiple subcatego- 
rizations, but only one deep semantic type, in this case, 
an event. Thus, the verb 'coerces' its complement (e.g. 
"the book") into an event related to that object. Such 
information can be represented by means of a represen- 
tational schema called qualia structure, which, among 
other things, specifies the relations associated with ob- 
jects. 
In related work being carried out with Mats Rooth of 
ATT, we are exploring what the range of coercion types 
is, and what environments hey may appear in, as dis- 
covered in corpora. Some of our initial data suggest hat 
the hypothesis of deep semantic selection may in fact be 
correct, as well as indicating what the nature of the coer- 
cion rules may be. Using techniques described in Church 
and Hindle (1990), Church and Hanks (1990), and Hin- 
dle and Rooth (1991), below are some examples of the 
most frequent V-O pairs from the AP corpus. 
Counts for "objects" of begin/V: 
205 begin/V career /O  
176 begin/V day/O 
159 begin/V work/O 
140 begin/V talk/O 
120 begin/V campaign/O 
113 begin/V investigation/O 
106 begin/V process/O 
92 begin/V program/O 
8S begin/V operation/O 
86 begin/V negotiation/O 
66 begin/V strike/O 
64 begin/V production/O 
59 begin/V meeting/O 
89 begin/V term/O 
50 begin/V visit/O 
45 begin/V test/O 
39 begin/V construction/O 
31 begin/V debate/O 
29 begin/V trial/O 
Corpus studies confirm similar results for "weakly inten- 
sional contexts" (Pustejovsky (1991)) such as the com- 
plement of coercive verbs such as veto. These are in- 
teresting because regardless of the noun type appearing 
as complement, it is embedded within a semantic in- 
terpretation of "the proposal to", thereby clothing the 
complement within an intensional context. The exam- 
ples below with the verb veto indicate two things: first, 
that such coercions are regular and pervasive in corpora; 
secondly, that almost anything can be vetoed, but that 
the most frequently occurring objects are closest to the 
type selected by the verb. 
303 veto/V bi11/O 
84 veto/V legislation/O 
58 veto/V measure/O 
36 veto/V resolution/O 
21 veto/V law/O 
14 veto/V item/O 
12 veto/V decision/O 
9 veto/V proposal/O 
9 veto/V plan/O 
7 veto/V package/O 
6 veto/V increase/O 
5 veto/V sanction/O 
6 veto/V penalty/O 
4 veto/V notice/O 
4 veto/V idea/O 
4 veto/V appropriation/O 
4 veto/V mission/O 
4 veto/V attempt/O 
3 veto/V search/O 
3 veto/V cut/O 
3 veto/V deal/O 
I veto/V expedition/O 
What these data "show is that the highest count comple- 
ment types match the type required by the verb; namely, 
that one vetoes a bill or proposal to do something, not 
244 
the thing itself. These nouns can therefore be used with 
some predictive certainty for inducing the semantic type 
in coercive environments such as "veto the expedition." 
This work is still preliminary, however, and requires fur- 
ther examination (Pustejovsky and Rooth (in prepara- 
tion)). 
3. Imp l i ca t ions  fo r  Natura l  Language 
Process ing  
The framework proposed here is attractive for NLP, for 
at least two reasons. First, it can be formalized, and thus 
make the basis for a computational procedure for word 
interpretation i  context. Second, it does not require the 
notion of exhaustive enumeration ofall the different ways 
in which a word can behave, in particular in collocations 
with other words. Consequently, the framework can nat- 
urally cope with the 'creative' use of language; that is, 
the open-ended nature of word combinations and their 
associated meanings. 
The method of fine-grained characterization f lexical en- 
tries, as proposed here, effectively allows us to conflate 
different word senses (in the traditional meaning of this 
term) into a single meta-entry, thereby offering great 
potential not only for systematically encoding regulari- 
ties of word behavior dependent on context, but also for 
greatly reducing the size of the lexicon. Following Puste- 
jovsky and Anick (1988), we call such meta-entries lexi- 
cal conceptuM paradigms (LCPs). The theoretical claim 
here is that such a characterization constrains what a 
possible word meaning can be, through the mechanism 
of logically well-formed semantic expressions. The ex- 
pressive power of a KR formalism can then be viewed as 
simply a tool which gives substance to this claim. 
The notion of a meta-entry turns out to be very use- 
ful for capturing the systematic ambiguities which are 
so pervasive throughout language. Among the alterna- 
tions captured by LCPs are the following (see Puste- 
jovsky (forthcoming) and Levin (1989)): 
1. Count/Mass alternations; e.g. sheep. 
2. Container/Containee alternations; e.g. bottle. 
3. Figure/Ground Reversals; e.g. door, window. 
4. Product/Producer diathesis; e.g. newspaper, IBM, 
Ford. 
For example, an apparently unambiguous noun such as 
newspaper can appear in many semantically distinct con- 
texts. 
1. The coffee cup is on top of the newspaper. 
2. The article is in the newspaper. 
3. The newspaper attacked the senator from Mas- 
sachusetts. 
4. The newspaper is hoping to fire its editor next 
month. 
This noun falls into a particular specialization of the 
Product/Producer paradigm, where the noun can logi- 
cally denote either the organization or the product pro- 
duced by the organization. This is another example of 
logical polysemy and is represented in the lexical struc- 
ture for newspaper explicitly (Pustejovsky (1991)). 
Another class of logically polysemous nominals is a spe- 
cialization of the process/result nominals uch as merger, 
joint venture, consolidation, etc. Examples of how these 
nominals pattern syntactically in text are given below: 
1. Trustcorp Inc. will become Society Bank 8J Trust 
when its merger is completed with Society Corp. of 
Cleveland, the bank said. 
2. Shareholders must approve the merger at general 
meetings of the two companies in late November. 
3. But Mr. Rey brought about a merger in the next few 
years between the country's major producers. 
4. A pharmaceutical joint venture of Johnson ~4 John- 
son and Merck agreed in principle to buy the U.S. 
over-the-counter drug business of ICI Americas for 
over $450 million. 
5. The four-year-old business is turning a small 
profit and the entrepreneurs are about to sign a 
joint venture agreement with a Moscow cooperative 
to export the yarn to the Soviet Union. 
Because of their semantic type, these nominals enter into 
an LCP which generates a set of structural templates 
predicted for that noun in the language. For example, 
the LCP in this case is the union concept, and has the 
following lexical structure associated with it: 
5. Plant/Food alternations; e.g. fig, apple. 
6. Process/Result diathesis; e.g. ezamination, combi- 
nation. 
7. Place/People diathesis; e.g. city, New York. 
LCP: type: union 
\[ Const: >2x:entity(x) \] 
\[ Form: exist(ly) \[entity(y)\] \] 
\[ Agent: type:event ? join(x) \] 
\[ Telic: nil \] 
245 
This states that a union is an event which brings about 
one entity from two or more, and comes about by a join- 
ing ewmt. The lexical structure for the nominal merger 
is inherited from this paradigm. 
=erger(*x*) 
\[ Const: ({w}>2) \[compamy(w) or firm(w)\] \] 
\[ Form: ex is ts (y )  \[company(y)\] \] 
\[ Agent: event(*x*): join(*x*,{~}) \] 
\[ Telie: contextual\] 
It is interesting to note that all synonyms for this word 
(or, alternatively, viewed as clustered under this con- 
cept) will share in the same LCP behavior: e.g. merging, 
unification, coalition, combination, consolidation, etc. 
With this LCP there are associated syntactic realization 
patterns for how the word and its arguments are real- 
ized in text. Such a paradigm is a very generic, domain 
independent set of schemas, which is a significant point 
for multi-domain and multi-task NLP applications. 
For the particular LCP of union, the syntactic schemas 
include the following: 
LCP schemas: 
\[where N=UNION; X=argl; Y=arg2\] 
N of X and Y 
X's N with Y 
Y's N with X 
N between X and Y 
N of Z (Z=X+Y) 
N between Z
EXAMPLE: 
merger of x and y 
x's merger with y 
y's merger with x 
merger between x and y 
merger of the two companies 
merger between two companies 
There are several things to note here. First, such 
paradigmatic behavior is extremely regular for nouns 
in a language, and as a result, the members of such 
paradigms can be found using knowledge acquisition 
techniques from large corpora (cf. Anick and Puste- 
jovsky (1990) for one such algorithm). Secondly, be- 
cause these are very common ominal patterns for nouns 
such as merger, it is significant when the noun appears 
without all arguments explicitly expressed. For example, 
in (5) below, presuppositions from the lexical structure 
combine with discourse clues in the form of definite refer- 
ence in the noun phrase (the merger) to suggest that the 
other partner in the merger was mentioned previously in 
the text. 
5. Florida National said yesterday that it remains com- 
mitted to the merger. 
Similarly powerful inferences can be made from an in- 
definite nominal when introduced into the discourse as 
in (6). Here, there is a strong presupposition that both 
partners in the merger are mentioned someplace in the 
immediately ocal context, e.g. as a coordinate subject, 
since the NP is a newly mentioned entity. 
6. Orkem and Coates said last Wednesday that the two 
were considering a merger, through Orkem's British 
subsidiary, Orkem Coatings U.K. Lid. 
Thus, the lexical structures provide a rich set of schemas 
for argument mapping and semantic inferencing, as well 
as directed presuppositions for discontinuous semantic 
relations. 
One final and important note about lexical structures 
and paradigmatic behavior. The seed information 
for these structures is largely derivable from machine- 
readable dictionaries. For example, a dictionary defini- 
tion for merger (from the Longman Dictionary of Con- 
temporary English is "the joining of 2 or more companies 
or firms" with subject code FINANCE. This makes the 
task of automatic onstruction of a robust lexicon for 
NLP applications a very realizable goal (cf. Boguraev 
(1991) and Wilks et ai. (1991)). 
4. Induction of Semantic Relations from 
Syntactic Forms 
From discussion in the previous section, it should be 
clear that such paradigmatic information would be help- 
ful if available. In this section, we present preliminary 
results indicating the feasability of learning LCPs from 
corpora, both tagged and untagged. Imagine being able 
to take the V-O pairs such as those given in section 2.1, 
and then applying semantic tags to the verbs which are 
appropriate to the role they play for that object (i.e. in- 
duction of the qualia roles for that noun). This is in fact 
the type of experiment reported on in Anick and Puste- 
jovsky (1990). Here we apply a similar technique to a 
much larger corpus, in order to induce the agentive role 
for nouns. That is, the semantic predicate associated 
with bringing about the object. 
In this example we look at the behavior of noun phrases 
246 
and the prepositional phrases that follow them. In par- 
ticular, we look at the co-occurrence ofnominals with be- 
tween, with, and to. Table 1 shows results of the conflat- 
ing verb/noun plus preposition patterns. The percent- 
age shown indicates the ratio of the particular colloca- 
tion to the key word. Mutual information (MI) statistics 
for the two words in collocation are also shown. What 
these results indicate is that induction of semantic type 
from conflating syntactic patterns is possible. Based on 
the semantic types for these prepositions, the syntactic 
evidence suggests that there is a symmetric relation be- 
tween the arguments in the following two patterns: 
a. Z with y = Ax3Rz, y\[Rz(x, y) A Rz(y, x)\] 
b. Z between x and y = 
3Rz, x, y\[Rz(x, y) ^  Rz(y, x)\] 
We then take these results and, for those nouns where 
the association ratios for N with and N between are sim- 
ilar, we pair them with the set of verbs governing these 
"NP PP" combinations in corpus, effectively partition- 
ing the original V-O set into \[+agentive\] predicates and 
\[-agentive\] predicates. If our hypothesis i correct, we 
expect hat verbs governing nominals collocated with a 
with-phrase will be mostly those predicates referring to 
the agentive quale of the nominal. This is because the 
with-phrase is unsaturated as a predicate, and acts to 
identify the agent of the verb as its argument. This is 
confirmed by our data, shown below. 
Verb-Object Pairs with Prep = to 
19 form/V venture/O 
3 announce/V venture/O 
3 enter/V venture/O 
2 discuss/V venture/O 
1 be/V venture/O 
1 abandon/V venture/O 
I begin/V venture/O 
I ?omplete/V venture/O 
I negotiate/V venture/O 
1 start/V venture/O 
1 expect/V venture/O 
Conversely, verbs governing nominals collocating with 
a between-phrase will not refer to the agentive since the 
phrase is saturated already. Indeed, the only verb occur- 
ring in this position with any frequency is the copula be, 
namely with the following counts: 12 be/Y venture/0. 
Thus, week semantic types can be induced on the basis of 
syntactic behavior. In Pustejovsky et al(1991), we dis- 
cuss how this general technique compares to somewhat 
different but related approaches described in Smadja 
(1991) and Zernik and Jacobs (1991). 
5. Conc lus ion  
We contend that using lexical semantic methods to 
guide lexical knowledge acquisition from corpora can 
yield structured thesaurus-like information in a form 
amenable for use within information retrieval applica- 
tions. The work reported here illustrates the applica- 
bility of this approach for several important classes of 
nominals. Future work includes refining the discovery 
procedures to reduce misses and false alarms and ex- 
tending the coverage of the lexical semantics component 
to allow the testing of such techniques on a greater range 
of terms. Finally, we are applying the results of the anal- 
ysis within the context of data extraction for IR, to test 
their effectiveness as indexing and retrieval aids. Much 
of what we have outlined is still programmatic, but we 
believe that the approach to extracting information from 
corpora making use of lexical semantic information is a 
fruitful one and an area definitely worth exploring. 
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by DARPA contract 
MDAg04-91-C-9328. I would like to thank Scott Wa- 
terman for his assistance in preparing the statistics used 
here. I would also like to thank Scott Waterman, Fed- 
erica Busa, Peter Anick, and Sabine Bergler for useful 
discussion. 
References 
1. Anick, P. and J. Pustejovsky (1990) "An Appli- 
cation of Lexical Semantics to Knowledge Acquisi- 
tion from Corpora," Proceedings of the 13th Inter- 
national Conference of Computational Linguistics, 
August 20-25, 1990, Helsinki, Finland. 
2. Bergler, S. (forthcoming) The Evidential Analysis of 
Reported Speech, Ph.D. Computer Science Depart- 
ment,Brandeis University. 
3. Boguraev, B. "Building a Lexicon: The Contribu- 
tion of Computers", in B. Boguraev (ed.), Special 
issue on computational lexicons, International Jour- 
nal of Lexicography, 4(3), 1991. 
4. Boguraev, B. and J. Pustejovsky (1990) "Lexical 
Ambiguity and the Role of Knowledge Represen- 
tation in Lexicon Design," Proceedings of the 13th 
InternationM Conference of ComputationM Linguis- 
tics, August 20-25, 1990, Helsinki, Finland. 
5. Church, K. and Hanks, P., (1990) "Word Associ- 
ation Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicogra- 
247 
phy". Computational Linguistics Vol. 16(1). 
6. Church, K. and D. IIindle (1990)" Collocational 
Constraints and Corpus-Based Linguistics." In 
Working Notes of the AAAI Symposium: Text- 
Based Intelligent Systems, 1990. 
7. Grishman, R., L. Hirschman, N. Nhan (1986) "Dis- 
covery Procedures for Sublanguage Selectional Pat- 
terns: Initial Experiments." Computational Lin- 
guistics, Vol. 12, Number 3, pp. 205-215. 
8. IIindle, D. and M. Rooth, "Structural Ambiguity 
and Lexical Relations", Proceedings of the ACL, 
1991. 
9. Levin, B. (1989) "The Lexical Organization of the 
English Verb", ms. to appear University of Chicago 
Press. 
10. Pustejovsky, J. (1991) "The Generative Lexicon," 
Computational Linguistics, 17.4, 1991. 
11. Pustejovsky, J. (forthcoming) The Generative Lexi- 
con: A Theory of Computational Lezical Semantics, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
12. Pustejovsky, J. and P. Anick (1988) "The Seman- 
tic Interpretation of Nominals",Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Budapest, IIungary. 
13. Pustejovsky, J., S. Bergler, and P. Anick (1991) 
"Lexical Semantic Techniques for Corpus Analysis," 
(submitted to) Computational Linguistics. 
14. Pustejovsky, J. and M. Rooth (in preparation) 
"Type Coercive Environments in Corpora". 
15. Smadja, F. (1991) "Macro-coding the lexicon with 
co-occurrence knowledge," in Zernik (ed) Lexical 
Acquisition: Using On-Line Resources to Build a 
Lexicon, LEA, IIillsdale, NJ, 1991. 
16. Wilks, Y., D. C. Fass, C.-M. Guo, J. E. McDonald, 
T. Plate, and B. M. Slator (1991) "Providing Ma- 
chine Tractable Dictionary Tools," Machine Trans- 
lation 5, 1991. 
17. Zernik, U. (1989) "Lexicon Acquisition: Learn- 
ing from Corpus by Exploiting Lexical Categories." 
Proceedings of IJCAI 89. 
18. Zernik, U. and P. Jacobs (1990) "Tagging for learn- 
ing: Collecting thematic relations from corpus." 
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Helsinki, Finland. 
Word Word Word 
Word + to + with + between 
(%)/MI (%)/MI (%)/MI 
agreement .117 .159 .028 
1.512 3.423 3.954 
announcement .010 .003 0 
-.918 -.409 n/a 
barrier .215 0 .030 
2.117 n/a 4.046 
competition .019 .028 .021 
-.269 1.701 3.666 
confrontation .029 .283 .074 
.141 4.000 4.932 
contest .052 .052 .039 
.715 2.323 4.301 
contract .066 .060 .002 
.947 2.463 1.701 
deal .028 .193 .004 
.086 3.616 2.015 
dialogue 0 .326 .152 
n/a 4.140 5.644 
difference .017 .009 .348 
-.410 .638 6.474 
expansion .013 .007 0 
-.666 .381 n/a 
impasse 0 .064 .096 
n/a 2.520 5.192 
interactions 0 0 .250 
n/a n/a 6.141 
market .013 .006 .000 
-.637 .240 -.500 
range .005 .002 .020 
-1.533 -.618 3.663 
relations .009 .217 .103 
-1.017 3.736 5.254 
settlement .013 .091 .012 
-.626 2.868 3.142 
talks .029 i .218 .030 
.138 3.740 4.043 
venture .032 .105 .035 
.226 3.008 4.185 
war .010 .041 .015 
-.937 2.079 3.372 
Table 1: Mutual information for noun/verb + preposi- 
tion patterns. 
248 
