A NAT IONAL RESOURCE GRAMMAR 
Jerry R. Hobbs 
Artificial Intelligence Center 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 94025 
1. THE PROBLEM AND ITS 
SOLUTION 
The syntax of English is largely a solved problem. Yet 
all natural anguage projects devote a large amount of 
their effort to developing rammars. The reason for this 
situation is that there is no very large, generally avail- 
able grammar of English based on current echnology-- 
unification grammar. The solution is to develop a very 
broad-coverage National Resource Grammar in a unifi- 
cation formalism, perhaps under the auspices of the Lin- 
guistic Data Consortium (LDC) and freely available to 
its members. 
What do we mean when we say syntax is a solved prob- 
lem? The syntactic structure and the corresponding 
predicate-argument, or operator-operand, relations are 
worked out for a great majority of grammatical construc- 
tions. Moreover, they are largely agreed upon, mod- 
ulo some fairly easily resolvable theoretical differences in
representation. Syntax is still a healthy area of research, 
hut most of the work is concentrated onachieving more 
elegant treatments and characterizing phenomena at the 
periphery of the language. 
From our experience at SRI with the very broad-coverage 
grammar DIALOGIC, we believe that it is possible to- 
day to build a grammar that has 95% coverage, with 
some parse, of arbitrary English prose of the sort found 
in newspaper articles. That is, the desired parse may not 
be the most highly ranked, but it would be somewhere 
in the list of parses. We estimate that with parse prefer- 
ence heuristics that have been developed at a number of 
sites, the parser could rank the desired parse most highly 
60% to 65% of the time. It is likely that with the use of 
probabilistic models and the proper training, this num- 
ber could be pushed up to 75% to 85%. But the training 
would require the existence of the broad-coverage ram- 
mar. 
2. WHAT THE NATIONAL 
RESOURCE GRAMMAR WOULD 
BE 
The National Resource Grammar should include every- 
thing we know how to do well. In particular, it should 
include the following features: 
? Complete English inflectional morphology. 
? A very broad grammatical coverage, including all 
the subcategorization patterns, sentential comple- 
ments; complex adverbials, relative clauses, com- 
plex determiners and quantifiers, conjunction and 
comparative constructions, and the most common 
sentence fragments. 
? Mechanisms for defining and applying selectional 
constraints, although the actual ontology would not 
be provided, since that is too domain-dependent. 
? A "quasi-logical form" defined for every construc- 
tion in the grammar. The quasi-logical form would 
encode all operator-operand relationships, but not 
attempt o decide among the various quantifier 
scope readings. It would be easily convertible into 
other semantic representations. 
? The most commonly used parse preference heuris- 
tics. 
? An  optional routine for pronoun reference resolution 
according to syntactic or centering criteria. 
? An  optional routine for quantifier-scope generation, 
either generating all quantifier scopings from the 
quasi-logical form, or using various common heuris- 
tics for ranking the alternate scopings. 
? A lexicon of several thousand words, including ex- 
amples of all lexical categories and subcategories de- 
fined by the grammar. 
The grammar should be 
? Implemented in a unification grammar formalism. 
352 
* As modular as possible, for easy modification. 
? As reflective as possible of current linguistic theory. 
? As neutral as possible on controversial issues. 
? Compatible with the classification scheme used in 
the Penn Tree Bank. 
(The third and fourth of these items exert pressure in 
different directions, of course, and where the conflict is 
unresolvable, the fourth should take priority.) The sys- 
tem should include 
? An efficient parser, programmed in C for portability. 
? Convenient grammar development tools, for users 
to extend the grammar as required in specialized 
domains. 
? Complete documentation on the grammar and on 
the algorithms used. 
During the development of the National Resource Gram- 
mar, it should be continually tested on a large set of key 
examples. Periodically, it should be tested on sentences 
taken at random from the Penn Tree Bank. Computa- 
tional linguists and potential users should be consulted 
regularly to make certain that the system produces anal- 
yses that are maximally useful to others. 
3. USES 
Among the uses of the National Resource Grammar 
would be the following: 
? To provide a convenient syntactic analysis compo- 
nent for researchers wishing to investigate other 
problems, such as semantics, pragmatics, or dis- 
course. 
? To provide a quick and effective syntactic analysis 
component for government agencies and members of 
the LDC and others implementing natural anguage 
processing applications. 
? To serve as a basis for experimentation with stochas- 
tic models of syntactic analysis. 
? To serve as an aid in the the annotation of sentences 
in the Penn Tree Bank and other corpora. 
We believe, on the other hand, that a National Resource 
Grammar should not in any way be required or imposed 
on research projects. It should be just what it says-- 
a resource. We believe it should promote rather than 
retard research on grammar and grammar formalisms. 
4. ORGANIZAT ION OF THE 
PROJECT 
By basing the effort on an existing, very broad-coverage 
grammar, the development of very nearly the entire Na- 
tional Resource Grammar and its supporting system 
could be completed in one year. Our guess is that 
roughly 90% of the phrase structure rules and 70% of 
the constraints on the rules could be completed in the 
first year. During the second year, the grammar could 
be put into the hands of a variety of users, who would 
be consulted frequently, ensuring that the final product 
was responsive to their needs. 
More specifically, we feel the first year's task could be 
broken down into six different areas, each representing 
roughly two months' effort for the implementation f an 
initial solution. Further development of all aspects of 
the grammar, especially in response to comments from 
potential users and an advisory committee of linguists 
and computational linguists, would continue throughout 
the two years. Completing the initial implementation i  
the first year would give the developers sufficient ime to 
respond to this feedback. 
The six areas are as follows: 
1. A core, skeletal grammar, which would allow the 
developers to trace out the broad outlines of the 
grammar and give them a tool for testing further 
developments. 
2. The structure of the noun phrase and adjective 
phrase to the left of the head, including complex 
determiner and quantifier structures, and adjective 
specifiers. 
3. The auxiliary complex, noun complements and 
predicate complements, including cleft and pseudo- 
cleft constructions. 
4. The structure of the verb phrase, subcategorization 
and sentential complements for verbs and adjectives. 
5. Relative clauses and other "wh" constructions. 
6. Adverbials and other sentence adjuncts. 
? To serve as a challenge to linguists and computa- 
tional linguists to handle the various phenomena in
better ways. 
Conjunction and comparative constructions would be 
handled not as a separate item, but throughout the ef- 
fort. It would be a bad idea, for example, to develop a 
353 
treatment of nonconjoined relative clauses in Month 3 
and a treatment of conjoined relative clauses in Month 
10, because the latter may force a complete rethinking of 
how the former was done. Similarly, semantic interpreta- 
tion, the lexicon, mechanisms for selectional constraints, 
and parse preference heuristics would be implemented 
and documented in tandem with grammar development. 
Each of these phenomena is of course a huge problem, 
and worthy of years of investigation. However, since at 
least one treatment of each of the phenomena has al- 
ready been implemented, and encoding the current best 
existing treatment is what is required, we are confident 
such a schedule could be met. However, the developers 
would have to be very sensitive to black holes, since syn- 
tax abounds with them, and more grammar development 
projects have been derailed by them than have avoided 
them. 
Of course, an effort of this scope could not be done by 
committee, but it would be extremely useful to have an 
advisory committee consisting of linguists and computa- 
tional linguists of a wide variety of theoretical orienta- 
tions. The advisory committee would be solicited, before 
each two-month period, for key examples and key treat- 
ments of the phenomena. As the initial implementation 
in each area of the grammar is completed, the results, 
that is, the rules together with complete documentation, 
would be circulated to the advisory committee for a cri- 
tique. Where this critique yielded clearly superior solu- 
tions to the problems, those solutions would be incorpo- 
rated into the implementation. 
5. CONCLUSION 
There will always be researchers who continue to build 
their own grammars, as they attempt o work out the- 
ories of more syntactic phenomena and to make exist- 
ing formulations more elegant. But there axe a large 
number of other researchers who are building grammars 
when they want to be and should be working on some 
of the less understood problems in natural language pro- 
cessing, or when they have an application that needs to 
be implemented. As a result, research is retarded and 
applications are delayed. The availability of a National 
Resource Grammar would free researchers topush on the 
frontiers of the field and to move applications into the 
workplace, rather than duplicating what has been done 
often before. 
After over thirty years of extensive research in linguistics 
and computational linguistics on the syntax of English, 
it is time for the development of the National Resource 
Grammar, reflective of the best that we know and avail- 
able for general use. 
354 
