RESEARCH IN  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
Ralph Grishman, Principal Investigator 
Department of Computer Science 
New York University 
New York, NY 10003 
PROJECT GOALS 
Our general objective has been the enhancement of tech- 
niques for extracting information and retrieving docu- 
ments from natural anguage text. Our focus has been 
on methods which automatically learn syntactic and se- 
mantic properties of the language used in particular do- 
mains, and on techniques for enhancing the robustness of
natural anguage analyzers. This work covers a number 
of areas; we summarize our accomplishments and plans 
for each area below. 
INFORMATION EXTRACTION 
A major portion of our effort over the past year was 
devoted to participation i  the Third Message Under- 
standing Conference (MUC-3). As the messages involved 
(newspaper reports of terrorist activity) were signifi- 
cantly more complex than those for MUC-2, a number of 
enhancements were required to our information extrac- 
tion system. These included extensions to our grammar, 
use of a commercial machine-readable dictionary (the 
Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary) as our primary 
source of lexical information, and several additional tech- 
niques for recovery in the event that an entire sentence 
cannot be analyzed syntactically or semantically. The 
enhancements were described in detail in the MUC-3 
Proceedings. Substantial effort was also required to de- 
velop a semantic model of the terrorist domain. The 
performance of the resulting system compared favorably 
to others participating in MUC-3. We are currently de- 
veloping further system enhancements for participation 
in MUC-4 in June of 1992. 
PARSER EVALUATION 
To assess alternative techniques for improving parsing 
performance, we have applied a metric of parsing qual- 
ity suggested by Ezra Black. Using this metric, we com- 
pared parses produced by the Univ. of Pennsylvania 
Tree Bank for a portion of the MUC-3 corpus against 
those produced by our system (with some automatic 
restructuring of our parses to ~ improve their alignment 
with the Tree Bank). We evaluated a number of meth- 
ods for improving parser performance, including fitted 
parses, closest attachment ofmodifiers, hypothesis merg- 
ing, stochastic grammars, and stochastic part of speech 
taggers. Most of these results will be reported at the 
Third Conf. on Applied Natural Language Processing. 
ACQUIS IT ION OF  SELECT IONAL 
PATTERNS 
We performed a syntactic analysis of the MUC-3 cor- 
pus (automatically, without selectional constraints), and 
performed a frequency analysis of the co-occurrence pat- 
terns to identify the common semantic patterns. When 
these patterns were used as the basis for selectional con- 
straints in further parsing, they were found to do slightly 
better than manually prepared constraints. We intend 
to extend this technique to substantially arger corpora 
in the coming year. 
DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL  
We have continued our research on using syntactic anal- 
ysis to enhance keyword-based document retrieval, both 
by identifying larger patterns than single words and 
by automatically discovering term similarity relations 
from word co-occurrence patterns in a large corpus. 
When applied to a small corpus of computer science 
abstracts, modest improvements in performance were 
demonstrated; these are reported in a separate paper 
in these proceedings. Over the coming year we intend to 
apply this technique to much larger corpora as part of 
the Text Retrieval Evaluation Conference. 
MULTI -L INGUAL SYSTEMS 
We are continuing our work, sponsored jointly with 
the National Science Foundation, on Japanese-English 
sublanguage-based machine translation. We completed 
a small system for translating programming language 
texts, which also incorporated the reversible grammar 
technology we had previously developed. Over the next 
year we intend to perform initial experiments for dis- 
covering transfer ules from parallel bilingual corpora. 
We are also developing a Spanish version of our infor- 
mation extraction system, in order to better understand 
the problems of porting such a system across languages. 
482 
