Automatic Detection and Correction of Repairs in 
Human-Computer Dialog* 
Elizabeth Shriberg~ John Bear, John Doweling 
SRI In ternat iona l  
Menlo Park ,  Cal i fornia 94025 
ABSTRACT 
We have analyzed 607 sentences of spontaneous human-  
computer speech data containing repairs (drawn from a cor- 
pus of 10,718). We present here criteria and techniques for 
automatical ly detecting the presence of a repair, its loca- 
tion, and making the appropriate correction. The criteria in- 
volve integrat ion of knowledge from several sources: pat tern  
matching, syntactic and semantic analysis, and acoustics. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Spontaneous spoken language often includes peech that 
is not intended by the speaker to be part of the con- 
tent of the utterance. This speech must be detected 
and deleted in order to correctly identify the intended 
meaning. This broad class of disfluencies encompasses 
a number of phenomena, including word fragments, in- 
terjections, filled pauses, restarts, and repairs. We are 
analyzing the repairs in a large subset (over ten thou- 
sand sentences) of spontaneous speech data collected for 
the DARPA spoken language program. We have cate- 
gorized these disfluencies as to type and frequency, and 
are investigating methods for their automatic detection 
and correction. Here we report promising results on de- 
tection and correction of repairs by combining pattern 
matching, syntactic and semantic analysis, and acous- 
tics. 
The problem of disfluent speech for language under- 
standing systems has been noted but has received limited 
attention, ttindle \[5\] attempts to delimit and correct 
repairs in spontaneous human-human dialog, based on 
transcripts containing an "edit signal," or external and 
reliable marker at the "expunction point," or point of in- 
terruption. Carbonell and Hayes \[4\] briefly describe re- 
*This research was supported by the Defense Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency under Contract ONR N00014-90-C-0085 
with the Office of Naval Research. It was also supported by a 
Grant, NSF IRI-8905249, from the NationM Science Foundation. 
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of 
the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily represent- 
ing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency of the U.S. Government, or 
of the National Science Foundation. 
lEl izabeth Shriberg is also affiliated with the Department of 
Psychology at the University of California t Berkeley. 
covery strategies for broken-off and restarted utterances 
in textual input. Ward \[13\] addresses repairs in sponta- 
neous speech, but does not attempt o identify or correct 
them. Our approach is most similar to that of Hindle. It 
differs, however, in that we make no assumption about 
the existence of an explicit edit signal. As a reliable edit 
signal has yet to be found, we take it as our problem to 
find the site of the repair automatically. 
It is the case, however, that cues to repair exist over 
a range of syllables. Research in speech production 
has shown that repairs tend to be marked prosodically 
\[8\] and there is perceptual evidence from work using 
lowpass-filtered speech that human listeners can detect 
the occurrence of a repair in the absence of segmental 
information \[9\]. 
In the sections that follow, we describe in detail our cor- 
pus of spontaneous speech data and present an analysis 
of the repair phenomena observed. In addition, we de- 
scribe ways in which pattern matching, syntactic and 
semantic anMysis, and acoustic analysis can be helpful 
in detecting and correcting these repairs. We use pattern 
matching to determine an initial set of possible repairs; 
we then apply information from syntactic, semantic, and 
acoustic analyses to distinguish actual repairs from false 
positives. 
2. THE CORPUS 
The data we are analyzing were collected at six sites 1 
as part of DARPA's Spoken Language Systems project. 
The corpus contains digitized waveforms and transcrip- 
tions of a large number of sessions in which subjects 
made air travel plans using a computer. In the majority 
of sessions, data were collected in a Wizard of Oz setting, 
in which subjects were led to believe they were talking to 
a computer, but in which a human actually interpreted 
and responded to queries. In a small portion of the ses- 
sions, data were collected using SRI's Spoken Language 
System \[12\]), in which no human intervention was in- 
1The sites were: AT&T, Bolt Beranek and Newman, Carnegie 
Mellon University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, SRI In- 
ternational, and Texas Instruments, Inc. 
419 
volved. Relevant o the current paper is the fact that 
although the speech was spontaneous, it was somewhat 
planned (subjects pressed a button to begin speaking to 
the system) and the transcribers who produced lexical 
transcriptions of the sessions were instructed to mark 
words they inferred were verbally deleted by the speaker 
with special symbols. For further description of the cor- 
pus, see MADCOW \[10\]. 
3. CHARACTERIST ICS  AND 
DISTRIBUT ION OF  REPAIRS  
Of the ten thousand sentences in our corpus, 607 con- 
tained repairs. We found that of sentences longer than 
nine words, 10% contained repairs. While this is lower 
than rates reported elsewhere for human-human dialog 
(Levelt \[7\] reports a rate of 34%), it is still large enough 
to be significant. And, as system developers move to- 
ward more closely modeling human-human i teraction, 
the percentage is likely to rise. 
3 .1  Notat ion  
In order to classify these repairs, and to facilitate com- 
munication among the authors, it was necessary for us to 
develop a notational system that would: (1) be relatively 
simple, (2) capture sufficient detail, and (3) describe the 
I want ti- 
M1- 
what 
M1 
show me flights 
M1 
I want a flight 
M1 
I want to leave 
R1 
what are 
M~ M2 
... fly to boston 
R1 M, 
... fly from boston 
M~ R1 
what are 
X X 
flights to boston. 
M1 
what are the fares 
M1 
dMly flights 
X M1 
one way flight 
Z X M1 
depart before ... 
R1 
what are the fares 
M1 M2 
from boston 
R~ M~ 
from denver 
M~ R~ 
are there any flights 
vast majority of repairs observed. The notation is de- 
scribed fully in \[2\]. 
The basic aspects of the notation include marking the 
interruption point, its extent, and relevant correspon- 
dences between words in the region. To mark the site of 
a repair, corresponding to Hindle's "edit signal" \[5\], we 
use a vertical bar (I). To express the notion that words 
on one side of the repair correspond to words on the 
other, we use a combination of a letter plus a numerical 
index. The letter M indicates that two words match ex- 
actly. R indicates that the second of the two words was 
intended by the speaker to replace the first. The two 
words must be similar, either of the same lexical cate- 
gory, or morphological variants of the same base form 
(including contraction pairs like I/ I 'd). Any other word 
withi, a repair is notated with X. A hyphen affixed to 
a symbol indicates a word fragment. In addition, cer- 
tain cue words, such as "sorry" or "oops" (marked with 
CR) as well as filled pauses (CF) are also labeled if they 
occur immediately before the site of a repair. 
3 .2  D is t r ibut ion  
While only 607 sentences contained eletions, some sen- 
tences contained more than one, for a total of 646 dele- 
tions. Table 2 gives the breakdown of deletions by 
length, where length is defined as the number of con- 
secutive deleted words or word fragments. Most of the 
deletions were fairly short. One or two word deletions ac- 
counted for 82% of the data. We categorized the length 
1 and length 2 repairs according to their transcriptions. 
The results are summarized in Table 3. For the pur- 
pose of simplicity, we have in this table combined cases 
involving fragments (which always occurred as the sec- 
ond word) with their associated full-word patterns. The 
overall rate of fragments for the length 2 repairs was 
34%. 
4. S IMPLE  PATTERN MATCHING 
We analyzed a subset of 607 sentences containing repairs 
and concluded that certain simple pattern-matching 
techniques could successfully detect a number of them. 
Deletion Length Occurrences Percentage 
1 376 59% 
2 154 24% 
3 52 8% 
4 25 4% 
5 23 4% 
6+ 16 3% 
Table 1: Examples of Notation Table 2: Distribution of Repairs by Length 
420 
Type Pattern Frequency 
Length 1 Repairs 
Fragments M1- ,  R i - ,  X -  61% 
Repeats M1 {M1 16% 
Insertions M1 \[ X1 ... XiM1 7% 
Replacement R1 \[R1 9% 
Other X\[X 5% 
Length 2 Repairs 
Repeats M1 M2 {M1 M2 28% 
Replace 2nd M1 R1 I M1 R1 27% 
Insertions M1M2IM1X1 . . .XiM2 19% 
Replace 1st R1 Mi JR1 M1 10% 
Other ...\[... 17% 
Table 3: Distribution of Repairs by Type 
The pattern matching component reported on here looks 
for the following kinds of subsequences: 
stems largely from the overlap of related patterns. Many 
sentences contain a subsequence of words that match 
not one but several patterns. For example the phrase 
"FLIGHT <word> FLIGHT" matches three different 
patterns: 
show the FLIGHT earliest FLIGHT 
M1 { X M1 
show the FLIGHT time FLIGHT date 
M1 Ri I M1 R1 
show the delta FLIGHT united FLIGHT 
R1 M1 I R1 M1 
Each of these sentences i a false positive for the other 
two patterns. Despite these problems of overlap, pattern 
matching is useful in reducing the set of candidate sen- 
tences to be processed for repairs. Instead of applying 
detailed and possibly time-intensive analysis techniques 
to 10,000 sentences, we can increase fficiency by limit- 
ing ourselves to the 500 sentences selected by the pattern 
matcher, which has (at least on one measure) a 75% re- 
call rate. The repair sites hypothesized by the pattern 
matcher constitute useful input for further processing 
based on other sources of information. 
? Simple syntactic anomalies, such as "a the" or "to 
from". 
? Sequences of identical words such as "<I> <would> 
<like> <a> <book> I would like a flight ..." 
? Matching single words surrounding a cue word 
like "sorry," for example "from" in this case: "I 
would like to see the flights <from> <philadelphia> 
<i 'm> <sorry> from denver to philadelphia." 
Of the 406 sentences with nontrivial repairs in our data 
(more editing necessary than deleting fragments and 
filled pauses), the program successfully corrected 177. 
It found 132 additional sentences with repairs but made 
the wrong correction. There were 97 sentences that con- 
tained repairs which it did not find. In addition, out of 
the 10,517 sentence corpus (10 ,718-  201 trivial), it in- 
correctly hypothesized that an additional 191 contained 
repairs. Thus of 10,517 sentences of varying lengths, it 
pulled out 500 as possibly containing a repair and missed 
97 sentences actually containing a repair. Of the 500 that 
it proposed as containing a repair, 62% actually did and 
38% did not. Of the 62% that had repairs, it made the 
appropriate correction for 57%. 
These numbers how that although pattern matching is 
useful in identifying possible repairs, it is less success- 
ful at making appropriate corrections. This problem 
5. NATURAL LANGUAGE 
CONSTRAINTS 
Here we describe xperiments conducted to measure the 
effectiveness of a natural anguage processing system in 
distinguishing repairs from false positives. A false pos- 
itive is a repair pattern that incorrectly matches a sen- 
tence or part of a sentence. We conducted the experi- 
ments using the syntactic and semantic omponents of 
the Gemini natural anguage processing system. Gem- 
ini is an extensive reimplementation f the Core Lan- 
guage Engine \[1\]. It includes modular syntactic and se- 
mantic components, integrated into an efficient all-paths 
bottom-up arser \[11\]). Gemini was trained on a 2,200 
sentence subset of the full 10,718-sentence corpus (only 
those annotated as class A or D). Since this subset ex- 
cluded the unanswerable (class X) sentences, Gemini's 
coverage on the full corpus is only an estimated 70% for 
syntax, and 50% for semantics. 2 Nonetheless, the re- 
sults reported here are promising, and should improve 
as syntactic and semantic overage increase. 
We tested Gemini on a subset of the data that the pat- 
2Gemini's yntactic overage of the 2,200 sentence dataset i  
was trained on (the set of annotated and answerable MADCOW 
queries) is approximately 91%, while its semantic overage is ap- 
proximately 77%. On a fair test of the February 1992 test set, 
Gemini's yntactic overage was 87% and semantic overage was 
71%. 
421 
Syntax Only 
Marked Marked 
as  as  
Repair False Positive 
Repairs 68 (96%) 56 (30%) 
False Positives 3 (4%) 131 (70%) 
Syntax and Semantics 
Marked Marked 
as  as  
Repair False Positive 
Repairs 64 (85%) 23 (20%) 
False Positives 11 (15%) 90 (80%) 
Table 4: Syntax and Semantics Results 
tern matcher eturned as likely to contain a repair. We 
excluded all sentences that contained fragments, result- 
ing in a dataset of 335 sentences, of which 179 contained 
repairs and 176 contained false positives. The approach 
was as follows: for each sentence, parsing was attempted. 
If parsing succeeded, the sentence was marked as a false 
positive. If parsing did not succeed, then pattern match- 
ing was used to detect possible repairs, and the edits as- 
sociated with the repairs were made. Parsing was then 
reattempted. If parsing succeeded at this point, the sen- 
tence was marked as a repair. Otherwise, it was marked 
as  NO OP IN ION.  
Since multiple repairs and false positives can occur in 
the same sentence, the pattern matching process is con- 
strained to prefer fewer repairs to more repairs, and 
shorter epairs to longer repairs. This is done to favor an 
analysis that deletes the fewest words from a sentence. 
It is often the case that more drastic repairs would result 
in a syntactically and semantically well-formed sentence, 
but not the sentence that the speaker intended. For in- 
stance, the sentence "show me <flights> daily flights to 
boston" could be repaired by deleting the words "flights 
daily", and would then yield a grammatical sentence, but 
in this case the speaker intended to delete only "flights." 
Table 4 shows the results of these experiments. We ran 
them two ways: once using syntactic constraints alone 
and again using both syntactic and semantic onstraints. 
As can be seen, Gemini is quite accurate at detecting 
a repair, although somewhat less accurate at detecting 
a false positive. Furthermore, in cases where Gemini 
detected a repair, it produced the intended correction 
in 62 out of 68 cases for syntax alone, and in 60 out of 
64 cases using combined syntax and semantics. In both 
cases, a large number of sentences (29% for syntax, 50% 
for semantics) received a NO OPINION evaluation. The 
NO OPINION cases were evenly split between repairs and 
false positives in both tests. 
The main points to be noted from Table 4 are that with 
syntax alone, the system is quite accurate in detecting 
repairs, and with syntax and semantics working together, 
it is accurate at detecting false positives. However, since 
the coverage of syntax and semantics will always be lower 
than the coverage of syntax alone, we cannot compare 
these rates directly. 
6. ACOUSTICS  
A third source of information that can be helpful in de- 
tecting repairs is acoustics. While acoustics alone cannot 
tackle th e problem of locating repairs, since any prosodic 
patterns found in repairs will be found in fluent speech, 
acoustic information can be quite effective when com- 
bined with other sources of information, particularly, 
pattern matching. 
Our approach in studying the ways in which acoustics 
might be helpful was to begin by looking at two pat- 
terns conducive to acoustic measurement and compar- 
ison. First, we focused on patterns in which there is 
only one matched word, and in which the two occur- 
rences of that word are either adjacent or separated by 
only one word. Matched words allow for comparisons 
of word duration; proximity helps avoid variability due 
to global intonation contours not associated with the 
patterns themselves. We present here analyses for the 
Mi\[M1 ("flights for <one> one person") and MI\[XM1 
("<flight> earliest flight") repairs, and their associated 
false positives ("u s air five one one," "a flight on flight 
number five one one," respectively). 
Second, we have done a preliminary analysis of repairs 
in which a word such as "no" or "well" was present 
as an editing expression \[6\] at the point of interrup- 
tion ("...flights <between> <boston> <and> <dallas> 
<no> between oakland and boston"). False positives for 
these cases are instances in which the cue word functions 
in its usual lexical sense ("I want to leave boston no later 
than one p m."). Hirshberg and Litman \[3\] have shown 
that cue words that function differently can be distin- 
guished perceptually by listeners on the basis of prosody. 
Thus, we sought to determine whether acoustic analysis 
could help in deciding, when such words were present, 
whether or not they marked the interruption point of a 
repair. 
In both analyses, a number of features were measured 
to allow for comparisons between the words of interest. 
422 
False Positives 
(N--24) 
Repairs 
(N=12) 
Pauses before/ 
after X 
before after 
X X 
(only) (only) 
.08 .58 
.83 .00 
F0 
of X 
greater than 
F0 of 
1st ~I1 
.08 
.92 
less than 
F0 of 
1st M1 
.42 
.08 
Table 5: Acoustic Characteristics of M1 IXM1 Repairs 
Pauses after 
X (only) 
and 
FO of X less than 
FO of 1st M1 
Pauses before 
X (only) 
and 
F0 of X greater than 
F0 of 1st M1 
False Positives .58 .00 
Repairs .00 .92 
Table 6: Combining Acoustic Characteristics of 
M11XM1 Repairs 
Word onsets and offsets were labeled by inspection of 
waveforms and parameter files (pitch tracks and spec- 
trograms) obtained using the Entropic Waves software 
package. Files with questionable pitch tracks were ex- 
cluded from the analysis. An average F0 value for words 
of interest was determined by simply averaging, within a 
labeled word, all 10-ms frame values having a probability 
of voicing above 0.20. 
In examining the MilM1 repair pattern, we found that 
the strongest distinguishing cue between the repairs 
(g  = 20) and the false positives (g  = 20) was the in- 
terval between the offset of the first word and the onset 
of the second. False positives had a mean gap of 42 
ms (s.d. = 55.8) as opposed to 380 ms (s.d. = 200.4) 
for repairs. A second difference found between the two 
groups was that, in the case of repairs, there was a sta- 
tistically reliable reduction in duration for the second 
occurrence of M1, with a mean difference of 53.4 ms. 
However because false positives howed no reliable dif- 
ference for word duration, this was a much less useful 
predictor than gap duration. F0 of the matched words 
was not helpful in separating repairs from false positives; 
both groups showed a highly significant correlation for, 
and no significant difference between, the mean F0 of the 
matched words. 
and rarely before the X in the false positives. Note that 
values do not add up to 100% because cases of no pauses, 
or pauses on both sides are not included in the table. A 
second distinguishing characteristic was the F0 value of 
X. For repairs, the inserted word was nearly always 
higher in F0 than the preceding M1; for false positives, 
this increase in F0 was rarely observed. Table 6 shows 
the results of combining the acoustic constraints in Ta- 
ble 5. As can be seen, although acoustic features may 
be helpful individually, certain combinations of features 
widen the gap between observed rates of repairs and false 
positives possessing the relevant set of features. 
Finally, in a preliminary study of the cue words "no" 
and "well," we compared 9 examples of these words at 
the site of a repair to 15 examples of the same words 
occurring in fluent speech. We found that these groups 
were quite distinguishable on the basis of simple prosodic 
features. Table 7 shows the percentage of repairs versus 
false positives characterized by a clear rise or fall in F0, 
lexical stress, and continuity of the speech immediately 
preceding and following the editing expression ("contin- 
uous" means there is no silent pause on either side of 
the cue word). As 'can be seen, at least for this limited 
data set, cue words marking repairs were quite distin- 
guishable from those same words found in fluent strings 
on the basis of simple prosodic features. 
A different set of features was found to be useful in dis- 
tinguishing repairs from false positives for the M11XM1 
pattern. These features are shown in Table 5. Cell val- 
ues are percentages of repairs or false positives that pos- 
sessed the characteristics indicated in the columns. De- 
spite the small data set, some suggestive trends emerge. 
For example, for cases in which there was a pause (de- 
fined for purposes of this analysis as a silence of greater 
than 200 ms) on only one side of the inserted word, the 
pause was never after the insertion (X) for the repairs 
F0 F0 Lexical Continuous 
rise fall stress speech 
Repairs .00 1.00 .00 .00 
False positives .87 .00 .87 .73 
Table 7: Acoustic Characteristics of Cue Words 
Although one cannot draw conclusions from such limited 
423 
data sets, such results are nevertheless interesting. They 
illustrate that acoustics can indeed play a role in dis- 
tinguishing repairs from false positives, but only if each 
pattern is examined individually, to determine which fea- 
tures to use, and how to combine them. Analysis of addi- 
tional patterns and access to a larger database of repairs 
will help us better determine the ways in which acoustics 
can play a role in detection of repairs. 
7. CONCLUSION 
In summary, disfluencies occur at high enough rates in 
human-computer dialog to merit consideration. In con- 
trast to earlier approaches, we have made it our goal to 
detect and correct repairs automatically, without assum- 
ing an explicit edit signal. Without such an edit signal, 
however, repairs are easily confused both with false pos- 
itives and with other repairs. Preliminary results show 
that pattern matching is effective at detecting repairs 
without excessive overgeneration. Our syntax-only ap- 
proach is quite accurate at detecting repairs and correct- 
ing them. Acoustics is a third source of information that 
can be tapped to provide corroborating evidence about 
a hypothesis, given the output of a pattern matcher. 
While none of these knowledge sources by itself is suffi- 
cient, we propose that by combining them, and possibly 
others, we can greatly enhance our ability to detect and 
correct repairs. As a next step, we intend to explore ad- 
ditional aspects of the syntax and semantics of repairs, 
analyze further acoustic patterns, and examine corpora 
with higher rates of disfluencies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Patti  Price for her helpful com- 
ments on earlier drafts, as well as for her participation 
in the development of the notational system used. We 
would also like to thank Robin Lickley for his helpful 
feedback on the acoustics ection. 
REFERENCES 
1. Alshawi, H, Carter, D., van Eijck, J., Moore, R. C., 
Moran, D. B., Pereira, F., Pulman, S., and A. Smith 
(1988) Research Programme In Natural Language Pro- 
cessing: July 1988 Annual Report, SRI International 
Tech Note, Cambridge, England. 
2. Bear, J., Dowding, J., Price, P., and E. E. Shriberg 
(1992) "Labeling Conventions for Notating Grammat- 
ical Repairs in Speech," unpublished manuscript, o ap- 
pear as an SRI Tech Note. 
3. Hirschberg, J. and D. Litman (1987) "Now Let's Talk 
About Now: Identifying Cue Phrases Intonationally," 
Proceedings of the ACL, pp. 163-171. 
4. Carbonell, J. and P. Hayes, P., (1983) "Recovery Strate- 
gies for Parsing Extragrammatical Language," Ameri- 
can Journal of Computational Linguistics, Vol. 9, Num- 
bers 3-4, pp. 123-146. 
5. Hindle, D. (1983) "Deterministic Parsing of Syntactic 
Non-fluencies," Proceedings of the A CL, pp. 123-128. 
6. Hockett, C. (1967) "Where the Tongue Slips, There Slip 
I," in To Honor Roman Jakobson: Vol. 2, The Hague: 
Mouton. 
7. Levelt, W. (1983) "Monitoring and self-repair in 
speech," Cognition, Vol. 14, pp. 41-104. 
8. Levelt, W., and A. Cutler (1983) "Prosodic Marking in 
Speech Repair," Journal of Semantics, Vol. 2, pp. 205- 
217. 
9. Lickley, R., R. Shillcock, and E. Bard (1991) "Process- 
ing Disfluent Speech: How and when are disfluencies 
found?" Proceedings of the Second European Confer- 
ence on Speech Communication and Technology, Vol. 3, 
pp. 1499-1502. 
10. MADCOW (1992) "Multi-site Data Collection for a 
Spoken Language Corpus," Proceedings of the DARPA 
Speech and Natural Language Workshop, February 23- 
26, 1992. 
11. Moore, R. and J. Dowding (1991) "Efficient Bottom-up 
Parsing," Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, February 19-22, 1991, pp. 200-203. 
12. Shriberg, E., Wade, E., and P. Price (1992) "Human- 
Machine Problem Solving Using Spoken Language Sys- 
tems (SLS): Factors Affecting Performance and User 
Satisfaction," Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, February 23-26, 1992. 
13. Ward, W. (1991) "Evaluation of the CMU ATIS Sys- 
tem," Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, February 19-22, 1991, pp. 101-105. 
424 
