SESSION 13: PROSODY 
Patti Price 1 and Julia Hirschberg 2 
1SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Avenue, EJ 133, Menlo Park, CA 94306. 
2AT&T Bell Laboratories, 600 Mountain Avenue, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 
ABSTRACT 
Tho aim of this introductory s~tion is to set the context for Ses- 
sion 13: Prosody. It will do so by defining some basic terms, by 
considering the status of current research on prosody, and by out- 
lining the papers in the session and how they contribute to and 
complement previous work in the area. 
1. What is Prosody? 
Prosody, perceptually, can be thought of as the relative tem- 
poral groupings of words and the relative prominence of 
certain syllables within these groupings. Acoustic orre- 
lates of prosody include patterns of relative duration of seg- 
ments and of silences, fundamental frequency, amplitude, 
and "vowel color." Phonological variation is related in part 
to prosodic structure and is sometimes also considered part 
of prosody. The bulk of the research on prosody, in the liter- 
ature as well as in this session, is focused on the primary 
acoustic orrelates of prosody, namely patterns of funda- 
mental frequency and duration. 
It is appropriate oend this workshop on this topic, since 
prosody, perhaps more than any other area in spoken lan- 
guage systems, requires the involvement ofboth speech 
and natural language. Prosody can provide for natural lan- 
guage a source of acoustic information bearing on higher 
linguistic levels. Further, this information is largely unrep- 
resented in text. One of the questions addressed in this ses- 
sion is: How can the acoustic attributes of prosody be 
transmitted not just to a speech recognizer (which is used to 
interpreting acoustic information), but also to natural lan- 
guage understanding components? The temporal (group- 
ing) aspect of prosody appears to be related to the syntactic 
structure of an utterance, and one could imagine acompo- 
nent that would pass temporal information to a parser. The 
prominence aspect of prosody appears to be related to the 
semantic and discourse/pragmatic s ructure, and one could 
imagine a component that would pass prominence informa- 
tion to these levels. However, both grouping and promi- 
nence relationships are involved to some extent in all 
linguistic levels, and a more complex architecture is 
required. 
Prosody is an area ripe for further esearch since it requires 
the integration of information from all levels, from the 
acoustics through morphology, syntax, semantics and prag- 
matics. Few, if any, researchers are comfortable in all these 
areas, and the work requires collaboration across traditional 
divisions among disciplines, as these papers how. 
2. HOW WELL DOES THIS SESSION 
REPRESENT THE RESEARCH ON 
PROSODY? 
In this session, in contrast to historical trends in prosody 
research, there is a focus on using statistical and corpus- 
based techniques. Further, in this session, these techniques 
are used not only to model prosody, but also to acquire 
information about prosody and its role in language. The 
traditional literature on prosody, while lacking this statisti- 
cal aspect, does include much that is not covered in this 
session. Much previous prosody research as been from 
two rather different traditions, neither of which overlaps 
greatly with the content of this session. The two traditions 
are (1) speech science, which has focused on the search for 
acoustic orrelates of linguistic entities (such as stress and 
accent) in laboratory conditions, and (2) linguistics, which 
has produced a volume of intuitive, anecdotal ttributions 
of prosody's role in higher linguistic levels, such as prag- 
matics and discourse. 
Growing interest in prosody research, due in part to the 
demands of the recent merging of speech and natural lan- 
guage, has been somewhat limited by the lack of an agreed 
upon convention for prosodic notation. However, as men- 
tioned in the paper in this session by Silverman, this issue 
is currently being addressed, with quite encouraging 
results. A draft notation was developed last fall by a group 
of prosody researchers from a number of academic and 
industrial research laboratories. The draft notation is cur- 
rently being evaluated, and a second meeting of the group 
will occur in early April to refine the system and to plan for 
future needs. 
415 
In brief, the prosody notation project consists of researchers 
meeting periodically and exchanging volumes of email. 
The goal of the group is to define a "core" notational sys- 
tem with which spoken English can be transcribed quickly 
and with good agreement across labelers. Agreeing on a 
standard with these characteristics means that large corpora 
could be labeled with prosodic and other linguistic nota- 
tions (e.g., those of the Penn Treebank). It also means that 
what would otherwise have been independent corpora can 
now be shared, and that researchers can much more easily 
test hypotheses on new and larger corpora. The existence of 
large corpora will also encourage the further development 
of statistical methods for modeling and for acquiring 
knowledge. The notion of a "core" system is meant o 
imply that different researchers can add different details to 
the "core," and thus reap the benefits of the shared portion 
while not limiting research to those aspects that all can 
agree on now. 
It is hoped that the existence of large labeled corpora can 
help bridge the traditional conflict between using dam in 
which known sources of variability are strictly controlled 
(e.g., readings of isolated utterances in a laboratory envi- 
ronment) versus using naturally occurring data (which may 
form a sample too small and too variable to be used for any- 
thing other than impressionistic analysis). Such corpora 
should also encourage work in evaluation, since experimen- 
tal hypotheses reported by one researcher can be tested by 
another researcher on the same corpus or on a new corpus 
labeled according to the same conventions. 
In sum, this session does not represent the field of prosody 
research as a whole. Rather, it represents hat part of pros- 
ody research which hardly existed previously, but which is 
currently growing rapidly. In particular, this session 
includes tatistical methods, corpora-based approaches, 
analyses of field data and spontaneous speech phenomena. 
These are areas that have previously played a small or non- 
existent role, and in which there are likely to be some 
important new results. 
3. OVERVIEW OF THE PAPERS IN 
THIS SESSION 
The first paper in this session, by Shriberg et al, focuses on 
the prosody of speech and language repairs in spontaneous 
speech using prosody as one knowledge source. The paper 
introduces a notational system for categorizing and analyz- 
ing repairs, discusses the distribution of these repairs and 
proposes an initial algorithm for "repairing" the repairs. 
The algorithm isbased on pattern matching in combination 
with other knowledge sources including syntax, semantics 
and acoustics. 
Abney's paper concerns the role of prosody and syntax. 
This paper points out, as others have noted, that phrase 
structure and prosodic structure are not identical, but nei- 
ther are they entirely unrelated. The paper describes a par- 
ticular approach to syntactic analysis that appears to 
provide interesting correlations between syntactic and pro- 
sodic structure. The study evaluates the hypothesized struc- 
tures on two data sets, including one from the ATIS domain. 
While it is true that we need an increased understanding of 
the relationship between prosody and syntax (both for syn- 
thesis and for understanding), wealso need to address the 
fact that given a syntactic structure, there is some choice 
about how to assign a prosodic structure. The paper by 
Ostendorf and Veillenx describes a strategy that models the 
choice, or variability, in prosodic structure. The proposed 
strategy, an extension of work done by Wang and Hirsch- 
berg, is used in synthesis as well as analysis (using an anal- 
ysis-by-synthesis approach). The new contribution is a 
richer set of segmentation (grouping) levels to be modeled. 
The paper by Silverman and others from Nynex focuses on 
locating discourse-relevant information-bearing words 
within an utterance. This concept is similar, but not identi- 
cal, to what may be called discourse "focus." The study is a 
field analysis using actual directory assistance calls, and 
compares the use of prosody in read and in spontaneous 
speech, using the draft prosody notation mentioned earlier. 
This study, like others at the workshop, point out potential 
differences in these two speech styles, differences that need 
to be better understood if we are to adequately model 
human speech. 
At the workshop, Mark Liberman reported a related study 
of calls left on answering machines compared to those made 
to people. The calls left on the machine were similar pro- 
sodically to the read style in the Nynex study. This appears 
to be evidence that the change in prosody may be related 
more to the interactivity of the situation than to the read vs. 
spontaneous contrast. Although most read speech is non- 
interactive, spontaneous speech can be either interactive (as 
in the people talking to the Nynex simulated understanding 
machine) or non-interactive (as in talking to an answering 
machine). 
The last paper in the session, by Hirschberg and Grosz, 
takes the position that similar models of prosody should be 
used for synthesis and understanding. The study uses Grosz 
and Sidner's discourse model for segmentation a d attempts 
to correlate the resulting structures with various prosodic 
attributes. Seven labelers are used, some of whom seg- 
mented based on the text only, and others who segmented 
on the basis of both text and through listening. The inter- 
labeler eliability and the correlations between acoustic and 
discourse attributes of prosody are results important for 
those who want o develop spoken language systems as well 
as those who want to better understand human communica- 
tion processes. 
The use of decision trees, evident in this session as well as 
in the statistical language modeling session of this work- 
shop, is a growing research area. Decision trees have the 
interesting property of providing astraightforward mecha- 
416 
nism for combining the virtues of probabilities with knowl- 
edge from role-based approaches. Because the structure of 
the knowledge from the rules is preserved, these methods 
can be used not only to model the phenomena of interest, 
but also to test hypotheses and to gain knowledge about 
which information sources are providing the most gain in 
the models. 
During the discussion period for this session, Bill Fisher 
pointed out that one of the utterances inthe test set ("Does 
this flight leave on Friday or Saturday") had to be marked 
class X (not evaluable) because the lexical SNOR was 
ambiguous. The sentence could, however, be disambigu- 
ated on the basis of its prosody (either by listening or by 
observing the .sro transcription). Throwing out sentences 
that prosody could disarnbiguate discourages work on inte- 
grating prosody in our systems. Bob Moore pointed out a 
related issue: the impoverished representation f disfluen- 
cies in the lexical SNOR representation. This is important 
since disfluencies form a significant portion of the errorful 
sentences inour systems. Our representations and our eval- 
uations are not yet in phase with our research goals. 
We could address these issues by: (1) havmg the annotators 
listen to sentences before classification (which is costly if 
done for every sentence), (2) developing a new transcrip- 
tion level that includes more than the lexical SNOR but less 
than the .sro transcriptions, or(3) providing two .cat files 
for some utterances (one categorization  the basis of lexi- 
cal SNOR and the other on the basis of the .sro file). These 
issues hould be addressed by the MADCOW committee in
cooperation with the Principles of Interpretation committee. 
As pointed out by Hirschberg and Grosz, it is of interest to 
know what different interpretations may be derived on the 
basis of text alone versus text and speech. We propose that a 
sample of the sentences be annotated from speech, so that at 
least we know what is being missed by relying on the text 
alone. 
4. HOW DO THESE PAPERS FIT INTO THE 
REST OF PROSODY RESEARCH? 
These papers differ from traditional prosody research in 
their focus on statistical nd corpus-based approaches, but 
they also differ in other ways. Table 1 outlines the areas 
covered by most previous work in prosody. The traditional 
linguistic divisions are labeled own the left-most column, 
and the other column headings address the traditional divi- 
sion between perception (analysis, understanding) onthe 
one hand and production (synthesis, generation) on the 
other. The perception area consists of two columns, for read 
and spontaneous styles. The production column is not so 
subdivided because we have not yet addressed the issue of 
generating spontaneous speech, though abetter understand- 
ing of these mechanisms could eventually ead to more nat- 
ural synthesis. The read speech column is located closer to 
the production column since this style is closer to what is 
currently used in synthesis. 
Table 1: How do these papers fit into the rest of prosody research? 
Source of  Production Perception Perception 
information (read speech) (spontaneous speech) 
pragmatic 
discourse 
semantic 
syntactic 
mo~h~o~c~ 
le~cN 
phonetic 
acoustic 
L 
2 
:~iiii;ii!i!iiiiiiiiiiii!iil~ 
.iiiii!::':':!!i!!!i!!!i!iiiii!!i ~ 
4 1' 
1 
4 
417 
The group of researchers dealing with speech and language 
is not culturally homogeneous. Even among those with 
degrees :in the same subject area (e.g., linguistics), special- 
ists from different sub-disciplines manifest significant cul- 
tural differences inbackground, strategies, beliefs and 
goals. The shaded areas of Table 1 indicate where tradi- 
tional research on prosody has focused its efforts. Please 
forgive any biases in this interpretation which is meant o 
be suggestive only. 
There is much work in the pragmatics literature, which 
draws greatly from semantics and which touches on syntax, 
but seldom has involved acoustic analyses. On the other 
hand, the tradition of speech science (which includes lin- 
guists of the more phonetic ilk) has focused agreat deal of 
attention on the production and perception of read speech 
styles. This work occasionally touches on syntactic issues, 
but largely ignores the higher linguistic levels as well as 
issues related to spontaneous speech. Largely, the past work 
in prosody has been performed by two different communi- 
ties with goals and results omewhat offset from one 
another. 
The papers in this session start o fill in some of the gaps in 
the field of prosody. For example, the Shriberg et al paper 
(labeled '1' in the table) begins to integrate aspects of 
acoustics, yntax and semantics for spontaneous speech. 
Abney's paper (labeled '2' in the table) considers syntax 
and some aspects of acoustics as related principally to pro- 
duction. The Ostendorf and Veilleux paper (labeled '3' in 
the table) integrates aspects of acoustics and syntax in a rep- 
resentation neutral with respect to perception and produc- 
tion. The paper by Silverman et al (labeled '4' in the table) 
integrates aspects of acoustics and pragmatics in read and 
spontaneous speech. The Hirschberg and Grosz paper, 
(labeled '5' in the table) strives for a representation neutral 
with respect to production and perception and integrates 
aspects of pragmatics and discourse with acoustics. 
As illustrated in Table 1, the papers in this session represent 
rather new research areas and begin to fill out the field of 
prosody. We are very hopeful that this area will provide 
results that will improve our understanding of human com- 
munication, and that will be useful in the development of
spoken language systems. However, though these papers 
begin to fill some gaps in our understanding of prosody and 
its relationship to other areas of speech and language, it is 
clear that far more research isneeded. To fully understand 
the nature of prosody, and to be able to use it effectively, we 
still have a good deal more integration work to achieve. 
418 
