Experiences Collecting Genuine Spoken Enquiries 
using WOZ Techniques 
Roger Moore and Angela Morris 
Speech Research  Un i t  
Defence  Research  Agency  Ma lvern  (RSRE)  
St. Andrews  Road,  Ma lvern ,  Worcs. ,  WR14 3PS,  Un i ted  K ingdom 
ABSTRACT 3. THE WIZARD 
This paper presents SRU's first experiences collecting un- 
scripted speech data using the 'Wizard of Oz' technique to 
provide a genuine telephone-based route planning service. 
Although only a limited quantity of data has been collected so 
far, several valuable insights into the nature of future speech- 
based human-machine interaction have been obtained. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Many laboratories have now used the so-called 'Wizard 
of Oz' (WOZ) technique for eliciting spontaneous spoken 
human-machine dialogue in order (i) to study the result- 
ing speech and (ii) to evaluate the necessary speech tech- 
nology and natural anguage processing systems \[1\]. The 
technique is particularly valuable because it enables user 
behaviour to be studied under conditions which are not 
constrained by the limitations of current technological 
(or theoretical) capabilities. 
However, many such exercises involve 'volunteer' users 
whose behaviour is prescribed by a pre-prepared sce- 
nario \[6\] thereby removing one potentially crucial aspect 
of human-machine interaction, namely any behavioural 
events which are unique to genuine (i.e. motivated) and 
un-preprepared transactions \[4\]. 
This paper presents $RU's first experiences collecting 
unscripted speech data using the WOZ technique by the 
provision of a genuine voice-based telephone nquiry ser- 
vice to personnel on the RSRE site. 
2. THE TASK DOMAIN 
The enquiry service was configured around a commer- 
cially available route planning software package. The 
package runs on a PC and contains map and gazetteer 
information covering the majority of the United King- 
dom. Its main feature is its ability to find the shortest 
and/or quickest routes between two locations in accor- 
dance with a range of specifyable variables uch as pref- 
erences for certain classes of roads and driving speeds. 
Alternative routes can also be found. 
Clearly the behaviour of the wizard will very much influ- 
ence the nature of the resulting corpus, and constraints 
(such as restricting the vocabulary) can be placed on a 
wizard in a variety of ways \[2\]. 
However, in order not to restrict or influence callers' be- 
haviour, it was decided that very few restrictions should 
be placed on the wizard apart from the use of a stock 
opening phrase and the provision of a few standard reply 
templates imply in order to reduce the wizard's work 
load. 
In general, the design for the wizard's behaviour was 
based on information derived from the procedures em- 
ployed by a commercial company who already provide 
a route planning service over the telephone (in this case 
the enquiries being made by tone dialling) based on the 
same software package. 
Every attempt was made to remove all distinctly hu- 
man characteristics from the wizard's speech such as 
false starts and stutters, and great care was taken to 
ensure that breath noise and key clicks were not audible 
to the caller. 
4. THE EXPERIMENTAL 
CONFIGURATION 
As well as implementing a genuine telephone-based n- 
quiry service using WOZ techniques, it was also de- 
cided to compare wizard-type transactions with normal 
human-human i teraction for the same task. Hence the 
experimental set-up was configured to operate with two 
incoming telephone lines - one assigned to the normal 
human operator and one assigned to the wizard. Ap- 
propriate quipment was installed to provide automatic 
detection of incoming calls and initiation of recording 
and digitisation. 
In order for there to be minimal differences between 
the operator's behaviour in both the human-human and 
human-wizard conditions, the same operator was used in 
each case. As a consequence the only difference between 
61 
the two conditions was that the wizard's natural voice 
was modified using a 'voice disguise' unit. This device 
changed the talker's pitch and then combined the natu- 
ral and altered signals to produce a highly synchronised 
duet effect. It was found that this provided a voice which 
was unnatural (indeed 'robotic') and yet fully intelligible 
\[5\]. 
The latter point was considered very important since it 
was anticipated that the quality of the wizard's voice 
would affect the user's perception of the system's capa- 
bilities; high voice quality being likely to suggest a sys- 
tem of high capabilities while a low voice quality would 
not only imply a system of poor capabilities but might 
lead to excessive confirmatory dialogue i f  the user had 
difficulty understanding the response \[2\]. 
The service was made available on each line for alternate 
half day sessions from 10 a.m. to  12 a.m. and 2 p.m. 
to 4 p.m. Whilst one number was on-line the other was 
connected to an answering machine which requested the 
caller to try the alternative number. 
The table of directions that the route planning software 
package produces is an essential part of the information 
service. To overcome the lack of screen display with a 
telephone-based service it was decided that the printed 
table could be sent to the caller through the internal 
mail system (this also served to ensure the identity and 
location of the caller was known in order to send a ques- 
tionnaire at a later stage). Callers were also given the 
option of having the route information read out during 
the call. 
The route planning package was configured to show no 
particular preference for road type and the road speeds 
were set at the national speed limits. 
5. INSTRUCTIONS TO THE 
CALLERS 
A poster advertising the service was circulated for dis- 
play on site noticeboards. Also an electronic advertise- 
ment was placed in the central computing facility. 
Since the emphasis of the exercise was to collect data 
from genuine nquiries, the advertisments made no men- 
tion of either the Speech Research Unit or of the dif- 
ference between the two available telephone numbers, 
nor did they specify that the service was experimental, 
computer-based or automatic in any way. 
On receipt of a call, the operator (in human or 
wizard mode) always used the following introductory 
announcement:- "Welcome to the route planning service 
- how can I help you?" 
MAKING A CAR JOURNEY SOON? 
CALL 1234 OR 5678 
WE CAN HELP YOU PLAN IT 
Figure 1: The advertisement for the service 
6. RESULTS 
The service went 'live' for the first time during November 
1991 but, due to the limited advertising campaign and a 
relatively small population of potential users, the num- 
ber of calls received (by the end of December 1991) was 
rather smaller than had been initially hoped for. Nev- 
ertheless, the data collected uring that period already 
capture some interesting eneral features of genuine spo- 
ken human-machine interaction. 
For example, with some calls there was considerable 
background office noise (some callers appeared to be us- 
ing loud-speaking telephones). Also, callers occasionally 
chuckled to themselves or made asides to other people 
in their vicinity (including statements along the lines of 
"Hey, I 'm talking to a machine" and constant references 
to 'it') - although this confirmed that the callers were 
convinced by the wizard's voice it also indicated that 
they believed that the system automatically knew when 
it was being addressed! Some callers interrupted the wiz- 
ard, and at least one mimicked the robotic style of the 
wizard's voice. 
It was also noticeable that, although the human-wizard 
dialogues were all concerned with planning particular 
routes, most of the human-human dialogues were about 
the nature of the service itself. In other words, the users 
who dealt with the wizard seemed to assume that such a 
system would not be able to provide explanations about 
what it could and couldn't do - and so they didn't ask. 
In summary, during the period 13th of November 1991 
to 5th of December 1991 the service received a total of 
twenty-two calls. 
The average length of a wizard operated call was two 
minutes and approximately three minutes for the human 
operated calls. 
A preliminary analysis of the transcripts produced a va- 
riety of interesting statistics on caller behaviour. In par- 
ticular it was found that, on average, there were signifi- 
62 
Wizard Operator: 
Human Operator: 
12 good calls 
3hung up 
1 gave up 
6 good calls 
Table 1: Summary of the calls. 
cantly fewer words spoken by the caller in each turn of 
the human-wizard condition than in the human-human 
condition. Also, although the rate of "uhms" and "errs" 
was about the same in both conditions, callers seemed 
to be more polite to the machine than to the human 
operator! 
CALLER BEHAVIOUR 
Average no. of turns/call: 
Average no. of words/call: 
Average no. of words/turn: 
Turns with "uhms/errs": 
Turns with "please/thankyou": 
Wizard 
31 
4.2 
12% 
27% 
Human 
18 
142 
7.9 
14% 
7% 
Table 2: Preliminary analysis of the transcripts. 
There were two interesting exceptions to the general 
statistics and the corresponding data was excluded from 
the analysis. 
In the first exception, the behaviour of one caller to the 
wizard was very different o the other human-wizard in- 
teractions but very much in line with the human-human 
dialogues. A check of the corresponding transcripts re- 
vealed that the following utterance was spoken by the 
caller at the start of the call - "Oh, sorry, it sounded 
63 
like a machine that was talking" - after which the caller 
appeared to continue with the assumption that he was 
talking to a human operator (despite the peculiar voice)! 
In the second exception, another caller, this time to the 
human operator, exhibited behaviour which was more 
in line with the human-wizard ialogues. In this case 
it transpired that the operator had forgotten to switch 
off the voice disguise unit at the very beginning of the 
call. Thus this caller seemed to believe he was talking 
to a machine even after the operator's voice suddenly 
returned to normal! 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has described SRU's first experiences collect- 
ing unscripted speech data using the Wizard of Oz tech- 
nique to provide a genuine telephone-based route plan- 
ning service. Although only a limited quantity of data 
has been collected so far, several valuable insights into 
the nature of future speech-based human-machine inter- 
action have been obtained. In particular, various practi- 
cal issues have been highlighted such as the need to han- 
dle significant background noises, spoken asides by the 
user and interruptions. Also, genuine spoken human- 
machine interaction appears to be shorter and more 
(short-term) goal directed than corresponding human- 
human dialogue. 
The service has currently been suspended temporarily 
with a view to launching a much larger exercise sometime 
in the early spring of 1992. 
References  
1. Fraser, N. M. and Gilbert, G. N. "Simulating speech 
systems", Computer Speech and Language, Vol.5, No.l, 
pp 81-99, January 1991. 
2. Moore, R. K., Tomlinson, M. J. and Morris, A. "Whither 
the wizard?", Proc. ESCA workshop on the Structure of 
MultimodM Dialogue, Maratea, Italy, 16-20 September 
1991. 
3. Polifroni, J., Seneff, S. and Zue, V. "Collection of spon- 
taneous speech for the ATIS domain and compara- 
tive analyses of data collected at MIT and Tr' ,  Proc. 
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pp 
360-365, Pacific-Grove, CA, 19-22 February 1991. 
4. Spitz, J. "Collection and analysis of data from real users: 
implications for speech recognition / understanding sys- 
tems", Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, pp 164-169, Pacific-Grove, CA, 19-22 Febru- 
ary 1991. 
5. Taylor, M. M. personal communication, September 1991. 
6. Zue, V., Daly, N., Glass, J., Leung, H., Phillips, M., 
Polfroni, J., Seneff, S. and Soclof, M. "The collection and 
preliminary analysis of a spontaneous speech database", 
Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Lan.guage Workshop, 
pp 126-134, ttarwichport, MA, 15-18 October 1989. 
