ONE SENSE PER COLLOCATION 
David Yarowsky* 
Department  of  Computer  and In format ion Science 
Univers i ty of  Pennsy lvania  
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
yarowsky@unagi .c is .upenn.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Previous work \[Gale, Church and Yarowsky, 1992\] showed that with 
high probability a polysemous word has one sense per discourse. 
In this paper we show that for certain definitions of collocation, a 
polysemous word exhibits essentially only one sense per collocation. 
We test his empirical hypothesis for several definitions of sense and 
collocation, and discover that it holds with 90-99% accuracy for 
binary ambiguities. We utilize this property in a disambiguation 
algorithm that achieves precision of 92% using combined models of 
very local context. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The use of collocations to resolve lexical ambiguities i cer- 
tainly not a new idea. The first approaches to sense dis- 
ambiguation, such as \[Kelly and Stone 1975\], were based 
on simple hand-built decision tables consisting almost ex- 
clusively of questions about observed word associations in
specific positions. Later work from the AI community relied 
heavily upon selectional restrictions for verbs, although pri- 
marily in terms of features exhibited by their arguments ( uch 
as +DRINKABLE) rather than in terms of individual words or 
word classes. More recent work \[Brown et al 1991\]\[Hearst 
1991\] has utilized a set of discrete local questions (such as 
word-to-the-right) in the development of statistical decision 
procedures. However, astrong trend in recent years is to treat 
a reasonably wide context window as an unordered bag of in- 
dependent evidence points. This technique from information 
retrieval has been used in neural networks, Bayesian discrim- 
inators, and dictionary definition matching. In a comparative 
paper in this volume \[Leacock et al 1993\], all three methods 
under investigation used words in wide context as a pool of 
evidence independent of relative position. It is perhaps not 
a coincidence that this work has focused almost exclusively 
on nouns, as will be shown in Section 6.2. In this study 
we will return again to extremely local sources of evidence, 
and show that models of discrete syntactic relationships have 
considerable advantages. 
*This research was supported by an NDSEG Fellowship and by DARPA 
grant N00014-90-J-1863. The author is also affiliated with the Linguistics 
Research Department ofAT&T Bell Laboratories, and greatly appreciates the 
use of its resources in support of this work. He would also like to thank Eric 
Bfill, Bill Gale, Libby Levison, Mitch Marcus and Philip Resnik for their 
valuable feedback. 
2. DEF IN IT IONS OF  SENSE 
The traditional definition of word sense is "One of several 
meanings assigned to the same orthographic string". As 
meanings can always be partitioned into multiple refinements, 
senses are typically organized in a tree such as one finds in a 
dictionary. In the extreme case, one could continue making 
refinements until a word has a slightly different sense every 
time it is used. If so, the title of this paper is a tautology. 
However, the studies in this paper are focused on the sense 
distinctions atthe top of the tree. A good working definition of 
the distinctions considered are those meanings which are not 
typically translated to the same word in a foreign language. 
Therefore, one natural type of sense distinction to consider 
are those words in English which indeed have multiple trans- 
lations in a language such as French. As is now standard in 
the field, we use the Canadian Hansards, a parallel bilingual 
corpus, to provide sense tags in the form of French transla- 
tions. Unfortunately, the Hansards are highly skewed in their 
sense distributions, and it is difficult to find words for which 
there are adequate numbers of a second sense. More diverse 
large bilingual corpora re not yet readily available. 
We also use data sets which have been hand-tagged bynative 
English speakers. To make the selection of sense distinc- 
tions more objective, we use words such as bass where the 
sense distinctions (fish and musical instrument) correspond 
to pronunciation differences (\[b~es\] and \[beIs\]). Such data is 
often problematic, as the tagging is potentially subjective and 
error-filled, and sufficient quantities are difficult o obtain. 
As a solution to the data shortages for the above methods, 
\[Gale, Church and Yarowsky 1992b\] proposed the use of 
"pseudo-words," artificial sense ambiguities created by tak- 
ing two English words with the same part of speech (such as 
guerilla and reptile), and replacing each instance of both in a 
corpus with a new polysemous word guerrilla~reptile. As it 
is entirely possible that the concepts guerrilla nd reptile are 
represented by the same orthographic string in some foreign 
language, choosing between these two meanings based on 
context is a problem a word sense disambiguation algorithm 
could easily face. "Pseudo-words" are very useful for devel- 
oping and testing disambiguation methods because of their 
nearly unlimited availability and the known, fully reliable 
266 
ground truth they provide when grading performance. 
Finally, we consider sense disambiguation for mediums other 
than clean English text. For example, we look at word pairs 
such as terse/tense and cookie/rookie which may be plausi- 
bly confused in optical character recognition (OCR). Homo- 
phones, such as aid~aide, and censor/sensor, are ideal can- 
didates for such a study because large data sets with known 
ground truth are available in written text, yet they are true 
ambiguities which must be resolved routinely in oral commu- 
nication. 
We discover that the central claims of this paper hold for all 
of these potential definitions of sense. This corroborating 
evidence makes us much more confident in our results than if 
they were derived solely from a relatively small hand-tagged 
data set. 
3. DEF IN IT IONS OF  COLLOCATION 
Collocation means the co-occurrence of two words in some 
defined relationship. We look at several such relationships, in- 
cluding direct adjacency and first word to the left or right hav- 
ing a certain part-of-speech. We also consider certain direct 
syntactic relationships, uch as verb/object, subject/verb, and 
adjective/noun pairs. It appears that content words (nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) behave quite differently from 
function words (other parts of speech); we make use of this 
distinction in several definitions of collocation. 
We will attempt to quantify the validity of the one-sense-per- 
collocation hypothesis for these different collocation types. 
4. EXPERIMENTS 
In the experiments, we ask two central, related questions: 
For each definition of sense and collocation, 
? What is the mean entropy of the distribution 
Pr(Sense\[Collocation)? 
? What is the performance of a disambiguation algorithm 
which uses only that collocation type as evidence? 
We examine several permutations for each, and are interested 
in how the results of these questions differ when applied to 
polysemous nouns, verbs, and adjectives. 
To limit the already very large number of parameters consid- 
ered, we study only binary sense distinctions. In all cases the 
senses being compared have the same part of speech. The 
selection between different possible parts of speech as been 
heavily studied and is not replicated here. 
4.1. Sample Collection 
All samples were extracted from a 380 million word cor- 
pus collection consisting of newswire text (AP Newswire and 
? Hand Tagged (homographs): bass, axes, chi, bow, 
colon, lead, IV, sake, tear, ... 
? French Translation Distinctions: sentence, duty, drug, 
language, position, paper, single .... 
? Homophones: aid/aide, cellar/seller, censor/sensor, 
cue/queue, pedal/petal .... 
? OCR Ambiguities: terse/tense, gum/gym, deaf/dear, 
cookie/rookie, beverage/leverage .... 
? Pseudo-Words: covered/waved, kissed/slapped, 
abused/escorted, cute/compatible .... 
Table 1: A sample of the words used in the experiments 
Wall Street Journal), scientific abstracts (from NSF and the 
Department ofEnergy), the Canadian Hansards parliamentary 
debate records, Grolier's Encyclopedia, a medical encyclo- 
pedia, over 100 Harper & Row books, and several smaller 
corpora including the Brown Corpus, and ATIS and TIMIT 
sentences.1 
The homophone pairs used were randomly selected from a 
list of words having the same pronunciation orwhich differed 
in only one phoneme. The OCR and pseudo-word pairs were 
randomly selected from corpus wordlists, with the former 
restricted to pairs which could plausibly be confused in a 
noisy FAX, typically words differing in only one character. 
Due to the difficulty of obtaining new data, the hand-tagged 
and French translation examples were borrowed from those 
used in our previous tudies in sense disambiguation. 
4.2. Measuring Entropies 
When computing the entropy of Pr(Sense\[Collocation), 
we enumerate all collocations of a given type observed for the 
word or word pair being disambiguated. Table 2 shows the 
example of the homophone ambiguity aid~aide for the collo- 
cation type content-word-to-the-left. We list all words 2 ap- 
pearing in such a collocation with either of these two "senses" 
of the homograph, and calculate the raw distributional count 
for each. 
Note that the vast majority of the entries in Table 2 have zero 
as one of the frequency counts. It is not acceptable, however, 
t Training and test samples were not only extracted from different articles 
or discourses but also from entirely different blocks of the corpus. This was 
done to minimize long range discourse ffects such as one finds in the AP or 
Hansards. 
2Note: the entries in this table are lemmas (uninflected root forms), rather 
than raw words. By treating the verbal inflections squander, squanders, 
squandering, and squandered asthe same word, one can improve statistics 
and coverage at a slight cost of lost subtlety. Although we will refer to "words 
in collocation" throughout this paper for simplicity, this should always be 
interpreted as "lemmas in collocation." 
267 
Frequency as Frequency as 
Collocation Aid Aide 
foreign 
federal 
western 
provide 
zovert 
appose 
future 
~imilar 
presidential 
:hief 
longtime 
aids-infected 
deepy 
disaffected 
Lndispensable 
~ractical 
;quander 
718 
297 
146 
88 
26 
13 
9 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
63 
40 
26 
2 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Table 2: A typical collocational distribution for the homo- 
phone ambiguity aid/aide. 
to treat these as having zero probability and hence a zero 
entropy for the distribution. It is quite possible, especially 
for the lower frequency distributions, that we would see a 
contrary example in a larger sample. By cross-validation, we 
discover for the aid~aide xample that for collocations with an 
observed 1/0 distribution, we would actually expect he minor 
sense to occur 6% of the time in an independent sample, on 
average. Thus a fairer distribution would be .94/.06, giving 
a cross-validated ntropy of .33 bits rather than 0 bits. For 
a more unbalanced observed istribution, such as 10/0, the 
probability of seeing the minor sense decreases to 2%, giving 
a cross-validated ntropy of H(.98,.02) = .14 bits. Repeating 
this process and taking the weighted mean yields the entropy 
of the full distribution, in this case .09 bits for the aid/aide 
ambiguity. 
For each type of collocation, we also compute how well an 
observed probability distribution predicts the correct classifi- 
cation for novel examples. In general, this is a more useful 
measure for most of the comparison purposes we will address. 
Not only does it reflect he underlying entropy of the distribu- 
tion, but it also has the practical advantage of showing how a 
working system would perform given this data. 
5. ALGORITHM 
The sense disambiguation algorithm used is quite straightfor- 
ward. When based on a single collocation type, such as the 
object of the verb or word immediately to the left, the pro- 
cedure is very simple. One identifies if this collocation type 
exists for the novel context and if the specific words found 
are listed in the table of probability distributions (as computed 
above). If so, we return the sense which was most frequent 
for that collocation in the training data. If not, we return the 
sense which is most frequent overall. 
When we consider more than one collocation type and com- 
bine evidence, the process is more complicated. The algo- 
rithm used is based on decision lists \[Rivest, 1987\], and was 
discussed in \[Sproat, Hirschberg, and Yarowsky 1992\]. The 
goal is to base the decision on the single best piece of evi- 
dence available. Cross-validated probabilities are computed 
as in Section 4.2, and the different ypes of evidence are 
sorted by the absolute value of the log of these probabil- 
? ? . P r  Sense l  Co l loca~ion i )  ratios. Abs(Log(prls,n,~  Conocauo,~,)))" When a novel lty 
context is encountered, one steps through the decision list 
until the evidence at that point in the list (such as word-to- 
/eft="presidential") matches the current context under con- 
sideration. The sense with the greatest listed probability is 
returned, and this cross-validated probability represents he 
confidence in the answer. 
This approach is well-suited for the combination of multi- 
ple evidence types which are clearly not independent (such 
as those found in this study) as probabilities are never com- 
bined. Therefore this method offers advantages over Bayesian 
classifier techniques which assume independence of the fea- 
tures used. It also offers advantages over decision tree based 
techniques because the training pools are not split at each 
question. The interesting problems are how one should re- 
estimate probabilities conditional on questions asked earlier 
in the list, or how one should prune lower evidence which 
is categorically subsumed by higher evidence or is entirely 
conditional on higher evidence. \[Bahl et al 1989\] have dis- 
cussed some of these issues at length, and there is not space 
to consider them here. For simplicity, in this experiment no 
secondary smoothing or pruning is done. This does not ap- 
pear to be problematic when small numbers of independent 
evidence types are used, but performance should increase if 
this extra step is taken. 
6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
6.1. One  Sense Per  Co l locat ion  
For the collocations tudied, it appears that the hypothesis 
of one sense per collocation holds with high probability for 
binary ambiguities. The experimental results in the precision 
column of Table 3 quantify the validity of this claim. Accu- 
racy varies from 90% to 99% for different types of collocation 
and part of speech, with a mean of 95%. The significance of 
these differences will be discussed in Section 6.2. 
These precision values have several interpretations. First, 
they reflect the underlying probability distributions of sense 
268 
Collocation Part Ent Prec Rec No No 
Type of Sp. Coil Data 
Content ALL .18 .97 .29 .57 .14 
word to Noun .98 .25 .66 .09 
immediate Verb .95 .14 .71 .15 
right \[A\] Adj .97 .51 .27 .22 
Content ALL .24 .96 .26 .58 .16 
word to Noun .99 .33 .56 .11 
immediate Verb .91 .23 .47 .30 
left \[B\] Adj .96 .15 .75 .10 
First ALL .33 .94 .51 .09 .40 
Content Noun .94 .49 .13 .38 
Word to Verb .91 .44 .05 .51 
Right Adj .96 .58 .04 .38 
First ALL .40 .92 .50 .06 .44 
Content Noun .96 .58 .06 .36 
Word to Verb .87 .37 .05 .58 
Left Adj .90 .45 .06 .49 
Subject ~ Noun .33 .94 .13 .87 .06 
Verb Pairs Verb .43 .91 .28 .33 .38 
Verb ~ Noun .46 .90 .07 .81 .07 
Object Pairs Verb .29 .95 .36 .32 .32 
Adj ~-+ Noun Adj .14 .98 .54 .20 .26 
A&BAbove ALL - .97 .47 I .31 I .21 I 
All Above ALL - .92 .98 .00 .02 
Table 3: IncludestheentropyofthePr(SennelGollocation ) distribution 
for several types of collocation, and the performance achieved when basing 
sense disambiguation solely on that evidence. Results are itemized by the 
part of speech of the ambiguous word (not of the collocate). Precision (Prec.) 
indicates percent correct and Recall (Rec.) refers to the percentage of samples 
for which an answer is returned. Precision is measured on this subset. No 
collocation (No Coil) indicates the failure to provide an answer because 
no collocation of that type was present in the test context, and "No Data" 
indicates the failure to return an answer because no data for-the observed 
collocation was present in the model. See Section 7.3 for a discussion of the 
"All Above" result. The results tated above are based on the average of the 
different types of sense considered, and have a mean prior probability of .69 
and a mean sample size of 3944. 
conditional on collocation. For example, for the collocation 
type content-word-to-the-right, t evalue of .97 indicates that 
on average, given a Specific collocation we will expect o see 
the same sense 97% of the time. This mean distribution is 
also reflected in the entropy column. 
However, these numbers have much more practical interpre- 
tations. If we actually build a disambiguation procedure using 
exclusively the content word to the right as information, such 
a system performs with 97% precision on new data where a 
content word appears to the right and for which there is in- 
formation in the model .3 This is considerably higher than the 
3The correlation between these numbers is not a coincidence. Because 
the probability distributions are based oncross-validated t sts on indepen- 
dent data and weighted by collocation frequency, if on average we find that 
Per formance  Us ing  Ev idence  a t  D i f fe rent  D is tances  
8 
" - ~ t  Verbs 
Adjectives 
2'o ,'o 8'o go ,no 
Distance 
Figure 1: Comparison of the performance ofnouns, verbs and 
adjectives based strictly on a 5 word window centered at the 
distance shown on the horizontal axis. 
performance of 69% one would expect simply by chance due 
to the unbalanced prior probability of the two senses. 
It should be noted that such precision is achieved at only 
partial recall. The three rightmost columns of Table 3 give 
the breakdown of the recall. On average, the model content- 
word-to-right could only be applied in 29% of the test samples. 
In 57% of the cases, no content word appeared to the right, 
so this collocational model did not hold. In 14% of the cases, 
a content word did appear to the right, but no instances of 
that word appeared in the training data, so the model had no 
information on which to base a decision. There are several 
solutions to both these deficiencies, and they are discussed in 
Section 7. 
6.2. Part of  Speech Differences 
It is interesting to note the difference in behavior between 
different parts of speech. Verbs, for example, derive more 
disambiguating information from their objects (.95) than from 
their subjects (.90). Adjectives derive almost all of their 
disambiguatinginformation fr m the nouns they modify (.98). 
Nouns are best disambiguated bydirectly adjacent adjectives 
or nouns, with the content word to the left indicating a single 
sense with 99% precision. Verbs appear to be less useful 
for noun sense disambiguation, although they are relatively 
better indicators when the noun is their object rather than their 
subject. 
97% of samples of a given collocation exhibit he same sense, this is the 
expected precision of a disambiguafion algorithm which assumes one sense 
per collocation, when applied to new samples of these collocations. 
269 
Figure \] shows that nouns, verbs and adjectives also differ in 
their ability to be disambiguated by wider context. \[Gale t 
al. 1993\] previously showed that nouns can be disambiguated 
based strictly on distant context, and that useful information 
was present up to 10,000 words away. We replicated an exper- 
iment in which performance was calculated for disambigua- 
tions based strictly on 5 word windows centered at various 
distances (shown on the horizontal axis). Gale's observation 
was tested only on nouns; our experiment also shows that 
reasonably accurate decisions may be made for nouns using 
exclusively remote context. Our results in this case are based 
on test sets with equal numbers of the two senses. Hence 
chance performance is at 50%. However, when tested on 
verbs and adjectives, precision drops off with a much steeper 
slope as the distance from the ambiguous word increases. This 
would indicate that approaches giving equal weight o all po- 
sitions in a broad window of context may be less well-suited 
for handling verbs and adjectives. Models which give greater 
weight o immediate context would seem more appropriate in 
these circumstances. 
A similar experiment was applied to function words, and the 
dropoff beyond strictly immediate context was precipitous, 
converging at near chance performance for distances greater 
than 5. However, function words did appear to have pre- 
dictive power of roughly 5% greater than chance in directly 
adjacent positions. The effect was greatest for verbs, where 
the function word to the right (typically a preposition or par- 
ticle) served to disambiguate at a precision of 13% above 
chance. This would indicate that methods which exclude 
function words from models to minimize noise should con- 
sider their inclusion, but only for restricted local positions. 
6.3. Comparison of Sense Definitions 
Results for the 5 different definitions of sense ambiguity stud- 
ied here are similar. However they tend to fluctuate relative 
to each other across experiments, and there appears to be 
no consistent ordering of the mean entropy of the different 
types of sense distributions. Because of the very large num- 
ber of permutations considered, it is not possible to give a 
full breakdown of the differences, and such a breakdown does 
not appear to be terribly informative. The important observa- 
tion, however, is that the basic conclusions drawn from this 
paper hold for each of the sense definitions considered, and 
hence corroborate and strengthen the conclusions which can 
be drawn from any one. 
6.4. Performance Given Little Evidence 
One of the most striking conclusions to emerge from this study 
is that for the local collocations considered, decisions based 
on a single data point are highly reliable. Normally one would 
consider a 1/0 sense distribution i  a 3944 sample training set 
to be noise, with performance based on this information ot 
Low Counts  a re  Re l iab le  
; ~ ,'o ~o ,;o o;o ,go., 
Training Frequency (f) 
Figure 2: Percentage correct for disambiguations based solely 
on a single content-word-to-the-rightcollocation seen ft imes 
in the training data without counter-examples. 
likely to much exceed the 69% prior probability expected by 
chance. But this is not what we observe. For example, when 
tested on the word-to-the-right collocation, disambiguations 
based solely on a single data point exceed 92% accuracy, and 
performance on 2/0 and 3/0 distributions climb rapidly from 
there, and reach nearly perfect accuracy for training samples as 
small as 15/0, as shown in Figure 2. In contrast, acollocation 
30 words away which also exhibits a 1/0 sense distribution 
has a predictive value of only 3% greater than chance. This 
difference in the reliability of low frequency data from local 
and wide context will have implications for algorithm design. 
7. APPL ICAT IONS 
7.1. Training Set Creation and Verification 
This last observation has relevance for new data set creation 
and correction. Collocations with an ambiguous content word 
which have frequency greater than 10-15 and which do not 
belong exclusively to one sense should be flagged for human 
reinspection, as they are most likely in error. One can speed 
the sense tagging process by computing the most frequent col- 
locates, and for each one assigning all examples to the same 
sense. For the data in Table 2, this will apparently fail for the 
foreignAid/Aide example in 1 out of 719 instances ( till 99.9% 
correct). However, in this example the model's classification 
was actually correct; the given usage was a misspelling in 
the 1992 AP Newswire: "Bush accelerated foreign aide and 
weapons ales to Iraq.". It is quite likely that if were in- 
deed a foreign assistant being discussed, this example would 
also have another collocation (with the verb, for example), 
270 
which would indicate the correct sense. Such inconsisten- 
cies should also be flagged for human supervision. Working 
from the most to least frequent collocates in this manner, one 
can use previously tagged collocates to automatically suggest 
the classification of other words appearing in different collo- 
cation types for those tagged examples. The one sense per 
discourse constraint can be used to refine this process further. 
We are working on a similar use of these two constraints for 
unsupervised sense clustering. 
7.2. Algor i thm Design 
Our results also have implications for algorithm design. For 
the large number of current approaches which treat wide con- 
text as an unordered bag of words, it may be beneficial to 
model certain local collocations separately. We have shown 
that reliability of collocational evidence differs considerably 
between local and distant context, especially for verbs and 
adjectives. If one one is interested inproviding aprobability 
with an answer, modeling local collocations separately will 
improve the probability estimates and reduce cross entropy. 
Another eason for modeling local collocations separately is
that his will allow the reliable inclusion of evidence with very 
low frequency counts. Evidence with observed frequency dis- 
tributions of 1/0 typically constitute on the order of 50% of 
all available vidence types, yet in a wide context window 
this low frequency evidence is effectively noise, with predic- 
tive power little better than chance. However, in very local 
collocations, ingle data points carry considerable informa- 
tion, and when used alone can achieve precision in excess of 
92%. Their inclusion should improve system recall, with a 
much-reduced danger of overmodeling the data. 
7.3. Bui lding a Full  Disambiguation System 
Finally, one may ask to what extent can local collocational 
evidence alone support apractical sense disambiguation algo- 
rithm. As shown in Table 3, our models of single collocation 
types achieve high precision, but individually their applica- 
bility is limited. However, if we combine these models as 
described in Section 5, and use an additional function word 
collocation model when no other evidence is available, we 
achieve full coverage at a precision of 92%. This result is 
comparable to those previously reported in the literature us- 
ing wider context of up to 50 words away \[5,6,7,12\]. Due 
to the large number of variables involved, we shall not at- 
tempt o compare these directly. Our results are encouraging, 
however, and and we plan to conduct amore formal compari- 
son of the "bag of words" approaches relative to our separate 
modeling of local collocation types. We will also consider ad- 
ditional collocation types covering awider range of syntactic 
relationships. In addition, we hope to incorporate class-based 
techniques, uch as the modeling of verb-argument selectional 
preferences \[Resnik, 1992\], as a mechanism for achieving im- 
proved performance on unfamiliar collocations. 
8. CONCLUSION 
This paper has examined some of the basic distributional prop- 
erties of lexical ambiguity in the English language. Our ex- 
periments have shown that for several definitions of sense 
and collocation, an ambiguous word has only one sense in a 
given collocation with a probability of 90-99%. We showed 
how this claim is influenced by part-of-speech, distance, and 
sample frequency. We discussed the implications of these 
results for data set creation and algorithm design, identifying 
potential weaknesses in the common "bag of words" approach 
to disambiguation. Finally, we showed that models of local 
collocation can be combined in a disambiguation algorithm 
that achieves overall precision of 92%. 
References 
1. Bahl, L., P. Brown, P. de Souza, R. Mercer, "A Tree-Based Sta- 
tistical Language Model for Natural Language Speech Recog- 
nition," in IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal 
Processing, 37, 1989. 
2. Brown, Peter, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della Pietra, and 
Robert Mercer, "Word Sense Disambiguation using Statisti- 
cal Methods," Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 1991, pp 264-270. 
3. Gale, W., K. Church, and D. Yarowsky, "One Sense Per Dis- 
course," Proceedings of the 4th DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, 1992. 
4. Gale, W., K. Church, and D. Yarowsky, "On Evaluation of 
Word-Sense Disambiguation Systems," in Proceedings, 30th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics, 1992b. 
5. Gale, W., K. Church, and D. Yarowsky, "A Method for Disam- 
biguating Word Senses in a Large Corpus," in Computers and 
the Humanities, 1993. 
6. Hearst, Marti, "Noun Homograph Disambiguation Using Local 
Context in Large Text Corpora," in Using Corpora, University 
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 1991. 
7. Leacock, Claudia, Geoffrey Towell and Ellen Voorhees 
"Corpus-Based Statistical Sense Resolution," inProceedings, 
ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop, 1993. 
8. Kelly, Edward, and Phillip Stone, Computer Recognition of 
English Word Senses, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975. 
9. Resnik, Philip, "A Class-based Approach to Lexical Discov- 
ery," in Proceedings of 3Oth Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 1992. 
10. Rivest, R. L., "Learning Decision Lists," in Machine Learning, 
2, 1987, pp 229-246. 
11. Sproat, R., J. Hirschberg and D. Yarowsky "A Corpus-based 
Synthesizer," in Proceedings, International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing, Banff, Alberta. October 1992. 
12. Yarowsky, David "Word-Sense Disambiguation Using Statisti- 
cal Models of Roget's Categories Trained on Large Corpora," 
in Proceedings, COLING-92, Nantes, France, 1992. 
271 
