ROBUSTNESS,  PORTABILITY,  AND SCALABIL ITY 
OF NATURAL LANGUAGE SYSTEMS 
RaSh Weischedel 
BBN Systems and Technologies 
70 Fawcett Street 
Cambridge, lvIA 02138 
1. OBJECTIVE 
In the DoD, every unit, from the smallest to the largest, 
communicates through messages. Messages are 
fundamental in command and conlrol, intelligence analysis, 
and in planning and replanning. Our objective is to create 
algorithms that will 
1) robustly process open source text, 
identifying relevant messages, and updating a
data base based on the relevant messages; 
2) reduce the effort required in porting natural 
language (NL) message processing software 
to a new domain from months to weeks; and 
3) be scalable to broad domains with 
vocabularies of tens of thousands ofwords. 
2. APPROACH 
Our approach is to apply probabilistic language models and 
training over large corpora in all phases of natural language 
processing. This new approach will enable systems to 
adapt o both new task domains and linguistic expressions 
not seen before by semi-automatically acquiring 1) a 
domain model, 2) facts required for semantic processing, 3) 
grammar ules, 4) information about new words, 5) 
probability models on frequency of occurrence, and 6) rules 
for mapping from representation t  application structure. 
For instance, a Statistical model of categories ofwords will 
enable systems to predict he most likely category of a 
word never encountered bythe system before and to focus 
on its most likely interpretation i  context, rather than 
skipping the word or considering all possible 
interpretations. Markov modelling techniques will be used 
for this problem. 
In an analogous way, statistical models of language will be 
developed and applied at the level of syntax (form), at the 
level of semantics (conten0, and at the contextual level 
(meaning and impact). 
3. RECENT RESULTS 
? Consistently achieved high performance in Government- 
sponsored evaluations (e.g., MUC-3, MUC-4, etc.) of dam 
extraction systems with significantly less human effort to 
port the PLUM system to each domain, compared with the 
effort reported inporting other high-performing systems. 
? Sped up the PLUM data extraction system by a factor of 
three. 
? Ported PLUM to a microelectronics domain with only 
seven person weeks of effort. (Typically, systems are 
ported to a new domain in half a person year or more.) 
? Developed a probabilistic model of answer correctness 
which requires only a set of articles and correct output (the 
data that should be extracted for each article) as training. 
This can be used as a model of confidence or certainty on 
each data item extracted by the system from text. 
? Successfully applied a statistical text classification 
algorithm in MUC-4. The algorithm is trained 
automatically from examples of relevant and irrelevant 
texts. The user can specify the degree of certainty desired. 
? Distributed POST, our software for statistically labelling 
words in text, to several other DARPA contractors (New 
Mexico State University, New York University, Syracuse 
University, and the University of Chicago). 
4. PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Create aptobabilistic model for predicting the most likely 
(partial) interpretation f an input, whether well-formed, 
novel, complex, or ill-formed. 
Develop rocedures for automatically earning template fill 
rules from examples. 
Participate inMUC-5 evaluation i all domains. 
386 
