Session 8: Statistical Language Modeling 
Mitchell Marcus, Chair 
Depar tment  of Computer  and In format ion  Sc ience 
Un ivers i ty  of Pennsy lvan ia  
Ph i lade lph ia ,  PA 19104-6389 
1. In t roduct ion  
Over the past several years, the successful application 
of statistical techniques in natural language processing 
has penetrated further and further into written language 
technology, proceding with time from the periphery of 
written language processing into deeper and deeper as- 
pects of language processing. At the periphery of natural 
language understanding, Hidden Markov Models were 
first applied over ten years ago to the problem of deter- 
mining part of speech (POS). HMM POS taggers have 
yielded quite good results for many tasks (96%+ correct, 
on a per word basis), and have been widely used in writ- 
ten language systems for the last several years. A little 
closer in from the periphery, extensions to probabilis- 
tic context free parsing (PCFG) methods have greatly 
increased the accuracy of probabilistic parsing methods 
within the last several years; these methods condition 
the probabilities of standard CFG rules on aspects of 
extended lingustic context. Just within the last year 
or two, we have begun to see the first applications of 
statistical methods to the problem of word sense deter- 
mination and lexical semantics. It is worthy of note that 
the first presentation of a majority of these techniques 
has been within this series of Workshops ponsored by 
ARPA. 
It is a measure of how fast this field is progressing that 
a majority of papers in this session, six, are on lexical 
semantics, an area where the effective application of sta- 
tistical techniques would have been unthinkable only a 
few years ago. One other paper addresses the question 
of how a POS tagger can be built using very limited 
amounts of training data, another presents a method for 
finding word associations and two others address various 
aspects of statistical parsing. 
2. Part of Speech Tagging 
The first paper in this session, by Matsukawa, Miller and 
Weischedel, describes a cascade of several components, 
sandwiching a novel algorithm between the output of an 
existing black-box segmentation and POS labelling sys- 
tern for Japanese, JUMAN, and the POST HMM POS 
tagger. The middle algorithm uses what the authors call 
example-based correction to change some of JUMAN's 
initial word segmentation and to add alternative POS 
tags from which POST can then make a final selection. 
(Japanese text is printed without spaces; determining 
where one word stops and another starts is a crucial 
problem in Japanese text processing.) The example- 
based correction method, closely related to a method 
presented by Brill at this workshop last year, uses a very 
small amount of training data to learn a set of symbolic 
transformation rules which augment or change the out- 
put of JUMAN in particular deterministic contexts. 
3. Gra lnrnar  Induct ion  and  Probab i l i s t i c  
Pars ing  
Most current methods for probabilistic parsing either es- 
timate grammar ule probabilities directly from an an- 
notated corpus or else use Baker's Inside/Outside algo- 
rithm (often in combination with some annotation) to 
estimate the parameters from an unannotated corpus. 
The 2/0 algorithm, however, maximizes the wrong ob- 
jective function for purposes of recovering the expected 
grammatical structure for a given sentence; the 2/0 al- 
gorithm finds the model that maximizes the likelihood 
of the observed sentence strings without reference to the 
grammatical structure assigned to that string by the es- 
timated gramnaar. Often, however, probabilistic parsing 
is used to derive a tree structure for use with a semantic 
analysis component based upon syntax directed transla- 
tion; for this translation to work effectively, the details 
of the parse tree must be appropriate for tree-based se- 
mantic composition techniques. Current techniques are 
also inapplicable to the recently developed class of chunk 
parsers, parsers which use finite-state techniques to parse 
the non-recursive structures of the language, and then 
use another technique, usually related to dependency 
parsing, to connect hese chunks together. Two papers 
in this session can be viewed as addressing one or both of 
these issues. The paper by Abney presents a new mea- 
sure for evaluating parser performance tied directly to 
225 
grammatical structure, and suggests ways in which such 
a measure can be used for chunk parsing. Brill presents 
a new technique for parsing which extends the symbolic 
POS tagger he presented last year. Surprisingly, this 
simple technique performs as well as the best recent re- 
sults using the I /O algorithm, using a very simple tech- 
nique to learn less than two hundred purely symbolic 
rules which deterministically parse new input. 
4. Lex ica l  semant ics :  Sense  c lass  
determinat ion  
The remaining papers in this session address three sep- 
arate areas of lexical semantics. The first is sense class 
determination, determining, for example, whether a par- 
ticular use of the word "newspaper" refers to the physi- 
cal entity that sits by your front door in the morning, or 
the corporate ntity that publishes it; whether a partic- 
ular use of "line" means a product line, a queue, a line 
of text, a fishing line, etc. Several papers in this ses- 
sion address the question of how well automatic statisti- 
cal techniques can discriminate between alternative word 
senses, and how much information such techniques must 
use. The paper by Leacock, Miller and Voorhees tests 
three different echniques for sense class determination: 
Bayesian decision theory, neural networks, and content 
vectors. These experiments show that the three tech- 
niques are statistically indistinguishable, ach resolving 
between three different uses of "line" with an accuracy 
of about 76%, and between six different uses with an 
accuracy of about 73%. These techniques use an ex- 
tended context of about, 100 words around the target 
word; Yarowsky's paper presents a new technique which 
uses only five words on either side of the target word, but 
can provide roughly comparable results by itself. This 
new method might well be combined with one of these 
earlier techniques to provide improved performance over 
either technique individually. 
5. Lex ica l  semant ics :  ad jec t iva l  sca les  
A second area of lexical semnantics focuses on the seman- 
tics of adjectives that determine linguistic scales. For 
example, one set of adjectives lie on the linguistic scale 
from hot through warm and cool to cold, while another 
set lies on the scale that goes fi'om huge through big 
to little to tiny. Many adjectives can be characteriz- 
ing as picking out a point or range on some such scale. 
These scales play a role in human language understand- 
ing because of a phenomenon called scalar implicature, 
which underlies the fact that if someone asks if Tokyo 
is a big city, much better than replying "yes" is to say, 
"Well, no; it's actually quite huge". By the law of scalar 
implicature, one cannot felicitously assent to an asser- 
tion about a midpoint on a scale even if it is logically 
true, if an assertion about an extremum is also logi- 
cally true. McKeown and Hatzivassiloglou take a first 
step toward using statistical techniques to automatically 
determine where adjectives fall along such scales by pre- 
senting a method which automatically clusters adjectives 
into groups which are closely related to such scales. 
6. Lex ica l  semant ics :  Se lec t iona l  
Rest r i c t ions  
Another key aspect of lexical semantics i the determina- 
tion of the selectional constraints of verbs; determining 
for each sense of any given verb what kinds of entities 
can serve as the subject for a given verb sense, and what 
kinds of entities can serve as objects. For example, for 
one meaning of open, the thing opened is most likely to 
be an entrance; for another meaning, a mouth; for an- 
other, a container; fbr another, a discourse. One key 
barrier to determining such selectional constraints auto- 
maritally is a serious problem with sparse data; in a large 
corpus, a given verb is likely to occur with any particu- 
lar noun as object in only a handful of instances. Two 
papers in this session automatically derive selectional re- 
strictions, each with a different solution to this partic- 
ular form of the sparse data problem. The paper by 
Resnik utilizes an information theoretic technique to au- 
tomatically determine such selectional restrictions; this 
information is then used to resolve a number of syntac- 
tic anabiguities that any parser must deal with. Resnik 
uses the noun is-a network within Miller's WordNet to 
provide sufficiently large classes to obtain reliable results. 
Grishman and Sterling attack the problem of sparse data 
by using co-occurance smoothing on a set. of fully auto- 
matically generated selectional constraints. 
In one last paper in lexical semantics, Matsukawa 
presents a new naethod of determining word associations 
in Japanese text. Such word associations are useful in 
dealing with parsing ambiguities and should also prove 
useful for Japanese word segmentation. 
226 
