Document  retr ieval  and text  retr ieval  
Karen Sparck Jones 
Computer  Laboratory,  University of Cambridge 
New Museums Site, Pembroke Street, Cambridge CB2 3QG, UK 
1. Essent ia l s  o f  document  re t r ieva l  
Document retrieval (DR) is for the user who wants to 
find out about something by reading about it. 
DR systems illustrate very variety of indexing language, 
request and document description, and search mecha- 
nism. Controlled languages (CLs) have been commonly 
used, across the range from only slightly restricted nat- 
ural language (NL) to a carefully designed artificial lan- 
guage. With CLs professional indexing is required and 
professional searching is the norm. However automatic 
DR systems have also encouraged the use of NL through 
searching on titles and abstracts. This naturally makes 
end-user searching practicable, though not necessarily 
easy; and end-users often lack the experience to search 
effectively when strict word matching fails to identify 
appropriate documents. The essential requirement in re- 
trieval is that a match between request and document de- 
scriptions hould reflect he underlying relation between 
user need and document content. 
Indexing, providing for matches, thus aims to promote 
precision and/or recall. It often has to do this under 
the external constraints of large files with small rele- 
vance sets. It always has to do it under the internal 
constraints on indexing itself. These are, for both re- 
quests and documents, variability of language, whether 
this stems from ambiguity or differences of perspective; 
for requests, underspecification, whether through vague- 
ness or incompleteness; and for documents, information 
reduction, whether through generalisation r selection. 
Reduction isessential for DR, for both efficiency in scan- 
ning and effectiveness in concentrating onkey content. 
The implications of these constraints for index language 
design and use are conflicting, and suggest many alterna- 
tive possibilities within the CL/NL space for the treat- 
ment of terms and term relations, of implicit and ex- 
plicit relations, and of syntagmatic and paradigmatic re- 
lations. Mixes and tradeoffs are possible, and the neces- 
sary flexibility is achieved, because descriptions are ma- 
nipulated in searching. 
However though the conventional preference is for CLs, 
extensive tests have shown that very competitive perfor- 
mance can be obtained through cheap and simple index- 
ing using coordinated single NL terms along with sta- 
tistical selection and weighting, ranked output, and rel- 
evance feedback. The gains from this approach come 
from allowing for late binding and redundancy, along 
with derivation from source documents, in topic char- 
acterisation. The findings have been supported by many 
tests investigating different DR system factors, and the 
approach as been implemented commercially. But the 
test evidence is not always strong, and the tests have 
been on a limited scale; further, the strategy depends on 
request quality and probably also on working with docu- 
ment surrogates, like abstracts, which concentrate infor- 
mation. Even so, the puzzle is that linguistic sophisti- 
cation, even with human LP, does not provide clear per- 
formance gains, and routine performance typically falls 
within an undistinguished 30-60% R-P tradeoff area. 
2. Text  re t r ieva l  
However a new situation has arisen with the availability 
of machine-readable full text. For text retrieval (TR), 
NLP to provide more sophisticated indexing may be 
needed because more discrimination within large files of 
long texts is required, or may be desired because more fo- 
cusing is possible. This suggests the more NLP the bet- 
ter, but whether for better-motivated simple indexing or 
for more complex representation has to be determined. 
Given past experience, and the need for flexibility in the 
face of uncertainty, a sound approach appears to be to 
maintain overall simplicity but to allow for more complex 
indexing descriptors than single terms, derived through 
NLP and NL-flavoured, e.g. simple phrases or predi- 
cations. These would be just coordinated for descrip- 
tions but, more importantly, statistically selected and 
weighted. To obtain the reduced escriptions still needed 
to emphasise important text content, text-locational or
statistical information could be exploited. To support 
indexing, and, more critically, searching a terminologi- 
cal apparatus again of a simple NL-oriented kind provid- 
ing term substitutes orcollocates, and again statistically 
controlled, could be valuable. Searching should allow 
347 
the substitution or relaxation of elements and relations 
in complex terms, again with weighting, especially via 
feedback. This whole approach would emphasise the NL 
of the texts while recognising the statistical properties 
of large files and long documents. The crux is thus to 
demonstrate hat linguistically-constrained terms are su- 
perior to e.g. co-locational ones. 
Heavy testing is needed to establish performance for the 
suggested approach, given the many factors affecting re- 
trieval systems, both environment variables e.g. doc- 
ument type, subject domain, user category, and system 
parameters e.g. description exhaustivity, language speci- 
ficity, weighting formula. There are also different eval- 
uation criteria, performance measures, and application 
methods to consider. Proper testing is hard (and costly) 
since it requires large collections, of requests as much as 
documents, with relevance assessments, and implies fine- 
grained comparisons within a grid of system contexts and 
design options. 
Various approaches along the lines suggested, as well as 
simpler DR-derived ones, are being investigated within 
ARPA TREC. The TREC experiments are important as 
the largest retrieval tests to date, with an earnest eval- 
uation design, as well as being TR tests on the grand 
scale. But any conclusions drawn from them must be 
treated with caution since the TREC queries are highly 
honed, and are for standing interests (matching a docu- 
ment against many requests not vice versa), with tightly 
specified response needs. TREC is not typical of many 
retrieval situations, notably the 'wants to read about' 
one, so any results obtained, especially good ones relying 
on collection tailoring, may not be generally applicable 
and other tests are mandatory. 
3. HLT  i ssues  
In the present state of TR research, and the HLT con- 
text, the issues are as follows: 
1. With respect o the objects manipulated in retrieval, 
i.e. index descriptions, given that indexing is mak- 
ing predictions for future searching: 
What kind of sophistication is in order: what con- 
cepts should be selected and how should they be 
represented? How should linguistic and statistical 
facts be related? For example, how should weights 
for compounds be derived, by wholes or from con- 
stituents, and how should matching, by wholes or 
constituents, be handled? 
2. Wrt the process of retrieval, given that searching is 
fundamentally interactive: 
What way of developing requests is best: should 
the system be proactive or reactive? How can the 
user be involved? For example, how can the user 
cope with CLs that are incomprehensible (through 
notation) or misleading (through pseudo-English); 
or with statistical numbers? 
3. Wrt the implementation f retrieval systems, given 
their asymmetry with requests demanding notice 
but many documents never wanted: 
What distribution of effort is rational: should effort 
be at file time or search time? How can flexibility be 
maintained? For instance, when should compounds 
be formed, or their weights computed? 
4. Wrt the model adopted to underpin systems, given 
the lumpiness inherent in system operation in the 
mass and average but user interest in the individual 
and distinctive: 
What strength of assumptions i rational: should 
the system work with the vector, or probabilistic, 
or some other model? How can an abstract formal 
model supply specific instructions for action? For 
instance, can the model say precisely how matches 
should be scored? 
5. Wrt retrieval using full text, given that with more 
detail there is also more noise: 
What functions should TR serve: should it help 
to refine indexing or offer passage retrieval? How 
might indexing and searching on two levels operate? 
For instance, how can a dispersed concept, spread 
over text, be identified? 
6. Wrt system testing, given the enormous variety of 
environment factors and system possibilities: 
What degree of reality and representativeness is re- 
quired for validity: can collections be picked up or 
must they be designed? How can control be im- 
posed to isolate factor effects? For instance, how 
should non-repeatable user search data be treated? 
These issues reflect the conflict between the fact of in- 
terdependencies within systems and the aim of decom- 
position for understanding and design. Thus the key 
points for DR and TR as potential NLP tasks, as op- 
posed to e.g. database query or translation, is that scale 
phenomena count; thus the value of index descriptions i
in file discrimination, not document definition; and re- 
trieval output is contingent on the lifetime file, not the 
local situation. At the same time, information retrieval 
experience has shown that any approach can seem plau- 
sible, as also that whatever one does comes out grey in 
the wash. 
348 
