Machine Translation 
Alex Waibel 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh PA 15213 
Machine Translation was one of the declared highlights 
and focal points of the Human Language Technology 
Workshop. Machine Translation, or MT for short, has seen 
a renaissance in recent years, brought about by the 
availability of faster and more powerful computing, and 
several decades of advances in speech and language 
processing. ARPA now sponsors a machine translation 
initiative and companies and governments, domestic and 
overseas, view it as a growth area and devote significant 
efforts to this problem. Indeed, as nations are growing 
increasingly intertwined with each other, and as 
economies, defense, travel, and the media grow increas- 
ingly internationalized and globalized, handling and over- 
coming language barriers effectively, becomes an ever 
more pressing issue. 
The session at the ARPA workshop attempted todo justice 
to the various blossoming avenues that make up machine 
translationa aswe see it today. First and perhaps foremost 
is the question of how MT is to be done. Two approaches 
have a~acted considerable scientific interest and debate: 
the knowledge based and statistical approaches. The 
knowledge based approach is perhaps the more classical 
approach, based on linguistic theory and in its most purist 
incarnation relying on rule based systems for syntactic and 
semantic analysis and generation. The statistical pproach, 
in contrast, attempts o achieve solutions to machine trans- 
lation by finding suitable mappings between two languages 
via statistical nalysis based on large corpora. Critcs of the 
former will argue that a knowledge based approach will 
lack the ability to make soft decisions, deal with uncer- 
tainty and ambiguity and cannot learn. Critics of the latter 
will see the lack of structure and simplicity of the statistical 
model as too simplistic and limited, given the intricacies 
and rich structure of language. The two views were high- 
lighted and well argued by Ed Hovy and Peter Brown in 
two eloquent, enlightening as well as entertaining tutorials. 
Both cases were well delivered and the discussion that 
ensued highlighted perhaps the commonalities more than 
the differences. Indeed, as knowledge based approaches 
adopt statistical techniques and as proponents pf statsfical 
MT discover structure in language, the two approaches ap- 
pear to be growing toward a common middle ground. 
Learning and handling uncertainty as well as taking advan- 
tage of structural universals of human languages will guide 
progress in years to come. Along he way, better tools, 
better principles of evaluation and a better understanding 
of what the ultimate needs in MT would be will drive 
advances. 
Tools, dictionaries and knowledgebases of various kinds 
make up important parts of the Iranslation task (human or 
by machine). Short of academic squabbles over the "right" 
approach, a number of efforts are aiming to improve and 
expand these supporting technologies to achieve better 
quality translations more effectively and more efficiently 
by humans and/or machines. Acknowledging that accurate 
automatic translation of any unrestricted texts may still be 
a research item for a while, researchers attempt to develop 
tools that help the human translator in "Machine Aided 
Translation" (MAT), to do the job more effectively. Un- 
like speech recognition, a partial solution here can provide 
significant help or save costs. A paper by Kevin Knight 
entitled "Building a Large Ontology for Machine Trans- 
lation" and by Peter Brown et al entitled "But Dictionaries 
are Data too", address ways by which dictionaries and on- 
tologies can be automatically or semi-automatically 
generated and how they can be applied and used in MT. 
The papers "LINGSTAT: and Interactive, Machine-Aided 
Translation System" by Jonathan Yumron et al and "An 
MAT Tool and Its Effectiveness" by Robert Frederking et 
al. address the question of how tools for generating trans- 
lated documents semi-automatically can improve ffective- 
ness of translation. 
In the light of these different streams of activity it is par- 
ticularly difficult o define commonly useful and accepted 
evaluation procedures. Since there is no clear definition of 
a "correct" translation, it is not a simple matter of counting 
the number correct or error rate. Translation fidelity is 
subjective in part and is determined by various chemes in 
which panels of judges decide on the naturalness and intel- 
ligibility of translations. No doubt, the cost of performing 
such evaluations i considerable and different schemes are 
being discussed. The paper "Evaluation of Machine Trans- 
lation" by John White et al addresses this thorny issue and 
gives evaluation results using current evaluation measures 
used under the ARPA MT-program. 
Finally, two papers on Speech Translation address the 
questions that arise, when text is not the input medium, but 
if an input sentence is spoken in one language and should 
be translated into another. Applications for this kind of 
MT system abound (telecommunication, media, con- 
ferences, etc.). The problem of translation is made harder 
by the fact that the input to the MT-system is now cor- 
rupted by syntactic ill-formedness produced by the 
speaker, colloquialisms, acoustic noise, and speech recog- 
nition error. While a speech translation system may at first 
glance combine speech-to-text recognition with text based 
machine translation, its long term viability demands a 
tighter coupling as translation and recognition eed to 
derive the intended meaning, not a perfect textual 
transcription and need to involve conextual cues in a cross- 
lingual dialog. Attempts at answering some of these still 
open questions are under way and described in two papers: 
"Recent Advances in Speech Translation" by Monika 
Woszczyna et al and "A Speech to Speech Translation 
183 
System built from Standard Components" by Manny 
Rayner et al They describe currently operational speech 
translation systems. 
In summary, a good number of the outstanding issues in 
Machine Translation have been touched by the papers 
presented atthe workshop. It is our hope that hey pave the 
way for a rich ongoing debate between proponents of dif- 
ferent approaches, applications and deployment considera- 
tions to our collective benefit. Indeed, the academic efforts 
are well warranted by the urgent needs in an increasingly 
internationalized but linguistically splintered world. 
Session 8: Machine Translation Summary 
Machine Translation was one of the declared highlights 
and focal points of the Human Language Technology 
Workshop. Machine Translation, or MT for short, has seen 
a renaissance in recent years, brought about by the 
availability of faster and more powerful computing, and 
several decades of advances in speech and language 
processing. ARPA now sponsors a machine translation i - 
itiative and companies and governments, domestic and 
overseas, view it as a growth area and devote significant 
efforts to this problem. Indeed, as nations are growing 
increasingly intertwined with each other, and as 
economies, defense, travel, and the media grow increas- 
ingly internationalized and globalized, handling and over- 
coming language barriers effectively, becomes an ever 
more pressing issue. The session at the ARPA workshop 
attempted todo justice to the various blossoming avenues 
that make up machine translafiona as we see it today. First 
and perhaps foremost is the question of how MT is to be 
done. Two approaches have attracted considerable scien- 
tific interest and debate: the knowledge based and statis- 
tical approaches. The knowledge based approach is per- 
haps the more classical approach, based on linguistic 
theory and in its most purist incarnation relying on rule 
based systems for syntactic and semantic analysis and 
generation. The statistical pproach, in contrast, attempts o 
achieve solutions to machine translation by finding suitable 
mappings between two languages via statistical analysis 
based on large corpora. Cntcs of the former will argue that 
a knowledge based approach will lack the ability to make 
soft decisions, deal with uncertainty and ambiguity and 
cannot learn. Critics of the latter will see the lack of struc- 
ture and simplicity of the statistical model as too simplistic 
and limited, given the intricacies and rich structure of lan- 
guage. The two views were highlighted and well argued by 
Ed Hovy and Peter Brown in two eloquent, enlightening as 
well as entertaining tutorials. Both cases were well 
delivered and the discussion that ensued highlighted per- 
haps the commonalities more than the differences. Indeed, 
as knowledge based approaches adopt statistical techniques 
and as proponents pf statistical MT discover structure in 
language, the two approaches appear to be growing toward 
a common middle ground. Learning and handling uncer- 
tainty as well as taking advantage of structural universals 
of human languages will guide progress in years to come. 
Along he way, better tools, better principles of evaluation 
and a better understanding of what the ultimate needs in 
MT would be will drive advances. Tools, dictionaries and 
knowledgebases of various kinds make up important parts 
of the translation task (human or by machine). Short of 
academic squabbles over the right approach, a number of 
efforts are aiming to improve and expand these supporting 
technologies toachieve better quality translations more ef- 
fectively and more efficiently by humans and/or machines. 
Acknowledging that accurate automatic translation of any 
unrestricted texts may still be a research item for a while, 
researchers attempt to develop tools that help the human 
translator in Machine Aided Translation (MAT), to do the 
job more effectively. Unlike speech recognition, a partial 
solution here can provide significant help or save costs. A 
paper by Kevin Knight entitled Building a Large Ontology 
for Machine Translation and by Peter Brown et al entitled 
But Dictionaries are Data too, address ways by which dic- 
tionaries and ontologies can be automatically or semi- 
automatically generated and how they can be applied and 
used in MT, The papers LINGSTAT: and Interactive, 
Machine-Aided Translation System by Jonathan Yamron et 
al. and An MAT Tool and Its Effectiveness by Robert 
Frederking et al address the question of how tools for 
generating translated ocuments emi-automatically can 
~mprove ffectiveness of translation. In the light of these 
different streams of activity it is particularly difficult to 
define commonly useful and accepted evaluation 
procedures. Since there is no clear definition of a correct 
translation, it is not a simple matter of counting the number 
correct or error rate. Translation fidelity is subjective in 
part and is determined by various chemes in which panels 
of judges decide on the naturalness and intelligibility of 
translations. No doubt, the cost of performing such evalua- 
tions is considerable and different schemes are being dis- 
cussed. The paper Evaluation of Machine Translation by 
John White et al addresses this thorny issue and gives 
evaluation results using current evaluation measures used 
under the ARPA MT-program. Finally, two papers on 
Speech Translation address the questions that arise, when 
text is not the input medium, but if an input sentence is 
spoken in one language and should be translated into 
another. Applications for this kind of MT system abound 
(telecommunication, media, conferences, etc.). The 
problem of translation is made harder by the fact that the 
input to the MT-system is now corrupted by syntactic ill- 
formedness produced by the speaker, colloquialisms, 
acoustic noise, and speech recognition error. While a 
speech translation system may at first glance combine 
speech-to-text recognition with text based machine trans- 
lation, its long term viability demands a tighter coupling as 
translation and recognition eed to derive the intended 
meaning, not a perfect extual transcription and need to 
involve conextual cues in a cross-lingual dialog. Attempts 
at answering some of these still open questions are under 
way and described in two papers: Recent Advances in 
Speech Translation by Monika Woszczyna et al and A 
Speech to Speech Translation System built from Standard 
Components by Manny Rayner et al They describe cur- 
rently operational speech translation systems. In summary, 
a good number of the outstanding issues in Machine Trans- 
lation have been touched by the papers presented at the 
workshop. It is our hope that they pave the way for a rich 
ongoing debate between proponents of different ap- 
proaches, applications and deployment considerations to
our collective benefit. Indeed, the academic efforts are well 
warranted by the urgent needs in an increasingly inter- 
nationalized butlinguistically splintered world. 
184 
