VALIDATION OF TERMINOLOGICAL INFERENCE 
IN AN INFORMATION EXTRACTION TASK 
Marc Vilain 
The MITRE Corporation 
Burlington Rd. 
Bedford, MA 01730 
mbv@linus.mitre.org 
ABSTRACT 
This paper is concerned with an inferential approach to 
information extraction, reporting in particular on the results of an 
empirical study that was performed to validate the approach. The 
study brings together two lines of research: (1) the RHO frame- 
work for tractable terminological knowledge representation, and 
(2) the Alembic message understanding system. There are 
correspondingly two principal aspects of interest o this work. 
From the knowledge representation perspective, the present study 
serves to validate xperimentally a normal form hypothesis that 
guarantees tractability of inference in the RrtO framework. From 
the message processing perspective, this study substantiates the 
utility of limited inference to the information extraction task. 
1. SOME BACKGROUND 
Alembic is a natural language-based information extraction 
system that has been under development for about one 
year. As with many such systems, the information ex- 
traction process in Alembic occurs through pattern 
matching against he semantic representation f sentences. 
These representations are themselves derived from parsing 
the input text, in our case with a highly lexicalized neo- 
categorial grammar \[1\]. 
Experience has shown that this kind of approach can yield 
impressive performance l vels in the data extraction task 
(see \[18\]). We have found--as have others--that 
meaningful results can be obtained espite only having 
sketchy sentence semantics (as can happen when there are 
widespread gaps in the lexicon's emantic assignments). 
In addition, because the parsing process normalizes the 
sentence semantics to a significant degree, the number of 
extraction patterns can be relatively small, especially 
compared to approaches that use only rudimentary parsing. 
Strict semantic pattern-matching is unattractive, however, 
in cases that presume some degree of inference. Consider 
the following example of an East-West joint venture: 
\[...\] Samsung signed an agreement with Soyuz, the 
external-trade organization of the Soviet Union, to 
swap Korean TV's and VCR's for pig iron from the 
Soviet Union 
What makes this sentence an example of the given joint 
venture concept is an accumulation of small inferences: 
that Soyuz is a Soviet entity, that signing an agreement 
designates agreement between the signing parties, and that 
the resulting agreement holds between a Soviet and non- 
Soviet entity. Such examples suggest that it is far 
preferable to approach the extraction problem through a set 
of small inferences, rather than through some monolithic 
extraction pattern. This notion has been embodied in a 
number of earfier approaches, e.g. \[11\] or \[17\]. 
The inferential approach we were interested in bringing to 
bear on this problem is the RHO framework. RHO is a 
terminological classification framework that ultimately 
descends from KL-ONE. Unlike most recent such systems, 
however, RHO focuses on terminological inference (rather 
than subsumption). And whereas most KL-ONE descen- 
dants sacrifice completeness for computational tractability, 
inference in RHO is complete in polynomial time if termi- 
nological axioms meet a normal form criterion. 
Nevertheless, before embarking on a significant develop- 
ment effort to implement he RHO framework under 
Alembic, we wanted to verify that the framework was up to 
the data extraction task. In particular, we were keen to 
ensure that the theoretical criterion that guarantees 
polynomial time completeness for RHO was actually met in 
practice. Towards this end, my colleagues and I undertook 
an extensive mpirical study whose goal was, among 
others, to validate this criterion. 
The present paper is a summary of our findings, with a 
special focus on RHO itself and on the validation task. We 
provide some suggestive interpretations of these findings, 
and touch on current and ongoing work towards bringing 
RHO to bear on the extraction task in Alembic. 
2. THE RHO FRAMEWORK 
The RHO framework, as noted above, arose in reaction to 
standard approaches to terminological reasoning, as em- 
bodied in most descendants of KL-ONE, e.g., CLASSIC \[4\], 
BACK \[13\], LOOM \[12\], and many others. This line of work 
has come to place a major emphasis on computing concept 
150 
subsumption, i.e., the determination f whether a represen- 
tational description (a concept) necessarily entails another 
description. In our view, this emphasis mistaken. 
Indeed, this emphasis ignores the way in which practical 
applications have successfully exploited the terminological 
framework. These systems primarily rely on the operation 
of classification, especially instance classification. 
Although subsumption helps to provide a semantic model 
of classification, it does not necessarily follow that it 
should provide its computational underpinnings. 
In addition, the emphasis on complete subsumption algo- 
rithms has led to restricted languages that are representa- 
tionally weak. As is well-known, these languages have 
been the subject of increasingly pessimistic theoretical 
results, from intractability of subsumption \[5\], to 
undecidability of subsumption \[15, 16\], to intractability of
the fundamental normalization f a terminological KB \[14\]. 
Against this background, RHO was targeted to support 
instance classification, and thus departs in significant ways 
from traditional terminological reasoners. The most 
draconian departure is in separating the normal termino- 
logical notion of necessary and sufficient definitions into 
separate sufficiency axioms and necessity axioms. The 
thrust of the former is to provide the kind of antecedent 
inference that is the hallmark of classification, e.g., 
western-corp (x) ~ corporation (x) & hq-ln (x, y) (1) 
& western-nation (y) 
The role of necessity conditions is to provide consequent 
inference such as that typically associated with inheritance 
and sort restrictions on predicates, e.g., 
organization (x) ~-- corporation (x) (2) 
corporation (x) ~ western-corp (x) (3) 
organization (x) ~ agreement (x, y, z) (4) 
Although both classes of axioms are expressed in the same 
syntactic garb, namely function-free Horn clauses, they 
differ with respect to their inferential import. If one thinks 
of predicates as being organized according to some 
taxonomy (see Fig. 1), then necessity axioms encode infe- 
rence that proceeds up the hierarchy (i.e., inheritance), 
while sufficiency axioms encode inference that proceeds 
down the hierarchy (i.e., classification). 
The most interesting consequence of RHO's uniform 
language for necessity and sufficiency is that it facilitates 
the formulation of a cfitedon under which classification is
guaranteed to be tractable. For a knowledge base to be 
guaranteed tractable, the criterion requires that there be a 
tree shape to the implicit dependencies between the 
variables in any given axiom in the knowledge base. 
For the sample axioms above, Fig. 2 informally illustrates 
this notion of variable dependencies. Axiom (1), for 
organization 
corporation 
western-corp 
Figure 1: A predicate taxonomy 
X agree~ X ~ ~  
hq-in 
y y z 
Figure 2: Dependency trees for variables in axioms (1), 
on the left, and 0), on the fight. 
example, mentions two variables, x and y. A dependency 
between these variables is introduced by the predicative 
term hq-in(x,y): the term makes the two variables depen- 
dent by virtue of mentioning them as arguments of the 
same predicate. As the axiom mentions no other variables, 
its dependency graph is the simple tree on the left of Fig. 1. 
Similarly, in axiom (4) the agreement predicate makes 
both y and z dependent on x, also yielding a tree. Finally, 
axioms (2) and (3) lead to degenerate rees containing only 
x. Since all the dependency relations between these 
variables are tree-shaped, the knowledge base formed out 
of their respective axioms is tractable under the cfitedon. 
A formal proof that tractability follows from the cfitedon 
appears in an appendix below, as well as in \[19\]. 
3. VAL IDAT ING RHO 
This formal tractability result is appealing, especially in 
light of the overwhelming number of intractability claims 
that are usually associated with terminological reasoning. 
Its correctness, however, is crucially dependent on a 
normal form assumption, and as with all such normal form 
cntefia, it remains of little more than theoretical interest 
unless it is validated in practice. As we mentioned above, 
we strove to achieve such a validation by determining 
through a paper study whether the RHO framework could 
be put to use in the data extraction phase of Alembic. 
Towards this end, my colleagues and I assembled a set of 
unbiased texts on Soviet economics. The validation task 
then consisted of deriving a set of terminological rules that 
would allow RHO to perform the inferential pattern 
matching necessary toextract from these texts all instances 
of a pre-determined class of target concepts. The 
hypothesis that RHO's tractability criterion can be met in 
practice would thus be considered validated just in case 
this set of inference rules was tractable under the criterion. 
151 
/ - -  
3.1. Some assumptions 
At the time that we undertook the study, however, the 
Alembic implementation was still in its infancy. We thus 
had to make a number of assumptions about what could be 
expected out of Alembic's parsing and semantic ompo- 
sition components. In so doing, we took great pain not to 
require superhuman performance on the part of the parser, 
and restricted our expected syntactic overage to pheno- 
mena that we felt were well within the state of the art. 
In particular, we rejected the need to derive S. As with 
many similar systems, Alembic uses a fragment parser that 
produces partial syntactic analyses when its grammar is 
insufficient to derive S. In addition, we exploited 
Alembic's hierarchy of syntactic ategories, and postulated 
a number of relatively fine-grained categories that were not 
currently in the system. This allowed us for example to 
assume we could obtain the intended parse of "Irish-Soviet 
airline" on the basis of the pre-modifiers being both 
adjectives of geographic origin (and hence co-ordinable). 
We also exploited the fact that the Alembic grammar is 
highly lexicalized (being based on the combinatorial 
categofial framework). This allowed us to postulate some 
fairly detailed subcategorization frames for verbs and their 
nominalizations. As is cu~ently the case with our system, 
we assumed that verbs and their nominalizations are 
canonicalized toidentical semantic representations. 
Elsewhere at the semantic level, we assumed basic 
competence at argument-passing, a characteristic already in 
place in the system. This allowed us, for example, to 
assume congruent semantics for the phrases "Samsung was 
announced to have X'd" and "Samsung has X'd." 
3.2. The validation corpus 
With these assumptions in mind, we assembled a corpus of 
data extraction inference problems in the area of Soviet 
economics. The corpus consisted of text passages that had 
been previously identified for an evaluation of information 
retrieval techniques in this subject area. The texts were 
drawn from over 6200 Wall Street Journal articles from 
1989 that were released through the ACL-DCI. These 
articles were filtered (by extensive use of GREP) tO a subset 
of 300-odd articles mentioning the then-extant Soviet 
Union. These articles were read in detail to locate all 
passages on a set of three pre-determined conomic topics: 
1. East-West joint ventures, these being any 
business arrangements between Soviet and 
non-Soviet agents. 
2. Hard currency, being any discussion of 
attempts to introduce a convertible unit of 
monetary value in the former USSR. 
3. Private cooperatives, i.e., employee-owned 
enterprises within the USSR. 
We found 85 such passages in 74 separate articles (1.2% of 
the initial set of articles under consideration). 
Among these, 47 passages were eliminated from consi- 
deration because they were just textual mentions of the 
target concepts (e.g. the string "joint venture") or of some 
simple variant. These passages could easily be identified 
by Boolean keyword techniques, and as such were not 
taken to provide a particularly insightful validation of a 
complex NL-based information-extraction process! 
Unfortunately, this eliminated all instances of private 
cooperatives from the corpus, because in these texts, the 
word "cooperative" is a perfect predictor of the concept. 
An additional four passages were also removed uring a 
cross-rater reliability verification. These were all amplifi- 
cations of an earlier instance of one of the target concepts, 
e.g., "U.S. and Soviet officials hailed the joint project." 
These passages were eliminated because the corpus 
collectors had differing intuitions as to whether they were 
sufficient indications in and of themselves of the target 
concepts, or were somehow pragmatically "parasitic" upon 
earlier instances of the target concept. The remaining 34 
passages required some degree of terminological inference, 
and formed the corpus for this study. 
4. INFERENTIAL  DATA EXTRACTION 
We then set about writing a collection of terminological 
axioms to handle this corpus. As these axioms are 
propositional in nature, and the semantic representations 
produced by Alembic are not strictly propositional, this 
required specifying a mapping from the language of 
interpretations to that of the inference axioms. 
4.1. Semantic representation i  Alembic 
Alembic produces emantic representations at the increa- 
singly popular interpretation level \[2, 10\]. That is, instead 
of generating fully scoped and disambiguated logical 
forms, Alembic produces representations that are ambi- 
guous with respect to quantifier scoping. For example, the 
noun phrase "a gold-based ruble" maps into something 
akin to the following interpretation: 
\[ \[head ruble\] 
\[quant :exists\] 
\[args NIL\] 
\[proxy P117\] 
\[roods { \[ \[head basis-of~ 
\[args { Pl17 \[ \[head gold\] 
\[quant :kind\]\] }\]\]}\]\] 
Semantic heads of phrases are mapped to the head slot of 
the interpretation, arguments are mapped to the args slot, 
152 
modifiers to the mods slot, and generalized quantifiers to 
the quant slot. The proxy slot contains a unique variable 
designating the individuals that satisfy the interpretation. 
If this interpretation were to be fully mapped to a sorted 
first-order logical form, it would result in the following 
sentence, where gold is treated as a kind individual: 
3 Pl17 : ruble basis-of(P117, gold) 
Details of this semantic framework can be found in \[3\]. 
4.2 Conversion to propositional form 
Axioms in RHO are strictly function-free Horn clauses, and 
as such are intended to match neither interpretations or 
first-order logical forms. As a result, we needed to specify 
a mapping from interpretations to some propositional 
encoding that can be exploited by RHO'S terminological 
axioms. In brief, this mapping hyper-Skolemizes the 
proxy variables in the interpretation a d then recursively 
flattens the interpretation's modifiers. 1 
For example, the interpretation for "a gold-based ruble" is 
mapped to the following propositions: 
ruble(Pll7) 
basis-of(P117, gold) 
The interpretation has been flattened by pulling its 
modifier to the same level as the head proposition (yielding 
an implicit overall conjunction). In addition, the proxy 
variable has been interpreted as a Skolem constant, in this 
case the "gensymed" individual ~17. 
This interpretation of proxies as Skolem constants is 
actually hyper-Skolemization, because we perform it on 
universally quantified proxies as well as on existentially 
quantified ones. Ignoring issues of negation and disjunc- 
tion, this unorthodox Skolemization process has a curious 
model-theoretic justification (which is beyond our present 
scope). Intuitively, however, one can think of these hyper- 
Skolemized variables as designating the individuals that 
would satisfy the interpretation, once it has been assigned 
some unambiguously scoped logical form. 
To see this, say we had the following inference rule: 
m-loves-w(x,y) ~-- loves (x, y) & man (x) & woman(y) 
Now say this rule were to be applied against he semantics 
of the infamously ambiguous case of "every man loves a 
woman." In propositionalized form, this would be: 
man(P118) 
woman(P119) 
Ioves(P118,PI19) 
1This glosses over issues of event reference, which we 
address through apartly Davidsonian framework, as in \[9\]. 
target occurrences, sufficiency rule density, 
n rules, r r/n 
joint venture 12 17 1.4 
hard curr. 22 13 .59 
Table 1: Summary of experimental findings. 
From this, the rule will infer m-loves-w(Pl18,P119). If we 
think of Pl18 and Pl19 as designating the individuals that 
satisfy the logical form of "every man loves a woman" in 
some model, then we can see that indeed the m-loves-w 
relation necessarily must hold between them. This is true 
regardless of whether the model itself satisfies the standard 
V-3 scoping of the sentence or the notorious 3-V scoping. 
This demonstrates a crucial property of this approach, 
namely that it enables inferential extraction over ambi- 
guously scoped text, without requiring resolution of the 
scope ambiguity (and without expensive theorem proving). 
5. F INDINGS 
Returning to our validation study, we took this propo- 
sifionalized representation as the basis for writing the set of 
axioms necessary to cover our corpus of data extraction 
problems. In complete honesty, we expected that the 
resulting axioms would not all end up meeting the trac- 
tability criterion. Natural anguage is notoriously complex, 
and even such classic simple KL-ONE concepts as 
Brachman's arch \[6\] do not meet he criterion. 
What we found took us by surprise. We came across many 
examples that were challenging at various levels: complex 
syntactic phenomena, nightmares of reference resolution, 
and the ilk. However, once the corpus passages were 
mapped to their corresponding interpretations, the termi- 
nological axioms necessary to perform data extraction 
from these interpretations all met the criterion. 
Table 1, above, summarizes these findings. To cover our 
corpus of 34 passages, we required between two and three 
dozen sufficiency rules, depending upon how one encoded 
certain economic concepts, and depending on what 
assumptions one made about argument-passing i  syntax. 
We settled on a working set of thirty such rules. 
Note that this inventory does not include any necessity 
rules. We ignored necessity rules for the present purposes 
in part because they only encode inheritance r lationships. 
The size of their inventory thus only reflects the degree to 
which one chooses to model intermediate l vels of the 
domain hierarchy. For this study, we could arguably have 
used none. In addition, necessity rules are guaranteed to
meet the tractability criterion, and were consequently of
only secondary interest to our present objectives. 
153 
5.1. Considerations for data extraction 
From a data extraction perspective, these results are clearly 
preliminary. Looking at the positive side, we are encou- 
raged that the rules for our hard currency examples were 
shared over multiple passages, as follows from their frac- 
tional rule density of .59 (see Table 1). The joint venture 
rules fared less well, mainly because the concept hey en- 
code is fairly complex, and can be described in many ways. 
Given our restricted ata set, however, it is not possible to 
conclude how well either set of rules will generalize if 
presented with a larger corpus. What is clearly needed is a 
larger corpus of examples. This would allow us to 
estimate generalizability of the rules by considenng the 
asymptotic growth of the rule set as it is extended to cover 
more examples. Unfortunately, constructing such a corpus 
is a laborious task, since the examples we are interested in
are precisely those that escape simple automated search 
techniques such as Boolean keyword patterns. The time 
and expense that were incurred in constructing the MUC3/4 
and TIPSTER corpora ttest to this difficulty. 
We soon hope to know more about this question of rule 
generalizability. We are currently in the process of 
implementing a version of RHO in the context of the 
Alembic system, which is now considerably more mature 
than when we undertook the present study. We intend to 
exploit this framework for our participation i  MUCS, as 
well as retool our system for the MUC4 task. As the 
TIPSTER and MUC4 data sets contain a considerably greater 
number of training examples than our Soviet economics 
corpus, we expect o gain much better insights into the 
ways in which our rule sets grow and generalize. 
5.2. Considerations for R.O 
From the perspective of our terminological inference 
framework, however, these preliminary results are quite 
encouraging indeed. We started with a very simple 
tractable inference framework, and studied how it could be 
applied to a very difficult problem in natural anguage 
processing. And it appears to work. 
Once again, one should refrain from reaching overly 
general conclusions based on a small test sample. And 
admittedly RHO gets a lot of help from other parts of 
Alembic, especially the parser and a rudimentary inheri- 
tance taxonomy. Further analyses, however, reveal some 
additional findings that suggest hat RHO's tractability 
cfitedon may be of general validity to this kind of natural 
language inference. 
Most interestingly, the tractability result can be understood 
in the context of some basic characteristics of natural 
language sentence structure. In particular, axioms that 
violate the tractability criterion can only be satisfied by 
sentences that display anaphora or definite reference. For 
example, an axiom with the following fight hand side: 
own(x, z) & scorn(x, y) & dislike(y, z) 
matches the sentences "the man who owns a Ferrari scorns 
anyone who dislikes it/his car/that car/the car." It is 
impossible, however, to satisfy this kind of circular axiom 
without invoking one of these referential mechanisms (at 
least in English). This observation, which was made in 
another context in \[8\], suggests a curious alignment 
between tractable cases of terminological natural language 
inference and non-anaphofic cases of language use. 
It is particularly tantalizing that the cases where these 
terminological inferences are predicted to become compu- 
tationally expensive are just those for which heuristic inter- 
pretation methods eem to play a large role (e.g., discourse 
structure and other reference resolution strategies). 
Though one must avoid the temptation to draw too strong a 
conclusion form such coincidences, one is still left thinking 
of Alice's ineffable words, "Curiouser and curiouser." 
?,~ Acknowledgments ?,~ 
Much gratitude is owed John Aberdeen for preparing our 
corpus through tireless perusal of the Wall Street Journal. 
Many thanks also to those who served as technical 
inspiration or as sounding boards: Bill Woods, Remko 
Scha, Steve Minton, Dennis Connolly, and John Burger. 
REFERENCES 
\[11 
\[2\] 
\[31 
\[4\] 
151 
\[6\] 
\[71 
181 
Aberdeen, J., Burger, J., Connolly, D., Roberts, S., & 
Vilain, M. (1992). "Mitre-Bedford: Description of the 
Alembic system as used for MUC-4". In \[18\]. 
Alshawi, H.cS-Van Eijck, J. (1989). "Logical forms in the 
core language ngine". In Prcdgs. Of ACL89. Vancouver, 
ac, 25-32. 
Bayer, S. L. ~Vilain, M. B. (1991). "The relation-based 
knowledge representation f King Kong". Sigart Bulletin 
2(3), 15-21. 
Brachman, R. J., Borgida, A., McGuiness, D. L., drPatel- 
Schneider, P. F. (1991). "Living with CLASSIC". In 
Sowa, J., ed., Principles of Semantic Networks. San 
Mateo, CA: Morgan-Kaufmann. 
Brachman, R. J. ~'Levesque, H. (1984). "The tractability 
of subsumption i frame-based description languages". 
In Prcdgs. of AAAtS4. Austin, Texas, 34-37. 
Brachman, R. J. ~ Schmolze, J. K. (1985). "An over- 
view of the KL-ONE knowledge representation system". 
Cognitive Science 9(2), 171-216. 
Garey, M. R. ~Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and 
Intractability. New York: W. H. Freeman. 
Haddock, N. J., (1992). "Semantic evaluation as 
constraint network consistency". In Prcdgs. of AAAt92. 
San Jose, CA, 415-420. 
154 
\[9\] Hobbs, J. R. (1985). "Ontological promiscuity". In 
Prcdgs. Of ACLSS. Chicago, IL, 119-124. 
\[10\] Hobbs, J. R. drShieber, S. M. (1987). "An algorithm for 
generating quantifier scopings". Computational 
Linguistics 13(1-2), 47-63. 
\[11\] Jacobs, P. S. (1988). "Concretion: Assumption-based 
understanding". In Prcdgs. of the 1988 Intl. Conf. on 
Comput. Linguistics (COLING88). Budapest, 270-274. 
\[12\] MacGregor, R. (1991). "Inside the LOOM description 
classifier". Sigart Bulletin 2(3), 88-92. 
\[13\] Nebel, B. (1988). "Computational complexity of 
terminological reasoning in BACK". Artificial Intelligence 
34(3), 371-383. 
\[14\] Nebel, B. (1990). "Terminological reasoning in inhe- 
rently intractable". Artificial Intelligence 43, 235-249. 
\[15\] Patel-Schneider, P. F. (1989). Undecidability of sub- 
sumption in NIKL. Artificial Intelligence 39: 263-272. 
\[16\] Schmidt-SchauB, M. (1989). "Subsumption i  KL-ONE is 
undecidable". InPrcdgs. ofgRsg. Toronto, ON. 
\[ 17\] Stallard, D. G. (1986). "A terminological simplification 
transformation for natural language question-answering 
systems". In Prcdgs. Of ACL86. New York, NY, 241-246. 
\[181 Sundheim, B.,ed. (1992). Prcdgs. of the Fourth Message 
Understanding Conf. (MUC-4), McLean, VA, 215-222. 
\[19\] Vilain, M. (1991). "Deduction as parsing: Tractable 
classification i  the KL-ONE framework". In Prcdgs. of 
AAAI91. Anaheim, CA, 464-470 
APPENDIX:  PROOF OF  TRACTABIL ITY  
To demonstrate he validity of the tractability criterion, we 
only need consider the computational cost of finding all 
instantiations of the fight-hand side of an axiom. In gene- 
ral, finding a single such instantiafion is NP-complete, by 
reduction to the conjunctive Boolean query problem (see 
\[7\]). Intuitively, this is because general function-flee Horn 
clauses can have arbitrary interactions between the 
variables on the right-hand side, i.e., their dependency 
graphs are fully cross-connected, as in: 
R(vl,v2) & R(vl,v3) & R(v2,v.5) & R(vl,v4) & R(v2,v4)... 
Intuitively again, verifying the instantiation of a given 
variable in a rule may require (in the worst case) checking 
all instantiations of all other variables in the rule. Under 
the usual assumptions of NP-completeness, no known 
algorithm exists that performs better in the worst case than 
enumerating all these instantiafions. As each variable may 
take on as many as ~c instanfiations, where t? is the number 
of constants present in the knowledge base, the overall cost 
of finding a single globally consistent instantiation is 
O(x~), where ~ is the number of variables in the rule. The 
resulting complexity is thus exponential in ~, which itself 
varies in the worst case with the length of the rule. 
Consider now an axiom that satisfies the tractability 
criterion, yielding a graph such as that in Fig. 3. By 
left-hand side vars: 11 ..... I a 
/ \ f Vl v 4 right-handsidevars: / ~ / 
v 2 v 3 v 5 v 6 
Figure 3: A dependency graph. 
definition, the root of the graph corresponds to all the 
variables on the left-hand side, and all other nodes 
correspond to some variable introduced on the fight-hand 
side. The cost of finding all the instantiations of the root 
variables is bounded by t? a, where a is the maximal 
predicate valence for all the predicates appearing in the 
database. The cost of instantiating each non-root variable v
is in turn bounded by ax  a, corresponding to the cost of 
enumerating all possible instantiations of any predicate 
relating v to its single parent in the graph. 
The topological restriction of the criterion leads dkectly to 
the fact that the exponent of these terms is a low- 
magnitude constant, a, rather than a parameter, ~, that can 
be allowed to grow arbitrarily with the complexity of 
inference rules. The topological restriction also leads to 
the fact that these terms contribute additively to the overall 
cost of finding all instantiations ofa rule. This overall cost 
is thus bounded by t?a + atca+.. .+atca,  or O(~ara). 
Finally, we note that with the appropriate indexing scheme, 
finding all consequents of all rules only adds a multipli- 
cative cost of p, where p is the total number of rules, 
yielding a final overall cost of O(p~axa). It is often 
assumed that predicates in natural languages have no more 
than three arguments, so this formula approximately 
reduces to O(~).  
This is of course a worst-case stimate. We are looking 
forward to measuring run-time performance figures on the 
MUC5 task, and are of course hoping to find actual per- 
formance to lie well below this cubic upper bound. 
155 
