Natural  Language Research 
PIs: Aravind Joshi, Mitch Marcus, Mark Steedman, and Bonnie Webber 
Department of Computer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
email: joshi@cis.upenn.edu 
OBJECTIVE 
The main objective is basic research and system devel- 
opment leading to (1) characterization of information 
carried by (a) syntax, semantics, and discourse struc- 
ture, (h) their relation to information carried by into- 
nation, and (c) development of methods for using this 
information for generation and understanding; (2) devel- 
opment of architectures for integration of utterance plan- 
ning with lexical, syntactic and intonational choice; (3) 
development of incremental strategies for using syntac- 
tic, semantic, and pragmatic knowledge in understand- 
ing and generating language. 
RECENT ACCOMPL ISHMENTS 
? Developed a new weakly supervised learning algo- 
rithm that can bracket text using a simple distri- 
butional error-correcting technique, which performs 
as well as recent applications of the I-O algorithm 
while using an order of magnitude l ss training data. 
A similar technique has been applied successfully to 
the problem of prepositional phrase attachment. 
? Developed techniques that combine WordNet and 
corpus-based lexical statistics acquired from the 
Penn Treebank. These techniques are being applied 
to the resolution of syntactic ambiguity. 
? The Penn Treebank project has released the results 
of its first three year phase as a CDROM through 
the Linguistic Data Consortium, consisting of 4.5 
million words of part-of-speech tagged text and 3 
million words of skeletally parsed text, including a 
parsed version of the Brown corpus. 
? A categorial grammar based theory of intonation 
structure and its discourse meaning has been devel- 
oped and implemented in a database query system 
which takes as input an orthographic representation 
of spoken questions including intonational annota- 
tions, and yields as output a synthesized spoken re- 
sponse as a speech wave bearing an intonation con- 
tour that is appropriate to the context established 
by the question. 
Developed an environment, Design World, for sim- 
ulating interactive task-oriented ialogue between 
two agents, that allows us to explore a number of 
key issues in inter-agent coordination. 
Investigated the way in which dialogue processing 
is cued by patterns of spoken language in task- 
oriented interactions between multiple agents. Re- 
sults show that the redundancy that makes commu- 
nication more robust is typically marked by prosodic 
destressing or broad focus. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Explore statistical morphology induction, lexi- 
cal disambiguation, and language modeling with 
stochastic dependency grammars. 
? Extend the use of WordNet and lexical statistics to 
the resolution of a broader set of syntactic ambigui- 
ties, and to apply these techniques to the construc- 
tion of stochastic language models. 
? Contribute to a model of limited processing for dis- 
course, using corpora collected by the Linguistic 
Data Consortium as the basis for a corpus-based 
analysis of bottom-up cues to discourse structure, 
such as variation in the forms of referring expres- 
sions, and prosodic marking by topline and baseline 
variation. 
? Extend the part-of-speech disambiguation strategies 
to the disambiguation f lexical tree assignments o
words in a lexicalized tree-adjoining grammar. 
? Develop a minimal-response part-of-speech tagger 
for conversational German without the use of on- 
line dictionaries and with minimal human resources. 
? Investigate the acquisition of lexical information 
about novel verbs by combining information about 
syntactic ontexts with information about semantic 
relationships acquired using WordNet. 
? Develop the 'strategic' or discourse-planning com- 
ponent of the spoken reply system. 
419 
