Spoken Language Recognition and Understanding 
Victor Zue and Lynette Hirschman 
Spoken Language Systems Group 
Laboratory for Computer Science 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 
1. PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this research is to demonstrate spoken lan- 
guage systems in support of interactive problem solving. 
The MIT spoken language system combines SUMMIT, a 
segment-based speech recognition system, and TINA, a 
probabilistic natural anguage system, to achieve speech 
understanding. The system accepts continuous peech 
input and handles multiple speakers without explicit 
speaker enrollment. It engages in interactive dialogue 
with the user, providing output in the form of tabular 
and graphical displays, as well as spoken and written re- 
sponses. We have demonstrated the system on several 
applications, including travel planning and direction as- 
sistance; it has also been ported to several anguages, 
including Japanese and French. 
2. RECENT RESULTS 
? Improved recognition and understanding: 
Reduced word error rate by over 30% through the 
use of improved phonetic modeling and more pow- 
erful N-gram language models; improved language 
understanding by 35% making use of stable corpus 
of annotated ata; other improvements include the 
ability to generate a word lattice. 
? Real-time~ software-only SLS system: Devel- 
oped near (1.5 times) real-time software only ver- 
sion of SUMMIT, using MFCC and fast match in the 
mixture Gaussian computation, running on a DEC 
Alpha or an HP735 workstation. 
? Evaluation of interactive dialogue: Continued 
study of interactive dialogue, focusing on error de- 
tection and recovery issues; supported multi-site 
logfile evaluation through distribution of portable 
logfile evaluation software and instructions. 
? On-line ATIS: Applied spoken language technology 
to access on-line dynamic air travel system via Com- 
puserve; the demonstration system, extending the 
MIT ATIS system, provides an interactive language- 
based interface to find flights, make reservations and 
show seating assignments. 
? Multi- l ingual VOYAGER: Ported SUMMIT and 
TINA to Japanese, to create a speaker-independent 
bilingual VOYAGER; English and Japanese use 
the same semantic frame representation and the 
generation mechanism is modular and language- 
independent, supporting a system with indepen- 
dently toggled input and output languages. 
? Support  to DARPA SLS community:  Chaired 
the ISAT Study Group on Multi-Modal Language- 
Based Systems; continued to chair MADCOW co- 
ordinating multi-site data collection, including in- 
troduction of experimental end-to-end evaluation; 
chaired first Spoken Language Technology Work- 
shop at MIT, Jan. 20-22, 1993. 
3. FUTURE PLANS 
? Large vocabulary spoken language systems:  
Explore realistic large vocabulary spoken language 
applications, (e.g., on-line air travel planning), in- 
cluding issues of system portability and language- 
based interface design. 
? Multi l ingual knowledge-base access: Use a 
uniform language-independent semantic frame to 
support extensions of VOYAGER and ATIS to other 
(more inflected) languages, e.g., French, German, 
Italian, and Spanish. 
? Interfacing speech and language: Investigate 
loosely and tightly coupled integration, using word 
lattice and TINA-2'S layered bigram model. 
? Dialogue modeling: Incorporate dialogue state- 
specific language models to improve recognition 
in interactive dialogue, collect and study data on 
human-human i teractive problem-solving, and ex- 
plore alternative generation and partial understand- 
ing strategies. 
? Language modeling: Investigate low-perplexity 
language models and the capture of higher level in- 
formation, e.g., semantic lass, phrase level infor- 
mation, and automatic grammar acquisition. 
401 
