SPOKEN-LANGUAGE RESEARCH AT CARNEGIE MELLON 
Raj Reddy, Principal Investigator 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of speech research at Carnegie Mellon continues to 
be the development of spoken language systems that effec- 
tively intelFate speech processing into the human-computer 
interface in a way that facilitates the use of computers in the 
performance of practical tasks. Research in spoken lan- 
guage is currently focussed in the following areas: 
? Improved speech recognition technologies: Extending 
the useful vocabulary of SPHINX-II by use of better phonetic 
and linguistic models and better search techniques, provid- 
ing for rapid configuration for new tasks. 
? Fluent human/machine interfaces: Developing tools that 
allow users to easily communicate with computers by voice 
and understanding the role of voice in the computer inter- 
face. 
? Unders tand ing  spontaneous  spoken language:  
Developing flexible recognition and parsing strategies to 
cope with phenomena peculiar to the lexical and grammati- 
coal structure of spontaneous spoken language. Investi- 
gate methods of integrating speech recognition and 
natural anguage understanding. Development ofautomatic 
training procedures for these grammars. 
? Acoustical and environmental  robustness: Developing 
procedures to enable good recognition in office environ- 
ments with desktop microphones and a useful evel of rec- 
ognition in more severe nvironments. 
? Rapid integration of speech technology: Developing an 
approach that will enable application developers and end 
users to incorporate speech recognition into their applica- 
tions quickly and easily, as well as the dynamic modifica- 
tion of grammars and vocabularies. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? SPmNX-II has been extended with a multi-pass search algo- 
rithm that incorporates two passes of beam search and a 
final A-star pass that can apply long-distance language 
models as well as produce alternative hypotheses. 
? Joint training of acoustic models and language models is 
currently being explored in the context of the Unified Sto- 
chastic Engine (USE). 
? A framework for long-distance language modeling was 
developed, in collaboration with IBM researchers. A pilot 
system using this model yielded significant reduction in 
perplexity over the trigram model. 
? Developed improved recognition, grammar coverage and 
context handling that reduced SLS errors for the ATIS 
Benchmark by 67%. We also improved the robusmess and 
user feedback in our live ATIS demo. 
? Developed and evaluated two methods for more tightly 
integrating speech recognition and natural anguage under- 
standing, producing error reductions of 20% compared to 
the loosely-coupled system. 
? Added automatic detection capability for out-of-vocabulary 
words and phrases. New words are now entered instantly 
into the phone dialer application given only their spelling. 
? Acoustical pre-processing algorithms for environmental 
robustness were extended to the CSR domain and made 
mote efficient. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Use our existing language modeling framework to model 
long-distance dependence on words and word combina- 
tions. These new models will be allow the recognizer to 
take advantage ofimproved linguistic knowledge at the ear- 
liest possible stage. 
? Implement confidence measures for large-vocabulary SLS 
systems, for new-word etection and greater accuracy. 
? Continue to explore issues associated with very large 
vocabulary (lO0,O00-worcO recognition systems. 
? Continue to develop methods for automatically acquisition 
of Natural Language information used by an SLS system. 
? Improve user interaction in the ATIS system, including 
clarification and mixed initiative dialogs, speech output and 
form-based displays. 
? Begin to develop a new SLS application, such as a tele- 
phone-based form filling application. 
? Provide grammar switching and instantaneous new word 
addition for the general SPmNX-II decoder. 
? Develop and test a 100,000-word pronunciation lexicon 
that will be available in the public domain. 
? Continue to improve our cepstrum-based nvironmental 
compensation procedu~s. 
? Demonstrate more robust microphone-array techniques. 
? Extend our work on environmental robustness tolong-dis- 
tance telephone lines. 
? Continue to enhance our spoken language interfaces, by 
introducing speech response capabilities and facilities for 
user customizing. Continue to investigate the appropriate 
use of speech in multi-modal interfaces. 
390 
