Applying Statistical Methods to Machine Translation 
Peter E Brown, Principal h~vestigator 
IBM / T.J. Watson Research Center  
P.O. Box 704 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of our project is to demonstrate he effectiveness of
statistical techniques in machine translation by improving the 
stale of the art in large-vocabulary French-to-English transla- 
tion. 
A common paradigm in machine translation isanalysis, trans- 
fer, and synthesis. In French-to-English translation, for ex- 
ample, a French sentence is analyzed into an intermediate 
structure in which various ambiguities present in the surface 
form have been resolved. This structure is then transferred 
to a similar English structure. Finally, an English sentence is
synthesized from the intermediate English structure. Analy- 
sis, transfer, and synthesis each require considerable linguistic 
insight for their successful dispatch. 
The approach taken in this project is to incorporate models 
of statistical transfer into the analysis-transfer-synthesis para- 
digm. This will be done by constructing deterministic, invert- 
ible transformations of the surface forms in the bilingual data 
which improve the locality of the transfer process and which 
reduce its variety. An example of the former is part-of-speech 
labeling, which is best performed by an examination of the 
global properties of the sentence and simplifies transfer by 
distinguishing, for example, between 'le' the article, and 'le' 
the direct object. An example of the latter is morphological 
analysis which exposes the fraternity of different forms of 
the same root and obviates the discovery of separate statistics 
relating these different forms in the two languages. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Developed Translator's Workstation. 
In the spring of 1992, we wrote TransMan, a post-editor's 
workstation, which permits ahuman translator to rapidly edit 
translations produced automatically b  a machine. TransMan 
allows cutting and pasting of sections of machine translations, 
and rapid access to an on-line dictionary. In a July of 1992 
DARPA evaluation, TransMan was used by human subjects 
to translate 35 percent more rapidly than they could translate 
without machine assistance. 
Speech Recognition in Machine Translation. 
It has been observed that humans can translate nearly four 
times as quickly with little loss in accuracy simply by dictat- 
ing, as opposed to typing, their translations. We considered 
the integration of speech recognition into a translator's work- 
station. In particular, we showed how to combine statistical 
models of speech, language, and translation i to a single sys- 
tem that decodes a sequence of words in a target language 
from a sequence of words in a source language together with 
an utterance of the target language sequence. We obtained 
results which demonstrate hat the difficulty of the speech 
recognition task can be reduced by making use of information 
contained in the source text being translated. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
In the July evaluation of our system we found a number of 
sources of errors. Some of the major problems include limited 
vocabularies, translation of numbers, translation of names, 
morphological errors, errors in syntactic transformations, and 
limitations in our trigram language model. 
We plan to construct name and number detectors and transla- 
tors. These module will detect names and numbers in French 
text, and replace them by name and number markers. The 
markers will then be translated statistically into English name 
and number markers. The English markers will then be trans- 
lated by rule into English names and numbers. Incorporating 
these modules into our system will permit our language model 
to 'see back through' multi-word names and numbers. 
We plan to increase the number of surface forms in our French 
vocabulary from 60,000 to 280,000 and the number of surface 
forms in our English vocabulary from 40,000 to 70,000. We 
will also completely reconstruct our morphological tables for 
both French and English. 
A number of new rule-based syntactic transformations will 
be added to account for problems encountered in the July 
evaluation. 
Finally, we plan to incorporate a decision-tree language model 
into our system which can make predictions based on signifi- 
cantly more context han our existing trigram model. 
397 
