Text  Ret r ieva l  and  Rout ing  Techn iques  Based  on an 
In fe rence  Net  
W. Bruce Croft, Principal Investigator 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, MA 01002 
PROJECT GOALS 
The TIPSTER detection project at the University of 
Massachusetts is focusing on information retrieval and 
routing techniques for large, full-text databases, includ- 
ing Japanese. The project approach is to use improved 
representations of text and information needs in the 
framework of a probabilistic inference net model of re- 
trieval. 
In this project, retrieval (and routing) is viewed as a 
probabilistic inference process which "compares" text 
representations based on different forms of linguistic 
and statistical evidence to representations of informa- 
tion needs based on similar evidence from natural an- 
guage queries and user interaction. New techniques for 
learning (relevance feedback) and extracting term rela- 
tionships from text are also being studied. 
Some of the specific research issues we are addressing are 
morphological analysis in English and Japanese, word 
sense disambiguation i  English, the use of phrases and 
other syntactic structure in English and Japanese, the 
use of special purpose recognizers in representing doc- 
uments and queries, analysing natural anguage queries 
to build structured representations of information eeds, 
learning techniques appropriate for routing and struc- 
tured queries, probability estimation techniques for in- 
dexing, and techniques for automatically building and 
using thesauri. A rctricval system based on the infer- 
ence net approach, INQUERY, has been built for study- 
ing these issues and distribution. 
RECENT RESULTS 
The results generated in the TIPSTER and TREC 
evaluations have been generally successful in that the 
probabilistic approach implemented in INQUERY has 
achieved the highest average levels of precision. We have 
also found that capturing a good description of the in- 
formation eed, either automatically or with some sim- 
ple user input, has a significant impact on effectiveness. 
In particular, describing paragraph-level structure be- 
tween concepts hasbeen effective, whereas phrase-level 
structure has (somewhat surprisingly) only resulted in 
small improvements. Special purpose recognizers, such 
as for company names, have resulted in small improve- 
ments. Early experiments with automatic expansion of 
the queries using associated words found through analy- 
sis of the corpus have begun to show promise. Relevance 
feedback techniques used for the routing situation where 
there are many previous relevance judgements have ad- 
vanced to the point where the average performance of 
the fully automatically generated queries can compete 
with the best manually-adjusted queries. With regard to 
Japanese, we have found that retrieval using character- 
based indexing of documents combined with word-based 
segmentation of the queries results in performance that 
is as good as word-based indexing of the documents. 
This is significant since character-based indexing is much 
more efficient han current word segmenters. 
418 
