MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES FOR DOCUMENT F ILTERING 
Richard M. Tong, Lee A. Appelbaum 
Advanced Dec is ion  Systems 
(a d iv is ion o f  BoozoAl len  & Hami l ton ,  Inc.)  
1500 P lymouth  Street, Mounta in  View, CA 94043 
PROJECT GOALS 
BoozoAllen & Hamilton's Advanced Decision Systems 
Division is conducting a program of research to investi- 
gate machine learning techniques that can automatically 
construct probabilistic structures from a training set of 
documents with respect o a single target filtering con- 
cept, or a set of related concepts. These structures can 
then be applied to individual documents to derive a pos- 
terior probability that the document is about a particular 
target concept. 
Our primary goal is to investigate the use of the CART 
(Classification and Regression Trees) algorithm as the 
basis of a totally automatic approach to generating doc- 
ument classification structures, working only with infor- 
mation need statements and training data supplied by 
users. That is, we are interested in testing the hypothesis 
that effective descriptions of what constitutes a "rele- 
vant document" can be constructed using just document 
exemplars and broad statements about document fea- 
tures. Such a scenario is common in organizations that 
monitor large volumes of real-time electronic docu- 
ments. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Our most recent results are those from the first ARPA 
sponsored TREC (Text Retrieval Conference) held in 
November 1992. 
The TREC corpus represents a significant challenge for 
our approach. Our previous results with a small corpus, 
while encouraging, did not allow us to evaluate how 
well the technique might do with realistically sized doc- 
ument collections. Our conclusion based on the results 
we have from TREC is that CART does exhibit some 
interesting behaviors on a realistic corpus, and that, 
despite the small size of the training sets and the 
restricted choice of features, for some topics it produces 
competitive results. So although the overall perfor- 
mance is moderate (relative to the better performing 
systems at TREC), we believe that the absolute perfor- 
mance (given that the system is totally automatic) is at 
least encouraging and definitely acceptable in several 
instances. 
Some specific observations on the performance of the 
current implementation f the CART algorithm as used 
for TREC are: 
? Relying on the re-substitution estimates for the ter- 
minal nodes is a very weak method for producing 
an output ranking. A scheme that makes use of sur- 
rogate split information to generate a post hoc 
ranking shows much promise as a technique for 
improving our scores in the TREC context. 
? While our approach is totally automatic, we 
restricted ourselves to using as features only those 
words that appear in the information eed state- 
ment. This is obviously a severe limitation since 
the use of even simple query expansion techniques 
(e.g., stemming and/or a synonym dictionary) is 
likely to provide a richer and more effective set of 
initial features. 
? Using words as features is possibly too "low- 
level" to ever allow stable, robust classification 
trees to be produced. At a minimum, we probably 
need to consider working with concepts rather than 
individual words. Not only would this reduce the 
size of the feature space but would probably result 
in more intuitive trees. 
? We need to work with much bigger and more rep- 
resentative training sets. Our preliminary experi- 
ment in this area shows, not surprisingly, that 
adding more training examples can lead to dra- 
matic changes in the classification trees. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
The main activity planned for the coming year is to par- 
ticipate in TREC 2. We intend to perform a series of 
additional experiments designed to explore some obvi- 
ous extensions suggested by the TREC 1 results. That is 
we will perform experiments odetermine: (1) the effect 
of training set size on the overall performance of the 
learning algorithm, (2) the effectiveness of using surro- 
gate splits information to help perform a post hoc rank- 
ing of the documents classified as relevant, (3) the 
effectiveness ofknowledge-based query expansion tech- 
niques, and (4) the value of using concepts, detected 
using our RUBRIC text retrieval technology, as docu- 
ment features. 
To facilitate the experimental procedure we plan to inte- 
grate the CART technology into BoozoAllen & Hamil- 
ton's distributed information integration system 
(MINERVA). The primary feature of MINERVA is a 
distributed operating environment, which is an imple- 
mentation of an intelligent Ethernet oken ring that uses 
TCP/IP and standard UNIX socket protocols. This pro- 
vides a unique transport layer that allows multiple data- 
bases and information access services to communicate 
transparently using a common metalanguage. 
383 
