EVALUATION OF MACHINE TRANSLATION 
John S. White, Theresa A. O'Connell 
PRC Inc. 
McLean, VA 22102 
and 
Lynn M. Carlson 
DoD 
ABSTRACT 
This paper eports results of the 1992 Evaluation of machine 
translation (MT) systems in the DARPA MT initiative and 
results of a Pre-test o the 1993 Evaluation. The DARPA 
initiative is unique in that the evaluated systems differ 
radically in languages translated, theoretical approach to 
system design, and intended end-user application. In the 1992 
suite, a Comprehension Test compared the accuracy and 
interpretability of system and control outputs; a Quality Panel 
for each language pair judged the fidelity of translations from 
each source version. The 1993 suite evaluated adequacy and 
fluency and investigated three scoring methods. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Despite the long history of machine translation projects, 
and the well-known effects that evaluations such as the 
ALPAC Report (Pierce et al, 1966) have had on that 
history, optimal MT evaluation methodologies remain 
elusive. This is perhaps due in part to the subjectivity 
inherent in judging the quality of any translation output 
(human or machine). The difficulty also lies in the 
heterogeneity of MT language pairs, computational 
approaches, and intended end-use. 
The DARPA machine translation i itiative is faced with all 
of these issues in evaluation, and so requires a suite of 
evaluation methodologies which minimize subjectivity and 
transcend the heterogeneity problems. At the same time, 
the initiative seeks to formulate this suite in such a way 
that it is economical to administer and portable to other 
MT development initiatives. This paper describes an 
evaluation of three research MT systems along with 
benchmark haman and external MT outputs. Two sets of 
evaluations were performed, one using a relatively complex 
suite of methodologies, and the other using a simpler set 
on the same data. The test procedure is described, along 
The authors would like to express their gratitude to 
Michael Naber for his assistance in compiling, expressing 
and interpreting data. 
with a comparison of the results of the different 
methodologies. 
2. SYSTEMS 
In a test conducted in July, 1992, three DARPA-sponsored 
research systems were evaluated in comparison with each 
other, with external MT systems, and with human-only 
translations. Each system translated 12 common Master 
Passages and six unique Original Passages, retrieved from 
commercial databases in the domain of business mergers 
and acquisitions. Master Passages were Wall Street 
Journal articles, translated into French, Spanish and 
Japanese for cross-comparison among the MT systems and 
languages. Original Passages were retrieved in French, 
Spanish, and Japanese, for translation i to English. 
The 1992 Evaluation tested three research MT systems: 
CANDIDE (IBM, French - English) uses a statistical 
language modeling technique based on speech recognition 
algorithms (see Brown et al, 1990). It employs 
alignments generated between French strings and English 
strings by training on a very large corpus of Canadian 
parliamentary proceedings represented in parallel French and 
English. The CANDIDE system was tested in both Fully 
Automatic (FAMT) and Human-assisted (HAMT) modes. 
PANGLOSS (Carnegie Mellon University, New Mexico 
State University, and University of Southern California) 
uses lexical, syntactic, semantic, and knowledge-based 
techniques for analysis and generation (Nirenburg, et al 
1991). The Spanish-English system is essentially an 
"interlingua" type. Pangloss operates in human-assisted 
mode, with system-initiated interactions with the user for 
disambiguation during the MT process. 
LINGSTAT (Dragon Systems Inc.) is a computer-aided 
translation environment in which a knowledgeable non- 
expert can compose English translations of Japanese by 
using a variety of contextual cues with word parsing and 
character interpretation aids (Bamberg 1992). 
206 
Three organizations external to the DARPA initiative 
provided benchmark output. These systems ran all the test 
input that was submitted to the research systems. While 
these systems are not all at the same state of commercial 
robustness, they nevertheless provided external perspective 
on the state of FAMT outside the DARPA initiative. 
The Pan American Health Organization provided output 
from the SPANAM Spanish-English system, a production 
system used daily by the organization. 
SYSTRAN Translation Systems Inc. provided output from 
a French - English production system and a Spanish - 
English pilot prototype. 
The Foreign Broadcast Information Service provided output 
from a Japanese-English SYSTRAN system. Though it is 
used operationally, SYSTRAN Japanese-English is not 
trained for the test domain. 
3. MT  EVALUATION 
METHODOLOGIES  
The 1992 Evaluation introduced two methods to meet he 
challenge of developing a black-box evaluation that would 
minimize judgment subjectivity while allowing a measure 
of comparison among three disparate systems. A 
Comprehension Test measured the adequacy or 
intelligibility of translated outputs, while a Quality Panel 
was established tomeasure translation fidelity. 
The 1992 Evaluation provided meaningful measures of 
performance and progress of the research systems, while 
providing quantitative measures of comparability ofdiverse 
systems. By these measures, the methodologies served 
their purpose. However, developing and evaluating 
materials was difficult and labor-intensive, involving 
special personnel categories. 
In order to assess whether alternative metrics could provide 
comparable or better evaluation results at reduced costs, a 
Pre-test o the 1993 Evaluation was conducted. The Pre- 
test was also divided into two parts: an evaluation of 
adequacy according to a methodology suggested by Tom 
Crystal of DARPA; and an evaluation of fluency. The new 
methodologies were applied to the 1992 MT test output o 
compare translations of a small number of Original 
Passages by the DARPA and benchmark systems against 
haman-alone translations produced by human translators. 
These persons were nonprofessional level 2 translators as 
defined by the Interagency Language Roundtable and 
adopted government-wide by the Office of Personnel 
Management in 1985. 
In the second suite, three numerical scoring scales were 
investigated: yes/no, 1-3 and 1-5. Two determinations 
arise from the comparison: whether the new methodology 
is in fact better in terms of cost, sensitivity (how 
accurately the variation between systems i  represented) and 
portability, and which sconng variant of the evaluation is
the best by the same terms. 
The methodologies u ed in the 1992 Evaluation and 1993 
Prc-test are described briefly below. 
3.1. Comprehension Test Methodology 
In the 1992 Evaluation, a set of Master Passage versions 
formed the basis of a multiple-choice Comprehension Test, 
similar to the comprehension section of the verbal 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT). These versions consisted 
of the "master passages" originally in English, 
professionally translated into the test source languages, and 
translated back into English by the systems, benchmarks 
and human translators. 
Twelve test takers unfamiliar with the source languages 
answered the same multiple choice questions over different 
translation versions of the passages. They each read the 
same 12 passages, but rendered variously into the 12 
outputs represented in the test (CANDIDE FAMT, 
CANDIDE HAMT, PANGLOSS HAMT, LINGSTAT 
HAMT, SPANAM FAMT, SYSTRAN FAMT for all 
three language pairs, human-only for all three pairs, and the 
Master Passages themselves.) The passages were ordered 
so that no person saw any passage, nor any output version 
twice. 
3.2. Quality Panel Methodology 
In the second part of the 1992 Evaluation, for each source 
language, a Quality Panel of three professional translators 
assigned numerical scores rating the fidelity of translated 
versions of six Original and six Master Passages against 
sources or back-translations. Within a given version of a 
passage, sentences were judged for syntactic, lexical, 
stylistic and orthographic errors. 
3.3. Pre-test Adequacy Methodology 
As part of the 1993 Pre-test, nine monolinguals judged the 
extent o which the semantic ontent of six baseline texts 
from each source language was present in translations 
produced for the 1992 Evaluation by the test systems and 
the benchmark systems. The 1992 Evaluation level 2 
translations were used as baselines. In the 18 baselines, 
scorable units were bracketed fragments that corresponded 
to a variety of grammatical constituents. Each monolingual 
saw 16 machine or human-assisted translations. Each 
evaluator saw two passages from each system. The 
passages were ordered so that no person saw the same 
passage twice. 
207 
3.4. Pre-test Fluency Methodology 
In Part Two of the Pre-test, the nine monolinguals 
evaluated the fluency (well-formedness) of each sentence in
the same distribution of the same 16 versions that they had 
seen in Part One. In Part Two, these sentences appeared in
paragraph form, without brackets. 
4. RESULTS 
In both the 1992 Evaluation and the 1993 Pre-test, the 
quality of output and time taken to produce that output 
were compared across: 
human-alone translations 
output from benchmark MT systems 
? output from the research systems in FAMT and/or 
HAMT modes. 
The results of the Comprehension Test (in which all 
systems used what were originally the same passages) are 
similar to the results of the Quality Panel, with some 
minor exceptions ( ee White, 1992). Thus for the purpose 
of the discussion that follows, we compare the results of 
the second, adequacy-fluency suite against he comparable 
subset of the Quality Panel test from the first suite. 
The Pre-test evaluation results are arrayed in a manner that 
emphasizes both the adequacy or fluency of the human- 
assisted and machine translations and the human effort 
involved to produce translations, expressed in (normalized) 
time. For each part of the Pre-test, scores were tabulated, 
entered into a spreadsheet table according to scoring method 
and relevant unit, and represented in two dimensional 
arrays. The relevant unit for Part 1 is the adequacy score 
for each fragment in each version evaluated. For Part 2, 
the relevant unit is the score for fluency of each sentence in
each version evaluated. 
Performance for each of the systems cored was computed 
by averaging the fragment (or sentence) score over all 
fragments (or sentences), passages, and test subjects. The 
method for normalizing these average scores was to divide 
them by the maximum score per fragment (or sentence); for 
example, 5 for the 1-5 tests. Thus, a perfect averaged 
normalized system score is 1, regardless of the test. 
Three evaluators each saw two passages per system; thus 
there was a total of six normalized average scores per 
system. The mean for each system is based on the six 
scores for that system. The eight system means were used 
to calculate the global variance. The F-raatio was calculated 
by dividing the global variance, i.e. the variance of the 
mean per system, by the local variance, i.e. the mean 
variance of each system. The F-ratio is used as a measure 
of sensitivity. 
The Quality Panel scores were arrayed in a like manner. 
The quality score per passage was divided by the number of 
sentences in that passage. The six Original Passages were 
each evaluated by 3 translators producing a total of 18 
scores per system. Adding the 18 scores per system 
together and dividing by 18 produced the mean of the 
normalized quality score per system. The means, variances 
and F-ratios were calculated as described above for adequacy 
and fluency. 
4.1. Quality Panel Evaluation Results 
Figure 1 is a representation of the Quality Panel 
evaluation, from the first evaluation suite, using the 
comparable subset of the 1992 data (i.e., the original 
passages). The quality scores range from .570 for Candide 
HAMT to .100 for Systran Japanese FAMT. The scores 
for time in HAMT mode, represented asthe ratio of HAMT 
time to Human-Only translation time, range from .689 for 
Candide HAMT to 1.499 for Pangloss Spanish HAMT. 
The normalized time for FAMT systems is set at 0. 
4.2. Adequacy Test Results 
Figure 2 represents he results of the adequacy evaluation 
from the second suite. Using the 1-5 variation of the 
evaluation, the adequacy (vertical axis) scores range from 
.863 for Candide HAMT to .250 for Systran Japanese 
FAMT. The time axis reflects the same ratio as is 
indicated in Figure 1. 
4.3. Fluency Test Results 
Figure 3 represents the results of the fluency evaluation 
from the second suite. Using the 1-5 variant, fluency 
scores range from .853 for Candide HAMT to .214 for 
Systran Japanese FAMT. The time axis reflects the same 
ratio as is indicated in Figure 1. 
5. COMPARISON OF 
METHODOLOGIES  
The measures of adequacy and fluency used in the second 
suite are equated with the measure of quality used by the 
1992 Evaluation Quality Panel. The methodologies were 
compared on the bases of sensitivity, efficiency, and 
expenditures of human time and effort involved in 
constructing, administering and performing the evaluation. 
Cursory comparison of MT system performance in the 
three results shown in Figures 1 through 3 shows 
similarity in behavior. All three methodologies 
demonstrate higher adequacy, fluency and quality scores for 
208 
I 0o0 
0?o0 
0 eoo 
o700 4 
*OeO0 t 
i O.S~ 
o~ "I' 
0.2~ ~ 
0000 1 I 
O.OOO 0 2o0 
OUALII"Y P~EL  ? ~(IIOU&ILI~P S~DAE (XOl~ly  14UM $El1411~1\[ I ~ PA.IPdlAOI)/111 V'l 
I~qlINJEED111E FOR XOP 
I ~ ? - ' -  - * ' -  I 
I 
iiiCI~4D J.IMIr 
IiJ, IO6T ~4~id)" 
I I I I I l I 
0400 0 1100 0 10? I 000 1.2c? + 400 i moo 
IIOAV,I4.11mO TIMI lldllq:t4,1Lllff i * Imq~ml.le M Ylmo l~ 14Nqm A+lllf 
Figure 1: Quality Panel Results 
14 ?14C1~ ' l l~ff  P~l141~OI, JIACY Oil Plltl l ' l~llr P~I IAO!  IiCOIg\[ll VII IlO$11JM.I~O 11'111 POll 
OAIOII4AL IM, IOA~ 
1000 
0.II00 
0tO0 
0700 
01100 IiC+II,C F+~e, IT 
0,800 
O4OO 
0~ 
0,2OO 
0100 
0000 I + 
O.OOO 0.~00 
I.IIimew40*~411~m ~
q,.lqOST/,.twr 
I I I I I I l 
0+400 0.400 O+llO0 1.000 I . |00  1.400 1.600 
llOlil.ll~lO 'lIMlt (llll4kllll0T IUl PI*~II l I ,  el Inlm Iel Itlmm alel 
Figure 2: Adequacy Evaluation Results 
I 
| 
i 
!1 ! 
It 
1 ! 
b ! 
1,4  O41OICl 'Irl\[llI' PO l l  IPl, J J l l l lg l t  O l i  pp l l~ l l r  pA , I IAOI  I iCQIW.i i  V l l  U , I I , i i i E  F4011 
l I IA , I I~  
1.000 
0g00 
0.100 
0.P00 
O.lOQ ' 
0 " ~  
0 .~ 
0.000 0.~00 
II~ClJ.VllI" 
IIJIe~TJ~I1P 
\[ b4w40*e lmla  i1~ tl,*km I 
IPJV4~ll...I.Ikl, ff 
I I I I I I I 
0.400 0.1100 0.1100 I.OOO 1.200 1.400 1.4100 
I l lU J J l lO  1ri l l  l l l l~ la l l l '  JlJ i~ml ,  l , l l  el lrlmm iw m 
Figure 3: Fluency Evaluation Results 
209 
HAMT than FAMT. Candide HAMT receives the highest 
scores for adequacy, fluency and quality; Systran Japanese 
FAMT receives the lowest. Bounds are consistent, but 
occasionally Lingstat and Pangloss trade places on the y 
axis as do SpanAm FAMT and Systran French FAMT. 
Given a similarity in performance, the comparison of 
evaluation suite 1 to evaluation suite 2 should depend upon 
the sensitivity of the measurements, a  well as the facility 
of implementation f the evaluation. 
To determine sensitivity, an F-ratio calculation was 
performed. For the suite 1 ( Quality Panel) and suite 2, as 
well as for the variants that were performed on the suite 2 
set (yes/no, 1-3, 1-5). The F-ratio statistic indicates that 
the second suite is indeed more sensitive than the suite 1 
tests. (The Quality Panel test shows an F-ratio of 2.153.) 
The 1-3 and 1-5 versions both have certain sensitivity 
advantages: the 1-3 scale is central for adequacy (1.329.), 
but proves most sensitive for fluency (3.583). The 1-5 
scale is by far the most sensitive for adequacy (4.136) and 
central for fluency (3.301). The 1-5 test for adequacy 
appears to be the most sensitive methodology overall. 
The suite 2 methodologies r quire less time/effort than the 
Quality Panel. For all three scoring variants used in the 
second suite, less time was required of evaluators than 
Quality Panefists. The overall average time per passage for 
the Quality Panel was 26 minutes per passage, while 
average times for the Pre- tests were 11 minutes per 
passage for the 1-5 variant of adequacy and four minutes per 
passage for the 1-5 variant of fluency. 
The level of expertise required of evaluators i reduced in 
the second suite; monolinguals perform the Pre-test 
evaluation, whereas Quality Panelists must be native 
speakers of English who are expert in French, Japanese or 
Spanish. The second suite eliminates a considerable 
amount of time and effort involved in preparation of texts 
in French, Spanish and Japanese for the test booklets. 
6. NEED FOR ADDIT IONAL TEST ING 
Human effort, expertise, and test sensitivity seem to 
indicate that the suite 2 evaluations are preferred over the 
suite 1 sets. However, the variance within a particular 
system result remains quite high. The standard eviations 
(represented in the figures as standard eviation of pooled 
variance) are large, due perhaps to the sample size, but also 
due to the fact that the baseline English used in this Suite 
2 Pre-test evaluation were produced by level 2 translators, 
and not by professional translators. Accordingly, we intend 
to re-apply the evaluation of the 1992 output, using 
professional translations of the texts as the adequacy 
basefine. Results will again be compared with the results 
of the 1992 Quality Panel. This will help us further 
determine the usefulness, portability, and sensitivity of the 
evaluation methodologies. 
The Pre-test methodologies measure the well-formedness of 
a translation and the degree to which a translation expresses 
the content of the source document. While results of the 
1992 Evaluation showed that results of the Quality Panel 
and the Comprehension Test were comparable, a test of the 
comprehensibility of the translation provides unique 
insight into the performance of an MT system. Therefore, 
the 1993 Evaluation will include a Comprehension Test on 
versions of Original Passages to evaluate the intelligibility 
of those versions. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
The DARPA MT evaluation methodology strives to 
minimize the inherent subjectivity of judging translations, 
while optimizing the portability and replicability of test 
results and accommodating the variety of approaches, 
Languages, and end-user applications. 
The two evaluation suites described in this paper sought to 
accomplish these goals. The comparison among them 
accordingly is based upon the fidelity of the measurement, 
the efficiency of administration, and ultimately the 
portability of the test to other environments. We find, 
subject o further testing underway, that he second suite is 
advantageous in all these respects. 
R E F E R E N C E S  
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Bamberg, Paul. 1992. "The LINGSTAT Japanese- 
English MAT System" Status Report presented at 
the 1992 DARPA MT Workshop, Newton, MA 
August, 1992. 
Brown, P. F., J. Cocke, S. A. DellaPietra, V. J. 
DellaPietra, F. Jelinek, J. D. Lafferty, R. L. 
Mercer, and P.S. Roossin. 1990. "A Statistical 
Approach to Machine Translation." Computational 
Linguistics, vol. 16, pp. 79-85. 
Nirenburg, S., J. Carbonell, M. Tomita, and K. 
Goodman. 1991. Machine Translation: A 
Knowledge-Based Approach. New York: Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Pierce, J., J. Caroll, E. Hamp, D. Hays, C. 
Hockett, A. Oettinger, and A. Perlis. 1966. 
"Language and Machines: Computers in 
Translation and Linguistics." National Academy of 
Sciences Publication 416. 
White, J.S. "The DARPA Machine Translation 
Evaluation: Implications for Methodological 
Extensibility." Presented at the November 1992 
Meeting of the Association for Machine Translation 
of the Americas. San Diego. 
210 
