ON CUSTOMIZING PROSODY IN SPEECH SYNTHESIS: 
NAMES AND ADDRESSES AS A CASE IN POINT 
Kim E. A. Silverman 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
NYNEX Science and Technology, Inc. 
500 Westchester Avenue 
White Plains, New York 10604 
1. ABSTRACT 
This work assesses the contribution of domain-specific prosodic 
modelling to synthetic speech quality in a name-and-address 
information service. A prosodic processor analyzes the textual 
structure of labelled input strings, and inserts markers which spec- 
ify the intended prosody for the DECtalk text-to-speech synthe- 
sizer. These markers impose discourse-level prosodic 
organization, annotate the information structure, and adapt he 
speaking rate to listeners in real time. In a quantitative comparison 
of this domain-specific modelling with the default rules in DEC- 
talk, the domain-specific prosody was found to reduce the tran- 
scription error rate from 14.6% to 6.4%, reduce the number of 
repeats requested by listeners from 2.6 to 1.1, and to sound signif- 
icantly easier to understand and more natural. This result demon- 
strates the importance of prosodic modelling in synthesis, and 
implies an even more important role for prosody in more compli- 
cated omains and discourse structures. 
2. INTRODUCTION 
Text-to-speech synthesis could profitably be used to auto- 
mate or create many information services, if only it were of 
better quality. Unfortunately it remains too unnatural and 
machine-like for all but the simplest and shortest texts. It 
has been described as sounding monotonous, boring, 
mechanical, harsh, disdainful, peremptory, fuzzy, muffled, 
choppy, and unclear. Synthesized isolated words are rela- 
tively easy to recognize, but when these are strung together 
into longer passages of connected speech (phrases or sen- 
tences) then it is much more difficult o follow the meaning: 
the task is unpleasant and the effort is fatiguing \[1\]. 
This less-than-ideal quality seems paradoxical, because 
published evaluations of synthetic speech yield intelligibil- 
ity scores that are very close to natural speech. For exam- 
ple, Greene, Logan and Pisoni \[2\] found the best synthetic 
speech could be transcribed with 96% accuracy; the several 
studies that have used human speech tokens typically report 
intelligibility scores of 96% to 99% for natural speech. (For 
a review see \[1\]). 
However, segmental intelligibility does not always predict 
comprehension. A series of experiments \[3\] compared two 
high-end commercially-available text-to-speech systems 
on application-like material such as news items, medical 
benefits information, and names and addresses. The result 
was that the one with the significantly higher segmental 
intelligibility had the lower comprehension scores. 
Although there may be several possible reasons for seg- 
mental intelligibility failing to predict comprehension, the 
current work focuses on the single most likely cause: syn- 
thesis of prosody. Prosody is the organization imposed onto 
a string of words when they are uttered as connected 
speech. It includes pitch, duration, pauses, tempo, rhythm, 
and every known aspect of articulation. When the prosody 
is incorrect hen at best the speech will be difficult or 
impossible to understand \[4\], at worst listeners will be mis- 
understand it with being aware that they have done so. 
Arguments for the importance of prosody in language 
abound in the literature. However, the cited examples of 
prosodic resolution of ambiguity usually are either anec- 
dotal citations or are illustrated by small sets of carefully- 
constructed cited sentences. It is not clear how important 
prosody is in more normal everyday texts. This brings us to 
the first question addressed in the current study: how much 
will prosody contribute to perception of synthetic speech 
for non-contrived, real-world textual material? 
2.1. Cur rent  Approaches  to P rosody  in Speech  
Synthesis 
Text-to-speech systems are typically designed to cope with 
"unrestricted text" \[5\]. Each sentence in the input text is 
analyzed independently, and the prosody that is applied is a 
trade-off to avoid one the one hand not sounding too 
monotonous, and on the other hand implementing the pro- 
sodic features o saliently that egregious errors occur when 
the wrong prosodic features are applied. The approach 
taken in these systems to generating the prosody has been 
to derive it from an impoverished syntactic analysis of the 
text to be spoken. Usually content words receive pitch- 
related prominence, function words do not. Small prosodic 
317 
boundaries, marked with pitch falls and some lengthening 
of the syllables on the left, are inserted wherever there is a 
content word on the left and a function word on the right. 
Larger tmundaries are placed at punctuation marks, accom- 
panied by a short pause and preceded by either a falling- 
then-rising pitch shape to cue nonfinality in the case of a 
comma, or finality in the case of a period. Declination of 
pitch is .imposed over the duration of each sentence. 
There are several ways in which deviations from the above 
principles can be implemented to add variety and interest to 
an intonation contour. For example the declination may be 
partially reset at commas within a sentence. Or the extent of 
prominence-lending pitch excursions on content words may 
be varied according to their lexical class (higher pitch peaks 
on nouns or adjectives, lower on verbs) or their position in 
the phrase (alternating higher and lower peaks). These vari- 
ations may be based on stochastically trained models. 
One problem with the above approach is that prosody is not 
a lexical property of English words - English is not a tone 
language. Neither is prosody completely predictable from 
English syntax - prosody is not a redundant encoding of 
already-inferable information. 
Rather, prosody annotates the information structure of the 
accompanying text string. It depends on the prior mutual 
knowledge of the speaker and listener, and on the role a par- 
ticular utterance takes within its particular discourse. It 
marks which concepts are considered by the speaker to be 
new in the dialogue, which ones are topics, and which ones 
are comments. It encodes the speaker's expectations about 
how the current utterance relates to that the listener's cur- 
rent knowledge, it indicates focussed versus background 
information. This realm of information is very difficult to 
derive in an unrestricted text-to-speech system, and it is 
correspondingly difficult to generate correct discourse-rele- 
vant prosody. This is a primary reason why long passages 
of synthetic speech sound so unnatural. 
2.2. Application-specific discourse constraints 
on prosody 
There are many different applications for synthetic speech, 
but what they tend to share in common is that usually 
within each application (i) the text is not unrestricted, but 
rather is a constrained topic and a limited subset of the lan- 
guage, and (ii) the speech is spoken within a known dis- 
course context. Therefore within the constraints of a 
particular application it is possible to make assumptions 
about the type of text structures to expect, the reasons the 
text is being spoken, and the expectations of the listener. 
These are just the types of information that are necessary to 
constraint the prosody. This brings us to the second aim of 
the current research: is it possible to create application-spe- 
cific rules to improve the prosody in a real text-to-speech 
synthesis application? 
Prior work has shown that discourse characteristics of simu- 
lated applications can be used to constrain prosody. Young 
and Fallside [6] built a system that enabled remote access to 
status information about East Anglia's water supply system. 
This system answered queries by generating text around 
numerical data and then synthesizing the resulting sen- 
tences. The desired prosody was generated along with the 
text, rather than being left to the default rules of an unre- 
stricted text-to-speech system. Silverman developed para- 
graph-level rules to vary pitch range and place accents 
based on a model of recently-activated concepts. Hirsch- 
berg and Pierrehumbert [7] generated the prosody in syn- 
thetic speech according to a block structure model of 
discourse in an automated tutor for the v i  text editor. Davis 
[8] built a system that generated travel directions within the 
Boston metropolitan area. In one version of the system, ele- 
ments of the discourse structure (such as given-versus-new, 
repetition, and grouping of sentences into larger units) were 
used to manipulate accent placement, boundary placement, 
and pitch range. 
Each of these pieces of research consists of a carefully-elab- 
orated set of rules to improve synthetic speech quality. 
However the evidence that the speech did indeed sound bet- 
ter was more intuitive than based on formal perceptual 
assessments. Yet systematic and controlled evaluation is 
crucial in order to test whether hypothesized rules are cor- 
rect, and whether they have a measurable effect on how the 
speech is perceived. 
The current work builds on the progress made in the above 
systems by evaluating prosodic modelling in the context of 
an existing information-provision service. 
3. PROSODY FOR A NAME AND ADDRESS 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICE 
The text domain for the current work is synthesis of names 
and addresses. The associated pronunciation rules and text 
processing are well understood, and there are many applica- 
tions that require this type of information. At the same time 
this represents a particularly stringent test for the contribu- 
tion of prosody to synthesis quality because names and 
addresses have such a simple linear structure. There is little 
structural ambiguity, no center-embedding, no relative 
clauses. There are no indirect speech acts. There are no 
digressions. Utterances are usually very short. In general, 
names and addresses contain few of the features common in 
cited examples of the centrality of prosody in spoken lan- 
guage. This class of text seems to offer little opportunity for 
prosody to aid perception. 
On the other hand, if prosody can be shown to influence 
synthetic speech quality even on such simple material as 
names and addresses, then it is all the more likely to be 
important in spoken language systems where the structure 
of the material is more complex and the discourse is richer. 
3.1. The application dialogue 
This work took place within the context of a field trial of 
speech synthesis to automate NYNEX's reverse-directory 
service \[9\]. Callers are real users of the information service. 
They know the nature of the information provision service, 
before they call. They have 10-digit elephone numbers, for 
which they want he associated listing information. At ran- 
dom, their call may arrive at the automated position. The 
dialogue with the automated system consists of two phases: 
information gathering and information provision. The 
information-gathering phase used standard Voice Response 
Unit technology: they hear recorded prompts and answer 
questions by pressing DTMF keys on their telephones. This 
phases establishes features of the discourse that are impor- 
tant for generating the prosody: callers are aware of the 
topic and purpose of the discourse and the information they 
will be asked to supply by the interlocutor (in this case the 
automated voice). It also establishes that the interlocutor 
can and will use the telephone numbers as a key to indicate 
how the to-be-spoken i formation (the listings) relates to 
what the caller already knows (thus "555 1234 is listed to 
Kim Silverman, 555 2345 is listed to Sara Basson"). 
The second phase is information provision: the listing infor- 
mation for each telephone number is spoken by a speech 
synthesizer. Specifically, the number and its associated 
name and town are embedded incarrier phrases, as in: 
<number> is listed to <name> in <town> 
The resultant sentence is spoken by the synthesizer, after 
which a recorded human voice offers to repeat the listing, 
spell the name, or continue to the next listing. 
These features may seem too obvious to be worthy of com- 
ment, but they very much constrain likely interpretations of 
what is to be spoken, and similarly define what the appro- 
priate prosody should be in order for the to-be-synthesized 
information to be spoken in a compliant way. 
3.2. Rules for Prosody in Names and Addresses 
In the field trial, text fields from NYNEX's Customer Name 
and Address database (approximately 20million entries) 
are sent o a text processor \[10\] which identifies and labels 
logical fields, corrects many errors, and expands abbrevia- 
tions. For the current research, a further processor was writ- 
ten which takes the cleaned-up text which is output from 
that ext processor, analyzes its information structure, and 
inserts prosodic markers into it before passing it on to a 
speech synthesizer. The prosodic markers control such 
things as accent type, accent location, overall pitch range, 
boundary tones, pause durations, and speaking rate. These 
are recognized by the synthesizer and will override that 
synthesizer's own inbuilt prosody rules. 
The prosodic hoices were based on analyses of 371 inter- 
actions between real operators and customers. The opera- 
tors use a careful, clear, deliberately-helpful style when 
saying this information. The principles that underlie their 
choice of prosody, however, are general and apply to all of 
language. The tunes they use appear to be instances of tunes 
in the repertoire shared by all native speakers, their use of 
pitch range is consistent with observational descriptions in
the Ethnomethodology literature, their pauses are neither 
unrepresentafively long nor rushed. What makes their pros- 
ody different from normal everyday speech is merely which 
tunes and categories they select from the repertoire, rather 
than the contents of the repertoire itself. This reflects the 
demand characteristics of the discourse. 
The synthesizer which was chosen for this prosodic prepro- 
cessor was DECtalk, within the DECvoice platform. This 
synthesizer has a reputation for very high segmental intelli- 
gibility \[2\]. It is widely used in applications and research 
laboratories, and has an international reputation. 
There are three categories of processing performed by the 
prosodic rules: (i) discourse-level shaping of the overall 
prosody; (ii) field-specific accent and boundary placement, 
and (iii) interactive adaptation of the speaking rate. 
(i) Discourse-level shaping of the prosody within a turn. 
That turn might be one short sentence, as in 914 555 2145 
shows no listing, or several sentences long, as in "the 
number 914 555 2609 is an auxiliary line. The main 
number is 914 555 2000. That number is handled 
by US Communicat ions of Westchester doing 
business as Southern New York Holdings Incorpo- 
rated in White Plains NY 10604. The general principle 
here is that prosodic organization can span multiple intona- 
tional phrases, and therefore multiple sentences. These turns 
are all prosodically grouped together by systematic varia- 
tion of the overall pitch range, lowering the final endpoint, 
deaccenting items in compounds (e.g. "auxiliary line"), and 
placing accents correctly to indicate backward references 
{e.g. "That number..."). The phone number which is being 
echoed back to the listener, which the listener only keyed in 
a few seconds prior, is spoken rather quickly (the 914 555 
2145, in this example). The one which is new is spoken 
more slowly, with larger prosodic boundaries after the area 
code and local exchange, and an extra boundary between 
the eighth and ninth digits. This is the way native speakers 
say this type of information when it is new and important in 
the discourse. 
Another characteristic ofthis level of prosodic ontrol is the 
type and duration of pauses within and between some of the 
sentences. Some pauses are inserted within intonational 
phrases, immediately prior to information-bearing words. 
These pauses are NOT preceded by boundary-related pitch 
tones, and only by a small amount of lengthening ofthe pre- 
ceding material. They serve to alert the listener that some- 
thing important isabout o be spoken, thereby focussing the 
listener's attention. In the TOBI transcription system, these 
would be transcribed as a 2 or 2p boundary. Example loca- 
tions of these pauses include: "The main number  is... 
914 555 2000?' and "In... White Plains, NY 10604." 
319 
The duration of the sentence-final pause between ames 
and their associated addresses i varied according to the 
length and complexity of the name. This allows listeners 
more time to finish processing the acoustic signal for the 
name (to perform any necessary backtracking, ambiguity 
resolution, or lexical access) before their auditory buffer is 
overwritten by the address. 
(ii) Signalling the internal structure of labelled fields. 
The most complicated and extensive set of rules is for name 
fields. Rules for this field first of all identify word strings 
which are inferable markers of information structure, rather 
than being information-bearing  themselves, uch as "... 
doing business as...". The relative pitch range is reduced, 
the relative speaking rate is increased, and the stress is low- 
ered. These features jointly signal to the listener the role 
that hese words play. In addition, the reduced range allows 
the synthesizer touse its normal and boosted range to mark 
the start of information-bearing units on either side of these 
markers. These units themselves are either esidential or 
business names, which are then analyzed for a number of 
structural features. Prefixed titles (Mr, Dr, etc.) are cliti- 
cized (assigned less salience so that they prosodically 
merge with the next word), unless they are head words in 
their own right (e.g. "Misses Incorporated"). Accentable 
suffixes (incorporated, the second, etc.) are separated from 
their preceding head and placed in an intermediate-level 
phrase of their own. After these are stripped off, the right 
hand edge of the head itself is searched for suffixes that 
indicate a complex nominal. If one of these is found is has 
its pitch accent removed, to yield for example Building 
Company, Plumbing Supply, Health Services, and Savings 
Bank. However if the preceding word is a function word 
then they are NOT deaccented, to allow for constructs such 
as "John's Hardware and Supply", or "The Limited". The 
rest of the head is then searched for a prefix on the right, in 
the form of "<word> and <word>". If found, then this is put 
into its own intermediate phrase, which separates it from 
the following material for the listener. This causes con- 
structs like "A and P Tea Company" to NOT sound like "A, 
and P T Company" (prosodically analogous to "A, and P T 
Barnum"). 
Within a head, words are prosodically separated from each 
other very slightly, to make the word boundaries clearer. 
The pitch contour at these separations is chosen to signal to 
the listener that although slight disjuncture is present, hese 
words cohere together as a larger unit. 
Similar principles are applied within the other address 
fields. In address fields, for example, a longer address tarts 
with a higher pitch than a shorter one, deaccenting is per- 
formed to distinguish "Johnson Avenue" from "Johnson 
Street", ambiguities like "120 3rd Street" versus "100 23rd 
Street" versus "123rd Street" are detected and resolved with 
boundaries and pauses, and so on. In city fields, items like 
"Warren Air Force Base" have the accents removed from 
the right hand two words. 
An important component of signalling the internal structure 
of fields is to mark their boundaries. Rules concerning inter- 
field boundaries prevent listings like "Sylvia Rose in 
Baume Forest" from being misheard as "Sylvia Rosenbaum 
Forest". 
(iii) Adapting the speaking rate. Speaking rate is a power- 
ful contributor to synthesizer intelligibility: it is possible to 
understand even an extremely poor synthesizer if it speaks 
slowly enough. But the slower it speaks, the more patholog- 
ical it sounds. Moreover as listeners become more familiar 
with a synthesizer, they understand it better and become less 
tolerant of unnecessarily-slow speech. Consequently it is 
unclear what the appropriate speaking rate should be for a 
particular synthesizer, since this depends on the characteris- 
tics of both the synthesizer and the application. 
To address this problem, a module modifies the speaking 
rate from listing to listing on the basis of whether customers 
request repeats. Briefly, repeats of listings are presented 
faster than the first presentation, because listeners typically 
ask for a repeat in order to hear only one particular part of a 
listing. However if listener consistently requests repeats for 
several consecutive listings, then the starting rate for new 
listings within that call is slowed down. If this happens over 
sufficient consecutive calls, then the default starting rate for 
a new call is slowed down. Similarly, if over successive list- 
ings or calls there are no repeats, then the speaking rate will 
be increased again. By modelling three different levels of 
speaking rate in this way (within-listing, within-call, and 
across-calls), this module attempts to distinguish between a
particularly difficult listing, a particularly confused listener, 
and an altogether-too-fast (or oo slow) synthesizer. 
In addition to the above prosodic ontrols, there is a specific 
module to control the way items are spelled when listeners 
request spelling This works in two ways. Firstly, using the 
same prosodic principles and features as above, it employs 
variation in pitch range, boundary tones, and pause dura- 
tions to define the end of the spelling of one item from the 
start of the next (to avoid "Terrance C McKay Sr." from 
being spelled "T-E-R-R-A-N-C-E-C, M-C-K-A Why 
Senior"), and it breaks long strings of letters into groups, so 
that "Silverman" is spelled "S-I-L, V-E-R, M-A-N". Sec- 
ondly, it spells by analogy letters that are ambiguous over 
the telephone, such as "F for Frank", using context-sensi- 
tive rules to decide when to do this, so that it is not done 
when the letter is predictable by the listener. Thus N is 
spelled "N for Nancy" in a name like "Nike", but not in a 
name like "Chang". The choice of analogy itself also 
depends on the word, so that "David" is NOT spelled "D for 
David, A ..... " 
4. PREL IMINARY EVALUATION 
A transcnpton experiment was carried out to evaluate the 
impact of the prosodic rules on the synthetic speech quality 
320 
in terms of both objective transcription accuracy and of 
subjective ratings. 
4.1. Test material 
A set of twenty-three names and addresses had been already 
been developed by Sara Basson (unpublished ms, 1992) for 
assessing the accuracy with which listeners can transcribe 
such material. This set had been constructed torepresent 
the variation in internal structure and length that occurred in 
NYNEX's database. Although it did contain some material 
that would be ambiguous if synthesized with incorrect pros- 
ody, it was not intended to focus exclusively on prosodic 
variability and was developed before the prosodic processor 
was finished. It contained phonemic diversity;, a variety of 
personal names, cities and states; short and long name 
fields, and digit strings. There were roughly equal propor- 
tions of easy, moderate, and difficult listings, as measured 
by how well listeners could transcribe the material when 
spoken by a human. Henceforth each of these names and 
addresses shall be referred to as items. 
4.2. Procedure 
The 23 items were divided into two sets. Listeners were all 
native speakers of English with no known hearing loss, and 
all employees of NYNEX Science and Technology. On the 
basis of our previous experience with synthetic speech per- 
ception experiments, we expect hese listeners will perform 
better on the transcription task than general members of the 
public. Thus the results of this transcription test represent a 
"best ease" in terms of how well we can expect real users to 
understand the utterances. 
Listeners called the computer over the public telephone net- 
work from their office telephones: their task was to tran- 
scribe each of the 23 items. Each listener heard and 
transcribed the items in two blocks: one of the sets of items 
spoken by DECtalk's default prosody rules, and the other 
spoken with application-specific prosody. The design was 
counter-balanced with roughly half of the listeners hearing 
each version in the first block, and roughly half hearing 
each item set in the first block. For each item, listeners 
could request as many repeats as they wanted in order to 
transcribe the material as accurately as they felt was reason- 
ably possible. Listeners were only allowed to request spell- 
ing in two of the items, which were constructed tosound 
like pronounceable names and contain every letter in the 
alphabet. 
4.3. Dependent variables 
Transcription scores per item. Each word in each item 
could score up to 3 points. One point would be deducted if
the right-hand word boundary was misplaced, one point if 
one phoneme was wrong, and two points of more than one 
phoneme was wrong. 
Number of repeats requested per item. For items that 
were spelled, this was the number of times after the first 
spelling. 
Perceived intelligibility. Each version of the synthesis was 
rated by each listener on a five-point scale labelled: "How 
easy was it to understand this voice?" (where 1 = "Consis- 
tently failed to understand much of the speech" and 5 = 
"Consistently effortless to understand"). 
Perceived naturalness. Each version was similarly rated, 
on a five-point scale labelled "How natural (i.e. like a 
human voice) did this voice sound? (where 1 = extremely 
unnatural nd 5 = extremely natural). 
Preferences. Since each listener heard each voice, they 
were asked for which voice they preferred: voice 1, voice 2, 
or no preference. 
4.4. Results 
So far results have been analyzed for 17 listeners. Summing 
over all transcriptions, the maximum possible transcription 
score for each synthesizer was 5032. The per-word error 
rate for items spoken with the synthesizer's default prosody 
was 14.6%. With the domain-specific prosody this was only 
6.4%. Thus listeners could transcribe the vowels and conso- 
nants ignificantly more accurately even though the vowels 
and consonants are pronounced by exactly the same seg- 
mental rules in both cases. The only difference is the pros- 
ody. 
Transcription scores do not reflect how much effort listeners 
expended to achieve their transcription accuracy. One mea- 
sure of that effort is the number of repeats they requested. 
Listeners needed on average 2.6 repeats per listing for the 
default prosody, but only 1.1 repeats per listing with the 
domain-specific prosody. Interestingly, in a prior transcrip- 
tion test with a human voice saying asuperset of the listings 
used in this experiment, listeners needed 1.2 repeats per list- 
ing (Sara Basson, personal communication). 
On the "ease of understanding" scale, the default prosody 
scored 1.8 (standard deviation =0.8), while domain-specific 
prosody scored 3.3 (standard eviation = 0.8). Thus listen- 
ers' subjective perceptions matched their objective tran- 
scription results: they were aware that the version with 
domain-specific prosody was easier to understand, though 
clearly it was not effortless. 
On the "naturalness" cale, the default prosody scored 1.9 
(standard eviation = 0.9) and domain-specific prosody 
scored 2.9 (standard eviation = 0.8). Though statistically 
significant, his difference is smaller than on the previous 
scale. Alteration of the just the pitch and duration made the 
321 
speech made the speech sound somewhat more natural, but 
it is still is a long way from sounding "extremely natural". 
One the preference ratings, so far all of the listeners pre- 
ferred the speech versions with domain-specific prosody. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Although this evaluation is preliminary, it suggests that 
even in such simple material as names and addresses 
domain-specific prosody can make a clear improvement to
synthetic speech quality. The transcription error rate was 
more than halved, the number of repetitions was more than 
halved, the speech was rated as more natural and easier to 
understand, aud it was preferred by listeners. This result 
encourages further esearch on methods for capitalizing on 
application constraints o improve prosody. The principles 
in the literature for customizing the prosody will generalize 
to other domains where the structure of the material and 
discourse purpose can be inferred. 
The second conclusion is that at least in this domain, 
although domain-specific rules can improve synthetic pros- 
ody over that in domain-independent rules, the domain-spe- 
cific customizat ion can be severely l imited if the 
synthesizer does not make the fight prosodic ontrols avail- 
able. In an ideal world, the markers that are embedded in
the text would specify exactly how the text is to be spoken. 
In reality, however, they specify at best an approximation. 
This exercise is constrained by the controls made available 
by that synthesizer. Some manipulations that are needed for 
this type of customization are not available, and some of the 
controls that are available interact in mutually-detrimental 
ways. Consequently tothe extent hat the application-spe- 
cific prosody did indeed improve synthesis quality, this is 
all the more supporting evidence for both the importance of 
generating domain-relevant prosody on the one hand, and 
for NOT doing it with such an improper prosodic model on 
the other. 
The immediate next steps in this work are to more system- 
atically evaluate the perceptual impact of the above rules, 
both in transcription tests and with the quantitative mea- 
sures of acceptance by real users that are already being used 
in the field trial. In addition, we are currently developing a 
set of rules to customize the prosody in a spoken language 
system for remote financial transactions, combining text- 
specific rules of the type evaluated in this work, with rules 
that will use the discourse history to dynamically derive 
information about opics, discourse functions of replies, and 
given versus new information. 
The development and evaluation of this work furthers our 
understanding of (i) how to use prosody to clarify names 
and addresses in particular, and other texts in general; (ii) 
prosody's importance in a real application context, rather 
than in laboratory-generated unrepresentative sentences; 
(iii) one way to incorporate user-modelling of speaking rate 
into speech synthesis (speakers should not ignore their lis- 
teners); and (iv) what prosodic ontrols asynthesizer should 
make available. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work could not have proceeded without he context 
and focus of the ACNA trial in general, and in particular the 
efforts and insights of Dina Yashchin, Ashok Kalyanswamy, 
Sara Basson, John Pitrelli, and Judy Spitz. Shortcomings of
course remain my own responsibility. 
REFERENCES 
1. Silverman, K.E.A. The Structure and Processing of Funda- 
mental Frequency Contours. Ph.D. Dissertation, Cam- 
bridge University, 1987. 
2. Greene, B.G.; Logan, J.S. and Pisoni, D.B. "Perception of
synthetic speech produced automatically b rule: Intelligi- 
bility of eight ext-to-speech systems", Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, Vol. 18, 1986, pp 
100-107 
3. Silverman, K.E.A., Basson, S. and Levas, S. Evaluating 
Synthesizer Performance: Is Segmental Intelligibility 
Enough? Proc. ICSLP-90, Vol. 1, 1990. 
4. Huggins, A.W.F. "Speech Timing and Intelligibility. In J. 
Requin (Ed): Attention and Performance VII. Erlbaurn, 
Hillsdale. 1978. 
5. Allen, J, Hunnicutt, M.S., Klatt, D., Armstrong, R.C. and 
Pisoni, D.B. From Text o Speech: The M1Talk System. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987 
6. Young, S.J. and Fallside, E "Synthesis by rule of prosodic 
features inword concatenation synthesis", Int. J. Man- 
Machine Studies, Vol. 12, 1980, pp 241-258. 
7. Hirschberg, J. and Pierrehumbert, J.B. "The Intonational 
Structuring ofDiscourse", Proc. 24th ACL Meeting, 1986, 
pp 136-144. 
8. Davis, J.R. "Generating intonational support for dis- 
course", J. Acoust. Soc. Am. Suppl. 1, Vol. 82, 1987, p S17. 
9. Yashchin, D Basson, S., Kalyanswamy, A. Silverman, 
K.E.A. "Results from automating a name and address ser- 
vice with speech synthesis". Proc AVIOS-92, 1992. 
10. Kalyanswamy, A. and Silverman, K.E.A. "Processing 
information i preparation for text-to-speech synthesis". 
Proc AVIOS-92, 1992. 
322 
