SESS ION 4: NATURAL LANGUAGE 
Robert C. Moore, Chair 
Arti f ic ial  Intel l igence Center  
SRI  In ternat iona l  
Menlo Park ,  CA 94025 
Collectively, the papers in this session are mainly con- 
cerned with parsing, semantic interpretation, and infer- 
ence. Interest in these processes can be motivated if we 
recognize that the overall goal of the field of NLP is the 
manipulation of natural language in ways that depend 
on meaning. Parsing, the recovery of the linguistic or 
grammatical structure of a natural-language utterance, 
is of concern to NLP because, in general, the meaning of 
a natural-language utterance depends on its structure. 
An example that illustrates this point is the sentence 
The man with the umbrella opened the door. If we tried 
to process this sentence without paying attention to its 
grammatical structure, we could easily be misled by the 
fact that it contains the substring ~he umbrella opened. 
But this sentence has nothing to do with umbrellas open- 
ing. Because of the structure of the sentence, the um- 
brella must be grouped with with and not with opened. 
If the central concern of NLP is the manipulation ofnat- 
ural language in ways that depend on meaning, then 
semantic interpretation would naturally be expected to 
play a central role. In practice, semantic interpreta- 
tion in NLP usually means recovering a representation 
of the meaning of an utterance that encodes that mean- 
ing in a more transparent way than does the utterance 
itself. IIow does this contribute to the goal of manipu- 
lating language in meaning-dependent ways? We want 
to have algorithms that manipulate language according 
to meaning, but meaning is ultimately an abstraction 
that algorithms can have no direct access to. Algorithms 
can directly manipulate xpressions only according to 
their structure. Thus we need expressions whose struc- 
ture corresponds in a very direct way to their mean- 
ing. While, as we have argued above, the meaning of 
a natural-language expression is dependent on its struc- 
ture, this dependence an be very indirect. By recovering 
an expression that encodes the meaning of an utterance 
more directly, we can create modular algorithms that 
consist of interacting pieces that each look only at a small 
piece of the structure of the meaning representation. If 
the pieces of the meaning representation fit together in a 
natural way that reflects the overall meaning of the ut- 
terance, then the algorithms that manipulate them will 
also be able to fit together in a natural way that reflects 
the overall meaning of the utterance. 
Finally, inference is the pay-off or the previous phases of 
parsing and semantic interpretation, being the canonical 
example of a form of manipulation of natural-language 
that depends on the meaning of utterances. In fact, a 
strong argument could be made that inference is a pro- 
cess on meanings and not on natural-language expres- 
sions per se. 
With this as background, we can briefly consider some 
of the major issues raised by the papers in this ses- 
sion. Some of the most important issues currently being 
raised about parsing are how complete it needs to be 
and how complex a structure needs to be recovered for 
different applications. The paper by McCord takes a 
fairly traditional view, attempting to recover a complete 
structural description of any sentence presented to the 
parser. In the paper by ttobbs, et al, parsing is much 
more fragmentary, attempting only to recover the struc- 
ture of pieces of a text that are criticM for the particular 
application. Moreover, the structures recovered in the 
ttobbs paper are simple enough to be characterized by 
finite-state automata, while the structures described in 
the McCord paper are more complex. A second parsing 
issue, which forms the focus of the McCord paper, is the 
problem of ambiguity. In parsing, we are given a string of 
words or tokens, and we have to recover the grammatical 
structure, but there may be many structures compatible 
with a given string. McCord, then, addresses the issue 
of how to find the most likely stucture out of all the ones 
that are possible. 
Issues of semantic interpretation are of greatest con- 
cern in the paper by IIwang and Schubert. The type of 
work reported in this paper can perhaps be best appre- 
ciated by keeping in mind some central methodological 
principles that are ofter used to guide work on seman- 
tics. flaying such principles is important because of the 
lack of clear intuititive agreement about the adequacy 
of semantic representations. Speech recognition, in con- 
trast, is methodologically much simpler than semantics 
because of the enormous intersubjective agreement as to 
125 
what strings of words most speech signals correspond to. 
While there are particular cases where the proper tran- 
scription of a signal can be argued about, in most cases 
this is simply not a problem. No such intuitive agree- 
ment exists in the field of semantics. It is something 
like speech recognition might be if there were no written 
languages and no general agreement on segmentation f
speech into words. 
So, in semantic interpretation, there are two method- 
ological principles that have come to be used as a means 
of evaluating the adequacy of proposed analyses. The 
first is that one should be able to give a mathematical, 
"model theoretic" interpretation of the formal expres- 
sions used to represent the meaning of natural-language 
expressions. This gives a way to decide whether there 
is really any basis for the claim that the representa- 
tions in question actually do capture the meaning of 
the corresponding natural-language. The main alterna- 
tive seems to be what is sometimes referred to as "pre- 
tend it's English" semantics, where one reads the tokens 
that appear in the representation as if they are English 
words and sees whether it sounds like it means what 
is desired--not a very satisfactory state of affairs. A 
second methodological principle in semantic interpreta- 
tion is that of compositionality--the slogan being, "the 
meaning of the whole must be a function of the mean- 
ing of the parts." This principle reflects the fact that 
it is not sufficient just to be able to represent formally 
the meaning of natural-language expressions; it must be 
possible to produce them in a systematic way from the 
natural anguage. In the Hwang and Schubert paper, the 
representations u ed may seem quite complex to some-- 
one outside the field, but that complexity is motivated 
by the need to satisfy these methodological constraints. 
In Vilain's paper, the major issue adressed is the trade- 
off between expressiveness in a representation formalism 
and the tractability of the inference problem for that for- 
malism. It is notorious that the more expressive a repre- 
sentation language is, the more computationally complex 
the inference problem for it is. Vilain looks at whether 
for a certain type of application, the expressions in the 
representation language can be limited to a normal form 
which is known to be computationally tractable. 
There are also a number of issues that cut across all 
phases of processing. One such issue is to what de- 
gree systems can be made language and domain indepen- 
dent. The ideal is for the algorithms to be both language 
and domain independent, with a declaratively specified 
grammar and lexicon that is language dependent but do- 
main independent, and a final domain-dependent mod- 
ule that interfaces the language processing to the appli- 
cation. The paper by Aone, et al, explores how well 
this model works in a real multi-lingual data extraction 
system. A second issue is that of hand coding versus 
automatic extraction of the knowledge required for NLP 
systems. Almost all the knowledge mbodied in the sys- 
tems described in this session is hand-coded, while the 
emphasis in Session 8 is on systems that use methods for 
automatic extraction. Often this issue is conflated with 
the issue of whether the knowledge in question is rep- 
resented by symbolic rules or by numerical parameters 
such as probabilities, but it is worth pointing out that 
the paper by Brill in Session 8 uses symbolic rules, but 
extracts them automatically from a corpus. Finally, sev- 
eral of these papers raise the question of how to evaluate 
the work reported on. This has come to be recognized as 
a central methodological issue in the field, and the Mc- 
Cord, Hobbs, and Vilain papers all address the problem 
in one way or another. 
126 
