A S IMULAT ION-BASED RESEARCH STRATEGY 
FOR DES IGNING COMPLEX NL  SYSTEMS*  
Sharon Oviatt, Philip Cohen, Michelle Wang 8J Jeremy Gaston t 
ABSTRACT 
Basic research is critically needed to guide the development 
of a new generation of multimodal and multilingual NL sys- 
tems. This paper summarizes the goals, capabilities, com- 
puting environment, and performance characteristics of a 
new semi-automatic simulation technique. This technique 
has been designed to support a wide spectrum of empiri- 
cal studies on highly interactive speech, writing, and multi- 
modal systems incorporating pen and voice. Initial studies 
using this technique have provided information on people's 
language, performance, and preferential use of these com- 
munication modalities, either alone or in multimodal combi- 
nation. One aim of this research as been to explore how 
the selection of input modality and presentation format can 
be used to reduce difficult sources of linguistic variability in 
people's peech and writing, such that more robust system 
processing results. The development of interface techniques 
for channeling users' language will be important to the ability 
of complex NL systems to function successfully in actual field 
use, as well as to the overall commercialization f this tech- 
nology. Future extensions of the present simulation research 
also are discussed. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Basic research is critically needed to guide the develop: 
ment of a new generation of complex natural language 
systems that are still in the planning stages, such as ones 
that support multimodal, multilingual, or multiparty ex- 
changes across a variety of intended applications. In the 
case of planned multimodal systems, for example, the 
potential exists to support more robust, productive, and 
flexible human-computer interaction than that afforded 
by current unimodal ones \[3\]. However, since multimodal 
systems are relatively complex, the problem of how to 
design optimal configurations i unlikely to be solved 
through simple intuition alone. Advance empirical work 
*This research was supported in part by Grant No. IFti-9213472 
from the National Science Foundation to the first authors, as well 
as additional funding and equipment donat ions from ATR Interns- 
tional, Apple Computer, USWest, and ~Vacom Inc. Any opinions, 
findings, or conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the 
authors, and do not necessarily reflect he views of our sponsors. 
t Michelle Wang is afl'diated with the Computer Science Depart- 
ment and Jeremy Gaston with the Symbolic Systems Program at 
Stanford University. 
Computer  D ia logue Laboratory  
A.I .  Center ,  SRI  In ternat iona l  
333 Ravenswood Avenue 
Men lo  Park ,  Cal i forn ia ,  U.S.A.  94025 
with human subjects will be needed to generate a factual 
basis for designing multimodal systems that can actually 
deliver performance superior to unimodal ones. 
In particular, there is a special need for both method- 
ological tools and research results based on high-quality 
simulations of proposed complex NL systems. Such 
simulations can reveal specific information about peo- 
ple's language, task performance, and preferential use 
of different types of systems, so that they can be de- 
signed to handle expected input. Likewise, simulation 
research provides a relatively affordable and nimble way 
to compare the specific advantages and disadvantages of 
alternative architectures, uch that more strategic de- 
signs can be developed in support of particular applica- 
tions. In the longer term, conclusions based on a series 
of related simulation studies also can provide a broader 
and more principled perspective on the best application 
prospects for emerging technologies such as speech, pen, 
and multimodal systems incoporating them. 
In part for these reasons, simulation studies of spoken 
language systems have become common in the past few 
years, and have begun to contribute to our understand- 
ing of human speech to computers \[1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 17\]. How- 
ever, spoken language simulations typically have been 
slow and cumbersome. There is concern that delayed re- 
sponding may systematically distort the data that these 
simulation studies were designed to collect, especially for 
a modality like speech from which people expect speed 
\[6, 10, 15\]. Unlike research on spoken language systems, 
there currently is very little literature on handwriting 
and pen systems. In particular, no simulation studies 
have been reported on: (1) interactive handwriting 1 \[6\], 
(2) comparing interactive speech versus handwriting as 
alternative ways to interact with a system, or (3) ex- 
amining the combined use of speech and handwriting to 
simulated multimodal systems of different types. Po- 
tential advantages of a combined pen/vo i~ system have 
been outlined previously \[4, 12\]. High quality simulation 
1Although we are familiar with nonlnteractive writing from 
everyday activities like personal notetaking, very llttle-is known 
about interactive writing and pen use as a modality of human- 
computer interaction. 
370 
research on these topics will be especially important o 
the successful design of mobile computing technology, 
much of which will emphasize communications and be 
keyboardless. 
The simulation technique developed for this research 
aims to: (1) support a very rapid exchange with sim- 
ulated speech, pen, and pen/voice systems, such that 
response delays are less than 1 second and interactions 
can be subject-paced, (2) provide a tool for investigat- 
ing interactive handwriting and other pen functional- 
ity, and (3) devise a technique appropriate for compar- 
ing people's use of speech and writing, such that dif- 
ferences between these communication modalities and 
their related technologies can be better understood. To- 
ward these ends, an adaptable simulation method was 
designed that supports a wide range of studies investi- 
gating how people speak, write, or use both pen and 
voice when interacting with a system to complete qual- 
itatively different asks (e.g., verbal/temporal, compu- 
tational/numeric, graphic/cartographic). The method 
also supports examination of different issues in spoken, 
written, and combined pen/voice interactions (e.g., typ- 
ical error patterns and resolution strategies). 
In developing this simulation, an emphasis was placed on 
providing automated support for streamlining the simu- 
lation to the extent needed to create facile, subject-paced 
interactions with clear feedback, and to have compara- 
ble specifications for the different modalities. Response 
speed was achieved in part by using scenarios with cor- 
rect solutions, and by preloading information. This en- 
abled the assistant o click on predefined fields in order 
to respond quickly. In addition, the simulated system 
was based on a conversational model that provides ana- 
logues of human backchannel and propositional confir- 
mations. Initial tasks involving service transactions em- 
bedded propositional-level confirmations in a compact 
transaction "receipt," an approach that contributed to 
the simulation's clarity and speed. Finally, emphasis was 
placed on automating features to reduce attentional de- 
mand on the simulation assistant, which also contributed 
to the fast pace and low rate of technical errors in the 
present simulation. 
2. S IMULAT ION METHOD 
Basic simulation features for the studies completed to 
date are summarized below, and have been detailed else- 
where \[16\], although some adaptations to these specifica- 
tions are in progress to accommodate planned research. 
2 .1 .  P rocedure  and  Ins t ruct ions  
Volunteer participants coming into the Computer Di- 
alogue Laboratory at SRI are told that the research 
project aims to develop and test a new pen/voice system 
for use on future portable devices. To date, subjects have 
included a broad spectrum of white-collar professionals, 
excluding computer scientists. All participants o far 
have believed that the "system" was a fully functional 
one. Following each session, they are debriefed about 
the nature and rationale for conducting a simulation. 
During the study, subjects receive written instructions 
about how to enter information on an LCD tablet when 
writing, when speaking, and when free to use both 
modalities. When writing, they are told to handwrite 
information with the electronic stylus directly onto ac- 
tive areas on the tablet. They are free to print or write 
cursive. When speaking, subjects are instructed to tap 
and hold the stylus on active areas as they speak into the 
microphone. During free choice, people are completely 
free to use either modality in any way they wish. Partic- 
ipants also receive written instructions about how to use 
the system to complete realistic tasks, which currently 
focus on the broad class of service-oriented transactions 
(e.g., car rental reservations, personal banking, real es- 
tate selection). Then they practice several scenarios us- 
ing spoken and written input until the system and the 
tasks are completely clear. 
People are encouraged to speak and write naturally. 
They are asked to complete the tasks according to in- 
structions, while working at their own pace. Other than 
providing motivation to complete the tasks and speci- 
fying the input modality, an effort is made not to in- 
fluence the specific manner in which subjects express 
themselves. They are encouraged to focus on complet- 
ing the tasks and are told that, if their input cannot be 
processed for any reason, this will be clear immediately 
since the system will respond with ??? to prompt them 
to try again. Subjects are told how to remove or replace 
information as needed. Otherwise, they are told that 
input will be confirmed by the system on a transaction 
receipt, which they can monitor to check that their re- 
quests are being met (see next section for details). Of 
course, participants' input actually is received by an in- 
formed assistant, who performs the role of interpreting 
and responding as the system would. 
The simulation assistant is instructed to respond as accu- 
rately and rapidly as possible to any spoken or written 
information corresponding to predefined receipt fields. 
Essentially, the assistant tracks the subject's input, click- 
ing with a mouse on predefined fields on a Sun SPARC- 
station to send confirmations back to the subject. Under 
some circumstances, the assistant is instructed to send 
a ??? prompt instead of a confirmation. For exam- 
ple, subjects receive ??? feedback when input is judged 
to be inaudible or illegible, when the subject forgets to 
371 
supply task-critical information, or when input clearly is 
inappropriate, ambiguous, or underspecified. In general, 
however, the assistant is instructed to use ??? feedback 
sparingly in order to minimize intervention with people's 
natural tendencies to speak or write. If the subject com- 
mits a procedural error, such as forgetting to click before 
entering speech or attempting to enter information us- 
ing the wrong modality, then the assistant is instructed 
not to respond until the subject recovers and correctly 
engages the system. The assistant's task is sufficiently 
automated that he or she is free to focus attention on 
monitoring the accuracy of incoming information, and 
on maintaining sufficient vigilance to respond promptly 
with confirmations. 
2.2.  P resentat ion  Format  
For studies completed to date, two different prompting 
techniques have been used to guide subjects' spoken and 
written input--  one unconstrained and one forms-based. 
In the relatively unconstrained presentation format, sub- 
jects must take the initiative to ask questions or state 
needs in one general workspace area. No specific system 
prompts direct their input. They simply continue pro- 
viding information until their transaction receipt is com- 
pleted, correctly reflecting their requests. In this case, 
guidance is provided primarily by the task itself and the 
receipt. When the presentation format is a form, labeled 
fields are used to elicit specific task content, for example: 
Car  p ickup locationl I. In this case, 
the interaction is more system-guided, and linguistic and 
layout cues are used to channel the content and order of 
people's language as they work. 
For other studies in which people work with visual in- 
formation (e.g., graphic/cartographic tasks), different 
graphic dimensions of presentation format are manip- 
ulated. In all studies, the goal is to examine the impact 
of presentation format on people's language and perfor- 
mance as they either speak or write to a simulated sys- 
tem. As a more specific aim, assessments are being con- 
ducted of the extent o which different formats naturally 
constrain linguistic variability, resulting in opportunities 
for more robust natural anguage processing. 
2.3.  Conversat iona l  Feedback  
With respect o system feedback, a conversational model 
of human-computer interaction was adopted. As a re- 
sult, analogues are provided of human backchannel and 
propositional-level confirmations. These confirmations 
function the same for different input modalities and pre- 
sentation formats. With respect o backchannel signals, 
subjects receive *** immediately following spoken in- 
put, and an electronic ink trace following written input. 
These confirmations are presented in the tablet's active 
area or a narrow "confirmation panel" just below it. Sub- 
jects are told that this feedback indicates that their input 
has been legible/audible and processable by the system, 
and that they should continue. 
In addition to this backchannel-level signal, subjects are 
told to verify that their requests are being met success- 
fully by checking the content of the receipt at the bot- 
tom of the tablet. This receipt is designed to confirm 
all task-critical information supplied during the interac- 
tion, thereby providing propositional confirmations. It 
remains visible throughout the transaction, and is com- 
pleted gradually as the interaction proceeds. Although 
the receipt varies for different asks, its form and content 
remains the same for different modalities and presenta- 
tion formats. 
Apart from confirmation feedback, the simulation also 
responds to people's questions and commands by trans- 
mitting textual and tabular feedback. For example, if a 
subject selects the car model that he or she wants and 
then says, "Do you have infant seats?" or "Show me the 
car options," a brief table would be displayed in which 
available items like infant seats and car phones are listed 
along with their cost. 
2 .4 .  Automated  Features  
To simplify and speed up system responding, the cor- 
rect receipt information associated with each task is 
preloaded for the set of tasks that a subject is to re- 
ceive. A series of preprogrammed dependency relations 
between specified task-critical information and associ- 
ated receipt fields is used to support the automation of 
propositional confirmations. As mentioned earlier, with 
this arrangement the assistant simply needs to click on 
certain predefined fields to send appropriate acknowledg- 
ments automatically as the subject gradually supplies 
relevant information. Of course, if the subject makes a 
performance error, the assistant must manually type and 
confirm the error that occurs. In such cases, however, 
canonical answers are maintained so that they can be 
confirmed quickly when people self-correct, which they 
tend to do over 50% of the time. The automated simula- 
tion strategy described above works well when research 
can take advantage of task scenarios that entail a limited 
set of correct answers. 
An additional automated feature of the present simu- 
lation technique is a "random error generator," which 
is designed to ensure that subjects encounter at least a 
minimal level of simulated system errors, in part to sup- 
port the credibility of the simulation. In this research, if 
subjects do not receive at least one ??? response from 
372 
the system during a set of two tasks, then the simula- 
tion generates one. This results in a minimum baseline 
rate of one simulated error per 33 items of information 
supplied, or 3%, which in this research as been consid- 
ered a relatively error-free nvironment. The simulated 
errors are distributed randomly across all task-critical 
information supplied for the set of tasks. 
2.5. Per fo rmance  Character i s t i cs  
The described method for organizing simulated response 
feedback was responsible in part for the fast pace of the 
present simulation. In studies conducted to date, re- 
sponse delays during the simulation have averaged 0.4 
second between a subject's input and visible confirma- 
tion on the tablet receipt, with less than a 1-second elay 
in all conditions. The rate of technical errors in exe- 
cuting the assistant's role according to instructions has 
been low, averaging 0.05 such errors per task. Further- 
more, any major error by the assistant would result in 
discarding that subject's data, which currently has been 
averaging 6% of subjects tested. The present simulation 
also appears to be adequately credible, since no partici- 
pants to date have doubted that it was a fully functional 
system. As a result, no data has been discarded for this 
reason. 
2.6. S imula t ion  Env i ronment  
The computing equipment that supports this simulation 
technique includes two Sun workstations, one a SPARC- 
station 2, that are linked via ethernet. A Wacom HD- 
648A integral transparent digitizing tablet/LCD display 
is interfaced to the SPARC 2 through aVigra S-bus VGA 
card. An accompanying cordless digitizing pen is used 
for writing, clicking to speak, pointing, or otherwise op- 
erating the tablet. A Crown PCC 160 microphone trans- 
mits spoken input from the subject to the simulation 
assistant, who listens through a pair of stereo speakers 
from a remote location. The assistant also views an im- 
age of the subject working at the tablet, along with an 
image of all visible input and feedback occurring on the 
tablet. 
The user interface is based on the X-windows system, 
employing MIT Athena widgets. X-windows is used for 
its ability to display results on multiple screens, includ- 
ing the subject's tablet and the assistant's workstation, 
and because the resulting program runs on equipment 
from several manufacturers. Two aspects of the system 
architecture are designed for rapid interface adaptability. 
First, Widget Creation Language (WCL) enables non- 
programmers to alter the user interface layout. Second, 
a simple textual language and interpreter were created to 
enable declarative specification of widget behavior and 
interrelations. Some widget behavior also is written in 
the C programming language. 
Various modifications tothe standard X-windows opera- 
tion have been deployed to ensure adequate r al-time re- 
sponding needed for acceptable handwriting quality and 
speed. To avoid objectionable ag in the system's elec- 
tronic ink echo, a high-performance workstation (i.e., 
Sun SPARCstation 2) is used to process the subject's 
input. 
2.7. Data  Capture  
With respect to data collection, all human-computer 
interactions are videotaped for subsequent analysis. 
The recording is a side-by-side split-screen image, cre- 
ated using a JVC KM-1200U special-effects generator. 
Videotaping is conducted unobtrusively with a remote 
genlocked Panasonic WV-D5000 videocamera filming 
through aone-way mirror. Data capture includes aclose- 
up of the subject working at the LCD tablet, and a real- 
time record of interactions on the tablet, including the 
subject's input, simulated feedback, and the gradually 
completed receipt. This image is recorded internally 
from the assistant's workstation, is processed through 
a Lyon Lamb scan converter, and then is merged using 
the special-effects generator and preserved on videotape 
for later analysis. In addition to being transmitted to 
the simulation assistant, he subject's peech is recorded 
and stored in analog form on a timecoded videotape, and 
later is transcribed for data analysis. All handwritten 
input is recorded on-line during real-time tablet interac- 
tions, which then is preserved on videotape and available 
for hardcopy printout. 
3. RESEARCH DES IGN 
In studies conducted at SRI to date, the experimen- 
tal design usually has been a completely-crossed fac- 
toriM with repeated measures, or a within-subjects de- 
sign. Primary factors of interest have included: (1) com- 
munication modality (speech-only, pen-only, combined 
pen/voice), and (2) presentation format (form-based, 
unconstrained). In a typical study, each subject com- 
pletes a series of 12 tasks, two representing each of the 
six main conditions. The order of presenting conditions 
is counterbalanced across ubjects. 
This generM design has been selected for its relative f- 
ficiency and power and, in particular, for its ability to 
control linguistic variability due to individual differences. 
In brief, for example, this design permits comparing how 
the same person completing the same tasks displays one 
type of language and performance while speaking, but 
then switches this language and performance when writ- 
ing. 
373 
4. SAMPLE RESULTS 
The variability inherent in people's language, whether 
spoken or written, poses a substantial challenge to the 
successful design of future NL systems. One aspect of 
this research as been a comprehensive assessment of 
the linguistic variability evident in people's peech and 
writing at various levels of processing, including acous- 
tic, lexical, syntactic, and semantic. Full reports of these 
results are forthcoming \[11, 14\]. Special emphasis has 
been placed on identifying problematic sources of vari- 
ability for system processing, as well as an explanation of
the circumstances and apparent reasons for their occur- 
rence. In connection with these analyses, one goal of this 
researclh program has been to identify specific interface 
techniques that may naturally channel users' language 
in ways that reduce or eliminate difficult sources of vari- 
ability, so that more robust system processing can be 
achieved. In particular, the impact of selecting a par- 
ticular input modality or presentation format is being 
examined, so that future system designers will have the 
option of choosing a particular modality or format be- 
cause doing so will minimize xpected performance fail- 
ures of their planned NL systems. 
To briefly illustrate the research theme of reducing lin- 
guistic variability through selection of modality and for- 
mat, the results of an analysis related to syntactic ambi- 
guity are summarized. Two indices of relative ambiguity 
were measured for all phrasal and sentential utterances 
that people spoke to an unconstrained format (SNF), 
wrote in an unconstrained.format (WNF), spoke to a 
form (SF), or wrote in a form (WF). Two different es- 
timates of parse ambiguity were computed to check for 
convergence of results. First, utterances produced under 
the different simulation conditions were parsed using DI- 
ALOGIC \[9\], a robust text processing system developed 
at SRI that employs a broad coverage grammar. Sec- 
ond, a summary was computed of the number of canoni- 
cal parses produced by DIALOGIC, through a mapping 
of each DIALOGIC parse to an emerging national stan- 
dard parse tree representation called PARSEVAL form 2 
\[2\]. The average number of DIALOGIC and PARSEVAL 
parses generated per utterance for the different simula- 
tion conditions i summarized in Table 1, along with the 
percentage of all utterances in each condition that were 
phrases or sentences and therefore appropriate for pars- 
ing. 
None of the subjects produced phrases or sentences when 
writing to a form, so none of the simple utterances from 
PAFtSEVAL form is designed to reflect agreement among com- 
putational linguists imply on the major constituent bracketlngs, 
so  PARSEVAL identification of syntactic structures should tend 
to  represent the commonalities among many different systems. 
COND. DIALOGIC 
SNF 20.9 
WNF 10.7 
SF 
WF 
6.3 
PARSEVAL 
7.2 
4.4 
2.8 
UTTERANCES 
PARSED 
36% 
18% 
8% 
0% 
Table 1: Average number of DIALOGIC and PARSE- 
VAL parses per utterance as a function of modality and 
format. 
this condition were appropriate for parsing. The percent- 
age of phrase and sentential utterances available for pars- 
ing was greater for unconstrained than form-based input, 
and greater for spoken than written input. Comparison 
of both parse metrics for unconstrained and form-based 
speech revealed that using a form significantly reduced 
the average number of parses per utterance, t (paired) 
= 2.50 (df = 5), p < .03, one-tailed (DIALOGIC), and 
t (paired) = 2.35 (df = 5), p < .04, one-tailed (PARSE- 
VAL). When comparisons were made of the same sub- 
jects accomplishing the same tasks, the parse ambiguity 
of utterances in the unconstrained format averaged 232% 
higher for DIALOGIC and 157% higher for PARSEVAL 
than when communicating to a form. However, com- 
parison of both parse metrics for speech and writing in 
an unconstrained format did not confirm that use of the 
written modality reduced the average number of parses 
per utterance, t (paired) = 1.18 (df = 14), p > .10, one- 
tailed (DIALOGIC), and t < 1 (PARSEVAL). That is, 
reliable reduction of parse ambiguity was obtained only 
through manipulation of the presentation format. 
This pattern of results suggests that selection of pre- 
sentation format can have a substantial impact on the 
ease of natural anguage processing, with direct implica- 
tions for improved system robustness. In addition, post- 
experimental interviews indicated that participants pre- 
ferred form-based interactions over unconstrained ones 
by a factor of 2-to-1 in the present asks. In particular, 
both the guidance and assurance of completeness a so- 
ciated with a form were considered esirable. This indi- 
cates that the a priori assumption that any type of con- 
straint will be viewed by people as unacceptable or un- 
natural clearly is not always valid. Furthermore, such a 
presumption may simply bias system development away 
from good prospects for shorter-term gain. The applica- 
tion of this kind of interface knowledge will be important 
to the successful performance and commercialization f 
future natural anguage technology. 
374 
5. FUTURE DIRECT IONS 
The long-term goal of the present research method is to 
support a wide spectrum of advance mpirical studies on 
interactive speech, pen, and pen/voice systems under dif- 
ferent circumstances of theoretical and commercial inter- 
est. Future extensions of the present simulation research 
are under way to examine issues relevant to multilin- 
gual and other multiparty applications \[13\]. In addition, 
a taxonomy of tasks is being developed in order to es- 
tablish a more analytical basis for distinguishing when 
findings do or do not generalize to qualitatively different 
domains, such that future work need not approach each 
new application as an unknown entity. Efforts also are 
under way to define the important dimensions of system 
interactivity, such as feedback characteristics and error 
resolution strategies, as well as their impact on human- 
computer interaction. Finally, in addition to providing 
proactive guidance for system design, a further aim of 
this simulation research is to yield better information 
about the range of preferred metrics for conducting per- 
formance assessments of future NL systems, including 
their accuracy, efficiency, learnability, flexibility, ease of 
use, expressive power, and breadth of utility. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to John Dowding, Dan Wilk, Martin Fong, and 
Michael Frank for invaluable programming assistance 
during the design and adaptation of the simulation. Spe- 
cial thanks also to Dan Wilk and Martin Fong for acting 
as the simulation assistant during experimental studies, 
to Zak Zaidman for general experimental ssistance, and 
to John Bear, Jerry Hobbs, and Mabry Tyson for assist- 
ing with the preparation of DIALOGIC and PARSEVAL 
parses. Finally, thanks to the many volunteers who so 
generously offered their time to participate in this re- 
search. 
References 
1. F. Andry, E. Bilange, F. Charpentier, K. Choukri, 
M. Ponamal6, and S. Soudoplatoff. Computerised sim- 
ulation tools for the design of an oral dialogue system. 
In Selected Publications, 1988-1990, SUNDIAL Project 
(Esprit P2218). Commission of the European Commu- 
nities, 1990. 
2. E. Black, S. Abney, D. Flickinger, C. Gdaniec, R. Gr- 
ishman, P. Harrison, D. Hindle, R. Ingria, F. Jelinek, 
J. Klavans, M. Liberman, M. Marcus, S. Roukos, B. San- 
torini, and T. Strzalkowski. A procedure for quantita- 
tively comparing the syntactic overage of English gram- 
mars. In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop, pages 306-311. Morgan Kaufmann, 
Inc., February 1991. 
3. R. Cole, L. Hirschman, L. Atlas, M. Beckman, A. Bier- 
man, M. Bush, J. Cohen, O. Garcia, B. Hanson, 
H. Hermansky, S. Levinson, K. McKeown, N. Morgan, 
D. Novick, M. Ostendorf, S. Oviatt, P. Price, H. Silver- 
man, J. Spitz, A. Waibel, C. Weinstein, S. Zahorain, and 
V. Zue. NSF workshop on spoken language understand- 
ing. Technical Report CS/E 92-014, Oregon Graduate 
Institute, September 1992. 
4. H. D. Crane. Writing and talking to computers. Busi- 
ness Intelligence Program Report D91-1557, SRI Inter- 
national, Menlo Park, California, July 1991. 
5. N. DahlbKck, A. JSnsson, and L. Ahrenberg. Wiz- 
ard of Oz studies - -  why and how. In L. Ahrenberg, 
N. Dahlbgck, and A. JSnsson, editors, Proceedings from 
the Workshop on Empirical Models and Methodology for 
Natural Language Dialogue Systems, Trento, Italy, April 
1992. Association for Computational Linguistics, Third 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing. 
6. N. M. Fraser and G. N. Gilbert. Simulating speech sys- 
tems. Computer Speech and Language, 5(1):81-99, 1991. 
7. M. Guyomard and J. Siroux. Experimentation i  the 
specification of an oral dialogue. In H. Niemann, 
M. Lung, and G. Sagerer, editors, Recent Advances in 
Speech Understanding and Dialog Systems. Springer Vet- 
lag, Berlin, B. R. D., 1988. NATO ASI Series, vol. 46. 
8. C. T. Hemphill, J. J. Godfrey, and G. R. Doddington. 
The ATIS spoken language systems pilot corpus. In 
Proceedings o/the 8rd Darpa Workshop on Speech and 
Natural Language, pages 96-101, San Mateo, California, 
1990. Morgan Kanfmann Publishers, Inc. 
9. J. R. Hobbs, D. E. Appelt, J. Bear, M. Tyson, and 
D. Magerman. Robust processing of real-world natural- 
language texts. In P. S. Jacobs, editor, Text-Based In. 
telligent Systems: Current Research and Practice in In- 
\]ormation Extraction and Retrieval. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Publishers, Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1992. 
10. A. F. Newell, J. L. Arnott, K. Carter, and G. Cruick- 
shank. Listening typewriter simulation studies. Inter- 
national Journal o/Man-machine Studies, 33(1):1-19, 
1990. 
11. S. L. Oviatt. Writing and talking to future interactive 
systems, manuscript in preparation. 
12. S. L. Oviatt. Pen/voice: Complementary multimodal 
communication. In Proceedings of Speech Tech '9~, pages 
238-241, New York, February 1992. 
13. S. L. Oviatt. Toward multimodal support for interpreted 
telephone dialogues. In M. M. Taylor, F. Nrel, and 
D. G. Bouwhuis, editors, Structure o/Multimodal Di- 
alogue. Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, in press. 
14. S. L. Oviatt and P. R. Cohen. Interface techniques for 
enhancing robust performance of speech and handwrit- 
ing systems, manuscript in preparation. 
15. S. L. Oviatt and P. R. Cohen. Discourse structure 
and performance efficiency in interactive and noninterac- 
tive spoken modalities. Computer Speech and Language, 
5(4):297-326, 1991a. 
16. S. L. Oviatt, P. R. Cohen, M. W. Fong, and M. P. Frank. 
A rapid semi-automatic simulation technique for inves- 
tigating interactive speech and handwriting. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 1992 International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, Banff, Canada, October 1992. 
17. E. Zoltan-Ford. How to get people to say and type 
what computers can understand. International Journal 
of Man-Machine Studies, 34:527-547, 1991. 
375 
