THE PENMAN PROJECT ON 
KNOWLEDGE-BASED MACHINE TRANSLAT ION 
Eduard Hovy, Principal Investigator 
Information Sciences Inst i tute of USC 
4676 Admira l ty  Way 
Mar ina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
PROJECT GOALS 
The joint development, ogether with the ULTRA 
project at New Mexico State University and the Center 
for Machine Translation at Carnegie Mellon University, 
of an integrated knowledge-based machine-aided trans- 
lation system called PANQLOSS. The ISI-specific work 
includes the development of English sentence generation 
and sentence planning capabilities and the construction 
of an Ontology of concepts to act as the semantic lexicon 
for all modules of the system as a whole. In addition, 
we continue to enhance Penman's existing generation 
technology, to collect and develop ancillary knowledge 
sources and software (such as grammars or bilingual dic- 
tionaries and lexicons for German, Japanese, Spanish, 
and Chinese), and to maintain and distribute Penman. 
RECENT RESULTS 
During the past year, the generation component ofPAN- 
CLOSS was installed; PANGLOSS was tested during the 
first DARPA MT evaluation. This work necessitated the 
development of code to transfer the output of New Mex- 
ico's ULTRA parser to a form suitable for Penman. 
More recently, Penman Project members have been 
working on the semi-automated construction and acqui- 
sition of an Ontology for PANGLOSS. A high-level tax- 
onomy of the basic concepts required for the processing 
of ULTRA, the CMU software, and Penman was synthe- 
sized out of several sources; this 400-odd node taxonomy 
we call the Ontology Base (OB). Current work involves 
migrating wordsense names from LDOCE into WordNet 
using several automatic techniques and then taxonomiz- 
ing fragments of WordNet under the OB; at the present 
time, approx. 11,000 concepts have been so taxonomized 
and another 10,000 are awaiting final placement. Our 
goal is an Ontology organized under the OB of approx. 
50,000 items. Toward this goal we acquired WordNet 
from Princeton and an online copy of Roget's thesaurus. 
Ramping up toward making the Ontology support pro- 
cessing of other languages, we have been collecting mul- 
tilingual resources of various types. We have acquired 
an online Japanese-English dictionary (approx. 50,000 
entries with phrases), several Chinese-English online dic- 
tionaries (approximately equal total size), and are in 
the process of acquiring the Collins bilingual Spanish- 
English dictionary. We have also established X-windows 
based display capabilities for Japanese and Chinese, in- 
eluding a Japanese macs editor and dictionary access 
intertgce. 
In other work, the core mapping engine of the Sentence 
Planning module of PANGLOSS has been constructed and 
is currently being debugged. The Sentence Planner con- 
verts representations of texts written in the Pangloss In- 
terlingua into SPL expressions suitable for Penman. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Three principal efforts are planned for the coming year: 
the construction of the 50,000-node Ontology, the de- 
velopment of English, Japanese, and Spanish lexicons 
associated with the Ontology, and the development and 
implementation f several microtheories for use in sen- 
tence planning. 
The main problem in Ontology construction is the au- 
tomated acquisition under Ontology nodes of semantic 
information, as used during semantic analysis and lexi- 
cal selection. A number of methods of extracting such 
information from dictionaries, text corpora, and other 
resources are being developed, as well as a system to as- 
sist the acquisition of remaining information by humans. 
A problem in automatically constructing lexicons of var- 
ious languages i  the association of a wordsense in a dic- 
tionary with its correct Ontology item (if such exists) 
or the creation of a new Ontology item and its correct 
placement in the Ontology. Variations of the algorithms 
used for associating LDOCE wordsenses with WordNet 
items will be used for this task, operating on the bilin- 
gual dictionaries we have collected. 
The main problems facing the Sentence Planner are the 
development ofmicrotheories for lexical selection, refer- 
ence (including pronominalization), and theme develop- 
ment, to ensure high quality and coherent output. 
421 
