SHOGUN-  MULT IL INGUAL DATA EXTRACTION 
FOR T IPSTER 
P. Jacobs, Principal Investigator 
GE Research and Development Center 
1 River Rd., Schenectady, NY 12301 
PROJECT GOALS 
The TIPSTER/SHOGUN project aims at substantive 
improvements in coverage and accuracy for automatic 
data extraction through innovative strategies in knowl- 
edge acquisition, run-time integration, and control. One 
of four teams in the data extraction component of the 
TIPSTER program, TIPSTER/SHOGUN includes GE 
Corporate Research and Development, Carnegie Mellon 
University - Center for Machine Translation, and GE 
Management and Data Systems. 
Data extraction systems interpret the key content of nat- 
ural language text, producing a structured representa- 
tion of items that range from high-level business rela- 
tionships to detailed knowledge coding of technologies 
and industry classifications. This task applies to both 
Japanese and English in each of two domains--joint 
ventures and micro-electronics. As such, TIPSTER is 
considerably more detailed and comprehensive than pre- 
vious text interpretation experiments, including prior 
MUC (Message Understanding Conference) valuations. 
The goals for SHOGUN are the following: 
? Accuracy significantly ahead of MUC-4, with lev- 
els near those of trained human analysts at about 
100 times human speed using conventional hardware 
and software. 
? Automated knowledge acquisition and extensibil- 
ity tools that support customization times of a few 
weeks for new applications. 
? Multi-lingual performance, with comparable l vels 
in both languages and the highest possible overlap 
between languages. 
The project is now within a few months of completion, 
and is on target oward all of these goals. 
RECENT RESULTS 
During the early stages of the project, the team reached 
very good initial levels of performance on MUC-4 by 
successfidly integrating methods used at GE and CMU, 
marking the first time that parsing systems of this level 
of coverage have been effectively combined. This pro- 
vided an important testbed and also allowed for multi- 
lingual development--In recent months, Japanese per- 
formance has remained close to English performance. 
As the system coverage and accuracy have continued 
to improve, the most important recent hrust has been 
the incorporation of most of the knowledge and control 
strategies of the system into a finite-state driven ana- 
lyzer, effectively replacing the traditional parsing layer 
with a detailed knowledge base of finite-state rules com- 
piled from syntactic and lexical resources. While this 
seems close to work done in the speech community, it is 
an unusual approach for text, where the high perplexity 
and long sentence l ngth have seemed to favor semantics- 
driven and high-level syntactic models. 
The finite-state model allows different knowledge 
sources, particularly corpus-based knowledge, to have 
more of an impact on interpretation. Data extraction 
is a knowledge-intensive task, and it has been much sim- 
pler to augment the finite-state rules with corpus data 
than it was for the more abstract rules. 
While the performance on all tasks still lags behind hu- 
man analysts, closing this gap may not be as hard as 
we first expected. Much of the difference comes from 
portions of the work that are still incomplete. In ad- 
dition, the ability to use automatically-acquired corpus 
data gives the programs a distinct advantage on certain 
portions of the task. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
As the project nears completion, the team is approach- 
ing the goal of near-human accuracy mostly by finishing 
certain key details, such as better reference resolution 
and word sense discrimination. At the same time, we 
are close to some significant advances in corpus-based 
training methods that will not only isolate the context 
required to discriminate nuances of meaning but also sig- 
nificantly reduce development, time by acquiring domain 
knowledge from the x:orpus. This may the key to future 
applications of TIPSTER technology. 
395 
