Diderot: T IPSTER Program, Automatic Data Extraction 
from Text Util izing Semantic Analysis 
Y. Wilks, J. Pustejovsky S, J. Cowie 
Computing Research Laboratory, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 
& 
Computer Science S,Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02254 
PROJECT GOALS 
The Computing Research Laboratory at New Mexico 
State University and the Computer Science Department 
at Brandeis University have been working for the past 
18 months on the development of a system to perform 
automatic data extraction from texts on restricted sub- 
ject areas (for business - joint ventures and for micro- 
electronics - improvements in semiconductor technology) 
in two languages (English and Japanese). 
The eventual aim is to be able to automatically populate 
data-bases containing information relevant o the work 
of government analysts. 
The system, Diderot, is to be extendible and the tech- 
niques used not explicitly tied to the two particular lan- 
guages, nor to the finance and electronics domains which 
are the initial targets of the Tipster project. To achieve 
this objective the project has as a primary goal the explo- 
ration of the usefulness of machine readable dictionaries 
and corpora as source for the semi-automatic creation of 
data extraction systems. 
RECENT RESULTS 
In the past year we have implemented 5 different ext ex- 
traction systems three for English and two for Japanese. 
Experiments have been carried out on the derivation of 
syntactic and semantic information automatically from 
machine readable dictionaries and text corpora. Statis- 
tical methods have been developed for recognizing rele- 
vant texts or sections of texts. Methods have been de- 
veloped which tag text using finite state automata which 
mark organizations, human names, places, products and 
dates. A parser generator has been produced which con- 
verts Generative Lexical Semantic structures into Defi- 
nite Clause Grammar ules. 
Japanese and English systems for a subset of the joint 
venture domain were evaluated on their performance 
against unseen texts for the Tipster 12 month evaluation. 
Full coverage Japanese and English systems for micro 
electronics were tested for the 18 month evaluation. Full 
coverage systems for the business domain were not corn- 
pleted in time for this evaluation and enhanced versions 
of the 12 month systems were used. The detailed results 
of the evaluations are reported in the Tipster 12 and 18 
month session notebooks. The performance of the En- 
glish systems is still very poor. The performance of the 
Japanese systems is significantly better, with the most 
recently developed micro-electronics system performing 
with a precision of 48% and a recall of 26%. It would 
appear that a combination of factors has influenced this 
result including more specific hand tuning and a single 
system developer. 
Tools have been created to support human text extrac- 
tion for Japanese and English for both domains. These 
have been used by IDA to produce all the training data 
(key structures extracted from over 4,000 texts) for the 
Tipster extraction project. Work has commenced on a 
tool (Tabula Rasa) which allows the creation of template 
extraction tools for human analysts and which also sup- 
ports the definition of an extraction task. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
The principal objective for the next six months is to pro- 
duce systems for English and Japanese which perform 
unifornaly well (around 50% precision and 40% recall). 
Initially we plan to hand tune our English systems to 
provide a 'core' system of good quality. We then in- 
tend to extend the coverage of this system by automat- 
ically extending the lexicon using machine readable dic- 
tionaries and information extracted automatically from 
corpora. At present most parts of the Diderot system 
are easily configurable for new languages and/or do- 
mains. The modules which perform reference resolution 
were specifically written for each domain (topic) and lan- 
guage. We intend to modify these and separate as far as 
possible domain information from the general purpose 
reference resolution mechanism. 
Subsequently, we hope to be involved in the next phase 
of Tipster, both ill the provision of modules for informa- 
tion extraction and in the provision of tools to assist the 
design process and to support the integration of auto- 
matic and human information extraction. 
405 
