Multi-Site Data  Collection and Evaluation 
in Spoken Language Understanding 
L. Hirschman, M. Bates, D. Dahl, W. Fisher, \]. Garofolo, 
D. Pallett, K. Hunicke-Smith, P. Price, A. Rudnicky, and E. Tzoukermann* 
Contact: Lynette H i rschman 
NE43-643 Spoken Language Systems Group 
MIT  Laboratory for Computer  Science, Cambridge,  MA 02139 
e-mail: lynet te@goldilocks.lcs.mit.edu 
ABSTRACT 
The Air Travel Information System (ATIS) domain serves as 
the common task for DARPA spoken language system re- 
search and development. The approaches and results possi- 
ble in this rapidly growing area are structured by available 
corpora, annotations of that data, and evaluation methods. 
Coordination of this crucial infrastructure is the charter of 
the Multi-Site AT IS  Data COllection Working group (MAD-  
COW) .  We focus here on selection of training and test data, 
evaluation of language understanding, and the continuing 
search for evaluation methods that will correlate well with 
expected performance of the technology in applications. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Data availability and evaluation procedures structure re- 
search possibilities: the type and amount of training 
data affects the performance of existing algorithms and 
limits the development of new algorithms; and evalua- 
tion procedures document progress, and force research 
choices in a world of limited resources. The recent rapid 
progress in spoken language understanding owes much to 
our success in collecting and distributing a large corpus 
of speech, transcriptions, and associated materials based 
on human-machine interactions in the air travel domain. 
A tight feedback loop between evaluation methodology 
and evaluation results has encouraged incremental ex- 
tension to the evaluation methodology, to keep pace with 
the technology development. The paper reports on the 
data collection and evaluation efforts co-ordinated by 
MADCOW over the past year. 
The multi-site data collection paradigm \[3, 4\] distributes 
the burden of data collection, provides data rapidly, ed- 
ucates multiple sites about data collection issues, and 
results in a more diverse pool of data than could be ob- 
tained with a single collection site. The resulting data 
represents a wide range of variability in speaker char- 
acteristics, speech style, language style and interaction 
style. It has allowed individual sites to experiment with 
data collection methods: by replacing various system 
*This paper was written the auspices of the Multi-Site ATIS 
Data Collection Working group (MADCOW). In addition to the 
authors, many other people, listed under the Acknowledgements 
section, made important contributions to this work. 
components  with a human,  we collect the kind of data we 
can a im for in the future, while completely automated  
systems help us to focus on the major  current issues 
in system accuracy and speed. Sites have also exper- 
imented with interface strategies: spoken output only, 
tabular output only, response summaries,  spoken and 
written paraphrase, and system initiative may be more  
or less appropriate for different users and different tasks 
and all can dramatically affect the resulting data. 
MADCOW's  recent accompl ishments include: 
? Release of 14,000 utterances for training and test, 
including speech and transcriptions; 
? Release of annotations for almost I0,000 of these 
utterances (7500 training utterances and three test 
sets of 2300 utterances total), balanced by site; 
? A bug reporting and bug fix mechanism,  to maintain 
the quality and consistency of the training data; 
? An  evaluation schedule that delivered training data 
and froze changes in the principles of interpretation I 
several months  before the evaluation; 
? An  experiment with "end-to-end" evaluation that 
permits evaluation of aspects of the system not pre- 
viously evaluable. 
Table I shows the breakdown of all training data and Ta- 
ble 2 shows the breakdown for just the annotated data?  
2. CURRENT EVALUATION 
METHODOLOGY 
When the ATIS task was developed in 1990 \[9\], lit- 
tle work had been done on formal evaluation of under- 
standing for natural language interfaces. 3 In the ab- 
sence of a generally accepted semantic representation, 
1These are the principles that define how various vague or dif- 
ficult phrases are to be interpreted; see section 2.1 below. 
2A class A utterance can be interpreted by itself, with no ad- 
ditional context; a class D utterance requires an earlier "context- 
setting" utterance for its interpretation; and a class X utterance 
cannot be evaluated in terms of a reference database answer. 
~This coincides with the beginnings of formal evaluation for 
written text, via the Message Understanding Conferences (MUCs) 
19  
Site 
AT&T 
BBN 
CMU 
MIT 
SRI 
TOTAL 
Speakers  Scenarios Utterances 
57 200 2100 
62 307 2277 
47 214 2219 
182 625 4910 
90 148 2478 
438 1494 13984 
Site 
ATT 
BBN 
CMU 
MIT 
SRI 
Total 
Class A Class D Class X Total 
457 36.6% 497 39.8% 295 23.6% 1249 16.6% 
858 56.2% 357 23.4% 312 20.4% 1527 20.3% 
562 37.6% 340 22.7% 594 39.7% 1496 19.9% 
663 37.7% 680 38.7% 414 23.6% 1757 23.4% 
676 45.7% 618 41.8% 184 12.4% 1478 19.7% 
3216 42.8% 2492 33.2% 1799 24.0% 7507 100.0% 
Table 1: Multi-site ATIS Data Summary Table 2: Annotated Training Data  Summary  
the DARPA SLS community focused instead on "the 
right answer," as defined in terms of a database query 
task (air travel planning). This permitted evaluation by 
comparing "canonical" database answers to the system 
answers using a comparator program \[1\]. This approach 
was felt to be far easier, given proper definition of terms, 
than to agree on a standard semantic representation. 
The original evaluation methodology was defined only 
for context-independent (class A) utterances. However, 
this left approximately half the data as unevaluable 
(see Table 2). Over the next two years, the evaluation 
method was extended to cover context~dependent queries 
(class D utterances), it was tightened by requiring that 
a correct answer lie within a minimal answer and a max- 
imal answer (see section 2.1), and it was made more 
realistic by presenting utterances in scenario order, as 
spoken during the data collection phase, with no infor- 
mation about the class of an utterance. Thus, we now 
can evaluate on approximately 75% of the data (all but 
class X data - see Tables 2 and 4). We also introduced a
Weighted Error metric because we believed, at least in 
some applications, wrong answers might be worse than 
"no answer" :4 
WeightedError = 
~(No_Answer) + 2 ? #(Wrong_Answer). 
2.1 .  The  Eva luat ion  Mechan ism 
The comparator-based evaluation method compares 
human annotator-generated canonical ("reference") 
database answers to system generated answers. The 
annotators first classify utterances into context- 
independent (A), context-dependent (D) and unevalu- 
able (X) classes. Each evaluable utterance (class A or 
D) is then given minimal and maximal reference an- 
\[8\]. The MUC evaluation uses a domain-specific template as the 
basis for evaluation. To date, the goal of a domain-independent se- 
mantic representation, perhaps analogous to the minimal bracket- 
ing of the Penn Treebank database \[2\] for parsing, remains elusive. 
4A recent experiment \[5\] showed that for one system, subjects 
were able to detect a system error before making their next query in 
90% of the cases. In the remaining 10%, a system error caused the 
subject o lose several turns before recovering, leading to a reduced 
estimated weighting factor of 1.25 for errors in that system. 
swers. The minimal reference answer is generated using 
NLParse 5 and the maximal answer is generated algorith- 
mically from the minimal answer. A correct answer must 
include all of the tuples contained in the minimal answer 
and no more tuples than contained in the maximal an- 
swer. 
The Principles of Interpretation document  provides an 
explicit interpretation for vague natural language expres- 
sions, e.g., "red-eye flight" or "mid-afternoon," and spec- 
ifies other factors necessary to define reference answers, 
e.g., how context can override ambiguity in certain cases, 
or how utterances should be classified if they depend on 
previous unevaluable utterances. This document  serves 
as a point of common reference for the annotators and 
the system developers, and permits evaluation of sen- 
tences that otherwise would  be too vague to have a well- 
defined database reference answer. 
The initial Principles of Interpretation was implemented 
in 1990. The document is now about 10 pages long, and 
includes interpretation decisions based on some 10,000 
ATIS utterances. The document continues to grow but 
at a significantly slower rate, as fewer new issues arise. It 
is remarkable that such a small document has sufficed to 
provide well-defined interpretations for a corpus of this 
size. This demonstrates that rules for the interpreta- 
tion of natural anguage utterances, at least in the ATIS 
domain, can be codified well enough to support an au- 
tomatic evaluation process. Because this procedure was 
explicit and well-documented, two new sites were able 
to participate in the most recent evaluation (November 
1992). 
2 .2 .  Tes t ing  on  the  MADCOW Data  
The test data selection procedure was designed to en- 
sure a balanced test set. Test data for the November 
1992 evaluation were chosen using procedures similar to 
those for the November 1991 test \[3\]. As sites submit- 
ted data to NIST, NIST set aside approximately 20% of 
the utterances to create a pool of potential test data; 
some 1200 utterances constituted the November 1991 
5NLParse is a database access product of Texas Instruments. 
20 
test  pool; 1300 utterances constituted the November 
1992 test pool. 
NIST's goal was to select approximately 1000 test utter- 
ances from the test data pool, evenly balanced among 
the five collection sites (AT~T, BBN, CMU, MIT, and 
SRI). Utterances were selected by session, i.e., utterances 
occurring in one problem-solving scenario were selected 
as a group, avoiding sessions that seemed to be extreme 
outliers (e.g., in number of class X utterances, total num- 
ber of utterances, or number of repeated utterances). 
Because the test pool contained only marginally more 
utterances than were needed for the test, it was not pos- 
sible to simultaneously balance the test set for number 
of speakers, gender, or subject-scenarios. The test set 
contained 1002 utterances. 6 The breakdown of the data 
is shown in Table 3. 
NIST verified and corrected the original transcriptions. 
However, some uncertainty about the transcriptions re- 
mained, due to inadequacies in the specifications for the 
transcription of difficult-to-understand speech, such as 
sotto  voce speech. After the transcriptions were verified, 
the data were annotated by the SRI annotation group to 
produce categorizations and reference answers. A period 
for adjudication followed the test, where testing sites 
could request changes to the test data categorizations, 
reference answers, and transcriptions. The final post- 
adjudication classification of the test data set is shown 
in Table 4. Final evaluation results are reported in \[6\]. 
Collecting Site Speakers Scenarios Utterances 
ATT 
BBN 
CMU 
MIT  
SRI  
7; 1M/ 6F 
7; 3M/ 4F 
4; 4M/ OF 
10; 3M/ 7F 
9; 5M/ 4F 
22 
28 
12 
37 
19 
200 
201 
200 
201 
200 
Total 37; 16M/21F 118 1002 
Table 3: Multi-site AT IS  Test Data  November  1992 
3. L IM ITAT IONS OF  THE 
CURRENT EVALUATION 
The current data collection and evaluation paradigm 
captures importan t dimensions of system behavior. 
However, we must constantly re-assess our evaluation 
procedures in terms of our goals, to ensure that our eval- 
uation procedures help us to assess the suitability of a 
particular technology for a particular application, and 
6The data recorded using the Sennheiser head:mounted noise- 
cancelling microphone were used as the test material for "offi- 
cial" speech recognition (SPREC) and spoken language system 
(SLS, NL) testing. For a subset of the utterances in the official 
test sets, recordings were also made using a desk-mounted Crown 
microphone. 
to ensure that benchmark scores will correlate well with 
user satisfaction and efficiency when the technology is 
transferred to an application. 
The advantage of using a pre-recorded corpus for evalu- 
ation is clear: the same data are used as input to all sys- 
tems under evaluation, and each system's et of answers 
is used to automatically generate a benchmark score. 
This approach ensures a uniform input across all sys- 
tems and removes human involvement from the bench- 
mark testing process (except hat human annotators de- 
fine the reference answers). Any annotated set of data 
can be used repeatedly for iterative training. However, 
some of these same strengths also impose limitations on 
what  we can evaluate. 
First, there is the issue of the match  between the ref- 
erence answer and the user's need for useful informa- 
tion. The  comparator  method  can count answers as cor- 
rect despite system misunderstanding. For example, if 
a system misrecognizes "Tuesday" as "Wednesday"  and  
the user realizes that the flight information shown is for 
Wednesday  flights, the user may appropriately believe 
that the answer  is wrong. However ,  if all flights have 
daily departures, the database answer  will be canoni- 
cally correct. On  the other hand, useful (but not strictly 
correct) answers will be counted wrong, because there is 
no "partially correct" category for answers. 
Second, mixed initiative in human-machine dialogue will 
be required for technology transfer in many spoken 
language understanding applications. But the evalua- 
tion paradigm actively discourages experimentation with 
mixed initiative. A query that is a response to a system- 
initiated query is classified as unevaluable if the user's 
response can only be understood in the context of the 
system's query. During evaluation, any system response 
that is a query will automatically be counted as incorrect 
(since only database answers can be correct). 
The use of pre-recorded ata also preserves artifacts of 
the data collection system. For example, much of the 
test data were collected using systems or components 
of systems to generate responses, rather than a human 
alone. As a result, the data include many instances of 
system errors that affect the user's next query. A user 
may have to repeat a query several times, or may cor- 
rect some error that the data collection system (but not 
the system under evaluation) made. These are artificial 
phenomena that would disappear if the data collection 
and evaluation systems were identical. 
Finally, the current paradigm does not take into account 
the speed of the response, which greatly affects the over- 
all interaction. Demonstration systems at several sites 
21 
Site 
ATT 
BBN 
CMU 
MIT 
SRI 
Total: 
Class A Class D Class X Total 
48 (24.0%) 
97 (48.3%) 
76 (38.0%) 
100 (49.8%) 
106 (53.0%) 
41 (20.5%) 
27 (13.4%) 
66 (33.0%) 
67 (33.3%) 
46 (23.0%) 
111 (55.5%) 
77 (38.3%) 
58 (29.0%) 
34 (16.9%) 
48 (24.0%) 
200 (20.0%) 
201 (20.1%) 
200 (20.0%) 
201 (20.1%) 
200 (20.0%) 
427 (42.6%) 247 (24.7%) 328 (32.7%) 1002 (100.0%) 
Table 4: Breakdown of Test Data by Class 
have begun to diverge from those used in benchmark 
evaluations, in part, because the requirements of demon- 
strating or using the system are quite different from the 
requirements for generating reference database answers. 
These limitations of the comparator-based valuation 
preclude the evaluation of certain strategies that are 
likely to be crucial in technology transfer. In particular, 
we need to develop metrics that keep human subjects in 
the loop and support human-machine interaction. How- 
ever, the use of human subjects introduces new issues 
in experimental design. Over the past year, MADCOW 
has begun to address these issues by designing a trial 
end-to-end evaluation. 
4. END-TO-END EVALUATION 
EXPERIMENT 
The end-to-end evaluation, designed to complement the 
comparator-based evaluation, included 1) objective mea- 
sures such as timing information, and time to task com- 
pletion, 2) human-derived judgements on correctness of
system answers and user solutions (logfile evaluation), 
and 3) a user satisfaction questionnaire. 
The unit of analysis for the new evaluation was a sce- 
nario, as completed by a single subject, using a partic- 
ular system. This kept the user in the loop, permitting 
each system to be evaluated on its own inputs and out- 
puts. The use of human evaluators allowed for assess- 
ing partial correctness, and provided the opportunity to 
score other system actions, such as mixed initiatives, er- 
ror responses and diagnostic messages. The end-to-end 
evaluation i cluded both task-level metrics (whether sce- 
narios had been solved correctly and the time it took a 
subject o solve a scenario) and utterance-level metrics 
(query characteristics, system response characteristics, 
the durations of individual transactions). 
An experimental evaluation took place in October 1992, 
to assess feasibiiity of the new evaluation method. We 
defined a common experimental design protocol and a 
common set of subject instructions (allowing some lo- 
cal variation). Each site submitted to NIST four travel 
planning scenarios that had a well-defined "solution set". 
From these, NIST assembled two sets of four scenarios. 
Each site then ran eight subjects, each doing four scenar- 
ios, in a counter-balanced design. Five systems partici- 
pated: the BBN, CMU, MIT and SRI spoken language 
systems, and the Paramax system using typed input. 
A novel feature of the end-to-end experiment was the 
logfile evaluation. This technique, developed at MIT 
\[7\], is based on the logiile which records and times- 
tamps all user/system interactions. A human evalu- 
ator, using an interactive program, 7 can review each 
user/system interaction and evaluate it by type of user 
request, type of system response, and correctness or ap- 
propriateness of response. For user requests, the follow- 
ing responses were distinguished: 1) New Information, 
2) Repeat, 3) Rephrase, or 4) Unevaluable. For system 
responses, the evaluators categorized each response as 
follows: 
Answer: further evaluated as Correct, Incorrect 
Partially Correct or Can't Decide; 
System Initiated Directive: further evaluated as 
Appropriate, Inappropriate, or Can't Decide; 
Diagnostic Message: further evaluated as Appropriate, 
Inappropriate, or Can't Decide; 
Failure-to-Understand Message: no further evaluation. 
The evaluator also assessed the scenario solution accord- 
ing to whether the subject finished and whether the an- 
swer belonged to the defined solution set. 
To facilitate determination f the correctness of individ- 
ual system responses, we agreed to follow the Princi- 
ples of Interpretation, at least to the extent hat an an- 
swer judged correct by these Principles would not be 
counted incorrect. For this experiment, logfile evalua- 
tion was performed independently b Bill Fisher (NIST) 
and Kate Hunicke-Smith (SRI Annotation), as well as by 
volunteers at MIT and BBN. This gave us experience in
looking at the variability among evaluators of different 
7The program was developed by David Goodine at MIT; the 
evaluator instructions were written by Lynette Hirschman, with 
help from Lyn Bates, Christine Pao and the rest of MADCOW. 
22 
levels of experience. We found that any two evaluators 
agreed about 90% of the time, and agreement among 
multiple evaluators decreased proportionally. 
5. LESSONS LEARNED 
The experiment provided useful feedback on the risks 
and advantages of end-to-end evaluation, and will guide 
us in refining the procedure. For the initial trial, we 
made methodological compromises in several areas: a 
small number of subjects, no control over cross-site sub- 
ject variability, few guidelines in developing or select- 
ing scenarios. These compromises seemed reasonable to 
get the experiment started; however, the next iteration 
of end-to-end evaluation will need to introduce method- 
ological changes to provide statistically valid data. 
5 .1 .  Sources  o f  Var iab i l i ty  
Valid comparisons of systems across sites require control 
over major  sources of variability, so that the differences 
of interest can emerge. The  use of human subjects in 
the evaluation creates a major  source of variability, due 
to differences in the subjects pools available at various 
sites and the characteristics of individuals. We can min- 
imize some of these differences, for example, by training 
all subjects to the same criterion across sites (to account 
for differences in background and familiarity with the 
domain),  by using many subjects f rom each site (so that 
any one subject's idiosyncrasies have less of an effect on 
the results), and by ensuring that procedures for subject 
recruitment and data collection across sites are as Similar 
as possible (we made a serious effort in this direction, but 
more  could be done to reduce the cross-site variability 
that is otherwise confounded with the system under eval- 
uation). An  alternative would  be to perform the eval- 
uation at a common site. This would  allow for greater 
uniformity in the data collection procedure, it could in- 
crease the uniformity of the subject pool, and would 
allow use of powerful experimental techniques (such as 
within-subject designs). Such a common-s i te  evaluation, 
however, would  pose other challenges, including the port 
of each system to a common site and platform, and the 
complex  design needed to assess potential scenario order 
effects, system order effects, and their interaction. 
Another  source of variability is the set of travel plan- 
ning scenarios the subjects were asked to solve. Certain 
scenarios posed serious problems for all systems; a few 
scenarios posed particular problems for specific systems. 
However,  the data suggest that there was a subset that 
could perform a reasonable diagnostic function. 
5.2.  Logf i le  Eva luat ion  
Somewhat unexpectedly, we found that logfile evaluation 
was a useful tool for system developers in identifying 
dialogue-related problems in their systems. The evalu- 
ator interface allowed for rapid evaluation (about 5-15 
minutes per scenario). However, the evaluator instruc- 
tions need refinement, the interface needs minor exten- 
sions, and most important, we need to design a proce- 
dure to produce a statistically reliable logfile evaluation 
score by combining assessments from multiple evalua- 
tors. 
A remaining thorny problem is the definition of  correct, 
partially correct, and incorrect answers. For this experi- 
ment, we used the Principles of Interpretation document 
to define a correct answer, so that we would not need to 
develop a new document for these purposes. For the next 
evaluation, we need definitions that reflect utility to the 
user, not just canonical correctness, s 
Finally, we found that we could not rely on subjects to 
correctly complete the scenarios presented to them. In 
some cases, the subject was not able to find the answer, 
and in other cases, the subject did not follow directions 
regarding what information to provide in the answer. 
This made it difficult to compute accurate statistics for 
scenario-level metrics such as task completion and task 
completion time; this problem was exacerbated by the 
limited amount of data we collected. 
6. FUTURE D IRECT IONS 
We view evaluation as iterative; at each evaluation, 
we assess our procedures and try to improve them. 
The comparator-based evaluation is now stable and the 
November 1992 evaluation ran very smoothly. The avail- 
ability of an expanded atabase will require a new data 
collection effort. Increasing emphasis on portability may 
have an impact on evaluation technology. In addition, we 
plan to continue our experiments with end-to-end evalu- 
ation, to work out some of the methodological problems 
described in the previous ection. 
The ATIS relational database has been expanded from 11 
cities to 46 cities, to provide a more realistic task sup- 
porting more challenging scenarios. The database was 
constructed using data from the Official Airline Guide 
and now includes 23,457 flights (compared to 765 flights). 
The set of new cities was limited to 46 because it was felt 
that a larger set would result in an unwieldy database 
SOriginally, we had wanted to compare logfile scores to 
comparator-based scores. However, for several sites, the data 
collection and evaluation systems had diverged and it was not 
possible to simultaneously interact with the subjects and provide 
comparator-style answers. Therefore, we were not able to perform 
this experiment. 
23 
and would thus require the sites to devote too many re- 
sources to issues peripheral to their research, such as 
database management and query optimization. Data 
collection on this larger database is now beginning. 
The portability of the technology (from application to 
application, and from language to language) becomes an 
increasing challenge as the technology improves, since 
more potential applications become possible. It still 
takes many hours of data collection and several person 
months of system development to port an application 
from one domain (e.g., air travel) to another similar do- 
main (e.g., schedule management). Evaluating portabil- 
ity is still more challenging. Evaluation has a significant 
cost: the comparator-based method requires the deft- 
nition of a training corpus and its collection, defining 
principles of interpretation, and (most expensively) the 
annotation ofdata. Therefore, if we believe that regular 
evaluations play an important role in guiding research, 
we need to find cost-effective ways of evaluating systems. 
End-to-end evaluation may provide some low-overhead 
techniques for quickly evaluating system performance in 
new domains. 
With the end-to-end evaluation experiment, We have 
made progress in creating a procedure that accurately 
assesses the usability of current spoken language tech- 
nology and provides useful feedback for the improvement 
of this technology. The procedure needs to be further e- 
fined to reliably identify differences among systems and 
it must embody principles that can assess trengths and 
weaknesses of different systems for different purposes. 
In developing evaluation procedures that involve human 
interactions, we need to carefully assess the validity of 
the measures we use. For example a measure such as 
the number of utterances per scenario may seem rele- 
vant (e.g., the subject was frustrated with answers and 
had to repeat a question several times), but in fact may 
reflect irrelevant aspects of the process (the subject was 
intrigued by the system and wanted to push its limits in 
various ways). Meaningful evaluation will require met- 
rics that have been systematically investigated and have 
been shown to measure relevant properties. 
MADCOW has played a central role in developing and 
coordinating the multi-site data collection and evalua- 
tion paradigm. It will also play an active role in defining 
new methodologies, such as end-to-end evaluation, to 
support evaluation of interactive spoken language sys- 
tems. We believe that end-to-end evaluation will allow us 
to assess the trade-offs among various component-level 
decisions (in speech recognition, natural anguage pro- 
cessing and interface design), bringing spoken language 
systems closer to eventual deployment. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would particularly like to acknowledge the contribu- 
tion of Nancy Dahlgren at NIST; prior to her accident, 
Nancy made important contributions to the annotation 
and debugging of the data. We greatly missed her par- 
ticipation during the final evaluation. 
In addition to the authors, the following people made a 
valuable contribution to the process: at ATT: J. Wilpon; 
at BBN: R. Bobrow, R. Ingria, J. Makhoul, V. Shaked, 
and D. Stallard; at CMU: C. Neelan, E. Thayer, and 
R. Weide; at MIT: D. Goodine, J. Polifroni, C. Pao, M. 
Phillips, and S. Seneff; at NIST: N. Dahlgren, J. Fiscus, 
and B. Tjaden; at Paramax: L. Norton, and R. Nilson; 
and at SRI: H. Bratt, R. Moore, E. Shriberg, and E. 
Wade. 
REFERENCES 
1. Bates, M., S. Boisen, and J. Makhoul, "Developing 
an Evaluation Methodology for Spoken Language Sys- 
tems," Proc. Third DARPA Speech and Language Work- 
shop, R. Stern (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, June 1990. 
2. Black, E., et al, "A Procedure for Quantitatively Com- 
paring the Syntactic Coverage of English Grammars," 
Proc. Third DARFA Speech and Language Workshop, 
P. Price (ed.), Morgan Kanfmann, June 1991. 
3. Hirschman, L., et al, "Multi-Site Data Collection for a 
Spoken Language Corpus", Proc. Fifth Speech and Natu- 
ral Language Workshop, M. Marcus (ed.), Morgan Kanf- 
mann, Arden House, NY, February 1992. 
4. Hirschman, L., et al, "Multi-Site Data Collection for a 
Spoken Language Corpus," Proc. of the ICSLP, Banff, 
Canada, October 1992. 
5. Hirschman, L. and C. Pao, "The Cost of Errors in a 
Spoken Language Systems," submitted to Eurospeech- 
93, Berlin 1993. 
6. Pallett, D., Fiscus, J., Fisher, W., and J. Garofolo, 
"Benchmark Tests for the Spoken Language Program," 
Proc. DARPA Human Language Technology Workshop, 
Princeton, March 1993. 
7. Polifroni, J., Hirschman, L., Seneff, S. and V. Zue, "Ex- 
periments in Evaluating Interactive Spoken Language 
Systems" Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop, M. Marcus (ed.), Arden House, NY, Febru- 
axy 1992. 
8. Proc. Fourth Message Understanding Conf., Morgan 
Kaufmann, McLean, June 1992. 
9. Price P., "Evaluation of Spoken Language Systems: The 
ATIS Domain," Proc. Third DARPA Speech and Lan- 
guage Workshop, P. Price (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 
June 1990. 
24 
