SESSION 1: SPOKEN LANGUAGE SYSTEMS 
Alexander I. Rudnicky 
School of  Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA 
By themselves, speech recognition and natural language 
processing have limited applications, the reason is that each 
only accomplishes a part of what humans are capable of 
when they use language. Spoken language systems repre- 
sent he merger of these two technologies and provide an 
integrated functionality hat more closely approximates 
humans capabilities in speech communication. 
The addition of natural language processing enhances 
speech recognition by allowing people to speak naturally 
without he need to remember specific ommand words or 
to keep within a specific grammar. In principle, as long as 
we are able to describe something verbally, aspoken lan- 
guage system should be able to understand us. 
Without he ability to interpret natural language, speech 
recognition is suited only for a subset of tasks (though cer- 
tainly not trivial ones), such as data entry, simple com- 
mands or dictation. Similarly, without speech recognition 
natural language isrestricted to the interpretation f written 
language, a stylized form of human communication. Spo- 
ken language systems thus represent an attempt to automate 
speech communication. While limited in terms of the target 
behavior, they still represents an advance over the capabili- 
ties of the individual technologies. 
The development of spoken language systems has many 
facets. Certainly it pushes the development of the basic 
technologies, speech recognition and natural language pro- 
cessing, since successful nderstanding ultimately depends 
on high quality processing at these levels. At the same time, 
spoken language generates the need for advances in other 
domains. 
The requirements of fluent communication require ngi- 
neering of algoritluns to produce real-time understanding of 
speech; since human speech is a highly interactive medium 
real-time response isnecessary for fluency. It also raises the 
need for incorporating additional aspects of analysis into 
the process. Prosody is a case in point. The development of 
spoken language systems also requires the implementation 
of running systems that can be used to perform non-trivial 
tasks. This in turn creates the need for studying the usabil- 
ity of spoken language systems, ince some issues critical 
to performance r veal themselves only in the course of 
actual use. In turn these issues impact he development of 
processing strategies atthe level of the individual technolo- 
gies. The use of spoken language systems under more real- 
istic conditions also serves as a stimulus for the study of 
robustness, a system's ability to handle variations in envi- 
ronment, microphone characteristics as well as the vagaries 
of human speech. 
The development of spoken language systems requires up- 
port activities, uch as the development of training and test 
corpora nd the development of evaluation techniques. The 
spoken language community has developed a large corpus 
of speech data that attempts o approximate he speech that 
would occur under eal conditions, t the same time, elabo- 
rate evaluation techniques have been developed that allow 
us to compare and diagnose the characteristics of spoken 
language systems. 
The papers in this session at first glance appear to fall into 
two groups. One group concerns itself with evaluation and 
data collection while the other concerns itself with lan- 
guage processing techniques. In fact the two sets of papers 
share an important theme in common, that of real data. In 
reading these papers one is struck by the extent o which 
the use of real data has shaped what we do and how we do 
it. 
The paper by Pallett et aldescribes the evaluation proce- 
dures cuffently in use in the spoken language technology 
program. In comparing the current evaluation procedures 
with those in use a few years ago, one is struck by the 
extent to which the program has progressed from the use of 
carefully controlled ata to the use of more natural (and 
more difficul0 speech. While the continuous speech recog- 
nition evaluation uses read speech for its main evaluations, 
a new "stress test" has been introduced which exposes ys- 
tems to a variety of unpredictable material, a condition that 
begins to approximate what recognition system might actu- 
ally be exposed to under ealistic onditions. The spoken 
language valuations have seen a similar progression from 
single sentences toedited scenarios to an attempt to use 
complete scenarios for evaluation. 
Data collection, as described in the paper by Hirshman and 
the MADCOW committee has seen a similar progression, 
from read sentences generated from an artificial grammar, 
to collection through the use of wizard systems, to the use 
of real systems to collect data fro both training and testing. 
The paper by Thompson and Bard represents perhaps the 
logical conclusion of this process, the collection of speech 
from natural human-human interactions. While the Edin- 
burgh corpus is meant for analysis rather than for speech 
system development, it nevertheless represents he kind of 
data that spoken language systems will ultimately be asked 
to process. In the discussion of this paper it was pointed out 
that human-computer communication might urn out to be 
quite different from human-human communication a d that 
things learned from this corpus might not be transferrable 
to that situation. Some interest was also expressed in the 
phenomenon foverlap and its role in communication. 
The three following papers, from Paramax, BBN and SRI 
describe current improvements to the natural language 
components of spoken language systems. All three papers 
attempt to deal with the problem of how to adapt a syntac- 
tic-based parser to the realities of language as spoken by 
humans and further transcribed (perhaps erroneously) by 
speech recognition systems. The paper by Linebarger et al
describes a robustness heuristic (based on the ability to skip 
non-keywords) that allows the Paramax parser to interpret 
otherwise unprocessed inputs. The paper by Stallard and 
Bobrow also addresses the problem of salvaging otherwise 
unparsable inputs by the use of semantic structure when the 
use of syntactic structure fails to produce an interpretation. 
It was pointed out in the discussion that he semantic post- 
processing might not be portable. The paper by Dowding et 
al presents a parsing strategy that uses the mutual con- 
straints of syntax an semantics to generate parses, together 
with heuristics that allow the system to produce an inter- 
pretation even if no satisfactory initial parse is found. Inter- 
estingly, for the ATIS task, none of the syntax based parsers 
can currently outperform a frame-based parser. 
One of the key arguments hat have been made in favor of 
syntax-based parsing is that he knowledge gained in one 
domain will transfer to other domains and will save the 
work of having to build a parser for the new domain. The 
paper by Linebarger et aldescribes how the Paramax 
robustness heuristics can be easily ported between 
domains. Portability can refer not only to transfer between 
domains but also to transfer between languages, a poten- 
tially more difficult ask. The paper by Glass et aldescribes 
experiences in porting the MIT Voyager system from 
English to Japanese. While this paper is a good example of 
how a syntactic parser can be successfully ported to a new 
domain, it is nevertheless ignificant that the parsing strat- 
egy had to be altered in order to accommodate the structure 
of the Japanese language. In the discussion, itwas pointed 
out that discourse-level processing might not, in principle, 
be portable, though the elementary processing need for the 
Voyager domain turned out to be portable. 
6 
