SESS ION 11: PROSODY 
M. Ostendorf 
Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering 
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 
ABSTRACT 
This paper provides a brief introduction to prosody research 
in the context of human-computer communication a d an  
overview of the contributions of the papers in the session. 
1. WHAT IS PROSODY?  
In large part, prosody is "the relative temporal groupings 
of words and the relative prominence ofcertain syllables 
within these groupings" (Price and Hirsehherg \[1\]). This 
organization of the words, as Silverman points out \[2\], 
"annotates the information structure and discourse role 
of the text, and indicates to the listener how the speaker 
believes the content relates to the ...prior knowledge 
within the discourse context." For example, the relative 
groupings of words can provide cues to syntactic struc- 
ture as well as discourse segmentation, and the relative 
prominence of words can provide cues to semantically 
important or focused items. Segmentation and focus 
represent two of the major uses of prosody, but other in- 
formation may also be cued by intonation patterns, e.g. 
indication of continuation, finality or a yes-no question 
with phrase final "boundary tones". 
Prosody is typically also defined with a reference to 
its suprasegmental n ture: "Prosody comprises all the 
sound attributes of a spoken utterance that are not 
a property of the individual phones" (Collier) \[2\]. In 
addition, prosody can operate at multiple levels (e.g., 
word, phrase, sentence, paragraph), making computa- 
tional modeling of prosody particularly challenging. The 
acoustic orrelates of prosody, which include duration of 
segments and pauses, fundamental frequency (F0), am- 
plitude and vowel quality, may be influenced by prosodic 
patterns at more than one level, as well as inherent seg- 
mental properties. Modeling the interactions among the 
different factors is an important and difficult problem. 
Most current linguistic theories of prosody include an ab- 
stract or phonological representation f prosody to char- 
acterize aspects of phrasing, prominence, and intonation 
or melody. However, here we also see that abstract rep- 
resentations are of interest for computational modeling. 
Since it is generally agreed that prosody is not directly 
related to standard representations of syntactic struc- 
ture, it is useful to have an intermediate r presentation 
to facilitate automatic learning and to simplify model 
structure. Thus, the form of an abstract representation 
is an important issue. Ideally, it should include all three 
main aspects of prosody, and address the needs of theory 
and computational models. Many different schemes have 
been proposed, and variations of two different prosodic 
transcription systems are used in the papers presented in
this session. The TOBI (Tones and Break Indices) sys- 
tem for American English \[3\] is a prosodic transcription 
system that has evolved from a series of workshops where 
researchers met with the goal of defining a common core 
of transcription labels. The TOBI system is used to 
varying degrees in the papers by Silverman, Veilleux and 
Ostendorf, and Nakatani and Hirsehberg. The IPO tax- 
onomy of intonation for Dutch \[4\], which is used in the 
work of Collier, de Pijper and Sanderman, was devel- 
oped from a long tradition of research in intonation that 
has recently been applied to several languages. 
2. PROSODY & HUMAN-COMPUTER 
COMMUNICATION 
The theme of this workshop is on technology for auto- 
mated language processing, and thus the emphasis in 
this overview is on representations and computational 
models of prosody for spoken language processing appli- 
cations. There are two classes of problems in speech pro- 
cessing for human-computer interactions: peech synthe- 
sis and speech understanding. Prosody plays a role in 
both problems, as is clearly seen in the different papers 
covered in this session. Prosodic patterns are determined 
by the information structure of language and realized in 
the speech waveform in terms of F0, duration and energy 
patterns. As illustrated in Figure 1, the overall problem 
in computational modeling of prosody is to move from 
one domain to the other, optionally via an intermediate 
abstract representation. 
Until recently, almost all research in computational mod- 
eling of prosody has been in speech synthesis applica- 
tions, where it has been claimed that good prosody mod- 
els are among the most important advances needed for 
315 
SYNTHESIS 
words ~ F0 
syntax duration 
semantics energy 
discourse 
? UNDERSTANDING 
Figure 1: Problems in computational modefing of 
prosody for human-machine communication. 
high quality synthesis. The papers by Silverman, van 
Santen, and Collier et al each address different prob- 
lems related to prosody synthesis. Silverman attacks the 
problem of predicting abstract prosodic labels, while van 
Santen presents a model for predicting duration from 
text (and optionally abstract labels). Collier el al., on 
the other hand, analyzes the relation between automat- 
ically predicted boundary levels and perceived level in 
natural speech. Both Silverman and van Santen make 
the point that good prosody models can improve natu- 
ralness, but Silverman also shows that intelligibility can 
be improved. 
Speech understanding is a relatively recent area of re- 
search for prosody, although researchers have long cited 
anecdotal evidence for its usefulness. Within the speech 
understanding domain, the papers in this session are di- 
rected mainly at contributions of prosody to natural an- 
guage processing. An example is the use of prosody in 
combination with other "knowledge sources" to choose 
among the different possible interpretations of an utter- 
ance, investigated by Veilleux and Ostendorf. Some ut- 
terances from the ATIS domain that illustrate the po- 
tential role of prosody in interpretation i clude: 
Does flight US six oh four leave San Francisco on Friday 
or Thursday? 
where both intonation and phrase structure can be 
used to distinguish between the yes-no question and the 
"Thursday vs. Friday" alternative, and 
Show me the itineraries for Delta flights eighty two one 
three one two seven t~ve and one seven nine. 
where knowledge of phrasing can help determine the spe- 
cific flights referred to. Prosody can also serve speech un- 
derstanding systems in an entirely different way, as dis- 
cussed in the paper by Nakatani and Hirschberg, which 
is to cue the presence of a disfluency and the interval of 
replacement. As an example, consider another sentence 
from the ATIS domain, where prosody would be useful in 
automatically distinguishing a disfluency from a speech 
recognition error: 
What is the <light> latest flight on Wednesday going 
from Atlanta to Washington DC? 
Of course, the presence of disfluencies complicates the 
design of prosodic models, e.g. since fluent and disfluent 
pauses may cue different ypes of syntactic onstituents. 
An important question in current approaches to com- 
putational modeling of prosody is the specification of 
(or even use of) an intermediate phonological repre- 
sentation. Although all papers use some sort of dis- 
crete prosody labels, the paper by Collier et al specif- 
ically investigates the perceptual relevance of one type 
of prosodic label - an integer epresentation of relative 
phrase breaks - and its acoustic orrelates. 
3. IMPORTANT THEMES 
Several important and common themes, indicative of re- 
cent research trends, cut across subsets of these papers. 
First, it is significant hat both synthesis and under- 
standing applications of prosody are represented in this 
session, and useful since the developments in one field 
can benefit he other. Second, we see corpus-based anal- 
ysis and automatic training methods being introduced 
into many aspects of prosody modeling. Third, Silver- 
man's results argue the case for developing models in 
constrained domains, but this approach is also supported 
by the development of automatic training methods and 
probably used to advantage in the papers focussed on the 
ATIS domain. Fourth, all of the papers use an interme- 
diate prosodic representation at some level, which raises 
the issue of representation asan important research ques- 
tion in its own right. Perhaps the most important con- 
tribution of this session is the collection of experimental 
results demonstrating the benefits of prosody in actual 
synthesis and understanding applications, providing con- 
crete and not just anecdotal evidence that prosody is a 
useful component of a spoken language system. Since 
these themes represent relatively new directions in com- 
putational modeling of prosody, the applications and 
modeling possibilities are only beginning to open up and 
we can expect many more gains in the future. 
Re ferences  
1. P. Price and J. Hirschberg, "Session 13: Prosody," Proc. 
of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural Lan- 
guage, pp. 415--418, 1992. 
2. Prosody definitions, personal communication. 
3. K. Silverman et aL, "TOBI: A Standard Scheme for La- 
beling Prosody," Proc. of the Inter. Conf. on Spoken 
Language Processing, pp. 867-870, 1992. 
4. J. 't Hart, R. Colfier and A. Cohen, A Perceptual Study 
of Intonation, Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
316 
