Pang loss :  
T rans la t ion  Research  Pro jec t  - S i te 2 
Y. Wilks, Principal Investigator 
Comput ing  Research Laboratory 
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico 88003 
A Knowledge-based  Mach ine  Ass i s ted  
PROJECT GOALS 
The Computing Research Laboratory (CRL) at New 
Mexico State University, jointly with the Center for 
Machine Translation (CMT) at Carnegie Mellon Uni- 
versity and the Information Sciences Institute (ISI) 
at the University of Southern California, are devel- 
oping a Translator's Workstation to assist a user in 
the translation of newspaper articles in the area of fi- 
nance (mergers and acquisitions, followed by joint ven- 
tures) in one language (Spanish initially, followed by 
Japanese) into a second language (English). At its core 
is a multilingual, knowledge-based, interlingual, interac- 
tive, machine-assisted translation system consisting of a 
source language analysis component, an interactive aug- 
mentor, and a target language generation component. 
During the initial phase, the CRL's objectives were to 
develop tools for constructing lexical items and onto- 
logical entries automatically from on-line resources, to 
develop the initial Spanish analysis component, and, 
jointly with CMT and ISI, to establish the infrastruc- 
ture for the three site project, develop the formats and 
initial content of the interlingua, the ontology, and the 
knowledge base, and to prepare design documents for 
the second phase versions of the analysis and generation 
components, the augmentor, and the translator's work- 
station. 
The second phase is a two-year program, and we are cur- 
rently in the first six months of this phase. Building on 
the results of the initial phase, the second phase calls 
for the construction of a new analysis component, with 
a considerably broader base than the first year analysis 
sytem, and incorporating a wider variety of fail-soft ech- 
niques; development and incorporation of the ontology 
into the year-two system; use of the jointly-developed in- 
terlingua; continued emphasis on automatic acquisition 
of lexical and semantic information. 
RECENT RESULTS 
At this p6int, a first version of the year-two analysis 
system has been completed and is undergoing expan- 
sion and refinement. The initial ontology has been con- 
structed, and a large number of sense-tokens have been 
incorporated. A phrasal lexicon has been extracted from 
on-line dictionary resources and is being prepared for in- 
corporation i to the Translator's WOrkstation. 
The second year analysis ytem begins with a dictionary- 
based part-of-speech tagger, followed by a component 
which chunks the tagged text into small syntactic sec- 
tions. These are analyzed and semantic/lexical informa- 
tion accessed and incorporated into the representation by
a constituent parser. These smaller constituents will be 
grouped into predicates and arguments, which are then 
further grouped into clausal structures. At each level, 
possible readings are rated for syntactic and semantic 
likelihood. 
With respect o automatic acquisition, several advances 
have occurred in the past year. We have provided the 
ontology with a sense-disambiguated hierarchy of nom- 
inal word senses drawn from ?ongman's Dictionary o f  
Contemporary English. The hierarchy is derived from 
disambiguated genus terms and rooted in the semantic 
categories provided by Longman's. We have gathered 
from our bilingual dictionaries a large number of phrases 
correlated with translations for that phrase. Verb classes 
for Spanish verbs, used as the basis for the morpholog- 
ical analysis program that feeds the part-of-speech tag- 
ger, were provided by Collin's Spanish-English/English- 
Spanish Dictionary. In a final note, the CRL has con- 
tracted with EFE (Spanish newswire service) for a con- 
tinuous line feed. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
By next fall we hope to extend the project to a second 
source language (Japanese). During the remainder of 
phase 2, we will deepen and broaden the coverage of the 
analysis ystem. Broadening will include further addi- 
tion of domain-specific lexical items (and a new domain) 
and the inclusion of proper name recognizers of various 
types (gazetteers, company names, personal names and 
titles). Deepening will involve working withthe ontology 
to sharpen the semantic oherence judgments-providing 
fewer but more likely analyses for each input sentence. 
406 
