MatchPlus: A CONTEXT VECTOR SYSTEM FOR 
DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL  
Stephen L Gallant, Principal Investigator 
William R. Caid, Project Manager 
HNC, Inc. 
5501 Oberlin Drive 
San Diego, CA 92121 
PROJECT GOALS ? Hand-entered queries may be given using a sim- 
There are two primary goals for Mat&Plus. First we 
want to incorporate into the system anotion of similarity 
of use. For example, if a query deals with 'autos' we want 
to be able to recognize as relevant adocument with many 
mentions of 'cars'. 
Second, we want to apply machine learning algorithms to 
improve both ad-hoc retrieval and routing performance. 
Several different algorithms come into play here: 
? a "bootstrap" algorithm develops context vector 
representations for stems o that similar stems have 
similar vector epresentations 
? neural network algorithms produce routing queries 
from initial queries and lists of relevant and non- 
relevant documents 
? clustering algorithms help generate a word-sense 
disambiguation subsystem (being implemented) 
? neural network algorithms interactively improve ad- 
hoc user queries (being implemented) 
? clustering algorithms can also speed retrieval algo- 
rithms using a new "cluster tree" pruning algorithm 
(planned) 
A context vector representation is central to all Match- 
Plus system capabilities. Every word (or stem), docu- 
ment (part), and query is represented by a fixed length 
vector with about 300 real-valued entries. For any two of 
these items, we can easily compute a similarity measure 
by taking a dot product of their respective vectors. This 
gives a build-in, generalized thesaurus capability to the 
system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? We have built a system for 800,000 documents 
(2 GB of text). This system takes Tipster topics, 
automatically generates queries, and performs re- 
trievals. 
ple syntax. Terms, paragraphs, and documents can 
comprise a query (all optionally weighted), along 
with an (optional) Boolean filter. Documents are 
always returned in order by estimated likelihood of 
relevance. 
? Documents may be "highlighted" to show hotspots, 
or areas of maxinmm correspondence with the 
query. 
? We have implemented routing using neural network 
learning algorithms. This resulted in a 20-30% im- 
provement compared with the automated ad-hoc 
system. 
? Lists of stems closest o a given stem provide use- 
ful and interesting insight into the system's vector 
representations. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
We have been running many bootstrap learning exper- 
iments, and some variations have resulted in significant 
improvements to performance. We expect hat this im- 
provement will carry over to all aspects of the system~ 
including routing. 
Currently we are implementing word sense disambigua- 
tion. We hope that this will give performance improve- 
ments, possibly even eliminating the need for phrase pro- 
cessing. This module should also be able to serve as a 
stand-alone package, providing help for machine trans- 
lation and speech understanding systems. 
We plan to apply learning algorithms for automated in- 
teractive query improvement in a manner similar to our 
approach with routing. It seems likely that this will give 
a significant boost to ad-hoc query performance. 
Finally, we are performing additional learning experi- 
ments to improve routing. 
396 
