EXPLOIT ING CONCEPT SPACES FOR TEXT 
RETRIEVAL  
Ellen M. Voorhees, Project Leader 
S iemens  Corporate  Research,  Inc. 
P r inceton ,  N J  08540 
PROJECT GOALS 
The Learning Systems Department at Siemens Corpo- 
rate Research is investigating the use of concept spaces 
to increase retrieval effectiveness. Similar to a seman- 
tic net, a concept space is a construct hat defines the 
semantic relationships among ideas. The current focus 
of our research is to exploit the information in such a 
structure to ameliorate known shortcomings of statisti- 
cal retrieval methods while maintaining the statistical 
methods' robustness. Our initial concept space is ex- 
tracted from WordNet, a manually-constructed l xical 
database developed at Princeton University. 
Our focus on statistical methods is a consequence of our 
goal to develop techniques that are applicable to match- 
ing texts in very large corpora. In particular, we im- 
pose two constraints on our research to meet this goal. 
First, we want to keep human intervention i the index- 
ing and retrieval processes at a minimum, and so we use 
strictly automatic procedures. Second, since even auto- 
matic procedures need to be relatively efficient, and we 
believe this efficiency requirement precludes the use of 
deep analyses of document content for the foreseeable 
future, we restrict ourselves to shallow (statistical) pro- 
cessing of the text and concept space. 
The specific problems we are addressing are the effects 
polysemy and synonymy have on retrieval performance. 
Polysemy depresses precision by causing false matches 
between texts, while synonymy depresses recall by caus- 
ing true conceptual matches to be missed. We are inves- 
tigating ways to index the content of text by the con- 
cepts of the Concept space rather than the words that 
appear in the text, and thus avoid both polysemy and 
synonymy problems. With this approach, additional 
expense is incurred only during indexing - -  efficient 
concept-matching routines can be used for retrieval. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Our first experiments investigated the effectiveness of ex- 
panding a text's representation with words that are re- 
lated to original text words in WordNet. The experimen- 
tal evidence indicates that in the absence of a method 
to resolve word senses, expansion is almost always detri- 
mental. For TREC-1, we were able to improve the per- 
formance of some queries using an expansion procedure 
that added only synonyms (as opposed to words related 
by other lexical relations) and required at least two orig- 
inal text words agree on the synonym (as a rudimen- 
tary check on the sense). However, this same procedure 
degrades the performance of other queries; overall per- 
formance is roughly comparable to the better statistical 
methods that do no special processing for synonYms. 
Given the importance of sense resolution to workable 
expansion schemes, and the belief that polysemy is an 
important retrieval problem in its own right, we are cur- 
rently studying automatic sense resolution procedures. 
In one approach, we use the nouns that co-occur within 
a text and the IS-A links within WordNet to select Word- 
Net synonym sets as the senses for ambiguous nouns in 
the text. Retrieval performance degrades using this tech- 
nique for two main reasons: the information inherent 
in the generalization/specialization hierarchy induced by 
the IS-A links is not sufficient o reliably select the cor- 
rect sense of a noun from the set of fine distinctions in 
WordNet; and short query statements provide little con- 
text for disambiguation. In a separate approach, we are 
investigating the utility of classifiers that learn the con- 
texts of the different senses of a given ambiguous word 
from training examples. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Our research in the coming year will continue to focus 
on classifier-based sense resolution methods. We hope 
to improve the effectiveness of the classifiers by allowing 
them to learn syntactic templates that are indicative of 
a sense in addition to the more general context models 
they already learn. We must also integrate classifiers 
into the indexing phase of a retrieval system. Our in- 
tention is to annotate the synonym sets in the WordNet 
hierarchy with sense vectors, vectors that summarize the 
contexts in which members of the synonym set are likely 
to appear, and to select a sense based on the text's sim- 
ilarities to the sense vectors. 
411 
