HIGH PERFORMANCE SPEECH RECOGNITION 
USING CONSISTENCY MODELING 
VassUios Digalakis 
Hy Murveit 
Mitch Weintraub 
SRI International 
Speech Research and Technology Program 
Menlo Park, CA, 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
The primary goal of this project is to develop acoustic rood- 
cling techniques that advance the state-of-the-art in speech 
recognition, focusing on those techniques that relax the hid- 
den Markov model's improper independence assumptions. 
Such techniques should both improve robustness tosystem- 
atic variations uch as microphone, channel, and speaker, 
by conditioning state's acoustic output distributions on 
long-term easurements, a  well as improve general acous- 
tic calibration by removing improper short-term (e.g. frame 
to frame) independence assumptions. 
In order to perform this work certain infraslructure needs to 
be developed. This includes the development of a state-of- 
the-art baseline recognition system for the development 
task (ARPA's Wall-Street Journal Task); the development 
of search techniques that allow experiments with computa- 
tionally expensive techniques to have reasonable turn- 
around times; and the development of modular software 
that enables rapid prototyping of new algorithms. 
RECENT RESULTS 
? We have built a software library that implements the 
components ofan HMM recognition system dealing 
with the observation distributions. The functional 
interface is designed to enable fast integration of new 
acoustic modeling techniques 
? We introduced a new search strategy, called 
Progressive Search, that constrains the search space of 
computationally expensive systems using simpler and 
faster systems in an iterative fashion. Using the word 
graphs created uring the initial recognition pass as 
grammars in subsequent recognition passes, we have 
been able to reduce recognition time of systems that 
use more complex acoustic models and higher order 
language models by more than an order of magnitude. 
? We developed a less-traditional, continuous output 
distribution system where different allophones of the 
same phone share the same sets of Gaussians, but 
different Gaussians are used for different phones. Our 
phonetically-fled mixture system achieved a 16% 
reduction in error rate over a typical tied mixture 
system. 
? We found that the different pronunciation dictionaries 
and the corresponding phone sets that the various ites 
used in the last CSR evaluations can account for 
differences inperformance in the order of 10 - 15%. 
? We developed new algorithms for local consistency by 
modeling the correlation between spectral features at 
neighboring time frames. This acoustic orrelation is 
used to improve the accuracy of the acoustic model by 
conditioning the state output probabilities on the 
previous frame's observations. 
? We have achieved a 31% reduction in error rate over 
our November evaluation system on the 5K, non 
verbalized punctuation development set. The 
improvement is the combined effect of the 
phonetically-fled mixtures, the improved 
pronunciation dictionaries and replacement of RASTA 
filtering with cepstral-mean removal on a sentence 
basis. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Continue xploring trade-offs in parameter tying for 
continuous distribution acoustic models. We will 
sample other points beyond fled-mixture, phonetically- 
tied mixture, and untied Ganssian-mixture systems. 
? Explore techniques for modeling the global 
consistencies of speaker and channel effects across the 
speech acoustic models. 
? Continue to develop search techniques that both allow 
us to perform experiments u ing computationally 
burdensome t chniques, as well as those that allow us 
to implement these systems as real-time 
demonstrations. 
415 
