Mode preference in a s imple data-retr ieval  task 
Alexander L Rudnicky 
School  of  Computer  Science,  Carneg ie  Mel lon  Un ivers i ty  
P i t t sburgh ,  PA 15213 USA 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes ome recent experiments that 
assess user behavior in a multi-modal environment 
in which actions can be performed with equivalent 
effect in speech, keyboard or scroller modes. Results 
indicate that users freely choose speech over other 
modalities, even when it is less efficient in objective 
terms, such as time-to-completion r input error. 
INTRODUCTION 
Multi-modal systems allow users to both tailor their 
input style to the task at hand and to use input strate- 
gies that combine several modes in a single trans- 
action. As yet no consistent body of knowledge is 
available for predicting user behavior in multi-modal 
environments or to guide the design of multi-modal 
systems. This is particularly true when interfaces in- 
corporate new technologies such as speech recogni- 
tion. 
For activities in a workstation environment, formal 
comparisons of speech with other input modes have 
failed to demonstrate a clear advantage for speech 
on conventional aggregate measures of performance 
such as time-to-completion \[1, 8, 4\], despite a con- 
sistent advantage displayed by speech at the level 
of single input operations. The difference can actu- 
ally be attributed to the additional incurred costs of 
non-real-time r cognition and error correction. While 
real-time performance can he achieved, it is unlikely 
that error-free recognition will be available in the near 
future. Given these shortcomings, we might ask if 
speech can provide advantages to the user along di- 
mensions other than task speed, for example by re- 
ducing the effort needed to generate an input. 
There is reason to believe that users are quite good 
at estimating the response characteristics of an inter- 
face and can choose an input strategy that optimizes 
salient aspects of performance, for example decreas- 
ing time-to-completion or minimizing task error \[5, 9\]. 
By observing the behavior of users in a situation in 
which they can freely choose between different strate- 
gies, we can gain insight into the factors that govern 
their preference for different input styles. 
A simple data retrieval task was chosen for this study, 
as the task was one amenable to execution in each 
of the three modalities that were examined: speech, 
keyboard and scroller. The database contained in- 
formation about individuals, such as address, tele- 
phone, etc selected from a list of conference atten- 
dees. The task consisted of retrieving the record for 
an individual and recording the last group of digits 
in their work telephone number (typically of length 
four). The database contained 225 names for the first 
experiment and was expanded to 240 names for the 
second experiment. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
The Personal Information Database (PID) compo- 
nent of the OM system \[3, 7\] served as the database 
system in this study. Given a search request specified 
in some combination of first name, last name and affil- 
iation, PID displays a window with the requested in- 
formation (in this study, the information consisted of 
name, affiliation and all known telephone numbers). 
If an unknown name was entered, an error panel came 
up. If a query was underspecified, a choice panel con- 
taining all entries atisfying the query was shown; for 
example asking for "Smith" produced a panel show- 
ing all Smiths in the database. The existing PID was 
altered to incorporate a scroll window in addition to 
the already available keyboard and speech interfaces. 
The remainder of this section provides detailed de- 
scriptions for each input mode. 
Speech Input 
The OM system uses a hidden Markov model (I-IMM) 
recognizer based on Sphinx \[2\] and is capable of 
speaker-independent continuous peech recognition. 
The subject interacted with the system through a 
364 
NeXT computer which provided attention manage- 
ment \[3\] as well as application-specific displays. To 
offload computation, the recognition engine ran on a 
separate NeXT computer and communicated through 
an ethernet connection. For the 731-word vocab- 
ulary and perplexity 33 grammar used in the first 
experiment, he system responded in 2.1 times real- 
time (xRT). Database retrieval was by a command 
phrase such as SHOW ME ALEX RUDNICKY. While sub- 
jects were instructed to use this specific phrase, the 
system also understood several variants, such as SHON, 
GIVE (ME), LIST, etc. The input protocol was "Push 
and Hold", meaning that the user had to depress the 
mouse button before beginning to speak and release 
it after the utterance was complete. Subjects were in- 
structed to keep repeating a spoken command in case 
of recognition error, until it was processed correctly 
and the desired information appeared in the result 
window. 
Keyboard  
Subjects were required to click a field in a window 
then type a name into it, followed by a carriage return 
(which would drop them to the next field or would ini- 
tial the retrieval). Three fields were provided: First 
name, Last Name and Organization. Subjects were 
provided with some shortcuts: last names were often 
unique and might be sufficient for a retrieval. They 
were also informed about the use of a wildcard char- 
acter which would allow then to minimize the num- 
ber of keystrokes need for a retrieval. Ambiguous 
search patterns produced a panel of choices; the sub- 
ject could click on the desired one. 
Scro l ler  
The scroller window displayed the names in the 
database sorted alphabetically by last name. Eleven 
names were visible in the window at any one time, 
providing approximately 4-5% exposure of the 225 
name list. The NeXT scroller provides a handle 
and two arrow buttons for navigation. Clicks on the 
scrollbar move the window to the corresponding po- 
sition in the text and the arrow buttons can be am- 
plified to jump by page when a control key is simul- 
taneously depressed. Each navigation technique was 
demonstrated to the subject. 
Session cont ro l le r  
The experiment was controlled by a separate process 
visible to the subject as a window displaying a name 
to look up, a field in which to enter the retrieved 
information and a field containing special instruc- 
tions such as Please use KEYBOARD only or Use 
any mode. The subject progressed through the ex- 
periment by clicking a button in this window labeled 
Figure 1: 
the control program. 
TO T1 T2 
......................... 
! Reedy Acquke task i Initiate 
select mode response 
travel 
Trial time line, showing events logged by 
T8 T9 iT10 
I I 
! i i end 
! stad i response 
i i response 
i end app 
i processing 
Next; this would display the next name to retrieve. 
Equidistant from the the Next button were three win- 
dows corresponding to the three input modes used in 
the experiment: voice, keyboard and scroller. All 
modes required a mouse action to initiate input, ei- 
ther a click on the speech input button, a click on a 
text input field or button in the keyboard window or 
the (direct) initiation of activity in the scroller. 
Ins t rumentat ion  
All applications were instrumented to generate a 
stream of time-stamped events corresponding to user 
and system actions. Figure 1 shows the time line 
for a single trial. In addition to the overall time- 
line, each mode was also instrumented to generate 
logging events corresponding to significant internal 
events. All logged events were time-stamped using 
absolute system time, then merged in analysis to pro- 
duce a composite timeline corresponding to the entire 
experimental session. 
The merged event stream was processed using a hi- 
erarchical set of finite-state machines (FSMs). Fig- 
ure 2 shows the FSM for a single transaction with 
the database retrieval program. Figures 3 show the 
FSM for the voice mode. During the analysis pro- 
cess, the latter FSM (as well as FSMs for keyboard 
and scroller) would be invoked within state 1 of the 
transaction FSM (Figure 2). An intermediate l vel 
of analysis (corresponding to conditions) is also used 
to simplify analysis. Arcs in the FSMs correspond to 
observable vents, either system outputs or user in- 
puts. The products of the analysis include transition 
frequencies for all arcs in an FSM as well as transi- 
tion times. The analysis can be treated in terms of 
Markov chains \[6\] to compactly describe recognition 
error, user-mode preferences and other system char- 
acteristics. 
USER MODE PREFERENCE IN DATA RE- 
TR IEVAL  
The purpose of the first experiment was to establish 
what mode-preference patterns users would display 
when using the PID system. To ensure that subjects 
365 
Figure 2: FSM for a single transaction. From the 
initial state (0) the subject can click the Next button 
to move to state 1 at which point the subject has a 
name to look up and can initiate a query. Queries are 
described by mode~specific FSMs which are invoked 
within this state. Figure 3 shows one such FSM. I f  
properly formed, a query will produce a database re- 
trieval and move the transaction to state 4. The sub- 
ject can opt to enter a response, moving the trans- 
action to state 2 or to repeat queries (by re-entering 
state 1). At this point, the subject is ready to begin a 
new trial by transitioning to state O. 
t_t 
Figure 3: FSM used for the analysis of voice input. 
?0t~fllcn 
were equally familiar with each of the input modes, 
the experiment was divided into two parts (although 
it was run as a single session, without breaks). In 
the first part, subjects were asked to perform 20 re- 
trievals using each mode. Initial testing determined 
that this was sufficient o acquaint he subjects with 
the operation of each mode. In the second part, they 
were instructed to use "any mode", with the expec- 
tation that they would choose on the basis of their 
assessment of the suitability of each mode. A total of 
55 entries were presented in the second part. 
The same sequence of 60 entries was used for the 
familiarization stage for all subjects. However, the 
order in which the subject was exposed to the differ- 
ent modes was counter-balanced according to a Latin 
square. Three different blocks of test items (each con- 
taining 55 entries) were used, for a total of nine dif- 
ferent combinations. 
Details about the operation of the different modes 
as well as the experiment controller were explained 
to the subject during a practice session prior to the 
experiment proper (a total of four practice retrievals 
were performed by the subject in this phase). 
Sub jects  
Nine subjects participated in this study, 7 male and 2 
female. All had had some previous exposure to speech 
systems, primarily through their participation in on- 
going speech data collection efforts conducted by our 
research group. This prior exposure nsured that the 
subjects were familiar with the mechanics of using 
a microphone and of interacting with a computer by 
voice. No attempt was made to select on demographic 
characteristics or on computer skills. The group con- 
sisted primarily of students, none of whom however 
were members of our research group. 
Results and Analysis 
A finite state machine (FSM) description of user be- 
havior was used to analyze session data. Separate 
FSMs were defined for condition, transaction, se- 
quence and intra-modal levels and were used to tab- 
ulate metrics of interest. 
Table 1 shows the durations of transactions for each of 
the modes during the familiarization phase. A trans- 
action is timed from the click on the Next button to 
the carriage return terminating the entry of the re- 
trieved telephone number. Speech input leads to the 
longest transaction times. Input time measures the 
duration between the initiation of input and system 
response (note that these times include recognition 
time, as well as the consequences of mis-recognition, 
366 
Table 1: Times (in sec) for the familiarization blocks 
in the first experiment. 
Mode 
Scroller 
Keyboard 
Voice 
I Utterance 
Transaction Input duration 
13.623 4.917 - -  
14.526 5.371 - -  
15.041 5.593 2.464 
Table 2: User mode choices in the Free block (trials 
81-"5). 
Transaction I First 
Mode Choice (%) Choice (%) 
Scroller 
Keyboard 
Voice 
mixed 
14.3 
21.8 
48.3 
15.5 
14.7 
22.4 
62.8 
Table 3: User mode preference in the Free block of 
the second experiment. 
Transaction Input Filtered 
Mode Choice (%) Choice (%) 
Scroller 5.8 4.4 
Keyboard 14.2 11.3 
Voice 74.9 79.9 
mixed 5.1 4.4 
Table 4: Times (in see) for the second experiment 
(using unfiltered data). The input time for voice is 
the utterance duration. 
Mode I Transaction 
Stroller 10.863 
Keyboard 9.560 
Voice 9.463 
Input 
4.394 
3.035 
2.078 
i.e., having to repeat an input). Here speech is also 
at a disadvantage (though note that the duration 
of a single utterance is only 2.464 see). Transac- 
tion durations for modes are statistically different 
(F(2, 14) = 5.54, MS~rr = 0.836, p < 0.05), though 
in individual comparisons only voice and scroller dif- 
fer (p < 0.05, the Neuman-Keuls procedure was used 
for this and all subsequent comparisons). Order of 
presentation was a significant factor (F(2, 14) = 8.3, 
p < 0.01), with the first mode encountered requiring 
the greatest amount of time. 
Table 2 shows choice of mode in the Free block. The 
mixed mode line refers to cases where subjects would 
first attempt a lookup in one mode then switch to an- 
other (for example because of misrecognition i the 
speech mode). The right-hand column in the table 
shows the first mode chosen in a mixed-mode transac- 
tion. In this case, voice is preferred 62.8% of the time 
as a first choice. The pattern of choices is statistically 
significant (F(2, 14) = 6.31,MSerr = 288,p < 0.01), 
with speech preferred significantly more than either 
keyboard or scroller(p < 0.05). 
This experiment suggests that speech is the preferred 
mode of interaction for the task we examined. This is 
particularly notable since speech is the least efficient 
of the three modes offered to the user, as measured 
in traditional terms uch as time-to-completion. Most 
previous investigations ( see, e.g. the review in \[4\]) 
have concentrated on this dimension, treating it as 
the single most important criterion for the suitabil- 
ity of speech input. The present result suggests that 
other aspects of performance may be equally impor- 
tant to the user. 
EXTENDED EXPERIENCE 
One possible explanation of the above result is that 
it's due to a novelty effect. That is, users displayed a
preference for speech input in this task not because of 
any inherent preference or benefit but simply because 
it was something new and interesting. Over time we 
might expect he novelty to wear off and users to refo- 
cus their attention on system response characteristics 
and perhaps hift their preference. 
To test this possibility, we performed a second exper- 
iment, scaling up the amount of time spent on a task 
by different amounts. Since it was not possible to 
predict the length of a novelty effect a priori, three 
separate xperience l vels were examined. A total of 
9 subjects participated (4 male and 5 female): 3 did 
720 trials, 3 did 1440 trials and 3 did 2160. This is 
in contrast o the 115 trials per subject in the first 
experiment. 
Method  
Based on observations made during the first experi- 
ment, several changes were made to the system, pri- 
marily to make the speech and keyboard inputs more 
efficient. Recognition response was improved from 2.1 
xRT to 1.5 xRT by the use of an IBM 6000/530 com- 
puter as the recognition engine. Keyboard entry was 
made more efficient by eliminating the need for the 
user to clear entry fields prior to entry. These changes 
367 
resulted in improved transaction times for these two 
modes relative to the scroller, which was unchanged 
except for a slight reduction in exposure (this due to 
an increase of the number of entries to 240, done to 
facilitate details of the design). 
Figure 4: User preference over blocks (filtered data). 
Note that the spikes at blocks 19 and 3~ are due to 
eqnipment failure. 
O 
O 
1? 77 0.8 
0.6 
ScroUer -?-- 
Keyboard -o--- 
o.5?" ' ? 
o I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Block 
40 
Resu l ts  and  Ana lys i s  
The mean preference for different modes in this ex- 
periment is shown in Table 3. Subjects display a 
strong bias in favor of voice input (74.9%). Prefer- 
ence for voice across individual subjects ranged from 
28% to 91% with all but one subject ($3) showing 
preference levels above 70% (the median preference 
is 82.5%). Differences in mode preference are signifi- 
cant (F(2, 16) = 34.6, MSerr = 0.037,p < 0.01) and 
the preference is greater (p < 0.01) for voice than for 
either of the other input modes. 
Since some of the names in the database were difficult 
to pronounce, we also tabulated choice data exclud- 
ing such names. Nineteen ames (about 8% of the 
database) were excluded on the basis of ratings pro- 
vided by subjects. 1 The data thus filtered are shown 
in Table 3; in this case (for names that subjects were 
reasonably comfortable about pronouncing) prefer- 
ence for speech rises to 79.9% (median of 86.1%). 
1 Part ic ipants  in this exper iment  rated  each name in the 
database prior to the  exper iment  i self. A name was presented 
to the subject ,  who was asked to  rate on a 4-point scale their  
lack of confidence in their  abil ity to pronounce it. They  then 
heard a recording of the name pronounced as expected by the 
recognizer and  finally ra ted  the degree to which the canonical 
pronunciat ion disagreed with their  own expectat ion.  A conser- 
vative criterion was used to place names  on the exclusion l ist: 
any name for which both  rat ings averaged over 1.0 (on a 0-3 
scale) was excluded. 
Table 4 shows the mean transaction and input times 
for the second experiment, computed over subjects. 
Compared to the first experiment, hese times are 
faster, probably reflecting the greater amount of ex- 
perience with the task for the second group of sub- 
jects. Transaction times are significantly different 
(F(2,16) = 16.8,MS~rr = 0.327,p < 0.01), with 
scroller times longer than keyboard or speech times 
(p < 0.01) which in turn are not different. If sub- 
jects were attending to the time necessary to carry 
out the task, keyboard and voice should have been 
chosen with about equal frequency. The subjects in 
this experiment nevertheless chose speech over key- 
board (and scroller) input. 
Figure 4 shows preference for voice input over the 
course of the experiment. Preference for speech in- 
creases over time, and begins to asymptote at about 
10-15 blocks (representing about 250 utterances). 
This phenomenon suggests that speech input, while 
highly appealing to the user requires acertain amount 
of confidence building, certainly a period of extended 
familiarization with what is after all a novel input 
mode. Additional investigation would be needed, 
however, to establish the accuracy of this observation. 
In any case, this last result underlines the importance 
of providing sufficient training. 
As can be seen in Figure 4 that preference for speech 
shows no sign of decreasing over time for the duration 
examined in this experiment. Preference for voice 
input appears to be robust. The 36 block version 
of the experiment took on the average 8-9 hours to 
complete, with subjects working up to 2 hours per 
day. 
A possible explanation for this finding may be that, 
rather than basing their choice on overall transaction 
time, users focus on simple input time (in both exper- 
iments voice input is the fastest). This would imply 
that users are willing to disregard the cost of recogni- 
tion error, at least for the error levels associated with 
the system under investigation. Data from followup 
experiments not reported here suggest that this may 
be the case: increasing the duration of the query ut- 
terance decreases the preference for speech. 
CONCLUSION 
The study reported in this paper indicates that users 
show a preference for speech input despite its inade- 
quacies in terms of classic measures of performance, 
such as time-to-completion. Subjects in this study 
based their choice of mode on attributes other than 
transaction time (quite possibly input time) and were 
willing to use speech input even if this meant Spend- 
368 
ing a longer time on the task. This preference ap- 
pears to persist and even increase with continuing 
use, suggesting that preference for speech cannot be 
attributed to short-term novelty effects. 
This paper also sketches an analysis technique based 
on FSM representations of human-computer interac- 
tion that permits rapid automatic processing of long 
event streams. The statistical properties of these 
event streams (as characterized by Markov chains) 
may provide insight into the types of information that 
users themselves compute in the course of developing 
satisfactory interaction strategies. 
\[9\] TEAL, S. L., AND RUDNICKY, A. I. A perfor- 
mance model of system delay and user strategy 
selection. In Proceedings of CHI (Monterey, CA, 
May 1992), ACM,  New York, 1992, pp. 295-206. 
References 
\[I\] BIERMANN, A. W., FINEMAN, L., AND HEI- 
DLAGE, J, F. A voice- and touch-driven at- 
ural language ditor and its performance. In- 
ternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies 37 
(1992), 1-21. 
\[2\] LEE, K.-F. Automatic Speech Recognition: The 
Development of the SPHINX System. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Boston, 1989. 
\[3\] LUNATI, J.-M., AND RUDNICKY, A. I. The de- 
sign of a spoken language interface. In Proceedings 
of the Third Darpa Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop (Hidden Valley, June 1990), Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1990, pp. 225-229. 
\[4\] MARTIN, G. The utility of speech input in user- 
computer interfaces. International Journal of 
Man-Machine Studies P9 (1989), 355-376. 
\[5\] RUDNICKY, A. System response delay and user 
strategy selection in a spreadsheet task. CHI'90, 
invited poster, April 1990. 
\[6\] RUDNICKY, A. I., AND HAUPTMANN, A. G. 
Models for evaluating interaction protocols in 
speech recognition. In Proceedings of CHI (New 
Orleans, Louisiana, April 1991), ACM, New York, 
1991, pp. 285-291. 
\[7\] RUDNICKY, A. I., LUNATI, J.-M., AND FRANZ, 
A .M.  Spoken language recognition in an of- 
fice management domain. Proceedings oflCASSP 
(May 1991), 829-832. 
\[8\] RUDNICKY, A. I., SAKAMOTO, M. H., AND PO- 
LIFRONI, J. H. Spoken language interaction in 
a spreadsheet task. In Human-Computer Inter- 
action - INTERACT'90, D. Diaper et al, Eds. 
Elsevier, 1990, pp. 767-772. 
369 
