RESEARCH IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 
Ralph Grishman, Principal Investigator 
Department  of  Computer  Science 
New York Univers i ty  
New York, NY  10003 
PROJECT GOALS 
Our central research focus is on the automatic acquisition 
of knowledge about language (both syntactic and semantic) 
from corpora. We wish to understand how the knowledge so 
acquired can enhance natural language applications, includ- 
ing document retrieval, information extraction, and machine 
translation. In addition to experimenting with acquisition 
procedures, we are continuing to develop the infrastructure 
needed for these applications (grammars and dictionaries, 
parsers, evaluation procedures, etc.). 
The work on information retrieval and supporting technolo- 
gies (in particular, robust, fast parsing), directed by Tomek 
Strzalkowski, is described in a separate page in this section, 
as well as a paper in this volume. 
RECENT ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
? Extended earlier work on the acquisition of semantic 
patterns from syntactically-analyzed corpora, and on the 
generalization of these patterns using word similarity 
measures obtained from the corpora. Measured the cov- 
erage of the collected patterns as a function of corpus 
size, and compared this with an analytic model for such 
coverage. 
? Participated in Message Understanding Conference - 5. 
Substantially extended our lexical preprocessor toiden- 
tify company names, people's names, locations, etc. 
Added an acquisition tool for lexico-semantic models, 
which allows users to specify correspondences between 
lexical and semantic structures through example sen- 
tences. 
? Organized meeting for planning of Message Understand- 
ing Conference - 6. Coordinated efforts for developing 
the different corpus annotations which will be required. 
(These plans and annotations are described in a separate 
paper in this volume.) 
? Developed improved procedures for the alignment of 
syntactic structures in sentences drawn from parallel 
bilingual corpora. The goal of this effort is to auto- 
matically learn transfer rules for a machine translation 
466  
system from a bilingual corpus; the starting point is an 
(incomplete) set of word correspondences from a bilin- 
gual dictionary. Demonstrated (using a small Spanish- 
English corpus) that an iterative algorithm, which uses 
initial alignments to obtain additional correspondences 
between words and between grammatical roles, can yield 
better final alignments. (This work is also supported by 
the National Science Foundation.) 
Continued studies of appropriate f ature structures for a 
common, broad-coverage syntactic dictionary of English 
(COMLEX). This work complemented the ongoing ef- 
fort for creation of COMLEX, which is being supported 
by ARPA through the Linguistic Data Consortium. (The 
work on COMLEX is described in a separate paper in 
this volume.) 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Extend earlier work on stocastic grammars for pars- 
ing: experiment with alternative word contexts for use 
in computing conditional probabilities; experiment with 
alternative search algorithms to obtain speed/preecision 
trade-offs. 
? Continue work on semantic pattern acquisition proce- 
dures. Experiment with alternative measures of word 
similarity for use in generalizing patterns extracted from 
corpora. 
? Continue planning for MUC-6. Coordinate fforts to 
develop specifications and annotated corpora for named 
entities, predicate-argument structure, coreference, and 
word sense information; to develop scoring rules for the 
different evaluations; and to define tasks for MUC-6 dry 
run in Fall 1994. 
Apply bilingual alignment algorithm to larger corpora. 
Develop generalization algorithms for transfer rules ex- 
tracteed from bilingual corpus. 
