(ALMOST)  AUTOMATIC  SEMANTIC  FEATURE 
EXTRACTION FROM TECHNICAL  TEXT 
Rajeev Agarwal* 
rajeevOcs, msstaSe, du 
Department of Computer Science 
Mississippi State University 
Mississippi State, MS 39762. 
ABSTRACT 
Acquisition of semantic information is necessary for proper 
understanding ofnatural anguage text. Such information is 
often domain-speclfic in nature and must be acquized from 
the domain. This causes a problem whenever a natural fan- 
guage processing (NLP) system is moved from one domain to 
another. The portability of an NLP system can be improved 
if these semantic features can be acquired with \];mited hu- 
man intervention. This paper proposes an approach towards 
(almost) automatic semantic feature xtraction. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Acquisition of semantic information is necessary for proper 
understanding ofnatural anguage text. Such information is 
often domaln-specific in nature and must be acquized from 
the domain. When an NLP system is moved from one do- 
main to another, usually a substantial mount of time has to 
be spent in tailoring the system to the new domain. Most of 
this time is spent on acquiring the semantic features pecific 
to that domain. It is important o automate the process of 
acquisition of semantic information as much as possible, and 
facilitate whatever human intervention is absolutely neces- 
sary. Portability of NLP systems has been of concern to re- 
searchers for some time \[8, 5, 11, 9\]. This paper proposes an 
approach to obtain the domaln-dependent semantic features 
of any given domain in a domain-independent manner. 
The next section will describe an existing NLP system 
(KUDZU) which has been developed at Mississippi State Uni- 
versity. Section 3 will then present the motimstion behind the 
automatic acquisition of the semantic features of a domain, 
and a brief outline of the methodology proposed to do it. Sec- 
tion 4 will describe the dlf\[ereut steps in this methodology in 
detail Section 5 will focus on the app\]icatlons of the seman- 
tic features. Section 6 compares the proposed approach to 
R;ml\]ar research efforts. The last section presents ome final 
comments. 
2. THE EXISTING KUDZU SYSTEM 
The research described in this paper is part of a larger on- 
going project called the KUDZU (Knowledge Under Devel- 
opment from Zero Understanding) project. This project is 
aimed at exploring the automation of extraction of infor- 
mation from technical texts. The KUDZU system has two 
primary components - - an NLP component, and a Knowl- 
edge Analysis (KA) component. This section desoribes this 
system in order to facilitate understanding of the approach 
described in this paper. 
The NLP component consists of a tagger, a semi-purser, a 
prepositional phrase attachment specialist, a conjunct iden- 
tifier for coordinate conjunctions, and a restructuzer. The 
tagger is an u-gram based program that currently generates 
syntactic/semantic ags for the words in the corpus. The 
syntactic portion of the tag is mandatory and the seman- 
tic portion depends upon whether the word has any spe- 
cial domain-specific classification or not. Currently only 
nouns, gerunds, and adjectives are assigned semantic tags. 
For example, in the domain of veterinary medicine, adog" 
would be assigned the tag "nounmpatient, m "nasal" would 
be "adj--body-part, m etc. 
The parsing strategy is based on the initial identification of 
simple phrases, which are later converted to deeper structures 
with the help of separate specialist programs for coordinate 
conjunct identification and prepositional phrase attachment. 
The result for a given sentence is a single parse, many of 
whose elements are comparatively underspecified. For exam- 
ple, the parses generated lack clause boundaries. Neverthe- 
less, the results are surprisingly useful in the extraction of 
relationships from the corpus. 
The semi-parser ecognises noun-, verb-, prepositional-, 
gerund-, infinitive-, and s~iectival-phrases. The preposi- 
tional phrase attachment specialist \[2\] uses case grammar 
analysis to disambiguate the attachments of prepositional 
phrases and is highly domain-dependent. The current ira- 
plemcntation of this subcomponent is highly specific to the 
domnin of veterinary medicine, the initial testbed for the 
KUDZU system. Note that all the examples presented in this 
paper will be taken from this domain. The coordinate con- 
junction specialist identifies pairs of appropriate conjuncts 
for the coordinate conjunctions in the text and is domain- 
independent in nature \[1\]. The restructurer puts together 
the information acquired by the specialist programs in order 
to provide a better (and deeper) structure to the parse. 
"This research is supported by the NSP-ARPA grant number 
IRI 9314963. 
Before being passed to the knowledge analysis portion of the 
system, some parses undergo manual modification, which is 
378 
facilitated by the help of an editing tool especially written for 
this purpose. A large percentage of the modifications can be 
attributed to the \];m;tation of the conjunct identifier in rec- 
ognising ouly pairs of conjuncts, as opposed to all conjuncts 
of coordinate conjunctions. 
The KA component receives appropriate parses from the NLP 
component and uses them to populate an object-oriented 
knowledge base \[4\]. The nature of the knowledge base cre- 
ated is dependent on a domain schema which specifies the 
concept hierarchy and the relationships of interest in the do- 
main. Examples of the concept hierarchy specifications and 
relationships present in the domain schema re given in Fig- 
ure 1. 
(class (name patient) 
(parent animal)) 
(relationship (name treatment) 
(role (name disease) (type mandatory) (class disorder)) 
(role (name lrestmont) (type mandatory) (class PROCEDURE) 
(class MEDICATION)) 
(role (name species) (type optional) (class PATIENT)) 
(role (name Iocalion) (type optional) (class BODY-PART))) 
Figure I: Examples of Schema Entries 
Many such relationships may be defined in the domain 
schema. While processing a sentence, the KA component 
hypothesises the types of relationships that may be present 
in it. However, before the actual relationship is instantiated, 
objects corresponding to the mandatory slots must be foundj 
either directly or by the help of an algorithm that resolves 
indirect and implied references. If objects corresponding to 
the optional slots are found, then they are also filled in, 
Currently, the domain schema has to be generated manually 
after a careful evaluation of the domain. This is a time- 
consuming process that often requ~.res the help of a domain 
expert. Once the schema has been specified, the rest of the 
KA component is domain independent \[4\], with the excep- 
tion of s domain-specific synonym table. For each sentence 
that is processed by the KA component, s set of semantic 
relationships that were found in the sentence is produced. 
An interface to the KA component allows users to navigate 
through all instances of the different relationships that have 
been acquired from the corpus. Two sample sentences from 
the veterinary medicine domain, their parsed output and the 
relations extracted from them are shown in Figure 2. 
3 .  OUTL INE  OF  THE PROPOSED 
APPROACH 
The automatic acquisition of semantic features of a domain 
is an important issue, since it assists portability by reduc- 
ing the amount of human intervention. In the context of the 
KUDZU system in particular, it is desired that the system 
be moved from the domain of veterinary medicine to that 
of physical chemistry. As explained above, certain compo- 
nents of the system are domain-dependent and have to be 
significantly modified before the system can be used for a 
new domain. The current research aims to use the acquired 
semantic features in order to improve the portability of the 
KUDZU system. 
It is important o note that although the initial motivation 
for this research came from the need to move the KUDZU sys- 
tern to a new domain, the underlying techniques are generic 
and can be used in a variety of applications. The primary 
goal is to acquire the semantic features of the domain with 
rn;nlmal human intervention, and ensure that these features 
can be applied to different systems rather easily. In this re- 
search, two main types of semantic features are of interest 
a concept hierarchy for the domain, and lexico-semantic 
patterns present in the domain. These patterns are i;m;lar 
to what are also known as "selectional constraints" or "selec- 
tional patterns" \[6, 5\] in systems which use them primarily 
to determine the correct parse from a large number of parses 
generated by a broad coverage grammar. They are basically 
co-occurrence patterns between meaningful t nouns, gerunds, 
adjectives, and verbs. For example, "DISORDER of BODY- 
PAKT' ,  "MEDICATION can be used to TREAT-VERB PA- 
TIENT", etc. are legitimate lexico-semantic patterns from 
the veterinary medicine domain. 
The steps involved in the acquisition of semantic features 
from the domain can be briefly outlined as follows: 
I. Generate the syntactic tags for all the words in the cor- 
pus. 
2. A\]gorithmically identify the expUclt semantic dusters 
that may exist in the current domain. Apply the cluster- 
ing algorithm separately to nouns, gerunds, adjectives, 
and verbs. 
3. Use the syntactic tags and semantic lasses to automate 
the identification of lexico-semantic patterns that exist 
in the given domain. 
This basic methodology is ~miIar to some other approaches 
adopted in the past \[8, 6\]. However, some important differ- 
ences exist which will be discussed later. 
Once the semantic features have been obtained, they can be 
used in a variety of ways depending upon the needs of the 
NLP system. They can be helpful in improving the ports- 
bility of an NLP system by providing useful semantic infor- 
mation that may be needed by different components of the 
system. In the KUDZU system, these features will be used 
to improve the success rate of a domaln-independent syntac- 
tically based prepositional phrase attachment specialist, and 
for automatic acquisition of the domain schema. 
It is easy to see how the lexico-semantic patterns can be help 
IAs explained later, a memd~al  word is one that has a se- 
mantic tag auociated with it. 
379 
Sentences: 
Parses: 
Cataracts may accompany corneal opacification. 
In the Labrador Retriever, they may be associated with skeletal dysplasia of the forelegs. 
(sent.mica 
(nounphrase ((w cataracts nounlplundlldiserder))) 
(verb_phrase ((w may aux) (w accompany verb))) 
(noun_phrase ((w cameal adjllbody_p~) (w opacificafion notmlldiserder)))) 
(sclttcltlce 
(prep-phr~ (win prep) 
(noun_plmrse ((w the det) (w Labrador noun) (w Retriever noun)))) 
(nounphrase ((w they prolplural))) 
(verb_phrase ((w may aux) (w be aux) (w associated verb)) 
(noun.phrase ((w skeletal djllbody-lmrt ) (w dysplasia nounlldisoxder)) 
(p~_~,hrffi~ (w of v,~) 
(norm_phrase ((w the det) (w foxelegs nounlpluralllbody-part)))))))) 
Relationships: 
Relalicmhip: Symptom 
Role SYMPTOM: cataracts 
Role DISORDER: opacificafion (comesl) 
Relationship: Predisposition 
Role DISEASE: dysplasia (skeletal) 
Role PREDISPOSED: cataracts 
Role SPECIES: Labrador Retriever 
Role LOCATION: forelegs 
Figure 2: Sample Sentences Processed by KUDZU 
ful in the attachment of prepositions/ phrases. All patterns 
that have some preposition embedded within them will essen- 
tially provide selectional constraints for the classes of words 
that may appear in the object and host slots. These pat- 
terns ~ be used to improve the success rate of a domain- 
independent syntactically based prepositional phrase attach- 
ment specialist. There is ample evidence \[10, 15\] that seman- 
tic categories and co\]\]ocational p tterns can be used effec- 
tively to assist in the process of prepositional phrase attach- 
ment. 
These semantic features will also be used to automatically 
generate the domain schema for any given domain. Figure 1 
contains examples of the semantic lass hierarchy and the re- 
lationships of interest, as defined in the domain schema. The 
former may be acquired from the semantic lustering pro- 
cess. The specification of the relationships can be achieved 
with the help of the weighted lexico-seme~xtie patterns. Some 
of the relationships can be acquired by an automated com- 
parlson of al\] patterns involving a given semantic verb class. 
Other relationships may be determined by comparing other 
patterns with common noun and gerund semantic classes. 
The resulting domain schema, in some sense, represents the 
semantic structure of the domain. 
4. ACQUIS IT ION OF SEMANTIC  
FEATURES 
4.1. Tagg ing  
It was decided that the tag set used by the Penn treebank 
project, with u few exceptions, be adopted for tagging the 
corpus. Unlike the Penn treebank tag set, we have separate 
tags for auxiliaries, gerunds, and subordinate conjunctions 
(rather than clumping subordinate conjunctions with prepo- 
sitions). Therefore, as a first step in the process of acquisition 
of semantic features, the corpus is tagged with appropriate 
tags. Brill's rule-based tagger \[3\] is being used for this pur- 
pose. This step is primarily domain-independent, although 
the tagger may have to be further trained on a new domain. 
Since this tag set is purely syntactic in nature, the semantic 
clusters of the words must be acquired by a different method. 
4.2. I dent i f i ca t ion  o f  Semant ic  C lus ters  
The identification of such semantic lusters (which provide 
the concept hierarchy) is the next step. Nouns, gerunds, ad- 
jectives, and verbs axe to be clustered into separate semantic 
hierarchies. A traditional clustering system m COBWEB/3 
is used to cluster words into their semantic categories. 
Since COBWEB/3 \[13\] requires attribute-value vectors asso- 
dated with the entities to be clustered, such vectors must be 
defined. The attributes used to define these vectors hould be 
chosen to reflect the lexico-syntactic context of the words be- 
cause the semantic ategory of s word is strongly influenced 
by the context in which it appears. The proposed method- 
ology involves specifying a set of lexico-syntactic attributes 
380 
separately for nouns, gerunds, adjectives, and verbs. Pre- 
sumably, the syntactic constraints that affect the semantic 
category of a noun are different from those that affect the 
category of gerunds, adjectives and verbs. Currently, three 
attributes are being used for noun clustering u subj,,.,.b (verb 
whose subject is the current noun), obj,~.,.b (verb whose ob- 
ject is the current noun), and host~.p (preposition of which 
the current noun is an object). The top i values that sat- 
isfy the attr ibute subj..,.b, top j values of ob~...b, and top 
k values of host~..p are of interest. A cross-product of these 
values yields the attribute-value vectors. For example, if 
i = 3, j = 3, and k = 2 are used, 3 x 3 x 2 = 18 vec- 
tors are generated for each noun. These values are generated 
by a program from the phrasal structures produced by the 
semi-parser. The same attributes can be used across differ- 
ent domains, and hence the attrlbute.value vectors needed 
for semantic lustering can be generated with no human in- 
tervention. Some examples of the semantic lusters that may 
be identified in the domain of veterinary medicine are DIS- 
ORDER, PATIENT, BODY-PART, MEDICATION, etc. for 
nouns; DIAGNOSTIC-PROC, TREATMENT-PROC, etc. 
for gerunds; DISORDER, BODY-PART, etc. for adjectives; 
CAUSE-VERB, TREAT-VEP~B, etc. for verbs. 
The clustering technique is not expected to generate com- 
pletely correct clusters in one pass. However, the improp- 
erly classified words Hill not be manually reclassified at this 
stage. In order to attain proper hierarchical clusters, the 
process of clustering may have to be performed again after 
lexico-semantic patterns have been discovered by the process 
described below. The only human intervention required at 
the present stage is for the assignment of class identifiers to 
the generated classes. In fact, a human is shown small sub- 
clusters (each with 8-10 objects 2) of the generated lfierarchy, 
and is asked to label these sub-clusters with a semantic label, 
if possible. Note that not all such sub-clusters should have se- 
mantic labels - -  several nouns in the corpus are generic nouns 
that cannot be classified into any semantic lass. However, 
a majority of the sub-clusters should represent the semantic 
classes that exist in the domain. The class identifiers thus as- 
signed are then associated as semantic tags with these words 
and used to discover the lex/co-semantic patterns in the next 
step. Any word that has a semantic tag is considered to be 
meaningful 
4.3. Discovery of Lexico-Semantic 
Patterns 
The semantic clusters obtained from the clustering proce- 
dure, after the manual assignment of class identifiers, are 
used to identify the lexico-semantic patterns. The phrase. 
level parsed structures produced by the semi-parser are ana- 
lysed for dJ~erent patterns. These patterns are of the form 
subject-verb-object, noun-noun, adjective.noun, NP-PP, and 
VP-NP-PP, where NP, VP, and PP refer to noun-, verb-, 
and prepositional-phrases r pectively. All patterns that oc- 
ZNote that this does not reflect he size of the ~na\] clusters gen- 
erated by the program, since words that eventually should belong 
to the same cluster may initially be in different sub-clusters. 
cur in the corpus more often than some pre.defined thresh- 
old are assumed to be important and are saved. One re- 
striction currently being placed on these patterns is that st 
least two meaningful words must be present in every pattern. 
The patterns are weighted on the bask of their frequency of 
occurrence, w/th the more frequent patterns getting higher 
weights. 
It seems reasonable to assume that if lexico-semantic pat- 
terns were already known to the system, the identification of 
semantic ategories would become easier and vice.versa. In 
this research, we propose to first identify semantic ategories 
and then the patterns. It has long been realized that there is 
an interdependence b tween the structure of a text and the 
semantic lassification that is present in it. HalUday \[7\] stated 
that ~' . . .  there is no question of discovering one before the 
other. ~ We believe that an appro~mate classi.~catlon can be 
achieved before the structures are fully identified. However, 
this interdependence b tween classification and structure win 
have its adverse effects on the results. It is anticipated that 
the results of both semantic lustering and pattern dlseov- 
ery Hill not be very accurate in the first pass. Therefore, an 
iteratlve scheme is being proposed. 
After semantic lustering has been performed, human inter- 
vention is needed to assign class identifiers to the gener- 
ated clusters. These identifiers assist in the proper discov- 
cry of lexico-semantic patterns. The resulting set of patterns 
may contain some Lrrelevant patterns and human interven- 
tion is needed to accept/reject the automatically generated 
patterns. Both the accepted and rejected patterns axe stored 
by the system so that in future iterations, the same patterns 
do not need human verification. As has been shown before 
\[8, 6, 14\], such patterns place constraints on the semantic 
classes of words appearing in particular contexts. The set 
of selected patterns can, therefore, be used to reanalyse the 
corpus in order to recogn~e the incorrectly clustered words 
in the previously generated class hierarchy and to suggest he 
correct class for these words. For example, if the word "pen/- 
cfllin" is incorrectly clustered as a DISORDER, an analysis 
of the corpus win show that it appears most frequent|y as 
a MEDICATION in patterns llke "TKEAT-VEB.B DISOB.- 
DER with MEDICATION",  "MEDICATION can be used to 
TREAT-VER.B PATIENT",  etc. and rarely as a DISORDER 
in the DISORDER patterns. Hence, its semantic ategory 
can be guessed to be MEDICATION. This guess is added to 
the fist of attributes for the words, and semantic lustering 
is performed again. This iterntlve mechanism assists clus- 
tering in two ways - -  firstly, the additional attribute helps 
convergence towards better clusters and secondly, the ten- 
tative semantic classes from the i,a iteration can be used 
to generate values for attributes for the (i + 1) ta iteration s,
thus reducing the sparsity of data. This time better clusters 
should be formed, and these will again be used to recognize 
lexico-semantic patterns. We expect the system to converge 
to a stable set of clusters and patterns after a small num- 
ber of iterations. A simple diagram outlining the process of 
a~Vhen attempting to duster nounJs, for exaxnple, the sem~ntic 
classes for gerunds, verbs, and adjectives are used. 
381 
Synla~c 
Tawng J -I 
l 
Semantic 
Cl~ 
Classification r 
Identification 
Manual Assignment 
of Class Id~flers 
FLute 3: The Proposed Approach 
Manual 
Accedes/Reid/on 
of Patunm 
d Pattern 
r I Discover/ 
acquisitlon of semantic features is ~ven in FLute 3. 
5. COMPARISON TO OTHER 
APPROACHES 
The most significant work that is similar to the proposed 
methodology is that conducted on the Linguistic String 
Project \[8\] and the PROTEUS project \[6\] at New York Uni- 
versity. Recent efforts have been made by Grkhman and 
Sterling \[6\] towards automatic acqnisition of selectlonal con- 
strnints. The technique proposed here for the acquisition 
of semantic features hould require only limited human in- 
tervention. Since the semi-parsed structures can directly 
be used to generate the attribute-value vectors needed for 
clustering, the only human intervention should be in a~n-  
ment of class identifiers, acceptance/rejection of the discov- 
ered patterns, and reelass~ca~on f some concepts that may 
not get correctly classified even after the feedback from the 
lexico-semantic patterns. Further, their approach \[8, 6\] uses 
a large broad coverage grammar, and often several parses 
are produced for each sentence. The basic parsing strategy 
adopted in the KUDZU system starts with simple phrasal 
parses which can be used to acquire the semantic features of 
the domaJ.u. These semantic features can then be used for 
disambigustion ofsyntactic attachments and thus in provid- 
ing a better and deeper structure to the parse. 
Sekine at el. \[16\] have also worked on this idea of "grad- 
ual approximation" using an iterative mechanism. They de- 
scribe a scenario for the determination of internal structures 
of Japanese compound nouns. They use syntactic tuples to 
generate co\]location statistics for words which are then used 
for clustering. The clusters produced by their program are 
much smaller in size (appror;mately 3 words per cluster) than 
the ones attempted in our research. We intend to generate 
much larger clusters of words that intnitively belong to the 
same semantic ategory in the ~ven dom~n. The semantic 
categories generated by the clustering process are used for 
the identification of semantic relationships of interest in the 
domain. Most of the emphasis in the research undertaken 
at New York University on selectional constraints \[8, 6\] and 
that in Se\]dne's work has been on using the co\]locations for 
improved syntactic ans/y~s. In addition to using them to 
disamb~uate prepositional phrase attachments, we will also 
use them to generate a domain schema which is fundamental 
to the knowledge xtraction process. 
Our approach of consolidating several exico-semantic pat- 
terns into frame-Irks tructures that represent the semantic 
structure of the domain is similar to one discussed by Marsh 
\[12\]. Several other efforts have been made towards n~ing 
semantic features for doms/n-specific dictionary creation or 
parsing. 
6. F INAL  COMMENTS 
The methodology described in this paper should be useful 
in acquiring semantic features of a domain with limited hu- 
man intervention. We also believe that our parsing method- 
ology and the mech~n;Rms for semantic feature acquisition 
lend themselves very nicely to the development of a simpler 
and smaller NLP system. This is in contrast to NLP systems 
that are very large and often use large broad coverage gram- 
mars that may take several thousand person-hours to build. 
The simplicity behind starting with phrasal parses and then 
using these parses to acquire semantic information that leads 
to better and deeper parses makes our approach s good "poor 
man's alternative". The KUDZU system has demonstrated 
that this simple approach can s/so yield reasonably good re- 
sults, at least for data or information extraction tasks. 
Acknowledgements 
The author is thankful to Dr. Lois Eoggess for carefully 
editing an earlier version of this paper. Thanks are also due 
to Eric BrlU for his tagger and to Kevin Thompson and NASA 
Ames Research Center for making COBWEB/3 available for 
this research. Finally, thanks are due to ARPA and NSF for 
providing the funding for this research. 
References 
1. Rajeev Agarwal and Lois Boggess. A simple but useful 
approach to conjunct identification. In Proceedings of 
the 30th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics, pages 15-21. Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, 1992. 
2. Lois Boggess, B.ajeev Agarwal, and Ron Davis. Dis- 
ambiguation of prepositional phrases in automatically 
labelled technical text. In Proceeding8 ofthe Ninth Na- 
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 155- 
159. The AAAI Pre~/The MIT Press, 1991. 
3. Eric Brfll. A simple ruleobased part of speech tagger. In 
Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Work- 
shop, pages 112-116, February 1992. 
4. Jose Cordova. A Domain-Independent Approach to the 
Eztraetion and Assimilation of Knowledge from Natural 
382 
Language Temk PhD thesis, Mississippi State University, 
August 1992. 
5. Ralph Grlshman, Lynette HJzschman, and Ngo Thanh 
Nhsa. Discovery procedures for sublanguage s lections] 
patterns: Initial experiments. Computational LinguiJ- 
ties, 12(3):205-215, July-September 1986. 
6. Ralph Grishman and John Sterling. Smoothing of au- 
tomatically generated selectional constraints. In Pro- 
ceedings of the ARPA Workshop ors Human Language 
Technolo911. Morgan Kanfmsan Publishers, March 1993. 
7. M. A. K. Hallldffiy. Categories of the theory of grammar. 
Word, 17(3):241-292, 1961. 
8. Lynette Hirechman. Discovering sublanguage struc- 
tures. In Ralph Grishman sad Richard Kittredge, edi- 
tors, Analyzing Langauage in Restricted Domains: Sub- 
language Description and Processing, chapter 12, pages 
211-234. Lawrence Eribaum Associates, Hilisdale, New 
Jersey, 1988. 
9. Lynette Hirechman, Francois-Michel Lang, John Dowd- 
ing, and Carl Weir. Porting PUNDIT to the resource 
management domain. In Proceedings of the Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, pages 277-282, Philadel- 
phia, PA, February 1989. 
10. Donald Hindie and Mats /tooth. Structural ambigu- 
ity and ]exical relations. Computational Linguistics, 
19(1):103-120, March 1993. 
11. Robert Ingria and Lance/tamshaw. Porting to new do- 
mains using the ]earner. In Proceedings of the Speech 
and Natural Language Workshop, ages 241-244, Cape 
Cod, MA, October 1989. 
12. Elaine Marsh. General semantic patterns in different 
sublanguages. In Ralph Grlshman and Richard Kit- 
tredge, ed/tore, Analyzing Language in Restricted Do- 
mains: Sublanguage Description and Procesing, chap- 
ter 7, pages 103-127. Lawrence Erlbanm Associates, 
H;llndale, New Jersey, 1986. 
13. Kathleen McKusick and Kevin Thompson. COB- 
WEB/3: A portable implementation. Technical report, 
NASA Ames Research Center, June 1990. 
14. Phil Resuik. Semantic elasses and syntactic ambiguity. 
In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Lan- 
guage Technology. Morgan Kaufm,L-n Publishers, March 
1993. 
15. Phil Resnik and Mexti Hearst. Structural ambiguity and 
conceptual relations. In Proceedings ofthe Workshop on 
Very Large Corpora: Academic and Industrial Perspec- 
tives, pages 58-64, June 1993. 
16. Satoshi Sekine, Sofia Anauiadou, Jeremy Carroll, and 
Jun'ichi Tsujii. Linguistic knowledge generator. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 15th International Conference on Com- 
putational Linguistics (COLING-9~), pages 56--566, 
1992. 
383  
