Segment-Based Acoustic Models 
for Continuous Speech Recognition 
Mari Ostendorf J. Robin Rohlicek 
Principal Investigators 
Boston University BBN Inc. 
Boston, MA 02215 Cambridge, MA 02138 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to develop improved statistical mod- 
els for speaker-independent r cognition of continuous speech, 
together with efficient search algorithms appropriate for use 
with these models. The current work on acoustic modeling is 
focussed on: stochastic, segment-based models that capture 
the time correlation of a sequence of observations (feature 
vectors) that correspond to a phoneme; hierarchical stochas- 
tic models that capture higher level intra-utterance orrelation; 
and multi-pass search algorithms for implementing these more 
complex models. In addition, we have extended the effort on 
models of high order statistical dependence to language mod- 
eling. This research as been jointly sponsored by ARPA and 
NSF under NSF grant IRI-8902124 and by ARPA and ONR 
under ONR grant N00014-92-J-1778. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Recent results on this project are summarized below with 
names of the students primarily responsible for the work in- 
dicated in parentheses. 
? Ported the BU recognition system to the Wall Street Jour- 
nal (WSJ) task and Switchboard task, obtaining results 
similar to H/VIM systems on those tasks. Also imple- 
mented several software changes to handle large vocab- 
ularies and allow for larger N-best lists by using more 
efficient score caching, as well as to accommodate the 
full amount of training data available. (F. Richardson, S. 
Tibrewal, A. Kannan) 
? Continued investigation of mixture distribution model- 
ing at both the segment and frame levels, shifting our 
focus primarily to "untied" segmental mixture systems. 
We have established baseline results and investigated 
various parameter allocation choices for these mod- 
els in experiments on the Resource Management task. 
For context-independent models, performance is found 
to improve over uni-modal and fled-mixture systems, 
through combining segmental nd frame-level mixtures. 
Further work on initialization is needed for estimating 
context-dependent models. (O. Kimball) 
449 
Implemented a new duration model that uses speaking- 
rate adapted parameters. 
Developed a sentence-level mixture n-gram language 
model to handle topic-related language dynamics, and 
evaluated recognition performance with this model on 
the 5k WSJ task in the N-best re, scoring framework, ob- 
taining a slight improvement over standard trigrams. (R. 
Iyer) 
Developed the theoretical framework for an automatic 
mapping of distributions to arbitrary subsets of a 
variable-length segment feature matrix, as an alterna- 
tive to the linear-time frame mapping currently used in 
the SSM. 
Developed the theoretical framework for a hierarchical 
model of intra-utterance observation correlation. 
Developed a new algorithm for fast search of a word lat- 
tice for multi-pass recognition scoring. (F. Richardson) 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Implement and evaluate the hierarchical stochastic 
model of intra-utterance d pendencies, first in TIM1T 
classification and latex in the WSJ system ff initial ex- 
periments are successful. 
Investigate unsupervised a aptation i the WSJ task do- 
main. 
Investigate algorithms to improve recognition accuracy 
for telephone speech. 
Assess accuracy/speed trade-offs for different lattice 
search algorithms for the WSJ task. 
Extend work in mixture language modeling to capture 
more language dynamics and/or task domain change 
through adaptation. 
