SPEECH AND HUMAN 
LANGUAGE TECHNOLOGY 
THE NAVAL RESEARCH 
LABORATORY 
AT 
Helen M. Gigley, Ph.D. 
Head, Human Computer Interaction Laboratory 
Naval Research Laboratory 
CODE 5530 
Washington, D.C. 20375-5337 
ABSTRACT 
Following a brief introduction to the Naval Research 
Laboratory (NRL), specific on-going research in speech 
and human language technology will be presented. Areas 
of research fall across two laboratories in the Information 
Technology Division, the Human Computer Interaction 
Laboratory (HCI) and the Navy Center for Applied 
Research in Artificial Intelligence (NCARAI). Speech 
research focuses on narrowband algorithm development 
and uses human based intelligibility to evaluate success. 
Demonstrations of results will be played. Navy has been a 
prominent participant in evaluation of narrowband speech. 
Current efforts on human-human communication 
evaluation will provide a basis for new approaches to 
multi-mode interactions which include speech interfaces. 
Finally, a video of on-going efforts at NCARAI on the 
EUCALYPTUS system which include graphics and spoken 
language interaction will be shown. 
1. WHAT IS NRL? 
NRL is the Departmefit o f  the Navy's corporate research 
laboratory. It's mission is to " conduct a broadly based 
multidisciplinary program of scientific research and 
adv~inced technological development directed toward 
maritime applications of new and improved materials, 
techniques, equipment, systems, and ocean, atmospheric, 
and space sciences and related technologies." NRL reports 
to the Chief of Naval Research at the Office of Naval 
Research. 
The Laboratory began in 1923 based on a vision of 
Thomas Edison. It presently has both a military and 
civilian director. There are 4 Laboratories and 17 
Divisions and 14 research sites outside the Washington 
D.C. area. The staff is comprised of approximately 900 
Ph.D.s, 500 Master's degree holders and 700 bachelor's 
degree holders. Each year the Lab produces a significant 
number of refereed journal conference publications. 
The Information Technology Division houses the two 
laboratories whose work will be reported in the remainder 
of this paper, the HCI Laboratory and the NCARAI 
Laboratory. The work in the HCI Lab includes: speech 
processing within narrowband capabilities and evaluation 
methods for speech and other interactive systems. The 
effort at NCARAI in human language technology focuses 
on integrating speech with graphical or other modality 
interfaces. A current effort is underway to transition one 
of the ARPA speech technology systems to the on-going 
work in EUCALYPTUS. 
1.1 Speech Technology in HCI 
The speech technology group in the HCI Lab focuses on 
algorithmic development which is reaching toward 
communication of humanly intelligible speech at 600 bps 
Current algorithms at 1200 bps are quite successful. The 
method relies on linear predictive coding (LPC) of the 
speech signal to LPC coefficients which can be 
independently manipulated to enhance aspects of the" 
signal under differing conditions. Changes in piwh with 
all else constant and in rate of speech by slowing or 
speeding the presentation of the entire set of coefficients 
are found to be equally intelligible and without distortions 
that interfere with intelligibility. A sample of a 
conversation at different communication bandwidths 
further demonstrates the role of the technology. This 
group has recently developed, using an off-the-shelf 
Macintosh, a non-real-time terminal which can transmit 
both speech and images (including annotation) within 
2400 bps. A second terminal is being developed to 
transmit voice and still images simultaneously but real- 
time. 
1.2 Evaluation Methods and 
Technology for Speech and Interaction 
The Navy has taken an active part in evaluation of speech 
systems by participation i  the Digital Voice Consortium 
since its inception in 1972. The Consortium coordinates 
speech efforts across DoD and insures interoperability of
systems as well as attempts to eliminate duplication of 
efforts. The evaluation group in the HCI Lab has 
contributed significantly to the test set used in evaluating 
the intelligibility of narrowband speech. 
A new project which spans both the HCI Lab and the 
NACRE Lab in human machine dialogue has recently 
shifted the focus to development of new evaluation 
methods to study human-human i teractions as a basis for 
developing new metaphors for human machine interaction. 
Using AEGIS team training data, issues of speech turn 
taking during decision making and length of speech and 
counts of phrases have been studied. This group provides 
expert consulting on evaluation for all levels of 
interactive techniques which include speech and human 
language uses. 
1.3 Human Language Technology at 
NCARAI 
The Interactive Systems Group at NCARAI has recently 
applied a SSI speech recognizer as input to the natural 
language interface which was added to a functioning 
interactive decision support tool called KOALAS. The 
natural input, EUCALYPTUS, assumes poken language 
inputs (not just key phrases) are available. The 
300 
interactions with the system use existing graphical 
semantics of the domain and integrate the language 
capability to refer to objects which are graphically 
presented. There is no extension to the graphical interface. 
Only domain relevant semantics are available to the 
language processor. The system achieves an integrated 
graphics I natural anguage interaction which can be used 
separately or in combination. Human Language 
capabilities such as ellipsis, deixis, and anaphora 
resolution have been implemented which allow cross- 
modal and contextually determined reference. A video of 
the working system documents the functionality. 
2. POINTS OF CONTACT 
The Section Heads for each of the research areas presented 
are as follows: 
Speech Technology 
George Kang, HCI Lab, CODE 5531 
emall: kang @itd.nrl.navy.mil 
1.4 On-going Experiment in ARPA 
Speech Technology Transition 
Within the HCI Lab work is currently underway to port the 
Sphinx H system to a SPARC 10. It will then replace the 
current EUCALYPTUS front end processor. This is a 
simple goal as we already have a working speech 
capability for the domain and only intend to substitute one 
"black-box" for another. We are discovering hidden 
constraints in the porting across hardware platforms which 
need to be handled explicitly if these systems are to 
become readily available to the computing public. This is 
? an experiment in progress with only one of the systems. 
Several others will be used in similar fashion as a means of 
developing transition methods to integrate the results into 
real military applications. Whatever is discovered will 
contribute to the successful transition to dual-use areas as 
well. 
Evaluation Methods and Technology 
Dr. As~id Schmidt-Nielsen, HCI Lab, CODE 5532 
email: schmidtu @itd.nrl.navy.mil 
Interactive Systems 
Elaine Marsh, NCARAI, CODE 5512 
email: marsh@ aic.nrl.navy.mil 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research described is supported by the Office of Naval 
Research within 6.l and 6.2 Block grants to the Naval 
Research Laboratory HCI and NCARAI Laboratories and 
by SPAWAR. 
301 
