SESS ION 8 &: 9: STAT IST ICAL  AND LEARNING METHODS 
Frederick Jelinek, Chair 
Center for Speech Processing 
The Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, MD 21218 
The statistical and learning methods of these two ses- 
sions are related to text processing. The presented tech- 
niques should facilitate achieving the desired goal of text 
understanding with all of its potential exploitation: speech 
understanding, gisting, information retrieval, indexing, ma- 
chine translation, etc. 
For many years, the conventional pproach consisted of 
an attempt o design systems by experts who gained their 
knowledge through personal experience, introspection, and 
information exchange with other experts. As time went on, 
and claims of promise failed to be redeemed, the realization 
began to take hold that facts about language are too com- 
plex to be either listed or incorporated in rules specified by 
humans. Something always eemed to have been forgotten, 
and surprisingly frequent cases remained untreated. 
Influenced in no small measure by the success of self- 
organizing methods in speech recognition, a growing circle 
of researchers have concluded that decisive progress in the 
field of language can only be achieved when the necessary 
knowledge will be extracted irectly from data, lots and lots 
of diverse data. The proper work of experts is to secure 
data, create facilities for the reliable, plentiful, and appro- 
priate annotation of the data, and help design systems that 
can extract he appropriate information from this data. 
The results presented in the sessions on statistical and 
learning methods provide help in carrying out the last task. 
The papers by Miller, Chodorow, Landes, Leacock, and 
Thomas (Using a Semantic Concordance for Sense Identi- 
fication) and by Bruce and Wiebe (A New Approach to 
Sense Disambiguation) present methods that can be used 
to annotate in context he sense in which a word is used. 
E.g., when we say BANK, do we mean the institution for 
the deposit of money, or the shore of a river? 
The training data for the work of the next four papers 
are treebanks. 
The paper by Miller and Fox (Automatic Grammar Ac- 
quisition) attempts to learn statistical rules of a context- 
dependent grammar appropriate for shift-reduced parsers. 
Assuming that text understanding will require parsing 
(constituent analysis), and realizing that grammar isonly a 
tool that (for this application) isnot needed for its own sake, 
three papers are dedicated to direct parsing without an ex- 
plicit specification of any grammar. Two of these papers are 
statistical. They are related not just by authorship, but by 
use of techniques extracting the needed probabilities. The 
article by Ratnaparkhi and Roukos (A Maximum Entropy 
Model for Prepositional Phrase Attachment) deals with the 
decision whether in a sequence consisting of verb, noun, and 
prepositional phrases, the last two form a compound noun 
phrase or all three form a unit (e.g. does =ate the banana on 
the plate" specify a manner of eating or the location of the 
banana?). The article by Jelinek, Lafferty, Magerman, Mer- 
cer, Ratnaparkhi, and Roukos (Decision Tree Parsing Using 
a Hidden Derivation Model) presents anew method of con- 
structing a statistical, direct, grammar-less parser attach- 
ing annotated trees to given word strings. Finally, Brill (A 
Report of Recent Progress in 'I~ansformation-Based Error- 
Driven Learning) discusses a deterministic method of direct 
parsing and tagging (part-of-speech annotation) in which an 
original standard parse or tagging is modified in a step by 
step fashion until the final form is attMned. 
Of course, parsing itself is only a means to an end. 
What one is really after is text understanding which the 
parse should facilitate. Miller, Bobrow, Schwartz, and In- 
gria (Statistical Language Processing Using Hidden Un- 
derstanding Models) attempt o extract meaning directly 
and develop a co~esponding methodology applicable to re- 
stricted domains uch as the ATIS task. Given a sentence, 
their goal is to fill a template. 
Meng, Seneff, and Zue (Phonological Parsing for Bi- 
directional Letter-to-Sound / Sound-to-Letter Generation) 
deal with a problem interesting to speech recognition and 
synthesis: given a spelled word, what should be its pho- 
netic realization, and vice versa: given a phonetic string 
what is its likely spelling? The latter problem may arise 
when a person pronounces a word whose phonetic structure 
the system can recognize but which is new to its vocabulary. 
The processing of Japanese text is complicated by the fact 
that there are no word delimiters. Japanese text consists 
of sequences of kanji followed by kana characters signaling 
inflection, politeness, and other information. The segmen- 
tation of such text is conventionally accomplished by deter- 
ministic rules. Papageorgiu (Japanese Word Segmentation 
by Hidden Markov Model) uses statistics. 
Finally, Pereira, Riley, and Sproat (Weighted Rational 
Transductions and their Application to Human Language 
Processing) present a new algebraic uniform representation 
which they claim to be applicable to varied information 
sources, such as pronunciation dictionaries, language mod- 
eels, and lattices. If practically successful, this automata 
theory approach will surely be considerably elaborated. 
239 
