Session 11: Acoust ic  Model ing and Robust  CSR 
Steve Young 
Cambr idge  Un ivers i ty  Eng ineer ing  Depar tment  
T rumpington  Street ,  Cambr idge ,  CB2 1PZ, Eng land  
The papers in this session are all concerned with im- 
proving the performance of speech recognition systems 
at the acoustic modeling level. Three papers focus on 
obtaining very high accuracy under clean matched con- 
ditions and the remaining papers deal with the problems 
of mis-match caused by the use of different microphones 
and environmental noise. 
The first three papers focus on the problem of building 
very accurate Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) for use in 
large vocabulary speech recognition systems. Such sys- 
tems require a very large number of context-dependent 
models, but the available training data is limited and 
.unevenly spread. Hence, some way has to be found to 
share the data amongst he models. Furthermore, the 
approximations inherent in the use of tied-mixture sys- 
tems has led to a return to more conventional contin- 
uous density mixture Gaussian systems. In their basic 
form, these have a much greater number of parameters 
and hence, the data insufficiency problem is exacerbated. 
The solution adopted in the first two cases is to tie states 
together in order to balance the available data against 
model complexity. In the third paper, MAP estimation 
is used in conjunction with generalised triphones. 
The first paper, "Tree-based State Tying for High Accu- 
racy Acoustic Modelling" by Young, Odell 84 Woodland, 
describes a state-tying method based on phonetic deci- 
sion trees. They use an incremental approach in which 
untied single Gaussian models are estimated for every 
triphone appearing in the training data, then states 
within allophone sets are tied and finally, the tied sin- 
gle Gaussians are converted to mixture Gaussians. The 
key attractions of this approach are that firstly it is very 
efficient since the objective function used for node split- 
ting depends only on the model parameters and not on 
the original data, and secondly, once built, the decision 
trees can be used to synthesise all of the unseen triphones 
needed by the recogniser but not seen in the training 
data. The technique described was used to build the 
HTK Large Vocabulary Recogniser. This was included 
in the November 1993 Wall Street Journal evaluation 
where it returned the lowest error rate in three of the 
four tests and the second lowest error rate in the fourth. 
The second paper, "High-Accuracy Large-Vocabulary 
Speech Recognition using Mixture Tying and Consis- 
tency Modeling" by Digilakis 84 Murveit follows a similar 
approach. The system here is also built incrementally, 
however, in this case, HMMs are built starting from a 
heavily tied system and then mixtures are successively 
untied using agglomerative clustering followed by a split- 
ting and pruning procedure. The paper also contains an 
interesting study on time correlation modelling and the 
use of linear discriminant analysis. 
The third paper, "The LIMSI Continuous Speech Dicta- 
tion System" by Gauvain, Lamel, Adda 84 Adda-Decker, 
describes a continuous density HMM system which has 
a more conventional generalised triphone structure but 
which is trained using MAP estimation. This yielded the 
lowest error rate of any 20k word trigram system in the 
November 1993 WSJ evaluation. In addition to WSJ, the 
paper also describes results for French using the BREF 
corpus. This leads to some interesting conclusions on the 
properties of the two languages. In particular, it would 
appear that although higher phoneme recognition rates 
are achieved for French, the higher homophone rate re- 
duces word recognition to similar levels as for English. 
The systems described in these three papers all use con- 
tinuous density mixture Gaussian HMMs. Whilst these 
seem to yield the best performance under ideal condi- 
tions, for robust near real-time operation, tied-mixture 
systems continue to offer many advantages. In the 
fourth paper of the session, "Adaptation to New Mi- 
crophones using Tied-Mixture Normalisation" by Anas- 
tasakos, Kubala, Makhoul 84 Schwartz, a technique is 
described in which a probabilistic function is used to 
map the codebook built in training into one suitable for 
the required new microphone. This mapping function is 
built using a small amount of stereo adaptation data col- 
lected using the new microphone. When combined with 
cepstral mean subtraction, the technique substantially 
reduced the effects of microphone mis-match. 
The fifth paper, "Signal Processing for Robust Speech 
Recognition" by Liu, Moreno, Stern 84 Acero reviews 
a number of cepstral-based compensation procedures 
305, 
which have been studied within the Sphinx-II recog- 
nition system developed at Carnegie Melon University. 
These include a phone-dependent cepstral normalisation 
scheme in which compensation vectors are estimated 
from training data consisting of clean speech and cor- 
responding noisy speech. Other techniques studied in- 
clude VQ codebook adaptation, reduced-band analysis 
for telephone speech and silence codebook adaptation. 
A variety of experimental results are presented for the 
Microphone Independence (Spoke 5) and the Calibrated 
Noise Sources (Spoke 8) November 1993 WSJ evalua- 
tions. Error reductions of around 40% were typically 
achieved using combinations of these techniques. 
The sixth paper, "Microphone-Independent Robust Sig- 
nal Processing using Probabilistic Optimum Filtering" 
by Neumeyer 84 Weintraub, also addresses the problems 
caused by having a mis-match between the microphone 
used for training a speech recognition system and the 
microphone used for testing. In this case, the solution 
proposed is to replace ach incoming noisy speech vector 
with an estimate of the underlying clean speech vector. 
This mapping is achieved using a piecewise non-linear 
transformation estimated from stereo training data. A 
large number of results are presented both for ATIS and 
WSJ. 
The seventh and final paper, "Microphone Arrays for 
Robust Speech Recognition" by Che, Lin, Pcarson, de 
Vries ~4 Flanagan, takes a very different approach to 
dealing with environmental robustness. In this case, the 
input signal is pre-processed using a beamforming mi- 
crophone array followed by a neural network trained on 
a small amount of the noisy speech data. In various tests 
using the Sphinx-I recognition system, the combination 
of array and neural network in a reverberent acoustic 
environment was able to achieve similar performance to
that obtained using a close-talking microphone. 
306 
