A Neural Network System for Large-Vocabulary Continuous 
Speech Recognition in Variable Acoustic Environments 
J. Flanagan +, Q. Lin +, J. Pearson*, and B. de Vries* 
+CAIP  Center ,  Rutgers  Un ivers i ty  
* Dav id  Sarnof f  Research  Center  
Performance of speech recognizers is typically degraded by 
deleterious properties of the acoustic environment, such as 
multipath distortion (reverberation) and ambient noise. The 
degradation becomes more prominent as the microphone is 
positioned more distant from the speaker, for instance, in 
a teleconferencing application. Mismatched training and 
testing conditions, such as frequency response, microphone, 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and room reverberation, also de- 
grade recognition performance. Among available approaches 
to handling mismatches between training and testing condi- 
tions, a popular one is to retrain the speech recognizer un- 
der new environments. Hidden Markov models (HMM) have 
to date been accepted as an effective classification method 
for large vocabulary continuous peech recognition, e.g., the 
ARPA-sponsored SPHINX and DECIPHER. Retraining of 
HMM-based recognizers is a complex and tedious task. It 
requires recollection of speech data under corresponding con- 
ditions and reestimation of HMM's parameters. Particularly 
great time and effort are needed to retrain a recognizer which 
operates in a speaker-independent mode, which is the mode 
of greatest general interest. 
ARPA Contract (No. DABT63-93-C-0037), entitled "A neu- 
ral network system for large-vocabulary continuous speech 
recognition in variable acoustic environments," aims to de- 
velop a system of microphone arrays (MA) and neural net- 
works (NN) for robust speech recognition. The system will ex- 
pand the power and advantages of existing ARPA speech rec- 
ognizers to practical acoustic environments where users need 
not be encumbered by hand-held, body-worn, or tethered mi- 
crophone equipment, and must have freedom of movement. 
(Examples include Combat Information Centers, large group 
conferences, and mobile hands-busy eyes-busy maintenance 
tasks.) Use of MA provides autodirective sound pickup that 
is higher in quality than conventional microphones used at 
distances. NN processors learn and compensate for environ- 
mental interference, and to adapt the testing condition to the 
training condition. Recognition performance in hostile acous- 
tic environments can thereby be elevated without the need to 
retrain the recognizer. 
The Contract covers joint research between the CAIP Cen- 
ter and Sarnoff Research Center. It commenced July 19, 
1993 and will run for 3 years. To date, a new speech cor- 
pus has been created to evaluate the recognition performance 
of synergistically-integrated systems of MA, NN, and ARPA 
speech recognizers. (The corpus is available to ARPA con- 
tractors upon request.) The corpus consists of 50 male and 30 
female speakers. Each speaker speaks 20 isolated command- 
words, 10 digits, and 10 continuous entences elected from 
the Resource Management task. Two recording sessions are 
made for each speaker. One session is for simultaneous record- 
ing from a head-mounted close-talking microphone (HMD 
224) and from a 1-D beamforming line array microphone. 
The other is for simultaneous recording of a desk-mounted 
microphone (PZM 160) and the line array microphone. The 
recording environment is a hard-walled laboratory room of 
6x6x2.7 meters, having a reverberation time of approximately 
0.5 second. Both the desk-mounted microphone and the line 
array microphone are placed 3 meters from the subjects. The 
recording is done with an Ariel ProPort with a sampling fre- 
quency of 16 kHz and 16-bit linear quantization. 
A preliminary NN design is also completed. It consists of 
13 multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), one for each of the 13 cep- 
strum coefficients used in the SPHINX recognizer. Each MLP 
has 3 layers. The input layer has 9 input nodes, covering the 
current speech frame and four preceding and four following 
frames. There are 4 sigmoid nodes in the hidden layer and 
1 linear node in the output layer. The NN is trained using 
backpropagation methods when microphone-array speech and 
close-talking speech are both available. The trained MLP's 
are then utilized to transform cepstrum coefficients of ar- 
ray speech to those appropriate to high-quality, close-talking 
speech. The transformed cepstrum features are used as inputs 
to the SPHINX speech recognizer. 
Promising results have been achieved for recognition of iso- 
lated utterances. Recognition accuracy under reverberant 
conditions is increased from from 13% for desk-mounted mi- 
crophone to 85% for the MA/NN system. It is also found that 
the system of MA and NN in unmatched training/testing con- 
ditions yields higher word accuracies than those obtained with 
a retrained SPHINX when using array input for both training 
and testing, i.e., a matchedtralning/testing condition. Similar 
results have been obtained for speaker identification. 
Various NN architectures are being explored to identify an op- 
timal one. Dynamic-time-warping (DTW)  classification tech- 
niques are also being included for experimental comparison. 
Because DTW recognizers have a simple back end, the capa- 
bility of the MA/NN system in improving recognition perfor- 
mance can be assessed more reliably. Evaluation experiments 
for continuous peech are under way. Work is planned to use 
the DECIPHER recognizer for comparisons. Also planned is 
a study of feature measures most appropriate for NN adapta- 
tion. The CAIP Center has ongoing NSF projects on develop- 
ing 2-D and 3-D microphone arrays. These new array micro- 
phones will later be used in the present work. By the end of 
the Contract, we will implement and demonstrate a reliable, 
real-time, hands-free prototype speech recognition system for 
laboratory evaluation. The Contract work will directly im- 
pact the successful applications of ARPA automatic speech 
recognition systems in adverse practical environments. 
470 
