Evaluating the Use of Prosodic Information 
in Speech Recognition and Understanding 
M. Ostendotf P. Price S. Shattuck Hufnagel 
Principal Investigators 
Boston University SRI International M IT  RLE 
Boston, MA 02215 Menlo Park, CA 94025 Cambridge, MA 02138 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to investigate the use of differ- 
ent levels of prosodic information in speech recognition and 
understanding. The two main thrusts in the current work 
involve the use of prosodic information i  parsing and detec- 
tion/correction fdisflueneies, but we have also investigated 
duration :modeling for continuous peech recognition. The 
research :involves determining a representation f prosodic 
information suitable for use in speech understanding systems, 
developing reliable algorithms for detection of prosodic ues 
in speech, investigating architectures for integrating prosodic 
cues in speech understanding systems, and assessing poten- 
tial performance improvements by evaluating prosody algo- 
rithms in actual spoken language systems (SLS). This research 
is sponsored jointly by ARIA and NSF, NSF grant no. IPA- 
8905249. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Recent results on this project are summarized below, with 
names of the students primarily responsible for the work in- 
dicated in parentheses. 
? Extended the prosodic prominence and break acoustic 
models by implementing an iterative pruning algorithm 
(hi. VeiUeux), integrating text and acoustic models (D. 
Macannuco), and developing a new energy feature based 
on results of recent linguistic studies. 
? Continued work in prosody-parse coring, running tests 
on a larger set of sentences and optimizing on word er- 
ror rate and achieving 10% reduction in word error by 
combining the prosody-parse score with acoustic and lan- 
guage scores from the MIT ATIS system. Experiments 
on the SPA ATIS system are in progress. (N. Veilleux) 
? Further explored parametric duration modeling in CSR 
using maximum likelihood clustering and speaking rate 
adaptation. Observed a 10% reduction in word error on 
the RM task, but no improvement in initial experiments 
on the WSJ task. (C. Fong) 
? In analyses of the ATIS corpus, found that: hesitations 
are associated with intonation patterns similar to those in 
frilled pauses (in addition to long pauses and lengthened 
segments) and occur at locations with relatively higher 
perplexity in the language model (N. Veilleux and A. 
Schlosser), that filled pauses occur almost exclusively in
low-probability word sequences and have longer schwa 
duration than in the determiner "a", and that there are 
differences inthe fO patterns of fluent vs. disfluent single 
word repetitions (E. Shriberg). 
? Developed methods for automatic detection of fragments 
from acoustic ues and patterns in the N-Best recognizer 
output using decision trees. (M. Hendrix) 
? Developed a taxonomy for disfluencies and analyzed 
distributional properties of 5000 hand-labeled disfluen- 
cies from the ATIS corpus, the Switchboard corpus, and 
a third comparison corpus of human-human air travel 
planning speech. Findings include general models for 
predicting overall disfluency rates, relative rates of dis- 
fluency types, and relationships between disfluency type 
and type-independent features (e.g. presence of a word 
fragment or editing phrase). (E. Shriberg) 
? Analyzed patterns of occurrences ofword-initial glottal- 
iTs!ion, finding a high coincidence rate with phrase onset 
and prominence marking, which suggests new cues for 
prosodic pattern detection. (L. Dilley) \[This work is also 
funded by an NIH grant.\] 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
? Further efine the break index and prominence r cogni- 
tion algorithms to improve accuracy on the ATIS corpus, 
and investigate the use of detected prominence in the 
SPA ATIS system as a knowledge source for rejecting or 
correcting template marcher output. 
? Improve the parse scoring algorithm performance by ex- 
ploring new syntactic features, and assess performance 
on SPA vs. MIT ATIS systems. 
? Refine the fragment detection algorithm and extend to 
detection of other disfluencies by integrating acoustic 
and pattern matching text cues, and evaluate usefulness 
in the SPA ATIS system. 
448 
