SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR ROBUST SPEECH RECOGNITION 
Fu-Hua Liu, Pedro J. Moreno, Richard M. Stem, Alejandro Acero 
Department ofElectrical and Computer Engineering 
School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes a series of ceps~al-based compensation pro- 
cedures that render the SPHINX-II system more robust with 
respect to acoustical environment. The first algorithm, phone- 
dependent cepstral compensation, is similar in concept to the pre- 
viously-described MFCDCN method, except hat cepstral com- 
pensation vectors are selected according to the current phonetic 
hypothesis, rather than on the basis of SNR or VQ codeword iden- 
tity. We also describe two procedures toaccomplish adaptation of 
the VQ codebook for new environments, as well as the use of 
reduced-bandwidth f~equency analysis to process telephone-band- 
width speech. Use of the various compensation algorithms in con- 
sort produces a reduction of error ates for SPHINX-II by as much 
as 40 percent relative to the rate achieved with eepstral mean nor- 
realization alone, in both development test sets and in the context 
of the 1993 ARPA CSR evaluations. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A continuing problem with current speech recognition technology 
is that of lack of robustness with respect to environmental v riabil- 
ity. For example, the use of microphones other than the ARPA 
standard Sennheiser HM--414 "close-talking" headset (CLSTLK) 
severely degrades the performance of systems like the original 
SPHINX system, even in a relatively quiet office environment 
\[e.g. 1,2\]. Applications such as speech recognition i automobiles, 
over telephones, on a factory floor, or outdoors demand an even 
greater degree of environmental robustness. 
In this paper we describe and compare the performance of a series 
of cepstrum-based procedures that enable the CMU SPHINX-II 
\[8\] speech recognition system to maintain a high level of recogni- 
tion accuracy over a wide variety of acoustical environments. We 
also discuss the aspects of these algorithms that appear to have 
contributed most significantly to the success of the SPHINX-II 
system in the 1993 ARPA CSR evaluations for microphone inde- 
pendence (Spoke 5) and calibrated noise sources (Spoke 8). 
In previous years we described the performance of cepstral map- 
ping procedures such as the CDCN algorithm, which is effective 
but fairly computationally costly \[2\]. More recently we discussed 
the use of eepstral highpass-filtering al orithms \[such as the popu- 
lax RASTA and cepstral-mean-normalization lg rithms (CMN) 
\[6\]. These algorithms are very simple to implement but somewhat 
limited in effectiveness, and CMN is now part of baseline process- 
ing for the CMU and many other systems. 
In this paper we describe several new procedures that when used 
in consort can provide as much as an additional 40 percent 
improvement over baseline processing with CMN. These tech- 
niques include: 
? Phone-dependent cepstral compensation 
? Environmental interpolation f compensation vectors 
? Codebook adaptation 
? Reduced-band analysis for telephone-bandwidth speech. 
? Silence codebook adaptation 
In Sec. 2 we describe these compensation procedures in detail, 
and we examine their effect on recognition accuracy in Secs. 3 
and 4. 
2. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPENSATION 
ALGORITHMS 
We begin this section by reviewing the previously-described 
MFCDCN algorithm, which is the basis for most of the new pro- 
cedures discussed. We then discuss blind environment selection 
and environmental interpolation asthey apply to MFCDCN. The 
complementary procedures of phone-dependent cepstral normal- 
ization and codebook adaptation are described. We close this sec- 
tion with brief description of reduced-bandwidth analysis and 
silence-codebook adaptation, which are very beneficial in pro- 
cessing telephone-bandwidth speech and speech recorded in the 
presence of strong background noise, respectively. 
2.1. Multiple Fixed Codeword-Dependent 
Cepstral Normalization (MFCDCN) 
Multiple fixed codeword-dependent cepstral normalization 
(MFCDCN) provides additive cepstral compensation vectors that 
depend on signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and that also vary from 
codeword to codeword of the vector-quantized (VQ) representa- 
tion of the incoming speech at each SNR \[6\]. At low SNRs these 
vectors primarily compensate for effects of additive noise. At 
higher SNRs, the algorithm compensates forlinear filtering, while 
at intermediate SNRs, they compensate for both of these effects. 
Environmental independence is provided by computing compen- 
sation vectors for a number of different environments and select- 
ing the compensation e vironment that results in minimal residual 
VQ distortion. 
Compensation vectors for the chosen testing environment are 
applied to normalize the utterance according to the expression 
330 
ftt = z t + r \ [k  t, l r e\] where kt, I t ,  t, and e are the VQ code- 
word index, instantaneous frame SNR, time frame index and the 
index of the chosen environment, respectively, and ~t, zt, and r are 
the compensated (transformed) ata, original data and compensa- 
tion vectors, respectively. 
2.2. Blind Environment Selection 
In several of the compensation procedures used, including 
MFCDCN, one of a set of environments must be selected as part 
of the compensation process. We considered three procedures for 
environment selection in our experiments. 
The first procedure, referred to as selection by compensation, 
applies compensation vectors from each possible nvironment 
successively tothe incoming test utterance. The environment e is 
chosen that minimizes the average residual VQ distortion over the 
entire utterance. In the second approach, referred to as environ- 
merit-specific VQ, environment-specific ookbooks are generated 
from the original uncompensated speech. By vector quantizing the 
test data using each environment-specific codebook in turn, the 
environment with the minimum VQ distortion ischosen. The third 
procedure, referred to as Gaassian environment classifier, models 
each environment with mixtures of Gaussian densities. Environ- 
ment selection is accomplished sothat he test data has the highest 
probability from the corresponding classifier. ~ latter approach 
is similar to one proposed previously by BBN \[7\]. 
All three methods produce similar speech recognition accuracy. 
2.3. Interpolated FCDCN (IFCDCN) 
In cases where the testing environment does not closely resemble 
any of the particular environment used to develop compensation 
parameters for MFCDCN, interpolating the compensation vectors 
of several environments can be more helpful than using compensa- 
tion vectors from a single (incorrect) environment. As in 
MFCDCN, compensation vectors used in the interpolated f ixed 
codeword-dependent  cepst ra l  normal i za t ion  algorithm 
(IFCDCN) are precomputed for environments in the training data- 
base in the estimation phase. Compensation vectors for new envi- 
ronments are obtained by linear interpolation of several of the 
MFCDCN compensation vectors: 
?\[k, l \]  = ~E~=lfe" rtk,  l, el 
where ?\[k, I\] , t\[k,l,e\], andre are the estimated compensation 
vectors, the environment-specific ompensation vector for the e th 
environment, and the weighting factor for the e th environment, 
respectively. 
The weighting factors for each environment are also based on 
residual VQ distortion: 
p (el ~ exp {De~ (202) } 
f " -  - 
where O is the codebook standard deviation using speech from the 
CLSTLK microphone, ~ represents he testing utterance, and Dj 
331 
and D e are the residual VQ distortions of the j4h and e th environ- 
ments. We have generally used a value of 3 for E. 
2.4. Phone-Dependent Cepstral Normalization 
(PDCN) 
In this section we discuss an approach to environmental compen- 
sation in which additive cepstral compensation vectors are selected 
according to the current phoneme hypothesis inthe search process, 
rather than according to physical parameters such as SNR or VQ 
eodeword identity. Since this phoneme-based approach relies on 
information from the acoustic-phonetic and language models to 
determine the compensation vectors, it can be referred to as a 
"back-end" compensation procedures, while other approaches 
such as MFCDCN which work independently of the decoder can 
be regarded as "front-end" compensation schemes. 
Estimation of PDCN compensation Vectors. In the current 
implementation f phone-dependent cepstral normalization 
(PDCN), we develop compensation vectors that are specific to 
individual phonetical events, using a base phone set of 51 pho- 
nemes, including silence but excluding other types of non-lexical 
events. This is accomplished by running the decoder in supervised 
mode using CLSTLK data and correction transcriptions. All 
CLSTLK utterances are divided into phonetic segments. For every 
phonetic label, a difference vector is computed by accumulating 
the cepstral difference between the CLSTLK training data, xp and 
its noisy counterpart, z r Compensation vectors are computed by 
averaging the corresponding difference vector as follows, 
e \[p\] = 
ZAu= S(ft-') IEt= I (xt-zt) 
lit__ is(/t-p) 
whereft is the phoneme for frame t, p the phoneme index and T u 
length of the uth utterance out of A sentences. 
Compensation of PDCN in Recognition. The SPHINX-H system 
uses the senone \[4,8\], a generalized state-based probability density 
function, as the basic unit to compute the likelihood from acousti- 
cal models. The probability density function for senone s in frame 
t for the cepstral vector z t of incoming speech can be expressed as 
= 
where m t stands for the index of the best B Gaussian mixtures of 
and are the cor- senone s for cepstra vector zt, and J.l.rat, Omt , Wra t
th ? responding mean, standard eviation, and weight for the m t nux- 
ture of senone s. Multiple compensated cepslxal vectors are formed 
in PDCN by adding various compensation vectors to incoming 
cepstra, ftt.p(t ) , where Rt. p = z t+c \ [p  \] on a frame-by-frame 
basis for the presumed phoneme index, p. 
The amount of computation needed for this procedure is reduced 
because in SPHINX-H, each senone corresponds toonly one dis- 
tinctive base phoneme. A cepstral vector can be normalized with a 
proper PDCN compensation factor corresponding to the particular 
base phonetical identity. As a result, senone probabilities can be 
calculated by the presumed phonetic identity that corresponds to a 
given senone. Using this approach, the senone probability in 
PDCN is re-written as 
Pr(tt.p\[ s) = znBt= 1Wnff(It, p;~n, On, ) 
where n t is the index of the best B Gaussian mixtures for senone 
s at frame t with respect to the PDCN-normalized ceprtral vector 
~t,p, for the corresponding phonetic labelp for senone s. 
Interpellated PDCN (IPDCN). PDCN, like SDCN and FCDCN 
\[3,6\], assumes the existence of a database of utterances recorded 
in stereo) in the training and testing environments. In situations 
where no data from any particular testing environment is available 
for estimation, IPDCN is desirable. Based on an ensemble ofpre- 
computed PDCN compensation vectors, IPDCN applies to the 
incoming utterance an interpolation f compensation vectors from 
several of the closest environments (IPDCN). The interpolation is 
performed in the same way that it was for IFCDCN. In the current 
implementation, we use the 3 closest environments with the best 4 
Ganssian mixtures in interpolation. 
2,5.  Codebook  Adaptat ion  (DCCA and  
BWCA) 
A vector quantization (VQ) codebook, which is a set of mean vec- 
tors and/or co-variance matrices of cepstral representations, al o 
exhibits ome fundamental differences when mismatches are 
encountered between training and testing environments \[7\]. This 
suggests that when such mismatches xist, the codebook can be 
"tuned" to better characterize the cepstral space of testing data. In 
this section, we propose two different implementations of uch 
codebook adaptation. 
Dual-Channel Codebook Adaptation (DCCA). Dual-Channel 
Codebook Adaptation (DCCA) exploits the existence of speech 
that is simultaneously recorded using the CLSTLK microphone 
and a number of secondary microphones. From the viewpoint of 
front-end compensation, the senone probability density function 
can be expressed as the Gaussian mixture 
B B 
Pst = k ~= lWkN(it;~k'?k) = k ~= 1WkN(Zt+Szt;~tk'?k) 
where k, z t, 8z t , Jt t, ~t k, o k are the mixture index among top B 
mixtures, noisy observation vector, compensation vector, compen- 
sated vector, mean vector for the k th mixture, and variance, respec- 
tively. The senone probability density function is re-written as 
Pst = ZkB= l WkN(Zt;Ilk k, O k +80 k) 
= ZkB= l WkN<Z::  
where 8gt and 8o k are deviations from cepstral space of target 
noisy environment to that of the reference training environment 
for means and variance in the corresponding Gaussian mixtures. 
In implementing DCCA, VQ encoding is performed on speech 
from the CLSTLK microphone processed with CMN. The output 
VQ labels are shared by the CLSTLK data and the corresponding 
data in the secondary (or target) environment. For each subspace in
the CLSTLK training environment, we generate he corresponding 
means and variances for the target environment. Thus, a one-to- 
one mapping between the means and variances of the cepstral 
space of the CLSTLK training condition and that of the target con- 
dition is established. 
Recognition is accomplished by shifting the means of the Gauss- 
ian mixtures according to the relationships 
B B 
= wkN(',+s':.k, ok)= 
Pat k=l  k f l  
Baum-Welch Codebook Adaptation (BWCA). There are many 
applications in which stereo data simuRaneously recorded in the 
CLSTLK and target environments are unavailable. In these cir- 
cumstances, transformations can be developed between environ- 
ments using the contents of the adaptation utterances using the 
Baum-Welch algorithm. 
In Bantu-Welch codebook adaptation, mean vectors and covari- 
ance matrices, along with senones, are re-estimated and updated 
using the Bantu-Welch algorithm \[5\] during each iteration of train- 
ing process. To compensate for the effect of changes in acoustical 
environments, he Baum-Welch approach is used to transform the 
means and covariances toward the cepstral space of the target est- 
ing environments. This is exactly like normal training, except that 
only a few adaptation utterances are available, and that number of 
free parameters to be estimated (i.e. the means and variances of the 
VQ codewords) is very small. 
2 .6.  Reduced Bandwidth  Ana lys i s  fo r  Te le -  
phone  Speech  
The conventional SPHINX-II system uses signal processing that 
extracts Mel-frequency epstral coefficients (MFCC) over an anal- 
ysis range of 130 to 6800 Hz. This choice of analysis bandwidth is
appropriate when the system processes speech recorded through 
goed-quality microphones such as the CLSTLK microphone. Nev- 
ertheless, when speech is recorded from telephone lines, previous 
research at CMU \[9\] indicates that error rates are sharply 
decreased when the analysis bandwidth is reduced. This is accom- 
plished by performing the normal DFT analysis with the normal 
16,000-Hz sampling rate, but only retaining DFT coefficients after 
the triangular f equency smothing from center frequencies of 200 
to 3700 Hz. Reduced-bandwidth MFCC coefficients are obtained 
by performing the discrete-cosine transform only on these fre- 
quency-weighted DFr  coefficients. 
To determine whether or not speech from an unknown environ- 
ment is of telephone nature, we use the Gaussian environment 
classifier approach, as described in Sec. 2.2. Two VQ codebooks 
are used, one for telephone speech using a wideband front-end 
analysis and another for non-telephone speech. The speech was 
classified to maximize nvironmental likelihood. 
2.7 .  S i lence  codebook  adaptat ion  
When dealing with speech-like noises such as a speech or music in 
the background the compensation techniques described above pro- 
332 
vide only partial recovery. Most of these techniques assume cer- 
tain statistical features for the noise (such as stationarity atthe 
sentence l vel), that are not valid. The SPHINX-l/recognition 
system still produces a large number of insertion errors in difficult 
recognition environments, such as those used in the 1993 CSR 
Spoke 8 evaluation, even when cepstral compensation is used. We 
have found that the use of silence codebook adaptation (SCA) 
helps reduce insertion rates in these circumstances byproviding 
better discrimination between speech and speech-like noises. 
In SCA processing, the HMM parameters (codebook means, vari- 
ances, and probabilities) are updated for the silence and noise seg- 
ments by exposure to lraining data from a corpus that more closely 
approximates the testing environment than speech from the 
CLSTLK microphone. If not enough data are available, an update 
of the cepstral means only is performed. Further details on how 
this procedure was implemented for the 1993 CSR Spoke 8 evalu- 
ation are provided in Sec. 4.2 
3. PERFORMANCE OF ALGORITHMS IN 
DEVELOPMENTAL TESTING 
In this and the following section we describe the results of a series 
of experiments that compare the recognition accuracy of the vari- 
ous algorithms described in Sec. 2 using the ARPA CSR Wall 
Street Journal task. The 7000 WSJ0 utterances recorded using the 
CLSTLK microphone were used for the training corpus, and in 
most cases the system was tested using the 330 utterances from 
secondary microphones in the 1992 evaluation test set. This test 
set has a closed vocabulary of5000 words. 
Two implementations of the SPHINX recognition system were 
used in these evaluations. For most of the development work and 
for the official 1993 CSR evaluations for Spoke 5 and Spoke 8, a 
smaller and faster version of SPHINX-II was used than the imple- 
mentation used for the official ATIS and CSR Hub evaluations. 
We refer to the faster system as SPHINX-IIa in this paper. 
SPHINX-Ha differs from SPHINX-II in two ways: it uses a big- 
ram grammar ( ather than a trigram grammar) and it uses only one 
codebook (rather than 27 phone-dependent codebooks). Spoke 5 
and selected other test sets were subsequently re-evaluated using a 
versions of SPHINX-II that was very similar to the one used in the 
ATIS and CSR Hub evaluations. 
3.1. Comparison of MFCDCN, IFCDCN, 
PDCN, and IPDCN 
We first consider the relative performance of the MFCDCN, 
IFCDCN, PDCN, and IPDCN algorithms, which were evaluated 
using the training and test sets described above. Recognition accu- 
racy using these algorithms i compared to the baseline perfor- 
mance, which was obtained using conventional Mel-cepstrum 
based signal processing in conjunction with cepstral man normal- 
ization (CMN). 
Table 1 compares word error ates obtained using various process- 
ing schemes along with the corresponding reduction of word error 
rates with the respect to the baseline with CMN. Compensation 
vectors used for these comparisons were developed from training 
data that include the testing environments. Table 2 summarizes 
similar esults that were obtained when the actual testing environ- 
ment was excluded from the set of data used to develop the com- 
pensation vectors. 
COMPENSATION CLSTLK OTHER 
ALGORITHM mle mlcs 
CMN (baseline) 7.6 21.4 
CMN+MFCDCN 7.6 14.5 
CMN+IFCDCN 7.8 15.1 
CMN+PDCN 7.9 16.9 
CMN+MFCDCN+PDCN 7.6 12.8 
Table 1: Word error ates obtained on the secondary-talc data 
from the 1992 WSJ evaluation test using CMN, MFCDCN, and 
PDCN with and without environment i erpolation. 
COMPENSATION 
ALGORITHM 
CMN (baseline) 
CMN+MFCDCN 
CMN+MFCDCN+PDCN 
CMN+IFCDCN 
CMN+IFCDCN+IPDCN 
CLSTLK OTHER 
mle mles 
7.6 21.4 
7.6 16.1 
7.6 14.8 
7.6 15.6 
7.6 13.5 
Table 2: Word error ates obtained using CMN, MFCDCN, and 
PDCN as in Table 1, but with the testing environments excluded 
from the corpus used to develop compensation vectors. 
The results of Table 1 indicate that PDCN when applied in isola- 
tion provides arecognition error rate that is not as good as that 
obtained using MFCDCN. Nevertheless, the effects of PDCN and 
MFCDCN are complementary in that he use of the two algorithms 
in combination provides alower error ate than was observed with 
either algorithm applied by itself. The results in Table 2 demon- 
strate that he use of environment i erpolation is helpful when the 
testing environment is not included in the set used to develop com- 
pensation vectors. Environmental interpolation degrades perfor- 
mance slightly, however, when the actual testing environment was 
observed in developing the compensation vectors. 
3.2. Performance of Codebook Adaptation 
Table 3 compares word error rates obtained with the DCCA and 
BWCA as described in Sec. 2.5 with error rates obtained with 
CMN and MFCDCN. The Bantu-Welch codebook adaptation was 
implemented with four iterations of re-estimation, re-estimating 
the codebook means only. (Means and variances were re-estimated 
in a pilot experiment, but with no improvement i  performance.) 
COMPENSATION CLSTLK OTHER 
ALGORITHM mle mics 
CMN (baseline) 7.6 21.4 
CMN+MFCDCN 7.6 14.5 
CMN+IFCDCN 7.8 15.1 
CMN+DCCA 7.9 14.2 
CMN+MFCDCN+DCCA 7.6 12.3 
CMN+BWCA 7.9 16.7 
CMN+MFCDCN+BWCA 7.6 13.5 
Table 3: Comparison of error ates obtained using codebook 
adaptation with and without MFCDCN. 
333 
Table 4 provides imilar comparisons, but with the testing envi- 
ronments excluded from the corpus used to develop compensation 
vectors (as in Table 2). 
COMPENSATION CLSTLK OTHE 
ALGORITHM mie R 
mlcs 
CMN (baseline) 7.6 21.4 
CMN+MFCDCN 7.6 16.1 
CMN+MFCDCN+DCCA I 7.6 15.8 
CMN+MFCDCN+BWCA 7.6 15.5 
CMN+IFCDCN 7.6 15.6 
CMN+IFCDCN+DCCA 7.6 15.0 
CMN+IFCDCN+BWCA \[ 7.6 14.6 
Table ,l: Word error ates as in Table 3, but with the testing envi- 
ronments excluded from the corpus used to develop the compen- 
The results of Tables 3 and 4 indicate that the effectiveness of
codebook adaptation used in isolation to reduce rror ate is about 
equal to that of MFCDCN. Once again, the use of environmental 
interpolation is helpful in cases in which the testing environment 
was not used to develop compensation vectors. 
3.3. Reduced-bandwidth Processing for Tele- 
phone Speech 
Table 5 compares error rates obtained using conventional signal 
processing versus reduced-bandwidth analysis for the telephone- 
microphone subset of the development set, and for the remaining 
microphones. 
PROCESSING NON-TELEPHONE TELEPHONE 
BANDWIDTH mlcs  mics  I 
Full bandwidth 11.2 39.0 
Reduced bandwidth I 22.3 15.5 
Table 5: Word error ates obtained using conventional and 
reduced-bandwidth analysis for the 1992 WSJ test set. 
It can be seen in Table 5 that the use of a reduced analysis band- 
width dramatically improves recognition error rate when the sys- 
tem is trained with high-quality speech and tested using 
telephone-bandwidth speech. 
In an unofficial evaluation we applied reduced-bandwidth analysis 
to the telephone speech data of Spoke 6 (known-microphone adap- 
tation) from the 1993 ARPA CSR evaluation. Using a version of 
SPHINX-II trained with only the 7000 sentences ofthe WSJ0 cor- 
pus, we observed an error rate for the test set of 13.4%. This 
results compares favorably with results reported by other sites 
using systems that were trained with both the WSJ0 snd WSJ1 
corpora. 
4. PERFORMANCE USING THE 1993 CSR 
EVALUATION DATA 
We summarize in this section the results of experiments u ing the 
1993 ARPA CSR WSJ test set, including official results obtained 
using SPHINX-Ha and subsequent evaluations with SPHINX-II. 
4.1.  Spoke  5: M ic rophone Independence  
The testing data for Spoke 5 were samples of speech from 10 
microphones that had never been used previously in ARPA evalua- 
tions. One of the microphones is a telephone handset and another 
is a speakerphone. 
The evaluation system for Spoke 5 first performs acrude environ- 
mental classification using the Gaussian environment classifier, 
blindly separating incoming speech into utterances that are 
assumed to be recorded either from wideband microphones ortele- 
phone-bandwidth microphones and channels. Speech that is 
assumed to be recorded from a full-bandwidth microphone is pro- 
cessed using a combination f IFCDCN and IPDCN, interpolating 
over the closest three environments forIFCDCN and over the best 
four environments for IPDCN. Speech that is believed to be 
recorded through atelephone channel is processed using a combi- 
nation of narrow-band processing as described in Sec. 2.6 and 
MFCDCN. The systems were trained using the CLSTLK micro- 
phone. 
CONDI- 
TION 
PO 
C1 
C2 
C3 
TESTING COMPEN- SPHX-IIa SPHX-H 
MIC SATION 11/93 12/93 
Other ON 15.6 10.4 
OFF ! 21.3 16.8 Other 
cLSTLK ON 10.0 6.6 
CLSTLK OFF I 10.1 6.5 
Table 6: Comparison of word error ates for Spoke 5 using two 
different recognition systems, SPHINX-Ha and SPHINX-If. 
Recognition error rates on the 5000-word $5 task are summarized 
in Table 6. The results for SPHINX-Ha are the official evaluation 
results. The test data were re-run in 12/93 using a version of 
SPHINX-II that was very similar to that used for the Hub evalua- 
tion. Although this evaluation was "unofficial", it was performed 
without any further algorithm development or exposure to the test 
set after the official evaluation. We note that the baseline system 
(without "compensation") already includes CMN. 
We believe that one of the most meaningful figures of merit for 
environmental compensation is the ratio of errors for the P0 and 
C2 conditions (i.e. the ratio of errors obtained with CLSTLK 
speech and speech in the target environments with compensation 
enabled). For this test set, switching from speech from the 
CLSTLK microphone tospeech from the secondary microphones 
causes the error rates to increase by a factor of 1.3 for the 8 non- 
telephone nvironments, by a factor of 2.4 for the 2 telephone 
environments, and by a factor of 1.5 fur the complete set of testing 
data. In fact, in 3 of the 10 secondary environments, he compen- 
sated error rate obtained using the secondary miss was within 25 
percent of the CLSTLK error rate. Interestingly enough, the ratio 
of errors for the P0 and C2 conditions i unaffected by whether 
SPHINX-II or SPHINX-Ha was used for recognition, confirming 
that in these conditions, the amount of error eduction provided by 
334 
environmental compensation does not depend on how powerful a 
recognition system is used. 
4.2. Spoke 8: Calibrated Noise Sources 
Spoke 8 considers the performance of speech recognition systems 
in the presence of background interference consisting of speech 
from AM-radio talk shows or various types of music at 3 different 
SNRs, 0, 10 and 20 dB. The speech is simultaneously collected 
using two microphones, the CLSTLK microphone and a desktop 
Audio-Technica microphone with known acoustical characteris- 
tics. The 0-dB and 10-dB conditions are more difficult than the 
acoustical environment of Spoke 5, because the background signal 
for both the AM-radio and music conditions i  frequently speech- 
like, and because it is highly non-stationary. SNRs are measured at 
the input to the Audio-Technica microphone 
The evaluation system used a combination of two algorithms for 
environmental robustness, MFCDCN, and silence codebook adap- 
tation (SCA). New silence codebooks were created using an 
implementation of Baum-Welch codebook adaptation, as 
described in Sec. 2.5. Two ceps~al codebooks were developed for 
SPHINX-IIa, with one codebook representing the noise and 
silence HMMs, and the other codebook representing the other 
phones. The normal Baum-Welch re-estimation formulas were 
used updating only the means for the noise and silence HMMs. 
NOISE 
TYPE 
Music 
AM radio 
SNR (dB) 
0 
10 
20 
0 
10 
20 
CONDITIONS 
(% error rate) 
P0 C1 C2 C3 
58.7 77.9 17.7 16.9 
19.5 32.2 14.8 12.0 
14.8 15.0 14.3 11.5 
75.5 86.7 29.1 25.9 
25.5 36.9 15.4 12.1 
15.8 16.6 15.4 12.4 
Table 7: Word error ates for Spoke 8 evaluation using 
SPHINX-Ha. The evaluation system included MFCDCN and 
SCA. The Audio-Technica is used as the secondary microphone. 
The reduced-performance SPHINX-IIa system was used as in 
Spoke 5, except hat two cepstral codebooks were needed to 
implement silence codebook adaptation, one to model the noise 
and silence segments, and the other to model the remaining pho- 
nemes. Four codebooks were developed to model silence seg- 
ments for different combinations of SNR and background noise, 
and the codebook used to provide silence compensation was cho- 
sen blindly on the basis of minimizing residual VQ distortion. 
System parameters were chosen that optimize performance for the 
10-dB SNR. Results for Spoke 8 are summarized in Table 7. By 
comparing the C2 and C3 results using the CLSTLK microphone 
with the P0 and S1 results using the Audio-Technica mic, we note 
that very little degradation is observed in the 20-dB condition but 
that recognition accuracy is quite low for the 0-riB condition, even 
when the signal is compensated. The use of MFCDCN and SCA 
improves recognition accuracy by 35.0 percent overall, and the 
ratio of overaU error rates for the C2 and P0 conditions i  1.49, as 
in Spoke 5. As expected, the AM-radio interference was more dif- 
ficult to cope with than the musical interference atall SNRs, pre- 
sumably because it is more speech-like. 
5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we describe anumber of procedures that improve the 
recognition accuracy of the SPHINX-II system in unknown acous- 
tical environments. We found that the use of MFCDFN and phone- 
dependent cepstral normalization reduces the error rate by 40 per- 
cent compared to that obtained with CMN alone. The use of 
Baum-Welch codebook adaptation with MFCDCN reduces the 
error rate by 37 percent compared to that obtained with CMN 
alone. The use of reduced-frequency processing reduces error ates 
for telephone-bandwidth speech by 58 percent compared to the 
rate observed for conventional signal processing. The performance 
of these systems for the 1993 CSR Spoke 5 and Spoke 8 evalua- 
tious is described. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was sponsored by the Department of the Navy, 
Naval Research Laboratory under Grant No. N00014-93-1-2005. 
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of 
the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the offi- 
cial pericles, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government. 
We thank Raj Reddy, Mei-Yuh Hwang, and the rest of the speech 
group for their contributions to this work, and Yoshiaki Ohshima 
in particular for seminal discussions on reduced-bandwidth fre- 
quency analysis. 
REFERENCES 
1. Juang, B.-H., "Speech Recognition i  Adverse Environ- 
ments", Computer Speech and Language, 5:275-294, 1991. 
2. Acero, A., Acoustical nd Etwironmental Robustness in Auto- 
matic SPeech Recognition, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Bos- 
ton, MA, 1993. 
3. Lin, F.H., Acero, A., and Stern, R.M., "Effective Joint Com- 
pensation of Speech for the Effects of AddRive Noise and Lin- 
ear Filtering", ICASSP-92, pp. 865-868, March 1992. 
4. Hwang, M.Y., Subphonetic A oustic Modeling for Speaker- 
Independent Continuous Speech Recognition, Ph.D. Thesis, 
Carnegie Mellon University, 1993. 
5. Huang, X.D., Ariki, Y., and Jack, M., Hidden Marker Models 
for Speech Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Edin- 
burgh, U.IC, 1990. 
6. Liu, F.H., Stern, R.M., Huang, X.D., and Acero A., "Efficient 
Cepstral Normalization for Robust Speech Recognition," Pro- 
ceedings of ARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
pp. 69-74, Princeton, March 1993. 
7. Schwartz, R., Anestesakos, T., Kubala, E, Makhoul, J., 
Nguyen, L., and Zavaliagkos, G., "Comparative Experiments 
on Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition", Prec. ARPA 
Human Language Technology Workshop, March, 1993. 
8. Huang, X., AUeva, F., Hen, H., Hwang, M., Lee, IC, and 
Rosenfeld, R., "The SPHINX-II Speech Recognition System: 
An Overview", Computer Speech and Language, 2:137-148, 
1993. 
9. Moreno, P. J., and Stern, R. M., "Sources of Degradation of
Speech Recognition i  the Telephone Network", ICASSP-94, 
April, 1994. 
335 
