SESSION 7: DEMONSTRATIONS 
Victor Abrash, Chair 
SRI  International 
Speech Research and Techno logy  Program 
333 Ravenswood Avenue 
Menlo  Park, CA,  94025 
This year, seven sites presented ten demos and one video, show- 
ing the continuing progress of speech and natural language tech- 
nology research and application. Papers were optional for this 
session. 
Jack Mostow, fzom CMU, began the evening by showing a pro- 
totype reading coach designed to help children read by listening 
to them reading aloud. The system follows along as the student 
reads, detecting when words are not read correctly or when the 
reader gets stuck. Reading disfluencies are evaluated by a rule- 
based pedagogical evaluation component, which chooses appro- 
priate interventions to help the reader. These interventions 
include asking the reader to re-read a word or a phrase, pro- 
nouncing adifficult word to the reader, ignoring the error, giving 
the reader a chance to correct he mis-reading in the context of a 
fluent reading of the initial part of the sentence, and reading the 
whole phrase to the reader. The system currently runs on a com- 
bination of DEC-Alpha and NeXT computers, with adult voices 
reading and mis-reading children's tories. 
Alex Hauptmann, also from CMU, presented the latest demon- 
stration version of their ATIS system. Based on the general pur- 
pose speech recognition system Sphinx-IL it ran completely in 
software on a DEC Alpha 3600 workstation. CMU claims that 
their implementation f the ATIS task is unusually robust o the 
quirks of spontaneous speech. 
Lyn Bates of BBN demonstrated speech-driven database access 
in a non-ATIS domain. This application iUnstrated the ability to 
quickly port BBN's SLS technology to a domain completely 
unrelated to ATIS. The new domain consisted of a Sybase d~tA- 
base containing information about Air Force facilities, equip- 
ment, and their features and status. Images as well as text were 
shown in response to user queries. This led to some discussion 
on useful tools to facilitate porting both the speech and language 
understanding components of SLS systems. 
IBBN also showed a speech interface to the Navy's JOTS sys- 
tem, developed to demonstrate the use of ARPA speech recogni- 
tion technology in an operational military setting. JOTS is an 
application that provides the ability to enter, update, and display 
tracks of interesting objects, such as ships or aircraft. This demo 
provides a speech-recoguition upgrade to JOTS, specifically in 
terms of entering and updating track position reports, the opera- 
tions which consume the largest fraction of the operator's work- 
load. The system does not remove any keyboard or mouse 
functionality, but simply adds the ability to set any field by 
speaking the field name and value, using an active vocabulary of 
a few hundred words. This illustrated that speech can be used as 
a useful adjunct to an interface that operators already understand; 
BBN reports that it was well received by JOTS operators. 
Richard Schwartz demonstrated the BBN Wall Street Journal 
dictation system. This year, BBN increased the size of their 
vocabulary to over 40,000 words. They also upgraded their 
grammar t aining by adding three more years of WSJ text (1990- 
1992), the spontaneous journalist raining data, and other words 
currently in the news. According to John Makhoul, these steps 
greatly reduced the frequency of out-of-vocabulary words, mak- 
ing it more likely that the language model would cover stories 
about rec~I events. As in the past, their recognizer performs an 
approximate fast match in the forward direction, followed by a 
fast, accurate backwards pass. 
Patti Price of SRI demonstrated a spoken language translation 
system for English to Swedish translation i  the air travel plan- 
ning domain. This demo, using a modular spoken language 
translation architecture, was developed under sponsorship from 
Swedish Telecom by a collaboration between SRI International, 
the Swedish Institute of Computer Science (SICS), and Telia 
Research. This system produces a synthesized Swedish transla- 
tion of ATIS utterances, and consists of an English language 
speech recoguizer (SRI's DECIPHER ATIS system), a natural 
language component which produces a language-independent 
intermediate form, and a translator to produce Swedish text 
which is sent o a text-to-speech synthesizer. State-of-the-art per- 
formance was demonstrated after only modest development 
effort. Although current echnology does not provide for uncon- 
strained translation between languages, this demo indicates that 
recent advances allow us to envision realistic translation applica- 
tions in specific domains. 
Victor Zue and the MIT-LCS Spoken Language Systems Group 
demonstrated GALAXY, a system enabling users to access and 
manipulate various ources of information using spoken input in 
order to solve specific tasks. GALAXY focused in general on the 
travel domain, including air travel, local navigation, and weather, 
building on MIT's past experience in the ATIS, VOYAGER, and 
PEGASUS domains. The demo made use of several real data- 
bases distributed on the information highway, including Ameri- 
can Airlines' EAASY SABRE, the NYNEX Yellow Pages, the 
US Census Bureau's map database, and the National Weather 
Service database, and was designed to promote modularity, flexi- 
235 
bility, portability, and acalability. MIT believes that heir strategy 
of integrating many different knowledge sources will allow them 
to uncover critical new technical issues, including new word 
detection and learning, portability across domains, and dialogue 
modeling, Furthermore, they believe that working on real appli- 
cations has the potential benefit of shortening the interval 
between demonstration f a technology and its ultimate use, and 
that real applications which help people solve problems will be 
used by real users, thus providing arich and continuing source of 
useful data. 
Bill Ogden and Fun Cowie, from New Mexico State University, 
presented Tabula Rass" an interactive design tool and code gen- 
erator for machine assisted human information extraction. 
Intended to put state-of-art TIPSTER technology into the hands 
of today's analysts, this tool allows them to define a new domain 
and to produce the matchin8 informatic~ extraction tool in min- 
utes. It is an attempt to reduce two of the major bottlenecks of 
information extraction: the definitions of the text extraction task 
and the production of automatic extraction tools to aid the human 
analyst in the production of structured ata. In the demo, they 
showed how easily the system could be used to generate new 
information extraction tools incorporating good human factors 
with existing automatic extraction capabilities. 
Carl Weir of Unisys demonstrated ASWIS, a system for mes- 
sage processing and data fusion. This illustrated the use of mes- 
sage processing technology for monitoring the movements of 
submarines, along with other types of naval platforms. Normally, 
message traffic pertinent to an object being tracked is ignored in 
the data fusion process, even though it could be a valuable source 
of informatic~t. ASWIS demouslrates the use of a text under- 
standing (data extraction) sensor which detects references in the 
message traffic to submarines arriving or departing from ports, 
providing afix on their locations. 
Suzanne Taylor, also from Unisys" presented IDUS, an intelli- 
gent doctunent tmdm'standing program. Starting from the bit- 
mapped image of a document, IDUS creates the data for a text 
relAeval application. This demo employed many different ech- 
nologies, ranging from image understanding and optical charac- 
ter recognition (OCR), to document structural analysis and text 
tmderstanding, in a knowledge-based cooperative fashion. The 
IDUS system showed the power and utility of an integrated set of 
document interpretation modules, all accessible via the standard 
X-Windows/Motif user interface. 
Finally, Xuedong Huang from Microsoft showed a video of 
Microsoft Whispers, their speech recognizer, running under W'm- 
dows on an lnte1486-based PC. The video showed two separate 
applications: a voice command-and-control system for a W'm- 
dows-based PC, and a speech recognition i terface to an intelli- 
gent agent system. The first points out an important application 
which will undoubtedly help introduce the public at large to 
speech recognition. The intelligent agent interface, complete 
with an mmnated taming bird rendered in high-resolution com- 
puter graphics, combined speech synthesis, recognition, and 
understsnding toenable users to negotiate with the agent o ask 
for and play songs tored in a jukebox. 
236 
