ROBUSTNESS, PORTABILITY AND SCALABILITY 
LANGUAGE SYSTEMS 
Ralph Weischedel 
weischedel@bbn.com 
BBN Systems and Technologies 
70 Fawcett Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
OF NATURAL 
1. OBJECTIVE 
In the DoD, every unit, from the smallest o the largest, 
commtinicates through messages. Message are fundamental in
command and control, in intelligence analysis, and in 
planning and replanning. Our objective is to create 
algorithms that will 
1) robustly process open source text, identifying relevant 
messages, and updating a data base based on the relevant 
messages; 
2) reduce the effort required in porting message processing 
software to a new domain from months to weeks; and 
3) be scalable to broad domains with vocabularies of tens of 
thousands of words. 
2. APPROACH 
Our approach is to apply probabilistic language models and 
training over large corpora in all phases of natural anguage 
processing. This new approach will enable systems to adapt 
to both new task domains and linguistic expressions not seen 
before by semi-automatically acquiring I) a domain model, 2) 
facts required for semantic processing, 3) grammar ules, 4) 
information about new words, 5) probability models on 
frequency of occurrence, and 6) rules for mapping from 
representation to application structure. 
For instance, a statistical model of categories of words enables 
systems to predict the most likely category of a word never 
encountered by the system before and to focus on its most 
likely interpretation i context, rather than skipping the word 
or considering all possible interpretations. Markov 
modelling techniques are used for this problem. 
In an analogous way, statistical models of language are being 
developed and applied at the level of syntax (form), at the level 
of semantics (content), and at the contextual level (meaning 
and impact). 
3. RECENT RESULTS 
? Consistently achieved high performance in Government- 
sponsored evaluations (MUC-3, MUC-4, MUC-5 and TIPSTER 
evaluations) of data extraction systems with significantly less 
human effort to port the PLUM system to each domain, 
compared with the effort reported in porting other high- 
performing systems. 
? Achieved very consistent, high performance across both 
English and Japanese and across both domains (joint ventures 
and mieroelectronics) in MUC-5 data extraction performance. 
? Applied our probabilistic model of answer correctness to 
improve the performance of our PLUM data extraction system 
in MUC-5. 
? Achieved speedup by a factor of 80 in POST, our Hidden 
Markov Model for labeling words in text by part of speech. 
POST is now distributed to many ARPA contractors (Boston 
Univ., New Mexico State Univ., New York Univ., Paramax, 
Syracuse Univ.) and other sites (Advanced Decision Systems, 
Duke Univ., Univ. of Iowa, City Univ. of New York, and Univ. 
of Toronto). 
? Completed grammar learning experiments showing that 
the error rate of a stochastic parser is a factor of two less than 
the same parser without a statistical language model. 
? Integrated a pattern matching component into our 
linguistically motivated framework to give semantics to 
fragmented parses and discontiguous constituents. 
? Created new demonstrations of the PLUM data extraction 
system in processing English texts about microelectronics and 
Japanese texts about microelectronics. 
4. PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Participate in MUC-6 evaluation at both the application level 
(extracting data from text) and the understanding level 
(parsing/semantic/discourse lev l). 
Create/revise probabilistic models for 
? word sense disambiguation, 
? semantic interpretation, and 
? co-reference r solution. 
Contribute to the definition of an evaluation methodology for 
glass box semantic evaluation (Semeval). 
446 
