Pang loss :  A Knowledge-based  Mach ine  Ass i s ted  
Trans la t ion  Research  Pro jec t  - S i te  2 
D. Farwell, Principal Investigator 
Comput ing  Research Laboratory  
New Mexico State  University,  Las Cruces,  New Mexico 88003 
PROJECT GOALS 
The Computing Research Laboratory (CRL) at New 
Mexico State University, jointly with the Center for Ma- 
chine Translation (CMT) at Carnegie Mellon University 
and the Information Sciences Institute (ISI) at the Uni- 
versity of Southern California, are developing a Trans- 
lator's Workstation to assist users in the translation of 
newspaper articles in the area of finance from Spanish 
or Japanese into English. At its core is a multi-engine 
MT system, consisting of a knowledge-based, interlin- 
gum system, an example-based system, and an extensive 
glossary and bilingual dictionary system. Results from 
all systems are combined in a chart structure which se- 
lects the most reliable and complete translation. The 
KBMT system consists of a source language analysis 
component, a mapper, and a target language generation 
component. 
During the first two years of the project, the CRL's ob- 
jectives were to develop tools for constructing lexical 
items and ontological entries automatically from on-line 
resources, to develop the Spanish analysis component, 
and, jointly with CMT and ISI, to establish the infras- 
tructure for the three site project and develop the for- 
mats and initial content of the interlingua, the ontology, 
and the knowledge base. 
The second phase of the project is also for two years, 
and we are currently in the first six months of this phase. 
CRL's responsibilities continue as before, with primary 
responsibility for Spanish analysis and joint planning 
of inter-site cooperation, but with the addition of the 
task of fulfilling knowledge-acquisition needs for all three 
sites, both automatic and manual. 
RECENT RESULTS 
In analysis, three new modules (a proper name recog- 
nizer, a clause boundary identifier and a syntactic de- 
pendency analysis module) have been added during the 
past year. As a result, full sentence throughput is now 
possible within the KBMT system. Acquisition work is 
continuing both with respect o integrating sense tokens 
into the growing ontology and in reviewing and increas- 
ing the Spanish vocabulary in the system. 
The analysis ystem begins with a dictionary-based part- 
of-speech tagger, followed by a component which groups 
the tagged text into small syntactic chunks. Chunks 
which are tagged as proper nouns are sent to the proper 
name recognizer for categorization. All chunks are then 
analyzed: semantic/lexical information is accessed and 
incorporated into the representation. These smaller 
constituents are then grouped into clause-level groups, 
which are then further analyzed to produce ranked pos- 
sible syntactic dependency structures. 
With respect to knowledge acquisition, CRL  is currently 
integrating sense tokens (concepts) into the Ontology 
Base. These sense tokens are drawn both from Long- 
man's Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE) 
and from Collins Spanish-English/English-Spanish Dic- 
tionary. Work is underway to provide a large set of 
tagged Spanish texts both for work within the project 
and ultimately for the NLP community at large. The 
portion of the Ontology used in Spanish anMysis has 
been incorporated into a data-base and merged with in- 
formation in an LDOCE-based database. This allows 
for experimentation with lexicon content and format and 
rapid increase in vocabulary coverage. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Major work is underway and expected to be completed 
this year for a final module in the analysis ystem which 
will rank semantic readings of an input text. This mod- 
ule will use semantic onsistency (preference) informa- 
tion, as well as other information (possibly statistically- 
based), to help disambiguate word senses in the input 
text by ranking the likelihood of readings. In acquisition 
work, large-scale semi-automatic a quisition of Spanish 
verbs is expected, and the ability to use the information 
about object entries in the Ontology will be developed. 
465 
