Spoken Language Recognition and Understanding 
Victor Zue 
Spoken Language Systems Group  
Laboratory for Computer  Science 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts 02139 
1. PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this research is to develop and demonstrate 
spoken language technology in support of interactive 
problem solving. The MIT spoken language system com- 
bines; SUMMIT, a segment-based speech recognition sys- 
tem, and TINA, a probabilistic natural anguage system, 
to achieve speech understanding. The system accepts 
continuous peech input and handles multiple speakers 
without explicit speaker enrollment. It engages in in- 
teractive dialogue with the user, providing output in 
the form of tabular and graphical displays, as well as 
spoken and written responses. We have demonstrated 
the system on several applications, including air travel 
planning and urban navigation/exploration; it has also 
been ported to several languages, including Japanese and 
French. 
2. RECENT RESULTS 
? Improved Recognit ion and Understanding:  
Reduced word error rate by over 50% from last 
year (while using a larger vocabulary with higher 
perplexity) through the use of improved acoustic- 
phonetic alignment and pronunciation modelling; 
reduced spoken language understanding error rate 
by over 25% from last year (while using a larger ap- 
plication back-end) by making use of stable corpus 
of annotated data. 
? On-Line Travel Planning: Developed PEGASUS, 
an interactive spoken language interface for on- 
line travel planning connected to American Airlines' 
EAASY SABRE system. 
? Multi - l ingual SLS: Extended the bilingual VOY- 
AGER system to other languages including Italian, 
French, and German. The system uses a single se- 
mantic frame to capture the meaning irrespective 
of the language, and the langauge generation com- 
ponent has also been unified and enhanced. In ad- 
dition, a segment-based language identification ap- 
proach has been formulated and implemented. The 
resulting system, when evaluated on the OGI Multi- 
460 
Language Telephone Speech Corpus, achieved an 
identification rate of 55.8%. 
Phonological  Parsing for Let ter /Sound Gen- 
eration: Developed and implemented a framework 
for bi-directional letter/sound generation, using a 
version of our probabilistic natural anguage system, 
TINA. The system can parse nearly 95% of unseen 
words, and achieved word accuracies of 71.8% and 
55.8% for letter-to-sound and sound-to-letter gener- 
ation on the parsable words. 
Tranformat ion -Based ,  Error-Dr iven Learn- 
ing: Refined and extended this technique for part 
of speech tagging, and achieved accuracies of 97.2% 
with 267 simple non-stochastic rules. 
HLT Communi ty  Service: Collected and dis- 
tributed more than 1400 ATIS-3 sentences from 58 
subjects. Distributed our POS tagger to over 150 
sites. Vice-Chair of 1994 HLT workshop. 
3. FUTURE PLANS 
Technology Development:  Continue to improve 
speech recognition and language understanding 
technologies for large vocabulary spoken langauge 
systems. Areas of research include acoustic mod- 
elling, lexical access, adaptation techniques, SR/NL 
integration strategies, dialogue modelling, gram- 
mar induction, multilingual porting (e.g., Spanish 
and Mandarin), and discovery/learning of unknown 
words. 
System Development:  Explore research issues 
within the context of developing a system that en- 
ables users to access and manipulate various (real) 
sources of information using spoken input in order 
to solve specific tasks. Initial focus will be in the 
travel domain, which include urban navigation, air 
travel planning, and weather information. 
