MACROPHONE: AN AMERICAN ENGLISH TELEPHONE SPEECH 
CORPUS 
Kelsey Taussig and Jared Bernstein 
SRI International 
Spe~h Research and Technology Program 
Menlo Park, CA, 94025 
ABSTRACT 
Macrophone is a corpus of approximately 200,000 utterances, 
recorded over the telephone from a broad sample of about 5,000 
American speakers. Sponsored by the Linguistic Data 
Consortium (LDC), it is the first of a series of similar data sets 
that will be colected for major languages of the world in a 
cooperative project called Polyphone. It is designed to provide 
telephone speech suitable for the development of automatic 
voice-interactive telephone services. In particular, Maerophone 
contains training material for applications in transportation, 
scheduling, ticketing, database access, shopping, and other 
automated telephone interactions. In addition to being 
phonetically balanced, the spoken material refers to times, 
locations, monetary amounts, and interactive operations. The 
utterances are spoken by respondents into telephone handsets 
and recorded irectly in 8-bit mu-law digital form through aT1 
connection to the usual switched telephone network. The entire 
corpus will be made available by LDC in 1994. The paper 
describes the design of the linguistic materials in the corpus, and 
the process of solicitation, collection, transcription, and file 
preparation for the Macrophone corpus. 
1. MATERIAL DESIGN 
The prospective applications for the Macrophone data partly 
determined the linguistic design of the material and the 
population of speakers to be recorded. Examples of the 
applications include: 
? voice interactive systems to support elephone services like 
collect calls, third-party billing, or rate inquiries 
? database information retrieval services that might provide 
schedule or availability information about ransportation r 
other public services in a limited semantic domain 
? systems for ordering theater or stadium tickets, or for making 
medical or other appointments 
? systems for manipulating bank accounts or other financial 
resources. 
I.I. Goal 
The goal of the Macrophone project was to provide abasic set 
of common spoken material suitable for training and evaluation 
of speech recognition systems for telephone-based applications, 
particularly those that use names, places, times, and numbers in a 
North American context. 
1.2. Sources  
The material collected came from pools of prompt texts. 
Materials were selected from these pools automatically and 
combined into a prompting sheet hat is mailed to a person. In the 
Macrophone corpus, 45 responses were solicited on each sheet. 
Of the 45 responses, 34 were read and 11 were spontaneous. The 
prompt material for the spontaneous tterances was designed to 
elicit particular responses or types or ranges of responses. The 
following describes the read and spontaneous material presented, 
with examples. 
Read 
3 digits trings: (nnn) nnn-nnnn; onnn-nnnn-nnnn; andone 
identification umber 
3 natural numbers (2with units): 236 years; 4.32 grams; 7000 tons 
4 dollar amounts: $834; $73.27; $1,975.55 
1 fraction: 1/4, 7/10, 1/16 
2 places: Newark, New Jersey; Paris, France 
6 application words: account; check; collect; icket; visa 
2spelledwords:AMBIGUOUS; CLERK; RANCHER 
1 date: Friday, January l, 1993 
1 time: 11:50; aquarter to twelve; 4:51 
I name at agency: Susan Crane of the U. S. Postal Service 
3 name at street address: Larry Garcia, at 133 Elm St. 
7 sentences (3 TIMIT, 2 WSJ, 2 ATIS) 
Examples of the sentence types (TIMIT, WSL ATIS) are: 
Will you please confirm government policy regarding waste removal? 
The budget isa long way from completion, however. 
I'd like to buy a coach class ticket for a flight from Columbus toSan 
Jose. 
For more information on the TIMIT sentences, ee Lamel et 
al. (1986); for the WSJ sentence set, see Paul & Baker (1992); 
and for the ATIS materials, ee Hirschrnan-MADCOW (1992). 
Spontaneous  
There were 11 prompts in the interaction that solicited 
spontaneous speech. Of these, ten were fixed and one was 
rotating. Some of the fixed questions provided additional 
demographic information about the speaker. Five of the fixed 
questions were designed to elicit an answer of yes or no. Six of 
the fixed questions were printed on each sheet: 
Are you ready to start7 (y/n) 
Are you calling from your home phone? (y/n) 
Do you speak any language b sides English at home? (y/n) 
Please name amajor city in your state. 
Would you be willing to participate in another study like this one?(y/n) 
We would appreciate any comments you may have about this 
recording session. Please record your comments. 
The four unpfinted questions were: 
Are you using a cordless phone? (y/n) 
What is today's date? 
What ime is it now? 
What is your date of birth? 
The rotating question was taken from the set: 
Please say any number f om 1 to 100. 
Please say any number f om one thousand toone million. 
What is your house number? 
Prompt Pools 
The utterances were selected from pools of prompts that were 
designed for this project. In particular, each pool was designed 
with knowledge of the material in the other pools; thus, for 
27 
example, "Jones" was in the family-name pool, but was excluded 
from the street-name pool. The prompt pools were: 
Place Names - -  All United States and Canadian cities with 
population over 150,000, and at least two cities in each state in 
the United States; all cities worldwide with over 2 million 
people, and at least one city from most major commercial 
nations. 
Personal Names--A gender-balanced list constructed from 
the 600 most common first names and the 600 most common last 
names in the United States. Some common first and last names 
that are also common words were omitted. 
Street Names - -  The most frequent 971 names compiled 
from the ZIP+4 directory BODY field by counting block faces. 
We deleted state names, city names, first and surnames that occur 
in our other lists, and we deleted the letter names A - Z. 
Application Words - -  A list of 674 control words selected 
from existing and imagined telephone applications. 
2. DATA FLOW 
2.1. Overview 
The data collection process has four distinct steps: 
? material distribution, 
? telephone signal collection, 
? verification and transcription, 
? package and delivery of the transcribed utterances. 
ThE process is shown in Figure 1 and is described in the 
foUowing sections. 
J---If 
D . . . . .  ~ Collect Tele- rN Verify & Package 
mnoute h~phone Signals ~ Transcribe ~ & Deliver 
Figtwe 1. Data Collection Process 
2.2. Hardware and Software for Phone 
Connection 
SRI designed and implemented a set of systems for this data 
collection. Dialogie hardware resident in an IBM-compatible PC 
provided a digital connection to 10 telephone lines that are 
available toll-free to callers. The Dialogie/PC system 
concentrated the data and sent it to the disk of a small Sun 
Microsystems SPARCstation. As convenient, the data was 
moved to an archive disk from which the data was archived onto 
Exabyte tapes and pressed onto CD-ROMs for further 
manipulation. The labor-intensive part of the Macrophone 
corpus development was the transcription and verification of the 
spoken material. This was performed with special-purpose 
software running on Sun ELCs. 
2.3. Time and Resources Used 
The design and selection of material, set up and monitoring of 
the telephone collection system, the verification/transcription of 
the utterances, and finally the delivery of the resultant files took 
about seven months of professional labor and about eight months 
of semi-skilled labor. After the linguistic material had been 
decided upon, the project yielded 200,000 utterance files with 
verified transcriptions and demographic headers in five calendar 
months. 
2.4. Material Distribution 
The data collection process began with the distribution of the 
material to prospective callers. The material was presented in the 
form of unique prompting sheets to guide the caller through the 
telephone interaction. The sheets were designed following a 
fixed format, but provide different read material. Each prompting 
sheet contained a different set of read material, and each caller 
received adifferent sheet. A sample prompting sheet is shown in 
Figure 2. 
BEFORE YOU C/U.L 
Please write y~xr six-dlglt panel idmatiJicatinn nmbc~r in the spree provided 
in the mld~.o f this page. (It i~ I~'inted at the top of your cover letter.) 
PLEASE C~.L  1-81Xl-XXX-XXXX 
A eomlmter ~ amwer end ask you the follovdng questinm. 
~ l"nankyou for ml l~  .f~tr~ o~ reeor~t~ syswm. Your ~ ic t  will b~ record~ and u~ed\[~ ~sm~ 
and dewlopmmt of speech le~nolo~y, l f  yoa do not w~h to Imv* your yore recorded and real for th~a * 
purpa~, you may ~ang up now. 
~h# ~oMon will begin with a few queJgonl, Your anawera provide m with hr~rtant in~ormmion about vocal 
qmllly cnd ~peec~ pert~rn~. Aft2 of your r~ Ip~ will b~ kept canfldenKat 
Are you ram'y to ston? (yot~ re~me)  
Are you ea l l~  from your hom~ ph~t?  (your re~te)  
Do yalt ~ any li~,nSua~* b~Mea E, rq~qLQ al ~or~? ~our reapome) 
Plmae read your paa el ldent~ion  number which you ~l~d in below: 
(write your pad fdenll|mllan umber here) 
Thank you. You will now be a~.ed m read ea~ of Oie O.ems in tlle rlg,ht-hand cohunn. 
1. (a wordJ mblma 
2. (axnt~nee) Ceuld you give me a lid ct -n tflemeon fliShm fram Loa Angelea 
3. (a le l~onc  number) ~79) 528-5883 
4. (a place) Ctnwn. CYaina 
5. (a~l~ll~word) M.A.N. If. O. S. K. I 
6. (a number) 51.611 melaa 
7. (anara?) Dmmy Peyne. of 251 Ironwood W,y 
& (a number) 4 
9. (a smlence) I~ l i t~  policy wm to keep the reut~ opea end prote~ the aettled aree& 
10. (a time) 9:22 
11. (a word) south 
12. (a sm/cnee) Ul h~ that only people with money wm be approved." she mid. 
13. (a dollar ~alolmO $219 
14. (anam?) Pamy Ward of the I R S 
15. (= dollar ~tounO $6388.12 
16, (adam) Tuesdty. Maraa 20. \]990 
17. (a #ira/c/we) The Sla~e of Lib~ty end Ellis htlend ere within the waters of New york Bay. 
18. (a word) flow 
19. (a dollar ~nounO $2 
~.  (a word) leave 
21. (a ?~ card number) 1495-1772-1515 
22. (a am/cnce) The ?~tteway reded abropay at the d-~re. 
23. (a name) Leuise Blmlford, of 143 Wexlneld Roed 
24. (a place) ~ Jemeiea 
25. (a1~aatm) 118 
26. (a doUar a~na~O $600 
27. (a word) slower 
28. (a apelled wotrl) B.R.U.S,H 
29. (a name) Dim RidL at 388 Bea~ 
349. (a ~en/cncc?) How am I get from the Ta~ma ilport to downtow~ 
31. (a number) 17~905 kilosrerm 
32. (aJen/cne?) irs all psydlolcgicaL 
33. (a word) ~ee 
27;cart you 
WouM you be willing to parffc~ate in anainer awdy likJ? ~1~ one? (your e~aae) 
W? would appreciate any ccornmen~ you may haw aboat inb F~contln8 action. 
Pleaa? recotd your corm.  (yatr re~e)  
you wry much for parllcipatin8 in ~ data collection ?~bn. You may now hang up the/clephone. 
Figure 2. Sample Prompting Sheet 
28 
Prospective callers were solicited through a market research 
firm that was able to select a sample from their panel of 400,000 
U.S. households. Since no incentive was offered for placing the 
call, a conservative estimate of a 25% response rate was used. 
Twenty thousand (20,000) prompting sheets were mailed, 
which resulted in 6700 calls, at a 33% response rate. The sheets 
were sent out as six separate mailings of 1000, 2000, 5000, 5000, 
5000, and 2000 at approximately one-week intervals. 
Calls typically started coming in the day following a mailing 
and peaked three days after a mailing. Although ten lines were 
available, all ten were never activated at once. The mailings and 
the response rate are shown in Figure 3. Each vertical bar shows 
the date and the number of prompting sheets in a mailing, and the 
lower line shows the number of calls received per day. 
TW T F SSM TWT F 8 t lMTW T F S~BMTWT F 8SMTWT F8  8MTWT F S 
I.---Weekl,..J I ,~Week2-. J  I.--=.Week3,~l L,._Week4.--J I - -=.W~k5==--I L==Week6 
Figure 3. Mailings and Responses 
The targetpopulation was specified to consist of equal 
numbers of males and females between the ages of 10 and 80, 
balanced between ages 20 and 60 and fewer in the 10-19 and 61- 
80 age groups. The target population was also specified to be 
gengraphieally balanced according to the latest census figures. 
The sample population was selected by the market research firm 
to compensate for different expected response rates. Past 
experience indicated higher expected response from females 
than from males, lower response rates among young people, 
higher esponse rates among elderly people, and lower response 
rates from people with household incomes above about $40,000. 
Figure 4 shows the mailings sent out (upper curve) and the 
responses received (lower curve) as a function of age. The low 
response rate among people aged 20-30 is due to income skew in 
the mailing sample, and partly due to low response rates among 
the people in that 20-30 age group who received sheets. 
s .  500 - " ? " \[ \[ 
4oo - -  . . ,  = I 
300 ~ ~ ,  "~ 
200 -- 
100 
O, 
,'o 9o 3'0 ,'0 5'0 8'0 
Age 
Figure 4. Response as a Function of Age 
2.5. Telephone Signal Collection 
The recipients of the prompting sheets were instructed to call 
a toll-free 1-800 number which connected them to one of 10 
digital telephone lines set up to receive calls. All data was 
recorded irectly from T1 digital telephone lines in 8-bit mu-law 
format using Dialogic hardware installed in an IBM-compatible 
PC. The PC, which operated under Interactive UNIX, was a 33 
MHz 386 with 16 MBytes of RAM. Each response was written 
as a separate file to one of two 2-GByte disks of a Sun 
Sparestation ELC. A completed call resulted in about 2 MBytes 
of data. The data collection system is shown in Figure 5. 
10 digRal T1 lines 
I . . . .  I (8-bit pAaw)-. I ~ k,~ 
\[o,=oo,c . . . . . .  *1  ELC I \ 
386PC I Ethem~ 
Figure 5. Data Collection System 
Software was written to play out prerecorded prompts and 
record the interaction. As a half duplex system, the data 
collection system was only capable of either playing out a 
prompt or recording a response. Care was taken to truncate the 
end of the prompting text in an attempt to keep callers from 
responding before the system began recording. It was necessary 
to remove the written text from the printed sheets for a few of the 
prompts to force the participant to listen to the entire prompt 
before responding. 
An average telephone call took about six minutes and resulted 
in about four minutes of collected speech (including two seconds 
of silence at the end of each utterance). Approximately one third 
of the coLlected data was silence. 
2.6. Verification and Transcription 
Verification of the read responses and transcription of the 
spontaneous responses was performed by temporary workers 
using SRI software written for Sun ELC computers. 
The data verification occurred in two steps. Since each of the 
20,000 sheets was unique, it was necessary to supply a unique 
sheet identifier to bring up the default transcription for the read 
29 
material. The sheet identifier was in the form of a 10-digit 
telephone number and was transcribed in a first pass along with 
three other responses. These items were then propagated to the 
headers of all 45 speech files produced from that call. In addition 
to the demographic responses, a gender indication was included 
(decision made by the transcriber). The demographic 
information items are responses to the following prompts: 
Do you speak any language besides English at home? 
Are you using a cordless phone? 
What is your date of birth? 
The second step of data verification involved providing an 
orthographic transcription of each utterance. Each utterance 
waveform was displayed on the transcriber's console and played 
through the computer's audio port. Default transcriptions were 
provided for read data, previously transcribed demographic ,d, ata, 
and predictable responses to spontaneous questions uch as'  Are 
you :ready to start?", "What is today's date?", "Would you be 
willing to participate in another study like this one?". 
Utterance files which did not contain any speech or contained 
truncated speech (approximately 7.5% of the total) were 
discarded. Utterances which were difficult to transcribe - -  those 
containing word fragments, mispronunciations, and other 
disflueneies - -  were set aside for a linguist to review. All other 
utterances were transcribed according to what was said; the 
transcriptions also included markings for non-speech events uch 
as background noise, background speech, line noise, mouth 
noise, and verbal hesitations. 
2.7. Package and Del ivery  
Each file was written as 8-bit mu-law with a SPHERE header. 
The headers contain information about the data as well as 
demographic nformation about the caller. All data files were 
written to Exabyte tape and shipped to LDC, where the files will 
be pressed onto CD-ROMs and made available to members of 
the Linguistic Data Consortium. 
3. CONCLUSION 
The Maerophone database collection project demonstrates 
that a large corpus of telephone speech cart be solicited, 
collected, and prepared for use within a specified time and effort. 
The Macrophone data should be available from the Linguistic 
Data Consortium by summer of 1994. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the Linguistic Data Consortium. 
Opinions, findings, conclusions and recommendations expressed 
in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect he views of the Linguistic Data Consortium. 
REFERENCES 
1. L .H i rschman-MADCOW (1992): "Mu, lt i-Site Data 
Collection for a Spoken Language Corpus, ' Prec. DARPA 
Speech and Natural Language Workshbp, M.Mareus (ed.), 
Morgan Kaufman. pp. 7-I4. 
2. L.Lamel, R. Kassel & S.Seneff (1986): "Speech Database 
Development: Design and Analysis or me Acousfic-rnonetie 
Corpus," Prec. DARPA Speech Recognition Worxsnop, 
February 1986, pp. 100-109. 
3. D.Paul & J.Baker (1992): "T,h,e Design for the Wall Street 
Journal-based CSR Corpus, '  Prec. DARPA Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, M.Mareus (ed.), Morgan 
Kaufman. pp. 35T-362. 
4. B.Wheafley & J.Pieone (1991) "Voice Across America," 
Digital Signal Processing, 1 pp. 45-63. 
30  
