VfORDNET:  A LEXICAL  DATABASE FOR ENGL ISH 
George A. Miller, Principal Investigator 
Cognitive Science Laboratory 
Princeton University 
Princeton, New Jersey 08542 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to provide lexical resources for 
natural language research. The primary emphases are on 
the further development and dissemination of the on-line 
lexical database, WordNet. A secondary goal is to learn 
how to develop contextual representations for different 
senses of a polysemous word, where a contextual repre- 
sentation is comprised of topical and local context for 
each sense. 
RECENT RESULTS 
WordNet  Upgrade:  The basic unit in WordNet is the 
synonym set, or synset, which represents a lexicalized 
concept. Synsets are comprised of open class words 
(nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) and are con- 
nected by bi-directional pointers denoting such semantic 
relations as synonymy, antonymy, hyponymy, meronymy, 
troponymy, entailment, etc. WordNet has been growing 
at a rate of about 1,500 lexicalized concepts (synsets) per 
month. The major source of new entries has been from 
the COMLZX vocabulary adopted by Ralph Grishman at 
NYU. As of February 9, 1994, WordNet contains 81,658 
synsets and 109,570 unique character strings (words and 
collocations). 
Semant ic  Concordance:  A semantic oncordance is 
a textual corpus and a lexicon so combined that every 
substantive word in the text is linked to its appropriate 
sense in the lexicon. In this case, the textual corpus is the 
Brown Corpus and the lexicon is WordNet. 103 passages 
from the Brown Corpus have been tagged with WordNet 
version 1.4 senses, and is available to authorized users 
of the Brown Corpus. For information, send emall to 
wordnet@princeton.edu. 
ESCORT, an X Windows interface to the semantic on- 
cordance, has been developed. ESCORT allows a user to 
search the semantic oncordance for sentences containing 
words that have been semantically tagged. In addition, 
ZSCORT has been incorporated into the WordNet inter- 
face so that when a user looks up a word, the option of 
seeing sentences that use the word in a given sense is 
available. 
With support from the Linguistic Data Consortium, a 
semantic concordance is being prepared for the most fre- 
quent polysemous words from the COMLEX vocabulary. 
WordNet  Distribution: WordNet version 1.4 was re- 
leased in August, a new and larger version of the Icxical 
database with support for Sun 3, Sun 4, NEXT, Silicon 
Graphics, DECstation, IBM RS-6000, PC, and Macin- 
tosh machines, and with upgraded documentation. The 
WordNet database is available via anonymous ftp from 
clarity.princeton.edu. 
As of February, 1994, we have 280 registered users of 
WordNet 1.3 or 1.4 in 25 countries. In April, a WordNet 
users group was created and now has 148 members. For 
information, send email to wordnet@princeton.edu. 
Word  Sense Identification: Benchmarks for the per- 
formance of automatic sense-identification systems have 
been developed, based on statistics derived from the se- 
mantic concordance for the Brown Corpus. In addition, 
a corpus of sentences using the verb "serve" in different 
senses has been compiled and used, along with a similar 
corpus of the noun "line" to find topical and local context 
for word sense identification. In collaboration with staff 
members from Siemens Corporate Research, the use of 
local context was found to improve performance in iden- 
tifying the intended sense of those polysemous words. In 
addition, a method was developed using similarity mea- 
sures based on the structure of WordNet that increased 
the virtual size of training sets. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
We will continue to maintain, edit, and upgrade Word- 
Net and make it available to interested users. When the 
COMLEX vocabulary has been completely incorporated 
into the WordNet database, we plan to release version 
1.5 and make it available on a CD-ROM.  In addition, the 
semantic concordance will continue to grow, and will also 
be made available via ftp. 
In collaboration with colleagues from Siemens Corporate 
Research and Hunter College, research on word sense 
identification will continue. 
468 
