COMBINING LINGUISTIC AND STATISTICAL TECHNOLOGY FOR 
IMPROVED SPOKEN LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING 
Michael Cohen and Robert Moore, Principal Investigators 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
PROJECT GOALS 
The goal of this project is to develop technology for spoken 
language understanding which is highly accurate, robust, 
and fast:, is easily ported to new domains, environments, 
and chaJmels, and quickly adapts to new speakers. The sys- 
tem combines the DECIPHER speech recognition system 
with the Gemini natural language understanding system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
SRI has developed a spoken language interface to the Offi- 
cial Airline Guide (OAG). Despite a funding ap for more 
than four months of the year, substantial improvements 
have been made in the component technologies. On recent 
ARPA benchmarks. SRI achieved 5.5% word error on the 
ATIS speech recognition task, 18.2% utterance error on the 
natural-language understanding task, and 20.7% utterance 
error on the spoken-language understanding task. Other 
recent results include: 
Investigated several speaker-adaptation algorithms 
for both native and non-native speakers of English. 
The resulting techniques can match speaker-depen- 
dent performance (trained on 650 sentences) using 
100 adaptation sentences, and outperforms the 
speaker-dependent sys em when more than 100 
adaptation sentences are used. 
Developed an approach for constructing acoustic 
models for telephone applications using high-quality 
recordings, resulting in a substantial savings in effort 
when porting the ATIS application to a telephone 
envkonment. 
Developed methods to discriminate "hesitation" 
from "end-of-utterance" silent pauses based on dura- 
tional and f0 correlates of preceding syllables. This 
can have important implications for the design of 
end-pointing algorithms. 
? Performed a study of filled pauses which showed 
that hey occur almost exclusively inbetween words 
in low-probability word sequences. 
? Improved the modeling of out-of-vocabulary words 
and word-fragments. 
? Developed a class-trigram grammar for ATIS, 
resulting in a 30% decrease inword error compared 
to a word-bigram grammar. Approximately half the 
improvement was due to the trigrams, and half to the 
classes. 
? Developed methods to incorporate natural-language 
constraints supplied by the Gemini parser into the 
DECIPHER recognition search. 
? Increased the speed of the Gemini parser by a factor 
of four by improved handling of semantic selec- 
tional restrictions. 
? Expanded the scope of the SRI ATIS system for 
ATIS3. 
? Assumed leadership of the effort o define a seman- 
tic evaluation methodology for spoken language 
systems, working out a detailed framework for 
annotation of the predicate-argument structure of 
utterances. 
? Collected atotal of 2863 ATIS3 training and test 
utterances (speech, transcriptions, and log files). 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
In the following year we plan to continue to explore meth- 
ods for integrating natural-language constraints into speech 
recognition systems, develop rapid speaker adaptation 
methods, improve the portability and scalability of the 
technology, and complete the development of a telephone- 
based ATIS system. 
472 
