The Automat ic  Component  of the L INGSTAT 
Machine-Aided Translation System* 
Jonathan Yamron, James Cant, Anne Demedts, Taiko Dietzel, and Yoshiko Ito 
Dragon Systems, Inc., 320 Nevada Street,  Newton,  MA 02160 
PROJECT GOALS 
LINGSTAT is an interactive machine-aided translation 
system designed to increase the productivity of a trans- 
lator. It is aimed both at experienced users whose goal 
is high quality translation, and inexperienced users with 
little knowledge of the source whose goal is simply to ex- 
tract information from foreign language text. The sys- 
tem makes use of statistical information gathered from 
parallel and single-language corpora, but also draws from 
linguistic sources of knowledge. The first problem to be 
studied is Japanese to English translation, and work is 
progressing on a Spanish to English system. 
RECENT RESULTS 
In the newest version of LINGSTAT, the user is provided 
with a draft translation of the source document, which 
may be used for reference or modified. The translation 
process in LINGSTAT consists of the following steps: 
1) tokenization and morphological nalysis; 2) parsing; 
3) rearrangement of he source into English order; 4) an- 
notation and selection of glosses. 
After tokenization and de-inflection (described in an ear- 
lier report), a source document passes through a two- 
stage parsing process. The first stage implements a 
coarse probabilisti? context-free grammar of a few hun- 
dred human-supplied rules acting on parts of speech. 
Because of this coarseness, ome parsing ambiguities re- 
main to be resolved by the second-stage parser, which 
implements a simple, lexicalized, probabilistic ontext- 
free grammar trained on word co-occurrences in unla- 
beled Japanese sentences without human input. 
The next step in the translation process is a transfer of 
the parse of each Japanese sentence into a corresponding 
English parse, giving an English word ordering. This is 
accomplished through the use of English rewrite rules 
encoded in the Japanese grammar, which implies an En- 
glish grammar. The rewrite process just consists of tak- 
ing the Japanese parse and expanding in this English 
grammar. 
*This work was sponsored by the Advanced Research Projects 
Agency under contract number J-FBI-91-239. 
The final step is to apply a trigram model to select he 
best gloss from among the many candidates for each 
word, by making the choices that maximize the aver- 
age probability per word. The trigram model used was 
trained on Wall Street Journal text. 
The January 1994 ARPA machine translation evalua- 
tion has recently been completed. In this test, Dragon 
used the same translators as in the May 1993 evaluation 
and provided them with essentially the same interface 
and online tools. The difference in this evaluation was 
that the translators were also provided an automatically 
generated English translation of the Japanese document 
as a first draft. Manual and machine-assisted ranslation 
times were measured, and the automatic output was also 
submitted for separate valuation. 
Preliminary timing results show a speedup by a factor 
of 2.4 in machine-assisted vs. manual translation, which 
is essentially unchanged from the May 1993 result. This 
suggests that the draft translation was of no significant 
help to the translators in this evaluation, probably be- 
cause the quality of automatic output is not high enough 
to be relied upon. A quality measurement of the auto- 
matic output is not yet available. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
The two independent grammars (probabilistic ontext- 
free and lexicalized) that comprise the current syntactic 
analysis must be merged and trained together. Attempts 
to do this have so far resulted in an unacceptable increase 
in training and parsing time due to the complexity of the 
algorithm. 
This newest version of the system must be ported to 
Spanish for the next evaluation, scheduled for June. This 
will require improvements to the Spanish dictionary and 
de-inflector, an update of the Spanish grammar f om the 
older Spanish system, a lexicalized grammar trained on 
Spanish text, and Spanish rewrite rules. We intend to 
use the parallel Spanish-English component of the UN 
data to provide gloss information. 
453 
