SESS ION 12: INFORMATION RETRIEVAL  
Donna llarman 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Building 225/A216 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Research in information retrieval is enjoying renewed in- 
terest by many different communities. Commercial retrieval 
systems, which in the past have concentrated on Boolean 
pattern matching methodologies, are beginning to look into 
more sophisticated search methods, including complex sta- 
tistical and/or  natural anguage processing systems. This 
has spurred new interest in research in information re- 
trieval in this community and also in the academic om- 
munities. Technology is being additionally pushed by the 
current emphasis on electronic communication, including 
digital libraries and the interlinking of oflices to allow of- 
rice automation. The availability of electronic text records 
in huge (and exponentially-growing) quantities, and the 
rapidly-expanding Internet access by potential users, is a 
third factor in promoting research. 
ARPA has contributed to this increased interest by spon- 
soring a new test collection for information retrieval. The 
widespread availability of the T IPSTER collection has al- 
lowed research on large-scale, real-world retrieval problems. 
This has not only opened up new areas of research that 
were not discovered using the smMler test collections, but 
has provided proof that the more complex retrieval systems 
do indeed scale up to handle realistic text collections. 
The first paper in this session, "Overview of the Sec- 
ond Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-2) ' ,  by Donna Har- 
man, il lustrates the use of this collection in a massive cross- 
system evaluation. The TREC-2 conference, held in August 
of 1993, compared results from 31 different retrieval systems 
working with the T IPSTER collection. These systems used 
many different approaches to retrieval, including manually 
constructed patterns, automatically constructed statistical 
queries that were input to statistical retrieval systems, and 
natural anguage approaches to information retrieval. The 
paper discusses the T IPSTER test collection, the evaluation 
methods used in TREC, and the results from the conference. 
The next two papers in the session represent systems that 
appeared in TREG-2. The first of these papers discusses a
mostly statistical system and the second of these papers 
discusses a system using natural anguage processing tech- 
niques. 
The paper "Learning from Relevant Documents in Large 
Scale Routing Retrieval", by K.L. Kwok and L. Grunfeld, 
discusses experiments performed using a routing or filter- 
ing paradigm. This type of information retrieval assumes 
that users have a standing request for information, such 
as in an electronic dissemination service or an intelligence 
operation. There exists training information in the form 
of previously-seen documents considered relevant, and this 
training information is used to produce better queries. This 
paper discusses in detail the problems of learning from full- 
text relevant documents, which range in length from a short 
paragraph to many hundreds of pages. This problem is 
compounded by the availability of large numbers of such 
relevant documents. Many experiments were performed to 
discover the optimal method of selecting which (and what 
parts) of documents to use for training, and the results are 
given in the paper. 
The next paper, "Document Representation i  Natural 
Language Text Retrieval", by Tomek Strzalkowski, dis- 
cusses experiments performed using mostly the adhoc re- 
trieval paradigm. In this case the documents are known in 
advance, but the information is requested on an "adhoc" 
basis. There is no training data, and systems are often re- 
quired to deal with short user requests that might not map 
well onto the terminology used in the documents. One way 
around this problem is to automatically transform the user 
query into a linguistic structure that is expanded to better 
map into the document collection. This paper presents a
series of experiments in automatically locating useful lin- 
gulstic fragments of documents to match against such a 
modified user query. One of the main issues dealt with here 
is the correct term weighting for these fragments. 
Information retrieval is not limited to the matching of 
textual material; two of the papers in the session deal with 
speech retrieval systems. The first of these papers describes 
a modification of traditional information retrieval methods 
to handle speech, whereas the second paper uses traditional 
speech recognition technology with information retrieval as 
the application. 
The paper, "Assessing the Retrieval Effectiveness of a 
Speech Retrieval System by Simulating Recognition Er- 
rors", by Peter Schauble and Ulrike Glavltsch, deals with 
retrieval of speech (speech "documents"). Their retrieval 
system uses phonetically motivated subword units as op- 
posed to complete words for indexing of speech. The use 
of subwords as index terms means that the system can be 
used against either speech or text, and that techniques tra- 
ditionally used in text retrieval can be modified for use with 
speech. The production of these subwords is dependent on 
current speech recognition technology, which is known to 
be error-prone. This paper presents ome experiments us- 
ing simulated speech recognition errors against well-known 
information retrieval test collections (textual) to see what 
effects these errors have on retrieval performance. 
The second of these papers, "Speech-Based Retrieval us- 
ing Semantic Co-Occurrence Filtering", by Julian Kupiec, 
Don Kimber, and Vijay Balasubramanian, uses a standard 
hidden Markov model as input to a text retrieval system. 
The issue in this paper is how to deal with the very large 
(generally unrestricted) vocabulary size that is normal for 
most text retrieval applications. Speech input using large 
vocabularies (and possibly many different speakers) is likely 
349 
to produce many inaccurate words so that a direct pho- 
netic dictionary lookup would not be reasonable. The paper 
presents a method using an n-best word selection to locate 
the user's query words, and then uses co-occurrence ofthese 
n-best query word lists to locate relevant documents. 
The final paper in this session, = '(Almost) '  Automatic 
Semantic Feature Extraction from Technical Text ~, by Ear 
jeev Agarwal, does not deal directly with information re- 
trieval, but with the production of data that would be use- 
ful in an information retrieval system. Some of the newer 
retrieval systems use knowledge bases to supplement (or re- 
place) the document indices. This paper deals with natural 
language processing methods that allow faster acquisition of 
such iinformation. The methods discussed also allow faster 
porting of all types of natural anguage systems into new do- 
mmns by providing machine-~d to the building of semantic 
know]ledge. 
350 
