A KNOWLEDGE-BASED APPROACH TO INDEXING 
SC IENT IF IC  TEXT 
Lois Boggess and Julia Hodges, Principal Investigators 
Depar tment  of Computer  Science 
Mississippi State Univers i ty 
Mississippi State, MS 39762 
PROJECT GOALS 
We are developing a system which scans articles from 
scientific literature for the purpose of indexing the text. 
That is, the system should assist in the rapid determi- 
nation of the key topics and content of articles in a par- 
ticular domain and in the production of brief phrases 
describing the content. The number of correct concepts 
generated should be 80% of the concepts present (a re- 
call rate of 80%), as compared to the output of human 
document analysts processing the same material. 
RECENT RESULTS 
Our KUDZU system is an existing system designed for 
knowledge xtraction from technical text, developed and 
tested primarily in the domain of veterinary medicine. 
The testbed for the current project consists of a large 
body of journal articles in the domain of physical chem- 
istry, previously indexed by humans to relate to about 
200 concepts taken from a hierarchy of more than 2000 
concepts. Efforts for these first months have been in two 
directions: (1) understanding the relationships among 
the entities in the hierarchy provided by the domain ex- 
perts; it is a tangled hierarchy - -  a graph rather than a 
tree; and (2) exploring the adaptation ofclustering algo- 
rithms to generate data-driven hierarchies - - hierarchies 
suggested by characteristics of the texts themselves. 
The KUDZU system is designed to extract information 
from technical text in a single domain, yet many ele- 
ments of the system are domaln-independent. For exam- 
ple, although the tags with which it labels text include 
domain-dependent semantic omponents, most parts of 
the system are not affected by the actual values of those 
semantic omponents and do not have to be changed 
to accommodate a change of domain. Two exceptions 
axe a) the portion of the system that attaches preposi- 
tional phrases to appropriate lements of sentences and 
b) the domain schema used by the knowledge analyzer 
of the system. The latter consists of a hierarchy of con- 
cepts (e.g., in the domain of veterinary medicine, heart 
is a body-part which is also a location), and a descrip- 
tion of the relations deemed to be of interest, along with 
mandatory and optional concepts which fill roles in those 
relations. We have access to a hierarchy of concepts used 
by domain experts to perform the indexing task. Part 
of the current effort is in coding the known required and 
optional elements of text used by the experts in deter- 
mining whether a given index concept is present. 
Until now we have used our own tag set, developed some 
years ago. We have just adopted a close correlate of the 
Penn Treebank tag set and have revised our tagger to 
work with bigrams and trigrams of any tag set. 
PLANS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
We will complete the computerization f (1) the hierar- 
chy used by the domain experts to index text, (2) the 
mandatory and optional elements of text used by the 
experts to determine whether a given index concept is 
indeed present, and (3) a set of words known by the ex- 
perts to map onto the index concepts. We will also be 
looking at automating the extraction of both kinds of 
information directly from a body of text of many hun- 
dreds of articles indexed by concept. Once the domain 
schema is modified, the KUDZU system will produce all 
relations from the text that the schema defines as being 
of interest. We expect at that time to analyze whether 
the set of concepts and the set of words mapping onto 
them are sufficient in the sense that they are the only 
ones whose presence in the text must be noted and given 
semantic labels. Additional analysis of the actual texts 
may be required to extend the set of concepts and words 
for the domain schema. 
Once the revised system receives a body of text and pro- 
duces a list of extracted relations from that text on the 
basis of prior descriptions of which relations are of inter- 
est, we will turn to the task of producing index phrases 
for that text. Most such phrases will probably not be 
identical to the index phrases that were actually gener- 
ated by a document analyst. However, we hope within 
the year to have a set of generated index phrases that 
look to a non-expert as if most of them may be equiv- 
alent to the actual phrases that were produced by the 
human expert. At that point the output of the system 
will be given to the experts themselves for evaluation. 
458 
