Support Vector Machines for Paraphrase Identification  
and Corpus Construction 
Chris Brockett and William B. Dolan 
Natural Language Processing Group 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98502, U.S.A. 
{chrisbkt, billdol}@microsoft.com 
Abstract 
The lack of readily-available large cor-
pora of aligned monolingual sentence 
pairs is a major obstacle to the devel-
opment of Statistical Machine Transla-
tion-based paraphrase models. In this 
paper, we describe the use of annotated 
datasets and Support Vector Machines 
to induce larger monolingual para-
phrase corpora from a comparable cor-
pus of news clusters found on the 
World Wide Web.  Features include: 
morphological variants; WordNet 
synonyms and hypernyms; log-
likelihood-based word pairings dy-
namically obtained from baseline sen-
tence alignments; and formal string 
features such as word-based edit dis-
tance. Use of this technique dramati-
cally reduces the Alignment Error Rate 
of the extracted corpora over heuristic 
methods based on position of the sen-
tences in the text.  
1 Introduction 
Paraphrase detection?the ability to determine 
whether or not two formally distinct strings are 
similar in meaning?is increasingly recognized 
as crucial to future applications in multiple 
fields including Information Retrieval, Question 
Answering, and Summarization. A growing 
body of recent research has focused on the prob-
lems of identifying and generating paraphrases, 
e.g., Barzilay & McKeown (2001), Lin & Pantel 
(2002), Shinyama et al (2002), Barzilay & Lee 
(2003), and Pang et al (2003). One promising 
approach extends standard Statistical Machine 
Translation (SMT) techniques (e.g., Brown et al, 
1993; Och & Ney, 2000, 2003) to the problems 
of monolingual paraphrase identification and 
generation. Finch et al (2004) have described 
several MT based paraphrase systems within the 
context of improving machine translation output. 
Quirk et al (2004) describe an end-to-end para-
phrase identification and generation system us-
ing GIZA++ (Och & Ney, 2003) and a 
monotone decoder to generate information-
preserving paraphrases.  
As with conventional SMT systems, SMT-
based paraphrase systems require extensive 
monolingual parallel training corpora. However, 
while translation is a common human activity, 
resulting in large corpora of human-translated 
bilingual sentence pairs being relatively easy to 
obtain across multiple domains and language 
pairs, this is not the case in monolingual para-
phrase, where naturally-occurring parallel data 
are hard to come by. The paucity of readily 
available monolingual parallel training corpora 
poses a formidable obstacle to the development 
of SMT-based paraphrase systems.   
The present paper describes the extraction of 
parallel corpora from clustered news articles 
using annotated seed corpora and an SVM clas-
sifier, demonstrating that large parallel corpora 
can be induced by a classifier that includes mor-
phological and synonymy features derived from 
both static and dynamic resources.  
2 Background 
Two broad approaches have dominated the lit-
erature on constructing paraphrase corpora. One 
1
approach utilizes multiple translations of a sin-
gle source language text, where the source lan-
guage text guarantees semantic equivalence in 
the target language texts (e.g., Barzilay & 
McKeown, 2001; Pang et al, 2003). Such cor-
pora are of limited availability, however, since 
multiple translations of the same document are 
uncommon in non-literary domains.  
The second strain of corpora construction in-
volves mining paraphrase strings or sentences 
from news articles, with document clustering 
typically providing the topical coherence neces-
sary to boost the likelihood that any two arbi-
trary sentences in the cluster are paraphrases. In 
this vein, Shinyama et al (2002) use named en-
tity anchors to extract paraphrases within a nar-
row domain. Barzilay & Lee (2003) employ 
Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA, e.g., 
Durbin et al, 1998) to align strings extracted 
from closely related news articles. Although the 
MSA approach can produce dramatic results, it 
is chiefly effective in extracting highly templatic 
data, and appears to be of limited extensibility to 
broad domain application (Quirk et al 2004).  
Recent work by Dolan, et al (2004) describes 
the construction of broad-domain corpora of 
aligned paraphrase pairs extracted from news-
cluster data on the World Wide Web using two 
heuristic strategies: 1) pairing sentences based 
on a word-based edit distance heuristic; and 2) a 
naive text-feature-based heuristic in which the 
first two sentences of each article in a cluster are 
cross-matched with each other, their assumption 
being that the early sentences of a news article 
will tend to summarize the whole article and are 
thus likely to contain the same information as 
other early sentences of other articles in the 
cluster. The word-based edit distance heuristic 
yields pairs that are relatively clean but offer 
relatively minor rewrites in generation, espe-
cially when compared to the MSA model of 
(Barzilay & Lee, 2003). The text-based heuristic, 
on the other hand, results in a noisy ?compara-
ble? corpus: only 29.7% of sentence pairs are 
paraphrases, resulting in degraded performance 
on alignment metrics. This latter technique, 
however, does afford large numbers of pairings 
that are widely divergent at the string level; cap-
turing these is of primary interest to paraphrase 
research. In this paper, we use an annotated cor-
pus and an SVM classifier to refine the output of 
this second heuristic in an attempt to better iden-
tify sentence pairs containing richer paraphrase 
material, and minimize the noise generated by 
unwanted and irrelevant data. 
3 Constructing a Classifier 
3.1 Sequential Minimal Optimization 
Although any of a number of machine learning 
algorithms, including Decision Trees, might be 
equally applicable here, Support Vector Ma-
chines (Vapnik, 1995) have been extensively 
used in text classification  problems and with 
considerable success (Dumais 1998; Dumais et 
al., 1998; Joachims 2002). In particular, SVMs 
are known to be robust in the face of noisy train-
ing data. Since they permit solutions in high di-
mensional space, SVMs lend themselves readily 
to bulk inclusion of lexical features such as 
morphological and synonymy information. 
For our SVM, we employed an off-the-shelf 
implementation of the Sequential Minimal Op-
timization (SMO) algorithm described in Platt 
(1999). 1  SMO offers the benefit of relatively 
short training times over very large feature sets, 
and in particular, appears well suited to handling 
the sparse features encountered in natural lan-
guage classification tasks. SMO has been de-
1 The pseudocode for SMO may be found in the appendix of Platt (1999)
Edit Distance
(e ? 12) 
San Jose Medical Center announced 
Wednesday that it would close its 
doors by Dec. 1, 2004. 
San Jose Medical Center has an-
nounced that it will close its 
doors by Dec. 1, 2004. 
First Two 
Sentences 
The genome of the fungal pathogen 
that causes Sudden Oak Death has 
been sequenced by US scientists
Researchers announced Thursday 
they've completed the genetic 
blueprint of the blight-causing 
culprit responsible for Sudden Oak 
Death
Table 1.  Paraphrase Examples Identified by Two Heuristics  
2
ployed a variety of text classification tasks (e.g., 
Dumais 1998; Dumais et al, 1998). 
3.2 Datasets 
To construct our corpus, we collected news arti-
cles from news clusters on the World Wide Web. 
A database of 13,127,938 candidate sentence 
pairs was assembled from 9,516,684 sentences 
in 32,408 clusters collected over a 2-year period, 
using simple heuristics to identify those sen-
tence pairs that were most likely to be para-
phrases, and thereby prune the overall search 
space.  
Word-based Levenshtein edit distance 
of 1 < e ? 20; and a length ratio 
> 66%; OR
Both sentences in the first three 
sentences of each file; and length 
ratio > 50%. 
From this database, we extracted three data-
sets. The extraction criteria, and characteristics 
of these datasets are given in Table 2. The data 
sets are labled L(evenshtein) 12, F(irst) 2 and 
F(irst) 3 reflecting their primary selection char-
acteristics. The L12 dataset represents the best 
case achieved so far, with Alignment Error 
Rates beginning to approach those reported for 
alignment of closely parallel bilingual corpora. 
The F2 dataset was constructed from the first 
two sentences of the corpus on the same as-
sumptions as those used in Dolan et al (2004). 
To avoid conflating the two data types, however, 
sentence pairs with an edit distance of 12 or less 
were excluded. Since this resulted in a corpus 
that was significantly smaller than that desirable 
for exploring extraction techniques, we also cre-
ated a third data set, F3 that consisted of the 
cross-pairings of the first three sentences of each 
article in each cluster, excluding those where 
the edit distance is e ? 12.   
3.3 Training Data 
Our training data consisted of 10,000 sentence 
pairs extracted from randomly held-out clusters 
and hand-tagged by two annotators according to 
whether in their judgment (1 or 0) the sentence 
pairs constituted paraphrases. The annotators 
were presented with the sentences pairs in isola-
tion, but were informed that they came from 
related document sets (clusters). A conservative 
interpretation of valid paraphrase was adopted: 
if one sentence was a superstring of the other, 
e.g., if a clause had no counterpart in the other 
sentence, the pair was counted as a non-
paraphrase. Wherever the two annotators dis-
agreed, the pairs were classed as non-
paraphrases. The resultant data set contains 2968 
positive and 7032 negative examples.  
3.4 Features 
Some 264,543 features, including overt lexical 
pairings, were in theory available to the classi-
fier. In practice, however, the number of dimen-
sions used typically fell to less than 1000 after 
the lowest frequency features are eliminated (see 
Table 4.) The main feature classes were: 
String Similarity Features: All sentence pairs 
were assigned string-based features, includ-
ing absolute and relative length in words, 
number of shared words, word-based edit 
distance, and lexical distance, as measured 
by converting the sentences into alphabet-
ized strings of unique words and applying 
word based edit distance. 
Morphological Variants: Another class of 
features was co-ocurrence of morphological 
variants in sentence pairs. Approximately 
490,000 sentences in our primary datasets 
were stemmed using a rule-based stemmer, 
to yield a lexicon of 95,422 morphologically 
variant word pairs. Each word pair was 
treated as a feature. Examples are: 
orbit|orbital
orbiter|orbiting
WordNet Lexical Mappings: Synonyms and 
hypernyms were extracted from WordNet, 
L12 F2 F3 
Corpus size 253,725 51,933 235,061 
Levenshtein 
edit distance 1 < e ? 12 e > 12 e > 12 
Sentence range 
in article All First two First three
Length 5 < n < 30 5 < n < 30 5 < n < 30
Length ratio 66% 50% 50% 
Shared words 3 3 3 
Table 2. Characteristics of L(evenshtein) 12, 
F(irst) 2, and F(irst) 3 Data 
3
(http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/;
Fellbaum, 1998), using the morphological 
variant lexicon from the 490,000 sentences 
as keywords. The theory here is that as addi-
tional paraphrase pairs are identified by the 
classifier, new information will ?come 
along for the ride,? thereby augmenting the 
range of paraphrases available to be learned. 
A lexicon of 314,924 word pairs of the fol-
lowing form created. Only those pairs iden-
tified as occurring in either training data or 
the corpus to be classified were included in 
the final classifier. 
operation|procedure
operation|work
Word Association Pairs: To augment the 
above resources, we dynamically extracted 
from the L12 corpus a lexicon of 13001 
possibly-synonymous word pairs using a 
log-likelihood algorithm described in Moore 
(2001) for machine translation. To minimize 
the damping effect of the overwhelming 
number of identical words, these were de-
leted from each sentence pair prior to proc-
essing; the algorithm was then run on the 
non-identical residue as if it were a bilingual 
parallel corpus.  
To deploy this data in the SVM feature set, 
a cutoff was arbitrarily selected that yielded 
13001 word pairs. Some exemplars (not 
found in WordNet) include:
straight|consecutive
vendors|suppliers
Fig. 1 shows the distribution of word pair-
ings obtained by this method on the L12 
corpus in comparison with WordNet. Ex-
amination of the top-ranked 1500 word 
pairs reveals that 46.53% are found in 
WordNet and of the remaining 53.47%, 
human judges rated 56% as good, yielding 
an overall ?goodness score? of 76.47%. 
Judgments were by two independent raters. 
For the purposes of comparison, we auto-
matically eliminated pairs containing trivial 
substring differences, e.g., spelling errors, 
British vs. American spellings, singu-
lar/plural alternations, and miscellaneous 
short abbreviations. All pairs on which the 
raters disagreed were discarded. Also dis-
carded were a large number of partial 
phrasal matches of the ?reported|according? 
and ?where|which? type, where part of a 
phrase (?according to?, ?in which?) was 
missing. Although viewed in isolation these 
do not constitute valid synonym or hyper-
rnym pairs, the ability to identify these par-
tial matchings is of central importance 
within an SMT-framework of paraphrase 
alignment and generation. These results 
suggest, among other things, that dynami-
cally-generated lexical data of this kind 
might be useful in increasing the coverage 
of hand-built synonymy resources. 
Composite Features: From each of the lexi-
cal feature classes, we derived a set of more 
abstract features that summarized the fre-
quency with which each feature or class of 
features occurred in the training data, both 
independently, and in correlation with others.  
These had the effect of performing normali-
zation for sentence length and other factors. 
Some examples are: 
No_of_List_2_Words (i.e., the 
count of Wordnet matches)
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
45.00%
50.00%
55.00%
60.00%
500
1000
1500
2000Word Pairs
Not in Wordnet
In WordNet
Fig. 1.  WordNet Coverage in Word Associa-
tion Output 
4
External_Matches_2_LED (i.e,, 
the ratio of total lexical matches to 
Levenshtein edit distance.) 
4 Evaluation
4.1 Methodology 
Evaluation of paraphrase recognition within an 
SMT framework is highly problematic, since no 
technique or data set is standardly recognized. 
Barzilay & Lee (2003) and Quirk et al (2004) 
use human evaluations of end-to-end generation, 
but these are not very useful here, since they add 
an additional layer of uncertainty into the 
evaluation, and depend to a significant extent on 
the quality and functionality of the decoder.  
Dolan & Brockett (2005) report extraction pre-
cision of 67% using a similar classifier, but with 
the explicit intention of creating a corpus that 
contained a significant number of naturally-
occuring paraphrase-like negative examples. 
Since our purpose in the present work  is non-
application specific corpus construction, we ap-
ply an automated technique that is widely used 
for reporting intermediate results in the SMT 
community, and is being extended in other fields 
such as summarization (Daum? and Marcu, 
forthcoming), namely word-level alignment us-
ing an off-the-shelf implementation of the SMT 
system GIZA++ (Och & Ney, 2003). Below, we 
use Alignment Error Rate (AER), which is in-
dicative of how far the corpus is from providing 
a solution under a standard SMT tool. This al-
lows the effective coverage of an extracted cor-
pus to be evaluated efficiently, repeatedly 
against a single standard, and at little cost after 
the initial tagging. Further, if used as an objec-
tive function, the AER technique offers the 
prospect of using hillclimbing or other optimiza-
tion techniques for non-application-specific cor-
pus extraction. 
To create the test set, two human annotators 
created a gold standard word alignment on held 
out data consisting of 1007 sentences pairs. Fol-
lowing the practice of Och & Ney (2000, 2003), 
the annotators each created an initial annotation, 
categorizing alignments as either SURE (neces-
sary) or POSSIBLE (allowed, but not required). In 
the event of differences, annotators were asked 
to review their choices. First pass inter-rater 
agreement was 90.28%, climbing to 94.43% on 
the second pass. Finally we combined the anno-
tations into a single gold standard as follows: if 
both annotators agreed that an alignment was 
SURE, it was tagged as SURE in the gold-
standard; otherwise it was tagged as POSSIBLE.
To compute Precision, Recall, and Alignment 
Error Rate (AER), we adhere to the formulae 
listed in Och & Ney (2003). Let A be the set of 
alignments in the comparison, S be the set of 
SURE alignments in the gold standard, and P be 
the union of the SURE and POSSIBLE alignments 
in the gold standard:  
||
||precision
A
PA?
= ; ||
||
recall
S
SA?
=
||
||||AER
SA
SAPA
+
?+?
=
4.2 Baselines 
Evaluations were performed on the heuristi-
cally-derived L12, F2, and F3 datasets using the 
above formulation. Results are shown in Table 3.  
L12 represents the best case, followed respec-
tively by F3 and F2.  AERs were also computed 
separately for identical (Id) and non-identical 
(Non-Id) word mappings in order to be able to  
Corpus 
Size
(pairs) 
Precision Recall AER Id AER Non Id AER 
L12 ~254 K 87.42% 87.66% 12.46% 11.57% 21.25% 
F2 ~52 K 85.56% 83.31% 15.57% 13.19% 39.08% 
F3 ~235K 86.53% 81.57% 15.99% 14.24% 33.83% 
10K Trained ~24 K 86.93% 87.24% 12.92% 11.69% 24.70% 
MSR Trained  ~50 K 86.76% 86.39% 13.42% 11.92% 28.31% 
Table 3.  Precision, Recall and Alignment Error Rates 
5
drill down on the extent to which new non-
identical mappings are being learned from the 
data. A high Id error rate can be considered in-
dicative of noise in the data. The score that we 
are most interested in, however, is the Non-Id 
alignment error rate, which can be considered 
indicative of coverage as represented by the 
Giza++ alignment algorithm?s ability to learn 
new mappings from the training data. It will be 
observed that the F3 dataset non-Id AER is 
smaller than that of the F2 dataset: it appears 
that more data is having the desired effect.  
Following accepted SMT practice, we added 
a lexicon of identical word mappings to the 
training data, since Giza++ does not directly 
model word identity, and cannot easily capture 
the fact that many words in paraphrase sentence 
may translate as themselves. We did not add in 
word pairs derived from word association data 
or other supplementary resources that might 
help resolve matches between unlike but seman-
tically similar words.  
4.3 Training on the 10K Data 
We trained an SVM on the 10 K training set 
employing 3-fold cross-validation on the train-
ing set itself.  Validation errors were typically in 
the region of 16-17%. Linear kernels with de-
fault parameters (tolerance=1e-3; margin size 
computed automatically; error probability=0.5) 
were employed throughout. Applying the SVM 
to the F3 data, using 946 features encountered in 
the training data with frequency > 4, this classi-
fier yielded a set of 24588 sentence pairs, which 
were then aligned using Giza++.   
The alignment result is shown in Table 3. The 
?10K Trained? row represents the results of ap-
plying Giza++ to the data extracted by the SVM. 
Non-identical word AER, at 24.70%, shows a 
36.9% reduction in the non-identical word AER 
over the F2 dataset (which is approximately 
double the size), and approximately 28% over 
the original F3 dataset. This represents a huge 
improvement in the quality of the data collected 
by using the SVM and is within striking distance 
of the score associated with the L12 best case. 
The difference is especially significant when it 
is considered that the newly constructed corpus 
is less than one-tenth the size of the best-case 
corpus. Table 5 shows sample extracted sen-
tences. 
To develop insights into the relative contribu-
tions of the different feature classes, we omitted 
some feature classes from several runs. The re-
sults were generally indistinguishable, except 
for non-Id AER, shown in Table 4, a fact that 
may be taken to indicate that string-based fea-
tures such as edit distance still play a major role.  
Eliminating information about morphological 
alternations has the largest overall impact, pro-
ducing a degradation of a 0.94 in on Non-Id 
AER. Of the three feature classes, removal of 
WordNet appears to have the least impact, 
showing the smallest change in Non-Id AER.  
When the word association algorithm is ap-
plied to the extracted ~24K-sentence-pair set, 
degradation in word pair quality occurs signifi-
cantly earlier than observed for  the L12 data; 
after removing ?trivial? matches, 22.63% of 
word pairs in the top ranked 800 were found in 
Wordnet, while 25.3% of the remainder were 
judged to be ?good? matches. This is equivalent 
to an overall ?goodness score? of 38.25%. The 
rapid degradation of goodness may be in part 
attributable to the smaller corpus size yielded by 
the classifier. Nevertheless, the model learns 
many valid new word pairs. Given enough data 
with which to bootstrap, it may be possible to do 
away with static resources such as Wordnet, and 
rely entirely on dynamically derived data.   
4.4 Training on the MSR Training Set 
By way of comparison, we also explored appli-
cation of the SVM to the training data in the 
MSR Paraphrase corpus. For this purpose we 
used the 4076-sentence-pair ?training? section 
of the MSR corpus, comprising 2753 positive 
and 1323 negative examples. The results at de-
fault parameter settings are given in Table 3, 
with respect to all features that were observed to 
occur with frequency greater than 4. Although 
the 49914 sentence pairs yielded by using the 
    Dimensions Non Id AER
All (fq > 4) 946 24.70
No Lexical Pairs 230 25.35 
No Word  
Association 470 25.35 
No WordNet  795 25.24 
No Morphology 813 25.64 
Table 4.  Effect of Eliminating Feature Classes 
on 10K Training Set 
6
MSR Paraphrase Corpus is nearly twice that of 
the 10K training set, AER performance is meas-
urably degraded. Nevertheless, the MSR-trained 
corpus outperforms the similar-sized F12, yield-
ing a reduction in Non-Id AER of a not insig-
nificant 16%.   
The fact that the MSR training data does not 
perform as well as the 10 K training set probably 
reflects its derivative nature, since it was origi-
nally constructed with data collected using the 
10K training set, as described in Dolan & 
Brockett (2005). The performance of the MSR 
corpus is therefore skewed to reflect the biases 
inherent in its original training, and therefore 
exhibits the performance degradation commonly 
associated with bootstrapping. It is also a sig-
nificantly smaller training set, with a higher 
proportion of negative examples than in typical 
in real world data. It will probably be necessary 
to augment the MSR training corpus with further 
negative examples before it can be utilized ef-
fectively for training classifiers. 
5 Discussion and Future Work 
These results show that it is possible to use ma-
chine learning techniques to induce a corpus of 
likely sentential paraphrase pairs whose align-
ment properties measured in terms of AER ap-
proach those of a much larger, more 
homogeneous dataset collected using a string-
edit distance heuristic. This result supports the 
idea that an abstract notion of paraphrase can be 
captured in a high dimensional model.  
Future work will revolve around optimizing 
classifiers for different domains, corpus types 
and training sets. It seems probable that the ef-
fect of the 10K training corpus can be greatly 
augmented by adding sentence pairs that have 
been aligned from multiple translations using 
the techniques described in, e.g., Barzilay & 
McKeown (2001) and Pang et al (2003).  
6 Conclusions
We have shown that supervised machine 
learning techniques such as SVMs can signifi-
cantly expand available paraphrase corpora, and 
achieve a reduction of noise as measured by 
AER on non-identical words.  
Although from the present research has fo-
cused on ?ready-made? news clusters found on 
the web, nothing in this paper depends on the 
availability of such clusters. Given standard 
clustering techniques, the approach that we have 
described for inductive classifier learning should 
in principle be applicable to any flat corpus 
which contains multiple sentences expressing 
similar content. We expect also that the tech-
niques described here could be extended to iden-
tify bilingual sentence pairs in comparable 
corpora, helping automate the construction of 
corpora for machine translation. 
The ultimate test of paraphrase identification 
technologies lies in applications. These are 
likely to be in fields such as extractive multi-
document summarization where paraphrase de-
tection might eliminate sentences with compara-
ble content and Question Answering, for both 
identifying sentence pairs with comparable con-
tent and generating unique new text. Such prac-
young female chimps learn skills 
earlier , spend more time studying 
and tend to do better than young 
male chimpanzees - at least when it 
comes to catching termites . 
young female chimpanzees are better stu-
dents than males , at least when it 
comes to catching termites , according 
to a study of wild chimps in tanzania 's 
gombe national park . Paraphrase
(accepted)  a %%number%% -year-old girl was 
arrested , handcuffed and taken 
into custody on charges of stealing 
a rabbit and a small amount of 
money from a neighbor 's home . 
sheriff 's deputies in pasco county , 
fla. , this week handcuffed and ques-
tioned a %%number%% -year-old girl who 
was accused of stealing a rabbit 
and  %%money%%  from a neighbor 's 
home . 
Non-
Paraphrase
(rejected) 
roy moore , the chief justice of 
alabama , installed the two-ton 
sculpture in the rotunda of his 
courthouse in montgomery , and has 
refused to remove it . 
the eight associate justices of alabama 
's supreme court voted unani-
mously  %%day%%  to overrule moore and 
comply with u.s. district judge myron 
thompson 's order to remove the monu-
ment . 
Table 5.  Sample Pairs Extracted and Rejected by the SVM Trained on the 10K Corpus 
7
tical applications will only be possible once 
large corpora are available to permit the devel-
opment of robust paraphrase models on the scale 
of the best SMT models. We believe that the 
corpus construction techniques that we have de-
scribed here represent an important contribution 
to this goal.      
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Monica Corston-Oliver, 
Jeff Stevenson, Amy Muia and Margaret Salome 
of Butler Hill Group LLC for their assistance in 
annotating and evaluating our data. This paper 
has also benefited from feedback from several 
anonymous reviewers. All errors and omissions 
are our own. 
References  
Regina Barzilay and Katherine. R. McKeown. 2001. 
Extracting Paraphrases from a parallel corpus. In 
Proceedings of the ACL/EACL.
Regina Barzilay and  Lillian Lee. 2003. Learning to 
Paraphrase; an unsupervised approach using mul-
tiple-sequence alignment. In Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL 2003.
P. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V.J. Della Pietra and R. 
L. Mercer. 1993. The Mathematics of Statistical 
Machine Translation. Computational Linguistics,
Vol. 19(2): 263-311. 
Hal Daum? III and Daniel Marcu. (forthcoming)  
Induction of Word and Phrase Alignments for 
Automatic Document Summarization. To appear 
in Computational Linguistics.
William. B. Dolan, Chris Quirk, and Chris Brockett. 
2004. Unsupervised Construction of Large Para-
phrase Corpora: Exploiting Massively Parallel 
News Sources. Proceedings of COLING 2004,
Geneva, Switzerland.  
William B. Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Auto-
matically Constructing a Corpus of Sentential 
Paraphrases. In Proceedings of The Third Interna-
tional Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP2005), 
Jeju, Republic of Korea.
Susan Dumais. 1998. Using SVMs for Text Catego-
rization. IEEE Intelligent Systems, Jul.-Aug. 1998: 
21-23 
Susan Dumais, John Platt, David Heckerman, Me-
hran Sahami. 1998. Inductive learning algorithms 
and representations for text categorization. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference 
on Information and Knowledge Management. 
Richard Durbin, Sean R. Eddy, Anders Krogh, and 
Graeme Mitchison. 1998. Biological sequence 
analysis: Probabilistic models of proteins and nu-
cleic acids. Cambridge University Press.  
Christiane Fellbaum (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press. 
Andrew Finch, Taro Watanabe, Yasuhiro Akiba and 
Eiichiro Sumita. 2004. Paraphrasing as Machine 
Translation. Journal of Natural Language Proc-
essing, 11(5), pp 87-111. 
Thorsten Joachims. 2002.  Learning to Classify Text 
Using Support Vector Machines: Methods, Theory, 
and Algorithms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston/Dordrecht/London. 
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus. 
http://research.microsoft.com/research/downloads/
default.aspx 
Robert C. Moore. 2001.  Towards a Simple and Ac-
curate Statistical Approach to Learning Transla-
tion Relationships among Words. In Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Data-Driven Machine Trans-
lation, ACL 2001. 
Franz Joseph Och and H. Ney. 2000. Improved Sta-
tistical Alignment Models.  In Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Meeting of the ACL, Hong Kong, 
China, pp 440-447. 
Franz Joseph Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Sys-
tematic Comparison of Various Statistical Align-
ment Models.  Computational Linguistics, 29 (1): 
19-52. 
Bo Pang, Kevin Knight, and Daniel Marcu. 2003. 
Syntax-based Alignment of Multiple Translations: 
Extracting Paraphrases and Generating New Sen-
tences. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT.
John C. Platt. 1999. Fast Training of Support Vector 
Machines Using Sequential Minimal Optimization. 
In Bernhard Sch?lkopf, Christopher J. C. Burges 
and Alexander J. Smola (eds.). 1999.  Advances in 
Kernel Methods: Support Vector Learning. The 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 185-208. 
Quirk, Chris, Chris Brockett, and William B. Dolan. 
2004. Monolingual Machine Translation for Para-
phrase Generation, In Proceedings of the 2004 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, 25-26 July 2004, Barcelona 
Spain, pp. 142-149. 
Bernhard Sch?lkopf and Alexander J. Smola. 2002.  
Learning with Kernels: Support Vector Machines, 
Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond. The 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Y. Shinyama, S. Sekine and K. Sudo 2002. Auto-
matic Paraphrase Acquisition from News Articles.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT. 
Vladimir N. Vapnik. 1995. The Nature of Statistical 
Learning Theory. Springer-Verlag, New York. 
8
