Automatic generation of paraphrases
to be used as translation references
in objective evaluation measures of machine translation
Yves Lepage Etienne Denoual
ATR ? Spoken language communication research labs
Keihanna gakken tosi, 619-0288 Kyoto, Japan
{yves.lepage, etienne.denoual}@atr.jp
Abstract
We propose a method that automat-
ically generates paraphrase sets from
seed sentences to be used as refer-
ence sets in objective machine trans-
lation evaluation measures like BLEU
and NIST. We measured the quality
of the paraphrases produced in an ex-
periment, i.e., (i) their grammatical-
ity: at least 99% correct sentences;
(ii) their equivalence in meaning: at
least 96% correct paraphrases either
by meaning equivalence or entailment;
and, (iii) the amount of internal lexi-
cal and syntactical variation in a set of
paraphrases: slightly superior to that
of hand-produced sets. The paraphrase
sets produced by this method thus seem
adequate as reference sets to be used for
MT evaluation.
1 Introduction
We present and evaluate a method to automati-
cally produce paraphrases from seed sentences,
from a given linguistic resource. Lexical and syn-
tactical variation among paraphrases is handled
through commutations exhibited in proportional
analogies, while well-formedness is enforced by
filtering with sequences of characters of a cer-
tain length. In an experiment, the quality of the
paraphrases produced, i.e., (i) their grammatical-
ity, (ii) their equivalence in meaning with the seed
sentence, and, (iii) the internal lexical and syn-
tactical variation in a set of paraphrases, was as-
sessed by sampling and objective measures.
2 Motivation
Paraphrases are an important element in the eval-
uation of many natural language processing tasks.
Specifically, in the automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation systems, the quality of transla-
tion candidates is judged against reference trans-
lations that are paraphrases in the target language.
Automatic measures like BLEU (PAPINENI et al,
2001) or NIST (DODDINGTON, 2002) do so by
counting sequences of words in such paraphrases.
It is expected that such reference sets contain
synonymous sentences (i.e., paraphrases) that ex-
plicit possible lexical and syntactical variations in
order to cope with translation variations in terms
and structures (BABYCH and HARTLEY, 2004).
In order to produce such reference sets, we pro-
pose a method to generate paraphrases from a
seed sentence where lexical and syntactical vari-
ations are handled by the use of commutations as
captured by proportional analogies whereas N -
sequences are used to enforce fluency of expres-
sion and adequacy of meaning.
3 The linguistic resource used
The linguistic resource used in the experiment
presented in this paper relies on the C-STAR col-
lection of utterances called Basic Traveler?s Ex-
pressions1. This is a multilingual resource of ex-
pressions from the travel and tourism domain that
contains 162,318 aligned translations in several
languages, among which English. The items are
quite short as the following examples show (one
line is one item in the corpus), and as the figures
in Table 1 show.
1http://www.c-star.org/.
57
Number of Avg. size ? std. dev.
6= sentences in characters in words
97,769 35.14 ? 18.81 6.86 ? 3.57
Table 1: Some statistics about the linguistic resource
Number of Avg. size ? std. dev.
6= sentences in characters in words
42,249 33.15 ? 9.31 6.44 ? 1.90
Table 2: Some statistics about the paraphrases produced
Thank you so much. Keep the change.
Bring plenty of lemon, please.
Please tell me about some interesting places
[near here.
Thank you. Please sign here.
How do you spell your name?
The quality of this resource is of at least 99%
correct sentences (p-value = 1.92%). The few in-
correct sentences contain spelling errors or slight
syntactical mistakes.
4 Our paraphrasing methodology
4.1 Our algorithm
The proposed method consists in two phases:
firstly, paraphrase detection through equality of
translation and secondly, paraphrase generation
through linguistic commutations based on the
data produced in the first phase:
? Detection: find sentences which share a
same translation in the multilingual resource
(4.2);
? Generation: produce new sentences by ex-
ploiting commutations (4.3); limit combina-
torics by contiguity constraints (4.4).
Each of the steps of the previous algorithm is
explained in details in the following sections.
4.2 Initialisation by paraphrase detection
In a first phase we initialise our data by para-
phrase detection. By definition, paraphrase is
an equivalence in meaning, thus, different sen-
tences having the same translation ought to be
considered equivalent in meaning, i.e., they are
paraphrases2. As the linguistic resource used
2This is basically the same approach as (OHTAKE and
YAMAMOTO, 2003, p. 3 and 4).
in the present experiment is a multilingual cor-
pus, we have at our disposal the corresponding
translations in different languages for each of its
sentences. For instance, the following English
sentences share a common Japanese translation
shown in bold face below. Therefore, they are
paraphrases.
A beer, please. ?????????
???????
???????????
Beer, please. ????
???????????
?????????
????????
??????????
Can I have a beer? ?????????
Give me a beer, please. ?????????
I would like beer. ?????????
I?d like a beer, please. ?????????
4.3 Commutation in proportional analogies
for paraphrase generation
In a second phase, we implement paraphrase gen-
eration. Any given sentence may share commu-
tations with other sentences of the corpus. Such
commutations are best seen in analogical relations
that explicit syntagmatic and paradigmatic varia-
tions (de SAUSSURE, 1995, part 3, chap 4). For
instance, the seed sentence
A slice of pizza, please.
58
I?d like a beer,
please. : A beer, please. ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. :
A slice of pizza,
please.
I?d like a twin,
please. : A twin, please. ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. :
A slice of pizza,
please.
I?d like a bottle of
red wine, please. :
A bottle of red
wine, please. ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. :
A slice of pizza,
please.
Table 3: Some analogies formed with sentences of the linguistic resource that show commutations with
the sentence A slice of pizza, please.
(i) I?d like a beer,
please. : A beer, please. ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. :
A slice of pizza,
please.
(ii) I?d like a beer,
please. : Can I have a beer? ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. : x
(iii) I?d like a beer,
please. : Can I have a beer? ::
I?d like a slice of
pizza, please. :
Can I have a slice
of pizza?
Table 4: Generating a paraphrase for the seed sentence A slice of pizza, please. using proportional
analogies. (i) The original proportional analogy taken from Table 3. (ii) Replacing the sentence A
beer, please. with one of its paraphrases acquired during the detection phase: Can I have a beer? The
last sentence of the proportional analogy becomes unknown. (iii) Solving the analogical equation, i.e.,
generating a paraphrase of A slice of pizza, please.
enters in the analogies of Table 3. The replace-
ment of some sentences with known paraphrases
in such analogies allows us to produce new sen-
tences. This explains why we needed some para-
phrases to start with. For instance, by replacing
the sentence:
A beer, please.
with the sentence:
Can I have a beer?
in the first analogy of Table 3, one gets the fol-
lowing analogical equation, that is solved as indi-
cated.
I?d like a beer, please. : Can I have a beer? ::
I?d like a slice of pizza, please. : x
? x = Can I have a slice of pizza?
It is then legitimate to say that the produced sen-
tence:
Can I have a slice of pizza?
is a paraphrase of the seed sentence (see Table 4).
Such a method alleviates the problem of cre-
ating templates from examples which would be
used in an ulterior phase of generation (BARZI-
LAY and LEE, 2003). Here, all examples in the
corpus are potential templates in their actual raw
form, with the advantage that the choice of the
places where commutations may occur is left to
proportional analogy.
4.4 Limitation of combinatorics by
contiguity constraints
During paraphrase generation, spurious sentences
may be produced. For instance, the replacement
in the previous analogy, of the sentence:
A beer, please.
by the following paraphrase detected during the
first phase:
A bottle of beer, please.
produces the unfortunate sentence:
?A bottle of slice of pizza, please.
Moreover, as no complete and valid formalisation
of linguistic analogies has yet been proposed, the
algorithm used (LEPAGE, 1998) may deliver such
unacceptable strings as:
59
43 Could we have a table in the corner?
43 I?d like a table in the corner.
43 We would like a table in the corner.
28 Can we have a table in the corner?
5 Can I get a table in the corner?
5 In the corner, please.
4 We?d like to sit in the corner.
2 I?d like to sit in the corner.
2 I would like a table in the corner.
2 We?d like a table in the corner.
1 I?d prefer a table in the corner.
1 I prefer a table in the corner.
Table 5: Paraphrase candidates for Can we have a table in the corner? Candidates filtered out by unseen
N -sequences (N = 20) are struck out. Notice that the seed sentence itself has been generated again
by the method (4th sentence from the top). The figures on the left are the frequencies with which the
sentence has been generated.
?A slice of pizzthe, pleaset for tha, please.
In order to ensure a very high rate of well-
formedness among the sentences produced, we
require a method that extracts well-formed sen-
tences from the set of generated sentences with a
very high precision (to the possible prejudice of
the recall).
To this end, we eliminate all sentences contain-
ing sequences of characters of a given length un-
seen in the original data3. It is clear that, by ad-
equately tuning the given length, such a method
will be able to retain a satisfactory number of sen-
tences that will be undoubtedly correct, at least in
the sense of the linguistic resource.
5 Experiments
During the first phase of paraphrase detection,
26, 079 sentences (out of 97, 769) got at least one
possibly incorrect paraphrase candidate with an
average of 5.35 paraphrases by sentence. How-
ever, the distribution is not uniform: 60 sentences
get more than 100 paraphrases.
The maximum is reached with 529 paraphrases
for the sentence Sure. Such a sentence has a vari-
ety of meanings depending on the context, which
explains the high number of its possible para-
phrases as illustrated below.
3This is conform to the trend of using N -sequences to as-
sess the quality of outputs of various NLP systems like (LIN
and HOVY, 2003) for summary generation, (DODDINGTON,
2002) for machine translation, etc..
Sure. Here you are.
Sure. This way, please.
Certainly, go ahead, please.
I?m sure I will.
No, I don?t mind a bit.
Okay. I understand quite well, thank you.
Sounds fine to me.
Yes, I do.
. . .
However, such an example shows also that the
more the paraphrases obtained by this method, the
less reliable their quality.
During the second phase of paraphrase gener-
ation, the method generated 4, 495, 266 English
sentences on our linguistic resource. An inspec-
tion of a sample of 400 sentences shows that the
quality lies around 23.6% of correct sentences (p-
value = 1.19%) in syntax and meaning. The set
of paraphrase candidates obtained on an example
sentence are shown in Table 5.
To ensure fluency of expression and adequacy
of meaning, the method then filtered out any sen-
tence containing an N -sequence unseen in the
corpus (see Section 4.4). The best value for N
that allowed us to obtain a quality rate at the same
level to that of the original linguistic resource was
20.
As a final result, the number of seed sentences
for which we obtained at least one paraphrase is
16, 153. With a total number of 147, 708 para-
60
phrases generated4, the average number of para-
phrases per sentence is 8.65 with a standard de-
viation of 16.98 which means that the distribu-
tion is unbalanced. The graph on the left of Fig-
ure 1 shows the number of seed sentences with the
same number of paraphrases. while the graph on
the right shows the number of paraphrases against
the length of the seed sentence in words.
6 Quality of the generated paraphrases
6.1 Well-formedness of the generated
paraphrases
The grammatical quality of the paraphrase candi-
dates obtained was evaluated on a sample of 400
sentences: at least 99% of the paraphrases may
be considered grammatically correct (p-value =
2.22%). This quality is approximately the same
as that of the original resource: at least 99% (p-
value = 1.92%).
An overview of the errors in the generated para-
phrases suggests that they do not differ from the
ones in the original data. For instance, one notes
that an article is lacking before the noun phrase
tourist area in the following sentence:
Where is tourist area?
Although we are not able to trace the error back
to its origin, such a mistake is certainly due to a
commutation with a sentence like:
Where is information office?
that contains a similar mistake and that is found
in the original linguistic resource.
6.2 Equivalence in content between
generated paraphases and seed sentence
The semantic quality of the paraphrases produced
was also checked by hand on a sample of 470
paraphrases that were compared with their cor-
responding seed sentence. We not only checked
for strict equivalence, but also for meaning entail-
ment5.
4The same sentence may have been generated several
times for different seed sentences. Overall there were
42, 249 different sentences generated. Their lengths in char-
acters and words are given in Table 2.
5Bill Dolan, Chris Brockett, and Chris Quirk,
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus, http://-
research.microsoft.com/research/nlp-
/msr paraphrase.htm.
The following three paraphrases on the left
with their corresponding seed sentences on the
right are examples that were judged to be strict
equivalences.
Can I see some ID? Could you show me
some ID?
Please exchange this. Could you exchange
this, please.
Please send it to
Japan.
Send it to Japan,
please.
The following are examples in which there is a
lack of information either in the paraphrase pro-
duced or in the seed sentence. This is precisely
what entailment is.
Coke, please. Miss, could I have a
coke?
I want to change
money. Please exchange this.
Sunny-side up, please. Fried eggs, sunny-side
up, please.
The result of the sampling is that the paraphrase
candidates can be considered valid paraphrases in
at least 94% of the cases either by equivalence
or entailment (p-value = 3.05%). The following
sentences exemplify the remaining cases where
two sentences were not judged valid paraphrases
of one another.
Do you charge extra if
I drop it off?
There will be a drop
off charge.
Here?s one for you,
sir.
You can get one here.
There it is. Yes, please sit down.
Table 6 summarises the distribution of para-
phrase candidates according to the abovemen-
tionned classification.
61
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 1  10  100  1000  10000
n
u
m
be
r o
f p
ar
ap
hr
as
es
number of seed sentences (log scale)
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18
n
u
m
be
r o
f p
ar
ap
hr
as
es
length of seed sentences in words
Figure 1: Number of seed sentences with the same number of paraphrases (on the left). Number of
paraphrases by length of seed sentence in words (on the right).
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14
av
er
ag
e 
BL
EU
 sc
or
es
length of seed sentence in words
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14
av
er
ag
e 
N
IS
T 
sc
or
es
length of seed sentence in words
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
av
er
ag
e 
BL
EU
 sc
or
es
number of paraphrases / seed sentence
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
av
er
ag
e 
N
IS
T 
sc
or
es
number of paraphrases / seed sentence
Figure 2: BLEU and NIST scores by length of seed sentence (upper graphs) and by number of para-
phrases per seed sentence (lower graphs). In these graphs, each point is the score of a set of paraphrases
against the seed sentence they were produced for. Lower scores indicate a greater lexical and syntactical
variation in paraphrases. The connected points show mean values along the axis of abscissae.
62
Paraphrase Not a paraphrase
Equivalence Entailment
346 104 20
Table 6: Equivalence or entailment in meaning of the paraphrases produced, on a sample of 470 para-
phrases from various seed sentences.
7 Measure of lexical and syntactical
variation in paraphrases
7.1 Objective measures
We assessed the lexical and syntactical variation
of our paraphrases on a sample of 400 seed sen-
tences using BLEU and NIST. On the contrary to
evaluation of machine translation where the goal
is to obtain high scores in BLEU and NIST, our
goal here, when comparing a paraphrase to the
seed sentence it has been produced for, is to get
low scores. Indeed, high scores reflect some high
correlation with translation references that is a
lesser variation. As our goal is precisely to pre-
pare data for evaluation with BLEU and NIST, it
is thus to generate sets of paraphrases that would
contain as much variation as possible to express
the same meaning as the seed sentences, i.e. we
look for low scores in BLEU and NIST.
Again, all this can be done safely as long as
one is sure that the sentences compared are valid
sentences and valid paraphrases. This is the case
of our data, as we have already shown that the
paraphrases produced are 99% grammatically and
semantically correct sentences and that they are
paraphrases of their corresponding seed sentences
in 94% of the cases.
As for the meaning of BLEU and NIST, they
are supposed to measure complementary charac-
teristics of translations: namely fluency and ade-
quacy (AKIBA et al, 2004, p. 7). BLEU tends
to measure the quality in form of expression (flu-
ency), while NIST6 tends to measure quality in
meaning (adequacy).
7.2 Results
The scores in BLEU and NIST (both on a scale
from 0 to 1) shown in Figure 2 are interpreted
6Formally, NIST is an open scale. Hence, scores cannot
be directly compared for different seed sentences. We thus
normalised them by the score of the seed sentence against
itself. In this way, NIST scores become comparable for dif-
ferent seed sentences.
as a measure of the lexical and syntactical vari-
ation among paraphrases. The lower they are, the
greater the variation. The upper graphs show that
this variation depends clearly on the lengths of the
seed sentences. The shorter the seed sentence,
the greater the variation among the paraphrases
produced by this method. This is no surprise as
the detection phase introduces a bias as was men-
tionned in Section 5 with the example sentence
Sure.
The lower graphs show that the variation does
not depend on the number of paraphrases per seed
sentence. Hence, on the contrary to a method
that would produce more variations as more para-
phrases are generated, in our method, the varia-
tion is not expected to change when one produces
more and more paraphrases (however, the gram-
matical quality or the paraphrasing quality could
change). In this sense, the method is scalable, i.e.,
one could tune the number of paraphrases wished
without considerably altering the lexical and syn-
tactical variation.
7.3 Comparison with reference sets
produced by hand
We compared the lexical and syntactical variation
of our paraphrases with paraphrases created by
hand for a past MT evaluation campaign (AKIBA
et al, 2004) in two language pairs: Japanese to
English and Chinese to English.
For every reference set, we evaluated each sen-
tence against one chosen at random and left out.
The mean of all these evaluation scores gives an
indication on the overall internal lexical and syn-
tactical variation inside the reference sets. The
lower the scores, the better the lexical and syn-
tactical variation. This scheme was applied to
both reference sets created by hand, and to the
one automatically produced by our method. The
scores obtained are shown on Figure 7. Whereas
BLEU scores are comparable for all reference
sets, which indicates no notable difference in flu-
63
Average Average
BLEU NIST
Automatically produced set 0.11 0.39
Hand-produced set 1 0.10 0.49
Hand-produced set 2 0.11 0.49
Table 7: Measure of the lexical and syntactical variation of various reference sets produced by hand
and automatically produced by our method. The lower the scores, the better the lexical and syntactical
variation.
ency, NIST scores are definitely better for the au-
tomatically produced reference set: this hints at a
possibly richer lexical variation.
8 Conclusion
We reported a technique to generate paraphrases
in the view of constituting reference sets for ma-
chine translation evaluation measures like BLEU
and NIST. In an experiment with a linguistic re-
source of 97, 769 sentences we generated 8, 65
paraphrases in average for 16, 153 seed sentences.
The grammaticality was evaluated by sampling
and was shown to be of at least 99% grammati-
cally and semantically correct sentences (p-value
= 2.22%), a quality comparable to that of the orig-
inal linguistic resource. In addition, at least 96%
of the candidates (p-value = 1.92%) were correct
paraphrases either by meaning equivalence or en-
tailment.
Finally, the lexical and syntactical variation
within each paraphrase set was assessed using
BLEU and NIST against the seed sentence. It was
found that the lexical and syntactical variation did
not depend upon the number of paraphrases gen-
erated, but on the length of the seed sentence.
Going back to the view of constituting refer-
ence sets for machine translation evaluation, not
only are the paraphrase sets produced by this
method correct sentences and valid paraphrases,
but they also exhibit an internal lexical and syn-
tactical variation which was shown to be slightly
superior to that of two evaluation campaign sets
of paraphrases produced by hand.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Na-
tional Institute of Information and Communica-
tions Technology.
References
Yasuhiro AKIBA, Marcello FEDERICO, Noriko
KANDO, Hiromi NAKAIWA, Michael PAUL, and
Jun?ichi TSUJII. 2004. Overview of the IWSLT04
evaluation campaign. In Proc. of the International
Workshop on Spoken Language Translation, pages
1?12, Kyoto, Japan.
Bogdan BABYCH and Anthony HARTLEY. 2004. Ex-
tending the BLEU MT evaluation method with fre-
quency weighting. In Proceedings of ACL 2004,
pages 621?628, Barcelone, July.
Regina BARZILAY and Lillian LEE. 2003. Learn-
ing to paraphrase: An unsupervised approach us-
ing multiple-sequence alignment. In HLT-NAACL
2003: Main Proceedings, pages 16?23.
Ferdinand de SAUSSURE. 1995. Cours de linguis-
tique ge?ne?rale. Payot, Lausanne et Paris. [1e
e?d. 1916].
George DODDINGTON. 2002. Automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation quality using N-gram
co-occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology, pages 128?132, San Diego,
March.
Yves LEPAGE. 1998. Solving analogies on words:
an algorithm. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL?98,
volume I, pages 728?735, Montre?al, August.
Chin-Yew LIN and Eduard HOVY. 2003. Auto-
matic evaluation of summaries using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL 2003, pages 71?78, Edmonton, May.
Kiyonori OHTAKE and Kazuhide YAMAMOTO. 2003.
Applicability analysis of corpus-derived para-
phrases toward example-based paraphrasing. In
Language, Information and Computation, Proceed-
ings of 17th Pacific Asia Conference, pages 380?
391.
Kishore PAPINENI, Salim ROUKOS, Todd WARD, and
Wei-Jing ZHU. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. Research report
RC22176, IBM, September.
64
