Automatic Extraction of English-Korean Translations for Constitu-
ents of Technical Terms 
Jong-Hoon Oh and Key-Sun Choi 
Department of Computer Science, Division of EECS, KAIST/KORTERM/BOLA 
373-1 Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea  
{rovellia,kschoi}@world.kaist.ac.kr 
 
Abstract*
Technical terms are linguistic realiza-
tion of a domain concept and their con-
stituents are a component used for 
representing the concept. Many techni-
cal terms are usually multi-word terms 
and their meaning can be inferred from 
their constituents. Because a term con-
stituent is usually a morphological unit 
rather than a conceptual unit in Korean 
technical terms, we need to first iden-
tify conceptual units and then to re-
solve the proper meaning of the 
conceptual units in order to properly 
translate technical terms. For natural 
language applications to properly han-
dle technical terms, it is necessary to 
give information about conceptual units 
and their meaning including homonym, 
synonym and domain dependency. In 
this paper, we propose a term constitu-
ent alignment algorithm, which extracts 
such information from bilingual techni-
cal term pairs. Our algorithm regards 
English term constituents as a concep-
tual unit and then finds its Korean 
counterpart. Our method shows about 
6.1% AER. 
1 Introduction 
Technical terms are linguistic realization of a 
domain specific concept and their constituents 
are a component used for representing the con-
cept (Sager, 1997). Technical terms can be clas-
sified into single-word terms, and complex term 
                                                          
                                                          
* The first author's current affiliation is with Computational 
Linguistics Group, National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology, 3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, 
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, 619-0289 Japan 
(or multi-word term) according to the number of 
their constituents. Single-word terms have one 
term constituent while complex terms have more 
than one term constituent. Many Korean techni-
cal terms are usually complex terms and their 
meaning can be inferred from their constituents 
(Sager, 1997).  Therefore it is helpful to identify 
constituents of technical terms and their mean-
ing in order to understand the meaning of the 
technical terms and to translate the technical 
term from one?s language to the other. However, 
a term constituent is usually a morphological 
unit rather than a conceptual unit1  in Korean 
technical terms. Due to the mismatch between a 
term constituent and a conceptual unit, we need 
to first identify conceptual units which is a 
chunk of term constituents representing a do-
main specific concept (?chunking conceptual 
units?) and then to resolve the proper meaning 
of the conceptual unit (?resolving meanings?) in 
order to properly understand the meaning of 
technical terms and to translate them.  
In the ?chunking conceptual units? stage, it is 
necessary to determine whether one term con-
stituent represents a concept or not. The decision 
depends on contexts of term constituents. For 
example, a Korean technical term, ?seong? can 
be a conceptual unit by itself when it represents 
sex. But ?seong? in the context of ?hyang-
chuk+seong / bun-yeol+jo-jik? 2  (representing 
adaxial meristem) should be recognized as a 
conceptual unit along with its neighborhood 
?hyang-chuk? such as ?hyang-chuk+seong? (ad-
axial). If ?seong? is recognized as a conceptual 
unit by itself in the context, like ?hyang-chuk 
(adaxial) / seong (sex) / bun-yeol+jo-jik (meris-
1 In this paper, a conceptual unit is defined as the linguistic 
unit representing a domain specific concept. 
2 In this paper, Romanized Korean transcriptions are repre-
sented in the quotation mark. In the transcriptions, ?+? 
represents the boundary of term constituents, ?-? represents 
the syllable boundary and ?/? represents the boundary of 
conceptual units. 
67
tem)?, we can neither understand the designated 
meaning of ?hyang-chuk+seong / bun-yeol+jo-
jik? (?meristem of a leaf cell in the adaxial 
area?) nor properly translate it.  
In the ?resolving meanings? stage, homonym, 
synonym, and domain dependency of conceptual 
units should be considered. Sino-Korean affixes 
are frequently used for coining Korean technical 
terms and are used as a conceptual unit like sin-
gle words. Moreover, they are usually homonym. 
For example, a suffix ?-gi? is used as a term con-
stituent in a biology domain with four senses 
like group (?), period (?), stage (?), and or-
gan (?). Therefore, disambiguating the sense of 
such affixes is very important for understanding 
a Korean technical term. 
Many Korean technical terms are from for-
eign origin. These technical terms become Ko-
rean technical terms with various translation 
ways ? 1) translation with pure Korean words, 
2) translation with Sino-Korean words, 3) trans-
literation, 4) combinations of the three ways. 
Moreover, each translation way produces some 
variations. For example, abdominal is translated 
into three different Korean terms like ?bok-bu?, 
?bok?, and ?bae?, but they indicate the same 
meaning; in other words, they are synonym. ab-
dominal is translated into two Sino-Korean 
terms like ?bok-bu (??)? and ?bok (?)?, and 
one pure Korean term, ?bae?. Capturing syno-
nym, therefore, is important for understanding 
meaning of technical terms. 
Depending on domain of technical terms, 
translations of conceptual units can be different. 
For example, the meaning of cell in chemistry, 
physics, and electricity is usually ?A single unit 
that converts radiant energy into electric energy?, 
while that in biology is usually ?The smallest 
structural unit of an organism?. In each case, 
cell is differently translated into Korean terms 
?jeon-ji? (in chemistry, physics, and electricity 
domain), and ?se-po? (biology domain). 
For natural language applications to properly 
handle technical terms, it is necessary to give 
information about conceptual units and their 
meaning including homonym, synonym and 
domain dependency. In this paper, we propose a 
term constituent alignment algorithm, which 
extracts such information from bilingual techni-
cal term pairs. In our algorithm, one or more 
than one English term constituents are regarded 
as a conceptual unit. Therefore, the main objec-
tive of our algorithm is to recognize conceptual 
units of Korean technical terms corresponding to 
an English term constituent in English-Korean 
translation pairs of technical terms.  
The recognized bilingual conceptual units 
give contextual information, which supports de-
cision whether certain term constituent tends to 
be used as a conceptual unit by itself or not. 
Homonym and synonym can be handled by find-
ing the correspondence between English and 
Korean conceptual units. Because English and 
Korean conceptual units indicating the same 
concept will be linked to each other, we can eas-
ily find homonym and synonym from the rela-
tions. For example, the homonym ?gi? will be 
linked to four different English conceptual units. 
In the same manner, we can capture three rela-
tions between the English conceptual unit ab-
dominal and its counterparts ?bok-bu?, ?bok?, 
and ?bae?. The three Korean counterparts can be 
clustered as synonyms by means of their corre-
sponding English conceptual unit, like {?bok-
bu?, ?bok?, ?bae?}. Moreover, domain depend-
ency of conceptual units can be handled by the 
relations because extracted relations for certain 
English conceptual unit, which has domain de-
pendency, will be different depending on do-
mains.  
This paper organized as follows. In section 2, 
we will describe the related works. Section 3 
shows details of our method. Section 4 deals 
with experiments. Conclusion and future works 
are drawn in sections 5. 
2 Related Works 
One of the well-known alignment techniques is 
the one based on statistical machine translation 
models. It was initially proposed by (Brown et 
al., 1993) and, more recently, have been inten-
sively studied by several research groups (Ger-
mann et al, 2001; Och et al, 2003). It is used 
for finding sentence, phrase, and word-level cor-
respondences from parallel texts. It can be 
formulated as equation (1). For the give source 
text, S, it finds the most probable alignment set, 
A, and target text, T.  
?
?
=
Aa
SaTpSTp )|,()|(    (1) 
Brown (Brown et al, 1993) proposed five 
alignment models, called IBM Model, for an 
English-French alignment task based on equa-
68
tion (1). Equation (2) describes the IBM Model 
1. It is modeled by two assumptions - P(F|E) 
depends on word translation probability t(fj|ei) 
and one English word was aligned to one French 
word (1:1 alignment). t(fj|ei) is estimated by EM 
algorithm.  
??
= =
=
m
j
l
i
ijml eftCEFp
1 1
, )|()|(  (2) 
where, m represents the length of F, l represents 
the length of E, and Cl,m is a constant value de-
termined by l (the length of E) and m (the length 
of F).  
IBM Model 2 considers distortion (How 
likely is a source language word in position i to 
align to a target language word in position j). 
IBM Model 3 adopts fertility (How likely is a 
source language word to align to k target lan-
guage words) as its parameter for 1:n alignment. 
IBM Model 4 and 5 make use of relative distor-
tion, word classes and variables to avoid defi-
ciency.  
There is another stream of studies on align-
ment. (Chen et al, 1993; Gale et al, 1993) pro-
posed sentence alignment techniques based on 
dynamic programming, using sentence length 
and lexical mapping information. (Haruno et al, 
1996; Kay et al, 1993) applied iterative refine-
ment algorithms to sentence level alignment 
tasks.  
In this paper, we propose an alignment algo-
rithm between English and Korean conceptual 
units (or between English and Korean term con-
stituents) in English-Korean technical term pairs 
based on IBM Model (Brown et al, 1993). 
Unlike IBM Model, our alignment model can 
deal with n:1 alignment. While the IBM Model 
aimed to word-level alignment of parallel texts, 
our method focuses on word- and morphology-
level alignment of English-Korean term pairs. 
Moreover, our algorithm reflects the translation 
properties of English-to-Korean technical term 
pairs in a bilingual dictionary. 
3 Term Constituent Alignment 
For term constituent alignment, we use biology, 
chemistry and physics dictionaries where term 
constituents are manually segmented and their 
part-of-speech is manually assigned. For exam-
ple, the Korean counterpart of crop growth rate 
is ?jak-mul + seng-jang + yul? and its three term 
constituents are ?jak-mul?, ?seng-jang?, and ?yul? 
where the first two are a noun and the last one is 
a suffix.  
The problem can be defined as finding corre-
spondence between English and Korean term 
constituents as described in equation (3). For a 
given English term E=e1,?,en, composed of n 
English term constituents and its corresponding 
Korean term K=k1,?,km, composed of m Korean 
term constituents, the task is to find alignment 
set, A={a1,....,at;ap=(ei,i+w(p),, kj(p))}, maximizing 
probability P(A|K,E), where ei is the ith term 
constituent of E, kj is the jth term constituent of 
K, and ap represents the pth alignment relation 
between English and Korean term constituents. 
Note that ap=(ei,i+w(p), kj(p)) (w ? 0) represents an 
alignment relation between English term con-
stituents ei ,?,ei+w  and Korean term constituent 
kj. For example, there are two alignment rela-
tions for English term female sex hormone and 
Korean term ?ja-seong + ho-leu-mon?, like a1 
=(e1,2(1)=female sex, k1(1)=?ja-seong?) and a2 
=(e1(2)=hormone, k2(2)=?ho-leu-mon?) 
),|(maxarg* EKAPA
A
=   (3) 
3.1  Statistical Modeling 
In this section, first, we describe two translation 
properties (or constraints), derived from analysis 
of the alignment tendency between English-
Korean term constituents and then describe how 
to apply these properties to statistical modeling 
of term constituent alignment.  
We randomly sample 20% data of English-
Korean term pairs in each technical dictionary 
and finds two properties ?Cross alignment ap-
pears in some conditions?3 and ?Null Alignment 
hardly appears?4 by analyzing the sampled data. 
Constraint 1: Cross alignment is partly al-
lowed. 
Let algnment units in a source language be si, 
sj(i<j), where i and j are the index of the source 
language, and those in a target language be tq, tr 
(q<r), where q and r are the index in the target 
language. Then alignment ai=(si,tr), and 
aj=(sj,tq) are called cross alignment. Because a 
sentence structure of Korean is different from 
                                                          
3 Among analyzed data, 1.3% for biology, 0.1% for physics 
and 5.65% for chemistry show cross alignment. 
4 Among analyzed data, 0.8% for biology, 0.2% for physics 
and 0.1% for chemistry show null alignment. 
69
that of English, cross-alignment between Eng-
lish and Korean words frequently occurs in par-
allel sentences (Shin et al, 1995). For alignment 
between term constituents, however, most 
alignment relations are derived from sequential 
alignment because technical terms, which are 
usually noun phrases, share the similar structure, 
say modifier and modifee, in both languages. 
Sometimes there is cross-alignment because of 
the preposition in an English term such as of. In 
that case, we allow cross-alignment. For exam-
ple, there is a cross-alignment relation such as a1 
= (e2 = blood, k1 = ?hyeol-aek?) and a2 = (e1 = 
clotting, k2 = ?eung-go?) between the English 
term clotting of blood and its Korean translation 
?hyeol-aek + eung-go?. Note that we do not con-
sider the preposition of as an alignment unit in 
that case. English-Korean term pairs represent-
ing a name of chemical compounds usually 
show cross-alignment and 1:1 alignment. To 
deal with this case, we allow cross-alignment 
when the number of English term constituents 
and that of Korean term constituents are same. 
With the constraint 1, sequential alignment is 
performed except the above two cases.  
Constraint 2:  Null Alignment is not allowed. 
Constraint 2 means that all English and Korean 
term constituents should be aligned. Because, 
term pairs consist of an English term and its 
translated Korean term, we assume that all con-
stituents should be aligned. Null alignment 
means that an alignment unit in one side is 
aligned to nothing in the other side. For example, 
for Dutch elm disease and ?ne-deol-lan-deu 
(Dutch) / neu-leup-na-mu (elm) / che-gwan 
(sieve tube) / byeong (disease)?, there is no Eng-
lish term constituent to be aligned to the Korean 
term constituent ?che-gwan (sieve tube)?. Be-
cause, null alignment, however, does not fre-
quently appear in term constituent alignment 
(only the 0.1%~0.8% data among analyzed data), 
we do not consider null alignment in our algo-
rithm. 
),,,|(),|(
),|(
1
)(,)( tmnjiaekap
EKAP
t
l
lwiiljl?
=
+ ?=  (4) 
),|()|(
),,|(
),|(
,,
)(,)()(
)(,)(
wiij
t
j
w
wiij
t
lwiilj
w
lj
t
l
lwiiljl
ekkpekp
ekkap
ekap
++
+
+
??
=  (5) 
By the constraints, equation (3) can be repre-
sented as equation (4). In equation (4), n, m, and 
t represent the number of English term constitu-
ents, the number of Korean term constituents 
and the number of alignment relations between 
term constituents. In equation (4), a(i|j,n,t) 
represents position information, which is a bi-
nary-valued function and supports the constraint 
1. a(i|j,n,m,t) = 0 when ap= a(ei,i+w(p),kj(p)) is 
cross-alignment, which is not allowed by con-
straint 1, otherwise a(i|j,n,m,t) = 1. 
In equation (4), p(al|kj(l),ei,i+w(l)) are estimated 
by equation (5). In equation (5), kj(l) is repre-
sented by kwj and ktj where kwj and ktj are lexical 
information and part of speech information of 
the jth Korean term constituent, respectively.  
3.2 Parameter Estimation with EM Algo-
rithm 
Parameters, p(ktj|ei,i+w) and p(kwj| ktj, ei,i+w), in 
equation (5) are estimated with EM (Expecta-
tion-Maximization) algorithm. EM algorithm is 
the technique for parameter estimation of ge-
neric statistical distributions in presence of in-
complete data (Dempster et al, 1997). The main 
goal of EM is to obtain the estimated parameters 
that give maximum likelihood to the input (in-
complete) data. The basic idea underlying the 
EM algorithm is to iterate through a series of 
expectation (E-step) and maximization (M-step) 
steps where the estimation of the parameters of 
the model is progressively refined until conver-
gence (Lopez et al, 1999).  
In this paper, parameters are estimated 
through two steps, called ?initial parameter es-
timation? and ?iterative parameter estimation?. 
In the initial parameter estimation step, the ini-
tial parameters are determined by seed data. 
Seed data, which contains alignment relations 
derived from E=e1,?,en  and E?s Korean transla-
tion K=k1,?,km, where n =1 or m = 1, was se-
lected among data for term constituent 
alignment. In the condition of n = 1 or m = 1, 
English technical terms or Korean technical 
terms are a conceptual unit by itself. In other 
words, alignment relations can be directly ex-
tracted from the English-Korean term pairs if 
70
there is only one English term constituent or 
only one Korean term constituent. With the seed 
data we can get the initial alignment relation set 
A(0) and then the initial parameter ?(0) is esti-
mated with A(0), where A(k) represents the 
alignment relation set and ?(k) represents the 
estimated parameter set derived from the kth it-
eration. Note that A={a1,....,at;ap=(ei,i+w(p),kj(p))} 
and ?={p(ktj|ei,i+w), p(kwj| ktj, ei,i+w)}.  
In the iterative parameter estimation step, 
A(k) is determined by ?(k-1) in E-step and ?
(k) is estimated by A(k) in M-step using the 
whole data until ?(k) converges. E-step and M-
step can be represented as equation (6) 
))1(;,|(maxarg)(: ?=? kKEApkAstepE A ?
))(|(maxarg)(: kApkstepM ?? ?=?  (6) 
p(ktj|ei) and p(kwj| ktj, ei) are estimated in the 
kth iteration as equation (7) and (8), respectively. 
In order to prevent zero probability, the Laplace 
smoothing method (Manning et al, 1999) is ap-
plied to equation (7) and (8). 
))(;(||
))(;,(1
))(;|(
,
,
, kAeCE
kAekC
kAekp
wii
wiij
t
wiij
t
+
+
+ +
+=       (7) 
))(;,(||||
))(;,,(1
))(;,|(
,
,
, kAekCET
kAekkC
kAekkp
wiij
t
wiij
t
j
w
wiij
t
j
w
+
+
+ ++
+= (8) 
where C(x) represents frequency of x, |E| repre-
sents the number of unique English term con-
stituents in A(k), |T| represents the number of 
unique POS tags of Korean term constituents in 
A(k). 
4 Experiments 
For experiments we use three kinds of technical 
dictionary. They are biology, chemistry, and 
physics technical dictionaries where Korean 
term constituents are manually analyzed. The 
characteristics of experimental data are summa-
rized as Table 1 (Ministry, 2002).  
Domain Seed data Test data Total  
Biology  8,163 5,668 13,831
Physics 2,757 8,047 10,804
Chemistry  5,353 10,024 15,377
Table 1. Characteristics experimental data (the 
number of bilingual term pairs) 
We compare our model with IBM Model 2 
(IBM-2), and IBM Model 4 (IBM-4) imple-
mented by GIZA++ (Och et al, 2003). We 
evaluate results with the alignment error rate 
(AER) of Och and Ney (Och et al, 2003), which 
measures agreement at the level of pairs of term 
constituents.5
||||
||21
GA
GAAER +
???=    (9) 
where A is the set of term constituent pairs 
aligned by the automatic system, and G is the set 
aligned in the gold standard. 
4.1 Experimental results 
Table 2 shows evaluation results for IBM-2, 
IBM-4 and our proposed method. In the results 
precision and AER of our proposed method is 
higher than those of IBM-4. But recall of our 
proposed method is lower than that of IBM-4. 
IBM-4 has strong points in handling cross-
alignment and null alignment while our model 
has strong points in handling n:1 alignment. The 
difference between our model and IBM-4 causes 
the performance gap. Because most alignment 
type found in the gold standard is 1:1 alignment 
and 1:n alignment rather than cross-alignment, 
null alignment, and n:1 alignment as described 
in Table 3, the performance gap between our 
method and IBM-4 is not so big. IBM-2 shows 
the worst performance because it can not deal 
with 1:n alignment. In other words, IBM-2 does 
not consider fertility as its parameter for estimat-
ing the translation probability. Note that 1:n 
alignment in the gold standard is about 
18%~22% (see Table 3).  
Domain IBM-2 IBM-4 Proposed 
Biology 25.0% 7.4% 6.5% 
Physics 30.0% 9.6% 5.2% 
Chemistry 28.7% 7.6% 6.5% 
Table 2. Experimental Results  
Type Biology  Physics Chem. 
Null alignment 0.6% 0.2% 0.2% 
Cross alignment 2.1% 0.2% 4.4% 
n:1 alignment 2.1% 1.6% 1.2% 
1:n alignment 16.5% 21.4% 19.0% 
1:1 alignment 78.7% 76.7% 75.3% 
Table 3. Alignment types found in the gold 
standard 
When we analyze errors caused by our 
method, errors are mainly caused by n:1 align-
ment and cross-alignment. In order to produce 
relevant alignment results for n:1 alignment, we 
need information indicating that more than one 
                                                          
5 While (Och et al, 2003) differentiates sure and possible 
hand-annotated alignment, our gold-standard comes in only 
one variety. 
71
English term constituents are used as a concep-
tual unit. Due to lack of the information, our 
model has limitation on recovering errors caused 
by n:1 alignment. It is necessary to use domain 
specific corpus as a way of relaxing the problem. 
Cross alignment, which our model does not al-
low due to constrain 1, makes errors. Due to the 
cross alignment, the performance of our method 
in chemistry and biology is lower than that in 
physics, where there are few cross alignments in 
the gold standard. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have described an alignment 
algorithm between English and Korean term 
constituents. Our alignment algorithm can han-
dle cross alignment, n:1 alignment and 1:n 
alignment between term constituents. Our 
method shows about 94.7% precision, 93.2% 
recall and 6.1% alignment error rate. However, 
there are scopes to improve performance still 
further. Constraints should be relaxed in order to 
generalize our model and overcome errors 
caused by them.  
Our method can be applied to handle techni-
cal terms in three aspects. First, alignment re-
sults produced by our alignment algorithm help 
a machine translation system to consistently 
translate new English technical terms to Korean 
terms by considering domain of the technical 
terms. Second, alignment results between term 
constituents can be used for constructing term 
formation patterns or word formation patterns. 
Because relations between conceptual units can 
be extracted from the alignment results, we can 
construct concept-level term formation patterns 
using them. Third, the alignment results can be 
used as a resource for recognizing term varia-
tions. Because alignment relations acquired by 
our alignment model offer information about 
homonym, synonym and domain dependency, 
term variations related to certain term constitu-
ent can be recognized using them. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the Korea Ministry 
of Science and Technology, the Korea Ministry 
of Commerce, Industry and Energy, and the Ko-
rea Science and Engineering Foundation 
(KOSEF). 
References 
Brown P.F., V.S.A. Della Petra, V.J. Della Pietra and 
R.L. Mercer, ?The mathematics of statistical ma-
chine translation: parameter estimation?, Compu-
tational Linguistics, Vol. 19 No 2, (1993) 263?
311 
Chen, S, F., Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora 
Using Lexical information, in proceedings of 31st 
ACL, (1993) 9?16 
Dempster A.P., N.M. Laird, and D.B. Rubin. Maxi-
mum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM 
algorithm. Journal of Royal Statistical Society, 
39(1):138, (1977) 
Gale, W. A. And Church K.W.  A program for al-
ingning sentences in Bilingual Corpora, Computa-
tional linguistics, vol 19, no 1, (1993), 75?102 
Germann, U. M.Jahr, Knight, K., Marcu, D. And 
Yamada, K. Fast Decoding and Optimal Decoding 
for Machine translation, in proceedings of 39th 
ACL, (2001) 228?235  
Haruno M., and Yamazaki, T. High-performance 
Bilingual Text alignment using Statistical and Dic-
tionary information, in proceedings of 34th ACL, 
(1996) 131?138 
Kay, M. and Roscheisen, M. Text-Translation Align-
ment, Computational Linguistics, Vol 19, No 1, 
(1993) 121?142  
L?pez de Teruel P. E., Jos? M. Garc?a and Manuel E. 
Acacio. The Parallel EM Algorithm and its Appli-
cations in Computer Vision. Parallel and Distrib-
uted Processing Techniques and Applications, 
(1999). 
Manning, C.D. and H. Schutze, Foundations of statis-
tical natural language processing, MIT Press 
(1999) 
Ministry of Culture and Tourism, "Forming the foun-
dation of Terminology Standardization?, 
http://www.korterm.or.kr/, (2002) 
Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment 
Models, Computational Linguistics, Vol 29 (1), 
(2003), 19?51  
Sager, J.C. ?Section 1.2.1 Term formation?, in Hand-
book of terminology management Vol.1, John 
Benjamins publishing company, (1997) 
Shin Jung Ho and Key-Sun Choi (1995), Aligning a 
parallel Korean-English corpus at word and phrase 
level, Proceedings of the 3rd Natural Language 
Processing Pacific Rim Symposium (NLPRS'95), 
(1995)  223?227 
72
