The influence of data homogeneity on NLP system performance
Etienne Denoual
ATR Spoken Language Communication Research Labs,
2-2-2 Keihanna Science City, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan
Laboratoire CLIPS - GETA - IMAG, Universite? Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France
etienne.denoual@atr.jp
Abstract
In this work we study the influence of
corpus homogeneity on corpus-based
NLP system performance. Experi-
ments are performed on both stochas-
tic language models and an EBMT sys-
tem translating from Japanese to En-
glish with a large bicorpus, in order
to reassess the assumption that using
only homogeneous data tends to make
system performance go up. We de-
scribe a method to represent corpus
homogeneity as a distribution of sim-
ilarity coefficients based on a cross-
entropic measure investigated in previ-
ous works. We show that beyond min-
imal sizes of training data the exces-
sive elimination of heterogeneous data
proves prejudicial in terms of both per-
plexity and translation quality : exces-
sively restricting the training data to a
particular domain may be prejudicial
in terms of In-Domain system perfor-
mance, and that heterogeneous, Out-of-
Domain data may in fact contribute to
better sytem performance.
1 Introduction
Homogeneity of large corpora is still an unclear
notion. In this study we make a link between the
notions of similarity and homogeneity : a large
corpus is made of sets of documents to which
may be assigned a score in similarity defined by
cross-entropic measures (similarity is implicitly
expressed in the data). The distribution of the
similarity scores of such subcorpora may then be
interpreted as a representation of the homogeneity
of the main corpus, which can in turn be used to
perform corpus adaptation to tune a corpus based
NLP system to a particular domain.
(Cavaglia` 2002) makes the assumption that a
corpus based NLP system generally yields bet-
ter results with homogeneous training data rather
than heterogeneous, and experiments on a text
classifier system (Rainbow1), to mixed conclu-
sions. We reassess this assumption by experi-
menting on language model perplexity, and on an
EBMT system translating from Japanese to En-
glish.
2 A framework for corpus homogeneity
2.1 Previous work on corpus similarity and
homogeneity
A range of measures for corpus similarity have
been put forward in past literature : (Kilgarriff
and Rose 98; Kilgarriff 2001) investigated on
the similarity of corpora and compared ?Known
Similarity Corpora? (KSC) using perplexity and
cross-entropy on words, word frequency mea-
sures, and a ?2-test which they found to be
the most robust. However(as acknowledged in
(Kilgarriff and Rose 98)), using KSC requires
that the two corpora chosen for comparison are
sufficiently similar that the most frequent lex-
emes in them almost perfectly overlap. How-
ever (Liebscher 2003) showed by comparing fre-
quency counts of different large Google Group
1See http://www.cs.cmu.edu/mccallum/bow .
226
corpora that it is not usually the case.
Measuring homogeneity by counting
word / lexeme frequencies introduces addi-
tional difficulties as it assumes that the word is an
obvious, well-defined unit, which is not the case
in the Chinese (Sproat and Emerson 2003) or
Japanese language (Matsumoto et al, 2002), for
instance, where word segmentation is not trivial.
(Denoual 2004) showed that similarity between
corpora could be quantified with a coefficient
based on the cross-entropies of probabilistic mod-
els built upon reference data. The approach
needed no explicit selection of features and was
language independent, as it relied on character
based models (as opposed to word based models)
thus bypassing the word segmentation issue and
making it applicable on any electronic data.
The cross-entropy HT (A) of an N-gram model
p constructed on a training corpus T , on a test
corpus A = {s1, .., sQ} of Q sentences with si =
{ci1..ci|si|} a sentence of |si| characters is:
HT (A) =
?Q
i=1[
?|si|
j=1?logpij ]?Q
i=1 |si|
(1)
where pij = p(cij |cij?N+1..cij?1).
We therefore define a scale of similarity be-
tween two corpora on which to rank any third
given one. Two reference corpora T1 and T2 are
selected by the user, and used as training sets to
compute N-gram character models. The cross-
entropies of these two reference models are es-
timated on a third test set T3, and respectively
named HT1(T3) and HT2(T3) as in the notation in
Eq. 1. Both model cross-entropies are estimated
according to the other reference , i .e ., HT1(T2)
and HT1(T1), HT2(T1) and HT2(T2) so as to ob-
tain the weights W1 and W2 of references T1 and
T2 :
W1 = HT1(T3)?HT1(T1)HT1(T2)?HT1(T1)
(2)
and :
W2 = HT2(T3)?HT2(T2)HT2(T1)?HT2(T2)
(3)
After which W1 and W2 are assumed to be
the weights of the barycentre between the user-
chosen references. Thus
I(T3) = W1W1 +W2 =
1
1 + W2W1
(4)
is defined to be the similarity coefficient between
reference sets 1 and 2, which are respectively cor-
pus T1 and corpus T2 . Given the previous as-
sumptions, I(T1) = 0 and I(T2) = 1 ; further-
more, any given corpus T3 yields a score between
the extrema I(T1) = 0 and I(T2) = 1
This framework may be applied to the quantifi-
cation of the similarity of large corpora, by pro-
jecting them to a scale defined implicitly via the
reference data selection. In this study we shall
specifically focus on a scale of similarity bounded
by a sublanguage of spoken conversation on the
one hand, and a sublanguage of written style me-
dia on the other.
We build upon this previous work in order to
represent intra-corpus homogeneity.
2.2 Representing corpus homogeneity
Corpora are collected sets of documents usually
originating from various sources. Whether a cor-
pus is homogeneous in content or not is scarcely
known besides the knowledge of the nature of
the sources. As homogeneity is multidimensional
(see (Biber 1988) and (Biber 1995) for consid-
erations on the dimensions in register variation
for instance), one cannot trivially say that a cor-
pus is homogeneous or heterogeneous : different
sublanguages show variations that are lexical, se-
mantic, syntactic, and structural (Kittredge and
Lehrberger 1982).
In this study we wish to implicitly capture such
variations by applying the previously described
similarity framework to the representation of ho-
mogeneity. Coefficients of similarity may be
computed for all smaller sets in a corpus, the dis-
tribution of which shall depict the homogeneity
of the corpus relatively to the scale defined im-
plicitly by the choice of the reference data.
Homogeneity as depicted here is relative to the
choice of reference training data, which implic-
itly embrace lexical and syntactic variations in a
sublanguage (which are by any means not unidi-
mensional, as argued previously). We focus as in
(Denoual 2004) on a scale of similarity bounded
by a sublanguage of spoken conversation on the
one hand, and a sublanguage of written style me-
dia on the other.
227
3 A study of the homogeneity of a large
bicorpus
3.1 Data
Reference data is needed to set up a scale of sim-
ilarity, and implicitly bound it.
For the sublanguage of spoken conversation we
used for both English and Japanese the SLDB
(Spontaneous Speech Database) corpus, a multi-
lingual corpus of raw transcripts of dialogues de-
scribed in (Nakamura et al, 1996).
For the sublanguage of written style media, we
used for English a part of the Calgary2 corpus,
containing several contemporary English litera-
ture pieces3, and for Japanese a corpus of col-
lected articles from the Nikkei Shinbun newspa-
per4.
The large multilingual corpus that is used in
our study is the C-STAR5 Japanese / English part
of an aligned multilingual corpus, the Basic Trav-
eller?s Expressions Corpus (BTEC).
A prerequisite of the method is that levels of
data transcriptions are strictly normalized, so that
the comparison is not made on the transcription
method but on the underlying signal itself.
3.2 Homogeneity in the BTEC
The BTEC is a collection of sentences originat-
ing from 197 sets (one set originating from one
phrasebook) of basic travel expressions. Here we
examine the distribution of the similarity coeffi-
cients assigned to its subsets.
The corpus may be segmented in a variety of
manners, however we wish to proceed in two intu-
itive ways : firstly, by keeping the original subdi-
vision, i .e ., one phrasebook per subset ; secondly,
at the level of the sentence, i .e ., one sentence per
subset . Figure 1 shows the similarity coefficient
distributions for Japanese and English at the sen-
tence and subset level, and Table 1 shows their
means and standard deviations.
The difference in means and standard deviation
2The Calgary Corpus is available via anonymous ftp at
ftp.cpcs.ucalgary.ca/pub/projects/text.compression.corpus .
3Parts are entitled book1, book2 and book3.
4The use of classical Japanese literature is not appropri-
ate as (older) copyright-free works make use of a consider-
ably different language. In order to maintain a certain homo-
geneity, we limit our study to contemporary language.
5See http://www.c-star.org .
Coefficient Japanese English
Phrasebook 0.330?0.020 0.288?0.027
Line 0.315?0.118 0.313?0.156
Table 1: Means ? standard deviations of the simi-
larity coefficient distributions in Japanese and En-
glish.
values can be explained by the fact that all phrase-
books do not have the same size in lines6. The dis-
tribution of similarity coefficients at the line level,
however similar to the distribution at the phrase-
book level, suggests in its irregularities that it is
indeed safer to use a larger unit to estimate cross-
entropies. Moreover, we wish not to tamper with
the integrity of the original subsets, that is to keep
the integrity of phrasebook contents as much as
possible.
On the phrasebook level, the similarity coef-
ficient has a low correlation on both the aver-
age phrasebook length (0.178) and the average
line length (0.278) (which does not make it a
too ?shallow? profiling method). On the other
hand, correlation is high between the coefficients
in Japanese and English (0.781), which is only to
be expected intuitively.
4 Experiments
4.1 Method
This work wishes to reassess the assumption that,
for a same amount of training data, a corpus-
based NLP system performs better when its data
tends to be homogeneous. Here we use the rep-
resentation of homogeneity defined by the sim-
ilarity coefficient scale to select data that tends
to be homogeneous to an expected task. Exper-
iments shall be performed both on randomly se-
lected data, and on data selected according to their
similarity coefficient. The closer the coefficient
of the training data is to the coefficient of the ex-
pected task, the better.
We assume that the task is sufficiently repre-
sented by a set of data from the same domain as
the large bicorpus used, the BTEC. Experiments
are performed on a test set of 510 Japanese sen-
tences which are not included in the ressource.
6The BTEC phrasebooks have an average size of 824
lines with a standard deviation in size of 594 lines.
228
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Japanese BTEC Coefficients
Oc
cur
ren
ces
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
English BTEC Coefficients
Oc
cur
ren
ces
Line level
Phrasebook level
Line level
Phrasebook level
Figure 1: Distributions of similarity coefficients at the sentence level (thin line) and at the phrasebook
level (thick line), respectively for Japanese and English.
0 50 1000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
BL
EU
 sc
ore
 (in
ter
pol
ate
d)
0 50 100
4
6
8
10
Percent of the original BTEC in size
NI
ST
 sc
ore
 (in
ter
pol
ate
d)
0 50 1000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
m
W
ER
 sc
or
e (
inte
rpo
late
d)
Randomly selected data
Homogeneous data
Figure 2: BLEU, NIST and mWER scores for EBMT systems built on increasing amounts of randomly
chosen and homogeneous BTEC data.
These sentences shall first be used for language
model perplexity estimation, then as input sen-
tences for the EBMT system. The task is found to
have a coefficient of I0 = 0.331. The average co-
efficient for a BTEC phrasebook being 0.330, the
task is found to be particularly in the domain of
the ressource. We examine the influence of train-
ing data size first on language model perplexity,
then on the quality of translation from Japanese
to English by an example-based MT system.
4.1.1 Language model perplexity
Even if perplexity does not always yield a high
correlation with NLP systems performance, it is
still an indicator of language model complexity as
it gives an estimate of the average branching fac-
tor in a language model. The measure is popular
in the NLP community because admittedly, when
perplexity decreases, the performance of systems
based on stochastic models tends to increase.
We compute perplexities of character language
models built on variable amounts of training data
first randomly taken from the Japanese part of
the BTEC, and then selected around the expected
task coefficient I0 (thresholds are determined by
the amount of training data to be kept). Cross-
entropies are estimated on the test set, and all es-
timations are performed five times for the ran-
dom data selections and averaged. Figure 3
shows the character perplexity values for increas-
ing amounts of data from 0.5% to 100% of the
BTEC and interpolated. As was expected, per-
plexity decreases as training data increases and
tends to have an asymptotic behaviour when more
data is being used as training.
229
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 1000
5
10
15
20
25
30
Percent of the original BTEC in size
Char
acte
r per
plexi
ty (int
erpola
ted)
Randomly selected dataHomogeneous data
Figure 3: Perplexity of character language models
built on increasing amounts of randomly chosen
BTEC and homogeneous Japanese data.
While homogeneous data yield lower perplex-
ity scores for small amounts of training data (up
to 15% of the ressource - roughly 1.5 Megabytes
of data), beyond this value perplexity is slightly
higher than for a model trained on randomly se-
lected data. Except for the smaller amounts of
data, there seems to be no benefit in using homo-
geneous rather than random heterogeneous train-
ing data for model perplexity. On the contrary,
excessively restricting the domain seems to yield
higher model perplexities.
4.1.2 Automatic evaluation of the translation
quality
In this section we experiment on a Japanese to
English grammar-based EBMT system, HPATR
(described in (Imamura 2001)), which parses a bi-
corpus with grammars for both source and target
language, and translates by automatically gener-
ating transfer patterns from bilingual trees con-
structed on the parsed data. Not being a MT
system based on stochastic methods, it is used
here as a task evaluation criterion complemen-
tary to language model perplexity. Systems are
likewise constructed on variable amounts of train-
ing data, and evaluated on the previous task of
510 Japanese sentences, to be translated from
Japanese to English.
Because it is not feasible here to have humans
judge the quality of many sets of translated data,
we rely on an array of well known automatic eval-
uation measures to estimate translation quality :
? BLEU (Papineni et al 2002) is the geomet-
ric mean of the n-gram precisions in the out-
put with respect to a set of reference trans-
lations. It is bounded between 0 and 1, bet-
ter scores indicate better translations, and it
tends to be highly correlated with the fluency
of outputs ;
? NIST (Doddington 2002) is a variant of
BLEU based on the arithmetic mean of
weighted n-gram precisions in the output
with respect to a set of reference translations.
It has a lower bound of 0, no upper bound,
better scores indicate better translations, and
it tends to be highly correlated with the ade-
quacy of outputs ;
? mWER (Och 2003) or Multiple Word Error
Rate is the edit distance in words between
the system output and the closest reference
translation in a set. It is bounded between 0
and 1, and lower scores indicate better trans-
lations.
Figure 2 shows BLEU, NIST and mWER
scores for increasing amounts of data from 0.5%
to 100% of the BTEC and interpolated. As was
expected, MT quality increases as training data
increases and tends to have an asymptotic be-
haviour when more data is being used in training.
Here again except for the smaller amounts of data
(up to 3% of the BTEC in BLEU, up to 18% in
NIST and up to 2% in mWER), using the three
evaluation methods, translation quality is equal or
higher when using random heterogenous data. If
we perform a mean comparison of the 510 paired
score values assigned to sentences, for instance at
50% of training data, this difference is found to be
statistically significant between BLEU, NIST, and
mWER scores with confidence levels of 88.49%,
99.9%, and 73.24% respectively.
5 Discussion and future work
The contribution of this work is twofold :
We describe a method of representing homo-
geneity according to a cross-entropic measure of
similarity to reference sublanguages, that can be
used to profile language ressources. A corpus
is represented by the distribution of the similar-
ity coefficients of the smaller subsets it contains,
230
and atypical therefore heterogeneous data may be
characterized by the lower occurrences of their
values.
We further observe that marginalizing such
atypical data in order to restrict the domain on
which a corpus-based NLP system operates does
not yield better performance, either in terms of
perplexity when the system is based on stochastic
language models, or in terms of objective transla-
tion quality when the system is a grammar-based
EBMT system.
An objective for future work is therefore
to study corpus adaptation with Out-of-Domain
data. While (Cavaglia` 2002) also acknowledged
that for minimal sizes of training data, the best
NLP system performance is reached with ho-
mogeneous ressources, we would like to know
more precisely why and to what extent mixing
In-Domain and Out-of-Domain data yields better
accuracy. Concerning the representation of ho-
mogeneity, other experiments are needed to tackle
the multidimensionality of sublanguage varieties
less implicitly. We would like to consider multi-
ple sublanguage references to untangle the dimen-
sions of register variation in spoken and written
language.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Na-
tional Institute of Information and Communica-
tions Technology.
References
Douglas Biber. 1988. Variation across speech and
writing. Cambridge University Press.
Douglas Biber. 1995. Dimensions in Register Varia-
tion. Cambridge University Press.
Gabriela Cavaglia`. 2002. Measuring corpus homo-
geneity using a range of measures for inter-
document distance. Proceedings of LREC, pp. 426-
431.
Etienne Denoual. 2004. A method to quantify corpus
similarity and its application to quantifying the de-
gree of literality in a document. Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Human Language Tech-
nology, Hong Kong, pp.28-31.
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of
machine translation quality using n-gram co-
occurrence statistics. Proceedings of Human Lang.
Technol. Conf. (HLT-02), pp.138-145.
Kenji Imamura. 2001. Hierarchical Phrase Alignment
Harmonized with Parsing. Proceedings of NLPRS,
pp.377-384.
Adam Kilgarriff and Tony Rose. 1998. Measures for
corpus similarity and homogeneity. Proceedings of
the 3rd conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, Granada, Spain, pp. 46 - 52.
Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. Comparing corpora. Interna-
tional Journal of Corpus Linguistics 6:1, pp. 1-37.
Richard Kittredge and John Lehrberger. 1982. Sublan-
guage. Studies of language in restricted semantic
domains Walter de Gruyter, editor.
Robert A. Liebscher. 2003. New corpora, new tests,
and new data for frequency-based corpus compar-
isons. Center for Research in Language Newsletter,
15:2
Yuji Matsumoto, Akira Kitauchi, Tatsuo Yamashita,
Yoshitaka Hirano, Hiroshi Matsuda,Kazuma
Takaoka and Masayuki Asahara. 2002. Morpholog-
ical Analysis System ChaSen version 2.2.9 Manual.
Nara Institute of Science and Technology.
Atsushi Nakamura, Shoichi Matsunaga, Tohru
Shimizu, Masahiro Tonomura and Yoshinori Sag-
isaka 1996. Japanese speech databases for robust
speech recognition. Proceedings of the ICSLP?96,
Philadelphia, PA, pp.2199-2202, Volume 4
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of
ACL 2003, pp.160-167.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Proceedings of
ACL 2002, pp.311-318.
Richard Sproat and Thomas Emerson. 2003. The First
International Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff.
The Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Lan-
guage Processing, Sapporo, Japan.
231
