Problems Of Reusing An Existing MT System?
Ondr?ej Bojar, Petr Homola, Vladislav Kubon?
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
?UFAL MFF UK, Malostranske? na?me?st?? 25, Praha 1, CZ-11800
Czech Republic
{bojar,homola,vk}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
This paper describes an attempt to recy-
cle parts of the Czech-to-Russian ma-
chine translation system (MT) in the
new Czech-to-English MT system. The
paper describes the overall architecture
of the new system and the details of
the modules which have been added.
A special attention is paid to the prob-
lem of named entity recognition and
to the method of automatic acquisition
of lexico-syntactic information for the
bilingual dictionary of the system. The
paper concentrates on the problems en-
countered in the process of reusing ex-
isting modules and their solution.
1 Introduction
The last decade has witnessed several attempts to
increase the quality of MT systems by introduc-
ing new methods. The strong stress on stochastic
methods in the NLP in general and in the MT in
particular, the attempts to develop hybrid systems,
a wide acceptance of translation-memory based
systems among the translation professionals, the
aim at limited domain speech-to-speech transla-
tion systems, all these (and many other) trends
have demonstrated encouraging results in recent
years.
Developing and using new methods definitely
moves the whole MT field forward, but one
?The work described in this paper has been supported by
the grant of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic GACR
No.405/03/0914 and partially also by the grant of the Grant
Agency of the Charles University GAUK No. 351/2005
should not forget about all the effort invested into
the old systems. Reusing at least some parts of
those systems may help to decrease the costs of
new systems, especially when one of the lan-
guages is not a ?big? language and therefore there
is not such a wide range of tools, grammars, dic-
tionaries available as for example for English,
German, Japanese or Spanish. In this paper we
would like to describe one such attempt to reuse
the existing system for a new language pair.
2 The original system
One of the systems which was silently abandoned
in early nineties was the system for the translation
from Czech to Russian called RUSLAN (Oliva,
1989). It was being developed in the second half
of eighties with the aim to translate texts from a
relatively closed thematic domain, the domain of
operating systems of mainframes.
The system used transfer-based architecture.
The implementation of the system was almost
completely done in Q-systems, a formalism cre-
ated by Alain Colmerauer (Colmerauer, 1969)
for the TAUM-METEO project. The Czech-to
Russian system also relied upon a set of dictio-
naries containing all data exploited by individ-
ual modules of the system. Each lexical item
in the main (bilingual) dictionary contained not
only lexico-syntactic data (valency frames etc.),
but also a set of semantic features.
The work on the system RUSLAN has been ter-
minated in 1990, in the final phase of system test-
ing and debugging. The reason was quite sim-
ple - after the political changes in 1989 there was
no more any commercial demand for Czech to
179
Russian MT system.
The demand for Czech-English translation has
grown dramatically during the years following the
abandonment of the system RUSLAN. On the
other hand, also the range of methods, tools and
resources for MT has grown substantially. Sev-
eral corpora were created for Czech, the most
prominent ones being the morphologically anno-
tated Czech National Corpus and syntactically an-
notated Prague Dependency Treebank. In 2002
we have started the work on the parallel bilin-
gual Prague Czech English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT) (Cur???n et al, 2004), which contains
about a half of the texts from PennTreebank 3
translated into Czech by native speakers. A large
morphological dictionary of Czech has been de-
veloped (Hajic?, 2001), allowing for a good quality
morphological analysis of Czech, which has been
tested in numerous commercial applications and
scientific projects since then.
3 The background of the project
The main motivation for our Czech-English MT
experiment was to test several hypotheses. The
most prominent of these hypotheses concerns the
level, at which it is reasonable to perform the
transfer. Due to the differences between both lan-
guages it is not sufficient to perform the transfer
immediately after the morphological analysis or
shallow parsing, as it has been done in the MT
system eslko aiming at the translation between
closely related (and similar) languages [cf (Hajic?
et al, 2003)]. On the other hand, it is a ques-
tion whether the typological differences between
Czech and English justify the transfer being per-
formed at the tectogrammatical (deep syntactic)
level.
Last but not least, one of our aims was to de-
velop a rule-based MT system with minimal pos-
sible costs, either reusing the existing modules or
trying to use (semi)automatic methods whenever
possible, concentrating on areas where using the
human labor would be extremely expensive (for
example building a large coverage bilingual dic-
tionary, cf. the following paragraphs.)
4 Czech-English MT system
The main goal of our project is to develop an ex-
perimental MT system for the translation of texts
from the PCEDT from Czech to English. The sys-
tem investigates the possibility of reusing the ex-
isting resources (grammar, dictionary) in order to
decrease the development time. It also exploits
the parallel bilingual corpus of syntactically anno-
tated texts, although not as a direct learning ma-
terial, more like an additional source of linguis-
tic data especially for the dictionary development
and for the testing of the system.
The task is complicated by the fact that this
translation direction is according to our opinion
more complicated than the reverse one. There are
several reasons for this claim; the most prominent
one is the free word-order nature of the source
language. It generally means that it is very of-
ten necessary to make substantial changes of the
word order if we want to get a grammatical Eng-
lish sentence, while when translating from Eng-
lish to Czech the results are more or less gram-
matically correct and comprehensible even if we
don?t change the word order at all.
Another problem of the Czech-English transla-
tion is the insertion of articles. Czech doesn?t use
any articles and it is of course much easier to re-
move them from the text (when translating from
English) than to insert a proper article on a proper
place (when translating from Czech).
Let us now look at the individual modules of
the new system.
4.1 Morphological analysis
Due to the limited size of the original morpho-
syntactic dictionary of the system it was neces-
sary to replace the original module by a new one.
The new module of morphological analysis of
Czech (Hajic?, 2001) has been already exploited in
numerous applications. It covers almost the entire
Czech language, with very few exceptions (it is
estimated that it contains about 800 000 lemmas).
It is very reliable, due to a really large coverage
there are almost no unknown words in the whole
PCEDT. The only problem was the incorporation
of the new module into the system - the original
module of syntactic analysis of Czech from the
system RUSLAN was very closely bound to a dic-
tionary lookup and to the morphological module.
The new module also uses a different tagset.
180
4.2 Bilingual dictionary
The bilingual dictionary of the system RUSLAN
contained approximately 8000 lexical items with
a rich lexico-syntactic information. We have orig-
inally assumed that the information contained in
the dictionary might be transformed and reused in
the new system, but this assumption turned to be
false. Although the information contained in the
original bilingual dictionary is extremely valuable
for the module of syntactic analysis of Czech, we
have decided to sacrifice it. The mere 8000 lex-
ical items constitute too small part of the new
bilingual dictionary and we have decided to prefer
handling the dictionary in a uniform way.
At the moment there are no Czech-English dic-
tionaries exploitable in an MT system. The avail-
able machine-readable dictionaries built mainly
for a human user (such as WinGED1 or
Svoboda (2001)) suffer from important limita-
tions:
? Sometimes, several variants of translation
are combined in one entry2.
? No clear annotation of meta-language is
present, although the entries contain valu-
able morphological or syntactic information
to some extent. (E.g. valency frames are
encoded by means of rather inconsistent ab-
breviations in plain text: accession to = vs-
toupen?? do or adjudge sb. to be guilty = uz-
nat vinny?m koho.)
? Usually, no morphological information is
given along the entries, although the mor-
phological information can be vital for cor-
rectly recognizing an occurrence of the entry
in a text. For example, an expression kniha
u?c?etn?? can be translated as either an account-
ing book or a book of an accountant depend-
ing whether the Czech word u?c?etn?? is an ad-
jective or a noun.
? No syntactic information is available and no
consistent rules have been adopted by the
1http://www.rewin.cz/
2Throughout the text, we use the term ENTRY as a syn-
onym to translation pair, i.e. a pair of Czech and English
expressions.
lexicographers to annotate syntactic proper-
ties in plain text (such as putting the head of
the clause as the first word).
From the point of view of structural machine
translation, the lack of syntactic information in
the translation dictionary is crucial. In the course
of translation, the input sentence is syntactically
analyzed before searching for foreign language
equivalents. In order to check for presence of
multi-word expressions in the input, the dictio-
nary must encode the structural shape of such en-
tries, otherwise the system does not know how to
traverse the relevant part of the tree. Similarly,
some expressions require some constraints to be
met (such as an agreement in case or number) in
the input text. If these constraints are not fulfilled,
the proposed foreign language equivalent is not
applicable.
The importance of valency (subcategorization)
frames and their equivalents should be stressed,
too. In the described system, already the syntac-
tic analyzer requires verb and adjective valency
frames in order to allow for specific syntactic con-
structions. In general, knowledge of translation
equivalents of valencies is important to preserve
the meaning (pr?ij??t na ne?jaky? na?pad = come at an
idea, literal translation: come on an idea; chodit
na housle = attend violin lessons, lit. walk on vi-
olin) or to handle auxiliary words properly (c?ekat
na ne?hoko = wait for somebody, lit. wait on sb.;
r???ci ne?co = tell something but pr?ejet ne?co = run
over something).
4.2.1 Dictionary cleanup
In order to handle the problems mentioned
above, we performed an extensive cleanup of the
data from available machine-readable dictionar-
ies. The core steps of the cleanup are as follows:
Identifying meta-information.
We manually processed all the entries and
searched for frequent words that typically encode
some meta-information, such as sth., st., oneself.
We also checked all entries ending with a word
that is potentially a preposition. Based on the ex-
pression in the other language, we were able to
recognize the meaning and identify, whether the
suspicious word expresses a ?slot? in the expres-
sion or whether it is a fixed part of the expression.
(E.g. m??t o sobe? vysoke? m??ne?n?? = think something
181
of oneself, only the word oneself encodes a slot,
the word something is a fixed part of the expres-
sion.)
During this phase, entries encoding several
translation variants at once were disassembled
into separate translation pairs, too.
Part-of-speech disambiguation.
We processed the Czech part of each entry with
a morphological analyzer (Hajic?, 2001) and we
performed manual part-of-speech disambiguation
of expressions with ambiguity. It should be noted
that automatic tagging would not provide us with
satisfactory results due to the lack of sentential
context around the expressions.
Adding morphological constraints.
Morphological constraints on word entries de-
scribe which values of morphological features are
valid for each word of the entry or have to be
shared among some words of the entry. Once
identified, morphological constraints can be used
to check whether a word group in the input text
represents an entry or not. With respect to our fi-
nal task (translation from Czech to English), we
aim at Czech constraints only.
We decided to induce morphological con-
straints automatically, based on corpus examples
of the entries. For each entry, we look up sen-
tences that contain all the lemmas of the entry
in a close neighborhood (but irrespective to the
word order and possible presence of inserted extra
words). We weight the instances to promote those
with no intervening words and those with con-
nected dependency graph. The list of weighted
instances is scanned for both unary (such as ?case
is accusative?, ?number is singular?) and binary
(?the case of the first and second words match?)
pre-defined constraints selecting those that are
satisfied by at least 75% of total weight.
Most of the expressions with at least 10 corpus
instances obtain a valid set of constraints. Only
expressions containing very common words (so
that the words do appear quite often close together
without actually forming the expression) obtain
too weak constraints. For instance, no case and
gender agreement constraints are selected for the
expression bohaty? c?love?k (wealthy man).
Adding syntactic information.
Syntactic information (dependency relations
among words in the expression) is needed mainly
during the analysis of input sentences, therefore
we focused on adding the information to the
Czech part of entries first. For most of the en-
tries, it was possible to add the dependency struc-
ture manually, based on the part-of-speech pattern
of the entry. For instance all the entries contain-
ing an adjective followed by a noun get the same
structure: the noun governs the preceeding adjec-
tive. For the remaining entries (with very varied
POS patterns), we employ a corpus-based search
similar to the automatic procedure of identifying
morphological constraints.
4.3 Named entity recognition module
Named entities (NE) are atomic units such as
proper names, temporal expressions (e.g., dates)
and quantities (e.g., monetary expressions). They
occur quite often in various texts and carry impor-
tant information. Hence, proper analysis of NEs
and their translation has an enormous impact on
MT quality (Babych and Hartley, 2004). In our
system they are extremely important due to the
nature of input texts. The Wall Street Journal sec-
tion of PennTreebank shows much higher density
of named entities than ordinary texts. Their cor-
rect recognition therefore has a tremendous im-
pact on the performance of the whole system, es-
pecially if the evaluation of the translation quality
is based on golden standard translations.
NE translation involves both semantic transla-
tion and phonetic transliteration. Each type of NE
is handled in a different way. For instance, person
names do not undergo semantic translation (only
transliteration is required), while certain titles and
part of names do (e.g., prvn?? da?ma Laura Bushova?
? first lady Laura Bush). In case of organiza-
tions, application of regular transfer rules for NPs
seems to be sufficient (e.g., ?Ustav forma?ln?? a ap-
likovane? lingvistiky ? Institute of formal and ap-
plied linguistics), although an idiomatic transla-
tion may be probably preferable sometimes. With
respect to geographical places we apply bilingual
glossaries and a set of regular transfer rules as
well.
For NE-recognition, we have developed a
grammar based on regular expressions that
processes typed feature structures. The gram-
mar framework, similarly as the formally a bit
weaker platform SProUT (Bering et al, 2003),
182
uses finite-state techniques and unification, i.e., a
grammar consists of pattern/action rules, where
the left-hand side is a regular expression over
typed feature structures (TFS) with variables, rep-
resenting the recognition pattern, and the right-
hand side is a TFS specification of the output
structure.
The NE grammar is based on the experiment
described in (Piskorski et al, 2004). An example
of a simple rule is:
#subst[LEMMA: ministerstvo]$s1
+ #top[CASE: gen, PHRASE: $phr]$s2
== $s1#ministry[ATTR: $s2,
PHRASE: &(?ministerstvo ? + phr)]
(1)
The first TFS matches any morphological vari-
ant of the word ministerstvo (ministry), followed
by a genitive NP. The variables $s1, $s2 and $phr
create dynamic value assignments and allow to
transport these values to the slots in the output
structure of type ministry. The output structure
contains a new attribute called PHRASE with the
lemmatized value of the whole phrase.
If the input phrase is
informace ministerstva zahranic???
o cestova?n?? do ohroz?eny?ch oblast?? (2)
then the phrase ?ministerstva zahranic???? will be
recognized as a NE and handled as an atomic unit
in the whole MT process:
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
ministry
LEMMA ministerstvo
FORM ministerstva
PHRASE ministerstvo zahranic???
ATTR
?
?
?
?
?
subst
LEMMA zahranic???
PHRASE zahranic???
FORM zahranic???
CASE gen
NUMBER sg
GENDER n
?
?
?
?
?
CASE gen
NUMBER sg
GENDER n
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
(3)
Lemmatization of NEs is crucial in the context
of MT. However, it might pose a serious problem
in case of languages with rich inflection due to
structural ambiguities, e.g., internal bracketing of
complex noun phrases might be difficult to ana-
lyze. The core of the framework is based on gram-
mars that have been developed for the MT system
?Ces??lko (Hajic? et al, 2003).
4.4 Syntactic analysis of Czech
Although we have originally assumed that the
module of syntactic analysis of Czech will re-
quire only small modifications and its reuse in the
new system was one of the goals of our system,
it turned out that this module is one of the main
sources of problems.
In the course of testing and debugging of the
system we had to create a number of new gram-
mar rules covering the phenomena which were
not properly accounted for in the original system
due to the different nature of the original domain.
The texts from PCEDT show for example much
higher number of numerals and numeric expres-
sions, some of which require either special gram-
matical or transfer rules than operating systems
manuals from the system RUSLAN. The com-
plexity of input sentences with regard to the num-
ber of clauses and their mutual relationship is also
much higher. This, of course, decreases the num-
ber of sentences which are completely syntacti-
cally analyzed and thus degrades the translation
quality.
One of the biggest problems of the grammar
are the properties of Q-systems. It was quite
clear since the start of the project that it is im-
possible to extract only the knowledge encoded
into the grammar, the grammar rules written in
Q-systems are so complicated that rewriting them
into a different (even chart-parser based) formal-
ism would actually mean to write a completely
new grammar. Although we have at our disposal
a new, modernized and reimplemented version of
a Q-systems compiler and interpreter which over-
comes the technical problems of the original ver-
sion, the nature of the formalism is of course pre-
served.
4.5 Transfer
The main task of this module is to transform the
syntactic structure (syntactic tree) of the input
Czech sentence into the syntactic structure (tree)
of the corresponding English sentence. The trans-
fer module does not handle the translation of reg-
ularly translated lexical units, it is handled by the
bilingual dictionary in the earlier phases of the
system. The transfer concentrates on three main
tasks:
183
? The transformation of the Czech syntactic
tree into the English one reflecting the dif-
ferences in the word order between both lan-
guages.
? The identification and translation of those
constructions in Czech, which require spe-
cific (irregular) translation into English.
? The insertion of articles (which do not exist
in Czech) into the target language sentences.
The development of this module still continues,
the initial tests confirmed that a substantial im-
provement can be achieved in the future.
4.6 Syntactic synthesis of English
The syntactic synthesis of Russian in RUSLAN is
very closely bound to transfer, therefore we have
tried to use as big portion of the grammar as possi-
ble, but of course, substantial modifications of the
grammar were necessary. As well as the work on
the transfer module, also the work on this module
still continues.
4.7 Morphological synthesis of English
Due to the simplicity of English morphology this
module has a very limited role in our system. It
handles plurals, 3rd persons and irregular words.
5 Conclusion
The problems mentioned in this paper do not al-
low to formulate an answer to the crucial ques-
tion - does it really pay off to recycle the old sys-
tem or not? The integration of existing parts into
a new system is so complicated that we are still
not able to perform evaluation of results on texts
of a reasonable size. One way out of this situa-
tion would be the combination of the new mod-
ules mentioned in this paper with one of the ex-
isting stochastic parsers of Czech instead of the
rule-based grammar.
Another possible direction for the future re-
search might be the exploitation of two new mod-
ules. The first one will contain partial, but error-
free disambiguation of the results of morpholog-
ical analysis of Czech, which will substantially
decrease the morphological ambiguity of individ-
ual Czech word forms. This ambiguity (the aver-
age number of morphological tags per word form
exceeds four in Czech) also negatively influences
the performance of the syntactic analysis.
The second way how to decrease the ambigu-
ity is the exploitation of a special module resolv-
ing the lexical ambiguity in those cases when the
bilingual dictionary provides more than one lexi-
cal equivalent. This stochastic module would ex-
ploit the context and would suggest the best trans-
lation.
References
B. Babych and A. Hartley. 2004. Selecting transla-
tion strategies in MT using automatic named en-
tity recognition. In Proceedings of the Ninth EAMT
Workshop, Valetta, Malta.
C. Bering, W. Droz?dz?yn?ski, G. Erbach, C. Guasch,
P. Homola, S. Lehmann, H. Li, H.-U. Krieger,
J. Piskorski, U. Schaefer, A. Shimada, M. Siegel,
F. Xu, and D. Ziegler-Eisele. 2003. Corpora
and evaluation tools for multilingual named entity
grammar development.
Alain Colmerauer. 1969. Les Systemes Q ou un for-
malisme pour analyser et synthetiser des phrases sur
ordinateur.
Jan Cur???n, Martin ?Cmejrek, Jir??? Havelka, and
Vladislav Kubon?. 2004. Building a Parallel Bilin-
gual Syntactically Annotated Corpus. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st International Joint Conference on
NLP.
Jan Hajic?. 2001. Disambiguation of Rich Inflection
- Computational Morphology of Czech, volume I.
Prague Karolinum, Charles University Press. 334
pp.
J. Hajic?, P. Homola, and V. Kubon?. 2003. A sim-
ple multilingual machine translation system. In In:
Proceedings of the MT Summit IX, New Orleans.
Karel Oliva. 1989. A Parser for Czech Implemented
in Systems Q. Explizite Beschreibung der Sprache
und automatische Textbearbeitung.
J. Piskorski, P. Homola, M. Marciniak,
A. Mykowiecka, A. Przepio?rkowski, and
M. Wolin?ski. 2004. Information extraction
for Polish using the SProUT platform. In Pro-
ceedings of the International IIS:IIP WM?04
Conference, Zakopane, Poland.
Milan Svoboda. 2001. GNU/FDL English-Czech
Dictionary. http://slovnik.zcu.cz/.
184
