Linguistically enriched corpora for establishing variation in support verb
constructions
Begon?a Villada Moiro?n
Alfa-Informatica
University of Groningen
P.O.Box 716
9700 AS Groningen
M.B.Villada.Moiron@rug.nl
Abstract
Many NLP tasks that require syntactic
analysis necessitate an accurate de-
scription of the lexical components,
morpho-syntactic constraints and the
semantic idiosyncracies of fixed ex-
pressions. (Moon, 1998) and (Riehem-
ann, 2001) show that many fixed ex-
pressions and idioms allow limited vari-
ation and modification inside their com-
plementation.
This paper discusses to what extent a
corpus-based method can help us estab-
lish the variation and adjectival modi-
fication potential of Dutch support verb
constructions. We also discuss what
problems the data poses when apply-
ing an automated data-driven method to
solve the problem.
1 Introduction
We aim at finding methods that facilitate the de-
scription of the linguistic behavior of multiword
expressions. Empirical evidence and generaliza-
tions about the linguistic properties of multiword
expressions are required to further a theory of
fixed expressions (or multiword expressions) as
well as to expand the coverage of NLP lexical re-
sources and grammars.
This paper describes an attempt to develop
automated methods for induction of lexical in-
formation from a linguistically enriched corpus.
In particular, the paper discusses to what extent
can an automated corpus-based approach be use-
ful to establish the variation potential of support
verb constructions. The experimental work ap-
plies to Dutch expressions, however the issue is
widely relevant in the development of lexical re-
sources for other languages.
1.1 Partially lexicalized expressions
Corpus-based studies showed that certain fixed
expressions and idioms allow limited vari-
ation and adjectival modification (Moon, 1998;
Riehemann, 2001).1 Riehemann (2001) invest-
igated various types of multiword expressions in
English and observed that around 25% of idiom
occurrences in a corpus allow some variation. By
way of example, among the occurrences of the
idiom keep tabs on ?(fig.) watch?, variation affects
verb tense inflection, adjective modifiers (close,
better, regular, daily), noun number morpheme
(tab(s)) and the location of the on complement
phrase that may be separate from the object NP.
The above example is by no means an isolated
case.
Variation has an effect not only on the rep-
resentation of the syntactic structure but also on
the semantic interpretation of the multiword ex-
pression (Sag et al, 2001; Baldwin et al, to ap-
pear). The presence of variation in multiword ex-
pressions brings up two scenarios: (a) the loss of
the peculiar meaning or (b) the modification of
the original meaning. Returning to the example
above, modifiers of tabs affect the interpretation
of the event predicate as a whole. Thus, keep
1From now onwards, we use ?variation? to refer to mor-
phological productivity or alternation of specifi ers or pre-
nominal modifi ers.
63
close tabs on s.o. means ?watch s.o. closely?. A
different effect has been reported of some VERB
NP idioms in which the adjectival modification af-
fects only the complement NP (Nicolas, 1995).
For a correct interpretation, such idiomatic ex-
pressions require internal semantic structure.
These observations suggest that: (i) not all
fixed expressions and idioms are frozen word
combinations given that, parts of the expression
participate in syntactic operations; (ii) some lex-
emes (in ?fixed? expressions) are subject to mor-
phological processes; and (iii), some fixed ex-
pressions still preserve underlying semantic struc-
ture. A description that captures the previous
facts needs to allow variable slots so that the men-
tioned variants of the expression are licensed by
the grammar. In sum, variation is a property that
should not be neglected while deciding the lexical
representation of multiword expressions in com-
putational resources.
1.2 Support verb constructions
Support verb constructions are made up out of a
light verb (aka. support verb) and a complement
(e.g. take into account). The predicational com-
plement may be realized as a noun, an adjective or
a prepositional phrase. The light verb and its com-
plement form a complex predicate, in which the
complement itself supplies most of the semantic
load (Butt, 1995). The verb performs a ?sup-
port? function, i.e. it serves to ?further structure
or modulate the event described by the main pre-
dicator? (Butt, 1995). Most researchers agree that
the light verb adds aspect, tense and ?aktionsart?
information to the predicate. Since the support
verb?s meaning differs from the meaning of the
(main) verb lexeme, the meaning of the support
verb construction is not fully compositional. Due
to the similarities with other idiosyncratic expres-
sions, support verb constructions (LVCs) belong
to the group of lexicalized multiword expressions
(Sag et al, 2001).
We limit this study to support verb construc-
tions for two practical reasons. First, there seems
to be a group of core light verbs that exist cross-
linguistically. Thus, we can concentrate on a
small set of verbal lexemes. Second, these light
verbs are based on main verbs still in active use
in the language (Butt, 1995). Concerning Dutch,
nine verbs that can function as main but also as
light verbs are brengen ?bring?, doen ?do?, gaan
?go?, geven ?give?, hebben ?have?, komen ?come?,
krijgen ?get?, maken ?make?, nemen ?take? and
stellen ?state? (Hollebrandse, 1993). Establishing
the lexical properties of light verb predicates is
necessary so that parsers do not misanalyze main
verb and light verb uses.
Before we describe a corpus-based method to
extract evidence of variation from a syntactically
annotated corpus, we enumerate some research
assumptions and highlight the types of variation
and modification object of this study. Section 3
presents the automated method and the evaluation
of its merits. Section 4 describes a proposal of the
required lexical annotation drawn from a working
implementation. Our conclusions and further im-
provements are summarised in section 6.
2 Base form, variation and modification
In addition to a subject, some prepositional sup-
port verb constructions select an additional com-
plement. This may be realized by an accusat-
ive, dative or reflexive NP. Prior to applying the
corpus-based method described in section 3, we
partly ignore the lexical content within the PP
complement; this is also why we want to estab-
lish the variation potential within LVCs. For the
above two reasons, we assume that the minimum
required lexemes (i.e. common to all preposi-
tional LVCs) include the argument PP and the sup-
port verb and represent each expression as a triple
of the form [PREPOSITION NOUN VERB] (P N V).
(Thus, determiners and modifiers are left out).
Some further assumptions must be introduced,
namely, what we understand as a base form and as
a variant of a support verb construction. The base
form includes the mentioned triple and may in-
clude other lexicalized arguments. In expressions
that allow no morphosyntactic variation or modi-
fication within the required arguments, tense in-
flection is usually possible. The base form shows
the infinitive verb form. The base form of the ex-
pression voet bij stuk houden ?stick to one?s guns
(fig)? includes the noun voet, the PP bij stuk and
the verb houden; tense inflection is possible (1-b).
(1) a. VOET BIJ STUK HOUDEN
64
b. De
the
verzekeraars
insurers
hielden
kept
echter
really
voet
foot
bij
by
stuk.
piece
?The insurance companies really sticked to
their guns (fig.)?
Any instance of an LVC whose NP within the PP
argument differs from the NOUN lexeme is con-
sidered a variant. The expression uit zijn dak
gaan ?go crazy? has as base form (2-a) with the
noun dak allowing various possessive determiners
(2-b).
(2) a. UIT DAK GAAN
b. Het
the
publiek
audience
ging
went
uit
out
zijn
his
dak.
roof
?The audience went crazy.?
We study variation observed within the expres-
sion. We focus on two levels:
lexeme level productive inflectional and deriva-
tional morphology.
phrase level variability in specifiers and modifi-
ers.
The evidence we seek to extract is the follow-
ing: (a) use of diminutive in nominal lexemes; (b)
singular and plural alternation in nouns. Evid-
ence of derivational morphology, for example,
instances of compounding (another noun or an
acronym prefixed to the head noun) or a genit-
ive noun modifier; (c) alternation in specifiers.
Among the specifiers: zero determiner, definite,
indefinite, reciprocals, possessives, demonstrat-
ives and quantifiers; (d) NPs that are realized by
reflexives. Reflexives may instantiate either open
argument slots or an NP within complement PPs;
and (e), among modification, we explore pre-
nominal adjectives, past participles, gerunds and
other intervening material.
In addition, some expressions allow relative
clauses and PP post-nominal modifiers. Relat-
ive clauses are observed less often than PP post-
nominal modifiers. So far, we ignore these two
types of modification because we extract the evid-
ence from an automatically annotated corpus and
with automated means. It is well-known that dis-
ambiguating a syntactic attachment site, e.g. a
PP?attachment site, is one of the hardest problems
for present-day parsing technology. Needless to
say, the parser (Alpino) also encounters diffi-
culties with this problem. In this work, we did
not investigate syntactic flexibility at the sentence
level, that is, processes such as passive, topicaliz-
ation, control, clefting, coordination, etc.
3 A corpus-based method to infer
variation
With access to automatically parsed data, subcat-
egorization frames and a standard search query
language such as dt search, we can extract all
instances of an LVC that satisfy rather specific
morphosyntactic features and head-complement
dependencies; these requirements ? expressed
as dt search queries ? are applied to XML-
encoded syntactic dependency trees. For a more
detailed description of the corpus-based method
refer to (Villada Moiro?n, 2005).
3.1 Corpus annotation
A list of P N V triples was automatically acquired
from a syntactically annotated corpus using col-
location statistics and linguistic diagnostics (Vil-
lada Moiro?n, 2004). A P N V triple represents an
abstraction of a support verb construction (LVC).
For each automatically extracted triple, all sen-
tences containing the three component lexemes
found in the Twente Nieuws Corpus (TwNC) (Or-
delman, 2002) were collected in a subcorpus. For
example, for the expression uit zijn dak gaan ?go
crazy?, all sentences that include the preposition
uit ?out?, the noun dak ?roof? and the verb gaan
?go? or one of its inflectional variants are collec-
ted in a subcorpus.
The Alpino parser (van der Beek et al, 2002)
was used to annotate the subcorpora. This is a
wide-coverage parser for Dutch. Based on a lexic-
alist constraint-based grammar framework (Head-
Driven Phrase Structure Grammar) (Pollard and
Sag, 1994), the Alpino grammar licenses a wide
variety of syntactic constructions.
All parsed data is stored as XML-dependency
trees. To illustrate the annotation, the result of
parsing example (2-b) is the dependency structure
tree shown in figure 1.
Among the information contained in the parsed
trees, we use: (i) categorical information (phrasal
65
top
smain
su
np
det
det
het/[0,1]
hd
noun
publiek/[1,2]
hd
verb
ga/[2,3]
ld
pp
hd
prep
uit/[3,4]
obj1
np
det
det
zijn/[4,5]
hd
noun
dak/[5,6]
Het publiek ging uit zijn dak .
Figure 1: This syntactic dependency tree corres-
ponds to the parsed sentence in (2-b).
(np, pp) and lexical (det, noun)), (ii) syntactic
information (grammatical function or dependency
relation (subject su, direct object obj1, locative
or directive complement ld, head hd, determiner
det)) and (iii) lexical information (lexemes and
word forms). Dependency nodes are crucial in
stating daughter?ancestor relations between con-
stituents and sub-constituents in an LVC.
3.2 Extraction
dt search (Bouma and Kloosterman, 2002), a
treebank query tool based on XPATH,2 is used
to extract evidence from the annotated subcor-
pora. A dt search query applied on the corres-
ponding parsed subcorpus searches for all LVC in-
stances. Two types of queries are needed: narrow
search and wide search queries. Narrow search
queries seek instances of a head-dependent rela-
tion between a VERB and a PP sibbling, given
necessary lexical restrictions as input. Wide
searches state that the PP is embedded (some-
where) under a clausal node whose head is VERB.
Wide searches are needed because the parser may
wrongly attach the sought PP to a previous noun.
(Thus, in the annotated data the PP and VERB do
2Nevertheless, other XML-based query tools are also
freely available, e.g. XSLT or the TIGERSearch kit.
not satisfy a head-dependent relation). Finally,
the vaguest search states that a given PP needs to
occur within the same sentence as the verb. This
type of search is used in case the other two types
fail to retrieve any evidence. The query in figure 2
seeks NP-internal adjectival modification.
dt_search
?//node[@cat="np" and
./node[@cat="ap"] and
./node[@rel="hd" and
@root="gedachte"] and
../node[@rel="obj1"] and
../node[@rel="hd" and @word="op"
and
(../../../node[@rel="hd" and
@root="breng"] or
../../node[@rel="hd" and
@root="breng"] or
../node[@rel="hd" and
@root="breng"]) ] ]?
breng.opgedachten/*.xml
Figure 2: Query to extract adjectives in the ex-
pression iemand op gedachten brengen.
Among the constraints expressed in the search
queries there are: parent-child relations between
nodes, phrase category (@cat), dependency rela-
tion (@rel), word base form (@root) or surface
form (@word). Queries need to capture deeply
embedded LVCs. A verbal complement embedded
under several modal or auxiliary verbs is rather
common. To allow uncertainty about the location
of the PP argument node with respect to its head
verb, disjunctive constraints are introduced in the
queries (figure 2).
3.3 Retrieved corpus evidence
A search query retrieves each LVC realization that
satisfies the query requirements, as well as the
LVC frequency in the subcorpora.
Figure 3 gives an excerpt from the observed
adjectival modification in iemand op gedachten
brengen ?give s.o. the idea?. Op andere gedachten
brengen ?change s.o.?s idea? is the most frequent
realization with 634 out of a total of 682 occur-
rences. This suggests that the adjective andere is
almost frozen in the expression.
The method extracts evidence of morpholo-
gical productivity, variation of specifiers and ad-
jectival modification, i.e. positive and negative
evidence. A description of the positive evidence
66
1 aangename gedachten
1 amoureuze gedachten
634 andere gedachten
1 andere politieke gedachten
1 andere, redelijke gedachten
1 beeldende gedachten
1 bepaalde gedachten
2 betere gedachten
1 duivelse gedachten
1 heel andere gedachten over...
1 hitsige gedachten
1 hogere gedachten
1 kritische gedachten
1 meer poe?tische gedachten
Figure 3: Observed adjectival modification in the
LVC iemand op gedachten brengen.
follows. We investigated 107 Dutch LVCs: 94 ex-
pressions that require a PP argument among which
some show an NPacc open slot; lexical restrictions
affect the verb and the PP argument; in addition,
13 other expressions are made up of a (partially)
lexicalized NP and a PP argument.
LVCs fall in one of three groups: (a) totally
fixed, (b) semi-fixed and (c) flexible. Fixed
LVCs show no variation and no modification in
the lexicalized NP (if present) and PP constitu-
ent(s). 42% of the LVCs studied are fixed. Semi-
fixed LVCs show partially lexicalized constitu-
ent(s) (20.5% of the studied LVCs). Rarely, a sin-
gular noun appears in plural. Variation affects the
lexeme?s morphology and/or the specifiers slot.
Expressions whose lexicalized argument requires
a reflexive are included into this group. Flexible
LVCs allow adjectival modification (37.5% of the
studied LVCs). The data is rather varied. There are
LVCs that show: (i) non-productive morphology
and no specifier variation but they show a limited
number of adjectives and, (ii) specifier variation
(some show compounding) and limited adjectival
variation. Border-line cases exhibit no morpho-
logical productivity and either definite/possessive
determiner alternation or no specifier variation;
modification involves a unique adjective (e.g. in
(verzekerde) bewaring stellen ?put into custody?).
Negative evidence (noise) typically includes
sentences where the VERB and the PP occur
within the same clause but not in the LVC con-
text (in its literal use). Often, the PP is an adjunct
or a complement of another verb. The reason for
this noise can be attributed to the uncertainty in
the search queries or errors in the annotated data.
3.4 Discussion
We argue that the corpus-based method is effi-
cient in extracting the linguistic contexts where
variation and internal modification are found in-
side LVCs. Examining the evidence retrieved by
the corpus-based method, a researcher quickly
forms an impression about which expressions are
totally fixed and which expressions allow some
variation and/or modification. One also has direct
access to the realizations of the variable slots, the
LVC frequency and relevant examples in the cor-
pus. Next, we discuss some limitations posed by
the corpus annotation, extraction procedure and
the nature of the idiosyncratic data.
Finding specific constructions in corpora of
free word order languages such as Dutch is not
trivial. Corpus annotation enriched with gram-
matical functions and/or dependency relations fa-
cilitates the search task.3 Thus, we are able to
explore LVC occurrences in any syntactic struc-
ture (main or subordinate sentence, questions,
etc.) without stating linear precedence con-
straints. Furthermore, in most sentences, the an-
notation correctly identifies the clause containing
the LVC thus, granting access to all sibblings of
the head verb.
In general, knowledge of the grammar and the
lexicon used by the parser is helpful. In particu-
lar, knowing whether some LVCs or idiosyncratic
phrases are already annotated in the lexicon as
lexicalized phrases helps. In the event that an LVC
were described in the lexicon, the parser either
analyzes the expression as an LVC or as a regular
verb phrase. This uncertainty needs to be taken
into account in the extraction queries.
The corpus-based method requires information
about the subcategorization requirements of the
LVCs. This information was manually entered
for each expression. Once we have a list of
PREPOSITION NOUN VERB triples, methods de-
scribed in the literature on automatic acquisition
of subcategorization information might be suc-
cessful in finding out the remaining LVC syntactic
requirements. This is an open issue for future re-
3Preliminary experiments were done on chunked data. A
corpus-based method applied on phrasal chunks was imprac-
tical. A lot of noise needed to be manually discarded.
67
search, but a starting point would be the approach
by (Briscoe and Carroll, 1997).
The success of the search queries is dependent
on parsing accuracy. Sometimes extracted evid-
ence shows the specific PP we seek but misan-
alyzed as a dependent of another verb. Parsing
accuracy introduces another shortcoming: evid-
ence of relative clauses and PP post-nominal mod-
ifiers cannot be automatically retrieved. Because
of structural ambiguity, attachment decisions are
still a hard parsing problem. This led us to ignore
these two types of modification in our research.
Some limitations due to the nature of the
support verb constructions emerged. Specifier
changes or insertion of modification may destroy
the LVC reading. The queries could extract evid-
ence that looks like a variant of the LVC base
form; in practice, the LVC interpretation does not
apply. For example, in most of the instances of the
expression de hand boven het hoofd houden ?to
protect s.o.? (lit. the hand above the head hold),
hoofd is preceded by the definite determiner;
there are also a few instances with a reciprocal
elkaars ?each other?s? and some instances with
possessive determiners. The query results sug-
gest that all three specifiers are possible; however,
the instances with possessive determiners are lit-
eral uses. Occasionally, a PREPOSITION NOUN
VERB triple clusters homonymous expressions. A
search that specifies the triple base form IN HAND
HOUDEN could match any of the following: iets
in e?e?n hand houden ?to be the boss?, het heft in
handen houden ?remain in control?, de touwtjes in
handen houden, iets in handen houden ?have con-
trol over sth? or iets in de handen houden ?to hold
sth in one?s hands (lit.)?. Access to the subcat-
egorization requirements of the LVC use (that dif-
fers from those of the regular phrase) (e.g. iemand
van de straat houden ?keep s.o. off the street? vs.
van de straat houden ?to love the street?) would
solve some cases.
The corpus-based method cannot be fully auto-
mated; that is, extraction of variation and modi-
fication evidence cannot be done fully automat-
ically. Instead, the evidence retrieved needs to
be manually inspected. This brings up a last
limitation of the method. At least one instance
of each variation and modification type requires
manual inspection. The researcher needs to es-
tablish whether the LVC interpretation is present
or only a literal reading applies. Yet, all the tools
we used facilitated this process and they provide
plenty of relevant linguistic empirical evidence.
A last limitation affecting most corpus-based
research is that having found no evidence of vari-
ation and modification does not mean that it is not
possible in LVCs. Some LVCs are rare in the cor-
pus; LVCs that exhibit variation and/or modifica-
tion are even more infrequent. A larger corpus is
desirable.
4 Lexicon representation in Alpino
The Alpino lexicon entries specify (if applicable)
subcategorization frames enriched with depend-
ency relations and some lexical restrictions. Sup-
port verb constructions and idiomatic expressions
are treated similarly; neither of these expressions
constitute a lexical entry on their own (cf. (Breidt
et al, 1996)). We concentrate on the LVC annota-
tion in the remainder.
Support verb constructions are lexicalized
combinations of a support verb. Main verbs ex-
hibit the same form (lemma) as their related sup-
port verb. We distinguish between a main verb
and a support verb by specifying the distributional
context of the support verb. This context is cap-
tured as an extended subcategorization frame. 4
An extended subcategorization frame consists of
two parts: (a) list of syntactic dependents and
(b) syntactic operations that the LVC (dis)allows.
Among syntactic dependents, we include those
lexemes and/or phrases necessary to derive the
predicational content of the LVC. The syntactic
dependents may be realized by three types of
phrases: (i) fully lexicalized, (ii) partially lexic-
alized and (iii) variable argument slots. Next, the
description of the phrase types is supported with
expressions encountered earlier in the paper. 5
Fully lexicalized phrases exist as individual
lexical entries. No variation, modification nor ex-
traction out of these phrases is possible. A fully
4This working implementation assumes that the verb se-
lects the dependents of the LVC, thus, departing from other
proposals (Abeill?e, 1995) where the complement noun se-
lects the support verb. Although the semantics layer is left
out, this approach echoes lexicalist HPSG proposals such
as (Krenn and Erbach, 1994; Sailer, 2000).
5Each example displays the light verb followed by its
syntactic dependents given within ??. Subject is omitted.
68
lexicalized phrase is a string of lexemes ? each in
their surface form ? and is represented within ?[]?:
houden ? dat,[de,hand],[boven,het,hoofd] ?
houden ? refl, [van,de,domme] ?
Partially lexicalized phrases declare the type of
argument they introduce e.g. accusative, semi-
fixed prepositional phrase, predicative argument.
These phrases also specify lexical restrictions on
the head lexeme and, allow alternation of spe-
cifiers and morphological productivity in nouns.
Partially lexicalized PPs list the head preposition
and its object NP head.
houden ? acc(rekening), pc(met) ?
brengen ? acc, pp(op,gedachten) ?
Finally, open argument slots state what sort
of argument is required (e.g. acc(usative),
refl(exive), dat(ive)). No lexical restrictions are
declared.
stellen ? acc, pp(in,bewaring) ?
Concerning the syntactic behavior of LVCs,
Alpino currently only declares whether the ex-
pressions allow passive or not and the type of
passive. The current representation allows in-
tervening adjuncts and other material between
the syntactic dependents. No explicit constraints
are stated with regards to topicalization, wh-
extraction, coordination, clefting, etc.
5 Related work
Automatically annotated corpora have been used
before to identify (prepositional) support verb
constructions and to asses their variation and
modification potential. Led by (Krenn, 2000) and
continued by (Spranger, 2004) (among others),
most work focused on German support verb con-
structions and figurative expressions. Our use of
fully parsed corpora and the treebank query tool
to extract relevant evidence introduces a funda-
mental difference with the cited work.
Analytic techniques to annotate syntactically
flexible (but idiosyncratic) expressions in lexical
resources are discussed in (Breidt et al, 1996;
Sag et al, 2001) and (Odijk, 2004). Within a
similar line of work, (Sag et al, 2001) propose
lexical selection, inheritance hierarchies of con-
structions and the notion of idiomatic construc-
tion to formalize the syntax and semantics of truly
fixed, semi-fixed and syntactically flexible ex-
pressions. Assuming a regular syntactic behavior
and having checked that component lexemes sat-
isfy certain predicate-argument relationships, the
semantics layer assigns the idiomatic interpreta-
tion to syntactically flexible expressions. (Sag et
al., 2001) only mention light verb plus noun con-
structions. Supposedly, the Dutch prepositional
LVCs fall into the syntactically flexible group.
6 Conclusion and further improvements
The corpus-based method extracts evidence of
variation and modification within support verb
constructions. The method is sufficiently efficient
in extracting proof of morphological productivity,
specifier variation and adjectival modification in-
side LVCs, but at least one instance of each type
of variation needs to be manually assessed to de-
termine whether the LVC interpretation is present.
The evidence retrieved allows us to establish the
required syntactic structure, lexical restrictions
and furthermore, a preliminary classification of
LVCs. Our findings form the basis of the lexical
annotation of these expressions in Alpino.
A few ideas to enhance the method described in
order to improve the quality of the retrieved evid-
ence follow. During compilation of the raw sub-
corpus, we will adapt the method so that, for each
P N V triple, all verb and noun variant forms are
retrieved from an existing lexicon. This ensures
that the ?subcorpus compiler? collects all possible
variants from the TwNC. Given that the parsed
data includes dependency relations we are trying
different methods to infer the complete subcat-
egorization frame of each LVC. So far, an LVC
is represented as a P N V triple, but we need to
know other syntactic requirements of the predic-
ate. Access to subcategorization frames ought to
improve the extraction of variation evidence. Fi-
nally, the experiments described concentrate on
support verb constructions. It is sometimes dif-
ficult to distinguish a support verb construction
from an idiomatic expression. Thus, some of the
expressions might perfectly belong to the idioms
class, rather than the support verb construction
group. A related question is how to distinguish
69
the literal use of triples from the support verb
construction use automatically. This still needs
a solution.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Gertjan van Noord and the
three anonymous reviewers for their invaluable
input on this research. This research was suppor-
ted in part by the NWO PIONIER grant 220-70-001
and also the IRME STEVIN project.
References
Anne Abeill?e. 1995. The Flexibility of French
Idioms: a representation with lexicalized tree ad-
joining grammar. In Martin Everaert, Erik-Jan
van der Linden, Andre Schenk, and Rob Schreuder,
editors, Idioms: Structural & Psychological Per-
spectives. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
T. Baldwin, J. Beavers, L. van der Beek, F. Bond,
D. Flickinger, and I.A. Sag, to appear. In search
of a systematic treatment of Determinerless PPs.
Computational Linguistics Dimensions of Syntax
and Semantics of Prepositions. Kluwer Academic.
Gosse Bouma and Geert Kloosterman. 2002. Query-
ing dependency treebanks in XML. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2002), volume V,
pages 1686?1691, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,
Spain.
Elisabeth Breidt, Frederique Segond, and Giuseppen
Valetto. 1996. Local grammars for the description
of multi-word lexemes and their automatic recogni-
tion in texts. In COMPLEX96, Budapest.
Ted Briscoe and John Carroll. 1997. Automatic ex-
traction of subcategorization from corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th ACL conference on applied Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 356?363, Wash-
ington,D.C.
Miriam Butt. 1995. The structure of complex predic-
ates in Urdu. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.
Bart Hollebrandse. 1993. Dutch light verb construc-
tions. Master?s thesis, Tilburg University, the Neth-
erlands.
Brigitte Krenn and Gregor Erbach. 1994. Idioms
and support verb constructions. In John Nerbonne,
Klaus Netter, and Carl Pollard, editors, German
in Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, pages
365?395. CSLI.
Brigitte Krenn. 2000. The Usual Suspects: Data Ori-
ented Models for the Identification and Representa-
tion of Lexical Collocations. Ph.D. thesis, DFKI &
Universitat des Saarlandes.
Rosamund Moon. 1998. Fixed expressions and
Idioms in English. A corpus-based approach. Clar-
endom Press, Oxford.
Tim Nicolas. 1995. Semantics of idiom modifi cation.
In Martin Everaert, Erik-Jan van der Linden, Andre
Schenk, and Rob Schreuder, editors, Idioms: Struc-
tural & Psychological Perspectives. Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, New Jersey.
Jan Odijk. 2004. Reusable lexical representation for
idioms. In Proceedings of 4th International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation 2004,
volume III, pages 903?906, Portugal.
R.J.F. Ordelman. 2002. Twente Nieuws Corpus
(TwNC), August. Parlevink Language Techono-
logy Group. University of Twente.
Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head?Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. The University of
Chicago Press, CSLI: Stanford.
Susanne Riehemann. 2001. A constructional ap-
proach to idioms and word formation. Ph.D. thesis,
Stanford University.
Ivan Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, A. Copestake, and
D. Flickinger. 2001. Multiword expressions: a pain
in the neck for NLP. LinGO Working Paper No.
2001-03.
Manfred Sailer. 2000. Combinatorial Semantics
& Idiomatic Expressions in Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Tuebingen.
Kristina Spranger. 2004. Beyond subcategoriza-
tion acquisition. Multi-parameter extraction from
German text corpora. In Proceedings of the 11th
EURALEX International Congress, volume I, pages
171?177, France.
Leonoor van der Beek, Gosse Bouma, Jan Da-
ciuk, Tanja Gaustad, Robert Malouf, Gertjan
van Noord, Robbert Prins, and Begon?a Vil-
lada. 2002. Algorithms for Linguistic Pro-
cessing NWO PIONIER Progress Report. Avail-
able electronically at http://odur.let.rug.
nl/?vannoord/alp., Groningen.
Begon?a Villada Moir?on. 2004. Distinguishing prepos-
itional complements from fi xed arguments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th EURALEX International Con-
gress, volume III, pages 935?942, Lorient, France.
Begon?a Villada Moir?on. 2005. Data-driven Identi-
fication of fixed expressions and their modifiability.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Groningen.
70
