Turn-taking in Mandarin Dialogue:
Interactions of Tone and Intonation
Gina-Anne Levow
Computer Science Department
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 USA
levow@cs.uchicago.edu
Abstract
Fluent dialogue requires that speak-
ers successfully negotiate and signal
turn-taking. While many cues to turn
change have been proposed, especially
in multi-modal frameworks, here we fo-
cus on the use of prosodic cues to these
functions. In particular, we consider
the use of prosodic cues in a tone lan-
guage, Mandarin Chinese, where varia-
tions in pitch height and slope addition-
ally serve to determine word meaning.
Within a corpus of spontaneous Chi-
nese dialogues, we find that turn-unit fi-
nal syllables are significantly lower in
average pitch and intensity than turn-
unit initial syllables in both smooth
turn changes and segments ended by
speaker overlap. Interruptions are char-
acterized by significant prosodic dif-
ferences from smooth turn initiations.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that these
contrasts correspond to an overall low-
ering across all tones in final posi-
tion, which largely preserves the rela-
tive heights of the lexical tones. In clas-
sification tasks, we contrast the use of
text and prosodic features. Finally, we
demonstrate that, on balanced training
and test sets, we can distinguish turn-
unit final words from other words at
? 93% accuracy and interruptions from
smooth turn unit initiations at 62% ac-
curacy.
1 Introduction
Fluent dialogues require effective turn transitions
between speakers. Research in turn-taking, typ-
ified by (Duncan, 1974), posits several key sig-
nals for turn-taking, including a turn-change sig-
nal which offers to cede the floor, speaker-state
signal which indicates taking the floor, within-
turn signal, and continuation signals. This pro-
cess fundamentally requires cooperation between
participants both to produce the contextually ap-
propriate signals and to interpret those of their in-
terlocutor. These analyses have proposed a wide
range of cues to turn status, ranging from gaze and
gesture in a multi-modal context to prosodic cues
including pitch, intensity, and duration as well as
lexical and syntactic cues.
Much of this fundamental research as well
as computational implementations have focused
on English, a language with well-studied intona-
tional sentence and discourse structure. A sub-
stantial body of work has identified sentence-like
units as well as fragments and repairs in con-
versational speech, including (Ostendorf, forth-
coming; Liu et al, 2004; Shriberg et al, 2001)
These approaches have employed lexical and
prosodic cues in diverse frameworks, including
Hidden Markov Models employing decision trees
and hidden state language models, neural net-
works, and maximum entropy models. (Shriberg
et al, 2001) identified jump-in points and jump-
in words in multi-party meeting speech using
prosodic and language model features at accura-
cies of 65 and 77% under equal priors. Further-
more, (Ward and Tsukahara, 2000) demonstrated
that backchannels occurred at predictable points
72
with specific prosodic characteristics in both En-
glish and Japanese.
In the current paper, we consider the interac-
tion of potential prosodic intonational cues re-
lated to turn-taking with the realization of lexical
tone in a tone language, Putonghua or Mandarin
Chinese. Mandarin employs four canonical lexi-
cal tones distinguished by pitch height and pitch
contour: high level, mid-rising, low falling-rising,
and high falling. We explore whether prosodic
features are also employed in turn-taking behav-
ior in this language and whether the forms are
comparable to those employed in languages with
lexical tone. We demonstrate that intonational
cues quite similar to those in English are also
employed in Chinese with lower pitch and in-
tensity at ends of turn units than at the begin-
nings of those turn units. Interruptions likewise
are distinguished from smooth turn transitions by
prosodic means, including greater pitch elevation.
We demonstrate how these changes interact with
lexical tone by substantial lowering of average
pitch height across all tones in final positions and
contrast pitch contours in final and non-final po-
sitions. Finally, these cues in conjunction with
silence and durational features can be employed
to distinguish turn-unit final words from non-final
words in the dialogue and words that initiate in-
terruptions from those which start smoother turn
transitions.
In the remainder of the paper we will briefly de-
scribe the data set employed in these experiments
and the basic extraction of prosodic features (Sec-
tion 2). We then present acoustic analyses con-
trasting turn unit final and turn unit initial sylla-
bles under different turn transition types (Section
3). We will describe the impact of these intona-
tional cues on the realization of lexical tone (Sec-
tion 4). Finally we will apply these prosodic con-
trasts to enable classification of words for finality
and interruption status (Section 5).
2 Experimental Data
The data in this study was drawn from the Tai-
wanese Putonghua Speech Corpus1. The mate-
rials chosen include 5 spontaneous dialogues by
Taiwanese speakers of Mandarin, seven females
1Available from http://www.ldc.upenn.edu
and three males. The dialogues, averaging 20
minutes in duration, were recorded on two chan-
nels, one per speaker, in a quiet room and digi-
tized at 16KHz sampling. The recordings were
later manually transcribed and segmented into
words; turn-beginnings and overlaps were time-
stamped. The manual word segmentation was
based on both syntax and phonology according to
a methodology described in detail in (Duanmu,
1996).
2.1 Prosodic Features
For the subsequent analysis, the conversa-
tions were divided into chunks based on the
turn and overlap time-stamps. Using a Chi-
nese character-to-pinyin dictionary and a hand-
constructed mapping of pinyin sequences to
ARPABET phonemes, the transcribed text was
then force-aligned to the corresponding audio
segments using the language porting mechanism
in the University of Colorado Sonic speech rec-
ognizer (Pellom et al, 2001). The resulting align-
ment provided phone, syllable, and word dura-
tions as well as silence positions and durations.
Pitch and intensity values for voiced regions
were computed using the functions ?To Pitch? and
?To Intensity? in the freely available Praat acous-
tic analysis software package(Boersma, 2001).
We then computed normalized pitch and inten-
sity values based on log-scaled z-score normal-
ization of each conversation side. Based on the
above alignment, we then computed maximum
and mean pitch and intensity values for each syl-
lable and word for all voiced regions. Given the
presence of lexical tone, we extracted five points
evenly distributed across the ?final? region of the
syllable, excluding the initial consonant, if any.
We then estimated the linear syllable slope based
on the latter half of this region in which the effects
of tonal coarticulation are likely to be minimized
under the pitch target approximation model(Xu,
1997).
3 Acoustic Analysis of Turn-taking
Each of the turn units extracted above was tagged
based on its starting and ending conditions as one
of four types: smooth, rough, intersmooth, and
interrough. ?Smooth? indicates a segment-ending
transition from one speaker to another, not caused
73
Position Start Start
?Overlap or +Overlap
?Spkr Change +Spkr Change
End Smooth Intersmooth
?Overlap 1413 289
End Rough Interrough
+Overlap 407 68
Table 1: Types of turn units
by the start of overlap with another speaker. By
contrast, a rough transition indicates the end of a
chunk at the start of overlap with another speaker.
The prefix ?inter? indicates the turn began with
an interruption, identified by overlap with the pre-
vious speaker and change of speaker holding the
floor. In this class, the new speaker continues to
hold the floor after the period of overlap.
We contrast turn unit initial and turn unit final
syllables for each type of transition and across all
turns. We compare mean pitch and mean intensity
in each case. We find in all cases highly signifi-
cant differences between mean pitch of turn unit
initial syllables and mean pitch of final syllables
(p < 0.0001) as illustrated in Figure 1. Syllables
in initial position have much higher log-scaled
mean pitch in all conditions. For intensity, we
find highly significant differences across all con-
ditions (p < 0.005), with initial syllables having
higher amplitude than final syllables. These con-
trasts appear in Figure 2. Furthermore, compar-
ing final intensity of transitions not marked by the
start of overlap with the intensity of the final pre-
overlap syllable in a transition caused by overlap,
we find significantly higher normalized mean in-
tensity in all rough transitions relative to others.
In contrast, comparable differences in pitch do not
reach significance.
Finally we compare smooth turn unit initia-
tions (?smooth?) to successful interruptions (?in-
terrough?,?intersmooth?), contrasting initial syl-
lables in each class. Here we find that both nor-
malized mean pitch (Figure 3) and normalized
mean intensity (Figure 4) in turn unit initial sylla-
bles are significantly higher in interruptions than
in ?smooth? turn transitions.2 Speakers use these
2If one compares both ?smooth? and ?rough? transitions
to ?intersmooth? and ?interrough? transitions, initial syl-
lables are significantly higher in pitch for the interruption
Figure 1: Pitch contrasts between syllables in ini-
tial and final position across turn types. Values for
initial position are in grey, final position in black.
Figure 2: Intensity contrasts between syllables in
initial and final position across turn types. Val-
ues for initial position are in grey, final position
in black.
74
Figure 3: Pitch contrasts between initial syllables
in smooth turn transitions and interruptions. Val-
ues for smooth transitions are in black, interrup-
tions in grey.
Figure 4: Intensity contrasts between initial sylla-
bles in smooth turn transitions and interruptions.
Values for smooth transitions are in black, inter-
ruptions in grey.
prosodic cues to take the floor by interruption.
These descriptive analyses demonstrate that in-
tonational cues to turn-taking do play a role in a
tone language. Not only does intensity play a sig-
nificant role, but pitch also is employed to dis-
tinguish initiation and finality, in spite of its con-
current use in determining lexical identity. In the
following section, we describe the effects on tone
height and tone shape caused by these broader in-
tonational phenomena.
4 Tone and Intonation
We have determined that syllables in turn unit fi-
nal position have dramatically reduced average
pitch relative to those in turn unit initial posi-
tion, and these contrasts can serve to signal turn-
change and speaker change as suggested by (Dun-
classes, but differences for intensity do not reach signifi-
cance (p = 0.053)
Figure 5: Contrasts in average pitch for the four
canonical tones in turn non-final and final posi-
tions. Values for non-final positions are in grey,
final positions in black.
can, 1974). How do these changes interact with
lexical identity and lexical tone? Since tone oper-
ates on a syllable in Chinese, we consider the av-
erage pitch and tone contours of syllables in final
and non-final position. We find that average pitch
for all tones is reduced, and relative tone height
is largely preserved.3 Thus a final high tone is
readily distinguishable from a final low tone, if
the listener can interpret the syllable as turn-final.
The contrasts appear in Figure 5.
Turning to tone contour, we find likewise lit-
tle change between non-final and final contours,
with the contours running parallel, but at a much
lower pitch.4 For illustration, mid-rising and high
falling tones are shown in Figure 6. Compara-
ble behavior has been observed at other discourse
boundaries such as story boundaries in newswire
speech. (Levow, 2004).
5 Recognizing Turn Unit Boundaries
and Interruptions
Based on the salient contrasts in pitch and in-
tensity observed above, we employ prosodic fea-
tures both to identify turn boundaries and to dis-
tinguish between the start of interruptions and
smooth transitions. We further contrast the use
of prosodic features with text n-gram features.
3This analysis excludes exclamatory and interjective par-
ticles.
4It is also true that contours do not always match their
canonical forms even in non-final position. This variation
may be attributed to a combination of tonal coarticulatory
effects and the presence of other turn-internal boundaries.
75
Figure 6: Contrasts in pitch contour for mid-
rising and high falling tones in turn non-final and
final positions. Values for non-final positions are
in heavy lines, final positions in thin lines. Mid-
rising tone is in black, dashed lines, high falling
in solid lines.
5.1 Classifier Features: Prosodic
The features used in the classifier trained to rec-
ognize turn boundaries and turn types fall into two
classes: local and contextual. The local features
describe the words or syllables themselves, while
the contextual features capture contrasts between
adjacent words or syllables. The first set of fea-
tures thus includes the mean pitch and mean in-
tensity for the current word and syllable, the word
duration, and the maximum pitch and intensity
for the syllable. The second set of features in-
clude the length of any following silence and the
differences in mean pitch and mean intensity be-
tween the current word or syllable and the follow-
ing word or syllable.
5.2 Classifier Features: Text
For contrastive purposes, we also consider the use
of textual features for turn boundary and bound-
ary type classification.5 Here we exploit syllable
and word features, as well as syllable n-gram fea-
tures. We use the toneless pinyin representation
of the current word and the final syllable in each
word. Such features aim to capture, for example,
question particles that signal the end of a turn.
In addition, we extracted the five preceding and
five following syllables in the sequence around
the current syllable. We then experimented with
different window widths for n-gram construction,
5All text features are drawn from the ground truth manual
text transcripts.
ranging from one to five, as supported by the clas-
sifier described below.
5.3 Classifiers
We performed experiments with several classi-
fiers: Boostexter (Schapire and Singer, 2000),
a well-known implementation of boosted weak
learners, multi-class Support Vector Machines
with linear kernels (C-C.Cheng and Lin, 2001),
an implementation of a margin-based discrimina-
tive classifier, and decision trees, implemented by
C4.5(Quinlan, 1992). All classifiers yielded com-
parable results on this classification task. Here
we present the results using Boostexter to ex-
ploit its support for text features and automatic n-
gram feature selection as well as its relative inter-
pretability. We used downsampled balanced train-
ing and test sets to enable assessment of the utility
of these features for classification and employed
10-fold cross-validation, presenting the average
over the runs.
5.3.1 Recognizing Turn Unit Ends
Using the features above we created a set of
1610 turn unit final words and 1610 non-final
words. Based on 10-fold cross-validation, using
combined text and prosodic features, we obtain an
accuracy of 93.1% on this task. The key prosodic
features in this classification are silence duration,
which is the first feature selected, and maximum
intensity. The highest lexical features are preced-
ing ?ta?, preceding ?ao?, and following ?dui?. If
silence features are excluded, classification accu-
racy drops substantially to 69%, still better than
the 50% chance baseline for this set. In this case,
syllable mean intensity features become the first
selected for classification.
We also consider the relative effectiveness of
classifiers based on text, with silence, or prosodic
features alone. We find that, when silence
duration features are available, both text- and
prosodic-based classifiers perform comparably at
93.5% and 93.7% accuracy respectively, near the
effectiveness of the combined text and prosodic
classifier. However, when silence features are
excluded, a greater difference is found between
classification based on text features and classifi-
cation based on prosodic features. Specifically,
without silence information, classification based
76
on text features alone reaches only 59.5%. How-
ever, classification based on prosodic features re-
mains somewhat more robust, though still with a
substantial drop in accuracy, at 66.5% for prosody
only. This finding suggests that although the pres-
ence of a longer silence interval is the best cue to
finality, additional prosodic features, such as dif-
ferences in pitch and intensity, concurrently sig-
nal the opportunity for another speaker to start a
turn. Text features, especially in highly disflu-
ent conversational speech, provide less clear ev-
idence. Results appear in Table 5.3.1.
5.3.2 Recognizing Interruptions
In order to create a comparable context for ini-
tial words in interruption and smoothly initiated
turns, we reversed the direction of the contex-
tual comparisons, comparing the preceding word
features to those of the current word and mea-
suring pre-word silences rather than following
silences. Using this configuration, we created
a set of 218 interruption initial words and 218
smooth transition initial words, following smooth
transitions without overlap. Based on 10-fold
cross-validation for this downsampled balanced
case, we obtain an accuracy of 62%, relative to a
50% baseline. The best classifiers employed only
prosodic features with silence duration and nor-
malized mean word pitch. Addition of text fea-
tures degrades test set performance as the classi-
fier rapidly overfits to the training materials. If we
exclude silence related features, accuracy drops to
almost chance.
6 Discussion and Conclusion
We have demonstrated that even in a language
that employs lexical tone, cues to turn and speaker
status are still carried by prosodic means, includ-
ing pitch. Specifically, turn unit initial syllables
have significantly higher mean pitch and inten-
sity than do final syllables in different turn transi-
tion types. The elevation of initial pitch is further
enhanced in interruptions, when a new speaker
seizes the floor beginning with an overlap of the
current speaker. These contrasts are similar to
those observed for English, and consistent with
signals described in the literature. These changes
result in an overall reduction in pitch for sylla-
bles in final position across all tones, but relative
pitch height employed by lexical tone is preserved
in most cases. Finally, we employed these cues to
train classifiers to distinguish turn unit final words
from other words in the dialogue and to distin-
guish interruption initial words from initial words
in smooth transitions with no overlap.
We further contrasted the utility of text and
prosodic features for the identification of turn
boundary position and type. We find that silence
is the most reliable cue both to identify final turn
boundaries and to distinguish types of turn tran-
sitions. In conjunction with silence features, text,
prosodic, and joint text-prosodic features can fare
comparably. However, for turn unit boundaries,
the availability of a variety of prosodic features
proves to be essential for relatively better classifi-
cation in the absence of silence information.
In future work, we plan to enhance tone recog-
nition by better contextual modeling that will
compensate for the effects of a variety of dis-
course boundaries, including turn and topic, on
tone realization. We also plan to embed turn-
based classification in a sequential discriminative
model to further facilitate integration of prosodic
and lexical features as well as sequence con-
straints on turn structure.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the developers of the Tai-
wanese Putonghua corpus and the Linguistic Data
Consortium for the provision of these resources.
This work was supported by NSF Grant 0414919.
References
P. Boersma. 2001. Praat, a system for doing phonetics
by computer. Glot International, 5(9?10):341?345.
C-C.Cheng and C-J. Lin. 2001. LIBSVM:a library
for support vector machines. Software available at:
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.
San Duanmu. 1996. Notes on word boundaries. Tai-
wanese Putonghua Corpus Documentation.
S. Duncan, 1974. Some signals and rules for taking
speaking turns in conversations, pages 298?311.
Gina-Anne Levow. 2004. Prosody-based topic seg-
mentation for mandarin broadcast news. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004, Companion Volume,
pages 137?140.
77
Prosody Only Text Prosody + Text
With silence 93.7% 93.5% 93.1%
Without silence 66.5% 59.5% 69%
Table 2: Recognition of turn unit final vs. non-final words
Y. Liu, A. Stolcke, E. Shriberg, and M. Harper. 2004.
Comparing and combining generative and poste-
rior probability models: Some advances in sentence
boundary detection in speech. In Proceedings of
Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing.
M. Ostendorf. forthcoming. Prosodic boundary de-
tection. In M. Horne, editor, Prosody: Theory
and Experiment. Studies Presented to Gosta Bruce.
Kluwer.
B. Pellom, W. Ward, J. Hansen, K. Hacioglu, J. Zhang,
X. Yu, and S. Pradhan. 2001. University of Col-
orado dialog systems for travel and navigation.
J.R. Quinlan. 1992. C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann.
Robert E. Schapire and Yoram Singer. 2000. Boost-
exter: A boosting-based system for text categoriza-
tion. Machine Learning, 39(2?3):135?168.
E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, and D. Baron. 2001. Can
prosody aid the automatic processing of multi-party
meetings? evidence from predicting punctuation,
disfluencies, and overlapping speech. In Proc. of
ISCA Tutorial and Research Workshop on Prosody
in Speech Recognition and Understanding.
N. Ward and W. Tsukahara. 2000. Prosodic features
which cue back-channel responses in English and
Japanese. Journal of Pragmatics, 23:1177?1207.
Yi Xu. 1997. Contextual tonal variations in Mandarin.
Journal of Phonetics, 25:62?83.
78
