  
A Lemmatization Method for Modern Mongolian and           
its Application to Information Retrieval 
Badam-Osor Khaltar           Atsushi Fujii 
Graduate School of Library, Information and Media Studies 
University of Tsukuba 
1-2 Kasuga Tsukuba, 305-8550, Japan 
{khab23, fujii}@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In Modern Mongolian, a content word can 
be inflected when concatenated with suf-
fixes. Identifying the original forms of 
content words is crucial for natural lan-
guage processing and information retrieval. 
We propose a lemmatization method for 
Modern Mongolian and apply our method 
to indexing for information retrieval. We 
use technical abstracts to show the effec-
tiveness of our method experimentally. 
1 Introduction 
The Mongolian language is divided into Tradition-
al Mongolian, which uses the Mongolian alphabet, 
and Modern Mongolian, which uses the Cyrillic 
alphabet. In this paper, we focus solely on the lat-
ter and use the word ?Mongolian? to refer to Mod-
ern Mongolian. 
In Mongolian, which is an agglutinative lan-
guage, each sentence is segmented on a phrase-by-
phrase basis. A phrase consists of a content word, 
such as a noun or a verb, and one or more suffixes, 
such as postpositional participles. A content word 
can potentially be inflected when concatenated 
with suffixes. 
Identifying the original forms of content words 
in Mongolian text is crucial for natural language 
processing and information retrieval. In informa-
tion retrieval, the process of normalizing index 
terms is important, and can be divided into lemma-
tization and stemming. Lemmatization identifies 
the original form of an inflected word, whereas 
stemming identifies a stem, which is not necessari-
ly a word.  
Existing search engines, such as Google and 
Yahoo!, do not perform lemmatization or stem-
ming for indexing Web pages in Mongolian. 
Therefore, Web pages that include only inflected 
forms of a query cannot be retrieved. 
In this paper, we propose a lemmatization me-
thod for Mongolian and apply our method to in-
dexing for information retrieval. 
2 Inflection types in Mongolian phrases 
Nouns, adjectives, numerals, and verbs can be 
concatenated with suffixes. Nouns and adjectives 
are usually concatenated with a sequence of a 
plural suffix, case suffix, and reflexive possessive 
suffix. Numerals are concatenated with either a 
case suffix or a reflexive possessive suffix. Verbs 
are concatenated with various suffixes, such as an 
aspect suffix, a participle suffix, and a mood suffix. 
Figure 1 shows the inflection types of content 
words in Mongolian phrases. In (a), there is no in-
flection in the content word ???? (book)?, conca-
tenated with the suffix ??? (the genitive case)?. 
The content words are inflected in (b)-(e). 
 
Type Example 
(a) No inflection ??? + ?? ? ????? 
book + genitive case 
(b) Vowel insertion ?? + ? ? ???? 
brother + dative case 
(c) Consonant insertion ?????? + ???? ?????????? 
building + genitive case 
(d) The letters ??? or ??? 
are eliminated, and the 
vowel converts to ???  
???? + ??? ? ?????? 
return + ablative case 
(e) Vowel elimination ???? + ??? ? ?????? 
work + ablative case  
Figure 1: Inflection types of content words in 
Mongolian phrases. 
1
  
Loanwords, which can be nouns, adjectives, or 
verbs in Mongolian, can also be concatenated with 
suffixes. In this paper, we define a loanword as a 
word imported from a Western language. 
Because loanwords are linguistically different 
from conventional Mongolian words, the suffix 
concatenation is also different from that for con-
ventional Mongolian words. Thus, exception rules 
are required for loanwords. 
For example, if the loanword ?????? (station)? 
is to be concatenated with a genitive case suffix, 
???? should be selected from the five genitive 
case suffixes (i.e., ??, ???, ?, ??, and ?) based 
on the Mongolian grammar. However, because 
?????? (station)? is a loanword, the genitive case 
????? is selected instead of ????, resulting in the 
noun phrase ????????? (station?s)?. 
Additionally, the inflection (e) in Figure 1 never 
occurs for noun and adjective loanwords.  
3 Related work 
Sanduijav et al (2005) proposed a lemmatization 
method for noun and verb phrases in Mongolian. 
They manually produced inflection rules and con-
catenation rules for nouns and verbs. Then, they 
automatically produced a dictionary by aligning 
nouns or verbs with suffixes. Lemmatization for 
phrases is performed by consulting this dictionary. 
Ehara et al (2004) proposed a morphological 
analysis method for Mongolian, for which they 
manually produced rules for inflections and conca-
tenations. However, because the lemmatization 
methods proposed by Sanduijav et al (2005) and 
Ehara et al (2004) rely on dictionaries, these me-
thods cannot lemmatize new words that are not in 
dictionaries, such as loanwords and technical terms. 
Khaltar et al (2006) proposed a lemmatization 
method for Mongolian noun phrases that does not 
use a noun dictionary. Their method can be used 
for nouns, adjectives, and numerals, because the 
suffixes that are concatenated with these are almost 
the same and the inflection types are also the same. 
However, they were not aware of the applicability 
of their method to adjectives and numerals. 
The method proposed by Khaltar et al (2006) 
mistakenly extracts loanwords with endings that 
are different from conventional Mongolian words. 
For example, if the phrase ?????????? 
(ecology?s)? is lemmatized, the resulting content 
word will be ????????, which is incorrect. The 
correct word is ???????? (ecology)?. This error 
occurs because the ending ?-????? (-ology)? does 
not appear in conventional Mongolian words.  
In addition, Khaltar et al (2006)?s method 
applies (e) in Figure 1 to loanwords, whereas in-
flection (e) never occurs in noun and adjective 
loanwords. 
Lemmatization and stemming are arguably ef-
fective for indexing in information retrieval (Hull, 
1996; Porter, 1980). Stemmers have been devel-
oped for a number of agglutinative languages, in-
cluding Malay (Tai et al, 2000), Indonesian (Ber-
lian Vega and Bressan, 2001), Finnish (Korenius et 
al., 2004), Arabic (Larkey et al, 2002), Swedish 
(Carlberger et al, 2001), Slovene (Popovi? and 
Willett, 1992) and Turkish (Ekmek?ioglu et al, 
1996). 
Xu and Croft (1998) and Melucci and Orio 
(2003) independently proposed a language-
independent method for stemming, which analyzes 
a corpus in a target language and identifies an 
equivalent class consisting of an original form, 
inflected forms, and derivations. However, their 
method, which cannot identify the original form in 
each class, cannot be used for natural language 
applications where word occurrences must be stan-
dardized by their original forms.  
Finite State Transducers (FSTs) have been ap-
plied to lemmatization. Although Karttunen and 
Beesley (2003) suggested the applicability of FSTs 
to various languages, no rule has actually been 
proposed for Mongolian. The rules proposed in this 
paper can potentially be used for FSTs. 
To the best of our knowledge, no attempt has 
been made to apply lemmatization or stemming to 
information retrieval for Mongolian. Our research 
is the first serious effort to address this problem. 
4 Methodology 
4.1 Overview 
In view of the discussion in Section 3, we en-
hanced the lemmatization method proposed by 
Khaltar et al (2006). The strength of this method is 
that noun dictionaries are not required. 
Figure 2 shows the overview of our lemmatiza-
tion method for Mongolian. Our method consists 
of two segments, which are identified with dashed 
lines in Figure 2: ?lemmatization for verb phrases? 
and ?lemmatization for noun phrases?. 
2
  
 
 
In Figure 2, we enhanced the method proposed 
by Khaltar et al (2006) from three perspectives. 
First, we introduced ?lemmatization for verb 
phrases?. There is a problem to be solved when we 
target both noun and verb phrases. There are a 
number of suffixes that can concatenate with both 
verbs and nouns, but the inflection type can be dif-
ferent depending on the part of speech. As a result, 
verb phrases can incorrectly be lemmatized as 
noun phrases and vice versa. 
Because new verbs are not created as frequently 
as nouns, we predefine a verb dictionary, but do 
not use a noun dictionary. We first lemmatize an 
entered phrase as a verb phrase and then check 
whether the extracted content word is defined in 
our verb dictionary. If the content word is not de-
fined in our verb dictionary, we lemmatize the in-
put phrase as a noun phrase.  
Second, we introduced a ?loanword identifica-
tion rule? in ?lemmatization for noun phrases?. We 
identify a loanword phrase before applying a 
?noun suffix segmentation rule? and ?vowel inser-
tion rule?. Because segmentation rules are different 
for conventional Mongolian words and loanwords, 
we enhance the noun suffix segmentation rule that 
was originally proposed by Khaltar et al (2006). 
Additionally, we do not use the vowel insertion 
rule, if the entered phrase is detected as a loanword 
phrase. The reason is that vowel elimination never 
occurs in noun loanwords.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Third, unlike Khaltar et al (2006), we targeted 
adjective and numeral phrases. Because the suffix-
es concatenated with nouns, adjectives, and num-
erals are almost the same, the lemmatization me-
thod for noun phrases can also be used for adjec-
tive and numeral phrases without any modifica-
tions. We use ?lemmatization for noun phrases? to 
refer to the lemmatization for noun, adjective, and 
numeral phrases. 
We briefly explain our lemmatization process 
using Figure 2. 
We consult a ?verb suffix dictionary? and per-
form backward partial matching to determine 
whether a suffix is concatenated at the end of a 
phrase. If a suffix is detected, we use a ?verb suffix 
segmentation rule? to remove the suffix and extract 
the content word. This process will be repeated 
until the residue of the phrase does not match any 
of the entries in the verb suffix dictionary. 
We use a ?vowel insertion rule? to check wheth-
er vowel elimination occurred in the content word 
and insert the eliminated vowel.  
If the content word is defined in a ?verb dictio-
nary?, we output the content word as a verb and 
terminate the lemmatization process. If not, we use 
the entered phrase and perform lemmatization for 
noun phrases. We consult a ?noun suffix dictio-
nary? to determine whether one or more suffixes 
are concatenated at the end of the target phrase. 
Yes 
No 
Detect a suffix in the phrase 
Remove suffixes and extract a content word 
Check if the content word is a verb 
Detect a suffix in the phrase 
Remove suffixes and extract a content word
Input a 
phrase 
Output the 
content word 
Process the inputted phrase as a noun phrase
Loanword identification rule 
Verb dictionary 
Verb suffix segmentation rule  
Noun suffix dictionary 
Noun suffix segmentation rule 
Verb suffix dictionary  
Figure 2: Overview of our lemmatization method for Mongolian.   
Lemmatization for noun phrases 
Vowel insertion rule Insert an eliminated vowel  
Insert an eliminated vowel  
Identify loanword 
Vowel insertion rule 
Lemmatization for verb phrases 
3
  
We use a ?loanword identification rule? to iden-
tify whether the phrase is a loanword phrase. We 
use a ?noun suffix segmentation rule? to remove 
the suffixes and extract the content word. If the 
phrase is identified as a loanword phrase we use 
different segmentation rules. 
We use the ?vowel insertion rule? which is also 
used for verb phrases to check whether vowel eli-
mination occurred in the content word and insert 
the eliminated vowel. However, if the phrase is 
identified as a loanword phrase, we do not use the 
vowel insertion rule. 
If the target phrase does not match any of the 
entries in the noun suffix dictionary, we determine 
that a suffix is not concatenated and we output the 
phrase as it is. 
The inflection types (b)?(d) in Figure 1 are 
processed by the verb suffix segmentation rule and 
noun suffix segmentation rule. The inflection (e) in 
Figure 1 is processed by the vowel insertion rule. 
We elaborate on the dictionaries and rules in 
Sections 4.2?4.8. 
4.2 Verb suffix dictionary 
We produced a verb suffix dictionary, which con-
sists of 126 suffixes that can concatenate with 
verbs. These suffixes include aspect suffixes, parti-
ciple suffixes, and mood suffixes. 
Figure 3 shows a fragment of our verb suffix 
dictionary, in which inflected forms of suffixes are 
shown in parentheses. All suffixes corresponding 
to the same suffix type represent the same meaning. 
4.3 Verb suffix segmentation rule 
For the verb suffix segmentation rule, we produced 
179 rules. There are one or more segmentation 
rules for each of the 126 verb suffixes mentioned 
in Section 4.2. 
Figure 4 shows a fragment of the verb suffix 
segmentation rule for suffix ?? (past)?. In the 
column ?Segmentation rule?, the condition of each 
?if? sentence is a phrase ending. ?V? refers to a 
vowel and ?*? refers to any strings. ?C9? refers to 
any of the nine consonants ???, ???, ???, ???, ???, 
???, ???, ???, or ???, and ?C7? refers to any of the 
seven consonants ???, ???, ???, ???, ???, ???, or 
???. If a condition is satisfied, we remove one or 
more corresponding characters. 
For example, because the verb phrase 
????????? (renew + past)? satisfies condition (ii),  
Suffix type Suffix 
Appeal 
Complete 
Perfect 
Progressive-perfect 
????, ???? 
??? 
??? (???), ??? (???), ???, ??? 
????, ????, ????, ???? 
Figure 3: Fragment of verb suffix dictionary. 
 
Suffix Segmentation rule   
 
? 
Past 
(i)  If ( *+ V + V +  ? )   
Remove ? 
(ii) If ( * + C9 + C7 + V + ? )  
Remove V + ? 
Figure 4: Fragment of verb suffix segmentation 
rule. 
 
we remove the suffix ??? and the preceding vowel 
??? to extract ????????. 
4.4 Verb dictionary 
We use the verb dictionary produced by Sanduijav 
et al (2005), which includes 1254 verbs. 
4.5 Noun suffix dictionary 
We use the noun suffix dictionary produced by 
Khaltar et al (2006), which contains 35 suffixes 
that can be concatenated with nouns. These suffix-
es are postpositional particles. Figure 5 shows a 
fragment of the dictionary, in which inflected 
forms of suffixes are shown in parentheses. 
4.6 Noun suffix segmentation rule 
There are 196 noun suffix segmentation rules, of 
which 173 were proposed by Khaltar et al (2006). 
As we explained in Section 3, these 173 rules often 
incorrectly lemmatize loanwords with different 
endings from conventional Mongolian words. 
We analyzed the list of English suffixes and 
found that English suffixes ?-ation? and ?-ology? 
are incorrectly lemmatized by Khaltar et al (2006). 
In Mongolian, ?-ation? is transliterated into ????? 
or ????? and ?-ology? is transliterated into 
???????. Thus, we produced 23 rules for 
loanwords that end with ?????, ?????, or ???????.  
Figure 6 shows a fragment of our suffix segmen-
tation rule for loanwords. For example, for the 
loanword phrase ?????????? (ecology + geni-
tive)?, we use the segmentation rule for suffix 
???? (genitive)? in Figure 6. We remove the suffix 
???? (genitive)? and add ??? to the end of the 
content word. As a result, the noun ???????? 
(ecology)? is correctly extracted. 
 
4
  
 Case Suffix 
Genitive 
Accusative 
Dative 
Ablative 
?, ?, ??, ??, ??? 
??, ???, ? 
?, ? 
??? (???), ??? (???), ???, ??? 
Figure 5: Fragment of noun suffix dictionary. 
 
Suffix Segmentation rule for loanwords  
??? 
Genitive 
If (* + ??????) 
     Remove (???) , Add (?) 
??? 
Accusative 
If (* + ??????) 
     Remove (???), Add (?) 
Figure 6: Fragment of suffix segmentation rules 
for loanwords. 
4.7 Vowel insertion rule 
To insert an eliminated vowel and extract the orig-
inal form of a content word, we check the last two 
characters of the content word. If they are both 
consonants, we determine that a vowel was elimi-
nated. However, a number of Mongolian words 
end with two consonants inherently and, therefore, 
Khaltar et al (2006) referred to a textbook on the 
Mongolian grammar (Ts, 2002) to produce 12 rules 
to determine when to insert a vowel between two 
consecutive consonants. We also use these rules as 
our vowel insertion rule. 
4.8 Loanword identification rule 
Khaltar et al (2006) proposed rules for extracting 
loanwords from Mongolian corpora. Words that 
satisfy one of seven conditions are extracted as 
loanwords. Of the seven conditions, we do not use 
the condition that extracts a word ending with 
?consonants + ?? as a loanword because it was not 
effective for lemmatization purposes in prelimi-
nary study. 
5 Experiments 
5.1 Evaluation method 
We collected 1102 technical abstracts from the 
?Mongolian IT Park? 1 and used them for experi-
ments. There were 178,448 phrase tokens and 
17,709 phrase types in the 1102 technical abstracts. 
We evaluated the accuracy of our lemmatization 
method (Section 5.2) and the effectiveness of our 
method in information retrieval (Section 5.3) expe-
rimentally. 
                                                 
1 http://www.itpark.mn/ (October, 2007)  
5.2 Evaluating lemmatization 
Two Mongolian graduate students served as asses-
sors. Neither of the assessors was an author of this 
paper. The assessors provided the correct answers 
for lemmatization. The assessors also tagged each 
word with its part of speech. 
The two assessors performed the same task in-
dependently. Differences can occur between two 
assessors on this task. We measured the agreement 
of the two assessors by the Kappa coefficient, 
which ranges from 0 to 1. The Kappa coefficients 
for performing lemmatization and tagging of parts 
of speech were 0.96 and 0.94, respectively, which 
represents almost perfect agreement (Landis and 
Koch, 1977). However, to enhance the objectivity 
of the evaluation, we used only the phrases for 
which the two assessors agreed with respect to the 
part of speech and lemmatization. 
We were able to use the noun and verb dictiona-
ries of Sanduijav et al (2005). Therefore, we com-
pared our lemmatization method with Sanduijav et 
al. (2005) and Khaltar et al (2006) in terms of ac-
curacy.  
Accuracy is the ratio of the number of phrases 
correctly lemmatized by the method under evalua-
tion to the total number of target phrases. Here, the 
target phrases are noun, verb, adjective, and num-
eral phrases. 
Table 1 shows the results of lemmatization. We 
targeted 15,478 phrase types in the technical ab-
stracts. Our experiment is the largest evaluation for 
Mongolian lemmatization in the literature. In con-
trast, Sanduijav et al (2005) and Khaltar et al 
(2006) used only 680 and 1167 phrase types, re-
spectively, for evaluation purposes. 
In Table 1, the accuracy of our method for 
nouns, which were targeted in all three methods, 
was higher than those of Sanduijav et al (2005) 
and Khaltar et al (2006). Because our method and 
that of Sanduijav et al (2005) used the same verb 
dictionary, the accuracy for verbs is principally the 
same for both methods. The accuracy for verbs 
was low, because a number of verbs were not in-
cluded in the verb dictionary and were mistakenly 
lemmatized as noun phrases. However, this prob-
lem will be solved by enhancing the verb dictio-
nary in the future. In total, the accuracy of our me-
thod was higher than those of Sanduijav et al 
(2005) and Khaltar et al (2006). 
 
5
  
Table 1: Accuracy of lemmatization (%). 
 #Phrase 
types 
Sanduijav 
et al 
(2005) 
Khaltar 
et al 
(2006) 
Our 
method 
Noun 13,016 57.6 87.7 92.5 
Verb 1,797 24.5 23.8 24.5 
Adjective 609 82.6 83.5 83.9 
Numeral 56 41.1 80.4 81.2 
Total 15,478 63.2 72.3 78.2 
 
We analyzed the errors caused by our method in 
Figure 7. In the column ?Example?, the left side 
and the right side of an arrow denote an error and 
the correct answer, respectively.  
The error (a) occurred to nouns, adjectives, and 
numerals, in which the ending of a content word 
was mistakenly recognized as a suffix and was re-
moved. The error (b) occurred because we did not 
consider irregular nouns. The error (c) occurred to 
loanword nouns because the loanword identifica-
tion rule was not sufficient. The error (d) occurred 
because we relied on a verb dictionary. The error 
(e) occurred because a number of nouns were in-
correctly lemmatized as verbs.  
For the errors (a)-(c), we have not found solu-
tions. The error (d) can be solved by enhancing the 
verb dictionary in the future. If we are able to use 
part of speech information, we can solve the error 
(e). There are a number of automatic methods for 
tagging parts of speech (Brill, 1997), which have 
promise for alleviating the error (e). 
5.3 Evaluating the effectiveness of lemmatiza-
tion in information retrieval 
We evaluated the effectiveness of lemmatization 
methods in indexing for information retrieval. No 
test collection for Mongolian information retrieval 
is available to the public. We used the 1102 tech-
nical abstracts to produce our test collection. 
Figure 8 shows an example technical abstract, in 
which the title is ?Advanced Albumin Fusion 
Technology? in English. Each technical abstract 
contains one or more keywords. In Figure 8, key-
words, such as ?????? ?????? (blood serum)? 
and ????? (placenta)? are annotated. 
We used two different types of queries for our 
evaluation. First, we used each keyword as a query, 
which we call ?keyword query (KQ)?. Second, we 
used each keyword list as a query, which we call 
?list query (LQ)?. The average number for key-
words in the keywords list was 6.1. For each query,  
 
Reasons of errors #Errors Example 
(a) Word ending is 
the same as a suffix. 274 
???? ? ??? 
sort 
(b) Noun plural 
tense is irregular. 244 
?????? ? ???? 
animal 
(c) Noun loanword 
ends with two con-
sonants. 
94 
???????? ? ????????? 
dinosaur 
(d) Verb does not 
exist in our verb 
dictionary.  
689 
????? ? ??????
to code  
(e) Word corres-
ponds to multiple 
part of speech. 
853 
???? ? ?? 
country   inter 
 
Figure 7: Errors of our lemmatization method. 
 
we used as the relevant documents the abstracts 
that were annotated with the query keyword in the 
keywords field. Thus, we were able to avoid the 
cost of relevance judgments. 
The target documents are the 1102 technical ab-
stracts, from which we extracted content words in 
the title, abstract, and result fields as index terms. 
However, we did not use the keywords field for 
indexing purposes. We used Okapi BM25 (Robert-
son et al, 1995) as the retrieval model. 
We used the lemmatization methods in Table 2 
to extract content words and compared the Mean 
Average Precision (MAP) of each method using 
KQ and LQ. MAP has commonly been used to 
evaluate the effectiveness of information retrieval. 
Because there were many queries for which the 
average precision was zero in all methods, we dis-
carded those queries. There were 686 remaining 
KQs and 273 remaining LQs. 
The average number of relevant documents for 
each query was 2.1. Although this number is small, 
the number of queries is large. Therefore, our eval-
uation result can be stable, as in evaluations for 
question answering (Voorhees and Tice, 2000).  
We can derive the following points from Table 2. 
First, to clarify the effectiveness of the lemmatiza-
tion in information retrieval, we compare ?no 
lemmatization? with the other methods. Any lem-
matization method improved the MAP for both KQ 
and LQ. Thus, lemmatization was effective for 
information retrieval in Mongolian. Second, we 
compare the MAP of our method with those of 
Sanduijav et al (2005) and Khaltar et al (2006). 
Our method was more effective than the method of 
Sanduijav et al (2005) for both KQ and LQ. How-
ever, the difference between Khaltar et al (2006) 
and our method was small for KQ and our method  
6
  
Figure 8: Example of technical abstract. 
 
Table 2: MAP of lemmatization methods.  
 Keyword query List query 
No lemmatization 0.2312 0.2766 
Sanduijav et al (2005) 0.2882 0.2834 
Khaltar et al (2006) 0.3134 0.3127 
Our method 0.3149 0.3114 
Correct lemmatization 0.3268 0.3187 
 
was less effective than Khaltar et al(2006) for LQ. 
This is because although we enhanced the lemma-
tization for verbs, adjectives, numerals, and loan-
words, the effects were overshadowed by a large 
number of queries comprising conventional Mon-
golian nouns. Finally, our method did not outper-
form the method using the correct lemmatization.  
We used the paired t-test for statistical testing, 
which investigates whether the difference in per-
formance is meaningful or simply because of 
chance (Keen, 1992). Table 3 shows the results, in 
which ?<? and ?<<? indicate that the difference of 
two results was significant at the 5% and 1% levels, 
respectively, and ??? indicates that the difference 
of two results was not significant.  
Looking at Table 3, the differences between no 
lemmatization and any lemmatization method, 
such as Sanduijav et al (2005), Khaltar et al 
(2006), our method, and correct lemmatization, 
were statistically significant in MAP for KQ. 
However, because the MAP value of no lemmati-
zation was improved for LQ, the differences be-
tween no lemmatization and the lemmatization me-
thods were less significant than those for KQ. The 
difference between Sanduijav et al (2005) and our 
method was statistically significant in MAP for 
both KQ and LQ. However, the difference between 
Khaltar et al (2006) and our method was not sig-
nificant in MAP for both KQ and LQ. Although, 
the difference between our method and correct 
lemmatization was statistically significant in MAP 
for KQ, the difference was not significant in MAP 
for LQ.  
 
 
 
Table 3: t-test result of the differences between 
lemmatization methods. 
 Keyword query List query 
No lemmatization vs. 
Correct lemmatization << < 
No lemmatization vs. 
Sanduijav et al (2005) << ? 
No lemmatization vs. 
Khaltar et al (2006) << < 
No lemmatization vs. 
Our method << < 
Sanduijav et al (2005) 
vs. Our method << < 
Khaltar et al (2006) vs. 
Our method ? ? 
Our method vs. Correct 
lemmatization < ? 
6 Conclusion 
In Modern Mongolian, a content word can poten-
tially be inflected when concatenated with suffixes. 
Identifying the original forms of content words is 
crucial for natural language processing and infor-
mation retrieval.  
In this paper, we proposed a lemmatization me-
thod for Modern Mongolian. We enhanced the 
lemmatization method proposed by Khaltar et al 
(2006). We targeted nouns, verbs, adjectives, and 
numerals. We also improved the lemmatization for 
loanwords.  
We evaluated our lemmatization method expe-
rimentally. The accuracy of our method was higher 
than those of existing methods. We also applied 
our lemmatization method to information retrieval 
and improved the retrieval accuracy. 
Future work includes using a part of speech tag-
ger because the part of speech information is effec-
tive for lemmatization.  
References 
Vinsensius Berlian Vega S N and St?phane Bressan. 
2001. Indexing the Indonesian Web: Language iden-
tification and miscellaneous issues. Tenth Interna-
tional World Wide Web Conference, Hong Kong.  
Eric Brill. 1997. Natural Language Processing Using 
Very Large Corpora. Kluwer Academic Press. 
Johan Carlberger, Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, and 
Ola Knutsson. 2001. Improving Precision in Informa-
tion Retrieval for Swedish using Stemming. Proceed-
ings of NODALIDA ?01 - 13th Nordic Conference on 
Computational Linguistics. 
Title: ???????? ????????? ????????? ????????? 
Author?s name: ???? ?????? 
Keywords: ????? ??????, ???? ? 
Abstract: ?????????? ????? ?????? 5, 10% ???? 
Result: ????????? ?????? ??????????, ?????? ? 
7
  
Terumasa Ehara, Suzushi Hayata, and Nobuyuki Kimu-
ra. 2004. Mongolian morphological analysis using 
ChaSen. Proceedings of the 10th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Natural Language Processing, 
pp. 709-712. (In Japanese). 
?una F. Ekmek?ioglu, Michael F. Lynch, and Peter 
Willett. 1996. Stemming and n-gram matching for 
term conflation in Turkish texts. Information Re-
search News, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 2-6. 
David A. Hull. 1996. Stemming algorithms ? a case 
study for detailed evaluation. Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information Science and Technology, 
Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 70-84. 
Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R. Beesley. 2003. Finite 
State Morphology. CSLI Publications. Stanford. 
Micheal E. Keen. 1992. Presenting results of experi-
mental retrieval comparisons. Information 
Processing and Management, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 
491-502. 
Badam-Osor Khaltar, Atsushi Fujii, and Tetsuya Ishi-
kawa. 2006. Extracting loanwords from Mongolian 
corpora and producing a Japanese-Mongolian bilin-
gual dictionary. Proceedings of the 21st International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pp. 657-664. 
Tuomo Korenius, Jorma Laurikkala, Kalervo J?rvelin, 
and Martti Juhola. 2004. Stemming and 
Lemmatization in the Clustering of Finnish Text 
Documents. Proceedings of the thirteenth Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery international confe-
rence on Information and knowledge management. 
pp. 625-633. 
Richard J. Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The mea-
surement of observer agreement for categorical data. 
Biometrics, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 159-174. 
Leah S. Larkey, Lisa Ballesteros, and Margaret E. Con-
nel. 2002. Improving Stemming for Arabic Informa-
tion Retrieval: Light Stemming and Co-occurrence 
Analysis. Proceedings of the 25th annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in information retrieval, pp. 275-282. 
Massimo Melucci and Nicola Orio. 2003. A Novel Me-
thod for Stemmer Generation Based on Hidden Mar-
kov Models. Proceedings of the twelfth international 
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, pp. 131-138. 
 
 
Mirko Popovi? and Peter Willett. 1992. The effective-
ness of stemming for natural-language access to Slo-
vene textual data. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 43, No. 
5, pp. 384-390. 
Martin F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix strip-
ping. Program, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 130-137.  
Stephen E. Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, 
Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. 
1995. Okapi at TREC-3. Proceedings of the Third 
Text REtrieval Conference, NIST Special Publication 
500-226. pp. 109-126.   
Enkhbayar Sanduijav, Takehito Utsuro, and Satoshi 
Sato. 2005. Mongolian phrase generation and mor-
phological analysis based on phonological and mor-
phological constraints. Journal of Natural Language 
Processing, Vol. 12, No. 5, pp. 185-205. (In Japa-
nese) . 
Sock Y. Tai, Cheng O. Ong, and Noor A. Abdullah. 
2000. On designing an automated Malaysian stem-
mer for the Malay language. Proceedings of the fifth 
international workshop on information retrieval with 
Asian languages, Hong Kong, pp. 207-208. 
Bayarmaa Ts. 2002. Mongolian grammar for grades I-
IV. (In Mongolian). 
Ellen M. Voorhees and Dawn M. Tice. 2000. Building a 
Question Answering Test Collection. Proceedings of 
the 23rd Annual International ACM SIGIR Confe-
rence on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, pp. 200-207. 
Jinxi Xu and Bruce W. Croft. 1998. Corpus-based 
stemming using co-occurrence of word variants. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 16, 
No. 1, pp. 61-81. 
8
