Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 123?130,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Speech to speech machine translation:
Biblical chatter from Finnish to English
David Ellis
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
Mathias Creutz Timo Honkela
Helsinki University of Technology
FIN-02015 TKK, Finland
Mikko Kurimo
Abstract
Speech-to-speech machine translation is in
some ways the peak of natural language pro-
cessing, in that it deals directly with our
original, oral mode of communication (as
opposed to derived written language). As
such, it presents challenges that are not to be
taken lightly. Although existing technology
covers each of the steps in the process, from
speech recognition to synthesis, deriving a
model of translation that is effective in the
domain of spoken language is an interesting
and challenging task. If we could teach our
algorithms to learn as children acquire lan-
guage, the result would be useful both for
language technology and cognitive science.
We propose several potential approaches, an
implementation of a multi-path model that
translates recognized morphemes alongside
words, and a web-interface to test our speech
translation tool as trained for Finnish to En-
glish. We also discuss current approaches to
machine translation and the problems they
face in adapting simultaneously to morpho-
logically rich languages and to the spoken
modality.
1 Introduction
Effective and fluent machine translation poses many
challenges, and often requires a variety of resources.
Some are language-specific, some domain-specific,
and others manage to be relatively independent (one
might even say context-free), and thus generally ap-
plicable in a wide variety of circumstances. There
are still untapped resources, however, that might
benefit machine translation systems. Most statistical
approaches do not take into account any similarities
in word forms, so words that share a common root,
(like ?blanche? and ?bianca?, meaning ?white? in
French and Italian respectively) are no more likely to
be aligned than others (like ?vache? and ?guardare?,
meaning ?cow? and ?to watch? respectively). Such
a root is sometimes subject to vowel shift and conso-
nant gradation, and may not be reflected in orthog-
raphy, since it is often purely phonetic.
This means we are not taking advantage of every-
thing that normally benefits human speakers, hear-
ers and translators. It may be that a more natural
approach to translation would first involve under-
standing of the input, stored in some mental rep-
resentation (an interlingua), and then generation of
an equivalent phrase in the target language, directly
from the knowledge sources.
In order to allow for more dramatic differences
in grammar like agglutinativity, it seems that the
statistical machine translation (SMT) system must
be more aware of sub-word units (morphemes) and
features (phonetic similarity). This general sort of
morphological approach could potentially benefit
any language pair, but might be crucial for a sys-
tem that handles Finnish, Turkish, Hungarian, Es-
tonian or any other highly inflectional language. In
the following section we discuss the confounds pre-
sented by agglutinative languages, and how aware-
ness of morphemes might improve the situation.
This is followed by a brief foray into semantics
and natural language generation as a component of
123
SMT. Capturing phonetic features is most applicable
to speech-to-speech translation, which will be dis-
cussed in the penultimate section. A description of
the Bible conversation experiment and some of its
results can be found in the final section.
2 Agglutinative Confounds
Traditional n-gram language models and phrase-
based translation models do not work terribly well
for Finnish because each lexical item can appear in
dozens of inflected or declined forms. If an SMT
system is presented with ?taloosi? (to your house), it
will not know if that is another form of a word it saw
in training (like ?taloissaan?, in their houses). Align-
ment data are thus unnaturally sparse and test sen-
tences often contain several unknown items, which
share their stems with trained words. It has been
assumed that morphological analysis would be es-
sential for handling agglutinative languages. How-
ever, although several effective segmenters and an-
alyzers for specific languages exist, and even unsu-
pervised language-neutral versions such as Morfes-
sor (Creutz and Lagus, 2007), only recently have
similar approaches been successfully used in the
context of machine translation to improve the BLEU
score (Oflazer and El-Kahlout, 2007), and none yet
in Finnish.
In our experience, building a translation model
through stemmed (truncated) word-alignment out-
performs full-form alignment, or any morph-
segmented alignment. But once one has generated
such a translation model, including phrase tables
where stemmed forms (keys in source language)
are associated with full forms (values in target lan-
guage), is there anything to be gained from induction
of morphology? Our research in this area has yet to
reveal any positive results, but we are still working
on it. It is also worth considering the effectiveness of
the evaluation metrics. Does BLEU accurately cap-
ture the accuracy of a translation, particularly in an
agglutinative language? Unfortunately not.
We think the word segmentation in the BLEU
metric is biased against progress in morpheme-level
translation. Some other metrics have been set forth,
but none is widely accepted, in part due to inertia,
but also because translation cannot be objectively
evaluated, unless both the communicative intent and
its effectiveness can be quantified. The same prob-
lem occurs for teachers grading essays ? what was
the student intending to convey, was the phrasing
correct, the argument sound, and where does all this
diverge from the underlying power of words, written
or well said, to transmit information? Translation is
an art, and maybe in addition to human evaluation
by linguists and native speakers of the language, we
should consider the equivalent of an art or literary
critic. On the other hand, that might only be worth-
while for poetry, wherein automated translation is
perhaps not the best approach.
One might think that the stemmed model de-
scribed above would lose track of closed-class func-
tion items (like prepositions), particularly when they
are represented as inflectional morphemes in one
language but as separate words in the other. How-
ever, it seems that the language model for the target
takes care of that quite well in most cases. There
are some languages (like Japanese) with underspec-
ified noun phrases, in which efforts to preserve def-
initeness (i.e., the book, kirjan; a book, kirjaa) seem
futile, but given the abundance of monolingual data
to train LM?s on, these are contextually inferred and
corrected at the tail end of the production line. Ag-
glutinative confounds are thus very closely related to
other issues found throughout machine translation,
and perhaps an integrated solution (including a new
evaluation metric) is necessary.
3 Knowledge-Based Approaches
Incorporating statistical natural language generation
into a machine translation system involves some
modifications to the above. First, the source lan-
guage is translated or parsed into ontological rep-
resentations. This is similar to sentence parsing
techniques that can be used to induce a context-free
grammar for a language (Charniak, 1997), and could
in fact be considered one of their more useful appli-
cations. The parsing generally depends on a proba-
bilistic model trained on sentences aligned with their
syntactic and semantic representations, often in a
tree that could be generated by a context-free gram-
mar. The resulting semantic representation can then
be used as the source of a target-language generation
process.
The algorithm that generates such a representa-
124
tion from raw input could be trained on a tree-
bank, and an annotated form of the same corpus
(where the derivations in the generation space are
associated with counts for each decision made) can
be used to train the output component to generate
language. (Belz, 2005) To incorporate the statisti-
cal component, which allows for robust generaliza-
tion, per (Knight and Hatzivassiloglou, 1995), the
NLG on the target side is filtered through a language
model (described above). This helps address many
of the knowledge gap problems introduced by lin-
guistic differences or in a component of the system
- the analyzer or generator.
This approach does have significant advantages,
particularly in that it is more focused on semantics
(as opposed to statistical cooccurrence), so it may
be less likely to distort meaning. On the other hand,
it could misinterpret or miscommunicate (or both),
just like a human translator. Perhaps the crucial dif-
ference is that, while machine learning often has lit-
tle to do with our understanding of cognitive pro-
cesses, this sort of machine translation has greater
potential for illuminating mysterious areas of the hu-
man process. It is not an ersatz brain, nor neural
network, but in many ways it has more in common
with those technologies (particularly in that they
model cognition) than many natural language pro-
cessing algorithms. That is because, if we can get
a semantically-aware machine translation system to
work, it may more closely mirror human cognition.
Humans certainly do not ignore meaning when they
translate, but today?s statistical machine translation
has no awareness of it at all.
Potential disadvantages of the system include its
dependence on more resources. However, this is
less of a problem with WordNet(Miller, 1995) and
other such semantic webs. It is also worth men-
tioning again that humans always have an incred-
ible amount of information at their disposal when
translating. Not only all of their past experience and
word-knowledge, but their interlocutor?s demeanor,
manner, intonation, facial expressions, gestures, and
so on. There are often things that would be obvi-
ous in the context of a conversation, but are missing
from the transcribed text. For instance, the referent
of many pronouns is ambiguous, but usually there is
a unique individual or item picked out by the speak-
ers? shared information. This is true for simple sen-
tences like ?He hit him,? which are normally dis-
ambiguated by conversational context, but a purely
statistical, pseudo-syntactic interpretation would get
little of the meaning a human would glean from that
utterance.
4 Spoken Features
Speech-to-speech machine translation is in some
ways the peak of natural language processing, in that
it deals directly with our (humans?) original, oral
mode of communication (as opposed to derived writ-
ten language). As such, it presents challenges that
are not to be taken lightly. Much of the pipeline in-
volved is at least relatively straightforward: acoustic
modeling and language modeling on the input side
can take advantage of the latest advances without
extensive adaptation; similarly, speech synthesis on
the output can be directly connected with the system
(i.e., not work with text output, but a richer repre-
sentation).
Although such a system might seem quite com-
plicated, it could better take advantage of all the
available data. Natural language understanding and
generation could even be incorporated to an extent,
perhaps to add further confidence measures based
on semantic equivalence. Designing it in this way
also allows for a variety of methods to be tried with
ease, in a modular fashion. It may be that yet an-
other source of information can be found to improve
the translation by adding features to the translation
model ? perhaps leveraging multilingual corpora in
other languages, segmenting into morphemes earlier
in the process, or even incorporating intonation in
some fashion. Weights for all such features could
be learned during training, such that no language-
specific tuning would be necessary. This framework
would certainly not make speech-to-speech transla-
tion simple, but its flexibility might make research
and improvement in this area more tractable.
Efficiency is crucial in online translation of con-
versation, so a word alignment model with collapsed
Gibbs sampling, rather than EM, at its core is worth
experimenting with. We have written up a bare-
bones IBM Model 1 in both C++ and Python, us-
ing the standard EM approach and a Gibbs sampling
one. The latter allows for optimizations using lin-
ear algebra, and although it does not quite match the
125
perplexity or log-likelihood achieved by EM, it is
significantly faster, particularly on longer sentences.
Since morpheme segmentation is at least somewhat
helpful in speech recognition (Creutz, 2006; Creutz
et al, 2007), it should still be considered a potential
component in speech-to-speech translation. In terms
of incorporating the knowledge-based approach into
such a system, we think it may yet be too early,
but if existing understanding-and-generation frame-
works for machine translation could be adapted to
this use, it could be very fruitful, in particular since
spoken language generation might be more effective
from a knowledge base, since it would know what
it was trying to say, instead of relying on statistics
alone, hoping the phonemes end up in a meaningful
order.
The critical step of SST is, of course, transla-
tion. In an integrated system, as described above,
the translation model could be trained on a parallel
spoken corpus (perhaps tokenized into phonemes, or
segmented into morphemes), since there might be
advantages to limiting the intermediate steps in the
process. The Bible is a massively multilingual publi-
cation, and as it happens, its text is available aligned
between Finnish and English, and it is possible to
find corresponding recordings in both languages.
So, this corpus would enable a direct approach
to speech-to-speech translation. Alternatively, one
could treat the speech recognition and synthesis as
distinct from the translation, in which case text cor-
pora corresponding to the style and genre of speech
would be necessary. This would be particularly fea-
sible when, for instance, translating UN parliamen-
tary proceedings from a recording, for which trans-
lated transcripts are readily available. For a more
general and robust solution, we might advocate a
combined approach, in the hope that some potential
weaknesses of one might be avoided or compensated
for by using whatever limited resources are available
to add features from the other. Thus, a direct trans-
lation from speech to speech could be informed, in a
sense, by a derived translation from the recognized
text.
5 Biblical Chatter
Here, we present a system for translating Finnish to
English speech, in a restricted and ancient domain:
the Bible.
5.1 Introduction
Speech to speech translation attacks a variety of
problems at once, from speech recognition to syn-
thesis, and can similarly be used for several pur-
poses. If a system is efficient enough to be used
without introducing significant delay, it can trans-
late conversational speech online, acting as an in-
terpreter in place of (or in cooperation with) a hu-
man professional. On the other hand, a slow speech
translation system is still useful because it can make
news broadcasts (radio or television) accessible to
wider audiences through offline multilingual dub-
bing, allowing international viewers to enjoy a de-
layed broadcast.
5.2 System Description
The domain selected for our experiments was heav-
ily influenced by the available data. We needed a
bilingual (Finnish and English) and bimodal (text
and speech) corpus, and unfortunately none is read-
ily available, but we put one together using the
Bible. Both Old and New Testaments were used,
with one book from each left out for testing pur-
poses. We used multiple editions of the Bible to
train the translation model: the American Standard
Version (first published in 1901, updated 1997),
and Finnish translations (from 1992 and 1933,38).
The spoken recordings used were the World English
Bible (1997) and Finnish Bible (Raamattu) readings
(recorded at TKK 2004).
Our approach was to use existing components,
and try weaving them together in an optimal way.
First, there is the open vocabulary automatic speech
recognition (ASR) task, where the goal is to de-
tect phonemes in an acoustic signal and map them
to words. Here, we use an ?unlimited vocabu-
lary? continuous speech recognizer (Hirsima?ki et al,
2006), trained on a multi-speaker Finnish acoustic
model with a varigram (Siivola et al, 2007) lan-
guage model that includes Bible n-grams. Then,
for translation, Moses (Koehn et al, 2007) is trained
on words and morphemes (derived from Morfessor
Baseline (Creutz and Lagus, 2005)). For speech syn-
thesis, we used Festival (Taylor, 1999), including the
built-in English voice and a Finnish voice developed
at Helsinki University.
126
5.3 Results
The following is an example fragment, taken from
the test corpus.
Niin Daavid meni David slept with his
lepoon isiensa? luo, fathers, and was
ja ha?nethaudattiin buried in the
Daavidin kaupunkiin. city of David. The days
Nelja?kymmenta? vuotta that David reigned
ha?n oli ollut over Israel were
Israelin kuninkaana. forty years; seven
Hebronissa ha?n years reigned he
hallitsi seitsema?n in Hebron, and
vuotta, Jerusalemissa thirty-three years
kolmenkymmenenkolmen reigned he
vuoden ajan. in Jerusalem.
Salomo nousi Solomon sat on
isa?nsa? Daavidin the throne of David
valtaistuimelle,ja his father; and
ha?nen kuninkuutensa his kingdom was
vahvistui lujaksi. established greatly.
A translation of the reference text skips recogni-
tion, and runs the system from translation to synthe-
sis. The following shows how the sample text was
translated by our system (BLEU = 0.735):
Niin Daavid meni so david slept with his
lepoon isiensa? luo, fathers and was
ja ha?net haudattiin buried in the
Daavidin kaupunkiin. city of david
Nelja?kymmenta? vuotta forty years he
ha?n oli ollut was king over
Israelin kuninkaana. israel and in
Hebronissa ha?n hebron he reigned
hallitsi seitsema?n seven years
vuotta, Jerusalemissa in jerusalem
kolmenkymmenenkolmen thirty and three
vuoden ajan. years solomon
Salomo nousi went up to
isa?nsa? Daavidin the throne of
valtaistuimelle, ja david his father
ha?nen kuninkuutensa and his kingdom
vahvistui lujaksi. was strong for luja
The following recognized translation (BLEU =
0.541) represents a complete run of the system. The
recognition (on the left) had a LER of 12.9% and a
WER of 56.8%.
niintaa meni niintaa went
lepoon isiensa?lla isiensa?lla rest and was
ja ha?net haudattiin buried in the
daavidin kaupunkiin city of david the king
nelja?kymmenta? of israel was
vuotta ha?n oli ollut forty years he was
israelin kuninkaan in hebron he
hebronissa ha?n reigned seven years
hallitsi seitsema?n in jerusalem
vuotta jerusalemissa kymmenenkolmen
kolmen kymmenenkolmen three years
vuoden ajan after the new
salomon uusi on the throne of david
isa?nsa? daavidin and solomon
valtaistuimelle ja his father
ha?nenkuninkuutensa ha?nenkuninkuutensa
valmistulujaksi valmistulujaksi
Here we have an alternative path through the sys-
tem, which uses Morfessor on the recognized text,
and then translates using a model trained on the
morpheme-segmented corpus. This results in a re-
duced score (BLEU = 0.456), but fewer unknown
words.
n iin taa# meni# iin behind went to
lepo on# isi ensa? lla# the sabbath that
ja# ha?n et# hauda ttiin# is with ensa? and he
daavid in# kaupunki in# shall not at the grave of abner
nelja?kymmenta?# vuotta# was forty years of the
ha?n# oli# ollut# city of david and
israeli n kuninkaan# he was israeli to
hebron issa# ha?n# the king of hebron
hallitsi# seitsema?n# and he reigned
vuotta# jerusalem seven years in
issa# kolmen# jerusalem three tenth
kymmenen kolmen# three years of
vuoden# ajan# the new solomon his
salomo n# uusi# isa? istuim to david
nsa?# daavid in# my father of the
valta istuim elle# kingdoms of
ja# ha?n en kun ink ink and he
uutensa# valmistu luja ksi# uutensa valmistu to luja
The morphemes might have been more effective
in translation if they had been derived through rule-
based morphological analysis. Or, they could still be
statistical, but optimized for the translation phase by
minimizing perplexity during word alignment.
A significant barrier to thorough and concrete
evaluation of our system involves segmentation of
the speech stream into sentences (or verses) to match
the text. In the above examples, we manually
clipped the audio files. Evaluating performance on
the entire test set reduced the BLEU score if the
data were streamed through each component unseg-
mented. When the recognizer was set to insert a pe-
riod for detected pauses of a certain length, or at sen-
tence boundaries identified by its language model,
127
input to the translation phase became considerably
more problematic. In particular, the lattice input
ought to be split into sentences, but there would usu-
ally be a period in every time slice (but with low
probability).
5.4 Discussion
There were significant difficulties in the process,
particularly in the English to Finnish direction.
Whereas Finnish speech recognition is relatively
straightforward, since its orthography is consistent,
English speech recognition is more dependent on
a pronunciation dictionary. Although many such
dictionaries are available, and the pronunciation of
novel words can be estimated, neither of these re-
sources is terribly effective within the Bible domain,
where there are many archaic words and names. In
the second step, translation into Finnish is demon-
strably difficult from any source language, and re-
sults in consistently lower BLEU scores (Virpioja
et al, 2007). And although using morphemes can
reduce the frequency of unknown words, it also re-
duces the BLEU score.
It might improve translation quality if we use the
recognizer lattice as translator input, since acous-
tically improbable segments may lead to the most
fluent translation. Having access to many possibili-
ties might help the translation model, but then again,
second-guessing the recognizer might not be help-
ful. There were some difficulties with the Moses in-
tegration, in part because the word-sausage format
varies from SRILM?s. Also, the recognizer output
indicates word boundaries as <w>, not string-final
hash-marks (#). This is problematic since the for-
mer are separate symbols, occupying a node in the
lattice, whereas the latter are appended to another
symbol (e.g., ?<w> morph eme </w>?, 4 nodes,
versus ?morph eme#?, 2 nodes). Using the lattice,
final output from Moses tends to be more fluent,
but less on-topic, and often truncated. Although we
have no improvements thus far, it is likely that with
further parameter tuning, we could achieve better re-
sults. On the other hand, we seek a general, robust,
domain-independent solution, so focusing on Bible
translation may not be worthwhile.
Our speech-to-speech translation system is
accessible through a web interface.
http://www.cis.hut.fi/projects/speech/
translate/
It accepts a sound file, with recorded Finnish
bible-style chatter, an optional reference text and
translation, and within a half hour (usually much
less) sends a detailed report, including a sound file
with the synthesized English.
Ideas for future research include online speech-
to-speech translation, which must be efficient, light-
weight and robust. A potential barrier to this and
other applications is the lack of spoken language
training texts. It might be possible to adaptively train
to new speakers and contexts, perhaps taking advan-
tage of an efficient alternative to EM in word align-
ment (see discussion of Gibbs sampling). As men-
tioned elsewhere, it might be worth using prosodic
features captured during recognition as factors in
translation. Adapting existing resources to new lan-
guage pairs is particularly essential in an area where
so much is necessary, and so little available.
6 Conclusion
We cannot yet say for sure whether linguistic or
statistically optimized morphemes derived from text
corpora could be useful somehow in machine trans-
lation, but it has been demonstrated helpful in
speech recognition. Awareness of sub-word units
could benefit a speech-to-speech translation system,
and it may in fact help to maintain information
from the speech recognizer about morpheme seg-
mentation throughout the translation process, even
in speech generation. Incorporating natural lan-
guage understanding may also be fruitful, but for
compact, efficient systems (like a handheld transla-
tor) might not have access to the necessary resources
or computational power to support that. On the other
hand, it is our duty as researchers to stay ahead of the
technology and push its limits.
We are by no means the first to imagine this, but
perhaps we will soon be speaking into wrist watches
that understand our query, seemingly instantly shift
through more information than Google has currently
indexed, and reply in fluent English, Finnish, or Pun-
jabi with as much detail as could be hoped for after
hours of painstaking research with current technol-
ogy. In this case (and computational linguists must
always be optimistic), knowledge-based natural lan-
guage processing certainly has a crucial place.
128
Morphemes and agglutinative languages do pose
unique problems for computational linguists, but
many of the general techniques developed for lan-
guages like Arabic and Chinese, which are equally
far from English in grammar (and even orthogra-
phy), might surmount those problems without any
manual adaptation. Discriminative training of fea-
tures used in the translation model allows for such
solutions to be molded automatically to whatever
language pair (and set of corpora) they are being
used for. There is, as always, much more to be done
in this area, and we hope our research into efficient,
online Bible-conversational translation ? a modern
Babelfish in an ancient genre? is fruitful, and helps
to shed light on lemmatization.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Teemu Hirsima?ki, Antti Puurula,
Sami-Virpioja and Jaakko J. Va?yrynen for their
help with components of the system and for their
thoughts and comments at various stages of the
project.
References
Anja Belz. 2005. Statistical generation: Three methods
compared and evaluated. In Proceedings of the 10th
European Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG05), pages 15?23.
Eugene Charniak. 1997. Statistical parsing with
a context-free grammar and word statistics. In
AAAI/IAAI, pages 598?603.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2005. Unsupervised
morpheme segmentation and morphology induction
from text corpora using Morfessor 1.0. Technical Re-
port A81, Publications in Computer and Information
Science, Helsinki University of Technology.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2007. Unsupervised
models for morpheme segmentation and morphology
learning. ACM Transactions on Speech and Language
Processing, 4(1), January.
Mathias Creutz, Teemu Hirsim?ki, Mikko Kurimo, Antti
Puurula, Janne Pylkknen, Vesa Siivola, Matti Var-
jokallio, Ebru Arisoy, Murat Saraclar, and Andreas
Stolcke. 2007. Analysis of morph-based speech
recognition and the modeling of out-of-vocabulary
words across languages. In Proceedings of Hu-
man Language Technologies / The Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (HLT-NAACL 2007),
Rochester, NY, USA.
Mathias Creutz. 2006. Morfessor in the morpho chal-
lenge. In Mikko Kurimo, Mathias Creutz, and Krista
Lagus, editors, Proceedings of the PASCAL Challenge
Workshop on Unsupervised Segmentation of Words
into Morphemes, Venice, Italy.
T. Hirsima?ki, M. Creutz, V. Siivola, M. Kurimo, S. Vir-
pioja, and J. Pylkko?nen. 2006. Unlimited vocabu-
lary speech recognition with morph language models
applied to Finnish. Computer Speech and Language,
20(4):515?541.
Kevin Knight and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 1995.
Two-level, many-paths generation. In Proceedings of
the 33rd annual meeting on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 252?260, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Constantin, and Evan
Herb. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of the ACL 2007
Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177?180.
George A. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: a lexical database for
English. Commun. ACM, 38(11):39?41.
Kemal Oflazer and Ilknur Durgar El-Kahlout. 2007. Ex-
ploring different representational units in English-to-
Turkish statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 25?
32.
Vesa Siivola, Teemu Hirsima?ki, and Sami Virpioja. 2007.
On growing and pruning Kneser-Ney smoothed n-
gram models. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech
and Language Processing, 15(5):1617?1624.
Paul Taylor. 1999. The Festival Speech Architecture.
Web page.
Sami Virpioja, Jaakko J. Va?yrynen, Mathias Creutz, and
Markus Sadeniemi. 2007. Morphology?aware statis-
tical machine translation based on morphs induced in
an unsupervised manner. In Proceedings of the Ma-
chine Translation Summit XI, Copenhagen, Denmark.
To appear.
129
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
130
