Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 113?116,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Indigenous Languages of Indonesia: Creating Language Resources  
for Language Preservation 
Hammam Riza 
IPTEKNET 
Agency for the Assessment and 
Application of Technology (BPPT) 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
hammam@iptek.net.id 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we report a survey of lan-
guage resources in Indonesia, primarily of 
indigenous languages. We look at the offi-
cial Indonesian language (Bahasa Indone-
sia) and 726 regional languages of Indone-
sia (Bahasa Nusantara) and list all the 
available lexical resources (LRs) that we 
can gathered. This paper suggests that the 
smaller regional languages may remain 
relatively unstudied, and unknown, but 
they are still worthy of our attention. Vari-
ous LRs of these endangered languages are 
being built and collected by regional lan-
guage centers for study and its preserva-
tion. We will also briefly report its pres-
ence on the Internet. 
1 Introduction 
It is not hard to get a picture of just how linguisti-
cally diverse Indonesia is. There are 726 languages 
in the country; making it the world?s second most 
diverse, after Papua New Guinea which has 823 
local languages (Mart? et al, 2005:48). Indonesia 
also has a high ratio of languages to speakers in 
each major region in Indonesia (see Figure 1). Di-
versity is the outcome of processes of language 
change (Schendl, 2001). The loss of language is 
itself a process that will logically result in mono-
lingualism.  
It is not uncommon to find the attitude among 
the general public and even among some Indone-
sian linguists that the process of language endan-
germent or language extinction is not something 
that needs worried about, that it is part of a natural 
process that should be left to take its course. This 
paper suggests otherwise. The smaller regional 
languages may remain relatively unstudied, and 
unknown, but they are still worthy of our attention 
(Lauder, 2007). This paper puts forward a number 
of claims that have been made in favour of linguis-
tic diversity and how we can preserve this diver-
sity. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Ratio of Population to Languages 
                       across Indonesia 
 
The languages of Indonesia are part of a com-
plex linguistic situation that is generally seen as 
comprised of three categories: Indonesian lan-
guage, the regional indigenous languages, and for-
eign languages (Alwi and Sugono, 2000).  Most of 
these regional languages have not received atten-
tion for computerization; they are less privilege 
languages that need to be brought into digitaliza-
tion.  
113
If we were to create NLP system for these lan-
guages, we will face one of the major obstacles, 
i.e. the amount of linguistic knowledge. Language 
analysis and generation require a complete set of 
lexical, grammatical, semantic and world knowl-
edge to carry out accurate function. On the other 
hand, these types of knowledge bases are hard to 
acquire and considerable attention has to be paid to 
the role that corpus and lexical resources can play. 
2 The Indigenous Languages and Its En-
dangerment 
The indigenous languages of Indonesia - also re-
ferred to as vernaculars or provincial languages, 
collectively called as Bahasa Nusantara - exhibits 
great variation in numbers of speakers. Thirteen of 
them have a million or more speakers, accounting 
for 69.91% of the total population. These lan-
guages are Javanese (75,200,000 speakers), Sun-
danese (27,000,000), Malay (20,000,000), 
Madurese (13,694,000), Minangkabau (6,500,000), 
Batak (5,150,000), Bugisnese (4,000,000), Bali-
nese (3,800,000), Acehnese (3,000,000), Sasak 
(2,100,000), Makasarese (1,600,000), Lampungese 
(1,500,000), and Rejang (1,000,000) (Lauder, 
2004).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Major Indigenous Languages 
 
The remaining 713 languages have a total popu-
lation of only 41.4 million speakers, and the major-
ity of these have very small numbers of speakers. 
For example, 386 languages are spoken by 5,000 
or less; 233 have 1,000 speakers or less; 169 lan-
guages have 500 speakers or less; and 52 have 100 
or less (Gordon, 2005). These languages are facing 
various degrees of language endangerment (Crys-
tal, 2000). 
There is evidence from census data over three 
decades that the growth in the numbers of speakers 
of Indonesian is reducing the numbers of speakers 
of the indigenous languages (Lauder, 2005). Con-
cerns that this kind of growth would give Indone-
sian the potential to replace the regional languages 
were aired as early as the 1980s. (Poedjosoedarmo, 
1981; Alisjahbana, 1984).  
These languages tend to be spoken in the eastern 
or more remote parts of the country. Their small 
populations of speakers make them vulnerable to 
processes of unhealthy language change and lan-
guage endangerment. Greatest language diversity 
is found in eastern part of Indonesia (Papua) 
A language that does not have official status, but 
which has a large enough number of speakers and 
which are being safely transmitted to new genera-
tions can usually be classified as either NOT EN-
DANGERED (SAFE or VIABLE), or POTEN-
TIALLY ENDANGERED. This would include the 
13 largest local languages and perhaps a few doz-
ens of others.  
However, this does not apply to the majority of 
the remaining 700 or so languages. Among them, 
there should also be many which could be classi-
fied as VIABLE BUT SMALL or ENDANGERED 
because they have small numbers of speakers, are 
socially or economically disadvantaged and they 
are not being transmitted to younger generations of 
speakers. There will also be many of these regional 
languages which can be classified as SERIOUSLY 
ENDANGERED or MORIBUND (NEARLY EX-
TINCT) because the speaker populations are very 
small and these few remaining speakers are mostly 
old.  
When trying to estimate the degree of endan-
germent of the regional languages in Indonesia, it 
becomes apparent that there is a singular lack of 
focused and comprehensive research. However, in 
spite of this, based on a consideration of the vari-
ous possible causes, there are good reasons to sus-
pect that many of the smaller languages in Indone-
sia are indeed endangered. 
3 Preserving Endangered Languages  
Within Indonesia, and globally, we are currently 
experiencing a massive and rapid loss of language 
and culture. In particular, the languages and cul-
tures of communities with very few speakers have 
practically no chance of survival beyond the end of 
114
this century and many will disappear much sooner, 
perhaps within the next 10 to 20 years.  
The loss of these languages is largely because of 
linguistic and cultural assimilation with the major-
ity group, with migration to the cities and lack of 
support for these languages in state education be-
ing important factors.  This is particularly true in 
Indonesia, where Bahasa Indonesia is being taught 
in school and the indigenous languages are loosing 
their ground in the daily life.  
Each language is part of patterns of diversity 
that have evolved over millennia. There are a 
number of reasons why diversity is beneficial. For 
example, by learning from the original languages 
we increase our stock of human wisdom. Diversity 
breeds diversity; the seeding of insights in the 
fields of science, art and literature.  
Meanwhile, the problem is urgent. A language is 
being lost on average every two weeks worldwide. 
When an oral language is lost, it takes with it all 
the knowledge that the people possessed. When the 
last speaker dies, there is likely to be no trace at all 
of their existence. There will be no artifacts or 
physical record to reconstruct the language or the 
knowledge it encoded. As each language dies, we 
lose data for philosophers, anthropologists, folklor-
ists, historians, psychologists, linguists, and writ-
ers. The loss of one is a tragedy; what do we call 
the loss of a large proportion of the 6,000 existing 
languages? (Crystal, 2000: 53). The loss of diver-
sity is something that we need to do something 
about.  
Two kinds of action can be taken, depending on 
the status of the language. But to know what the 
status of languages is, a survey needs to be made to 
gather information for all the regional languages 
concerning the factors that are usually the causes 
of language loss or language maintenance, such as 
numbers of speakers, language attitudes, and so on. 
As a result, estimates can be made about which are 
likely to survive and which not. From this, an ac-
tion plan can be set up based on priorities.  
Of the 13 major indigenous languages, there 
only are 7 languages presence on the Internet under 
the ccTLD .id (Riza 2006). We need to explore 
furthermore to map the remaining regional lan-
guages that probably exist on the Internet. The is-
sue of ?digital language divide? has shown that 
many of the indigenous language do not have ac-
cess to Information and Communication Technol-
ogy (ICT) in general; hence they are lacking the 
process of digitalization. The relationship between 
languages on the Internet and diversity of language 
within a country indicates that even with a global-
ize network, nation states have a role to play in 
encouraging language diversity in cyberspace. 
Language diversity can be viewed as much within 
a country as within the Internet as a whole.  
For languages which are not seriously endan-
gered or moribund, language maintenance and lan-
guage revitalization programs should be put in 
place. These programs include creating LRs that 
would involve the people themselves to provide 
them with NLP toolkit and language computeriza-
tion to help keep the language alive. For seriously 
endangered languages, those that cannot possibly 
be saved, LRs creation should be set up. These 
programs would involve study, documentation and 
the assembly of a rich archive of materials that will 
help to preserve as much as possible of the lan-
guage and way of life in digital and other formats.  
We have identified three important tasks in lan-
guage preservation. The first is the exploitation of 
current techniques from computational linguistics 
to permit a multidimensional view of the LRs. The 
second is the increasing orientation of the regional 
research centers towards the creation and use of 
resources of various sorts, either to extract useful 
information or directly as components in systems. 
The third, related, trend is towards statistical or 
empirical models of language especially if the lan-
guage is near extinction and found only as spoken 
language. 
In cases where the indigenous languages exist 
only in the form of spoken language, there should 
be a collection efforts similar to the work carried 
out by ELRA on the Basic Language Resource Kit  
(ELDA, 2007) and LDC on Less Commonly 
Taught Languages (LCTL, 2007). Both initiatives 
focus on the minimal sets of LRs required develop-
ing basic research for a given language. It is crucial 
to connect the preservation work to this language 
kit in order to be shared with the language research 
community. 
In Indonesia, over the last few years, there has 
been an increasing awareness of the importance of 
corpus resources in language preservation. As re-
gional leaders begin to consider the implications of 
loosing their indigenous assets, considerable atten-
tion is being aid to the role that corpus and lexical 
resources can play.  
115
Masyarakat Linguistik Indonesia (MLI) is a 
group of institutions, organizations and corpora-
tion, working together on mutually defined goals 
and projects that seek to provide a specification of  
LRs of all languages of Indonesia. It is currently in 
the process of mapping indigenous written lan-
guages of Indonesia (540 of languages). 
MLI also help members to use the specification 
for NLP tools and applications; find the best means 
to disseminate the specifications, tools and applica-
tions and encourage an open standard-based ap-
proach to the creation and interchange of LRs. It 
also demonstrate how MLI can be applied through 
making the results of collaborative endeavors 
available to wider associations; provide training, 
awareness and educational events and share with 
each other their work on related issues.  
4 Conclusion 
A perspective on preservation of the languages of 
Indonesia is given together with a brief overview 
of some of the indigenous languages, which are 
being actively researched today by national lan-
guage centers throughout Indonesia.  
Culture and language are fundamental human 
rights; it is our right and duty to preserve and de-
velop them. This is an ethical choice, not simply a 
scientific one or one based on political or eco-
nomic expediency. Total lack of concern and inac-
tion may seem to some to be a rational choice but 
it represents an ethical failure. In addition, research 
which merely documents an endangered language 
but does nothing to help the community of the in-
formants is like the photographer who takes a pic-
ture of someone in difficulty but do nothing to help 
them. Any delay now will mean that many of the 
languages which are still around now won?t be 
there for them to do something about. Diversity 
will have been lost.  
We have identified three important tasks in lan-
guage preservation, which is the exploitation of 
computational linguistics, increasing orientation of 
the regional research centers towards the creation 
and use of resources and using towards statistical 
or empirical models of language.  
The current effort of documenting the indige-
nous languages will be shared with the rest of the 
world, to close ?digital language divide?. 
 
References 
Alisjahbana, S. T. 1984. The problem of minority lan-
fguages in the overall linguistic problems of our time. 
In Linguistic Minorities and Literacy: Language Pol-
icy Issues in Developing Countries, ed. F. Coulmas. 
Berlin: Mouton.  
Alwi, Hasan, and Sugono, Dendy. 2000. From National 
Language Politics to National Language Policy. Pro-
cedings of the Seminar on Language Politics, Jakarta 
ELDA. 2007. Basic Language Resource Kit (Blark). 
ELRA Project, http://www.elda.org/blark/index.php 
Crystal, David. 2000. Language Death. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. ed. 2005. Ethnologue: Lan-
guages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: 
SIL International.  
Lauder, Multamia RMT. 2005. Language Treasures in 
Indonesia. In Words and Worlds : World Languages 
Review, eds. F?lix Mart? et al, 95-97. Clevedon 
[England] ; Buffalo [N.Y.]: Multilingual Matters.  
Lauder, Allan F. 2007. Indigenous Languages in Indo-
nesia: Diversity and Endangerment. In Proceedings 
of Kongres Linguistik Nasional XII, Surakarta, 3-6 
September. 
LCTL, 2007. Less Commonly Taught Language Pro-
ject. http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/LCTL/index.html
Mart?, F?lix, et.al. eds. 2005. Words and Worlds : World 
Languages Review. vol. 52. Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism. Clevedon. England. 
Mikami, Y., Zavarsky, et.al. 2005. The Language Ob-
servatory Project (LOP), www2005, Proceedings, 
Chiba, Japan, 990-991. 
Poedjosoedarmo, S. 1981. Problems of Indonesian. In 
Language and Nation Building, ed. Amran Halim. 
Jakarta: Center for Language Development.  
Riza, H, et. al. 2006.  Indonesian Languages Diversity 
on the Internet, Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
Athens. 
Schendl, Herbert. 2001. Historical linguistics. Oxford 
Introductions to Language Study. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
Wurm, S. A. 1998. Methods of language maintenance 
and revival, with selected cases of language endan-
germent in the world. The International Symposium 
on Endangered Languages, Tokyo, 18-20 November 
1995), ed. Kazuto Matsumura, 191-211. Tokyo: Hi-
tuzi Syobo.  
 
116
