Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 13?18,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
KUI: an ubiquitous tool for collective intelligence development 
Thatsanee Charoenporn, Virach Sornlertlamvanich 
and Kergrit Robkop 
Thai Computational Linguistics Laboratory 
NICT Asia Research Center, Thailand 
{virach,thatsanee,kergrit}@tcllab.org 
Hitoshi Isahara 
National Institute for 
Communications Tech-
nology (NICT), Japan 
ishara@nict.go.jp
 
 
Abstract 
Collective intelligence is the capability for 
a group of people to collaborate in order to 
achieve goals in a complex context than its 
individual member. This common concept 
increases topic of interest in many sciences 
including computer science where com-
puters are bring about as group support 
elements. This paper presents a new plat-
form, called Knowledge Unifying Initiator 
(KUI) for knowledge development which 
enables connection and collaboration 
among individual intelligence in order to 
accomplish a complex mission. KUI is a 
platform to unify the various thoughts fol-
lowing the process of thinking, i.e., initiat-
ing the topic of interest, collecting the 
opinions to the selected topics, localizing 
the opinions through the translation or cus-
tomization and posting for public hearing 
to conceptualize the knowledge. The proc-
ess of thinking is done under the selectional 
preference simulated by voting mechanism 
in case that many alternatives occur. By 
measuring the history of participation of 
each member, KUI adaptively manages the 
reliability of each member?s opinion and 
vote according to the estimated Ex-
pertScore. 
1 Introduction 
The Internet is a must for forming an online com-
munity in the present day. Many tools have been 
developed to support such an online community 
work. For instance, SourceForge.net (http://www. 
sourceforge.net) facilitates project based Open 
Source software development. Open Source soft-
ware developers deploy SourceForge.net to an-
nounce their initiation, to call for participation, to 
distribute their works and to receive feedbacks. 
SourceForge.net is said to be the largest Open 
Source software development community. 
Wiki.org (http://www.wiki.org) facilitates a data-
base for creating and editing Web page content. It 
keeps the history of the online editing works which 
allows multiple authoring. Wiki is especially de-
rived for several online collaborative works such 
as wikipedia, wikitionary, wikibooks, etc. In addi-
tion, PhpWiki is one of the derived works of wiki 
as a handy software tool for managing the organ-
izational documentation. This collaborative work-
ing environment has changed our working style to 
a more efficient manner. In the same time, the 
flood of information under the open collaborative 
works is now challenging us for an efficient man-
agement system. The disorder of the information 
causes difficulties in the requirement of the sys-
tematic maintenance for retrieval, extraction, or 
even summarization from the stored information. 
To understand the intention of an article (or a solu-
tion), we not only rely on the trace or the history of 
editing, but we also constantly recall the back-
ground of our decision in producing the article (or 
the solution). 
Why don't we organize the information in the 
development process beforehand rather than limit-
ing our capability in making use of the un-
structured information? Google (http://www. 
google.com) successfully responds our needs in 
looking for documents from the WWW. However, 
the results from the search can simply over a mil-
lion sites and just some tens out of which are 
13
viewed for the search. This most powerful search-
ing tool does not digest the information to meet 
final our requirement. It only thoroughly shows the 
results of the related document. 
Back to the principle of collective intelligent 
(Smith, 1994; Johnson et al, 1998; Levy, 1997) in 
which ?two minds are better than one?, mountains 
of knowledge are contributed by this internet 
community. But the most intelligence is the intelli-
gence of knowledge connections in which new 
technologies can take part in helping individuals to 
think and develop their concept collectively. 
We proposed and developed KUI (Knowledge 
Unifying Initiator) (KUI, 2006; Sornlertlamvanich, 
2006) to be a Knowledge User Interface (KUI) for 
online collaborative work to help community to 
think and to develop things together. KUI is a plat-
form to unify the various thoughts following the 
process of thinking, i.e., initiating the topic of in-
terest, collecting the opinions to the selected top-
ics, localizing the opinions through the translation 
or customization and finally posting for public 
hearing to conceptualize the knowledge. The proc-
ess of thinking is done under the selectional prefer-
ence simulated by voting mechanism in case that 
many alternatives occur. 
2 Collaborative tool for managing collec-
tive intelligence 
We developed KUI (Knowledge Unifying Initia-
tor) for being a knowledge development supporting 
tool of a web community. Actually, KUI is a plat-
form to unify various thoughts created by follow-
ing process of thinking, i.e., (1) new task, to allow 
a participant to initiate a task, (2) opinion, to allow 
a participant to post his own opinion, (3) localiza-
tion, to allow a participant to bring in a new 
knowledge into the community by translation, and 
(4) public-hearing, to allow a participant to post a 
draft of concept for conceptualizing the knowl-
edge. The process of thinking is done under the 
selectional preference simulated by voting mecha-
nism in case that many alternatives occur. 
In this section, we describe the concept behind 
KUI, the knowledge development process, and the 
features in KUI. 
2.1 What is KUI? 
KUI or Knowledge Unifying Initiator is a GUI for 
knowledge engineering, in other words Knowledge 
User Interface (KUI). It provides a web interface 
accessible for pre-registered members only for the 
accountability reason. An online registration is of-
fered to manage the account by profiling the login 
participant in making contribution to the commu-
nity. A contributor can comfortably move around 
in the virtual space from desk to desk to participate 
in a particular task. A login member will be as-
signed to a desk when a participation task is de-
fined. Members can then participate in the chat 
group of the same desk. A desk functions as a 
meeting place for collaborative work that needs 
some discussion through the chat function, or al-
low a contributor to work individually by using the 
message slot to record each own opinion. The 
working space can be expanded by closing the un-
necessary frames so that the contributor can con-
centrate on a particular task. All working topics 
can also be statistically viewed through the pro-
vided tabs. These tabs help contributors to under-
stand KUI in the aspects of the current status of 
contribution and the available tasks. A web com-
munity can be formed to create a domain specific 
knowledge efficiently through the features pro-
vided by KUI. These KUI features fulfill the proc-
ess of human thought to record the knowledge. 
In addition, KUI also provides a KUI look up 
function for viewing the composed knowledge. It 
is equipped with a powerful search and statistical 
browse in many aspects. Moreover, the chat log is 
provided to learn about the intention of the knowl-
edge composers. We frequently want to know 
about the background of the solution for better un-
derstanding or to remind us about the decision, but 
we cannot find one. To avoid the repetition of a 
mistake, we systematically provide the chat log to 
keep the trace of discussion or the comments to 
show the intention of knowledge composers. 
2.2 Knowledge Development in KUI 
Adopting the concept of Open Source software 
development, we will be possibly able to develop a 
framework for domain specific knowledge devel-
opment under the web community environment. 
Sharing and collaboration are the considerable fea-
tures of the framework. The knowledge will be 
finally shared among the communities by receiving 
the consensus from the participants in each step. 
To facilitate the knowledge development, the proc-
ess is deliberated into four steps (Sornlertlam-
vanich, 2006). 
14
New Task 
A new task (Topic of interest) can be posted to 
draw intention from participants. The only selected 
tasks by a major vote will then be proceed for fur-
ther discussion in the requested type of task i.e., 
Opinion Poll, Localization or Public-Hearing. 
 
 
 
   Figure 1. Process of knowledge development 
 
Opinion Poll 
The selected task is posted to call for opinions 
from the participants in this step. Opinion poll is 
conducted to get the population of each opinion. 
The result of the opinion poll provides the variety 
of opinions that reflects the current thought of the 
communities together with the consensus to the 
opinions. 
 
Localization 
Translation is a straightforward implementation of 
the localization. Collaborative translation helps 
producing the knowledge in multiple languages in 
the most efficient way. Multi-lingual texts are gen-
erated in this type of task. 
 
Public-Hearing 
The result of discussion will be revised and con-
firmed by gathering the opinions to develop the 
final draft of the proposal. Suggestions for revision 
are ranked according to the vote. The author may 
consider the weight of suggestion to make decision 
on the final revision. 
The developed knowledge is started from post-
ing 'New Task', participants express their supports 
by casting a vote. Upon a threshold the    'New 
Task' is selected for conducting a poll on 'Opinion', 
or introducing to the community by  'Localization', 
or posting a draft for 'Public-Hearing' to gather 
feedbacks from the community. The transition 
from 'Opinion' to either 'Localization' or 'Public-
Hearing' occurs when the 'Opinion' has a concrete 
view for implementation. The discussion in 'Local-
ization' and 'Public-Hearing' is however inter-
changeable due to purpose of implementation 
whether to adopt the knowledge to the local com-
munity or to get feedbacks from the community. 
The knowledge creating is managed in 4 differ-
ent categories corresponding to the stage of knowl-
edge. Each individual in the community casts a 
vote to rank the appropriateness of solutions at 
each category. The community can then form the 
community knowledge under the 'Selectional Pref-
erence' background. 
Topic 
     of  
Interest 
Localization 
Opinion 
Public Hear-
ing 
2.3 Features in KUI 
These KUI features fulfill the process of hu-
man thought to record the knowledge. 
 
Poll-based Opinion or Public-Hearing 
A contributor may choose to work individually by 
posting an opinion e.g. localization, suggestion 
etc., or join a discussion desk to conduct 'Public-
Hearing' with others on the selected topic. The dis-
cussion can be conducted via the provided 'Chat' 
frame before concluding an opinion. Any opinions 
or suggestions are committed to voting. Opinions 
can be different but majority votes will cast the 
belief of the community. These features naturally 
realize the online collaborative works to create the 
knowledge. 
 
Individual or Group Work 
Thought may be formed individually or though a 
concentrated discussion. KUI facilitates a window 
for submitting an opinion and another window for 
submitting a chat message. Each suggestion can be 
cast through the 'Opinion' window marked with a 
degree of its confidence. By working individually, 
comments to a suggestion can be posted to mark its 
background to make it more understanding. On the 
other hand, when working as a group, discussions 
among the group participants will be recorded. The 
discussion can be resumed at any points to avoid 
the iterating words. 
 
Record of Intention 
The intention of each opinion can be reminded by 
the recorded comments or the trace of discussions. 
Frequently, we have to discuss again and again on 
the result that we have already agreed. Misinterpre-
15
tation of the previous decision is also frequently 
faced when we do not record the background of 
decision. Record of intention is therefore necessary 
in the process of knowledge creation. The knowl-
edge interpretation also refers to the record of in-
tention to obtain a better understanding. 
 
Selectional Preference 
Opinions can be differed from person to person 
depending on the aspects of the problem. It is not 
always necessary to say what is right or what is 
wrong. Each opinion should be treated as a result 
of intelligent activity. However, the majority ac-
cepted opinions are preferred at the moment. Ex-
periences could tell the preference via vote casting. 
The dynamically vote ranking will tell the selec-
tional preference of the community at each mo-
ment 
3 KUI for Collective Intelligent Develop-
ment 
Related to the principle of KUI and its features, 
KUI provide many collaborative tools or applica-
tion as followings. 
  
Translating 
Translating is a type of text for language expert 
group contribution. Since the existing knowledge 
in one language is invaluable to other language 
communities. Translating such knowledge will 
help bridging the different language communities. 
It will also bring the individual to an unlimited in-
formation space beyond the language barrier. Con-
tribution in term and phrase translation is to create 
a multi-lingual terminology and an aligned multi-
lingual corpus.  
KUI-Translating Room facilitates an individual 
to view either the current translation tasks in the 
task list or the discussion forum of each translating 
task. Online lookup is also provided to consult a 
term translation.  
Individual participated in KUI-Translating can 
cast a vote for a new task, a vote for multiple tasks 
is allowed, select a topic to participate in the dis-
cussion forum, translate the existing terms into 
your own language, chat with your friends to find 
the best translation, cast a vote to your favorite 
translation, invite assistants to your own initiated 
private task, and propose a new task for commu-
nity voting as well.  
Polling 
Opinion Poll is conducted for getting the popula-
tion of each opinion. The result of the opinion poll 
shows the variety of opinions that reflects the cur-
rent thought of the communities together with the 
consensus to the opinions.  
Similar to KUI-Translating, an individual can 
view the current polling task in the task list as well 
as the discussion forum of each polling task via 
KUI-Polling. And current result of polling can be 
view via online lookup function.    
 
Public-Hearing 
Public Hearing is a way to make a complete docu-
ment from the draft. The result from discussion 
will be received and confirmed by gathering the 
opinions to reflect in the final document. Voting of 
the opinion will help the author to select the ap-
propriate opinion of the community. 
An individual can view the current public hear-
ing tasks in the task list as well as the discussion 
forum of each public hearing task via KUI-Polling. 
And current result of polling can be view via 
online lookup function.    
 
 
Figure 2. KUI-Translating page 
 
Writing 
Writing your document online will keep your 
document in access anywhere and anytime. Indi-
vidual does not have to carry all the documents 
with him/her. Only online, one can work on it. 
Sharing the editing online will also support the 
collaborative work.  
16
With KUI-Writing, individual can create or im-
port a new document, edit the existing document, 
chat with friends about the document, and save or 
export the document.  
 
Correspondent to other collaborative tools, all of 
KUI-application provides function to cast a vote 
for either a new task or multiple tasks. Individual 
can select a topic to participate or post new topic, 
chat with others, invite assistants to his/her own 
initiated task, and so on. 
 
The majority vote will select the best solution 
for the collaborative task. 
4 ExpertScore 
KUI heavily depends on members? voting score to 
produce a reliable result. Therefore, we introduce 
an adjustable voting score to realize a self-
organizing system. Each member is initially pro-
vided a default value of voting score equals to one. 
The voting score is increased according to Ex-
pertScore which is estimated by the value of Ex-
pertise, Contribution, and Continuity of the par-
ticipation history of each member. Expertise is a 
composite score of the accuracy of opinion and 
vote, as shown in Equation 1. Contribution is a 
composite score of the ratio of opinion and vote 
posting comparing to the total, as shown in Equa-
tion 2. Continuity is a regressive function based on 
the assumption that the absence of participation of 
a member will gradually decrease its ExpertScore 
to one after a year (365 days) of the absence, as 
shown in Equation 3. 
 
)3(
365
1
)2(
)(
)(
)(
)(
)1(
)(
)(
)(
)(
4
???
???
??=
+=
+=
???????????????
?
??
D
Continuity
TotalVotecount
Votecount
onTotalOpinicount
Opinioncount
onContributi
Votecount
BestVotecount
Opinioncount
nBestOpiniocount
Expertise
??
??
  
 
Where, 
1=+++ ????  
D is number of recent absent date 
 
As a result, the ExpertScore can be estimated by 
Equation 4. 
 
???
???
?
???
???
?
++
+
?
???
?
???
? ??
???
??=
)(
)(
)(
)(
)(
)(
)(
)(
365
1
4
TotalVotecount
Votecount
onTotalOpinicount
Opinioncount
Votecount
BestVotecount
Opinioncount
nBestOpiniocount
D
eExpertScor
??
??
                          
???(4) 
 
The value of ExperScore is ranged between 1 to 
365 according to the accuracy and the rate of con-
tribution of each member. This means that reliable 
members are rewarded better score for each vote. 
However, the expertise of the member is decreased 
according to the continuity of the participation. By 
means of the ExpertScore, we can rank the opin-
ions precisely and yield reliable results, especially 
for the results produced by an online community. 
 
 
Figure 3. KUI-Polling page 
5 Application Show Case 
KUI for Collaborative Translation Task 
In this collaborative text translation, individual 
participants of different mother language work 
online as a virtual group by using KUI. There are 
several translation task required the collaborative 
translation such as Asian WordNet (originally from 
WordNet (Miller, 1995; http://wordnet. prince-
ton.edu/), Medical Translation, OSS Glossary and 
so on. And some are ready for individual use for 
example NICT?s Japanese ? English News Articles 
Alignment, Open Office Glossary, Swadesh List, 
Technical Term Dictionary. 
The volunteer participants are to translate the 
English text into their native languages, by using 
KUI. They act as a virtual group and participate in 
the translation via this web interface. With differ-
ent backgrounds and degrees of translation abili-
ties, they, therefore, can discuss or exchange their 
opinion while translating each utterance. The 
17
communication is not only for getting to know 
each other, but also for better understanding of the 
utterance before translation. Figure 4 shows the 
participation work flow. 
 
 
                Figure 4. Participant work flow 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Lookup page of Asian WordNet 
 
 
6 Conclusion 
We proposed an efficient online collaborative 
framework in producing and maintaining knowl-
edge according to the principle of collective intel-
ligent. KUI was designed to support an open web 
community by introducing a voting system and a 
mechanism to realize the function of selectional 
preference. It was efficiently introduced to encour-
age the communication among individuals from 
different background. KUI was also proved to sup-
port the collaborative work in producing many 
kinds of tasks. The translated text, an example, will 
be voluntarily maintained by the online partici-
pants under the selectional preference based on the 
voting function. Correspondent to collective intel-
ligent collaborative tool, KUI enables to connect 
and collaborate among individual intelligence in 
order to accomplish a complex mission. Of course, 
?two minds are better than one?.  
 
Acknowledgment 
 
Thanks to KUI community for the invaluable con-
tribution to this project. 
References 
http://www.google.com 
http://www.sourceforge.net 
http://www.wiki.org 
 
N. Johnson, S. Rasmussen, C. Joslyn, L. Rocha, S. 
Smith and M. Kantor. Symbiotic Intelligence: 
Self-organizing Knowledge on Distributed Net-
works Driven by Human Interaction, Int. Con-
ference on Artificial Life, Boston. 1998. 
 
KUI. http://www.tcllab.org/kui/ (2006) 
 
Levy. Collective Intelligence: Mankind?s Emerg-
ing World in Cyberspace, New York, 1997. 
 
G. A. Miller. WordNet: A Lexical Databases for 
English. Communications of the ACM, 39-41, 
November, 1995 
 
J.B. Smith.  Collective Intelligence in Computer-
Based Collaboration. Erlbaum, New York, 
1994. 
V. Sornlertlamvanich. KUI: The OSS-Styled 
Knowledge Development System. Handbook of 
The 7th AOSS Symposium, Kuala Lumpur, Ma-
laysia, 2006. 
 
WordNet. http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
18
