Proceedings of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, pages 7?12,
Hyderabad, India, January 2008. c?2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing for Less Privileged Languages: Where do we
come from? Where are we going?
Anil Kumar Singh
Language Technologies Research Centre
IIIT, Hyderabad, India
anil@research.iiit.ac.in
Abstract
In the context of the IJCNLP workshop
on Natural Language Processing (NLP) for
Less Privileged Languages, we discuss the
obstacles to research on such languages.
We also briefly discuss the ways to make
progress in removing these obstacles. We
mention some previous work and comment
on the papers selected for the workshop.
1 Introduction
While computing has become ubiquitous in the de-
veloped regions, its spread in other areas such as
Asia is more recent. However, despite the fact that
Asia is a dense area in terms of linguistic diversity
(or perhaps because of it), many Asian languages
are inadequately supported on computers. Even ba-
sic NLP tools are not available for these languages.
This also has a social cost.
NLP or Computational Linguistics (CL) based
technologies are now becoming important and fu-
ture intelligent systems will use more of these tech-
niques. Most of NLP/CL tools and technologies are
tailored for English or European languages. Re-
cently, there has been a rapid growth of IT indus-
try in many Asian countries. This is now the per-
fect time to reduce the linguistic, computational and
computational linguistics gap between the ?more
privileged? and ?less privileged? languages.
The IJCNLP workshop on NLP for Less Privi-
leged Language is aimed at bridging this gap. Only
when a basic infrastructure for supporting regional
languages becomes available can we hope for a more
equitable availability of opportunities made possi-
ble by the language technology. There have already
been attempts in this direction and this workshop
will hopefully take them further.
Figure-1 shows one possible view of the computa-
tional infrastructure needed for language processing
for a particular language, or more preferably, for a
set of related languages.
In this paper, we will first discuss various aspects
of the problem. We will then look back at the work
already done. After that, we will present some sug-
gestion for future work. But we will begin by ad-
dressing a minor issue: the terminology.
2 Terminology
There can be a debate about the correct term for the
languages on which this workshop focuses. There
are at least four candidates: less studied (LS) lan-
guages, resource scarce (RS) languages, less com-
puterized (LC) languages, and less privileged (LP)
languages. Out of these, two (LS and RS) are too
narrow for our purposes. LC is admittedly more ob-
jective, but it also is somewhat narrow in the sense
that it does not cover the lack of resources for cre-
ating resources (finance) and the lack of linguistic
study. We have used LP because it is more general
and covers all the aspects of the problem. However,
it might be preferable to use LC in many contexts.
As the common element among all these terms
is the adjective ?less? (?resoure scarce? can be
paraphrased as ?with less resources?), perhaps we
can avoid the terminological debate by calling the
languages covered by any such terms as the L-
languages.
7
FirstLevel Preprocessing
Second Level Preprocessing Editors and Interfaces
Models and Other
Applications
Higher Level Multilingual
NLP Applications
Text
Language-Encoding
Identification
Encoding Converters
Text Normalization
Sentence Splitting
Tokenization
Morphological Analyzer
Encoding Converter
Generator
Model of Scripts
Spell Checker
Model of Morphology
Part Of Speech Tagger
Other Specialized
Interfaces
Text Editor
Annotation Interfaces
Local Word Grouper
or Chunker
Figure 1: One view of the basic computational in-
frastructure required for Natural Language Process-
ing or Computational Linguistics. Components like
encoding converters are needed for languages with
less standardization, such as the South Asian lan-
guages. Language resources like lexicon, corpora
etc. have not been shown in this figure.
3 Problems
Not surprisingly, the terms mentioned in the previ-
ous section cover different aspects of the problems
that restrict work on and for these languages. There
is a lack of something and each of those terms covers
some part of what is lacking.
3.1 Linguistic Study
The term LS languages indicates that these are not
well studied linguistically. The sheer amount of lin-
guistic analysis available for English is so huge that
the linguistic work on even a language like Hindi,
which is spoken or understood by a billion people,
is simply not comparable. For languages (or di-
alects) like Santali or Manipuri, the situation is much
worse. And there are a large number of languages
which have been studied even less than Santali or
Manipuri. There are dozens (more accurately, hun-
dreds) of such languages in South Asia alone1. It
can be said that very little is known about the ma-
jority of languages of the world, many of which are
facing extinction.
3.2 Language Resources
Even those languages which have been studied to a
good extent, e.g. Telugu, lack language resources,
e.g. a large dictionary in machine readable form,
let alne resources like WordNet or FrameNet, al-
though efforts are being made to develop resources
for some of these languages. The term RS covers
this aspect of the problem.
3.3 Computerization
Computerization, in general, might include machine
readable language resources and NLP tools etc., but
here we will restrict the meaning of this term to the
support for languages that is provided on comput-
ers, either as part of operating systems, or in the
commonly used applications such as word proces-
sors. In the narrowest sense, computerization means
language-encoding support. Even this level of sup-
port is currently not available (or is inadequate) for
a large number of languages.
3.4 Language Processing
Proper computerization (in the restricted sense) is a
prerequisite to effective language processing. But
even without adequate computerization, attempts are
being made towards making language processing
possible for the L-languages. However, language
processing for the L-languages is still far behind that
for English. For a large number of language it is,
in fact, non-existent. This is true even for a lan-
guage like Gujarati, which is the official language
of the state of Gujarat in India and is recognized as
a scheduled language by the government of India.
And it is actually used as the first language by the
people of Gujarat, which is one of the larger states
in India. While adequate computerization may be
easy to achieve in the near future, at least theoret-
ically, language processing (and building language
resources) is going to be much more difficult task.
1Ethnologue: http://www.ethnologue.com/web.asp
8
NL
P
/C
L
Linguistic Study
Co
mp
ute
riza
tion
Less Privileged
(Finance, Human Resources,
Equipment, Socio-Political Support, etc.)
NL
P
/ C
L
Linguistic Study
Co
mp
ute
riza
tion
Other Privileges
More Privileged
Source
Destination
Figure 2: The four dimensions of the problem: The Source is where we come from and Destination is where
we are going. The problem is to go from the Source to the Destination and the solution is non-trivial.
3.5 Other Privileges
One of the major reasons why building language re-
sources and providing language processing capabil-
ities for the L-languages is going to be a very dif-
ficult task is the fact that these languages lack the
privileges which make it possible to build language
resources and NLP/CL tools. By ?privileges? we
mean the availability of finance, equipment, human
resources, and even political and social support for
reducing the lack of computing and language pro-
cessing support for the L-languages. The lack of
such ?privileges? may be the single biggest reason
which is holding back the progress towards provid-
ing computing and language processing support for
these languages.
4 Some (Partially) Successful Efforts
The problem seems to be insurmountable, but there
has been some progress. More importantly, the ur-
gency of solving this problem (even if partially) is
being realized by more and more people. Some re-
cent events or efforts which tried to address the prob-
lem and which have had some impact in improving
the situation are:
? The LREC conferences and workshops2.
? Workshop on ?Shallow Parsing in South Asian
Languages?, IJCAI-07, India.
2www.lrec-conf.org
? EMELD and the Digital Tools Summit in Lin-
guistics, 2006, USA.
? Workshop on Language Resources for Euro-
pean Minority Languages, 1998, Spain.
? Projects supported by ELRA on the Basic Lan-
guage Resource Kit (BLARK) that targets the
specifications of a minimal kits for each lan-
guage to support NLP tools development3.
? There is also a corresponding project at LDC
(the Less Commonly Taught Languages4).
? The IJCNLP Workshop on Named Entity
Recognition for South and South Asian Lan-
guages5.
This list is, of course, not exhaustive. There are
many papers relevant to the theme of this workshop
at the IJCNLP 2008 main conference6 , as at some
previous major conferences. There is also a very rel-
evant tutorial (Mihalcea, 2008) at the IJCNLP 2008
conference about building resources and tools for
languages with scarce resources.
Even the industry is realizing the importance of
providing computing support for some of the L-
languages. In the last few years there have been
many announcements about the addition of some
3http://www.elda.org/blark
4http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/LCTL
5http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/ner-ssea-08/
6http://ijcnlp2008.org
9
such language to a product or a service and also
of the addition of better facilities (input methods,
transliteration, search) in an existing product or ser-
vice for some L-language.
5 Towards a Solution
Since the problem is very much like the conserva-
tion of the Earth?s environment, there is no easy so-
lution. It is not even evident that a complete solution
is possible. However, we can still try for the best
possible solution. Such a solution should have some
prerequisites. As Figure-2 shows, the ?other privi-
leges? dimension of the problem has to be a major
element of the solution, but it is not something over
which researchers and developers have much con-
trol. This means that we will have to find ways to
work even with very little of these ?other privileges?.
This is the key point that we want to make in this
paper because it implies that the methods that have
been used for English (a language with almost un-
limited ?privileges?) may not be applicable for the
L-languages. Many of these methods assume the
availability of certain things which simply cannot be
assumed for the L-languages. For example, there is
no reasonable ground to assume that there will be
(in the near future) corpus even with shallow levels
of annotation for Avadhi or Dogri or Konkani, let
alone a treebank like resource. Therefore, we have
to look for methods which can work with unanno-
tated corpus. Moreover, these methods should also
not require a lot of work from trained linguists be-
cause such linguists may not be available to work on
these languages. There is one approach, however,
that can still allow us to build resources and tools
for these languages. This is the approach of adapt-
ing the resources of a linguistically close but more
privileged language. It is this area which needs to
be studied and explored more thoroughly because it
seems to be the only practical way to make the kind
of progress that is required urgently. The process
of resource adaptation will have to studied from lin-
guistic, computational, and other practical points of
view. Since ?other privileges? are a major factor as
discussed earlier, some ways of calculating the cost
of adaptation have also to be found.
Another very general but important point is that
we will have to build multilingual systems as far
as possible so that the cost per language is reduced.
This will require innovation in terms of modeling as
well as engineering.
6 Some Comments about the Workshop
The scope of the workshop included topics such as
the following:
? Archiving and creation of interoperable data
and metadata for less privileged languages
? Support for less privileged language on com-
puters. This includes input methods, dis-
play, fonts, encoding converters, spell check-
ers, more linguistically aware text editors etc.
? Basic NLP tools such as sentence marker, tok-
enizer, morphological analyzer, transliteration
tools, language and encoding identifiers etc.
? Advanced NLP tools such as POS taggers, local
word grouper, approximate string search, tools
for developing language resources.
There were a relatively large number of submis-
sions to the workshop and the overall quality was
at least above average. The most noteworthy fact is
that the variety of papers submitted (and selected)
was pleasantly surprising. The workshop includes
paper on topics as diverse as Machine Translation
(MT) from text to sign language (an L-language on
which very few people have worked) to MT from
speech to speech. And from segmentation and stem-
ming to parser adaptation. Also, from input meth-
ods, text editor and interfaces to part of speech
(POS) tagger. The variety is also remarkable in
terms of the languages covered and research loca-
tions.
In addition, the workshop includes three invited
talks: the first on building language resources by re-
source adaptation (David and Maxwell, 2008); the
second on cross-language resource sharing (Sorn-
lertlamvanich, 2008b); and the third on breaking the
Zipfian barrier in NLP (Choudhury, 2008). It can
be said that the workshop has been a moderate suc-
cess. We hope it will stimulate further work in this
direction.
10
7 An Overview of the Papers
We noted above that resource adaptation needs a
lot more study. In one of the papers at the work-
shop, Zeman and Resnik presented their work on
cross-language parser adaptation between related
languages, which can be highly relevant for the
L-languages in ?linguistic areas? (Emeneau, 1956;
Emeneau, 1980). Maxwell and David suggest a
better way to weave together a descriptive gram-
mar with a formal grammar through collaboration
between linguists and computer scientists. Alegria
et al discuss the strategies for sustainable MT
for Basque. They suggest that the main elements
of such a strategy should be incremental design,
reusability, standardization and open source devel-
opment.
Among the papers which focus more on comput-
erization and building of tools, Sornlertlamvanich
et al present a ubiquitous system called KUI for
collective intelligence development. Goonetilleke et
al. describe a predictive text input system called
SriShell Primo for Sinhala language. Veeraragha-
van and Roy describe a text editor and a framework
for working with Indic scripts. Aggarwal and Dave
present an implementation of a speech recognition
system interface for Indian languages.
Riza presents brief overview of the literature on
language endangerment, with focus on the Indone-
sian languages. Some other papers focused more
on linguistic study as applied for computational pur-
poses. Among them, Ali et al investigate the opti-
mal order of factors for the computational treatment
of personal anaphoric devices in Urdu discourse.
Muhirwe and Trosterud discuss finite state solutions
for reduplication in Kinyarwanda language. Maung
Maung and Mikami describe a rule-based syllable
segmentation of Myanmar text. In another paper
on a related domain, Sarkar and Bandyopadhyay
present a design of a rule-based stemmer for natu-
ral language text in Bengali.
Among the papers focusing more on NLP, Das-
gupta et al present a prototype machine translation
system from text to Indian Sign Language (ISL). In
another paper on MT, Ellis et al describe an Finnish
to English speech to speech machine translation sys-
tem that they have currently tried with some success
on the Bible. Doren and Bandyopadhyay present a
morphology driven Manipuri POS tagger. Another
paper on POS tagging is by Patel and Gali. They
have tried to build a tagger for Gujarati.
8 Conclusion
We discussed the problem of the lack of linguis-
tic study, language resources, NLP tools for some
languages, which we called the L-languages since
they less of something. We argued that the ?other
privileges? form another dimension of the problem
and are a crucial factor in deciding what methods
we should use to solve this problem. The techni-
cal has to take into account this non-technical factor.
We suggested that resource adaptation may be one
to move forward. Finally we made some comments
about the NLPLPL-08 workshop.
9 Acknowledgment
We would specially like to thank Samar Husain and
Harshit Surana (Language Technologies Research
Centre, IIIT, Hyderabad, India) for providing vital
help in organizing this workshop.
References
Rajesh Kumar Aggarwal and Mayank Dave. 2008. Im-
plementing a speech recognition system interface for
indian languages. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP
Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hy-
derabad, India.
I Alegria, Xabier Arregi, Xabier Artola, Arantza Diaz
de Ilarraza, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Lersundi, Aingeru
Mayor, and Kepa Sarasola. 2008. Strategies for
sustainable mt for basque: incremental design, reus-
ability, standardization and open-source. In Proceed-
ings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privi-
leged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Mohammad Naveed Ali, Muhammad Abid Khan, and
Muhammad Aamir Khan. 2008. An optimal order
of factors for the computational treatment of personal
anaphoric devices in urdu discourse. In Proceedings
of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged
Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Monojit Choudhury. 2008. Breaking the zipfian barrier
of nlp. Invited Talk at the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP
for Less Privileged Languages. Hyderabad, India.
Tirthankar Dasgupta, Sandipan Dandapat, and Anupam
Basu. 2008. Prototype machine translation system
from text-to-indian sign language. In Proceedings
11
of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged
Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Anne David and Michael Maxwell. 2008. Building lan-
guage resources: Ways to move forward. Invited Talk
at the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged
Languages, 2008. Hyderabad, India.
Timo Honkela David Ellis, Mathias Creutz and Mikko
Kurimo. 2008. Speech to speech machine translation:
Biblical chatter from finnish to english. In Proceed-
ings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privi-
leged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
M. B. Emeneau. 1956. India as a linguistic area. Lin-
guistics, 32:3-16.
M. B. Emeneau. 1980. Language and linguistic area. Es-
says by Murray B. Emeneau. Selected and introduced
by Anwar S. Dil. Stanford University Press.
Sandeva Goonetilleke, Yoshihiko Hayashi, Yuichi Itoh,
and Fumio Kishino. 2008. Srishell primo: A predic-
tive sinhala text input system. In Proceedings of the
IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Lan-
guages, Hyderabad, India.
Zin Maung Maung and Yoshiki Mikami. 2008. A rule-
based syllable segmentation of myanmar text. In Pro-
ceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less
Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Michael Maxwell and Anne David. 2008. Joint grammar
development by linguists and computer scientists. In
Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less
Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Rada Mihalcea. 2008. How to add a new language on the
nlp map: Building resources and tools for languages
with scarce resources. Tutorial at the Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing (IJCNLP). Hyderabad, India.
Jackson Muhirwe and Trond Trosterud. 2008. Finite
state solutions for reduplication in kinyarwanda lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on
NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, In-
dia.
Chirag Patel and Karthik Gali. 2008. Part of speech tag-
ger for gujarati using conditional random fields. In
Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less
Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Hammam Riza. 2008. Indigenous languages of indone-
sia: Creating language resources for language preser-
vation. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on
NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, In-
dia.
Sandipan Sarkar and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2008. De-
sign of a rule-based stemmer for natural language text
in bengali. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop
on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hyderabad,
India.
Thoudam Doren Singh and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2008.
Morphology driven manipuri pos tagger. In Proceed-
ings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privi-
leged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoenporn,
Kergrit Robkop, and Hitoshi Isahara. 2008a. Kui:
an ubiquitous tool for collective intelligence devel-
opment. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop
on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hyderabad,
India.
Virach Sornlertlamvanich. 2008b. Cross language re-
source sharing. Invited Talk at the IJCNLP Workshop
on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, 2008. Hyder-
abad, India.
Krishnakumar Veeraraghavan and Indrani Roy. 2008.
Acharya - a text editor and framework for working
with indic scripts. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP
Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, Hy-
derabad, India.
Daniel Zeman and Philip Resnik. 2008. Cross-language
parser adaptation between related languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less
Privileged Languages, Hyderabad, India.
12
