Formalising Multi-layer Corpora in OWL DL ?
Lexicon Modelling, Querying and Consistency Control
Aljoscha Burchardt1, Sebastian Pad?2?, Dennis Spohr3?, Anette Frank4?and Ulrich Heid3
1Dept. of Comp. Ling. 2Dept. of Linguistics 3Inst. for NLP 4Dept. of Comp. Ling.
Saarland University Stanford University University of Stuttgart University of Heidelberg
Saarbr?cken, Germany Stanford, CA Stuttgart, Germany Heidelberg, Germany
albu@coli.uni-sb.de pado@stanford.edu spohrds,heid@ims.uni-stuttgart.de frank@cl.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract
We present a general approach to formally
modelling corpora with multi-layered anno-
tation, thereby inducing a lexicon model in a
typed logical representation language, OWL
DL. This model can be interpreted as a graph
structure that offers flexible querying func-
tionality beyond current XML-based query
languages and powerful methods for consis-
tency control. We illustrate our approach by
applying it to the syntactically and semanti-
cally annotated SALSA/TIGER corpus.
1 Introduction
Over the years, much effort has gone into the creation
of large corpora with multiple layers of linguistic an-
notation, such as morphology, syntax, semantics, and
discourse structure. Such corpora offer the possibility
to empirically investigate the interactions between
different levels of linguistic analysis.
Currently, the most common use of such corpora
is the acquisition of statistical models that make use
of the ?more shallow? levels to predict the ?deeper?
levels of annotation (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002; Milt-
sakaki et al, 2005). While these models fill an im-
portant need for practical applications, they fall short
of the general task of lexicon modelling, i.e., creat-
ing an abstracted and compact representation of the
corpus information that lends itself to ?linguistically
informed? usages such as human interpretation or
integration with other knowledge sources (e.g., deep
grammar resources or ontologies). In practice, this
task faces three major problems:
?At the time of writing, Sebastian Pad? and Dennis Spohr
were affiliated with Saarland University, and Anette Frank with
DFKI Saarbr?cken and Saarland University.
Ensuring consistency. Annotation reliability and
consistency are key prerequisites for the extraction of
generalised linguistic knowledge. However, with the
increasing complexity of annotations for ?deeper? (in
particular, semantic) linguistic analysis, it becomes
more difficult to ensure that all annotation instances
are consistent with the annotation scheme.
Querying multiple layers of linguistic annotation.
A recent survey (Lai and Bird, 2004) found that cur-
rently available XML-based corpus query tools sup-
port queries operating on multiple linguistic levels
only in very restricted ways. Particularly problematic
are intersecting hierarchies, i.e., tree-shaped analyses
on multiple linguistic levels.
Abstractions and application interfaces. A per-
vasive problem in annotation is granularity: The gran-
ularity offered by a given annotation layer may di-
verge considerably from the granularity that is needed
for the integration of corpus-derived data in large
symbolic processing architectures or general lexical
resources. This problem is multiplied when more
than one layer of annotation is considered, for exam-
ple in the characterisation of interface phenomena.
While it may be possible to obtain coarser-grained
representations procedurally by collapsing categories,
such procedures are not flexibly configurable.
Figure 1 illustrates these difficulties with a sentence
from the SALSA/TIGER corpus (Burchardt et al,
2006), a manually annotated German newspaper cor-
pus which contains role-semantic analyses in the
FrameNet paradigm (Fillmore et al, 2003) on top
of syntactic structure (Brants et al, 2002).1 The se-
1While FrameNet was originally developed for English, the
majority of frames has been found to generalise well to other
389
which the official Croatia but in significant international-law difficulties bring would
Figure 1: Multi-layer annotation of a German phrase with syntax and frame semantics (?which would bring
official Croatia into significant difficulties with international law?)
mantic structure consists of frames, semantic classes
assigned to predicating expressions, and the semantic
roles introduced by these classes. The verb bringen
(?to bring?) is used metaphorically and is thus analy-
sed as introducing one frame for the ?literal? reading
(PLACING) and one for the ?understood? reading
(CAUSATION), both with their own role sets.
The high complexity of the semantic structure even
on its own shows the necessity of a device for con-
sistency checking. In conjunction with syntax, it
presents exactly the case of intersecting hierarchies
which is difficult to query. With respect to the issue of
abstraction, note that semantic roles are realised vari-
ously as individual words (was (?which?) ) and con-
stituents (NPs, PPs), a well-known problem in deriv-
ing syntax-semantics mappings from corpora (Frank,
2004; Babko-Malaya et al, 2006).
Our proposal. We propose that the problems in-
troduced above can be addressed by formalising cor-
pora in an integrated, multi-layered corpus and lexi-
con model in a declarative logical framework, more
specifically, the description logics-based OWL DL
formalism. The major benefits of this approach are
that all relevant properties of the annotation and the
underlying model are captured in a uniform represen-
tation and, moreover, that the formal semantics of the
model makes it possible to use general and efficient
knowledge representation techniques for consistency
control. Finally, we can extract specific subsets from
a corpus by defining task-specific views on the graph.
After a short discussion of related approaches in
languages (Burchardt et al, 2006; Boas, 2005).
Section 2, Section 3 provides details on our method-
ology. Sections 4 and 5 demonstrate the benefits of
our strategy on a model of the SALSA/TIGER data.
Section 6 concludes.
2 Related Work
One recent approach to lexical resource modelling
is the Lexical Systems framework (Polgu?re, 2006),
which aims at providing a highly general represen-
tation for arbitrary kinds of lexica. While this is
desirable from a representational point of view, the
resulting models are arguably too generic to support
strong consistency checks on the encoded data.
A further proposal is the currently evolving Lex-
ical Markup Framework (LMF; Francopoulo et
al. (2006)), an ISO standard for lexical resource mod-
elling, and an LMF version of FrameNet exists. How-
ever, we believe that our usage of a typed formalism
takes advantage of a strong logical foundation and
the notions of inheritance and entailment (cf. Schef-
fczyk et al (2006)) and is a crucial step beyond the
representational means provided by LMF.
Finally, the closest neighbour to our proposal is
the ATLAS project (Laprun et al, 2002), which
combines annotations with a descriptive meta-model.
However, to our knowledge, ATLAS only models
basic consistency constraints, and does not capture
dependencies between different layers of annotation.
390
3 Modelling Multilevel Corpora in OWL DL
3.1 A formal graph-based Lexicon
This section demonstrates how OWL DL, a strongly
typed representation language, can serve to transpar-
ently formalise corpora with multi-level annotation.
OWL DL is a logical language that combines the
expressivity of OWL2 with the favourable computa-
tional properties of Description Logics (DL), notably
decidability and monotonicity (Baader et al, 2003).
The strongly typed, well-defined model-theoretic se-
mantics distinguishes OWL DL from recent alterna-
tive approaches to lexicon modelling.
Due to the fact that OWL DL has been defined
in the Resource Description Framework (RDF3), the
first central benefit of using OWL DL is the possibil-
ity to conceive of the lexicon as a graph ? a net-like
entity with a high degree of interaction between lay-
ers of linguistic description, with an associated class
hierarchy. Although OWL DL itself does not have a
graph model but a model-theoretic semantics based
on First Order Logic, we will illustrate our ideas with
reference to a graph-like representation, since this is
what we obtain by transforming our OWL DL files
into an RDFS database.
Each node in the graph instantiates one or more
classes that determine the properties of the node. In
a straightforward sense, properties correspond to la-
belled edges between nodes. They are, however, also
represented as nodes in the graph which instantiate
(meta-)classes themselves.
The model is kept compact by OWL?s support for
multiple instantiation, i.e., the ability of instances
to realise more than one class. For example, in a
syntactically and semantically annotated corpus, all
syntactic units (constituents, words, or even parts
of words) can instantiate ? in addition to a syntac-
tic class ? one or more semantic classes. Multiple
instantiation enables the representation of informa-
tion about several annotation layers within single
instances.
As we have argued in Section 2, we believe that
having one generic model that can represent all cor-
pora is problematic. Instead, we propose to construct
lexicon models for specific types of corpora. The
2http://www.w3.org/2004/OWL/
3http://www.w3.org/RDF/
design of such models faces two central design ques-
tions: (a) Which properties of the annotated instances
should be represented?; (b) How are different types
of these annotation properties modelled in the graph?
Implicit features in annotations. Linguistic anno-
tation guidelines often concentrate on specifying the
linguistic data categories to be annotated. However,
a lot of linguistically relevant information often re-
mains implicit in the annotation scheme. Examples
from the SALSA corpus include, e.g., the fact that
the annotation in Figure 1 is metaphorical. This in-
formation has to be inferred from the configuration
that one predicate evokes two frames. As such infor-
mation about different annotation types is useful in
final lexicon resources, e.g. to define clean generali-
sations over the data (singling out ?special cases?), to
extract information about special data categories, and
to define formally grounded consistency constraints,
we include it in the lexicon model.
Form of representation. All relevant information
has to be represented either as assertional statements
in the model graph (i.e., nodes connected by edges),
or as definitional axioms in the class hierarchy.4
This decision involves a fundamental trade-off be-
tween expressivity and flexibility. Modelling features
as axioms in the class hierarchy imposes definitional
constraints on all instances of these classes and is
arguably more attractive from a cognitive perspec-
tive. However, modelling features as entities in the
graph leads to a smaller class hierarchy, increased
querying flexibility, and more robustness in the face
of variation and noise in the data.
3.2 Modelling SALSA/TIGER Data
We now illustrate these decisions concretely by de-
signing a model for a corpus with syntactic and
frame-semantic annotation, more concretely the
SALSA/TIGER corpus. However, the general points
we make are valid beyond this particular setting.
As concerns implicit annotation features, we have
designed a hierarchy of annotation types which now
explicitly expresses different classes of annotation
phenomena and which allows for the definition of
annotation class-specific properties. For example,
frame targets are marked as a multi-word target if
4This choice corresponds to the DL distinction between TBox
(?intensional knowledge?) and ABox (?extensional knowledge?).
391
L
in
gu
is
ti
c
m
od
el
? Frames
w Intentionally_affect
w Placing
w Motion, . . .
? Roles
w Intentionally_affect.Act
w Placing.Means
? TIGER edge labels and POS
w SB, OA, PPER, ADJA, . . .
? Generalised functions and categories
w subj, obj, NounP, AdjP, . . .
A
nn
ot
at
io
n
ty
pe
s
? Frame Annotations
w Simple
w Metaphoric
w Underspecified
? Role Annotations
w Simple
w Underspecified
? Target Annotations
w Single-word targets
w Multi-word targets
? Sentences, syntactic units, . . .
Figure 2: Schema of the OWL DL model?s class hierarchy (?TBox?)
their span contains at least two terminal nodes. The
hierarchy is shown on the right of Figure 2, which
shows parts of the bipartite class hierarchy.
The left-hand side of Figure 2 illustrates the lin-
guistic model, in which frames and roles are organ-
ised according to FrameNet?s inheritance relation.
Although this design seems to be straightforward, it
is the result of careful considerations concerning the
second design decision. Since FrameNet is a hierar-
chically structured resource with built-in inheritance
relations, one important question is whether to model
individual frames, such as SELF_MOTION or LEAD-
ERSHIP, and their relations either as instances of a
general class Frame and as links between these in-
stances, or as hierarchically structured classes with
richer axiomatisation. In line with our focus on con-
sistency checking, we adopt the latter option, which
allows us to use built-in reasoning mechanisms of
OWL DL to ensure consistency.
Annotation instances from the corpus instantiate
multiple classes in both hierarchies (cf. Figure 2): On
the annotation side according to their types of phe-
nomena; on the linguistic side based on their frames,
roles, syntactic functions, and categories.
Flexible abstraction. Section 1 introduced granu-
larity as a pervasive problem in the use of multi-level
corpora. Figure 2 indicates that the class hierarchy
of the OWL DL model offers a very elegant way
of defining generalised data categories that provide
abstractions over model classes, both for linguistic
categories and annotation types. Moreover, proper-
ties can be added to each abstracting class and then
be used, e.g., for consistency checking. In our case,
Figure 2 shows (functional) edge labels and part-of-
speech tags provided by TIGER, as well as sets of
(largely theory-neutral) grammatical functions and
categories that subsume these fine-grained categories
and support the extraction of generalised valence in-
formation from the lexicon.
An annotated corpus sentence. To substantiate
the above discussion, Figure 3 shows a partial lexicon
representation of the example in Figure 1. The boxes
represent instance nodes, with classes listed above
the horizontal line, and datatype properties below
it.5 The links between these instances indicate OWL
object properties which have been defined for the
instantiated classes. For example, the metaphorical
PLACING frame is shown as a grey box in the middle.
Multiple inheritance is indicated by instances
carrying more than one class, such as the in-
stance in the left centre, which instantiates the
classes SyntacticUnit, NP, OA, NounP and
obj. Multi-class instances inherit the properties
of each of these classes, so that e.g., the meta-
phoric frame annotation of the PLACING frame
in the middle has both the properties defined for
frames (hasCoreRole) and for frame annotations
(hasTarget). The generalised syntactic categories
discussed above are given in italics (e.g., NounP).
The figure highlights the model?s graph-based
structure with a high degree of interrelation between
the lexicon entities. For example, the grey PLAC-
ING frame instance is directly related to its roles
(left, bottom), its lexical anchor (right), the surround-
ing sentence (top), and a flag (top left) indicating
metaphorical use.
5For the sake of simplicity, we excluded explicit ?is-a? links.
392
MetaphoricFrameAnnotationUspFrameAnnotationCausation
SyntacticUnitPRELSSB
hasTigerIDhasContent
NounPsubj
SyntacticUnitNENKhasTigerIDhasContent s2910_17"Kroatien"
Source
SyntacticUnitNPOA
hasTigerIDhasContent
SimpleRoleAnnotationPlacing.ThemehasContent
UspFrameAnnotationSupport LemmahasLemma
LexicalUnitrdf:ID bringen.Placing
SingleWordTargethasContent
SyntacticUnitVVINFHDhasTigerIDhasContent
SyntacticUnitNNNKhasTigerIDhasContent
NounPobj
s2910_15
"das"
s2910_502
"das offizielle Kroatien"
s2910_14
"was"SyntacticUnitARTNKhasTigerIDhasContent
"bringen"
"bringen"
SimpleRoleAnnotationPlacing.CausehasContent "was"
SentenceAnnotationhasSentenceIDhasContent s2910"Die Ausrufung des ..."
MetaphoricFrameAnnotationPlacing
"das offizielle Kroatien"
SimpleRoleAnnotationPlacing.GoalhasContent "in betr?chtliche v?lker..."
"bringen"s2910_23
"Schwierigkeiten"s2910_22
consistsOf
isAssignedTo hasFlag
hasFrameAnnotation hasFrameAnnotation
isUspWith
hasFrameAnnotation
hasCoreRole
hasCoreRoleisAssignedTo
hasCoreRole
hasTargetisTargetOf isAssignedTo hasHead
hasAnnotation?Instance
hasReadingisReadingOf
isAnnotationInstanceOf
isAssignedToSyntacticUnitADJANKhasTigerIDhasContent s2910_16"offizielle"
consistsOf consistsOf
...
Figure 3: Partial lexicon representation of an annotated corpus sentence
4 Querying the Model
We now address the second desideratum introduced
in Section 1, namely a flexible and powerful query
mechanism. For OWL DL models, such a mecha-
nism is available in the form of the Sesame (Broekstra
et al, 2002) SeRQL query language. Since SeRQL
makes it possible to extract and view arbitrary sub-
graphs of the model, querying of intersective hierar-
chies is possible in an intuitive manner.
An interesting application for this querying mecha-
nism is to extract genuine lexicon views on the corpus
annotations, e.g., to extract syntax-semantics map-
ping information for particular senses of lemmas, by
correlating role assignments with deep syntactic in-
formation. These can serve both for inspection and
for interfacing the annotation data with deep gram-
matical resources or general lexica. Applied to our
complete corpus, this ?lexicon? contains on average
8.5 role sets per lemma, and 5.6 role sets per frame.
The result of such a query is illustrated in Table 1 for
the lemma senken (?to lower?).
From such view, frame- or lemma-specific role
sets, i.e., patterns of role-category-function assign-
ments can easily be retrieved. A typical example is
given in Table 2, with additional frequency counts.
The first row indicates that the AGENT role has been
realised as a (deep) subject noun phrase and the ITEM
as (deep) object noun phrase.
We found that generalisations over corpus cate-
gories encoded in the class hierarchies are central
Role Cat Func Freq
Item NounP obj 26
Agent NounP subj 15
Difference PrepP mod-um 6
Cause NounP subj 4
Value_2 PrepP mod-auf 3
Value_2 PrepP pobj-auf 2
Value_1 PrepP mod-von 1
Table 1: Role-category-function assignments for
senken / CAUSE_CHANGE_OF_SCALAR_POSITION (CCSP)
Role set for senken / CCSP Freq
Agent Item 11
subj obj
NounP NounP
Cause Item 4
subj obj
NounP NounP
Item 4
obj
NounP
Agent Item Difference 2
subj obj mod-um
NounP NounP PrepP
Table 2: Sample of role sets for senken / CCSP
to the usefulness of the resulting patterns. For ex-
ample, the number of unique mappings between se-
mantic roles and syntactic categories in our corpus
is 5,065 for specific corpus categories, and 2,289 for
abstracted categories. Thus, the definition of an ab-
straction layer, in conjunction with a flexible query
mechanism, allows us to induce lexical characterisa-
tions of the syntax-semantics mapping ? aggregated
393
and generalised from disparate corpus annotations.
Incremental refinements. Querying, and the re-
sulting lexical views, can serve yet another purpose:
Such aggregates make it possible to conduct a data-
driven search for linguistic generalisations which
might not be obvious from a theoretical perspective,
and allow quick inspection of the data for counterex-
amples to plausible regularities.
In the case of semantic roles, for example, such
a regularity would be that semantic roles are not
assigned to conflicting grammatical functions (e.g.,
deep subject and object) within a given lemma. How-
ever, some of the role sets we extracted contained
exactly such configurations. Further inspection re-
vealed that these irregularities resulted from either
noise introduced by errors in the automatic assign-
ment of grammatical functions, or instances with
syntactically non-local role assignments.
Starting from such observations, our approach sup-
ported a semi-automatic, incremental refinement of
the linguistic and annotation models, in this case in-
troducing a distinction between local and non-local
role realisations.
Size of the lexicon. Using a series of SeRQL
queries, we have computed the size of the cor-
pus/lexicon model for the SALSA/TIGER data (see
Table 3). The lexicon model architecture as described
in Section 3 results in a total of more than 304,000
instances in the lexicon, instantiating 581 different
frame classes and 1,494 role classes.
5 Consistency Control
The first problem pointed out in Section 1 was the
need for efficient consistency control mechanisms.
Our OWL DL-based model in fact offers two mech-
anisms for consistency checking: axiom-based and
query-based checking.
Axiom-based checking. Once some constraint has
been determined to be universally applicable, it can
be formulated in Description Logics in the form of
axiomatic expressions on the respective class in the
model. Although the general interpretation of these
axioms in DL is that they allow for inference of new
statements, they can still be used as a kind of well-
formedness ?constraint?. For example, if an individ-
ual is asserted as an instance of a particular class, the
Type No. of instances
Lemmas 523
Lemma-frame pairs (LUs) 1,176
Sentences 13,353
Syntactic units 223,302
Single-word targets 16,268
Multi-word targets 258
Frame annotations 16,526
Simple 14,700
Underspecified 995
Metaphoric 785
Elliptic 107
Role annotations 31,704
Simple 31,112
Underspecified 592
Table 3: Instance count based on the first SALSA
release
reasoner will detect an inconsistency if this instance
does not adhere to the axiomatic class definition. For
semantic role annotations, axioms can e.g. define the
admissible relations between a particular frame and
its roles. This is illustrated in the DL statements be-
low, which express that an instance of PLACING may
at most have the roles GOAL, PATH, etc.
Placing v ?.hasRole (Placing.Goal unionsq Placing.Path unionsq . . .)
Placing v ?.hasRole (Placing.Goal unionsq Placing.Path unionsq . . .)
Relations between roles can be formalised in a
similar way. An example is the excludes relation in
FrameNet, which prohibits the co-occurrence of roles
like CAUSE and AGENT of the PLACING frame. This
can be expressed by the following statement.
Placing v ?((?.hasRole Placing.Cause)u
(?.hasRole Placing.Agent))
The restrictions are used in checking the consistency
of the semantic annotation; violations of these con-
straints lead to inconsistencies that can be identified
by theorem provers. Although current state-of-the-art
reasoners do not yet scale to the size of entire cor-
pora, axiom-based checking still works well for our
data due to SALSA?s policy of dividing the original
TIGER corpus into separate subcorpora, each deal-
ing with one particular lemma (cf. Scheffczyk et al
(2006)).
394
Query-based checking. Due to the nature of our
graph representation, constraints can combine dif-
ferent types of information to control adherence to
annotation guidelines. Examples are the assignment
of the SUPPORTED role of support verb constructions,
which ought to be assigned to the maximal syntactic
constituent projected by the supported noun, or the
exclusion of reflexive pronouns from the span of the
target verb. However, the consistency of multi-level
annotation is often difficult to check: Not only are
some types of classification (e.g. assignment of se-
mantic classes) inherently difficult; the annotations
also need to be considered in context. For such cases,
axiom-based checking is too strict. In practice, it is
important that manual effort can be reduced by auto-
matically extracting subsets of ?suspicious? data for
inspection. This can be done using SeRQL queries
which ? in contrast to the general remarks on the
scalability of reasoners ? are processed and evaluated
very quickly on the entire annotated corpus data.
Example queries that we formulated examine sus-
picious configurations of annotation types, such as
target words evoking two or more frame annota-
tions which are neither marked as underspecified nor
tagged as a pair of (non-)literal metaphorical frame
annotations. Here, we identified 8 cases of omitted
annotation markup, namely 4 missing metaphor flags
and 4 omitted underspecification links.
On the semantic level, we extracted annotation
instances (in context) for metaphorical vs. non-
metaphorical readings, or frames that are involved
in underspecification in certain sentences, but not in
others. While the result sets thus obtained still re-
quire manual inspection, they clearly illustrate how
the detection of inconsistencies can be enhanced by
a declarative formalisation of the annotation scheme.
Another strategy could be to concentrate on frames
or lemmas exhibiting proportionally high variation
in annotation (Dickinson and Meurers, 2003).
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have constructed a Description
Logics-based lexicon model directly from multi-layer
linguistic corpus annotations. We have shown how
such a model allows for explicit data modelling, and
for flexible and fine-grained definition of various de-
grees of abstractions over corpus annotations.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated that a pow-
erful logical formalisation which integrates an un-
derlying annotation scheme can be used to directly
control consistency of the annotations using general
KR techniques. It can also overcome limitations
of current XML-based search tools by supporting
queries which are able to connect multiple levels of
linguistic analysis. These queries can be used vari-
ously as an additional means of consistency control,
to derive quantitative tendencies from the data, to
extract lexicon views tailored to specific purposes,
and finally as a general tool for linguistic research.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partly funded by the German
Research Foundation DFG (grant PI 154/9-2). We
also thank the two anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments and suggestions.
References
Franz Baader, Diego Calvanese, Deborah L. McGuinness,
Daniele Nardi, and Peter F. Patel-Schneider. 2003.
The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implemen-
tation and Applications. CUP.
Olga Babko-Malaya, Ann Bies, Ann Taylor, Szuting Yi,
Martha Palmer, Mitch Marcus, Seth Kulick, and Li-
bin Shen. 2006. Issues in Synchronizing the English
Treebank and PropBank. In Proceedings of the COL-
ING/ACL Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically An-
notated Corpora, Sydney.
Hans C. Boas. 2005. Semantic frames as interlingual
representations for multilingual lexical databases. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 18(4):445?478.
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolfgang
Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, Sozopol.
Jeen Broekstra, Arjohn Kampman, and Frank van Herme-
len. 2002. Sesame: A generic architecture for storing
and querying RDF and RDF Schema. In Proceedings
of the 1st ISWC, Sardinia.
Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, Andrea
Kowalski, Sebastian Pad?, and Manfred Pinkal. 2006.
The SALSA corpus: a German corpus resource for
lexical semantics. In Proceedings of the 5th LREC,
Genoa.
Markus Dickinson and W. Detmar Meurers. 2003. De-
tecting errors in part-of-speech annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th EACL, Budapest.
395
Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and
Miriam R.L. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16:235?250.
Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzolari,
Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet, and Clau-
dia Soria. 2006. LMF for multilingual, specialized
lexicons. In Proceedings of the 5th LREC, Genoa.
Anette Frank. 2004. Generalisations over corpus-
induced frame assignment rules. In Proceedings of the
LREC Workshop on Building Lexical Resources From
Semantically Annotated Corpora, Lisbon.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):245?288.
Catherine Lai and Steven Bird. 2004. Querying and up-
dating treebanks: A critical survey and requirements
analysis. In Proceedings of the Australasian Language
Technology Workshop, Sydney.
Christophe Laprun, Jonathan Fiscus, John Garofolo, and
Sylvain Pajot. 2002. Recent Improvements to the AT-
LAS Architecture. In Proceedings of HLT 2002, San
Diego.
Eleni Miltsakaki, Nikhil Dinesh, Rashmi Prasad, Ar-
avind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber. 2005. Exper-
iments on sense annotations and sense disambigua-
tion of discourse connectives. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries, Barcelona, Spain.
Alain Polgu?re. 2006. Structural properties of lexi-
cal systems: Monolingual and multilingual perspec-
tives. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL Workshop
on Multilingual Language Resources and Interoper-
ability, Sydney.
Jan Scheffczyk, Collin F. Baker, and Srini Narayanan.
2006. Ontology-based reasoning about lexical re-
sources. In Proceedings of the 5th OntoLex, Genoa.
396
