Towards an Annotated Corpus of Discourse Relations in Hindi 
Rashmi Prasad*, Samar Husain?, Dipti Mishra Sharma? and Aravind Joshi* 
 
Abstract 
We describe our initial efforts towards 
developing a large-scale corpus of Hindi 
texts annotated with discourse relations. 
Adopting the lexically grounded approach 
of the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB), 
we present a preliminary analysis of 
discourse connectives in a small corpus. 
We describe how discourse connectives are 
represented in the sentence-level 
dependency annotation in Hindi, and 
discuss how the discourse annotation can 
enrich this level for research and 
applications. The ultimate goal of our work 
is to build a Hindi Discourse Relation Bank 
along the lines of the PDTB. Our work will 
also contribute to the cross-linguistic 
understanding of discourse connectives. 
1 Introduction 
An increasing interest in human language 
technologies such as textual summarization, 
question answering, natural language generation 
has recently led to the development of several 
discourse annotation projects aimed at creating 
large scale resources for natural language 
processing. One of these projects is the Penn 
Discourse Treebank (PDTB Group, 2006),1whose 
goal is to annotate the discourse relations holding 
between eventualities described in a text, for 
example causal and contrastive relations. The 
PDTB is unique in using a lexically grounded 
approach for annotation: discourse relations are 
anchored in lexical items (called ?explicit 
discourse connectives?) whenever they are 
                                                 
* University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 
{rjprasad,joshi}@seas.upenn.edu 
? Language Technologies Research Centre, IIIT, Hyderabad, 
India, samar@research.iiit.ac.in, dipti@iiit.ac.in 
1 http://www.seas.upenn.edu/?pdtb 
 
explicitly realized in the text. For example, in (1), 
the causal relation between ?the federal 
government suspending US savings bonds sales? 
and ?Congress not lifting the ceiling on 
government debt? is expressed with the explicit 
connective ?because?.2 The two arguments of each 
connective are also annotated, and the annotations 
of both connectives and their arguments are 
recorded in terms of their text span offsets.3  
 
(1) The federal government suspended sales of U.S. 
savings bonds because Congress hasn?t lifted the 
ceiling on government debt. 
 
One of the questions that arises is how the 
PDTB style annotation can be carried over to 
languages other than English. It may prove to be a 
challenge cross-linguistically, as the guidelines and 
methodology appropriate for English may not 
apply as well or directly to other languages, 
especially when they differ greatly in syntax and 
morphology. To date, cross-linguistic 
investigations of connectives in this direction have 
been carried out for Chinese (Xue, 2005) and 
Turkish (Deniz and Webber, 2008). This paper 
explores discourse relation annotation in Hindi, a 
language with rich morphology and free word 
order. We describe our study of ?explicit 
connectives? in a small corpus of Hindi texts, 
discussing them from two perspectives. First, we 
consider the type and distribution of Hindi 
connectives, proposing to annotate a wider range 
                                                 
2 The PDTB also annotates implicit discourse relations, but 
only locally, between adjacent sentences. Annotation here 
consists of providing connectives (called ?implicit discourse 
connectives?) to express the inferred relation. Implicit 
connectives are beyond the scope of this paper, but will be 
taken up in future work. 
3 The PDTB also records the senses of the connectives, and 
each connective and its arguments are also marked for their 
attribution. Sense annotation and attribution annotation are not 
discussed in this paper. We will, of course, pursue these 
aspects in our future work concerning the building of a Hindi 
Discourse Relation Bank. 
 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
73
of connectives than the PDTB. Second, we 
consider how the connectives are represented in 
the Hindi sentence-level dependency annotation, in 
particular discussing how the discourse annotation 
can enrich the sentence-level structures. We also 
briefly discuss issues involved in aligning the 
discourse and sentence-level annotations.  
Section 2 provides a brief description of Hindi 
word order and morphology. In Section 3, we 
present our study of the explicit connectives 
identified in our texts, discussing them in light of 
the PDTB. Section 4 describes how connectives 
are represented in the sentence-level dependency 
annotation in Hindi. Finally, Section 5 concludes 
with a summary and future work. 
2 Brief Overview of Hindi Syntax and 
Morphology 
Hindi is a free word order language with SOV as 
the default order. This can be seen in (2), where 
(2a) shows the constituents in the default order, 
and the remaining examples show some of the 
word order variants of (2a). 
 
(2)  a. malaya       nao         samaIr         kao     iktaba    dI .  
           malay   ERG  sameer    DAT  book   gave 
           ?Malay gave the book to Sameer? (S-IO-DO-V)4 
       b. malaya nao iktaba samaIr kao dI. (S-DO-IO-V) 
       c. samaIr kao malaya nao iktaba dI. (IO-S-DO-V) 
       d. samaIr kao iktaba malaya nao dI. (IO-DO-S-V) 
       e. iktaba malaya nao samaIr kao dI. (DO-S-IO-V) 
        f. iktaba samaIr kao malaya nao dI.  (DO-IO-S-V) 
 
Hindi also has a rich case marking system, 
although case marking is not obligatory. For 
example, in (2), while the subject and indirect 
object are explicitly for the ergative (ERG) and 
dative (DAT) cases, the direct object is unmarked 
for the accusative. 
3 Discourse Connectives in Hindi 
Given the lexically grounded approach adopted for 
discourse annotation, the first question that arises 
is how to identify discourse connectives in Hindi. 
Unlike the case of the English connectives in the 
PDTB, there are no resources that alone or together 
provide an exhaustive list of connectives in the 
                                                 
4 S=Subject; IO=Indirect Object; DO=Direct Object; 
V=Verb; ERG=Ergative; DAT=Dative 
language. We did try to create a list from our own 
knowledge of the language and grammar, and also 
by translating the list of English connectives in the 
PDTB. However, when we started looking at real 
data, this list proved to be incomplete. For 
example, we discovered that the form of the 
complementizer ?ik? also functions as a temporal 
subordinator, as in (3). 
 
(3) [ vah  baalaTI      ko   gaMdo      panaI      sao      ApnaI    caaOklaoT  
      [he   bucket  of  dirty  water  from  his     chocolates 
      inakalanao          hI     vaalaa    qaa]    ik    {]sakI  mammaI       nao  
      taking-out  just doing was]  that  {his   mother ERG 
      ]sao    raok idyaa } 
      him stop did} 
?He was just going to take out the chocolates from 
the dirty water in the bucket when his mother stopped 
him.? 
 
The method of collecting connectives will 
therefore necessarily involve ?discovery during 
annotation?. However, we wanted to get some 
initial ideas about what kinds of connectives were 
likely to occur in real text, and to this end, we 
looked at 9 short stories with approximately 8000 
words. Our goal here is to develop an initial set of 
guidelines for annotation, which will be done on 
the same corpus on which the sentence-level 
dependency annotation is being carried out (see 
Section 4). Table 1 provides the full set of 
connectives we found in our texts, grouped by 
syntactic type. The first four columns give the 
syntactic grouping, the Hindi connective 
expressions, the English gloss, and the English 
equivalent expressions, respectively. The last 
column gives the number of occurrences we found 
of each expression. In the rest of this section, we 
describe the function and distribution of discourse 
connectives in Hindi based on our texts. In the 
discussion, we have noted our points of departure 
from the PDTB where applicable, both with 
respect to the types of relations being annotated as 
well as with respect to terminology. For argument 
naming, we use the PDTB convention: the clause 
with which the connective is syntactically 
associated is called Arg2 and the other clause is 
called Arg1. Two special conventions are followed 
for paired connectives, which we describe below. 
In all Hindi examples in this paper, Arg1 is 
enclosed in square brackets and Arg2 is in braces. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
74
Connective Type Hindi Gloss English Num 
Sub. Conj. @yaaoMik 
(@yaaoM)ik..[salaIe 
(Agar|yadI)..tba|tao 
(jaba).. tba|tao 
jaba tk.. tba tk (ko ilae)  
jaOsao hI..(tao)  
[tnaa|eosaa..kI  
taik  
ik 
why-that 
(why)-that..this-for  
(if)..then 
(when)..then  
when till..then till (of for)  
as just..(then)  
so|such..that  
so-that  
that  
 
because  
because 
if..(then)  
when  
until  
as soon as  
so that  
so that  
when
  
2 
3 
15 
50 
2 
5 
12 
1 
5 
Sentential Relatives ijasasao 
jaao 
ijasako karNa 
which-with 
which 
which-of reason 
because of which 
because of which 
because of which 
5 
1 
1 
Subordinator pr 
(-kr|-ko|krko) 
samaya 
hue 
ko baad 
sao 
ko phlao 
ko ilae 
maoM 
ko karNa 
upon 
(do) 
time 
happening 
of later 
with 
of before 
of for 
in 
of reason
 
upon 
after|while 
while 
while 
after 
due to 
before 
in order to 
while 
because of
 
9 
111 
1 
28 
3 
1 
1 
4 
1 
3 
Coord. Conj. laoikna|pr|prntu 
AaOr|tqaa  
yaa  
yaaoM tao..pr  
naa kovala..balaik  
but  
and  
or  
such TOP..but  
not only..but
 
but  
and  
or  
but  
not only..but
 
51 
117 
2 
2 
1 
Adverbial tba  
baad maoM  
ifr  
[saIilae  
nahIM tao  
tBaI tao  
saao  
vahI|yahI nahIM  
then  
later in  
then  
this-for  
not then  
then-only TOP  
so  
that|this-only not  
then  
later  
then  
that is why  
otherwise  
that is why  
so  
not only that  
2 
5 
4 
7 
5 
1 
10 
1 
TOTAL    472 
     Table 1: A Partial List of Discourse Connectives in Hindi. Parentheses are used for optional  
     elements; ?|? is used for alternating elements; TOP = topic marker.
 
3.1 Types of Discourse Connectives 
3.1.1 Subordinating Conjunctions 
Finite adverbial subordinate clauses are 
introduced by independent lexical items called 
?subordinating conjunctions?, such as @yaaoMik 
(?because?), as in (4), and they typically occur as 
right or left attached to the main clause. 
 
(4) [maOM   [sa  saBaI    Qana        kao       rajya      ko   baadSaah  
      [I  this  all   wealth ACC kingdom of  king 
      kao      do      dota],    @yaaoMik       {vahI           samast 
     
 
 
  DAT give would], why-that {he-EMPH all 
      QartI     kI  sampda      ka  svaamaI   hO} 
      earth  of   wealth  of   lord  is} 
?I would give all this wealth to the king, because he 
alone is the lord of this whole world?s wealth.? 
 
As the first group in Table 1 shows, 
subordinating conjunctions in Hindi often come 
paired, with one element in the main clause and 
the other in the subordinate clause (Ex.5). One 
of these elements can also be implicit (Ex.6),  
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
75
and in our texts, this was most often the 
subordinate clause element. 
 
(5)  @yaaoMik       {yah   tumharI  ja,maIna   pr   imalaa     hO},      [sailae 
       because {this  your  land  on  found  has}, this-for 
       [[sa       Qana      pr  tumhara  AiQakar  hO] 
       [this treasure on  your  right  is] 
?Because this was found on your land, you have the 
right to this treasure.? 
 
(6)  []saka  vaSa       calata]     tao    {vah   ]sao   Gar        sao 
       [her   power  walk] then  {she  it   home  from 
       baahr  inakala  dotI}  
       out  take  would} 
?Had it been in her power, she would have banished 
it from the house.? 
 
When both elements of the paired connective are 
explicit, their text spans must be selected 
discontinuously. The main clause argument is 
called Arg1 and the subordinate clause 
argument, Arg2. 
Subordinating conjunctions, whether single or 
paired, can occur in non-initial positions in their 
clause. However, this word order variability is 
not completely unconstrained. First, not all 
conjunctions display this freedom. For example, 
while ?jaba? (?when?) can be clause-medial (Ex. 
7), ?@yaaoMik? (?because?) cannot. Second, when the 
main clause precedes the subordinate clause, the 
main clause element, if explicit, cannot appear 
clause-initially at all. Consider the causal ?@yaaoMik.. 
[salaIe? (Ex.5), which represents the subordinate-
main clause order. In the reverse order, the 
explicit main clause ?[salaIe? (Ex.8) appears 
clause medially. Placing this element in clause-
initial position is not possible. 
 
(7) {lakD,haro         kI  p%naI      kao}    jaba    {yah 
      {woodcutter of  wife DAT} when {this 
       maalaUma            pD,a  ik     [sa  icaiDyaa  ko   karNa,  
       knowledge put  that this bird   of   reason 
       kama     CaoD,kr    Gar       Aa   gayaa     hO}   tao      [vah 
       work leaving home come went is} then  [she 
       ]sa    pr       barsa        pD,I]. 
       him on  anger-rain put] 
 ?When the woodcutter?s wife found out that he had 
left his work and come home to care for the bird, she 
raged at him.? 
 
(8)  [. . . pr  icaraga   kI  ba%tI    ]sakanaa  yaa   daohrI  
       [. . .but lamp of  light  light    or  another 
       ba%tI    lagaanaa]         Saayad [sailae         []icat nahIM  
       light  putting] perhaps this-for  [appropriate not 
       samaJato          qao]  ik     {tola  ka  Apvyaya   haogaa}. 
       Consider did]  that  {oil  of  waste   be-FUT}. 
?. . . but he did not consider it appropriate to light the 
lamp repeatedly or light another lamp, perhaps 
because it would be a waste of oil.? 
3.1.2 Sentential Relative Pronouns 
Since discourse relations are defined as holding 
between eventualities, we have also identified 
relations that are expressed syntactically as 
relative pronouns in sentential relative clauses, 
which modify the main clause verb denoting an 
eventuality, rather than some entity denoting 
noun phrase. For example, in (9), a 
result/purpose relation is conveyed between ?the 
man?s rushing home? and ?the bird being taken 
care of?, and we believe that this relation 
between the eventualities should be captured 
despite it?s syntactic realization as the relative 
pronoun ?ijasasao? (?because of which/so that?). (10) 
gives an example of a modified relative 
pronoun. 
 
(9) [saara  kama     caaoD,kr     vah  ]sa    baImaar   icaiD,yaa 
      [all  work  leaving  he  that  sick  bird 
      kao       ]zakr       dbaa     Gar     kI    Aaor       Baagaa], 
      ACC picking-up fast home of direction ran], 
      ijasasao             {]saka   sahI       [laaja   ikyaa  jaa    sako} 
      from-which {her    proper  care  do   go  able} 
?Leaving all his work, he picked up the bird and ran 
home very fast, so that the bird could be given proper 
care.? 
 
(10) [}M^TaoM       ko   hr     baar    kdma  rKnao       pr 
        [camels of  every time step keeping upon 
        icaiD,yaao M ko  isar     Aapsa          maoM   tqaa   }M^T      kI 
        birds of  head each-other in and camels of 
        gardna   sao    Tkra            rho     qao]   ijasako karNa 
        neck with hit-against be had] of-which reason 
       {]na     pixayaaoM   kI   drdBarI      caIKoM        inakla 
       {those birds  of   painful  screams come-out  
         rhI   qaIM}. 
         be had} 
?With each step of the camels, the birds heads were 
hitting against each other as well as with the camels? 
necks because of which the birds were screaming 
painfully.? 
3.1.3 Subordinators 
In contrast to the subordinating conjunctions, 
elements introducing non-finite subordinate 
clauses are called ?subordinators?. Unlike 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
76
English, where certain non-finite subordinate 
clauses, called ?free adjuncts?, appear without 
any overt marking so that their relationship with 
the main clause is unspecified, Hindi non-finite 
subordinate clauses almost always appear with 
overt marking. However, also unlike English, 
where the same elements may introduce both 
finite and non-finite clauses (cf. After leaving, 
she caught the bus vs. After she left, she caught 
the bus), different sets of elements are used in 
Hindi. In fact, as can be seen in the subordinator 
group in Table 1, the non-finite clause markers 
are either postpositions (Ex.11), particles 
following verbal participles (Ex.12), or suffixes 
marking serial verbs (Ex.13). 
 
(11) {mammaI          ko     manaa        krnao}      ko karNa     [ramaU 
        {mummy of  warning  doing} of reason [Ramu 
         qaaoD,I  qaaoD,I    caaOklaoT      baD,o     AnaMd        ko   saaqa 
         little little chocolate big  pleasure  of  with  
         Ka  rha      qaa]. 
         eat being be] 
?Because of his mother?s warning, Ramu was eating 
bits of chocolate with a lot of pleasure.? 
 
(12) . . . AaOr    {Kolato}      hue               [yah    BaUla     jaata hO 
        . . . and  {playing} happening [this forget go is 
         ik    yaid  ]saka  ima~        BaI    Apnao  iKlaaOnao    kao 
         that if    his   friends also their  toys     to 
         ]sao     haqa   nahIM   lagaanao         dota,  tao      ]sao 
         him hand not   touching did,  then  he  
           iktnaa        baura     lagata] 
         how-much bad   feel] 
?. . . and while playing, he forgets that if his friends 
too didn?t let him touch their toys, then how bad he 
would feel.? 
 
(13) {ApnaI  p%naI     sao     yah       sauna}kr      [lakD,hara  
        {self  wife from this   listen}-do  [woodcutter 
         bahut    duKI       huAa] 
         much sad  became] 
?Upon hearing this from his wife, the woodcutter 
became very sad.? 
 
While subordinators constitute a frequently-
used way to mark discourse relations, their 
annotation raises at least two difficult problems, 
both of which have implications for the 
reliability of annotation. The first is that these 
markers are used for marking both argument 
clauses and adjunct clauses, so that annotators 
would be required to make difficult decisions for 
distinguishing them: in the former case, the 
marker would not be regarded as a connective, 
while in the latter case, it would. Second, the 
clauses marked by these connectives often seem 
to be semantically weak. This is especially true 
of verbal participles, which are nonfinite verb 
appearing in a modifying relation with another 
finite verb. Whereas in some cases (Ex.12-13) 
the two verbs are perceived as each projecting 
?two distinct events? between which some 
discourse relation can be said to exist, in other 
cases (Ex.14), the two verbs seem to project two 
distinct actions but as part of a ?single complex 
event? (Verma, 1993). These judgments can be 
very subtle, however, and our final decision on 
whether to annotate such constructions will be 
made after some initial annotation and 
evaluation. 
 
(14) {doKto        hI         doKto      saba  baOla             Baagato } 
        {looking EMPH looking all buffalos running} 
         hue              [gaaoSaalaa   phu^Mca     gae] 
         happening [shed   reach  did] 
?Within seconds all the buffalos came running to the 
shed.? 
 
The naming convention for the arguments of 
subordinators is the same as for the 
subordinating conjunctions: the clause 
associated with the subordinator is called Arg2 
while its matrix clause is called Arg1. 
Unlike subordinating conjunctions, 
subordinators do not come paired and they can 
only appear clause-finally. Clause order, while 
not fixed, is restricted in that the nonfinite 
subordinate clause can appear either before the 
main clause or embedded in it, but never after 
the main clause.  
3.1.4 Coordinating Conjunctions 
Coordinating conjunctions in Hindi are found in 
both inter-sentential (Ex.15) and intra-sentential 
(Ex.16) contexts, they always appear as 
independent elements, and they almost always 
appear clause-initially. 5  For these connectives, 
                                                 
5 While the contrastive connectives  ?pr?, ?prntU? appear only 
clause-initially, it seems possible for the contrastive ?laoikna? 
to appear clause-medially, suggesting that these two types 
may correspond to the English ?but? and ?however?, 
respectively. However, we did not find any examples of 
clause-medial ?laoikna? in our texts, and this behavior will 
have to be verified with further annotation. 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
77
the first clause is called Arg1 and the second, 
Arg2. 
 
(15) [jaba      vah  laaOTta    tao       gaa-gaakr          ]saka  mana 
         [when he  return then sing-singing   his  mind 
         KuSa      kr    dotI].   laoikna  {]sakI p%naI   kao      vah 
         happy do gave].   But   {his wife DAT  the  
         icaiD,yaa   fUTI    AaM^K  nahIM    sauhatI   qaI}. 
         bird    torn  eye  not   bear  did} 
?Upon his return, she would make him happy by 
singing. But his wife could not tolerate the bird even 
a little bit.? 
 
(16) [ tBaI          drvaaja,a      Kulaa]  AaOr    {maalaikna  Aa 
        [then-only door opened]  and  {wife  come 
         ga[- }. 
        went} 
?Just then the door opened and the wife came in.? 
 
We also recognize paired coordinating 
conjunctions, such as ?naa kovala..balaik? (See Table 
1). The argument naming convention for these is 
the same as for the single conjunctions. 
3.1.5 Discourse Adverbials 
Discourse adverbials in Hindi modify their clau- 
ses as independent elements, and some of these 
are free to appear in non-initial positions in the 
clause. Example (17) gives an example of the 
consequence adverb, ?saao?. The Arg2 of discourse 
adverbials is the clause they modify, whereas 
Arg1 is the other argument. 
 
(17) [icaiD,yaa  jabaana      kT   jaanao     AaOr   maalaikna  ko  eosao 
        [bird    tongue  cut  going  and  wife  of  this  
        vyavahar       sao      Dr   ga[-     qaI]. saao    {vah     iksaI 
        behavior with fear go  had]. So  {she  some 
        trh        ]D,kr    calaI        ga[-}. 
        manner flying  walk    went}. 
?The bird was scared due to her tongue being cut and 
because of the wife?s behavior. So she somehow flew 
away.? 
 
As with the PDTB, one of our goals with the 
Hindi discourse annotation is to explore the 
structural distance of Arg1 from the discourse 
adverbial. If the Arg1 clause is found to be snon-
adjacent to the connective and the Arg2 clause, 
it may suggest that adverbials in Hindi behave 
anaphorically. In the texts we looked at, we did 
not find any instances of non-adjacent Arg1s. 
Addtional annotation will provide further 
evidence in this regard. 
4 Hindi Sentence-level Annotation 
andDiscourse Connectives 
The sentence-level annotation task in Hindi is 
an ongoing effort which aims to come up with a 
dependency annotated treebank for the NLP/CL 
community working on Indian languages. 
Presently a million word Hindi corpus is being 
manually annotated (Begum et al, 2008). The 
dependency annotation is being done on top of 
the corpus which has already been marked for 
POS tag and chunk information. The scheme has 
28 tags which capture various dependency 
relations. These relations are largely inspired by 
the Paninian grammatical framework. Given 
below are some relations, reflecting the 
argument structure of the verb. 
 
a) kta- (agent) (k1) 
b) kma- (theme) (k2) 
c) krNa (instrument) (k3) 
d) samp`dana sampradaan (recipient) (k4) 
e) Apadana (source) (k5) 
f) AiQakrNa (location) (k7) 
 
Figure 1 shows how Examples (2a-f) are 
represented in the framework. Note that agent 
and theme are rough translations for ?kta-? and 
?kma-? respectively. Unlike thematic roles, these 
relations are not purely semantic, and are 
motivated not only through verbal semantics but 
also through vibhaktis (postpositions) and TAM 
(Tense, aspect and modality) markers (Bharati et 
al., 1995). The relations are therefore syntactico-
semantic, and unlike thematic roles there is a 
greater binding between these relations and the 
syntactic cues. 
 
 
k1 k4 k2
 
 
 
Figure 1: Dependency Diagram for Example (2) 
Some discourse relations that we have identified 
are already clearly represented in the sentence-
level annotation. But for those that aren?t, the 
   dI 
   malaya    samaIr    iktaba 
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
78
discourse level annotations will enrich the 
sentence-level. In the rest of this section, we 
discuss the representation of the different types 
of connectives at the sentence level, and discuss 
how the discourse annotation will add to the 
information present in the dependency 
structures. 
 
Subordinating Conjunctions Subordinating 
conjunctions are lexically represented in the 
dependency tree, taking the subordinating clause 
as their dependents while themselves attaching 
to the main verb (the root of the tree). Figure 2 
shows the dependency tree for Example (4) 
containing the subordinating conjunction ?@yaaoMik?. 
Note that the edge between the connective and 
the main verb gives us the causal relation 
between the two clauses, the relation label being 
?rh? (relation hetu ?cause?). Thus, the discourse 
level can be taken to be completely represented 
at the sentence-level. 
 
hE
k1 k2 k4 rh
ccofr6
k1sk1
r6
r6 
 
Figure 2: Dependency Tree for Subordinating 
Conjunction in Example (4) 
 
Paired Subordinating Conjunctions Unlike 
Example (4), however, the analysis for the 
paired connective in Example (5), given in 
Figure 3, is insufficient. Despite the lexical 
representation of the connective in the tree, the 
correct interpretation of the paired conjunction 
and the clauses which it relates is only possible 
at the discourse level. In particular, the 
dependencies don?t show that ?@yaaoMik? and ?[salaIe? 
are two parts of the same connective, expressing 
a single relation and taking the same two 
arguments. Thus, the discourse annotation will 
be able to provide the appropriate argument 
structure and semantics for these paired 
connectives.  
 
 
ccof
k2 k1 rh
ccof
k7p
r6
k1
 
 
Figure 3: Dependency Tree for Paired 
Subordinating Conjunction in Example (5) 
 
Subordinators As mentioned earlier, Hindi 
nonfinite subordinate clauses almost always 
appear with overt marking. But unlike the 
subordinating conjunctions, subordinators are 
not lexically represented in the dependency 
trees. Figure 4 gives the dependency 
representation for Example (11) containing a 
postposition subordinator ?ko karNa?, which relates 
the main and subordinate clauses causally. As 
the figure shows, while the causal relation label 
(?rh?) appears on the edge between the main and 
subordinate verbs, the subordinator itself is not 
lexically represented as the mediator of this 
relation. The lexically grounded annotation at 
the discourse level will thus provide the textual 
anchors of such relations, enriching the 
dependency representation. Furthermore, while 
many of the subordinators in Table 1 are fully 
specified in the dependency trees for the 
semantic relation they denote (e.g., ?pr? and ?maoM? 
marked as the ?k7t? (location in time) relation, 
and ?ko karNa? and ?sao? marked as the ?rh? 
(cause/reason) relation), others, like the particle 
?hue? are underspecified for their semantics, being 
marked only as ?vmod? (verbal modifier). The 
discourse-level annotation will thus be the 
source for the semantics of these subordinators. 
 
Coordinating Conjunctions Coordinating 
conjunctions at the sentence level anchor the 
root of the dependency tree. Figure 5 shows the 
 do dotao oo oo o   
   maOMOM O MO M   Qana   baadSaah    @yaaoMikoM oMoM   
rajya  
   vahI   svaamaI  
  sampda  
   QartI  
   [sailae 
    
AiQakar hOO OO 
    Qana  tuuuumhara  @yaaoMikoMoMo M   
  imalaa hOO OO 
    yah 
  
 ja,maIna, ,,  
 
  tumharIuuu  
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
79
dependency representation of Example (16) 
containing a coordinating conjunction. 
 
 
rh k1 k2
vmod
k1
 
 
Figure 4: Dependency Tree for Subordinator in 
Example (11) 
 
 
ccof ccof
k7t k1 k1
 
 
Figure 5: Dependency Tree for Coordinating 
Conjunction in Example (16) 
 
While the sentence-level dependency analysis 
here is similar to the one we get at the discourse 
level, the semantics of these conjunctions are 
again underspecified, being all marked as ?ccof?, 
and can be obtained from the discourse level. 
 
Discourse Adverbials Like subordinating 
conjunctions, discourse adverbials are 
represented lexically in the dependency tree. 
They are attached to the verb of their clause as 
its child node and their denoted semantic 
relation is specified clearly. This can be seen 
with the temporal adverb ?tBaI? (?then-only?) and 
its semantic label ?k7t? in Figure 5. At the same 
time, since the Arg1 discourse argument of 
adverbials is most often in the prior context, the 
discourse annotation will enrich the semantics of 
these connectives by providing the Arg1 
argument. 
5 Summary and Future Work 
In this paper, we have described our study of 
discourse connectives in a small corpus of Hindi 
texts in an effort towards developing an 
annotated corpus of discourse relations in Hindi. 
Adopting the lexically grounded approach of the 
Penn Discourse Treebank, we have identified a 
wide range of connectives, analyzing their types 
and distributions, and discussing some of the 
issues involved in the annotation. We also 
described the representation of the connectives 
in the sentence-level dependency annotation 
being carried out independently for Hindi, and 
discussed how the discourse annotations can 
enrich the information provided at the sentence 
level. While we focused on explicit connectives 
in this paper, future work will investigate the 
annotation of implicit connectives, the semantic 
classification of connectives, and the attribution 
of connectives and their arguments. 
References 
Rafiya Begum, Samar Husain, Arun Dhwaj, Dipti 
Misra Sharma, Lakshmi Bai, and Rajeev Sangal. 
2008. Dependency annotation scheme for Indian 
languages. In Proceedings of IJCNLP-2008. 
Hyderabad, India. 
Akshar Bharati, Vineet Chaitanya, and Rajeev 
Sangal. 1995. Natural Language Processing: A 
Paninian Perspective. Prentice Hall of India. 
http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/downloads/nlpbook/nlppanini.p
df. 
Manindra K. Verma (ed.). 1993. Complex Predicates 
in South Asian Languages. New Delhi: Manohar. 
The PDTB-Group. 2006. The Penn Discourse 
TreeBank 1.0 Annotation Manual. Technical 
Report IRCS-06-01, IRCS, University of 
Pennsylvania. 
Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi, Matthew Stone, and 
Alistair Knott. 2003. Anaphora and discourse 
structure. Computational Linguistics, 29(4):545?
587. 
Nianwen Xue. 2005. Annotating Discourse 
Connectives in the Chinese Treebank. In 
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky. Ann Arbor, 
Michigan.  
Deniz Zeyrek and Bonnie Webber. 2008. A 
Discourse Resource for Turkish: Annotating 
Discourse Connectives in the METU Corpus. In 
Proceedings of IJCNLP-2008. Hyderabad, India. 
 
 
  Ka rha qaa 
manaa krnaoo oo rama   caaOO OOklaoTooo    AanaMdMMM  
 mammaI 
  AaOrOOO  
 Kulaauuu   Aa ga[-- -- 
maalaikna  drvaaja,a, ,,   tBaI  
The 6th Workshop on Asian Languae Resources, 2008
80
