A Morpheme-based Part-of-Speech Tagger for Chinese 
Guohong Fu 
School of Computer Science and Technology 
Heilongjiang University 
Harbin 150080, P.R. China 
ghfu@hotmail.com 
Jonathan J. Webster 
Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
83 Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong, P.R. China 
ctjjw@cityu.edu.hk 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a morpheme-based 
part-of-speech tagger for Chinese. It con-
sists of two main components, namely a 
morpheme segmenter to segment each 
word in a sentence into a sequence of mor-
phemes, based on forward maximum 
matching, and a lexical tagger to label each 
morpheme with a proper tag indicating its 
position pattern in forming a word of a 
specific class, based on lexicalized hidden 
Markov models. This system have partici-
pated four closed tracks for POS tagging at 
the Fourth International Chinese Language 
Processing Bakeoff sponsored by the ACL-
SIGHAN.  
1 Introduction 
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging aims to assign each 
word in a sentence with a proper tag indicating its 
POS category. While a number of successful POS 
tagging systems have been available for English 
and many other languages, it is still a challenge to 
develop a practical POS tagger for Chinese due to 
its language-specific issues. Firstly, Chinese words 
do not have a strict one-to-one correspondence be-
tween their POS categories and functions in a sen-
tence. Secondly, an ambiguous Chinese word can 
act as different POS categories in different con-
texts without changing its form. Thirdly, there are 
many out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words in real Chi-
nese text whose POS categories are not defined in 
the dictionary used. All these factors make it much 
more difficult to achieve a high-performance POS 
tagger for Chinese. 
Recent studies in Chinese POS tagging focus on 
statistical or machine learning approaches with 
either characters or words as basic units for tagging 
(Ng and Low, 2004; Fu and Luke, 2006). Very 
little research has been devoted to resolving Chi-
nese POS tagging problems based on morphemes. 
In our system, we prefer morphemes to characters 
or words as tagging units for three reasons. First, 
words are made of morphemes instead of charac-
ters (Wu and Tseng, 1995; Packard, 2000). Sec-
ond, most morphemes are productive in word for-
mation (Baayen, 1989; Sproat and Shih, 2002; Ni-
shimoto, 2003), particularly in the formation of 
morphologically-derived words (MDWs) and 
proper nouns, which are the major source of OOV 
words in Chinese texts. Third, Packard (2000) in-
dicates that Chinese do have morphology. More-
over, morphology proves to be a very informative 
cue for predicting POS categories of Chinese OOV 
words (Tseng et al 2005).  Therefore, we believe 
that a morpheme-based framework would be more 
effective than the character- or word-based ones in 
capturing both word-internal morphological fea-
tures and word-external contextual information for 
Chinese POS disambiguation and unknown word 
guessing (UWG) as well. 
Thus we present a morpheme-based POS tagger 
for Chinese in this paper. It consists of two main 
components, namely a morpheme segmentation 
component for segmenting each word in a sentence 
into a sequence of morphemes, based on the for-
ward maximum matching (FMM) technique, and a 
lexical tagging component for labeling each seg-
mented morpheme with a proper tag indicating its 
position pattern in forming a word of a specific 
type, based on lexicalized hidden Markov models 
(HMMs). Lack of a large morphological knowl-
124
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
edge base is a major obstacle to Chinese morpho-
logical analysis (Tseng and Chen, 2002). To over-
come this problem and to facilitate morpheme-
based POS tagging as well, we have also devel-
oped a statistically-based technique for automati-
cally extracting morphemes from POS-tagged cor-
pora. We participated in four closed tracks for POS 
tagging at the Fourth International Chinese Lan-
guage Processing Bakeoff sponsored by the ACL-
SIGHAN and tested our system on different testing 
corpora. In this paper, we also made a summary of 
this work and give some brief analysis on the re-
sults. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 is a brief description of our system. Sec-
tion 3 details the settings of our system for differ-
ent testing tracks and presents the scored results of 
our system at this bakeoff. Finally, we give our 
conclusions in Section 4. 
2 System Description 
2.1 Chinese Morphemes 
In brief, Chinese morphemes can be classified 
into free morphemes and bound morphemes. A 
free morpheme can stand by itself as a word (viz. a 
basic word), whereas a bound morpheme can show 
up if and only if being attached to other 
morphemes to form a word. Free morphemes can 
be subdivided into true free morphemes and 
pseudo free morphemes. A pseudo free morpheme 
??such as  ran2-er2 ?however? can only stand 
alone, while a true free morpheme like ?? 
SHENG-CHAN ?produce? can stand alone by itself 
as a word or occur as parts of other words. Chinese 
affixes include prefixes (e.g. ? fei1 ?non-?, ? 
wei3 ?pseudo?), infixes (e.g. ??  fei1-zhi1) or 
suffixes (e.g. ? xing4 ?-ity?, ?? zhu3-yi4 ?-
ism?), in terms of their positions within a word. 
2.2 Formulation 
To perform morpheme-based Chinese POS tag-
ging, we represent a POS-tagged word in a Chi-
nese sentence as a sequence of lexical chunks with 
the aid of an extended IOB2 tag set (Fu and Luke 
2005). A lexical chunk consists of a sequence of 
constituent morphemes associated with their corre-
sponding lexical chunk tags. A lexical chunk tag 
follows the format T1-T2, indicating the POS cate-
gory T2 of a word and the position pattern T1 of a 
constituent morpheme within the word. As shown 
in Table 1, four position patterns are involved in 
our system, namely O for a single morpheme as a 
word by itself, I for a morpheme inside a word, B 
for a morpheme at the beginning of a word and E 
for a morpheme at the end of a word. 
 
Tag Definition 
Corresponding 
morpheme types 
O A morpheme as a word by itself Free morphemes 
I 
A morpheme inside a 
word 
Free morphemes and 
infixes 
B 
A word-initial mor-
pheme 
Free morphemes and 
prefixes 
E A word-final morpheme Free morphemes and 
suffixes 
Table 1. Extended IOB2 tag set 
2.3 Affix Extraction 
Due to the increasing involvement of affixation in 
Chinese word formation, affixes play a more and 
more important role in Chinese POS tagging. In 
morpheme extraction, affixes are very useful in 
determining whether a given word is derived by 
affixation. To extract affixes from corpora, we 
consider three statistics, i.e. morpheme-position 
frequency )1,( TmCount , morpheme-position 
probability )()1,()1,( mCountTmCountTmMPP =  
and morphological productivity. Following the 
proposal in (Baayen, 1989), the morphological 
productivity of a morpheme m  with a position pat-
tern 1T , denoted as )1,( TmMP , can be defined as 
)1,(
)1,(1)1,(
TmCount
TmnTmMP =                 (1) 
where )1,(1 Tmn  is the number of word types that 
occur only once in the training corpus and at the 
same time, are formed by the morpheme m  with 
the position pattern 1T . 
To estimate the above statistics for affix extrac-
tion, we only take into account the three position 
patterns B, I and E, for prefixes, infixes and suf-
fixes, respectively. Thus we can extract affixes 
from training data with the following three condi-
tions: MPFTHTmCount ?)1,( , MPPTHTmMPP ?)1,(  
and MPTHTmMP ?)1,( , where THMPF, THMPP and 
THMP are three empirically-determined thresholds. 
125
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
2.4 Morpheme Extraction 
The goal of morpheme extraction is to identify 
MDWs and proper nouns in training corpora and 
prevent them from getting into the morpheme dic-
tionary for POS tagging. In the present system, the 
following criteria are applied to determine whether 
a word in training data should enter the morpheme 
dictionary. 
Completeness. With a view to the completeness 
of the morpheme dictionary, all characters in train-
ing data will be collected as morphemes. 
Word length. In general, shorter morphemes 
are more productive than longer ones in word for-
mation. As such, the length of a morpheme should 
not exceed four characters. 
Word frequency. By this criterion, a word is 
selected as a morpheme if its frequency of occur-
rences in training data is higher than a given 
threshold. 
MDWs. By this criterion, words formed by 
morphological patterns such as affixation, com-
pounding, reduplication and abbreviation will be 
excluded from the morpheme dictionary. 
Proper nouns. In some training corpora like the 
PKU corpus, some special tags are specified for 
proper nouns. In this case, they will be used to fil-
ter proper nouns during morpheme extraction. 
2.5 Lexicalized HMM Tagger 
As shown in Figure 1, our system works in three 
main steps as follows. 
 
Figure 1. Overall architecture of our system 
 
Morpheme segmentation. In this step, the 
FMM technique is employed to segment each word 
in a sentence to a sequence of morphemes associ-
ated with their position tags within the word.  
Tag candidate generation. In this step, all pos-
sible POS candidates are generated for each word 
in the sentence by consulting the morpheme dic-
tionary with its constitute morphemes and their 
related position patterns. All these candidates are 
stored in a lattice. 
Scoring and Decoding. In this step, the lexical-
ized HMMs are first employed to score each can-
didate in the lattice and the Viterbi decoding algo-
rithm is further used to search an optimal sequence 
of POS tags for the sentence. The details of lexical-
ized HMMs can be seen in (Lee et al 200) and (Fu 
and Luke, 2005).  
3 Evaluation Results 
3.1 System Settings for Different Tracks 
The POS tagging task at the fourth ACL-SIGHAN 
bakeoff consists of five closed tracks. We partici-
pated four of them, namely CKIP, CTB, NCC and 
PKU. Therefore our system is trained only using 
the relevant training corpora provided for the 
bakeoff. Furthermore, the morpheme dictionaries 
for these tracks are also extracted automatically 
from the relevant training data with the method 
presented in Sections 2.3 and 2.4. Table 2 illus-
trated the number of morphemes extracted from 
different training data.  
 
Source Training data (tokens/word types) 
Number of 
morphemes 
CKIP 721551 / 48045 30757 
CTB 642246 / 42133 26330 
NCC 535023 / 45108 28432 
PKU 1116754 / 55178 30085 
Table 2. Number of morphemes extracted from the 
training data for SIGHAN POS tagging bakeoff 
 
3.2 Evaluation Results 
 
Track Total-A IV-R OOV-R MT-R 
CKIP-O 0.9124 0.9549 0.4756 0.8953 
CTB-O 0.9234 0.9507 0.52 0.9051 
NCC-O 0.9395 0.969 0.4086 0.9059 
PKU-C 0.9266 0.9574 0.4386 0.9079 
Table 3. Scores of our system for different tracks 
 
Table 3 presents the scores of our system for dif-
ferent tracks. It should be noted that four measures 
are employed in the 4th ACL-SIGHAN bakeoff to 
Tag Candidate Generation 
Scoring & Decoding 
Morph dictionary 
A segmented sentence 
Morpheme Segmentation 
A POS-tagged sentence 
Lexicalized HMMs 
126
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
score the performance of a POS tagging system, 
namely the overall accuracy (Total-A) and the re-
call with respect to in-vocabulary words (IV-R), 
OOV words (OOV-R) or multi-POS words (MT-
R).  
Although our system has achieved a promising 
performance, there is still much to be done to im-
prove it. First, the quality of the morpheme dic-
tionary is of particular importance to morpheme-
based POS tagger. Although the present study pro-
posed a statistical technique to extract morphemes 
from tagged corpora, further exploration is still 
needed on the optimization of this technique to 
acquire a more desirable morpheme dictionary for 
Chinese POS tagging. Second, morphological pat-
terns prove to be informative cues for Chinese POS 
disambiguation and OOV word prediction. How-
ever, such a knowledge base is not publicly avail-
able for Chinese. As such, in the present study we 
only made use of certain surface morphological 
features, namely the position patterns of mor-
phemes in word formation. Future research might 
usefully extend the present method to explore sys-
tematically more precise morphological features, 
including morpheme POS categories and morpho-
syntactic rules for Chinese POS tagging. 
4 Conclusion 
In this paper we have presented a morpheme-based 
POS tagger for Chinese. We participated in four 
closed tracks at the fourth SIGHAN bakeoff. The 
scored results show that our system can achieve an 
overall accuracy of 0.9124-0.9395 for different 
corpora. However, the present system is still under 
development, especially in morphological knowl-
edge acquisition. For future work, we hope to im-
prove our system with a higher quality morpheme 
dictionary and more deep morphological knowl-
edge such as morpheme POS categories and mor-
pho-syntactic rules. 
Acknowledgments 
This study was supported in part by CityU Stra-
tegic Research Grant for fundable CERG (No. 
7001879 & 7002037). 
References 
E. Nishimoto. 2003. Measuring and comparing the pro-
ductivity of Mandarin Chinese suffixes. Computa-
tional Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing, 
8(1): 49-76. 
G. Fu and K.-K. Luke. 2005. Chinese named entity rec-
ognition using lexicalized HMMs. ACM SIGKDD 
Explorations Newsletter, 7(1): 19-25. 
G. Fu and K.-K. Luke. 2006. Chinese POS disambigua-
tion and unknown word guessing with lexicalized 
HMMs. International Journal of Technology and 
Human Interaction, 2(1): 39-50. 
H. Tseng and K.-J. Chen. 2002. Design of Chinese mor-
phological analyzer. In: Proceedings of the 1st 
SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Process-
ing, 1-7. 
H. Tseng, D. Jurafsky, and C. Manning. 2005. Morpho-
logical features help POS tagging of unknown words 
across language varieties. In: Proceedings of the 
Fourth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language 
Processing. 
H.T. Ng and J.K. Low. 2004. Chinese part-of-speech 
tagging: One-at-a-time or all-at-once? Word-based or 
character-based?. In: Proceedings of the 2004 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP 2004), Barcelona, Spain, 277-
284. 
J. Packard. 2000. Morphology of Chinese: A linguistic 
and cognitive approach. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
R. Sproat and C. Shih. 2002. Corpus-based methods in 
Chinese morphology. In: Proceedings of the 19th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING 2002), Taipei, Taiwan. 
R.H. Baayen. 1989. A corpus-based study of morpho-
logical productivity: Statistical analysis and psycho-
logical interpretation. Ph.D. thesis, Free University, 
Amsterdam. 
S.-Z. Lee, T.-J. Tsujii, and H.-C. Rim. 2000. Lexical-
ized hidden Markov models for part-of-speech tag-
ging. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 
2000), Saarbruken, Germany, 481-487. 
Z. Wu, G. Tseng. 1995. ACTS: An automatic Chinese 
text segmentation systems for full text retrieval. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence, 46(2): 83-96. 
 
127
Sixth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing
