Introduction to Text Summarization and Other Information
Access Technologies
Horacio Saggion
Natural Language Processing Group
University of Sheffield
211 Portobello Street - Sheffield - S1 4DP
England - United Kingdom
saggion@dcs.shef.ac.uk
Abstract
In recent years we have witnessed an explosion
of on-line unstructured information in multi-
ple languages, making natural language process-
ing technologies such as automatic text summa-
rization increasingly important for the informa-
tion society. Text Summarization provides users
with condensed descriptions of documents, al-
lowing them to make informed decisions based
on text summaries. Text summarization can be
combined with Information Retrieval (IR) and
Question Answering (QA) to provide users with
focus-based or query-based summaries which
are targeted towards the users? specific needs.
When the information a user looks for is spread
across multiple sources, text summarization can
be used to condense facts and present a non-
redundant account of the most relevant facts
found across a set of documents.
The objective of this IJCNLP 2008 tutorial
is to give an overview of a number of tech-
nologies in natural language processing for in-
formation access including: single and multi-
document summarization, cross-lingual summa-
rization; and summarization in the context of
question answering.
The tutorial will discuss summarization con-
cepts and techniques as well as its relation and
relevance to other technologies such as informa-
tion retrieval and question answering. It will
also include description of available resources for
development, training and evaluation of summa-
rization components. A summarization (multi-
document and multilingual) toolkit will be used
for demonstration purposes. A number of ques-
tion answering components relevant for the cre-
ation of definitional summaries and profiles will
also be demonstrated.
Biography
Dr. Saggion is a research fellow in the Natu-
ral Language Processing group, Department of
Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Eng-
land, UK. His area of expertise is Text Summa-
rization. He works in national and international
projects on information extraction, ontology-
based information extraction, question answer-
ing, and text summarization. He obtained his
PhD. in 2000 from Universite? de Montre?al, De-
partement d?Informatique et de Recherche Op-
erationnelle. He has published over 50 works in
conferences, workshops and journal papers. To-
gether with his research career, he has been an
active teacher, he was assistant professor and
researcher at Universidad de Buenos Aires, and
Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, and teach-
ing assistant at Universite? de Montre?al. He
has participated in a number of summarization
and question answering evaluations including
DUC 2004, DUC 2005, MSE 2005, TREC/QA
2003, TREC/QA 2004, TREC/QA 2005. He
has recently organised the workshops ?Multi-
source Multi-lingual Information Extraction and
Summarization? and ?Crossing Barriers in Text
Summarization Research? in the RANLP Con-
ferences. He has given courses and tutorials
on Text Summarization and other technologies
such as question answering in a number of inter-
national venues such as ESSLLI and LREC.
939
