c? 2003 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Association of Web Directories
with Word Senses
Celina Santamar??a? Julio Gonzalo? Felisa Verdejo?
UNED, Madrid UNED, Madrid UNED, Madrid
We describe an algorithm that combines lexical information (from WordNet 1.7) with Web di-
rectories (from the Open Directory Project) to associate word senses with such directories. Such
associations can be used as rich characterizations to acquire sense-tagged corpora automatically,
cluster topically related senses, and detect sense specializations. The algorithm is evaluated for
the 29 nouns (147 senses) used in the Senseval 2 competition, obtaining 148 (word sense, Web
directory) associations covering 88% of the domain-specific word senses in the test data with 86%
accuracy. The richness of Web directories as sense characterizations is evaluated in a supervised
word sense disambiguation task using the Senseval 2 test suite. The results indicate that, when
the directory/word sense association is correct, the samples automatically acquired from the Web
directories are nearly as valid for training as the original Senseval 2 training instances. The re-
sults support our hypothesis that Web directories are a rich source of lexical information: cleaner,
more reliable, and more structured than the full Web as a corpus.
1. Introduction
Combining the size and diversity of the textual material on the World Wide Web
with the power and efficiency of current search engines is an attractive possibility for
acquiring lexical information and corpora. A widespread example is spell-checking:
Many Web users routinely use search engines to assess which is the ?correct? (i.e. with
more hits in the Web) spelling of words. Among NLP researchers, Web search engines
have already been used as a point of departure for extraction of parallel corpora,
automatic acquisition of sense-tagged corpora, and extraction of lexical information.
Extraction of parallel corpora. In Resnik (1999), Nie, Simard, and Foster (2001),
Ma and Liberman (1999), and Resnik and Smith (2002), the Web is harvested in search
of pages that are available in two languages, with the aim of building parallel corpora
for any pair of target languages. This is a very promising technique, as many machine
translation (MT) and cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) strategies rely on
the existence of parallel corpora, which are still a scarce resource. Such Web-mined
parallel corpora have proved to be useful, for instance, in the context of the CLEF
(Cross-Language Evaluation Forum) CLIR competition, in which many participants
use such parallel corpora (provided by the University of Montreal) to improve the
performance of their systems (Peters et al 2002).
Automatic acquisition of sense-tagged corpora. The description of a word sense
can be used to build rich queries in such a way that the occurrences of the word in
the documents retrieved are, with some probability, associated with the desired sense.
If the probability is high enough, it is then possible to acquire sense-tagged corpora
? ETS Ingenier??a Informa?tica de la UNED, c/ Juan del Rosal, 16, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid,
Spain. E-mail: {celina,julio,felisa}@lsi.uned.es
486
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
in a fully automatic fashion. Again, this is an exciting possibility that would solve the
current bottleneck of supervised word sense disambiguation (WSD) methods (namely,
that sense-tagged corpora are very costly to acquire).
One example of this kind of technique is Mihalcea and Moldovan (1999), in which
a precision of 91% is reported over a set of 20 words with 120 senses. In spite of the
high accuracy obtained, such methodology did not perform well in the comparative
evaluation reported in Agirre and Mart??nez (2000), perhaps indicating that examples
obtained from the Web may have topical biases (depending on the word), and that
further refinement is required. For instance, a technique that behaves well with a small
set of words might fail in the common cases in which a new sense is predominant
on the Web (e.g., oasis or nirvana as music groups, tiger as a golfer, jaguar as a car
brand).
Extraction of lexical information. In Agirre et al (2000), search engines and the
Web are used to assign Web documents to WordNet concepts. The resulting sets of
documents are then processed to build topic signatures, that is, sets of words with
weights that enrich the description of a concept. In Grefenstette (1999), the number of
hits in Web search engines is used as a source of evidence to select optimal translations
for multiword expressions. For instance, apple juice is selected as a better translation
than apple sap for the German ApfelSaft because apple juice hits a thousand times more
documents in AltaVista. Finally, in Joho and Sanderson (2000) and Fujii and Ishikawa
(1999), the Web is used as a resource to provide descriptive phrases or definitions for
technical terms.
A common problem to all the above applications is how to detect and filter out
all the noisy material on the Web, and how to characterize the rest (Kilgarriff 2001b).
Our starting hypotheses is that Web directories (e.g., Yahoo, AltaVista or Google
directories, the Open Directory Project [ODP]), in which documents are mostly manu-
ally classified in hierarchical topical clusters, are an optimal source for acquiring lexical
information; their size is not comparable to the full Web, but they are still enormous
sources of semistructured, semifiltered information waiting to be mined.
In this article, we describe an algorithm for assigning Web directories (from the
Open Directory Project ?http://dmoz.org?) as characterizations for word senses in
WordNet 1.7 noun synsets (Miller 1990). For instance, let us consider the noun circuit,
which has six senses in WordNet 1.7. These senses are grouped in synsets, together
with their synonym terms, and linked to broader (more general) synsets via hyper-
nymy relations:
6 senses of circuit
Sense 1: {circuit, electrical circuit, electric circuit} => {electrical device}
Sense 2: {tour, circuit} => {journey, journeying}
Sense 3: {circuit} => {path, route, itinerary}
Sense 4: {circuit (judicial division)} => {group, grouping}
Sense 5: {racing circuit, circuit} => {racetrack, racecourse, raceway, track}
Sense 6: {lap, circle, circuit} => {locomotion, travel}
Our algorithm associates circuit 1 (electric circuit) with ODP directories such as
business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers
487
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
whereas circuit 5 (racing circuit) is tagged with directories such as
sports/motorsports/auto racing/tracks
sports/equestrian/racing/tracks
sports/motorsports/auto racing/formula one
Every ODP directory has an associated URL, which contains a description of the
directory and a number of Web sites that have been manually listed as pertaining to the
directory topic, accompanied by brief descriptions of each site. This information is com-
pleted with a list of subdirectories, each containing more Web sites and subdirectories.
Finally, some directories also have pointers to the same category in other languages.
For instance, the Web page for the directory sports/motorsports/auto racing/tracks can be
seen in Figure 1. This directory contains links and descriptions for 846 Web sites orga-
nized in 12 subdirectories, a link to a related directory (sports/motorsports/karting/tracks)
and a link to the same category in French.
The association of word senses with Web directories is related to the assignment
of domain labels to WordNet synsets as described in Magnini and Cavaglia (2000), in
which WordNet is (manually) enriched with domain categories from the Dewey Dec-
imal Classification (DDC). Some clear differences between the two are that directories
from the ODP are assigned automatically, are richer and deeper and, more importantly,
Figure 1
Contents of an ODP Web directory associated with circuit 5 (racing circuit).
488
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
come with a large amount of associated information directly retrievable from the Web.
DDC categories, on the other hand, are a stable domain characterization compared to
Web directories.
As WordNet and ODP are both hierarchical structures, connecting them is also
related to research in mapping thesauruses for digital libraries, ontologies, and data
structures in compatible databases. A salient feature of our task is, however, that we
do not intend to map both structures, as they are of a quite different nature (lexicalized
English concepts versus topics on the Web). Our goal is rather to associate individual
items in a many-to-many fashion. A word sense may be characterized with several
Web directories, and a Web directory may be suitable for many word senses.
The most direct applications of word sense/Web directory associations are
? Clustering of senses with identical or very similar categories.
? Refinement of senses into specialized variants (e.g., equestrian circuit and
formula one circuit as specializations of racing circuit in the example above).
? Extraction of sense-tagged corpora from the Web sites listed under the
appropriate directories.
In Section 2 we describe the proposed algorithm. In Section 3, we evaluate the
precision and recall of the algorithm for the set of nouns used in the Senseval 2 WSD
competition. In Section 4, we make a preliminary experiment using the material from
ODP directories as training corpora for a supervised WSD system. In section 5, we
present the results of applying the algorithm to most WordNet 1.7 nouns. Finally, in
Section 6 we draw some conclusions.
2. Algorithm
Overall, the system takes a WordNet 1.7 noun as input, generates and submits a set
of queries into the ODP, filters the information obtained from the search engine, and
returns a set of ODP directories classified as (1) pseudo?domain labels for some word
sense, (2) noise, and (3) salient noise (i.e., directories that are not suitable for any sense
in WordNet but could reveal and characterize a new relevant sense of the noun). In
case (1), the WordNet sense ? ODP directory association also receives a probability
score. A detailed description of the algorithm steps follows.
2.1 Querying ODP Structure
For every sense wi of the noun w, a query qi is generated, including w as compulsory
term, the synonyms and direct hypernyms of wi as optional terms, and the synonyms
of other senses of w as negated (forbidden) terms. These queries are submitted to ODP,
and a set of directories is retrieved. For instance, for circuit, the following queries are
generated and sent to the ODP search engine:1
q1= [+circuit "electrical circuit" "electric circuit" "electrical device" -tour
-"racing circuit" -lap -circle]
q2= [+circuit tour journey journeying -"electrical circuit" -"electric circuit"
-"electrical device" -"racing circuit" -lap -circle]
1 In ODP queries, compulsory terms are denoted by + and forbidden terms by ?.
489
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
q3= [+circuit path route itinerary -"electrical circuit" -"electric circuit"
-"electrical device" -tour -"racing circuit" -lap -circle ]
q4= [+circuit group grouping -"electrical circuit" -"electric circuit"
-"electrical device" -tour -"racing circuit" -lap -circle]
q5= [+circuit "racing circuit" racetrack racecourse raceway track -"electrical circuit"
-"electric circuit" -"electrical device" -tour -lap -circle]
q6= [+circuit lap circle locomotion travel -"electrical circuit" -"electric circuit"
-"electrical device" -tour -"racing circuit" -lap -circle]
2.2 Representing Retrieved Directory Descriptions
For every directory d, a list of words l(d) is obtained removing stopwords and pre-
serving all content words in the directory path. For instance, one of the directories
produced by the circuit queries is
d = business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers
which is characterized by the following word list:
l(d) = [business, industries, electronics, electrical, contract, manufacturers]
2.3 Representing WordNet Senses
For every sense wj, a list l(wj) of words is made with
? all nouns in the hypernym chain of maximal length 6
? all hyponyms
? all meronyms, holonyms, and coordinate terms
of wj in WordNet. l(wj) is used as a description of the sense wj. For instance, circuit 1
receives the following description:
l(circuit1) = [electrical circuit, electric circuit, electrical device, bridge,
bridge circuit, Wheatstone bridge, bridged-T, closed circuit, loop, parallel circuit,
shunt circuit, computer circuit, gate, logic gate, AND circuit, AND gate, NAND circuit,
NAND gate, OR circuit, OR gate, X-OR circuit, XOR circuit, XOR gate, integrated circuit,
(..)
instrumentality, instrumentation, artifact, artefact, object, physical object, entity]
2.4 Sense/Directory Comparisons
For every sense description l(wj), a comparison is made with the terms in the directory
description l(d). This comparison is based on the hypothesis that the terms in an
appropriate directory for a word sense will have some correlation with the sense
description via WordNet semantic relations. In other words, our assumption is that the
path to the directory in the ODP topical structure will have some degree of overlapping
with the hyponymy path to the word sense in the WordNet hierarchical structure.
For this comparison, we simply count the number of co-occurrences between
words in l(wj) and words in l(d). Repeated terms are not discarded, as repetition
is correlated with stronger associations. Other, better-grounded comparisons, such as
the cosine between l(wj) and l(d), were empirically discarded because of the small size
and small amount of overlapping of the average vectors.
490
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
2.5 Candidate Sense/Directory Associations
The association vector v(d, w) has as many components as senses for w in WordNet 1.7;
the ith component, v(d, w)i represents the number of matches between the directory
l(d) and the sense descriptor l(wj). For instance, the association vector of
business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers
with circuit is
v(d, circuit) = (6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
that is, six coincidences for sense 1 (the electric circuit sense), which has the associated
vector shown in the previous section (which includes five occurrences of electrical and
one occurrence of electronic). The rest of the sense descriptions have no coincidences
with the directory description.
v(d, w) is the basis for making candidate assignments of suitable senses for direc-
tory d: If one of the components v(d, w)j is not null, we assign the sense wj to the
directory d. If all components are null, the directory is provisionally classified as noise
or new sense. If more than one component is not null, the senses i with maximal
v(d, w)i are all considered candidates. These candidate assignments are confirmed or
discarded after passing a number of filters and receiving a confidence score C(d, wj),
both of which are described below.
2.6 Filters
Filters are simple heuristics that contribute to a more accurate classification of the
relations predicted by the co-ocurrence vector v(d, w). We are currently using two
filters: One differentiates nouns and noun modifiers to prevent wrong associations,
and another detects sense specializations.
2.6.1 Modifiers. Frequently, the ODP search engine retrieves directories in which the
noun to be searched, w, has as a noun modifier role. Such cases usually produce
erroneous associations. For instance, the directory
library/sciences/animals & wildlife/mammals/tamarins/golden lion tamarin
is erroneously associated with the mammal sense of lion, which is here a modifier for
tamarin.
Modifiers are detected with a set of simple patterns, as the syntactic properties of
descriptions in directories are quite simple. In particular, we discard most cases using
the structure of the ODP hierarchy, as in this case. The filter analyzes the structure of
the directory, detects that the parent category of golden lion tamarin is tamarin, therefore
assumes that golden lion tamarin is a specialization of tamarin, and assigns the directory
to a suitable sense of tamarin (tamarin 1 in WordNet).
An additional filter (weaker than the previous one) discards compounds according
to the position (the searched noun precedes another noun), as in
personal/kids/arts & entertainment/movies/animals/lion king
This directory could be associated with lion 1 because it contains the word animal, but
the assignment is rejected because of the modifier filter. In general, on such occasions
the searched noun plays a modifier role (as adjective or noun); discarding all such
cases favors precision over recall. In this case, the label is classified as noise.
491
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
2.6.2 Sense Specializations (Hyponyms). A retrieved directory might be appropriate
as a characterization of a sense specialization for some of the word senses being con-
sidered; our algorithm tries to detect such cases, creating a hyponym of the sense and
characterizing the directory with the hyponym.
The filter identifies a directory as a candidate hyponym if it contains explicitly a
modifier w pattern (where w is the noun being searched). This filter detects explicit
specializations, such as office chair as a hyponym of chair 1, or fox family channel as a
hyponym of channel 7, but fails to identify, for instance, memorial day as a hyponym
of holiday.
If the candidate hyponym, as a compound, is not present in WordNet, then it is
incorporated and described with the directory. If it is already present in WordNet, an
additional checking of the hyponymy relation is made. For instance, the directory
business/industries/electronics and electrical/components/integrated circuits
is assigned to the WordNet entry integrated circuit, because integrated circuit is already
a hyponym of circuit in WordNet.
2.7 Confidence Score
Finally, a confidence score C(d, wj) for every potential association (d, wj) is calculated
using four empirical criteria:
1. Checking whether d was directly retrieved for the query associated to wj.
2. Checking whether the system associates d with one or more senses of the
word w.
3. Checking the number of coincidences between l(d) and l(wj).
4. Comparing the previous number with the number of coincidences
between l(d) and the other sense descriptions {l(w)i, i = j}.
The confidence score is a linear combination of these factors, weighted according to
an empirical estimation of their relevance:
C(d, wj) =
4
?
i=1
?iCi(d, wj)
where
C1(d, wj) =
{
1, if query(wj) retrieves d
0, otherwise
C2(d, wj) = 1 ?
k
n
C3(d, wj) =
?
?
?
1, if vj ? 5
(vj + 5)/10, if 1 < vj ? 4
0.5, if vj = 1
C4(d, wj) =
vj ? maxi=j(vi),
?n
i=1 vi
where v is the association vector v(d, w), n the number of senses, k the number of senses
for which vj is non-null, and ?i are coefficients empirically adjusted to (?1,?2,?3,?4) =
492
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
(0.1, 0.15, 0.4, 0.35). The value of C(d, wj) ranges between 0 and 1 (all Ci range between
0 and 1, and the sum of the linear coefficients ?i is 1). Note that C2 cannot reach 1 (but
can get asymptotically close to 1), and note also that C4 cannot take negative values,
because, as (d, wj) is a candidate association, vj is maximal in v(d, w), and therefore
vj ? maxi=j(vi) ranges between 0 and vj.
Let us see an example of how this confidence measure works, calculating C(d, wj)
for the directory
d = business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers
with circuit 1 (electric circuit):
? C1. This directory has been retrieved from the query
q1= [+circuit "electrical circuit" "electric circuit" "electrical device"
-tour -"racing circuit" -lap -circle]
corresponding to circuit 1, which agrees with the association made by the
system. Hence C1 = 1.
? C2. The association vector v(d, w) = (6, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) presents only one
non-null coordinate; therefore C2 = 1 ? 16 = 0.83. Note that, in general,
this factor prevents C from reaching the upper bound 1.
? C3. As v1 = 6, C3 = 1. This factor increases along with the number of
coincidences between the sense and directory characterizations.
? C4. As all other components of v are null, the highest value of the
components different from sense 1 is also null (maxi=j(vi) = 0); therefore,
C4 = 1. This factor measures the strength of the association (d, w1)
compared with the other possibilities. It decreases when v(d, w) includes
more than one non-null coordinate, and their values are similar.
? C. Finally, applying the ?i coefficients, we obtain C(d, circuit 1) = 0.975.
The confidence score can be used to set a threshold for accepting/discarding associ-
ations. A higher threshold should produce a lower number of highly precise associa-
tions; a lower threshold would produce more associations with less accuracy. For the
evaluation below, we have retained all directories, regardless of their confidence score,
in order to assess how well this empirical measure correlates with correct and useful
assignments.
An example of the results produced by the algorithm can be seen in Table 1. The
system assigns directories to senses 1, 2, and 5 of circuit (six, two, and three directories,
respectively). Some of them are shown in the table, together with a sense specialization,
integrated circuit, for sense 1 (electrical circuit). Senses 3, 4, and 6, which did not receive
any directory association, do not appear to have domain specificity, but are instead
general terms.
3. Evaluation
We have analyzed the results of the algorithm for the set of nouns in the Senseval 2
WSD English lexical sample test bed (Kilgarriff 2001a). The Senseval campaigns (Ed-
monds and Cotton 2001; Kilgarriff and Palmer 2000) are devoted to the comparative
evaluation of word sense disambiguation systems in many languages. In the Senseval
2 lexical sample task, a large number of instances (occurrences in context extracted
493
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
Table 1
Results of the association algorithm for circuit.
circuit 1 (electrical circuit)
ODP directories C
business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers 0.98
manufacturers/printed circuit boards/fabrication 0.88
computers/cad/electronic design automation 0.78
...
sense specializations (hyponyms)
business/industries/electronics and electrical/components/integrated circuits 0.98
circuit 2 (tour, journey around a particular area)
ODP directories
sports/cycling/travel/travelogues/europe/france 0.58
regional/asia/nepal/travel and tourism/travel guides 0.66
circuit 5 (racing circuit)
ODP directories
sports/motorsports/auto racing/stock cars/drivers and teams 0.78
sports/motorsports/auto racing/tracks 0.82
sports/motorsports/auto racing/driving schools 0.78
from corpora) for a fixed set of words had to be tagged with the appropriate sense
by the participating WSD systems. For English, the sense inventory was a prerelease
of WordNet 1.7, and two sets of manually tagged instances were made available: A
first set was intended for training supervised systems, and a second set for evaluation
of all systems attempting the task. Altogether, the Senseval 2 lexical sample test bed
is one of the most widely used resources for studying and comparing word sense
disambiguation approaches.
For our evaluation, we have considered the fraction of the Senseval 2 test bed that
deals with English nouns: 29 polysemous nouns with a total of 147 word senses.
We have applied the algorithm to this set of nouns and examined the results in
terms of coverage and quality of the sense/directory associations. Coverage measures
how many senses can be characterized with directories, assuming that every domain-
specific sense should receive at least one directory. Quality is measured in terms of
precision (are the assignments correct?), relevance (are the assignments useful?), and
confidence (does the confidence score correlate well with precision and relevance of
the associations?).
3.1 Coverage
Table 2 shows the 148 directories retrieved by our algorithm, an average of 1.0 directo-
ries per sense. The directories, however, are not evenly distributed among senses, cov-
ering only 43 different senses with unique directories and 28 specialized (hyponym)
senses. In addition, 9 senses are identified as part of potential clusters (i.e., having
nonunique directories).
In order to measure the real coverage of the system, we have to estimate how
many word senses in the Senseval 2 sample are susceptible to receiving a domain
label. For instance, sense in common sense is not associated with any particular topic
or domain, whereas sense in word sense can be associated with linguistics or language-
related topics.
The decision as to whether or not a word sense might receive a domain label is
not always a simple, binary one. Hence we have manually tagged all word senses
494
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
Table 2
Coverage of nouns in the Senseval 2 test bed.
Senseval 2
Nouns
Number of
Senses
Number of
Directories
Number of Labeled
Senses
Number of
Hyponyms
art 4 6 1 1
authority 7 4 2 1
bar 13 3 3 0
bum 4 0 0 0
chair 4 4 1 0
channel 7 5 1 1
child 4 12 2 0
church 3 24 2 4
circuit 6 11 3 1
day 10 15 1 14
detention 2 1 1 0
dyke 2 1 1 0
facility 5 10 3 0
fatigue 4 0 0 0
feeling 6 2 1 0
grip 7 3 2 0
hearth 3 5 2 0
holiday 2 2 2 0
lady 3 0 0 0
material 5 9 2 3
mouth 8 0 0 0
nation 4 4 1 1
nature 5 0 0 0
post 8 14 5 0
restraint 6 4 3 0
sense 5 0 0 0
spade 3 3 1 1
stress 5 5 2 1
yew 2 1 1 0
Total 147 148 43 28
with two criteria (with each tagging performed by a different human annotator): a
strict one (only word senses that can clearly receive a domain label are marked as
positive) and a loose one (only word senses that are completely generic are marked as
negative). The strict judgment gave 59 domain-specific senses in the sample; the loose
judgment gave 71.
With these manual judgments, the coverage of the algorithm is between 73% (loose
judgment) and 88% (strict judgment). This coverage can be increased by
? Propagating a directory/word sense association to all members of the
WordNet synset to which the word sense belongs.
? Propagating directories via hyponymy chains, as in Magnini and
Cavaglia (2000).
3.2 Quality
We have used three criteria to evaluate the directory/sense associations produced:
? Precision. Is the directory correct (suitable) for the word sense or not?
495
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
? Relevance. Is the directory useful for characterizing the word sense?
? Confidence. How well is the confidence value C(d, wj) correlated with
the precision and relevance of the associations?
3.2.1 Precision. An assignment (d, wj) is considered correct (d is suitable for wj) unless
1. d adjusts better to some other sense wi. For instance, the association of
regional/north america/united states/government/agencies/independent/
federal labor relations authority
as a hyponym of
authority4 : assurance, self -assurance, confidence , self -confidence , authority ,
sureness
is considered an error, as the directory would be better suited for a
hyponym of sense 5 (authority as administrative unit).
2. The terms in l(d) are contradictory to the definition of the word sense or
are better suited for a sense that is not listed in the dictionary. This is the
case of
arts/music/bands and artists/offspring
which is erroneously assigned to child 2: human offspring of any age.
The results of this manual evaluation can be seen in Table 3. The overall precision is
86%.
Regarding potential topical clusters (directories associated with more than one
sense of the same word), these are considered correct if (1) the associated directory
is correct for all the senses in the cluster and (2) the occurrences of the word on the
Web page associated with the directory can be loosely assigned to any of the cluster
senses. Twelve out of the 13 clusters extracted are correct according to this criterion.
3.2.2 Confidence Measures. Table 4 shows the distribution of directories according
to the confidence measure. Eighty-four percent of the directories have a confidence C
over 0.7, and 41% over 0.8. This skewed distribution is consistent with the algorithm
filters, which are designed to favor precision rather than recall.
Table 5 shows the distribution of errors in levels of confidence. The percentage
of errors in directories with a confidence level below .6 is 25%. This error percentage
Table 3
Precision over Senseval 2 nouns.
Directories Associated
with WordNet Senses
Number of
Directories Number of Correct Number of Errors
Unique sense 148 127 21
Potential clustering 13 12 1
Total 161 139 (86%) 22 (14%)
496
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
Table 4
Confidence distribution.
Confidence C ? 0.7 0.7 < C ? 0.8 0.8 < C
Number of directories 24 63 61
Table 5
Correlation between confidence and correctness.
Confidence Number of Directories Percentage of Errors
C ? 0.7 24 25%
0.7 < C ? 0.8 63 19%
C > 0.8 61 5%
Total 148 14%
decreases with increasing levels of confidence, down to 5% for associations with C
over .8. Table 5 indicates that the confidence value, which is assigned heuristically, is
indeed correlated with precision.
3.2.3 Relevance. Besides correctness of the associations, we want to measure the use-
fulness of the directories: How well can they be used to characterize the associated
word senses? How much information do they provide about the word senses?
We have performed a manual, qualitative classification of the directories extracted
as irrelevant, mildly relevant, or very relevant. An irrelevant directory is compatible
with the word sense but does not provide any useful characterization; a mildly rele-
vant directory illustrates the word sense, but not centrally or in some particular aspect
or domain. A very relevant directory provides a rich characterization per se and can
be considered a domain label for the word sense.
An example of a very relevant directory is
business/industries/electronics and electrical/components/integrated circuit
associated as hyponym of circuit 1 (electrical circuit) with a confidence of 98%. An
example of mildly relevant association is
regional/north america/united states/texas/../society and culture/religion
associated with church 1 (Christian church) with a 73% confidence. Obviously, Texas is
not correlated with church, but the directory contains a lot of material (for instance,
the Web page of the Northcrest Community Church and many others) that might
be used, for instance, to acquire topical signatures for the concept. Hence the mildly
relevant judgment. Finally, an example of an irrelevant association is
regional/north america/united states/new york/localities/utica
associated with art 1 (fine art) with a confidence of 66% (the directory contains a section
on Arts at Utica, which would be considered mildly relevant if pointed to explicitly
by the label). For the purposes of measuring relevance, all the directories that were
judged as incorrect are counted as irrelevant.
497
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
Table 6
Relevance of the directories in the test set.
Relevance Irrelevant MildlyRelevant
Highly
Relevant
C ? 0.7 7 4 13
0.7 < C ? 0.8 13 12 38
0.8 < C 3 9 49
Total 23 (15%) 25 (17%) 100 (67%)
The overall relevance figures, and the correlation of relevance with the confidence
value, can be seen in Table 6. Sixty-seven percent of the directories are highly relevant
to characterize word senses, which is an encouraging result. Also, the set of irrele-
vant directories (15%) is almost identical to the set of erroneous directories (with just
one addition), indicating that (almost) all directories that are correct can be used to
characterize word senses to some extent.
4. Example Application: Automatic Acquisition of Sense-Tagged Corpora
Each ODP directory contains links to related subdirectories and to a large number of
Web sites that have been manually classified there. Every link to a Web site includes
the name of the site and a short description. For instance, under
business/industries/electronics and electrical/components/integrated circuit
we find over 30 descriptions, such as ??Multilink Technology corporation: Manufacture of
integrated circuits, modules, and boards for use in both data and telecommunications??. In
order to perform a first experiment on extraction of sense-tagged corpora, we have
used only such descriptions (without exploring the associated Web sites) to build a
sense-tagged corpus for Senseval 2 nouns.
Notice that we are not using the contents of the Web sites that belong to a directory,
but only the manually added descriptions of Web sites in the directory. Using the Web
sites themselves is also an attractive possibility that would produce a much larger
corpus at the expense of lower precision.
The extraction is straightforward: When a word sense wi has an associated direc-
tory d, we scan the site descriptions on the ODP page that corresponds to the directory
d and extract all contexts in which w occurs, assuming that in all of them w is used in
the sense i. Some examples of the training material for circuit can be seen in Table 7.
On average, these examples are shorter than Senseval 2 training instances.
The goal is to compare the performance of a supervised word sense disambigua-
tion system using Senseval 2 training data (hand made for the competition) to that
using the sense-tagged corpus from ODP (automatically extracted). We have chosen
the Duluth system (Pedersen 2001) to perform the comparison. The Duluth system is
a freely available supervised WSD system that participated in the Senseval 2 compe-
tition. As we are not concerned with absolute performance, we simply adopted the
first of the many available versions of the system (Duluth 1).
An obstacle to performing such comparative evaluation is that, as expected, our
algorithm assigns ODP directories only to a fraction of all word senses, partly because
not every sense is domain-specific, and partly because of lack of coverage. In order to
498
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
Table 7
Examples of training material for circuit.
circuit 1 (electrical circuit)
Electromechanical products for brand name firms; offers printed circuit boards (..)
Offers surface mount, thru-hole, and flex circuit assembly, in circuit and functional (..)
circuit 2 (tour, journey around a particular area)
The Tour du Mont-Blanc is a circuit of 322km based in the northern French Alps.
A virtual tour of the circuit by Raimon Bach.
circuit 5 (racing circuit)
The Circuit is a smooth 536 yards of racing for Hot Rod and Stock Car?s at the East of (..)
(..) History of the circuit and its banked track and news of Formula 1 (..)
circumvent this problem, we have considered only the subset of 10 Senseval nouns for
which our system tags at least two senses: bar, child, circuit, facility, grip, holiday, material,
post, restraint, and stress. We have then projected the Senseval 2 training corpus, and
the test material, onto the annotations for the word senses already in our ODP-based
material. Hence we will evaluate the quality of the training material obtained from
Web directories, not the coverage of the approach.
Table 8 shows the training material obtained for that subset of Senseval 2 nouns.
A total of 66 directories are used as a source of training instances, of which 17% are
incorrect and will presumably incorporate noise into the training. Table 9 compares the
training material for the word senses in this sample, and the results of the supervised
WSD algorithm with the Senseval and the ODP training instances.
We have measured the performance of the system in terms of Senseval recall: the
number of correctly disambiguated instances over the total number of test instances.
Overall, using the Senseval training set gives .73 recall, and training with the automat-
ically extracted ODP instances gives .58 (21% worse). A decrease of 21% is significant
but nevertheless encouraging, because the Senseval training set is the gold standard
for the Senseval test set: It is larger than the ODP set (773 versus 547 instances in this
subset), well balanced, built with redundant manual annotations, and part of the same
corpus as the test set.
Table 8
Training material obtained for the WSD experiment.
Word
Senses
Number of Directories
per Sense
Number of Incorrect
Directories
Number of Training
Instances
bar 1,10 1,1 0,0 1,1
child 1,2 3,9 0,0 3,80
circuit 1,2,5 6,2,3 0,0,0 229,2,5
facility 1,4 4,5 0,0 4,18
grip 2,7 2,1 0,1 17,6
holiday 1,2 1,1 0,1 5,17
material 1,4 6,3 2,1 63,10
post 2,3,4,7,8 1,5,1,4,3 1,1,1,0,3 2,7,1,9,3
restraint 1,4,6 2,1,1 0,0,0 2,2,2
stress 1,2 1,4 0,0 8,50
Total 66 11 547
499
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
Table 9
Results of supervised WSD.
Word
Senses
Number of
instances
Senseval
Training
Number of
instances
ODP
Training
Number of Test
Instances
Recall
Senseval
Training
Recall
ODP
Training
bar 1,10 127,11 1,1 62,6 .91 .50
child 1,2 39,78 3,80 35,27 .57 .44
circuit 1,2,5 67,6,7 229,2,5 23,2,8 .70 .70
facility 1,4 26,61 4,18 15,28 .79 .67
grip 2,7 6,1 17,6 4,0 1.00 1.00
holiday 1,2 4,57 5,17 26,2 .96 .96
material 1,4 65,7 63,10 30,9 .79 .79
post 2,3,4,7,8 1,64,20,11,7 2,7,1,9,3 2,25,13,12,4 .45 .25
restraint 1,4,6 17,32,11 2,2,2 8,14,4 .65 .50
stress 1,2 3,45 8,50 1,19 .95 .95
Total 773 547 379 .73 .58
The most similar experiment in the literature is Agirre and Mart??nez (2000), in
which the sense-tagged instances obtained using a high-performance Web-mining al-
gorithm (Mihalcea and Moldovan 1999) performed hardly better than a random base-
line as WSD training instances. A difference between the two experiments is that
Agirre et al do not limit their experiments to the fraction of the test set for which
they have automatically extracted training samples; hence a direct comparison of the
results is not possible.
A detailed examination of the results indicates that the difference in performance
is related to the smaller number of training instances rather than to the quality of
individual instances:
? In all four cases in which ODP provides a comparable?or
larger?number of training instances (circuit, grip, material, stress), ODP
training equals hand-tagged training. In one additional case (holiday), the
number of ODP instances is smaller, but still the recall is the same. For
the other five words, the number of ODP instances is substantially
smaller and the recall is worse.
? Remarkably, incorrect directories harm recall substantially only for post,
which accumulates six erroneous associations (out of 11 errors). The
other five errors (in material 1, 4, holiday 2, grip 7) do not affect the final
recall for these words. There are two possible reasons for this behavior:
? Erroneous directories tend to be less productive in terms of
training instances. Indeed, this fact could be incorporated as an
additional filter for candidate directories. This is the case, for
instance, of material 1, for which correct directories provide
much more training material than the incorrect one.
? Erroneous directories are more frequent with rare (less frequent)
word senses. This is correlated with a smaller number of test
instances (hence the influence on average recall is lower) and
also of training instances (and then the reference, hand-tagged
material does not provide good training data either). This is the
500
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
case of grip 7 or holiday 2, which have zero and two test
instances, respectively.
Overall, our results suggest that directory-based instances, in spite of being shorter
and automatically extracted, are not substantially worse for supervised WSD than the
hand-tagged material provided by the Senseval organization. The limitation of the
approach is currently the low coverage of word senses and the amount of training
samples. Two strategies may help in overcoming such limitations: first, propagating
directories via synonymy (attaching directories to synsets rather than word senses)
and semantic relationships (propagating directories via hyponymy relations); second,
retrieving instances not only from the ODP page describing the directory contents, but
from the Web pages listed in the directory.
The only fundamental limitation of our approach for the automatic extraction
of annotated examples is the fact that directories are closely related to topics and
domains, and therefore word senses that do not pertain to any domain cannot receive
directories and training instances from them. Still, the approach can be very useful
for language engineering applications in which only domain disambiguation (versus
sense disambiguation) is required, such as information retrieval (Gonzalo et al 1998)
and content-based user modeling (Magnini and Strapparava 2000).
5. Massive Processing of WordNet Nouns
We have applied the association algorithm to all noncompound nouns in WordNet
without nonalphabetic characters (e.g., sea lion and 10 are not included in the bulk
processing). The results can be seen in Table 10. Overall, the system associates at least
one directory with 13,375 nouns (28% of the candidate set).
The most direct way of propagating directories in the WordNet structure is ex-
tending sense/directory associations to synset/directory relations (i.e., if a word sense
receives a directory, then all word senses in the same synset receive the same direc-
tory). For instance, cable 2 (transmission line) receives the following directories:
business/industries/electronics and electrical
business/industries/electronics and electrical/hardware/connectors and terminals
business/industries/electronics and electrical/contract manufacturers
As cable 2 is part of the synset {cable 2, line 9, transmission line 1}, line 9 and transmission
line 1 inherit the three directories.
With this (quite conservative) strategy, the number of characterized nouns and
word senses almost doubles: 24,558 nouns and 27,383 senses, covering 34% of the can-
Table 10
Massive association of ODP directories with WordNet 1.7 nouns.
With Propagation
Candidate nouns 51,168
Candidate senses 73,612
Associated directories 29,291
Characterized nouns 13,375 24,558
Characterized senses 14,483 27,383
Hyponyms 1,800
501
Santamar??a, Gonzalo, and Verdejo Association of Web Directories with Word Senses
didate nouns plus 7,027 multiword terms that were not in the candidate set. The results
of this massive processing, together with the results for the Senseval 2 test (including
training material) are available for public inspection at ?http://nlp.uned.es/ODP?.
6. Conclusions
Our algorithm is able to associate ODP directories with WordNet senses with 86%
accuracy over the Senseval 2 test, and with coverage between 73% and 88% of the
domain-specific senses. Such associations can be used as rich characterizations for
word senses: as a source of information to cluster senses according to their topical
relatedness, to extract topic signatures, to acquire sense-tagged corpora, etc. The only
intrinsic limitation of the approach is that Web directories are not appropriate for
characterizing general word senses (versus domain-specific ones). If such characteri-
zation is necessary for a particular natural language application, the method should
be complemented by other means of acquiring lexical information.
In the supervised WSD experiment we have carried out, the results suggest that the
characterization of word senses with Web directories provides cleaner data, without
further sophisticated filtering, than a direct use of the full Web. Indeed the WSD
results using training material from ODP directories gives better results than could be
expected from previous cross-validations of training and test WSD materials.
Our ongoing work is extending the algorithm?which works independently for
every input word?to combine and propagate sense/directory associations over the
entire WordNet. The initial coverage of WordNet nouns is 34%, but we hope to improve
this figure by taking advantage of the WordNet structure.
Perhaps the main conclusion of our work is that Web directories are a much more
structured and reliable corpus than the whole Web. In spite of being manually su-
pervised, Web directories offer immense structured corpora that deserve our attention
as sources of linguistic information. In particular, listing word sense/ODP directory
associations has the additional advantage, compared to other Web-mining approaches,
of providing a wealth of lexical information in a very condensed manner.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by
the Spanish government through project
Hermes (TIC2000-0335-C03-01).
References
Agirre, E., O. Ansa, E. Hovy, and
D. Mart??nez. 2000. Enriching very large
ontologies using the WWW. In Proceedings
of the Ontology Learning Workshop, Berlin.
Agirre, E. and D. Mart??nez. 2000. Exploring
automatic word sense disambiguation
with decision lists and the Web. In
Proceedings of the COLING Workshop on
Semantic Annotation and Intelligent Content,
Luxembourg.
Edmonds, P. and S. Cotton. 2001.
Senseval-2: Overview. In Proceedings of
Senseval 2. Association for Computational
Linguistics, New Brunswick, NJ.
Fujii, A. and T. Ishikawa. 1999. Utilizing the
World Wide Web as an encyclopedia:
Extracting term descriptions from
semi-structured texts. In Proceedings of
ACL-99. Association for Computational
Linguistics, New Brunswick, NJ.
Gonzalo, J., F. Verdejo, I. Chugur, and
J. Cigarra?n. 1998. Indexing with Wordnet
synsets can improve text retrieval. In
COLING/ACL?98 Workshop on Usage of
WordNet in Natural Language Processing
Systems. Association for Computational
Linguistics, New Brunswick, NJ.
Grefenstette, G. 1999. The WWW as a
resource for example-based MT tasks. In
Proceedings of ASLIB-99, London.
Joho, H. and M. Sanderson. 2000. Retrieving
descriptive phrases from large amounts of
free text. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM
CIKM Conference, McLean, VA.
Kilgarriff, A. 2001a. English lexical sample
task description. In Proceedings of Senseval
2. Association for Computational
Linguistics, New Brunswick, NJ.
Kilgarriff, A. 2001b. Web as corpus. In
502
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 3
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2001,
Lancaster, England.
Kilgarriff, A. and M. Palmer. 2000.
Introduction to the special issue on
Senseval. Computers and the Humanities,
34(1?2).
Ma, X. and M. Liberman. 1999. Bits: A
method for bilingual text search over the
Web. In Proceedings of the Machine
Translation Summit VII, Singapore.
Magnini, B. and G. Cavaglia. 2000.
Integrating subject field codes into
WordNet. In Proceedings of LREC-2000,
Second International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Athens.
Magnini, B. and C. Strapparava. 2000.
Experiments in word domain
disambiguation for parallel texts. In
ACL-2000 Workshop on Word Sense and
Multilinguality. Association for
Computational Linguistics, New
Brunswick, NJ.
Mihalcea, R. and D. Moldovan. 1999a. An
automatic method for generating sense
tagged corpora. In Proceedings of AAAI ?99,
Orlando, FL, July, pages 461?466.
Miller, G. 1990. Wordnet: An on-line lexical
database. Special issue. International
Journal of Lexicography, 3(4).
Nie, Jian-Yun, Michel Simard, and George
Foster. 2001. Multilingual information
retrieval based on parallel texts from the
Web. In Carol Peters, Editor,
Cross-Language Information Retrieval and
Evaluation: Workshop of Cross-Language
Evaluation Forum (CLEF 2000), Lisbon,
Portugal, September 21?22, 2000, Revised
Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 2069. Berlin, Springer-Verlag,
pages 188?200.
Pedersen, T. 2001. Machine Learning with
lexical features: The Duluth approach to
Senseval-2. In Proceedings of Senseval-2.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, New Brunswick, NJ.
Peters, C., M. Braschler, J. Gonzalo, and
M. Kluck, editors. 2002. Evaluation of
Cross-Language Information Retrieval
Systems. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 2406. Springer-Verlag.
Resnik, P. 1999. Mining the Web for
bilingual text. In Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, College Park,
MD.
Resnik, P. and N. Smith. 2002. The Web as a
parallel corpus. Technical Report
UMIACS-TR-2002, University of
Maryland.
