c? 2004 Association for Computational Linguistics
Optimizing Referential Coherence
in Text Generation
Rodger Kibble? Richard Power?
University of London University of Brighton
This article describes an implemented system which uses centering theory for planning of coherent
texts and choice of referring expressions. We argue that text and sentence planning need to be
driven in part by the goal of maintaining referential continuity and thereby facilitating pronoun
resolution: Obtaining a favorable ordering of clauses, and of arguments within clauses, is likely
to increase opportunities for nonambiguous pronoun use. Centering theory provides the basis for
such an integrated approach. Generating coherent texts according to centering theory is treated
as a constraint satisfaction problem. The well-known Rule 2 of centering theory is reformulated in
terms of a set of constraints?cohesion, salience, cheapness, and continuity?and we show sample
outputs obtained under a particular weighting of these constraints. This framework facilitates
detailed research into evaluation metrics and will therefore provide a productive research tool in
addition to the immediate practical benefit of improving the fluency and readability of generated
texts. The technique is generally applicable to natural language generation systems, which perform
hierarchical text structuring based on a theory of coherence relations with certain additional
assumptions.
1. Overview
A central task for natural language generation (NLG) systems is to produce text that
is coherent, in the sense in which (1a) is noticeably more coherent than (1b):
1. a. Elixir is a white cream.
It is used in the treatment of cold sores.
It contains aliprosan.
Aliprosan relieves viral skin disorders.
b. Elixir contains aliprosan.
Viral skin disorders are relieved by aliprosan.
Elixir is used in the treatment of cold sores.
It is a white cream.
We can observe various ways in which text organization influences coherence: the
sequence in which certain facts are presented, the order in which entities are mentioned
in a clause, and the possibilities available for identifying the intended reference of
pronouns. Generally, (1a) seems to conform better to a reader?s expectations of what
will be referred to next and of how to resolve underspecified referring expressions,
? Department of Computing, Goldsmiths College, University of London, London SE14 6NW, U. K.
E-mail: r.kibble@gold.ac.uk
? Information Technology Research Institute, University of Brighton, Brighton BN2 4GJ, U. K. E-mail:
Richard.Power@itri.brighton.ac.uk
Submission received: 17 October 2002; Revised submission received: 22 May 2004; Accepted for
publication: 6 August 2004
402
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
in particular pronouns. These are issues which the well-known centering theory (CT)
of Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995; henceforth GJW) is concerned with. Previous
algorithms for pronominalization such as those of McCoy and Strube (1999), Henschel,
Cheng, and Poesio (2000), and Callaway and Lester (2002) have addressed the task of
deciding whether to realize an entity as a pronoun on the basis of given factors such as
its syntactic role and discourse history within a given text structure; what is essentially
novel in our approach is that we treat referential coherence as a planning problem, on
the assumption that obtaining a favorable ordering of clauses, and of arguments within
clauses, is likely to increase opportunities for nonambiguous pronoun use. Centering
theory provides the basis for such an integrated approach.1
Of course coherence of a text depends on the realization of rhetorical relations
(Mann and Thompson 1987) as well as referential continuity, and the latter is to an
extent a byproduct of the former, as clauses that are rhetorically related also tend
to mention the same entities. However, even when a set of facts is arranged in a
hierarchical RST structure, there are still many possible linear orderings with notice-
able differences in referential coherence. This article concentrates on the influence of
referential continuity on overall coherence and describes a method for applying CT
to problems in text planning and pronominalization in order to improve the fluency
and readability of generated texts. This method is applicable in principle to any sys-
tem which produces hierarchically structured text plans using a theory of coherence
relations, with the following additional assumptions:
? There is a one-to-one correspondence between predicates and verbs, so
that the options for syntactic realization can be predicted from the
argument structure of predicates. Such ?shallow? lexicalization appears
to be standard in applied NLG systems (Cahill 1999).
? Pronominalization is deferred until grammatical relations and word
order have been determined.
Our exposition will refer to an implemented document generation system, Icon-
oclast, which uses the technique of constraint satisfaction (van Hentenryck 1989;
Power 2000; Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha 2003) with CT principles implemented
among a set of soft constraints. The Iconoclast system allows the user to specify
content and rhetorical structure through an interactive knowledge-base editor and
supports fine-grained control over stylistic and layout features. The user-determined
rhetorical structure is transformed into a text structure or a set of candidate text struc-
tures which respect various text formation rules encoded as hard constraints. Not all
of the resulting text structures will give rise to stylistically acceptable documents, and
of those which may be judged acceptable, some will be noticeably preferable to others.
The text-structuring phase is followed by an evaluation of the candidate structures in
which they are ranked according to a set of preferences encoded as soft constraints.
Centering preferences are weighted along with other stylistic constraints to fix the
preferred final ordering both of propositions in the text and of arguments within a
clause.
It is not our primary aim in this short article to provide an empirical assessment
of the claims of CT, for which we refer the reader to the relevant papers, such as
1 Callaway and Lester (2002) note that CT-based pronominalization algorithms ?assume that the
discourse tree was constructed with Centering theory in mind? (page 91); in our case this assumption
is justified.
403
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
those collected in Walker, Joshi, and Prince (1998a) as well as Poesio et al (2002)
and other works cited there. We report elsewhere (Kibble and Power 2004) on two
ongoing empirical studies: A paired-comparison study of judgments by naive subjects
indicates that centering constraints make an appreciable difference to the acceptability
of texts, and a corpus study using what we believe to be a novel technique involving
perturbations provides clear evidence of preferences between the different constraints.
One of the strengths of our framework is that it can be used as a research tool for
the evaluation of variants of CT, as different realizations of an input sequence can be
generated by varying control parameters, and one can very quickly see the results of
alternative choices.
1.1 Related Work
Other researchers have applied CT to generation, though to our knowledge none have
applied it to text planning, sentence planning, and pronominalization in the integrated
way that we present in this article. This general approach is anticipated by McKeown?s
(1985) text-planning system, in which referential coherence is taken to be one of the
factors determining fluency, though McKeown?s work predates RST and centering.
Mittal et al (1998) apply what we term salience to sentence planning, with the goal of
realizing the Cb as subject, though the text planner does not have a goal of attempting
to maintain the same Cb. We regard Cheng?s (2000) work on the interaction of centering
preferences and aggregation in text planning as complementary to our enterprise.
Karamanis (2001), Kibble (2001), and Beaver (2004), have argued for a ranking of the
centering principles as opposed to weighting, and indeed Beaver provides a unified
formulation of the centering rules and constraints as a ranked set of OT constraints.
However, we believe that such a ranking stands in need of empirical justification,
and Beaver?s data actually provide little evidence for strict ranking as opposed to
weighting of constraints (see Kibble 2003). Constraint satisfaction search was applied
by Marcu (1996, 1997) to the far harder task of constructing RST trees given a set
of facts and a repertoire of rhetorical relations; Mellish et al (1998) argue that this
approach may not scale up to the generation of larger texts and propose an alternative
using stochastic search. We address the issue of computational complexity in section
4; however we do not face the same problems as Marcu, since the task for our text
planner is to convert a given RST tree into a (possibly singleton) set of text structures
rather than to build the RST tree from scratch.
2. Centering Parameters
We assume some familiarity with the basic concepts of CT. In this section we briefly
and informally summarize the main assumptions of the theory and explain how we
have interpreted and applied these assumptions:
1. For each utterance in a discourse there is said to be at most one entity that is the
center of attention or center (Constraint 1). The center in an utterance Un is the most
highly ranked entity realized in Un?1, which is also realized in Un (Constraint 3). This
is also referred to as the backward-looking center or Cb. (The set of entities mentioned
in an utterance Un is defined by Constraint 2 as the set of forward-looking centers
or Cfs.) It is not entirely clear whether Constraint 1 is to be taken as an empirical
claim or as a stipulation that some entity must be designated as Cb, if necessary by
constructing an indirect anaphoric link.
2. There is a preference for consecutive utterances within a discourse segment to
keep the same entity as the center and for the center to be realized as the highest-
ranked entity or preferred center (Cp). Kibble (1999) dubbed these principles cohe-
404
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
Table 1
Centering transitions.
Continue Cohesion and Salience both hold; same center (or Cb(Un) undefined),
realized as Cp in Un+1
Retain Cohesion only; that is, center remains the same but is not realized
as Cp in Un+1
Smooth Shift Salience only; center of Un+1 realized as Cp but not equal to Cb(Un)
Rough Shift Neither cohesion nor salience holds
sion and salience, respectively. Combinations of these preferences provide the familiar
canonical set of transitions shown in Table 1, ranked in the stipulated order of pref-
erence first set out as Rule 2 by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) and adopted
by Walker, Joshi, and Prince (1998b).
3. The center is the entity which is most likely to be pronominalized: GJW?s Rule 1
in its weakest form states that if any entity is referred to by a pronoun, the Cb must be.
As Poesio et al (2002) point out, CT can be viewed as a ?parametric? theory in
that key notions such as utterance and previous utterance, realization of entities, and
ranking are not given precise definitions by GJW, and subsequent applied studies
have had to begin by fixing particular instantiations of these notions.
2.1 Ranking
Since Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987), a ranking in terms of grammatical roles
(or obliqueness) has become standard; for example: subject > direct object >
indirect object > others.
We have simplified matters somewhat for the purposes of this implementation. First,
we assume that syntactic realization serves only to distinguish the Cp from all other
referents, which are ranked on the same level: Thus effectively subject > others.
Secondly, we assume that the system already knows, from the argument structure
of the proposition, which entities can occur in subject position: Thus in realizing a
proposition ban(fda, elixir), both arguments are potential Cps because active and pas-
sive realizations are both allowed; for contain(elixir, gestodene), only elixir is a potential
Cp because we disallow Gestodene is contained by Elixir.
2.2 Realization
GJW?s original formulation distinguished between ?direct? realization, or coreference,
and ?indirect? realization, which corresponds to bridging reference. As an example,
in (1a) the terms cold sores and viral skin disorders are not strictly coreferential and so do
not count as direct realizations of the same entity, but if we allow indirect realization,
then there is the potential for one of these to be identified as Cb, in a sequence such
as Elixir is used to treat cold sores. Viral skin disorders are relieved by aliprosan. Again, we
keep things simple at this stage by treating nominal expressions as realizations of the
same entity only if they strictly corefer. As Poesio et al (2002) observe, under this
interpretation of realization, a number of utterances will lack an identifiable Cb, so we
have to allow for a ?no-Cb? transition in addition to the canonical transitions listed
in Table 1.2
2 Of course, even with indirect realization we would still have to allow for the possibility of no-Cb
transitions.
405
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
2.3 Utterance and Previous Utterance
Two different approaches to the realization of ?utterance? have become associated with
the work of Kameyama (1998) and Suri, McCoy, and DeCristoforo (1999). To simplify
somewhat: Kameyama argued that the local focus is updated in a linear manner by
tensed clauses rather than by sentences, while Suri, McCoy, and DeCristoforo present
evidence that the subject of the main clause in a complex sentence is likely to be
the preferred antecedent for a subject pronoun in an immediately following sentence,
winning out over candidates in an intervening subordinate clause, as in example (2):
2. Dodgei was robbed by an ex-convict j the other night.
The ex-convictj tied himi up because hei wasn?t cooperating.
Then hej took all the money and ran / #he i started screaming for help.
In fact we would argue that Suri, McCoy, and DeCristoforo?s analysis does not estab-
lish whether the accessibility effects are due to the syntactic or the rhetorical structure
of utterances. The examples they present all involve sentences of the form Sx because
Sy corresponding to the rhetorical pattern nucleus?connective?satellite. Their results
are therefore consistent with the hypothesis that the nucleus of a preceding segment
is more accessible than the satellite. We allow the user of our system to choose be-
tween two strategies: a linear, Kameyama-style approach or a hierarchical approach
in which the utterance is effectively identified with a rhetorical span. Our approach is
more general than that of Suri, McCoy, and DeCristoforo as it covers cases in which
the components of a complex rhetorical span are realized in different sentences. Veins
theory (Cristea, Ide, and Romary 1998) provides a possible formalization of the intu-
ition that some earlier propositions become inaccessible as a rhetorical boundary is
crossed. The theory could be applied to centering in various ways; we have imple-
mented perhaps the simplest approach, in which centering transitions are assessed in
relation to the nearest accessible predecessor. In many cases the linear and hierarchi-
cal definitions give the same result, but sometimes they diverge, as in the following
schematic example:
3. ban(fda, elixir) since contain(elixir, gestodene).
However, approve(fda, elixirplus).
Following Veins Theory, the predecessor of approve(fda, elixirplus) is ban(fda, elixir); its
linear predecessor contain(elixir, gestodene) (an embedded satellite) is inaccessible. This
makes a considerable difference: Under a hierarchical approach, fda can be the Cb of
the final proposition; under a linear approach, this proposition has no Cb.
2.4 Transitions versus Constraints
Kibble (1999, 2001) argued for a decomposition of the canonical transition types into
the principles of cohesion and salience, partly on the architectural grounds that this
makes it easier to apply CT to the generation task, and partly on the empirical grounds
that the preference ordering assumed by GJW is not strongly supported by corpus
evidence and that transitions are better seen as epiphenomenal, emerging in a partial
ordering from the interaction of more fundamental constraints. We follow this general
approach, including among the constraints the principle of continuity: Each utterance
should have at least one referent in common with the preceding utterance, which
is effectively a restatement of GJW?s Constraint 1. If we assign a weight of 1 each
to cohesion and salience and 2 to continuity, we obtain a partial ordering over the
406
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
canonical transitions as follows:
0 : Continue > 1 : {Retain | Smooth Shift} > 2 : {Rough Shift | No Cb}
Any relative weighting or ranking of coherence over salience would need to be mo-
tivated by evidence that Retain is preferred over Smooth Shift, and we are not aware
of any conclusive evidence of this in the literature (see Kipple [1999] for further dis-
cussion).
This approach also means that Strube and Hahn?s (1999) principle of cheapness
can be naturally incorporated as an additional constraint: This is a requirement that
Cp(Un?1) = Cb(Un). The principle of cheapness effectively cashes out the informal
definition of the Cp as ?represent[ing] a prediction about the Cb of the following
utterance? (Walker, Joshi, and Prince, 1998b, page 3). In classic variants of centering
theory, this happens only indirectly as a result of transition preferences, and only
following a Continue or Smooth Shift, since the Cp is also the Cb and Rule 2 predicts
that the preferred transition will maintain the same Cb. However, the prediction is
not entailed by the theory following a Retain, Rough Shift, or no-Cb transition or
indeed for the first sentence in a discourse, when there is effectively no prediction
concerning the Cp. Strube and Hahn claim that the cheapness principle is motivated
by the existence of Retain-Shift patterns, which are evidently a common means of
introducing a new topic (see also Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987 [henceforth
BFP]). To summarize, our system incorporates the following constraints:
cohesion: Cb(Un?1) = Cb(Un)
salience: Cp(Un) = Cb(Un)
cheapness: Cp(Un?1) = Cb(Un)
continuity: Cfs(Un?1) ? Cfs(Un) = ?
2.5 Preferences: Transitions, Pairs, or Sequences?
The original version of GJW?s Rule 2 specified that sequences of Continue transitions
are preferred over sequences of Retains, and so on; in BFP?s implementation, how-
ever, transitions are evaluated incrementally and the preference applies to individ-
ual transitions such as Continue versus Retain rather than to sequences. Strube and
Hahn (1999) take an intermediate position: In their formulation, pairs of transitions
??Ui, Uj?, ?Uj, Uk?? are preferred that are cheap, that is, Cp(Uj) = Cb(Uk). Strube and
Hahn intended the preference for cheap transition pairs to replace GJW?s Rule 2 in
toto, which seems a rather weak requirement. On the other hand the original GJW
formulation is difficult to verify, since as Poesio et al (2002, page 66) found, sequences
of multiple occurrences of the same transition type turn out to be relatively rare.
Our position is a little more complex, as we do not directly aim to generate particular
transitions or sequences of transitions but to minimize violations of the constraints con-
tinuity, cohesion, salience, and cheapness. Violations are computed on individual nodes
and summed for each candidate text structure, so we may expect that the candidate
with the fewest violations will have a preponderance of the preferred transitions. The
system is certainly more slanted toward global optimization than BFP?s incremental
model but may be said to achieve this in a more natural way than a strategy of trying
to produce uniform sequences of transitions.
2.6 Pronominalization
GJW?s Rule 1 is rather weak as a guide to pronominalization decisions in general, as
it only mentions the Cb and gives little guidance on when or whether to pronomi-
407
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
nalize non-Cbs. An important consideration for NLG is to minimize the possibility of
ambiguity, and so we adopt a cautious strategy: The user can choose between invari-
ably pronominalizing the Cb or using a fairly simple algorithm based on parallelism
of grammatical roles. A possible future development is to supplement our CT-based
text planner with a more sophisticated pronominalization algorithm as proposed by
Henschel, Cheng, and Poesio (2000) or Callaway and Lester (2002).
3. Generation Issues
CT has developed primarily in the context of natural language interpretation, focussing
on anaphora resolution (see, e.g., Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 1987). As stated
above, the novel contribution of this article is an integrated treatment of pronomi-
nalization and planning, aiming to determine whether the principles underlying the
constraints and rules of the theory can be ?turned round? and used as planning oper-
ators for generating coherent text. We have assumed some familiarity in the foregoing
with terms such as text planning and sentence planning. These are among the distinct
tasks identified in Reiter?s ?consensus architecture? for natural language generation
(Reiter 1994):
Text planning/content determination: deciding the content of a message and or-
ganizing the component propositions into a text structure (typically a tree)
Sentence planning: aggregating propositions into clausal units and choosing lex-
ical items corresponding to concepts in the knowledge base; this is the
level at which the order of arguments and choice of referring expressions
will be determined
Linguistic realization: surface details such as agreement and orthography
Reiter observed that these functions can often be identified with discrete modules
in applied NLG systems and that a de facto standard had emerged in which these
modules are organized in a pipeline such that data flows only in one direction and
only between consecutive modules.
Breaking down the generation task in this way makes it evident that there are var-
ious ways the distinct principles of CT can be incorporated. Continuity and cohesion
naturally come under text planning: respectively, ordering a sequence of utterances to
ensure that each has a backward-looking center and maintaining the same entity as
the center within constraints on ordering determined by discourse relations. Salience
and cheapness, on the other hand, would come under sentence planning, since in each
case a particular entity is to be realized as subject. However, we encounter an appar-
ent paradox in that identifying the center itself depends on grammatical salience as
determined by the sentence planner: for example, choice of active or passive voice.
Consequently, the text planner appears to rely on decisions made at the sentence-
planning level, which is incompatible with the fact that ?pipelined systems cannot
perform general search over a decision space which includes decisions made in more
than one module? (Reiter 2000, page 252).
We can envisage three possibilities for incorporating CT into a generation archi-
tecture:
1. ?Incremental? sentence-by-sentence generation, in which the syntactic structure
of Un is determined before the semantic content of Un+1 is planned. That is, the text
planner would plan the content of Un+1 by aiming to realize a proposition in the
knowledge base which mentions an entity which is salient in Un. We are not aware
408
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
Figure 1
Rhetorical structure.
of any system which performs all stages of generation in a sentence-by-sentence way,
and in any case this type of architecture would not allow for global planning over
multisentence sequences, which we take to be essential for a faithful implementation
of centering.
2. A pipelined system in which the ?topic? or ?theme? of a sentence is desig-
nated independently as part of the semantic input and centering rules reflect the
information structure of a discourse. Prince (1999) notes that definitions of topic in
the literature do not provide objective tests for topichood and proposes that the
topic should be identified with the center of attention as defined by CT; however,
what would be needed here would be a more fundamental definition that would ac-
count for a particular entity?s being chosen to be the center of attention in the first
place.
3. The solution we adopt is to treat the task of identifying Cbs and Cps as an
optimization problem. We assume that certain options for syntactic realization can be
predicted on the basis of the argument structure of predicates, which means that cen-
tering constructs can be calculated as part of text planning before syntactic realization
takes place, so that the paradox noted above is resolved. Pronominalization decisions
are deferred until a point at which grammatical relations and word order have been
fixed.
4. Generation as Constraint Satisfaction
In this section we give an overview of our text-planning component in order to set the
implementation of CT in context. The methodology is more fully described by Power,
Scott, and Bouayad-Agha (2003).
The text planner was developed within Iconoclast, a project that investigated
applications of constraint-based reasoning in natural language generation using as sub-
ject matter the domain of medical information leaflets. Following Scott and de Souza
(1990), we represent rhetorical structure by graphs like Figure 1, in which nontermi-
nal nodes represent RST relations, terminal nodes represent propositions, and linear
order is unspecified. The task of the text planner is to realize the rhetorical structure
as a text structure in which propositions are ordered, assigned to textual units (e.g.,
sentences, paragraphs, vertical lists), and linked where appropriate by discourse con-
nectives (e.g., since, however). The boundary between text and sentence planning is
drawn at the realization of elementary propositions rather than at the generation of
individual sentences. If a rhetorical subtree is realized as a complex sentence, the effect
409
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
is that ?text planning? trespasses into the higher-level syntax of the sentence, leaving
only the elementary propositions to be realized by ?sentence planning.?3
Even for a simple rhetorical input like figure 1, many reasonable text structures
can be generated. Since there are two nucleus-satellite relations, the elementary propo-
sitions can be ordered in four ways. Several discourse connectives can be employed
to realize each rhetorical relation (e.g., concession can be realized by although, but, and
however). At one extreme, the text can be spread out over several paragraphs, while at
the other extreme, it can be squeezed into a single sentence. With fairly restrictive con-
straint settings, the system generates 24 text structure patterns for figure 1, including
the following (shown schematically):
A. Since contain(elixir, gestodene), ban(fda, elixir).
However, approve(fda, elixirplus).
B. approve(fda, elixirplus), although since contain(elixir, gestodene),
ban(fda, elixir).
The final output texts will depend on how the propositions are realized syntactically;
among other things, this will depend on centering choices within each proposition.
In outline, the procedure that we propose is as follows:
1. Enumerate all text structures that are acceptable realizations of the
rhetorical structure.
2. For each text structure, enumerate all permissible choices for the Cb and
Cp of each proposition.
3. Evaluate the solutions, taking account of referential coherence among
other considerations, and choose the best.
For the example in figure 1, centers can be assigned in four ways for each text structure
pattern, making a total of 96 solutions.
As will probably be obvious, such a procedure could not be applied for rhetorical
structures with many propositions. For examples of this kind, based on the relations
cause and concession (each of which can be marked by several different connectives), we
find that the total number of text structures is approximately 5N?1 for N propositions.
Hence with N = 5, we would expect around 600 text structures; with perhaps five
to ten ways of assigning centers to each text structure, the total number of solutions
would approximate to 5,000. Global optimization of the solution therefore becomes
impracticable for texts longer than about five propositions; we address this problem
by a technique of partial optimization in which a high-level planner fixes the large-
scale structure of the text, thus defining a set of local planning problems, each small
enough to be tackled by the methods described here.
Stage 1 of the planning procedure is described in more detail by Power, Scott,
and Bouayad-Agha (2003). A brief summary follows, after which we focus on stages 2
and 3, in which the text planner enumerates the possible assignments of centers and
evaluates which is the best.
3 See Power, Scott, and Bouayad-Agha (2003) for detailed motivation of this concept of text structure as a
level of representation distinct from both rhetorical structure and syntactic structure.
410
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
4.1 Generating and Evaluating Text Structures
A text structure is defined in Iconoclast as an ordered tree in which each node has a
feature named text?level. Values of text?level are represented by integers in the
range 0 . . .Lmax; these may be interpreted in various ways, but we will assume here
that Lmax = 4 and that integers are paired with descriptive labels as follows:
0 text phrase
1 text clause
2 text sentence
3 paragraph
4 section
Informally, a text structure (TS) is well-formed if it respects the hierarchy of textual
levels, so that sections are composed of paragraphs, paragraphs of text sentences,
and so forth. An example of an ill-formed structure would be one in which a text
sentence contained a paragraph; such a structure can occur only when the paragraph
is indented?a possibility we are excluding here. As well as being a well-formed text
structure, a candidate solution must realize a rhetorical structure (RS) ?correctly,? in
a sense that we need to make precise. Roughly, a correct solution should satisfy three
conditions:
1. The terminal nodes of the TS should express all the elementary
propositions in the RS; they may also contain discourse connectives
expressing rhetorical relations in the RS, although for some relations
discourse connectives are optional.
2. The TS must respect rules of syntax when it combines propositions and
discourse connectives within a text clause; for instance, a conjunction
such as but linking two text phrases must be coordinated with the
second one.
3. The TS must be structurally compatible with the RS.
The first two conditions are straightforward, but what is meant by ?structural compat-
ibility?? We suggest the crucial criterion for such compatibility should be as follows:
Any grouping of the elementary propositions in the TS must also occur in the RS. In
other words, the text structurer is allowed to eliminate groupings, but not to add any.
More formally:
? If a node in the TS dominates terminal nodes expressing a set of
elementary propositions, there must be a corresponding node in the RS
dominating the same set of propositions.
? The converse does not hold: For instance, an RS of the form
R1(R2(p1, p2), p3) can be realized by a paragraph of three sentences, one
for each proposition, even though this TS contains no node dominating
the propositions p1 and p2 that are grouped by R2. However, when this
happens, the propositions grouped together in the RS must remain
consecutive in the TS; solutions in which p3 comes in between p1 and p2
are prohibited.
411
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
Table 2
Examples of text-structuring constraints.
Name Type Description
Root domination Hard The text?level of the root node r must exceed
Lp > Ld that of any daughter d.
Parental domination Hard The text?level of a parent node p must be equal to
Lp ? Ld or greater than the text?level of any daughter d.
Sister equality Hard If nodes a and b are descended from the same
La = Lb parent, they must have the same text?level.
Sister order Hard If nodes a and b are descended from the same
Oa = Ob parent, they must have different values of order.
Connective Hard Governs choice of discourse connective.
Rhetorical grouping Soft Failure to express a rhetorical grouping can be
treated as a defect.
Oversimple paragraph Soft A paragraph containing only one text sentence can
be treated as a defect.
Centering Soft Constraints derived from centering theory.
Our procedure for generating candidate solutions is based on a technique for for-
mulating text structuring as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) (van Hentenryck,
1989), using the Eclipse logic programming environment.4 In general, a CSP is char-
acterized by the following elements:
? a set of variables V1 . . .VN
? For each variable Vi, a finite domain Di of possible values
? a set of constraints on the values of the variables (for integer domains
these often use ?greater than? and ?less than?; other domains usually
rely on ?equal? or ?unequal?.)
A solution assigns to each variable Vi a value from its domain Di while respecting
all constraints. For instance each node of the rhetorical structure is annotated with
a text?level variable with the domain 0 . . .Lmax and an order variable with the
domain 1 . . .N, where N is the number of sisters. Depending on the constraints, there
may be multiple solutions, or there may be no solution at all. We distinguish between
hard constraints, which are applied during the enumeration phase, determining which
candidate structures will be considered, and soft constraints, which apply during an
evaluation phase in which the enumerated solutions are ordered from best to worst.
Some examples of hard and soft constraints are shown in Table 2.
4.2 Choosing Centers
Given a text structure, we enumerate all permissible centering assignments as follows:
1. Determine the predecessor Un?1 (if any) of each proposition Un.
2. List the potential Cbs and Cps of each proposition (henceforth denoted
by ?Cb and ?Cp).
4 See http://www-icparc.doc.ic.ac.uk/eclipse/.
412
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
Table 3
Cbs and Cps for solution A.
U Proposition ?Cb(U) ?Cp(U)
U1 contain(elixir, gestodene) [ ] [elixir]
U2 ban(fda, elixir) [elixir] [fda, elixir]
U3 approve(fda, elixir-plus) [fda] [fda, elixir-plus]
3. Compute all combinations from ?Cb and ?Cp that respect the
fundamental centering constraint that Cb(Un) should be the most salient
candidate in Un?1.
As stated earlier, two criteria for determining the predecessor have been implemented;
the user can select one or the other criterion, thus using the NLG system to test different
approaches. Following a linear criterion, the predecessor is simply the proposition that
precedes the current proposition in the text, regardless of structural considerations.
Following a hierarchical criterion, the predecessor is the most accessible previous
proposition, in the sense defined by Veins Theory (Cristea, Ide, and Romary, 1998).
For now we assume the criterion is linear.
?Cb(Un) (potential Cbs of proposition Un) is given by the intersection between
Cf (Un) and Cf (Un?1)?that is, all the referents they have in common. The potential
Cps are those referents in the current proposition that can be realized as most salient.
Obviously this should depend on the linguistic resources available to the generator; the
system actually uses a simpler rule based on argument types within the proposition.
Table 3 shows the potential Cbs and Cps for the proposition sequence in solution A pre-
sented at the beginning of this section. As stated earlier, our treatment of salience here
simplifies in two ways: We assume that syntactic realization serves only to distinguish
the Cp from all other referents and that the system already knows, from the argument
structure of the proposition, which entities can occur in subject position. With these
simplifications, the enumeration of centering assignments is straightforward; in the
above example, four combinations are possible, since there are two choices each for
Cp(U2) and Cp(U3).
4.3 Evaluating Solutions
The system evaluates candidate solutions by applying a battery of tests to each node of
the text plan. Each test identifies whether the node suffers from a particular defect. For
instance, one stylistic defect (at least for the rhetorical relations occurring in figure 1)
is that of placing nucleus before satellite; in general, the text reads better if important
material is placed at the end. For each type of defect, we specify a weight indicating
its importance: In evaluating continuity of reference, for example, the defect ?no Cb?
is regarded as more significant than other defects. Other violations are recorded only
in the case in which a Cb is present, so if all violations were weighted equally, this
could result in a ?no-Cb? transition?s being treated as less serious than an ?expensive?
Smooth Shift, for example (violating cheapness and cohesion). Summing the weighted
costs for all defects, we obtain a total cost for the solution; our aim is to find the
solution with the lowest total cost.
Regarding centering, the tests currently applied are as follows:
Salience violation: A proposition Un violates salience if Cb(Un) = Cp(Un). This
defect is assessed only on propositions that have a backward-looking cen-
ter.
413
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
Cohesion violation: A transition ?Un?1, Un? violates cohesion if Cb(Un) =
Cb(Un?1). This defect is not recorded when either Un or Un?1 has no Cb.
Cheapness violation: A transition ?Un?1, Un? violates cheapness if Cb(Un) =
Cp(Un?1). This defect is assessed only on propositions that have a
backward-looking center.
Continuity violation: This defect is recorded for any proposition with no Cb,
except the first proposition in the sequence (which by definition cannot
have a Cb).
Relative weightings for these defects can be chosen by the user; for the current exam-
ples we have chosen a neutral scheme with a weight of 3 for continuity violations and
1 each for the others, so that a no-Cb transition is ranked equally bad as an ?expen-
sive? Rough Shift.5 Applied to the four solutions to text structures A and B presented
in this section, these definitions yield costs shown in Table 4. According to our metric,
solutions A1 and A2 should be preferred because they incur less cost than any others,
with B3 and B4 the least preferred.
Although this article focuses on centering issues, it is important to remember that
other aspects of text quality are evaluated at the same time: The aim is to compute a
global measure so that disadvantages in one factor can be weighed against advantages
in another. For instance, text pattern B is bound to yield poor continuity of reference
because it orders the propositions so that U1 and U2 have no referents in common.
Text pattern A avoids this defect, but this does not automatically mean that A is better
than B; there may be other reasons, unconnected with centering, for preferring B to
A. The constraints which have an effect on clause ordering include:
Satellite before nucleus: For nucleus-satellite relations, place the satellite before
the nucleus.
Right-branching structure: If an elementary proposition is coordinated with a
complex rhetorical structure, place the elementary proposition first.
Centering constraints: Penalize orderings which violate centering preferences.
Text pattern B is favored by ?right-branching structure,? but in this case the centering
constraints will ?conspire? with ?satellite before nucleus? to favor pattern A overall.
5. Conclusion
We have described a technique for generating texts which will be coherent according
to a reasonably faithful interpretation of centering theory. NLG systems need some
principled means of deciding on the preferred orderings of clauses and of arguments
within clauses, and CT appears a good candidate to provide a basis for these decisions,
in tandem with other stylistic considerations. We have reported on a particular imple-
mentation in the Iconoclast document generation system, but the technique can be
applied to other NLG systems that perform hierarchical text structuring based on a
theory of coherence relations (with additional assumptions as detailed in Section 1):
? For systems which generate a single text plan, CT can determine the
most coherent ordering of arguments within clauses.
5 See Kibble and Power (2004) for initial results of empirical research on constraint weightings.
414
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
Table 4
Realizations of text patterns A and B, with weights: cohesion | salience | cheapness = 1,
continuity = 3.
Version Text Cb Cp Defects Sum
Since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir none
A1 the FDA bans Elixir. elixir fda sal 2
However, it approves Elixir+. fda fda coh
Since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir none
A2 it is banned by the FDA. elixir elixir none 2
However, the FDA approves Elixir+. fda fda coh, ch
Since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir none
A3 the FDA bans Elixir. However, elixir fda sal 3
Elixir+ is approved by the FDA. fda elixir+ sal, coh
Since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir none
A4 it is banned by the FDA. However, elixir elixir none 3
Elixir+ is approved by the FDA. fda elixir+ sal, coh, ch
The FDA approves Elixir+ although ? fda none
B1 since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir cont 3
it is banned by the FDA. elixir elixir none
Elixir+ is approved by the FDA ? elixir+ none
B2 although since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir cont 3
it is banned by the FDA. elixir elixir none
The FDA approves Elixir+ although ? fda none
B3 since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir cont 4
the FDA bans Elixir. elixir fda sal
Elixir+ is approved by the FDA ? elixir+ none
B4 although since Elixir contains gestodene ? elixir cont 4
the FDA bans Elixir. fda elixir sal
Note: ch = cohesion, coh=cohesion, cont=continuity, sal=salience.
? For systems which generate multiple text plans, CT can be used to
evaluate the different plans as well as to determine the optimal
realization of any particular plan.
We have carried out empirical studies that provide clear evidence that centering fea-
tures make a difference to the acceptability of texts and demonstrate one way to
determine weightings (Kibble and Power 2004). It may turn out that different weight-
415
Kibble and Power Optimizing Referential Coherence
ings are appropriate for different text genres or for speech as opposed to ?written?
text. Our framework will facilitate detailed research into evaluation metrics and will
therefore provide a productive research tool in addition to the immediate practical
benefit of improving the fluency and readability of generated texts.
Acknowledgments
The essential ideas of this work were
originally presented at the ACL Workshop
on Discourse Structure and Reference (1999),
the 12th Amsterdam Colloquium (1999),
and COLING 2000. An earlier version of
this article was presented at INLG 2000. We
are grateful to the audiences on those
occasions for useful feedback and also to
colleagues on the GNOME project as well
as Nikiforos Karamanis and the anonymous
reviewers for Computational Linguistics. This
work was supported in part by the U.K.
EPSRC under grant references L51126,
L77102, and M36960.
References
Beaver, David. 2004. The optimization of
discourse anaphora. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 27(1):3?56.
Brennan, Susan, Marilyn Walker Friedman,
and Carl Pollard. 1987. A centering
approach to pronouns. In Proceedings of
25th ACL, pages 155?162, Stanford, CA.
Cahill, Lynne. 1999. Lexicalisation in
applied NLG systems. Technical Report
ITRI-99-04, Information Technology
Research Institute, University of Brighton.
Callaway, Charles B. and James C. Lester.
2002. Pronominalization in generated
discourse and dialogue. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
88?95, Philadelphia.
Cheng, Hua. 2000. Experimenting with the
interaction between aggregation and text
planning. In Proceedings of ANLP-NAACL,
pages 1?6, Seattle.
Cristea, Dan, Nancy Ide, and Laurent
Romary. 1998. Veins theory: A model of
global discourse cohesion and coherence.
In Proceedings of COLING/ACL?98, pages
281?285, Montreal.
Grosz, Barbara, Aravind Joshi, and Scott
Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A framework
for modelling the local coherence of
discourse. Computational Linguistics,
21(2):203?225.
Henschel, Renate, Hua Cheng, and
Massimo Poesio. 2000. Pronominalisation
revisited. In Proceedings of 18th COLING,
pages 306?312, Saarbru?cken, Germany.
Kameyama, Megumi. 1998. Intrasentential
centering: A case study. In Marilyn
Walker, Aravind Joshi, and Ellen Prince,
editors, Centering Theory in Discourse,
pages 89?112. Clarendon, Oxford.
Karamanis, Nikiforos. 2001. Exploring
entity-based coherence. In Proceedings of
Fourth CLUK, pages 18?26, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, England.
Kibble, Rodger. 1999. Cb or not Cb?
Centering theory applied to NLG. In
Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Discourse
and Reference Structure, pages 72?81,
University of Maryland, College Park.
Kibble, Rodger. 2001. A reformulation of
rule 2 of centering theory. Computational
Linguistics, 27(4):579?587.
Kibble, Rodger. 2003. Towards the
elimination of centering theory. In Ivana
Kruijff-Korbayova? and Claudia Kosny,
editors, DiaBruck 2003: Proceedings of the
Seventh Workshop on the Semantics and
Pragmatics of Dialogue, Universita?t des
Saarlandes, Saarbru?cken, Germany.
Kibble, Rodger and Richard Power. 2004.
Optimising referential coherence as a
constraint satisfaction problem. Technical
Report RK/2004/1, Department of
Computing, Goldsmiths College, and
ITRI-04-07, Information Technology
Research Institute, University of Brighton.
Mann, William and Sandra Thompson.
1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A
theory of text organisation. Technical
Report ISI/RS-87-190, Information
Sciences Institute, Los Angeles.
Marcu, Daniel. 1996. Building up rhetorical
structure trees. In Proceedings of AAAI-96,
pages 1069?1074, Portland, OR.
Marcu, Daniel. 1997. From local to global
coherence: A bottom-up approach to text
planning. In Proceedings of AAAI-97, pages
629?635, Providence, RI.
McCoy, Kathleen and Michael Strube. 1999.
Generating anaphoric expressions:
Pronoun or definite description? In
Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Discourse
and Reference Structure, pages 63?71,
University of Maryland, College Park.
McKeown, Kathleen R. 1985. Text Generation.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mellish, Chris, Alistair Knott, Jon
Oberlander, and Mick O?Donnell. 1998.
Experiments using stochastic search for
text planning. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International Workshop on Natural Language
416
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
Generation, pages 97?108,
Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario.
Mittal, Vibhu, Johanna Moore, Giuseppe
Carenini, and Steven Roth. 1998.
Describing complex charts in natural
language: A caption generation system.
Computational Linguistics, 24(3):431?467.
Poesio, Massimo, Rosemary Stevenson, Hua
Cheng, Barbara di Eugenio, and Janet
Hitzeman. 2002. A corpus-based
evaluation of centering theory. Technical
Report TN-02-01/CSM-369, Natural
Language Engineering Group, University
of Essex.
Power, Richard. 2000. Planning texts by
constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of
COLING 2000, pages 642?648,
Saarbru?cken, Germany.
Power, Richard, Donia Scott, and Nadjet
Bouayad-Agha. 2003. Document structure.
Computational Linguistics, 29(2):211?260.
Prince, Ellen. 1999. How not to mark topics:
?Topicalization? in English and Yiddish.
Unpublished manuscript, Linguistics
Department, University of Pennsylvania.
Reiter, Ehud. 1994. Has a consensus NL
generation architecture appeared, and is it
psycholinguistically plausible? In
Proceedings of the Seventh International
Natural Language Generation Workshop,
pages 163?170, Kennebunkport, ME.
Reiter, Ehud. 2000. Pipelines and size
constraints. Computational Linguistics,
26(2):251?259.
Scott, Donia and Clarisse de Souza. 1990.
Getting the message across in RST-based
text generation. In Robert Dale, Chris
Mellish, and Michael Zock, editors,
Current Research in Natural Language
Generation, pages 47?73. Academic Press,
London.
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1999.
Functional centering?Grounding
referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics,
25(3):309?344.
Suri, Linda, Kathleen McCoy, and Jonathan
DeCristofaro. 1999. A methodology for
extending focussing franeworks.
Computational Linguistics, 25(2):173?194.
van Hentenryck, P. 1989. Constraint
Satisfaction in Logic Programming. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Walker, Marilyn, Aravind Joshi, and Ellen
Prince, editors. 1998a. Centering Theory in
Discourse. Clarendon, Oxford.
Walker, Marilyn, Aravind Joshi, and Ellen
Prince. 1998b. Centering in naturally
occurring discourse. In Marilyn Walker,
Aravind Joshi, and Ellen Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse, pages 1?28.
Clarendon, Oxford.
