Improving Machine Translation Performance
by Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Dragos Stefan Munteanu?
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Daniel Marcu?
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
We present a novel method for discovering parallel sentences in comparable, non-parallel corpora.
We train a maximum entropy classifier that, given a pair of sentences, can reliably determine
whether or not they are translations of each other. Using this approach, we extract parallel data
from large Chinese, Arabic, and English non-parallel newspaper corpora. We evaluate the quality
of the extracted data by showing that it improves the performance of a state-of-the-art statistical
machine translation system. We also show that a good-quality MT system can be built from
scratch by starting with a very small parallel corpus (100,000 words) and exploiting a large
non-parallel corpus. Thus, our method can be applied with great benefit to language pairs for
which only scarce resources are available.
1. Introduction
Parallel texts?texts that are translations of each other?are an important resource in
many NLP applications. They provide indispensable training data for statistical ma-
chine translation (Brown et al 1990; Och and Ney 2002) and have been found useful in
research on automatic lexical acquisition (Gale and Church 1991; Melamed 1997), cross-
language information retrieval (Davis and Dunning 1995; Oard 1997), and annotation
projection (Diab and Resnik 2002; Yarowsky and Ngai 2001; Yarowsky, Ngai, and Wi-
centowski 2001).
Unfortunately, parallel texts are also scarce resources: limited in size, language
coverage, and language register. There are relatively few language pairs for which
parallel corpora of reasonable sizes are available; and even for those pairs, the corpora
come mostly from one domain, that of political discourse (proceedings of the Canadian
or European Parliament, or of the United Nations). This is especially problematic for
the field of statistical machine translation (SMT), because translation systems trained
on data from a particular domain (e.g., parliamentary proceedings) will perform poorly
when translating texts from a different domain (e.g., news articles).
One way to alleviate this lack of parallel data is to exploit a much more available
and diverse resource: comparable non-parallel corpora. Comparable corpora are texts
that, while not parallel in the strict sense, are somewhat related and convey overlap-
ping information. Good examples are the multilingual news feeds produced by news
agencies such as Agence France Presse, Xinhua News, Reuters, CNN, BBC, etc. Such
texts are widely available on the Web for many language pairs and domains. They often
? 4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001, Marina del Rey, CA 90292. E-mail: {dragos,marcu}@isi.edu.
Submission received: 5 November 2004; Accepted for publication: 3 March 2005.
? 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
contain many sentence pairs that are fairly good translations of each other. The ability
to reliably identify these pairs would enable the automatic creation of large and diverse
parallel corpora.
However, identifying good translations in comparable corpora is hard. Even texts
that convey the same information will exhibit great differences at the sentence level.
Consider the two newspaper articles in Figure 1. They have been published by the
English and French editors of Agence France Presse, and report on the same event, an
epidemic of cholera in Pyongyang. The lines in the figure connect sentence pairs
that are approximate translations of each other. Discovering these links automatically
is clearly non-trivial. Traditional sentence alignment algorithms (Gale and Church
1991; Wu 1994; Fung and Church 1994; Melamed 1999; Moore 2002) are designed to
align sentences in parallel corpora and operate on the assumption that there are no
reorderings and only limited insertions and deletions between the two renderings of
a parallel document. Thus, they perform poorly on comparable, non-parallel texts.
What we need are methods able to judge sentence pairs in isolation, independent of the
(potentially misleading) context.
This article describes a method for identifying parallel sentences in comparable
corpora and builds on our earlier work on parallel sentence extraction (Munteanu,
Fraser, and Marcu 2004). We describe how to build a maximum entropy-based classifier
that can reliably judge whether two sentences are translations of each other, without
making use of any context. Using this classifier, we extract parallel sentences from very
large comparable corpora of newspaper articles. We demonstrate the quality of our
Figure 1
A pair of comparable texts.
478
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
extracted sentences by showing that adding them to the training data of an SMT system
improves the system?s performance. We also show that language pairs for which very
little parallel data is available are likely to benefit the most from our method; by running
our extraction system on a large comparable corpus in a bootstrapping manner, we can
obtain performance improvements of more than 50% over a baseline MT system trained
only on existing parallel data.
Our main experimental framework is designed to address the commonly en-
countered situation that exists when the MT training and test data come from dif-
ferent domains. In such a situation, the test data is in-domain, and the training data
is out-of-domain. The problem is that in such conditions, translation performance
is quite poor; the out-of-domain data doesn?t really help the system to produce
good translations. What is needed is additional in-domain training data. Our goal
is to get such data from a large in-domain comparable corpus and use it to im-
prove the performance of an out-of-domain MT system. We work in the context
of Arabic-English and Chinese-English statistical machine translation systems. Our
out-of-domain data comes from translated United Nations proceedings, and our in-
domain data consists of news articles. In this experimental framework we have ac-
cess to a variety of resources, all of which are available from the Linguistic Data
Consortium:1
 large amounts of out-of-domain parallel data;
 smaller amounts of in-domain parallel data;
 in-domain MT test corpora with four reference translations; and
 in-domain comparable corpora: large collections of Arabic, Chinese, and
English news articles from various news agencies.
In summary, we call in-domain the domain of the test data that we wish to trans-
late; in this article, that in-domain data consists of news articles. Out-of-domain data
is data that belongs to any other domain; in this article, the out-of-domain data is
drawn from United Nations (UN) parliamentary proceedings. We are interested in
the situation that exists when we need to translate news data but only have UN
data available for training. The solution we propose is to get comparable news data,
automatically extract parallel sentences from it, and use these sentences as additional
training data; we will show that doing this improves translation performance on
a news test set. The Arabic-English and Chinese-English resources described in the
previous paragraph enable us to simulate our conditions of interest and perform de-
tailed measurements of the impact of our proposed solution. We can train baseline
systems on UN parallel data (using the data from the first bullet in the previous
paragraph), extract additional news data from the large comparable corpora (the fourth
bullet), accurately measure translation performance on news data against four ref-
erence translations (the third bullet), and compare the impact of the automatically
extracted news data with that of similar amounts of human-translated news data
(the second bullet).
In the next section, we give a high-level overview of our parallel sentence extrac-
tion system. In Section 3, we describe in detail the core of the system, the parallel sen-
1 http://www.ldc.upenn.edu.
479
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 2
A Parallel Sentence Extraction System.
tence classifier. In Section 4, we discuss several data extraction experiments. In Section 5,
we evaluate the extracted data by showing that adding it to out-of-domain parallel data
improves the in-domain performance of an out-of-domain MT system, and in Section 6,
we show that in certain cases, even larger improvements can be obtained by using boot-
strapping. In Section 7, we present examples of sentence pairs extracted by our method
and discuss some of its weaknesses. Before concluding, we discuss related work.
2. A System for Extracting Parallel Sentences from Comparable Corpora
The general architecture of our extraction system is presented in Figure 2. Starting with
two large monolingual corpora (a non-parallel corpus) divided into documents, we
begin by selecting pairs of similar documents (Section 2.1). From each such pair, we
generate all possible sentence pairs and pass them through a simple word-overlap-
based filter (Section 2.2), thus obtaining candidate sentence pairs. The candidates are
presented to a maximum entropy (ME) classifier (Section 2.3) that decides whether the
sentences in each pair are mutual translations of each other.
The resources required by the system are minimal: a bilingual dictionary and a small
amount of parallel data (used for training the ME classifier). The dictionaries used in
our experiments are learned automatically from (out-of-domain) parallel corpora;2
thus, the only resource used by our system consists of parallel sentences.
2 If such a resource is unavailable, other dictionaries can be used.
480
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
2.1 Article Selection
Our comparable corpus consists of two large, non-parallel, news corpora, one in English
and the other in the foreign language of interest (in our case, Chinese or Arabic). The
parallel sentence extraction process begins by selecting, for each foreign article, English
articles that are likely to contain sentences that are parallel to those in the foreign one.
This step of the process emphasizes recall rather than precision. For each foreign
document, we do not attempt to find the best-matching English document, but rather a
set of similar English documents. The subsequent components of the system are robust
enough to filter out the extra noise introduced by the selection of additional (possibly
bad) English documents.
We perform document selection using the Lemur IR toolkit3 (Ogilvie and Callan
2001). We first index all the English documents into a database. For each foreign docu-
ment, we take the top five translations of each of its words (according to our probabilis-
tic dictionary) and create an English language query. The translation probabilities are
only used to choose the word translations; they do not appear in the query. We use the
query to run TF-IDF retrieval against the database, take the top 20 English documents
returned by Lemur, and pair each of them with the foreign query document.
This document matching procedure is both slow (it looks at all possible document
pairs, so it is quadratic in the number of documents) and imprecise (due to noise in
the dictionary, the query will contain many wrong words). We attempt to fix these
problems by using the following heuristic: we consider it likely that articles with simi-
lar content have publication dates that are close to each other. Thus, each query is
actually run only against English documents published within a window of five days
around the publication date of the foreign query document; we retrieve the best 20
of these documents. Each query is thus run against fewer documents, so it becomes
faster and has a better chance of getting the right documents at the top.
Our experiments have shown that the final performance of the system does not
depend too much on the size of the window (for example, doubling the size to 10 days
made no difference). However, having no window at all leads to a decrease in the over-
all performance of the system.
2.2 Candidate Sentence Pair Selection
From each foreign document and set of associated English documents, we take all
possible sentence pairs and pass them through a word-overlap filter.
The filter verifies that the ratio of the lengths of the two sentences is no greater than
two. It then checks that at least half the words in each sentence have a translation in the
other sentence, according to the dictionary. Pairs that do not fulfill these two conditions
are discarded. The others are passed on to the parallel sentence selection stage.
This step removes most of the noise (i.e., pairs of non-parallel sentences) introduced
by our recall-oriented document selection procedure. It also removes good pairs that
fail to pass the filter because the dictionary does not contain the necessary entries; but
those pairs could not have been handled reliably anyway, so the overall effect of the
filter is to improve the precision and robustness of the system. However, the filter also
accepts many wrong pairs, because the word-overlap condition is weak; for instance,
stopwords almost always have a translation on the other side, so if a few of the content
3 http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/?lemur.
481
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
words happen to match, the overlap threshold is fulfilled and an erroneous candidate
sentence pair is selected.
2.3 Parallel Sentence Selection
For each candidate sentence pair, we need a reliable way of deciding whether the two
sentences in the pair are mutual translations. This is achieved by a Maximum Entropy
(ME) classifier (described at length in Section 3), which is the core component of our
system. Those pairs that are classified as being translations of each other constitute the
output of the system.
3. A Maximum Entropy Classifier for Parallel Sentence Identification
In the Maximum Entropy (ME) statistical modeling framework, we impose constraints
on the model of our data by defining a set of feature functions. These feature functions
emphasize properties of the data that we believe to be useful for the modeling task. For
example, for a sentence pair sp, the word overlap (the percentage of words in either
sentence that have a translation in the other) might be a useful indicator of whether the
sentences are parallel. We therefore define a feature function f (sp), whose value is the
word overlap of the sentences in sp.
According to the ME principle, the optimal parametric form of the model of our
data, taking into account the constraints imposed by the feature functions, is a log linear
combination of these functions. Thus, for our classification problem, we have:
P(ci|sp) = 1Z(sp)
k
?
j=1
?
fij(c,sp)
j
where ci is the class (c0=?parallel?, c1=?not parallel?), Z(sp) is a normalization factor, and
fij are the feature functions (indexed both by class and by feature). The resulting model
has free parameters ?j, the feature weights. The parameter values that maximize the
likelihood of a given training corpus can be computed using various optimization
algorithms (see [Malouf 2002] for a comparison of such algorithms).
3.1 Features for Parallel Sentence Identification
For our particular classification problem, we need to find feature functions that dis-
tinguish between parallel and non-parallel sentence pairs. For this purpose, we com-
pute and exploit word-level alignments between the sentences in each pair. A word
alignment between two sentences in different languages specifies which words in one
sentence are translations of which words in the other. Word alignments were first intro-
duced in the context of statistical MT, where they are used to estimate the parameters
of a translation model (Brown et al 1990). Since then, they were found useful in many
other NLP applications (e.g., word sense tagging [Diab and Resnik 2002] and question
answering [Echihabi and Marcu 2003]).
Figures 3 and 4 give examples of word alignments between two English-Arabic
sentence pairs from our comparable corpus. Each figure contains two alignments. The
one on the left is a correct alignment, produced by a human, while the one on the right
482
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Figure 3
Alignments between two parallel sentences.
was computed automatically. As can be seen from the gloss next to the Arabic words,
the sentences in Figure 3 are parallel while the sentences in Figure 4 are not.
In a correct alignment between two non-parallel sentences, most words would
have no translation equivalents; in contrast, in an alignment between parallel sentences,
most words would be aligned. Automatically computed alignments, however, may
have incorrect connections; for example, on the right side of Figure 3, the Arabic word
issue is connected to the comma; and in Figure 4, the Arabic word at is connected to
the English phrase its case to the. Such errors are due to noisy dictionary entries and to
Figure 4
Alignments between two non-parallel sentences.
483
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
shortcomings of the model used to generate the alignments. Thus, merely looking at
the number of unconnected words, while helpful, is not discriminative enough. Still,
automatically produced alignments have certain additional characteristics that can be
exploited.
We follow Brown et al (1993) in defining the fertility of a word in an alignment
as the number of words it is connected to. The presence, in an automatically computed
alignment between a pair of sentences, of words of high fertility (such as the Arabic
word at in Figure 4) is indicative of non-parallelism. Most likely, these connections
were produced because of a lack of better alternatives.
Another aspect of interest is the presence of long contiguous connected spans,
which we define as pairs of bilingual substrings in which the words in one substring are
connected only to words in the other substring. Such a span may contain a few words
without any connection (a small percentage of the length of the span), but no word
with a connection outside the span. Examples of such spans can be seen in Figure 3:
the English strings after saudi mediation failed or to the international court of justice together
with their Arabic counterparts. Long contiguous connected spans are indicative of
parallelism, since they suggest that the two sentences have long phrases in common.
And, in contrast, long substrings whose words are all unconnected are indicative of
non-parallelism.
To summarize, our classifier uses the following features, defined over two sen-
tences and an automatically computed alignment between them.
General features (independent of the word alignment):
 lengths of the sentences, as well as the length difference and length ratio;
 percentage of words on each side that have a translation on the other side
(according to the dictionary).
Alignment features:
 percentage and number of words that have no connection;
 the top three largest fertilities;
 length of the longest contiguous connected span; and
 length of the longest unconnected substring.
3.2 Word Alignment Model
In order to compute word alignments we need a simple and efficient model. We want to
align a large number of sentences, with many out-of-vocabulary words, in reasonable
time. We also want a model with as few parameters as possible?preferably only word-
for-word translation probabilities.
One such model is the IBM Model 1 (Brown et al 1993). According to this model,
given foreign sentence ( fj1<=j<=m), English sentence (ei1<=i<=l), and translation prob-
abilities t( fj|ei), the best alignment f ? e is obtained by linking each foreign word fj to
its most likely English translation argmaxei t( fj|ei). Thus, each foreign word is aligned to
exactly one English word (or to a special NULL token).
Due to its simplicity, this model has several shortcomings, some more structural
than others (see Moore [2004] for a discussion). Thus, we use a version that is aug-
mented with two simple heuristics that attempt to alleviate some of these shortcomings.
484
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
One possible improvement concerns English words that appear more than once
in a sentence. According to the model, a foreign word that prefers to be aligned with
such an English word could be equally well aligned with any instance of that word. In
such situations, instead of arbitrarily choosing the first instance or a random instance,
we attempt to make a ?smarter? decision. First, we create links only for those English
words that appear exactly once; next, for words that appear more than once, we choose
which instance to link with so that we minimize the number of crossings with already
existing links.
The second heuristic attempts to improve the choice of the most likely English
translation of a foreign word. Our translation probabilities are automatically learned
from parallel data, and we learn values for both t( fj|ei) and t(ei| fj). We can therefore
decide that the most likely English translation of fj is argmaxei{t( fj|ei), t(ei| fj)}. Using
both sets of probabilities is likely to help us make a better-informed decision.
Using this alignment strategy, we follow (Och and Ney 2003) and compute one
alignment for each translation direction ( f ? e and e ? f ), and then combine them. Och
and Ney present three combination methods: intersection, union, and refined (a form of
intersection expanded with certain additional neighboring links).
Thus, for each sentence pair, we compute five alignments (two modified-IBM-
Model-1 plus three combinations) and then extract one set of general features and five
sets of alignment features (as described in the previous section).
3.3 Training and Testing
We create training instances for our classifier from a small parallel corpus. The sim-
plest way to obtain classifier training data from a parallel corpus is to generate all
possible sentence pairs from the corpus (the Cartesian product). This generates 5,0002
training instances, out of which 5,000 are positive (i.e., belong to class ?parallel?) and
the rest are negative.
One drawback of this approach is that the resulting training set is very imbalanced,
i.e., it has many more negative examples than positive ones. Classifiers trained on such
data do not achieve good performance; they generally tend to predict the majority
class, i.e., classify most sentences as non-parallel (which has indeed been the case in
our experiments). Our solution to this is to downsample, i.e., eliminate a number of
(randomly selected) negative instances.
Another problem is that the large majority of sentence pairs in the Cartesian prod-
uct have low word overlap (i.e., few words that are translations of each other). As
explained in Section 2 (and shown in Figure 2), when extracting data from a compara-
ble corpus, we only apply the classifier on the output of the word-overlap filter. Thus,
low-overlap sentence pairs, which would be discarded by the filter, are unlikely to be
useful as training examples. We therefore use for training only those pairs from the
Cartesian product that are accepted by the word-overlap filter. This has the additional
advantage that, since all these pairs have many words in common, the classifier learns
to make distinctions that cannot be made based on word overlap alone.
To summarize, we prepare our classifier training set in the following manner: start-
ing from a parallel corpus of about 5,000 sentence pairs, we generate all the sentence
pairs in the Cartesian product; we discard the pairs that do not fulfill the conditions of
the word-overlap filter; if the resulting set is imbalanced, i.e., the ratio of non-parallel
to parallel pairs is greater than five, we balance it by removing randomly chosen non-
parallel pairs. We then compute word alignments and extract feature values.
485
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Using the training set, we compute values for the classifier feature weights using
the YASMET4 implementation of the GIS algorithm (Darroch and Ratcliff 1974). Since
we are dealing with few parameters and have sufficiently many training instances,
using more advanced training algorithms is unlikely to bring significant improvements.
We test the performance of the classifier by generating test instances from a differ-
ent parallel corpus (also around 5,000 sentence pairs) and checking how many of these
instances are correctly classified. We prepare the test set by creating the Cartesian
product of the sentences in the test parallel corpus and applying the word-overlap
filter (we do not perform any balancing). Although we apply the filter, we still concep-
tually classify all pairs from the Cartesian product in a two-stage classification process:
all pairs discarded by the filter are classified as ?non-parallel,? and for the rest, we obtain
predictions from the classifier. Since this is how we apply the system on truly unseen
data, this is the process in whose performance we are interested.
We measure the performance of the classification process by computing precision
and recall. Precision is the ratio of sentence pairs correctly judged as parallel to the
total number of pairs judged as parallel by the classifier. Recall is the ratio of sentence
pairs correctly identified as parallel by the classifier to the total number of truly parallel
pairs?i.e., the number of pairs in the parallel corpus used to generate the test instances.
Both numbers are expressed as percentages. More formally: let classified parallel be the
total number of sentence pairs from our test set that the classifier judged as parallel,
classified well be the number of pairs that the classifier correctly judged as parallel, and
true parallel be the total number of parallel pairs in the test set. Then:
precision = 100 ? classified well
classified parallel
recall = 100 ? classified well
true parallel
3.4 Performance Evaluation
There are two factors that influence a classifier?s performance: dictionary coverage
and similarity between the domains of the training and test instances. We performed
evaluation experiments to account for both these factors.
All our dictionaries are automatically learned from parallel data; thus, we can cre-
ate dictionaries of various coverage by learning them from parallel corpora of different
sizes. We use five dictionaries, learned from five initial out-of-domain parallel corpora,
whose sizes are 100k, 1M, 10M, 50M, and 95M tokens, as measured on the English
side.
Since we want to use the classifier to extract sentence pairs from our in-domain
comparable corpus, we test it on instances generated from an in-domain parallel cor-
pus. In order to measure the effect of the domain difference, we use two training sets:
one generated from an in-domain parallel corpus and another one from an out-of-
domain parallel corpus.
In summary, for each language pair, we use the following corpora:
 five initial out-of-domain corpora of various sizes, used for learning
dictionaries;
 one out-of-domain classifier training corpus;
4 http://www.fjoch.com/YASMET.html.
486
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Figure 5
Precision and recall of the Arabic-English classifiers.
 one in-domain classifier training corpus; and
 one in-domain classifier test corpus.
From each initial, out-of-domain corpus, we learn a dictionary. We then take the
classifier training and test corpora and, using the method described in the previous
section, create two sets of training instances and one set of test instances. We train two
classifiers (one on each training set) and evaluate both of them on the test set.
The parallel corpora used for generating training and test instances have around
5k sentence pairs each (approximately 150k English tokens), and generate around 10k
training instances (for each training set) and 8k test instances.
Figure 6
Precision and recall of the Chinese-English classifiers.
487
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figures 5 and 6 show the recall and precision of our classifiers, for both Arabic-
English and Chinese-English. The results show that the precision of our classification
process is robust with respect to dictionary coverage and training domain. Even when
starting from a very small initial parallel corpus, we can build a high-precision classifier.
Having a good dictionary and training data from the right domain does help though,
mainly with respect to recall.
The classifiers achieve high precision because their positive training examples are
clean parallel sentence pairs, with high word overlap (since the pairs with low overlap
are filtered out); thus, the classification decision frontier is pushed towards ?good-
looking? alignments. The low recall results are partly due to the word-overlap filter
(the first stage of the classification process), which discards many parallel pairs. If we
don?t apply the filter before the classifier, the recall results increase by about 20% (with
no loss in precision). However, the filter plays a very important role in keeping the
extraction pipeline robust and efficient (as shown in Figure 7, the filter discards 99% of
the candidate pairs), so this loss of recall is a price worth paying.
Classifier evaluations using different subsets of features show that most of the
classifier performance comes from the general features together with the alignment
features concerning the percentage and number of words that have no connection.
However, we expect that in real data, the differences between parallel and non-parallel
pairs are less clear than in our test data (see the discussion in Section 7) and can no
Figure 7
The amounts of data processed by our system during extraction from the Chinese-English
comparable corpus.
488
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Table 1
The Gigaword comparable corpora.
Foreign English
Language pair News agency and period # articles # tokens # articles # tokens
Arabic-English AFP, 1994?1997, 2002 224k 40M 650k 195M
Xinhua News, 2001
Chinese-English Xinhua News, 1995?2001 457k 162M 580k 128M
longer be accounted for only by counting the linked words; thus, the other features
should become more important.
4. Data Extraction Experiments
4.1 Controlled Experiments
The comparable corpora that we use for parallel sentence extraction are collections of
news stories published by the Agence France Presse and Xinhua News agencies. They
are parts of the Arabic, English, and Chinese Gigaword corpora which are available
from the Linguistic Data Consortium. From these collections, for each language pair,
we create an in-domain comparable corpus by putting together articles coming from
the same agency and the same time period. Table 1 presents in detail the sources and
sizes of the resulting comparable corpora. The remainder of the section presents the
various data sets that we extracted automatically from these corpora, under various
experimental conditions.
In the experiments described in Section 3.4, we started out with five out-of-domain
initial parallel corpora of various sizes and obtained five dictionaries and five out-of-
domain trained classifiers (per language pair). We now plug in each of these classifiers
(and their associated dictionaries) in our extraction system (Section 2) and apply it to
our comparable corpora. We thus obtain five Arabic-English and five Chinese-English
extracted corpora.
Note that in each of these experiments the only resource used by our system
is the initial, out-of-domain parallel corpus. Thus, the experiments fit in the frame-
work of interest described in Section 1, which assumes the availability of (limited
amounts of) out-of-domain training data and (large amounts of) in-domain comparable
data.
Table 2 shows the sizes of the extracted corpora for each initial corpus size, for
both Chinese-English and Arabic-English. As can be seen, when the initial parallel
corpus is very small, the amount of extracted data is also quite small. This is due to the
low coverage of the dictionary learned from that corpus. Our candidate pair selection
step (Section 2.2) discards pairs with too many unknown (or unrelated) words, accord-
ing to the dictionary; thus, only few sentences fulfill the word-overlap condition of
our filter.
As mentioned in Section 1, our goal is to use the extracted data as additional
MT training data and obtain better translation performance on a given in-domain MT
test set. A simple way of estimating the usefulness of the data for this purpose is to
measure its coverage of the test set, i.e., the percentage of running n-grams from the
test corpus that are also in our corpus. Tables 3 and 4 present the coverage of our
489
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 2
Size of the datasets extracted from the comparable corpora, in millions of English words.
Size of automatically extracted corpora
Size of initial parallel corpus Arabic-English Chinese-English
100k 0.09M 0.9M
1M 0.6M 5M
10M 1.9M 8.3M
50M 2.2M 10.5M
95M 2.1M 10.5M
Table 3
Coverage of the extracted corpora for Arabic-English.
Out-of-domain In-domain
Initial corpus size Initial Initial plus extracted
100k 68/16/3/0.5 82/31/8/2
1M 86/33/7/1 94/54/20/7
10M 95/51/16/3 98/67/30/12
50M 98/64/24/6 99/74/36/14
95M 98/68/28/8 99/76/38/15
Table 4
Coverage of the extracted corpora for Chinese-English.
Out-of-domain In-domain
Initial corpus size Initial Initial plus extracted
100k 75/19/2/0.2 91/41/11/3
1M 90/38/8/1 97/61/22/7
10M 97/57/18/4 99/70/29/10
50M 98/69/27/7 99/76/36/12
95M 99/73/32/9 99/78/39/14
extracted corpora. For each initial corpus size, the first column shows the coverage
of that initial corpus, and the second column shows the coverage of the initial corpus
plus the extracted corpus. Each cell contains four numbers that represent the coverage
with respect to unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, and 4-grams. The numbers show that
unigram coverage depends only on the size of the corpus (and not on the domain), but
for longer n-grams, our in-domain extracted data brings significant improvements in
coverage.
4.2 Non-Controlled Experiments Using Web-Based Non-Parallel Corpora
The extraction experiments from the previous section are controlled experiments in
which we only use limited amounts of parallel data for our extraction system. In this
490
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
section, we describe experiments in which the goal is to assess the applicability of our
method to data that we mined from the Web.
We obtained comparable corpora from the Web by going to bilingual news web-
sites (such as Al-Jazeera) and downloading news articles in each language indepen-
dently. In order to get as many articles as possible, we used the web site?s search engine
to get lists of articles and their URLs, and then crawled those lists. We used the Agent-
Builder tool (Ticrea and Minton 2003; Minton, Ticrea, and Beach 2003) for crawling. The
tool can be programmed to automatically initiate searches with different parameters
and to identify and extract the desired article URLs (as well as other information such
as dates and titles) from the result pages. Table 5 shows the sources, time periods, and
size of the datasets that we downloaded.
For the extraction experiments, we used dictionaries of high coverage, learned from
all our available parallel training data. The sizes of these training corpora, measured in
number of English tokens, are as follows:
 Arabic-English: 100M tokens out-of-domain data and 4.5M tokens
in-domain data
 Chinese-English: 150M tokens out-of-domain data and 40M tokens
in-domain data
We applied our extraction method on both the LDC-released Gigaword corpora
and the Web-downloaded comparable corpora. For each language pair, we used the
highest precision classifier from those presented in Section 3.4. In order to obtain data
of higher quality, we didn?t use all the sentences classified as parallel, but only those for
which the probability computed by our classifier was higher than 0.70. Table 6 shows
the amounts of extracted data, measured in number of English tokens. For Arabic-
English, we were able to extract from the Gigaword corpora much more data than in
our previous experiments (see Table 2), clearly due to the better dictionary. For Chinese-
English, there was no increase in the size of extracted data (although the amount from
Table 6 is smaller than that from Table 2, it counts only sentence pairs extracted with
confidence higher than 0.70).
In the previous section, we measured, for our training corpora, their coverage of
the test set (Tables 3 and 4). We repeated the measurements for the training data from
Table 6 and obtained very similar results: using the additional extracted data improves
coverage, especially for longer n-grams.
To give the reader an idea of the amount of data that is funneled through our
system, we show in Figure 7 the sizes of the data processed by each of the system?s
Table 5
Comparable corpora downloaded from the Web.
Foreign English
Language pair News agency and period # articles # tokens # articles # tokens
Arabic-English People?s Daily, 2001?2003 70k 38M 50k 20M
Al-Jazeera, 2003
Al-Hayat, 2003
Chinese-English Voice of America, 2001?2003 25k 13M 36k 19M
491
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 6
Size of the datasets extracted for the NIST 2004 MT evaluation.
Source Arabic-English Chinese-English
Gigaword 5.3M 7.2M
Web 1.4M 2.1M
Total 6.8M 9.3M
components during extraction from the Gigaword and Web-based Chinese-English
comparable corpora. We use a dictionary learned from a parallel corpus on 190M
English tokens and a classifier trained on instances generated from a parallel corpus
of 220k English tokens. We start with a comparable corpus consisting of 500k Chinese
articles and 600k English articles. The article selection step (Section 2.1) outputs 7.5M
similar article pairs; from each article pair we generate all possible sentence pairs and
obtain 2,400M pairs. Of these, less than 1% (17M) pass the candidate selection stage
(Section 2.2) and are presented to the ME classifier. The system outputs 430k sen-
tence pairs (9.5M English tokens) that have been classified as parallel (with probability
greater than 0.7).
The figure also presents, in the lower part, the parameters that control the filtering
at each stage.
 best K results: in the article selection stage (Section 2.1), for each foreign
article we only consider the top K most similar English ones. In our
experiments, K is set to 20.
 date window: when looking for possible article pairs, we only consider
English articles whose publication dates fall within a window of 5 days
around the publication date of the foreign one.
 word overlap: the word-overlap filter (Section 2.2) will discard sentence
pairs that have less than a certain proportion of words in common
(according to the bilingual dictionary). The value we use (expressed
as a percentage of sentence length) is 50.
 length ratio: similarly, the word-overlap filter will discard pairs whose
length ratio is greater than this value, which we set to 2.
 decision threshold: The ME classifier associates a probability with each
of its predictions. Values above 0.5 indicate that the classifier considers
the particular sentence pair to be parallel; the higher the value, the
higher the classifier?s confidence. Thus, in order to obtain higher
precision, we can choose to define as parallel only those pairs for
which the classifier probability is above a certain threshold. In the
experiments from Section 4.1, we use the (default) threshold of 0.5,
while in Section 4.2 we use 0.7.
5. Machine Translation Improvements
Our main goal is to extract, from an in-domain comparable corpus, parallel training
data that improves the performance of an out-of-domain-trained SMT system. Thus,
492
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
we evaluate our extracted corpora by showing that adding them to the out-of-domain
training data of a baseline MT system improves its performance.
5.1 Controlled Experiments
We first evaluate the extracted corpora presented in Section 4.1. The extraction system
used to obtain each of those corpora made use of a certain initial out-of-domain parallel
corpus. We train a Baseline MT system on that initial corpus. We then train another MT
system (which we call PlusExtracted) on the initial corpus plus the extracted corpus. In
order to compare the quality of our extracted data with that of human-translated data
from the same domain, we also train an UpperBound MT system, using the initial corpus
plus a corpus of in-domain, human-translated data. For each initial corpus, we use the
same amount of human-translated data as there is extracted data (see Table 2). Thus, for
each language pair and each initial parallel corpus, we compare 3 MT systems: Baseline,
PlusExtracted, and UpperBound.
All our MT systems were trained using a variant of the alignment template model
described in (Och 2003). Each system used two language models: a very large one,
trained on 800 million English tokens, which is the same for all the systems; and a
smaller one, trained only on the English side of the parallel training data for that
particular system. This ensured that any differences in performance are caused only
by differences in the training data.
The systems were tested on the news test corpus used for the NIST 2003 MT eval-
uation.5 Translation performance was measured using the automatic BLEU evaluation
metric (Papineni et al 2002) on four reference translations.
Figures 8 and 9 show the BLEU scores obtained by our MT systems. The 95%
confidence intervals of the scores computed by bootstrap resampling (Koehn 2004)
are marked on the graphs; the delta value is around 1.2 for Arabic-English and 1 for
Chinese-English.
As the results show, the automatically extracted additional training data yields
significant improvements in performance over most initial training corpora for both
language pairs. At least for Chinese-English, the improvements are quite comparable
to those produced by the human-translated data. And, as can be expected, the impact
of the extracted data decreases as the size of the initial corpus increases.
In order to check that the classifier really does something important, we per-
formed a few experiments without it. After the article selection step, we simply paired
each foreign document with the best-matching English one, assumed they are parallel,
sentence-aligned them with a generic sentence alignment method, and added the re-
sulting data to the training corpus. The resulting BLEU scores were practically the same
as the baseline; thus, our classifier does indeed help to discover higher-quality parallel
data.
5.2 Non-Controlled Experiments
We also measured the MT performance impact of the extracted corpora described
in Section 4.2. We trained a Baseline MT system on all our available (in-domain and
5 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/mt.
493
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 8
MT performance improvements for Arabic-English.
out-of-domain) parallel data, and a PlusExtracted system on the parallel data plus the
extracted in-domain data. Clearly, we have access to no UpperBound system in this
case.
The results are presented in the first two rows of Table 7. Adding the extracted
corpus lowers the score for the Arabic-English system and improves the score for
the Chinese-English one; however, none of the differences are statistically significant.
Since the baseline systems are trained on such large amounts of data (see Section 4.2),
it is not surprising that our extracted corpora have no significant impact.
In an attempt to give a better indication of the value of these corpora, we used
them alone as MT training data. The BLEU scores obtained by the systems we trained
on them are presented in the third row of Table 7. For comparison purposes, the last
line of the table shows the scores of systems trained on 10M English tokens of out-
of-domain data. As can be seen, our automatically extracted corpora obtain better MT
performance than out-of-domain parallel corpora of similar size. It?s true that this is
not a fair comparison, since the extracted corpora were obtained using all our available
parallel data. The numbers do show, however, that the extracted data, although it was
obtained automatically, is of good value for machine translation.
6. Bootstrapping
As can be seen from Table 2, the amount of data we can extract from our comparable
corpora is adversely affected by poor dictionary coverage. Thus, if we start with very
little parallel data, we do not make good use of the comparable corpora. One simple
way to alleviate this problem is to bootstrap: after we?ve extracted some in-domain data,
we can use it to learn a new dictionary and go back and extract again. Bootstrapping
was also successfully applied to this problem by Fung and Cheung (2004).
We performed bootstrapping iterations starting from two very small corpora: 100k
English tokens and 1M English tokens, respectively. After each iteration, we trained
494
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Figure 9
MT performance improvements for Chinese-English.
(and evaluated) an MT system on the initial data plus the data extracted in that iteration.
We did not use any of the data extracted in previous iterations since it is mostly a
subset of that extracted in the current iteration. We iterated until there were no further
improvements in MT performance on our development data.
Figures 10 and 11 show the sizes of the data extracted at each iteration, for both
initial corpus sizes. Iteration 0 is the one that uses the dictionary learned from the
initial corpus. Starting with 100k words of parallel data, we eventually collect 20M
words of in-domain Arabic-English data and 90M words of in-domain Chinese-English
data.
Figures 12 and 13 show the BLEU scores of these MT systems. For comparison
purposes, we also plotted on each graph the performance of our best MT system for
that language pair, trained on all our available parallel data (Table 7).
As we can see, bootstrapping allows us to extract significantly larger amounts of
data, which leads to significantly higher BLEU scores. Starting with as little as 100k
English tokens of parallel data, we obtain MT systems that come within 7?10 BLEU
points of systems trained on parallel corpora of more than 100M English tokens. This
Table 7
BLEU scores of the systems obtained using all available parallel data.
System Arabic-English Chinese-English
Baseline 49.22 33.77
Baseline plus extracted 48.54 34.38
Extracted only 41.2 28.04
Out-of-domain data 36.81 25.11
495
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 10
Sizes of the Arabic-English corpora extracted using bootstrapping, in millions of English tokens.
shows that using our method, a good-quality MT system can be built from very little
parallel data and a large amount of comparable, non-parallel data.
7. Examples
We conclude the description of our method by presenting a few sentence pairs ex-
tracted by our system. We chose the examples by looking for cases when a given
foreign sentence was judged parallel to several different English sentences. Figures 14
and 15 show the foreign sentence in Arabic and Chinese, respectively, followed by a
human-produced translation in bold italic font, followed by the automatically extracted
matching English sentences in normal font. The sentences are picked from the data
sets presented in Section 4.2.
The examples reveal the two main types of errors that our system makes. The
first type concerns cases when the system classifies as parallel sentence pairs that,
although they share many content words, express slightly different meanings, as in
Figure 15, example 7. The second concerns pairs in which the two sentences convey
different amounts of information. In such pairs, one of the sentences contains a trans-
Figure 11
Sizes of the Chinese-English corpora extracted using bootstrapping, in millions of English
tokens.
496
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Figure 12
BLEU scores of the Arabic-English MT systems using bootstrapping.
lation of the other, plus additional (often quite long) phrases (Figure 15, examples 1
and 5).
These errors are caused by the noise present in the automatically learned dictio-
naries and by the use of a weak word alignment model for extracting the classifier
Figure 13
BLEU scores of the Chinese-English MT systems using bootstrapping.
497
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 14
Automatically extracted Arabic-English sentence pairs.
features. In an automatically learned dictionary, many words (especially the frequent,
non-content ones) will have a lot of spurious translations. The IBM-1 alignment model
takes no account of word order and allows a source word to be connected to arbitrarily
many target words. Alignments computed using this model and a noisy, automatically
learned, dictionary will contain many incorrect links. Thus, if two sentences share
several content words, these incorrect links together with the correct links between the
498
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Figure 15
Automatically extracted Chinese-English sentence pairs.
common content words will yield an alignment good enough to make the classifier
judge the sentence pair as parallel.
The effect of the noise in the dictionary is even more clear for sentence pairs with
few words, such as Figure 14, example 6. The sentences in that example are tables
of soccer team statistics. They are judged parallel because corresponding digits align
499
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
to each other, and according to our dictionary, the Arabic word for ?Mexico? can be
translated as any of the country names listed in the example.
These examples also show that the problem of finding only true translation pairs
is hard. Two sentences may share many content words and yet express different mean-
ings (see Figure 14, example 1). However, our task of getting useful MT training data
does not require a perfect solution; as we have seen, even such noisy training pairs can
help improve a translation system?s performance.
8. Related Work
While there is a large body of work on bilingual comparable corpora, most of it is
focused on learning word translations (Fung and Yee 1998; Rapp 1999; Diab and Finch
2000; Koehn and Knight 2000; Gaussier et al 2004). We are aware of only three previ-
ous efforts aimed at discovering parallel sentences. Zhao and Vogel (2002) describe a
generative model for discovering parallel sentences in the Xinhua News Chinese-
English corpus. Utiyama et. al (2003) use cross-language information retrieval tech-
niques and dynamic programming to extract sentences from an English-Japanese
comparable corpus. Fung and Cheung (2004) present an extraction method similar to
ours but focus on ?very-non-parallel corpora,? aggregations of Chinese and English
news stories from different sources and time periods.
The first two systems extend algorithms designed to perform sentence alignment
of parallel texts. They start by attempting to identify similar article pairs from the two
corpora. Then they treat each of those pairs as parallel texts and align their sentences
by defining a sentence pair similarity score and use dynamic programming to find the
least-cost alignment over the whole document pair.
In the article pair selection stage, the researchers try to identify, for an article in
one language, the best matching article in the other language. Zhao and Vogel (2002)
measure article similarity by defining a generative model in which an English story
generates a Chinese story with a given probability. Utiyama et al (2003) use the
BM25 (Robertson and Walker 1994) similarity measure.
The two works also differ in the way they define the sentence similarity score.
Zhao and Vogel (2002) combine a sentence length model with an IBM Model 1-type
translation model. Utiyama et al (2003) define a score based on word overlap (i.e.,
number of word pairs from the two sentences that are translations of each other),
which also includes the similarity score of the article pair from which the sentence pair
originates.
The performance of these approaches depends heavily on the ability to reliably
find similar document pairs. Moreover, comparable article pairs, even those similar
in content, may exhibit great differences at the sentence level (reorderings, additions,
etc). Therefore, they pose hard problems for the dynamic programming alignment
approach.
In contrast, our method is more robust. The document pair selection part plays
a minor role; it only acts as a filter. We do not attempt to find the best-matching
English document for each foreign one, but rather a set of similar documents. And, most
importantly, we are able to reliably judge each sentence pair in isolation, without need
for context. On the other hand, the dynamic programming approach enables discovery
of many-to-one sentence alignments, whereas our method is limited to finding one-to-
one alignments.
The approach of Fung and Cheung (2004) is a simpler version of ours. They match
each foreign document with a set of English documents, using a threshold on their
500
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
cosine similarity. Then, from each document pair, they generate all possible sentence
pairs, compute their cosine similarity, and apply another threshold in order to select the
ones that are parallel. Using the set of extracted sentences, they learn a new dictionary,
try to extend their set of matching document pairs (by looking for other documents that
contain these sentences), and iterate.
The evaluation methodologies of these previous approaches are less direct than
ours. Utiyama et al (2003) evaluate their sentence pairs manually; they estimate that
about 90% of the sentence pairs in their final corpus are parallel. Fung and Cheung
(2004) also perform a manual evaluation of the extracted sentences and estimate their
precision to be 65.7% after bootstrapping. In addition, they also estimate the quality of
a lexicon automatically learned from those sentences. Zhao and Vogel (2002) go one
step further and show that the sentences extracted with their method improve the
accuracy of automatically computed word alignments, to an F-score of 52.56% over a
baseline of 46.46%. In a subsequent publication, Vogel (2003) evaluates these sentences
in the context of an MT system and shows that they bring improvement under special
circumstances (i.e., a language model constructed from reference translations) designed
to reduce the noise introduced by the automatically extracted corpus. We go even
further and demonstrate that our method can extract data that improves end-to-end
MT performance without any special processing. Moreover, we show that our approach
works even when only a limited amount of initial parallel data (i.e., a low-coverage
dictionary) is available.
The problem of aligning sentences in comparable corpora was also addressed for
monolingual texts. Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) present a method of aligning sentences
in two comparable English corpora for the purpose of building a training set of text-to-
text rewriting examples. Monolingual parallel sentence detection presents a particular
challenge: there are many sentence pairs that have low lexical overlap but are never-
theless parallel. Therefore pairs cannot be judged in isolation, and context becomes
an important factor. Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) make use of contextual information
by detecting the topical structure of the articles in the two corpora and aligning them
at paragraph level based on the topic assigned to each paragraph. Afterwards, they
proceed and align sentences within paragraph pairs using dynamic programming.
Their results show that both the induced topical structure and the paragraph align-
ment improve the precision of their extraction method.
A line of research that is both complementary and related to ours is that of Resnik
and Smith (2003). Their STRAND Web-mining system has a purpose that is similar
to ours: to identify translational pairs. However, STRAND focuses on extracting pairs
of parallel Web pages rather than sentences. Resnik and Smith (2003) show that their
approach is able to find large numbers of similar document pairs. Their system is
potentially a good way of acquiring comparable corpora from the Web that could then
be mined for parallel sentences using our method.
9. Discussion
The most important feature of our parallel sentence selection approach is its robust-
ness. Comparable corpora are inherently noisy environments, where even similar
content may be expressed in very different ways. Moreover, out-of-domain corpora
introduce additional difficulties related to limited dictionary coverage. Therefore, the
ability to reliably judge sentence pairs in isolation is crucial.
Comparable corpora of interest are usually of large size; thus, processing them
requires efficient algorithms. The computational processes involved in our system are
501
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
quite modest. All the operations necessary for the classification of a sentence pair (fil-
ter, word alignment computation, and feature extraction) can be implemented efficiently
and scaled up to very large amounts of data. The task can be easily parallelized for
increased speed. For example, extracting data from 600k English documents and 500k
Chinese documents (Section 4.2) required only about 7 days of processing time on
10 processors.
The data that we extract is useful. Its impact on MT performance is comparable
to that of human-translated data of similar size and domain. Thus, although we have
focused our experiments on the particular scenario where there is little in-domain
training data available, we believe that our method can be useful for increasing the
amount of training data, regardless of the domain of interest.
As we have shown, this could be particularly effective for language pairs for which
only very small amounts of parallel data are available. By acquiring a large compara-
ble corpus and performing a few bootstrapping iterations, we can obtain a training
corpus that yields a competitive MT system.
We suspect our approach can be used on comparable corpora coming from any do-
main. The only domain-dependent element of the system is the date window parameter
of the article selection stage (Figure 7); for other domains, this can be replaced with
a more appropriate indication of where the parallel sentences are likely to be found.
For example, if the domain were that of technical manuals, one would cluster printer
manuals and aircraft manuals separately. It is important to note that our work assumes
that the comparable corpus does contain parallel sentences (which is the case for our
data). Whether this is true for comparable corpora from other domains is an empirical
question outside the scope of this article; however, both our results and those of Resnik
and Smith (2003) strongly indicate that good data is available on the Web.
Lack of parallel corpora is a major bottleneck in the development of SMT systems
for most language pairs. The method presented in this paper is a step towards the
important goal of automatic acquisition of such corpora. Comparable texts are avail-
able on the Web in large quantities for many language pairs and domains. In this
article, we have shown how they can be efficiently mined for parallel sentences.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by DARPA-ITO
grant NN66001-00-1-9814 and NSF grant
IIS-0326276. The experiments were run on
University of Southern California?s
high-performance computer cluster HPC
(http://www.usc.edu/hpcc). We would like
to thank Hal Daume? III, Alexander Fraser,
Radu Soricut, as well as the anonymous
reviewers, for their helpful comments. Any
remaining errors are of course our own.
References
Barzilay, Regina and Noemie Elhadad. 2003.
Sentence alignment for monolingual
comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2003),
pages 25?32, Sapporo, Japan.
Brown, Peter F., John Cocke, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra,
Fredrick Jelinek, John D. Lafferty, Robert L.
Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A
statistical approach to machine
translation. Computational Linguistics,
16(2):79?85.
Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Robert L.
Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of
machine translation: Parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):263?311.
Darroch, J. N. and D. Ratcliff. 1974.
Generalized iterative scaling for log-linear
models. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
43:95?144.
Davis, Mark W. and Ted E. Dunning. 1995. A
TREC evaluation of query translation
methods for multi-lingual text retrieval. In
Fourth Text Retrieval Conference,
pages 483?498, Gaithersburg, MD.
502
Munteanu and Marcu Exploiting Non-Parallel Corpora
Diab, Mona and Steve Finch. 2000. A
statistical word-level translation model for
comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Content-Based Multimedia
Information Access, Paris, France.
Diab, Mona and Philip Resnik. 2002. An
unsupervised method for word sense
tagging using parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 255?262, Philadelphia.
Echihabi, Abdessamad and Daniel Marcu.
2003. A noisy-channel approach to
question answering. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 16?23,
Sapporo, Japan.
Fung, Pascale and Percy Cheung. 2004.
Mining very non-parallel corpora: Parallel
sentence and lexicon extraction vie
bootstrapping and EM. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2004),
pages 57?63, Barcelona, Spain.
Fung, Pascale and Kenneth Ward Church.
1994. Kvec: A new approach for aligning
parallel texts. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), pages 1096?1102,
Kyoto.
Fung, Pascale and Lo Yuen Yee. 1998. An IR
approach for translating new words from
nonparallel, comparable texts. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 414?420, Montreal.
Gale, William A. and Kenneth Ward Church.
1991. A program for aligning sentences in
bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 177?184,
Berkeley, CA.
Gaussier, Eric, Jean-Michel Renders, Irina
Matveeva, Cyril Goutte, and Herve
Dejean. 2004. A geometric view on
bilingual lexicon extraction from
comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 527?534,
Barcelona, Spain.
Koehn, Philipp. 2004. Statistical significance
tests for machine translation evaluation. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 388?395, Barcelona, Spain.
Koehn, Philipp and Kevin Knight. 2000.
Estimating word translation probabilities
from unrelated monolingual corpora using
the EM algorithm. In Proceedings of the
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 711?715, Austin, TX.
Malouf, Robert. 2002. A comparison of
algorithms for maximum entropy
parameter estimation. In Sixth Conference
on Natural Language Learning, Taipei,
Taiwan.
Melamed, Dan I. 1997. A portable algorithm
for mapping bitext correspondence. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 305?312, Madrid, Spain.
Melamed, Dan I. 1999. Bitext maps and
alignment via pattern recognition.
Computational Linguistics, 25(1):107?130.
Minton, Steven N., Sorinel I. Ticrea, and
Jennifer Beach. 2003. Trainability:
Developing a responsive learning system.
In IJCAI Workshop on Information Integration
on the Web, pages 27?32, Acapulco,
Mexico.
Moore, Robert C. 2002. Fast and accurate
sentence alignment of bilingual corpora.
In Proceedings of the 5th Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas, pages 135?144, Tiburon, CA.
Moore, Robert C. 2004. Improving IBM
word-alignment model 1. In 42nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 519?526, Barcelona,
Spain.
Munteanu, Dragos Stefan, Alexander Fraser,
and Daniel Marcu. 2004. Improved
machine translation performance via
parallel sentence extraction from
comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
Human Language Technology Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association
For Computational Linguistics,
pages 265?272, Boston, MA.
Oard, Douglas W. 1997. Cross-language text
retrieval research in the USA. In Third
DELOS Workshop on Cross-Language
Information Retrieval, pages 1?10, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Och, Franz Josef. 2003. Minimum error rate
training for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 160?167, Sapporo, Japan.
Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2002.
Discriminative training and maximum
entropy models for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 295?302,
Philadelphia.
Och, Franz Joseph and Hermann Ney. 2003.
A systematic comparison of various
503
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
statistical alignment models. Computational
Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Ogilvie, Paul and Jamie Callan. 2001.
Experiments using the Lemur toolkit. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Text Retrieval
Conference, pages 103?108, Gaithersburg,
MD.
Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd
Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU:
A method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Anniversary Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 311?318,
Philadelphia.
Rapp, Reinhard. 1999. Automatic
identification of word translations from
unrelated English and German corpora.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 519?526, College
Park, MD.
Resnik, Philip and Noah A. Smith. 2003.
The web as a parallel corpus.
Computational Linguistics, 29(3):349?380,
September.
Robertson, E. and S. Walker. 1994. Some
simple effective approximations to the
2-Poisson model for probabilistic weighted
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual
ACM SIGIR, pages 232?241, Dublin,
Ireland.
Ticrea, Sorinel I. and Steven Minton. 2003.
Inducing web agents: Sample page
management. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Engineering, pages 399?403, Las
Vegas, NV, June.
Utiyama, Masao and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003.
Reliable measures for aligning
Japanese-English news articles and
sentences. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 72?79, Sapporo, Japan.
Vogel, Stephan. 2003. Using noisy bilingual
data for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 175?178,
Budapest, Hungary.
Wu, Dekai. 1994. Aligning a parallel
English-Chinese corpus statistically with
lexical criteria. In Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 80?87, Las
Cruces, NM.
Yarowsky, David and Grace Ngai. 2001.
Inducing multilingual POS taggers and NP
bracketers via robust projection across
aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Meeting of the North American Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 200?207,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Yarowsky, David, Grace Ngai, and Richard
Wicentowski. 2001. Inducing multilingual
text analysis tools via robust projection
across aligned corpora. In Proceedings
of the First International Conference on
Human Language Technology Research,
pages 161?168, San Diego, CA.
Zhao, Bing and Stephan Vogel. 2002.
Adaptive parallel sentences mining from
web bilingual news collection. In 2002
IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining, pages 745?748, Maebashi City,
Japan.
504
