Chinese Word Segmentation and Named
Entity Recognition: A Pragmatic Approach
Jianfeng Gao?
Microsoft Research Asia
Mu Li?
Microsoft Research Asia
Andi Wu+
GrapeCity Inc.
Chang-Ning Huang?
Microsoft Research Asia
This article presents a pragmatic approach to Chinese word segmentation. It differs from most
previous approaches mainly in three respects. First, while theoretical linguists have defined
Chinese words using various linguistic criteria, Chinese words in this study are defined prag-
matically as segmentation units whose definition depends on how they are used and processed
in realistic computer applications. Second, we propose a pragmatic mathematical framework in
which segmenting known words and detecting unknown words of different types (i.e., morpho-
logically derived words, factoids, named entities, and other unlisted words) can be performed
simultaneously in a unified way. These tasks are usually conducted separately in other systems.
Finally, we do not assume the existence of a universal word segmentation standard that is
application-independent. Instead, we argue for the necessity of multiple segmentation standards
due to the pragmatic fact that different natural language processing applications might require
different granularities of Chinese words.
These pragmatic approaches have been implemented in an adaptive Chinese word segmenter,
called MSRSeg, which will be described in detail. It consists of two components: (1) a generic
segmenter that is based on the framework of linear mixture models and provides a unified
approach to the five fundamental features of word-level Chinese language processing: lexicon
word processing, morphological analysis, factoid detection, named entity recognition, and new
word identification; and (2) a set of output adaptors for adapting the output of (1) to different
application-specific standards. Evaluation on five test sets with different standards shows that
the adaptive system achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the test sets.
1. Introduction
This article is intended to address, with a unified and pragmatic approach, two funda-
mental questions in Chinese natural language processing (NLP): What is a ?word? in
Chinese?, and How does a computer identify Chinese words automatically? Our ap-
proach is distinguished from most previous approaches by the following three unique
? Natural Language Computing Group, Microsoft Research Asia, 5F, Sigma Center, No. 49, Zhichun Road,
Beijing, 100080, China. E-mail: jfgao@microsoft.com, muli@microsoft.com, cnhuang@msrchina.research.
microsoft.com.
+ The work reported in this article was done while the author was at Microsoft Research. His current e-mail
address is andi.wu@grapecity.com.
Submission received: 22 November 2004; revised submission received: 20 April 2005; accepted for
publication: 17 June 2005.
? 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
components that are integrated into a single model: a taxonomy of Chinese words, a
unified approach to word breaking and unknown word detection, and a customizable
display of word segmentation.1 We will describe each of these in turn.
Chinese word segmentation is challenging because it is often difficult to define what
constitutes a word in Chinese. Theoretical linguists have tried to define Chinese words
using various linguistic criteria (e.g., Packard 2000). While each of those criteria pro-
vides valuable insights into ?word-hood? in Chinese, they do not consistently lead us to
the same conclusions. Fortunately, this may not be a serious issue in computational lin-
guistics, where the definition of words can vary and can depend to a large degree upon
how one uses and processes these words in computer applications (Sproat and Shih
2002).
In this article, we define the concept of Chinese words from the viewpoint of
computational linguistics. We develop a taxonomy in which Chinese words can be
categorized into one of the following five types: lexicon words, morphologically derived
words, factoids, named entities, and new words.2 These five types of words have
different computational properties and are processed in different ways in our system,
as will be described in detail in Section 3. Two of these five types, factoids and named
entities, are not important to theoretical linguists but are significant in NLP.
Chinese word segmentation involves mainly two research issues: word boundary
disambiguation and unknown word identification. In most of the current systems, these
are considered to be two separate tasks and are dealt with using different components
in a cascaded or consecutive manner.
However, we believe that these two issues are not separate in nature and are
better approached simultaneously. In this article, we present a unified approach to
the five fundamental features of word-level Chinese NLP (corresponding to the five
types of words described earlier): (1) word breaking, (2) morphological analysis, (3)
factoid detection, (4) named entity recognition (NER), and (5) new word identifica-
tion (NWI). This approach is based on a mathematical framework of linear mixture
models in which component models are inspired by the source?channel models of
Chinese sentence generation. There are basically two types of component models: a
source model and a set of channel models. The source model is used to estimate the
generative probability of a word sequence in which each word belongs to one word
type. For each of the word types, a channel model is used to estimate the likelihood
of a character string, given the word type. We shall show that this framework is
flexible enough to incorporate a wide variety of linguistic knowledge and statistical
models in a unified way.
In computer applications, we are more concerned with segmentation units than
words. While words are supposed to be unambiguous and static linguistic entities,
segmentation units are expected to vary from application to application. In fact, dif-
ferent Chinese NLP-enabled applications may have different requirements that request
different granularities of word segmentation. For example, automatic speech recog-
nition (ASR) systems prefer longer ?words? to achieve higher accuracy, whereas in-
1 In this article, we differentiate the terms word breaking and word segmentation. Word breaking refers
to the process of segmenting known words that are predefined in a lexicon. Word segmentation refers
to the process of both lexicon word segmentation and unknown word detection.
2 New words in this article refer to out-of-vocabulary words that are neither recognized as named entities
or factoids nor derived by morphological rules. These words are mostly domain-specific and/or
time-sensitive (see Section 5.5 for details).
532
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
formation retrieval (IR) systems prefer shorter ?words? to obtain higher recall rates
(Wu 2003).
Therefore, we do not assume that an application-independent universal word seg-
mentation standard exists. We argue instead for the existence of multiple segmenta-
tion standards, each for a specific application. It is undesirable to develop a set of
application-specific segmenters. A better solution would be to develop a generic seg-
menter with customizable output that is able to provide alternative segmentation units
according to the specification that is either predefined or implied in the application data.
To achieve this, we present a transformation-based learning (TBL; Brill 1995) method,
to be described in Section 6.
We implement the pragmatic approach to Chinese word segmentation in an adapt-
ive Chinese word segmenter called MSRSeg. It consists of two components: (1) a
generic segmenter that is based on the linear mixture model framework of word
breaking and unknown word detection and that can adapt to domain-specific vocab-
ularies, and (2) a set of output adaptors for adapting the output of (1) to different
application-specific standards. Evaluation on five test sets with different standards
shows that the adaptive system achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the test
sets. It thus demonstrates the possibility of a single adaptive Chinese word segmenter
that is capable of supporting multiple applications.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents previ-
ous work in this field. Section 3 introduces the taxonomy of Chinese words and de-
scribes the corpora we used in our study. Section 4 presents some of the theoretical
background on which our unified approach is based. Section 5 outlines the general
architecture of the Chinese word segmenter, MSRSeg, and describes each of the com-
ponents in detail, presenting a separate evaluation of each component where appro-
priate. Section 6 presents the TBL method of standards adaptation. While in Section 5
we presume the existence of an annotated training corpus, we focus in Section 7 on
the methods of creating training data in a (semi-)automatic manner, with minimal or
no human annotation. We thus demonstrate the possibilities of unsupervised learning
of Chinese words. Section 8 presents several evaluations of the system on the different
corpora, each corresponding to a different segmentation standard, in comparison with
other state-of-the-art systems. Finally, we conclude the article in Section 9.
2. Previous Work
2.1 Approaches to Word Segmentation
Many methods of Chinese word segmentation have been proposed: reviews include Wu
and Tseng (1993); Sproat and Shih (2002); and Sun and Tsou (2001). These methods can
be roughly classified as either dictionary-based or statistically-based methods, while
many state-of-the-art systems use hybrid approaches.
In dictionary-based methods, given an input character string, only words that are
stored in the dictionary can be identified. One of the most popular methods is maxi-
mum matching (MM), usually augmented with heuristics to deal with ambiguities in
segmentation. Studies that use this method or minor variants include Chen et al (1999)
and Nie, Jin, and Hannan (1994). The performance of these methods thus depends to
a large degree upon the coverage of the dictionary, which unfortunately may never be
complete because new words appear constantly. Therefore, in addition to the dictio-
nary, many systems also contain special components for unknown word identification.
533
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
In particular, statistical methods have been widely applied because they use a proba-
bilistic or cost-based scoring mechanism rather than a dictionary to segment the text.
These methods have three drawbacks. First, some of these methods (e.g., Lin et al 1993;
Chang and Su 1997) identify OOV (out-of-vocabulary) words without identifying their
types. For instance, one might identify a string as a unit but fail to identify that it is
a person name. Second, many current statistical methods do not incorporate linguistic
knowledge effectively into segmentation. For example, Teahan et al (2000) and Dai et al
(1999) do not use any linguistic knowledge. Thus, the identified OOV words are likely to
be linguistically implausible, and consequently, additional manual checking is needed
for some subsequent tasks such as parsing. Third, in many current segmenters, OOV
identification is considered a separate process from segmentation (e.g., Chen 2003; Wu
and Jiang 2000; Chen and Bai 1998). For instance, Chen (2003) assumes that OOV words
are usually two or more characters long and are often segmented into single characters.
He then uses different components to detect OOV words of different types in a cascaded
manner after the basic word segmentation.
We believe that the identification of OOV words should not be treated as a problem
separate from word segmentation. We propose a unified approach that solves both
problems simultaneously. A previous work along this line is Sproat et al (1996), which is
based on weighted finite-state transducers (FSTs). Our approach is similarly motivated
but is based on a different mechanism: linear mixture models. As we shall see, the
models provide a more flexible framework for incorporating various kinds of lexical
and statistical information. Many types of OOV words that are not covered in Sproat?s
system can be dealt with in our system. The linear models we used are originally
derived from linear discriminant functions widely used for pattern classification (Duda,
Hart, and Stork 2001) and have been recently introduced into NLP tasks by Collins and
Duffy (2001). Other frameworks of Chinese word segmentation, which are similar to the
linear models, include maximum entropy models (Xue 2003) and conditional random
fields (Peng, Feng, and McCallum 2004). They also use a unified approach to word
breaking and OOV identification.
2.2 More on New Word Identification
In this article, we use the term ?new words? to refer to OOV words other than named en-
tities, factoids, and morphologically derived words. ?New words? are mostly domain-
specific terms (e.g., ? ?cellular?) and time-sensitive political, social, or cultural
terms (e.g., 	 ?Three Links?; ^x ?SARS?). There have been two general approaches
to NWI. The first is to acquire new words from large corpora off-line and put them
into a dictionary before word segmentation starts (e.g., Fung and Wu 1994; Nie, Jin and
Hannan 1994; Chien 1997; Gao et al 2002). The other is to detect new words on-line,
i.e., to spot new words in a sentence on the fly during the process of word segmentation
(e.g., Chen 2003; Wu and Jiang 2000). These two approaches complement one another,
and we use both of them in our system.
There have been quite a few methods proposed for the off-line approach in which
the basic assumption is that a Chinese word should appear as a stable sequence in
the corpus. These methods use metrics that are based on statistical features such as
mutual information, term frequency, and their variants. They require a reasonably large
training corpus. The new words detected are mostly proper nouns and other relatively
frequent words. Unfortunately, new words, under our definition of the term, may not
be detected.
534
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Fewer methods have been proposed for an on-line approach, and that is the focus
of this article. Some recent advances in on-line NWI explore the use of machine learning
approaches. For example, Li et al (2003) define NWI as a binary classification problem
and use support vector machines (SVM) to combine various linguistically motivated
features to determine whether a Chinese character sequence is a word. Our method is
an extension of that of Li et al in that NWI is not a stand-alone process in our system
but an integral part of word segmentation. We shall show experimentally the benefit of
the integration in Section 5.5.
2.3 Standards Adaptation
As described earlier, while Chinese words are supposed to be well-defined, unambigu-
ous, and static linguistic entities, we are more concerned with segmentation units that are
expected to vary among different computer applications. This inspires the development
of an adaptive Chinese word segmenter.
However, most of the previous segmenters have been developed according to
a standard that assumes a single correct segmentation. The only adaptive system, to
the best of our knowledge, is the customizable segmenter described in Wu (2003),
in which the display of the segmentation output can be customized by users.3 The
adaptation method we will describe in Section 6 can be viewed as an improved version
in that the adaptation rules (or transformations) are acquired automatically from
application data via the TBL method (Gao et al 2004). Though the use of TBL for
Chinese word segmentation is not new (see Palmer [1997]; Hockenmaier and Brew
[1998]), none of the previous work is aimed at standards adaptation.
2.4 Evaluation
The performance of Chinese word segmenters is generally reported in terms of preci-
sion and recall. However, a comparison across systems could be very difficult for two
reasons. First, the ?correct? segmentation is not clearly defined. It is common that
for a given sentence there are multiple plausible word segmentations. As shown in
Sproat et al (1996), the rate of agreement between two human judges is less than
80%. To deal with this problem, Fung and Wu (1994) suggest a procedure called
nk-blind that uses n blind judges? standards. If we set k = 1, it is sufficient for a seg-
mentation to be considered correct if it agrees with at least one of the n judges. If k = n,
all judges must agree. Therefore, nk-blind gives a more representative performance
measure by taking into account multiple judges. Similarly, Sproat et al (1996) also uses
multiple human judges. In Section 8.2, we will present our method for cross-system
comparison. We do not use multiple human judges. Instead, we only consider a set of
measures that are lexicon-independent and less ambiguous among different human
judges and systems.
The second reason that cross-system comparisons are difficult concerns the use of
different test sets and ground rules by many research papers. For example, some papers
report precision and recall rates of 98% or 99%. But they either count only the words that
are stored in the dictionary or use unrealistically simple data with a very low OOV rate.
Recently, the ACL-SIGHAN?sponsored First International Chinese Word Segmentation
3 Huang et al (1997) also proposed an adaptive, three-level standard.
535
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Bakeoff alleviated the situation to some degree (Sproat and Emerson 2003). The Bakeoff
released four data sets, each corresponding to a different standard, and consistent
train?test splits. We evaluate our segmenter using those four data sets in Sections 6.2
and 8.3.
3. Chinese Words
This section defines Chinese words at three levels. We begin with a taxonomy by
which Chinese words are categorized into five main types according to the way they
are processed and used in realistic systems. Second, we develop the MSR standard,
which is a set of specific rules to guide human annotators in segmenting Chinese
sentences. Finally, we describe the development of a gold test set and how we evaluate
Chinese word segmenters. Here, we use the term ?gold test set? to refer to the manually
annotated corpus, according to the MSR standard, on top of the ?test corpus? that is the
raw text corpus.
3.1 Taxonomy
The taxonomy of Chinese words is summarized in Table 1, where Chinese words are
categorized into the five types: entries in a lexicon (or lexicon words, LWs), morpho-
logically derived words (MDWs), factoids (FTs), named entities (NEs), and new words
Table 1
Taxonomy of Chinese words used in developing MSRSeg.
LW Lexical Word Y?,?,?t,m
MDW (see Figure 1 for details) Morphologically Derived Word
MP *, MS * Affixation (Prefix, Suffix) ??
MR * Reduplication ??tt
ML * Splitting ?m
MM * Merging 
?
MHP * Head + Particle p??
FT Factoid word
Dat Date 1011?
Dur Duration 20?
Tim Time A??	A
Per Percent and fraction 60%, 1/8
Mon Money 25000?C
NUMBER Frequency, integer, decimal, 	!,	*, 12.2?,,?*
ordinal, rate, etc.
MEASURE Age, weight, length, area, 78?, 700l?, 2?l?, 1.8?
capacity, speed, temperature, lw, 78???s,?? 2.89s,
angle, etc. 9D?, 5?
Ema E-mail jfgao@microsoft.com
Pho Phone, fax, telex 62617711
www WWW www.microsoft.com
NE Named Entity
P Person name N?,??q'
L Location name ?y),#w&?l?
O Organization name -.?P?,??"Zi?
NW New Word 	,^x
536
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
(NWs). These five types of words have different functions in Chinese NLP and are
processed in different ways in our system. For example, a plausible word segmentation
for the sentence in Figure 1(a) is shown in the same figure. Figure 1(b) is the output of
our system, where words of different types are processed in different ways:
 For LWs, word boundaries are detected, such asY? ?professor?.
 For MDWs, their morphological patterns and stems are detected, e.g.,
?? ?friend+s? is derived by affixation of the plural affix? to the noun
(stem)? (MA S indicates a suffixation pattern), and??tt ?happily?
is a reduplication of the stem?t ?happy? (MR AABB indicates an AABB
reduplication pattern).
 For FTs, their types and normalized forms are detected, e.g., 12:30 is the
normalized form of the time expressionA??	A (?tim? indicates a
time expression).
 For NEs, their types are detected, e.g.,N? ?Li Junsheng? is a person
name.
The five types of words cannot be defined by any consistent classification criteria
(e.g., the relation between MDWs and LWs depends on the lexicon being used); the
taxonomy therefore does not give a clear definition of Chinese words. We do not intend
for this article to give a standard definition of Chinese words. Instead, we treat Chinese
word segmentation as a preprocessing step where the best segmentation units depend
on how they are used in the consuming applications. The five word types represent the
five types of Chinese words that appear in most applications. This is one of the reasons
that we title this article ?a pragmatic approach.? We focus on two tasks in the approach:
processing of the five types of Chinese word using a unified framework that can be
jointly optimized (Sections 4 and 5), and adapting our system to different applications
(Section 6). Now, we describe each of the five word types in Table 1 in detail.
LWs (lexicon words): Although some previous research has suggested carrying
out Chinese word segmentation without the use of dictionaries (e.g., Sproat and Shih
1990; Sun, Shen and Tsou 1998), we believe that a dictionary is an essential compo-
nent of many applications. For example, in a machine translation system, it is de-
sirable to segment a sentence into LWs as much as possible so that the candidate
translations of these words can be looked up in a bilingual dictionary. Similarly, we
would also like to segment a sentence into LWs in a Chinese text-to-speech (TTS)
system because the pronunciations stored in the dictionary are usually much more
precise than those generated dynamically (for instance, by character-to-sound rules). In
our system, we used a lexicon containing 98,668 words, including 22,996 Chi-
Figure 1
(a) A Chinese sentence. Slashes indicate word boundaries. (b) An output of our word
segmentation system. Square brackets indicate word boundaries. + indicates a morpheme
boundary.
537
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
nese characters stored as single-character words. This lexicon is a combination of
several dictionaries authored by Chinese linguists and used in different Microsoft
applications. Thus, all LWs in theory are similar to those described in Packard (2000),
i.e., linguistic units that are ?salient and highly relevant to the operation of the
language processor.?
MDWs (morphologically derived words): Chinese words of this type have the
following two characteristics. First, MDWs can be generated from one or more LWs
(called stems) via a productive morphological process. For example, in Figure 2, the
MDW ??tt ?happily? is generated from a stem ?t ?happy? via an AABB redu-
plication process. As shown in Table 1, there are five main categories of morpho-
logical processes, each of which has several subcategories, as detailed in Figure 2
(see Wu [2003] for a detailed description):
 Affixation (MP and MS):?? (friend - plural) ?friends?;
 Reduplication (MR):?t ?happy? ???tt ?happily?;
 Splitting (MS) (i.e., a set of expressions that are separate words at the
syntactic level but single words at the semantic level):?m ?already ate?,
where the bi-character wordm ?eat? is split by the particle? ?already?;
 Merging (MM):
? ?on duty? +? ?off duty??
? ?on-off duty?; and
 Head Particle (MHP) (i.e., expressions that are verb + comp):p ?walk? +
?? ?out? ?p?? ?walk out?.
The second characteristic of MDWs is that they form stable Chinese character
sequences in the corpus. That is, the components within the MDWs are strongly cor-
related (of high co-occurrence frequency), while the components at both ends have low
correlations with words outside the sequence. We shall describe in Section 5.2 how
the ?stability? of a Chinese sequence is measured qualitatively, and how to construct
a morph-lexicon for Chinese morphology analysis.
FTs (factoids): There are ten categories of factoid words, such as time and date
expressions, as shown in Table 1. All FTs can be represented as regular expressions.
Therefore, the detection and normalization of FTs can be achieved by Finite State
Machines.
NEs (named entities): NEs are frequently used Chinese names, including per-
son names, location names, and organization names. One cannot develop a regular
grammar that rejects or accepts the constructions of NEs with high accuracy, as we
can do with most FTs. In Section 5.3, we shall describe how we use both heuristics and
statistical models for NER.
NWs (new words): NWs are OOV words that are neither recognized as named
entities or factoids nor derived by morphological rules. In particular, we focus on low-
frequency new words, including newly coined words, occasional words, and mostly
time-sensitive words (Wu and Jiang 2000). Many current segmenters simply ignore
NWs, assuming that they are of little significance in most applications. However, we
argue that the identification of those words is critical because a single unidentified word
can cause segmentation errors in the surrounding words. For NLP applications that
require full parsing, it is even more critical because a single error would cause a whole
sentence to fail.
538
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Figure 2
Taxonomy of morphologically derived words (MDWs) in MSRSeg.
3.2 MSR Standard
The taxonomy employed here has been specified in detail in the MSR standard. There
are two general guidelines for the development of the standard:
1. The standard should be applicable to a wide variety of NLP tasks, of
which some representative examples are Chinese text input, IR, TTS, ASR,
and MT.
2. The standard should be compatible with existing standards, of which
representative examples are the Chinese NE standards in ET/ER-99, the
Mainland standard (GB/T), Taiwan?s ROCLING standard (CNS14366;
Huang et al 1997), and the UPenn Chinese Treebank (Xia 1999), as much
as possible.4
We are seeking a standard that is ?linguistically felicitous, computationally feasible,
and [ensures] data uniformity? (Huang et al 1997; Sproat and Shih 2002). The MSR
standard consists of a set of specific rules that aims at unambiguously determining the
word segmentation of a Chinese sentence, given a reference lexicon. The development
of the standard is an iterative procedure, interacting with the development of a gold
test set (which we will describe in the next section). We begin with an initial set of
4 MET is a Chinese named entity standard defined in the MUC (message understanding conference,
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/related projects/muc/). ER99 is an extension of MET, though
it is not as universally used as MET (http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ie-er/er 99/er 99.htm).
539
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
segmentation rules, based on which four human annotators label a test corpus. When-
ever an interannotator conflict is detected (automatically), we resolve it by revising the
standard (e.g., mostly by adding more specific rules). The process is iterated until no
conflict is detected. For example, we begin with the rule for detecting MDWs: ?if a
character sequence can be derived from a LW via a morphological process, then the
sequence is treated as an MDW candidate.? We then observe that both ?m ?already
ate? and ? m ?already had a meal? are derived from the LW m ?eat? via the
morphological process of splitting. While ?m is a reasonable MDW, ? m
is debatable. We then add a rule: ?MDW candidates with complex internal structures
should be segmented.? We also add a set of specific rules to define what a complex
internal structure is. An example of those rules is ?for MDW candidates of type MS, we
only consider sequences that are less than four characters long.?
One drawback of the approach is that the standard would become very complicated
as we continue to add such specific rules, and people would start making clerical
errors. We currently do not have a systematic solution to this. The complexity has to
be controlled manually. That is, all new added rules are recompiled by a linguist so that
the total number of rules is manageable.
3.3 MSR Gold Test Set and Training Set
Several questions had to be answered when we were developing the gold test set for
evaluation.
1. How should we construct a test corpus for reliable evaluation?
2. Does the segmentation in the gold test set depend on a particular lexicon?
3. Should we assume a single correct segmentation for a sentence?
4. What are the evaluation criteria?
5. How should we perform a fair comparison across different systems using
the gold test set?
We answer the first three questions in this section and leave the rest for Sec-
tion 3.5. First, to conduct a reliable evaluation, we select a test corpus that contains ap-
proximately half a million Chinese characters that have been proofread and balanced in
terms of domains and styles. The distributions are shown in Table 2. The gold test set is
developed by annotating the test corpus according to the MSR standard via the iterative
procedure described in Section 3.2. The statistics are shown in Table 3. Some fragments
of the gold test set are shown in Figure 3, and the notation is presented in Table 1.
As discussed in Section 3.1, we believe that the lexicon is a critical component
of many applications. The segmentation of the gold test set depends upon a refer-
ence lexicon, which is the combination of several lexicons that are used in Microsoft
applications, including a Chinese text input system (Gao et al 2002), ASR (Chang et al
2001), TTS (Chu et al 2003), and the MSR-NLP Chinese parser (Wu and Jiang 2000).
The lexicon consists of 98,668 entries. We also developed a morph-lexicon, which contains
50,963 high-frequency MDWs. We will describe how the morph-lexicon was constructed
in Section 5.2.
Regarding the third question, though it is common that there are multiple plausible
segmentations for a given Chinese sentence, we keep only a single gold segmentation
for each sentence for two reasons. The first is simplicity. The second is due to the fact
540
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Table 2
Domain/style distribution in the MSR test corpus.
Domain/Style Descriptive Expository Narrative Practical Spoken Total (%)
(MB) writing writing writing writing5
Culture 2.2 49.6 12.2 64 (6)
Economic 10.6 102.6 55.1 12.7 181 (17)
Literature 33.1 13.2 6.3 52.6 (5)
Military 42.1 42.1 (4)
Politics 36.2 102.9 88.8 100.8 328.7 (31)
Science & Tech. 7.3 14.7 85.8 2.1 9.4 119.3 (11)
Society 4.5 6.2 56.9 23.9 91.5 (8)
Sport 10.5 33.7 8.3 52.5 (5)
Computer 24.8 65.6 90.4 (9)
Law 2.1 26.3 28.4 (3)
Total (%) 44.9 (4) 120.5 (12) 571.8 (54) 182.1 (17) 131.2 (13) 1,051 (100)
Table 3
Words in the MSR gold test set.
Word type N
LW 205,162
MDW 3,746
FT 6,630
NE:
Person name 4,347
Location name 5,311
Organization name 3,850
that we currently do not know any effective way of using multiple segmentations in
the above-mentioned applications. In particular, we segment each sentence as much
as possible into words that are stored in the reference lexicon. When there are multiple
segmentations for a sentence, we keep the one that contains the fewest number of
words.
We have also manually developed a training set according to the MSR standard.
It contains approximately 40 million Chinese characters from various domains of text
such as newspapers, novels, and magazines. In our experiments, 90% of the training set
is used for model parameter estimation, and the remaining 10% is a held-out set for
tuning.
3.4 SIGHAN?s Bakeoff Standards and Corpora
As mentioned in Section 1, MSRSeg is designed as an adaptive segmenter that consists
of two components: (1) a generic segmenter that can adapt to different domain vocab-
ularies, and (2) a set of output adaptors, learned from application data, for adapting to
different application-specific standards.
5 Chinese writing is normally divided into the first three: descriptive, expository, and narrative. Practical
writing is just an umbrella term for practical writing such as notes, letter, e-mails, and marriage
announcements.
541
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 3
Fragments of the MSR gold test set.
Therefore, we evaluate MSRSeg using five corpora, each corresponding to a differ-
ent standard, and consistent train?test splits, as shown in Table 4. MSR is described
in previous sections, and the other four are standards used in SIGHAN?s First In-
ternational Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff (or Bakeoff for brevity) (Sproat and
Emerson 2003). In the Bakeoff corpora, OOV is defined as the set of words in the test
corpus not occurring in the training corpus.
In experiments, we always consider the following adaptation paradigm. Suppose
we have a general predefined standard according to which we create a large amount
of training data. We then develop a generic word segmenter. Whenever we deploy the
segmenter for any application, we customize the output of the segmenter according
to an application-specific standard that can be partially acquired from a given small
amount of application data (called adaptation data).
The MSR standard described in Section 3.2 is used as the general standard in our
experiments, on which the generic segmenter has been developed. The four Bakeoff
standards are used as specific standards into which we wish to adapt the general
standard. We notice in Table 4 that the adaptation data sets (i.e., training corpora for
the four Bakeoff standards) are much smaller than the MSR training set. Thus, the
experimental setting is a good simulation of the adaptation paradigm described above.
In the rest of the article, we shall by default report results on the MSR data set unless
otherwise stated.
3.5 Evaluation Methodology
As described earlier, we argue that Chinese words (or segmentation units) cannot be
defined independently of the applications, and hence a more flexible system (i.e., an
Table 4
Standards and corpora.
Corpora (standards) Abbrev. # Training word # Test word OOV
MSR standard MSR 20M 226K .002
Beijing University PK 1.1M 17K .069
U. Penn Chinese Treebank CTB 250K 40K .181
Hong Kong City U. HK 240K 35K .071
Academia Sinica AS 5.8M 12K .021
542
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
adaptive segmenter such as MSRSeg) should be adopted. However, we are faced with
the challenge of performing an objective and rigorous evaluation of such a system.
In general, the evaluation of NLP systems is concerned with both the criteria and
the standard data sets. In this article, we argue that MSRSeg is a better system in two
regards. First, the generic segmenter provides not only word segmentation but also
word-internal structures (e.g., the tree structures of MDWs, FTs, and NEs, as will be
described in Section 6) that cover all possible segmentations. Ideally, such a segmenter
provides a superset of segmentation units where each different application can find the
subset it needs. Second, the output adaptors of MSRSeg can automatically pick different
subsets (i.e., segmentation units) from the superset according to different applications.
Therefore, there are two criteria for evaluating an adaptive segmenter: how complete
the superset is and how effective the adaptation is. The real evaluation will require
some application data sets (i.e., segmented texts used by different applications). How-
ever, such application data are not available yet, and no other system has undergone
such evaluation, so there is no way to compare our system against others in this
fashion. The evaluation methodology we adopted in this article is a simulation. On
the one hand, we developed a generic standard and a corresponding gold test set that
simulates the generic superset that attempts to cover as many applications as possible.
We then evaluate on the data set the completeness of the generic segmenter. On the
other hand, we will show that we can effectively adapt the generic segmenter to the
four different bakeoff data sets, each of which simulates an application subset.
The evaluation measures we use in this study are summarized in Table 5. The
performance of MSRSeg is measured through multiple precision?recall (P/R) pairs,
and F-measures (defined as 2PR/(P+R)), each for one word type. Riv is the recall of
in-vocabulary words. Roov is the recall of OOV words. They are used to measure the
segmenter?s performance in resolving ambiguities in word segmentation and detect-
ing unknown words, respectively. We also test the statistical significance of results,
using the criterion proposed by Sproat and Emerson (2003).
In addition to Riv, the number of OAS (overlap ambiguity string) and CAS (com-
bination ambiguity string) errors are used to measure the segmenter?s performance of
resolving ambiguities in word segmentation in more detail. Liang (1987) defines OAS
and CAS as follows.
Definition 1
A character string ABC is called an overlap ambiguity string (OAS) if it can be seg-
mented into two words either as AB/C or A/BC (not both), depending on context.
Table 5
Evaluation measures for Chinese word segmenter.
Measures Remarks
P/R/F Multiple pairs, each for one type of words (i.e., LW, MDW, FT, NE);
P/R/F of NER are used for cross-system comparison
Roov Test the performance of detecting unknown words
Riv Test the performance of resolving ambiguities in word segmentation
# OAS errors Similar to cross-bracketing, used for cross-system comparison
# CAS errors Test on a set of 70 high-frequency CASs in our study
Significant test See Sproat and Emerson (2003).
543
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Definition 2
A character string AB is called a combination ambiguity string (CAS) if A, B, and AB
are words.
Liang (1987) reports that the relative frequency of OASs is 1.2 per 100 characters
in Chinese text, and the relative frequency of CASs is 12 times lower than that of OAS.
However, according to the above definition, the relative frequency of CASs can be much
higher because most single characters in Chinese can be words by themselves, and as
a result, almost all two-character words can be CASs. However, this is not desirable.
Consider the word ?? ?altitude?. Though both ? ?high? and ? ?degree? are words
by themselves, the segmentation ?/? almost never occurs in reality. To remedy this
problem, Sun and Tsou (2001) revise the definition as follows:
Definition 3
A character string AB is called a combination ambiguity string (CAS) if A, B, and
AB are words, and there is at least one context under which the segmentation A/B is
plausible both semantically and syntactically.
Though the revision clarifies the definition in principle, it requires a judgment of the
syntactic and semantic sense of the segmentation?a task where an agreement cannot
be reached easily among different human annotators. Therefore, we only use the
CAS measure in a pilot study. As will be described in Section 7, the number of CAS
errors is estimated by counting the wrong segmentations of the predefined 70 high-
frequency CASs.
While all the measures in Table 5 can be used in evaluating MSRSeg, most of them
cannot be used in cross-system comparisons. For example, since the MSR gold test
set is based on a reference lexicon, some of the measures are meaningless when we
compare our system to other segmenters that use different lexicons. So in comparing
different systems, we consider only the P/R/F of NER and the number of OAS errors
(i.e., crossing brackets), because these measures are lexicon-independent and there is
always a single unambiguous answer.
4. Theoretical Background
This section provides some theoretical background on the basis of the development
of MSRSeg. We first present in Section 4.1 a Chinese word segmentation frame-
work that uses source?channel models of Chinese sentence generation. Then, in Sec-
tion 4.2, we generalize source?channel models as linear mixture models in which a wide
variety of linguistic knowledge and statistical models can be incorporated in a unified
way. These models are constructed via two basic modeling tools: (1) n-gram language
models (LMs; Chen and Goodman 1999), and (2) finite state automata (FSA; Roche and
Schabes 1997). More specifically, the LMs we used are bigram and trigram backoff mod-
els, where the parameters are estimated using maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE)
with a particular smoothing method, called modified absolute discounting, described
in Gao, Goodman, and Miao (2001). LMs are used to capture statistical information
such as the likelihood of word or character sequence. FSAs are used to represent (1) the
lexicon, (2) the rules for detecting FTs, and (3) the rules for generating NE candidates.
544
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
4.1 Source?Channel Models
The task of MSRSeg is to detect not only word boundaries but also word types so that
words of different types can be processed as shown in Figure 1. Therefore, following the
Chinese word taxonomy in Table 1, we define a Chinese word class as a group of words
that are supposed to be generated according to the same distribution (or processed in
the same manner) as follows:
1. Each LW is defined as a class;
2. Each MDW is defined as a class;
3. Each type of FT (e.g., time expressions) is defined as a class;
4. Each type of NE (e.g., person names) is defined as a class; and
5. All NWs belong to a class.
Notice that both the LW and MDW classes are open sets and that we need to assign a
floor-value to those words that are not stored in the lexicons. In particular, we define six
unknown word classes as follows. One class is used to represent all unknown LWs and
all unknown MDWs whose type cannot be detected. The other five classes are used to
represent unknown MDWs, one for each of the five types listed in Table 1, i.e., MP/MS,
MR, MS, MM, and MHP. The probabilities of these unknown word classes are estimated
using the Good-Turing method.
Let w = w1w2 . . .wn be a word class sequence, and s be a Chinese sentence that is a
character sequence. A segmenter?s job is to choose the most likely word class sequence
w? among all possible candidates into which s could have been segmented:
w? = arg max
w?GEN(s)
P(w |s) = arg max
w?GEN(s)
P(w)P(s |w) (1)
where GEN(s) denotes the candidate set given s.
Equation (1) is the basic form of source?channel models for Chinese word segmen-
tation. The models assume that a Chinese sentence s is generated as follows: First, a
person chooses a sequence of concepts (i.e., word classes w) to be output, according
to the probability distribution P(w); then the person attempts to express each con-
cept by choosing a sequence of characters, according to the probability distribution
P(s|w).
The source?channel models also can be interpreted in another way: P(w) is a
stochastic model estimating the probability of word class sequence. It indicates, given
a context, how likely a word class occurs. For example, person names are more
likely to occur before a title such as Y? ?professor?. Consequently, we also refer
to P(w) as a context model. P(s|w) is a generative model estimating how likely a
character string is generated given a word class. For example, the character string
N? is more likely to be a person name than ?? ?Li Junsheng? because N is a
common family name in China while ? is not. So P(s|w) is also referred to as class
model. In our system, we use only one context model (i.e., a trigram language model)
and a set of class models of different types, each of which is for one class of words, as
shown in Table 6.
545
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 6
Context model, word classes, class models, and feature functions.
Word class Model Feature functions, f (s, w)
Context model Word class trigram, P(w) log(P(w))
LW Lexicon TRIE Number of LW in w.
MDW Morph-lexicon TRIE Number of MDW in w.
NE Character/word bigram, each for ? s??A log(P(s? |NE)), where A is the set of
one type, P(s?|NE), where s? is a substrings that are NE of a particular type
substring of s, and forms an NE. in w.
FT FSA, each for one type Number of FT (of a particular type) in w.
NW SVM classifier Score of SVM classifier.
It should be noted that different class models are constructed in different ways
(e.g., NE models are n-gram models trained on corpora, whereas FT models use de-
rivation rules and have binary values). The dynamic value ranges of different class
model probabilities can be so different (some are not probabilities but scores) that it is
inappropriate to combine all models through simple multiplication as in Equation
(1). One way to balance these score quantities is to introduce for each class model
(i.e., channel model) a model weight ? to adjust the class model score P(s|w) to
P(s|w)?. In our experiments, these weights are optimized so as to minimize the
number of word segmentation errors on training data under the framework of lin-
ear models, as described in Section 4.2. It is worth noticing that the source?channel
models are the rationale behind our system, e.g., the decoding process described in
Section 5.6 follows the framework. Linear models are just another representation based
on the optimization algorithm of class model weights.
4.2 Linear Models
The framework of linear models is derived from linear discriminant functions widely
used for pattern classification (Duda, Hart, and Stork 2001) and has been recently
introduced into NLP tasks by Collins and Duffy (2001). It is also related to (log-)linear
models described in Berger, Della Pietra, and Della Pietra (1996), Xue (2003); Och (2003),
and Peng, Feng, and McCallum (2004).
We use the following notation in the rest of the article.
 Training data are a set of example input/output pairs. In Chinese word
segmentation, we have training samples {si, wRi }, for i = 1. . .M, where
each si is an input Chinese character sequence and each wRi is the reference
segmentation (i.e., word class sequence) of si.
 We assume a set of D + 1 features fd(s, w), for d = 0. . .D. The features are
arbitrary functions that map (s, w) to real values. Using vector notation,
we have f(s, w) ? D+1, where f(s, w) = {f0(s, w), f1(s, w), . . . , fD(s, w)}. As
shown in Table 6, f0(w) is called the base feature and is defined as the
logarithm probability of the context model (i.e., word class trigram model).
fd(s, w), for d = 1. . .D, are defined for D word classes, respectively (i.e.,
546
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
they are basically derived from class models). Their values are either the
summation of the logarithm of the probabilities of the corresponding
probabilistic models, or assigned heuristically. Here, for those features that
are only defined on w, we will omit s and denote them as f (w).
 Finally, the parameters of the model are a vector of D + 1 parameters, each
for one feature function, ? = (?0, ?1, . . ., ?D). ?1, . . ., ?D are in fact class
model weights, described in Section 4.1. The likelihood score of a word
class sequence w can be written as
Score(w, s,?) = ?f(w, s) =
D
?
d=0
?dfd(w, s)? (2)
We see that Equation (2) is yet another representation of the source?channel models
described in Section 4.1 by introducing class weights (i.e., adjust P(s|w) to P(s|w)?) and
taking the logarithm of all probabilities. The decision rule of Equation (1) can then be
rewritten as
w? = arg max
w?GEN(s)
Score(w, s,?)? (3)
In what follows, we will describe the way of estimating ? under the framework of
gradient descent: an iterative procedure of adjusting the parameters of ? in the direction
that minimizes the segmentation errors with respect to a loss function. We will present
in turn the loss function and the optimization algorithm.
4.2.1 Loss Function. Assume that we can measure the number of segmentation errors in
w by comparing it with a reference segmentation wR using an error function Er(wR, w)
(i.e., editing distance, in our case). The training criterion that directly minimizes the
segmentation errors over the training data is
?? = arg min
?
?
i=1...M
Er(wRi , w(si,?)), (4)
where w(si, ?) is the segmentation determined by Equation (3), where it is denoted
as w?. Equation (4) is referred to as the minimum sample risk (MSR; Gao et al 2005)
criterion hereafter. Notice that without knowing the ?true? distribution of the data, the
best ? can be chosen approximately based on training samples. This is known as the
principle of empirical risk minimization (ERM; Vapnik 1998): If the segmenter were
trained using exactly the MSR criterion, it would converge to a Bayes risk performance
(minimal error rate) as the training size goes to infinity.
However, Er(.) is a piecewise constant function of the model parameter ?, and
thus a poor candidate for optimization by any simple gradient-type numerical search.
For example, the gradient cannot be computed explicitly because Er(.) is not differ-
entiable with respect to ?, and there are many local minima on the error surface.
Therefore, we use an alternative loss function, minimum squared error (MSE) in
equation (5), where Score(.) is defined in Equation (2), where s has been suppressed
547
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
for simplicity. MSELoss(?) is simply the squared difference between the score of the
correct segmentation and the score of the incorrect one, summing over all training
samples.
MSELoss(?) =
?
i=1...M
(Score(wRi ,?) ? Score(wi,?))2? (5)
It is useful to note that the MSE solution, under certain conditions, leads to approx-
imations to maximum likelihood solution. The quality of the approximation depends
upon the form of the linear discriminant functions (e.g., Equation (2)). Due to its ap-
pealing theoretical properties, the MSE criterion has received considerable attention in
the literature, and there are many solution procedures available (Duda, Hart, and Stork
2001).
4.2.2 Optimization Algorithm. This section discusses the delta rule, a training algorithm
for an unthresholded perceptron, following the description in Mitchell (1997). The delta
rule in its component form is
?d = ?d ? ?G(?d), (6)
where ? is the step size, and G is the gradient of MSELoss.6 G can be estimated by
differentiating the loss function of equation (7) with respect to ?d as
G(?d) =
?MSELoss(?)
??d
=
?
i=1...M
(Score(wRi ,?) ? Score(wi,?))( fd(wRi ) ? fd(wi))? (7)
However, the objective function of Equation (5) in the context of our task (i.e., Chinese
word segmentation) has many local minima, and thus gradient descent cannot guaran-
tee finding the global minimum. We therefore use a stochastic approximation to gradient
descent. Whereas the gradient descent computes parameter updates after summing
over all training samples as shown in Equation (7), the stochastic approximation method
updates parameters incrementally, following the calculation of the error for each indi-
vidual training sample, as shown in Equation (8).
G(?d) = (Score(wRi ,?) ? Score(wi,?))( fd(wRi ) ? fd(wi)) (8)
The stochastic approximation method can be viewed as optimizing a distinct loss
function MSELossi(?) defined for each individual training sample i as follows
MSELossi(?) = (Score(wRi ,?) ? Score(wi,?))2? (9)
6 ? is usually taken as a time-decreasing function (e.g., Su and Lee 1994) to have a fast convergence speed
in the beginning and a small variance in final iterations. We have tested this approach in our study, and it
resulted in very limited improvement.
548
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
The optimization algorithm we used in our experiments is shown in Figure 4. It
takes T passes over the training set. All parameters are initially set to be 1. The context
model parameter ?0 does change during training. Class model parameters are updated
in a simple additive fashion: Parameters are altered according to the gradient with
respect to MSELossi(?).
In our implementation, we approximate wR as the w in GEN(s) with the fewest er-
rors, so Score(?, s, wR) ? Score(?, s, w) ? 0, where the equality holds only when wR = w.
That is, the model parameters are updated when the sentence is wrongly segmented.
The update rule increases the parameter values for word classes whose models were
?underestimated? (i.e., expected feature value f (s, w) is less than observed feature
value f (s, wR)), and decreases the parameter values whose models were ?overesti-
mated? (i.e., f (s, w) is larger than f (s, wR)). Empirically, the sequence of these up-
dates, when iterated over all training samples, provides a reasonable approximation
to descending the gradient with respect to the original loss function of Equation (5).
Although this method cannot guarantee a globally optimal solution, it is chosen for
our modeling because of its efficiency and because it achieved the best results in our
experiments.
The algorithm is similar to the perceptron algorithm described in Collins (2002). The
key difference is that, instead of using the delta rule of Equation (8) (as shown in line 5
of Figure 4), Collins (2002) updates parameters using the rule: ?t+1d ? ?td + fd(wRi ) ?
fd(wi). Our pilot study shows that our algorithm achieves slightly better results.
4.3 Discussions on Robustness
The training methods described in Section 4.2 aim at minimizing errors in a training
set. But test sets can be different. The robustness issue concerns how well the min-
imal error rate in the training set preserves in the test set. According to Dudewicz
and Mishra (1988), the MSE function in general is not very robust because it is not
bounded and can be contaminated from those training samples far away from the
decision boundary. One of many possible solutions for improving the robustness is to
introduce a margin in the training procedure of Figure 4. The basic idea is to enlarge
the score difference (or score margin) between a correct segmentation (i.e., wR) and
its competing incorrect segmentations (i.e., {w; w ? GEN(s), w = wR}). According to
Equation (8), the perceptron training algorithm of Figure 4 does not adjust parameters
if the sentence is segmented correctly. The robustness could be improved if we con-
tinued to enlarge the score margin between the correct segmentation and the top com-
peting candidate even if the input sentence had been correctly segmented, until the
Figure 4
The perceptron training algorithm for Chinese word segmentation.
549
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
margin has exceeded a preset threshold. More specifically, we can modify Equation (8)
as follows
G(?d) = (Score(wRi ,?) ? Score(wi,?) ? ?)( fd(wRi ) ? fd(wi)), (10)
where ? is the desired margin that can either be an absolute value or a quantity propor-
tional to the score of the correct segmentation (Su and Lee 1994). The modified training
algorithm is similar to the perceptron algorithm with margins proposed by Krauth and
Me`zard (1987). We leave the evaluation of the algorithm to future work.
Readers can also refer to Duda, Hart, and Stork (2001) for a detailed description of
margin-based learning algorithms.
5. System Description
5.1 Architecture Overview
MSRSeg consists of two components: a generic segmenter and a set of output adaptors.
We describe the first component in this section and leave the second to Section 6.
The generic segmenter has been developed on the basis of the mathematical models
described in Section 4. It consists of several components, as shown in Figure 5.
1. Sentence Segmenter: To detect sentence boundaries using punctuation
clues such as . , ? and !.
2. Word Candidate Generator: Given an input string s, to generate all word
candidates and store them in a word lattice. Each candidate is assigned to
its word class and the class model score, e.g., log P(s?|w), where s? is any
substring of s.
Figure 5
Overall architecture of MSRSeg.
550
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
3. Decoder: To select the best (or the N best) word segmentation (i.e., word
class sequence w*) from the lattice according to Equations (4) and (5),
using the Viterbi (or A*) search algorithm.
4. Wrapper: To output segmentation results using some predefined canonical
forms, e.g., MDW and FT are of their normalized form, as described in
Section 3.1.
Here, we will describe candidate generators for different word classes. They are (1)
the lexicon (and morph-lexicon) TRIEs to generate LW (or MDW) candidates, (2) the NE
class models to generate NE candidates, (3) the finite-state automaton (FSA) to generate
FT candidates, and (4) the classifier to generate NW candidates.
5.2 Lexicon Representation and Morphological Analysis
Lexicon words are represented as a set of TRIEs (Frakes and Baeza-Yates 1992), which is
a particular implementation of the FSA described in Section 4. Given a character string,
all prefix strings that form lexical words can be retrieved by browsing the TRIE whose
root represents its first character.
Though there are well-known techniques for English morphological analysis (e.g.,
finite-state morphology), they are difficult to extend to Chinese for two reasons. First,
Chinese morphological rules are not as general as their English counterparts. For ex-
ample, in most cases English plural nouns can be generated using the rule ?noun +
s ? plural noun?. But only a small subset of Chinese nouns can be pluralized (e.g.,
?? ?friends?) using its Chinese counterpart ?noun + ? ? plural noun? whereas
others (e.g., W? ?pumpkins?) cannot.7 Secondly, the operations required by Chinese
morphological analysis, such as copying in reduplication, merging, and splitting, cannot
be implemented using current finite-state networks.8
Our solution is extended lexicalization. We simply collect all MDWs of the five types
described in Section 3.1 and incorporate them into the TRIE lexicon, called morph-lexicon.
The TRIEs are essentially the same as those used for lexical words, except that not only
the MDW?s identity but also its morphological pattern and stem(s) are stored.
The procedure of lexicalization involves three steps: (1) Candidate generation.
Candidate generation is done by applying a set of morphological rules to both the
word lexicon and a large corpus. For example, the rule ?noun + ? ? plural noun?
would generate candidates like ??. (2) Statistical filtering. For each candidate, we
obtain a set of statistical features such as frequency, mutual information, and left/right
context dependency from a large corpus. We then use an information-gain-like metric
described in Chien (1997) and Gao et al (2002) to estimate how likely a candidate is
to form a morphologically derived word and remove the ?bad? candidates. The basic
idea behind the metric is that a Chinese word should appear as a stable sequence in
the corpus. That is, the components within the word are strongly correlated, while
the components at both ends should have low correlations with words outside the
sequence. (3) Linguistic selection. Finally, we manually check the remaining candidates
7 We do not consider those special cases, such as in a children?s fairy story, where the magic pumpkins
can talk.
8 There are some types of copying operations that can be implemented by FSMs (e.g., Sproat 1992), but
implementation is not trivial. Because the number of MDWs is manageable, storing them as a list is not
much more expensive than storing them as a finite-state network, in terms of space and access speed.
Our implementation can be viewed as a pragmatic solution, easy to implement and maintain.
551
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
and construct the morph-lexicon, where each entry is tagged with its morphological
pattern and stem(s). The resulting morph-lexicon contains 50,963 MDWs.
5.3 Named Entities
We consider four types of named entities: person names (PNs), location names (LNs),
organization names (ONs), and transliterations of foreign names (FNs). Because any
character string can in principle be a named entity of one or more types, in order to
limit the number of candidates for a more effective search, we generate named entity
candidates given an input string in two steps: First, for each type, we use a set of
constraints (which are compiled by linguists and are represented as FSAs) to generate
only those ?most likely? candidates. Second, each of the generated candidates is as-
signed a class model probability. Class models are defined as generative models that are
estimated on their corresponding named entity lists using MLE, together with a backoff
smoothing schema, as described in Section 4.1.1. We will describe briefly the con-
straints and the class models here. The Chinese person-name model is a modified
version of that described in Sproat et al (1996). Other NE models are novel, though
they share some similarities with the Chinese person-name model.
5.3.1 Chinese Person Names. There are two main constraints. (1) PN patterns: We
assume that a Chinese PN consists of a family name F and a given name G, and is of
the pattern F+G. Both F and G are one or two characters long. (2) Family name list: We
only consider PN candidates that begin with an F stored in the family name list (which
contains 373 entries in our system).
Given a PN candidate, which is a character string s, the class model probabil-
ity P(s|PN) is computed by a character bigram model as follows: (1) generate the
family name substring sF, with the probability P(sF|F); (2) generate the given name
sub-string sG, with the probability P(sG|G)(or P(sG1|G1)); and (3) generate the second
given name, with the probability P(sG2|sG1, G2). For example, the generative probabil-
ity of the string N? given that it is a PN would be estimated as P(N?|PN) =
P(N|F)P(?|G1)P(|?, G2).
5.3.2 Location Names. Unlike PNs, there are no patterns for LNs. We assume that an
LN candidate is generated given s (which is less than 10 characters long), if one of the
following conditions is satisfied: (1) s is an entry in the LN list (which contains 30,000
LNs); (2) s ends in a keyword in a 120-entry LN keyword list (e.g., ?city?).9
The probability P(s|LN) is computed by a character bigram model. Consider a
strings? ?Shamir river?. It is an LN candidate because it ends in an LN keyword
? ?river?. The generative probability of the string, given that it is an LN, would be
estimated as P(s?|LN) = P(|<LN>) P(s|) P(|s) P(?|) P(</LN>|?),
where <LN> and </LN> are symbols denoting the beginning and the end of an LN,
respectively.
5.3.3 Organization Names. ONs are more difficult to identify than PNs and LNs because
ONs are usually nested named entities. For example, the ON -??E*zl? ?Air
China Corporation? contains an LN-? ?China?.
9 For clarity, the constraint is a simplified version of that used in MSRSeg.
552
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Like the identification of LNs, an ON candidate is only generated given a
character string s (less than 15 characters long), if it ends in a keyword in a
1,355-entry ON keyword list (e.g., l? ?corporation?). To estimate the generative
probability of a nested ON, we introduce word class segmentations of s, w, as
hidden variables. In principle, the ON class model recovers P(s|ON) over all pos-
sible C: P(s |ON) = ?wP(s,w |ON) = ?wP(w |ON)P(s |w,ON). Since P(s |w,ON)=
P(s |w), we have P(s |ON) = ?wP(w |ON)P(s |w). We then assume that the sum is
approximated by a single pair of terms P(w?|ON)P(s |w?), where w? is the most
probable word class segmentation discovered by Equation (5). That is, we also use
our system to find w*, but the source?channel models are estimated on the ON
list.
Consider the earlier example. Assuming that w* = LN/?E/*z/l?, where
-? is tagged as an LN, the probability P(s |ON) would be estimated using a word
class bigram model as: P(-??E*zl? |ON) ? P(LN/?E/*z/l? |ON)
P(-? |LN) = P(LN |<ON>) P(?E |LN) P(*z |?E) P(l? |*z) P(</ON> |l?)
P(-? |LN), where P(-? |LN) is the class model probability of -? given that it is
an LN, and <ON> and </ON> are symbols denoting the beginning and the end of an
ON, respectively.
5.3.4 Transliterations of Foreign Names. As described in Sproat et al (1996), FNs are
usually transliterated using Chinese character strings whose sequential pronunciation
mimics the source language pronunciation of the name. Since FNs can be of any length
and their original pronunciation is effectively unlimited, the recognition of such names
can be tricky. Fortunately, there are only a few hundred Chinese characters that are
particularly common in transliterations.
Therefore, an FN candidate would be generated given s if it contains only char-
acters stored in a transliterated name character list (which contains 618 Chinese
characters). The probability P(s|FN) is estimated using a character bigram model.
Notice that in our system an FN can be a PN, an LN, or an ON, depending on
the context. Then, given an FN candidate, three named entity candidates, each for
one category, are generated in the lattice, with the class probabilities P(s|PN) =
P(s|LN) = P(s|ON) = P(s|FN). In other words, we postpone the determination of its
type to the decoding phase where the context model is used.
5.3.5 Abbreviations. For the sake of completeness, we describe below the basic ideas
for tackling NE abbreviations within our framework. This is ongoing research, and
we do not have conclusive results yet. Readers can refer to Zhu et al (2003) and
Sun, Zhou, and Gao (2003) for more details, where marginal improvements have been
reported.
For different types of NEs, different strategies can be adopted. We find that most
abbreviations of Chinese PNs and LNs are single-character NEs. The PN and LN models
described previously cannot handle them very well because (1) single-character NEs
are generated in a different way from that of multicharacter NEs, and (2) the context
of single-character NEs is different from multicharacter ones. For example, single-
character NEs usually appear adjacent to one another, such as - and ? in -?8
?China-Russia trade?. But this is not the case for multicharacter NEs.
We thus define single-character PNs and LNs as two separate word classes, de-
noted by SCPN and SCLN, respectively. We assume that a character is a candidate of
SCPN (or SCLN) only when it is included in a predefined SCPN (or SCLN) list, which
553
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
contains 151 (or 177) characters. The class model probabilities are assigned by unigram
models as
P(s | SCPN) = C(s)?
i=1...N
C(si)
, P(s | SCLN) = C(s)?
i=1...N
C(si)
, (11)
where C(s) is the count of the SCPN (or SCLN) s in an annotated training set and N is the
size of the SCPN (or SCLN) list. In the context model, we also differentiate between PN
(or LN) and SCPN (or SCLN). Therefore, SCPN and SCLN should be labeled explicitly
in the training data.
It is much more difficult to detect abbreviations of ONs (denoted by ONA) because
ONAs are usually multiple-character strings and can be generated from their original
ON arbitrarily. For example, the abbreviation of N'f ?Tsinghua University? is
N while the abbreviation of?'f ?Peking University? is'. We assume that an
ONA candidate is only generated given a character string s (fewer than 6 characters
long), if both of the following conditions are satisfied: (1) An ON has been detected
in the same document, and (2) s can be derived from the ON using a generative
pattern defined in Table 7. Since there is no training data for the ONA class model,
we construct a score function to assign each ONA candidate a class model score.
Consider a string '. The generative probability of the string, given it is an ONA,
would be approximated as P('|ONA) ? P(?'f|ON) P('|?'f, ON),
where P('|?'f, ON) is defined as a constant (0.8 in our experiments) if '
can be derived from ?'f using any generative pattern of Figure 7; 0, otherwise.
If more than one ON is detected previously in the same document and can be used
to derive the ONA candidate (e.g., ?'f ?North University?), only the closest
ON is taken into account. We also notice that ONAs and ONs occur in similar contexts.
So we do not differentiate them in the context model.
5.4 Factoids
The types of factoids handled in MSRSeg are shown in Table 1 of Section 3.1. For
each type of factoid, we generate a grammar of regular expressions. The ten regular
expressions are then compiled into a single FSA. Given an input string s, we scan it
from left to right, and output a FT candidate when a substring matches one of the ten
Table 7
Generative patterns of ONA, where sij denotes the j-th character of the i-th word of ON (Sun,
Zhou and Gao 2003).
Condition (ON) Generated patterns (ONA) Examples
ON = w1 . . .wN (N ? 2) ONA = s11s21, or ?/?5/'f??
ONA = s11s21s31, or . . . ?/?5/'f??'
ONA = s11s21. . . sN1
ON = w1w2, and w1 is not an LN ONA = w1 N/'f? N
ON = w1w2w3, and w1 is not an LN ONA = w1, or ??/5/l????
ONA = w1w2 ??/5/l????/5
ON = w1w2w3, and w1 is an LN ONA = w2 ?/??/???
554
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
regular expressions. We also remove those FT candidates that are substrings of any
other candidates of the same type. Consider the example in Figure 1; only the string
A??	A is accepted as a FT candidate (a time expression), not the substrings (e.g.,
A?? orA??	A).
The use of FSA is motivated by the fact that the detection of most FTs is based
exclusively on their internal properties and without relying on context. This can be
in principle justified by experiments. As shown in Table 8, the overall performance
of FT detection using only FSA is comparable with that of using MSRSeg where the
contextual information of the FT is considered (i.e., in MSRSeg, FSA are used as feature
functions, and the FT are detected simultaneously with other words). If we read the
results carefully, we can see that the use of context information (in MSRSeg) achieves a
higher precision but a lower recall?a small but significant difference.
5.5 New Words
New words in this section refer to OOV words that are neither recognized as named
entities or factoids nor derived by morphological rules. These words are mostly domain-
specific and/or time-sensitive, such as 	 ?Three Links?, ^x ?SARS?. The identifi-
cation of such new words has not been studied extensively before. It is an important
issue that has substantial impact on the performance of word segmentation. For ex-
ample, approximately 30% of OOV words in the SIGHAN?s PK corpus in Table 4 are
new words of this type. There has been previous work on detecting Chinese new words
from a large corpus in an off-line manner and updating the dictionary before word
segmentation. However, our approach is able to detect new words on-line, i.e., to spot
new words in a sentence on the fly during the process of word segmentation, where
widely used statistical features such as mutual information or term frequency are not
available.
For brevity, we will focus on the identification of two-character new words, denoted
as NW 11. Other types of new words such as NW 21 (a two-character word followed
with a character) and NW 12 can be detected similarly (e.g., by viewing the two-
character word as an inseparable unit, like a character). These three types amount to
85% of all NWs in the PK corpus. Here, we shall describe the class model and context
model for NWI, and the creation of training data by sampling.
5.5.1 Class Model. We use a classifier (SVMlight [Joachims 2002] in our experiments)
to estimate the likelihood of two adjacent characters forming a new word. Of the
great number of features with which we experimented, four linguistically motivated
features are chosen due to their effectiveness and availability for on-line detection.
They are independent word probability (IWP), anti-word pair (AWP), word formation analogy
Table 8
FT detection results on the MSR gold test set. The ?All? column shows the results of detecting all
10 types of factoids, as described in Table 1, which amount to 6630 factoids, as shown in Table 3.
All (P/R) dat (P/R) tim (P/R) mea (P/R) mon (P/R)
FSA 0.906/0.905 0.967/0.870 0.967/0.967 0.911/0.919 0.991/0.975
MSRSeg 0.908/0.896 0.980/0.851 0.973/0.967 0.913/0.898 0.994/0.975
555
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
(WFA), and morphological productivity (MP). We now describe each feature in turn.
In Section 5.5.2, we shall describe the way the training data (new word list) for the
classifier is created by sampling.
IWP (independent word probability) is a real-valued feature. Most Chinese char-
acters can be used either as independent words or component parts of multicharacter
words, or both. The IWP of a single character is the likelihood of this character to appear
as an independent word in texts (Wu and Jiang 2000):
IWP(x) =
C(x, W)
C(x)
, (12)
where C(x, W) is the number of occurrences of the character x as an independent word
in training data, and C(x) is the total number of occurrences of x in training data. We
assume that the IWP of a character string is the product of the IWPs of the component
characters. Intuitively, the lower the IWP value, the more likely the character string
forms a new word. In our implementation, the training data is word-segmented.
AWP (anti-word pair) is a binary feature derived from IWP. For example, the value
of AWP of an NW 11 candidate ab is defined as: AWP(ab)=1 if IWP(a)>? or IWP(b) >?;
0, otherwise. ? ? [0, 1] is a preset threshold. Intuitively, if one of the component char-
acters is very likely to be an independent word, it is unlikely to be able to form a word
with any other characters. While IWP considers all component characters in a new word
candidate, AWP only considers the one with the maximal IWP value.
WFA (word formation analogy) is a binary feature. Given a character pair (x, y), a
character (or a multicharacter string) z is called the common stem of (x, y) if at least one
of the following two conditions hold: (1) character strings xz and yz are lexical words
(i.e., x and y as prefixes); and (2) character strings zx and zy are lexical words (i.e., x and
y as suffixes). We then collect a list of such character pairs, called affix pairs, of which
the number of common stems is larger than a preset threshold. The value of WFA for a
given NW 11 candidate ab is defined as: WFA(ab) = 1 if there exists an affix pair (a, x)
(or (b, x)) and the string xb (or ax) is a lexical word; 0, otherwise. For example, given an
NW 11 candidate ? (xia4-gang3, ?be laid off?), we have WFA(?) = 1 because (
,
) is an affix pair (they have 32 common stems such as ?, 8, ?, f, b, H, ?)
and
? (shang4-gang3, ?take over a shift?) is a lexical word.
MP (morphological productivity) is a real-valued feature. It is a measure of the
productivity of a particular construction, as defined here (Baayen 1989):
MP(x) =
n1(x)
N(x)
. (13)
MP is strongly related to the Good-Turing estimate. Here, N is the number of tokens of
a particular construction found in a corpus, e.g., the number of tokens of all nouns
ending in -?, and n1 is the number of types of that construction, e.g., the number
of unique nouns ending in -?. Intuitively, a higher value of MP indicates a higher
probability that (one of) the component parts of a multicharacter string appears to be a
word. For example, Sproat and Shih (2002) show that the MP values of Chinese noun
affix -? and verb affix -? are 0.20 and 0.04, respectively, indicating that -? is a much
more productive affix, while the MP value of single-character nouns which belong to
556
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
a closed and nonproductive class is close to 0. These results are in agreement with our
intuition. Similarly, we find some very productive characters with high MP values. For
example, in our training set, there are 236 words that contain the character =, among
which 13 occur only once.
5.5.2 Context Model. The motivations for using a context model for NWI are twofold.
The first is to capture useful contextual information. For example, new words are more
likely to be nouns than pronouns, and POS tagging is context-sensitive. The second
is more important. As described in Section 4, with a context model, NWI can be per-
formed simultaneously with other word segmentation tasks (e.g., word breaking, NER,
and morphological analysis) in a unified manner.
However, it is difficult to develop a training corpus where new words are anno-
tated because ?we usually do not know what we don?t know.? Our solution is Monte
Carlo simulation. We sample a set of new words from our dictionary according to the
distribution?the probability that any lexical word w would be a new word P(NW|w).
We then generate a new-word-annotated corpus from a word-segmented text corpus.
Now we describe the way P(NW|w) is estimated. It is reasonable to assume that
new words are those words whose probability of appearing in a new document is lower
than general lexical words. Let Pi(k) be the probability of word wi that occurs k times
in a document. In our experiments, we assume that P(NW|wi) can be approximated by
the probability of wi occurring less than K times in a new document:
P(NW |wi) ?
K 1
?
k=0
Pi(k), (14)
where the constant K (7 in our experiments) is dependent on the size of the document:
The larger the document, the larger the value. Pi(k) can be estimated using several term
distribution models (Chapter 15.3 in Manning and Schu?tze [1999]). Following Gao and
Lee (2000), we use K-Mixture (Katz 1996) which estimates Pi(k) as
Pi(k) = (1 ? a)?k, 0 + a?+ 1 (
?
?+ 1 )
k, (15)
where ?k,0=1 if k=0; 0, otherwise. ? and ? are parameters that can be fit using the
observed mean ? and the observed inverse document frequency IDF as follows:
? =
cf
N , IDF = log
N
df
,
? = ?? 2IDF ? 1 = cf ? df
df
, and a = ?? , (16)
where cf is the total number of occurrence of word wi in training data, df is the
number of documents in training data in which wi occurs, and N is the total number
of documents. In our implementation, the training data contain approximately 40,000
documents that have been balanced among domain, style, and time.
557
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 9
NW 11 identification results on PK test set.
P R F
All features 0.565 0.788 0.658
w/o IWP 0.395 0.835 0.536
w/o AWP 0.508 0.723 0.596
w/o MP 0.556 0.771 0.646
w/o WFA 0.561 0.779 0.652
Table 10
NW 21 identification results on PK test set.
P R F
All features 0.420 0.811 0.553
w/o IWP 0.104 0.973 0.188
w/o AWP 0.338 0.730 0.462
w/o MP 0.398 0.716 0.512
w/o WFA 0.401 0.797 0.534
5.5.3 Evaluation Results. The NWI component has been constructed as an SVM clas-
sifier. This section discusses two factors that we believe have the most impact on the
performance of NWI. First, we investigate the relative contribution of the four linguisti-
cally motivated features in NWI. Second, we compare methods where we use the NWI
component (i.e., an SVM classifier) as a post-processor versus as a feature function in
the linear models of Equation (4).
Table 11
NWI results on PK and CTB corpora, NWI as post-processor versus unified approach.
PK CTB
MSRSeg Roov F P R Roov F P R
w/o NWI .741 .956 .949 .963 .690 .892 .875 .910
w/ NWI (post-processor) .746 .953 .947 .960 .722 .899 .886 .912
w/ NWI (unified approach) .781 .955 .952 .959 .746 .904 .895 .914
Table 12
NWI results on HK and AS corpora, NWI as post-processor versus unified approach.
HK AS
MSRSeg Roov F P R Roov F P R
w/o NWI .694 .947 .937 .958 .436 .951 .958 .943
w/ NWI (post-processor) .728 .952 .944 .959 .549 .955 .950 .959
w/ NWI (unified approach) .746 .954 .948 .960 .584 .958 .955 .961
558
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
The NWI results on the PK test set are shown in Tables 9 and 10. We turned off
the features one at a time and recorded the scores of each ablated NWI component. It
turns out that in cases of both NW 11 and NW 12, IWP is obviously the most effective
feature.
Tables 11 and 12 show results of NWI on four Bakeoff test sets. We can see that
unified approaches (i.e., using the NWI component as a feature function) significantly
outperform consecutive approaches (i.e., using the NWI component as a post-processor)
consistently, in terms of both Roov and P/R/F of the overall word segmentation. This
demonstrates empirically the benefits of using the context model for NWI and the
unified approach to Chinese word segmentation, as described in 5.5.2.
5.6 Decoder
The decoding process follows the source?channel framework. It consists of three steps:
Step 1: Throughout the process, we maintain an array of word class candidates, called
a lattice, which is initialized to be empty.
Step 2: Given a Chinese sentence, all possible words of different types are generated
simultaneously by the corresponding channel models described in Sections 5.2 to 5.5.
For example, as shown in Table 6, the lexicon TRIE generates LW candidates; the SVM
classifier generates NW candidates, and so on. All the generated candidates are added
to the lattice. Each element in the lattice is a 5-tuple (w, i, l, t, s), where w is the word
candidate, i is the starting position of w in the sentence, l is the length of w, t is the word
class tag, and s is the class model score of w assigned by its feature function in Table 6.
Some examples are shown in Figure 5.
Step 3: The Viterbi (or A*) algorithm is used to search for the best word class sequence,
among all candidate segmentations in the lattice, according to Equations (2) and (3).
For efficiency, we sometimes need to control the search space. Given an input sen-
tence s, all word candidates are ranked by their normalized class model score ?f (.).
Thus, the number of candidates (i.e., the size of the lattice) is controlled by two
parameters:
 Number threshold: The maximum number of candidates cannot be larger
than a given threshold;
 Score threshold: The difference between the class model score of the
top-ranked candidates and the bottom-ranked candidates cannot be larger
than a given threshold.
6. Standards Adaptation
This section describes the second component of MSRSeg: a set of adaptors for adjusting
the output of the generic segmenter to different application-specific standards.
We consider the following standards adaptation paradigm. Suppose we have a
general standard predefined by ourselves. We have also created a large amount of
training data that are segmented according to this general standard. We then de-
velop a generic word segmenter, i.e., the system described in Section 5. Whenever we
559
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
deploy the segmenter for any application, we need to customize the output of the
segmenter according to an application-specific standard, which is not always explic-
itly defined. However, it is often implicitly defined in a given amount of applica-
tion data (called adaptation data) from which the specific standard can be partially
acquired.
6.1 Transformation-Based Learning Approach
In MSRSeg, standards adaptation is conducted by a postprocessor that performs an
ordered list of transformations on the output of the generic segmenter?removing
extraneous word boundaries and inserting new boundaries?to obtain a word segmen-
tation that meets a different standard.
The method we use is Transformation-Based Learning (TBL; Brill [1995]), which
requires an initial segmentation, a goal segmentation into which we wish to transform
the initial segmentation, and a space of allowable transformations (i.e., transforma-
tion templates). Under the above-mentioned adaptation paradigm, the initial segmen-
tation is the output of the generic segmenter. The goal segmentation is adaptation
data. The transformation templates can make reference to words (i.e., lexicalized tem-
plates) as well as some predefined types (i.e., class-type based templates), as described
below.
We notice that most variability in word segmentation across different standards
comes from those words that are not typically stored in the dictionary. Those words
are dynamic in nature and are usually formed through productive morphological
processes. In this study, we focus on three categories: MDW, NE, and FT.
For each word class that belongs to these categories, we define an internal structure
similar to Wu (2003). The structure is a tree with ?word class? as the root and ?component
types? as the other nodes. There are 30 component types. As shown in Figure 6, the
word class Affixation has three component types: Prefix, Stem, and Suffix. Similarly,
PersonName has two component types and Date has nine?3 as non-terminals and 6 as
terminals. These internal structures are assigned to words by the generic segmenter at
Figure 6
Word internal structure and class-type transformation templates.
560
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Table 13
Comparison scores for PK open and CTB open.
PK (# of Tr. Word = 1.1M) CTB (# of Tr. Word = 250K)
P R F Roov Riv P R F Roov Riv
1. MSRSeg w/o adaptation .824 .854 .839 .320 .861 .799 .818 .809 .624 .861
2. MSRSeg .952 .959 .955 .781 .972 .895 .914 .904 .746 .950
3. FMM w/ adaptation .913 .946 .929 .524 .977 .805 .874 .838 .521 .952
4. Rank 1 in Bakeoff .956 .963 .959 .799 .975 .907 .916 .912 .766 .949
5. Rank 2 in Bakeoff .943 .963 .953 .743 .980 .891 .911 .901 .736 .949
run time. The transformation templates for words of the above three categories are of
the form:
Condition: word class
Actions:
 Insert: Place a new boundary between two component types.
 Delete: Remove an existing boundary between two component types.
Since the application of the transformations derived from the above templates
is conditioned on word class and makes reference to component types, we call the
templates class-type transformation templates. Some examples are shown in Figure 6.
In addition, we also use lexicalized transformation templates as follows:
 Insert: Place a new boundary between two lemmas.
 Delete: Remove an existing boundary between two lemmas.
Here, lemmas refer to those basic lexical words that cannot be formed by any pro-
ductive morphological process. They are mostly single characters, two-character words,
and 4-character idioms.
6.2 Evaluation Results
The results of standards adaptation on four Bakeoff open test sets are shown in
Tables 13 and 14.10 A set of transformations for each standard is learned using TBL
from the corresponding Bakeoff training set. For each test set, we report results using
our system with and without standards adaptation (Rows 1 and 2). It turns out that
performance improves dramatically across the board in all four test sets.
For comparison, we also include in each table the results of using the FMM (for-
ward maximum matching) greedy segmenter as a generic segmenter (Row 3), and the
top 2 scores (sorted by F) that are reported in SIGHAN?s First International Chinese
Word Segmentation Bakeoff (Rows 4 and 5).11 We can see that with adaptation,
10 See Section 8.3 for the definitions of open test and close test.
11 The FMM algorithm processes through the sentence from left to right, taking the longest match with the
lexicon entry at each point. Similarly, the BMM (backward maximum matching) algorithm processes the
sentence from right to left.
561
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 14
Comparison scores for HK open and AS open.
HK (# of Tr. Word = 240K) AS (# of Tr. Word = 5.8M)
P R F Roov Riv P R F Roov Riv
1. MSRSeg w/o adaptation .819 .822 .820 .593 .840 .832 .838 .835 .405 .847
2. MSRSeg .948 .960 .954 .746 .977 .955 .961 .958 .584 .969
3. FMM w/ adaptation .818 .823 .821 .591 .841 .930 .947 .939 .160 .964
4. Rank 1 in Bakeoff .954 .958 .956 .788 .971 .894 .915 .904 .426 .926
5. Rank 2 in Bakeoff .863 .909 .886 .579 .935 .853 .892 .872 .236 .906
Table 15
Size of training data set and the adaptation results on AS open.
Size of training set(# words) R P F Roov Riv
5.8 M .961 .956 .958 .603 .968
2.9 M .959 .950 .954 .623 .966
1.1 M .954 .945 .949 .591 .962
.25 M .947 .935 .941 .595 .955
w/o adaptation .832 .838 .835 .405 .847
our generic segmenter can achieve state-of-the-art performance on different standards,
showing its superiority over other systems. For example, there is no single segmenter
in the Bakeoff that achieved top-2 ranks in all four test sets (Sproat and Emerson 2003).
We notice in Tables 13 and 14 that the quality of adaptation seems to depend
largely upon the size of adaptation data (indicated by # of Tr. Word in the tables): we
outperformed the best Bakeoff systems in the AS set because of the large size of the
adaptation data, while we are worse in the CTB set because of the small size of the
adaptation data. To verify our hypothesis, we evaluated the adaptation results using
subsets of the AS training set of different sizes and observed the same trend, as shown
in Table 15. However, even with a much smaller adaptation data set (e.g., 250K words),
we still outperform the best Bakeoff results.
7. Training Data Creation
This section describes (semi-)automatic methods of creating the training data based on
the estimated class model probability P(w) (i.e., trigram probability) in Equation (1).
Ideally, given an annotated corpus, where each sentence is segmented into words that
are tagged by their classes, the trigram word class probabilities can be calculated using
MLE. Unfortunately, building such annotated training corpora is very expensive.
7.1 Bootstrapping Approach and Beyond
Our basic solution is the bootstrapping approach described in Gao et al (2002). It
consists of three steps: (1) Initially, we use a greedy word segmenter to annotate the
corpus and obtain an initial context model based on the initial annotated corpus; (2)
we reannotate the corpus using the obtained models; and (3) we retrain the context
562
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Figure 7
(a) A Chinese OAS?	. (b) Two sentences in the training set, which contain the OAS and (c)
whose OASs have been replaced with the single tokens <OAS>. (Li et al 2003).
Table 16
Methods of resolving OAs in word segmentation, on the MSR test set.
Methods Accuracy
FMM 73.1%
BMM 71.5%
Rule + FMM 90.7%
Rule + BMM 91.3%
Ours 94.3%
model using the reannotated corpus.12 Steps 2 and 3 are iterated until the performance
of the system converges. This approach is also named Viterbi iterative training, an
approximation of EM training.
In the above approach, the quality of the context model depends to a large degree
upon the quality of the initial annotated corpus, which is, however, not satisfied due to
two problems. First, the greedy segmenter cannot deal with the segmentation ambigu-
ities, and even after many iterations, these ambiguities can only be partially resolved.
Second, many factoids and named entities cannot be identified using the greedy word
segmenter, which is based on the dictionary.
To solve the first problem, we use two methods to resolve segmentation ambigu-
ities in the initially segmented training data. We classify word segmentation ambi-
guities into two classes: overlap ambiguity (OA) and combination ambiguity (CA),
corresponding, respectively, to OAS and CAS, defined in Section 3.5.
To resolve OA, we identify all OASs in the training data and replace them with a
single token <OAS>. An example is shown in Figure 7. By doing so, we remove the
portion of training data that are likely to contain OA errors. We thus train a context
model using the reduced training set that does not contain any OASs. Intuitively, the
resulting context model would resolve the ambiguities. The method has been tested on
the MSR test set. Our main results are shown in Table 16. We can see that the FMM
(or backward maximum matching?BMM) method can only resolve 73.1% (or 71.1%) of
OAs, while using our method, the resulting context model can resolve 94.3% of the OAs.
Our method is different from previous ones that use lexicalized rules to resolve OAS.
For example, Sun and Zuo (1998) report that over 90% of OAs can be disambiguated
12 The greedy word segmenter is based on a FMM algorithm.
563
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Figure 8
Results of 70 high-frequency two-character CASs. ?Voting? indicates the accuracy of the baseline
method that always chooses the more frequent case of a given CAS. ?ME? indicates the accuracy
of the maximum-entropy classifier. ?VSM? indicates the accuracy of the method of using VSM
for disambiguation.
simply by rules. We reimplemented their method in our experiments and found that
90.7% (or 91.3%) of the OAs in the MSR test set can be resolved. The result is sim-
ilar to Sun and Zou?s but still not as good as ours. Therefore, we conclude that our
method significantly outperforms the rule-based approaches. Another advantage of
our method is that it is an unsupervised approach that requires no human annota-
tion. Readers can refer to Li et al (2003) for more details.
To resolve CA, we select 70 high-frequency two-character CASs (e.g., M?
?talent? and M/? ?just able?), as shown in Figure 8. For each CAS, we train a binary
classifier using sentences that contain the CAS and that have been segmented using
the greedy segmenter. Then, for each occurrence of a CAS in the initial segmented
training data, the corresponding classifier is used to determine whether the CAS
should be segmented. Our experiments show that 95.7% of the CAs can be resolved.
Detailed results are shown in Figure 8, where ?Voting? indicates the accuracy of
the baseline method that always chooses the more frequent case of a given CAS,
and ?VSM? indicates the accuracy of the VSM-inspired (vector space model) binary
classifier, which will be described here.13 Suppose we have a CAS, s, whose position
in a sentence is i. We use its six surrounding words w in positions i?3, i?2, i?1, i+1,
i+2, and i+3 as features. We then define a set of feature functions to simulate the TF-
IDF scores. Each feature function is a mapping f (s, w) ? . In particular, let TF1(s, w) (or
TF2(s, w)) be the term frequency of w in the case that s is a 1-word (or 2-word) string.
Similarly, let IDF1 (s, w) (or IDF2 (s, w)) be 1 if w only occurs in the case that s is a
1-word (or 2-word) string. If w occurs in both cases, let IDF1 (s, w) = IDF2 (s, w) =
0.25. We also assign weight ? for each position empirically (i.e., in our experiments, we
have ??3=?+3=1, ??2=?+2=4, and ??1=?+1=7). Then we can calculate the score of s to
be 1-word or 2-word by Equations (18) and (19), respectively. The CAS is a single word
if Score1(s) > Score2(s), and two words otherwise.
Score 1(s) =
?
i=?3...+3,i =0
TF 1(s, wi)IDF 1(s, wi)?i (17)
Score 2(s) =
?
i=?3...+3,i =0
TF 2(s, wi)IDF 2(s, wi)?i (18)
13 The VSM-inspired classifier for resolving CAs was mainly proposed and implemented by Wenfeng Yang
when he was visiting Microsoft Research Asia.
564
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Our experiments show that the VSM-inspired classifier outperforms other well-
known classifiers for this particular task. For example, a maximum entropy classifier
using the same features achieved an overall accuracy of 94.1%.
For the second problem of NE and FT detection, though, we can simply use the FSA-
based approach, as described in Section 5.4, to detect FTs in the initial segmented corpus;
our method of NER in the initial step (i.e., step 1) is a little more sophisticated. First, we
manually annotate named entities on a small subset (called the seed set) of the training
data. Then we obtain a context model on the seed set (called the seed model). We
thus improve the context model that is trained on the initial annotated training corpus
by interpolating it with the seed model. Finally, we use the improved context model
in steps 2 and 3 of the bootstrapping. We shall show in the next subsection that a
relatively small seed set (e.g., 150K words) is enough to get a reasonably good context
model for initialization.
7.2 Evaluation Results
To justify the methods just described, we built a large number of context models
using different initial corpora. For each of the initial corpora, a context model is
trained using the Viterbi iterative procedure until convergence, i.e., the improvement of
the word segmentation performance of the resulting system, is less than a preset
threshold. The results are shown in Table 17, where Row 1 (FMM) presents the seg-
mentation results of using the initial corpus segmented by a greedy word segmenter?
the basic solution described earlier; in Row 2, we resolve segmentation (overlap) am-
biguities on top of the corpus in Row 1; we then tag FTs in Rows 3 and 4. From
Rows 5 to 8, several NE annotated seed sets of different sizes are used, showing
the trade-off between performance and human cost. In Rows 1 to 8, we use the raw
training set containing approximately 50 million characters. For comparison, we also
include in Row 9 the results of MSRSeg, whose context model has been trained on a
20-million-word manually annotated corpus. The experimental results reveal several
facts.
Table 17
Comparison of performance of MSRSeg: The versions that are trained using (semi-)supervised
iterative training with different initial training sets (Rows 1 to 8) versus the version that is
trained on annotated corpus of 20 million words (Row 9).
Word segmentation FT PN LN ON
Initial
training set F P R P R P R P R P R
1 FMM .877 .833 .927
2 1 + OA .886 .841 .936
3 1 + FT .919 .894 .946 .903 .887
4 2 + FT .927 .903 .954 .902 .886
5 4 + NE 0.15 .961 .955 .968 .900 .889 .835 .818 .897 .865 .780 .681
6 Seed set 0.35 .967 .962 .973 .903 .891 .840 .820 .900 .866 .794 .680
7 (M word) 0.50 .967 .962 .972 .905 .895 .844 .821 .900 .863 .800 .678
8 1.00 .968 .963 .973 .905 .895 .854 .826 .903 .865 .802 .679
9 MSR training set .974 .969 .979 .905 .899 .870 .906 .892 .855 .816 .654
565
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Table 18
Precision of person name recognition on the MSR test set, using Viterbi iterative training,
initialized by four seed sets with different sizes.
Seed set (M char) w/o iteration w/1 iteration w/2 iterations
0.15 .745 .790 (+1.6%) .800 (+0.7%)
0.35 .757 .796 (+1.8%) .802 (+0.5%)
0.50 .783 .824 (+5.2%) .835 (+1.3%)
1.00 .815 .835 (+2.5%) .840 (+0.6%)
 Although the greedy segmenter (FMM) can resolve around 90% of
ambiguities in word segmentation, as shown in Table 16, the resulting
segmenter is still much worse than MSRSeg because a large number of
unknown words cannot be detected correctly even after Viterbi iterative
learning.
 The method of resolving OA brings marginal improvements. Since the
method does not require any human annotation, Row 2 shows the best
results we achieved in our experiments using unsupervised learning
approaches.
 Factoid rules, although simple, bring substantial improvements.
 The Viterbi iterative training method does not turn out to be an effective
way of resolving ambiguities in word segmentation or of detecting new
words. In Rows 1 to 4, the word segmentation performance always
saturates after 2 or 3 iterations, with little improvement. For example,
FMM (Row 1) achieves an initial segmentation F-measure of 0.8771, and
after two iterations, it saturates and ends up with 0.8773.
Table 19
Precision of location name recognition on the MSR test set, using Viterbi iterative training,
initialized by four seed sets with different sizes.
Seed set (M char) w/o iteration w/1 iteration w/2 iterations
0.15 .883 .895 (+1.4%) .897 (+0.2%)
0.35 .893 .901 (+0.9%) .900 (?0.1%)
0.50 .894 .901 (+0.8%) .900 (?0.1%)
1.00 .895 .902 (+0.8%) .903 (+0.1%)
Table 20
Precision of organization name recognition on the MSR test set, using Viterbi iterative training,
initialized by four seed sets with different sizes.
Seed set (M char) w/o iteration w/1 iteration w/2 iterations
0.15 .695 .770 (+10.8%) .780 (+1.3%)
0.35 .737 .786 (+6.6%) .794 (+1.0%)
0.50 .745 .790 (+6.0%) .800 (+1.3%)
1.00 .757 .796 (+5.2%) .802 (+0.8%)
566
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
 The Viterbi iterative training is effective in boosting the precision of NER
without great sacrifices for recall (e.g., the recall remains almost the same
when using the seed set of Row 5 in Table 17, or becomes a little worse
when using the seed sets of Rows 6 to 8). As shown in Tables 18?20, we
start with a series of seed sets of different sizes and achieve a reasonable
accuracy of NER, which is comparable with that of MSRSeg, after two
iterations.
 The use of a small NE annotated seed set (e.g., in Row 5) would achieve
the best trade-off between performance and human effort, because after
two iterations, the accuracy of NER is very close to that of using larger
seed sets, while the human effort of creating the seed set is much less.
8. System Evaluation
8.1 System Results
Our system is designed so that components such as the FT detector and NE recognizer
can be ?switched on or off? so that we can investigate the relative contribution of each
component to the overall word segmentation performance. To date, we have not done
a separate evaluation of MDW recognition. We leave that to future work.
The main results are shown in Table 21. For comparison, we also include in the
table (Row 1) the results of using the greedy segmenter (FMM) described in Section 7.
Row 2 shows the baseline results of our system, where only the lexicon is used. It is
interesting to find, in Rows 1 and 2, that the dictionary-based methods already achieve
quite good recall, but the precision is not very good because those methods cannot cor-
rectly identify unknown words that are not in the lexicon, such as factoids and named
entities. We also find that even using the same lexicon, our approach based on the
linear mixture models outperforms the greedy approach (with a slight but statistically
significant difference) because the use of context model resolves more ambiguities in
segmentation. The most promising property of our approach is that the linear mixture
models provide a flexible framework where a wide variety of linguistic knowledge
and statistical models can be combined in a unified way. As shown in Rows 3 to 6,
when components are switched on in turn by activating corresponding class models,
the overall word segmentation performance increases consistently.
Table 21
MSRSeg system results for the MSR test set.
Word segmentation FT PN LN ON
Segmenter P R P R P R P R P R
1 FMM .837 .927
2 Baseline .863 .947
3 2 + FT .913 .961 .904 .898
4 3 + PN .950 .972 .905 .898 .790 .905
5 4 + LN .955 .975 .905 .899 .858 .906 .794 .860
6 5 + ON .969 .979 .905 .899 .870 .906 .892 .855 .816 .654
567
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
We also conduct an error analysis, which shows that 85% of errors come from NER
and factoid detection, especially the NE abbreviations, although the tokens of these
word types amount to only 8.3% in the MSR test set. The remaining 15% of errors are
mainly due to new words.
8.2 Comparison with Other Systems using the MSR Test Set
We compare our system with three other Chinese word segmenters on the MSR test
set:14
1. The MSWS system is one of the best available products. It is released by
Microsoft (as a set of Windows APIs). MSWS first conducts word breaking
using MM (augmented by heuristic rules for disambiguation), and then
conducts factoid detection and NER using rules.
2. The LCWS system is one of the best research systems in mainland China.
It is released by Beijing Language University. The system works similarly
to MSWS, but has a larger dictionary containing more PNs and LNs.
3. The PBWS system is a rule-based Chinese parser (Wu and Jiang 2000) that
can also output word segmentation results. It explores high-level linguistic
knowledge such as syntactic structure for Chinese word segmentation and
NER.
As mentioned earlier, to achieve a fair comparison, we compare the previously
mentioned four systems only in terms of NER precision and recall and the number
of OAS errors. However, we find that due to the different annotation specifications
used by these systems, it is still very difficult to compare their results automatically. For
example, ??? ?Beijing city government? has been segmented inconsistently as
?/?? ?Beijing city? + ?government? or ?/?? ?Beijing? + ?city government?
even in the same system. Worse still, some LNs tagged in one system are tagged as
ONs in another system. Therefore, we have to manually check the results. We picked
933 sentences at random containing 22,833 words (including 329 PNs, 617 LNs, and
435 ONs) for testing. We also did not differentiate LNs and ONs in evaluation. That
is, we only checked the word boundaries of LNs and ONs and treated both tags as
interchangeable. The results are shown in Table 22. We can see that in this small test
set, MSRSeg achieves the best overall performance of NER and the best performance of
resolving OASs.
8.3 Evaluations on Bakeoff Test Sets
Table 23 presents the comparison results of MSRSeg on four Bakeoff test sets with
others reported previously. The layout of the table follows (Peng, Feng, and McCallum
2004). SXX indicates participating sites in the 1st SIGHAN International Chinese Word
Segmentation Bakeoff (Sproat and Emerson 2003). CRFs indicates the word segmenter
reported in Peng, Feng, and McCallum (2004), which uses models of linear-chain con-
14 The three systems are well known in mainland China, but to our knowledge, no standard evaluations on
Chinese word segmentation have been published. Although our comparison evaluations are limited to
NER and crossing brackets (described later), we think the comparison we draw is still informative.
568
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Table 22
Cross-system comparison results.
# OAS LN PN ON
Segmenters errors P R F P R F P R F
MSWS 63 .935 .442 .600 .907 .744 .818 .642 .469 .600
LCWS 49 .854 .720 .782 .945 .781 .856 .713 .131 .222
PBWS 20 .767 .736 .752 .780 .787 .784 .817 .216 .342
MSRSeg 7 .876 .864 .870 .830 .897 .862 .799 .617 .696
Table 23
Comparisons against other segmenters: In Column 1, SXX indicates participating sites in the
1st SIGHAN International Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff, and CRFs indicates the word
segmenter reported in (Peng et al 2004). In Columns 2 to 5, entries contain the F-measure of each
segmenter on different open runs, with the best performance in bold. Column Site-Avg is the
average F-measure over the data sets on which a segmenter reported results of open runs, where
a bolded entry indicates the segmenter outperforms MSRSeg. Column Our-Avg is the average
F-measure of MSRSeg over the same data sets, where a bolded entry indicates that MSRSeg
outperforms the other segmenter.
ASo ASc CTBo CTBc HKo HKc PKo PKc Site-Avg Our-Avg
S01 .881 .881 .901 .953 .951 .917 .930
S02 .912 .874 .912 .904
S03 .872 .829 .886 .925 .878 .943
S04 .937 .939 .937 .955
S05 .942 .732 .894
S06 .945 .829 .924 .924
S07 .940 .940 .955
S08 .956 .904 .938 .936 .947 .955
S09 .961 .946
S10 .901 .831 .959 .947 .930 .930
S11 .904 .884 .879 .886 .888 .943
S12 .959 .916
CRFs .957 .956 .894 .849 .946 .928 .946 .941 .936 .943
MSRSeg .958 .904 .954 .955 .943
ditional random fields (CRFs). Entries contain the F-measure of each segmenter on
different open runs, indicated by XXo, with the best performance in bold. Column Site-
Avg is the average F-measure over the data sets on which a segmenter reported results
of open runs, where a bolded entry indicates the segmenter outperforms MSRSeg.
Column Our-Avg is the average F-measure of MSRSeg over the same data sets, where
a bolded entry indicates that MSRSeg outperforms the other segmenter. For com-
pleteness, we also include in Table 23 the results of closed runs, indicated by XXc.
In a closed test, one can only use training material from the training data for the
particular corpus being tested on. No other material was allowed (Sproat and Emerson
2003). Since MSRSeg uses the MSR corpus for training, our results are of open tests.15
15 It would be more informative if the comparison could be conducted in closed tests, which implies that
dictionaries and models of MSRSeg should be generated solely on the given training data. We leave
this for future work.
569
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Several conclusions can be drawn from Table 23. First, for the same system, open
tests generally achieve better results than closed tests due to the use of additional
training material.16 Second, there is no single segmenter that performs best in all
four data sets. Third, MSRSeg achieves consistently high performance across all four
data sets. For example, MSRSeg achieves better average performance than the other
three segmenters that report results on all four data sets (i.e., S03, S11, CRF). In
particular, MSRSeg outperforms them on every data set. There are two segmenters
that achieve better average F-measure than ours. One is S02, which reported results
on CTB only. The other is S10, which reported results on CTB and PK. From these
results, we conclude that MSRSeg is an adaptive word segmenter that achieves state-
of-the-art performance on different data sets, corresponding to different domains and
standards.
As described in Section 2.1, most segmenters, including the ones in Table 23, can
be roughly grouped into two categories: ones that use a rule-based approach and ones
that use a statistical approach. MSRSeg is a hybrid system that takes advantage of both
approaches. Though rule-based systems (e.g., S08, S10, and S11 in Table 23) can achieve
reasonably good results, they cannot effectively make use of increasingly large training
data and are weak in unknown word detection and adaptation. Some statistical seg-
menters (e.g., S01 and S07 in Table 23) use generative models such as HMM for Chinese
word segmentation. However, it is very difficult to incorporate linguistic knowledge
into the (approximated or assumed) generation process of Chinese sentences, under-
neath which the models are developed. Discriminative models (e.g., the linear models
in MSRSeg, where though all components models are derived from generative models,
they are combined using discriminatively trained weights) are free from this issue and
provide a flexible mathematical framework to incorporate arbitrary linguistic knowl-
edge. They do not assume any underlying generation process. Instead, they assume that
the training and test sets are generated from the same distribution, but the form of the
distribution (i.e., generative process) is unknown. If we view Chinese word segmenta-
tion as a classification problem, i.e., to discriminate between ?good? segmentations and
?bad? ones, we may prefer discriminative models to generative models. Intuitively, it is
sufficient to find directly the desired features that can differentiate good segmentations
from bad ones (as in discriminative models). It is, however, not necessary to estimate
the distributions based upon which Chinese sentences are generated (or segmentations)
first, and then use the estimated distributions to construct the desired features (as in
generative models). As pointed out by Vapnik (1998): ?When solving a given problem,
solve it directly and try to avoid solving a more general problem as an intermediate
step.?
Our models are similar to the maximum entropy models in Xue (2003) and CRFs
in Peng, Feng, and McCallum (2004) in that all these models give the flexibility to
incorporate arbitrary features and can be discriminatively trained. Our models are
novel in that many feature functions are derived from probabilistic or heuristic models
inspired by source?channel models of Chinese sentence generation, as described in
Section 4.3. Therefore, these feature functions are not only potentially more reasonable
but also much more informative than, for instance, the binary features used in standard
maximum entropy models in NLP.
16 It is interesting to see that, in AS, close tests achieve better performance than open tests, although among
different systems. This is because the training data of AS is much larger than the other three corpora,
and those segmenters that apply statistical approaches, such as S09 (Xue 2003) and CRFs, have been well
trained.
570
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
We also notice that many segmenters (e.g., S03 and S04 in Table 23) separate
unknown word detection from word segmentation. Though this would make the de-
velopment of the segmenter easier, it seems to be a flawed solution in reality, as we dis-
cussed earlier. The benefits of integrating both tasks has also been shown empirically in
Table 23.
9. Conclusions
This article presents a pragmatic approach to Chinese word segmentation. Our main
contributions are threefold. First, we view Chinese words as segmentation units whose
definition is pragmatic in nature and depends on how they are used and processed
(differently) in realistic applications, while theoretical linguists define words using
purely linguistic criteria. Second, we propose a pragmatic mathematical framework for
Chinese word segmentation, where various problems of word segmentation (i.e., word
breaking, morphological analysis, factoid detection, NER, and NWI) are solved in a
unified approach. The approach is based on linear models where component models
are inspired by source?channel models of Chinese sentence generation. Third, we de-
scribe in detail an adaptive Chinese word segmenter, MSRSeg. This pragmatic system
consists of two components: (1) a generic segmenter that is based on the mathematical
framework of word segmentation and unknown word detection, and that can adapt to
different domain-specific vocabularies, and (2) a set of output adaptors for adapting the
output of the former to different application-specific standards. Evaluation on five test
sets with different standards shows that the adaptive system achieves state-of-the-art
performance on all the test sets.
One area of our future work is to apply MSRSeg in a wide range of practical
applications. We believe that some application-specific features can also be integrated
into the framework. For instance, in MT, it would be interesting to investigate how to
jointly optimize the performances of both word segmentation and word alignment.
As one of the reviewers pointed out, though the reliable high performance of
MSRSeg is impressive, it is by far one of the most complex systems with access to
the richest resources. Hence, another interesting area of our future work is to explore
whether the performance is attributed to a superior architecture or simply to the richer
resources. We have developed a simplified version of MSRSeg, called S-MSRSeg. It
does not use the morph-lexicon and is trained using one-fifth of the MSR training
data in Table 4, which are only partially labeled (i.e., LWs are not annotated). Inter-
estingly, S-MSRSeg achieves very similar (or slightly worse) performance on the five
test sets in Table 4. This demonstrates again the potential of our pragmatic approach
to Chinese word segmentation. The work reported in this article represents not an
end but a beginning of yet another view of Chinese word segmentation. Toward
this end, S-MSRSeg and its training and test data sets are publicly available (e.g., at
http://research.microsoft.com/?jfgao) for the sake of encouraging others to improve
upon the work we have carried out.
Acknowledgments
The work reported in this article was a team
effort. The number of people intimately
involved in this project is far too large for us
to enumerate here. We only name a few now.
We thank the manager teams of the NLC
group at MSRA and the NLG at NISD,
especially Ming Zhou, Hong-Jiang Zhang,
Jun Liu, and Kai-Fu Lee, for initiating and
funding the project. We thank Ashley Chang,
Hongqiao Li, Jianfeng Li, Jianghong Li,
Haowei Qin, Jian Sun, Xinsong Xia, Wenfeng
Yang, Ye Zhang, and Xiaodan Zhu for their
help in the experimentation and evaluation
of our system, and for data annotation.
We also thank John Chen, Nianwen Xue,
571
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Richard Sproat, Keh Yi Su, Hisami Suzuki,
and the three anonymous reviewers for
their comments on early drafts of this
article.
References
Aho, Alfred V., Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D.
Ullman. 1986. Compilers: Principles,
Techniques, and Tools. Addison-Wesley,
Boston.
Baayen, R. Harald. 1989. A Corpus-based
Approach to Morphological Productivity:
Statistical Analysis and Psycholinguistic
Interpretation. Ph.D. thesis, Free University,
Amsterdam.
Berger, Adam, Stephen Della Pietra, and
Vincent J. Della Pietra. 1996. A maximum
entropy approach to natural language
processing. Computational Linguistics,
22(1):39?71.
Brill, Eric. 1995. Transformation-based
error-driven learning and natural
language processing: A case study in
Part-of-Speech tagging. Computational
Linguistics, 21(4):543?565.
Chang, Eric, Jianlai Zhou, Yu Shi, and Chao
Huang. 2001. Speech lab in a box: A
Mandarin speech toolbox to Jumpstart
speech related research. In Eurospeech?2001,
pages 2799?2782, Aalborg, Denmark.
Chang, Jing-Shin and Keh-Yih Su. 1997. An
unsupervised iterative method for Chinese
new lexicon extraction. International Journal
of Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, 2(2):97?148.
Chen, Aitao. 2003. Chinese word
segmentation using minimal linguistic
knowledge. In The Second SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing.
July 11?12, Sapporo, Japan.
Chen, Keh-Jiann and Ming-Hong Bai. 1998.
Unknown word detection for Chinese
by a corpus-based learning method.
International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing,
3(1):27?44.
Chen, Stanley F. and Joshua Goodman. 1999.
An empirical study of smoothing
techniques for language modeling.
Computer Speech and Language, 13:359?394.
Cheng, Kowk-Shing, Gilbert H. Yong, and
Kam-Fai Wong. 1999. A study on
word-based and integral-bit Chinese text
compression algorithms. JASIS,
50(3):218?228.
Chien, Lee-Feng. 1997. PAT-tree-based
keyword extraction for Chinese
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, ACM Press,
New York.
Chu, Min, Hu Peng, Yong Zhao, Zhengyu
Niu, and Eric Chang. 2003. Microsoft
Mulan?a bilingual TTS system. In
Proceedings of the 2003 International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, vol. 1, pages 264?267.
Collins, Michael and Nigel Duffy. 2001.
Convolution kernels for natural language.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS 14), pages 625?632,
MIT Press.
Collins, Michael. 2002. Discriminative
training methods for Hidden Markov
Models: theory and experiments with the
perceptron algorithm. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Method in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1?8.
Collins, Michael. 2004. Parameter estimation
for statistical parsing models: theory and
practice of distribution-free methods.
Chapter 1 in Harry Bunt, John Carroll and
Giorgio Satta, editors, New Developments in
Parsing Technology, Kluwer.
Dai, Yubin, Christopher S. G. Khoo, and
Tech Ee Loh. 1999. A new statistical
formula for Chinese word segmentation
incorporating contextual information. In
Proceedings of the 18th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 82?89.
Della Pietra, Stephen, Vincent Della Pietra,
and John Lafferty. 1997. Inducing features
of random fields. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
19, 380?393.
Duda, Richard O., Peter E. Hart, and David
G. Stork. 2001. Pattern Classification. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Dudewicz, Edward J. and Satya N. Mishra.
1988. Modern Mathematical Statistics. Wiley
Series in Probability and Mathematical
Statistics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Gao, Jianfeng and Kai-Fu Lee. 2000.
Distribution based pruning of backoff
language models. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, October 3?6,
Hong Kong, pages 579?586.
Gao, Jianfeng, Joshua Goodman, and
Jiangbo Miao. 2001. The use of
clustering techniques for language
modeling?application to Asian language.
Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, 6(1):27?60.
572
Gao et al Chinese Word Segmentation: A Pragmatic Approach
Gao, Jianfeng, Joshua Goodman, Mingjing
Li, and Kai-Fu Lee. 2002. Toward a unified
approach to statistical language modeling
for Chinese. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing, 1(1):3?33.
Gao, Jianfeng, Mu Li, and Chang-Ning
Huang. 2003. Improved source-channel
model for Chinese word segmentation. In
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
July 7?12, Sapporo, Japan, pages 272?280.
Gao, Jianfeng, Andi Wu, Mu Li, Chang-Ning
Huang, Hongqiao Li, Xinsong Xia, and
Haowei Qin. 2004. Adaptive Chinese word
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 42nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, July 21?26,
Barcelona, pages 462?469.
Gao, Jianfeng, Hao Yu, Peng Xu, and Wei
Yuan. 2005. Minimum sample risk
methods for language modeling. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Human
Language Technology and Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing.
Frakes, William B. and Ricardo Baeza-Yates
(eds.). 1992. Information Retrieval. Prentice
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Fung, Pascale and Dekai Wu. 1994. Statistical
augmentation of a Chinese machine-
readable dictionary. In Proceeding of the
Second Annual Workshop on Very Large
Corpora, Kyoto, pages 180?181.
Katz, S. M. 1987. Estimation of probabilities
from sparse data for the language model
component of a speech recognizer. IEEE
ASSP 35(3):400?401.
Katz, S. M. 1996. Distribution of content
words and phrases in text and language
modeling. Natural Language Engineering,
1996(2):15?59.
Kneser, Reinhard and Hermann Ney. 1995.
Improved backing-off for m-gram language
modeling. In Proceeding of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing, pages 181?184.
Krauth, W. and M. Me`zard. 1987. Learning
algorithm with optimal stability in neural
networks. Journal of Physics A, 20:745?752.
Hockenmaier, Julia and Chris Brew. 1998.
Error driven segmentation of Chinese. In
Communications of COLIPS, 8(1):69?84.
Huang, Chu-Ren, Keh-Jiann Chen, Chang
Lili, and Feng-Yi Chen. 1997. Segmentation
standard for Chinese natural language
processing. International Journal of
Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, 2(2):47?62.
Joachims, Thorsten. 2002. Learning to Classify
Text Using Support Vector Machines. Kluwer.
Li, Hongqiao, Chang-Ning Huang, Jianfeng
Gao, and Xiaozhong Fan. 2004. The use of
SVM for Chinese new word identification.
In Proceedings of the First International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing,
Sanya City, Hainan Island, China,
March 22?24, pages 497?504.
Li, Mu, Jianfeng Gao, Chang-Ning Huang,
and Jianfeng Li. 2003. Unsupervised
training for overlapping ambiguity
resolution in Chinese word segmentation.
In Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing,
July 11?12, Sapporo, Japan, pages 1?7.
Liang, Nanyuan. (?WC) 1987.fbI??
???? ? CDWS (A written Chinese
automatic segmentation system). In
-??of? (Journal of Chinese
Information Processing), 2:44?52.
Lin, Ming-Yu, Tung-Hui Chiang, and Keh-Yi
Su. 1993. A preliminary study on
unknown word problem in Chinese word
segmentation. In Proceedings of the ROC
Computational Linguistics Conference VI,
119?141.
Manning, Christopher D. and Hinrich
Schutze. 1999. Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Mitchell, Tom M. 1997. Machine Learning.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Nie, Jian-Yun, Wanying Jin, and
Mareie-Louise Hannan. 1994. A hybrid
approach to unknown word detection and
segmentation of Chinese. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Chinese
Computing, pages 326?335, Singapore.
Och, Franz. 2003. Minimum error rate
training in statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, July 7?12, Sapporo, Japan,
pages 160?167.
Packard, Jerome. 2000. The Morphology of
Chinese: A Linguistics and Cognitive Approach.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Palmer, David D. 1997. A trainable rule-
based algorithm for word segmentation.
In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Madrid, pages 321?328.
Peng, Fuchun, Fangfang Feng, and Andrew
McCallum. 2004. Chinese segmentation
and new word detection using conditional
random fields. In COLING 2004,
pages 562?568.
Roche, Emmanuel and Yves Schabes. 1997.
Finite-State Language Processing. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
573
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 4
Rosenfeld, Roland, Stanley F. Chen, and
Xiaojin Zhu. 2001. Whole sentence
exponential language models: A vehicle
for linguistic statistical integration.
Computer Speech and Language, 15(1):55?73.
Sproat, Richard and Tom Emerson. 2003. The
first international Chinese word segmentation
bakeoff. In Proceedings of the Second
SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language
Processing, July 11?12, Sapporo, Japan.
Sproat, Richard and Chilin Shih. 2002.
Corpus-based methods in Chinese
morphology and phonology. In Proceedings
of the 2002 International Conference on
Computational Linguistics.
Sproat, Richard, Alan W. Black, Stanley
Chen, Shankar Kumar, Mari Ostendorf,
and Christoper Richards. 2001.
Normalization of non-standard words.
Computer Speech and Languages, 15:287?333.
Sproat, Richard, Chilin Shih, William Gale,
and Nancy Chang. 1996. A stochastic
finite-state word-segmentation algorithm
for Chinese. Computational Linguistics,
22(3):377?404.
Sproat, Richard. 1992. Morphology and
Computation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Sproat, Richard and Chilin Shih. 1990. A
statistical method for finding word
boundaries in Chinese text. Computer
Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages,
4:336?351.
Su, Keh-Yih and Chin-Hui Lee. 1994. Speech
recognition using weighted HMM and
subspace projection approaches. IEEE
Trans., Speech and Audio Processing,
2(1):69?79.
Sun, Jian, Jianfeng Gao, Lei Zhang, Ming
Zhou, and Chang-Ning Huang. 2002.
Chinese named entity identification
using class-based language model. In
Proceedings of the 2002 International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 967?973.
Sun, Jian, Ming Zhou, and Jianfeng Gao.
2003. Chinese named entity identification
using class-based language model.
International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing,
8(2):1?28.
Sun, Maosong. (Y~) and Benjamin K.
Tsou (?	f). 2001.I????v??
(A review and evaluation on automatic
segmentation of Chinese).S?? f
(Contemporary Linguistics), 3(1):22?32.
Sun, Maosong, Dayang Shen, and Benjamin
K. Tsou. 1998. Chinese word segmentation
without using lexicon and hand-crafted
training data. In Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
pages 1265?1271.
Sun, Maosong and Zhengping Zuo. 1998.
Overlapping ambiguity in Chinese text. (In
Chinese) Quantitative and Computational
Studies on the Chinese Language, HK,
pages 323?338.
Teahan, W. J., Yingying Wen, Rodger McNab,
and Ian Witten. 2000. A compression-
based algorithm for Chinese word
segmentation. Computational Linguistics,
26(3):375?393.
Uchimoto, Kiyotaka, Satoshi Sekine, and
Hitoshi Isahara. 2001. The unknown
word problem: a morphological analysis
of Japanese using maximum entropy
aided by a dictionary. In Proceedings
of the 2001 Conference on EMNLP,
pages 91?99.
Vapnik, Vladimir N. 1998. Statistical Learning
Theory. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wu, Andi and Zixin Jiang. 2000.
Statistically-enhanced new word
identification in a rule-based Chinese
system. In Proceedings of the Second
ACL Chinese Processing Workshop,
pages 41?66.
Wu, Andi. 2003. Customizable segmentation
of morphologically derived words in
Chinese. In International Journal of
Computational Linguistics and Chinese
Language Processing, 8(1):1?27.
Wu, Zimin and Gwyneth Tseng. 1993.
Chinese text segmentation for text retrieval
achievements and problems. JASIS, 44(9):
532?542.
Xia, Fei. 1999. Segmentation guideline,
Chinese Treebank Project. Technical report,
University of Pennsylvania.
Xue, Nianwen. 2003. Chinese word
segmentation as character tagging.
International Journal of Computational
Linguistics and Chinese Language
Processing, 8(1):29?48.
Zhu, Xiaodan, Mu Li, Jianfeng Gao, and
Chang-Ning Huang. Single character
Chinese named entity recognition. In
Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Proceeding,
July 11?12, Sapporo, Japan, pages 125?132.
574
