Consistent Validation of Manual and
Automatic Sense Annotations with
the Aid of Semantic Graphs
Roberto Navigli?
Universita` di Roma ?La Sapienza?
The task of annotating texts with senses from a computational lexicon is widely recognized to be
complex and often subjective. Although strategies like interannotator agreement and voting can
be applied to deal with the divergences between sense taggers, the consistency of sense choices
with respect to the reference dictionary is not always guaranteed.
In this article, we introduce Valido, a visual tool for the validation of manual and auto-
matic sense annotations. The tool employs semantic interconnection patterns to smooth possible
divergences and support consistent decision making.
1. Introduction
Sense tagging is the task of assigning senses chosen from a computational lexicon to
words in context. This is a task where both machines and humans find it difficult to
reach an agreement. The problem depends on a variety of factors, ranging from the
inherent subjectivity of the task to the granularity of sense discretization, coverage of
the reference dictionary, etc.
The problem of validation is even amplified when sense tags are collected through
acquisition interfaces like the Open Mind Word Expert (Chklovski and Mihalcea 2002),
due to the unknown source of the contributions of possibly unskilled volunteers.
Strategies like voting for automatic sense annotations and the use of interannotator
agreement with adjudication for human sense assignments only partially solve the issue
of disagreement. Especially when there is no clear preference towards a certain word
sense, the final choice made by a judge can be subjective, if not arbitrary. This is a case
where analyzing the intrinsic structure of the reference lexicon is essential for producing
a consistent decision. A lexicographer is indeed expected to review a number of related
dictionary entries in order to adjudicate a sense coherently. This work can be tedious,
time-consuming, and often incomplete due to the complex structure of the resource. As
a result, inconsistent choices can be made.
In this article, we present Valido, a tool for supporting the validation of both manual
and automatic sense annotations through the use of semantic graphs, particularly of
semantic interconnection patterns (Navigli and Velardi 2005).
? Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita` di Roma ?La Sapienza,? Via Salaria, 113 - 00198 Roma, Italia.
E-mail: navigli@di.uniroma1.it.
? 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 2
2. Semantic Networks and Semantic Interconnection Patterns
Semantic networks are a graphical notation developed to represent knowledge expli-
citly as a set of conceptual entities and their interrelationships. The availability of wide-
coverage computational lexicons like WordNet (Fellbaum 1998), as well as semantically
annotated corpora like SemCor (Miller et al 1993), has certainly contributed to the
exploration and exploitation of semantic graphs for several tasks like the analysis of
lexical text cohesion (Morris and Hirst 1991), word sense disambiguation (Agirre and
Rigau 1996; Mihalcea and Moldovan 2001), and ontology learning (Navigli and Velardi
2004), etc.
Recently, a knowledge-based algorithm for word sense disambiguation called
structural semantic interconnections (SSI, http://lcl.di.uniroma1.it/ssi) (Navigli and
Velardi 2004, 2005), has been shown to provide interesting insights into the choice of
word senses by providing structural justifications in terms of semantic graphs. Given
a word context and a lexical knowledge base (LKB), obtained by integrating WordNet
with annotated corpora and collocation resources (Navigli 2005), SSI selects a semantic
graph including those word senses having a higher degree of interconnection, according
to a measure of connectivity.
A semantic interconnection pattern is a relevant sequence of edges selected ac-
cording to a context-free grammar, i.e., a path connecting a pair of word senses
(dark nodes in Figure 1), possibly including a number of intermediate concepts (light
nodes in Figure 1). For example, if the context of words to be disambiguated is [cross-v,
street-n, intersection-n], the senses chosen by SSI with respect to WordNet are [cross-v#1,
street#2, intersection#2],1 supported, among others, by the pattern intersection#2
??
part?of road#1 ??kind?of thoroughfare#1 ??kind?of street#2. Semantic interconnection patterns
are inspired by several works on semantic relatedness and similarity (Rada et al 1989;
Hirst and St-Onge 1998; Mihalcea and Moldovan 2001).
An excerpt of the manually written context-free grammar encoding semantic inter-
connection patterns for the WordNet lexicon is reported in Table 1. For further details
the reader can refer to Velardi 2005.
3. Supporting Validation with Semantic Interconnection Patterns
The validation task can be defined as follows: Let w be a word in a sentence ?,
previously annotated by a set of annotators A = {a1, a2, ..., an} each providing a sense
for w, and let S = {s1, s2, ..., sm} ? Senses(w) be the set of senses chosen for w by the
annotators in A, where Senses(w) is the set of senses of w in the reference inven-
tory (e.g., WordNet). A validator is asked to validate, that is, to adjudicate a sense
s ? Senses(w) for a word w over the others. Notice that s is a word sense for w in the
sense inventory, but is not necessarily in S, although it is likely to be. Also note that
the annotators in A can be either human or automatic, depending upon the purpose of
the exercise.
Based on SSI, we developed a visual tool, Valido (http://lcl.di.uniroma1.it/valido),
to support the validator in the difficult task of assessing the quality and suitability of
sense annotations. The tool takes as input a corpus of documents whose sentences are
1 We indicate a word sense with the convention w-p#i, where w is a word, p its part of speech (n for
nouns, a for adjectives, v for verbs, r for adverbs) and i its sense number in the reference inventory.
For readability, in the following we omit the noun part of speech.
274
Navigli Consistent Validation of Manual and Automatic Sense Annotations
Figure 1
Structural interconnection patterns for the sentence We crossed the street near the intersection when
sense #2 of street is chosen, as suggested by the validation policy (?).
tagged by one or more annotators with word senses from the WordNet inventory. The
user can then browse the sentences and adjudicate a choice over the others in case of
disagreement among the annotators. To the end of facilitating the user in the validation
task, the tool highlights each word in a sentence with different colors, namely, green for
words having a full agreement, red for words where no agreement can be found, and
orange for those words to which a validation policy can be applied.
Table 1
An excerpt of the context-free grammar for the recognition of semantic interconnections.
S ? S?S1|S?S2|S?S3 (start rule)
S? ? eNOMINALIZATION|ePERTAINYMY| (part-of-speech jump)
S1 ? eKIND?OFS1|ePART?OFS1|eKIND?OF|ePART?OF (hyperonymy/meronymy)
S2 ? eKIND?OFS2|eRELATEDNESSS2|eKIND?OF|eRELATEDNESS (hypernymy/relatedness)
S3 ? eSIMILARITYS3|eANTONYMYS3|eSIMILARITY|eANTONYMY (adjectives)
275
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 2
A validation policy is a strategy for suggesting a default sense choice to the val-
idator in case of disagreement. Initially, the validator can choose one of four vali-
dation policies to be applied to those words with disagreement on which sense to
assign:
(?) majority voting: If there exists a sense s ? S such that
|{a ? A | a annotated w with s}|
|A| ?
1
2 ,
s is proposed as the preferred sense for w.
(?) majority voting + SSI: The same as the previous policy, with the addition
that if there exists no sense chosen by a majority of annotators, SSI is
applied to w, and the sense chosen by the algorithm, if any, is proposed
to the validator.
(?) SSI: The SSI algorithm is applied to w, and the chosen sense, if any, is
proposed to the validator.
(?) no validation: w is left untagged.
Notice that for policies (?) and (?) Valido applies the SSI algorithm to w in the
context of its sentence ? by taking into account for disambiguation only the senses in S
(i.e., the set of senses chosen by the annotators). In general, given a set of words with
disagreement W ? ?, SSI is applied to W using as a fixed context the agreed senses
chosen for the words in ? \ W.
Also note that the suggestion of a sense choice, marked in orange based on the
validation policy, is just a proposal and can be freely modified by the validator, as
explained hereafter.
Before starting the interface, the validator can also choose whether to add a vir-
tual annotator aSSI to the set of annotators A. This virtual annotator tags each word
w ? ? with the sense chosen by the application of the SSI algorithm to ?. As a re-
sult, the selected validation policy will be applied to the new set of annotators A? =
A ? {aSSI}. This is useful especially when |A| = 1 (e.g., in the automatic application of
a single word sense disambiguation system), that is, when validation policies are of
no use.
Figure 1 illustrates the interface of the tool: In the top pane the sentence at hand
is shown, marked with colors as explained above. The main pane shows the semantic
interconnections between senses for which either there is a full agreement or the chosen
validation policy can be applied. When the user clicks on a word w, the left pane reports
the sense inventory for w, including information about the hypernym, definition, and
usage for each sense of w. The validator can then click on a sense and see how the
semantic graph shown in the main pane changes after the selection, possibly resulting
in a different number and strength of semantic interconnection patterns supporting that
sense choice.
In the following subsections, we describe the application of the Valido tool to the
validation of manual and automatic annotations, and we discuss cases of uncertain
applicability of the tool.
276
Navigli Consistent Validation of Manual and Automatic Sense Annotations
3.1 Validating Manual Annotations
In the following, we illustrate the tool by presenting two examples of validation of a
manual annotation (the validation policy ? was selected).
Figure 1 shows the senses chosen by the validators for the following sentence:
(a) We crossed the street near the intersection.
Sense #2 of intersection and sense #1 of cross are marked in green in the top pane,
meaning that the annotators fully agreed on those choices. On the other hand, sense
#2 of street is marked in orange, due to a disagreement between the annotators, one
preferring sense #1. Such an inconsistency is reported on the left pane, showing the
dictionary definitions of the two senses. The validator can then visualize in the same or
in a new window the semantic graphs concerning conflicting sense choices, comparing
the interconnection patterns available for sense #1 and #2 of street.
After evaluating the respective semantic interconnections, the validator can either
confirm the human annotator?s choice, accept the SSI interpretation, or assess the se-
mantic interconnection patterns resulting from different sense choices (reported in the
left pane of Figure 1).
It is worth mentioning that all the occurrences of the phrase cross the street in the
SemCor corpus are tagged with the first sense of street [defined as a thoroughfare (usually
including sidewalks) that is lined with buildings], but it is clear, from the definition of the
second sense (the part of a thoroughfare between the sidewalks; the part of the thoroughfare on
which vehicles travel; ?be careful crossing the street?), that a pedestrian crosses that part of
the thoroughfare between the sidewalks. Though questionable, this is a subtlety made
explicit in the dictionary and reinforced by the usage example of sense #2 above. The
tool reflects this fact, showing that both senses are connected with other word senses in
context, the first sense having a smaller degree of overall connectivity.2
As a second example, consider the WordNet definition of motorcycle:
(b) Motorcycle: a motor vehicle with two wheels and a strong frame
In the Gloss Word Sense Disambiguation task at Senseval-3 (Litkowski 2004), the
human annotators assigned the first sense to the word frame (a structure supporting or
containing something), unintentionally neglecting that the dictionary encodes a specific
sense of frame concerning the structure of objects (e.g., vehicles, buildings, etc.). In fact,
a chassis#3 is a kind of frame#6 (the internal supporting structure that gives an artifact its
shape), and is also part of a motor vehicle#1. While regular polysemy holds between sense
#1 and #6, there is no justification for the former choice, as it does not refer to vehicles
at all (as reflected by the lack of semantic interconnection patterns concerning frame#1).
The tool applies the validation policy and suggests sense #6 to the validator.
From these two real-world cases, it is evident that Valido can point at inconsistent,
although acceptable, choices made by human annotators due, among others, to the fine
granularity of the sense inventory and to regular polysemy. In Section 4 we present an
experiment showing that this claim still holds on a larger scale.
2 In the case of a large, connected graph, a pruned version is shown, and a link is available for viewing a
more complete, extended version of the graph.
277
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 2
Apart from tagging mistakes, most of the cases of disagreement between manual
annotators is due to the fine granularity of the lexicon inventory. We recognize that
subtle distinctions, like those encoded in WordNet, are rarely useful in any NLP appli-
cation, but, as a matter of fact, WordNet is at the moment the de facto standard within
the research community, as no other computational lexicon of that size and complexity
is freely available.
3.2 Validating Automatic Annotations
While the task of manual annotation is mostly restricted to lexicographers, automatic
annotations of texts (especially Web pages) are gaining a huge popularity in the Seman-
tic Web vision (Berners-Lee 1999). In order to perform automatic tagging, one or more
word sense disambiguation systems are applied, resulting in a semantically enhanced
resource. Unfortunately, even when dealing with restricted sense inventories or selected
domains, automated systems can make mistakes in the sense assignment, also due to
the difficulty in training a supervised program with a sufficient number of annotated
instances and again the fine granularity of the dictionary inventory.
The recognition of intuitive and convincing interconnection patterns reinforces a
consistent choice of senses throughout the discourse, a desirable condition for guaran-
teeing semantic coherence. For example, semantic interconnections can help deal with
partially justifiable, but incorrect, interpretations for words in context. Consider for
instance the sentence from the Senseval-3 English all-words competition:
(c) The driver stopped swearing at them, turned on his heel and went back to
his truck.
A partial interpretation of driver and heel can be provided in the golf domain (a
heel#6 is part of a driver#5). This can be a reasonable choice for a word sense disam-
biguator, but the overall semantic graph exposes a poor structural quality. A different
choice of senses pointed out by Valido (driver as an operator of a vehicle and heel as
the back part of the foot) provides a more interconnected structure (among others,
driver#1 ??related?to motor vehicle#1 ??kind?of truck#1, turn ? v#1 ??related?to heel#2, etc.).
3.3 Weaknesses of the Approach
It can happen that semantic interconnection patterns proposed by the validation tool
convey weak suggestions due to the lack of structure in the lexical knowledge base
used to extract patterns like those in Table 1. In that case, the validator is expected to
reject the possible suggestion and make a more reasonable choice. As a result, if no
interesting proposal is provided to the validator, it is less likely that the final choice will
be inconsistent with the lexicon structure. Typical examples are:
(d) A payment was made last week.
(e) I spent three days in that hospital.
WordNet encodes two senses of payment: the sum of money paid (sense #1) and the
act of paying money (sense #2). Such regular polysemy makes it hard to converge on a
sense choice for payment in sentence (d). This difficulty is also manifested in the anno-
tations of similar expressions involving make and payment within SemCor. Furthermore,
278
Navigli Consistent Validation of Manual and Automatic Sense Annotations
Table 2
Precision and recall of the Valido tool in the appropriateness of its suggestions for 360 words.
Part of speech Precision Recall F1 measure
Nouns 73.83% (79/107) 65.83% (79/120) 69.60%
Adjectives 89.29% (25/28) 20.83% (25/120) 33.78%
Verbs 82.14% (69/84) 57.50% (69/120) 67.65%
Total 79.00% (173/219) 48.05% (173/360) 59.76%
apart from the distinction between the act of doing the action and the amount of money
paid, there are not many structural suggestions that allow us to distinguish between
the two senses. Semantic interconnection patterns cannot help the validator here, but
any choice will not violate the structural consistency of the lexicon. As for sentence (e),
WordNet encodes two senses for hospital: the building where patients receive treatment
(sense #1) and the medical institution (sense #2). This case is diametrically opposite
in that here WordNet encodes much information about both senses, but such ?noisy?
knowledge does not help discriminate. As a result, a number of semantic interconnec-
tion patterns are presented to the validator, indicating the relevance of both senses for
tagging, but no evidence in favor of the choice of sense #1 (which is most appropriate
in the sentence).
4. Evaluation
We performed an evaluation of the tool on SemCor (Miller et al 1993), a selection of
documents from the Brown Corpus where each content word is annotated with concepts
(specifically, synsets) from the WordNet inventory.
The objective of our evaluation is to show that Valido constitutes good support
for a validator in detecting bad or inconsistent annotations. A total of 360 sentences
of average length (9 or 10 content words) were uniformly selected from the set of
documents in the SemCor corpus. The average ambiguity of an arbitrary word in the
data set was 5.77, while the average ambiguity of the most ambiguous word in a
sentence was 8.70.
For each sentence ? = w1w2 . . .wn annotated in SemCor with the senses
sw1 sw2 . . . swn (swi ? Senses(wi), i ? {1, 2, . . . , n}), we identified the most ambiguous word
wi ? ?, and randomly chose a different sense swi for that word, that is, swi ? Senses(wi) \
{swi}. The experiment simulates in vitro a situation in which, for each sentence, the
annotators agree on which sense to assign to all the words but one, where one annotator
provides an appropriate sense and the other selects a different sense. The random factor
guarantees an approximation to the uniform distribution in the test set of all the possible
degrees of disagreement between sense annotators (ranging from regular polysemy to
homonymy).
We applied Valido with validation policy (?) to the annotated sentences and evalu-
ated the performance of the tool in suggesting the appropriate choice for the words with
disagreement. We assessed precision (the number of correct suggestions over the overall
number of suggestions from the Valido tool), recall (the number of correct suggestions
over the total number of words to be validated), and the F1 measure
( 2pr
p+r
)
.
The results are reported in Table 2 for nouns, adjectives, and verbs (we neglected
adverbs, as very few interconnections can be found for them). The experiment shows
279
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 2
that evidences of inconsistency are provided by the tool with good precision (and a
good F1 measure, especially for nouns and verbs, beating the random baseline of 50%).
Notice that this test differs from the typical evaluation of word sense disambiguation
tasks, like the Senseval exercises (http://www.senseval.org), in that we are assessing
highly polysemous (possibly, very fine grained) words. Comparing the results with a
smart baseline, like the most frequent sense heuristic, is not feasible in this experiment,
as the frequency of WordNet senses was calculated on the same data set (i.e., SemCor).
Notice anyway that beating a baseline is not necessarily our objective if we are not able
to provide justifications (like semantic graphs) of which the human validator can take
advantage in order to take the final decision.
The low recall resulting for parts of speech other than nouns (mainly, adjectives)
is due to a lack of connectivity in the lexical knowledge base, especially when dealing
with connections across different parts of speech. This is a problem already discussed in
Navigli and Velardi (2005) and partially taken into account in Navigli (2005). Valido can
indeed be used as a tool to collect new, consistent collocations that could grow the LKB
from which the semantic interconnection patterns are extracted, possibly in an iterative
process. We plan to investigate this topic in the near future.
5. Conclusions
In this article we discussed a tool, Valido, for supporting validators in the difficult task
of assessing the quality of both manual and automatic sense assignments. The validator
can analyze the correctness of a sense choice in terms of its structural semantic inter-
connections (SSI) with respect to the other word senses chosen in context. The use of
semantic interconnection patterns to support validation allows one to smooth possible
divergences between the annotators and to corroborate choices consistent with the LKB.
Furthermore, the method is independent of the adopted lexicon (i.e., WordNet), in that
patterns can be derived from any sufficiently rich ontological resource. Moreover, the
approach allows the validator to discover mistakes in the lexicon: For instance, the
semantic graphs analyzed in a number of experiments helped us find out that a Swiss
canton#1 is not a Chinese city (canton#1) but a division of a country (canton#2), that a male
horse should be a kind of horse, that carelessness is not a kind of attentiveness, but rather
the contrary, and so on. These inconsistencies of WordNet 2.0 were promptly reported
to the resource maintainers, and most of them have been corrected in the latest version
of the lexicon.
Finally, we would like to point out that, in the future, the tool could also be used
during the annotation phase by taggers looking for suggestions based on the structure
of the LKB, with the result of improving the coherence and awareness of the decisions
to be taken.
References
Agirre, Eneko and German Rigau. 1996.
Word sense disambiguation using
conceptual density. In Proceedings
of COLING 1996, pages 16?22,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Berners-Lee, Tim. 1999. Weaving the Web.
Harper, San Francisco, CA.
Chklovski, Tim and Rada Mihalcea. 2002.
Building a sense tagged corpus with
Open Mind Word Expert. In Proceedings
of ACL 2002 Workshop on Word Sense
Disambiguation: Recent Successes and Future
Directions, pages 116?122, Philadelphia, PA.
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998. WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Hirst, Graeme and David St-Onge. 1998.
Lexical chains as representations of
context for the detection and correction
280
Navigli Consistent Validation of Manual and Automatic Sense Annotations
of malapropisms. In C. Fellbaum, editor,
WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pages 305?332.
Litkowski, Kenneth C. 2004. SENSEVAL-3
task: Word-sense disambiguation of
WordNet glosses. In Proceedings of ACL
2004 SENSEVAL-3 Workshop, pages 13?16,
Barcelona, Spain.
Mihalcea, Rada and Dan Moldovan. 2001.
eXtended WordNet: Progress report. In
Proceedings of NAACL Workshop on WordNet
and Other Lexical Resources, pages 95?100,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Miller, George, Claudia Leacock, Tengi
Randee, and Ross Bunker. 1993. A
semantic concordance. In Proceedings 3rd
DARPA Workshop on Human Language
Technology, Plainsboro, NJ.
Morris, Jane and Graeme Hirst. 1991. Lexical
cohesion computed by thesaural relations
as an indicator of the structure of text.
Computational Linguistics, 17(1):21?48.
Navigli, Roberto. 2005. Semi-automatic
extension of large-scale linguistic
knowledge bases. In Proceedings of
18th FLAIRS International Conference,
pages 548?553, Clearwater Beach, FL,
May 16?18, 2005.
Navigli, Roberto and Paola Velardi. 2004.
Learning domain ontologies from
document warehouses and dedicated
websites, Computational Linguistics,
30(2):151?179.
Navigli, Roberto and Paola Velardi.
2005. Structural semantic interconnections:
a knowledge-based approach to
word sense disambiguation. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 27(7):
1075?1086.
Rada, Roy, Hafedh Mili, Ellen Bickell, and
Maria Blettner. 1989. Development and
application of a metric on semantic nets.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, 19(1):17?30.
281

