Advances in Open Domain Question Answering
Tomek Strzalkowski and Sanda Harabagiu (editors)
(SUNY Albany and University of Texas at Dallas)
Springer (Text, speech and language technology series, edited by Nancy Ide and
Jean Ve?ronis, volume 32), 2006, xxvi+566 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-1-4020-4744-2,
$259.00
Reviewed by
Paul Thompson
Dartmouth College
This edited volume provides an excellent, comprehensive introduction to recent re-
search on open-domain question answering, meaning that the question-answering sys-
tems are not used merely in specific, narrow domains, but rather in domains such as
news or the Internet. Most of the chapters describe systems that have been developed
for the Advanced Question Answering for Intelligence, or AQUAINT, program spon-
sored by the U.S. Government Advanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA),
or the related Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) Question Answering (QA) Track. Both
of these activities began in 1999 and, as of this writing, still continue. Although much
of the research described here has this common origin, a wide variety of approaches
to question answering are represented in these chapters. The book is divided into six
sections:
1. Approaches to question answering
2. Question processing
3. Question answering as information retrieval
4. Answer extraction
5. Evaluating question-answering systems
6. Perspectives on question answering
Each section consists of two or three chapters.
Automatic question answering has long been studied in artificial intelligence re-
search. Early systems were constrained to answering questions about limited domains,
for example, baseball statistics or lunar rocks. By the 1990s, question answering had
become a less active field of research. During the 1990s the U.S. Government funded
the Tipster program for research on information retrieval and information extraction.
As discussed by Maiorano in his chapter ?Question answering: Technology for in-
telligence analysis,? it was hoped that the template-filling of Tipster?s information-
extraction tasks would require researchers to develop systems capable of deep natural
language understanding. Instead, shallow techniques were able to perform well on
those tasks. Similarly, the AQUAINT program is seen as building on information-
retrieval and information-extraction technology to provide systems that can extract
answers from open-domain free text for information seekers, rather than just ranked
lists of documents that might answer the question when read. Again, there is the
view that achieving a question-answering capability will require deep natural language
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
understanding. Although some of the chapters in this volume describe long-range goals
of achieving levels of question answering requiring deep understanding, much of the
research described here so far has focused on simpler question-answering tasks, such
as the factoid question answering of the TREC QA track. As the book shows, however,
factoid, or slightly more complex, question answering can benefit from a variety of more
or less deep approaches.
Section 1 of the book contains three chapters presenting very different approaches
to question answering. The first chapter in the book, by Moldovan et al, describes how
definition-style questions can be answered using deep language processing and logic
theorem proving. The next chapter, by Ittycheriah, describes the application of maxi-
mum entropy and other machine-learning approaches to answering factoid questions.
The chapter by Vicedo and Ferra?ndez shows how anaphora resolution can improve
question-answering performance. Most contemporary question-answering systems use
an information-retrieval component to find candidate documents, followed by an ex-
traction component that produces an answer. Section 3 describes three approaches to
question answering that rely primarily on information-retrieval techniques.
Contemporary question-answering systems generally include question-processing
and answer-processing components, where a question type is first determined from
an analysis of the question, and then answers are sought using algorithms specific to
that question type. Sections 2 and 4 describe question processing and answer extrac-
tion. Harabagiu?s chapter, ?Questions and intentions,? provides a particularly useful
discussion of the importance of pragmatic knowledge in question answering. In Sec-
tion 4, Prager et al?s chapter, ?Question answering by predictive annotation,? discusses
preprocessing of text, for example, marking up named entities, and Srihari et al in
?Question answering supported by multiple levels of information extraction? focus
on applying information-extraction techniques at retrieval time. On the other hand,
Echihabi et al, in their chapter ?How to select an answer string,? use statistical and
information-theoretic techniques, which interpret an answer as a ?translation? of the
question.
The Tipster program, with its Message Understanding Conferences, and TREC both
placed a strong emphasis on evaluation. The TREC QA Track and the Interactive Ques-
tion Answering Track likewise have developed formal evaluation metrics, in particular
for factoid question answering. Though evaluation for the more advanced forms of
question answering in the AQUAINT program has not been as formal, some interesting
new approaches to evaluation involving analysts performing realistic tasks have been
developed, as discussed, for example, by Strzalkowski et al in their chapter, ?Question
answering as dialogue with data.? Voorhees?s ?Evaluating question answering system
performance? and Hersh?s ?Evaluating interactive question answering? describe the
TREC QA Track evaluations; Ogden et al?s ?Habitability in question-answering sys-
tems? takes a step back from current question-answering technology and considers user
requirements with future question-answering systems.
The final section of the book considers question answering from the perspectives of
intelligence analysis, statistical machine learning, and the long-range future. Maiorano?s
chapter has been mentioned earlier. Riloff et al in ?Reverse-engineering question /
answer collections? describe a technique with which to bootstrap training data to
support machine-learning approaches to question answering. Maybury?s concluding
chapter, ?New directions in question answering,? provides a long-range perspective
on question-answering research, describing three future question-answering visions.
The first is a user-centered one, where personal assistants model the user?s interests
and cognitive style. Another vision is of embedded intelligence, where intelligence and
598
Book Reviews
question-answering capabilities reside in the environment. The third vision is of em-
bodied agents, for example, virtual avatars or physical humanoid robots. Maybury
notes that one of the crucial issues will be discovering the right mixed-initiative sym-
biosis among human and artificial agents.
This book is based largely on an ongoing, but soon to be completed, research
program. The chapters necessarily reflect research from early in the program. It will be
useful to compare the present volume to a volume that might appear once the program
has been completed. So far, question answering has not had the commercial success of,
say, information-retrieval technology. It will be interesting to see how research in this
area proceeds once the stimulus from the AQUAINT program ends and whether the
expected utility of question answering for analysts can be extended to the more general
user.
Paul Thompson is a Research Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science
at Dartmouth College. His research interests include probabilistic information retrieval, nat-
ural language processing, and information assurance. Thompson?s address is Department of
Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hinman Box 6211, Hanover, NH 03755-3510; e-mail:
Paul.Thompson@dartmouth.edu.
599

