Answering Clinical Questions with
Knowledge-Based and Statistical Techniques
Dina Demner-Fushman?
University of Maryland, College Park
Jimmy Lin?
University of Maryland, College Park
The combination of recent developments in question-answering research and the availability of
unparalleled resources developed specifically for automatic semantic processing of text in the
medical domain provides a unique opportunity to explore complex question answering in the
domain of clinical medicine. This article presents a system designed to satisfy the information
needs of physicians practicing evidence-based medicine. We have developed a series of knowl-
edge extractors, which employ a combination of knowledge-based and statistical techniques, for
automatically identifying clinically relevant aspects of MEDLINE abstracts. These extracted
elements serve as the input to an algorithm that scores the relevance of citations with respect to
structured representations of information needs, in accordance with the principles of evidence-
based medicine. Starting with an initial list of citations retrieved by PubMed, our system
can bring relevant abstracts into higher ranking positions, and from these abstracts generate
responses that directly answer physicians? questions. We describe three separate evaluations: one
focused on the accuracy of the knowledge extractors, one conceptualized as a document reranking
task, and finally, an evaluation of answers by two physicians. Experiments on a collection
of real-world clinical questions show that our approach significantly outperforms the already
competitive PubMed baseline.
1. Introduction
Recently, the focus of question-answering research has shifted away from simple fact-
based questions that can be answered with relatively little linguistic knowledge to
?harder? questions that require fine-grained text analysis, reasoning capabilities, and
the ability to synthesize information from multiple sources. General purpose reasoning
on anything other than superficial lexical relations is exceedingly difficult because there
is a vast amount of world knowledge that must be encoded, either manually or auto-
matically, to overcome the brittleness often associated with long chains of evidence. This
situation poses a serious bottleneck to ?advanced? question-answering systems. How-
ever, the availability of existing knowledge sources and ontologies in certain domains
provides exciting opportunities to experiment with knowledge-rich approaches. How
might one go about leveraging these resources effectively? How might one integrate
? Department of Computer Science and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies. E-mail:
demner@umd.edu.
? College of Information Studies, Department of Computer Science, and Institute for Advanced Computer
Studies. E-mail: jimmylin@umd.edu.
Submission received: 4 July 2005; revised submission received: 7 January 2006; accepted for publication:
12 April 2006.
? 2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
statistical techniques to overcome the brittleness often associated with knowledge-
based approaches?
We explore these interesting research questions in the domain of medicine, fo-
cusing on the information needs of physicians in clinical settings. This domain is
well-suited for exploring the posed research questions for several reasons. First,
substantial understanding of the domain has already been codified in the Unified
Medical Language System (UMLS) (Lindberg, Humphreys, and McCray 1993). Sec-
ond, software for utilizing this ontology already exists: MetaMap (Aronson 2001)
identifies concepts in free text, and SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman 2003) extracts
relations between the concepts. Both systems utilize and propagate semantic infor-
mation from UMLS knowledge sources: the Metathesaurus, the Semantic Network,
and the SPECIALIST lexicon. The 2004 version of the UMLS Metathesaurus (used
in this work) contains information about over 1 million biomedical concepts and
5 million concept names from more than 100 controlled vocabularies. The Seman-
tic Network provides a consistent categorization of all concepts represented in the
UMLS Metathesaurus. Third, the paradigm of evidence-based medicine (Sackett et al
2000) provides a task-based model of the clinical information-seeking process. The
PICO framework (Richardson et al 1995) for capturing well-formulated clinical queries
(described in Section 2) can serve as the basis of a knowledge representation that
bridges the needs of clinicians and analytical capabilities of a system. The conflu-
ence of these many factors makes clinical question answering a very exciting area of
research.
Furthermore, the need to answer questions related to patient care at the point of
service has been well studied and documented (Covell, Uman, and Manning 1985;
Gorman, Ash, and Wykoff 1994; Ely et al 1999, 2005). MEDLINE, the authoritative
repository of abstracts from the medical and biomedical primary literature maintained
by the National Library of Medicine, provides the clinically relevant sources for answer-
ing physicians? questions, and is commonly used in that capacity (Cogdill and Moore
1997; De Groote and Dorsch 2003). However, studies have shown that existing systems
for searching MEDLINE (such as PubMed, the search service provided by the National
Library of Medicine) are often inadequate and unable to supply clinically relevant
answers in a timely manner (Gorman, Ash, and Wykoff 1994; Chambliss and Conley
1996). Furthermore, it is clear that traditional document retrieval technology applied
to MEDLINE abstracts is insufficient for satisfactory information access; research and
experience point to the need for systems that automatically analyze text and return
only the relevant information, appropriately summarizing and fusing segments from
multiple texts. Not only is clinical question answering interesting from a research
perspective, it also represents a potentially high-impact, real-world application of lan-
guage processing and information retrieval technology?better information systems to
provide decision support for physicians have the potential to improve the quality of
health care.
Our question-answering system supports the practice of evidence-based medi-
cine (EBM), a widely accepted paradigm for medical practice that stresses the impor-
tance of evidence from patient-centered clinical research in the health care process.
EBM prescribes an approach to structuring clinical information needs and identi-
fies elements (for example, the problem at hand and the interventions under con-
sideration) that factor into the assessment of clinically relevant studies for medical
practice. The foundation of our question-answering strategy is built on knowledge
extractors that automatically identify these elements in MEDLINE abstracts. Using
these knowledge extractors, we have developed algorithms for scoring the relevance
64
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
of MEDLINE citations in accordance with the principles of EBM. Our scorer is em-
ployed to rerank citations retrieved by the PubMed search engine, with the goal of
bringing as many topically relevant abstracts to higher ranking positions as possible.
From this reranked list of citations, our system is then able to generate textual re-
sponses that directly address physicians? information needs. We evaluated our system
with a collection of real-world clinical questions and demonstrate that our combined
knowledge-based and statistical approach delivers significantly better document re-
trieval and question-answering performance, compared to systems used by physicians
today.
This article is organized in the following manner: We start in the next section with
an overview of evidence-based medicine and its basic principles. Section 3 provides an
overview of MEDLINE, the bibliographic database used by our system, and PubMed,
the public gateway for accessing this database. Section 4 describes our system architec-
ture and outlines our conception of clinical question answering as ?semantic unifica-
tion? between query frames and knowledge frames derived from MEDLINE citations.
The knowledge extractors that underlie our approach are described in Section 5, along
with intrinsic evaluations of each component. In Section 6, we detail an algorithm for
scoring the relevance of MEDLINE citations with respect to structured query represen-
tations. This scoring algorithm captures the principles of EBM and uses the results of
the knowledge extractors as basic features. To evaluate the performance of this citation
scoring algorithm, we have gathered a corpus of real-world clinical questions. Section 7
presents results from a document reranking experiment where our EBM scores were
used to rerank citations retrieved by PubMed. Section 8 provides additional details on
attempts to optimize the performance of our EBM citation scoring algorithm. Answer
generation, based on reranked results, is described in Section 9. Answers from our
system were manually assessed by two physicians; results are presented in Section 10.
Related work is discussed in Section 11, followed by future work in Section 12. Finally,
we conclude in Section 13.
2. The Framework of Evidence-Based Medicine
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is a widely accepted paradigm for medical practice
that involves the explicit use of current best evidence, that is, high-quality patient-
centered clinical research such as reports from randomized controlled trials, in mak-
ing decisions about patient care. Naturally, such evidence, as reported in the primary
medical literature, must be suitably integrated with the physician?s own expertise and
patient-specific factors. It is argued by many that practicing medicine in this manner
leads to better patient outcomes and higher quality health care. The goal of our work is
to develop question-answering techniques that complement this paradigm of medical
practice.
EBM offers three orthogonal facets that, when taken together, provide a framework
for codifying the knowledge involved in answering clinical questions. These three
complementary facets are outlined below.
The first facet describes the four main clinical tasks that physicians engage in
(arranged roughly in order of prevalence):
Therapy: Selecting treatments to offer a patient, taking into account effectiveness, risk,
cost, and other relevant factors (includes Prevention?selecting actions to reduce
the chance of a disease by identifying and modifying risk factors).
65
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Diagnosis: This encompasses two primary types:
Differential diagnosis: Identifying and ranking by likelihood potential diseases
based on findings observed in a patient.
Diagnostic test: Selecting and interpreting diagnostic tests for a patient, consid-
ering their precision, accuracy, acceptability, cost, and safety.
Etiology/Harm: Identifying factors that cause a disease or condition in a patient.
Prognosis: Estimating a patient?s likely course over time and anticipating likely
complications.
These activities represent what Ingwersen (1999) calls ?work tasks.? It is important
to note that they exist independently of information needs, namely, searching is not
necessarily implicated in any of these activities. We are, however, interested in situations
where questions arise during one of these clinical tasks?only then does the physician
engage in information-seeking behavior. These activities translate into natural ?search
tasks.? For therapy, the search task is usually therapy selection (for example, determining
which course of action is the best treatment for a disease) or prevention (for example,
selecting preemptive measures with respect to a particular disease). For diagnosis,
there are two different possibilities: in differential diagnosis, a physician is consider-
ing multiple hypotheses regarding what disease a patient has; in diagnostic methods
selection, the clinician is attempting to ascertain the relative utility of different tests.
For etiology, cause determination is the search task, and for prognosis, patient outcome
prediction.
Terms and the types of studies relevant to each of the four tasks have been exten-
sively studied by the Hedges Project at the McMaster University (Haynes et al 1994;
Wilczynski, McKibbon, and Haynes 2001). The results of this research are implemented
in the PubMed Clinical Queries tools, which can be used to retrieve task-specific cita-
tions (more about this in the next section).
The second facet is independent of the clinical task and pertains to the struc-
ture of a well-built clinical question. The following four components have been iden-
tified as the key elements of a question related to patient care (Richardson et al
1995):
 What is the primary problem or disease? What are the characteristics of
the patient (e.g., age, gender, or co-existing conditions)?
 What is the main intervention (e.g., a diagnostic test, medication, or
therapeutic procedure)?
 What is the main intervention compared to (e.g., no intervention, another
drug, another therapeutic procedure, or a placebo)?
 What is the desired effect of the intervention (e.g., cure a disease, relieve
or eliminate symptoms, reduce side effects, or lower cost)?
These four elements are often referenced with the mnemonic PICO, which stands
for Patient/Problem, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcome.
Finally, the third facet serves as a tool for appraising the strength of evidence
presented in the study, that is, how much confidence should a physician have in the
results? Several taxonomies for appraising the strength of evidence based on the type
and quality of the study have been developed. We chose the Strength of Recommenda-
tions Taxonomy (SORT) as the basis for determining the potential upper bound on the
66
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
quality of evidence, due to its emphasis on the use of patient-oriented outcomes and its
attempt to unify other existing taxonomies (Ebell et al 2004). There are three levels of
recommendations according to SORT:
 A-level evidence is based on consistent, good-quality patient
outcome-oriented evidence presented in systematic reviews, randomized
controlled clinical trials, cohort studies, and meta-analyses.
 B-level evidence is inconsistent, limited-quality, patient-oriented evidence
in the same types of studies.
 C-level evidence is based on disease-oriented evidence or studies less
rigorous than randomized controlled clinical trials, cohort studies,
systematic reviews, and meta-analyses.
A question-answering system designed to support the practice of evidence-based
medicine must be sensitive to the multifaceted considerations that go into evaluating
an abstract?s relevance to a clinical information need. It is exactly these three comple-
mentary facets that we attempt to encode in a question-answering system for clinical
decision support.
3. MEDLINE and PubMed
MEDLINE is a large bibliographic database maintained by the U.S. National Library
of Medicine (NLM). This database is viewed by medical professionals, biomedical
researchers, and many other users as the authoritative source of clinical evidence, and
hence we have adopted it as the target corpus for our clinical question-answering sys-
tem. MEDLINE contains over 15 million references to articles from approximately 4,800
journals in 30 languages, dating back to the 1960s. In 2004, over 571,000 new citations
were added to the database, and it continues to grow at a steady pace. The subject
scope of MEDLINE is biomedicine and health, broadly defined to encompass those
areas of the life sciences, behavioral sciences, chemical sciences, and bioengineering
needed by health professionals and others engaged in basic research and clinical care,
public health, health policy development, or related educational activities. MEDLINE
also covers life sciences vital to biomedical practitioners, researchers, and educators,
including aspects of biology, environmental science, marine biology, plant and animal
science, as well as biophysics and chemistry.1
Each MEDLINE citation includes basic information such as the title of the article,
name of the authors, name of the publication, publication type, date of publication,
language, and so on. Of the entries added over the last decade or so, approximately
76% have English abstracts written by the authors of the articles?these texts provide
the source for answers extracted by our system.
Additional metadata are associated with each MEDLINE citation. The most impor-
tant of these is the controlled vocabulary terms assigned by human indexers. NLM?s
controlled vocabulary thesaurus, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH),2 contains approx-
imately 23,000 descriptors arranged in a hierarchical structure and more than 151,000
Supplementary Concept Records (additional chemical substance names) within a
1 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html
2 Commonly referred to as MeSH terms or MeSH headings, although technically the latter is redundant.
67
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
separate thesaurus. Indexing is performed by approximately 100 indexers with at least
bachelor?s degrees in life sciences and formal training in indexing provided by NLM.
Since mid-2002, the Library has been employing software that automatically suggests
MeSH headings based on content (Aronson et al 2004). Nevertheless, the indexing
process remains firmly human-centered.
As a concrete example, an abstract titled ?Antipyretic efficacy of ibuprofen vs.
acetaminophen? might have the following MeSH headings associated with it:
MH - Acetaminophen/*therapeutic use
MH - Child
MH - Comparative Study
MH - Fever/*drug therapy
MH - Ibuprofen/*therapeutic use
To represent different aspects of the topic described by a particular MeSH heading,
up to three subheadings may be assigned, as indicated by the slash notation. In this
example, a trained user could interpret from the MeSH terms that the article is about
drug therapy for fever and the therapeutic use of ibuprofen and acetaminophen. An
asterisk placed next to a MeSH heading indicates that the human indexer interprets the
term to be the main focus of the article. Multiple MeSH terms can be notated in this
manner.
MEDLINE is publicly accessible on the World Wide Web through PubMed, the Na-
tional Library of Medicine?s gateway, or through third-party organizations that license
MEDLINE from NLM. PubMed is a sophisticated boolean search engine that allows
users to query not only on abstract text, but also on metadata fields such as MeSH terms.
In addition, PubMed provides a number of pre-defined ?search templates? called Clin-
ical Queries (Haynes et al 1994; Wilczynski, McKibbon, and Haynes 2001) that allow
users to narrow the scope of retrieved articles. These filters are implemented as fixed
boolean query fragments (containing restrictions on MeSH terms, for example) that are
appended to the original user query. Our experiments involve the use of PubMed to
retrieve an initial set of candidate citations for subsequent processing.
4. System Architecture
We view clinical question answering as ?semantic unification? between information
needs expressed in a PICO-based frame and corresponding structures automatically
extracted from MEDLINE citations. In accordance with the principles of EBM, this
matching process should be sensitive to the nature of the clinical task and the strength
of evidence of retrieved abstracts.
As a concrete example, consider the following clinical question:
In children with an acute febrile illness, what is the efficacy of single-medication
therapy with acetaminophen or ibuprofen in reducing fever?
The information need might be formally encoded in the following manner:
Search Task: therapy selection
Problem/Population: acute febrile illness/in children
Intervention: acetaminophen
Comparison: ibuprofen
Outcome: reducing fever
68
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
This query representation explicitly encodes the search task and the PICO structure
of the clinical question. After processing MEDLINE citations, automatically extracting
PICO elements from the abstracts, and semantically matching these elements with the
query, a system might produce the following answer:
Ibuprofen provided greater temperature decrement and longer duration of antipyresis
than acetaminophen when the two drugs were administered in approximately equal
doses.
PMID: 1621668
Strength of Evidence: grade A
Physicians are usually most interested in outcome statements that assert a patient-
oriented clinical finding?for example, the relative efficacy of two drugs. Thus, out-
comes can serve as the basis for good answers and an entry point into the full text. The
system should automatically evaluate the strength of evidence of the citations supplying
the answer, but the decision to adopt the recommendations as suggested ultimately rests
with the physician.
What is the best input to a clinical question-answering system? Two possibilities
include a natural language question or a structured PICO query frame. We advocate
the latter. With a frame-based query interface, the physician shoulders the burden of
translating an information need into a frame-based representation, but this provides
several advantages. Most importantly, formal representations force physicians to ?think
through? their questions, ensuring that relevant elements are captured. Poorly formu-
lated queries have been identified by Ely et al (2005) as one of the obstacles to finding
answers to clinical questions. Because well-formed questions should have concretely
instantiated PICO slots, a frame representation clearly lets the physician see missing
elements. In addition, a structured query representation obviates the need for linguistic
analysis of a natural language question, where ambiguities may negatively impact
overall performance. We discuss alternative interfaces in Section 12.
Ideally, we would like to match structured representations derived from the ques-
tion with those derived from MEDLINE citations (taking into consideration other EBM-
relevant factors). However, we do not have access to the computational resources nec-
essary to apply knowledge extractors to the 15 million plus citations in the MEDLINE
database and directly index their results. As an alternative, we rely on PubMed to
retrieve an initial set of hits that we then postprocess in greater detail?this is the
standard pipeline architecture commonly employed in other question-answering sys-
tems (Voorhees and Tice 1999; Hirschman and Gaizauskas 2001).
The architecture of our system is shown in Figure 1. The query formulator is respon-
sible for converting a clinical question (in the form of a query frame) into a PubMed
search query. Presently, these queries are already encoded in our test collection (see
Section 6). PubMed returns an initial list of MEDLINE citations, which is then analyzed
by our knowledge extractors (see Section 5). The input to the semantic matcher, which
implements our EBM citation scoring algorithm, is the query frame and annotated
MEDLINE citations. The module outputs a ranked list of citations that have been scored
in accordance with the principles of EBM (see Section 6). Finally, the answer generator
takes these citations and extracts appropriate answers (see Section 9).
In summary, our conception of clinical question answering as semantic frame
matching suggests the need for a number of capabilities, which correspond to the
bold outlined boxes in Figure 1: knowledge extraction, semantic matching for scoring
69
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Figure 1
Architecture of our clinical question-answering system.
citations, and answer generation. We have realized all three capabilities in an imple-
mented clinical question-answering system and conducted three separate evaluations
to assess the effectiveness of our developed capabilities. We do not tackle the query
formulator, although see discussion in Section 12. Overall, results indicate that our
implemented system significantly outperforms the PubMed baseline.
5. Knowledge Extraction for Evidence-Based Medicine
The automatic extraction of PICO elements from MEDLINE citations represents a key
capability integral to clinical question answering. This section, which elaborates on
preliminary results reported in Demner-Fushman and Lin (2005), describes extraction
algorithms for population, problems, interventions, outcomes, and the strength of evi-
dence. For an example of a completely annotated abstract, see Figure 2. Each individual
PICO extractor takes as input the abstract text of a MEDLINE citation and identifies the
relevant elements: Outcomes are complete sentences, while population, problems, and
interventions are short noun phrases.
Our knowledge extractors rely extensively on MetaMap (Aronson 2001), a system
for identifying segments of text that correspond to concepts in the UMLS Metathe-
saurus. Many of our algorithms operate at the level of coarser-grained semantic
types called Semantic Groups (McCray, Burgun, and Bodenreider 2001), which capture
higher-level generalizations about entities (e.g., CHEMICALS & DRUGS). An additional
feature we take advantage of (when present) is explicit section markers present in some
abstracts. These so-called structured abstracts were recommended by the Ad Hoc Work-
ing Group for Critical Appraisal of the Medical Literature (1987) to help humans assess
the reliability and content of a publication and to facilitate the indexing and retrieval
processes. These abstracts loosely adhere to the introduction, methods, results, and
conclusions format common in scientific writing, and delineate a study using explicitly
marked sections with variations of the above headings. Although many core clinical
journals require structured abstracts, there is a great deal of variation in the actual
headings. Even when present, the headings are not organized in a manner focused on
patient care. In addition, abstracts of much high-quality work remain unstructured. For
these reasons, explicit section markers are not entirely reliable indicators for the various
semantic elements we seek to extract, but must be considered along with other sources
of evidence.
The extraction of each PICO element relies to a different extent on an annotated
corpus of MEDLINE abstracts, created through an effort led by the first author at
the National Library of Medicine (Demner-Fushman et al 2006). As will be described
herein, the population, problem, and the intervention extractors are based largely on
recognition of semantic types and a few manually constructed rules; the outcome extrac-
70
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
tor, in contrast, is implemented as an ensemble of classifiers trained using supervised
machine learning techniques (Demner-Fushman et al 2006). These two very different
approaches can be attributed to differences in the nature of the frame elements: Whereas
problems and interventions can be directly mapped to UMLS concepts, and populations
easily mapped to patterns that include UMLS concepts, outcome statements follow no
predictable pattern. The initial goal of the annotation effort was to identify outcome
statements in abstract text. A physician, two registered nurses, and an engineering
researcher manually identified sentences that describe outcomes in 633 MEDLINE
abstracts; a post hoc analysis demonstrates good agreement (? = 0.77). The annotated
abstracts were retrieved using PubMed and attempted to model different user behaviors
ranging from naive to expert (where advanced search features were employed). With the
exception of 50 citations retrieved to answer a question about childhood immunization,
the rest of the results were retrieved by querying on a disease, for example, diabetes. Of
the 633 citations, 100 abstracts were also fully annotated with population, problems, and
interventions. These 100 abstracts were set aside as a held-out test set. Of the remaining
citations, 275 were used for training and rule derivation, as described in the following
sections.
After much exploration, Demner-Fushman et al (2006) discovered that it was not
practical to annotate PICO entities at the phrase level due to significant unresolvable
disagreement and interannotator reliability issues. Consider the following segment:
This double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, 3-period, complete block, 6-week
crossover study examined the efficacy of simvastatin in adult men and women (N =
151) with stable type 2 DM, low density lipoprotein-cholesterol 100 mg/dL, HDL-C <
40 mg/dL, and fasting triglyceride level > 150 and < 700 mg/dL.
All annotators agreed that the sentence contained the problem, population, and
intervention. However, they could not agree on the exact phrasal boundaries of each
element, and more importantly, general guidelines for ensuring consistent annotations.
For example, should the whole clause starting with adult men and women be marked as
population, or should type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (type 2 DM) be marked up only as the
problem? How should we indicate that the cholesterol levels description belongs to 151
subjects of the study, and so forth? This issue becomes important for evaluation because
there is a mismatch between annotated ground truth and the output of our knowledge
extractors, as we will discuss.
In what follows, we describe each of the individual PICO extractors and a series of
component evaluations that assess their accuracy. This section is organized such that the
description of each extractor and its evaluation are paired together. Results are reported
in terms of the percentage of correctly identified instances, percentage of instances for
which the extractor had no answer, and percentage of incorrectly identified instances.
The baselines and gold standards for each extractor vary, and will be described in-
dividually. The goal of these component evaluations is a general characterization of
performance, as we focused the majority of our efforts on the two other evaluations.
5.1 Population Extractor
The PICO framework makes no distinction between the population and the problem,
which is rooted in the concept of the population in clinical studies, as exemplified by
text such as POPULATION: Fifty-five postmenopausal women with a urodynamic diagnosis
of genuine urinary stress incontinence. Although this fragment simultaneously describes
71
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
the population (of which a particular patient can be viewed as a sample therefrom) and
the problem, we chose to separate the extraction of the two elements because they are
not always specified together in abstracts (issues with respect to exact boundaries men-
tioned previously notwithstanding). Furthermore, many clinical questions ask about a
particular problem without specifying a population.
Population elements, which are typically noun phrases, are identified using a series
of manually crafted rules that codify the following assumptions:
 The concept describing the population belongs to the semantic type
GROUP or any of its children. In addition, certain nouns are often used to
describe study participants in medical texts; for example, an often
observed pattern is ?subjects? or ?cases? followed by a concept from the
semantic group DISORDER.
 The number of subjects that participated in the study often precedes or
follows a concept identified as a GROUP. In the latter case, the number is
sometimes given in parentheses using a common pattern n = number,
where ?n = ? is a shorthand for the number of subjects, and number
provides the actual number of study participants.
 The confidence that a clause with an identified number and GROUP
contains information about the population is inversely proportional to the
distance between the two entities.
 The confidence that a clause contains the population is influenced by the
position of the clause, with respect to headings in the case of structured
abstracts and with respect to the beginning of the abstract in the case of
unstructured abstracts.
Given these assumptions, the population extractor searches for the following
patterns:
 GROUP ([Nn]=[0?9]+)
for example, in 5?6-year-old French children (n = 234), Subjects (n = 54)
 number* GROUP
for example, forty-nine infants
 number* DISORDER* GROUP?
for example, 44 HIV-infected children
The confidence score assigned to a particular pattern match is a function of both its
position in the abstract and its position in the clause from which it was extracted. If a
number is followed by a measure, for example, year or percent, the number is discarded,
and pattern matching continues. After the entire abstract is processed in this manner,
the match with the highest confidence value is retained as the population description.
5.2 Evaluation of Population Extractor
Ninety of the 100 fully annotated abstracts in our collection were agreed upon by the
annotators as being clinical in nature, and were used as test data for our population
extractor. Because these abstracts were not examined in the process of developing the
extractor rules, they can be viewed as a blind held-out test set. The output of our popu-
72
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 1
Evaluation of the population extractor.
Correct (%) Unknown (%) Wrong (%)
Baseline 53 ? 47
Extractor 80 10 10
lation extractor was judged to be correct if it occurred in a sentence that was annotated
as containing the population in the gold standard. Note that this evaluation presents an
upper bound on the performance of the population extractor, whose outputs are noun
phrases. We adopted such a lenient evaluation setup because of the boundary issues
previously discussed, and also to forestall potential difficulties with scoring partially
overlapping string matches.
For comparison, our baseline simply returned the first three sentences of the ab-
stract. We considered the baseline correct if any one of the sentences were annotated
as containing the population in the gold standard (an even more lenient criterion).
This baseline was motivated by the observation that the aim and methods sections of
structured abstracts are likely to contain the population information?for structured ab-
stracts, explicit headings provide structural cues; for unstructured abstracts, positional
information serves as a surrogate.
The performance of the population extractor is shown in Table 1. A manual error
analysis revealed three sources of error: First, not all population descriptions contain
a number explicitly, for example, The medical charts of all patients who were treated with
etanercept for back or neck pain at a single private medical clinic in 2003. Second, not all study
populations are population groups, as for example in All primary care trusts in England.
Finally, tagging and chunking errors propagate to the semantic type assignment level
and affect the quality of MetaMap output. For example, consider the following sentence:
We have compared the LD and recombination patterns defined by single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in ENCODE region ENm010, chromosome 7p15 2, in Korean, Japanese,
and Chinese samples.
Both Korean and Japanese were mistagged as nouns, which lead to the following
erroneous chunking:
[We] [have] [compared] [the LD] [and] [recombination patterns] [defined] [by
single-nucleotide polymorphisms] [in] [ENCODE] [region ENm010,] [chromosome
7p15 2,] [in Korean,] [Japanese,] [and] [Chinese samples.]
This resulted in the tagging of Japanese as a population. Errors of this type affect
other extractors as well. For example, lead was mistagged as a noun in the phrase
Echocardiographic findings lead to the right diagnosis, which caused MetaMap to identify
the word as a PHARMACOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE (lead is sometimes used as a homeo-
pathic preparation).
5.3 Problem Extractor
The problem extractor relies on the recognition of concepts belonging to the UMLS
semantic group DISORDER. In short, it returns a ranked list of all such concepts within
a given span of text. We evaluate the performance of this simple heuristic on segments
73
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 2
Evaluation of the problem extractor.
Correct (%) Unknown (%) Wrong (%)
Abstract title 85 10 5
Title + 1st two sentences 90 5 5
Entire abstract 86 2 12
of the abstract varying in length: abstract title only, abstract title and first two sentences,
and entire abstract text. Concepts in the title, in the introduction section of structured
abstracts, or in the first two sentences in unstructured abstracts, are given higher confi-
dence values due to their discourse prominence. Finally, the highest-scoring problem
is designated as the primary problem in order to differentiate it from co-occurring
conditions identified in the abstract.
5.4 Evaluation of Problem Extractor
Although our problem extractor returns a list of clinical problems, we only evalu-
ate performance on identification of the primary problem. For some abstracts, MeSH
headings can be used as ground truth, because one of the human indexers? tasks in
assigning terms is to identify the main topic of the article (sometimes a disorder). For
this evaluation, we randomly selected 50 abstracts with disorders indexed as the main
topic from abstracts retrieved using PubMed on the five clinical questions described
in Sneiderman et al (2005).
We applied our problem extractor on different segments of the abstract: the title
only, the title and first two sentences, and the entire abstract. These results are shown in
Table 2. Here, a problem was considered correctly identified only if it shared the same
concept ID as the ground truth problem (from the MeSH heading). The performance of
our best variant (abstract title and first two sentences) approaches the upper bound on
MetaMap performance?which is limited by human agreement on the identification of
semantic concepts in medical texts, as established in Pratt and Yetisgen-Yildiz (2003).
Although problem extraction largely depends on disease coverage in UMLS and
MetaMap performance, the error rate could be further reduced by more sophisticated
recognition of implicitly stated problems. For example, with respect to a question about
immunization in children, an abstract about the measles-mumps-rubella vaccination
never mentioned the disease without the word vaccination; hence, no concept of the
type DISEASE OR SYNDROME was identified.
5.5 Intervention Extractor
The intervention extractor identifies both the intervention and comparison elements in
a PICO frame; processing of these two frame elements can be collapsed because they
belong to the same semantic group. In many abstracts, it is unclear which intervention is
the primary one and which are the comparisons, and hence our extractor simply returns
a list of all interventions under study.
For interventions, we are primarily interested in entities that may participate in the
UMLS Semantic Network relations associated with each clinical task. Restrictions on
the semantic types allowed in these relations prescribe the set of possible clinical in-
terventions. For therapy these relations include treats, prevents, and carries out; diagnoses
74
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 3
Evaluation of the intervention extractor.
Correct (%) Unknown (%) Wrong (%)
Baseline 60 ? 40
Extractor 80 ? 20
for diagnosis; causes and result of for etiology; and prevents for prognosis. At present, the
identification of nine semantic types, for example, DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURE, CLINICAL
DRUG, and HEALTH CARE ACTIVITY, serves as the foundation for our intervention
extraction algorithm.
Candidate scores are further adjusted to reflect a few different factors. In structured
abstracts, concepts of the relevant semantic type are given additional weight if they
appear in the title, aims, and methods sections. In unstructured abstracts, concepts
towards the beginning of the abstract text are favored. Finally, the intervention extractor
takes into account the presence of certain cue phrases that describe the aim and/or
methods of the study, such as This study examines or This paper describes.
5.6 Evaluation of Intervention Extractor
The intervention extractor was evaluated in the same manner as the population extrac-
tor and compared to the same baseline. To iterate, 90 held-out clinical abstracts that
contained human-annotated interventions served as ground truth. The output of our
intervention extractor was judged to be correct if it occurred in a sentence that was
annotated as containing the intervention in the gold standard. As with the evaluation
of the population extractor, this represents an upper bound on performance. Results are
shown in Table 3.
Some of the errors were caused by ambiguity of terms. For example, in the clause
serum levels of anti-HBsAg and presence of autoantibodies (ANA, ENA) were evaluated,
serum is recognized as a TISSUE, levels as INTELLECTUAL PRODUCT, and autoantibodies
and ANA as IMMUNOLOGIC FACTORS. In this case, however, autoantibodies should
be considered a LABORATORY OR TEST RESULT.3 In other cases, extraction errors
were caused by summary sentences that were very similar to intervention statements,
for example, This study compared the effects of 52 weeks? treatment with pioglitazone, a
thiazolidinedione that reduces insulin resistance, and glibenclamide, on insulin sensitivity,
glycaemic control, and lipids in patients with Type 2 diabetes. For this particular abstract,
the correct interventions are contained in the sentence Patients with Type 2 diabetes
were randomized to receive either pioglitazone (initially 30 mg QD, n = 91) or micronized
glibenclamide (initially 1.75 mg QD, n = 109) as monotherapy.
5.7 Outcome Extractor
We approached outcome extraction as a classification problem at the sentence level, that
is, the outcome extractor assigns a probability of being an outcome to each sentence
in an abstract. Our preliminary work has led to a strategy based on an ensemble of
classifiers, which includes a rule-based classifier, a unigram ?bag of words? classifier,
3 MetaMap does provide alternative mappings, but the current extractor only considers the best candidate.
75
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
an n-gram classifier, a position classifier, an abstract length classifier, and a semantic
classifier. With the exception of the rule-based classifier, all classifiers were trained on
the 275 citations from the annotated collection of abstracts described previously.
Knowledge for the rule-based classifier was hand-coded, prior to the annotation
effort, by a registered nurse with 20 years of clinical experience. This classifier estimates
the likelihood that a sentence states an outcome based on cue phrases such as signif-
icantly greater, well tolerated, and adverse events. The likelihood of a sentence being an
outcome as indicated by cue phrases is the ratio of the cumulative score for recognized
phrases to the maximum possible score. For example, the sentence The dropout rate due to
adverse events was 12.4% in the moxonidine and 9.8% in the nitrendipine group is segmented
into eight phrases by MetaMap, which sets the maximum score to 8. The two phrases
dropout rate and adverse events contribute one point each to the cumulative score, which
results in a likelihood estimate of 0.25 for this sentence.
The unigram ?bag of words? classifier is a naive Bayes classifier implemented with
the API provided by the MALLET toolkit.4 This classifier outputs the probability of a
class assignment.
The n-gram based classifier is also a naive Bayes classifier, but it operates on a differ-
ent set of features. We first identified the most informative unigrams and bigrams using
the information gain measure (Yang and Pedersen 1997), and then selected only the
positive outcome predictors using odds ratio (Mladenic and Grobelnik 1999). Disease-
specific terms, such as rheumatoid arthritis, were then manually removed. Finally, the
list of features was revised by the registered nurse who participated in the annotation
effort. This classifier also outputs the probability of a class assignment.
The position classifier returns the maximum likelihood estimate that a sentence is
an outcome based on its position in the abstract (for structured abstracts, with respect
to the results or conclusions sections; for unstructured abstracts, with respect to the end
of the abstract).
The abstract length classifier returns a smoothed (add one smoothing) probability
that an abstract of a given length (in the number of sentences) contains an outcome
statement. For example, the probability that an abstract four sentences long contains an
outcome statement is 0.25, and the probability of finding an outcome in a ten sentence?
long abstract is 0.92. This feature turns out to be useful because the average length of
abstracts with and without outcome statements differs: 11.7 sentences for the former,
7.95 sentences for the latter.
The semantic classifier assigns to a sentence an ad hoc score based on the presence
of UMLS concepts belonging to semantic groups highly associated with outcomes
such as THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURE or PHARMACOLOGICAL SUBSTANCE. The score is
given a boost if the concept has already been identified as the primary problem or an
intervention.
The outputs of our basic classifiers are combined using a simple weighted linear
interpolation scheme:
Soutcome = ?1Scues + ?2Sunigram + ?3Sn-gram + ?4Sposition + ?5Slength + ?6Ssemantic type (1)
We attempted two approaches for assigning these weights. The first method relied
on ad hoc weight selection based on intuition. The second involved a more principled
method using confidence values generated by the base classifiers and least squares lin-
4 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/
76
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
ear regression adapted for classification (Ting and Witten 1999), which can be described
by the following equation:
LR(x) =
N
?
k=1
?kPk(X) (2)
Pk is the probability that a sentence specifies an outcome, as determined by classifier
k (for classifiers that do not return actual probabilities, we normalized the scores and
treated them as such). To predict the class of a sentence, the probabilities generated
by n classifiers are combined using the coefficients (?0, ...,?n). These values are de-
termined in the training stage as follows: Probabilities predicted by base classifiers
for each sentence are represented in an N ? M matrix A, where M is the number of
sentences in the training set, and N is the number of classifiers. The gold standard
class assignments for each sentence is stored in a vector b, and weights are found by
computing the vector ? that minimizes ||A?? b||. The solution can be found using
singular value decomposition, as provided in the JAMA basic linear algebra package
released by NIST.5
5.8 Evaluation of Outcome Extractor
Because outcome statements were annotated in each of the 633 citations in our collec-
tion, it was possible to evaluate the outcome extractor on a broader set of abstracts. From
those not used in training the outcome classifiers, 153 citations pertaining to therapy
were selected. Of these, 143 contained outcome statements and were used as the blind
held-out test set. In addition, outcome statements in abstracts pertaining to diagnosis
(57), prognosis (111), and etiology (37) were also used.
The output of our outcome extractor is a ranked list of sentences sorted by con-
fidence. Based on the observation that human annotators typically mark two to three
sentences in each abstract as outcomes, we evaluated the performance of our extractor
at cutoffs of two and three sentences. These results are shown in Table 4: The columns
marked AH2 and AH3 show performance of the weighted linear interpolation approach
with ad hoc weight assignment at two- and three-sentence cutoffs, respectively; the
columns marked LR2 and LR3 show performance of the least squares linear regression
model at the same cutoffs. In the evaluation, our outcome extractor was considered
correct if the returned sentences intersected with sentences judged as outcomes by
our human annotators. Although this is a lenient criterion, it does roughly capture
the performance of our knowledge extractor. Because outcome statements are typically
found in the conclusion of a structured abstract (or near the end of the abstract in the
case of unstructured abstracts), we compared our answer extractor to the baseline of
returning either the final two or final three sentences in the abstract (B2 and B3 in
Table 4).
As can be seen, variants of our outcome extractor performed better than the baseline
at the two-sentence cutoff, for the most part. Bigger improvements, however, can be
seen at the three-sentence cutoff level. It is evident that the assignment of weights in
our ad hoc model is primarily geared towards therapy questions, perhaps overly so.
Better overall performance is obtained with the least squares linear regression model.
5 http://math.nist.gov/javanumerics/jama/
77
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 4
Evaluation of the outcome extractor. B = baseline, returns last sentences in abstract; AH = ad hoc
weight assignment; LR = least squares linear regression. Statistically significant improvement
over the baseline at the 1% level is indicated by  .
2-sentence cutoff (%) 3-sentence cutoff (%)
B2 AH2 LR2 B3 AH3 LR3
Therapy 74 75 77 75 95 93
Diagnosis 72 70 78 75 78 89
Prognosis 73 76 79 85 87 89
Etiology 64 68 74 78 83 88
Table 5
Examples of strength of evidence categories based on Publication Type and MeSH headings.
Strength of Evidence Publication Type/MeSH
Level A(1) Meta-analysis, randomized controlled trials, cohort study,
follow-up study
Level B(2) Case-control study, case series
Level C(3) Case report, in vitro, animal and animal testing,
alternatives studies
The majority of errors made by the outcome extractor were related to inaccurate
sentence boundary identification, chunking errors, and word sense ambiguity in the
Metathesaurus.
5.9 Determining the Strength of Evidence
The strength of evidence is a classification scheme that helps physicians assess the
quality of a particular citation for clinical purposes. Metadata associated with most
MEDLINE citations (MeSH terms) are extensively used to determine the strength of
evidence and in our EBM citation scoring algorithm (Section 6).
The potential highest level of the strength of evidence for a given citation can be
identified using the Publication Type (a metadata field) and MeSH terms pertaining
to the type of the clinical study. Table 5 shows our mapping from publication type
and MeSH headings to evidence grades based on principles defined in the Strength
of Recommendations Taxonomy (Ebell et al 2004).
5.10 Sample Output
A complete example of our knowledge extractors working in unison is shown in
Figure 2, which contains an abstract retrieved in response to the following question:
?In children with an acute febrile illness, what is the efficacy of single-medication
therapy with acetaminophen or ibuprofen in reducing fever?? (Kauffman, Sawyer, and
Scheinbaum 1992). Febrile illness is the only concept mapped to DISORDER, and hence
is identified as the primary problem. 37 otherwise healthy children aged 2 to 12 years is
correctly identified as the population. Acetaminophen, ibuprofen, and placebo are correctly
78
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Antipyretic efficacy of ibuprofen vs acetaminophen
Kauffman RE, Sawyer LA, Scheinbaum ML
Am J Dis Child. 1992 May;146(5):622-5
OBJECTIVE?To compare the antipyretic efficacy of ibuprofen, placebo, and
acetaminophen. DESIGN?Double-dummy, double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. SETTING?Emergency department and inpatient units of a large,
metropolitan, university-based, children?s hospital in Michigan. PARTICIPANTS?
??
37
???????????
otherwise
????????
healthy
?????????
children
?????
aged
??
2
???
to
???
12
??????
yearsPopulation with
??????
acute,
?????????????
intercurrent,
??????
febrile
???????
illnessProblem. INTERVENTIONS?Each child was randomly assigned to receive
a single dose of
???????????????
acetaminophenIntervention (10 mg/kg),
??????????
ibuprofenIntervention (10 mg/kg) (7.5
or 10 mg/kg), or
????????
placeboIntervention (10 mg/kg). MEASUREMENTS/MAIN RESULTS?
Oral temperature was measured before dosing, 30 minutes after dosing, and
hourly thereafter for 8 hours after the dose. Patients were monitored for ad-
verse effects during the study and 24 hours after administration of the as-
signed drug.
???
All
?????
three
??????
active
???????????
treatments
??????????
produced
??????????
significant
???????????
antipyresis
???????????
compared
????
with
?????????
placebo.Outcome
??????????
Ibuprofen
??????????
provided
???????
greater
?????????????
temperature
??????????
decrement
?????
and
???????
longer
????????
duration
???
of
???????????
antipyresis
?????
than
???????????????
acetaminophen
??????
when
???
the
????
two
??????
drugs
?????
were
??????????????
administered
??
in
???????????????
approximately
??????
equal
??????
doses.Outcome No adverse effects were observed in any treat-
ment group. CONCLUSION?
?????????
Ibuprofen
???
is
??
a
????????
potent
???????????
antipyretic
???????
agent
?????
and
??
is
???
a
????
safe
???????????
alternative
????
for
????
the
?????????
selected
???????
febrile
??????
child
?????
who
?????
may
????????
benefit
?????
from
????????????
antipyretic
???????????
medication
????
but
?????
who
??????
either
???????
cannot
????
take
???
or
?????
does
????
not
????????
achieve
???????????
satisfactory
????????????
antipyresis
????
with
????????????????
acetaminophen.Outcome
Publication Type: Clinical Trial, Randomized Controlled Trial
PMID: 1621668
Strength of Evidence: grade A
Figure 2
Sample output from our PICO extractors.
extracted as the interventions under study. The three outcome sentences are correctly
classified; the short sentence concerning adverse effects was ranked lower than the
other three sentences and hence below the cutoff. The study design, from metadata
associated with the citation, allows our strength of evidence extractor to classify this
article as grade A.
6. Operationalizing Evidence-Based Medicine
In our view of clinical question answering, the knowledge extractors just described sup-
ply the features on which semantic matching occurs. This section describes an algorithm
that, when presented with a structured representation of an information need and a
MEDLINE citation, automatically computes a topical relevance score in accordance with
the principles of EBM.
In order to develop algorithms that operationalize the three facets of EBM, it is
necessary to possess a corpus of clinical questions on which to experiment. Because no
such test collection exists, we had to first manually create one. Fortunately, collections
of clinical questions (representing real-world information needs of physicians), are
79
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 6
Composition of our clinical questions collection.
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology Total
Development 10 6 3 5 24
Test 12 6 3 5 26
available on-line. From two sources, the Journal of Family Practice6 and the Parkhurst
Exchange,7 we gathered 50 clinical questions, which capture a realistic sampling of the
scenarios that a clinical question-answering system would be confronted with. These
questions were minimally modified from their original form as downloaded from the
World Wide Web. In a few cases, a single question actually consisted of several smaller
questions; such clusters were simplified by removing questions more peripheral to the
central clinical problem. All questions were manually classified into one of the four
clinical tasks; the distribution of the questions roughly follows the prevalence of each
task type as observed in natural settings, noted by Ely et al (1999). The final step in
the preparation process was manual translation of the natural language questions into
PICO query frames.
Our collection was divided into a development set and a blind held-out test set for
verification purposes. The breakdown of these questions into the four clinical tasks and
the development/test split is shown in Table 6. An example of each question type from
our development set is presented here, along with its query frame:
Does quinine reduce leg cramps for young athletes? (Therapy)
search task: therapy selection
primary problem: leg cramps
co-occurring problems: muscle cramps, cramps
population: young adult
intervention: quinine
How often is coughing the presenting complaint in patients with gastroesophageal
reflux disease? (Diagnosis)
search task: differential diagnosis
primary problem: gastroesophageal reflux disease
co-occurring problems: cough
What?s the prognosis of lupoid sclerosis? (Prognosis)
search task: patient outcome prediction
primary problem: lupus erythematosus
co-occurring problems: multiple sclerosis
What are the causes of hypomagnesemia? (Etiology)
search task: cause determination
primary problem: hypomagnesemia
6 http://www.jfponline.com/
7 http://www.parkhurstexchange.com/qa/
80
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
As discussed earlier, we do not believe that natural language text is the best input
for a question-answering system. Instead, a structured PICO-based representation cap-
tures physicians? information needs in a more perspicuous manner?primarily because
clinicians are trained to analyze clinical situations with this framework.
Mirroring the organization of our knowledge extractors, we broke up the P in PICO
into population, primary problem, and co-occurring problems in the query representa-
tion. The justification for this will become apparent when we present our algorithm for
scoring MEDLINE citations, as each of these three facets must be treated differently.
Note that many elements are specified only to the extent that they were explicit in
the original natural language question; for example, if the clinician does not specify
a population, that element will be empty. Finally, outcomes are not directly encoded in
the query representation because they are implicit most of the time; for example, in Does
quinine reduce leg cramps for young athletes?, the desired outcome, naturally, is to reduce
the occurrence and severity of leg cramps. Nevertheless, outcome identification is an
important component of the citation scoring algorithm, as we shall see later.
What is the relevance of an abstract with respect to a particular clinical question?
Evidence-based medicine outlines the need to consider three different facets (see Sec-
tion 2), which we operationalize in the following manner:
SEBM = SPICO + SSoE + Stask (3)
The relevance of a particular citation, with respect to a structured query, includes
contributions from matching PICO structures, the strength of evidence of the citation,
and factors specifically associated with the search tasks (and indirectly, the clinical
tasks). In what follows, we describe each of these contributions in detail.
Viewed as a whole, each score component is a heuristic reflection of the factors that
enter into consideration when a physician examines a MEDLINE citation. Although the
assignment of numeric scores is based on intuition and may seem ad hoc in many cases,
evaluation results in the next section demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm.
This issue will be taken up further in Section 8.
6.1 Scores Based on PICO Elements
The score of an abstract based on extracted PICO elements, SPICO, is broken into individ-
ual components according to the following formula:
SPICO = Sproblem + Spopulation + Sintervention + Soutcome (4)
The first component in the equation, Sproblem, reflects a match between the primary
problem in the query frame and the primary problem in the abstract (i.e., the highest-
scoring problem identified by the problem extractor). A score of 1 is given if the prob-
lems match exactly based on their unique UMLS concept ID as provided by MetaMap.
Matching based on concept IDs has the advantage that it abstracts away from termino-
logical variation; in essence, MetaMap performs terminological normalization. Failing
an exact match of concept IDs, a partial string match is given a score of 0.5. If the primary
problem in the query has no overlap with the primary problem from the abstract, a score
of ?1 is given. Finally, if our problem extractor could not identify a problem (but the
query frame does contain a problem), a score of ?0.5 is given.
Co-occurring problems must be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis
and cause determination search tasks because knowledge of the problems is typically
81
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
incomplete in these scenarios. Therefore, physicians would normally be interested in
any problems mentioned in the abstracts in addition to the primary problem specified
in the query frame. As an example, consider the question What is the differential diagnosis
of chronic diarrhea in immunocompetent patients? Although chronic diarrhea is the primary
problem, citations that discuss additional related disorders should be favored over those
that don?t. In terms of actual scoring, disorders mentioned in the title receive three
points, and disorders mentioned anywhere else receive one point (in addition to the
match score based on the primary problem, as discussed).
Scores based on population and intervention, Spopulation and Sintervention respectively, mea-
sure the overlap between query frame elements and corresponding elements extracted
from abstracts. A point is given to each matching intervention and matching population.
For example, finding the population group children from a query frame in the abstract
increments the match score; the remaining words in the abstract population are ignored.
Thus, if the query frame contains a population element and an intervention element, the
score for an abstract that contains the same UMLS concepts in the corresponding slots
is incremented by two.
The outcome-based score, Soutcome, is simply the value assigned to the highest-scoring
outcome sentence (we employed the outcome extractor based on the linear regression
model for our experiments). As outcomes are rarely explicitly specified in the original
question, we decided to omit them in the query representation. Our citation scoring
algorithm simply considers the inherent quality of the outcome statements in an ab-
stract, independent of the query. This is justified because, given a match on the primary
problem, all clinical outcomes are likely to be of interest to the physician.
6.2 Scores Based on Strength of Evidence
The relevance score component based on the strength of evidence is calculated in the
following manner:
SSoE = Sjournal + Sstudy + Sdate (5)
Citations published in core and high-impact journals such as Journal of the American
Medical Association (JAMA) get a score of 0.6 for Sjournal, and 0 otherwise. In terms of the
study type, Sstudy, clinical trials, such as randomized controlled trials, receive a score of
0.5; observational studies, for example, case reports, 0.3; all non-clinical publications,
?1.5; and 0 otherwise. The study type is directly encoded in the Publication Type field
of a MEDLINE citation.
Finally, recency factors into the strength of evidence score according to the formula:
Sdate = (yearpublication ? yearcurrent )/100 (6)
A mild penalty decreases the score of a citation proportionally to the time difference
between the date of the search and the date of publication.
6.3 Scores Based on Specific Tasks
The final component of our EBM score is based on task-specific considerations, as
reflected in manually assigned MeSH terms. For search tasks falling into each clinical
task, we gathered a list of terms that are positive and negative indicators of relevance.
82
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
The task score, Stask, is given by:
Stask =
?
t?MeSH
?(t) (7)
The function ?(t) maps a MeSH term to a positive score if the term is a positive
indicator for that particular task type, or a negative score if the term is a negative indi-
cator for the clinical task. Note that although our current system uses MeSH headings
assigned by human indexers, manually assigned terms can be replaced with automatic
processing if needed (Aronson et al 2004).
Below, we enumerate the relevant indicator terms by clinical task. However, there
is a set of negative indicators common to all tasks; these were extracted from the set
of genomics articles provided for the secondary task in the TREC 2004 genomics track
evaluation (Hersh, Bhupatiraju, and Corley 2004); examples include genetics and cell
physiology. The positive and negative weights assigned to each term heuristically encode
the relative importance of different MeSH headings and are derived from the Clinical
Queries filters in PubMed, from the JAMA EBM tutorial series on critical appraisal of
medical literature, from MeSH scope notes, and based on a physician?s understanding
of the domain (the first author).
Indicators for Therapy Tasks. Positive indicators for therapy were derived from the
PubMed?s Clinical Queries filters; examples include drug administration routes and any
of its children in the MeSH hierarchy. A score of ?1 is given if the MeSH descriptor
or qualifier is marked as the main theme of the article (indicated via the star notation
by human indexers), and a score of ?0.5 otherwise. If the question pertains to the
search task of prevention, three additional headings are considered positive indicators:
prevention and control, prevention measures, and prophylaxis.
Indicators for Diagnosis Tasks. Positive indicators for therapy are also used as negative
indicators for diagnosis because the relevant studies are usually disjoint; it is highly
unlikely that the same clinical trial will study both diagnostic methods and treatment
methods. The MeSH term diagnosis and any of its children are considered positive
indicators. As with therapy questions, terms marked as the major theme get a score of
?1.0, and ?0.5 otherwise. This general assignment of indicator terms allows a system
to differentiate between questions such as Does a Short Symptom Checklist accurately
diagnose ADHD? and What is the most effective treatment for ADHD in children?, which
might retrieve very similar sets of citations.
Indicators for Prognosis Tasks. Positive indicators for prognosis include the following
MeSH terms: survival analysis, disease-free survival, treatment outcome, health status, preva-
lence, risk factors, disability evaluation, quality of life, and recovery of function. For terms
marked as the major theme, a score of +2 is given; +1 otherwise. There are no negative
indicators, other than those common to all tasks previously described.
Indicators for Etiology Tasks. Negative indicators for etiology include therapy-oriented
MeSH terms; these terms are given a score of ?0.3. Positive indicators for the diag-
nosis task are weak positive indicators for etiology, and receive a positive score of
+0.1. The following MeSH terms are considered highly indicative of citations rele-
vant to etiology: population at risk, risk factors, etiology, causality, and physiopathology. If
83
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
one of these terms is marked as the major theme, a score of +2 is given; otherwise, a
score of +1 is given.
7. Evaluation of Citation Scoring
The previous section describes a relevance-scoring algorithm for MEDLINE citations
that attempts to capture the principles of EBM. In this section, we present an evaluation
of this algorithm.
Ideally, questions should be answered by directly comparing queries to knowl-
edge structures derived from MEDLINE citations. However, knowledge extraction on
such large scales is impractical given our computational resources, so we opted for
an IR-based pipeline approach. Under this strategy, an existing search engine would
be employed to generate a candidate list of citations to be rescored, according to our
algorithm. PubMed is a logical choice for gathering this initial list of citations because
it represents one of the most widely used tools employed by physicians and other
health professionals today. The system supports boolean operators and sorts results
chronologically, most recent citations first.
This two-stage retrieval process immediately suggests an evaluation methodology
for our citation scoring algorithm?as a document reranking task. Given an initial hit
list, can our algorithm automatically re-sort the results such that relevant documents
are brought to higher ranks? Not only is such a task intuitive to understand, this
conceptualization also lends itself to an evaluation based on widely accepted practices
in information retrieval.
For each question in our test collection, PubMed queries were manually crafted to
fetch an initial set of hits. These queries took advantage of existing advanced search
features to simulate the types of results that would be currently available to a knowl-
edgeable physician. Specifically, widely accepted tools for narrowing down PubMed
search results such as Clinical Queries were employed whenever appropriate.
As a concrete example, consider the following question: What is the best treatment for
analgesic rebound headaches? The search started with the initial terms ?analgesic rebound
headache? with a ?narrow therapy filter.? In PubMed, this query is:
((?headache disorders?[TIAB] NOT Medline[SB]) OR ?headache disorders?[MeSH
Terms] OR analgesic rebound headache[Text Word]) AND (randomized controlled
trial[Publication Type] OR (randomized[Title/Abstract] AND
controlled[Title/Abstract] AND trial[Title/Abstract])) AND hasabstract[text] AND
English[Lang] AND ?humans?[MeSH Terms]
Note that PubMed automatically identifies concepts and attempts matching both
in abstract text and MeSH headings. We always restrict searches to articles that have
abstracts, are published in English, and are assigned the MeSH term humans (as opposed
to say, experiments on animals)?these are all strategies commonly used by clinicians.
In this case, because none of the top 20 results were relevant, the query was ex-
panded with the term side effects to emphasize the aspect of the problem requiring an
intervention. The final query for the question became:
(((?analgesics?[TIAB] NOT Medline[SB]) OR ?analgesics?[MeSH Terms] OR
?analgesics?[Pharmacological Action] OR analgesic[Text Word]) AND
((?headache?[TIAB] NOT Medline[SB]) OR ?headache?[MeSH Terms] OR
headaches[Text Word]) AND (?adverse effects?[Subheading] OR side effects[Text
Word])) AND hasabstract[text] AND English[Lang] AND ?humans?[MeSH Terms]
84
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
The first author, who is a medical doctor, performed the query formulation process
manually for every question in our collection; she verified that each hit list contained at
least some relevant documents and that the results were as good as could be reasonably
achieved. The process of generating queries averaged about 40 minutes per question.
The top 50 results for each query were retained for our experiments. In total, 2,309
citations were gathered because some queries returned fewer than 50 hits. The process
of generating a ?good? PubMed query is not a trivial task, which we have side-stepped
in this work by placing a human in the loop. We return to this issue in Section 12.
All abstracts gathered by this process were exhaustively examined for relevance by
the first author. It is important to note that relevance assessment in the clinical domain
requires significant medical knowledge (in short, a medical degree). After careful con-
sideration, we decided to assess only topical relevance, with the understanding that
the applicability of information from a specific citation in real-world settings depends
on a variety of other factors (see Section 10 for further discussion). Each citation was
assigned one of four labels:
 Contains answer: The citation directly contains information that answers
the question.
 Relevant: The citation does not directly answer the question, but provides
topically relevant information.
 Partially relevant: The citation provides information that is marginally
relevant.
 Not relevant: The citation does not provide any topically relevant
information.
Because all abstracts were judged, we did not have to worry about impartiality
issues when comparing different systems. In total, the relevance assessment process
took approximately 100 hours, or about an average of 2 hours per question.
Our reranking experiment compared four different systems:
 The baseline PubMed results.
 A term-based reranker that computes term overlap between the natural
language question and the citation (i.e., counted words shared between the
two strings). Each term match was weighted by the outcome score of the
sentence from which it came (see Section 5.7). This simple algorithm favors
term matches that occur in sentences recognized as outcome statements.
 A reranker based on the EBM scorer described in the previous section.
 A reranker that combines normalized scores from the term-based reranker
and the EBM-based reranker (weighted linear interpolation).
Questions in the development set were used to debug the EBM-based reranker as
we implemented the scoring algorithm. The development questions were also used to
tune the weight for combining scores from the term-based scorer and EBM-based scorer;
by simply trying all possible values, we settled on a ? of 0.8, that is, 80% weight to the
EBM score, and 20% weight to the term-based score. As we shall see later, it is unclear
if evidence combination in this simple manner helps at all; for one, it is debatable
which metric should be optimized. The test questions were hidden during the system
85
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
development phase and served as a blind held-out test set for assessing the generality
of our algorithm.
In our experiment, we collected the following metrics, all computed automatically
using our relevance judgments:
 Precision at ten retrieved documents (P10) measures the fraction of
relevant documents in the top ten results.
 Mean Average Precision (MAP) is the average of precision values after
each relevant document is retrieved (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto 1999).
It is the most widely accepted single-value metric in information retrieval,
and is seen to balance the need for both precision and recall.
 Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) is a measure of how far down a hit list the
user must browse before encountering the first relevant result. The score is
equal to the reciprocal of the rank, that is, a relevant document at rank 1
gets a score of 1, 1/2 at rank 2, 1/3 at rank 3, and so on. Note that this
measure only captures the appearance of the first relevant document.
Furthermore, due to its discretization, MRR values are noisy on small
collections.
 Total Document Reciprocal Rank (TDRR) is the sum of the reciprocal
ranks of all relevant documents. For example, if relevant documents were
found at ranks 2 and 5, the TDRR would be 1/2 + 1/5 = 0.7. TDRR
provides an advantage over MRR in that it captures the ranks of all
relevant documents?emphasizing their appearance at higher ranks. The
downside, however, is that TDRR does not have an intuitive interpretation.
For our reranking experiment, we applied the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to deter-
mine the statistical significance of the results. This test is commonly used in information
retrieval research because it makes minimal assumptions about the underlying distrib-
ution of differences. For each evaluation metric, significance at the 1% level is indicated
by either  or , depending on the direction of change; significance at the 5% level
is indicated by  or , depending on the direction of change. Differences that are not
statistically significant are marked with the symbol ?.
We report results under two different scoring criteria. Under the lenient condition,
documents marked ?contains answer? and ?relevant? were given credit; these results
are shown in Table 7 (for the development set) and Table 8 (for the blind held-out test
set). Across all questions, both the EBM-based reranker and combination reranker sig-
nificantly outperform the PubMed baseline on all metrics. In many cases, the differences
are particularly noteworthy?for example, our EBM citation scoring algorithm more
than doubles the baseline in terms of MAP and P10 on the test set. There are enough
therapy questions to achieve statistical significance in the task-specific results; however,
due to the smaller number of questions for the other clinical tasks, those results are
not statistically significant. Results also show that the simple term-based reranker out-
performs the PubMed baseline, demonstrating the importance of recognizing outcome
statements in MEDLINE abstracts.
Are the differences in performance between the term-based, EBM, and combination
rerankers statistically significant? Results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests are shown in
Table 11. Both the EBM and combination rerankers significantly outperform the term-
based reranker (at the 1% level, on all metrics, on both development and test set), with
86
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 7
(Lenient, Development) Lenient results of reranking experiment on development questions
for the baseline PubMed condition, term-based reranker, EBM-based reranker, and combination
reranker.
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology
Precision at 10 (P10)
PubMed 0.300 0.367 0.400 0.533
Term 0.520 (+73%) 0.383 (+4.5%)? 0.433 (+8.3%)? 0.553 (+3.8%)?
EBM 0.730 (+143%) 0.800 (+118%) 0.633 (+58%)? 0.553 (+3.7%)?
Combo 0.750 (+150%) 0.783 (+114%) 0.633 (+58%)? 0.573 (+7.5%)?
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
PubMed 0.354 0.421 0.385 0.608
Term 0.622 (+76%) 0.438 (+4.0%)? 0.464 (+21%)? 0.720 (+18%)?
EBM 0.819 (+131%) 0.794 (+89%) 0.635 (+65%)? 0.649 (+6.7%)?
Combo 0.813 (+130%) 0.759 (+81%) 0.644 (+67%)? 0.686 (+13%)?
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
PubMed 0.428 0.792 0.733 0.900
Term 0.853 (+99%) 0.739 (?6.7%)? 0.833 (+14%)? 1.000 (+11%)?
EBM 0.933 (+118%) 0.917 (+16%)? 0.667 (?9.1%)? 1.000 (+11%)?
Combo 0.933 (+118%) 0.917 (+16%)? 1.000 (+36%)? 0.900 (+0.0%)?
Total Document Reciprocal Rank (TDRR)
PubMed 1.317 1.805 1.778 2.008
Term 2.305 (+75%) 1.887 (+4.6%)? 1.923 (+8.2%)? 2.291 (+14%)?
EBM 2.869 (+118%) 2.944 (+63%) 2.238 (+26%)? 2.104 (+4.8%)?
Combo 2.833 (+115%) 2.870 (+59%) 2.487 (+40%)? 2.108 (+5.0%)?
(a) Breakdown by clinical task
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
PubMed 0.378 0.428 0.656 1.640
Term 0.482 (+28%)? 0.577 (+35%) 0.853 (+30%)? 2.150 (+31%)
EBM 0.699 (+85%) 0.754 (+76%) 0.910 (+39%) 2.650 (+62%)
Combo 0.707 (+87%) 0.752 (+76%) 0.931 (+42%) 2.648 (+61%)
(b) Performance across all clinical tasks
 Significance at the 1% level, depending on direction of change.
 Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
the exception of MRR on the development set. However, for all metrics, on both the
development set and test set, there is no significant difference between the EBM and
combination reranker (which combines both term-based and EBM-based evidence). In
the parameter tuning process, we could not find a weight where performance across all
measures was higher; in the end, we settled on what we felt was a reasonable weight
that improved P10 and MRR on the development set.
Under the strict condition, only documents marked ?contains answer? were given
credit; these results are shown in Table 9 (for the development set) and Table 10
(for the blind held-out test set). The same trend is observed?in fact, larger relative
gains were achieved under the strict scoring criteria for our EBM and combination
87
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 8
(Lenient, Test) Lenient results of reranking experiment on blind held-out test questions for
the baseline PubMed condition, term-based reranker, EBM-based reranker, and combination
reranker.
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology
Precision at 10 (P10)
PubMed 0.350 0.150 0.200 0.320
Term 0.575 (+64%) 0.383 (+156%)? 0.333 (+67%)? 0.460 (+43%)?
EBM 0.783 (+124%) 0.583 (+289%) 0.467 (+133%)? 0.660 (+106%)?
Combo 0.792 (+126%) 0.633 (+322%) 0.433 (+117%)? 0.660 (+106%)?
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
PubMed 0.421 0.279 0.235 0.364
Term 0.563 (+34%) 0.489 (+76%)? 0.415 (+77%)? 0.480 (+32%)?
EBM 0.765 (+82%) 0.637 (+129%) 0.722 (+207%)? 0.701 (+93%)?
Combo 0.770 (+83%) 0.653 (+134%) 0.690 (+194%)? 0.687 (+89%)?
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
PubMed 0.579 0.443 0.456 0.540
Term 0.660 (+14%)? 0.765 (+73%)? 0.611 (+34%)? 0.650 (+20%)?
EBM 0.917 (+58%) 0.889 (+101%)? 1.000 (+119%)? 1.000 (+85%)?
Combo 0.958 (+66%) 0.917 (+107%)? 1.000 (+119%)? 1.000 (+85%)?
Total Document Reciprocal Rank (TDRR)
PubMed 1.669 0.926 0.895 1.381
Term 2.204 (+32%) 1.880 (+103%)? 1.390 (+55%)? 1.736 (+26%)?
EBM 2.979 (+79%) 2.341 (+153%) 2.101 (+138%)? 2.671 (+93%)?
Combo 3.025 (+81%) 2.380 (+157%) 2.048 (+129%)? 2.593 (+88%)?
(a) Breakdown by clinical task
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
PubMed 0.281 0.356 0.526 1.353
Term 0.481 (+71%) 0.513 (+44%) 0.677 (+29%)? 1.945 (+44%)
EBM 0.677 (+141%) 0.718 (+102%) 0.936 (+78%) 2.671 (+98%)
Combo 0.688 (+145%) 0.718 (+102%) 0.962 (+83%) 2.680 (+98%)
(b) Performance across all clinical tasks
Significance at the 1% level, depending on direction of change.
Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
rerankers. Results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on the term-based, EBM, and com-
bination rerankers are also shown in Table 11 for the strict scoring condition. In most
cases, combining term scoring with EBM scoring does not help. In almost all cases,
the EBM and combination reranker perform significantly better than the term-based
reranker.
How does better ranking of citations impact end-to-end question answering perfor-
mance? We shall return to this issue in Sections 9 and 10, which describe and evaluate
the answer generation module, respectively. In the next section, we describe more
detailed experiments with our EBM citation scoring algorithm.
88
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 9
(Strict, Development) Strict results of reranking experiment on development questions for the
baseline PubMed condition, term-based reranker, EBM-based reranker, and combination
reranker.
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology
Precision at 10 (P10)
PubMed 0.130 0.133 0.100 0.253
Term 0.230 (+77%)? 0.217 (+63%)? 0.233 (+133%)? 0.293 (+16%)?
EBM 0.350 (+170%) 0.350 (+163%)? 0.267 (+167%)? 0.293 (+16%)?
Combo 0.350 (+170%) 0.367 (+175%)? 0.300 (+200%)? 0.313 (+24%)?
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
PubMed 0.088 0.108 0.058 0.164
Term 0.205 (+134%)? 0.142 (+32%)? 0.090 (+54%)? 0.246 (+50%)?
EBM 0.314 (+260%)? 0.259 (+140%)? 0.105 (+79%)? 0.265 (+62%)?
Combo 0.301 (+244%)? 0.248 (+130%)? 0.129 (+122%)? 0.273 (+67%)?
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
PubMed 0.350 0.453 0.394 0.367
Term 0.409 (+17%)? 0.581 (+28%)? 0.528 (+34%)? 0.700 (+91%)?
EBM 0.675 (+93%) 0.756 (+67%)? 0.444 (+13%)? 0.800 (+118%)?
Combo 0.569 (+63%) 0.676 (+49%)? 0.833 (+111%)? 0.700 (+91%)?
Total Document Reciprocal Rank (TDRR)
PubMed 0.610 0.711 0.568 0.721
Term 0.872 (+43%)? 1.022 (+44%)? 0.804 (+42%)? 1.224 (+70%)?
EBM 1.434 (+135%) 1.601 (+125%)? 0.824 (+45%)? 1.298 (+80%)?
Combo 1.282 (+110%) 1.502 (+111%)? 1.173 (+106%)? 1.241 (+72%)?
(a) Breakdown by clinical task
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
PubMed 0.153 0.105 0.385 0.653
Term 0.240 (+57%) 0.183 (+75%)? 0.527 (+37%) 0.974 (+49%)
EBM 0.328 (+115%) 0.264 (+152%) 0.693 (+80%) 1.371 (+110%)
Combo 0.340 (+123%) 0.260 (+148%) 0.656 (+71%) 1.315 (+101%)
(b) Performance across all clinical tasks
 Significance at the 1% level, depending on direction of change.
 Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
8. Optimizing Citation Scoring
A potential, and certainly valid, criticism of our EBM citation scoring algorithm is its
ad hoc nature. Weights for various features were assigned based on intuition, reflecting
our understanding of the domain and our knowledge about the principles of evidence-
based medicine. Parameters were fine-tuned during the system implementation process
by actively working with the development set; however, this was not done in any
systematic fashion. Nevertheless, results on the blind held-out test set confirm the
generality of our citation scoring algorithm.
89
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 10
(Strict, Test) Strict results of reranking experiment on blind held-out test questions for the
baseline PubMed condition, term-based reranker, EBM-based reranker, and combination
reranker.
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology
Precision at 10 (P10)
PubMed 0.108 0.017 0.000 0.080
Term 0.192 (+77%)? 0.133 (+700%)? 0.033 ? 0.140 (+75%)?
EBM 0.233 (+115%)? 0.167 (+900%)? 0.100 ? 0.200 (+150%)?
Combo 0.258 (+139%) 0.200 (+1100%)? 0.100 ? 0.220 (+175%)?
Mean Average Precision (MAP)
PubMed 0.061 0.024 0.015 0.050
Term 0.082 (+36%)? 0.118 (+386%)? 0.086 (+464%)? 0.086 (+74%)?
EBM 0.109 (+80%)? 0.091 (+276%)? 0.234 (+1442%)? 0.159 (+220%)?
Combo 0.120 (+99%)? 0.107 (+339%)? 0.224 (+1372%)? 0.165 (+232%)?
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR)
PubMed 0.282 0.073 0.031 0.207
Term 0.368 (+31%)? 0.429 (+488%)? 0.146 (+377%)? 0.314 (+52%)?
EBM 0.397 (+41%)? 0.431 (+490%)? 0.465 (+1422%)? 0.500 (+142%)?
Combo 0.556 (+97%) 0.422 (+479%)? 0.438 (+1331%)? 0.467 (+126%)?
Total Document Reciprocal Rank (TDRR)
PubMed 0.495 0.137 0.038 0.331
Term 0.700 (+41%)? 0.759 (+454%)? 0.171 (+355%)? 0.596 (+80%)?
EBM 0.807 (+63%)? 0.654 (+377%)? 0.513 (+1262%)? 0.946 (+186%)?
Combo 0.969 (+96%) 0.698 (+409%)? 0.479 (+1172%)? 0.975 (+195%)?
(a) Breakdown by clinical task
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
PubMed 0.069 0.045 0.190 0.328
Term 0.150 (+117%) 0.092 (+105%) 0.346 (+82%) 0.632 (+93%)
EBM 0.196 (+183%) 0.129 (+187%) 0.433 (+127%) 0.765 (+133%)
Combo 0.219 (+217%) 0.138 (+207%) 0.494 (+160%) 0.851 (+159%)
(b) Performance across all clinical tasks
 Significance at the 1% level, depending on direction of change.
 Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
In the development of various language technology applications, it is common for
the first materialization of a new capability to be rather ad hoc in its implementation.
This is a reflection of an initial attempt to understand both the problem and solution
spaces. Subsequent systems, with a better understanding of the possible technical ap-
proaches and their limitations, are then able to implement a more principled solution.
Because our clinical question-answering system is the first of its type that we are aware
of, in terms of both depth and scope, it is inevitable that our algorithms suffer from
some of these limitations. Similarly, our collection of clinical questions is the first test
collection of its type that we are aware of. Typically, construction of formal models is
only made possible by the existence of test collections. We hope that our work sheds new
insight on question answering in the clinical domain and paves the way for future work.
90
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 11
Performance differences between various rerankers.
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
Development Set
EBM vs. Term +45.0%  +30.8%  +6.7% ? +23.3% 
Combo vs. Term +46.7%  +30.4%  +9.1% ? +23.2% 
Combo vs. EBM +1.2% ? ?0.3% ? +2.3% ? ?0.1% ?
Test Set
EBM vs. Term +40.8  +40.1%  +38.3%  +37.3% 
Combo vs. Term +43.2  +40.0%  +42.1%  +37.8% 
Combo vs. EBM +1.7 ? ?0.1% ? +2.7% ? +0.3% ?
(a) Lenient Scoring
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
Development Set
EBM vs. Term +36.4%  +43.8%  +31.3% ? +40.7% 
Combo vs. Term +41.6%  +41.9%  +24.5% ? +35.0% 
Combo vs. EBM +3.8% ? ?1.3% ? ?5.2% ? ?4.1% ?
Test Set
EBM vs. Term +30.8 ? +40.4%  +24.9% ? +20.9% ?
Combo vs. Term +46.2  +50.0%  +42.8%  +34.6% 
Combo vs. EBM +11.8  +6.8% ? +14.3% ? +11.3% ?
(b) Strict Scoring
 Significance at the 1% level, depending on direction of change.
 Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
In addition, there are some theoretical obstacles for developing a more formal (say,
generative) model. Most methods for training such models require independently and
identically distributed samples from the underlying distribution?which is certainly not
the case with our test collection. Moreover, the event space of queries and documents
is extremely large or even infinite, depending on how it is defined. Our training data,
assumed to be samples from this underlying distribution, is extremely small compared
to the event space, and hence it is unlikely that popular methods (e.g., maximum
likelihood estimates) would yield an accurate characterization of the true distribution.
Furthermore, many techniques for automatically setting parameters make use
of maximum likelihood techniques?which do not maximize the correct objective
function. Maximizing the likelihood of generating the training data does not mean
that the evaluation metric under consideration (e.g., mean average precision) is also
maximized?this phenomenon is known as metric divergence.
Nevertheless, it is important to better understand the effects of parameter settings
in our system. This section describes a few experiments aimed at this goal.
The EBM score of a MEDLINE citation is the sum of three separate components,
each representing a facet of evidence-based medicine. This structure naturally suggests
a modification to Equation (3) that weights each score component differently:
SEBM = ?1SPICO + ?2SSoE + (1 ? ?1 ? ?2)Stask (8)
91
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Figure 3
The MAP performance surface for ?1 and ?2.
Table 12
Results of optimizing ?1 and ?2 on therapy questions.
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
Development Test
Baseline 0.730 0.819 0.933 2.869
Optimized 0.760 (+4.1%)? 0.822 (+0.4%)? 0.933 (+0.0%)? 2.878 (+0.3%)?
Test Test
Baseline 0.783 0.765 0.917 2.979
Optimized 0.783 (+0.0%)? 0.762 (?0.4%)? 0.917 (+0.0%)? 2.972 (?0.2%)?
?Difference not statistically significant.
The parameters ?1 and ?2 can be derived from our development set. For therapy
questions, we exhaustively searched through the entire parameter space, in increments
of hundredths, and determined the optimal settings to be ?1 = 0.38, ?2 = 0.34 (which
was found to slightly improve all metrics). The performance surface for mean average
precision is shown in Figure 3, which plots results for all possible parameter values
on the development set. Numeric results are shown in Table 12. It can be seen that
optimizing the parameters in this fashion does not lead to a statistically significant
increase in any of the metrics. Furthermore, these gains do not carry over to the blind
held-out test set. We also tried optimizing the ??s on all questions in the development
set. These results are shown in Table 13. Once again, differences are not statistically
significant.
Why does parameter optimization not help? We believe that there are two factors
at play here: On the one hand, parameter settings should be specific to the clinical
task. This explains why optimizing across all question types at the same time did
not improve performance. On the other hand, there are too few questions of any
particular type to represent an accurate sampling of all possible questions. This is why
parameter tuning on therapy questions did not significantly alter performance. These
experiments point to the need for larger test collections, which is an area for future
work.
92
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Table 13
Results of optimizing ?1 and ?2 on all questions.
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
Development Test
Baseline 0.699 0.754 0.910 2.650
Optimized 0.707 (+1.2%)? 0.755 (+0.1%)? 0.918 (+0.9%)? 2.660 (+0.4%)?
Test Test
Baseline 0.677 0.718 0.936 2.671
Optimized 0.669 (?1.1%)? 0.716 (?0.3%)? 0.936 (+0.0%)? 2.662 (?0.3%)?
?Difference not statistically significant.
Table 14
Results of assigning uniform weights to the EBM score component based on the clinical task.
P10 MAP MRR TDRR
Development Test
Baseline 0.699 0.754 0.910 2.650
?(t) = ?1 0.690 (?1.2%)? 0.738 (?2.1%)? 0.927 (+1.9%)? 2.646 (?0.2%)?
Test Test
Baseline 0.677 0.718 0.936 2.671
?(t) = ?1 0.627 (?7.4%) 0.681 (?5.2%)? 0.913 (?2.4%)? 2.519 (?5.7%)?
 Significance at the 5% level, depending on direction of change.
?Difference not statistically significant.
Another component of our EBM citation scoring algorithm that contains many
ad hoc weights is Stask, defined in Equation (7) and repeated here:
Stask =
?
t?MeSH
?(t) (9)
The function ?(t) maps a particular MeSH term to a weight that quantifies the
degree to which it is a positive or negative indicator for the particular clinical task.
Because these weights were heuristically assigned, it would be worthwhile to examine
the impact they have on performance. As a variant, we modified ?(t) so that all MeSH
terms were mapped to ?1; in other words, we did not encode granular levels of
?goodness.? These results are shown in Table 8. Although performance dropped across
all metrics, none of the differences were statistically significant except for P10 on the
test set.
The series of experiments described herein help us better understand the effects of
parameter settings on abstract reranking performance. As can be seen from the results,
our algorithm is relatively invariant with respect to the choice of parameters, con-
firming that our primary contribution is the EBM-based approach to clinical question
93
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
answering, and that our performance gains cannot be simply attributed to a fortunate
choice of parameters.
9. From Scoring Citations to Answering Questions
The aim of question-answering technology is to move from the ?hit list? paradigm of
information retrieval, where users receive a list of potentially relevant documents that
they must then browse through, to a mode of interaction where users directly receive
responses that satisfy their information needs. In our current architecture, fetching a
higher-quality ranked list is a step towards generating responsive answers.
The most important characteristic of answers, as recommended by Ely et al (2005)
in their study of real-world physicians, is that they focus on bottom-line clinical
advice?information that physicians can directly act on. Ideally, answers should in-
tegrate information from multiple clinical studies, pointing out both similarities and
differences. The system should collate concurrences, that is, if multiple abstracts ar-
rive at the same conclusion?it need not be repeated unless the physician wishes to
?drill down?; the system should reconcile contradictions, for example, if two abstracts
disagree on a particular treatment because they studied different patient populations.
We have noted that many of these desiderata make complex question answering quite
similar to multi-document summarization (Lin and Demner-Fushman 2005b), but these
features are also beyond the capabilities of current summarization systems.
It is clear that the type of answers desired by physicians require a level of semantic
analysis that is beyond the current state of the art, even with the aid of existing medical
ontologies. For example, even the seemingly straightforward task of identifying simi-
larities and differences in outcome statements is rendered exceedingly complex by the
tremendous amount of background medical knowledge that must be brought to bear
in interpreting clinical results and subtle differences in study design, objectives, and
results; the closest analogous task in computational linguistics?redundancy detection
for multi-document summarization?seems easy by comparison. Furthermore, it is
unclear if textual strings make ?good answers.? Perhaps a graphical rendering of the
semantic predicates present in relevant abstracts might more effectively convey the
desired information; see, for example, Fiszman, Rindflesch, and Kilicoglu (2004). Per-
haps some variation of multi-level bulleted lists, appropriately integrated with interface
elements for expanding and hiding items, might provide physicians a better overview
of the information landscape; see, for example, Demner-Fushman and Lin (2006).
Recognizing this complex set of issues, we decided to take a simple extractive
approach to answer generation. For each abstract in our reranked list of citations,
our system produces an answer by combining the title of the abstract and the top
three outcome sentences (in the order they appeared in the abstract). We employed the
outcome scores generated by the regression model. No attempt was made to synthesize
information from multiple citations. A formal evaluation of this simple approach to
answer generation is presented in the next section.
10. Evaluation of Clinical Answers
Evaluation of answers within a clinical setting involves a complex decision that must
not only take into account topical relevance (i.e., ?Does the answer address the infor-
mation need??), but also situational relevance (e.g., Saracevic 1975, Barry and Schamber
94
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
1998). The latter factor includes many issues such as the strength of evidence, recency
of results, and reputation of the journal. Clinicians need to carefully consider all these
elements before acting on any information for the purposes of patient care. Within the
framework of evidence-based medicine, the physician is the final arbiter of how clinical
answers are integrated into the broader activities of medical care, but this complicates
any attempt to evaluate answers generated by our system.
In assessing answers produced by our system, we decided to focus only on the
evaluation of topical relevance?assessors were only presented with answer strings,
generated in the manner described in the previous section. Metadata that would con-
tribute to judgments about situational relevance, such as the strength of evidence,
names of the authors and the journal, and so on, were purposefully suppressed. Our
evaluation compared the top five answers generated from the original PubMed hit list
and the top five answers generated from our reranked list of citations. Answers were
prepared for all 24 questions in our development set.
We recruited two medical doctors (one family practitioner, one surgeon) from the
National Library of Medicine to evaluate the textual answers. Our instructions clearly
stated that only topical relevance was to be assessed. We asked the physicians to provide
three-valued judgments:
 A plus (+) indicates that the response directly answers the question.
Naturally, the physicians would need to follow up and examine the source
citation in more detail.
 A check (
?
) indicates that the response provides clinically relevant
information that may factor into decisions about patient treatment, and
that the source citation was worth examining in more detail.
 A minus (?) indicates that the response does not provide useful
information in answering the clinical question, and that the source citation
was not worth examining.
We purposely avoided short linguistic labels for the judgments so as to sidestep
the question of ?What exactly is an answer to a clinical question?? Informally, an-
swers marked with a plus can be considered ?actionable? clinical advice. Answers
marked with a check provide relevant information that may influence the physician?s
actions.
We adopted a double-blind study design for the actual assessment process: Answers
from both systems were presented in a randomized order without any indication of
which system the response came from (duplicates were suppressed). A paper printout,
containing each question followed by the blinded answers, was presented to each
assessor. We then coded the relevance judgments in a plain text file manually. During
this entire time, the key that maps answers to systems was kept in a separate file and
hidden from everyone, including the authors. All scores were computed automatically
without human intervention.
Answer precision was calculated for two separate conditions: Under the strict
condition (Table 15), only ?plus? judgments were considered good; under the lenient
condition (Table 16), both ?plus? and ?check? judgments were considered good. As can
be seen, our EBM algorithm significantly outperforms the baseline under both the strict
and lenient conditions, according to both assessors. On average, the length of answers
generated from the original PubMed list of citations was 90 words; answers generated
from the reranked list of citations averaged 87 words. Answers from both sources
95
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Table 15
Strict answer precision (considering only ?plus? judgments).
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology All
Assessor 1
Baseline .160 .233 .333 .480 .267
EBM .260 (+63%) .367 (+58%) .333 (+0%) .600 (+25%) .367 (+37%)
Assessor 2
Baseline .040 .233 .200 .400 .183
EBM .200 (+400%) .300 (+29%) .266 (+33%) .560 (+40%) .308 (+68%)
Table 16
Lenient answer precision (considering both ?plus? and ?check? judgments).
Therapy Diagnosis Prognosis Etiology All
Assessor 1
Baseline .400 .300 .533 .520 .417
EBM .640 (+60%) .567 (+89%) .400 (?25%) .640 (+23%) .592 (+42%)
Assessor 2
Baseline .240 .267 .333 .440 .300
EBM .520 (+117%) .600 (+125%) .400 (+20%) .560 (+27%) .533 (+78%)
were significantly shorter than the abstracts from which they were extracted (250 word
average for original PubMed results and 270 word average for reranked results).
To give a feel for the types of responses that are generated by our system, consider
the following question:
What is the best treatment for analgesic rebound headaches?
The following is an example of a response that received a ?plus? judgment:
Medication overuse headache from antimigraine therapy: clinical features,
pathogenesis and management: Because of easy availability and low expense, the
greatest problem appears to be associated with barbiturate-containing combination
analgesics and over-the-counter caffeine-containing combination analgesics. The best
management advice is to raise awareness and strive for prevention. Reduction in
headache risk factors should include behavioural modification approaches to headache
control earlier in the natural history of migraine.
This answer was accepted by both physicians because it clearly states that specific
analgesics are most likely to cause the problem, and gives a direct guideline for preven-
tive treatment.
In contrast, the following response to the same question received a ?check?:
Does chronic daily headache arise de novo in association with regular use of
analgesics? Regular use of analgesics preceded the onset of daily headache in 5 patients
by a mean of 5.4 years (range, 2 to 10 years). In 1 patient, the onset of daily headache
preceded regular use of analgesics by almost 30 years. These findings suggest that
individuals with primary headache, specifically migraine, are predisposed to
developing chronic daily headache in association with regular use of analgesics.
96
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Although this answer provides information about the risks and causes of the
headaches, neither prevention nor treatment is explicitly mentioned. For these reasons
this response was marked as potentially leading to an answer, but not as containing one.
To summarize, we have presented a simple answer generation algorithm that
is capable of supplying clinically relevant responses to physicians. Compared to
PubMed, which does not take into account the principles of evidence-based medicine,
our question-answering system represents a leap forward in information access
capabilities.8
11. Related Work and Discussion
Clinical question answering is an emerging area of research that has only recently begun
to receive serious attention. As a result, there exist relatively few points of comparison to
our own work, as the research space is sparsely populated. In this section, however, we
will attempt to draw connections to other clinical information systems (although not
necessarily for question answering) and related domain-specific question-answering
systems. For an overview of systems designed to answer open-domain factoid ques-
tions, the TREC QA track overview papers are a good place to start (Voorhees and
Tice 1999). In addition, there has been much work on the application of linguistic and
semantic knowledge to information retrieval; see Lin and Demner-Fushman (2006a) for
a brief overview.
The idea that clinical information systems should be sensitive to the practice of
evidence-based medicine is not new. Based on analyses of 4,000 MEDLINE citations,
Mendonc?a and Cimino (2001) have studied MeSH terms associated with the four basic
clinical tasks of therapy, diagnosis, prognosis, and etiology. The goal was to auto-
matically classify citations for task-specific retrieval, similar in spirit to the Hedges
Project (Haynes et al 1994; Wilczynski, McKibbon, and Haynes 2001). Cimino and
Mendonc?a reported good performance for etiology, diagnosis, and in particular therapy,
but not prognosis. Although originally developed as a tool to assist in query formu-
lation, Booth (2000) pointed out that PICO frames can be employed to structure IR
results for improving precision. PICO-based querying in information retrieval is merely
an instance of faceted querying, which has been widely used by librarians since the
introduction of automated retrieval systems (e.g., Meadow et al 1989). The work of
Hearst (1996) demonstrates that faceted queries can be converted into simple filtering
constraints to boost precision.
The feasibility of automatically identifying outcome statements in secondary
sources has been demonstrated by Niu and Hirst (2004). Their study also illustrates
the importance of semantic classes and relations. However, extraction of outcome state-
ments from secondary sources (meta-analyses, in this case) differs from extraction of
outcomes from MEDLINE citations because secondary sources represent knowledge
that has already been distilled by humans (which may limit its scope). Because sec-
ondary sources are often more consistently organized, it is possible to depend on
certain surface cues for reliable extraction (which is not possible for MEDLINE ab-
stracts in general). Our study tackles outcome identification in primary medical sources
and demonstrates that respectable performance is possible with a feature-combination
approach.
8 Although note that answer generation from the PubMed results also requires the use of the outcome
extractor.
97
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
The literature also contains work on sentence-level classification of MEDLINE
abstracts for non-clinical purposes. For example, McKnight and Srinivasan (2003) de-
scribe a machine learning approach to automatically label sentences as belonging to
introduction, methods, results, or conclusion using structured abstracts as training data
(see also Lin et al 2006). Tbahriti et al (2006) have demonstrated that differential
weighting of automatically labeled sections can lead to improved retrieval performance.
Note, however, that such labels are orthogonal to PICO frame elements, and hence
are not directly relevant to knowledge extraction for clinical question answering. In a
similar vein, Light, Qiu, and Srinivasan (2004) report on the identification of speculative
statements in MEDLINE abstracts, but once again, this work is not directly applicable
to clinical question answering.
In addition to question answering, multi-document summarization provides a com-
plementary approach to addressing clinical information needs. The PERSIVAL project,
the most comprehensive study of such techniques applied on medical texts to date,
leverages patient records to generate personalized summaries in response to physicians?
queries (McKeown, Elhadad, and Hatzivassiloglou 2003; Elhadad et al 2005). Although
the system incorporates both a user and a task model, it does not explicitly capture
the principles of evidence-based medicine. Patient information is no doubt important
to answering clinical questions, and our work could certainly benefit from experiences
gained in the PERSIVAL project.
The application of domain models and deep semantic knowledge to question
answering has been explored by a variety of researchers (e.g., Jacquemart and
Zweigenbaum 2003, Rinaldi et al 2004), and was also the focus of recent workshops
on question answering in restricted domains at ACL 2004 and AAAI 2005. Our work
contributes to this ongoing discourse by demonstrating a specific application in the
domain of clinical medicine.
Finally, the evaluation of answers to complex questions remains an open research
problem. Although it is clear that measures designed for open-domain factoid questions
are not appropriate, the community has not agreed on a methodology that will allow
meaningful comparisons of results from different systems. In Sections 9 and 10, we
have discussed many of these issues. Recently, there is a growing consensus that an
evaluation methodology based on the notion of ?information nuggets? may provide
an appropriate framework for assessing the quality of answers to complex questions.
Nugget F-score has been employed as a metric in the TREC question-answering track
since 2003, to evaluate so-called definition and ?other? questions (Voorhees 2003). A
number of studies (e.g., Hildebrandt, Katz, and Lin 2004) have pointed out shortcom-
ings of the original nugget scoring model, although a number of these issues have been
recently addressed (Lin and Demner-Fushman 2005a, 2006b). However, adaptation of
the nugget evaluation methodology to a domain as specific as clinical medicine is an
endeavor that has yet to be undertaken.
12. Future Work
The design and implementation of our current system leaves many open avenues for
future exploration, one of which concerns our assumptions about the query interface.
Previously, a user study (Lin et al 2003) has shown that people are reluctant to type
full natural language questions, even after being told that they were using a question-
answering system and that typing complete questions would result in better perform-
ance. We have argued that a query interface based on structured PICO frames will
yield better-formulated queries, although it is unclear whether physicians would invest
98
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
the upfront effort necessary to accomplish this. Issuing extremely short queries appears
to be an ingrained habit of information seekers today, and the dominance of World Wide
Web searches reinforce this behavior. Given these trends, physicians may actually prefer
the rapid back-and-forth interaction style that comes with short queries. We believe
that if systems can produce noticeably better results with richer queries, users will
make more of an effort to formulate them. This, however, presents a chicken-and-egg
problem: One possible solution is to develop models that can automatically fill query
frames given a couple of keywords?this would serve to kick-start the query generation
process.
The astute reader will have noticed that the initial retrieval of abstracts in our
study was performed with high-quality manually crafted queries (that were part of
the test collection). Although this was intended to demonstrate the performance of our
EBM citation scoring algorithm with respect to a strong baseline, it also means that we
have omitted a component in the automatic question-answering process. Translating a
clinical question into a good PubMed query is not a trivial task?in our experiments,
it required an experienced searcher approximately 40 minutes on average per question.
However, it is important to note that query formulation in the clinical domain is not
a problem limited to question-answering systems, but one that users of all retrieval
systems must contend with.
Nevertheless, there are three potential solutions to this problem: First, although
there is an infinite variety of clinical questions, the number of query types is bounded
and far smaller in number; see Huang, Lin, and Demner-Fushman (2006) for an analysis.
In a query interface based on PICO frames, it is possible to identify a number of proto-
typical query frames. From these prototypes, one can generate query templates that ab-
stract over the actual slot fillers?this is the idea behind Clinical Queries. Although this
method will probably not retrieve citations as high in quality as custom-crafted queries,
there is reason to believe that as long as a reasonable set of citations is retrieved, our sys-
tem will be able to extract relevant answers (given the high accuracy of our knowledge
extractors and citation scoring algorithm). The second approach to tackling this problem
is to bypass PubMed altogether and index MEDLINE with another search engine.
Due to the rapidly changing nature of the entire MEDLINE database, experiments for
practical purposes would most likely be conducted on a static subset of the collection,
for example, the ten-year portion created for the TREC 2004 genomics track (Hersh,
Bhupatiraju, and Corley 2004). Recent results from TREC have demonstrated that high
performance ad hoc retrieval is possible in the genomics domain (Hersh et al 2005),
and it is not a stretch to imagine adopting these technologies for clinical tasks. Using
a separate search engine would provide other benefits as well: Greater control over
the document retrieval process would allow one to examine the effects of different
indexing schemes, different query operators, and techniques such as query expansion;
see, for example, Aronson, Rindflesch, and Browne (1994). Finally, yet another way to
solve the document retrieval problem is to eliminate that stage completely. Recall that
our two-stage architecture was a practical expediency, because we did not have access
to the computing resources necessary to pre-extract PICO elements from the entire
MEDLINE database and directly index the results. Given access to more resources,
a system could index identified PICO elements and directly match queries against a
knowledge store.
Finally, answer generation remains an area that awaits further exploration, although
we would have to first define what a good answer should be. We have empirically
verified that an extractive approach based on outcome sentences is actually quite
satisfactory, but our algorithm does not currently integrate evidence from multiple
99
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
abstracts; although see Demner-Fushman and Lin (2006). Furthermore, the current an-
swer generator does not handle complex issues such as contradictory and inconsistent
statements. To address these very difficult challenges, finer-grained semantic analysis
of medical texts is required.
13. Conclusion
Our experiments in clinical question answering provide some answers to the broader
research question regarding the role of knowledge-based and statistical techniques in
advanced question answering. This work demonstrates that the two approaches are
complementary and can be seamlessly integrated into algorithms that draw from the
best of both worlds. Explicitly coded semantic knowledge, in the form of UMLS, and
software for leveraging this resource?for example, MetaMap?combine to simplify
many knowledge extraction tasks that would be far more difficult otherwise. The re-
spectable performance of our population, problem, and intervention extractors, all of
which use relatively simple rules, provides evidence that complex clinical problems
can be tackled by appropriate use of ontological knowledge. Explicitly coded semantic
knowledge is less helpful for outcome identification due to the large variety of possi-
ble ?outcomes;? nevertheless, knowledge-rich features can be combined with simple,
statistically derived features to build a good outcome classifier. Overall, this work
demonstrates that the application of a semantic domain model yields clinical question
answering capabilities that significantly outperform presently available technology,
especially when coupled with traditional statistical methods (classification, evidence
combination, etc.).
We have taken an important step in building a complete question-answering system
that assists physicians in the patient care process. Our work demonstrates that the
principles of evidence-based medicine can be computationally captured and imple-
mented in a system, and although we are still far from operational deployment, these
positive results are certainly encouraging. Information systems in support of the clinical
decision-making process have the potential to improve the quality of health care, which
is a worthy goal indeed.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Charles
Sneiderman and Dr. Kin Wah Fung for
the evaluation of the answers. For this
work, D. D-F. was supported by an
appointment to the National Library of
Medicine Research Participation Program
administered by the Oak Ridge Institute
for Science and Education through an
inter-agency agreement between the U.S.
Department of Energy and the National
Library of Medicine. For this work, J. L.
was supported in part by a grant from the
National Library of Medicine, where he
was a visiting researcher during the
summer of 2005. We would like to thank
the anonymous reviewers for their valuable
comments. J. L. would like to thank Kiri
and Esther for their kind support.
References
Ad Hoc Working Group for Critical
Appraisal of the Medical Literature. 1987.
A proposal for more informative abstracts
of clinical articles. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 106:595?604.
Aronson, Alan R. 2001. Effective mapping
of biomedical text to the UMLS
Metathesaurus: The MetaMap program.
In Proceeding of the 2001 Annual Symposium
of the American Medical Informatics
Association (AMIA 2001), pages 17?21,
Portland, OR.
Aronson, Alan R., James G. Mork,
Clifford W. Gay, Susanne M. Humphrey,
and Willie J. Rogers. 2004. The NLM
Indexing Initiative?s Medical Text
Indexer. In Proceedings of the 11th
World Congress on Medical Informatics
100
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
(MEDINFO 2004), pages 268?272,
San Francisco, CA.
Aronson, Alan R., Thomas C. Rindflesch,
and Allen C. Browne. 1994. Exploiting a
large thesaurus for information retrieval.
In Proceedings of RIAO 1994: Intelligent
Multimedia Information Retrieval Systems
and Management, pages 197?216, New York.
Baeza-Yates, Ricardo and Berthier
Ribeiro-Neto. 1999. Modern Information
Retrieval. ACM Press, New York.
Barry, Carol and Linda Schamber. 1998.
Users? criteria for relevance evaluation:
A cross-situational comparison.
Information Processing and Management,
34(2/3):219?236.
Booth, Andrew. 2000. Formulating the
question. In Andrew Booth and Graham
Walton, editors, Managing Knowledge in
Health Services. Library Association
Publishing, London, England.
Chambliss, M. Lee and Jennifer Conley. 1996.
Answering clinical questions. The Journal of
Family Practice, 43:140?144.
Cogdill, Keith W. and Margaret E. Moore.
1997. First-year medical students?
information needs and resource selection:
Responses to a clinical scenario. Bulletin of
the Medical Library Association, 85(1):51?54.
Covell, David G., Gwen C. Uman, and
Phil R. Manning. 1985. Information needs
in office practice: Are they being met?
Annals of Internal Medicine, 103(4):596?599.
De Groote, Sandra L. and Josephine L.
Dorsch. 2003. Measuring use patterns
of online journals and databases.
Journal of the Medical Library Association,
91(2):231?240.
Demner-Fushman, Dina, Barbara Few,
Susan E. Hauser, and George Thoma. 2006.
Automatically identifying health outcome
information in MEDLINE records. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 13(1):52?60.
Demner-Fushman, Dina and Jimmy Lin.
2005. Knowledge extraction for clinical
question answering: Preliminary results.
In Proceedings of the AAAI-05 Workshop on
Question Answering in Restricted Domains,
pages 1?10, Pittsburgh, PA.
Demner-Fushman, Dina and Jimmy Lin.
2006. Answer extraction, semantic
clustering, and extractive summarization
for clinical question answering. In
Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (COLING/ACL
2006), pages 841?848, Sydney, Australia.
Ebell, Mark H., Jay Siwek, Barry D. Weiss,
Steven H. Woolf, Jeffrey Susman, Bernard
Ewigman, and Marjorie Bowman. 2004.
Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy
(SORT): A patient-centered approach to
grading evidence in the medical literature.
The Journal of the American Board of Family
Practice, 17(1):59?67.
Elhadad, Noemie, Min-Yen Kan, Judith
Klavans, and Kathleen McKeown. 2005.
Customization in a unified framework for
summarizing medical literature. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,
33(2):179?198.
Ely, John W., Jerome A. Osheroff, Mark H.
Ebell, George R. Bergus, Barcey T. Levy,
M. Lee Chambliss, and Eric R. Evans. 1999.
Analysis of questions asked by family
doctors regarding patient care. BMJ,
319:358?361.
Ely, John W., Jerome A. Osheroff, M. Lee
Chambliss, Mark H. Ebell, and Marcy E.
Rosenbaum. 2005. Answering physicians?
clinical questions: Obstacles and potential
solutions. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 12(2):217?224.
Fiszman, Marcelo, Thomas C. Rindflesch,
and Halil Kilicoglu. 2004. Abstraction
summarization for managing the
biomedical research literature. In
Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL 2004
Workshop on Computational Lexical
Semantics, pages 76?83, Boston, MA.
Gorman, Paul N., Joan S. Ash, and
Leslie W. Wykoff. 1994. Can primary care
physicians? questions be answered using
the medical journal literature? Bulletin of
the Medical Library Association,
82(2):140?146.
Haynes, R. Brian, Nancy Wilczynski, K. Ann
McKibbon, Cynthia J. Walker, and John C.
Sinclair. 1994. Developing optimal search
strategies for detecting clinically sound
studies in MEDLINE. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association,
1(6):447?458.
Hearst, Marti A. 1996. Improving full-text
precision on short queries using simple
constraints. In Proceedings of the Fifth
Annual Symposium on Document Analysis
and Information Retrieval (SDAIR 1996),
pages 217?232, Las Vegas, NV.
Hersh, William, Ravi Teja Bhupatiraju,
and Sarah Corley. 2004. Enhancing
access to the bibliome: The TREC
genomics track. In Proceedings of the
11th World Congress on Medical Informatics
(MEDINFO 2004), pages 773?777,
San Francisco, CA.
101
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 1
Hersh, William, Aaron Cohen, Jianji Yang,
Ravi Teja Bhupatiraju1, Phoebe Roberts,
and Marti Hearst. 2005. TREC 2005
genomics track overview. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC 2005), Gaithersburg, MD.
Hildebrandt, Wesley, Boris Katz, and Jimmy
Lin. 2004. Answering definition questions
with multiple knowledge sources. In
Proceedings of the 2004 Human Language
Technology Conference and the North
American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics Annual
Meeting (HLT/NAACL 2004), pages 49?56,
Boston, MA.
Hirschman, Lynette and Robert Gaizauskas.
2001. Natural language question
answering: The view from here. Natural
Language Engineering, 7(4):275?300.
Huang, Xiaoli, Jimmy Lin, and Dina
Demner-Fushman. 2006. Evaluation of
PICO as a knowledge representation for
clinical questions. In Proceeding of the 2006
Annual Symposium of the American Medical
Informatics Association (AMIA 2006),
pages 359?363, Washington, D.C.
Ingwersen, Peter. 1999. Cognitive
information retrieval. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 34:3?52.
Jacquemart, Pierre and Pierre Zweigenbaum.
2003. Towards a medical
question-answering system: A feasibility
study. In Robert Baud, Marius Fieschi,
Pierre Le Beux, and Patrick Ruch, editors,
The New Navigators: From Professionals to
Patients, volume 95 of Actes Medical
Informatics Europe, Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics. IOS Press,
Amsterdam, pages 463?468.
Kauffman, Ralph E., L. A. Sawyer, and
M. L. Scheinbaum. 1992. Antipyretic
efficacy of ibuprofen vs acetaminophen.
American Journal of Diseases of Children,
146(5):622?625.
Light, Marc, Xin Ying Qiu, and Padmini
Srinivasan. 2004. The language of
bioscience: Facts, speculations, and
statements in between. In Proceedings of the
BioLink 2004 Workshop at HLT/NAACL
2004, pages 17?24, Boston, MA.
Lin, Jimmy and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2005a. Automatically evaluating answers
to definition questions. In Proceedings of the
2005 Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP
2005), pages 931?938, Vancouver, Canada.
Lin, Jimmy and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2005b. Evaluating summaries and
answers: Two sides of the same coin? In
Proceedings of the ACL 2005 Workshop on
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures
for MT and/or Summarization, pages 41?48,
Ann Arbor, MI.
Lin, Jimmy and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2006a. The role of knowledge in
conceptual retrieval: A study in the
domain of clinical medicine. In Proceedings
of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2006),
pages 99?106, Seattle, WA.
Lin, Jimmy and Dina Demner-Fushman.
2006b. Will pyramids built of nuggets
topple over? In Proceedings of the 2006
Human Language Technology Conference
and North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
Annual Meeting (HLT/NAACL 2006),
pages 383?390, New York.
Lin, Jimmy, Damianos Karakos, Dina
Demner-Fushman, and Sanjeev
Khudanpur. 2006. Generative content
models for structural analysis of medical
abstracts. In Proceedings of the HLT/
NAACL 2006 Workshop on Biomedical
Natural Language Processing (BioNLP?06),
pages 65?72, New York.
Lin, Jimmy, Dennis Quan, Vineet Sinha,
Karun Bakshi, David Huynh, Boris Katz,
and David R. Karger. 2003. What makes a
good answer? The role of context in
question answering. In Proceedings of the
Ninth IFIP TC13 International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction (INTERACT
2003), pages 25?32, Zu?rich, Switzerland.
Lindberg, Donald A., Betsy L. Humphreys,
and Alexa T. McCray. 1993. The Unified
Medical Language System. Methods of
Information in Medicine, 32(4):281?291.
McCray, Alexa T., Anita Burgun, and Olivier
Bodenreider. 2001. Aggregating UMLS
semantic types for reducing conceptual
complexity. In Proceedings of 10th World
Congress on Medical Informatics (MEDINFO
2001), pages 216?220, London, England.
McKeown, Kathleen, Noemie Elhadad,
and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003.
Leveraging a common representation for
personalized search and summarization
in a medical digital library. In Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries (JCDL 2003), pages
159?170, Houston, TX.
McKnight, Larry and Padmini Srinivasan.
2003. Categorization of sentence types
in medical abstracts. In Proceeding of the
2003 Annual Symposium of the American
102
Demner-Fushman and Lin Answering Clinical Questions
Medical Informatics Association (AMIA
2003), pages 440?444, Washington, D.C.
Meadow, Charles T., Barbara A. Cerny,
Christine L. Borgman, and Donald O.
Case. 1989. Online access to knowledge:
System design. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 40(2):86?98.
Mendonc?a, Eneida A. and James J. Cimino.
2001. Building a knowledge base to
support a digital library. In Proceedings
of 10th World Congress on Medical
Informatics (MEDINFO 2001),
pages 222?225, London, England.
Mladenic, Dunja and Marko Grobelnik. 1999.
Feature selection for unbalanced class
distribution and Na??ve Bayes. In
Proceedings of the Sixteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML
1999), pages 258?267, Bled, Slovenia.
Nenkova, Ani and Rebecca Passonneau.
2004. Evaluating content selection in
summarization: The pyramid method. In
Proceedings of the 2004 Human Language
Technology Conference and the North
American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics Annual Meeting
(HLT/NAACL 2004), pages 145?152,
Boston, MA.
Niu, Yun and Graeme Hirst. 2004. Analysis
of semantic classes in medical text for
question answering. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2004 Workshop on Question Answering
in Restricted Domains, pages 54?61,
Barcelona, Spain.
Pratt, Wanda and Meliha Yetisgen-Yildiz.
2003. A study of biomedical concept
identification: MetaMap vs. people.
In Proceeding of the 2003 Annual
Symposium of the American Medical
Informatics Association (AMIA 2003),
pages 529?533, Washington, D.C.
Richardson, W. Scott, Mark C. Wilson, James
Nishikawa, and Robert S. Hayward. 1995.
The well-built clinical question: A key to
evidence-based decisions. American College
of Physicians Journal Club, 123(3):A12?A13.
Rinaldi, Fabio, James Dowdall, Gerold
Schneider, and Andreas Persidis. 2004.
Answering questions in the genomics
domain. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004
Workshop on Question Answering in
Restricted Domains, pages 46?53,
Barcelona, Spain.
Rindflesch, Thomas C. and Marcelo Fiszman.
2003. The interaction of domain
knowledge and linguistic structure in
natural language processing: Interpreting
hypernymic propositions in biomedical
text. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
36(6):462?477.
Sackett, David L., Sharon E. Straus, W. Scott
Richardson, William Rosenberg, and
R. Brian Haynes. 2000. Evidence-Based
Medicine: How to Practice and Teach EBM,
second edition. Churchill Livingstone,
Edinburgh, Scotland.
Saracevic, Tefko. 1975. Relevance: A review
of and a framework for thinking on the
notion in information science. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science,
26(6):321?343.
Sneiderman, Charles, Dina
Demner-Fushman, Marcelo Fiszman, and
Thomas C. Rindflesch. 2005. Semantic
characteristics of MEDLINE citations
useful for therapeutic decision-making.
In Proceeding of the 2005 Annual Symposium
of the American Medical Informatics
Association (AMIA 2005), page 1117,
Washington, D.C.
Tbahriti, Imad, Christine Chichester,
Fre?de?rique Lisacek, and Patrick Ruch.
2006. Using argumentation to retrieve
articles with similar citations: An inquiry
into improving related articles search in
the MEDLINE digital library. International
Journal of Medical Informatics, 75(6):488?495.
Ting, Kai Ming and Ian H. Witten. 1999.
Issues in stacked generalization. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 10:271?289.
Voorhees, Ellen M. 2003. Overview of the
TREC 2003 question answering track. In
Proceedings of the Twelfth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC 2003), pages 54?68,
Gaithersburg, MD.
Voorhees, Ellen M. and Dawn M. Tice.
1999. The TREC-8 question answering
track evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-8),
pages 83?106, Gaithersburg, MD.
Wilczynski, Nancy, K. Ann McKibbon, and
R. Brian Haynes. 2001. Enhancing retrieval
of best evidence for health care from
bibliographic databases: Calibration
of the hand search of the literature. In
Proceedings of 10th World Congress on
Medical Informatics (MEDINFO 2001),
pages 390?393, London, England.
Yang, Yiming and Jan O. Pedersen. 1997.
A comparative study on feature selection
in text categorization. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML 1997),
pages 412?420, Nashville, TN.
103

