Unsupervised Acquisition of Predominant
Word Senses
Diana McCarthy
University of Sussex
Rob Koeling
University of Sussex
Julie Weeds
University of Sussex
John Carroll?
University of Sussex
There has been a great deal of recent research into word sense disambiguation, particularly
since the inception of the Senseval evaluation exercises. Because a word often has more than
one meaning, resolving word sense ambiguity could benefit applications that need some level
of semantic interpretation of language input. A major problem is that the accuracy of word
sense disambiguation systems is strongly dependent on the quantity of manually sense-tagged
data available, and even the best systems, when tagging every word token in a document,
perform little better than a simple heuristic that guesses the first, or predominant, sense of a
word in all contexts. The success of this heuristic is due to the skewed nature of word sense
distributions. Data for the heuristic can come from either dictionaries or a sample of sense-
tagged data. However, there is a limited supply of the latter, and the sense distributions and
predominant sense of a word can depend on the domain or source of a document. (The first
sense of ?star? for example would be different in the popular press and scientific journals).
In this article, we expand on a previously proposed method for determining the predominant
sense of a word automatically from raw text. We look at a number of different data sources and
parameterizations of the method, using evaluation results and error analyses to identify where
the method performs well and also where it does not. In particular, we find that the method
does not work as well for verbs and adverbs as nouns and adjectives, but produces more accurate
predominant sense information than the widely used SemCor corpus for nouns with low coverage
in that corpus. We further show that the method is able to adapt successfully to domains when
using domain specific corpora as input and where the input can either be hand-labeled for domain
or automatically classified.
? Department of Informatics, Brighton BN1 9QH, UK. E-mail: {dianam,robk,juliewe,johnca}@sussex.ac.uk.
Submission received: 16 November 2005; revised submission received: 12 July 2006; accepted for publication
16 February 2007.
? 2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
1. Introduction
In word sense disambiguation, the ?first sense? heuristic (choosing the first, or predom-
inant sense of a word) is used by most state-of-the-art systems as a back-off method
when information from the context is not sufficient to make a more informed choice.
In this article, we present an in-depth study of a method for automatically acquiring
predominant senses for words from raw text (McCarthy et al 2004a).
The method uses distributionally similar words listed as ?nearest neighbors?
in automatically acquired thesauruses (e.g., Lin 1998a), and takes advantage of the
observation that the more prevalent a sense of a word, the more neighbors will relate
to that sense, and the higher their distributional similarity scores will be. The senses
of a word are defined in a sense inventory. We use WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) because
this is widely used, is publicly available, and has plenty of gold-standard evaluation
data available (Miller et al 1993; Cotton et al 2001; Preiss and Yarowsky 2001; Mihalcea
and Edmonds 2004). The distributional strength of the neighbors is associated with the
senses of a word using a measure of semantic similarity which relies on the relationships
between word senses, such as hyponyms (available in an inventory such as WordNet)
or overlap in the definitions of word senses (available in most dictionaries), or both.
In this article we provide a detailed discussion and quantitative analysis of the
motivation behind the first sense heuristic, and a full description of our method. We
extend previously reported work in a number of different directions:
 We evaluate the method on all parts of speech (PoS) on SemCor (Miller
et al 1993). Previous experiments (McCarthy et al 2004c) evaluated only
nouns on SemCor, or all PoS but only on the Senseval-2 (Cotton et al 2001)
and Senseval-3 (Mihalcea and Edmonds 2004) data. The evaluation on all
PoS is much more extensive because the SemCor corpus is composed of
220,000 words in contrast to the 6 documents in the Senseval-2 and -3
English all words data (10,000 words).
 We compare two WordNet similarity measures in our evaluation on
nouns, and also contrast performance using two publicly available
thesauruses, both produced from the same NEWSWIRE corpus, but one
derived using a proximity-based approach and the other using
dependency relations from a parser. It turns out that the results from the
proximity-based thesaurus are comparable to those from the dependency-
based thesaurus; this is encouraging for applying the method to languages
without sophisticated analysis tools.
 We manually analyze a sample of errors from the SemCor evaluation. A
small number of errors can be traced back to inherent shortcomings of our
method, but the main source of error is due to noise from related senses.
This is a common problem for all WSD systems (Ide and Wilks 2006) but
one which is only recently starting to be addressed by the WSD
community (Navigli, Litkowski, and Hargraves 2007).
 One motivation for an automatic method for acquiring predominant
senses is that there will always be words for which there are insufficient
data available in manually sense-tagged resources. We compare the
performance of our automatic method with the first sense heuristic
derived from SemCor on nouns in the Senseval-2 data. We find that the
554
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
automatic method outperforms the one obtained from manual annotations
in SemCor for nouns with fewer than five occurrences in SemCor.
 Aside from the lack of coverage of manually annotated data, there is a
need for first sense heuristics to be specific to domain. We explore the
potential for applying the method with domain-specific text for all PoS in
an experiment using a gold-standard domain-specific resource (Magnini
and Cavaglia` 2000) which we have used previously only with nouns. We
show that although there is a little mileage to be had from domain-specific
first sense heuristics for verbs, nouns benefit greatly from domain-specific
training.
 In previous work (Koeling, McCarthy, and Carroll 2005) we produced
manually sense-annotated domain-specific test corpora for a lexical
sample, and demonstrated that predominant senses acquired (from
hand-classified corpora) in the same domain as the test data outperformed
the SemCor first sense. We further this exploration by contrasting with
results from training on automatically categorized text from the English
Gigaword Corpus and show that the results are comparable to those using
hand-classified domain data.
The article is organized as follows. In the next section we motivate the use of pre-
dominant sense information in WSD systems and the need for acquiring this information
automatically. In Section 3 we give an overview of related work in WSD, focusing on the
acquisition of prior sense distributions and domain-specific sense information. Section 4
describes our acquisition method. Section 5 describes the experimental setup for the
work reported in this article. Section 6 describes four experiments. The first evaluates
the first sense heuristic using predominant sense information acquired for all PoS on
SemCor; for nouns we compare two semantic similarity methods and three different
types of distributional thesaurus. We also report an error analysis for all PoS of our
method. The second experiment compares the performance of the automatic method
to the manually produced data in SemCor, on nouns in the Senseval-2 data, looking
particularly at nouns which have a low frequency in SemCor. The third uses corpora in
restricted domains and the subject field code gold standard of Magnini and Cavaglia`
(2000) to investigate the potential for domain-specific rankings for different PoS. The
fourth compares results when we train and test on domain-specific corpora, where
the training data is (1) manually categorized for domain and from the same corpus
as the test data, and (2) where the training data is harvested automatically from another
corpus which is categorized automatically. Finally, we conclude (Section 7) and discuss
directions for future work (Section 8).
2. Motivation
The problem of disambiguating the meanings of words in text has received much
attention recently, particularly since the inception of the Senseval evaluation exercises
(Kilgarriff and Palmer 2000; Preiss and Yarowsky 2001; Mihalcea and Edmonds 2004).
One of the standard Senseval tasks (the ?all words? task) is to tag each open class word
with one of its senses, as listed in a dictionary or thesaurus such as WordNet (Fellbaum
1998). The most accurate word sense disambiguation (WSD) systems use supervised
machine learning approaches (Stevenson and Wilks 2001), trained on text which has
been sense tagged by hand. However, the performance of these systems is strongly
555
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
dependent on the quantity of training data available (Yarowsky and Florian 2002),
and manually sense-annotated text is extremely costly to produce (Kilgarriff 1998). The
largest all words sense tagged corpus is SemCor, which is 220,000 words taken from
103 passages, each of about 2,000 words, from the Brown corpus (Francis and Kuc?era
1979) and the complete text of a 19th-century American novel, The Red Badge of Courage,
which totals 45,600 words (Landes, Leacock, and Tengi 1998). Approximately half of the
words in this corpus are open-class words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) and
these have been linked to WordNet senses by human taggers using a software interface.
The shortage of training data due to the high costs of tagging texts has motivated
research into unsupervised methods for WSD. But in the English all-words tasks in
Senseval-2 and Senseval-3 (Snyder and Palmer 2004), systems that did not make
use of hand-tagged data (in some form or other) performed substantially worse than
those that did. Table 1 summarizes the situation. It gives the precision and recall of
the best1 two supervised (S) and unsupervised (U)2 systems for the English all words
and English lexical sample for Senseval-23 and -3, along with the first sense baseline
(FS) reported by the task organizers.4 This is a simple application of the ?first sense?
heuristic?that is, using the most common sense of a word for every instance of it in the
test corpus, regardless of context. Although contextual WSD is of course preferable, the
baseline is a very powerful one and unsupervised systems find it surprisingly hard to
beat (indeed, some of the systems that report themselves as unsupervised actually make
some use of a manually obtained first-sense heuristic). Considering both precision and
recall, only 5 of 26 systems in the Senseval-3 English all-words task beat the first sense
heuristic as derived from SemCor (61.5%5), and then by only a few percentage points
(the top system scoring 65% precision and recall) despite using hand-tagged training
data available from SemCor and previous Senseval data sets, large sets of contextual
features, and sophisticated machine learning algorithms.
The performance of WSD systems, at least for all-words tasks, seems to have
plateaued at a level just above the first sense heuristic (Snyder and Palmer 2004). This is
due to the shortage of training data and the often fine granularity of sense distinctions.
Ide and Wilks (2006) argue that it is best to concentrate effort on distinctions which
are useful for applications and where systems can be confident of high precision. In
cases where systems are less confident, but word senses, rather than words, are needed,
the first sense heuristic is a powerful back-off strategy. This strategy is dependent on
information provided in dictionaries. Two dictionaries that have been used by English
WSD systems are the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE) (Procter
1 We rank the systems by the recall scores, because this is the accuracy over the entire test set regardless of
how many items were attempted.
2 Note that the classification of systems as unsupervised is not straightforward. Systems reported as
unsupervised in the Senseval proceedings sometimes make use of some manual annotations. For
example, the top scoring system that reported itself unsupervised in the Senseval-3 lexical sample task
used manually sense-tagged training data for constructing glosses.
3 The verb lexical sample was done as a separate exercise for Senseval-2, and for brevity we have not
included the results from this task.
4 The all-words task organizers used the first sense as listed in WordNet. This is based on the SemCor first
sense because WordNet senses are ordered according to the frequency data in SemCor. However, where
senses are not found in WordNet, the ordering is arbitrarily determined as a function of the ?grind?
program (see http://wordnet.princeton.edu/man/grind.1WN.htm). The lexical sample task organizers
state that they use the ?most frequent sense? but do not stipulate if this is taken from WordNet, or
directly from SemCor.
5 This figure is the arithmetic mean of two published estimates (Snyder and Palmer 2004), the difference
being due to the treatment of multiwords.
556
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Table 1
The best two performing systems of each type (according to fine-grained recall) in Senseval-2
and -3.
All words Lexical sample
Precision (%) Recall (%) Precision (%) Recall (%)
Senseval-2 S 69.0 69.0 64.2 64.2
Senseval-2 S 63.6 63.6 63.8 63.8
Senseval-2 U 45.1 45.1 40.2 40.1
Senseval-2 U 36.0 36.0 58.1 31.9
FS baseline 57.0 57.0 47.6 47.6
Senseval-3 S 65.1 65.1 72.9 72.9
Senseval-3 S 65.1 64.2 72.6 72.6
Senseval-3 U 58.3 58.2 66.1 65.7
Senseval-3 U 55.7 54.6 56.3 56.3
FS baseline 61.5 61.5 55.2 55.2
1978) and WordNet (Fellbaum 1998). These both provide a ranking of senses accord-
ing to their predominance. The sense ordering in LDOCE is based on lexicographer
intuition, whereas in WordNet the senses are ordered according to their frequency in
SemCor (Miller et al 1993).
There are two major problems with deriving a first sense heuristic from these types
of resources. The first is that the predominant sense of a word varies according to
the source of the document (McCarthy and Carroll 2003) and with the domain. For
example, the first sense of star as derived from SemCor is celestial body, but if one were
disambiguating popular news stories then celebrity would be more likely. Domain,
topic, and genre are important in WSD (Martinez and Agirre 2000; Magnini et al 2002)
and the sense-frequency distributions of words depend on all of these factors. Any
dictionary will provide only a single sense ranking, whether this is derived from sense-
tagged data as in WordNet, lexicographer intuition as in LDOCE, or inspection of corpus
data as in the Oxford Advanced Learner?s Dictionary (Hornby 1989). A fixed order of
senses may not reflect the data that an NLP system is dealing with.
The second problem with obtaining predominant sense information applies to the
use of hand-tagged resources, such as SemCor. Such resources are relatively small due
to the cost of manual tagging (Kilgarriff 1998). Many words will simply not be covered,
or occur only a few times. For many words in WordNet the ordering of word senses is
based on a very small number of occurrences in SemCor. For example, the first sense
of tiger is an audacious person whereas most people would assume the carnivorous
animal sense is more prevalent. This is because the two senses each occur exactly once
in SemCor, and when there is no frequency information to break the tie the WordNet
sense ordering is assigned arbitrarily. There are many fairly common words (such as
the noun crane) which do not occur at all in SemCor. Table 2 gives the number and
percentage of words6 in WordNet and the BNC which do not occur in SemCor. As one
would expect from Zipf?s law, a substantial number of words do not occur in SemCor,
even when we do not consider multiwords. Many of these words are extremely rare, but
6 Here and elsewhere in this article we give figures only for words without embedded spaces, that is, not
multiwords.
557
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 2
Words (excluding multiwords) in WordNet 1.7.1 and the BNC without any data in SemCor.
WordNet types BNC types
PoS No. % No. %
noun 43,781 81.9 360,535 97.5
verb 4,741 56.4 25,292 87.6
adjective 14,991 72.3 95,908 95.4
adverb 2,405 64.4 10,223 89.2
Table 3
Polysemous word types in the Senseval-2 and -3 English all-words tasks test documents with no
data in SemCor (0 columns), or with very little data (? 1 and ? 5 occurrences). Note that there
are no annotations for adverbs in the Senseval-3 documents.
Senseval-2 Senseval-3
0 ? 1 ? 5 0 ? 1 ? 5
PoS No. % No. % No. % No. % No. % No. %
noun 12 3.2 28 7.4 49 12.9 13 3.1 26 6.3 69 16.7
verb 7 2.1 11 3.4 28 8.6 3 0.9 10 2.9 36 10.4
adjective 9 4.2 16 7.4 50 23.1 8 4.7 15 8.9 33 19.5
adverb 1 0.9 1 0.9 2 1.8 ? ? ? ? ? ?
in any given document it is likely that there will be at least some words without SemCor
data. Table 3 quantifies this, for the Senseval-2 and -3 all-words tasks test data, showing
the percentage of polysemous word types with no frequency information in SemCor, the
percentage with zero or one occurrences, and the percentage with up to five occurrences.
(For example, the table indicates that 12.9% of nouns in the Senseval-2 data, and 16.7%
in Senseval-3, have five or fewer occurrences in SemCor.) Thus, although SemCor may
cover many frequently occurring word types in a given document, there are likely to be
a substantial proportion for which there is very little or no information available.
Tables 4 and 5 present an analysis of the actual ambiguity of polysemous words
within the six documents making up the Senseval-2 and -3 all-words test data. They
show the extent to which these words are used in a predominant sense, within a
document, and the extent to which this is the same as that given by SemCor. The two
tables share a common format: columns 2?5 give percentages over all ?document/word
type? combinations. The second column shows the percentage of the ?document/word
type? combinations where the word is used in the document in only one of its senses.
The fourth column shows the same percentage but for ?document/word type? combi-
nations where the word is used in more than one sense in the document. The third and
fifth columns give the percentage of the words in the preceding columns (second and
fourth, respectively) where the first sense for the word in the document is the same as in
SemCor (FS = SC FS). For the third column, this is the only sense that this word appears
in within the document. (Note that for any row, columns 2 and 4 account for all possibil-
ities so will always add up to 100.) The sixth column gives the mean degree of polysemy,
according to WordNet, for the set of words that these figures are calculated for.
558
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Table 4
Most frequent sense analysis for Senseval-2 and -3 polysemous lemmas occurring more than
once in a document (adverb data is only from Senseval-2).
1 sense > 1 sense
PoS % FS = SC FS % % FS = SC FS % Mean polysemy
noun 72.2 52.2 27.8 7.3 5.9
verb 45.6 25.1 54.4 16.9 12.7
adjective 62.9 40.5 37.1 10.3 4.8
adverb 64.7 50.0 35.3 17.6 4.7
The figures in Table 4 are for words occurring more than once in a given Senseval
test document. The tendency for words to be used in only one sense in any given
document7 is strongest for nouns, although adverbs and adjectives also tend towards
one sense. Verbs are on average much more polysemous than the other parts of speech
yet still 45.6% of polysemous verbs which occur more than once are used in only a single
sense. However, because verbs are in general more polysemous, it makes it less likely
that if a verb occurs in only one sense in a document then it will be the one indicated by
SemCor.
The figures in Table 5 are for all words in the Senseval documents (not just those oc-
curring more than once), showing the accuracy of a SemCor-derived first-sense heuristic
for words with a frequency below a specified threshold (column 1) in SemCor. The table
shows that although having a first sense from SemCor is certainly useful, when looking
at figures for all the words in the Senseval documents a good proportion have first
senses other than the one indicated by SemCor. Furthermore, the lower the frequency
in SemCor the more likely that the first sense indicated by SemCor is wrong. (However,
the situation is slightly different for adverbs because there are not many with low
frequency in SemCor and they are on average not very polysemous, so for them a first
sense derived from a resource like SemCor?where one exists?is possibly sufficient.)
These results show that although SemCor is a useful resource, there will always be
words for which its coverage is inadequate. In addition, few languages have extensive
hand-tagged resources or sense orderings produced by lexicographers. Moreover, gen-
eral resources containing word sense information are not likely to be appropriate when
processing language for a wider variety of domains, topics, and genres. What is needed
is a means to find predominant senses automatically.
3. Related Work
Most research in WSD to date has concentrated on using contextual features, typically
neighboring words, to help infer the correct sense of a target word. In contrast, our
work is aimed at discovering the predominant sense of a word from raw text because
7 The tendency for words to be used in only one sense in a given discourse is weaker for fine-grained
distinctions (Krovetz 1998) compared to coarse-grained distinctions (Gale, Church, and Yarowsky 1992).
Nevertheless, even with a fine-grained inventory the first sense heuristic is certainly powerful, as shown
in Table 1.
559
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 5
Most frequent sense analysis for all polysemous lemmas in the Senseval-2 and -3 test data,
broken down by their frequencies of occurrence in SemCor (adverb data is only from
Senseval-2).
1 sense > 1 sense
Frequency % FS = SC FS % % FS = SC FS % Mean polysemy
noun
? 1 (54) 96.3 24.1 3.7 0.0 2.8
? 5 (118) 96.6 43.2 3.4 0.0 3.2
? 10 (191) 96.9 48.7 3.1 0.0 3.3
all (792) 88.8 51.6 11.2 2.5 5.5
verb
? 1 (21) 100.0 33.3 0.0 0.0 2.4
? 5 (64) 98.4 35.9 1.6 1.6 3.2
? 10 (110) 98.2 38.2 1.8 1.8 3.5
all (671) 82.6 39.3 17.4 5.1 9.0
adjective
? 1 (31) 93.5 19.4 6.5 0.0 2.5
? 5 (83) 95.2 34.9 4.8 1.2 2.7
? 10 (120) 90.8 40.8 9.2 1.7 2.8
all (385) 82.6 46.2 17.4 3.6 5.1
adverb
? 1 (1) 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 2.0
? 5 (2) 50.0 50.0 50.0 0.0 2.0
? 10 (8) 87.5 62.5 12.5 0.0 2.3
all (111) 82.9 62.2 17.1 5.4 4.0
the first sense heuristic is so powerful, and because manually sense-tagged data is not
always available.
Lapata and Brew (2004) highlighted the importance of a good prior in WSD. They
used syntactic evidence to find a prior distribution for Levin (1993) verb classes, and
incorporated this in a WSD system. Lapata and Brew obtained their priors for verb
classes directly from subcategorization evidence in a parsed corpus, whereas we use
parsed data to find distributionally similar words (nearest neighbors) to the target
word which reflect the different senses of the word and have associated distributional
similarity scores which can be used for ranking the senses according to prevalence.
We would, however, agree that subcategorization evidence should be very useful for
disambiguating verbs, and would hope to combine such evidence with our ranking
models for context-based WSD.
A major benefit of our work is that this method permits us to produce predominant
senses for any desired domain and text type. Buitelaar and Sacaleanu (2001) explored
ranking and selection of synsets in GermaNet for specific domains using the words
in a given synset, and those related by hyponymy, and a term relevance measure
taken from information retrieval. Buitelaar and Sacaleanu evaluated their method on
identifying domain-specific concepts using human judgments on 100 items. We evaluate
560
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
our method using publicly available resources for balanced text, and, for domain-
specific investigations, resources we have developed ourselves (Koeling, McCarthy,
and Carroll 2005). Magnini and Cavaglia` (2000) associated WordNet word senses with
particular domains, and this has proved useful for high precision WSD (Magnini et
al. 2001); indeed, we have used their domain labels (or subject field codes, SFCs) for
evaluation (Section 6.3). Identification of these SFCs for word senses was semi-automatic
and required a considerable amount of hand-labeling. Our approach requires only raw
text from the given domain and because of this it can easily be applied to a new domain
or sense inventory, as long as there is enough appropriate text.
There are other approaches aimed at gleaning domain-specific information from
raw data. Gliozzo, Giuliano, and Strapparava (2005) induced domain models from raw
data using unsupervised latent semantic models and then fed this into a supervised
WSD model and evaluated on Senseval-3 lexical sample data in four languages. Chan
and Ng (2005) obtained probability distributions to feed into their supervised WSD mod-
els. They used multilingual parallel corpus data to provide probability estimates for a
subset of 22 nouns from the lexical sample task. They then fed this into a supervised WSD
model and verified that the estimates for prior distributions improved performance for
supervised WSD. We intend eventually to use our prevalence scores to feed into un-
supervised WSD models. Although unsupervised models seem to be beaten whenever
there is training data to be had, we anticipate that unsupervised models with improved
priors from the ranking might outperform supervised systems in situations where there
is little training data available. Whereas this article is about finding predominant senses
for back-off in a WSD system, the method could be applied to finding a prior distribution
over all word senses of each target word. It is our intention that the back-off models pro-
duced by our prevalence ranking, either as predominant senses or prior distributions
over word senses, could be combined with contextual information for WSD.
Mohammad and Hirst (2006) describe an approach to acquiring predominant senses
from corpora which makes use of the category information in the Macquarie Thesaurus.
Evaluation is performed on an artificially constructed test set from unambiguous words
in the same category as the 27 test words (nouns, verbs, and adjectives). The senses of
the words are the categories of the thesaurus and the experiment uses only two senses
of each word, the two most predominant ones. The predominance of the two senses is
altered systematically. The results are encouraging because a much smaller amount of
corpus data is needed compared to our approach. However, their method has only been
applied to an artificially constructed test set, rather than a publicly available corpus, and
has yet to be applied in a domain-specific setting, which is the chief motivation of our
work.
The work of Pantel and Lin (2002) is probably the most closely related study
that predates ours, although their ultimate goal is different. Pantel and Lin devised
a method called CBC (clustering by committee) where the 10 nearest neighbors of
a word in a distributional thesaurus are clustered to identify the various senses of
the word. Pantel and Lin use a measure of semantic similarity (Lin 1997) to evaluate
the discovered classes with respect to WordNet as a gold standard. The CBC method
obtained a precision of 61% (the percentage of senses discovered that did exist in
WordNet) and a recall of 51% (the percentage of senses discovered from the union of
those discovered with different clustering algorithms that they tried).8
8 The calculation of recall was over the union of senses discovered automatically, rather than over the
senses in WordNet, because senses in WordNet may be unattested in the data.
561
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Pantel and Lin?s approach is related to ours in that, in their sense discovery pro-
cedure, predominant senses have more of a chance of being found than other senses,
although their algorithm is specifically tailored to look for senses regardless of fre-
quency. To do this the algorithm removes neighbors of the target word once they
are assigned to a cluster so that less frequent senses can be discovered. Our method,
described in detail in Section 4, associates the nearest neighbors to the senses of the
target in a predefined inventory (we use WordNet). We rank the senses using a measure
which sums over the distributional similarity of neighbors weighted by the strength of
the association between the neighbors and the sense. This is done on the assumption
that more prevalent senses will have strong associations with more nearest neighbors
because they have occurred in more contexts in the corpus used for producing the
thesaurus. Both the number and the distributional similarity of the neighbors are used
in our prevalence ranking measure. Pantel and Lin process the possible clusters in order
of their average distributional similarity and number of neighbors but do not take the
number of neighbors into account in the scores given for the clusters. The measures
that Pantel and Lin associate with their clusters are determined by the cohesiveness
of the cluster with the target word because their aim is one of sense discovery. Their
measure is the similarity between the cluster and the target word and does not retain
the distributional similarity of the neighbors within the cluster. It is quite possible that
there is a low frequency sense of a target word with synonyms that form a nice cohesive
group.
Although the number of neighbors assigned to a cluster may correlate with our
ranking score, intuition suggests that a combination of the quantity and distributional
similarity of neighbors to the target word sense is best for determining the relative
predominance of senses. In Section 6 we test this hypothesis using a simplified version
of our method which only uses the number of neighbors, and assigns each to one
sense. Comparisons with the CBC algorithm as it stands would be difficult because
in order to evaluate acquisition of predominance information we have used publicly
available gold-standard sense-tagged corpora, and these have WordNet senses. CBC
will not always find WordNet senses. For example, using the on-line demonstration of
CBC,9 several common senses from nouns from the Senseval-2 lexical sample are not
discovered, including the upright object sense of post, the block of something sense
of bar, the daytime sense of day and the meaning of the word sense of the word sense.
Automatic acquisition of sense inventories is an important endeavor, and we hope to
look at ways of combining our method for detecting predominance with automatically
induced inventories such as those produced by CBC. Evaluation of induced inventories
should be done in the context of an application, because the senses will be keyed to the
acquisition corpus and not to WordNet.
Induction of senses allows coverage of senses appearing in the data that are not
present in a predefined inventory. Although we could adapt our method for use with
an automatically induced inventory, our method which uses WordNet might also be
combined with one that can automatically find new senses from text and then relate
these to WordNet synsets, as Ciaramita and Johnson (2003) and Curran (2005) do with
unknown nouns.
9 We used the demonstration at http://www.isi.edu/~pantel/Content/Demos/LexSem/cbc.htm with the
option to include all corpora (TREC-2002, TREC-9, and COSMOS).
562
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
4. Method
In our method, the predominant sense for a target word is determined from a preva-
lence ranking of the possible senses for that word. The senses come from a predefined
inventory (which might be a dictionary or WordNet-like resource). The ranking is
derived using a distributional thesaurus automatically produced from a large corpus,
and a semantic similarity measure defined over the sense inventory. The distributional
thesaurus contains a set of words that are ?nearest neighbors? to the target word with
respect to similarity of the way in which they are distributed. (Distributional similarity
is based on the hypothesis of Harris, 1968, that words which occur in similar contexts
have related meanings.) The thesaurus assigns a distributional similarity score to each
neighbor word, indicating its closeness to the target word. For example, the nearest10
neighbors of sandwich might be:
salad, pizza, bread, soup...
and the nearest neighbors of the polysemous noun star11 might be:
actor, footballer, planet, circle...
These neighbors reflect the various senses of the word, which for star might be:
 a celebrity
 a celestial body
 a shape
 a sign of the zodiac12
We assume that the number and distributional similarity scores of neighbors pertaining
to a given sense of a target word will reflect the prevalence of that sense in the corpus
from which the thesaurus was derived. This is because the more prevalent senses of the
word will appear more frequently and in more contexts than other, less prevalent senses.
The neighbors of the target word relate to its senses, but are themselves word forms
rather than senses. The senses of the target word are predefined in a sense inventory
and we use a semantic similarity score defined over the sense inventory to relate the
neighbors to the various senses of the target word. The two semantic similarity scores
that we use in this article are implemented in the WordNet similarity package. One uses
the overlap in definitions of word senses, based on Lesk (1986), and the other uses a
combination of corpus statistics and the WordNet hyponym hierarchy, based on Jiang
and Conrath (1997). We describe these fully in Section 4.2. We now describe intuitively
10 In this and other examples we restrict ourselves to four neighbors for brevity.
11 In this example we assume that the sense inventory assigns four senses to star, but the inventory could
assign fewer or more depending on its level of granularity and level of detail.
12 Note that this zodiac or horoscope sense of star usually occurs as part of the multiword star sign (e.g.,
your star sign secrets revealed) or in plural form (your stars today?free online).
563
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
the measure for ranking the senses according to predominance, and then give a more
formal definition.
The measure uses the sum total of the distributional similarity scores of the k nearest
neighbors. This total is divided between the senses of the target word by apportioning
the distributional similarity of each neighbor to the senses. The contribution of each
neighbor is measured in terms of its distributional similarity score so that ?nearer?
neighbors count for more. The distributional similarity score of each neighbor is divided
between the various senses rather than attributing the neighbor to only one sense. This
is done because neighbors can relate to more than one sense due to relationships such
as systematic polysemy. For example, in the thesaurus we describe subsequently in
Section 4.1 acquired from the BNC, chicken has neighbors duck and goose which relate to
both the meat and animal senses. We apportion the contribution of a neighbor to each
of the word senses according to a weight which is the normalized semantic similarity
score between the sense and the neighbor. We normalize the semantic similarity scores
because some of the semantic similarity scores that we use, described in Section 4.2,
can get disproportionately large. Because we normalize the semantic similarity scores,
the sum of the ranking scores for a word equals the sum of the distributional similarity
scores. To summarize, we rank the senses of the target word, such as star, by apportion-
ing the distributional similarity scores of the top k neighbors between the senses. Each
distributional similarity score (dss) is weighted by a normalized semantic similarity
score (sss) between the sense and the neighbor. This process is illustrated in Figure 1.
More formally, to find the predominant sense of a word (w) we take each sense
in turn and obtain a prevalence score. Let Nw = {n1, n2...nk} be the ordered set of the
top scoring k neighbors of w from the distributional thesaurus with associated scores
{dss(w, n1), dss(w, n2), ...dss(w, nk)}. Let senses(w) be the set of senses of w in the sense
inventory. For each sense of w (si ? senses(w)) we obtain a prevalence score by summing
over the dss(w, nj) of each neighbor (nj ? Nw) multiplied by a weight. This weight is the
sss between the target sense (si) and nj divided by the sum of all sss scores for senses(w)
Figure 1
The prevalence ranking process for the noun star.
564
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
and nj. sss is the maximum WordNet similarity score (sss?) between si and the senses of
nj (sx ? senses(nj)).13 Each sense si ? senses(w) is therefore assigned a score as follows:
Prevalence Score(w, si) =
?
nj?Nw
dss(w, nj) ?
sss(si, nj)
?
si??senses(w) sss(si? , nj)
(1)
where
sss(si, nj) = max
sx?senses(nj )
sss?(si, sx) (2)
We describe dss and sss? in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Note that the dss for a given neighbor
is shared between the different senses of w depending on the weight given by the
normalized sss.
4.1 The Distributional Similarity Score
Measures of distributional similarity take into account the shared contexts of the two
words. Several measures of distributional similarity have been described in the litera-
ture. In our experiments, dss is computed using Lin?s similarity measure (Lin 1998a).
We set the number of nearest neighbors to equal 50.14 We use three different sources of
data for our first two experiments, resulting in three distributional thesauruses. These
are described in the next section. We use domain-specific data for our third and fourth
experiments. The data sources for these are described in Sections 6.3 and 6.4.
A word, w, is described by a set of features, f , each with an associated frequency,
where each feature is a pair ?r, x? consisting of a grammatical relation name and the
other word in the relation. We computed distributional similarity scores for every pair of
words of the same PoS where each word?s total feature frequency was at least 10. A the-
saurus entry of size k for a target word w is then defined as the k most similar words to w.
A large number of distributional similarity measures have been proposed in the
literature (see Weeds 2003 for a review) and comparing them is outside the scope of this
work. However, the study of Weeds and Weir (2005) provides interesting insights into
what makes a ?good? distributional similarity measure in the contexts of semantic simi-
larity prediction and language modeling. In particular, weighting features by pointwise
mutual information (Church and Hanks 1989) appears to be beneficial. The pointwise
mutual information (I(w, f )) between a word and a feature is calculated as
I(w, f ) = log
P( f |w)
P( f )
(3)
Intuitively, this means that the occurrence of a less-common feature is more important
in describing a word than a more-common feature. For example, the verb eat is more
selective and tells us more about the meaning of its arguments than the verb be.
13 We use sss for the semantic similarity between a WordNet sense and another word, the neighbor. We use
sss? for the semantic similarity between two WordNet senses, si and a sense of the neighbor (sx).
14 From previous work (McCarthy et al 2004b), the value of k has a minimal effect on finding the
predominant sense; however, we will continue experimentation with this in the future for using our
ranking score for estimating probability distributions of senses, because a sufficiently large value of k will
be needed to include neighbors for rarer senses.
565
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
We chose to use the distributional similarity score described by Lin (1998a) because
it is an unparameterized measure which uses pointwise mutual information to weight
features and which has been shown (Weeds 2003) to be highly competitive in making
predictions of semantic similarity. This measure is based on Lin?s information-theoretic
similarity theorem (Lin 1997):
The similarity between A and B is measured by the ratio between the amount of
information needed to state the commonality of A and B and the information needed to
fully describe what A and B are.
In our application, if T(w) is the set of features f such that I(w, f ) is positive, then the
similarity between two words, w and n, is
dss(w, n) =
?
f?T(w)?T(n)
(
I(w, f ) + I(n, f )
)
?
f?T(w) I(w, f ) +
?
f?T(n) I(n, f )
(4)
However, due to this choice of dss and the openness of the domain, we restrict ourselves
to only considering words with a total feature frequency of at least 10. Weeds et al (2005)
do show that distributional similarity can be computed for lower frequency words but
this is using a highly specialized corpus of 400,000 words from the biomedical domain.
Further, it has been shown (Weeds et al 2005; Weeds and Weir 2005) that performance
of Lin?s distributional similarity score decreases more significantly than other measures
for low frequency nouns. We leave the investigation of other distributional similarity
scores and the application to smaller corpora as areas for further study.
4.2 The Semantic Similarity Scores
WordNet is widely used for research in WSD because it is publicly available and there
are a number of associated sense-tagged corpora (Miller et al 1993; Cotton et al 2001;
Preiss and Yarowsky 2001; Mihalcea and Edmonds 2004) available for testing purposes.
Several semantic similarity scores have been proposed that leverage the structure of
WordNet; for sss? we experiment with two of these, as implemented in the WordNet
Similarity Package (Patwardhan and Pedersen 2003).
The WordNet Similarity Package implements a range of similarity scores. McCarthy
et al (2004b) experimented with six of these for the sss? used in the prevalence score,
Equation (2). In the experiments reported here we use the two scores that performed
best in that previous work. We briefly summarize them here; Patwardhan, Banerjee,
and Pedersen (2003) give a more detailed discussion. The scores measure the similarity
between two WordNet senses (s1 and s2).
lesk This measure (Banerjee and Pedersen 2002) maximizes the number of overlap-
ping words in the gloss, or definition, of the senses. It uses the glosses of semanti-
cally related (according to WordNet) senses too. We use the default version of the
measure in the package with no normalizing for gloss length, and the default set
of relations:
lesk(s1, s2) = |{W1 ? definition(s1)}| ? |{W2 ? definition(s2)}| (5)
where definitions(s) is the gloss definition of sense s concatenated with the gloss
definitions of the senses related to s where the relationships are defined by the de-
566
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
fault set of relations in the relations.dat file supplied with the WordNet Similarity
package. W ? definition(s) is the set of words from the concatenated definitions.
jcn This measure (Jiang and Conrath 1997) uses corpus data to populate classes
(synsets) in the WordNet hierarchy with frequency counts. Each synset is incre-
mented with the frequency counts (from the corpus) of all words belonging to
that synset, directly or via the hyponymy relation. The frequency data is used to
calculate the ?information content? (IC; Resnik 1995) of a class as follows:
IC(s) = ?log(p(s)) (6)
Jiang and Conrath specify a distance measure:
Djcn(s1, s2) = IC(s1) + IC(s2) ? 2 ? IC(s3) (7)
where the third class (s3) is the most informative, or most specific, superordinate
synset of the two senses s1 and s2. This is converted to a similarity measure
in the WordNet Similarity package by taking the reciprocal as in Equation (8)
(which follows). For this reason, the jcn values can get very large indeed when
the distances are negligible, for example where the neighbor has a sense which is
a synonym. This is a motivation for our normalizing the sss in Equation (1).
jcn(s1, s2) = 1/Djcn(s1, s2) (8)
The IC data required for the jcn measure can be acquired automatically from raw
text. We used raw data from the BNC to create the IC files. There are various parameters
that can be set in the WordNet Similarity Package when creating these files; we used
the RESNIK method of counting frequencies in WordNet (Resnik 1995), the stop words
provided with the package, and no smoothing.
The lesk score is applicable to all parts of speech, whereas the jcn is applicable
only to nouns and verbs because it relies on IC counts which are obtained using the
hyponym links and these only exist for nouns and verbs.15 However, we did not use
jcn for verbs because in previous experiments (McCarthy et al 2004c) the lesk measure
outperformed jcn because the structure of the hyponym hierarchy is very shallow for
verbs and the measure is therefore considerably less informative for verbs than it is for
nouns.
4.3 An Example
We illustrate the application of our measure with an example. For star, if we set16 k = 4
and have the dss for the previously given neighbors as in the first row of Table 6, and
15 For verbs these pointers actually encode troponymy, which is a particular kind of entailment relation,
rather than hyponymy.
16 In this example, as before, we set k to 4 for the sake of brevity.
567
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 6
Example dss and sss scores for star and its neighbors.
Neighbors of star (dss)
Senses actor (0.22) footballer (0.12) planet (0.08) circle (0.03)
celebrity 0.42 0.53 0.02 0.01
celestial body 0.01 0.01 0.68 0.10
shape 0.0 0.0 0.02 0.78
zodiac 0.03 0.03 0.21 0.01
Total 0.46 0.57 0.93 0.90
the sss between the senses and the neighbors as in the remaining rows, the prevalence
score for celebrity would be:
= 0.22 ? 0.420.46 + 0.12 ? 0.530.57 + 0.08 ? 0.020.93 + 0.03 ? 0.010.90
= 0.2009 + 0.1116 + 0.0017 + 0.0003
= 0.3145
The prevalence score for each of the senses would be:
prevalence score(celebrity) = 0.3145
prevalence score(celestial body) = 0.0687
prevalence score(shape) = 0.0277
prevalence score(zodiac) = 0.0390
so the method would select celebrity as the predominant sense.
5. Experimental Setup
5.1 The Distributional Thesauruses
The three thesauruses used in our first two experiments were all created automatically
from raw corpus data, based either on grammatical relations between words computed
by syntactic parsers or alternatively on word proximity relations.
We created the first thesaurus, which we call BNC, from grammatical relation output
produced by the RASP system (Briscoe and Carroll 2002) applied to the 90M words of
the ?written? portion of the British National Corpus (Leech 1992), for all polysemous
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs in WordNet. For each word we considered co-
occurring words in the grammatical contexts listed in Table 7.
In the first two experiments, we also use two further automatically computed
distributional thesauruses, produced by Dekang Lin from 125M words of text from the
Wall Street Journal, San Jose Mercury News, and AP Newswire, using the same similarity
measure. The thesauruses are publicly available.17 One was constructed based on word
17 The thesauruses are available for download from http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/~lindek/
downloads.htm.
568
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Table 7
Grammatical contexts used for acquiring the BNC thesaurus.
PoS Grammatical contexts
noun verb in direct object or subject relation, adjective or noun modifier
verb noun as direct object or subject
adjective modified noun, modifying adverb
adverb modified adjective or verb
Table 8
Thesaurus coverage of polysemous words (excluding multiwords) in WordNet 1.6.
PoS Thesaurus types NISC NITH
noun BNC 7,090 2,436 115
noun DEP 6,583 2,176 217
noun PROX 6,582 2,176 217
verb BNC 2,958 553 45
adjective BNC 3,659 1,208 123
adverb BNC 505 132 38
similarities computed from syntactic dependencies produced by MINIPAR (Lin 1998b),
and the other was constructed based on textual proximity relationships between words.
We refer below to the original corpus as NEWSWIRE, and these two thesauruses as DEP
and PROX, respectively. We restricted our experiments to the nouns in these thesauruses.
Table 8 contains details of the numbers of polysemous (according to WordNet 1.6)
words contained in these thesauruses, the number of words in SemCor that were not
found in these thesauruses (NITH) and the number of words in the thesauruses that
were not in SemCor (NISC).
For the experiments described in Sections 6.3 and 6.4 we use exactly the same
method as that proposed for the BNC thesaurus, however the data source is different
and is described in those sections.
5.2 The Sense Inventory
We use WordNet version 1.6 as the sense inventory for our first three experiments, and
1.7.1 for our last experiment.18
For sss? we use the WordNet Similarity Package version 0.05 (Patwardhan and
Pedersen 2003).
18 We use 1.6 which is a rather old version of WordNet so that we can directly evaluate on the SemCor data
released with this version; we also use it to enable comparison with the results of McCarthy et al (2004a).
We use WordNet 1.7.1 for the fourth experiment, because this is the version that was used for annotating
the test data in that experiment. We plan to move to more recent versions of WordNet and experiment
with other sense inventories in the future.
569
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
6. Experiments
In this section we describe four experiments using our method for acquiring predomi-
nant sense information.
The first experiment evaluates automatically acquired predominant senses for all
parts of speech, using SemCor as the test corpus. This extends previous work which
had only evaluated all PoS on Senseval-2 (Cotton et al 2001) and Senseval-3 (Mihalcea
and Edmonds 2004) data. The SemCor corpus is composed of 220,000 words, in contrast
to the 6 documents in the Senseval-2 and -3 English all-words data (10,000 words). We
examine the effects of using the two different semantic similarity scores that performed
well in previous work: jcn is quick to compute but lesk has the advantage that it is
applicable to all PoS and can be implemented for any dictionary with sense defini-
tions. We compare three thesauruses: one is derived from the BNC and two from the
NEWSWIRE corpus. The two from the NEWSWIRE corpus examine the requirement for
a parser by contrasting results obtained when the thesaurus is built using parsed data
compared to a proximity approach. We contrast the results of the BNC thesaurus with
a simplified version of the prevalence score which uses the number of the k neighbors
closest to a sense for ranking without using the dss and without sharing the credit for
a neighbor between senses. We also perform an error analysis on a random sample
of words for which a predominant sense was found that differed from that given by
SemCor, identifying and giving an indication of the frequencies of the main sources of
error.
The second experiment is on nouns in the Senseval-2 all-words data, again using
predominant senses acquired using each of the three distributional thesauruses, but
in this experiment we explore the benefits of an automatic first sense heuristic when
there is inadequate data in available resources. Although McCarthy et al (2004c) show
that on Senseval-2 and Senseval-3 test data a first sense heuristic derived from SemCor
outperforms the automatic method, we look at whether the method?s performance is
relatively stronger on words for which there is little data in SemCor. This is important
because, as we have shown in Table 5, low frequency words are used often in senses
other than the sense that is ranked first according to SemCor.
In addition to the issue of lack of coverage of manually annotated resources, sense
frequency will depend on the domain of the data. In the third experiment, we revisit
some previous work on noun senses and domain (McCarthy et al 2004a) using corpora
of news text about sports and finance. Using distributional thesauruses computed from
these corpora and a gold standard domain labeling of word senses we look at the
potential for computing domain-specific predominant senses for parts of speech other
than nouns.
Continuing the line of research on automatic acquisition of domain-specific pre-
dominant senses, the fourth experiment compares results when we train and test on
domain-specific corpora, where the training data is (1) manually categorized for domain
and from the same corpus as the gold-standard test data, and (2) where the training data
is harvested automatically from another corpus which is categorized automatically.
6.1 Experiment 1: All Parts of Speech
In this experiment, we evaluate the accuracy of automatically acquired predominant
senses for all open class parts of speech, taking SemCor as the gold standard. For nouns
we use the semantic similarity measures lesk and jcn, and for other parts of speech, lesk.
We use the three distributional thesauruses BNC, DEP, and PROX.
570
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
The gold standard is derived from the Brown Corpus files publicly released as part
of SemCor, rather than the processed data provided in the cntlist file in the WordNet
distribution. The released SemCor files contain only the tagged data from the Brown
Corpus and do not include data from The Red Badge of Courage. We use the released data
rather than that in cntlist because this includes the actual tagged examples which are
marked for genre by the Brown files. We envisage the possibility of further experiments
with these genre markers. We only evaluate on instances where a single, unique sense
is supplied by the annotators. So, for example, we ignore instances like the following
with multiple wnsn values:
<wf cmd=done pos=NN lemma=tooth wnsn=3;1 lexsn=1:05:02::;1:08:00::>tooth</wf>
We also only evaluate on polysemous words (according to WordNet) having one sense
in SemCor which is more frequent than any other, and for which both SemCor and our
thesauruses have at least a minimal amount of data. Specifically, a word must occur
three or more times in SemCor; it must also occur in ten or more grammatical relations
in the parsed version of the BNC and have neighbors in the distributional thesaurus, or
be present in Dekang Lin?s thesaurus.19
We evaluate on nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs separately, computing a num-
ber of accuracy measures, both type-based and token-based. PSacc is calculated over
word types in SemCor which have one sense which occurs more than any other. It is the
accuracy of identifying the predominant sense in SemCor. If the automatic ranking has
a tie for the top ranked sense then we score that word as incorrect.20 So we have
PSacc =
|correcttyp|
|typesmf |
? 100 (9)
where typesmf are the types in SemCor such that one sense is more frequent than
any other, the word has occurred at least three times in SemCor and has an entry
in the thesaurus. |correcttyp| is the number of these where the automatically acquired
predominant sense matches the first sense in SemCor.
PSaccBL is the predominant sense random baseline, obtained as follows:
PSaccBL =
?
w?typesmf
1
|senses(w)|
|typesmf |
? 100 (10)
WSDsc is a token-based measure. It is the WSD accuracy that would be obtained
by using the first sense heuristic with the automatically acquired predominant sense
information, in cases where there was a unique automatic top ranked sense:
WSDsc =
|correcttok|
|SCtokensafs|
? 100 (11)
19 Although we do not evaluate words for which there were no neighbors in the thesaurus, we could extend
the thesaurus to include some of these by widening the range of grammatical relations covered and
compensating for some systematic PoS tagging errors.
20 If we exclude these words with joint top ranking from the automatic method (precision rather than recall)
then we obtain marginally higher accuracy for the jcn measure but no difference for lesk.
571
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
where |correcttok| is the number of tokens disambiguated correctly out of the tokens in
SemCor having an automatically acquired first sense (SCtokensafs).
SC FS is the WSD accuracy of the SemCor first sense heuristic on the same set of
tokens (SCtokensafs), which is the upper bound because the information it uses is derived
from the test data itself. RBL is the random baseline for the WSD task, calculated by
splitting the credit for each token to be tagged in the test data evenly between all of the
word?s senses.
RBL =
?
w?SCtokensafs
1
|senses(w)|
|SCtokensafs|
? 100 (12)
The results are shown in Table 9. We examined differences between the semantic
similarity measures (lesk and jcn), the BNC and DEP thesauruses, and the DEP and
PROX thesauruses using the ?2 test of significance with one degree of freedom (Siegel
and Castellan 1988). None of the differences between the different combinations of
similarity measures and thesauruses for the type-based measure PSacc are significant.
The differences between lesk and jcn are significant for the token-based measure WSDsc
for both the BNC and PROX thesauruses (both p < .001), however not when comparing
lesk and jcn for the DEP thesaurus. Although lesk is more accurate than jcn, at least on
the WSD task, jcn is much faster because of the precompilation of IC in the WordNet
similarity package; however, lesk has the additional benefit of being applicable to other
parts of speech. The method gives particularly good results for adjectives, given that
they have a similar random baseline to nouns. It does not do so well for adverbs and
verbs, but still performs well above the random baseline which is low for verbs due
to their high degree of polysemy. Given that the first sense heuristic from SemCor is
particularly strong for adverbs, it is disappointing that the automatic method does not
perform as well as it does on adjectives. One possible reason for this might be that
adverbs are often less strongly associated to the verbs that they modify than adjectives
are to the nouns that they modify, so the distributional thesaurus information is less
reliable. Another reason may be that less data are available for adverbs, both in the
thesaurus and also in WordNet.
Table 9
Evaluation on SemCor, polysemous words only.
Type Token
PoS Settings No. PSacc PSaccBL No. WSDsc SC FS RBL
noun lesk BNC 2,555 54.5 32.3 53,468 48.7 68.6 24.7
noun lesk DEP 2,437 56.3 32.1 52,158 49.2 68.4 24.6
noun lesk PROX 2,437 55.9 32.1 52,158 49.0 68.4 24.6
noun jcn BNC 2,555 54.0 32.3 53,429 46.1 68.6 24.7
noun jcn DEP 2,436 56.4 32.1 52,122 48.8 68.4 24.6
noun jcn PROX 2,436 55.9 32.1 52,117 47.7 68.4 24.6
verb lesk BNC 1,149 45.6 27.1 31,182 36.1 57.1 17.1
adjective lesk BNC 1,154 60.4 32.8 18,216 56.8 73.8 24.9
adverb lesk BNC 230 52.2 39.9 8,810 43.2 76.1 33.0
572
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Comparing the results for the DEP and the PROX thesauruses, we see that although
there is no significant difference in PSacc (with either lesk or jcn), there is for WSDsc
when using jcn (p < .001), but not when comparing the lesk values for these thesauruses.
Even though the differences between jcn DEP and jcn PROX are significant, the absolute
differences are nevertheless relatively small; this bodes well for applying the automatic
predominant sense method to languages less well resourced than English, because
the PROX thesaurus was produced without using a parser. The differences in results
between jcn BNC and jcn DEP for nouns are statistically significant (p < .001).21 The
better accuracy with DEP may be because the NEWSWIRE corpus is larger than the
BNC. We intend to investigate the effects of corpus size in the future. The differences in
results between lesk BNC and lesk DEP for nouns are not significant.
6.1.1 Results Using Simplified Prevalence Score. A simple variation of our method is just to
associate each neighbor with just one sense and use the number of neighbors associated
with a sense for the prevalence score. This gives a modified version of Equation (1)
where each sense si ? senses(w) is assigned a score as follows:
Simplified Prevalence Score(w, si) = |{nj ? Nw} : arg max
sk?senses(w)
(sss(sk, nj)) = si| (13)
where
sss(sk, nj) = max
sx?senses(nj )
sss?(sk, sx) (14)
For the example in Table 6, celebrity would get the top score of 2 (due to it having
the highest sss for actor and footballer), celestial body would get a score of 1 (due to its
sss with planet), shape would get 1 (due to circle), and zodiac would obtain a Simplified
Prevalence Score of 0 because it does not have the highest sss for any of the neighbors.
As the results from Table 10 show, we do not get such good results with this score.
This supports our intuition that a combination of both the number of neighbors and
their distributional similarity scores is important for determining predominance. The
rest of the article gives results and analysis for our original prevalence score as given in
Equation (1).
6.1.2 Error Analysis. We took a random sample of 80 words that occurred more than five
times in SemCor, 20 words for each PoS, from those where the automatically identified
predominant sense was different from the SemCor first sense when using the lesk sss
and BNC thesaurus and our ranking score as defined in Equation (1) (i.e., the data
represented by the first result line and the last three result lines of Table 9). Herein, we
call the automatically identified sense AUTO FS, and the SemCor sense SemCor FS. We
21 The coverage of the SemCor data by the DEP and PROX thesauruses is slightly lower than that of the
BNC-derived thesaurus due to mismatches in spelling and capitalization and also probably because the
NEWSWIRE corpus is narrower in genre and domain than the BNC.
573
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 10
Simplified prevalence score, evaluation on SemCor, polysemous words only.
Type Token
PoS Settings No. PSacc PSaccBL No. WSDsc SC FS RBL
noun lesk BNC 2,555 52.9 32.3 53,175 47.2 68.6 24.7
noun jcn BNC 2,555 50.1 32.3 52,033 46.7 69.2 24.8
verb lesk BNC 1,149 45.1 27.1 30,364 36.7 58.0 17.4
adjective lesk BNC 1,154 58.3 32.8 18,136 56.0 73.7 24.8
adverb lesk BNC 230 50.0 39.9 8,802 42.2 76.1 33.0
manually inspected the data for each of the words to find the source of the problem.
We did not have the (substantial) resources that would be required to sense tag all
occurrences of these words in the BNC to see what their actual first senses were. Instead,
we examined the parses, grammatical relations, and sense definitions for the words to
see why the AUTO FS was ranked above the SemCor FS. We found the following main
types of error:22
corpora The difference appears to be due to genuine divergence between the BNC
and SemCor. For this error type we looked at the BNC parses to see if the acquired
predominant sense was clearly due to differences in the corpus data. There may
be other errors that should have been assigned this category, but without access
to sense tagged BNC data we could not be sure of this, so we used this category
conservatively. An example of this error is the adjective solid which has the good
quality first sense in the Brown files in SemCor, but the firm sense according to
our BNC automatic ranking.
related The automatic predominant sense is closely related to the SemCor first sense.
Although many word senses are related to some extent, the category was picked
where a close relationship seemed to be the main cause of the error. An example
is the noun straw which has two senses in WordNet 1.6, fibre used for hats and
fodder and plant material. The SemCor FS was the former whereas our AUTO FS
was the latter.
competing Two or more related senses are ranked highly but they are overtaken by
an unrelated sense. For example, the ranking and scores for the noun transmission
are:
WordNet sense Description Prevalence score
5 gears 1.79
2 communication 1.20
1 act of sending a message 1.19
3 fraction of radiant energy 0.48
4 infection 0.15
22 There were a few other, less numerous types of error, for example systematic PoS mis-tagging of particles
(such as down) as adverbs.
574
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
The act of sending a message sense is overtaken by the gears sense because the
credit from shared distributional neighbors is split between it and the communi-
cation sense.
neighbors There are not many neighbors related to the sense. There can be various
reasons for this, such as the sense having restricted contexts of occurrence or only
a small number of near synonyms existing for the sense. An example of this is
the adjective live where the SemCor FS unrecorded sense seems to occur in the
BNC corpus more than the alive sense; there are plenty of grammatical relations
pertaining to this sense, but there are few distributional neighbors near in meaning
to unrecorded.23
spurious similarity The WordNet similarity scores were misled by spurious relation-
ships to neighbors; this can occur in dense areas such as the ?physical object?
region of the noun hyponym hierarchy. An example of this is the verb tap which
has neighbors push and press which are related to the AUTO FS (solicit) as well as
the SemCor FS (strike lightly).
The results of the error analysis are shown in Table 11. The analysis shows that
differences between the training (BNC) and testing (SemCor) corpora are not a major
source of error. Although SemCor itself (the released files from the Brown corpus
comprising only 200,000 words) is not large enough to build a thesaurus with entries
for a reasonable portion of the words, we did build a thesaurus from the entire Brown
corpus (1 million words) to see the effect of corpus data. The results are compared
to those from the BNC in Table 12 on the set of words which had thesaurus entries
in the Brown data (to make the results more comparable, because the corpora are of
such different sizes). We also show the average results for 10 random selections of a
1 million word random sample of the BNC. To do this we randomly selected 190 th of the
tuples.24 The differences in the WSDsc for the BNC 190 sample and the Brown corpus are
significant (p < .01 on the ?2), but the differences in PSacc are not significant. Although
the entire BNC produced better results than the Brown data, this is undoubtedly due to
the difference in size of the corpus. Taking a comparably sized sample, the results are
slightly better from Brown which is the corpus from which SemCor is taken.
For nouns, it was apparent that in two cases less-prevalent senses were receiving a
higher ranking simply because the credit for some neighbors associated with another
meaning was split between related senses (error type competing). This was not ob-
served for other parts of speech, possibly because the AUTO FS was rarely unrelated to
the SemCor FS.
There were some problems arising from spurious similarity. One possible source
of such problems is due to the ambiguity of the neighbor; in the future we will look
at reducing this source of error by removing neighbors which have a value for sx in
Equation (2) which is not the same as that preferred by the other senses of the target
word (w). For adverbs, all the cases that were categorized as spurious similarity were
also noted to be related to the SemCor FS, though they were not categorized as related
as this was not considered the primary cause of the error.
The analysis was hardest for verbs. Verbs are on average highly polysemous, and
often have senses that are related. Furthermore, the structure of the WordNet verb tro-
ponym hierarchy is very shallow compared to the noun hyponymy hierarchy, so there
23 The closest neighbors to the adjective live are adult, forthcoming, lively, solo, excellent, stuffed, living, dead,
and australian weekly.
24 The variance for the 190 sample for PSacc was 0.46 and for WSDsc it was 0.49.
575
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 11
Results of the error analysis for the sample of 80 words.
PoS
noun verb adjective adverb All PoS
corpora 1 2 1 1 5
related 8 12 13 8 41
competing 2 0 0 0 2
neighbors 4 3 2 2 11
spurious similarity 5 3 4 9 21
Table 12
SemCor results for Nouns using jcn.
Thesaurus PSacc% WSDsc %
full BNC 53.8 44.9
1
90 BNC 46.6 40.8
Brown 47.2 41.7
are more possibilities for spurious similarities from overlap of glosses. So, although we
tried to identify the main problem source, for verbs the problems usually arose from a
combination of factors and the relatedness of the senses was usually one of these.
Relatedness of senses and fine-grained distinctions are major sources of error. There
have been various attempts to group WordNet senses both manually and automati-
cally (Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle 2003; McCarthy 2006; Palmer, Dang, and Fellbaum
2007). Indeed, McCarthy demonstrated that distributional and semantic similarity can
be used for relating word senses and that such methods increase accuracy of first
sense heuristics, including the automatic method proposed here. WSD is improved with
coarser-grained inventories but ultimately, performance depends on the application.
For example, the noun bar has 11 senses in WordNet 1.6. These include the pub sense
as well as the counter sense and these are related to a certain extent. One might want
to group them when acquiring predominant senses, but there may be situations where
they should be distinguished. For example, if one were to ask a robot to ?go to the bar?
one would hope it could use the context to go get the drinks rather than replying that it
is already there! Even in cases where fine-grained distinctions are ultimately required, it
may be helpful to have a coarse-grained prior and then use contextual features to tease
apart subtle sense distinctions.
From our error analysis, the problem of semantically isolated senses (identified as
neighbors) was not a major source of error, but still causes some problems. One possible
remedy might be to identify these cases by looking for neighbors which relate strongly
to a sense which none of the other neighbors relate to and weighting the contribution
from these neighbors more. This may however give rise to further errors because of the
noise introduced by focusing on individual neighbors. We will explore such directions
in future work.
576
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
In this experiment we did not assign any credit for near misses. In many cases
of error the SemCor FS nonetheless received a high prevalence score. In the future
we hope to use the score for probability estimation, and combine this with contextual
information for WSD as in related work by Lapata and Brew (2004) and Chan and Ng
(2005).
6.2 Experiment 2: Frequency and the SemCor First Sense Heuristic
In the previous section we described an evaluation of the accuracy of automatically
acquired predominant sense information. We carried out the evaluation with respect to
SemCor in order to have as much test data as possible. To obtain reasonably reliable
gold-standard first-sense data and first-sense heuristic upper bounds, we limited the
evaluation to words occurring at least three times in SemCor. Clearly this scenario is
unrealistic. For many words, and particularly for nouns, there is very little or no data in
SemCor; Table 2 shows that 81.9% of nouns (excluding multiwords) listed in WordNet
do not occur at all in SemCor. Thus, even for English, which has substantial manually
sense-tagged resources, coverage is severely limited for many words.
For a more realistic comparison of automatic and manual heuristics, we therefore
now change to a different test corpus, the Senseval-2 English all-words task data set. We
focus on nouns and evaluate using all words regardless of their frequencies in SemCor.
We examine the effect of frequency in SemCor on performance of a SemCor-derived
heuristic in comparison to results from our automatic method on the same words. Our
hypothesis is that although automatically acquired predominant sense information may
not outperform first-sense data obtained from a hand-tagged resource over all words in
a text, the information may well be more accurate for low frequency items.
We use a mapping between different WordNet versions25 (Daude?, Padro?, and Rigau
2000) to obtain the Senseval-2 all words noun data (originally distributed with 1.7 sense
numbers) with 1.6 sense numbers. As well as examining the performance of our method
in contrast to the SemCor heuristic, we calculate an upper bound for this using the
first sense heuristic from the Senseval-2 all-words data itself. This is obtained for nouns
with two or more occurrences in the Senseval-2 data and where one sense occurs more
than any of the others. We calculate type, precision, and recall, using this Senseval-2
first-sense as the gold standard. The recall measure is the same as PSacc described
previously, except that we include items which do not have entries in the thesaurus,
scoring them incorrect. Precision only includes items where there is a sense ranked
higher than any other for that word with the prevalence score, that is, it does not include
items with a joint automatic ranking. We also calculate token precision and recall (WSD).
These measures relate to WSDsc, but again, recall includes words not in the thesaurus
which are scored incorrect, and precision does not include items with a joint automatic
ranking. We also separately compute WSD precision for words not in SemCor (NISC).
The results are shown in Table 13.26
The automatically acquired predominant sense results (the first six lines of results
in the table) are approaching the SemCor-derived results (third line from the bottom of
the table). The NISC results are particularly encouraging, but with the caveat that there
are only 17 such words in the data. The precision for these items is higher than the
25 This mapping is available at http://www.lsi.upc.es/~nlp/tools/mapping.html.
26 Note that these figures are lower than those of McCarthy et al (2004a) in a similar experiment because
the evaluation here is only on polysemous words.
577
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 13
Evaluating predominant sense information for polysemous nouns on the Senseval-2 all-words
task data.
Type WSD/token
Settings Precision (%) Recall (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) Precision NISC (%)
lesk BNC 56.3 53.7 54.6 53.4 58.3
lesk DEP 52.0 47.2 52.6 48.7 58.3
lesk PROX 52.0 47.2 52.3 48.5 58.3
jcn BNC 52.4 50.0 51.8 50.6 66.7
jcn DEP 52.0 47.2 58.0 53.7 83.3
jcn PROX 53.1 48.1 57.3 53.1 83.3
SemCor 64.8 63.0 58.5 57.3 0.0
Senseval-2 ? ? 90.8 60.1 100.0
RBL 26.5 26.5 26.0 26.0 50.0
overall figure. This is because the nouns involved are less frequent so tend to be less
polysemous and consequently have a higher random baseline. There are a few nouns
that are not in the automatic ranking, but this is due to the fact that neighbors were
not collected for these nouns in the thesaurus because of tagging or parser errors or
the particular set of grammatical relations used. It should be possible to extend the
range of grammatical relations, or use proximity-based relations, so that neighbors can
be obtained in these cases. It would also be possible to assign some credit in the case of
joint top ranked senses to increase coverage.
Looking at Table 13 in more detail, it seems to be the case that although the BNC
thesaurus does well in identifying the first sense of a word (the type results), the PROX
and DEP thesauruses from the NEWSWIRE corpus return better WSD results when
used with the jcn measure. This is possibly because jcn works well for more frequent
items due to its incorporation of frequency information, and the NEWSWIRE corpus
has more data for frequent words, although coverage is not as good as the BNC as
seen by the bigger differences in precision and recall and the figures in Table 8. The
lower coverage may be due to the narrower domain and genre of the NEWSWIRE
corpus, though spelling and capitalization differences probably also account for some
differences.
Table 14 shows results on the Senseval-2 nouns for the best similarity measure
and thesaurus combinations in Table 13 for nouns at or below various frequencies
in SemCor. (The differences between the DEP and PROX thesauruses are negligible at
frequencies of 10 or below, so for those we report only the results for DEP.) As we
anticipated, for low frequency words the automatic methods do give more accurate
predominant sense information than SemCor. The low number of test items at frequency
five or less means that results for jcn with the BNC thesaurus are not significantly better
when compared with SemCor (p = .05); however the lesk WSD results are significantly
better (p < .01 for the ? 1 threshold and p < .05 for the ? 5 threshold). On the whole, we
see that the automatic method, using either jcn or lesk and any of the three thesauruses,
tend to give better results than SemCor on nouns which have low coverage in SemCor.
Figures 2 and 3 show the precision for type and token (WSD) evaluation where the
items have a frequency at or below given thresholds in SemCor. Although the manually
578
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Table 14
Senseval-2 results, polysemous nouns only, broken down by their frequencies of occurrence in
SemCor.
Type WSD/token
No. of occurrences in Precision Recall Precision Recall
SemCor (no. of words) Settings (%) (%) (%) (%)
jcn BNC 100.0 33.3 66.7 47.1
lesk BNC 100.0 33.3 58.3 41.2
0 (17) jcn DEP 100.0 33.3 83.3 58.8
lesk DEP 100.0 33.3 58.3 41.2
SemCor 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Senseval-2 ? ? 100.0 52.9
RBL 38.9 38.9 46.1 46.1
jcn BNC 66.7 44.4 54.1 45.5
lesk BNC 83.3 55.6 67.6 56.8
jcn DEP 50.0 22.2 51.7 34.1
? 1 (44) lesk DEP 75.0 33.3 69.0 45.5
SemCor 50.0 33.3 33.3 20.5
Senseval-2 ? ? 93.3 63.6
RBL 40.7 40.7 42.8 42.8
jcn BNC 80.0 61.5 63.0 57.5
lesk BNC 90.0 69.2 71.2 65.0
? 5 (80) jcn DEP 71.4 38.5 56.7 42.5
lesk DEP 85.7 46.2 70.0 52.5
SemCor 60.0 46.2 54.0 42.5
Senseval-2 ? ? 95.9 58.8
RBL 38.1 38.1 39.1 39.1
jcn BNC 75.0 63.2 59.3 55.8
lesk BNC 68.8 57.9 62.8 59.2
? 10 (120) jcn DEP 66.7 42.1 56.8 45.0
lesk DEP 58.3 36.8 58.9 46.7
SemCor 68.8 57.9 57.3 49.2
Senseval-2 ? ? 96.8 50.8
RBL 37.5 37.5 38.0 38.0
jcn BNC 76.0 67.9 66.7 64.8
lesk BNC 64.0 57.1 71.6 69.6
? 15 (250) jcn DEP 60.0 42.9 68.8 55.6
lesk DEP 55.0 39.3 67.3 54.4
jcn PROX 70.0 50.0 72.3 58.4
lesk PROX 55.0 39.3 66.8 54.0
SemCor 64.0 57.1 66.5 62.0
Senseval-2 ? ? 98.8 68.4
RBL 32.9 32.9 30.4 30.4
jcn BNC 52.4 50.0 51.8 50.6
lesk BNC 56.3 53.7 54.6 53.4
all (786) jcn DEP 52.0 47.2 58.0 53.7
lesk DEP 52.0 47.2 52.6 48.7
jcn PROX 53.1 48.1 57.3 53.1
lesk PROX 52.0 47.2 52.3 48.5
SemCor 64.8 63.0 58.5 57.3
Senseval-2 ? ? 90.8 60.1
RBL 26.5 26.5 26.0 26.0
579
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Figure 2
?TYPE? precision on finding the predominant sense for the Senseval-2 English all-words test
data for nouns having a frequency less than or equal to various thresholds.
produced SemCor first-sense heuristic outperforms the automatic methods over all the
test items (see the ?all? results in Table 14), when items are below a frequency threshold
of five the automatic methods give better results. Indeed, as the threshold is moved
up to 20 and even 30, more nouns are covered, and the automatic methods are still
comparable and in some cases competitive with the SemCor heuristic.
6.3 Experiment 3: The Influence of Domain
In this experiment, we investigate the potential of the automatic ranking method for
computing predominant senses with respect to particular domains. We have previ-
ously demonstrated that the method produces intuitive domain-specific models for
nouns (McCarthy et al 2004a), and that these can be more accurate than first senses de-
rived from SemCor for words salient to a domain (Koeling, McCarthy, and Carroll 2005).
Here we investigate the behavior for other parts of speech, using a similar experimental
setup to that of McCarthy et al That work used the subject field codes (SFC) (Magnini
and Cavaglia` 2000)27 as a gold standard. In SFC the Princeton English WordNet is
augmented with some domain labels. Every synset in WordNet?s sense inventory is
annotated with at least one domain label, selected from a set of about 200 labels. These
labels are organized in a tree structure. Each synset of WordNet 1.6 is labeled with one
or more labels. The label factotum is assigned if any other is inadequate. The first level
consists of five main categories (e.g., doctrines and social science) and factotum.doctrines
27 More recently referred to as WordNet Domains (WN-DOMAINS).
580
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Figure 3
WSD precision on the Senseval-2 English all-words test data for nouns having a frequency less
than or equal to various thresholds.
has subcategories such as art, religion, and psychology. Some subcategories are further
divided in subcategories (e.g., dance, music, and theatre are subcategories of art).
McCarthy et al (2004a) used two domain-specific corpora for input to the method
for finding predominant senses. The corpora were obtained from the Reuters Corpus,
Volume 1 (RCV1; Rose, Stevenson, and Whitehead 2002) using the Reuters topic codes.
The two domain-specific corpora were:
SPORTS (Reuters topic code GSPO), 9.1 million words
FINANCE (Reuters topic codes ECAT and MCAT), 32.5 million words
In that work we produced sense rankings for a set of 38 nouns which have at
least one synset with an economy SFC label and one with a sport SFC label. We then
demonstrated that there were more sport labels assigned to the predominant senses
acquired from the SPORTS corpus and more economy labels assigned to those from the
FINANCE corpus. The predominant senses from both domains had a similarly high
percentage of factotum (domain-independent) labels. We reproduce the results here (in
Figure 4) for ease of reference, and for comparison with other results presented in this
section. The y-axis in this figure shows the percentage of the predominant sense labels
for these 38 nouns that have the SFC label indicated by the x-axis.
We envisaged running the same experiment with verbs, adjectives, and adverbs,
although we suspected that these would show less domain-specific tendencies and
there would be fewer candidate words to work with. The SFC labels for all senses of
polysemous words (excluding multiwords) in the various parts of speech are shown in
Table 15. We see from the distribution of factotum labels across the parts of speech that
nouns are certainly the PoS most likely to be influenced by domain.
To produce results like Figure 4 for each PoS, we needed words having at least one
synset with a sport label and one with an economy label. There were 20 such verbs but
581
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Figure 4
Distribution of domain labels of predominant senses for 38 polysemous nouns ranked using the
SPORTS and FINANCE corpora.
only two adjectives and no adverbs meeting this condition. We therefore performed
the experiment only with verbs. To do this we used the SPORTS and FINANCE corpora
as before, computing thesauruses for verbs using the grammatical relations specified
in Table 7. The results for the distribution of domain labels of the predominant senses
Table 15
Most frequent SFC labels for all senses of polysemous words in WordNet, by part of speech.
Domain % Domain %
noun biology 29.3 verb factotum 67.0
factotum 20.7 psychology 3.5
art 6.2 sport 2.9
sport 3.1 art 2.5
medicine 3.1 biology 2.5
other 37.6 other 21.6
adjective factotum 67.8 adverb factotum 81.4
biology 6.5 psychology 7.5
art 3.2 art 1.8
psychology 2.7 physics 1.1
physics 1.9 economy 1.1
other 17.9 other 7.1
582
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
acquired from the SPORTS and FINANCE corpora are shown in Figure 5. We see the same
tendency for sport labels for predominant senses from the SPORTS corpus and economy
labels for the predominant senses from the FINANCE corpus, but the relationship is
less marked compared with nouns because of the high proportions of factotum senses
in both corpora for verbs. We believe that acquisition of domain-specific predominant
senses should be focused on those words which show domain-specific tendencies. We
hope to put more work into automatic detection of these tendencies using indicators
such as domain salience and words that have different sense rankings in a given domain
compared to the BNC (as discussed by Koeling, McCarthy, and Carroll 2005).
6.4 Experiment 4: Domain-Specific Predominant Sense Acquisition
In the final set of experiments we evaluate the acquired predominant senses for domain-
specific corpora. The first of the two experiments was reported by Koeling, McCarthy,
and Carroll (2005), but we extend it by the second experiment reported subsequently.
Because there are no publicly available domain-specific manually sense-tagged corpora,
we created our own gold standard. The two chosen domains (SPORTS and FINANCE) and
the domain-neutral corpus (BNC) are the same as we used in the previous experiment.
We selected 40 words and we sampled (randomly) sentences containing these words
from the three corpora and asked annotators to choose the correct sense for the target
words. The set consists of 17 words which have at least one sense assigned an economy
domain label and at least one sense assigned a sports label: club, manager, record, right,
bill, check, competition, conversion, crew, delivery, division, fishing, reserve, return, score,
receiver, running; eight words that are particular salient in the SPORTS domain: fan,
star, transfer, striker, goal, title, tie, coach; eight words that are particular salient in the
Figure 5
Distribution of domain labels of predominant senses for 20 polysemous verbs ranked using the
SPORTS and FINANCE corpora.
583
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Table 16
WSD using predominant senses, training, and testing on all domain combinations
(hand-classified corpora).
Testing
Training BNC FINANCE SPORTS
BNC 40.7 43.3 33.2
FINANCE 39.1 49.9 24.0
SPORTS 25.7 19.7 43.7
Random BL 19.8 19.6 19.4
SemCor FS 32.0 (32.9) 33.9 (35.0) 16.3 (16.8)
FINANCE domain: package, chip, bond, market, strike, bank, share, target; and seven words
that are equally salient in both domains: will, phase, half, top, performance, level, country.
Koeling, McCarthy, and Carroll (2005) give further details of the construction of the gold
standard.
In the first experiment, we train on a corpus of documents with manually assigned
domain labels (i.e., sub-corpora of the Reuters corpus, see Section 6.3), and we test on
data from the same source. In a second experiment we build a text classifier, use the
text classifier to obtain SPORTS and FINANCE corpora (using general newswire text from
the English Gigaword Corpus; Graff 2003) and test on the gold-standard data from the
Reuters corpus. The second experiment eliminates issues about dependencies between
training and test data and will shed light on the question of how robust the acquired
predominant sense method is with respect to noise in the input data. At the same time,
the second experiment paves the way towards creating predominant sense inventories
for any conceivable domain.
6.4.1 Experiment Using Hand-Labeled Data. In this section we focus on the predominant
sense evaluation of the experiments described by Koeling, McCarthy, and Carroll (2005).
After running the predominant sense finding algorithms on the raw text of the two do-
main corpora (SPORTS and FINANCE) and the domain-neutral corpus (BNC), we evaluate
the accuracy of performing WSD on the sample of 40 words purely with the first sense
heuristic using all nine combinations of training and test corpora. The results (as given
in Table 16) are compared with a random baseline (?Random BL?)28 and the accuracy
using the first sense heuristic from SemCor (?SemCor FS?).29
The results in Table 16 show that the best results are obtained when the predominant
senses are acquired using the appropriate domain (i.e., test and training data from the
same domain). Moreover, when trained on the domain-relevant corpora, the random
baseline as well as the baseline provided by SemCor are comfortably beaten. It can be
observed from these results that apparently the BNC is more similar to the FINANCE
corpus than it is to the SPORTS corpus. The results for the SPORTS domain lag behind the
results for the FINANCE domain by almost 6 percentage points. This could be because
28 The random baseline is
?
i?tokens
1
#senses(i) .
29 The precision is given alongside in brackets because a predominant sense for the word striker is not
supplied by SemCor. The automatic method proposes a predominant sense in every case.
584
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Table 17
WSD using predominant senses, training, and testing on all domain combinations (automatically
classified corpora).
Testing
Training BNC FINANCE SPORTS
BNC 40.7 43.3 33.2
FINANCE 38.2 44.0 29.0
SPORTS 27.0 23.4 45.0
Random BL 19.8 19.6 19.4
SemCor FS 32.0 (32.9) 33.9 (35.0) 16.3 (16.8)
of the smaller amount of training data available (32M words versus 9M words), but it
could also be an artifact of this particular selection of words.
6.4.2 Experiment Using Automatically Classified Data. Although the previous experiment
shows that it is possible to acquire domain-specific predominant senses successfully, the
usefulness of doing this will be far greater if there is no need to classify corpora with
respect to domain by hand. There is no such thing as a standard domain specification
because the definition of a domain depends on user and application. It would be
advantageous if we could automatically obtain a user-/application-specific corpus from
which to acquire predominant senses.
In this section we describe an experiment where we build a text classifier using
WordNet as a sense inventory and the SFC domain extension (see Section 6.3). We
extracted bags of domain-specific words from WordNet for all the defined domains by
collecting all the word senses (synsets) and corresponding glosses associated with each
domain label. These bags of words are the fingerprints for the domains and we used
them to train a Support Vector Machine (SVM) text classifier using TwentyOne.30
The classifier distinguishes between 48 classes (the first and second levels of the
SFC hierarchy). When a document is evaluated by the classifier, it returns a list of
all the classes (domains) it recognizes and an associated confidence score reflecting the
certainty that the document belongs to that particular domain. We classified 10 months?
worth of data from the English Gigaword Corpus using this classifier and assigned each
document to the corpus belonging to the highest scoring class of the classifier?s output.
The level of confidence was ignored at this stage.
This resulted in a SPORTS corpus comprising about 11M words and a FINANCE
corpus of about 27M words. The predominant sense finding algorithm was run on the
raw text of these two corpora and we followed exactly the same evaluation strategy as
in the previous section. The results are summarized in Table 17 and are very similar
to those based on hand-labeled corpora. Again, the best results are obtained when test
and training data are derived from the same domain. The FINANCE?FINANCE result
is slightly worse, but is still well above both Random and the SemCor baseline. The
SPORTS?SPORTS result has slightly improved over the result reported in the previous
30 TwentyOne Classifier is an Irion Technologies product: www.irion.ml/products/english/
products classify.html.
585
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
section. The reason for these differences may well be because the FINANCE corpus used
for this experiment is smaller and the SPORTS corpus is slightly larger than those used in
the hand-labeled experiment.
Automatically classifying documents inherently introduces noise in the training
corpora. This experiment to test the robustness of our method for finding predominant
senses suggests that it deals well with the noise. Further experiments that take the
confidence levels of the classifier into account will allow us to create corpora with less
noise and will allow us to find the right balance between corpus size and corpus quality.
7. Conclusions
In this article we have argued that information on the predominant sense of words is
important, and that it is desirable to be able to infer this automatically from unlabeled
text. We presented a number of evaluations investigating various facets of a previously
proposed method for automatically acquiring this information (McCarthy et al 2004a).
The evaluations extend ones in previous publications in a number of ways: they use
larger, balanced test data sets, and they compare alternative semantic similarity scores
and distributional thesauruses derived from different corpora and based on different
kinds of relations. We also looked in detail at areas where the method performs well
and also where it does not, and carried out a manual error analysis to identify the types
of mistakes it makes.
Our main results are:
 The predominant sense acquisition method produces promising results
overall for all open class parts of speech, when evaluated on SemCor, a
large balanced corpus.
 The highest accuracies are for nouns and adjectives; overall accuracy for
verbs is lower, but they have the lowest random baseline; adverbs have the
lowest average polysemy but gains over the random baseline are lower
than for other PoS.
 Using a thesaurus computed from proximity-based relations produces
almost as good results as using an otherwise identical one computed from
syntactic dependency-based relations.
 Lesk?s semantic similarity score (Banerjee and Pedersen 2002, lesk)
produces particularly good results for nouns which have low corpus
frequencies; Jiang and Conrath?s (1997, jcn) score does well on higher
frequency words.31
 For low frequency nouns in SemCor, the method, using any combination
of automatically acquired thesaurus and semantic similarity score that we
tried, produces more accurate predominant sense information than
SemCor. In particular, for nouns with a frequency of five or less (12.9% of
the polysemous nouns in the Senseval-2 data) it outperforms the SemCor
first sense heuristic. As the threshold is increased, the SemCor first sense
31 The lesk score has wider applicability than jcn since it can be applied to all parts of speech. It can also be
used with any sense inventory which has textual definitions for its senses even if the inventory does not
contain WordNet-like semantic relations.
586
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
heuristic becomes more competitive, but some of the automatic methods
are still outperforming it for nouns occurring 20 or fewer times in SemCor.
 Nouns show a stronger tendency for domain-specific meanings than other
parts of speech, but predominant senses for verbs acquired automatically
with respect to domain-specific corpora also correlate with the appropriate
domain labeling for those senses.
 Predominant senses acquired using domain-specific corpora outperform
those from SemCor in a WSD task, for a selection of nouns, using corpora
consisting of either hand-classified or automatically-classified documents.
8. Further Work
We are continuing to work on automatic ranking of word senses for WSD. Our next step
will be to use the numeric values of sense prevalence scores to compare the skews in
the distributions of word senses across different corpora and see if this enables us to
detect automatically words for which a domain- or genre-specific ranking is warranted.
Looking at skews should also help in predicting words for which contextual WSD is
likely to be particularly powerful, for example when more than one sense is scored
as being highly prevalent. In such situations we will combine our method with an
approach to unsupervised context-based WSD which uses the collocates of the distri-
butional neighbors associated with each of the senses as contextual features.
Our error analysis shows that many errors in identifying predominant senses are
caused by the sense distinctions in WordNet being particularly fine-grained. We have
recently (Koeling and McCarthy 2007) evaluated our method on the coarse-grained
English all words task at SemEval (Navigli, Litkowski, and Hargraves 2007). We will fol-
low work on finding relationships between WordNet senses to induce coarser-grained
classes (McCarthy 2006), and on automatic induction of senses (Pantel and Lin 2002)
and adapt our method to acquire prevalence rankings for these. The granularity of the
inventory will depend on the application and we plan to apply rankings over such
inventories for WSD within the context of a task, such as lexical substitution (McCarthy
and Navigli 2007).
To date we have only applied our methods to English. We plan to apply our
approach to other languages for which sense tagged resources of the size of SemCor are
not available. Given the good results with Lin?s proximity based thesaurus we believe
our method should work even for languages which do not have high quality parsers
available.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the UK EPSRC
project EP/C537262 ?Ranking Word Senses
for Disambiguation: Models and
Applications,? and a UK Royal Society
Dorothy Hodgkin Fellowship to the first
author. We are grateful to Dekang Lin for
making his thesaurus data publicly available
and to Siddharth Patwardhan and Ted
Pedersen for the WordNet Similarity
Package. We thank the anonymous reviewers
for the many helpful comments and
suggestions they made.
References
Agirre, Eneko and Oier Lopez de Lacalle.
2003. Clustering WordNet word senses. In
Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing, pages 121?130, Borovets,
Bulgaria.
Banerjee, Satanjeev and Ted Pedersen. 2002.
An adapted Lesk algorithm for word sense
disambiguation using WordNet. In
Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and
Computational Linguistics (CICLing-02),
pages 136?145, Mexico City.
587
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Briscoe, Edward and John Carroll. 2002.
Robust accurate statistical annotation of
general text. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
pages 1499?1504, Las Palmas, Canary
Islands, Spain.
Buitelaar, Paul and Bogdan Sacaleanu.
2001. Ranking and selecting synsets by
domain relevance. In Proceedings of
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources:
Applications, Extensions and Customizations,
NAACL 2001 Workshop, pages 119?124,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Chan, Yee Seng and Hwee Tou Ng. 2005.
Word sense disambiguation with
distribution estimation. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2005),
pages 1010?1015, Edinburgh, UK.
Church, Kenneth W. and Patrick Hanks.
1989. Word association norms, mutual
information and lexicography. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL-89), pages 76?82, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
Ciaramita, Massimiliano and Mark Johnson.
2003. Supersense tagging of unknown
nouns in WordNet. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2003),
pages 168?175, Sapporo, Japan.
Cotton, Scott, Phil Edmonds, Adam
Kilgarriff, and Martha Palmer. 2001.
Senseval-2. http://www.sle.sharp.
co.uk/senseval2.
Curran, James. 2005. Supersense tagging
of unknown nouns using semantic
similarity. In Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL?05), pages
26?33, Ann Arbor, MI.
Daude?, Jordi, Lluis Padro?, and German
Rigau. 2000. Mapping WordNets using
structural information. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 504?511,
Hong Kong.
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998. WordNet,
An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Francis, W. Nelson and Henry Kuc?era, 1979.
Manual of Information to Accompany a
Standard Corpus of Present-Day Edited
American English, for Use with Digital
Computers. Department of Linguistics,
Brown University, Providence, RI. Revised
and amplified ed.
Gale, William, Kenneth Church, and David
Yarowsky. 1992. One sense per discourse.
In Proceedings of the 4th DARPA Speech and
Natural Language Workshop, pages 233?237,
Harriman, NY.
Gliozzo, Alfio, Claudio Giuliano, and
Carlo Strapparava. 2005. Domain kernels
for word sense disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 403?410, Ann Arbor, MI.
Graff, David. 2003. English Gigaword.
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia,
PA.
Harris, Zellig S. 1968. Mathematical Structures
of Languages. Wiley, New York, NY.
Hornby, A. S. 1989. Oxford Advanced Learner?s
Dictionary of Current English. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK.
Ide, Nancy and Yorick Wilks. 2006. Making
sense about sense. In Eneko Agirre and
Phil Edmonds, editors, Word Sense
Disambiguation, Algorithms and Applications.
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
pages 47?73.
Jiang, Jay and David Conrath. 1997.
Semantic similarity based on corpus
statistics and lexical taxonomy. In 10th
International Conference on Research in
Computational Linguistics, pages 19?33,
Taiwan.
Kilgarriff, Adam. 1998. Gold standard
datasets for evaluating word sense
disambiguation programs. Computer
Speech and Language, 12(3):453?472.
Kilgarriff, Adam and Martha Palmer, editors.
2000. Senseval: Special Issue of the Journal
Computers and the Humanities, volume
34(1?2). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.
Koeling, Rob and Diana McCarthy. 2007.
Sussx: WSD using automatically acquired
predominant senses. In Proceedings of
ACL/SIGLEX SemEval-2007, pages 314?317,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Koeling, Rob, Diana McCarthy, and John
Carroll. 2005. Domain-specific sense
distributions and predominant sense
acquisition. In Proceedings of the Human
Language Technology Conference and
EMNLP, pages 419?426, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
Krovetz, Robert. 1998. More than one sense
per discourse. In Proceedings of the
ACL-SIGLEX Senseval Workshop.
http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk/events/
senseval/ARCHIVE/PROCEEDINGS/.
Landes, Shari, Claudia Leacock, and
Randee I. Tengi, editors. 1998. Building
588
McCarthy, Koeling, Weeds, and Carroll Acquisition of Predominant Word Senses
Semantic Concordances. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Lapata, Mirella and Chris Brew. 2004. Verb
class disambiguation using informative
priors. Computational Linguistics,
30(1):45?75.
Leech, Geoffrey. 1992. 100 million words of
English: The British National Corpus.
Language Research, 28(1):1?13.
Lesk, Michael. 1986. Automatic sense
disambiguation using machine readable
dictionaries: How to tell a pine cone from
an ice cream cone. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGDOC Conference, pages 24?26,
Toronto, Canada.
Levin, Beth. 1993. English Verb Classes and
Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago and
London.
Lin, Dekang. 1997. Using syntactic
dependency as local context to resolve
word sense ambiguity. In Proceedings of the
35th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and 8th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-97),
pages 64?71, Madrid, Spain.
Lin, Dekang. 1998a. Automatic retrieval and
clustering of similar words. In Proceedings
of COLING-ACL?98, pages 768?774,
Montreal, Canada.
Lin, Dekang. 1998b. Dependency-based
evaluation of MINIPAR. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on the Evaluation of Parsing
Systems, pages 48?56, Granada, Spain.
http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/~lindek/
minipar.htm.
Magnini, Bernardo and Gabriela Cavaglia`.
2000. Integrating subject field codes into
WordNet. In Proceedings of LREC-2000,
pages 1413?1418, Athens, Greece.
Magnini, Bernardo, Carlo Strapparava,
Giovanni Pezzuli, and Alfio Gliozzo. 2001.
Using domain information for word sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
Senseval-2 Workshop, pages 111?114,
Toulouse, France.
Magnini, Bernardo, Carlo Strapparava,
Giovanni Pezzulo, and Alfio Gliozzo. 2002.
The role of domain information in word
sense disambiguation. Natural Language
Engineering, 8(4):359?373.
Martinez, David and Eneko Agirre. 2000.
One sense per collocation and genre/topic
variations. In Proceedings of the Joint
SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing and Very Large
Corpora, pages 207?215, Hong Kong.
McCarthy, Diana. 2006. Relating WordNet
senses for word sense disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the EACL 06 Workshop:
Making Sense of Sense: Bringing
Psycholinguistics and Computational
Linguistics Together, pages 17?24, Trento,
Italy.
McCarthy, Diana and John Carroll. 2003.
Disambiguating nouns, verbs, and
adjectives using automatically acquired
selectional preferences. Computational
Linguistics, 29(4):639?654.
McCarthy, Diana, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds,
and John Carroll. 2004a. Finding
predominant senses in untagged text. In
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 280?287, Barcelona, Spain.
McCarthy, Diana, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds,
and John Carroll. 2004b. Ranking WordNet
senses automatically. CSRP 569,
Department of Informatics, University of
Sussex, January.
McCarthy, Diana, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds,
and John Carroll. 2004c. Using
automatically acquired predominant
senses for word sense disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the ACL Senseval-3 Workshop,
pages 151?154, Barcelona, Spain.
McCarthy, Diana and Roberto Navigli. 2007.
SemEval-2007 task 10: English lexical
substitution task. In Proceedings of
ACL/SIGLEX SemEval-2007, pages 48?53,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Mihalcea, Rada and Phil Edmonds, editors.
2004. Proceedings Senseval-3 3rd
International Workshop on Evaluating Word
Sense Disambiguation Systems. ACL,
Barcelona, Spain.
Miller, George A., Claudia Leacock, Randee
Tengi, and Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A
semantic concordance. In Proceedings of the
ARPA Workshop on Human Language
Technology, pages 303?308, San Francisco,
CA.
Mohammad, Saif and Graeme Hirst.
2006. Determining word sense dominance
using a thesaurus. In Proceedings of
the 11th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL-2006), pages 121?128,
Trento, Italy.
Navigli, Roberto, Ken Litkowski, and
Orin Hargraves. 2007. SemEval-2007
task 7: Coarse-grained English all-words
task. In Proceedings of ACL/SIGLEX
SemEval-2007, pages 30?35, Prague,
Czech Republic.
589
Computational Linguistics Volume 33, Number 4
Palmer, Martha, Hoa Trang Dang, and
Christiane Fellbaum. 2007. Making
fine-grained and coarse-grained sense
distinctions, both manually and
automatically. Natural Language
Engineering, 13(02):137?163.
Pantel, Patrick and Dekang Lin.
2002. Discovering word senses from
text. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 613?619, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.
Patwardhan, Siddharth, Satanjeev Banerjee,
and Ted Pedersen. 2003. Using measures of
semantic relatedness for word sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLing 2003), pages 241?257, Mexico
City, Mexico.
Patwardhan, Siddharth and Ted Pedersen.
2003. The CPAN WordNet::Similarity
Package. http://search.cpan.org/~sid/
WordNet-Similarity-0.05/.
Preiss, Judita and David Yarowsky, editors.
2001. Proceedings of Senseval-2 Second
International Workshop on Evaluating Word
Sense Disambiguation Systems. ACL,
Toulouse, France.
Procter, Paul, editor. 1978. Longman
Dictionary of Contemporary English.
Longman Group Ltd., Harlow, UK.
Resnik, Philip. 1995. Using information
content to evaluate semantic similarity
in a taxonomy. In 14th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 448?453, Montreal, Canada.
Rose, Tony G., Mary Stevenson, and Miles
Whitehead. 2002. The Reuters Corpus
volume 1?From yesterday?s news to
tomorrow?s language resources. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 827?833, Las Palmas,
Canary Islands, Spain.
Siegel, Sidney and N. John Castellan.
1988. Non-Parametric Statistics for the
Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill,
New York, NY.
Snyder, Benjamin and Martha Palmer.
2004. The English all-words task.
In Proceedings of the ACL Senseval-3
Workshop, pages 41?43, Barcelona,
Spain.
Stevenson, Mark and Yorick Wilks. 2001.
The interaction of knowledge sources for
word sense disambiguation. Computational
Linguistics, 27(3):321?350.
Weeds, Julie. 2003. Measures and
Applications of Lexical Distributional
Similarity. Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Informatics, University of Sussex,
Brighton, UK.
Weeds, Julie, James Dowdall, Gerold
Schneider, Bill Keller, and David Weir.
2005. Using distributional similarity to
organise biomedical terminology.
Terminology, 11(1):107?141.
Weeds, Julie and David Weir. 2005.
Co-occurrence Retrieval: A flexible
framework for lexical distributional
similarity. Computational Linguistics,
31(4):439?476.
Yarowsky, David and Radu Florian. 2002.
Evaluating sense disambiguation
performance across diverse parameter
spaces. Natural Language Engineering,
8(4):293?310.
590
