Incremental Conceptualization for Language Production
Markus Guhe
(University of Edinburgh)
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (distributed by Psychology Press), 2007,
xii+260 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-0-8058-5624-8, $75.00
Reviewed by
Paul Piwek
The Open University
For the past ten years or more, most work in the field of Natural Language Gener-
ation (NLG) has shied away from considerations regarding the processes underlying
human language production. Rather, the focus has been on systems that automatically
produce language?usually text?from non-linguistic representations, with the main
objective being generation of a text that faithfully captures the meaning of those non-
linguistic representations (see, e.g., Reiter and Dale?s 2000 textbook on NLG). There
is, however, also a different take on NLG ?as not just competent performance by a
computer but the development of a computational theory of the human capacity for
language and processes that engage it? (McDonald 1987, page 642). Guhe?s research
monograph, based on his 2003 Ph.D. thesis, is firmly situated in the latter tradition.
One of his main goals is to work out a computational architecture for Levelt?s (1989)
psycholinguistically motivated model of language production. According to Levelt?s
model, speaking involves three main activities: conceptualizing (deciding what to say),
formulating (deciding how to say it), and articulating (saying it). Guhe?s book focuses
on the mental activity of conceptualizing.
Conceptualizing is a recalcitrant object of study, partly because of the problem of
the ?initial spark?; the decision to say something appears to be the result of volitional
conscious decisions, which largely elude scientific study. Guhe avoids this problem by
investigating conceptualization in settings where the main intention is already fixed:
a speaker witnesses several events unfold and is instructed to describe what happens
(while it happens). The research challenge then is to figure out how ?subintentions? for
individual speech acts come about. The benefit of using an on-line generation setting is
that it provides information on both what a speaker says at a given point in time and
what is being reported, that is, the data that drive the speaker?s utterances.
The book consists of the usual preface and introduction, followed by four parts
(A, B, C, and Results), a list of the book?s theses, and an appendix that includes,
among other things, a glossary, bibliography, name index, and subject index. Part A
of the book is titled ?Conceptualization.? It starts with an introduction to the field of
language production, with particular reference to Levelt?s (1989) model. The notion of
conceptualization as a ?quasi-module,? partly using Fodor?s (1983) criteria, is presented
and four subtasks of conceptualization are discussed:
1. construction (mainly mapping what is perceived to concepts from
long-term memory)
2. selection (of events that are to be verbalized)
3. linearization (ordering selected events appropriate to the goal of
the discourse)
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 1
4. generation of preverbal messages (mapping the conceptual
representations that have been handled so far to semantic
content that can interface with the linguistic formulator)
This chapter also introduces referential nets, the formalism that is used to represent
conceptual content.
Part B (?Incrementality?) traces the roots of the notion of incrementality in computer
science, and provides an extensive overview of various notions of incrementality. Guhe
settles on a definition of incrementality whose crux is the piecemeal processing of
information and production of output before all input has been seen. He distinguishes
between incremental processes, algorithms, and models; roughly speaking, incremental
models contain a strictly uni-directional cascade of incremental processes that recur-
sively call incremental algorithms. For Guhe, an essential characteristic of incremental
algorithms is that they use only a local context, as opposed to all available knowl-
edge, for their computations. He also adopts the common distinction between working
memory and long-term memory. The former mediates the flow of information between
incremental processes. ?Increments,? the small pieces of information that incremental
processes operate with, can be read from it and written to it. It contains ?situation and
discourse knowledge,? whereas long-term memory stores static ?encyclopedic knowl-
edge.? This ?blueprint for incrementality? is accompanied by a useful discussion of
various dimensions of incrementality, such as monotonicity, lookahead, feedback, and
discreteness.
Part C focuses on INC, the incremental conceptualizer, which is an implemented
?working model? of the blueprint for incrementality. INC is offered as a framework,
that is, a model which has been fleshed out in detail in some respects and left under-
specified in others. A central role is played by four parameters of INC which influence
its behavior. For example, two of these concern the storage of event representations in a
buffer inworkingmemorywhichmediates the flow of information between incremental
processes. One parameter, length of traverse buffer (LOTB), concerns the size of this
buffer, whereas the other, latency (LT), determines for how long an element is kept in
the buffer until it is picked up by preverbal message generation. Small values for LOTB
in combination with a large value for LT can lead to the ?forgetting? of information: If
the buffer has filled up and new information is added, the first element on the buffer
is discarded and never reaches preverbal message generation. The book presents some
evidence that variation of the parameter settings can account for some of the variation
found among human speakers. This part of the book concludes with a discussion of the
output of INC for two domains and output of human speakers for the same domains.
It concerns a visual scene, from a bird?s eye perspective, of two moving planes on a
runway, and the replay of the drawing of a simple line drawing consisting of eight lines
that represents a crossing.
The ?Results? summarizes the main contributions of the book, makes some com-
parisons with Levelt?s (1989) model, and proposes a number of future extensions, such
as the addition of Levelt?s monitor. The monitor takes as input the output of the speech-
comprehension system and uses this to influence the processing of the conceptualizer.
Finally, there are a good number of suggestions for further ways to parameterize INC.
The book is a rich source of information on language production, both from a
computational and a cognitive point of view. It includes a good introduction to con-
ceptualizing, and provides an insightful discussion of many varieties of incrementality.
INC is an excellent starting point for others interested in on-line data-driven generation
to both build on and respond to. The breadth of the work means that one gets a truly
130
Book Reviews
holistic view of the problem and is given a good impression of the many debates that
cross the boundaries of different disciplines. In this respect, the book goes against a
recent trend in computational linguistics to show less interest in other language-related
research communities (see Reiter 2007).
Although the wide scope of this book is in many ways what makes it attractive,
it also leads to some of its weaknesses. In particular, the way INC is presented in this
broad context did not feel optimal to me. Although the proper description of INC is
delayed until Part C, there are numerous forward references to INC in the preceding
parts. The reader will find several instances where a certain aspect of conceptualization
or incrementality is discussed with reference to INC, only to find out later that this
particular feature ?is not implemented yet (apart from a dummy function).? It would
have been fairer to the reader to separate a clear description of the current state of INC
from the wider discussion surrounding it. Another presentational issue concerns the
tight integration of locality and incrementality in the book?s definitions. In particular,
the virtual identification of incremental algorithms with computation on a local context
makes one question why the book speaks of incremental rather than local algorithms.
A more substantive point relates to Part C on INC. This part includes the description
of two simulations that were run with INC. Somewhat frustratingly, both descriptions
are incomplete. For instance, whereas for the first simulation the appendix contains the
texts produced by human participants for the same task, there is no systematic analysis
of the structural (dis)similarities between the output of INC and that of the human
speakers. For the second simulation, there are some analyses of the similarities between
the structure of INC?s and the human speakers? output, but no transcripts of complete
human outputs are provided. In both cases, there is also no detail about how long-
term memory, referred to as the concept storage (CS), was populated for the relevant
domains, even though the CS must have had a significant influence on the output that
INC produces.
This book will be useful to research students and researchers in natural language
generation who are interested in the study of generation systems as a computational
model of human language production. Part B of the book, on incrementality, might
also prove useful to those approaching NLG as an engineering problem. The main
reason to consult this book is that it brings together in a single place information on
conceptualization, incrementality, and various debates in philosophy, cognitive science,
and computer science affecting these topics. INC, the incremental conceptualizer which
is described in part C of the book, presents an ambitious attempt to implement a
computational model of incremental conceptualization. The verdict on its adequacy is
still out, given the limited empirical evaluation to which it has been subjected thus far.
Online generation, a central theme of this book, was adopted in 2007 at the Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents as a task (automated real-time reporting
on simulated horse races) in the GALA competition for Embodied Lifelike Agents.1
Work on embodiment and conceptualization, new insights into societal grounding of
conceptual representations (e.g., DeVault, Oved, and Stone 2006), empirical and compu-
tational studies on generation (both incremental and non-incremental, from numerical
data; e.g., vanDeemter 2006), and recent experimental techniques for studying language
production (see Roelofs 2004 for an overview) give a sense that this book could be part
of an exciting revival of cognitively motivated NLG.
1 See http://hmi.ewi.utwente.nl/gala/.
131
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 1
References
van Deemter, Kees. 2006. Generating
referring expressions that involve gradable
properties. Computational Linguistics,
32(2):195?222.
DeVault, David, Iris Oved, and Matthew
Stone. 2006. Societal grounding is
essential for meaningful language use. In
Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-06), Boston,
MA, pages 747?754.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1983. The modularity of mind.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Levelt, Willem J. M. 1989. Speaking: From
Intention to Articulation. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
McDonald, David. 1987. Natural language
generation. In Stuart C. Shapiro, editor,
Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence,
Volume 1, John Wiley & Sons, New York,
pages 642?654.
Reiter, Ehud. 2007. The shrinking
horizons of computational linguistics.
Computational Linguistics,
33(2):283?287.
Reiter, Ehud and Robert Dale. 2000.
Building Natural Language Generation
Systems. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Roelofs, Ardi. 2004. The seduced speaker:
Modeling of cognitive control.
In Anja Belz, Roger Evans, and
Paul Piwek, editors, Natural Language
Generation, Third International
Conference, LNCS 3123, Springer,
Berlin, pages 1?10.
Paul Piwek is lecturer in computing at the Open University. His research interests are (multimodal)
natural language generation and dialogue modeling. Piwek?s address is: Centre for Research in
Computing, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK; e-mail: p.piwek@open.ac.uk.
132
