Book Reviews
A Computational Model of Natural Language Communication
Roland Hausser
(Friedrich-Alexander-Universita?t Erlangen-Nu?rnberg)
Springer, 2006, xii+365 pp; hardbound, ISBN 3-540-35476-X/978-3-540-35476-5, e69.50
Reviewed by
Markus Egg
University of Groningen
The work presented in this book is motivated by the goal of applying linguistic theory-
building to the concrete needs of potential linguistic applications such as question
answering, dialogue systems, andmachine translation. To pursue this goal, a translation
of linguistic theory into a framework of ?practical linguistics? is suggested. Database
Semantics (DBS) is presented as a first step towards such a framework. It models the
communication between cognitive agents, which can be used, for example, to imple-
ment the communicative abilities of a cognitive robot.
DBS serves as a single underlying format for modeling communication in that it
lends itself to an account of both language processing and language production (think-
ing is added as a separate component, which refers to inferencing on stored information,
and activating content to be verbalized). As such an underlying format, it can be used to
describe linguistic as well as extralinguistic content (to represent utterances and the con-
text, respectively). Being explicitly designed for practical applications, DBS deliberately
ignores linguistic phenomena considered irrelevant for these (e.g., quantifier scope).
The structure of the book is as follows. It has threemain parts, which introduce DBS,
outline the range of constructions covered by DBS so far, and specify fragments that can
be processed or produced in the framework of DBS. There is also an appendix with two
sections on the treatment of word-order variation in DBS and on the global architecture
of DBS systems, and a glossary.
The first part of the book starts with general principles of linguistic analysis that ap-
ply to DBS. These principles include incrementality (input is to be processed successively
as it comes in, which yields an analysis for incomplete as well as complete chunks of
input; the syntactic basis for this strategy is Left-Associative Grammar [Hausser 1992]),
surface orientation (no empty categories), and a focus on communication (description for-
malisms must be able to handle turn-taking, i.e., language processing and production).
After a sketch of the general theory of communication of which DBS is a part, DBS
is presented in detail. It is implemented as a non-recursive data structure, that is, a list of
feature structures called proplets (usually, one per word1) that are linked by coindexing
the values of specific features.2 For example, subcategorizing elements (?functors?)
have features whose values indicate their arguments and the other way around.
In spite of its name, DBS does not offer a purely semantic representation of linguistic
expressions. Although it does abstract away from purely syntactic phenomena such
1 Function words such as determiners, auxiliaries, and conjunctions have no proplets of their own but
contribute to other proplets.
2 This technique makes it resemble minimal recursion semantics (Copestake et al 2005).
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 2
as word order and diatheses, it still preserves much syntactic structure, for example,
in its representation of modification and of elliptical expressions. Semantics proper is
encoded within proplets (except those for deictic expressions and proper names) by
defining a concept as the value of their ?core attribute.?
DBS also serves for the representation of the extralinguistic context. The context is
described in terms of proplet sets that are linked by feature value coindexation; the only
difference to proplet sets for the modeling of linguistic content is that proplet sets for
context do not comprise explicit pointers to specific words.
The similarity between the representations of utterances and of context makes the
move between them straightforward, which is crucial for the proposed analysis of
language processing and production: Language processing consists of deriving lists
of proplets (including the coindexations between proplet values) from utterances and
storing them in the context representation, which is modeled as a database. Language
production consists of the activation of such lists of proplets from this database and
their translation into utterances.
The second part of the book is devoted to three classes of linguistic phenomena and
their description in DBS. The first class is called ?functor-argument structure? and cov-
ers the relations between subcategorizing elements and their arguments and modifica-
tion. This includes sentential arguments, subordinate clauses, and relative clauses. The
second class consists of coordination phenomena, ranging from simple coordination on
the word or phrase level to gapping and right-node raising. The last class is cases of
coreference. A wide range of these cases is represented in DBS, including even Bach?
Peters sentences (where there are two NPs that constitute anaphors whose antecedent
is the respective other NP). The DBS framework is used to formulate a version of the
Langacker?Ross condition dating back to Langacker (1969) and Ross (1969): Pronouns
can precede a coreferential NP only if they are part of a clause that is embedded within
the clause of the NP.
In the third part, three fragments are presented in detail, the first two from the
processing and production perspective, the last one only from the processing perspec-
tive. The first fragment prepares the ground by illustrating how the approach handles
extremely simple texts consisting of intransitive present-tense sentences whose NP
is a proper name. The second fragment extends the coverage to pronouns, complex
NPs (Det-Adj*-N), and transitive and ditransitive verbs in simple and complex tenses.
Finally, the third fragment offers a treatment of intensifiers (very, rather) and adverbials,
and an outlook on a syntactically underspecified approach to modifier attachment
ambiguities. The fragments are described in terms of ?grammars,? which specify start
and end states (in terms of the first and the last proplet of a list to be processed or
verbalized) and a set of rules. The rules are ordered in that every rule is accompanied
by a set of potential successors, and in that rules to start and to end a derivation with
are specified.
The book is written in a highly accessible way. The formalism itself as well as its
application to the fragments is described thoroughly, whichmakes it easy to understand
and evaluate DBS. The underlying perspective on linguistic theory-building and the
theory of communication of which DBS is a part are also explicated clearly. The formal
details of the analysis are presented carefully. A remaining point of dispute is in my
view the set of readings of sentences where several PPs have more than one attachment
possibility (Chapter 15.1).
However, the book does not offer much discussion of the relation between the
proposed analysis and competing approaches. This shows up in specific parts of the
analysis?for example, in the discussion of coreference in Chapter 10, which does not
312
Book Reviews
integrate previous work that formulates constraints on potential coreferences in terms
of syntactic constellations such as c- or o-command (e.g., Pollard and Sag 1994; Reuland
2006), and in the treatment of quantifier scope and scope ambiguity in Chapter 6 (as
opposed to, e.g., the papers in vanDeemter and Peters [1996]). But evenmore important,
it would have been interesting to hear more about the way in which DBS compares to
other approaches whose goal is the application of linguistic theory-building to concrete
needs of potential linguistic applications. Although the completion of the manuscript
admittedly antedates much of the ongoing work in the field (e.g., the application of
deep linguistic processing in the analysis of biomedical and other scientific texts), a
comparison of DBS to wide-coverage systems such as the LinGO English Resource
Grammar (Copestake and Flickinger 2000) (including also related activities such as
the development of Robust Minimal Recursion Semantics [Copestake 2007]) or Alpino
(analysis of unrestricted Dutch texts [Bouma, van Noord, and Malouf 2001]) would
have been a welcome complementation to the presentation of DBS in the book.
References
Bouma, Gosse, Gertjan van Noord, and
Robert Malouf. 2001. Alpino: Wide
coverage computational analysis of Dutch.
In Walter Daelemans, Khalil Sima?an,
Jorn Veenstra, and Jakub Zavrel, editors,
Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands
(CLIN) 2000, Rodopi, Amsterdam,
pages 45?59.
Copestake, Ann. 2007. Semantic composition
with (robust) minimal recursion semantics.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Deep
Processing, pages 73?80, Prague.
Copestake, Ann and Dan Flickinger. 2000.
An open-source grammar development
environment and broad-coverage English
grammar using HPSG. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Athens.
Copestake, Ann, Daniel Flickinger, Carl
Pollard, and Ivan Sag. 2005. Minimal
recursion semantics. An introduction.
Research on Language and Computation,
3:281?332.
van Deemter, Kees and Stanley Peters,
editors. 1996. Semantic Ambiguity and
Underspecification. CSLI, Stanford, CA.
Hausser, Roland. 1992. Complexity in
left-associative grammar. Theoretical
Computer Science, 106:283?308.
Langacker, R. 1969. On pronominalization
and the chain of command. In D. Reibel
and S. Schane, editors,Modern Studies in
English. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, pages 160?186.
Pollard, Carl and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-driven
Phrase Structure Grammar. CSLI and
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Reuland, Eric. 2006. Binding theory: Terms
and concepts. In Martin Everaert and
Henk van Riemsdijk, editors, The Blackwell
Companion to Syntax, volume 1. Blackwell,
Malden, UK, chapter 9, pages 260?283.
Ross, J. 1969. On the cyclic nature of English
pronominalization. In D. Reibel and
S. Schane, editors,Modern Studies in
English. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, pages 187?200.
Markus Egg is an associate professor in Discourse Studies at the University of Groningen. His
main areas of interest are semantics and discourse and their interfaces with syntax. His address
is Centre for Language and Cognition Groningen, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Oude Kijk in
?t Jatstraat 26, 9712 EK Groningen, The Netherlands; e-mail: k.m.m.egg@rug.nl.
313

