Information Extraction: Algorithms and Prospects in a
Retrieval Context
Marie-Francine Moens
(Katholieke Universiteit Leuven)
Springer (Information retrieval series, edited by W. Bruce Croft), 2006, xiii+246 pp;
ISBN 978-1-4020-4987-3, $119.00
Reviewed by
Diana Maynard
University of Sheffield
Published as part of the Information Retrieval Series, this book aims to present both
a historical overview of information extraction (IE) and a description of current ap-
proaches and applications. Essentially, it introduces the topic of information extraction
to an information retrieval (IR) audience, aiming as much at students as established
researchers, and focusing primarily on the algorithms used. Although it claims to
give equal importance to early technologies developed in the field and to the ?most
advanced and recent technologies,? for the latter it concentrates mainly on machine-
learning approaches rather than knowledge-engineering (rule-based) techniques.
The book is well-structured and progresses from an introductory chapter that gives
a brief explanation of information extraction and how it fits into the IR paradigm,
through a historical overview of the field in Chapter 2, and on to the meat of the book,
which describes different approaches to IE in a set of four chapters leading from sym-
bolic techniques and pattern recognition through to supervised and then unsupervised
classification techniques. Chapter 7 discusses information retrieval models and makes
some suggestions as to why and how information extraction should be incorporated
into these models. Chapter 8 then discusses evaluation of IE technologies, focusing
on the most commonly used measures from the Message Understanding Conference
(MUC) and Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) competitions, and suggesting other
ways in which evaluation might be measured. Chapter 9 describes some case studies
in which information extraction is commonly used. Finally, the author takes a look at
the future of information extraction within an information retrieval context, discussing
some of the findings and challenges for current research.
The aim of the book is quite ambitious in attempting to cater to the rather different
needs of both students and established researchers. On the one hand, the chapters on
the history of information extraction would be interesting for students; on the other
hand, this could be of lesser interest to researchers concerned about the techniques and
applications. The first half of the book is quite readable; the second half, however, targets
those with quite some knowledge already of statistical processing, language modeling,
and so on. Although the book is designed more for reading right through than dipping
into individual chapters, the middle sections are certainly not easy reading, except
perhaps for those already familiar with the topic.
It is slightly disappointing that the book is angled almost exclusively towards
machine-learning approaches to IE, and consequently omits any mention of some of the
leading tools in the field such as GATE (Cunningham et al 2002) and KIM (Popov et al
2004), which are based on knowledge-engineering approaches. Although the book does
not concern itself with examining individual IE tools, one might expect some reference
to such tools, at least in the historical chapters if nowhere else. It is also unfortunate
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 2
that the quality of the English is quite poor: The dozens of spelling and grammatical
mistakes impair the quality and, at times, readability of the work.
The first two chapters of the book, introducing the topic and detailing the history
of IE, are most interesting and present an overview of the development of the field that
is hard to find in other work. One might have expected to find more about the MUC
competitions in this section, which shaped the way for much current research in IE by
pushing the technology towards real applications and providing amechanism bywhich
future tools could be evaluated and compared. There is some discussion of the MUC
evaluationmethodology later in the book, however. The chapter on symbolic techniques
is also written very much from a historical perspective, but does not seem to contribute
much to the book as a whole, and is probably of most interest to linguistics students.
The chapter on pattern recognition, which one might expect to deal with approaches for
rule-based IE, focuses more on investigating the different information units and features
that are used for machine-learning techniques, described in the following chapters.
Whereas the classification of which features are useful for which tasks is most useful,
the omission of more discussion about hand-crafted approaches is a little disappointing.
The section on active learning also has some omissions. There is no reference to some of
the earliest work such as that of Thompson, Califf, and Mooney (1999), and the author?s
claim that experiments with such techniques are ?recent and limited? is perhaps a little
too dismissive.
The chapters on supervised and unsupervised classification are geared towards
describing different machine-learning methods with particular respect to IE tasks such
as named entity recognition, and give a very detailed overview of the approaches
possible. A useful addition would have been a summary of the pros and cons of each
method: The reader has to delve deep into each section in order to find this information.
The material is well described but still quite difficult to follow for someone without
a statistics background?it?s definitely not a ?Machine Learning for Dummies??and
again, more examples would have been useful.
Chapter 7 discusses how the results of IE could be applied to retrieval models. It
first describes the IR models used, which is interesting for someone unfamiliar with the
field. However, the discussion of the integration of IE does not seem convincing and
there is once again a lack of real examples which would strengthen the arguments.
Chapter 8 is devoted to evaluation techniques for IE. Although the explanation is
thorough, it is quite complicated and would have benefited from a discussion of the
difference between the approaches and the appropriateness of each for different tasks.
The complicated ACE value, as used in the Automatic Content Extraction series (a
successor of MUC) is explained in great detail, but even so it is hard for the reader to
grasp the intricacies of the model and a real understanding of the benefits of each part
of it. Most of the discussion is limited to MUC and ACE measures; however it would
have been even more interesting if the author had investigated other possible criteria,
which are only briefly mentioned at the end, and with no indication of how to evaluate
them. For example, the difficulty of evaluating information extraction with respect to an
ontology is not discussed, yet this is a very timely and important issue with the advent
of systems that categorize entities into many related classes, rather than the handful of
classes traditionally used.
Chapter 9 aims to illustrate the different IE approaches and tasks with a set of
applications, looking at six domains in which IE is commonly used: news, biomedicine,
criminal intelligence, and business, legal, and informal texts. The focus is more on the
needs and problems in these areas than on specific applications that have been devel-
oped. Although the chapter gives quite a good overview of these domains, it would
316
Book Reviews
have been useful to see some more concrete examples explaining exactly how the use of
IE technology would be of use, as is done for the intelligence domain. For example, the
section on news texts just describes the MUC and ACE competitions but might leave
the uninitiated reader still guessing as to what the technology might practically be used
for in this field. Some interesting problems are highlighted but unfortunately there are
no real solutions to these as yet: for example, problems in the scalability of IE systems
are still a major impediment to the more-widespread uptake of such tools in industry.
The final chapter sums up the most important findings from the previous chapters
and makes some suggestions for the future of Information Extraction in a retrieval
context. Although it does not offer any earth shattering new ideas here, it does make
some very valid points about the importance of relation finding and advanced retrieval
techniques.
In summary, the book offers a useful overview of the field of IE for those unfamiliar
with the topic, but it is probably not for those seeking novel ideas or an application-
oriented approach. It could be an appropriate textbook for those in the IR field looking
for an introduction to IE, but probably not as useful for those in the IE field looking to
expand their horizons into IR. Overall, I would suggest the book as one for the library
rather than the personal bookshelf.
References
Cunningham, Hamish, Diana Maynard,
Kalina Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan.
2002. GATE: A framework and graphical
development environment for robust NLP
tools and applications. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL ?02),
pages 168?175, Philadelphia, PA.
Popov, Borislav, Atanas Kiryakov, Damyan
Ognyanoff, Dimitar Manov, and Angel
Kirilov. 2004. KIM?A semantic platform
for information extraction and retrieval.
Natural Language Engineering,
10(3/4):375?392.
Thompson, Cynthia A., Mary Elaine
Califf, and Raymond J. Mooney. 1999.
Active learning for natural language
parsing and information extraction. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Machine
Learning Conference, pages 406?414,
Bled, Slovenia.
Diana Maynard is a Research Associate at the University of Sheffield. She has interests in in-
formation extraction, tools for language engineering, terminology, evaluation, and accessibility
of technology. Her address is Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Regent
Court, 211 Portobello St., Sheffield, S1 4DP, UK; e-mail: diana@dcs.shef.ac.uk.
317

