Computational Approaches to Morphology and Syntax
Brian Roark and Richard Sproat
(Oregon Health and Science University and University of Illinois at
Urbana?Champaign)
Oxford: Oxford University Press (Oxford surveys in syntax and morphology, edited by
Robert D. Van Valin Jr, volume 4), 2007, xx+316 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-0-19-927477-2,
$110.00, ?60.00; paperbound, ISBN 978-0-19-927478-9, $45.00, ?24.99
Reviewed by
Noah A. Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
Brian Roark and Richard Sproat have written a compact and very readable book survey-
ing computational morphology and computational syntax. This text is not introductory;
instead, it will help bring computational linguists who do not work on morphology
or syntax up to date on these areas? latest developments. Certain chapters (in particu-
lar, Chapters 2 and 8) provide especially good starting points for advanced graduate
courses or seminars. The text is divided into an Introduction and Preliminaries chapter,
four chapters on computational approaches to morphology, and four chapters on com-
putational approaches to syntax. The morphology chapters focus primarily on formal
and theoretical issues, and are likely to be of interest to morphologists, computational
and not. The syntax chapters are drivenmore by engineering goals, withmore algorithm
details. Because a good understanding of probabilistic modeling is assumed, these
chapters will also be useful for machine learning researchers interested in language
processing.
Despite the authors? former affiliations, this book is not an AT&T analogue of
Beesley and Karttunen?s (2003) pedagogically motivated text on the Xerox finite-state
tools. This text is not about the AT&T FSM libraries or the algorithms underlying them
(cf. Roche and Schabes 1997).
1. Chapter 1: Introduction and Preliminaries
The first chapter is a take-no-prisoners introduction to finite-state automata and trans-
ducers and their semiring-weighted generalizations. Algorithms (e.g., for FST compo-
sition) are discussed but not presented in detail. Epsilon removal, minimization, and
determinization are mentioned but not defined. This material is probably too cursory to
serve as a lone introduction for those wishing to fully understand weighted FSTs, but
that lack of understanding will not be an impediment in the ensuing chapters because
weights do not re-surface until chapter 6, in the context of n-gram models, and even
then the algebraic view given here is not mentioned.
The chapter concludes with a defense of the place of finite-state models in linguis-
tics, followed by a clear explanation of the trade-offs in computational linguistics (e.g.,
between computational cost, expressive power, and annotation cost).
2. Part I (Chapters 2?5): Computational Approaches to Morphology
These chapters are primarily an argument for the effectiveness of finite-state transducers
in modeling natural language morphology.
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 3
Chapter 2 provides a laundry list of morphological phenomena, arguing that finite-
state composition captures each of them, even in cases where there is a more obvious
solution (e.g., finite-state concatenation for concatenative phenomena). Examples of
many kinds of phenomena are given from diverse languages: prosodic restrictions in
Yowulmne, phonological effects of German affixes, and subsegmental morphology in
Welsh, to name a few. Importantly, the compile-reduce and merge operations are argued
to be syntactic sugar for effects achievable by finite-state composition, so that even root-
and-pattern Arabic morphology is explained in the same algebraic framework.
Reduplication effects, of course, challenge finite-state explanations, and so receive
their own section. Extended (non-regular) computational models are presented along-
side data from Gothic, Dakota, and Sye. The authors speculate that, in contrast with the
commonly accepted Correspondence theory, Morphological Doubling theory (Inkelas
and Zoll 1999), if correct, would imply that a non-regular ?copying? process is not at
work in reduplication. It is at this point that the reader may experience some discomfort;
should the reduplication problem be addressed in syntax rather than morphology?
Where exactly does the boundary lie? Readers hoping for a reassessment of this bound-
ary, or even a new bridge over it, will not find it here.
Chapter 3 begins with Stump?s (2001) two-dimensional taxonomy of morphological
theories, which appears rather divorced from the rich work on finite-state computational
morphology in Chapter 2. The subtleties among the four types of theories (lexical vs. in-
ferential and incremental vs. realizational, a more nuanced breakdown of the debate
over ?item-and-arrangement? vs. ?item-and-process?) may be difficult to understand
for the reader not trained in morphological theory, but resolution comes quickly. We
are presented with a series of examples showing ?proof-of-concept? fragmentary im-
plementations (in AT&T?s lextools) of phenomena in Sanskrit, Swahili, and Breton to
argue that lexical-incrementalist and inferential-realizational theories are computation-
ally equivalent; both can be implemented using FSTs and can lead to the same models.
Chapter 4 gives an algebraic analysis of Koskenniemi?s (1983) ?KIMMO? two-
level morphological analysis system. Koskenniemi?s hand-coded morphology rules are
argued to be a historical accident; if only computers had been more powerful in the
1980s, compilation of those rules into FSTs might have been automated, and in fact
Kaplan and Kay had already developed the algorithms.1 In the spirit of the previous
chapter, Sproat and Roark also note that morphological accounts that use one, two, or
more ?cascaded? levels are all computationally equivalent rational relations under the
finite-state approach, and that Optimality Theory can (under certain assumptions about
constraints) be implemented with finite-state operations as well (Ellison 1994).
Chapter 5, ?Machine learning of morphology,? focuses on unsupervised morphol-
ogy induction methods. There is about a page of discussion on statistical language
modeling approaches for disambiguation in agglutinative languages; no mention is
made of the more recent use of discriminative machine learning in morphological
disambiguation (Kudo, Yamamoto, and Matsumoto 2004; Habash and Rambow 2005;
Smith, Smith, and Tromble 2005). The chapter focuses on the approaches of Goldsmith
(2001), Schone and Jurafsky (2001), and Yarowsky and Wicentowski (2001). Although
each approach is interesting on its own, little effort is made to unify work in this area,
and none to bring the reader back full circle to finite-state models or the problem of
inducing from data regular grammars (Stolcke and Omohundro 1993) or their weights
1 The authors rightly point out that Koskenniemi deserves much credit for building an implementation
that aimed to have broad coverage, not merely a proof-of-concept.
454
Book Reviews
(Eisner 2002). Another missed opportunity here is the recent introduction of Bayesian
learning for word segmentation (Goldwater, Griffiths, and Johnson 2006).
Part I, in summary, aims to reduce many accounts of morphological phenomena
to finite-state transducer composition, drawing on a wealth of illustrative examples.
Twenty-two languages are listed in the language index at the end of the book, and,
tellingly, all of them are discussed exclusively in Part I. These chapters are good diplo-
macy toward theoretical linguistics, showing how computational arguments can have
theoretical implications.
3. Part II (Chapters 6?9): Computational Approaches to Syntax
In Part II, Roark and Sproat turn to models of syntax in computational linguistics.
Because most research in this area has been on English, English parsing is what they
present.
Chapter 6 covers finite-state approaches to syntax, including n-gram models and
smoothing, class-based language models, hidden Markov models (though without a
formal definition), part-of-speech tagging, log-linear models, and shallow parsing/
chunking. The Forward, Viterbi, Viterbi n-best, Forward?Backward algorithms, and
?Forward?Backward Decoding? (also known as posterior or minimum Bayes risk de-
coding) are covered with examples. This chapter is not as leisurely as the treatments
of HMMs by Manning and Schu?tze (1999) or Charniak (1993), and it omits basic back-
ground on probabilistic modeling. For example, why must we ensure that an n-gram
model?s total probability sums exactly to one? The answer relies on an understanding
of perplexity and its use in evaluation, now in decline (cf. ?stupid backoff? in Brants
et al 2007). The chapter does not reconnect with the algebraic view presented in Chap-
ter 1; for example, the connection between HMMs and WFSAs is never expressed.
Chapter 7 introduces context-free grammars and their parsers, broken down into
?deterministic? and ?nondeterministic? approaches.2 Probabilistic CFGs and treebanks
are introduced informally alongside the latter, which may confuse some readers. Am-
biguity is only presented as a natural phenomenon, not a problem of crude, over-
generating grammars. The probabilistic CKY and Earley algorithms are presented. The
Inside?Outside algorithm is presented in the context of Goodman?s (1996) maximum
expected recall parsing (another instance of minimum Bayes risk). As in the case of the
dynamic programming algorithms for HMMs in Chapter 6, the exposition is probably
too brisk to be an introduction to the topic.
Chapter 8 contains a thoughtful discussion of many best practices in statistical pars-
ing: treebank ?decoration? techniques such as parent annotation and lexicalization, and
the probabilitymodels underlying the parsers of Collins (1997) and Charniak (1997). De-
pendency parsing, unsupervised grammar induction, and finite-state approximations to
PCFGs are allotted short sections.
Chapter 9 covers context-sensitive models of syntax. Unification-based parsing
is presented at a high level, without formal details of unification or the differences
between theories such as LFG and HPSG. The ?lexicalized? models (TAG and CCG)
are treated more thoroughly; pseudocode for a TAG dynamic programming parser is
provided. There is brief treatment of Data-Oriented Parsing, reranking (a section that
2 These terms, though in wide use, are misnomers. All of these parsers are deterministic, since none
involve randomness or nondeterministic behavior resulting from multiple processors. Here
?(non)deterministic? refers to the grammar, not the parser.
455
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 3
would have been of more practical use in Chapter 8), and transduction grammars (i.e.,
grammars over more than one string, most frequently used in machine translation).
The abundance of dynamic programming algorithms in Part II leads to the question
of whether such algorithms can be more easily taught (and unified) using recursive
equations (Manning and Schu?tze 1999), or a more declarative framework (Shieber,
Schabes, and Pereira 1995). Readers who prefer procedural pseudocode will find it here,
though the book does not address implementation tricks for storing and indexing parse
charts, or agenda-ordering methods to make parsing efficient.
These chapters are neither a gentle introduction to probabilistic modeling of syntax
for linguists nor a handbook for the language engineer who wants to build an efficient,
competitive parser. (There is also no advice on the relative merits of today?s parsers
available for download.) The audience that will find Part II most valuable will be
researchers who understand the principles of probabilistic modeling but want a more
up-to-date view of statistical parsing than offered by Manning and Schu?tze (1999), with
more coverage of advanced topics than Jurafsky and Martin (2008). This group might
include structured machine-learning researchers interested in the nuances of natural
language parsing and computational linguists who do not work on syntax but want to
keep up with the area.
4. Conclusion
The two major parts of this book stand as clear, up-to-date, and concisely written
summaries of particular sub-fields in computational linguistics: finite-state morphology
and English syntactic processing. The book does a fine job of elucidating the trade-
offs that make computational linguistics a tightrope act, and therefore serves as good
diplomacy for researchers in related fields. At 112 and 146 pages, respectively, either of
the parts is readable on a half-day plane or train trip.
Today, the strongest bridge between morphology and syntax is the Chomsky hier-
archy, which is mentioned frequently in this book (but never depicted). The contrast
between Parts I and II implies blueprints for more bridges: data resources to support
more powerful learning algorithms for morphology (as we have seen in syntax), a
stronger influence of non-English data on computational syntactic modeling (as we
have seen in morphology), and practical ways to accomplish the amalgamation of
morphology and syntax. This reviewer believes Computational Approaches to Morphology
and Syntax will re-introduce the two sub-communities to each other and help each to
leverage the successes of the other.
References
Beesley, Kenneth R. and Lauri Karttunen.
2003. Finite State Morphology. CSLI
Publications, Stanford, CA.
Brants, Thorsten, Ashok C. Popat, Peng Xu,
Franz J. Och, and Jeffrey Dean. 2007. Large
language models in machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 858?867, Prague.
Charniak, Eugene. 1993. Statistical Language
Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Charniak, Eugene. 1997. Statistical parsing
with a context-free grammar and word
statistics. In Proceedings of the 14th National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 598?603, Providence, RI.
Collins, Michael. 1997. Three generative,
lexicalised models for statistical parsing. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 16?23, Madrid.
Eisner, Jason. 2002. Parameter estimation for
probabilistic finite-state transducers. In
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 1?8, Philadelphia, PA.
Ellison, T. Mark. 1994. Phonological
derivation in Optimality Theory. In
456
Book Reviews
Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics,
vol. 2, pages 1007?1013, Kyoto.
Goldsmith, John. 2001. Unsupervised
acquisition of the morphology of a natural
language. Computational Linguistics
27(2):153?198.
Goldwater, Sharon, Thomas L. Griffiths, and
Mark Johnson. 2006. Contextual
dependencies in unsupervised word
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 673?680, Sydney.
Goodman, Joshua. 1996. Parsing algorithms
and metrics. In Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 177?183,
Santa Cruz, CA.
Habash, Nizar and Owen Rambow. 2005.
Arabic tokenization, part-of-speech
tagging, and morphological
disambiguation in one fell swoop. In
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 573?580, Ann Arbor, MI.
Inkelas, Sharon and Cheryl Zoll. 1999.
Reduplication as morphological doubling.
Technical report 412-0800, Rutgers
Optimality Archive.
Jurafsky, Daniel and James H. Martin. 2008.
Speech and Language Processing (2nd
edition). Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ.
Koskenniemi, Kimmo. 1983. Two-Level
Morphology: A General Computational Model
for Word-Form Recognition and Production.
Ph.D. thesis, Department of General
Linguistics, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
Kudo, Taku, Kaoru Yamamoto, and Yuji
Matsumoto. 2004. Applying conditional
random fields to Japanese morphological
analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 230?237, Barcelona.
Manning, Christopher D. and Hinrich
Schu?tze. 1999. Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Roche, Emmanuel and Yves Schabes
(editors). 1997. Finite-State Language
Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel Jurafsky. 2001.
Knowledge-free induction of morphology
using latent semantic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 5th Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning,
pages 67?72, Toulouse.
Shieber, Stuart and Yves Schabes and
Fernando C. N. Pereira. 1995. Principles
and implementation of deductive
parsing. Journal of Logic Programming
24(1?2):3?36.
Smith, Noah A., David A. Smith, and Roy
W. Tromble. 2005. Context-based
morphological disambiguation with
random fields. In Proceedings of the Human
Language Technology Conference and
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 475?482,
Vancouver.
Stolcke, Andreas and Stephen Omohundro.
1993. Hidden Markov model induction by
Bayesian model merging. In Stephen Jose?
Hanson, Jack D. Cowen, and C. Lee Giles,
editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 5. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, pages 11?18.
Stump, Gregory T. 2001. Inflectional
Morphology: A Theory of Paradigm
Structure. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Yarowsky, David and Richard Wicentowski.
2001. Minimally supervised morphological
analysis by multimodal alignment. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 207?216, Toulouse.
Noah A. Smith is an assistant professor at Carnegie Mellon University. He conducts research in
statistical models and learning algorithms for natural language processing, including morphol-
ogy and syntax, as well as applications such as machine translation and question answering.
Smith?s address is Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mel-
lon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; e-mail: nasmith@cs.cmu.edu; URL:
www.cs.cmu.edu/?nasmith.
457

