Book Reviews
The Text Mining Handbook:
Advanced Approaches to Analyzing Unstructured Data
Ronen Feldman and James Sanger
(Bar-Ilan University and ABS Ventures)
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007, xii+410 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 0-521-83657-3, $70.00
Reviewed by
Rada Mihalcea
University of North Texas
Text mining is the process of discovering information in large text collections, and
automatically identifying interesting patterns and relationships in textual data. It is
a relatively new research area, which has recently raised much interest among the
research and industry communities, mainly due to the continuously increasing amount
of information available on the Web and elsewhere. Text mining is a highly interdisci-
plinary research area, bringing together research insights from the fields of data mining,
natural language processing, machine learning, and information retrieval. In particular,
text mining is closely related to the older area of data mining, which targets the extrac-
tion of interesting information from data records, although text mining is allegedlymore
difficult, as the source data consists of unstructured collections of documents rather than
structured databases.
The book by Feldman and Sanger is a thorough introduction to text mining, cov-
ering the general architecture of text mining systems, along with the main techniques
used by such systems. It addresses both the theory and practice of text mining, and it
illustrates the different techniques with real-world scenarios and practical applications.
It is particularly relevant for students and professional practitioners, being structured
as a self-contained handbook that does not require previous experience in any of the
research fields involved.
The book is structured into twelve chapters, which gradually introduce the area of
text mining and related topics, starting with an introduction to the task of text mining,
and ending with examples of practical applications from three different domains.
The first chapter can be regarded as an overview of the book. It starts by defining the
problem of text mining and the key elements in text mining: the document collections,
the document features (words, terms, and concepts), and the role of background knowl-
edge in text mining. It then briefly touches upon the possible applications of text mining,
such as pattern discovery and trend analysis, and shortly discusses the interface layer of
text mining systems. The second part of the chapter lays down the general architecture
of a text mining system, which also serves as a rough guide for the rest of the book, as
it describes the main components of a text mining system that are described in detail in
subsequent chapters.
Chapter 2 is one of the longest chapters in the book, and also one of the most
dense in terms of newly introduced concepts. Despite being a more difficult read
compared to the other chapters in the book, I found it to be the most informative with
respect to operations specific to text mining. The chapter starts by defining the core
text mining operations, including distributions, sets, and associations, and introduces
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 1
the main techniques for isolating interesting patterns and analyzing trends over time.
The second part of the chapter overviews the role of background knowledge in
text mining. The authors describe several ontologies and lexicons, and show with
evidence from a real-world example (the FACT system they developed in the late
1990s) how background knowledge can be effectively integrated into text mining
systems. A shortcoming of this section is the interchangeable use of ?domain ontol-
ogy? and ?background knowledge,? which can be confusing for computational lin-
guists, who typically make a distinction between these terms. Finally, the third part
of the chapter briefly describes query languages, which are later addressed in detail in
Chapter 9.
Chapter 3 is meant as a short introduction to text preprocessing techniques, includ-
ing tokenization, tagging, and parsing. This chapter, as well as several of the following
chapters addressing text classification and information extraction, were most likely
included in the book because of the authors? intention to make the book self-contained
and appealing even for those with no background in computational linguistics.
Chapters 4 and 5 describe techniques for text classification and clustering, which
are relevant to the selection of documents addressed by a text mining system. Chapter
4 describes the representation of documents for the purpose of text categorization,
and introduces several machine-learning algorithms, including decision trees, naive
Bayes, and SVMs, as well as committees of classifiers through bagging and boosting.
Chapter 5 introduces several clustering algorithms, including agglomerative clustering,
expectation maximization, and K-means, as well as techniques specific to clustering
textual data such as latent semantic analysis.
The next three chapters, 6, 7, and 8, address the task of information extraction, which
is a key element in any text mining system. Chapter 6 begins by defining the problem of
information extraction, the architecture of a typical information extraction system, and
the main knowledge-based and structural approaches to information extraction. Chap-
ter 7 is dedicated to probabilistic models, including maximum entropy, hidden Markov
models, and conditional random fields. Chapter 8 then describes text preprocessing
using these probabilistic models, including part-of-speech tagging, shallow parsing,
and named-entity tagging. The chapter also addresses bootstrapping techniques for
information extraction. One drawback of this section of the book is the fact that the
division of the material among these three chapters is not always very clear, and some
parts could have been organized differently. For instance, the probabilistic models and
their applications are split among Chapters 7 and 8, although they could have been
combined under one chapter. Chapter 8 includes material on bootstrapping approaches
for information extraction, which seems unrelated to the rest of this chapter and instead
could have been included in Chapter 6.
Chapter 9 addresses techniques for interfacing with text mining systems, includ-
ing browsing and displaying of distributions, associations, and hierarchies, as well as
query languages and query refinement. Visualization techniques are then addressed in
Chapter 10, which describes visual interfaces to text mining systems, such as association
graphs, histograms, and self-organizing maps. The chapter is rich in illustrations, which
contribute to a better understanding of the differences between the various visualization
methods.
The relationships discovered by a text mining system can be further explored by
using techniques for link analysis, which are described in Chapter 11. The chapter
begins with a brief introduction to graph theory, followed by a description of several
graph centrality methods and algorithms for network partitioning. The chapter also
provides pointers to software packages for link analysis.
126
Book Reviews
Finally, Chapter 12 illustrates the application of the text mining concepts introduced
in the book to three practical text mining problems: industry literature mining, patent
analysis, and protein interactions. By showing examples of concrete applications, the
authors demonstrate the applicability of the text mining theory introduced in the book
to practical real-world scenarios.
Overall, The Text Mining Handbook is a good introduction to text mining, written by
leading experts in the field. The book is well written and addresses both the theory and
practice of text mining, whichmakes it appealing for researchers and practitioners alike.
By being self-contained, with several chapters addressing in detail the main topics
relevant to text mining, the book is highly recommended to those who would like to
start delving into the area of text mining without having any previous background
in computational linguistics. Although experts in computational linguistics will most
likely find that they can safely skip over several of the text processing chapters (e.g., the
introductory chapters on text preprocessing, or the chapters on text classification and
information extraction), they will certainly find a lot of value in the chapters addressing
the specific task of text mining (mainly Chapters 2, 10, 11, and 12).
Rada Mihalcea is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the University of North Texas. Her
research interests are in lexical semantics, multilingual natural language processing, minimally
supervised natural language learning, and graph-based algorithms for natural language process-
ing. She served as the president of the ACL Special Interest Group on the Lexicon (SIGLEX)
from 2004 to 2007, and she is currently a board member of the ACL Special Interest Group on
Natural Language Learning (SIGNLL). Mihalcea?s address is: Department of Computer Science,
University of North Texas, P.O. Box 311366, Denton, TX, 76203; e-mail: rada@cs.unt.edu.
127

