Book Review
Mathematical Linguistics
Andra?s Kornai
(MetaCarta Inc.)
Springer (Advanced information and knowledge processing series, edited by
Lakhmi Jain), 2008, xiii+289 pp; ISBN 978-1-84628-985-9, $99.00
Reviewed by
Richard Sproat and Roxana G??rju
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
For readers of traditional textbooks such as that of Partee, ter Meulen, and Wall (1990),
the term ?mathematical linguistics? denotes a rather narrowly circumscribed set of issues
including automata theory, set theory, and lambda calculus, with maybe a little formal
language theory thrown in. Kornai?s contribution is refreshingly different in that he
treats, in this relatively compact volume, practically all areas of linguistics, phonetics,
and speech and language processing.
Kornai?s motivation for writing this book is to present ?a single entry point to
the central methods and concepts of linguistics that are made largely inaccessible
to the mathematician, computer scientist, or engineer by the surprisingly adversarial
style of argumentation . . . and the proliferation of unmotivated notation and formal-
ism . . . all too often encountered in research papers and monographs in the humanities?
(page viii). There is no question that much of what passes for rigor (mathematical and
scientific) in linguistics is a joke and that there is clearly a need for any work that can
place the field on a more solid footing. It also seems likely that Kornai is the only person
who could have written this book.
The book is divided into ten chapters, including a short introductory chapter, which
lays the groundwork and identifies the potential audience, and a concluding chapter
where Kornai reveals his own views on what is important in the field, which in the
interests of balance he has largely suppressed throughout the book. Chapter 2 is also
introductory in that it presents basic concepts of generation (via a ruleset), axioms, and
string rewriting.
The main chapters (3?9) deal with a variety of topic areas relating to language
and speech, starting with phonology in Chapter 3. This chapter introduces the notion
of phonemes, distinctive features, autosegmental phonology, and computation using
finite automata. Kornai offers many details that are of course lacking in most linguistic
treatments, such as a proof that the number of well-formed association lines between
two tiers of length n is asymptotically (6+ 4
?
2)n.
Chapter 4 deals with morphology, which for Kornai includes not only word forma-
tion, but also prosody (including stress assignment and moraic structure), as well as
Optimality Theory and Zipf?s law.
The fifth chapter treats syntax, including categorial grammar, phrase structure,
dependency frameworks, valency, and weighted models of grammar, ending with a
discussion of weighted finite automata and hidden Markov models. In the context of
weighted models, Kornai implies that Chomsky?s original notion of degree of gram-
maticality fits naturally as an instance of a weighted model with a particular semiring;
of course, exactly what the ? and ? operators of that semiring map to remain to
Computational Linguistics Volume 34, Number 4
be seen insofar as the notion ?degree of grammaticality? has never been rigorously
defined.
Chapter 6, on Semantics, starts with a discussion of various standard paradoxes
such as the Liar, and then moves on to an overview of Montague?s theory, type theory,
and grammatical semantics. Throughout the discussion, Kornai underscores the fun-
damental limitations of theories of semantics that are based purely upon evaluation of
truth conditions for artificial fragments, an important point for anyone who wants to
go beyond theoretical philosophically inspired models and consider semantic interpre-
tation in the real world.
Complexity is the topic of Chapter 7. This is not the Chomsky-hierarchy notion of
complexity, but rather deals with information theory, in particular entropy, Kolmogorov
complexity, and a short section on learning, including identification in the limit and PAC
learning.
Pattern recognition is divided across two chapters, with Chapter 8 laying the es-
sential groundwork of linguistic pattern recognition, and Chapter 9 presenting details
on speech processing and handwriting recognition. This includes feature extraction: In
the case of speech recognition, Kornai reviews the frequency representation of speech
signals, and defines the cepstrum. Discussion of acoustic models leads us to phonemes
as hidden units, with a slight detour into the fine-grained distinctions between different
levels of phonemic analysis in the once popular but now largely discredited theory of
Lexical Phonology.
Each chapter ends with a section entitled ?Further Reading,? and the texts referred
to are generally quite useful as material for readers who wish to explore the issues
further.
According to Wikipedia, Kornai is a ?well-known mathematical linguist? whose
Erdo?s number is 2. Unfortunately, neither of us can claim Kornai?s mathematical so-
phistication or stature, but on the other hand this makes us good judges of the book?s
potential audience; and herein lies a problem. Kornai?s target is ?anyone with suffi-
cient general mathematical maturity? with ?[n]o prior knowledge of linguistics or lan-
guages . . . assumed on the part of the reader? (page viii). This suggests that the book
is not primarily aimed at linguists, and certainly the mathematical maturity assumed
puts this book well beyond the reach of most linguists, so that it could not easily be
used in an introductory course on mathematical linguistics in a linguistics program. It
is probably beyond the reach of many computer science students as well.
What about those who do have the mathematical maturity, but know nothing
about linguistics? The problem here is that in many cases Kornai does not give enough
background (or any background) to appreciate the significance of the particular issues
being discussed. For example, on page 77 Kornai gives weak crossover and heavy NP shift
as examples of phenomena that have ?weak? effects on grammaticality, and resumptive
pronouns as examples of phenomena that are marginal in some languages (such as Eng-
lish). But nowhere does he explain what these terms denote, which means that these are
throw-away comments for anyone who does not already know. Section 3.2 introduces
phonological features and feature geometry and sketches some of the mathematical
properties of systems with features; but very little background is given on what features
are supposed to represent. The short discussion of Optimality Theory (pages 67?69)
hardly gives enough background to give a feel for the main points of that approach.
In other cases, topics are introduced but their importance to surrounding topics is hard
to fathom. For example, in Section 6.1.3 a discussion of the Berry paradox leads into a
digression on how to implement digit-sequence-to-number-name mappings as finite-
state transducers. Apart from giving Kornai an opportunity to emphasize that this is
616
Book Review
trivial to do (something that is true in principle, but less true in practice, depending
upon the language), it is not clear what purpose this digression serves.
There are also a number of places where issues are presented in a non-standard
way, which might make sense from some points of view, but not if you are trying to
introduce someone to the way the field is practiced. It is odd, for instance, that prosody
is introduced not in the chapter on phonology but in the one on morphology. It is
also somewhat odd that Zipf?s law gets introduced in the morphology chapter. (And
why is it that nowhere does Kornai cite Baayen?s excellent book on word-frequency
distributions (Baayen 2001), which would be a very useful source of further information
on this topic to any reader of Kornai?s book?)
Some material presented is puzzling or simply wrong. It is not explained in what
sense German has a ?pure SVO construction? (page 103) in contradistinction to the
normal assumption that German is verb-second. The Cypriot syllabary does not date
from the 15th century BCE (page 54); Latin does not have two locative cases (page 90)?
indeed, it does not even have one locative case, so-called; the basic Hangul letter shapes
(introduced on page 31 to make a point about phonetic features) are, with two excep-
tions, completely incorrect?probably it would have been better to use a real Korean
font rather than trying to imitate the jamowith LATEX math symbols. There are of course a
great many places where the discussion is useful and informative, but there are enough
examples of the kinds we have outlined that the uninitiated reader should be careful.
As far as we can see, the most likely readership of this book consists of (computa-
tional) linguists and others who already know the linguistic issues, have a fairly strong
formal and mathematical background, and could benefit from the more-precise and
more-rigorous mathematical expositions that Kornai provides.
Throughout the book, Kornai pauses occasionally to present exercises to the reader.
These range from relatively simple to major research projects. As with other aspects of
this book, the distribution of topics for the exercises is somewhat erratic. Thus, on page
184, in the chapter on complexity, we are offered exercises 7.6 and 7.7 in close proximity:
Exercise 7.6 Prove that a regular language is prefix-free iff it is accepted by a DFSA
with no transitions out of accepting states. Is a prefix-free language context-free iff it
is accepted by a DPDA with the same restriction on its control?
...
Exercise 7.7 Research the role of the ascii codes 0x02 (STX), 0x03 (ETX), and 0x16
(SYN).
But variety is, after all, what keeps things interesting.
References
Baayen, R. Harald 2001. Word Frequency
Distributions. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht.
Partee, Barbara, Alice ter Meulen, and Robert
Wall. 1990. Mathematical Methods in
Linguistics. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht.
Richard Sproat is Professor of Linguistics and Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He works on computational morphology, text normal-
ization, and speech processing. His Erdo?s number is 4. Roxana G??rju is Assistant Professor of
Linguistics at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She has a Ph.D. in Computer
Science and works on computational semantics, pragmatics, and inference. Her Erdo?s number
is also 4. Their address is Department of Linguistics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Foreign Languages Building 4016D, 707 South Matthews Avenue, MC-168, Urbana, IL, 61801;
e-mail: rws@uiuc.edu and girju@uiuc.edu.
617

