Evaluating Centering for Information
Ordering Using Corpora
Nikiforos Karamanis?
University of Cambridge
Chris Mellish??
University of Aberdeen
Massimo Poesio?
University of Essex
Jon Oberlander?
University of Edinburgh
In this article we discuss several metrics of coherence defined using centering theory and
investigate the usefulness of such metrics for information ordering in automatic text generation.
We estimate empirically which is the most promising metric and how useful this metric is using
a general methodology applied on several corpora. Our main result is that the simplest metric
(which relies exclusively on NOCB transitions) sets a robust baseline that cannot be outperformed
by other metrics which make use of additional centering-based features. This baseline can be used
for the development of both text-to-text and concept-to-text generation systems.
1. Introduction
Information ordering (Barzilay and Lee 2004), that is, deciding in which sequence to
present a set of preselected information-bearing items, has received much attention in
recent work in automatic text generation. This is because text generation systems need
to organize the content in a way that makes the output text coherent, that is, easy to read
and understand. The easiest way to exemplify coherence is by arbitrarily reordering the
sentences of a comprehensible text. This process very often gives rise to documents that
do not make sense although the information content is the same before and after the
reordering (Hovy 1988; Marcu 1997; Reiter and Dale 2000).
Entity coherence, which is based on the way the referents of noun phrases (NPs)
relate subsequent clauses in the text, is an important aspect of textual organization.
Since the early 1980s, when it was first introduced, centering theory has been an
influential framework for modelling entity coherence. Seminal papers on centering such
as Brennan, Friedman [Walker], and Pollard (1987, page 160) and Grosz, Joshi, and
Weinstein (1995, page 215) suggest that centering may provide solutions for information
ordering.
Indeed, following the pioneering work of McKeown (1985), recent work on text
generation exploits constraints on entity coherence to organize information (Mellish
et al 1998; Kibble and Power 2000, 2004; O?Donnell et al 2001; Cheng 2002; Lapata
? Computer Laboratory, William Gates Building, Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK.
Nikiforos.Karamanis@cl.cam.ac.uk.
?? Department of Computing Science, King?s College, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, UK.
? Department of Computer Science, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK.
? School of Informatics, 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK.
Submission received: 15 May 2006; revised submission received: 15 December 2007; accepted for publication:
7 January 2008.
? 2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
2003; Barzilay and Lee 2004; Barzilay and Lapata 2005, among others). Although these
approaches often make use of heuristics related to centering, the features of entity
coherence they employ are usually defined informally. Additionally, centering-related
features are combined with other coherence-inducing factors in ways that are based
mainly on intuition, leaving many equally plausible options unexplored.
Thus, the answers to the following questions remain unclear: (i) How appropriate
is centering for information ordering in text generation? (ii) Which aspects of centering are
most useful for this purpose? These are the issues we investigate in this paper, which
presents the first systematic evaluation of centering for information ordering. To do this,
we define centering-based metrics of coherence which are compatible with several extant
information ordering approaches. An important insight of our work is that centering
can give rise to many such metrics of coherence. Hence, a general methodology
for identifying which of these metrics represent the most promising candidates for
information ordering is required.
We adopt a corpus-based approach to compare the metrics empirically and
demonstrate the portability and generality of our evaluation methods by experimenting
with several corpora. Our main result is that the simplest metric (which relies
exclusively on NOCB transitions) sets a baseline that cannot be outperformed by
other metrics that make use of additional centering-related features. Thus, we provide
substantial insight into the role of centering as an information ordering constraint and
offer researchers working on text generation a simple, yet robust, baseline to use against
their own information ordering approaches during system development.
The article is structured as follows: In Section 2 we discuss our information ordering
approach in relation to other work on text generation. After a brief introduction
to centering in Section 3, Section 4 demonstrates how we derived centering data
structures from existing corpora. Section 5 discusses how centering can be used to
define various metrics of coherence suitable for information ordering. Then, Section 6
outlines a corpus-based methodology for choosing among these metrics. Section 7
reports on the results of our experiments and Section 8 discusses their implications.
We conclude the paper with directions for future work and a summary of our main
contributions.1
2. Information Ordering
Information ordering has been investigated by substantial recent work in text-to-
text generation (Barzilay, Elhadad, and McKeown 2002; Lapata 2003; Barzilay and
Lee 2004; Barzilay and Lapata 2005; Bollegala, Okazaki, and Ishizuka 2006; Ji and
Pulman 2006; Siddharthan 2006; Soricut and Marcu 2006; Madnani et al 2007,
among others) as well as concept-to-text generation (particularly Kan and McKeown
[2002] and Dimitromanolaki and Androutsopoulos 2003).2 We added to this work
by presenting approaches to information ordering based on a genetic algorithm
(Karamanis and Manurung 2002) and linear programming (Althaus, Karamanis, and
Koller 2004) which can be applied to both concept-to-text and text-to-text generation.
These approaches use a metric of coherence defined using features derived from
1 Earlier versions of this work were presented in Karamanis et al (2004) and Karamanis (2006).
2 Concept-to-text generation is concerned with the automatic generation of text from some underlying
non-linguistic representation. By contrast, the input to text-to-text generation applications is text.
30
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
centering and will serve as the premises of our investigation of centering in this
article.
Metrics of coherence are used in other work on text generation, too (Mellish et al
1998; Kibble and Power 2000, 2004; Cheng 2002). With the exception of Kibble and
Power?s work, the features of entity coherence used in these metrics are informally
defined using heuristics related to centering. Additionally, the metrics are further
specified by combining these features with other coherence-inducing factors such
as rhetorical relations (Mann and Thompson 1987). However, as acknowledged in
most of this work, these are preliminary computational investigations of the complex
interactions between different types of coherence which leave many other equally
plausible combinations unexplored.
Clearly, one would like to know what centering can achieve on its own before
devising more complicated metrics. To address this question, we define metrics which
are purely centering-based, placing any attempt to specify a more elaborate model of
coherence beyond the scope of this article. This strategy is similar to most work on
centering for text interpretation in which additional constraints on coherence are not
taken into account (the papers in Walker, Joshi, and Prince [1998] are characteristic
examples). This simplification makes it possible to assess for the first time how useful
the employed centering features are for information ordering.
Work on text generation which is solely based on rhetorical relations (Hovy 1988;
Marcu 1997, among others) typically masks entity coherence under the ELABORATION
relation. However, ELABORATION has been characterized as ?the weakest of all
rhetorical relations? (Scott and de Souza 1990, page 60). Knott et al (2001) identified
several theoretical problems all related to ELABORATION and suggested that this relation
be replaced by a theory of entity coherence for text generation. Our work builds on this
suggestion by investigating how appropriate centering is as a theory of entity coherence
for information ordering.
McKeown (1985, pages 60?75) also deployed features of entity coherence to
organize information for text generation. McKeown?s ?constraints on immediate focus?
(which are based on the model of entity coherence that was introduced by Sidner
[1979] and precedes centering) are embedded within the schema-driven approach to
generation which is rather domain-specific (Reiter and Dale 2000). By contrast, our
metrics are general and portable across domains and can be applied within information
ordering approaches which are applicable to both concept-to-text and text-to-text
generation.
3. Centering Overview
This section provides an overview of centering, focusing on the aspects which are most
closely related to our work. Poesio et al (2004) and Walker, Joshi, and Prince (1998)
discuss centering and its relation to other theories of coherence in more detail.
According to Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995), each utterance Un is assigned a
ranked list of forward looking centers (i.e., discourse entities) denoted as CF(Un). The
members of CF(Un) must be realized by the NPs in Un (Brennan, Friedman [Walker],
and Pollard 1987). The first member of CF(Un) is called the preferred center
CP(Un).
The backward looking center CB(Un) links Un to the previous utterance Un?1.
CB(Un) is defined as the most highly ranked member of CF(Un?1) which also belongs
to CF(Un). CF lists prior to CF(Un?1) are not taken into account for the computation
31
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Table 1
Centering transitions are defined according to whether the backward looking center, CB, is
the same in two subsequent utterances, Un?1 and Un, and whether the CB of the current
utterance, CB(Un), is the same as its preferred center, CP(Un). These identity checks are also
known as the principles of COHERENCE and SALIENCE, the violations of which are denoted
with an asterisk.
COHERENCE: COHERENCE?:
CB(Un)=CB(Un?1) CB(Un) =CB(Un?1)
or CB(Un?1) undef.
SALIENCE: CB(Un)=CP(Un) CONTINUE SMOOTH-SHIFT
SALIENCE?: CB(Un) =CP(Un) RETAIN ROUGH-SHIFT
of CB(Un). The original formulations of centering by Brennan, Friedman [Walker], and
Pollard (1987) and Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) lay emphasis on the uniqueness
and the locality of the CB and will serve as the foundations of our work.
The CB and the CP are combined to define transitions across pairs of
adjacent utterances (Table 1). This definition of transitions is based on Brennan,
Friedman [Walker], and Pollard (1987) and has been popular with subsequent work.
There exist several variations, however, the most important of which comes from Grosz,
Joshi, and Weinstein (1995), who define only one SHIFT transition.3
Centering makes two major claims about textual coherence, the first of which
is known as Rule 2. Rule 2 states that CONTINUE is preferred to RETAIN, which
is preferred to SMOOTH-SHIFT, which is preferred to ROUGH-SHIFT. Although the
Rule was introduced within an algorithm for anaphora resolution, Brennan, Friedman
[Walker], and Pollard (1987, page 160) consider it to be relevant to text generation
too. Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995, page 215) also take Rule 2 to suggest that
text generation systems should attempt to avoid unfavorable transitions such as
SHIFTs.
The second claim, which is implied by the definition of the CB (Poesio et al 2004),
is that CF(Un) should contain at least one member of CF(Un?1). This became known
as the principle of CONTINUITY (Karamanis and Manurung 2002). Although Grosz,
Joshi, and Weinstein and Brennan, Friedman [Walker], and Pollard do not discuss
the effect of violating CONTINUITY, Kibble and Power (2000, Figure 1) define the
additional transition NOCB to account for this case. Different types of NOCB transitions
are introduced by Passoneau (1998) and Poesio et al (2004), among others. Other
researchers, however, consider the NOCB transition to be a type of ROUGH-SHIFT
(Miltsakaki and Kukich 2004).
Kibble (2001) and Beaver (2004) introduced the principles of COHERENCE and
SALIENCE, which correspond to the identity checks used to define the transitions
(see Table 1). To improve the way centering resolves pronominal anaphora, Strube
and Hahn (1999) introduced a fourth principle called CHEAPNESS and defined it as
CB(Un)=CP(Un?1). They also redefined Rule 2 to favor transition pairs which satisfy
3 ?CB(Un?1) undef.? in Table 1 stands for the cases where Un?1 does not have a CB. Instead of classifying
the transition of Un as a CONTINUE or a RETAIN in such cases, the additional transition ESTABLISHMENT
is sometimes used (Kameyama 1998; Poesio et al 2004).
32
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
CHEAPNESS over those which violate it. This means that CHEAPNESS is given priority
over every other centering principle in Strube and Hahn?s model.
In addition to the variability caused by the numerous definitions of transitions and
the introduction of the various principles, parameters such as ?utterance,? ?ranking,?
and ?realization? can also be specified in several ways giving rise to different
instantiations of centering (Poesio et al 2004). The following section discusses how these
parameters were defined in the corpora we deploy.
4. Experimental Data
We made use of the data of Dimitromanolaki and Androutsopoulos (2003), the GNOME
corpus (Poesio et al 2004), and the two corpora that Barzilay and Lapata (2005)
experimented with. In this section, we discuss how the centering representations we
utilize were derived from each corpus.
4.1 The MPIRO-CF Corpus
Dimitromanolaki and Androutsopoulos (2003, henceforth D&A) derived facts from the
database of the MPIRO concept-to-text generation system (Isard et al 2003), realized
them as sentences, and organized them in sets. Each set consisted of six facts which
were ordered by a domain expert. The orderings produced by this expert were shown
to be very close to those produced by two other archeologists (Karamanis and Mellish
2005b).
Our first corpus, MPIRO-CF, consists of 122 orderings that were made available
to us by D&A. We computed a CF list for each fact in each ordering by applying the
instantiation of centering introduced by Kibble and Power (2000, 2004) for concept-to-
text generation. That is, we took each database fact to correspond to an ?utterance?
and specified the ?realization? parameter using the arguments of each fact as the
members of the corresponding CF list. Table 2 shows the CF lists, the CBs, the
centering transitions, and the violations of CHEAPNESS for the following example from
MPIRO-CF:
(1) (a) This exhibit is an amphora.
(b) This exhibit was decorated by the Painter of Kleofrades.
(c) The Painter of Kleofrades used to decorate big vases.
(d) This exhibit depicts a warrior performing splachnoscopy before leaving for the
battle.
(e) This exhibit is currently displayed in the Martin von Wagner Museum.
(f) The Martin von Wagner Museum is in Germany.
MPIRO facts consist of two arguments, the first of which was specified as the CP
following the definition of ?CF ranking? in O?Donnell et al (2001).4 Notice that the
second argument can often be an entity such as en914 that is realized by a canned phrase
of significant syntactic complexity (a warrior performing splachnoscopy before leaving for
the battle). Moreover, the deployed definition of ?realization? is similar to what Grosz,
4 This is the main difference between our approach and that of Kibble and Power, who allow for more than
one potential CP in their CF lists.
33
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Table 2
The CF list, the CB, NOCB, or centering transition (see Table 1) and violations of CHEAPNESS
(denoted with an asterisk) for each fact in Example (1) from the MPIRO-CF corpus.
Fact CF list: next referent} CB Transition CHEAPNESS
{CP, CBn=CPn?1
(1a) {ex1, amphora} n.a. n.a. n.a.
(1b) {ex1, paint-of-kleofr} ex1 CONTINUE ?
(1c) {paint-of-kleofr, en404} paint-of-kleofr SMOOTH-SHIFT ?
(1d) {ex1, en914} ? NOCB n.a.
(1e) {ex1, wagner-mus} ex1 CONTINUE ?
(1f) {wagner-mus, germany} wagner-mus SMOOTH-SHIFT ?
Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) call ?direct realization,? which ignores potential bridging
relations (Clark 1977) between the members of two subsequent CF lists. These relations
are typically not taken into account for information ordering and were not considered
in any of the deployed corpora.
4.2 The GNOME-LAB Corpus
We also made use of the GNOME corpus (Poesio et al 2004), which contains object
descriptions (museum labels) reliably annotated with features relevant to centering.
The motivation for this study was to examine whether the phenomena observed in
MPIRO-CF (which is arguably somewhat artificial) also manifest in texts from the
same genre written by humans without the constraints imposed by a text generation
system.
Based on the definition of museum labels in Cheng (2002, page 65), we identified
20 such texts in GNOME, which were published in a book and a museum Web site (and
were thus taken to be coherent). The following example is a characteristic text from this
subcorpus (referred to here as GNOME-LAB):
(2) (a) Item 144 is a torc.
(b) Its present arrangement, twisted into three rings, may be a modern alteration;
(c) it should probably be a single ring, worn around the neck.
(d) The terminals are in the form of goats? heads.
The GNOME corpus provides us with reliable annotation of discourse units (i.e.,
clauses and sentences) that can be used for the computation of ?utterance? and of
NPs which introduce entities to the CF list. Each feature was marked up by at
least two annotators and agreement was checked using the ? statistic on part of the
corpus.
In order to avoid deviating too much from the MPIRO application domain, we
computed the CF lists from the units that seemed to correspond more closely to MPIRO
facts. So instead of using sentence for the definition of ?utterance,? we followed most
work on centering for English and computed CF lists from GNOME?s finite units.5 The
5 This definition includes titles which do not always have finite verbs, but excludes finite relative clauses,
the second element of coordinated VPs and clause complements which are often taken as not having their
own CF lists in the centering literature.
34
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
Table 3
First two members of the CF list, the CB, NOCB, or centering transition (see Table 1) and
violations of CHEAPNESS (denoted with an asterisk) for each finite unit in Example (2) from the
GNOME-LAB corpus.
Unit CF list: next referent} CB Transition CHEAPNESS
{CP, CBn=CPn?1
(2a) {de374, de375} n.a. n.a. n.a.
(2b) {de376, de374, ... } de374 RETAIN ?
(2c) {de374, de379, ... } de374 CONTINUE ?
(2d) {de380, de381, ... } ? NOCB n.a.
text spans with the indexes (a) to (d) in Example (2) are examples of such units. Units
such as (2a) are as simple as the MPIRO-generated sentence (1a), whereas others appear
to be of similar syntactic complexity to (1d). On the other hand, the second sentence in
Example (2) consists of two finite units, namely (b) and (c), and appears to correspond
to higher degrees of aggregation than is typically seen in an MPIRO fact. The texts in
GNOME-LAB consist of 8.35 finite units on average.
Table 3 shows the first two members of the CF list, the CB, the transitions, and the
violations of CHEAPNESS for Example (2). Note that the same entity (i.e., de374) is used
to denote the referent of the NP Item 144 in (2a) and its in (2b), which is annotated as
coreferring with Item 144. All annotated NPs introduce referents to the CF list (which
often contains more entities than in MPIRO), but only direct realization is used for the
computation of the list. This means that, similarly to the MPIRO domain, bridging
relations between, for example, it in (2c) and the terminals in (2d), are not taken into
account.
The members of the CF list were ranked by combining grammatical function with
linear order, which is a robust way of estimating ?CF ranking? in English (Poesio et al
2004). In this instantiation, the CP corresponds to the referent of the first NP within the
unit that is annotated as a subject or as the post-copular NP in a there-clause.
4.3 The NEWS and ACCS Corpora
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) presented a probabilistic approach for information ordering
which is particularly suitable for text-to-text generation and is based on a new
representation called the entity grid. A collection of 200 articles from the North American
News Corpus (NEWS) and 200 narratives of accidents from the National Transportation
Safety Board database (ACCS) was used for training and evaluation. Example (3)
presents a characteristic text from the NEWS corpus:
(3) (a) [The Justice Department]S is conducting [an anti-trust trial]O against [Microsoft
Corp.]X with [evidence]X that [the company]S is increasingly attempting to crush
[competitors]O.
(b) [Microsoft]O is accused of trying to forcefully buy into [markets]X where [its
own products]S are not competitive enough to unseat [established brands]O.
(c) [The case]S revolves around [evidence]O of [Microsoft]S aggressively pressuring
[Netscape]O into merging [browser software]O.
(d) [Microsoft]S claims [its tactics]S are commonplace and good economically.
35
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Table 4
Fragment of the entity grid for Example (3). The grammatical function of the referents in each
sentence is reported using S, O, and X (for subject, object, and other). The symbol ??? is used for
referents which do not occur in the sentence.
Referents
Sentences department trial microsoft evidence ... products brands ...
(3a) S O S X ... ? ? ...
(3b) ? ? O ? ... S O ...
(3c) ? ? S O ... ? ? ...
(3d) ? ? S ? ... ? ? ...
(3e) ? ? ? ? ... ? ? ...
(3f) ? X S ? ... ? ? ...
(e) [The government]S may file [a civil suit]O ruling that [conspiracy]S to curb
[competition]O through [collusion]X is [a violation]O of [the Sherman Act]X.
(f) [Microsoft]S continues to show [increased earnings]O despite [the trial]X.
Barzilay and Lapata automatically annotated their corpora for the grammatical function
of the NPs in each sentence (denoted in the example by the subscripts S, O, and
X for subject, object, and other, respectively) as well as their coreferential relations
(which do not include bridging references). More specifically, they used a parser
(Collins 1997) to determine the constituent structure of the sentences from which the
grammatical function for each NP was derived.6 Coreferential NPs such as Microsoft
Corp. and the company in (3a) were identified using the system of Ng and Cardie
(2002).
The entity grid is a two-dimensional array that captures the distribution of NP
referents across sentences in the text using the aforementioned symbols for their
grammatical role and the symbol ??? for a referent that does not occur in a sentence.
Table 4 illustrates a fragment of the grid for the sentences in Example (3).7
Barzilay and Lapata use the grid to compute models of coherence that are
considerably more elaborate than centering. To derive an appropriate instantiation of
centering for our investigation, we compute a CF list for each grid row using the
referents with the symbols S, O, and X. These referents are ranked according to their
grammatical function and their position in the text. This definition of ?CF ranking? is
similar to the one we use in GNOME-LAB. For instance, department is ranked higher
than microsoft in CF(3a) because the Justice Department is mentioned before Microsoft
Corp. in the text. The derived sequence of CF lists is used to compute the additional
centering data structures shown in Table 5.
The average number of sentences per text is 10.4 in NEWS and 11.5 in ACCS.
As we explain in the next section, our centering-based metrics of coherence can be
6 They also used a small set of patterns to recognize passive verbs and annotate arguments involved in
passive constructions with their underlying grammatical function. This is why Microsoft is marked with
the role O in sentence (3b).
7 If a referent such as microsoft is attested by several NPs in the same sentence, for example, Microsoft
Corp. and the company in (3a), the role with the highest priority (in this case S) is used to represent it.
36
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
Table 5
First two members of the CF list, the CB, NOCB, or centering transitions (see Table 1) and
violations of CHEAPNESS (denoted with an asterisk) for Example (3) from the NEWS corpus.
Sentence CF list: next referent} CB Transition CHEAPNESS
{CP, CBn=CPn?1
(3a) {department, microsoft, ...} n.a. n.a. n.a.
(3b) {products, microsoft, ...} microsoft RETAIN ?
(3c) {microsoft, case, ...} microsoft CONTINUE ?
(3d) {microsoft, tactics} microsoft CONTINUE ?
(3e) {government, conspiracy, ...} ? NOCB n.a.
(3f) {microsoft, earnings, ... } ? NOCB n.a.
deployed directly on unseen texts, so we treated all texts in NEWS and ACCS as test
data.8
5. Computing Centering-Based Metrics of Coherence
Following our previous work (Karamanis and Manurung 2002; Althaus, Karamanis,
and Koller 2004), the input to information ordering is an unordered set of information-
bearing items represented as CF lists. A set of candidate orderings is produced by
creating different permutations of these lists. A metric of coherence uses features from
centering to compute a score for each candidate ordering and select the highest scoring
ordering as the output.9
A wide range of metrics of coherence can be defined in centering?s terms, simply
on the basis of the work we reviewed in Section 3. To exemplify this, let us first assume
that the ordering in Example (3), which is analyzed as a sequence of CF lists in Table 5,
is a candidate ordering. Table 6 summarizes the NOCBs, the violations of COHERENCE,
SALIENCE, and CHEAPNESS, and the centering transitions for this ordering.10
The candidate ordering contains two NOCBs in sentences (3e) and (3f). Its score
according to M.NOCB, the metric used by Karamanis and Manurung (2002) and
Althaus, Karamanis, and Koller (2004), is 2. Another ordering with fewer NOCBs (should
such an ordering exist) will be preferred over this candidate as the selected output of
information ordering if M.NOCB is used to guide this process. M.NOCB relies only on
CONTINUITY. Because satisfying this principle is a prerequisite for the computation of
every other centering feature, M.NOCB is the simplest possible centering-based metric
and will be used as the baseline in our experiments.
According to Strube and Hahn (1999) the principle of CHEAPNESS is the most
important centering feature for anaphora resolution. We are interested in assessing how
suitable M.CHEAP, a metric which utilizes CHEAPNESS, is for information ordering.
CHEAPNESS is violated twice according to Table 6 so the score of the candidate ordering
8 By contrast, Barzilay and Lapata used 100 texts in each domain to train their models and reserved the
other 100 for testing them.
9 If the best coherence score is assigned to several candidate orderings, then the information ordering
algorithm will choose randomly between them.
10 Principles and transitions will be collectively referred to as ?features? from now on.
37
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Table 6
Violations of CONTINUITY (NOCB), COHERENCE, SALIENCE, and CHEAPNESS and centering
transitions for Example (3), based on the analysis in Table 5. The table reports the sentences
marked with each centering feature: That is, sentences (3e) and (3f) are classified as NOCBs, and
so on.
CONTINUITY? COHERENCE? SALIENCE? CHEAPNESS?
NOCB: CBn = CBn?1: CBn = CPn: CBn = CPn?1:
(3e), (3f) ? (3b) (3b), (3c)
CONTINUE: RETAIN: SMOOTH-SHIFT: ROUGH-SHIFT:
(3c), (3d) (3b) ? ?
according to M.CHEAP is 2.11 If another candidate ordering with fewer violations of
CHEAPNESS exists, it will be chosen as a preferred output according to M.CHEAP.
M.BFP employs the transition preferences of Rule 2 as specified by Brennan,
Friedman [Walker], and Pollard (1987). The first score to be computed by M.BFP is
the sum of CONTINUE transitions, which is 2 for the candidate ordering according to
Table 6. If this ordering is found to score higher than every other candidate ordering for
the number of CONTINUEs, it is selected as the output. If another ordering is found to
have the same number of CONTINUEs, the sum of RETAINs is examined, and so forth for
the other two types of centering transitions.12
M.KP, the metric deployed by Kibble and Power (2000) in their text generation
system, sums up the NOCBs as well as the violations of CHEAPNESS, COHERENCE,
and SALIENCE, preferring the ordering with the lowest total cost. In addition to
the violations of CONTINUITY and CHEAPNESS, the candidate ordering also violates
SALIENCE once, so its score according to M.KP is 5. An alternative ordering with a
lower score (if any) will be preferred by this metric. Although Kibble and Power (2004)
introduced a weighted version of M.KP, the exact weighting of centering?s principles
remains an open question, as argued by Kibble (2001). This is why we decided to
experiment with M.KP instead of its weighted variant.
In the remainder of the paper, we take forward the four metrics motivated in this
section as the most appropriate starting point for experimentation. We would like to
emphasize, however, that these are not the only possible options. Indeed, similarly to
the various ways in which centering?s parameters can be specified, there exist many
other ways of using centering to define metrics of entity coherence for information
ordering. These possibilities arise from the numerous other definitions of centering?s
transitions and the various ways in which transitions and principles can be combined.
These are explored in more detail in Karamanis (2003, Chapter 3), which also provides
a formal definition of the metrics discussed previously.
6. Evaluation Methodology
Because using naturally occurring discourse in psycholinguistic studies to investigate
coherence effects is almost infeasible, computational corpus-based experiments are
11 In order to estimate the effect of CHEAPNESS only, NOCBs are not counted as violations of CHEAPNESS.
12 Following Brennan, Friedman [Walker], and Pollard (1987), NOCBs are not taken into account for the
definition of transitions in M.BFP.
38
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
often the most viable alternative (Poesio et al 2004; Barzilay and Lee 2004). Corpus-
based evaluation can be usefully employed during system development and may
be later supplemented by less extended evaluation based on human judgments as
suggested by Lapata (2006).
The corpus-based methodology of Karamanis (2003) served as our experimental
framework. This methodology is based on the premise that the original sentence order
(OSO, Barzilay and Lee 2004) observed in a corpus text is more coherent than any other
ordering. If a metric takes an alternative ordering to be more coherent than the OSO, it
has to be penalized.
Karamanis (2003) introduced a performance measure called the classification error
rate which is computed according to the formula: Better(M,OSO)+Equal(M,OSO)/2.
Better(M,OSO) stands for the percentage of orderings that score better than the OSO
according to a metric M, and Equal(M,OSO) is the percentage of orderings that score
equal to the OSO.13 This measure provides an indication of how likely a metric is to lead
to an ordering different from the OSO. When comparing several metrics with each other,
the one with the lowest classification error rate is the most appropriate for ordering
the sentences that the OSO consists of. In other words, the smaller the classification
error rate, the better a metric is expected to perform for information ordering. The
average classification error rate is used to summarize the performance of each metric in
a corpus.
To compute the classification error rate we permute the CF lists of the OSO and
classify each alternative ordering as scoring better, equal, or worse than the OSO
according to M. When the number of CF lists in the OSO is fairly small, it is feasible
to search through all possible orderings. For OSOs consisting of more than 10 CF
lists, the classification error rate for the entire population of orderings can be reliably
estimated using a random sample of one million permutations (Karamanis 2003,
Chapter 5).
7. Results
Table 7 shows the average performance of each metric in the corpora employed in our
experiments. The smallest?that is, best?score in each corpus is printed in boldface.
The table indicates that the baseline M.NOCB performs best in three out of four corpora.
The experimental results of the pairwise comparisons of M.NOCB with each of
M.CHEAP, M.KP, and M.BFP in each corpus are reported in Table 8. The exact number
of texts for which the classification error rate of M.NOCB is lower than its competitor for
each comparison is reported in the columns headed by ?lower.? For instance, M.NOCB
has a lower classification error rate than M.CHEAP for 110 (out of 122) texts from
MPIRO-CF. M.CHEAP achieves a lower classification error rate for just 12 texts, and
there do not exist any ties, that is, cases in which the classification error rate of the two
metrics is the same.
The p value returned by the two-tailed Sign Test for the difference in the number
of texts in each corpus, rounded to the third decimal place, is also reported.14 With
13 Weighting Equal(M,OSO) by 0.5 is based on the assumption that, similarly to tossing a coin, the OSO will
on average do better than half of the orderings that score the same as it does when other coherence
constraints are considered.
14 The Sign Test was chosen over its parametric alternatives to test significance because it does not carry
specific assumptions about population distributions and variance.
39
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Table 7
Average classification error rate for the centering-based metrics in each corpus.
Corpus
Metric MPIRO-CF GNOME-LAB NEWS ACCS Mean
M.NOCB 20.42 19.95 30.90 15.51 21.70
M.BFP 19.91 33.01 37.90 21.20 28.01
M.KP 53.15 58.22 57.70 55.60 56.12
M.CHEAP 81.04 57.23 64.60 76.29 69.79
No. of texts 122 20 200 200
Table 8
Comparing M.NOCB with M.CHEAP, M.KP, and M.BFP in each corpus.
MPIRO-CF GNOME-LAB
M.NOCB M.NOCB
lower greater ties p lower greater ties p
M.CHEAP 110 12 0 <0.001 18 2 0 <0.001
M.KP 103 16 3 <0.001 16 2 2 0.002
M.BFP 42 31 49 0.242 12 3 5 0.036
No. of texts 122 20
NEWS ACCS
M.NOCB M.NOCB
lower greater ties p lower greater ties p
M.CHEAP 155 44 1 <0.001 183 17 0 <0.001
M.KP 131 68 1 <0.001 167 33 0 <0.001
M.BFP 121 71 8 <0.001 100 100 0 1.000
No. of texts 200 200
respect to the exemplified comparison of M.NOCB against M.CHEAP in MPIRO-CF,
the p value is lower than 0.001 after rounding. This in turn means that M.NOCB
returns a better classification error rate for significantly more texts in MPIRO-CF
than M.CHEAP. In other words, M.NOCB outperforms M.CHEAP significantly in this
corpus.
Notably, M.NOCB performs significantly better than its competitor in 10 out of
12 cases.15 In the remaining two comparisons, the difference in performance between
M.NOCB and M.BFP is not significant (p > 0.05). However, this does not constitute
evidence against M.NOCB, the simplest of the investigated metrics. In fact, because
M.BFP fails to outperform the baseline, the latter may be considered as the most
promising solution for information ordering in these cases too by applying Occam?s
razor. Thus, M.NOCB is shown to be the best performing metric across all four
corpora.
15 This result is significant too according to the two-tailed Sign Test (p < 0.05).
40
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
8. Discussion
Our experiments show that M.NOCB is the most suitable metric for information
ordering among the metrics we experimented with. Despite the differences between our
corpora (in genre, average length, syntactic complexity, number of referents in the CF
list, etc.), M.NOCB proves robust across all four of them. It is also the most appropriate
metric to use in both application areas we relate our corpora to, namely concept-to-text
(MPIRO-CF and GNOME-LAB) as well as text-to-text (NEWS and ACCS) generation.
These results indicate that when purely centering-based metrics are used, simply
avoiding NOCBs is more relevant to information ordering than the combinations of
additional centering features that the other metrics make use of.
In this section, we compare our work with other recent evaluation studies,
including the corpus-based investigation of centering by Poesio et al (2004); discuss
the implications of our findings for text generation; and summarize our contributions.
8.1 Recent Evaluation Studies in Information Ordering
There has been significant recent work on the corpus-based evaluation for information
ordering. In this section, we discuss the methodological differences between our work
and the studies which are most closely related to it.
Barzilay and Lee (2004) introduce a stochastic model for information ordering
which computes the probability of generating the OSO and every alternative ordering.
Then, all orderings are ranked according to this probability and the rank given to the
OSO is retrieved. Several evaluation measures are discussed, the most important of
which is the average OSO rank, that is, the average rank of the OSOs in their corpora.
This measure does not take into account that the OSOs differ in length. However, this
information is necessary to estimate reliably the performance of an information ordering
approach, as we discuss in Karamanis and Mellish (2005a) in more detail.
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) overcome this difficulty by introducing a performance
measure called ranking accuracywhich expresses the percentage of alternative orderings
that are ranked lower than the OSO. In Karamanis?s (2003) terms, ranking accuracy
equals 100% ? Better(M,OSO), assuming that no equally ranking orderings exist.16
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) compare the OSO with just 20 alternative orderings,
often sampled out of several millions. On the other hand, Barzilay and Lee (2004)
enumerate exhaustively each possible ordering, which might become impractical as the
search space grows factorially. We overcame these problems by using a large random
sample for the texts which consist of more than 10 sentences as suggested in Karamanis
(2003, Chapter 5). Equally important is the emphasis we placed on the use of statistical
tests, which were not deployed by either Barzilay and Lee or Barzilay and Lapata.
Lapata (2003) presented a methodology for automatically evaluating generated
orderings on the basis of their distance from observed sentence orderings in a corpus.
A measure of rank correlation (called Kendall?s ?), which was subsequently shown to
correlate reliably with human ratings and reading times (Lapata 2006), was used to
estimate the distance between orderings.
16 Neither Barzilay and Lapata (2005) nor Barzilay and Lee (2004) appear to consider the possibility that two
orderings may be equally ranked.
41
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Whereas ? estimates how close the predictions of a metric are to several original
orderings, we measure how likely a metric is to lead to an ordering different than the
OSO. Taking into account more than one OSO for information ordering is the main
strength of Lapata?s method, but to do this one needs to ask several humans to order the
same set of sentences (Madnani et al 2007). Karamanis and Mellish (2005b) conducted
an experiment in the MPIRO domain using Lapata?s methodology which supplements
the work reported in this article. However, such an approach is less practical for much
larger collections of texts such as NEWS and ACCS. This is presumably the reason why
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) use ranking accuracy instead of ? in their evaluation.
8.2 Previous Corpus-Based Evaluations of Centering
Our work investigates how the coherence score of the OSO compares to the scores
of alternative orderings of the sentences that the OSO consists of. As Kibble (2001,
page 582) noticed, this question is crucial from an information ordering viewpoint, but
was not taken into account by any previous corpus-based study of centering. Grosz,
Joshi, and Weinstein (1995, page 215) also suggested that Rule 2 should be tested by
examining ?alternative multi-utterance sequences that differentially realize the same
content.? We are the first to have pursued this research objective in the evaluation of
centering for information ordering.
Poesio et al (2004) observed that there remained a large number of NOCBs under
every instantiation of centering they tested and concluded that centering is inadequate
as a coherence model.17 However, the frequency of NOCBs does not necessarily provide
adequate indication of how appropriate NOCBs (and centering in general) are for
information ordering. Although over 50% of the transitions in GNOME-LAB are NOCBs,
the average classification error rate of approximately 20% for M.NOCB suggests that the
OSO tends to be in greater agreement with the preference to avoid NOCBs than 80% of
the alternative orderings. Thus, it appears that the observed ordering in the corpus does
optimize with respect to the number of potential NOCBs to a great extent.
8.3 A Simple and Robust Baseline for Text Generation
How likely is M.NOCB to come up with the attested ordering in the corpus (the OSO)
if it is actually used to guide an algorithm that orders the CF lists in our corpora?
The average classification error rates (Table 7) estimate exactly this variable. The
performance of M.NOCB varies across the corpora from about 15.5% (ACCS) to 30.9%
(NEWS). We attribute this variation to the aforesaid differences between the corpora.
Notice, however, that these differences affect all metrics in a similar way, not allowing
for another metric to significantly outperform M.NOCB.
Noticeably, even in ACCS, for which M.NOCB achieves its best performance,
approximately one out of six alternative orderings on average are taken to be more
coherent than the OSO. Given the average number of sentences per text in this corpus
17 We viewed the definition of the centering instantiation as being related to the application domain, as we
explained in Section 4. This is why, unlike Poesio et al, we did not experiment with different
instantiations of centering on the same data.
42
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
(11.5), this means that several millions of alternative orderings are often taken to be
more coherent than the gold standard.
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) report an average ranking accuracy of 87.3% for their
best sentence ordering method in ACCS. This corresponds to an average classification
error rate of 12.7% (assuming that there are no equally scoring orderings in their
evaluation; see Section 8.1). This is equal to an improvement of just 2.8% over
the performance of our baseline metric (15.5%) using a coherence model which is
substantially more elaborate than centering. However, it is in NEWS (for which
M.NOCB returns its worst performance of 30.9%) that this model shows its real strength,
approximating an average classification error rate of 9.6%, which corresponds to an
improvement of 21.3% over our baseline. We believe that the experiments reported in
this article put the studies of our colleagues in better perspective by providing a reliable
baseline to compare their metrics against.
8.4 Moving Beyond Centering-Based Metrics
Following McKeown (1985), Kibble and Power argue in favor of an integrated approach
for concept-to-text generation in which the same centering features are used at different
stages in the generation pipeline. However, our study suggests that features such as
CHEAPNESS and the centering transitions are not particularly relevant to information
ordering. The poor performance of these features can be explained by the fact that they
were originally introduced to account for pronoun resolution rather than information
ordering. CONTINUITY, on the other hand, captures a fundamental intuition about entity
coherence which constitutes part of several other discourse theories.18
CONTINUITY, however, captures just one aspect of coherence. This explains the
relatively high classification error rates for M.NOCB, which needs to be supplemented
with other coherence-inducing factors in order to be used in practice. This verifies the
premises of researchers such as Kibble and Power who a priori use features derived
from centering in combination with other factors in the definition of their metrics. Our
work should be quite helpful for that effort too, suggesting that M.NOCB is a better
starting point for defining such metrics than M.CHEAP or M.KP.
9. Conclusion
In conclusion, our analysis sheds more light on two previously unaddressed questions
in the corpus-based evaluation of centering: (i) which aspects of centering are most
relevant to information ordering and (ii) to what extent centering on its own can be
useful for this purpose. We have shown that the metric which relies exclusively on NOCB
transitions (M.NOCB) sets a baseline that cannot be outperformed by other coherence
metrics which make use of additional centering features. Although this metric does not
perform well enough to be used on its own, it constitutes a simple, yet robust, baseline
against which more elaborate information ordering approaches can be tested during
system development in both text-to-text and concept-to-text generation.
This work can be extended in numerous ways. For instance, given the abundance
of possible centering-based metrics one may investigate whether a different metric can
18 We thank one anonymous reviewer for suggesting this explanation of our results.
43
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
outperform M.NOCB in any corpus or application domain. M.NOCB can also serve as
the starting point for the definition of more informed metrics which will incorporate
additional coherence-inducing factors. Finally, given that we used the instantiation
of centering which seemed to correspond more closely to the targeted application
domains, the extent to which computing the CF list in a different way may affect the
performance of the metrics is another question to explore in future work.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Aggeliki Dimitromanolaki,
Mirella Lapata, and Regina Barzilay for their
data; to David Schlangen, Ruli Manurung,
James Soutter, and Le An Ha for
programming solutions; and to Ruth Seal
and two anonymous reviewers for their
comments. Nikiforos Karamanis received
support from the Greek State Scholarships
Foundation (IKY) as a PhD student in
Edinburgh as well as the Rapid Item
Generation project and the BBSRC-funded
FlySlip grant (No 38688) as a postdoc in
Wolverhampton and Cambridge,
respectively.
References
Althaus, Ernst, Nikiforos Karamanis, and
Alexander Koller. 2004. Computing locally
coherent discourses. In Proceedings of ACL
2004, pages 399?406, Barcelona.
Barzilay, Regina, Noemie Elhadad, and
Kathleen McKeown. 2002. Inferring
strategies for sentence ordering in
multidocument news summarization.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
17:35?55.
Barzilay, Regina and Mirella Lapata. 2005.
Modeling local coherence: An entity-based
approach. In Proceedings of ACL 2005,
pages 141?148, Ann Arbor, MI.
Barzilay, Regina and Lillian Lee. 2004.
Catching the drift: Probabilistic content
models with applications to generation
and summarization. In Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 113?120,
Boston, MA.
Beaver, David. 2004. The optimization of
discourse anaphora. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 27(1):3?56.
Bollegala, Danushka, Naoaki Okazaki, and
Mitsuru Ishizuka. 2006. A bottom-up
approach to sentence ordering for
multi-document summarization. In
Proceedings of ACL-COLING 2006,
pages 385?392, Sydney.
Brennan, Susan E., Marilyn A.
Friedman [Walker], and Carl J. Pollard.
1987. A centering approach to pronouns.
In Proceedings of ACL 1987, pages 155?162,
Stanford, CA.
Cheng, Hua. 2002. Modelling Aggregation
Motivated Interactions in Descriptive Text
Generation. Ph.D. thesis, Division of
Informatics, University of Edinburgh.
Clark, Herbert. H. 1977. Bridging. In P. N.
Johnson-Laird and P. C. Wason, editors,
Thinking: Readings in Cognitive Science.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pages 9?27.
Collins, Michael. 1997. Three generative,
lexicalised models for statistical parsing.
In Proceedings of ACL-EACL 1997,
pages 16?23, Madrid.
Dimitromanolaki, Aggeliki and Ion
Androutsopoulos. 2003. Learning to order
facts for discourse planning in natural
language generation. In Proceedings of
ENLG 2003, pages 23?30, Budapest.
Grosz, Barbara J., Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott
Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A framework
for modeling the local coherence of
discourse. Computational Linguistics,
21(2):203?225.
Hovy, Eduard. 1988. Planning coherent
multisentential text. In Proceedings of ACL
1988, pages 163?169, Buffalo, NY.
Isard, Amy, Jon Oberlander, Ion
Androutsopoulos, and Colin Matheson.
2003. Speaking the users? languages. IEEE
Intelligent Systems Magazine, 18(1):40?45.
Ji, Paul and Stephen Pulman. 2006. Sentence
ordering with manifold-based
classification in multi-document
summarization. In Proceedings of EMNLP
2006, pages 526?533, Sydney.
Kameyama, Megumi. 1998. Intrasentential
centering: A case study. In Walker, Joshi,
and Prince 1998, pages 89?122.
Kan, Min-Yen and Kathleen McKeown. 2002.
Corpus-trained text generation for
summarization. In Proceedings of INLG
2002, pages 1?8, Harriman, NY.
Karamanis, N. 2006. Evaluating centering for
information ordering in two new domains.
In Proceedings of NAACL 2006, Companion
Volume, pages 65?68, New York.
Karamanis, N., M. Poesio, C. Mellish, and
J. Oberlander. 2004. Evaluating
centering-based metrics of coherence using
44
Karamanis et al Centering for Information Ordering
a reliably annotated corpus. In Proceedings
of ACL 2004, pages 391?398, Barcelona.
Karamanis, Nikiforos. 2003. Entity Coherence
for Descriptive Text Structuring. Ph.D.
thesis, Division of Informatics, University
of Edinburgh.
Karamanis, Nikiforos and Hisar Maruli
Manurung. 2002. Stochastic text
structuring using the principle of
continuity. In Proceedings of INLG 2002,
pages 81?88, Harriman, NY.
Karamanis, Nikiforos and Chris Mellish.
2005a. A review of recent corpus-based
methods for evaluating information
ordering in text production. In Proceedings
of Corpus Linguistics 2005 Workshop on
Using Corpora for NLG, pages 13?18,
Birmingham.
Karamanis, Nikiforos and Chris Mellish.
2005b. Using a corpus of sentence
orderings defined by many experts to
evaluate metrics of coherence for text
structuring. In Proceedings of ENLG 2005,
pages 174?179, Aberdeen.
Kibble, Rodger. 2001. A reformulation of rule
2 of centering theory. Computational
Linguistics, 27(4):579?587.
Kibble, Rodger and Richard Power. 2000.
An integrated framework for text
planning and pronominalisation. In
Proceedings of INLG 2000, pages 77?84,
Mitzpe Ramon.
Kibble, Rodger and Richard Power. 2004.
Optimizing referential coherence in text
generation. Computational Linguistics,
30(4):401?416.
Knott, Alistair, Jon Oberlander, Mick
O?Donnell, and Chris Mellish. 2001.
Beyond elaboration: The interaction of
relations and focus in coherent text. In
T. Sanders, J. Schilperoord, and
W. Spooren, editors, Text Representation:
Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Aspects.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, chapter 7,
pages 181?196.
Lapata, Mirella. 2003. Probabilistic text
structuring: Experiments with sentence
ordering. In Proceedings of ACL 2003,
pages 545?552, Sapporo.
Lapata, Mirella. 2006. Automatic evaluation
of information ordering: Kendall?s tau.
Computational Linguistics, 32(4):1?14.
Madnani, Nitin, Rebecca Passonneau,
Necip Fazil Ayan, John Conroy, Bonnie
Dorr, Judith Klavans, Dianne O?Leary, and
Judith Schlesinger. 2007. Measuring
variability in sentence ordering for news
summarization. In Proceedings of ENLG
2007, pages 81?88, Schloss Dagstuhl.
Mann, William C. and Sandra A. Thompson.
1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A theory
of text organisation. Technical Report
RR-87-190, University of Southern
California / Information Sciences Institute.
Marcu, Daniel. 1997. The Rhetorical Parsing,
Summarization and Generation of Natural
Language Texts. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Toronto.
McKeown, Kathleen. 1985. Text Generation:
Using Discourse Strategies and Focus
Constraints to Generate Natural Language
Text. Studies in Natural Language
Processing. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Mellish, Chris, Alistair Knott, Jon
Oberlander, and Mick O?Donnell. 1998.
Experiments using stochastic search for
text planning. In Proceedings of INLG 1998,
pages 98?107, Niagara-on-the-Lake.
Miltsakaki, Eleni and Karen Kukich. 2004.
Evaluation of text coherence for electronic
essay scoring systems. Natural Language
Engineering, 10(1):25?55.
Ng, Vincent and Claire Cardie. 2002.
Improving machine learning approaches
to coreference resolution. In Proceedings of
ACL 2002, pages 104?111, Philadelphia,
PA.
O?Donnell, Mick, Chris Mellish, Jon
Oberlander, and Alistair Knott. 2001. ILEX:
An architecture for a dynamic hypertext
generation system. Natural Language
Engineering, 7(3):225?250.
Passoneau, Rebecca J. 1998. Interaction
of discourse structure with explicitness
of discourse anaphoric phrases. In
Walker, Joshi, and Prince 1998,
pages 327?358.
Poesio, Massimo, Rosemary Stevenson,
Barbara Di Eugenio, and Janet Hitzeman.
2004. Centering: a parametric theory and
its instantiations. Technical Report
CSM-369, Department of Computer
Science, University of Essex. Extended
version of the paper that appeared in
Computational Linguistics 30(3):309?363,
2004.
Reiter, Ehud and Robert Dale. 2000.
Building Natural Language Generation
Systems. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Scott, Donia and Clarisse Sieckenius
de Souza. 1990. Getting the message across
in RST-based text generation. In Robert
Dale, Chris Mellish, and Michael Zock,
editors, Current Research in Natural
Language Generation. Academic Press, San
Diego, CA, pages 47?74.
45
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 1
Siddharthan, Advaith. 2006. Syntactic
simplification and text cohesion.
Research on Language and Computation,
4(1):77?109.
Sidner, Candace L. 1979. Towards a
Computational Theory of Definite Anaphora
Comprehension in English. Ph.D. thesis, AI
Laboratory/MIT, Cambridge, MA. Also
available as Technical Report No.
AI-TR-537.
Soricut, Radu and Daniel Marcu. 2006.
Discourse generation using utility-trained
coherence models. In Proceedings of
ACL-COLING 2006 Poster Session,
pages 803?810, Sydney.
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1999.
Functional centering: Grounding
referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics,
25(3):309?344.
Walker, Marilyn A., Aravind K. Joshi, and
Ellen F. Prince, editors. 1998. Centering
Theory in Discourse. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
46
