Prepositions in Applications: A Survey and
Introduction to the Special Issue
Timothy Baldwin
University of Melbourne, Australia
Valia Kordoni
DFKI GmbH and Saarland University,
Germany
Aline Villavicencio
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil, and University of Bath, UK
1. Introduction
Prepositions1?as well as prepositional phrases (PPs) and markers of various sorts?
have a mixed history in computational linguistics (CL), as well as related fields such as
artificial intelligence, information retrieval (IR), and computational psycholinguistics:
On the one hand they have been championed as being vital to precise language un-
derstanding (e.g., in information extraction), and on the other they have been ignored
on the grounds of being syntactically promiscuous and semantically vacuous, and
relegated to the ignominious rank of ?stop word? (e.g., in text classification and IR).
Although NLP in general has benefitted from advances in those areas where prepo-
sitions have received attention, there are still many issues to be addressed. For example,
in machine translation, generating a preposition (or ?case marker? in languages such
as Japanese) incorrectly in the target language can lead to critical semantic divergences
over the source language string. Equivalently in information retrieval and information
extraction, it would seem desirable to be able to predict that book on NLP and book about
NLPmean largely the same thing, but paranoid about drugs and paranoid on drugs suggest
very different things.
Prepositions are often among the most frequent words in a language. For example,
based on the British National Corpus (BNC; Burnard 2000), four out of the top-ten
most-frequent words in English are prepositions (of, to, in, and for). In terms of both
parsing and generation, therefore, accurate models of preposition usage are essential to
avoid repeatedly making errors. Despite their frequency, however, they are notoriously
difficult to master, even for humans (Chodorow, Tetreault, and Han 2007). For example,
Lindstromberg (2001) estimates that less than 10% of upper-level English as a Second
1 Our discussion will focus primarily on prepositions in English, but many of the comments we make
apply equally to adpositions (prepositions and postpositions) and case markers in various languages. For
definitions and general discussion of prepositions in English and other languages, we refer the reader to
Lindstromberg (1998), Huddleston and Pullum (2002), and Che?liz (2002), inter alia.
Submission received: 9 December 2008; revised submission received: 17 January 2009; accepted for
publication: 17 January 2009.
? 2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
Language (ESL) students can use and understand prepositions correctly, and Izumi et al
(2003) reported error rates of English preposition usage by Japanese speakers of up
to 10%.
The purpose of this special issue is to showcase recent research on prepositions
across the spectrum of computational linguistics, focusing on computational syntax and
semantics. More importantly, however, we hope to reignite interest in the systematic
treatment of prepositions in applications. To this end, this article is intended to present
a cross-section view of research on prepositions and their use in NLP applications. We
begin by outlining the syntax of prepositions and its relevance to NLP applications,
focusing on PP attachment and prepositions in multiword expressions (Section 2). Next,
we discuss formal and lexical semantic aspects of prepositions, and again their rele-
vance to NLP applications (Section 3), and describe instances of applied research where
prepositions have featured prominently (Section 4). Finally, we outline the contributions
of the papers included in this special issue (Section 5) and conclude with a discussion of
research areas relevant to prepositions which we believe are ripe for further exploration
(Section 6).
2. Syntax
There has been a tendency for prepositions to be largely ignored in the area of syntactic
research as ?an annoying little surface peculiarity? (Jackendoff 1973, page 345). In com-
putational terms, the two most important syntactic considerations with prepositions
are: (1) selection (Fillmore 1968; Bennett 1975; Tseng 2000; Kracht 2003), and (2) valence
(Huddleston and Pullum 2002).
Selection is the property of a preposition being subcategorized/specified by the
governor (usually a verb) as part of its argument structure. An example of a selected
preposition is with in dispense with introductions, where introductions is the object of the
verb dispense, butmust be realized in a prepositional phrase headed bywith (c.f. *dispense
introductions). Conventionally, selected prepositions are specified uniquely (e.g., dispense
with) or as well-defined clusters (e.g., chuckle over/at), and have bleached semantics.
Selected prepositions contrast with unselected prepositions, which do not form part
of the argument structure of a governor and do have semantic import (e.g., live in
Japan). Unsurprisingly, there is not a strict dichotomy between selected and unselected
prepositions (Tseng 2000). For example, in the case of rely on Kim, on is specified in
the argument structure of rely but preserves its directional semantics; similarly, in put it
down , put requires a locative adjunct (c.f. *put it) but is entirely agnostic as to its identity,
and the preposition is semantically transparent.
Preposition selection is important in any NLP application that operates at the
syntax?semantics interface, that is, that overtly translates surface strings onto semantic
representations, or vice versa (e.g., information extraction or machine translation using
some form of interlingua). It forms a core component of subcategorization learning
(Manning 1993; Briscoe and Carroll 1997; Korhonen 2002), and poses considerable chal-
lenges when developing language resources with syntactico-semantic mark-up (Kipper,
Snyder, and Palmer 2004).
Prepositions can occur with either intransitive or transitive valence. Intransitive
prepositions (often referred to as ?particles?) are valence-saturated, and as such do not
take arguments. They occur most commonly as: (a) components of larger multiword
expressions (e.g., verb particle constructions, such as pick it up), (b) copular predicates
(e.g., the doctor is in), or (c) prenominal modifiers (e.g., an off day). Transitive prepositions,
120
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
on the other hand, select for (usually noun phrase) complements to form PPs (e.g., at
home). The bare term ?preposition? traditionally refers to a transitive preposition, but in
this article is used as a catch-all for prepositions of all valences.
Preposition valence has received relatively little direct exposure in the NLP liter-
ature but has been a latent feature of all work on part of speech (POS) tagging and
parsing over the Penn Treebank (Marcus, Santorini, and Marcinkiewicz 1993), as the
Penn POS tagset distinguishes between transitive prepositions (IN), selected intransitive
prepositions (RP), and unselected intransitive prepositions (RB, along with a range of
other adverbials).2 There have been only isolated cases of research where a dedicated
approach has been used to distinguish between these three sub-usages, in the interests
of optimizing overall POS tagging or parsing performance (Shaked 1993; Toutanova and
Manning 2000; Klein and Manning 2003; MacKinlay and Baldwin 2005).
Two large areas of research on the syntactic aspects of prepositions are (a) PP-
attachment and (b) prepositions in multiword expressions, which are discussed in the
following sections. Although this article will focus largely on the syntax of preposi-
tions in English, prepositions in other languages naturally have their own challenges.
Notable examples which have been the target of research in computational linguistics
are adpositions in Estonian (Muischnek, Mu?u?risep, and Puolakainen 2005), adpositions
in Finnish (Lestrade 2006), short and long prepositions in Polish (Tseng 2004), and the
French a` and de (Abeille? et al 2003).
2.1 PP Attachment
PP attachment is the task of finding the governor for a given PP. For example, in the
following sentence:
(1) Kim eats pizza with chopsticks
there is syntactic ambiguity, with the PP with chopsticks being governed by either the
noun pizza (i.e., as part of the NP pizza with chopsticks, as indicated in Example (2)), or
the verb eats (i.e., as a modifier of the verb, as indicated in Example (3)).
(2) S
NP
N
Kim
VP
V
eats
NP
N
pizza
PP
P
with
NP
N
chopsticks
2 It also includes the enigmatic TO tag, which is exclusively used for occurrences of to, over all infinitive,
transitive preposition, and intransitive preposition usages.
121
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
(3) S
NP
N
Kim
VP
V
eats
NP
N
pizza
PP
P
with
NP
N
chopsticks
Of these, the latter case of verb attachment (i.e., Example (3)) is, of course, the correct
analysis.
Naturally the number of PP contexts with attachment ambiguity is theoretically
unbounded. One special case of note is a sequence of PPs such as Kim eats pizza
with chopsticks on Wednesdays at Papa Gino?s, where the number of discrete analyses for a
sequence of n PPs is defined by the corresponding Catalan number Cn (Church and Patil
1982). The bulk of PP attachment research, however, has focused exclusively on the case
of a single PP occurring immediately after anNP, which in turn is immediately preceded
by a verb. As such, wewill focus our discussion predominantly on this syntactic context.
To simplify discussion, we will refer to the verb as v, the head noun of the immediately
proceeding NP as n1, the preposition as p, and the head noun of the NP object of
the preposition as n2. Returning to our earlier example, the corresponding 4-tuple is
?eatv, pizzan1 ,withp, chopsticksn2?.
The high degree of interest in PP attachment stems from it being a common phe-
nomenon when parsing languages such as English, and hence a major cause of parser
errors (Lin 2003). As such, it has implications for any task requiring full syntactic
analysis or a notion of constituency, such as prosodic phrasing (van Herwijnen et al
2003). Languages other than English with PP attachment ambiguity which have been
the target of research include Dutch (van Herwijnen et al 2003), French (Gaussier and
Cancedda 2001; Gala and Lafourcade 2005), German (Hartrumpf 1999; Volk 2001, 2003;
Foth and Menzel 2006), Spanish (Calvo, Gelbukh, and Kilgarriff 2005), and Swedish
(Kokkinakis 2000; Aasa 2004; Volk 2006).
PP attachment research has undergone a number of significant paradigm shifts over
the course of the last three decades, and been the target of interest of theoretical syntax,
AI, psycholinguistics, statistical NLP, and statistical parsing.
Early research on PP attachment focused on the development of heuristics intended
to model human processing strategies, based on analysis of the competing parse trees
independent of lexical or discourse context (Frazier 1979; Schu?tze 1995). For example,
Minimal Attachment was the strategy of choosing the attachment site which ?mini-
mizes? the parse tree, as calculated by its node membership; assuming the parse trees
provided for Example (1), this would be unable to disambiguate between Examples (2)
and (3) as they both contain the same number of nodes. Late Attachment, on the other
hand, was the strategy of attaching ?low? in the parse tree, corresponding to Exam-
ple (2). Ford, Bresnan, and Kaplan (1982) proposed an alternative heuristic strategy,
based on the existence of p in a subcategorization frame for v. In later research, Pereira
(1985) described amethod for incorporating Right Association andMinimal Attachment
122
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
into a shift-reduce parser, and Whittemore and Ferrara (1990) developed a rule-based
algorithm to combine various attachment preferences on the basis of empirical evalua-
tion of the predictive power of each.
Syntactic preferences were of course a blunt instrument in dealing with PP attach-
ment, and largely ineffectual in predicting the difference in PP attachment between
Kim eats pizza with chopsticks (verb attachment) and Kim eats pizza with anchovies (noun
attachment), for example. This led to a shift away from syntactic methods in the 1980s
towards AI-inspired techniques which used world knowledge to resolve PP attachment
ambiguity. In the case of Example (1), for example, the knowledge that chopsticks are
an eating implement would suggest a preference for verb attachment, and similarly the
knowledge that they are not a foodstuff would suggest a dispreference for noun attach-
ment. Wilks, Huang, and Fass (1985) attempted to capture this type of world knowledge
using hand-coded ?preferential semantics? of each of v, n1, p, and n2. Dahlgren and
McDowell (1986) simplified this analysis to use only p and n2, still in the form of
hand-coded rules. Hirst (1987) used his model of ?commonsense semantics? to resolve
PP attachment ambiguity, based on verb-guided preferences (i.e., valence properties
of the verb) and plausibility relative to a knowledge base. In this same vein, Jensen
and Binot (1987) used the dictionary definitions of v and n2 as a ?knowledge base? to
resolve PP attachment based on approximate reasoning, for example, by determining
that chopsticks is an instrument which is compatible with eat.
In parallel, in the area of psycholinguistics, Altmann and Steedman (1988) provided
experimental evidence to suggest that PP attachment resolution interacts dynamically
with discourse context, and that ambiguity is resolved on the basis of the interdepen-
dence between structure and the mental representation of that context. This suggested
that computational research on PP attachment resolution needed to take into account
the discourse context, in addition to syntax and world knowledge. Spivey-Knowlton
and Sedivy (1995) later used psycholinguistic experiments to demonstrate that verb-
specific attachment properties and NP definiteness both play important roles in the
human processing of PP attachment. Importantly, this workmotivated the need for verb
classes to resolve PP attachment ambiguity.
The next significant shift in NLP research on PP attachment was brought about by
Hindle and Rooth (1993), who were the harbingers of statistical NLP and large-scale
empirical evaluation. Hindle and Rooth challenged the prevailing view at the time that
lexical semantics and/or discourse modeling were needed to resolve PP attachment, in
proposing a distributional approach, based simply on estimation of the probability of
p attaching high or low given v and n1 (ignoring n2). The method uses unambiguous
cases of PP attachment (e.g., cases of n1 being a pronoun [high attachment], or the PP
post-modifying n1 in subject position [low attachment]) to derive smoothed estimates
of Prhigh(p|v), Prhigh(NULL|n) (i.e., the probability of n not being post-modified by
a PP), and Prlow(p|n), which then form the basis of Prhigh(p|v, n) and Prlow(p|v, n),
respectively. The proposedmethodwas significant in demonstrating the effectiveness of
simple co-occurrence probabilities, without explicit semantics or discourse processing,
and also in its ability to operate without explicitly annotated training data.
Resnik and Hearst (1993) observed that PP attachment preferences are also condi-
tioned on the semantics of the noun object of the preposition in the PP, as can be seen
in our earlier example of Kim eats pizza with chopsticks/anchovies where chopsticks leads
to verb attachment and anchovies to noun attachment. Although they were unable to
come up with a model which was empirically superior to existing methods which did
not represent the semantics of the noun object, this paved the way for a new wave of
research using the full 4-tuple of ?v, n1, p, n2?.
123
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
The first to successfully apply the full 4-tuple were Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and
Roukos (1994), who in the process established a benchmark PP attachment data set
upon which most of the subsequent research has been based. The data set, colloquially
known as the ?RRR? data set, was automatically extracted from the Wall Street Journal
section of the Penn Treebank, and is made up of 20,801 training and 3,097 test 4-tuples
of type ?v, n1, p, n2?, each of which is annotated with a binary label for verb or noun
attachment.3 Also of significance was the fact that Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos
were able to come up with a ?class? representation for words, based on distributional
similarity, that outperformed a simple word-based model.
The general framework established by Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos (1994),
and the RRR data set, defined the task of PP attachment for over a decade. It has been
tackled using a variety of smoothing methods andmachine learning algorithms, includ-
ing backed-off estimation (Collins and Brooks 1995), instance-based learning (Zavrel,
Daelemans, and Veenstra 1997; Zhao and Lin 2004), log-linear models (Franz 1996),
maximum entropy learning (Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos 1994), decision trees
(Merlo, Crocker, and Berthouzoz 1997), neural networks (Sopena, Lloberas, andMoliner
1998; Alegre, Sopena, and Lloberas 1999), and boosting (Abney, Schapire, and Singer
1999). In addition to the four lexical and class-based features provided by the 4-tuple
?v, n1, p, n2?, researchers have used noun definiteness, distributional similarity, noun
number, subcategorization categories, word proximity in corpus data, and PP semantic
class (Stetina and Nagao 1997; Yeh and Vilain 1998; Pantel and Lin 2000; Volk 2002). The
empirical benchmark for the data set was achieved by Stetina and Nagao (1997), who
used WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) to explicitly model verb and noun semantics.
In a novel approach to the task, Schwartz, Aikawa, and Quirk (2003) observed that
Japanese translations of English verb and noun attachment involve distinct construc-
tions. This allowed them to automatically identify instances of PP attachment ambiguity
in a parallel English?Japanese corpus, complete with attachment information. They
used this data to disambiguate PP attachment in English inputs, and demonstrated that,
the quality of English?Japanese machine translation improved significantly as a result.
More recently, Atterer and Schu?tze (2007) challenged the real-world utility of meth-
ods based on the RRR data set, on the grounds that it is based on the availability of a
gold-standard parse tree for a given input. They proposed that, instead, PP attachment
be evaluated as a means of post-processing over the raw output of an actual parser,
and produced results to indicate: (a) that a state-of-the-art parser (Bikel 2004) does
remarkably well at PP attachment without a dedicated PP attachment module; but
also (b) that post-processing based on a range of methods developed over the RRR
data set (Collins and Brooks 1995; Toutanova, Manning, and Ng 2004; Olteanu and
Moldovan 2005) generally improves parser accuracy. In addition, they developed a
variant of the RRR data set (RRR-sent) which contains full sentential contexts of possible
PP attachment ambiguity. Others who have successfully built PP re-attachment models
for specific parsers are Olteanu (2004) and Foth and Menzel (2006). Agirre, Baldwin,
and Martinez (2008) used the evaluation methodology of Atterer and Schu?tze (2007) to
confirm the finding from the original RRR data set that lexical semantics (in various
guises) can enhance PP attachment accuracy relative to a baseline parser. As part of this
effort, they developed a standardized data set for exploration of the interaction between
lexical semantics and parsing/PP attachment accuracy.
3 Because it was automatically extracted, the RRR data set is notoriously noisy. For instance, Pantel and
Lin (2000) observed that 133 tuples contain the as either n1 or n2.
124
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
One significant variation on the classic binary PP attachment task which attempts
to generate a richer semantic characterisation of the PP is the work of Merlo (2003) and
Merlo and Esteve Ferrer (2006), who included classification of the PP as an argument
or adjunct, making for a four-way classification task. In this context, they found that
PP attachment resolution for argument PPs is considerably easier than is the case for
adjunct PPs.
Returning to our observation that PP attachment can occur in multiple syntactic
configurations, Merlo, Crocker, and Berthouzoz (1997) applied backed-off estimation
to the problem of multiple PP attachment, in the form of 14 discrete syntactic config-
urations. Unsurprisingly, they found the task considerably harder than the basic V NP
PP case, due to increased ambiguity and data sparseness. Mitchell (2004) similarly per-
formed an extensive analysis of the Penn Treebank to investigate the different contexts
PP attachment ambiguities occur in, and the relative ability of different PP attachment
methods to disambiguate each.
There have also been domain-specific methods proposed for PP attachment, for
example, in the area of biomedicine (Hahn, Romacker, and Schulz 2002; Pustejovsky
et al 2002; Leroy, Chen, and Martinez 2003; Schuman and Bergler 2006).
2.2 The Syntax of Prepositional Multiword Expressions
Prepositions are also often found as part of multiword expressions (MWEs), such as
verb-particle constructions (break down), prepositional verbs (rely on), determinerless
PPs (in hospital), complex prepositions (by means of ) and compound nominals (affairs
of state). MWEs are lexical items which are composed of more than one word and are
lexically, syntactically, semantically, pragmatically, and/or statistically idiosyncratic in
some way (Sag et al 2002). In this section, we present a brief overview of the syntax
of the key prepositional MWEs in English, and discuss a cross-section of some of the
recent research done in the area.
Prepositional MWEs span the full spectrum of morphosyntactic variation. Some
complex prepositions undergo no inflection, internal modification, or word order vari-
ation (e.g., in addition to) and are best analyzed as ?words with spaces? (Sag et al
2002). Others optionally allow internal modification (e.g., with [due/particular/special/...]
regard to) or determiner insertion (e.g., on [the] top of ) and are considered to be semi-
fixed expressions (Villada Moiro?n 2005). Compound nominals are similarly semi-fixed
expressions, in that they have rigid constraints on word order and lexical composition,
but allow morphological inflection (e.g., part(s) of speech).
The three prepositional MWE types that cause the greatest syntactic problems in
English, in terms of their relative frequency and tendency for syntactic variation, are:
1. verb-particle constructions (VPCs), where the verb selects for an
intransitive preposition (e.g., chicken out or hand in: Dehe? et al [2002]);
2. prepositional verbs (PVs), where the verb selects for a transitive
preposition (e.g., rely on or refer to: Huddleston and Pullum [2002]);
3. determinerless PPs (PP?Ds), where a PP is made up of a preposition and
singular noun without a determiner (e.g., at school, off screen: Baldwin et al
[2006]).
All three MWE types undergo limited syntactic variation (Sag et al 2002). For exam-
ple, transitive verb particle constructions generally undergo the particle alternation,
125
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
whereby the particle may occur either adjacent to the verb (e.g., tear up the letter), or
be separated from the verb by the NP complement (e.g., tear the letter up). Some VPCs
readily occur with both orders (like tear up), while others have a strong preference for
a particular order (e.g., take off?under the interpretation of having the day off?tends
to occur in the particle-final configuration in usages such as take Friday off vs. ?take off
Friday).4 In addition, many VPCs undergo limited internal modification by adverbials,
where the adverb pre-modifies the particle (e.g., come straight over).
The syntactic variability of prepositional verbs is more subtle. PVs occur in two
basic forms: (1) fixed preposition PVs (e.g., come across), where the verb and selected
preposition must be strictly adjacent; and (2) mobile preposition PVs (e.g., refer to),
where the selected preposition is adjacent to the verb in the canonical word order, but
undergoes limited syntactic alternation. For example, mobile preposition PVs allow
limited coordination of PP objects (e.g., refer to the book and to the DVD), and the NP
object of the selected preposition can be passivized (e.g., the book they referred to).
Even subtler are the syntactic effects observed for determinerless PPs. The singular
noun in the PP?D is often strictly countable (e.g., off screen, on break), resulting in
syntactic markedness as, without a determiner, the noun does not constitute a saturated
NP. This in turn dictates the need for a dedicated analysis in a linguistically motivated
grammar in order to be able to avoid parse failures (Baldwin et al 2004; van der Beek
2005). Additionally, there is considerable variation in the internal modifiability of deter-
minerless PPs, with some not permitting any internal modification (e.g., of course) and
others allowing optional internal modification (e.g., at considerable length). There are also,
however, cases of obligatory internal modification (e.g., at considerable/great expense vs.
*at expense) and highly restricted internal modification (e.g., at long last vs. *at great/short
last). Balancing up these different possibilities in terms of over- and undergeneration in
a grammar is far from trivial (Baldwin et al 2006).
Naturally there are other prepositional MWE types in languages other than English
with their own syntactic complexities. Notable examples to have received attention in
the computational linguistics literature are Dutch ?collocational prepositional phrases?
(VilladaMoiro?n 2005), German complex prepositions (Trawin?ski 2003; Trawinski, Sailer,
and Soehn 2006), German particle verbs (Schulte im Walde 2004; Rehbein and van
Genabith 2006), and Polish preposition?pronoun contractions (Trawin?ski 2005, 2006).
2.2.1 Prepositional MWEs in NLP. The syntactic variation of prepositional MWEs leads
to difficulties for NLP applications. To start with, there is the problem of identifying
their token occurrences, for example, for semantic indexing purposes. As with simplex
words, a given MWE may appear with different subcategorization frames (e.g., give up
vs. give up [something]), but added to that, the order of the elements may be flexible
or internally modified (see previous discussion), and some elements may be optional
(e.g., out in make a big thing (out) of [something]). Additionally, they conspire with PP
attachment ambiguity to compound structural ambiguity. For example, hand the paper in
today is ambiguous between a V NP PP analysis ([V hand] [NP the paper] [PP in today]), a
V NP analysis ([V hand] [NP the paper in today]), and a transitive VPC analysis ([V hand]
[NP the paper] [P in] [NP today]); of these, the final analysis is, of course, correct.
4 The question of whether or not a particle can be separated from the verb depends on factors such as the
degree of bonding of the particle with the verb, the size of the NP, and the type of the NP, as discussed by
Wasow (2002).
126
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Related to this is the issue of resource development, especially lexicon development
for linguistically motivated parsers. First, a representation must be arrived at which is
sufficiently expressive to encode the syntactic subtleties of eachMWE instance (Sag et al
2002; Calzolari et al 2002; Copestake et al 2002; Odijk 2004). Second, the lexiconmust be
populated in order to ensure adequate parser coverage over prepositional MWEs. Due
to the high productivity and domain specificity of prepositional MWEs, a number of
lexical acquisition approaches have been developed, usually customized to a particular
prepositional MWE type in a specific language.
For VPCs in English, for instance, Baldwin and Villavicencio (2002) focused on
their automatic extraction from raw text corpora, on the basis of a POS tagger, chunker,
and chunk grammar, and finally the combined output of the three along with various
linguistic and frequency features. Baldwin (2005a) expanded on this work to extract
VPCs complete with valence information, to produce a fully specified lexical item. In
both cases, it was found that 100% recall was extremely hard to achieve due to the
power-law distribution of VPC token frequencies in corpus data. That is, around half
of the VPC lexical items found in pre-existing lexical resources occurred in the BNC at
most 2 times.
Villavicencio (2005, 2006) took a different approach, in observing that VPCs occur
productively in semantically coherent clusters, based on (near-)synonymy of the head
verb (e.g., clear/clean/drain up and break/rip/cut/tear up). As a result, she expanded a
seed set of VPCs based on class-based verb semantic information, and used Web-based
statistics to filter false positives out of the resultant VPC candidate set.
Li et al (2003) looked at the task of VPC identification rather than extraction,
namely, identifying each individual VPC token instance in corpus data, based on a
set of hand-crafted regular expressions. Although they report very high precision and
recall for their method, it has the obvious disadvantage that the regular expressions
must be manually encoded, and it is not clear that the proposed method is superior
to an off-the-shelf parser. Kim and Baldwin (2006, in press) attempted to automate
the process of identification by post-processing the output of the RASP parser, and
demonstrated (a) that the RASP parser (Briscoe, Carroll, and Watson 2006) is highly
effective at VPC identification, and (b) that the incorporation of lexicalized models of
selectional preferences can lead to modest improvements in parser accuracy.
In terms of English PV extraction, Baldwin (2005b) proposed a method based on a
combination of statistical measures and linguistic diagnostics, and demonstrated that
the combination of statistics with linguistic diagnostics achieved the best extraction
performance.
Research on prepositional MWEs in languages other than English includes Krenn
and Evert (2001) and Evert and Krenn (2005) on the extraction of German PP?verb
collocations (which are similar to verbal idioms/verb?noun combinations in English
[Fazly, Cook, and Stevenson 2009]) based on a range of lexical association measures.
Pecina (2008) further extended this work using a much broader set of lexical association
measures and classifier combination. Looking at German, Do?mges et al (2007) analyzed
the productivity of PP?Ds headed by unter, and used their results to motivate a syntactic
analysis of the phenomenon. For Dutch, van der Beek (2005) worked on the extraction
of PP?Ds from the output of a parser, once again using a range of statistical measures.
Sharoff (2004) described a semi-automatic approach to classifying prepositional MWEs
in Russian, based on statistical measures and manual filtering using knowledge about
the structure of Russian prepositional phrases.
A recent development which we expect will further catalyze research on preposi-
tional (and general) MWE extraction was the release of a number of standardized data
127
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
sets for MWE extraction evaluation as part of an LREC 2008 Workshop. This includes
data sets for English VPCs (Baldwin 2008) and German PP?verbs (Krenn 2008).
3. Semantics
There are three diametrically opposed views to the semantics of prepositions: (1) prepo-
sitions are semantically vacuous and unworthy of semantic representation (a view
commonly subscribed to in the information retrieval community: Baeza-Yates and
Ribeiro-Neto [1999], Manning, Raghavan, and Schu?tze [2008]); (2) preposition semantics
is a function of the words that select them and they in turn select, such that it is impos-
sible to devise a standalone semantic characterization of preposition semantics (Tseng
2000; Old 2003); and (3) prepositional semantics is complex but can be captured in a
standalone resource (Kipper, Dang, and Palmer 2000; Saint-Dizier and Vazquez 2001;
Litkowski and Hargraves 2005). Kipper, Snyder, and Palmer (2004, page 23) elegantly
summarized this third position as ?it is precisely because the preposition?semantics
relationship is so complex that properly accounting for it will lead to a more robust
natural language resource.? Turning the clock back 16 years, Zelinski-Wibbelt (1993,
page 1) observed that ?we are now witnessing a veritable plethora of investigations
into the semantics of preposition semantics? and speculated that ?the time has come to
see how natural language processing (NLP) can benefit from the insights of theoretical
linguistics.? Although these prognostications were perhaps overly optimistic at the
time, they are now being progressively fulfilled.
In discussing preposition semantics, there is a basic distinction between composi-
tional (or regular/productive) and non-compositional (or irregular/collocational) se-
mantics. Preposition usages with compositional semantics transparently preserve the
standalone semantics of the preposition (e.g., They met on Friday), whereas those with
non-compositional semantics involve some level of semantic specialization or diver-
gence from the standalone semantics (e.g., They got on famously). In terms of formal
semantics, the complement vs. adjunct distinction5 is also relevant for determining the
logical form for a given input.
Subsequently, we review research on the formal and lexical semantics of preposi-
tions, and the semantics of prepositional MWEs.
3.1 Formal Semantic Approaches to Prepositions
Research on the formal semantics of prepositions has focused predominantly on devis-
ing representations for temporal, spatial, and locative usages, the three most productive
and coherent classes of prepositions.
Prepositions can be used in order to convey temporal information relevant to the
duration of a proposition. Normally, three types of information are identified: (1) the
duration of the preposition, (2) its duration relative to the time of reference of the dis-
course, and (3) its absolute location on the time axis. Some prepositions convey all three
types of information, and others convey only one. Within each information type, the
5 In talking about the complement/adjunct distinction, we put aside the well-known issue of borderline
cases (Rauh 1993), and ignore language-specific phenomena such as Funktionsverbgefu?ge, where
German PPs can also occur as invariant syntagmas in light verb constructions (e.g., in Beschlag nehmen ?to
occupy?) and the complement?adjunct distinction does not apply.
128
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
semantic input of temporal prepositions can vary considerably: They can distinguish
between existential and universal quantification over time, indicate whether or not the
extremes of the period are to be included, and mark the motion through time.
Themain challenge for formal approaches to the semantics of temporal prepositions
is coming upwith a representation which can adequately encode the different semantics
of temporal prepositions (Bennett 1975; Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976; Ro?hrer 1977;
Kamp 1981; Allen 1984; Richards et al 1989; Bre?e and Smit 1986; Durrell and Bre?e 1993).
Another concern has been the ability to support compositional semantic interpretation
of temporal PPs, with emphasis on their quantificational role. For English, Pratt and
Francez (1997), for instance, proposed generalized temporal quantifiers to represent
temporal NPs, temporal PPs, and sentences.
With respect to spatial semantics, the focus of research has been on devising formal
semantic representations that capture both the functional relationships between the
objects, and human interaction with those objects. Along these lines, Kelleher and
Costello (2009) propose computational models of spatial preposition semantics for use
in visually situated dialogue systems.
Finally, with locative prepositions, formal semantic approaches have proposed that
they should decompose into three semantic elements: a locative relation, a reference
entity, and a place value. Each locative expression (e.g., a PP orNP) is generally assumed
to have a unique locative relation and place value. Thus, combinations of pure locative
relationmarkers and prepositions which are specified for place values are ruled out, and
no embedded locative relations are allowed in the semantic structure of a single locative
expression. Some locative prepositions are underspecified for a place value, however,
and thus are able to co-occur with a second preposition that specifies a place value
(e.g., out from under the table). The specific locative relation denoted by a preposition
is generally considered not to be specified in the lexicon, but instead to vary with
eventuality types.
J?rgensen and L?nning (2009) used the Minimal Recursion Semantics (MRS)
framework (Copestake et al 2005) as the basis for a language-independent represen-
tation of semantics of locative prepositions. They applied the proposed representa-
tion to English and Norwegian locative prepositions, and demonstrated its utility for
Norwegian?English machine translation. Hellan and Beermann (2005) similarly used
the MRS framework to capture the locative and spatial semantics of Norwegian prepo-
sitions. Ramsay (2005) proposed a unified theory of preposition semantics, where the
semantics of temporal usages of prepositions are predicted naturally from abstract
relational definitions. Arsenijevic? (2005) developed a formal semantic analysis of prepo-
sitions in terms of event structure and applied it to a natural language generation
task.
Denis, Kuhn, and Wechsler (2003) analyzed the syntactico-semantics of V-PP goal
motion complexes in English (e.g., Kim ran to the library), and developed an analysis
based on the conclusion that the preposition is often semantically rather than syn-
tactically determined. This lends support to arguments for a systematic account of
preposition semantics.
Kordoni (2003b, 2003a, 2006) focused instead on the role of prepositions in diathesis
alternations, and proposed an MRS analysis of indirect prepositional arguments based
on English, German, and Modern Greek data. Specifically, she showed that a robust
formal semantic framework like MRS provides an appropriate theoretical basis for
a linguistically motivated account of indirect prepositional arguments, and also the
necessary formal generalizations for the analysis of such arguments in a multilingual
context (as a result of MRS structures being easily comparable across languages).
129
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
3.2 Lexical Semantic Resources for Prepositions
A number of lexical semantic resources have been developed specifically for prepo-
sitions, four of which are outlined here: (1) the English LCS Lexicon, (2) the Preposition
Project, (3) PrepNet, and (4) VerbNet.
The English LCS Lexicon (Dorr 1993, 1997) uses the formalism of Lexical Conceptual
Structure (based on work by Jackendoff [1983, 1990]6) to encode lexical knowledge
using a typed directed graph of semantic primitives and fields. In addition to a large
lexicon of verbs, it includes 165 English prepositions classified into 122 intransitive and
375 transitive senses. For example, the LCS representation for the directional sense of
up (as in up the stairs) is:
(4) (toward Loc (nil 2) (UP Loc (nil 2) (? Thing 6)))
where the numbers indicate the logical arguments of the predicates. This representation
indicates that the logical subject of the PP (indexed by ?2?; e.g., the piano in move the
piano up the stairs) is relocated up in the direction of the logical argument (indexed by
?6?; e.g., the stairs in our example), which is in turn a concrete thing. The LCS Lexicon
was developed from a theoretical point of view and isn?t directly tied to corpus usage.
The Preposition Project (Litkowski 2002; Litkowski and Hargraves 2005, 2006) is
an attempt to develop a comprehensive semantic database for English prepositions,
intended for NLP applications. The project took the New Oxford Dictionary of English
(Pearsall 1998) as its source of preposition sense definitions, which it then fine-tuned
based on cross-comparison with both functionally tagged prepositions in FrameNet
(Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998) and the account of preposition semantics in a de-
scriptive grammar of English (Quirk et al 1985); it also draws partially on Dorr?s
LCS definitions of prepositions. Importantly, the Preposition Project is building up a
significant number of tagged preposition instances through analysis of the preposition
data in FrameNet, which it then uses to characterize the noun selectional preferences of
each preposition sense and also the attachment properties to verbs of different types. At
the time of writing, 673 preposition senses for 334 prepositions (mostly phrasal prepo-
sitions) have been annotated. In tandemwith developing type-level sense definitions of
prepositions, the Preposition Project has sense annotated over 27,000 occurrences of the
56 most common prepositions, based on functionally tagged prepositions in FrameNet.
To date, the primary application of the Preposition Project has been in a SemEval 2007
task on the word sense disambiguation of prepositions (see Section 3.3).
PrepNet (Saint-Dizier and Vazquez 2001; Cannesson and Saint-Dizier 2002; Saint-
Dizier 2005, 2008) is an attempt to develop a compositional account of preposition
semantics which interfaces with the semantics of the predicate (e.g., verb or predicative
noun). Similarly to the English LCS Lexicon, it uses LCS as the descriptive language,
in conjunction with typed ?-calculus and underspecified representations. Noteworthy
elements of PrepNet are that it attempts to capture selectional constraints, metaphor-
ical sense extension, and complex arguments. PrepNet was originally developed over
French prepositions, but has since been applied to the analysis of instrumentals across
a range of languages (Saint-Dizier 2006b).
VerbNet (Kipper, Dang, and Palmer 2000; Kipper Schuler 2005) contains a shallow
hierarchy of 50 spatial prepositions, classified into five categories. The hierarchy is
6 See Levin and Rappaport-Hovav (in press) for a recent review of this style of semantics.
130
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
derived from pioneering work by Spa?rck Jones and Boguraev (1987), which is in turn
derived from Wood (1979). The preposition sense inventory was used as the basis for
extending VerbNet and led to significant redevelopment of the verb class set (Kipper,
Snyder, and Palmer 2004), in a poignant illustration of how preposition semantics
impinges on verb semantics.
In other work, Sablayrolles (1995) classified 199 simple and complex spatial prepo-
sitions into 16 classes. Lersundi and Agirre (2003) applied a similar methodology to
Dorr and Habash (2002) in developing a multilingual sense inventory for Basque post-
positions and English and Spanish prepositions. Fort and Guillaume (2007) developed
a syntactico-semantic lexicon of French prepositions, partly based on PrepNet; their
particular interest was in enhancing parsing performance. Old (2003) analyzed Roget?s
Thesaurus and arrived at the conclusion that it was not a good source of standalone
preposition semantics. Beavers (2003) analyzed the aspectual and path properties of
goal-marking postpositions in Japanese, and proposed an analysis based on predicate
and event restrictions. Boonthum, Toida, and Levinstein (2005, 2006) defined a general-
purpose sense inventory of seven prepositions (but purportedly applicable to all prepo-
sitions), taking the LCS lexicon as a starting point and expanding the sense inventory
by consulting Quirk et al (1985) and Barker (1996). Finally, as part of a more general
attempt to capture lexical semantics in the formalism of Multilayered Extended Seman-
tic Networks (MultiNet), Helbig (2006) developed a semantic treatment of prepositions,
focusing primarily on German.
There has historically been a strong interest in preposition semantics in the field of
cognitive linguistics (Talmy 1988), in the form of ?schemas.? Schemas are an attempt to
visualize the relation between the object of the preposition (the Trajector, or TR) and its
cognitive context (the Landmark, or LM). They provide a language-independent repre-
sentation, and have been used to analyze crosslinguistic correspondences in preposition
semantics. For example, Tyler and Evans (2003)used schemas to capture the semantics of
English prepositions, arguing that all meanings are grounded in human spatio-physical
experience. Schemas have also been used as the basis of crosslinguistic analysis of
preposition semantics, for example, by Brala (2000) to describe the senses of on and in
in English and Croatian, Knas? (2006) to motivate a sense inventory for at in English and
Polish, and Cosme and Gilquin (2008) to contrast with and avec in English and French.
Trujillo (1995) also developed a language-independent classification of spatial
prepositions for machine translation purposes, in a lexicalist framework.
3.3 Automatic Classification of Preposition Sense
Only a modest amount of research has been carried out on the sense disambiguation
of prepositions, largely because until recently, there haven?t been lexical semantic re-
sources and sense-tagged corpora for prepositions that could be used for this purpose.
Classification of preposition sense has been motivated as a standalone task in appli-
cations such as machine translation, and also as a means of improving the general
performance of semantic tasks such as semantic role labeling.
O?Hara and Wiebe (2003) were the first to perform a standalone preposition word
sense disambiguation (WSD) task, based on the semantic roles in the Penn Treebank.
They collapsed the semantic roles into seven basic semantic classes, and built a decision
tree classifier based on a set of contextual features similar to those used inWSD systems.
O?Hara andWiebe (2009) is an updated version of this original research, using a broader
range of resources. Ye and Baldwin (2006) also built on the earlier research, in attempt-
ing to enhance the accuracy of semantic role labelingwith dedicated PP disambiguation.
131
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
They demonstrated the potential for accurate preposition labeling to contribute to large-
scale improvements in overall semantic role labeling performance.
As mentioned in Section 3.2, Litkowski and Hargraves (2007) ran a task on the
WSD of prepositions at SemEval 2007, as a spinoff of the Preposition Project. The task
focused on 34 prepositions, with a combined total of 332 senses. Similarly to a lexical
sample WSD task, participants were required to disambiguate token instances of each
preposition relative to the provided discrete sense inventory. Three teams participated
in the task (Popescu, Tonelli, and Pianta 2007; Ye and Baldwin 2007; Yuret 2007), with all
systems outperforming two baselines over both fine- and coarse-grained sense invento-
ries, through various combinations of lexical, syntactic, and semantic features. The best-
performing system achieved F-scores of 0.818 and 0.861 over fine- and coarse-grained
senses, respectively (Ye and Baldwin 2007).
In other papers dedicated to prepositional WSD, Boonthum, Toida, and Levinstein
(2005, 2006) proposed a semantic collocation-based approach to preposition interpre-
tation, and demonstrated the import of the method in a paraphrase recognition task.
Alam (2003, 2004) used decision trees to disambiguate 12 senses of over, distinguishing
between senses which are determined by their governor and those which are deter-
mined by their NP complement.
Baldwin (2006) explored the interaction between preposition valence and the dis-
tributional hypothesis, based on latent semantic analysis (LSA; Deerwester et al 1990).
He derived gold-standard preposition-to-preposition similarities using each of Dorr?s
LCS lexicon (based on the method of Resnik and Diab [2000]) and Roget?s Thesaurus,
and compared them to the similarities predicted by LSA, in each case using either
valence specification (considering intransitive and transitive prepositions separately) or
valence underspecification (considering both preposition valences together). His results
indicated higher correlation when valence specification is used, suggesting not only
that there is a significant difference in semantics between transitive and intransitive
usages of a given preposition, but that it is sufficiently marked in the context of use that
distributional methods are able to pick up on it.
Cook and Stevenson (2006) developed a four-way classification of the semantics
of up in VPCs based on cognitive grammar, and classified token instances based on a
combination of linguistic and word co-occurrence features.
In a machine translation context, Trujillo (1995) used selectional preferences and
unification to perform target language disambiguation over his classification of spatial
prepositions.
Srihari, Niu, and Li (2000) used manual rules to disambiguate prepositions in
named entities.
3.4 The Semantics of Prepositional MWEs
Prepositional MWEs?focusing primarily on the English MWE types of VPCs, PVs, PP?
Ds, and compound nominals?populate the spectrum from fully compositional to fully
non-compositional (Dixon 1982; McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll 2003). For instance, put
up (as in put the picture up) is fully compositional, whereas make out (as in Kim and Sandy
made out) is fully non-compositional. Compositionality can be viewed relative to each
component word (Bannard 2005) or holistically for the MWE as a single unit (McCarthy,
Keller, and Carroll 2003). With play out (as in see how the match plays out), for example,
we might claim that play is non-compositional but out is (semi-)compositional, and that
as a whole the VPC is non-compositional. The question of compositionality is confused
132
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
somewhat by productive constructions such as the resultative up (e.g., eat/beat/finish/...
up) and the manner by (e.g., by train/car/broomstick/...), which have specialized semantics
relative to their simplex usages but occur relatively freely with this semantics within a
given construction (VPC and PP?D, respectively, in our examples).
There have been a number of attempts to model the compositionality of VPCs. Ban-
nard (2005, 2006) considered VPC compositionality at the component word level, and
proposed a distributional approach that assumes there is a positive correlation between
compositionality and the distributional similarity of each component to simplex usages
of that same word. McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll (2003) opted for a holistic notion
of compositionality and used a range of approaches based on the distributional ?the-
saurus? of Lin (1998) to model compositionality, for example, in calculating the overlap
in the top-N similar words for a given VPC and its head verb. They also examined
the use of statistical tests such as mutual information in modeling compositionality,
and found the similarity-based methods to correlate more highly with the human
judgments. Baldwin et al (2003) used LSA to analyze the compositionality of VPCs
(and compound nouns), and once again demonstrated that there is a positive correlation
between compositionality and the distributional similarity between a given VPC and
its head word. Kim and Baldwin (2007) predicted the compositionality of VPCs based
on a combination of the McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll (2003) and Bannard (2006) data
sets, and analysis of verb?particle co-occurrence patterns. Taking a different approach to
the task, Patrick and Fletcher (2005) classified token instances of verb?preposition pairs
according to the three classes of decomposable (syntactic dependence between the P and
V, with compositional semantics), non-decomposable (syntactic dependence between
the P and V, with idiomatic semantics), and independent (no syntactic dependence
between the P and V).
Levi (1978) pioneered the use of prepositions as a means of interpreting compound
nouns, through the notion of compatibility with paraphrases incorporating preposi-
tions. For example, baby chair can be paraphrased as chair for (a) baby, indicating com-
patibility with the FOR class. In her original research, Levi used four prepositions, in
combination with a set of verbs (for relative clause paraphrases) and semantic roles
(for nominalizations). Lauer (1995) extended this research in developing an exclusively
preposition-based set of seven semantic classes. For example, Levi would interpret truck
driver as PATIENT, in the sense that truck is the patient of the underlying verb of the
head noun to drive, whereas Lauer would interpret it as OF (c.f., driver of (the) truck).
Girju (2007, 2009) leveraged translation data to improve the accuracy of compound
noun interpretation, based on the observation that the choice of preposition in Ro-
mance languages is often indicative of the semantics of the compound noun. Con-
versely, Johnston and Busa (1996) used Qualia structure from the Generative Lexicon
(Pustejovsky 1995) to interpret the prepositions in Italian complex nominals, such as
macchina da corsa ?race car?. Jensen and Nilsson (2003) used (Danish) prepositions as
the basis of a finite set of role relations with which to describe the meaning content
of nominals, and demonstrated the utility of the resultant ontology in disambiguating
nominal phrases.
4. Applications
Prepositions have tended to be overlooked in NLP applications, but there have been
isolated examples of prepositions being shown to be worthy of dedicated treatment. In
particular, applications requiring some level of syntactic abstraction tend to benefit from
133
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
the inclusion of prepositions. Similarly, applications which incorporate an element of
natural language generation or realization need to preserve prepositions in the interests
of producing well-formed outputs.
Riloff (1995) challenged the validity of the stop-word philosophy for text classi-
fication, and demonstrated that dependency tuples incorporating prepositions are a
more effective document representation than simple words. In a direct challenge to
the prevalent ?stop word? perception of prepositions in information retrieval, Hansen
(2005) and Lassen (2006) placed emphasis on not only prepositions but preposi-
tion semantics in a music retrieval system and ontology-based text search system,
respectively.
Information extraction is one application where prepositions are uncontrover-
sially crucial to system accuracy, in terms of the role they play in named entities
(Cucchiarelli and Velardi 2001; Toral 2005; Kozareva 2006) and in IE patterns, in linking
the elements in a text (Appelt et al 1993; Muslea 1999; Ono et al 2001; Leroy and Chen
2002).
Benamara (2005) used preposition semantics in a cooperative question answering
system. In the context of cross-language question answering (CLQA), Hartrumpf,
Helbig, and Osswald (2006) used MultiNet to interpret the semantics of German
prepositions, and demonstrated that in instances where the answer passage contained
a different preposition to that included in the original question, preposition semantics
boosted the performance of their CLQA system.
Boonthum, Toida, and Levinstein (2006) successfully applied their prepositionWSD
method in a paraphrase recognition task, namely, predicting that Kim covered the baby in
blankets and Kim covered the baby with blankets have essentially the same semantics. They
proposed seven general senses of prepositions (e.g., PARTICIPANT, INSTRUMENT, and
QUALITY), and annotated prepositions occurring in 120 sentences for each of 10 prepo-
sitions. They evaluated aWSDmethod over this data, and sketched how the preposition
sense information could then be used for paraphrase recognition.
Prepositions have deservedly received a moderate amount of attention in appli-
cations which require explicit representation of 3D space, such as robotics, animated
agents, and virtual reality, in the context of interpreting the spatial information of
prepositions. For example, Xu and Badler (2000) developed a geometric definition of
the motion trajectories of prepositions, whereas Tokunaga, Koyama, and Saito (2005)
use potential functions to estimate the spatial extent of Japanese spatial nouns (which
combine with postpositions to have a similar syntactic and semantic profile to Eng-
lish spatial prepositions). Kelleher and van Genabith (2003) proposed a method for
interpreting in front of and behind in a virtual reality environment based on different
frames of reference. Hying (2007) carried out an analysis of preposition semantics
in the HRCR Map Task corpus, and used it to evaluate two models of projective
prepositions. Kelleher and Kruijff (2005) developed a model for grounding spatial
expressions in visual perception and also for modeling proximity, and Reichelt and
Verleih (2005) developed the B3D system for generating a computational representation
of prepositions in geospatial applications. Furlan, Baldwin, and Klippel (2007) used
preposition occurrence in Web data as a means of classifying landmarks for use in
route directions. Finally, Kelleher and Costello (2009) proposed computational models
of topological and projective spatial prepositions for use in a visually situated dialogue
system.
In the field of machine translation (MT), spatial and temporal prepositions have
received a moderate amount of attention, particularly in the context of interlingua-
and transfer-based MT. Dorr and Voss (1993) mapped prepositions onto 5-place spatial
134
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
predicates in the context of interlingua-based MT, building on the work of Talmy (1985)
and Jackendoff (1983, 1990). Nu?bel (1996) developed a set of interlingual predicates for
adjunct PPs in English?German MT, incorporating a dialogue component which can
be used to disambiguate prepositions relative to the discourse context. Bond, Ogura,
and Uchino (1997) developed a dedicated type hierarchy for the generation of preposi-
tions associated with temporal expressions in Japanese?English machine translation.
Kumar Naskar and Bandyopadhyay (2006) proposed a transfer-based method for trans-
lating English prepositions into Bengali postpositions/inflectional markers, focusing
on spatial, temporal, and also idiomatic usages. Bond (1998) proposed an algorithm
for translating Japanese spatial nouns into English prepositions based on semantic
fields. Trujillo (1995) used his classification of spatial prepositions as the basis of an
English?Spanish translation system using bilingual lexical rules. Hajic? et al (2002)
proposed a method for inserting prepositions into tectogrammatical representations in
Czech?English MT, although they did not manage to integrate the predictions into
their final MT system. Husain, Sharma, and Reddy (2007) achieved promising results
using an explicit model of preposition semantics as the basis for preposition selection in
Hindi/Telugu?English machine translation.
In the context of statistical machine translation, Toutanova and Suzuki (2007) iden-
tified that case marker (= postposition) generation poses a significant challenge for stan-
dard phrase-based methods in English?Japanese translation, identifying case marker
errors in 16% of outputs. They proposed an n-best reranking method to improve case
marker generation performance, whereby they expand the n-best list to include extra
case marker variations, and perform case marker prediction for each bunsetsu.7 In eval-
uation, they demonstrated that their proposed method significantly outperforms both
the baseline SMT system (Quirk, Menezes, and Cherry 2005) and a comparable n-best
rerankingmethodwithout dedicated casemarker candidate expansion. The significance
of this research is that it demonstrates that dedicated handling of postpositions can
enhance SMT performance, a result which has promise for adpositions and markers in
other languages.
As stated in Section 1, prepositions are notoriously hard for non-native speakers to
master, and are a frequent source of errors in English as a Second Language (ESL) prose.
Errors can take the form of incorrect preposition selection (e.g., *Kim stayed in home),
erroneous preposition insertion (e.g., *Kim played at outside), or erroneous preposition
omission (e.g., *Kim went ? the conference) (Tetreault and Chodorow 2008b). Tetreault
and Chodorow (2008b) proposed a combined detection/correction method based on a
supervised model. For each preposition in a text, they predict the most likely candidate
from 34 candidates, based on local word context. If the most likely candidate differs
from the original preposition selection, an error is predicted and correction proposed.
In evaluation over ESL texts, they found that their method performs at high precision
but low recall. Separately, they found that the same method performs considerably
better when applied to preposition selection over native English text, and also that it
is important to have multiple annotators correct ESL text in order to avoid skewing the
data (Tetreault and Chodorow 2008a). In other research, Gamon et al (2008) performed
preposition selection in terms of both selection and insertion, but over a smaller
set of prepositions. De Felice and Pulman (2007) similarly proposed a method for
7 Roughly speaking, a bunsetsu is a case-marked chunk.
135
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
preposition correction, but only evaluated their model over five prepositions and native
English text.
5. Introduction to the Articles in This Special Issue
For this special issue we invited submissions that brought a theoretical basis to research
on prepositions in lexical resources and NLP tasks. The number of submissions re-
ceived reflects the interest in prepositions at this time, with a total of 16 submissions.
On the basis of a rigorous review process, we selected four articles for inclusion in
the special issue, covering: the use of semantic resources to disambiguate preposition
semantics, for use in lexical acquisition (O?Hara and Wiebe 2009); a crosslingual lexical
semantic analysis of prepositions to interpret nominal compounds (Girju 2009); a formal
semantic analysis of preposition semantics, and its possible application in Norwegian?
English machine translation (J?rgensen and L?nning 2009); and a computational model
for preposition semantics for use in a dialogue system (Kelleher and Costello 2009). We
now outline each of these articles.
The first two articles look at the semantic interpretation of prepositions, as they tend
to be highly polysemous and have a number of closely related senses.
O?Hara and Wiebe look at the disambiguation of preposition semantics for use
in lexical acquisition, in semi-automatically extending lexical resources. They investi-
gate the utility of information learned from resources such as the Penn Treebank and
FrameNet, to perform semantic role disambiguation of PPs. The proposedmethodology
is evaluated in a series of experiments, and different sense granularities are contrasted
in task-based evaluation.
Prepositions are highly frequent in many languages, but also highly idiomatic in
usage in a given language (hence the difficulty of non-native speakers in learning to use
prepositions correctly). However, there are instances of cross-linguistic regularities in
their linguistic realizations. For example, when translating English nominal compounds
of the type Noun Preposition Noun (N P N) and Noun Noun (N N) into Romance
languages, these are often translated into N PN compounds, where the choice of prepo-
sition is (semi-)predictable from the semantics of the compound. Girju investigates
the role of the syntactic and semantic properties of prepositions in English and Romance
languages in the automatic semantic interpretation of English nominal compounds.
On the basis of an extensive corpus analysis of the distribution of semantic relations
in nominal compounds in English and five Romance languages, she attempts to dis-
ambiguate the semantic relations in English nominal compounds. She focuses on non-
equative compositional nominal compounds, and empirically tests the contribution of
prepositions to the task of semantic interpretation, using a supervised, knowledge-
intensive model.
Identification of crosslinguistic and possibly universal properties of prepositions (or
equivalent constructions) could potentially impact on a number of NLP applications. In
machine translation, for example, a formal description of the crosslinguistic semantic
properties of prepositions could provide the basis for an interlingua. This is the topic of
the third article in this special issue: J?rgensen and L?nning propose a unification-based
grammar implementation of a formal semantic analysis of preposition semantics, and
demonstrate its application in Norwegian?English MT.
A correct handling of prepositions, particularly spatial prepositions, is also impor-
tant in dialogue systems, as prepositions are often used to refer to entities in the physical
environment of system interaction. The last article in this special issue addresses this
136
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
topic: Kelleher and Costello present computational models of spatial preposition
semantics for use in visually situated dialogue systems. The proposed models of
topological and projective spatial prepositions can be used for both interpretation and
generation of prepositional expressions in complex visual environments containing
multiple objects, and are able to account for the contextual effect which other distractor
objects can have on the region described by a preposition. The evaluation is done in
terms of psycholinguistic tests evaluating the approach to distractor interference on
prepositional semantics. The models are employed in a human?robot dialogue system
to interpret locative expressions containing a topological preposition and to generate
spatial references in visually situated contexts.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
As we hope to have demonstrated in this introduction, prepositions have led a mixed
existence in computational linguistics and related fields, particularly in the context
of applications. In applications requiring spatial interpretation (e.g., situated dialogue
systems), they have been the focus of dedicated research, and in applications which
incorporate a language generation component such as MT, there have been isolated
instances exemplifying the need for dedicated handling of prepositions/case markers.
In general, however, they tend to have been relegated to the sidelines in applied NLP
research.
Research on prepositions has tended to concentrate on a specific subset of preposi-
tions in a particular language, often as a one-off research task which has failed to make
broader impact in the field of computational linguistics. PP attachment?especially in
English?has been an exception, in the sense that the RRR data set has given rise to an
active strand of research centered around prepositions.We hope that variants of the RRR
data set from Atterer and Schu?tze (2007) and Agirre, Baldwin, and Martinez (2008) will
reinvigorate interest in PP attachment, in a situated parsing context. Similarly, the emer-
gence of resources such as the Preposition Project, and the data set made available for
the SemEval 2007 task on the word sense disambiguation of prepositions (Litkowski
and Hargraves 2007), provide the means for more detailed analysis of preposition
semantics. In addition to standalone word sense disambiguation tasks, however, there
needs to be more research on the interaction of preposition semantics with other
semantic tasks, such as semantic role labeling and the word sense disambiguation of
content words. The increasing availability of large-scale parallel corpora paves the way
for crosslinguistic research on preposition syntax. Areas of particular promise in this
regard are methods for generating prepositions inMT, and automatic error correction of
preposition usage in non-native speaker text. Following the lead of Saint-Dizier (2006b),
J?rgensen and L?nning (2009), and others, we also hope to see more crosslinguistic
and typological research on the lexical semantics of prepositions. Although there has
been a steady proliferation of WordNets for different languages, linked variously to
English WordNet (e.g., EuroWordNet for several European languages [Vossen 1998],
BALKANET for Balkan languages [Stamou et al 2002], HowNet for Chinese [Dong and
Dong 2006], and Japanese WordNet for Japanese [Isahara et al 2008]), they have tended
to follow the lead of English WordNet and focus exclusively on content words. Given
the increasing maturity of resources such as the Preposition Project and PrepNet, the
time seems right to develop preposition sense inventories for more languages, linked
back to English. On the basis of currently available resources and future efforts such
as these, we believe there will be a steady lowering of the barrier to including a more
systematic handling of prepositions in NLP applications.
137
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
The purpose of this article has been to highlight the theoretical and applied re-
search that has been done on prepositions in computational linguistics, focusing on
computational syntax and semantics. In particular, we have aimed to highlight applied
research which has focused specifically on prepositions. It is our hope that through this
special issue, we will rekindle interest in prepositions and motivate greater awareness
of prepositions in various applications.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Ken Litkowski, Paola Merlo,
Patrick Saint-Dizier, and Martin Volk for
feedback on an earlier draft of this paper,
and Robert Dale and Mary Gardiner for their
unfailing support and encouragement
throughout the editorial process. We also
acknowledge the efforts of the considerable
number of reviewers who devoted time to
reviewing the original submissions to the
special issue, and fine-tuning the accepted
articles. The first author of this article was
supported in part by the Australian Research
Council through Discovery Project grant
DP0663879.
References
Aasa, Jo?rgen. 2004. Unsupervised resolution
of PP attachment ambiguities in Swedish.
Master?s thesis, Stockholm University.
Abeille?, Anne, Olivier Bonami, Danie`le
Godard, and Jesse Tseng. 2003. The
syntax of a` and de: an HPSG analysis. In
Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 133?144,
Toulouse.
Abney, Steven, Robert E. Schapire, and
Yoram Singer. 1999. Boosting applied to
tagging and PP attachment. In Proceedings
of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Very Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC-99),
pages 38?45, College Park, MD.
Agirre, Eneko, Timothy Baldwin, and
David Martinez. 2008. Improving parsing
and PP attachment performance with
sense information. In Proceedings of the
46th Annual Meeting of the ACL: Human
Language Technologies, pages 317?325,
Columbus, OH.
Alam, Yukiko Sasaki. 2003. For
computational treatment of the polysemy
of prepositional uses of Over. In
Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 66?76,
Toulouse.
Alam, Yukiko Sasaki. 2004. Decision trees
for sense disambiguation of prepositions:
Case of over. In Proceedings of the
HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop on
Computational Lexical Semantics,
pages 52?59, Boston, MA.
Alegre, Martha A., Josep M. Sopena, and
Agusti Lloberas. 1999. PP-attachment: A
committee machine approach. In
Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Very Large Corpora
(EMNLP/VLC-99), pages 231?238,
College Park, MD.
Allen, James F. 1984. Towards a general
theory of action and time. Artificial
Intelligence, 23:123?154.
Altmann, Gerry and Mark Steedman. 1988.
Interaction with context during human
sentence processing. Cognition,
30(3):191?238.
Appelt, Douglas E., Jerry R. Hobbs, John
Bear, David Israel, Megumi Kameyama,
and Mabry Tyson. 1993. FASTUS: A
finite-state processor for information
extraction from real-world text. In
Proceedings of the 13th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-93), pages 1172?1181, Chambery.
Arsenijevic?, Boban. 2005. Subevents and
prepositions. In Proceedings of the Second
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the Linguistic
Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 39?46, Colchester.
Atterer, Michaela and Hinrich Schu?tze. 2007.
Prepositional phrase attachment without
oracles. Computational Linguistics,
33(4):469?476.
Baeza-Yates, Ricardo and Berthier
Ribeiro-Neto. 1999.Modern Information
Retrieval. Addison Wesley/ACM press,
Harlow, UK.
Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and
John B. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley
FrameNet project. In Proceedings of the
36th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 17th
International Conference on Computational
138
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Linguistics: COLING/ACL-98, pages 86?90,
Montreal.
Baldwin, Timothy. 2005a. Deep lexical
acquisition of verb-particle constructions.
Computer Speech and Language,
19(4):398?414.
Baldwin, Timothy. 2005b. Looking for
prepositional verbs in corpus data. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 180?189, Colchester.
Baldwin, Timothy. 2006. Distributional
similarity and preposition semantics. In
Saint-Dizier (Saint-Dizier 2006a).
Baldwin, Timothy. 2008. A resource for
evaluating the deep lexical acquisition of
English verb-particle constructions. In
Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Workshop:
Towards a Shared Task for Multiword
Expressions (MWE 2008), pages 1?2,
Marrakech.
Baldwin, Timothy, Colin Bannard, Takaaki
Tanaka, and Dominic Widdows. 2003.
An empirical model of multiword
expression decomposability. In
Proceedings of the ACL-2003 Workshop
on Multiword Expressions: Analysis,
Acquisition and Treatment, pages 89?96,
Sapporo.
Baldwin, Timothy, John Beavers, Leonoor
van der Beek, Francis Bond, Dan
Flickinger, and Ivan A. Sag. 2006. In search
of a systematic treatment of determinerless
PPs. In Saint-Dizier (Saint-Dizier 2006a).
Baldwin, Timothy, Emily M. Bender, Dan
Flickinger, Ara Kim, and Stephan Oepen.
2004. Road-testing the English Resource
Grammar over the British National
Corpus. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004),
pages 2047?2050, Lisbon.
Baldwin, Timothy and Aline Villavicencio.
2002. Extracting the unextractable: A case
study on verb-particles. In Proceedings of
the 6th Conference on Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL-2002), pages 98?104,
Taipei.
Bannard, Colin. 2005. Learning about the
meaning of verb-particle constructions
from corpora. Computer Speech and
Language, 19(4):467?478.
Bannard, Colin. 2006. Acquiring Phrasal
Lexicons from Corpora. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.
Barker, Ken. 1996. The assessment of
semantic cases using English positional,
prepositional and adverbial case markers.
Technical Report TR-96-08, Computer
Science, University of Ottawa.
Beavers, John. 2003. The semantics and
polysemy of goal marking prepositions in
Japanese. In Proceedings of the
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the Linguistic
Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 205?216, Toulouse.
Benamara, Farah. 2005. Reasoning with
prepositions within a cooperative
question-answering framework. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 145?152, Colchester.
Bennett, David C. 1975. Spatial and Temporal
uses of English Prepositions: As Essay in
Stratified Semantics. Longman, London.
Bikel, Daniel M. 2004. Intricacies of Collins?
parsing model. Computational Linguistics,
30(4):479?511.
Bond, Francis. 1998. Interpretation of
Japanese ?spatial? nouns in
Japanese-to-English machine translation.
Presentation at the 1998 Annual General
Meeting of the Australian Linguistics
Society: ALS-98.
Bond, Francis, Kentaro Ogura, and Hajime
Uchino. 1997. Temporal expressions in
Japanese-to-English machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological
Issues in Machine Translation (TMI-97),
pages 55?62, Santa Fe, NM.
Boonthum, Chutima, Shunichi Toida, and
Irwin Levinstein. 2005. Sense
disambiguation for preposition ?with?. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 153?162, Colchester.
Boonthum, Chutima, Shunichi Toida, and
Irwin Levinstein. 2006. Preposition senses:
Generalized disambiguation model. In
Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and
Computational Linguistics (CICLing-2006),
pages 196?207, Mexico City.
Brala, Marija M. 2000. Understanding and
translating (spatial) prepositions: An
exercise in cognitive semantics for
lexicographic purposes.Working Papers of
the University of Cambridge Research Centre
for English and Applied Linguistics, 7.
University of Cambridge.
139
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
Bre?e, D. S. and R. A. Smit. 1986. Temporal
relations. Journal of Semantics, 5(4):345?384.
Briscoe, Ted and John Carroll. 1997.
Automatic extraction of subcategorization
from corpora. In Proceedings of the 5th
Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing (ANLP), pages 356?363,
Washington, DC.
Briscoe, Ted, John Carroll, and Rebecca
Watson. 2006. The second release of the
RASP system. In Proceedings of the Poster
Session of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (COLING/ACL 2006),
pages 77?80, Sydney.
Burnard, Lou. 2000. Reference Guide for the
British National Corpus. Oxford University
Computing Services, Oxford, UK.
Calvo, Hiram, Alexander Gelbukh, and
Adam Kilgarriff. 2005. Distributional
thesaurus versus WordNet: A comparison
of backoff techniques for unsupervised PP
attachment. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLing-2005), pages 177?188,
Mexico City.
Calzolari, Nicoletta, Charles Fillmore,
Ralph Grishman, Nancy Ide, Alessandro
Lenci, Catherine MacLeod, and
Antonio Zampolli. 2002. Towards
best practice for multiword expressions
in computational lexicons. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2002), pages 1934?1940,
Las Palmas.
Cannesson, Emmanuelle and Patrick
Saint-Dizier. 2002. Defining and
representing preposition senses: A
preliminary analysis. In Proceedings
of the ACL-02 Workshop on Word Sense
Disambiguation: Recent Successes
and Future Directions, pages 25?31,
Philadelphia, PA.
Che?liz, Mar??a del Carmen Horno. 2002. Lo
que la Preposicio?n Esconde: Estudio Sobre la
Argumentalidad Preposicional en el Predicado
Verbal. University of Zaragoza Press,
Zaragoza, Spain. (In Spanish).
Chodorow, Martin, Joel Tetreault, and
Na-Rae Han. 2007. Detection of
grammatical errors involving prepositions.
In Proceedings of the 4th ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on Prepositions, pages 25?30,
Prague.
Church, Kenneth and Ramesh Patil. 1982.
Coping with syntactic ambiguity or how
to put the block in the box on the table.
American Journal of Computational
Linguistics, 8(3?4):139?149.
Collins, Michael and James Brooks. 1995.
Prepositional phrase attachment through a
backed-off model. In Proceedings of the 3rd
Annual Workshop on Very Large Corpora,
pages 27?38, Cambridge, MA.
Cook, Paul and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006.
Classifying particle semantics in English
verb-particle constructions. In Proceedings
of the COLING/ACL 2006 Workshop on
Multiword Expressions: Identifying and
Exploiting Underlying Properties,
pages 45?53, Sydney.
Copestake, Ann, Dan Flickinger, Ivan A. Sag,
and Carl Pollard. 2005. Minimal recursion
semantics: An introduction. Journal of
Research on Language and Computation,
3(2?3):281?332.
Copestake, Ann, Fabre Lambeau, Aline
Villavicencio, Francis Bond, Timothy
Baldwin, Ivan Sag, and Dan Flickinger.
2002. Multiword expressions: Linguistic
precision and reusability. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2002),
pages 1941?1947, Las Palmas.
Cosme, Christelle and Gae?tanelle Gilquin.
2008. Free and bound prepositions
in a contrastive perspective: The
case of with and avec. In Sylviane
Granger and Fanny Meunier, editors,
Phraseology: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective. John Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 259?274.
Cucchiarelli, Alessandro and Paola Velardi.
2001. Unsupervised named entity
recognition using syntactic and semantic
contextual evidence. Computational
Linguistics, 27(1):123?131.
Dahlgren, Kathleen and Joyce McDowell.
1986. Using commonsense knowledge
to disambiguate prepositional
phrase modifiers. In Proceedings of
the 6th Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-86), pages 589?593,
Philadelphia, PA.
De Felice, Rachele and Stephen G. Pulman.
2007. Automatically acquiring models of
preposition use. In Proceedings of the 4th
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 45?50, Prague.
Deerwester, Scott, Susan T. Dumais,
George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Landauer,
and Richard Harshman. 1990. Indexing by
latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391?407.
140
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Dehe?, Nicole, Ray Jackendoff, Andrew
McIntyre, and Silke Urban, editors. 2002.
Verb-particle explorations. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin/New York.
Denis, Pascal, Jonas Kuhn, and Stephen
Wechsler. 2003. V-PP goal motion
complexes in English: An HPSG account.
In Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 121?132,
Toulouse.
Dixon, Robert M. W. 1982. The grammar of
English phrasal verbs. Australian Journal of
Linguistics, 2:149?247.
Do?mges, Florian, Tibor Kiss, Antje Mu?ller,
and Claudia Roch. 2007. Measuring the
productivity of determinerless PPs. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on Prepositions, pages 31?37,
Prague.
Dong, Zhendong and Qiang Dong. 2006.
HowNet And the Computation of Meaning.
World Scientific Publishing, River
Edge, NJ.
Dorr, Bonnie. 1993.Machine Translation: A
View from the Lexicon. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Dorr, Bonnie and Nizar Habash. 2002.
Interlingua approximation: A
generation-heavy approach. In Proceedings
of the AMTA-2002 Interlingua Reliability
Workshop, Tiburon, CA.
Dorr, Bonnie J. 1997. Large-scale dictionary
construction for foreign language tutoring
and interlingual machine translation.
Machine Translation, 12(4):271?322.
Dorr, Bonnie J. and Clare R. Voss. 1993.
Machine translation of spatial expressions:
Defining the relation between an
interlingua and a knowledge
representation system. In Proceedings of the
11th Annual Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-93), pages 374?379,
Washington, DC.
Durrell, Martin and David Bre?e. 1993.
German temporal prepositions from an
English perspective. In Zelinski-Wibbelt
(Zelinski-Wibbelt 1993), pages 295?326.
Evert, Stefan and Brigitte Krenn. 2005. Using
small random samples for the manual
evaluation of statistical association
measures. Computer Speech and Language,
19(4):450?466.
Fazly, Afsaneh, Paul Cook, and Suzanne
Stevenson. 2009. Unsupervised type and
token identification of idiomatic
expressions. Computational Linguistics,
35(1):61?103.
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor. 1998.WordNet:
An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Fillmore, Charles J. 1968. The case for case. In
Emmon Bach and Robert T. Harms,
editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory.
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York,
pages 1?88.
Ford, Marilyn, Joan Bresnan, and Ronald
Kaplan. 1982. A competence-based theory
of syntactic closure. In Joan Bresnan,
editor, The Mental Representation of
Grammatical Relations. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pages 727?796.
Fort, Kare?n and Bruno Guillaume. 2007.
PrepLex: A lexicon of French prepositions
for parsing. In Proceedings of the 4th
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 17?24, Prague.
Foth, Kilian A. and Wolfgang Menzel. 2006.
The benefit of stochastic PP attachment to
a rule-based parser. In Proceedings of the
Poster Session of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and
44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (COLING/ACL
2006), pages 223?230, Sydney.
Franz, Alexander. 1996. Learning PP
attachment from corpus statistics. In Stefan
Wermter, Ellen Riloff, and Gabriele
Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Statistical,
and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for
Natural Language Processing. Springer,
Berlin, Germany, pages 188?202.
Frazier, Lyn. 1979. On Comprehending
Sentences: Syntactic Parsing Strategies.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Connecticut.
Furlan, Aidan, Timothy Baldwin, and Alex
Klippel. 2007. Landmark classification for
route description generation. In Proceedings
of the 4th ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 9?16, Prague.
Gala, Nuria and Mathieu Lafourcade.
2005. Combining corpus-based pattern
distributions with lexical signatures
for PP attachment ambiguity resolution.
In Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on
Natural Language Processing (SNLP-05),
Chiang Rai.
Gamon, Michael, Jianfeng Gao, Chris
Brockett, Alexandre Klementiev,
William B. Dolan, Dmitriy Belenko, and
Lucy Vanderwende. 2008. Using
contextual speller techniques and
language modeling for ESL error
correction. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (IJCNLP-08),
pages 449?456, Hyderabad.
141
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
Gaussier, Eric and Nicola Cancedda. 2001.
Probabilistic models for PP-attachment
resolution and NP analysis. In Proceedings
of the ACL/EACL-2001 Workshop on
Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL-2001), pages 1?8, Toulouse.
Girju, Roxana. 2007. Improving the
interpretation of noun phrases with
cross-linguistic information. In Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 568?575, Prague.
Girju, Roxana. 2009. The syntax and
semantics of prepositions in the task of
automatic interpretation of nominal
phrases and compounds: A cross-linguistic
study. Computational Linguistics,
35(2):185?228.
Hahn, Udo, Martin Romacker, and Stefan
Schulz. 2002. Creating knowledge
repositories from biomedical reports: The
MEDSYNDIKATE system. In Proceedings of
the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2002,
pages 338?349, Lihue, HI.
Hajic?, Jan, Martin C?mejrek, Jason Eisner,
Gerald Penn, Owen Rambow, Drago
Radev, Yuan Ding, Terry Koo, and Kristen
Parton. 2002. Natural language generation
in the context of machine translation.
Technical report, CSLP, Johns Hopkins
University. Available at www.clsp.jhu.
edu/ws02/groups/mt/?MT final rpt.pdf.
Hansen, Steffen Leo. 2005. Concept-based
representation of prepositions. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 138?144, Colchester.
Hartrumpf, Sven. 1999. Hybrid
disambiguation of prepositional phrase
attachment and interpretation. In
Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Very Large Corpora
(EMNLP/VLC-99), pages 111?120,
College Park, MD.
Hartrumpf, Sven, Hermann Helbig, and
Rainer Osswald. 2006. Semantic
interpretation of prepositions for NLP
applications. In Proceedings of the Third
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 29?36, Trento.
Helbig, Hermann. 2006. Knowledge
Representation and the Semantics of
Natural Language. Springer, Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Hellan, Lars and Dorothee Beermann. 2005.
Classification of prepositional senses for
deep grammar applications. In Proceedings
of the Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 74?83,
Colchester.
Hindle, Donald and Mats Rooth. 1993.
Structural ambiguity and lexical relations.
Computational Linguistics, 19(1):103?120.
Hirst, Graeme. 1987. Semantic Interpretation
and the Resolution of Ambiguity. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Huddleston, Rodney and Geoffrey K.
Pullum. 2002. The Cambridge Grammar of
the English Language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Husain, Samar, Dipti Misra Sharma, and
Manohar Reddy. 2007. Simple preposition
correspondence: A problem in English to
Indian language machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 4th ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on Prepositions, pages 51?58,
Prague.
Hying, Christian. 2007. A corpus-based
analysis of geometric constraints on
projective prepositions. In Proceedings
of the 4th ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 1?8, Prague.
Isahara, Hitoshi, Francis Bond, Kiyotaka
Uchimoto, Masao Utiyama, and Kyoko
Kanzaki. 2008. Development of the
Japanese WordNet. In Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008),
Marrakech.
Izumi, Emi, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Toyomi
Saiga, Thepchai Supnithi, and Hitoshi
Isahara. 2003. Automatic error detection
in the Japanese learners? English spoken
data. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 145?148,
Sapporo.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1973. The base rules for
prepositional phrases. In Stephen R.
Anderson and Paul Kiparsky, editors, A
Festschrift for Morris Halle. Holt, Rinehart,
and Winston Inc., New York,
pages 345?356.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1983. Semantics and
Cognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1990. Semantic Structures.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jensen, Karen and Jean-Louis Binot. 1987.
Disambiguating prepositional phrase
attachments by using on-line dictionary
definitions. Computational Linguistics,
13(3?4):251?260.
Jensen, Per Anker and J. Fischer Nilsson.
2003. Ontology-based semantics for
prepositions. In Proceedings of the
142
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the Linguistic
Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 193?204, Toulouse.
Johnston, Michael and Frederica Busa. 1996.
Qualia structure and the compositional
interpretation of compounds. In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on
Breadth and Depth of Semantic Lexicons,
pages 77?88, Santa Cruz, CA.
J?rgensen, Fredrik and Jan Tore L?nning.
2009. A minimal recursion semantic
analysis of locatives. Computational
Linguistics, 35(2):229?270.
Kamp, Hans. 1981. Theory of truth and
semantic representation. In B. J. Janssen
and T. M. V. Stokhof, editors, Formal
Methods in the Study of Language.
Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam,
pages 277?322.
Kelleher, John and Josef van Genabith. 2003.
A computational model of the referential
semantics of projective prepositions. In
Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 181?192,
Toulouse.
Kelleher, John D. and Fintan J. Costello.
2009. Applying computational models of
spatial prepositions to visually situated
dialog. Computational Linguistics,
35(2):271?306.
Kelleher, John D. and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff.
2005. A context-dependent model of
proximity in physically situated
environments. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 128?137,
Colchester.
Kim, Su Nam and Timothy Baldwin. 2006.
Automatic identification of English verb
particle constructions using linguistic
features. In Proceedings of the Third
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 65?72, Trento.
Kim, Su Nam and Timothy Baldwin. 2007.
Detecting compositionality of English
verb-particle constructions using semantic
similarity. In Proceedings of the 7th Meeting
of the Pacific Association for Computational
Linguistics (PACLING 2007), pages 40?48,
Melbourne.
Kim, Su Nam and Timothy Baldwin (in
press). How to pick out token instances of
English verb-particle constructions.
Language Resources and Evaluation.
Kipper, Karin, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha
Palmer. 2000. Class-based construction of a
verb lexicon. In Proceedings of the 18th
Annual Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI-2000), pages 691?696, Austin, TX.
Kipper, Karin, Benjamin Snyder, and Martha
Palmer. 2004. Using prepositions to extend
a verb lexicon. In Proceedings of the
HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop on
Computational Lexical Semantics,
pages 23?29, Boston, MA.
Kipper Schuler, Karin. 2005. VerbNet: A
Broad-coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Klein, Dan and Christopher D. Manning.
2003. Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the
ACL, pages 423?430, Sapporo.
Knas?, Iwona. 2006. Polish equivalents of
spatial at. In Proceedings of the Third
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 9?16, Trento.
Kokkinakis, Dimitris. 2000. Supervised
PP-attachment for Swedish: Combining
unsupervised and supervised training
data. Nordic Journal of Linguistics,
3(2):191?213.
Kordoni, Valia. 2003a. The key role of
semantics in the development of
large-scale grammars of natural language.
In Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the
EACL (EACL 2003), pages 111?14,
Budapest.
Kordoni, Valia. 2003b. A robust deep analysis
of indirect prepositional arguments. In
Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 112?120,
Toulouse.
Kordoni, Valia. 2006. Prepositional
arguments in a multilingual context. In
Saint-Dizier (Saint-Dizier 2006a).
Korhonen, Anna. 2002. Subcategorization
Acquisition. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Cambridge.
Kozareva, Zornitsa. 2006. Bootstrapping
named entity recognition with
automatically generated gazetteer lists. In
Proceedings of the EACL 2006 Student
Research Workshop, pages 15?21, Trento.
Kracht, Marcus. 2003. Directionality
selection. In Proceedings of the
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the Linguistic
Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 89?100, Toulouse.
Krenn, Brigitte. 2008. Description of
evaluation resource?German PP-verb
143
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
data. In Proceedings of the LREC 2008
Workshop: Towards a Shared Task for
Multiword Expressions (MWE 2008),
pages 7?10, Marrakech.
Krenn, Brigitte and Stefan Evert. 2001. Can
we do better than frequency? A case study
on extracting PP-verb collocations. In
Proceedings of the ACL/EACL 2001 Workshop
on the Computational Extraction, Analysis
and Exploitation of Collocations, pages 39?46,
Toulouse.
Kumar Naskar, Sudip and Sivaji
Bandyopadhyay. 2006. Handling of
prepositions in English to Bengali machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Third
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 89?94, Trento.
Lassen, Tine. 2006. An ontology-based view
of prepositional senses. In Proceedings of the
Third ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 45?50, Trento.
Lauer, Mark. 1995. Designing Statistical
Language Learners: Experiments on Noun
Compounds. Ph.D. thesis, Macquarie
University.
Leroy, Gondy and Hsinchun Chen. 2002.
Filling preposition-based templates to
capture information from medical
abstracts. In Proceedings of the Pacific
Symposium on Biocomputing 2002,
pages 350?61, Lihue, HI.
Leroy, Gondy, Hsinchun Chen, and Jesse D.
Martinez. 2003. A shallow parser based on
closed-class words to capture relations in
biomedical text. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 36:145?158.
Lersundi, Mikel and Eneko Agirre. 2003.
Semantic interpretations of postpositions
and prepositions: A multilingual inventory
for Basque, English and Spanish. In
Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and Their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 56?65,
Toulouse.
Lestrade, S. A. M. 2006. Marked adpositions.
In Proceedings of the Third ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on Prepositions, pages 23?28,
Trento.
Levi, Judith N. 1978. The Syntax and Semantics
of Complex Nominals. Academic Press,
New York.
Levin, Beth and Malka Rappaport-Hovav (in
press). Lexical conceptual structure. In
Claudia Maienborn, Klaus von Heusinger,
and Paul Portner, editors, Semantics: An
International Handbook of Natural Language
Meaning. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin,
Germany.
Li, Wei, Xiuhong Zhang, Cheng Niu, Yuankai
Jiang, and Rohini K. Srihari. 2003. An
expert lexicon approach to identifying
English phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 513?520, Sapporo.
Lin, Dekang. 1998. Automatic retrieval
and clustering of similar words. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting
of the ACL and 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING/ACL-98), pages 768?774,
Montreal.
Lin, Dekang. 2003. Dependency-based
evaluation of MINIPAR. In Anne Abeille?,
editor, Building and Using Syntactically
Annotated Corpora. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
Netherlands, pages 317?330.
Lindstromberg, Seth. 1998. English
Prepositions Explained. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Lindstromberg, Seth. 2001. Preposition
entries in UK monolingual learner?s
dictionaries: Problems and possible
solutions. Applied Linguistics, 22(1):79?103.
Litkowski, Ken and Orin Hargraves. 2005.
The Preposition Project. In Proceedings of
the Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 171?179,
Colchester.
Litkowski, Kenneth C. 2002. Digraph
analysis of dictionary preposition
definitions. In Proceedings of the ACL-02
Workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation:
Recent Successes and Future Directions,
pages 9?16, Philadelphia, PA.
Litkowski, Kenneth C. and Orin Hargraves.
2006. Coverage and inheritance in the
preposition project. In Proceedings of the
Third ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 37?44, Trento.
Litkowski, Kenneth C. and Orin Hargraves.
2007. SemEval-2007 task 06: Word-sense
disambiguation of prepositions. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluations, pages 24?29,
Prague.
MacKinlay, Andrew and Timothy Baldwin.
2005. POS tagging with a more informative
tagset. In Proceedings of the Australasian
Language Technology Workshop 2005,
pages 40?48, Sydney.
Manning, Christopher D. 1993. Automatic
acquisition of a large subcategorization
dictionary from corpora. In Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 235?242, Columbus, OH.
144
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Manning, Christopher D., Prabhakar
Raghavan, and Hinrich Schu?tze. 2008.
Introduction to Information Retrieval.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini, and
Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a
large annotated corpus of English: the
Penn treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):313?330.
McCarthy, Diana, Bill Keller, and John
Carroll. 2003. Detecting a continuum of
compositionality in phrasal verbs. In
Proceedings of the ACL-2003 Workshop on
Multiword Expressions: Analysis,
Acquisition and Treatment, pages 73?80,
Sapporo.
Merlo, Paola. 2003. Generalised
PP-attachment disambiguation using
corpus-based linguistic diagnostics. In
Proceedings of the 10th Conference of the
EACL (EACL 2003), pages 251?258,
Budapest.
Merlo, Paola, Matthew W. Crocker, and
Cathy Berthouzoz. 1997. Attaching
multiple prepositional phrases:
Generalized backed-off estimation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-97), pages 149?155,
Providence, RI.
Merlo, Paola and Eva Esteve Ferrer. 2006.
The notion of argument in prepositional
phrase attachment. Computational
Linguistics, 32(3):341?377.
Miller, George A. and Philip N.
Johnson-Laird. 1976. Language and
Perception. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Mitchell, Brian. 2004. Prepositional Phrase
Attachment Using Machine Learning
Algorithms. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Sheffield.
Muischnek, Kadri, Kaili Mu?u?risep, and Tiina
Puolakainen. 2005. Adpositions in
Estonian computational syntax. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 2?10, Colchester.
Muslea, Ion. 1999. Extraction patterns for
information extraction tasks: A survey. In
Proceedings of the AAAI-99 Workshop on
Machine Learning for Information Extraction,
pages 1?6, Orlando, FL.
Nu?bel, Rita. 1996. Knowledge sources for the
disambiguation of prepositions in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the PRICAI-96
Workshop on Future Issues for Multi-lingual
Text Processing, Cairns. Available at
ftp://ftp.mpce.mq.edu.au/pub/comp/
mri/nlp/fimtp/nuebel.ps.gz.
Odijk, Jan. 2004. Reusable lexical
representations for idioms. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2004), pages 903?906, Lisbon.
O?Hara, Tom and Janyce Wiebe. 2003.
Preposition semantic classification via
Treebank and FrameNet. In Proceedings of
the 7th Conference on Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL-2003), pages 79?86,
Edmonton.
O?Hara, Tom and Janyce Wiebe. 2009.
Exploiting semantic role resources for
preposition disambiguation. Computational
Linguistics, 35(2):151?184.
Old, L. John. 2003. An analysis of semantic
overlap among English prepositions
from the Roget?s Thesaurus. In Proceedings
of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 13?19,
Toulouse.
Olteanu, Marian and Dan Moldovan. 2005.
PP-attachment disambiguation using large
context. In Proceedings of the 2005
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP 2005),
pages 273?280, Vancouver.
Olteanu, Marian G. 2004. Prepositional
phrase attachment ambiguity resolution
through a rich syntactic, lexical and
semantic set of features applied in support
vector machines learner. Master?s thesis,
University of Texas, Dallas.
Ono, Toshihide, Haretsugu Hishigaki, Akira
Tanigami, and Toshihisa Takagi. 2001.
Automated extraction of information on
protein-protein interactions from the
biological literature. Bioinformatics,
17(2):155?161.
Pantel, Patrick and Dekang Lin. 2000. An
unsupervised approach to prepositional
phrase attachment using contextually
similar words. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 101?108,
Hong Kong.
Patrick, Jon and Jeremy Fletcher. 2005.
Classifying verb particle constructions by
verb arguments. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 200?209,
Colchester.
145
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
Pearsall, Judy, editor. 1998. The New Oxford
Dictionary of English. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, UK.
Pecina, Pavel. 2008. A machine learning
approach to multiword expression
extraction. In Proceedings of the LREC 2008
Workshop: Towards a Shared Task for
Multiword Expressions (MWE 2008),
pages 54?57, Marrakech.
Pereira, Fernando C. N. 1985. A new
characterization of attachment preferences.
In David R. Dowty, Lauri Karttunen, and
Arnold M. Zwicky, editors, Natural
Language Parsing: Psychological,
Computational and Theoretical Perspectives.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, pages 307?319.
Popescu, Octavian, Sara Tonelli, and
Emanuele Pianta. 2007. IRST-BP:
Preposition disambiguation based on
chain clarifying relationships contexts. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluations, pages 191?194,
Prague.
Pratt, Ian and Nissim Francez. 1997. On the
semantics of temporal prepositions and
preposition phrases. Technical Report
LCL9701, Computer Science Department,
Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Pustejovsky, J., J. Castano, R. Saur??,
A. Rumshinsky, J. Zhang, and W. Luo.
2002. Medstract: Creating large-scale
information servers for biomedical
libraries. In Proceedings of the ACL 2002
Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
the Biomedical Domain, pages 85?92,
Philadelphia, PA.
Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The Generative
Lexicon. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Quirk, Chris, Arul Menezes, and Colin
Cherry. 2005. Dependency treelet
translation: Syntactically informed phrasal
SMT. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 271?279, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum,
Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Longman, London.
Ramsay, Allan. 2005. Prepositions as
abstract relations. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 30?38,
Colchester.
Ratnaparkhi, Adwait, Jeff Reynar, and Salim
Roukos. 1994. A maximum entropy model
for prepositional phrase attachment. In
Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language
Technology Workshop, pages 250?255,
Princeton, NJ.
Rauh, Gisa. 1993. On the grammar of lexical
and non-lexical prepositions in English. In
Zelinski-Wibbelt (Zelinski-Wibbelt 1993),
pages 99?150.
Rehbein, Ines and Josef van Genabith. 2006.
German particle verbs and pleonastic
prepositions. In Proceedings of the Third
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on Prepositions,
pages 57?64, Trento.
Reichelt, Thorsten and Etienne Verleih. 2005.
B3D?a system for the description and
calculation of spatial prepositions. In
Proceedings of the Second ACL-SIGSEM
Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of
Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications,
pages 101?109, Colchester.
Resnik, Philip and Mona Diab. 2000.
Measuring verb similarity. In Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (CogSci 2000),
pages 399?404, Philadelphia, PA.
Resnik, Philip and Marti A. Hearst. 1993.
Structural ambiguity and conceptual
relations. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Very Large Corpora: Academic and Industrial
Perspectives, pages 58?64, Columbus, OH.
Richards, Barry, Inge Bethke, Jaap van der
Does, and Jon Oberlander. 1989. Temporal
Representation and Inference. Academic
Press, London.
Riloff, Ellen. 1995. Little words can make a
big difference for text classification. In
Proceedings of 18th International ACM-SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR?95),
pages 130?136, Seattle, WA.
Ro?hrer, Christian. 1977. How to define
temporal conjunctions. Linguistische
Berichte Braunschweig, 51:1?11.
Sablayrolles, Pierre. 1995. The semantics of
motion. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL?95),
pages 281?283, Dublin.
Sag, Ivan, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond,
Ann Copestake, and Dan Flickinger.
2002. Multiword expressions: A pain
in the neck for NLP. In Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics (CICLing-2002), pages 1?15,
Mexico City.
Saint-Dizier, Patrick. 2005. An overview of
PrepNet: abstract notions, frames and
inferential patterns. In Proceedings of the
146
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 155?169,
Colchester.
Saint-Dizier, Patrick, editor. 2006a.
Computational Linguistics Dimensions of
Syntax and Semantics of Prepositions.
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Saint-Dizier, Patrick. 2006b. PrepNet: a
multilingual lexical description of
prepositions. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006),
pages 877?885, Genoa.
Saint-Dizier, Patrick. 2008. Syntactic and
semantic frames in PrepNet. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-08),
pages 763?768, Hyderabad.
Saint-Dizier, Patrick and Gloria Vazquez.
2001. A compositional framework for
prepositions. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Computational
Semantics (IWCS-4), pages 165?179,
Tilburg.
Schulte im Walde, Sabine. 2004.
Identification, quantitative description,
and preliminary distributional analysis of
German particle verbs. In Proceedings of the
COLING Workshop on Enhancing and Using
Electronic Dictionaries, pages 85?88, Geneva.
Schuman, Jonathan and Sabine Bergler. 2006.
Postnominal prepositional phrase
attachment in proteomics. In Proceedings of
the HLT-NAACL 06 BioNLP Workshop on
Linking Natural Language Processing and
Biology, pages 82?89, New York.
Schu?tze, Carson. 1995. PP attachment and
argumenthood. In Carson T. Schu?tze,
Jennifer B. Ganger, and Kevin Broihier,
editors, Papers on Language Processing and
Acquisition, volume 26. MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics, Cambridge, MA,
pages 95?152.
Schwartz, Lee, Takako Aikawa, and Chris
Quirk. 2003. Disambiguation of English PP
attachment using multilingual aligned
data. In Proceedings of the Ninth Machine
Translation Summit (MT Summit IX), New
Orleans, LA. Available at www.amtaweb.
org/summit/MTSummit/FinalPapers/
39-Aikawa-final.pdf.
Shaked, Nava A. 1993. How do we count?
The problem of tagging phrasal verbs in
parts. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 289?291,
Columbus, OH.
Sharoff, Serge. 2004. What is at stake: A case
study of Russian expressions starting with
a preposition. In Proceedings of the ACL
2004 Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
Integrating Processing, pages 17?23,
Barcelona.
Sopena, Josep M., Agusti Lloberas, and
Joan L. Moliner. 1998. A connectionist
approach to prepositional phrase
attachment for real world texts. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
ACL and 17th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics
(COLING/ACL-98), pages 1233?1237,
Montreal.
Spa?rck Jones, Karen and Branimir Boguraev.
1987. A note on a study of cases.
Computational Linguistics, 13(1?2):65?8.
Spivey-Knowlton, Michael and Julie C.
Sedivy. 1995. Resolving attachment
ambiguities with multiple constraints.
Cognition, 55:227?267.
Srihari, Rohini, Cheng Niu, and Wei Li. 2000.
A hybrid approach for named entity and
sub-type tagging. In Proceedings of the 6th
Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing (ANLP), pages 247?254, Seattle,
WA.
Stamou, Sofia, Kemal Oflazer, Karel Pala,
Dimitris Christoudoulakis, Dan Cristea,
Dan Tufi Svetla Koeva, George Totkov,
Dominique Dutoit, and Maria
Grigoriadou. 2002. BALKANET: A
multilingual semantic network for the
Balkan languages. In Proceedings of the
International Wordnet Conference,
pages 12?14, Mysore.
Stetina, Jiri and Makoto Nagao. 1997.
Corpus based PP attachment ambiguity
resolution with a semantic dictionary.
In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Workshop
on Very Large Corpora, pages 66?80,
Hong Kong.
Talmy, Len. 1985. Lexicalization patterns:
Semantic structure in lexical forms. In
Timothy Shopen, editor, Grammatical
Categories and the Lexicon. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK,
pages 57?149.
Talmy, Leonard. 1988. Force dynamics in
language and cognition. Cognitive Science,
12:49?100.
Tetreault, Joel R. and Martin Chodorow.
2008a. Native judgments of non-native
usage: Experiments in preposition error
detection. In Coling 2008: Proceedings of the
Workshop on Human Judgements in
Computational Linguistics, pages 24?32,
Manchester.
147
Computational Linguistics Volume 35, Number 2
Tetreault, Joel R. and Martin Chodorow.
2008b. The ups and downs of preposition
error detection in ESL writing. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING 2008), pages 865?872,
Manchester.
Tokunaga, Takenobu, Tomofumi Koyama,
and Suguru Saito. 2005. Meaning of
Japanese spatial nouns. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 93?100,
Colchester.
Toral, Antonio. 2005. DRAMNERI: A free
knowledge based tool to named entity
recognition. In Proceedings of the First Free
Software Technologies Conference,
pages 27?32, Corunna.
Toutanova, Kristina and Christoper D.
Manning. 2000. Enriching the knowledge
sources used in a maximum entropy
part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of the
Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Very Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC-2000),
pages 63?70, Hong Kong.
Toutanova, Kristina, Christopher D.
Manning, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2004.
Learning random walk models for
inducing word dependency distributions.
In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 815?822, Banff.
Toutanova, Kristina and Hisami Suzuki.
2007. Generating case markers in
machine translation. In Proceedings of
Human Language Technologies 2007: The
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 49?56, Rochester, NY.
Trawin?ski, Beata. 2003. Combinatorial
aspects of PPs headed by raising
prepositions. In Proceedings of the
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the Linguistic
Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 157?168, Toulouse.
Trawin?ski, Beata. 2005. Preposition?pronoun
contraction in Polish. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 20?29,
Colchester.
Trawin?ski, Beata. 2006. A quantitative
approach to preposition-pronoun
contraction in Polish. In Proceedings of the
Third ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 17?22, Trento.
Trawinski, Beata, Manfred Sailer, and
Jan-Philipp Soehn. 2006. Combinatorial
aspects of collocational prepositional
phrases. In Saint-Dizier (Saint-Dizier
2006a).
Trujillo, Arturo. 1995. Lexicalist Machine
Translation of Spatial Prepositions. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Cambridge.
Tseng, Jesse. 2004. Prepositions and
complement selection. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 11?19,
Colchester.
Tseng, Jesse L. 2000. The Representation and
Selection of Prepositions. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.
Tyler, Andrea and Vyvyan Evans. 2003. The
Semantics of English Prepositions: Spatial
Scenes, Embodied Meaning, and Cognition.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
van der Beek, Leonoor. 2005. The extraction
of determinerless PPs. In Proceedings of the
Second ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on the
Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 190?199,
Colchester.
van Herwijnen, Olga, Jacques Terken, Antal
van den Bosch, and Erwin Marsi. 2003.
Learning PP attachment for filtering
prosodic phrasing. In Proceedings of the 10th
Conference of the EACL (EACL 2003),
pages 139?146, Budapest.
Villada Moiro?n, Begon?a. 2005. Data-driven
identification of fixed expressions and their
modifiability. Ph.D. thesis, Alfa-Informatica,
University of Groningen.
Villavicencio, Aline. 2005. The availability of
verb-particle constructions in lexical
resources: How much is enough? Computer
Speech and Language, 19(4):415?432.
Villavicencio, Aline. 2006. Verb-particle
constructions in the World Wide Web. In
Saint-Dizier (2006a).
Volk, Martin. 2001. Exploiting the WWW as a
corpus to resolve PP attachment
ambiguities. In Proceedings of Corpus
Linguistics 2001, pages 601?606, Lancaster.
Volk, Martin. 2002. Combining unsupervised
and supervised methods for PP
attachment disambiguation. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002),
pages 1?7, Taipei.
148
Baldwin, Kordoni, and Villavicencio A Survey of Prepositions in Applications
Volk, Martin. 2003. German prepositions and
their kin. A survey with respect to the
resolution of PP attachment ambiguities.
In Proceedings of the ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions
and their Use in Computational Linguistics
Formalisms and Applications, pages 77?85,
Toulouse.
Volk, Martin. 2006. How bad is the problem
of PP-attachment? A comparison of English,
German, and Swedish. In Proceedings of the
Third ACL-SIGSEMWorkshop on
Prepositions, pages 81?88, Trento.
Vossen, Piek, editor. 1998. EuroWordNet: A
Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic
Networks. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Wasow, Thomas. 2002. Postverbal Behavior.
CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.
Whittemore, Greg and Kathleen Ferrara.
1990. Empirical study of predictive powers
of simple attachment schemes for
post-modifier prepositional phrases. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the
ACL, pages 23?30, Pittsburgh, PA.
Wilks, Yorick, Xiuming Huang, and Dan
Fass. 1985. Syntax, preference and right
attachment. In Proceedings of the 9th
International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI-85), pages 779?784, Los
Angeles, CA.
Wood, Frederick T. 1979. English Prepositional
Idioms. Macmillan, London.
Xu, Yilun Dianna and Norman I. Badler.
2000. Algorithms for generating motion
trajectories described by prepositions. In
Proceedings of Computer Animation 2000
(CA?00), pages 30?35, Washington, DC.
Ye, Patrick and Timothy Baldwin. 2006.
Semantic role labeling of prepositional
phrases. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing,
5(3):228?244.
Ye, Patrick and Timothy Baldwin. 2007.
MELB-YB: Preposition sense
disambiguation using rich semantic
features. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations, pages 241?244, Prague.
Yeh, Alexander S. and Marc B. Vilain.
1998. Some properties of preposition
and subordinate conjunction
attachments. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and 17th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: COLING/ACL-98,
pages 1436?1442, Montreal.
Yuret, Deniz. 2007. KU: Word sense
disambiguation by substitution. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluations, pages 207?214,
Prague.
Zavrel, Jakub, Walter Daelemans, and
Jorn Veenstra. 1997. Resolving PP
attachment ambiguities with
memory-based learning. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-97),
pages 136?144, Madrid.
Zelinski-Wibbelt, Cornelia, editor. 1993.
The Semantics of Prepositions: From
Mental Processing to Natural Language
Processing. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin,
Germany.
Zhao, Shaojun and Dekang Lin. 2004. A
nearest-neighbor method for resolving
PP-attachment ambiguity. In Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-04),
pages 545?554, Hainan Island.
149

