Book Review
Introduction to Linguistic Annotation and Text Analytics
Graham Wilcock
(University of Helsinki)
Princeton, NJ: Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies, edited by Graeme Hirst, volume 2, No. 1), 2009, x+149 pp;
paperbound, ISBN 978-1-59829-738-6, $40.00; ebook, ISBN 978-1-59829-739-3,
$30.00 or by subscription
Reviewed by
Udo Hahn
Friedrich-Schiller-Universita?t Jena
Looking for a book that lucidly sorts out XML, XSLT and XMI, GATE and UIMA,
WordFreak, OpenNLP, and the Stanford NLP Toolkit? Looking for meticulous guid-
ance via batteries of stylesheets and shell scripts, but also keen on exploiting special-
purpose rule languages such as JAPE, or pre-configured text analytics engines such as
ANNIE? Looking for a coherent set of exercises (covering different technical angles and
varying in task complexity) and a series of illustrative screenshots that break down the
understanding of annotation workflows into easy-to-digest atomic thematic chunks?
Preferring the hands-on ?how-to? over dry and winding theory debates and formally
basedmethodological discussions? Interested to get in touch (again) with Shakespeare?s
Sonnet 130 (the text example running throughout the entire book)? Well, Graham
Wilcock?s Introduction to Linguistic Annotation and Text Analyticsmight be a perfect match
to enjoy all this.
This volume, the third published lecture in Morgan & Claypool?s Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies series, consists of six chapters. The first one lays the
XML-focused meta language foundations and provides additional insights into XML
parsing and validation tools, as well as format-switching XML transformation routines
using XSL Transformations (XSLT). Chapter 4 continues this technical thread as it elab-
orates on frameworks for interchanging annotations between different formats using
XSLT, as well as the UML-based XMLMetadata Interchange (XMI) format, an emerging
standard to support the interchange of annotations produced by different tools. In-
troducing the WordFreak annotation tool, the second chapter sheds light on relevant
linguistic annotation layers ranging from formal sentence splitting and tokenization
via part-of-speech tagging, syntactic constituency parsing, and semantic predicate?
argument analysis up to discourse phenomena such as co-reference resolution. Al-
though this chapter focuses primarily on manual annotation (there is also a subsection
at the end where WordFreak is linked with OpenNLP), the following one features
automatic statistical annotation procedures. Easy-to-plug-in OpenNLP is contrasted here
with stand-alone Stanford NLP tools at all major levels of the linguistic food chain,
namely, sentence and token splitting, chunking and parsing, named entity recognition,
and co-reference resolution. Increasing the level of abstraction at the systems level, the
author then advances to comparing GATE and UIMA, two alternative architectures for
text analytics. His emphasis is on the proper configuration and task-specific customiza-
tion (e.g., by introducing the JAPE rule language in GATE and the regex annotator in
UIMA, both serving to improve named entity recognition). Again, practical exercises
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
are discussed in detail running through all levels of linguistic processing (integrating
gazetteers/dictionaries, POS tagging, NP chunking and full parsing, named entity
recognition, co-reference resolution, etc.). The final chapter concludes with a survey
of commercially available tools doing text analytics (e.g., alias-i?s LingPipe or IBM?s
LanguageWare). Furthermore, an advanced treatment of named entity recognition (for
job titles) and co-reference resolution is provided using the open-source frameworks
of rule-based GATE and UIMA solutions (both incorporating customized dictionaries)
and statistically based OpenNLP.
The book assumes little prior knowledge, although regular expression, JAVA, and
XML basics will certainly be helpful. It is targeted at undergraduate level (not necessar-
ily computer science) students who wish to gather experience in reusing, modifying,
and customizing existing linguistic annotation tools and text analytics architectures.
Throughout the book, the author directs the reader to open-source, freely available,
platform-independent, and easily downloadable software resources and repositories.
So students find themselves embedded in a stimulating playground where tooling is
the message.
The book is comprehensively written, well-structured, and very easy to follow,
in particular when students have the exercises run simultaneously on their personal
machines. The author has a clearly designed didactical master plan in mind which is
realized by a large number of exercises with increasing, but never particularly high,
complexity (see, e.g., the fourth chapter that deals with a nice set of transformation
problems involvingWordFreak?OpenNLP [XML?plain text], GATE?WordFreak [XML?
XML], and WordFreak?UIMA [XML?XMI] tool [language] pairs). These exercises are
reasonably chosen and solutions are technically well prepared and exhaustively ex-
plained with an admirable degree of clarity.
However, the more advanced and experienced reader might find the continuous
pampering by way of overly fine-grained thematic exposition and visualization a bit
excessive, perhaps even wearisome. There is, for example, also no division into easy,
medium, and hard problems to offer challenging tasks at different levels of students?
understanding. If the book is used in the context of more advanced teaching, it should
be complemented by much more technical standard reference textbooks providing
complementary theoretical background information on empirical NLP, (supervised)
machine learning methods for NLP, computational corpus linguistics, and so forth. Yet,
for getting used to mapping routines, workflows, and software underlying linguistic
meta data annotation, this tutorial fills certainly a gap for students who come across
these topics for the first time and enjoy the all-embracing tutorial approach of the author.
Any real complaints? Just a minor remark: all (URL) references are almost unread-
able (Web links were not removed from the printed version of the book).
There is also a dedicated Web site which contains copies of the material from this
book.1
This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.
Udo Hahn is Professor of Computational Linguistics and Language Technology at Friedrich-
Schiller-Universita?t Jena (Germany) and Head of the Jena University Language & Information
Engineering (JULIE) Lab. He works on text analytics (semantic search technologies, information
extraction, text mining, and text summarization), with focus on biomedical language process-
ing. Hahn?s address is Computerlinguistik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universita?t Jena, D-07743 Jena,
Germany; e-mail: udo.hahn@uni-jena.de; URL: http://www.julielab.de/.
1 http://sites.morganclaypool.com/wilcock.
766
