Book Review
Introduction to Chinese Natural Language Processing
Kam-Fai Wong, Wenjie Li, Ruifeng Xu, and Zheng-sheng Zhang
(Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
City University of Hong Kong, and San Diego State University)
Princeton, NJ: Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies, edited by Graeme Hirst, volume 4), 2010, x+148 pp; paperbound,
ISBN 978-1-59829-932-8, $40.00; e-book, ISBN 978-1-59829-933-5, $30.00
or by subscription
Reviewed by
Min Zhang
Institute for Infocomm Research
This introductory book is a systematic and up-to-date overview of fundamental and
focused knowledge of Chinese NLP for both practitioners and a general audience. The
Chinese language has the largest number of native speakers in the world, with over one
billion people speaking some style of Chinese. The globalization and the development
of the Internet have significantly increased the participation of Chinese-speaking users
in global business and social life, accounting for the highest growth rate in on-line
population over the past decade.
Despite its increasing importance, the uniqueness of Chinese renders the computer
processing of the language distinctive and challenging. With a clear awareness of many
differences between Chinese and other languages in morphology, syntax, and seman-
tics, the authors focus the subject matter on morphological analysis, which means they
choose to pay close attention to the essential processing techniques that lay down the
foundation of any advanced Chinese NLP system. For many readers who are puzzled
by ?why on earth we have to bother with Chinese NLP given the availability of English-
language processing technologies,? this book is suitable puzzle-solving material; for
undergraduate and postgraduate students interested in the field, knowledge regarding
the fundamentals of computer processing of Chinese language can be acquired; for a
veteran already who knows everything in Chinese NLP, this is a useful and lightweight
reference book. Overall, this book has a large potential audience of readers who are
interested in Chinese NLP at all levels.
The book consists of eight chapters of main material, an appendix of linguistic
resources, and a bibliography. Chapter 1 gives an introduction by raising the unique
characteristics of Chinese. A couple of interesting examples are used to explain the
problem of ambiguity caused by the lack of clear delimiters between words in Chi-
nese text. Then it proceeds to illustrate how other types of difficulties are produced
at morphological, syntactic, and semantic levels. From these discussions, Chapter 1
highlights and concludes that ?The main difference in NLP between Chinese and other
languages takes place in the first stage. This lays down the objective of the book, namely,
to introduce the basic techniques in Chinese morphological analysis.?
Chapter 2 describes the basic forms of morphological construction in Chinese
written script, providing the necessary preparation for morphological analysis in the
later chapters. It introduces the concepts of characters, morphemes, and words, as well
as the typical morphological processes of word formation. In particular, the authors
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
provide sufficient details on the nature of the compounding that plays a predominant
role in Chinese word formation and appears much more prevalent than that in English.
A number of examples make the content easy to follow, especially for international
learners who are not familiar with Chinese.
Given these primary linguistic characteristics, Chapter 3 particularizes the chal-
lenges that arise from a wide spectrum of morphological problems of Chinese. Com-
pared to an alphabetic system like English, the difficulties of Chinese morphological
processing not only result from its representation and writing conventions, such as a
large character set, multiple co-existing variants of character sets and encoding stan-
dards, dialectal variations, special genres of punctuation, and so on, but also from
its underlying linguistic heritage and distinctions. For example, the lack of formal
morphological markers may render part-of-speech tagging troublesome due to few
part-of-speech clues and multiple parts of speech for the same word; the indetermi-
nacy may be worsened by homophony and homography. The authors emphasize the
influences of different kinds of ambiguities and out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words and
suggest that external knowledge and contextual information are important to ambiguity
resolution.
Chapter 4 reviews Chinese word segmentation, a major challenge unique to Chi-
nese and a few other Asian languages. A tree-based taxonomy is used to classify
segmentation algorithms into character- and word-based approaches. Besides the rudi-
mentary methods, emphasis is given to those methods using statistics and machine
learning that take the advantage of large-scale annotated corpora to solve the segmen-
tation ambiguity issue. Three main Chinese word segmentation standards are intro-
duced, together with the performance measures and benchmark data widely used for
evaluation.
As one of the major challenges in Chinese word segmentation, unknown word
identification (UWI) is discussed separately in Chapter 5, probably because of its larger
impact on accuracy and greater difficulty. Unknown words account for 60% of word
segmentation errors. Proper nouns representing person, place, and organization names
that are missing from the dictionary are common sources of unknown words. New
names may appear on a daily basis, tending to intensify the OOV problem. This chapter
describes various means for UWI from both generic and specific point of views. The
general statistical methods based on co-occurrence statistics are depicted, followed by
the techniques for identifying specific types of proper nouns based on their particular
formation patterns. Two general methods worthy of review but missing are class-
based language models (Fu and Luke 2004) and discriminative Markov models (Zhou
2005), both of which make significant improvements by leveraging various types of
features.
Chapter 6 turns the reader?s attention from word structure to meaning; it familiar-
izes themwith the gist of the basic semantic concepts, relations, and resources, and helps
build up knowledge for resolving deeper NLP problems such as word sense disam-
biguation, parsing, and language understanding. Three major contemporary Chinese
thesauri, namely CILIN, HowNet, and CCD, are surveyed in comparison with the well-
known English WordNet. For example, HowNet has three unique features compared
to WordNet: (1) its concept definitions are based on sememes, which are specified in a
structured mark-up language; (2) the semantic role relations can be connected across
part-of-speech categories such as between nouns and verbs; and (3) the concepts are
represented in both Chinese and English. Though structurally compatible, CCD differs
from WordNet with some important extensions, such as more types of nouns, finer
relations, and examples of collocations selected from real corpora with quantitative
778
Book Review
descriptions. The three major Chinese linguistic resources at the lexical semantic level
are valuable to Chinese NLP applications.
Chapters 7 and 8 concentrate on Chinese word collocation, which is a common lexi-
cal convention using the customary combination of words in expressions. Starting with
the interesting example of historical burden as contrasted with historical luggage (burden
and luggage can be expressed with the same Chinese word), Chapter 7 places emphasis
on the concepts, distinguishing features, categorization, and data resources. Although
widely used and easily comprehensible, collocation is defined in various ways and is
therefore subject to controversy in the literature. After a review of English collocation,
the authors accentuate the major differences between Chinese and English collocations,
and then define Chinese collocation as a lexically restricted word combination with
emphasis on semantic and syntactic considerations.
Chapter 8 elaborates on techniques for extracting Chinese collocations. The survey
categorizes the existing methods into statistical, syntactic, semantic, and categorical
approaches. Given a headword and a context window, a statistical approach identifies
the word combinations from the context inclusive of the head word with significant
lexical statistics as the collocations; a syntactic approach resorts to syntactic knowledge
acquired from a parser to refine the candidates, assuming that collocation words are
syntactically dependent; a semantic approach exploits semantic relations such as syn-
onyms obtained from WordNet to overcome the inaccuracies caused by insufficient
statistics; a categorical approach adopts a set of carefully tailored rules to identify
collocations of different types, which may potentially achieve better results, but the
method turns out to be less generalizable. This language-specific approach corresponds
to the characteristics of Chinese collocations. The chapter would have beenmore helpful
if it had included the work on collocativity measures based on limited modifiability
with only shallow parsing (Wermter and Hahn 2004), statistical methods using accurate
collocational information based on full parsing (Seretan andWehrli 2006), and the more
recent monolingual word alignment method (Liu et al 2009).
The appendix provides a comprehensive and categorized list of linguistic resources.
The references are generally complete and helpful to readers interested in further
studies.
In summary, the book is clear and self-contained, discussing fundamental and
critical issues in Chinese NLP. As the foundation of any NLP technology, morphological
analysis (where Chinese morphology differs most apparently from other languages) is
the first crucial procedure prior to syntactic and semantic processing. Although it would
be more integrated to include syntactic and semantic analysis, I do believe the authors
have made this choice wisely. Given the limited number of pages, it makes sense to
focus on the essence with sufficient details to draw quick attention from many NLP
readers who are sensitive to the most salient and distinctive subject matters. Instead of
elaborating the Chinese part alone, the authors adopt a helpful writing style so that,
whenever applicable, comparative discussions are made on the corresponding issues
in other languages, especially English. This bilingual perspective sheds more light on
what constitutes the noteworthy features in Chinese and the reason why customary
techniques have to be or not be employed in Chinese NLP. The reader might have hoped
for more polish and a better editorial quality in the book. For instance, a repeatedly
referred-to concept OAS is not pre-defined (Section 4.4); not all the extracted co-words
shown in Tables 8.1?8.6 are true collocations, which should have been boldface as stated
in the text. In addition, one more chapter is needed to close the book by summarizing
the book with some conclusions and discussions on further readings beyond the intro-
duction at Chinese morphological level.
779
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.
References
Fu, Guohong and Kang-Kwong Luke. 2004.
Chinese unknown word identification
using class-based LM. In Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing,
pages 704?713, Hainan Island.
Liu, Zhanyi, Haifeng Wang, Hua Wu, and
Sheng Li. 2009. Collocation extraction
using monolingual word alignment
method. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing,
pages 487?495, Singapore.
Seretan, Violeta and Eric Wehrli. 2006.
Accurate collocation extraction
using a multilingual parser. In
Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Computational Linguistics
and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics,
pages 953?960, Sydney.
Wermter, Joachim and Udo Hahn. 2004.
Collocation extraction based on
modifiability statistics. In Proceedings
of the 20th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 980?986,
Geneva.
Zhou, GuoDong. 2005. A chunking strategy
towards unknown word detection
in Chinese word segmentation. In
Proceedings of the Second International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pages 530?541, Jeju Island.
Min Zhang is a research scientist at Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore. His research
focuses onmachine translation, information extraction, kernel-based statistical structure learning,
and natural language processing. Min Zhang?s address is 1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01 Connexis
(South Tower), Singapore 138632; e-mail: mzhang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg.
780
