Book Review
Spoken Dialogue Systems
Kristiina Jokinen and Michael McTear
(University of Helsinki, University of Ulster)
Princeton, NJ: Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Language
Technologies, edited by Graeme Hirst, volume 5), 2009, xiv+151pp;
paperback, ISBN 978-1-59829-599-3, $40.00; ebook, ISBN 978-1-59829-600-6,
doi 10.2200/S00204ED1V01Y200910HLT005, $30.00 or by subscription
Reviewed by
Mary Ellen Foster
Heriot-Watt University
This book gives a short but comprehensive overview of the field of spoken dialogue
systems, outlining the issues involved in building and evaluating this type of system
and making liberal use of techniques and examples from a wide range of implemented
systems. It provides an excellent review of the research, with particularly relevant dis-
cussions of error handling and system evaluation, and is suitable both as an intro-
duction to this research area and as a survey of current state-of-the-art techniques.
The book is structured into seven chapters. Chapter 1 provides an introduction to
the research area and briefly introduces the topics covered in the book. The end of the
chapter consists of a list of links to tools and components that can be used for dialogue
system development, which?although currently useful?seems likely to go out of date
quickly.
Chapter 2 addresses the task of dialogue management, beginning by describing
simple graph- and frame-based methods for dialogue control, and continuing with a
discussion of VoiceXML. The chapter ends with an extended discussion of recent work
in statistical approaches to dialogue control and modeling. It is unfortunate that the
discussion of other methods such as the information state approach and plan-based
models is postponed to Chapter 4, but otherwise this chapter provides a good summary
of both classic and recent approaches.
Chapter 3 discusses error handling, which is divided into three processes: error de-
tection, error prediction (i.e., the online prediction of errors based on dialogue features),
and error recovery. After surveying a range of previous approaches to these three sub-
tasks, the authors go on to discuss several more recent, data-driven approaches. Error
handling is both a vital component of any spoken dialogue system designed for real-
world use and an active area of current research, so this compact summary of techniques
and issues is welcome.
Chapter 4 contains case studies illustrating a range of dialogue control strategies
and models. It begins with a description of the information state approach, and then
moves on to discuss plan-based approaches as exemplified in the TRAINS and TRIPS
projects. This is followed by a discussion of two systems that employ software agents for
dialogue management: the Queen?s Communicator and the AthosMail system. Finally,
two systems which make use of statistical models are presented: the Microsoft Bayesian
receptionist, which models conversation as decision making under uncertainty, and
the DIHANA system, which employs corpus-based dialogue management. The case
studies in this chapter provide detailed examples of a range of techniques, along with
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
some discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, adding to the
relevance of the book for developers of future dialogue systems.
Chapter 5 discusses four aspects of spoken dialogue systems that go beyond the
straightforward information exchange scenarios considered in the preceding chapters.
The first section covers aspects of collaborative planning along with Jokinen?s (2009)
Constructive Dialogue Modeling approach. The section on adaptation and user model-
ing provides a brief but useful survey of approaches to this task. The discussion of mul-
timodality is longer and more concrete, but concentrates almost entirely on multimodal
input processing; it would have been helpful to include a similar summary of the issues
involved in multimodal output generation. The final section on ?natural interaction?
briefly discusses two topics: non-verbal communication for embodied conversational
agents and multimodal corpus annotation.
Chapter 6?the longest in the book?gives a thorough treatment of the issues in-
volved in evaluating spoken dialogue systems, beginning with an historical overview.
It continues with a discussion of terminology and techniques and describes a wide
range of subjective and objective evaluation measures that have been applied to the
evaluation task. Next, two frameworks are presented that are designed to provide a
general methodology for evaluation: PARADISE (Walker et al 1997) and Quality of
Experience (Mo?ller 2005). This is followed by a discussion of concepts from HCI-style
usability evaluations and how they can be applied to spoken dialogue systems, and
then a section dealing with semiautomatic evaluation and the role of standardization.
The final section discusses challenges that arise when evaluating advanced dialogue
systems incorporating multimodality and adaptivity, and when evaluating systems
designed for real-world applications.
Finally, Chapter 7 briefly discusses conversational dialogue systems (i.e., com-
panion/chatbot systems), whose emphasis is on social communication rather than the
information exchange tasks considered for most of the book. It also addresses the
relationship between commercial and academic approaches to spoken dialogue.
It is interesting to note that both of the authors have also written books of their own
that address aspects of spoken dialogue systems: McTear (2004) gives a comprehensive
overview of the research area, including a series of hands-on tutorials on building
systems using tools such as the CSLU toolkit and VoiceXML, and Jokinen (2009) pro-
vides a detailed description of a particular style of dialogue management, Constructive
Dialogue Modeling.
This book fills a different niche: It has neither the exercises and tutorials of the
McTear book, nor the in-depth description of a single formalism provided by Jokinen.
Instead, it concentrates on outlining the issues involved in building a spoken dialogue
system and on describing a wide range of existing techniques and systems. Although
the book is short, it provides an excellent starting point for researchers new to the
field, and every section has a good selection of references which would easily allow
the interested reader to follow up any particular topic in more depth. The chapters on
error handling and evaluation provide particularly useful summaries of the issues and
techniques in these active research areas.
Although the preface says that the book is aimed at both engineering and humani-
ties students, I suspect that readers without any mathematical background would have
difficulty with some of the more formal sections. However, the necessary background
knowledge is not great, and in general the book is clearly written and understandable;
it is suitable as both an introduction to this research area and a survey of current state-
of-the-art techniques.
782
Book Review
References
Jokinen, K. 2009. Constructive Dialogue
Modelling: Speech Interaction and Rational
Agents. Wiley Series in Agent Technology.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Hoboken, NJ.
McTear, M. F. 2004. Spoken Dialogue
Technology: Toward the Conversational User
Interface. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Mo?ller, S. 2005. Quality of Telephone-Based
Spoken Dialogue Systems. Springer,
New York.
Walker, M. A., D. J. Litman, C. A. Kamm, and
A. Abella. 1997. PARADISE: a framework
for evaluating spoken dialogue agents. In
Proceedings of EACL 1997, pages 271?280,
Madrid.
This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.
Mary Ellen Foster is a research fellow in the Interaction Lab of the School of Mathematical and
Computer Sciences at Heriot-Watt University. Her research interests include embodied commu-
nication, natural language generation, and multimodal dialogue systems. Her address is School
of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, United
Kingdom; e-mail: M.E.Foster@hw.ac.uk.
783

