Last Words
Failure Is an Orphan (Let?s Adopt)
Stan Szpakowicz?
SITE, University of Ottawa &
ICS, Polish Academy of Sciences
Sweet Smell of Success
We like to think that the progress of science follows an exponential curve, boldly shoot-
ing upwards, ever more speedily. In reality, there is a firmament of darkness (that?s our
daily slog) sparsely spottedwith dim lights (those are discoveries). Fittingly, discoverers
are also few, just as in every field of human endeavor. For every great leader, artist, or
scientist there is a multitude of followers, and this is as it should be. There can only be
so many winners?and only so much winning research. Anecdotal evidence has it that
one project in a hundred gives back: Its results justify the investment.1
And yet, our cocky attitude: We tend to count ourselves among that one hundredth.
We need success. We simply must excel. That is, after all, how scientists are judged.
Those of us who have sat on hiring or promotion committees know how evaluation
works; surely, we all get to be at the receiving end. One needs many publications for
a thriving career, and we publish if we show how we go one better on someone else?s
result. So, we cannot afford a setback, a path wrongly taken, a poor result. There is no
room for that in our line of work.
This already sounds dismal, but it gets worse. People have come to equate every
negative result with failure. Suppose you have set up an experiment carefully and
in good faith, but still it comes up short. That?s not a positive outcome. Maybe your
intuition has let you down. Maybe this cannot work. Wait, maybe you can prove that it
cannot work? No, forget it. You have already failed. Don?t waste any more time. Cut
your losses and move on.
Well, reconsider! You can miss a truly fundamental lesson. In 1887, Michelson and
Morley set out to prove the existence of ether, thought to be a conduit for light. They
could not prove it: they failed. But?their null result prompted a line of research which
culminated in the theory of special relativity.
House of Peers
Peer review breedsmediocrity. Galileos, Brunos, Modiglianis, and van Goghs go against
the grain; the scorn of their peers and the indifference of the public crush them.
An obliging self-promoter will fare much better. Peer review also censures failure. A
? School of Information Technology and Engineering, University of Ottawa, 800 King Edward Avenue,
Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5, Canada. Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Ordona 21,
01-237 Warszawa, Poland. E-mail: szpak@site.uottawa.ca.
1 As Einstein famously said: ?I think and think for months and years. Ninety-nine times, the conclusion is
false. The hundredth time I am right.?
? 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 1
forthright admission of the inferiority of one?s results?despite the integrity or novelty
of the work?is a kiss of death: no publication. There must be improvement, however
minuscule.2 By the ?law of averages,? caution tends to trump adventurousness, and
certainly conformance to reviewers? expectations is an asset. Indeed, we write so they
are likely to accept.
Now, reviewers are us. If we the authors believe that negative results are always and
inescapably a bad thing, so do we the reviewers. If we the authors relentlessly strive for
success, we the reviewers check papers for signs of success. Serves us all right: If we
have lost, we can?t win.
Can?t we?
Philosopher?s Stone
Good science engenders good results. An experiment carefully thought out, a systematic
procedure, an honest evaluation?these are the ingredients. It is not mandatory for the
results to be positive, though it certainly lifts one up if they are.
In areas where empirical methods dominate?computational linguistics is such a
discipline?it is a given that people try things which fail at the experimental stage.
This may be due to lack of rigor, but often there are deeper, unexpected, and intriguing
reasons. We can learn a lot if we analyze scientifically why an intuitive and plausible
experiment did not work. We know how important counter-examples are in rejecting
conjectures. And if a negative result points to an interesting and important open prob-
lem, it ought to be explored. Then again, to know what leads to dead ends in research
surely can warn others off paths which take us nowhere.
An interesting negative result may arise from a compelling idea proven wrong in a
thorough and well-conducted experiment. This is valuable to the community if you can
explain confidently why you have tried out this idea, and if people can replicate your
experiment; the setback is an educational experience insofar as you convince others that
the expected outcome just could not materialize. Simply put, a negative result can be a
useful lesson.3
Acknowledgments
This note owes a great deal to Vivi Nastase.
Not only did she put me on the path toward
it, but she kept me on my toes. Her many
incisive comments helped this little paper
take its present shape.
2 A score will double if just a hundred researchers increase it, one by one, by a mere 0.7%.
3 Not everyone is loath to accept negative results. Journal of Negative Results in BioMedicine (www.jnrbm.com)
welcomes articles which contradict current tenets, to better support scientists and physicians in making
clinical decisions. Journal of Negative Results ? Ecology and Evolutionary Biology (www.jnr-eeb.org) offers
an outlet to studies which seem uneventful (as a reaction to publications in the field which only accept
studies with noteworthy results) to avoid missing important phenomena in nature. Journal of Articles in
Support of the Null Hypothesis (www.jasnh.com) publishes papers on experiments which do not pass the
traditional significance level threshold, to avoid replicating empirical work already examined. Closer to
home, there is WWWW: the AAAI Spring Symposia hosted in 2006 and 2008 workshops dedicated to
?What Went Wrong and Why: Lessons from AI Research and Applications? (www.aaai.org/Press/
Reports/Symposia/Spring/ss-06-08.php), www.aaai.org/Press/Reports/Workshops/ws-08-14.php.
And if you want to publish a serious, worthwhile negative result in computational linguistics, there is
Journal of Interesting Negative Results in NLP and ML (www.jinr.org).
158
