Book Review
Machine-Aided Linguistic Discovery: An Introduction
and Some Examples
Vladimir Pericliev
(Bulgarian Academy of Sciences)
London: Equinox, 2010, ix+330 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-1-84553-660-2, $90.00, ?60.00
Reviewed by
Eric J. M. Smith
University of Toronto
The subtitle of Vladimir Pericliev?s book,An Introduction and Some Examples, is a succinct
and accurate description of its contents. Pericliev argues briefly for the usefulness of
computer-aided techniques in linguistic discovery, contrasting it with the intuitionist
approach which has characterized linguistic discovery throughout much of its history.
The bulk of the book is devoted to examples of software-aided linguistic discovery
drawn from his own work.
Chapter 1 starts by sketching out the current state of discovery techniques in lin-
guistic theory, categorizing scientific discovery into three main approaches: the intui-
tionist approach, the chance approach, and the problem-solving approach. Discoveries
by intuition and by chance remain the purview of humans, but clearly the problem-
solving approach can benefit from the application of computational techniques.
Chapter 2 presents the KINSHIP program, which performs ?parsimonious discrimi-
nation? in order to determine the minimal set of features which are necessary to dis-
criminate all of a language?s kinship terms. The program is used to discover feature
geometries, superior to existing human-discovered ones, which describe the kinship
terminology of languages like English and Bulgarian.
Chapter 3 extends the ideas used in KINSHIP to a program called MPD (maximal
parsimonious discrimination), which is then applied to a variety of other tasks, some
of which are unconnected to linguistics. Of these applications, the most interesting is
the use of MPD to determine the segment profiles which uniquely identify languages
in the UPSID-451 database (consisting of segment inventories from 451 languages,
selected to provide broad coverage of the world?s language families) (Maddieson and
Precoda 1991). Although Pericliev discusses his results at considerable length, it is not
clear what the theoretical usefulness of these profiles might be. What does it really
tell us about French to know that it is the only language in the database to contain
the phoneme [??]? Of more practical interest was Pericliev?s discussion of the process
of converting the UPSID data into a featural representation to make it amenable to
processing, describing how to represent underspecified segments and how to deal with
transcription variations. This sort of necessary preprocessing constitutes an important
and underemphasized part of the process of machine-aided linguistic discovery. The
study of UPSID does produce some interesting, though not unexpected, results. For
instance, when a profile contains more than one unique segment, the majority of these
segments share a common feature, and 85.8% of the unique segments have some sort of
secondary articulation.
Chapters 4 and 5 present twomore pieces of software developed by Pericliev: UNIV
and AUTO. The UNIV software is inspired by Greenberg?s universals (Greenberg 1966),
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
and automates the haphazard process by which universals have been identified in the
past. Given a vector of features for each language being studied, UNIV identifies all
universal patterns which hold above a user-specified threshold. Such universals can
be unrestricted or statistical and they can be stand-alone or implicational. Once a set
of universals has been identified, the results are fed through AUTO (for "AUthoring
TOol"), which assembles boilerplate text into a journal article; given the vast number
of (often trivial) universals which UNIV discovers, this can be useful. UNIV is first
applied to two data sets: one of kinship terms, and the other the word-order data used
by Greenberg himself. The most interesting result is that Greenberg?s set of word-order
universals was neither complete nor fully supported by the data.
UNIV is then applied to the UPSID-451 database. UNIV identifies a large number
of previously unnoted universals, most of which are rather low-level and of little in-
herent theoretical interest. However, the low-level machine-discovered generalizations
can then be used as the basis for more interesting manually created generalizations.
The UNIV analysis also serves to refine earlier claims made by Maddieson (1984) and
Gamkrelidze (1978).
Chapter 6 is devoted to MINTYP, which is a program for determining the minimum
typology to account for an observed set of universals. The search for such typologies
is discussed by Greenberg (1966) and by Hawkins (1983). MINTYP takes a system of
universals and a set of logically admissible types, and eliminates any superfluous uni-
versals which can be implied by stronger universals in order to determine the smallest
set of universals which still accounts for the observed data. This approach is able to
distill Greenberg?s set of universals into as few as four composite universals. Like UNIV
and KINSHIP, MINTYP follows Pericliev?s basic approach: Reduce the data to a set of
features, and then find the patterns whichmost economically cover the observed feature
distribution.
Chapter 7 turns this featural approach to the problem of genetic language classifi-
cation with the RECLASS software. Pericliev extends the featural approach to include
Swadesh-type word-lists, for which he describes a method for calculating a similarity
metric based on phonological features of words in the list. A set of languages from
different families is selected for study, a similarity metric is calculated for pairs of lan-
guages, and unrelated languages whose similarity is significantly greater than expected
are given further attention. In Pericliev?s test case, the initial feature data consists of
kinship terminology, which revealed an unexpected similarity between the Kaingang
languages of Brazil and various Polynesian languages. He pursues this similarity first
by using features based on word-list similarities and then by looking at other structural
features, arguing at length for the plausibility of a genetic connection. Of all the results
described in the book, this is probably the most interesting, because it represents a
discovery made by Pericliev?s machine-aided approach which is unlikely ever to have
been found by the haphazard manual process of discovery.
The main weakness of the book is that all the software described in the book
was developed or co-developed by Pericliev himself, so the various programs all risk
seeming like variations on a single theme. The book would have benefited by including
examples of software from others working in the field, which might differ from the
feature-coverage approach favored by Pericliev. That being said, Pericliev?s essential
point is a valid one: Machine-aided discovery has a tremendous untapped potential
for analyzing data sets which are too large to be amenable to human inspection.
The success of this approach is best exemplified by his machine-aided discovery of a
possible genetic relationship which would otherwise have eluded human discovery.
786
Book Review
References
Gamkrelidze, T. V. 1978. On the correlation
of stops and fricatives in a phonological
system. In J. H. Greenberg, editor,
Universals of Human Language. Stanford
University Press, Stanford, CA,
pages 2:9?46.
Greenberg, J. H. 1966. Some universals of
grammar with particular reference to the
order of meaningful elements. In J. H.
Greenberg, editor, Universals of Language.
Mouton & Co., The Hague, pages 73?113.
Hawkins, J. 1983.Word Order Universals.
Academic Press, New York.
Maddieson, Ian. 1984. Patterns of Sounds.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Maddieson, I. and K. Precoda. 1991.
Updating UPSID. UCLA Working Papers
in Phonetics, 74:104?114.
Eric Smith?s primary research at the University of Toronto is centered on corpus approaches to
the study of Sumerian syntax. Earlier machine-aided discoveries included the reconstruction of
Elamite phonology using Optimality Theory. His e-mail address is eric.smith@utoronto.ca.
787

