Cross-Language Information Retrieval
Jian-Yun Nie
(University of Montreal)
San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool (Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies, edited by Graeme Hirst, volume 8), 2010, xv+125 pp; paperbound, ISBN
978-1-59829-863-5, $40.00; ebook, ISBN 978-1-59829-864-3, $30.00 or by subscription
Reviewed by
Marcello Federico
FBK-irst Trento
Cross-Language Information Retrieval is a compact book introducing a branch of infor-
mation retrieval that has gained considerable research interest since the dawn of the
WorldWideWeb in the mid 1990s. Information retrieval is generally concerned with the
problem of finding documents within a large collection that are relevant to a given input
query. Whereas the original formulation of IR assumes that queries and documents are
written in the same language, cross-language IR (CLIR) presumes instead that they
are written in two different languages. If the collection contains documents in more
languages, then we refer to multi-lingual IR (MLIR), which is typically solved with
multiple instances of CLIR. Recently, other variations on the theme have been proposed
that address non-textual documents, such as image, music, and speech retrieval. An
interesting application of CLIR is the retrieval of images that are provided with textual
descriptions in any language.
Computational linguistics could be interested in CLIR for several reasons. CLIR is
mainly about the optimal integration ofmachine translation (MT) and IR, and it presents
peculiar and difficult translation issues when short queries are involved, which is the
most common case. For such problems, interesting approaches have been developed
and refined over time, which mainly build on top of core statistical MT techniques
(e.g., word alignment models, translation models) and various lexical resources (e.g.,
WordNet, dictionaries).
In recent years, several books on IR have been published (e.g., Grossman and
Frieder 2004; Manning, Raghavan, and Schu?tze 2008; Bu?ttcher, Clarke, and Cormack
2010), which devoted at most a section or chapter to CLIR. As specific books on CLIR
have been limited so far to edited collections of scientific papers (Grefenstette 1998), it
was definitely time for the first monograph on the topic.
Jian-Yun Nie?s volume is structured as five chapters, which are organized as
follows:
 Chapter 1, ?Introduction,? covers IR problems, approaches, and models,
language problems in IR with European and East Asian languages, CLIR
problems and approaches, needs for CLIR and MLIR, and a brief history
of CLIR.
 Chapter 2, ?Using manually constructed translation systems and resources
for CLIR,? covers an introduction to MT, basic use of MT in CLIR, and
dictionary-based translation for CLIR.
? 2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
 Chapter 3, ?Translation based on parallel and comparable corpora,?
covers methods for automatic paragraph and sentence alignment, use
Computational Linguistics Volume 37, Number 2
of translation models for CLIR, alternative approaches using parallel
corpora, discussion of CLIR methods and resources, and mining for
translation resources and relations.
 Chapter 4, ?Other methods to improve CLIR,? covers pre- and
post-translation expansion, fuzzy matching, combination of translations,
transitive translation, and integration of monolingual and translingual
relations.
 Chapter 5, ?A look into the future: Towards a unified view of monolingual
IR and CLIR?? summarizes the state-of-the-art in CLIR and proposals for
improvements.
CLIR approaches are in general presented together with their statistical models,
whose understanding does not require more than elementary calculus and probability
theory. However, the book does not present algorithms or data structures to implement
the models, so it might not be a sufficient resource to build an effective CLIR system.
The first two chapters are rather introductory and lead to the conventional CLIR
approach, in which MT or dictionary-based translation is simply cascaded with mono-
lingual IR. A discussion on the limitations of using such general translation tools
convinces the reader of the need for translation techniques that are more specific to and
better integrated with IR. In Chapters 3 and 4, the core of the book, several advanced
CLIR models from the recent literature are discussed. In particular, Chapter 3 focuses
on the collection and processing of parallel texts and on statistical translation models
for query terms. Chapter 4 discusses cross-lingual counterparts of well-established IR
techniques (i.e., pre- and post-translation query expansion) as well as CLIR-specific
methods to further improve retrieval performance (e.g., fuzzy matching and translation
combination). Finally, in Chapter 5 the author, starting from a parallel between query
expansion in IR and query translation in CLEF, proposes new directions for future work.
In conclusion, the book presents a body of work in CLIRwith a uniform level of pre-
sentation and a consistent notation. It is definitely a good reference for an introduction
to the field as well as for a survey of the state-of-the-art.
References
Bu?ttcher, Stefan, Charles L.A. Clarke, and
Gordon V. Cormack. 2010. Information
Retrieval: Implementing and Evaluating Search
Engines. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Grefenstette, Gregory, editor. 1998.
Cross-Language Information Retrieval.
Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Grossman, David A. and Ophir Frieder.
2004. Information Retrieval: Algorithms
and Heuristics, second edition. Springer
Verlag, Berlin.
Manning, Christopher D., Prabhakar
Raghavan, and Hinrich Schu?tze. 2008.
Introduction to Information Retrieval.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.
Marcello Federico is co-director of the Human Language Technology research unit at FBK-irst,
Trento (Italy). He has contributed about 100 scientific papers in the fields of automatic speech
recognition, statistical language modeling, cross-language information retrieval, and statistical
machine translation. e-mail: federico@fbk.eu.
412
