Book Reviews
Interactive Multi-Modal Question-Answering
? 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Antal van den Bosch? and Gosse Bouma? (editors)
(?Tilburg University and ?University of Groningen)
Berlin: Springer (Theory and Applications of Natural Language Processing series,
edited by Eduard Hovy), 2011, xii+279 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-3-642-17524-4,
$124.00; e-book, ISBN 978-3-642-17525-1; paperbound, $24.95 or ?24.95 to members
of subscribing institutions
Reviewed by
Constantin Ora?san
University of Wolverhampton
Processing and presentation of multimodal information was one of the important di-
rections pursued by researchers in the areas related to information processing and
management in the first decade of this century (Stock and Zancanaro 2005; Maragos,
Potamianos, and Gros 2008; Lalanne et al 2009). The Interactive Multimodal Informa-
tion eXtraction (IMIX) Programme, a research program that ran between 2004 and 2009
and was funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), ad-
hered to this direction of research. This book contains a collection of articles describing
research carried out in the IMIX Programme. Given the large scale of the program, the
book covers only parts of it, arguably the most important ones: question answering,
(spoken) dialogue systems, and human?machine interaction.
The book is organized into four parts and an epilogue. The first part introduces
the IMIX Programme and the demonstrator developed by it. The main purpose of
the program was to bring together research groups from the Netherlands to build an
interactive multimodal question answering (QA) system that is able to answer gen-
eral encyclopedic medical questions. The IMIX Programme funded seven individual
projects that worked in a common field and contributed to a common demonstrator.
The fact that these projects ran largely independently is also apparent from the book
because there are few links between its chapters.
The architecture of the demonstrator is presented in the second article of the book,
?The IMIX Demonstrator? (Dennis Hofs, Boris van Schooten, and Rieks op den Akker).
The demonstrator showed users a fully functional system and allowed them to ask
questions using text, speech, and gestures. The answers produced by the system were
presented in the form of text, speech, or images, and could be used in follow-up ques-
tions. The article features a detailed description of the architecture, as well as several
screenshots and diagrams; these can be useful to researchers who want to find out
more about the demonstrator. In addition to the technical details, there is an interesting
discussion about the role of demonstrators in large projects and problems that need to
be addressed when building them. I think this brief discussion could be very useful for
anyone involved in a medium or large project that includes several research groups and
needs to build demonstrators.
The second part of the book focuses on dialog managers and covers most of the
interaction discussed in this book. First, the Vidiam (DIAlogue Management and the
VIsual channel) project is described in the article entitled ?Corpus-Based Develop-
ment of a Dialogue Manager for Multimodal Question Answering? (Van Schooten and
Computational Linguistics Volume 38, Number 2
Op den Akker). In addition to the corpora built in the project and the dialog manager
developed on the basis of these corpora, the article also contains a very good discussion
about how it is possible to integrate a dialog manager with a QA engine as a way of
developing an interactive QA system. I am not aware of any other articles that contain
all the information presented here in one place and in such detail. The second article in
this part, ?Multidimensional Dialogue Management? (Simon Keizer, Harry Bunt, and
Volha Petukhova), is more theoretical and presents a dialog manager built using the
framework of Dynamic Interpretation Theory (Bunt 2000) which is able to both interpret
and generate utterances using dialog acts. The article also presents briefly the way in
which this dialog manager was integrated in the IMIX demonstrator.
In my opinion, the editors of the book could have chosen a better title for the third
part of the book: ?Fusing Text, Speech, and Images.? Both articles in this part present
work done in the IMOGEN (Interactive Multimodal Output GENeration) project,1 one
of the subprojects embedded in the IMIX Programme that focused on producing mul-
timodal presentations that combine text, speech, and graphics. Only the first article
focuses on the multimodal aspect of the project, however. The other one discusses
only text processing. The article ?Experiments inMultimodal Information Presentation?
(Charlotte van Hooijdonk, Wauter Bosma, Emiel Krahmer, Alfons Maes, and Marie?t
Theune) presents three experiments for finding the appropriate way of combining
text and images when answering questions from the medical domain. In one of these
experiments, the multimodal answers are produced automatically. The other article,
?Text-to-Text Generation for Question Answering? (Bosma, Erwin Marsi, Krahmer, and
Theune), discusses sentence fusion and could fit very well in a book dedicated to text
summarization, as the method presented there is tested not only on data specific to
IMIX, but also on the DUC 2005 data.2
The fourth and the largest part of the book is ?Text Analysis for Question An-
swering.? It contains five articles, none of which describe a full QA system. Instead,
as the title suggests, they focus on various ways of processing texts that can help
with answering questions. One common feature of these articles is that they describe
methods to extract entities or relations between entities from texts. Most of the articles
also briefly discuss how this information is used in QA systems.
Most of the methods described in the fourth part of the book are now widely used
in computational linguistics, but when they were proposed a few years ago many
of them were rather innovative. For brevity, I give only a succinct indication of the
methods presented in the articles. ?Automatic Extraction of Medical Term Variants
from Multilingual Parallel Translations? (Lonneke van der Plas, Jo?rg Tiedemann, and
Ismail Fahmi) describes how to acquire medical terms and their variants from parallel
corpora. ?Relation Extraction for Open and Closed Domain Question Answering?
(Bouma, Fahmi, and Jori Mur) shows how it is possible to extract relations between
entities using dependency paths in a large collection of newspaper articles and in a
much smaller and closed domain corpus of medical documents. A sequence label-
ing method for entity recognition is presented in the article ?Constraint-Satisfaction
Inference for Entity Recognition? (Sander Canisius, Antal van den Bosch, and Walter
Daelemans). Large newspaper corpora and the Web are used in ?Extraction of Hyper-
nymy Information from Texts? (Erik Tjong Kim Sang, Katja Hofmann, and Maarten de
Rijke) to determine hypernymy relations between entities. The last article in the fourth
1 http://wwwhome.cs.utwente.nl/?theune/IMOGEN/.
2 http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/duc/intro.html.
452
Book Reviews
part, ?Towards a Discourse-Driven Taxonomic Inference Model? (Piroska Lendvai)
looks at how the structure of discourse can be used for knowledge discovery from
encyclopedic texts. All the articles are well written and could be very interesting for
researchers working on information extraction.
The book finishes with an epilogue written by three members of the international
review panel of IMIX (Eduard Hovy, Jon Oberlander, and Norbert Reithinger) who give
a very good overview of the project, providing information that is not covered in any
other article of the book. For example, it expands on themultimodal research carried out
in the program and presents some details from the point of view of project management.
An objective evaluation of the overall program is also included.
The book is interesting and I enjoyed reading it. I have to point out, however, that
the research presented here is rather old. The IMIX Programme effectively ended in
2008, so it can be argued that most of the articles refer to work that is more than 5
years old. The authors of the epilogue praise the researchers involved in IMIX for the
large number of publications they produced. This means that most of the information
presented in the book was already published in one form or another somewhere else.
Despite this, the book compiles in one place information about the IMIX Programwhich
otherwise could take a while to collect.
When I started reading the book, I expected to find more about interactive multi-
modal question answering. Each of these topics is presented individually, but with the
exception of the article about the IMIX demonstrator, they are not discussed as a
whole. I was particularly disappointed by how little space was dedicated to multimodal
processing.
The articles in the book are written by different groups of authors and they are more
or less stand-alone. To achieve this, they all present brief background information about
the IMIX Programme. Despite the extra space required for it and the overlap between
the information presented in the articles, this is not necessarily bad because it means
that researchers who do not have the time to read the whole book can focus on only the
articles that are most relevant for them.
The potential readers of this book are likely to be researchers interested in the
processing of Dutch texts. Researchers in question answering, dialog processing, and
information extraction would also benefit from the book.
References
Bunt, Harry. 2000. Dialogue pragmatics and
context specification. In Abduction, Belief
and Context in Dialogue. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam.
Lalanne, Denis, Laurence Nigay, Philippe
Palanque, Peter Robinson, Jean
Vanderdonckt, and Jean-Franc?ois Ladry.
2009. Fusion engines for multimodal
input: a survey. In Proceedings of the
2009 International Conference on Multimodal
Interfaces, ICMI-MLMI ?09, pages 153?160,
New York, NY.
Maragos, Petros, Alexandros Potamianos,
and Patrick Gros, editors. 2008.Multimodal
Processing and Interaction: Audio, Video,
Text. Springer, Berlin.
Stock, Oliviero and Massimo Zancanaro,
editors. 2005.Multimodal Intelligent
Information Presentation. Springer, Berlin.
Constantin Ora?san is a Senior Lecturer in Computational Linguistics at the University of
Wolverhampton, UK. His current research interests include anaphora and coreference resolution,
automatic summarization, and question answering. Ora?san?s address is RIILP, Wulfruna St.,
University of Wolverhampton, WV1 1LY, UK; e-mail: C.Orasan@wlv.ac.uk.
453
