Book Review
Interpreting Motion: Grounded Representations for Spatial Language
Inderjeet Mani* and James Pustejovsky?
(*Children?s Organization of Southeast Asia and ?Brandeis University)
Oxford University Press (Explorations in Language and Space series, edited by
Emile Van Der Zee), 2012, xiii+166 pp; hardbound, ISBN 978-0-19-960124-0, ?60.00
Reviewed by
Thora Tenbrink
Bangor University, Wales
Inderjeet Mani and James Pustejovsky present a documentation of the state of the
art with respect to the formal and computational representation of motion concepts
expressed in language (mostly English). Starting from the conceptual properties rep-
resented in the linguistic repertory of motion, they provide an overview of existing for-
malisms and annotation approaches, ultimately moving towards automatic approaches
and computational applications. The book is timely in its representation of the current
understanding of motion concepts in language, and will therefore be of great interest
in the computational and cognitive linguistics communities.
Why, one may ask, do we need a better understanding of motion? It might seem
that motion is just one of many human concepts expressed by a number of linguistic
terms, which are adequately described by their lexical entries in anybody?s dictionary.
Mani and Pustejovsky?s analysis of the linguistic representation of motion suggests a
very different idea, however. Far from representing just one marginal aspect of human
language, the conceptualization and verbalization of motion turns out to be central to
human life?and, as a consequence, central to communication. Motion combines the
two fundamental human concepts of space and time. Space without time is, for humans,
asmeaningless as timewithout space. Both are inextricably linked?and this link ismost
notably and systematically represented in language via expressions of motion. Motion
is represented whenever aspects of life are described, reflecting its deep relevance for
human thinking. Any computational approach towards interpreting natural language
representation will, sooner or later, need to deal with motion concepts. Interpreting
motion, therefore, turns out to be one of the most fundamental research issues for a
variety of purposes both in basic (or cognitive) and applied (or computational) research.
? 2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Strangely, so far, research on the human representation of these fundamental
conceptual domains is characteristically divided into two fairly distinct communities
dealing with either space or time in language and cognition. The combination of both,
adding dynamic aspects, appears to pose too many challenges, adding too many
complexities to the already puzzling diversity with respect to human representations
of space and time. With their book Interpreting Motion, Mani and Pustejovsky are at the
forefront of research that aims to bridge this gap by systematically bringing together
findings and formalisms from both directions. The effort, as such, is laudable. The
formal detail provided to explicate the representational patterns considerably adds
to the value of this book. Formalization serves computational purposes just as well
doi:10.1162/COLI r 00155
Computational Linguistics Volume 39, Number 2
as providing a more precise conceptual grasp of the identified linguistic phenomena.
Nevertheless, it is noted that more elaborate explanations and consistent informal
glossesmight have supported the general audience of the OxfordUniversity Press ?Lan-
guage and Space? series. Some readersmay bemore interested in the identified concepts
than in the abundance of formalizations, which may be felt to hamper readability.
Against the background of the current state of research, it becomes clear why
readers may, at particular points, feel slightly less than satisfied with the mechanisms
provided for dealing with motion in language. The book is unusually clear and honest
in highlighting limitations in the current understanding of crucially relevant concepts,
including existing formalization techniques. Consequently, the book is not only a valu-
able summary of the currently available tools for interpreting motion, but also a useful
starting point for further research that aims to fill various gaps identified by Mani and
Pustejovsky?s exploration of the field.
One major gap that pervades much of the book concerns the mapping of non-
linguistic formalisms such as ontologies or calculi to linguistic expressions. Such a
mapping is essential, because language reflects how humans naturally represent just
those concepts that formalisms attempt to capture. The lack of systematic mapping
mechanisms between linguistic structures and widely used formalization categories
is by no means the authors? fault, but reflects a longstanding research desideratum
well-known in the relevant research communities?with scattered attempts to provide
solutions here and there, several of which are represented in this book. Mani and
Pustejovsky contribute to this urgently needed research by laying out the available tools
in an accessible way and in many cases going several steps further ahead, suggesting
mapping solutions wherever and to the extent possible.
The book starts with an insightful and fairly detailed introduction section that
mainly serves to motivate the complexity involved in interpreting motion, highlighting
key insights taken from cognitive linguistic theory as well as earlier psycholinguistic
experimentation. Subsequent chapters outline linguistic observations supplemented by
non-linguistic calculi, ontologies, and representations, dealing with space and time sep-
arately. The main innovative contribution of the book emerges with a proposal for the
formal representation of motion in Chapter 4. Here, previous approaches and mecha-
nisms are combined to model the topological changes over time introduced by motion
verbs. The remaining two chapters provide annotation specifications and application
prospects. Extraction of motion information from natural language descriptions is pro-
posed in terms of manual annotation; computational implementations are currently
still very limited. Nevertheless, these chapters set the stage for subsequent machine
learning and other automatic approaches, adopting methodologies already successfully
established for other formalisms, to which the newly proposed motion formalism is
a successor. In general, the described actual applications concern mostly other related
work; the book describes the relevance of the current framework to such applications
and represents their goals.
Concerning the formal interpretation of motion, the aim in Mani and Pustejovsky?s
approach is to capture the spatial implications carried by lexical items in terms of their
consequences in the real world. For instance, the verb to fly implies a disconnection be-
tween the flying figure and the ground below it. Although this is an essential condition
for flying, in other cases implications can be context dependent, which is why corpus-
based investigation is essential. For instance, to establish the spatial situation conveyed
by the verb to cross it is necessary to consider what exactly is being crossed. In the case
of a field, there is constant contact with the ground, whereas in the case of a river being
crossed via a bridge, there is no such contact?in fact, contact with the river will be
456
Book Review
avoided. Spatial implications such as these are implicitly understood by humans and
need to be made available for computational approaches.
Along these lines, the presented framework scrutinizes lexical denotation in relation
to systematic patterns in the spatial domain, rather than making any claims about con-
ceptually prominent aspects of lexical items in a cognitive linguistic (or psychological)
sense. In this, the present approach is unique. For example, the linguistic ontology
proposed by Bateman et al (2010) captures the differences in meaning distinguished by
the linguistic system, pointing to conceptual patterns reflected in (or made prominent
by) language. In contrast, the framework presented in this book aims at identifying the
spatial content carried across by the use of lexical items in context.
Altogether, the goal of this book is to provide a clearer and better-defined formal
procedure for interpreting the language of motion than has been available before. As
a matter of fact, the authors basically reject all previous approaches for being too
vague in fundamental respects. I believe that there may be limits to the specifiability
of linguistic terms, however, due to their phenomenal flexibility. Cognitive linguists
generally assume that language serves to trigger associations in people?s minds, or build
them up on the spot, based on sketchy and flexible semantics along with discourse
context. As Talmy (1988, page 165) puts it, ?we take a sentence (or other portion of
discourse) to evoke in the listener a particular kind of experiential complex, here to be
termed a ?cognitive representation.?? In other words, linguistic termsmay not in the first
place describe or represent meanings as such, but rather serve as triggers for activating
concepts of human experience, which are far richer and more flexible than any lexical
entry or formalization could possibly represent. These considerations resonate with
current efforts to capture more adequately what has been characterized as ?embodied
cognition? (Anderson 2003). To the extent that human cognition operates in a non-
symbolic way, formalizations may ultimately remain inadequate in capturing human
understanding of motion.
That said, I do believe that the authors? effort in representing systematic impli-
cations that can be gained from the language of motion has led to a considerable
step forward in a much-needed direction. It reaches far beyond traditional formal
semantics approaches that basically leave the import of conceptual elements altogether
untouched. The formal representation of motion is in this book carried further than ever
before, combining decades of previous effort ingeniously towards extraction of motion
information from natural language descriptions, to the extent possible given the current
state of the art?and maybe ultimately limited by the nature of human language.
References
Anderson, Michael L. 2003. Embodied
Cognition: A field guide. Artificial
Intelligence, 149:91?130.
Bateman, John, Joana Hois, Robert J. Ross,
and Thora Tenbrink. 2010. A linguistic
ontology of space for natural language
processing. Artificial Intelligence
174:1027?1071.
Talmy, Leonard. 1988. The relation of
grammar to cognition. In Brygida
Rudzka-Ostyn, editor, Topics in Cognitive
Linguistics. Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pages 165?206.
Thora Tenbrink is a Lecturer in Cognitive Linguistics at Bangor University (Wales, UK), and a
principal investigator in two projects in the Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR 8 Spatial
Cognition (Bremen / Freiburg). Her main interest concerns the relationship between cognitive
processes and linguistic representations. She is the author of Space, Time, and the Use of Language
(Mouton de Gruyter, 2007), and has co-edited two books on issues in spatial language and spatial
representation. E-mail: t.tenbrink@bangor.ac.uk.
457

