American Journal of computations! Linguistics Microfiche 36 
1 3 T H  A N N U A L  M E E T I N G  
Timothy C .  Diller, Edi to r  
Sperry-Univac 
St. Paul, Minnesota 55101 
C o p y r i g h t  @ 1975 by the Association for Computational Linguistics 
PREFACE 
The fifth and final ACL sesskon was split into two sub- 
sessions: one continued the treatment of discourse structure 
and general knowledge begun in session 4; the other provided 
a look at several automated text analysis systems. Georgette 
Silva kindly chaired both subaetsions. 
Only five .of the a ix talks given are represented in this 
Proceedings. The paper detailing Salton's talk on automatic 
igdexing was far too extensive to be included on this fiche 
and hence will be published separately. The paper by Klapp- 
holz and Lbckman discusses the problems involved in the feeso- 
lution of cross-sentential reference and sketches an algorithm 
for their solution. (Notq the closely related paper by Deutsch 
in Session 4.) Rosenschein addresses the problem of restrict- 
ing the generation of inferential propositions given a set of 
beliefs and proposes a structural constraint upon inferencing. 
Becklea et al present a man-machine approach to the descrip- 
tion of idiolect variations in an environment extraordinarily 
complex linguistically and sociologically. Brill and Oshika 
describe a set of programs which permit both batch and inter- 
actLve processing of orthographic and phonological strings to 
provfde information on f r , contextual variation, and 
associational relations. Anderson, Bross, and Sager present 
a theory, of: linguistic compression in written texts and de- 
scribe the results of an implementation of that theory. 
Timothy 6. Diller, Program Committee Chairman 
TABLE O F  CONTENTS 
MOOELING DISCOURSE AND WORLD KNOWLEDGE 1 1 -  
Contextual Reference Resolution David Klappholz and Abe 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Lockman 
How does a System Know When to Stop Inferencing? 
Stan Rosenschein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26 
Developing a Computer System to Handle Inherently 
Variable Linguistic Data D. Beckles, L. C w r i n g t o n ,  and 
G .  Warner i n  collaboration with C .  B o r e l y ,  H I  Knight, P. Aquing, 
and J .  Marquee - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40 
A Natural Language Processing Package David Brill and 
Beatrice T. ~ s h i k a  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52 
On the Role of Wofds and Phrases in Automatic Text 
Analysis Gerard Salton (Abstract only) . . . . . . . . .  67 
Grammatical Compression in Notes and Records: Analysis 
and Cornputdtion Barbara B .  Anderson, Irwin D. J .  Bross, and 
Naomi Sager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 36 : 4 
DAV.ID KLAPPHOLZ AND ABE LOCKMAN 
Department of Elec t r i ca l  E n g i n e e r i n g  
and Computer Science 
Columbla Vniversi t y  
N e w  Yorh, New York 1 0 0 2 7  
ABSTRACT 
With the exception of pranomial reference, little, has been written 
(in the field of computational linguistics) about the phenomenon of reference 
in  natural language. This paper investigates the power and use of 
reference in natural language. and the problems involved in its resolution. 
An algorithm is sketched for accomplishing reference resolution using 
a notion of cross-sentential focus, a mechanism fo r  hypothesizing all  
possible contextual references, and a judgment mechanism for  dis - 
~r i rn ina t i  ng among the hypotheses. 
The reference resolution problem 
The present work began as an attempt to develop a set  of 
algorithms and/or heurietics to enable a primitive-based, inference - 
driven model of a natural language user (Schank 1972 Rieger 1974) to 
properly resolve pronomial references acmee eentence bmndaries. The 
authors quickly realized, however, that the problem of pronomial reference 
resolution is only a .small aspect of a problem which might be termed 
nominal reference resolution, itself but a 8-11 aspect of the problem 'of 
the coherence of d text, (or conversation) i, em the manner in which it 
llmeansu more than the logicd conjunction of the meaningp of its in- 
dividual constituent aentences, 
Examples of tqe f i rs t  problem, i. e. pronomial reference resohtion 
a r e  given in sentence sequences 1-4 below. 
1. Yesterday some boys from our village chased a pack of wild dogs; 
the largest one fell into a ditch. 
2. The wild dogs which forage just outside our village suffer from a 
strange bone-wealeining disealte. Yesterday some boys from our 
village chased a pack of wild dogs* the largeat one broke a leg and 
fell into a ditch. 
3. Yesterday John chased Bill half a block; he was soon out of breath. 
4. My friend Bill has an extremely severe case of asthma. Yesterday 
John chased Bill half a block; he was soon out of breath. 
The ~ r o b l e m  in utterance (text, conversation etc. ) excerpts of the 
above type is #hat of determining the referents of W e  various occurrences 
of the pronouns I '  one, I '  and "heN 
For the moment we simply note that usually preferred referents 
of the two occurreqces of llonell a r e  I1boyl1 and I l d ~ g ~ ~ ,  (examples 1 and 
2 respectively) and those of the two occurrehces of "hew a re  I1Johnl1 
and Bill (exampies 3 and 4 respectively. ) 
The more general p r ~ b l e m  of nominal reference resolution is 
exhibited in ?he following annotated excerpt from a recent newpaper 
article (N. Y. Times 7/15/75, byline Arnold Lubasch); subscripted 
bracketing of the excerpt is intended only to enable later reference to 
specific parts of the text. 
1 [Some of the tnajor provisions of [the state's Fair  Campaign 2 \ were declared unconstitutional here yesterday oy [a special 3 
Federal court] that assailed [the restiictions on election campaigning] 3 4 
as  "repugnant to the right of freedom of speech. " 
5  h he three-judge court, ] whi* was convened to consider a 5 
constitutional challenge by three State As sembly candidates last  year 
threw out [ [the ' code' s] prohibition against attacking any political 6 7 7 
candidate's xa ce, sex, - religion or ethnic background] 6 
*[It]* also overtuned [ [ [ the codets]ll ban lo  on any 9 10 11 
misrepresentation of a candidate1 a party affiliation, position on political 
issues and personal qualifications, including the use af llcharacter 
defamationr1 and scurrilous attacks. I l l 9  
Accordbg to [the caurt1s]12 38-page decision, written by 12 
13  [Judge Henry F. Werber] with &he concurrence of [Judges Leonard 13 14 
P. hdoore, and Mark A. Con~tan t ing]~~ .  15[ 16[the provisions b a ~ h g  116 
misrepresentation Irca st a substantial chill on the expres sion of 
protected speech that a r e  unconstitutionally overbroad and vague. l 1  
If newpaper reporters had a bit more sympathy for those of u s  
concerned with natu-1 language poocessing, the above excerpt might 
have read as  follows: 
The state has a Fair Campaign Code. 
Some of the major provisions of the state's Fair  Campagin Code 
a r e  provisions which restrict something. 
Some of the things restricted by some of the major provisions of 
the state's Fair  Campaign Code which restrict  something a r e  activities 
having to do with election campaigning. 
Same of the activities having to do with election campaigning which 
a r e  restricted by some of the major ,provisions of the state's Fair  
Campaign Code whioh restrict something are attacking a political 
candidate's race, sex, religions or  ethnic background and misrepresent- 
ing a) candidate1 s party affiliation, position on political is sue s . . . 
Last year three state assembly canddiates filed a constihtional 
challenge to some of the major provisions of the state's Fair  Campaign 
Code which restrict  something. 
Y esterday a special Federal court declared unconstitutional thou of the 
major provisione of the state's Fair  Campaign Code which restrict  . 
something . . , 
The p& is that in order for  a machine or a human to validly 
claim to have Ilunder~tood~~ the original excerpt& helshelit  must be able 
at  the very least to dekonstrate that he/she/it  has established the 
following relationships between various items occurring in the excerpt. 
(Iqtegers ap rbsen t  subscripted bracketed regments of the original excerpt. ) 
(f)  The identity of 2 ,  7, and 11 
(ii) The identity of 3, 5, 8, and 12 
(iii) The fact that 4, 6, 9, and 15 a re  elements, subsets or  p a f b  of 1 
(iv) The fact that 13 and 14 a re  members of 3 
and on and on and on. (I. em a closer analysis of the original excerpt 
reveals many more relationships which must be established before 
llundeirstandingu may be clamed. ) 
It people sctually wrotelspoke in the style of the somewhat 
facetious paraphrase of the original excerpt, the nominal reference 
problem would be reduced to one of matching lexcial patterns and 
recognising a few syntactic cues; to state the obvious, the necessity for 
more* succinct linguistic communication has forced the development of 
elliptical devices which shia  the burden of nominal reference resolution 
from syntactic analysis to an analysis of the Hsemanticsll of sentences 
in context. More specifically, nominal references cannot in general be 
resolved without the use of general semantic infarmation a s  well as  
specific world knowledge. 
While the fact that syntactic a-lysis alone i s  insufficient for 
understmding is  anything but novel, the question of the magnitude of the 
nominal reference problem and of its solution1 s crucial dependence upon 
local context seems to have been little commented upon. (Clark (1975) 
discussee the problem from a viewpoint different from that of this paper, ) 
The reader who remains unconvinced by the examples above that 
local context (and specific world knowledge relating to local context) 
must play a crucial role in reference resolution i s  asked to consider the 
two sentence sequences 5a, 6, and 5b, 6. 
5. a. The founding fathers had a difficult time agreeing on how the 
basic laws governing our country should be framed. 
b. Those foolish people a t  the country club have spent an incredible 
amount of time arguing about club rules. 
6. The second article of the constitution, for example, was argued 
about for months before agreement was reached. 
In sentence sequence 5a, 6, Itthe second articlett  clearly refers to 
the second article of the constitution of the United States, while in 
sentence sequence 5b, 6, the reference i s  to the second article of the 
constitution of the country club. In each case the only factor involved 
in resolving the reference is the semantic content of i ts  10-1 aontext- 
in this case the meaning of the sentende preceding the one in which tke 
reference occurs. 
Since the lexical item Itthe constitutiontt appears in the example 
just considered, a word- concerning such proper-noun-like objects is in 
order. In any language ?here a re  lexical Items and phrases such as 
those appearing in 7 below, which, in the absence of compelling 
alternative, have standard default ref erentsf for example the standard 
default referents of the items in 7 a r e  the corresponding items in 8 
7. a. The constitution 
b. The founding fathers 
c. Wall Street 
d. The establishment 
e. The presiaent 
f. Madison Avenue 
8. a. The constitution of the U. S. 
b. The flhnding fathers of the U. S. 
C. The U. S. business. community (or that par t  of it residing in 
New Yotk City. ) 
d. Those people who have the power to influence the course of events 
in the nation etc. etc. 
e. The president of the U. S. 
f. The advertising industry. 
In order for textual occurrm-ce of such proper-noun-like objects to be 
properly handled, their standard default referents must be listed in the 
lexicon. This is not to say that occurrences of proper-noun-like objects 
cannot be references to objects occurring previously in the text; rather 
-
it is the case that their default options must also be considered a s  
possible referents. 
As  final examples of the reference resolution problem let  us  con- 
sider sentence sequences 9 and 10 below. 
9. The president was shot while riding in a motorcade down one of the 
major boulevards of Dallas yesterday; it caused a panic on Wall 
Street. 
10. John was invited to tea at the Quimbyls last  Saturday; he would have 
loveq to go, but he knew held be busy then. 
In example 9, while t&e first sentence of the eequence contains a 
number of noun objects (president, motorcade, boulevards, Dallas) 
which a r e  potential referents for the occurrence of r l i t l l  in the second 
sentence, none of the these is in fact, the proper referent; rather, the 
proper referent of I f i t l t  i s  the event (or fact) that "The president was 
shot while . . . . I t  
In example 10 we have an instance of an  adverbial reference 
("thenf1) which must be recognized a s  referring to flyesterday" rather 
than bo some non adverbial object occurring in the f i r s t  sentence of 
that example, 
Sketch of a Solution 
F r s m  the point of view of computer implementation, the problem 
of nominal reference resolution is one of creating tokens for noun 
objects mentioned in a text, and discovering and encoding the relations, 
alluded to in the text, which hold between them and various other tokens 
in memory. 
This problem, though certainly not i t  s magnitude or  ramifications, 
was noticed by Rieger (1974) in his poineering implementation of a 
primitive-based model of a natural language user. Riegerls system, 
however, suffers from the incredible inefficiency r esuIting f rom its  need 
to search all  of memory in order to attempt any reference resolution; 
in addition it will often miss a quite obvious referent entirely, and, in 
fact, resolves non-pronomial references only accidentally i f  at all. 
Before presenting a sketch of a proposed solution to the nominal 
reference resolution problem, it would be well to detail more precisely 
the overall language processing enviornment within which it i s  meint  to 
operate and of which it is a most necessary part. 
First,  we adsume that a relatively small set, S, of semantic 
primitives and $ logical-calculus -like language, L, for expressing 
ltmeaningsll a r e  available. The set  S and language L must satisfy the 
following two conditions. 
(i) The predicate, function, and constant eymbols of L a r e  members of 
S .  
(ii) There is a one-to-o* mapping f rom meanings of (natural language) 
sentences to formulas of L. 
While a set of prki i t ives  and a meaning representation language 
even demonstably close to satisfying the above conditions have yet to be 
produced, we will, in examples to follow, make use of meaning represen 
tations; the only claim we will make for them is that the functibns 
served by their constituent constructs must be served by the elements 
of any adequate system. 
In addition to a meaning representation scheme we will assume en 
encoding of world knowledge of the sort  which a lltypicallt adult might 
possess, again with the same obvious caveat. 
While the question of translation from natural language sentence8 
to'meaning representations will not be touched upon here ,  we will 
sasume sentence -by- sentence translation of the sort  exhibited in various 
examples to follow. 
The solution  PO the reference resolution problem res ts  in recog- 
nizing the fact that reference is an elliptical device, and +that the 
human under stander of. natural language cannot recapture that which was 
elided once he is too far from it in the text; in fact, he cannot resolve 
a reference to a p i n t  in the text more than a few-sentences back with- 
out going back and pondering i t  (if he can do so at all). We should note 
that this i s  true even ih the case in which the referent doesn't 
actually appear in the text, but appears only in an inference f rom some 
statement made in the text. In this latter case - a case which we will 
discuss only a t  the very end of this paper the reference is not resolvable 
(and would not therefore have Been made by the c ~ e a t o r  of the text in the 
first place). unless the statement from which the inference is made 
appears shortly before in the text . Though we cannot say precisely 
how far back i s  meant by. "shortly before, " it is certainly no more than 
a few sentences. Fbr a given sentence, S, appearing in a text we will 
refer to the gequence of sentences preceding S by no more than the 
intended distance as the focus of S. 
In terms of computer implementation, we will, in the processing of 
a text (which we conc-eive of as proceeding sentence-by-sentence), 
maintain the following focus sets. 
%bje CJ' 
(i) The noun-object focus - the set of tokens of a noun meaning re -  
presentation~ of the focus of S (where S is the bentence currently. 
being processed) 
(ii) The event focus - a  set aontaining, for every sentence W in the 
focus of S, the object EVENT(F), where F i s  the meaninq 
representation of W, and EVENT i s  a function which maps the 
meaning of a formula, F, into a noun-like object whose meaning 
is "the event (or fact) that F" 
(iii) The time focus - a set containing taken8 for all time references 
(e. g, yesterday, five olclock, etc. ) occurring in the meaninq 
representation of the focus of S. 
The reader may question our inclusion of every object appearing 
in the meaning xepresentation of the focus of S in one of the above focus 
sets, i. e. in the set  of potential referents. In fact, however, it seems 
to be the case that any object (of one of the above-mentioned types) 
occurring in the meaning representation of the focus of S may be the 
referent of an object occurring later  in the meaning representation of S. 
Sonsidex, for example, the sentence sequences formed by taking each of 
he sentences af 12 below, - in turn - as an immediate continuation of a text 
zontaining sentence 1 1 below. 
11. Stan argued with his s i s ter  Fran in an attempt to convince her that 
she should bring Mary, whom he would like to get to knpw, on their 
planned t r ip  to the San Diego Zoo tomor~ow. 
12. a. - He was really insistent. 
b. - She was hard to convince. 
C. - It was useless. 
d. He thinks - she's the prettiest one of all  Frads friends. 
e. The prospect really excites him. 
f. He arguecl that - f t  wouldn't tie Mary up for m o r e  than half a day. 
g. - It's ?he best one in the country, you know. 
h. - She thruught - it was a twr ib le  idea. 
i. She happened to be busy then, but expressed a n  interest in coming 
along ahother the. 
Ea& of the mderlined items in sentences 12a-12i references some 
object in senten- 11. (For the sake of clarity we present in 13 below 
the referents a s  we understand them, ) 
13, a, Stan 
b. Fran 
c. The attempt (to convince , . . 
d. Mary 
em EVENT \Stan will get to know Mary) 
f. The trip 
g. The San Diego Zoo 
h. Both --- @he a& it a r e  ambiuous; if - she is taken to be "Fran, l1  then 
it refers to EXENT (Fran will bring Mary ,. .); i f  - she is taken 
to be "Maryll), then - it refers  to EVENT (Mary will come.. . ) 
The point i s ,  of course, that any item in (the meaning representa- 
tion of) a sentence, S, may be referenced by some item in (the mean- 
ing repr eeentation of) a latter sentence. 
On the other side of the coin the question of identifying potential re-  
-
ferences is just a s  important a s  that of identifying the seb of all  
possible referents for an object which is known to reference something. 
If we were' concerned only with pronomial referenee reaolution, the 
problem would have a simple solution; every pronoun is a reference. 
For  nominal items other than pronouns the problem is far less simple; 
if a noun occurs in a text just how do we know if there i s  a previously 
occurring nominal item to which it refers? As much a s  we would like 
there to be algorithmically testable criteria, i. e. recognizable syntactic 
and/or semantic cues, for making the decision, there seem to be none. 
Thus, the mechanism we propose considers every token appearing 
in the translation of a sentence as a possible reference. 
At present, we hypothesize the existence of a small set, R, of 
relations which a re  suffvient to account for all  instances of nominal 
reference. Included in this set a r e ,  a t  the very least, the relations 
identity, member of, subset of, and part of. Noje that although this 
list of relations im quite small, it suffices to handle all  the examples of 
reference presented thus far (i. e. those occurring in sentence sequences 
1-6 and 9-12 as well as those occurring in the excerpted newpaper 
article above). 
Al l  of the above observations taken together lead to the following 
sketch of an algorithm for reference resolution. 
I. #AS each new sentence, S, is transrated into its meaning representation, 
the various focus sets (noun-object, event, time) a r e  updated. 
11. A set, H, is formed containing all tuples of t&e form (N1, N2, P )  such 
'that N1 is a nominal item occurring in(the meaning representation 
of S, Nz is an object occurring in the focus set (noun-object, 
event, or time) appropriate to N1 , and i s  a member of R; H 
is the set  of all current refewnce hypotheses arising-from S. 
III. A lljudgment mechanism, " discussed below, is invoked to determine 
the liklihoods of the correctness of the various members of H. 
It i s  clear that following step II any further processing of reference 
hypotheses requires that all members of H be considered relahive to one 
avther, since the correctness or  incorrectness of one may depend 
crucially upon that of others. In the general case not all hypotheses will 
turn out to be correct, and in fact some may contradict o thers  - for 
instance in the case of two hypothesis-triples with identical f i r s t  and 
second elements and different third elements. 
Once it  has been created, the set  H is submitted to a "judgment 
mechanismft whose task it i s  to choose some of the hypotheses a s  valid 
and others a s  invalid. The judgement mechanism must clearly have 
access to the world knowledge stored in memory, and must be capable of 
performing inferencing of a sort which produces decisions a s  to the 
relative Eklihoods of the various hypotheses. 
Before giving example8 of just how such a judgment mechanism 
might work, we should make it clear that our sense of I1inferencing1l is very 
different from Riegerls (1974). In Riegerls sense inferencing is un- 
directed, while ours is directed toward the goal of val idat i~g hypotheses. 
There is, in addition, another sense in which the sor t  of inferencing to 
be done by the judgment mechanism is directed. The fact that the rgasons 
for validating or  throwing out a particular reference hypothesis (on the 
part  of human natural language users) involve the information coweyed in 
local context as well a s  world knowledge relating to items contained in 
that information (and world knowledge relating to items contained in world 
knowledge relating to items contained in that information, ctc. ) constitutes 
a good guess as to the particular pieces of world kncrwledge and the rules 
of inference which must be involved in judging that hypothesis. 
Ekamples of reference resolation 
14 and 15 below contain components of possible meaning repfek 
sentations of the two sentencel of sentence sequence 1 at the beginning 
of this paper. 
14. C 1 : CHASED (xl, q) 
C2: TIME (cis YESTERDAY) 
C3: SUBSET ( x  [BOYS]) 
C4: SUBSET (x~ ,  [DOGS]) 
C5: GREATER (SIZE(xl),l) 
C6: GREATER (SIZE (IS,), 1) 
15, C7: FALL INTO (yI, y2) 
C8: TIME (C7, PAST) 
C9: MEMBER (y,, [DITCH]) 
?30: MEMBER(yl,y3) 
C11: LARGEST (yl, y3) 
'The meaning reprecentations proposed for the two sentences a r e  
C1A%hGhGAC5AC& and G7hCshCo A C ~ O A C ~ ~  respectively. Note that we are 
not claiming that the predicates CHASED, and FALL INTO and the constants 
YESTERDAY, BOY, DOG, PAST and DITCH a r e  a t  the leve3. of semantic 
primitives; rather, the above analyses a r e  at just the level which we need 
to illustate the operation of the reference resolution mechanism. Further - 
more, the symbols YESTERDAY, BOY, DOG, PAST and DITCH ahould 
be taken a s  pointers to the definitions of the appropriate items encoded 
in memory in whatever fashion. The brackethg in the notation [A], where 
A is a pointer to a definition, is meant to be a function which takes A 
into an object whose meaning ie  the class of items satisfying the meaning 
pointed to by A. 
Once the translation of the f irs t  sentence of sequence 1 into its 
meaning representation has been completed - on the assumption that that 
sentence is at the beginning of the text being processed - the various 
focus sem will contain the followkg: 
no.- object focus: [xl, xz) ; event fbcps.: [(cfic21\~/\chcd\~~ ) 3  ; 
time focus [YESTERDAY ] . 
After the second sentence i s  translated the set, H, of reference - 
triple hypotheses presented to the judgment mechanism will then be the 
following : 
i s  a member of 
is a sqbget of 
i s ~ p a r t  of 
Note that no member of the event focus occurrs in H because the 
translation of the second sentence contains no term of the form EVENT(y); for  
s i m p l i c a e  omit the question of time referencing. 
All of the relations between y2 and xl or rt can be ruled out 
pn the basis of SUBSET (x,, [DOC]) SUBSET (xl. [BOY]), MEMBER 
Or,, [DITCH]) and of the world knowledge to the effect that boysldogs 
cannot be identical to, members of, eubsets of or parts of ditches (of 
course in some weird fairy tale setting one of these might be possible 
and shouldn't be thrown out; but in such a case local context would 
inform us of the "weirdrr situation and the appropriate one wouldn't be 
thrown out. ) 
The hypothesis that or  y3 i s  a part of either xl or xz can be 
20  
ruled out on the basis of SUBSET (q, [BOY]) and SUBSET (x,, [DOG]), 
which tell us that q and x2 a r e  sets  of objects, and the world 
knowledge that sets  don't have "partsi1 in the sense of the "part of1! 
relation. 
Identify between yl and either XI or  x2 can be ruled out on the 
basis of MEMBER (yl , y3) which tells us that yl i s  an ihdividual and 
SUBSET (x1, [BOY]), SUBSET (x2, [DOG]), GREATER (SIZE (x,), l), 
and GREATER (SIZE (xz), 11, which tell us that xl and x2 are sets  
containing more than one object. (Remember that we're not doing 
axiomatic se t  theory in which there a r e  no lgindividuals in our sense 
and in which the sor t  of ll-iindividualll which is dealt with can be a subset 
of some set. ) 
Fmally, the "member of" relation between y3 and either xl or x2 
can be ruled out pn the basie of MEMBER (yl, y3) which requires thpt 
y3 be a set, SUBSET (xl, [BOY]), SUBSET (x ,  [DOG]), GREATER 
(SIZE (xl), I), and GREATER (SIZE (x2), 1), which tell  us that x1 and x2 
a r e  sets containing more thad one element each, and the fact that sets  
are not members of sets. (Again, we're not dealing with set theory; if 
in fact, we were - talking about axiomatic set  theory in English, then 
local context would contain that information, and aiff erent inferences 
would come into play. ) 
This leaves us with the following hypotheses : 
is identical to 
' {is a subset o f j  [ : j  
y, is a member of { :g 
But some of these hypotheses are consistent with one another: in fact 
the hypotheses 
i e  identical to 
X. i = l , 2  
1 is  a subset of 
-C 3 
imply the hypotheses 
yl is  a member of x. i = l , 2  
1 
respectively because of MEMBER (yl, y,). At any rate, the judgment 
mechanism assumes at this point that either yl is a member of xl or 
yl i s  a member of x2. The readear is asked to recall at this point 
that in presenting the usually preferred referents for references in 
sentence sequences 1-4 the claim was made that in sentence sequence 1, 
the usually preferred referent for "onefr is  lfboys." The reason for this 
claim is  the authort s observation. that, when such a pronomial refercnce 
occurs a s  the surface subject of a sentence, in the absence of semantic 
content which discrminates among the various possible referents, most 
people seem to take the eurface subject of the last sentence in the focus 
a s  the inbnded referent. The reason for this human judgment is probably 
that the readerlhearer takes the surface subject to b e  the "topicll of a 
sentence. If this observation is correct, the judgment mechanism should, 
in the current example, simply choose "one of the boysr1 (yl is a member 
of xl) as  the proper referent. If this observation i s  incorrect, the judgment 
mechaaism should judge that there is ambiguity in the reference 'lone 
Sentence sequence 2 at  the beginning of this paper would be handled 
in precisely the same manner a s  sentence sequence 1 up to the point at 
which 11y3 is a member of xl1I and "y, i s  a member of x," were the r e -  
maining hypotheses. The knowledge that Ifthe dogsLt refer red to suffer 
from a strange bone -weakening diaease would bhen cause the judgment 
mechaniam to strengthen the likelihood that tlonell refers to "dogs, thus 
causing Ityl is a member of x," to be the preferred judgment. 
Sentence sequence16 below contains an example of EVENT reference. 
16. The presidnet was shot yesterday. It caused a panic on Wall Street. 
Omitting all  other details of the translation into meaning representation we 
simply note that the primitive -level predicate into which cause" is tranq- 
lated requires an object of the form EVENT (F) as its subject (i. e. if we 
say something like "John caused a stir" what we mean is that John did 
something and the event (or fact) that he did that caused a stir.) Thus, 
when the 2nd sentence is handled, the only possible referents for will 
be the objects contained in the EVENT focus, namely just EVENT (the 
president was shot yesterrlay). The judgment mechanism thus must s k p l y  
decide if the event (or fact) that the president was shot yesterday was likely 
to have caused a panic on Wall Street, a judgment which, with adequate 
world knowledge, should certainly be confirmed. 
Sentence sequence 17 is a very similar case. 
17. The president was shot yesterday. Bill told me all about it. It 
caused a panic on Wall Street. 
In order to resolve the reference 'lit" in the last sentence of 17, the 
judgment mechanism would have to decide on the relative likelihoods of 
i and ii below 
(i) The event (or fact) that the president was shot yesterday caused a 
panic on Wall Street. 
(ii) The event (ok fact) that Bill told me about the president being shot 
yesterday cauaed a panic on Wall Street. 
Again, with the availability of reasonable world knowledge about such 
things a s  presidents, their being shot and panics, the judgment mechanism 
should be able to choose the proper referent for "it1I 
While a fully detailed specification of the judgment mechanism must 
await further investigation, the above examples should illustrate, at least 
in part, the manner in which we conceive of i ts  operation. 
Conclusions 
The phenomenon with which we have been dealing is one example of 
what we would like to call the llcreativefl aspect of language use; more 
specifically, reference of the sort  we have described - and attempted to 
handle - is an elliptical device necessary for effective communication; 
moreover, it is a device which exhibits the ability of language to "change 
the ground rulestf in a very flexible and fluid manner in response to 
context. 
At this point we must admit that there is an even more creative 
type of reference than the sort we have dealt with. 18 below is an 
example of this type of reference. 
18. Last week I caught a cold while vieiting my mother in Chicago; as 
ueual , the chicken eoup had too much pepper in it. 
The interesting reference in the above example i s  ILchickeh soup. There 
i s  no item in the first  sentence to which it is directly related; on the 
other hand, few people have any trouble resolving it by interpolating 
between the two sentences of example 18 the idea expressed in sentence 19 
below: 
1,q. When I get sick my mother makes me chicken soup. 
If sentence 19 were available, our reference resolution mechanism would 
easily come up with an identity relation between the two occurrences 
of I t  chicken eoup Obviously, for our proposed mechanism to resolve 
this reference, some sort  of inferencing must f i rs t  work on the 1st 
sentence of 18 to produce the meaning of 19 a s  an inference. Thus it is 
clear that reference resolution and general inferencing must be inter - 
leaved. 
The mechanism proposed abave does not handle the entire problem. 
It does, however, seem to be a minimal model of reference resoIdtion 
(minimal in the sense that at least this much must be going on). In 
addition, it provides for that control over the use of general inferencing 
which is required to avoid a combinatbrial explosion (BOOM). 
References 
Clark, H. H. (1975), I1Bridging1I, Conference on Theoretical Is sues in 
Natural Language Processing, 10 -13 June 1975, Cambridge, Mass. 
Rieger, C. J. (1974), Conceptual Memory: A Theory and Computer 
Program for Processing the Meaning Content of Natural Language Utterences, 
Ph.D. Thesis. Stanford University. 1974. 
Schaak, R. (1972), I1Conceptual Dependency: A Theory of Natural Language 
Under standing, Cognitive psycho lo^ 3(4), 1972. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Miaofiche 36 : 26 
How DOES A SYSTEM KNOW WHEN TO STOP INFERENCING?* 
The Moore School  o f  E l e c t r i c a l  Engineer ing  
U n i v e r s i t y  o f  Pennsy lvania ,  P h i l a d e l p h i a  19174 
Abstract The problem of constmining the set of hfemtces added t o  a set of 
beliefs is considered. One method, based on finding a minimal unifying 
structure, is frresented and discussed. The method is meant t o  pnxride 
internal criteria for  inference cut-off. 
I. Introduction 
Natural language processing systems that  are sensitive t o  the semantic 
and logical content of processed sentences and to the p ~ g l r a t i c s  of t he i r  use 
generally draw inferences. A set of fonmilas representing the meaning of a 
sentence and the 'state of be l ie f t  of the system is augnented by other related 
formulas (the inferences) which are retrieved and/or constructed during the 
pmcessing. The problem t o  be investigated here is: How can thi$ process be 
contmlled? Can reasonable criteria be found fo r  restraining the addition of 
inferences? 
Top-down inferences fol.luwing from the meaning of lexical items (often 
expressed by decomposition into  primitives) are clearly bounded, i f  no 
interactions are allowed amng the generated sub-formulas. This process 
(which we call EXPANSION) w i l l  not be discussed here. Rather, we shall be 
concerned with SYNlESIS, i.e., the addition of new formulas based on the 
* This work was part ial ly suppored by NSF- Grant SCC 72-05465A01. 
** AuthorT s currerrt address : Courant Ins t i tu te  of Mathemtical Sciences, 
New York University, 2 51 Mercer S m e t ,  New York , New York 1 0  012. 
zxsence - of already generated lower-level formulas, 'v~hich we shall call 
kliefs. In particular, we are concerned with infererces addgd because a set 
cf beliefs is recognized as fitting a plre-defined pattern. 
The question we ask is: Given an initial set of beliefs ovm a set of 
;ri&ives, - w h a t  ' c r i t e~ ion  can be us& to M t  the pmcess of pattern matcljng 
r-d associated inference addition? The major structural- feature t h a t  we use 
% w i d e  such a cri terion is a partial order over the set of patterns. 
Before pursuing th is  suggestion any further, let us examme sane d 
-3s a i t ~ ~ n a t i v e  ap-pmaches to infence and iiiCsrence c~r-off. 
To logicians, deductive inference involves rules by which fanmilas can 
3e added to a set (which k i ~ a l l y  cantains the d o n s )  in cer ta in  ways 
pv ided other formulas are dLready in the set. In general, th i s  sort of 
infexence is quite open-ended in that one can keep applying the rules of 
LnXerence and ccrme up w i t h  m r e  and a o ~ e  famulad dl of which represent 
'pvab le t  statements. Xhe terminaticm criterion for  a particular invocation 
of the m&ankmmi&t be the appemce of an 'intestingt farmola or the 
loss of interest of the infemcer, but in general the stdement of the rules 
of inference says nohing about when to cease deriving fbmulas. 
This para- from logic has been carried over into ktificbl 
3telligence qmtenrs, where the issue of terndnaticm is very real. The 
usual  solution has been to invoke the inferencer under the very strict 
control of a supervising pgran w*&- has its own gmls progmnmd in 
w h i c h  mkes c-ain that appropriate criteria are applied to hdlt the 
inferenchg. This is =st apparent in systems written in PLANNER-like 
languages a c h  has use~~pmgrammble me&anisms for conbmlling the p l ~ g f  
process . 
In the work uf Schank and Riege, (Sch, 75) (Ri , 7 4  inference has nore 
of the flavor of b e  association; inferences are conceive$ of as expan&g 
s p h ~ s  in'inference space. ' 'Ib termination strategies are q l o y e d :  (1) 
the (iisoovery of a chain of inferences leading fr\m one of the i i i d l  
behkfs to another thmw a shared formila, or 'contact p i n t  in i n f m c e  
space, and (2) the association of numerical fs tnngthst  to fomuks so that 
a line of inference can be discontinued if the strength falls below a certain 
thIesbld. 
Smtegy (2) is scmwihat unsatisfyii in viaw of t ! e  prwLtW. 
arbi-brsariness and attendant difficulties in evaluating the mle of parttcular 
numerical constants in the total. behavim o f  a cc~lplex systep. These osnstants, 
presumbly, have l i t t le  to do with the m-iical stru~tuce of t?e foninl 
inferace scha~~, and as such we would call them 'extaml criteria. ' A 
stmtegy like (1) above, on the other hard, is nure tintexmalt and is to be 
pfm.' 
A gwl of 'the present mrlj is to fcmnulate a reasonable internal criterion 
for infmce cut-off tjhich can be stated fcmnally as part of the inference 
rule. To do this, we & E L  impose a s t m c h m  on the set of patterns to be 
used in inferencing, and the rule for adding inferences w i l l  be fc~rmkted 
in terns of .this s t r u t m e .  
The operatibns to be de-ibed below ate exp- mrre fu l ly  in (R,75), 
where a desmiption of a ccquter iq lem~nta th  is also presented. 
* See also (C,75), (W,75). 
1 A Partial Order for the Patterm Set 
!he inference rule we are aiming fop is to  depend on the - r e t  of input 
beliefs and the - set 0s patterns. The notion we are trying t o  fcmnalize is 
''What does this set of beliefs suggest with respect t o  this se t  af patterns?" 
The particular class of inferences we are concerned with are those gotten 
by matching beliefs i n  the input set against a pattern and augmenting the 
beliefs with additional p p o s i t i o n s  as dictated by the pattern. We want t o  
find the least instarlces of patterns which cover (include) the set of input 
beiiefs. We w i l l  take as inferences a l l  pmpositions (an arbitrary nunber) 
wW& a .  entailed by that  instance of the pattern. 
Put another way, the inference operaticsl is to jump t o  ~onclusions. 
However, it is cmly to  jump to those conclusion required to make the resulting 
set an instance of ,the - least possible pattern in the pattern set. 
The key concept here is 'least' in that thls is what cmtmls how many 
inferences are added. What would be a suitable d e r i n g  relation far patterns 
and ~aopositional beliefs? One w h i c h  naturally suggests i t se l f  and w h i c h  is 
c~rrartly unclex- investigation relies Qn the relations of instantiation and 
substitution instance 
and (2) S 5, S' if S a S t .  
< {q l,... ,%I, where the p 's Carbbing these two, we say that ?q,. . ,p,) - i 
& p i  's are ~ ~ o p o s i t i o n a l  forms, i f  there is  a substitution, s, for the 
variables of {pl,.. . ,p 3 such that {s(pl),-. ,s(p 1) < Iq , e n m  9%)- 
n n -1 1 
We adopt the notational convention of prefixing variables with '?' . 
and let Q = I (HAPPY JOHN) , (GIVE MR. JONES JOHN TOY), 
(PIIRE;YT MR. JONES JOHN)). 
Then P 5 Q under the substitution ?x+JOHN, ?y+MR. JWS. 
The t l e s s - t h m ~ u a J . '  relation is also defined lor pairs of pattam: 
h t  P A M  = {(P ?x ?y), $Q ?y ? a ) }  
and l& PAT-2 = {iR ?u ?v ?w), (Q ?w ?v), Pdu ?w) 1. 
Clearly, PH-1 f P-2 under the sub9citution ?x+?u, ?3*?~, ?B-?V. 
This defi#itfon of - < is quite s tdgh t f c r rd  and czn be made to aceorodate 
expressions wdth embeddings and m a t e  Variables. (These are included 
in the implaentation. 1 
that the relation < - can be -thought of an informition-axrtent 
caparison; if S - < S t  then S t  contains at least askmch 'infomatiant as S 
(and pcwsibly mre) either by virtue of variables t ~v i ng  been replaced by 
particular constants or by additional farmuLas having been added to the set. 
Given 5 far rehting pairs of belief sets, pairs of patterns, aa. 
bedief-set/pttem pairs, we can now fundate me belief-set-extending 
III. The Infemnce Operation: SYNTHESIZE 
Given a set of P of patterns and an input set Bel of beliefs, 
SYN!EESTZE returns a set I of instantiated patterns fma P such that  the 
following -Wee caditions a3 l  hold: 
(1) ~Caemge of input. beliefs) For each instantiated 
(2) (Pairwise inccnparability) If p,q r I then 
(3E (MinWity) mere are no other instances r of patterns in P 
which  are not ih I and yet which are to some element of I 
.cI 
and for which Bil - < r. 
The el-ts of I = SYHTHESSrEbl) represent possible r n u m d .  b extensions 
of Bel; n I represents clear extensions of Bel, namely the superset of Be1 
. 
stained in all rmmmll. extansions. 
Let P { pl = {(A ?XI, (B ?g), (C ?XI), 
p2 = I (B 7x1, (C ?XI, (D ?XI), 
p3 = {(A ?XI, (B ?XI, (C ?XI, (G ? X I }  1 
Represented graphically: 
If input bet Bel = {(A JOHN), (C JOHN)3 
then SYNEESIZE(Bel) = I I (A JOHN), (B JOHN), (C JOHN)) 3. 
There is only one possible ndnimdL extenshn; (B JOHN) is inferred. 
If input set B e l  = ?(B JOHN), (C JOHN)) 
then sYN'mSIZE:(Bell = { f (A JOHN), (B JOHN), (C JOHN) 1 
C(B JQRN), (C JOHN), (D JOfN)) 1 .  
There are two possible rmrundl . . extensions, but the set of clear extensions 
contains no inferences beyond the input set, Bel. (Had pl and pq shared 
another clause, however, an inference would have been added.) 
If the input set Be1 = ?(G JOHN), (B JOHN11 
then SYNTHESIZE(l3el) I { (G JOHN), (A JOHN),  
(B JOHN), (C JOHN)} I ,  
Pattern pa is the least pattern which wheh instantiated covers the inputs, 
and there are two inferxed pru,positions : 
(A JOHN) and (C JOHN). 
me descr ip t i~n  given here has been necessmily brief and incomplete 
A mre farnodl trea-t of SYNTHESIZE i n  t a m s  of lattice-themetic operations 
is given in (R,75) and is  miz zed in (JR,75). One additional technical 
point should be made: It often happens that  fo r  a given input se t  there are 
no single patt- instances which cover a l l  the inputs, though patterns 
-
exist m s e  instances cover subsets of the inputs. In such a case we use 
an extended SYNTHFLSIZE operationt~hich is defined in the same sp i r i t  a s  
SYWHESIZE. (See (R,75).) 
Even w i t b u t  the firU f d  treatment, several things should now be 
clear. First ,  the actual nunibex of inferences dra.. (propositions added) for 
a particular input set may be small o r  large (depending on the inputs and 
the pattern set,) but it is bounded in a p h c i p l e d  way because of the 
definitim of SYNTHESIZE. 
Second, the usual distinction between 'antecedent' and 'consequent' 
clauses in the pattern is not h t a i n e d ;  a clause in the pattern may serve 
as an antecedent on one occasion and a consequent on ano-Eher. 
Third, if 'defined1 lexical item were t o  be associated w i t h  tht: 
patterns, noting which variables are to be bound as arguments upon 
instantiation, then the SYN'IIESIZE function can be used to canpute sumnarizhg 
expressions. a*ls SYNTHESIZE remsents a possiELe formalism for lexical 
insertion. 
IV. An f5wmole of the beration SYNTHESIZE 
Far the sake o f  illustration, let  the primitives be: 
(BENIGN ?x) 
(- ?X ?y) -- ?X thr?ebtesls ?y 
(GIVE ?x ?ob ?y) -- ?x gives ?ob to ?y 
(BELONG ?ob ?XI -- ?ob belongs to ?x 
~IlITEND ?x ?Q) -- ?x intends to do ?Q 
(LEIURN ?X ?ob ?y) -- ?X ?ob to ?y 
(?*ljlS-n~sT ?x ?y)  - ?x -pays i.nt-:sz ?y 
(These primitives and the patterns below may appear somwhat ark i f icu ,  but 
we have chosen a sinrple illustration due to the difficulties in following 
examples with axre than a few clauses.) 
k t  the pattern set consist of the following four pattms: 
E (BENIGN ?x) , (BMNG ?ob ?y) , (GIVE ?y ?ob ?XI, 
(INTEND ?x (REIURN ?x ?ob ?yl)l 
PAT-2 : ?x takes-loan-% ?y : 
- -
I (BENIGN ?x) , (EELOM; ?ob iy) , (GIVE ?y ?ob ?x) , 
(INEND ?x (REIURI'V ?x ?ob ?y)), (PAYS-INEREST ?x ?y)) 
pm-3: ?x roba -?y: 
{(NOT (KEXLGN ?XI), (BElXlNG ?ob ?y), (- ?x ?y), 
(GIVE ?y ?ob ?XI, (NOT (INEND ?x (RFNRN Tx ?ob ?y))) 3 
Pm-4: ?x plays-practid joke on ?y : 
{ (BENIGN ?XI, (BWla ?ub ?y) , (mm ?x ?y) , 
(GIVE ?y ?ob ?y), (DVIEND ?x (RFNRN ?x ?ob ?y))) 
A rough graphic 'pepsentation of the set of patterns is sham in 
Figure 1. 
PAT-2 (takes-loan-from) PAT-4 (plays-pctical-j ake ) 
PAYS- BENIGN BELONG GIVE THREATEN INTEND NOT- NOT-INqEND 
INTEREST BENIGN 
Figure 1 
Ncrw consider the folluwing situations: 
Situation 1. Input beliefs 
Be1 {(BELXING HARRY), (GIVE HARRY bKLEC HIE)) 
smTHESIZE(kl) = 
{{(BFLXING WUlfS;T HARRY), (BENIGN MOE), (GNE HARKY W MOE), 
a' (INTEND MOE (REMW MOE WUET HlRRY))3 
{(NOT BENIGN MOE)), (BELXING WLET HARRY), (THREATEN MOE HARRY), 
(GIVE HARRY MALLET MOE), 
(NOT  INTEND MOE ~FEruRN m WLIm IwRRY)13 
The m m m d  . . matched patterns are - rob and b o r n ,  adding the 
(conjectural) inf-tim that either Hary was threatened, 0x1 Moe intends to 
return the w a l l e t .  
Situation 2. Input beliefs : 
Be1 = {(GIEUE WVK 1000-&XLARS JOHNDCE) ,(PAYS-INTEEST JOHNWE BANK)} 
sYNTHESIzE(~1) = 
{ { ( m G N  JOHNWE), (BELONG 1000-DOWARS BANK) , 
(GIW BANK 1000-DOLLARS JOHNWE), 
(INTEND JO-E (RETURN JOHMXlE 1000-DOLIARS BANK) 1, 
(PAYS-INTEREST JOHNDOE BANK) I I 
As a msult of matching the - loan pattern, we have added three clauses. 
Situation 3. Input beliefs 
Be1 ={(INTEND JOHNDOE (REXKN JOHNDOE 1000-DOLLARS BANK)), 
(PAYS-INTEREST JOHNDOE BANK) 1 
Here SYNTHESIZE(I3el) fiturns exactly the same set as was returned 
in Situation 2. Note, however, that the roles of 
(1) (GIVE RAM( 1000-DOLLARS JOHNDOE) 
and (2) (INTEND JOHMXlE (RFIURN JOHNDOE 1000-DOLLARS BANK)) 
have been reversed. In Situation 2, (1) was an input and ( 2 ) was infemed , 
whereas in Situation 3, (2) was input wd (1) inferred. The curresponding 
clauses of the loan pattke2*n were serving as antecedents on one occasion and 
consequents on the other. This follows naturKLly fran the way SYNIPIESIZE was 
defined. 
In this regard the reader rnay notice that sane input belief sets might 
yield 'warrantedt or 'spu~?ious' inferences--jumping to too many cmclusicms. 
Hawever, the incmmntal addition of new patterns corrects this anom19 in a 
natural way: Patterns which formerly were 'least covers' may cease to be so in 
the extended pattern set. 
V .  Using Definitions to Set  -Up the Pgt tem Space 
We have been particularly interested in using definitions of words 
to set up pattern spaces in which SYNTHESIZE could wark as an inferencer 
and a lexical insertion technique. Special attention was payed t o  the 'speech 
actv verbs, and a bief sample list is presented below. (The symbol '?Prt 
denotes a predicate variable. Also, primitive predicates are capitalized, 
while defined predicates are underlined. ) Again, the definitions are greatly 
oversimplified for i l lustrative purposes. 
(define - tell  (?x ?y ?p ?t) 
(and (-RE ? t O  ?t) 
(NOT (KNOW ?y ?p ?to)) 
(SAY ?x ?y ?p ?t) 
(KNOW ?y ?p ?t) 
(CAUSE (SAY ?x ?y ?p ?t)(KNW ?y ?p ?t)))) 
(define request (?x ?y ?p ? t )  
(tels ?x ?y (W ?x ?p ?t) ?t) )  
(define m s e  (?x ?y ?Pr ?t) 
(and (EELS-OBLIGA'F?D ?x (?Pr ?XI ?t) 
(tell -?x ?y UNTENP ?x (?Pr ?x) ?t)  ? t ) ) )  
(define camand (?x  ?y ?Pr ?t) 
(request ?x ?y (?Fb ?y) ?t 1) 
(define implare (?x ?y ?Pr ?t ) 
(and WWl?S-FAVOR-FROM ?x ?y) 
38 
The expansion of these items to patterns over the primitives yields 
a set in which, far example, KNOW < - t e l l  5 request iccnmand. The input 
set Be1 = {CBEFQRE tl t2), (SAY JAMES MASTER (INTEND JAMES (OPEN JAMES DOOR) t 2 )  t2), 
(FEELS-OBLIGATED JAMES (OPE3 JAMES DOOR) t 2  1) 
tmuld be synthesized to (pmmise JAMES MASER (O?EN + LX)OR) t2), with &eed 
inferences (KNOW FASTER (DElfi) JLLCES (OPEN J A I  CCOi:? t2) t21, etc., as 
d i c t a t d  by the pattern instance of W s e .  
A m t ? d  bas been pmwsed far 'fred bfez-znciri - by attern - inatchig in 
which inference c u t - f  can be structurally ccmstrained: A pattsx is matched 
if it is one of the minioil =ems whose instantiati~n c o r n  &he iqput 
in.~~mati.cm--~ven if this necessitates addkg an mbitmry anounf of additional 
infmmtion. Similarly, on the question of b w  m y  infmces to &aw: 
'Enom -a inferemes are drawn to enable a c o h m t  pattm to be matched. 
The method we have proposed is general in that it nrakes no assunptions 
about the particular predicates to be used in the patterns and beliefs. (Of 
course, it does make  as^^ about h t  counts as a pattern m a belief. 1 
The i n f m c i n g  a u l d  be done by a general purpose cmponent wfiich accepts a 
set of patterns as a parameta. Th*, a p g r w  designing a system for 
inference by pattern mtch need not" devise external criteria, and certainly 
not miteria to be associated Wi'th 1 every pattern. Ram the criteria are 
hqlicit in the system as a Wle; any wtterns w h i c h  can be described in a 
v w  general pattern description language w i l l  genemte its awn set of 
internal miteria fur inference cut-off. 
We are continuing to investigate f d s m s  for smcturing pattern 
sets in the hope of gaining further insights into this class ~f inferences. 
References 
(C,75> Clark, H.H. 1113ridging,'' in Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing. W i d g e ,  
Mass&usetts., June 1975. 
(JR,75) Joshi, ~ . 1 ( .  and Rosenschein, S. "A FomKLism for R e l a t i n g  Meal 
and Pragmatic Information," in Proceedings of  the Workshop on 
Theoretical Issues in N a t u r w l  Language messing. Canilxidge, 
Massachusetts 3 June 19,75. 
(Ri,74) Keg?, C. Conceptual M e m r y .  Ph.Dw Thesis S t a n f c x d  University. 
Stanford, CaliTn;l..nia. 1974. 
GR,75) Rosenschein , S . Struc-hg a Pattern Space, w i t h  Applications to 
L e x i c a l  Information and Event Intermetation. Doctoral 
- - -- --- 
Dissertat ion.  University of Pennsylvania. W l a d e l p h i a ,  
Pennsylvania. 1975. 
(Sch,  75) Schank, R. , Goldman, N. , Rieger , C. , and Riesba&, C. "Inference 
and P a r a p m e  by Computer " Journal,of-the A.C.M. Volume 22, 
No. 3. July, 1975. 
(W,75) Wilks , Y . "A Preferentie, Pattern-seeking Semantics fcrr Natural 
Language Inference ." Artificial InTelligence. Volume 6. 1975. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 36 : 40 
D .  BECKLES, L.  C A R R I N G T O N ,  AND G .  WARNER IN C O L L A B O R A T I O N  W I T H  
C .  BORELY, H.  KNIGHT, P. AQUING, AND J.  MARQUE^ 
Department of Mathematics and School of Education 
Universi t y of t h e  Wes t I n d i  es 
St. A u g u s t i h e ,  T r 2 n i d a d  
ABSTRACT 
Linguistic communication i n  Trinidad and Tobago i~ characterised by 
in t ra -  and inter- ideolectal  var iat ion i n  a spectrum ranging frbm Creole- 
English t o  Internationally Acceptab le English. The tape-recorded speech of a 
sample of children is being analysed t o  determine the s t ruc ture  of t h e i r  
language, i t s  correlation with socio- l inguis t ic  fac te r s  and t h e i r  progress i n  
the  use of English. X.2 c o q v t e r  system is designed t o  deal with manually 
codified data i n  the form of parse t r ees  with associated grammatical and 
semantic information. The communication complex does not have readi ly 
ident i f iab  l e  norms. The analyt ical  method and compwr  sys tern e f f ec t  
recognition of s t ab l e  sub-systems (regardless of the external  c r i t e r i a  which 
determine these sub-system), comparison of these sub-systems with English as 
well as s t a t e  the evolution of the  children's language. 
Acknowledgement 
The research of which tkis paper i s  a working document is p a r t i a l l y  
funded by Ford Foundation Grant 690-06641). The authors acknowledge the kind 
assistance of the IBM worid Trade Corporation, Port of Spain, Trinidad. 
The design and some r e s u l t s  ~f the research t o  which t h e  computer 
system r e l a t e s  a re  described by Carrington, Borely and Knight (1969, 1972, 
1974 a + b) . Part  of t h e  in tent ion of  t h e  pro jec t  is  t o  describe i n  terms 
applicable t o  curriculum development and teacher education, the  s t r u c t u r e  of 
the speech of  school-children aged 5-11+ i n  Trinidad and Tobago and t o  compare 
t h i s  speech with English. 
The o f f i c i a l  language and medium of ins t ruc t ion  is Englfsh. However, 
the medium of da i ly  communication ranges from a type of Creole-English t o  a 
modifed var ie ty  of Internat ional ly  Acceptable English ( I A E ) .  The term 'post-  
creole d ia l ec t  continuum" has  been used by severa l  researchers,  notably Le 
Page (1957), De Camp (1971) and Bickerton (1973) t o  r e f e r  to apparently 
analagous s i tua t ions  i n  Jamaica and Guyana. In  addition t o  Creole, English 
and var ian ts  of both, a large p a r t  of t h e  population i s  exposed t o  a loca l  
var ie ty  of  Hindi (Bho jpuri)  . Smaller numbers a re  exposed t o  Lesser 
Antillean French Creole and fewer s t i l l  t o  Spanish. 
Communication within t h e  soc ie ty  is character ised by in te r - ideolec ta l  
var ia t ion re la ted  t o  several  soc io- l inguis t ic  f ac to r s  - ethno-l inguis t ic  
background, soc ia l  c l a s s ,  educational leve l ,  occupation, sex and age. Code- 
switching and in t ra - ideolec ta l  var ia t ion  r e l a t ed  t o  the context, content and 
purpose of communication complicate the  examinat ion of  the  communication 
s)btem. Since the  var i an t  levels  of the  complex appear t o  overlap they a re  
d i f f i c u l t  f o separate i n t o  d i s t i n c t  sub-systems . 
n e  k i n p i s t i c  Data 
-
The available corpus comprises 100 hours of t h e  recorded conversation 
of almost 1,000 children between 5 and 11+ se lec ted  randomly from 30 schools. 
m e  da ta  f a l l  i n t o  two pre-determined categories: (a) free (with pees group); 
controlled (with invest igator)  . Given the  nature  of the  communication 
compaex s t a t e d  above, var ia t ion  and cont ras t  a re  cen t ra l  t o  the  da ta .  In 
addit ion t o  the usual soc io- l inguis t ic  cor re la tes  of va r i a t ion ,  these  da ta  
have the  p o s s i b i l i t y  of containing l i n g u i s t i c  elements which a re  not 
para l le led  anywhere e l s e  i n  the  community. These elements may occur as a 
r e s u l t  of the  instabil i ty i n t r i n s i c  t o  t h e  performance of a vulnerable age 
cohort. We are  not  dealing with f u l l y  learned d i s c r e t e  languages o r  d i a l ec t s  
bu t  with p a r t i a l l y  learned systems of speech communication being used by 
children who, by v i r t u e  of being i n  school, are  under pressure t o  abandon 
p a r t  of t h e i r  communication r epe r to i r e  i n  favour of  another va r i e ty  of speech. 
h p l i c ~ l t i o n s  of t h e  Data Type f o r  t h e  
Analytical Procedure 
h g l i s h  is  the  only code of t h e  communication complex f o r  which 
adequate grammatical descript ions a re  avai lable  . It  is  demonstrably 
untenable t o  assume t h a t  the  informants a re  attempting t o  speak English a t  
a l l  times. They a re  communicating i n  a set of  language v a r i e t i e s  which a re  
assumed t o  be  rule-governed. A statement of frequency and type of deviation 
from Bnglish cannot therefore be an adequate analysis .  The f i rs t  task of the  
analysis  must be t o  determine the  s t ruc tu res ,  both major and minor, used by 
informants of' various soc io- l inguis t ic  descr ipt ions .  
A preliminary examination of t h e  da ta  shows t h a t  a t  the  l e v e l  of 
phrase-structure of utterances; t h e  s t ruc tu res  w i l l  appear t o  be pre-  
dominantly iden t i ca l  with English. I t  is the components of the  elements, 
t h e i r  meanings and functions t h a t  w i l l  show the  di f ferences  from English. 
Consequently, t he  analysis  mst note  the  leve ls  a t  which der ivat ional  t r e e s  
cease t o  be compatible w i t h  English. 
In view of t h e  v a r i a b i l i t y  inherent  in t h e  data,  t he  analysis  must 
discover the socio- l inguis t ic  corre la tes  of the  occurence of elements, as 
hue11 as s t a t e  co-occurence r e s t r i c t i ons  of a given element. Since it is 
possible  that some elements may be d i s t r ibu ted  ih a way that  does not perinit 
corre la t ion  with the s t a t e d  socio- l inguis t ic  fac to rs ,  t he  analysis must 
permit grouping of informants based on shared l i n g u i s t i c  fea tures  f o r  
sasequent re-examination. This provision admits the pos s ib i l i t y  t h a t  sets 
of fea tures  may be typica l  of a language acquistion s tage  of the  informants 
mgardless  of  t h e i r  soc io- l inguis t ic  descr ipt ions.  
me Analytical Procedure 
1, Each utterance is  phonetically t ranscr ibed and ascribed t o  an 
informant by an iden t i f i ca t ion  procedure. Doubtful identf  t y  is  
specia l ly  coded. 
2 Each utterance is  rewrit ten i n  English orthography. 
3. For each utterance a parse t r e e  i s  c o n s t a c t e d  using the  following 
protocol where each category described below forms the  content of a 
node of the parse t ree .  The numbers are  f o r  reference and ind ica te  
the hierarchical  re lat ionship of t he  nodes. 
.a Utterance type S sentence 
SEL e l l i p t i c a l  S 
FRAG fragment 
FREL e l  l i p  t i c a l  FKAG 
8.1 Utterance 
comp 1 exi  t y  
0.2 St ruc tura l  type 
SIMP simple 
CP compound 
CX complex 
CPCX compound- complex 
DEC declarat ive 
INT in ter rogat ive  
IMP imperative 
0.3 Semantic type STMT statement 
Qu question 
COMM command 
RHET rhetorical intent 
(1.4 Linear order and type of cl*auses occurring 
e.g. MCl + ADVC TEMP 2 
$9.5 Linear order and type of phrases occurring 
(where not part of a clause) 
e.g. PREP P 1 + VBL P 2  
9.6 Dependency of clauses - dependent 
embedded 
co-ordinate 
included 
e.g. 2/1 = clause 2 i s  embedded in c l a s e  1 
8 - 7  ACI'V active 
AFM affirmative PAS passive 
NEG negative EQ equational 
STAT stative 
LOC Iocbnive 
1-9 surface structure of the clause/phrase occurring first. 
e .g .  M C ~  --7 SUM + PRED* + IOBJ + WBJ + PREP P 
*PRED = predicator - not predicate 
1-1  detailed analysis of first occurring element of 
1.9. e .g .  SUBJ 3 PRMD + HDW 
1.1.1 first element of subject. e.g. P R M D ~ [ H E ]  PADJ, 
RD, MASC, SG, NOK; IAE: [HfS] etc, 
2. fU surface structure of the clause/phrase occurring 
second,, , etc t o  7 , 9 ,  
As exemplified a t  1.1.1, the last node of each sub-part states  the  actual  
l i teral  being described. The acceptabi l i ty  of the i t e m  as IAE i s  n o t e d , O K  
or NOK,together with a reasonable IAE al ternat ive .  Apart from the  obligatory 
i n f o r m a t i o n  requifed by the procedure, the analyst may make additional 
comments which may be either i n  keywords o r  E n g l i s h .  e.g. CMNT: probably 
idiosyncratic or CMNT: double NEG. 
8.6 is reserved f o r  special  idioms. 
e.g. 8.9 [SCRUNT]----) serounge for a l iving 
9.g is reserved fo r  tags.  
e.g. 9.0 TAG-[YOU HEAR] 
Fig. 1 shows a sample analysis.  
Figure 1 
4652g72 
[bH SISTER AND THEM DOES BREAK A SET OF PLATE, YES] 
9.flS; 8.1 SIMP; 9.2 DEC; 8.3 S W ;  9.4 MC + TAG; 9.5 NA; 8.6 NA; 9.7 AFM ACTV 
1.9 MC + SUM + PRED + DOBJ 
1.1 SUBJ-PRMD + HDW 
1.1.1 PRMD--+ [MY] PADJ, ST, SG, OK 
1.1.2 HDW-N. ASOC, ANIM, NOK: IAE: NEQV 
1.1.2.1 N ASOC -NCO + ASOC 
1.1.2.1.1 NCO + [SISTER] N SG, ANIM, OK 
1.1.2.1.2 ASOC+ [AND THEM] NOK; IAE: NEQV; VIDE 8.9 
1.2 PRED--3AUX + VT; GR @ CTN, @ PROG, PATT, NEUTTM 
1.2.1 AUX+[DOES] NOK; IAE: ZERO 
1.2.2 VT +[BREAK] OK TRAN 
1.3 DOBJ *PRMD + HDW 
1.3.1 PRMD- IND DET + N + PREP 
1.3.1.1 I N D  DET-f[A] 
1.3.1.2 N---)[SET] NCO, SG; LEX: NOK; IAE:[LOT] 
1.3.1.3 PREP- t [OF]  OK 
1.3.2 HDW [PLATE] N PL, INAN, NOK; IAE : [PLATES] 
1.3.2.1 NPL* NCQ - PLZR; NOK; IAE : NCO + PLZR 
1.3 .2 .1 .1-NCO +[PLATE] @ BCL, OK 
P.3.2.1.2 P L Z R r Z E R O ,  NOK; IAE: PLZR = +S, CLF 
8.8 [MY SISTER AND THEM] 3 [MY SISTERS]* [MY SISTER AND HER FRIENDS] 
9.q TAG [YES] 
Glossary of keywords 
ADV - adverb [ ia l )  , ANIM - animate, ASOC - associative 
AUX - auxil iary,  BCL - base form f i n a l  c lus ter ,  C- clause 
CLF - f i n a l  c lus ter  resu l t s  from suffixation,  CMEJT - comment 
CTN - completion, DET - determiner, DOBJ - d i r ec t  object ,  GR - grammar 
HDW - headword, INAN - inanimate, I N D  - indef in i te ,  IOBJ - ind i rec t  object 
LEX - lexical ,  MASC - masculine, MC - main clause, N - noun, 
NCO - countable noun, NEQV - no equivalent, NEUT - ne t ra l ,  P - phrase 
PADJ - possessive adjective, PATT - pat tern,  PL - plura l ,  PLZR - plura l i ze r  
PRED - predicator, PREP - preposition, PRMD - pre-head modifier, 
PROG - progressive, RD - t h i rd  person, SG - singular,  S U B J  - subject ,  
TEMP - temporal, TM - time, TRAN - t r ans i t ive ,  VBL - verbal, 
VT - verb used t rans i t ive ly  
* - al ternat ive  parse o r  meaning, @ - absence of. . . , [ ] enclose l i t e ra l s ,  
- end of inSonnation s e t ,  , - minor separator. 
Developing the Computer System 
The strucfure of the  parse t r e e  i s ,  i n  general, qui te  complex and a 
simple ad hoc approach t o  va l id i ty  checking was quickly seen t o  be inadequate. 
7 
As a r e s u l t  a formal description of the t r e e  was developed and used t o  
construct a (par t ia l ly)  syntax-driven va l id i ty  checking rgutine. The output 
of t h i s  routine consists  of a l i s t i n g  of t h e  input, with e r ro r  comments where 
necessary, together with the  in ternal  representation of the  va l id  t r ee s  which 
is wri t ten onto a f i l e  - the  parse-tree f i l e  - f o r  the  subsequent analyses. 
several other f i l e s  are used i n  addition t o  the parse t r e e  f i l e .  
There is the  informant f i l e  which contains p rof i l es  of the informants, 
(e.g. age, sex, l i ngu i s t i c  background, e t c ) ,  a s e t  o f  form class  files and a 
s e t  of c lass i f ica t ion files. The form class  files are groupings of the  
various keywords which may occur i n  the data. Thus, f o r  example, one form 
class f i l e  contains a l l  keywords which may occur on the left-hand s ide  of a 
rewrite. A class i f ica t ion file contains a group number f o r  each informant; 
for  example, one c lass i f ica t ion f i l e  contains 0 f o r  each informant not aged 5 
1 i f  the  informant is  aged 5 with a Hindi l ingu is t i c  background and 2 
otherwise: In any operation on the data  the utterances of informants i n  
group 0 of the relevant c lass i f ica t ion w i l l  be ignored. 
Each node of a t r e e  i n  the parse t r ee  f i l e  consists of a name - i n  the 
case of a rewrite t h i s  is the left-hand s ide  of the rewrite,  otherwise it is 
the level number - and a s e t  of descriptors, e .g. the grammar associated with 
the name. Thus, i n  the example of Figure 1, the l ines 1.1, 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 
1.1.2.1 become the sub-tree of Figure 2 where the descriptors are  put i n  
parentheses. 
Figure 2 
SUBJ 
PRMD (PADJ, ST, SG, OK) HDW (ANIM, NOK; IAE: NEQV) 
I I 
NCO ASOC 
For any t ree ,  each analysis s t a r t s  a t  the root and many of the tasks 
t o  be described below may be regarded, i n  par t ,  as a pat tern  matching 
exercise. The d i f f i cu l t i e s ,  and in t e re s t ,  a r i s e  because each node of the  
parse t r e e  carr ies  a substant ial  amount of information, and except for 
l i t e r a l s ,  only a p a r t i a l  matching of the nodes is usually required. In 
addition, some tasks requira the matching of d i s jo in t  sub-trees within a given 
parse t r ee ,  occasionally subject t o  s ide  conditions which may involve nodes 
not lying on the paths between the  root and any of the  sub-trees of i n t e r e s t .  
Apart from the pat tern matching,there is the problem of c lass i f i ca t ion  of the 
occurrences of the  various patterns.  This is a simple tabulation complicated, 
i n  some cases, by the f a c t  tha t  the t o t a l  number of categories i s  unknown. 
The bas ic  task of the  system may be cas t  i n  the form: count with 
respect t o  a given c lass i f i ca t ion  f i l e ,  and subject t o  s t a t ed  s ide  conditions, 
the occurrences of a given pattern. 
Since there are only 1,000 informants and they f a l l  i n to  a reasonably 
small nunher of classes it is economical t o  pre-classify on the bas i s  of the  
informant prof i les  ra ther  than bui ld  the c lass i f i ca t ion  process i n t o  the  r e s t  
of the  analysis. The system is instructed t o  produce a c lass i f i ca t ion  f i l e  
by a statement of the  form: 
CLASS = ( class i f ica t ion  f i l e  name ) , (4 expression l i s t  >) where 
(classif icat ion f i l e  name) is  the name by which the f i l e  w i l l  be known, 
and each expression in<eqress ion  l i s t  7 i s  a Boolean expression. For 
example : 
CLASS = H I N D I ,  (AGE = 5 e LANG = HINDi, AGE = 5 4 LmG + HIND11 
w i l l  produce the c lass i f ica t ion  f i l e  given e a r l i e r  as an example. 
The s ide  conditions r e f e r  t o  items i h  the  parse t rees  which must occur 
if the tree is  t o  be i ~ ~ c l u d d  i n  a given analysis.  For example, i f  only 
affirmative active uHerances are  t o  be analysed the s ide  condition Q. 7 
AFM AC171 is  used. me patrern t o  be used is  s t a t e d  i n  a manner s imi lar  t o  
t h a t  used i n  specifying the input data. Thus, the  pat tern description 
PRED r .. . + AUX.. .; GR: @ CTN, NEUT TM, @ PROG, PATT 
P d i c a t e s  that the sub-tree 
PRED (GR: @ CTN, NEUT TM, @ FROG, PATT) 
is  of in te res t ,  subject t o  the convention that  both the order of node 
descriptors (where given) and node descriptors not mentioned i n  the pat tern 
are t o  be Lgnored. The occurrence of keyword FORM = < form class  f i l e  name) 
indicates tha t  the contents of the s ta ted  form class  f i l e  are t o  form an 
additional dimension t o  the f ina l  tabulations. Thus the pattern 
AUX --+ [?I FORM = OKFILE 
where OKFILE contains the keywords OK and NOK and i s  an abbreviation Sor the 
pai r  of patterns. 
AUX -P [?I OK 
AUX+ [?I NOK 
The symbol ? indicates that the items found there are also t o  add an 
additional dimension t o  the tabulations. The output of each tabulation may 
also be used t o  construct a c lass i f ica t ion f i l e  of the informants, t o  be 
used i n  further analyses. 
CONCLUSION 
In respect of performance of groups with d i f ferent  socio-l inguist ic  
descriptions, f o r  purposes of t h i s  study, it is assumed tha t  the frequency of 
occurrence of par t icular  basic parse trees is a meaningful indicator of 
differences i n  speech patterns. A major d i f f i cu l ty  is that no two t rees  i n  
the study are identical  but at the same time i f  we s t r i p  too much information 
from each node there are too few trees to make an analysis worthwhile, and 
i n  part, the study aims at determining the degree t o  which strippilrp of 
information at interior nodes i s  necessary i f  the Gomputer i s  to  be a qseful 
aid.  
REFERENCES 
Bickerton, D. 1973 
Carrington L. and 
Borely, C. 1969 
Carrington L., 1972 
Borely, C. and 
Knight H. 
Carrington L., 1974 
Borely, C. and 
Knight H. 
De Camp, Dm 1971 
Le Page, R.B. 1957 
Knig,ht, H a w  19 74 
Carrington L. 
and Borely, C. 
"The Nature of a Creole Continuumn Language 49 (3) 
p.640-669. 
"An Investigation i n t o  English Language Learning 
and Teaching Problems i n  Trinidad and Tobago 
Progress Reporttf. U. W. I. I n s t i t u t e  of Education, 
S t .  Augustine (mimeo) . 
Away Robin Run: A C r i t i c a l  description of the  
Teaching of Language A r t s  i n  the Primary Schools 
of Trinidad and Tobago. U.W.I. I n s t i t u t e  of 
Education, S t .  Augustine. (mimeo) . 
'ILinguistic Exposure of Trinidadian Children'' 
Caribbean Journal of Education No. 1, p. 12-22. 
"The study of pidgin and creole languagest' i n  
Hymes Pidginization of Creolization of Languages 
CUP. p.13-39. 
"General out l ines  of creole English d ia lec ts  i n  the 
Bri t ish Caribbean1'. Orbes 6,  p. 373-391. 
'tPreliminary Comments on Language Arts Textbooks 
i n  use i n  the  primary schools of Trinidad and 
Tobago". Caribbean Journal of Education No. 2 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 36 : 52 
DAVID BRILL AND BEATRICE T. OSHIKA 
Speech Communicat ions  R e s e a r c h  L a b o r a t o r y ,  I n c .  
8 0 0 A  Mirarnonte Drive 
S a n t a  B a r b a r a ,  C a l i f o r n i a  9 3 1 0 9  
ABSTRACT 
A set of SAIL programs has been implemented for analyzing 
large bodies of natural language data in which associations 
exist between strings and sets of strings. These programs 
include facilities for compiling information such as 
frequency of occurrence of strings (e.g. word frequencies) 
or substrings (e.g. consonant cluster frequencies), and 
describing relationships among strings (e.g. various phono- 
logical realizations af a word). Also, an associative data 
base may be interactively accessed on the basis of keys 
corresponding to different types of data elements, and a 
pattern matcher allows retrieval of incompletely specified 
elements. Applications Of this natural language processing 
package include analysis of phonological variation for speci- 
fying and testing phonological rules, and comparison across 
languages for historical reconstruction. 
f ,  NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING PACKAGE 
A. General characteristics 
The natural language processing package implemented at 
the Speech Communications Research Laboratoqy (SCIU;) is 
currently w e d  in the analysis of associated lists @f string 
data such as discourse transcriptions or pronouncing diction- 
aries. The package consists of 
a) a set of "batchw programs which provide frequency 
and context information on the lexical and phonological forms 
appearing in the input; and 
b) a system for interactively accessing the data dn the 
basis of orthographic and phonological patterns. 
All of the programs in this package are written in SAIL, 
an ALGOL-based language offering extended string and set 
manipulation operations and an associative data base. The 
programs run on a DEC PDP-10 at Carnegie-Mellon University 
via the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) computer 
network (ARPANET). The ARPANET is accessed by the ELI? oper- 
ating system developed by SCRL, which runs on a local PDP-11 [I]. 
While the processing package is applicable to various 
types of natural language data, it has been used most exten- 
sively at SCRL in the analysis of discourse transcriptions. 
The discourses consist of conversational speech gathered in 
interviews with adult speakers of various dialects of American 
English. More than twenty-five discourses, transcribed ortho- 
graphically and phonologically, have been prmssed, yielding 
detailed information on over 28,000 utterances representing 
about 3,500 distinct lexical- items. All examples in this 
section are taken from a typical discburse. 
B. "Batchw Facility 
Discourse processing usually begins with the generation 
of a transcription reference file in which orthographic and 
phonological representations are listed in discourse order, 
as illustrated in Figure 1. 
WELL 
LET ' S 
TRY 
CLASSIFYING 
THEM 
ACCORDING= 
TO 
THE 
EXCUSES 
086 TRAY 
887 KLAES$CFAYIHNS 
888 DHAXM 
88s //AXK$ORDIHN/TUW// 
Figure 1 
In this example, the phonological realization of TRY 
is /tray/ (coded TRAY). The phonological code shown is a 
basic ARPA phonemic alphabet augmented by special symbols 
indicatim some phonetic detail, such as vowel height. The 
realization of THE, for example, is coded DH$I, indicating 
that the vowel fell between /i/ and / I / .  
Reference number's assigned to each utterance serve as an 
index to the discourse context in which utterances occur, and 
are used to interpret the output of other programs in the 
package. Separate reference number sequences are provided for 
the orthographic and phonological forms in the reference files, 
since there may not be a one-to-one correspondence between 
these forms, as in the case of phonological merging whl-eh 
obscures word boundaries, In Figure 1, for example, the two 
orthographic items WELL and LET'S are realized as a single 
phonological item /wl E ts/ (coded WELEHTS) 
The core of the "batch! processing facility is a set of 
three programs: PROCON, ENVIRN and CLUSTR. PROCON provides 
frequency and context information on the lexical level, while 
the other two provide similaf information on the phonological 
level, 
PROCON output contains an alphabetically sorted list of 
the utterance types occurring in the input discourse trans- 
cription file as illustrated in Figure 2. Frequency of oc- 
currence of each type is given, along with the various phono- 
logical realizations. For each phonological realization, 
frequency count and reference numbers are provided. 
8 HAVE 3 AXV 11,337,703 
3 HHAEI 354,828,1397 
1 HHAXh 710 
1 HH$GV 1067 
Figure 2 
In Figure 2, for example, HAVE occurred eight times, and 
was pronounced (/av/) three times and HHAEV v three 
times. Using the reference numbers associated with these pro- 
nunciations, it is possible to establish the discourse context. 
One would f i n d  that the tbree AXV pronunciations (i.e. 
utterances 11, 337 and 703) a l l  involved the auxiliary 
construction in ",.,may have felt,,,seemed to have been 
which have since been. .. II 
ENVIRN tallies occurrences of phonological segments and 
environments in the discourse transcriptions. The output of 
this program lists frequencies of all phonemes appearing in 
&he input file, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
Figure 3 
Glottal stop, coded Q, occurred a total of thirty times 
in the discourse, The immediate environments of Q are l i s t e d  
alphabetically by left context, with word boundaries indicated 
by slash /, and a frequency count and reference numbers are 
given for each environment. For example, Q appeared eight 
times in the context EH--EN ( E - n ,  and a check of the 
reference list shows that all these occurrences were in the 
word sentence (s) . 
ENVIRN output also provides a frequency ordered l i S t  of 
phonemes, w i t h  frequency totals brokerr down according t o  
occurrence in word i n i t i a l ,  medial and final position. 
CLUSTR, the third of the "batch" programs,is used i n  the 
analysis of phoneme c lus ter  distribution i n  the discourse data. 
A l l  c lusters  are indexed by each of their component phonemes, 
so that the cluster NDZ (fndz)') which is  listed under D i n  
Figure 4 also appears under N a d  2 i n  the  full output. 
D E N T S  1 699 
D Q E N T S  1 486 
D V 2 1 4 1 7 ,  1445 
D Z 5 278, 284, 837, 1341,  1350 
N D Z  1 1429 
Figure 4 
Separate output may be generated for clusters occurring within 
woxds or across word boundaries- Currently, consonant and 
vawel clusters are tallied, but the program can be easily 
modified to handle sequences of phonemes belonging to arbi- 
trary user-defined classes (e.g. voiced sounds,, nasals, un- 
voiced stops, etc. ) . 
For each phoneme belonging to a selected class, CLUSTR 
provides a count of the number of times that the phoneme appears 
in clusters, an alphabetically sorted list of those clusters, 
and a frequency count and reference numbers for each cluster. 
Figure 4, a sample of CLUSTR output for within-word consonant 
clusters, shows that D appeared in clusters a total of 70 times, 
with 32 of these being ND clusters. Reference numbers may be 
used to establish the discourse context of any cluster. For 
example, the cluster D Q EN T S (/di?nts/) appears in utterance 
486 which is the word students. Like ENVIRN, CLUSTR provides 
a frequency ordered list of cluster types in addition ts the 
alphabetic list. 
C- Interactive Retrieval Facility 
The set of "batch" programs is complemented by a language 
data retrieval system which allows the user to interactively 
retrieve data items conforming to various orthographic, phono- 
logical and syntactic patterns. 
Linguistic data is inte~nally stored in the system as a 
network of associations between items of various types. These 
associations are implemented in SAIL as LEAP triples [2J and 
the element types entering into these associations vary accord- 
ing to the - particular application. For example, in analysis 
of the discourse data described above, triples contain ortho- 
graphic, phonological and syntactic elements. For study of 
phonetic-to-phonemic mapping, triples might be orthographic, 
phonemic and phonetic elements. In comparative linguistic 
research, triples might consist of an orthographic element 
and two phonological elements corresponding to two languages 
or dialects 
Data can be accessed on the basis of patterns directed to 
any one (or any combination) of these elements. For example, 
if the data base contains associations between orthographic, 
phonological and syntactic elements, then the query 
P/ 0: THE 
retrieves the phonological items associated with the .spelling 
THE, and might return DHAX(/Ba/ )  and DHIY i ) .  The query 
O/ P: TUW 
would retprn the orthographic items pronounced T m  (/tu/), e.g 
two, too, t o r  
- - -  
Patterns such as THE and TUW completely specify the 
element to which they are directed, but various special forms 
allow partial. specifications to be expressed also. The symbol 
$ matches any single segment (in a phonological pattern) or 
character (in an orthographic pattern), and the symbol = 
matches any number, llncluding zero, of contiguous segments 
(or characters). Thus, if N is the syntactic code for Nounr 
the query 
O/ P: $$, S: N, 0: D= 
searches for all two-phoneme nouns which begin with the letter 
D, and might return dye, day, - doe, dough. 
Each phonological element is defined in terms of a set of 
features such as UV (unvoiced) and ST (stop), and these 
features may be used to specify segments in phonological 
pawerns. To search for phonological realizations containing 
/i/ between unvoiced stops, one could use the query 
P/ P: =(UV + ST)IY(UV + ST)= 
to find /kip/ (keep) , /pik~ ?/  (peeking) , and /r  pit d/ (repeated) 
Boolean operators are also available for specifying 
pattern segments. For example, the query 
0 6: (C OR K)=, P: (NOT K)= 
returns arthographic ikems which begin with C or K and are not 
pronounced with initial k ,  e.g. cite, change, know. 
Several capabilities lacking in the current interactive 
system will be available in the near future. The user will be 
able to (1) specify optional segments and sequences of segments 
in phonological patterns; (2) create and name sets containing 
items of interest, e.g. monosyllabic function words, and use 
set operations such as union and intersection; (3) interactive- 
ly modify feature definitions of phonological symbols: (4) re- 
trieve several elements, e.g. orthographic and phonological 
forms, simultaneously; (5) display the discourse context of any 
given item, and (6) write retrieval queries and responses to a 
file for subsequent analysis. 
11. APPLICATIONS 
The processing package can be used in the analysis of 
various kihds of natural language data, as illustrated in the 
following examples. 
A. Phonological variation 
The programs can be used to efficiently index and sort 
natural language data so that systematic phonological varia- 
tion can be easily examined. For example, inspection of a 
PROCON output for a ten minute interview consisting of over 
2,000 utterance tokeno yields general observations such as 
-- final /t/ alternates with final glottal stop /?/ under 
certain conditions; 
-- alveolar flapping occurs under several stress 
conditions whidh appear to be related to noun affixes. 
These preliminary observations can be systematically 
investigated using the interactive query system. 
The data base can be queried for all phonological realiza- 
tions ending in T (/t/) or Q ( /? / ) ,  and the corresponding ortho- 
graphic entries, using the queries 
P/ P: =(T OR Q )  and O/ P: =(T OR 9 )  
The resulting list might include 
art /a*/ 
but /bat /  
can' t /k=nt/ 
/k en?/ 
fished /f 1 J t /  
limit 
raft 
that 
want 
That is, final /t/ appears to vary with final /? /  following 
vowels arid following nasals, but not elgewhere. This hy- 
pothesis, represented as a context-sensitive phonological 
rule, could then be tested against additional data using any 
of several computer rule testers [3-51. 
Forthcoming modifications will allow queries with set 
operations, such that the intersection of orthographic entries- 
having final /t/ alternating with /?/ can be requested directly 
by the query 
01 P: =T n P: =Q . 
That is, only entrieq with /t/ and /?/ alternation would be 
retrieved, and the entties art, fished and raft would not be 
returned, 
In order to determine the conditions under which alveolar 
flapping occurs, the queries 
O/ P: =DX= and P/ P: =DX= 
can be used to retrieve phonological items which contain DX 
( )  and correspondihg orthographic items. Such a list might 
include 
ability l a b  il xfi/ 
city /s ifid/ 
facility /f as il  IF^/ 
letter /l ;fa/ 
petty /p ;pi/ 
responsibility / r ~ s p a n s ~ b i l ~ ~ i /  
writing /rd~f I g /  
Flapping occprs in a descending stress pattern, e.g. city 
letter, petty, wrdting in which a stressed vowel precedes 
the flap and an unstressed vowel follows. In addition, trhe 
flap appears to occur between unstressed vowels when the 
sequence rppresents the noun asfix -ity, as in ability. To 
check this, the query 
P/ 0: =ITY, S: N 
could be used to retrieve a81 nouns ending in -ity, and the 
subset involving affixed forms ( i . e .  excluding city, pity) 
could be examined for occurrences of flapping. 
B. Word Error Recognition testing 
The interactive facility can be used to examine the kinds 
of word recognition errors which might occur in a speech under- 
standing system due to indeterminacies in segment labelling. 
If a string is completely specified as /likrg/(coded LIYKIHNX), 
then it matches a single word, leaking. However, if labelling 
is less precise, then alternative (and incorrect)word matches 
might occur. Using the inte~ctive retrieval system, alter- 
native labels and resulting word matches can be examined for 
any given lexicon. 
In the example above, the labelled string might be 
L (VOC HIGH ANT) K I H  NX 
with the stressed vowel represented as a set of features: 
vocalic, high, anterior. Resulting word matches might include 
leaking and licking. 
If the initial consonant is also specified as a set of 
features (consonant, sonorant, continuant), as i n  the string* 
(CON SON CONT) {VOC H I G H  ANT) K IH NX 
then the resulting word matches might be leaking, l i c k i n q ,  
reeking. If the K is specified less precisely as $ voice- 
less stop, word matches might include leakinq, licking, 
reeking, leaping, rippinq. 
The interactive facility allows the system designer to 
easily determine the nature of possible incorrect matches 
due to phonological indeterminacy, especially as the size of 
the lexison increases. 
C. Comparative Linguistic Relationships 
If the data base is represented as an orthographic list 
with two associated phonological lists representing two 
languages or dialects, the interactive system can be used to 
discover systematic sound correspondences, and to aid in the 
study of dialect relationships and historical reconstruction. 
A sample'data base might be: 
Gloss 
a fish 
to have 
no, not 
brother 
bamboo 
Lanquaqe A Lanquage B 
plaa Pa 
mi i mia 
plaaw Paw 
phii fia 
phaay fay 
The query 
would retrieve those items in language B which correspond to 
items in language A with initial /pl-/ clusters, e.g. and 
paw, indicating that consonant cluster simplification may have 
occurred in language B. The query 
B/ A: =IYIY 
would retrieve those items in language B which correspond to 
items in language A with final /-ii/, e.g. the drphthongized 
mia and f ia. 
- -
A large data base could be accessed in this way to dis- 
cover systematic correspondences between languages A and B, 
such as the correspondences /pl-/:/p-/, m : m ,  /ph-/:/f/, 
i i : i a  a a : a ,  etc. 
The flexibility of the interactive system, combined with 
the linguistic intuition of the user, can be used.to specify 
and retrieve any set of correspondences, without the need to 
format the data according to initial consonants or clusters, 
vowel nuclei, finals, etc. Information such as tonal cnntours 
and stress can also be represented and accessed. 
REFERENCES 
[I] Retz, D. La, 3. R. Miller, J. L. McClurg, B. W. Schafer, 
Elf Kernel Programmer's Guide, Speech Comunications 
Research Laboratory, Santa Barbara, California. April, 1975. 
[2 ]  Feldman, J. A. and P. Rovner , "An ALGOL-based Associative 
Language," Comm. ACM, Volume 12, August, 1969, 439-449. 
[3] Barnett, J. A,, A Phonological Rules System, TM-5478/000/00, 
System beveiopment Corporation, Santa Monica, California, 
1975. 
[ 4 ]  Bobrow, D. G. and J. B. Fraser, "A Phonological Rule 
T e ~ t e r , ~  Comm. ACM, Volume 11, November, 1968, 766-772. 
[5 ]  Friedman, J. and Y. C. Morin, Phonoloqical Grammar Tester: 
Description, Natural Language Studies No. 9, Phonetics 
Laboratory, The University of Michigan, 1971. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was supported in part by the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency of the Department df Defense through 
Contract N00014-73-C-0221 administered by the Office of Naval 
Research Information Systems Proqram. 
1975 ACL Meeting 
ON THE ROLE OF WORDS AND PHRASES I N  AUTOMATIC TEXT ANALYSIS 
Automatic indexing nom~ally consists i n  assigning to documents 
either single terms, or more specific entities such as phrases, or 
more general entities such as term classes. Discrimination value 
analysis assigns an appropriate role in the indexing operation to 
the single terms, term phrases, and thesaurus categories. To 
enhance precision i t  is useful to form phrases from high-frequency 
single term components. To improve recall, low-frequency terms 
should be grouped into affinity classes, assigned as content 
identifiers instead of the single terms. 
Collections in different subj ect areas are used in experiments 
to characterize the type of phrase an8 word class most effective 
for content representation. 
The following typical conclusions can be reached: 
a) the addition of phrases improves performance considerably; 
b) use of phrases is better with corresponding deletion of 
single terms in practically all cases; 
c) the use of both high-frequency and medium-frequency 
phrases is generally more effective than the use of either phrase- 
type alone; 
d) the most effective thesaurus categories are those which 
include a large number of low-frequency terms; 
e) the least effective classes either consist of only one or 
two terms, or else they include terms w i ~ h  unequal frequency cha- 
racteristics permitting the high-frequency terms to overcome the 
others. 
The discrimination value theagr is developed and appropriate 
experimental output is supplied. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 36 : 68 
D e p a r t q e n t  o f  ~ n t h r o p o l o g y  
U n i v e r s i t y  of New Brunswick 
Roswe l l  Park Memorial X n s t i  t u t g  
B u f f a l o ,  New York 
L i n g u i s t i c  S t r i n g  P r o j e c t  
New York University 
2 Washington Sqyare V i l l a g e r  28 
New York, New Yofk 10012 
ABSTRACT 
~inguistic mechanisms of compression are used when making notes within a 
context where the objects and meanings are known. Mechanisms of compressidn in 
medical records for a collaborative study of breast cancer are described. The 
syntactic devices were mainly deletion of words having a special status in the 
grammar of the whole language and deletion in particular positions of word+ 
having a special sta&us in the sublanguage. The deIeted forms are described 
and sublanguage Qord classes defined. A subcorpus of the medical records was 
parsed by an existing computer parsing system; a component covering the dele- 
tion-forms was added to the granunar. Modifications to t,he computer grammar 
are discussed and the parsing results are summarized. 
Introduction 
All 1anguages"have mechanisms of compression. Sentences may be embedded 
within other sentenaes by means of nominalization and complementation. Various 
grammatical transformations involve deletion of certain parts of the sentence. 
In medical records, we find entries such as no evidence of metastases, which 
may be said to be derived Trea something like There is no evidence of metastases. 
Such incomplete sentences are not common in the spoken language of the medical 
records (i.e. dictated reports). However when physiciakrs themselves are requirbd 
to write- material for records, compression mechanisms are qmmonly use&. 
Although this paper will deal with a m i f i c  corpus, similar devices would 
I 
often be used for compression in other s-ations where there is pressure to 
write as little as possible, Legal, educational, and scientific recordg where 
informal notes are kept woum be other examples of this class of sitqations. 
The original motivation for this study was to develop effective methods for 
storing &e information in a medical record and to be able to retrieve this in- 
formation for purposes of research, medical care, or administration. Fsoan pre- 
vious research, the feasibility of verbatim input of dictated narrative has been 
established, Computerized extraction of the information has been shown to be 
feaeible i~ a test system ACORN (Automated Coding of Report ~arrative). 
 his 
system has been described in detail in a series of previous papers. 1dt3 
1 I .Dm J. Bross et al "Information in Natural Languages : A New Approach1'. 
Journal of the American Medical ~ssociakkon, Vol. 207, No. 11, 1969, pp. 2080- 
2084. 
2 I . D . 3 ,  Bross et al "Feasibility ~f ~utoxnated Information Systems in the 
Usarts NatvlLal Language". American Scientist, Vol. 57, No. 2, 1969, pp. 193-205. 
3p.k Shapim and D.F. Stemole. "ACORN (Automated Coding ot Report Narrative.): 
An Automated Ratrral-language Question-Answering syst& for surgical Reportsw. 
Conputers and Butomation, Vol. 20, No. 7, 1971. 
For a highly s t ructured medical record where the e n t r i e s  are s ing le  words 
o r  very r e s t r i c t e d  sentences, the  f e a s i b i l i t y ' o f  computer-assisted ed i t i ng  and 
coding has a l s o  been established. A procedure fo r  typing i n  t he  e n t d e s  ver- 
batim i n  a medical record,called 'TICPIS' (Type-In Coding and Editing System) 
4 ha8 been reported e1sew)rere. However, the th i td ,  intermediate c l a s s  of material  
cannot be handled by ACORN o r  by TICES. Therefore, a l i n g u i s t i c  analys is  of 
t h i s  type of material has been undertaken with the  ultimate object ive of s e t t i n g  
up a comprehensive eomputer system t h a t  can handle almost everything i n  the 
medical records. 
I n  the earlier effoxts  t o  develop na tura l  language technology, t h e  work was 
f a c i l i t a t e d  by the  f a c t  t h a t  the  documents involved were s t r i c t l y  f o r  the trans- 
5 
mission of f ac tua l  information. Such documents a re  regarded as important both 
by the persons who are f i l l i n g  them out  and by the  persons who read them. I n  
t h i s  no-nonsense s i tua t ion  where the  record may be c r i t i c a l l y  reviewed by the  
peers of the person who is reporting the  information, unambiguous and informa- 
t i v e  transmission of information is a c r i t i c a l  need. Some of the simplicities 
i n  the  present  analysis  may b e ~ e c u l i a r  t o  ws type of s i tuat fon.  
The existence of a subculture with shared t ra ining,  object ives,  and exper- 
ience may f a c i l i t a t e  t h e  note-taking process i n  somewhat the  same way t h a t  a 
person taking notes for  himself can somehow be more concise without ambiguity. 
.. 
Howeveb, r m a n y  other  note-taking s i tua t ions  would involve subculture, though 
not necessari ly a medical one, and t h e  f indings here might be expected t o  have 
sdne general appl icabi l i ty .  
4 1.D.J. Bross e t  al.  "Unobtrusive Biomedical Data-Input Systems". - Bio- 
Medical Computing, No. 4, 1973, pp. 219-228. 
E J I .D .J .  Bross, P.A. Shapiro and B.B. Anderson. "How Information Is Carried 
i n  Sc ien t i f i c  Sublangukges". Science, Vol. 176, No. 4041, 1972, pp. 1303-1307. 
Source of Material 
The medical&es discussed here are ffom tjhe records of the  Surgical 
Adjutrant Breast Project,  a nationwide collaborative study involving 36 medical 
ins t i tu t ions .  The records were f i l l e d  ou t  by medical and paramedical personnel 
a t  the par t ic ipat ing in s t i t u t ions  and cehtralized a t  Ro$glell Park Nemri&l 
I n s t i t u t e  i n  a S t a t i s t i c a l  un i t  under thq direction\of-Dr. Nelson S-lack. A 
sample of approximately 50 w a s  taken from the 2734 cage h i s t o r i e s  of pa t ien ts  
i n  the program and is being used i n  the l b g u i s t i c  analysis.  Each case his tory  
ordinari ly consiats df 3-6 pages of deta i led  information on the pa t i en t ' s  i n i -  
t i a l  s ta tus ,  treatment, pathology report,  nledicai problems, and subsequent 
fate .  When the structured information i n  the  record was excluded, each case 
history had between 6 and 26 notated items, each item consisting of 1 t6 5 par- 
t ia l -sentences .  While this material is speckalized t o  me purposes of the col- 
laborative study, t h i s  type of information i q  f a i r l y  typ ica l  of what is found 
i n  the usual hospital  record. 
The notes were typed v e x b a t h  using An IBM Mag Card Communicator so as t o  
obtain simultaneously a typed paper document and a record i n  computer-usable 
form. This device is used i n  the  data-input sgstem of T~CES;  an exist ing system 
fo r  handling completely s tructured records. It would presumably be usea i n  any 
extension of TICES which would handle medical nates. I n  e i s ' a n a l y s i s  the com- 
puter  w a s  used t o  reorganize the material  i n  a fbrmmore convenient fo r  manual 
analysis by the l inguis t .  
Anderson analyzed the l i ngu i s t i c  s t ruc ture  of the en t r i e s  i n  a sample of 
the  medical records involving radiation findings, A discussion of t h i s  ana- 
l y s i s  w i l l  take up the next part of the paper. Sager and associates used some 
of the findings from this study to  develop methods fo r  processing these same 
medical records by computef, adapting% program and grananar which had been 
developed fok parsing science a r t i c l e s .  This p ro jec t  w i l l  be discussed i n  the  
f i n a l  part of the  paper. 
Linguist ic  Character is t ics  of Medical Notes 
Many o f  the e n t r i e s  on the  medical records a r e  i n  the  form of notes which 
a r e  ne i ther  complete sentences nor s ing l e  word e n t r i e s ,  but  l i n g u i s t i c  strings 
of a n  intermediate type, which we w i l l  he rea f te r  c a l l  fragments, Fragments a r e  
a compressed t y p  of l i n g u i s t i c  material resu l t ing  from various transformations 
which have the e f f e c t  of making l i n g u i s t i c  s t r i ngs  shor te r  by reducing or de- 
l e t i n g  materihl. The writer of these  stretches of mater ia l  must make h i s  en- 
tries brief, i n  order t o  save time and e f f o r t ,  but  a l s o  make them informative 
and unambiguous. For t h i s  reason the deleted material has t o  be eas i l y  recover- 
able, o r  i n  other  words it must not  contain much information. An analys is  of 
the  fragments shows t h a t  de le t ion  is maiinly of a small c l a s s  of sentence parts: 
(1) tense and the verb - be (t - be ) ;  (2) subjec t ,  tense and t h e  verb - be; (3) t he  
subject; and (4) subject ,  tense,  and verb (V) other  than - be.
A second cha rac t e r i s t i c  of fragments which makes deleted mater ia l  recover- 
ab le  is that both t h e  meted  material and the remainders consis t  of words i n  
easily defined subclasses,  based on both d i s t r i bu t iona l  and semantic c r i t e r i a .  
These subclasses are eas i l y  defined because of t he  nature of the  sublanguage; 
i n  general the  vocabulary is l imited and each word has a l imi ted  semantic range. 
The question on a form khich is being answered can a l s o  be used a s  a basis f o r  
re to r ing  deleted material. 
One of the most commonly deleted items i n  the medical records is t - be (1 
and 2) .  Tense is perhaps t he  most important information - be gives. The dele t ion  
of tense i n  the medical records causes no ambiguity because usually the physician 
describes the  s i t u a t i o n  a t  the time of f i l l i n g  ou t  the report, O t h e r w i s e  he 
gives the time i n  a t i m e  phrase: x-rays on November 2. 
Fragment Types 
In  Table 1 w e  l ist  the fragment types, giving an example of each, but not 
with a l l  occurring word subcl&!3ses. The types w i l l  S i r s t  be given according t o  
what material is deleted and then w i l l  be fu t ther  subclassed according t o  the  
highest nodes of the t r e e  s t ructure  of the remainder. The material i n  brac- 
kets  is the word subclasses which a r e  assumed .So have been deldted. 
TABU3 1. FRAGMENT TYPES 
S trudurs 
Material Deleted of Fragment Example 
1. t - be by N Ven no metastatic lesions [were] detectea [by 
N-physician physician] 
N Adj chest films [were] nonnal 
N P N  pat ient  [was] without cough 
1 N t o  V this form [is] to  be used . . . 
N Ving wound [ i s ]  healing well 
2. Subject t 
be 
-
Ven [N-disease was] aspirated once 
Ads [N-Patient i s ]  dead 
t o  be Ven [N-patient i s ]  t o  be seen by gynecologist 
Ving [N-patient i s ]  doing well 
3. Subject t V Object 
3a. N-physician 
Subject 
3b. N-patient 
Subject 
3c. N-disease 
Subject 
(rare 1 
4. Subject t v 
4a. N-physician t Object 
V-diecover 
4b. N-physician Object 
t V-do 
4c. N-patient Object 
t have 
[I] found osteochondritis in, 
r i b  (5th r igh t )  
[N-patient] had period one week ago 
[N-disease] invades skin 
[N-disease] seems minor 
[I V-discovered] no bony metastases 
[N-ghysician did] excision of (r ) 
5th cos ta l  car t i lage  
[N-patient has] no bone pain 
Word Subclasses 
The word subclassbs should have th ree  character is t ics :  (1) they should 
enable deleted material t o  be recovered, (2) they should make it possible t o  
6 ex t r ac t  and s to re  informational un i t s  such as those i n  ACORN and (3) they should 
be defined so t h a t  a l i ngu i s t i ca l ly  unsophisticated person can eas i ly  put  words 
i n t o  their subclasses. 
The word subclasses ate  based on both semantic and d i s t r ibu t iona l  c r i t e r i a .  
To a large  extent  nouns can conveniently be subclassed on a semantic basis and 
verbs can be subclassed on a d i s t r ibu t iona l  bas is ,  according t a  the subclasses 
of nouns which they take as subject  and object. Due t o  the nature of the sub- 
language there  is r e l a t ive ly  l i t t l e  overlap (e.g., a given verb is l i k e l y  t o  
take only one noun subclass as s h j e c t )  compared t o  what w e  would f ind  i n  the  
language as a whole. 
Two impoftant subclasses of h-n nouns used i n  the  medical records are 
N-physician and N-patieht. Each has only a few members, but is important because 
many verbs c h q a c t e r i s t i c a l l y  take it as subject  o r  object ,  and a l s o  because 
both, but par t icu la r ly  N-physician, are usually deleted. It is on the basis of 
the verbs which charac te r i s t i ca l ly  take  them as subject  o r  object  t h a t  they can 
usually be recovered without ambiguity. 
Other noun subclasses concern more d i rec t ly  the  subject  matter of the  re- 
ports, the concrete objects  with which the  physician is  dealing. Unlike N- 
physician and N-patient, these classes usually have many mmbers and they a r e  
seldom deleted. A s  w i t h  N-physician and N-patient, ce r ta in  uerb subclasses 
c h a r ~ c t e r i s t i c a l l y  take them as subject  o r  object. 
Table 2 gives some of t he  word subclasses with examples of each. 
6 ~ r o s s  e t  al. "Information i n  Natural Languages: A New Approach," 1969. 
TABLE 2. SOME WORD SUBCLASSES 
N - b w a $ t  
N-change I 
R-dimas ion 
N-disease 
N-exam 
N-locatibrl 
N-patient 
N- physician 
N-therapy 
N-time 
V-be-equivalent 
V-change 
V - d i s c e r  
V-patient-object 
V-patient-subject 
V-physician-subject 
V-show 
Ad j -bodypart 
Adj-changed 
Adj-degree 
Ad j -discover 
Adj-disease qual i ty  
abdomen, axi l la ,  bone, Br-t, cervix,  pe lv i s  
change, elevation, enlargement, g a b ,  increase 
pressure,' r a t e ,  rhythm, s ize ,  weight 
carcinoma, cough, disease, edema, fibxosis 
6iopsy, exam, f i lm,  qamogram; scan, x-xay 
area,  f i e l d ,  f loor ,  lobe, neck, p a r t ,  regionr 
she, her, pa t ien t ,  lady, woman 
doctor, he, him, h i s ,  I , * M . D . ,  radiologis t  
drug, insul in,  medication, medicine, radiat ion 
date ,  month, the, v i s i t ,  winter, year 
appear, feel, indicate ,  remain, represent,  seem 
alter, c lea r ,  change, enlarge, heal ,  progress 
detec t ,  f ind,  ident i fy ,  ncyte, observe, see 
a h = ,  give, leave, place,  readmit, see,  t r ans fe r ,  t r q a t  
complain, come, moperate,  enter ,  f e e l ,  gain, go, have, 
refuse,  show, suf f ;r , take 
f ee l ,  have, place, tel.1, t'kansfer, t r e a t ,  See 
show, demonstrate, indicate ,  reveal,  suggest 
ax i l l a ry ,  bony, clavicular ,  lumbar, pelvic  
elevated, enlarged, healed, s t ab le ,  unchanged. 
considerable, extensive, in termi t tent ,  l i t t l e  
absent, evident, Fnown, possible,  present 
ac t ive ,  bad, benign, degenerative, firm, hard, 
malignant, metastatpc, nodular 
adjoining, d i s t a l ,  dorsal,  f ron ta l ,  l e f t  
c lea r ,  f ree ,  healthy, negative, normal 
Computer Parsing of Medical Records ' 
To test the  l ingu is t i c  analysis ,  a subset of the manually analyzed corpus 
of medical records was parsed by computer, using the NYU Linguist ic  Str ing Parser. 8 
7 I d grateful  t o  Cynthia Insol io and Lynette Hirschman f o r  their help i n  
processing these data. w. S) 
8 R. Grishman, N. Sager, C. Raze, and B. Bookchin, "The ~ i n g u i s t i c  St r ing  
Parsern'. Proceedings of t he  NCC, AFIPS Press, Montvale; N. 3. , 1973. 
The LSP grqmmar of English is based on the same linguistic principles as the 
ACORN grammar. Hence it could also serve to test the feasibility of adding a 
note-handling capability to the ACORN-TICES system. The LSY sylr which was 
designed for text-processinQ, was adapted to the parsing of medical records by 
deleting portions of the grammar which are not required for this type of ma- 
terial and adding a section covering sentence fragments. These change$ are 
described below, followed by the parsing resultb. 
The corpus which was parsed consisted of 12 sections of the Radiation 
Findings extracted in their order of appearance from the medical records. These 
sections contained 245 sentences or sentence fragments (word sequences ending 
in a period). Of these, 37 were complete English sentences and 205 were frag- 
ments; 3 were combinations of both types. 21 entries were identical to others 
in the corpus, accounting in all for 139 of the sentences ox sentence fragments. 
Of the complete sentences, same were quite long, e.g., Reexamination shows some 
scarring and thickening over the right apex which is perhaps slightly more evi- 
dent than it was before, but nothing is seen that is typical of tumor involvement. 
Typical sxorter sentences are Chest films on 10-25-68 and 12-14-68 do not show 
any essential changes since- last reports, Liver scan 1-29-69 was normal. Frag- 
ments were, as predicted, of the types listed in Table 1, above, though not all 
tyMs were represent-ed in the parsed corpus. 
Table 3 shows the new definitions or redefinitioqd which were added to the 
LSP grammar to cover fragments. These definitions are written in ~ahs-Naur Form 
(BNF), as ilze all the ca. 180 definitions which comprise the context-free-part 
of the LSP English grammar. The BNF definitions are used by the parser to con- 
struct a tree representing the structure of the input sentence. 
In addition to BNF definitions, the grammar contains restrictions, which 
test the sentence trees for grammatical and selectional well-formedness. The 
9 For more explanation of the LSP system and grammar, see N. Sager and 
TABLE 3. DEFINITIONS ADDED TO THE LSP GRAMMAR 
TO COVER SENTENm FRAGMENTS 
(SENTENCE) 
<TExTILET> 
COLD-SENTENCE? 
<MORESENT> 
(INTRODUCER) 
<CENTER? 
<FRAGMENT> 
::= <TEXTLET>. 
::I <OLD-SEmNCE><MORESENT>. 
::= <INTRODUCEI~<CENTER)<ENDMARK>. 
: : = NULL/<TEXTLET>. 
c : = NULL. 
::= <ASSERTION>/:FRAGMENT>/<IMPERATIVE>. 
: := <SA> C<SOBJBESHOW/<ASTG)(SA>/<NSTG><SA~/ 
<VENPASS~/<NSTG) ~~ASSERTION~/~SOBJBESHOW~ 1 . 
::= <SUBJECT><B$-OR-SHOW><OBJBE><SA>. 
: :=- +--+/NULL. 
::= +.+/+,+/+;+/+-4. 
starting, or root, definition of the gramnqr is SENTENCE, so this is tha first 
definition seen in Table 3. In the case of medical records, the unit may be. 
longer than one sentence, but we have retained the root-word SENTENCE and de- 
fined SENTENCE in this case to be a TEXTLET (definition 2 ) ,  ,which.consists of a 
sentence (called OLD-SENTENCE, definition 3) optionally followed by more sdn- 
tences (MORESENT, definition 4). The definition of OLD-SENTENCE has the same 
three elements (INTRODUCER, CENTER, ENDMARK) that the definition of SENTENCE 
does in the LSP grammar; however, in this case, tho INTRODUCER (definiqion 5) is 
NULL; the CENTER (definition 6) contains an option FRAGMENT in addition to the 
options ASSERTION and IMPERATIVE defined in the English grammar; (other~options 
of CENTER, e.g. QUESTION, have been deleted); and the ENDMARK (definition 10) 
contains unconventional punctuation, such as dashes and cornma, in addition to 
the period and semicolon. Since our main interest here is in FRAGMENT (defini- 
tion 7), we will elaborate onlhis definition. 
R. Grishman, "The Restrictton Language for Computer Grammars of TFatural Language' 
Commun. of the ACM, 18, 390-400, 1975, and the references cited there. 
I n  defining FRAGMENT, we have used parts of the  grammar which were defined 
independently of the  fragment problem. That t h i s  is poss ib le  is i n  i t s e l f  a 
p a r t i a l  v e r i f i c a t i a n  of t he  conclusion from manual analys is  t h a t  only l imited,  
grammatically speci f iable ,  deletion-forms occur i n  the  fragments seen i n  notes  
and records. For example, the dropping of the  verb (type 1 of Table 1) can 
occur i n  normal English when a sentence containing the  verb - be occurs as the  
objec t  of a verb l i k e  - f ind ,  e.g. We found the  chest  c l e a r  t o  pekcussion and 
auscul tat ion.  itn the U P  grammar the re  is an objec t  s t r i n g  defined f o r  such oc- 
currences; it is calleg SOBJBE (Subject - + Object of - be). This same s t r i n g  can 
then be made an option of CENTER t o  analyze fragments having the same ? o m  e,g. 
Cheet c l ea r  to.percussion and auscul tat ion.  
In  detail, the de f in i t i on  of FRAGMENT begins with t h e  element SA (Sentence - 
Adjunct). The defini t ion '  of SA (not shown here)  contaihs 16 options covering a l l  
- 
types of sentence modifiers* In  t h i s  material the  most frequent SA is a t h e  
expzession, usually a da te  [called PDATE, f o r  opt ional  Preposit ion + date) o r  
th is  examination, t h i s  v i s i t .  Following SA i n  the  de f in i t i on  FRAGMENT are the  
options proper, naming de f in i t i ons  already i n  t h e  LSP grammar. The f i r s t  option 
SOBJBESHOW (Subject - + O b j  ect of - be o r  - show), corresponds t o  t h e  second and t h i r d  
s t ruc tures  of type 1 and a l s o  occurrences l i k e  Chest f i l m  no change, which is  an 
expansion of SOBJBE, discussed above. This option covers dele t ions  of t he  two 
most common verbs i n  this material, - be and - show. The plade of - be o r  - show (defi- 
n i t i on  8) i n  a fragment is e i t h e r  empty or is f i l l e d  by a dash. 
The mkond and four th  options,  ASTG and VENPASS, i n  FRAGMENT correspond t o  
s t ruc tures  of type 2 i n  Table 1 (e.g., Negative_, f e l t  t o  be a benign l e s ion ) ,  
where t h e  subjec t ,  tense  and verb - be have been dropped. I n  t he  LSP grammar, ASTG 
(Adjective - - s t r i n d  is an option of OBJBE, and VEWASS (V-en  passive s t r i n g )  i s  
a l s o  permitted a f t e r  -C be and i n  other  places.  The thitd option, NSTG Noun - 
s t r i n d ,  is an objec t  of show e . g . ,  Mild degenerative chanqes (?$om, X-rays show 
- -' 
mild*degenerative changes). I t  ale0 covers occurrences of t h e  first s t r u c t u r e  of 
type 1 (e.g. No X-rays taken) where fo r  regu la r i ty  with more complete e n t r i e s  the  
passive Verb (taken) is seen as a r i g h t  adjunct  of the  noun. The last  opt ion,  
consisting of NSTG followed by e i t h e r  ASSERTION o r  SOBJBESHOW, covers such oc- 
currences as PA and l a t e r a l  ches t  1l,-5-71 reexamination shows some scar r ing  and 
thickening over the  r i g h t  apex. where a noun phrase (PA and' lateral  ches t  11-5- 
71) precedes an asse r t ion  about t h a t  ngun phrase. 
-
Space permits only a few remarks about these def in i t ions .  It was helpful  
t o  order t he  options so t h a t  the longer opt ions precede t h e  sho r t e r  ones, s ince  
some of the shor te r  options (e.g., NSTG) can have the  &form a s  t he  f i r s t  
element of t he  longer ones. This is not  required i n  parsing t e x t s ,  s ince  i n  f u l l  
s e n t h c e s  the re  is usually no other  way of f i t t i n g  i n  t he  remainder of t he  sen- 
tence. Also, i n  t e x t  sentences, many nouns requ i re  a preceding determiner, s o  
t h a t  compound nouns are no t  s p l i t  i n t o  separa te  noun phrases. In  t h i s  mater ia l ,  
determiners are ra re ly  emplbyed, so  t h i s  cons t ra in t  cannot be applied. 
T h i ~ ,  combined wim verb dele t ions  and t h e  use of commas both i n  t he  t e x t  and as 
sentence sepamtors ,  makes fof a g rea t  dea l  of syn tac t ic  ambiguity. However, as 
the next sec t ion  shows, it was possible  t o  obta in  the  intended parse  as t h e  
firs* output i n  most cases. This was accomplished without using the  subclasses 
spec ia l  t o  the medical material ,  which are used i n  a subsequent s tage  of pro- 
cessing preparatory t o  information r e t r i e v a l .  
Parsing Results 
Parsing output is i n  t h e  form of a tree, i l l u s t r a t e d  f o r  a typicdl  frag- 
ment i n  Fig. 1. (Only the  nodes mentioned above are shown, plus  LN/RN = left/ 
- 
r i g h t  modifiers of Noun,) The f u l l  power of the parser  is better i l l u s t r a t e d  by 
- - 
t he  along f u l l  sentences; bu t  space does no t  permit presenting them here. 
Fig. 1 
Parse t r e e  for  FRAGMENT = 5-2-67 chest--no chanqe sjnce 2-7-67 
FRAGMENT. 
A summary of the parsing re su l t s  is given i n  Table 4. Of the  t o t a l  245 sen- 
tences, a correct  firat parse was obtained for  171 o r  69.8%, and a f i r s t  parse 
adequate f o r  fur ther  processing t o  obtain an "information format1' i n  213 cases, 
or  86.9%. The l a t t e r  statement brings us t o  the  important question of how these 
parses are to be used. 
Ful l  sentence 
Fragment 
Ful l  S + Fragment 
TOTAL 
1st parse correct  
TABU3 4. PARSING RESULTS 
Number of Sentences 
1st parse OK fo r  format 
2nd o r  3rd parse OK f o r  format 
No parse ox parse9 i - 3  not  OK for  format 
TOTAL 
Average time f o r  1st par$e 5.158 seconds 
Percentage 
15.1 
83.7 
1 . 2  
100.0 
The aim i n  processing natural  language notes and records is t o  a r r i v e  a t  
forms f o r  the data which are su i tab le  f o r  computerized information re t r i eva l .  
The data s t ructures  must not change the  meaning. This is why syntactic  methods 
are knpo%ant. Parsing with an English grammar provides the  gross s t ruc ture  of 
input sentences. (The use of English transformations makes the  grammatical 
analysis more refined,) In each specialized technical area, more specific struc- 
ture is p~s~ibie, making use of the restricted word usage characteristic of the 
disqourse in the given subject area. K) 
A second stage of processing of this type is now being applied to the parsed 
corpus of medical records and will be reported in a subsequent paper. A con- 
venkent test of the adeqyacy of the parsing outputs is therefore whether they can 
serve as input to this second stage of processing (called forhatting). It can 
be seen in Table 4 that a number of "wrong" parses were still adequate as input 
to the formatting; the segmentation of the sentence into parts was correct even 
if the parts were assigned an incorrect syntactic status, e.g., object instead 
of adjunct. Only when the first parse was not adequate for formatting was the 
sentence rerun to obtain alternative analyses. 
The parsing times are a rough indication of the efficiency of the parsing 
but two points should be kept in mind. (1) The present LSP system is not a pro- 
duction model, but a research tool, with all that implies. (2) A bignificant 
fraction of the input sentences were "no data" types, e,g., None this visit. 
These word sequences were so limited linguistically that a literal formula could 
serve to reaogniae them. The experimental use of such a formula cut down parsing 
times on the no-data entries from about 1.817 to0.030. However, this formula was 
not used in the parsing summarized in Table 4, 
- - 
This investigation was supported by Public Health service Research Grant 
number CA-11531 from the National Cancer Institute. 
losee Ref. 5 and A. Sager, Syntactic Formatting of Scientific Information, 
Proc. FJCC, AFIPS Press, Montvale, N. J., 1972, 

