American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 49 
,T THE FINITE STRING 
NEWSLETTER OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS 
VOLUME 13 - NUMBER 4 MAY 1976 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CLAM: A COMPUTER LANGUAGE MODEL Nicholas J .  S .  Dobree 2 
R F P t FEDERAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BY CONTRACT 
Washington Office, State University of New York . . . .  53 
AFIPSt SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS COMMITTEE . . . . . . . . .  94 \., 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  NFAISz STRUCTURE AND PURPOSE 95 
KURZWEIL READINGMACHINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  96 
TRANSLATING MACHINE DEVELOPED . . . . . . . . . . . .  97 
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS is ~ublished 
by the Center for Applied Linguistics for  the ~ssbciation 
f o r  Computational Linguistics 
EDITOR: David G. Hays Professor of L ingu i s t i c s ,  SUNY ~uffalo 
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT: William Benzon 
EDITORIAL ADDRESS : Twin Willows, Wanakah, New York 14075 
MANAGING EDITOR: A. Hood Roberts ~eputy Director, Center for 
A p p l i e d  Linguistics 
MANAGEMENT ASS IS TANT : James Meggins on 
PRODUCTION AND SUBSCRIPTION ADDRESS : 1611 North Kent Street,  
Arlington,  Virginia 22209 
Copyright Q 1976, 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 49 : 2 
C L A M : A COMPUTER LANGUAGE MODEL 
International Language Centre 
P .  0 .  Box 155712 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Temporarily: Rose Cottage, Hindon, Wiltshire, England 
This paper describes a program which translates Engllsh 
into French, It is difficult to delineate the subset which a 
program can deal with, so sample sentences are given. 
The analyser is multiple path, single pass, akln to 
Woods' A.T.N. grammar. The syntax is dealt wi$h by matching. 
J 
with $emplates; the semantics by the application of semantic 
re$trictions to syntactically associated pairs of word meanings. 
To lirn~t the number of paths, all available guns, syntactic and 
semantic, are brought to bear at every stage. The output is a 
list of disambiguated word meanings, formed into a tree structure 
but with semantic rather than syntactio relationships betweep 
them. 
The French generation first makes appropriate tense changes, 
then finds the French word(s) and redistributes them if 
necessary. This may generate a French structure radically 
different from the English, Then the words are sequenced and 
put into the correct form. 
The program consists of about 8,500 Fortran irlstructions and 
the processing averages about 15 seconds per word on a 36.0-40. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Introduction ......................................... '-t 
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Sample Sentences ;..... 15 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Description of Method 19 
Flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2i 
................ Reduction of the Passage to Base Form 22 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Generation of the French Translation 46 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Conclusion 48 
My *banks are due to the Managers of IBM Near East and+IBM 
Lebanon and many members of the staff of IBM Lebanon, who have 
helped and encouraged me i n  every way. I am a l s o  indebted t o  
Y o r i c k  Wilks, Margaret K i n g  and Walther Bischoff of the 
Fondazione dalle Molle, who have been very he3pful with their a 
advice and ideas. 
INTfRODUCTION 
There are, I hope three reasons why CLAM will be of 
interest to computational linguists. 
( 1 )  Ir; 1s a working model. This is not a "paperf1 
containing ltideas". Lt is a description of a model which works, 
To be more specific, it is a description of a large program, 
written in FORTRAN, which runs on a 960-40. It accepts as input 
English $ext, carrieg out a syntactic and semantic analysis of! 
it, stores the result, and translates it into good French. 
(2) The subset of English which it is capable of analysing 
is, by present standards, extremely large, The vocabulary is 
about 1300 words, many of which have a variety of meanings. More 
important that the size of the vocabulary is, of course, the 
range of syntactic structure's and, perhaps most significantly, 
the degree of complexity of senkences which can be dealt with, 
Increasing the length and complexltg of sentences does not bring 
likelihood of combinat orial explosion. The amount of working 
store and computing time required to analyse a sentence is of 
the order of the number of words in a sentence, although of 
course it varies according to the number of meanings of the words 
and the types of syntactic structure involved. 
(3) The program is continuously extensible. This 
extensi'bility applies first t~ the subset of language which can 
be analysed, secondly to the target languages into which trans- 
lations can be generated, and thirdly bo the uses to which the 
analysis of the rext can be put. Tn other words, I believe that 
the program embodies 3 sound method of syntactic and semantic 
analysis such as must be the basis of a computer l a w a g e  model. 
Extension of the subset of language which can be malysed 
is a matter of addition and refinement. It can be stated with 
confidence that such extension can be achieved because nothing 
fundamentally different from what has already been achieved is 
involved. New syntactic structures, well formed or otherwise, 
can be incorporated, by addition partly to the files and partly 
to Ohe program. Continual refinements can be made to the method 
of finding pronoun antecedents. This problem, which seems to be 
generally accepted as the most difficult single problem in 
analysis, will never be solved by one simple algorithm, and the 
fact that a particular program at any given stage of its develop- 
ment gives the wrong answer in a particular case, so far from 
invalidating the prograp, rather points the way to further 
refinements (cf. Wilks, June 1975). What is important is that 
the program should provide the tools which enable the refinement 
to be made, and CLAM does this. 
Extension of the target languages involves applying to 
other languages the same method which is used to generate French. 
This can be done, and indeed part of the actual program used for 
French would be generally applic3ble. It will be interesting to 
attack a language outside the Indo-European group, and Arabic is 
the first one I have in mind, although how soon this can be done 
is a question of time and priocities, 
The obvious use to which the analysis can be put other than 
6 
translation is a questionLanswer system, and work on this is at 
present in hanb. A question-answer system must be based on an 
effective malyser, and it is beljeved that CLAM can provide 
this. However, I do not maintain that the analyser Sb~uld be 
independent of9the memory and inferencihg part of the sy$te~n. 
Obviously it should not be independent of the memory, since an 
analyser   nu st create and use its own memory, and although it 
would be theoretically possible for the analyser to have one 
type of memory and the latter part of the program to have 
another, this would be a ludicrous arrangement. The same 
argument applies tp inferencing, which again has to be performed. 
by an analyser. Therefore it seems that a question-answer 
system should be more integrated than rnany A.1. reseqrcher,~ 
appear to allow. On this score, I support the view of Wilks 
vis-a-vis Charniak. 
To create a que~tion~answer system, and, indeed, to improve 
the translation program, -t;he memory and the semantics of the 
present program have to be developed. I use the word "developed" 
advisedly because I believe that the ekisting memory and 
semantics form a sound basis upon which a more comprehensive 
system can be built. 
RESULTS 
Assessment of the Subset of Language which the Model can Analyse 
It is normal practice when describing a language model to 
leave d;iscussion of the achievedents of the model until the end. 
First comes the description of how the model doeslor ~ o u l d  
operate, then, if it is actually in operation, an account of 
what &t can do. En this description I am reversing 3he 
procedure, becauge I would not like to think of a reader 
ploughing through details of how something is done ii he 
subsequently comes to the conclusion that what was done was not 
worth doing anyway, Let him first sge what can be done, and 
then decide whether it is w~rth the trouble of reading on to 
discover how it is done. 
Having said this, I am immediately conYronted by the problem 
adrunbrated by Woods of how a reader can assess the range and 
scope of a particular model, and by implication, of how the 
programmer can honestly present it. There are two standard 
methods of prepentation. One is by rather sweeping general 
statements such as "the program can cope with noun clauses. 
adjectival clauses, conjunction, questions" etc., according to 
what claims are being made, Such generalisations are inevitably 
suspect and rightly so, since no reader will believe that he 
could not find, for example, adjectival clauses which the program 
could not cope with. The alternative method of presentation is 
to give sample sentences which the program has coped with, and 
hope that the reader will make for himself the type of general- 
isation which the programmer has scrupulously avoided. If the 
first method is adopted, the programmer may justifiably be 
branded as a charlatan. If the second, he runs the risk of 
having his sent-encesdismissed as "a few examples", 
The problem is real, and the solution far from obvious: 
how to define a subset of language. Supposing that we were 
conCerned only with single sentences and not longer texts; and 
supposing that it were possible, which evidently it is not, $0 
list all the sentences of the subset: the11 how can we find a 
definition which ,wou&d include a l l  the sentences which we have 
listed and exc1ud.e any which we have not listed? Two things 
are clear. The definition would be very long, ahd it would 
contain an agglomeration of embedded provisos, For example + the 
section on relative Clauses might include something like this: 
Relative clauses are admissible, provided that 
1 . they do not contain more Zhan seven words ; 
2. they do not contain a passive verb 
unless (a) it is a verb of Icookmgt 
ol- (b) the clause is a vsubject' clause; 
3. there is no word between the noun and the relative 
clause unless it is part of a supervening relative 
clause; 
4, the noun 1s not part of a subsidiary clause unless 
the subsidiary clause is itself a relatlve clause 
provided that (a) the noun is not the object of the 
clause 
and (b) the noun is not a 'time1 noun. 
All of the above provisos are of a type which could well be 
applicable at any particular stage in the development of a 
program, although some may be more likely than others. The 
programmerls difficulty is that until he has tried an appropriate 
type of sentence, he probably will not realise the existence of a 
9 
particular limitation. The first indication of it is that the 
sentence doesn't work, and he then has to rack his brain to 
findrout w h y  not, and alter the program to eliminate the limit- 
ation, thereby enlarging the subset in that particular direction 
(hoping that he is not at the same time being so stupid as to 
reduce it' in another). Therefore if a programmer asserts that 
his program can deal with e . g , ,  relative clauses of all types, 
he is probably not being dishonest but m ~ r e l y  ignorant about 
the limitations of his o m  program. Whether such lirnitat50ns 
should rightly be described as bugs, which Wood,s implies, is 
dubious, because that is tantamount .Q;o execting a program which 
can deal with some relative clauses to be able to deal with all 
relative clauses. and asserting that insofar as it cannot, some- 
thing has gone wrong. R a t h e r  might one think of a program in 
terms of a pool of w a t e r  spreading slowly over an area and 
gradually covering more and mare of that area. The fact that 
the water covered a particular part of the area wottld carry no 
implication of covering any other part, although ther'e would be 
a reasonable expectation of its spreading to a contiguous area 
next. This analogy, though valuable in helping to destroy a 
misconception, is evidently incomplete in two respec%-s. It is 
two-dimensional, whereas.language is #multi-dimensional; and the 
program would advance not continuously, like a pool of water, 
but by fits and starts, in discrete steps. Each of these points 
is worth further examination, 
Lip service has long been paid to the multi-dimensional 
nature of language, and yet the importance of this aspect in 
I0  
attempting to analyse language has rather slowly comb to be 
recognised, How many features are there whlch have to be talcen 
into account, and what are they? How m a n y  possible relation- 
ships can exist between t~hiclz of t l l e ~ n ?  And, a r l u o s t i o n  
raised with particular force by coniputer analysers, what 
combinations of features are relevant? As a simple esaztiple, 
consider two features, both as it happens syntactic although 
the argument applies to semantic as ~ 8 1 1  as s y n t a c - t i e  features: 
ralative clauses, and the passive voice. If a program can 
analyse each of the features separately, does it follow that 
it can analyse them in combination? Suppose, for example, it 
can arlalyse both of these sentences: 
1. The man who came to dinner stole the silver. 
2. The man was hit by a bus. 
Does it follow that it can analyse this? 
The man who was hit by a bus stole the silver. 
Alas, it does not. It may iin fact be able to, but there is no 
logical rule from which it can be deduced that it must be able 
to. Is the absence of' suc a rule merely a computational quirk, 
or does it corres~ond to some linguLstic truth? In this case, 
but not necessarily in all such cases, I would say that it does 
so c~rrespond. We may asK ourselves if it is possible to imagine 
a language in which relative clauses e&ist, and the passive 
voice exists, but in which the verb In a relative clause cannot 
be in the passive. Of course it is, and *here may for all I 
Know be such languages. It +is this absence of a logical rule of 
combination which makes the task of defining the bounds of a 
subset of language so appallingly difficult, especially when it 
is remembered that it is not merely combinations of two features, 
9 s  in the above example, but combinations of many features which 
have to be taken into account. Multi-dimensiona3l.y is such a 
cardinal characteristic of language that analysgrs dealing with 
tiny subsets from which this characteristic lias been removed 
should probably be treated with reserve. They may give valuable 
insights, but they may also be nxisleading, I do not of course 
refer to the memory oP inferencing part of microworld models, 
which is usually their raison dletre, but: only to their interfade 
with natural language input, The designers of such models are 
inclined to regard the input analysis as little more than a 
tedious chore, and would be unllikely to take exception to what I 
am saying since they themselves normally make no great claims 
fox this part of their models. But ethers, commenting on the 
moaels, sometimes m a e  exaggerated claims on behalf of the 
analysers, and these claims should be guarded against. Perhaps 
Che relationship between a language and a t$ny subset of it with 
a stric*t;ly limited number of features should be thought of as 
akin to the relationship between a wall and a stone. They are 
recognisably composed of the same substance, but one has 
essential characteristics which the other totally.lacks. 
Before leaving the shbjsa~t of multi-dimensionality, 1 would 
like to touch briefly on the possibility, at some time in the 
future, of devising a standard method of determinine the extent 
of a subset of a language. The following idea could be considered, 
probably to be rejected, but at least it could provide a starting- 
point for discussion, A fiumber of features, say n, could be 
decided upon, the number varying according to the degree of 
subtlety of delineation required. An n-dimensional array with 
n+l columns in each dimension (fbr the n featul~es + 1 blank) 
would then contain an element corresponding to ewbry combination 
of these features. Some of these qlements would be irr~levant, 
since they would represent impossible combinations. The valid 
elements could be filled or not, according to whether tHe subset 
contained the combination of features which they represented. 
For a programmer building up the subset which his program was 
capable of analysing, such an array could provide both a measure 
of achievement and a guide to what was missing. 
To return now to the analogy of the puddle, the second 
respect in which it was incomplete Ftas that a program, as it 
develops, b e s  not advmce continuously, like water spreading, 
but by fits and starts, in discrebe steps. Suppose, for example, 
that a programmer is testing a particurar feature like, say, 
relative clauses, as that is the feature we have previously 
discussed. Sentences containing relative clauses Uave been 
entered repeatedly, and each time they have been rejected or 
analysed inco~rectly. Then at last comes the moment of triumph 
and relief when, for the first time, the program takes in such 
a sentence and analyses it c'orrectly. At that moment, the 
program has not merely edged forward, but it has leapt. In 
terms of the array postulated in the last paragraph, not just one 
but several elements will in all probability have been covered in 
one step. It will not be known for certain which elements, until 
more testing has been done and more sentences tried. B U ~  just 
as it would be ludicrous to suppose that because a program can 
analyse one relative clause it can analyse all, i.t would be 
equally ludicrous not to edpect a program which can analyse one 
rela-t;ive clause to be able to analyse at least some others. 
There is a section of program common to all relative clauses, 
which has to work before any can be ana~ysed correctly, and once 
that section is wox3cing jn combination with ~anp feaeures, the 
liklghood is that it will work in combination with at least some 
others. 
What follows from this? Firstly, that no reliable method 
at present exists for the designer of a language model ?0 
delineate the subset of language which his model can analyse,. 
Secondly, that desi"rab1e as it undoubtedly is, for the benefit 
of both the designers of models and those who seek to assess 
their scope, to devise such a method, it is going to be extremely 
difficult to do so. Thirdly, that in this unfortunate state of 
affairs a designer can but fall back on the established system of 
presenting a list of sentepces which his program has analysed 
correctly, and leave it to the reader to make his- own assessment 
of where the bounds of the subset analysable by the model lie. 
To discuss the sentences as simply a few examples would be un- 
intelligent; equally unintelligent to see in them visions of 
universal.ity. Where, between these two extremes, the reader's 
judgement falls should depend upon the variety of the sent-ences, 
and upon their complexity. If the program can" deal with 
complexity in any area, it should be some indication of its power, 
perhaps yet unrealised, to do so in other areas, It would be a 
sign of its versatility, of its ability to disentangle elaborate 
pat* ern3 and resolite them into their elementary cornporls~lt s . 
After - k h i s  r a t h w  prolix introduction, 1 eorrle eventually to 
my own "Pist of ssntenc\@st1 ellat have been successftrlly annlyssd 
by CLAM. They fall into two categqries: those which have been 
tranglat~d into French, in which case the Frexic$l translation is 
given; and those which have sirtiply been analysed sylt actically, 
and semantically and reduced to a base form. Tliis 1s  because 
durfng the last year 1 have not been working on the French 
generator but concentrating on certain asyects of the ana1yser;- 
and so in order to save computer time, the French seneration has 
been omitted, Thus the sentenceswithout translation have been 
processed last. 
The question arises of what exactly is meant by "analwed 
syntactically and semantically" and "reduced to base form". T h s  
will be more fully explained in the subsequent test. At this, 
stage a"t  is sufficient to say that a syntactic tree has been formed 
and serntxntic ambiguities resolved, and that semantic relations 
betr3een words in the tree have been determined ( e . g .  a syntactic 
subject of a passive verb is recorded as the semantic object). 
Singre word meanings are retained as basic units. There is no 
Schankian-type resolutiun lnto semantic primitives, e x c e p t  inso- 
far as this is implicit in the classification system. This is 
the base form from which the French has been generated. It has 
no% so far proved necessary to go any baser. Development, as 
will be explained later, is envisaged along the lines of extending 
the network rather than breaking down the units. 
SAMPLE SENTENCES 
The follow3.ng are samples of sentences which have been 
correctly anaW8ed by the program. They are given, together 
with the French translations where these have been produced by 
the program, and with comments on points .of interest in the 
s8rTtences. 
I The shirt which you sold is dirty. 
La chemise que vous avez vendue est sale. 
Relative clause. 
2 , The man and woman doctors saw have eaten the bread, 
L'homme et la femme que les medecins on* vu ont mange le pain. 
Contact clause (relative clause with relative pronoun 
missing). 
Simple conjunative phrase, 
No article in English but article required in French. 
3 I want the king to read the book. 
Je veux que le roi lise le livre. 
AccusativQ and infinitive. 
4. I thought she would eat, 
J'ai pense qufelle rnangerait, 
Object clause with "that" missing, 
5. He hurt some donkeys last month. 
I1 a fait m a 1  a des anes l e  mois dernier, 
~ultiple-word verb in French. 
6 .  qe want t o  see the house. 
I1 e s t  a l l e  v o i r  l a  maison, 
He Lived to ea t .  
11 a vecu pour manger, 
Different  types of i n f i n i t i v e s .  
7 ,  The watch w i l l  work when -tihe mechanic f i n i s h e s  w o r k l n g .  
La  montre foqctionner quand 1s mecmicien f i n i r a  de t r a v a i l l e r .  
Tirne c l ~ ~ u s s  : present tense in E n g l i s l l  becornes f u t u r e  in 
French. 
"Da" after " f i n i r "  f o l l o w e d  by i n f i n i t i v e  ins tead  o f  
gerund. 
Different meanings of "worku. 
8. WhGn did  you open the door? 
Quand e s  -ce que vous avez ouvert l a  por te?  
Question.  
9.  Drink the  m i l k  f a s t e r .  
Buvez plus  rapidement le l a i t .  
Command. 
10. The men got up. 
L e s  hommes se  sont l eves ,  
Two-word verb. 
Reflexive. 
Verb takes "etre" .  
1 1 .  The c lever  queen's uncle  disagreed. 
L'onqle de l a  r e ine  in t e l l i genke  n t a  pas e t e  d'accord. 
Possessive. 
Pos i t lon  o f  adjec t ive .  
1 Peel the potatoes for youp mother. 
Epluchez les pornmes de terre pour votre mere. 
Multiple-word noun. 
13.  Teachers write pla$s in March in some countnies. 
Les instituteurs ecrivent des pieces en Mars dans des 
campagnes. 
Semantic resolution of "in". 
lDes campagnest should be tcertnJrlrpays 
14. He stood up to put the fire off. 
I1 stest leve pour eteindre le chauffage. 
Two-word verbs. 
15. That waiter, fat and stupid, was breaking the plates. 
Ce serv'eur gros et stupide cassait les assiettes, 
Appositional adjectives between commas. 
Continuous tense. 
6 .  The man who drank the wine does not laugh. 
L1hornrne qui a bu le vin ne rit pas. 
Negative . 
17. You frightened the man whose pen you stoCLe, 
Vous avez effraye lthomme dont vous avee vole la plume. 
"Whose"-- difficult constsuction, 
18. The woman who you swam with is happy. 
La femme avec qui vois avez nage est contente. 
Floating preposition at end of relative clause. 
19. The woman  looks depressed and bored. 
La femme a 1 1  a i r  0MUye apd drprime. 
Semantic r e so lu t ion  of "looks" 
l k n u y e '  and ldeprirno should be f ominine. M y  ignorarlce. 
20 .The Queens should have ar r ived .  
Les  r e i n e s  aura ient  dl1 a r r i v s r .  
tfShould have" -- d i f f i c u l t  cons t ruc t ion ,  
2 1 I. had t o  l e a rn  t o  shout.  
J1a i  du apprendre a c r i e r .  
Semantic r e so lu t ion  of "had", 
22. Yaur bro ther ,  you and found and your father bought her 
horses.  
Votre f r e r e ,  vous e t  m o i  avons t rouve e t  vo t r e  oere  a 
achete s e s  chevaux, 
Mixed con ju-&ion.  
23, I f  you had come you would have met him. 
Vous llauriez recont re  s i  vous e t i e z  Venus. 
Conditional c lause .  
Compound tenses.  
Pronoun object .  
Concord of pas t  p a r t i c i p l e  a f t e r  "e t re" .  
24, Picking flowers i s  wrong, 
C u e i l l i r  des f l e u r s  est mauvais, 
Gerund subject .  
25. The king i s  a s  l a rge  a s  a cow. 
Le r o i  e s t  auss i  grand qu'une vache, 
" A s N  comparative. 
19 
I have never behaved rudely since you allowed me to stay. 
He prefers painting pictures to working. 
As many as six aeroplanes took off, 
Men bought the book and cloclc. They mended it. It often 
did work. 
Pronoun resolution. 
How good a game is tennis. 
I know which house the man w8S l$ving in, 
I know how easily embarrassed you are. 
How clean a brush did you sweep the room with. 
Men can understand which book is best .  
DESCRIPTION O F  METHOD 
Before going into some detail about the method used to 
achieve these results, I would like to say something about the 
danger of over-sophistication on the part of the reader, There 
is a natural tendency for researchers, on reading something new, 
to look for points of broad similarity with something, anything, 
%*hat they have read, before; and, having found it, to sit back 
with relief and feel absolved -from reading any further. In a 
field in which vast amounts are being written, it is a proper 
self-defence on the part of the reader, but in A.1. in part- 
icular, it has its special dangers. 
When one passes from the realm of pure ideas to the- ,hard 
practicalities of writing a computer program, a subtle change 
of emphasis occurs, The ideas, all embracing they may have 
seemed at their inception, recede into the background, and 
what becoma vital are the details, the tiny mosaic pieces 
which determine whether the program succeeds. To Judge a 
computer program by a crude classification ofi its metl~od is 
like judging a picture by saying that it is impressionistic. 
Certainly it ; is impressionistic, but is it any good? 
In case the reader is not convinced by t'his argument, 
let me say immediately that this is a multiple-path, single- 
pass, left-to-right, word-by-word analyser, akin to the 
multiple-path analyser of Oettinger and the augmented 
transitiofi~networ grammar of Woods. In order to tackle the 
semantics, and indeed also the syntactics, the meanings of 
words have been coded according to a hierarchical taxonomy 
That they are coded has been largely dictated by the demands 
of FORTRAN, in which the program is written, although some 
system more overtly !Like a networ could have been used. That 
the classification should be essentially hierarchical, with 
certain necesgary refinements, has always seemed obvious. 
Some details of how the program works now follow. I will 
start wikh the syntactic and semantic analysis, and come later 
to the generation of the French. 
find codes 
FLOWCHART 
syntactic and semantic analysis French 
REDUCTION O F  THE PASSAGE TO BASE FORM 
A glance at the flowchart on the preceding page shows 
that there are two main parts of the program: first, the 
single subroutine READ, and second, a,group of subroutines 
comprising t h ~  syntactic and semantic analysis. 
READ This subroutine first transgers the base form of 
-
the ppeceding sentence to semi-permanent store. Then ~t 
reads the next sentence. It looks up each word in the 
dictionary file (VOCAB). If it cannot find it at first, it 
tests for-certain endings such as -s, -ed, and -ing, subtracts 
them and tries again. When it finds the word it stores all 
the possible codes which are associated with the word in 
VOCAB. It also assembles compounds such as 'in front of1, 
'in order tot, or infinitives, for which there is no single 
code, Proverbs or cliches can be 'similarly treated. 
Coding Every possible rheaning of a word has a code 
number containing a maximum of twelve digits. These code 
numbergs are stored with the word in VOCAB and extracted in 
READ, The coding is based on a straightforward classification. 
2 1 1 1 
For example the code of 'bull' is 
6 2 I noun concrete creature male 
Such classification is essential to reduce 
animal farm cow 
the number of syntactic and semantic patterns which have to be 
B 
stored. It may be noted in passing that the system of coding 
contains the elements of both syntactic and semantic class- 
ification. The distinction between the two is at tlmes tenuous. 
Further explanation of the coding is given in the appendix. 
Syntactic and Semantic Analysis This is Ohe most 
complicated part of the model, and comprises several sub- 
routines. For ease of explanation, many of them are here 
treated as parts of the larger routines CON, UPDT and OACR. 
As the flowchart shows, these three routines operate in 
turn on each word of' a sentence, and when the end of the 
sentence is reached, a fourth routine, ENDR, is called on to 
operate on the complete sentence . 
Before giving some account of the functions of these 
routines, it is necessary to explain the term EP, and to 
describe JEP and JSP, the two principle files referred t o  in 
this part of the program. 
EP ( ~ n ~ l i s h  pattern). Take the sentence, The man with a 
-
long nose always snores. The program breaks this down into 
four EPs, as follows: 
EP 1 EP 2 EP 3 EP 4 
lead word snores man with nose 
subsidiary word man the nose a 
subsidiary word always with long 
A n  EP contains one lead word plus a number of subsidiaries, 
and is classified according to the nature of the lead word. 
Thus W 1 is a verb EP, EPs 2 and 4 are noun EPs, and EP 3 is 
a preposition EP. Man, the lead word of EP2, is a subsidiary 
of EP 1 ,  so EP 2 is dependent on EP 1. Similarly, EP 3 is 
depenaent on EP 2, and EP 4 on EP 3.  Splitting a sentence into 
EPs is simply forming it into a tree structure. 
snores 
/ \  
a long 
JEP This file contains the templates for all the different 
-
-t;ypes of EP. FOT example the template for a noun EP contains 
various types of adjective in appropriate sequence, These are 
followed by the lead novn. This is then followed by 
adjectives, appositional nouns, prepositions and relative pro- 
nouns. In an EP certain positions, such as the lead, are 
necessary, while others are optional. In a noun EP, the only 
necessary position is the lead noun. In a preposition EP, 
besides the lead preposition, the following noun is necessary. 
By far the most compliCated EP is of course the verb EP. In 
this EP, later positions can be either closed, or opened, or 
made necessary, by a particular class of word in a particular 
posi'tibn. For example, a pre-verb subject closes a fiost-verb 
subject. A question verb makes a post-verb subject necessary. 
One class of verbs opens a subsequent gerund position and 
closes a subsequent infinitive, Once an EP has bean started, 
the program tests to see if the next word could occupy an 
open posi$ion on the template as far as the next necessary 
position (cf. below). Note that these templates are of syntacfic 
patterns and bear no relation to Wilkst semantic templates. 
JSP This file contains all the semantic patterns (SPS). 
-
An example of an SP is 12119 21 21102. This means that all 
verbs whose codes start with the digits 12119 can have as 
subjects any nouns whose codes start with the digits 21102. 
More specifically, it means that human beings read1 or write. 
In this case the verb would be the lead of a verb EP, and the 
noun would be a subsidiary word in the subject position of the 
EP. The middle group of digits in the SP specify the relation- 
ship between subsidiary and the lead. In this case, 21 
specifies subject of verb. Similarly, SPs govern the relation- 
ships between the lead verb and all other subsidiary positions 
in the verb EP, and between lea9 and subsidiaries of all the 
other EPs. For example, 621 2 226 means that time prepositions, 
whose code words start with the digits 621, can have as objects 
any time nouns whose codes start with digits 226. When deciding 
whether a word is acceptable in a subsidiary position of a 
particular EP, a,semantic match is made between that word and 
the lead word: JSP is searched to see if an SP exists permit- 
ting that word to be associated in that subsidiary position 
with that lead wofd (cf. below). 
Processing the Sentence The sentence is processed in a 
single pass word by word from left to right. After each word, 
a number of possible continuation paths are open. The next 
word is tested along each of these paths, and if no place can 
be found for it that path is closed. If no placescan be found, 
the path is reproduced n-1 times and the word added to each path 
Each path may then have one or more  continuation^, 
Let us now return to th8 sentence, The man with a long nose 
always snores. The program goe's through the sentqnce word by 
word, starting from the first. At the beginning, a verb EP 
is llapentl, Thak is to say, the program loodcs for all posltiqns 
which could start a verb EP which the first word satisfies. In 
this case, 'the1 cannot be part of a verb El?, but only of a 
noun EP, so the program will skart a noun LP which is dependent 
on the subject position of a verb EP. The next word 11iust 
continua the noun EP. Therefore on going to the next word, 
only EP2 is "open". ,'Many is then read, and EP2 and also EP1 
<are updated. At this point there are two alternative 
continuations. Either EP2 could be continued, as in fact happens, 
or EP2 could be  closed" and EP1 continued. Therefore on going 
to the next word, EPs 1 aqd 2 are both open. So the process is 
continued through the sentence. 
As shown in the flowchart, there are three subroutines which 
operate on each word--CON, UPIX and OACR. 
CON takes each EP which is open, and tests each sense of the 
-
word against each possible continuation of the EP. If the word 
could satisfy a position, it then looks to see whether a form 
match is necessary. In general, in English, a form test is only 
necessary between subject and verb, when the number and person 
must agree. If this hurdle is overcome, CON then proceeds to a 
semantic match. In general, the lead word of an EP must be 
matched semantically with every subsidiary word of that EP. 
For example a sub"jct must' be matched with a verb. So i% check 
is performed, to see if that particular noun taken in that 
particular sense could be the subject of that particular verb 
taken in that particular sense. Having found all the possible 
solutions, CON then gives way to UPDT. 
UPDT updates each EP according to the solutions found in 
CII_  
CON. It reproduces EPs as necessary where more than one 
solution has Been found, and discards EPs which have becorne 
defunct because no solution has been found. It also determines 
which lqter positions of' an EP either can or m u s t  be filled as 
a result of the current word becoming a part of the EP. T t  L l l e n  
hands over to OACR. 
OACR (open and Close ~outine) determines which EPs must 
-
be kept for the next word. It also perforrns some 
juggling with EPs in certain rather tricky cases such as 
relative clauses. It then returns control to the root PTOgXaIn 
for the next word. 
When all the words of the sentence have been processed, 
ENDR is entered. This examines all existing solutions. It 
discards any that are incomplete, and perfornls sorne housekeeping 
on those which: are complete in order to separate them, In 
future, it will make a choice between alternative solutions, 
although this part of the program has not yet been written. 
After ENDR, the sentence has been reduced to one (or more) 
sets of connecked EPs. Within an EP, for each subsidiary word 
the relationship to the lead word ( eg. verb/ob j e c t  , verb/time- 
noun, noun/article, etc.) is specified, as are the code(s) 
remaining as a result of the semantic matches which that word 
has undergone during the analysis. 
After  t h i s  b r i e f  d e s c r i p t i o n  of t h e  func t ions  of t he  va r ious  
subrout i l ies ,  a Inore d e t a i l e d  explanat ion of t h e  s e m m t i c  match 
fo l lows.  We thon show l~ow t h o  progrnrrl deals w i t 1 1  sams a f  the. 
more co~nplsx probllsr~ls ~ ~ ~ ' h i c l r ~  i t  s i l c o ~ n t ~ t ~ r s .  
SerriariCic Mat ching 111 or*dsx* t o  i l l u s t r a t e  tho rriotllcsd, ;I 
sixllplified exarnple i s  given,  us ing  the  word i . Take the  
sexltence, She walked i.11 f i e l d s  i x i  Nay, Suppose after READ, t h o  
fo l lowing  coclos aro i.11 s t o r e :  
The l a s t  d i g i b s ,  1 to 6 ,  r e f e r  to the 
word number. ' I n t  i s  words 3 and 5 
w i t h  codc nunibers 4-9,  1 1 - 16. Suppose 
t h e  codes have t h e  same meanings a s  
shown asc r ibed  t o  1 1-16. Suppose 
f u r t h e r  t h a t  "places11 s t a r t  n with  
d i g i t s  2127, and t h a t  'fieJdl is 21274 ,  
a l s o  that "time pe r iods"  s t a r t  with 
d i g i t s  2 2 3 ,  and t h a t  lfrnonths't s t a r t  
11 . ,521. . . . . .5  adverb 
12 .. 621 .. ; . . . 5  p l ace  p r e p o s i t i o n  o b j e c t  - place 
13 .. 6211. . . . .5 p l ace  preposition o b j e c t  - c i t y  
14 .. 6212 . . . . .5 p l ace  p r e p o s i t i o n  o b j e c t  - country 
15..631 . . . . . .5  time p r e p o s i t i o n  o b j e c t  - time per iod  
16 .. 6311 .'....5 time p r e p o s i t i o n  o b j e c t  - month 
17..22355.... 6, 
It m a y  w e l l  be asked w h y  t h e  d i s t i n c t i o n  h a s  been made 
between t h e  t h r e e  p lace  p r e p o s i t i o n s  and betweer1 t h e  t w o  t i m e  
p repos i t i ons .  There could be t w o  reasons:  e i t h e r  that the 
concept of the preposition changes (which is probably not 
true here),.or that the tranaIation is different in spme 
target language. If it is only the second case, the 
distinctian could have been left for the ,program which 
generatds the target languwe to draw. However, it is more 
economical to deal with it @ring the semantic ntatching. 
Now let us see how the disambiguation procoas works. 
This example is simplified because it does not shaw the 
semantib matching acTOSS prepositions, between 'walked1 and 
'fields1, and between 'walked1 and 'Mayt. Although sometimes 
necessary for complete disambiguation, it is not so in this 
example, and as i .4;  complicates the explanation, I will omlt it 
here for the sake of simplicity, 
After the second word, there is only one EP open. 
Cbde range 
(??he meaning of "code 
EP 1 lead w d k  2-2 
range1* w i l l  appear 
subject she 1 - 1  prgsently. ) 
The thipd word, i n 1 ,  has two syntactic classes, ad'verb 
or preposition. Both are acceptable at this point in the verb 
EP. So a semantic match is performed between each class of 
'in' and the lea4 word ' w a l k ' .  
Suppose that one SP gives 114 5 52, 
another gives 1 1 6 62, 
and another gives 1 1  6 63. 
A l l  the codes of 'in' are accepted-- code 4 by the first SP, 
codes 5, 6 and 7 by the second SP, and codes 8 and 9 by the third 
The EP has to be reproduced because there are two syntactic 
classes of 'in'. We therefore have the following: 
code range code ranges 
EP 1 lead walk 2-2 EP2 lead walk 2-2 2-2 
subject she 1 - 1  subject she 1 - 1  1 - 1 
adverb in 4- 4 preposition in 5-7 819 
in EP2 there are two code ranges, one f o r  r;he place preposition 
and one for the t i n i s  prepositiong. EP3, a preposition EP 
attackled to EP2, is now opened, and for the next w o r d  this 
preposition EP and EP1 are open, but EP2 is closed, 
The next word, 'fields', is a place noun. It is not 
accepted in EP1, which is therefore disca-rded. It is accewted 
in EP3 as the object of the preposition, so a sernantlc match IS 
performed between 'in1 and 'fields', 
Suppose there is an SP, 62 2 2127, Codes 5-7 are then 
accepted by this SP, and EP3 then looks like this: 
code range 
EP 3 lead in 5-7 
object< field 10-10 
A reconciliation is now carried out between the codes of 'inf 
in EP3 and EP2, As a result, the second code range in EP2 1 s  
elirninat ed. 
The next word, 'in1 again, IS now read, and the process is 
repeated, EP2 now looks like this: 
lead walk 2-2 2-2 
subject she 1-1 1 - 1  
preposition in 5- 7 5-7 
preposition in 12-14 15-16 
This time, on 'May', the relevant SP is 6311 2 2235. 
There would also be an SP like this: 63 2 223. 
But the first SP gives a narrower code range (16-16 instead 
of 15-16), and so it is preferred. This time, on recgnciliation, 
the first code range in EP2 is eliminated and the second is 
reduced. So at the end, the three EPs are thus: 
EP2 lead walk 2-2 EP3 lead in 5-7 E P ~  lead in 16-16 
subject she 1 - 1  object fields 10-10 object May 17-17 
preposition in 5-7 
preposition in 16- 16 
We are now left with a code range for the first 'in1 
containing three codes, In such eases, it is the first code of 
the range which 1 s  selected. So 'in' has been dlsambfguated to 
621 in the first case, and tg 6311 in the second. 
Syntactic Complexities Of course, it is all very well for 
a program to be able to digest, She walked in fields in May. 
But can it also cope with this? 
The farmers we were talking about grew, and the green- 
grocers, thieves and liars, sold those apples. 
In other words, the program must be capable of being expanded 
to deal with the myriad complexities and exceptions of natural 
language. However sound the principles underlying a program 
may be, such expansion involves a deal of intricate and 
detaiJ.ed work. At every stage,, flexibility and rigidity liave 
to be balmced. The program must be flexible enough ta 
e'nvisage possibilities, but rigid enough to exclude im- 
possibilities and to latch onto the right solution when it 
appears. The programmer's task resembles a tailor's. Let out 
an inch or two mare, taka in a couple thore. It .c~.ould be 
satisfactory inaeed if an algorithm could be Pound both concise 
and comprehensive which would encompass all the requirements, 
but language is such a barnacled growth that this seems on the 
face of it improbable, It would be surpri.sing if excrescences 
in the program were not necessary to deal with excrescences in 
the language. In the development of this program, when the 
treatment of a new structure has been added, whenever possible 
the original framework has been adapted to incorporate it, 
thereby avoid~ng the necessity of adding large sections of 
program. This is only commonsensical. Nevertheless, the program 
has grown considerably with its c~pacity to handle largerareas of 
language. 
Here is perhaps a suitable point to emphasise that, since 
this is a multiple-path analyser', at sach point all the avail- 
able information, syntact'ic and semantic, has been deployed to 
eliminate incorrect paths. This has been done not only to 
avoid unnecessary computatian, but also because the storage 
limits have made i$ essential. There are only 25 EPs. Frequently 
during testing this store overflowed, but interestingly enough 
~t has always been possible to bring the demand on it back 
within bounds by finding some restriction which had been over- 
looked and which cut out one of the paths. It had originally 
been feared that 25 EPs would not be nearly enough. One of 
the satisfying discoveries of the program is that it'i.3. 
Of course the deployment of all available information is 
nod &he only approach. Most of the earlier program concentrated 
on the syntax and paid little heed to the semantics. Wilks, 
on the other hand, is relying primarily on the semantics suzd 
is tbaking from the syntax only what is absolutely necessary. 
It will be fascinating if his research is able to deternine 
exackly how much of the syntax is unnecessary. There are obvious 
redundancies in the form of unnecessary safe-guards in language, 
No one who has struggled with German case endings is ignorant 
of this, In English, we have the concord between subject and 
verb in the third perSbn of the present, patently unnecessary 
since it exists only in this one instance, There are many 
sentences in which the semantics alone are clearly sufficient. 
In the sentence, "The man ate the steak with a fork,", the words 
could appear in any sequence and the meaning would be decipherable, 
although it might take longer to decipher. The interesting 
question is what features of the syntax can be consistently 
ignored, without occasional sentences cropping up which can only 
be deciphered with the help of these features. 
There now follows a description of the treatment of three 
notoriotisly awkward problems-- relative clauses, pronouns, and 
conjunction. 
Relative Clauses Six cases are distinguished: 
1. The man who met you. 5. The man you met. 
. The man who(m) you met. 6. The man you gave it to. 
3. The rnan who (m) you gave it to. 
4, The man to whom you gave it. 
After the lead of a noun EP, a relative pronoun (94), a pre- 
position ( 6 ) ,  and a contact noun ( 2 ~ )  are all possible 
continuations. 
lWhol has three relative pronoun codes, starting with, 
941, subject of relative clause, 
942, object of relative clause, 
943, object of prepositicm in relative clause,- 
'Whom' ~bviously only has the last two. 
EP1 man EP2 man EP3 man E P ~  --- 
the the the (man) (subject) 
who 9-41 who 942 who 943 
EP5 --- EP~--A EP7 --- 
(a) (object) --- (man) (preposition object) 
When a relative pronoun is recognised, the noun EP, EP1, 
is reproduced to EPs 2 and 3, and the codes 941, 942, and 943 are 
to  
added to separate noun EPs. Then in OACR, new EPs 4 6 are 
opened dependent uppn the noun EPs. In the case of 941 and 942, 
the lead of the noun EP, *mant, is Bntered in the neQ EPs,as 
subject and objec-k respectively. They are marked so as to avoid 
translation, but they are necessary for semantic matching in 
the relative clause. In the case of 943, an additional new 
preposition EP, EP7, is opened dependent upon the relative 
clause EP, and the lead of the noun EP, 'man', is entered as 
the object of this prepositiatn EP. The relative clause EP 
is marked as waiting for a fldating preposition, although when 
a preposition comes this EP is reproduced, and in one EP the 
preposition is taken as the floating preposition, while in the 
other EP it i s  talcen as a n o t h e r  preposition. This is necessary 
to allow for such clauses as, the man wliom you g a v e  tile book 
in the end to. 
In the cases  of 941, 942 and 943, the only EP which is open 
for the next word is the relative clause EP. For 941 the next 
necessary word in the EP is the lead verb, while for 942 and 943 
the next necessary word is the subject. In practice, one or 
m o r e  of these EPs is usually eliminated on the next word. 
When a contact noun is recognised, it is marked i n  the noun 
EP as being in reality a relative pronoun. Then the procedure 
for 942 and 943 above is followed; but in addition, the contact 
noun is entered as the subject of the relative clause EP. 
When a prepusition is recognised, the noun EP is reproduced 
once, because the preposition might be in the noun EP, like dog 
in a manger, or it might be in a relative clause. For the 
relative clause path, a preposition EP and a relative clause EP 
are opened. Only the preposition EP is left open for the next 
word, which must be a relative pronoun, 
For indirect questions, 
I don't know which house he bought. 
I don't know what he lived in. etc 
the treatment is somewhat similar to that for relative clauses. 
Pronouns For either a translation or a questio~l-a~isweri~lg 
program, the noun which the pronoun replaces, called here the 
replacement noun, has to be identified. In a question- 
allawering program, the reasons are obvious enough. I n  a 
translation progrml, it is necsssary for sertiantic ~natchlng and 
also because in many target languages the gender of the prohoun 
varies with that of the replacement noun. 
The replacement noun might; be in the same sentence as the 
pronoun, or in a previous sentence. Therefore, in dealing with 
pronouns, the program must be able to refer to preceding 
sentences. So after ENDR, the essential information for the 
sentence just processed is extracted from the first chain of 
EPs and stored. At present, th$s is only done for one chain of 
E P s ,  i,e. one solution. This essential information consists 
of a tree, containing one code for each word and the relatlon 
of each word to the code to which it is attached. Reverting 
to, The m a i l  with a long nose always snores., the information 
is as follows, 
snores....,...l.....e.1175 
tense.........Z.......tense, mood, code.,.T 1 
m ~ . .  . . ~ . . t . . 3 e . ~ ~ ~ ~ m 2 1 1 0 2 1 ~ e ~ ~ ~ o ~ ~ m ~ e 1  1 
........... the 4.....~..4032..................3 
with .*C.......5e.e....6~ 7e...e.e*.0***.0....3 
.......... nqse 6 e . . . m ~ ~ 2 1 2 e e ~ e e m ~ e ~ ~ ~ e ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ e 5  
a......~ . m . . . m 7 m e e ~ ~ ~ ~ 4 ~ 3 3 1 ~ m ~ ~ m e ~ ~ ~ m ~ ~ o m ~ ~ ~  6 
.......... long 8....... 4 1 7 6 . a . ~ . . . e . ~ e . e ~ * . . m  6 
r alwgYs ........9.......33 6e..-...........e.m.1 
The fasr; co~umn p o l r l ~ s  b~ tile code to which the word is 
attached. The previous column contains any relationship 
information not implicit in the code itself or, in the case 
of a pronoun, a pointer to the code of the replacement noun, 
1% is important to notice that the code itself usually does 
provide the relationship information. For example 61, the 
first two digits of 'witht, specify with some precision the 
relationship of 'witht to 'man', 
With the preceding sentences available in this form, the 
processing of a pronoun works as fo1;lows. When the pronoun 
is first encountered for a semqntic match, all the possime 
replacement nouns are found; that is to say, all those nouns 
which agree in number and person with the pronoun and which 
are either before the pronoun in the same sentende but not in 
the same clause, or in a preceding.sentence. The program only 
goes back through the preceding sentences until suitable 
noun has been found, If for example there w e r B  one or more 
suitable nouns in the second sentence before the current one, 
38 
it would not examine the third sentence besore the current 
one. Consider the following sentences. 
The man went into the shop where he had seen the raincoat. 
He bought a hat an4 took it away. 
For 'het, the only possible replacement noun is 'man' because 
it is the only noun which agrees in person. For i t ,  the 
program firids 'hat1, 'raincoatt, and 'shopt as possible re- 
placement nouns, If there were a preceding sentence, it 
would not bother to search it. Semantic matches are then 
carried out between 'take' and each of the three nouns and all 
three nouns are accepted, so they are all entered into the 
EP after i t .  But the code ranges for 'shop' are more 
restricted than for 'hat1 and 'raincoat1, because the physical- 
movement meaning of 'taker is excluded with 'shopt because 
'shopt is imrnoveable. When 'away' is read and matched with 
'taket, all meanings of 'take' except the physical-movement 
meaning are eliminated. tShopt is now left dangling, so to 
speak, and is eliminated as a possible replacement noun. So 
when the end of the sentence is reached, there are two possible 
swviving replacement nouns, 'hat' and 'raincoat'. There is 
no semantic reason for preferring one of these to the other, 
becaase the number of digits matched in the semantic match 
with 'take' is the same in both cases. Therefore in ENDR a 
choice is made according to a formula of priorities and 'hatt 
is selected, as; a rmre recent verb object. 
This "formula of prioritiesv, which is only applied if 
there is no semantic preference for one noun, is probably at 
3 9  
the moment .a rather blunt instrumeat. It is concerned with 
two factors -- which noun occurred in a 1-ater clause, and 
which noun has the same function as the pronoun; subject, 
objept, preposition object, or object of the same preposition. 
In the majority of cases it produces the correct answer, but 
it is possible to think up examples in which it doesn't. 
With experience of use, the formula will be refined. 
A complication is addea ~y rhe possibility that, when a 
subdect, 'itt may be impersonal. This sense is treated 
essentially as one possible replacement noun. 
There is still work to be done in developing the for,mula 
of priorities. CLAM extracts the information required to 
solve the pronoun problem. The question is, how to use it. 
Conjunction No m t  of the program is more complex than 
that dealing with conjunct'fon. The principles are clear,Qeven 
simple, enough; but applying them has demanded a considerable 
amount of care. Consider the fragment, 
He cleaned the carpets in the bedroom and...... 
When 'and1 is read, the EPs are as follows: 
EPI cleaned EP2 carpets EP3 in E P ~  bedroom 
he the bedroom the 
carpets in 
All four of these EPs are alive, which is to say that the next 
word might be a continuation of any of them. On recognising 
a conjunction, the program looks for nnssible continuations in 
all alive EPs, from the beginning of the EP up to the point 
which has been reached. It carries out the necessary semantic 
matches, it opens a new "conjeptt or conjunctive EP for each 
solution, and it enters dummy words in both the conjep and 
the EPs above it in the chain where necessary. To clarify 
this prooedure, we will consider two possible continuations. 
(a) ..... and I...... '1' can only be the subject of a 
verb EP, so the conjep., EP5, must be joined to EP1. The 
program adds a 5(: entry, and opens EP5 thus: 
EP1 cleaned EP5----- 
carpets EP5 is dependent on EPI at the subject 
position 
K 5  
(b) ..... and curtains. 'Curtainsf could be joined to 
EP2 as the lead, or J S Y ~  as the object. The conjep IS 
attached to the lower EP, EP2, but a dummy word is entered 
in EP1 and the semantic match is carried out between the 
dummy word, 'curtains', and the lead of the  EP, 'cleanedt, 
EP1 cleaned EP2 carpets EP5 curtains 
he the theX 
carpets in 
EP5 is dependent on EP2 at the 
X 
curtains K 5  lead position, 
'The1 r is entered as a dummy word in EP5 because it comes before 
the point at which EP5 is dependent on EP2. A semantic match 
is carried out be%w;een 'thev and 'curtainst. 
'CurtainsT might also be the subject of a verb EP, so 
EPI is reproduced and another conjep started, attached to the 
reproduced EP at -%he subject position, as for.....and I...... 
aboqe. This path is unlikely to be correct, and will probably 
soon b~ eliminated, 
An attempt is also made to attach curtainst to E P ~  in 
the lead position, but it fails because a dummy word 
curtainsi is then put into EP3, and the semantic match 
between 'int and 'curtains1 is tried +and fails, 
Now let us see what the EPs 1ookd.ike at the end of a 
more complex conjunctive sentence: 
I, you and Nellie saw, watched and greeted the men, 
women and tired children. 
EPI saw EP2 I EP5 watched E P ~  greeted EP7 men 
I K 3  the 
~4~ X youX YOU K8 
~ e 1 l i . e ~  EP3 you   el lie^   el lie^ 1c9 
K 5  ~4 ~6 men EP8 women X 
~6 E P ~  Nellie X X men women theX 
X 
men women childi-enx Kg 
X 
women childrenX EP9 children 
tired 
It will be seen that control passes from the conjeps 5 
and 6 up to EP1 before 'men', so that 'men' is entered as a 
word in EPI. B u t  it is also entered as a dummy word in EPs 
5 and 6, and semantic matches are carried out with 'watched1 
and 'greeted1. Also 'woment and 'children', although only 
dummy words in EPI, are entered as dummy words in EPs 5 and 
6 as well, 
A c ~ n j e p  remains open, and the EP ofi which it depends 
42 
remains closed until the last necessary word up to the branch 
has been filled. If the sentence had read, 
1 you and Nellie saw, and 'he1 watched and greeted.,etc. 
EP5 would have opened with 'he'. I ,  'you1 and 'Nellie1 would 
not have been entered i n  it as durnrny W Q ~ ~ S .  E l ?  would flclvo 
remained open, and EP1 closed until arter tho lead w ~ r d  
twa-l;chedlm 
A c o m a  is treated as a possible conjunction or as FI 
possible braclcst. Bocauso of the dual  r o l e  o f  c.i corntrln, tllc 
programming associated with it is rather awlc~qard .  
To sum up the treatment o f  conjunction, the possible 
continuations from a conjunction, particularly if'there have 
been previous conj~mctions in the sentence, can be numerous. 
But by the strict use of dumrriy entries and their associated 
semantic matches, false continuat~ons are usually quickly 
nosed out and eliminated. Also, f o r  the recordirlg of the 
full meaning of a corij~uictive senterice for-  tho purpose of 
later interrogation, the dummy entry system is of course 
essential. And in the special case of comparative sente~~ces, 
it is only by such a system that it can be clearly established 
exactly what is being compared. 
Summary. I conclude this section with an assessment of what 
the analysis can and cannot achieve. The purpose of analysis 
might be described as follows: to select, from among all the 
possible meanings of each word in the passage, its correct 
meaning in the context, and t o  determine what semantic 
relationships exist between '~qhich words, CLAN can do thzs 
with considerable efficiency within the confines of 9 single 
sentence. It is just beginning to enlarge its horizens to 
deal with longer texts. 
To clarify this statement let us consider the aids which 
enable us to select one meaning of a word raeher than another, 
and see which of them CLAM applies. 
1. Syntactic class. Example: "The car will work when 
the mechhic finishes his wo'rlc. Here tho word 'worlc' is 
evidehtly a verb on the first occasion and 3 noun on the 
second. CLAM can usually deal easily enough with this type of 
ambiguity. 
2. Rules for pronoun antecedents, This has already been 
discussed at some length.. The rules are both semantic and 
syntactic. When the rules are determined, CLAM will be in a 
position to apply th6m. 
3. Semantic restrictions on syntactically associated pairs 
of'words which exclude one meaning. Example: "He took off his 
g~andmother.~ Here the two word verb 'take offt mugt me- 
'mimicl. The personal subject and the existence of an object 
excludes the sense of a plane taking off, 'Grandmother1 as 
object excludes the sense of taking off clothes, Such 
restrictions are the basis of CLAM'S semantic match, and 
ambiguities of this sort are resolved as a matter of course. 
4. Semantic restrictions on syntactically associated 
pairs of words khich give preference to one meaning. Example: 
"I killed ths man with a gun." Here, there is a synta~tic as 
well as a semantic ambiguity. It is less straightforward than 
the previous example because the ambiguous word is 'with', 
whlch might be ~JI instrument preposition attached to the verb 
kill1, or a possessicon preposition attached to the noun 
Vrnanl. The semantic relationships which determine the choice, 
however, ~ n l y  involve 'witht i n d l  ectly. They are between 'kill1 
and 'gun1 in one case, and between 'man1 and 'gun1 in the 
other, NormalLy tlXle preference would be for the instrunlent; 
interpretation because l g ~ p l '  is more strongly associated with 
'killt as an instrument than with 'man1 as a possession. CLISrcI 
chooses the stronger association by taking the 'deepert 
semadtic match, ar 2n other words the match involving the 
Larger number of digits. It does this correctly, but as w e  
shall see in a moment, it is not always correct to do so, 
5, Remoter contextual environment. Sometimes the 
factors enabling a choice to be made are more remote from the 
word in question than In the examples given above, In order 
to find these factors, a longer journey has to be made into 
the environment of the word, 
Examples: (i) "The mayor hit the alderman so hard that he 
fell down." The normal rules for selection of pronotin 
antecedents would prefer 'mayor' as the antecedent of 'he' 
because it is the subjec-tt, but in the environment of hitting, 
it is much more likely to be the person hit who falls down 
rather than t b  hitter, so 'alderman' must be preferred. 
(ii) "Two men came in. One had a gun and tho other had 
a knife. I killed the man with a gun." Here 'withT is 
obviously not an instrument preposition attached to lkilll, 
but a possession preposition attached to 'menv. This is so 
because the definite article 'thet attached to vmpn' implies 
that 'man1 has already been defined, But in fact two men 
have already been defined, and more information is needed to 
determine which of them is referred to. The only possible 
additional information which could satisfy this requirement 
is 'with a gunr, whioh does suffice to distinguish one of the 
previously determined men. Therefore this phrase must be 
attached to 'manv, 
At present, CLAM could not resolve either sf these 
ambiguities. In order to do so it would need, in the fix"st 
case, more information about the environment of 'hitt than 
is contained in the semantic restrictions now at its 
disposal, and i n  the second case, both a better memory and a 
routine for dealing with definition of nouns. Work is in 
progress on these vital additions. They will involve 
adding to the type and range of the semantic relationships 
between pairs of words referred to in the definition of the 
purpose of analysis given at the beginning of this summary. 
At present, CLAM only holds semantic relationships be-tween 
words which are syntactically related. This is not enough. 
Adding to the types of relationships held, and extending them 
to pairs of words which are syntactically remote, will greatly 
increase the scope of the model. 
GENERATION OF TFIE FIXENCFI TRANSLATION 
As shown in the flowchart, the sentence is operated on 
sequentially by four subroutines--TWEN, ITRN, FRORM and 
PRIN. Briefly the function of each of these subroutines 
is as follows. 
TWEN examines all the verbs. It welds them (joins 
auxiliaries to main verbs), and determines their tense in 
French. Thls is not of course necessarily the sane as in 
English. Other features of the sentence often have to be 
examined. Thus, "When he arrives we will meet him", becomes 
in French, "When he will arrive we will meet him". And 
"I have been here for five years" becomes "I am here since 
five years.!! Gerunds, infinitives and participles are also 
dealt with by T W E N ,  It may well be asked why the weld part 
of this routine is thus left until the French generation. 
Should it not be done avring the reduction of the English 
sentence to base fo'rm? The answer is that logically it 
should, and it will sooner or later be transferred, probably 
to ENDR. But at present it doesn't matter. The part of the 
program described in the section on pronouns which stores the 
base form of the last sentences is in fact performed after the 
French translation has been generated, and therefore, after 
the verbs have been welded. 
ITRN takes each word in the sentence in turn. I;t finds 
the code number in FRILE, the French dictionary file, and 
extracts the French word(s). Sometimes of course there is 
more than one, Sometimes there is zero because the English 
word does not have to be translated. Any particular French 
word may not have the same function in the sentence as the 
English word. In such cases, the French word entry in FRILE 
is followed by a code which specifies the word's function in 
x'glation to the English word being translated. For example, 
if 2.32237 isl the code for 'potato', -t;hen'FR1LE entry will be 
212237 POMME F DE 6 TERRE 6x2. The F after POMME shows that 
it is feminine. The 6 after DE shows that its x'unc$ion is as 
a plcepqsition in the EP of which POMME is the lead. The 6x2 
after T E W  shows that it is the object in the EP of which DE 
is the lead, 
Sometimes it isaecessary to go up Che tree. Fop example 
Y1x5 means an adverb (5) in the verb EP (1) of which the 
English word is a subsidiary ( Y ) .  It is thus possible to 
generate a French sentdnce of a radically different shape from 
English. 
ITRY also finds a French sequence code for each word. 
This is a code which provides the ordering of words within an 
EP. All lead words have the code 200. A pre-noun adjective 
may have a code 140, and a post-noun adjective 350. So these 
codes do not determine what is the actual sequence of words 
in the sentence, but they do provide the basic information 
from which the sequence is derived in FRORM. 
FRORM first derives the actual sequence of words in %he 
,sentence. It then takes each French word and puts it into the 
correct rorrn. Obviously the most arduous part of this tqsk 
is finding the forms of the verbs. FRORM refers to tables 
which contain the verb endrings for both irregular b d  regular 
verbs, and the irregular feminine and plural endings for 
nouns and adjectives. 
PRIN prints the French translation, haying made any 
-
necessary elisions. If there is more than one solution, it 
prints alterna-bive translations of particular words on sub- 
sequen.1; linss or, if appropriate, it will print complete 
alternative sentences. 
CONCLUSION 
Programming Details and Future Developments 
Programmersmay be interested in some details. The program 
runs on a 360-40 using 1 4 6 ~  of core store. The program is 
m i t t e n  in FORTRAN IV, not an ideal choice but the best 
available in the circumstances. The reduction of the English 
to base form requires about 6,000 instructions, and the French 
generation about 2,500. At present all the files are 1cep-k 
in core store except for the two large dictionary files VOCAB 
and FRILE, which are accessed on disk. It will eventually be 
necessary to Keep JSP also on disk. 
At present the processing takes about 15 seconds per word 
on average, of which READ takes 4076, the semantic and 
syntactic analysis about 20%, and the French generation 40%. 
No serims attempt has y e t  been made to optimise the program and 
this time could certainly be peduced. But the reduction would 
be offset by the eventual need to keep JSP on disk. So as 
a practical proposition for translating texts, it would be 
necessary for the processing time to be reduced by a factor 
of about 10. Presumably this will come sooner or later with 
improvement in hardware. 
There are certain improvements which would have -bo be 
made to the pogram before it could be used, apart from the 
extension of the vocabulary. Most obvious: 
(a) there are some syntactic structures such as 
inversion after negatives which the program does 
not at present recognise; 
(b) a, selection routine must be incorporated in ENDR 
to choose between alternative solutions if more 
than one emerges; 
(c) if no solution emerges the program should try 
again, selectively suppressing semantic matching, 
allowing words to be used outside their normal sense; 
(d) the sizes of some of the temporary stores would 
have to be increased. 
No particular dirficulty is anticipated with any of these 
developments, in that they involve no methodology fundamentally 
different from what has already been applied. It is primarily 
a matter of time and priorities. However with a fifth develop- 
ment, namely the extension of the memory as outlined at the 
end of the section o h  analysis, new ground must be covered, 
and work on this is at present in progress. 
APPENDIX 
Coding System : Principal Categori,es 
D i g k t  I s t  
1 verb 
2 noun 
3 pr,onoun 
4 adjective 
2nd 3rd 
1 intransi-tive 
2 noun object 
3 clause predicate I noun + part part. 
2 noun + to + i n f i n .  
3 noun + gerund 
5 noun clause 
4 verb sequel 
5 noun + clause 
predicate 
6 complement sequel 
7 be (pres. cont.) 
8 
1 concrete 
2 abstract 
1 infinitive 
2 to + infinitive 
3 gerund 
1 noun + infinitive 
2 noun + to + 1nfi.n. 
4 noun + prep. + 
gerund 
5 noun + noun clause 
0 qualify concrete or 
abstract noun 
1 be (passive) 
2 have (pres. perf.) 
1 animate 
2 inanimate 
1 qualify concrete 0 animate or 
noun inanirnat e 
1 animate 
2 inanimate 
2 qualify abstract 
noun 
4 question 
5 possessive 
1 time 
2 place 
3 purpose 
4 question 
5 manner 
6 degree 
7 probability 
8 frequency 
6 pfeposition 1 predetermined 1 by verb 
2 by noun 
3 by adjective 
2 post determined 1 time 
2 place 
3 purpose 
4 reason 
5 manner 
6 instrument 
3rd 
7 association 
8 past 
9 concession 
A subject matter 
7 conjunct;ioll 1 link: 
2 contxagt 
'j comparison 
9 clause word 2 noun c lause  
4 relative c lause  
6 adverbial clause 1 time 
2 place 
3 purpose 
4 reason 
5 manner 
8 condition 
9 concession 
Amencan Journal of Computational Linguistics ~ ic ro f i che  49 : 53 
Slate Universily 
of New York 
R E Q U E S T  F O R  P R O P O S A L  
Federal 
Research & Development 
by 
Contract 
WASHINGTON OFFICE 
STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK 
SEPTEMBER 1974 
AJCL EDITOR'S NOTE 
The document reproduced on these frames came t o  the  Ed i to r ' s  
a t t en t ion  recent ly ,  i n  s p i t e  of the publicat ion da te .  AJCL 
thanks the Sta te  University of New ~ o r E ,  copyright holder,  
and M r .  Mort Grant, Director of the Research Foundation of 
SUNY; M s .  Winifred R .  Widmer, Assistant  Director f o r  Adminis- 
t r a t i on ;  M r .  William F1. Claire ,  Director of the SUNY Washington 
Office; M r .  J i m  Kalas and Ms. Susan G. ,Sorrels  of tha t  Office; 
f o r  t h e i r  several  contributions to  the appearance here of RFP. 
Some of the names and telephone numbers must no longer be 
cor rec t ;  but ACL and AJCL do not have the means t o  bring them 
up t o  date .  The general understanding of the-system which 
t h i s  document provides i s  valuable t o  any ACL member who 
chooses t o  make use of i t .  Broader Federal support fo r  the 
usepof  computers i n  l i ngu i s t i c s  i s  probably the only way t o  
bring the f i e l d  t o  a much higher l eve l  of a c t i v i t y .  
Individual copies are available to all autlorized 
State University of New York personnel free of 
charge. Bulk orders, or other requests for copies 
can be arranged at a cost-of-print~ng charge of 
$1.50 per copy. All requests regarding this pub- 
lication should be directed to the Washington 
Office, -State University of New --York, Suite 500, 
1730 Rhode Island Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20036 (202, 659-2330). Checks should be made 
payable t o  the Research Foundation of State 
University of New York. 
William F. Claire, Director 
Susan G .  Sorrels, Edltor 
Carole K. Combs, Administrative Ass~stant 
Q State University of New York 1974 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I, FEDERAL PROCUREMENJ' FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: AN EXPLANA- 
TION OF THE RFP CONTRACT MECHANISM 
11, ALPHABETICAL LISTING OF FEDERAL AGENCIES WHICH CONTRACT FOR 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Department of Agriculture 
Atomic Energy Commission 
Depart men t of Commerce 
Department of Defense 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Department of Health, Education, and welfare 
Department of Hous~ng and Urban Development 
Department of the Interior 
Department of Justice 
Department of Labor 
Department of Transportation 
Nationd Aeronautics and Space Administration 
National Science Foundation 
Srnithsonian instituhon 
United States Information Agency 
111. GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
IV, INDEX OF AGENCIES AND DEPARTMENTS WITH FEDERAL CIVILIAN AND 
MILITARY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
V. APPENDIX A 
Sample of Standard Form 129 
Sample of Standard Form DOD 558-1 
VI. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ORIGINAL PAGE \rJUMBERS ARE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE FRAME 
INTRODUCTION 
In view of an incredsing interest in government agencies in pinpointing thclr r r scach  
needs, the Washington Office of State University of New York feels that it is appropn.ltc for 
its campuses to  familiarize themselves withQ what is commonly c;dled the RFP plocrss. Thr 
"request for proposal," or the governrnetlt way of saylrlg t h ~ t  it is p u t r ~ r ~ g  out bids to fulfill 
a specific need, is bccoming something that  all cnnlpuses sllould bc awnrc of in t h r i  efforts 
t o  secure all possible funding for research xnd devdopment from outside sources. Fcder'd con-  
tracting out ,  as it were, can be a complicated process, bu t  we hope that potcnt1.J 1nvcstig.rtors 
d l  rcgard this information as preliminary. Aftcr that,  there isn't ~ r i y  substitute for dic .unount 
of work involved. 
Tlus booklct is d c s y l c d  to  givc carnyur rcp~esent~~t i \ lcs  L~rl  ovr.nr1eiv of tlic ngerlclm 
involved, as wen as ill1 u n d c ~ s t n n d i n ~  of ' ~ n d  c s p l a ~ l ~ ~ t l o n  of the RFP contract mrch;wnm. We 
I I ~ V C  listed 15 sepalate agncics  c~irrerltly invo1vt.d m this contrdct rncchnnisrn. thelr irltcrcst ~ n d  
appropriate addresses for more inforrliation. We have also included a glossav of tcrnls .IS Ll 
guide and all index o f  the v,xious offices and bureaus within each of the 15 agencies. 
The time span from inception of  an idea to actnnl publication IS always a lengthy 
one  and many people have been involved with thls report. Willi.lrn Hedbcrq. L Susan Sorrcls. J im 
Kalas, ~ n d  Carole Combs have all participated in its dcvelopmcnt. Bryan Sw.lrtz. \vlio lvined 
our  office in the summer of 1974 as an lntcln from the Stony Brook campus. dcscrvcs sFcclal 
pralsc for his coordination of  many activities leading to  the publlcatlo~i of the book. Witllout 
Ms dedication to the project, it  might have bcen delc~)red considcrnbl~.  We are grateful to .dl 
of these people for thcir assistance. Wc hope tfi.~t the book w ~ l l  p row GI v.duable \r!nrLing 
glide for anyone interested in thc contrLIct system. Thc Wbwhlngton Office would bc p l c ~ s c d  
to provlde additional in?orm.~tion about thc c ~ g e ~ ~ c l c s  lnvolvcd. 
I. FEDERAL PRQCUREMENT FOR RESEARCH AND DEVBLOPMENT: AN 
EXPLANATION OF THE RFP CONTRACT MECHANISM 
Each year the federal government contracts for billions of dollars of work to  
support efforts deemed to  be in the national interest. A significant percentage of the contract 
services are in the form of Research and ~eve lopment  (R & D) or programmatic work which 
colleges and universities are particularly wcll-suited to  perform. The government commits these 
funds i n  eithet of two WAYS: grants or contracts. 
University researchers are generally more familiar with the grant procedure than with 
the contract procedure. Under a grant program, a given federal agency is authorized to grant 
funds to non-profit institutions, frequently educational institutions, for the purpose of supporting 
research or a in a given general area. A body of general conditions are established by 
the Congress and refined by the applicable agency to  set parameters for the pro$am as a whole. 
A specific grant for a program can be made so long as it fits within the gevral stpndards (the 
Guidelines) of the program and meets whatever qualitative standards for review that  have been 
established. 
Since grant funds, particularly in research areas, have been inc~asingly competitive 
in recent years, the university community ' is turning its attention to potential support through 
the contract mechanismi. A contract, unlike a grant, is generally awarded for the purpose of 
meeting a specific reqwrement that a federal agency has determined to be important to the 
achievement of .the agency:s responsibilities. The contract will tend, therefore, to be specific 
in terms of the agency's needs, and in the case of research, wdl usually be for the purpose of 
"applied" rather than "basic" research. The contract, also unlike the grant, can be negotiated 
with any organization that is legally constituted to do business w ~ t h  the government, whether 
non-profit or profit-making. 
Government procurement m its present massive scope is a relatively new phenomenon, 
having emerged fin a s  prpscnt form in the past quarter of a century. Each of the many federal 
agencies involved in procurement - and most are - developed a set of standards'and procedures 
to administer the contracting process. While the procedures used by any gven agency tend to 
be relativel) orderly in terms of that agency's requirements, they will not necessarily conform to 
the practices of  anoJler agency. Looking at the federal government as a whole, however, the 
set of. practices is varied, highly technical and often confusing. The general descriptions offered 
in 'this statement, therefore, are subject to the differing qualifications and refinements established 
by individd government agencies. 
In recent years there has been an attempt to  bring mter-agency consistency to the 
procurement' process. A speclal government task force has recommended legislation -which would 
bring uniformity in procurement policy. Congress is considering such legislation, which will be 
discussed later. 
Basic contractual agreements with the federal government are developed in one of 
four ways: 
A. Sole Sotrrce I'roclrrement. The government negotiates with one and only one 
provider on the grounds that the product or service is uniqucly provided by the organization 
in question. 
B. Sitlqlc Solrrco Procir r ( w l o l t  Thc governmcot ncgotlatcs with onc and onl). 
o n c  profidel in ir~stances whcrc tllcrc could bc cnmpctlttve Lids but becnusc of f'ictors such 
.IS locnnon, co~ lven ienc~  or spoc1.d urgency competitive bidding 16 unwarranted. 
C. Cutrlpc>titi~~e Nrgothltiotr In  instances where providers are few and known to 
the government, cornpetltion is litnited to  tllc known promders and publicity reg,uding thr  
availability of .I contract is not rcqulrcd. 
1). O ~ C V P  CIotrip~tlttoil. CorltrI~cts .ue lct by open bid, u t i l i ~ i n ~  the mmdatory 
provisions for ndvcrtts~ng publlcly the availability of the contract, and ope,, solicitation of 
proposals AS dcscrlbcd Intcr. 
In dddition to  the four types o f  contractual processes, there are special types of 
contractual arrangements for special purposes. For university representatives, the Ope11 and 
No Cost Contracts 'Ire o f  particular interest. These contracts permit the exchange of equip- 
ment, p~~rticularly scientific equipment, and documents for specified purposes wlthout actual 
fiscal trmiaction. 
o f  the various contractual patterns, the Open Competition is becoming the most 
common contract mcchanhm. Since the government purchases goods and servlces on a dady 
bass and in amounts totaling blllions of dollars annually, the problem for potential investiga- 
tors is how to d~scover t h ~ t  a contract of interest wdl be let and whether thew organizations 
have sufficiently reasonable chances of winning the contract t o  justify the extensive and un- 
compensatablc cffort required to apply. 
Each competitive contract let by the government must be announced as open to 
cornpetltion. The announcement i$ in the form of a Request for Proposal ( R F P ) .  The an- 
nouncement must be published in the journal that has begome the pnrnary source for all 
contract information the Conirnerce B~cslness Dally. The Commerce Business Daily is p b -  
Lshed In Chicago as a senrice of  the Department of Commerce. (It may be ordered from 
the Government Pnntlng Office, Washingtpn, D.C.; the subscription rate is currently 563.50 
per year.) The Commerce ~ ~ r s ~ ~ z o s s  Dally has a small staff a ~ ~ d  consequently must publish 
RFP announcements. as they arc written by the contributing.agency. As a result, informa- 
tion t ha t  is published regarmng a gven competition is often scant and late, with proposal 
deadlines somctlrnes only a matter of days away from the dare of *jpblication. ~ r aquen t l y  
a notice d indicate the need to send for more detailed information promded by the agency 
offering the contract. Writing for the necessary informat~on cuts Into the short tiine avail- 
able fir preparation of a proposal to  meet a deadl~ne date. 
Alternately, most agencies provldc an additional advantage t o  prospective bldders 
in the form of "Bidders Lists." All current prospective bidders on a "Bldders List" are 
notified of a pen&ng RFP, generally a t  the same time the Conzmerce Business Daily is notified, 
thus gvlng the bidder on the list the advantage of several days. 
In order to be included on a "bidders list," an investigator must contact the agency 
w t h  which he intends to do business and request an %pplicatim. Most agencies now use 
Standard Form 129*for placegent on bidders lists. While there is some 'inter-agency cross- 
llstlng of bldders, for the most part appl~cants must expect to' submit Standard Form 129 
separately t o  each agency for placement on a biddcrs list. 
There are some difficult problems in the mechanics of the contract process o$ 
which interested college and university representatives should be aware. For example, govern- 
ment agencles,have established the rule that each organizot~on on a "bidders list" must respond 
either positively 01 negatively to every RFP it rccelvcs. 1f an organization falls to  respond 
to an RFP with at least a notice of-  intent, it is removcd from the "bidders list." Maintain- 
ing status on a "bidders list" therefore can become a tedious adrnln~strative task justrfiablc 
only to those organizations that lare geared t o  a heavy volilmc of government contracting. 
The "bidders list" does permlt the applicant organization to indicate the types of proposals 
in which it 1s interested and its capacities t o  perform tasks, however, so that RFP's are sent 
to the Grganlzation only when the RFP 1s relevant to  the organizations' capabilities. Some 
of the administrative burden on prospective contractors 1s eliminated by this procedure. 
Even hi the best of cacumstances,'however, bidders frequently have as llttle as 
two weeks to  prepare a proposal. Gcenerally the competltlon has the same tlme constraints,, 
but the process does require staff who are available and who can "drop everything" in order' 
to meet a proposal deadline. Pnvate research corporations and consulting firms can admin- 
ister their w o k  so that they may respond t o  proposal preparation on short notice; respond- 
mg quickly to an RFP 1s frequently 'more difficult for university investigators with heavy 
comkitrnents to teaching and other university-relyed activities. 
Except for -the time constrants under wlilch one must work, ihe preparation of 
contract ptoposals differs little ,from the preparation of grant proposals. In one sense, the 
preparation of a contract proposal IS easier\,because specific terms and objectives are generally 
stated in the W P .  The proposal is frequently a statement of  the methodology and proce- 
dures for acbiewy! prescnbed objectives. On the other hand, the contract leaves little lati- 
tude for the creative investigator to detennme'the character of  the rtisearcb to his own stan- 
dards. The agency sponsoring the RFP sometimes employs qualified persollb who can state 
a valid set of object&ves and specifications for the contract; sometimes, however, it does not. 
It might be .necessary for  he response t o  ~IJ  RFP t o  contain arguments for d tenng  objectives 
and specifications that diplo~atical ly demonstrate how the governments' Interests d be 
served. 
Contracting also can take place by mean6 of an "Unsolicited Proposal." The in- 
vestigator sul~mits a proposal which hk has initiated to an appropnate federal agency and the 
agency can respond at its discretion it the proposal meets agency needs. Generally the un- 
solicited proposal rises as a result of prim informal discussions between the investigator and 
the government agent. 
When a contract has been awarded by a gart~culnr agency, thc investigator's fiscal 
agent must meet with thc agency's contract off icer  to negotiate the final terms of tbc con- 
tract. Thc type of negotiatiotl wll depend upon whether the contlact is i;trr~l-l'riccb or  Cuct- 
~ei?rrbursable. A Fixed-Pflce contrLct is one in wlllcll thc olganizdtion and the agency agree 
upon contract terms for a  re-determined fixed cost. Once the Fixed-Price contract is signed, 
thc organization must rncct thc terms of  the contract for the prlce regardless of  circurnstdnccs. 
The fixed-price con tract is generally more appro priiltk fbr products than for services. 
The Cost-Reimb~mable contract is ncgot i~tcd on the basis of cost e r t im~ tc s  of  
monthly operating levels. The tnontlily bperdting level will bc the sum of  .dlbwn6le costs on  
a monthly basls during thc tirne of the contract. ~t is understood that thc Rnal prlce of .l 
Cost-~cimbursablr  contract can go up (Cost Ovcrrun) or  down from tfic original' cstimatc as 
a function of  cdlowablc costs actucdly incurred. 
Thc ~ ixcd-pr ice  contract is easier to administer and simplifies record-keepmg. 
The reason for this is that once the pncc IS set the government is relgtlvely unconcerned 
about how contract expenditures break down by category or  line items. With the Cost-Re- 
lmbursable contract, completc documcntatlon by cost category must be strictly maintained 
sincc the documcntaaon is the sole basis for relrnbursement fo r  expehditures under the cok- 
tract The adrnlnistration of the Cost-Reimbursable contract is much more tedious, therefore, 
than is the case !or the Fixed-Price contract, but doos have the advantage, given adequate 
book-keeping, of entallins no risk to d ~ e  contractor. 
Bccause the t o t ~ l  cost of a cos t -~cimbursablc  contr'1c.t is an estirndte rather than 
a firm figure, the <~w.irdln~ of n colnpctltlvc bid can be based on f'lctors othcr tllan the 
"bo t to~n  line" cost. Clearly the level of  operational cost wlll be a significa~\t factor in deter- 
mination of an award, but in tlie absence of strict FixcdCost. the way is opened for numcr- 
o u ~  judgment factors t o  affect the decision of c~ward. while the government has tried to 
establish safeguards agrunst4 arbitrariness and favoritism, the latitude in decision-making is still 
w d e  in open competition contracting and even wlder in the other contractural forms. 
WHAT CONGRESS IS DOING ABOUT THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS 
What has happened over the years is that federal procurement has become a 
big business. Contracts for goods, services (which include research and development), and 
facilities have reached $60 billion annually. Although no statistics are available to describe 
the amount of federal contracts awaded  colleges and universities, we do  know that college 
and university participation in federal research and development efforts represents approxi- 
mately 14% of the total federal Investment in R & D, and that an increasing amount of that 
money is awarded by contract. 
What is dist urblng is that despite thc magnitude of federal cxpcnditures 
contract, the govern~lieilt has n o  angle office responsible for policies to  govern the procure- 
ment process, and no single source to  provlde guidance and inforrnatlon about federal pro- 
curement laws and regulations. In fact, the fcderal government has no clear-cut definition 
for the terms grant and contract. 
As a result, we have been faced wlth confusing and complicated rules, excessive 
paperwork, favoritism and abuses in procurement practices, cost overruns, and many other fac- 
tors that led to  a thorough study of procurement practices by the Commission on Govcrn- 
ment Procurement. 
The results of the Commission's work is now demonstrated in the Congress. Using 
the Commission's report and recommendations as a bluepnnt, Congrcss is considering 1cgisl;l- 
tion to address procurement problems, including two major bllls of interest to State University 
of New York. 
One measure, certain to brlng about fundamental changcs a necessary to irnprovc 
the system, would establish a central procurerncnt policy office in the Erecutivc off ice ,  
which would provide overall guidance and direction for federal procurcment policy Thc 
office would establish a government-wde system of uniform procurcment regulations, coordin- 
ating policies* and regulations of federal agencies, and exercising leadership in monitoring and 
revising future policies and procedures. The Adml~listrator would be appointed by the Presi- 
dent and approved by the Senate. dl major decisions by thc office would be approved by 
Congress. 
At this writing, a House-Senate conference committee is considering the measure. 
Sources inkcate that the blll should be agreed to in the near future and wJ1 bc scnt to thc 
President for his signature. 
The other major procurement blll (S 3514, HR 9060) now under consideration by 
Congressional committees hopefully would eliminate the proscnt confusion among fcdcral age~~c ic  
in deterrninillg whether the legal Instrument used t o  support Lhc desired goods or servlces should 
be a @wt or contract, or cooperative agreement, simply b y  defining the terms clearly. Undcr 
both House and Senate versions of the bdl, the contracts would be used whenever the principal 
purpose of the agreement would be t o  purchase goods or sewces "for the direct benefit or 
use of the federal government" for "ultimatc ~ u b l i c  use." Grants would be used as the legal 
instrument when the objective would be "to accomplish a public purpose authorized by federal 
statute" rather than for dlrect use by the federal government. Cooperative agreement would 
be used t o  apply whenever the acnvlty would be authorized by federal statute but "substantial 
involvement" of the federal agency is also necessary. 
At this writing, the bill is under consideration by House and Scnate Government 
Operations Committees. Since the legslation would directly affect agreements for research 
and development by State University of New York and federal agellcies, a is recommended 
that interested persons remain aware of the measure's status. 
11. A&PHABETICAL LISTING OF FEDERAL AGENCIES THAT CONTRACT FOR 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF AGIRICULTURE 
~gricultural  Research Service 
Principal Interests. Physical, biological, 
chemical and engineering research; includes 
the 21,000 acre Agricultural ~esea rch  Cen- 
ter, ~cltsville, ~ a r ~ l b n d .  Clothing and 
housing research, household economics, 
and human nutrition research. Ncw and 
improved industrial and food products and 
processing mcthods for agricultural com- 
modities. Soil and water, crop, animal 
husbandry, entornology and agricultural 
cngineering research. 
Address. 
Administrator, T.W. Edminster 
Agriculturd ~ e s e a r c h  S e ~ c e  
14th and Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
Tel: 202, 447-3656 
Forest Service 
I+incipal Interests: Timber, forested water- 
shed and rangeland management and protec - 
tion; forest product utilization and market- 
ing. 
A ddrcss: 
chief, Forest Service, John McGulre 
Department of Agriculture 
14th and Independeoce Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
Tel: 202, 447-6661 
Eco~lomics ~ e s e a r c h  Service 
Research in farm and marketing ccon- 
ornics, resource development, economic 
and statistical analyses, foreign trade 
dcvclopmcnt . 
A ddrcss . 
Administrator, QL entin M, West 
Economics Research Service 
Department of Agriculture 
14th and Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
Tcl: 202, 447-8104 
63 
11. ALPHABETICAL LISTING OF FEDERAlL AGENCIES THAT CONTRACT FOR 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
~ ~ r i c u l t u r a l  ~ e s e a r c h  Service 
h n c i p a l  Interests: Physical, biologcal, 
chemical and engineering research; includes 
the 11,000 acre Agricultural ~ c s e a r c h  Cen- 
ter, ~e l t svdle ,  Maryland. clothing and 
housing research, household economics, 
and human nutrition research. New and 
improved industrial and food products and 
@- 
procpssing methods for agrlculturd com- 
modities. Soil and water, crop, animal 
husbandry, entomology and agricultural 
cngineerlng research. 
Address. 
Administrator, T.W. Edminster 
Agricultural Research S e ~ c e  
14th and Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
 el: 202, 447-3656 
Forest Service 
Prlncrpal Interests: Timber, forested water- 
shed and rangeland management and protec- 
tion; forest product u t l l i za~o  n and market- 
ing. 
Address: 
Chief, Forest Service, John McGuire 
Department of Agricultpre 
14th and ~ndependence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
Tel: 202, 447-6661 
Economics ~ e s e a r c h  S e ~ c e  
~ e s e a r c h  in farm and marketing econ- 
omics, resource development, economlc 
and statistical analyses, fopeign trade 
development. 
A ddress . 
Administrator, Q ~ ~ e n t i n  M. West 
Eco~~omics  Research Service 
Department of Agriculture 
14th and Independence A'vcnuc, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250 
Tel: 202, 447-8104 
Office of Sea Grant 
Interests: Administers and directs the Na- 
tiond Sea Grant Program. This program pro- 
vides support for institutions engaged in com- 
prehensive mnrinc research, education, and ad 
visory service programs, supports mdividual 
projects in marine research and development, 
and sponsors education of ocean scientists 
and ehgineers, marine technicians, and other 
specialists at selected colleges and universitics. 
Address 
Administrator: Dr. Robert M. White 
Nationd Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad- 
min~stration 
GO10 Executive Boulevard 
Washington Science Center 
Rockville, Md. 20852 
Tel: 301, 496-8111 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEPARTMENT OF M E  AIR FORCE 
Air Force Systems Command 
Interests Responsible for the rapid advance- 
ment of aerospace technology and its adapta- 
tion into operational aerospace systems. 
Address: 
Air Force Systcms Command Headquarters 
Cmdg. Gen: Gen. Georse S. Brown 
Andrews Air Force Base, Md. 20331 
Tel: 301, 981-9111 
Air Force Office of Aerospace Research 
Interests: Air Force's basic research org- 
anization. Four major areas: life, mathe- 
matical, enginrenng, and physical sciences. 
Address: 
Exec. Dir: W. J. Price 
Directorate of Procurement (CCB), 
Air Force 
Office of Scientific Research 
1400 Wilson Blvd. 
Arlington, Va. 22209 
Tel: 703, 545-6700 
DEPARTMENT OF M E  ARMY 
Army ~iologcal Laboratories 
Interests: Biologca] research and development. Address: Crndg. Officer: Col. P.Olenchuk 
Siientific Director: Dr. Riley D. ~ b u s e w r i ~ h t  
Army Biological Laboratories 
Fort Detrlck, Frederick, Md. 21701 
Tel. 301, 663-4111 
U.S. Army Engineer Topographic Laboratories 
It1 terests Advanced research in general fields 
of geodesy, enpneer intelligence, and mapping. 
Address 
Cmdg. officer: Col. John R. ~ s w a l t  
Army Engineer Topographic Laboratorles 
Fort Belvoir, Va, 22060 
Tel 703, 781-8500 
Army Mobility Equipment 
Research and Development Center 
Interests ~ e s e a r c h ,  development and 
engineermg in support of Army surface 
mobility. 
Address. 
Comdg. officer: Col. Bennett L. Lewis 
Army Mobility Equipment Research and 
Development Center 
Fort* ~e lvo i r ,  Va. 22060 
Tel: 703, 664-5251 
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 
OFFICE OF NAVAL RESEARCH 
~ a v d  Research Navd Analysis 
Interests: Acor .ticsi geography, geophysics, 
metallurgy, chemistry, including physical, or- 
ganic, inorganic and colloid and propulsion 
chemistry, solid state physics, nuclear physic's, 
electronics, mathematics, logistics and mathe- 
matical statistics, fluid dynamics, physiology, 
biochemistry, microbiology, medicine, and 
dentistry, biology, group psychology, phydo- 
logcal psychology, enpneering psychology and 
personncl training. 
Naval ~ppl icat ions  
Interests: Research and exploratory develop- 
ment in the field of &craft and missile sys- 
tems, air warfare, surface vessel problems, 
amphibious warfare systems, underwater wea- 
Interests: Preliminary investigations of 
systems and warfare problems; directs 
and monitors systems and warfare ana- 
lysis studies undertaken by the Naval 
warfare Research Center and selectively 
sponsored under contract with ifidustry, 
research institutes, and universitics. 
Address: 
Chief of Naval Research 
Department of the Navy 
800 North Quincy' Street 
Arlington, Va. 22217 
Tel: 7Q3, 692-4609 
pons, underwater communications and naviga- 
tion, noise reduction in naval vessels, and ad- 
vanced submarine problems. 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
Itlterests: The Agency generates iesearch and 
development needs in the ,areas of air and 
water pollution control and abatement, pesti- 
cldes research and' control, solid wastc manage- 
ment, noise pollution, and radiation monitor- 
ing and control. In  all srcas of EPA concern, 
there IS need for fLlther research into the ef- 
fects of pollutants on the environment and 
human health, 
Address. 
stanley M. Greenfield 
Assistant Admin~strator for Resc~rch arld 
Monitoring 
office of Rcse.uc11 md Monito~lng 
U.S. Envlron1nent.d PI otectlon Agency 
Waterside Mall, Room 3202 
Wnshlngto~~, D.C. 20460 
Tcl: 202, 755-2600 
DEPARTNIENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE 
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH 
Interests. Conducts laboratory and clinical 
tesearch on the prevention,, diagnosis, and 
treatment of diseases and disabil~ty. Supports 
memcal research in the nation's nonprofit 
biomedical research institutions. Generally- 
the Institutes conduct and support research 
and the Divlslons provide administration and 
service. They are listed below. 
Address. 
Dr. ~ o b e r t  Stone, Director 
National Institutes of Health 
Building 1 
900 ~ockv i l l e  Pike 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-2433 
National Institute of Allergy and infectious 
Diseases 
Interests: Research and development on in- 
fectious diseases and immunological phenome- 
na of man with special emphasis on vaccines 
and other immunizing agents, immunosuppressive 
drugs, drugs for prevention and treatment of 
virus diseases, test systems and reagents 
for identifyylng tissue an tigens and disease- 
producing agents. Current emphasis is o n  
the development of vaccines for vlral and 
bacterial diseases, antiviral substances and 
tissue typing for human organ transplan- 
ta*n. 
Address: 
Dr. Dorland J .  Dams 
Assistant Scientific Director for 
Collaborative Research, NIAII) 
National Institutes of Health 
Building 31, Room 7A-03 
Bethesda, Md, 20014 
 el: 301, 496-2263 
National Institute of Arthritis and 
Metabolic Diseases 
Interests Conducts, fosters,-and coordin- 
ates research into the causes prevention, 
diagnosis, and treatment of mhrit ic ,  rheu- 
manc, collagen, and metabolic diseases. 
Address. 
Contracting officer, NIAMD 
~ a t i o n a l  Institutes of Health 
Room 10A-52, Building 31 
Bethesda, aMd. 20014 
 el: 301, 496-5877 
National Institute of Chdd Health and 
Human Development 
Interests. Research and development progams 
in areas relating to maternal health, chdd health, 
human growth and development, maturation and 
the aging process, ~eproductive and perinatal 
biology, mental retardation and population pro- 
blems. 
Address: 
Illrector, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development 
National Institutes of Health 
Building 31, Room 2A05 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-3454 
National Institute of Dental Research 
Interestso Conducts, assists, and fosters re- 
search and training in matters relating to the 
causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of 
dental diseases and conditions. 
Address. 
Drector, ~ a t i o n d  Institute of Dental Research 
Bulldlng 30, Room 132 
9000 Rockvllle Plke 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-3571 
National lnstitute of Environmental Health 
Sciences 
Interests: Basic research on the b io lo~ca l  
effects ,of environmental hazards on man. 
Address: 
Director, National Institute of Envlron- 
mental Health Sciences 
P.O. Box 12223 
Research Triangle Park, N.C. 27709 
Tel: 919, 549-8110 
~ a t i o n a l  Institute of Generid ~ e d i c d  
Sciences 
In tercsts. 1.  Research, development, and 
evaluation of rap~d ,  rcliablc automated sys- 
tems and instrliments, for potential appli- 
cation in all aspects of clinical chcrnistry, 
toxicology, hematology, microbiology, vir- 
ology, blood banking, etc. Subject axeas 
of interest include sample collection and 
labelling techniques, new or improved ana- 
lytical methods, data  handllng and reduc- 
tion techniques for compact computers, 
miniaturized and portable test sfsterds for 
emergency use, all intended to increase 
reliability, throughout, and clinical signlfi- 
cance. 
2. ~ e s e a r c h ,  development, and 
evaluation in all aspects of therapeutic 
drug use, includng synthesis, testing, as- 
says in body fluids, and surveillance for 
effectiveness, side effects, and drug mter- 
actions. The principal alm is to promote 
safer and more effectlve use of drugs. 
Related problcrns include dose-respo;se 
patterns, kinetics of uptake, distribution, 
and ehmination, metaboiic transformations 
of administered drugs, and quantitative 
analytical methods and instruments for 
identificatiori and assay. 
3. Research, development, and 
production in areas where technological 
constrants impede progress in genetics 
research. Representative problem areas 
include isolation, synthesis, separayions, 
purification, and production procedures 
for material and synthetic gen,e,tic material: 
such as nuclear acids, synthetic genetic 
materials such as nuclear acids, related enzymes, 
tlssue culture cells, gene tically determined ani- 
mals, etc. 
Address. 
Ihrector, National Institute df General ~ e d i c a l  
Sciences 
National Institutes of ~ e a l t h  
Building 31, Room 41452 
~ethesda ,  Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-5231 
National Institute of ~eurologicd Diseases 
and Stroke 
Interests: 1. Research on diseases of the 
nervous and sensory system with emphasis 
upon: cerebrovascular disorders, epllepsy and 
related convulsive disorders, head and spinal 
cord trauma, infections of the nervous system, 
debilitating diseases of viral etiology, braln 
death, and cerebral palsy and other neurolog- 
ical disorders of Infancy and early life. 
2. Development and experimental 
application of new or advancing technologies 
fnr the study of the nemous and sensory sys- 
tem ana related disorders, 
3. utilization of unique or unusual 
services to support research programs, such as. 
computer programming and data processing; 
animal housing 'and #maintenance; preparation of 
tissue cultures, ma1 antigens, and other research 
products; and the provision of support for high- 
lL. complex field research. 
Address . 
Director, Nationd Institute of ~eurologcal  Di- 
seases and Stroke 
National Institutes of Health 
9000 Rockville Pike, Building 31, Rm. 8A52A 
~ethesda ,  Md. 20014 
301, 496-3167 
National Cancer Institute 
Interests. The Institute has three' principal 
scientific program areas, which accomplish 
a significant part of their research programs 
through collaborativc research, under con- 
tract with profit-n1akmg, nonprofit, .md 
educational institutions as follows: 
1. Etiology Progr(s~ Atea - Plans 
and directs a progran~ of laboratory, field 
and demographic research on the etiology 
and natural llistory of cancer; evaluates 
enwonmental carcinogenic hazards, mech- 
anisms of cancer induction, and the natura 
history of neoplasms; and serves as the 
focal point for the Federal Government on 
the synthesis of clinical, epidemiologccd 
and environmental data relating to etiology. 
2. Chemotherapy ProgmlG Area 
Plans, directs and coordinates the Institute's 
Integrated cancer chemotherapy activltles, 
including intramural laboratory and clinical 
stuhes, contractor research, and research 
conducted in cooperation wth  other Feder- 
al  agencies; participates in evaluation of 
grant applications in the field of cancer 
chemotherapy, and plans and directs the 
research aspects of the ~ d t i m o r e  Cancer 
Research Center, A collaborative effort be- 
tween the Division of Hospitds and the 
NCI . 
3. Getiernl Lnboratories and Clintcs 
Propam Area - Plans and directs the Insti- 
tute's general (as distinguished from speci- 
fically targeted) laboratory and c1inlca.l re- 
seqch activities. 
Address 
chief, Research Contracts Branch, NCI 
~uilding 31, Room 10A03 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel. 301, 496-1673 
National Eye Institute 
Interests. ~ e v e l o ~ r p e n t  of techniques, in- 
strumentatlon and other resources which 
will improve the prevention, diagnosis or 
treatment of glaucoma, retinal and choroidd 
disease, corneal dlsease, cataract, congenital 
and developmental ab~~ormalities and other 
vlsion related health problems. 
Address: 
Associate Drector fot ~ x t r a m u r d  and 
Collaborative Programs 
National Eye Institute 
Builmng 31, Room 6A-04 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
 el: 301, 496-4903 
National Heart and Lung Institute 
Irlterests: Research in lipid me tabolisrn: 
materials that are compat~bre w t h  blood and 
other tissues, instrumeatation for improved 
diagnosis and monitoring of patients, and 
devlces for the treatment of patients with 
mad<quate or fading circulatory or pulmon- 
ary functions; cause, treatment and prevention 
of myocar&al infarction; supply,. safety, utdi- 
zation, distribution and use of blood; respira- 
tory chseases; and sickle cell anemia. 
Address: 
Dxec tor, ~ a t i o n a l  Heart and Lung Illstitute 
~ u d d i n ~  31, Room 5A52 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-5166 
National Library of Med~clne 
Interests Application of advanced communi- 
canon and computer techniques t o  meet the 
information needs of health care professionals. 
Inforrnatlon storage and retrieval systems, micro- 
<dm systems, clearinghouses, data banks, time- 
sharing computer networks. Cable, microwave 
and satellite com~unica t ions  networks for 
voice, video, and data transmission. Computer 
and communicatiqns terminals, facsimile, slow- 
scan vldeo Evaluation of interation of com- 
munications technology and health care systems. - 
Address. 
A e c t o r ,  National L~brary of ~ e d i c i n e  
Room M-101 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-6221 
Clinical Center 
hiterests. Provldes patlcnt care in sup- 
port of the clincial investigations con- 
ducted by thc categor1ca.l Institutcs. 
A dciress : 
nrec tor ,  Cllnical Center 
National ltlstitutcs of Health 
9000 Rockvillc Pike 
Building 10, Room IN212 
Bethesda, Md. 20014 
Tel. 301, 496-4114 
Division of Res&rch Sex-v~ces 
In retests Provldes Faclllties, equipplent, 
and a wlde vanety of scientific and 
tcchn~cal servlces essential to ;he needs 
of the medical investigatots and lesearch 
admirlistratorq at NIH. 
Address 
n r e c  tor, Dvision of Research Services 
, ~a tional Institutes of Health 
9000 Rockvllle Prke 
~u l ld ing  12A, Room 4007 
Bethesda,, Md. 20014 
Tel: 301, 496-5793 
Division of Research Graats 
Interests'  evel lops, coordinates, and im- 
plements policies and procedures govern- 
mg management of public Health Service 
extramural grants programs. 
Address: 
Director, D~vlslon ~f ~ c s e a r c h  Grants 
Westwood ~f i i ld ing  
5401 Wcstbard Avenue 
Room 452 
Washington, D. C .  20016 
'Tcl: 301, 496-7381 
Division o f  kesearch Resotrrccs 
lritcrcsts: Axds institution ~n thc cc-nstructlorl 
of tlcw and icrnodclccl n~cdic ,~ l  rcscnrch facili- 
tics: llclps thcrn cstablisl~ .~ttd opetatc .I tlut11- 
bcr o f  gellcr.d clinical rese'u-ch centers: su y plics 
a va~ie ty  o f  unuru,d .uid liigllly special resea~cll 
scraces and cquipn~crlt such as computers: suy- 
ports regional prirn'xto research centers, and 
s t i r~~ulates  well-balanced institutional rescarch 
programs through grants for genernl blomedicd 
research support 
mntical and other computer-related sciences. 
l ~ l c l u d l n ~  inforsilation p r o c e s ~ r ; ~ ,  in support 
of NIH programs. 
* - l ~ l ~ l l ~ ~ $ . c ;  
131 cctor, Chvislon of Co~nputcr  Rcsc u '11 
and Tecllnology 
N , I ~ ~ O I ~ A ~  I~lsti tute of Health 
9000 Rockvillc Pike 
~ u i l d i n ~  12A. Rootil 3033 
~ c t h e s d a ,  Md. 20014 
Tcl: 301 ,  496-5703 
Fogarty International Ccn tcr 
Ivltert>xtx Provides the R c d ~ c )  for dls- 
cusslon. study and rcseatch r e l~ t ing  to 
the development bf science mte rna t iond l~  
as it pertains t o  health, coordinates thc 
NTH international actimties. 
#iddress, . - i r  Jdrcss 
Director, Division of Reseuch Resources Director. Foparty Intern'~t~on.d Ccntcr 
wationcd Institutes of Health Nntsonal Institutes of Hc'dth 
9000 Rockvillc P ~ k c  9000 Rockvdle Pikc 
~ u d d l n g  31. Roorn. 5303 Boddirlg 31. Room 2CO2 
Bethosda, Md. 20014 k t ) l c s d L ~ .  hld 30014 
Tcl: 301, 496 5605 Tcl: 302,  496-1425 
Division of Computer Research and 
Technology 
Interests:, Plans and conducts research, develop- 
mental, and demonstration programs in mathe- 
HEALTH RESOURCES ADMINISTRATION 
Bureau of Health Services Research emphasis in five broad categories: (1) 
Plnnnlnq, L regulation, and licensurc: (2)  
Interests: Supports research concerning the P r o d u c t l v ~ t ~  of health services. (3) Econ- 
organization, financing, and ntlllzatlon of omic analysis: (4) Quality of health 
health services research. Interested in new cnre; 5) Health care ddta and informa- 
methods or  improving old methods. Pnmary tion systems. 
The Bureau is divided into the. following ma- 
jor divisions: 
Division af Health Care ~nfortriation Systems 
Division oe' ~ e a l t h  Systems .Research and De- 
velopment 
Divisioil of ' . ~ e a l t h  Services Desi~n and Develop- 
ment 
-
JXision of fiealth Services Quality Research 
Division of health Services ~esearch  and 
Analvsis 
"Division of /Lone; Term Care 
Contact: 
James ~ e c h s l e r  
Contract Ciaison 
Tel: 301;, 443-3185 
Address: 
Bureau @f Health Services Research 
~arMawn Building, Room 1515 
5600 qshers Lane 
~ockville, ~ a r y l a ~ d  20852 
Tel: 301, 443-2770 
Bureau of Health Resources Developmenb 
interests: Each division' has its own con tract- 
ing interests. See below. 
Division of Associated ~ e d t h  Professions 
Interests: Pendinglegislative authority . 
Contact: Hrzabeth Wolfkn 
Tel: 301, 496-67\87 
Address: Seie below 
Inte,rests. Supports research relating to dental 
education, practice, manpower and service. 
Lontact: Alys I?. Jacobs 
Executive Assistant 
Tel: 301, 496-4775 
Address: See below 
Dvlsion of Nursin~ 
Interests: Research includes nursing prac- 
tice, nursing educatlonal programs, organ- 
ization ind  delivery of nursing services to 
patients, and nursing as an occupation. 
~esearch  also includes studles 111 various 
n~cdical and other spccialitles related to 
nursing care and related health programs. 
Cotitact: Jessie Scott 
Director, Ihvision of Nursing 
Tck 301, 496-1418 
Address. See below 
. . 
of. * 
111 terests Mcdical evaluation, projects 
concerlung health care delivery, educatlonal 
technology, ct,.trriculum development, and 
rnstitutional development among others. 
Confac t. Dl. ~ o b e r t  K n ~ u s s  
Tcl. 301, 496-5608 
Acfdress* Scc below 
lDivrsion of Comprehensive Hedth planning 
Irltcraats. Supports rssearch in two pajor  
areas ( I )  technical assistance: (2) health 
plannm g technical devel~prnen t. ~eve lo~mei - i  t 
approach to using new tools and methodolog) 
Plann~ng for services and facilities. 
Coqtact: Mr. Robert Crane 
Tel: 301, 443-4614 
Address See below 
Address for ,divi-srons above. 
(Name o f  Division) 
Bureau of Health Resources Development. 
9000 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, Maryland 20014 
4 :  See divi$ion , 
National Centet for Health Statistics Address, Helen Johirson 
National Center for Health Statistics 
Interests: The Center conducts research on 5600 Fishers Lane 
health statistics, data collection, and ciissemin- ~ockville, Maryland 20852 
at ion. Tel: 301, 443-6315 
ALCO).)OL, DRUG ABUSE, AND MENTAL HEALTH ADMINISTRATION 
National Institute of Mental Health Address: 
~ a t i b n d  Institute of Alcohol Abuse and 
Interests: Research in all mental heath-related ~lcoholism 
matters, including child abuse, manpower train- Contracts Management Branch, Room 16C21 
ing, the aged, community mental health centers, ~arMawn ~ u i l d l n ~  
among others. 5600 Fishers Lane 
~ockville, Maryland 208 52 
Contact: Mr. John Miller Tel: 301, 443-1191 
Contracts Management Sectton 
Parklawn ~uilding, Room 7C 23 
5600 Fishers Lane 
~ o c k d e ,  Maryland 20852 
Tel: 301, 443-2696 
Nahonal lnstitute on Drug Abuse 
Interests (1) Research and development: 
emphasizes development of new methods of 
treatment fcr addiction of a broad range of 
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and A~co- addicuve agents; (2) Training and public 
holism education: supports efforts to develop and 
install systems related to the Integrated drug 
Interests. Supports research concerning treat- abuse management information systems. 
ment evaluation, clinical afid non-clinical studies 
relating to alcohol and health, problems, pro- Address: Contracting Officer 
jects and special studies on the alcohol con- Contracts Management Branch 
suming populaaon such as drunken drivers, ~ a t i o n d  Institute on Drug Abuse 
poverty-stricken alcoholics, convict alcoholics, 11400 ~ockville Pike 
and the inebriated. Rockville, Maryland 208 52 
F W D  AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
Interests: Primarily concerned with research Contact: Mr. ~ l o y d  Sundquist 
and development studies in radiological health, Director of Contract ab j Grant Administration 
biologics, drugs, veterinary medicine, medical ~ o o d  and Drug Admin~strationl 
devices, and cosmetics. Colleges, universit~es, 5600  ish hers Lane 
and other education institutions reptesent most ~ o c k d l e ,  Maryland 20852 
FDA contracts. Tel: 301, 44316890 
OFFICE OF EDUCATION 
Interests: Research and development in the Address: 
field of educational msthodology and tech- Director, Contracts and ;rants Division 
niques, incluhng curriculum development, Office of Education, Department of HEW 
career education models, and collection and Federal Office ~u l ldmg ,  No. 6 
analysis of educational data. 400 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20202 
Tel: 202, 245-8160 
SOCIAL AND REHABILITATION SERVICE 
Interests kesearch , development, and evdua- Address* Associate Administrator for 
hon o[ socid programs in the areas of aging, Planning, ~esea rch  and Trainlng 
rehabilitauon, community services, Medicaid - Social and Rehabilitation Servlce 
youth development and delinquency prevention. Room 5050, HEW South Budding 
330 ~ndepenflence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20201 
Tel: 202, 245-0843 
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
Interests: ~esea rch  , development and evalua- Address: Assistant Secretary for Research 
tion of new technology leadmg to the solu~oian and Technology 
of problems of housing, urban development and Department of Housing and Urban Develop- 
mass transportation. ment 
Room 4100. 451 7th St., S.W. 
Washington, D.c.' 20410 
Tel: 202, 755-5600 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
Geological Survey 
Interest= Fundamental research in topography, Address Director, U.S. Dept. of the Inter101 
geocliemistry , hydrology, geology, geophysics, Geolopcal Survey 
related science; and .new techn~ques and meth- 12201 Sunnse Valley Drive 
ods for appraising and conserving minerals and Reptofi, Va. 22092 
water, Tel: 703, 860-6111 
Bureau of M a s  
Itlterests: Basic and applied research in earac-  
tion. processing, use, reuse, and disposal of min- 
a d s  and mineral fuels: recovering and recycling 
mineral substances from wastes including urban 
p f ~ ~ s c ;  research in improving mining practices 
a d  dewsing new systems that will reduce 
health and safety halards to worlie~s in the 
metal, nonmetal, and coal producing indust~ies; 
and environmental quality research and studies 
associated with problems of surface disturbance, 
air,;and water pollution, and waste disposal that 
are common to the processes used in elitracting 
minerals fr m the earth. 
Address: Director, Bureau of Mines 
"C"' Street between Eighteenth and Nineteenth 
Streets 
Washington, D. C. 20240 
I'el: 202, 1834815 
Office of Water Resources Research 
Interests: Encourages and supports research 
investigations d e d ~ g  with major problem areas 
and which hold promise of contributing to the 
solution of important water problems. 
Address. Director, office of Water Resources 
Research 
6008 ~ i f i h  Road, North 
Arlington, Va. 22203 
Tel: 703, 343-5975 
office of Assistant Secretary - Energy and 
Minerds Research 
Interests: Encouraga and support elecmcd 
power transrmssion and &stribution research to 
improve the cost for electkical cables. Work in 
cooperation with the Electnc Power Commission 
in ~ d i f o m i a .  
Address: Assistant  dire^ tor F.F. Parry 
Department of the Interior 
office of Research and Development 
18th and E Street, N.W., Room 4452 
Washington, D.C. 20240 
Tel: 202, 343-8713 
Nationd Park Servicc 
blterests. Encourages and supports research 
dealing with environmental studies, wld-  
life studies, historical architecture studies, 
site survey studies, natural hlstory studies, 
and social history studies. The NPS s u p  
ports ecological studies dealing with any 
relationships of a concentrated number of 
- 
persons affecti~ig ecology, such as visitors, 
etc. 
Address. 
chief Scientist Dr. Theodore W. Su&a 
Nationd Park Servlce 
19th & E Streets, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20240 
Tel: 202, 523-5051 
Office of Coal Research 
Interests. Concerned with the utilizatbn 
of coal in liquefaction and gasification' in 
research and development. 
Address: Office of Cpal Research 
Department of the Intenoi 
2100 M Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20037 
Tel: 202, 343-5533 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service 
Irzterests* The Service has no authority 
to award grants. They do, h~wever ,  con- 
tract w ~ t h  universities and colleges for 
research interests, Basic research is conducted 
and is necessary for the preservation and en- 
hancement of natural resources. 
Address: Dr. Eugene Hester, Associate 
Director 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
Department of the Interior 
washington, D.C. 20240 
Tel: 202, 343-2279 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE ADMINISTRATION 
National Institute of Law Enforcement and 
Criminal Justice 
Interests: The NILECJ conducts research pro- (5) Correction - a) xqconceptualization 
grams for the LEAA in seven categones: toward worklug for new methods of 
rehabilitation; b)  accessment of adult 
(I) Community Crlrne Prevention - violence, correction; c)  offender classificatiorl. 
crime- victms, environmental design, white col- 
lar crlrne and fencing, etc. (6) Advanced Technology Division - 
~ e a l s  with hardware - pollce armor, 
(2) ~uvenile Delinquency - juvenile incarceration, body equipment, police vehicles, closed- 
employment, and youth cnme, etc. circuit televksion ballist~c shields, etc. 
( 3 )  Police - police patrol, police integriry-and (7) Education and Manpower 
professional resp~as ib l l i t~ ,  police administration, a) - Education Programs under LEAA 
forensic science, personnel utdization. b) - Visiting   el lows Programs 
c)  - Manpower Surveys 
(4) Courts - measures for courts, 
sentencing, court administration, diversion. ~ d & r e s s  Director of Research Programs 
National Institute of Law- Enforcement 
and Cnrninal Justice 
LEAA 
633 Indiana Avenue, N.W. 
' ~ash ing ton ,  D.C. 20530 
Tel: 202, 386-4451 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
Office of Administrative Services - Office Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- 
of the Assistant Secretary tration 
Itlterests: The office of Administrative 
Services directs and controls a11 of the 
following Department of Labor facilities 
and services relating to procurement. 
I l l  terests: Assists and encourages the states 
in their efforts to assure safe and health- 
ful worklng conditions. Provides research, 
inforrnatlon education and training m the 
field of occupational safety and health. 
Address: See below 
Address: See below. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics 
Enlployment Standards ~dministrat ion 
Interests: Conducts a program of statisti- 
cal s w e y s  and economic analyses on labor- 
related issues including manpower and em- 
ployment, prices and living conditions, 
wages and industrial relations, produc tivlty 
and technological developments, occup a- 
t iohd safety and health, structure and 
growth of the economy, povmy, urban 
conditions and related socio-economic 
issues, and international labor comparisons. 
Address. See below 
Labor - Management Services Administra- 
tion 
Interests: Dcvelops labor-manageme n t  policy, 
assists national interest collective bargain- 
mg and counsels state and local govem- 
ments on labor-management relations. 
blterests: Advlse and assist the Secretary 
on all matters related to Employment Stan- 
dards programs, policies, and systems, and 
provides executive direction for the 
Nation's wage-hour, employee's compensa- 
tion, wage determination, federal contract 
compliance, programs for women, and all 
other related programs. 
Address : 
office of Administrative Servlces 
Chief, Lhvision of Procurement 
Room 7 102, Manpower ~ a b o r  Budding 
14th and Constitution Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 202 10 
Tel: 202, 961-2580 
Address. See below 
MANPOWER ADMINISTRATION 
Office of Policy,  valuation and Research Address: U.S. Department of Labor 
Manpower Administration 
- 
Interests: Administers the manpower research Director, office of Manpower, R & D 
and development program and the review and Room 9100, Patrick Henry Building 
analysis of manpower program performance. Washington, D.C. 20213 
BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, 
Itzterests: Adminls~ers the international labor Address: Bureau of International ~ f f a i r s  
and manpower activities of the Department of Director, Administration &I anagemen t Staff 
Labor. Room 7380, 14th & Constitution Avc., N,W. 
Washington, D.C. 20210 
Tel: 202, 961-3786 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY FOR UNIVERSITY RESEARCH 
Interests: The office of the Secretary for 
University Research is the central office of 
DOT concerned with the procurement of ser- 
vices and studies to unive+dties and colleges 
relating to  the following individual offices: 
Office of the .Assistant Secretary for Policy 
and International Affairs 
Interests. The procuremehts for this office 
include aqdies and analyses conducted on  a 
broad range of transpoitation policy, economic 
and environmental problems to determine the 
national transportatioh requuements; and studies 
aimed at removing the impedbents to the ef- 
ficient flow of passengers and cargo. 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Environ- 
ment and Urban" Systems 
Interests: The procurements for this office 
include transportanon policy studies relatlng 
to the environment and urban systems and 
includes research to minimize the environmental 
and urban impact of transportation, improve 
the intermodal urban- and regional transporta- 
tion planning process, and coordinate and streng- 
then transportation policy effecting the environ- 
mental and urban systems. 
office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Systems Development and ~echllokogy 
Interests: The procuremcnts fdr this office 
pclude analytical studies to  support establish- 
ment of R & D gods, objectives, policies, plar 
and information systems; and R & D studies 
and hardware related t o  noise abatement, pol- 
lution, telecommunications and advanced rnulti 
modal programs; 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for safety 
and Consumer ~ f f a l r s  
Interem: The procvrements for this officc 
include a broad range of services and items 
relating to programs concer~ing pipeline safety 
transportation of hazardous materials, safety 
program coordination, transportation secunty 
and consumer affairs. 
Any iqz formation concerning procurement 
carned on wrthin the Office of the Secretary 
of Transportation may be obtalned by con- 
tac ting the followtng central of ice  
Address Director 
office of University Research 
Office of the Secretary 
U.S. Department of Transportation 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
Tel: 202, 426-0190 
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRAT ION 
Systems Research and Development Service National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center 
Interests: Design for the National Airspace 
System and research and development activities 
associated with programs pertaining to air 
traffic control, air navigation, communications, 
airports, avianon weather, aeronautics (airframe 
structures and materials, aircraft flight systems, 
propulson) and in aircraft engineering and 
safety, including airborne devices, equipment, 
and systems other than navigation and com- 
munications. Special emphasis is placed on 
the development of simplified, low cost, func- 
tional general aviation cockpit instrumentation 
and control systems. Also conducts close 
liaison \nth the Department of Defense on 
the dcvclopment of V/STOL and other sub- 
sonic aircraft for application to  civil require- 
ments. 
Address. Director, Systems ~ e s e a r c h  and 
Development Servlce 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
Tcl: 202, 426-3577 
Interests: Conducts all research, experimcnta- 
tion, testing and evaluation of aviation research 
and development programs under the direction 
of the Systems ResParch and Development S'er- 
vice. 
Address. Manager, National Aviation 
Facilities Experimental Center 
Atlantic City, New Jersey 08405 
Tel: 609, 641-8200 
Office of Avlation Medicine 
Interests. Conducts a medical research ,pro- 
gram that deals in clinical medic in^ and hu- 
man factors. The program is directed toward 
the solution of current and anticipated pro- 
blems in the memcal aspects of amation. 
Address. Federal Air Surgeofi 
office of Aviation Medicine 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
Tel: 202, 426-8326 
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION 
Interests: Research and development in  r d -  Address. 
road and high speed ground transportation, Chief, Contracts and Procurement  vision 
including but not limited t o  aerodynamics, Federal R d r o a d  ~drniniskat ion  
vehicle control, communications, and guideways. Department of Transportation 
It also contracts for demonstrations to  deter- 400 Seventh Street, S.W. 
mine contributions that high speed ground Washington, D.C. 20590 
transportation could make to  effect an effic~ent Tel: 202, 426-0872 
and cconornical intercity transportanon system, 
and surveys to  measure public response to 
changes in service. 
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMlNlSTRATlON 
I~rterests. The National Highway ~ r a f f t c  safety 
Administration is responsible for programs t o  
reduce deaths, injuries, and property damage 
resulting from traffic accidents. It is also res- 
ponsible for the establishtncnt and enforcement 
of safety performance standards f o ~  motor vc- 
lliclcs and ass~cia tcd  cquipmcnt; the cfbctua-  
tion of supporting research, includins thc ac- 
quisition of rcqui~cd  testing faciliti(*s: ' ~nd  the 
adminlstratio~l of the National Drivcr Kcgstcr. 
The Administration furtllcr provides for a co- 
ordinated national highway safcty grant program 
to bc carricd out  on a matching fund basis 
with thc Statcs, and authorizes supporting high- 
C 
way safety rescarch, dcvclopment, and dcmon- 
stration programs, 
Thc NHTSA enters into contracts with private 
industry, educational institutions, rton-profit 
organizat~ons, and State and local governments 
for defects investigations, crashworthlncss pro- 
gra IYIS, system operations, einergency medical 
services dcmons t ra t io~~  projects, safcty man- 
power development, drivcr/vehicle intcrac tion, 
expcrimcntal safety vchicles, test and cvalua- 
tlon, vcliicle structures, occupant. packaging, 
b i o ~ ~ ~ c c h a n i c s ,  passive rcstraln t tests, cornputel 
support, nlanagchent studics, and data ac- 
iluisition. 
.Jcl(hc>,s: ~ a t i o n d  Highway Traffic safe ty  
~dnl inis t rnt ion 
~ f f t c e  of Contracts and Procurement 
(Codc 48-30) 
400 Seventh Strect, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
Tel: 202, 426-0607 
URBAN MASS TRANSPORTATION ADMINISTRATION 
Interests. Thc Urban Mass Transportation ~ d -  development of improved managerial pro- 
ministration (UMTA) is responsible for the con- cedures in the areas of maintenance, rout- 
duct o f  a program to assist in the development ing, scheduling, accounting and reporting[) 
of improved mass transportation through finan- 
cial ad to  State and local governments and Address: Mr. Philip Hughes 
their instrumcntalitics, and research and develop- Urban Mass Transportation Administration 
Inent. Principal procurement activities arc cen - 2100 Second Street, S.W. 
tered around the UMTA office of  Research De- Washington, D.C. 20590 
velopment and Demonstration. Research con- Tcl: 202, 426-0090 
tracts may be for  either hardware (such as the 
U.S. COAST GUARD 
~ n v i r o n m e n t d  Transportation and ~ e c h n o l o g y  warnlng systems for buoys, and other basic 
Division ocean engineering systems. 
Interests Conducts the full range of R & D Address chief Commandant (G-det-62) 
activities within two main branches: (1) pol- office of Research and Development 
lution - sewage and waste water treatment, re- United States Coast Guard 
mote detection o f  oil and other such hazards, 400 Seventh Street, S.W. 
(2) alds to navigation - light power sources, Washington, D.C. 20590 
Tel: 202, 426-1042 
Marine Safety i"eu$mology Division 
Ititerests: Conducts research in two main Address: 
areas: (I.) rescue and search projects in Chief Commandant (Gdet-62) 
helicopter operations, detection of people in Office of Research and Development 
water, communications, satellite communications, U.S. Coast Guard 
domestic ice-breaking, and high performance 400 Scventh Street, S,W, 
watercraft;' (2) research in co~nrnercial visull Washington, D.C. 20590 
safety projects in fue and explosion safety, Tel: 202, 426-1008 
research to minimize collisions, investigation 
of struc t u rd  problems, survival problems, and 
crew safety problems. 
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 
Headquarters Contracts Division 
111 terests: The Headquarters Contracts Divlsion 
of the Headquarters Administration office is 
responsible for planning, negotiating, awarding, 
and administering contracts based on procurc- 
ment requirements initiated by the Headquarters 
'office. Such requirements include, but are 
not limited to: system engineering services, 
reliability studies, initial phases of research and 
development projects, recruitment advertising 
services, mobile lecturedemonstration units, 
exhibits, motion services, managqnent analysis 
surveys, and various professional servicts. In 
addition, the Division has agency-wide responsi- 
bility for negotiation and execution of NASA 
contracts w t h  foreign governments and for- 
eign commercial organizations. 
Research and ~eve lopment  contracting rs the 
most important phase of National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration operations, account- 
ing for more than t h o  dollars out of every 
three .in current budgets. Research and develop - 
ment Eunds are divided into major programs 
and piojects such as launch vehicle and'pro- 
yulsion programs w t h  a goal of greater sim- 
plicity , reliability, and payload capability; the 
manned space fl~ght program, geophysics 
and astronomy programs for the gathering 
of greater and more accurate knowledg 
in these fields; applications programs for 
the perfection of communication systems 
and a host of other projects covering the 
many problems lnvolved in aerospace/me&- 
cine, bioscience, nuclear systems, lunar, and 
Most NASA business flows to contractors 
Arectly from NASA instaflations outs~de 
Washington, since most general procure- 
ment and much research and development 
contracting is decentrahzed for maximum 
efficiency in technical control. These* in- 
stallatlons are: Arnes Research Center 
Flight Research Center, Goddard Space 
 light Center, Jet Propuls~on Laboratory, 
John F. Kennedy Space Center, ~ a n g l e y  
Research Center, Lewis Research Center, 
~ a n n e d  Spacecraft Center, Marshall Space 
Fhght Center* NASA Pasadena Offtce, &$ace 
Nuclear Systems Office, Wallops Station. 
Address Procurement officer 
National Aeronautics and Space- Adm~nistratlon 
Headquarters Contracts Divis~on 
Washington, D . .  20546 
Tel. 202, 755-3394 
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION 
Interests Sponsors scientific research, encour- 
aging and supporting improvements in science 
education, and fostering scientific information 
exchange. The Foundation also prdvides wp- 
port for the development and operation of 
national researlch centers - established to  meet 
national needs for research in specific areas 
bf science.  hik kc many federally sponsored 
research laboratories, the ~oundation-hpported 
national research centers do not perform spe- 
cific research tasks assigned by or for the dir- 
ect benefit of the Goverllnlcnt. They are es- 
tablished and supported for the purpose of 
making available to  all qualified sc&ntists -- the 
facilities, equipment, skilled personnel support, 
and other resources required for the perform- 
ance of independent research of the scientist's 
own choosing in the applicable areas of science. 
Address Nationd Science Foundation 
Contracts ~ h c h ,  Grants & Contracts office 
Room 630,. 1800 G Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20550 
 el: 202, 632-5772 
The Foundation supports four astronomy 
centers (National Astronomy and ~ o n o s ~ h e r e  
Center at Arecibo, Puerto Rico; Cerro To- 
lolo Inter-American Observatory located 
near Santiago, Chile; f i t t  Peak National 
Observatory at Tucson, Arizona; and Na- 
tional Radio Astronomy Observatory at 
Green Bank, West Virginia) and one atrnos- 
pheric research center (Nationd Center for 
Atmospheric ~esearch  at Boulder. colorado). 
Summary information about the programs 
of the Foundation (including the ~ationa.1 
Centers), eligibility requirements, and the 
address from which rnore detailed informa- 
tion, brochures, or application forms may be 
obtained is contained in the National Sci- 
ence Foundation publication ('Guide to Pro- 
grams" which is for sde  by the Superinten- 
dent of Documents, U.S. Government Print- 
ing Office, Washingto?, D.C. 20402 (Stock 
Number 3800-0107-Price 75 Cents). 
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 
The Institution offers two programs which con- office of Internationd Activities 
tract for research and development with colleges Special Foreign Currency Program 
and universities: 
Interests: Contracting currently includes the 
office of Museum Programs fields of archeology, biology, botany, and 
anthropology. Countries currently included 
Interests ~esea rch  projects are directed toward in the program are India, Arab Republic of 
the museum as a profession,-not as a public Egypt , Tunisia, Poland, Burma, Guinea, and 
endeavor.  heref fore projects must focus on im- Pakistan. 
.?I 
proving profession museum practices, technology; 
and manpower training. Address: Kennedy B. Schmeftz 
Office of Internatronal Activities 
Address: Frederick Schmid Special Foreign Currency Program 
office of Museum Programs, Smithsonian Institution Smithsodan Institution 
Washington, D.C. 20560 Washington, D.C. 20560 
Tel: 202,. 381-6581 Tel: 202, 381-5881 
28 
UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY 
Inmests: USIA provides for the disserninatioll 
of information about the United Statcs, its 
people, culture, and policies by promoting a 
better understanding of the United States in 
other countries. Means used to  accomplish 
this purpose are through radio broadcasting, 
motio,n pictures, television, exhibits, persona 
contact, lectures and seminars, information .cen- 
Survey type research of information is covered 
in these malor areas: (1) Program  valuation 
evaluation of agency programs, and media 
actiirlties such as Vbice of Arnerica and others, 
(2) Foreign Opinion - questioning of, United 
States foreign. policy; (3) Miscellaneous - doc- 
umentaries and academic research on foreign 
relations, problems in societies, and other sim- 
ters, libraries, Endish 'language instruction, press ilar topics. 
placement, magazines and other publications, 
book translation distribution, and providing Address: United States information Agency 
facilitatixe assistance to foreign press and tele- office of Research 
vision journalists covering public affairs and 17 50 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
developments in the United States. Washmgton, D.C. 20547 
Tel: 202, 632-6662 
111. GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Bidder's List 
Co~nnterce Birsiness Daily (CBD) 
Contract 
Cost-Reimbursable Contract 
Fixed-Price Contract 
A fdc of qualifying organizations maintained 
by federal agencies and departments for the 
purpose of notitying such organizations .of in- 
vltations to  bid on a federal contract. Or- 
ganizatlons may be included on the bidder's 
list by completing Standard' Form 129 (See 
Appendix A) and submitting it to  the. appro 
priate federal agencies and departments. The 
Department of ~ e f e n s e  may require applicants 
to c o ~ p l e t e  a supplemental form DOD Form 
558-1 (Appendix A). Organizations on the 
bidder's list may be notified of an RFP in ad- 
vance of public notice. 
The publication of the Department of Commerce 
which announces the availability of contracts 
(RFP) and recipients of contract awards for 
the federal government. The CBD also pub- 
llshes occasional information of interest to organ- 
izations engaged in business with the ' federal 
gdvernment. S u b ~ c r i ~ t ~ o n s  to  the CBD may be 
ordered from the Superintendent of Documents, 
Government Printing office, Washington, D.C. 
20420, currently at $63.50 a year. 
The legal ag~eernerit between the federal govern- 
ment ahd olganizations eligible t o  receive federal 
fuitds by which the government acquires goods, 
services (research and development), property 
or systems of direct benefit or use by the 
federal government. A contract protures for 
the federal government a definable product or 
servlce fot a negotiated pnce and/or work sched- 
ule. 
The type of contract betwecn the federal govern- 
ment and e lkb le  organizations in which goods or 
services are pr~vided according to  a negotiated 
work schedule for which cost rates have been 
prede tern~ined. 
A type of contract between the federal govern- 
ment and an organization eligible to receive 
federal funds, in which the goods or semces 
are promised by the organization for a predeter- 
m n e d  cost. 
Cos t-Qverrun 
DOD Form 558-1 
Procurement 
The difference between an original estimate and 
the cumulative total of a cost-reimbursable con- 
tract. 
The supplemental farm which may be required 
by the Department of Defense to  bc completed 
by an organization applyisg to an agency or dc- 
partment within BOD to be included o n  the bid- 
der's list. standard Form 129 must dso be corn- 
pletcd by the applicant (See Appendix A). 
(Definition pending legrslatlon S 25 10) The 
provision of money, services. or property to a 
state, political subdivis~on, or person for the pur- 
pose of supporting, stimulating, strengthening, sub- 
udizing, or otherwise pfornoung non-federal acti- 
vlties benefiting a state, political subdivision. or 
the public generally. 
The legal agreemm between the federal govern- 
ment and an individual or a non-profit organiza- 
tion ~ e l i ~ b l e  to receive federal funds, in which 
the federal government transfers money, propcrty, 
services -or  other items of value to the grant 
recipient in support of an activity authorized 
by federal statute: Proposed legislation (S 3514) 
would add two provisions to  the definition: that 
a grant would be used' to  support an activity 
"to accompli+ a public purpose" and that "no 
siubstan tial idvolvement " by the federal ,govern- 
ment would be anticipated in the activity. 
A comprehensive process by which the federal 
government dispenses funds, the end product of 
which is a contract for goods, s e ~ c e s  (research 
and development), facilities, or systems. The 
~ e d e r d  Commissibn on Government Procurement 
would add to the definition chat procurement 
may be in the form of a grant when the fed- 
eral government obtains rights to information, 
data, inventions, or obtans  performance of work 
or services or property, even though the primary 
objective is not to obtain an end product fqr 
government use. 
RFP (Request for ~ r o p o s d )  
R & D (Research and Development) 
Standard Form 129 
unsolicited Proposal 
The formal and public advertlsernent by the 
federal gdvernme~t of an intentioh to procute 
particular p o d s  or services through open com- 
petition. RFPs are often refegred to as "in- 
vitations to bid" on a federal contract, The 
federal government is required by law to pub- 
lish all RFP announcements in the Commerce 
Business Llail2. 
An innovative process of scitdnfic and techno- 
logical preparation for changa Federal agancie 
and departments s p a s o r  R & D activities to 
ful fdl national objectives. 
standard application form t o  be completed by 
grganization in order to be included on thl 
Bidder's List for a particular federal igency 
or department (See Appendix A). standard 
Form 129 identifies the applicant's research in 
terests and quaiifications. 
An application to a federal agency or departm 
for support of a proposal initiated by the app 
cant. Unsolicited proposals must relate to the 
research and development interests of the fedei 
agency or department. 
IV. INDEX QF AGENCIES AND DlEPaRTMENTs WITH FEDERAI: CIVILIAN AND 
MILITARY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
Department of Agriculture 9 
Agricdtural Research Service 9 
Forest Service 9 
Economics ~esearch Sertvice 9 
Atomic Energy Comrnissioq 10 
Department of Commerce 10 
~ a t i o n d  Bureau of ~tandards 10 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 10 
office of Sea Grant 11 
Department of ~ e f e n s e  11 
Department of the Air Force 11 
Air* Force Systems Command 11 
Air Force office of Aerospace Research 11 
Department of the Apny 11 
Army Biological Laboratories 11 
U.S. Army Engineer Topographic Laboratories 12 
Army Mobility Equipment Research and Devdopment Center 12 
Department of the Navy 12 
office of N v a l  Research 12 
Naval Research 12  
~ a v d  ~pplications 12 
~ a v d  ~ n d y s i s  12 
Environmental Protection Agency 13 
Department of Health, Education, and welfare 13 
National Institutes of Health 13 
~ a t i o n d  Institute of Allergy and ~nfectious Dseases 13 
Nationd Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Dseases 13 
~ a t i o n a l  Inshtute of ~ h d d  Health and Human Development 14 
Nationd Institute of Dentd Research 14 
Nationd Institute of Envlronrnental ~ e a l t h  Scie~ices 14 
~ a t l o n d  Institute of General ~ e d i c d  Scieuces 14 
Nationd Instrtute of Neurologicd Diseases and stroke 15 
National Cancer- 'Institute 15 
~ a t ~ o n d  Eye Institute 15 
Nationd Heart and Lung Institute 16 
Nationd Library of Medieme 16 
Clinical Center 16 
Department of Health, Education. and Welfare (continued) 
Division of Research Services 16 
Divlsion of Research Grants 16 
Division of Research Resources 17 
Division of Computer ~esca rch  and ~echnology 17 
Fogarty International Center 17 
Health ~ e s o u r e e i  Administration- 17 
Bureau of ~ e d t h  Services Research 17 
Division of Health Cilre information Systems and Technology 18 
Dvision of Hedth Systems ~esea rch  and Development 18 
Division of Hedth Services Design and ~evelopment 18 
division of Health Services Qudity Resewch 18 
Division of Health Services Rcsearch and Analysis 18 
Division of Long Term care 18 
Bureau of ~ e d t h  Resources Dcvclopment 18 
Division of Associated Health ~rofessions 18 
I h ~ i o n  of Dentistry 18 
Diwion of Nursing 18 
Division of Medicine 18 
Division of Comprehensive Health Planning 18 
National Center for Health Statistics f 9 
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Heatlh Administration 19 
National Institute of Mental Health 19 
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 69 
~ a t i o n d  Institute on Drug Abuse 19 
Food and Drug Administration 19 
Office of Education 20 
Social and Rehabilitation Servlce 20 
Department of Houslng and Urban Development 20 
Department of the interior 20 
Bureau sf Mines 21 
office of Water Resources Research 21 
Office of Assistant Secretary - Energy and Minerals Research 21 
National Park Service 21 
office of Cod  Research 21 
United States Fish and wildlife Servlce 21 
Department of Justice 22 
Law ~nforcement  Assistance Administration 22 
National lnstltute of Law ~nforcement and Crmlnd Just~ce 22 
Department of Labor 23 
Office of Administrative Semces - office of the Assistant Secretary 23 
Bureau of Labor Statistics 23 
Department of Labor (continued) 
Labor - Management Services Administrat~on 23 
Occupational safety and ~ e a l t h  Administrat~on 23 
~mployment  Standards ~dmimst ra t~on 23 
Manpower Administration 23 
office of Policy, Edua t ion  and Research 23 
Bureau of International ~ f f a k s  24 
Department of Transportation 24 
office gf the Secretary for University Research 24 
Office of the Assistant -Secretary for Pohcy and Internationid ~ f f a i r s  24 
office of the Assistant Secretary for Environment and Urban Systems 24 
office of the Assistant Secretary for Systems l?everopmcnt and Technology 24 
Office of the Assistant Sccrcta-y for safety and Consumer Affars 24 
F 1 : a  Aviation Adnw~lstration 2 5 
b y s h q  Research and Development Service 25 
~ a t i o  n d  A- ~acdi t ies  Experimental Center 25 
Office of ~ v l a b o n  MeQcil 25 
Federal Railroad Administratxon 25 
~ a t i o n d  fighway ~ r a f f i c  safety Administration 26 
Utban Mass Transportation Administration 26 
U.S. Coast Guard 26 
Marine Safety Technology Division 27 
Nat~onal Aeronautics and Space Administration 27 
Headquarters Contracts Dvision 27 
National Science Foundat~on 28 
Smithsonian Institution 28 
united States Information Agency 29 
V. APPENDIX A SAMPLE OF STANDARD FORM 129 
, 
STANDARD fORM 1 2 9  
JANUARY 1 9 0 6  L D l T l  ON 
I N I T I A L  APPI I 1  A l l O l .  
FPR ( 4 1  CFH)  1 1 6  8 0 2  
BIDDER'S MAILING LIST APPLICATION H L V l S l O N  4 
F,II all Inser t  "NA" in blocbs not clppl~cable. fy , ,c  or print PI/ enirles. See reverse for lnsfructrons 
m 
'To (/.nrt.r nctn~p urtd t r t l b c ~ r  01 Fedc ml a(1cnc) t o  ti h ~ c  h f i m l  I S  \ulrrrtrtted. I n ~ l u r i c  / I / '   cud^) O A T L  
5. NAMES O F  O F F I C E R S ,  OWNERS, OR PARTNERS 
SECRETARY P R E S I D E N T  V I C E  P H E S I O E N T  
TREASURER OWNERS OR P A R T N ~ R S  
'6. AFF I L ' I  ATES OF APPL I CANT (Numes. localtons, and nature of affrlrafron. See defrnrftorr or4 rc*vrrrc) 
7. PTR~ONSAU~~~ORI ZED TO SIGN BIDS.  OFFERS,  AND CONTRACTS I N  YOUR NAME ( ~ r r r I r r t i t r  if ~ ~ t ~ n t )  
T E L  NO. (Id orccl cod<) NAME 
L 
O F F I C I A L  C A P A C I T Y  
a. I D E N T I F Y  ~ W I P M U J T ,  SUPPLIES. M A T ~ R I A L ~ .  AND/OR S E R V l r E S  ON WHICH YOU D E S I R E  TO B I ~  (Scc at tathcd Federal a g r n c y ' ~  supplcrnenlal 
Lrsdng and knstrurttons. any) 
, 
9 .  TYPE O F  B U S I N E S S  (Sees t / t b / i n ~ t t o n s  o n  rrt rr;c;c) 
* 
MANUFACTURER OR PRODUCER 
SCRV ICE ESTAOL I SHMENT 
SURPLUS DEALER (Check t h ~ s  60x t j you arc aiso a d e a l e r  rn'surplu s goods) 
10 S I  Z E  OF BUS I N  ESS (.4've d t b j ~ t r r ~ r o ; ~ ~  on retlcvac*) 
w 
SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN* I OTHER THAN SMALL B U S I N E S S  CONCERN 
REGULAR D t A L E R  (Type 1 )  
CONSTRUCT ION CONCERN E 
R E W L A R  DEALER fT> pi* 21 
RESEARCH  AN^ DEVELOPMENT FIM 
( t ~ l  A V t R A G E  ANNUAL S A L E S  OR R E C E I P T S  FOR 
P R E C E D I N G  THREE F I S C A L  YEARS 
t If Y O U  a f t  (1 sltldI 6u\lrirs5 
r unccrn,  f r l l  kn l a l a n d  ( 6 )  
( a )  AVERAGE NUMBER OF EMPLQYEES (Includrng 
affrtratcd FOR FOUR P R E O E D l N t  CALENDAR 
O U ~ R T E R S  
1,l . FLOOR SPACE (Yquurc, fernt) 
M A N U r A C T U R l N G  
12. N E T  'NORTH 
WAREHOUSE D A T t  
13 .  SECUR I TY CLEARANCE (if uppl t rab le ,  =heck  h i p h r s t  eicaarancr aurhor lzvd)  
AMOUNT 
FOR 
K E f  PERSONNCL, 
f o p  SECRET 
PLANT ONLY 
SECRET 
THIS SPACE FOR USE BY THE GOVERNMENT - 
1 7 9 .  I a r r  
CERTl FlCATlON 
- 
I C E R T I F Y  THAT INFORMAT I O N  S U P P L I F D  H E R E I N  rrc uc &ng u pa es attoclrcrrl 
I S CORRECT AND THAT N E I T H E R  THE APPL I CANT N f R  L N J P E R B t N  Id ro , tc~rnJ I 
AN? CONNECT I O N  *I TH THE A P P L I C A N T  AS A F R l N C l P A L  OR OFFICER. 5 0  FAR AS I S  
KNOWN. 1 S NOW D t B A R R E D  OR OTHERWISE OECLARLO I N E L  1 G I  B L E  BY ANY AGE%CY 
O F  THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FROM B I D D I N G  FOR F U R N I S I I I N G  MATERIAL:,. SUP- 
P L I E S  UR S E R V I C F S  TO T H E  GWERNMFNT OR ANY AGENCY THKRFOF. 
SI GNI\TURE- 
lYAME AND T I T L E  OF PERSON AUTHORIZED TO S I G N  ( r ) p e  or pr l t r l )  
C O N F i D E N T l A L  NAMES OF AGENCIES WHICH GRANTED S E C U R I T Y  CLEARANCES ( Include riutva) 
h n o n s  or concsrns wishing to be Wdod to a particular agency's bidder's maillnp~ ltst for supplhs w mnricrs shall flk thh 
properly campktud and certified Bidder's Malllng Ust Applkatlon, together with such other Ihts its may be attached to the applka* 
tbn f m ,  with each procurement ofies of tha Federal agency with whkh they desire to do burlwss, If 8 F&ni agency haswt- 
tacW a rupplementsl Commodity List with instructicms, compkh She applicatkm w IrWwtd, Otherwlrs, Identity in ttam 8 
the oqulpmt, altpplisr, and/or senbq on which you desiw to bki. T b  rpp l l e r th  shall be subsnittad and slgnsd by the prln. 
dm/ u dlstlngulshud from an agent, however constituted, 
After placement on the bidder's mailing list of an agency, a suppllsr's fbilum to respond (submitdon of bld, or notice In writ- 
Ing, that you am unable to bld on that partIcuLr transaction but wish to remain on thu actiw bidder's mailing lrst for that partlcu- 
Inr item) ta Inwitatlons for Bids will be undantwd by the agency to 1ndkat-a k k  of l n h n r t  and cmcumncs in the rumoval of the 
supptlefs name from the purchasing activity's biddsfs mailing list for the ltamr cmcemcrd. 
TYPE OF BUSINESS DEFINITIONS 
(See I k m  No. 9) 
A. MANUFACTURER OR PRODUCER means a p o r n  (or can. 
cem) owning, operating, or maintalnlng a factory or astab. 
llshmsnt that produces, on the premises, the materials, 
supplies, articles, or equipment of the general character of 
those listed in Item No, 8, or in the Federal Agency's supple 
mental Commodity List, if attached. 
5. REGULAR DEALER (Type I) means a person (or concern) 
who owus operates, or maintains a store, warehouse, or 
qther escabllshment in which the materials, supplies, 
articles, or equipment of the general character listed In ltem 
No. 8 or In the Federat Agency's supplemental Commodity 
List If attached, are bought, kept in stock, and sold to the 
public In the usual course of buslness. 
C. REQUlAR D U L E R  (Typa 2) In the case of supplies of par- 
tlcular kinds (st present, petroleum, lumber and timber 
praducts, machine tools, raw cotton, g m n  coffee, hay, grain, 
feed, or straw, agricultural liming materials, tw, raw or 
unmanufactured cotton Ifnters). "REGULAR DEALER" 
means a penon (or concern) satisfying the requirements of 
the regulations (Code, of Federal Regulations, Title 41, 50- 
201.101(b)) as amended from time to time, prescribed by 
the Secretary of Labor under the \ h-Healey Public Con- 
tra& Act (Title 41 U,S ode 35-45). For coal dealen, 
see Code of Federal Regulatio~a. Title 41. 50-201.604(a). 
D. SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT means a concsrn (or person) 
which owns, operates, or maintains any type of buslness 
which is princlpally.engaged In the furnishing of nonpersonai 
rswices. such as (but not llmlted to) repairing, cleaning, re- 
decorating, or rental of personal property, includlng the 
fumlthing of ~~ry repair parts or other supplies as part 
of t h  SUf'ViC8s ~ r f o m l d ,  
DEFINITIONS RELATING TO SIZE 
OF B~SINES 
A. SMAU'BUSINESS CONCERN. A small businass concern 
for the purpose of W r n m e n t  procurement Is a concern, 
including its affiliates, whlch is independently owned and 
operatud, is not dominant in the fleld of operation in whlch 
it is bidding on Government contracts and can further 
qualify under the criteria concerning number of employees, 
average annual receipts, or other cntena, as prescribed by 
the Small Business Administration (See Code of Federal 
Regulations, Title 13, Part 121, as amended, which contams 
detailed industry definitions and related procedures ) 
B. AFFIMATES. Busmess concerns are affil~ates of each other 
when either directly or indirectly (I) one concern controls or 
has the power to control the other, or (11) a third party con- 
trols or has the power to control both In determining 
whether concerns are independently, owned and operated 
and whether or not affiliation exists, consideration is given 
to all appropriate factots including common ownership, corn- 
mon management, and contrcrctual relat onshlp (See items 
Nos. 6 and 10.) 
C. NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES. In connection with the deter- 
mlnation of small business status, "number of employees" 
means the avarage employment of any concern, including 
the employees of its domestic and foreign affiliates, based 
on the number of persons employed on a full-time, part-tlrne, 
bmporary, or any other basis dunng thp pay period ending 
nearest the last day of the th~rd month In each calendar 
quarter fdr the preceding four quarters If a concern has 
not been In existence for four full calendar quarters, "num- 
ber of employees" means the average employment of such 
concern and its atAliatas during the period such concern has 
bsan in existence based on the number of persons employed 
during the pay period ending nearest the last day of each 
month. (See ltem No. 10.) 
COMMERCE BUSINESS DAILY 
The Commerce Busineq Dally, published by the Department 
E. CONSTRUCTlON CONCERN meant a c o n m  (or person) of Commerce, contains information concerning proposed pro- 
sn8aglsd fft constnrctlon, altoration or repair (includlng curements, sales, and contract awards. For further Informs 
dwging, axcavalng, and minting) of buildings, structures tion concerning this publication, contact your local Commerce 
or other rwal proparty. Field OfHca 
SAMPLE OF STANDARD FORM DOD 558-1 
L A b O R A T O I I Y  T O T A L  P L e O R  SPACE Cfncludinp W * ~ O U # O  
mmufachrrfn# apace) 
BIDDER'S MAILING LIST APPLICATION SUPPLEMENT 
Form Approtcd 
Huclprr Bureau No 2L-RWl 6 
- w 
I F  ADDlTfONAL SPACE I S  REQUIRED. ATTACH SEPARATE S H E E T  AND REFER T O  ITEm,NVMDER 
I i I 
8 ~ R I S F  D~SCRIPTION O r  BUILOINOI (Type 01 c o n * l ~ c l l o n  m d  8.1.0) 
T O T A L  
10 I N C L O S U R E S  fCh*ck) 0 F I N A N C I A L  S T A + E M E N T S ,  I N C L U D I N G  O P E R A T I N G  S T A T E M E N T S  0 D E S C R I P T I V E  L I T E R A T U R I  
OTHERS 
SECURITY CLEARANCE ( I f  .pplferblo, d e c k  hl#~.mt clearmca u t h o r l x d  by clsrrlnp aamcy)  
PRODUCTION 
2 CONTRACTS HELD WITH ARMED SERVICES DURING PAST 3 Y E A R S ~ L I . ~  *.por.t*l*~ 
L I 1 
l ~ l v r  &l*f, rqmwemtdirw outlfne ol :).p. .nd condition el  mrchin.ry. a w l p  
m m t  (6). a d  Irsllltiem (7)  evrllrble. I f  not o m e d  by Iinn, p l w  atatur In detr1l 
D D,:2',558-1 E D I T I O N  O F  1  J A N  54 I S  O B S O L E T E  
ENGINEERING 1  
NUMBER 
0 f 
EMPLOYEES 
FOR KEY PERSONNEL 
a A D O l T t O N A L  I N F O R M A T l O N  A T T A C H E D  a B R O C H U R E  0 C A T A L O G  0 P H O T O G R A P H S  
1 1  I C E R T I F Y  T H A T  T H E  INFORMAT lON SUPPLIED HEREIN  (Incfudinp m y  a t t * ~ m w t t ~ )  IS C O R R E C T  
OPERATIONS AT 
WAXIMUM L t VEL 
MINIMUM (Durlna Irbt 2 yr.,) 
P R E S E N T  L E V F i L  
D O L L A R  VALUE CONTRACT NUMBER 
L l S T  O O P A R T M E ? I T I  WHICH W A V E  O R A N T E D  S E C U R I T Y  C L E A R A N C E  A N D  D A T E S  G R A N T E D  
T O P  l E C R E T  I S E C R E T  
FOR P L A N T  O N L Y  
D  A T  E  
8 T V P E S  O F  S Q U I P M L N T  COMPONENTS. M A T T R I A L  O R  S E R V I C E S  NOW OILINQ M A N U F A C T U R E D .  P K R C O R Y E D .  O N  D E V E L O P L D  (Commrcclrl m d  ~ l l l f r t y ~  
OESCRlPTlON O F  (TEMS 
C O N F I D L N T I A L  S E C R E T  C O N C I D E N T I A L  
N A M E  I N 0  AOORESS O F  A P P L I C A N T  S I G N A T U R E  
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
I. Federal Procurement for Research and Development: An Explanation of the 
RFP Contract Mechanism 
Report of the Commission on Govemmettt Procurenlent, Volume 11, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402, December 1972 (Superintendent of Documents, 
Stock Number 5255-00003). 
To Create m Ofice of Federul Procurement Policy Witliin the Exeerrtive office of 
the President, and for Other Rirposes, 5. 2510. October 1. 1973, U.S. Senate, 93rd 
Congress, Second Session. 
To Distinguish ~edernl  Grant a d  Cooperative Agrcemetit ~ ~ l n t i o t t s h i ~ ~ s  from Federal Pro- 
curement ~e ln t ionshi~s ,  and for Other lhmoses, S. 3514, May 20, 1974, U.S. Senate, 
93rd Congress, Second Session. 
11. Alphabetical Listing of Federal Agencies which Contract for Resevch and Development 
Congressional Directory, 93rd Congress, 2nd Session, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 20402, 1974. 
Code of Federal Regulations, U.S. Government Pnnting Office, Washington, D. C. 20402, 
1974. 
Commerce Business Daily, U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Government Prlnting Office, 
Washington, D.C. 20402, 1974. 
Rtrchnn'ng and Sdes Directory U.S. Small Business Administrat~on, U.S. Government Print- 
mg Office, Washington, D.C. 20402, 1972 Revision (Superintendent of Documents, Stock 
Number 4500-001 18). 
Selling to AEC, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, U.S. Government Pnnting office, Washingtt 
D.C. 20402, 1972 Revision. 
Selling to the Military, U.S. Department of ~ e f e n s e ,  U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 20402. 
Smithsonran Opportunities. For Research and Study m Mstory, Art, Science, Board of 
Academlc Studies, Smithsonian Institution, washington, D.C. 20560, 1972. 
U.S. Department of Health, Education, und ~Velfare, Telephotte Dzrec tory, U.S. Government 
Printing office, ~ash lng ton ,  D.C. 20402, 1973 (Superintendent of Documents, Stock Number 
1700-00120). 
US. Department of Labor, office of the Assistant Secretary for Admintstratlon, Telephone 
Illrec tofy ; U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 
U.S. Govenltnent Ala~zzlol, 19 73- 74, office of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Service, General Services Administration, Washington, D.C. 20408, 1974. 
Coalzir~~to~~ I I I ,  A Comprehensive Directory of the Nation's Capital ... lts People and institu- 
tions, Cary T. Grayson, Jr., Editor, Potomac Book Publishers, 4737 Fulton Street, N.W., 
washington, D.C. 20007, 197 1. 
What I t  Btiys, U.S. Department of Labor, Office of the Comptroller, Washington, D.C. 20210, 
April 1974. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics M i  cro f i 4 : 
Chairman: Herbert B. Safford 
GTE Data Services, Inc. 
Marina del Rey, California 
Members: Barry Boehm, TRW Systems 
Harold Borko, School of Library Sciences, UCLA 
Burt Nanus, Center for Future Research, USC 
Harold Sackman, The Rand Corporation 
Virginia Wood, California Metropolitan State Hospital 
AFIPS Liaison: Donald Thomsen, President, SIAM 
Projects: Computer Ethics Related to the Public 
Compterized Personal Medical Data Banks 
Computer Bill of Rights 
Community Information Utilities 
Computer Users Society of America 
Objectives: Assist constituent societies 
Develop educational programs 
Encourage involvement with professional and 
societal groups and government agencies 
Publications and meetings 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics M i  cr of i che 4 9 : 9 5 
STRUCTURE AND PURPOSE 
NATIONAL FEDERATION OF ABSTRACTING AND I N D E X I N G  SERVICES 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Toni Carbo Bearman 
3401 Market Street 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104 
Research, publication, education 
Seminars, meetings, workshops, committees 
Relations among segments of the community: 
primary publishers, libraries, commercial 
and industrial abstracting and indexing 
services, data analysis centers, informa- 
tion dissemination centers, teachers, and 
researchers 
American Joarnal of Computational Linguistics M i  crof i che 4 9 : 9 6 
K U R Z W E I L  R E A D I N G  M A C H I N E  
A two-foot cube with a glass-top scanning device that reads 
printed pages aloud, e.g .  to the blind, has been described 
in the newspapers. Developed by "a Cambridge, Massachusetts 
research firm" (name and address unknown to AJCL) , the 
machine is described as capable of reading almost any printed 
type from newspapers, magazines, etc. 
It is said to be able to recognize hundreds of different 
type faces and to determine the correct pronunciation of English 
words. However, its intonation is said to be flat, and its 
pronunciation o f  some words "bizarre" 
The machine is to be available for institutional use in-a 
year or two, and for homes in four or five years. The price 
is predicted to start initially at $25K, falling eventually 
to a fifth as much. 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Any reader with further information to con- 
tribute is invited to write to AJCL. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics M i  c ro f i  che 4 9 : 9 7 
Sold By La Jolla Firm 
Translating 
Developed 
By JA3IES GARY 
Woshinoton 6ureaU Ch~cf .  Coplev News Qrvlos 
WASHINGTOS - Have jou ever heard 
of a machlne that can translate Rusalan, 
C h i n e ,  German and French into Eng- 
lish? 
A machine that can analyze thousands of 
words of A forejgn lenguage text and 
prepare summaries and anafises m Eng- 
lish? 
A machine that has stored vocabulanes 
Utat permll it to '.fansinre foreign lany~age 
material dsahng w t h  such scientific cilscl- 
plines as chemistry, physlcs, eiectroflics, 
aviation, rne!allurgy, earth sciences and 
mathema tics? 
It exists and has been in use by the U S 
Air Force since 1970. It also was used by 
the National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 
ministration dunnp the recent combined 
U.S.-Soviet space night. 
Actually, however, ~t 1s much more than 
a machine. It is a sjsiem developed by Dr 
Peter Paul Toma of L;1 JoUa, who has been 
working since 1936 to comblne the capabdl- 
tkes of computers wth the sclence of 
linguistics 
His system is known as "Systran," an 
acronym formed from the ~ o r o s  ystem 
a n d  translation, or what he calls the 
world's first fully automated universal 
machine translauon system. 
FROM THE SAN OIEGO SUN, 1 1  MARCH 1976 
It is now being marketed in the United 
States and E u ~ o p e  bq Latsec, lnc , Tonla's 
La Jolla-based finn that takes it-5 name, 
agaln an acroq  m, from ":angmqe trans- 
lat~orl sjsternq and electro:lic comrnunlca- 
tions." 
Toma says Systran is be!ng uscd by the 
European Common Market, and is in 
various stages of use in Lusembourg, 
Germany and Canada, in add~tion to the 
United States 
The charms of It spreadirlg are quite 
good Tonla demonstrated the s) stem here 
Monday before a two-day senllnar spon- 
sored by the Foreig Brosdcastlng Infor- 
matiotl Scrvice, the P;ovemrner t agency 
that monitors arid p r ~ i d c s  translations of 
all major foreign broadcasts 
Russian language texts itere punched, 
letter by letter, on tptlat IS cal!cd a Carter- 
tone S-15 C - a fonn of e lec t lc  type~k~it- 
er, This was transn~itted by teleghone to 
the Teled) ne \ an computer m San D!ego, 9 &hich had been programmed to recelke 11, 
and then - after some problems were 
worked out - was sent back by the 
computer in E~glish. 
As Tonla explairls ~ t ,  this can be accom- 
plished witfi any relntn ely ad\anced tom- 
puter, after it has been programmed to 
operate as a translator. 
Fed Into Memory Bank 
The system is recorded on mayetlc: 
tapes or discs whlch are fed Lnto the 
computer's memory bank, gning it a 
vocabulq  to operate withln whatever 
language is to be uscd 
At this time, ~t is possibie to program a 
computer to translate from Russ~an to 
English, English to Russlan, German to 
English, Chinese to Engl~sh. French to 
Engl~sh and Englsh to Freflch 
It also is possib!e for the computer to 
recelve up to three foreign language 
transmissions s:rnultaneously, record 
them and then translate them separately, 
normally ~ l t h l n  an hbur. 
There is no claim that the translations 
are literarily perfect. But they are ~ h 2 t  IS
called "uszb!e translat~ons," and they can 
be obtained quite rap~dly. 
Latsec says the system can be used to 
proude H hat IS called content analysis, or 
automatic zbstract~r~g and pobtical trend 
pre&ction. In other \lords, lt  can be us:d 
to analyze a teh t  and select common 
themes In many tests to lnd~cate trends. 

