Determining Verb Phrase Referents  in Dialogs I 
Ann E. Robinson 
Artificial Intell igence Center 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 94025 
This paper discusses two problems central to the interpretation of utterances: deter- 
mining the relationship between actions described in an utterance and events in the world, 
and inferring the "state of the world" from utterances. Knowledge of the language, 
knowledge about the general subject being discussed, and knowledge about the current 
situation are all necessary for this. The problem of determining an action referred to by a 
verb phrase is analogous to the problem of determining the object referred to by a noun 
phrase. 
This paper presents an approach to the problem of determining verb phrase referents in 
which knowledge about language, the subject area, and the dialog itself is combined to 
interpret such references. Presented and discussed are the kinds of knowledge necessary 
for interpreting references to actions, as well as algorithms for using that knowledge in 
interpreting dialog utterances about ongoing tasks and for drawing inferences about the 
task situation that are based on a given interpretation. 
1. Introduction 
This paper discusses two problems central to the 
interpretation of utterances: determining the relation- 
ship between actions described in an utterance and 
events in the world, and inferring the current world- 
state from utterances. Knowledge of the language, 
knowledge about the general subject area, and knowl- 
edge about the current situation are all necessary for 
this. The problem of determining an action referred to 
by a verb phrase is analogous to the problem of deter- 
mining the object referred to by a noun phrase. Al- 
though considerable attention has been given to the 
latter (Donellan, 1977; Grosz, 1977a, 1977b; Sidner, 
1979; Webber, 1978), little has been done with the 
former. 2
The need to identify an action is obvious in utter- 
ances containing verbs like "do",  "have",  and "use", 
as in " I 've done it", "what tool should I use?", or "I 
1 This research has been funded under three-year NSF Con- 
tinuing Research Grant No. MCS76-22004. This paper and the 
research reported in it have benefited from interactions with all the 
members of the natural language research group at SRI. Barbara 
Grosz, Jerry Hobbs, Gary Hendrix, and Jane Robinson have been 
particularly helpful in the preparation of the paper. 
2 A problem related to determining verb phrase referents - -  
interpreting verb phrase ellipsis - -  has been investigated by Webber 
(1978). 
have it". In these utterances the verb does not name 
the action, but rather refers to it more generally, much 
as pronouns or "nonspecif ic" nouns (e.g., "thing") 
refer to objects. Even when more specific verbs are 
used, complex reasoning may be required to ascertain 
the particular action being referred to. For example, 
the utterance " I 've glued the pieces together" can 
refer to different steps in a task - -  depending on what 
objects "the pieces" refers to, because each gluing 
action is a different step. Similarly, the verb "cut" 
refers to different types of cutting actions when used 
with different objects, as in "cut grass", "cut wood",  
or "cut cake" (Searle, 1978). 
A variant of this problem is deciding whether a 
verb is intended to refer to a general or a specific ac- 
tion. For example, "cutting wood" can refer to the 
general activity of cutting many pieces of wood or it 
can refer to the action of cutting a particular piece. 
(Werner, 1966) 
This paper presents an approach to these problems 
in which knowledge about language, the subject area, 
and the dialog itself is combined to interpret refer- 
ences by verbs. Presented and discussed are the kinds 
of knowledge necessary for interpreting references to 
actions, as well as algorithms for using that knowledge 
in interpreting dialog utterances about ongoing tasks 
Copyright 1981 by the Association for Computational Linguistics. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made for direct commercial advantage and the Journal reference and this copyright notice are included on 
the first page. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or  specific permission. 
0362-613 X /81 /010001-16501.00  
Amer ican  Journal  of  Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 1 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
and for drawing inferences about the task situation 
that are based on a given interpretation. The algor- 
ithms have been implemented and tested in a computer 
system (TDUS) that participates in a dialog about the 
assembly of an air compressor (Robinson et al, 1980). 
The system acts as an expert, guiding an apprentice 
through the steps of the task. The knowledge availa- 
ble will be described first, followed by a detailed de- 
scription of the algorithms for verb interpretation, 
then by a discussion of a sample dialog in which the 
system participated. 
2. Knowledge Needed 
Interpreting any utterance and relating it to a task 
requires knowledge about the language and the task, 
as well as the relationships between them. This paper 
will concentrate on knowledge needed to identify ac- 
tions. It builds directly on the concepts of global and 
immediate focusing, through which certain entities are 
highlighted (Grosz, 1977a, 1977b, 1978; Sidner, 
1979). General familiarity with that research will be 
assumed. More detailed descriptions of other aspects 
of the knowledge needed for interpreting utterances 
can be found elsewhere (Grosz, 1977a; Hendrix, 
1977, 1979; Robinson et al, 1980; J. Robinson, 
1980). 
2.1 Act ions  and Events  
Interpreting verb phrases requires knowing about 
events that have occurred, are occurring, or can occur. 
Such knowledge typically includes the steps necessary 
to perform the actions associated with the events, the 
possible participants, the conditions that must be true 
before the actions can be performed, and their effects. 
Knowledge about actions and events includes both 
general knowledge about possible actions and events 
and more specific knowledge about those that occur 
during a particular task. 
We have developed a formalism, process models, for 
encoding information about actions (Grosz et al, 
1977). This formalism enables the specification of a 
hierarchical decomposition of actions into subactions, 
as well as the description of individual types of ac- 
tions. It is an extension of the network formalism 
used for representing other knowledge about objects 
and relationships, as described by Hendrix (1979). 
The description of each action type includes informa- 
tion about its participating actors and objects, the 
preconditions for its enactment,  its effects, and the 
alternat ive sequences of substeps that may be follow e d 
to accomplish it. A sequence of substeps may be par- 
tially ordered. This decomposition of actions builds 
upon earlier research on the hierarchical decomposi- 
tion of the planning process (Sacerdoti, 1977) and 
upon the work by Hendrix (1973, 1975) on modeling 
actions and processes. Many of the actions for a 
pump-assembly task have been encoded in this formal- 
ism for use in the TDUS system. 
Figure 1 illustrates a process model for a pump- 
attaching process. The network node ATTACH 
PUMP represents the set of pump-attaching actions. 
The large box depicts a separate space in the network 
in which the schema of the ATTACH PUMP action is 
represented. The DELIN arc links the schema to the 
ATTACH PUMP node. The schema specifies the 
participants in the attach operation, marked by the 
MAJORPART,  M INORPART,  and AGENT arcs. 
The description of the action, an element of the set of 
EVENT DESCRIPT IONS,  includes the PRECONDI -  
T IONS that must be true for the action to be per- 
formed, the EFFECTS of performing the action, and 
the PLOT or steps by which the action is performed. 
Each step in the plot (encoded on a separate space) is 
in turn further described by a process model. In this 
example, the substeps of attaching are positioning and 
bolting the pump. Their ordering is indicated by the 
SUC (successor) link. The plot steps have many of 
the same participants as the main action. In addition 
the second plot step, "secure with bolts", introduces 
another set of participants, BOLTS, indicated by the 
FASTENER arc. 
During a task, a record of progress is kept by filling 
in, or instantiating, the schema for an action as that 
action is performed and then incorporating the newly 
created piece of network into the model of the current 
situation. Records of actions are linked both tempo- 
rally by a time lattice and through their taxonomic 
relationships with other events and objects in the task. 
Each instantiated action has associated with it a time 
interval. The interval can be past, present, or future, 
and it can be bounded by two times: a start time and 
an end time. For events treated as points, the start 
and end times are identical. For events whose start 
and/or  end time is not precisely known, the values 
may be left unspecified or represented by parameters 
that are bounded above and/or  below by known 
points in the time lattice. 
Once an instance of an event is recorded, it can be 
used in subsequent deductions and is available for 
answering questions about past events. This provides 
a means of maintaining an up-to-date record of assem- 
bly progress. Such a record comprises an essential 
part of the domain context within which utterances are 
interpreted and questions answered. At any given 
moment the domain context indicates what assembly 
actions have already occurred (and in what order), 
what actions are in progress, and what actions can be 
initiated next. 
We have developed procedures for reasoning about 
process models. These procedures build upon those 
that embody general knowledge about logical deduc- 
tion (Fikes and Hendrix, 1977). These new proce- 
2 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 

Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
a goal is current or achieved, and how goals are repre- 
sented. 4 In the following sections, we will see how 
these goals are used for interpreting verbs. 
2.2.1 Recognizing Goals in TDUS 
The TDUS system handles two kinds of goals: do- 
main goals and certain knowledge-state goals. Domain 
goals concern states to be achieved by task-related 
actions, while knowledge-state goals concern states to 
be achieved by acquiring a specific piece of informa- 
tion. 
Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between actions 
and goals. The hierarchy shown is a simplification of 
a portion of the assembly task hierarchy currently 
encoded in TDUS. 5 Each node represents an action 
and its associated goal. The hierarchy encodes the 
substep relationships: child nodes represent substeps 
of their parent nodes. The top-level node in the tree, 
node 1, represents the action of attaching a pump 
whose associated goal is that the pump be attached. 
Nodes 2 and 3 represent substeps of this attaching 
process - -  the actions of positioning the pump and 
tightening the bolts, with the associated goals that the 
pump be positioned and that the bolts be tight. The 
action of locating bolts represented by node 4 is not 
an explicit step in the task, but is necessary for its 
performance. Node 4 has an associated knowledge- 
state goal: "know the location of the bolts". All 
these goals have associated actions that, in the process 
model formalism, are specific instantiations of actions, 
not action schemata. 
We distinguish two classes of goals: direct goals 
achieved by actions the apprentice has explicitly or 
implicitly said are being performed now or have been 
performed and potential goals mentioned by either par- 
ticipant that have not been acted upon but might possi- 
bly be. Both domain and knowledge-state goals can be 
either direct or potential although the current imple- 
mentation of TDUS does not support potential 
knowledge-state goals. 
In the context of the task steps shown in Figure 2, 
"I am attaching the pump" states that an attaching 
action (node 1), is being performed. This establishes 
the direct domain goal that the pump be attached. 
"Should I tighten the bolts?" indicates that the tight- 
ening action (node 3) might be performed, establishing 
the potential domain goal that the bolts be tight. 
4 The current implementation of goals in TDUS is an exten- 
sion and partial revision of one by Sidner described in her disserta- 
tion (1979). 
5 Although the assembly task currently encoded in TDUS 
involves strong structuring of actions and goals, the representations 
and procedures we have developed are applicable to less structured 
subject areas. 
(2) 
I 
(1) 
I ATTACH PUMP 
goal: ATTACHED 
(4) 
POSITION PUMP 
goal: IN POSITION 
TIGHTEN BOLTS 
goal: TIGHT 
I 
LOCATE BOLTS 
goal: KNOW LOCATION 
Figure 2. Goal/action tree. 
A direct knowledge-state goal can be established, 
for example, by the utterance "where are the bolts?", 
which establishes the knowledge-state goal "know the 
location of the bolts" (node 4). A potential 
knowledge-state goal would be established by an utter- 
ance such as " I 'd  like to read more Plato" which im- 
plies the potential knowledge-state goal of knowing 
more about the philosophy of Plato. 
Direct and potential goals are distinguished from 
one another because of the different roles they play in 
the interpretation of verbs. Basically, direct goals are 
those that are known to be current or former goals 
associated with actions that are being or have been 
performed. Potential goals are possible near-term 
goals associated with possible future actions. Depend- 
ing on the type of utterance, one or the other class of 
goal might be considered first. The different roles of 
the two goal classes will be illustrated when the inter- 
pretation of verbs is discussed in detail in Section 3. 
In the TDUS system, a potential goal can be intro- 
duced either by the apprentice who is performing the 
task or by the system which is acting as an expert 
advisor. These goals can be introduced in at least 
three different ways. 
(1) The apprentice can introduce a potential goal 
by mentioning a possible future action, while not ex- 
plicitly stating that it will be performed. This distin- 
guishes between "I am going to take the lid off now" 
and "should I take the lid off now?" The former ex- 
presses a direct goal because the speaker explicitly 
says s /he  is planning to perform the action. The latter 
expresses a potential goal because the speaker has not 
made a commitment o performing the action, but 
implies that s /he might. When a potential action is 
mentioned in this way, if it is an appropriate next step 
4 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
in the task the system will establish the associated goal 
as a potential goal. For example, 
"Should I tighten the bolts now?" 
will cause the system to establish the potential goal 
"that the bolts be tight" if the appropriate reply is 
"yes". 
(2) The expert can introduce a potential goal by 
telling the apprentice what actions to perform. The 
goal is potential and not direct, because the expert 
cannot, on the basis of the utterance alone, assume 
that the apprentice will perform the action. For exam- 
ple, the expert's reply to 
"What should I do now?" 
will cause establishment of the potential goal - -  or 
goals if there are multiple possibilities - -  associated 
with the action in the reply. 
(3) The apprentice can also introduce a potential 
goal by indirectly mentioning an action in the task. 
For example, if the apprentice says 
"I found the pulley." 
in a situation in which one of the next steps is to in- 
stall the pulley, but neither the installation nor the 
pulley has been mentioned before, the potential goal 
"that the pulley be installed" will be inferred from the 
reference to the pulley and the knowledge that it is a 
possible next step. This forward reference to an ob- 
ject implicitly focuses the object and the step it is 
associated with. Previously, algorithms for shifting 
focus caused a shift to the step associated with the 
object (Grosz, 1977b). However, this is problematic 
because the speaker may not intend to perform the 
step or even discuss it, but rather intends to talk about 
the object. Establishing the step in which the object 
participates as a potential goal highlights the step but 
does not force a shift of focus to it. This change has 
proved to be important, as will be seen during discus- 
sion of the algorithm. 
Utterances can introduce direct and potential goals 
simultaneously. In the examples in items 1 and 2 
above, direct knowledge-state goals are also being 
introduced. In particular, the knowledge-state goals 
are "knowing whether tightening the bolts is the next 
step" and "knowing the action to perform". 
2.2.2 Recogniz ing the State  of a Goal 
As important as recognizing a goal, is recognizing 
whether the goal is the current one, one that has al- 
ready been achieved, or one that has been abandoned. 
Recognizing when goals are no longer potential is also 
important. 
m direct goal is assumed to be current when an 
utterance states that an action that will achieve the 
goal is in progress. 
achieved either 
A goal is assumed to have been 
(1) when an explicit statement such as "I 
have attached it" or " I 'm done" or 
"OK ''6 indicates the completion of the 
action achieving the goal; 
(2) when an explicit statement indicates an 
action intended to achieve the goal is 
finished; or 
(3) when the start of a new action implies 
completion of the current one and thus 
achievement of the associated goal. 7 
A goal is assumed to have been abandoned following 
an utterance such as "never mind". 
Potential goals cannot be achieved as such. Rath- 
er, they can either become direct goals through the 
mechanisms for establishing direct goals or they disap- 
pear when a new potential goal is recognized. 
2.2.3 Represent ing  Goals  in TDUS 
The structure of goals in a dialog about a task is 
related both to the structure of the task and to the 
structure of the dialog. The structure of tasks and the 
structure of dialogs have been discussed elsewhere 
(Grimes, 1980; Grosz, 1977a, 1977b, 1978; Hobbs,  
1978; Reichman, 1978; Sacerdoti, 1977; Sidner, 1979; 
Wilensky, 1978). Open questions remain about the 
structure of the goals that arise and how they should 
be represented. 
In TDUS direct goals are represented in a single 
list, acting like a last- in-f irst-out stack. Both 
knowledge-state and domain goals are entered on the 
same list. This simplification has proved adequate for 
current purposes. 
In general, there can be only one potential goal at a 
time. The exception is when two possible actions are 
introduced at once, as in "install the aftercooler or 
install the brace". Because it is simplest to view a 
potential goal as a single item, hereafter eferences to 
the potential goal can be read as referring to the possi- 
ble conjunction or disjunction of potential goals when 
appropriate. 
2.3 Knowledge about Language 
To interpret verbs and infer the current task and 
dialog situation, the knowledge outlined above must be 
combined with knowledge about the language includ- 
ing what is generally characterized as syntactic, se- 
mantic, and discourse knowledge. 
6 See the discussion in Grosz (1977a) of the roles of OK. 
7 As Sidner (1979) points out, in the first two cases the 
information comes from the utterance, while in the third case it is 
from the task model. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 5 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
2.3.1 Syntactic Knowledge 
One of the most important elements of syntactic 
knowledge necessary for interpreting verbs - -  and the 
one discussed here - -  is knowledge about tense and 
aspect. Tense and aspect are used to indicate the 
relative time of an event and whether it is or was oc- 
curring or completed. 
Tense and aspect are indicated syntactically by 
auxiliaries and/or  certain verb forms. In TDUS, utter- 
ances are analyzed and marked for tense (past, pres- 
ent, or future) and for progressive (event in progress) 
and perfective (event completed) aspect. 
The following are some examples of the verb forms 
TDUS can interpret alng with their tense and aspect 
markings: 
I am going. 
I had gone. 
I had been going. 
I will be going. 
present, progressive 
past, perfective 
past, perfective, progressive 
future, progressive 
In determining referents, the tense and aspect of 
the utterance restrict the alternatives within the task 
model and limit the goals that might be considered. 
Generally, present tense and progressive aspect are 
used when referring to a new action, indicating that it 
has been started. Only if the utterance is somehow 
marked, as in " I 'm sti l l  tightening the bolts", will the 
verb phrase refer to an action that already has been 
mentioned as in progress. Similarly, past tense and/or  
perfect aspect indicate that an action has been fin- 
ished. However,  the hearer may or may not have 
known that the action was in progress. 
So far, we have considered primarily verbs that 
refer to events rather than states, and to the usage 
that is most common in dialogs about tasks, such as 
references to single occurrences of actions. However,  
the analysis and representat ion are compatible with 
analyses that consider other kinds of usage (Leech, 
1976). 
2.3.2 Semantic Knowledge 
The interpretation of references to actions and 
events requires knowledge of the relationship between 
words for actions or events and the internal represent- 
ations of the corresponding classes of actions or 
events; s it also requires knowledge of the relationship 
between nouns and entities in the domain. For exam- 
ple, the "SELL ING"  action is an action whose partici- 
pants include a buyer, seller, some object being sold, 
and some money. Semantic knowledge about selling 
would include the information that for an utterance 
8 Note that at the beginning of a dialog only the relationships 
between words and classes of concepts is known. The problem 
addressed here is how to identify the particular action or event 
referenced in a particular utterance. 
whose main verb is "sell" in the active voice, the syn- 
tactic subject is the "seller" in a selling event, the 
syntactic object is the item sold, the indirect object is 
the one to whom the item is sold, and the object of 
the "for" preposition is the selling price. The infor- 
mation necessary to make this mapping and to build 
the appropriate representat ion is encoded with the 
verb. (Hendrix in Walker, 1978; Konolige, 1979). 
2.3.3 Discourse Knowledge 
Discourse knowledge is knowledge about how the 
domain and dialog contexts in which an utterance oc- 
curs contribute to and are influenced by the interpre- 
tation of the utterance. Although we have included it 
here under knowledge about language, discourse 
knowledge may be viewed as spanning knowledge 
about language and about the domain. 
2.3.3.1 Focusing 
During a dialog, the participants focus their atten- 
tion on only a small portion of what each of them 
knows or believes. Both what is said and how it is 
interpreted epend on a shared understanding of this 
narrowing of attention to a small highlighted portion 
of what is known. 
Focusing is an active process. As a dialog prog- 
resses, the participants continually shift their focus and 
thus form an evolving context within which utterances 
are produced and interpreted. A speaker provides a 
hearer with clues of what to look at and how to look 
at it - -  what to focus on, how to focus on it, and how 
wide or narrow the focusing should be. We have de- 
veloped a representat ion for discourse focusing (or 
global focusing), procedures for using it in identifying 
objects referred to by noun phrases, and procedures 
for detecting and representing shifts in focusing 
(Grosz, 1977a, 1977b, 1978, 1980). 
Focused objects are highlighted in the network 
model by placing them in separate "focus spaces". 
Several focused objects may appear in one space. Fo- 
cus spaces are arranged in a hierarchy that reflects the 
degree of focusing. The most prominent space is con- 
sidered primary focus. As focusing shifts, the hier- 
archy is changed accordingly and new spaces may be 
created for the newly highlighted objects, while old 
ones may disappear. 
In addition to global focusing, we have incorporat- 
ed the concept of immediate focus (Sidner, 1979) 
through which one entity among those focused is sin- 
gled out. This is a more localized focusing phenome- 
non that is closely related to the use and recognition 
of anaphora, as well as to changes in global focusing. 
The notion of focusing has been used elsewhere 
and is related to notions such as topic, comment, giv- 
en, and new. Each of these reflects an attempt to 
6 American Journal  of Computat iona l  Linguistics. Volume 7, Number 1. January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
identify the roles of certain sentential elements within 
a discourse. See Sidner (1979) for a discussion of the 
relationship between focus and these other concepts. 
2.3.3.2 Common-background and Communicated 
Knowledge 
In our framework, the dialog participants are as- 
sumed to share knowledge about processes in the task 
model 9 and the history of the task performed to date, 
along with knowledge about direct and potential goals 
and focused entities. We view this shared knowledge 
as composed of at least two parts: (1) common- 
background knowledge - -  knowledge about the world 
that is assumed to be shared by the participants inde- 
pendently of the dialog, based on their common back- 
ground and experience, such as the processes in the 
task model and the history of its performance; (2) 
communicated knowledge - -  knowledge about the goals 
and focusing, which is assumed to be shared as a result 
of the dialog. The steps of the task that are explicitly 
mentioned are communicated knowledge, as are other 
focused entities that have been mentioned. We will 
distinguish these two types of shared knowledge and 
their roles in the interpretation of utterances. 
We distinguish as communicated knowledge essen- 
tially what Clark and Marshall (1980) distinguish as 
the mutual knowledge that results from "linguistic 
co-presence." Our use of the term common- 
background knowledge covers the mutual knowledge 
they describe as resulting from "cultural co-presence" 
and a limited form of "physical co-presence". 
To help clarify our distinction between common- 
background and communicated knowledge, consider a 
dialog about assembling a pump. The dialog partici- 
pants share knowledge about actions used in assembly 
(inserting objects, tightening bolts), about parts (nuts, 
bolts, washers), about tools, and about terminology for 
talking about them. All this is common at the begin- 
ning of the dialog. During the dialog additional 
knowledge is communicated. Consider the following 
exchange between an expert (E) and an apprentice 
(A): 
E: First, put the bolts in the holes. 
A: How many and what size? 
E: 4 bolts, each 3 /4" .  
A: OK. 
A: They're in. 
Common-background knowledge here includes know- 
ing about aligning holes and inserting bolts. Following 
9 Note that the apprentice knows neither all the steps in the 
task nor their ordering - -  otherwise there would be no need for the 
expert. However, the apprentice does know how to perform most 
of the basic actions, such as bolting and tightening. 
the expert's first utterance it has become communicat- 
ed knowledge that the first step is to put the bolts in 
the holes and that doing so is a potential goal of the 
apprentice. The expert's second utterance communi- 
cates the fact that 4 bolts should be used. The 
apprentice's response then adds to communicated 
knowledge the fact that the action has taken place. 
The fact that the holes were aligned and the proper 
bolts found can be assumed by the expert, drawing on 
knowledge of the task. Since these actions were not 
mentioned, they are part of common-background 
knowledge but not communicated. 
Assumptions about things that are communicated 
knowledge play a critical role in the interpretation and 
production of utterances (Clark and Marshall, 1980), 
as the use of anaphora illustrates. Pronouns and pro- 
verbs (when used felicitously) always refer to concepts 
in communicated knowledge, so that any utterance 
containing a pronoun or pro-verb must draw upon 
communicated knowledge. In the example above, if 
the apprentice's second utterance had been " I 'm put- 
ting them in now" followed by "I 've done it", the "it" 
could have referred only to the insertion step, which 
has been communicated, not to any substep which has 
not been. 
A similar observation about the use of anaphora 
has been made by Hankamer and Sag (1976). They 
differentiate the linguistic and nonlinguistic compo- 
nents of communicated knowledge, using the term 
"pragmatic environment" to refer to the nonlinguistic 
environment - -  which is limited in our situation since 
there is no shared visual information. Hankamer and 
Sag state that "the conditions on insertion (and inter- 
pretation) are that the speaker presumes the content 
of the anaphor to be recoverable, either from linguistic 
context (in which case the anaphor has an 'antecedent'  
in linguistic structure, a fully specified linguistic form 
with the same semantic ontent) or from the pragmatic 
environment."  (Pg. 422). The algorithms we have 
developed for interpreting verbs draw on these obser- 
vations and distinguish between utterances containing 
and not containing anaphora, relying more heavily on 
communicated knowledge when anaphora is present. 
Entities that form part of communicated knowledge 
can  be referred to anaphorically, but they are not al- 
ways, as is demonstrated by the use of definite noun 
phrases to refer to focused objects. In the foregoing 
example, the bolts are focused and are thus part of 
communicated knowledge after the expert's first utter- 
ance - -  but when the expert refers to them the second 
time, a noun phrase is used instead of a pronoun. The 
degree of focusing, which influences the choice of 
anaphora or a definite noun phrase to refer to some 
entity in communicated knowledge, has been discussed 
elsewhere (Sidner, 1979; Grosz, 1977b; Reichman, 
1978). 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 7 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
When referring to something not assumed to be 
communicated knowledge, a speaker not only cannot 
use anaphora, but must draw on other shared knowl- 
edge and supply enough information to enable the 
hearer to interpret the reference correctly. In our 
example, if the apprentice had asked where to find the 
bolts, the expert could have said "in the cabinet",  
assuming the apprentice was generally familiar with 
the surroundings and knew where the cabinet was. 
The expert could not have said "in it" unless the cabi- 
net had already been mentioned and comprised a high- 
ly focused part of communicated knowledge. 
3. Determin ing Verb Phrase Referents  
In this section we address issues that arise in apply- 
ing domain and linguistic knowledge to interpret verb 
phrases and to infer the current situation on the basis 
of the interpretation. Many of the examples in this 
section are taken from the sample dialog in Section 4. 
The possible referents of a verb phrase are con- 
strained by both the context and the utterance itself. 
Coordination of the constraints is necessary for inter- 
preting verbs. Contextual constraints are derived from 
two sources: the dialog and the subject area, particu- 
larly the task being performed. Utterance constraints 
are derived from the syntax and semantics, particularly 
tense and aspect information and the type of action 
denoted by the verb. 
The search for the referent of a verb phrase can be 
conducted either top-down or bottom-up. The top- 
down search uses contextual constraints to find the 
place in the task that the utterance fits and it uses 
utterance constraints to limit alternatives. The 
bottom-up mode uses information from the utterance, 
such as verb type, to find its relationship to the task. 
If the top-down search is successful, the action and its 
place in the task are identified simultaneously. 
For the assembly dialogs in which all the utterances 
are directly related to the task and in which the system 
has already encoded all the relevant steps to be per- 
formed, top-down constraints are strong enough to 
allow a top-down search to be conducted first - -  and 
only if that fails is a bottom-up search conducted. In 
dialogs where less structure is provided by the task, a 
bottom-up search will clearly play a more central role. 
This search can be improved by more extensive rea- 
soning based on the verb in the utterance. 
One of the limitations of our previous natural- 
language systems has  been a lack of coordination of 
the strategies for identifying referents of noun phrases 
and pronouns with one another or with the interpreta- 
tion of the verb. In fact, except for the pronoun reso- 
lution procedure that used a very simple goal recogni- 
tion algorithm (Sidner, 1979), the verb phrase was not 
even taken into account. However, since the interpre- 
ration of each of these utterance elements cannot be 
carried out in isolation, the procedures for identifying 
noun phrase and pronoun referents described in Grosz 
(1977a) and Sidner (1979) have been modified to 
coordinate the search for noun phrase and anaphoric 
referents with the search for the verb phrase referent. 
3.1 The Top-down Algorithm 
Different types of utterances can draw upon differ- 
ent contextual constraints. Three major factors are 
considered by the interpretation algorithm in determin- 
ing which contextual constraints to draw upon. The 
factors are: (1) whether or not a pronoun is present 
in the utterance; (2) whether or not all the noun 
phrases in the utterance refer to focused entities; and 
(3) whether or not the main verb is "do".  For the 
first factor, the presence of a pronoun indicates that 
communicated knowledge, particularly goals and im- 
mediate focus, is being drawn upon. If no pronoun is 
present, these factors may still be relevant but other 
factors weigh more heavily in determining constraints. 
For the second factor, when all the definite noun 
phrases refer to focused entities, focusing information 
is also key in interpreting the verb. If not all the re- 
ferents are focused, knowledge about the task and its 
structure must be used. For the third factor, when 
"do" appears as the main verb, communicated knowl- 
edge plays a more central role than when other verbs 
are used. The particular usage of "do",  as signalled 
by the other constituents, indicates which aspects of 
communicated knowledge are most important. 
We will discuss the interpretation algorithm by 
examining the interpretation of utterances resulting 
from various combinations of these factors. The utter- 
ances we will discuss are those containing the verb 
"do",  those containing verbs other than "do" and 
pronouns, and those containing verbs other than "do" 
and definite noun phrases. 
Within the first type of utterances, those containing 
"do",  we further distinguish utterances like " I 've done 
it" from utterances like " I 've done the screws." In the 
former, "do" refers to the general action of perform- 
ing an action and "it" refers to the action. In the 
latter, "do" refers to a particular action, such as 
"remove".  Our discussion will first cover these two 
types of utterances containing "do",  then utterances 
with other verbs and pronouns, then utterances with 
other verbs and definite noun phrases. 
3.1.1 Do and Pronouns  
In interpreting verb phrases such as "do it", knowl- 
edge about the context is used first to determine possi- 
ble referents. If " it" has been used felicitously, it 
must refer to an action in communicated knowledge. 
As we have discussed, communicated knowledge in 
TDUS is represented by goals and focusing. Goals are 
8 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number  1, January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
a subset of all focused entities and, by definition, 
those actions that could possibly be performed by the 
apprentice. Consequently, possible referents are con- 
tained in the subset of communicated knowledge rep- 
resented by the most current direct goals and by the 
potential goal. 
The main utterance constraints are derived from 
the tense and aspect, which limit the goals whose asso- 
ciated actions could be referents. The three cases we 
distinguish are past tense, present tense and prog- 
ressive aspect, and future tense. 
Past-tense utterances can refer to either direct or 
potential goals. For such utterances, the algorithm 
examines the most recent direct goal first. If it is as- 
sociated with a task-related action (i.e., not a 
knowledge-state goal), the action is taken to be the 
referent of "it" because it is the action known to be in 
progress. Utterance 10 from the sample dialog illus- 
trates such a reference to a task goal. 
A: I 'm do ing  the brace  now. (9) 
E: OK 
A: I 've done it. (10) 
Here "it" refers to the action of installing the brace, 
the action associated with the current goal. 
Because of current implementation restrictions, the 
most recent direct goal is not considered as a referent 
if it is a knowledge-state goal. Instead, the action 
associated with the potential goal is taken to be the 
one referred to since it is always an action of the 
task.10 Clearly, if potential goals were extended to 
include knowledge-state goals, a more sophisticated 
test would be required. 
Utterances 12 through 15 from the sample dialog 
illustrate reference to a potential goal. 
A: What  shou ld  I do now (12) 
E: Insta l l  the a f te rcoo ler  e lbow 
on the pump. 
A: I 've done it (13) 
E: OK 
A: Shou ld  I insta l l  the a f te rcoo ler  (14) 
E: yes 
A: I 've done it (15) 
The apprentice's utterance 12 establishes a direct 
knowledge-state goal of knowing what action to per- 
form, while the expert's reply establishes a potential 
goal that the aftercooler elbow be installed. Utterance 
10 This is a limitation that should be removed as linguistic and 
representational capabilities improve. An example of "it" referring 
to a knowledge-state goal would be "I wanted to learn Spanish and 
I've done it", where the goal was a knowledge-state goal of 
'KNOWING SPANISH'. 
13 refers to the potential goal. Utterance 14 similarly 
establishes a direct knowledge-state goal of knowing 
about the action - -  in this case, whether the action is 
installing the aftercooler; here the apprentice's utter- 
ance establishes the potential goal that the aftercooler 
be installed. Utterance 15 refers again to the potential 
goal. 
An utterance that is present-tense and progressive 
(e.g., " I 'm doing it") refers to an action that has been 
previously mentioned but only just started. As we 
have seen, a potential goal is associated with such an 
action, so that the latter is taken as the referent. For 
example, utterance 15 could have been " I 'm doing it", 
referring to the action of installing the aftercooler. 
For a question referring to a future or a hypotheti- 
cal action (e.g., "What should I do now?"),  no attempt 
is made to identify the action as part of the interpreta- 
tion. Instead, the reasoning process makes use of the 
task model to identify the appropriate reply. 
3.1.2 Do and Def in i te Noun Phrases  
For the use of "do" in which "do" refers to an 
action (e.g., " I 'm doing the screws"), the hearer must 
be able to infer the action from the context. One case 
of this is when the action type is part of communicat- 
ed knowledge but no specific action is being referred 
to. For example in the sequence: 
I 've a t tached the pump. 
I 'm do ing  the pu l ley  now. 
the first utterance adds the attaching action for the 
pump to communicated knowledge. In the second 
utterance, "do" refers to another attaching action, but 
this one is attaching the pulley, a separate action. 
"Do" is not referring to the same specific action, but 
rather to the same type of action, "attaching". 
There are other occurrences of "do" in which the 
action is implicit from the context and the action type 
has not been mentioned. The algorithm currently only 
handles the situation in which the action type has been 
mentioned. 
To interpret hese utterances, the contextual knowl- 
edge used is communicated knowledge and knowledge 
about the task. The communicated knowledge used is 
focusing information, because an action of the same 
type as the one referred to should be focused, it The 
interpretation algorithm searches among focused ac- 
tions to find one that is of a type capable of having 
the newly mentioned participating objects. For exam- 
ple, the algorithm might find "attach pump" as a fo- 
cused action, determine that it is an "attach" and then 
It Goal information could be used by examining the types of 
the actions associated with domain goals. However, access to the 
action type is more direct through focusing information. 
American Journal of Computat iona l  Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 9 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
that a pulley can also participate in an "attach" action. 
If an action is found, task knowledge is used to deter- 
mine if an action of that type with the participants 
indicated is an appropriate action in the current situa- 
tion. Thus, if attach + pulley is an appropriate action, 
"attach pulley" is taken as the referent of "do". 
Tense and aspect information from the utterance 
help determine which actions in the task model are 
appropriate. As we noted, a present-progressive utter- 
ance indicates initiation of a new step, whereas the 
past tense could be used either with a new step or with 
one in progress. 
Utterances 8 and 9 of the sample dialog illustrate a 
related situation. 
A: Shou ld  I insta l l  the pu l ley  now (8) 
E: No. The next  step is: 
ins ta l l  the a f te rcoo ler  e lbow 
on the pump, or 
insta l l  the brace  on the pump. 
A: I 'm do ing  the brace  now (9) 
Here two steps have been mentioned and are essential- 
ly equally focused and both potential goals, so "do it" 
could not refer unambiguously to one of the actions. 
However, both actions are "install" actions, so "do" 
can refer to an "install" type action. The interpreta- 
tion algorithm outlined above works for this case as 
well. 
3.1.3 Pronouns w i th  Verbs Other Than Do 
For utterances containing verbs other than "do" 
and pronouns, contextual constraints also stem from 
communicated knowledge, since the object or objects 
referred to by the pronoun must be communicated 
knowledge - -  in our case, mentioned in the dialog. 
The way the referent of the pronoun was introduced 
into the dialog affects the interpretation of utterances 
with pronouns. The distinction we make is whether 
the object was  mentioned as a participant in an action 
that is part of the task, (e.g., "I attached the pump.") 
or was  not  mentioned as a participant in an action 
(e.g., "Where is the pump?"). In the first case, if the 
object has been mentioned as participating in an ac- 
tion, the action will be recognized as a direct or poten- 
tial goal and all its participating objects will be fo- 
cused. In the second case, if no action has been men- 
tioned but the object is a participant in some task 
action, the action will be inferred through the 
potential-goal recognition mechanism and will become 
a potential goal. However, in this case only the object 
mentioned will be focused and not the other partici- 
pants in the action. An example of the second case is: 
Where are the bolts? 
\[Immediate focus = bolts\] 
\[Potential goal = THE BOLTS ARE BOLTED\] 
I've tightened them with the wrench. 
\[with the wrench not in focus\] 
In this situation, the first reference to the bolts has 
established the potential goal that the bolts be bolted. 
In both these situations the object mentioned is 
focused and, when appropriate, an action it partici- 
pates in is established as a goal. The difference be- 
tween the two is whether the actions and the other 
participating objects are also focused. This difference 
affects the interpretation of successive utterances con- 
taining pronouns. 
Three cases are distinguished in the algorithm: (1) 
If there is a pronoun and there are no definite noun 
phrases, the actions associated with the most recent 
direct goal and the potential goals are considered as 
possible referents of the verb, since either of the two 
cases described above could obtain. (2) If there are 
definite noun phrases, all of which refer to focused 
entities, then the actions associated with the most 
recent direct goal and the potential goal are the most 
likely referents. Since all the objects are focused, the 
action was presumably mentioned as in the first case 
described above. (3) If there is a pronoun and there 
are also definite noun phrases, but not all the definite 
noun phrases refer to focused entities, then only an 
action associated with a potential goal is a possible 
referent. Since a direct goal associated with this ob- 
ject could not have been established, only the second 
case described above could obtain. 
In all three cases, utterance information about 
tense and aspect and about action type (from the 
verb) is used either to verify that the action associated 
with the goal is a possible referent or to choose a 
matching action type among possible referents. 
3.1 .4  No  Pronoun or  Do  
When there is no anaphora in the utterance, the 
contextual knowledge used for interpretation comes 
from focusing and the task model. Focusing is used to 
determine the relationship between the utterance and 
focused entities, including the current action. The 
task model, including the record of task progress, is 
used to determine which actions can reasonably be 
talked about in the current context. First, focusing 
information is used to determine if the referents of any 
definite noun phrases associated with the verb are 
currently focused. 
10 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Vo lume7,  Number 1, January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
3.1.4.1 All Noun Phrases  in Current Focus 
The presence of all noun phrase referents in focus 
indicates that the action involves objects currently 
being discussed by discourse participants and that the 
action is related to the current step (because it in- 
volves the same objects). The task model provides 
information about actions the apprentice can perform 
and has performed. Tense and aspect information 
from the utterance and the verb type restrict alterna- 
tives within the task model. 
Since present and progressive utterances generally 
refer to newly started actions, the actions considered 
in the task model are those that are closely related to 
the most recent action performed and that involve 
objects referred to in the utterance. Possible actions 
might be: a substep of the last step started but not 
completed; the potential goal; or a step not involving 
any different objects that is closely linked in the plan 
to the last step started or completed (i.e., a step that is 
a substep of or successor to the last step, or succeeds 
a parent of the last step). 
Utterance 1 in the sample dialog ("I am attaching 
the pump") illustrates a present-progressive utterance 
with a noun phrase referring to a focused object. In 
this instance, the pump-attaching step is a substep of 
the last step started - -  installing the pump. 
For utterances that are past tense and/or  perfective 
aspect, actions in the task model known to have been 
in progress and those that could be next steps are pos- 
sible referents. The alternatives considered during 
interpretation are: a step in progress; the potential 
goal; a substep of the last step started; a substep of 
any step in progress; and a step closely linked to the 
last step started or completed. Utterance 7 ("I atta- 
ched the pump") shows a reference to a completed 
action that was a step in progress - -  attaching the 
pump. The verb in utterance 11 ("I 've installed the 
pulley") refers to a completed action which was the 
next step to perform, but was not explicitly mentioned 
as having been started - -  installing the pulley. 
3.1.4.2 Not all Noun Phrases  in Current Focus 
If the referents of the noun phrases are not cur- 
rently focused, the focusing hierarchy is searched be- 
cause the hierarchy indicates previously focused ob- 
jects that might become focused again. If the noun 
phrase referents are identified somewhere in the focus- 
ing hierarchy, the action named in the utterance is 
matched against any action occurring at that place in 
the hierarchy. 
If the utterance contains noun phrases referring to 
objects participating in the action and those objects 
cannot be identified among focused entities, the ac- 
tions associated with direct goals are eliminated as 
possible referents of the verb. This happens because 
all actions associated with direct goals have been men- 
tioned, which has caused all their participants to be 
focused. 
Possible referents of such verb phrases include: 
the action associated with the potential goal; a substep 
of the current step in progress; a substep of all the 
steps in progress (if the utterance is past and/or  per- 
fective); or any action which can achieve some current 
goal (e.g., knowing a location -> found the object). 
Since the objects described in the noun phrases and 
the action both have to be tested when examining the 
substeps, the algorithm first checks the objects de- 
scribed by the noun phrases to see if they are partici- 
pants in any of the substeps and if so, it then examines 
the actions to ascertain whether one of them matches 
the input action. 
3.2 Bottom-Up Search 
Currently the bottom-up algorithm consists of a 
search for the most specific occurrence of an event in 
the model whose participants are compatible with 
those in the utterance. This strategy is being expand- 
ed to include a search for a more general event that 
can then be found in the task. This can be either the 
most specific event type that is compatible with all the 
elements in the utterance, or a more general or 
'similar' event type that is compatible and can be 
found in the task. An example of the first is an utter- 
ance containing "tighten the bolt". The verb 
"tighten" refers to a general tightening action, that 
can have more specific uses - -  such as tighten screws, 
tighten bolts, etc. From the knowledge that one kind 
of tightening is bolt tightening and from the occur- 
rence of "bolts" in the utterance, it can be inferred 
that the "tighten bolts" action is intended. In the 
second case, a more specific verb might have been 
used (e.g., bolt the pump) to mean securing the bolts. 
The verb "bolt" might be initially interpreted as refer- 
ring to a specific action of tightening bolts. However, 
the task model may not have "tighten bolts" encoded 
as an explicit step. Instead, perhaps it is implicit in 
some more general securing step. From the bolting 
action and knowledge of the more general actions of 
which it is a subset (e.g., securing), its relation to the 
task model can be found. 
3.3 Set t ing  Limits to a Search 
Knowing when to stop searching for a referent of a 
verb phrase is another important part of interpreting 
it. In general, the extent to which a verb phrase refer- 
ence is interpreted epends on the type of utterance. 
For example, a verb phrase may refer to an action that 
does not fit into the current task context, such as one 
that could not or should not be performed at that 
time. If the verb phrase is contained in a question 
(e.g., "Should I cut the end off now?"), a reasonable 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 11 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
assumption may be as follows: if the action cannot be 
identified it is not the appropriate one to take, as illus- 
trated in Utterance 8. On the other hand, if the verb 
phrase is contained in a statement (e.g., "I have cut 
off the end.") ,  identifying the specific action per- 
formed is more important, since a model of the current 
situation could not otherwise be maintained. Thus, 
any process for identifying a verb phrase referent 
should be able to determine the amount of resources it 
should expend in each situation. 
Another factor to be considered is the extent to 
which the speaker can be assumed to be cooperative, 
and, consequently his or her utterances to be relevant. 
If some fairly direct connection between the utterance, 
the task, and/or  dialog context can be postulated, 
devoting more effort to the search for a connection is 
more reasonable than in a less task-oriented ialog, in 
which such a connection may not even exist. In the 
TDUS system it is assumed that the user is cooperative 
and that all of his or her utterances are relevant. 
Thus, considerable ffort is expended when necessary 
to relate a statement about an executed step to the 
task of which it is a part. 
3.4 Effect of Automatic Planning 
The strategy described here has been developed in 
a system in which the plan for accomplishing the task 
has already been determined. The incorporation of an 
automatic planning facility should not require substan- 
tial modification. With automatic planning, the search 
forward to next possible steps would generally require 
planning "next steps" to see if the action in the utter- 
ance would fit, and bottom-up searching could include 
plan recognition to see how the action might be part 
of a plan. 
4. Sample Dialog 
This section presents a sample dialog in which the 
TDUS system was one of the participants. This dialog 
illustrates some utterances that can be interpreted and 
responded to, the goals that are inferred, and the in- 
ferences that are drawn about the task. The 
apprentice's utterances are preceded by the symbol 
"#" and numbered for purposes of discussion. The 
rest of the dialog was generated by the system acting 
as an expert. 
In the initial context for this dialog, the next step 
to be performed is to install the pump. The first step 
in installing the pump is the pump-attaching step illus- 
trated in Figure 1. At the outset, the table (T1), the 
pump (PU), the apprentice (you) and the compressor 
(COMP) are in "primary focus". 
#I AM ATTACHING THE PUMP (I) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to :  
P r imary  focus :  
PL  - a p la t fo rm.  
PU - a pump.  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Expected  immediate  focus :  
PU - a pump.  
New goa l - s tep  is:  
A t tach ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm.  
#WHICH WRENCH SHOULD I USE  TO BOLT IT  (2) 
Use  the  box  end  wrench .  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to :  
P r imary  focus :  
You  are  us ing  the  box-end wrench .  
Wq - a box  end  wrench .  
The  pump is  be ing  bo l ted .  
PL  - a p la t fo rm.  
PU - a pump.  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Immediate  focus :  
PU - a pump.  
New goa l - s tep  is :  
Knowing  the  wrench  to  use .  
In utterance 1, the apprentice indicates the start of 
the pump-attaching action. This is assumed to be the 
current goal-step, as the commentary indicates. The 
utterance also causes focusing to shift to the pump 
(PU) and the platform (PL) with the pump (PU) as 
the expected immediate focus, t2 The hierarchy of 
focused entities (Grosz, 1977a, 1977b) is illustrated in 
the two levels of focusing shown here. "Pr imary fo- 
cus" indicates the most highly focused entities, "then" 
indicates the next level of the hierarchy containing the 
other objects T1, PU, You, and COMP. Because the 
pump is explicitly mentioned in utterance 1, it appears 
12 See Sidner (1979) for a discussion of expected and poten- 
tial immediate focus. 
12 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
in both places in the focusing hierarchy. 
Utterance 2 is a question about a substep of the 
attaching action. The goal is interpreted as a 
knowledge-state goal - -  knowing what wrench to use. 
This goal is added to the stack of direct goals as the 
most recent goal. 
#WHERE ARE THE BOLTS (3) 
I don ' t  know.  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
bo l t s  
You  are  us ing  the  box-end  wrench .  
W4 - a box-end  wrench .  
The  pump is be ing  bo l ted .  
PL  - a p la t fo rm.  
PU - a pump.  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Immediate  focus :  
bo l t s  
New goa l - s tep  is: 
Knowing  a locat ion .  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Bo l t ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm wi th  
the  bo l t s .  
#I FOUND THEM (4) 
OK 
Immediate  focus :  
bo l t s  
Completed  goa l - s tep  was:  
Knowing  the  locat ion .  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Bo l t ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm wi th  
the  bo l t s .  
Utterance 3 is another question about a substep, in 
this case the location of the bolts used for bolting the 
pump. The direct goal is a knowledge-state goal, to 
know the location of the bolts; it is placed on the 
stack atop the goal from utterance 2., The potential 
goal, a domain goal, is that the bolts be bolted; this is 
the goal associated with the bolting substep in which 
the bolts are used. It replaces the previous potential 
goal. 
Utterance 4 shows satisfaction of the goal of know- 
ing the location of the bolts, which is removed from 
the stack of direct goals. 
#WHERE IS THE WRENCH 
The  box-end  wrench  is on  the  tab le .  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
#I 
OK 
(5) 
Pr imary  focus :  
The  box-end  wrench  is on  the  tab le .  
TI - a tab le .  
bo l t s  
You  are  us ing  the  box  end  wrench .  
W4 - a box-end  wrench .  
The  pump is be ing  bo l ted .  
PL  - a p la t fo rm.  
PU - a pump.  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Immediate  focus :  
bo l t s  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
W4 - a box-end  wrench .  
New goa l - s tep  is: 
Knowing  a locat ion .  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Bo l t ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm wi th  
the  bo l t s .  
FOUND IT (6) 
Immediate  focus :  
w4 - a box-end  wrench .  
Completed  goa l - s tep  was:  
Knowing  the  locat ion .  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Bo l t ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm wi th  
the  bo l t s .  
In utterance 5 the apprentice asks about the loca- 
tion of "the wrench". This utterance illustrates how 
focusing information helps disambiguate noun phrase 
referents. There are several wrenches in the model, so 
the phrase "the wrench" might be considered ambigu- 
ous. However,  in utterance 2 a particular wrench was 
focused by the expert's reply and has remained fo- 
cused, so the phrase "the wrench" can be interpreted 
as referring to a unique wrench - -  the particular box- 
end wrench previously mentioned and identified. The 
goal inferred from utterance 5 is "knowing the loca- 
tion of the wrench." 
In both this utterance and utterance 2, TDUS has 
apparently satisfied the apprentice's knowledge-state 
goal by supplying the relevant information, but TDUS 
does not assume that the knowledge-state goal will be 
satisfied unless the apprentice confirms it. This is a 
design decision that could be changed by assuming the 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 13 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
reply satisfied the goal or by distinguishing the goal as 
one that has been potentially-satisfied. Different 
choices reflect different assumptions about the other 
participant. In one case, it is assumed that the copar- 
ticipant understands, whereas in the other case, such 
understanding is not assumed, but must be explicitly 
confirmed. 
In utterance 7 the apprentice explicitly indicates 
the completion of the attaching step, from which the 
system infers that the substeps shown in Figure 1 have 
been performed. 
#I ATTACHED THE PUMP (7) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
You  put  the  pump at  the  p la t fo rm.  
You  bo l ted  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm 
wi th  the  bo l t s .  
Immediate  focus :  
PU  - a pump.  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
PU - a pump.  
Completed  goa l - s tep  was:  
A t tach ing  the  pump to  the  p la t fo rm.  
#SHOULD I INSTALL  THE PULLEY  NOW (8) 
No  
The  next  s tep  is: 
Ins ta l l  the  a f te rcoo ler  e lbow on  the  pump.  
or  
Ins ta l l  the  brace  on  the  pump.  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
ACE - a a f te rcoo ler  e lbow.  
BR - a b race .  
You  a t tached the  pump.  
The  box-end  wrench  was  on  the  tab le .  
TI - a tab le .  
bo l t s  
You  used  the  box-end  wrench .  
W4 - a box-end  wrench .  
The  pump has  been bo l ted .  
PL  - a p la t fo rm.  
PU - a pump.  
then  
T\] - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Immediate  focus :  
PU  - a pump.  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
a pu l ley .  
# I 'M  DOING THE BRACE NOW (9) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
DO is assumed to  mean:  
You  are  ins ta l l ing  the  brace .  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
PU  - a pump.  
BR - a b race .  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Immediate  focus :  
PU  - a pump.  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
BR - a b race .  
New goa l - s tep  is : 
Ins ta l l ing  the  brace  on  the  pump.  
# I 'VE  DONE IT (\]0) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
You  a t tached the  ins ta l led  brace  to  
the  pump.  
You  put  the  ins ta l led  brace  a t  the  pump.  
You  secured  the  ins ta l led  brace .  
DO is assumed to  mean:  
You  ins ta l led  the  brace .  
Immediate  focus :  
BR - a b race .  
Completed  goa l - s tep  was :  
Ins ta l l ing  the  brace  on  the  pump.  
The question in utterance 8 is about a possible next 
step - -  in this case the wrong one. The algorithm for 
identifying the action indicated by the verb phrase 
recognizes that the step mentioned is not a possible 
next step; the apprentice is told this and, in addition, 
is told the possible next steps. 
Utterance 9 shows the verb "do" used in this case 
to mean "install" - -  referring back to the expert's 
reply, in which "install" was used. 
In utterance 10 "do" is used differently - -  as 
"perform" with "it" referring to the brace-installing 
action, which is inferred to have been completed. 
TDUS also infers completion of the substeps of install- 
ing the brace, putting it on the pump, and securing it. 
Utterances 11 through 15 illustrate other references 
to steps started and/or  completed and the correspond- 
ing inferences, focusing shifts, and goal changes. 
14 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
#I 'VE  INSTALLED THE PULLEY  (11) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
You  ins ta l led  the  woodru f f  key  
on the  pump.  
You  a t tached the  woodru f f  key  
to  the  pump.  
You  put  the  woodru f f  key  at  the  pump.  
You  secured  the  woodru f f  key.  
You  a t tached the  ins ta l led  pu l ley  
to  the  pump.  
You  put  the  ins ta l led  pu l ley  at  the  pump.  
You  fas tened the  ins ta l led  pu l ley  
to  the  pump wi th  the  sc rews .  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  pu l ley .  
PU  - a pump.  
PUL  - a pu l ley .  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
PUL  - a pu l ley .  
#WHAT SHOULD I DO NOW (12) 
Ins ta l l  the  a f te rcoo ler  e lbow on  the  pump.  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
ACE - a a f te rcoo ler  e lbow.  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  pu l ley .  
PU - a pump.  
PUL  - a pu l ley .  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU  - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
Potent ia l  immediate  focus :  
PUL  - a pu l ley .  
New goa l - s tep  is: 
Knowing  the  ac t ions .  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Ins ta l l  the  a f te rcoo ler  e lbow 
on  the  pump.  
# I 'VE  DONE IT (13) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
You  a t tached the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  
e lbow to  the  pump.  
You  put  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  e lbow 
at the  pump.  
You  secured  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  
e lbow.  
DO is assumed to  mean:  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  
e lbow on  the  pump.  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  
a f te rcoo ler  e lbow on  the  pump.  
PU - a pump.  
ACE - a a f te rcoo ler  e lbow.  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
#SHOULD I INSTALL  THE AFTERCOOLER (14) 
Yes  
Potent ia l  goa l - s tep  is: 
Ins ta l l ing  the  a f te rcoo ler .  
# I 'VE  DONE IT  (15) 
OK 
The  fo l low ing  has  been assumed:  
You  a t tached the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  
to  the  pump.  
You  put  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler  
at  the  pump.  
You  secured  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler .  
DO is assumed to  mean:  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  a f te rcoo ler .  
Focus  has  sh i f ted  to: 
P r imary  focus :  
You  ins ta l led  the  ins ta l led  
a f te rcoo ler .  
PU - a pump.  
AC - a a f te rcoo ler .  
then  
TI - a tab le .  
PU - a pump.  
You  - a person .  
COMP - a compressor .  
5. Future Direct ions 
In this paper, we have discussed the problem of 
identifying the actions and events referred to by verb 
phrases. In particular, we have considered dialogs 
about an ongoing task. We have examined some of 
the knowledge needed for identifying the actions and 
have presented a strategy for finding them. This prob- 
lem is of interest both because it is an important part 
of interpreting utterances and because it illustrates the 
need for combining knowledge of many types when 
interpreting utterances. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 15 
Ann E. Robinson Determining Verb Phrase Referents in Dialogs 
The research discussed here shows how the knowl- 
edge about language and about the domain that is 
currently identified and represented in a computer 
system can be used when interpreting verb phrases. 
Important extensions of this research include deter- 
mining: (1) how top-down and bottom-up searching 
can be combined more effectively; (2) on what basis 
decisions can be made to stop looking for a connection 
between an action and a plan; (3) what extensions of 
this algorithm are necessary for handling dialogs in 
which the lack of a strong model of the task being 
performed results in weaker top-down constraints. 
Further research on finding referents of verb phrases, 
building on the algorithm presented here, should con- 
tribute to solving the more general natural-language 
processing problems of determining what other knowl- 
edge is needed for interpreting utterances and how 
that knowledge can be used most effectively. 
References  
Allen, J. 1979. "A Plan-Based Approach to Speech Act Recogni- 
tion," Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. 
Appelt, D.E. 1979. "Planning Natural Language Utterances to 
Satisfy Multiple Goals," Unpublished Thesis Proposal, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California. 
Clark, H.H. and Marshall, C. 1980. "Definite Reference and Mutu- 
al Knowledge," In Elements of Discourse Understanding: Proceed- 
ings of a Workshop on Computational Aspects of Linguistic Struc- 
ture and Discourse Setting, A.K. Joshi, I.A. Sag, and B.L. Web- 
ber, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. 
Cohen, P.R. 1978. "On Knowing What to Say: Planning Speech 
Acts," Technical Report No. 118, Department of Computer 
Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. 
Donellan, K.S. 1977. "Reference and Definite Description," In S.P. 
Schwartz (Ed.) Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kind, Cornell 
University Press, Ithaca, New York, pp. 42-65. 
Fikes, R.E. and Hendrix, G.G. 1977. "A Network-Based Knowl- 
edge Representation and its Natural Deduction System," Pro- 
ceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, pp. 235- 
246. 
Grimes, J.G. 1980. "Context Structure Patterns," Presented at the 
Nobel Symposium on Text Processing, Stockholm, Sweden, 
August, 1980. 
Grosz, B.J. 1977a. "The Representation and Use of Focus in Dia- 
logue Understanding," Technical Note No. 151, SRI Interna- 
tional, Menlo Park, California. 
Grosz, B.J. 1977b. "The Representation and Use of Focus in a 
System for Understanding Dialogues," Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, pp. 67-76. 
Grosz, B.J. 1978. "Focusing in Dialogue," Proceedings of  
TINLAP-2, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, July, 1978. 
Grosz, B.J. 1979. "Utterance and Objective: Issues in Natural 
Language Communication," Proceedings of  the Sixth Internation- 
al Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Tokyo, Japan, Au- 
gust 1979, pp. 1067-1076. 
Grosz, B.J. 1980. "Focusing and Description in Natural Language 
Dialogues," In Elements of Discourse Understanding: Proceedings 
of a Workshop on Computational Aspects of Linguistic Structure 
and Discourse Setting, A.K. Joshi, I.A. Sag, and B.L. Webber, 
eds, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. 
Grosz, B.J., Hendrix, G.G. and Robinson, A.E. 1977. "Using 
Process Knowledge in Understanding Task-Oriented Dialogs," 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, pg. 
90. 
Hankamer, J. and Sag, I. 1976. "Deep and Surface Anaphora," 
Linguistic Inquiry 7, 3, (Summer, 1976), pp. 391-426. 
Hendrix, G.G. 1973. "Modeling Simultaneous Actions and Continu- 
ous Processes," Artificial Intelligence 4, pp. 145-180. 
Hendrix, G.G. 1975. "Partitioned Networks for the Mathematical 
Modeling of Natural Language Semantics," Technical Report 
NL-28, Department of Computer Sciences, University of Texas, 
Austin, Texas. 
Hendrix, G.G. 1977. "Some General Comments on Semantic Net- 
works," Panel on Knowledge Representation, Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, pp. 984-985. 
Hendrix, G.G. 1979. "Encoding Knowledge in Partitioned Net- 
works," In Associative Networks - The Representation a d Use of 
Knowledge in Computers, N.V. Findler, ed., Academic Press, 
New York, 1979. 
Hobbs, J.R. 1978. "Why is Discourse Coherent?", Technical Note 
No. 176, SRI International, Menlo Park, California. 
Konolige, K. 1979. "A Framework for a Portable Natural-Language 
Interface to Large Data Bases," Technical Note No. 197, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, California. 
Leech, G.N. 1976. Meaning and the English Verb, Longman Group 
Ltd., London, England. 
Reichman, R. 1978. "Conversational Coherency," Cognitive Science 
2, 4, pp. 283-327. 
Robinson, A.E., Appelt, D.E., Grosz, B.J., Hendrix, G.G., and 
Robinson, J.J. 1980. "Interpreting Natural-Language Utteranc- 
es in Dialogs about Tasks," Technical Note No. 210, SRI Inter- 
national, Menlo Park, California. 
Robinson, J.J. 1980. "DIAGRAM," Technical Note No. 205, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, California. (To appear in Comm. 
ACM. 
Sacerdoti, E.D. 1977. A Structure for Plans and Behavior, Elsevier 
North-Holland, New York. 
Searle, J.R. 1978. "Literal Meaning," Erkenntnis 13, pp. 207-224. 
Sidner, C. 1979. "Towards a Computational Theory of Definite 
Anaphora Comprehension i English Discourse," Ph.D. Disser- 
tation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Walker, D.E., ed. 1978. Understanding Spoken Language, Elsevier 
North-Holland, New York. 
Webber, B.L. 1978. "A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora," 
Report No. 3761, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc., Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Werner, O. 1966. "Pragmatics and Ethnoscience," Anthropological 
Linguistics 8, 8, (1966), pp. 42-65. 
Wilensky, R. 1978. "Understanding Goal-Based Stories", Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. 
Ann E. Robinson is a Computer Scientist in the 
Artificial Intelligence Center at SR I  International. She 
received the M.S. degree in computer science from Stan- 
ford University in 1968. 
16 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 1, January-March 1981 
