Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution in 
Natural Language Understanding: A Review 
Graeme Hirst  
Department of Computer Science 
Brown University 
Providence, Rhode Island 02912 
Recent research in anaphora resolution has emphasized the effects of discourse 
structure and cohesion in determining what concepts are available as possible referents, and 
how discourse cohesion can aid reference resolution. Five approaches, all within this 
paradigm and yet al distinctly different, are presented, and their strengths and weaknesses 
evaluated. 
1. Introduction 
To resolve various forms of definite reference u 
anaphora in particular - -  early natural language un- 
derstanding systems (reviewed in Hirst 1981) typically 
used a simple kind of history list of concepts previous- 
ly mentioned in the input, with heuristics for selecting 
from this list. The history list was usually just a shift 
register containing the noun phrases from the last sen- 
tence or two, and the heuristics would take into ac- 
count (among other things) selectional restrictions and 
syntactic constraints on pronominalization. SHRDLU 
(Winograd 1972) exemplifies this approach. Although 
able to resolve some types of reference, these systems 
were not able to handle reference in general, primarily 
because they did not take into account the effects of 
discourse structure on reference and pronominaliza- 
tion. This failure motivated work in computational 
discourse understanding that attempted to exploit dis- 
course structure, especially the relationship between 
reference and discourse theme, to resolve definite ref- 
erence. 
The present paper 1 is a review of recent work in 
this area. Five principal approaches are surveyed: 
1. Concept activatedness (Kantor) - -  an ex- 
amination of the factors affecting the 
pronominalizability of a concept; 
2. Task-oriented ialogues (Grosz) - -  using 
a priori knowledge of discourse structure 
to resolve references; 
3. Frames as focus (Sidner) - -  using dis- 
course cues to choose a frame from a 
knowledge structure to act as focus; 
4. Logical formalism (Webber) - -  choosing a 
predicate calculus-like representation to
handle problems uch as quantification i  
reference resolution; 
5. Discourse cohesion (Hobbs, Lockman, and 
others) - -  building a focus and resolving 
reference by discovering the cohesive ties 
in a text. 
Some preliminary definitions: By focus we mean 
the set containing exactly those concepts available for 
anaphoric or other definite reference at a point in a 
text, a set which may conveniently be divided into 
parts for nominal concepts, temporal concepts, verbal 
concepts and so forth.2 The focus is closely related to, 
but not necessarily identical to, the theme of a dis- 
course - -  what the discourse is about - -  and since the 
latter is also sometimes termed focus, there is some 
terminological confusion. (See Section 2.6 and Chap- 
ter 4 of Hirst 1981 for further discussion of the dis- 
tinction between theme and focus.) 
Strictly speaking, we mean by the referent of an 
anaphor or reference the real-world entity that it spec- 
ifies, while by antecedent we mean the textual item 
through which the reference is made. In (1-1): 
1 This paper is condensed from a chapter of a longer review of 
research concerning anaphora and its computational resolution 
(Hirst 1981). 
2 In this paper we will be concerned mostly with focus for 
nominal concepts. Temporal, locative and verbal focus are dis- 
cussed in Hirst (1981). 
Copyright 1981 by the Association for Computational Linguistics. Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made for direct commercial advantage and the Journal reference and this copyright notice are included on 
the first page. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or  specific permission. 
0362-613X/81/020085-14501.00 
Amer ican Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April- June 1981 85 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
(1-1) The Queen splutters a little when she 
speaks. 3
the antecedent of she is the text The Queen and the 
referent is the person who is queen. Generally, how- 
ever, the two words can be (and are) used inter- 
changeably without confusion. 
2. Concept  ac t ivatedness  
Robert Kantor (1977) has investigated the problem 
of why some pronouns in discourse are more compre- 
hensible than others, even when there is no ambiguity 
or anomaly. In Kantor's terms, a hard-to-understand 
pronoun is an example of inconsiderate discourse, and 
speakers (or, more usually, writers) who produce such 
pronouns lack secondary llinguistic\] competence. In our 
terms, an inconsiderate pronoun is one that is not 
properly in focus. 
I will first summarize Kantor's work, and then dis- 
cuss what we can learn about focus from it. 
2.1 Kantor ' s  thes i s  
Kantor's main exhibit is the following text: 
(2-1) A good share of the amazing revival of 
commerce must be credited to the ease 
and security of communications within the 
empire. 'The Imperial fleet kept the Medi- 
terranean Sea cleared of pirates. In each 
province, the Roman emperor epaired or 
constructed a number of skillfully de- 
signed roads. They were built for the 
army but served the merchant class as 
well. Over them, messengers of the Impe- 
rial service, equipped with relays of hors- 
es, could average fifty miles a day. 
He claims that the they in the penultimate sentence is 
hard to comprehend, and that most informants need to 
reread the previous text to find its referent. Yet the 
sentence is neither semantically anomalous nor ambi- 
guous - -  the roads is the only plural NP available as a 
referent, and it occurs immediately before the pronoun 
with only a full-stop intervening. To explain this para- 
dox is the task Kantor set himself. 
Kantor's explanation is based on discourse topic 
and the listener's expectations. In (2-1), the discourse 
topic of the first three sentences is ease and security of 
communication i  the Roman empire. In the fourth 
sentence, there is an improper shift to the roads as the 
topic: improper, because it is unexpected, and there is 
no discourse cue to signal it. Had the demonstrative 
these roads been used, the shift would have been okay. 
3 Underlining is used in this and subsequent examples to indi- 
cate the anaphor(s) of interest. It does not indicate stress. 
(Note that a definite NP such as the roads is not 
enough.) Alternatively, the writer could have clarified 
the text by combining the last three sentences with 
semicolons, indicating that the last two main clauses 
were to be construed as relating only to the preceding 
one rather than to the discourse as a whole. 
Kantor identifies a continuum of factors affecting 
the comprehension of pronouns. At one end is unres- 
tricted expectation and at the other negative 
expectation. What this says in effect is that a pronoun 
is easy to understand if its referent is expected, and 
difficult if it is unexpected. This is not as vacuous as 
it at first sounds; Kantor provides an analysis of some 
subtle factors which affect expectation. 
The most expected pronominalizations are those 
whose referent is the discourse topic, or something 
associated with it (though note the qualifications to 
this below). Consider: 
(2-2) The final years of Henry's reign, as re- 
corded by the admiring Hall, were given 
over to sport and gaiety, though there was 
little of the licentiousness that character- 
ized the French court. The athletic con- 
tests were serious but very popular. 
Masques, jousts and spectacles followed 
one another in endless pageantry. He 
brought to Greenwich a tremendously vi- 
tal court life, a central importance in the 
country's affairs, and above all, a great 
naval connection. 4 
In the last sentence, he is quite comprehensible, de- 
spite the distance back to its referent, because the 
discourse topic in all the sentences is Henry's reign. 
An example of the converse - -  an unexpected pro- 
noun which is difficult despite recency - -  can be seen 
in (2-1) above. Between these two extremes are other 
cases involving references to aspects of the local topic, 
changes in topic, syntactic parallelism, and, in topicless 
instances, recency (though the effect of recency de- 
cays very fast). I will not describe these here; the 
interested reader is referred to Section 2.6.5 of 
Kantor's dissertation (1977). 
Kantor then defines the notion of the activatedness 
of a concept. This provides a continuum of Concept 
givenness, which contrasts with the simple binary 
given-new distinction usually accepted in linguistics 
(for example, Chafe 1970). Kantor also distinguishes 
activatedness from the similar "communicative dynam- 
ism" of the Prague school (Firbas 1964). Activated- 
4 From: Hamilton, Olive and Hamilton, Nigel. Royal Greenwich. 
Greenwich: The Greenwich Bookshop, 1969. Quoted by Halliday 
and Hasan (1976:14), quoted by Kantor (1977). 
86 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, Apri l- June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
ness is defined in terms of the comprehensibility phe- 
nomena described above: the more activated a concept 
is, the easier it is to understand an anaphoric reference 
to it. Thus activatedness depends upon discourse top- 
ic, context, and so forth. 
2.2 The implications of Kantor's work  
What are the ramifications of Kantor's thesis for 
focus? Clearly, the notions of activatedness and focus 
are very similar, though the latter has not generally 
been thought of as a continuum. It follows that the 
factors Kantor finds relevant for activatedness and 
comprehensibility of pronouns are also important for 
those of us who would maintain focus in computer- 
based natural language understanding (NLU) systems; 
we will have to discover discourse topic and topic 
shifts, generate pronominalization expectations, and so 
forth. 
In other words, if we could dynamically compute 
(and maintain) the activatedness of each concept 
floating around, we would have a measure for the 
ordering of the focus set by preferability as referent; 
the referent for any given anaphor would be the most 
highly activated element which passes basic tests for 
number, gender and semantic reasonableness. And to 
find the activatedness of the concepts, we follow 
Kantor's pointers (which he himself concedes are very 
tenuous and difficult) to extract and identify the rele- 
vant factors from the text. 
It may be objected that by applying Kantor's in- 
sights all we have done is produce a mere notational 
variant of our original problem. This is partly true. 
One should not gainsay the power of a good notation, 
however, and what we can buy here even with mere 
notational variance is the power of Kantor's investiga- 
tions. And there is more. Previously, it has been 
suggested that items either are in focus or they aren't, 
and that at each separate anaphor we need to compute 
a preference ranking of the focus elements for that 
anaphor. What Kantor tells us is that such a ranking 
exists independently of the actual use of anaphors in 
the text, and that we can find the ranking by looking 
at things like discourse topic. 
Some miscellaneous comments on Kantor's work: 
1. It can be seen as a generalization albeit a weak- 
ening of Grosz's (1977a, 1977b, 1978) findings on 
focus in task-oriented ialogues (where each sub-task 
becomes the new discourse topic, opening up a new 
set of possible referents), which are discussed below in 
Section 3. (Kantor and Grosz were apparently un- 
aware of each other's work; neither cites the other.) 
2. It provides an explanation for focus problems 
that have previously baffled us. For example, in Hirst 
(1977a) I contemplated the problem of the ill- 
formedness of this text: 
(2-3) *John left the window and drank the wine 
on the table. It was brown and round. 
I had previously thought this to be due to a syntactic 
factor - -  that cross-sentence pronominal reference to 
an NP in a relative clause or adjectival phrase qualify- 
ing an NP was not possible. However, it can also be 
explained as a grossly inconsiderate pronoun which 
does not refer to the topic properly - -  the table occurs 
only as a descriptor for the wine, and not as a concept 
"in its own right". This would be a major restriction 
on possible reference to sub-aspects of topics. 
3. Like too many other researchers, Kantor makes 
many claims about comprehensibility and the degree of 
well-formedness of sentences which others (as he con- 
cedes) may not agree with. He uses only himself (and 
his friends, sometimes) as an informant, and then only 
at an intuitive level. 5 Claims as strong and subtle as 
Kantor's cry out for empirical testing.6 
3. Focus of attention in task-oriented dialogues 
Barbara Grosz (1977a, 1977b, 1978) studied the 
maintenance of the focus of attention in task-oriented 
dialogues and its effect on the resolution of definite 
reference, as part of SRI's speech understanding sys- 
tem project (Walker 1978). By a task-oriented ia- 
logue is meant one which has some single major well- 
defined task as its goal. For example, Grosz collected 
and studied dialogues in which an expert guides an 
apprentice in the assembly of an air compressor. She 
found that the structure of such dialogues parallels the 
structure of the task. That is, just as the major task is 
divided into several well-defined sub-tasks, and these 
perhaps into sub-sub-tasks and so on, the dialogue is 
likewise divided into sub-dialogues, ub-sub-dialogues, 
etc, 7 each corresponding to a task component, much as 
a well-structured Algol program is composed of blocks 
within blocks within blocks. As the dialogue progress- 
es, each sub-dialogue in turn is performed in a strict 
depth-first order corresponding to the order of sub- 
task performance in the task goal (though note that 
some sub-tasks may not be ordered with respect to 
5 For a discussion of the problem of idiosyncrat ic well- 
formedness judgments, and a suggested solution, see Sections 4.2 
and 7.3 of Hirst (1981). 
6 Kantor tells me that he hopes to test some of his assertions 
by observing the eye movements of readers of considerate and 
inconsiderate t xts, to find out if inconsiderate t xts actually make 
readers physically search back for a referent. 
7 Below I will use the prefix sub-  generical ly to include 
sub-sub-sub-  . . . to an indefinite level. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April- June 1981 87 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
others). As we will see, this dialogue structure can be 
exploited in reference resolution. 
Grosz's aim was to find ways of determining and 
representing the focus of attention of a discourse - -  
that is, roughly speaking, its global theme and the 
things associated therewith - -  as a means for con- 
straining the knowledge an NLU system needs to bring 
to bear in understanding discourse. In other words, 
the focus of attention is that knowledge which is rele- 
vant at a given point in a text for comprehension of 
the text. 8 Grosz claims that antecedents for definite 
reference can be found in the focus of attention. That 
is, the focus of attention is a superset of focus in our 
sense, the set of referable concepts (in this case defi- 
nite reference, not just anaphoric reference). More- 
over, no element in the focus of attention is excluded 
from being a candidate antecedent for a definite NP. 
Grosz thereby implies that all items in the focus of 
attention can be referred to, and that hence the two 
senses of the word focus are actually identical. 
3.1 Representing and searching focus 
In Grosz's representation, which uses a partit ioned 
semantic net formalism (Hendrix 1975, 1978), an 
explicit focus corresponds to a sub-dialogue, and in- 
cludes, for each concept in it, type information about 
that concept and any situation in which that concept 
participates. For each item in the explicit focus, there 
is an associated implicit focus, which includes subparts 
of objects in explicit focus, subevents of events in 
explicit focus, and participants in those subevents. 
The implicit focus attempts to account for reference to 
items that have a close semantic distance to items in 
focus, or which have a close enough relationship to 
items in focus to be able to be referred to. The im- 
plicit focus is also used in detecting focus shifts 
(discussed below). 
Then, at any given point in a text, antecedents of 
definite non-pronominal NPs can be found by search- 
ing through the explicit and implicit focus for a match 
for the reference. After checking the other non- 
pronominal NPs in the same sentence to see if the 
reference is intrasentential, the currently active explicit 
focus (the focus corresponding to the present sub- 
dialogue) is searched, and then if that search is not 
successful, the other currently open focus spaces (that 
is, those corresponding to sub-dialogues that the pres- 
ent sub-dialogue is contained in) are searched in order, 
back up to the top of the tree. As part of the search 
the implicit focus associated with each explicit focus is 
checked, as are subset relations, so that if a novel, say, 
8 In her later work (Grosz 1978), Grosz emphasizes focusing as 
an active process carried out by dialogue participants. 
is in focus, it could be referred to as the book. If there 
is still no success after this, one then checks whether 
the NP refers to a single unique concept (such as the 
sun), contains new information (such as the red coat, 
when a coat is in focus, but not yet known to be red), 
or refers to an item in implicit focus. 
A similar search method could be used for pro- 
nouns. However,  since pronouns carry much less in- 
formation than other definite NPs, more inference is 
required by the reference matching process to disam- 
biguate many syntactically ambiguous pronouns, and it 
would be necessary to search focus exhaustively, com- 
paring the reasonableness of candidate referents, rath- 
er than stopping at the first plausible one. In addition, 
other constraints on pronoun reference, such as local 
(rather than global) theme, and default referent, would 
also need to be taken into account; Grosz's  mecha- 
nisms do not do this. However,  Grosz does show how 
a partit ioned network structure can be used to resolve 
certain types of ellipsis by means of syntactic and 
semantic pattern matching against the immediately 
preceding utterance, which may itself have been ex- 
panded from an elliptical expression. She leaves open 
for future research most of the problems in relating 
pronouns to focus. 
3.2 Maintaining focus 
Given this approach, one is then faced with the 
problem of deciding what the focus is at a given point 
in the discourse. For highly constrained task-oriented 
dialogues such as those Grosz considered, the question 
of an initial focus does not arise; it is, by definition, 
the overall task in question. The other component of 
the problem, handling changes and shifts in the focus, 
is attacked by Grosz in a top-down manner using the 
task structure as a guide. 
A shift in focus can be indicated explicitly by an 
utterance, such as: 
(3-1) Well, the reciprocating afterburner nozzle 
speed control is assembled. Next, it must 
be fitted above the preburner swivel hose 
cover guard cooling fin mounting rack. 
In this case, the reciprocating afterburner nozzle speed 
control assembly sub-task and its corresponding sub- 
dialogue and focus are closed, and new ones are 
opened for the reciprocating afterburner nozzle speed 
control fitting, dominated by the same open sub- 
tasks/sub-d ia logues/ focuses in their respective trees 
that dominated the old ones. If however the new sub- 
task were a sub-task of the old one, then the old one 
would not be closed, but the new one added to the 
hierarchy below it as the new active focus space. The 
newly created focus space initially contains only those 
88 American Journal  of Computat ional  Linguistics, Vo lume 7, Number 2, Apri l - June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
items referred to in the utterance, and those objects 
associated with the current sub-task. (Being able to 
bring in the associated objects at this time is, of 
course, the crucial point on which the whole system 
relies.) As subsequent non-shift-causing utterances 
come in, their new information is added to the active 
focus space. 
Usually, of course, speakers are not as helpful as in 
(3-1), and it is necessary to look for various clues to 
shifts in focus. For Grosz, the clues are definite NPs. 
If a definite NP from an utterance cannot be matched 
in focus, then this is a clue that the focus has shifted, 
and it is necessary to search for the new focus. If the 
antecedent of a definite NP is in the current implicit 
focus, this is a clue that a sub-task associated with this 
item is being opened. If the task structure is being 
followed, then the new focus will reflect the opening 
or closing of a sub-task. 
Shifting cannot be done until a whole utterance is 
considered, because clues may conflict, or the meaning 
of the utterance may contraindicate the posited shift. 
In p~rticular, recall that the task structure is only a 
guide, and does not define the dialogue structure abso- 
lutely. For example, the focus may shift to a problem 
associated with the current sub-task with a question 
like this: 
(3-2) Should I use the box-end ratchet wrench 
to do that? 
This does not imply a shift to the next sub-task requir- 
ing a box-end ratchet wrench (assuming that the cur- 
rent task doesn't require one) (cf Grosz 1977b:105). 
We can see here that the problem of the circularity 
of language comprehension looms dangerously: to 
determine the focus one must resolve the references, 
and to resolve the references, one must know the fo- 
cus. In Grosz's work, the strong constraints of the 
structure of task-oriented ialogues provide a toehold. 
Whether generalization to the case of discourse with 
other structures, or with no particular structure, is 
possible is unclear, as it may not be possible to deter- 
mine so nicely what the knowledge associated with any 
new focus is. (See however my remarks in Section 2.2 
above on the relationship between Grosz's work and 
that of Kantor, and Section 6 on approaches which 
attempt o exploit local discourse structure.) 
In addition, Grosz's mechanisms are limited in their 
ability to resolve anaphora that require inference or 
are intersentential (or both). The assumption that 
global focus of attention equals all and only possible 
referents (except where the focus shifts), while per- 
haps not unreasonable in task-oriented omains, is 
probably untrue in general. For example, it is unclear 
that such mechanisms could handle the effects of local 
as opposed to global theme that exclude the table from 
the focus for almost all speakers in (2-3). Similarly, 
could the level of world knowledge and inference re- 
quired to resolve the different referents of she in (3-3) 
and (3-4) be integrated into the partitioned semantic 
net formalism? 
(3-3) When Nadia visited Sue for dinner, 
she ate sukiyaki au gratin. 
(3-4) When Nadia visited Sue for dinner, 
she served sukiyaki au gratin. 
Could entities evoked by, but not explicit in, a text of 
only moderate structure be identified and instantiated 
in focus? Grosz did not address these issues (nor did 
she need to for her immediate goals), but they would 
need to be resolved in any attempt to generalize her 
approach. (Some other related problems, including 
those of focus shifting, are discussed in Grosz 1978.) 
Grosz's contribution was to demonstrate the role of 
discourse structure in the identification of theme, rele- 
vant world knowledge and the resolution of reference. 
We now turn to another system which aspires to simi- 
lar goals, but in a more general context. 
4. Focus in the PAL system 
The PAL personal assistant program (Bullwinkle 
1977a) is a system designed to accept natural anguage 
requests for scheduling activities. A typical request 
(from Bullwinkle 1977b:44) is: 
(4-1) I want to schedule a meeting with Ira. It 
should be at 3 pm tomorrow. We can 
meet in Bruce's office. 
The section of PAL that deals with discourse prag- 
matics and reference was developed by Candace Sid- 
ner \[Bullwinkle\] (Bullwinkle 1977b; Sidner 1978a). 
Like Grosz's system, PAL attempts to find a focus of 
attention in its knowledge structures to use as a focus 
for reference resolution. Sidner sees the focus as 
equivalent o the discourse topic; in fact in Bullwinkle 
(1977b) the word topic is used instead of focus. 
There are three major differences from Grosz's 
system: 
1. PAL does not rely heavily on discourse 
structures. 
2. Knowledge is represented in frames. 
3. Focus selection and shifting are handled at 
a more superficial level. 
I will discuss each difference in turn. 
4.1 PAL's approach to discourse 
Because a request to PAL need not have the rigid 
structure of one of Grosz's task-oriented ialogues, 
PAL does not use discourse structure to the same ex- 
tent, instead relying on more general ocal cues. How- 
ever, as we shall see below, in focus selection and 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 89 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
shift ing, Sidner was forced to use ad hoc rules based 
on observat ions  of typical  requests to PAL.  
4.2 The  f rame as focus  
The representat ion  of knowledge in PAL  is based 
on frames,  and its imp lementat ion  uses the FRL  f rame 
representat ion  language (actua l ly  a d ia lect  of L ISP)  
deve loped by Rober ts  and Go ldste in  (1977a,  1977b).  
In PAL ,  the f rame cor responds  to Grosz ' s  focus 
space. Fo l lowing Rosenberg 's  (1976, 1977) work on 
discourse structure and frames, the antecedent  for a 
def in i te  NP is f irst assumed to be e i ther  the f rame 
itself, or  one of its slots. So, for example,  in (4-2) :  
(4-2)  I want  to have a meet ing with Ross (1). It 
should be at three pm. The locat ion will 
be the depar tment  lounge.  P lease tel l  
Ross(2). 
it refers  to the MEETING f rame (not to the text  a 
meeting) which prov ides  the context  for the whole  
d iscourse;  the location refers  to the LOCATION slot 
that  the MEETING f rame presumably  has (thus the 
CLOSELY ASSOCIATED WITH re lat ion (Hirst  1981) is 
hand led) ,  and Ross (e) to the contents  9 of the 
CO-MEETER slot, previous ly  given as Ross. 
If the antecedent  cannot  be found in the frame, it 
is assumed to be either outs ide the discourse or infer-  
red. In (4-2) ,  PAL  would search its database  to f ind 
referents  for Ross (1) and the department lounge. Per-  
sonal  names are resolved with a special  module that 
knows about  the semant ics  of names  (Bul lwink le  
1977b:48) .  PAL  carr ies out  database  searches  for 
re ferences  l ike the department lounge apparent ly  by 
searching a h ierarchy of f rames,  looking at the f rames 
in the slots of the current  focus, and then in the slots 
of these frames,  and so on (S idner 1978a:211) ,  though 
it is not apparent  why this should useful ly constra in  
the search in the above example.  10 
9 Sidner only speaks of reference to slots (1978a:211), without 
saying whether she means the slot itself or its contents; it seems 
reasonable to assume, as I have done here, that she actually means 
both. 
10 In fact there is no need in this particular example for a 
referent at all. The personal assistant need only treat the department 
lounge as a piece of text, presumably meaningful to both the speak- 
er and Ross, denoting the meeting location. A human might do this 
when passing on a message he or she didn't understand: 
(i) Ross asked me to tell you to meet him in 
the arboretum, whatever the beck that is. 
On the other hand, an explicit antecedent would be needed if PAL 
had been asked, say, to deliver coffee to the meeting in the depart- 
ment lounge. Knowing when to be satisfied with ignorance is a 
difficult problem which Sidner does not consider, preferring the safe 
course of always requiring an antecedent. 
4.3 Focus se lec t ion  
In PAL ,  the init ial  focus is the first NP fo l lowing 
the main verb of the first sentence of the discourse - -  
usually, the ob ject  of the sentence - -  or, if there is no 
such NP, then the subject  of that  sentence.  This is a 
shor t -cut  method,  which seems to be suf f ic ient  for 
requests to PAL ,  but  which Sidner readi ly  admits is 
inadequate  for the general  case (S idner 1978a:209) .  I 
will br ief ly  review some of the problems.  
Charn iak  (1978)  has shown that  the f rame-  
select ion prob lem (which is here ident ical  to the init ial  
focus se lect ion prob lem,  since the focus is just  the 
f rame represent ing the theme of the d iscourse)  is in 
fact ext remely  diff icult,  and is not  in the most  general  
case amenab le  to so lut ion by ei ther str ict ly top -down 
or bot tom-up methods.  S idner 's  assumpt ion  that the 
re levant  f rame is given by an expl ic i t ly  ment ioned NP 
is also a source of t rouble,  even in the examples  she 
quotes,  such as these two (S idner 1978b:92) :  
(4-3)  I was dr iv ing along th__ S f reeway the other  
day. Suddenly  the engine began to make 
a funny noise. 
(4-4)  I went  to a new restaurant  with Sam. The 
waitress was nasty. The food was great. 
(Under l in ing  ind icates  what  S idner  c la ims is the fo-  
cus.) In (4-3) ,  S idner posits a chain of  in ferences to 
get f rom the engine to the focus, the FREEWAY frame. 
This is more  complex  than is necessary ;  if the 
f rame/ focus  were DRIVING (with its LOCATION slot 
conta in ing the FREEWAY f rame) ,  then the path f rom 
the frame to the engine is shorter  and the whole ar- 
rangement  seems more natural .  Thus we see that fo- 
cus need not  be based on an NP at all. 
In (4-4) ,  our p rob lem is what  to do with Sam, who 
could be re ferenced in a subsequent  sentence.  It is 
necessary  to in tegrate  Sam into the RESTAURANT 
f rame/ focus ,  since c lear ly he should not  be cons idered 
externa l  to the d iscourse and sought  in the database.  
Whi le the RESTAURANT f rame may indeed conta in  a 
COMPANION slot for Sam to sit in, it is c lear that  the 
f irst sentence  could  have been I went <anywhere at 
all> with Sam, requir ing that  any frame referr ing to 
someth ing  occupy ing  a locat ion  must  have a 
COMPANION slot. This is c lear ly undes i rable .  But 
the RESTAURANT f rame is involved in (4-4) ;  o ther -  
wise the waitress and the food would be externa l  to the 
discourse.  A natura l  so lut ion is that  the f rame/ focus  
of  (4-4)  is actua l ly  the GOING-SOMEWHERE f rame 
(with Sam in its COMPANION s lot) ,  conta in ing  the 
RESTAURANT f rame in its PLACE slot, with both  
f rames together  taken as the focus. S idner does not  
cons ider  mechanisms for a mul t i - f rame focus. 
90 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
It is, of course,  not  a lways true that the 
f rame/ focus  is explicit.  Charn iak  (1978)  points  out 
that (4-5)  is somehow suff ic ient  to invoke the 
MAGICIAN frame: 
(4-5)  The woman waved as the man on stage 
sawed her in half. 
(See also Charn iak  (1981) for more on frame invoca-  
t ion problems.)  
Focus  shift ing in PAL  is restr icted:  the only shifts 
permi t ted  are to and f rom sub-aspects  of the present  
focus (Sidner 1978a:209) .  Old topics are s tacked for 
possib le later return. This is very similar to Grosz ' s  
open- focus  hierarchy.  It is unclear  whether  there is a 
predict ive aspect  to PAL 's  focus-sh i f t  mechan ism,  11 
but the basic idea seems to be that any new phrase in 
a sentence is p icked as a potent ia l  new focus. If in a 
subsequent  sentence an anaphor ic  re ference  is a se- 
mant ica l ly  acceptab le  core ferent  for that  potent ia l  
focus, then a shift to that focus is ipso facto ind icated 
(Sidner 1978a:209) .  P resumably  this check is done 
after  a check of focus has fai led, but before  any data-  
base search. A potent ia l  focus has a l imited life span, 
and is d ropped if not shi f ted to by the end of the sec- 
ond sentence fo l lowing the one in which it occurred.  
An  example (S idner 1978a:209) :  
(4-6)  I want  to schedule a meet ing with George,  
J im, Steve and Mike. We can meet in my 
office. I t 's  k ind of small,  but the meet ing 
won ' t  last long anyway.  
(4-7)  I want  to schedule a meet ing with George,  
J im, Steve and Mike. We can meet in my 
office. It won ' t  take more than 20 min- 
utes. 
In the second sentence my office is ident i f ied as a po-  
tent ial  focus, and it, in the first reading of the third 
sentence,  as an acceptab le  core ferent  to my office 
conf i rms the shift. In the second reading,  it cou ldn ' t  
be my office, so no shift occurs. The acceptab i l i ty  
decis ion is based on select ional  and case- l ike restr ic-  
tions. 
Whi le perhaps adequate  for PAL ,  this mechanism 
is, of course,  not  suff ic ient for the general  case, where 
a true shift, as opposed  to an expans ion upon a previ-  
l l On page 209 of Sidner (1978a) we are told: "Focus shifts 
cannot be predicted; they are detectable only after they occur". 
Yet on the following page, Sidner says: "Sentences appearing in 
mid-discourse are assumed to be about the focus until the corefer- 
ence module predicts a focus shift . . . .  Once an implicit focus 
relation is established, the module can go onto \[sic\] predictions of 
focus shift". My interpretation f these remarks is that one cannot 
be certain that the next sentence will shift focus, but one can note 
when a shift might happen, requiring later checking to confirm or 
disconfirm the shift. 
ously ment ioned point ,  may occur. This is exempl i f ied 
by many of the shifts in Grosz ' s  task -or iented  dia-  
logues. 
Another  prob lem arising f rom this shift mechanism 
is that two di f ferent  focus shifts may be ind icated at 
the same t ime, but  the mechan ism has no way  to 
choose between them. For  example:  
(4-8)  Schedule  a meet ing  of  t..h_e Exper imenta l  
Theo logy  Research  Group,  and tell Ross 
Andrews  about  it too. I 'd  l ike him to 
hear  about  the deocommunicat ion  work  
that they ' re  doing. 
Each of the two under l ined NPs in the first sentence 
would be p icked as a potent ia l  focus. Since each is 
p ronomina l ly  re ferenced in the second sentence,  the 
mechanism would be confused as to where to shift the 
focus. (P resumably  Ross Andrews would be the correct  
choice here.)  
4.4 Conc lus ions  
The shortcomings of S idner 's  work  are mainly  at- 
t r ibutable  to two causes: her avo idance of relying on 
the highly const ra ined iscourse structures that Grosz  
used, and the l imited connect iv i ty  of f rame systems,  
compared  to Grosz ' s  semant ic  nets. tz With  respect  to 
the former point,  perhaps S idner 's  main contr ibut ion  
has been to show the dif f icult ies and pitfal ls that  lie in 
wait  for anyone at tempt ing  to general ize Grosz ' s  work,  
even to the extent  that PAL  does. 
5. Webber ' s  formal ism 
In the preced ing  sect ions  of  this paper ,  we saw 
approaches  to anaphor  reso lut ion  that  were main ly  
top-down in that  they  re l ied on a not ion  of  theme 
and/or  focus of a t tent ion  to guide the se lect ion of 
focus (a l though theme determinat ion  may have been 
bot tom-up) .  An  a l ternat ive approach  has been sug- 
gested by Bonnie \ [Nash- \ ]Webber  (Nash-Webber  and 
Re i ter  1977; Webber  1978a, 1978b),  wherein a set of 
rules is appl ied to a log ica l - form representat ion  of the 
text  to der ive the set of ent i t ies that that  text makes 
avai lable for subsequent  reference.  Webber ' s  formal -  
ism at tacks  some prob lems caused by quant i f i ca t ion  
that have not  otherwise been cons idered by workers  in 
NLU,  
12 In her thesis (1979) \[which was not available to me when 
this paper was first written\], Sidner subsequently proposed the use 
of an association etwork instead of frames, and presented more 
sophisticated focus selection and shifting algorithms. I have empha- 
sized her earlier work here, as it has received much wider circula- 
tion. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 91 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anapbora Resolution 
I can only give the flavor of Webber's formalism 
here, and I shall have to assume some familiarity with 
logical forms. Readers who want more details should 
see her thesis (1978a); readers who find my exposition 
mystifying should not worry unduly - -  the fault is 
probably mine - -  but should turn to the thesis for 
illumination. 
In Webber's formalism, it is assumed that an input 
sentence is first converted to a parse tree, and then, 
by some semantic interpretation process, to an extend- 
ed restricted-quantification predicate calculus represen- 
tation. It is during this second conversion that ana- 
phor resolution takes place. When the final represent- 
ation, which we shall simply call a logical form, is com- 
plete, certain rules are applied to it to generate the set 
of referable entities and descriptions that the sentence 
evokes. Webber considers three types of antecedents 
those for definite pronouns, those for 
one-anaphora, 13 and those for verb phrase ellipsis. 
Each type has its own set of rules; we will briefly look 
at the first. (The others are discussed in Sections 
5.4.2 and 5.4.3 of Hirst 1981.) 
5.1 Definite pronouns' 
The antecedents for def in i tepronouns are invoking 
descriptions (IDs); these are in effect focus elements 
that are explicit in the text. IDs are derived from the 
logical form representation of a sentence by a set of 
rules that attempt o take into account factors, such as 
NP definiteness or references to sets, that affect what 
antecedents are evoked by a text. There are six of 
these ID-rules; 14 which one applies depends on the 
structural description of the logical form. 
Here is one of Webber 's  examples (1978a:64): 
(5-1) Wendy bought a crayon. 
This has this representation: 
(5-2) Ox:Crayon) . Bought Wendy,x 
Now, one of the ID-rules says that any sentence S 
whose representation is of this form: 
(5-3) (ax:C). Fx 
where C is an arbitrary predicate on individuals and 
Fx an arbitrary open sentence in which x is free, 
evokes an entity whose representation is of this form: 
13 One-anaphors are those such as those, one, and some uses of it 
that refer to a description rather than a specific entity. An exam- 
ple: 
(i) Wendy didn't give either boy a green tie-dyed 
T-shirt, but she gave Sue a red one. 
14 Webber regards her rules only as a preliminary step towards 
a complete set that considers all relevant factors. She discusses 
some of the remaining problems, such as negation, in Webber 
(1978a:81-88). 
(5-4) ej ix: Cx & Fx & evoke S ,x  
where ej is an arbitrary label assigned to the entity and 
is the definite operator. Hence, starting at the left of 
(5-2), we obtain this representation for the crayon of 
(5-1): 
(5-5) e 1 ,x: Crayon x & Bought Wendy,x & 
evoke (5-1),x 
which may be interpreted as e I is the crayon mentioned 
in sentence (5-1) that Wendy bought. Similarly we will 
obtain a representation of e 2, Wendy, which is then 
substituted for Wendy in (5-5) after some matching 
process has determined the identity of the two. 
In this next, more complex example (Webber 
1978a:73), we see how quantification is handled: 
(5-6) Each boy gave each girl a peach. 
(?x:Boy) (Vy:Girl) (~:Peach)  . Gave x ,y ,g  
This matches the following structural description 
(where Oj stands for the quantifier (Vxj e ej), where ej 
is an earlier evoked discourse entity, and ! is the left 
boundary of a clause): 
(5-7) lO 1 . . .  Qn (3y:C) . Fy 
and hence evokes an ID of this form: 
(5 -8 )  e i ty: maxset(X(u:C)\[(3x 1 ? el) 
(~ix n ? en) . Fu & evoke S,u\]) y 
(For any one-place predicate P, maxset(P)y is true if 
and only if y is the set of all items u such that Pu 
holds.) Another rule has already given us: 
(5-9) e 1 tx: maxset(Boy) x 
"the set of all boys" 
e 2 tx: maxset(Girl)  x
"the set of all girls" 
and so (5-8) is instantiated as: 
(5-10) e 3 ~z: maxset(A(u:Peach) \[(ax ? el) (3y 
? e2) . Gave x,y,u & evoke (5-6),y\]) z
"the set of peaches, each one of 
which is linked to (5-6) by virtue of 
some member of e 1 giving it to some 
member of e2" 
Although such rules could (in principle) be used to 
generate all IDs (explicit focus elements) that a sen- 
tence evokes, Webber does not commit herself to such 
an approach, instead allowing for the possibil ity of 
generating IDs only when they are needed, depending 
on subsequent information such as speaker's perspec- 
tive. She also suggests the possibility of "vague, tem- 
porary" IDs for interim use (1978a:67). 
There is a problem here with intrasentential ana- 
phora, since it is assumed that a sentence's anaphors 
are resolved before ID rules are applied to find what 
may be the antecedents necessary for that resolution. 
Webber proposes that known syntactic and selectional 
92 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April- June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
constraints may help in this conflict, but this is not 
always sufficient. For example: 
(5-11) Marybought  each girl a cotton T-shirt, 
but none of them were the style de rigeur 
in high schools. 
The IDs for both the set of girls and the set of T-shirts 
are needed to resolve them, but them needs to be re- 
solved before the IDs are generated. In this particular 
example, the clear solution is to work a clause at a 
time rather than at a sentence level. However, this is 
not always an adequate solution, as (5-12) shows: 
(5-12) The rebel students annoyed the teachers 
greatly, and by the end of the week none 
of the faculty were willing to go to their 
classes. 
In this ambiguous sentence, one possible antecedent 
for their, the faculty, occurs in the same clause as the 
anaphor. Thus neither strictly intraclausal nor strictly 
interclausal methods are appropriate. Webber is aware 
of this problem (1978a:48), and believes that it suffic- 
es that such information as is available be used to rule 
out impossible choices; the use of vague temporary 
IDs then allows the anaphor to be resolved. 
5.2 Conclus ions 
It remains to discuss the strengths and weaknesses 
of Webber's approach, and she herself (in contradis- 
tinction to some other workers) is as quick to point 
out the latter as the former. The reader is therefore 
referred to her thesis (1978a) for this. However, I 
will make some global comments on the important 
aspects relevant here. 
Webber's main contributions, as I see them, are as 
follows: 
1. The anaphor resolution problem is ap- 
proached from the point of view of deter- 
mining what an adequate representation 
would be, rather than trying to fit (to 
straitjacket?) a resolution mechanism into 
some pre-existing and perhaps arbitrarily 
chosen representation; and the criteria of 
adequacy for the representation are rigor- 
ously enumerated. 
2. A formalism in which it is possible to 
compute focus elements as they are need- 
ed, rather than having them sitting round 
in advance (as in Grosz 's  system), per- 
haps never to be used, is provided (but 
compare my further remarks below). 
3. Webber brings to NLU anaphora research 
the formality and rigor of logic, something 
that has been previously almost unseen. 
4. Previously ignored problems of quantifica- 
tion are dealt with. 
5. The formalism itself is an important con- 
tribution. 
The shortcomings, as I see them, are as follows: 
1. The formalism relies very much on ante- 
cedents being in the text. Entities evoked 
by, but not explicit in, the text cannot in 
general be adequately handled (in con- 
trast to Grosz's system). 
2. The formalism is not related to discourse 
structure. So, for example, it contains 
nothing to discourage the use of the table 
as the antecedent in (2-3). It remains to 
be seen if discourse pragmatics can be 
adequately integrated with the formalism 
or otherwise accounted for in a system 
using the formalism. 
3. Intrasentential  and intraclausal anaphora 
are not adequately dealt with. 
4. Webber does not relate her discussions of 
representational adequacy to currently 
popular knowledge representations. If 
frames, for example, are truly inadequate 
we would like to have some watertight 
proof of this before abandoning current 
NLU projects attempting to use frames. 
It will be noticed that contribution 2 and shortcoming 
1 are actually two sides of the same coin m it is static 
pre-available knowledge that allows non-textual enti- 
ties to be easily found - -  and clearly a synthesis will 
be necessary here. 
6. Discourse-cohes ion approaches to anaphora 
resolut ion 
Another approach to coreference resolution at- 
tempts to exploit local discourse cohesion, building a 
representation of the discourse with which references 
can be resolved. This approach has been taken by 
(inter alia) Klappholz and Lockman (1977; Lockman 
1978). By using only cues to the discourse structure 
at the sentence level or lower, one avoids the need to 
search for referents in pre-determined dialogue models 
such as those of Grosz 's  task-oriented ialogues, or 
rigidly predefined knowledge structures uch as scripts 
(Schank and Abelson 1977) and frames (Minsky 
1975), which Klappholz and Lockman,  for example, 
call overweight structures that inflexibly dominate 
processing of text. Klappholz and Lockman empha- 
size that the structure through which reference is re- 
solved must be dynamically built up as the text is 
processed; frames or scripts could assist in this build- 
ing, but cannot, however, be reliably used for refer- 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 93 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
ence resolution, because deviations by the text from 
the pre-defined structure will cause errors. 
The basis of this approach is that there is a strong 
interrelationship between coreference and the cohesive 
ties in a discourse that make it coherent. By determin- 
ing what the cohesive ties in a discourse are, one can 
put each new sentence or clause, as it comes in, into 
the appropriate place in a growing structure that repre- 
sents the discourse. This structure can then be used as 
a focus to search for coreference antecedents, since 
not only do coherently connected sentences tend to 
refer to the same things, but knowledge of the cohe- 
sion relation can provide additional reference resolu- 
tion restraints. Hobbs (1979) in particular sees the 
problem of coreference resolution as being automati- 
cally solved in the process of discovering the coher- 
ence relations in a text. (An example of this will be 
given in Section 6.2.) Conversely, it is frequently help- 
ful or necessary to resolve coreference relations in 
order to discover the coherence relations. This is not 
a vicious circle, claims Hobbs, but a spiral staircase. 
In our discussion below, we will cover four issues: 
1. deciding on a set of possible coherence 
relations; 
2. detecting them when they occur in a text; 
3. using the coherence relations to build a 
focus structure; and 
4. searching for referents in the structure. 
6.1 Coherence relations 
The first thing required by this approach is a com- 
plete and computable set of the coherence relations 
that may obtain between sentences and/or  clauses. 
Various sets have been suggested by many people, 
including Eisenstadt (1976), Phillips (1977), Pitkin 
(1977a, 1977b), Hirst (1977b, 1978), Lockman 
(1978), Hobbs (1978, 1979) and Reichman (1978). 15 
None of these sets fulfill all desiderata; and while Hal- 
liday and Hasan (1976) provide an extensive analysis 
of cohesion, it does not fit within our computational 
framework of coherence relations, and those, such as 
Hobbs, Lockman, Eisenstadt and Hirst, who empha- 
size computabil ity, provide sets insufficient, I believe, 
to capture all the semantic subtleties of discourse co- 
hesion. Nevertheless, the works cited above undoub- 
tedly serve as a useful starting point for development 
of this area. 
To illustrate what a very preliminary set of cohe- 
sion relations could look like, I will briefly present a 
set abstracted from the various sets of Eisenstadt, 
Hirst, Hobbs, Lockman and Phillips (but not faithful 
to any one of these). 
The set contains two basic classes of coherence 
relations: expansion or elaboration on an entity, con- 
cept or event in the discourse, and temporal continua- 
tion or time flow. Expansion includes relations like 
EFFECT, CAUSE, SYLLOGISM, ELABORATION, 
CONTRAST, PARALLEL and EXEMPLIFICATION. In 
the following examples, "u"  is used to indicate the 
point where the cohesive tie illustrated is acting: 
(6-1) \[ELABORATION\] To gain access to the 
latch-housing, remove the control panel 
cover. ? Undo both screws and rock it 
gently until it snaps out from the mount- 
ing bracket. 
(6-2) \[CONTRAST\] The hoary marmot likes to 
be scratched behind the ears by its mate, 
? while in the lesser dormouse, nuzzling 
is the primary behavior promoting pair- 
bonding. 
(6-3) \[EFFECT\] Ross pulled out the bottom 
module. ? The entire structure collapsed. 
(6-4) \[CAUSE\] Ross scratched his head furi- 
ously. ? The new Hoary  Marmot  TM 
shampoo that he used had made it itch 
unbearably. 
(6-5) \[SYLLOGISM\] Nadia goes to the movies 
with Ross on Fridays. Today's  Friday, ? 
so I guess she'll be going to the movies. 
(6-6) \[PARALLEL\] Nearly all our best men are 
dead! Carlyle, Tennyson, Browning, 
George Eliot? - -  ? I 'm not feeling very 
well myself!16 
(6-7) \[EXEMPLIFICATION\] Many of our staff 
are keen amateur ornithologists. ? Nadia 
has written a book on the Canadian trill- 
er, and Daryel once missed a board meet- 
ing because he was high up a tree near 
Gundaroo, watching the hatching of some 
rare red-crested snipes. 
(One may disagree with my classification of some of 
the relations above; the boundaries between categories 
are yet ill-defined, and it is to be expected that some 
people's intuitions will differ from mine.) 
15 Reichman's coherence relations operate at paragraph level 
rather than sentence or clause level. 
16 From: A lament \[cartoon caption\]. Punch, or the London 
charivari, CIV, 1893, page 210. 
94 American Journal  of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, Apri l - June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
Temporal flow relations involve some continuation 
forwards or backwards over time: 
(6-8) V ICTORIA  - -  A suntanned Prince 
Charles arrived here Sunday afternoon, ? 
and was greeted with a big kiss by a pret- 
ty English au pair girl. 17 
(6-9) SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico - -  Travel offi- 
cials tackled a major job here Sunday to 
find new accommodations for 650 passen- 
gers from the burned Italian cruise liner 
Angelina Lauro. 
? The vessel caught fire Friday while 
docked at Charlotte Amalie in the Virgin 
Islands, but most passengers were ashore 
at the time. 18 
Temporal flow may be treated as a single relation, 
as Phillips, for example, does, or it may be subdivided, 
as by Eisenstadt and Hirst, into categories like TIME 
STEP, FLASHBACK, FLASHFORWARD, TIME EDIT, 
and so on. Certainly, time flow in a text may be quite 
contorted, as in (6-10) (from Hirst 1978); "m" indi- 
cates a point where the direction of the time flow 
changes: 
(6-10) Slowly, hesitantly, Ross approached Na- 
dia. ? He had waited for this moment for 
many days. ? Now he was going to say 
the words ? which he had agonized over 
? and in the very room ? he had often 
dreamed about. ? He gazed lovingly at 
her soft green eyes. 
It is not clear, however, to what extent an analysis of 
time flow is necessary for anaphor resolution. I sus- 
pect that relatively little is necessary - -  less than is 
required for other aspects of discourse understanding. 
I see relations like those exempli f ied above as 
primitives from which more complex relations could be 
built. For example, the relation between the two sen- 
tences of (6-3) above clearly involves FORWARD 
TIME STEP as well as EFFECT. I have hypothesized 
elsewhere (Hirst 1978) the possibility of constructing 
a small set of discourse relations (with cardinality 
about twenty or less) from which more complex rela- 
tions may be built up by simple combination, and, one 
hopes, in such a way that the effects of relation 
R i+R 2 would be the sum of the individual effects of 
relations R 1 and R 2. Rules for permitted combina- 
tions would be needed; for example, FORWARD TIME 
STEP could combine with EFFECT, but not with 
BACKWARD TIME STEP. 
17 From: The Vancouver xpress, 2 April 1979, page A1. 
18 From: The Vancouver xpress, 2 April 1979, page A5. 
What would the formal definition of a coherence 
relation be like? Here is Hobbs's (1979:73) definition 
of ELABORATION: Sentence S1 is an ELABORATION 
of sentence SO if some proposition P follows from the 
assertions of both S O and $1, but S 1 contains a prop- 
erty of one of the elements of P that is not in S 0. The 
example in the next section will clarify this. 
6.2 An  example  of anaphor  resolut ion using a 
? coherence  relat ion 
It is appropriate at this stage to give an example of 
the use of coherence relations in the resolution of 
anaphors. I will present an outline of one of Hobbs's; 
for the fine details I have omitted, see Hobbs 
(1979:78-80). The text is this: 
(6-11) John can open Bill's safe. He knows the 
combination. 
We want an NLU system to recognize the cohesion 
relation operating here, namely ELABORATION, and 
identify he as John and the combination as that of Bill's 
safe. We assume that in the world knowledge that the 
system has are various axioms and rules of inference 
dealing with such matters as what combinations of 
safes are and knowledge about doing things. Then, 
from the first sentence of (6-11), which we represent 
as (6-12): 
(6-12) can (John, open (Bill's-safe)) 
(we omit the details of the representation of Bill's 
safe), we can infer: 
(6-13) know (John, cause (do (John, a), 
open (Bill's-safe))) 
"John knows that he can perform an ac- 
tion a that will cause Bill's-safe to be 
open" 
From the second sentence of (6-11), namely: 
(6-14) know (he, combination (comb, y)) 
"someone, he, knows the combination 
comb to something, y" 
we can infer, using knowledge about combinations: 
(6-15) know (he, cause (dial (comb,y), open (y))) 
"he knows that by causing the dialing of 
comb on y, the state in which y is open 
will be brought about" 
Recognizing that (6-13) and (6-15) are nearly identi- 
cal, and assuming that some coherence relation does 
hold, we can identify he with John, y with Bill's-safe, 
and the definition of the ELABORATION relation is 
satisfied. In the process, the required referents were 
found. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 95 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
6.3 Lockman's  contextua l  re ference resolut ion 
a lgor i thm 
Given a set of discourse cohesion relations, how 
may their use in a text be computationally recognized 
and employed to build a structure that represents the 
discourse and can be used as a focus for reference 
resolution? Only Hobbs (1978, 1979) and Lockman 
(1978; Klappholz and Lockman 1977) seem to have 
considered these aspects of the problem, though Eisen- 
stadt (1976) discusses some of the requirements in 
world knowledge and inference that would be re- 
quired. In this section we look at Lockman's work. 
Lockman does not separate the three processes of 
recognizing cohesion, resolving references and building 
the representation of the discourse. Rather, as befits 
such interrelated processes, all three are carried out at 
the same time. His contextual reference resolution 
algorithm (CRRA) works as follows: 
The structure to be built is a tree, initially null, of 
which each node is a sentence and each edge a coher- 
ence relation. As each new sentence comes in, the 
CRRA tries to find the right node of the tree to attach 
it to, starting at the leaf that is the previous sentence 
and working back up the tree in a specified search 
order (discussed below) until a connection is indicated. 
Lockman assumes the existence of a judgment mecha- 
nism that generates and tests hypotheses as to how the 
new sentence may be feasibly connected to the node 
being tested. The first hypothesis whose likelihood 
exceeds a certain threshold is chosen. 
The hypotheses consider both the coherence and 
the coreference relations that may obtain. Each mem- 
ber of the set of coherence relations is hypothesized, 
and for each one, all possible coreference relations 
between the conceptual tokens of the new sentence 
and tokens in the node under consideration (or nearby 
it in the tree) are posited. (The search for tokens goes 
back as far as necessary in the tree until suitable to- 
kens are found for all unfulfilled definite noun phras- 
es.) The hypotheses are considered in parallel; if none 
are judged sufficiently likely, the next node or set of 
nodes will be considered for feasible connection to the 
current sentence. 
The search order is as follows: First the immediate 
context, the previous sentence, is tried. If no feasible 
connection is found, then the immediate ancestor of 
this node, and all its other descendants, are tried in 
parallel. If the algorithm is still unsuccessful, the im- 
mediate ancestor of the immediate ancestor, and the 
descendants thereof, are tried, and so on up the tree. 
If a test of several nodes in parallel yields more than 
one acceptable node, the one nearest the immediate 
context is chosen. 
If the current sentence is not a simple sentence, it 
is not broken into clauses dealt with individually, but 
rather converted to a small sub-tree, reflecting the 
semantic relationship between the clauses. The con- 
version is based simply upon a table look-up indexed 
on the structure of the parse tree of the sentence. 
One of the nodes is designated by the table look-up as 
the head node, and the sub-tree is attached to the 
pre-existing context tree, using the procedure de- 
scribed above, with the connection occurring at this 
node. Similarly one (or more) of the nodes is desig- 
nated as the immediate context, the starting point for 
the next search. (The search will be conducted in 
parallel if there is more than one immediate context 
node.) 
There are some possible problems with Lockman's 
approach. The first lies in the fact that the structure 
built grows without limit, and therefore a search in it 
could, in theory, run right through an enormous tree. 
Normally, of course, a feasible connection or desired 
referent will be found fairly quickly, close to the im- 
mediate context. However, should the judgment 
mechanism fail to spot the correct one, the algorithm 
may run a little wild, searching large areas of the 
structure needlessly and expensively, possibly lighting 
on a wrong referent or wrong node for attachment, 
with no indication that an error has occurred. In other 
words, Lockman's CRRA places much greater trust in 
the judgment mechanism than a system like Grosz's 
that constrains the referent search area - -  more trust 
than perhaps should be put in what will necessarily be 
the most tentative and unreliable part of the system. 
Secondly, I am worried about the syntax-based 
table look-up for sub-trees for complex sentences. On 
the one hand, it would be nice if it were correct, sim- 
plifying processing. On the other hand, I cannot but 
feel that it is an over-simplification, and that effects of 
discourse theme cannot reliably be handled in this 
way. However, I have no counterexamples to give, 
and suggest that this question needs more investiga- 
tion. 
The third possible problem, and perhaps the most 
serious, concerns the order in which the search for a 
feasible connection takes place. Because the first 
hypothesis whose likelihood exceeds the threshold is 
selected, it is possible to miss an even better hypothe- 
sis further up the tree. In theory, this could be avoid- 
ed by doing all tests in parallel, the winning hypothesis 
being judged on both likelihood and closeness to the 
immediate context. In practice, given the ever- 
growing context tree as discussed above, this would 
not be feasible, and some way to limit the search area 
would be needed. 
96 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
The fourth problem lies in the judgment  mechanism 
itself. Lockman frankly admits that the mechanism, 
incorporated as a black box in his algorithm, must 
have abilities far beyond those of present state-of-the- 
art inference and judgment  systems. The problem is 
that it is unwise to predicate too much on the nature 
of this unbui l t  black box, as we do not know yet if its 
input -output  behavior could be as Lockman posits. It 
may well be that to perform as required, the mecha- 
nism will need access to in format ion such as the sen- 
tence fol lowing the current one (in effect, the abil ity 
to delay a decision), or more informat ion about  the 
previous context than the CRRA retains or ever deter- 
mines; in fact, it may need an entirely di f ferent dis- 
course structure representat ion  from the tree being 
built. In other words, while it is f ine in theory to de- 
sign a reference resolver around a black box, in p rac -  
tice it may be computat iona l ly  more economica l  to  
design the reference resolver around a knowledge of 
how the black box actual ly works, exploit ing that 
mechanism, rather than stra i t jacket ing the judgment  
module into its pre-def ined cabinet ;  thus Lockman's  
work may be premature. 
None of these problems are insurmountable .  How- 
ever it is perhaps a little unfor tunate  that Lockman's  
work offers little of immediate use for NLU systems of 
the present day. 
6.4 Conclus ions 
Clearly, much work remains to be done if the 
coherence/cohes ion  paradigm of NLU is to be viable. 
Almost all aspects need ref inement.  However,  it is an 
intuit ively appeal ing paradigm, and it will be interest-  
ing to see if it can be developed into funct ion ing NLU 
systems. 
7. Epilogue 
Each approach examined offers a dif ferent insight 
into some aspect or aspects of the use of discourse 
structure to resolve anaphora.  So far there has been 
no at tempt to integrate these insights into a single 
cohesive system or model;  indeed this will be an ex- 
tremely difficult task. It should, however, be a most 
fruitful one, and is the logical next step in computa-  
t ional anaphora resolution. 
Acknowledgements  
This paper was wr i t ten while the author was at the 
Department  of Computer  Science, Univers i ty of British 
Columbia,  Vancouver,  Canada,  and was supported in 
part by an Austra l ian Postgraduate Research Award. 
Richard Rosenberg,  Nadia Talent ,  Barbara Grosz,  
Bonnie Webber,  Mark Scott Johnson and the anony-  
mous referees were among the many people whose 
helpful comments  improved its quality. 
References  
Bullwinkle, Candace Lee. see also Sidner, Candace Lee. 
Bullwinkle, Candace Lee (1977a). The semantic omponent of 
PAL: The personal assistant language understanding program. 
Working paper 141, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massa- 
chusetts Institute of Technology, March 1977. 
Bullwinkle, Candace Lee (1977b). Levels of complexity in dis- 
course for anaphora disambiguation and speech act interpreta- 
tion. \[ 11 Proceedings of the fifth international joint conference on 
artificial intelligence. Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, 
43-49. \[2\] an earlier version was published as: Memo 413, 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, May 1977. 
Chafe, Wallace L (1970). Meaning and the structure of language. 
The University of Chicago Press, 1970. 
Charniak, Eugene (1978). With spoon in hand this must be the 
eating frame, in: Waltz 1978, 187-193. 
Charniak, Eugene (1981). Context recognition in language com- 
prehension, in: Wendy Grace Lehnert and Martin Ringle 
(editors). Knowledge representation for language processing 
systems, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1981 
\[forthcoming\]. 
Eisenstadt, Marc (1976). Processing newspaper stories: some 
thoughts on fighting and stylistics. Proceedings of  the AISB 
summer conference, Society for the Study of Artificial Intelli- 
gence and the Simulation of Behaviour, July 1976, 104-117. 
Firbas, Jan (1964). On defining the theme in functional sentence 
analysis. Travaux linguistiques de Prague, 1, 1964, 267-280. 
Grosz, Barbara Jean (1977a). The representation a d use of focus 
in a system for understanding dialogs. \[1\] Proceedings of the 
fifth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts, August 1977, 67-76. \[2\] Technical note 
150, Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI International, June 
1977. 
Grosz, Barbara Jean (1977b). The representation a d use of focus 
in dialogue understanding. \[1\] Unpublished PhD thesis, Depart- 
ment of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, 
June 1977. \[2\] published, slightly revised, as: Technical note 
151, SRI International, Artificial Intelligence Center, July 1977. 
\[3\] a newer revised version appears in: Walker 1978, section 4. 
Grosz, Barbara Jean (1978). Focusing in dialog. \[1\] in: Waltz 
1978, 96-103. \[2\] Technical note 166, Artificial Intelligence 
Center, SRI International, July 1978. 
Halliday, Michael Alexander Kirkwood and Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976). 
Cohesion in English. (= Longman English Language Series 9). 
London: Longman, 1976. 
Hendrix. Gary Grant (1975). Expanding the utility of semantic 
networks through partitioning. Advance papers of the fourth 
international joint conference on artificial intelligence. Tblisi, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, September 1975, 115-121. 
Hend{ix, Gary Grant (1978). The representation of semantic 
knowledge, in: Walker 1978, 121-181. 
Hirst, Graeme John (1977a). Focus in reference resolution in 
natural anguage understanding. Paper presented at the Lan- 
guage and Speech Conference, Melbourne, November 1977. 
Hirst, Graeme John (1977b). Cohesive discourse transitions and 
reference resolution: The cinema metaphor and beyond into the 
transfinite. Unpublished manuscript, 20 December 1977. 
Hirst, Graeme John (1978). A set of primitives for discourse 
transitions. Unpublishable manuscript, 1February 1978. 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 97 
Graeme Hirst Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution 
Hirst, Graeme John (1981). Anaphora in natural anguage under- 
standing: a survey. \[1\] (Lecture notes in computer science), NY: 
Springer-Verlag, 1981. \[2\] Technical report 79-2, Department 
of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancou- 
ver, B.C., Canada, May 1979. 
Hobbs, Jerry Robert (1978). Why is discourse coherent? \[1\] 
Technical note 176, Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI Interna- 
tional, 30 November 1978. \[2\] in: F Neubauer (editor). Coher- 
ence in natural anguage texts, 1979. 
Hobbs, Jerry Robert (1979). Coherence and coreference. \[1\] 
Cognitive Science, 3(1), January-March 1979, 67-90. \[2\] Tech- 
nical note 168, Artificial Intelligence Center, SRI International, 
4 August 1978. 
Kantor, Robert Neal (1977). The management and comprehension 
of discourse connection by pronouns in English. PhD thesis, 
Department of Linguistics, Ohio State University, 1977. 
Klappholz, A David and Lockman, Abe David (1977). The use of 
dynamically extracted context for anaphoric reference resolu- 
tion. Unpublished MS, Department of Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, Febru- 
ary 1977. 
Lockman, Abe David (1978). Contextual reference resolution \[1\] 
PhD dissertation, Faculty of Pure Science, Columbia University, 
May 1978. \[2\] Technical report DCS-TR-70, Department of 
Computer Science, Rutgers University, 1978. 
Minsky, Marvin Lee (1975). A framework for representing knowl- 
edge. \[1\] in: Patrick Henry Winston (editor). The psychology of 
computer vision. McGraw-Hill, 1975, 211-280. \[2\] Memo 306, 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, June 1974. \[3\] a condensed version appears in: 
Schank and Nash-Webber 1975, 118-130. \[4\] version 3 also 
appears as: Frame-system theory, in: Philip Nicholas Johnson- 
Laird and Peter Cathcart Wason (editors). Thinking: Readings 
in cognitive science. Cambridge University Press, 1977, 355-376. 
Nash-Webber, Bonnie Lynn. See also Webber, Bonnie Lynn. 
Nash-Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1976). Semantic interpretation re- 
visited. Report 3335 (AI report 48), Bolt Beranek and New- 
man Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, July 1976. 
Nash-Webber, Bonnie Lynn and Reiter, Raymond (1977). Ana- 
phora and logical form: on formal meaning representations for 
natural anguage. \[1\] Proceedings of the fifth international joint 
conference on artificial intelligence. Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
August 1977, 121-131. \[2\] Technical report CSR-36, Center 
for the Study of Reading, University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign, 1977. 
Phillips, Brian (1977). Discourse connectives. Technical report 
KSL-11, Knowledge Systems Laboratory, Department of Infor- 
mation Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago Circle, 
March 1977. 
Pitkin, Willis L Jr (1977a). Hierarchies and the discourse hier- 
archy. College English, 38(7), March 1977, 648-659. 
Pitkin, Willis L Jr (1977b). X/Y: Some basic strategies of dis- 
course. College English, 38(7), March 1977, 660-672. 
Reichman, Rachel (1978). Conversational coherency. Cognitive 
science, 2(4), October-December 1978, 283-327. 
Roberts, R Bruce and Goldstein, Ira P (1977a). The FRL primer. 
Memo 408, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, July 1977. 
Roberts, R Bruce and Goldstein, Ira P (1977b). The FRL manual. 
Memo 409, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, September 1977. 
Rosenberg, Steven T (1976). Discourse structure. Working paper 
130, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, 17 August 1976. 
Rosenberg, Steven T (1977). Frame-based text processing. Memo 
431, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, November 1977. 
Schank, Roger Carl and Abelson, Robert P (1977). Scripts, plans, 
goals and understanding: An enquiry into human knowledge 
structures. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ- 
ates, 1977. 1975, 309-328. 
Schank, Roger Carl and Nash-Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1975). Theo- 
retical issues in natural anguage processing: An inter-disciplinary 
workshop. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics, June 1975. 
Sidner, Candace Lee. see also Bullwinkle, Candace Lee. 
Sidner, Candace Lee (1978a). A progress report on the discourse 
and reference components of PAL. \[1\] in: Proceedings of the 
second national conference, Canadian Society for Computational 
Studies of Intelligence/Societe canadienne des etudes 
d'intelligence par ordinateur. Toronto. July 1978, 206-213. \[2\] 
Memo 468, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 1978. 
Sidner, Candace Lee (1978b). The use of focus as a tool for the 
disambiguation of definite noun phrases, in: Waltz 1978, 86-95. 
Sidner, Candace Lee (1979). Towards a computational theory of 
definite anaphora comprehension i  English discourse. \[1\] PhD 
thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 16May 1979. 
\[2\] revised as: Technical report 537, Artificial Intelligence 
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1979. 
Walker, Donald E (editor) (1978). Understanding spoken language. 
(The computer science library, Artificial intelligence series 5), 
New York: North-Holland, 1978. 
Waltz, David L (editor) (1978). TINLAP-2: Theoretical issues in 
natural language processing 2. \[1\] University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, 25-27 July 1978. \[2\] reprinted in: Ameri- 
can journal of computational linguistics, fiche 78-80, 1978. 
Webber, Bonnie Lynn. see also Nash-Webber, Bonnie Lynn. 
Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1978a). A formal approach to discourse 
anaphora. \[1\] (Outstanding dissertations in linguistics), NY: 
Garland Publishing, 1978. \[2\] PhD thesis, Department of Ap- 
plied Mathematics, Harvard University, 1978. \[3\] Report 3761, 
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc, May 1978. 
Webber, Bonnie Lynn (1978b). Description formation and dis- 
course model synthesis, in: Waltz 1978, 42-50. 
Winograd, Terry (1972). Understanding atural anguage. \[1\] New 
York: Academic Press, 1972. \[2\] Edinburgh University Press, 
1972. \[3\] also published in: Cognitive psychology, 3(1), 1972, 
1-191. 
Woods, William A; Kaplan, Ronald M and Nash-Webber, Bonnie 
Lynn (1972). The Lunar Science Natural Language Informa- 
tion System: Final report. Report 2378, Bolt Beranek and 
Newman Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 1972. 
Graeme Hirst is a doctoral candidate in the Depart- 
ment o f  Computer Science at Brown University. He 
received the M.Sc.  degree in Engineering Physics f rom 
the Australian National University in 1980. 
98 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 7, Number 2, April-June 1981 
