Semantics of Paragraphs 
Wlodek  Zadrozny  ?
Karen Jensew 
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center 
We present a computational theory of the paragraph. Within it we formally define coherence, 
give semantics to the adversative conjunction "but" and to the Gricean maxim of quantity, 
and present some new methods for anaphora resolution. 
The theory precisely characterizes the relationship between the content of the paragraph 
and background knowledge needed for its understanding. This is achieved by introducing a 
new type of logical theory consisting of an object level, corresponding to the content of the 
paragraph, a referential level, which is a new logical level encoding background knowledge, 
and a metalevel containing constraints on models of discourse (e.g. a formal version of Gricean 
maxims). We propose also specific mechanisms of interaction between these levels, resembling 
both classical provability and abduction. Paragraphs are then represented by a class of structures 
called p-models. 
1. Introduction 
Logic and knowledge have been often discussed by linguists. Anaphora is another 
prominent subject in linguistic analyses. Not so frequently examined are different ypes 
of cohesion. And it is quite rare to find the word "paragraph" in articles or books 
about natural language understanding, although paragraphs are grammatical units 
and units of discourse. But it is possible to speak formally about he role of background 
knowledge, cohesion, coherence and anaphora--all within one, flexible and natural, 
logical system--if one examines the semantic role of the linguistic construct called a 
paragraph. 
Paragraphs have been sometimes described, rather loosely, as "units of thought." 
We establish a correspondence b tween them and certain types of logical models, 
thereby making the characterization f paragraphs more precise. The correspondence 
gives us also an opportunity to identify and attack--with some success, we believe-- 
three interesting and important problems: (1) how to define formally coherence and 
topic, (2) how to resolve anaphora, and (3) what is the formal meaning of linkages (con- 
nectives) such as but, however, and, certainly, usually, because, then, etc. These questions 
are central from our point of view because: (1) the "unity" of a paragraph stems from 
its coherence, while the "aboutness" of thought can be, at least to some extent, de- 
scribed as existence of a topic; (2) without determining reference of pronouns and 
phrases, the universes of the models are undefined; and (3) the linkages, which make 
sentences into paragraphs, have semantic roles that must be accounted for. We can ex- 
plain then the process of building a computational model of a paragraph (a p-model) as 
an interaction between its sentences, background knowledge to which these sentences 
refer, and metatheoretical operators that indicate types of permitted models. 
? P.O. Box 704, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
(~ 1991 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
At this point the reader may ask: what is so special about paragraphs; does all 
this mean that a chapter, a book or a letter do not have any formal counterparts? We 
believe they do. But we simply do not yet know how corresponding formal structures 
would be created from models of paragraphs. ~Ib answer this question we may need 
more advanced theories of categorization and learning than exist today. On the other 
hand, the paragraph is the right place to begin: it is the next grammatical unit after 
the sentence; connectives providing cohesion operate here, not at the level of an entire 
discourse; and it is the smallest reasonable domain of anaphora resolution. Further- 
more, we will argue, it is the smallest domain in which topic and coherence can be 
defined. 
The formalization of paragraph structure requires the introduction of a new type 
of logical theory and a corresponding class of models. As we know, the usual log- 
ical structures consist of an object level theory T and provability relation F-; within 
the context of the semantics of natural anguage, the object theory contains a logical 
translation of the surface form of sentences, and F- is the standard provability relation 
(logical consequence). In mathematical logic, this scheme is sometimes extended by 
adding a metalevel assumption, for instance postulating the standardness of natural 
numbers. In artificial intelligence, a metarule typically, the closed world assumption 
of circumscription---can beused in dealing with theoretical questions, like the frame 
problem. But a formal account of natural language understanding requires more. It 
requires at least a description (a) of how background knowledge about objects and 
relations that the sentences describe is used in the process of understanding, and (b) of 
general constraints on linguistic communications, asexpressed for instance in Gricean 
maxims. It is well known that without the former it is impossible to find references of 
pronouns or attachments of prepositional phrases; background knowledge, as it turns 
out, is also indispensable in establishing coherence. We have then reasons for introduc- 
ing a new logical level--a referential level R, which codes the background knowledge. 
As for Gricean maxims, we show that they can be expressed formally and can be used 
in a computational model of communication. We include them in a metalevel M, which 
contains global constraints on models of a text and definitions of meta-operators such 
as the conjunction but. We end up with three-level logical theories (M, T, R, ~-R + M), 
where a provability relation ~-~ + M, based on R and M, can be used, for example, to 
establish the reference of pronouns. 
This work is addressed primarily to our colleagues working on computational 
models of natural language; but it should be also of interest o linguists, logicians, 
and philosophers. It should be of interest o linguists because the notion that a para- 
graph is equivalent o a model is something concrete to discuss; because p-models 
are as formal as formal languages (and therefore something satisfyingly theoretical 
to argue about); and because new directions for analysis are opened beyond the sen- 
tence. The work should be of interest o logicians because it introduces a new type of 
three-level theory, and corresponding models. The theory of these structures, which 
are based on linguistic constructs, will differ from classical model theory--for instance, 
by the fact that names of predicates of an object theory matter, because they connect 
the object heory with the referential level. This work should be of interest o philoso- 
phers for many of the same reasons: it makes more sense to talk about the meaning 
of a paragraph than about the meaning of a sentence. The following parallel can be 
drawn: a sentence is meaningful only with respect o a model of a paragraph, exactly 
as the truth value of a formula can be computed only with respect o a given model. 
Moreover, it is possible in this framework to talk about meaning without mentioning 
the idea of possible worlds. However, we do not identify meaning with truth condi- 
tions; in this paper, the meaning of a sentence is its role in the model of the paragraph 
172 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
in which this sentence occurs. Our intuitive concept of meaning is similar to Lakoff's 
(1987) Idealized Cognitive Model (ICM). Needless to say, we believe in the possibil- 
ity of formalizing ICMs, although in this paper we will not try to express, in logic, 
prototype ffects, metaphors, or formal links with vision. 
The paper is presented in six sections. In Section 2, we discuss the grammatical 
function of the paragraph and we show, informally, how a formal model of a para- 
graph might actually be built. In Section 3 we give the logical preliminaries to our 
analysis. We discuss a three-part logical structure that includes a referential level, and 
we introduce a model for plausible meaning. Section 4 discusses paragraph coherence, 
and Section 5 constructs a model of a paragraph, a p-model, based on the information 
contained in the paragraph itself and background information contained in the ref- 
erential evel R. Section 5 further motivates the use of the referential level, showing 
how it contributes to the resolution of anaphoric reference. In Section 6, we broaden 
our presentation of the metalevel, introducing some metalevel axioms, and sketching 
ways by which they can be used to reduce ambiguity and construct new models. We 
also show metalevel rules for interpreting "but." 
2. The Paragraph as a Discourse Unit 
2.1 Approaches to Paragraph Analysis 
Recent syntactic theory--that is, in the last 30 years--has been preoccupied with 
sentence-level analysis. Within discourse theory, however, some significant work has 
been done on the analysis of written paragraphs. We can identify four different linguis- 
tic approaches to paragraphs: prescriptivist, psycholinguist, extualist, and discourse- 
oriented. 
The prescriptivist approach is typified in standard English grammar textbooks, 
such as Warriner (1963). In these sources, a paragraph is notionally defined as some- 
thing like a series of sentences that develop one single topic, and rules are laid down 
for the construction of an ideal (or at least an acceptable) paragraph. Although these 
dictates are fairly clear, the underlying notion of topic is not. 
An example of psycholinguistically oriented research work can be found in Bond 
and Hayes (1983). These authors take the position that a paragraph is a psychologically 
real unit of discourse, and, in fact, a formal grammatical unit. Bond and Hayes found 
three major formal devices that are used, by readers, to identify a paragraph: (1) the 
repetition of content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs); (2) pronoun reference; 
and (3) paragraph length, as determined by spatial and/or sentence-count i formation. 
Other psycholinguistic studies that confirm the validity of paragraph units can be 
found in Black and Bower (1979) and Haberlandt et al (1980). 
The textualist approach to paragraph analysis is exemplified by E. J. Crothers. His 
work is taxonomic, in that he performs detailed escriptive analyses of paragraphs. He 
lists, classifies, and discusses various types of inference, by which he means, generally, 
"the linguistic-logical notions of consequent and presupposition" Crothers (1979:112) 
have collected convincing evidence of the existence of language chunks--real struc- 
tures, not just orthographic conventions--that are smaller than a discourse, larger than 
a sentence, generally composed of sentences, and recursive in nature (like sentences). 
These chunks are sometimes called "episodes," and sometimes "paragraphs." Accord- 
ing to Hinds (1979), paragraphs are made up of segments, which in turn are made up of 
sentences or clauses, which in turn are made up of phrases. Paragraphs therefore give 
hierarchical structure to sentences. Hinds discusses three major types of paragraphs, 
and their corresponding segment types. The three types are procedural (how-to), ex- 
pository (essay), and narrative (in this case, spontaneous conversation). For each type, 
173 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
its segments are distinguished by bearing distinct relationships to the paragraph topic 
(which is central, but nowhere clearly defined). Segments themselves are composed 
of clauses and regulated by "switching" patterns, uch as the question-answer pattern 
and the remark-reply pattern. 
2.2 Our View of Paragraphs: An Informal Sketch 
Although there are other discussions of the paragraph as a central element of discourse 
(e.g. Chafe 1979, Halliday and Hasan 1976, Longacre 1979, Haberlandt et al 1980), all 
of them share a certain limitation in their formal techniques for analyzing paragraph 
structure. Discourse linguists how little interest in making the structural descriptions 
precise enough so that a computational grammar of text could adapt them and use 
them. Our interest, however, lies precisely in that area. 
We suggest that the paragraph is a grammatical nd logical unit. It is the small- 
est linguistic representation f what, in logic, is called a "model," and it is the first 
reasonable domain of anaphora resolution, and of coherent thought about a central 
topic. 
A paragraph can be thought of as a grammatical unit in the following sense: it 
is the discourse unit in which a functional (or a predicate-argument) structure can be 
definitely assigned to sentences/strings. For instance, Sells (1985, p. 8) says that the 
sentence "Reagan thinks bananas," which is otherwise strange, is in fact acceptable if 
it occurs as an answer to the question "What is Kissinger's favorite fruit?" The pairing 
of these two sentences may be said to create a small paragraph. Our point is that an 
acceptable structure can be assigned to the utterance "Reagan thinks bananas" only 
within the paragraph inwhich this utterance occurs. We believe that, in general, no unit 
larger than a paragraph is necessary to assign a functional structure to a sentence, and 
that no smaller discourse fragment, such as two (or one) neighboring sentences, will 
be sufficient for this task. That is, we can ask in the first sentence of a paragraph about 
Kissinger's favorite fruit, elaborate the question and the circumstances in the next few 
sentences, and give the above answer at the end. We do not claim that a paragraph is
necessarily described by a set of grammar rules in some grammar formalism (although 
it may be); rather, it has the grammatical role of providing functional structures that 
can be assigned to strings. 
The logical structure of paragraphs will be analyzed in the next sections. At this 
point we would like to present some intuitions that led to this analysis. But first we 
want to identify our point of departure. In order to resolve anaphora nd to establish 
the coherence or incoherence of a text, one must appeal to the necessary background 
knowledge. Hence, a formal analysis of paragraphs must include a formal description 
of background knowledge and its usage. Furthermore, this background knowledge 
cannot be treated as a collection of facts or formulas in some formal anguage, because 
that would preclude dealing with contradictory word senses, or multiple meanings. 
Secondly, this background knowledge is not infinite and esoteric. In fact, to a large ex- 
tent it can be found in standard reference works such as dictionaries and encyclopedias. 
To argue for these points, we can consider the following paragraph: 1 
In the summer of 1347 a merchant ship returning from the Black Sea entered the 
Sicilian port of Messina bringing with it the horrifying disease that came to be 
known as the Black Death. It struck rapidly. Within twenty-four hours of 
infection and the appearance ofthe first small black pustule came an agonizing 
death. The effect of the Black Death was appalling. In less than twenty ears half 
1 J. Burke, The Day the Universe Changed. 1986. Little, Brown & Co., Boston, Massachusetts, p. 55. 
174 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
the population of Europe had been killed, the countryside devastated, and a 
period of optimism and growing economic welfare had been brought o a 
sudden and catastrophic end. 
The sentences that compose a paragraph must stick together; to put it more tech- 
nically, they must cohere. This means very often that they show cohesion in the sense 
of Halliday (1976)--semantic l nks between elements. Crucially, also, the sentences of 
a paragraph must all be related to a topic. 
However, in the example paragraph, very few instances can be found here of the 
formal grammatical devices for paragraph cohesion. There are no connectives, and 
there are only two anaphoric pronouns (both occurrences of "it'0. In each case, there 
are multiple possible referents for the pronoun. The paragraph is coherent because it
has a topic: "Black Death"; all sentences mention it, explicitly or implicitly. 
Notice that resolving anaphora precedes the discovery of a topic. A few words 
about his will illustrate the usage of background knowledge. By parsing with syntactic 
information alone, we show that resolution of the first "it" reference hinges on the 
proper attachment of the participial clause "bringing within it... ". If the "bringing" 
clause modifies "Messina," then "Messina" is the subject of '`bringing" and must be 
the referent for "it." If the clause modifies "port," then "port" is the desired referent; 
if the clause is attached at the level of the main verb of the sentence, then "ship" is 
the referent. 
But syntactic relations do not suffice to resolve anaphora: Hobbs' (1976) algorithm 
for resolving the reference of pronouns, depending only on the surface syntax of 
sentences in the text, when applied to "it" in the example paragraph, fails in both 
cases to identify the most likely referent NP. 
Adding selectional restrictions (semantic feature information, Hobbs 1977) does 
not solve the problem, because isolated features offer only part of the background 
knowledge necessary for reference disambiguation. Later, Hobbs (1979, 1982) proposed 
a knowledge base in which information about language and the world would be 
encoded, and he emphasized the need for using "salience" in choosing facts from this 
knowledge base. 
We will investigate the possibility that the structure of this knowledge base can 
actually resemble the structure of, for example, natural language dictionaries. The 
process of finding referents could then be automated. 
Determining that the most likely subject for "bringing," in the first sentence, is the 
noun "ship" is done in the following fashion. The first definition for "bring" in W7 
(Webster's Seventh Collegiate Dictionary) is "to convey, lead, carry, or cause to come along 
with one..." The available possible subjects for "bringing" are "Messina," port," and 
"ship." "Messina" is listed in the Pronouncing Gazetteer of W7, which means that it 
is a place (and is so identified in the subtitle of the Gazetteer). So we can substitute 
the word "place" for the word "Messina." Then we check the given definitions for the 
words "place," port," and "ship" in both dictionaries. LDOCE (Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English) proves particularly useful at this point. Definitions for "place" 
begin: "a particular part of space... ". Definitions for "port" include: "harbour... "; "an 
opening in the side of a ship... ". But the first entry for "ship" in LDOCE reads "a large 
boat for carrying people or goods... ". This demonstrates a very quick connection with 
the definition for the verb "bring," since the word "carry" occurs in both definitions. 
It requires much more time and effort to find a connection between "bring" and either 
of the other two candidate subject words "place" or "port." Similar techniques can be 
used to assign "disease" as the most probable referent for the second "it" anaphor in 
our example paragraph. 
175 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
Equally significant in this instance is the realization that a dictionary points to 
synonym and paraphrase r lations, and thereby verifies the cohesiveness of the pas- 
sage. Through the dictionary (LDOCE again), we establish shared-word relationships 
between and among the words "disease," "Black death," infection," "death," "killed," 
and "end." Note that there is no other means, short of appealing to human under- 
standing or to some hand-coded body of predicate assertions, for making these rela- 
tionships. 
This demonstrates that information eeded to identify and resolve anaphoric ref- 
erences can be found, to an interesting extent, in standard ictionaries and thesauri. 
(Other reference works could be treated as additional sources of world knowledge.) 
This type of consultation uses existing natural language texts as a referential evel for 
processing purposes. It is the lack of exactly this notion of referential level that has 
stood in the way of other linguists who have been interested in the paragraph as a 
unit. Crothers (1979, p. 112), for example, bemoans the fact that his "theory lacks a 
world knowledge component, a mental 'encyclopedia,' which could be invoked to gen- 
erate inferences... "  With respect to that independent source of knowledge, our main 
contributions are two. First, we identify its possible structure (a collection of partially 
ordered theories) and make formal the choice of a most plausible interpretation. In 
other words, we recognize it as a separate logical evel--the referential level. Second, 
we suggest that natural language reference works, like dictionaries and thesauri, can 
quite often fill the role of the referential level. 
3. The Logic of Reference 
The goal of this section is to introduce a formalism describing how background knowl- 
edge is used in understanding text. The term "logic of reference" denotes a formal 
description of this process of consulting various sources of information in order to 
produce an interpretation of a text. The formalist will be presented in a number of 
steps in which we will elaborate one simple example: 
Example 1 
Entering the port, a ship brought a disease. 
This sentence can be translated into the logical formula (ignoring only the past 
tense of "bring" and the progressive of "enter'9: 
Definition S: enter(xl~ x2) & ship(x1) & port(x2) & bring(x3~ x4) & disease(x4) & xl  = s 
& x2 = m & x3 = s & x4 = d, 
where s, m, d, are constants. 
We adopt he three-level semantics as a formal tool for the analysis of paragraphs. 
This semantics was constructed (Zadrozny 1987a, 1987b) as a formal framework for 
default and commonsense r asoning. It should not come as a surprise that we can 
now use this apparatus for text/discourse analysis; after all, many natural anguage 
inferences are based on defaults, and quite often they can be reduced to choosing most 
plausible interpretations of predicates. For instance, relating "they" to "apples" in the 
sentence (cf. Haugeland 1985 p. 195; Zadrozny 1987a): 
We bought the boys apples because they were so cheap 
176 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
can be an example of such a most plausible choice. 
The main ideas of the three-level semantics can be stated as follows: 
1. Reasoning takes place in a three-level structure consisting of an object 
level, a referential evel, and a metalevel. 
2. The object level is used to describe the current situation, and in our case 
is reserved for the formal representation f paragraph sentences. For the 
sake of simplicity, the object level will consist of a first order theory. 
3. The referential level, denoted by R, consists of theories representing 
background knowledge, from which information relevant o the 
understanding of a given piece of text has to be extracted. It constrains 
interpretations of the predicates of an object theory. Its structure and the 
extraction methods will be discussed below. 
4. Understanding has as its goal construction of an interpretation of the 
text, i.e. building some kind of model. Since not all logically permissible 
models are linguistically appropriate, one needs a place, namely the 
metalevel, to put constraints on types of models. Gricean maxims belong 
there; Section 6 will be devoted to a presentation of the metalevel rules 
corresponding to them. 
We have shown elsewhere (Jensen and Binot 1988; Zadrozny 1987a, 1987b) that natural 
language programs, such as on-line grammars and dictionaries, can be used as referen- 
tial levels for commonsense r asoning--for example, to disambiguate PP attachment. 
This means that information contained in grammars and dictionaries can be used to 
constrain possible interpretations of the logical predicates of an object-level theory. 
The referential structures we are going to use are collections of logical theories, 
but the concept of reference is more general. Some of the intuitions we associate with 
this notion have been very well expressed by Turner (1987, pp. 7-8): 
... Semantics i constrained by our models of ourselves and our worlds. We have 
models of up and down that are based by the way our bodies actually function. 
Once the word "up" is given its meaning relative to our experience with gravity, 
it is not free to "slip" into its opposite. "Up" means up and not down . . . .  We 
have a model that men and women couple to produce offspring who are similar 
to their parents, and this model is grounded in genetics, and the semantics of 
kinship metaphor is grounded in this model. Mothers have a different role than 
fathers in this model, and thus there is a reason why "Death is the father of 
beauty" fails poetically while "Death is the mother of beauty" succeeds .... 
It is precisely this "grounding" of logical predicates in other conceptual structures 
that we would like to capture. We investigate here only the "grounding" in logical the- 
ories. However, it is possible to think about constraining linguistic or logical predicates 
by simulating physical experiences (cf. Woods 1987). 
We assume here that a translation of the surface forms of sentences into a logical 
formalism is possible. Its details are not important for our aim of giving a semantic 
interpretation of paragraphs; the main theses of our theory do not depend on a logical 
notation. So we will use a very simple formalism, like the one above, resembling the 
standard first order language. But, obviously, there are other possibilities--for instance, 
the discourse representation structures (DRS's) of Kamp (1981), which have been used 
to translate a subset of English into logical formulas, to model text (identified with a list 
of sentences), to analyze a fragment of English, and to deal with anaphora. The logical 
177 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
notation of Montague (1970) is more sophisticated, and may be considered another pos- 
sibility. Jackendoff's (1983) formalism is richer and resembles more closely an English 
grammar. Jackendoff (1983, p. 14) writes "it would be perverse not to take as a working 
assumption that language is a relatively efficient and accurate ncoding of the infor- 
mation it conveys." Therefore a formalism of the kind he advocates would probably be 
most suitable for an implementation f our semantics. It will also be a model for our 
simplified logical notation (cf. Section 5). We can envision asystem that uses data struc- 
tures produced by a computational grammar to obtain the logical form of sentences. 
3.1 Finite Representations, Finite Theories 
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, we assume that formulas are expressed in a certain 
(formal) language L without equality; the extension L(=) of L is going to be used only 
in Section 5 for dealing with noun phrase references. This means that natural language 
expressions such as "A is B," "A is the same as B," etc. are not directly represented by 
logical equality; similarly, "not" is often not treated as logical negation; cf. Hintikka 
(1985). 
All logical notions that we are going to consider, such as theory or model, will 
be finitary. For example, a model would typically contain fewer than a hundred ele- 
ments of different logical sorts. Therefore these notions, and all other constructs we 
are going to define (axioms, metarules, definitions etc.) are computational, lthough 
usually we will not provide explicit algorithms for computing them. The issues of 
control are not so important for us at this point; we restrict ourselves to describing 
the logic. This Principle of Finitism is also assumed by Johnson-Laird (1983), Jackendoff 
(1983), Kamp (1981), and implicitly or explicitly by almost all researchers in compu- 
tational linguistics. As a logical postulate it is not very radical; it is possible within a 
finitary framework to develop that part of mathematics that is used or has potential 
applications in natural science, such as mathematical analysis (cf. Mycielski 1981). 
On the other hand, a possible obstacle to our strategy of using only finite objects is 
the fact that the deductive closure of any set of formulas is not finite in standard logic, 
while, clearly, we will have to deduce new facts from formal representations of text 
and background knowledge. But there are several ways to avoid this obstruction. For 
example, consider theories consisting of universal formulas without function symbols. 
Let Th(T) of such a theory T be defined as T plus ground clauses/sets of literals prov- 
able from T in standard logic. It is easily seen that it is a closure, i.e. Th(Th(T)) = Th(T); 
and obviously, it is finite, for finite T. It makes ense then to require that logical conse- 
quences of paragraph sentences have similar finite representations. However, in order 
not to limit the expressive power of the formal language, we should proceed in a 
slightly different manner. The easiest way to achieve the above requirement is by pos- 
tulating that all universes of discourse are always finite, and therefore all quantifiers 
actually range over finite domains. In practice, we would use those two and other 
tricks: we could forbid more than three quantifier changes, because ven in mathe- 
matics more than three are rare; we could restrict he size of universes of discourse to 
some large number such as 1001; we could allow only a fixed finite nesting of func- 
tion symbols (or operators) in formulas; etc. The intention of this illustration was to 
convince the reader that we now can introduce the following set of definitions. 
Definitions 
? A theory is a finite set of sentences Sent (formulas without free variables 
in some formal anguage). 
178 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
? A deductive closure operator is a function Th : P(Sent) --* P(Sent) 
(a) T c Th(T), for any T, 
(b) Th(Th(T)) = Th(T), 
(c) Th(T) is finite, for finite T; additionally, we require it to be 
ground, for ground T. 
? A theory T is consistent if there is no formula ~ such that both ~ and -~ 
belong to Th(T) (and inconsistent o herwise). 
? A model of a theory T is defined, as usual, as an interpretation defined on 
a certain domain, which satisfies all formulas of T. The collection of all 
(finite) models of a theory T will be denoted by Mods(T). 
? The set of all subformulas of a collection of formulas F is denoted by 
Form(F). ~ is a ground instance of a formula G if ~ contains no variables, 
and ~ = ~,  for some substitution 0.
Thus, we do not require Th(T) to be closed under substitution i stances of tautologies. 
Although in this paper we take modus ponens as the main rule of inference, in general 
one can consider deductive closures with respect o weaker, nonstandard logics, (cf. 
Levesque 1984; Frisch 1987; Patel-Schneider 1985). But we won't pursue this topic 
further here. 
3.2 The Structure of Background Knowledge 
Background knowledge is not a simple list of meaning postulates--it has a structure 
and it may contain contradictions and ambiguities. These actualities have to be taken 
into account in any realistic model of natural language understanding. For instance, the 
verb "enter" is polysemous. But, unless context specifies otherwise, "to come in" is a 
more plausible meaning than "to join a group." Assuming some logical representation 
of this knowledge, we can write that 
enter(x, y) --* {come_in (x~ y); place(y)} 
enter(x, y) --* {join(x, y)&group(y);. . .} 
(el) 
(e2) 
and e2 ~enter el. 
Two things should be explained now about this notation: 
Meanings of predicates/words are represented on the right-hand sides of 
the arrows as collections of formulas--i.e., theories. The main idea is that 
these mini-theories of predicates appearing in a paragraph will jointly 
provide enough constraints o exclude implausible interpretations. (One 
can think of meanings as regions in space, and of constraints as sets of 
linear inequalities approximating these regions). How this can be done, 
we will show in a moment. 
These theories are partially ordered; and their partial orders are written 
as  <enter(x,y), or <enter, or <i, or simply <, depending on context. This is 
our way of making formal the asymmetry of plausibility of different 
meanings of a predicate. Again, a way of exploiting it will be shown 
below. 
179 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
Definition 
A referential level R is a structure 
R = {(?, <?) : ? E Formulae} 
where---for each ? - -  <? is a partially ordered (by a relation of 
plausibility) collection of implications ? ~ T?. 
The term ? --* T stands for the theory {? --* ~- : ~- E T}, and 
~) ---* {?1, ?2, ' '  "} abbreviates {? --* ?1, ? --* ?2, . . .}.  
It is convenient to assume also that all formulas, except "laws"--which 
are supposed to be always true---have the least preferred empty 
interpretation ~. 
We suppose also that interpretations are additionally ranked according 
to the canonical partial ordering on subformulas. The ranking provides a 
natural method of dealing with exceptions, as in the case of finding an 
interpretation of ~ & p & fl with R containing (~ --* y), (c~ & fl ~ -~y), 
where -~y would be preferred to ywif both are consistent, and both 
defaults are equally preferred. This means that preference is given to 
more specific information. For instance, the sentence The officer went out 
and struck the flag will get the reading "lowered the flag," if the 
appropriate theory of strike(x, y)&flag(y) is part of background 
knowledge; if not, it will be understood as "hit the flag." 
The referential level (R, <) may contain the theories listed below. Since we view 
a dictionary as an (imperfect) embodiment of a referential level, we have derived the 
formulas in every theory T? from a dictionary definition of the term ?. We believe that 
even such a crude model can be useful in practice, but a refinement of this model will 
be needed to have a sophisticated theory of a working natural anguage understanding 
system. 
enter(x, y) --. {come_in(x, y); place(y);...} (el) 
/* enter--to come into a place */ 
enter(x, y) --* join(x, y)&group(y); typically : professionals(y)} (e2) 
/* enter--to join a group; typically of professionals */
ship(x) --* {large_boat(x); 3y carry(x, y)&(people(y) v goods(y));...} (shl) 
/* ship--a large boat for carrying people or goods on the sea */ 
ship(x) ---, {(large,aircraft(x) V space_vehicle(x));...} 
bring(x, y) --* {carry(x, y);...} 
bring(x, y) --. {cause(x, y);...} 
disease(y) ---, {illness(y);...} 
/* disease 
(sh2) 
(bl) 
/* bring--to carry */ 
(b2) 
/* bring--to cause */ 
(de1) 
illness caused by an infection */ 
180 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
disaster(y) ~ {. . .  ; 3x cause(y, x)&harm(x) . . .} 
port(x) ~ {harbor(x);. . .} 
( . . . )  
(dr1) 
/* disaster---causes a harm */ 
(pl) 
/* port--harbor */ 
Note: We leave undefined the semantics of adverbs uch as typically in (e2). This ad- 
verb appears in the formula s an operator; our purpose in choosing this representation 
is to call the reader's attention to the fact that for any real applications the theories 
will have to be more complex and very likely written in a higher order language (cf. 
Section 4). 
The theories, which we describe here only partially, restricting ourselves to their 
relevant parts, represent the meanings of concepts. We assume as before that (el) is 
more plausible than (e2), i.e. e2 <enter el; similarly, for (shl), (sh2) and <ship, etc. This 
particular ordering of theories is based on the ordering of meanings of the correspond- 
ing words in dictionaries (derived and less frequent meanings have lower priority). 
But one can imagine deriving such orderings by other means, such as statistics. 
The partial order <enter has the theories {el, e2, ~} as its domain; ~ is the least 
preferred empty interpretation corresponding to our lack of knowledge about the 
predicate; it is used when both (el) and (e2) are inconsistent with a current object 
theory. The domain is ordered by the relation of preference ~<enter e2 <enter el. The 
theory (el) will always be used in constructing theories and models of paragraphs 
in which the expression "enter" (in any grammatical form) appears, unless assuming 
it would lead to an inconsistency. In such a case, the meaning of "to enter" would 
change to (e2), or some other theory belonging to R. 
We would like to stress three points now: (1) the above implications are based 
on the definitions that actually occur in dictionaries; (2) the ordering can actually be 
found in some dictionaries--it is not our own arbitrary invention; (3) it is natural to 
treat a dictionary definition as a theory, since it expresses "the analysis of a set of 
facts in their relation to one another," different definitions corresponding to possible 
different analyses. (Encyclopedia articles are even more theory-like.) In this sense, the 
notion of a referential level is a formalization of a real phenomenon. 
Obviously, dictionaries or encyclopedias do not include all knowledge an agent 
must have to function in the world, or a program should possess in order to under- 
stand any kind of discourse. Although the exact boundary between world knowledge 
and lexical knowledge is impossible to draw, we do know that lexicons usually contain 
very little information about human behavior or temporal relations among objects of 
the world. Despite all these differences, we may assume that world knowledge and 
lexical knowledge (its proper subset) have a similar formal structure. And in the ex- 
amples that we present, it is the structure that matters. 
3.3 How to Use Background Knowledge 
The next few pages will be devoted to an analysis of the interaction of background 
knowledge with a logical representation f a text. We will describe two modes of such 
an interaction; both seem to be present in our understanding of language. One exploits 
differences in plausibility of the meanings of words and phrases, in the absence of 
context (e.g., the difference between a central and a peripheral sense, or between a
frequent and a rare meaning). The other one takes advantage of connections between 
those meanings. We do not claim that this is the only possible such analysis; rather, 
181 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
we present a formal model which can perhaps be eventually disproved and replaced 
by a better one. As far as we know, this is the first such formal proposal. 
3.3.1 Dominance. In Figure I the theories of "enter," ship," etc. and the partial orders 
are represented graphically; more plausible theories are positioned higher. A path 
through this graph chooses an interpretation of the sentence S. For instance, the path 
f int  = {el, shl~ pl, bl, dl} and S say together that 
A large boat (ship) that carries people or goods came into the harbor and carried a 
disease (illness). 
Since it is the "highest" path, fint is the most plausible (relative to R) interpretation of
the words that appear in the sentence. Because it is also consistent, it will be chosen 
as a best interpretation of S, (cf. Zadrozny 1987a, 1987b). Another theory, consisting 
of f~ = {el, sh2, pl, b2~ dl} and S, saying that 
A space vehicle came into the harbor and caused a disease~illness 
is less plausible according to that ordering. As it turns out, f~ is never constructed in 
the process of building an interpretation of a paragraph containing the sentence S, 
unless assuming fint would lead to a contradiction, for instance within the higher level 
context of a science fiction story. 
The collection of these most plausible consistent interpretations of a given theory 
T is denoted by PT< (T). Then fint belongs to PT< (Th({S})), but this is not true for f'. 
Note: One should remember that, in general, because all our orderings are partial, 
there can be more than one most plausible interpretation of a sentence or a paragraph, 
and more that one "next best" interpretation. Moreover, to try to impose a total order 
on all the paths (i.e. the cartesian product defined in Section 3.3.2) would be a mistake; 
it would mean that ambiguities, represented in our formalism by existence of more 
than one ("best'0 interpretation of a text, are outlawed. 
3.3.2 Cartesian Products. Formalization of the interpretation produced in 3.3.1. is pre- 
sented below. Any path through the graph of Figure 1 is an element .of the cartesian 
product I'I~Esubformulas(S) (~I, of the partial orderings. 
Figure 2 explains the geometric intuitions we associate with the product and the 
ordering. The product itself is given by the following definition: 
Definition 
Let F be a collection of formulas ~e, e G m, for some natural number m; and let, for 
each e, <e be a partial ordering on the collection theories 
of ~be. Define: 
{?e .... ,?e G,} 
I I(F) ~- 1--\[ (e= 0c: (Ve G m)(31 < ne)~(e) = ~de -'~ Z~\]} 
e~m 
We denote by < the partial order induced on II(F) by the orderings <e and the canoni- 
cal ordering of subformulas (a formula is "greater" than its subformulas). The geomet- 
rical meaning of this ordering can be expressed as "higher paths are more important 
provided they pass through the most specific nodes." 
182 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
/ / /S  
f in t~ .,..,,~1 
.e I c - - - - -s  h I bit _.. i f l . -  j "~  J ~.....,,1~1 
e2 sh2, b2" a a 
I I I 
a a Q 
Figure 1 
The partial ordering of theories of the referential level R and the ordering of interpretations. 
Since (shl) and (bl) dominate (respectively) (sh2) and (b2), the path f, nt represents a more 
plausible interpretation than ft. 
<1 <2 <5 
"flag" "strike" "strike ~ flag" 
(2) 
"cloth" "hit/anger" "lower" j (I) 
(4) 
"tail" (3) 
"music" 
Figure 2 
The cartesian product I-I <i=-<1 x <2 x K3 can be depicted as a collection of all paths through 
the graphs representing the partial orderings; a path chooses only one element from each 
ordering--thus (1) and (2) are "legal" paths, while (4) is not. Also, more plausible theories 
appear higher: "cloth" > "music" > ~. More specific paths are preferred: Assuming that all 
higher paths, like path (1), are excluded by inconsistency, path (2) is the most plausible 
interpretation f c~&fl, and it is preferred to (3). (More explanations in the text). 
To make Figure 2 more intuitive we assigned some meanings to the partial orders. 
Thus, (1 represents some possible meanings of "flag," shown with the help of the "key 
words;" the meaning "piece of cloth" preferred to "deer's tail." The word "strike" has 
dozens of meanings, and we can imagine that the meaning of the transitive verb being 
represented by (2, with "hit in anger" at the top, then "hit, e.g. a ball" and "discover" 
equally preferred, and then all other possible meanings. The trivial (3 representing 
183 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
"strike a flag" should remind us that we already know all that from Section 3.2. Notice 
that path (2) does not give us the correct interpretation f "strike the flag," which is 
created from "cloth"~-"lower." 
Each element of the cartesian product I-\[ <i represents a set of possible meanings. 
These meanings can be combined in various ways, the simplest of which consists of 
taking their union as we did in 3.3.1. But a paragraph isn't just a sum of its sentences, 
as a sentence isn't simply a concatenation f its phrases. The cohesion devices--such 
as "but," "unless," since"--arrange s ntences together, and they also have semantic 
functions. This is reflected, for instance, in the way various pieces of background 
knowledge are pasted together. Fortunately, at this point we can abstract from this by 
introducing an operator variable ? whose meaning will be, as a default, that of a set 
theoretic union, U; but, as we describe it in Section 6.2, it can sometimes be changed 
to a more sophisticated join operator. There, when considering the semantics of "but," 
we'll see that referential level theories can be combined in slightly more complicated 
ways. In other words, a partial theory corresponding to a paragraph cannot be just a 
sum of the theories of its sentencesIthe arrangement of those theories hould obey 
the metalevel composition rules, which give the semantics of connectives. However, 
from a purely formal point of view, @ can be any function producing a theory from a 
collection of theories. 
The cartesian product represents all possible amalgamations of these elementary 
theories. In other words, this product is the space of possible combinations of mean- 
ings, some of which will be inconsistent with the object level theory T. We can imme- 
diately exclude the inconsistent combinations, eliminating at least some nonsense: 
I:I(F) = {f E II(F) : ?f is consistent with T} 
It remains now to fill in the details of the construction of PT<. We assume that a text 
P can be translated into a (ground) theory/5 (a set of logical sentences); T = Th(P) is 
the set of logical consequences of P. We denote by F the set Form(Th(_fi))--the set of all 
subformulas of Th(/5), about which we shall seek information at the referential level 
R. If F = {~bl(C'~),... ~b,(C'n)} (~/is a collection of constants that are arguments of ~bi), 
is this theory, we have to describe a method of augmenting it with the background 
knowledge. We can assume without loss of generality that each ~i(~i) in F has, in R, a 
corresponding partial order <i of theories of ~i(xi). We now substitute the constants c'i
for the variables xi inside the theories of <i. With a slight abuse of notation, we will use 
the same symbol <i for the new ordering. The product spaces II(F) and I:I(F) can then 
be defined as before, with the new orderings in place of the ones with variables. Notice 
that if only some of the variables of ~bi(~i) were bound by c'i, the same construction 
would work. We have arrived then at a general method of linking object level formulas 
with their theories from R. 
Now we can define PT< (T) of the theory T as the set of most likely consistent 
theories of T given by (H(F), <), where F = Form(T): 
PT<(T) = {TUT' :T '= ?f and f is a maximal element of (I~I(F), <)} 
Notice that PT< (T) can contain more than one theory, meaning that T is ambiguous. 
This is a consequence of the fact that the cartesian product is only partially ordered 
by <. The main reason for using ground instances ~i(Ci) in modifying the orderings 
is the need to deal with multiple occurrences of the same predicate, as in 
John went to the bank by the bank. 
184 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
The above construction is also very close in spirit to Poole's (1988) method for default 
reasoning, where object theories are augmented by ground instances of defaults. 
3.3.3 Coherence Links. The reasoning that led to the intended interpretation fi t in our 
discussion of dominance was based on the partial ordering of the theories of R. We 
want to exploit now another property of the theories of R--their coherence. Finding 
an interpretation for a natural anguage text or sentence typically involves an appeal 
to coherence. Consider 
$2: Entering the port, a ship brought adisaster. 
Using the coherence link between (b2) and (dr1) (cf. Section 3.2)--the presence of 
cause(*, ,) in the theories of "bring" and "disaster"--we can find a partial coherent 
interpretation T E PTc(Th({S2})) of $2. In this interpretation, theories explaining the 
meanings of terms are chosen on the basis of shared terms. This makes (b2) ("to bring" 
means "to cause") plausible and therefore it would be included in T. The formalization 
of all this is given below: 
Definitions 
? The set of all theories about the formulas of T is defined as: 
Here, we ignore the ordering, because we are interested only in 
connections between concepts (represented by words). 
? If t, t r E G(T), t ~ t I, share a predicate, we say that there is a c-link 
between t and tC A c-path is defined as a chain of c-links; i.e. if 
t = ~ --* T and t ~ = ~' --* T' belong to a c-path, then ~ ~ ~'. 
Under this condition, for any predicate, only one of its theories will 
belong to a c-path. A c-path therefore chooses only one meaning for each 
term. 
? C(T) will denote the set of all c-paths in G(T) consistent with T, i.e. for 
each p E C(T), Op td T is consistent. 
This construction is like the one we have encountered when defining 
I~I(T). The details should be filled out exactly as before; we leave this to 
the reader. 
? We define PTc(T) of a theory T as the set of most coherent consistent 
theories of T given by C(T): 
PTc(T) = {T U T' : T' -- ?p and p is a C - maximal element of C(T)} 
Going back to $2, PTc(Th(S2)) contains also the interpretation based on 
the coherence link between "ship" and "bring," which involves "carry." 
Based on the just-described coherence relations, we conclude that 
sentence $2 is ambiguous; it has two interpretations, based on the two 
senses of "bring." Resolution of ambiguities involves factors beyond the 
scope of this section--for instance, Gricean maxims and topic (Section 6), 
or various notions of context (cf. Small et al 1988). We will continue the 
185 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
topic of the interaction of object level theories with background 
knowledge by showing how the two methods of using background 
knowledge can be combined. 
3.3.4 Partial Theories. A finer interpretation of an object level theory T--its partial 
theory--is obtained by the iteration: 
PT(T) = PT< (PTc(Th(T) ) 
PT is well defined after we specify that PT of a set of theories is the set of the PTs 
(for both < and C): 
PT{~( {T~, T2,...} ) = PT(~(T1) U PT,\](T2) U... 
Notice that coherence does not decide between (el) and (e2) given the above R, but 
the iteration produces two theories of $2, both of which assert that the meaning of 
"ship entered" is "ship came." 
A ship~boat came into the harbor/port and caused~brought a disaster. 
A ship~boat came into the harbor/port and carried/brought a disaster. 
PT({S1}) contains only one interpretation based on fint" 
A ship~boat came into the harbor~port and carried~brought a disease. 
Partial theories will be the main syntactic onstructs in the subsequent sections. In 
particular, the p-models will be defined as some special models or partial theories of 
paragraphs. 
3.4 Summary and Discussion 
We have shown that finding an interpretation of a sentence depends on two graph- 
theoretical properties--coherence and dominance. Coherence is a purely "associative" 
property; we are interested only in the existence of links between represented con- 
cepts/theories. Dominance uses the directionality of the partial orders. 
A partial theory PT(T) of an object theory T corresponding to a paragraph is 
obtained by joining most plausible theories or sentences, collocations, and words of 
the paragraph. However, this simple picture must be slightly retouched to account 
for semantic roles of inter- and intra-sentential connectives uch as "but," and to 
assure consistency of the partial theory. These modifications have complicated the 
definitions a little bit. The above definitions capture the fact that even if, in principle, 
any consistent combination of the mini-theories about predicates can be extended to 
an interpretation, we are really interested only in the most plausible ones. The theory 
PT(T) is called "partial" because it does not contain all knowledge about predicates-- 
less plausible properties are excluded from consideration, although they are accessible 
should an inconsistency appear. Moreover, the partiality is related to the unutilized 
possibility of iterating the operator PT (cf. Section 4). 
How can we now summarize what we have learned about he three logical levels? 
To begin with, one should notice that they are syntactically distinct. If object level 
theories are expressed by collections of first order formulas, metalevel definitions-- 
e.g., to express as a default hat ? is a set theoretical union--require another language, 
186 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
such as higher order logic or set theory, where one can define predicates dealing 
with models, consistency, and provability. Even if all background knowledge were 
described, as in our examples, by sets of first order theories, because of the preferences 
and inconsistencies of meanings, we could not treat R as a flat database of facts--such 
a model simply would not be realistic. Rather, R must be treated as a separate logical 
level for these syntactic reasons, and because of its function--being a pool of possibly 
conflicting semantic onstraints. 
The last point may be seen better if we look at some differences between our 
system and KRYPTON, which also distinguishes between an object heory and back- 
ground knowledge (cf. Brachman et al 1985). KRYPTON's A-box, encoding the object 
theory as a set of assertions, uses standard first order logic; the T-box contains informa- 
tion expressed in a frame-based language quivalent to a fragment of FOL. However, 
the distinction between the two parts is purely functional--that is, characterized in
terms of the system's behavior. From the logical point of view, the knowledge base 
is the union of the two boxes, i.e. a theory, and the entailment is standard. In our 
system, we also distinguish between the "definitional" and factual information, but 
the "definitional" part contains collections of mutually excluding theories, not just 
of formulas describing a semantic network. Moreover, in addition to proposing this 
structure of R, we have described the two mechanisms for exploiting it, "coherence" 
and "dominance," which are not variants of the standard first order entailment, but 
abduction. 
The idea of using preferences among theories is new, hence it was described in 
more detail. "Coherence," as outlined above, can be understood as a declarative (or 
static) version of marker passing (Hirst 1987; Charniak 1983), with one difference: the 
activation spreads to theories that share a predicate, not through the IS-A hierarchy, 
and is limited to elementary facts about predicates appearing in the text. 
The metalevel rules we are going to discuss in Section 6, and that deal with the 
Gricean maxims and the meaning of "but," can be easily expressed in the languages 
of set theory or higher order logic, but not everything expressible in those languages 
makes sense in natural language. Hence, putting limitations on the expressive power 
of the language of the metalevel will remain as one of many open problems. 
4. Coherence of Paragraphs 
We are now in a position to use the notion of the referential level in a formal definition 
of coherence and topic. Having done that, we will turn our attention to the resolution 
of anaphora, linking it with the provability relation (abduction) t-R+M and a metarule 
postulating that a most plausible model of a paragraph is one in which anaphors have 
references. Since the example paragraph we analyze has only one connective ("and"), 
we can postpone a discussion of connectives until Section 6. 
Building an interpretation f a paragraph does not mean finding all of its possible 
meanings; the implausible ones should not be computed at all. This viewpoint has 
been reflected in the definition of a partial theory as a most plausible interpretation 
of a sequence of predicates. Now we want to restrict he notion of a partial theory by 
introducing the formal notions of topic and coherence. We can then later (Section 5.2) 
define p-models--a category of models corresponding to paragraphs--as models of 
coherent theories that satisfy all metalevel conditions. 
The partial theories pick up from the referential level the most obvious or the 
most important information about a formula. This immediate information may be 
insufficient to decide the truth of certain predicates. It would seem therefore that 
the iteration of the PT operation to form a closure is needed (cf. Zadrozny 1987b). 
187 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
However, there are at least three arguments against iterating PT. First of all, iteration 
would increase the complexity of building a model of a paragraph; infinite iteration 
would almost certainly make impossible such a construction i real time. Secondly, the 
cooperative principle of Grice (1975, 1978), under the assumption that referential levels 
of a writer and a reader are quite similar, implies that the writer should structure the 
text in a way that makes the construction of his intended model easy for the reader; 
and this seems to imply that he should appeal only to the most direct knowledge of the 
reader. Finally, it has been shown by Groesser (1981) that the ratio of derived to explicit 
information ecessary for understanding a piece of text is about 8:1; furthermore, our 
reading of the analysis of five paragraphs by Crothers (1979) strongly suggests that 
only the most direct or obvious inferences are being made in the process of building a 
model or constructing a theory of a paragraph. Thus, for example, we can expect hat 
in the worst case only one or two steps of such an iteration would be needed to find 
answers to wh-questions. 
Let P be a paragraph, let /3 = ($1,..., Sn) be its translation into a sequence of 
logical formulas. The set of all predicates appearing in X will be denoted by Pred(X). 
Definition 
Let T be a partial theory of a paragraph P. A sequence of predicates appearing in i6, 
denoted by Tp, is called a topic of the paragraph P, if it is a longest sequence satisfying 
the conditions (1) and (2) below: 
1. For all "sentences" Si, (a) or (b) or (c) holds: 
(a) Direct reference to the topic: 
Tp C Pred(Si) 
(b) Indirect reference to the topic: 
If ? E Pred(Si) & (? -~ T?) E T, then Tp C Pred(T?) 
(c) Direct reference to a previous entence: 
If ? E Pred(Si) & (~ ~ T?) E T then Pred(Si_l)MPred(? ~ TV~ ) # 9~ 
2. Either (i) or (ii) is satisfied: 
(i) Existence of a topic sentence: Tp C Pred(Si), for some sentence Si; 
(ii) Existence of a topic sentence: a theory of Tp belongs to R, i.e. if 0 is 
the conjunction of predicates of Tp then 0 ~ To E R, for 
some To. 
The last two conditions ay that either the discussed concept (topic) already exists in 
the background knowledge or it must be introduced in a sentence. For instance, we 
can see that the sentence The effect of the Black Death was appalling can be assumed to 
be a topic sentence. 
The first three conditions make the requirements for a collection of sentences to 
have a topic. Either every sentence talks about he topic (as, for instance, the first two 
sentences of the paragraph about the Black Death), or a sentence refers to the topic 
188 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
through background knowledge----the topic appears in a theory about an entity or a 
relation of the sentence (in the case of Within twenty-four hours of infection . . . .  "infec- 
tion" can be linked to "disease'--cf. Sections 2 and 4.2), or else a sentence laborates 
a fragment of the previous sentence (the theme The effect of... being developed in In 
less than... ). 
The definition allows a paragraph to have more than one topic. For instance, a
paragraph consisting of 
John thinks Mary is pretty. John thinks Mary is intelligent. John wants to marry 
her. 
can be either about {John(\]), Mary(m), think(j, m, pretty(m))}, or about John, Mary, and 
marrying. (Notice that the condition 2 (i) forbids us merging the two topics into a 
larger one). Thus paragraphs can be ambiguous about what constitutes their topics. 
The point is that they should have one. 
It is also clear that what constitutes a topic depends on the way the content of 
paragraph sentences i represented. In the last case, if "pretty" were translated into a 
predicate, and not into a modifier of m (i.e. an operator), "John thinking about Mary" 
could not be a topic, for it wouldn't be the longest sequence of predicates atisfying 
the conditions (1) and (2). 
We'd like to put forward a hypothesis that this relationship between topics and 
representations can actually be useful: Because the requirement that a well-formed 
paragraph should have a topic is a very natural one (and we can judge pretty well 
what can be a topic and what can't), we can obtain a new method for judging semantic 
representations. Thus, if the naive first order representation containing pretty(m) as 
one of the formulas gives a wrong answer as to what is the topic of the above, or 
another, paragraph, we can reject it in favor of a (higher order) representation i
which adjectives and adverbs are operators, not predicates, and which provides us 
with an intuitively correct opic. Such a method can be used in addition to the standard 
criteria for judging representations, such as elegance and ability to express emantic 
generalizations. 
Definition 
A partial theory T E PT(P) of the paragraph P is coherent iff the paragraph P has a 
topic. 
A random permutation of just any sentences about a disease wouldn't be coher- 
ent. But it would be premature to jump to the conclusion that we need more than just 
existence of a topic as a condition for coherence. Although it may be the case that it 
will be necessary in the future to introduce notions like "temporal coherence," "deictic 
coherence," or "causal coherence," there is no need to start multiplying beings now. 
We can surmise that the random permutations we talk about would produce an in- 
consistent theory; hence, the temporal, causal, and other aspects would be dealt with 
by consistency. But of course at this point it is just a hypothesis. 
An important aspect of the definition is that coherence has been defined as a prop- 
erty of representation--in our case, it is a property of a formal theory. The existence of 
the topic, the direct or indirect allusion to it, and anaphora (which will be addressed 
below) take up the issue of formal criteria for a paragraph definition, which was raised 
189 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
by Bond and Hayes (1983) (cf. also Section 2.1). The question of paragraph length can 
probably be attended to by limiting the size of p-models, perhaps after introducing 
some kind of metric on logical data structures. 
Still, our definition of coherence may not be restrictive nough: two collections 
of sentences, one referring to "black" (about black pencils, black pullovers, and black 
poodles), the other one about "death" (war, cancer, etc.), connected by a sentence 
referring to both of these, could be interpreted as one paragraph about he new, broader 
topic "black + death." This problem may be similar to the situation in which current 
formal grammars allow nonsensical but parsable collections of words (e.g., "colorless 
green ideas... '9, while before the advent of Chomskyan formalisms, a sentence was 
defined as the smallest meaningful collection of words; Fowler (1965, p. 546) gives 10 
definitions of a sentence. 
It then seems worth differentiating between the creation of a new concept like 
"black + death," with a meaning given by a paraphrase of the example collection of 
sentences, and the acceptance of the new concept--storing it in R. In our case the 
concept "black + death," which does not refer to any normal experiences, would be 
discarded as useless, although the collection of sentences would be recognized as a 
strange, even if coherent, paragraph. 
We can also hope for some fine-tuning of the notion of topic, which would prevent 
many offensive xamples. This approach is taken in computational syntactic grammars 
(e.g. Jensen 1986); the number of unlikely parses is severely reduced whenever pos- 
sible, but no attempt is made to define only the so-called grammatical strings of a 
language. 
Finally, as the paragraph is a natural domain in which word senses can be reliably 
assigned to words or sentences can be syntactically disambiguated, larger chunks of 
discourse may be needed for precise assignment of topics, which we view as another 
type of disambiguation. Notice also that for coherence, as defined above, it does not 
matter whether the topic is defined as a longest, a shortest, or--simply--a sequence of 
predicates satisfying the conditions (1) and (2); the existence of a sequence is equivalent 
with the existence of a shortest and a longest sequence. The reason for choosing a 
longest sequence as the topic is our belief that the topic should rather contain more 
information about a paragraph than less. 
4.1 Comparison with Other Approaches 
At this point it may be proper to comment on the relationship between our theory of 
coherence and theories advocated by others. We are going to make such a comparison 
with the theories proposed by J. Hobbs (1979, 1982) that represent a more computa- 
tionally oriented approach to coherence, and those of T.A. van Dijk and W. Kintch 
(1983), who are more interested in addressing psychological nd cognitive aspects of 
discourse coherence. The quoted works seem to be good representatives for each of 
the directions; they also point to related literature. 
The approach we advocate is compatible with the work of these researchers, we 
believe. There are, however, some interesting differences: first of all, we emphasize the 
role of paragraphs; econd, we talk about formal principles regulating the organization 
and use of knowledge in language understanding; and third, we realize that natural 
language text (such as an on-line dictionary) can, in many cases, provide the type of 
commonsense background information that Hobbs (for example) advocated but didn't 
know how to access. (There are also some other, minor, differences. For instance, our 
three-level semantics does not appeal to possible worlds, as van Dijk and Kintch do; 
neither is it objectivist, as Hobbs' semantics eems to be.) 
190 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
We shall discuss only the first two points, since the third one has already been 
explained. 
The chief difference between our approach and the other two lies in identifying the 
paragraph as a domain of coherence. Hobbs, van Dijk, and Kintch distinguish between 
"local" coherence~a property of subsequent sentences--and "global" coherence---a 
property of discourse as a whole. Hobbs explains coherence in terms of an inventory 
of "local," possibly computable, coherence relations, like "elaboration," "occasion," 
etc. (Mann and Thompson 1983 give an even more detailed list of coherence relations 
than Hobbs.) Van Dijk and Kintch do this too, but they also describe "macrostructures" 
representing the global content of discourse, and they emphasize psychological and 
cognitive strategies used by people in establishing discourse coherence. Since we have 
linked coherence to models of paragraphs, we can talk simply about "coherence"-- 
without adjectives--as  property of these models. To us the first "local" domain seems 
to be too small, and the second "global" one too large, for constructing meaningful 
computational models. To be sure, we believe relations between pairs of sentences are 
worth investigating, especially in dialogs. However, in written discourse, the smallest 
domain of coherence is a paragraph, very much as the sentence is the basic domain 
of grammaticality (although one can also judge the correctness of phrases). 
To see the advantage of assuming that coherence is a property of a fragment of a 
text/discourse, and not a relation between subsequent sentences, let us consider for 
instance the text 
John took a train from Paris to Istanbul. He likes spinach. 
According to Hobbs (1979, p. 67), these two sentences are incoherent. However, the 
same fragment, augmented with the third sentence Mary told him yesterday that the 
French spinach crop failed and Turkey is the only country... (ibid.) suddenly (for Hobbs) 
becomes coherent. It seems that any analysis of coherence in terms of the relation 
between subsequent sentences cannot explain this sudden change; after all, the first 
two sentences didn't change when the third one was added. On the other hand, this 
change is easily explained when we treat the first two sentences as a paragraph: 
if the third sentence is not a part of the background knowledge, the paragraph is 
incoherent. And the paragraph obtained by adding the third sentence is coherent. 
Moreover, coherence here is clearly the result of the existence of the topic "John likes 
spinach." 
We derive coherence from formal principles regulating the organization and use 
of knowledge in language understanding. Although, like the authors discussed above, 
we stress the importance of inferencing and background knowledge in determining 
coherence, we also address the problem of knowledge organization; for us the cen- 
tral problem is how a model emerges from such an organization. Hobbs sets forth 
hypotheses about the interaction of background knowledge with sentences that are 
examined at a given moment; van Dijk and Kintch provide a wealth of psychological 
information on that topic. But their analyses of how such knowledge could be used 
are quasi-formal. Our point of departure is different: we assume a certain simple struc- 
ture of the referential level (partial orders) and a natural way of using the knowledge 
contained there ("coherence links" + "most plausible = first"). Then we examine what 
corresponds to "topic" and "coherence"---they become mathematical concepts. In this 
sense our work refines these concepts, changes the way of looking at them by linking 
them to the notion of paragraph, and puts the findings of the other researchers into a 
new context. 
191 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
5. Models of Paragraphs 
We argue below that paragraphs can be mapped into models with small, finite uni- 
verses. We could have chosen another, more abstract semantics, with infinite models, 
but in this and all cases below we have in mind computational reasons for this enter- 
prise. Thus, as in the case of Kamp's (1981) DRS, we shall construct a kind of Herbrand 
model of texts, with common and proper names translated into unary predicates, in- 
transitive verbs into unary predicates, and transitive verbs into binary predicates. In 
building the logical model M of a collection of formulas S corresponding to the sen- 
tences of a paragraph, we assume that the universe of M contains constants introduced 
by elements of S, usually by ones corresponding toNPs, and possibly by some formu- 
las picked by the construction from the referential level. However, we are interested 
not in the relationship between truth conditions and representations of a sentence, 
but in a formalization of the way knowledge is used to produce a representation f a 
section of text. Therefore we need not only a logical description of the truth conditions 
of sentences, as presented by Kamp, but also a formal analysis of how background 
knowledge and metalevel operations are used in the construction of models. This 
extension is important and nontrivial; we doubt that one .can deal effectively with 
coherence, anaphora, presuppositions or the semantics of connectives without it. We 
have begun presenting such an analysis in Section 3, and we continue now. 
5.1 The Example Revisited: Preparation for Building a Model 
We return now to the example paragraph, to illustrate how the interaction between 
an object heory and a referential level produces a coherent interpretation f the text 
(i.e., a p-model) and resolves the anaphoric references. The method will be similar 
to, but more formal than, what was presented in Section 2. In order not to bore the 
reader with the same details all over again, we will use a shorter version of the same 
text. 
Example 2 
PI: In 1347 a ship entered the port of Messina bringing with it the disease 
that came to be known as the Black Death. 
P2: It struck rapidly. 
P3: Within twenty-four hours of infection came an agonizing death. 
5.1.1 Translation to Logic. The text concerns events happening in time. Naturally, we 
will use a logical notation in which formulas may have temporal and event compo- 
nents. We assume that any formal interpretation f time will agree with the intuitive 
one. So it is not necessary now to present a formal semantics here. The reader may 
consult recent papers on this subject (e.g. Moens and Steedman 1987; Webber 1987) to 
see what a formal interpretation f events in time might look like. Since sentences can 
refer to events described by other sentences, we may need also a quotation operator; 
Perlis (1985) describes how first order logic can be augmented with such an operator. 
Extending and revising Jackendoff's (1983) formalism seems to us a correct method 
to achieve the correspondence b tween syntax and semantics expressed in the gram- 
matical constraint ("that one should prefer a semantic theory that explains otherwise 
arbitrary generalizations about the syntax and the lexicon"---ibid.). 
However, as noted before, we will use a simplified version of such a logical no- 
tation; we will have only time, event, result, and property as primitives. After these 
remarks we can begin constructing the model of the example paragraph. We assume 
192 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
that constants are introduced by NPs. We have then 
(i) Constants  s, m, d, i, b, 1347 satisfying: ship(s), Messina(m), disease(d), 
infection(i), death(b), year(1347). 
(ii) Formulae  
$1: \[t ime: year(1347); event : enter(s,m) & ship(s) & port(m) & 
bring(xo, d) & disease(d) & name(d, BlackDeath)  & (Xo -- s V 
x0 = d V x0 -- m)\] 
$2: t ime : past; event : rapidly: strike(yo) & (yo -- s V yo = m V 
y0 --  d)\] 
$3: 3t, t'{\[time : t; infection(i)\] & \[time: t' c (t, t + 24h); 
event :come(b) & death(b) & agonizing(b)\]} 
The notation t ime : ~(t); event : fl should be understood as meaning 
that the event described by the formula fl took place in (or during) the 
time period described by the formula c~(t), t ranges over instants of time 
(not intervals). 
Note. We assume that "strike" is used intransitively. But our construction of the 
p-models of the paragraph would look exactly the same for the transitive meaning, 
except that we would be expected to infer that people were harmed by the illness. 
5.1.2 Referential Level. We use only standard dictionaries as a source of background 
information. The content of this information is of secondary importance we want to 
stress the formal, logical side of the interaction between the referential level and the 
object theory. Therefore we represent both in our simplified logical notation, and not 
in English. All formulas at the referential level below have been obtained by a direct 
translation of appropriate ntries in Webster's and Longman. The translation in this 
case was manual, but could be automated. 
? Referent ia l  leve l  (a fragment): 
ship(x) --, {large: boat(x); 3ycarry(x,y) & (people(y) v goods(y)) & agent(x);...} (shl) 
/* ship--a large boat for carrying people or goods on the sea */ 
bring(x, y) --* {carry(x, y); ...} (bl) 
strike(x, y) --* {hit(x, y); agent(x) & patient(y);...} 
strike(x) --~ {hit(x); agent(x);...} 
strike(x) --* {illness(x) & By suddenly:harm(x, y);...} 
/* bring--to carry */ 
(sla) 
(slb) 
/* strike---to hit */ 
(s2 _ex) 
/* strike---to harm suddenly; "they were struck by illness */ 
193 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
disease(y) ---* {illness(y) & 3z (infection(z) & causes(z,y));...} (dl) 
/* disease illness caused by an infection */ 
death(x) --~ {3t, y\[x =' \[t ime:t;  event :die(y) & (ereature.(y) v plant(y))\]'\]} (de_l) 
/* death--an event in which a creature or a plant dies */ 
come(x) --* {3t\[time : t; event :arrive(x)\]} (ct_l) 
/* to come--to arrive (...) in the course of time */ 
infection(x) --~ {3e, y, z\[e = event :infect(y, z) & person(y) & disease(z))\] 
& x -- result(e)} (i_1) 
/* infection--the r sult of being infected by a disease */ 
agonizing(x) ~ {3y causes(x, y) & pain(y)} (a_l) 
/* agonizing---causing great pain */ 
enter(x, y) - .  {come_in(x, y); place(y)} (e_l) 
/* enter--to come into a place */ 
We have shown, in Section 3, the role of preferences in building the model of a para- 
graph. Therefore, to make our exposition clearer, we assume that all the above theories 
are equally preferred. Still, some interesting things will happen before we arrive at our 
intended model. 
5.1.3 Provability and Anaphora Resolution. To formalize a part of the process for 
finding antecedents of anaphors, we have to introduce a new logical notion--the re- 
lation of weak R + M-abduction. This relation would hold, for instance, between the 
object heory of our example paragraph and a formula expressing the equality of two 
constants, i and i', denoting (respectively) the "infection" in the sentence Within twenty- 
four hours of infection . . . .  and the "infection" of the theory (dl)--a disease is an illness 
caused by an infection. This equality i = i' cannot be proven, but it may be reasonably 
assumed--we know that in this case the infection i' caused the illness, which, in turn, 
caused the death. 
The necessity of this kind of merging of arguments has been recognized before: 
Charniak and McDermott (1985) call it abductive unification~matching, Hobbs (1978, 1979) 
refers to such operations using the terms knitting or petty conversational implicature. 
Neither Hobbs nor Charniak and McDermott ried then to make this notion precise, 
but the paper by Hobbs et al (1988) moves in that direction. The purpose of this 
subsection is to formalize and explain how assumptions like that one above can be 
made. 
Definition 
A formula ~ is weakly provable from an object heory T, expressed as T t-r ~, iff there 
exists a partial theory T E PT(T) such that T F ~b, i.e. T proves ~ in logic. (We call F-r 
"weak" because it is enough to find one partial theory proving a given formula.) 
As an example, in the case of the three-sentence paragraph, we have a partial 
theory T1 based on (slb) saying that " 'it' hits rapidly," and T2 saying that "an illness 
('it') harms rapidly" (s2_ex). Thus both statements are weakly provable. 
194 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
Since we view the metalevel constraints M rather as rules for choosing models than 
as special inference rules, the definition of the R+M-abduction is model-theoretic, not 
proof-theoretic: 
Definition 
A preferred model of a theory T is an element of Mods(T) that satisfies metalevel con- 
straints contained in M. The set of all preferred models of T is denoted by PM(T). 
A formula 4 of L(=), the language with equality, is weakly R + M-abductible from 
an object heory T, denoted by T ~-a+M G iff there exists a partial theory T E PT(T) and 
a preferred model M E PM(T) such that M ~ G i.e. 4 is true in at least one preferred 
model of the partial theory T. 
Note: The notions of strong provability and strong R + M-abduction can be in- 
troduced by replacing "there exists" by "all" in the above definitions (cf. Zadrozny 
1987b). We will have, however, no need for "strong" notions in this paper. Also, in a 
practical system, "satisfies" should be probably replaced by "violates fewest." 
Obviously, it is better to have references of pronouns resolved than not. After 
all, we assume that texts make sense, and that authors know these references. That 
applies to references of noun phrases too. On the other hand, there must be some 
restrictions on possible references; we would rather assume that "spinach" ~ "train" 
(i.e. V x,y)(spinach(x) & train(y) --, x # y)), or "ship" # "disease." Two elementary 
conditions limiting the number of equalities are: an equality N1 = N2 may be assumed 
only if either N1 and N2 are listed as synonyms (or paraphrases) or their equality is 
explicitly asserted by the partial theory T. Of course there are other conditions, like 
"typically, the determiner 'a' introduces a new entity, while 'the' refers to an already 
introduced constant." (But notice that in our example paragraph "infection" appears 
without an article.) All these, and other, guidelines can be articulated in the form of 
metarules. 
We define another partial order, this time on models Mods(T) of a partial theory 
T of a paragraph: M1 >= M2, if M1, satisfies more R + M-abductible qualities than 
M2. The principle articulating preference for having the references resolved can now 
be expressed as 
Metarule 1 
Assume that T E PT(P) is a partial theory of a paragraph P. Every preferred model 
M E PM(T) is a maximal element of the ordering >= of Mods(T). 
To explain the meaning of the metarule, let us analyze the paragraph (P1, P2, P3) 
and the background knowledge needed for some kind of rudimentary understanding 
of that text. The rule (i_1) (infection is a result of being infected by a disease... ), dealing 
with the infection i, introduces a disease dl; we also know about the existence of the 
disease d in 1347. Now, notice that there may be many models satisfying the object 
theory of the paragraph P augmented by the background knowledge. But we can find 
two among them: in one, call it M1, d and dl are identical; in the other one, M2, they 
are distinct. The rule says that only the first one has a chance to be a preferred model 
of the paragraph; it has more noun phrase references resolved than the other model, 
or--formally--it satisfies more R + M-abductible qualities, and therefore M1 >= M2. 
This reasoning, as the reader surely has noticed, resembles the example about 
infections from the beginning of this section. The difference between the cases lies in 
the equality d = dl being the result of a formal choice of a model, while i = i ~ wasn't 
proved, just "reasonably" assumed. 
195 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
In interpreting texts, knowledge of typical subjects and typical objects of verbs 
helps in anaphora resolution (cf. Braden-Harder & Zadrozny 1990). Thus if we know 
that A farmer grows vegetables, either having obtained this information directly from 
a text, or from R, we can reasonably assume tlhat He also grows some cotton refers to 
the farmer, and not to a policeman mentioned in the same paragraph. Of course, this 
should be only a defeasible assumption, if nothing indicates otherwise. We now want 
to express this strategy as a metarule: 
Metarule 2 
Let us assume that it is known that P(a, b) & Q(a) & R(b), and it is not known that 
P(a', X), for any X. Then models in which P(a, c) & R'(c) holds are preferred to models 
in which P(a',c) & R'(c) is true. 
One can think of this rule as a model-theoretic version of Ockham's razor or 
abduction; it says "minimize the number of things that have the property P(,, ,)," 
and it allows us to draw certain conclusions on the basis of partial information. We 
shall see it in action in Section 5.2. 
We have no doubts that various other metarules will be necessary; clearly, our 
two metarules cannot constitute the whole theory of anaphora resolution. They are 
intended as an illustration of the power of abduction, which in this framework helps 
determine the universe of the model (that is the set of entities that appear in it). Other 
factors, such as the role of focus (Grosz 1977, 1978; Sidner 1983) or quantifier scoping 
(Webber 1983) must play a role, too. Determining the relative importance of those 
factors, the above metarules, and syntactic lues, appears to be an interesting topic in 
itself. 
Note: In our translation from English to logic we are assuming that "it" is anaphoric 
(with the pronoun following the element hat it refers to), not cataphoric (the other 
way around). This means that the "it" that brought he disease in P1 will not be con- 
sidered to refer to the infection "i" or the death "d" in P3. This strategy is certainly 
the right one to start out with, since anaphora is always the more typical direction of 
reference in English prose (Halliday and Hasan 1976, p. 329). 
Since techniques developed elsewhere may prove useful, at least for comparison, 
it is worth mentioning at this point that the proposed metarules are distant cousins 
of "unique-name assumption" (Genesereth and Nilsson 1987), "domain closure as- 
sumption" (ibid.), "domain circumscription" (cf. Etherington and Mercer 1987), and 
their kin. Similarly, the notion of R + M-abduction is spiritually related to the "abduc- 
tive inference" of Reggia (1985), the "diagnosis from first principles" of Reiter (1987), 
"explainability" of Poole (1988), and the subset principle of Berwick (1986). But, ob- 
viously, trying to establish precise connections for the metarules or the provability 
and the R + M-abduction would go much beyond the scope of an argument for the 
correspondence of paragraphs and models. These connections are being examined 
elsewhere (Zadrozny forthcoming). 
5.2 p-Models 
The construction of a model of a paragraph, a p-model, must be based on the in- 
formation contained in the paragraph itself (the object theory) and in the referential 
level while the metalevel restricts ways that the model can be constructed, or, in other 
words, provides criteria for choosing a most plausible model(s), if a partial theory is 
ambiguous. This role of the metarules will be clearly visible in finding references of 
pronouns in a simple case requiring only a rule postulating that these references be 
196 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
searched for, and in a more complex case (in Section 5) when they can be found only 
by an interplay of background knowledge and (a formalization of) Gricean maxims. 
Definition 
M is a p-model of a paragraph P iff there exists a coherent partial theory T E PT(P) 
such that M E PM(T). 
Having defined the notion of a p-model, we can mimic now, in logic, the rea- 
soning presented in Section 2.2. Using background information and the translation of 
sentences, we build a p-model of the paragraph. This involves determining the ref- 
erences of the pronoun "it," and deciding whether "struck" in the sentence It struck 
rapidly means "hit" (slb) or "harmed" (s2_ex). We have then two meanings of "strike" 
and a number of possibilities for the pronouns. 
We begin by constructing the two classes of preferred models given by (slb) and 
(s2_ex), respectively. It is easily seen that, in the models of the first class, based on 
{$2, slb}, (that is {rapidly:strike(yo) and strike(x) --~ hit(x)...}), together with all other 
available information, do not let us R+M-abduct anything about y0, i.e., the referent for 
the subject pronoun "it" in P2 (it struck rapidly). On the other hand, from {$2, s2_ex, dl} 
we R + M-abduct hat y0 = d, i.e. the disease struck rapidly. That is the case because 
s2_ex implies that the agent hat "struck rapidly" is actually an illness. From rapidly : 
strike(yo), strike(x) -* illness(x) & .... disease(y) --, illness(y) & .... and disease(d) we can 
infer illness(yo) and illness(d); by the Metarule (1) we conclude that Y0 -- d. In other 
words, the referent for the subject "it" is "disease." Thus the Metarule (1) immediately 
eliminates all the models from the first class given by (slb), in which "struck" means 
"hit." 
Notice that we cannot prove in classical logic that the ship has brought the disease. 
But we are allowed to assume it by the above formal rule as the most plausible state 
of affairs, or--in other words--we prove it in our three-level logic. 
We are left then with models of the three sentences ($1, $2, $3) that contain {$2, 
s2_ex, dl}; they all satisfy y0 = d. We now use {Sl,shl,bl}(enter(s,m) & ship(s) & 
bring(xo~ d) & ...; ship(s) --~ (3y)carry(s,y) & ...; Vz\[bring(xo, z) --* carry(xo, z)\]). From 
these facts we can conclude by Metarule (1) that x0 = s: a "ship" is an agent hat carries 
goods; to "bring" means to "carry"; and the disease has been brought by something-- 
we obtain carry(xo, d) and carry(s, y); and then by Metarule (2), carry(s, d). That is, the 
referent for the pronoun "it" in P1 (... bringing with it the disease... ) should be "ship." 
Observe that we do not assert about the disease that it is a kind of goods or people; 
the line of reasoning oes as follows: since ships are known to carry people or goods, 
and ports are not known to carry anything, we may assume that the ship carried the 
disease along with its standard cargo. 
Having resolved all pronoun references, with no ambiguity left, we conclude that 
the class PM(P) consists of only one model, based on the the partial theory 
{$1, $2, $3, shl, bl, e_l, s2_ex, dl, de1, il, al, ctl}. 
The model describes a situation in which the ship came into the port/harbor; the 
ship brought he disease; the disease was caused by an infection; the disease harmed 
rapidly, causing a painful death; and so on. 
The topic Tp of (P1, P2, P3) is the disease(x). The first sentence talks about it; the 
second one refers to it using the pronoun "it," and the third one extends our knowl- 
edge about the topic, since "disease' is linked to "infection" through dl. Furthermore, 
197 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
f -1 
II place(m)! r 
' i h?rb?rCm)  
I 
PI sh ip (s ) - -~  port(m) j -- time :1:547 I 
0 
s m -~ 
I name: Messin?l 
s ~ nome : Block Deoth l 
, ,  , d Z 
I \] in fec t ion~ness  (d)J 
p l ill suddenly I 
/ /  
F'" I I o event (e') I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
P3 .- a.q in-time (24+ t) I 
b t?  I 
- -deoth(~ ~\[ io infecti?n (i) I 
l?g?nizing (b)-~ ' o e,Lent (e) 
I 
Ii person(p) diseose(d)l I 
Figure 3 
The p-model for the example paragraph 
"disease" is the only noun phrase mentioned or referred to in all three sentences; the 
sentence $1 is the topic sentence. The p-model of the paragraph is represented by 
Figure 3. 
But notice that our definition of topic licences also other analyses, for example, one 
in which all the predicates of the first sentence constitute the topic of the paragraph, $2 
elaborates $1 (in the sense of condition I (c) of the definition of topic), and $3 elaborates 
$2. Based on the larger context, we prefer the first analysis; however, a computational 
criterion for such a preference remains as an open problem. 
6. On the Ro le  of  the Meta leve l  
We have already seen examples of the application of metalevel rules. In the analysis 
of the paragraph, we applied one such rule expressing our commonsense knowledge 
about the usage of pronouns. In this section we discuss two other sources of met- 
alevel axioms: Gricean cooperative principles, which reduce the number of possible 
198 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
interpretations of a text or an utterance; and connectives and modalities--such as
"but, .... unless," or "maybe"---which refer to the process of constructing the models 
or partial theories, and to some operations on them (see Figure 4). 
We can see then two applications of metarules: in constructing models of a text 
from representations of sentences, and in reducing, or constraining, the ambiguity 
of the obtained structure. We begin by showing how to formalize the latter. In the 
next subsection (6.1), assuming the Gricean maxims to be constraints on language 
communication, either spoken or written, we use their formal versions in building 
partial theories. A specific instance of the rule of "quantity" turns out to be applicable 
to anaphora resolution. That example will end our discussion of anaphora in this 
article. 
The last topic we intend to tackle is the semantic role of conjunctions. In subsection 
6.2 we present ametalevel axiom dealing with the semantic role of the adversative con- 
junction "but;" then we talk about some of its consequences for constructing models 
of text. This will complete our investigation of the most important issues concerning 
paragraph structure: coherence (how one can determine that a paragraph expresses 
a "thought'0, anaphora (how one can compute "links" between entities that a para- 
graph talks about), and cohesion (what makes a paragraph more than just a sum of 
sentences). Of course, we will not have final answers to any of these problems, but 
we do believe that the/a direction of search for computational models of text will be 
visible at that point. 
We assume aflat structure of the metalevel, envisioning it as a collection of (closed) 
formulas written in the language of set theory or higher order logic. In either of the two 
theories it is possible to define the notions of a model, satisfiability, provability, etc. for 
any first order language (cf. e.g. Shoenfield 1967); therefore the metalevel formulas can 
say how partial theories hould be constructed (specifying for instance the meaning of 
0) and what kinds of models are admissible. The metarules thus form a logical theory 
in a special anguage, such as the language of ZF-set theory. However, for the sake of 
readability, we express all of them in English. 
6.1 A Formalization of Gricean Maxims 
A Gricean Cooperative Principle applies to text, too. For instance, in normal writing 
people do not express common knowledge about typical functions of objects. In fact, 
as the reader may check for himself, there is nothing in Gricean maxims that does not 
apply to written language. That the maxims play a semantic role is hardly surprising. 
But that they can be axiomatized and used in building formal models of texts is new. 
We present in the next couple of paragraphs our formalization of the first maxim, and 
sketch axiomatizations of the others. Then we will apply the formal rule in an example. 
Gricean maxims, after formalization, belong to the rnetalevel. This can be seen from 
our formalization of the rule "don't say too much." To this end we define redundancy 
of a partial theory T of a paragraph as the situation in which some sentences can be 
logically derived from other sentences and from the theory T in a direct manner: 
(3S E/5)(3cr E R)\[a E T& e : ~b --~ ~b &/St- ~ & {~} U (/5- {S}) F- S\] 
The meaning of this formula can be explained as follows: a paragraph P has been 
translated into its formal version/5 and is to be examined for redundancy. Its partial 
theory PT(/5) has also been computed. The test will turn positive if, for some sentence 
S, we can find a rule/theorem a = ~ --* ~ in PT(P) such that the sentence S is implied 
(in a classical ogic) by the other sentences and ~. For example, if the paragraph 
about Black Death were to contain also the sentence The ship carried people or goods, or 
199 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
? Quantity. Say neither too much nor too little. 
? Quality. Try to make your contribution one that is true. 
? Relation. Be relevant. 
? Manner. Avoid obscurity and ambiguity; be brief and orderly. 
Figure 4 
The Gricean maxims 
both, which (in its logical form) belongs to R, it would be redundant: ~ = (shl), there. 
Similarly, the definition takes care of the redundancy resulting from a simple repetition. 
Metarule Gla  
(nonredundancy) If T1, T2 C PT(P) and T1 is less redundant han T2, then the theory 
T1 is preferred to T2. (Where "less redundant" means that the number of redundant 
sentences in T1 is smaller than in T2) 
The relevant half of the Maxim of Quantity has been expressed by Gla. How 
would we express the other maxims? The "too little" part of the first maxim might 
be represented as a preference for unambiguous partial theories. The second maxim 
has been assumed all the t ime--when constructing partial theories or models, the 
sentences of a paragraph are assumed to be true. The Maxim of Manner seems to us 
to be more relevant for critiquing the style of a written passage or for natural anguage 
generation; in the case of text generation, it can be construed as a requirement that 
the produced text be coherent and cohesive. 
We do not claim that Gla is the best or unique way of expressing the rule "assume 
that the writer did not say too much." Rather, we stress the possibility that one can 
axiomatize and productively use such a rule. We shall see this in the next example: 
two sentences, regarded as a fragment of paragraph, are a variation on a theme by 
Hobbs (1979). 
Example 3 
The captain is worried because the third officer can open his safe. He knows the combination. 
The above metarule postulating "nonredundancy" implies that "he" = "the third 
officer, .... his" = "the captain's" are the referents of the pronouns. This is because the 
formula 
safe(x) --, (owns(y~ x) & cmbntn(z~ x) --, knows(y~ z) & can_open(y~ x)) E Tsafe, 
belongs to R, since it is common knowledge about safes that they have owners, and 
also combinations that are known to the owners. Therefore "his" = "the third officer's" 
would produce a redundant formula, corresponding to the sentence The third officer 
can open the third officer's safe. By the same token, The captain knows the combination 
would be redundant too. 
200 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
We now explain the details of this reasoning. One first proves that "his" = "the 
captain's." Indeed, if "his" = "the third officer's," then our example sentence would 
mean 
? The captain is worried because the third officer can open the third officer's safe; 
in logic: 
captain(x) & worry(x,s) & sentence(s) 
& s = 'the third officer can open the third officer's afe." 
We assume also, based on common knowledge about worrying, that worry(x', s') -~ 
S. That is, one worries about things that might possibly be or become true (S denotes 
the logical formula corresponding to the sentence s, cf. Section 3); but one doesn't 
worry about things that are accepted as (almost) always true (such as the law of 
gravity), so that worry(x', 's') ~ -~(S E Tf), where f ranges over subformulas of S. 
In our case, S immediately follows from Tsafe and X, where X = safe(sf) & third_offi- 
cer(o) & owns(o, sf)--the fact that "the third officer can open the third officer's afe" is 
a consequence of general knowledge about the ownership of safes. And therefore the 
interpretation with "his" = "the captain's" is preferred as less redundant by the rule 
Gla. This theory contains representations of the two sentences, the theory of safes, a 
theory of worrying, and the equality "his" = "captain's." 
It remains to prove that "he" = "the third officer." Otherwise we have 
P1. The captain is worried because the third officer can open the captain's afe. 
P2. ? The captain knows the combination. 
Clearly, the last sentence is true but redundant--the theory of "safe" and P1 entail P2: 
{P1} U Tsafe t- P2 
We are left with the combination 
Q1. The captain is worried because the third officer can open the captain's afe. 
Q2. ? The third officer knows the combination. 
In this case, Q2 does not follow from {Q1} u Tsafe and therefore Q1, Q2 is preferred to 
P1, P2 (by Gla). We obtain then 
The captain is worried because the third officer can open the captain's afe. 
The third officer knows the combination 
as the most plausible interpretation f our example sentences. 
Note: The reader must have noticed that we did not bother to distinguish the 
sentences P1, P2, Q1 and Q2 from their logical forms. Representing "because" and 
"know" adequately should be considered a separate topic; representing the rest (in 
the first order convention of this paper) is trivial. 
6.1.1 Was the Use of a Gricean Maxim Necessary? Can one deal effectively with the 
problem of reference without axiomatized Gricean maxims, for instance by using only 
201 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
"petty conversational implicature" (Hobbs 1979), or the metarules of Section 5.2? It 
seems to us that the answer is no. 
As a case in point, consider the process of finding the antecedent of the anaphor 
"he" in the sentences 
John can open Bill's safe. He knows the combination. 
Hobbs (1979, 1982) proves "he" = "John" by assuming the relation of "elaboration" 
between the sentences. (Elaboration is a relation between two segments of a text. It 
intuitively means "expressing the same thought from a different perspective," but has 
been defined formally as the existence of a proposition implied by both segments-- 
here the proposition is "John can open the safe".) However, if we change the pair to 
the triple 
Bill has a safe under the painting of his yacht. John can open Bill's safe. He knows 
the combination 
the relation of elaboration holds between the segment consisting of the first two sen- 
tences of the triple and each of the two possible readings: John knows the combination 
and Bill knows the combination. In this case, elaboration cannot choose the correct ref- 
erent, but the rule Gla can and does. Clearly, an elaboration should not degenerate 
into redundancy; the Gricean maxims are to keep it fresh. 
As we have observed, correct interpretations cannot be chosen by an interaction of 
an object level theory and a referential level alone, because coherence, plausibility and 
consistency are too weak to weed out wrong partial theories. Metarules are necessary. 
True, the captain knew the combination, but it was consistent that "his" might have 
referred to "the third officer's." 
6.2 Semantics of the Conjunction "But" 
Any analysis of natural anguage text, to be useful for a computational system, will 
have to deal with coherence, anaphora, and connectives. We have examined so far 
the first two concepts; we shall present now our view of connectives to complete the 
argument about paragraphs being counterparts of models. We present ametalevel rule 
that governs the behavior of the conjunction "but;" we formalize the manner in which 
"but" carries out the contradiction. Then we derive from it two rules that prevent 
infelicitous uses of "but." 
Connectives are function words--like conjunctions and some adverbs--that re 
responsible simultaneously for maintaining cohesiveness within the text and for sig- 
naling the nature of the relationships that hold between and among various text units. 
"And," "or," and "but" are the three main coordinating connectives in English. How- 
ever, "but" does not behave quite like the other two--semantically, "but" signals a 
contradiction, and in this role it seems to have three subfunctions: 
. 
. 
Opposition (called "adversative" or "contrary-to-expectation" by 
Halliday and Hasan 1976; cf. also Quirk et al 1972, p. 672). 
The ship arrived but the passengers could not get off. 
The yacht is cheap but elegant. 
Comparison. In this function, the first conjunct is not so directly 
contradicted by the second. A contradiction exists, but we may have to 
202 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
go through additional levels of implication to find it. Consider the 
sentence: 
. 
That basketball player is short, but he's very quick. 
Affirmation. This use of "but" always follows a negative clause, and 
actually augments the meaning of the preceding clause by adding 
supporting information: 
The disease not only killed thousands of people, but also ended a period 
of economic welfare. 
In this section we consider only the first, or adversative, function of the coordinating 
conjunction "but." 
6.2.1 The Semantic Function of "But" "But" introduces an element of surprise into 
discourse. Because it expresses some kind of contradiction, "but" has no role in the 
propositional calculus equivalent to the roles filled by "and" and "or." Although there 
are logical formation rules using the conjunction operator ("and") and the disjunction 
operator ("or"), there is no "but" operator. What, then, is the semantic role of "but"? 
We believe that its function should be described at the metalevel as one of many rules 
guiding the construction of partial theories. This is expressed below. 
Metarule (BUT) 
The formulas ? but k~, ~' but ~1 . . . .  of a (formal representation f) paragraph P are 
to be interpreted as follows: 
In the construction of any T E PT(P) instead of taking @f to be the union U 
of rr --* T~, take the union of ~ --* T?/{k~, ~', . . .}.  
The symbol cr ---* T~,/{qt, ?d',...} denotes a maximal consistent with {or, ~, k~',...} sub- 
theory of r~ --* T?, and in general T/T  t will be a maximal consistent with T' subtheory 
of T. 
"But" is then an order to delete from background information everything contra- 
dicting ? , but to use what remains. Notice that "and" does not have this meaning; a
model for ? and ? will not contain any part of a theory that contradicts either of the 
clauses ? or ?d. 
Typically this rule will be used to override defaults, to say that the expected 
consequences of the first conjunct hold except for the fact expressed by the second 
conjunct; for instance: We were coming to see you, but it rained (so we didn't). The rule 
BUT is supposed to capture the "contrary-to-expectation" function of "but." 
We present now a simple example of building a model of a one-sentence paragraph 
containing "but." We will use this example to explain how the rule BUT can be used. 
Using background information presented below, we will construct a partial model for 
this one-sentence paragraph. 
203 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
Example 4 
This yacht is cheap, but it is elegant. 
Referential level (a fragment) 
cheap(x) --, {~elegant(x); poor_quality(x);-~expensive} (cl) 
expensive(x) ~ -~cheap( x ) (encl) 
yacht(x) ~ {ship(x) & small(x)} (yl) 
elegant(x) --, { ~cheap( x ) ~ . . . } (el) 
elegant(x) & yacht(x) --, {status-symbol(x)} (e_yl) 
Note: Compare (yl) with (cl); in (yl) smallness is a property of a ship; this would 
be more precisely expressed as yacht(x) --* \[ship(x); property:  small(x)\]. This trick al- 
lows us not to conclude that "a big ant is big," or "a small elephant is small." 
We ignore the problem of multiple meanings (theories) of predicates, and assume 
the trivial ordering in which all formulas are equally preferred. (But note that (e_yl) 
is still preferred to (el) as a more specific theory of "elegant;" cf. Section 3.) 
Construction of the model: In our case ? ___ yacht(yo) & cheap(yo) and ? =__ 
elegant(yo ). Then 
Tcheap -= {-~elegant(x); poor_quality(x) ; -~expensive(x) } 
Tyacht = {ship(x) & small(x)} 
Telcgant = {expensive(x)} 
Tyacht & elegant = {status_symbol(x)} 
Tcheap/~d = {poor-quality(x) ; -~expensive(x)} 
Tyacht/'  = Tyacht 
Tyacht&elegant / @ = Tyacht&elegant 
We can now use the Metarule (BUT) and construct the partial theories of the sentence. 
In this case, there is only one: 
PT(~ but ~) = {T}~ where 
T = {yacht(yo)~ elegant(yo)~cheap(yo)~ship(yo) & small(yo)~ 
status-symbol (Yo )~ poor_quality(yo ) } 
In other words, the yacht in question is a poor quality small and elegant ship serving 
as an inexpensive status symbol. 
The partial model of the theory T is quite trivial: it consists of one entity repre- 
senting the yacht and of a bunch of its attributes. However, the size of the model is 
not important here; what counts is the method of derivation of the partial theory. 
6.2.2 Confirming the Analysis. The Metarule (BUT) is supposed to capture the "con- 
trary-to-expectation" function of "but." The next two rules follow from our formaliza- 
204 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
tion; their validity indirectly supports the plausibility of our analysis of "but." 
BUT_C1 : ff but -~  is incorrect, if ? --* ? is a "law." 
e.g. Henry was murdered but not killed. 
Our referential level is a collection of partially ordered theories; we have expressed 
the fact that a theory of some ? is a "law" is by deleting the empty interpretation f ? 
from the partial order. If we accept he definition of a concept as given by necessary 
and sufficient conditions, the theories would all appear as laws. If we subscribe to a 
more realistic view where definitions are given by a collection of central/prototypical 
and peripheral conditions, only the peripheral ones can be contradicted by "but." In 
either formalization we get BUT_C1 as a consequence: Since "laws" cannot be deleted, 
BUT can't be applied, and hence its use in those kinds of sentences would be incorrect. 
W. Labov (1973) discussed sentences of the form 
,This is a chair but you can sit on it. 
The sentence is incorrect, since the function "one can sit on it" belongs to the core of 
the concept "chair"; so--contrary to the role of "but"--the sentence does not contain 
any surprising new elements. Using the Metarule (BUT) and the cooperative principle 
of Grice, we get 
BUT_C2: ? but ? is incorrect, if ? -* k~ is a "law." 
The Metarule (BUT) gives the semantics of "but;" the rules BUT_C1 and BUT_C2 follow 
from it (after formalization i a sufficiently strong rnetalanguage such as type theory 
or set theory). We can link all of them to procedures for constructing and evaluating 
models of text. Are they sufficient? Certainly not. We have not dealt with the other 
usages of '%ut;" neither have we shown how to deal with the apparent asymmetry 
of conclusions: cheap but elegant seems to imply "worth buying," but elegant but cheap 
doesn't; we have ignored possible prototypical effects in our semantics. However, we 
do believe that other ules, dealing with "but" or with other connectives, can be conve- 
niently expressed in our framework. (The main idea is that one should talk explicitly 
and formally about relations between text and background knowledge, and that this 
knowledge is more than just a list of facts--it has structure, and it is ambiguous.) 
Furthermore, the semantics of "but" as described above is computationally tractable. 
We also believe that one could not present a similarly natural account of the se- 
mantics of "but" in traditional logics, because classical logics withstand contradictions 
with great difficulty. Contradiction, however, is precisely what "but" expresses. No- 
tice that certain types of coordinating conjunctions often have their counterparts in
classical logic: copulative (and, or, neither-nor, besides, sometimes etc.), disjunctive (like 
either-or), illative (hence, for that reason). Others, such as explanatory (namely or viz.) 
or causal (for) conjunctions can probably be expressed somehow, for better or worse, 
within a classical framework. Thus the class of adversative conjunctions (but, still, and 
yet, nevertheless) is in that sense unique. 
7. Conclusions 
We hope that the reader has found this paper coherent, and its topic--the correspon- 
dence between paragraphs and models--interesting. Our strategy was to divide the 
205 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
subject into three subtopics: a theory of anaphora, which corresponds to the logical 
theory of equality in p-models; a theory of background knowledge, expressed as the 
logical theory of reference in the three-level semantics; and principles of communication 
encoded in metarules. These principles include Gricean maxims and the semantics of 
cohesion, and specify a model theory for the three-level semantics. The framework re- 
sulting from putting these theories together is computational, empirical, and verifiable 
(even if incomplete); furthermore, it has strong links to already existing natural an- 
guage processing systems. In particular, the new logical level--the referential level--is 
exemplified by on-line dictionaries and other reference works, from which we extract 
background information about defaults and plausibility rankings. 
We also hope that the reader would be inclined to share our belief that natural 
language text can be properly and usefully analyzed by means of a three-level seman- 
tics that includes an object level, a metalevel, and a referential level. We believe that 
the coherence of an essay, a paper, or a book can be described by an extension of our 
theory. The work of van Dijk and Kintch (1983) on "macrostructures" could probably 
form the basis for such an expansion. Similarly, much of the abovementioned work 
by Hobbs, Webber, Grosz, and Sidner can be incorporated into this framework. 
Our main intention was to demonstrate hat formal notions of background knowl- 
edge can be used to 
? define coherence, make it semantically distinct from mere consistency, 
and link it formally with the notion of a topic; 
? define a class of p-models--logical models of paragraphs; 
? provide a semantics for "but" (which exemplifies our understanding of
grammatical cohesion); 
? express the Gricean maxims formally, and use them in a computational 
model of communication (which seems to contradict Allen 1988, p. 464). 
Moreover, we tried to convince the reader that paragraph is an important linguistic 
unit, not only because of its pragmatic importance xemplified by coherence and links 
to background knowledge, but also because of its role in assignment of syntactic 
structures (viz. ellipsis) and in semantics (viz. its possible role in evaluating semantic 
representations). 
A great many issues have been omitted from our analysis. Thus, although we are 
aware that anaphora resolution and consistency depend on previously processed text, 
the problem of connecting a paragraph to such text has been conveniently ignored. 
Notice that this doesn't make our thesis about paragraphs being units of semantic 
processing any weaker, we have not claimed that paragraphs are independent. The 
questions of how to translate from natural anguage to a logical notation needs a lot 
of attention; we have merely assumed that this can be done. Continuing this list, we 
have accepted a very classical theory of meaning, given by Tarski: the truth is what 
is satisfied in a model. This theory should be refined, for instance by formalizing 
Lakoff's (1987) concept of radial categories, and proposing mechanisms for exploiting 
it. By the same token, the concept of reference has to be broadened to include iconic 
(e.g., visual and tactile) information. And certainly it would be .nice to have a more 
detailed theory describing the role of the metalevel. In particular, we can imagine 
that the simple structure of a collection of set theoretic formulas can be replaced by 
something more interesting. We leave this as another open problem. 
We have shown that it is possible to develop a formal system with an explicit 
relationship between background knowledge and text, showing mechanisms that take 
206 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
advantage ofpreference, coherence, and contradiction (the reality of these phenomena 
has never been disputed, but their semantic functions had not been investigated). We 
should also mention that we have also begun some work on actually checking the 
empirical validity of this model (cf. e.g. Braden-Harder and Zadrozny 1990), using on- 
line dictionaries (LDOCE and Webster's) as the referential level. We know, of course, 
that existing dictionaries are very imperfect, but (1) they can be accessed and used 
by computer programs; (2) they are getting better, as they are very systematically 
created with help of computers (see Sinclair 1987 for an account of how COBUILD 
was constructed); (3) obviously, we can imagine useful new ones, like a Dictionary of 
Pragmatics; (4) we believe that we can explore the new inference mechanisms even in 
such unrefined environments. 
Although the scheme we have proposed certainly needs further efinement, we 
believe that it is correct in two of its most important aspects: first, in the separation 
of current paragraph analysis (the object theory) from background information (the 
referential level); and second, in asserting that the function of a paragraph is to allow 
the building of a model of the situation described in the paragraph. This model can be 
stored, maybe modified, and subsequently used as a reference for processing following 
paragraphs. 
Finally, the paper can be viewed as an argument that the meaning of a sentence 
cannot be defined outside of a context, just as the truth value of a formula cannot be 
computed in a vacuum. A paragraph is the smallest example of such a context--it is 
"a unit of thought." 
Acknowledgments 
We gratefully acknowledge the help 
provided by our anonymous but diligent 
referees, by Graeme Hirst and Susan 
McRoy, and by our many colleagues at IBM 
Research, all for whom helped us to avoid 
worst consequences of Murphy's Law 
during the writing of this paper. 
References 
Allen, J. (1987). Natural Language 
Understanding. Benjamin/Cummings. 
Menlo Park, California. 
Berwick, R.C. (1986). "Learning from 
Positive-Only Examples: The Subset 
Principle and Three Case Studies." In 
Michalski, R.S. et al, eds. Machine 
Learning Vol. II. Morgan Kaufmann. Los 
Altos, California: 625-645. 
Black, J.B., and Bower, G.H. (1979). 
"Episodes as Chunks in Narrative 
Memory." Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior 18: 309-318. 
Bond, S.J., and Hayes, J.R. (1983). Cues 
People Use to Paragraph Text. manuscript. 
Dept. of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon 
University. 
Brachman, R.J., Fikes, R.E., and Levesque, 
H.J. (1985). "Krypton: A Functional 
Approach to Knowledge Representation." 
In Brachman, R.J., and Levesque, H.J., 
eds. Readings in Knowledge Representation. 
Morgan Kaufmann. Los Altos, California: 
411-430. 
Braden-Harder, L. and Zadrozny, W. (1989). 
Lexicons for Broad Coverage Semantics. IBM 
Research Division Report, RC 15568. 
Chafe, W.L. (1979). "The Flow of Thought 
and the Flow of Language." In Givon, T., 
ed., Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 12. 
Academic Press. New York, New York. 
Charniak, E. (1983). "Passing Markers: A 
Theory of Contextual Influence in 
Language Comprehension." Cognitive 
Science, 7(3): 171-190. 
Charniak, E., and McDermott, D. (1985). 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. 
Addison-Wesley. Reading, Massachusetts. 
Crothers, E.J. (1979). Paragraph Structure 
Inference. Ablex Publishing Corp., 
Norwood, New Jersey. 
Etherington, D.W., and Mercer, R.E. (1987). 
"Domain Circumscription: A 
Reevaluation." Computational Intelligence 
3: 94--99. 
Frisch, A. (1987). "Inference without 
Chaining." Proc. IJCAI-87. Milan, Italy: 
515-519. 
Fowler, H.W. (1965). A Dictionary of Modern 
English Usage. Oxford University Press. 
New York, New York. 
Genesereth, M.R., and Nilsson, N.J. (1987). 
Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. 
Morgan Kaufmann. Los Altos, California. 
Grice, H.P. (1978). "Further Notes on Logic 
207 
Computational Linguistics Volume 17, Number 2 
and Conversation." In Cole, P., ed. Syntax 
and Semantics 9:Pragmatics. Academic 
Press. New York, New York: 113-128. 
Grice, H.P. (1975). "Logic and 
Conversation." In Cole, P., and Morgan, 
J.L., eds., Syntax and Semantics 3: Speech 
Acts. Academic Press. New York New 
York: 41-58. 
Groesser, A.C. (1981). Prose Comprehension 
Beyond the Word. Springer. New York, 
New York. 
Grosz, B.J. (1978). DISCOURSE 
KNOWLEDGE--Section 4 of Walker, D.E., 
ed., Understanding Spoken Language. 
North-Holland. New York, New York: 
229-344. 
Grosz, B.J. (1977). "The Representation a d 
Use of Focus in a System for 
Understanding Dialogs." Proc. IJCAI-77. 
W. Kaufmann. Los Altos, California: 
67-76. 
Haberlandt, K., Berian, C., and Sandson, J.
(1980). "The Episode Schema in Story 
Processing." Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior 19: 635--650. 
Halliday, M.A.K., and Hasan, R. (1976). 
Cohesion in English. Longman Group Ltd. 
London. 
Haugeland, J. (1985). Artificial Intelligence: 
The Very Idea. MIT Press. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Hinds, J. (1979). "Organizational Patterns in 
Discourse." In Givon, T., ed., Syntax and 
Semantics, Vol. 12. Academic Press. New 
York, New York. 
Hintikka, J. (1985). The Game of Language. 
D. Reidel. Dordrecht. 
Hirst, G. (1987). Semantic Interpretation a d 
the Resolution of Ambiguity. Cambridge 
University Press. Cambridge. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1982). "Towards an 
Understanding of Coherence in 
Discourse." In Lehnert, W.G., and Ringle, 
M.H., eds. Strategies for Natural Language 
Processing. Lawrence Erlbaum. Hillsdale, 
New Jersey: 223-244. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1979). "Coherence and 
Coreference." Cognitive Science 3: 67-90. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1978). "Resolving Pronoun 
References." Lingua 44: 311-338. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1977). 38 Examples of Elusive 
Antecedents from Published Texts. 
Research Report 77-2. Department of
Computer Science, City College, CUNY, 
New York. 
Hobbs, J.R. (1976). Pronoun Resolution. 
Research Report 76-1. Dept. of Computer 
Science. City College, CUNY, New York. 
Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Martin, P., and 
Edwards, D. (1988). "Interpretation as
Abduction." In Proc. of 26th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, ACL: 95-103. 
Jackendoff, R. (1983). Semantics and 
Cognition. The MIT Press. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Jensen, K. (1988). "Issues in Parsing." In 
A. Blaser, ed., Natural Language at the 
Compute, r. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
Germany: 65-83. 
Jensen, K. (1986). Parsing Strategies in a 
Broad-Coverage Grammar of English. 
Research Report RC 12147. IBM 
T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown 
Heights, New York. 
Jensen, K., and Binot, J.-L. (1988). 
"Disambiguating Prepositional Phrase 
Attachments by Using On-line Dictionary 
Definitions." Computational Linguistics 
13.3-4.251-260 (special issue on the 
lexicon). 
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. 
Harvard University Press. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
Kamp, H. (1981). "A Theory of Truth and 
Semantic Representation." In Groenendijk, 
J.A.G., et al eds., Formal Methods in the 
Study of Language, I. Mathematisch 
Centrum, Amsterdam: 277-322. 
Labov, W. (1973). "The Boundaries of Words 
and Their Meanings." In Fishman, J., New 
Ways of Analyzing Variation in English. 
Georgetown U. Press. Washington, D.C.: 
340-373. 
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous 
Things. The University of Chicago Press. 
Chicago, Illinois. 
Levesque, H.J. (1984). "A Logic of Implicit 
and Explicit Beliefs." Proc. AAAI-84. 
AAAI: 198-202. 
Longacre, R.E. (1979). The Paragraph as a 
Grammatical Unit. In Givon, T., ed., 
Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 12. Academic 
Press. New York, New York. 
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English. 
(1978). Longman Group Ltd., London. 
Lyons, J. (1969). Introduction to Theoretical 
Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge, England. 
Mann, W.C., and Thompson, S.A. (1983). 
Relational Propositions in Discourse. 
Information Sciences Institute Research 
Report 83-115. 
Moens, M., and Steedman, M. (1987). 
"Temporal Ontology in Natural 
Language." Proc. 25th Annual Meeting of 
the ACL. Stanford, California: 1-7. 
Montague, R. (1970). "Universal Grammar." 
Theoria 36: 373-398. 
Mycielski, J. (1981). "Analysis without 
Actual Infinity." Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
46(3): 625-633. 
208 
Zadrozny and Jensen Semantics of Paragraphs 
Patel-Schneider, P.S. (1985). "A Decidable 
First Order Logic for Knowledge 
Representation." Proc. IJCAI-85. AAAI: 
455-458. 
Perlis, D. (1985). "Languages with Self 
Reference I: Foundations." Artificial 
Intelligence 25: 301-322. 
Poole, D. (1988). "A Logical Framework for 
Default Reasoning." Artificial Intelligence 
36(1): 27-47. 
Quirk" R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and 
Svartvik, J. (1972). A Grammar of 
Contemporary English. Longman Group 
Ltd. London. 
Reggia, J.A. (1985). "Abductive Inference." 
In Karma, K.N., ed., Expert Systems in 
Government Symposfum. IEEE: 484-489. 
Reiter, R. (1987). "A Theory of Diagnosis 
from First Principles." Artificial 
Intelligence, 32(1): 57-95. 
Sidner, C. (1983). "Focusing in the 
Comprehension f Definite Anaphora." In 
Brady, M., and Berwick" R., eds., 
Computational Models of Discourse, MIT 
Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
330-367. 
Sells, P. (1985). Lectures on Contemporary 
Syntactic Theories. CSLI lecture notes; 
no. 3. 
Shoenfield, J.R. (1987). Mathematical Logic. 
Addison-Wesley. New York" New York. 
Sinclair, J.M., ed. (1987). Looking Up. An 
account of the COBUILD project. Collins 
ELT, London. 
Small, S.L., Cottrell, G.W., and Tanenhaus, 
M.K., eds. (1988). Lexical Ambiguity 
Resolution. Morgan Kaufmann. San Mateo, 
California. 
Turner, M. (1987). Death is the Mother of 
Beauty. The University of Chicago Press. 
Chicago, Illinois. 
van Dijk, T.A., and Kintch, W. (1983). 
Strategies of Discourse Comprehension. 
Academic Press. Orlando, Florida. 
Warriner, J.E. (1963). English Grammar and 
Composition. Harcourt, Brace & World, 
Inc., New York New York. 
Webber, B. (1983). "So What Can We Talk 
About Now?" In Brad~ M., and Berwick, 
R., eds., Computational Models of Discourse. 
MIT Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
147-154. 
Webber, B. (1987). "The Interpretation f 
Tense in Discourse." Proc. 25th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, ACL: 147-154. 
Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(1963). Merriam-Webster, Inc. Springfield, 
Massachusetts. 
Woods, W. (1987). "Don't Blame the Tool." 
Computational Intelligence 3(3): 228-237. 
Zadrozny, W. (1987a). "Intended Models, 
Circumscription and Commonsense 
Reasoning." Proc. IJCAI-87: 909-916. 
Zadrozny, W. (1987b). "A Theory of Default 
Reasoning." Proc. AAAI-87. Seattle, 
Washington: 385-390. 
Zadrozny, W. (unpublished). The Logic of 
Abduction. 
209 

