Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural 
Language 
Peter F. Brown" 
Peter V. deSouza* 
Robert  L. Mercer* 
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center 
Vincent J. Della Pietra* 
Jenifer C. Lai* 
We address the problem of predicting a word from previous words in a sample of text. In particular, 
we discuss n-gram models based on classes of words. We also discuss everal statistical algorithms 
for assigning words to classes based on the frequency of their co-occurrence with other words. We 
find that we are able to extract classes that have the flavor of either syntactically based groupings 
or semantically based groupings, depending on the nature of the underlying statistics. 
1. Introduction 
In a number of natural language processing tasks, we face the problem of recovering a 
string of English words after it has been garbled by passage through a noisy channel. 
To tackle this problem successfully, we must be able to estimate the probability with 
which any particular string of English words will be presented as input to the noisy 
channel. In this paper, we discuss a method for making such estimates. We also discuss 
the related topic of assigning words to classes according to statistical behavior in a 
large body of text. 
In the next section, we review the concept of a language model and give a defini- 
tion of n-gram models. In Section 3, we look at the subset of n-gram models in which 
the words are divided into classes. We show that for n = 2 the maximum likelihood 
assignment of words to classes is equivalent to the assignment for which the average 
mutual information of adjacent classes is greatest. Finding an optimal assignment of
words to classes is computationally hard, but we describe two algorithms for finding a 
suboptimal ssignment. In Section 4, we apply mutual information to two other forms 
of word clustering. First, we use it to find pairs of words that function together as a 
single lexical entity. Then, by examining the probability that two words will appear 
within a reasonable distance of one another, we use it to find classes that have some 
loose semantic oherence. 
In describing our work, we draw freely on terminology and notation from the 
mathematical theory of communication. The reader who is unfamiliar with this field 
or who has allowed his or her facility with some of its concepts to fall into disrepair 
may profit from a brief perusal of Feller (1950) and Gallagher (1968). In the first of 
these, the reader should focus on conditional probabilities and on Markov chains; in 
the second, on entropy and mutual information. 
* IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598. 
(~) 1992 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
Source 
Language 
Model 
W Channel 
Model 
Y 
P r (W)  x P r (Y IW)  = Pr (W,Y)  
Figure 1 
Source-channel setup. 
2. Language Models 
Figure I shows a model that has long been used in automatic speech recognition (Bahl, 
Jelinek, and Mercer 1983) and has recently been proposed for machine translation 
(Brown et al 1990) and for automatic spelling correction (Mays, Demerau, and Mercer 
1990). In automatic speech recognition, y is an acoustic signal; in machine translation, y 
is a sequence of words in another language; and in spelling correction, y is a sequence 
of characters produced by a possibly imperfect typist. In all three applications, given 
a signal y, we seek to determine the string of English words, w, which gave rise to 
it. In general, many different word strings can give rise to the same signal and so 
we cannot hope to recover w successfully in all cases. We can, however, minimize 
our probability of error by choosing as our estimate of w that string @ for which the 
a posteriori probability of @ given y is greatest. For a fixed choice of y, this probability 
is proportional to the joint probability of @ and y which, as shown in Figure 1, is the 
product of two terms: the a priori probability of @ and the probability that y will 
appear at the output of the channel when @ is placed at the input. The a priori 
probability of @, Pr (@), is the probability that the string @ will arise in English. We 
do not attempt a formal definition of English or of the concept of arising in English. 
Rather, we blithely assume that the production of English text can be characterized by 
a set of conditional probabilities, Pr(Wk I W~1-1), in terms of which the probability of a 
string of words, w~l, can be expressed as a product: 
Pr (wkl) = Pr(wl)Pr (w2 Iwl)'"Pr(Wk Iw~-l). (1) 
Here, W~ -1 represents the string WlW2" ' 'Wk_  1. In the conditional probability Pr(Wk I 
w~-l), we call Wl k-1 the history and Wk the prediction. We refer to a computational 
mechanism for obtaining these conditional probabilities as a language model. 
Often we must choose which of two different language models is the better one. 
The performance of a language model in a complete system depends on a delicate 
interplay between the language model and other components of the system. One lan- 
guage model may surpass another as part of a speech recognition system but perform 
less well in a translation system. However, because it is expensive to evaluate a lan- 
guage model in the context of a complete system, we are led to seek an intrinsic 
measure of the quality of a language model. We might, for example, use each lan- 
468 
Peter E Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
guage model to compute the joint probability of some collection of strings and judge 
as better the language model that yields the greater probability. The perplexity of a 
language model with respect o a sample of text, S, is the reciprocal of the geomet- 
ric average of the probabilities of the predictions in S. If S has I S \] words, then the 
perplexity is Pr (S) -1/Isj. Thus, the language model with the smaller perplexity will be 
the one that assigns the larger probability to S. Because the perplexity depends not 
only on the language model but also on the text with respect to which it is measured, 
'it is important that the text be representative of that for which the language model 
is intended. Because perplexity is subject o sampling error, making fine distinctions 
between language models may require that the perplexity be measured with respect 
to a large sample. 
In an n-gram language model, we treat two histories as equivalent if they end in 
the same n - 1 words, i.e., we assume that for k > n, Pr (Wk I wl k-l) is equal to 
wk--1 Pr (Wk \[ k-n+1)" For a vocabulary of size V, a 1-gram model has V - 1 independent 
parameters, one for each word minus one for the constraint that all of the probabilities 
add up to 1. A 2-gram model has V(V - 1) independent parameters of the form 
Pr (w2 \[ Wl) and V - 1 of the form Pr (w) for a total of V 2 - 1 independent parameters. 
In general, an n-gram model has V n - 1 independent parameters: V n-1 (V - 1) of the 
form Pr (Wn \] w~-l), which we call the order-n parameters, plus the V n - l -  1 parameters 
of an (n - 1)-gram model. 
We estimate the parameters of an n-gram model by examining a sample of text, 
t~, which we call the training text, in a process called training. If C(w) is the number 
of times that the string w occurs in the string t~, then for a 1-gram language model 
the maximum likelihood estimate for the parameter Pr (w) is C(w)/T. To estimate the 
parameters ofan n-gram model, we estimate the parameters of the (n - 1)-gram model 
that it contains and then choose the order-n parameters soas to maximize Pr (tn T \[ t~-'). 
Thus, the order-n parameters are 
C(w -'wn) (2) 
Pr  (wn \ ]w / -1 )  -~ n -1  " Ew C(wl w) 
We call this method of parameter estimation sequential maximum likelihood estimation. 
We can think of the order-n parameters of an n-gram model as constituting the 
transition matrix of a Markov model the states of which are sequences of n - 1 words. 
Thus, the probability of a transition between the state wlw2..  "Wn-1 and the state 
w2w3.., w n is Pr (Wn \ ]wlw2""  Wn-1) ? The steady-state distribution for this transition 
matrix assigns a probability to each (n - 1)-gram, which we denote S(w~-l). We say 
that an n-gram language model is consistent if, for each string w ln-1, the probability that 
n-1 is S(w~ -1). Sequential maximum likelihood estimation does the model assigns to w 1 
not, in general, lead to a consistent model, although for large values of T, the model 
will be very nearly consistent. Maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters of a 
consistent n-gram language model is an interesting topic, but is beyond the scope of 
this paper. 
The vocabulary of English is very large and so, even for small values of n, the 
number of parameters in an n-gram model is enormous. The IBM Tangora speech 
recognition system has a vocabulary of about 20,000 words and employs a 3-gram 
language model with over eight trillion parameters (Averbuch et al 1987). We can 
illustrate the problems attendant toparameter stimation for a 3-gram language model 
with the data in Table 1. Here, we show the number of 1-, 2-, and 3-grams appearing 
with various frequencies in a sample of 365,893,263 words of English text from a 
variety of sources. The vocabulary consists of the 260,740 different words plus a special 
469 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
Table 1 
Count 1 -grams 2-grams 3-grams 
1 36,789 8,045,024 53,737,350 
2 20,269 2,065,469 9,229,958 
3 13,123 970,434 3,653,791 
> 3 135,335 3,413,290 8,728,789 
> 0 205,516 14,494,217 ,75,349,888 
> 0 260,741 6.799 x 101? 1.773 X 1016 
Number of n-grams with various frequencies in 365,893,263 words of running text. 
unknown word into which all other words are mapped. Of the 6.799 x 10 l? 2-grams that 
might have occurred in the data, only 14,494,217 actually did occur and of these, 
8,045,024 occurred only once each. Similarly, of the 1.773 x 1016 3-grams that might 
have occurred, only 75,349,888 actually did occur and of these, 53,737,350 occurred 
only once each. From these data and Turing's formula (Good 1953), we can expect 
that maximum likelihood estimates will be 0 for 14.7 percent of the 3-grams and for 
2.2 percent of the 2-grams in a new sample of English text. We can be confident that 
any 3-gram that does not appear in our sample is, in fact, rare, but there are so many 
of them that their aggregate probability is substantial. 
As n increases, the accuracy of an n-gram model increases, but the reliability of our 
parameter estimates, drawn as they must be from a limited training text, decreases. 
Jelinek and Mercer (1980) describe a technique called interpolated estimation that com- 
bines the estimates of several language models so as to use the estimates of the more 
accurate models where they are reliable and, where they are unreliable, to fall back on 
the more reliable estimates of less accurate models. If Prq) (wi I i-1 w I ) is the conditional 
probability as determined by the jth language model, then the interpolated estimate, 
Pr(wi \[ i-1 w 1 ), is given by 
Pr Iwi \[W~--I / ~ ~ &j(w~-l)Pr(J)(wi \[ w~-l). 
J 
(3) 
Given values for prq)(.), the /~j(W~ -1) are chosen, with the help of the EM algorithm, 
so as to maximize the probability of some additional sample of text called the held-out 
data (Baum 1972; Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977; Jelinek and Mercer 1980). When we 
use interpolated estimation to combine the estimates from 1-, 2-, and 3-gram models, 
we choose the )~s to depend on the history, W 1i-1, only through the count of the 2- 
gram, wi_2wi_ 1. We expect hat where the count of the 2-gram is high, the 3-gram 
estimates will be reliable, and, where the count is low, the estimates will be unreliable. 
We have constructed an interpolated 3-gram model in which we have divided the ;~s 
into 1,782 different sets according to the 2-gram counts. We estimated these ),s from a 
held-out sample of 4,630,934 words. We measure the performance ofour model on the 
Brown corpus, which contains a variety of English text and is not included in either 
our training or held-out data (Ku~era nd Francis 1967). The Brown corpus contains 
1,014,312 words and has a perplexity of 244 with respect o our interpolated model. 
3. Word Classes 
Clearly, some words are similar to other words in their meaning and syntactic function. 
We would not be surprised to learn that the probability distribution of words in the 
vicinity of Thursday is very much like that for words in the vicinity of Friday. Of 
470 
Peter F. Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
course, they will not be identical: we rarely hear someone say Thank God it's Thursday! 
or worry about Thursday the 13 th. If we can successfully assign words to classes, it 
may be possible to make more reasonable predictions for histories that we have not 
previously seen by assuming that they are similar to other histories that we have seen. 
Suppose that we partition a vocabulary of V words into C classes using a function, 
7r, which maps a word, wi, into its class, ci. We say that a language model is an n- 
gram class model if it is an n-gram language model and if, in addition, for 1 < k < n, 
Pr (Wk I W~ -1) = Pr (Wk \[ Ck)Pr (Ck \[~-1). An n-gram class model has C" - 1 + V - C 
independent parameters: V - C of the form Pr (wi \] ci), plus the C" - 1 independent 
parameters of an n-gram language model for a vocabulary of size C. Thus, except in 
the trivial cases in which C = V or n = 1, an n-gram class language model always has 
fewer independent parameters than a general n-gram language model. 
Given training text, t T, the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of a 
1-gram class model are 
Pr (w \[ c) - C(w) C(c) ' (4) 
and 
Pr(c) = C(c) -T-' (5) 
where by C(c) we mean the number of words in tl r for which the class is c. From these 
equations, we see that, since c = 7r(w), Pr (w) = Pr (w I c) Pr (c) -- C(w)/T. For a 1-gram 
class model, the choice of the mapping rr has no effect. For a 2-gram class model, 
the sequential maximum likelihood estimates of the order-2 parameters maximize 
Pr (t T \] tl) or, equivalently, log Pr(t2 r I h) and are given by 
C(clc2) 
Pr (c2 I Cl) -= y-~cC(ClC ) ? (6) 
By definition, Pr (clc2) = Pr (Cl)Pr (c2 \] Cl), and so, for sequential maximum likelihood 
estimation, we have 
c(cl) Pr (CLC2) - C(CLC2) x (7) 
T ~,c C(clc) 
Since C(Cl) and ~c C(ClC) are the numbers of words for which the class is Cl in the 
strings tT and t r-1 respectively, the final term in this equation tends to 1 as T tends to 
infinity. Thus, Pr (CLC2) tends to the relative frequency of ClC2 as consecutive classes in 
the training text. 
Let L(rr) = (T - 1) -1 logPr (t r \[ h). Then 
C(WlW2) L(Tr) = y~ ~---~ logPr(c2ICl)Pr(w2\[c2) 
Wl W2 
Pr (c2 \] Cl) ~W C(~w2) 
- -  
ClC2 W2 
logPr (w2 I c2) Pr(c2). (8) 
Y 
Pr(w2) 
Therefore, since Y~w C(ww2)/(T-1) tends to the relative frequency of w2 in the training 
text, and hence to Pr (w2), we must have, in the limit, 
L(Tr) = ZPr (w) logPr (w)+ZPr (C lCa) log  Pr (c2 Icl) 
Pr (c2) 
W CiC 2 
= -H(w) ? I(Cl, C2), (9) 
471 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
where H(w) is the entropy of the 1-gram word distribution and I(cl, C2) is the average 
mutual information of adjacent classes. Because L(1r) depends on ~r only through this 
average mutual information, the partition that maximizes L(~r) is, in the limit, also the 
partition that maximizes the average mutual information of adjacent classes. 
We know of no practical method for finding one of the partitions that maximize the 
average mutual information. Indeed, given such a partition, we know of no practical 
method for demonstrating that it does, in fact, maximize the average mutual informa- 
tion. We have, however, obtained interesting results using a greedy algorithm. Initially, 
we assign each word to a distinct class and compute the average mutual information 
between adjacent classes. We then merge that pair of classes for which the loss in 
average mutual information is least. After V - C of these merges, C classes remain. 
Often, we find that for classes obtained in this way the average mutual information 
can be made larger by moving some words from one class to another. Therefore, after 
having derived a set of classes from successive merges, we cycle through the vocabu- 
lary moving each word to the class for which the resulting partition has the greatest 
average mutual information. Eventually no potential reassignment of a word leads to 
a partition with greater average mutual information. At this point, we stop. It may 
be possible to find a partition with higher average mutual information by simultane- 
ously reassigning two or more words, but we regard such a search as too costly to be 
feasible. 
To make even this suboptimal lgorithm practical one must exercise a certain care 
in implementation. There are approximately (V-i)2/2 merges that we must investigate 
to carry out the /th step. The average mutual information remaining after any one of 
them is the sum of (V -/)2 terms, each of which involves a logarithm. Since altogether 
we must make V - C merges, this straightforward approach to the computation is of 
order V s. We cannot seriously contemplate such a calculation except for very small 
values of V. A more frugal organization of the computation must take advantage of 
the redundancy in this straightforward calculation. As we shall see, we can make the 
computation of the average mutual information remaining after a merge in constant 
time, independent of V. 
Suppose that we have already made V-  k merges, resulting in classes Ck (1), Ck (2), 
..., Ck(k) and that we now wish to investigate the merge of Ck(i) with Ck(j) for 1 _< 
i < j <_ k. Let pk(l, m) = Pr (Ck(1), Ck(m)), i.e., the probability that a word in class Ck(m) 
follows a word in class Ck(1). Let 
plk(l) = ~ pk(l, m), (10) 
m 
let 
and let 
prk(m) = ~ pk(l, m), (11) 
1 
qk(l,m) = pk(l,m)" pk(l,m) log p l~m ) " 
The average mutual information remaining after V - k merges is 
(12) 
Ik = ~ qk(l, m). (13) 
l,m 
We use the notation i + j  to represent the cluster obtained by merging Ck(i) and Ck(j). 
472 
Peter E Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
Thus, for example, pk(i +j ,m)  = pk(i,m) + pk(j,m) and 
pk(i + j, m) 
qk(i + j, m) = pk(i + j, m)log plk(i + j)prk(m)" (14) 
The average mutual information remaining after we merge Ck(i) and Ck(j) is then 
Ik(i,j) Ik -- Sk(i) -- Sk(j) + qk(i,j) + qk(j, i) + qk(i +j,  i +j)  
+ Y2 qk(l,i + j) + ~ qk(i + j ,m), 
l#i d m#i,j 
(15) 
where 
sk(i) = y~ qk(l, i) + ~ qk(i, m) -- qk(i, i). 
I m 
(16) 
If we know Ik, Sk(i), and Sk(J'), then the majority of the time involved in computing 
Ik(i,j) is devoted to computing the sums on the second line of equation (15). Each of 
these sums has approximately V - k terms and so we have reduced the problem of 
evaluating Ik(i,j) from one of order V 2 to one of order V. We can improve this further 
by keeping track of those pairs I, m for which pk(l, m) is different from 0. We recall 
from Table 1, for example, that of the 6.799 x 101? 2-grams that might have occurred 
in the training data, only 14,494,217 actually did occur. Thus, in this case, the sums 
required in equation (15) have, on average, only about 56 non-zero terms instead of 
260,741, as we might expect from the size of the vocabulary. 
By examining all pairs, we can find that pair, i ( j, for which the loss in average 
mutual information, Lk(i,j) =-- Ik -- Ik(i,j), is least. We complete the step by merging 
Ck(i) and Ck(j) to form a new cluster Ck-l(/). I f j  # k, we rename Ck(k) as Ck-l(j) and 
for I  i,j, we set Ck_l(l) to Ck(1). Obviously, lk-1 = Ik(i,j). The values of pk-1, plk-1, 
prk-1, and qk-1 can be obtained easily from pk, plk, prk, and qk. If 1 and m both denote 
indices neither of which is equal to either i or j, then it is easy to establish that 
Sk-l(l) 
sk_l(j) 
Lk-1 (1, m) 
= Sk(l) -- qk(l, i) -- qk(i, 1) -- qk(l,j) -- qk(J', l) + qk-~ (I, i) + qk-l(i, I) 
= Sk(k) -- qk(k, i) -- qk(i, k) - qk(k,j) - qk(j, k) + qk-l(j, i) + qk-l(i,j) 
= Lk ( l ,m) - -qk( l+m, i ) - -qk ( i , l+m)- -qk( l+m, j ) - -qk ( j , l+m)  
+qk-1 (I + m, i) + qk-1 (i, 1 + m) 
Lk-1 (l,j) = Lk(l, k) - qk(l + k, i) - qk(i, 1 + k) - qk(l + k,j) - qk(J', l + k) 
+qk-l(l + j, i) + qk-1 (i, I + j) 
Lk-l(j,l) ---- Lk-l(l, j) (17) 
Finally, we must evaluate Sk-l(i) and Lk_l(l,i) from equations 15 and 16. Thus, the 
entire update process requires something on the order of V 2 computations in the 
course of which we will determine the next pair of clusters to merge. The algorithm, 
then, is of order V 3. 
Although we have described this algorithm as one for finding clusters, we actually 
determine much more. If we continue the algorithm for V - 1 merges, then we will 
have a single cluster which, of course, will be the entire vocabulary. The order in which 
clusters are merged, however, determines a binary tree the root of which corresponds 
473 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
plan 
letter 
request 
memo 
case 
question -'-7 
charge----I ~__ 
statement L - \ ]  
draft ~ 
F- 
.evaluation 
assessment ~"  
analysis ,., 
understanding 
opinion 1 I 
conversation 
discussion 
day 
year 
week 
month 
quarter 
half 
iI 
accounts 
people 
customers 
individuals 
employees 
students \] 
reps i~  representatives 
representative 
rep 
Figure 2 
Sample subtrees from a 1,000-word mutual information tree. 
iL I 
to this single cluster and the leaves of which correspond to the words in the vocabulary. 
Intermediate nodes of the tree correspond to groupings of words intermediate between 
single words and the entire vocabulary. Words that are statistically similar with respect 
to their immediate neighbors in running text will be close together in the tree. We 
have applied this tree-building algorithm to vocabularies of up to 5,000 words. Figure 
2 shows some of the substructures in a tree constructed in this manner for the 1,000 
most frequent words in a collection of office correspondence. 
Beyond 5,000 words this algorithm also fails of practicality. To obtain clusters for 
larger vocabularies, we proceed as follows. We arrange the words in the vocabulary 
in order of frequency with the most frequent words first and assign each of the first 
C words to its own, distinct class. At the first step of the algorithm, we assign the 
(C Jr 1) st most probable word to a new class and merge that pair among the resulting 
C + 1 classes for which the loss in average mutual information is least. At the k th step 
of the algorithm, we assign the (C + k) th most probable word to a new class. This 
restores the number of classes to C + 1, and we again merge that pair for which the 
loss in average mutual information is least. After V - C steps, each of the words in 
the vocabulary will have been assigned to one of C classes. 
We have used this algorithm to divide the 260,741-word vocabulary of Table I into 
1,000 classes. Table 2 contains examples of classes that we find particularly interesting. 
Table 3 contains examples that were selected at random. Each of the lines in the tables 
contains members of a different class. The average class has 260 words and so to 
make the table manageable, we include only words that occur at least ten times and 
474 
Peter F. Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
Friday Monday Thursday Wednesday Tuesday Saturday Sunday weekends Sundays Saturdays 
June March July April January December October November September August 
people guys folks fellows CEOs chaps doubters commies unfortunates blokes 
down backwards ashore sideways outhward northward overboard aloft downwards adrift 
water gas coal liquid acid sand carbon steam shale iron 
great big vast sudden mere sheer gigantic lifelong scant colossal 
man woman boy girl lawyer doctor guy farmer teacher citizen 
American Indian European Japanese German African Catholic Israeli Italian Arab 
pressure temperature p rmeability density porosity stress velocity viscosity gravity tension 
mother wife father son husband brother daughter sister boss uncle 
machine device controller processor CPU printer spindle subsystem compiler plotter 
John George James Bob Robert Paul William Jim David Mike 
anyone someone anybody somebody 
feet miles pounds degrees inches barrels tons acres meters bytes 
director chief professor commissioner commander treasurer founder superintendent dean cus- 
todian 
liberal conservative parliamentary oyal progressive Tory provisional separatist federalist PQ 
had hadn't hath would've could've should've must've might've 
asking telling wondering instructing informing kidding reminding bc)thering thanking deposing 
that tha theat 
head body hands eyes voice arm seat eye hair mouth 
Table 2 
Classes from a 260,741-word vocabulary. 
we include no more than the ten most frequent words of any class (the other two 
months would appear with the class of months if we extended this limit to twelve). 
The degree to which the classes capture both syntactic and semantic aspects of English 
is quite surprising iven that they were constructed from nothing more than counts 
of bigrams. The class {that ha theat} is interesting because although tha and theat are 
not English words, the computer has discovered that in our data each of them is most 
often a mistyped that. 
Table 4 shows the number of class 1-, 2-, and 3-grams occurring in the text with 
various frequencies. We can expect from these data that maximum likelihood estimates 
will assign a probability of 0 to about 3.8 percent of the class 3-grams and to about 
.02 percent of the class 2-grams in a new sample of English text. This is a substantial 
improvement over the corresponding numbers for a 3-gram language model, which 
are 14.7 percent for word 3-grams and 2.2 percent for word 2-grams, but we have 
achieved this at the expense of precision in the model. With a class model, we distin- 
guish between two different words of the same class only according to their relative 
frequencies in the text as a whole. Looking at the classes in Tables 2 and 3, we feel that 
475 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
little prima moment's trifle tad Litle minute's tinker's hornet's teammate's 
6 
ask remind instruct urge interrupt invite congratulate commend warn applaud 
object apologize apologise avow whish 
cost expense risk profitability deferral earmarks capstone cardinality mintage reseller 
B dept. AA Whitey CL pi Namerow PA Mgr. LaRose 
# Rel rel. #S Shree 
S Gens nai Matsuzawa ow Kageyama Nishida Sumit Zollner Mallik 
research training education science advertising arts medicine machinery Art AIDS 
rise focus depend rely concentrate dwell capitalize mbark intrude typewriting 
Minister mover Sydneys Minster Miniter 
3 
running moving playing setting holding carrying passing cutting driving fighting 
court judge jury slam Edelstein magistrate marshal Abella Scalia larceny 
annual regular monthly daily weekly quarterly periodic Good yearly convertible 
aware unaware unsure cognizant apprised mindful partakers 
force ethic stoppage force's conditioner stoppages conditioners waybill forwarder Atonabee 
systems magnetics loggers products' coupler Econ databanks Centre inscriber correctors 
industry producers makers fishery Arabia growers addiction medalist inhalation addict 
brought moved opened picked caught ied gathered cleared hung lifted 
Table 3 
Randomly selected word classes. 
Table 4 
Count 1-gram 2-grams 3-grams 
1 0 81 ,171 13,873,192 
2 0 57,056 4,109,998 
3 0 43,752 2,012,394 
> 3 1,000 658,564 6,917,746 
> 0 1,000 840,543 26,913,330 
0 1,000 1,000,000 1.000 x 109 
Number of class n-grams with various frequencies in 365,893,263 words of running text. 
this is reasonable for pairs like John and George or liberal and conservative but perhaps 
less so for pairs like little and prima or Minister and mover. 
We used these classes to construct an interpolated 3-gram class model using the 
same training text and held-out data as we used for the word-based language model 
we discussed above. We measured the perplexity of the Brown corpus with respect o 
this model and found it to be 271. We then interpolated the class-based estimators with 
the word-based estimators and found the perplexity of the test data to be 236, which 
is a small improvement over the perplexity of 244 we obtained with the word-based 
model. 
476 
Peter F. Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
4. Sticky Pairs and Semantic Classes 
In the previous section, we discussed some methods for grouping words together 
according to the statistical similarity of their surroundings. Here, we discuss two ad- 
ditional types of relations between words that can be discovered by examining various 
co-occurrence statistics. 
The mutual information of the pair wl and w2 as adjacent words is 
Pr (wl w2) (18) 
log Pr (wl) Pr (w2). 
If w2 follows Wl less often than we would expect on the basis of their independent 
frequencies, then the mutual information is negative. If w 2 follows Wl more often than 
we would expect, then the mutual information is positive. We say that the pair WlW2 is 
sticky if the mutual information for the pair is substantially greater than 0. In Table 5, 
we list the 20 stickiest pairs of words found in a 59,537,595-word sample of text from 
the Canadian parliament. The mutual information for each pair is given in bits, which 
corresponds to using 2 as the base of the logarithm in equation 18. Most of the pairs 
are proper names such as Pontius Pilate or foreign phrases that have been adopted into 
English such as mutatis mutandis and avant garde. The mutual information for Humpty 
Dumpty, 22.5 bits, means that the pair occurs roughly 6,000,000 times more than one 
would expect from the individual frequencies of Humpty and Dumpty. Notice that the 
property of being a sticky pair is not symmetric and so, while Humpty Dumpty forms 
a sticky pair, Dumpty Humpty does not. 
Table 5 
Sticky word pairs. 
Word pair Mutual Information 
Humpty Dumpty 22.5 
Klux Klan 22.2 
Ku Klux 22.2 
Chah Nulth 22.2 
Lao Bao 22.2 
Nuu Chah 22.1 
Tse Tung 22.1 
avant garde 22.1 
Carena Bancorp 22.0 
gizzard shad 22.0 
Bobby Orr 22.0 
Warnock Hersey 22.0 
mutatis mutandis 21.9 
Taj Mahal 21.8 
Pontius Pilate 21.7 
ammonium nitrate 21.7 
jiggery pokery 21.6 
Pitney Bowes 21.6 
Lubor Zink 21.5 
anciens combattants 21.5 
Abu Dhabi 21.4 
Aldo Moro 21.4 
fuddle duddle 21.4 
helter skelter 21.4 
mumbo jumbo 21.4 
477 
Computational Linguistics Volume 18, Number 4 
Table 6 
Semantic lusters. 
we our us ourselves ours 
question questions asking answer answers answering 
performance performed perform performs performing 
tie jacket suit 
write writes writing written wrote pen 
morning noon evening night nights midnight bed 
attorney counsel trial court judge 
problems problem solution solve analyzed solved solving 
letter addressed enclosed letters correspondence 
large size small larger smaller 
operations operations operating operate operated 
school classroom teaching rade math 
street block avenue corner blocks 
table tables dining chairs plate 
published publication author publish writer titled 
wall ceiling walls enclosure roof 
sell buy selling buying sold 
Instead of seeking pairs of words that occur next to one another more than we 
would expect, we can seek pairs of words that simply occur near one another more 
than we would expect. We avoid finding sticky pairs again by not considering pairs of 
words that occur too close to one another. To be precise, let Prnear (WlW2) be the proba- 
bility that a word chosen at random from the text is Wl and that a second word, chosen 
at random from a window of 1,001 words centered on wl but excluding the words in 
a window of 5 centered on wl, is w2. We say that Wl and w2 are semantically sticky if 
Prnear (WlW2) is much larger than Pr (wO Pr (W2). Unlike stickiness, semantic stickiness 
is symmetric so that if Wl sticks semantically to w2, then w2 sticks semantically to Wl. 
In Table 6, we show some interesting classes that we constructed, using Prnear (WlW2), 
in a manner similar to that described in the preceding section. Some classes group to- 
gether words having the same morphological stem, such as performance, performed, 
perform, performs, and performing. Other classes contain words that are semantically 
related but have different stems, such as attorney, counsel, trial, court, and judge. 
5. D iscuss ion  
We have described several methods here that we feel clearly demonstrate he value of 
simple statistical techniques as allies in the struggle to tease from words their linguistic 
secrets. However, we have not as yet demonstrated the full value of the secrets thus 
gleaned. At the expense of a slightly greater perplexity, the 3-gram model with word 
classes requires only about one-third as much storage as the 3-gram language model 
in which each word is treated as a unique individual (see Tables 1 and 4). Even when 
we combine the two models, we are not able to achieve much improvement in the 
perplexity. Nonetheless, we are confident hat we will eventually be able to make 
significant improvements o 3-gram language models with the help of classes of the 
kind that we have described here. 
478 
Peter F. Brown and Vincent J. Della Pietra Class-Based n-gram Models of Natural Language 
Acknowledgment 
The authors would like to thank John 
Lafferty for his assistance in constructing 
word classes described in this paper. 
References 
Averbuch, A.; Bahl, L.; Bakis, R.; Brown, P.; 
Cole, A.; Daggett, G.; Das, S.; Davies, K.; 
Gennaro, S. De.; de Souza, P.; Epstein, E.; 
Fraleigh, D.; Jelinek, E; Moorhead, J.; 
Lewis, B.; Mercer, R.; Nadas, A.; 
Nahamoo, D.; Picheny, M.; Shichman, G.; 
Spinelli, P.; Van Compernolle, D.; and 
Wilkens, H. (1987). "Experiments with the 
Tangora 20,000 word speech recognizer." 
In Proceedings, IEEE International Conference 
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. 
Dallas, Texas, 701-704. 
Bahl, L. R.; Jelinek, E; and Mercer, R. L. 
(1983). "A maximum likelihood approach 
to continuous speech recognition." IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, PAMI-5(2), 179-190. 
Baum, L. (1972). "An inequality and 
associated maximization technique in 
statistical estimation of probabilistic 
functions of a Markov process." 
Inequalities, 3, 1-8. 
Brown, P. E; Cocke, J.; DellaPietra, S. A.; 
DellaPietra, V. J.; Jelinek, E; Lafferty, J. D.; 
Mercer, R. L.; and Roossin, P. S. (1990). "A 
statistical approach to machine 
translation." Computational Linguistics, 
16(2), 79-85. 
Dempster, A.; Laird, N.; and Rubin, D. 
(1977). "Maximum likelihood from 
incomplete data via the EM algorithm." 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 39(B), 
1-38. 
Feller, W. (1950). An Introduction to 
Probability Theory and its Applications, 
Volume I. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Gallagher, R. G. (1968). Information Theory 
and Reliable Communication. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. 
Good, I. (1953). "The population frequencies 
of species and the estimation of 
population parameters." Biometrika, 
40(3-4), 237-264. 
Jelinek, E, and Mercer, R. L. (1980). 
"Interpolated estimation of Markov 
source parameters from sparse data." In 
Proceedings, Workshop on Pattern Recognition 
in Practice, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 
381-397. 
Ku~era, H., and Francis, W. (1967). 
Computational Analysis of Present Day 
American English. Brown University Press. 
Mays, E.; Damerau, E J.; and Mercer, R. L. 
(1990). "Context-based spelling 
correction." In Proceedings, IBM Natural 
Language ITL. Paris, France, 517-522. 
479 

