Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Janyce  M. Wiebe* 
New Mexico State University 
Third-person fictional narrative text is composed not only of passages that objectively narrate 
events, but also of passages that present characters" thoughts, perceptions, and inner states. 
Such passages take a character's psychological point of view. A language understander 
must determine the current psychological point of view in order to distinguish the beliefs of the 
characters from the facts of the story, to correctly attribute beliefs and other attitudes to their 
sources, and to understand the discourse relations among sentences. Tracking the psychological 
point of view is not a trivial problem, because many sentences are not explicitly marked for point 
of view, and whether the point of view of a sentence is objective or that of a character (and if the 
latter, which character it is) often depends on the context in which the sentence appears. Tracking 
the psychological point of view is the problem addressed in this work. The approach is to seek, by 
extensive xaminations ofnaturally occurring narrative, regularities in the ways that authors 
manipulate point of view, and to develop an algorithm that tracks point of view on the basis of the 
regularities found. This paper presents this algorithm, gives demonstrations of an implemented 
system, and describes the results of some preliminary empirical studies, which lend support o 
the algorithm. 
1. Introduction 
Imagine that a language understander ncounters the following passage while reading 
a novel: 
(1) 
HHe \[Sandy\] wanted to talk to Dennys. 1'2How were they going to 
be able to get home from this strange desert land into which they had 
been cast and which was heaven knew where in all the countless olar 
systems in all the countless galaxies? \[UEngle, Many Waters, p. 91\] 
In this passage, the author is not objectively narrating events or describing the fictional 
world, but is presenting the thoughts and emotions of a character. It is to Sandy that 
the land is strange, and it is Sandy's uncertainty that is expressed by the question and 
the expression 'heaven knew where.' Unless the language understander realizes these 
things, it hasn't fully understood the passage. 
Passages uch as (1) take a character's psychological point of view and are com- 
posed of subjective sentences--sentences that present he thoughts, perceptions, and 
inner states of characters in the story. Notice that nothing in (1.2) explicitly specifies 
that the sentence is Sandy's thought. In general, only a narrative parenthetical, such 
as 'Dennys thought' in (2), serves to explicitly indicate both that a sentence is subjective 
and who its subjective character is. 
* Department of Computer Science, New Mexico State University, Box 30001/Dept. CS, Las Cruces, NM 
88003-0001. E-mail: wiebe@nmsu.edu. 
(~) 1994 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
(2) 
Certainly, Dennys thought, anything would be better than this horrible- 
smelling place full of horrible little people. \[UEngle, Many Waters, p. 
25\] 
In all other cases, one must rely on less direct sources of information to determine the 
psychological point of view. 
This paper presents an algorithm for recognizing subjective sentences and identi- 
fying their subjective characters in third-person fictional narrative text. The algorithm 
is based on regularities, found by extensive xamination of naturally occurring text 
(i.e., published novels and short stories) in the ways that authors manipulate point of 
view. It has been implemented, and some preliminary empirical studies, which lend 
support o the algorithm, have also been performed. 
The algorithm is described in the body of the paper and is given in full in Ap- 
pendix A. Sections 2-5 give background information and describe my approach to the 
problem. Sections 6 and 7 present an overview of the algorithm, specifying the input 
and output of the basic components and identifying the components focused on in this 
work. Sections 8-10 present the bulk of the algorithm, addressing the problem of iden- 
tifying subjective characters before the problem of recognizing subjective sentences. 
Section 11 describes the algorithm's treatment of sentences about private-state actions, 
such as sighing and looking. Sections 12-14 conclude the paper with a summary of 
tests of the algorithm and discussions of the relationship between tracking point of 
view and anaphora resolution and of directions for future research. The algorithm is 
given in Appendix A, demonstrations of its implementation are given in Appendix B, 
and the results of a test of the algorithm are given in Appendix C. 
2. Point of View 
2.1 Introduction 
In face-to-face conversation, an utterance is understood with respect to the situation in 
which the conversation takes place (Barwise and Perry 1983). Thus, deictic expressions 
such as 'now,' 'here,' come,' go,' and 'just ahead' derive their meanings from the 
time and place of the utterance (Fillmore 1975; Lyons 1977). In fictional narrative text, 
however, spatial and temporal deictic terms are clearly not understood with respect to 
the time and place of the author's writing nor of the reader's reading. Rather, they are 
understood with respect o a "here" and "now" within the story (Hamburger 1973; 
Kuroda 1976; Banfield 1982; Bruder et al 1986; Rapaport et al 1989a, 1989b). Thus, 
the reader must track the spatial and temporal points of view with respect o which 
objects and events are described (Uspensky 1973). 
Knowing who the speaker is another situational component eeded to understand 
conversation. Most obviously, the speaker is needed as the referent of first-person pro- 
nouns, but in addition she is the source of beliefs, emotions, evaluations, etc., expressed 
by her utterances. But in third-person arrative text, sentences can express a charac- 
ter's beliefs, emotions, etc., even when he or she is referred to in the third person. 
Thus, an additional deictic component, corresponding to the speaker in conversation, 
is needed to understand third-person narrative: the psychological point of view (Us- 
pensky 1973). 
Although Various points of view often 'coincide in third-person narrative text, they 
need not. For example, a passage may take a character's spatial and temporal points 
of view without taking the psychological point of view of any character (Uspensky 
1973). It is the psychological point of view we are concerned with in this paper. 
234 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
2.2 Subjective Sentences 
Following Ann Banfield (1982), a literary theorist who analyzes point of view lin- 
guistically, we shall call sentences that take a character's psychological point of view 
(hereafter, simply point of view or POV) subjective, in contrast o sentences that ob- 
jectively narrate events or describe the fictional world. Subjective sentences present 
private states of characters--states of an experiencer holding an attitude, optionally 
toward an object. Varieties of private states include intellectual ones, such as someone 
believing, wondering, or knowing something; emotive ones, such as someone hating 
something or being afraid; and perceptual ones, such as someone seeing or hearing 
something. Thus, private states are states that are not open to objective observation 
or verification (Quirk et al 1985). To refer to a private state p and its components, we 
shall write: 
PS (p, experiencer, attitude, object) 
where experiencer is the person in state p, and attitude is know, believe, see, or whatever 
sort of private state p is. Notice that "attitude" is being used as a general covering 
term, referring to a class of which the propositional attitudes are only a subclass. 
We shall limit our scope in this paper mainly to two classes of subjective sen- 
tences, one containing those Banfield calls "represented thoughts" and "represented 
perceptions," and the other containing those I call "private-state r ports." We will not 
consider epresented speech at all (Jespersen 1924; Banfield 1982), because of its com- 
plexity, and only toward the end of the paper (Section 11) will we consider a variant 
of private-state r ports: subjective sentences about private-state actions. 
Even restricting one's attention to the two classes mentioned above, there are many 
syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic features according to which one could characterize 
subjective sentences. Below I propose a view of subjective sentences that is useful 
for the specific purpose of tracking POV. For characterizations that include further 
and alternative distinctions, see, for example, the following works in literary theory 
and linguistics: Dole~el 1973; Uspensky 1973; Fillmore 1974; Cohn 1978; Banfield 1982; 
Caenepeel 1989; Galbraith 1990; Li 1991. 
A private state is part of the meaning of any kind of subjective sentence. However, 
a represented thought or represented perception without a narrative parenthetical 
explicitly mentions only the object of the private state; the attitude and experiencer are 
implicit. On the other hand, a private-state r port explicitly mentions the experiencer, 
the attitude, and, optionally, the object of a private state p; in addition, with the private- 
state report, p is not the object of some other private state with an implicit experiencer 
and attitude. Consider the following sentences: 
3.1 Zoe was angry at Joe. 3.2 Where was he? 
Sentence (3.2) is a represented thought. It mentions the object of a private state p whose 
experiencer, Zoe, and attitude, wonder or a similar attitude, are implicit: 
"Where was he?" 
ps(p, experiencer, attitude, object) 
235 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Sentence (3.1) mentions the experiencer, attitude, and object of a private state Pl: 
" Zoe was angry at Joe." 
PS(pl, experiencer 1, attitude1, object1) 
Under a private-state r port interpretation f (3.1), Pl is not itself the object of some 
other private state. 
We shall call the character whose psychological point of view is taken by a sub- 
jective sentence the subjective character (SC) of that sentence. The SC is the subject 
of a narrative parenthetical, when one is present; the implicit experiencer, when the 
sentence is a represented thought or represented perception without a narrative par- 
enthetical; and the explicit experiencer, when the sentence is a private-state r port. 
In addition to private-state rms uch as 'know' and 'see,' subjective sentences can 
contain subjective lements, linguistic elements that express attitudes of the SC (this 
aspect of subjective sentences i noted in many studies of POV; the term "subjective 
element" isattributable toBanfield 1982). An example appears in the following passage 
(throughout this paper, sentences incited passages are indented to reflect paragraphing 
in the original texts). 
(4) 
4.1,What are you doing in here?" 42Suddenly she \[Zoe\] was furious 
with him \[Joe\]. 
4"3"Spying, of course." 
4"4"Well of all dumb things! 4'5I thought you ran away." 46joe 
Bunch was awful. \[Oneal, War Work, p. 130\] 
The adjective "awful" in (4.6) is a subjective lement, expressing Zoe's evaluation of Joe 
(that he is awful). Notice that (4.6) is a represented thought--Zoe thought is implicit-- 
and (4.2) is a private-state r port, reporting Zoe's private state of being furious with 
Joe. 
As will be specified shortly in Section 6, the output of the algorithm is the POV 
of a sentence, not a representation f its meaning. One interesting issue not addressed 
in this paper is how one might represent the difference between, for example, "John 
wondered where he was" and " 'Where was he?' John wondered." 
But one distinction that is crucial for tracking POV is the distinction between the 
interpretation f a sentence as either objective or subjective, and the kinds of states of 
affairs that the sentence is about. The former is a pragmatic issue, concerning the use 
of a sentence to present objective or subjective information about the fictional world 
(Kuroda 1976). The latter is a semantic issue, concerning the word senses of lexical 
items in the sentence. For instance, (5) below can be used to objectively narrate a past 
action or to portray a character's thought of one. In either case, the sentence is about 
an action. 
(5) Gus had taken them back to town. 
Now consider (6): 
(6) Gus had a cornish hen. 
Whether the word sense of 'had' in (6) is a state or an action (eating) is a separate 
question from whether the sentence is objective or subjective (similarly, Hirst \[1987\] 
236 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
suggests that lexical ambiguity is orthogonal to speech act ambiguity in conversation). 
As specified in Secti6n 6.1, the type of state of affairs that each clause is about is part 
of the input to the algorithm. 
In addition to being objective or a character's subjective sentence, a sentence may 
express the attitudes of an overt narrator (Chatman 1978). But this paper will focus 
only on texts without overt narrators. In addition, we will not consider passages with 
irony and humor that do not originate with a character, or passages that are written 
in the style of an epic, parable, or folktale. As well, we will not try to account for 
fiction that is experimental in its manipulation of POV. Finally, we will only consider 
narrative sentences in which the tenses are "shifted" (Jespersen 1924); that is, in which 
the simple past is used for the narrative present, and the past perfective is used for 
the narrative past. Note that it is not difficult to find published third-person texts that 
satisfy these criteria. 
3. Importance of Tracking Point of View 
The importance to narrative understanding of recognizing characters' intentions has 
long been recognized in AI (see, for example, Wilensky \[1983\] and Dyer \[1983\]). To 
perform plan recognition, the reader must, among other things, realize when charac- 
ter's intentions are being communicated; this may involve realizing that a particular 
sentence is subjective rather than objective. In (7), a represented thought communicates 
a character's intentions: 
(7) 
71He \[Jeff\] could see her walking the other way. 72If he wanted to 
avoid notice, he would have to act with the same deliberate manner as 
all the robots around him. 7'3He lengthened his stride and gave chase 
without otherwise altering his body language. \[Wu, Cyborg, p. 71\] 
Sentence (7.2) is not a purely narrative sentence informing the reader that if Jeff wants 
to avoid notice, he must change the way he is walking. Rather, (7.2) is Jeff's thought 
expressing his goal to avoid notice, and also his belief about how to achieve it. Un- 
derstanding this is necessary for the reader to perceive the intentionality behind the 
action described in (7.3). 
In addition to being important for plan recognition, tracking POV is necessary to 
distinguish what is true in the fictional world from what is believed by the characters. 
While objective sentences are unquestionably true in the fictional world, subjective 
sentences reflect he subjective character'S beliefs, which may be false in the fictional 
world (Uspensky 1973; Kuroda 1976; Cohn 1978; Banfield 1982). A striking example 
is the following: 
(8) This was David's boy. \[Bridgers, All Together Now, p. 91\] 
Sentence (8) is actually about a female character named "Casey." However, it is the 
represented thought of a character who believes that Casey is a boy, and reflects this 
false belief about her. 
Beliefs and intentions are just two of many types of attitudes communicated by 
subjective sentences ( ee Dyer \[1983\] for a processing model of how various attitudes 
can be related to goals). The algorithm for tracking POV presented in this paper is 
intended to be just one part of an overall narrative-understanding system. Identifying 
which attitudes are being presented and incorporating them into a representation f 
237 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
the meaning of the text is beyond the scope of this work. But to accomplish such tasks, 
the system must recognize when attitudes are being presented in the first place and 
identify the character whose attitudes they are; these are the tasks involved in tracking 
the psychological POV. 
POV also has important implications for discourse processing. Discussion of this 
topic is deferred until Section 14. 
Sentences that present 1 the attitudes of someone who is not the writer appear in 
genres other than third-person fictional narrative text, such as newspaper articles and 
textbooks (Banfield 1982), even if we might prefer another term than "represented 
thought" for such sentences. Thus, the problem of tracking POV arises for these other 
genres as well. Following is a passage from The New York Times (1990) that contains a 
"represented thought": 
Looking at the more severely affected countries, experts are wondering 
where the saturation point will be. Where will the infection rate level 
off as most of those engaging in riskier behavior fall prey: 30 percent? 
40 percent? 
The second sentence presents omething that the experts are wondering; 30 and 40 
percent are the experts' guesses, not those of the writer. 
Third-person fictional narrative text is the focus of this work primarily because it 
contains o many prototypical instances of sentences that present attitudes of someone 
who is not the writer. Further, by restricting the types of texts considered (see Sec- 
tion 2.2 above), it is possible to constrain the problem to choosing among an objective 
POV and the points of view of the characters. In genres uch as soft news and editori- 
als, for example, the writer may present his or her own attitudes; when attitudes of the 
writer, the speaker, or a narrator may be presented, the problem is less constrained. 
Hamburger (1973), Kuroda (1973), Banfield (1982), Galbraith (1990), and Wiebe (1991) 
address this issue more fully. Finally, there is a great deal of previous work to build 
upon, in linguistics and especially literary theory, investigating POV in novels and 
short stories. 
4. Approach 
Reasoning about whether a sentence is objective or the subjective sentence of this or 
that character is certainly part of tracking POV (Fillmore 1974). But it is reasonable to 
hypothesize that, in the face of all of the inferential possibilities, discourse xpectations 
too are involved in tracking POV; that is, in the absence of an explicit indication of 
POV, readers are intended to assume that POV is being manipulated in one of the 
usual ways, and to try to interpret the sentence accordingly. (Similar suggestions have 
been made by Carberry \[1989\] with respect o resolving intersentential el ipsis and by 
Sidner \[1983\] with respect o pronoun resolution.) We can view the text as composed 
of maximal blocks of objective sentences (objective contexts) and maximal blocks of 
subjective sentences that have the same subjective character (subjective contexts). Fur- 
1 My wording in this paper often attributes agency to sentences. I might say, for example, that a sentence 
states omething, communicates something, initiates anew POV, or refers to someone. Sidner (1983) 
and Webber (1983) object specifically tousing a noun phrase as the agent of the verb 'refer,' since it is 
the writer who is doing the referring, not the noun phrase. I do not disagree---my wording is for 
convenience only. 
238 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
ther, we can view the process of tracking POV as recognizing the following discourse 
operations: 
. 
. 
. 
Sentence s continues the current POV: s and the previous entence are 
either both objective or both subjective sentences of the same character. 
Sentence s resumes y's POV: s is a subjective sentence of y and is 
preceded by an objective context, which is in turn preceded by a 
subjective context of the same character y. 
Sentence s init iates y's POV: s is a subjective sentence of y and either s is 
the first subjective sentence of a scene, or the SC of the previous 
subjective sentence is a different character z. 
The approach taken in this work is to seek, by extensive xamination of naturally oc- 
curring narratives, regularities in the ways that authors initiate, resume, and continue 
a character's point of view, and to develop an algorithm that tracks point of view 
on the basis of the regularities found. Given certain combinations of sentence features 
(e.g., tense, aspect, lexical items that potentially express ubjectivity, the types of states 
of affairs that the sentence is about, and the identities of the actors or experiencers of
those states of affairs), and of the current context (e.g., whether the previous entence 
was subjective or objective, whether a paragraph break separates the current and pre- 
vious sentences, and the identity of the SC of the previous ubjective sentence, if there 
was one), particular point-of-view operations can be expected. A simple example: a 
sentence that (1) is about an action, (2) is in the past progressive, and (3) follows, 
without a paragraph break, the subjective sentence of a character c, usually continues 
c's POV. 
The examination of texts mentioned above was not a formal empirical investi- 
gation, so the algorithm should be viewed as a hypothesis that can be subjected to 
such tests. However, I examined passages from over forty novels and short stories 
to identify the regularities upon which the algorithm is based, and strictly adhered 
to the practice of considering only naturally occurring examples in developing the 
algorithm. Further, some preliminary empirical tests of the algorithm have been per- 
formed (see Section 12), among them psychological experiments of specific aspects of 
the algorithm. The results of these experiments are positive. I describe them as "pre- 
liminary" so as not to suggest hat the entire algorithm has already been subjected to 
psychological experimentation. 
5. Previous Work 
There are literary theorists and linguists who investigate linguistic aspects of sub- 
jective sentences. The present work greatly benefited from their investigations, most 
directly from Dole~el (1973), Uspensky (1973), Kuroda (1973, 1976), Fillmore (1974), 
Cohn (1978), and especially Banfield (1982). However, the relevant work in the above 
fields is descriptive only; it describes characteristics of subjective sentences, but does 
not address the problem of tracking POV. An exception is work on POV and aspect 
that shows that aspect is only a context-sensitive marker of subjectivity (Ehrlich \[1987, 
1990\] and Caenepeel \[1989\]; see Section 9). 
In AI, Nakhimovsky (1988) suggests a discourse-processing approach to tracking 
POV, but does not develop it in any depth. Also, Reiser (1981) simply suggests that 
POV may be established by syntactic lues, and by including "more episodes and 
internal information" about a character (p. 209). 
239 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
con text ~ l{ }, { }, { }, presubjective-nonactive / 
loop 
if ~SENTENCE(ITEM( text, i) ) then 
context ~- NEW-CONTEXT' (ITEM(text, i), context) 
else 
interpretation ~ POV (FEATURES(ITEM( text, i) ),context) 
context ~ NEw-CONTEXT(interpretation, context) 
end if 
i~ i+ l  
end loop 
n ~e.nl~ce ~ N / 
Figure 1 
Overview. 
A great deal of work in AI has involved inferring speaker and hearer attitudes in 
conversation (such as work in plan recognition in conversation--see, e.g., Allen and 
Perrault \[1980\]; in user modeling--see, .g., the papers in the special issue of Computa- 
tional Linguistics on user modeling 1988; and in dynamically constructing nested-belief 
environments during understanding--see, .g., Wilks and Bien \[1983\]) and character's 
attitudes in stories (see, e.g., Wilensky \[1983\] and Dyer \[1983\]). Such beliefs might be 
about what agents who are mentioned in the discourse believe, but the question is not 
addressed as to whether an utterance itself presents what is actually the object of an 
agent's attitude, where that agent is not mentioned in the sentence. 
In summary, there is no previous detailed investigation of the problem of tracking 
the psychological POV. 
6. Overview of the Algorithm 
The algorithm will be developed in detail in subsequent sections. This section provides 
an overview, giving the input and output of the basic components. While this involves 
using some terms before they are defined, it will provide the reader with a framework 
in which to understand the material that follows. As well, it will enable me to clarify 
the focus of the work and to state exactly what has been implemented. 
Figure I gives the algorithm at the highest level and a corresponding flow-diagram. 
Of the functions hown in Figure 1, it is functions POV, NEW-CONTEXT, and NEW-CON-- 
240 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
TEXT' that are addressed in this work. Functions ITEM and FEATURES, preprocessing 
functions, represent a subset of the other tasks performed by an overall NLU system. 
The remainder of this section gives the input/output mappings of all five functions. 
6.1 The Preprocessing Functions 
? Function ITEM maps the text and the current position in the text into the input item 
at that position, i.e., the paragraph break, scene break (see Section 8.2.1), or sentence 
(see Section 6.3.2) that is at the current position: 
ITEM : Text x Position --+ Inputltem. 
This function is not implemented in the system, so a facility is provided that enables 
the user to input the current input item. 
? Function FEATURES maps a sentence (see Section 6.3.2) into a set of features: 
FEATURES : Sentence ~ FeatureSet. 
A FeatureSet consists of the following (some of the features will be expanded upon in 
later sections, as indicated; for extensive detail, see Wiebe \[1990\]): 
. 
. 
. 
The potential subjective elements in the sentence, if any. The potential 
subjective lements form a large class that includes lexical items used 
with particular meanings, tense, aspect, and certain syntactic properties 
(see Section 9.2). 
The type of state of affairs that each clause is about. For example, the 
main clause of the following is about a private state and the 
subordinated clause is about an action: 
John wondered whether Mary opened the door. 
Note that each of the following is about a private state: 
Mary was afraid of the dark. 
The darkness made Mary afraid. 
Wiebe (1990) gives a list of private-state rms, noting which syntactic 
roles the experiencer fills in various clause structures (this material is 
drawn from Quirk et al \[1985\]). Section 6.3.1 gives the categorization of
states of affairs used in this work. 
An indication of whether or not the head noun of the subject of the main 
clause is a private-state noun (e.g., 'pain' and 'astonishment') and, if it is, 
the state of affairs that that noun is about. Examples of sentences with 
such private-state nouns are: 
(10) The feeling went away. 
(11) The pain increased. 
(12) His astonishment grew. 
4. The experiencers and actors (i.e., particular case fillers \[Fillmore 1968\]) of 
the states of affairs of items (2) and (3). Because a single action might 
have more than one actor, and a single state might have more than one 
experiencer, each of these is a set. If an experiencer or actor is not 
mentioned in the sentence (as is the case for the subject nouns in (10) 
and (11)), then that experiencer or actor is the empty set. 
241 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
. 
. 
An indication of whether or not the sentence contains a narrative 
parenthetical, and, if it does, the identity (or identities) of the 
individual(s) referred to by the subject of the parenthetical. 
Some other syntactic information ot included above. 
Function FEATURES involves the resolution of syntactic, semantic, and discourse/prag- 
matic ambiguities that are outside the scope of this work (see Section 14 for a dis- 
cussion of interactions between point of view and discourse processing). While the 
implemented system demonstrated in Appendix B takes actual sentences as input, it 
does not truly implement FEATURES, but is successful in computing the FeatureSet of 
a sentence only for sentences that fall within its limited coverage. There is another 
version of the system that queries the user for the information returned by function 
FEATURES, to enable the algorithm to be tested on unlimited text, without concern 
for problems not addressed in this work. It is this system that is used in the test of 
the algorithm presented in Appendix C and to support he psychological experiments 
mentioned in Sections 8.3.1, 9.3, and 12. 
6.2 The Central Functions 
? Function POV, which is implemented, maps a FeatureSet and a Context into an Inter- 
pretation: 
POV : FeatureSet x Context ~ Interpretation. 
A Context and an Interpretation are as follows. A Context consists of (1) the identity of 
the SC of the last subjective sentence that appeared in the text, if there was one, (2) the 
identity of the last active character (defined in Section 8.2.2), if there was one, (3) the 
identities of any characters whose points of view were taken earlier in the text, and 
(4) the current ext situation (defined just below in Section 6.3.4): 
Context = {LastSC, 
LastActiveCharacter, 
PreviousSCs, 
TextS ituation ) 
An Interpretation is either that the sentence is the subjective sentence of a particu- 
lar character, or that the sentence is objective and has a particular active character 
(ActiveCharacter is the empty set for objective sentences without active characters): 
Interpretation E {{objective, ActiveCharacter} \] ActiveCharacter C Characters} U
{{subjective, SC} i SC c Characters}. 
? Functions NEW-CONTEXT and NEW-CONTEXT' return the Context of the next input 
item, the former for the case in which the current item is a sentence; the latter for the 
case in which the current item is a scene or paragraph break: 
NEW-CONTEXT : Interpretation x Context --+ Context. 
NEW-CONTEXT' : {paragraph break, scene break} x Context ~ Context. 
These functions are also implemented; algorithms for them follow trivially from the 
definitions of an interpretation and of a context and its components. 
242 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
The Context of the i th input item in text t, ci, is 
({}, {}, {}, presubjective-nonactive) 
NEW-CONTEXT'(ITEM(t, i -- 1)~ ci-1) 
Ci 
NEW-CONTEXT( 
POV(FEATURES(ITEM(t, i -- 1)), ci-1)~ 
Ci-1) 
i f i= l  
i f i> l&  
~SENTENCE (ITEM (t, i-- 1)) 
i f i> l&  
SENTENCE (ITEM (t, i -- 1)) 
where "presubjective-nonactive" is the text situation of the first item in a text, and 
SENTENCE(X) is true iff x is a sentence. To refer to the components of a context, we 
shall use the functions LAST-SC-OF, LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF, PREVIOUS-SCS-OF, and 
TEXT-SITUATION-OF, which map a context C to the LastSC, LastActiveCharacter, Previ- 
ousSCs, and TextSituation of C, respectively. 
In the above definitions, LastSC, LastActiveCharacter, SC, and ActiveCharacter are 
sets, and PreviousSCs is a set of sets. This is because a subjective sentence can represent 
the shared psychological POV of more than one physical character (Banfield 1982). For 
example: 
(13) 
13"1Leaning out of the window side by side the two women watched 
the man' . . .132Now he threw away his cigarette. 133They watched 
him. 134What would he do next? \[Woolf, The Years, p. 103; cited by 
Banfield 1982, p. 96\] 
Sentence (13.4) is a represented thought whose SC is more than one physical character. 
6.3 States of Affairs, Sentences, and Contexts: Some Further Details 
6.3.1 States of Affairs. The following are the range of state-of-affairs types that can be 
included in a FeatureSet. For more refined categorizations for the purpose of analyzing 
tense and aspect, see, for example, Reichenbach (1947) and the papers in the special 
issue of Computational Linguistics on tense and aspect in 1988. 
. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
private-state actions, such as looking and sighing (see Section 11); 
other kinds of actions; 
private states; and 
nonprivate states, such as being six feet tall. 
The rough part of this categorization is the boundary between the second and fourth 
items. We shall assume that function FEATURES classifies only clear instances of nonpri- 
vate states as such, and that states of affairs that fall between the categories of action 
and nonprivate state, such as processes, are classified as actions. 
In quoted speech, there are states of affairs on two levels: those spoken of and 
the action of speaking itself. The regularities on which the algorithm is based involve 
the latter. Thus, the contents of the quoted string are not considered, and, even if a 
discourse parenthetical does not actually appear, the sentence is viewed as one whose 
main clause is about a communicative action (a subtype of (2)above); that is, as one 
whose main verb phrase contains a communicative rb with a quoted string as object. 
We return to this point in Section 9.5. 
243 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
6.3.2 Sentences. We shall call any Inputltem that is not a scene or paragraph break a 
"sentence," although such an Inputltem is sometimes smaller than an actual sentence, 
sometimes larger. The former occurs for compound sentences and the latter occurs for 
sentences of quoted speech. 
Suppose that a compound sentence with conjuncts c1,.. . ,  Cn starts at position i in 
text t. Then, ITEM(t,/) = cl, ..., ITEM(t,i+n-1) = Cn. We shall call each ci a "sentence." 
In the case of quoted speech, everything enclosed within a single pair of quotes, 
together with the accompanying discourse parenthetical, if there is one, counts as a 
single Inputltem that we shall call a "sentence." For example, (4.4) and (4.5) together 
compose a single Inputltem (a single "sentence"). Since the algorithm does not consider 
the contents of quoted strings (see Section 6.3.1), there is no reason for each constituent 
sentence of a quoted string to be a separate Inputltem. 
From this point forward, numbering within cited passages is as follows: each 
Inputltem that is not a paragraph or scene break is given a separate number. 
Now that the units of input have been specified, the following can be noted. In 
this work, if any part of a sentential Inputltem s is subjective, then s as a whole is 
considered to be subjective. This makes the algorithm easier to understand. Enabling 
it to report which part of s is subjective, if relevant, would involve straightforward 
refinements of the text situations, of interpretations, and of some conditional steps of 
the algorithm into subcases. 
6.3.3 Choosing a State of Affairs. Out of the states of affairs included in a FeatureSet 
for a sentential input item s, the algorithm chooses just one to consider. Specifically, 
the algorithm for POV uses the following function: 
CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS : FeatureSet - ,  StateOfAffairs. 
As we shall see in Section 8, private states are particularly important to consider, be- 
cause if a sentence that is about a private state is interpreted to be a private-state 
report, then the SC of the sentence is the experiencer of the private state. A subordi- 
nated clause can report a character's private state; an example is "thinking . . ."  in the 
following sentence (as it appears in the novel): 
When he \[Call\] got within fifteen miles of Lonesome Dove he cut west, 
thinking they would be holding the herd in that direction. \[McMurtry, 
Lonesome Dove, p. 181\] 
Following is the specification of CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS. Let Cmain be the main 
clause of s; let Cl,C2,... ,Cn be the other n clauses of s; and let hn be the head noun 
of the subject of Cmain. Further, let SOamain be the state of affairs that Cmain is about; let 
SOahn be the state of affairs that hn is about (but if hn is not about a state of affairs--for 
example, if it is a proper noun--then let sOahn be nil); and let soai (1 K i < n) be the state 
of affairs that ci is about. Then, the result of CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS(FEATURES(S)) is 
as follows: 
If SOamain is a private state then 
the result is sOamain 
else if SOahn is a private state then 
the result is soahn 
else if 3 soai (1 < i < n) such that soai is a private state, and ci is not 
subordinated to another clause Ck such that SOak is a private state then 
244 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Table 1 
Choosing a state of affairs: examples. 
s: "Japheth turned the book over in a puzzled manner." 
Chosen: SOamain 
S: "The pain increased." 
Chosen : SOahn 
S: "The pain angered him." 
Chosen: SOamain 
S: "When he got within fifteen miles of Lonesome Dove he cut west, thinking they 
would be holding the herd in that direction." 
Chosen: soai, where ci = "thinking they would be holding the herd in that direction" 
s: " 'Rosie's just saying that. She doesn't really care,' Zoe said." (sentence (15.3)). 
Chosen: SOamainn, which is the action of Zoe saying the quoted string. 
s: "What are you doing in here?" (sentence (4.1)). 
Chosen: SOamain, which, as s appears in the novel, is Zoe saying the quoted string. 
That Zoe is the speaker is in FEATURES(s) (see items (2) and (4) 
of section 6.1 and the end of section 6.3.1). 
the result is $oai (if there is more than one such soai, one is randomly chosen) 
else the result is SOamain. 
Table 1 gives some examples. 
Note that private-state t rms appearing in certain types of constituents cannot be 
used to report private states. An example is a manner  adverbial  (Quirk et al 1985), 
such as the italicized portion of "Japheth turned the book over in a puzzled manner." 
(There are others addressed in Wiebe \[1990\], but because of space limitations, we shall 
ignore them in this paper.) The phrase "in a puzzled manner"  does not report a private 
state, but rather describes the manner in which something is done. The state of affairs 
chosen for this sentence is s imply the main-clause action. 
To facilitate discussion, a sentential Inputltem of which the state of affairs chosen 
for consideration is of type X will be called an "X sentence," for example, "action 
sentence" and "private-state sentence." 
6.3.4 The Text Situations. Following are the text situations (recall that a text situa- 
tion is part of the context, defined in Section 6.2). 2 To make it easier to understand 
them, definitions are given in both English and diagrams. Each diagram shows what 
appears between the start of the current scene, represented by "start-of-scene," and 
the current position, represented by a d iamond (c~). The start of the current scene is 
either a scene break or the very beginning of the text. The symbol "?" represents 
a paragraph break; "objective-sentence" and "subjective-sentence" r present objective 
and subjective sentences, respectively; "sentence" alone represents either a subjective 
or objective sentence; the symbol "*" means 0 or more occurrences, "?"  means 1 or 
more occurrences, and " . . . "  represents any number  of paragraph breaks and sentences 
(but not scene breaks, since only what has appeared since the start of the current scene 
is shown). A scene is assumed to always begin with a paragraph break. 
2 1 am indebted to Stuart C. Shapiro for suggesting the names. 
245 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
presubjective-nonactive: a subjective sentence has not appeared so far in 
the current scene, and a sentence with an active character (defined in 
Section 8.2.2) has not appeared so far in the current paragraph. 
start-of-scene ? (objective-sentence + ?)" objective-sentence ~ o 
None has an 
active character 
presubjective-active: a subjective sentence has not appeared so far in the 
current scene, but a sentence with an active character has appeared 
earlier in the current paragraph. 
start-of-scene ? (objective-sentence + ?)~ objective-sentence +, * 
At least one has 
an active character 
continuing-subjective: the current sentence follows a subjective sentence 
without a paragraph break. 
start-of-scene ... ? sentence ~ subjective-sentence o 
broken-subjective: the current sentence follows a subjective sentence, 
but after a paragraph break. 
start-of-scene .. .  subjective-sentence ? o 
interrupted-subjective: the current sentence follows an objective 
sentence, but an earlier sentence in the current paragraph is subjective. 
start-of-scene . .. ? sentence" subjective-sentence sentence ~ 
objective-sentence o 
postsubjective-nonactive: a subjective sentence has appeared in the 
current scene, and an objective sentence and a paragraph break have 
appeared since the last subjective sentence. However,  a sentence with an 
active character does not appear  earlier in the current paragraph. 
start-of-scene .. .  subjective-sentence .. .  objective-sentence ? o 
-o r -  
start-of-scene .. .  subjective-sentence .. .  ? objective-sentence +, * 
Y 
None has an 
active character 
postsubjective-active: like the postsubjective-nonactive situation, except 
that a sentence with an active character does appear earlier in the 
current paragraph. 
start-of-scene .. .  subjective-sentence .. .  ? objective-sentence +, * 
At least one has 
an active character 
7. Focus of This Work 
Algorithms for the preprocessing functions are not given in this paper, and algorithms 
for NEW-CONTEXT and NEW-CONTEXT' are given in Appendix A. The remainder of 
246 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
this paper develops an algorithm for function POV, which at the highest level is the 
following: 
POV (featureSet~ context) 
if SENTENCE-IS-SUBJECTIVE (featureSet~ context) then ?9 
return/subjective~ IDENTIFY-SC (featureSet~ context)I ?8 
else 
return/objective~ ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (featureSet~ context ) l ?8 
end if 
Active characters are discussed in the section about identifying the SC (Section 8), 
because the raison d'etre of the active-character component of an interpretation is that 
the active character of an objective sentence may become the LastActiveCharacter of a 
later context, contexti, and as such, may become the SC of a subjective sentence that is 
processed in contexti. 
8. Identifying the Subjective Character 
8.1 Introduction 
The SC of a subjective sentence can always be identified from the sentence itself if 
the sentence has a narrative parenthetical, such as 'Dennys thought' in (2), and can 
sometimes be so identified if the sentence is about a private state. When the SC is not 
identifiable from the sentence, she is often a previously mentioned character. Thus, as 
the text is processed, any algorithm for tracking POV must keep track of characters 
who are likely to become the SC of a later subjective sentence. I call such characters 
expected subjective characters. The algorithm presented in this paper considers two 
possibilities: the last subjective character and the last active character of the current 
context. Each is an expected subjective character only in certain text situations. The 
idea of keeping track of entities evoked in the text in order to interpret later sentences 
is attributable to work on anaphora resolution (e.g., Sidner \[1983\] and Grosz, Joshi, 
and Weinstein \[1983\]). Active characters are based specifically on Sidner's actor focus, 
but while Sidner's actor focus is "whoever is currently the agent in the sentence" 
(p. 282), many sentences with agents do not have active characters, as we shall see in 
Section 8.2.2. 
In some cases, the SC of a subjective sentence isnot identifiable when the sentence 
appears, but may be identifiable after later sentences are processed. The algorithm, 
as presented in Wiebe (1990), handles one such case. Because of space limitations, 
however, this aspect of the algorithm is not presented in this paper, but is only briefly 
described (in Section 8.2.4). 
Here is a high-level algorithm for identifying the SC (comments are preceded by 
'O/o'): 
IDENTIFY-SC (featureSet~ context) 
% IDENTIFY-SC(featureSet~ context) C Characters; the empty set indicates failure. 
if IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE(featureSet~ context) ~ {} then 
return IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE (featureSeL context) 
else if LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context) and 
LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context ) then 
return CHOOSE-AN-EXPECTED-SC (featureSet~ context) 
else if LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC(context) then 
return LAST-SC-OF( context) 
247 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
else if LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC(context) hen 
return LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF(context) 
else 
return {} 
end if 
The following subsections refine and illustrate the above algorithm. We first consider 
identifying the SC based on expected subjective characters (in Section 8.2), and then 
identifying the SC from the sentence (in Section 8.3). 
8.2 Identifying the SC from the Context 
In this section, we consider cases in which the SC of a subjective sentence cannot 
be identified from the sentence itself. We first consider the last subjective character 
(Section 8.2.1), then the last active character (Section 8.2.2), and then the cases in 
which both (Section 8.2.3) or neither (Section 8.2.4) are expected subjective characters. 
8.2.1 The Last Subjective Character. An SC who is not identifiable from the sentence 
itself is most often the last subjective character. In this case, the current sentence is 
continuing a character's POV, if the previous entence was also subjective, or resuming 
one, if objective sentences have appeared since the last subjective sentence. Sentence 
(1.2) above illustrates the former, and passage (15) illustrates the latter: 
(15) 
15"lZoe would have liked to punch her. lS'2She could not understand 
why her parents didn't know Rosie was a phony. 
15"3"Rosie's just saying that. She doesn't really care," Zoe said. 
15"4"I do too!" cried Rosie. 
lS'S"Phony!" Zoe yelled. 
lS6"That will be enough." 157Their father stood up. 15"8"You may 
take your plate to the kitchen." 
15"9"What about Rosie!" Zoe yelled. 
15"1?"I will worry about Rosie." 
ls'nThere was no use arguing. \[Oneal, War Work, p. 40; italics in 
original\] 
Sentences (15.1), (15.2), and (15.11) are Zoe's subjective sentences. Sentence (15.11) 
expresses Zoe's judgment hat there is no use in arguing, resuming Zoe's point of 
view: it has the same SC as the last subjective sentence, (15.2), and is separated from 
(15.2) by objective sentences (15.3)-(15.10). 
If there has not been a subjective sentence so far in the text, then the last subjective 
character, which is the empty set in this case, clearly should not be an expected subjec- 
tive character. Moreover, drastic spatial and temporal discontinuities can block the con- 
tinuation or resumption of a character's psychological POV. This paper considers one 
such kind of discontinuity, a scene break. The condition under which the last subjective 
character of contexti is an expected subjective character is when a subjective sentence 
has appeared in the current scene. That is, LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (contexti) is true 
iff TEXT-SITUATION-OF(contexti) ~ {presubjective-nonactive, pr subjective-active}. 
A scene break is a break from one parallel story-line to another. Almeida (1987) 
analyzes parallel story-lines as forming separate narrative-lines, which are stretches 
of narrative that are controlled by single now-points. The following passage illustrates 
248 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
the situation in which a scene break blocks the resumption of a character's point of 
view: 
(16) 
16"1Moving fast, in the dark. 
16'2He'd lost Cherry. 16"3He'd lost the hammer. 16"4She must've slid 
back down into Factory when the guy fired his first shot. 16SLast shot, 
if he'd been under that box when it came down ... 
\[Mixture of subjective sentences of the same character and quoted speech\] 
\[Chapter break\] 
16"6What kind of place was this, anyway? 
167Things had gotten to a point where Mona couldn't get any com- 
fort out of imagining Lanette's advice. \[Gibson, Mona Lisa Overdrive, 
pp. 275-276; ellipsis in original\] 
As passage (16) appears in the novel, the SC of all of the subjective sentences before 
the chapter break is the character Slick, and a scene break occurs at the chapter break. 
While the sentence following the break is subjective, the SC of that sentence should 
not be identified to be the last subjective character, Slick. 
8.2.2 The Last Active Character. A SC who is not identifiable from the sentence itself 
may also be the actor of an action that a previous objective sentence is about (but less 
commonly than the last subjective character). Since this character need not be the SC 
of the last subjective sentence, this is a way for the author to initiate a new point of 
view. Following is an example (by this point in the novel, both Jake and Augustus 
have been the SC of previous ubjective sentences): 
(17) 
17.1 Jake felt sour. 17"2He wished again that circumstances hadn't 
prompted him to come back. 173He had already spent one full night 
on horseback, 174and now the boys were expecting him to spend an- 
other, all on account of a bunch of livestock he had no interest in in 
the first place. 
17"5"I don't know as I'm coming," he said. 17'6"I just got here. If 
I'd known you boys did nothing but chase horses around all night, I
don't know that I would have come." 
177"Why, Jake, you lazy bean," Augustus aid, 17"Sand walked off. 
179jake had a stubborn streak in him, 171?and once it was activated 
even Call could seldom do much with him. \[McMurtry, Lonesome Dove, 
p. 162\] 
As this passage appears in the novel, (17.1)-(17.4) are the subjective sentences of Jake, 
and (17.9)-(17.10) are the subjective sentences of Augustus, the actor of an action that 
a previous objective sentence was about (sentence (17.8)). However, it is Jake who is 
the last subjective character, so Augustus's point of view is being initiated, not merely 
resumed or continued. 
The situation I observed in which POV shifts to an actor (who is not also the last 
subjective character) is one in which the actor was the SC of some previous ubjective 
249 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
sentence in the text, and the sentence about his or her action is focused by the text. The 
precise situation is captured by the following specifications ofwhat an active character 
is, what the last active character is, and of the text situations in which the last active 
character is expected. 
Suppose that os is an objective sentence that is Inputltemj. Saying that os has an 
active character means that POV(FEATURES(0S), contextj) = /objective, ac I, where ac is 
not the empty set. This is the case iff: 
os is about an action that is actually performed in the current scene by ac 
(more precisely, when the state of affairs chosen for consideration is such 
an action), and 
ii. acc  PREVIOUS-SCS-OF (contextj). That is, ac is in the set of characters who 
have been the SC of some previous ubjective sentence in the text 
(possibly before the current scene). 
The algorithm for POV determines whether an action meets the conditions in (i) by 
looking at such things as the tense, aspect, and mood of os (the features the algorithm 
considers are in FEATURES(0s)). First, to guarantee that the action is not performed 
earlier or later than the current moment in the story, the main verb phrase of os must 
be in the simple past. Also, to be about a specific action, os cannot be habitual. So, 
the main verb phrase cannot be accompanied by an adverbial such as at times, usually, 
rarely, or on weekends. 3 Finally, to be about an action that actually occurs, the main 
clause of the sentence must not contain modal auxiliary verbs such as could, going to, 
had better, have to, might, should, or must, modal adverbs uch as likely, maybe, perhaps, 
or possibly, and it must not be negated. If the action is quoted speech, then these 
restrictions apply to the discourse parenthetical. 
Now we turn to the last active character. In contexti, LAST-ACT1VE-CHARACTER- 
OF(contexti) is the empty set if no sentences with active characters have appeared; 
otherwise, it is the active character of the last sentence that had one. 
The last active character is an expected subjective character only when a subjec- 
tive sentence has not appeared earlier in the current paragraph, and there is an earlier 
sentence in the current paragraph that has an active character. That is, LAST-ACTIVE- 
CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (contexti) is true iff TEXT-SITUATION-OF(contexti) E 
{presubjective-active, postsubjective-active }. 
8.2.3 When There Are Two Expected Subjective Characters. When the last active 
character and the last subjective character are both expected subjective characters 
(which, as the reader may have noticed, is when the current ext situation is post- 
subjective-active), the algorithm chooses the last active character in most cases, since 
he or she is more highly focused by the text. In fact, there is only one case in which 
the algorithm chooses the last subjective character: when the sentence is about he last 
active character (specifically, when the last active character is the experiencer o  actor 
of the state of affairs chosen for consideration). Following is the algorithm for function 
CHOOSE-AN-EXPECTED-SC introduced in Section 8.1 above. The only new function is 
EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF, which maps a state of affairs soa and a feature set f into 
3 The fact that a sentence r is habitual is part of FEATURES(r). The system demonstrated in Appendix B 
relies on adverbials to decide whether or not a sentence is habitual. However, an adverbial is not 
necessary for a simple-past narrative sentence to be habitual. 
250 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
the actor or experiencer of soa (if soa or its actor or experiencer is not in f,  the result 
is the empty set). 
CHOOSE-AN-EXPECTED-SC(featureSet, context) 
if EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF (CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS ~eatureSet),featureSet) 
= LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (context) then 
return LAST-SC-OF (context) 
else 
return LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (context) 
end if 
The criterion for choosing the last subjective character is correct for the situation in 
which the last subjective character's attention is directed toward the last active char- 
acter, and the sentence represents the last subjective character's reflection about or 
observation of the other. It is incorrect, however, if the sentence is the last active char- 
acter's elf-reflection or self-perception; this heuristic relies on the relative infrequency 
of subjective sentences about oneself. 
Consider subjective sentence (15.11). When this sentence is encountered, only the 
last subjective character (Zoe) is expected, because the sentence is at the beginning of 
a new paragraph. The algorithm correctly identifies her to be the subjective character. 
Now consider (17.9), which is also subjective. When it is encountered, not only is the 
last subjective character expected (Jake), but so is the last active character (Augustus): 
Augustus is the active character of (17.7)-(17.8), because he has been the SC of previous 
subjective sentences and (17.7)-(17.8) are objective sentences about his current actions; 
and, when (17.9) is encountered, the last active character is expected, since (17.8) (but 
no subjective sentences) appeared earlier in the current paragraph. The algorithm 
correctly identifies the SC to be Augustus (the last active character), rather than Jake 
(the last subjective character), because the criterion for choosing the last subjective 
character is not satisfied: the sentence isnot about he last active character. Competition 
also arises in the following passage, but this time it is the last subjective character 
who should be chosen. When the passage is encountered, Lorena is the last subjective 
character: 
(18) 
ls'l"I never tolt on you, Lorie," he \[Lippy\] said. 18'2He looked like 
he might cry too. 183you'll just have to cry, she \[Lorena\] thought. 
\[McMurtry, Lonesome Dove, p. 218\] 
By this point in the novel, Lippy has been a subjective character. Thus, since (18.1) is 
about his current action, he is the active character of (18.1). After (18.1), Lippy, as the 
last active character, is expected, because (18.1) is an objective sentence that begins 
a new paragraph. Sentence (18.2) is subjective because the evidential 'looked like' 
appears. Competition is (correctly) resolved in favor of the last subjective character 
(Lorena), because the sentence is about the last active character (Lippy). 
8.2.4 When There Are No Expected Subjective Characters. If no character is expected, 
then the algorithm fails to identify the SC at this point in the text. This eventuality is
rare, relative to others: it can arise only upon the first subjective sentence of a scene 
(otherwise, the last subjective character would be expected) and only in the absence of 
one of the things that are usually used to initiate a character's point of view (such as 
251 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
a narrative parenthetical or private-state r port, discussed in Section 8.3). An example 
of this is (16.6), and another is (19.1), which is the beginning of a novel: 
(19) 
19"1Captain Scalawag's treasure! 19"2It was the first thing Pete 
thought of when he woke up. \[Lorimer, The Mystery of the Missing 
Treasure, p. 1\] 
In a case such as (19.1), it is not possible to identify the SC without reading further in 
the text. In a case such as (16.6), however, it might be possible to do so. That is, a reader 
might be able to infer who the SC is from clues in the sentence, such as indications 
of place, or facts that only a certain character knows. This process is not addressed in 
this work. However, the author could have made identifying the SC easier by using, 
for example, a narrative parenthetical or private-state r port (see Section 8.3); by not 
including one of these, the author is deliberately demanding some extra work from 
the reader. 
The algorithm as presented in Wiebe (1990) can identify the SC after later sentences 
are processed in the case where a later sentence contains a narrative parenthetical or is 
a private-state r port. As illustrations, (16.7) is a private-state r port whose SC, Mona, 
is the SC of (16.6), and (19.2) is a private-state report whose SC, Pete, is the SC of 
(19.1). 
8.3 Identifying the SC from the Sentence 
We now turn to cases in which the SC is identifiable from the sentence itself (that 
is, cases in which IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE(featureSet, context) ~ {}; see Sec- 
tion 8.1). In these cases, the SC of sentence s is chosen from among certain characters 
in FEATURES(s). Such a character need not be the last subjective character; when she is 
not, s initiates her POV. Thus, the cases discussed in this section--i.e., uses of sentences 
with certain features in particular contexts--are ways to initiate a character's POV. 
The straightforward case is when s contains a narrative parenthetical, such as 
sentence (2). The SC is always the subject of the parenthetical. 
The less straightforward case is when s is a private-state sentence. Dole~el (1973), 
Cohn (1978), and Banfield (1982) all note that a private-state sentence is a way to 
initiate a character's POV. In the framework presented in this paper, the SC may be 
the experiencer of the private state, even if she is not the last subjective character. An 
example occurs in (20): 
(20) 
2?a"Drown me?" Augustus aid. 2?'2"Why if anybody had tried it, 
those girls would have clawed them to shreds." 2?'3He knew Call was 
mad, 2?'4but wasn't much inclined to humor him. 2?'5It was his dinner 
table as much as Call's, 2?'6and if Call didn't like the conversation he 
could go to bed. 
2?'7Call knew there was no point in arguing. 2?'8That was what Au- 
gustus wanted: argument. 2?9He didn't really care what the question 
was, 2?'1?and it made no great difference to him which side he was 
on. 2?'nHe just plain loved to argue. \[McMurtry, Lonesome Dove, p. 16\] 
Sentences (20.3)-(20.6) are Augustus's ubjective sentences and (20.7)-(20.11) are Call's. 
Thus, (20.7) initiates a new POV. It is a private-state sentence and the SC, Call, is the 
experiencer of the private state. But passage (20) also shows that the SC of a private- 
252 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
state sentence need not be the experiencer. In (20.6), for example, "Call didn't like the 
conversation" is about a private state (Call not liking the conversation), but the SC 
of the sentence is Augustus, not Call. In the following subsections, we will consider 
factors that can indicate that it is not the experiencer who is the SC of a private-state 
sentence. 
8.3.1 Textual Continuity. POV does not typically shift from one character to another 
without a paragraph break. Thus, the absence of a paragraph break suggests that a 
shift has not occurred. Consider the following schema, in which a subjective sentence 
S, whose SC is X, is followed, without a paragraph break, by a private-state sentence 
P whose experiencer is a different character Y: 
? sentence* subjective-sentence-S private-state-sentence-P 
SC = X experiencer = Y 
Character Y is the experiencer of the private state that P is about. If Y were also the SC 
of P, then a shift would have occurred, from X's POV to Y's POV, without a paragraph 
break. The fact that no paragraph break appears--that is, that P is in the continuing- 
subjective situation--suggests that P continues X's POV rather than initiating Y's. 
When a private-state s ntence appears in the continuing-subjective situation, therefore, 
the algorithm identifies the SC to be the last SC rather than the experiencer of the 
private state. 
The question of whether there is a psychological link between paragraph breaks 
and tracking POV has not been previously investigated. Stark (1987, 1988) performed 
psychological experiments hat showed that there is a significant correlation between 
paragraph breaks and discourse discontinuities, but the sorts of discontinuities she 
investigated did not include changes in POV. Nakhimovsky and Rapaport (1988) sug- 
gest that in narrative, paragraph breaks accompany changes in POV, but they did 
not investigate this hypothesis experimentally. In fact, we have performed psycholog- 
ical experiments (Bruder and Wiebe 1990 and in press) that did establish such a link. 
Specifically, through manipulation of paragraph breaks in naturally occurring pas- 
sages, the experiments showed that readers' interpretations of private-state sentences 
are influenced by paragraph breaks as we predicted on the basis of the algorithm. 
8.3.2 Subjective Elements. Private-state sentences are pragmatically ambiguous as to 
whether they are private-state reports or represented thoughts. 4 Consider sentence 
(21): 
(21) John knew Mary had the key. 
Sentence (21) is about a private state: 
"John knew Mary had the key." 
ps(pl,experiencerl, attitude1, objectl) 
4 A private-state sentence may also be objective. An example isa simple-past sentence with a negated 
factive term and a propositional object, such as "John did not know that Mary was in the next room." 
This sentence annot be John's subjective s ntence; it is either objective or the subjective s ntence of
someone else. Because ofspace limitations, how the algorithm recognizes and processes such sentences 
is not discussed inthis paper; see Wiebe and Rapaport (1988) and Wiebe (1990). 
253 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Under a private-state r port interpretation of (21), pl is not itself the object of some 
other private state. But under a represented thought interpretation of (21), pl is the 
object of some other private state P2, the experiencer and attitude of which are implicit: 
ps (P2, experiencer2, attitude2, 
"John knew Mary had the key." 
object2 = pl ) 
To my knowledge, this ambiguity in the interpretation of private-state sentences and 
its importance in tracking POV have not been previously discussed in linguistics or 
literary theory. For example, Cohn (1978) says that represented thoughts can be dis- 
tinguished from private-state r ports by "the absence of mental verbs" in the former 
(p. 104). 
The SC of a private-state r port is always the experiencer of the private state. So, 
if some oracle were to inform you that (21) is a private-state r port, you would then 
know that the SC is the experiencer of the private state (John). On the other hand, if 
the oracle were to inform you that (21) is a represented thought, you could not then 
identify the SC just by looking at the sentence alone. In fact, it is true of any represented 
thought without a narrative parenthetical, private-state s ntence or otherwise, that you 
cannot identify the SC from the sentence itself. This is so regardless of whether or not 
the SC happens to be referred to in the sentence. Consider the following two sentences, 
which are represented thoughts from different pages of a short story ("The Garden 
Party" by Katharine Mansfield): 
(22) Why couldn't she? 
(23) What nice eyes he had, small, but such a dark blue! 
As these sentences appear in the story, the SC of (22) happens to be the referent of 
"she" (corresponding to the conversational utterance, "Why can't I?'), but the SC of 
(23) is not mentioned in the sentence at all. Even though you know that (22) and (23) 
are represented thoughts, you need to consider the context o identify their SCs. Thus, 
if a private-state sentence s contains ome indication that s is a represented thought, 
then the SC cannot be identified from s itself, and, as discussed in Section 8.2, the 
expected subjective characters should be considered. 
Subjective lements indicate that a sentence is a represented thought (this state- 
ment is qualified later in this section and in Section 10). Subjective lements are lin- 
guistic elements that express emotions, uncertainty, evaluations, and other kinds of 
subjectivity (Banfield 1982) (they are discussed in detail in Section 9). Examples are 
evaluative terms such as 'the old bag' (Banfield 1982) and evidentials uch as 'evi- 
dently' and 'apparently' (Dole~el 1973). 
In the following passage, a subjective lement indicates that the SC of a private- 
state sentence is not the experiencer of the private state. At the start of the passage, 
Sandy and Dennys are (collectively) the last subjective character: 
(24) 
24"1Japheth, evidently realizing that they were no longer behind 
him, turned around 242and jogged back toward them, seemingly cool 
and unwinded. \[UEngle, Many Waters, p. 24\] 
The subjective lement 'evidently' in (24.1) indicates that the sentence is not a private- 
state report. That is, (24.1) is not a report that Japheth realizes that they are no longer 
254 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
behind him. Rather, Sandy and Dennys (the collective SC) ascribe this private state to 
him. 
However, subordinated subjective lements, those within the scope of the private- 
state term, can appear in private-state r ports. (This is one reason why I define private- 
state reports to be subjective.) Thus, they cannot be used to distinguish private-state 
reports from represented thoughts, and so cannot be used as evidence that the SC of 
a private-state s ntence is not the experiencer. For example: 
(25) 
25'1Ugh! she \[the girl\] thought. 25"2How could the poor thing have 
married him in the first place? 
25"3johnnie Martin could not believe that he was seeing that old 
bag's black eyes sparkling with disgust and unsheathed contempt at 
him. \[Caldwell, No One Hears But Him, pp. 98-99\] 
Sentence (25.3) is a private-state r port and the experiencer is the SC (Johnnie Martin); 
this is so even though (25.3) contains the subjective lement 'old bag' and even though 
there is an expected subjective character (the girl) when it is encountered. Because 'old 
bag' appears within the scope of the private-state rm 'believe,' it is not considered 
in identifying the SC. On the other hand, the subjective lement 'evidently' in (24.1) 
is not in the scope of 'realizing' (i.e., it is nonsubordinated); thus, it can be used as 
evidence that the SC is not the experiencer of the private state. 
If a private-state s ntence does not have a nonsubordinated subjective lement and 
does not appear in the continuing-subjective situation, then the algorithm identifies 
the SC to be the experiencer. 
8.3.3 Broadening and Narrowing of POV. Recall that an experiencer, actor, SC, or 
expected subjective character may be more than one physical character (recall that 
these entities are represented as sets). A broadening of point of view occurs when a 
new subjective character is a superset of the old subjective character, and a narrowing 
occurs when a new one is a subset of the old one. One situation in which such changes 
occur is when the experiencer of a private-state r port is such a subset or superset. 
One addition to the algorithm as described so far is needed to allow for this situation: 
for a private-state s ntence in the continuing-subjective situation (without subjective 
elements that can be considered), if the experiencer is a superset or subset of the last 
subjective character, then it is the experiencer who the algorithm chooses to be the SC, 
rather than the last subjective character. For example: 
(26) 
26"1In the clear late afternoon light they \[Call and Augustus\] could 
see all the way back to Lonesome Dove and the river and Mexico. 
26"2Augustus regretted not tying a jug to his saddle---~63he would have 
liked to sit on the little hill and drink for an hour. \[McMurtry, Lonesome 
Dove, p. 241\] 
As this passage appears in the novel, (26.1) is the subjective sentence of both Call and 
Augustus, but (26.2) is the subjective sentence only of Augustus; thus, point of view 
narrows upon (26.2). The above rule precludes the reading of a sentence such as (26.2) 
as the represented thought of the last subjective character (i.e., Call and Augustus 
in passage (26)). However, no examples of such a reading were found in the texts 
examined; note that the rule applies only if there are no subjective lements that can 
be considered in the sentence. 
255 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
8.3.4 Unspecified Experiencers. Consider the following passage: 
(27) 
27'lFor the first time in his life, Sandy had a flash of gratitude that 
Dennys was not with him. 
27'2Then anxiety surfaced. 27"3"Deunys--" \[UEngle, Many Waters, 
p. 91 
Sentence (27.2) is a private-state sentence; specifically, CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS(FEA- 
TURES (27.2)) = ps, where ps is the private state that the private-state noun "anxiety" 
is about (see Section 6.3.3). Both the experiencer of ps and the SC of (27.2) happen to 
be the same character (Sandy). However, the SC of (27.2) cannot be identified from 
the sentence itself, because the experiencer of ps is not mentioned in the sentence. 
(I call such experiencers unspecified experiencers; note that EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR- 
OF(ps,FEATURES(27.2)) = {}.) Thus, for a private-state sentence with an unspecified 
experiencer, IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE returns the empty set, and the algorithm 
goes on to consider expected subjective characters. In (27), for example, the algorithm 
correctly identifies the SC of (27.2) to be Sandy, the last subjective character. 
8.3.5 Summary. Following is the algorithm for function IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENT- 
ENCE (introduced in Section 8.1). One of the arguments i  a feature set, featureSet; we 
will use s to refer to the sentence thatfeatureSet is a feature set of (i.e., FEATURES(S) = 
featureSet). With the exception of calls to previously mentioned functions, statements 
are given in English. Further, two cases discussed later (in Sections 10 and 11) are not 
included (the complete version is given in Appendix A). 
IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE (featureSet, context) 
soa ~ CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS (featureSet) 
if s contains a narrative parenthetical then 
return the subject of the narrative parenthetical 
else if 
1 (soa is a private state ) and 
2 % not an unspecified experiencer 
(EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa, fe tureSet) # {}) and 
3 (There are no nonsubordinated subjective lements in the sentence) and 
4: 
(a) ((TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) # continuing-subjective) or 
(b): 
(i) ((TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) = continuing-subjective) and 
(ii): % broadening or narrowing of POV 
(1) ( (EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa) C 
LAST-SC-OF (context) or 
(2) (EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF (soa) D 
LAST-SC-OF (context)))) 
then return EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa) 
else return {} 
end if 
end if 
256 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
9. Recognizing Subjective Sentences 
9.1 Introduction 
We now turn to deciding whether or not a sentence is subjective in the first place. Au- 
thors could unambiguously mark each subjective sentence as subjective, by including 
a narrative parenthetical in each, for example. But suppose that a sentence S that the 
author intends to be subjective appears in the continuing-subjective situation: 
(i) ? sentence" subjective-sentence s ntence-S sentence * ? 
SC = X 
A character's POV very often continues at least until the end of the paragraph. So, in 
schema (i), S and any sentences after S until the paragraph break will very often be 
subjective sentences ofX. Thus, the reader has a strong expectation that X's POV will 
continue, so a weak hint that S is subjective is sufficient for the reader to recognize 
that it is. 
Now consider a text situation in which there has been a subjective sentence in the 
scene, but objective sentences and paragraph breaks have appeared since then: 
(ii) start-of-scene ... subjective-sentence (objective-sentence + ?)+ sentence-S 
SC = X 
In S's context in schema f/i), X is an expected subjective character. The reader expects 
X's POV to be resumed, but not as strongly as the reader expects X's POV to be 
continued in schema (i), since the local context of S in (ii) is not subjective as it is in 
(i). An unambiguous indication that S is subjective isnot necessary, but a stronger hint 
should be included than is sufficient in (i). 
The main sorts of "hints" of subjectivity that the algorithm considers are linguistic 
elements that potentially express ubjectivity (potential subjective elements). Some of 
these are weaker hints than others, and many are usually subjective only in certain text 
situations. The algorithm, which, recall, tracks point of view on the basis of regularities, 
uses the text situation to decide whether an instance of one is indeed subjective. 
"Subjective lement" is the term I use for an instance of a potential subjective 
element that actually is subjective in the context of use. This term is borrowed from 
Banfield (1982), but redefined; Banfield uses it to refer only to linguistic elements that 
are always subjective. 
Section 9.2 identifies a number of potential subjective lements, and Section 9.3 
specifies how the algorithm uses them and other information to recognize subjective 
sentences. 
9.2 Potential Subjective Elements 
Previous work in linguistics and literary theory noted the presence in subjective sen- 
tences of many (but not all) of the potential subjective lements considered by the 
algorithm. However, with the exception of two of the elements, the perfective and 
progressive aspects (see below), previous work did not address the problem that many 
of the elements are only potentially subjective, and can also appear in objective sen- 
tences. Further, Wiebe (1990) contains an extensive, detailed catalogue of the potential 
subjective lements (specified mainly in terms of syntactic and semantic ategories 
presented in Quirk et al \[1985\]); such a catalog did not previously exist. 
Most of the potential subjective lements are lexical. But it is not words and phrases 
themselves that are potential subjective lements, but rather words and phrases used 
257 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Table 2 
Some potential subjective lements. 
1 Exclamations, uch as (25.1), and direct questions, uch as (25.2) 
2 Elements that express evaluation or judgement 
2.1 Adjectives uch as 'awful' in (4.6) and 'poor' in (25.2) 
2.2 Nouns such as 'old bag' in (25.3) 
2.3 Adverbs such as "oddly' and 'incredibly' 
2.4 Auxiliary verbs and phrases that express judgments of obligation, such as 
'had better', 'ought o', 'should', and 'be supposed to' 
2.5 Adverbs such as 'scarcely' and 'hardly' (when used as minimizer subjuncts 
(Quirk et al 1985)), as in "She could hardly be expected to live there" 
3 Elements that express a lack of knowledge 
3.1 Subordinators such as 'whoever' and 'whatever', when used in reference to 
particular individuals, as in "Whatever it was, it had flown by quickly" 
3.2 Adjectival phrases uch as 'some kind of', when used in reference to particular 
individuals, as in "The object in her hand was some kind of weapon" 
with particular meanings. For example, 'poor' is a potential subjective lement only 
with its evaluative meaning, as in "Poor John was sick," but not with its nonevaluative 
meaning, as in "John was poor" (Banfield 1982; the evaluative meaning of 'poor' is 
one of the elements that Banfield argues is always subjective). 
Tables 2 and 3 list some potential subjective lements, giving very brief character- 
izations. For further details, see Wiebe (1990). All of the citations in Tables 2 and 3 are 
with respect o the linguistic categories of the elements. Some of those who discuss 
the appearance of the elements in subjective sentences are as follows: Banfield (1982) 
discusses (1), (2.1)-(2.3), (4), (5), and (12); Dole~el (1973) discusses (1), (2.1)-(2.3), (5), 
(6.1), (6.2), and (8); Brinton (1980) discusses (9) (she shows that a simile can be a marker 
of represented perception) and (12); Ehrlich (1990) discusses (11), and Ehrlich (1987) 
discusses (12). 
The past perfective is potentially subjective simply because a character can reflect 
on what occurred (or might have occurred) in the past. However, as discussed by 
Ehrlich (1990) and many others, the narrative past may be expressed by the simple- 
past tense in the midst of a subjective context; detecting simple-past references to the 
past is not addressed in this work. 
9.3 Recognizing Subjective Sentences 
Subjective lements are important for recognizing represented thoughts and percep- 
tions, not private-state r ports (recall, in fact, that a nonsubordinated subjective le- 
ment is evidence that a private-state sentence is not a report). That is, they are impor- 
tant for recognizing subjective sentences whose subjective characters are to be identi- 
fied from the context, rather than from the sentence itself. 
My examination of novels and short stories suggests the following (we are cur- 
rently performing psychological experiments investigating the aspects of the algorithm 
discussed in this section): (1) Two potential subjective lements, the past perfective and 
258 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Table 3 
Some potential subjective lements (continued). 
4 Sentence fragments, such as (30.6) 
5 Kinship terms, such as 'Dad' and 'Aunt Margaret' 
6 Evidentials, which, in the broadest sense, qualify the information conveyed by a 
statement (Chafe 1986) 
6.1 Evidentials that express certainty or uncertainty, such as 'surely' and 'might' 
6.2 Evidentials that express certainty or uncertainty and also that one's knowledge is 
based partly on evidence. Examples are 'evidently', seemingly', 'must have', 
'appear to be', 'as if', 'as though', and 'look', as in "He looked like he might cry" 
6.3 Hedges, e.g., adverbs uch as 'more or less' and 'sort of' when used as modifiers 
of adjectives and adverbs, as in "It was more or less green", or as adverbials 
(Quirk et al 1985), as in "The man more or less held a large stretch of the border" 
6.4 Evidentials that address expectations 
6.4.1 Signal that expectations have been met, such as 'of course' (when used as 
an emphasizer subjunct (Quirk et al 1985)) as in "John of course sat down" 
6.4.2 Signal that expectations have not been met. Examples are adverbs uch as 
'just', 'merely', and 'only' (when used as attitude diminishers 
(Quirk et al 1985)), as in "He just sat and drank" (it was expected that 
he would do something "more" than sit and drink) 
7 Adverbials that are conjuncts, which connect units of discourse (Quirk et al 1985) 
(i.e., cue phrases; Reichman 1985, Grosz and Sidner 1986, Cohen 1987). Examples 
are 'first', 'in addition', 'for instance', on the other hand', 'after all', 
'anyway', and 'yet' as in "Yet, they were the pride of the family" 
8 Conditional clauses 
9 Comparative 'like', as in "They followed her like acolytes behind a goddess" 
10 Habitual sentences, uch as "Gus himself often joked about it" 
11 The past perfective, but only in the main verb phrase 
12 The progressive, but only in the main verb phrase 
the progressive, can typical ly serve only to cont inue a character 's  POV and only within 
a paragraph (see Ehrlich \[1987\] for an analysis of why  this is so for the progressive); 
(2) stronger ones can cont inue a character 's  POV after a paragraph break, or resume 
a character 's  POV within a paragraph;  (3) still stronger ones, such as evidentials and 
sentence fragments, can resume the last subjective character 's  POV or initiate the last 
active character 's  just as long as they are expected subjective characters; and (4) the 
strongest subjective lements, such as exclamations and questions, are a lways subjec- 
tive, even when there is not an expected subjective character to whom to attribute the 
259 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
sentence. The sets of text situations corresponding to (1)-(4) are: 
lts 
2ts 
3ts 
4ts 
{continuing-subjective} 
{broken-subjective, interrupted-subjective} 
{presubjective-active, postsubjective-nonactive, postsubjective-active} 
{presubjective-nonactive} 
Expectations for a subjective sentence are strongest in situation (lts) and weakest in 
situation (4ts), so the algorithm takes even the weakest potential subjective lements 
to be subjective in (lts), but only the strongest ones to be subjective in (4ts). In general, 
each potential subjective lement pse is associated with a set of text situations t such 
that the algorithm interprets pse to be subjective iff the current text situation is in t. 
There is an its (1 < i < 4) such that t contains the situations in lts through its but not 
those in its + 1 through 4ts. We shall say that pse is associated at the highest level with 
the situations in its. 
In addition to potential subjective lements, there is another source of information 
the algorithm considers: the type of state of affairs the sentence is about. First, private- 
state action sentences can be subjective; see Section 11. Second, private-state s ntences 
are usually subjective (we are not considering objective private-state sentences in this 
paper; see Wiebe \[1990\] and footnote 4). Third, a nonprivate-state s ntence in the 
continuing-subjective situation usually continues the subjective context. For example: 
(28) 
28.1Lorena didn't like it that Gus acted like Jake wasn't much. 282He 
had a reputation for being a cool man in a fight. \[McMurtry, Lonesome 
Dove, p. 190\] 
Sentence (28.1) is Lorena's ubjective sentence, and (28.2), a nonprivate-state s ntence, 
continues her subjective context. In the continuing-subjective situation, therefore, the 
algorithm interprets a nonprivate-state s ntence to be subjective) 
9.4 Examples and Discussion 
Consider the following passage: 
(29) 
29"1Call had heard from someone that she had been raised rich, in the 
East, with servants to comb her hair and help her into her shoes when 
she got up. 29'2It might just have been a story--293it was hard for him 
to imagine a grownup who would need to be helped into their own 
shoes--39"4but if even part of it was true she had come a long way 
down. 29"5Ned Spettle had never got around to putting a floor in the 
5 Notice that there are three things that are taken as evidence that a sentence is subjective only in the 
continuing-subjective situation: being a nonprivate-state sentence, being in the perfective, and being in 
the progressive. Caenepeel (1989), in work done simultaneously, analyzed aspect and perspective 
linguistically, and reached similar conclusions with respect o these three types of evidence. Caenepeel 
suggests that states appearing in what I call the continuing-subjective situation continue the current 
POV. Her notion of state includes entences in the perfective and progressive aspects, regardless of the 
type of state of affairs that the sentence is about. It might be desirable to revise this aspect of the 
algorithm on the basis of her work, which focused on aspect, to arrive at a more general treatment of 
these three kinds of evidence in this situation. 
260 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
shack of a house he built. 29"6His wife was rearing eight children on 
the bare dirt. 29'7He had heard it said that Ned had never got over 
the war, which might have explained it. \[McMurtry, Lonesome Dove, 
p. 176\] 
All of these sentences are Call's subjective sentences. Thus, the text situation is continu- 
ing-subjective after each of them. Sentences (29.1), (29.3), and (29.7) are Call's private- 
state reports, and (29.2) and (29.4) contain potential subjective lements that are as- 
sociated with other situations--and not merely the continuing-subjective one ('might' 
in (29.2) and 'if even' in (29.4)). The interesting sentences are (29.5) and (29.6), since 
they contain potential subjective lements that are associated only with the continuing- 
subjective situation (the past perfective in (29.5) and the progressive in (29.6)). (These 
sentences express Call's reasons for his belief, expressed in (29.4), that "she had come 
a long way down.") 
In the following passage, a subjective lement appears in a situation other than 
continuing-subjective. The situation is continuing-subjective at the beginning, and 
Sandy is the last subjective character. 
(30) 
3?'1The eyes were an incredibly bright blue, like the sea with sunlight 
touching the waves. 
3?2Lemech greeted him respectfully. 3?'3"Adnarel, we thank you." 
3?'4Then he said to Sandy, "The seraph will be able to help you. 
Seraphim know much about healing." 
3?SSo this was a seraph. 3?'6Tall, even taller than the twins. \[UEngle, 
Many Waters, p. 39\] 
Sentence (30.1) continues Sandy's subjective context, because it contains the subjective 
elements 'incredibly' and comparative 'like.' Sentences (30.2)-(30.4) are objective, and 
a paragraph break appears before (30.5), so the situation at the beginning of (30.5) is 
postsubjective-nonactive (one of the situations in (3ts)) and the last subjective character, 
Sandy, is an expected subjective character. The algorithm is able to recognize that (30.5) 
is Sandy's subjective sentence, because it contains 'so' used as a conjunct, which is 
subjective as long as there is an expected subjective character. 
Consider passage (19) (reprinted here); recall that it is the beginning of a novel, 
so there isn't an expected subjective character when it is encountered. 
(19) 
19"1Captain Scalawag's treasure! 192It was the first thing Pete thought 
of when he woke up. \[Lorimer, The Mystery of the Missing Treasure, p. 1\] 
Since an exclamation is subjective in any situation, the algorithm is able to recognize 
that (19.1) is subjective. 
In the following passage, in contrast, potential subjective elements that are not 
necessarily subjective appear when there isn't an expected subjective character. This 
passage is of the type that Banfield has characterized as having an empty center (Ban- 
field 1987); 6it describes perceptions and impressions that one would have if observing 
6 Banfield (1987) extends the definition of subjective sentences given in Banfield (1982) to include these 
kinds of sentences; our interest is to recognize character's subjective sentences (for the reasons given in 
Section 3), so we adopt he earlier definition. 
261 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
the scene, but no character is present to whom to attribute them. There is an expected 
subjective character at the beginning of the passage, but a scene break appears after 
the third sentence. (The blank lines after (31.3) and (31.12) appear in the original. The 
sentences following '-- '  are a kind of unuttered quoted speech.) 
(31) 
31"l"We're coming," Oholibamah said. 31"2arid they hurried toward 
the central section of the oasis, where Noah's vineyards were, and his 
grazing grounds, and his tents. 31'3And where Dennys was waiting 
for them. 
314The moon set, its path whiter than the desert sands dwindling 
into shadow. 31SThe stars moved in their joyous dance across the sky. 
31"6The horizon was dark with that deep darkness which comes just 
before the dawn. 
31"7A vulture flew down, seemingly out of nowhere, stretching its 
naked neck, settling its dark features. 
31'B--Vultures are underestimated. Without us, disease would wipe 
out all life. We clean up garbage, feces, dead bodies of man and beast. 
We are not appreciated. 
31'9No sound was heard 3H?and yet the words seemed scratched 
upon the air. 
3111The twelve oddly assorted creatt~es began to position themselves 
into a circle. 
31"12The nephilim. 
31'13Oholibamah lay in Japheth's arms on a large, flat stone a short 
walk into the desert. \[UEngle, Many Waters, pp. 118-119\] 
There are scene breaks after (31.3) and after (31.12). Between the breaks, there are no 
private-state s ntences or narrative parentheticals, and, since none of the creatures in 
the scene has been the SC, there are no sentences with active characters (this is true 
for the elided sentences as well). Thus, if none of the potential subjective lements 
are subjective, then there are no expected subjective characters from (31.4) to (31.12). 
There are strong potential subjective lements that would be subjective if there were 
an expected subjective character--'seemingly' in (31.7), 'sound' in (31.9), 'yet' used 
as a conjunct and 'seemed' in (31.10), 'oddly' in (31.11), and a sentence fragment in 
(31.12). However, since these are associated at the highest level with the situations in 
(3ts), and not with the presubjective-nonactive s tuation, the algorithm correctly does 
not interpret them to be subjective. 
There are three things to note about passages such as (31). First, the potential for an 
overt narrator to appear is strong when there isn't an expected subjective character and 
a strong element such as 'seemingly' appears; my restriction to texts that do not have 
overt narrators allows the algorithm to exclude this possibility from consideration. 
Second, the algorithm does not revise its decision as to whether a sentence is subjective 
in light of later sentences. However, one could imagine a sentence within passage (31) 
that might cause the reader to decide that earlier sentences were actually subjective. For 
example, the following sentence, inserted after (31.10), would suggest his: "Dennys 
was mystified by the spectacle." The algorithm would interpret his sentence to be 
262 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
subjective; this would affect its interpretation of the remainder of the passage--the 
algorithm would interpret the potential subjective lements in (31.11) and (31.12) to be 
subjective--but it would not affect its interpretation f earlier sentences. Third, to be 
conservative, only Banfield's emotive and evaluative subjective lements, which must 
be understood to express omeone's emotions or evaluations, are associated with the 
presubjective-nonactive s tuation (4ts). As mentioned in Section 8.2.4, the number of 
sentences that appear in this situation is relatively small, and, of those that do, many 
are private-state r ports or have narrative parentheticals. It may be that some of the 
potential subjective lements associated at the highest level with the situations in (3ts) 
should also be associated with the one in (4ts); the appearance of the relevant kind of 
subjective sentence in this situation was too rare in the texts examined to decide this. 
Because there are 34 classes of potential subjective lements, the majority of which 
have multiple members (Wiebe 1990), a significant number of each potential subjec- 
tive element in each situation was not found. The association of elements with text 
situations is based on the examples that were found, and, for the ones that did not 
appear very often in the texts examined, on my judgments as to which of the ones that 
did appear often are closest o them in strength. Psychological experiments (with Gail 
Bruder) of this aspect of the algorithm are underway. We plan to revise the association 
of potential subjective lements with text situations as needed in light of the results. 
9.5 Quoted Speech 
In quoted speech, there are two points of view: the point of view taken by the quoted 
string--the speaker's--and the one taken by the discourse parenthetical, which may 
be objective or a character's. 7 It is the point of view taken by the discourse paren- 
thetical that concerns us here: the speaker's point of view is not directly presented 
by a quoted string, as the subjective character's i by a subjective sentence, but is 
conveyed indirectly through a communicative act. Quoted speech is a major way of 
communicating the beliefs, intentions, etc., of characters who are not to become the 
SC; merely the fact that what a character says expresses her point of view should not 
lead the reader to anticipate later subjective sentences of that character, as the reader 
does after a subjective sentence. 
Therefore, the algorithm considers ubjective lements that appear in discourse 
parentheticals, but not those within quoted strings. For example: 
(32) 
"I'll talk to Amy," Daddy said, "and make sure she behaves herself." 
\[Sachs, Amy and Laura, p. 100\] 
The subjective lement 'Daddy' in the discourse parenthetical is attributed to an ex- 
pected subjective character, Laura. In contrast, the algorithm interprets the following 
sentence from passage (20) to be objective, even though there is a question in the 
quoted string: 
"Drown me?" Augustus aid. 
7 See Banfield (1982) for a principled account of the relationship between the points of view of a quoted 
string and its discourse parenthetical. 
263 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
10. A Return to Private-State Sentences 
In contrast to what was implied in Section 8.3.2, there are some subjective lements that 
do not suggest hat a private-state sentence is a represented thought, even when they 
are nonsubordinated. First, Cohn (1978) shows that private-state r ports 8 do not always 
report private states experienced specifically at the current moment in the story, but 
instead have "almost unlimited temporal flexibility" (p. 34). One consequence of this is 
that private-state r ports can be habitual. Second, Cohn (1978) also shows that private- 
state reports can employ simile. 9 Thus, comparative 'like' can appear nonsubordinated 
in private-state r ports. For example: 
(33) 
His \[Sandy's\] head began to swell, to be filled with hot air like a 
balloon, so that he was afraid he was going to float off into the sky. 
\[UEngle, Many Waters, p. 27\] 
Finally, some intensifier adverbs, when nonsubordinated in a private-state report, 
simply indicate the degree to which the private state is experienced. An example 
is 'hardly,' as in: 
(34) 
Sandy, his flannel shift still draped over his head, was hardly aware 
that he was supporting his brother. \[UEngle, Many Waters, p. 27\] 
Sentence (34), as it appears in the novel, is Sandy's private-state r port. 
Given these observations, we need to revise the algorithm as presented so far: the 
algorithm does not consider the above types of subjective lements when it decides 
who the SC of a private-state sentence is, even when they are nonsubordinated to the 
private-state rm. 
11. Private-State-Action Sentences 
A private-state action is an action from which a private state can be inferred. Exam- 
ples are looking, glancing, sighing, frowning, smiling, and shivering. In contrast o a 
private-state r port such as "She was unhappy," the sentence "She frowned" narrates 
a private-state action from which unhappiness or displeasure can be inferred, but does 
not directly report the character's private state. 1? In a given context, the private state 
that can be inferred may or may not be significant for tracking point of view. It is 
significant in the following passage: 
(35) 
35"lZoe looked at the notebook. 352On the first page Joe had written 
WAR WORK in large block letters in red and blue crayon. 35"3On the 
next page he had written the date 35"4and under it all about seeing 
Miss Lavatier's boyfriend. \[Oneal, War Work, p. 47\] 
8 Cohn's term for a private-state r port is psycho-narration. 
9 Cohn's term for such reports is psycho-analogy. 
10 Brinton (1980) notes that perceptions may be reported from an "outer perspective" with terms such as 
'gaze' and 'look' or from an "inner perspective" with terms such as 'see' and 'hear" (p. 370-371), but 
she does not address the significance of this difference for tracking point of view. 
264 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
As this passage appears in the novel, (35.2)-(35.4) continue the subjective context estab- 
lished by (35.1)--they are subjective sentences presenting what Zoe sees. Interpreting 
(35.1) to be subjective, the algorithm is able to recognize that (35.2)-(35.4) are also sub- 
jective, because the past perfective is a subjective lement in the continuing-subjective 
situation, and it is able to determine that the SC is Zoe, because she is the last sub- 
jective character. On the other hand, a private-state action sentence might not be the 
subjective sentence of the actor; an example is (36.1): 
(36) 
36'1japheth looked at them. 36"2"You are flushed. And wet." 36"3He 
himself did not seem to feel the intense heat. \[UEngle, Many Waters, 
p. 20\] 
As this passage appears in the novel, (36.3) is the subjective sentence of the last sub- 
jective character, Sandy and Dennys. If (36.1) were Japheth's ubjective sentence, then 
it would be to Japheth that the subjective lement 'seem' in (36.3) would be attributed, 
rather than to Sandy and Dennys. 
Like quoted speech, a private-state-action se tence is a way to communicate some- 
thing about the consciousness of a character who is not to become the SC. The reader 
infers from (36.1) that Japheth sees the people he is looking at; however, there are no 
subsequent subjective sentences about what he sees, such as the sentences in (35) that 
show what Zoe sees. 
The first decision to be made when one encounters a private-state-action sentence 
is whether it should be treated as a private-state sentence or as an action sentence. 
Whether the sentence is subjective and, if so, who the SC is then depend upon the 
factors already presented. 
The algorithm's treatment of these sorts of sentences i based on the observation 
that a more direct appeal to a character's consciousness, such as a private-state r port 
or a narrative parenthetical, is usually used to establish a character as an SC for the 
first time. Thus, the actor of a private-state-action se tence that is the actor's subjective 
sentence has usually been the SC before. While consistency in the interpretation of a 
passage with this sort of sentence must be supported by other factors, this regularity 
is a strong one in the texts examined. 
Thus, if the actor has been a SC, then the algorithm treats a private-state-action 
sentence s as it would have treated a private-state sentence in the same context; oth- 
erwise, it treats s as it would have treated an action sentence in the same context (see 
Wiebe \[1990\] for illustrations of the various consequences of treating s one way or the 
other). 
12. Tests of the Algorithm 
This section summarizes the tests of the algorithm that have been performed. 
First, the algorithm was hand-simulated on over 700 pages (roughly 17,500 sen- 
tential input items) from 7 novels that represent a range in the number of different 
subjective characters they contain. Given the large amount of data and the prepro- 
cessing requirements of running the algorithm, the purpose of this test was not to 
compile statistical measures, but rather to find out what kinds of exceptions occur. 
Generally, point of view is manipulated in these novels as expected by the algorithm. 
Of the exceptions, many can be attributed to problems that are specifically not ad- 
dressed in this work, such as how the spatial and temporal points of view affect the 
psychological one (discussed in the next section), how point of view is manipulated in 
265 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
relatively rare situations, such as the very beginning of a novel, and what constitutes 
a "significant" subjective context for the purpose of interpreting private-state-action 
sentences (discussed in Appendix C). (The classes of errors and examples of them are 
given in Wiebe \[1990\].) 
In order to obtain more specific numeric results, the algorithm was tested, and 
results tabulated, for a more modest amount of text (32 pages with 900 sentential 
input items). The results are positive, and are given in Appendix C. Fully testing the 
algorithm would require a much larger corpus, in which a significant number of each 
of the possibilities arises. Such testing would be a major endeavor in itself. 
Finally, as mentioned in Section 8.3.1, we have performed psychological experi- 
ments that showed that readers' interpretations of private-state sentences are affected 
by paragraph breaks as we predicted on the basis of the algorithm (Bruder and Wiebe 
1990 and in press). We are continuing this line of research with psychological experi- 
ments of other aspects of the algorithm. 
13. Relation to Anaphora Resolution 
A question likely to arise in the reader's mind is how tracking POV and anaphora 
resolution are related. Anaphora resolution is necessary for tracking POV (the actors 
and experiencers of states of affairs must be known; see item (4) of Section 6.1). But it 
is certainly not sufficient, and an additional mechanism is needed. A case that clearly 
illustrates this is a private-state sentence in which the experiencer is referred to with 
a pronoun, such as: 
(37) He hated holidays. 
Resolving the pronoun is not sufficient for identifying the SC of (37), since the SC may 
or may not be the referent of 'he' (see Section 8.3.2). 
However, the pipeline architecture of the algorithm is not realistic. Almost cer- 
tainly, POV affects anaphora resolution, and also recognizing the discourse structure 
of the text. Specific issues I am exploring are discussed in the next section. 
14. Directions for Future Research and Conclusion 
One direction for future research is investigating the interactions of different points of 
view. A large class of exceptions to the algorithm can be attributed to interactions be- 
tween the spatial and temporal points of view and the psychological one. For example, 
there are spatial and temporal discontinuities other than scene breaks after which a 
character should no longer be expected: the current "here" and "now" in the story may 
shift away from the character, or the character may leave the scene while the "here" 
and "now" remain unchanged. These situations must be distinguished from the situ- 
ation, occurring with represented thoughts, in which there is a "projected here" and 
a "projected now" of events that are being thought about, and from the situation in 
represented perception in which there is a "projected here" of events being perceived 
(Bruder et al 1986; Rapaport et al 1989a, 1989b). 
An important area of future research is investigating interactions among tracking 
POV, recognizing discourse structure, and anaphora resolution. I am currently focusing 
on discourse structure within subjective contexts. We can view a subjective context 
as presenting a sequence of private states, where the experiencers and attitudes of 
some are only implicit (in the case of represented thoughts). In addition to discourse 
relations among sentences as wholes, there can be discourse relations among objects of 
266 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
private states, even a hierarchical structure involving several such objects. As a concrete 
example, the contrast signaled by the cue-phrase 'but' appearing in a represented 
thought may be between a represented thought and the object of a previous private- 
state report. One example of a potential effect on pronoun resolution: if a sentence s is 
to be interpreted as a represented thought, and is to be incorporated into a discourse- 
segment structure among previous private-state objects, then pronouns in s can be 
resolved against he focus space(s) corresponding to the private-state-object segments 
(as in Grosz and Sidner's \[1986\] theory). Of course, determining whether or not s is to 
be so interpreted is a difficult problem. But such interactions among POV, discourse 
structure, and anaphora resolution might be usefully cast as constraints, with evidence 
regarding interpretation with respect to one limiting the options to be pursued for the 
others. 
The psychological POV is related to other pragmatic and discourse phenomena. 
Subjective contexts are paragraph-level analogs of opaque contexts in belief reports 
(Wiebe \[1991\] specifically addresses this issue). In addition, the discourse phenomena 
identified by Fauconnier (1985) are similar to the psychological point of view. Just as 
a private-state r port can begin a discourse segment in which subsequent sentences 
are understood to continue a character's point of view, an adverbial such as "in 1969" 
can begin a discourse segment in which subsequent sentences are understood to refer 
to events that occurred in 1969, even though the date is not subsequently mentioned. 
Or, consider discussing someone lse's work, say Smith's, in a research paper or text- 
book. After an initial reference to Smith's work, you may go on to describe his or 
her theory without explicitly saying in each sentence that you are doing so (with a 
locution such as "Smith shows that," "In Smith's theory, .... In Smith's algorithm," or 
"According to Smith") (William J. Rapaport, personal communication). Along with 
subjective contexts, an NLU system must be able to recognize such discourse phe- 
nomena in order to recover information implicitly communicated in the discourse. A
detailed investigation of one of them suggests directions for investigating the others. 
The one investigated here, subjective contexts in particular kinds of texts, is a good 
one to investigate because it is possible to constrain the problem, because there are so 
many prototypical instances in those kinds of texts, and because there is a great deal 
of previous work in linguistics and literary theory to build upon. 
In conclusion, this paper presented an algorithm for tracking the psychological 
point of view in third-person fictional narrative text. The algorithm is based on regu- 
larities, found by extensive xamination ofnaturally occurring narratives, in the ways 
that authors manipulate point of view. The algorithm has been implemented, pre- 
liminary empirical studies have been performed, which support he algorithm, and 
psychological experimentation is continuing. This is the first detailed computational 
approach to the problem of tracking the psychological point of view. 
Acknowledgments 
I wish to thank the members of the SUNY 
Buffalo Graduate Group in Cognitive 
Science and the SNePS Research Group for 
many discussions and ideas, and William J. 
Rapaport, Graeme Hirst, Peter Heeman, 
Russ Greiner, the anonymous reviewers, 
and especially Diane Horton for helpful 
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
This research was supported inpart by 
National Science Foundation grants 
IST-8504713 and IRI-8610517, and the 
preparation of this paper was supported in
part by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada. 
References 
Allen, James F., and Perrault, C. Raymond 
(1980). "Analyzing intention in 
utterances." Artij~'cial Intelligence 15, 
143-178. 
Almeida, Michael J. (1987). "Reasoning 
about he temporal structure of 
narratives." Technical report 87-10, SUNY 
267 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Buffalo Department of Computer Science. 
Banfield, Ann (1982). Unspeakable S ntences: 
Narration and Representation in the Language 
of Fiction. Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Banfield, Ann (1987). "Describing the 
unobserved." In The Linguistics of Writing, 
edited by Nigel Fabb, 265-285. Methuen. 
Barwise, Jon, and Perry, John (1983). 
Situations and Attitudes. MIT Press. 
Brinton, Laurel (1980). "'Represented 
perception': A study in narrative style." 
Poetics 9, 363-381. 
Bruder, Gail A., and Wiebe, Janyce M. 
(1990). "A psychological test of an 
algorithm for recognizing subjectivity in 
narrative text." In Proceedings, 12th Annual 
Conference ofthe Cognitive Science Society. 
947-952. 
Bruder, Gail A., and Wiebe, Janyce M. (in 
press). "Recognizing subjectivity and 
identifying subjective characters in
third-person fictional narrative." In Deixis 
in Narrative: A Cognitive Science Perspective, 
edited by Judy Duchan and Gail Bruder. 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Bruder, Gail A.; Duchan, Judith F.; 
Rapaport, William J.; Segal, Erwin M.; 
Shapiro, Stuart C.; and Zubin, David A. 
(1986). "Deictic centers in narrative: An 
interdisciplinary cognitive-science 
project." Technical report 86-20, SUNY 
Buffalo Department of Computer Science. 
Caenepeel, Mimo (1989). Aspect, temporal 
ordering, and perspective in narrative fiction. 
Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Edinburgh. 
Carberry, Sandra (1989). "A 
pragmatics-based approach to ellipsis 
resolution." Computational Linguistics 
15(2), 75-96. 
Chafe, Wallace (1986). "Evidentiality in 
English conversation and academic 
writing." In Evidentiality: The Linguistic 
Coding of Epistemology, edited by Wallace 
Chafe and Johanna Nichols, 261-272. 
Ablex. 
Chatman, Seymour (1978). Story and 
Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and 
Film. Cornell University Press. 
Chun, Soon Ae (1987). "SNePS 
implementation f possessive phrases." 
SNeRG technical note 19, SUNY Buffalo 
Department of Computer Science. 
Cohen, Robin (1987). "Analyzing the 
structure of argumentative discourse." 
Computational Linguistics 13, 11-24. 
Cohn, Dorrit (1978). Transparent Minds: 
Narrative Modes for Representing 
Consciousness in Fiction. Princeton 
University Press. 
Computational Linguistics, Special Issue on 
Tense and Aspect. 1988, 14(2). 
Computational Linguistics, Special Issue on 
User Modeling. 1988, 14(3). 
Dole~el, Lubomir (1973). Narrative Modes in 
Czech Literature. University of Toronto 
Press. 
Dyer, Michael G. (1983). In-Depth 
Understanding: A Computer Model of 
Integrated Processing for Narrative 
Comprehension. MIT Press. 
Ehrlich, Susan (1987). "Aspect, 
foregrounding and point of view." Text 
7(4), 363-376. 
Ehrlich, Susan (1990). "Referential linking 
and the interpretation f tense." Journal of 
Pragmatics 14, 57-75. 
Fauconnier, Gilles (1985). Mental Spaces: 
Aspects of Meaning Construction in Natural 
Language. MIT Press. 
Fillmore, Charles (1968). "The case for case." 
In Universals in Linguistic Theory, edited by 
E. Bach and R. T. Harms, 1-90. Holt. 
Fillmore, Charles (1974). "Pragmatics and 
the description of discourse." In Berkeley 
Studies in Syntax and Semantics I, edited by 
Charles Fillmore, George Lakoff, and 
Robin Lakoff, V1-V21. University of 
California Department of Linguistics and 
Institute of Human Learning. 
Fillmore, Charles (1975). Santa Cruz Lectures 
on Deixis. Indiana University Linguistics 
Club. 
Galbraith, Mary (1990). Subjectivity in the 
Novel. Ph.D. dissertation, SUNY Buffalo 
Department of English. 
Grosz, Barbara J., and Sidner, Candace L. 
(1986). "Attention, intentions, and the 
structure of discourse." Computational 
Linguistics 12(3), 175-204. 
Grosz, Barbara J.; Joshi, Aravind K; and 
Weinstein, Scott (1983). "Providing a 
unified account of definite noun phrases 
in discourse." In Proceedings, 21st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 44-50. 
Hamburger, Kate (1973). The Logic of 
Literature, translated by M. J. Rose. 
Indiana University Press. 
Hirst, Graeme (1987). Semantic Interpretation 
and the Resolution of Ambiguity. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Jespersen, Otto (1924). The Philosophy of 
Grammar. George Allen & Unwin. 
Kuroda, S.-Y. (1973). "Where epistemology, 
style and grammar meet: A case study 
from the Japanese." In A Festschrift for 
Morris Halle, edited by P. Kiparsky and 
S. Anderson, 377-391. Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston. 
Kuroda, S.-Y. (1976). "Reflections on the 
foundations of narrative theory--from a 
268 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
linguistic point of view." In Pragmatics of 
Language and Literature, edited by 
T. A. van Dijk, 107-140. North-Holland. 
Li, Naicong (1987). "Pronoun resolution in 
SNePS." SNeRG technical note 18, SUNY 
Buffalo Department of Computer Science. 
Li, Naicong (1991). Perspective-taking  
Mandarin discourse. Doctoral dissertation, 
SUNY Buffalo. 
Lyons, John (1977). Semantics, vol. 2. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Nakhimovsky, Alexander (1988). "Aspect, 
aspectual class, and the temporal 
structure of narrative." Computational 
Linguistics 14(2), 29-43. 
Nakhimovsky, Alexander, and Rapaport, 
William J. (1988). "Discontinuities in
narratives." In Proceedings, 12th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. 465-470. 
New York Times (16 Sept 1990). AIDS in 
Africa: A killer rages on, by Eric Eckholm. 
Peters, Sandra L., and Shapiro, Stuart C. 
(1987a). "A representation for natural 
category systems." In Proceedings, 9th 
Annual Conference ofthe Cognitive Science 
Society. 379-390. 
Peters, Sandra L., and Shapiro, Stuart C. 
(1987b). "A representation fornatural 
categorysystems." In Proceedings, lOth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence. 140-146. 
Peters, Sandra L.; Shapiro, Stuart C.; and 
Rapaport, William J. (1988). "Flexible 
natural language processing and roschian 
category theory." In Proceedings, lOth 
Annual Conference ofthe Cognitive Science 
Society. 125-131. 
Quirk, Randolph; Greenbaum, Sidney; 
Leech, Geoffrey; and Svartvik, Jan (1985). 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language. Longman. 
Rapaport, William J. (1986). "Logical 
foundations for belief representation." 
Cognitive Science 10, 371-422. 
Rapaport, William J.; Segal, Erwin M.; 
Shapiro, Stuart C.; Zubin, David A.; 
Bruder, Gail A.; Duchan, Judith E; 
Almeida, Michael J.; Daniels, Joyce H.; 
Galbraith, Mary; Wiebe, Janyce M.; and 
Yuhan, Albert H. (1989a). "Deictic centers 
and the cognitive structure of narrative 
comprehension." Technical report 89-01, 
SUNY Buffalo Department of Computer 
Science. 
Rapaport, William J.; Segal, Erwin M.; 
Shapiro, Stuart C.; Zubin, David A.; 
Bruder, Gail A.; Duchan, Judith F.; and 
Mark, David M. (1989b). "Cognitive and 
computer systems for understanding 
narrative text." Technical report 89-07, 
SUNY Buffalo Department of Computer 
Science. 
Reichenbach, Hans (1947). Elements of 
Symbolic Logic. Macmillan. 
Reichman, Rachel (1985). Getting Computers 
to Talk Like You and Me. MIT Press. 
Reiser, Brian J. (1981). "Character t acking 
and the understanding of narratives. In 
Proceedings, 7th International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 1. 209-211. 
Shapiro, Stuart C. (1979). "The SNePS 
semantic network processing system." In 
Associative Networks, edited by 
N. V. Findler, 179-203. Academic. 
Shapiro, Stuart C. (1982). "Generalized 
augmented transition etwork grammars 
for generation from semantic networks." 
American Journal of Computational 
Linguistics 8, 12-25. 
Shapiro, Stuart C., and Rapaport, William J. 
(1987). "SNePS considered as a fully 
intensional propositional semantic 
network." In The Knowledge Frontier, 
edited by N. Cercone and G. McCalla, 
262-315. Springer-Verlag. 
Sidner, Candace L. (1983). "Focusing in the 
comprehension f definite anaphora." In 
Computational Models of Discourse, edited 
by Michael Brady and Robert Berwick, 
267-330. MIT Press. 
Stark, Heather A. (1987). Keeping track of 
characters in narrative. Doctoral 
dissertation, Department of Psychology, 
Stanford University. 
Stark, Heather A. (1988). "What do 
paragraph markings do?" Discourse 
Processes 11, 275-303. 
Uspensky, Boris (1973). A Poetics of 
Composition. University of California 
Press. 
Webber, Bonnie L. (1983). "So what can we 
talk about now?" In Computational Models 
of Discourse, edited by Michael Brady and 
Robert Berwick, 331-371. MIT Press. 
Wiebe, Janyce M. (1990). Recognizing 
subjective sentences: A computational 
investigation ofnarrative text. Doctoral 
dissertation, SUNY Buffalo Department of
Computer Science. Also published as 
Technical report 90-03. 
Wiebe, Janyce M. (1991). "References in
narrative text." No~s (Special Issue on 
Cognitive Science and AI) 25(4), 457-486. 
Wiebe, Janyce M., and Rapaport, William J. 
(1988). "A computational theory of 
perspective and reference in narrative." In 
Proceedings, 26th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
131-138. 
Wilensky, Robert (1983). Planning and 
Understanding. Addison-Wesley. 
269 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Wilks, Yorick, and Bien, Janusz (1983). 
"Beliefs, points of view, and multiple 
environments." Cognitive Science 7, 95-119. 
Texts Cited 
Adler, Carole S. (1987). The Magic of the Glits. 
Macmillan. 
Bridgers, Sue Ellen (1979). All Together Now. 
Knopf. 
Caldwell, Taylor (1966). No One Hears But 
Him. Doubleday. 
Gibson, William (1988). Mona Lisa Overdrive. 
Bantam. 
UEngle, Madeleine (1986). Many Waters. 
Dell Publishing. 
Lorimer, Janet (1987). The Mystery of the 
Missing Treasure: Scholastic. 
McMurtry, Larry (1985). Lonesome Dove. 
Simon & Schuster. 
Oneal, Zibby (1971). War Work. Viking Press. 
Sachs, Marilyn (1966). Amy and Laura. 
Doubleday. 
Wootf, Virginia (1972). The Years. Hogarth 
Press. 
Wu, William (1987). Cyborg. Ace Books. 
270 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Appendix  A: The Algor i thm 
A.1 Introduction 
The following aspects of the algorithm as it is presented in Wiebe (1990) are not 
addressed in this paper or included in the version of the algorithm given below. 
. 
. 
. 
4. 
. 
. 
In addition to the state-of-affairs types listed in Section 6.3.1, there is an 
additional one, a seeming state. For example, "The man seemed tired to 
John" is about a seeming state. Such states are treated as private states. 
The types of constituents, mentioned in Section 6.3.3, in which 
private-state rms are not considered by the algorithm when choosing a 
state of affairs to consider. The example given in Section 6.3.3 was a 
manner adverbial. 
Objective private-state sentences (see footnote 4). 
When the SC cannot be identified when the sentence appears, 
identifying it after later sentences are processed (in Section 8.2.4). 
A listing of all of the potential subjective lement categories (Section 9.2) 
and the text situations with which each is associated (Section 9.3). 
A listing of all of the subjective lements that are not considered when 
they appear in private-state sentences (Section 10). 
This appendix is organized as follows. The preprocessing functions and operations on 
their ranges are specified in section A.2; intermediate-level functions are given in A.3; 
and the high-level functions are given in A.4. 
Function names are given in capital letters; parameter and variable names are 
given in italics; and comments are preceded by percent signs. The type of result re- 
turned by a function is given in the function heading following a colon. Preconditions 
are preceded by Given. 
Only specifications are given for the functions in A.2. These consist of precondi- 
tions, preceded by Given, and a specification of the result, preceded by Returns. 
A.2 Preprocessing Functions 
? Funct ion Item and type-predicates on input items. 
ITEM(t, i): input item 
Returns: The input item at position i in text t. 
SENTENCE(item): Boolean 
Returns: true iff input item item is a sentence. 
PARAGRAPH-BREAK(item): Boolean 
Returns: true iff input item item is a paragraph break. 
SCENE-BREAK(item): Boolean 
Returns: true iff input item item is a scene break. 
? Funct ion Features and operat ions on feature sets. 
FEATURE(S): feature set 
Returns: The feature set for sentence s.
271 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Following are the operations on feature sets, however they may be implemented. 
? Item (1) of Section 6.1. 
POTENTIAL-SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS(featureSet): s t of potential subjective lements 
Returns: the set of potential subjective lements in featureSet. 
TYPE-OF-PSE(pse, featureSet): potential subjective lement ype (e.g., habitual, 
comparative-'like') 
Given: pse E POTENTIAL-SUBJECTWE-ELEMENTS(featureSet) 
Returns: The type of potential subjective lement hat pse is. 
? Item (2) of Section 6.1. 
CLAUSES (featureSet): set of clauses 
Returns: the set of clauses in ffeatureSet. 
SUBORDINATING-CLAUSES(clause, featureSet): set of clauses 
Given: clause E Clauses (featureSet) 
Returns: The set of clauses to which clause is syntactically subordinated. 
STATES-OF-AFFAIRS (featureSet): set of states of affairs 
Returns: the set of states of affairs in featureSet. 
TYPE-OF-SOA (soa, featureSet): one of private-state-action, action, private-state, 
nonprivate-state 
Given: soa E STATES-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet) 
Returns: The type of state of affairs that soa is. 
SOA-OF-CLAUSE (clause, featureSet): state of affairs 
Given: clause E CLAUSES(featureSet) 
Returns: The state of affairs that clause is about 
? Item (3) of Section 6.1. These are the only functions that access information about the 
head noun of the subject of the main clause. A feature set must contain an indication 
as to whether or not this noun is about a private state, and, if this indication is true, 
the feature set must contain the state of affairs that this noun is about. But if this 
indication is false, even if the noun is about another kind of state of affairs, the feature 
set need not contain that state of affairs. 
SO Ahn-IS-ABOUT-A-PRIVATE-STATE(featureSet ) : Boolean 
Returns: True iff the head noun of the subject of the main clause is about a private 
state. 
SOAhn(featureSet): state of affairs 
Returns: if SOAhn-IS-ABOUT-A-PRIVATE-STATE(featureSet), then returns the 
member of STATES-OF-AFFAIRS (featureSet) hat the head noun of the subject 
of the main clause is about. Otherwise, returns nil. 
? Item (4) in Section 6.1. 
EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF (soa, featureSet): set of characters 
Returns: {}, if soa ~ STATES-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet). 
272 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Otherwise, returns the experiencer or actor of soa (possibly the empty set). 
? I tem (5) in Section 6.1. 
NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL (featureSet): Boolean 
Returns: true iff the sentence contains a narrative parenthetical. 
SUBJECT-OF-NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL(.featureSet): setof characters 
Given: NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL ~featureSet) 
Returns: The subject of the narrative parenthetical in the sentence. 
? I tem (6) in Section 6.1. 
IS-IN-THE-SIMPLE-P AST( clause, featureSet ): Boolean 
This is a pattern for other functions used by ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF in A.4. 
Given: clause E Clauses (featureSet) 
Returns: True iff the main verb phrase of clause is in the simple past. 
IS-PSE-SUBORDINATED-TO-SOA (pse, soa, featureSet): Boolean 
Given: pse E POTENTIAL-SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS ~featureSet) and soa E 
STATES-OF-AFFAIRSIfeatureSet ) 
Returns: False, if soa = SOAhn(featureSet). Otherwise, let clause be the clause in 
CLAUSES(featureSet) such that SOA-OF-CLAUSE(clause, featureSet) = soa, and 
let l be the lexical item(s) according to which it was determined 
that clause is about soa. Then, returns true iff pse is syntactically 
subordinated to I. 
A.3 Intermediate-Level Functions 
These functions are used in many of the higher-level ones given in A.4. 
? Context-Access Functions. 
Recall the context-access functions LAST-SC-OF, LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF, PREVIOUS- 
SCS-OF, and TEXT-SITUATION-OF, introduced in Section 6.2. Only the first is given here; 
the others are the obvious similar ones. 
LAST-SC-OF 
(context = IlastSC, lastActiveCharacter, p eviousSCs, textSituation} ): 
set of characters 
return lastSC 
? Function To-Be-Treated-As-A-Private-State. 
TO-BE-TREATED-AS-A-PRlVATE-STATE(SOa, featureSet, context): Boolean 
Given: soa E STATES-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet) and TYPE-OF-SOA(soa,featureSet) = 
private-state-action 
return true iff EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa,featureSet) C 
PREVIOUS-SCs-OF(context) 
? Function Chosen-State-Of-Affairs and auxiliary functions. 
CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS~featureSet, context): state of affairs 
% Let s be the sentence such that FEATURES(S) = featureSet. Then, 
% CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet) is the state of affairs that 
% the algorithm will consider for s. 
273 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
% The specification in Section 6.3.3 does not mention private-state actions 
% because they are not discussed until the end of the paper. However, they are 
included here. 
SOamain ~ SO A-OF-CLA USE(MAIN-CLA USE(featureSet ), featureSet ) 
if 
1 (TYPE-OF-SOA(SOamain, featureSet) = private-state) or 
2: 
(a) ((TYPE-OF-SOA(SOamain, featureSet) = private-state-action) and 
(b) (TO-BE-TREATED-AS-A-PRIVATE-STATE(SOamain, fe tureSet, context))) then 
re turn  SOamain 
else if SOAhn-Is-About-A-Private-State(featureSet) then 
return SOAhn (featureSet) 
else if CANDIDATE-SUBORDINATED-CLAUSES(featureSet, context) ~ { } then 
return 
SOA-OF-CLAUSE(ONE-OF ( CANDID ATE-SUBORDINATED-CLA USES( featureSet , 
context)), featureSet) 
else return SOamain 
end if 
MAIN-CLAUSE (featureSet): clause 
return the clause c such that c E CLAUSES(featureSet) and Subordinating-Clauses 
(c, featureSet) = {}. 
CANDIDATE-SUBORDINATED-CLAUSES (featureSet, context): set of clauses 
return the set of all c such that 
1 (c c CLAUSES (featureSet)) and 
2 (c # MAIN-CLAUSE (featureSet)) and 
4: 
(a) ((TYPE-OF-SOA (SOA-OF-CLAUSE(c, featureSet),featureSet) = private-state) 
or  
(b): 
(i) ((TYPE-OF-SOA (SOA-OF-CLAUSE (c, featureSet), featureSet) =
private-state-action) and 
(ii) (TO-BE-TREATED-AS-A-PRIVATE-STATE 
(SOA-OF-CLAUSE (c, featureSet), featureSet, context)))) and 
5: there does not exist a c' such that 
(c' c CLAUSES(featureSet)) and 
(TYPE-OF-SOA (SOA-OF-CLAUSE (c', featureSet), featureSet) C
{private-state, private-state-action}) and 
(C' E SUBORDINATING-CLAUSES (C, featureSet)) 
A.4 High-Level Functions 
TRACK-POV (a procedure) 
% Interpretations and contexts are defined in Section 6. 
i~1  
context ~-- ({}, {}, {}, presubjective-nonactive/ 
loop 
if ~SENTENCE (ITEM (text, i)) then 
context ~ NEW-CONTEXT' (ITEM(text, i), context) 
else 
interpretation ~-- PO V (FEATURES(ITEM( text,i) ),context) 
274 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
context ~- NEW-CONTEXT(interpretation, context) 
end if 
i~ i+ l  
end loop 
NEW-CONTEXT 
(interpretation = (value, character), 
context = (lastSC, lastActiveCharacter, previousSCs, textSituationl ): context 
if value = subjective then 
ISCnew ~-- character 
pSCne w ~ character U previousSCs 
laCnew ~-- lastActiveCharacter 
tSnew ~ continuing-subjective 
else 
if character # {} then 
lacnew ~-- character 
else 
laCnew ~ lastActiveCharacter 
end if 
\]SCnew ~ lastSC 
pSC ne w ~ previousSCs 
if character # {} and textSituation = presubjective-nonactive then 
tSnew ~- presubjective-active 
else if character ~ (} and textSituation C {postsubjective-nonactive, broken- 
subjective} then 
tSnew ~ postsubjective-active 
else if character = {} and textSituation = broken-subjective then 
tSnew ~-- postsubjective-nonactive 
else if textSituation = continuing-subjective then 
tSn~w ~ interrupted-subjective 
else tSnew ~-- textSituation 
end if 
end if 
return ( ISCnew, lacnew, pSCne w, tSnew) 
NEW-CONTEXT /
(break, 
context = (lastSC, lastActiveCharacter, previousSCs 
if break = scene-break then 
tSnew ~-- presubjective-nonactive 
else if textSituation -- presubjective-active th n 
tSnew ~ presubjective-nonactive 
else if textSituation = continuing-subjective th n 
tSnew ~- broken-subjective 
else if textSituation = interrupted-subjective th n 
tSne w ~ postsubjective-nonactive 
else if textSituation = postsubjective-active th n 
tSnew ~-- postsubjective-nonactive 
else tSnew +-- textSituation 
end if 
return (lastSC, lastActiveCharacter, previousSCs, ts,~ew) 
textSituationl ): context 
275 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
POV (featureSet, context): Interpretation 
if SENTENCE-IS-SUBJECTIVE ~featureSet, context) then 
return / subjective, IDENTIFY-SC (featureSet, context) I 
else 
return / objective, ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (featureSet, context) I 
end if 
SENTENCE-IS-SUBJECTIVEIfeatureSet, context): Boolean 
soa ~-- CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet, con ext) 
return 
1 (NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL(featureSet)) or  
2 (SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS(featureSet, context) # {})) or 
3 (TYpE-OF-SOA(soa, featureSet) =private-state) or 
4: 
(a) ((TYPE-OF-SOA(soa, ffeatureSet) = private-state-action) a d 
(b) (TO-BE-TREATED-AS-A-PRIVATE-STATE(soa, featureSet, context)) or 
5: 
(a) ((TYPE-OF-SOA(soa, featureSet) =nonprivate-state) and 
(b) (TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) = continuing-subjective)) 
SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS~eatureSet, context): set of potential subjective lements 
% As specified in Section A.1, the potential subjective lement categories and the 
% text situations with which they are associated are not listed in this paper. 
return 
{pse \[ pse E POTENTIAL-SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS (featureSet) and 
pse is associated with TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context)} 
else 
else 
else 
end 
IDENTIFY-SC ~featureSet, context): set of characters 
if IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE (featureSet~ context) ~ {} then 
return IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE (featureSet, context) 
else if LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context) and 
LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context) then 
return CHOOSE-AN-EXPECTED-SC (featureSet~ context) 
if LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context) then 
return LAST-SC-OF( context) 
if LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC (context) then 
return LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF(context) 
return {} 
if 
IDENTIFY-SC-FROM-THE-SENTENCE (featureSet, context): set of characters 
soa ~ CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS (featureSet, context) 
if NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL~featureSet) th n 
return SUBJECT-OF-NARRATIVE-PARENTHETICAL(featureSet) 
else if 
1 (EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa,featureSet) # {}) and 
2 (SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS-TO-CONSIDER(soa, featureSet, context) = {}) and 
3: 
(a) ((TYPE-OF-SOA(soa,featureSet) = private-state) or  
276 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
4: 
(b): 
(i) ((TYPE-OF-SOA(soa, featureSet) =private-state-action) a d 
(ii) (TO-BE-TREATED-AS-A-PRIVATE-STATE(soa, featureSet, context)))) and 
(a) ((TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) ~ continuing-subjective) or 
(b): 
(i) ((TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) = continuing-subjective) and 
(ii): 
(1) ( (EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa) C LAST-SC-OF(context) or 
(2) (EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa) D LAST-SC-OF(context) ) ) ) 
then return EXPER1ENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa ) 
else return {} 
end if 
LAST-SC-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC(context): Boolean 
If TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) ~ {presubjective-nonactive, pr subjective-active} then 
return true 
else return false 
LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-IS-AN-EXPECTED-SC(context): Boolean 
If TEXT-SITUATION-OF(context) E {presubjective-active, postsubjective-active} then 
return true 
else return false 
end if 
CHOOSE-AN-EXPECTED-SC(featureSet, con ext): set of characters 
if EXPERIENCER-OR-A CTOR-OF( CHOSEN-STA TE-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet ), f atureSet ) 
= LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF(context) then 
return LaST-SC-OF(context) 
else 
return LAST-ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (context) 
end if 
SUBJECTWE-ELEMENTS-TO-CONSIDER(soa, featureSet, context): set of potential 
subjective lements 
return 
{pse I pse E SUBJECTIVE-ELEMENTS (featureSet, context) and 
IS-PSE-SUBORDINATED-TO-SOA(pse, soa, featureSet) and 
TYPE-OF-PSE(pse, featureSet) 
{habitual, comparative-'like', 'as'-followed-by-modifier, some kinds 
of intensifier adverbs.} } 
% See Section 10 and item (6) of A.1. 
ACTIVE-CHARACTER-OF (featureSet, context): set of characters 
soa ~ CHOSEN-STATE-OF-AFFAIRS(featureSet, con ext) 
if (TYPE-OF-SOA(soa, featureSet) =action) and 
(EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa, fe tureSet) _C_ Previous-SCs-Of (context)) and 
(IS-IN-THE-SIMPLE-PAST(CLAUSE-OF(soa, fe tureSet), featureSet) ) and 
% the remaining conjuncts of this conditional are in English, so as not to list many 
% obvious functions. IS-IN-THE-SIMPLE-PAST is a model for the ones implied by the 
English statements. 
(The main verb phrase is not negated, is not habitual, and does not contain a 
modal auxiliary verb or adverb such as those listed in Section 8.2.2) 
277 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
then return EXPERIENCER-OR-ACTOR-OF(soa,featureSet) 
else return {} 
end if 
Appendix B: Implementation and Demonstrations 
Implementation 
The algorithm has been implemented in two systems. Both implement functions POV, 
NEw-CONTEXT, and NEW-CONTEXT', and neither implements function ITEM. The system 
demonstrated here takes actual sentences a input, so has a component for performing 
function FEATURES. However, it does not truly implement FEATURES, but is successful 
in computing the FeatureSet of a sentence only for sentences that fall within its limited 
coverage. It requires many actual sentences of a text to be simplified. 
The other version of the system queries the user for the information returned by 
function FEATURES, to enable the algorithm to be tested on unlimited text, without 
concern for problems not addressed in this work. 
Both systems are implemented using the SNePS knowledge representation a d 
reasoning system (Shapiro 1979; Shapiro and Rapaport 1987) and an ATN grammar 
(Shapiro 1982). The grammar of the system demonstrated here is an extension of 
others developed at the State University of New York at Buffalo, and includeS pieces of 
programs written by Soon Ae Chun (Chun 1987), Zuzana Dobes, Naicong Li (Li 1987), 
Sandra Peters (Peters and Shapiro 1987a, 1987b; Peters, Shapiro, and Rapaport 1988), 
William J. Rapaport (Rapaport 1986), and Stuart C. Shapiro (Shapiro 1982; Shapiro and 
Rapaport 1987). 
Demonstrations 
In the following, input to the system is preceded by a colon, comments are preceded 
by percent signs, and all other lines are the system's output. To save space, extraneous 
messages have been deleted, such as those concerned with entering and exiting the 
system. Sentences of quoted speech are input simply as 'Quoted_speech' followed by 
a discourse parenthetical, since the algorithm does not consider the contents of the 
quoted string. 
The system is first demonstrated on the following passage; when the passage isen- 
countered in the novel, the situation is postsubjecfive-nonactive and the last subjective 
character is Sandy and Dennys. 
Japheth looked at Sandy and Dennys anxiously. "Sun-sickness can 
be dangerous." He reached up to touch Dennys's cheek. Shook his 
head. "You're cold and clammy. Bad sign." He put his hand against 
his forehead. Appeared to be thinking deeply. \[UEngle, Many Waters, 
p. 241 
: Initialize situation to postsubj-nonactive. 
The situation is now postsubj-nonactive 
: Initialize last_subj_char to Sandy and Dennys. 
Dennys and Sandy is the last_subj_char 
% The situation and last subjective character arefirst initialized. 
: Japheth looked at Sandy and Dennys anxiously. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
278 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last_subjchar 
Perc action of Japheth treated as an action: Actor has not been the 
subjchar  
The sentence is not subjective 
The situation is still postsubj-nonactive 
% The s~te ofaffai~ that the algorithm considers ~ the perceptual ction (~erc-action') 
%thatthe main clauseisabout, a kind ofprivate-stateaction. 
% Note that even though "anxiously" is a private-state t rm, it isn't considered 
% by the system because it is being used as a manner adverbial. 
: Quoted speech Japheth said. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last subj char 
The sentence is not subjective 
The situation is still postsubj-nonactive 
: He reached up to touch Dennys's cheek. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last subj_char 
The sentence is not subjective 
The situation is still postsubj-nonactive 
: Shook his head. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last subj char 
Potential subjective element considered: 
sentence_fragment 
It is a subjective element 
Subjective context established by this feature: 
sentence_fragment 
The subj_char is Dennys and Sandy 
The situation is now continuing-subj 
% Th~ utterance ~ a sentence fragment, apotentml su~ective lement. In the situat~n 
% in which it appea~ (postsu~ective-nonactive), t is a subjective lement. 
: Quoted_speech he said. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is continuing-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last_subj_char 
The sentence is not subjective 
Objective sentence in continuing-subj situation: 
279 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
situation is now interrupted-subj 
: He put his hand against his forehead. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is interrupted-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last subj char 
The sentence is not subjective 
The situation is still interrupted-subj 
: Appeared to be thinking deeply. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is interrupted-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
Dennys and Sandy, the last subj_char 
Potential subjective elements considered: 
sentence fragment 
progressive 
seeming verb 
Of these, the following are subjective elements: 
sentence_fragment 
seeming_verb 
Subjective context established by these features: 
sentence_fragment 
seeming verb 
The subj char is Dennys and Sandy 
The situation is now continuing-subj 
% Even though the sentence ~ a private-state sentence that is not in the 
% continuing-su~ective situation, the system ident~es the su~ective 
% character to be the last su~ective characteG because non-subordinated 
% su~ective elements appear (note that the prog~ssive aspect is not a 
% su~ective element in this situation). 
The next demonstration is on a slightly simplified version of (25.2)-(25.3). (When 
it is encountered, the last subjective character is the girl.) 
How could the poor thing have married him? 
Johnnie Martin could not believe that he was seeing that old bag's 
black eyes sparkling with disgust. 
: Initialize situation to continuing-subj. 
The situation is now continuing-sub3 
: Initialize last_subj char to the girl. 
the girl is the last subj char 
: How could the poor thing have married him? 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is continuing-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
the girl, the last subj_char 
280 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Potential subjective elements considered: 
question 
past_perfective 
eval_adjective 
All of these are subjective elements 
Subjective context continued by these features: 
question 
eval adjective 
past_perfective 
The subj_char is the girl 
The situation is still continuing-subj 
% The systems abb~v~tionfor anevaluative adjective is ~val~djective'. 
% The evaluative adjective in th~ sentence is Moor'. 
: Paragraph. 
Before the paragraph break: 
The situation is continuing-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
the girl, the last_subj_char 
After the paragraph break: 
The situation is broken-subj 
The last_subjchar is still an expected subjective character 
%'Paragraph'indicatesthata paragraph b~akoccu~ atth~ point. 
: Johnnie Martin could not believe that he was seeing the old bag's black 
eyes sparkling with disgust. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is broken-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
the girl, the last subj char 
Potential subjective elements not considered: 
percept_term 
attitude_noun 
Subjective context established by this feature: 
private_state of Idohnnie Martini 
The subj_char is IJohnnie Martinl 
The situation is now continuing-subj 
% The system does not consider the perceptual term ('sparkling') or the attitude noun 
% ('old bag9 because they are subordinated tothe private-state rm. 
In the following passage, competition arises that is resolved in favor of the last 
subjective character: 
Newt had always missed having a father, but the fact that Sean 
spoke so coldly of his put the matter in a different light. Perhaps he 
was not so unlucky, after all. 
He was riding around the herd when Jake Spoon trotted past on 
his way to Lonesome Dove. 
"Going to town, Jake?" Newt asked. 
"Yes, I think I will," Jake said. He didn't stop to pass the time; in 
a second, he was out of sight in the shadows. It made Newt's spirits 
281 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
fall a little, for Jake had seldom said two words to him since he came 
back. \[McMurtry, Lonesome Dove, p. 200\] 
The system wi l l  be demonstrated ona slightly modified version of the critical part of 
this passage (Newt is the last subjective character at the beginning): 
Newt was riding around the herd when Jake Spoon went by on 
his way to Lonesome Dove. 
"Going to town, Jake?" Newt asked. 
"Yes, I think I will," Jake said. He didn't stop to pass the time. In 
a second he was out of sight in the shadows. 
: Previous_subj_char Jake. 
Jake has been the subj_char 
%Fi~t, thesystem hasto beinformedthatJakehasbeen thesubjectivecharacten 
: Initialize situation to broken-sub3. 
The situation is now broken-subj 
: Initialize last_subj_char Newt. 
Newt is the last_subj_char 
: Newt was riding around the herd when Jake went by on his way to 
Lonesome Dove. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is broken-subj 
Expected subjective character: 
Newt, the last subj char 
Potential subjective element considered: 
progressive 
It is not a subjective element 
Newt is the active_char of this sentence 
The sentence is not subjective 
Sentence with an active char in broken-subj situation: 
situation is now postsubj-active 
% The prog~ssive aspect is a su~ective element on~ in the continuing-su~ective situation. 
: Paragraph. 
Before the paragraph break: 
The situation is postsubj-active 
Expected subjective characters: 
Newt, the last subj char 
Newt, the last_active_char 
After the paragraph break: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
The last_active_char is no longer an expected subjective character 
The last_subj_char is still an expected subjective character 
: Ouoted_speech Newt asked. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
282 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Newt, the last subj char 
Newt is the active_char of this sentence 
The sentence is not subjective 
Sentence with an active_char in postsubj-nonactive situation: 
situation is now postsubj-active 
: Paragraph. 
Before the paragraph break: 
The situation is postsubj-active 
Expected subjective characters: 
Newt, the last_subj_char 
Newt, the last_active_char 
After the paragraph break: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
The last active_char is no longer an expected subjective character 
The last_subj_char is still an expected subjective character 
: Quoted_speech Jake said. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-nonactive 
Expected subjective character: 
Newt, the last_subj char 
Jake is the active_char of this sentence 
The sentence is not subjective 
Sentence with an active_char in postsubj-nonactive situation: 
situation is now postsubj-active 
: He did not stop to pass the time. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-active 
Expected subjective characters: 
Newt, the last subj char 
Jake, the last active_char 
The sentence is not subjective 
The situation is still postsubj-active 
: In a second he was out of sight in the shadows. 
At the beginning of this sentence: 
The situation is postsubj-active 
Expected subjective characters: 
Newt, the last subj char 
Jake, the last_active_char 
Potential subjective element considered: 
perceptterm 
It is a subjective element 
Competition between the last_subjchar and the last_active_char 
Choosing the last subj_char because the sentence is about the 
last_active_char 
Subjective context established by this feature: 
283 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
perceptterm 
The subj_char is Newt 
The situation is now continuing-subj 
% The pe~ept erm in this sentence ~ "sight'. 
Appendix C: A Test of the Algorithm 
C.1 Introduction 
To give an idea of the success rate of the algorithm, this appendix presents the results 
of a test of the algorithm on 450 sentential input items (exclusive of paragraph and 
scene breaks) from each of two novels, Lonesome Dove by Larry McMurtry and The 
Magic of the Glits by Carole S. Adler. Lonesome Dove is an adult novel that has many 
subjective characters, and The Magic of the Glits is a childrens' novel that has one main 
subjective character. The input items are those of the complete sentences of every fifth 
page of these novels, starting in Lonesome Dove with page 176 and ending with page 
236 (13 pages total), and starting in The Magic of the Glits with page 1 and ending with 
page 86 (18 pages total). (For each book, the first part of an additional page was used 
to make the number of input items exactly equal to 450.) Page 176 in Lonesome Dove 
is the beginning of a chapter in the middle of the novel. The reason I started in the 
middle of the novel is that earlier pages were considered uring the development of
the algorithm. 
The system used in this study implements only POV, NEW-CONTEXT, and NEW- 
CONTEXT'. The results of ITEM and FEATURES are supplied by me. What is being tested 
in this study is POV--NEW-CONTEXT and NEW-CONTEXT' are not in question, since 
their mappings follow from the definitions of an interpretation and of a context and 
its components. What POV is judged against is function H, which is based on my 
judgements. It maps a sentence into the correct interpretation of the sentence: 
H : sentence ~ interpretation. 
Sometimes, either a subjective or objective interpretation of a sentence would be rea- 
sonable. For these sentences, I accept he algorithm's interpretation--assuming that 
s is such a sentence, and c is the context in which s appears, I take H(s) to be 
POV(FEATURES(S), C). There are fewer than 20 such sentences in the passages from 
Lonesome Dove and fewer than 30 in the passages from The Magic of the Glits. One 
goal of our current and planned psychological experiments i to identify the types of 
situations in which there are significant individual differences among subjects' inter- 
pretations. 
We will also distinguish between primary and secondary errors, primary errors being 
the more severe. The algorithm's interpretation of a sentence is a primary error when its 
interpretation is incorrect given the actual context of the sentence, which is computed 
from the correct interpretations of all previous entences. A secondary error is one that 
results only from previous errors. In this case, the algorithm's interpretation is correct 
given the actual context, but incorrect given the context computed by the algorithm. 
The definition of the context computed by the algorithm is given in Section 6.2; the 
definition of the actual context of the i th input item, aci, is the same, except hat H 
takes the place of POV: 
aci : 
({}, {}, {}, presubjecfive-nonactive> 
NEW-CONTEXT'(ITEM (t, i -- 1), ci-1) 
NEW-CONTEXT(H(ITEM (t, i -- 1)), aci-1) 
i f /=  1 
if i > 1 & ~SENTENCE (ITEM (t, i -- 1)) 
if i > 1 & SENTENCE (ITEM (t, i-- 1)) 
284 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Table 4 
Results for Lonesome Dove by interpretation. 
Interpretation Actual Instances Primary Errors Incorrect Interpretations 
(subjective,x / 271/450 (60%) 20/271 (7%) 13 objective 
7 (subjective,y),  # x 
objective 179/450 (40%) 7/179 (4%) 7 (subjective,x / 
objective, other than 54/450 (12%) 7/54 (13%) 7 (subjective,x) 
simple quoted speech 
Table 5 
Results for Lonesome Dove by point-of-view operation. 
Point-of-View Actual Instances Primary Errors Incorrect Interpretations 
Operation 
continuation 215/450 (48%) 11/215 (5%) 1 initiation 
10 objective 
resumption 20/450 (4%) 0/20 (0%) -- 
initiation 36/450 (8%) 9/36 (25%) 5 resumptions 
1 initiation 
3 objective 
objective 179/450 (40%) 7/179 (4%) 4 continuations 
3 resumptions 
objective, other than 54/450 (12%) 7/54 (13%) 4 continuations 
simple quoted speech 3 resumptions 
C.2 Results 
Lonesome Dove. We now present he results of the study, beginning with Lonesome 
Dove. Out of the 450 input items, the algorithm committed 27 primary errors (6%) and 
28 secondary errors (6%). We will first give a breakdown of the primary errors accord- 
ing to interpretation in Table 4, and then one according to point-of-view operation in 
Table 5. Note that many of the input items, 125 of them (28%), are simple items of 
quoted speech (i.e., they do not have potential subjective lements in the discourse 
parenthetical, or subordinated clauses outside the quoted string that have private-state 
terms, private-state-action terms, or potential subjective lements). 
Consider Table 4. The first row, for example, should be understood as follows: out 
of the 271 actual subjective sentences, the algorithm committed 20 primary errors. It 
interpreted 13 subjective sentences to be objective, and 7 to be the subjective sentence 
of the wrong subjective character. 
Now consider Table 5. The first row, for example, should be understood as follows: 
out of the 215 items that actually continue a character's point of view, the algorithm 
committed 11 primary errors. It interpreted 1 of them to be an initiation and 10 to be 
objective. Notice that the last column of the row for initiations includes an initiation. 
This means that for one actual initiation, the algorithm was correct hat a character's 
point of view was initiated, but incorrect as to the identity of that character. 
285 
Computational Linguistics Volume 20, Number 2 
Table 6 
Results for The Magic of the Glits by interpretation. 
Interpretation Actual Instances Primary Errors Incorrect Interpretations 
(subjective,x / 125/450 (28%) 12/125 (10%) 10 objective 
2 (subjective,y/,  # x 
objective 325/450 (72%) 22/325 (7%) 22 (subjective,x) 
objective, other than 97/450 (22%) 22/97 (23%) 22 (subjective,x) 
simple quoted speech 
Table 7 
Results for The Magic of the Glits by point-of-view operation. 
Point-of-View Actual Instances Primary Errors Incorrect Interpretations 
Operation 
continuation 79/450 (18%) 4/79 (5%) 4 objective 
resumption 41/450 (9%) 7/41 (17%) 2 initiations 
5 objective 
initiation 5/450 (1%) 1/5 (20%) 1 objective 
objective 325/450 (72%) 22/325 (7%) 4 continuations 
9 resumptions 
9 initiations 
objective, other than 97/450 (22%) 22/97 (23%) 4 continuations 
simple quoted speech 9 resumptions 
9 initiations 
The Magic of the Glits. In The Magic of the Glits, out of the 450 input items, the 
algorithm committed 34 primary errors (8%) and 21 secondary errors (5%). There are 
228 items that are simple quoted speech (51%). Tables 6 and 7 present he kinds of 
results for this novel that were given above in Tables 4 and 5 for Lonesome Dove. 
A particular weakness of the algorithm on novels such as The Magic of the Glits is 
responsible for a number of the primary errors given in the last two rows of Tables 6 
and 7. The salient feature of the novel is that it has two main characters, Jeremy 
and Lynette, but primarily takes the psychological point of view only of Jeremy. The 
problem with the algorithm is that very minor subjective contexts of Lynette affect he 
interpretations of later sentences about her private-state actions--they are treated as 
private-state s ntences, while they should be treated as action sentences. 
When a novel primarily takes an external view of a character (Uspensky 1973), 
descriptions ofbehavior, quoted speech, and private-state-action se tences are the pri- 
mary means employed to communicate hings about his or her consciousness. How- 
ever, if a character appears often enough, some reports of that character's private 
states are bound to appear to explain his or her actions. According to the algorithm 
as presented in this paper, once a character is the SC of any subjective sentence, all 
later private-state actions of that character are treated as private states rather than as 
actions (see Section 11). As suggested in Wiebe (1990), however, this criterion is too 
weak--what should be required for a private-state action to be treated as a private 
286 
Janyce M. Wiebe Tracking Point of View in Narrative 
Table 8 
Revised results for The Magic of the Glits by point-of-view operation. 
Point-of-View Actual Instances Primary Errors Incorrect Interpretations 
Operation 
continuation 79/450 (18%) 4/79 (5%) 4 objective 
resumption 41/450 (9%) 7/41 (17%) 2 initiations 
5 objective 
initiation 5/450 (1%) 1/5 (20%) 1 objective 
objective 325/450 (72%) 10/325 (3%) 1 continuation 
9 resumptions 
objective, other than 97/450 (22%) 10/97 (10%) 1 continuation 
simple quoted speech 9 resumptions 
state is that there be a previous ubjective context of the actor that is "significant." 
Some possible, but perhaps arbitrary, definitions of a "significant" subjective context 
are that it contain a represented thought, that it contain a potential subjective lement 
that is indeed subjective, or that it be at least two input items in length. The only 
reason that one of these heuristics has not been incorporated into the algorithm is that 
an examination of texts broad enough to choose among them (or to suggest another) 
has not yet been performed. For The Magic of the Glits, any such heuristic would suffice. 
In the entire novel (not only in the passages tested), there are a total of 10 subjective 
sentences attributed to Lynette. All are private-state r ports, none has a subjective 
element, and no two of them appear together. In addition, 5 of them include some 
description of Lynette's behavior, and, of the remaining 5, 4 are the subjective sentence 
of Jeremy and Lynette together, not of Lynette alone. If one of the above heuristics 
were employed, then there would be 12 fewer primary errors and 14 fewer secondary 
errors. Whether or not one of these heuristics is employed oes not affect he results 
given above for Lonesome Dove. 
Assuming one of the above heuristics, the results for The Magic of the Glits would be 
as follows. Out of the 450 input items, the algorithm would commit 22 primary errors 
(5%) and 7 secondary errors (2%). Table 8 shows the primary errors broken down 
according to point-of-view operation, assuming that one of the heuristics discussed 
above is employed. Notice that the differences between Tables 7 and 8 appear in the 
last two rows. 
287 

