Functional Centering 
Grounding Referential Coherence 
in Information Structure 
Michae l  Strube* 
University of Pennsylvania 
Udo  Hahnt  
Freiburg University 
Considering empirical evidence from a free-word-order language (German) we propose a revi- 
sion of the principles guiding the ordering of discourse ntities in the forward-looking center list 
within the centering model. We claim that grammatical role criteria should be replaced by criteria 
that reflect he functional information structure of the utterances. These new criteria are based 
on the distinction between hearer-old and hearer-new discourse ntities. We demonstrate hat 
such a functional model of centering can be successfully applied to the analysis of several forms 
of referential text phenomena, viz. pronominal, nominal, and functional anaphora. Our method- 
ological and empirical claims are substantiated by two evaluation studies. In the first one, we 
compare success rates for the resolution of pronominal naphora that result from a grammatical- 
role-driven centering algorithm and from a functional centering algorithm. The second study 
deals with a new cost-based evaluation methodology for the assessment ofcentering data, one 
which can be directly derived from and justified by the cognitive load premises of the centering 
model. 
1. Introduction 
The problem of establishing referential coherence in discourse can be rephrased as the 
problem of determining the proper antecedent of a given anaphoric expression i  the 
current or the preceding utterance(s) and the rendering of both as referentially iden- 
tical (coreferential). This task can be approached in a very principled way by stating 
general constraints on the grammatical compatibility of the expressions involved (e.g., 
Haddock 1987; Alshawi 1992). Linguists have devoted a lot of effort to identifying 
conclusive syntactic and semantic riteria to reach this goal, e.g., for intrasentential 
anaphora within the binding theory part of the theory of Government and Binding 
(Chomsky 1981), or for intersentential anaphora within the context of the Discourse 
Representation Theory (Kamp and Reyle 1993). 
Unfortunately, these frameworks fail to uniquely determine anaphoric antecedents 
in a variety of cases. As a consequence, referentially ambiguous interpretations have 
to be dealt with in those cases in which several alternatives fulfill all the required 
syntactic and semantic onstraints. It seems that syntactic and semantic riteria con- 
stitute only necessary but by no means sufficient conditions for identifying the valid 
antecedent among several possible candidates. Hence, one is left with a preferential 
choice problem that falls outside of the scope of those strict grammaticality constraints 
relating to the level of syntax or semantics only. Its solution requires considering pat- 
? Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, 3401 Walnut Street, Suite 400A, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
t Computational Linguistics Group, Text Understanding Lab, Werthmannplatz 1, 79085 Freiburg, 
Germany 
(~) 1999 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
terns of language use and, thus, introduces the level of discourse context and further 
pragmatic factors as a complementary description level. 
Computational linguists have recognized the need to account for referential mbi- 
guities in discourse and have developed various theories centered around the notion of 
discourse focus (Grosz 1977; Sidner 1983). In a seminal paper, Grosz and Sidner (1986) 
wrapped up the results of their research and formulated a model in which three levels 
of discourse coherence are distinguished--attention, intention, and discourse segment 
structure. While this paper gives a comprehensive picture of a complex, yet not ex- 
plicitly spelled-out theory of discourse coherence, the centering model (Grosz, Joshi, 
and Weinstein, 1983, 1995) marked a major step in clarifying the relationship between 
attentional states and (local) discourse segment structure. More precisely, the centering 
model accounts for the interactions between local coherence and preferential choices of 
referring expressions. It relates differences in coherence (in part) to varying demands 
on inferences as required by different types of referring expressions, given a particular 
attentional state of the hearer in a discourse setting (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1995, 
204-205). The claim is made then that the lower the inference load put on the hearer, 
the more coherent the underlying discourse appears. 
The centering model as formulated by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) refines 
the structure of "centers" of discourse, which are conceived as the representational 
device for the attentional state at the local level of discourse. They distinguish two 
basic types of centers, which can be assigned to each utterance Ui--a single backward- 
looking center, Cb(Ui), and a partially ordered set of discourse ntities, the forward- 
looking centers, Cf(Ui). The ordering on Cf is relevant for determining the Cb. It 
can be viewed as a salience ranking that reflects the assumption that the higher the 
ranking of a discourse ntity in Cf, the more likely it will be mentioned again in the 
immediately following utterance. Thus, given an adequate ordering of the discourse 
entities in Cf, the costs of computations necessary to establish local coherence are 
minimized. 
Given that the ordering on the Cf list is crucial for determining the Cb, it is no 
surprise that there has been much discussion among researchers about the ranking 
criteria appropriate for different languages. In fact, Walker, Iida, and Cote (1994) hy- 
pothesize that the Cf ranking criteria are the only language-dependent fac ors within 
the centering model. Though evidence for many additional criteria for the Cf ranking 
have been brought forward in the literature, to some extent consensus has emerged 
that grammatical roles play a major role in making ranking decisions (e.g., whether 
the referential expression appears as the grammatical subject, direct object, or indirect 
object of an utterance). Our own work on the centering model 1(Strube and Hahn 1996; 
Hahn and Strube 1996) brings in evidence from German, a free-word-order language 
in which grammatical role information is far less predictive of the organization of 
centers than for fixed-word-order languages such as English. In establishing proper 
referential relations, we found the functional information structure of the utterances 
to be much more relevant. By this we mean indicators of whether or not a discourse 
entity in the current utterance refers to another discourse ntity already introduced 
by previous utterances in the discourse. Borrowing terminology from Prince (1981, 
1992), an entity that does refer to another discourse ntity already introduced is called 
discourse-old or hearer-old, while an entity that does not refer to another discourse 
entity is called discourse-new or hearer-new. 
1 This article is an extended and revised version of our contribution to the 1996 Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (Strube and Hahn 1996). It contains additional material from 
the doctoral thesis of the first author (Strube 1996a). 
310 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Based on evidence from empirical studies in which we considered German as well 
as English texts from different domains and genres, we make three contributions to 
the centering approach. The first, the introduction of functional notions of information 
structure into the centering model, is purely methodological in nature and concerns the 
centering approach as a theory of local coherence. The second deals with an empirical 
issue, in that we demonstrate how a functional model of centering can be success- 
fully applied to the analysis of different forms of anaphoric text phenomena, namely 
pronominal, nominal, and functional anaphora. Finally, we propose a new evaluation 
methodology for centering data in terms of a cost-based evaluation approach that can 
be directly derived from and justified by the cognitive load premises of the centering 
model. 
At the methodological level, we develop arguments that (at least for some free- 
word-order languages) grammatical role criteria should be replaced by functional 
role criteria, since they seem to more adequately account for the ordering of discourse 
entities in the Cf list. In Section 4, we elaborate on particular information structure 
criteria underlying such a functional center ordering. We also make a second, more 
general methodological claim for which we have gathered some preliminary, though 
still not conclusive vidence. Based on a reevaluation of centering analyses of some 
challenging language data that can be found in the literature on centering, we will 
argue that exchanging rammatical for functional criteria might also be a reason- 
able strategy for fixed-word-order languages. What makes this proposal so attractive 
is the obvious gain in the generality of the model--given a functional framework, 
fixed- and free-word-order languages might be accounted for by the same ordering 
principles. 
The second major contribution of this paper is related to the unified treatment of 
different ext coherence phenomena. It consists of an equally balanced treatment of 
intersentential (pro)nominal anaphora nd inferables (also called functional, bridging, 
or partial anaphora). The latter phenomenon (cf. the examples in the next section and 
the in-depth treatment in Hahn, Markert, and Strube \[1996\]) is usually only sketchily 
dealt with in the centering literature, e.g., by asserting that the entity in question "is re- 
alized but not directly realized" (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1995, 217). Furthermore, 
the distinction between these two kinds of realization is not part of the centering 
mechanisms but delegated to the underlying semantic theory. We will develop argu- 
ments for how to discern inferable discourse ntities and relate them properly to their 
antecedent at the center level. The ordering constraints we supply account for all of 
the types of anaphora mentioned above, including (pro)nominal anaphora (Strube and 
Hahn 1995; Hahn and Strube 1996). This claim will be validated by a substantial body 
of empirical data in Section 5. 
Our third contribution relates to the way the results of centering-based anaphora 
resolution are usually evaluated. Basically, we argue that rather than counting reso- 
lution rates for anaphora or comparing isolated transition types holding among head 
positions in the center lists--preferred transition types stand for a high degree of local 
coherence, while less preferred ones signal that the underlying discourse might lack 
coherence--one should consider adjacent transition pairs and annotate such pairs with 
the processing costs they incur. This way, we define a dual theory-internal metric of 
inference load by distinguishing between "cheap" and "expensive" transition types. 
Based on this distinction, some transition types receiving bad marks in isolation are 
ranked "cheap" when they occur in the appropriate context, and vice versa. 
The article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the different ypes of 
anaphora we consider subsequently, viz. pronominal, nominal, and functional anaphora. 
We then turn to the proposed modification of the centering model. After a brief in- 
311 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
troduction into what we call the "grammatical" centering model (actually, a recap of 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein \[1995\]) in Section 3, we turn in Section 4 to our approach, 
the functional model of centering. In Section 5, we present the methodological frame- 
work and the empirical data from two evaluation studies we carried out. In Section 6, 
we relate our work to alternative approaches dealing with local text coherence. In 
Section 7, we discuss ome remaining unsolved problems. 
2. Types of Anaphoric Expressions 
In this paper, we consider anaphora s a textual phenomenon only, and deal with 
anaphoric relations that hold between adjacent utterances (intersentential anaphora). 2 
Text phenomena are a challenging issue for the design of a text parser for any text- 
understanding system, since recognition facilities that are imperfect or altogether lack- 
ing result in referentially incomplete, invalid, or incohesive text knowledge represen- 
tation structures (Hahn, Romacker, and Schulz 1999). Incomplete knowledge structures 
emerge when references to already established discourse ntities are simply not rec- 
ognized, as in the case of conceptually neutral pronominal anaphora (e.g., er, 'it,' in 
example (ld) co-specifying with 316LT, a particular notebook introduced in exam- 
ple (la)). Invalid knowledge structures emerge when each entity that has a different 
denotation at the text surface is also treated as a formally distinct item at the level 
of text knowledge representation, although they all refer literally to the same entity. 
These false referential descriptions result from unresolved nominal anaphora (e.g., 
Rechner, 'computer' in example (lc) co-specifies with 316LT in (la)). Finally, incohesive 
or artificially fragmented knowledge structures emerge when entities that are linked 
by various conceptual relations at the knowledge level occur in a text such that an 
implicit reference to these relations can be made without he need for explicit signal- 
ing at the text surface level. Corresponding referential relations cannot be established 
at the text representation level, since these inferables remain unsolved (such as the 
relation between Akkus, 'rechargeable battery cell', and 316LT in examples (lb) and 
(la), respectively. 3 The linking conceptual relation between these two discourse le- 
ments has to be inferred in order to make it explicit at the level of text knowledge 
representation structures (for an early statement of this idea in terms of "bridging" 
inferences, ee Clark \[1975\]). 
Note an interesting asymmetric relationship between these three types of anaphora. 
Pronominal anaphora re constrained by morphosyntactic and grammatical greement 
criteria between the pronoun and the antecedent, 4 and no conceptual constraints ap- 
ply. Nominal anaphora re only constrained by number compatibility between the 
anaphoric expression and the antecedent, while at the conceptual level the anaphoric 
expression is related to its antecedent in terms of a conceptual generalization relation. 
Finally, no grammatical constraints apply to inferables, while conceptual constraints 
typically require a nongeneralization relation (e.g., part-whole) to hold between the 
inferable and its antecedent. Of course, contextual conceptual constraints are intro- 
duced for both nominal and pronominal anaphora by sortal requirements set up, e.g., 
by the case roles of the main verb. 
2 We have also considered the role of anaphora within sentences. The d-binding criterion we have 
developed for resolving intrasentential anaphora is based on dependency grammar notions described 
in more detail n Strube and Hahn (1995). 
3 Note that Reserve-Batteriepack in Example (la) and Akkus in (lb) denote conceptually different discourse 
entities that cannot be coindexed. 
4 See Jaeggli (1986) for special cases where this criterion isoverruled. 
312 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Let us illustrate these different ypes of phenomena by considering the following 
text fragment: 
Example 1 
a. Ein Reserve-Batteriepack versorgt den 316LT ca. 2 Minuten mit Strom. 
\[A reserve battery pack\]nom - supplies - the \[316LT\]acc - for 
approximately 2 minutes - with power. 
The 316LT is supplied with power by a reserve battery pack for 
approximately 2 minutes. 
b. Der Status des Akkus wird dem Anwender angezeigt. 
\[The status - \[of the rechargeable battery cell\]gen\]nom -- is -- \[to the user\]aat - 
signalled. 
The status of the rechargeable battery cell is signalled to the user. 
c. Ca. 30 Minuten vor der Entleerung beginnt der Rechner 5 Sekunden zu 
piepen. 
Approximately 30 minutes - before discharge - starts - \[the 
computer\]nmam c - for 5 seconds - to beep. 
Approximately 30 minutes before discharge the computer beeps for 5 
seconds. 
d. 5 Minuten bevor er sich ausschaltet, f/ingt die Low-Battery-LED an zu 
blinken. 
5 minutes - before - \[it\]n m~sc - itself - turns off - begins - \[the 
low-battery-LED\],om - to flash. 
5 minutes before it turns off, the low-battery-LED begins to flash. 
Common to all the varieties of anaphora we discuss is the search for the proper 
antecedent in previous utterances, the correct determination of which is considered to 
be the task of the centering mechanism. The kinds of anaphora we treat can be distin- 
guished, however, in terms of the criteria being evaluated for referentiality. In the case 
of inferables, the missing conceptual link must be inferred in order to establish local 
coherence between the utterances involved. In the surface form of utterance (lb) the in- 
formation that Akkus,  'rechargeable battery cell', links up with 316LT is missing, while, 
due to obvious conceptual constraints, it cannot link up with Reserve-Batteriepack, for 
example. The underlying relation can only be made explicit if conceptual knowledge 
about the domain, viz. the relation PART-OF between the concepts RECHARGEBAT- 
TERYCELL and 316LT, is available (see Hahn, Markert, and Strube \[1996\] for a detailed 
treatment of the resolution of inferables). In the case of nominal anaphors, a conceptual 
specialization relation has to be determined between the specific antecedent and the 
more general anaphoric expression, for example, between 316LT and Rechner, 'com- 
puter', in (la) and (lc), respectively. Finally, the resolution of pronominal anaphors 
need not take conceptual constraints into account at all, but is restricted to gram- 
matical constraints, as illustrated by the masculine gender of Rechner, 'computermasc', 
(co-specifying with 316LTmasc) and er 'it'masc, in (lc) and (ld), respectively. 
Certainly, the types of phenomena we discuss cover only a limited range of 
anaphora. In particular, we leave out the whole range of quantificational studies on 
anaphora (in particular, the "hard" issues related to generalized quantifiers), deictic 
phenomena, etc., which significantly complicate matters. We return to these unresolved 
issues in Section 7. 
313 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 1 
Cf ranking by grammatical roles. 
subject > object(s) > other(s) 
Table 2 
Transition types. 
Cb(U~) = Cb(U~_ 0 Cb(Ui) # Cb(U~_ 0
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) CONTINUE 
Cb(U~) :/: Cp(Ui) RETAIN 
SHIFT 
3. The Centering Model  
The centering model (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1983, 1995) is intended to describe 
the relationship between local coherence and the use of referring expressions. The 
model requires two constructs, a single backward-looking center and a list of forward- 
looking centers, as well as a few rules and constraints that govern the interpretation 
of centers. It is assumed that discourses are composed of constituent segments (Grosz 
and Sidner 1986), each of which consists of a sequence of utterances. Each utterance Ui 
in a given discourse segment DS is assigned a list of forward-looking centers, Cf(DS, 
Ui), and a unique backward-looking center, Cb(DS, Ui). The forward-looking centers 
of Ui depend only on the discourse ntities that constitute the ith utterance; previous 
utterances provide no constraints on Cf(DS, Ui). A ranking imposed on the elements 
of the Cf reflects the assumption that the most highly ranked element of Cf(DS, Ui), 
the preferred center Cp(DS, Ui), will most likely be the Cb(DS, Ui+l). The most highly 
ranked element of Cf(DS, Ui) that is finally realized in Ui+l (i.e., is associated with an 
expression that has a valid interpretation i  the underlying semantic representation) 
is the actual Cb(DS, Ui+I). Since in this paper we will not discuss the topics of global 
coherence and discourse macro segmentation (for recent reatments of these issues, 
see Hahn and Strube \[1997\] and Walker \[1998\]), we assume a priori that any centering 
data structure is assigned an utterance in a given discourse segment and simplify the 
notation of centers to Cb(Ui) and Cf(Ui). 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) state that the items in the Cf list have to be 
ranked according to a number of factors including rammatical role, text position, and 
lexical semantics. As far as their discussion of concrete English discourse phenomena 
is concerned, they nevertheless restrict heir ranking criteria to those solely based on 
grammatical roles, which we repeat in Table 1. 
The centering model, in addition, defines transition relations across pairs of adja- 
cent utterances (Table 2). These transitions differ from each other according to whether 
backward-looking centers of successive utterances are identical or not, and, if they are 
identical, whether they match the most highly ranked element of the current forward- 
looking center list, the Cp(Ui), or not. 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) also define two rules on center movement and 
realization: 
314 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
clauses 
tensed 
embedded same-level 
inaccessible accessible, less salient 
I I 
direct speech non-report complements 
reported speech relative clauses 
Figure 1 
Kameyama's intrasentential centering categorization. 
untensed 
Rule 1 
If any element of CJ:(Ui) is realized by a pronoun in Ui+l, then the Cb(Ui+l) must  be 
realized by a pronoun also. 
Rule 2 
Sequences of continuation are to be preferred over sequences of retaining; and se- 
quences of retaining are to be preferred over sequences of shifting. 
Rule 1 states that no element in an utterance can be realized by a pronoun unless 
the backward-looking center is realized by a pronoun, too. This rule is intended to 
capture one function of the use of pronominal anaphors--a pronoun in the Cb signals 
to the hearer that the speaker is continuing to refer to the same discourse. Rule 2 
should reflect he intuition that a pair of utterances that have the same theme is more 
coherent than another pair of utterances with more than one theme. The theory claims, 
above all, that to the extent hat a discourse adheres to these rules and constraints, 
its local coherence will increase and the inference load placed upon the hearer will 
decrease. 
The basic unit for which the centering data structures are generated is the utter- 
ance U. Since Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) and Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 
(1987) do not give a reasonable definition of utterance, we follow Kameyama's (1998) 
method for dividing a sentence into several center-updating units (Figure 1). Her in- 
trasentential centering mechanisms operate at the clause level. While tensed clauses 
are defined as utterances on their own, untensed clauses are processed with the main 
clause so that the Cf list of the main clause contains the elements of the untensed 
embedded clause. Kameyama further distinguishes, for tensed clauses, between se- 
quential and hierarchical centering. Except for direct and reported speech (embed- 
ded and inaccessible to the superordinate level), nonreport complements, and relative 
clauses (both embedded but accessible to the superordinate level; less salient han the 
higher levels), all other types of tensed clauses build a chain of utterances atthe same 
level. 
3.1 A Centering Algorithm for Anaphora Resolution 
Though the centering model was not originally intended to be used as a blueprint 
for anaphora resolution, 5 several applications tackling this problem have made use of 
5 Aravind Joshi, personal communication. 
315 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 3 
Basic centering algorithm. 
1. If a pronoun in Ui is encountered, test the elements of the Cf(Ui-1) in the given order 
until an element under scrutiny satisfies all the required morphosyntactic, binding, 
and sortal criteria. This element is chosen as the antecedent of the pronoun. 
2. When utterance Ui is completely read, compute Cb(Ui) and generate Cf(Ui); rank the 
elements according to agreed-upon preference criteria (such as the ones from Table 1). 
the model, nevertheless. One interpretation is due to Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 
(1987) who utilize Rule 2 for computing preferences for antecedents of pronouns (see 
Section 3.2). In this section, we will specify a simple algorithm that uses the Cf list 
directly for providing preferences for the antecedents of pronouns. 
The algorithm (which we will refer to as the basic algorithm; Table 3) consists of 
two steps, which are triggered independently. 
We may illustrate this algorithm by referring to the text fragment in example (2): 6 
Example 2 
a. The sentry was not dead. 
b. He was, in fact, showing signs of reviving ...  
c. He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic. 
d. Mike stripped this from him and donned it. 
e. He tied and gagged the man . . . .  
Table 4 gives the centering analysis for this text fragment using the algorithm 
from Table 3. 7 Since (2a) is the first sentence in this fragment, it has no Cb. In (2b) ~ and 
in (2c) the discourse entity SENTRY is referred to by the personal pronoun he. Since 
we assume a Cf ranking by grammatical roles in this example, SENTRY is ranked 
highest in these sentences (the pronoun always appears in subject position). In (2d), 
the discourse entity MIKE is introduced by a proper name in subject position. The 
pronoun him is resolved to the most highly ranked element of Cf(2c), namely SENTRY. 
Since Mike occupies the subject position, it is ranked higher in the Cf(2d) than SENTRY. 
Therefore the pronoun he in (2e) can be resolved correctly to MIKE. 
This example not only illustrates anaphora resolution using the basic algorithm 
from Table 3 but also incorporates the application of Rule 1 of the centering model. 
(2d) contains the pronoun him, which is the Cb of this utterance. In (2e), the Cb is also 
realized as a pronoun while SENTRY is realized by the definite noun phrase the man, 
which is allowed by Rule 1. 
3.2 The BFP Algorithm 
The centering algorithm described by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987, hence- 
forth BFP algorithm) interprets the centering model in a certain way and applies it 
to the resolution of pronouns. The most obvious difference between Grosz, Joshi, and 
6 With slight simplifications taken from the Brown Corpus cn03. 
7 In the subsequent tables illustrating centering data, discourse ntities, anotion at the representational 
level, are denoted by SMALLCAPS and appear on the left side of the colon, while the corresponding 
surface xpressions, at the level of linguistic data, appear on the right side of the colon. 
316 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 4 
Analysis for the text fragment in Example 2 according to 
the basic centering algorithm. 
(2a) The sentry was not dead. 
Cb: - 
Cf: \[SENTRY: sentry\] 
(2b) He was, in fact, showing signs of reviving ... 
Cb: SENTRY: he 
Cf: \[SENTRY: he, SIGNS: signs\] 
(2c) He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic. 
Cb: SENTRY: he 
Cf: \[SENTRY: he, TUNIC: tunic\] 
(2d) Mike stripped this from him and donned it. 
Cb: SENTRY: him 
Cf: \[MIKE: Mike, TUNIC: this, it, SENTRY: him\] 
(2e) He tied and gagged the man . . . .  
Cb: MIKE: he 
Cf: \[MIKE: he, SENTRY: the man\] 
Table 5 
Transition types according to BFP. 
Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui_l) Cb(Ui) # Cb(Ui-1) 
OR Cb(Ui-1) undef. 
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) CONTINUE SMOOTH-SHIFT 
Cb(Ui) ~ Cp(Ui) RETAIN  ROUGH-SHIFT 
Weinstein (1983, 1995) and Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) is that the latter 
use two SHIFT transitions instead of only one: SMOOTH-SHIFT 8 requires the Cb(Ui) to 
equal Cp(Ui), while ROUGH-SHIFT requires inequality (Table 5). Brennan, Friedman, 
and Pollard (1987) also allow the Cb(Ui_I) to remain undefined. 
Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) extend the ordering constraints in Cf in 
the following way: "We rank the items in Cf by obliqueness of grammatical relations 
of the subcategorized functions of the main verb: that is, first the subject, object, and 
object2, followed by other subcategorized functions, and finally, adjuncts." (p. 156). In 
order to apply the centering model to pronoun resolution, they use Rule 2 in making 
predictions for pronominal reference and redefine the rules as follows (quoting Walker, 
Iida, and Cote \[1994\]): 
Rule 1' 
If some element of Cf(Ui-1) is realized as a pronoun in Ui, then so is Cb(Ui). 
8 Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) call these transitions SHIFTING and SHIFTING-1. The more 
figurative names were introduced by Walker, Iida, and Cote (1994). 
317 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 6 
BFP-algorithm. 
1. Generate possible Cb-Cf combinations. In this step, all (plausible and implausible) 
assignments ofpronouns to elements of the previous Cf are computed. 
2. Filter by constraints, e.g., contra-indexing, sortal predicates, centering rules and 
constraints. This way, possible antecedents are filtered out because of morphosyntactic, 
binding, and semantic riteria. Also the realization of noun phrases in the current 
utterance (e.g., realization as a pronoun vs. realization as a definite noun phrase or 
proper name) comes into play. 
3. Rank by transition orderings. This is the step, where the pragmatic onstraints of 
centering apply. Basically, CONTINUE transitions are preferred, i.e., the antecedent of a 
pronoun is more likely to turn up as the Cb of the previous utterance than any other 
element of the Cf. In certain configurations, the algorithm includes a preference for 
parallelism in linguistic onstructions. 
Rule 2 ~ 
Transition states are ordered. CONTINUE is preferred to RETAIN is preferred to SMOOTH- 
SHIFT is preferred to ROUGH-SHIFT. 
Their algorithm (Table 6) consists of three basic steps (as described by Walker, Iida, 
and Cote \[1994\]). 9 
In order to illustrate this algorithm, we use example (2) from above and supply the 
corresponding Cb/Cf data in Table 7. Let us focus on the interpretation of utterance 
(2e) where the centering data diverges when one compares the basic and the BFP 
algorithms. After step 2 (filtering), the algorithm has produced two readings, which 
are rated by the corresponding transitions in step 3. Since SMOOTH-SHIFT is preferred 
over ROUGH-SHIFT, the pronoun he is resolved to MIKE, the highest-ranked element of 
Cf(2d). Also, Rule 1 would be violated in the rejected reading. 
4. Principles of Functional Centering 
The crucial point underlying functional centering is to relate the ranking of the forward- 
looking centers and the information structure of the corresponding utterances. Hence, 
a proper correspondence relation between the basic centering data structures and the 
relevant functional notions has to be established and formally rephrased in terms 
of the centering model. In this section, we first discuss two studies in which the 
information structure of utterances is already integrated into the centering model 
(Rambow 1993; Hoffman 1996, 1998). Using these proposals as a point of depar- 
ture, we shall develop our own proposal--functional centering (Strube and Hahn 
1996). 
4.1 Integrating Information Structure and Centering 
As far as the centering model is concerned, the first account involving information 
structure criteria was given by Kameyama (1986) and further refined by Walker, 
Iida, and Cote (1994) in their study on the use of zero pronouns and topic mark- 
9 Walker, Iida, and Cote (1994) note that it is possible to improve the computational efficiency of the 
algorithm by interleaving generating, filtering, and ranking steps; cf. the version of the algorithm 
described by Walker (1998). 
318 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 7 
Centering analysis for the text fragment in example (2) according to the 
BFP algorithm. 
(2a) The sentry was not dead. 
Cb: - 
Cf: \[SENTRY: sentry\] 
(2b) He was, in fact, showing signs of reviving ... 
Cb: SENTRY: he CONTINUE 
Cf: \[SENTRY: he, SIGNS: signs\] 
(2c) He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic. 
Cb: SENTRY: he CONTINUE 
Cf: \[SENTRY: he, TUNIC: tunic\] 
(2d) Mike stripped this from him and donned it. 
Cb: SENTRY: him RETAIN 
Cf: \[MIKE: Mike, TUNIC: this, it, SENTRY: him\] 
(2e) He tied and gagged the man . . . .  
Cb: MIKE: he SMOOTH-SHIFT 
Cf: \[MIKE: he, SENTRY: the man\] 
Cb: . . . . . .  ?vJ.Jr,.r~. th6 iii~iz KGUGH-SHIFT 
LOm,~N J - l~t, l .  It?~ l &Vl lh f J .  ~ll.G l l t l ,? l l , \ ]  
ers in Japanese. This led them to augment the grammatical ranking conditions for the 
forward-looking centers by additional functional notions. 
A deeper consideration of information structure principles and their relation to 
the centering model has been proposed in two studies concerned with the analysis of 
German and Turkish discourse. Rambow (1993) was the first to apply the centering 
methodology to German, aiming at the description of information structure aspects 
underlying scrambling and topicalization. As a side effect, he used centering to define 
the utterance's theme and rheme in the sense of the functional sentence perspective 
(FSP) (Firbas 1974). Viewed from this perspective, the theme/rheme-hierarchy of utter- 
ance Ui is determined by the Cf(Ui_l). Elements of Ui that are contained in Cf(Ui-1) are 
less rhematic than those not contained in Cf(Ui-1). He then concludes that the Cb(Ui) 
must be the theme of the current utterance. Rambow does not exploit he information 
structure of utterances to determine the Cf ranking but formulates it on the basis of 
linear textual precedence among the relevant discourse ntities. 
In order to analyze Turkish texts, Hoffman (1996, 1998) distinguishes between 
the information structure of utterances and centering, since both constructs are as- 
signed different functions for text understanding. A hearer exploits the information 
structure of an utterance to update his discourse model, and he applies the center- 
ing constraints in order to connect he current utterance to the previous discourse. 
Hoffman describes the information structure of an utterance in terms of topic (theme) 
and comment (rheme). The comment is split again into focus and (back)ground (see 
also Vallduvi \[1990\] and Vallduvf and Engdahl \[1996\]). Based on previous work about 
Turkish, Hoffman argues that, in this language, the sentence-initial position corre- 
sponds to the topic, the position that immediately precedes the verb yields the focus, 
and the remainder of the sentence is to be considered the (back)ground. Further- 
more, Hoffman relates this notion of information structure of utterances to center- 
ing, claiming that the topic corresponds to the Cb in most cases--with the excep- 
tion of segment-initial utterances, which do not have a Cb. Hoffman does not say 
anything about the relation between information structure and the ranking of the 
319 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Cf list. In her approach, this ranking is achieved by thematic roles (see also Turan 
\[1998\]). 
Both Rambow (1983) as well as Hoffman (1996, 1998) argue for a correlation be- 
tween the information structure of utterances and centering. Both of them find a cor- 
respondence between the Cb and the theme or the topic of an utterance. They refrain, 
however, from establishing a strong link between the information structure and center- 
ing as we suggest in our model, one that mirrors the influence of information structure 
in the way the forward-looking centers are actually ranked. 
4.2 Functional Centering 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) admit that several factors may have an influence 
on the ranking of the Cf but limit their exposition to the exploitation of grammatical 
roles only. We diverge from this proposal and claim that, at least for languages with 
relatively free word order (such as German), the functional information structure of 
the utterance is crucial for the ranking of discourse ntities in the Cf list. Originally, 
in Strube and Hahn (1996), we defined the Cf ranking criteria in terms of context- 
boundedness. In this paper, we redefine the functional Cf ranking criteria by making 
reference to Prince's work on the assumed familiarity of discourse entities (Prince 
1981) and information status (Prince 1992). The term context-bound in Strube and 
Hahn (1996) corresponds to the term evoked used by Prince. I? 
We briefly list the major claims of our approach to centering. In the following 
sections, we elaborate on these claims, in particular the ranking of the forward-looking 
centers. 
? The elements of the Cf list are ordered according to their information 
status. Hearer-old iscourse ntities are ranked higher than hearer-new 
discourse ntities. The order of the elements of the Cf list for Ui provides 
the preference for the interpretation of anaphoric expressions in Ui+l. 
? The first element of the Cf(Ui), the preferred center, Cp(Ui), is the 
discourse ntity the utterance Ui is "about." In other words, the Cp is the 
center of attention. 
In contrast to the BFP algorithm, the model of functional centering requires neither 
a backward-looking center, nor transitions, nor transition ranking criteria for anaphora 
resolution. For text interpretation, at least, functional centering also makes no com- 
mitments to further constraints and rules. 
4.3 Cf Ranking Criteria in Functional Centering 
In this section, we introduce the functional Cf ranking criteria. We first describe a basic 
version, which is valid for a wide range of text genres in which pronominal reference 
is the predominant text phenomenon. This is the type of discourse to which centering 
was mainly applied in previous approaches (see, for example, Walker's \[1989\] or Di 
Eugenio's \[1998\] test sets). We then describe the extended version of the functional 
Cf ranking constraints. The two versions differ with respect o the incorporation of (a 
subset of) inferables in the second version and, hence, with respect o the requirements 
10 In Strube and Hahn (1996), we assumed that the information status of a discourse ntity has the main 
impact on its salience. In particular, evoked iscourse ntities were ranked higher in the Cf list than 
brand-new discourse ntities (using Prince's terminology). We also restricted the category of the most 
salient discourse ntities to evoked (i.e., context-bound) discourse ntities. In this article, we extend this 
category to hearer-old discourse ntities, which includes, besides evoked iscourse ntities, unused 
ones (again, referring to Prince's terminology). 
320 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
--< 
NEW 
Figure 2 
Information status and familiarity (basic version). 
relating to the availability of world knowledge, which is needed to properly account 
for inferables. The extended version assumes a detailed treatment of a particular sub- 
set of inferables, so-called functional anaphora (in Hahn, Markert, and Strube \[1996\], 
functional anaphora are referred to as textual ellipses). We claim that the extended 
version of ranking constraints is necessary to analyze texts from certain genres, e.g., 
texts from technical or medical domains. In these areas, pronouns are used rather in- 
frequently, while functional anaphors are the major text phenomena to achieve local 
coherence. 
4.3.1 Basic Cf Ranking. Usually, the Cf ranking is represented by an ordering relation 
on a single set of elements, e.g., grammatical relations (as in Table 1). We use a layered 
representation for our criteria. For the basic Cf ranking criteria, we distinguish between 
two different sets of expressions, hearer-old iscourse ntities in Ui (OLD) and hearer- 
new discourse ntities in Ui (NEW). These sets can be further split into the elements 
of Prince's (1981, 245) familiarity scale. The set of hearer-old iscourse ntities (OLD) 
consists of evoked (E) and unused (U) discourse ntities, while the set of hearer-new 
discourse ntities (NEW) consists of brand-new (BN) discourse ntities. For the basic 
Cf ranking criteria, it is sufficient o assign inferable (I), containing inferable (IC), 
and anchored brand-new (BN A) discourse ntities to the set of hearer-new discourse 
entities (NEW). n See Figure 2 for an illustration of Prince's familiarity scale and its 
relation to the two sets. Note that the elements of each set are indistinguishable with 
respect o their information status. Evoked and unused discourse ntities, for example, 
have the same information status because they belong to the set of hearer-old iscourse 
entities. So the basic Cf ranking in Figure 2 boils down to the preference of OLD 
discourse ntities over NEW ones. 
For an operationalization f Prince's terms, we state that evoked discourse en- 
tities are simply cospecifying (resolved anaphoric) expressions, i.e., pronominal and 
nominal anaphora, relative pronouns, previously mentioned proper names, etc. Un- 
used discourse ntities are proper names and titles. In texts, brand-new proper names 
are usually accompanied by a relative clause or an appositive that relates them to 
the hearer's knowledge. The corresponding discourse ntity is evoked only after this 
elaboration. Whenever these linguistic devices are missing, we treat proper names as 
unused. 12 In the following, we give some examples of evoked, unused, and brand-new 
11 Quoting Prince (1992, 305): "Inferrables are like Hearer-new (and, therefore, Discourse-new) entities in 
that the hearer is not expected to already have in his/her head the entity in question." 
12 For examples of brand-new proper names and how they are introduced, see, for example, the 
beginning of articles in the "obituaries" ection of the New York Times. 
321 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
discourse ntities, though in naturally occurring texts these phenomena rarely show 
up unadulterated. 13 The remaining categories will be explained subsequently. 
Example 3 
a. He lived his final nine years in one of \[two rent-subsidized buildings\]BN 
constructed especially for elderly survivors. 
b. When the \[buildings\]E opened - one in 1964, one in 1970 - there were 
waiting lists. 
c. Once, \[they\]E held 333 survivors. 
In example (3a), buildings is introduced as a discourse-new discourse ntity, which 
is brand-new (BN). In (3b), the definite NP the buildings cospecifies the discourse ntity 
from (3a). Hence, buildings in (3b) is evoked (E), just as is they in (3c). 
Certain proper names are assumed to be known by any hearer. Therefore, these 
proper names need no further explanation. Winnie Madikizela Mandela in example (4) 
is unused (U), i.e., it is discourse-new but hearer-old. Other proper names have to be 
introduced because they are discourse-new and hearer-new. In example (5), Marianne 
Kador is introduced by means of a lengthy appositive that relates the brand-new proper 
name to the knowledge of the hearer. In particular, the noun phrase the apartment 
buildings is discourse-old (see example (3)). 
Example 4 
\[A defiant Winnie Madikizela Mandela\]u testified for more than 10 hours 
today, dismissing all evidence that .. .  
Example 5 
"He was an undervalued person all his life," said Marianne Kador, a 
social worker for Selfhelp Community Services, which operates the 
apartment buildings in Queens. 
In Table 8, we define various sets, which are used for the specification of the Cf 
ranking criteria in Table 9. We distinguish between two different sets of discourse 
entities, hearer-old iscourse ntities (OLD) and hearer-new discourse ntities (NEW). 
For any two discourse entities (x, posx) and (y, posy), with x and y denoting the 
linguistic surface expression of those entities as they occur in the discourse, and pOSx 
and posy indicating their respective text position, pOSx ~ posy, in Table 9 we define the 
basic ordering constraints on elements in the forward-looking centers Cf(Ui). For any 
utterance Ui, the ordering of discourse ntities in the Cf(Ui) that can be derived from 
the above definitions and the ordering constraints (1) to (3) are denoted by the relation 
II ..~ H. 
Ordering constraint (1) characterizes the basic relation for the overall ranking of the 
elements in the Cf. Accordingly, any hearer-old expression in utterance Ui is given the 
highest preference as a potential antecedent for an anaphoric expression in Ui+l. Any 
13 Examples (3) and (5)-(8) are from the New York Times, Dec. 11, 1997. ("Remembering one who 
remembered. Eugen Zuckermann, survivor, kept the ghosts of the holocaust alive," by Barry Bearak.) 
Example (4) is from the New York Times, Dec. 1, 1997. ("Winnie Mandela is defiant, calling accusations 
'lunacy'," by Suzanne Daley.) We split complex sentences into the units specified by Kameyama (1998) 
following the categorization in Figure 1. 
322 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 8 
Sets of discourse ntities for the basic Cf ranking. 
DE : the set of discourse ntities in Ui 
E : the set of evoked discourse ntities in Ui 
U : the set of unused discourse ntities in Ui 
OLD := E U U 
NEW := DE - OLD 
Table 9 
Basic functional ranking constraints on the Cf list. 
1. If x E OLD and y E NEW, then x-~ y. 
2. If x, y E OLD or x, y E NEW, then x -~ y, if posx < posy 
3. If (1) or (2) do not apply, then x and y are unordered with respect o the Cf-ranking. 
hearer-new expression is ranked below hearer-old expressions. Ordering constraint (2) 
captures the ordering for the sets OLD or NEW when they contain elements of the 
same type. In this case, the elements of each set are ranked according to their text 
position. 
4.3.2 Extended Cf Ranking. While the basic Cf ranking criteria are sufficient for texts 
with a high proport ion of pronouns and nominal anaphora (e.g., l iterary texts, news- 
paper articles about persons), it is necessary to refine the ranking criteria in order to 
deal with expository texts, e.g., test reports, discharge summaries. These texts usually 
contain few pronouns and are characterized by a large number  of inferrables, which 
are often the major glue in achieving local coherence. In order to accommodate the 
centering model to texts from these genres, we distinguish a third set of expressions; 
mediated discourse entities in Ui (MED). On Prince's (1981) familiarity scale, the set 
of hearer-old discourse entities (OLD) remains the same as before, i.e., it consists of 
evoked (E) and unused (U) discourse entities, while the set of hearer-new discourse 
entities (NEW) now consists only of brand-new (BN) discourse entities. Inferable (I), 
containing inferable (IC), and anchored brand-new (BN A) discourse entities, which 
make up the set of mediated iscourse ntities, have a status between hearer-old and 
hearer-new discourse ntities. 14 See Figure 3 for Prince's familiarity scale and its rela- 
tion to the three sets. Again, the elements of this set are indistinguishable with respect 
to their information status-- for  instance, inferable and anchored brand-new discourse 
entities have the same information status because they belong to the set of mediated 
discourse entities. Hence, the extended Cf ranking, depicted in Figure 3, will prefer 
OLD discourse entities over MEDiated ones, and MEDiated ones will be preferred 
over NEW ones. 
We assume that the difference between containing inferables and anchored brand- 
new discourse entities is negligible. (It was not well defined in Prince \[1981\] and in 
14 Again, quoting Prince (1992, 305-306): "Inferrables are thus like Hearer-old entities in that they rely on 
certain assumptions about what the hearer does know, e.g. that buildings typically have doors \[...\], 
and they are like Discourse-old entities in that they rely on there being already in the discourse-model 
some entity to trigger the inference \[...\]." 
323 
Computational Linguistics 
Figure 3 
Information status and familiarity (refined version). 
Volume 25, Number 3 
Prince \[1992\] she abandoned the second term.) Therefore, we conflate them into the 
category of anchored brand-new discourse ntities. These discourse ntities require 
that the anchor modifies a brand-new head and that the anchor is either an evoked 
or an unused discourse ntity. In the following, we give examples of inferrables and 
anchored brand-new discourse ntities. 
Example 6 
a. By his teen-age years, the distorted mentality of anti-Semitism was in full 
warp. 
b. \[Thefamily\]i was expelled to Hungary in 1939 ... 
In example 6 the relation between the definite NP the family and the context has 
to be inferred, therefore the family belongs to the category inferable (I). It is marked 
by definiteness but it is not anaphoric since there is no anaphoric antecedent. Though 
inferables are often marked by definiteness, it is possible that they are indefinite, like 
an uncle in example (7b). 
Example 7 
a. He shared this bounty with his father 
b. but \[a sickly uncle\]1 was left to remain hungry. 
Anchored brand-new (BN A) discourse ntities as in example (8) are heads of 
phrases whose modifiers relate (anchor) them to the context. 
Example 8 
a. He had already lost too many companions. 
b. \[\[HiS\]E fianc~e\]BNA had died in a car wreck. 
With respect o inferables, there exist only a few computational treatments, all 
of which are limited in scope. We here restrict inferables to the particular subset de- 
fined by Hahn, Markert, and Strube (1996), which we call functional anaphora (FA). 
In the following, we will limit our discussion of inferables to those which figure as 
functional anaphors. In Table 10, we define the sets needed for the specification of 
the extended Cf ranking criteria in Table 11. We distinguish between three different 
sets of discourse ntities; hearer-old iscourse ntities (OLD), mediated iscourse n- 
tities (MED), and hearer-new discourse ntities (NEW). Note that the antecedent of a 
functional anaphor (the inferred discourse ntity) is included in the set of hearer-old 
discourse ntities. 
324 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 10 
Sets of discourse ntities for the extended Cf ranking. 
DE : the set of discourse ntities in Ui 
E 
U 
FA ante 
FA 
BN A : 
the set of evoked discourse ntities in Ui 
the set of unused discourse ntities in Ui 
the set of antecedents of functional anaphors in Ui 
the set of functional anaphors in Ui 
the set of anchored brand-new discourse ntities in Ui 
OLD := E U U U FA ante 
MED := FA U BN A 
NEW := DE - (MED U OLD) 
Table 11 
Extended functional ranking constraints on the Cf list. 
1. If x E OLD and y E MED, then x-< y. 
If x C OLD and y C NEW, then x -< y. 
If x E MED and y E NEW, then x -4 y. 
2. If x, y C OLD, or x, y C MED, or x, y C NEW, then x -< y, if pOSx < posy 
3. If (1) or (2) do not apply, then x and y are unordered with respect to the Cf-ranking. 
For any two discourse entities (x, pOSx) and (y, po@), with x and y denoting the 
linguistic surface expression of those entities as they occur in the discourse, and pOSx 
and posy indicating their respective text position, pOSx =fi posy, in Table 11 we define the 
extended functional ordering constraints on elements in the forward-looking centers 
Cf(Ui). In the following, for any utterance Ui, the ordering of discourse entities in the 
Cf(Ui) that can be derived from the above definitions and the ordering constraints (1) 
to (3) are denoted by the relation "-<". 
Ordering constraint (1) characterizes the basic relation for the overall ranking 
of the elements in the Cf. Accordingly, any hearer-old expression in utterance Ui is 
given the highest preference as a potential antecedent for an anaphoric or functional 
anaphoric expression in Ui+l. Any mediated expression is ranked just below hearer- 
old expressions. Any hearer-new expression is ranked lowest. Ordering constraint (2) 
fixes the ordering when the sets OLD, MED, or NEW contain elements of the same 
type. In these cases, the elements of each set are ranked according to their text position. 
In Table 12 we show the analysis of text fragment (2) using the basic algorithm see 
Table 3) with the basic functional Cf ranking constraints (see Table 9). The fragment 
starts with the evoked discourse entity SENTRY in (2a) (the definiteness of the NP 
indicates that it was already mentioned earlier in the text). The pronouns he in (2b) 
and (2c) are evoked, while signs and tunic are brand-new. We assume Mike in (2d) to 
be evoked, too (MIKE is the main character of that story). MIKE is the leftmost evoked 
discourse entity in (2d), hence ranked highest in the Cf(2d) and the most preferred 
antecedent for the pronoun he in (2e). 
5. Eva luat ion  
In this section, we discuss two evaluation experiments on naturally occurring data. 
We first compare the success rate of the functional centering algorithm with that of 
the BFP algorithm. This evaluation uses the basic Cf ranking constraints from Table 9. 
325 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 12 
Analysis for text fragment in example (2) according to the 
model of functional centering. 
(2a) 
(2b) 
(2c) 
(2d) 
(2e) 
The sentry was not dead. 
Cb: - 
Cf: \[SENTtWE: sentry\] 
He was, in fact, showing signs of reviving ... 
Cb: SENTRYE: he 
Cf: \[SENTRYE: he, SIGNS:BN signs\] 
He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic. 
Cb: SENTRYE: he 
Cf: \[SENTRYE: he, TUNICBN: tunic\] 
Mike stripped this from him and donned it. 
Cb: SENTRYE: him 
Cf: \[MIKEE: Mike, TUNICE: this, it, SENTRYE: him\] 
He tied and gagged the man,. . .  
Cb: MIKEE: he 
Cf: \[MIKEE: he, SENTRY:E the man\] 
We then introduce a new cost-based evaluat ion method,  which we use for compar ing  
the extended Cf rank ing constraints f rom Table 11 with several other approaches.  
5.1 Success  Rate Eva luat ion  
5.1.1 Data. In order to compare  the functional centering a lgor i thm (i.e., the basic al- 
gor i thm from Table 3 operat ing with the basic functional Cf rank ing constraints f rom 
Table 9) with the BFP algorithm, we analyzed a sample of English and German texts. 
The test set (Table 13) consisted of the beginnings of three short stories by  Ernest 
Hemingway,  15 three articles f rom the New York Times (NYT), 16 the first three chapters of 
a novel  by  Uwe JohnsonS the first two chapters of a short story by Heiner Mfiller, TM 
and seven articles f rom the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ). 19 
15 Hemingway, Ernest. 1987. The Complete Short Stories of Ernest Hemingway. Scribner, New York. ("An 
African story," pages 545-554; "Soldier's home," pages 111-116; "Up in Michigan," pages 59~62.) 
16 (i) New York Times, Dec. 7, 1997. ("Shot in head, suspect goes free, then to college," by Jane Fritsch, 
pages A45-48.) (ii) New York Times, Dec. 1, 1997. ("Winnie Mandela is defiant, calling accusations 
'lunacy'," by Suzanne Daley, pages A1-12.) (iii) New York Times, Dec. 11, 1997. ("Remembering one who 
remembered. Eugen Zuckermann, survivor, kept the ghosts of the holocaust alive," by Barry Bearak, 
pages B1-8.) 
17 Johnson, Uwe. 1965. Zwei Ansichten. Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main. 
18 Miiller, Heiner. 1974. Geschichten aus der Produktion 2. Rotbuch Verlag, Berlin. ("Liebesgeschichte," 
pages 57-62.) 
19 FAZ, Aug. 28, 1997. ("Die gute Nachricht ist: Wir k6nnen gewirmen. New Yorks frthherer 
Polizeiprasident in Berlin," by Konrad Schuller.) (ii) FAZ, Nov. 3, 1997. ("Biirgermeister Giuliani steht 
vor einer fast sicheren Wiederwahl," by Verena Leucken.) (iii) FAZ, Sept. 9, 1997. ("Wir haben viel 
voneinander lernen kiSnnen," by Claus Peter Mfiller.) (iv) FAZ, Sept. 10, 1997. ("Die Mutter der 
Meinungsforschung im Streit. Ist Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann eine unverbesserliche D utsche?" by Kurt 
Reumann.) (v) FAZ, Aug. 4, 1997. ("Der zarte Riese, Geisterhaftes Klanglicht und ein Zug ins Weite: 
Zum Tode von Swjatoslaw Richter," by Gerhard R. Koch.) (vi) FAZ, Sept. 2, 1997. ("Glaubwtirdiger als 
der K6ixigssohn. Der Oppositionspolitiker Sam Rainsy k/trnpft ffir das bessere Kambodscha," by Erhard 
Haubold.) (vii) FAZ, Sept. 3, 1997. ("Bald das Ende des Vorsitzenden Wagner? Wechsel an der Spitze 
der CDU-Fraktion," by Peter Jochen Winters.) 
326 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 13 
Test set for success rate evaluation. 
Hemingway NYT English Writers FAZ German 
3rd pers. & poss. pron. 274 302 576 
sentences 153 233 386 
words 2785 4546 7331 
299 320 619 
186 394 580 
3195 8005 11200 
5.1.2 Method. The evaluation was carried out manually by the authors, supported 
by a small-scale discourse annotation tool. We used the following guidelines for our 
evaluation: We did not assume any world knowledge as part of the anaphora resolu- 
tion process. Only agreement criteria and sortal constraints were applied. We did not 
account for false positives and error chains, but marked the latter (see Walker 1989). 
We use Kameyama's (1998) specifications for dealing with complex sentences (for 
a description, see Section 3). Following Walker (1989), a discourse segment is defined 
as a paragraph unless its first sentence has a pronoun in subject position or a pronoun 
whose syntactic features do not match the syntactic features of any of the preceding 
sentence-internal oun phrases. Also, at the beginning of a segment, anaphora resolu- 
tion is preferentially performed within the same utterance. According to the preference 
for intersentential c ndidates in the original centering model, we defined the following 
anaphora resolution strategy (which is not the best solution for the anaphora resolution 
problem either, but sufficient for the purposes of the evaluation): 
1. 
. 
3. 
Test elements of Cf(Ui_l)--according to the BFP algorithm, or the 
functional centering (henceforth abbreviated as FunC) algorithm. 
Test elements of Ui, which precede the pronoun, left-to-right. 
Test elements of Cf(Ui_2) , Cf(Ui_3) . . . .  in  the given order. 
Since clauses are short in general, step 2 of the algorithm only rarely applies. 
5.1.3 Results. The results of our evaluation are given in Table 14. The first row gives 
the number of third person pronouns and possessive pronouns in the data. The up- 
per part of the table shows the results for the BFP algorithm, the lower part those 
for the FunC algorithm. Overall, the data are consistently in favor of the FuncC al- 
gorithm, though no significance judgments can be made (the data were not drawn 
as a random sample). The overall error rate of each approach is given in the rows 
labeled as "wrong". We also tried to determine the major sources of errors (see the 
nonbold sections in Table 14), and were able to distinguish three different types. One 
class of errors relates to the algorithm's strategy. In the case of the BFP algorithm, the 
corresponding row also contains the number of ambiguous cases generated by this 
algorithm (we counted ambiguities as errors, since FunC produced only one read- 
ing in these cases). A second class of errors results from error chains, mainly caused 
by the strategy of each approach or by ambiguities in the BFP algorithm. A third 
error class is caused by the intersentential specifications, e.g., the correct antecedent 
is not accessible because it is realized in an embedded clause (reported speech). Fi- 
nally, other errors were mainly caused by split antecedents (plural pronouns referring 
to a couple of antecedents in singular), reference to events (or propositions), and 
cataphora. 
327 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 14 
Evaluation results for success rates. 
Hemingway NYT English Writers FAZ German 
3rd pers. & poss. pron. 274 302 576 299 320 619 
:orrect 193 245 438 (76%) 236 227 463 74,8% 
wrong 81 57 138 (24%) 63 93 156 (25,2%) 
wrong (strategy) 20 8 28 10 27 37 
wrong (error chains) 29 15 44 22 28 50 
wrong (intersentential) 17 27 44 18 24 42 
wrong (others) 15 7 22 13 14 27 
:orrect 214 252 466 (80,9%) 248 270 518 (83,7%) 
wrong 60 50 110 (19,1%) 51 50 101 (16,3%) 
wrong (strategy) 
wrong (error chains) 
wrong (intersentential) 
wrong (others) 
8 3 
18 13 
18 27 
16 7 
11 
31 
45 
23 
3 3 
18 6 
17 27 
13 14 
6 
24 
44 
27 
5.1.4 Interpretat ion. While the rate of errors caused by the specifications for complex 
sentences and by other reasons is almost identical (the small difference can be ex- 
plained by false positives), there is a remarkable difference between the algorithms 
with respect o strategic errors and error chains. Strategic errors occur whenever the 
preference given by the algorithm under consideration leads to an error. Most of the 
strategic errors implied by the FunC algorithm also show up as errors for the BFP 
algorithm. We interpret his finding as an indication that these errors are caused by 
a lack of semantic or world knowledge. The remaining errors of the BFP algorithm 
are caused by the strictly local definition of its criteria and because the BFP algorithm 
cannot deal with some particular configurations leading to ambiguities. The FunC al- 
gorithm has fewer error chains not only because it yields fewer strategic errors, but 
also because it is more robust with respect o real texts. An utterance Ui, for instance, 
which intervenes between Ui-1 and Ui+l without any relation to Ui-1 does not affect 
the preference decisions in Ui+2 for FunC, although it does affect them for the BFP 
algorithm, since the latter cannot assign the Cb(Ui+l). Also, error chains are sometimes 
shorter in the FunC analyses. 
Example (9) illustrates how the local restrictions as defined by the original cen- 
tering model and the BFP algorithm result in errors and lead to rather lengthy error 
chains (see Table 15 for the corresponding centering analysis). The discourse entity 
SENTENCE, which is cospecified by the pronoun er, 'it'masc, in (9b), is the Cb(9b). There- 
fore, it is the most preferred antecedent for the pronoun ihn in (9c), which causes a 
strategic error. This error, in turn, is the reason for a consequent error in (9d), because 
there are no semantic ues that enforce the correct interpretation, i.e., the coreferen- 
tiality between ihn and Giuliani. The possible interruption of the error chain, indicated 
by the alternative interpretation i (9c), is ruled out, however, by the preference for 
RETAIN over ROUGH-SHIFT transitions (cf. Rule 2'). 
Example  9 
a. Der Satz, mit dem Ruth Messinger eine der Fernsehdebatten im 
Bfirgermeisterwahlkampf in New York er6ffnete, wird der einzige sein, 
der von ihr in Erinnerung bleibt. 
328 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 15 
BFP results for example (9). 
(9a) Cb: - 
Cf: \[SENTENCE: Satz, dem, der, der, RUTH: Ruth Messinger, ihr, 
DEBATES: Fernsehdebatten, RACE: Biirgermeisterwahlkampf, 
NEW YORK: New York, RECOLLECTION: Erinnerung\] 
(9b) Cb: SENTENCE: er CONTINUE 
Cf: \[SENTENCE: er, VICTORY: Wahlsieg, GIULIANI: Rudolph Giuliani\] 
(9c) Cb: SENTENCE: ihn RETAIN 
Cf: \[NEWSPAPERS: Zeitungen, SENTENCE: ihn, NEW YORK: Stadt\] 
Cb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  : ~ u t ~ .  ~,~,~ ~OUGH-SH/FT  Cf r~T  . . . . . . . . . . .  -7_ :~ . . . . . . . .  ,-~ . . . . . . . . .  :1.._ ~,T . . . .  ~r  . . . .  O , -  JL1 
(9d) Cb: RETAIN 
Cf: 
SENTENCE:  ihm 
\[UNIONS: Gewerkschaften, SENTENCE:  ihm\] 
\[The sentence\]smuabSjCect, with which Ruth Messinger - one of the TV debates 
- opened, - will - the only one - be, - which - of her - in memory  -
remains. 
The sentence, with which Ruth Messinger opened one of the TV debates, 
will be the only one, which will be recollected of her. 
b. Am nahezu sicheren Wahlsieg des Amtsinhabers Rudolph Giuliani am 
Dienstag wird er nichts ~indern. 
\[Of the almost certain - victory in the election - of \[the officeholder 
Rudolph Giuliani\]masc\]a'd~SCct - on Tuesday - will - \[it\]smu~Cct - nothing -
alter. 
Of the officeholder Rudolph Giuliani's almost certain victory in the 
election on Tuesday, it will alter nothing. 
c. Alle Zeitungen der Stadt unterstiitzen ihn. 
\[All - newspapers of the city\]subject - support - \[him\]dmiraeScCt_object . 
He is supported by all newspapers of the city. 
d. Die Gewerkschaften stehen hinter ihm. 
\[The un ions \ ]sub jec t  - stand behind - \[him\]imnadSiCrect_object . 
He is backed up by the unions. 
The nonlocal definition of hearer-old discourse entities enables the FunC algo- 
r i thm to compute the correct antecedent for the pronoun ihn in (9c) preventing it from 
running into an error chain (see Table 16 for the functional centering data). GIULIANI, 
who was mentioned earlier in the text, is the leftmost evoked discourse entity in (9b) 
and therefore the most preferred antecedent for the pronoun in (9c), though there is a 
pronoun of the same gender in (9b). 
We encountered problems with Kameyama's  (1998) specifications for complex sen- 
tences. The differences between clauses that are accessible from a higher syntactic level 
and clauses that are not could not be verified by our analyses. Also, her approach is 
sometimes too coarse-grained (i.e., there are still antecedents within one utterance), 
and sometimes too fine-grained. 2?
20 An  a l te rnat ive  to  Kameyama's  in t rasentent ia l  center ing ,  wh ich  overcomes  these  prob lems and  leads  to  
329 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Tabl, 
Fun( 
(9a) 
(9b) 
(9c) 
(9d) 
16 
results for example (9). 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
\[SENTENCEE: Satz, dem, der, der, RUTHE: Ruth Messinger, 
RACEE: B~irgermeisterwahlkampf, NEW YORKE: New York, 
DEBATESBNA : Fernsehdebatten, RECOLLECTIONBN: Erinnerung\] 
\[GIULIANIE: Rudolph Giuliani, SENTENCEE: er, VICTORYBNA: Wahlsieg\] 
\[NEW YORKE: Stadt, GIULIANIE: ihn, NEWSPAPERSBNA: Zeitungen\] 
\[GIuLIANIE: ihm, UNIONSBN: Gewerkschaften\] 
Table 17 
Test set for cost-based evaluation. 
IT Spiegel  Mtiller E 
(pro)nominal naphors 308 102 153 563 
functional anaphors 294 25 20 339 
sentences 451 82 87 620 
words 5542 1468 867 7877 
5.2 Cost-based Evaluation 
5.2.1 Data. The test set for our second evaluation experiment consisted of three dif- 
ferent ext genres: 15 product reviews from the information technology (IT) domain, 
one article from the German news magazine Der Spiegel, and the first two chapters 
of a short story by the German writer Heiner Mtillerf I Table 17 summarizes the total 
number of (pro)nominal naphors, functional anaphors, utterances and words in the 
test set. 
5.2.2 Method (Distr ibution of Transition Types). Given these sample texts, we com- 
pared three approaches to the ranking of the Cf: a model whose ordering principles 
are based on grammatical role indicators only (see Table 1); an "intermediate" model, 
which can be considered a "naive" approach to free-word-order languages; and the 
functional model based on the information structure constraints stated in Table 11. For 
reasons discussed below, slightly modified versions of the naive and the grammatical 
approaches will also be considered. They are characterized bythe additional constraint 
that antecedents of functional anaphors are ranked higher than the functional anaphors 
themselves. As in Section 5.1, the evaluation was carried out manually by the authors. 
Since most of the anaphors in these texts are nominal anaphors, the resolution of 
which is much more restricted than that of pronominal anaphors, the success rate for 
the whole anaphora resolution process is not distinctive nough for a proper evalu- 
ation of the functional constraints. The reason for this lies in the fact that nominal 
anaphors are far more constrained by conceptual criteria than pronominal ones. Thus, 
the chance of properly resolving a nominal anaphor, even when ranked at a lower 
position in the center lists, is greater than for pronominal anaphors. By shifting our 
evaluation criteria way from resolution success data to structural conditions reflecting 
the proper ordering of center lists (in particular, we focus on the most highly ranked 
item of the forward-looking centers), these criteria are intended to compensate for the 
a significant improvement i  the results, is proposed in Strube (1998). 
21 Mtiller, Heiner. 1974. Geschichten aus der Produktion 2. Rotbuch Verlag, Berlin. ("Liebesgeschichte," 
pages 57~2.) 
330 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 18 
Quantitative distribution of centering transitions. 
Naive & Grammatical & Transition Types Naive FA ante > FA Grammatical FA ante > FA FunC 
IT CONTINUE 49 167 102 197 309 
RETAIN 269 158 226 131 25 
SMOOTH-SHIFT 32 41 24 35 51 
ROUGH-SHIFT 39 23 37 26 4 
Spiegel CONTINUE 17 28 37 43 50 
RETAIN 42 32 28 23 12 
SMOOTH-SHIFT 9 9 7 8 13 
ROUGH-SHIFT 7 6 3 1 0 
Mfiller CONTINUE 31 31 32 32 36 
RETAIN 19 19 18 18 15 
SMOOTH-SHIFT 15 17 15 16 18 
ROUGH-SHIFT 14 12 14 13 10 
E CONTINUE 97 226 171 272 395 
RETAIN 330 209 272 172 52 
SMOOTH-SHIFT 56 67 46 59 82 
ROUGH-SHIFT 60 41 54 40 14 
high proport ion of nominal anaphora in our sample. Table 5 enumerates the types of 
centering transitions we consider. 
5.2.3 Results (Distribution of Transition Types). In Table 18, we give the numbers 
of centering transitions between the utterances in the three test sets. The first column 
contains those generated by the naive approach (such a proposal was made by Gordon, 
Grosz, and Gill iom \[1993\] as well as by Rambow \[1993\], who, nevertheless, restricts it to 
the German middlefield). We simply ranked the elements of C/according to their text 
position. While it is usually assumed that the functional anaphor (FA) is ranked above 
its antecedent (FA ante) (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1995, 217), we assume the opposite. 
The second column contains the results of this modification with respect o the naive 
approach. In the third column of Table 18, we give the numbers of transitions generated 
by the grammatical  constraints (Table 1) stated by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995, 
214, 217). The fourth column supplies the results of the same modification as was used 
for the naive approach, namely, antecedents of functional anaphors are ranked higher 
than the corresponding anaphoric expressions. The fifth column shows the results 
generated by the functional constraints from Table 11. 
5.2.4 Interpretation (Distribution of Transition Types). The centering model  assumes 
a preference order among transition types--CONTINUE ranks above RETAIN and RETAIN 
ranks above SHIFT. This preference order reflects the presumed inference load put on 
the hearer to coherently decode a discourse. Since the functional approach generates 
more CONTINUE transitions (see Table 18), we interpret his as prel iminary evidence 
that this approach provides for a more efficient processing than its competitors. In 
particular, the observation of a predominance of CONTINUEs holds irrespective of the 
various text genres we considered for functional centering and, to a lesser degree, for 
the modif ied grammatical  ranking constraints. 
331 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
5.2.5 Method (Costs of Transition Types). The arguments we have given so far do 
not seem to be entirely convincing. Counting single occurrences of transition types, 
in general, does not reveal the entire validity of the center lists. Considering adja- 
cent transition pairs as an indicator of validity should give a more reliable picture, 
since depending on the text genre considered (e.g., technical vs. news magazine vs. 
literary texts), certain sequences of transition types may be entirely plausible though 
they include transitions which, when viewed in isolation, seem to imply consider- 
able inferencing load (Table 18). For instance, a CONTINUE transition that follows a 
CONTINUE transition is a sequence that requires the lowest processing costs. But a 
CONTINUE transition that follows a RETAIN transition implies higher processing costs 
than a SMOOTH-SHIFT transition following a RETAIN transition. This is due to the fact 
that a RETAIN transition ideally predicts a SMOOTH-SHIFT in the following utterance. 
Hence, we claim that no one particular centering transition should be preferred over 
another. Instead, we advocate the idea that certain centering transition pairs are to 
be preferred over others. Following this line of argumentation, we propose here to 
classify all occurrences of centering transition pairs with respect o the "costs" they 
imply. The cost-based evaluation of different Cf orderings refers to evaluation criteria 
that form an intrinsic part of the centering model. 
Transition pairs hold for three immediately successive utterances. We distinguish 
between two types of transition pairs, cheap ones and expensive ones. 
? A transition pair is cheap if the backward-looking center of the current 
utterance is correctly predicted by the preferred center of the 
immediately preceding utterance, i.e., Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui_l). 
? A transition pair is expensive if the backward-looking center of the 
current utterance is not correctly predicted by the preferred center of the 
immediately preceding utterance, i.e., Cb(Ui) # G(Ui_I). 
In particular, chains of the RETAIN transition in passages where the Cb does not 
change (passages with constant theme) show that the grammatical ordering constraints 
for the forward-looking centers are not appropriate. 
5.2.6 Results (Costs of Transition Types). The numbers of centering transition pairs 
generated by the different approaches are shown in Table 19. In general, the func- 
tional approach reveals the best results, while the naive and the grammatical p- 
proaches work reasonably well for the literary text, but exhibit a remarkably poorer 
performance for the texts from the IT domain and, to a lesser degree, from the news 
magazine. The results for the latter approaches improve only slightly with the modifi- 
cation of ranking the antecedent of an functional anaphor (FA ante) above the functional 
anaphor itself (FA). In any case, they do not compare to the results of the functional 
approach. 
5.3 Extension of the Centering Transitions 
Our use of the centering transitions led us to the conclusion that CONTINUE and 
SMOOTH-SHIFT are not completely specified by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) and 
Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987). According to Brennan, Friedman, and Pol- 
lard's definition, it is possible that a transition is labeled SMOOTH-SHIFT even if Cp(Ui) 
Cp(Ui-1). Such a SHIFT is less smooth, because it contradicts the intuition that a 
SMOOTH-SHIFT fulfills what a RETAIN predicted. The same applies to a CONTINUE with 
this characteristic. Hence, we propose to extend the set of transitions as shown in Ta- 
332 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 19 
Cost values for centering transition pair types. 
Grammatical & FunC Naive & Grammatical FA a'te > FA Cost Type Naive FA ante > FA 
IT cheap 72 180 129 236 321 
expensive 317 209 260 153 68 
Spiegel cheap 25 36 45 51 62 
expensive 50 39 30 24 13 
Mfiller cheap 45 48 46 48 55 
expensive 34 31 33 31 24 
E cheap 142 264 220 335 438 
expensive 401 279 323 208 105 
Table 20 
Revised transition types. 
Cb(Ui) = Cb(Ui-1) Cb(Ui) :/: Cb(Ui-1) 
OR Cb(Ui-1) undef. 
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) AND Cp( Ui) = Cp( Ui-1) CONTINUE SMOOTH-SHIFT  
Cb(Ui) = Cp(Ui) AND Cp(Ui)  Cp(U i_ l )  EXP-CONTINUE EKP-SMOOTH-SHIFT  
Cb(Ui) -7 ? Cp(Ui) RETAIN ROUGH-SHIFT  
Table 21 
Costs for transition pairs. 
CONT. EXP-CONT.  RET.  SMOOTH-S.  EXP-SMOOTH-S .  ROUGH-S.  
- cheap - exp. - - - 
CONT. cheap - cheap exp. - exp. 
EXP-CONT. exp. - exp. exp. - exp. 
RET. exp. exp. exp. cheap exp. exp. 
SMOOTH-S. cheap exp. exp. exp. exp. exp. 
EXP-SMOOTH-S. exp. exp. exp. exp. exp. exp. 
ROUGH-S. exp. exp. exp. cheap exp. exp. 
ble 20. The def in i t ions of CONTINUE and  SMOOTH-SHIFT are extended by  the cond i t ion  
that Cp(Ui) = Cp(Ui-1), whi le  EXP-CONTINUE and EXP-SMOOTH-SHIFT (expensive CON- 
TINUE and  expens ive  SMOOTH-SHIFT) require the oppos i te .  RETAIN and  ROUGH-SHIFT 
fulfil l Cp(Ui) =fi Cp(Ui-1) without  further  extensions.  
Table 21 contains a complete  overv iew of the t rans i t ion pairs.  On ly  those whose  
second t rans i t ion fulfi l ls the cr i ter ion Cp(Ui) = Cp(Ui-1) are labe led  as "cheap."  
5.4 Redef in i t ion  o f  Ru le  2 
Grosz,  Joshi, and  Weinste in  (1995) def ine Rule 2 of the center ing mode l  on the ba-  
sis of sequences of transit ions.  Sequences of CONTINUE trans i t ions are pre fer red  over  
333 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
sequences of RETAIN transitions, which are preferred over sequences of SHIFT transi- 
tions. Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987) utilize this rule for anaphora resolution 
but restrict it to single transitions. Based on the preceding discussion of cheap and 
expensive transition pairs, we propose to redefine Rule 2 in terms of the costs of 
transition types. 22 Rule 2 then reads as follows: 
Rule 2" Cheap transition pairs are preferred over expensive ones. 
We believe that this definition of Rule 2 allows for a far better assessment of
referential coherence in discourse than a definition in terms of sequences oftransitions. 
For anaphora resolution, we interpret Rule 2" such that the preference for an- 
tecedents of anaphors in Ui can be derived directly from the Cf(Ui-1). The higher a 
discourse ntity is ranked in the Cf, the more likely it is the antecedent of a pronoun. 
We see the redefinition of Rule 2 as the theoretical basis for a centering algorithm for 
pronoun resolution that simply uses the Cf as a preference ranking device like the 
basic centering algorithm shown in Table 3. In this algorithm, the metaphor of costs 
translates into the number of elements of the Cf that have to be tested until the correct 
antecedent is found. If the Cp of the previous utterance is the correct one, then the 
costs are indeed very low. 
5.5 Does Functional Centering Provide a More Satisfactory Explanation of the Data? 
We were also interested in finding out whether the functional criteria we propose 
might explain the linguistic data in a more satisfactory way than the grammatical- 
role-based criteria discussed so far. So, we screened sample data from the literature, 
which were already annotated by centering analyses (for English, we considered all 
examples discussed in Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein \[1995\] and Brennan, Friedman, and 
Pollard \[1987\]). We achieved consistent results for the grammatical nd the functional 
approach for all the examples contained in Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) but found 
diverging analyses for some examples discussed by Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard 
(1987). While the RETAIN-SHIFT combination in examples (10c) and (10d') (slightly 
modified from Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard \[1987, 157\]) did not indicate adifference 
between the approaches, for the RETAIN-CONTINUE combination i examples (10c) and 
(10d), the two approaches led to different results (see Table 22 for the BFP algorithm 
and Table 23 for the FunC algorithm). 
Example 10 
a. Brennan drives an Alfa Romeo. 
b. She drives too fast. 
c. Friedman races her on weekends. 
d. She often wins. 
d'. She often beats her. 
Within the functional approach, the proper name Friedman is unused and, there- 
fore, the leftmost hearer-old iscourse ntity of (10c). Hence, FRIEDMAN is the most 
preferred antecedent for the pronoun she in (10d) and (10d'). 
22 See Di Eugenio (1998) for a discussion regarding certain pairs of transitions and their elation to zero 
vs. strong pronouns. 
334 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Table 22 
BFP interpretation for example (10)--The "Friedman" scenario. 
(10a) Cb: - 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: Brennan, ALFA ROMEO: Alfa Romeo\] 
(10b) Cb: \[BRENNAN: she\] CONTINUE 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: she\] 
(10c) Cb: \[BRENNAN: her\] RETAIN 
Cf: \[FRIEDMAN: Friedman, BRENNAN: her\] 
(10d) Cb: \[BRENNAN: she\] CONTINUE 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: she\] 
Cb: \[FRIEDMAN: slie\] SMOOTH-SHIFT 
Cf: \[FaiE~l"~ia~. she\] 
(10d') Cb: \[FRIEDMAN: she\] SMOOTH-SHIFT 
Cf: \[FRIEDMAN: she, BRENNAN: her\] 
Cb: \[FaIE~ZvlaN: her\] 
Cf: \[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  her\] . . . . .  - . . . . .  UI~I2~ININ/a-IN, DII~; 12 I~ I~ I J IV I /~ IN .  
Table 23 
FunC interpretation for example (10)--The "Friedman" scenario. 
(10a) 
(10b) 
(10c) 
(10d) 
(10d') 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
\[BRENNANu: Brennan, ALFA ROMEOBN: Alfa Romeo\] 
\[BRENNANE: she\] 
\[FRIEDMANu: Friedman, BRENNANE: her\] 
\[FRIEDMANE : she\] 
\[FRIEDMANE: she, BRENNANE: her\] 
But is subjecthood really the decisive factor? When we replace Friedman with a 
hearer-new discourse ntity, e.g., a professional driver, as in (10c#), 23 then the procedures 
generate inconsistent results, again. In the BFP algorithm, the ranking of the Cf list 
depends only on grammatical roles. Hence, DRIVER is ranked higher than BRENNAN 
in the Cf(lOc'). In (10d), the pronoun she is resolved to BRENNAN because of the pref- 
erence for CONTINUE over SMOOTH-SHIFT. In (10d~), she is resolved to DRIVER because 
SMOOTH-SHIFT is preferred over ROUGH-SHIFT (see Table 24). 
10cq A professional driver races her on weekends. 
Within the functional approach, the evoked phrase her in (10c ~) is ranked higher 
than the brand-new phrase a professional driver. Therefore, the preference changes be- 
tween example (10c) and (10c'). In (10d) and (10d') the pronoun she is resolved to 
BRENNAN, the discourse ntity denoted by her (see Table 25). 
We find the analyses of functional centering to match our intuitions about the 
underlying referential relations more closely than those that are computed by gram- 
matically based centering approaches. Hence, in the light of this still preliminary ev- 
idence, we answer the question we posed at the beginning of this subsection in the 
affirmative--functional centering indeed explains the data in a more satisfying manner 
than other well-known centering principles. 
23 We owe this variant o Andrew Kehler. This example may misdirect readers because the phrase a 
professional driver might be assigned the "default" gender masculine. Anyway, this example--like the 
original example--seems not to be felicitous English and has only illustrative character. 
335 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Table 24 
BFP interpretation for Example (10)--The "driver" scenario. 
(10a) Cb: - 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: Brennan, ALFA ROMEO: Alfa Romeo\] 
(10b) Cb: \[BRENNAN: she\] 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: she\] CONTINUE 
(10c') CD: \[BRENNAN: her\] 
Cf: \[DRIVER: driver, BRENNAN: her\] RETAIN 
(10d) Cb: \[BRENNAN: she\] 
Cf: \[BRENNAN: she\] CONTINUE 
Cb: \[D F~7?F,R. d~e\] 
Cf: \[D~ivF~a. she\] . . . . . . . .  - . . . . .  
(lOd') Cb: \[DRIVER: she\] SMOOTH-SHIFT 
Cf: \[DRIVER: she, BRENNAN: her\] 
Cb: \[DKIVEF~. \]igr\] R,OUGH-SHIFT 
r~ . . . . . . . . .  Cf: \[ . . . . . . . . . . .  ~,,~,- . . . . . . . . . .  ,-,,~,v ~.  he;\] 
Table 25 
FunC interpretation for Example (10)--The "driver" scenario. 
(10a) 
(10b) 
00c') 
(10d) 
(10d') 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
Cf: 
\[BRENNANu: Brennan, ALFA ROMEOBN: Alfa Romeo\] 
\[BRENNANE: she\] 
\[BRENNANE: her, DRIVERBN: driver\] 
\[BRENNANE: she\] 
\[BRENNANE: she, DRIVERE: her\] 
5.6 Summary of Evaluation 
To summarize the results of our empirical evaluation, we claim, first, that our proposal 
based on functional criteria leads to substantially improved and--with respect o the 
inference load placed on the text understander, whether human or machine--more 
plausible results for languages with free word order than the structural constraints 
given by Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995) and those underlying the naive approach. 
We base these observations on an evaluation study that considers transition pairs in 
terms of the inference load specific pairs imply. Second, we have gathered prelimi- 
nary evidence, still far from conclusive, that the functional constraints on centering 
seem to explain linguistic data more satisfactorily than the common grammar-oriented 
constraints. Hence, we hypothesize that these functional constraints might constitute 
a general framework for treating free- and fixed-word-order languages by the same 
methodology. This claim, without doubt, has to be further substantiated by additional 
cross-linguistic empirical studies. 
The cost-based evaluation we focused on in this section refers to evaluation cri- 
teria that form an intrinsic part of the centering model. As a consequence, we have 
redefined Rule 2 of the Centering Constraints (Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 1995, 215) 
appropriately. We replaced the characterization f a preference for sequences of CON- 
TINUE over sequences of RETAIN and, similarly, sequences of RETAIN over sequences 
of SHIFT by one in which cheap transitions are to be preferred over expensive ones. 
6. Comparison with Related Approaches 
6.1 Focus-based Approaches 
Approaches to anaphora resolution based on focus devices partly use the informa- 
tion status of discourse ntities to determine the current discourse focus. However, a 
336 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
common area of criticism of these approaches i the diversity of data structures they 
require. These data structures are likely to hide the underlying linguistic regularities, 
because they promote the mix of preference and data structure considerations in the fo- 
cusing algorithms. As an example, Sidner (1983, 292ff.) distinguishes between an Actor 
Focus and a Discourse Focus, as well as corresponding lists, viz. Potential Actor Focus List 
and Potential Discourse Focus List. Suri and McCoy (1994) in their RAFT/RAPR approach 
use grammatical roles for ordering the focus lists and make a distinction between Sub- 
ject Focus, Current Focus, and corresponding lists. Both focusing algorithms prefer an 
element that represents he Focus to the elements in the list when the anaphoric ex- 
pression under consideration is not the agent (for Sidner) or the subject (for Suri and 
McCoy). Relating these approaches toour proposal, they already exhibit a weak prefer- 
ence for a single hearer-old (more precisely, evoked) discourse lement. Dahl and Ball 
(1990), describing the anaphora resolution module of the PUNDIT system, improve the 
focusing mechanism by simplifying its underlying data structures. Thus, their proposal 
is more closely related to the centering model than any other focusing mechanism. Fur- 
thermore, if there is a pronoun in the sentence for which the Focus List is built, the 
corresponding evoked discourse ntity is shifted to the front of the list. The following 
elements of the Focus List are ordered by grammatical roles again. Hence, their ap- 
proach still relies upon grammatical information for the ordering of the centering list, 
while we use only the functional information structure as the guiding principle. 
6.2 Heuristics 
Given its embedding in a cognitive theory of inference loads imposed on the hearer 
and, even more importantly, its fundamental role in a more comprehensive theory 
of discourse understanding based on linguistic, attentional, and intentional layers, 
the centering model can be considered the first principled attempt to deal with pref- 
erence orders for plausible antecedent selection for anaphors. Its predecessors were 
entirely heuristic approaches to anaphora resolution. These were concerned with var- 
ious criteria--beyond strictly grammatical constraints such as agreement--for the op- 
timization of the referent selection process based on preferential choices. An elaborate 
description of several of these preference criteria is supplied by Carbonell and Brown 
(1988) who discuss, among others, heuristics involving case role filling, semantic and 
pragmatic alignment, syntactic parallelism, syntactic topicalization, and intersentential 
recency. Given such a wealth of criteria one may either try to order them a priori in 
terms of importance or--as was proposed by the majority of researchers in this field-- 
define several scoring functions that compute flexible orderings on the fly. These com- 
bine the variety of available vidence, each one usually annotated by a specific weight 
factor, and, finally, map the weights to a single salience score (Rich and LuperFoy 
1988; Haji~ovG KuboG and Kubo~ 1992; Lappin and Leass 1994) 
These heuristics helped to improve the performance of discourse-understanding 
systems through significant reductions of the available search-space for antecedents. 
Their major drawback is that they require a great deal of skilled hand-crafting that, 
unfortunately, usually does not scale in broader application domains. Hence, proposals 
were made to replace these high-level "symbolic" categories by statistically interpreted 
occurrence patterns derived from large text corpora (Dagan and Itai 1990). Preferences 
then reflect patterns of statistically significant lexical usage rather than introspective 
abstractions of linguistic patterns uch as syntactic parallelism or pragmatic alignment. 
Among the heuristic approaches toanaphora resolution, those which consider the 
identification of heuristics a machine learning (ML) problem are particularly inter- 
esting, since their heuristics dynamically adapt to the textual data. Furthermore, ML 
procedures operate on incomplete parses (hence, they accept noisy data), which dis- 
337 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
tinguishes them from the requirements of perfect information and high data fidelity 
imposed by almost any other anaphora resolution scheme. Connolly, Burger, and Day 
(1994) treat anaphora resolution as an ML classification problem and compare seven 
classifier approaches with the solution quality of a naive hand-crafted algorithm whose 
heuristics incorporate the well-known agreement and recency indicators. Aone and 
Bennett (1996) outline an approach where they consider more than 60 features auto- 
matically obtained from the machinery of the host natural anguage processing system 
the learner is embedded in. The features under consideration i clude lexical ones like 
categories, yntactic ones like grammatical roles, semantic ones like semantic lasses, 
and text positional ones, e.g., the distance between anaphor and antecedent. These 
features are packed in feature vectors--for each pair of an anaphor and its possible 
antecedent--and used to train a decision tree, employing Quinlan's C4.5 algorithm 
(Aone and Bennett 1996), or a whole battery of alternative classifiers in which hybrid 
variants yield the highest scores (Connolly, Burger, and Day 1994). Though still not 
fully worked out, it is interesting to note that in both studies ML-derived heuristics 
tend to outperform those that were carefully developed by human experts (similar 
results are reported by Cardie \[1992\] with respect o learning resolution heuristics for 
relative pronouns pertaining to a case-based learning procedure). This indicates, at 
least, that heuristically based methods using simple combinations of features benefit 
from being exposed to and having to adapt to training data. ML-based mechanisms 
might constitute an interesting perspective for the further tuning of ordering criteria 
for the forward-looking centers. 
These mixed heuristic approaches, using multidimensional metrics for ranking an- 
tecedent candidates, diverge from the assumption that underlies the centering model 
that a single type of criterion--the attentional state and its representation i  terms 
of the backward- and forward-looking centers--is crucial for referent selection. By 
incorporating functional considerations in terms of the information structure of utter- 
ances into the centering model we actually enrich the types of knowledge that go into 
centered anaphora resolution decisions, i.e., we extend the "dimensionality" of the 
centering model, too. But unlike the numerical scoring approaches, our combination 
remains at the symbolic computation level, preserves the modularity of criteria, and, 
in particular, is linguistically justified. Although functional centering is not a com- 
plete theory of preferential naphora resolution, one should clearly stress the different 
goals behind heuristics-based systems, such as the ones just discussed, and the model 
of centering. Heuristic approaches combine introspectively acquired descriptive vi- 
dence and attempt o optimize reference resolution performance by proper evidence 
"engineering". This is often done in an admittedly ad hoc way, requiring tricky retun- 
ing when new evidence is added (Rich and LuperFoy 1988). On the other hand, many 
of these systems work in a real-world environment (Rich and LuperFoy 1988; Lappin 
and Leass 1994; Kennedy and Boguraev 1996) in which noisy data and incomplete, 
sometimes even faulty, analysis results have to be accounted for. The centering model 
differs from these considerations in that it aims at unfolding a unified theory of dis- 
course coherence at the linguistic, attentional, and intentional level (Grosz and Sidner 
1986); hence, the search for a more principled, theory-based solution, but also the need 
for (almost) perfect linguistic analyses in terms of parsing and semantic interpretation. 
7. Conclusion 
In this paper, we provided a novel account for ordering the forward-looking center 
list, a major construct of the centering model. The new formulation is entirely based on 
functional notions, grounded in the information structure of utterances in a discourse. 
338 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
We motivated our proposal by the constraints that hold for a free-word-order language 
such as German and derived our results from empirical studies of real-world texts. 
We also augmented the ordering criteria of the forward-looking center list such that 
it accounts not only for (pro)nominal anaphora but also for inferables (restricted to 
the subset of functional anaphora), an issue that, up to now, has only been sketchily 
dealt with in the centering framework. The extensions we proposed were validated by 
the empirical analysis of various texts of considerable l ngth selected from different 
domains and genres. The "evaluation metric" we used refers to a new cost-based model 
of interpreting the validity of centering data. The distinction between cognitively cheap 
and expensive transition pairs led us to replace Rule 2 from the original model by a 
formulation that explicitly incorporates this cost-oriented distinction. 
A resolution module for (pro)nominal anaphora (Strube and Hahn 1995) and one 
for functional anaphora (Hahn, Markert, and Strube 1996) based on this functional 
centering model has been implemented as part of PARSETALK, a comprehensive t xt 
parser for German (Hahn, Schacht, and Br6ker 1994; Hahn, Neuhaus, and Br6ker 
1997) in our group. All these modules are fully operational and integrated within 
the text-understanding backbone of SYNDIKATE, a large-scale text knowledge acqui- 
sition system for the two real-world domains of information technology (Hahn and 
Schnattinger 1998) and medicine (Hahn, Romacker, and Schulz 1999). 
Despite the progress made so far, many research problems remain open for further 
consideration i the centering framework. The following list mentions only the most 
pertinent issues that have come to our attention and complements he list given by 
Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein (1995): 
. 
. 
The centering model is rather agnostic about the intricacies of complex 
sentences such as relative clauses, subordinate clauses, coordinations, 
and complex noun phrases. The problem caused by these structures 
for the centering model is how to decompose a complex sentence into 
center-updating units and how to process complex utterances consisting 
of multiple clauses. A first proposal is due to Kameyama (1998) 
who breaks a complex sentence into a hierarchy of center-updating 
units. Furthermore, she distinguishes several types of constructions in
order to decide which part of the sentence is relevant for the resolution 
of an intersentential naphor in the following sentence. Strube (1996b) 
(with respect o centering) and Suri and McCoy (1994) (with respect o 
the focus model) describe similar approaches and provide algorithms for 
the interaction of the resolution of inter- and intrasentential naphora, 
but the topic has certainly not been dealt with exhaustively. The problem 
of complex NPs was pointed out by Walker and Prince (1996). Since the 
grammatical functions in a sentence may be realized by a complex NP, it is 
not clear how to rank these phrases in the Cf list. Walker and Prince (1996) 
propose a "working hypothesis" based on the surface order. Strube (1998) 
provides a complete specification for dealing with complex sentences, 
but this approach departs ignificantly from the centering model. 
It seems that there exist only a few fully operational implementations of 
centering-based algorithms, since the interaction of the algorithm with 
global and local ambiguities generated by a sentence parser has not 
received much attention until now. A first proposal for how to deal with 
center ambiguity in an incremental text parser has been made by Hahn 
and Strube (1996). 
339 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
. 
. 
. 
The centering model covers the standard cases of anaphora, i.e., 
pronominal and nominal anaphora nd even functional anaphora based 
on the proposal we have developed in this article. It does not, however, 
take into account several "hard" issues such as plural anaphora, generic 
definite noun phrases, propositional anaphora, and deictic forms (but see 
Eckert and Strube \[1999\] for a treatment of discourse-deictic anaphora in 
dialogues within a centering-type framework). These shortcomings 
might be traced back to the fact that the centering model, up to now, did 
not consider the role of the (main) verb of the utterance under scrutiny. 
Other cases, such as VP anaphora (Hardt 1992), temporal anaphora 
(Kameyama, Passonneau, and Poesio 1993; Hitzeman, Moens, and 
Grover 1995) have already been examined within the centering model. 
The particular phenomenon of paycheck anaphora is described by Hardt 
(1996), though he uses only a rather simplified centering model for this 
work. Other cases are only dealt with in the focusing framework such as 
propositional anaphora (Dahl and Ball 1990). 
Evaluations of the centering model have so far only been carried out 
manually. This is clearly no longer rewarding, so appropriate 
computational support environments have to be provided. What we 
have in mind is a kind of discourse structure bank and associated 
workbenches comparable to grammar workbenches and parse treebanks. 
Aone and Bennett (1994), for example, report on a GUI-based Discourse 
Tagging Tool (DTT) that allows a user to link an anaphor with its 
antecedent and specify the type of the anaphor (e.g., pronoun, definite 
NP, etc.). The tagged result can be written out to an SGML-marked file. 
Arguing for the need for discourse taggers, this also implies the 
development of a discourse structure interlingua (some sort of Discourse 
Structure Mark-up Language) for describing discourse structures in a 
common format in order to ease nonproblematic exchange and 
world-wide distribution of discourse structure data sets. Such an 
environment would provide excellent conditions for further testing, for 
example, of our assumption that the information structure constraints we 
suggest might apply in a universal manner. 
Centering theory, so far, is a model of local coherence in the minimal 
sense, i.e., it allows only the consideration of immediately adjacent 
centering structures for establishing proper referential links. In order to 
extend that theory to the level of global coherence, various steps have to 
be taken. 
At the referential level, mechanisms have to be introduced to 
account for reference relationships that extend beyond the 
immediately preceding utterance. Empirical evidence for such 
phenomena exists in the literature and we also found the need to 
have such a mechanism available for longer texts. The extension 
of functional centering to these phenomena is presented in Hahn 
and Strube (1997), while Walker (1998) builds upon the centering 
algorithm described in Brennan, Friedman, and Pollard (1987). 
At the level of discourse pragmatics, a richer notion than mere 
reference between terms is needed to account for coherence 
relations uch as those aimed at by Rhetorical Structure Theory 
340 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
(Mann and Thompson 1988). In addition, an explicit relation to 
basic notions from speech act theory is also missing, though it 
should be considered vital for the global coherence of discourse 
(Grosz and Sidner 1986). In general, it might become 
increasingly necessary to integrate very deep forms of reasoning, 
perhaps even nonmonotonic (Dunin-Keplicz and Lukaszewicz 
1986) or abductive inference mechanisms (Nagao 1989), into the 
anaphora resolution process. This might become a sheer 
necessity when incrementality of processing receives a higher 
level of attention in the centering community. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank our colleagues from 
the Computational Linguistics Group in 
Freiburg and at the University of 
Pennsylvania for fruitful discussions, in 
particular Norbert Br6ker, Miriam Eckert, 
Aravind Joshi, Manfred Klenner, Nobo 
Komagata, Katja Markert, Peter Neuhaus, 
Ellen Prince, Rashmi Prasad, Owen 
Rambow, Susanne Schacht, and Bonnie 
Webber. We also owe special thanks to the 
four reviewers whose challenges and 
suggestions have considerably improved 
the presentation f our ideas about 
functional centering in this article. The first 
author was partially funded by LGFG 
Baden-WUrttemberg, a post-doctoral grant 
from DFG (Str 545/1-1) and a post-doctoral 
fellowship award from the Institute for 
Research in Cognitive Science at the 
University of Pennsylvania (NSF SBR 
8920230). 
References 
Alshawi, Hiyan. 1992. Resolving quasi 
logical forms. In H. Alshawi, editor, The 
Core Language Engine. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, pages 187-216. 
Aone, Chinatsu and Scott W. Bennett. 1994. 
Discourse tagging tool and 
discourse-tagged multilingual corpora. In 
Proceedings ofthe International Workshop on 
Sharable Natural Language Resources, 
pages 71-77, Ikoma, Nara, Japan, August. 
Aone, Chinatsu and Scott W. Bennett. 1996. 
Applying machine learning to anaphora 
resolution. In S. Wermter, E. Riloff, and G. 
Scheler, editors, Connectionist, S atistical 
and Symbolic Approaches toLearning for 
Natural Language Processing. Springer, 
Berlin, pages 302-314. 
Brennan, Susan E., Marilyn W. Friedman, 
and Carl J. Pollard. 1987. A centering 
approach to pronouns. In Proceedings ofthe 
25th Annual Meeting, pages 155-162, 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Stanford, CA, July. 
Carbonell, Jaime G. and Ralph D. Brown. 
1988. Anaphora resolution: A
multi-strategy approach. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, volume 1, 
pages 96-101, Budapest, Hungary, 
August. 
Cardie, Claire. 1992. Learning to 
disambiguate r lative pronouns. In 
Proceedings ofthe l Oth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pages 38-43, San 
JosG CA, July. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1981. Lectures on 
Government and Binding. Foris, Dordrecht. 
Clark, Herbert H. 1975. Bridging. In 
Proceedings ofthe Conference on Theoretical 
Issues in Natural Language Processing, 
pages 169-174, Cambridge, MA, June. 
Connolly, Dennis, John D. Burger, and 
David S. Day. 1994. A machine learning 
approach to anaphoric reference. In
Proceedings ofthe International Conference on 
New Methods in Language Processing, 
pages 255-261, Manchester, England, 
September. 
Dagan, Ido and Alon Itai. 1990. Automatic 
processing of large corpora for the 
resolution of anaphora references. In
Proceedings ofthe 13th In ternational 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
volume 3, pages 330-332, Helsinki, 
Finland, August. 
Dahl, Deborah A. and Catherine N. Ball. 
1990. Reference resolution in PUNDIT. In 
P. Saint-Dizier and S. Szpakowicz, editors, 
Logic and Logic Grammars for Language 
Processing. Ellis Horwood, Chichester, 
England, pages 168-184. 
Di Eugenio, Barbara. 1998. Centering in 
Italian. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and 
E. F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory in 
Discourse, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, England, pages 115-137. 
Dunin-Keplicz, Barbara nd Witold 
341 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Lukaszewicz. 1986. Towards 
discourse-oriented nonmonotonic system. 
In Proceedings ofthe llth International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
pages 504-506, Bonn, Germany, August. 
Eckert, Miriam and Michael Strube. 1999. 
Resolving discourse deictic anaphora in 
dialogues. In Proceedings ofthe 9th 
Conference ofthe European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 37-44, Bergen, Norway, June. 
Firbas, Jan. 1974. Some aspects of the 
Czechoslovak approach to problems of 
functional sentence prespective. In F. 
Daneg, editor, Papers on Functional Sentence 
Perspective. Academia, Prague, 
pages 11-37. 
Gordon, Peter C., Barbara J. Grosz, and 
Laura A. Gilliom. 1993. Pronouns, names, 
and the centering of attention in 
discourse. Cognitive Science, 17:311-347. 
Grosz, Barbara J. 1977. The representation 
and use of focus in a system for 
understanding dialogs. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, volume 1, 
pages 67-76, Cambridge, MA, August. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Aravind K. Joshi, and 
Scott Weinstein. 1983. Providing a unified 
account of definite noun phrases in 
discourse. In Proceedings ofthe 21st Annual 
Meeting, pages 44-50, Cambridge, MA, 
June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Aravind K. Joshi, and 
Scott Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A
framework for modeling the local 
coherence of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(2):203-225. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 
1986. Attention, intentions, and the 
structure of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Haddock, Nicholas J. 1987. Incremental 
interpretation a d combinatory categorial 
grammar. In Proceedings ofthe lOth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, volume 2, pages 661-663, 
Milan, Italy, August. 
Hahn, Udo, Katja Markert, and Michael 
Strube. 1996. A conceptual reasoning 
approach to textual ellipsis. In Proceedings 
of the 12th European Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 572-576, Budapest, 
Hungary, August. 
Hahn, Udo, Peter Neuhaus, and Norbert 
BrOker. 1997. Message-passing protocols 
for real-world parsing: An object-oriented 
model and its preliminary evaluation. In 
Proceedings ofthe 5th International Workshop 
on Parsing Technologies, pages 101-112, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, September. 
Hahn, Udo, Martin Romacker, and Stefan 
Schulz. 1999. Discourse structures in 
medical reports--watch out! The 
generation of referentially coherent and 
valid text knowledge bases in 
MEDSYND1KATE system. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, 53(1):1-28. 
Hahn, Udo, Susanne Schacht, and Norbert 
BrOker. 1994. Concurrent, object-oriented 
natural language parsing: The 
PARSETALK model. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 41(1/2):179-222. 
Hahn, Udo and Klemens Schnattinger. 1998. 
Towards text knowledge ngineering. In
Proceedings ofthe 15th National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence & the l Oth Conference 
on Innovative Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 524-531, Madison, WI, 
July. 
Hahn, Udo and Michael Strube. 1996. 
Incremental centering and center 
ambiguity. In Proceedings ofthe 18th Annual 
Conference ofthe Cognitive Science Society, 
pages 568-573, LaJolla, CA, July. 
Hahn, Udo and Michael Strube. 1997. 
Centering in-the-large: Computing 
referential discourse segments. In 
Proceedings ofthe 35th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics and 
the 8th Conference ofthe European Chapter of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 104-111, Madrid, Spain, July. 
HajigovG Eva, Vladislav Kubofi, and Petr 
Kubofi. 1992. Stock of shared knowledge: 
A tool for solving pronominal anaphora. 
In Proceedings ofthe 15th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
volume 1, pages 127-133, Nantes, France, 
August. 
Hardt, Daniel. 1992. An algorithm for VP 
ellipsis. In Proceedings ofthe 30th Annual 
Meeting, pages 9-14, Newark, DE, 
June-July. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Hardt, Daniel. 1996. Centering in dynamic 
semantics. In Proceedings ofthe 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 519-524, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, August. 
Hitzeman, Janet. Marc Moens, and Claire 
Groven 1995. Algorithms for analysing 
the temporal structure of discourse. In 
Proceedings ofthe 7th Conference ofthe 
European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pages 253-260, 
Dublin, Ireland, March. 
Hoffman, Beryl. 1996. Translating into free 
word order languages. In Proceedings ofthe 
16th International Conference on 
342 
Strube and Hahn Functional Centering 
Computational Linguistics, volume 1, 
pages 556-561, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
August. 
Hoffman, Beryl. 1998. Word order, 
information structure, and centering in 
Turkish. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and 
E. E Prince, editors, Centering Theory in 
Discourse, pages 251-271, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, England. 
Jaeggli, Osvaldo. 1986. Arbitrary plural 
pronominals. Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory, 4:43-76. 
Kameyama, Megumi. 1986. A 
property-sharing constraint in centering. 
In Proceedings ofthe 24th Annual Meeting, 
pages 200-206, New York, NY, June. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Kameyama, Megumi. 1998. Intrasentential 
centering: A case study. In M. A. Walker, 
A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors, 
Centering Theory in Discourse. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, England, 
pages 89-112. 
Kameyama, Megumi, Rebecca Passonneau, 
and Massimo Poesio. 1993. Temporal 
centering. In Proceedings ofthe 31st Annual 
Meeting, pages 70-77, Columbus, OH, 
June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Kamp, Hans and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From 
Discourse to Logic. Introduction to 
Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural 
Language, Formal Logic and Discourse 
Representation Theory. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Kennedy, Christopher and Branimir 
Boguraev. 1996. Anaphora for everyone: 
Pronominal anaphora resolution without 
a parser. In Proceedings ofthe 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 113-118, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, August. 
Lappin, Shalom and Herbert J. Leass. 1994. 
An algorithm for pronominal anaphora 
resolution. Computational Linguistics, 
20(4):535-561. 
Mann, William C. and Sandra A. 
Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical Structure 
Theory: Toward a functional theory of 
text organization. Text, 8(3):243-281. 
Nagao, Katashi. 1989. Semantic 
interpretation based on the multi-world 
model. In Proceedings ofthe 11th 
International Joint Conference on Arti~cial 
Intelligence, pages 1,467-1,473, Detroit, MI, 
August. 
Prince, Ellen E 1981. Towards a taxonomy 
of given-new information. In P. Cole, 
editor, Radical Pragmatics. Academic Press, 
New York, NY, pages 223-255. 
Prince, Ellen E 1992. The ZPG letter: 
Subjects, definiteness, and 
information-status. In W. C. Mann and 
S. A. Thompson, editors, Discourse 
Description: Diverse Linguistic Analyses of a 
Fund-Raising Text. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam, pages 295-325. 
Rambow, Owen. 1993. Pragmatic aspects of 
scrambling and topicalization i German. 
In Workshop on Centering Theory in 
Naturally-Occurring Discourse. Institute for 
Research in Cognitive Science (IRCS), 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, May. 
Rich, Elaine and Susann LuperFoy. 1988. An 
architecture for anaphora resolution. In 
Proceedings ofthe 2nd Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing, pages 18-24, 
Austin, TX, February. 
Sidner, Candace L. 1983. Focusing in the 
comprehension f definite anaphora. In 
M. Brady and R. C. Berwick, editors, 
Computational Models of Discourse. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, pages 267-330. 
Strube, Michael. 1996a. Funktionales 
Centering. Ph.D. thesis, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universit~it Freiburg, 
Freiburg. 
Strube, Michael. 1996b. Processing complex 
sentences in the centering framework. In 
Proceedings ofthe 34th Annual Meeting, 
pages 378-380, Santa Cruz, CA, June. 
Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Strube, Michael. 1998. Never look back: An 
alternative to centering. In COLING-ACL 
"98: 36th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics and the 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 
volume 2, pages 1,251-1,257. 
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1995. 
PARSETALK about sentence- and 
text-level anaphora. In Proceedings ofthe 
7th Conference ofthe European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 237-244, Dublin, Ireland, March. 
Strube, Michael and Udo Hahn. 1996. 
Functional centering. In Proceedings ofthe 
34th Annual Meeting, pages 270-277, Santa 
Cruz, CA, June. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Suri, Linda Z. and Kathleen E McCoy. 1994. 
RAFT/RAPR and centering: A
comparison and discussion of problems 
related to processing complex sentences. 
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):301-317. 
Turan, Omit Deniz. 1998. Ranking 
forward-looking centers in Turkish: 
Universal and language specific 
properties. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, 
and E. E Prince, editors, Centering in 
343 
Computational Linguistics Volume 25, Number 3 
Discourse. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, England, pages 138-160. 
VallduvL Enric. 1990. The Informational 
Component. Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA. 
VallduvL Enric and Elisabet Engdahl. 1996. 
The linguistic realization of information 
packaging. Linguistics, 34:459-519. 
Walker, Marilyn A. 1989. Evaluating 
discourse processing algorithms. In 
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting, 
pages 251-261, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, 
June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Walker, Marilyn A. 1998. Centering 
anaphora resolution, and discourse 
structure. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, 
and E. F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory 
in Discourse. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, England, pages 401-435. 
Walker, Marilyn A., Masayo Iida, and 
Sharon Cote. 1994. Japanese discourse 
and the process of centering. 
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):193-233. 
Walker, Marilyn A. and Ellen F. Prince. A 
bilateral approach to givenness: A 
hearer-status algorithm and a centering 
algorithm. In T. Fretheim and J. K. 
Gundel, editors, Reference and Referent 
Accessibility. John Benjarnins, Amsterdam, 
pages 291-306. 
344 
