MUC-7 TEST SCORES
This appendix contains the summary score reports for each system in the MUC-7 evaluation. The reports are
ordered by task (Template Element, Template Relation, Scenario Template, Named Entity, and Coreference) and
secondarily by site and language (in alphabetical order).
A brief introduction to reading the MUC-7 score reports is presented here. First, the common aspects of the
score reports will be presented followed by the task-specific aspects. Then references will be given for more detailed
information on the metrics, scoring algorithms, and statistical significance testing.
The first column in the report, SLOT, contains one of the following types of label:
A slot name, e.g. ent_name
An object name, e.g. entity
The following tallies for the test set are presented in the lefthand columns of the score report:
POS Number possible (COR + INC + MIS), i.e., the number of fills in the answer key
plus any optional fills allowed by the key and generated by the system
ACT Number actual (COR + INC + SPU),i.e., the number of fills generated by the
system under evaluation
COR Number correct
PAR Number partially correct (no partial credit was given in MUC-7)
INC Number incorrect
MIS Number missing
SPU Number spurious
NON Number non-committal (null fills generated by system that were also null in the
answer key)
The righthand columns in the report contain the values for the following extraction metrics:
REC Recall = COR/POS
PRE Precision = COR/ACT
UND Undergeneration = MIS/POS
OVG Overgeneration = SPU/ACT
SUB Substitution = INC/(COR + INC)
ERR Error per response fill = (INC + SPU + MIS)/(COR + INC + SPU + MIS)
The first row at the bottom of the report is marked as the ALL SLOTS row and gives the official overall
tallies and the overall REC, PRE, UND, OVG, SUB, and ERR. The tallies in the POS, ACT, COR, PAR, INC,
SPU, MIS, and NON columns add up to the ALL SLOTS values, but not all rows are considered. The rows that are
not considered are the OBJ SCORES (i.e., the section where the entries in the SLOT column are object names). The
scores for the metrics in the ALL SLOTS row are not computed by averaging the scores in the individual slot rows,
but instead are computed on the basis of the tally totals contained in the ALL SLOTS row itself.
The remaining row at the bottom of the report contains scores for the following metrics:
F-MEASURES F-Measures (weighted combination of recall and precision
scores in ALL SLOTS row)
F-Measure scores corresponding to three different weightings of precision relative to recall are computed.
The P&R value weights precision the same as recall; the 2P&R value gives twice the weight to precision; the P&2R
value weights precision half as much as recall. The general formula is:
Information Extraction
Scenario Template
In the Scenario Template task, there is one template object per article and the content slot may or may not be
filled depending on whether the text contains a relevant event. The ability of the system to judge relevancy is reflected
in the TEXT-FILTERING row of the score report.
TEXT-FILTERING Text filtering (recall and precision for document detection)
The score category columns used to contain the tallies for these decisions across the test set are as follows:
COR (decides relevant and relevant is correct), SPU (decides relevant and nonrelevant is correct), MIS (decides
nonrelevant and relevant is correct), and NON (decides nonrelevant and nonrelevant is correct). Text filtering
formulas are therefore as follows: REC = COR/(COR + MIS); PRE = COR/(COR + SPU); UND = MIS/(COR +
MIS); OVG = SPU/(COR + SPU).
Template Element and Template Relation
The variation on the Scenario Template (ST) score report for Template Element (TE) and Template
Relation(TR) is minor; there is no template object and no text filtering score in either because the objects are
generated independent of any domain (scenario) relevance criteria.
Named Entity
For the Named Entity (NE) task, the reporting is slightly more extensive. The first table is the same as for
Information Extraction, i.e., it contains subtask scores. The second table reports the scores according to which part of
the document the named entity appeared in. The remaining tables are the same as those in the Information Extraction
tasks.
Coreference
The Coreference (CO) task is quite different from the other four tasks and the output is also different. The
number of coreference chains per document is given for the key and the response. The scoring method looks at
linkages that define equivalence classes, and the important measure is how many linkages need to be added or taken
away to get the correct equivalence class. The score reports contain recall, precision, and F-measure scores. Please
note that the recall and precision scores for CO are reported as both ratios and percentages.
REFERENCES
? Chinchor, N.; Hirschman, L.; and Lewis, D. D. (1993). ?Evaluating Message Understanding
Systems: An Analysis of the Third Message Understanding Conference (MUC-3).? Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(3),409 - 449.
? Chinchor, N. (1992). ?The Statistical Significance of the MUC-4 Results.? In Proceedings,
Fourth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-4). Morgan Kaufmann. San Mateo, CA.
? Vilain, M.; Burger, J.; Aberdeen, J.; Connolly, D.; and Hirschman, L. (1995). ?A Model-Theo-
retic Coreference Scoring Scheme.? In Proceedings, Fourth Message Understanding Confer-
ence (MUC-4). Morgan Kaufmann. San Mateo, CA.
F =
(?2 + 1.0) x P x R
(?2 x P)+ R
