Oki Electric Industry :
Description of the Oki System as Used for MUC-7
J. Fukumoto, F. Masui, M. Shimohata, M. Sasaki
Kansai Lab., R&D group
Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd.
Crystal Tower 1-2-27 Shiromi, Chuo-ku, Osaka 540-6025 JAPAN
ffukumoto,masui,simohata,sasakig@kansai.oki.co.jp
INTRODUCTION
This paper describes the Oki Information Extraction system as used for MUC-7 evaluation [1][2].
The tasks we have conducted are Named Entity, Co-reference, Template Element and Template
Relation. Each module is implemented using MT system modules and pattern recognition modules.
Our purposes to participate MUC-7 evaluation are to evaluate how MT system modules are eective
for other application such as IE system and to develop our information extraction technology based
on pattern recognition.
Oki's MT system, PENS

EE [3][4], is a commercial system and is one of major MT systems in
Japan. Translation mechanism of PENS

EE system basically applies transfer method. There are
English-to-Japanese (EJ) and Japanese-to-English (JE) systems and both are based on the same
software systems, that is, both MT systems are using the same Grammar Description Language
(GDL), and GDL rule translator and interpreter (GDL system). Oki has already spent more than
ten years for development and improvement of the MT system.
The Oki IE system used for MUC-7 is composed of a surface pattern recognition module and
a structural pattern recognition module. The surface pattern recognition module traces a text at
surface linguistic level and detects NE elements and co-referred elements without any language
analysis system such as lexical analysis and syntax analysis. The structural pattern recognition
module traces parse trees of a text, which is generated by parser of MT system. Syntactic and
semantic information embedded in the parse tree are used to detect NE elements, co-referred
elements and so on. The structural pattern recognition rules are described in GDL and are executed
on the GDL system which is based on pattern matching mechanism of tree data. Detected elements
of tree data are marked and are extracted after execution of rules.
BACKGROUND
Oki has submitted two systems: the English system for MUC-7 (NE, CO, TE and TR) and the
Japanese system for MET-2 (NE). This is our rst participation in MUC and MET evaluation.
In order to develop the systems in a short period, we utilized parsing module of the MT system
1
for a sentence analyzer. The English system is developed using the English sentence analyzer
of the PENS

EE-EJ and the Japanese system is developed using the Japanese sentence analyzer
of PENS

EE-JE. We also utilized the GDL system for description of extraction rules (only for
description of structural patterns). The GDL system has powerful rule debugging environment,
which is very helpful to develop an extraction system in a short period.
OKI MT SYSTEM : PENS

EE
In the MT system, PENS

EE, translation rules are executed on the GDL system. A GDL rule
consists of pattern matching part and action part. Pattern matching part describes conditions to
specify a part of tree data and action part states changes of the specied tree structure and/or
modication of node information of the tree. Sample transformation of tree data is shown in
Figure 1.
Top
*1
*1
adj               noun
            (article = det.)
Top
art adj noun *2
noun(NP) *2
Figure 1: Transformation of tree data in the GDL system
Pattern matching species a sequence of article (art), adjective (adj) and noun and both sides
of the sequence are arbitrary number of nodes (\*1" and \*2"). After transformation, node infor-
mation of article is embedded into the noun node, and the noun and adjective nodes are moved
under the noun phrase node (NP). In our current implementation, a lower node modied its upper
node.
OVERVIEW OF THE OKI IE SYSTEM
Oki's IE system consists of surface pattern recognition modules, structural pattern recognition
modules, ltering programs to convert internal expression of parser to surface expression, and
2
SGML tag processing modules. Architecture of the system is shown in Figure 2.
SGML Tag Processors
Surface Pattern
Recognition Modules
(NE, CO and TE)
Morphological and
  Syntax Analyzer
+
Structural Pattern
Recognition Modules
Co-reference
Analysis Module
Template Element
Analysis Module
Template Relation
Analysis Module
NE ResultsNE Filter
CO ResultsCO Filter
TE ResultsTE Filter
TR ResultsTR Filter
Input Text
Figure 2: Architecture of the Oki MUC system
The system rstly recognizes surface level patterns in a text and adds SGML tags for each task.
In this analysis, NE elements, CO elements and sub-category of NE elements for the TE task are
extracted. In the SGML tag processing module, these tags and original SGML tags are embedded
in their adjacent words for morphological and syntax analysis. Each sentence of the tag-processed
text is parsed in the morphological and syntax analyzer which is originally used in the MT system.
Structural pattern analysis rules for the NE task are implemented in the syntax analysis rules. The
recognized patterns are expressed in node attributes in a parse tree. In order to obtain NE results,
information of node attributes is extracted and embedded in a text as SGML tags by the NE lter.
For the CO task, all parse trees of sentences are converted into one tree structure each child
node of which is a parse tree of a sentence. In recognition of the CO task, anaphoric elements are
extracted and their antecedents are detected by traversing the tree structure. Information of CO
elements is extracted from the tree structure and embedded in the original text as SGML tags by
the CO lter. CO-reference numbers are also set by the CO lter. For the TE and TR tasks, a
text tree structure is used for identifying TE and TR elements. The TE and TR lters generate
TE and TR information in BNF format from the tree structure of a text.
The NE system
The NE system consists of a surface pattern recognition module, a structural pattern recognition
module and some ltering programs for tag-processing for parsing and post-processing.
3
Surface Pattern Recognition
Surface pattern recognition is processed in the following sub-processes.
 Recognition of capitalized area
Sequential capitalized words are recognized as NE candidates.
 Head word processing
A head word of a sentence is removed from NE candidates when it is registered in Non-element
word list.
 Merging capitalized area
Some functional words and prepositions, \for" and \of", are utilized for recognition of NE
candidates. For example, the functional word \Bank" and the preposition \of" are used for
recognition of the NE element, \Bank of Tokyo". The functional word \University" and the
preposition \of" are used for recognition of the NE element, \University of Tokyo".
 Type recognition of NE elements
Type information of NE candidates is recognized by functional words such as \Mr." of a
person name, \Bank" of a organization name, \City" of a location name and so on.
 Dictionary look up
The rests of NE candidates are checked with word list of each NE type. The lists are manually
extracted from newspaper articles, index information of a world map and company names
from stock market news, etc.
In the recognition of NE elements, identied elements are utilized for recognition of their abbre-
viation which is repeated in a text. For example, when \Mr. John Doe" in a text is recognized as a
person name, the words \John" and \Doe" in the same text are also recognized as a person name.
Moreover, the abbreviation \FAA" in a text is used for checking NE candidates after recognition
of \Federal Aviation Administration" in the same text.
Tag-processing for Parsing
An original text is SGML-tagged one and NE elements in the text are also SGML-tagged after
the surface pattern recognition. In order to parse such a SGML-tagged text, these tags have to be
concealed. In a parse tree, tag information is expressed in node attributes of a parse tree, therefore,
the system can handles information obtained at a surface level pattern recognition during parsing.
Structural Pattern Recognition
After parsing, several structural pattern rules are applied to a parse tree in order to recognize NE
elements. Some of them are as follows:
4
 The subject element of some types of verb such as \say", \die", \play" and so on is recognized
as a person name.
 The noun phrase in front of relative pronoun \who" is recognized as a person name.
 The noun phrase, whose appositive phrase is a person name, is recognized as a person name,
vice versa.
 The noun phrase followed by \employee", \spokesman" and so on is recognized as an organi-
zation name.
 The noun phrase with preposition \in", \at", \near" or \over", whose appositive phrase is
an organization name, is recognized as an organization name.
Post-processing
After the structural pattern recognition, NE tag information is extracted from a parse tree and
added to the pattern tagged text. All the NE tag information is utilized for tagging to non-body
part of the text.
The CO System
The CO system also consists of a surface pattern recognition module, a structural pattern recogni-
tion module and some ltering programs for tag-processing for parsing and post-processing.
Surface Level Recognition
In the surface pattern recognition of the NE system, abbreviation and repeated one are utilized
for recognition of NE elements. This mechanism is also used for surface level recognition of CO
elements. For example, when the person name \Mr. John Doe" appears in a text, the words \John"
and \Doe" are utilized as abbreviation of the person name.
Tag-processing for Parsing
SGML-tags and CO tags obtained from the surface pattern analysis are concealed for parsing as
well as the NE system.
Structural Level Recognition
This is the main module of CO-reference analysis. Firstly, the CO system recognizes co-reference
expression of appositions and the expression of \A is B". Then, the CO system extracts anaphoric
expressions of pronouns and noun phrases with denite articles, and traverses the tree structure
from bottom to top and left to right way to detect its antecedent.
5
Post-processing
Information of CO tags is extracted from the tree structure of a text and is added to the pattern
tagged text. All the CO tag information is utilized for tagging to non-body part of a text in the
same way of the NE system. Moreover, all the co-referred elements have the same co-reference
number, therefore, renumbering according to the CO task denition is also done in this module.
The TE System
The TE system consists of the following sub-processes.
1. Recognition of Entities
Entities which are recognized in the NE system are selected. Capitalized elements which
are not identied in the NE system will be handled as candidates for TE elements. These
elements will be identied as TE elements, if they are related to some descriptor.
2. Recognition of Descriptors
Noun phrases and prepositional phrases which have functional words of descriptors such as
\Comdr.", \President", \agency" and so on are extracted. Semantic information of Descrip-
tors which is used in parsing will be utilized for recognition of type information of TE entities
in the next process.
3. Recognition Relation between Entities and Descriptor
Relation between entities and descriptors is recognized by structural pattern rules for the
TE task. For example, an entity and a descriptor are related on some verb such as \called",
\named" and \be", they are recognized as a TE pattern.
4. Merging TE Patterns
Some TE patterns are merged using Co-reference information, that is, the same entities (co-
referred elements) are recognized as one entity.
The TR System
The TR system identies relation between TE elements. In our current simple implementation, if a
person and an organization are related on some predicate, they are recognized as having \employee-
of" relation. Moreover, if an organization and a location are related on some predicate, they are
recognized as having \locate-of" relation. In case of an artifact and an organization, they will have
\product-of" relation.
WORKTHROUGH ARTICLE
Table shows results of the workthrough article. As for the TE task, we mainly implemented rules
for entity, therefore, the TE score for entity is at an average level according to the results of
6
MUC-6. However, the score for location is very low. It is because the TE system has a few
location rules and has no dictionaries to identify the detailed information of a location.
Task Recall Precision F-measure
NE (nyt9602140704) 94/132 71.1 94/114 82.5 76.4
TE (nyt9602140509) 52/186 30.0 52/62 83.9 41.9
TR (nyt9602140509) 45/168 26.8 45/62 72.6 39.1
CO (nyt9609100378) 26/79 32.9 26/47 55.3 41.3
Table 1: Results of Workthrough Article
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION
This participation to the MUC-7 and MET-2 tasks was our rst trial and we had to develop our IE
systems for the tasks in a short period. Our purpose to participate MUC-7 tasks is to evaluate how
MT parsing modules are eective for development of an IE system in a short period and how they
work. We found that it is useful to utilize the MT system modules for the other application such
as IE system because our MT system has practically achieved robustness and the rule description
system called the GDL system is also very helpful due to its pattern matching mechanism. However,
parsing modules of the MT system has been originally developed for language transformation in
a transfer method, therefore, tree structure of an original language is sometimes converted to the
structure of a target language. These kinds of rules caused some diculty of pattern matching in
the IE tasks.
We have participated the MET-2 task in Japanese which has only the NE task. We are plan-
ning to apply our IE technology developed for MUC-7 tasks to a practical Japanese information
extraction system. Moreover, it will be useful to participate Japanese CO, TE, TR and ST tasks
if they will be dened in the next conference.
References
[1] TIPSTER TEXT PROGRAM Phrase II, DARPA, (1996).
[2] Proceedings of 6th Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6), DARPA, (1995).
[3] Masui, F., Tsunashima, T., Sugio, T., Tazoe, T. and Shiino, T.: \Analysis of Lengthy Sen-
tences Using an English Comparative Structure Model", System and Computers in Japan,
pp.40{48, SCRIPTA TECHNICA Inc., (1996).
[4] PENS

EE, http://www.oki.co.jp/OKI/RDG/English/kikaku/vol.1/sugio/main.html
http://www.oki.co.jp/OKI/Home/English/Topic/PENSEE/
7
