Knowledge-Free Induction of Inflectional Morphologies
Patrick SCHONE                                 Daniel JURAFSKY
University of Colorado at Boulder           University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, Colorado 80309                        Boulder, Colorado 80309
schone@cs.colorado.edu                        jurafsky@cs.colorado.edu
Abstract
We propose an algorithm  to automatically induce
the morphology of inflectional languages using only
text corpora and no human input.  Our algorithm
combines cues from orthography, semantics, and
syntactic distributions to induce morphological
relationships in German, Dutch, and English. Using
CELEX as a gold standard for evaluation, we show
our algorithm to be an improvement over any
knowledge-free algorithm yet proposed.
1       Introduction
Many NLP tasks, such as building machine-readable
dictionaries, are dependent on the results of
morphological analysis.  While morphological
analyzers have existed since the early 1960s, current
algorithms require human labor to build rules for
morphological structure.  In an attempt to avoid this
labor-intensive process, recent work has focused on
machine-learning approaches to induce
morphological structure using large corpora. 
In this paper, we propose a knowledge-free
algorithm to automatically induce the morphology
structures of a language.  Our algorithm takes as
input a large corpus and  produces as output a set of
conflation sets indicating the various inflected and
derived forms for each word in the language.  As an
example, the conflation set of the word ?abuse?
would contain ?abuse?,  ?abused?, ?abuses?,
?abusive?, ?abusively?, and so forth. Our algorithm
extends earlier approaches to morphology induction
by combining various induced information sources:
the semantic relatedness of the affixed forms using
a Latent Semantic Analysis approach to corpus-
based semantics (Schone and Jurafsky, 2000), affix
frequency, syntactic context, and transitive closure.
Using the hand-labeled CELEX lexicon  (Baayen, et
al., 1993) as our gold standard, the current version
of our algorithm achieves an F-score of 88.1% on
the task of identifying conflation sets in English,
outperforming earlier algorithms.  Our algorithm is
also applied to German and Dutch and evaluated on
its ability to find  prefixes, suffixes, and circumfixes
in these languages.  To our knowledge, this serves
as the first evaluation of complete regular
morphological induction of German or Dutch
(although researchers such as Nakisa and Hahn
(1996) have evaluated induction algorithms on
morphological sub-problems in German).
2 Previous Approaches
Previous morphology induction approaches have
fallen into three categories.  These categories differ
depending on whether human input is provided and
on whether the goal is to obtain affixes or complete
morphological analysis.  We here briefly describe
work in each category.
2.1 Using a Knowledge Source to Bootstrap
Some researchers begin with some initial human-
labeled source from which they induce other
morphological components. In particular, Xu and
Croft (1998) use word context derived from  a
corpus to refine Porter stemmer output. Gaussier
(1999) induces derivational morphology using an
inflectional lexicon which includes part of speech
information.  Grabar and Zweigenbaum (1999) use
the SNOMED corpus of semantically-arranged
medical terms to find semantically-motivated
morphological relationships. Also, Yarowsky and
Wicentowski (2000) obtained outstanding results at
inducing English past tense after beginning with a
list of the open class roots in the language, a table of
a language?s inflectional parts of speech, and the
canonical suffixes for each part of speech.
2.2 Affix Inventories
A second, knowledge-free category of research has
focused on obtaining affix inventories.  Brent, et al
(1995) used minimum description length (MDL) to
find the most data-compressing suffixes. Kazakov
(1997) does something akin to this using MDL as a
fitness metric for evolutionary computing. D?Jean
(1998) uses a strategy similar to that of Harris
(1951). He declares that a stem has ended when the
number of characters following it exceed some
given threshold and identifies any residual following semantic relations, we identified those word pairs
the stems as suffixes.  that have strong semantic correlations as being
2.3 Complete morphological analysis
Due to the existence of morphological ambiguity
(such as with the word ?caring? whose stem is
?care? rather than ?car?), finding affixes alone does
not constitute a complete morphological analysis.
Hence, the last category of research is also
knowledge-free but attempts to induce, for each
word of a corpus, a complete analysis.  Since our Most of the existing algorithms described focus on
approach falls into this category (expanding upon suffixing in inflectional languages (though
our earlier approach (Schone and Jurafsky, 2000)), Jacquemin and D?Jean describe work on prefixes).
we describe work in this area in more detail. None of these algorithms consider the general
2.3.1 Jacquemin?s multiword approach
Jacquemin (1997) deems pairs of word n-grams as
morphologically related if two words in the first n-
gram have the same first few letters (or stem) as two
words in the second n-gram and if there is a suffix
for each stem whose length is less than k. He also
clusters groups of words having the same kinds of
word endings, which gives an added performance
boost.  He applies his algorithm to a French term list
and scores based on sampled, by-hand evaluation. 
2.3.2. Goldsmith: EM and MDLs
Goldsmith (1997/2000) tries to automatically sever
each word in exactly one place in order to establish
a potential set of stems and suffixes.  He uses the
expectation-maximization algorithm (EM) and MDL
as well as some triage procedures to help eliminate
inappropriate parses for every word in a corpus.  He
collects the possible suffixes for each stem and calls
these signatures which give clues about word
classes. With the exceptions of capitalization
removal and some word segmentation, Goldsmith's
algorithm is otherwise knowledge-free. His
algorithm, Linguistica, is freely available on the
Internet.  Goldsmith applies his algorithm to various
languages but evaluates in English and French.
2.3.3  Schone and Jurafsky: induced semantics
In our earlier work, we (Schone and Jurafsky
(2000)) generated a list of N candidate suffixes and
used this list to identify word pairs which share the
same stem but conclude with distinct candidate
suffixes.  We then applied  Latent Semantic
Analysis (Deerwester, et al, 1990) as a method of
automatically determining semantic relatedness
between word pairs.  Using statistics from the
morphological variants of each other.  With the
exception of word segmentation, we provided  no
human information to our system.  We applied our
system to an English corpus and evaluated by
comparing each word?s conflation set as produced
by our algorithm to those derivable from CELEX.
2.4 Problems with earlier approaches 
conditions of circumfixing or infixing, nor are they
applicable to other language types such as
agglutinative languages (Sproat, 1992).
Additionally, most approaches have centered
around statistics of orthographic properties.  We had
noted previously (Schone and Jurafsky, 2000),
however, that errors can arise from strictly
orthographic systems.  We had observed in other
systems such errors as inappropriate removal of
valid affixes (?ally?<?all?), failure to resolve
morphological ambiguities (?hated?<?hat?), and
pruning of semi-productive affixes (?dirty?h?dirt?).
Yet we illustrated that induced semantics can help
overcome some of these errors.
However, we have since observed that induced
semantics can give rise to different kinds of
problems.  For instance, morphological variants may
be semantically opaque such that the meaning of
one variant cannot be readily determined by the
other (?reusability?h?use?).  Additionally,  high-
frequency function words may be conflated due to
having weak semantic information (?as?<?a?).
Coupling  semantic and orthographic statistics, as
well as introducing induced syntactic information
and relational transitivity can help in overcoming
these problems.  Therefore, we begin with an
approach similar to our previous algorithm.  Yet we
build upon this algorithm in several ways in that we:
[1] consider circumfixes, [2] automatically identify
capitalizations by treating them similar to prefixes
[3] incorporate frequency information, [4] use
distributional information to help identify syntactic
properties, and [5] use transitive closure to help find
variants that may not have been found to be
semantically related but which are related to mutual
variants.  We then apply these strategies to English,
Figure 1: Strategy and evaluation
Figure 2: Inserting the residual lexicon into a trie
German, and Dutch.  We evaluate our algorithm Figure 2). Yet using this approach, there may be
against the human-labeled CELEX lexicon in all circumfixes whose endings will be overlooked in
three languages and compare our results to those the search for suffixes unless we first remove all
that the Goldsmith and Schone/Jurafsky algorithms candidate prefixes.  Therefore, we build a lexicon
would have obtained on our same data. We show consisting of all words in our corpus and identify all
how each of our additions result in progressively word beginnings with frequencies in excess of some
better overall solutions. threshold (T ). We call these pseudo-prefixes. We
3  Current Approach
3.1 Finding Candidate Circumfix Pairings
As in our earlier approach (Schone and Jurafsky,
2000), we begin by generating, from an untagged
corpus, a list of word pairs that might be
morphological variants.  Our algorithm has changed
somewhat, though, since we previously sought word
pairs that vary only by a prefix or a suffix, yet we
now wish to generalize to those with circumfixing
differences.  We use ?circumfix? to mean true
circumfixes like the German ge-/-t as well as
combinations of prefixes and suffixes. It should be
mentioned also that we assume the existence of
languages having valid circumfixes that are not
composed merely of a prefix  and a suffix that
appear independently elsewhere.  
To find potential morphological variants, our first
goal is to find word endings which could serve as
suffixes. We had shown in our earlier work how one
might do this using a character tree, or  trie  (as in
1
strip all pseudo-prefixes from each word in our
lexicon and add the word residuals back into the
lexicon as if they were also words.  Using this final
lexicon, we can now seek for suffixes in a manner
equivalent to what we had done before (Schone and
Jurafsky, 2000).  
To demonstrate how this is done, suppose our
initial  lexicon / contained the words ?align,?
?real,? ?aligns,? ?realign?, ?realigned?,  ?react?,
?reacts,? and ?reacted.? Due to the high frequency
occurrence of ?re-? suppose it is identified as a
pseudo-prefix.  If we strip off ?re-? from all words,
and add all residuals to a trie, the branch of the trie
of words beginning with ?a? is depicted in Figure 2.
In our earlier work, we showed that a majority of
the regular suffixes in the corpus can be found by
identifying trie branches that appear repetitively.
By ?branch? we mean those places in the trie where
some splitting occurs.  In the case of Figure 2, for
example, the branches  NULL (empty circle), ?-s?
and ?-ed? each appear twice.  We assemble a list of
all trie branches that occur some minimum number
of times (T ) and refer to such as potential suffixes.2
Given this list, we can now  find potential prefixes
using a similar strategy. Using our original lexicon,
we can now strip off all potential suffixes from each
word and form a new augmented lexicon.  Then, (as
we had proposed before) if we reverse the ordering
on the words and insert them into a trie, the
branches that are formed will be potential prefixes
(in reverse order).
Before describing the last steps of this procedure,
it is beneficial to define a few terms (some of which
appeared in our previous work):
[a] potential circumfix: A pair B/E where B and E
occur respectively in potential prefix and suffix lists
[b] pseudo-stem: the residue of a word after its
potential circumfix is removed
[c] candidate circumfix: a potential circumfix which
appears affixed to at least T  pseudo-stems that are3
shared by other potential circumfixes
[d] rule: a pair of candidate circumfixes sharing at
least T  pseudo-stems4
[e] pair of potential morphological variants
(PPMV): two words sharing the same rule but
distinct candidate circumfixes
[f] ruleset: the set of all PPMVs for a common rule
Our final goal in this first stage of induction is to
find all of the possible rules and their corresponding
rulesets. We therefore re-evaluate each word in the
original lexicon to identify all potential circumfixes
that could have been valid for the word.  For
example, suppose that the lists of potential suffixes
and prefixes contained ?-ed? and  ?re-? respectively.
Note also that NULL exists by default in both lists
as well.  If we consider the word ?realigned? from
our lexicon /, we would find that its potential
circumfixes would be NULL/ed, re/NULL, and
re/ed and the corresponding pseudo-stems would be
?realign,? ?aligned,? and ?align,? respectively,
From /, we also note that circumfixes re/ed and
NULL/ing share the pseudo-stems ?us,? ?align,? and
?view? so a rule could be created: re/ed<NULL/ing.
This means that word pairs such as ?reused/using?
and ?realigned/aligning? would be deemed PPMVs.
Although the choices in T  through T  is1 4
somewhat arbitrary, we chose  T =T =T =10 and1 2 3
T =3. In English, for example, this yielded 305354
possible rules. Table 1 gives a sampling of these
potential rules in each of the three languages in
terms of frequency-sorted rank.  Notice that several
?rules? are quite valid, such as the indication of an
English suffix -s. There are also valid circumfixes
like the ge-/-t circumfix of German. Capitalization
also appears (as a ?prefix?), such as C< c in English,
D<d in German, and V<v in Dutch. Likewise,there
are also some rules that may only be true in certain
circumstances, such as -d<-r in English (such as
worked/worker, but certainly not for steed/steer.)
However, there are some rules that are
Table 1: Outputs of the trie stage: potential rules
Rank ENGLISH GERMAN DUTCH
1 -s< L -n< L -en< L
2 -ed< -ing -en< L -e< L
4 -ing< L -s< L -n< L
8 -ly< L -en< -t de-< L
12 C-< c- -en< -te -er< L
16 re-< L 1-< L -r< L
20 -ers< -ing er-< L V-< v-
24 1-< L 1-< 2- -ingen < -e
28 -d< -r ge-/-t < -en ge-< -e
32 s-< L D-< d- -n< -rs
 
wrong: the potential ?s-? prefix of English  is never
valid although word combinations like stick/tick
spark/park, and slap/lap happen frequently in
English. Incorporating semantics can help determine
the validity of each rule.
3.2 Computing Semantics
Deerwester, et al (1990) introduced an algorithm
called Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) which
showed that valid semantic relationships between
words and documents in a corpus can be induced
with virtually no human intervention. To do this,
one typically begins by applying singular value
decomposition (SVD) to a matrix, M, whose entries
M(i,j) contains the frequency of word i as seen in
document j of the corpus. The SVD decomposes M
into the product of three matrices, U, D, and V  suchT
that U and V  are orthogonal matrices and D is aT
diagonal matrix whose entries are the singular
values of M.  The LSA approach then zeros out all
but the top k singular values of the SVD, which has
the effect of projecting vectors into an optimal k-
dimensional subspace. This methodology is
well-described in the literature (Landauer, et al,
1998; Manning and Sch?tze, 1999). 
In order to obtain semantic representations of each
word, we apply our previous strategy (Schone and
Jurafsky (2000)). Rather than using a term-
document matrix, we had followed an approach akin
to that of Sch?tze (1993), who performed SVD on
a Nx2N  term-term matrix.  The N here represents
the N-1 most-frequent words as well as a glob
position to account for all other words not in the top
N-1.  The matrix  is structured such that for a given
word w?s row, the first N columns denote words that
-NCS (?,1) 

P

NCS
exp[	((x	?)/1)2]dx
NCS(w1,w2 ) 

min
k(1,2)
cos(
w1 ,w2)	?k
1k
(1)
Pr(NCS)


nT-NCS(?T,1T)
(nR	nT)-NCS(0,1)  nT-NCS(?T,1T)
.
precede w by up to 50 words, and the second N
columns represent those words that follow by up to
50 words.  Since SVDs are more designed to work then, if there were n  items in the ruleset, the
with  normally-distributed data (Manning and probability that a NCS is non-random is
Sch?tze, 1999, p. 565), we fill each entry with a
normalized count (or Z-score) rather than straight
frequency.   We then compute the SVD and keep the
top 300 singular values to form semantic vectors for We define Pr (w <w )=Pr(NCS(w ,w )). We
each word.  Word w would be assigned the semantic choose to accept as valid relationships only those
vector  U D , where U  represents the row ofW= w k w
U corresponding to w and D  indicates that only thek
top k diagonal entries of D have been preserved. 
As a last comment, one would like to be able to
obtain a separate semantic vector for every word
(not just those in the top N).  SVD computations can
be expensive and impractical for large values of N.
Yet due to the fact that U and V  are orthogonalT
matrices, we can start with a matrix of reasonable-
sized N and ?fold in? the remaining terms, which is
the approach we have followed.  For details about
folding in terms, the reader is referred to Manning
and Sch?tze (1999, p. 563).
3.3 Correlating Semantic Vectors
To correlate these semantic vectors, we use
normalized cosine scores (NCSs) as we had
illustrated before (Schone and Jurafsky (2000)).
The normalized cosine score between two words w1
and w  is determined by first computing cosine2
values between each word?s semantic vector and
200 other randomly selected semantic vectors.  This
provides a mean (?) and variance (1 ) of correlation2
for each word.  The NCS is given to be 
We had previously illustrated NCS values on
various PPMVs and showed that this type of score
seems to be appropriately identifying semantic
relationships. (For example, the PPMVs of car/cars
and ally/allies had NCS values of 5.6 and 6.5
respectively, whereas car/cares and ally/all had
scored only -0.14 and -1.3.)  Further, we showed
that by performing this normalizing process, one can
estimate the probability that an NCS is random or
not.  We expect that random NCSs will be
approximately normally distributed according to
N(0,1). We can also estimate the distribution
N(? ,1 ) of true correlations and number of  termsT T2
in that distribution (n ).  If we define  a functionT
R
sem 1 2 1 2
PPMVs with Pr T , where T  is an acceptancesem 5 5
threshold. We showed in our earlier work that
T =85% affords high overall precision while still5
identifying most valid morphological relationships.
 3.4 Augmenting with Affix Frequencies
The first major change to our previous algorithm is
an attempt to overcome some of the weaknesses of
purely semantic-based morphology induction by
incorporating information about affix frequencies.
As validated by Kazakov (1997), high frequency
word endings and beginnings in inflectional
languages are very likely to be legitimate affixes.  In
English, for example, the highest frequency rule is
-s<L. CELEX suggests that 99.7% of our PPMVs
for this rule would be true. However, since the
purely semantic-based approach tends to select only
relationships with contextually similar meanings,
only 92% of the PPMVs are retained.  This suggests
that one might improve the analysis by
supplementing semantic probabilities with
orthographic-based probabilities (Pr ). orth
Our approach to obtaining Pr   is motivated byorth
an appeal to minimum edit distance (MED). MED
has been applied to the morphology induction
problem by other researchers (such as Yarowsky
and Wicentowski, 2000).  MED determines the
minimum-weighted set of insertions, substitutions,
and deletions required to transform one word into
another. For example, only a single deletion is
required to transform ?rates? into ?rate? whereas
two substitutions and an insertion are required to
transform it into ?rating.? Effectively, if Cost(&) is
transforming cost, Cost(rates<rate) = Cost(s<L)
whereas Cost(rates<rating)=Cost(es<ing). More
generally, suppose word X has circumfix C =B /E1 1 1
and pseudo-stem -S-, and word Y has circumfix
C =B /E  also with pseudo-stem -S-. Then,2 2 2
Cost(X<Y)=Cost(B SE <B SE )=Cost(C <C ).1 1 2 2 1 2
Since we are free to choose whatever cost function
we desire, we can equally choose one whose range
Cost(C1<C2)
1	
2 . f (C1<C2 )
max f (C1<Z) 
~Z
max f (W<C2)
~W
lies in the interval of [0,1]. Hence, we can assign Consider Table 2 which is a sample of PPMVs
Pr (X<Y) = 1-Cost(X<Y). This calculation implies from the ruleset for ?-s<L? along with theirorth
that the orthographic probability that X and Y are probabilities of validity.  A validity threshold (T ) of
morphological variants is directly derivable from the 85% would mean that the four bottom PPMVs
cost of transforming C  into C . would be deemed invalid.  Yet if we find that the1 2
The only question remaining is how to determine local contexts of these low-scoring word pairs
Cost(C <C ). This cost should depend on a number match the contexts of other PPMVs having high1 2
of factors: the frequency of the rule f(C <C ),  the scores (i.e., those whose scores exceed T ), then1 2
reliability of the metric in comparison to that of their probabilities of validity should increase.  If we
semantics (., where .  [0,1]), and the frequencies could compute a syntax-based probability for these
of other rules involving C  and C .  We define the words, namely Pr , then assuming independence1 2
orthographic probability of validity as we would have:
  Figure 3 describes the pseudo-code for an
We suppose that orthographic information is less (L) and right-hand (R) sides of each valid PPMV of
reliable than semantic information, so we arbitrarily a given ruleset, try to find a collection of words
set .=0.5.  Now since Pr (X<Y)=1-Cost(C <C ), from the corpus that are collocated with L and R butorth 1 2
we can readily combine it with Pr  if we assume which occur statistically too many or too few timessem
independence using the ?noisy or? formulation: in these collocations.  Such word sets form
  Pr (valid) = Pr  +Pr  - (Pr  Pr ).  (2) signatures.  Then, determine similar signatures fors-o sem orth sem orth  
By using this formula, we obtain 3% (absolute)
more of the correct PPMVs than semantics alone
had provided for the -s<L rule and, as will be
shown later, gives reasonable improvements overall.
3.5 Local Syntactic Context
Since a primary role of morphology ? inflectional
morphology in particular ?  is to convey syntactic
information, there is no guarantee that two words
that are morphological variants need to share similar
semantic properties.  This suggests that performance
could improve if the induction process took
advantage of  local, syntactic contexts around words
in addition to the more global, large-window
contexts used in semantic processing.  
Table 2: Sample probabilities for ?-s<L?
Word+s Word Pr Word+s Word Pr
agendas agenda .968 legends legend .981
ideas idea .974 militias militia 1.00
pleas plea 1.00 guerrillas guerrilla 1.00
seas sea 1.00 formulas formula 1.00
areas area 1.00 railroads railroad 1.00
Areas Area .721 pads pad .731
Vegas Vega .641 feeds feed .543
5
5
syntax
Pr (valid) = Pr  +Pr  - (Pr  Pr )
  s-o syntax s-o syntax
algorithm to compute Pr .  Essentially, thesyntax
algorithm has two major components.  First, for left
a randomly-chosen set of words from the corpus as
well as for each of the PPMVs of the ruleset that are
not yet validated.  Lastly, compute the NCS and
their corresponding probabilities (see equation 1)
between the ruleset?s signatures and those of the to-
be-validated PPMVs to see if they can be validated.
Table 3 gives an example of the kinds of
contextual words one might expect for the ?-s<L?
rule. In fact, the syntactic signature for ?-s<L? does
indeed include such words as are, other, these, two,
were, and have as indicators of words that occur on
the left-hand side of the ruleset, and a, an, this, is,
has, and A as indicators of the right-hand side.
These terms help distinguish plurals from singulars.
Table 3: Examples of ?-s<L? contexts
Context for L Context for R
agendas are seas were a legend this formula
two red pads pleas have militia is an area
these ideas other areas railroad has A guerrilla
There is an added benefit from following this
approach: it can also be used to find rules that,
though different, seem to convey similar
information . Table 4 illustrates a number of such
agreements.  We have yet to take advantage of this
feature, but it clearly could be of use for part-of-
speech induction.
procedure SyntaxProb(ruleset,corpus)
    leftSig  =GetSignature(ruleset,corpus,left)
    rightSig=GetSignature(ruleset,corpus,right)
         =Concatenate(leftSig, rightSig)ruleset
    (? ,1 )=ComparetoRandom( )ruleset ruleset ruleset
    foreach PPMV in ruleset
       if   (Pr (PPMV)  T  )   continueS-O 5
       wLSig=GetSignature(PPMV,corpus,left)
       wRSig=GetSignature(PPMV,corpus,right)
         =Concatenate(wLSig, wRSig)PPMV
       (? ,1 )=ComparetoRandom( )PPMV PPMV PPMV
       prob[PPMV]=Pr(NCS(PPMV,ruleset))
end procedure
function GetSignature(ruleset,corpus,side)
    foreach PPMV in ruleset
        if   (Pr (PPMV) < T  )   continueS-O 5
        if  (side=left) X = LeftWordOf(PPMV)
        else  X = RightWordOf(PPMV)
        CountNeighbors(corpus,colloc,X)
    colloc  =SortWordsByFreq(colloc)
    for i = 1 to 100 signature[i]=colloc[i]
    return signature
end function
procedure CountNeighbors(corpus,colloc,X)
   foreach W in Corpus
       push(lexicon,W)
       if (PositionalDistanceBetween(X,W)2)
          count[W] = count[W]+1
    foreach W in lexicon
       if ( Zscore(count[W]) 3.0   or
             Zscore(count[W]) -3.0)
           colloc[W]=colloc[W]+1
end procedure
Figure 3: Pseudo-code to find Probability  syntax Figure 4: Semantic strengths
Table 4: Relations amongst rules
Rule Relative Cos Rule Relative Cos
-s<L -ies<y 83.8 -ed<L -d<L 95.5
-s<L -es<L 79.5 -ing<L -e<L 94.3
-ed<L -ied<y 81.9 -ing<L -ting<L 70.7
3.6 Branching Transitive Closure
Despite the semantic, orthographic, and syntactic
components of the algorithm, there are still valid
PPMVs, (X<Y), that may seem unrelated due to
corpus choice or weak distributional properties.
However, X and Y may appear as members of other
valid PPMVs such as (X<Z) and (Z<Y) containing
variants (Z, in this case) which are either
semantically or syntactically related to both of the
other words.  Figure 4 demonstrates this property in
greater detail.  The words conveyed in Figure 4 are
all words from the corpus that have potential
relationships between variants of the word ?abuse.?
Links between two words, such as ?abuse? and
?Abuse,? are labeled with a weight which is the
semantic correlation derived by LSA. Solid lines
represent valid relationships with Pr 0.85 andsem
dashed lines indicate relationships with lower-than-
threshold scores. The absence of a link suggests that
either the potential relationship was never identified
or discarded at an earlier stage.  Self loops are
assumed for each node since clearly each word
should be related morphologically to itself. Since
there are seven words that are valid morphological
relationships of ?abuse,? we would like to see a
complete graph containing 21 solid edges.  Yet, only
eight connections can be found by semantics alone
(Abuse<abuse, abusers<abusing, etc.).  
However, note that there is a path that can be
followed along solid edges from every correct word
to every other correct variant.  This suggests that
taking into consideration link transitivity (i.e., if
X<Y , Y <Y , Y <Y ,... and Y<Z, then X<Z)1 1 2 2 3 t
may drastically reduce the number of deletions. 
There are two caveats that need to be considered
for transitivity to be properly pursued.  The first
caveat: if no rule exists that would transform X into
Z, we will assume that despite the fact that there
may be a probabilistic path between the two, we
Pr
? i 
 
t
N
t
j
0 pj.
function BranchProbBetween(X,Z)
prob=0
foreach independent path ?j
    prob = prob+Pr (X<Z) - (prob*Pr (X<Z) )
?j ?j
return prob
Figure 5: Pseudocode for Branching Probability
Figure 6: Morphologic relations of ?conduct?
will disregard such a path. The second caveat is that  the algorithms we test against.  Furthermore, since
we will say that paths can only consist of solid CELEX has limited coverage, many of these lower-
edges, namely each Pr(Y<Y ) on every path must frequency words could not be scored anyway.  Thisi i+1
exceed  the specified  threshold. cut-off also helps each of the algorithms to obtain
Given these constraints, suppose now there is a stronger statistical information on the words they do
transitive relation from X to Z by way of some process which means that any observed failures
intermediate path ?={Y Y Y }.  That is, assume cannot be attributed to weak statistics.i 1, 2,.. t
there is a path X<Y  Y <Y ,...,Y<Z.  Suppose Morphological relationships can be represented as1, 1 2 t
also that the probabilities of these relationships are directed graphs.  Figure 6, for instance, illustrates
respectively p , p , p ,...,p .  If  is a decay factor in the directed graph, according to CELEX, of words0 1 2 t
the unit interval accounting for the number of link associated with ?conduct.?  We will call the words
separations, then we will say that the Pr(X<Z) of such a directed graph the conflation set for any of
along path ?  has probability                       .       We the words in the graph.   Due to the difficulty ini
combine the probabilities of all independent paths developing a scoring algorithm to compare directed
between X and Z according to Figure 5: graphs, we will follow our earlier approach and only
If the returned probability exceeds T , we declare X5
and Z to be morphological variants of each other.
4 Evaluation
We compare this improved algorithm to our former
algorithm (Schone and Jurafsky (2000)) as well as
to Goldsmith's Linguistica (2000).  We use as input
to our system 6.7 million words of English
newswire, 2.3 million of German, and 6.7 million of
Dutch.  Our gold standards are the hand-tagged
morphologically-analyzed CELEX lexicon in each
of these languages (Baayen, et al, 1993). We apply
the algorithms only to those words of our corpora
with frequencies of 10 or more.   Obviously this cut-
off slightly limits the generality of our results, but
it also greatly decreases processing time for all of
compare induced conflation sets to those of
CELEX. To evaluate, we compute the number of
correct (&), inserted (,), and deleted (') words each
algorithm predicts for each hypothesized conflation
set.  If X  represents word w's conflation setw
according to an algorithm, and if Y   represents itsw
CELEX-based conflation set, then, 
& = ~w(|X Y |/|Y |), w w w
' = ~w(|Y -(X Y )|/|Y |), andw w w w
,  = ~w (|X -(X Y )|/|Y |),w w w w
In making these computations, we disregard any
CELEX words absent from our data set and vice
versa. Most capital words are not in CELEX so this
process also discards them. Hence, we also make an
augmented CELEX to incorporate capitalized forms.
Table 5 uses the above scoring mechanism to
compare the F-Scores (product of precision and
recall divided by average of the two ) of our system
at a cutoff threshold of 85% to those of our earlier
algorithm (?S/J2000?) at the same threshold;
Goldsmith; and a baseline system which performs
no analysis (claiming that for any word, its
conflation set only consists of itself). The ?S? and
?C? columns respectively indicate performance of
systems when scoring for suffixing and
circumfixing (using the unaugmented CELEX). The
?A? column shows circumfixing performance using
the augmented CELEX. Space limitations required
that we illustrate ?A? scores for one language only,
but performance in the other two language is
similarly degraded. Boxes are shaded out for
algorithms not designed to produce circumfixes. 
Note that each of our additions resulted in an
overall improvement which held true across each of
the three languages.  Furthermore, using ten-fold
cross validation on the English data, we find that F-
score differences of the S column are each
statistically significant at least at the 95% level.
Table 5: Computation of F-Scores
Algorithms English German Dutch
S C A S C S C
None 62.8 59.9 51.7 75.8 63.0 74.2 70.0
Goldsmith 81.8 84.0 75.8
S/J2000 85.2 88.3 82.2
+orthogrph 85.7 82.2 76.9 89.3 76.1 84.5 78.9
+ syntax 87.5 84.0 79.0 91.6 78.2 85.6 79.4
+ transitive 84.5 79.7 78.9 79.688.1 92.3 85.8
5 Conclusions
We have illustrated three extensions to our earlier
morphology induction work (Schone and Jurafsky
(2000)). In addition to induced semantics, we
incorporated induced orthographic, syntactic, and
transitive information resulting in almost a 20%
relative reduction in overall  induction error.  We
have also extended the work by illustrating
performance in German and Dutch where, to our
knowledge, complete morphology induction
performance measures have not previously been
obtained.  Lastly, we showed a mechanism whereby
circumfixes as well as combinations of prefixing
and suffixing can be induced in lieu of the suffix-
only strategies prevailing in most previous research.
For the future, we expect improvements could be
derived by coupling this work, which focuses
primarily on inducing regular morphology, with that
of Yarowsky and Wicentowski (2000), who assume
some information about regular morphology in order
to induce irregular morphology. We also believe
that some findings of this work can benefit other
areas of linguistic induction, such as part of speech.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their thorough review and insightful comments.
References
Baayen, R.H., R. Piepenbrock, and H. van Rijn. (1993)
The CELEX lexical database (CD-ROM), LDC, Univ.
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Brent, M., S. K. Murthy, A. Lundberg. (1995).
Discovering morphemic suffixes: A case study in
MDL induction. Proc. Of 5  Int?l Workshop onth
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
D?Jean, H. (1998) Morphemes as necessary concepts for
structures: Discovery from untagged corpora.
Workshop on paradigms and Grounding in Natural
Language Learning, pp. 295-299.Adelaide, Australia
Deerwester, S., S.T. Dumais, G.W. Furnas, T.K.
Landauer, and R. Harshman. (1990) Indexing by
Latent Semantic Analysis. Journal of the American
Society of Information Science, Vol. 41, pp.391-407.
Gaussier, ?. (1999) Unsupervised learning of derivational
morphology from inflectional lexicons. ACL '99
Workshop: Unsupervised Learning in Natural
Language Processing, Univ. of Maryland.
Goldsmith, J. (1997/2000) Unsupervised learning of the
morphology of a natural language. Univ. of Chicago.
http://humanities.uchicago.edu/faculty/goldsmith.
Grabar, N. and P. Zweigenbaum. (1999) Acquisition
automatique de connaissances morphologiques sur le
vocabulaire  m?dical, TALN, Carg?se, France.
Harris, Z.  (1951) Structural Linguistics. University of
Chicago Press.
Jacquemin, C. (1997) Guessing morphology from terms
and corpora. SIGIR'97, pp. 156-167, Philadelphia, PA.
Kazakov, D. (1997) Unsupervised learning of na?ve
morphology with genetic algorithms. In W.
Daelemans, et al, eds., ECML/Mlnet Workshop on
Empirical Learning of Natural Language Processing
Tasks, Prague, pp. 105-111.
Landauer, T.K., P.W. Foltz, and D. Laham. (1998)
Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes. Vol. 25, pp. 259-284.
Manning, C.D. and H. Sch?tze. (1999) Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Nakisa, R.C., U.Hahn. (1996) Where defaults don't help:
the case of the German plural system.  Proc. of the
18th Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Schone, P. and D. Jurafsky. (2000) Knowledge-free
induction of morphology using latent semantic
analysis.  Proc. of the Computational Natural
Language Learning Conference, Lisbon, pp. 67-72.
Sch?tze, H. (1993) Distributed syntactic representations
with an application to part-of-speech tagging.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Neural Networks, pp. 1504-1509.
Sproat, R. (1992) Morphology and Computation. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Xu, J., B.W. Croft. (1998) Corpus-based stemming using
co-occurrence of word variants. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 16 (1), pp. 61-81.
Yarowsky, D. and R. Wicentowski. (2000) Minimally
supervised morphological analysis by multimodal
alignment.  Proc. of the ACL 2000, Hong Kong.
