An Analysis of Clarification Dialogue for Question Answering
Marco De Boni

School of Computing
Leeds Metropolitan University
Leeds LS6 3QS, UK
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York Y010 5DD, UK
mdeboni@cs.york.ac.uk
Suresh Manandhar

 Department of Computer Science
University of York
York Y010 5DD, UK
suresh@cs.york.ac.uk



Abstract
We examine clarification dialogue, a
mechanism for refining user questions with
follow-up questions, in the context of open
domain Question Answering systems. We
develop an algorithm for clarification dialogue
recognition through the analysis of collected
data on clarification dialogues and examine
the importance of clarification dialogue
recognition for question answering. The
algorithm is evaluated and shown to
successfully recognize the occurrence of
clarification dialogue in the majority of cases
and to simplify the task of answer retrieval.
1 Clarification dialogues in Question
Answering
Question Answering Systems aim to determine an
answer to a question by searching for a response in a
collection of documents (see Voorhees 2002 for an
overview of current systems). In order to achieve this
(see for example Harabagiu et al 2002), systems narrow
down the search by using information retrieval
techniques to select a subset of documents, or
paragraphs within documents, containing keywords
from the question and a concept which corresponds to
the correct question type (e.g. a question starting with
the word ?Who?? would require an answer containing a
person). The exact answer sentence is then sought by
either attempting to unify the answer semantically with
the question, through some kind of logical
transformation (e.g. Moldovan and Rus 2001) or by
some form of pattern matching (e.g. Soubbotin 2002;
Harabagiu et al 1999).
Often, though, a single question is not enough to meet
user?s goals and an elaboration or clarification dialogue
is required, i.e. a dialogue with the user which would
enable the answering system to refine its understanding
of the questioner's needs (for reasons of space we shall
not investigate here the difference between elaboration
dialogues, clarification dialogues and coherent topical
subdialogues and we shall hence refer to this type of
dialogue simply as ?clarification dialogue?, noting that
this may not be entirely satisfactory from a theoretical
linguistic point of view). While a number of researchers
have looked at clarification dialogue from a theoretical
point of view (e.g. Ginzburg 1998; Ginzburg and Sag
2000; van Beek at al. 1993), or from the point of view
of task oriented dialogue within a narrow domain (e.g.
Ardissono and Sestero 1996), we are not aware of any
work on clarification dialogue for open domain question
answering systems such as the ones presented at the
TREC workshops, apart from the experiments carried
out for the (subsequently abandoned) ?context? task in
the TREC-10 QA workshop (Voorhees 2002; Harabagiu
et al 2002). Here we seek to partially address this
problem by looking at some particular aspect of
clarification dialogues in the context of open domain
question answering. In particular, we examine the
problem of recognizing that a clarification dialogue is
occurring, i.e. how to recognize that the current question
under consideration is part of a previous series (i.e.
clarifying previous questions) or the start of a new
series; we then show how the recognition that a
clarification dialogue is occurring can simplify the
problem of answer retrieval.
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                               Main Papers , pp. 48-55
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
2 The TREC Context Experiments
The TREC-2001 QA track included a "context" task
which aimed at testing systems' ability to track context
through a series of questions (Voorhees 2002). In other
words, systems were required to respond correctly to a
kind of clarification dialogue in which a full
understanding of questions depended on an
understanding of previous questions. In order to test the
ability to answer such questions correctly, a total of 42
questions were prepared by NIST staff, divided into 10
series of related question sentences which therefore
constituted a type of clarification dialogue; the
sentences varied in length between 3 and 8 questions,
with an average of 4 questions per dialogue. These
clarification dialogues were however presented to the
question answering systems already classified and hence
systems did not need to recognize that clarification was
actually taking place.  Consequently systems that simply
looked for an answer in the subset of documents
retrieved for the first question in a series performed well
without any understanding of the fact that the questions
constituted a coherent series.
In a more realistic approach, systems would not be
informed in advance of the start and end of a series of
clarification questions and would not be able to use this
information to limit the subset of documents in which
an answer is to be sought.
3 Analysis of the TREC context questions
We manually analysed the TREC context question
collection in order to determine what features could be
used to determine the start and end of a question series,
with the following conclusions:
? Pronouns and possessive adjectives: questions such
as ?When was it born??, which followed ?What was
the first transgenic mammal??, were referring to
some previously mentioned object through a
pronoun (?it?). The use of personal pronouns (?he?,
?it?, ?) and possessive adjectives (?his?, ?her?,?)
which did not have any referent in the question
under consideration was therefore considered an
indication of a clarification question..
? Absence of verbs: questions such as ?On what body
of water?? clearly referred to some previous
question or answer.
? Repetition of proper nouns: the question series
starting with ?What type of vessel was the modern
Varyag?? had a follow-up question ?How long was
the Varyag??, where the repetition of the proper
noun indicates that the same subject matter is under
investigation.
? Importance of semantic relations: the first question
series started with the question ?Which museum in
Florence was damaged by a major bomb
explosion??; follow-up questions included ?How
many people were killed?? and ?How much
explosive was used??, where there is a clear
semantic relation between the ?explosion? of the
initial question and the ?killing? and ?explosive? of
the following questions. Questions belonging to a
series were ?about? the same subject, and this
aboutness could be seen in the use of semantically
related words.
4 Experiments in Clarification Dialogue
Recognition
It was therefore speculated that an algorithm which
made use of these features would successfully recognize
the occurrence of clarification dialogue. Given that the
only available data was the collection of ?context?
questions used in TREC-10, it was felt necessary to
collect further data in order to test our algorithm
rigorously. This was necessary both because of the
small number of questions in the TREC data and the
fact that there was no guarantee that an algorithm built
for this dataset would perform well on ?real? user
questions. A collection of 253 questions was therefore
put together by asking potential users to seek
information on a particular topic by asking a prototype
question answering system a series of questions, with
?cue? questions derived from the TREC question
collection given as starting points for the dialogues.
These questions made up 24 clarification dialogues,
varying in length from 3 questions to 23, with an
average length of 12 questions (the data is available
from the main author upon request).
The differences between the TREC ?context?
collection and the new collection are summarized in the
following table:

 Groups Qs Av. len Max Min
TREC 10 41 4 8 4
New 24 253 12 23 3

The questions were recorded and manually tagged to
recognize the occurrence of clarification dialogue.
The questions thus collected were then fed into a
system implementing the algorithm, with no indication
as to where a clarification dialogue occurred. The
system then attempted to recognize the occurrence of a
clarification dialogue. Finally the results given by the
system were compared to the manually recognized
clarification dialogue tags. In particular the algorithm
was evaluated for its capacity to:
? recognize a new series of questions (i.e. to tell that
the current question is not a clarification of any
previous question) (indicated by New in the results
table)
? recognize that the current question is clarifying a
previous question (indicated by Clarification in the
table)
5 Clarification Recognition Algorithm
Our approach to clarification dialogue recognition
looks at certain features of the question currently under
consideration (e.g. pronouns and proper nouns) and
compares the meaning of the current question with the
meanings of previous questions to determine whether
they are ?about? the same matter.
Given a question q0  and n  previously asked
questions q
-1..q-n  we have a function
Clarification_Question which is true if a question is
considered a clarification of a previously asked
question. In the light of empirical work such as
(Ginzburg 1998), which indicates that questioners do
not usually refer back to questions which are very
distant, we only considered the set of the previously
mentioned 10 questions.
A question is deemed to be a clarification of a
previous question if:
1. There are direct references to nouns mentioned in
the previous n  questions through  the use of
pronouns (he, she, it, ?) or possessive adjectives
(his, her, its?) which have no references in the
current question.
2. The question does not contain any verbs
3. There are explicit references to proper and common
nouns mentioned in the previous n  questions, i.e.
repetitions which refer to an identical object; or
there is a strong sentence similarity between the
current question and the previously asked
questions.
In other words:

Clarification_Question
   (qn,q-1..q-n)
is true if
1. q0  has pronoun and
possessive adjective
references to q
-1..q-n 
2. q0  does not contain any
verbs
3. q0 has repetition of
common or proper nouns
in q
-1..q-n or q0  has a
strong semantic
similarity to some q ?
q
-1..q-n 
6 Sentence Similarity Metric
A major part of our clarification dialogue recognition
algorithm is the sentence similarity metric which looks
at the similarity in meaning between the current
question and previous questions. WordNet (Miller 1999;
Fellbaum 1998), a lexical database which organizes
words into synsets, sets of synonymous words, and
specifies a number of relationships such as hypernym,
synonym, meronym which can exist between the synsets
in the lexicon, has been shown to be fruitful in the
calculation of semantic similarity. One approach has
been to determine similarity by calculating the length of
the path or relations connecting the words which
constitute sentences (see for example Green 1997 and
Hirst and St-Onge 1998); different approaches have
been proposed (for an evaluation see (Budanitsky and
Hirst 2001)), either using all WordNet relations
(Budanitsky and Hirst 2001) or only is-a relations
(Resnik 1995; Jiang and Conrath 1997; Mihalcea and
Moldvoan 1999). Miller (1999), Harabagiu et al (2002)
and De Boni and Manandhar (2002) found WordNet
glosses, considered as micro-contexts, to be useful in
determining conceptual similarity. (Lee et al 2002)
have applied conceptual similarity to the Question
Answering task, giving an answer A  a score dependent
on the number of matching terms in A  and the question.
Our sentence similarity measure followed on these
ideas, adding to the use of WordNet relations, part-of-
speech information, compound noun and word
frequency information.
In particular, sentence similarity was considered as a
function which took as arguments a sentence s1  and a
second sentence s2 and returned a value representing the
semantic relevance of s1  in respect of s2  in the context of
knowledge B, i.e.

semantic-relevance( s1, s2, B  ) = n ?
 


semantic-relevance(s1,s,B) < semantic-
relevance(s2,s, B) represents the fact that sentence s1  is
less relevant than s2  in respect to the sentence s and the
context B. In our experiments, B  was taken to be the set
of semantic relations given by WordNet. Clearly, the
use of a different knowledge base would give different
results, depending on its completeness and correctness.
In order to calculate the semantic similarity between
a sentence s1  and another sentence s2, s1  and s2  were
considered as sets P  and Q  of word stems. The
similarity between each word in the question and each
word in the answer was then calculated and the sum of
the closest matches gave the overall similarity. In other
words, given two sets Q  and P, where
Q={qw1,qw2,?,qwn} and P={pw1,pw2,?,pwm}, the
similarity between Q  and P  is given by
1<p<n Argmaxm similarity( qwp, pwm)

The function similarity( w1, w2) maps the stems of
the two words w1 and w2  to a similarity measure m
representing how semantically related the two words
are; similarity( wi, wj)< similarity( wi, wk) represents the
fact that the word wj is less semantically related than wk
in respect to the word wi. In particular similarity=0 if
two words are not at all semantically related and
similarity=1 if the words are the same.

similarity( w1, w2) = h  ?
 


where 0 ?  h  ?  1. In particular, similarity( w1, w2) = 0 if
w1?ST ? w2?ST, where ST is a set containing a number
of stop-words (e.g. ?the?, ?a?, ?to?) which are too
common to be able to be usefully employed to estimate
semantic similarity. In all other cases,  h  is calculated as
follows: the words w1 and w2  are compared using all the
available WordNet relationships (is-a, satellite, similar,
pertains, meronym, entails, etc.), with the additional
relationship, ?same-as?, which indicated that two words
were identical. Each relationship is given a weighting
indicating how related two words are, with a ?same as?
relationship indicating the closest relationship, followed
by synonym relationships, hypernym, hyponym, then
satellite, meronym, pertains, entails.
So, for example, given the question ?Who went to
the mountains yesterday?? and the second question ?Did
Fred walk to the big mountain and then to mount
Pleasant??, Q  would be the set {who, go, to, the,
mountain, yesterday} and P  would be the set {Did,
Fred, walk, to, the, big, mountain, and, then, to, mount,
Pleasant}.
In order to calculate similarity the algorithm would
consider each word in turn. ?Who? would be ignored as
it is a common word and hence part of the list of stop-
words. ?Go? would be related to ?walk? in a is-a
relationship and receive a score h1. ?To? and ?the?
would be found in the list of stop-words and ignored.
?Mountain? would be considered most similar to
?mountain? (same-as relationship) and receive a score
h2: ?mount? would be in a synonym relationship with
?mountain? and give a lower score, so it is ignored.
?Yesterday? would receive a score of 0 as there are no
semantically related words in Q. The similarity measure
of Q  in respect to P  would therefore be given by h1  + h2.
In order to improve performance of the similarity
measure, additional information was considered in
addition to simple word matching (see De Boni and
Manandhar 2003 for a complete discussion):
? Compound noun information.  The motivation
behind is similar to the reason for using chunking
information, i.e. the fact that the word ?United? in
?United States?  should not be considered similar to
?United? as in ?Manchester United?. As opposed to
when using chunking information, however, when
using noun compound information, the compound
is considered a single word, as opposed to a group
of words: chunking and compound noun
information may therefore be combined as in ?[the
[United States] official team]?.
? Proper noun information. The intuition behind this
is that titles (of books, films, etc.) should not be
confused with the ?normal? use of the same words:
?blue lagoon? as in the sentence ?the film Blue
Lagoon was rather strange? should not be
considered as similar to the same words in the
sentence ?they swan in the blue lagoon? as they are
to the sentence ?I enjoyed Blue Lagoon when I was
younger?.
? Word frequency information.  This is a step beyond
the use of stop-words, following the intuition that
the more a word is common the less it is useful in
determining similarity between sentence. So, given
the sentences ?metatheoretical reasoning is
common in philosophy? and ?metatheoretical
arguments are common in philosophy?, the word
?metatheoretical? should be considered more
important in determining relevance than the words
?common?, ?philosophy? and ?is? as it is much
more rare and therefore less probably found in
irrelevant sentences. Word frequency data was
taken from the Given that the questions examined
were generic queries which did not necessarily refer
to a specific set of documents, the word frequency
for individual words was taken to be the word
frequency given in the British National Corpus (see
BNCFreq 2003). The top 100 words, making up
43% of the English Language, were then used as
stop-words and were not used in calculating
semantic similarity.

7 Results
An implementation of the algorithm was evaluated
on the TREC context questions used to develop the
algorithm and then on the collection of 500 new
clarification dialogue questions. The results on the
TREC data, which was used to develop the algorithm,
were as follows (see below for discussion and an
explanation of each method):

TREC Meth.0 Meth.1 Meth.2 Meth.3aMeth.3b
New  90 90 90 60 80
Clarif. 47 53 59 78 72
Where ?New? indicates the ability to recognize
whether the current question is the first in a new series
of clarification questions and ?Clarif.? (for
?Clarification?) indicates the ability to recognize
whether the current question is a clarification question.
The results for the same experiments conducted on
the collected data were as follows:

Collected Meth.0 Meth.1 Meth.2 Meth.3a Meth.3b
New  100 100 100 67 83
Clarif. 64 62 66 91 89

Method 0. This method did not use any linguistic
information and simply took a question to be a
clarification question if it had any words in common
with the previous n questions, else took the question to
be the beginning of a new series. 64% of questions in
the new collection could be recognized with this simple
algorithm, which did not misclassify any "new"
questions.
Method 1. This method employed point 1 of the
algorithm described in section 5: 62% of questions in
the new collection could be recognized as clarification
questions simply by looking for "reference" keywords
such as he, she, this, so, etc. which clearly referred to
previous questions. Interestingly this did not misclassify
any "new" questions.
Method 2. This method employed points 1 and 2 of
the algorithm described in section 5: 5% of questions in
the new collection could be recognized simply by
looking for the absence of verbs, which, combined with
keyword lookup (Method 1), improved performance to
66%. Again this did not misclassify any "new"
questions.
Method 3a. This method employed the full
algorithm described in section 5 (point 3 is the
similarity measure algorithm described in section 6):
clarification recognition rose to 91% of the new
collection by looking at the similarity between nouns in
the current question and nouns in the previous
questions, in addition to reference words and the
absence of verbs. Misclassification was a serious
problem, however with correctly classified "new"
questions falling to 67%.
Method 3b. This was the same as method 3a, but
specified a similarity threshold when employing the
similarity measure described in section 6: this required
the nouns in the current question to be similar to nouns
in the previous question beyond a specified similarity
threshold. This brought clarification question
recognition down to 89% of the new collection, but
misclassification of "new" questions was reduced
significantly, with "new" questions being correctly
classified 83% of the time.
Problems noted were:
? False positives: questions following a similar but
unrelated question series. E.g. "Are they all Muslim
countries?" (talking about religion, but in the
context of a general conversation about Saudi
Arabia) followed by "What is the chief religion in
Peru?" (also about religion, but in a totally
unrelated context).
? Questions referring to answers, not previous
questions (e.g. clarifying the meaning of a word
contained in the answer, or building upon a concept
defined in the answer: e.g. "What did Antonio
Carlos Tobim play?" following "Which famous
musicians did he play with?" in the context of a
series of questions about Fank Sinatra: Antonio
Carlos Tobim was referred to in the answer to the
previous question, and nowhere else in the
exchange. These made up 3% of the missed
clarifications.
? Absence of relationships in WordNet, e.g. between
"NASDAQ" and "index" (as in share index).
Absence of verb-noun relationships in WordNet,
e.g. between to die and death, between "battle" and
"win" (i.e. after a battle one side generally wins and
another side loses), "airport" and "visit" (i.e. people
who are visiting another country use an airport to
get there)

As can be seen from the tables above, the same
experiments conducted on the TREC context questions
yielded worse results; it was difficult to say, however,
whether this was due to the small size of the TREC data
or the nature of the data itself, which perhaps did not
fully reflect ?real? dialogues.
 As regards the recognition of question in a series
(the recognition that a clarification I taking place), the
number of sentences recognized by keyword alone was
smaller in the TREC data (53% compared to 62%),
while the number of questions not containing verbs was
roughly similar (about 6%). The improvement given by
computing noun similarity between successive
questions gave worse results on the TREC data: using
method 3a resulted in an improvement to the overall
correctness of 19 percentage points, or a 32% increase
(compared to an improvement of 25 percentage points,
or a 38% increase on the collected data); using method
3b resulted in an improvement of 13 percentage points,
or a 22% increase (compared to an improvement of 23
percentage points or a 35% increase on the collected
data), perhaps indicating that in "real" conversation
speakers tend to use simpler semantic relationships than
what was observed in the TREC data.
8 Usefulness of Clarification Dialogue
Recognition
Recognizing that a clarification dialogue is occurring
only makes sense if this information can then be used to
improve answer retrieval performance.
We therefore hypothesized that noting that a
questioner is trying to clarify previously asked questions
is important in order to determine the context in which
an answer is to be sought: in other words, the answers to
certain questions are constrained by the context in
which they have been uttered. The question ?What does
attenuate mean??, for example, may require a generic
answer outlining all the possible meanings of
?attenuate? if asked in isolation, or a particular meaning
if asked after the word has been seen in an answer (i.e.
in a definite context which constrains its meaning).  In
other cases, questions do not make sense at all out of a
context. For example, no answer could be given to the
question ?where?? asked on its own, while following a
question such as ?Does Sean have a house anywhere
apart from Scotland?? it becomes an easily intelligible
query.
The usual way in which Question Answering
systems constrain possible answers is by restricting the
number of documents in which an answer is sought by
filtering the total number of available documents
through the use of an information retrieval engine. The
information retrieval engine selects a subset of the
available documents based on a number of keywords
derived from the question at hand. In the simplest case,
it is necessary to note that some words in the current
question refer to words in previous questions or answers
and hence use these other words when formulating the
IR query. For example, the question ?Is he married??
cannot be used as is  in order to select documents, as the
only word passed to the IR engine would be ?married?
(possibly the root version ?marry?) which would return
too many documents to be of any use. Noting that the
?he? refers to a previously mentioned person (e.g. ?Sean
Connery?) would enable the answerer to seek an answer
in a smaller number of documents. Moreover, given that
the current question is asked in the context of a previous
question, the documents retrieved for the previous
related question could provide a context in which to
initially seek an answer.
In order to verify the usefulness of constraining the
set of documents from in which to seek an answer, a
subset made of 15 clarification dialogues (about 100
questions) from the given question data was analyzed by
taking the initial question for a series, submitting it to
the Google Internet Search Engine and then manually
checking to see how many of the questions in the series
could be answered simply by using the first 20
documents retrieved for the first question in a series.
The results are summarized in the following diagram
(Fig. 1):

Fig. 1: Search technique used for Question
First Q in series
Words in Q
Coreference
Mini-clarification
Other

? 69% of clarification questions could be answered
by looking within the documents used for the
previous question in the series, thus indicating the
usefulness of noting the occurrence of clarification
dialogue.
? The remaining 31% could not be answered by
making reference to the previously retrieved
documents, and to find an answer a different
approach had to be taken. In particular:
? 6% could be answered after retrieving documents
simply by using the words in the question as search
terms (e.g. ?What caused the boxer uprising??);
? 14% required some form of coreference resolution
and could be answered only by combining the
words in the question with the words to which the
relative pronouns in the question referred (e.g.
?What film is he working on at the moment?, with
the reference to ?he? resolved, which gets passed to
the search engine as ?What film is Sean Connery
working on at the moment??);
? 7% required more than 20 documents to be
retrieved by the search engine or other, more
complex techniques. An example is a question such
as ?Where exactly?? which requires both an
understanding of the context in which the question
is asked (?Where?? makes no sense on its own) and
the previously given answer (which was probably a
place, but not restrictive enough for the questioner).
? 4% constituted mini-clarification dialogues within a
larger clarification dialogue (a slight deviation from
the main topic which was being investigated by the
questioner) and could be answered by looking at
the documents retrieved for the first question in the
mini-series.

Recognizing that a clarification dialogue is
occurring therefore can simplify the task of retrieving an
answer by specifying that an answer must be in the set
of documents used the previous questions. This is
consistent with the results found in the TREC context
task (Voorhees 2002), which indicated that systems
were capable of finding most answers to questions in a
context dialogue simply by looking at the documents
retrieved for the initial question in a series. As in the
case of clarification dialogue recognition, therefore,
simple techniques can resolve the majority of cases;
nevertheless, a full solution to the problem requires
more complex methods. The last case indicates that it is
not enough simply to look at the documents provided by
the first question in a series in order to seek an answer:
it is necessary to use the documents found for a
previously asked question which is related to the current
question (i.e. the questioner could "jump" between
topics). For example, given the following series of
questions starting with Q1:

Q1: When was the Hellenistic Age?
[?]
Q5: How did Alexander the great become ruler?
Q6: Did he conquer anywhere else?
Q7: What was the Greek religion in the Hellenistic Age?

where Q6  should be related to Q5  but Q7  should be
related to Q1, and not Q6. In this case, given that the
subject matter of Q1  is more immediately related to the
subject matter of Q7  than Q6  (although the subject
matter of Q6  is still broadly related, it is more of a
specialized subtopic), the documents retrieved for Q1
will probably be more relevant to Q7  than the
documents retrieved for Q6 (which would probably be
the same documents retrieved for Q5)

9 Conclusion
It has been shown that recognizing that a clarification
dialogue is occurring can simplify the task of retrieving
an answer by constraining the subset of documents in
which an answer is to be found. An algorithm was
presented to recognize the occurrence of clarification
dialogue and is shown to have a good performance. The
major limitation of our algorithm is the fact that it only
considers series of questions, not series of answers. As
noted above, it is often necessary to look at an answer to
a question to determine whether the current question is a
clarification question or not. Our sentence similarity
algorithm was limited by the number of semantic
relationships in WordNet: for example, a big
improvement would come from the use of noun-verb
relationships. Future work will be directed on extending
WordNet in this direction and in providing other useful
semantic relationships. Work also needs to be done on
using information given by answers, not just questions
in recognizing clarification dialogue and on coping with
the cases in which clarification dialogue recognition is
not enough to retrieve an answer and where other, more
complex, techniques need to be used. It would also be
beneficial to examine the use of a similarity function in
which similarity decayed in function of the distance in
time between the current question and the past
questions.
References
Ardissono, L. and Sestero, D. 1996. "Using dynamic
user models in the recognition of the plans of the
user". User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction,
5(2):157-190.
BNCFreq. 2003. English Word Frequency List.
http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~qstout/586/bncfreq.html
(last accessed March 2003).
Budanitsky, A., and Hirst, G. 2001. ?Semantic distance
in WordNet: and experimental, application-oriented
evaluation of five measures?, in Proceedings of the
NAACL 2001 Workshop on WordNet and other
lexical resources, Pittsburgh.
De Boni, M. and Manandhar, S. 2003. ?The Use of
Sentence Similarity as a Semantic Relevance Metric
for Question Answering?. Proceedings of the AAAI
Symposium on New Directions in Question
Answering, Stanford.
De Boni, M. and Manandhar, S. 2002. ?Automated
Discovery of Telic Relations for WordNet?.
Proceedings of the First International WordNet
Conference, India.
Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet, An electronic Lexical
Database, MIT Press.
Ginzburg , J. 1998. "Clarifying Utterances" In: J.
Hulstijn and A. Nijholt (eds.) Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on the Formal Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue, Twente.
Ginzburg and Sag, 2000. Interrogative Investigations,
CSLI.
Green, S. J. 1997. Automatically generating hypertext
by computing semantic similarity, Technical Report
n. 366, University of Toronto.
Harabagiu, S., Miller, A. G., Moldovan, D. 1999.
?WordNet2 - a morphologically and semantically
enhanced resource?, In Proceedings of SIGLEX-99,
University of Maryland.
Harabagiu, S., et al 2002. ?Answering Complex, List
and Context Questions with LCC?s Question-
Answering Server?, Proceedings of TREC-10, NIST.
Hirst, G., and St-Onge, D. 1998. ?Lexical chains as
representations of context for the detection and
correction of malapropisms?, in Fellbaum (ed.),
WordNet: and electronic lexical database, MIT
Press.
Jiang, J. J., and Conrath, D. W. 1997. ?Semantic
similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical
taxonomy?, in Proceedings of ICRCL, Taiwan.
Lee, G. G., et al 2002. ?SiteQ: Engineering High
Performance QA System Using Lexico-Semantic
Pattern Matching and Shallow NLP?, Proceedings of
TREC-10, NIST.
Lin, D. 1998. ?An information-theoretic definition of
similarity?, in Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Machine Learning, Madison.
Mihalcea, R. and Moldovan, D. 1999. ?A Method for
Word Sense Disambiguation of Unrestricted Text?,
in Proceedings of ACL ?99, Maryland, NY.
Miller, G. A. 1999. ?WordNet: A Lexical Database?,
Communications of the ACM, 38 (11).
Moldovan, D. and Rus, V. 2001. ?Logic Form
Transformation of WordNet and its Applicability to
Question Answering?, Proceedings of the 39th
conference of ACL, Toulouse.
Resnik, P. 1995. ?Using information content to evaluate
semantic similarity?, in Proceedings of the 14th
IJCAI, Montreal.
Soubbotin, M. M. 2002. :?Patterns of Potential Answer
Expressions as Clues to the Right Answers?,
Proceedings of TREC-10, NIST.
van Beek, P., Cohen, R. and Schmidt, K., 1993. ?From
plan critiquing to clarification dialogue for
cooperative response generation?, Computational
Intelligence  9:132-154.
Voorhees, E. 2002. ?Overview of the TREC 2001
Question Answering Track?, Proceedings of TREC-
10, NIST.
