Latent Semantic Analysis for dialogue act classification
Riccardo Serafin
Computer Science
University of Illinois
Chicago, IL, USA
rseraf1@uic.edu
Barbara Di Eugenio
Computer Science
University of Illinois
Chicago, IL, USA
bdieugen@uic.edu
Michael Glass
Mathematics and Computer Science
Valparaiso University
Valparaiso, IN, USA
Michael.Glass@valpo.edu
Abstract
This paper presents our experiments in apply-
ing Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to dia-
logue act classification. We employ both LSA
proper and LSA augmented in two ways. We
report results on DIAG, our own corpus of tu-
toring dialogues, and on the CallHome Spanish
corpus. Our work has the theoretical goal of as-
sessing whether LSA, an approach based only
on raw text, can be improved by using addi-
tional features of the text.
1 Introduction
Dialogue systems need to perform dialog act classifica-
tion, in order to understand the role the user?s utterance
plays in the dialog (e.g., a question for information or a
request to perform an action), and to generate an appro-
priate next turn. In recent years, a variety of empirical
techniques have been used to train the dialogue act clas-
sifier (Reithinger and Maier, 1995; Stolcke et al, 2000;
Walker et al, 2001).
In this paper, we propose Latent Semantic Analysis
(LSA) as a method to train the dialogue act classifier.
LSA can be thought as representing the meaning of a
word as a kind of average of the meanings of all the pas-
sages in which it appears, and the meaning of a passage
as a kind of average of the meaning of all the words it
contains (Landauer et al, 1998). LSA learns from co-
occurrence of words in collections of texts. It builds a se-
mantic space where words and passages are represented
as vectors. Their similarity is measured by the cosine of
their contained angle in the semantic space. LSA is based
on Single Value Decomposition (SVD), a mathematical
technique that causes the semantic space to be arranged
so as to reflect the major associative patterns in the data,
and ignores the smaller, less important influences.
LSA has been successfully applied to many tasks: e.g,
to assess the quality of student essays (Foltz et al, 1999)
and to interpret the student?s input in an Intelligent Tutor-
ing system (Graesser et al, 2000). However, there is no
research on applying LSA to dialogue act classification.
LSA is an attractive method because it is relatively
straightforward to train and use. More importantly, al-
though it is a statistical theory, it has been shown to mimic
a number of aspects of human competence / performance
(Landauer et al, 1998). Thus, it appears to somehow cap-
ture and represent important components of meanings.
We also have a theoretical goal in investigating LSA.
A common criticism of LSA is that its ?bag of words? ap-
proach ignores any other linguistic information that may
be available, e.g. order and syntactic information: to
LSA, man bites dog is identical to dog bites man. We
suggest that an LSA semantic space can be built from the
co-occurrence of arbitrary textual features. We propose
to place in the bag of words other features that co-occur
in the same text. We are calling LSA augmented with
features ?FLSA? (for ?feature LSA?). The only relevant
prior work is (Wiemer-Hastings, 2001), that adds part of
speech tags and some syntactic information to LSA.
This paper describes the corpora and the methods we
used, and the results we obtained. To summarize, plain
LSA seems to perform well on large corpora and classi-
fication tasks. Augmented LSA seems to perform better
on smaller corpora and target classifications.
2 Corpora
We report experiments on two corpora, DIAG and Span-
ish CallHome.
DIAG is a corpus of computer mediated tutoring dia-
logues between a tutor and a student who is diagnosing a
fault in a mechanical system with the DIAG tutoring sys-
tem (Towne, 1997). The student?s input is via menu, the
tutor is in a different room and answers via a text window.
The DIAG corpus comprises 23 dialogues for a total of
607 different words and 660 dialogue acts. It has been an-
notated for a variety of features, including four dialogue
acts1 (Glass et al, 2002): problem solving, the tutor gives
problem solving directions; judgement, the tutor evalu-
ates the student?s actions or diagnosis; domain knowl-
edge, the tutor imparts domain knowledge; and other,
when none of the previous three applies.
The Spanish CallHome corpus (Levin et al, 1998;
Ries, 1999) comprises 128 unrestricted phone calls in
Spanish, for a total of 12066 different words and 44628
dialogue acts. The Spanish CallHome annotation aug-
ments a basic tag such as statement along several dimen-
sions, such as whether the statement describes a psycho-
logical state of the speaker. This results in 232 differ-
ent dialogue act tags, many with very low frequencies.
In this sort of situations, tag categories are often col-
lapsed when running experiments so as to get meaningful
frequencies (Stolcke et al, 2000). In CallHome37, we
collapsed statements and backchannels, obtaining 37 dif-
ferent tags. CallHome37 maintains some subcategoriza-
tions, e.g. whether a question is yes/no or rhetorical. In
CallHome10, we further collapse these categories. Call-
Home10 is reduced to 8 dialogue acts proper (eg state-
ment, question, answer) plus the two tags ??%?? for
abandoned sentences and ??x?? for noise.
3 Methods
We have experimented with four methods: LSA proper,
which we call plain LSA; two versions of clustered LSA,
in which we ?cluster? the document dimension in the
Word-Document matrix; FLSA, in which we incorporate
features other than words to train LSA (specifically, we
used the preceding n dialogue acts).
Plain LSA. The input to LSA is a Word-Document ma-
trix with a row for each word, and a column for each
document (for us, a document is a unit such as a sen-
tence or paragraph tagged with a dialogue act). Cell
c(i; j) contains the frequency with which word
i
appears
in document
j
. Clearly, this w*d matrix will be very
sparse. Next, LSA applies SVD to the Word-Document
matrix, obtaining a representation of each document in a
k dimensional space: crucially, k is much smaller than the
dimension of the original space. As a result, words that
did not appear in certain documents now appear, as an
estimate of their correlation to the meaning of those doc-
uments. The number of dimensions k retained by LSA
is an empirical question. The results we report below are
for the best k we experimented with.
To choose the best tag for a document in the test set, we
compare the vector representing the new document with
the vector of each document in the training set. The tag of
1They should be more appropriately termed tutor moves.
the document which has the highest cosine with our test
vector is assigned to the new document.
Clustered LSA. Instead of building the Word-
Document matrix we build a Word-Tag matrix, where the
columns refer to all the possible dialog act types (tags).
The cell c(i; j) will tell us how many times word
i
is
used in documents that have tag
j
. The Word-Tag matrix
is w*t instead of w*d. We then apply Plain LSA to the
Word-Tag matrix.
SemiClustered LSA. In Clustered LSA we lose the
distribution of words in the documents. Moreover, if the
number of tags is small, such as for DIAG, SVD loses its
meaning. SemiClustered LSA tries to remedy these prob-
lems. We still produce the k-dimensional space apply-
ing SVD to the Word-Document matrix. We then reduce
the Word-Tag matrix to the k dimensional space using a
transformation based on the SVD of the Word-Document
matrix. Note that both Clustered and SemiClustered LSA
are much faster at test time than plain LSA, as the test
document needs to be compared only with t tag vectors,
rather than with d document vectors (t << d).
Feature LSA (FLSA). We add extra features to plain
LSA. Specifically, we have experimented with the se-
quence of the previous n dialogue acts. We compute
the input WordTag-Document matrix by computing the
Word-Document matrix, computing the Tag-Document
matrix and then concatenating them vertically to get the
(w+t)*d final matrix. Otherwise, the method is the same
as Plain LSA.
4 Results
Table 1 reports the best results we obtained for each cor-
pus and method. In parentheses, we include the k di-
mension, and, for FLSA, the number of previous tags we
considered.
In all cases, we can see that Plain LSA performs much
better than baseline, where baseline is computed as pick-
ing the most frequent dialogue act in each corpus. As
concerns DIAG, we can also see that SemiClustered LSA
improves on Plain LSA by 3%, but no other method does.
As regards CallHome, first, the results with plain LSA
are comparable to published ones, even if the comparison
is not straightforward, because it is often unclear what
the target classification and features used are. For exam-
ple, (Ries, 1999) reports 76.2% accuracy by using neural
networks augmented with the sequence of the n previous
speech acts. However, (Ries, 1999) does not mention the
target classification; the reported baseline appears com-
patible with both CallHome37 and CallHome10. The
training features in (Ries, 1999) include part-of-speech
(POS) tags for words, which we do not have. This may
Corpus Plain Clustered SemiClustered FLSA
Diag (43.64%) 75.73% (50) 71.91% (3) 78.78% (50) 74.26% (1,150)
CallHome37 (42.69%) 65.36% (50) 22.08% (10) 31.39% (300) 62.59% (1, 50)
CallHome10 (42.69%) 68.91% (25) 61.64% (5) 58.38% (300) 66.57% (1, 100)
Table 1: Result Summary
explain the higher performance. Including POS tags into
our FLSA method is left for future work.
No variation on LSA performs better than plain LSA in
our CallHome experiments. In fact, clustered and semi-
clustered LSA perform vastly worse on the larger clas-
sification problem in CallHome37. It appears that, the
smaller the corpus and target classification are, the better
clustered and semiclustered LSA perform. In fact, semi-
clustered LSA outperforms plain LSA on DIAG.
Our experiments with FLSA do not support the hy-
pothesis that adding features different from words to LSA
helps with classification. (Wiemer-Hastings, 2001) re-
ports mixed results when augmenting LSA: adding POS
tags did not improve performance, but adding some syn-
tactic information did. Note that, in our experiments,
adding more than one previous speech act did not help.
5 Future work
Our experiments show that LSA can be effectively used
to train a dialogue act classifier. On the whole, plain LSA
appears to perform well. Even if our experiments with
extensions to plain LSA were mostly unsuccessful, they
are not sufficient to conclude that plain LSA cannot be
improved. Thus, we will pursue the following directions.
1) Further investigate the correlation of the performance
of (semi)clustered LSA with the size of the corpus and /
or of the target classification. 2) Include other features in
FLSA, e.g. syntactic roles. 3) Redo our experiments on
other corpora, such as Map Task (Carletta et al, 1997).
Map Task is appropriate because besides dialogue acts it
is annotated for syntactic information, while CallHome
is not. 4) Experiment with FLSA on other tasks, such as
assessing text coherence.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by grant N00014-00-1-0640 from the
Office of Naval Research.
References
J. Carletta, A. Isard, S. Isard, J. C. Kowtko, G. Doherty-
Sneddon, and A. H. Anderson. 1997. The reliability
of a dialogue structure coding scheme. Computational
Linguistics, 23(1):13?31.
P. W. Foltz, D. Laham, and T. K. Landauer. 1999. The
intelligent essay assessor: Applications to educational
technology. Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal
of Computer-Enhanced Learning, 1(2).
M. Glass, H. Raval, B. Di Eugenio, and M. Traat. 2002.
The DIAG-NLP dialogues: coding manual. Technical
Report UIC-CS 02-03, University of Illinois - Chicago.
A. C. Graesser, K. Wiemer-Hastings, P. Wiemer-
Hastings, R. Kreuz, and the Tutoring Research Group.
2000. Autotutor: A simulation of a human tutor. Jour-
nal of Cognitive Systems Research.
T. K. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, and D. Laham. 1998. Intro-
duction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Pro-
cesses, 25:259?284.
L. Levin, A. Thyme?-Gobbel, A. Lavie, K. Ries, and K.
Zechner. 1998. A discourse coding scheme for con-
versational Spanish. In Proceedings ICSLP.
N. Reithinger and E. Maier. 1995. Utilizing statistical
dialogue act processing in Verbmobil. In ACL95, Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.
K. Ries. 1999. HMM and Neural Network Based Speech
Act Detection. In Proceedings of ICASSP 99.
A. Stolcke, K. Ries, N. Coccaro, E. Shriberg, R. Bates,
D. Jurafsky, P. Taylor, R. Martin, C. Van Ess-Dykema,
and M. Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for
automatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):339?373.
D. M. Towne. 1997. Approximate reasoning techniques
for intelligent diagnostic instruction. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,8.
M. A. Walker, R. Passonneau, and J. E. Boland. 2001.
Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of DARPA
communicator dialogue systems. In ACL01, Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
P. Wiemer-Hastings. 2001. Rules for syntax, vectors for
semantics. In CogSci01, Proceedings of the Twenty-
Third Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
