A Spoken Dialogue Interface to a Geologist?s Field Assistant
John Dowding and James Hieronymus
Mail Stop T-27A-2
NASA Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000
{jdowding,jimh}@riacs.edu
Abstract
We will demonstrate a spoken dialogue inter-
face to a Geologist?s Field Assistant that is
being developed as part of NASA?s Mobile
Agents project. The assistant consists of a
robot and an agent system which helps an as-
tronaut wearing a planetary space suit while
conducting a geological exploration. The pri-
mary technical challanges relating to spoken
dialogue systems that arise in this project are
speech recognition in noise, open-microphone,
and recording voice annotations. This system
is capable of discriminating between speech in-
tended for the system and for other purposes.
1 Introduction
The Geologist?s Field Assistant is one component of Mo-
bile Agents, a NASA project studying technologies, tech-
niques, and work practices for sophisticated human-agent
and human-robot cooperation in space and planetary ex-
ploration environments, such as the surface of Mars. The
evolution, development and evaluation of this project oc-
curs in a series of increasingly complex field tests in Mars
analog environments (deserts and artic sites) on Earth.
The Spoken Dialogue component assists an astronaut
wearing a space suit while conducting a geological ex-
ploration, by tagging samples by spoken discriptions,
commanding the taking of pictures, recording descriptive
voice annotations, and tracking the associations between
these samples, images, and annotations. The assistant
will also help track the astronaut?s location and progress
though the survey, and help track their body exertion level
(heart and respiration rate).
The Spoken Dialogue interface is one of several of Mo-
bile Agents, each with different goals and evaluation met-
rics. Other components include: Brahms work-practice
modelling and simulation system (NASA Ames); MEX
mobile wireless networking (Ames); robots (Johnson
Space Center (JSC) and Georgia Tech); Spacesuits (JSC)
Start tracking my g p s coordinates.
Start logging my bio sensors every fifteen seconds.
Where is my my current location?
Call this location Asparagus.
Create a new sample bag and label it sample bag three.
Take a voice note
Please begin recording voice note now:
This sample originated in a dry creek bed. [pause]
Would you like to continue recording the voice note?
no
Voice note has been created.
Associate that voice note with sample bag three.
Play the voice note associated with sample bag three.
Table 1: Example utterances
and Biomedical sensors (Stanford University); Satellite
Internet services (Goddard Space Flight Center); and Ge-
ologists (US Geological Survey).
The primary technical challanges relating to spoken
dialogue systems that arise in this project are open-
microphone speech recognition and understanding which
decides which agent receives, and responds to a particular
utterance and space suit noise.
2 Example Dialogue
The language capabilities developed so far are largely di-
rect commanding with the user controlling task initiative.
A sample of user commands is given in Table 1. A system
response is always given, but is usually omitted below for
the sake of brevity. When given, the system response ap-
pears in italics.
3 Architecture
This spoken dialogue system shares a common architec-
ture with several prior systems: CommandTalk (Stent et
al., 1999), PSA (Rayner et al, 2000), WITAS (Lemon et
al., 2001), and the Intelligent Procedure Assistant (Aist
et al, 2002). The architecure has been well described in
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                             Demonstrations , pp. 9-10
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
prior work. The critical feature of the architecture rel-
evant to this work is the use of a grammar-based lan-
guage model for speech recognition that is automatically
derived from the same Unification Grammar that is used
for parsing and interpretation.
4 Data Collection
The Mobile Agents project conducted two field tests in
2002: a one week dress rehearsal at JSC in the Mars yard
in May, and a two week field test in the Arizona desert
in September, split between two sites of geological inter-
est, one near the Petrified Forest National Park, and the
other on the ejecta field at Meteor Crater. We collected
approxmimately 5,000 recorded sound files from 8 sub-
jects during the September tests, some from space-suit
subjects, and the rest in shirt-sleeve walk-throughs (still
a high wind condition). We transcribed 1059 wave files.
All conditions were performed open-mic and all sounds
that were picked up by the microphone were recorded, so
not all of these files contained within-domain utterances
intended. Of the transcribed sound files, 208 contained
no speech (mostly wind noise) and 243 contained out-of-
domain speech that was intended for other hearers. That
left 608 within-domain utterances that were split 80%-
20% into test and training utterances.
5 Technical Challanges
The Geologist?s Field Assitant requires the ability to
make voice notes that can be stored and transmitted.
We implemented this by adding a recording mode to
the speech recognizer agent, and temporarily increas-
ing the speech end-pointing interval. This allows us to
record multi-sentence voice notes without treating inter-
sentence pauses as end-of-voice-note markers. Entering
recording mode is triggered by specific speach acts like
Take a voice note or Annotate sample bag one.
When considering recognition accuracy in the open-
mic condition, we consider additional metrics beyond
word-error rate (WER). Since the recognizer can fail to
find a hypothesis for an utterance, we compute the false-
rejection rate (FREJ) for within-domain utterances and
adjusted word-error (AWER) counting only the word er-
rors on the non-rejected utterances. We also consider
misrecognitions of out-of-domain utterance as within-
domain, and compute the false-accept rate (FACC). Table
2 gives the performance results for the grammar-based
language model that was used in the September test. This
model gives reasonable performance on within-domain
utterances, but falsely accepts 25.5% of out-of-domain
utterances. After the September test, we used the training
data we had collected to build a Probabilistic Context-
Free Grammar using the compute-grammar-probs
tool that comes with Nuance (Nuance, 2002). Using only
485 utterances of training data, there was improvement
in both the AWER and FACC rates, resulting in a lan-
guage model where both FREF and FACC were under
10%. There was also a substantial improvement in recog-
nition speed, as measured in multiples of CPU real-time.
Version WER FREJ AWER FACC xCPUrt
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Baseline CFG Language Model
Training 12.56 4.54 7.72 ? 58.9
Test 9.5 3.25 7.5 25.5 57.5
Probabilistic CFG Language Model
Training 9.97 5.57 4.6 ? 19.4
Test 8.99 7.32 3.7 9.09 19.0
Table 2: Comparing Baseline and Probabilistic CFG
6 Conclusions
We will demonstrate a dialogue system that has an im-
proved ability to discriminate between speech that is in-
tended for different purposes, treating some as data ob-
jects to be saved, and others identified as being out-of-
domain. With probabilities on the rules the system has an
acceptably low false accept rate and is fast and accurate.
References
G. Aist, J. Dowding, B.A. Hockey, and J. Hieronymus.
2002. An intelligent procedure assistant for astro-
naut training and support. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (demo track), Philadelphia, PA.
O. Lemon, A. Bracy, A. Gruenstein, and S. Peters. 2001.
Multimodal dialogues with intelligent agents in dy-
namic environments: the WITAS conversational in-
terface. In Proceedings of 2nd Meeting of the North
American Association for Computational Linguistics,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Nuance, 2002. http://www.nuance.com. As of 15
November 2002.
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and F. James. 2000. A com-
pact architecture for dialogue management based on
scripts and meta-outputs. In Proceedings of the 6th Ap-
plied Natural Language Processing Conference, Seat-
tle, WA.
A. Stent, J. Dowding, J. Gawron, E. Bratt, and R. Moore.
1999. The CommandTalk spoken dialogue system. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
183?190.
