Automatic Expansion of Equivalent Sentence Set
Based on Syntactic Substitution
Kenji Imamura, Yasuhiro Akiba and Eiichiro Sumita
ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories
2-2-2 Hikaridai, ?Keihanna Science City?, Kyoto, 619-0288, Japan
{kenji.imamura,yasuhiro.akiba,eiichiro.sumita}@atr.co.jp
Abstract
In this paper, we propose an automatic quan-
titative expansion method for a sentence set
that contains sentences of the same meaning
(called an equivalent sentence set). This task
is regarded as paraphrasing. The features of
our method are: 1) The paraphrasing rules are
dynamically acquired by Hierarchical Phrase
Alignment from the equivalent sentence set,
and 2) A large equivalent sentence set is gen-
erated by substituting source syntactic struc-
tures. Our experiments show that 561 sen-
tences on average are correctly generated from
8.48 equivalent sentences.
1 Introduction
Sentences can be represented by various expressions even
though they have the same meaning. Paraphrasing that
transfer from sentence to sentence (Barzilay and McK-
eown, 2001) is a technique that generates such various
expressions.
In this paper, we propose an automatic quantitative
expansion method for a sentence set that contains sen-
tences of the same meaning (called an equivalent sen-
tence set), as a paraphrasing technique. Our method is
roughly structured from the following two phases.
1. Extract phrasal correspondences that have the same
meaning (called equivalent phrases) from the source
equivalent sentence set (acquisition phase).
2. Based on the parse tree of the sentence selected
from the source set, generate target sentences by re-
cursively substituting the equivalent phrases for the
source phrases (generation phase).
Paraphrasing is regarded as machine translation into
the same language. In this paper, we apply syntactic sub-
stitution for generating sentences, which corresponds to
transfer-based machine translation. In addition, Hierar-
chical Phrase Alignment (HPA) (Imamura, 2001), which
is an automatic acquisition method for machine transla-
tion rules, is applied to acquire the paraphrasing rules.
Namely, two equivalent sentences are regarded as bilin-
gual sentences, and simplified machine translation is car-
ried out.
Paraphrasing by our method has the following charac-
teristics.
 Not only lexical paraphrasing but also phrasal para-
phrasing can be generated because our method is
based on structural substitution.
 Equivalent phrases extracted by HPA are not only
semantically but also grammatically equivalent.
Thus, our method rarely generates ungrammatical
sentences by substitution.
Expansion of the equivalent sentence set can be ap-
plied to automatic evaluation of machine translation qual-
ity (Papineni et al, 2002; Akiba et al, 2001), for exam-
ple. These methods evaluate the quality of the transla-
tion by measuring the similarity between machine trans-
lation results and translations done by humans (called ref-
erences). However, the accuracy increases when multi-
ple references are applied because one source sentence
can be translated into multiple target expressions. Our
method generates multiple sentences that are suitable for
this purpose.
2 Acquisition of Paraphrasing Rules:
Hierarchical Phrase Alignment
Hierarchical Phrase Alignment is based on the assump-
tion that an ?equivalent phrase pair has the same informa-
tion and the same grammatical role.? We decompose this
assumption into the following two conditions for compu-
tation.
 The words in the phrase pair correspond, with no
deficiency and no excess.
 The phrases are of the same syntactic category.
Therefore, HPA is a task to extract phrase pairs that
satisfy the above two conditions. The procedure of HPA
is summarized as follows. 1
1. Tag and parse two equivalent sentences.
2. Extract corresponding words (called word links) be-
tween the sentences. In this paper, we regard identi-
cal words and words that belong to the same group
in a thesaurus as word links.
3. Check all combinations of syntactic nodes between
the sentences. If the node pair satisfies the above
two conditions, then output the pair as an equivalent
phrase. Namely, if no words in the phrase link to the
outside of the other phrase, and the nodes have the
same category, the phrase pair is regarded as equiv-
alent.
Figure 1 shows an example of equivalent phrase extrac-
tion from source equivalent sentences. The upper sen-
tence is interrogative, the lower sentence is imperative,
and they have the same meaning. For example, focusing
on the upper phrase ?get me,? this phrase is VP and con-
tains two word links. However, no nodes contain only the
links ?get?, and ?me? in the lower sentence. On the other
hand, focusing on the upper phrase ?get me a taxi,? it con-
tains four word links that correspond to the lower phrase
?get a taxi for me?, and they have the same syntactic cat-
egory. Therefore, the node pair VP(4) is regarded as an
equivalent phrase.
By iterating the above process, HPA consequently ex-
tracts eight nodes as equivalents from the source sen-
tences shown in Figure 1. Excluding the identical
phrases, the following three phrases are acquired as
equivalent phrases.
 ?get me a taxi? and ?get a taxi for me?
 ?10 in the morning? and ?10 a.m.?
 ?at 10 in the morning? and ?at 10 a.m.?
HPA can extract phrasal correspondences from source
equivalent sentences even if their sentence structures
are significantly different. In addition, because node
pairs have to be in the same syntactic category, un-
paraphrasable correspondences, such as ?morning? and
?a.m.,? are ignored even though they have word links.
3 Expansion of Equivalent Sentence Set
The equivalent phrases extracted by HPA are substi-
tutable with one another because they are semantically
and grammatically equivalent. Therefore, they are re-
garded as bi-directional paraphrasing rules. When we
paraphrase from any N sentences, target equivalent sen-
tences are generated by the following procedure, where
1The original method of HPA has two additional features.
1) Ambiguity of parsing is resolved by comparing parse trees of
input sentences. 2) It employs partial parsing to analyze irregu-
lar sentences. Details are described in (Imamura, 2001).
Would you get me a taxi at 10 in the morning?
Please get a taxi for me at 10 a.m.
NP
NMP
NP(5)
VMP(6)
NP(1)NP(2)VP(3)
VP
VP(4)
VP(7)
S(8)
NP(5)
VMP(6)
NP(2)NP(1)
VMP
VP(3)
VP
VP(4)
VP(7)
ADVP
VP
S(8)
Figure 1: Example of Equivalent Phrase Extraction from
English Equivalent Sentences (The lines between the sen-
tences denote word links, the trees denote parsing re-
sults, and the numbers on the nodes denote corresponding
equivalent phrases.)
the range from Step 1 to Step 3 corresponds to the acqui-
sition phase, and Steps 4 and 5 correspond to the genera-
tion phase.
1. First, select one sentence from the source equivalent
sentence set.
2. Process HPA with the remaining (N ? 1) sentences,
and extract equivalent phrases.
3. Repeat Steps 1 and 2 for all combinations of the
source sentences. All phrases that construct the
source set and their paraphrasing rules are acquired.
4. Next, select one tree created by HPA from the source
equivalent sentence set, and trace the tree top-down.
If a node registered in the paraphrasing rules is
found, substitute the equivalent phrase for the node.
Substitution is recursively done until it reaches a
leaf.
5. Repeat Step 4 with all sentences in the source set.
For example, when the source equivalent sentence set
contains only the two sentences shown in Figure 1, the
following six sentences are generated. Our method gen-
erates all sentences constructed from the phrases of N
sentences.
Would you get a taxi for me at 10 a.m.?
Would you get a taxi for me at 10 in the morning?
Would you get me a taxi at 10 a.m.?
Please get me a taxi at 10 in the morning
Please get me a taxi at 10 a.m.
Please get a taxi for me at 10 in the morning.
110
100
1000
10000
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
N
um
be
r o
f G
en
er
at
ed
 S
en
te
nc
es
Number of Equivalent Phrases
Figure 2: Relationship between Number of Equivalent
Phrases and Number of Generated Sentences
Japanese Correctness
OK NG Total
Translation OK 892 (61%) 382 (26%) 1274 (86%)
Effectiveness NG 87 ( 6%) 112 ( 8%) 199 (14%)
Total 979 (66%) 494 (34%) 1473 (100%)
Table 1: Quality of Generated Sentences
4 Experiments
Expansion experiments of Japanese equivalent sentences
were carried out. We used 339 source equivalent sentence
sets selected from ATR corpus (Furuse et al, 1994). The
sets were created by having ten Japanese native speakers
translate English sentences into Japanese. The number of
different sentences was 8.48 sentences per English sen-
tence on average.
Number of Generated Sentences Figure 2 is a graph
plotting the number of equivalent phrases and the number
of of generated sentences. Each point denotes a source
equivalent sentence set. Consequently 60.2 equivalent
phrases on average were acquired, and 920 sentences on
average were generated from a source set.
Quality of Generated Sentences We randomly se-
lected five sentences per set from above generated sen-
tences and showed them to a Japanese native speaker to-
gether with the English sentences. One-by-one, he/she
judged whether the sentences were good or not from the
viewpoints of Japanese correctness (grammatically and
pragmatically correct or not) and translation effectiveness
(understandable or not). The results are shown in Table
1.
Consequently, approximately 61 percent of the gener-
ated sentences were judged good from the viewpoints of
both Japanese correctness and translation effectiveness.
In other words, 561 sentences on average were correctly
generated, and the source equivalent sentence sets were
expanded about 66 times. About 39% of the generated
sentences contain errors. However, we believe that our
method is effective when we make a large equivalent sen-
tence set because eliminating error sentences is easier
than creating a large set manually.
Our error analysis found that major errors are caused
by inconsistency in the modality. Our method does not
consider pragmatical correctness although it generates
syntactically correct sentences.
5 Conclusion
We proposed an expansion method for an equivalent sen-
tence set based on syntactic substitution. Our method dy-
namically acquires paraphrasing rules by using HPA, and
generates many sentences by applying the rules to a parse
tree recursively. One application of our method is the au-
tomatic evaluation of machine translation quality. We are
planning to integrate this method into a form of automatic
evaluation.
Acknowledgment
The research reported here is supported in part by a con-
tract with the Telecommunications Advancement Orga-
nization of Japan entitled, ?A study of speech dialogue
translation technology based on a large corpus.?
References
Yasuhiro Akiba, Kenji Imamura, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2001. Using multiple edit distances to automatically
rank machine translation output. In Proceedings of
Machine Translation Summit VIII, pages 15?20.
Regina Barzilay and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2001. Ex-
tracting paraphrases from a parallel corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 50?57.
Osamu Furuse, Y. Sobashima, Toshiyuki Takezawa, and
N. Uratani. 1994. Bilingual corpus for speech transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the AAAI?94 Workshop ?Inte-
gration of Natural Language and Speech Processing?,
pages 84?91.
Kenji Imamura. 2001. Hierarchical phrase alignment
harmonized with parsing. In Proceedings of the 6th
Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium
(NLPRS 2001), pages 377?384.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalua-
tion of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 311?318.
