Evaluating Answers to Definition Questions
Ellen M. Voorhees
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
ellen.voorhees@nist.gov
Abstract
This paper describes an initial evaluation of
systems that answer questions seeking defini-
tions. The results suggest that humans agree
sufficiently as to what the basic concepts that
should be included in the definition of a par-
ticular subject are to permit the computation of
concept recall. Computing concept precision is
more problematic, however. Using the length
in characters of a definition is a crude approxi-
mation to concept precision that is nonetheless
sufficient to correlate with humans? subjective
assessment of definition quality.
The TREC question answering track has sponsored
a series of evaluations of systems? abilities to answer
closed class questions in many domains (Voorhees,
2001). Closed class questions are fact-based, short an-
swer questions. The evaluation of QA systems for closed
class questions is relatively simple because a response
to such a question can be meaningfully judged on a bi-
nary scale of right/wrong. Increasing the complexity of
the question type even slightly significantly increases the
difficulty of the evaluation because partial credit for re-
sponses must then be accommodated.
The ARDA AQUAINT1 program is a research initia-
tive sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense aimed
at increasing the kinds and difficulty of the questions au-
tomatic systems can answer. A series of pilot evaluations
has been planned as part of the research agenda of the
AQUAINT program. The purpose of each pilot is to de-
velop an effective evaluation methodology for systems
that answer a certain kind of question. One of the first
pilots to be implemented was the Definitions Pilot, a pi-
lot to develop an evaluation methodology for questions
such as What is mold? and Who is Colin Powell?.
1See http:///www.ic-arda.org/InfoExploit/
aquaint/index.html.
This paper presents the results of the pilot evaluation.
The pilot demonstrated that human assessors generally
agree on the concepts that should appear in the definition
for a particular subject, and can find those concepts in the
systems? responses. Such judgments support the compu-
tation of concept recall, but do not support concept pre-
cision since it is not feasible to enumerate all concepts
contained within a system response. Instead, the length
of a response is used to approximate concept precision.
An F-measure score combining concept recall and length
is used as the final metric for a response. Systems ranked
by average F score correlate well with assessors? subjec-
tive opinions as to definition quality.
1 The Task
The systems? task in the pilot was as follows. For each
of 25 questions the system retrieved a list of text frag-
ments such that each fragment was a component of the
definition. The list was assumed to be ordered such that
the more important elements in the definition appeared
earlier in the list. There were no limits placed on ei-
ther the length of an individual fragment or on the num-
ber of items in a list, though systems knew they would
be penalized for retrieving extraneous information. Six
AQUAINT contractors submitted eight runs to the pilot.
The eight runs are labeled A?H in the discussion below.
The questions were developed by NIST assessors who
searched a set of news articles for definition targets. The
result of question development was a question phrased as
either ?Who is. . . ? or ?What is. . . ?, plus their own defi-
nition of the target. In general, these definitions consisted
of one or two paragraphs of English prose.
2 Assessing System Responses
Each system response was independently judged by two
different assessors. In what follows, the ?author? asses-
sor is the assessor who originally created the question; the
?other? assessor is the second assessor to judge the ques-
tion. Each assessor performed two rounds of assessing
per question.
In the first round of assessing, the assessor assigned
two scores to the response from a system. One score was
for the content of the response and the other for its or-
ganization, with each score on a scale of 0?10. A high
content score indicated that the response contained most
of the information it should contain and little misleading
information. A high organization score indicated the re-
sponse ranked the more important information before the
less important information, and contained little or no ir-
relevant information. The final score for a question was a
function of the organization and content scores, with the
content score receiving much more emphasis.
The ranking of systems when using the question au-
thor to assign scores was FADEBGCH; the ranking was
FAEGDBHC when using scores assigned by the other as-
sessor. The final scores for the systems varied across as-
sessors largely due to different interpretations of the or-
ganization score. Different assessors used different de-
fault scores when there was only one entry in the sys-
tem response; organization scores also appeared to be
strongly correlated with content scores. Despite these dif-
ferences, the judgments do provide some guidance as to
how a more quantitative scoring metric should rank sys-
tems. The assessors preferred the responses from system
F over those from system A, which in turn was preferred
over the remainder of the systems. Responses from sys-
tems C and H were the least preferred.
The goal of the second round of assessing was to sup-
port a more quantitative evaluation of the system re-
sponses. In this round of assessing, an assessor first cre-
ated a list of ?information nuggets? about the target us-
ing all the system responses and the question author?s
definition. An information nugget was defined as a fact
for which the assessor could make a binary decision as
to whether a response contained the nugget. The asses-
sor then decided which nuggets were vital?nuggets that
must appear in a definition for that definition to be good.
Finally, the assessor went through each of the system re-
sponses and marked where each nugget appeared in the
response. If a system returned a particular nugget more
than once, it was marked only once.
Figure 1 shows an example of how one response was
judged for the question Who is Christopher Reeve?. The
left side of the figure shows the concept list developed by
the assessor, with vital concepts marked with a star. The
right side of the figure shows a system response with the
concepts underlined and tagged with the concept number.
In Figure 1, each list entry has at most one concept
marked. However, that was not generally the case. Many
list entries contained multiple concepts while others con-
tained none. Thus, using the list entry as the unit for eval-
uation is not sensible. Instead, we should calculate mea-
sures in terms of the concepts themselves. Computing
concept recall is straightforward given these judgments;
it is the ratio of the number of correct concepts retrieved
to the number of concepts in the assessor?s list. But the
corresponding measure of concept precision, the ratio of
the number of correct concepts retrieved to the total num-
ber of concepts retrieved, is problematic since the correct
value for the denominator is unknown. A trial evalua-
tion prior to the pilot showed that assessors found enu-
merating all concepts represented in a response to be so
difficult as to be unworkable. For example, how many
concepts are contained in ?stars on Sunday in ABC?s re-
make of ?Rear Window?? Using only concept recall as
the final score is not workable either, since systems would
not be rewarded for being selective: retrieving the entire
document collection would get a perfect score for every
question.
Borrowing from the evaluation of summarization sys-
tems (Harman and Over, 2002), we can use length as
a (crude) approximation to precision. A length-based
measure captures the intuition that users would prefer
the shorter of two definitions that contain the same con-
cepts. The length-based measure used in the pilot gives
a system an allowance of 100 (non-white-space) char-
acters for each correct concept it retrieves. The pre-
cision score is set to one if the response is no longer
than this allowance. If the response is longer than the
allowance, the precision score is downgraded using the
function precision   length  allowancelength .
Remember that the assessors marked some concepts as
vital and the remainder are not vital. The non-vital con-
cepts act as a ?don?t care? condition. That is, systems
should be penalized for not retrieving vital concepts, and
penalized for retrieving items that are not on the asses-
sor?s concept list at all, but should be neither penalized
nor rewarded for retrieving a non-vital concept. To imple-
ment the don?t care condition, concept recall is computed
only over vital concepts, while the character allowance in
the precision computation is based on both vital and non-
vital concepts. The recall for the example in Figure 1 is
thus 2/3, and the character allowance is 300.
The final score for a response was computed using the
F-measure, a function of both recall (R) and precision (P).
The general version of the F-measure is
F  

	
 RP

	
P

R
where

is a parameter signifying the relative importance
of recall and precision. The main evaluation in the pi-
lot used a value of 5, indicating that recall is 5 times as
important as precision. The value of 5 is arbitrary, but re-
flects both the emphasis given to content in the first round
1 * actor
2 * accident
3 * treatment/therapy
4 spinal cord injury activist
5 written an autobiography
6 human embryo research activist
a) list of concepts
  Actor 
  the actor who was paralyzed when he fell off his horse 	
  the name attraction
  stars on Sunday in ABC?s remake of ?Rear Window
  was injured in a show jumping accident and
has become a spokesman for the cause 
b) system response
Figure 1: Assessor annotation of a sample response for Who is Christopher Reeve?
author other
F 0.688 F 0.757
A 0.606 A 0.687
D 0.568 G 0.671
G 0.562 D 0.669
E 0.555 E 0.657
B 0.467 B 0.522
C 0.349 C 0.384
H 0.330 H 0.365
Table 1: Average F scores per system per assessor type.
of assessing and acknowledges the crudeness of the pre-
cision approximation.
Table 1 gives the average F scores for the pilot runs
as evaluated using both assessors? judgments. As can be
seen from the table, the rankings of systems are stable
across different assessors in that the only difference in
the rankings are for two runs whose scores are extremely
similar (D and G). While the absolute value of the scores
is different when using different assessors, the magnitude
of the difference between scores is generally preserved.
For example, there is a large gap between the scores for
systems F and A, and a much smaller gap for systems C
and H. The rankings also obey the ordering constraints
suggested by the first round of assessing.
The different systems in the pilot took different ap-
proaches to producing their definitions. System H always
returned a single text snippet as a definition. System B
returned a set of complete sentences. System G tended to
be relatively terse, while F and A were more verbose. The
average length of a response for each system is A: 1121.2,
B: 1236.5, C: 84.7, D: 281.8, E: 533.9, F: 935.6, G: 164.5,
and H: 33.7. The differences in the systems are reflected
in their relative scores when different

values are used.
For example, when evaluated using

  and the au-
thors? judgments, the system ranking is GFDAECHB; for

   the ranking is GDFAECHB. Thus as expected, as
precision gains in importance, system G rises in the rank-
ings, system B falls quickly, and system F also sinks.
3 Conclusion
The AQUAINT pilot evaluations are designed to explore
the issues surrounding new evaluation methodologies for
question answering systems using a small set of systems.
If a pilot is successful, the evaluation will be transferred
to the much larger TREC QA track. The definition pi-
lot demonstrated that relative F scores based on concept
recall and adjusted response length are stable when com-
puted using different human assessor judgments, and re-
flect intuitive judgments of quality. The main measure
used in the pilot strongly emphasized recall, but varying
the F measure?s

parameter allows different user prefer-
ences to be accommodated as expected. Definition ques-
tions will be included as a part of the TREC 2003 QA
track where they will be evaluated using this methodol-
ogy.
Acknowledgments
This paper was informed by the discussion that took
place on the AQUAINT definition question mailing list.
My thanks to the AQUAINT contractors who submitted
results to the pilot evaluation, and especially to Ralph
Weischedel and Dan Moldovan who coordinated the def-
inition pilot.
References
Donna Harman and Paul Over. 2002. The DUC sum-
marization evaluations. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Human Language Technology.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2001. The TREC question answer-
ing track. Journal of Natural Language Engineering,
7(4):361?378.
