Automatic Extraction of Semantic Networks from Text using Leximancer
Andrew E. Smith.
Key Centre for Human Factors and Applied Cognitive Psychology,
The University of Queensland,
Queensland, Australia, 4072.
asmith@humanfactors.uq.edu.au
Abstract
Leximancer is a software system for perform-
ing conceptual analysis of text data in a largely
language independent manner. The system is
modelled on Content Analysis and provides
unsupervised and supervised analysis using
seeded concept classifiers. Unsupervised on-
tology discovery is a key component.
1 Method
The strategy used for conceptual mapping of text in-
volves abstracting families of words to thesaurus con-
cepts. These concepts are then used to classify text at
a resolution of several sentences. The resulting concept
tags are indexed to provide a document exploration en-
vironment for the user. A smaller number of simple
concepts can index many more complex relationships
by recording co-occurrences, and complex systems ap-
proaches can be applied to these systems of agents.
To achieve this, several novel algorithms were de-
veloped: a learning optimiser for automatically select-
ing, learning, and adapting a concept from the word us-
age within the text, and an asymmetric scaling process
for generating a cluster map of concepts based on co-
occurrence in the text.
Extensive evaluation has been performed on real doc-
ument collections in collaboration with domain experts.
The method adopted has been to perform parallel analy-
ses with these experts and compare the results.
An outline of the algorithms (Smith, 2000) follows:
1. Text preparation: Standard techniques are em-
ployed, including name and term preservation, to-
kenisation, and the application of a stop-list.
2. Unsupervised and supervised ontology discovery:
Concepts can be seeded by a domain expert to suit
user requirements, or they can be chosen automat-
ically using a ranking algorithm for finding seed
words which reflect the themes present in the data.
This process looks for words near the centre of local
maxima in the lexical co-occurrence network.
3. Filling the thesaurus: A machine learning algorithm
is used to find the relevant thesaurus words from the
text data. This iterative optimiser, derived from a
word disambiguation technique (Yarowsky, 1995),
finds the nearest local maximum in the lexical co-
occurrence network from each concept seed. Early
results show that this lexical network can be reduced
to a Scale-free and Small-world network1.
4. Classification: Text is tagged with multiple concepts
using the thesaurus, to a sentence resolution.
5. Mapping: The concepts and their relative co-
occurrence frequencies now form a semantic net-
work. This is scaled using an asymmetric scaling
algorithm, and made into a lattice by ranking con-
cepts by their connectedness, or centrality.
6. User interface: A browser is used for exploring the
classification system in depth. The semantic lat-
tice browser enables semantic characterisation of the
data and discovery of indirect association. Con-
cept co-occurrence spectra and themed text segment
browsing are also provided.
2 Analysis of the PNAS Data Set
The data set presented here consisted of text and meta-
data from Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ence, 1997 to 2002. These examples are extracted from
the abstract data. Firstly, Leximancer was configured to
map the document set in unsupervised mode. A screen
image of this interactive map is shown in figure 1. This
1Following (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2003).
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                            Demonstrations , pp. 23-24
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
shows the semantic lattice (left), with the co-occurrence
links from the concept ?brain? highlighted (left and right).
Figure 1: Unsupervised map of PNAS abstracts.
Figure 2 shows the top of the thesaurus entry for the
concept ?brain?. This concept was seeded with just the
word ?brain? and then the learning system found a larger
family of words and names which are strongly relevant
to ?brain? in the these abstracts. In the figure, terms in
square brackets are identified proper names, and numeri-
cal values are the relevancy weights.
Figure 2: Thesaurus entry for ?brain? (excerpt).
It is also of interest to discover which concepts tend
to be unique to each year of the PNAS proceedings, and
so identify trends. This usually requires a different form
of analysis, since concepts which characterise the whole
data set may not be good for discriminating parts. By
placing the data for each year in a folder, Leximancer can
tag each text sentence with the relevant year, and place
each year as a prior concept on the map. The result-
ing map contains the prior concepts plus other concepts
which are relevant to at least one of the priors, and shows
trending from early years to later years (figure 3).
Figure 3: Temporal map of PNAS abstracts.
3 Conclusion
The Leximancer system has demonstrated several major
strengths for text data analysis:
? Large amounts of text can be analysed rapidly in a
quantitative manner. Text is quickly re-classified us-
ing different ontologies when needs change.
? The unsupervised analysis generates concepts which
are well-defined ? they have signifiers which com-
municate the meaning of each concept to the user.
? Machine Learning removes much of the need to re-
vise thesauri as the domain vocabulary evolves.
References
Andrew E. Smith. 2000. Machine mapping of document
collections: the leximancer system. In Proceedings
of the Fifth Australasian Document Computing Sym-
posium, Sunshine Coast, Australia, December. DSTC.
http://www.leximancer.com/technology.html.
Mark Steyvers and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2003. The
large-scale structure of semantic networks: Statistical
analyses and a model of semantic growth. Submitted
to Cognitive Science. http://www-psych.stanford.edu/
?msteyver.
David Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word-sense dis-
ambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceed-
ings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-95), pages 189?196,
Cambridge, MA. http://www.cs.jhu.edu/?yarowsky/
pubs.html.
