TIPS: A Translingual Information Processing System
Y. Al-Onaizan, R. Florian, M. Franz, H. Hassan, Y. S. Lee, S. McCarley, K.
Papineni, S. Roukos, J. Sorensen, C. Tillmann, T. Ward, F. Xia
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights
Abstract
Searching online information is
increasingly a daily activity for many
people. The multilinguality of online
content is also increasing (e.g. the
proportion of English web users, which
has been decreasing as a fraction the
increasing population of web users, dipped
below 50% in the summer of 2001). To
improve the ability of an English speaker
to search mutlilingual content, we built a
system that supports cross-lingual search
of an Arabic newswire collection and
provides on demand translation of Arabic
web pages into English. The cross-lingual
search engine supports a fast search
capability (sub-second response for typical
queries) and achieves state-of-the-art
performance in the high precision region
of the result list. The on demand statistical
machine translation uses the Direct
Translation model along with a novel
statistical Arabic Morphological Analyzer
to yield state-of-the-art translation quality.
The on demand SMT uses an efficient
dynamic programming decoder that
achieves reasonable speed for translating
web documents.
Overview
Morphologically rich languages like Arabic
(Beesley, K. 1996) present significant challenges
to many natural language processing applications
as the one described above because a word often
conveys complex meanings decomposable into
several morphemes (i.e. prefix, stem, suffix). By
segmenting words into morphemes, we can
improve the performance of natural language
systems including machine translation (Brown et
al. 1993) and information retrieval (Franz, M.
and McCarley, S. 2002). In this paper, we
present a cross-lingual English-Arabic search
engine combined with an on demand Arabic-
English statistical machine translation system
that relies on source language analysis for both
improved search and translation. We developed
novel statistical learning algorithms for
performing Arabic word segmentation (Lee, Y.
et al2003) into morphemes and morphological
source language (Arabic) analysis (Lee, Y. et al
2003b). These components improve both mono-
lingual (Arabic) search and cross-lingual
(English-Arabic) search and machine
translation. In addition, the system supports
either document translation or convolutional
models for cross-lingual search (Franz, M. and
McCarley, S. 2002).
The overall demonstration has the following
major components:
1. Mono-lingual search: uses Arabic word
segmentation and an okapi-like search
engine for document ranking.
2. Cross-lingual search: uses Arabic word
segmentation and morphological
analysis along with a statistical
morpheme translation matrix in a
convolutional model for document
ranking. The search can also use
document translation into English to
rank the Arabic documents. Both
approaches achieve similar precision in
the high precision region of retrieval.
The English query is also
morphologically analyzed to improve
performance.
3. OnDemand statistical machine
translation: this component uses both
analysis components along with a direct
channel translation model with a fast
dynamic programming decoder
(Tillmann, C. 2003). This system
                                                               Edmonton, May-June 2003
                                                              Demonstrations , pp. 1-2
                                                         Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003
achieves state-of-the-art Arabic-English
translation quality.
4. Arabic named entity detection and
translation: we have 31 categories of
Named Entities (Person, Organization,
etc.) that we detect and highlight in
Arabic text and provide the translation
of these entities into English. The
highlighted named entities help the user
to quickly assess the relevance of a
document.
All of the above functionality is available
through a web browser. We indexed the Arabic
AFP corpus about 330k documents for the
demonstration. The resulting search engine
supports sub-second query response. We also
provide an html detagging capability that allows
the translation of Arabic web pages while trying
to preserve the original layout as much as
possible in the on demand SMT component. The
Arabic Name Entity Tagger is currently run as an
offline process but we expect to have it online by
the demonstration time. We aslo include two
screen shots of the demonstration system.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
and monitored by SPAWAR under contract No.
N66001-99-2-8916. The views and findings
contained in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the position of
policy of the Government and no official
endorsement should be inferred.
References
Beesley, K. 1996. Arabic Finite-State
Morphological Analysis and Generation.
Proceedings of COLING-96, pages 89? 94.
Brown, P., Della Pietra, S., Della Pietra, V., and
Mercer, R. 1993. The mathematics of statistical
machine translation: Parameter Estimation.
Computational Linguistics, 19(2): 263?311.
Franz, M. and McCarley, S. 2002. Arabic
Information Retrieval at IBM. Proceedings
of TREC 2002, pages 402?405.
Lee, Y., Papineni, K., Roukos, S.,
Emam, O., and Hassan, H. 2003. Language
Model Based Arabic Word Segmentation.
Submitted for publication.
Lee, Y., Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Emam,
O., and Hassan, H. 2003b. Automatic
Induction of Morphological Analysis for
Statistical Machine Translation. Manuscript in
preparation.
Tillmann, C., 2003. Word Reordering and a
DP Beam Search Algorithm for Statistical
Machine Translation. Computational
Linguistics, 29(1): 97-133.
