Active Learning for Classifying Phone Sequences from Unsupervised
Phonotactic Models
Shona Douglas
AT&T Labs - Research
Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA
shona@research.att.com
Abstract
This paper describes an application of active
learning methods to the classification of phone
strings recognized using unsupervised phono-
tactic models. The only training data required
for classification using these recognition meth-
ods is assigning class labels to the audio files.
The work described here demonstrates that
substantial savings in this effort can be ob-
tained by actively selecting examples to be la-
beled using confidence scores from the Boos-
Texter classifier. The saving in class label-
ing effort is evaluated on two different spo-
ken language system domains in terms both of
the number of utterances to be labeled and the
length of the labeled utterances in phones. We
show that savings in labeling effort of around
30% can be obtained using active selection of
examples.
1 Introduction
A major barrier to the rapid and cost-effective develop-
ment of spoken language processing applications is the
need for time-consuming and expensive human transcrip-
tion and annotation of collected data. Extensive transcrip-
tion of audio is generally undertaken to provide word-
level labeling to train recognition models. Applications
that use statistically trained classification as a component
of an understanding system also require this transcribed
text to train on, plus an assignment of class labels to each
utterance.
In recent work by Alshawi (2003) reported in this con-
ference, new methods for unsupervised training of phone
string recognizers have been developed, removing the
need for word-level transcription. The phone-string out-
put of such recognizers has been used in classification
tasks using the BoosTexter text classification algorithm,
giving utterance classfication accuracy that is surprisingly
close to that obtained using conventionally trained word
trigram models requiring transcription. The only train-
ing data required for classification using these recogni-
tion methods is assigning class labels to the audio files.
The aim of the work described in this paper is to amplify
this advantage by reducing the amount of effort required
to train classifiers for phone-based systems by actively
selecting which utterances to assign class labels. Active
learning has been applied to classification problems be-
fore (McCallum and Nigam, 1998; Tur et al, 2003), but
not to classifiying phone strings.
2 Unsupervised Phone Recognition
Unsupervised recognition of phone sequences is car-
ried out according to the method described by
Alshawi (2003). In this method, the training inputs to
recognition model training are simply the set of audio
files that have been recorded from the application.
The recognition training phase is an iterative procedure
in which a phone n-gram model is refined successively:
The phone strings resulting from the current pass over the
speech files are used to construct the phone n-gram model
for the next iteration. We currently only re-estimate the n-
gram model, so the same general-purpose HMM acoustic
model is used for ASR decoding in all iterations.
Recognition training can be briefly described as fol-
lows. First, set the phone sequence model to an initial
phone string model. This initial model used can be an
unweighted phone loop or a general purpose phonotac-
tic model for the language being recognized. Then, for
successively larger n-grams, produce the output set of
phone sequences from recognizing the training speech
files with the current phone sequence model, and train the
next larger n-gram phone sequence model on this output
corpus.
3 Training phone sequence classifiers with
active selection of examples
The method we use for training the phone sequence clas-
sifier is as follows.
1. Choose an initial subset S of training recordings at
random; assign class label(s) to each example.
2. Recognize these recordings using the phone recog-
nizer described in section 2.
3. Train an initial classifier C on the pairs (phone
string, class label) of S.
4. Run the classifier on the recognized phone strings of
the training corpus, obtaining confidence scores for
each classification.
5. While labeling effort is available, or until per-
formance on a development corpus reaches some
threshold,
(a) Choose the next subset S? of examples from of
the training corpus, on the basis of the confi-
dence scores or other indicators. (Selection cri-
teria are discussed later.)
(b) Assign class label(s) to each selected example.
(c) Train classifier C ? on all the data labeled so far.
(d) Run C ? on the whole training corpus, obtaining
confidence scores for each classification.
(e) Optionally test C ? on a separate test corpus.
4 Experimental Setup
The datasets tested on and the classifier used are the same
as those in the experiments on phone sequence classifica-
tion reported by Alshawi (2003). The details are briefly
restated here.
4.1 Data
Two collections of utterances from two domains were
used in the experiments:
1. Customer care utterances (HMIHY). These utter-
ances are the customer side of live English conversations
between AT&T residential customers and an automated
customer care system. This system is open to the public
so the number of speakers is large (several thousand).
The total number of training utterances was 40,106.
All tests use 9724 test utterances. Average utterance
length was 11.19 words; there were 56 classes, with an
average of 1.09 classes per utterance.
2. Text-to-Speech Help Desk utterances (TTSHD).
This is a smaller database of utterances in which cus-
tomers called an automated information system primar-
ily to find out about AT&T Natural Voices text-to-speech
synthesis products.
The total number of possible training utterances was
10,470. All tests use 5005 test utterances. Average utter-
ance length was 3.95 words; there were 54 classes, with
an average of 1.23 classes per utterance.
4.2 Phone sequences
The phone sequences used for testing and training are
those obtained using the phone recognizer described in
section 2. Since the phone recognizer is trained with-
out labeling of any sort, we can use all available train-
ing utterances to train it, that is, 40,106 in the HMIHY
domain and 10,470 in the TTSHD domain. The initial
model used to start the iteration is, as in (Alshawi, 2003),
an unweighted phone loop.
4.3 Classifier
For the experiments reported here we use the BoosT-
exter classifier (Schapire and Singer, 2000). The fea-
tures used were identifiers corresponding to prompts, and
phone n-grams up to length 4. Following Schapire and
Singer (2000), the confidence level for a given prediction
is taken to be the difference between the scores assigned
by BoosTexter to the highest ranked action (the predicted
action) and the next highest ranked action.
4.4 Selection criteria
Subsets of the recognized phone sequences were selected
to be assigned class labels and used in training the clas-
sifiers. Examples were selected in order of BoosTex-
ter confidence score, least confident first. Further selec-
tion by utterance length was also used in some experi-
ments such that only recognized utterances with less than
a given number of phones were selected.
5 Experiments
5.1 Evaluation metrics
We are interested in comparing the performance for a
given amount of labeling effort of classifiers trained on
random selection of examples with that of classifiers
trained on examples chosen according to the confidence-
based method described in section 3.
The basic measurements are:
A(e): the classification accuracy at a given labeling
effort level e of the classifier trained on actively selected
labeling examples.
R(e): the classification accuracy at a given labeling
effort level e of the classifier trained on randomly selected
labeling examples.
A?1(R(e)): the effort required to achieve the perfor-
mance of random selection at effort e, using active learn-
ing.
Derived from these is the main comparison we are in-
terested in:
Effort A R A?1(R) Effort
(utt) (%) (%) (utt) Ratio
2000 67.4 66.0 1128 0.56
4000 69.6 68.0 2678 0.67
Table 1: HMIHY, no length limit, effort is number of ut-
terances
Effort A R A?1(R) Effort
(phn) (%) (%) (phn) Ratio
68032 67.0 66.1 52940 0.78
128636 69.3 67.9 91057 0.71
Table 2: HMIHY, length limited, effort is number of
phones
EffortRatio(e) = A?1(R(e))/e: the proportion of the
effort that would be required to achieve the performance
of random selection at effort e, actually required using
active learning: that is, low is good.
We use two metrics for labeling effort: the number
of utterances to be labeled and the number of phones in
those utterances. The number of phones is indicative of
the length of the audio file that must be listened to in order
to make the class label assignment, so this is relevant to
assessing just how much real effort is saved by any active
learning technique.
5.2 Results
Table 1 gives the results for selected levels of labeling ef-
fort in the HMIHY domain, calculated in terms of number
of utterances labeled.
These results suggest that we can achieve the same
accuracy as random labeling with around 60% of the
effort by active selection of examples according to the
confidence-based method described in section 3.
However, a closer inspection of the chosen examples
reveals that, on average, the actively selected utterances
are nearly 1.5 times longer than the random selection in
terms of number of phones. (This is not suprising given
that the classification method performs much worse on
longer utterances, and the confidence levels reflect this.)
In order to overcome this we introduce as part of the se-
lection criteria a length limit of 50 phones. This allows us
to retain appreciable effort savings as shown in table 2.
The TTSHD application is considerably less complex
than HMIHY, and this may be reflected in the greater sav-
ings obtained using active learning. Tables 3 and 4 show
the corresponding results for this domain.
There is also a smaller variation in utterance length be-
tween actively and randomly selected training examples
(more like 110% than the 150% for HMIHY); table 4
shows that defining effort in terms of number of phones
still results in appreciable savings for active learning. (In-
Effort A R A?1(R) Effort
(utt) (%) (%) (utt) Ratio
2000 78.9 77.5 1327 0.66
4000 80.3 78.8 1971 0.49
Table 3: TTSHD, effort is number of utterances
Effort A R A?1(R) Effort
(phn) (%) (%) (phn) Ratio
35877 78.9 77.9 27019 0.75
71338 80.3 79.1 48267 0.68
Table 4: TTSHD, effort is number of phones
corporating a length limit gave little additional benefit
here.)
6 Discussion
By actively choosing the examples with the lowest con-
fidence scores first, we can get the same classification
results with around 60-70% of the utterances labeled in
HMIHY and TTSHD. But we want to optimize labeling
effort, which is presumably some combination of a fixed
amount of effort per utterance plus a ?listening effort?
proportional to utterance length. We therefore augmented
our active learning selection to include a constraint on the
length of the utterances, measured in recognized phones.
If we simply take effort to be proportional to the number
of phones in the utterances selected (likely to result in a
conservative estimate of savings), the effort reduction at
4,000 utterances is around 30% even for the more com-
plex HMIHY domain. Further investigation is needed
into the best way to measure overall labeling effort, and
into refinements of the active learning process to optimize
that labeling effort.
References
H. Alshawi. 2003. Effective utterance classification with
unsupervised phonotactic models. In HLT-NAACL
2003, Edmonton, Canada.
A. K. McCallum and K. Nigam. 1998. Employing EM
in pool-based active learning for text classification. In
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 350?358.
R. E. Schapire and Y. Singer. 2000. BoosTexter: A
boosting-based system for text categorization. Ma-
chine Learning, 39(2/3):135?168.
Gokhan Tur, Robert E. Schapire, , and Dilek Hakkani-
Tur. 2003. Active learning for spoken language un-
derstanding. In Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP?03), Hong Kong, April. (to appear).
