Performance Evaluation and Error Analysis for Multimodal Reference 
Resolution in a Conversation System 
Joyce Y. Chai          Zahar Prasov              Pengyu Hong 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University  
East Lansing, MI 48864 
jchai@cse.msu.edu,  prasovza@cse.msu.edu 
Department of Statistics 
Harvard University 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
hong@stat.harvard.edu 
 
Abstract 
Multimodal reference resolution is a process 
that automatically identifies what users refer 
to during multimodal human-machine 
conversation. Given the substantial work on 
multimodal reference resolution; it is important 
to evaluate the current state of the art, 
understand the limitations, and identify 
directions for future improvement. We 
conducted a series of user studies to evaluate the 
capability of reference resolution in a 
multimodal conversation system.  This paper 
analyzes the main error sources during real-time 
human-machine interaction and presents key 
strategies for designing robust multimodal 
reference resolution algorithms. 
1 Introduction* 
Multimodal systems enable users to interact with 
computers through multiple modalities such as speech, 
gesture, and gaze (Bolt 1980; Cassell et al, 1999; Cohen et 
al., 1996; Chai et al, 2002; Johnston et al, 2002). One 
important aspect of building multimodal systems is for the 
system to understand the meanings of multimodal user 
inputs. A key element of this understanding process is 
reference resolution. Reference resolution is a process that 
finds the most proper referents to referring expressions. To 
resolve multimodal references, many approaches have 
been developed, from the use of a focus space model (Neal 
et al, 1998), a centering framework (Zancanaro et al 
1997), contextual factors (Huls et al, 1995); to recent 
approaches using unification (Johnston, 1998), finite state 
machines (Johnston and Bangalore 2000), and context-
based rules (Kehler 2000).   
Given the substantial work in this area; it is important 
to evaluate the state of the art, understand the limitations, 
                                                                
* This work was supported by grant IIS-0347548 from the 
National Science Foundation and grant IRGP-03-42111 from 
Michigan State University. 
 
and identify directions for future improvement. We 
conducted a series of user studies to evaluate the capability 
of reference resolution in a multimodal conversation 
system. In particular, this paper examines two important 
aspects: (1) algorithm requirements for handling a variety 
of references, and (2) technology requirements for 
achieving good real-time performance. In the following 
sections, we first give a brief description of our system. 
Then we analyze the main error sources during real-time 
human-machine interaction and discuss the key strategies 
for designing robust reference resolution algorithms. 
2 System Description  
We implemented a multimodal conversation system to 
study multimodal user referring behavior and to evaluate 
reference resolution algorithms. Users can use both speech 
and manual gestures (e.g., point and circle) to interact with 
a map-based graphic interface to find information about 
real estate properties.  
As shown in Figure 1, our system applies a semantic 
fusion approach that combines the semantic information 
identified from each modality. A key characteristic of the 
system is that, in addition to fusing information from 
different modalities, our system systematically 
incorporates information from the conversation context 
(e.g., the focus of attention from prior conversation), the 
Speech Input Gesture Input
Speech 
Recognizer 
NL
Parser 
Gesture
Recognizer
Multimodal Interpreter
(Graph-based Reference 
Resolution Component)
Conversation
Manager
Presentation
Manager
Conversation 
Context
Visual 
Context
Domain
Context
Multimedia Output  
Figure 1:  Overview of the system 
visual context (e.g., objects on the screen that are in the 
visual focus), and the domain context (i.e., the domain 
k
m
g
re
sp
re
e
in
re
re
g
o
h
c
p
is
a
G
p
R
re
m
d
3
W
p
g
th
sy
a
th
voice from each subject was trained individually to 
minimize speech recognition errors.  
e 
s 
t 
e 
e 
 
f 
, 
e 
 
 
e 
 
. 
s 
e 
 nowledge).   
The reference resolution approach is based on a graph-
atching algorithm. Specifically, two attribute relational 
raphs are used (Tsai and Fu, 1979). One graph is called 
ferring graph that captures referring expressions from 
eech utterances. Each node, corresponding to one 
ferring expression, consists of the semantic information 
xtracted from the expression and the temporal 
formation when the expression is uttered.  Each edge 
presents the semantic and temporal relation between two 
ferring expressions. The second graph is called referent 
raph that represents all potential referents (including 
bjects selected by the gesture, objects in the conversation 
istory, and objects in the visual focus). Each node 
aptures the semantic and temporal information about a 
otential referent (e.g., the time when the potential referent 
 selected by a gesture). Each edge captures the semantic 
nd temporal relations between two potential referents. 
iven these graph representations, the reference resolution 
roblem becomes a graph-matching problem (Gold and 
angarajan, 1996). The goal is to find a match between the 
3.1 Performance Evaluation 
Table 1 summarizes the referring behavior observed in th
studies and the performance of the system. The column
indicate whether there was no gesture, one gesture (poin
or circle), or multiple gestures involved in the input. Th
rows indicate the type of referring expressions in th
speech utterances. Each table entry shows the system
performance on resolving a particular combination o
speech and gesture inputs. For example, the entry at <S2
G4> indicates that 35 inputs consist of demonstrativ
singular noun phrases (as the referring expressions) and a
single circle gesture. Out of these inputs, 27 were correctly
recognized and eight were incorrectly recognized by th
speech recognizer. Out of the 27 correctly recognized
inputs, 26 were correctly assigned referents by the system
Out of the eight incorrectly recognized inputs, reference
in two inputs were correctly resolved.  
Consistent with earlier findings (Kehler 2000), th
majority of user references were simple which onlyferring graph and the referent graph that achieves the 
aximum compatibility between the two graphs.  The 
etails of this approach are described in (Chai et al, 2004). 
 Performance Evaluation and Analysis 
e conducted several user studies to evaluate the 
erformance of real time reference resolution using the 
raph-based approach. Eleven subjects participated in 
ese studies. Each of them was asked to interact with the 
stem using both speech and gestures (point and circle) to 
ccomplish five tasks. For example, one task was to find 
e least expensive house in the most populated town. The 
involved one referring expression and one gesture as 
shown in Table 1 (i.e., S1 to S8, with column G2 and G4). 
However, we have also found that 14% (31/219) of the 
inputs were complex, which involved multiple referring 
expressions from speech utterances (see the row S9). Some 
of these inputs did not have any accompanied gesture (e.g., 
<S9, G1>). Some were accompanied by one gesture (e.g., 
<S9, G4>) or multiple gestures (e.g., <S9, G3> and <S9, 
G5>). The referents to these referring expressions could 
come from user?s gestures, or from the conversation 
context, or from the graphic display. To resolve these types 
of references, the graph-based approach is effective by 
simultaneously considering the semantic, temporal, and 
1(1), 1(0)001(1), 1(0)000S5:(these|those)(num)*(adj)*(ones)*|them
129(111), 90(26)
15(9), 16(1)
2(0) 12(4)
4(2), 0(0)
7(7), 2(1)
7(4), 12(5)
22(21), 14(3)
64(61), 27(11)
7(6), 6(1)
Total 
Num
4(4), 11(0)9(7), 5(0)63(54), 36(8)7(4), 3(2)39(37),29(14)7(5), 6(2)Total Num
0(0), 3(0)8(6), 5(0)3(1), 7(1)4(2), 0(0)00(0), 1(0)S9: multiple expressions
0(0), 3(0)00(0), 3(0)0(0), 3(2)1(0), 3(2)1(0), 0(0)S8: proper nouns
002(0), 0(0)01(1), 0(0)1(1), 0(0)S7: empty expression
006(6), 0(0)01(1), 1(0)0(0), 1(1)S6: here|there
004(2), 4(1)02(2), 6(3)1(0), 2(1)S4: it|this|that| (this|that|the)(adj)*one
3(3), 2(0)019(18), 12(3)000S3: (these|those)(num)*(adj)*Ns
1(1), 2(0)1(1), 0(0)27(26), 8(2)3(2), 0(0)29(28), 16(9)3(3), 1(0)S2: (this|that) (adj*) N
0(0), 1(0)01(0), 1(1)05(5), 3(0)1(1), 1(0)S1: the (adj)*(N | Ns)
G6
Points and 
Circles
G5
Multiple 
Circles
G4
One Circle
G3
Multiple 
Points
G2
One Point
G1
No 
Gesture
Table 1: Performance evaluation of the graph-matching approach to multimodal reference resolution. In each entry form
?a(b), c(d)?,  ?a? indicates the number of inputs in which the referring expressions were correctly recognized by the speech
recognizer; ?b? indicates the number of inputs in which the referring expressions were  correctly recognized and were cor-
rectly resolved; ?c? indicates the number of inputs in which the referring expressions were not correctly recognized; ?d?
indicates the number of inputs in which the referring expressions were not correctly recognized, but were correctly resolved.
The sum of ?a? and ?c? gives the total number of inputs with a particular combination of speech and gesture. 
 
contextual constraints.   
3.2 Error Analysis 
As shown in Table 1, out of the total 219 inputs, 137 inputs 
had their referents correctly identified (A complex input 
with multiple referring expressions was considered 
correctly resolved only if the referents to all the referring 
expressions were correctly identified). For the remaining 
82 inputs in which the referents were not correctly 
identified, the errors mainly came from five sources as 
summarized in Table 2.  
A poor performance in speech recognition is a major 
error source. Although we have trained each user?s voice 
individually, the speech recognition rate is still very low. 
Only 59% (129/219) of inputs had correctly recognized 
referring expressions. This is partly due to the fact that 
more than half of our subjects are non-native speakers.  
Fusing inputs from multiple modalities together can 
sometimes compensate for the recognition errors (Oviatt 
1996). Among 90 inputs in which referring expressions 
were incorrectly recognized, 26 of them were correctly 
assigned referents due to the mutual disambiguation. 
However, poor speech recognition still accounted for 55% 
of the total errors. A mechanism to reduce the recognition 
errors, especially by utilizing information from other 
modalities will be important to provide a robust solution 
for real time multimodal reference resolution.  
The second source of errors (20% of the total errors) 
came from insufficient language understanding, especially 
the out-of-vocabularies. For example, ?area? was not in 
our vocabulary. So the additional semantic constraint 
expressed by ?area? was not captured. Therefore, the 
system could not identify whether a house or a town was 
referred when the user uttered ?this area?. It is important 
for the system to have a capability of acquire knowledge 
(e.g., vocabulary) dynamically by utilizing information 
from other modalities and the interaction context. 
Furthermore, the errors also came from a lack of 
understanding of spatial relations (as in ?the house just 
close to the red one?) and superlatives (as in ?the most 
expensive house?). Algorithms to align visual features to 
resolve spatial references as described in (Gorniak and Roy 
2003) are desirable.  
Among all errors, 13% came from unsynchronized 
inputs. Currently, we use an idle status (i.e., 2 seconds with 
no input from either speech or gesture) as the boundary to 
delimit an interaction turn. There are two types of out of 
synchronization. The first type is unsynchronized inputs 
from the user (such as a big pause between speech and 
gesture) and the other comes from the underlying system 
implementation.  The system captures speech inputs and 
gesture inputs from two different servers through TCP/IP 
protocol. A communication delay sometimes split one 
synchronized input into two separate turns of inputs (i.e., 
one turn was speech input alone and the other turn was 
gesture input alone). A better engineering mechanism to 
synchronize inputs is desired. 
The disfluencies from the users also accounted for 
about 7% of the total errors. Recent findings indicated that 
gesture patterns could be used as an additional source to 
identify different types of speech disfluencies during 
human-human conversation (Chen et al, 2002). As 
expected, speech disfluencies did not occur that much in 
our studies. Based on our limited cases, we found that 
gesture patterns could be indicators of speech disfluencies 
when they did occur. For example, if a user says ?show me 
the red house (point to house A), the green house (still 
point to the house A)?, then the behavior of pointing to the 
same house with different speech description usually 
indicates a repair. Furthermore, gestures also involve 
disfluencies, for example, repeatedly pointing to an object 
is a gesture repetition. Failure in identifying these 
disfluencies caused problems with reference resolution. It 
is important to have a mechanism that can identify these 
disfluencies using multimodal information.  
The remaining 5% errors came from the 
implementation of our approach in order to reduce the 
complexity of graph matching.  Currently, the referent 
graph only consists of potential referents from gestures, 
objects from the prior conversation, and the objects in the 
visual focus (i.e., highlighted on the screen). Therefore, it 
is insufficient to handle cases where users only use proper 
names (without any gestures) to refer to objects visible on 
the screen.  
From the error analysis, we learned that variations in 
user inputs (e.g., variations in vocabulary and 
synchronization patterns), disfluencies in speech utterances, 
and even small changes in the input quality or the 
environment could seriously impair the real-time 
performance. The future research effort should be devoted 
to developing adaptive approaches for reference resolution 
to deal with unexpected inputs (e.g., inputs that are outside 
of system knowledge).    
3.
Th ies in 
de rence 
re andle 
te dings 
(O tudy, 
ge were 
ut % of 
ca sture 
an rred. 
Fu poral 
5%Others
7%Disfluency
13%Out of synchronization
20%Language understanding errors
55%Speech recognition errors
Percentage
 
Table 2: The distribution of error sources 3 Design Strategies   
e evaluation also indicates three important strateg
signing effective algorithms for multimodal refe
solution. The first strategy concerns with how to h
mporal relations. Consistent with the previous fin
viatt et al 1997), in most cases (85%) in our s
stures occurred before the referring expressions 
tered. However, we did find some exceptions. In 7
ses, there was no overlap between speech and ge
d speech were uttered before gestures occu
rthermore, one user could have different tem
behavior at different stages in one interaction. In our study, 
five users exhibited varied temporal alignment during the 
interaction. Therefore, to accommodate different temporal 
variations, incorporating relative temporal relations 
between different modalities based on temporal closeness 
is preferred over incorporating absolute temporal relations 
or temporal orders.  
Second, in a multimodal conversation, the potential 
objects referred to by a user could come from different 
sources. They could be the objects gestured at, objects in 
the visual focus (e.g., highlighted), objects visible on the 
screen, or objects mentioned in a prior conversation. It is 
important for reference resolution algorithms to 
simultaneously combine semantic, temporal, and 
contextual constraints. This is particularly important for 
complex inputs that involve multiple referring expressions 
and multiple gestures as described earlier. 
Third, depending on the interface design and the 
underlying architecture for multimodal systems, different 
types of uncertainties occur during the process of input 
interpretation. For example, in our interface, each house 
icon is built on top of the town icon. Therefore, a pointing 
gesture could result in several possible objects.  Once a 
touch screen is used, a finger point may result in different 
possibilities. Furthermore, most systems like ours are 
based on the pipelined architecture as shown in Figure1. 
The pipelined processes can potentially lose low 
probability information (e.g., recognized alternatives with 
low probabilities) that could be very crucial when 
incorporated with other modalities and the interaction 
context. Therefore, it is important to retain information at 
different levels and systematically incorporate the 
imprecise information.  
4 Conclusion 
This paper presents an evaluation of graph-based 
multimodal reference resolution in a conversational system. 
The evaluation indicates that, the real-time performance is 
largely dependent on speech recognition performance, 
language processing capability, disfluency detection from 
both speech and gesture, as well as the system engineering 
issues.  Furthermore, the studies identify three important 
strategies for robust multimodal reference resolution 
algorithms: (1) using relative temporal constraints based 
on temporal closeness, (2) combining temporal, semantic, 
and contextual constraints simultaneously, and (3) 
incorporating imprecise information. A successful 
approach will need to consider both algorithmic 
requirements and technology limitations.  
Acknowledgement 
The authors would like to thank Keith Houck and    
Michelle Zhou at IBM T. J. Watson Research Center for 
their support in developing the system, and the anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. 
 
References 
Bolt, R.A. 1980. Put that there: Voice and Gesture at the 
Graphics Interface. Computer Graphics14(3): 262-270. 
Cassell, J., Bickmore, T., Billinghurst, M., Campbell, L., 
Chang, K., Vilhjalmsson, H. and Yan, H. 1999. Embodi-
ment in Conversational Interfaces: Rea. In Proceedings of 
the CHI'99 Conference, pp. 520-527. Pittsburgh, PA. 
Chai, J. Y., Hong, P., and Zhou, M. X. 2004. A probabilistic 
approach to reference resolution in multimodal user inter-
faces, Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Intel-
ligent User Interfaces (IUI): 70-77. Madeira, Portugal, 
January.  
Chai, J., Pan, S., Zhou, M., and Houck, K. 2002. Context-
based Multimodal Interpretation in Conversational Systems. 
Fourth International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces. 
Chen, L., Harper, M. and Quek, F. 2002. Gesture patterns 
during speech repairs. Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI).  
Cohen, P., Johnston, M., McGee, D., Oviatt, S., Pittman, J., 
Smith, I., Chen, L., and Clow, J. 1996. Quickset: Multimo-
dal Interaction for Distributed Applications. Proceedings of 
ACM Multimedia, pp. 31? 40. 
Gold, S. and Rangarajan, A. 1996. A graduated assignment 
algorithm for graph-matching. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 18, no. 4. 
Gorniak, P. and Roy, D. 2003.Grounded Semantic Composi-
tion for Visual Scenes. Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research. 
Huls, C., Bos, E., and Classen, W. 1995. Automatic Referent 
Resolution of Deictic and Anaphoric Expressions. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 21(1):59-79. 
Johnston, M. 1998. Unification-based Multimodal parsing, 
Proceedings of COLING-ACL.  
Johnston, M. and Bangalore, S. 2000. Finite-state multimodal 
parsing and understanding. Proceedings of COLING. 
Johnston, M.,  Bangalore, S.,  Visireddy G., Stent, A., Ehlen, 
P., Walker, M., Whittaker, S., and Maloor, P. 2002. 
MATCH: An Architecture for Multimodal Dialog Systems, 
in Proceedings of ACL. 
Kehler, A. 2000. Cognitive Status and Form of Reference in 
Multimodal Human-Computer Interaction, Proceedings of 
AAAI. 
Neal, J. G., Thielman, C. Y.,  Dobes, Z. Haller, S. M., and 
Shapiro, S. C. 1998. Natural Language with Integrated 
Deictic and Graphic Gestures. Intelligent User Interfaces, 
M. Maybury and W. Wahlster (eds.), 38-51.  
Oviatt, S., DeAngeli, A., and Kuhn, K. 1997. Integration and 
Synchronization of Input Modes during Multimodal Hu-
man-Computer Interaction, In Proceedings of Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems: CHI '97. 
Tsai, W.H. and Fu, K.S.  1979. Error-correcting isomorphism 
of attributed relational graphs for pattern analysis. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 9, pp. 
757?768. 
Zancanaro, M., Stock, O., and Strapparava, C. 1997. Multi-
modal Interaction for Information Access: Exploiting Co-
hesion. Computational Intelligence 13(7):439-464. 
