Lattice-Based Search for Spoken Utterance Retrieval
Murat Saraclar
AT&T Labs ? Research
180 Park Ave. Florham Park, NJ 07932
murat@research.att.com
Richard Sproat
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
rws@uiuc.edu
Abstract
Recent work on spoken document retrieval has
suggested that it is adequate to take the single-
best output of ASR, and perform text retrieval
on this output. This is reasonable enough for
the task of retrieving broadcast news stories,
where word error rates are relatively low, and
the stories are long enough to contain much
redundancy. But it is patently not reasonable
if one?s task is to retrieve a short snippet of
speech in a domain where WER?s can be as
high as 50%; such would be the situation with
teleconference speech, where one?s task is to
find if and when a participant uttered a certain
phrase.
In this paper we propose an indexing proce-
dure for spoken utterance retrieval that works
on lattices rather than just single-best text. We
demonstrate that this procedure can improve F
scores by over five points compared to single-
best retrieval on tasks with poor WER and low
redundancy. The representation is flexible so
that we can represent both word lattices, as
well as phone lattices, the latter being impor-
tant for improving performance when search-
ing for phrases containing OOV words.
1 Introduction
Automatic systems for indexing, archiving, searching and
browsing of large amounts of spoken communications
have become a reality in the last decade. Most such sys-
tems use an automatic speech recognition (ASR) compo-
nent to convert speech to text which is then used as an
input to a standard text based information retrieval (IR)
component. This strategy works reasonably well when
speech recognition output is mostly correct or the docu-
ments are long enough so that some occurrences of the
query terms are recognized correctly.
Most of the research has concentrated on retrieval of
Broadcast News type of spoken documents where speech
is relatively clean and the documents are relatively long.
In addition it is possible to find large amounts of text with
similar content in order to build better language models
and enhance retrieval through use of similar documents.
We are interested in extending this to telephone con-
versations and teleconferences. Our task is locating oc-
currences of a query in spoken communications to aid
browsing. This is not exactly spoken document retrieval.
In fact, it is more similar to word spotting. Each docu-
ment is a short segment of audio.
Although reasonable retrieval performance can be ob-
tained using the best ASR hypothesis for tasks with
moderate (? 20%) word error rates, tasks with higher
(40? 50%) word error rates require use of multiple ASR
hypotheses. Use of ASR lattices makes the system more
robust to recognition errors.
Almost all ASR systems have a closed vocabulary.
This restriction comes from run-time requirements as
well as the finite amount of data used for training the
language models of the ASR systems. Typically the
recognition vocabulary is taken to be the words appear-
ing in the language model training corpus. Sometimes
the vocabulary is further reduced to only include the
most frequent words in the corpus. The words that are
not in this closed vocabulary ? the out of vocabulary
(OOV) words ? will not be recognized by the ASR sys-
tem, contributing to recognition errors. The effects of
OOV words in spoken document retrieval are discussed
by Woodland et al (2000). Using phonetic search helps
retrieve OOV words.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
give an overview of related work, focusing on methods
dealing with speech recognition errors and OOV queries.
We present the methods used in this study in Section 3.
Experimental setup and results are given in Section 4. Fi-
nally, our conclusions are presented in Section 5.
2 Related Work
There are commercial systems including Nexidia/Fast-
Talk (www.nexidia.com), Virage/AudioLogger
(www.virage.com), Convera (www.convera.com)
as well as research systems like AT&T DVL (Cox et
al., 1998), AT&T ScanMail (Hirschberg et al, 2001),
BBN Rough?n?Ready (Makhoul et al, 2000), CMU
Informedia (www.informedia.cs.cmu.edu),
SpeechBot (www.speechbot.com), among others.
Also between 1997 and 2000, the Test REtrieval Con-
ference (TREC) had a spoken document retrieval (SDR)
track with many participants (Garofolo et al, 2000).
NIST TREC-9 SDR Web Site (2000) states that:
The results of the TREC-9 2000 SDR eval-
uation presented at TREC on November 14,
2000 showed that retrieval performance for
sites on their own recognizer transcripts was
virtually the same as their performance on the
human reference transcripts. Therefore, re-
trieval of excerpts from broadcast news using
automatic speech recognition for transcription
was deemed to be a solved problem - even with
word error rates of 30%.
PhD Theses written on this topic include James (1995),
Wechsler (1998), Siegler (1999) and Ng (2000).
Jones et al (1996) describe a system that com-
bines a large vocabulary continuous speech recognition
(LVCSR) system and a phone-lattice word spotter (WS)
for retrieval of voice and video mail messages (Brown
et al, 1996). Witbrock and Hauptmann (1997) present
a system where a phonetic transcript is obtained from
the word transcript and retrieval is performed using
both word and phone indices. Wechsler et al (1998)
present new techniques including a new method to
detect occurrences of query features, a new method
to estimate occurrence probabilities, a collection-wide
probability re-estimation technique and feature length
weighting. Srinivasan and Petkovic (2000) introduce a
method for phonetic retrieval based on the probabilis-
tic formulation of term weighting using phone confu-
sion data. Amir et al (2001) use indexing based on con-
fusable phone groups and a Bayesian phonetic edit dis-
tance for phonetic speech retrieval. Logan et al (2002)
compare three indexing methods based on words,
syllable-like particles, and phonemes to study the
problem of OOV queries in audio indexing systems.
Logan and Van Thong (2002) give an alternate approach
to the OOV query problem by expanding query words
into in-vocabulary phrases while taking acoustic confus-
ability and language model scores into account.
Of the previous work, the most similar approach to the
one proposed here is that of Jones et al (1996), in that
they used phone lattices to aid in word spotting, in ad-
dition to single-best output from LVCSR. Our proposal
might be thought of as a generalization of their approach
in that we use lattices as the sole representation over
which retrieval is performed. We believe that lattices are
a more natural representation for retrieval in cases where
there is a high degree of uncertainty about what was said,
which is typically the case in LVCSR systems for con-
versational speech. We feel that our results, presented
below, bear out this belief. Also novel in our approach is
the use of indexed lattices allowing for efficient retrieval.
As we note below, in the limit where one is using one-best
output, the indexed lattices reduce to the normal inverted
index used in text retrieval.
3 Methods
In this section we describe the overall structure of our
system and give details of the techniques used in our
investigations. The system consists of three main com-
ponents. First, the ASR component is used to convert
speech into a lattice representation, together with timing
information. Second, this representation is indexed for
efficient retrieval. These two steps are performed off-line.
Finally, when the user enters a query the index is searched
and matching audio segments are returned.
3.1 Automatic Speech Recognition
We use a state-of-the-art HMM based large vocabulary
continuous speech recognition (LVCSR) system. The
acoustic models consist of decision tree state clustered
triphones and the output distributions are mixtures of
Gaussians. The language models are pruned backoff tri-
gram models. The pronunciation dictionaries contain few
alternative pronunciations. Pronunciations that are not
in our baseline pronunciation dictionary (including OOV
query words) are generated using a text-to-speech (TTS)
frontend. The TTS frontend can produce multiple pro-
nunciations. The ASR systems used in this study are
single pass systems. The recognition networks are rep-
resented as weighted finite state machines (FSMs).
The output of the ASR system is also represented as an
FSM and may be in the form of a best hypothesis string
or a lattice of alternate hypotheses. The labels on the arcs
of the FSM may be words or phones, and the conversion
between the two can easily be done using FSM composi-
tion. The costs on the arcs are negative log likelihoods.
Additionally, timing information can also be present in
the output.
3.2 Lattice Indexing and Retrieval
In the case of lattices, we store a set of indices, one for
each arc label (word or phone) l, that records the lat-
tice number L[a], input-state k[a] of each arc a labeled
with l in each lattice, along with the probability mass
f(k[a]) leading to that state, the probability of the arc
itself p(a|k[a]) and an index for the next state. To re-
trieve a single label from a set of lattices representing a
speech corpus one simply retrieves all arcs in each lattice
from the label index. The lattices are first normalized by
weight pushing (Mohri et al, 2002) so that the probabil-
ity of the set of all paths leading from the arc to the final
state is 1. After weight pushing, for a given arc a, the
probability of the set of all paths containing that arc is
given by
p(a) =
?
pi?L:a?pi
p(pi) = f(k[a])p(a|k[a])
namely the probability of all paths leading into that arc,
multiplied by the probability of the arc itself. For a lattice
L we construct a ?count? C(l|L) for a given label l using
the information stored in the index I(l) as follows,
C(l|L) =
?
pi?L
p(pi)C(l|pi)
=
?
pi?L
(
p(pi)
?
a?pi
?(a, l)
)
=
?
a?L
(
?(a, l)
?
pi?L:a?pi
p(pi)
)
=
?
a?I(l):L[a]=L
p(a)
=
?
a?I(l):L[a]=L
f(k[a])p(a|k[a])
where C(l|pi) is the number of times l is seen on path pi
and ?(a, l) is 1 if arc a has the label l and 0 otherwise. Re-
trieval can be thresholded so that matches below a certain
count are not returned.
To search a multilabel expression (e.g. a multi-
word phrase) w1w2 . . . wn we seek on each label in
the expression, and then for each (wi, wi+1) join the
output states of wi with the matching input states of
wi+1; in this way we retrieve just those path seg-
ments in each lattice that match the entire multi-label
expression. The probability of each match is de-
fined as f(k[a1])p(a1|k[a1])p(a2|k[a2]) . . . p(an|k[an]),
where p(ai|k[ai]) is the probability of the ith arc in the
expression starting in arc a1. The total ?count? for the
lattice is computed as defined above.
Note that in the limit case where each lattice is an un-
weighted single path ? i.e. a string of labels ? the above
scheme reduces to a standard inverted index.
The count C(l|L) can be interpreted as a lattice-based
confidence measure. Although it may be possible to use
more sophisticated confidence measures, use of (poste-
rior) probabilities allows for a simple factorization which
makes indexing efficient.
3.3 Indexing Using Sub-word Units
In order to deal with queries that contain OOV words we
investigate the use of sub-word units for indexing. In this
study we use phones as the sub-word units. There are two
methods for obtaining phonetic representation of an input
utterance.
1. Phone recognition using an ASR system where
recognition units are phones. This is achieved by
using a phone level language model instead of the
word level language model used in the baseline ASR
system.
2. Converting the word level representation of the ut-
terance into a phone level representation. This is
achieved by using the baseline ASR system and re-
placing each word in the output by its pronuncia-
tion(s) in terms of phones.
Both methods have their shortcomings. Phone recogni-
tion is known to be less accurate than word recognition.
On the other hand, the second method can only generate
phone strings that are substrings of the pronunciations of
in-vocabulary word strings. An alternative is to use hy-
brid language models used for OOV word detection (Yaz-
gan and Saraclar, 2004).
For retrieval, each query word is converted into phone
string(s) by using its pronunciation(s). The phone index
can then be searched for each phone string. Note that this
approach will generate many false alarms, particularly for
short query words, which are likely to be substrings of
longer words. In order to control for this a bound on min-
imum pronunciation length can be utilized. Since most
short words are in vocabulary this bound has little effect
on recall.
3.4 Using Both Word and Sub-word Indices
Given a word index and a sub-word index, it is possible to
improve the retrieval performance of the system by using
both indices. There are many strategies for doing this.
1. combination:
Search both the word index and the sub-word index,
combine the results.
2. vocabulary cascade:
Search the word index for in-vocabulary queries,
search the sub-word index for OOV queries.
3. search cascade:
Search the word index,
if no result is returned search the sub-word index.
In the first case, if the indices are obtained from ASR
best hypotheses, then the result combination is a simple
union of the separate sets of results. However, if indices
are obtained from lattices, then in addition to taking a
union of results, retrieval can be done using a combined
score. Given a query q, let Cw(q) and Cp(q) be the lattice
counts obtained from the word index and the phone index
respectively. We also define the normalized lattice count
for the phone index as
Cnormp (q) = (Cp(q))
1
|pron(q)|
where |pron(q)| is the length of the pronunciation of
query q. We then define the combined score to be
Cwp(q) = Cw(q) + ?C
norm
p (q)
where ? is an empirically determined scaling factor.
In the other cases, instead of using two different thresh-
olds we use a single threshold on Cw(q) and Cnormp (q)
during retrieval.
4 Experiments
4.1 Evaluation Metrics
For evaluating ASR performance we use the standard
word error rate (WER) as our metric. Since we are in-
terested in retrieval we use OOV rate by type to measure
the OOV word characteristics. For evaluating retrieval
performance we use precision and recall with respect to
manual transcriptions. Let Correct(q) be the number of
times the query q is found correctly, Answer(q) be the
number of answers to the query q, and Reference(q) be
the number of times q is found in the reference.
Precision(q) =
Correct(q)
Answer(q)
Recall(q) =
Correct(q)
Reference(q)
We compute precision and recall rates for each query and
report the average over all queries. The set of queries Q
consists of all the words seen in the reference except for
a stoplist of 100 most common words. The measurement
is not weighted by frequency ? i.e. each query q ? Q
is presented to the system only once, independent of the
number of occurences of q in the transcriptions.
Precision =
1
|Q|
?
q?Q
Precision(q)
Recall =
1
|Q|
?
q?Q
Recall(q)
For lattice based retrieval methods, different operating
points can be obtained by changing the threshold. The
precision and recall at these operating points can be plot-
ted as a curve.
In addition to individual precision-recall values we
also compute the F-measure defined as
F =
2? Precision? Recall
Precision + Recall
and report the maximum F-measure (maxF) to summa-
rize the information in a precision-recall curve.
4.2 Corpora
We use three different corpora to assess the effectiveness
of different retrieval techniques.
The first corpus is the DARPA Broadcast News cor-
pus consisting of excerpts from TV or radio programs
including various acoustic conditions. The test set is
the 1998 Hub-4 Broadcast News (hub4e98) evaluation
test set (available from LDC, Catalog no. LDC2000S86)
which is 3 hours long and was manually segmented into
940 segments. It contains 32411 word tokens and 4885
word types. For ASR we use a real-time system (Saraclar
et al, 2002). Since the system was designed for SDR,
the recognition vocabulary of the system has over 200K
words. The pronunciation dictionary has 1.25 pronuncia-
tions per word.
The second corpus is the Switchboard corpus consist-
ing of two party telephone conversations. The test set is
the RT02 evaluation test set which is 5 hours long, has
120 conversation sides and was manually segmented into
6266 segments. It contains 65255 word tokens and 3788
word types. For ASR we use the first pass of the evalua-
tion system (Ljolje et al, 2002). The recognition vocab-
ulary of the system has over 45K words. For these words
the average number of pronunciations per word is 1.07.
The third corpus is named Teleconferences since it con-
sists of multiparty teleconferences on various topics. The
audio from the legs of the conference are summed and
recorded as a single channel. A test set of six telecon-
ferences (about 3.5 hours) was transcribed. It contains
31106 word tokens and 2779 word types. Calls are auto-
matically segmented into a total of 1157 segments prior
to ASR, using an algorithm that detects changes in the
acoustics. We again use the first pass of the Switchboard
evaluation system for ASR.
In Table 1 we present the ASR performance on these
three tasks as well as the OOV Rate by type of the cor-
pora. It is important to note that the recognition vocab-
ulary for the Switchboard and Teleconferences tasks are
the same and no data from the Teleconferences task was
used while building the ASR systems. The mismatch be-
tween the Teleconference data and the models trained on
the Switchboard corpus contributes to the significant in-
crease in WER.
4.3 Using ASR Best Word Hypotheses
As a baseline, we use the best word hypotheses of the
ASR system for indexing and retrieval. The performance
Task WER OOV Rate by Type
Broadcast News ?20% 0.6%
Switchboard ?40% 6%
Teleconferences ?50% 12%
Table 1: Word Error Rate (WER) and OOV Rate (by
type) of various LVCSR tasks
of this baseline system is given in Table 2. As ex-
pected, we obtain very good performance on the Broad-
cast News corpus. It is interesting to note that when mov-
ing from Switchboard to Teleconferences the degradation
in precision-recall is the same as the degradation in WER.
Task WER Precision Recall
Broadcast News ?20% 92% 77%
Switchboard ?40% 74% 47%
Teleconferences ?50% 65% 37%
Table 2: Precision Recall for ASR 1-best
4.4 Using ASR Word Lattices
In the second set of experiments we investigate the use
of ASR word lattices. In order to reduce storage require-
ments, lattices can be pruned to contain only the paths
whose costs (i.e. negative log likelihood) are within a
threshold with respect to the best path. The smaller this
cost threshold is, the smaller the lattices and the index
files are. In Figure 1 we present the precision-recall
curves for different pruning thresholds on the Telecon-
ferences task.
0 20 40 60 80 1000
20
40
60
80
100 Precision vs Recall on Teleconferences
Precision
Reca
ll
1?best word hypothesisword latticesword lattices (prune=6)word lattices (prune=4)word lattices (prune=2)
Figure 1: Precision Recall using word lattices for tele-
conferences
In Table 3 the resulting index sizes and maximum F-
measure values are given. On the teleconferences task we
observed that cost=6 yields good results, and used this
value for the rest of the experiments. Note that this in-
creases the index size with respect to the ASR 1-best case
by 3 times for Broadcast News, by 5 times for Switch-
board and by 9 times for Teleconferences.
Task Pruning Size (MB) maxF
Broadcast News nbest=1 29 84.0
Broadcast News cost=6 91 84.8
Switchboard nbest=1 18 57.1
Switchboard cost=6 90 58.4
Teleconferences nbest=1 16 47.4
Teleconferences cost=2 29 49.5
Teleconferences cost=4 62 50.0
Teleconferences cost=6 142 50.3
Teleconferences cost=12 3100 50.1
Table 3: Comparison of index sizes
4.5 Using ASR Phone Lattices
Next, we compare using the two methods of phonetic
transcription discussed in Section 3.3 ? phone recogni-
tion and word-to-phone conversion ? for retrieval using
only phone lattices. In Table 4 the precision and recall
values that yield the maximum F-measure as well as the
maximum F-measure values are presented. These results
clearly indicate that phone recognition is inferior for our
purposes.
Source for Indexing Precision Recall maxF
Phone Recognition 25.6 37.3 30.4
Conversion from Words 43.1 48.5 45.6
Table 4: Comparison of different sources for the phone
index on the Teleconferences corpus
4.6 Using ASR Word and Phone Lattices
We investigated using the strategies mentioned in Sec-
tion 3.4, and found strategy 3 ? search the word index, if
no result is returned search the phone index ? to be su-
perior to others. We give a comparison of the maximum
F-values for the three strategies in Table 5.
Strategy maxF
1.combination 50.5
2.vocabulary cascade 51.0
3.search cascade 52.8
Table 5: Comparison of different strategies for using
word and phone indices
In Figure 2 we present results for this strategy on the
Teleconferences corpus. The phone indices used in these
experiments were obtained by converting the word lat-
tices into phone lattices. Using the phone indices ob-
tained by phone recognition gave significantly worse re-
sults.
0 20 40 60 80 1000
20
40
60
80
100 Precision vs Recall on Teleconferences
Precision
Reca
ll
1?best word hypothesisword latticesword and phone lattices
Figure 2: Comparison of word lattices and word/phone
hybrid strategies for teleconferences
4.7 Effect of Minimum Pronunciation Length for
Queries
When searching for words with short pronunciations in
the phone index the system will produce many false
alarms. One way of reducing the number of false alarms
is to disallow queries with short pronunciations. In Fig-
ure 3 we show the effect of imposing a minimum pronun-
ciation length for queries. For a query to be answered its
pronunciation has to have more than minphone phones,
otherwise no answers are returned. Best maximum F-
measure result is obtained using minphone=3.
4.8 Effects of Recognition Vocabulary Size
In Figure 4 we present results for different recognition
vocabulary sizes (5k, 20k, 45k) on the Switchboard cor-
pus. The OOV rates by type are 32%, 10% and 6% re-
spectively. The word error rates are 41.5%, 40.1% and
40.1% respectively. The precision recall curves are al-
most the same for 20k and 45k vocabulary sizes.
4.9 Using Word Pair Queries
So far, in all the experiments the query list consisted of
single words. In order to observe the behavior of various
methods when faced with longer queries we used a set of
0 20 40 60 80 1000
20
40
60
80
100 Effect of Minimum Pronunciation Length
Precision
Reca
ll
1?best word hypothesisword latticesminphone=0minphone=3minphone=5
Figure 3: Effect of minimum pronunciation length using
a word/phone hybrid strategy for teleconferences
word pair queries. Instead of using all the word pairs seen
in the reference transcriptions, we chose the ones which
were more likely to occur together than with other words.
For this, we sorted the word pairs (w1, w2) according to
their pointwise mutual information
log
p(w1, w2)
p(w1)p(w2)
and used the top pairs as queries in our experiments. Note
that in these experiments only the query set is changed
and the indices remain the same as before.
As it turns out, the precision of the system is very high
on this type of queries. For this reason, it is more in-
teresting to look at the operating point that achieves the
maximum F-measure for each technique, which in this
case coincides with the point that yields the highest re-
call. In Table 6 we present results on the Switchboard
corpus using 1004 word pair queries. Using word lat-
tices it is possible to increase the recall of the system by
16.4% while degrading the precision by only 2.2%. Us-
ing phone lattices we can get another 3.7% increase in
recall for 1.2% loss in precision. The final system still
has 95% precision.
System Precision Recall maxF
Word 1-best 98.3 29.7 45.6
Word lattices 96.1 46.1 62.3
Word+Phone lattices 94.9 49.8 65.4
Table 6: Results for word pair queries on Switchboard
0 20 40 60 80 1000
20
40
60
80
100 Effect of Recognition Vocabulary Size
Precision
Reca
ll
word (45k)word (20k)word (5k)word+phone (45k)word+phone (20k)word+phone (5k)
Figure 4: Comparison of various recognition vocabulary
sizes for Switchboard
4.10 Summary of Results on Different Corpora
Finally, we make a comparison of various techniques on
different tasks. In Table 7 maximum F-measure (maxF)
is given. Using word lattices yields a relative gain of 3-
5% in maxF over using best word hypotheses. For the
final system that uses both word and phone lattices, the
relative gain over the baseline increases to 8-12%.
Task System
1-best W Lats W+P Lats
Broadcast News 84.0 84.8 86.0
Switchboard 57.1 58.4 60.5
Teleconferences 47.4 50.3 52.8
Table 7: Maximum F-measure for various systems and
tasks
In Figure 5 we present the precision recall curves.
The gain from using better techniques utilizing word
and phone lattices increases as retrieval performance gets
worse.
5 Conclusion
We proposed an indexing procedure for spoken utter-
ance retrieval that works on ASR lattices rather than just
single-best text. We demonstrated that this procedure can
improve maximum F-measure by over five points com-
pared to single-best retrieval on tasks with poor WER
and low redundancy. The representation is flexible so
that we can represent both word lattices, as well as phone
lattices, the latter being important for improving per-
formance when searching for phrases containing OOV
0 20 40 60 80 1000
20
40
60
80
100 Precision vs Recall Comparison
Precision
Reca
ll
Teleconferences
SwitchboardBroadcast News
Figure 5: Precision Recall for various techniques on dif-
ferent tasks. The tasks are Broadcast News (+), Switch-
board (x), and Teleconferences (o). The techniques are
using best word hypotheses (single points), using word
lattices (solid lines), and using word and phone lattices
(dashed lines).
words. It is important to note that spoken utterance re-
trieval for conversational speech has different properties
than spoken document retrieval for broadcast news. Al-
though consistent improvements were observed on a va-
riety of tasks including Broadcast News, the procedure
proposed here is most beneficial for more difficult con-
versational speech tasks like Switchboard and Telecon-
ferences.
References
A. Amir, A. Efrat, and S. Srinivasan. 2001. Advances
in phonetic word spotting. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management, pages 580?582, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.
M. G. Brown, J. T. Foote, G. J. F. Jones, K. Sparck Jones,
and S. J. Young. 1996. Open-vocabulary speech in-
dexing for voice and video mail retrieval. In Proc.
ACM Multimedia 96, pages 307?316, Boston, Novem-
ber.
R. V. Cox, B. Haskell, Y. LeCun, B. Shahraray, and L. Ra-
biner. 1998. On the application of multimedia pro-
cessing to telecommunications. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 86(5):755?824, May.
J. Garofolo, G. Auzanne, and E. Voorhees. 2000. The
TREC spoken document retrieval track: A success
story. In Proceedings of the Recherche d?Informations
Assiste par Ordinateur: Content Based Multimedia In-
formation Access Conference.
J. Hirschberg, M. Bacchiani, D. Hindle, P. Isenhour,
A. Rosenberg, L. Stark, L. Stead, S. Whittaker, and
G. Zamchick. 2001. Scanmail: Browsing and search-
ing speech data by content. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Speech Communication and
Technology (Eurospeech), Aalborg, Denmark.
David Anthony James. 1995. The Application of Classi-
cal Information Retrieval Techniques to Spoken Docu-
ments. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge, Down-
ing College.
G. J. F. Jones, J. T. Foote, K. Sparck Jones, and S. J.
Young. 1996. Retrieving spoken documents by com-
bining multiple index sources. In Proc. SIGIR 96,
pages 30?38, Zu?rich, August.
A. Ljolje, M. Saraclar, M. Bacchiani, M. Collins, and
B. Roark. 2002. The AT&T RT-02 STT system. In
Proc. RT02 Workshop, Vienna, Virginia.
B. Logan and JM Van Thong. 2002. Confusion-based
query expansion for OOV words in spoken document
retrieval. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), Den-
ver, Colorado, USA.
B. Logan, P. Moreno, and O. Deshmukh. 2002. Word
and sub-word indexing approaches for reducing the ef-
fects of OOV queries on spoken audio. In Proc. HLT.
J. Makhoul, F. Kubala, T. Leek, D. Liu, L. Nguyen,
R. Schwartz, and A. Srivastava. 2000. Speech and
language technologies for audio indexing and retrieval.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 88(8):1338?1353, August.
M. Mohri, F. Pereira, and M. Riley. 2002. Weighted
finite-state transducers in speech recognition. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 16(1):69?88.
Kenney Ng. 2000. Subword-Based Approaches for Spo-
ken Document Retrieval. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
NIST TREC-9 SDR Web Site. 2000.
www.nist.gov/speech/tests/sdr/sdr2000/sdr2000.htm.
M. Saraclar, M. Riley, E. Bocchieri, and V. Goffin. 2002.
Towards automatic closed captioning: Low latency
real time broadcast news transcription. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (ICSLP), Denver, Colorado, USA.
Matthew A. Siegler. 1999. Integration of Continuous
Speech Recognition and Information Retrieval for Mu-
tually Optimal Performance. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie
Mellon University.
S. Srinivasan and D. Petkovic. 2000. Phonetic confu-
sion matrix based spoken document retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 81?87.
M. Wechsler, E. Munteanu, and P. Sca?uble. 1998. New
techniques for open-vocabulary spoken document re-
trieval. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Interna-
tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and De-
velopment in Information Retrieval, pages 20?27, Mel-
bourne, Australia.
Martin Wechsler. 1998. Spoken Document Retrieval
Based on Phoneme Recognition. Ph.D. thesis, Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich.
M. Witbrock and A. Hauptmann. 1997. Using words and
phonetic strings for efficient information retrieval from
imperfectly transcribed spoken documents. In 2nd
ACM International Conference on Digital Libraries
(DL?97), pages 30?35, Philadelphia, PA, July.
P.C. Woodland, S.E. Johnson, P. Jourlin, and K.Sparck
Jones. 2000. Effects of out of vocabulary words
in spoken document retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages
372?374, Athens, Greece.
A. Yazgan and M. Saraclar. 2004. Hybrid language mod-
els for out of vocabulary word detection in large vocab-
ulary conversational speech recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Mon-
treal, Canada.
