Use and Acquisition of Semantic Language Model 
 
Kuansan Wang Ye-Yi Wang Alex Acero 
Speech Technology Group, Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052, USA 
http://research.microsoft.com/srg 
 
 
Abstract 
Semantic language model is a technique that 
utilizes the semantic structure of an utterance 
to better rank the likelihood of words compos-
ing the sentence. When used in a conversa-
tional system, one can dynamically integrate 
the dialog state and domain semantics into the 
semantic language model to better guide the 
speech recognizer executing the decoding 
process. We describe one such application that 
employs semantic language model to cope 
with spontaneous speech in a robust manner. 
The semantic language model, though can be 
manually crafted without data, can benefit 
significantly from data driven machine learn-
ing techniques. An example based approach is 
also described here to demonstrate a viable 
approach. 
1 Introduction 
Any spoken language understanding system must deal 
with two critical issues: how to accurately infer user?s 
intention from speech, and how to do it robustly amidst 
the prevalent spontaneous speech effects where users 
would inevitably stutter, hesitate, and self correct them-
selves on a regular basis. To address these issues, it has 
been proposed (Miller et al, 1994; Wang, 2000; Esteve 
et al, 2003) that one can extend the statistical pattern 
recognition framework commonly used for automatic 
speech recognition (ASR) to the spoken language un-
derstanding (SLU) problem. The ?pattern? to be recog-
nized for ASR is a string of word, and for SLU, a tree 
of semantic objects that represent the domain entities 
and tasks that describe the user?s intention. As is the 
case for ASR where a language model plays the pivotal 
role in guiding the recognizer to compose plausible 
string hypotheses, a pattern recognition based SLU re-
lies on what is often called the semantic language model 
(SLM) to detect semantic objects and construct a parse 
tree from the user?s utterance. Because the end outcome 
is a parse tree, SLM is usually realized using the struc-
tured language model techniques so that the semantic 
structure of the utterance can be included in modeling 
the language (Wang, 2000; Erdogan et al, 2002). 
In this article, we describe an application of SLM in 
the semantic synchronous understanding (SSU) frame-
work for multimodal conversational systems. A key idea 
of SSU is to immediately recognize and parse user?s 
utterance, accepting only speech segments conforming 
to the prediction of SLM while the user is still speaking. 
Since the SLM can be updated in real-time during the 
course of interaction, irrelevant expressions, including 
the spontaneous speech, can be gracefully rejected 
based on what makes sense to the dialog context. In Sec. 
2, we describe a study on the efficacy of SSU for a mo-
bile personal information management (PIM) applica-
tion called MiPad (Huang et al, 2000). The SLM used 
there was manually derived with combined CFG and N-
gram (Microsoft, 1999; Wang, 2002) by consulting the 
structure of the PIM back end without any user data. 
Obviously, the linguistic coverage of the SLM can be 
further improved with modern data-driven learning 
techniques. In Sec. 3, we describe one such learning 
technique that can utilize the manually crafted model as 
a bootstrapping template to enrich the SLM when suit-
able amount of training data become available. 
2 SSU MiPad? 
MiPad is a Web based PIM application that facilitates 
multimodal access to personal email, calendar, and con-
tact information. MiPad users can combine speech 
commands with pen gestures to query PIM database, 
compose or modify email messages or appointments. 
We recently implemented a version of MiPad in HTML 
and SALT, taking the native support of SSU in SALT 
                                                          
? A video demonstration of SSU MiPad is  available for 
download at http://research.microsoft.com/srg/videos/Mi-
PadDemo_2Mbit.wmv 
(Wang, 2002). Whenever a semantic object is detected, 
the PIM logic based on the current semantic parse is 
executed and the screen updated accordingly. The na-
ture of SSU insures that the user receives immediate 
feedback on the process of SLU, and therefore can re-
phrase rejected and correct misrecognized speech seg-
ments. Studies (Wang, 2003) that contrast SSU with 
conventional turn taking based system show that, be-
cause SSU copes with spontaneous speech better, it elic-
its longer user utterances and hence fewer sentences are 
needed to complete a task. The highly interactive nature 
of SSU lends itself to more effective dynamic visual 
prompting, leading lower out of domain utterances. SSU 
also simplifies the confirmation strategy as every se-
mantic object can be implicitly confirmed. Users have 
no trouble dealing with this strategy. In fact, users natu-
rally correct and rephrase based on the immediate feed-
back, making their speech even more spontaneous. All 
these results are statistically significant. Finally and 
most intriguingly, users feel they accomplish tasks 
faster in the SSU system even though the through puts 
from both systems are statistically tied. 
3 SLM Learning 
SLU utilizes SLM to infer user?s intention from speech. 
Before sufficient data make it practical to use machine 
learning techniques, SLM often has to be developed 
manually. The manual development process is labor-
intensive, requires expertise in linguistics and speech 
understanding, and often lacks good coverage because it 
is hard for a developer to anticipate all possible lan-
guage constructions that different users may choose to 
express their minds. The manually developed model is 
therefore not robust to extra-grammaticality commonly 
found in spontaneous speech. An approach to address 
this problem is to employ a robust parser to loosen the 
constraints specified in the SLM, which sometimes re-
sults in unpredictable system behavior (Wang, 2001).  
The robust parser approach also mandates a separate 
understanding pass from speech recognition. The results 
tend to be suboptimal since the first pass, optimizing 
ASR word accuracy, does not necessarily lead to a 
higher overall SLU accuracy (Wang and Acero, 2003b).  
We have developed example-based grammar leaning 
algorithms to acquire SLM for speech understanding. It 
is shown (Wang and Acero, 2002) that a grammar learn-
ing algorithm may result in a semantic context free 
grammar that has better coverage than manually au-
thored grammar.  It is demonstrated (Wang and Acero, 
2003a) that a statistical model can also be obtained by 
the learning algorithm, and the model itself is robust to 
extra-grammaticality in spontaneous speech. Therefore, 
a robust parser is no longer necessary. Most impor-
tantly, such a statistical SLM can be incorporated di-
rectly into the search algorithm for ASR, making a 
single pass, joint speech recognition and understanding 
process such as SSU possible.  Because of that, the 
model can be trained directly to optimize the under-
standing accuracy. It is shown (Wang and Acero, 
2003b) that the single pass approach achieved a 17% 
understanding accuracy improvement even though there 
is a signification word error rate increase, suggesting 
that optimizing ASR and SLU accuracy may indeed be 
two very different businesses after all. 
References 
Erdogan H. Sarikaya R. Gao Y. Picheny M. 2002. Se-
mantic structured language models. Proc. ICSLP-
2002, Denver, CO. 
Esteve Y. Raymond C. Bechet F. De Mori R. 2003. 
Conceptual decoding for spoken dialog systems. 
Proc. EuroSpeech-2003, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Huang X. et al MiPad: A next generation PDA proto-
type. Proc. ICSLP-2000, Beijing, China. 
Microsoft Corporation. 1999. Speech Application Pro-
gram Interface (SAPI), Version 5. 
Miller S. Bobrow R. Ingria R. and Schwartz R.  1994. 
Hidden understanding models of natural language.  
Proc. 32nd Annual Meeting of ACL, Las Cruces, NM. 
Wang K.  2000. A plan-based dialog system with prob-
abilistic inferences.  Proc. ICSLP-2000,  Beijing, 
China. 
Wang K. 2002. SALT: A spoken language understand-
ing interface for Web-based multimodal dialog sys-
tems.  Proc. ICSLP-2002, Denver, CO. 
Wang K. 2003.  Semantic synchronous understanding 
for robust spoken language applications.  Proc. 
ASRU-2003, St. Thomas, Virgin Islands. 
Wang Y. 2001. Robust language understanding in Mi-
Pad. Proc. EuroSpeech-2001. Aalborg, Demark. 
Wang Y.  Acero A. 2002. Evaluation of spoken lan-
guage grammar learning in the ATIS domain. Proc. 
ICASSP-2002, Orlando, FL. 
Wang Y.  Acero A. 2003a. Combination of CFG and N-
gram modeling in semantic grammar learning.  Proc. 
EuroSpeech-2003.  Geneva, Switzerland. 
Wang Y.  Acero A. 2003b. Is word error rate a good 
indicator for spoken language understanding accu-
racy?  Proc. ASRU-2003,  St. Thomas, Virgin Is-
lands. 
 
