Speech Graffiti vs. Natural Language: Assessing the User Experience 
Stefanie Tomko and Roni Rosenfeld 
Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15213 
{stef, roni}@cs.cmu.edu 
 
Abstract 
Speech-based interfaces have great potential 
but are hampered by problems related to spo-
ken language such as variability, noise and 
ambiguity. Speech Graffiti was designed to 
address these issues via a structured, universal 
interface protocol for interacting with simple 
machines. Since Speech Graffiti requires that 
users speak to the system in a certain way, we 
were interested in how users might respond to 
such a system when compared with a natural 
language system. We conducted a user study 
and found that 74% of users preferred the 
Speech Graffiti system to a natural language 
interface in the same domain. User satisfac-
tion scores were higher for Speech Graffiti 
and task completion rates were roughly equal.  
1 Introduction 
Many problems still exist in the design of speech-based 
interfaces. Noisy environments and linguistic variability 
make interpretation of already uncertain input even 
more difficult, resulting in errors that must be handled 
effectively. What if many of these issues could be re-
duced by asking users to interact with speech-based 
systems in a structured way? Would they learn the in-
teraction protocol? Would they prefer a more efficient 
yet structured interaction to one that was more natural, 
but perhaps less efficient?  
One approach to structuring interaction is through 
directed-dialog systems. These generally work well for 
novice users, but they can be too meandering for expert 
users who know exactly what they want from the sys-
tem. Specialized command-and-control languages give 
more power to the user, but they can be difficult for 
novices and require learning a new language for each 
new application encountered.  
Speech Graffiti is a structured interaction protocol 
that is designed to be universal. Common input struc-
tures, output patterns and keywords are used for all 
Speech Graffiti applications, and once users are familiar 
with these for any single application, they can navigate 
their way through any other Speech Graffiti application. 
Fig. 1 shows a sample Speech Graffiti dialog 
User interactions with Speech Graffiti (independent 
of other speech interfaces) have previously been as-
sessed in Rosenfeld et al (2000). Here we consider a 
head-to-head comparison: given the chance to interact 
with both types of interfaces, which would people 
choose? What differences might be observed in per-
formance or user satisfaction?  
1.1 Related work 
Although much research has been conducted on the 
design of natural language spoken dialog systems, far 
less research has been done on more standardized 
speech interfaces. Several studies have previously found 
that users are able to interact successfully using 
constrained or subset languages (e.g. Guindon & 
Shuldberg, 1987; Ringle & Halstead-Nussloch, 1989; 
Sidner & Forlines, 2002). As far as we know, no studies 
have been done comparing constrained, ?universal? 
languages and natural language interfaces directly as we 
have done in this study. General information about the 
Speech Graffiti project and its motivation can be found 
in Rosenfeld et al (2001). 
User: Theater is the Manor. Title is Tuck Everlasting.  
System: THE CINEMAGIC MANOR THEATRE, TUCK EVERLASTING. 
Options.  
SHOW TIME, DAY, GENRE, {?}.  
What are the show times? 
2 MATCHES: 1:25, 5:30.  
Start over.   
STARTING OVER.  
Area is Monroeville. 
MONROEVILLE.   
What are the theaters?   
SHOWCASE CINEMAS PITTSBURGH EAST.   
Theater is Showcase Cinemas Pittsburgh East.  
SHOWCASE CINEMAS PITTSBURGH EAST. 
What are the titles?  
11 MATCHES, BLUE CRUSH, ABANDON, BROWN SUGAR, {?}.   
Genre is comedy.  
COMEDY. 
Where am I? 
AREA IS MONROEVILLE, THEATER IS SHOWCASE CINEMAS PITTSBURGH   
EAST, WHAT ARE THE TITLES?, GENRE IS COMEDY. 
What are the titles?   
5 MATCHES, MY BIG FAT GREEK WEDDING, BROWN SUGAR,  
JONAH - A VEGGIETALES MOVIE, {?}. 
Figure 1. Sample Speech Graffiti interaction.
2 Method 
We conducted a within-subjects user study in which 
participants attempted a series of queries to a movie 
information database with either a Speech Graffiti inter-
face (SG-ML) or a natural language interface (NL-ML). 
Participants repeated the process with the other system 
after completing their initial tasks and an evaluation 
questionnaire. System presentation order was balanced.  
2.1 Participants  
Twenty-three users (12 female, 11 male) accessed the 
systems via telephone in our lab. Most were under-
graduate students from Carnegie Mellon University, 
resulting in a limited range of ages represented. None 
had any prior experience with either of the two movie 
systems or interfaces, and all users were native speakers 
of American English. About half the users had computer 
science and/or engineering (CSE) backgrounds, and 
similarly about half reported that they did computer 
programming ?fairly often? or ?very frequently.? 
2.2 Training 
Users learned Speech Graffiti concepts prior to use dur-
ing a brief, self-paced, web-based tutorial session. 
Speech Graffiti training sessions were balanced between 
tutorials using examples from the MovieLine and tutori-
als using examples from a database that provided simu-
lated flight arrival, departure, and gate information. 
Regardless of training domain, most users spent ten to 
fifteen minutes on the Speech Graffiti tutorial. 
A side effect of the Speech Graffiti-specific training 
is that in addition to teaching users the concepts of the 
language, it also familiarizes users with the more gen-
eral task of speaking to a computer over the phone. To 
balance this effect for users of the natural language sys-
tem, which is otherwise intended to be a walk-up-and-
use interface, participants engaged in a brief NL ?fa-
miliarization session? in which they were simply in-
structed to call the system and try it out. To match the 
in-domain/out-of-domain variable used in the SG tutori-
als, half of the NL familiarization sessions used the NL 
MovieLine and half used MIT?s Jupiter natural lan-
guage weather information system (Zue et al, 2000). 
Users typically spent about five minutes exploring the 
NL systems during the familiarization session. 
2.3 Tasks 
After having completed the training session for a spe-
cific system, each user was asked to call that system and 
attempt a set of tasks (e.g. ?list what?s playing at the 
Squirrel Hill Theater,? ?find out & write down what the 
ratings are for the movies showing at the Oaks Thea-
ter?). Participant compensation included task comple-
tion bonuses to encourage users to attempt each task in 
earnest. Regardless of which system they were working 
with, all users were given the same eight tasks for their 
first interactions and a different set of eight tasks for 
their second system interactions. 
2.4 Evaluation 
After interacting with a system, each participant was 
asked to complete a user satisfaction questionnaire scor-
ing 34 subjective-response items on a 7-point Likert 
scale. This questionnaire was based on the Subjective 
Assessment of Speech System Interfaces (SASSI) pro-
ject (Hone & Graham, 2001), which sorts a number of 
subjective user satisfaction statements (such as ?I al-
ways knew what to say to the system? and ?the system 
makes few errors?) into six relevant factors: system 
response accuracy, habitability, cognitive demand, an-
noyance, likeability and speed. User satisfaction scores 
were calculated for each factor and overall by averaging 
the responses to the appropriate component statements.1 
In addition to the Likert scale items, users were also 
asked a few comparison questions, such as ?which of 
the two systems did you prefer?? 
For objective comparison of the two interfaces, we 
measured overall task completion, time- and turns-to-
completion, and word- and understanding-error rates. 
3 Results 
3.1 Subjective assessments 
Seventeen out of 23 participants preferred Speech Graf-
fiti to the natural language interface. User assessments 
were significantly higher for Speech Graffiti overall and 
for each of the six subjective factors, as shown in Fig. 2 
(REML analysis: system response accuracy F=13.8, 
p<0.01; likeability F=6.8, p<0.02; cognitive demand 
F=5.7, p<0.03; annoyance F=4.3, p<0.05; habitability 
F=7.7, p<0.02; speed F=34.7, p<0.01; overall F=11.2, 
p<0.01). All of the mean SG-ML scores except for an-
noyance and habitability are positive (i.e. > 4), while the 
NL-ML did not generate positive mean ratings in any 
category. For individual users, all those and only those 
who stated they preferred the NL-ML to the SG-ML 
gave the NL-ML higher overall subjective ratings.  
Although users with CSE/programming back-
grounds tended to give the SG-ML higher user satisfac-
tion ratings than non-CSE/programming participants, 
the differences were not significant. Training domain 
likewise had no significant effect on user satisfaction. 
                                                        
1  Some component statements are reversal items 
whose values were converted for analysis, so that high 
scores in all categories are considered good. 
 
3.2 Objective assessments 
Task completion. Task completion did not differ sig-
nificantly for the two interfaces. In total, just over two 
thirds of the tasks were successfully completed with 
each system: 67.4% for the NL-ML and 67.9% for the 
SG-ML. The average participant completed 5.2 tasks 
with the NL-ML and 5.4 tasks with the SG-ML. As with 
user satisfaction, users with CSE or programming back-
ground generally completed more tasks in the SG-ML 
system than non-CSE/programming users, but again the 
difference was not significant. Training domain had no 
significant effect on task completion for either system. 
To account for incomplete tasks when comparing 
the interfaces, we ordered the task completion measures 
(times or turn counts) for each system, leaving all in-
completes at the end of the list as if they had been com-
pleted in ?infinite time,? and compared the medians. 
Time-to-completion. For completed tasks, the aver-
age time users spent on each SG-ML task was lower 
than for the NL-ML system, though not significantly: 
67.9 versus 71.3 seconds. Considering incomplete tasks, 
the SG-ML performed better than the NL-ML, with a 
median time of 81.5 seconds, compared to 103 seconds. 
Turns-to-completion. For completed tasks, the av-
erage number of turns users took for each SG-ML task 
was significantly higher than for the NL-ML sys-tem: 
8.2 versus 3.8 (F=26.4, p<0.01). Considering incom-
plete tasks, the median SG-ML turns-to-completion rate 
was twice that of the NL-ML: 10 versus 5.  
Word-error rate. The SG-ML had an overall word-
error rate (WER) of 35.1%, compared to 51.2% for the 
NL-ML. When calculated for each user, WER ranged 
from 7.8% to 71.2% (mean 35.0%, median 30.0%) for 
the SG-ML and from 31.2% to 78.6% (mean 50.3%, 
median 48.9%) for the NL-ML. The six users with the 
highest SG-ML WER were the same ones who preferred 
the NL-ML system, and four of them were also the only 
users in the study whose NL-ML error rate was lower 
than their SG-ML error rate. This suggests, not surpris-
ingly, that WER is strongly related to user preference.  
To further explore this correlation, we plotted WER 
against users? overall subjective assessments of each 
system, with the results shown in Fig. 3. There is a sig-
nificant, moderate correlation between WER and user 
satisfaction for Speech Graffiti (r=-0.66, p<0.01), but no 
similar correlation for the NL-ML system (r=0.26).  
Understanding error. Word-error rate may not be 
the most useful measure of system performance for 
many spoken dialogue systems. Because of grammar 
redundancies, systems are often able to ?understand? an 
utterance correctly even when some individual words 
are misrecognized. Understanding error rate (UER) may 
therefore provide a more accurate picture of the error 
rate that a user experiences. For this analysis, we only 
made a preliminary attempt at assessing UER. These 
error rates were hand-scored, and as such represent an 
approximation of actual UER. For both systems, we 
calculated UER based on an entire user utterance rather 
than individual concepts in that utterance.  
SG-ML UER for each user ranged from 2.9% to 
65.5% (mean 26.6%, median 21.1%). The average 
change per user from WER to understanding-error for 
the SG-ML interface was ?29.2%.  
The NL-ML understanding-error rates differed little 
from the NL-ML WER rates. UER per user ranged from 
31.4% to 80.0% (mean 50.7%, median 48.5%). The 
average change per user from NL-ML WER was +0.8%.  
Figure 2. Mean user satisfaction for system
response accuracy, likeability, cognitive demand,
annoyance, habitability, speed and overall. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
syst.
resp.
acc.
like. cog.
dmd.
ann. hab. speed overall
NL SG
Figure 3. Word-error rate vs. overall user 
satisfaction for Speech Graffiti and natural 
language MovieLines. 
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0 20 40 60 80
SG word-error rate 
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0 20 40 60 80
NL word-error rate 
4 Discussion 
Overall, we found that Speech Graffiti performed 
favorably compared to the natural language interface. 
Speech Graffiti generated significantly higher user 
satisfaction scores, and task completion rates and times 
were similar.  
The higher turns-to-completion rate for Speech 
Graffiti is not necessarily problematic. The phrasal na-
ture of Speech Graffiti syntax seems to encourage users 
to input single phrases; we suspect that in a longitudinal 
study, we would find single-utterance command use in 
SG-ML increasing as users became more familiar with 
the system. Furthermore, because the SG-ML splits long 
output lists into smaller chunks, a user often has to ex-
plicitly issue a request to hear more items in a list, add-
ing at least one more turn to the interaction. Thus there 
exists a trade-off between turn-wise efficiency and re-
duced cognitive load. Because of the reasonable results 
shown for the SG-ML in user satisfaction and comple-
tion time, we view this as a reasonable trade-off.   
It is possible that if lower word-error rates can be 
achieved, Speech Graffiti would become unnecessary. 
This may be true for consistent, extremely low word-
error rates, but such rates do not appear to be attainable 
in the near term. Furthermore, the correlations in Fig. 3 
suggest that as WER decreases, users become more sat-
isfied with the SG interface but that this is not necessar-
ily true for the NL interface. Consider also the effect of 
understanding error. UER is the key to good system 
performance since even if the system has correctly de-
coded a word string, it must still match that string with 
the appropriate concepts in order to perform the desired 
action. Although WER may be reduced via improved 
language and acoustic models, matching input to under-
standing in NL systems is usually a labor-intensive and 
domain-specific task. In contrast, the structured nature 
of Speech Graffiti significantly reduces the need for 
such intensive concept mapping.  
Future work. For Speech Graffiti, scores for 
habitability (represented by statements like ?I always 
knew what to say to the system?) were typically the 
lowest of any of the six user satisfaction factors, 
suggesting that this is a prime area for further work.  
In this regard, it is instructive to consider the ex-
perience of the six users who preferred the NL interface. 
Overall, they accounted for the six highest SG-ML 
word- and understanding-error rates and the six lowest 
SG-ML task completion rates: clearly not a positive 
experience. An additional measure of habitability is 
grammaticality: how often do users speak within the 
Speech Graffiti grammar? The six NL-ML-preferring 
users also had low grammaticality rates (Tomko & 
Rosenfeld, 2004). These users have become a motivator 
of future work: what can be done to make the interface 
work for them and others like them? (Future studies will 
focus on a broader population of adults.) How can we 
help users who are having severe difficulties with an 
interface learn how to use it better and faster? To 
improve the habitability of Speech Graffiti, we plan to 
explore allowing more natural language-esque 
interaction while retaining an application-portable 
structure. We also plan to refine Speech Graffiti?s 
runtime help facilities in order to assist users more 
effectively in saying the right thing at the right time.  
In addition to these core interface goals, we plan to 
extend the functionality of Speech Graffiti beyond 
information access to support the creation, deletion and 
modification of information in a database. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by an NDSEG Fellowship, 
Pittsburgh Digital Greenhouse and Grant N66001-99-1-
8905 from the Space & Naval Warfare Systems Center. 
The information in this publication does not necessarily 
reflect the position or the policy of the US Government 
and no official endorsement should be inferred.  
References 
Guindon, R. & Shuldberg, K. 1987. Grammatical and 
ungrammatical structures in user-adviser dialogues: 
evidence for sufficiency of restricted languages in 
natural language interfaces to advisory systems. In 
Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 41-44. 
Hone, K. & Graham, R. 2001. Subjective Assessment of 
Speech-System Interface Usability. In Proceedings of 
Eurospeech, Aalborg, Denmark. 
Ringle, M.D. & Halstead-Nussloch, R. 1989. Shaping 
user input: a strategy for natural language design. In-
teracting with Computers 1(3):227-244 
Rosenfeld, R., Zhu, X., Toth, A., Shriver, S., Lenzo, K. 
& Black, A. 2000. Towards a Universal Speech Inter-
face. In Proceedings of ISCLP, Beijing, China. 
Rosenfeld, R., Olsen, D. & Rudnicky, A. 2001. Uni-
versal Speech Interfaces. Interactions, 8(6):34-44.  
Sidner, C. & Forlines, C. 2002. Subset Languages for 
Conversing with Collaborative Interface Agents. In 
Proc. of ICSLP, Denver CO, pp. 281-284. 
Tomko, S. & Rosenfeld, R. 2004. Speech Graffiti habi-
tability: what do users really say? To appear in Pro-
ceedings of SIGDIAL. 
Zue, V., Seneff, S., Glass, J.R., Polifroni, J., Pao, C., 
Hazen, T.J. & Hetherington, L. 2000. JUPITER: A 
Telephone-Based Conversational Interface for 
Weather Information, IEEE Transactions on Speech 
and Audio Processing, 8(1): 85 ?96. 
