Columbia Newsblaster: Multilingual News Summarization on the Web
David Kirk Evans Judith L. Klavans
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University, NY, NY 10027
{devans, klavans, kathy}@cs.columbia.edu
Kathleen R. McKeown
Abstract
We present the new multilingual version of
the Columbia Newsblaster news summariza-
tion system. The system addresses the problem
of user access to browsing news from multiple
languages from multiple sites on the internet.
The system automatically collects, organizes,
and summarizes news in multiple source lan-
guages, allowing the user to browse news top-
ics with English summaries, and compare per-
spectives from different countries on the topics.
1 Introduction
The Columbia Newsblaster1 system has been online and
providing summaries of topically clustered news daily
since late 2001 (McKeown et al, 2002). The goal of
the system is to aid daily news browsing by providing
an automatic, user-friendly access to important news top-
ics, along with summaries and links to the original arti-
cles for further information. The system has six major
phases: crawling, article extraction, clustering, sum-
marization, classification, and web page generation.
The focus of this paper is to present the entire mul-
tilingual Columbia Newsblaster system as a platform
for multilingual multi-document summarization exper-
iments. The phases in the multilingual version of
Columbia Newsblaster have been modified to take lan-
guage and character encoding into account, and a new
phase, translation, has been added. Figure 1 depicts the
multilingual Columbia Newsblaster architecture. We will
describe the system, in particular a method using machine
learning to extract article text from web pages that is ap-
plicable to different languages, and a baseline approach
to multilingual multi-document summarization.
1.1 Related Research
Previous work in multilingual document summarization,
such as the SUMMARIST system (Hovy and Lin, 1999)
1http://newsblaster.cs.columbia.edu/
Figure 1: Architecture of the multilingual Columbia
Newsblaster system.
extracts sentences from documents in a variety of lan-
guages, and translates the resulting summary. This sys-
tem has been applied to Information Retrieval in the
MuST System (Lin, 1999) which uses query translation
to allow a user to search for documents in a variety of lan-
guages, summarize the documents using SUMMARIST,
and translate the summary. The Keizei system (Ogden et
al., 1999) uses query translation to allow users to search
Japanese and Korean documents in English, and displays
query-specific summaries focusing on passages contain-
ing query terms. Our work differs in the document clus-
tering component ? we cluster news to provide emergent
topic structure from the data, instead of using an informa-
tion retrieval model. This is useful in analysis, monitor-
ing, and browsing settings, where a user does not have an
a priori topic in mind. Our summarization strategy also
differs from the approach taken by MuST in that we focus
our effort on the summarization system, but only target a
single language, shifting the majority of the multilingual
knowledge burden to specialized machine translation sys-
tems. The Keizei system has the advantage of being able
to generate query-specific summaries.
Chen and Lin (Chen and Lin, 2000) describe a sys-
tem that combines multiple monolingual news clustering
components, a multilingual news clustering component,
and a news summarization component. Their system
clusters news in each language into topics, then the mul-
tilingual clustering component relates the clusters that
are similar across languages. A summary is generated
by linking sentences that are similar from the two lan-
guages. The system has been implemented for Chinese
and English, and an evaluation over six topics is pre-
sented. Our clustering strategy differs here, as we trans-
late documents before clustering, and cluster documents
from all languages at the same time. This makes it easy
to add support for additional languages by incorporating a
new translation system for the language; no other changes
need to be made. Our summarization model also provides
summaries for documents from each language, allowing
comparisons between them.
2 Extracting article data
2.1 Extracting article text
To move Columbia Newsblaster into a multilingual ca-
pable environment, we must be able to extract the ?ar-
ticle text? from web pages in multiple languages. The
article text is the portion of a web page that contains the
actual news content of the page, as opposed to site navi-
gation links, ads, layout information, etc. Our previous
approach to extracting article text in Columbia News-
blaster used regular expressions that were hand-tailored
to specific web sites. Adapting this approach to new web
sites is difficult, and it is also difficult to adapt to for-
eign languages sites. We solved this problem by incor-
porating a new article extraction module using machine
learning techniques. The new article extraction module
parses HTML into blocks of text based on HTML markup
and computes a set of 34 features based on simple sur-
face characteristics of the text. We use features such as
the percentage of text that is punctuation, the number
of HTML links in the block, the percentage of question
marks, the number of characters in the text block, and so
on. Since the features are relatively language independent
they can be computed for and applied to any language.
Training data for the system is generated using a GUI
that allows a human to annotate text candidates with one
of fives labels: ?ArticleText?, ?Title?, ?Caption?, ?Im-
age?, or ?Other?. The ?ArticleText? label is associated
with the actual text of the article which we wish to ex-
tract. At the same time, we try to determine document
titles, image caption text, and image blocks in the same
framework. ?Other? is a catch-all category for all other
text blocks, such as links to related articles, navigation
links, ads, and so on. The training data is used with the
Language Training set Precision Recall
English 353 89.10% 90.70%
Russian 112 90.59% 95.06%
Russian English Rules 37.66% 73.05%
Japanese 67 89.66% 100.00%
Japanese English Rules 100.00% 20.00%
Table 1: Article extractor performance for detecting arti-
cle text in three languages.
machine learning program Ripper (Cohen, 1996) to in-
duce a hypothesis for categorizing text candidates accord-
ing to the features. This approach has been trained on
web pages from sites in English, Russian, and Japanese
as shown in Table 1, but has been used with sites in En-
glish, Russian, Japanese, Chinese, French, Spanish, Ger-
man, Italian, Portuguese, and Korean.
The English training set was composed of 353 arti-
cles, collected from 19 web sites. Using 10-fold cross-
validation, the induced hypothesis classify into the article
text category with a precision of 89.1% and a recall of
90.7%. Performance over Russian data was similar, with
a precision of 90.59% and recall of 95.06%. We evalu-
ated the English hypothesis against the Russian data to
observe whether the languages behave differently. As ex-
pected, the English hypothesis resulted in poor perfor-
mance over the Russian data, and we saw comparable
results for Japanese. The same English hypothesis per-
forms adequately on other English sites not in the train-
ing set, so the differences between languages seem to be
significant.
2.2 Title and date extraction
The article extraction component also determines a title
for each document, and attempts to locate a publishing
date for the articles. Title identification is important since
in a cluster, sometimes with as many as 60 articles, the
only information the user sees are the titles for the arti-
cles; if our system chooses poor titles, they will have a
difficult time discriminating between the articles. If the
article extraction component finds a title it is used. Un-
fortunately, this process is not always successful, so we
have a variety of fall-back methods, including taking the
title from the HTML TITLE tag, using heuristics to de-
tect the title from the first text block, and using a portion
of the first sentence. These approaches led to many un-
informative titles extracted from the non-English sites,
since they were developed for English news. We imple-
mented a system to identify titles that are clearly non-
descriptive, such as ?Stock Market News?, that would
apply to non-English text as well. We record the titles
seen and rejected over time and use the list to reject ti-
tles with high frequency. A title with high frequency is
assumed to be not descriptive enough to give a clear idea
of the content of an article in a cluster of similar articles.
To correctly extract dates for articles, we use heuristics
to identify sequences of possible dates, weigh them, and
choose the most likely date as the publication date. Reg-
ular expressions for Japanese date extraction were added
to the system.
3 Multilingual Clustering
The document clustering system that we use (Hatzivas-
siloglou et al, 2000) has been trained on, and extensively
tested with English. While it can cluster documents in
other languages, our goal is to generate clusters with doc-
uments from multiple languages, so a baseline approach
is to translate all non-English documents into English,
and then cluster the translated documents. We take this
approach, and further experimented with using simple
and fast techniques for glossing the input articles for clus-
tering. We developed simple dictionary lookup glossing
systems for Japanese and Russian. Our experimentation
showed that full translation using Systran outperformed
our glossing-based techniques, so the glossing techniques
are not used in the current system.
4 Multilingual Summarization Baseline
Our baseline approach to multilingual multi-document
summarization is to apply our English-based summa-
rization system, the Columbia Summarizer (McKeown
et al, 2001), to document clusters containing machine-
translated versions of non-English documents. The
Columbia Summarizer routes to one of two multi-
document summarization systems based on the similar-
ity of the documents in the cluster. If the documents
are highly similar, the Multigen summarization system
(McKeown et al, 1999) is used. Multigen clusters sen-
tences based on similarity, and then parses and fuses in-
formation from similar sentences to form a summary.
The second summarization system used is DEMS, the
Dissimilarity Engine for Multi-document Summarization
(Schiffman et al, 2002), which uses a sentence extraction
approach to summarization. The resulting summary is
then run through a named entity recovery tool (Nenkova
and McKeown, 2003), which repairs named entity refer-
ences in the summary by making the first reference de-
scriptive, and shortening subsequent reference mentions
in the summary. Using an unmodified version of DEMS,
summaries might contain sentences from translated doc-
uments which are not grammatically correct. The DEMS
summarization system was modified to prefer choosing
a sentence from an English article if there are sentences
that express similar content in multiple languages. By
setting different weight penalties we can take the quality
of the translation system for a given language pair into
Figure 2: A screen shot comparing a summary from En-
glish documents to a summary from German documents.
account.
4.1 Similarity-based Summarization
As part of our multilingual summarization work, we
are investigating approaches to summarization that use
sentence-level similarity computation across languages to
cluster sentences by similarity, and then generate a sum-
mary sentence using translated portions of the relevant
sentences. The multilingual version of Columbia News-
blaster provides us with a platform to frame future ex-
periments for this summarization technique. We are in-
vestigating translation at different levels - sentence level,
clause level, and phrase level. Our initial similarity-based
summarization system works at the sentence level. Start-
ing with machine-translated sentences, we compute their
similarity to English sentences that have been simpli-
fied(Siddharthan, 2002). Foreign-language sentences that
have a high enough similarity to English text are replaced
(or augmented with) the similar English sentence.
This first system using full machine translation over
the sentences and English similarity detection will be ex-
tended using simple features for multilingual similarity
detection in SimFinder MultiLingual (SimFinderML), a
multilingual version of SimFinder (Hatzivassiloglou et
al., 2001). We also plan an experiment evaluating the use-
fulness of noun phrase detection and noun phrase variant
detection as a primitive for multilingual similarity detec-
tion, using tools such as Christian Jacquemin?s FASTR
(Jacquemin, 1994; Jacquemin, 1999).
4.2 Summary presentation
Multilingual Newsblaster presents multiple views of a
cluster of documents to the user, broken down by lan-
guage and by country. Summaries are generated for the
entire cluster, as well as sub-sets of the articles based on
the country of origin and language of the original arti-
cles. Users are first presented with a summary of the en-
tire cluster using all documents, and then have the ability
to focus on countries or languages of their choosing. We
also allow the user to view two summaries side-by-side so
they can easily compare differences between summaries
from different countries. For example, figure 4.2 shows a
summary of articles about talks between America, Japan,
and Korea over nuclear arms, comparing the summaries
from articles in English and German.
5 Evaluation
Evaluation of multi-document summarization is a dif-
ficult task; the Document Understanding Conference
(DUC)2 is designed as an evaluation for multi-document
summarization systems. We participated in the DUC
2004 conference submitting the results of the summariza-
tion system used in Newsblaster, as well as an in-progress
system described in Section 4.1 for multilingual cluster
summarization. The results of the DUC evaluation will
provide us with valuable feedback on the multi-document
multi-lingual summarization components in Newsblaster.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we have described a multilingual version
of Columbia Newsblaster, a system that runs daily offer-
ing users an accessible interface to online news brows-
ing. The multilingual version of the system incorporates
two varieties of machine translation, one for clustering,
and one for translation of documents for summarization.
Existing summarization methods have been applied to
translated text, with plans for an evaluation of the current
method, and incorporation of summarization techniques
specific to translated documents. The system presents a
platform for further multilingual summarization experi-
ments and user-oriented studies.
References
Hsin-Hsi Chen and Chuan-Jie Lin. 2000. A multilin-
gual news summarizer. In Proceedings of the 18th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 159?165.
William W. Cohen. 1996. Learning trees and rules with
set-valued features. In AAAI/IAAI, Vol. 1, pages 709?
716.
Vasileois Hatzivassiloglou, Luis Gravano, and Ankineedu
Maganti. 2000. An investigation of linguistic features
and clustering algorithms for topical document clus-
tering. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval.
2http://duc.nist.gov/
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith L. Klavans, Melissa
Holcombe, Regina Barzilay, Min-Yen Kan, and Kathy
McKeown. 2001. Simfinder: A flexible clustering tool
for summarization. In Proceedings of the North Amer-
ican Association for Computational Linguistics Auto-
matic Summarization Workshop.
E.H. Hovy and Chin-Yew Lin. 1999. Automated text
summarization in summarist. In I. Mani and M. May-
bury, editors, Advances in Automated Text Summariza-
tion, chapter 8. MIT Press.
Christian Jacquemin. 1994. Fastr: a unification-based
front-end to automatic indexing. In In Proceedings,
Intelligent Multimedia Information Retrieval Systems
and Management (RIAO?94), pages p. 34?47.
Christian Jacquemin. 1999. Syntagmatic and paradig-
matic representations of term variation. In Proceed-
ings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL?99), pages 341?348.
Chin-Yew Lin. 1999. Machine translation for informa-
tion access across the language barrier: the must sys-
tem. In Machine Translation Summit VII, September.
Kathleen McKeown, Judith Klavans, Vasileios Hatzivas-
siloglou, Regina Barzilay, and Eleazar Eskin. 1999.
Towards multidocument summarization by reformula-
tion: Progress and prospects. In AAAI, pages 453?460.
Kathleen R. McKeown, Regina Barzilay, David Kirk
Evans, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Min-Yen Kan,
Barry Schiffman, and Simone Teufel. 2001. Columbia
multi-document summarization: Approach and evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the Document Understanding
Conference.
Kathleen R. McKeown, Regina Barzilay, David Kirk
Evans, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith L. Klavans,
Ani Nenkova, Carl Sable, Barry Schiffman, and Sergey
Sigelman. 2002. Tracking and summarizing news on
a daily basis with columbia?s newsblaster. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology Conference.
Ani Nenkova and Kathy McKeown. 2003. References to
named entities: A corpus study. In Short Paper Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT.
William Ogden, James Cowie, Mark Davis, Eugene Lu-
dovik, Hugo Molina-Salgado, and Hyopil Shin. 1999.
Getting information from documents you cannot read:
An interactive cross-language text retrieval and sum-
marization system. In SIGIR/DL Workshop on Mul-
tilingual Information Discovery and Access (MIDAS),
August.
Barry Schiffman, Ani Nenkova, and Kathleen McKeown.
2002. Experiments in multidocument summarization.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference, March.
Advaith Siddharthan. 2002. Resolving attachment and
clause boundary ambiguities for simplifying relative
clause constructs. In Proceedings of the Student Work-
shop, 40th Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL?02), pages 60?65, Philadel-
phia, USA.
