Construction of Conceptual Graph representation of texts
Svetlana Hensman
Department of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4
svetlana.damianova@ucd.ie
Abstract
This paper describes a system for construct-
ing conceptual graph representation of text by
using a combination of existing linguistic re-
sources (VerbNet and WordNet). We use a two-
step approach, by firstly identifying the seman-
tic roles in a sentence, and then using these
roles, together with semi-automatically com-
piled domain-specific knowledge to construct
the conceptual graph representation.
1 Introduction
The problem of automatic acquisition of knowledge is an
interesting and challenging one and has been tackled by
linguists for some time.
This paper describes a system for automatic concep-
tual graph acquisition using a combination of linguistic
resources, such as VerbNet and WordNet, together with
semi-automatically compiled domain-specific knowl-
edge.
Such semantic information has a number of possi-
ble applications. One possible application is in the
area of information retrieval/extraction for enhancing the
search methods and for providing more precise search
results. Another application is in question-answering
systems, allowing users to communicate with the sys-
tem in natural language (English) and translating their
queries/responses into a machine-understandable repre-
sentation.
We use conceptual graphs (CGs) (Sowa, 1984), a
knowledge-representation formalism based on semantic
networks and the existential graphs of C. S. Peirce. There
is a defined mapping between a conceptual graph and a
corresponding first-order logical formula, although con-
ceptual graphs also allow for representation of temporal
and non-monotonic logics, thus exceeding the expressive
power of FOL.
One of the first systems for the generation of concep-
tual graph representation of text is described in (Sowa and
Way, 1986). It uses a lexicon of canonical graphs that rep-
resent valid (possible) relations between concepts. These
canonical graphs are then combined to build a conceptual
graph representation of a sentence.
Veraldi at al. (1988) describe a prototype of a semantic
processor for Italian sentences. It uses a lexicon of about
850 word-sense definitions, each including 10-20 surface
semantic patterns (SSPs). Each SSP represents both us-
age information and semantic constrains and is manually
acquired.
There are also systems aimed at extracting partial
knowledge from texts, by either filling semantic tem-
plates (Hobbs et al, 1996) or by generation of a set of
linguistic patterns for information extraction (Harabagiu
and Maiorano, 2000), to name few.
The following section describes the general overview
of the system, together with the documents we used to
test our algorithms. Section 3 describes the semantic role
identification module, Section 4 outlines the algorithm
for constructing the conceptual graph representation of
a sentence. The experiments that we performed are de-
scribed in Section 5, while in Section 6 we draw some
conclusions and outline ongoing and future work.
2 System overview
We use a two-step approach for conceptual graph repre-
sentation of texts: first, by using VerbNet and WordNet,
we identify the semantic roles in a sentence, and second,
using these semantic roles and a set of syntactic/semantic
rules we construct a conceptual graph.
The general architecture of the system is represented
in Figure 1.
To apply our algorithms we use documents from two
corpora in different domains. The first corpus is the freely
available Reuters-21578 text categorization test collec-
tion (Reuters, 1987). The other corpus we use is the col-
lection of aviation incident reports provided by the Irish
Air Accident Investigation Unit (AAIU) (2004) .
Figure 1: General architecture for the graph construction
All documents are converted to XML format and sen-
tential boundaries are identified. The documents are then
parsed using Eugene Charniak?s maximum entropy in-
spired parser (Charniak, 2000). This probabilistic parser
produces Penn tree-bank style trees and achieves 90.1%
average accuracy for sentences not exceeding 40 words
long and 89.5% for sentences with length under 100
words when trained and tested on the Wall Street Jour-
nal treebank.
3 Semantic role identification
The problem of automatic semantic role identification is
an important part of many natural language processing
systems and while recent syntactic parsers can correctly
label over 95% of the constituents of a sentence, finding
a representation in terms of semantic roles is still unsat-
isfactory.
There are number of quite different existing ap-
proaches for identifying semantic roles. The traditional
parsing approaches, such as HPSG grammars and Lexi-
cal functional grammars, to a certain extent all suggest se-
mantic relationships corresponding to the syntactic ones.
They rely strongly on manually-developed grammars and
lexicons, which must encode all possible realisations of
the semantic roles. Developing such grammars is a time-
consuming and tedious process and such systems usually
work well within limited domains only.
The data-driven approach is an alternative approach,
based on filling semantic templates. Applying such
a model to information extraction, in AutoSlog Riloff
(1993) builds a list of patterns for filling in semantic slots
in a specific domain, as well as a method for automatic
acquisition of case frames (Riloff and Schmelzenbach,
1998). In the domain of the Air Traveler Information
System, Miller at al. (1996) apply statistical methods to
compute the probability of a constituent in order to fill in
a semantic slot within a semantic frame.
Gildea and Jurafsky (2000, 2002) describe a statistical
approach for semantic role labelling using data collected
from FrameNet. They investigate the influence of the
following features for identification of a semantic role:
phrase type, grammatical function (the relationship of the
constituent to the rest of the sentence), position in the sen-
tence, voice and head word, as well as a combination of
features. They also describe a model for estimating the
probability a phrase to be assigned a specific semantic
role.
The approach we propose for semantic role identifica-
tion uses information about each verb?s behaviour, pro-
vided in VerbNet, and the WordNet taxonomy when de-
ciding whether a phrase can be a suitable match for a se-
mantic role.
VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2000) is a computational verb
lexicon, based on Levin?s verb classes (Levin, 1993), that
contains syntactic and semantic information for English
verbs. Each VerbNet class defines a list of members, a list
of possible thematic roles, and a list of frames (patterns)
of how these semantic roles can be realized in a sentence.
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is an English lexical
database containing about 120 000 entries of nouns,
verbs, adjectives and adverbs, hierarchically organized in
synonym groups (called synsets), and linked with rela-
tions, such as hypernym, hyponym, holonym and others.
The algorithm for semantic role identification of a sen-
tence that we propose consists of the following three
steps:
1. Firstly, for each clause in the sentence we identify
the main verb and build a sentence pattern using the
parse tree;
2. Secondly, for each verb in the sentence we extract
a list of possible semantic frames from VerbNet, to-
gether with selectional restrictions for each semantic
role;
3. Thirdly, we match the sentence pattern to each of
the available semantic frames, taking into account
the semantic role?s constraints. As a result we are
presented with a list of all possible semantic role as-
signments, from which we have to identify the cor-
rect one.
These steps are described in more detail in the follow-
ing sub-sections.
3.1 Constructing sentence patterns for the verbs in
a sentence
As mentioned earlier, during the pre-processing stage we
produce a parse tree for each sentence using the Char-
niak parser. From this parse tree for each clause of the
sentence we construct a sentence pattern, which is a flat
parse representation that identifies the main verb and the
other main categories of the clause. For example, from
the parse tree for the sentence
USAir bought Piedmont for 69 dlrs cash per
share
we construct the following pattern:
NP VERB(buy) NP PP
As a sentence can have subordinate clauses, we may
have more than one syntactic pattern per sentence. Each
such pattern is processed individually.
3.2 Extracting VerbNet semantic role frames
Each verb can be described in VerbNet as a member of
more than one class (for example the verb make is listed
as a member of the verb classes dub-29.3 and build-26.1,
each of which correspond to different verb senses), and
therefore the list of its possible semantic frames is a com-
bination of the semantic frames defined in each of the
classes in which it participates (currently we do not dis-
tinguish between different verb senses and therefore do
not process the WordNet sense information attached to
each verb class member).
We extract all the semantic frames in a class and con-
siders them to be possible semantic frames for each of
the verbs that are members of this class. For example, for
all the verbs that are members of the VerbNet class get-
13.5.1 (including the verb buy) we extract the semantic
frames shown in Figure 2.
Agent V Theme (1)
Agent V Theme Prep(from) Source (2)
Agent V Theme Prep(for) Beneficiary (3)
Agent V Beneficiary Theme (4)
Agent V Theme Prep(for) Asset (5)
Asset V Theme (6)
Figure 2: Semantic frames and selectional restrictions ex-
tracted for the verbs in class get-13.5.1
The verb classes also define a list of selectional con-
straints each semantic roles should satisfy. For example,
the roles defined in the VerbNet class get-13.5.1 should
satisfy the restrictions shown in Figure 3.
Some frames define additional restrictions local to the
frame. In this case these restrictions are combined with
the restrictions defined in the frames.
Agent[+animate OR +organization]
Theme[]
Source[+concrete]
Beneficiary[+animate OR +organization]
Asset[+currency]
Figure 3: Selectional constraints for the semantic roles
defined in class get-13.5.1
3.3 Matching algorithm
The matching algorithm matches the sentence pattern
against each of the possible semantic role frames ex-
tracted from VerbNet. We independently match the con-
stituents before and after the verb in the sentence pattern
to the semantic roles before and after the verb in the se-
mantic role frame.
If the number of the available constituents in the sen-
tence pattern is less than the number of the required slots
in the frame, the match fails.
If there is more than one constituent available to fill a
slot in a semantic frame, they are assigned priorities using
heuristic rules. For example, in the cases where we have
a choice of a few possible role fillers for the Agent, a
higher weight is given to noun phrases, especially if they
are marked as proper nouns (NNP) or contain at least one
proper noun.
If, for a semantic frame, we find a constituent for each
of the semantic role slots that complies with the selec-
tional constraints, the algorithm considers this a possible
match. Currently, if the algorithm returns more than one
match, we manually select the best one.
3.4 Selectional constraints check
The selectional constraints check verifies if a candidate
constituent for a thematic role fulfills the selectional con-
straints assigned to this role. For example, a common
requirement for a constituent to fill the role of Agent is to
be of type animate or organization.
The selectional constraints check is implemented us-
ing one or combination of the following techniques: hy-
pernym relations defined in WordNet, pattern matching
techniques, syntactic rules and some heuristics.
For example, the restriction machine is a type restric-
tion and is fulfilled if the word represented by the con-
stituent is a member of a synset that is a hyponym of the
synset containing the word machine.
Other restrictions, like infinitival and sentential, are re-
solved only by checking the syntactic parse structure of
the parse tree.
Restrictions such as animate and organization are re-
solved by applying a combination of the synset hierarchy
in WordNet and pre-compiled lists of organization and
personal names, and if no satisfactory answer is found,
using heuristics to identify if the phrase contains proper
nouns.
We also check for a suitable preposition before the con-
stituent to be matched. For example, for the frame
Agent V Topic Prep(to) Recipient
the constituent filling the semantic role of Recipient
should be a prepositional phrase headed by the preposi-
tion to (e.g. Bob said a few words to Mary).
4 Building conceptual graphs
The previous section describes the process of identify-
ing the semantic roles of the constituents in a sentence.
These roles are used to build a conceptual graph represen-
tation of the sentence by applying series of transforma-
tions, starting with more generic concepts and relations
and replacing them with more specific ones.
The conceptual graph is built through the following
steps:
  Step 1 ? For each of the constituents of the sentence
we build a conceptual graph representation
Each phrase (part of the sentence) should be repre-
sented by a conceptual graph. This is done recur-
sively by analysing the syntactical structure of the
phrase.
  Step 2 ? Link all the conceptual graphs representing
the constituents in a single graph
All the conceptual graphs built during the previ-
ous step are attached to the concept representing the
verb, thus creating a conceptual graph representa-
tion for the complete sentence.
  Step 3 ? Resolve the unknown relations
This step attempts to identify all generic labels as-
signed during the previous two steps. This is done
by using a list of relation correction rules.
Each of these steps are described in more detail in the
following sub-sections.
4.1 Building a conceptual graph representation of a
phrase
This step involves building a conceptual graph for a
phrase. Our general assumption is that each lexeme in the
sentence is represented using a separate concept, there-
fore all nouns, adjectives, adverbs and pronouns are rep-
resented using concepts, while the determiners and num-
bers are used as a referent of the relevant concept (thus
further specifying the concept).
Here we will outline the process of building a concep-
tual graph for a phrase depending on the part of speech
category of the phrase.
4.1.1 Noun phrases
The list of some of the most common syntactic patterns
for noun phrases is shown in Table 1.
Syntactic pattern % AAIU % Reuters
(1) NP -  DT NN 20.42% 9.10%
(2) NP -  NP PP 12.99% 14.17%
(3) NP -  DT JJ NN 5.32% 2.49%
(4) NP -  NN 5.18% 4.01%
(5) NP -  NNP 4.59% 6.09%
(6) NP -  PRP 3.57% 4.47%
(7) NP -  NNP NNP 3.22% 2.15%
(8) NP -  CD NNS 2.88% 1.81%
(9) NP -  DT NN NN 2.20% 1.17%
(10) NP -  NP SBAR 0.88% 1.29%
Table 1: A list of some of the most common syntactic
patterns for noun phrases
Each of these cases is resolved individually. For exam-
ple, for pattern (1) we create a concept for the NN with a
referent, corresponding to the type of the determiner (an
existential quantifier referent if the word marked as DT
is the, a defined quantifier if the word is every, or none
if the word is a). For pattern (3) we create concepts rep-
resenting the adjective and the noun and link them by an
Attribute relation. Pattern (10) represents phrases where
the noun is further specified by the SBAR (for example,
The co-pilot, who was acting as a main pilot, landed the
plane.) For these patterns a conceptual graph is built for
the SBAR and the head concept, which could be a WHNP
phrase (e.g. which or who) or WHADVP (e.g. where) is
replaced by the concept, created for the NP (also see Ta-
ble 3).
4.1.2 Prepositional phrases
The conceptual graph representation of propositional
phrases, similarly on the noun phrases, depends on their
syntactic structure. A list of the most common syntactic
patterns for prepositional phrases is shown in Table 2.
Syntactic pattern % AAIU % Reuters
(1) PP -  IN NP 77.99% 82.57%
(2) PP -  TO NP 13.81% 8.81%
Table 2: A list of the most common syntactic patterns for
prepositional phrases
The two most common patterns consist of a preposi-
tion followed by a noun phrase. For such prepositional
phrases we construct a conceptual graph representing the
noun phrase. We also keep track of the preposition head-
ing the prepositional phrase, as it is used to mark the re-
lation between this phrase and the rest of relevant phrases
in the sentence.
4.1.3 Subordinate clauses
The list of the most common syntactic patterns for
phrases representing subordinate clauses (and marked as
SBAR) is shown in Table 3.
Syntactic pattern % AAIU % Reuters
(1) SBAR -  IN S 52.76% 24.33%
(2) SBAR -  WHNP S 18.90% 12.57%
(3) SBAR -  WHADVP S 12.60% 2.53%
(4) SBAR -  S 3.94% 56.34%
Table 3: A list of the most common syntactic patterns for
subordinate phrases
For all these cases the embedded clause S is treated
as an independent sentence, and we recursively create a
conceptual graph for it. To link the resulting graph to the
main graph we either use a relation with label related to
the preposition marked as IN (in case (1)) or by replac-
ing the concept representing the WHNP or the WHADVP
node with the concept representing the node it refers to.
4.2 Attaching all constituents to the verb
After building separate graphs for each of the con-
stituents, we link them together in a single conceptual
graph. As each of them describe some aspect of the con-
cept represented with the verb, we link them to that con-
cept. Here we use the term main node to denote the node
(concept) in the conceptual graph representing the head
of the constituent. We identify the head using syntactic
information about the constituent. For example, if the
constituent is a noun phrase consisting of a noun phrase,
followed by a prepositional phrase, its head is the head of
the noun phrase and the PP is a modifier. Alternatively,
if the constituent is a noun phrase that consists of an ad-
jective followed by a noun, the noun is the head and the
adjective is a modifier.
If the constituent already has a semantic role attached
to it, the same relation is used when constructing the
conceptual graph between the CG representing the con-
stituent and the verb.
If the constituent does not have any semantic roles at-
tached to it, a relation with a generic label is used. Using
a generic type of relation allows us to build the structure
of the CG, concentrating on the concepts involved, and to
resolve the remaining relations later. If the constituent is
not a propositional phrase (this includes NP, SBAR, etc.),
we use a generic label REL.
If the constituent is a prepositional phrase (PP) headed
with a proposition prep, we use a generic label REL prep.
For example, for the phrase a flight from Dublin we create
a concept of a flight and a concept of a city, called Dublin
and link them with a generic relation REL from.
4.3 Resolving unknown relations
This is the final step in the conceptual graph construction,
where we resolve the unknown (generic) relations in the
conceptual graph.
We keep a database of most common syntactic reali-
sation of relations between concepts with specific types.
Figure 4 shows some of the relation correction rules we
use for the documents in the AAIU corpus. The left
part of the rule represents the two concepts linked with a
generic relation, while the right side represents this graph
after the correction. For example, the first pattern states
that if in our graph there are concepts Runway and Air-
port linked with relation REL at, we replace the relation
with Location.
Runway REL at Airport -  Runway Location Airport
Flight REL from Airport -  Flight Source Airport
Flight REL from City -  Flight Source City
Flight REL to Airport -  Flight Destination Airport
Flight REL to City -  Flight Destination City
Flight REL for Airport -  Flight Destination Airport
Flight REL for City -  Flight Destination City
Land REL on Runway -  Land Destination Runway
Route REL from City -  Route Source City
Route REL to City -  Route Destination City
Figure 4: A sample list of relation correction rules
Building the relation correction rules database is
a challenging task. Currently, the process is semi-
automated by scanning the corpus for commonly occur-
ring syntactic patterns. Such patterns are then manually
evaluated and the semantic relations are identified.
Here is an example of applying a relation correction
rule: for the NP the flight from Dublin on step 2 we create
the conceptual graph
[FLIGHT:*a]-  (REL from)-  [City:Dublin]
Using the correction rule 3 we substitute the relation
REL from with Source to produce the graph
[FLIGHT:*a]-  (Source)-  [City:Dublin]
This is an useful approach for resolving relations be-
tween nouns, as no such information is available in Verb-
Net.
5 Experimental results
We currently are in the process of testing and tuning our
system. We have some preliminary results for the per-
formance of the semantic role annotation module, both
on Reuters news articles and AAIU reports. The tests on
the Reuters documents are performed on a quarter of the
available corpus (reut2-003.sgm) and for the AAIU doc-
uments on the reports from years 1998, 1999 and 2000.
The coverage (the percentage of the verbs in the cor-
pus that have a VerbNet description) of VerbNet for both
corpora is relatively low: 66% for Reuters and 53% for
the AAIU.
To evaluate the performance of the semantic role la-
belling algorithm we randomly selected 1% of the verbs
from each corpus and manually analysed the assigned se-
mantic roles. Our tests show that the semantic roles are
correctly identified in 39% of cases in Reuters corpus and
35% of the cases in the AAIU reports, which is 59% and
66% respectively of the verbs present in VerbNet (the per-
centage of the correctly identified out of all that are cov-
ered by VerbNet).
We are currently extending the coverage of VerbNet by
manually identifying frames present in the corpora and
not included in VerbNet, which we believe should signif-
icantly increase the performance.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we described an approach for constructing
conceptual graphs for English sentences, using syntactic
and semantic information from VerbNet and WordNet, as
well as some domain-specific knowledge. We tested the
semantic role labeling algorithm on parts of Reuters cor-
pus and on Irish Air Accident reports. The achieved ac-
curacy is strongly influenced by the lack of VerbNet de-
scription of many verbs present in the corpora, as well as
the lack of semantic frames for the verb sense.
The work on the system is ongoing and the efforts
are continuing to implement a verb sense disambiguation
component and to test the conceptual graph construction
module.
7 Acknowledgments
This work is developed as part of the INTINN project,
funded under the Enterprise Ireland Informatics Research
Initiative. I would also like to thank my supervisor, John
Dunnion, and the anonymous reviewers for their useful
comments.
References
Air Accident Investigation Unit. 2004. Irish Air Ac-
cident Investigation Unit Reports. Available online:
(http://www.aaiu.ie/).
Eugene Charniak. 2000. A Maximum-Entropy-Inspired
Parser. In Proceedings of NAACL-2000, pages 132?
139.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, May.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2000. Automatic La-
beling of Semantic Roles. In Proceedings of 38th An-
nual Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL-00), pages 512?520, Hong Kong,
October.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic La-
beling of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):245?288.
Sanda Harabagiu and Steven Maiorano. 2000. Acqui-
sition of linguistic patterns for knowledge-based in-
formation extraction. In Proceedings of LREC-2000,
Athens, June.
Jerry Hobbs, Douglas Appelt, John Bear, David Israel,
Megumi Kameyama, Mark Stickel, and Mabry Tyson.
1996. FASTUS: A cascaded finite-state transducer for
extracting information from natural-language text. In
In Finite State Devices for Natural Language Process-
ing, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer.
2000. Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexicon.
In Proceedings of Seventeenth National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2000), pages 691 ? 696,
Austin, TX, July 30 - August 3.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes And Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. The University of
Chicago Press.
Scott Miller, David Stallard, Robert Bobrow, and Richard
Schwartz. 1996. A fully statistical approach to nat-
ural language interfaces. In Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 55?61, Santa Cruz, CA, June. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
Reuters. 1987. Reuters-21578 Text Categorization
Collection. Available online: (http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/-
databases/reuters21578/reuters21578.html).
Ellen Riloff and Mark Schmelzenbach. 1998. An Empir-
ical Approach to Conceptual Case Frame Acquisition.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Very Large
Corpora.
Ellen Riloff. 1993. Automatically Constructing a Dictio-
nary for Information Extraction Tasks. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial In-
telligence (AAAI-93), pages 811?816. AAAI Press/The
MIT Press.
John F. Sowa and Eileen C. Way. 1986. Implementing
a semantic interpreter using conceptual graphs. IBM
Journal of Research and Development, 30(1):57?69,
January.
John F. Sowa. 1984. Conceptual Structures: Information
Processing in Mind and Machine. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, M.
Paola Velardi, Maria Teresa Pazienza, and Mario
De?Giovanetti. 1988. Conceptual graphs for the anal-
ysis and generation of sentences. IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development, 32(2):251?267, March.
