Morphological Analysis for Statistical Machine Translation 
 
Young-Suk Lee 
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
Email: ysuklee@us.ibm.com 
 
Abstract 
 
We present a novel morphological 
analysis technique which induces a 
morphological and syntactic   symmetry 
between two languages with highly 
asymmetrical morphological structures to 
improve statistical machine translation 
qualities.  The technique pre-supposes 
fine-grained segmentation of a word in 
the morphologically rich language into  
the sequence of prefix(es)-stem-suffix(es) 
and  part-of-speech tagging of the parallel 
corpus.  The algorithm identifies 
morphemes to be merged or deleted in the 
morphologically rich language to induce 
the desired morphological and syntactic 
symmetry. The technique improves 
Arabic-to-English translation qualities 
significantly  when applied to IBM Model 
1 and Phrase Translation Models trained  
on the training corpus size ranging from 
3,500 to 3.3 million sentence pairs. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Translation of two languages with  highly 
different morphological structures as exemplified 
by Arabic and English poses a challenge to 
successful implementation of statistical machine 
translation models (Brown et al 1993).  Rarely 
occurring inflected forms of a stem in Arabic 
often do not accurately translate due to the 
frequency imbalance with the corresponding 
translation word in English.  So called a word 
(separated by a white space) in Arabic often 
corresponds to more than one independent word 
in English, posing a technical problem to the 
source channel models.  In the English-Arabic 
sentence alignment shown in Figure 1, Arabic 
word AlAHmr (written in Buckwalter 
transliteration) is aligned to two English words 
?the red?, and llmEArDp to three English words 
?of the opposition.?  In this paper, we present a 
technique to induce a morphological and 
syntactic symmetry between two languages with 
different morphological structures for statistical 
translation quality improvement. 
The technique is implemented as a two-step 
morphological processing for word-based 
translation models.  We first apply word 
segmentation to Arabic, segmenting a word into 
prefix(es)-stem-suffix(es). Arabic-English 
sentence alignment after Arabic word 
segmentation is illustrated in Figure 2, where one 
Arabic morpheme is aligned to one or zero 
English word.  We then apply the proposed 
technique to the word segmented  Arabic corpus 
to identify prefixes/suffixes to be merged into 
their stems or deleted to induce a symmetrical 
morphological structure.  Arabic-English 
sentence alignment after Arabic morphological 
analysis is shown in Figure 3, where the suffix p 
is merged into their stems mwAjh and mEArd. 
For phrase translation models, we apply 
additional morphological analysis induced from 
noun phrase parsing of Arabic to accomplish a 
syntactic as well as morphological symmetry 
between the two languages. 
 
2. Word Segmentation 
 
We pre-suppose segmentation of a word into 
prefix(es)-stem-suffix(es), as described in (Lee et 
al. 2003)  The category prefix and suffix 
encompasses function words such as conjunction 
markers, prepositions, pronouns, determiners and 
all inflectional morphemes of the language. If a 
word token contains more than one prefix and/or 
suffix, we posit multiple prefixes/suffixes per 
stem.  A sample word segmented Arabic text is 
given below, where prefixes are marked with #, 
and suffixes with +.  
 
w# s# y# Hl sA}q Al# tjArb fy jAgwAr Al# 
brAzyly lwsyAnw bwrty mkAn AyrfAyn fy Al# 
sbAq gdA Al# AHd Al*y s# y# kwn Awly xTw 
+At +h fy EAlm sbAq +At AlfwrmwlA 
 
3.  Morphological  Analysis 
 
Morphological analysis identifies functional 
morphemes to be merged into meaning-bearing 
stems or to be deleted. In Arabic, functional 
morphemes typically belong to prefixes or 
suffixes. 
 
         Sudan  :    alert    in       the     red     sea   to  face       build-up    of      the  oppositions       in     Eritrea 
 
 
 
   AlswdAn         :    AstnfAr    fy  AlbHr  AlAHmr   lmwAjhp    H$wd   llmEArDp     dAxl      ArytryA 
       Figure 1. Word alignment between Arabic and English without Arabic morphological processing 
        Sudan    :   alert   in    the      red  sea  to    face        build-up  of   the    opposition      in     Eritrea 
 
 
 
      Al     swdAn  :  AstnfAr   fy  Al  bHr  Al  AHmr  l  mwAjh  p      H$wd  l  Al  mEArd  p dAxl    ArytryA 
            Figure 2. Alignment between word-segmented Arabic and English 
          Sudan   :   alert   in       the  red      sea   to  face   build-up        of   the   opposition       in        Eritrea 
        
 
 
         swdAn  :  AstnfAr  fy   Al  bHr    AHmr  l    mwAjhp  H$wd    l     Al     mEArdp  dAxl       ArytryA 
      Figure 3. Alignment between morphologically analyzed Arabic and English 
 
Sample Arabic texts before and after   
morphological analysis is shown below. 
Mwskw 51-7 ( Af b ) - Elm An Al# qSf Al# 
mdfEy Al*y Ady Aly ASAb +p jndy +yn 
rwsy +yn Avn +yn b# jrwH Tfyf +p q*A}f 
Al# jmE +p fy mTAr xAn qlE +p ? 
Mwskw 51-7 ( Af b ) - Elm An Al# qSf Al# 
mdfEy Al*y Ady Aly ASAbp jndyyn rwsyyn 
Avnyn b# jrwH Tfyfp msA' Al# jmEp fy 
mTAr xAn qlEp ? 
 
In the morphologically analyzed Arabic (bottom), 
the feminine singular suffix +p and the 
masculine plural suffix +yn are merged into the 
preceding stems analogous to singular/plural 
noun distinction in English, e.g. girl vs. girls.  
 
3.1 Method 
 
We apply part-speech tagging to a symbol 
tokenized and word segmented Arabic and 
symbol-tokenized English parallel corpus.  We 
then viterbi-align the part-of-speech tagged 
parallel corpus, using translation parameters 
obtained via Model 1 training of word 
segmented Arabic and symbol-tokenized English, 
to derive the conditional probability of an 
English part-of-speech tag given the combination 
of an Arabic prefix and its part-of-speech or an 
Arabic suffix and its part-of-speech.1 
                                                 
1 We have used an Arabic part-of-speech tagger with 
around 120 tags, and an English part-of-speech tagger 
with around 55 tags. 
 
3.2  Algorithm 
 
The algorithm utilizes two sets of translation 
probabilities to determine merge/deletion 
analysis of a morpheme. We obtain tag-to-tag 
translation probabilities according to (1), which 
identifies the most probable part-of-speech 
correspondences between Arabic (tagA) and 
English (tagE).  
 
(1) Pr(tagE | tagA) 
 
We also obtain translation probabilities of an 
English part-of-speech tag given each Arabic 
prefix/suffix and its part-of-speech according to 
(2) and (3):  
 
(2)  Pr(tagE | stemtagA, suffixj_tagjk) 
 
(2) computes the translation probability of an 
Arabic suffix and its part-of-speech into an 
English part-of-speech in the Arabic stem tag 
context, stemtagA. StemtagA is one of the major 
stem parts-of-speech with which the specified 
prefix or suffix co-occurs, i.e. ADV, ADJ, NOUN, 
NOUN_PROP, VERB_IMPERFECT, VERB_PERFECT. 2  
J in suffixj ranges from 1 to M, M = number of 
distinct suffixes co-occurring with stemtagA.  
tagjk in suffixj_tagjk is the part-of-speech of suffixj, 
where k ranges from 1 to L, L = number of 
                                                 
2  All Arabic part-of-speech tags are adopted from 
LDC-distributed Arabic Treebank and English tags are 
adopted from Penn Treebank. 
distinct tags assigned to the suffixj in the training 
corpus.  
 
(3) Pr(tagE | prefixi_tagik, stemtagA) 
 
(3) computes the translation probability of an 
Arabic prefix and its part-of-speech into an 
English part-of-speech in the Arabic stem tag 
context, stemtagA.  Prefixi and tagik in 
prefixi_tagik may be interpreted in a manner 
analogous to suffixj and tagjk of suffixj_tagjk in (2).  
 
3.2.1  IBM Model 1 
 
The algorithm for  word-based translation model, 
e.g. IBM Model 1, implements the idea that if a 
morpheme in one language is robustly  translated 
into a distinct part-of-speech in the other 
language, the morpheme is very likely to have its 
independent counterpart in the other language.  
Therefore, a robust overlap of tagE given tagA 
between Pr(tagE|tagA) and Pr(tagE|stemtagA, 
suffixj_tagjk) for a suffix  and Pr(tagE|tagA) and 
Pr(tagE|prefixi_tagik, stemtagA) for a prefix is a 
positive indicator that the Arabic prefix/suffix 
has an independent counterpart in English.  If the 
overlap is weak or doesn?t exist, the prefix/suffix 
is unlikely to have an independent counterpart 
and is subject to merge/deletion analysis.3  
 
Step 1: For each tagA, select the top 3 most 
probable tagE from Pr(tagE|tagA).   
Step 2: Partition all prefixi_tagik and suffixj_tagjk 
into two groups in each  stemtagA context. 
Group I: At least one of  ?tagE|tagik? or 
?tagE|tagjk? occurs as one of the top 3 most 
probable translation pairs in Pr(tagE|tagA).  
Prefixes and suffixes in this group are likely to 
have their independent counterparts in English. 
Group II: None of  ?tagE|tagik? or ?tagE|tagjk? 
occurs as one of the top 3 most probable 
translation pairs in Pr(tagE|tagA).  Prefixes and 
suffixes in this group are unlikely to have their 
independent counterparts in English. 
Step 3:  Determine the merge/deletion analysis 
of  the prefixes/suffixes in Group II as follows: If 
prefixi_tagik/suffixj_tagjk occurs in more than one 
stemtagA context, and its translation probability 
into NULL tag is the highest, delete the 
prefixi_tagik/suffixj_tagjk in the stemtagA context. 
If prefixi_tagik/suffixj_tagjk occurs in more than 
one stemtagA context, and its translation 
                                                 
3  We assume that only one tag is assigned to one 
morpheme or word, i.e. no combination tag of the 
form DET+NOUN, etc. 
probability into NULL tag is not the highest, 
merge the prefixi_tagik/suffixj_tagjk into its stem 
in the  stemtagA context.   
Merge/deletion analysis is applied to all 
prefixi_tagik/suffixj_tagjk occurring in the 
appropriate stem tag contexts in the training 
corpus (for translation model training) and a new 
input text (for decoding). 
 
3.2.2 Phrase Translation Model 
 
For phrase translation models (Och and Ney 
2002),  we induce  additional merge/deletion 
analysis on the basis of base noun phrase parsing 
of Arabic. One major  asymmetry between 
Arabic and English is caused by more frequent 
use of the determiner Al# in Arabic compared 
with its counterpart the in English.  We apply 
Al#-deletion to Arabic noun phrases so that only 
the first occurrence of Al#  in a noun phrase is 
retained. All instances of Al# occurring before a 
proper noun ? as in Al# qds, whose literal 
translation is the Jerusalem ? are also deleted. 
Unlike the automatic induction of morphological 
analysis described in 3.2.1,  Al#-deletion analysis 
is manually induced.  
 
4. Performance Evaluations 
 
System performances are evaluated on LDC-
distributed Multiple Translation Arabic Part I  
consisting of 1,043 segments derived from AFP 
and Xinhua newswires. Translation qualities are 
measured by uncased BLEU (Papineni et al 
2002) with 4 reference translations, sysids: ahb, 
ahc, ahd, ahe.  
Systems are developed from 4 different sizes 
of training corpora, 3.5K, 35K, 350K and 3.3M 
sentence pairs, as in Table 1. The number in each 
cell indicates the number of sentence pairs in 
each genre (newswires, ummah, UN corpus).4 
Genre    3.5K    35K    350K     3.3M 
News   1,000   1,000     9,238      12,002 
Ummah      500   1,000   13,027      13,027 
UN   2,000 33,000 327,735 3,270,200 
      Table 1. Training Corpora Specifications 
 
4.1 IBM Model 1 
 
Impact of morphological analysis on IBM Model 
1 is shown in Table 2. 
                                                 
4  We have used the same language model for all 
evaluations.  
 
corpus  size   baseline   morph analysis 
       3.5K      0.10           0.25 
        35K      0.14           0.29 
      350K      0.18           0.31 
      3.3M      0.18           0.32 
Table 2. Impact of morphological analysis on 
IBM Model 1 
Baseline performances are obtained by 
Model 1 training and decoding without any 
segmentation or morphological analysis on 
Arabic. BLEU scores under ?morph analysis? is 
obtained by Model 1 training on Arabic 
morphologically analyzed and English symbol-
tokenized parallel corpus and Model 1 decoding 
on the Arabic morphologically analyzed input 
text.5 
  
4.2  Phrase Translation Model 
 
Impact of Arabic morphological analysis on a 
phrase translation model with monotone 
decoding (Tillmann 2003), is shown in Table 3. 
  corpus size   baseline  morph analysis 
       3.5K      0.17           0.24 
        35K      0.24           0.29 
      350K      0.32           0.36 
       3.3M      0.36           0.39 
Table 3. Impact of morphological analysis on 
Phrase Translation Model 
BLEU scores under baseline and morph 
analysis are obtained in a manner analogous to 
Model 1 except that the morphological analysis 
for the phrase translation model is a combination 
of the automatically induced analysis for Model 
1 plus the manually induced Al#-deletion in 3.2.2. 
The scores with only automatically induced 
morphological analysis are 0.21, 0.25, 0.33 and 
0.36 for 3.5K, 35K, 350K and 3.3M sentence 
pair training corpora, respectively. 
 
5. Related  Work 
 
Automatic induction of the desired linguistic 
knowledge from a word/morpheme-aligned 
parallel corpus is analogous to (Yarowsky et al 
2001). Word segmentation and merge/deletion 
analysis in morphology is similar to parsing and   
insertion operation in syntax by (Yamada and 
Knight 2001). Symmetrization of linguistic 
structures can also be found in (Niessen and Ney 
2000).  
                                                 
5  Our experiments indicate that addition of Al#-
deletion, cf. Phrase Translation Model, does not affect 
the performance of IBM Model 1.  
Acknowledgements 
 
This work was partially supported by the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
and monitored by SPAWAR under contract No. 
N66001-99-2-8916. The views and findings 
contained in this material are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the position of 
policy of the Government and no official 
endorsement should be inferred. We would like 
to acknowledge Salim Roukos and Kishore 
Papineni for technical discussions. 
 
6. References 
 
Brown, P., Della Pietra, S., Della Pietra, V., 
and Mercer, R. 1993. The mathematics of 
statistical machine translation: Parameter 
Estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2): 
263?311. 
Lee, Y-S., Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Emam, 
O., Hassan, H. 2003. Language Model Based 
Arabic Word Segmentation. In Proceedings of 
the 41st Annual Meeting of the ACL. Pages 399?
406. Sapporo, Japan. 
Niessen, S., Ney, H. 2000. Improving SMT 
quality with morpho-syntactic analysis. In 
Proceedings of 20th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics. Saarbrucken, 
Germany. 
Och, F. J., Ney. H. 2002. Discriminative 
training and maximum entropy models for 
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of 
the 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL. Pages 
295?302. Philadelphia. PA. 
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, R., Zhu W. 
2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation 
of Machine Translation. Proceedings of the 40th 
Annual Meeting of the ACL.  Pages 311?318. 
Philadelphia, PA. 
Tillmann, Christoph 2003. A Projection 
Extension Algorithm for Statistical Machine 
Translation. In Proceedings of the 2003 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing.  Pages 1?8. Sapporo, 
Japan. 
Yamada, K. and Knight, K. 2001. A Syntax-
Based Statistical Translation Model. In 
Proceedings of the 39th Conference of the ACL. 
Pages 523?530. Toulouse, France. 
Yarowsky, D., G. Ngai and R. Wicentowski 
2001.  Inducing Multilingual Text Analysis 
Tools via Robust Projection across Aligned 
Corpora. In Proceedings of HLT 2001 (ISBN: 1-
55860-786-2). 
 
  
