Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 248?255,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Grammatical Machine Translation
Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell III
Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304
Abstract
We present an approach to statistical
machine translation that combines ideas
from phrase-based SMT and traditional
grammar-based MT. Our system incor-
porates the concept of multi-word trans-
lation units into transfer of dependency
structure snippets, and models and trains
statistical components according to state-
of-the-art SMT systems. Compliant with
classical transfer-based MT, target depen-
dency structure snippets are input to a
grammar-based generator. An experimen-
tal evaluation shows that the incorpora-
tion of a grammar-based generator into an
SMT framework provides improved gram-
maticality while achieving state-of-the-art
quality on in-coverage examples, suggest-
ing a possible hybrid framework.
1 Introduction
Recent approaches to statistical machine translation
(SMT) piggyback on the central concepts of phrase-
based SMT (Och et al, 1999; Koehn et al, 2003)
and at the same time attempt to improve some of its
shortcomings by incorporating syntactic knowledge
in the translation process. Phrase-based translation
with multi-word units excels at modeling local or-
dering and short idiomatic expressions, however, it
lacks a mechanism to learn long-distance dependen-
cies and is unable to generalize to unseen phrases
that share non-overt linguistic information. Publicly
available statistical parsers can provide the syntactic
information that is necessary for linguistic general-
izations and for the resolution of non-local depen-
dencies. This information source is deployed in re-
cent work either for pre-ordering source sentences
before they are input to to a phrase-based system
(Xia and McCord, 2004; Collins et al, 2005), or
for re-ordering the output of translation models by
statistical ordering models that access linguistic in-
formation on dependencies and part-of-speech (Lin,
2004; Ding and Palmer, 2005; Quirk et al, 2005)1 .
While these approaches deploy dependency-style
grammars for parsing source and/or target text, a uti-
lization of grammar-based generation on the output
of translation models has not yet been attempted in
dependency-based SMT. Instead, simple target lan-
guage realization models that can easily be trained
to reflect the ordering of the reference translations in
the training corpus are preferred. The advantage of
such models over grammar-based generation seems
to be supported, for example, by Quirk et al?s (2005)
improvements over phrase-based SMT as well as
over an SMT system that deploys a grammar-based
generator (Menezes and Richardson, 2001) on n-
gram based automatic evaluation scores (Papineni et
al., 2001; Doddington, 2002). Another data point,
however, is given by Charniak et al (2003) who
show that parsing-based language modeling can im-
prove grammaticality of translations, even if these
improvements are not recorded under n-gram based
evaluation measures.
1A notable exception to this kind of approach is Chiang
(2005) who introduces syntactic information into phrase-based
SMT via hierarchical phrases rather than by external parsing.
248
In this paper we would like to step away from
n-gram based automatic evaluation scores for a
moment, and investigate the possible contributions
of incorporating a grammar-based generator into
a dependency-based SMT system. We present a
dependency-based SMT model that integrates the
idea of multi-word translation units from phrase-
based SMT into a transfer system for dependency
structure snippets. The statistical components of
our system are modeled on the phrase-based sys-
tem of Koehn et al (2003), and component weights
are adjusted by minimum error rate training (Och,
2003). In contrast to phrase-based SMT and to the
above cited dependency-based SMT approaches, our
system feeds dependency-structure snippets into a
grammar-based generator, and determines target lan-
guage ordering by applying n-gram and distortion
models after grammar-based generation. The goal of
this ordering model is thus not foremost to reflect the
ordering of the reference translations, but to improve
the grammaticality of translations.
Since our system uses standard SMT techniques
to learn about correct lexical choice and idiomatic
expressions, it allows us to investigate the contri-
bution of grammar-based generation to dependency-
based SMT2. In an experimental evaluation on the
test-set that was used in Koehn et al (2003) we
show that for examples that are in coverage of
the grammar-based system, we can achieve state-
of-the-art quality on n-gram based evaluation mea-
sures. To discern the factors of grammaticality
and translational adequacy, we conducted a man-
ual evaluation on 500 in-coverage and 500 out-of-
coverage examples. This showed that an incorpo-
ration of a grammar-based generator into an SMT
framework provides improved grammaticality over
phrase-based SMT on in-coverage examples. Since
in our system it is determinable whether an example
is in-coverage, this opens the possibility for a hy-
brid system that achieves improved grammaticality
at state-of-the-art translation quality.
2A comparison of the approaches of Quirk et al (2005) and
Menezes and Richardson (2001) with respect to ordering mod-
els is difficult because they differ from each other in their statis-
tical and dependency-tree alignment models.
2 Extracting F-Structure Snippets
Our method for extracting transfer rules for depen-
dency structure snippets operates on the paired sen-
tences of a sentence-aligned bilingual corpus. Sim-
ilar to phrase-based SMT, our approach starts with
an improved word-alignment that is created by in-
tersecting alignment matrices for both translation di-
rections, and refining the intersection alignment by
adding directly adjacent alignment points, and align-
ment points that align previously unaligned words
(see Och et al (1999)). Next, source and target sen-
tences are parsed using source and target LFG gram-
mars to produce a set of possible f(unctional) de-
pendency structures for each side (see Riezler et al
(2002) for the English grammar and parser; Butt et
al. (2002) for German). The two f-structures that
most preserve dependencies are selected for further
consideration. Selecting the most similar instead of
the most probable f-structures is advantageous for
rule induction since it provides for higher cover-
age with simpler rules. In the third step, the many-
to-many word alignment created in the first step is
used to define many-to-many correspondences be-
tween the substructures of the f-structures selected
in the second step. The parsing process maintains
an association between words in the string and par-
ticular predicate features in the f-structure, and thus
the predicates on the two sides are implicitly linked
by virtue of the original word alignment. The word
alignment is extended to f-structures by setting into
correspondence the f-structure units that immedi-
ately contain linked predicates. These f-structure
correspondences are the basis for hypothesizing can-
didate transfer rules.
To illustrate, suppose our corpus contains the fol-
lowing aligned sentences (this example is taken from
our experiments on German-to-English translation):
Dafu?r bin ich zutiefst dankbar.
I have a deep appreciation for that.
Suppose further that we have created the many-to-
many bi-directional word alignment
Dafu?r{6 7} bin{2} ich{1} zutiefst{3 4 5}
dankbar{5}
indicating for example that Dafu?r is aligned with
words 6 and 7 of the English sentence (for and that).
249
??
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
PRED sein
SUBJ
[
PRED ich
]
XCOMP
?
?
?
?
?
PRED dankbar
ADJ
?
?
?
?
?
[
PRED zutiefst
]
[
PRED dafu?r
]
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
PRED have
SUBJ
[
PRED I
]
OBJ
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
PRED appreciation
SPEC
[
PRED a
]
ADJ
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
[
PRED deep
]
?
?
PRED for
OBJ
[
PRED that
]
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Figure 1: F-structure alignment for induction of German-to-English transfer rules.
This results in the links between the predicates of the
source and target f-structures shown in Fig. 1.
From these source-target f-structure alignments
transfer rules are extracted in two steps. In the first
step, primitive transfer rules are extracted directly
from the alignment of f-structure units. These in-
clude simple rules for mapping lexical predicates
such as:
PRED(%X1, ich) ==> PRED(%X1, I)
and somewhat more complicated rules for mapping
local f-structure configurations. For example, the
rule shown below is derived from the alignment of
the outermost f-structures. It maps any f-structure
whose pred is sein to an f-structure with pred have,
and in addition interprets the subj-to-subj link as an
indication to map the subject of a source with this
predicate into the subject of the target and the xcomp
of the source into the object of the target. Features
denoting number, person, type, etc. are not shown;
variables %X denote f-structure values.
PRED(%X1,sein) PRED(%X1,have)
SUBJ(%X1,%X2) ==> SUBJ(%X1,%X2)
XCOMP(%X1,%X3) OBJ(%X1,%X3)
The following rule shows how a single source f-
structure can be mapped to a local configuration of
several units on the target side, in this case the sin-
gle f-structure headed by dafu?r into one that corre-
sponds to an English preposition+object f-structure.
PRED(%X1,for)
PRED(%X1, dafu?r) ==> OBJ(%X1,%X2)
PRED(%X2,that)
Transfer rules are required to only operate on con-
tiguous units of the f-structure that are consistent
with the word alignment. This transfer contiguity
constraint states that
1. source and target f-structures are each con-
nected.
2. f-structures in the transfer source can only be
aligned with f-structures in the transfer target,
and vice versa.
This constraint on f-structures is analogous to the
constraint on contiguous and alignment-consistent
phrases employed in phrase-based SMT. It prevents
the extraction of a transfer rule that would trans-
late dankbar directly into appreciation since appre-
ciation is aligned also to zutiefst and its f-structure
would also have to be included in the transfer. Thus,
the primitive transfer rule for these predicates must
be:
PRED(%X1,dankbar) PRED(%X1,appr.)
ADJ(%X1,%X2) ==> SPEC(%X1,%X2)
in set(%X3,%X2) PRED(%X2,a)
PRED(%X3,zutiefst) ADJ(%X1,%X3)
in set(%X4,%X3)
PRED(%X4,deep)
In the second step, rules for more complex map-
pings are created by combining primitive transfer
rules that are adjacent in the source and target f-
structures. For instance, we can combine the prim-
itive transfer rule that maps sein to have with the
primitive transfer rule that maps ich to I to produce
the complex transfer rule:
PRED(%X1,sein) PRED(%X1,have)
SUBJ(%X1,%X2) ==> SUBJ(%X1,%X2)
PRED(%X2,ich) PRED(%X2,I)
XCOMP(%X1,%X3) OBJ(%X1,%X3)
In the worst case, there can be an exponential
number of combinations of primitive transfer rules,
so we only allow at most three primitive transfer
rules to be combined. This produces O(n2) trans-
250
fer rules in the worst case, where n is the number of
f-structures in the source.
Other points where linguistic information comes
into play is in morphological stemming in f-
structures, and in the optional filtering of f-structure
phrases based on consistency of linguistic types. For
example, the extraction of a phrase-pair that trans-
lates zutiefst dankbar into a deep appreciation is
valid in the string-based world, but would be pre-
vented in the f-structure world because of the incom-
patibility of the types A and N for adjectival dankbar
and nominal appreciation. Similarly, a transfer rule
translating sein to have could be dispreferred be-
cause of a mismatch in the the verbal types V/A and
V/N. However, the transfer of sein zutiefst dankbar
to have a deep appreciation is licensed by compati-
ble head types V.
3 Parsing-Transfer-Generation
We use LFG grammars, producing c(onstituent)-
structures (trees) and f(unctional)-structures (at-
tribute value matrices) as output, for parsing source
and target text (Riezler et al, 2002; Butt et al, 2002).
To increase robustness, the standard grammar is aug-
mented with a FRAGMENT grammar. This allows
sentences that are outside the scope of the standard
grammar to be parsed as well-formed chunks speci-
fied by the grammar, with unparsable tokens possi-
bly interspersed. The correct parse is determined by
a fewest-chunk method.
Transfer converts source into a target f-structures
by non-deterministically applying all of the induced
transfer rules in parallel. Each fact in the German f-
structure must be transferred by exactly one trans-
fer rule. For robustness a default rule is included
that transfers any fact as itself. Similar to parsing,
transfer works on a chart. The chart has an edge for
each combination of facts that have been transferred.
When the chart is complete, the outputs of the trans-
fer rules are unified to make sure they are consistent
(for instance, that the transfer rules did not produce
two determiners for the same noun). Selection of
the most probable transfer output is done by beam-
decoding on the transfer chart.
LFG grammars can be used bidirectionally for
parsing and generation, thus the existing English
grammar used for parsing the training data can
also be used for generation of English translations.
For in-coverage examples, the grammar specifies c-
structures that differ in linear precedence of sub-
trees for a given f-structure, and realizes the termi-
nal yield according to morphological rules. In order
to guarantee non-empty output for the overall trans-
lation system, the generation component has to be
fault-tolerant in cases where the transfer system op-
erates on a fragmentary parse, or produces non-valid
f-structures from valid input f-structures. For gener-
ation from unknown predicates, a default morphol-
ogy is used to inflect the source stem correctly for
English. For generation from unknown structures, a
default grammar is used that allows any attribute to
be generated in any order as any category, with op-
timality marks set so as to prefer the standard gram-
mar over the default grammar.
4 Statistical Models and Training
The statistical components of our system are mod-
eled on the statistical components of the phrase-
based system Pharaoh, described in Koehn et al
(2003) and Koehn (2004). Pharaoh integrates the
following 8 statistical models: relative frequency of
phrase translations in source-to-target and target-
to-source direction, lexical weighting in source-to-
target and target-to-source direction, phrase count,
language model probability, word count, and distor-
tion probability.
Correspondingly, our system computes the fol-
lowing statistics for each translation:
1. log-probability of source-to-target transfer
rules, where the probability r(e|f) of a rule
that transfers source snippet f into target snip-
pet e is estimated by the relative frequency
r(e|f) = count(f ==> e)?
e? count(f ==> e?)
2. log-probability of target-to-source rules
3. log-probability of lexical translations from
source to target snippets, estimated from
Viterbi alignments a? between source word po-
sitions i = 1, . . . , n and target word positions
j = 1, . . . ,m for stems fi and ej in snippets
f and e with relative word translation frequen-
251
cies t(ej |fi):
l(e|f) =
?
j
1
|{i|(i, j) ? a?}|
?
(i,j)?a?
t(ej |fi)
4. log-probability of lexical translations from tar-
get to source snippets
5. number of transfer rules
6. number of transfer rules with frequency 1
7. number of default transfer rules (translating
source features into themselves)
8. log-probability of strings of predicates from
root to frontier of target f-structure, estimated
from predicate trigrams in English f-structures
9. number of predicates in target f-structure
10. number of constituent movements during gen-
eration based on the original order of the head
predicates of the constituents (for example,
AP[2] BP[3] CP[1] counts as two move-
ments since the head predicate of CP moved
from the first position to the third position)
11. number of generation repairs
12. log-probability of target string as computed by
trigram language model
13. number of words in target string
These statistics are combined into a log-linear model
whose parameters are adjusted by minimum error
rate training (Och, 2003).
5 Experimental Evaluation
The setup for our experimental comparison is
German-to-English translation on the Europarl par-
allel data set3. For quick experimental turnaround
we restricted our attention to sentences with 5 to
15 words, resulting in a training set of 163,141 sen-
tences and a development set of 1967 sentences. Fi-
nal results are reported on the test set of 1,755 sen-
tences of length 5-15 that was used in Koehn et al
(2003). To extract transfer rules, an improved bidi-
rectional word alignment was created for the train-
ing data from the word alignment of IBM model 4 as
3http://people.csail.mit.edu/koehn/publications/europarl/
implemented by GIZA++ (Och et al, 1999). Train-
ing sentences were parsed using German and En-
glish LFG grammars (Riezler et al, 2002; Butt et
al., 2002). The grammars obtain 100% coverage on
unseen data. 80% are parsed as full parses; 20% re-
ceive FRAGMENT parses. Around 700,000 transfer
rules were extracted from f-structures pairs chosen
according to a dependency similarity measure. For
language modeling, we used the trigram model of
Stolcke (2002).
When applied to translating unseen text, the sys-
tem operates on n-best lists of parses, transferred
f-structures, and generated strings. For minimum-
error-rate training on the development set, and for
translating the test set, we considered 1 German
parse for each source sentence, 10 transferred f-
structures for each source parse, and 1,000 gener-
ated strings for each transferred f-structure. Selec-
tion of most probable translations proceeds in two
steps: First, the most probable transferred f-structure
is computed by a beam search on the transfer chart
using the first 10 features described above. These
features include tests on source and target f-structure
snippets related via transfer rules (features 1-7) as
well as language model and distortion features on
the target c- and f-structures (features 8-10). In our
experiments, the beam size was set to 20 hypotheses.
The second step is based on features 11-13, which
are computed on the strings that were actually gen-
erated from the selected n-best f-structures.
We compared our system to IBM model 4 as pro-
duced by GIZA++ (Och et al, 1999) and a phrase-
based SMT model as provided by Pharaoh (2004).
The same improved word alignment matrix and the
same training data were used for phrase-extraction
for phrase-based SMT as well as for transfer-rule
extraction for LFG-based SMT. Minimum-error-rate
training was done using Koehn?s implementation of
Och?s (2003) minimum-error-rate model. To train
the weights for phrase-based SMT we used the first
500 sentences of the development set; the weights of
the LFG-based translator were adjusted on the 750
sentences that were in coverage of our grammars.
For automatic evaluation, we use the NIST metric
(Doddington, 2002) combined with the approximate
randomization test (Noreen, 1989), providing the de-
sired combination of a sensitive evaluation metric
and an accurate significance test (see Riezler and
252
Table 1: NIST scores on test set for IBM model 4 (M4),
phrase-based SMT (P), and the LFG-based SMT (LFG) on the
full test set and on in-coverage examples for LFG. Results in the
same row that are not statistically significant from each other are
marked with a ?.
M4 LFG P
in-coverage 5.13 *5.82 *5.99
full test set *5.57 *5.62 6.40
Table 2: Preference ratings of two human judges for transla-
tions of phrase-based SMT (P) or LFG-based SMT (LFG) under
criteria of fluency/grammaticality and translational/semantic
adequacy on 500 in-coverage examples. Ratings by judge 1 are
shown in rows, for judge 2 in columns. Agreed-on examples are
shown in boldface in the diagonals.
adequacy grammaticality
j1\j2 P LFG equal P LFG equal
P 48 8 7 36 2 9
LFG 10 105 18 6 113 17
equal 53 60 192 51 44 223
Maxwell (2005)). In order to avoid a random as-
sessment of statistical significance in our three-fold
pairwise comparison, we reduce the per-comparison
significance level to 0.01 so as to achieve a standard
experimentwise significance level of 0.05 (see Co-
hen (1995)). Table 1 shows results for IBM model
4, phrase-based SMT, and LFG-based SMT, where
examples that are in coverage of the LFG-based sys-
tems are evaluated separately. Out of the 1,755 sen-
tences of the test set, 44% were in coverage of the
LFG-grammars; for 51% the system had to resort to
the FRAGMENT technique for parsing and/or repair
techniques in generation; in 5% of the cases our sys-
tem timed out. Since our grammars are not set up
with punctuation in mind, punctuation is ignored in
all evaluations reported below.
For in-coverage examples, the difference between
NIST scores for the LFG system and the phrase-
based system is statistically not significant. On the
full set of test examples, the suboptimal quality on
out-of-coverage examples overwhelms the quality
achieved on in-coverage examples, resulting in a sta-
tistically not significant result difference in NIST
scores between the LFG system and IBM model 4.
In order to discern the factors of grammaticality
and translational adequacy, we conducted a manual
evaluation on randomly selected 500 examples that
were in coverage of the grammar-based generator.
Two independent human judges were presented with
the source sentence, and the output of the phrase-
based and LFG-based systems in a blind test. This
was achieved by displaying the system outputs in
random order. The judges were asked to indicate a
preference for one system translation over the other,
or whether they thought them to be of equal quality.
These questions had to be answered separately un-
der the criteria of grammaticality/fluency and trans-
lational/semantic adequacy. As shown in Table 2,
both judges express a preference for the LFG system
over the phrase-based system for both adequacy and
grammaticality. If we just look at sentences where
judges agree, we see a net improvement on trans-
lational adequacy of 57 sentences, which is an im-
provement of 11.4% over the 500 sentences. If this
were part of a hybrid system, this would amount to a
5% overall improvement in translational adequacy.
Similarly we see a net improvement on grammat-
icality of 77 sentences, which is an improvement
of 15.4% over the 500 sentences or 6.7% overall
in a hybrid system. Result differences on agreed-
on ratings are statistically significant, where sig-
nificance was assessed by approximate randomiza-
tion via stratified shuffling of the preferences be-
tween the systems (Noreen, 1989). Examples from
the manual evaluation are shown in Fig. 2.
Along the same lines, a further manual evaluation
was conducted on 500 randomly selected examples
that were out of coverage of the LFG-based gram-
mars. Across the combined set of 1,000 in-coverage
and out-of-coverage sentences, this resulted in an
agreed-on preference for the phrase-based system
in 204 cases and for the LFG-based system in 158
cases under the measure of translational adequacy.
Under the grammaticality measure the phrase-based
system was preferred by both judges in 157 cases
and the LFG-based system in 136 cases.
6 Discussion
The above presented evaluation of the LFG-based
translator shows promising results for examples that
are in coverage of the employed LFG grammars.
However, a back-off to robustness techniques in
parsing and/or generation results in a considerable
253
(1) src: in diesem fall werde ich meine verantwortung wahrnehmen
ref: then i will exercise my responsibility
LFG: in this case i accept my responsibility
P: in this case i shall my responsibilities
(2) src: die politische stabilita?t ha?ngt ab von der besserung der lebensbedingungen
ref: political stability depends upon the improvement of living conditions
LFG: the political stability hinges on the recovery the conditions
P: the political stability is rejects the recovery of the living conditions
(3) src: und schlie?lich mu? dieser agentur eine kritische haltung gegenu?ber der kommission selbst erlaubt sein
ref: moreover the agency must be able to criticise the commission itself
LFG: and even to the commission a critical stance must finally be allowed this agency
P: finally this is a critical attitude towards the commission itself to be agency
(4) src: nach der ratifizierung werden co2 emissionen ihren preis haben
ref: after ratification co2 emission will have a price tag
LFG: carbon dioxide emissions have its price following the ratification
P: after the ratification co2 emissions are a price
(5) src: die lebensmittel mu?ssen die sichere erna?hrung des menschen gewa?hrleisten
ref: man?s food must be safe to eat
LFG: food must guarantee the safe nutrition of the people
P: the people of the nutrition safe food must guarantee
(6) src: was wir morgen beschlie?en werden ist letztlich material fu?r das vermittlungsverfahren
ref: whatever we agree tomorrow will ultimately have to go into the conciliation procedure
LFG: one tomorrow we approved what is ultimately material for the conciliation procedure
P: what we decide tomorrow is ultimately material for the conciliation procedure
(7) src: die verwaltung mu? ku?nftig schneller reagieren ko?nnen
ref: in future the administration must be able to react more quickly
LFG: more in future the administration must be able to react
P: the administration must be able to react more quickly
(8) src: das ist jetzt u?ber 40 jahre her
ref: that was over 40 years ago
LFG: on 40 years ago it is now
P: that is now over 40 years ago
(9) src: das ist schon eine seltsame vorstellung von gleichheit
ref: a strange notion of equality
LFG: equality that is even a strange idea
P: this is already a strange idea of equality
(10) src: frau pra?sidentin ich beglu?ckwu?nsche herrn nicholson zu seinem ausgezeichneten bericht
ref: madam president i congratulate mr nicholson on his excellent report
LFG: madam president i congratulate mister nicholson on his report excellented
P: madam president i congratulate mr nicholson for his excellent report
Figure 2: Examples from manual evaluation: Preference for LFG-based system (LFG) over phrase-based system (P) under both
adequacy and grammaticality (ex 1-5), preference of phrased-based system over LFG (6-10) , together with source (src) sentences
and human reference (ref) translations. All ratings are agreed on by both judges.
loss in translation quality. The high percentage of
examples that fall out of coverage of the LFG-
based system can partially be explained by the ac-
cumulation of errors in parsing the training data
where source and target language parser each pro-
duce FRAGMENT parses in 20% of the cases. To-
gether with errors in rule extraction, this results in
a large number ill-formed transfer rules that force
the generator to back-off to robustness techniques.
In applying the parse-transfer-generation pipeline to
translating unseen text, parsing errors can cause er-
roneous transfer, which can result in generation er-
rors. Similar effects can be observed for errors in
translating in-coverage examples. Here disambigua-
tion errors in parsing and transfer propagate through
the system, producing suboptimal translations. An
error analysis on 100 suboptimal in-coverage exam-
ples from the development set showed that 69 sub-
optimal translations were due to transfer errors, 10
of which were due to errors in parsing.
The discrepancy between NIST scores and man-
ual preference rankings can be explained on the one
hand by the suboptimal integration of transfer and
generation in our system, making it infeasible to
work with large n-best lists in training and applica-
tion. Moreover, despite our use of minimum-error-
254
rate training and n-gram language models, our sys-
tem cannot be adjusted to maximize n-gram scores
on reference translation in the same way as phrase-
based systems since statistical ordering models are
employed in our framework after grammar-based
generation, thus giving preference to grammatical-
ity over similarity to reference translations.
7 Conclusion
We presented an SMT model that marries phrase-
based SMT with traditional grammar-based MT
by incorporating a grammar-based generator into a
dependency-based SMT system. Under the NIST
measure, we achieve results in the range of the
state-of-the-art phrase-based system of Koehn et
al. (2003) for in-coverage examples of the LFG-
based system. A manual evaluation of a large set
of such examples shows that on in-coverage ex-
amples our system achieves significant improve-
ments in grammaticality and also translational ad-
equacy over the phrase-based system. Fortunately,
it is determinable when our system is in-coverage,
which opens the possibility for a hybrid system that
achieves improved grammaticality at state-of-the-art
translation quality. Future work thus will concen-
trate on improvements of in-coverage translations
e.g., by stochastic generation. Furthermore, we in-
tend to apply our system to other language pairs and
larger data sets.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sabine Blum for her invalu-
able help with the manual evaluation.
References
Miriam Butt, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King, Hiroshi Ma-
suichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002. The parallel grammar
project. COLING?02, Workshop on Grammar Engineering
and Evaluation.
Eugene Charniak, Kevin Knight, and Kenji Yamada. 2003.
Syntax-based language models for statistical machine trans-
lation. MT Summit IX.
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based model for
statistical machine translation. ACL?05.
Paul R. Cohen. 1995. Empirical Methods for Artificial Intelli-
gence. The MIT Press.
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kucerova. 2005.
Clause restructuring for statistical machine translation.
ACL?05.
Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer. 2005. Machine translation
using probabilistic synchronous dependency insertion gram-
mars. ACL?05.
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence statis-
tics. ARPA Workshop on Human Language Technology.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sta-
tistical phrase-based translation. HLT-NAACL?03.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A beam search decoder for
phrase-based statistical machine translation models. User
manual. Technical report, USC ISI.
Dekang Lin. 2004. A path-based transfer model for statistical
machine translation. COLING?04.
Arul Menezes and Stephen D. Richardson. 2001. A best-
first alignment algorithm for automatic extraction of transfer-
mappings from bilingual corpora. Workshop on Data-
Driven Machine Translation.
Eric W. Noreen. 1989. Computer Intensive Methods for Testing
Hypotheses. An Introduction. Wiley.
Franz Josef Och, Christoph Tillmann, and Hermann Ney. 1999.
Improved alignment models for statistical machine transla-
tion. EMNLP?99.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in statisti-
cal machine translation. HLT-NAACL?03.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing
Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation. Technical Report IBM RC22176 (W0190-
022).
Chris Quirk, Arul Menezes, and Colin Cherry. 2005. De-
pendency treelet translation: Syntactically informed phrasal
SMT. ACL?05.
Stefan Riezler and John Maxwell. 2005. On some pitfalls in
automatic evaluation and significance testing for mt. ACL-
05 Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures
for MT and/or Summarization.
Stefan Riezler, Tracy H. King, Ronald M. Kaplan, Richard
Crouch, John T. Maxwell, and Mark Johnson. 2002. Parsing
the Wall Street Journal using a Lexical-Functional Grammar
and discriminative estimation techniques. ACL?02.
Stefan Riezler, Tracy H. King, Richard Crouch, and Annie Za-
enen. 2003. Statistical sentence condensation using am-
biguity packing and stochastic disambiguation methods for
lexical-functional grammar. HLT-NAACL?03.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language mod-
eling toolkit. International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing.
Fei Xia and Michael McCord. 2004. Improving a statistical mt
system with automatically learned rewrite patterns. COL-
ING?04.
255
