Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 189?192,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
BioEx: A Novel User-Interface that Accesses Images from Abstract Sentences 
  
Hong Yu Minsuk Lee 
Department of Biomedical Informatics Department of Biomedical Informatics 
Columbia University Columbia University 
New York, NY 10032 New York, NY 10032 
Hy52@columbia.edu minsuk.lee@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
Images (i.e., figures or tables) are important ex-
perimental results that are typically reported in 
bioscience full-text articles. Biologists need to 
access the images to validate research facts and 
to formulate or to test novel research hypothe-
ses. We designed, evaluated, and implemented a 
novel user-interface, BioEx, that allows biolo-
gists to access images that appear in a full-text 
article directly from the abstract of the article.  
1 Introduction 
The rapid growth of full-text electronic publica-
tions in bioscience has made it necessary to cre-
ate information systems that allow biologists to 
navigate and search efficiently among them. Im-
ages are usually important experimental results 
that are typically reported in full-text bioscience 
articles. An image is worth a thousand words. 
Biologists need to access image data to validate 
research facts and to formulate or to test novel 
research hypotheses. Additionally, full-text arti-
cles are frequently long and typically incorpo-
rate multiple images. For example, we have 
found an average of 5.2 images per biological 
article in the journal Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences (PNAS). Biologists need to 
spend significant amount of time to read the full-
text articles in order to access specific images.  
 
 
Figure 1. BioEx user-interface (as shown in A) is built upon the PubMed user-interface. Images 
are shown as thumbnails at the bottom of a PubMed abstract. Images include both Figure and Ta-
ble. When a mouse (as shown as a hand in A) moves to ?Fig x?, it shows the associated abstract 
sentence(s) that link to the original figure that appears in the full-text articles. For example, ?Fig 
1? links to image B. ?Related Text? provides links to other associated texts that correspond to the 
image besides its image caption. 
 
189
In order to facilitate biologists? access to images, 
we designed, evaluated, and implemented a 
novel user-interface, BioEx, that allows biolo-
gists to access images that appear in a full-text 
article directly from the abstract of the article. In 
the following, we will describe the BioEx user-
interface, evaluation, and the implementation.  
 
2. Data Collection 
 
We hypothesize that images reported in a full-
text article can be summarized by sentences in 
the abstract. To test this hypothesis, we ran-
domly selected a total of 329 biological articles 
that are recently published in leading journals 
Cell (104), EMBO (72), Journal of Biological 
Chemistry (92), and Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences (PNAS) (61). For each arti-
cle, we e-mailed the corresponding author and 
invited him or her to identify abstract sentences 
that summarize image content in that article. In 
order to eliminate the errors that may be intro-
duced by sentence boundary ambiguity, we 
manually segmented the abstracts into sentences 
and sent the sentences as the email attachments.  
 
A total of 119 biologists from 19 countries par-
ticipated voluntarily the annotation to identify 
abstract sentences that summarize figures or ta-
bles from 114 articles (39 Cells, 29 EMBO, 30 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, and 16 PNAS), 
a collection that is 34.7% of the total articles we 
requested. The responding biologists included 
the corresponding authors to whom we had sent 
emails, as well as the first authors of the articles 
to whom the corresponding authors had for-
warded our emails. None of the biologists or 
authors were compensated.  
 
This collection of 114 full-text articles incorpo-
rates 742 images and 826 abstract sentences. 
The average number of images per document is 
6.5?1.5 and the average number of sentences per 
abstract is 7.2?1.9. Our data show that 87.9% 
images correspond to abstract sentences and 
66.5% of the abstract sentences correspond to 
images. The data empirically validate our hy-
pothesis that image content can be summarized 
by abstract sentences. Since an abstract is a sum-
mary of a full-text article, our results also em-
pirically validate that images are important 
elements in full-text articles. This collection of 
114 annotated articles was then used as the cor-
pus to evaluate automatic mapping of abstract 
sentences to images using the natural language 
processing approaches described in Section 4. 
 
3. BioEx User-Interface Evaluation 
 
In order to evaluate whether biologists would 
prefer to accessing images from abstract sen-
tence links, we designed BioEx (Figure 1) and 
two other baseline user-interfaces. BioEx is built 
upon the PubMed user-interface except that im-
ages can be accessed by the abstract sentences. 
We chose the PubMed user-interface because it 
has more than 70 million hits a month and repre-
sents the most familiar user-interface to biolo-
gists. Other information systems have also 
adapted the PubMed user-interface for similar 
reasons (Smalheiser and Swanson 1998; Hearst 
2003). The two other baseline user-interfaces 
were the original PubMed user-interface and a 
modified version of the SummaryPlus user-
interface, in which the images are listed as dis-
jointed thumbnails rather than related by abstract 
sentences.  
 
We asked the 119 biologists who linked sen-
tences to images in their publications to assign a 
label to each of the three user-interfaces to be 
?My favorite?, ?My second favorite?, or ?My 
least favorite?. We designed the evaluation so 
that a user-interface?s label is independent of the 
choices of the other two user-interfaces.  
 
A total of 41 or 34.5% of the biologists com-
pleted the evaluation in which 36 or 87.8% of 
the total 41 biologists judged BioEx as ?My fa-
vorite?. One biologist judged all three user-
interfaces to be ?My favorite?. Five other biolo-
gists considered SummaryPlus as ?My favorite?, 
two of whom (or 4.9% of the total 41 biologists) 
judged BioEx to be ?My least favorite?.  
 
4. Linking Abstract Sentences to Images 
 
We have explored hierarchical clustering algo-
rithms to cluster abstract sentences and image 
captions based on lexical similarities.  
Hierarchical clustering algorithms are well-
established algorithms that are widely used in 
190
many other research areas including biological 
sequence alignment (Corpet 1988), gene expres-
sion analyses (Herrero et al 2001), and topic 
detection (Lee et al 2006). The algorithm starts 
with a set of text (i.e., abstract sentences or im-
age captions). Each sentence or image caption 
represents a document that needs to be clustered. 
The algorithm identifies pair-wise document 
similarity based on the TF*IDF weighted cosine 
similarity. It then merges the two documents 
with the highest similarity into one cluster. It 
then re-evaluates pairs of documents/clusters; 
two clusters can be merged if the average simi-
larity across all pairs of documents within the 
two clusters exceeds a predefined threshold.  In 
presence of multiple clusters that can be merged 
at any time, the pair of clusters with the highest 
similarity is always preferred. 
In our application, if abstract sentences belong 
to the same cluster that includes images cap-
tions, the abstract sentences summarize the im-
age content of the corresponded images. The 
clustering model is advantageous over other 
models in that the flexibility of clustering meth-
ods allows ?many-to-many? mappings. That is a 
sentence in the abstract can be mapped to zero, 
one or more than one images and an image can 
be mapped to zero, one or more than one ab-
stract sentences.  
 
We explored different learning features, weights 
and clustering algorithms to link abstract sen-
tences to images. We applied the TF*IDF 
weighted cosine similarity for document cluster-
ing. We treat each sentence or image caption as 
a ?document? and the features are bag-of-words.  
 
We tested three different methods to obtain the 
IDF value for each word feature: 1) 
IDF(abstract+caption): the IDF values were 
calculated from the pool of abstract sentences 
and image captions; 2) IDF(full-text): the IDF 
values were calculated from all sentences in the 
full-text article; and 3) 
IDF(abstract)::IDF(caption): two sets of IDF 
values were obtained. For word features that 
appear in abstracts, the IDF values were calcu-
lated from the abstract sentences. For words that 
appear in image captions, the IDF values were 
calculated from the image captions.  
 
The positions of abstract sentences or images are 
important. The chance that two abstract sen-
tences link to an image decreases when the dis-
tance between two abstract sentences increases. 
For example, two consecutive abstract sentences 
have a higher probability to link to one image 
than two abstract sentences that are far apart. 
Two consecutive images have a higher chance to 
link to the same abstract sentence than two im-
ages that are separated by many other images. 
Additionally, sentence positions in an abstract 
seem to correspond to image positions. For ex-
ample, the first sentences in an abstract have 
higher probabilities than the last sentences to 
link to the first image. 
  
To integrate such ?neighboring effect? into our 
existing hierarchical clustering algorithms, we 
modified the TF*IDF weighted cosine similar-
ity. The TF*IDF weighted cosine similarity for a 
pair of documents i and j is Sim(i,j), and the final 
similarity metric W(i,j) is: 
( ) ))//(1(*),(, jjii TPTPabsjiSimjiW ??=
                                 
1. If i and j are both abstract sentences,   
Ti=Tj=total number of abstract sentences; and 
Pi and Pj represents the positions of sentences i 
and j in the abstract.   
2. If i and j are both image captions, 
Ti=Tj=total number of images that appear in a 
full-text article; and Pi and Pj represents the 
positions of images i and j in the full-text arti-
cle. 
3.  If i and j are an abstract sentence and an 
image caption, respectively, Ti=total number 
of abstract sentences and Tj=total number of 
images that appear in a full-text article; and Pi 
and Pj represent the positions of abstract sen-
tence i and image j.    
Finally, we explored three clustering strategies; 
namely, per-image, per-abstract sentence, and 
mix. 
The Per-image strategy clusters each image 
caption with all abstract sentences. The image is 
191
assigned to (an) abstract sentence(s) if it belongs 
to the same cluster. This method values features 
in abstract sentences more than image captions 
because the decision that an image belongs to (a) 
sentence(s) depends upon the features from all 
abstract sentences and the examined image cap-
tion. The features from other image captions do 
not play a role in the clustering methodology.  
The Per-abstract-sentence strategy takes each 
abstract sentence and clusters it with all image 
captions that appear in a full-text article. Images 
are assigned to the sentence if they belong to the 
same cluster. This method values features in im-
age captions higher than the features in abstract 
sentences because the decision that an abstract 
sentence belongs to image(s) depends upon the 
features from the image captions and the exam-
ined abstract sentence. Similar to per-image 
clustering, the features from other abstract sen-
tences do not play a role in the clustering meth-
odology.  
The Mix strategy clusters all image captions 
with all abstract sentences. This method treats 
features in abstract sentences and image captions 
equally. 
5. Results and Conclusions 
Figures 2 - 4 show the results from three differ-
ent combinations of features and algorithms with 
varied TF*IDF thresholds. The default parame-
ters for all these experiments were ?per image?, 
?bag-of-words?, and ?without neighboring 
weight?. 
 
Figure 2 shows that the ?global? IDFs, or the 
IDFs obtained from the full-text article, have a 
much lower performance than ?local? IDFs, or 
IDFs calculated from the abstract sentences and 
image captions. Figure 3 shows that Per-image 
out-performs the other two strategies. The re-
sults suggest that features in abstract sentences 
are more useful than features that reside within 
captions for the task of clustering. Figure 4 
shows that the ?neighboring weighted? approach 
offers significant enhancement over the TF*IDF 
weighted approach. When the recall is 33%, the 
precision of ?neighboring weighted? approach 
increases to 72% from the original 38%, which 
corresponds to a 34% increase. The results 
strongly indicate the importance of the 
?neighboring effect? or positions of additional 
features. When the precision is 100%, the recall 
is 4.6%. We believe BioEx system is applicable 
for real use because a high level of precision is 
the key to BioEx success. 
 
Acknowledgement: The authors thank Dr. Weiqing 
Wang for her contribution to this work. The authors 
also thank Michael Bales, Li Zhou and Eric Silfen, 
and three anonymous reviewers for valuable com-
ments. The authors acknowledge the support of Juve-
nile Diabetes Foundation International (JDRF 6-
2005-835).  
 
References: 
Corpet F (1988) Multiple sequence alignment with hierar-
chical clustering. Nucleic Acids Res 16:10881-10890 
Hearst M (2003) The BioText project. A powerpoint pres-
entation. 
Herrero J, Valencia A, Dopazo J (2001) A hierarchical 
unsupervised growing neural network for clustering gene 
expression patterns. Bioinformatics 17:126-136 
Lee M, Wang W, Yu H (2006) Exploring supervised and 
unsupervised methods to detect topics in Biomedical text. 
BMC Bioinformatics 7:140 
Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR (1998) Using 
ARROWSMITH: a computer-assisted approach to formu-
lating and assessing scientific hypotheses. Comput Meth-
ods Programs Biomed 57:149-153 
 
 
192
