Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 243?246,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Hybrid Approach to Biomedical Named Entity Recognition and  
Semantic Role Labeling 
 
Richard Tzong-Han Tsai 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering 
National Taiwan University 
Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, 115 
thtsai@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we describe our hybrid ap-
proach to two key NLP technologies: 
biomedical named entity recognition 
(Bio-NER) and (Bio-SRL). In Bio-NER, 
our system successfully integrates linguis-
tic features into the CRF framework. In 
addition, we employ web lexicons and 
template-based post-processing to further 
boost its performance. Through these 
broad linguistic features and the nature of 
CRF, our system outperforms state-of-
the-art machine-learning-based systems, 
especially in the recognition of protein 
names (F=78.5%). In Bio-SRL, first, we 
construct a proposition bank on top of the 
popular biomedical GENIA treebank fol-
lowing the PropBank annotation scheme. 
We only annotate the predicate-argument 
structures (PAS?s) of thirty frequently 
used biomedical verbs (predicates) and 
their corresponding arguments. Second, 
we use our proposition bank to train a 
biomedical SRL system, which uses a 
maximum entropy (ME) machine-
learning model. Thirdly, we automatically 
generate argument-type templates, which 
can be used to improve classification of 
biomedical argument roles. Our experi-
mental results show that a newswire Eng-
lish SRL system that achieves an F-score 
of 86.29% in the newswire English do-
main can maintain an F-score of 64.64% 
when ported to the biomedical domain. 
By using our annotated biomedical corpus, 
we can increase that F-score by 22.9%. 
Adding automatically generated template 
features further increases overall F-score 
by 0.47% and adjunct (AM) F-score by 
1.57%, respectively. 
1 Introduction 
The volume of biomedical literature available on 
the Web has experienced unprecedented growth in 
recent years, and demand for efficient methods to 
process this material has increased accordingly. 
Lately, there has been a surge of interest in mining 
biomedical literature. To this end, more and more 
information extraction (IE) systems using natural 
language processing (NLP) technologies have been 
developed for use in the biomedical field. Key 
biomedical IE tasks include named entity (NE) 
recognition (NER), such as the recognition of pro-
tein and gene names; and relation extraction, such 
as the extraction of protein-protein and gene-gene 
interactions. 
NER identifies named entities from natural lan-
guage texts and classifies them into specific classes 
according to a defined ontology or classification. 
In general, biomedical NEs do not follow any no-
menclature and may comprise long compound 
words and short abbreviations. Some NEs contain 
various symbols and other spelling variations. On 
average, an NE has five synonyms (Tsai et al, 
2006a), and it may belong to multiple categories 
intrinsically. Since biomedical language and vo-
243
cabulary are highly complex and evolving rapidly, 
Bio-NER is a very challenging problem, which 
raises a number of difficulties. 
The other main focus of Bio-IE is relation ex-
traction. Most systems only extract the relation 
targets (e.g., proteins, genes) and the verbs repre-
senting those relations, overlooking the many ad-
verbial and prepositional phrases and words that 
describe location, manner, timing, condition, and 
extent. However, the information in such phrases 
may be important for precise definition and clarifi-
cation of complex biological relations. 
This problem can be tackled by using semantic 
role labeling (SRL) because it not only recognizes 
main roles, such as agents and objects, but also 
extracts adjunct roles such as location, manner, 
timing, condition, and extent. (Morarescu et al, 
2005) has demonstrated that full-parsing and SRL 
can improve the performance of relation extraction, 
resulting in an F-score increase of 15% (from 67% 
to 82%). This significant result leads us to surmise 
that SRL may also have potential for relation ex-
traction in the biomedical domain. Unfortunately, 
no SRL system for the biomedical domain exists.  
In this paper, we tackle the problems of both 
biomedical SRL and NER. Our contributions are (1) 
employing web lexicons and template-based post-
processing to boost the performance of Bio-NER; 
(2) constructing a proposition bank on top of the 
popular biomedical GENIA treebank following the 
PropBank annotation scheme and developing a 
Biomedical SRL system. We adapt an SRL system 
trained the World Street Journal (WSJ) corpus to 
the biomedical domain. On adjunct arguments, 
especially those relevant to the biomedical domain, 
the performance is unsatisfactory. We, therefore, 
develop automatically generated templates for 
identifying these arguments. 
2 Biomedical Named Entity Recognition  
Our Bio-NER system uses the CRF model 
(Lafferty et al, 2001), which has proven its effec-
tiveness in several sequence tagging tasks.  
2.1 Features and Post-Processing 
Orthographical Features 
In our experience, ALLCAPS, CAPSMIX, and 
INITCAP are more useful than others. The details 
are listed in (Tsai et al, 2006a). 
Context Features 
Words preceding or following the target word may 
be useful for determining its category. In our ex-
perience, a suitable window size is five. 
Part-of-speech Features 
Part-of-speech information is quite useful for iden-
tifying NEs. Verbs and prepositions usually indi-
cate an NE?s boundaries, whereas nouns not found 
in the dictionary are usually good candidates for 
named entities. Our experience indicates that five 
is also a suitable window size. The MBT POS tag-
ger is used to provide POS information. We trained 
it on GENIA 3.02p and achieved 97.85% accuracy. 
Word Shape Features 
As NEs in the same category may look similar 
(e.g., IL-2 and IL-4), we have to find a simple way 
to normalize all similar words. According to our 
method, capitalized characters are all replaced by 
?A?, digits are all replaced by ?0?, non-English 
characters are replaced by ?_? (underscore), and 
non-capitalized characters are replaced by ?a?. To 
further normalize these words, we reduce consecu-
tive strings of identical characters to one character. 
Affix Features 
Some affixes can provide good clues for classify-
ing named entities (e.g., ?ase?). In our experience, 
an acceptable affix length is 3-5 characters. 
Lexicon Features 
Depending on the quality of a given dictionary, our 
system uses one of two different lexicon features to 
estimate the possibility of a token in a biomedical 
named entity. The first feature determines whether 
a token is part of a multi-word NE in the dictionary, 
while the second feature calculates the minimum 
distance between the given token and a dictionary. 
In our experience, the first feature is effective for a 
dictionary containing high-quality items, for ex-
ample, human-curated protein dictionaries. The 
second feature is effective for a dictionary that has 
a large number of items that are not very accurate, 
for example, web or database lexicons. Details can 
be found in (Tsai et al, 2006a). 
Post-Processing 
We count the number of occurrences of a word x 
appearing in the rightmost position of all NEs in 
each category. Let the maximum occurrence be n, 
244
and the corresponding category be c. The total 
number of occurrences of x in the rightmost posi-
tion of an NE is T; c/T is the consistency rate of x. 
According to our analysis of the training set of the 
JNLPBA 2004 data, 75% of words have a consis-
tency rate of over 95%. We record this 75% of 
words and their associated categories in a table. 
After testing, we crosscheck all the rightmost 
words of NEs found by our system against this ta-
ble. If they match, we overwrite the NE categories 
with those from the table.  
2.2 Experiments and Summary 
We perform 10-fold cross validation on the 
GENIA V3.02 corpus (Kim et al, 2003) to com-
pare our CRF-based system with other biomedical 
NER systems. The experimental results are re-
ported in Table 1. Our system  outperforms other 
systems in protein names by an F-score of at least 
2.6%. For DNA names, our performance is very 
close to that of the best system. 
BioNER System Protein DNA 
Our System (Tsai et al, 2006a) 78.4 66.3 
HMM (Zhou et al, 2004) 75.8 63.3 
Two Phase SVM (Lee et al, 2003) 70.6 66.4 
Table 1. Performance of protein and DNA name 
recognition on the GENIA V3.02 corpus 
We have made every effort to implement a vari-
ety of linguistic features in our system?s CRF 
framework. Thanks to these features and the nature 
of CRF, our system outperforms state-of-the-art 
machine-learning-based systems, especially in the 
recognition of protein names. 
Our system still has difficulty recognizing long, 
complicated NEs and coordinated NEs and distin-
guishing between overlapping NE classes, e.g., 
cell-line and cell-type. This is because biomedical 
texts have complicated sentence structures and in-
volve more expert knowledge than texts from the 
general newswire domain. Since pure machine 
learning approaches cannot model long contextual 
phenomena well due to context window size limi-
tations and data sparseness, we believe that tem-
plate-based methods, which exploit long templates 
containing different levels of linguistic information, 
may be of help. Certain errors, such as incorrect 
boundary identification, are more tolerable if the 
main purpose is to discover relations between NEs 
(Tsai et al, 2006c). We shall exploit more linguis-
tic features, such as composite features and exter-
nal features, in the future. However, machine 
leaning approaches suffer from a serious problem 
of annotation inconsistency, which confuses ma-
chine learning models and makes evaluation diffi-
cult. In order to reduce human annotation effort 
and alleviate the scarcity of available annotated 
corpora, we shall learn from web corpora to de-
velop machine learning techniques in different 
biomedical domains. 
3 Biomedical Semantic Role Labeling 
In this section, we describe the main steps in build-
ing a biomedical SRL system: (1) create semantic 
roles for each biomedical verb; (2) construct a 
biomedical corpus, annotated with verbs and their 
corresponding semantic roles; (3) build an auto-
matic semantic interpretation model, using the an-
notated text as a training corpus for machine 
learning. However, on adjunct arguments, espe-
cially on those highly relevant to the biomedical 
domain, such as AM-LOC (location), the perform-
ance is not satisfactory. We therefore develop a 
template generation method to create templates 
that are used as features for identifying these ar-
gument types. 
3.1 Biomedical Proposition Bank -- BioProp 
Our biomedical proposition bank, BioProp, is 
based on the GENIA Treebank (Yuka et al, 2005), 
which is a 491-abstract corpus annotated with syn-
tactic structures. The semantic annotation in Bio-
Prop is added to the proper constituents in a 
syntactic tree. 
Basically, we adopt the definitions in PropBank 
(Palmer et al, 2005). For the verbs not in Prop-
Bank, such as ?phosphorylate?, we define their 
framesets. Since the annotation is time-consuming, 
we adopt a semi-automatic approach. We adapt an 
SRL system trained on PropBank (Wall Street 
Journal corpus) to the biomedical domain. We first 
use this SRL system to automatically annotate our 
corpus, and then human annotators to double check 
the system?s results. Therefore, human effort is 
greatly reduced. 
3.2 Biomedical SRL System -- SEROW 
245
Following (Punyakanok et al, 2004), we formulate 
SRL as a constituent-by-constituent (C-by-C) tag-
ging problem. We use BioProp to train our bio-
medical SRL system, SEROW (Tsai et al, 2006b), 
which uses a maximum entropy (ME) machine-
learning model. We use the basic features de-
scribed in (Xue & Palmer, 2004). In addition, we 
automatically generate templates which can be 
used to improve classification of biomedical argu-
ment types. The details of SEROW system are de-
scribed in (Tsai et al, 2005) and (Tsai et al, 
2006b). 
3.3 Experiment and Summary 
Our experimental results show that a newswire 
English SRL system that achieves an F-score of 
86.29% can maintain an F-score of 64.64% when 
ported to the biomedical domain. By using SE-
ROW, we can increase that F-score by 22.9%. 
Adding automatically generated template features 
further increases overall F-score by 0.47% and ad-
junct (AM) F-score by 1.57%, respectively.  
4 Conclusion 
NER and SRL are two key topics in biomedical 
NLP. For NER, we find broad linguistic features 
and integrate them into our CRF framework. Our 
system outperforms most machine learning-based 
systems, especially in the recognition of protein 
names (78.4% of F-score). In the future, templates 
that can match long contextual relations and coor-
dinated NEs may be applied to NER post-
processing. Web corpora may also be used to en-
hance unknown NE detection. In Bio-SRL, our 
contribution is threefold. First, we construct a bio-
medical proposition bank, BioProp, on top of the 
popular biomedical GENIA treebank following the 
PropBank annotation scheme. We employ semi-
automatic annotation using an SRL system trained 
on PropBank thereby significantly reducing anno-
tation effort. Second, we construct SEROW, which 
uses BioProp as its training corpus. Thirdly, we 
develop a method to automatically generate tem-
plates that can boost overall performance, espe-
cially on location, manner, adverb, and temporal 
arguments. In the future, we will expand BioProp 
to include more biomedical verbs and will also 
integrate a parser into SEROW. 
References  
Kim, J.-D., Ohta, T., Teteisi, Y., & Tsujii, J. i. (2003). 
Genia corpus - a semantically annotated corpus for 
bio-textmining. Bioinformatics, 19(suppl. 1). 
Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. (2001). Condi-
tional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. Paper presented 
at the ICML-01. 
Lee, K.-J., Hwang, Y.-S., & Rim, H.-C. (2003). Two 
phase biomedical ne recognition based on svms. Pa-
per presented at the ACL-03 Workshop on Natural 
Language Processing in Biomedicine. 
Morarescu, P., Bejan, C., & Harabagiu, S. (2005). Shal-
low semantics for relation extraction. Paper presented 
at the IJCAI-05. 
Palmer, M., Gildea, D., & Kingsbury, P. (2005). The 
proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic 
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1). 
Punyakanok, V., Roth, D., Yih, W., & Zimak, D. (2004). 
Semantic role labeling via integer linear program-
ming inference. Paper presented at the 20th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-04). 
Tsai, R. T.-H., Chou, W.-C., Wu, S.-H., Sung, T.-Y., 
Hsiang, J., & Hsu, W.-L. (2006a). Integrating lin-
guistic knowledge into a conditional random field 
framework to identify biomedical named entities. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 30(1), 117-128. 
Tsai, R. T.-H., Lin, W.-C. C. Y.-C., Ku, W., Su, Y.-S., 
Sung, T.-Y., & Hsu, W.-L. (2006b). Serow: Adapting 
semantic role labeling for biomedical verbs: An ex-
ponential model coupled with adapting semantic role 
labeling for biomedical verbs: An exponential model 
coupled with automatically generated template fea-
tures. To appear in BioNLP-2006. 
Tsai, R. T.-H., Wu, C.-W., Lin, Y.-C., & Hsu, W.-L. 
(2005). Exploiting full parsing information to label 
semantic roles using an ensemble of me and svm via 
integer linear programming. Paper presented at the 
CoNLL-2005. 
Tsai, R. T.-H., Wu, S.-H., Chou, W.-C., Lin, Y.-C., He, 
D., Hsiang, J., et al (2006c). Various criteria in the 
evaluation of biomedical named entity recognition. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 7(92). 
Xue, N., & Palmer, M. (2004). Calibrating features for 
semantic role labeling. Paper presented at the 
EMNLP 2004. 
Yuka, T., Yakushiji, A., Ohta, T., & Tsujii, J. (2005). 
Syntax annotation for the genia corpus. 
Zhou, G., Zhang, J., Su, J., Shen, D., & Tan, C. (2004). 
Recognizing names in biomedical texts: A machine 
learning approach. Bioinformatics, 20, 1178-1190. 
 
 
246
