Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 73?76,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Early Deletion of Fillers In Processing Conversational Speech
Matthew Lease and Mark Johnson
Brown Laboratory for Linguistic Information Processing (BLLIP)
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
{mlease,mj}@cs.brown.edu
Abstract
This paper evaluates the benefit of deleting fillers
(e.g. you know, like) early in parsing conver-
sational speech. Readability studies have shown
that disfluencies (fillers and speech repairs) may
be deleted from transcripts without compromising
meaning (Jones et al, 2003), and deleting repairs
prior to parsing has been shown to improve its
accuracy (Charniak and Johnson, 2001). We ex-
plore whether this strategy of early deletion is also
beneficial with regard to fillers. Reported exper-
iments measure the effect of early deletion under
in-domain and out-of-domain parser training con-
ditions using a state-of-the-art parser (Charniak,
2000). While early deletion is found to yield only
modest benefit for in-domain parsing, significant
improvement is achieved for out-of-domain adap-
tation. This suggests a potentially broader role for
disfluency modeling in adapting text-based tools
for processing conversational speech.
1 Introduction
This paper evaluates the benefit of deleting fillers
early in parsing conversational speech. We follow
LDC (2004) conventions in using the term filler to
encompass a broad set of vocalized space-fillers that
can introduce syntactic (and semantic) ambiguity.
For example, in the questions
Did you know I do that?
Is it like that one?
colloquial use of fillers, indicated below through use
of commas, can yield alternative readings
Did, you know, I do that?
Is it, like, that one?
Readings of the first example differ in querying lis-
tener knowledge versus speaker action, while read-
ings of the second differ in querying similarity ver-
sus exact match. Though an engaged listener rarely
has difficulty distinguishing between such alterna-
tives, studies show that deleting disfluencies from
transcripts improves readability with no reduction in
reading comprehension (Jones et al, 2003).
The fact that disfluencies can be completely re-
moved without compromising meaning is important.
Earlier work had already made this claim regard-
ing speech repairs1 and argued that there was con-
sequently little value in syntactically analyzing re-
pairs or evaluating our ability to do so (Charniak
and Johnson, 2001). Moreover, this work showed
that collateral damage to parse accuracy caused by
repairs could be averted by deleting them prior to
parsing, and this finding has been confirmed in sub-
sequent studies (Kahn et al, 2005; Harper et al,
2005). But whereas speech repairs have received
significant attention in the parsing literature, fillers
have been relatively neglected. While one study
has shown that the presence of interjection and par-
enthetical constituents in conversational speech re-
duces parse accuracy (Engel et al, 2002), these con-
stituent types are defined to cover both fluent and
disfluent speech phenomena (Taylor, 1996), leaving
the impact of fillers alone unclear.
In our study, disfluency annotations (Taylor,
1995) are leveraged to identify fillers precisely, and
these annotations are merged with treebank syn-
tax. Extending the arguments of Charniak and John-
son with regard to repairs (2001), we argue there
is little value in recovering the syntactic structure
1See (Core and Schubert, 1999) for a prototypical counter-
example that rarely occurs in practice.
73
of fillers, and we relax evaluation metrics accord-
ingly (?3.2). Experiments performed (?3.3) use a
state-of-the-art parser (Charniak, 2000) to study the
impact of early filler deletion under in-domain and
out-of-domain (i.e. adaptation) training conditions.
In terms of adaptation, there is tremendous poten-
tial in applying textual tools and training data to
processing transcribed speech (e.g. machine trans-
lation, information extraction, etc.), and bleaching
speech data to more closely resemble text has been
shown to improve accuracy with some text-based
processing tasks (Rosenfeld et al, 1995). For our
study, a state-of-the-art filler detector (Johnson et al,
2004) is employed to delete fillers prior to parsing.
Results show parse accuracy improves significantly,
suggesting disfluency filtering may have a broad role
in enabling text-based processing of speech data.
2 Disfluency in Brief
In this section we give a brief introduction to disflu-
ency, providing an excerpt from Switchboard (Graff
and Bird, 2000) that demonstrates typical production
of repairs and fillers in conversational speech.
We follow previous work (Shriberg, 1994) in de-
scribing a repair in terms of three parts: the reparan-
dum (the material repaired), the corrected alteration,
and between these an optional interregnum (or edit-
ing term) consisting of one or more fillers. Our no-
tion of fillers encompasses filled pauses (e.g. uh,
um, ah) as well as other vocalized space-fillers
annotated by LDC (Taylor, 1995), such as you
know, i mean, like, so, well, etc. An-
notations shown here are typeset with the following
conventions: fillers are bold, [reparanda] are square-
bracketed, and alterations are underlined.
S1: Uh first um i need to know uh how
do you feel [about] uh about sending uh
an elderly uh family member to a nursing
home
S2: Well of course [it?s] you know it?s one
of the last few things in the world you?d
ever want to do you know unless it?s just
you know really you know uh [for their]
uh you know for their own good
Though disfluencies rarely complicate understand-
ing for an engaged listener, deleting them from tran-
scripts improves readability with no reduction in
reading comprehension (Jones et al, 2003). For au-
tomated analysis of speech data, this means we may
freely explore processing alternatives which delete
disfluencies without compromising meaning.
3 Experiments
This section reports parsing experiments studying
the effect of early deletion under in-domain and out-
of-domain parser training conditions using the Au-
gust 2005 release of the Charniak parser (2000). We
describe data and evaluation metrics used, then pro-
ceed to describe the experiments.
3.1 Data
Conversational speech data was drawn from the
Switchboard corpus (Graff and Bird, 2000), which
annotates disfluency (Taylor, 1995) as well as syn-
tax. Our division of the corpus follows that used
in (Charniak and Johnson, 2001). Speech recognizer
(ASR) output is approximated by removing punctua-
tion, partial words, and capitalization, but we do use
reference words, representing an upperbound condi-
tion of perfect ASR. Likewise, annotated sentence
boundaries are taken to represent oracle boundary
detection. Because fillers are annotated only in
disfluency markup, we perform an automatic tree
transform to merge these two levels of annotation:
each span of contiguous filler words were pruned
from their corresponding tree and then reinserted at
the same position under a flat FILLER constituent,
attached as highly as possible. Transforms were
achieved using TSurgeon2 and Lingua::Treebank3.
For our out-of-domain training condition, the
parser was trained on sections 2-21 of the Wall Street
Journal (WSJ) corpus (Marcus et al, 1993). Punctu-
ation and capitalization were removed to bleach our
our textual training data to more closely resemble
speech (Rosenfeld et al, 1995). We also tried auto-
matically changing numbers, symbols, and abbrevi-
ations in the training text to match how they would
be read (Roark, 2002), but this did not improve ac-
curacy and so is not discussed further.
3.2 Evaluation Metrics
As discussed earlier (?1), Charniak and John-
son (2001) have argued that speech repairs do not
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tsurgeon.shtml
3http://www.cpan.org
74
contribute to meaning and so there is little value
in syntactically analyzing repairs or evaluating our
ability to do so. Consequently, they relaxed stan-
dard PARSEVAL (Black et al, 1991) to treat EDITED
constituents like punctuation: adjacent EDITED con-
stituents are merged, and the internal structure and
attachment of EDITED constituents is not evaluated.
We propose generalizing this approach to disfluency
at large, i.e. fillers as well as repairs. Note that the
details of appropriate evaluation metrics for parsed
speech data is orthogonal to the parsing methods
proposed here: however parsing is performed, we
should avoid wasting metric attention evaluating
syntax of words that do not contribute toward mean-
ing and instead evaluate only how well such words
can be identified.
Relaxed metric treatment of disfluency was
achieved via simple parameterization of the SPar-
seval tool (Harper et al, 2005). SParseval also
has the added benefit of calculating a dependency-
based evaluation alongside PARSEVAL?s bracket-
based measure. The dependency metric performs
syntactic head-matching for each word using a set
of given head percolation rules (derived from Char-
niak?s parser (2000)), and its relaxed formulation
ignores terminals spanned by FILLER and EDITED
constituents. We found this metric offered additional
insights in analyzing some of our results.
3.3 Results
In the first set of experiments, we train the parser on
Switchboard and contrast early deletion of disfluen-
cies (identified by an oracle) versus parsing in the
more usual fashion. Our method for early deletion
generalizes the approach used with repairs in (Char-
niak and Johnson, 2001): contiguous filler and edit
words are deleted from the input strings, the strings
are parsed, and the removed words are reinserted
into the output trees under the appropriate flat con-
stituent, FILLER or EDITED.
Results in Table 1 give F-scores for PARSEVAL
and dependency-based parse accuracy (?3.2), as well
as per-word edit and filler detection accuracy (i.e.
how well the parser does in identifying which termi-
nals should be spanned by EDITED and FILLER con-
stituents when early deletion is not performed). We
see that the parser correctly identifies filler words
with 93.1% f-score, and that early deletion of fillers
Table 1: F-scores on Switchboard when trained in-
domain. LB and Dep refer to relaxed labelled-
bracket and dependency parse metrics (?3.2). Edit
and filler word detection f-scores are also shown.
Edits Fillers Edit F Filler F LB Dep
oracle oracle 100.0 100.0 88.9 88.5
oracle parser 100.0 93.1 87.8 87.9
parser oracle 64.3 100.0 85.0 85.6
parser parser 62.4 94.1 83.9 85.0
(via oracle knowledge) yields only a modest im-
provement in parsing accuracy (87.8% to 88.9%
bracket-based, 87.9% to 88.5% dependency-based).
We conclude from this that for in-domain training,
early deletion of fillers has limited potential to im-
prove parsing accuracy relative to what has been
seen with repairs. It is still worth noting, however,
that the parser does perform better when fillers are
absent, consistent with Engel et al?s findings (2002).
While fillers have been reported to often occur at
major clause boundaries (Shriberg, 1994), suggest-
ing their presence may benefit parsing, we do not
find this to be the case. Results shown for repair de-
tection accuracy and its impact on parsing are con-
sistent with previous work (Charniak and Johnson,
2001; Kahn et al, 2005; Harper et al, 2005).
Our second set of experiments reports the effect
of deleting fillers early when the parser is trained on
text only (WSJ, ?3.1). Our motivation here is to see
if disfluency modeling, particularly filler detection,
can help bleach speech data to more closely resem-
ble text, thereby improving our ability to process it
using text-based methods and training data (Rosen-
feld et al, 1995). Again we contrast standard
parsing with deleting disfluencies early (via oracle
knowledge). Given our particular interest in fillers,
we also report the effect of detecting them via a
state-of-the-art system (Johnson et al, 2004).
Results appear in Table 2. It is worth noting that
since our text-trained parser never produces FILLER
or EDITED constituents, the bracket-based metric
penalizes it for each such constituent appearing in
the gold trees. Similarly, since the dependency
metric ignores terminals occurring under these con-
stituents in the gold trees, the metric penalizes the
parser for producing dependencies for these termi-
75
Table 2: F-scores parsing Switchboard when trained
on WSJ. Edit word detection varies between parser
and oracle, and filler word detection varies between
none, system (Johnson et al, 2004), and oracle.
Filler F, LB, and Dep are defined as in Table 1.
Edits Fillers Filler F LB Dep
oracle oracle 100.0 83.6 81.4
oracle detect 89.3 81.6 80.5
oracle none - 71.8 75.4
none oracle 100.0 76.3 76.7
none detect 74.6 75.9 91.3
none none - 66.8 71.5
nals. Taken together, the two metrics provide a com-
plementary perspective in interpreting results.
The trend observed across metrics and edit detec-
tion conditions shows that early deletion of system-
detected fillers improves parsing accuracy 5-10%.
As seen with in-domain training, early deletion of
repairs is again seen to have a significant effect.
Given that state-of-the-art edit detection performs at
about 80% f-measure (Johnson and Charniak, 2004),
much of the benefit derived here from oracle re-
pair detection should be realizable in practice. The
broader conclusion we draw from these results is
that disfluency modeling has significant potential to
improve text-based processing of speech data.
4 Conclusion
While early deletion of fillers has limited benefit for
in-domain parsing of speech data, it can play an im-
portant role in bleaching speech data for more accu-
rate text-based processing. Alternative methods of
integrating detected filler information, such as parse
reranking (Kahn et al, 2005), also merit investiga-
tion. It will also be important to evaluate the inter-
action with ASR error and sentence boundary de-
tection error. In terms of bleaching, we saw that
even with oracle detection of disfluency, our text-
trained model still significantly under-performed the
in-domain model, indicating additional methods for
bleaching are still needed. We also plan to evaluat-
ing the benefit of disfluency modeling in bleaching
speech data for text-based machine translation.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grants 0121285, LIS9720368,
and IIS0095940, and DARPA GALE contract HR0011-06-2-
0001. We would like to thank Brian Roark, Mary Harper, and
the rest of the JHU PASSED team for its support of this work.
References
E. Charniak and M. Johnson. 2001. Edit detection and parsing
for transcribed speech. In Proc. NAACL, pages 118?126.
E. Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired parser. In
Proc. NAACL, pages 132?139.
M.G. Core and L.K. Schubert. 1999. A syntactic framework
for speech repairs and other disruptions. In Proc. ACL, pages
413?420.
E. Black et al 1991. Procedure for quantitatively comparing
the syntactic coverage of English grammars. In Proc. Work-
shop on Speech and Natural Language, pages 306?311.
D. Engel, E. Charniak, and M. Johnson. 2002. Parsing and
disfluency placement. In Proc. EMNLP, pages 49?54.
D. Graff and S. Bird. 2000. Many uses, many annotations for
large speech corpora: Switchboard and TDT as case studies.
In Proc. LREC, pages 427?433.
M. Harper et al 2005 Johns Hopkins Summer Workshop Final
Report on Parsing and Spoken Structural Event Detection.
J.G. Kahn et al 2005. Effective use of prosody in parsing
conversational speech. In Proc. HLT/EMNLP, 233?240.
M. Johnson and E. Charniak. 2004. A TAG-based noisy chan-
nel model of speech repairs. In Proc. ACL, pages 33?39.
M. Johnson, E. Charniak, and M. Lease. 2004. An improved
model for recognizing disfluencies in conversational speech.
In Proc. Rich Text 2004 Fall Workshop (RT-04F).
D. Jones et al 2003. Measuring the readability of automatic
speech-to-text transcripts. In Proc. Eurospeech, 1585?1588.
Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC). 2004. Simple metadata
annotation specification version 6.2.
M. Marcus et al 1993. Building a large annotated corpus of
English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2): 313?330.
B. Roark. 2002. Markov parsing: Lattice rescoring with a sta-
tistical parser. In Proc. ACL, pages 287?294.
R. Rosenfeld et al 1995. Error analysis and disfluency mod-
eling in the Swichboard domain: 1995 JHU Summer Work-
shop project team report.
E. Shriberg. 1994. Preliminaries to a Theory of Speech Disflu-
encies. Ph.D. thesis, UC Berkeley.
A. Taylor, 1995. Revision of Meteer et al?s Dysfluency Annota-
tion Stylebook for the Switchboard Corpus. LDC.
A. Taylor, 1996. Bracketing Switchboard: An addendum to the
Treebank II Bracketing Guidelines. LDC.
76
