Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 487?494,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unlimited vocabulary speech recognition for agglutinative languages
Mikko Kurimo1, Antti Puurula1, Ebru Arisoy2, Vesa Siivola1,
Teemu Hirsim?ki1, Janne Pylkk?nen1, Tanel Alum?e3, Murat Saraclar2
1 Adaptive Informatics Research Centre, Helsinki University of Technology
P.O.Box 5400, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland
{Mikko.Kurimo,Antti.Puurula,Vesa.Siivola}@tkk.fi
2 Bogazici University, Electrical and Electronics Eng. Dept.
34342 Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
{arisoyeb,murat.saraclar}@boun.edu.tr
3 Laboratory of Phonetics and Speech Technology,
Institute of Cybernetics, Tallinn Technical University, Estonia
tanel.alumae@phon.ioc.ee
Abstract
It is practically impossible to build a
word-based lexicon for speech recogni-
tion in agglutinative languages that would
cover all the relevant words. The prob-
lem is that words are generally built by
concatenating several prefixes and suffixes
to the word roots. Together with com-
pounding and inflections this leads to mil-
lions of different, but still frequent word
forms. Due to inflections, ambiguity and
other phenomena, it is also not trivial to
automatically split the words into mean-
ingful parts. Rule-based morphological
analyzers can perform this splitting, but
due to the handcrafted rules, they also suf-
fer from an out-of-vocabulary problem. In
this paper we apply a recently proposed
fully automatic and rather language and
vocabulary independent way to build sub-
word lexica for three different agglutina-
tive languages. We demonstrate the lan-
guage portability as well by building a
successful large vocabulary speech recog-
nizer for each language and show superior
recognition performance compared to the
corresponding word-based reference sys-
tems.
1 Introduction
Speech recognition for dictation or prepared radio
and television broadcasts has had huge advances
during the last decades. For example, broadcast
news (BN) in English can now be recognized with
about ten percent word error rate (WER) (NIST,
2000) which results in mostly quite understandable
text. Some rare and new words may be missing but
the result has proven to be sufficient for many im-
portant applications, such as browsing and retrieval
of recorded speech and information retrieval from
the speech (Garofolo et al, 2000). However, besides
the development of powerful computers and new al-
gorithms, a crucial factor in this development is the
vast amount of transcribed speech and suitable text
data that has been collected for training the mod-
els. The problem faced in porting the BN recogni-
tion systems to conversational speech or to other lan-
guages is that almost as much new speech and text
data have to be collected again for the new task.
The reason for the need for a vast amount of train-
ing texts is that the state-of-the-art statistical lan-
guage models contain a huge amount of parameters
to be estimated in order to provide a proper probabil-
ity for any possible word sequence. The main reason
for the huge model size is that for an acceptable cov-
erage in an English BN task, the vocabulary must
be very large, at least 50,000 words, or more. For
languages with a higher degree of word inflections
than English, even larger vocabularies are required.
This paper focuses on the agglutinative languages in
which words are frequently formed by concatenat-
ing one or more stems, prefixes, and suffixes. For
these languages in which the words are often highly
inflected as well as formed from several morphemes,
even a vocabulary of 100,000 most common words
would not give sufficient coverage (Kneissler and
487
Klakow, 2001; Hirsim?ki et al, 2005). Thus, the
solution to the language modeling clearly has to in-
volve splitting of words into smaller modeling units
that could then be adequately modeled.
This paper focuses on solving the vocabulary
problem for several languages in which the speech
and text database resources are much smaller than
for the world?s main languages. A common fea-
ture for the agglutinative languages, such as Finnish,
Estonian, Hungarian and Turkish is that the large
vocabulary continuous speech recognition (LVCSR)
attempts so far have not resulted comparable perfor-
mance to the English systems. The reason for this
is not only the language modeling difficulties, but,
of course, the lack of suitable speech and text train-
ing data resources. In (Geutner et al, 1998; Sii-
vola et al, 2001) the systems aim at reducing the
active vocabulary and language models to a feasi-
ble size by clustering and focusing. In (Szarvas and
Furui, 2003; Alum?e, 2005; Hacioglu et al, 2003)
the words are split into morphemes by language-
dependent hand-crafted morphological rules. In
(Kneissler and Klakow, 2001; Arisoy and Arslan,
2005) different combinations of words, grammati-
cal morphemes and endings are utilized to decrease
the OOV rate and optimize the speech recognition
accuracy. However, constant large improvements
over the conventional word-based language models
in LVCSR have been rare.
The approach presented in this paper relies on a
data-driven algorithm called Morfessor (Creutz and
Lagus, 2002; Creutz and Lagus, 2005) which is a
language independent unsupervised machine learn-
ing method to find morpheme-like units (called sta-
tistical morphs) from a large text corpus. This
method has several advantages over the rule-based
grammatical morphemes, e.g. that no hand-crafted
rules are needed and all words can be processed,
even the foreign ones. Even if good grammatical
morphemes are available, the language modeling re-
sults by the statistical morphs seem to be at least as
good, if not better (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005). In this
paper we evaluate the statistical morphs for three
agglutinative languages and describe three different
speech recognition systems that successfully utilize
the n-gram language models trained for these units
in the corresponding LVCSR tasks.
2 Building the lexicon and language
models
2.1 Unsupervised discovery of morph units
Naturally, there are many ways to split the words
into smaller units to reduce a lexicon to a tractable
size. However, for a subword lexicon suitable
for language modeling applications such as speech
recognition, several properties are desirable:
1. The size of the lexicon should be small enough
that the n-gram modeling becomes more feasi-
ble than the conventional word based modeling.
2. The coverage of the target language by words
that can be built by concatenating the units
should be high enough to avoid the out-of-
vocabulary problem.
3. The units should be somehow meaningful, so
that the previously observed units can help in
predicting the next one.
4. In speech recognition one should be able to de-
termine the pronunciation for each unit.
A common approach to find the subword units
is to program the language-dependent grammatical
rules into a morphological analyzer and utilize that
to then split the text corpus into morphemes as in
e.g. (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005; Alum?e, 2005; Ha-
cioglu et al, 2003). There are some problems re-
lated to ambiguous splits and pronunciations of very
short inflection-type units, but also the coverage in,
e.g., news texts may be poor because of many names
and foreign words.
In this paper we have adopted a similar approach
as (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005). We use unsupervised
learning to find the best units according to some cost
function. In the Morfessor algorithm the minimized
cost is the coding length of the lexicon and the words
in the corpus represented by the units of the lexicon.
This minimum description length based cost func-
tion is especially appealing, because it tends to give
units that are both as frequent and as long as possi-
ble to suit well for both training the language models
and also decoding of the speech. Full coverage of
the language is also guaranteed by splitting the rare
words into very short units, even to single phonemes
if necessary. For language models utilized in speech
488
recognition, the lexicon of the statistical morphs can
be further reduced by omitting the rare words from
the input of the Morfessor algorithm. This operation
does not reduce the coverage of the lexicon, because
it just splits the rare words then into smaller units,
but the smaller lexicon may offer a remarkable speed
up of the recognition.
The pronunciation of, especially, the short units
may be ambiguous and may cause severe problems
in languages like English, in which the pronuncia-
tions can not be adequately determined from the or-
thography. In most agglutinative languages, such as
Finnish, Estonian and Turkish, rather simple letter-
to-phoneme rules are, however, sufficient for most
cases.
2.2 Building the lexicon for open vocabulary
The whole training text corpus is first passed through
a word splitting transformation as in Figure 1. Based
on the learned subword unit lexicon, the best split
for each word is determined by performing a Viterbi
search with the unigram probabilities of the units. At
this point the word break symbols are added between
each word in order to incorporate that information in
the statistical language models, as well. Then the n-
gram models are trained similarly as if the language
units were words including word and sentence break
symbols as additional units.
2.3 Building the n-gram model over morphs
Even though the required morph lexicon is much
smaller than the lexicon for the corresponding word
n-gram estimation, the data sparsity problem is still
important. Interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing is
utilized to tune the language model probabilities in
the same way as found best for the word n-grams.
The n-grams that are not very useful for modeling
the language can be discarded from the model in
order to keep the model size down. For Turkish,
we used the entropy based pruning (Stolcke, 1998),
where the n-grams, that change the model entropy
less than a given treshold, are discarded from the
model. For Finnish and Estonian, we used n-gram
growing (Siivola and Pellom, 2005). The n-grams
that increase the training set likelihood enough with
respect to the corresponding increase in the model
size are accepted into the model (as in the minimum
description length principle). After the growing pro-
Morph lexicon
+ probabilities
word forms
Distinct
Text with words
segmented into
morphs
model
Language
Text corpus
segmentation
Viterbi
segmentation
MorphExtract
vocabulary
Train
n?grams
Figure 1: The steps in the process of estimating a
language model based on statistical morphs from a
text corpus (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005).
cess the model is further pruned with entropy based
pruning. The method allows us to train models with
higher order n-grams, since the memory consump-
tion is lower and also gives somewhat better mod-
els. Both methods can also be viewed as choosing
the correct model complexity for the training data to
avoid over-learning.
3 Statistical properties of Finnish,
Estonian and Turkish
Before presenting the speech recognition results,
some statistical properties are presented for the three
agglutinative languages studied. If we consider
choosing a vocabulary of the 50k-70k most common
words, as usual in English broadcast news LVCSR
systems, the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) rate in En-
glish is typically smaller than 1%. Using the lan-
guage model training data the following OOV rates
can be found for a vocabulary including only the
most common words: 15% OOV for 69k in Finnish
(Hirsim?ki et al, 2005), 10% for 60k in Estonian
and 9% for 50k in Turkish. As shown in (Hacioglu et
al., 2003) this does not only mean the same amount
of extra speech recognition errors, but even more,
because the recognizer tends to lose track when un-
known words get mapped to those that are in the vo-
cabulary. Even doubling the vocabulary is not a suf-
489
0 1 2 3
x 106
0
2
4
6
8 x 10
5
Number of sentences
N
um
be
r o
f d
ist
in
ct
 u
ni
ts
0 1 2 3
x 106
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6 x 10
4
Number of sentences
N
um
be
r o
f d
ist
in
ct
 m
or
ph
s
Morphs
Words Morphs
Figure 2: Vocabulary growth of words and morphs
for Turkish language
ficient solution, because a vocabulary twice as large
(120k) would only reduce the OOV rate to 6% in
Estonian and 5% in Turkish. In Finnish even a 400k
vocabulary of the most common words still gives 5%
OOV in the language model training material.
Figure 2 illustrates the vocabulary explosion en-
countered when using words and how using morphs
avoids this problem for Turkish. The figure on the
left shows the vocabulary growth for both words and
morphs. The figure on the right shows the graph
for morphs in more detail. As seen in the figure,
the number of new words encountered continues to
increase as the corpus size gets larger whereas the
number of new morphs encountered levels off.
4 Speech recognition experiments
4.1 About selection of the recognition tasks
In this work the morph-based language models have
been applied in speech recognition for three differ-
ent agglutinative languages, Finnish, Estonian and
Turkish. The recognition tasks are speaker depen-
dent and independent fluent dictation of sentences
taken from newspapers and books, which typically
require very large vocabulary language models.
4.2 Finnish
Finnish is a highly inflected language, in which
words are formed mainly by agglutination and com-
pounding. Finnish is also the language for which the
algorithm for the unsupervised morpheme discovery
(Creutz and Lagus, 2002) was originally developed.
The units of the morph lexicon for the experiments
in this paper were learned from a joint corpus con-
taining newspapers, books and newswire stories of
totally about 150 million words (CSC, 2001). We
obtained a lexicon of 25k morphs by feeding the
learning algorithm with the word list containing the
160k most common words. For language model
training we used the same text corpus and the re-
cently developed growing n-gram training algorithm
(Siivola and Pellom, 2005). The amount of resulted
n-grams are listed in Table 4. The average length
of a morph is such that a word corresponds to 2.52
morphs including a word break symbol.
The speech recognition task consisted of a book
read aloud by one female speaker as in (Hirsim?ki et
al., 2005). Speaker dependent cross-word triphone
models were trained using the first 12 hours of data
and evaluated by the last 27 minutes. The models
included tied state hidden Markov models (HMMs)
of totally 1500 different states, 8 Gaussian mixtures
(GMMs) per state, short-time mel-cepstral features
(MFCCs), maximum likelihood linear transforma-
tion (MLLT) and explicit phone duration models
(Pylkk?nen and Kurimo, 2004). The real-time fac-
tor of recognition speed was less than 10 xRT with
a 2.2 GHz CPU. However, with the efficient LVCSR
decoder utilized (Pylkk?nen, 2005) it seems that by
making an even smaller morph lexicon, such as 10k,
the decoding speed could be optimized to only a few
times real-time without an excessive trade-off with
recognition performance.
4.3 Estonian
Estonian is closely related to Finnish and a similar
language modeling approach was directly applied
to the Estonian recognition task. The text corpus
used to learn the morph units and train the statis-
tical language model consisted of newspapers and
books, altogether about 55 million words (Segakor-
pus, 2005). At first, 45k morph units were obtained
as the best subword unit set from the list of the 470k
most common words in the corpora. For speed-
ing up the recognition, the morph lexicon was after-
wards reduced to 37k by splitting the rarest morphs
(occurring in only one or two words) further into
smaller ones. Corresponding growing n-gram lan-
guage models as in Finnish were trained from the
Estonian corpora resulting the n-grams in Table 4.
The speech recognition task in Estonian consisted
of long sentences read by 50 randomly picked held-
out test speakers, 7 sentences each (a part of (Meister
490
et al, 2002)). Unlike the Finnish and Turkish micro-
phone data, this data was recorded from telephone,
i.e. 8 kHz sampling rate and narrow band data in-
stead of 16 kHz and normal (full) bandwidth. The
phoneme models were trained for speaker indepen-
dent recognition using windowed cepstral mean sub-
traction and significantly more data (over 200 hours
and 1300 speakers) than for the Finnish task. The
speaker independence, together with the telephone
quality and occasional background noises, made this
task still a considerably more difficult one. Other-
wise the acoustic models were similar cross-word
triphone GMM-HMMs with MFCC features, MLLT
transformation and the explicit phone duration mod-
eling, except larger: 5100 different states and 16
GMMs per state. Thus, the recognition speed is
also slower than in Finnish, about 20 xRT (2.2GHz
CPU).
4.4 Turkish
Turkish is another a highly-inflected and agglutina-
tive language with relatively free word order. The
same Morfessor tool (Creutz and Lagus, 2005) as in
Finnish and Estonian was applied to Turkish texts
as well. Using the 360k most common words from
the training corpus, 34k morph units were obtained.
The training corpus consists of approximately 27M
words taken from literature, law, politics, social
sciences, popular science, information technology,
medicine, newspapers, magazines and sports news.
N-gram language models for different orders with
interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing as well as en-
tropy based pruning were built for this morph lexi-
con using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). The
number of n-grams for the highest order we tried (6-
grams without entropy-based pruning) are reported
in Table 4. In average, there are 2.37 morphs per
word including the word break symbol.
The recognition task in Turkish consisted of ap-
proximately one hour of newspaper sentences read
by one female speaker. We used decision-tree state
clustered cross-word triphone models with approx-
imately 5000 HMM states. Instead of using letter
to phoneme rules, the acoustic models were based
directly on letters. Each state of the speaker inde-
pendent HMMs had a GMM with 6 mixture compo-
nents. The HTK frontend (Young et al, 2002) was
used to get the MFCC based acoustic features. The
explicit phone duration models were not applied.
The training data contained 17 hours of speech from
over 250 speakers. Instead of the LVCSR decoder
used in Finnish and Estonian (Pylkk?nen, 2005), the
Turkish evaluation was performed using another de-
coder (AT&T, 2003), Using a 3.6GHz CPU, the real-
time factor was around one.
5 Results
The recognition results for the three different tasks:
Finnish, Estonian and Turkish, are provided in Ta-
bles 1 ? 3. In each task the word error rate (WER)
and letter error rate (LER) statistics for the morph-
based system is compared to a corresponding word-
based system. The resulting morpheme strings are
glued to words according to the word break symbols
included in the language model (see Section 2.2) and
the WER is computed as the sum of substituted, in-
serted and deleted words divided by the correct num-
ber of words. LER is included here as well, because
although WER is a more common measure, it is not
comparable between languages. For example, in ag-
glutinative languages the words are long and contain
a variable amount of morphemes. Thus, any incor-
rect prefix or suffix would make the whole word in-
correct. The n-gram language model statistics are
given in Table 4.
Finnish lexicon WER LER
Words 400k 8.5 1.20
Morphs 25k 7.0 0.95
Table 1: The LVCSR performance for the speaker-
dependent Finnish task consisting of book-reading
(see Section 4.2). For a reference (word-based) lan-
guage model a 400k lexicon was chosen.
Estonian lexicon WER LER
Words 60k 56.3 22.4
Morphs 37k 47.6 18.9
Table 2: The LVCSR performance for the speaker-
independent Estonian task consisting of read sen-
tences recorded via telephone (see Section 4.3). For
a reference (word-based) language model a 60k lex-
icon was used here.
491
Turkish lexicon WER LER
Words
3-gram 50k 38.8 15.2
Morphs
3-gram 34k 39.2 14.8
4-gram 34k 35.0 13.1
5-gram 34k 33.9 12.4
Morphs, rescored by morph 6-gram
3-gram 34k 33.8 12.4
4-gram 34k 33.2 12.3
5-gram 34k 33.3 12.2
Table 3: The LVCSR performance for the speaker-
independent Turkish task consisting of read news-
paper sentences (see Section 4.4). For the refer-
ence 50k (word-based) language model the accuracy
given by 4 and 5-grams did not improve from that of
3-grams.
In the Turkish recognizer the memory constraints
during network optimization (Allauzen et al, 2004)
allowed the use of language models only up to 5-
grams. The language model pruning thresholds were
optimized over a range of values and the best re-
sults are shown in Table 3. We also tried the same
experiments with two-pass recognition. In the first
pass, instead of the best path, lattice output was gen-
erated with the same language models with prun-
ing. Then these lattices were rescored using the non-
pruned 6-gram language models (see Table 4) and
the best path was taken as the recognition output.
For the word-based reference model, the two-pass
recognition gave no improvements. It is likely that
the language model training corpus was too small to
train proper 6-gram word models. However, for the
morph-based model, we obtained a slight improve-
ment (0.7 % absolute) by two-pass recognition.
6 Discussion
The key result of this paper is that we can success-
fully apply the unsupervised statistical morphs in
large vocabulary language models in all the three ex-
perimented agglutinative languages. Furthermore,
the results show that in all the different LVCSR
tasks, the morph-based language models perform
very well and constantly dominate the reference lan-
guage model based on words. The way that the lexi-
# morph-based models
ngrams Finnish Estonian Turkish
1grams 24,833 37,061 34,332
2grams 2,188,476 1,050,127 655,621
3grams 17,064,072 7,133,902 1,936,263
4grams 25,200,308 8,201,543 3,824,362
5grams 7,167,021 3,298,429 4,857,125
6grams 624,832 691,899 5,523,922
7grams 23,851 55,363 -
8grams 0 1045 -
Sum 52,293,393 20,469,369 16,831,625
Table 4: The amount of different n-grams in each
language model based on statistical morphs. Note
that the Turkish language model was not prepared
by the growing n-gram algorithm as the others and
the model was limited to 6-grams.
con is built from the word fragments allows the con-
struction of statistical language models, in practice,
for almost an unlimited vocabulary by a lexicon that
still has a convenient size.
The recognition was here restricted to agglutina-
tive languages and tasks in which the language used
is both rather general and matches fairly well with
the available training texts. Significant performance
variation in different languages can be observed
here, because of the different tasks and the fact that
comparable recognition conditions and training re-
sources have not been possible to arrange. However,
we believe that the tasks are still both difficult and
realistic enough to illustrate the difference of per-
formance when using language models based on a
lexicon of morphs vs. words in each task. There are
no directly comparable previous LVCSR results on
the same tasks and data, but the closest ones which
can be found are slightly over 20% WER for the
Finnish task (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005), slightly over
40 % WER for the Estonian task (Alum?e, 2005)
and slightly over 30 % WER for the Turkish task
(Erdogan et al, 2005).
Naturally, it is also possible to prepare a huge lex-
icon and still succeed in recognition fairly well (Sar-
aclar et al, 2002; McTait and Adda-Decker, 2003;
Hirsim?ki et al, 2005), but this is not a very con-
venient approach because of the resulting huge lan-
guage models or the heavy pruning required to keep
492
them still tractable. The word-based language mod-
els that were constructed in this paper as reference
models were trained as much as possible in the same
way as the corresponding morph language models.
For Finnish and Estonian the growing n-grams (Sii-
vola and Pellom, 2005) were used including the op-
tion of constructing the OOV words from phonemes
as in (Hirsim?ki et al, 2005). For Turkish a con-
ventional n-gram was built by SRILM similarly as
for the morphs. The recognition approach taken for
Turkish involves a static decoding network construc-
tion and optimization resulting in near real time de-
coding. However, the memory requirements of net-
work optimization becomes prohibitive for large lex-
icon and language models as presented in this paper.
In this paper the recognition speed was not a ma-
jor concern, but from the application point of view
that is a very important factor to be taken into a ac-
count in the comparison. It seems that the major fac-
tors that make the recognition slower are short lexi-
cal units, large lexicon and language models and the
amount of Gaussian mixtures in the acoustic model.
7 Conclusions
This work presents statistical language models
trained on different agglutinative languages utilizing
a lexicon based on the recently proposed unsuper-
vised statistical morphs. To our knowledge this is
the first work in which similarly developed subword
unit lexica are developed and successfully evaluated
in three different LVCSR systems in different lan-
guages. In each case the morph-based approach con-
stantly shows a significant improvement over a con-
ventional word-based LVCSR language models. Fu-
ture work will be the further development of also
the grammatical morph-based language models and
comparison of that to the current approach, as well
as extending this evaluation work to new languages.
8 Acknowledgments
We thank the Finnish Federation of the Visually Im-
paired for providing the Finnish speech data and the
Finnish news agency (STT) and the Finnish IT cen-
ter for science (CSC) for the text data. Our work was
supported by the Academy of Finland in the projects
New information processing principles, Adaptive In-
formatics and New adaptive and learning methods in
speech recognition. This work was supported in part
by the IST Programme of the European Community,
under the PASCAL Network of Excellence, IST-
2002-506778. The authors would like to thank Sa-
banci and ODTU universities for the Turkish acous-
tic and text data and AT&T Labs ? Research for
the software. This research is partially supported
by SIMILAR Network of Excellence and TUBITAK
BDP (Unified Doctorate Program of the Scientific
and Technological Research Council of Turkey).
References
Cyril Allauzen, Mehryar Mohri, Michael Riley, and Brian
Roark. 2004. A generalized construction of integrated
speech recognition transducers. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Montreal, Canada.
Tanel Alum?e. 2005. Phonological and morphologi-
cal modeling in large vocabulary continuous Estonian
speech recognition system. In Proceedings of Second
Baltic Conference on Human Language Technologies,
pages 89?94.
Mehryar Mohri and Michael D. Riley. DCD Library ?
Speech Recognition Decoder Library. AT&T Labs ?
Research. http://www.research.att.com/
sw/tools/dcd/.
Ebru Arisoy and Levent Arslan. 2005. Turkish dictation
system for broadcast news applications. In 13th Euro-
pean Signal Processing Conference - EUSIPCO 2005,
Antalya, Turkey, September.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2002. Unsupervised
discovery of morphemes. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Morphological and Phonological Learning of
ACL-02, pages 21?30.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus. 2005. Unsuper-
vised morpheme segmentation and morphology in-
duction from text corpora using Morfessor. Techni-
cal Report A81, Publications in Computer and Infor-
mation Science, Helsinki University of Technology.
URL: http://www.cis.hut.fi/projects/
morpho/.
J. Garofolo, G. Auzanne, and E. Voorhees. 2000. The
TREC spoken document retrieval track: A success
story. In Proceedings of Content Based Multimedia
Information Access Conference, April 12-14.
P. Geutner, M. Finke, and P. Scheytt. 1998. Adap-
tive vocabularies for transcribing multilingual broad-
cast news. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing (ICASSP), Seattle, WA, USA, May.
493
H. Erdogan, O. Buyuk, K. Oflazer. 2005. Incorporating
language constraints in sub-word based speech recog-
nition. IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Un-
derstanding Workshop, Cancun, Mexico.
Kadri Hacioglu, Brian Pellom, Tolga Ciloglu, Ozlem Oz-
turk, Mikko Kurimo, and Mathias Creutz. 2003. On
lexicon creation for Turkish LVCSR. In Proceedings
of 8th European Conference on Speech Communica-
tion and Technology, pages 1165?1168.
Teemu Hirsim?ki, Mathias Creutz, Vesa Siivola, Mikko
Kurimo, Sami Virpioja, and Janne Pylkk?nen. 2005.
Unlimited vocabulary speech recognition with morph
language models applied to Finnish. Computer Speech
and Language. (accepted for publication).
Jan Kneissler and Dietrich Klakow. 2001. Speech recog-
nition for huge vocabularies by using optimized sub-
word units. In Proceedings of the 7th European Con-
ference on Speech Communication and Technology
(Eurospeech), pages 69?72, Aalborg, Denmark.
CSC Tieteellinen laskenta Oy. 2001. Finnish Lan-
guage Text Bank: Corpora Books, Newspapers,
Magazines and Other. http://www.csc.fi/
kielipankki/.
Kevin McTait and Martine Adda-Decker. 2003. The
300k LIMSI German Broadcast News Transcription
System. In Proceedings of 8th European Conference
on Speech Communication and Technology.
Einar Meister, J?rgen Lasn, and Lya Meister. 2002. Esto-
nian SpeechDat: a project in progress. In Proceedings
of the Fonetiikan P?iv?t ? Phonetics Symposium 2002
in Finland, pages 21?26.
NIST. 2000. Proceedings of DARPA workshop on Auto-
matic Transcription of Broadcast News. NIST, Wash-
ington DC, May.
Janne Pylkk?nen. 2005. New pruning criteria for effi-
cient decoding. In Proceedings of 9th European Con-
ference on Speech Communication and Technology.
Janne Pylkk?nen and Mikko Kurimo. 2004. Duration
modeling techniques for continuous speech recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing.
Murat Saraclar, Michael Riley, Enrico Bocchieri, and
Vincent Goffin. 2002. Towards automatic closed cap-
tioning: Low latency real time broadcast news tran-
scription. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP), Den-
ver, CO, USA.
Segakorpus ? Mixed Corpus of Estonian. Tartu Uni-
versity. http://test.cl.ut.ee/korpused/
segakorpus/.
Vesa Siivola and Bryan Pellom. 2005. Growing an n-
gram language model. In Proceedings of 9th European
Conference on Speech Communication and Technol-
ogy.
Vesa Siivola, Mikko Kurimo, and Krista Lagus. 2001.
Large vocabulary statistical language modeling for
continuous speech recognition. In Proceedings of 7th
European Conference on Speech Communication and
Technology, pages 737?747, Aalborg, Copenhagen.
Andreas Stolcke. 1998. Entropy-based pruning of back-
off language models. In Proc. DARPA Broadcast News
Transcription and Understanding Workshop, pages
270?274.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
pages 901?904.
Mate Szarvas and Sadaoki Furui. 2003. Evaluation of the
stochastic morphosyntactic language model on a one
million word Hungarian task. In Proceedings of the
8th European Conference on Speech Communication
and Technology (Eurospeech), pages 2297?2300.
S. Young, D. Ollason, V. Valtchev, and P. Woodland.
2002. The HTK book (for HTK version 3.2.), March.
494
