Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 133?136,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Phrasal Patterns to Identify Discourse Relations  
Manami Saito 
Nagaoka University of  
Technology 
Niigata, JP 9402188 
saito@nlp.nagaokaut.ac.jp 
Kazuhide Yamamoto 
Nagaoka University of 
Technology 
Niigata, JP 9402188 
yamamoto@fw.ipsj.or.jp
Satoshi Sekine 
New York University 
New York, NY 10003 
sekine@cs.nyu.edu 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a system which 
identifies discourse relations between two 
successive sentences in Japanese. On top 
of the lexical information previously 
proposed, we used phrasal pattern 
information. Adding phrasal information 
improves the system's accuracy 12%, 
from 53% to 65%. 
1 Introduction 
Identifying discourse relations is important for 
many applications, such as text/conversation 
understanding, single/multi-document 
summarization and question answering. (Marcu 
and Echihabi 2002) proposed a method to identify 
discourse relations between text segments using 
Na?ve Bayes classifiers trained on a huge corpus. 
They showed that lexical pair information 
extracted from massive amounts of data can have a 
major impact. 
We developed a system which identifies the 
discourse relation between two successive 
sentences in Japanese. On top of the lexical 
information previously proposed, we added phrasal 
pattern information. A phrasal pattern includes at 
least three phrases (bunsetsu segments) from two 
sentences, where function words are mandatory 
and content words are optional. For example, if the 
first sentence is ?X should have done Y? and the 
second sentence is ?A did B?, then we found it 
very likely that the discourse relation is 
CONTRAST (89% in our Japanese corpus). 
2 Discourse Relation Definitions 
There have been many definitions of discourse 
relation, for example (Wolf 2005) and (Ichikawa 
1987) in Japanese. We basically used Ichikawa?s 
classes and categorized 167 cue phrases in the 
ChaSen dictionary (IPADIC, Ver.2.7.0), as shown 
in Table 1. Ambiguous cue phrases were 
categorized into multiple classes. There are 7 
classes, but the OTHER class will be ignored in the 
following experiment, as its frequency is very 
small. 
Table 1. Discourse relations 
Discourse     
relation 
Examples of cue phrase 
(English translation) 
Freq. in  
corpus [%]
ELABORATION and, also, then, moreover 43.0 
CONTRAST although, but, while 32.2 
CAUSE-
EFFECT 
because, and so, thus, 
therefore 12.1 
EQUIVALENCE in fact, alternatively, similarly 6.0 
CHANGE-
TOPIC 
by the way, incidentally, 
and now, meanwhile, well 5.1 
EXAMPLE for example, for instance 1.5 
OTHER most of all, in general 0.2 
 
3 Identification using Lexical Information 
The system has two components; one is to identify 
the discourse relation using lexical information, 
described in this section, and the other is to 
identify it using phrasal patterns, described in the 
next section. 
A pair of words in two consecutive sentences 
can be a clue to identify the discourse relation of 
those sentences. For example, the CONTRAST 
relation may hold between two sentences which 
133
have antonyms, such as ?ideal? and ?reality? in 
Example 1. Also, the EXAMPLE relation may 
hold when the second sentence has hyponyms of a 
word in the first sentence. For example, ?gift shop?, 
?department store?, and ?supermarket? are 
hyponyms of ?store? in Example 2.  
Ex1) 
a. It is ideal that people all over the world 
accept independence and associate on an 
equal footing with each other. 
b. (However,) Reality is not that simple. 
Ex2) 
a. Every town has many stores.  
b. (For example,) Gift shops, department 
stores, and supermarkets are the main 
stores. 
 
In our experiment, we used a corpus from the 
Web (about 20G of text) and 38 years of 
newspapers. We extracted pairs of sentences in 
which an unambiguous discourse cue phrase 
appears at the beginning of the second sentence. 
We extracted about 1,300,000 sentence pairs from 
the Web and about 150,000 pairs from newspapers.  
300 pairs (50 of each discourse relation) were set 
aside as a test corpus. 
3.1 Extracting Word Pairs 
Word pairs are extracted from two sentences; i.e. 
one word from each sentence. In order to reduce 
noise, the words are restricted to common nouns, 
verbal nouns, verbs, and adjectives. Also, the word 
pairs are restricted to particular kinds of POS 
combinations in order to reduce the impact of word 
pairs which are not expected to be useful in 
discourse relation identification. We confined the 
combinations to the pairs involving the same part 
of speech and those between verb and adjective, 
and between verb and verbal noun. 
All of the extracted word pairs are used in base 
form. In addition, each word is annotated with a 
positive or negative label. If a phrase segment 
includes negative words like ?not?, the words in 
the same segment are annotated with a negative 
label. Otherwise, words are annotated with a 
positive label. We don?t consider double negatives. 
In Example 1-b, ?simple? is annotated with a 
negative, as it includes ?not? in the same segment. 
3.2 Score Calculation 
All possible word pairs are extracted from the 
sentence pairs and the frequencies of pairs are 
counted for each discourse relation. For a new 
(test) sentence pair, two types of score are 
calculated for each discourse relation based on all 
of the word pairs found in the two sentences. The 
scores are given by formulas (1) and (2). Here 
Freq(dr, wp) is the frequency of word pair (wp) in 
the discourse relation (dr). Score1 is the fraction of 
the given discourse relation among all the word 
pairs in the sentences. Score2 incorporates an 
adjustment based on the rate (RateDR) of the 
discourse relation in the corpus, i.e. the third 
column in Table 1. The score actually compares 
the ratio of a discourse relation in the particular 
word pairs against the ratio in the entire corpus. It 
helps the low frequency discourse relations get 
better scores.  
 
( )
( )
?
?
=
wpdr
wp
wpdrFreq
wpDRFreq
DRScore
,
1 ),(
,
                 (1) 
 
( )
( )
DR
wpdr
wp
RatewpdrFreq
wpDRFreq
DRScore ?= ?
?
,
2 ),(
,
 (2) 
 
4 Identification using Phrasal Pattern 
We can sometimes identify the discourse relation 
between two sentences from fragments of the two 
sentences. For example, the CONTRAST relation 
is likely to hold between the pair of fragments ?? 
should have done ?.? and ?? did ?.?, and the 
EXAMPLE relation is likely to hold between the 
pair of fragments ?There is?? and ?Those are ? 
and so on.?.  Here ??? represents any sequence of 
words. The above examples indicate that the 
discourse relation between two sentences can be 
recognized using fragments of the sentences even 
if there are no clues based on the sort of content 
words involved in the word pairs.  Accumulating 
such fragments in Japanese, we observe that these 
fragments actually form a phrasal pattern. A phrase 
(bunsetsu) in Japanese is a basic component of 
sentences, and consists of one or more content 
words and zero or more function words. We 
134
specify that a phrasal pattern contain at least three 
subphrases, with at least one from each sentence. 
Each subphrase contains the function words of the 
phrase, and may also include accompanying 
content words. We describe the method to create 
patterns in three steps using an example sentence 
pair (Example 3) which actually has the 
CONTRAST relation. 
Ex3)  
a. ?kanojo-no kokoro-ni donna omoi-ga at-ta-
ka-ha wakara-nai.? (No one knows what 
feeling she had in her mind.) 
b. ?sore-ha totemo yuuki-ga iru koto-dat-ta-
ni-chigai-nai.? (I think that she must have 
needed courage.) 
 
1) Deleting unnecessary phrases 
Noun modifiers using ?no? (a typical particle for a 
noun modifier) are excised from the sentences, as 
they are generally not useful to identify a discourse 
relation. For example, in the compound phrase 
?kanozyo-no (her) kokoro (mind)? in Example 3, 
the first phrase (her), which just modifies a noun 
(mind), is excised. Also, all of the phrases which 
modify excised phrases, and all but the last phrase 
in a conjunctive clause are excised.  
 
2) Restricting phrasal pattern 
In order to avoid meaningless phrases, we restrict 
the phrase participants to components matching the 
following regular expression pattern. Here, noun-x 
means all types of nouns except common nouns, i.e. 
verbal nouns, proper nouns, pronouns, etc. 
 
?(noun-x | verb | adjective)? (particle | auxiliary 
verb | period)+$?, or ?adverb$? 
 
3) Combining phrases and selecting words in a 
phrase 
All possible combinations of phrases including at 
least one phrase from each sentence and at least 
three phrases in total are extracted from a pair of 
sentences in order to build up phrasal patterns. For 
each phrase which satisfies the regular expression 
in 2), the subphrases to be used in phrasal patterns 
are selected based on the following four criteria (A 
to D). In each criterion, a sample of the result 
pattern (using all the phrases in Example 3) is 
expressed in bold face. Note that it is quite difficult 
to translate those patterns into English as many 
function words in Japanese are encoded as a 
position in English. We hope readers understand 
the procedure intuitively. 
 
A) Use all components in each phrase 
kanojo-no kokoro-ni donna omoi-ga at-ta-ka-ha wakara-nai. 
sore-ha totemo yuuki-ga iru koto-dat-ta-ni-chigai-nai. 
 
B) Remove verbal noun and proper noun 
kanojo-no kokoro-ni donna omoi-ga at-ta-ka-ha wakara-nai. 
sore-ha totemo yuuki-ga iru koto-dat-ta-ni-chigai-nai. 
 
C) In addition, remove verb and adjective 
kanojo-no kokoro-ni donna omoi-ga at-ta-ka-ha wakara-nai. 
sore-ha totemo yuuki-ga iru koto-dat-ta-ni-chigai-nai. 
 
D) In addition, remove adverb and remaining noun 
kanojo-no kokoro-ni donna omoi-ga at-ta-ka-ha wakara-nai. 
sore-ha totemo yuuki-ga iru koto-dat-ta-ni-chigai-nai. 
 
4.1 Score Calculation 
By taking combinations of 3 or more subphrases 
produced as described above, 348 distinct patterns 
can be created for the sentences in Example 3; all 
of them are counted with frequency 1 for the 
CONTRAST relation. Like the score calculation 
using lexical information, we count the frequency 
of patterns for each discourse relation over the 
entire corpus. Patterns appearing more than 1000 
times are not used, as those are found not useful to 
distinguish discourse relations. 
The scores are calculated replacing Freq(dr, 
wp) in formulas (1) and (2) by Freq(dr, pp). Here, 
pp is a phrasal pattern and Freq(dr, pp) is the 
number of times discourse relation dr connects 
sentences for which phrasal pattern pp is matched. 
These scores will be called Score3 and Score4, 
respectively. 
5 Evaluation 
The system identifies one of six discourse relations, 
described in Table 1, for a test sentence pair. Using 
the 300 sentence pairs set aside earlier (50 of each 
discourse relation type), we ran two experiments 
for comparison purposes: one using only lexical 
information, the other using phrasal patterns as 
well. In the experiment using only lexical 
information, the system selects the relation 
maximizing Score2 (this did better than Score1).  In 
the other, the system chooses a relation as follows: 
if one relation maximizes both Score1 and Score2, 
135
choose that relation; else, if one relation maximizes 
both Score3 and Score4, choose that relation; else 
choose the relation maximizing Score2. 
Table 2 shows the result. For all discourse relations, 
the results using phrasal patterns are better or the 
same. When we consider the frequency of 
discourse relations, i.e. 43% for ELABORATION, 
32% for CONTRAST etc., the weighted accuracy 
was 53% using only lexical information, which is 
comparable to the similar experiment by (Marcu 
and Echihabi 2002) of 49.7%. Using phrasal 
patterns, the accuracy improves 12% to 65%. Note 
that the baseline accuracy (by always selecting the 
most frequent relation) is 43%, so the improvement 
is significant. 
Table 2. The result 
Discourse relation Lexical info. Only 
With phrasal 
pattern 
ELABORATION 44% (22/50) 52% (26/50) 
CONTRAST 62% (31/50) 86% (43/50) 
CAUSE-EFFECT 56% (28/50) 56% (28/50) 
EQUIVALENCE 58% (29/50) 58% (29/50) 
CHANGE-TOPIC 66% (33/50) 72% (36/50) 
EXAMPLE 56% (28/50) 60% (30/50) 
Total 57% (171/300) 64% (192/300)
Weighted accuracy 53% 65% 
 
Since they are more frequent in the corpus, 
ELABORATION and CONTRAST are more 
likely to be selected by Score1 or Score3. But 
adjusting the influence of rate bias using Score2 
and Score4, it sometimes identifies the other 
relations.  
The system makes many mistakes, but people 
also may not be able to identify a discourse 
relation just using the two sentences if the cue 
phrase is deleted. We asked three human subjects 
(two of them are not authors of this paper) to do 
the same task. The total (un-weighted) accuracies 
are 63, 54 and 48%, which are about the same or 
even lower than the system performance. Note that 
the subjects are allowed to annotate more than one 
relation (Actually, they did it for 3% to 30% of the 
data). If the correct relation is included among 
their N choices, then 1/N is credited to the accuracy 
count. We measured inter annotator agreements. 
The average of the inter-annotator agreements is 
69%. We also measured the system performance 
on the data where all three subjects identified the 
correct relation, or two of them identified the 
correct relation and so on (Table 3). We can see 
the correlation between the number of subjects 
who answered correctly and the system accuracy. 
In short, we can observe from the result and the 
analyses that the system works as well as a human 
does under the condition that only two sentences 
can be read. 
Table 3. Accuracy for different agreements 
# of  subjects correct 3 2 1 0 
System accuracy 71% 63% 60% 47%
. 
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we proposed a system which 
identifies discourse relations between two 
successive sentences in Japanese. On top of the 
lexical information previously proposed, we used 
phrasal pattern information. Using phrasal 
information improves accuracy 12%, from 53% to 
65%. The accuracy is comparable to human 
performance. There are many future directions, 
which include 1) applying other machine learning 
methods, 2) analyzing discourse relation 
categorization strategy, and 3) including a longer 
context beyond two sentences. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was partially supported by the 
National Science Foundation under Grant IIS-
00325657. This paper does not necessarily reflect 
the position of the U.S. Government. We would 
like to thank Prof. Ralph Grishman, New York 
University, who provided useful suggestions and 
discussions. 
References 
Daniel Marcu and Abdessamad Echihabi. 2002. An 
Unsupervised Approach to Recognizing Discourse 
Relations, Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 368-
375. 
Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing 
Discourse Coherence: A Corpus-Based Study, 
Computational Linguistics, 31(2):249-287. 
Takashi Ichikawa. 1978. Syntactic Overview for 
Japanese Education, Kyo-iku publishing, 65-67 (in 
Japanese). 
136
