Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 235?238,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Document Representation and Multilevel Measures of Document Similarity
Irina Matveeva
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Chicago
matveeva@cs.uchicago.edu
Abstract
We present our work on combining large-
scale statistical approaches with local lin-
guistic analysis and graph-based machine
learning techniques to compute a com-
bined measure of semantic similarity be-
tween terms and documents for applica-
tion in information extraction, question
answering, and summarisation.
1 Introduction
Document indexing and representation of term-
document relations are crucial for document classi-
fication, clustering and retrieval. In the traditional
bag-of-words vector space representation of docu-
ments (Salton and McGill, 1983) words represent
orthogonal dimensions which makes an unrealistic
assumption about their independence.
Since document vectors are constructed in a very
high dimensional vocabulary space, there has been a
considerable interest in low-dimensional document
representations to overcome the drawbacks of the
bag-of-words document vectors. Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) (Deerwester et al, 1990) is one of
the best known dimensionality reduction algorithms
in information retrieval.
In my research, I consider different notions of
similarity measure between documents. I use di-
mensionality reduction and statistical co-occurrence
information to define representations that support
them.
2 Dimensionality Reduction for Document
and Term Representation
A vector space representation of documents is very
convenient because it puts documents in a Euclidean
space where similarity measures such as inner prod-
uct and cosine similarity or distance are immediately
available. However, these measures will not be ef-
fective if they do not have a natural interpretation for
the original text data.
I have considered several approaches to comput-
ing a vector space representation of text data for
which inner product and distance make sense. The
general framework is to construct a matrix of pair-
wise similarities between terms or documents and
use appropriate methods of dimensionality reduc-
tion to compute low dimensional vectors. The inner
product between the resulting vectors must preserve
the similarities in the input matrix. The similarities
matrix can be computed using different notions of
similarity in the input space. Different dimensional-
ity reduction techniques impose different conditions
on how the similarities are preserved.
I investigated how external query-based similar-
ity information can be used to compute low dimen-
sional document vectors. Similar to LSA, this ap-
proach used weighted bag-of-words document vec-
tors as input which limited its effectiveness. The
next step was to develop the Generalized Latent Se-
mantic Analysis framework that allows to compute
semantically motivated term and document vectors.
235
2.1 Document Representation with the
Locality Preserving Projection Algorithm
The Locality Preserving Projection algorithm
(LPP) (He and Niyogi, 2003) is a graph-based
dimensionality reduction algorithm that computes
low dimensional document vectors by preserving
local similarities between the documents. It requires
a vector space representation of documents as
input. In addition, it uses the adjacency matrix
of the nearest neighbors graph of the data. It can
be shown, see (He and Niyogi, 2003), that the
Euclidean distance in the LPP space corresponds to
similarity in the document space.
The information about the similarity of the input
documents is contained in the adjacency matrix of
the nearest neighbors graph. In this graph, nodes
represent documents and are connected by an edge
if the documents are similar. This graph can be con-
structed using any similarity measure between the
documents, for example, the query-based similar-
ity between the documents obtained from relevance
feedback. The base case is to use inner products be-
tween the input document vectors and to connect k
nearest neighbors.
We considered several ways of modifying the
graph, see (Matveeva, 2004). We used relevance
feedback and pseudo relevance feedback from the
base line term matching retrieval to identify the top
N documents most related to the query. We added
edges to the document neighborhood graph to con-
nect these N documents. Our experiments showed
that incorporating this external relevance informa-
tion into the LPP graph improves the performance
on the information retrieval tasks, in particular at
high levels of recall. Without the use of external
information, the performance of the LPP algorithm
was comparable to the performance of the LSA al-
gorithm up to recall of 0.6?0.7. At higher levels of
recall, LSA achieves a precision that is about 0.1
better than LPP. The precision at high levels of re-
call seemed to be a weak point of LPP. Fortunately,
using the relevance feedback helped to improve the
performance in particular in this range of recall.
We found the LPP algorithm to be very sensitive
to the graph structure. It confirmed the intuition that
the Euclidean distance between the document vec-
tors in the bag-of-words representation is not a good
similarity measure. When we added query relevance
information to the graph, we introduced a similarity
metric on the document space that was closer to the
true similarity. However, this information was only
partial, because only a subset of the edges reflected
this true similarity. The next step was therefore to
develop a vector space representation for documents
which did not require the bag-of-words representa-
tion as input.
2.2 Generalized Latent Semantic Analysis
We developed the Generalized Latent Seman-
tic Analysis (GLSA) framework to compute se-
mantically motivated term and document vec-
tors (Matveeva et al, 2005). We begin with seman-
tically motivated pair-wise term similarities and use
dimensionality reduction to compute a vector space
representation for terms. Our approach is to focus on
similarity between vocabulary terms. We compute
representations and similarities for terms and con-
sider documents to be linear combinations of terms.
This shift from dual document-term representation
to terms has the following motivation.
? Terms offer a much greater flexibility in explor-
ing similarity relations than documents. The
availability of large document collections such
as the Web offers a great resource for statisti-
cal approaches. Recently, co-occurrence based
measures of semantic similarity between terms
has been shown to improve performance on
such tasks as the synonymy test, taxonomy in-
duction, etc. (Turney, 2001; Terra and Clarke,
2003; Chklovski and Pantel, 2004). On the
other hand, many semi-supervised and trans-
ductive methods based on document vectors
cannot yet handle such large document collec-
tions.
? While the vocabulary size is still quite large,
it is intuitively clear that the intrinsic dimen-
sionality of the vocabulary space is much lower.
Content bearing words are often combined into
semantic classes that correspond to particular
activities or relations and contain synonyms
and semantically related words. Therefore, it
seems very natural to represent terms as low di-
mensional vectors in the space of semantic con-
cepts.
236
2.2.1 GLSA Algorithm
The GLSA algorithm takes as input a document
collection C with vocabulary V and a large corpus
W . It has the following outline:
1. Construct the weighted term document matrix
D based on C
2. For the vocabulary words in V , obtain a ma-
trix of pair-wise similarities, S, using the large
corpus W
3. Obtain the matrix UT of low dimensional vec-
tor space representation of terms that preserves
the similarities in S, UT ? Rk?|V | . The
columns of UT are k-dimensional term vectors
4. Compute document vectors by taking linear
combinations of term vectors D? = UTD
In step 2 of the GLSA algorithm we used point-
wise mutual information (PMI) as the co-occurrence
based measure of semantic associations between
pairs of the vocabulary terms. We used the singu-
lar value decomposition in step 3 to compute GLSA
term vectors.
2.2.2 Experimental Evaluation
We used the TOEFL, TS1 and TS2 synonymy
tests to demonstrate that the GLSA vector space rep-
resentation for terms captures their semantic rela-
tions, see (Matveeva et al, 2005) for details. Our
results demonstrate that similarities between GLSA
term vectors achieve better results than PMI scores
and outperform the related PMI-IR approach (Tur-
ney, 2001; Terra and Clarke, 2003). On the TOEFL
test GLSA achieves the best precision of 0.86, which
is much better than our PMI baseline as well as
the highest precision of 0.81 reported in (Terra and
Clarke, 2003). GLSA achieves the same maximum
precision as in (Terra and Clarke, 2003) for TS1
(0.73) and higher precision on TS2 (0.82 compared
to 0.75 in (Terra and Clarke, 2003)).
We also conducted document classification exper-
iments to demonstrate the advantage of the GLSA
document vectors (Matveeva et al, 2005). We used
a k-nearest neighbors classifier for a set of 5300
documents from 6 dissimilar groups from the 20
news groups data set. The k-nn classifier achieved
higher accuracy with the GLSA document vectors
than with the traditional tf-idf document vectors, es-
pecially with fewer training examples. With 100
training examples, the k-nn classifier with GLSA
had 0.75 accuracy vs. 0.58 with the tf-idf document
vectors. With 1000 training examples the numbers
were 0.81 vs. 0.75.
The inner product between the GLSA document
vectors can be used as input to other algorithms.
The language modelling approach (Berger and Laf-
ferty, 1999) proved very effective for the informa-
tion retrieval task. Berger et. al (Berger and Laf-
ferty, 1999) used translation probabilities between
the document and query terms to account for syn-
onymy and polysemy. We proposed to use low di-
mensional term vectors for inducing the translation
probabilities between terms (Matveeva and Levow,
2006). We used the same k-nn classification task as
above. With 100 training examples, the k-nn accu-
racy based on tf-idf document vectors was 0.58 and
with the similarity based on the language modelling
with GLSA term translation probabilities the accu-
racy was 0.69. With larger training sets the differ-
ence in performance was less significant. These re-
sults illustrate that the pair-wise similarities between
the GLSA term vectors add important semantic in-
formation which helps to go beyond term matching
and deal with synonymy and polysemy.
3 Work in Progress
Many recent applications such as document sum-
marization, information extraction and question an-
swering require a detailed analysis of semantic re-
lations between terms within and across documents
and sentences. Often one has a number of sentences
or paragraphs and has to choose the candidate with
the highest level of relevance for the topic or ques-
tion. An additional requirement may be that the in-
formation content of the next candidate is different
from the sentences that are already chosen.
In these cases, it seems natural to have differ-
ent levels of document similarity. Two sentences or
paragraphs can be similar because they contain in-
formation about the same people or events. In this
case, the similarity can be based on the number of
the named entities they have in common. On the
other hand, they can be similar because they contain
synonyms or semantically related terms.
237
I am currently working on a combination of sim-
ilarity measures between terms to model document
similarity. I divide the vocabulary into general vo-
cabulary terms and named entities and compute a
separate similarity score for each group of terms.
The overall document similarity score is a function
of these two scores. To keep the vocabulary size
manageable and denoise the data, we only use the
content bearing words from the set of the general
vocabulary terms. We use a parser to identify nouns
and adjectives that participate in three types of syn-
tactic relations: subject, direct object, the head of the
noun phrase with an adjective or noun as a modifier
for nouns and the modifier of a noun for adjectives.
Currently we include only such nouns and adjectives
in the set of the content bearing vocabulary terms.
We used the TDT2 collection for preliminary
classification experiments. We used a k-nn classi-
fier to classify documents from the 10 most frequent
topics. We used tf-idf document vectors indexed
with 55,729 general vocabulary words as our base-
line. The set of the content bearing words was much
smaller and had 13,818 nouns and adjectives. The
GLSA document vectors improved the classification
accuracy over the baseline and outperformed LSA
document vectors. This validates our approach to
selecting the content bearing terms and shows the
advantage of using the GLSA framework. We are
going to extend the set of content bearing words and
to include verbs. We will take advantage of the flex-
ibility provided by our framework and use syntax
based measure of similarity in the computation of
the verb vectors, following (Lin, 1998).
Currently we are using string matching to com-
pute the named entity based measure of similar-
ity. We are planning to integrate more sophisticated
techniques in our framework.
4 Conclusion
We developed the GLSA framework for comput-
ing semantically motivated term and document vec-
tors. This framework takes advantage of the avail-
ability of large document collections and recent re-
search of corpus-based term similarity measures and
combines them with dimensionality reduction algo-
rithms.
Different measures of similarity may be required
for different groups of terms such as content bear-
ing vocabulary words and named entities. To ex-
tend the GLSA approach to computing the document
vectors, we use a combination of similarity mea-
sures between terms to model the document simi-
larity. This approach defines a fine-grained similar-
ity measure between documents and sentences. Our
goal is to develop a multilevel measure of document
similarity that will be helpful for summarization and
information extraction.
References
Adam Berger and John Lafferty. 1999. Information re-
trieval as statistical translation. In Proc. of the 22rd
ACM SIGIR.
Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. Verbo-
cean: Mining the web for fine-grained semantic verb
relations. In Proc. of EMNLP.
Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391?407.
Xiaofei He and Partha Niyogi. 2003. Locality preserving
projections. In Proc. of NIPS.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of
similar words. In COLING-ACL, pages 768?774.
Irina Matveeva and Gina-Anne Levow. 2006. Comput-
ing term translation probabilities with generalized la-
tent semantic analysis. In Proc. of EACL.
Irina Matveeva, Gina-Anne Levow, Ayman Farahat, and
Christian Royer. 2005. Generalized latent semantic
analysis for term representation. In Proc. of RANLP.
Irina Matveeva. 2004. Text representation with the lo-
cality preserving projection algorithm for information
retrieval task. In Master?s Thesis.
Gerard Salton and Michael J. McGill. 1983. Introduction
to Modern Information Retrieval. McGraw-Hill.
Egidio L. Terra and Charles L. A. Clarke. 2003. Fre-
quency estimates for statistical word similarity mea-
sures. In Proc.of HLT-NAACL.
Peter D. Turney. 2001. Mining the web for synonyms:
PMI?IR versus LSA on TOEFL. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2167:491?502.
238
