Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 201?204,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Bridging the Inflection Morphology Gap for Arabic Statistical Machine
Translation
Andreas Zollmann and Ashish Venugopal and Stephan Vogel
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{zollmann,ashishv,stephan.vogel}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Statistical machine translation (SMT) is
based on the ability to effectively learn
word and phrase relationships from par-
allel corpora, a process which is consid-
erably more difficult when the extent of
morphological expression differs signifi-
cantly across the source and target lan-
guages. We present techniques that se-
lect appropriate word segmentations in
the morphologically rich source language
based on contextual relationships in the
target language. Our results take ad-
vantage of existing word level morpho-
logical analysis components to improve
translation quality above state-of-the-art
on a limited-data Arabic to English speech
translation task.
1 Introduction
The problem of translating from a language ex-
hibiting rich inflectional morphology to a language
exhibiting relatively poor inflectional morphology
presents several challenges to the existing compo-
nents of the statistical machine translation (SMT)
process. This inflection gap causes an abundance of
surface word forms 1 in the source language com-
pared with relatively few forms in the target lan-
guage. This mismatch aggravates several issues
1We use the term surface form to refer to a series of charac-
ters separated by whitespace
found in natural language processing: more un-
known words forms in unseen data, more words oc-
curring only once, more distinct words and lower
token-to-type ratios (mean number of occurrences
over all distinct words) in the source language than
in the target language.
Lexical relationships under the standard IBM
models (Brown et al, 1993) do not account for
many-to-many mappings, and phrase extraction re-
lies heavily on the accuracy of the IBM word-to-
word alignment. In this work, we propose an ap-
proach to bridge the inflectional gap that addresses
the issues described above through a series of pre-
processing steps based on the Buckwalter Arabic
Morphological Analyzer (BAMA) tool (Buckwalter,
2004). While (Lee et al, 2003) develop accurate
segmentation models of Arabic surface word forms
using manually segmented data, we rely instead on
the translated context in the target language, lever-
aging the manually constructed lexical gloss from
BAMA to select the appropriate segmented sense for
each Arabic source word.
Our technique, applied as preprocessing to the
source corpus, splits and normalizes surface words
based on the target sentence context. In contrast
to (Popovic and Ney, 2004) and (Nie?en and Ney,
2004), we do not modify the IBM models, and we
leave reordering effects to the decoder. Statistically
significant improvements (Zhang and Vogel, 2004)
in BLEU and NIST translation score over a lightly
stemmed baseline are reported on the available and
well known BTEC IWSLT?05 Arabic-English cor-
pus (Eck and Hori, 2005).
201
2 Arabic Morphology in Recent Work
Arabic-to-English machine translation exemplifies
some of the issues caused by the inflection gap. Re-
fer to (Buckwalter, 2005) and (Larkey et al, 2002)
for examples that highlight morphological inflection
for a simple Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) word
and basic stemming operations that we use as our
baseline system.
(Nie?en and Ney, 2000) tackle the inflection gap
for German-to-English word alignment by perform-
ing a series of morphological operations on the Ger-
man text. They fragment words based on a full
morphological analysis of the sentence, but need to
use domain specific and hand written rules to deal
with ambiguous fragmentation. (Nie?en and Ney,
2004) also extend the corpus by annotating each
source word with morphological information and
building a hierarchical lexicon. The experimental
results show dramatic improvements from sentence-
level restructuring (question inversion, separated
verb prefixes and merging phrases), but limited im-
provement from the hierarchical lexicon, especially
as the size of the training data increases.
We conduct our morphological analysis at the
word level, using Buckwalter Arabic Morphological
Analyzer (BAMA) version 2.0 (Buckwalter, 2004).
BAMA analyzes a given surface word, returning a
set of potential segmentations (order of a dozen) for
the source word into prefixes, stems, and suffixes.
Our techniques select the appropriate splitting from
that set by taking into account the target sides (full
sentences) of that word?s occurrences in the training
corpus. We now describe each splitting technique
that we apply.
2.1 BAMA: Simple fragment splitting
We begin by simply replacing each Arabic word
with the fragments representing the first of the pos-
sible splittings returned by the BAMA tool. BAMA
uses simple word-based heuristics to rank the split-
ting alternatives.
2.2 CONTEXT: Single Sense selection
In the step CONTEXT, we take advantage of the
gloss information provided in BAMA?s lexicon.
Each potential splitting corresponds to a particular
choice of prefix, stem and suffix, all of which exist
in the manually constructed lexicon, along with a set
of possible translations (glosses) for each fragment.
We select a fragmentation (choice of splitting for the
source word) whose corresponding glosses have the
most target side matches in the parallel translation
(of the full sentence). The choice of fragmentation
is saved and used for all occurrences of the surface
form word in training and testing, introducing con-
text sensitivity without parsing solutions. In case of
unseen words during testing, we segment it simply
using the first alternative from the BAMA tool. This
allows us to still translate an unseen test word cor-
rectly even if the surface form was never seen during
training.
2.3 CORRMATCH: Correspondence matching
The Arabic language often encodes linguistic in-
formation within the surface word form that is not
present in English. Word fragments that represent
this missing information are misleading in the trans-
lation process unless explicitly aligned to the NULL
word on the target side. In this step we explicitly
remove fragments that correspond to lexical infor-
mation that is not represented in English. While
(Lee, 2004) builds part of speech models to recog-
nize such elements, we use the fact that their corre-
sponding English translations in the BAMA lexicon
are empty. Examples of such fragments are case and
gender markers. As an example of CORRMATCH
removal, we present the Arabic sentence ? h?*A lA
ya zAl u gayor naZiyf ? (after BAMA only) which
becomes ?h?*A lA ya zAl gayor naZiyf? after the
CORRMATCH stage. The ?u? has been removed.
3 Experimental Framework
We evaluate the impact of inflectional splitting on
the BTEC (Takezawa et al, 2002) IWSLT05 Ara-
bic language data track. The ?Supplied? data track
includes a 20K Arabic/English sentence pair train-
ing set, as well as a development (?DevSet?) and
test (?Test05?) set of 500 Arabic sentences each and
16 reference translations per Arabic sentence. De-
tails regarding the IWSLT evaluation criteria and
data topic and collection methods are available in
(Eck and Hori, 2005). We also evaluate on test and
development data randomly sampled from the com-
plete supplied dev and test data, due to considera-
202
tions noted by (Josep M.Crego, 2005) regarding the
similarity of the development and test data sets.
3.1 System description
Translation experiments were conducted using the
(Vogel et al, 2003) system with reordering and fu-
ture cost estimation. We trained translation parame-
ters for 10 scores (language model, word and phrase
count, and 6 translation model scores from (Vogel,
2005) ) with Minimum Error Rate training on the
development set. We optimized separately for both
the NIST (Doddington, 2002) and the BLEU metrics
(Papineni et al, 2002).
4 Translation Results
Table 1 and 2 shows the results of each stage
of inflectional splitting on the BLEU and NIST
metrics. Basic orthographic normalization serves
as a baseline (merging all Alif, tar marbuta, ee
forms to the base form). The test set NIST scores
show steady improvements of up to 5 percent rel-
ative, as more sophisticated splitting techniques
are used, ie BAMA+CONTEXT+CORRMATCH.
These improvements are statistically significant over
the baseline in both metrics as measured by the tech-
niques in (Zhang and Vogel, 2004).
Our NIST results for all the final stages of inflec-
tional splitting would place us above the top NIST
scores from the ISWLT evaluation on the supplied
test set.2 On both DevSet/Test05 and the randomly
split data, we see more dramatic improvements in
the NIST scores than in BLEU. This might be due to
the NIST metric?s sensitivity to correctly translating
certain high gain words in the test corpus. Inflec-
tional splitting techniques that cause previously un-
known surface form words to be translated correctly
after splitting can significantly impact the overall
score.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
This work shows the potential for significant im-
provements in machine translation quality by di-
rectly bridging the inflectional gap across language
pairs. Our method takes advantage of source and
2The IWSLT evaluation did not allow systems to train sep-
arately for evaluation on BLEU or NIST, but results from the
proceedings indicate that top performers in each metric opti-
mized towards the respective metric.
target language context when conducting morpho-
logical analysis of each surface word form, while
avoiding complex parsing engines or refinements to
the alignment training process. Our results are pre-
sented on moderately sized corpora rather than the
scarce resource domain that has been traditionally
employed to highlight the impact of detailed mor-
phological analysis.
By showing the impact of simple processing steps
we encourage the creation of simple word and gloss
level analysis tools for new languages and show
that small investments in this direction (compared
to high octane context sensitive parsing tools) can
yield dramatic improvements, especially when rapid
development of machine translation tools becomes
increasingly relevant to the research community.
While our work focused on processing the morpho-
logically rich language and then translating ?down?
into the morphologically poor language, we plan to
use the analysis tools developed here to model the
reverse translation process as well, the harder task
of translating ?up? into a highly inflected space.
References
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: parameter esti-
mation. Comput. Linguist., 19(2):263?311.
Tim Buckwalter. 2004. Buckwalter Arabic Mor-
phological Analyzer Version 2.0. LDC Cata-
log No. LDC2004L02, Linguistic Data Consortium,
www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog.
Tim Buckwalter. 2005.
www.qamus.org/morphology.htm.
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation quality using n-gram co-occurrence
statistics. In In Proc. ARPA Workshop on Human Lan-
guage Technology.
Matthias Eck and Chiori Hori. 2005. Overview of the
IWSLT 2005 evaluation campaign. In Proceedings of
International Workshop on Spoken Language Transla-
tion, pages 11?17.
Jose B.Marino Josep M.Crego, Adria de Gispert. 2005.
The talp ngram-based smt system for iwslt?05. In Pro-
ceedings of International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation, pages 191?198.
203
Inflection system NIST ? Dev. NIST ? Test BLEU ? Dev. BLEU ? Test
No preprocessing 9.33 9.44 51.1 49.7
Orthographic normalization (baseline) 9.41 9.51 51.0 49.7
BAMA 9.90 9.76 (+2.5%) 52.0 50.2 (+1%)
BAMA+CONTEXT+CORRMATCH 9.91 10.02 (+5.3%) 52.8 52.0 (+4.7%)
Table 1: Translation results for each stage of inflectional splitting for the merged, sampled dev. and test
data, highest scores in bold, relative improvements in brackets
Inflection system NIST ? Dev. NIST ? Test BLEU ? Dev. BLEU ? Test
No preprocessing 9.46 9.38 51.1 49.6
Orthographic normalization (baseline) 9.58 9.35 52.1 49.8
BAMA 10.10 9.60 (+2.7%) 53.8 48.8 (-2%)
BAMA+CONTEXT+CORRMATCH 10.08 9.79 (+4.7%) 53.7 50.6 (+1.6%)
Table 2: Translation results for each stage of inflectional splitting for the BTEC Supplied DevSet/Test05
data, highest scores in bold, relative improvements in brackets
Leah Larkey, Lisa Ballesteros, and Margaret Connell.
2002. Improving stemming for arabic information re-
trieval: Light stemming and co-occurrence analysis.
In Proc. of the 25th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development information
retrieval.
Young-Suk Lee, Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Os-
sama Emam, and Hany Hassan. 2003. Language
model based arabic word segmentation. In ACL, Sap-
poro, Japan, July 6-7.
Young-Suk Lee. 2004. Morphological analysis for sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the Hu-
man Language Technology and North American As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics Conference
(HLT/NAACL), Boston,MA, May 27-June 1.
Sonja Nie?en and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improving SMT
quality with morpho-syntactic analysis. In The 18th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sonja Nie?en and Herman Ney. 2004. Statistical ma-
chine translation with scarce resources using morpho-
syntactic information. Comput. Linguist., 30(2):181?
204.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Association of Computational Linguistics, pages 311?
318.
H. Popovic and Hermann Ney. 2004. Improving word
alignment quality using morpho-syntactic informa-
tion. In 20th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (CoLing), Geneva, Switzerland.
Toshiyuki Takezawa, Eiichiro Sumita, Fumiaki Sugaya,
Hirofumi Yamamoto, and Seiichi Yamamoto. 2002.
Toward a broad-coverage bilingual corpus for speech
translation of travel conversations in the real world. In
Proc. of LREC 2002, pages 147?152, Las Palmas, Ca-
nary Islands, Spain, May.
Stephan Vogel, Ying Zhang, Fei Huang, Alicia Trib-
ble, Ashish Venogupal, Bing Zhao, and Alex Waibel.
2003. The CMU statistical translation system. In Pro-
ceedings of MT Summit IX, New Orleans, LA, Septem-
ber.
Stephan Vogel. 2005. PESA: Phrase pair extraction as
sentence splitting. In Proceedings of MT Summit X,
Phuket,Thailand, September.
Ying Zhang and Stephan Vogel. 2004. Measuring confi-
dence intervals for the machine translation evaluation
metrics. In Proceedings of the 10th International Con-
ference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in
Machine Translation (TMII), Baltimore, MD, October.
204
