Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 145?148,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Selecting relevant text subsets from web-data for building topic specic
language models
Abhinav Sethy, Panayiotis G. Georgiou, Shrikanth Narayanan
Speech Analysis and Interpretation Lab
Integrated Media Systems Center
Viterbi School of Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering-Systems
University of Southern California
Abstract
In this paper we present a scheme to se-
lect relevant subsets of sentences from a
large generic corpus such as text acquired
from the web. A relative entropy (R.E)
based criterion is used to incrementally se-
lect sentences whose distribution matches
the domain of interest. Experimental re-
sults show that by using the proposed sub-
set selection scheme we can get signif-
icant performance improvement in both
Word Error Rate (WER) and Perplexity
(PPL) over the models built from the en-
tire web-corpus by using just 10% of the
data. In addition incremental data selec-
tion enables us to achieve significant re-
duction in the vocabulary size as well as
number of n-grams in the adapted lan-
guage model. To demonstrate the gains
from our method we provide a compar-
ative analysis with a number of methods
proposed in recent language modeling lit-
erature for cleaning up text.
1 Introduction
One of the main challenges in the rapid deployment
of NLP applications is the lack of in-domain data
required for training statistical models. Language
models, especially n-gram based, are key compo-
nents of most NLP applications, such as speech
recognition and machine translation, where they
serve as priors in the decoding process. To estimate
a n-gram language model we require examples of
in-domain transcribed utterances, which in absence
of readily available relevant corpora have to be col-
lected manually. This poses severe constraints in
terms of both system turnaround time and cost.
This led to a growing interest in using the World
Wide Web (WWW) as a corpus for NLP (Lapata,
2005; Resnik and Smith, 2003). The web can serve
as a good resource for automatically gathering data
for building task-specific language models. Web-
pages of interest can be identified by generating
query terms either manually or automatically from
an initial set of in-domain sentences by measures
such as TFIDF or Relative Entropy (R.E). These
webpages can then be converted to a text corpus
(which we will refer to as web-data) by appropri-
ate preprocessing. However text gathered from the
web will rarely fit the demands or the nature of the
domain of interest completely. Even with the best
queries and web crawling schemes, both the style
and content of the web-data will usually differ sig-
nificantly from the specific needs. For example, a
speech recognition system requires conversational
style text whereas most of the data on the web is
literary.
The mismatch between in-domain data and web-
data can be seen as a semi-supervised learning prob-
lem. We can model the web-data as a mix of sen-
tences from two classes: in-domain (I) and noise
(N) (or out-of-domain). The labels I and N are la-
tent and unknown for the sentences in web-data but
we usually have a small number of examples of in-
domain examples I. Selecting the right labels for
the unlabeled set is important for benefiting from it.
145
Recent research on semi-supervised learning shows
that in many cases (Nigam et al, 2000; Zhu, 2005)
poor preprocessing of unlabeled data might actually
lower the performance of classifiers. We found sim-
ilar results in our language modeling experiments
where the presence of a large set of noisy N ex-
amples in training actually lowers the performance
slightly in both perplexity and WER terms. Recent
literature on building language models from text ac-
quired from the web addresses this issue partly by
using various rank-and-select schemes for identify-
ing the set I (Ostendorf et al, 2005; Sethy, 2005;
Sarikaya, 2005). However we believe that simi-
lar to the question of balance (Zhu, 2005) in semi-
supervised learning for classification, we need to ad-
dress the question of distributional similarity while
selecting the appropriate utterances for building a
language model from noisy data. The subset of sen-
tences from web-data which are selected to build the
adaptation language should have a distribution sim-
ilar to the in-domain data model.
To address the issue of distributional similarity we
present an incremental algorithm which compares
the distribution of the selected set and the in-domain
examples by using a relative entropy (R.E) criterion.
We will review in section 2 some of the ranking
schemes which provide baselines for performance
comparison and in section 3 we describe the pro-
posed algorithm. Experimental results are provided
in section 4, before we conclude with a summary of
this work and directions for the future.
2 Rank and select methods for text
cleaning
The central idea behind text cleanup schemes in re-
cent literature, on using web-data for language mod-
eling, is to use a scoring function that measures the
similarity of each observed sentence in the web-
data to the in-domain set and assigns an appropri-
ate score. The subsequent step is to set a threshold
in terms of either the minimum score or the num-
ber of top scoring sentences. The threshold can usu-
ally be fixed using a heldout set. Ostendorf (2005)
use perplexity from an in-domain n-gram language
model as a scoring function. More recently, a mod-
ified version of the BLEU metric which measures
sentence similarity in machine translation has been
proposed by Sarikaya (2005) as a scoring function.
Instead of explicit ranking and thresholding it is also
possible to design a classifier in a learning from pos-
itive and unlabeled examples framework (LPU) (Liu
et al, 2003). In this system, a subset of the unla-
beled set is selected as the negative or the noise set
N. A two class classifier is then trained using the
in-domain set and the negative set. The classifier
is then used to label the sentences in the web-data.
The classifier can then be iteratively refined by us-
ing a better and larger subset of the I/N sentences
selected in each iteration.
Rank ordering schemes do not address the issue of
distributional similarity and select many sentences
which already have a high probability in the in-
domain text. Adapting models on such data has the
tendency to skew the distribution even further to-
wards the center. For example, in our doctor-patient
interaction task short sentences containing the word
?okay? such as ?okay?,?yes okay?, ?okay okay? were
very frequent in the in-domain data. Perplexity or
other similarity measures give a high score to all
such examples in the web-data boosting the prob-
ability of these words even further while other perti-
nent sentences unseen in the in-domain data such as
?Can you stand up please?? are ranked low and get
rejected.
3 Incremental Selection
To address the issue of distributional similarity we
developed an incremental greedy selection scheme
based on relative entropy which selects a sentence
if adding it to the already selected set of sentences
reduces the relative entropy with respect to the in-
domain data distribution.
Let us denote the language model built from in-
domain data as P and let Pinit be a language modelfor initialization purposes which we estimate by
bagging samples from the same in-domain data. To
describe our algorithm we will employ the paradigm
of unigram probabilities though the method general-
izes to higher n-grams also.
Let W (i) be a initial set of counts for the words
i in the vocabulary V initialized using Pinit. We de-note the count of word i in the j th sentence sj ofweb-data with mij . Let nj = ?i mij be the num-ber of words in the sentence and N = ?i W (i) be
146
the total number of words already selected. The rel-
ative entropy of the maximum likelihood estimate of
the language model of the selected sentences to the
initial model P is given by
H(j ? 1) = ?
?
i
P (i) ln P (i)W (i)/N
If we select the sentence sj , the updated R.E
H(j) = ?
?
i
P (i) ln P (i)(W (i) + mij)/(N + nj)
Direct computation of R.E using the above ex-
pressions for every sentence in the web-data will
have a very high computational cost since O(V )
computations per sentence in the web-data are re-
quired. However given the fact that mij is sparse,we can split the summation H(j) into
H(j) = ?
?
i
P (i) ln P (i) +
+
?
i
P (i) ln W (i) + mijN + nj
= H(j ? 1) + ln N + njN
? ?? ?
T1
?
?
i,mij 6=0
P (i) ln (W (i) + mij)W (i)
? ?? ?
T2
Intuitively, the term T1 measures the decrease
in probability mass because of adding nj wordsmore to the corpus and the term T2 measures the
in-domain distribution P weighted improvement in
probability for words with non-zero mij .For the R.E to decrease with selection of sentence
sj we require T1 < T2. To make the selection morerefined we can impose a condition T1 + thr(j) <
T2 where thr(j) is a function of j. A good choice
for thr(j) based on empirical study is a function that
declines at the same rate as the ratio ln (N+nj)N ?
nj/N ? 1/kj where k is the average number ofwords for every sentence.
The proposed algorithm is sequential and greedy
in nature and can benefit from randomization of the
order in which it scans the corpus. We generate per-
mutes of the corpus by scanning through the corpus
and randomly swapping sentences. Next we do se-
quential selection on each permutation and merge
the selected sets.
The choice of using maximum likelihood estima-
tion for estimating the intermediate language mod-
els for W (j) is motivated by the simplification in
the entropy calculation which reduces the order from
O(V ) to O(k). However, maximum likelihood esti-
mation of language models is poor when compared
to smoothing based estimation. To balance the com-
putation cost and estimation accuracy, we modify
the counts W (j) using Kneser-Ney smoothing pe-
riodically after fixed number of sentences.
4 Experiments
Our experiments were conducted on medical do-
main data collected for building the English ASR
of our English-Persian Speech to Speech translation
project (Georgiou et al, 2003). We have 50K in-
domain sentences for this task available. We down-
loaded around 60GB data from the web using au-
tomatically generated queries which after filtering
and normalization amount to 150M words. The test
set for perplexity evaluations consists of 5000 sen-
tences(35K words) and the heldout set had 2000
sentences (12K words). The test set for word er-
ror rate evaluation consisted of 520 utterances. A
generic conversational speech language model was
built from the WSJ, Fisher and SWB corpora in-
terpolated with the CMU LM. All language models
built from web-data and in-domain data were inter-
polated with this language model with the interpola-
tion weight determined on the heldout set.
We first compare our proposed algorithm against
baselines based on perplexity(PPL), BLEU and LPU
classification in terms of test set perplexity. As the
comparison shows the proposed algorithm outper-
forms the rank-and-select schemes with just 1/10th
of data. Table 1 shows the test set perplexity with
different amounts of initial in-domain data. Table 2
shows the number of sentences selected for the best
perplexity on the heldout set by the above schemes.
The average relative perplexity reduction is around
6%. In addition to the PPL and WER improvements
we were able to acheive a factor of 5 reduction in
the number of estimated language model parameters
(bigram+trigram) and a 30% reduction in the vocab-
147
10K 20K 30K 40K
No Web 60 49.6 42.2 39.7
AllWeb 57.1 48.1 41.8 38.2
PPL 56.1 48.1 41.8 38.2
BLEU 56.3 48.2 42.0 38.3
LPU 56.3 48.2 42.0 38.3
Proposed 54.8 46.8 40.7 38.1
Table 1: Perplexity of testdata with the web adapted
model for different number of initial sentences.
ulary size. No Web refers to the language model built
from just in-domain data with no web-data. All-
Web refers to the case where the entire web-data was
used.
The WER results in Table 3 show that adding data
from the web without proper filtering can actually
harm the performance of the speech recognition sys-
tem when the initial in-domain data size increases.
This can be attributed to the large increase in vo-
cabulary size which increases the acoustic decoder
perplexity. The average reduction in WER using the
proposed scheme is close to 3% relative. It is inter-
esting to note that for our data selection scheme the
perplexity improvments correlate surprisingly well
with WER improvments. A plausible explanation
is that the perplexity improvments are accompanied
by a significant reduction in the number of language
model parameters.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have presented a computationally
efficient scheme for selecting a subset of data from
an unclean generic corpus such as data acquired
from the web. Our results indicate that with this
scheme, we can identify small subsets of sentences
(about 1/10th of the original corpus), with which we
can build language models which are substantially
smaller in size and yet have better performance in
10K 20K 30K 40K
PPL 93 92 91 91
BLEU 91 90 89 89
LPU 90 88 87 87
Proposed 12 11 11 12
Table 2: Percentage of web-data selected for differ-
ent number of initial sentences.
10K 20K 30K 40K
No Web 19.8 18.9 18.3 17.9
AllWeb 19.5 19.1 18.7 17.9
PPL 19.2 18.8 18.5 17.9
BLEU 19.3 18.8 18.5 17.9
LPU 19.2 18.8 18.5 17.8
Proposed 18.3 18.2 18.2 17.3
Table 3: Word Error Rate (WER) with web adapted
models for different number of initial sentences.
both perplexity and WER terms compared to models
built using the entire corpus. Although our focus in
the paper was on web-data, we believe the proposed
method can be used for adaptation of topic specific
models from large generic corpora.
We are currently exploring ways to use multiple
bagged in-domain language models for the selection
process. Instead of sequential scan of the corpus, we
are exploring the use of rank-and-select methods to
give a better search sequence.
References
Abhinav Sethy and Panayiotis Georgiou et al. Building topic
specific language models from web-data using competitive
models. Proceedings of Eurospeech. 2005
Bing Liu and Yang Dai et al. Building Text Classifiers Using
Positive and Unlabeled Examples. Proceedings of ICDM.
2003
Kamal Nigam and Andrew Kachites McCallum et al. Text
Classification from Labeled and Unlabeled Documents using
EM. Journal of Machine Learning. 39(2:3)103?134. 2000
Mirella Lapata and Frank Keller. Web-based models for natu-
ral language processing. ACM Transactions on Speech and
Language Processing. 2(1),2005.
Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. The Web as a parallel cor-
pus. Computational Linguistics. 29(3),2003.
P.G. Georgiou and S.Narayanan et al. Transonics: A speech to
speech system for English-Persian Interactions. Proceedings
of IEEE ASRU. 2003
Ruhi Sarikaya and Agustin Gravano et al Rapid Language
Model Development Using External Resources For New
Spoken Dialog Domains Proceedings of ICASSP. 2005
Tim Ng and Mari Ostendorf et al. Web-data Augmented Lan-
guage Model for Mandarin Speech Recognition. Proceed-
ings of ICASSP. 2005
Xiaojin Zhu. Semi-Supervised Learning Literature Survey.
Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
148
