Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 81?84,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Initial Study on Automatic Identification of Speaker Role in Broadcast News
Speech
Yang Liu
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX
yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
Identifying a speaker?s role (anchor, reporter,
or guest speaker) is important for finding
the structural information in broadcast news
speech. We present an HMM-based approach
and a maximum entropy model for speaker
role labeling using Mandarin broadcast news
speech. The algorithms achieve classification
accuracy of about 80% (compared to the base-
line of around 50%) using the human tran-
scriptions and manually labeled speaker turns.
We found that the maximum entropy model
performs slightly better than the HMM, and
that the combination of them outperforms any
model alone. The impact of the contextual role
information is also examined in this study.
1 Introduction
More effective information access is beneficial to deal
with the increasing amount of broadcast news speech.
Many attempts have been made in the past decade to build
news browser, spoken document retrieval system, and
summarization or question answering system to effec-
tively handle the large volume of news broadcast speech
(e.g., the recent DARPA GALE program). Structural in-
formation, such as story segmentation or speaker cluster-
ing, is critical for all of these applications. In this paper,
we investigate automatic identification of the speakers?
roles in broadcast news speech. A speaker?s role (such
as anchor, reporter or journalist, interviewee, or some
soundbites) can provide useful structural information of
broadcast news. For example, anchors appear through the
entire program and generally introduce news stories. Re-
porters typically report a specific news story, in which
there may be other guest speakers. The transition be-
tween anchors and reporters is usually a good indicator
of story structure. Speaker role information was shown
to be useful for summarizing broadcast news (Maskey
and Hirschberg, 2003). Anchor information has also been
used for video segmentation, such as the systems in the
TRECVID evaluations.1
1See http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/trecvid/ for more in-
formation on video retrieval evaluations.
In this paper, we develop algorithms for speaker role
identification in broadcast news speech. Human tran-
scription and manual speaker turn labels are used in this
initial study. The task is then to classify each speaker?s
turn as anchor, reporter, or other. We use about 170
hours of speech for training and testing. Two approaches
are evaluated, an HMM and a maximum entropy classi-
fier. Our methods achieve about 80% accuracy for the
three-way classification task, compared to around 50%
when every speaker is labeled with the majority class la-
bel, i.e., anchor.2
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related
work is introduced in Section 2. We describe our ap-
proaches in Section 3. Experimental setup and results are
presented in Section 4. Summary and future work appear
in Section 5.
2 Related Work
The most related previous work is (Barzilay et al, 2000),
in which Barzilay et al used BoosTexter and the max-
imum entropy model to classify each speaker?s role in
an English broadcast news corpus. Three classes are
used, anchor, journalist, and guest speaker, which are
very similar to the role categories in our study. Lexical
features (key words), context features, duration, and ex-
plicit speaker introduction are used as features. For the
three-way classification task, they reported accuracy of
about 80% compared to the chance of 35%. They have in-
vestigated using both the reference transcripts and speech
recognition output. Our study differs from theirs in that
we use one generative modeling approach (HMM), as
well as the conditional maximum entropy method. We
also evaluate the contextual role information for classifi-
cation. In addition, our experiments are conducted using
a different language, Mandarin broadcast news. There
may be inherent difference across languages and news
sources.
Another task related to our study is anchor segmen-
tation. Huang et al (Huang et al, 1999) used a recog-
nition model for a particular anchor and a background
model to identify anchor segments. They reported very
promising results for the task of determining whether
2Even though this is a baseline (or chance performance), it
is not very meaningful since there is no information provided in
this output.
81
or not a particular anchor is talking. However, this
method is not generalizable to multiple anchors, nor is
it to reporters or other guest speakers. Speaker role
detection is also related to speaker segmentation and
clustering (also called speaker diarization), which was a
benchmark test in the NIST Rich Transcription evalua-
tions in the past few years (for example, NIST RT-04F
http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/rt/rt2004/fall/). Most of
the speaker diarization systems only use acoustic infor-
mation; however, in recent studies textual sources have
also been utilized to help improve speaker clustering re-
sults, such as (Canseco et al, 2005). The goal of speaker
diarization is to identify speaker change and group the
same speakers together. It is different from our task since
we determine the role of a speaker rather than speaker
identity. In this initial study, instead of using automatic
speaker segmentation and clustering results, we use the
manual speaker segments but without any speaker iden-
tity information.
3 Speaker Role Identification Approaches
3.1 Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
anchor
reporterother
Sentence 1Sentence 2Sentence 3
????
Sentence 1Sentence 2
????
Sentence 1Sentence 2Sentence 3
????
Figure 1: A graphical representation of the HMM ap-
proach for speaker role labeling. This is a simple first
order HMM.
The HMM has been widely used in many tagging prob-
lems. Stolcke et al (Stolcke et al, 2000) used it for dialog
act classification, where each utterance (or dialog act) is
used as the observation. In speaker role detection, the ob-
servation is composed of a much longer word sequence,
i.e., the entire speech from one speaker. Figure 1 shows
the graphical representation of the HMM for speaker role
identification, in which the states are the speaker roles,
and the observation associated with a state consists of the
utterances from a speaker. The most likely role sequence
R? is:
R? = argmax
R
P (R|O) = argmax
R
P (O|R)P (R), (1)
where O is the observation sequence, in which Oi corre-
sponds to one speaker turn. If we assume what a speaker
says is only dependent on his or her role, then:
P (O|R) =
?
i
P (Oi|Ri). (2)
From the labeled training set, we train a language
model (LM), which provides the transition probabilities
in the HMM, i.e., the P (R) term in Equation (1). The vo-
cabulary in this role LM (or role grammar) consists of dif-
ferent role tags. All the sentences belonging to the same
role are put together to train a role specific word-based N-
gram LM. During testing, to obtain the observation prob-
abilities in the HMM, P (Oi|Ri), each role specific LM
is used to calculate the perplexity of those sentences cor-
responding to a test speaker turn.
The graph in Figure 1 is a first-order HMM, in which
the role state is only dependent on the previous state.
In order to capture longer dependency relationship, we
used a 6-gram LM for the role LM. For each role spe-
cific word-based LM, 4-gram is used with Kneser-Ney
smoothing. There is a weighting factor when combin-
ing the state transitions and the observation probabilities
with the best weights tuned on the development set (6 for
the transition probabilities in our experiments). In addi-
tion, in stead of using Viterbi decoding, we used forward-
backward decoding in order to find the most likely role
tag for each segment. Finally we may use only a subset
of the sentences in a speaker?s turn, which are possibly
more discriminative to determine the speaker?s role. The
LM training and testing and HMM decoding are imple-
mented using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002).
3.2 Maximum Entropy (Maxent) Classifier
A Maxent model estimates the conditional probability:
P (Ri|O) =
1
Z?(O)
exp(
?
k
?kgk(Ri, O)), (3)
where Z?(O) is the normalization term, functions
gk(Ri, O) are indicator functions weighted by ?, and k is
used to indicate different ?features?. The weights (?) are
obtained to maximize the conditional likelihood of the
training data, or in other words, maximize the entropy
while satisfying all the constraints. Gaussian smoothing
(variance=1) is used to avoid overfitting. In our experi-
ments we used an existing Maxent toolkit (available from
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/s0450736/maxent toolkit.
html).
The following features are used in the Maxent model:
? bigram and trigram of the words in the first and the
last sentence of the current speaker turn
? bigram and trigram of the words in the last sentence
of the previous turn
82
? bigram and trigram of the words in the first sentence
of the following turn
Our hypothesis is that the first and the last sentence from
a speaker?s turn are more indicative of the speaker?s role
(e.g., self introduction and closing). Similarly the last
sentence from the previous speaker segment and the first
sentence of the following speaker turn also capture the
speaker transition information. Even though sentences
from the other speakers are included as features, the Max-
ent model makes a decision for each test speaker turn in-
dividually without considering the other segments. The
impact of the contextual role tags will be evaluated in our
experiments.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setup
We used the TDT4 Mandarin broadcast news data in this
study. The data set consists of about 170 hours (336
shows) of news speech from different sources. In the
original transcripts provided by LDC, stories are seg-
mented; however, speaker information (segmentation or
identity) is not provided. Using the reference transcripts
and the audio files, we manually labeled the data with
speaker turns and the role tag for each turn.3 Speaker
segmentation is generally very reliable; however, the role
annotation is ambiguous in some cases. The interanno-
tator agreement will be evaluated in our future work. In
this initial study, we just treat the data as noisy data.
We preprocessed the transcriptions by removing some
bad codes and also did text normalization. We used punc-
tuation (period, question mark, and exclamation) avail-
able from the transcriptions (though not very accurate)
to generate sentences, and a left-to-right longest word
match approach to segment sentences into words. These
words/sentences are then used for feature extraction in
the Maxent model, and LM training and perplexity cal-
culation in the HMM as described in Section 3. Note
that the word segmentation approach we used may not
be the-state-of-art, which might have some effect on our
experiments.
10-fold cross validation is used in our experiments.
The entire data set is split into ten subsets. Each time
one subset is used as the test set, another one is used as
the development set, and the rest are used for training.
The average number of segments (i.e., speaker turns) in
the ten subsets is 1591, among which 50.8% are anchors.
Parameters (e.g., weighting factor) are tuned based on the
average performance over the ten development sets, and
the same weights are applied to all the splits during test-
ing.
3The labeling guideline can be found from
http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/?yangl/spkr-label/. It was modified
based on the annotation manual used for English at Columbia
University (available from http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/
?smaskey/labeling/Labeling Manual v 2 1.pdf).
4.2 Results
A HMM and Maxent: Table 1 shows the role iden-
tification results using the HMM and the Maxent
model, including the overall classification accuracy
and the precision/recall rate (%) for each role. These
results are the average over the 10 test sets.
HMM Maxent
precision recall precision recall
anchor 78.03 87.33 80.29 87.23
reporter 78.54 66.42 73.34 77.01
other 83.05 68.19 89.52 41.30
Accuracy (%) 77.18 77.42
Table 1: Automatic role labeling results (%) using the
HMM and Maxent classifiers.
From Table 1 we find that the overall classification
performance is similar when using the HMM and
the Maxent model; however, their error patterns are
quite different. For example, the Maxent model is
better than the HMM at identifying ?reporter? role,
but worse at identifying ?other? speakers (see the re-
call rate shown in the table). In the HMM, we only
used the first and the last sentence in a speaker?s
turn, which are more indicative of the speaker?s role.
We observed significant performance degradation,
that is, 74.68% when using all the sentences for
LM training and perplexity calculation, compared
to 77.18% as shown in the table using a subset of
a speaker?s speech. Note that the sentences used in
the HMM and Maxent models are the same; how-
ever, the Maxent does not use any contextual role
tags (which we will examine next), although it does
include some words from the previous and the fol-
lowing speaker segments in its feature set.
B Contextual role information: In order to investi-
gate how important the role sequence is, we con-
ducted two experiments for the Maxent model. In
the first experiment, for each segment, the reference
role tag of the previous and the following segments
and the combination of them are included as features
for model training and testing (a ?cheating? exper-
iment). In the second experiment, a two-step ap-
proach is employed. Following the HMM and Max-
ent experiments (i.e., results as shown in Table 1),
Viterbi decoding is performed using the posterior
probabilities from the Maxent model and the tran-
sition probabilities from the role LM as in the HMM
(with weight 0.3). The average performance over the
ten test sets is shown in Table 2 for these two exper-
iments. For comparison, we also present the decod-
ing results of the HMM with and without using se-
quence information (i.e., the transition probabilities
in the HMM). Additionally, the system combination
83
results of the HMM and Maxent are presented in the
table, with more discussion on this later. We observe
from Table 2 that adding contextual role informa-
tion improves performance. Including the two refer-
ence role tags yields significant gain in the Maxent
model, even though some sentences from the previ-
ous and the following segments are already included
as features. The HMM suffers more than the Max-
ent classifier when role sequence information is not
used during decoding, since that is the only contex-
tual information used in the HMM, unlike the Max-
ent model, which uses features extracted from the
neighboring speaker turns.
Accuracy (%)
0: Maxent (as in Table 1) 77.42
1: Maxent + 2 reference tags 80.90
2: Maxent + sequence decoding 78.59
3: HMM (as in Table 1) 77.18
4: HMM w/o sequence 73.30
Maxent (0) + HMM (3) 79.74
Maxent (2) + HMM (3) 81.97
Table 2: Impact of role sequence information on the
HMM and Maxent classifiers. The combination results
of the HMM and Maxent are also provided.
C System combination: For system combination, we
used two different Maxent results: with and with-
out the Viterbi sequence decoding, corresponding to
experiments (0) and (2) as shown in Table 2 respec-
tively. When combining the HMM and Maxent, i.e.,
the last two rows in Table 2, the posterior probabili-
ties from them are linearly weighted (weight 0.6 for
the Maxent in the upper one, and 0.7 for the Max-
ent in the bottom one). The combination of the two
approaches yields better performance than any sin-
gle model in the two cases. We also investigated
other system combination approaches. For example,
a decision tree or SVM that builds a 3-way super-
classifier using the posterior probabilities from the
HMM and Maxent. However, so far we have not
found any gain from more complicated system com-
bination than a simple linear interpolation. We will
study this in our future work.
5 Summary and Future Work
In this paper we have reported an initial study of speaker
role identification in Mandarin broadcast news speech us-
ing the HMM and Maxent tagging approaches. We find
that the conditional Maxent generally performs slightly
better than the HMM, and that their combination out-
performs each model alone. The HMM and the Max-
ent model show differences in identifying different roles.
The impact of contextual role information is also exam-
ined for the two approaches, and a significant gain is ob-
served when contextual information is modeled. We find
that the beginning and the end sentences in a speaker?s
turn are good cues for role identification. The overall
classification performance in this study is similar to that
reported in (Barzilay et al, 2000); however, the chance
performance is quite different (35% in that study). It is
not clear yet whether it is because of the difference across
the two corpora or languages.
The Maxent model provides a convenient way to in-
corporate various knowledge sources. We will investi-
gate other features to improve the classification results,
such as name information, acoustic or prosodic features,
and speaker clustering results (considering that the same
speaker typically has the same role tag). We plan to
examine the effect of using speech recognition output,
as well as automatic speaker segmentation and cluster-
ing results. Analysis of difference news sources may
also reveal some interesting findings. Since our working
hypothesis is that speaker role information is important
to find structure in broadcast news, we will investigate
whether and how speaker role relates to downstream lan-
guage processing applications, such as summarization or
question answering.
Acknowledgment
The author thanks Julia Hirschberg and Sameer Maskey at
Columbia University and Mari Ostendorf at the University of
Washington for the useful discussions, and Mei-Yuh Hwang
for helping with Mandarin word segmentation and text normal-
ization. This material is based upon work supported by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under
Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
DARPA.
References
R. Barzilay, M. Collins, J. Hirschberg, and S. Whittaker. 2000.
The rules behind roles: Identifying speaker role in radio
broadcasts. In Proc. of AAAI.
L. Canseco, L. Lamel, and J Gauvain. 2005. A comparative
study using manual and automatic transcription for diariza-
tion. In Proc. of ASRU.
Q. Huang, Z. Liu, A. Rosenberg, D. Gibbon, and B. Shahraray.
1999. Automated generation of news content hierarchy by
integrating audio, video, and text information. In Proc. of
ICASSP, pages 3025?3028.
S. Maskey and J. Hirschberg. 2003. Automatic summarization
of broadcast news using structural features. In Eurospeech.
A. Stolcke, K. Ries, N. Coccaro, E. Shriberg, R. Bates,
D. Jurasky, P. Taylor, R. Martin, C.V. Ess-Dykema, and
M. Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for automatic tag-
ging and recognition of conversational speech. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 26(3):339?373.
A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? An extensible language modeling
toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP, pages 901?904.
84
