Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 9?12,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Museli: A Multi-Source Evidence Integration Approach to Topic Seg-
mentation of Spontaneous Dialogue 
 
  
Jaime Arguello Carolyn Ros? 
Language Technologies Institute Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
jarguell@andrew.cmu.edu cprose@cs.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
We introduce a novel topic segmentation 
approach that combines evidence of topic 
shifts from lexical cohesion with linguistic 
evidence such as syntactically distinct fea-
tures of segment initial contributions.  Our 
evaluation demonstrates that this hybrid 
approach outperforms state-of-the-art algo-
rithms even when applied to loosely struc-
tured, spontaneous dialogue. 
1 Introduction    
Use of topic-based models of dialogue has 
played a role in information retrieval (Oard et al, 
2004), information extraction (Baufaden, 2001), 
and summarization (Zechner, 2001). However, 
previous work on automatic topic segmentation has 
focused primarily on segmentation of expository 
text.  We present Museli, a novel topic segmenta-
tion approach for dialogue that integrates evidence 
of topic shifts from lexical cohesion with linguistic 
indicators such as syntactically distinct features of 
segment initial contributions. 
Our evaluation demonstrates that approaches de-
signed for text do not generalize well to dialogue.  
We demonstrate a significant advantage of Museli 
over competing approaches.  We then discuss why 
models based entirely on lexical cohesion fail on 
dialogue and how our algorithm compensates with 
other topic shift indicators.  
2 Previous Work 
Existing topic segmentation approaches can be 
loosely classified into two types: (1) lexical cohe-
sion models, and (2) content-oriented models.  The 
underlying assumption in lexical cohesion models 
is that a shift in term distribution signals a shift in 
topic (Halliday and Hassan, 1976). The best known 
algorithm based on this idea is TextTiling (Hearst, 
1997). In TextTiling, a sliding window is passed 
over the vector-space representation of the text. At 
each position, the cosine correlation between the 
upper and lower region of the sliding window is 
compared with that of the peak cosine correlation 
values to the left and right of the window.  A seg-
ment boundary is predicted when the magnitude of 
the difference exceeds a threshold.    
One drawback to relying on term co-occurrence 
to signal topic continuity is that synonyms or re-
lated terms are treated as thematically-unrelated. 
One solution to this problem is using a dimension-
ality reduction technique such as Latent Semantic 
Analysis (LSA) (Landauer and Dumais, 1997). 
Two such algorithms for segmentation are de-
scribed in (Foltz, 1998) and (Olney and Cai, 2005).  
Both TextTiling and Foltz?s approach measure 
coherence as a function of the repetition of the-
matically-related terms. TextTiling looks for co-
occurrences of terms or term-stems and Foltz uses 
LSA to measure semantic relatedness between 
terms.  Olney and Cai?s orthonormal basis ap-
proach also uses LSA, but allows a richer represen-
tation of discourse coherence, which is that coher-
ence is a function of how much new information a 
discourse unit (e.g. a dialogue contribution) adds  
(informativity) and how relevant it is to the local 
context (relevance) (Olney and Cai, 2005). 
Content-oriented models, such as (Barzilay and 
Lee, 2004), rely on the re-occurrence of patterns of 
topics over multiple realizations of thematically 
similar discourses, such as a series of newspaper 
articles about similar events. Their approach util-
izes a hidden Markov model where states corre-
spond to topics, and state transition probabilities 
correspond to topic shifts. To obtain the desired 
9
number of topics (states), text spans of uniform 
length (individual contributions, in our case) are 
clustered. Then, state emission probabilities are 
induced using smoothed cluster-specific language 
models. Transition probabilities are induced by 
considering the proportion of documents in which 
a contribution assigned to the source cluster (state) 
immediately precedes a contribution assigned to 
the target cluster (state). Using an EM-like Viterbi 
approach, each contribution is reassigned to the 
state most likely to have generated it.  
3 Overview of Museli Approach 
We will demonstrate that lexical cohesion alone 
does not adequately mark topic boundaries in dia-
logue.  Nevertheless, it can provide one meaning-
ful source of evidence towards segmenting dia-
logue. In our hybrid Museli approach, we com-
bined lexical cohesion with features that have the 
potential to capture something about the linguistic 
style that marks shifts in topic: word-unigrams, 
word-bigrams, and POS-bigrams for the current 
and previous contributions; the inclusion of at least 
one non-stopword term (contribution of content); 
time difference between contributions; contribution 
length; and the agent role of the previous and cur-
rent contribution.  
We cast the segmentation problem as a binary 
classification problem where each contribution is 
classified as NEW_TOPIC if the contribution in-
troduces a new topic and SAME_TOPIC other-
wise.  We found that using a Na?ve Bayes classifier 
(John & Langley, 1995) with an attribute selection 
wrapper using the chi-square test for ranking at-
tributes performed better than other state-of-the-art 
machine learning algorithms, perhaps because of 
the evidence integration oriented nature of the 
problem.  We conducted our evaluation using 10-
fold cross-validation, being careful not to include 
instances from the same dialogue in both the train-
ing and test sets on any fold so that the results we 
report would not be biased by idiosyncratic com-
municative patterns associated with individual 
conversational participants picked up by the 
trained model.  
Using the complete set of features enumerated 
above, we perform feature selection on the training 
data for each fold of the cross-validation sepa-
rately, training a model with the top 1000 features, 
and applying that trained model to the test data.  
Examples of high ranking features confirm our 
intuition that contributions that begin new topic 
segments are syntactically marked.  For example, 
many typical selected word bigrams were indica-
tive of imperatives, such as lets-do, do-the, ok-lets, 
ok-try, lets-see, etc.  Others included time oriented 
discourse markers such as now, then, next, etc. 
To capitalize on differences in conversational 
behavior between participants assigned to different 
roles in the conversation (i.e., student and tutor in 
our evaluation corpora), we learn separate models 
for each role in the conversation1. This decision is 
based on the observation that participants with dif-
ferent agent-roles introduce topics with a different 
frequency, introduce different types of topics, and 
may introduce topics in a different style that dis-
plays their status in the conversation. For instance, 
a tutor may introduce new topics with a contribu-
tion that ends with an imperative. A student may 
introduce new topics with a contribution that ends 
with a wh-question.   
4 Evaluation 
In this section we evaluate Museli in comparison 
to the best performing state-of-the-art approaches, 
demonstrating that our hybrid Museli approach 
out-performs all of these approaches on two differ-
ent dialogue corpora by a statistically significant 
margin (p < .01), in one case reducing the prob-
ability of error as measured by Beeferman's Pk to 
only 10% (Beeferman et al, 1999). 
4.1 Experimental Corpora 
We used two different dialogue corpora for our 
evaluation.  The first corpus, which we refer to as the 
Olney & Cai corpus, is a set of dialogues selected ran-
domly from the same corpus Olney and Cai selected 
their corpus from (Olney and Cai, 2005). The second 
corpus is a locally collected corpus of thermodynamics 
tutoring dialogues, which we refer to as the Thermo 
corpus. This corpus is particularly appropriate for ad-
dressing the research question of how to automatically 
segment dialogue for two reasons: First, the explora-
tory task that students and tutors engaged in together is 
more loosely structured than many task oriented do-
mains typically investigated in the dialogue commu-
nity, such as flight reservation or meeting scheduling.  
Second, because the tutor and student play asymmetric 
roles in the interaction, this corpus allows us to explore 
                                                 
1 Dissimilar agent-roles occur in other domains as well (e.g. 
Travel Agent and Customer)
10
how conversational role affects how speakers mark 
topic shifts.   
Table 1 presents statistics describing characteris-
tics of these two corpora.  Similar to (Passonneau 
and Litman, 1993), we adopt a flat model of topic-
segmentation for our gold standard based on dis-
course segment purpose, where a shift in topic cor-
responds to a shift in purpose that is acknowledged 
and acted upon by both conversational agents. We 
evaluated inter-coder reliability over 10% of the 
Thermo corpus mentioned above.  3 annotators 
were given a 10 page coding manual with explana-
tion of our informal definition of shared discourse 
segment purpose as well as examples of segmented 
dialogues.  Pairwise inter-coder agreement was 
above 0.7 kappa for all pairs of annotators. 
 
 Olney & Cai  
Corpus 
Thermo 
Corpus 
# Dialogues 42 22 
Contributions/ 
Dialogue 
195.40 217.90 
Contributions/ 
Topic 
24.00 13.31 
Topics/Dialogue 8.14 16.36 
Words/ 
Contribution 
28.63 5.12 
Table 1: Evaluation Corpora Statistics 
4.2 Baseline Approaches 
We evaluate Museli against the following algo-
rithms: (1) Olney and Cai (Ortho), (2) Barzilay and 
Lee (B&L), (3) TextTiling (TT), and (4) Foltz.  
As opposed to the other baseline algorithms, 
(Olney and Cai, 2005) applied their orthonormal 
basis approach specifically to dialogue, and prior 
to this work, report the highest numbers for topic 
segmentation of dialogue. Barzilay and Lee?s ap-
proach is the state of the art in modeling topic 
shifts in monologue text. Our application of B&L 
to dialogue attempts to harness any existing and 
recognizable redundancy in topic-flow across our 
dialogues for the purpose of topic segmentation.  
We chose TextTiling for its seminal contribution 
to monologue segmentation. TextTiling and Foltz 
consider lexical cohesion as their only evidence of 
topic shifts. Applying these approaches to dialogue 
segmentation sheds light on how term distribution 
in dialogue differs from that of expository mono-
logue text (e.g. news articles).  
The Foltz and Ortho approaches require a 
trained LSA space, which we prepared as de-
scribed in (Olney and Cai, 2005). Any parameter 
tuning for approaches other than our hybrid ap-
proach was computed over the entire test set, giv-
ing competing algorithms the maximum advantage. 
In addition to these approaches, we include 
segmentation results from three degenerate ap-
proaches: (1) classifying all contributions as 
NEW_TOPIC (ALL), (2) classifying no contribu-
tions as NEW_TOPIC (NONE), and (3) classifying 
contributions as NEW_TOPIC at uniform intervals 
(EVEN), corresponding to the average reference 
topic length (see Table 1). 
As a means for comparison, we adopt two evalua-
tion metrics: Pk and f-measure. An extensive argu-
ment of Pk?s robustness (if k is set to ? the average 
reference topic length) is present in (Beeferman, et al 
1999).  Pk measures the probability of misclassifying 
two contributions a distance of k contributions apart, 
where the classification question is are the two con-
tributions part of the same topic segment or not?  
Lower Pk values are preferred over higher ones. It 
equally captures the effect of false-negatives and 
false-positives and it favors near misses. F-measure 
punishes false positives equally, regardless of the 
distance to the reference boundary.  
4.3 Results 
Results for all approaches are displayed in Table 
2.  Note that lower values of Pk are preferred over 
higher ones. The opposite is true of F-measure.  In 
both corpora, Museli performed significantly better 
than all other approaches (p <  .01).   
 
 Olney & Cai Corpus Thermo Corpus 
 Pk F Pk F 
NONE 0.4897 -- 0.4900 -- 
ALL 0.5180 -- 0.5100 -- 
EVEN 0.5117 -- 0.5132 -- 
TT 0.6240 0.1475 0.5353 0.1614 
B&L 0.6351 0.1747 0.5086 0.1512 
Foltz 0.3270 0.3492 0.5058 0.1180 
Ortho 0.2754 0.6012 0.4898 0.2111 
Museli 0.1051 0.8013 0.4043 0.3693 
Table 2: Results on both corpora 
4.4 Error Analysis 
Results for all approaches are better on the Ol-
ney and Cai corpus than the Thermo corpus. The 
Thermo corpus differs profoundly from the Olney 
and Cai corpus in ways that very likely influenced 
the performance. For instance, in the Thermo cor-
pus each dialogue contribution is an average of 5 
words long, whereas in the Olney and Cai corpus 
11
each dialogue contribution contains an average of 
28 words. Thus, the vector space representation of 
the dialogue contributions is much more sparse in 
the Thermo corpus, which makes shifts in lexical 
coherence less reliable as topic shift indicators.   
In terms of Pk, TextTiling (TT) performed worse 
than the degenerate algorithms. TextTiling meas-
ures the term-overlap between adjacent regions in 
the discourse. However, dialogue contributions are 
often terse or even contentless. This produces 
many islands of contribution-sequences for which 
the local lexical cohesion is zero. TextTiling 
wrongfully classifies all of these as starts of new 
topics.  A heuristic improvement to prevent 
TextTiling from placing topic boundaries at every 
point along a sequence of contributions failed to 
produce a statistically significant improvement. 
The Foltz and the orthonormal basis approaches 
rely on LSA to provide strategic semantic gener-
alizations. Following (Olney and Cai, 2005), we 
built our LSA space using dialogue contributions 
as the atomic text unit.  However, in corpora such 
as the Thermo corpus, this may not be effective 
because of the brevity of contributions. 
Barzilay and Lee?s algorithm (B&L) did not 
generalize well to either dialogue corpus. One rea-
son could be that such probabilistic methods re-
quire that reference topics have significantly dif-
ferent language models, which was not true in ei-
ther of our evaluation corpora. We also noticed a 
number of instances in the dialogue corpora where 
participants referred to information from previous 
topic segments, which consequently may have 
blurred the distinction between the language mod-
els assigned to different topics. 
5 Current Directions 
In this paper we address the problem of auto-
matic topic segmentation of spontaneous dialogue.  
We demonstrated with an empirical evaluation that 
state-of-the-art approaches fail on spontaneous dia-
logue because word-distribution patterns alone are 
insufficient evidence of topic shifts in dialogue.  
We have presented a supervised learning algorithm 
for topic segmentation of dialogue that combines 
linguistic features signaling a contribution?s func-
tion with lexical cohesion. Our evaluation on two 
distinct dialogue corpora shows a significant im-
provement over the state of the art approaches.  
The disadvantage of our approach is that it re-
quires hand-labeled training data. We are currently 
exploring ways of bootstrapping a model from a 
small amount of hand labeled data in combination 
with lexical cohesion (tuned for high precision and 
consequently low recall) and some reliable dis-
course markers.  
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by Office of Naval Re-
search, Cognitive and Neural Science Division, 
grant number N00014-05-1-0043. 
References  
Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee (2004). Catching the 
drift: Probabilistic Content Models, with Applications 
to Generation and Summarization. In Proceedings of 
HLT-NAACL 2004.  
Doug Beeferman, Adam Berger, John D. Lafferty 
(1999).  Statistical Models for Text Segmentation. 
Machine Learning 34 (1-3): 177-210. 
Narj?s Boufaden, Guy Lapalme, Yoshua Bengio (2001). 
Topic Segmentation: A first stage to Dialog-based In-
formation Extraction. In Proceedings of NLPRS 2001. 
P.W. Foltz, W. Kintsch, and Thomas Landauer (1998). 
The measurement of textual cohesion with latent se-
mantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 285-307. 
M. A. K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan (1976). Cohesion 
in English. London: Longman. 
Marti Hearst. 1997. TextTiling: Segmenting Text into 
Multi-Paragragh Subtopic Passages. Computational 
Linguistics, 23(1), 33 ? 64.   
George John & Pat Langley (1995).  Estimating Con-
tinuous Distributions in Bayesian Classifiers.  In Pro-
ceedings of UAI 2005. 
Thomas Landauer, & Susan Dumais (1997). A Solution 
to Plato?s Problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis of 
Acquisition, Induction, and Representation of Knowl-
edge. Psychological Review, 104, 221-240.  
Douglas Oard, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, and Samuel 
Gustman (2004). Building an Information Retrieval 
Test Collection for Spontaneous Conversational 
Speech. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2004.  
Andrew Olney and Zhiqiang Cai (2005). An Orthonor-
mal Basis for Topic Segmentation of Tutorial Dia-
logue. In Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP 2005. 
Rebecca Passonneau and Diane Litman (1993). Inten-
tion-Based Segmentation: Human Reliability and 
Correlation with Linguistic Cues. In Proceedings 
ACL 2003.  
Klaus Zechner (2001). Automatic Generation of Con-
cise Summaries of Spoken Dialogues in Unrestricted 
Domains. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2001.  
12
