Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 65?68,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluating Centering for Sentence Ordering in Two New Domains
Nikiforos Karamanis
Natural Language and Information Processing Group
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Nikiforos.Karamanis@cl.cam.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper builds on recent research investigating
sentence ordering in text production by evaluating
the Centering-based metrics of coherence
employed by Karamanis et al (2004) using the
data of Barzilay and Lapata (2005). This is the first
time that Centering is evaluated empirically as a
sentence ordering constraint in several domains,
verifying the results reported in Karamanis et al
1 Introduction
As most literature in text linguistics argues, a
felicitous text should be coherent which means
that the content has to be organised in a way
that makes the text easy to read and comprehend.
The easiest way to demonstrate this claim is
by arbitrarily reordering the sentences that an
understandable text consists of. This process very
often gives rise to documents that do not make sense
although the information content remains the same.
Hence, deciding in which sequence to present a
set of preselected information-bearing items is an
important problem in automatic text production.
Entity coherence, which arises from the way
NP referents relate subsequent sentences in the
text, is an important aspect of textual felicity.
Centering Theory (Grosz et al, 1995) has been
an influential framework for modelling entity
coherence in computational linguistics in the last
two decades. Karamanis et al (2004) were the first
to evaluate Centering-based metrics of coherence
for ordering clauses in a subset of the GNOME
corpus (Poesio et al, 2004) consisting of 20 artefact
descriptions. They introduced a novel experimental
methodology that treats the observed ordering of
clauses in a text as the gold standard, which is
scored by each metric. Then, the metric is penalised
proportionally to the amount of alternative orderings
of the same material that score equally to or better
than the gold standard.
This methodology is very similar to the way
Barzilay and Lapata (2005) evaluate automatically
another model of coherence called the entity grid
using a larger collection of 200 articles from the
North American News Corpus (NEWS) and 200
accident narratives from the National Transportation
Safety Board database (ACCS). The same data and
similar methods were used by Barzilay and Lee
(2004) to compare their probabilistic approach for
ordering sentences with that of Lapata (2003).
This paper discusses how the Centering-based
metrics of coherence employed by Karamanis et al
can be evaluated on the data prepared by Barzilay
and Lapata. This is the first time that Centering
is evaluated empirically as a sentence ordering
constraint in more than one domain, verifying the
results reported in Karamanis et al
The paper also contributes by emphasising the
following methodological point: To conduct our
experiments, we need to produce several alternative
orderings of sentences and compare them with the
gold standard. As the number of possible orderings
grows factorially, enumerating them exhaustively
(as Barzilay and Lee do) becomes impractical.
In this paper, we make use of the methods of
Karamanis (2003) which allow us to explore a
65
Table 1A NP referents
Sentences department trial microsoft ... products brands ...
(a) S O S ... ? ? ...
(b) ? ? O ... S O ...
Table 1B CF list: CHEAPNESS
Sentences {CP, next two referents} CB Transition CBn=CPn?1(a) {department, microsoft, trial, ...} n.a. n.a. n.a.
(b) {products, microsoft, brands, ...} microsoft RETAIN ?
Table 1: (A) Fragment of the entity grid for example (1); (B) CP (i.e. first member of the CF list), next two
referents, CB, transition and violations of CHEAPNESS (denoted with a ?) for the same example.
sufficient number of alternative orderings and return
more reliable results than Barzilay and Lapata,
who used a sample of just 20 randomly produced
orderings (often out of several millions).
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Centering data structures
Example (1) presents the first two sentences of a text
in NEWS (Barzilay and Lapata, Table 2):
(1) (a) [The Justice Department]S is conducting [an anti-trust trial]O against [Microsoft Corp.]X with [evidence]Xthat [the company]S is increasingly attempting to crush[competitors]O . (b) [Microsoft]O is accused of trying toforcefully buy into [markets]X where [its own products]Sare not competitive enough to unseat [established
brands]O . (...)
Barzilay and Lapata automatically annotated their
corpora for the grammatical role of the NPs in
each sentence (denoted in the example by the
subscripts S, O and X for subject, object and
other respectively)1 as well as their coreferential
relations. This information is used as the basis
for the computation of the entity grid: a two-
dimensional array that captures the distribution of
NP referents across sentences in the text using the
aforementioned symbols for their grammatical role
and ??? for a referent that does not occur in a
sentence. Table 1A illustrates a fragment of the grid
for the sentences in example (1).2
Our data transformation script computes the basic
structure of Centering (known as CF list) for each
row of the grid using the referents with the symbols
1Subjects in passive constructions such as ?Microsoft?
in (1b) are marked with O.
2If a referent such as microsoft is attested by several
NPs, e.g. ?Microsoft Corp.? and ?the company? in (1a), the
role with the highest priority (in this case S) is used.
S, O and X (Table 1B). The members of the CF
list are ranked according to their grammatical role
(Brennan et al, 1987) and their position in the grid.3
The derived sequence of CF lists can then be used to
compute other important Centering concepts:
? The CB, i.e. the referent that links the current CF list with
the previous one such as microsoft in (b).
? Transitions (Brennan et al, 1987) and NOCBs, that is,
cases in which two subsequent CF lists do not have any
referent in common.
? Violations of CHEAPNESS (Strube and Hahn, 1999),
COHERENCE and SALIENCE (Kibble and Power, 2000).
2.2 Metrics of coherence
Karamanis (2003) assumes a system which receives
an unordered set of CF lists as its input and uses a
metric to output the highest scoring ordering. He
discusses how Centering can be used to define many
different metrics of coherence which might be useful
for this task. In our experiments we made use of the
four metrics employed in Karamanis et al (2004):
? The baseline metric M.NOCB which simply prefers the
ordering with the fewest NOCBs.
? M.CHEAP which selects the ordering with the fewest
violations of CHEAPNESS.
? M.KP, introduced by Kibble and Power, which sums
up the NOCBs as well as the violations of CHEAPNESS,
COHERENCE and SALIENCE, preferring the ordering with
the lowest total cost.
? M.BFP which employs the transition preferences of
Brennan et al
3The referent department appears in an earlier grid
column than microsoft because ?the Justice Department?
is mentioned before ?Microsoft Corp.? in the text. Since
grid position corresponds to order of mention, the former
can be used to resolve ties between referents with the same
grammatical role in the CF list similarly to the use of the latter
e.g. by Strube and Hahn.
66
NEWS M.NOCB p
corpus lower greater ties
M.CHEAP 155 44 1 <0.000
M.KP 131 68 1 <0.000
M.BFP 121 71 8 <0.000
N of texts 200
Table 2: Comparing M.NOCB with M.CHEAP,
M.KP and M.BFP in the NEWS corpus.
2.3 Experimental methodology
As already mentioned, previous work assumes that
the gold standard ordering (GSO) observed in a text
is more coherent than any other ordering of the
sentences (or the corresponding CF lists) it consists
of. If a metric takes a randomly produced ordering
to be more coherent than the GSO, it has to be
penalised.
Karamanis et al (2004) introduce a measure
called the classication rate which estimates this
penalty as the weighted sum of the percentage
of alternative orderings that score equally to or
better than the GSO.4 When comparing several
metrics with each other, the one with the lowest
classification rate is the most appropriate for
sentence ordering.
Karamanis (2003) argues that computing the
classification rate using a random sample of one
million orderings provides reliable results for the
entire population of orderings. In our experiments,
we used a random sample of that size for GSOs
which consisted of more than 10 sentences. This
allows us to explore a sufficient portion of possible
orderings (without having to exhaustively enumerate
every ordering as Barzilay and Lee do). Arguably,
our experiments also return more reliable results
than those of Barzilay and Lapata who used a sample
of just a few randomly produced orderings.
Since the Centering-based metrics can be directly
deployed on unseen texts without any training, we
treated all texts in NEWS and ACCS as testing data.5
4The classification rate is computed according to the
formula Better(M,GSO) + Equal(M,GSO)/2. Better(M,GSO)
stands for the percentage of orderings that score better than
the GSO according to a metric M, whilst Equal(M,GSO) is the
percentage of orderings that score equal to the GSO.
5By contrast, Barzilay and Lapata used 100 texts in each
domain to train their probabilistic model and 100 to test it. Note
that although they experiment with quite large corpora their
reported results are not verified by statistical tests.
ACCS M.NOCB p
corpus lower greater ties
M.CHEAP 183 17 0 <0.000
M.KP 167 33 0 <0.000
M.BFP 100 100 0 1.000
N of texts 200
Table 3: Comparing M.NOCB with M.CHEAP,
M.KP and M.BFP in the ACCS corpus.
3 Results
The experimental results of the comparisons of the
metrics from section 2.2 are reported in Table 2
for the NEWS corpus and in Table 3 for ACCS.
Following Karamanis et al, the tables compare the
baseline metric M.NOCB with each of M.CHEAP,
M.KP and M.BFP. The exact number of GSOs
for which the classification rate of M.NOCB is
lower than its competitor for each comparison is
reported in the second column of the Table. For
example, M.NOCB has a lower classification rate
than M.CHEAP for 155 (out of 200) GSOs from
NEWS. M.CHEAP achieves a lower classification
rate for just 44 GSOs, while there is a single tie in
which the classification rate of the two metrics is
the same. The p value returned by the two-tailed
sign test for the difference in the number of GSOs,
rounded to the third decimal place, is reported in the
fifth column of Table 2.6
Overall, the Table shows that M.NOCB does
significantly better in NEWS than the other
three metrics which employ additional Centering
concepts. Similarly, M.CHEAP and M.KP are
overwhelmingly beaten by the baseline in ACCS.
Also note that since M.BFP fails to significantly
overtake M.NOCB in ACCS, the baseline can be
considered the most promising solution in that case
too by applying Occam?s razor.
Table 4 shows the results of the evaluation of the
metrics in GNOME from Karamanis et al These
results are strikingly similar to ours despite the much
smaller size of their sample. Hence, M.NOCB is
the most suitable among the investigated metrics for
ordering the CF lists in both NEWS and ACCS in
addition to GNOME.
6The sign test was chosen by Karamanis et al to test
significance because it does not carry specific assumptions
about population distributions and variance.
67
GNOME M.NOCB p
corpus lower greater ties
M.CHEAP 18 2 0 <0.000
M.KP 16 2 2 0.002
M.BFP 12 3 5 0.036
N of texts 20
Table 4: Comparing M.NOCB with M.CHEAP,
M.KP and M.BFP in the GNOME corpus.
4 Discussion
Our experiments have shown that the baseline
M.NOCB performs better than its competitors.
This in turn indicates that simply avoiding NOCB
transitions is more relevant to sentence ordering than
the additional Centering concepts employed by the
other metrics.
But how likely is M.NOCB to come up with the
GSO if it is actually used to guide an algorithm
which orders the CF lists in our corpora? The
average classication rate of M.NOCB is an
estimate of exactly this variable.
The average classification rate for M.NOCB
is 30.90% in NEWS and 15.51% in ACCS.
The previously reported value for GNOME is
19.95%.7 This means that on average M.NOCB
takes approximately 1 out of 3 alternative orderings
in NEWS and 1 out of 6 in ACCS to be more
coherent that the GSO. As already observed by
Karamanis et al, there results suggest that M.NOCB
cannot be put in practical use.
However, the fact that M.NOCB is shown to
overtake its Centering-based competitors across
several corpora means that it is a simple, yet robust,
baseline against which other similar metrics can be
tested. For instance, Barzilay and Lapata report a
ranking accuracy of around 90% for their best grid-
based sentence ordering method, which we take to
correspond to a classification rate of approximately
10% (assuming that there do not exist any equally
scoring alternative orderings). This amounts to an
improvement over M.NOCB of almost 5% in ACCS
and 20% in NEWS.
Given the deficiencies of the evaluation in
Barzilay and Lapata, this comparison can only be
7The variability is presumably due to the different
characteristics of each corpus (which do not prevent M.NOCB
from always beating its competitors).
provisional. In our future work, we intend to directly
evaluate their method using a substantially large
number of alternative orderings and M.NOCB as the
baseline. We will also try to supplement M.NOCB
with other features of coherence to improve its
performance.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata for their
data, to Le An Ha for the data transformation script and to Chris
Mellish, Massimo Poesio and three anonymous reviewers for
comments. Support from the Rapid Item Generation project
(Wolverhampton University) and the BBSRC-funded Flyslip
grant (No 16291) is also acknowledged.
References
Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Modeling local
coherence: An entity-based approach. In Proceedings ofACL 2005, pages 141?148.
Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. 2004. Catching the drift:
Probabilistic content models with applications to generation
and summarization. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004,
pages 113?120.
Susan E. Brennan, Marilyn A. Friedman [Walker], and Carl J.
Pollard. 1987. A centering approach to pronouns.
In Proceedings of ACL 1987, pages 155?162, Stanford,
California.
Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Weinstein. 1995.
Centering: A framework for modeling the local coherence of
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203?225.
Nikiforos Karamanis, Massimo Poesio, Chris Mellish, and Jon
Oberlander. 2004. Evaluating centering-based metrics of
coherence using a reliably annotated corpus. In Proceedingsof ACL 2004, pages 391?398, Barcelona, Spain.
Nikiforos Karamanis. 2003. Entity Coherence for DescriptiveText Structuring. Ph.D. thesis, Division of Informatics,
University of Edinburgh.
Rodger Kibble and Richard Power. 2000. An integrated
framework for text planning and pronominalisation. InProceedings of INLG 2000, pages 77?84, Israel.
Mirella Lapata. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring:
Experiments with sentence ordering. In Proceedings of ACL2003, pages 545?552, Saporo, Japan, July.
Massimo Poesio, Rosemary Stevenson, Barbara Di Eugenio,
and Janet Hitzeman. 2004. Centering: a parametric
theory and its instantiations. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):309?363.
Michael Strube and Udo Hahn. 1999. Functional centering:
Grounding referential coherence in information structure.Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309?344.
68
