Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 224?231,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised and Semi-supervised Learning of Tone and Pitch Accent
Gina-Anne Levow
University of Chicago
1100 E. 58th St.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA
levow@cs.uchicago.edu
Abstract
Recognition of tone and intonation is es-
sential for speech recognition and lan-
guage understanding. However, most ap-
proaches to this recognition task have re-
lied upon extensive collections of man-
ually tagged data obtained at substantial
time and financial cost. In this paper,
we explore two approaches to tone learn-
ing with substantially reductions in train-
ing data. We employ both unsupervised
clustering and semi-supervised learning
to recognize pitch accent in English and
tones in Mandarin Chinese. In unsu-
pervised Mandarin tone clustering exper-
iments, we achieve 57-87% accuracy on
materials ranging from broadcast news to
clean lab speech. For English pitch accent
in broadcast news materials, results reach
78%. In the semi-supervised framework,
we achieve Mandarin tone recognition ac-
curacies ranging from 70% for broadcast
news speech to 94% for read speech, out-
performing both Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) trained on only the labeled data
and the 25% most common class assign-
ment level. These results indicate that the
intrinsic structure of tone and pitch accent
acoustics can be exploited to reduce the
need for costly labeled training data for
tone learning and recognition.
1 Introduction
Tone and intonation play a crucial role across many
languages. However, the use and structure of tone
varies widely, ranging from lexical tone which de-
termines word identity to pitch accent signalling in-
formation status. Here we consider the recognition
of lexical tones in Mandarin Chinese syllables and
pitch accent in English.
Although intonation is an integral part of lan-
guage and is requisite for understanding, recogni-
tion of tone and pitch accent remains a challeng-
ing problem. The majority of current approaches to
tone recognition in Mandarin and other East Asian
tone languages integrate tone identification with the
general task of speech recognition within a Hid-
den Markov Model framework. In some cases tone
recognition is done only implicitly when a word
or syllable is constrained jointly by the segmental
acoustics and a higher level language model and the
word identity determines tone identity. Other strate-
gies build explicit and distinct models for the syl-
lable final region, the vowel and optionally a final
nasal, for each tone.
Recent research has demonstrated the importance
of contextual and coarticulatory influences on the
surface realization of tones.(Xu, 1997; Shen, 1990)
The overall shape of the tone or accent can be sub-
stantially modified by the local effects of adjacent
tone and intonational elements. Furthermore, broad
scale phenomena such as topic and phrase struc-
ture can affect pitch height, and pitch shape may be
variably affected by the presence of boundary tones.
These findings have led to explicit modeling of tonal
224
context within the HMM framework. In addition
to earlier approaches that employed phrase structure
(Fujisaki, 1983), several recent approaches to tone
recognition in East Asian languages (Wang and Sen-
eff, 2000; Zhou et al, 2004) have incorporated ele-
ments of local and broad range contextual influence
on tone. Many of these techniques create explicit
context-dependent models of the phone, tone, or ac-
cent for each context in which they appear, either
using the tone sequence for left or right context or
using a simplified high-low contrast, as is natural
for integration in a Hidden Markov Model speech
recognition framework. In pitch accent recognition,
recent work by (Hasegawa-Johnson et al, 2004) has
integrated pitch accent and boundary tone recogni-
tion with speech recognition using prosodically con-
ditioned models within an HMM framework, im-
proving both speech and prosodic recognition.
Since these approaches are integrated with HMM
speech recognition models, standard HMM training
procedures which rely upon large labeled training
sets are used for tone recognition as well. Other
tone and pitch accent recognition approaches us-
ing other classification frameworks such as support
vector machines (Thubthong and Kijsirikul, 2001)
and decision trees with boosting and bagging (Sun,
2002) have relied upon large labeled training sets -
thousands of instances - for classifier learning. This
labelled training data is costly to construct, both in
terms of time and money, with estimates for some in-
tonation annotation tasks reaching tens of times real-
time. This annotation bottleneck as well as a theo-
retical interest in the learning of tone motivates the
use of unsupervised or semi-supervised approaches
to tone recognition whereby the reliance on this of-
ten scarce resource can be reduced.
Little research has been done in the application
of unsupervised and semi-supervised techniques for
tone and pitch accent recognition. Some prelimi-
nary work by (Gauthier et al, 2005) employs self-
organizing maps and measures of f0 velocity for
tone learning. In this paper we explore the use
of spectral and standard k-means clustering for un-
supervised acquisition of tone, and the framework
of manifold regularization for semi-supervised tone
learning. We find that in clean read speech, un-
supervised techniques can identify the underlying
Mandarin tone categories with high accuracy, while
even on noisier broadcast news speech, Mandarin
tones can be recognized well above chance levels,
with English pitch accent recognition at near the
levels achieved with fully supervised Support Vec-
tor Machine (SVM) classifiers. Likewise in the
semi-supervised framework, tone classification out-
performs both most common class assignment and
a comparable SVM trained on only the same small
set of labeled instances, without recourse to the un-
labeled instances.
The remainder of paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the data sets on which
English pitch accent and Mandarin tone learning
are performed and the feature extraction process.
Section 3 describes the unsupervised and semi-
supervised techniques employed. Sections 4 and
5 describe the experiments and results in unsuper-
vised and semi-supervised frameworks respectively.
Section 6 presents conclusions and future work.
2 Data Sets
We consider two corpora: one in English for pitch
accent recognition and two in Mandarin for tone
recognition. We introduce each briefly below.
2.1 English Corpus
We employ a subset of the Boston Radio News Cor-
pus (Ostendorf et al, 1995), read by female speaker
F2B, comprising 40 minutes of news material. The
corpus includes pitch accent, phrase and boundary
tone annotation in the ToBI framework (Silverman
et al, 1992) aligned with manual transcription and
syllabification of the materials. Following earlier re-
search (Ostendorf and Ross, 1997; Sun, 2002), we
collapse the ToBI pitch accent labels to four classes:
unaccented, high, low, and downstepped high for ex-
perimentation.
2.2 Mandarin Chinese Tone Data
Mandarin Chinese is a language with lexical tone
in which each syllable carries a tone and the mean-
ing of the syllable is jointly determined by the tone
and segmental information. Mandarin Chinese has
four canonical lexical tones, typically described as
follows: 1) high level, 2) mid-rising, 3) low falling-
rising, and 4) high falling.1 The canonical pitch con-
1For the experiments in this paper, we exclude the neutral
tone, which appears on unstressed syllables, because the clear
225
Figure 1: Contours for canonical Mandarin tones
tours for these tones appear in Figure 1.
We employ data from two distinct sources in the
experiments reported here.
2.2.1 Read Speech
The first data set is very clean speech data drawn
from a collection of read speech collected under lab-
oratory conditions by (Xu, 1999). In these mate-
rials, speakers read a set of short sentences where
syllable tone and position of focus were varied to
assess the effects of focus position on tone realiza-
tion. Focus here corresponds to narrow focus, where
speakers were asked to emphasize a particular word
or syllable. Tones on focussed syllables were found
to conform closely to the canonical shapes described
above, and in previous supervised experiments using
a linear support vector machine classifier trained on
focused syllables, accuracy approached 99%. For
these materials, pitch tracks were manually aligned
to the syllable and automatically smoothed and time-
normalized by the original researcher, resulting in 20
pitch values for each syllable.
2.2.2 Broadcast News Speech
The second data set is drawn from the Voice of
America Mandarin broadcast news, distributed by
the Linguistic Data Consortium2, as part of the Topic
Detection and Tracking (TDT-2) evaluation. Us-
ing the corresponding anchor scripts, automatically
word-segmented, as gold standard transcription, au-
dio from the news stories was force-aligned to the
text transcripts. The forced alignment employed the
language porting functionality of the University of
speech data described below contains no such instances.
2http://www.ldc.upenn.edu
Colorado Sonic speech recognizer (Pellom et al,
2001). A mapping from the transcriptions to English
phone sequences supported by Sonic was created
using a Chinese character-pinyin pronunciation dic-
tionary and a manually constructed mapping from
pinyin sequences to the closest corresponding En-
glish phone sequences.3
2.3 Acoustic Features
Using Praat?s (Boersma, 2001) ?To pitch? and ?To
intensity? functions and the alignments generated
above, we extract acoustic features for the prosodic
region of interest. This region corresponds to the
?final? region of each syllable in Chinese, including
the vowel and any following nasal, and to the sylla-
ble nucleus in English.4 For all pitch and intensity
features in both datasets, we compute per-speaker z-
score normalized log-scaled values. We extract pitch
values from points across valid pitch tracked regions
in the syllable. We also compute mean pitch across
the syllable. Recent phonetic research (Xu, 1997;
Shih and Kochanski, 2000) has identified signifi-
cant effects of carryover coarticulation from preced-
ing adjacent syllable tones. To minimize these ef-
fects consistent with the pitch target approximation
model (Xu et al, 1999), we compute slope features
based on the second half of this final region, where
this model predicts that the underlying pitch height
and slope targets of the syllable will be most accu-
rately approached. We further log-scale and normal-
ize slope values to compensate for greater speeds of
pitch fall than pitch rise(Xu and Sun, 2002).
We consider two types of contextualized features
as well, to model and compensate for coarticula-
tory effects from neighboring syllables. The first set
of features, referred to as ?extended features?, in-
cludes the maximum and mean pitch from adjacent
syllables as well as the nearest pitch point or points
from the preceding and following syllables. These
features extend the modeled tone beyond the strict
bounds of the syllable segmentation. A second set
of contextual features, termed ?difference features?,
captures the change in pitch maximum, mean, mid-
point, and slope as well as intensity maximum be-
3All tone transformations due to third tone sandhi are ap-
plied to create the label set.
4We restrict our experiments to syllables with at least 50 ms
of tracked pitch in this final region.
226
tween the current syllable and the previous or fol-
lowing syllable.
In prior supervised experiments using support
vector machines(Levow, 2005), variants of this rep-
resentation achieved competitive recognition levels
for both tone and pitch accent recognition. Since
many of the experiments for Mandarin Chinese tone
recognition deal with clean, careful lab speech, we
anticipate little coarticulatory influence, and use
a simple pitch-only context-free representation for
our primary Mandarin tone recognition experiments.
For primary experiments in pitch accent recognition,
we employ a high-performing contextualized repre-
sentation in (Levow, 2005), using both ?extended?
and ?difference? features computed only on the pre-
ceding syllable. We will also report some contrastive
experimental results varying the amount of contex-
tual information.
3 Unsupervised and Semi-supervised
Learning
The bottleneck of time and monetary cost asso-
ciated with manual annotation has generated sig-
nificant interest in the development of techniques
for machine learning and classification that reduce
the amount of annotated data required for train-
ing. Likewise, learning from unlabeled data aligns
with the perspective of language acquisition, as
child learners must identify these linguistic cate-
gories without explicit instruction by observation of
natural language interaction. Of particular interest
are techniques in unsupervised and semi-supervised
learning where the structure of unlabeled examples
may be exploited. Here we consider both unsuper-
vised techniques with no labeled training data and
semi-supervised approaches where unlabeled train-
ing data is used in conjunction with small amounts
of labeled data.
A wide variety of unsupervised clustering tech-
niques have been proposed. In addition to classic
clustering techniques such as k-means, recent work
has shown good results for many forms of spec-
tral clustering including those by (Shi and Ma-
lik, 2000; Belkin and Niyogi, 2002; Fischer and
Poland, 2004). In the unsupervised experiments re-
ported here, we employ asymmetric k-lines clus-
tering by (Fischer and Poland, 2004) using code
available at the authors? site, as our primary unsu-
pervised learning approach. Asymmetric clustering
is distinguished from other techniques by the con-
struction and use of context-dependent kernel radii.
Rather than assuming that all clusters are uniform
and spherical, this approach enhances clustering ef-
fectiveness when clusters may not be spherical and
may vary in size and shape. We will see that this
flexibility yields a good match to the structure of
Mandarin tone data where both shape and size of
clusters vary across tones. In additional contrastive
experiments reported below, we also compare k-
means clustering, symmetric k-lines clustering (Fis-
cher and Poland, 2004), and Laplacian Eigenmaps
(Belkin and Niyogi, 2002) with k-lines clustering.
The spectral techniques all perform spectral decom-
position on some representation of the affinity or ad-
jacency graph.
For semi-supervised learning, we employ learn-
ers in the Manifold Regularization framework de-
veloped by (Belkin et al, 2004). This work postu-
lates an underlying intrinsic distribution on a low di-
mensional manifold for data with an observed, am-
bient distribution that may be in a higher dimen-
sional space. It further aims to preserve locality in
that elements that are neighbors in the ambient space
should remain ?close? in the intrinsic space. A semi-
supervised classification algorithm, termed ?Lapla-
cian Support Vector Machines?, allows training and
classification based on both labeled and unlabeled
training examples.
We contrast results under both unsupervised and
semi-supervised learning with most common class
assignment and previous results employing fully su-
pervised approaches, such as SVMs.
4 Unsupervised Clustering Experiments
We executed four sets of experiments in unsu-
pervised clustering using the (Fischer and Poland,
2004) asymmetric clustering algorithm.
4.1 Experiment Configuration
In these experiments, we chose increasingly diffi-
cult and natural test materials. In the first experi-
ment with the cleanest data, we used only focused
syllables from the read Mandarin speech dataset.
In the second, we included both in-focus (focused)
227
and pre-focus syllables from the read Mandarin
speech dataset.5 In the third and fourth experiments,
we chose subsets of broadcast news report data,
from the Voice of America (VOA) in Mandarin and
Boston University Radio News corpus in English.
In all experiments on Mandarin data, we per-
formed clustering on a balanced sampling set of
tones, with 100 instances from each class6, yield-
ing a baseline for assignment of a single class to all
instances of 25%. We then employed a two-stage re-
peated clustering process, creating 2 or 3 clusters at
each stage.
For experiments on English data, we extracted a
set of 1000 instances, sampling pitch accent types
according to their frequency in the collection. We
performed a single clustering phase with 2 to 16
clusters, reporting results at different numbers of
clusters.
For evaluation, we report accuracy based on as-
signing the most frequent class label in each cluster
to all members of the cluster.
4.2 Experimental Results
We find that in all cases, accuracy based on the
asymmetric clustering is significantly better than
most common class assignment and in some cases
approaches labelled classification accuracy. Unsur-
prisingly, the best results, in absolute terms, are
achieved on the clean focused syllables, reaching
87% accuracy. For combined in-focus and pre-focus
syllables, this rate drops to 77%. These rates con-
trast with 99-93% accuracies in supervised classi-
fication using linear SVM classifiers with several
thousand labelled training examples(Surendran et
al., 2005).
On broadcast news audio, accuracy for Mandarin
reaches 57%, still much better than the 25% level,
though below a 72% accuracy achieved using super-
vised linear SVMs with 600 labeled training exam-
ples. Interestingly, for English pitch accent recogni-
tion, accuracy reaches 78.4%, aproaching the 80.1%
5Post-focus syllables typically have decreased pitch height
and range, resulting in particularly poor recognition accuracy.
We chose not to concentrate on this specific tone modeling
problem here.
6Sample sizes were bounded to support rapid repeated ex-
perimentation and for consistency with the relatively small
VOA data set.
Figure 2: Differences for alternative unsupervised
learners across numbers of clusters.
accuracy achieved with SVMs on a comparable data
representation.
4.3 Contrastive Experiments
We further contrast the use of different unsupervised
learners, comparing the three spectral techniques
and k-means with Euclidean distance. All contrasts
are presented for English pitch accent classification,
ranging over different numbers of clusters, with the
best parameter setting of neighborhood size. The re-
sults are illustrated in Figure 2. K-means and the
asymmetric clustering technique are presented for
the clean focal Mandarin speech under the standard
two stage clustering, in Table 1.
The asymmetric k-lines clustering approach con-
sistently outperforms the corresponding symmetric
clustering learner, as well as Laplacian Eigenmaps
with binary weights for pitch accent classification.
Somewhat surprisingly, k-means clustering outper-
forms all of the other approaches when producing 3-
14 clusters. Accuracy for the optimal choice of clus-
ters and parameters is comparable for asymmetric
k-lines clustering and k-means, and somewhat bet-
ter than all other techniques considered. The care-
ful feature selection process for tone and pitch ac-
cent modeling may reduce the difference between
the spectral and k-means approaches. In contrast,
for the four tone classification task in Mandarin us-
ing two stage clustering with 2 or 3 initial clusters,
the best clustering using asymmetric k-lines strongly
outperforms k-means.
We also performed a contrastive experiment in
pitch accent recognition in which we excluded con-
textual information from both types of contextual
features. We find little difference for the majority of
228
Asymm. K-means
Clear speech 87% 74.75%
Table 1: Clustering effectiveness for asymmetric k-lines and k-means on clear focused speech.
Figure 3: Scatterplot of pitch height vs pitch slope.
Open Diamond: High tone (1), Filled black traingle:
Rising tone (2), Filled grey square: Low tone (3), X:
Falling tone (4)
the unsupervised clustering algorithms, with results
from symmetric, asymmetric and k-means cluster-
ing differing by less than 1% in absolute accuracy.
It is, however, worth noting that exclusion of these
features from experiments using supervised learning
led to a 4% absolute reduction in accuracy.
4.4 Discussion
An examination of both the clusters formed and the
structure of the data provides insight into the effec-
tiveness of this process. Figure 3 displays 2 dimen-
sions of the Mandarin four-tone data from the fo-
cused read speech, where normalized pitch mean is
on the x-axis and slope is on the y-axis. The sepa-
ration of classes and their structure is clear. One ob-
serves that rising tone (tone 2) lies above the x-axis,
while high-level (tone 1) lies along the x-axis. Low
(tone 3) and falling (tone 4) tones lie mostly below
the x-axis as they generally have falling slope. Low
tone (3) appears to the left of falling tone (4) in the
figure, corresponding to differences in mean pitch.
In clustering experiments, an initial 2- or 3-way
split separates falling from rising or level tones
based on pitch slope. The second stage of cluster-
ing splits either by slope (tones 1,2, some 3) or by
pitch height (tones 3,4). These clusters capture the
natural structure of the data where tones are charac-
terized by pitch height and slope targets.
5 Semi-supervised Learning
By exploiting a semi-supervised approach, we hope
to enhance classification accuracy over that achiev-
able by unsupervised methods alone by incorporat-
ing small amounts of labeled data while exploiting
the structure of the unlabeled examples.
5.1 Experiment Configuration
We again conduct contrastive experiments using
both the clean focused read speech and the more
challenging broadcast news data. In each Mandarin
case, for each class, we use only a small set (40) of
labeled training instances in conjunction with an ad-
ditional sixty unlabeled instances, testing on 40 in-
stances. For English pitch accent, we restricted the
task to the binary classification of syllables as ac-
cented or unaccented. For the one thousand samples
we proportionally labeled 200 unaccented examples
and 100 accented examples. 7
We configure the Laplacian SVM classification
with binary neighborhood weights, radial basis func-
tion kernel, and cosine distance measure typically
with 6 nearest neighbors. Following (C-C.Cheng
and Lin, 2001), for   -class classification we train
	

 binary classifiers. We then classify each
test instance using all of the classifiers and assign
the most frequent prediction, with ties broken ran-
domly. We contrast these results both with conven-
tional SVM classification with a radial basis func-
tion kernel excluding the unlabeled training exam-
ples and with most common class assignment, which
gives a 25% baseline.
5.2 Experimental Results
For the Mandarin focused read syllables, we achieve
94% accuracy on the four-way classification task.
7The framework is transductive; the test samples are a subset
of the unlabeled training examples.
229
For the noisier broadcast news data, the accuracy is
70% for the comparable task. These results all sub-
stantially outperform the 25% most common class
assignment level. The semi-supervised classifier
also reliably outperforms an SVM classifier with an
RBF kernel trained on the same labeled training in-
stances. This baseline SVM classifier with a very
small training set achieves 81% accuracy on clean
read speech, but only   35% on the broadcast news
speech. Finally, for English pitch accent recogni-
tion in broadcast news data, the classifier achieves
81.5%, relative to 84% accuracy in the fully super-
vised case.
6 Conclusion & Future Work
We have demonstrated the effectiveness of both
unsupervised and semi-supervised techniques for
recognition of Mandarin Chinese syllable tones and
English pitch accents using acoustic features alone
to capture pitch target height and slope. Although
outperformed by fully supervised classification tech-
niques using much larger samples of labelled train-
ing data, these unsupervised and semi-supervised
techniques perform well above most common class
assignment, in the best cases approaching 90%
of supervised levels, and, where comparable, well
above a good discriminative classifier trained on a
comparably small set of labelled data. Unsuper-
vised techniques achieve accuracies of 87% on the
cleanest read speech, reaching 57% on data from a
standard Mandarin broadcast news corpus, and over
78% on pitch accent classification for English broad-
cast news. Semi-supervised classification in the
Mandarin four-class classification task reaches 94%
accuracy on read speech, 70% on broadcast news
data, improving dramatically over both the simple
baseline of 25% and a standard SVM with an RBF
kernel trained only on the labeled examples.
Future work will consider a broader range of tone
and intonation classification, including the richer
tone set of Cantonese as well as Bantu family tone
languages, where annotated data truly is very rare.
We also hope to integrate a richer contextual rep-
resentation of tone and intonation consistent with
phonetic theory within this unsupervised and semi-
supervised learning framework. We will further ex-
plore improvements in classification accuracy based
on increases in labeled and unlabeled training exam-
ples.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Yi Xu for granting access
to the read speech data, Vikas Sindhwani, Mikhail
Belkin, and Partha Niyogi for their implementation
of Laplacian SVM, and Igor Fischer and J. Poland
for their implementation of asymmetric clustering.
References
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. 2002. Laplacian
eigenmaps and spectral techniques for embedding and
clustering. In Proceeding of NIPS?02.
M. Belkin, P. Niyogi, and V. Sindhwani. 2004. Mani-
fold regularization: a geometric framework for learn-
ing from examples. Technical Report TR-2004-06,
University of Chicago Computer Science.
P. Boersma. 2001. Praat, a system for doing phonetics
by computer. Glot International, 5(9?10):341?345.
C-C.Cheng and C-J. Lin. 2001. LIBSVM:a library
for support vector machines. Software available at:
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.
I. Fischer and J. Poland. 2004. New methods for spectral
clustering. Technical Report ISDIA-12-04, IDSIA.
H. Fujisaki. 1983. Dynamic characteristics of voice fun-
damental frequency in speech and singing. In The Pro-
duction of Speech, pages 39?55. Springer-Verlag.
Bruno Gauthier, Rushen Shi, Yi Xu, and Robert Proulx.
2005. Neural-network simulation of tonal categoriza-
tion based on f0 velocity profiles. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 117, Pt. 2:2430.
M. Hasegawa-Johnson, Jennifer Cole, Chilin Shih abd
Ken Chen, Aaron Cohen, Sandra Chavarria, Heejin
Kim, Taejin Yoon, Sarah Borys, and Jeung-Yoon Choi.
2004. Speech recognition models of the interdepen-
dence among syntax, prosody, and segmental acous-
tics. In HLT/NAACL-2004.
Gina-Anne Levow. 2005. Context in multi-lingual tone
and pitch accent prediction. In Proc. of Interspeech
2005 (to appear).
M. Ostendorf and K. Ross. 1997. A multi-level model
for recognition of intonation labels. In Y. Sagisaka,
N. Campbell, and N. Higuchi, editors, Computing
Prosody, pages 291?308.
M. Ostendorf, P. J. Price, and S. Shattuck-Hufnagel.
1995. The Boston University radio news corpus.
Technical Report ECS-95-001, Boston University.
230
B. Pellom, W. Ward, J. Hansen, K. Hacioglu, J. Zhang,
X. Yu, and S. Pradhan. 2001. University of Colorado
dialog systems for travel and navigation.
Xiao-Nan Shen. 1990. Tonal co-articulation in Man-
darin. Journal of Phonetics, 18:281?295.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. 2000. Normalized cuts
and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(8).
C. Shih and G. P. Kochanski. 2000. Chinese tone model-
ing with stem-ml. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Volume
2, pages 67?70.
K. Silverman, M. Beckman, J. Pitrelli, M. Osten-
dorf, C. Wightman, P. Price, J. Pierrehumbert, and
J. Hirschberg. 1992. ToBI: A standard for labelling
English prosody. In Proceedings of ICSLP, pages
867?870.
Xuejing Sun. 2002. Pitch accent prediction using ensem-
ble machine learning. In Proceedings of ICSLP-2002.
D. Surendran, Gina-Anne Levow, and Yi Xu. 2005. Tone
recognition in Mandarin using focus. In Proc. of Inter-
speech 2005 (to appear).
Nuttakorn Thubthong and Boonserm Kijsirikul. 2001.
Support vector machines for Thai phoneme recogni-
tion. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness
and Knowledge-Based Systems, 9(6):803?813.
C. Wang and S. Seneff. 2000. Improved tone recogni-
tion by normalizing for coarticulation and intonation
effects. In Proceedings of 6th International Confer-
ence on Spoken Language Processing.
Yi Xu and X. Sun. 2002. Maximum speed of pitch
change and how it may relate to speech. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 111.
C.X. Xu, Y. Xu, and L.-S. Luo. 1999. A pitch tar-
get approximation model for f0 contours in Mandarin.
In Proceedings of the 14th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, pages 2359?2362.
Yi Xu. 1997. Contextual tonal variations in Mandarin.
Journal of Phonetics, 25:62?83.
Y. Xu. 1999. Effects of tone and focus on the formation
and alignment of f0 contours - evidence from Man-
darin. Journal of Phonetics, 27.
J. L. Zhou, Ye Tian, Yu Shi, Chao Huang, and Eric
Chang. 2004. Tone articulation modeling for Man-
darin spontaneous speech recognition. In Proceedings
of ICASSP 2004.
231
