Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion Volume, pages 253?256,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
InfoMagnets: Making Sense of Corpus Data 
 
 Jaime Arguello Carolyn Ros? 
Language Technologies Institute Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15216 Pittsburgh, PA 15216 
jarguell@andrew.cmu.edu cprose@cs.cmu.edu 
 
  
Abstract 
We introduce a new interactive corpus 
exploration tool called InfoMagnets. In-
foMagnets aims at making exploratory 
corpus analysis accessible to researchers 
who are not experts in text mining. As 
evidence of its usefulness and usability, it 
has been used successfully in a research 
context to uncover relationships between 
language and behavioral patterns in two 
distinct domains: tutorial dialogue 
(Kumar et al, submitted) and on-line 
communities (Arguello et al, 2006). As 
an educational tool, it has been used as 
part of a unit on protocol analysis in an 
Educational Research Methods course.  
1 Introduction 
Exploring large text corpora can be a daunting 
prospect. This is especially the case for behavioral 
researchers who have a vested interest in the latent 
patterns present in text, but are less interested in 
computational models of text-representation (e.g. 
the vector-space model) or unsupervised pattern-
learning (e.g. clustering). Our goal is to provide 
this technology to the broader community of learn-
ing scientists and other behavioral researchers who 
collect and code corpus data as an important part 
of their research.  To date none of the tools that are 
commonly used in the behavioral research com-
munity, such as HyperResearch, MacShapa, or 
Nvivo, which are used to support their corpus 
analysis efforts, make use of technology more ad-
vanced than simplistic word counting approaches.  
With InfoMagnets, we are working towards bridg-
ing the gap between the text-mining community 
and the corpus-based behavioral research commu-
nity. The purpose of our demonstration is to make 
the language technologies community more aware 
of opportunities for applications of language tech-
nologies to support corpus oriented behavioral re-
search. 
 
 
Figure 1: InfoMagnets Screenshot 
 
InfoMagnet?s novelty is two-fold: First, it pro-
vides an intuitive visual metaphor that allows the 
user to get a sense of their data and organize it for 
easy retrieval later. This is important during the 
sense making stage of corpus analysis work just 
before formal coding scheme development begins.  
Secondly, it allows the user to interact with cluster-
ing technology, and thus influence its behavior, in 
effect introducing human knowledge into the clus-
tering process.  Because of this give and take be-
tween the clustering technology and the human 
253
influence, the tool is able to achieve an organiza-
tion of textual units that is not just optimal from an 
algorithmic stand-point, but also optimal for the 
user?s unique purpose, which non-interactive clus-
tering algorithms are not in general capable of 
achieving.  
Using visual metaphors to convey to the user 
proximity and relations between documents and 
automatically generated clusters is not a new tech-
nique (Chalmers and Chitson, 1992; Dubin, 1995; 
Wise et al, 1995; Leuski and Allan, 2000; Ras-
mussen and Karypis, 2004). InfoMagnet?s novelty 
comes from giving the user more control over the 
ultimate clustering organization. The user is able to 
incrementally influence the formation and reor-
ganization of cluster centroids and immediately see 
the effect on the text-to-cluster assignment. Thus, 
the user can explore the corpus in more effective 
and meaningful ways.  
In what follows, we more concretely elaborate 
on InfoMagnet?s functionality and technical de-
tails. We then motivate its usability and usefulness 
with a real case study.   
2 Functionality  
Exploring a textual corpus in search of interest-
ing topical patterns that correlate with externally 
observable variables is a non-trivial task.  Take as 
an example the task of characterizing the process 
by which students and tutors negotiate with one 
another over a chat interface as they navigate in-
structional materials together in an on-line explora-
tory learning environment. A sensible approach is 
to segment all dialogue transcripts into topic-
oriented segments and then group the segments by 
topic similarity. If done manually, this is a chal-
lenging task in two respects. First, to segment each 
dialogue the analyst must rely on their knowledge 
of the domain to locate where the focus of the dia-
logue shifts from one topic to the next. This, of 
course, requires the analyst to know what to look 
for and to remain consistent throughout the whole 
set of dialogues. More importantly, it introduces 
into the topic analysis a primacy bias. The analyst 
may miss important dialogue digressions simply 
because they are not expected based on observa-
tions from the first few dialogues viewed in detail.  
InfoMagnets addresses these issues by offering 
users a constant bird?s eye view of their data.  See 
Figure 1. 
As input, InfoMagnets accepts a corpus of tex-
tual documents. As an option to the user, the docu-
ments can be automatically fragmented into 
topically-coherent segments (referred to also as 
documents from here on), which then become the 
atomic textual unit1. The documents (or topic seg-
ments) are automatically clustered into an initial 
organization that the user then incrementally ad-
justs through the interface. Figure 1 shows the ini-
tial document-to-topic assignment that 
InfoMagnets produces as a starting point for the 
user. The large circles represent InfoMagnets, or 
topic oriented cluster centroids, and the smaller 
circles represent documents. An InfoMagnet can 
be thought of as a set of words representative of a 
topic concept. The similarity between the vector 
representation of the words in a document and that 
of the words in an InfoMagnet translate into attrac-
tion in the two-dimensional InfoMagnet space.  
This semantic similarity is computed using Latent 
Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al,  1998). 
Thus, a document appears closest to the InfoMag-
net that best represents its topic.  
A document that appears equidistant to two In-
foMagnets shares its content equally between the 
two represented topics. Topics with lots of docu-
ments nearby are popular topics. InfoMagnets with 
only a few documents nearby represent infrequent 
topics. Should the user decide to remove an In-
foMagnet, any document with some level of attrac-
tion to that InfoMagnet will animate and reposition 
itself based on the topics still represented by the 
remaining InfoMagnets.  At all times, the In-
foMagnets interface offers the analyst a bird?s eye 
view of the entire corpus as it is being analyzed 
and organized. 
Given the automatically-generated initial topic 
representation, the user typically starts by brows-
ing the different InfoMagnets and documents. Us-
ing a magnifying cross-hair lens, the user can view 
the contents of a document on the top pane. As 
noted above, each InfoMagnet represents a topic 
concept through a collection of words (from the 
corpus) that convey that concept. Selecting the In-
foMagnet displays this list of words on the left 
pane. The list is shown in descending order of im-
portance with respect to that topic. By browsing 
each InfoMagnet?s list of words and browsing 
                                                          
1 Due to lack of space, we do not focus on our topic-
segmentation algorithm. We intend to discuss this in the demo.  
254
nearby documents, the user can start recognizing 
topics represented in the InfoMagnet space and can 
start labeling those InfoMagnets.  
InfoMagnets with only a few neighboring 
documents can be removed. Likewise, InfoMag-
nets attracting too many topically-unrelated docu-
ments can be split into multiple topics. The user 
can do this semi-automatically (by requesting a 
split, and allowing the algorithm to determine 
where the best split is) or by manually selecting a 
set of terms from the InfoMagnet?s word list and 
creating a new InfoMagnet using those words to 
represent the new InfoMagnet?s topic. If the user 
finds words in an InfoMagnet?s word list that lack 
topical relevance, the user can remove them from 
InfoMagnet?s word list or from all the InfoMag-
nets? word lists at once. 
Users may also choose to manually assign a seg-
ment to a topic by ?snapping? that document to an 
InfoMagnet. ?Snapping? is a way of overriding the 
attraction between the document and other In-
foMagnets.  By ?snapping? a document to an In-
foMagnet, the relationship between the ?snapped? 
document and the associated InfoMagnet remains 
constant, regardless of any changes made to the 
InfoMagnet space subsequently.  
If a user would like to remove the influence of a 
subset of the corpus from the behavior of the tool, 
the user may select an InfoMagnet and all the 
documents close to it and place them in the ?quar-
antine? area of the interface. When placed in the 
quarantine, as when ?snapped?, a document?s as-
signment remains unchanged. This feature is used 
to free screen space for the user.  
If the user opts for segmenting each input dis-
course and working with topic segments rather 
than whole documents, an alternative interface al-
lows the user to quickly browse through the corpus 
sequentially (Figure 2).  By switching between this 
view and the bird?s eye view, the user is able to see 
where each segment fits sequentially into the larger 
context of the discourse it was extracted from.  The 
user can also use the sequential interface for mak-
ing minor adjustments to topic segment boundaries 
and topic assignments where necessary.  Once the 
user is satisfied with the topic representation in the 
space and the assignments of all documents to 
those topics, the tool can automatically generate an 
XML file, where all documents are tagged with 
their corresponding topic labels. 
 
 
Figure 2. InfoMagnet?s alternative sequential view 
3 Implementation 
As mentioned previously, InfoMagnets uses La-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA) to relate documents 
to InfoMagnets. LSA is a dimensionality reduction 
technique that can be used to compute the semantic 
similarity between text spans of arbitrary size. For 
a more technical overview of LSA, we direct the 
reader to (Landauer et al, 1998).  
The LSA space is constructed using the corpus 
that the user desires to organize, possibly aug-
mented with some general purpose text (such as 
newsgroup data) to introduce more domain-general 
term associations. The parameters used in building 
the space are set by the user during pre-processing, 
so that the space is consistent with the semantic 
granularity the user is interested in capturing.  
Because documents (or topic-segments) tend to 
cover more than one relevant topic, our clustering 
approach is based on what are determined heuristi-
cally to be the most important terms in the corpus, 
and not on whole documents. This higher granular-
ity allows us to more precisely capture the topics 
discussed in the corpus by not imposing the as-
sumption that documents are about a single topic. 
First, all terms that occur less than n times and in 
less than m documents are removed from consid-
eration2. Then, the remaining terms are clustered 
via average-link clustering, using their LSA-based 
vector representations and using cosine-correlation 
as a vector similarity measure. Our clustering algo-
rithm combines top-down clustering (Bisecting K-
Means) and bottom-up clustering (Agglomerative 
Clustering) (Steinbach et al, 2000). This hybrid 
                                                          
2 n and m are parameters set by the user. 
255
clustering approach leverages the speed of bisect-
ing K-means and the greedy search of agglomera-
tive clustering, thus achieving a nice effectiveness 
versus efficiency balance.   
Cluster centroids (InfoMagnets) and documents 
(or topic segments) are all treated as bag-of-words. 
Their vector-space representation is the sum of the 
LSA vectors of their constituent terms. When the 
user changes the topic-representation by removing 
or adding a term to an InfoMagnet, a new LSA 
vector is obtained by projecting the new bag-of-
words onto the LSA space and re-computing the 
cosine correlation between all documents and the 
new topic.     
4 An Example of Use 
InfoMagnets was designed for easy usability by 
both computational linguistics and non-technical 
users.  It has been successfully used by social psy-
chologists working on on-line communities re-
search as well as learning science researchers 
studying tutorial dialogue interactions (which we 
discuss in some detail here).   
Using InfoMagnets, a thermodynamics domain 
expert constructed a topic analysis of a corpus of 
human tutoring dialogues collected during class-
room study focusing on thermodynamics instruc-
tion (Ros? et al, 2005). Altogether each student?s 
protocol was divided into between 10 and 25 seg-
ments such that the entire corpus was divided into 
approximately 379 topic segments altogether.  Us-
ing InfoMagnets, the domain expert identified 15 
distinct topics such that each student covered be-
tween 4 and 11 of these topics either once or mul-
tiple times throughout their interaction. 
The topic analysis of the corpus gives us a way 
of quickly getting a sense of how tutors divided 
their instructional time between different topics of 
conversation.  Based on this topic analysis of the 
human-tutoring corpus, the domain expert de-
signed 12 dialogues, which were then implemented 
using a dialogue authoring environment called 
TuTalk (Gweon et al, 2005).  In a recent very suc-
cessful classroom evaluation, we observed the in-
structional effectiveness of these implemented 
tutorial dialogue agents, as measured by pre and 
post tests. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by Office of Naval Re-
search, Cognitive and Neural Science Division, 
grant number N00014-05-1-0043. 
References  
Jaime Arguello, Brian S. Butler, Lisa Joyce, Robert 
Kraut, Kimberly S. Ling, Carolyn Rose and Xiaoqing 
Wang (2006). Talk to Me: Foundations of Successful 
Individual-Group Interactions in Online Communi-
ties. To appear in Proceedings of CHI: Human Fac-
tors in Computing. 
Matthew Chalmers and Paul Chitson (1992). Bead: Ex-
plorations in Information Visualization. In Proceed-
ings of ACM SIGIR,  330-337 
David Dubin (1995). Document Analysis for Visualiza-
tion. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR, 199-204. 
Gahgene Gweon, Jaime Arguello, Carol Pai, Regan 
Carey, Zachary Zaiss, and Carolyn Ros? (2005).  
Towards a Prototyping Tool for Behavior Oriented 
Authoring of Conversational Interfaces, Proceedings 
of the ACL Workshop on Educational Applications of 
NLP. 
Rohit Kumar, Carolyn Ros?, Vincent Aleven, Ana Igle-
sias, Allen Robinson (submitted). Evaluating the Ef-
fectiveness of Tutorial Dialogue Instruction in an 
Exploratory Learning Context, Submitted to ITS ?06 
Thomas Landauer, Peter W. Foltz, and Darrell Laham 
(1998).  Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. 
Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.  
Anton Leuski and James Allan (2002). Lighthouse: 
Showing the Way to Relevant Information. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE InfoVis  2000 
Matt Rasmussen and George Karypis (2004). gCLUTO: 
An Interactive Clustering, Visualization, and Analy-
sis System. Technical Report # 04-021 
Carolyn Ros?, Vincent Aleven, Regan Carey, Allen 
Robinson, and Chih Wu (2005). A First Evaluation 
of the Instructional Value of Negotiable Problem 
Solving Goals on the Exploratory Learning Contin-
uum, Proceedings of AI in Education ?05 
Michael Steinbach, George Karypis, and Vipin Kuma 
(2000). A comparison of document clustering tech-
niques. In KDD Workshop on Text Mining. 
James A. Wise, James J. Thomas, Kelly Pennock, David 
Lantrip, Marc Pottier, and Anne Schur (1995).  Visu-
alizing the Non-Visual: Spatial Analysis and Interac-
tion with Information from Text Documents. In 
Proceedings of IEEE InfoVis ?95, 51-58. 
256
