Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 89?92,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Summarizing Speech Without Text Using Hidden Markov Models
Sameer Maskey, Julia Hirschberg
Dept. of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY
{smaskey, julia}@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
We present a method for summarizing
speech documents without using any type
of transcript/text in a Hidden Markov
Model framework. The hidden variables
or states in the model represent whether
a sentence is to be included in a sum-
mary or not, and the acoustic/prosodic fea-
tures are the observation vectors. The
model predicts the optimal sequence of
segments that best summarize the docu-
ment. We evaluate our method by compar-
ing the predicted summary with one gen-
erated by a human summarizer. Our re-
sults indicate that we can generate ?good?
summaries even when using only acous-
tic/prosodic information, which points to-
ward the possibility of text-independent
summarization for spoken documents.
1 Introduction
The goal of single document text or speech sum-
marization is to identify information from a text
or spoken document that summarizes, or conveys
the essence of a document. EXTRACTIVE SUM-
MARIZATION identifies portions of the original doc-
ument and concatenates these segments to form a
summary. How these segments are selected is thus
critical to the summarization adequacy.
Many classifier-based methods have been exam-
ined for extractive summarization of text and of
speech (Maskey and Hirschberg, 2005; Christensen
et. al., 2004; Kupiec et. al., 1995). These ap-
proaches attempt to classify segments as to whether
they should or should not be included in a summary.
However, the classifiers used in these methods im-
plicitly assume that the posterior probability for the
inclusion of a sentence in the summary is only de-
pendent on the observations for that sentence, and
is not affected by previous decisions. Some of these
(Kupiec et. al., 1995; Maskey and Hirschberg, 2005)
also assume that the features themselves are inde-
pendent. Such an independence assumption simpli-
fies the training procedure of the models, but it does
not appear to model the factors human beings appear
to use in generating summaries. In particular, human
summarizers seem to take previous decisions into
account when deciding if a sentence in the source
document should be in the document?s summary.
In this paper, we examine a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) approach to the selection of seg-
ments to be included in a summary that we believe
better models the interaction between extracted seg-
ments and their features, for the domain of Broad-
cast News (BN). In Section 2 we describe related
work on the use of HMMs in summarization. We
present our own approach in Section 3 and discuss
our results in Section 3.1. We conclude in Section 5
and discuss future research.
2 Related Work
Most speech summarization systems (Christensen
et. al., 2004; Hori et. al., 2002; Zechner, 2001) use
lexical features derived from human or Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) transcripts as features to
select words or sentences to be included in a sum-
mary. However, human transcripts are not gener-
ally available for spoken documents, and ASR tran-
scripts are errorful. So, lexical features have prac-
tical limits as a means of choosing important seg-
ments for summarization. Other research efforts
have focussed on text-independent approaches to ex-
tractive summarization (Ohtake et. al., 2003), which
rely upon acoustic/prosodic cues. However, none
of these efforts allow for the context-dependence of
extractive summarization, such that the inclusion of
89
one word or sentence in a summary depends upon
prior selection decisions. While HMMs are used in
many language processing tasks, they have not been
employed frequently in summarization. A signifi-
cant exception is the work of Conroy and O?Leary
(2001), which employs an HMM model with pivoted
QR decomposition for text summarization. How-
ever, the structure of their model is constrained by
identifying a fixed number of ?lead? sentences to be
extracted for a summary. In the work we present
below, we introduce a new HMM approach to ex-
tractive summarization which addresses some of the
deficiencies of work done to date.
3 Using Continuous HMM for Speech
Summarization
We define our HMM by the following parameters:
? = 1..N : The state space, representing a set of
states where N is the total number of states in the
model; O = o1k, o2k, o3k, ...oMk : The set of obser-
vation vectors, where each vector is of size k; A =
{aij} : The transition probability matrix, where aij
is the probability of transition from state i to state j;
bj(ojk) : The observation probability density func-
tion, estimated by ?Mk=1cjkN(ojk, ?jk,?jk), where
ojk denotes the feature vector; N(ojk, ?jk,?jk) de-
notes a single Gaussian density function with mean
of ?jk and covariance matrix ?jk for the state j,
with M the number of mixture components and cjk
the weight of the kth mixture component; ? = pii :
The initial state probability distribution. For conve-
nience, we define the parameters for our HMM by
a set ? that represents A, B and ?. We can use the
parameter set ? to evaluate P (O|?), i.e. to measure
the maximum likelihood performance of the output
observables O. In order to evaluate P (O|?), how-
ever, we first need to compute the probabilities in
the matrices in the parameter set ?
The Markov assumption that state durations have
a geometric distribution defined by the probability
of self transitions makes it difficult to model dura-
tions in an HMM. If we introduce an explicit du-
ration probability to replace self transition proba-
bilities, the Markov assumption no longer holds.
Yet, HMMs have been extended by defining state
duration distributions called Hidden Semi-Markov
Model (HSMM) that has been succesfully used
(Tweed et. al., 2005). Similar to (Tweed et. al.,
1
2
3
4
L-1
L
Figure 1: L state position-sensitive HMM
2005)?s use of HSMMs, we want to model the po-
sition of a sentence in the source document explic-
itly. But instead of building an HSMM, we model
this positional information by building our position-
sensitive HMM in the following way:
We first discretize the position feature into L num-
ber of bins, where the number of sentences in each
bin is proportional to the length of the document.
We build 2 states for each bin where the second
state models the probability of the sentence being
included in the document?s summary and the other
models the exclusion probability. Hence, for L bins
we have 2L states. For any bin lth where 2l and
2l ? 1 are the corresponding states, we remove all
transitions from these states to other states except
2(l+1) and 2(l+1)?1. This converts our ergodic L
state HMM to an almost Left-to-Right HMM though
l states can go back to l ? 1. This models sentence
position in that decisions at the lth state can be ar-
rived at only after decisions at the (l ? 1)th state
have been made. For example, if we discretize sen-
tence position in document into 10 bins, such that
10% of sentences in the document fall into each bin,
then states 13 and 14, corresponding to the seventh
bin (.i.e. all positions between 0.6 to 0.7 of the text)
can be reached only from states 11, 12, 13 and 14.
The topology of our HMM is shown in Figure 1.
3.1 Features and Training
We trained and tested our model on a portion of
the TDT-2 corpus previously used in (Maskey and
Hirschberg, 2005). This subset includes 216 stories
from 20 CNN shows, comprising 10 hours of audio
data and corresponding manual transcript. An an-
notator generated a summary for each story by ex-
tracting sentences. While we thus rely upon human-
90
identified sentence boundaries, automatic sentence
detection procedures have been found to perform
with reasonable accuracy compared to human per-
formance (Shriberg et. al., 2000).
For these experiments, we extracted only acous-
tic/prosodic features from the corpus. The intu-
ition behind using acoustic/prosodic features for
speech summarization is based on research in speech
prosody (Hirschberg, 2002) that humans use acous-
tic/prosodic variation ? expanded pitch range,
greater intensity, and timing variation ? to indi-
cate the importance of particular segments of their
speech. In BN, we note that a change in pitch, am-
plitude or speaking rate may signal differences in
the relative importance of the speech segments pro-
duced by anchors and reporters ? the professional
speakers in our corpus. There is also considerable
evidence that topic shift is marked by changes in
pitch, intensity, speaking rate and duration of pause
(Shriberg et. al., 2000), and new topics or stories
in BN are often introduced with content-laden sen-
tences which, in turn, often are included in story
summaries.
Our acoustic feature-set consists of 12 features,
similar to those used in (Inoue et. al., 2004; Chris-
tensen et. al., 2004; Maskey and Hirschberg, 2005).
It includes speaking rate (the ratio of voiced/total
frames); F0 minimum, maximum, and mean; F0
range and slope; minimum, maximum, and mean
RMS energy (minDB, maxDB, meanDB); RMS
slope (slopeDB); sentence duration (timeLen =
endtime - starttime). We extract these features by
automatically aligning the annotated manual tran-
scripts with the audio source. We then employ Praat
(Boersma, 2001) to extract the features from the
audio and produce normalized and raw versions of
each. Normalized features were produced by divid-
ing each feature by the average of the feature values
for each speaker, where speaker identify was deter-
mined from the Dragon speaker segmentation of the
TDT-2 corpus. In general, the normalized acoustic
features performed better than the raw values.
We used 197 stories from this labeled corpus to
train our HMM. We computed the transition proba-
bilities for the matrix ANXN by computing the rel-
ative frequency of the transitions made from each
state to the other valid states. We had to compute
four transition probabilities for each state, i.e. aij
where j = i, i + 1, i + 2, i + 3 if i is odd and
j = i ? 1, i, i + 1, i + 2 if i is even. Odd states
signify that the sentence should not be included in
the summary, while even states signify sentence in-
clusion. Observation probabilities were estimated
using a mixture of Gaussians where the number of
mixtures was 12. We computed a 12X1 matrix for
the mean ? and 12X12 matrices for the covariance
matrix ? for each state. We then computed the max-
imum likelihood estimates and found the optimal
sequence of states to predict the selection of docu-
ment summaries using the Viterbi algorithm. This
approach maximizes the probability of inclusion of
sentences at each stage incrementally.
4 Results and Evaluation
We tested our resulting model on a held-out test set
of 19 stories. For each sentence in the test set we ex-
tracted the 12 acoustic/prosodic features. We built a
12XN matrix using these features for N sentences
in the story where N was the total length of the
story. We then computed the optimal sequence of
sentences to include in the summary by decoding
our sentence state lattice using the Viterbi algorithm.
For all the even states in this sequence we extracted
the corresponding segments and concatenated them
to produce the summary.
Evaluating summarizers is a difficult problem,
since there is great disagreement between humans
over what should be included in a summary. Speech
summaries are even harder to evaluate because most
objective evaluation metrics are based on word over-
lap. The metric we will use here is the standard
information retrieval measure of Precision, Recall
and F-measure on sentences. This is a strict met-
ric, since it requires exact matching with sentences
in the human summary; we are penalized if we iden-
tify sentences similar in meaning but not identical to
the gold standard.
We first computed the F-measure of a baseline
system which randomly extracts sentences for the
summary; this method produces an F-measure of
0.24. To determine whether the positional informa-
tion captured in our position-sensitive HMM model
was useful, we first built a 2-state HMM that models
only inclusion/exclusion of sentences from a sum-
mary, without modeling sentence position in the
document. We trained this HMM on the train-
91
ing corpus described above. We then trained a
position-sensitive HMM by first discretizing posi-
tion into 4 bins, such that each bin includes one-
quarter of the sentences in the story. We built an
8-state HMM that captures this positional informa-
tion. We tested both on our held-out test set. Re-
sults are shown in Table 1. Note that recall for
the 8-state position-sensitive HMM is 16% better
than recall for the 2-state HMM, although precision
for the 2-state model is slightly (1%) better than
for the 8-state model. The F-measure for the 8-
state position-sensitive model represents a slight im-
provement over the 2-state model, of 1%. These re-
sults are encouraging, since, in skewed datasets like
documents with their summaries, only a few sen-
tences from a document are usually included in the
summary; thus, recall is generally more important
than precision in extractive summarization. And,
compared to the baseline, the position-sensitive 8-
state HMM obtains an F-measure of 0.41, which is
17% higher than the baseline.
ModelType Precision Recall F-Meas
HMM-8state 0.26 0.95 0.41
HMM-2state 0.27 0.79 0.40
Baseline 0.23 0.24 0.24
Table 1: Speech Summarization Results
5 Conclusion
We have shown a novel way of using continuous
HMMs for summarizing speech documents without
using any lexical information. Our model generates
an optimal summary by decoding the state lattice,
where states represent whether a sentence should
be included in the summary or not. This model is
able to take the context and the previous decisions
into account generating better summaries. Our re-
sults also show that speech can be summarized fairly
well using acoustic/prosodic features alone, without
lexical features, suggesting that the effect of ASR
transcription errors on summarization may be mini-
mized by techniques such as ours.
6 Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Yang Liu, Michel Galley and
Fadi Biadsy for helpful comments. This work was
funded in part by the DARPA GALE program under
a subcontract to SRI International.
References
Boersma P. Praat, a system for doing phonetics by com-
puter Glot International 5:9/10, 341-345. 2001.
Christensen H., Kolluru B., Gotoh Y., Renals S. From
text summarisation to style-specific summarisation for
broadcast news Proc. ECIR-2004, 2004
Conroy J. and Leary D.O Text Summarization via Hidden
Markov Models and Pivoted QR Matrix Decomposi-
tion Technical report, University of Maryland, March
2001
Hirschberg J Communication and Prosody: Functional
Aspects of Prosody Speech Communication, Vol 36,
pp 31-43, 2002.
Hori C., Furui S., Malkin R., Yu H., Waibel A.. Au-
tomatic Speech Summarization Applied to English
Broadcast News Speech Proc. of ICASSP 2002, pp.
9-12 .
Inoue A., Mikami T., Yamashita Y. Improvement of
Speech Summarization Using Prosodic Information
Proc. of Speech Prosody 2004, Japan
Kupiec J., Pedersen J.O., Chen F. A Trainable Document
Summarizer Proc. of SIGIR 1995
Language Data Consortium ?TDT-2 Corpus Univ. of
Pennsylvania.
Maskey S. and Hirschberg J. 2005. Comparing Lexical,
Acoustic/Prosodic, Structural and Discourse Features
Proc. of ICSLP, Lisbon, Portugal.
Ohtake K., Yamamoto K., Toma y., Sado S., Ma-
suyama S. Newscast Speech Summarization via Sen-
tence Shortening Based on Prosodic Features Proc. of
SSPR pp.167-170. 2003
Shriberg E., Stolcke A., Hakkani-Tur D., Tur G. Prosody
Based Automatic Segmentation of Speech into Sen-
tences and Topics? Speech Communication 32(1-2)
September 2000
Tweed D., Fisher R., Bins J., List T, Efficient Hidden
Semi-Markov Model Inference for Structured Video
Sequences Proc. of (VS-PETS), pp 247-254, Beijing,
Oct 2005.
Witbrock M.J. and Mittal V.O. Ultra-Summarization: A
Statistical Approach to Generating Highly Condensed
Non-Extractive Summaries Proc. of SIGIR 1999
Zechner K. Automatic Generation of Concise Sum-
maries of Spoken Dialogues in Unrestricted Domains
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
199-207, 2001.
92
