Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 153?156,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Induction of Modern Standard Arabic Verb Classes
Neal Snider
Linguistics Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
snider@stanford.edu
Mona Diab
Center for Computational Learning Systems
Columbia University
New York, NY 10115
mdiab@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
We exploit the resources in the Ara-
bic Treebank (ATB) for the novel task
of automatically creating lexical semantic
verb classes for Modern Standard Arabic
(MSA). Verbs are clustered into groups
that share semantic elements of meaning
as they exhibit similar syntactic behavior.
The results of the clustering experiments
are compared with a gold standard set of
classes, which is approximated by using
the noisy English translations provided in
the ATB to create Levin-like classes for
MSA. The quality of the clusters is found
to be sensitive to the inclusion of informa-
tion about lexical heads of the constituents
in the syntactic frames, as well as parame-
ters of the clustering algorithm . The best
set of parameters yields an F?=1 score
of 0.501, compared to a random baseline
with an F?=1 score of 0.37.
1 Introduction
The creation of the Arabic Treebank (ATB) fa-
cilitates corpus based studies of many interesting
linguistic phenomena in Modern Standard Arabic
(MSA).1 The ATB comprises manually annotated
morphological and syntactic analyses of newswire
text from different Arabic sources. We exploit the
ATB for the novel task of automatically creating lex-
ical semantic verb classes for MSA. We are inter-
ested in the problem of classifying verbs in MSA
into groups that share semantic elements of mean-
ing as they exhibit similar syntactic behavior. This
1http://www.ldc.org
manner of classifying verbs in a language is mainly
advocated by Levin (1993). The Levin Hypothesis
(LH) contends that verbs that exhibit similar syn-
tactic behavior share element(s) of meaning. There
exists a relatively extensive classification of English
verbs according to different syntactic alternations,
and numerous linguistic studies of other languages
illustrate that LH holds cross linguistically, in spite
of variations in the verb class assignment (Guerssel
et al, 1985).
For MSA, the only test of LH has been the work
of Mahmoud (1991), arguing for Middle and Unac-
cusative alternations in Arabic. To date, no general
study of MSA verbs and alternations exists. We ad-
dress this problem by automatically inducing such
classes, exploiting explicit syntactic and morpholog-
ical information in the ATB.
Inducing such classes automatically allows for
a large-scale study of different linguistic phenom-
ena within the MSA verb system, as well as cross-
linguistic comparison with their English counter-
parts. Moreover, drawing on generalizations yielded
by such a classification could potentially be useful
in several NLP problems such as Information Ex-
traction, Event Detection, Information Retrieval and
Word Sense Disambiguation, not to mention the fa-
cilitation of lexical resource creation such as MSA
WordNets and ontologies.
2 Related Work
Based on the Levin classes, many researchers at-
tempt to induce such classes automatically (Merlo
and Stevenson, 2001; Schulte im Walde, 2000) . No-
tably, in the work of Merlo and Stevenson , they at-
tempt to induce three main English verb classes on a
large scale from parsed corpora, the class of Unerga-
153
tive, Unaccusative, and Object-drop verbs. They re-
port results of 69.8% accuracy on a task whose base-
line is 34%, and whose expert-based upper bound
is 86.5%. In a task similar to ours except for its
use of English, Schulte im Walde clusters English
verbs semantically by using their alternation behav-
ior, using frames from a statistical parser combined
with WordNet classes. She evaluates against the
published Levin classes, and reports that 61% of all
verbs are clustered into correct classes, with a base-
line of 5%.
3 Clustering
We employ both soft and hard clustering techniques
to induce the verb classes, using the clustering algo-
rithms implemented in the library cluster (Kaufman
and Rousseeuw, 1990) in the R statistical comput-
ing language. The soft clustering algorithm, called
FANNY, is a type of fuzzy clustering, where each ob-
servation is ?spread out? over various clusters. Thus,
the output is a membership function P (xi, c), the
membership of element xi to cluster c. The mem-
berships are nonnegative and sum to 1 for each fixed
observation. The algorithm takes k, the number of
clusters, as a parameter and uses a Euclidean dis-
tance measure.
The hard clustering used is a type of k-means clus-
tering The canonical k-means algorithm proceeds
by iteratively assigning elements to a cluster whose
center (centroid) is closest in Euclidian distance.
4 Features
For both clustering techniques, we explore three dif-
ferent sets of features. The features are cast as the
column dimensions of a matrix with the MSA lem-
matized verbs constituting the row entries.
Information content of frames This is the main
feature set used in the clustering algorithm. These
are the syntactic frames in which the verbs occur.
The syntactic frames are defined as the sister con-
stituents of the verb in a Verb Phrase (VP) con-
stituent.
We vary the type of information resulting from
the syntactic frames as input to our clustering algo-
rithms. We investigate the impact of different lev-
els of granularity of frame information on the clus-
tering of the verbs. We create four different data
sets based on the syntactic frame information reflect-
ing four levels of frame information: FRAME1 in-
cludes all frames with all head information for PPs
and SBARs, FRAME2 includes only head informa-
tion for PPs but no head information for SBARs,
FRAME3 includes no head information for neither
PPs nor SBARs, and FRAME4 is constructed with
all head information, but no constituent ordering in-
formation. For all four frame information sets, the
elements in the matrix are the co-occurrence fre-
quencies of a verb with a given column heading.
Verb pattern The ATB includes morphological
analyses for each verb resulting from the Buckwal-
ter 2 analyzer. Semitic languages such as Arabic
have a rich templatic morphology, and this analy-
sis includes the root and pattern information of each
verb. This feature is of particular scientific interest
because it is unique to the Semitic languages, and
has an interesting potential correlation with argu-
ment structure.
Subject animacy In an attempt to allow the clus-
tering algorithm to use information closer to actual
argument structure than mere syntactic frames, we
add a feature that indicates whether a verb requires
an animate subject. Following a technique suggested
by Merlo and Stevenson , we take advantage of this
tendency by adding a feature that is the number of
times each verb occurs with each NP types as sub-
ject, including when the subject is pronominal or
pro-dropped.
5 Evaluation
5.1 Data Preparation
The data used is obtained from the ATB. The ATB is
a collection of 1800 stories of newswire text from
three different press agencies, comprising a total
of 800, 000 Arabic tokens after clitic segmentation.
The domain of the corpus covers mostly politics,
economics and sports journalism. Each active verb
is extracted from the lemmatized treebank along
with its sister constituents under the VP. The ele-
ments of the matrix are the frequency of the row verb
co-occuring with a feature column entry. There are
2074 verb types and 321 frame types, corresponding
to 54954 total verb frame tokens. Subject animacy
2http://www.ldc.org
154
information is extracted and represented as four fea-
ture columns in our matrix, corresponding to the
four subject NP types. The morphological pattern
associated with each verb is extracted by looking up
the lemma in the output of the morphological ana-
lyzer, which is included with the treebank release.
5.2 Gold Standard Data
The gold standard data is created automatically by
taking the English translations corresponding to the
MSA verb entries provided with the ATB distribu-
tions. We use these English translations to locate the
lemmatized MSA verbs in the Levin English classes
represented in the Levin Verb Index. Thereby creat-
ing an approximated MSA set of verb classes corre-
sponding to the English Levin classes. Admittedly,
this is a crude manner to create a gold standard set.
Given the lack of a pre-existing classification for
MSA verbs, and the novelty of the task, we consider
it a first approximation step towards the creation of
a real gold standard classification set in the near fu-
ture.
5.3 Evaluation Metric
The evaluation metric used here is a variation on
an F -score derived for hard clustering (Rijsber-
gen, 1979). The result is an F? measure, where
? is the coefficient of the relative strengths of pre-
cision and recall. ? = 1 for all results we re-
port. The score measures the maximum overlap be-
tween a hypothesized cluster (HYP) and a corre-
sponding gold standard cluster (GOLD), and com-
putes a weighted average across all the HYP clus-
ters: F? =
?
A?A
?A?
Vtot
max
C?C
(?2 + 1)?A ? C?
?2?C? + ?A?
Here A is the set of HYP clusters, C is the set
of GOLD clusters, and Vtot =
?
A?A
?A? is the total
number of verbs that were clustered into the HYP
set. This can be larger than the number of verbs to
be clustered because verbs can be members of more
than one cluster.
5.4 Results
To determine the best clustering of the extracted
verbs, we run tests comparing five different pa-
rameters of the model, in a 6x2x3x3x3 design.
For the first parameter, we examine six different
frame dimensional conditions, FRAME1+ SUB-
JAnimacy + VerbPatt,FRAME2 + SUBJAnimacy
+ VerbPatt,FRAME3 + SUBJAnimacy + VerbPatt,
FRAME4 + SUBJAnimacy + VerbPatt, FRAME1
+ VerbPatt only; and finally, FRAME1+ SUBJAn-
imacy only . The second parameter is hard vs. soft
clustering. The last three conditions are the num-
ber of verbs clustered, the number of clusters, and
the threshold values used to obtain discrete clusters
from the soft clustering probability distribution.
We compare our best results to a random baseline.
In the baseline, verbs are randomly assigned to clus-
ters where a random cluster size is on average the
same size as each other and as GOLD.3 The highest
overall scored F?=1 is 0.501 and it results from us-
ing FRAME1+SUBJAnimacy+VerbPatt, 125 verbs,
61 clusters, and a threshold of 0.09 in the soft clus-
tering condition. The average cluster size is 3, be-
cause this is a soft clustering. The random baseline
achieves an overall F?=1 of 0.37 with comparable
settings of 125 verbs randomly assigned to 61 clus-
ters of approximately equal size. A representative
mean F?=1 score is 0.31, and the worst F?=1 score
obtained is 0.188. This indicates that the cluster-
ing takes advantage of the structure in the data. To
support this observation, a statistical analysis of the
clustering experiments is undertaken in the next sec-
tion.
6 Discussion
For further quantitative error analysis of the data,
we perform ANOVAs to test the significance of the
differences among the various parameter settings
of the clustering algorithm. We find that informa-
tion type is highly significant (p < .001). Within
varying levels of the frame information parameter,
FRAME2 and FRAME3 are significantly worse than
using FRAME1 information (p < .02). The effects
of SUBJAnimacy, VerbPatt, and FRAME4 are not
significantly different from using FRAME1 alone
as a baseline, which indicates that these features do
not independently contribute to improve clustering,
i.e. FRAME1 implicitly encodes the information in
VerbPatt and SUBJAnimacy. Also, algorithm type
(soft or hard) is found to be significant (p < .01),
3It is worth noting that this gives an added advantage to the
random baseline, since a comparable to GOLD size implicitly
contibutes to a higher overlap score.
155
with soft clustering being better than hard clustering,
while controlling for other factors. Among the con-
trol factors, verb number is significant (p < .001),
with 125 verbs being better than both 276 and 407
verbs. The number of clusters is also significant
(p < .001), with more clusters being better than
fewer.
As evident from the results of the statistical anal-
ysis, the various informational factors have an inter-
esting effect on the quality of the clusters. Includ-
ing lexical head information in the frames signifi-
cantly improves clustering, confirming the intuition
that such information is a necessary part of the alter-
nations that define verb classes. However, as long as
head information is included, configurational infor-
mation about the frames does not appear to help the
clustering, i.e. ordering of constituents is not signif-
icant. It seems that rich Arabic morphology plays
a role in rendering order insignificant. Nonetheless,
this is an interesting result from a linguistic perspec-
tive that begs further investigation. Also interesting
is the fact that SUBJAnimacy and the VerbPatt do
not help improve clustering. The non-significance
of SUBJAnimacy is indeed surprising, given its sig-
nificant impact on English clusterings. Perhaps the
cues utilized in our study require more fine tuning.
The lack of significance of the pattern information
could indicate that the role played by the patterns
is already encoded in the subcategorization frame,
therefore pattern information is superfluous.
The score of the best parameter settings with re-
spect to the baseline is considerable given the nov-
elty of the task and lack of good quality resources
for evaluation. Moreover, there is no reason to ex-
pect that there would be perfect alignment between
the Arabic clusters and the corresponding translated
Levin clusters, primarily because of the quality of
the translation, but also because there is unlikely to
be an isomorphism between English and Arabic lex-
ical semantics, as assumed here as a means of ap-
proximating the problem.
In an attempt at a qualitative analysis of the re-
sulting clusters, we manually examine several HYP
clusters. As an example, one includes the verbs
>aloqaY [meet], $ahid [view], >ajoraY [run an in-
terview], {isotaqobal [receive a guest], Eaqad [hold
a conference], >aSodar [issue]. We note that they
all share the concept of convening, or formal meet-
ings. The verbs are clearly related in terms of their
event structure (they are all activities, without an as-
sociated change of state) yet are not semantically
similar. Therefore, our clustering approach yields a
classification that is on par with the Levin classes in
the coarseness of the cluster membership granular-
ity. In summary, we observe very interesting clusters
of verbs which indeed require more in depth lexical
semantic study as MSA verbs in their own right.
7 Conclusions
We successfully perform the novel task of apply-
ing clustering techniques to verb frame information
acquired from the ATB to induce lexical semantic
classes for MSA verbs. In doing this, we find that
the quality of the clusters is sensitive to the inclu-
sion of information about lexical heads of the con-
stituents in the syntactic frames, as well as param-
eters of the clustering algorithm. Our classification
performs well with respect to a gold standard clus-
ters produced by noisy translations of English verbs
in the Levin classes. Our best clustering condition
when we use all frame information and the most fre-
quent verbs in the ATB and a high number of clusters
outperforms a random baseline by F?=1 difference
of 0.13. This analysis leads us to conclude that the
clusters are induced from the structure in the data
Our results are reported with a caveat on the gold
standard data. We are in the process of manually
cleaning the English translations corresponding to
the MSA verbs.
References
M. Guerssel, K. Hale, M. Laughren, B. Levin, and J. White Eagle. 1985. A cross
linguistic study of transitivity alternations. In Papers from the Parasession on
Causatives and Agentivity, volume 21:2, pages 48?63. CLS, Chicago.
L. Kaufman and P.J. Rousseeuw. 1990. Finding Groups in Data. John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations: A Preliminary Investi-
gation. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Abdelgawad T. Mahmoud. 1991. A contrastive study of middle and unaccusative
constructions in Arabic and English. In B. Comrie and M. Eid, editors, Per-
spectives on Arabic Linguistics, volume 3, pages 119?134. Benjamins, Ams-
terdam.
Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson. 2001. Automatic verb classification based
on statistical distributions of argument structure. Computational Linguistics,
27(4).
C.J. Van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retrieval. Butterworths, London.
Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2000. Clustering verbs semantically according to their
alternation behaviour. In 18th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING 2000), Saarbrucken, Germany.
156
