Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 109?112,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Extracting Salient Keywords from Instructional Videos Using Joint Text,
Audio and Visual Cues
Youngja Park and Ying Li
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Hawthorne, NY 10532
{young park, yingli}@us.ibm.com
Abstract
This paper presents a multi-modal feature-
based system for extracting salient keywords
from transcripts of instructional videos. Specif-
ically, we propose to extract domain-specific
keywords for videos by integrating various
cues from linguistic and statistical knowledge,
as well as derived sound classes and charac-
teristic visual content types. The acquisition
of such salient keywords will facilitate video
indexing and browsing, and significantly im-
prove the quality of current video search en-
gines. Experiments on four government in-
structional videos show that 82% of the salient
keywords appear in the top 50% of the highly
ranked keywords. In addition, the audiovisual
cues improve precision and recall by 1.1% and
1.5% respectively.
1 Introduction
With recent advances in multimedia technology, the num-
ber of videos that are available to both general public and
particular individuals or organizations is growing rapidly.
This consequently creates a high demand for efficient
video searching and categorization as evidenced by the
emergence of various offerings for web video searching. 1
While videos contain a rich source of audiovisual in-
formation, text-based video search is still among the most
effective and widely used approaches. However, the qual-
ity of such text-based video search engines still lags be-
hind the quality of those that search textual information
like web pages. This is due to the extreme difficulty of
tagging domain-specific keywords to videos. How to
effectively extract domain-specific or salient keywords
1For example, see http://video.google.com and
http://video.yahoo.com
from video transcripts has thus become a critical and
challenging issue for both the video indexing and search-
ing communities.
Recently, with the advances in speech recognition
and natural language processing technologies, systems
are being developed to automatically extract keywords
from video transcripts which are either transcribed from
speech or obtained from closed captions. Most of these
systems, however, simply treat all words equally or di-
rectly ?transplant? keyword extraction techniques devel-
oped for pure text documents to the video domain without
taking specific characteristics of videos into account (M.
Smith and T. Kanade, 1997).
In the traditional information retrieval (IR) field, most
existing methods for selecting salient keywords rely pri-
marily on word frequency or other statistical informa-
tion obtained from a collection of documents (Salton and
McGill, 1983; Salton and Buckley, 1988). These tech-
niques, however, do not work well for videos for two rea-
sons: 1) most video transcripts are very short, as com-
pared to a typical text collection; and 2) it is impractical
to assume that there is a large video collection on a spe-
cific topic, due to the video production costs. As a result,
many keywords extracted from videos using traditional
IR techniques are not really content-specific, and conse-
quently, the video search results that are returned based
on these keywords are generally unsatisfactory.
In this paper, we propose a system for extracting salient
or domain-specific keywords from instructional videos
by exploiting joint audio, visual, and text cues. Specif-
ically, we first apply a text-based keyword extraction sys-
tem to find a set of keywords from video transcripts. Then
we apply various audiovisual content analysis techniques
to identify cue contexts in which domain-specific key-
words are more likely to appear. Finally, we adjust the
keyword salience by fusing the audio, visual and text cues
together, and ?discover? a set of salient keywords.
Professionally produced educational or instructional
109
videos are the main focus of this work since they are play-
ing increasingly important roles in people?s daily lives.
For the system evaluation, we used training and education
videos that are freely downloadable from various DHS
(Department of Homeland Security) web sites. These
were selected because 1) DHS has an increasing need for
quickly browsing, searching and re-purposing its learning
resources across its over twenty diverse agencies; 2) most
DHS videos contain closed captions in compliance with
federal accessibility requirements such as Section 508.
2 A Text-based Keyword Extraction
System
This section describes the text-based keyword extrac-
tion system, GlossEx, which we developed in our earlier
work (Park et al 2002). GlossEx applies a hybrid method,
which exploits both linguistic and statistical knowledge,
to extract domain-specific keywords in a document col-
lection. GlossEx has been successfully used in large-
scale text analysis applications such as document author-
ing and indexing, back-of-book indexing, and contact
center data analysis.
An overall outline of the algorithm is given below.
First, the algorithm identifies candidate glossary items by
using syntactic grammars as well as a set of entity recog-
nizers. To extract more cohesive and domain-specific
glossary items, it then conducts pre-nominal modifier
filtering and various glossary item normalization tech-
niques such as associating abbreviations with their full
forms, and misspellings or alternative spellings with their
canonical spellings. Finally, the glossary items are ranked
based on their confidence values.
The confidence value of a term T,C(T ), is defined as
C(T ) = ? ? TD(T ) + ? ? TC(T ) (1)
where TD and TC denote the term domain-specificity
and term cohesion, respectively. ? and ? are two weights
which sum up to 1. The domain specificity is further de-
fined as
TD =
?
wi?T
Pd(wi)
Pg(wi)
| T | (2)
where, | T | is the number of words in term T , pd(wi) is
the probability of word wi in a domain document collec-
tion, and pg(wi) is the probability of word wi in a general
document collection. And the term cohesion is defined as
TC = | T | ?f(T )? log10f(T )?
wi?T f(wi)
(3)
where, f(T ) is the frequency of term T , and f(wi) is the
frequency of a component word wi.
Finally, GlossEx normalizes the term confidence val-
ues to the range of [0, 3.5]. Figure 1 shows the normal-
ized distributions of keyword confidence values that we
obtained from two instructional videos by analyzing their
text transcripts with GlossEx. Superimposed on each plot
is the probability density function (PDF) of a gamma dis-
tribution (Gamma(?, ?)) whose two parameters are di-
rectly computed from the confidence values. As we can
see, the gamma PDF fits very well with the data distrib-
ution. This observation has also been confirmed by other
test videos.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 40
5
10
15
20
25 Video on Bioterrorism History
Confidence value 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 40
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40 Video on Massive Weapon Destruction
Confidence value
(a) (b)
Figure 1: Normalized distribution of keyword saliencies
for two DHS video, superimposed by Gamma PDFs.
3 Salient Keyword Extraction for
Instructional Videos
In this section, we elaborate on our approach for extract-
ing salient keywords from instructional videos based on
the exploitation of audiovisual and text cues.
3.1 Characteristics of Instructional Videos
Compared to general videos, professionally produced
instructional videos are usually better structured, that is,
they generally contain well organized topics and sub-
topics due to education nature. In fact, there are certain
types of production patterns that could be observed from
these videos. For instance, at the very beginning section
of the video, a host will usually give an overview of the
main topics (as well as a list of sub-topics) that are to
be discussed throughout the video. Then each individual
topic or sub-topic is sequentially presented following a
pre-designed order. When one topic is completed, some
informational credit pages will be (optionally) displayed,
followed by either some informational title pages show-
ing the next topic, or a host introduction. A relatively
long interval of music or silence that accompanies this
transitional period could usually be observed in this case.
To effectively deliver the topics or materials to an au-
dience, the video producers usually apply the following
types of content presentation forms: host narration, inter-
views and site reports, presentation slides and informa-
tion bulletins, as well as assisted content that are related
with the topic under discussion. For convenience, we call
the last two types as informative text and linkage scene
110
in this work. Figure 2 shows the individual examples of
video frames that contain narrator, informative text, and
the linkage scene.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 2: Three visual content types: (a) narrator, (b) in-
formative text, and (c) linkage scene.
3.2 AudioVisual Content Analysis
This section describes our approach on mining the afore-
mentioned content structure and patterns for instructional
videos based on the analysis of both audio and visual in-
formation. Specifically, given an instructional video, we
first apply an audio classification module to partition its
audio track into homogeneous audio segments. Each seg-
ment is then tagged with one of the following five sound
labels: speech, silence, music, environmental sound, and
speech with music (Li and Dorai, 2004). The support
vector machine technique is applied for this purpose.
Meanwhile, a homogeneous video segmentation
process is performed which partitions the video into a
series of video segments in which each segment con-
tains content in the same physical setting. Two groups
of visual features are then extracted from each segment
so as to further derive its content type. Specifically, fea-
tures regarding the presence of human faces are first ex-
tracted using a face detector, and these are subsequently
applied to determine if the segment contains a narrator.
The other feature group contains features regarding de-
tected text blobs and sentences from the video?s text over-
lays. This information is mainly applied to determine if
the segment contains informative text. Finally, we label
segments that do not contain narrators or informative text
as linkage scenes. These could be an outdoor landscape, a
field demonstration or indoor classroom overview. More
details on this part are presented in (Li and Dorai, 2005).
The audio and visual analysis results are then inte-
grated together to essentially assign a semantic audiovi-
sual label to each video segment. Specifically, given a
segment, we first identify its major audio type by finding
the one that lasts the longest. Then, the audio and visual
labels are integrated in a straightforward way to reveal its
semantics. For instance, if the segment contains a narra-
tor while its major audio type is music, it will be tagged
as narrator with music playing. A total of fifteen possi-
ble constructs is thus generated, coming from the com-
bination of three visual labels (narrator, informative text
and linkage scene) and five sound labels (speech, silence,
music, environmental sound, and speech with music).
3.3 AudioVisual and Text Cues for Salient Keyword
Extraction
Having acquired video content structure and segment
content types, we now extract important audiovisual cues
that imply the existence of salient keywords. Specifically,
we observe that topic-specific keywords are more likely
appearing in the following scenarios (a.k.a cue context):
1) the first N1 sentences of segments that contain narra-
tor presentation (i.e. narrator with speech), or informa-
tive text with voice-over; 2) the first N2 sentences of a
new speaker (i.e. after a speaker change); 3) the question
sentence; 4) the first N2 sentences right after the ques-
tion (i.e. the corresponding answer); and 5) the first N2
sentences following the segments that contain silence, or
informative text with music. Specifically, the first 4 cues
conform with our intuition that important content sub-
jects are more likely to be mentioned at the beginning part
of narration, presentation, answers, as well as in ques-
tions; while the last cue corresponds to the transitional
period between topics. Here, N1 is a threshold which
will be automatically adjusted for each segment during
the process. Specifically, we set N1 to min(SS, 3) where
SS is the number of sentences that are overlapped with
each segment. In contrast, N2 is fixed to 2 for this work
as it is only associated with sentences.
Note that currently we identify the speaker changes
and question sentences by locating the signature charac-
ters (such as ?>>? and ???) in the transcript. However,
when this information is unavailable, numerous exist-
ing techniques on speaker change detection and prosody
analysis could be applied to accomplish the task (Chen
et al, 1998).
3.4 Keyword Salience Adjustment
Now, given each keyword (K) obtained from GlossEx,
we recalculate its salience by considering the following
three factors: 1) its original confidence value assigned by
GlossEx (CGlossEx(K)); 2) the frequency of the keyword
occurring in the aforementioned cue context (Fcue(K));
and 3) the number of component words in the keyword
(|K|). Specifically, we give more weight or incentive
(I(K)) to keywords that are originally of high confi-
dence, appear more frequently in cue contexts, and have
multiple component words. Note that if keyword K does
not appear in any cue contexts, its incentive value will be
zero.
Figure 3 shows the detailed incentive calculation steps.
Here, mode and ? denote the mode and standard devia-
tion derived from the GlossEx ?s confidence value distri-
bution. MAX CONFIDENCE is the maximum con-
fidence value used for normalization by GlossEx, which
is set to 3.5 in this work. As we can see, the three afore-
mentioned factors have been re-transformed into C(K),
F (K) and L(K), respectively. Please also note that we
111
have re-adjusted the frequency of keyword K in the cue
context if it is larger than 10. This intends to reduce the
biased influence of a high frequency. Finally, we add a
small value ? to |K| and Fcue respectively in order to
avoid zero values for F (K) and L(K). Now, we have
similar value scales for F (K) and L(K) ([1.09, 2.xx])
and C(K) ([0, 2.yy]), which is desirable.
As the last step, we boost keyword K?s original
salience CGlossEx(K) by I(K).
if (CGlossEx(K) >= mode
C(K) = CGlossEx(K)mode
else C(K) = CGlossEx(K)MAX CONFIDENCE
if ( Fcue(K) > 10)
Fcue(K) = 10 + log10(Fcue(K)? 10)
F (K) = ln(Fcue(K) + ?)
L(K) = ln(|K|+ ?)
I(K) = ? ? C(K)? F (K)? L(K)
Figure 3: Steps for computing incentive value for key-
word K appearing in cue context
4 Experimental Results
Four DHS videos were used in the experiment, which
contain diverse topics ranging from bio-terrorism history,
weapons of mass destruction, to school preparation for
terrorism. The video length also varies a lot from 30
minutes to 2 hours. Each video also contains a variety of
sub-topics. Video transcripts were acquired by extracting
the closed captions with our own application.
To evaluate system performance, we compare the key-
words generated from our system against the human-
generated gold standard. Note that for this experiment,
we only consider nouns and noun phrases as keywords.
To collect the ground truth, we invited a few human eval-
uators, showed them the four test videos, and presented
them with all candidate keywords extracted by GlossEx.
We then asked them to label all keywords that they con-
sidered to be domain-specific, which is guidelined by the
following question: ?would you be satisfied if you get this
video when you use this keyword as a search term??.
Table 1 shows the number of candidate keywords and
manually labeled salient keywords for all four test videos.
As we can see, approximately 50% of candidate key-
words were judged to be domain-specific by humans.
Based on this observation, we selected the top 50% of
highly ranked keywords based on the adjusted salience,
and examined their presence in the pool of salient key-
words for each video. As a result, an average of 82%
of salient keywords were identified within these top 50%
of re-ranked keywords. In addition, the audiovisual cues
improve precision and recall by 1.1% and 1.5% respec-
tively.
videos v1 v2 v3 v4
no. of candidate keywords 477 934 1303 870
no. of salient keywords 253 370 665 363
ratio of salient keywords 53% 40% 51% 42%
Table 1: The number of candidate and manually labeled
salient keywords in the four test videos
5 Conclusion and Future Work
We described a mutimodal feature-based system for ex-
tracting salient keywords from instructional videos. The
system utilizes a richer set of information cues which not
only include linguistic and statistical knowledge but also
sound classes and characteristic visual content types that
are available to videos. Experiments conducted on the
DHS videos have shown that incorporating multimodal
features for extracting salient keywords from videos is
useful.
Currently, we are performing more sophisticated ex-
periments on different ways to exploit additional audio-
visual cues. There is also room for improving the calcu-
lation of the incentive values of keywords. Our next plan
is to conduct an extensive comparison between GlossEx
and the proposed scheme.
References
Y. Park, R. Byrd and B. Boguraev. 2002. Automatic Glos-
sary Extraction: Beyond Terminology Identification. Proc.
of the 19th International Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(COLING02), pp 772?778.
Y. Li and C. Dorai. 2004 SVM-based Audio Classification for
Instructional Video Analysis. IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP?04).
Y. Li and C. Dorai. 2005 Video frame identification for learn-
ing media content understanding. IEEE International Con-
ference on Multimedia & Expo (ICME?05).
M. Smith and T. Kanade. 1997 Video Skimming and Charac-
terization through the Combination of Image and Language
Understanding Techniques. IEEE Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pp. 775-781.
G. Salton and J. McGill 1983. Introduction to modern infor-
mation Retrieval. . New York: McGraw-Hill.
G. Salton and C. Buckley 1988. Term-Weighting Approaches
in Automatic Text Retrieval. Information Processing & Man-
agement, 24 (5), 513-523.
S. Chen and P. Gopalakrishnan 1998. Speaker, Environ-
ment and Channel Change Detection and Clustering via the
Bayesian Information Criterion. Proc. of DARPA Broadcast
News Transcription and Understanding Workshop.
112
