Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 57?60,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
OntoNotes: The 90% Solution 
 
 
Eduard Hovy Mitchell Marcus Martha Palmer Lance Ramshaw Ralph Weischedel 
USC/ICI Comp & Info Science ICS and Linguistics BBN Technologies BBN Technologies 
4676 Admiralty U. of Pennsylvania U. of Colorado 10 Moulton St. 10 Moulton St. 
Marina d. R., CA Philadelphia, PA Boulder, CO Cambridge, MA Cambridge, MA 
hovy 
@isi.edu 
mitch  
@cis.upenn.edu 
martha.palmer 
@colorado.edu 
lance.ramshaw 
@bbn.com 
weischedel 
@bbn.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract* 
We describe the OntoNotes methodology and its 
result, a large multilingual richly-annotated corpus 
constructed at 90% interannotator agreement. An 
initial portion (300K words of English newswire 
and 250K words of Chinese newswire) will be 
made available to the community during 2007. 
1 Introduction 
Many natural language processing applications 
could benefit from a richer model of text meaning 
than the bag-of-words and n-gram models that cur-
rently predominate. Until now, however, no such 
model has been identified that can be annotated 
dependably and rapidly. We have developed a 
methodology for producing such a corpus at 90% 
inter-annotator agreement, and will release com-
pleted segments beginning in early 2007. 
The OntoNotes project focuses on a domain in-
dependent representation of literal meaning that 
includes predicate structure, word sense, ontology 
linking, and coreference. Pilot studies have shown 
that these can all be annotated rapidly and with 
better than 90% consistency. Once a substantial 
and accurate training corpus is available, trained 
algorithms can be developed to predict these struc-
tures in new documents. 
                                                        
*
 This work was supported under the GALE program of the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Contract No. 
HR0011-06-C-0022. 
This process begins with parse (TreeBank) and 
propositional (PropBank) structures, which provide 
normalization over predicates and their arguments.  
Word sense ambiguities are then resolved, with 
each word sense also linked to the appropriate 
node in the Omega ontology. Coreference is also 
annotated, allowing the entity mentions that are 
propositional arguments to be resolved in context. 
Annotation will cover multiple languages (Eng-
lish, Chinese, and Arabic) and multiple genres 
(newswire, broadcast news, news groups, weblogs, 
etc.), to create a resource that is broadly applicable. 
2 Treebanking 
The Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1993) is anno-
tated with information to make predicate-argument 
structure easy to decode, including function tags 
and markers of ?empty? categories that represent 
displaced constituents.  To expedite later stages of 
annotation, we have developed a parsing system 
(Gabbard et al, 2006) that recovers both of these 
latter annotations, the first we know of.  A first-
stage parser matches the Collins (2003) parser on 
which it is based on the Parseval metric, while si-
multaneously achieving near state-of-the-art per-
formance on recovering function tags (F-measure 
89.0). A second stage, a seven stage pipeline of 
maximum entropy learners and voted perceptrons, 
achieves state-of-the-art performance (F-measure 
74.7) on the recovery of empty categories by com-
bining a linguistically-informed architecture and a 
rich feature set with the power of modern machine 
learning methods. 
57
3 PropBanking  
The Penn Proposition Bank, funded by ACE 
(DOD), focuses on the argument structure of verbs, 
and provides a corpus annotated with semantic 
roles, including participants traditionally viewed as 
arguments and adjuncts.  The 1M word Penn Tree-
bank II Wall Street Journal corpus has been suc-
cessfully annotated with semantic argument 
structures for verbs and is now available via the 
Penn Linguistic Data Consortium as PropBank I 
(Palmer et al, 2005).   Links from the argument 
labels in the Frames Files to FrameNet frame ele-
ments and VerbNet thematic roles are being added.  
This style of annotation has also been successfully 
applied to other genres and languages. 
4 Word Sense  
Word sense ambiguity is a continuing major ob-
stacle to accurate information extraction, summari-
zation and machine translation.  The subtle fine-
grained sense distinctions in WordNet have not 
lent themselves to high agreement between human 
annotators or high automatic tagging performance. 
Building on results in grouping fine-grained 
WordNet senses into more coarse-grained senses 
that led to improved inter-annotator agreement 
(ITA) and system performance (Palmer et al, 
2004; Palmer et al, 2006), we have  developed a 
process for rapid sense inventory creation and an-
notation that includes critical links between the 
grouped word senses and the Omega ontology 
(Philpot et al, 2005; see Section 5 below). 
This process is based on recognizing that sense 
distinctions can be represented by linguists in an 
hierarchical structure, similar to a decision tree, 
that is rooted in very coarse-grained distinctions 
which become increasingly fine-grained until 
reaching WordNet senses at the leaves.  Sets of 
senses under specific nodes of the tree are grouped 
together into single entries, along with the syntac-
tic and semantic criteria for their groupings, to be 
presented to the annotators.   
As shown in Figure 1, a 50-sentence sample of 
instances is annotated and immediately checked for 
inter-annotator agreement.  ITA scores below 90% 
lead to a revision and clarification of the groupings 
by the linguist. It is only after the groupings have 
passed the ITA hurdle that each individual group is 
linked to a conceptual node in the ontology. In ad-
dition to higher accuracy, we find at least a three-
fold increase in annotator productivity. 
 
Figure 1. Annotation Procedure 
As part of OntoNotes we are annotating the 
most frequent noun and verb senses in a 300K 
subset of the PropBank, and will have this data 
available for release in early 2007.  
4.1 Verbs 
Our initial goal is to annotate the 700 most fre-
quently occurring verbs in our data, which are 
typically also the most polysemous; so far 300 
verbs have been grouped and 150 double anno-
tated. Subcategorization frames and semantic 
classes of arguments play major roles in determin-
ing the groupings, as illustrated by the grouping for 
the 22 WN 2.1 senses for drive in Figure 2.  In ad-
word
Check against ontology (1 person)
not OK
Annotate test (2 people)
Results: agreement 
and confusion matrix
Sense partitioning, creating definitions, 
commentary, etc. (2 or 3 people)
Adjudication (1 person)
OK 
not OK
Sa
ve
 
fo
r 
fu
ll
a
n
n
o
ta
tio
n
GI: operating or traveling via a vehi-
cle 
NP (Agent) drive NP, NP drive PP 
WN1: ?Can you drive a truck??, WN2: ?drive to school,?, WN3: ?drive her to 
school,?, WN12: ?this truck drives well,? WN13: ?he drives a taxi,?,WN14: ?The car 
drove around the corner,?, WN:16: ?drive the turnpike to work,?  
G2: force to a position or stance 
NP drive NP/PP/infinitival 
WN4: ?He drives me mad.,? WN6: ?drive back the invaders,? WN7: ?She finally 
drove him to change jobs,? WN8: ?drive a nail,? WN15: ?drive the herd,? WN22: 
?drive the game.? 
G3:  to exert energy on behalf of 
something NP drive NP/infinitival 
WN5: ?Her passion drives her,? WN10: ?He is driving away at his thesis.? 
G4: cause object to move rapidly by 
striking it NP drive NP 
WN9: ?drive the ball into the outfield ,? WN17 ?drive a golf ball,? WN18 ?drive a 
ball? 
Figure 2. A Portion of the Grouping of WordNet Senses for "drive? 
58
dition to improved annotator productivity and ac-
curacy, we predict a corresponding improvement 
in word sense disambiguation performance.  Train-
ing on this new data, Chen and Palmer (2005) re-
port 86.3% accuracy for verbs using a smoothed 
maximum entropy model and rich linguistic fea-
tures, which is 10% higher than their earlier, state-
of-the art performance on ungrouped, fine-grained 
senses. 
4.2 Nouns 
We follow a similar procedure for the annotation 
of nouns.  The same individual who groups Word-
Net verb senses also creates noun senses, starting 
with WordNet and other dictionaries.  We aim to 
double-annotate the 1100 most frequent polyse-
mous nouns in the initial corpus by the end of 
2006, while maximizing overlap with the sentences 
containing annotated verbs.   
Certain nouns carry predicate structure; these 
include nominalizations (whose structure obvi-
ously is derived from their verbal form) and vari-
ous types of relational nouns (like father, 
President, and believer, that express relations be-
tween entities, often stated using of).  We have 
identified a limited set of these whose structural 
relations can be semi-automatically annotated with 
high accuracy.   
5 Ontology  
In standard dictionaries, the senses for each word 
are simply listed.   In order to allow access to addi-
tional useful information, such as subsumption, 
property inheritance, predicate frames from other 
sources, links to instances, and so on, our goal is to 
link the senses to an ontology.  This requires de-
composing the hierarchical structure into subtrees 
which can then be inserted at the appropriate con-
ceptual node in the ontology. 
The OntoNotes terms are represented in the 
110,000-node Omega ontology (Philpot et al, 
2005), under continued construction and extension 
at ISI.  Omega, which has been used for MT, 
summarization, and database alignment, has been 
assembled semi-automatically by merging a vari-
ety of sources, including Princeton?s WordNet, 
New Mexico State University?s Mikrokosmos, and 
a variety of Upper Models, including DOLCE 
(Gangemi et al, 2002), SUMO (Niles and Pease, 
2001), and ISI?s Upper Model, which are in the 
process of being reconciled.  The verb frames from 
PropBank, FrameNet, WordNet, and Lexical Con-
ceptual Structures (Dorr and Habash, 2001) have 
all been included and cross-linked.   
In work planned for later this year, verb and 
noun sense groupings will be manually inserted 
into Omega, replacing the current (primarily 
WordNet-derived) contents. For example, of the 
verb groups for drive in the table above, G1 and 
G4 will be placed into the area of ?controlled mo-
tion?, while G2 will then sort with ?attitudes?.   
6 Coreference  
The coreference annotation in OntoNotes connects 
coreferring instances of specific referring expres-
sions, meaning primarily NPs that introduce or 
access a discourse entity. For example, ?Elco In-
dustries, Inc.?, ?the Rockford, Ill. Maker of fasten-
ers?, and ?it? could all corefer. (Non-specific 
references like ?officials? in ?Later, officials re-
ported?? are not included, since coreference for 
them is frequently unclear.) In addition, proper 
premodifiers and verb phrases can be marked when 
coreferent with an NP, such as linking, ?when the 
company withdrew from the bidding? to ?the with-
drawal of New England Electric?.  
Unlike the coreference task as defined in the 
ACE program, attributives are not generally 
marked. For example, the ?veterinarian? NP would 
not be marked in ?Baxter Black is a large animal 
veterinarian?. Adjectival modifiers like ?Ameri-
can? in ?the American embassy? are also not sub-
ject to coreference. 
Appositives are annotated as a special kind of 
coreference, so that later processing will be able to 
supply and interpret the implicit copula link. 
All of the coreference annotation is being dou-
bly annotated and adjudicated. In our initial Eng-
lish batch, the average agreement scores between 
each annotator and the adjudicated results were 
91.8% for normal coreference and 94.2% for ap-
positives. 
7 Related and Future Work  
PropBank I (Palmer et al, 2005), developed at 
UPenn, captures predicate argument structure for 
verbs; NomBank provides predicate argument 
structure for nominalizations and other noun predi-
cates (Meyers et al, 2004).  PropBank II annota-
59
tion (eventuality ID?s, coarse-grained sense tags, 
nominal coreference and selected discourse con-
nectives) is being applied to a small (100K) paral-
lel Chinese/English corpus (Babko-Malaya et al, 
2004).  The OntoNotes representation extends 
these annotations, and allows eventual inclusion of 
additional shallow semantic representations for 
other phenomena, including temporal and spatial 
relations, numerical expressions, deixis, etc. One 
of the principal aims of OntoNotes is to enable 
automated semantic analysis.  The best current al-
gorithm for semantic role labeling for PropBank 
style annotation (Pradhan et al, 2005) achieves an 
F-measure of 81.0 using an SVM. OntoNotes will 
provide a large amount of new training data for 
similar efforts.   
Existing work in the same realm falls into two 
classes: the development of resources for specific 
phenomena or the annotation of corpora. An ex-
ample of the former is Berkeley?s FrameNet pro-
ject (Baker et al, 1998), which produces rich 
semantic frames, annotating a set of examples for 
each predicator (including verbs, nouns and adjec-
tives), and describing the network of relations 
among the semantic frames.  An example of the 
latter type is the Salsa project (Burchardt et al, 
2004), which produced a German lexicon based on 
the FrameNet semantic frames and annotated a 
large German newswire corpus.  A second exam-
ple, the Prague Dependency Treebank (Hajic et al, 
2001), has annotated a large Czech corpus with 
several levels of (tectogrammatical) representation, 
including parts of speech, syntax, and topic/focus 
information structure. Finally, the IL-Annotation 
project (Reeder et al, 2004) focused on the repre-
sentations required to support a series of increas-
ingly semantic phenomena across seven languages 
(Arabic, Hindi, English, Spanish, Korean, Japanese  
and French). In intent and in many details, 
OntoNotes is compatible with all these efforts, 
which may one day all participate in a larger multi-
lingual corpus integration effort.   
References  
O. Babko-Malaya, M. Palmer, N. Xue, A. Joshi, and S. Ku-
lick. 2004. Proposition Bank II: Delving Deeper, Frontiers 
in Corpus Annotation, Workshop, HLT/NAACL  
C. F. Baker, C. J. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe. 1998. The Berke-
ley FrameNet Project. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL, 
pages 86-90. 
J. Chen and M. Palmer.  2005.  Towards Robust High Per-
formance Word Sense Disambiguation of English Verbs 
Using Rich Linguistic Features. In Proceedings of 
IJCNLP2005, pp. 933-944. 
B. Dorr and N. Habash.  2001.  Lexical Conceptual Structure 
Lexicons. In Calzolari et al ISLE-IST-1999-10647-WP2-
WP3, Survey of Major Approaches Towards Bilin-
gual/Multilingual Lexicons.  
A. Burchardt, K. Erk, A. Frank, A. Kowalski, S. Pado, and M. 
Pinkal. 2006. Consistency and Coverage: Challenges for 
exhaustive semantic annotation. In Proceedings of DGfS-
06. 
C. Fellbaum (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An On-line Lexical Data-
base and Some of its Applications. MIT Press. 
R. Gabbard, M. Marcus, and S. Kulick. Fully Parsing the Penn 
Treebank. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2006.  
A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, C. Masolo, A. Oltramari, and L. 
Schneider. 2002. Sweetening Ontologies with DOLCE. In 
Proceedings of EKAW  pp. 166-181. 
J. Hajic, B. Vidov?-Hladk?, and P. Pajas.  2001: The Prague 
Dependency Treebank: Annotation Structure and Support. 
Proceeding of the IRCS Workshop on Linguistic Data-
bases, pp. 105?114. 
M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. A. Marcinkiewicz. 1993. 
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn 
Treebank. Computational Linguistics 19: 313-330. 
A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C Macleod, R. Szekely, V. Zielinska, 
B. Young, and R. Grishman. 2004. The NomBank Project: 
An Interim Report. Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Work-
shop in conjunction with HLT/NAACL. 
I. Niles and A. Pease.  2001.  Towards a Standard Upper On-
tology.  Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS-2001). 
M. Palmer, O. Babko-Malaya, and H. T. Dang. 2004. Differ-
ent Sense Granularities for Different Applications, 2nd 
Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding 
Systems, at HLT/NAACL-04,  
M. Palmer, H. Dang and C. Fellbaum. 2006. Making Fine-
grained and Coarse-grained Sense Distinctions, Both 
Manually and Automatically, Journal of Natural Language 
Engineering, to appear. 
M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The Proposi-
tion Bank: A Corpus Annotated with Semantic Roles, 
Computational Linguistics, 31(1). 
A. Philpot, E.. Hovy, and P. Pantel. 2005. The Omega Ontol-
ogy. Proceedings of the ONTOLEX Workshop at IJCNLP 
 S. Pradhan, W. Ward, K. Hacioglu, J. Martin, D. Jurafsky.  
2005.  Semantic Role Labeling Using Different Syntactic 
Views.  Proceedings of the ACL.  
F. Reeder, B. Dorr, D. Farwell, N. Habash, S. Helmreich, E.H. 
Hovy, L. Levin, T. Mitamura, K. Miller, O. Rambow, A. 
Siddharthan. 2004.  Interlingual Annotation for MT Devel-
opment. Proceedings of AMTA.  
60
