Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion Volume, pages 299?300,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
1. What?s in a Name: Current Methods, Applications, and Evaluation
in Multilingual Name Search and Matching
Sherri Condon and Keith J. Miller, MITRE
Names of people, places, and organizations have unique linguistic properties, and they typically require
special treatment in automatic processes. Appropriate processing of names is essential to achieve high-
quality information extraction, speech recognition, machine translation, and information management, yet
most HLT applications provide limited specialized processing of names. Variation in the forms of names can
make it difficult to retrieve names from data sources, to perform co-reference resolution across documents,
or to associate instances of names with their representations in gazetteers and lexicons. Name matching
has become critical in government contexts for checking watchlists and maintaining tax, health, and So-
cial Security records. In commercial contexts, name matching is essential in credit, insurance, and legal
applications.
This tutorial will focus on personal names, with special attention given to Arabic names, though it will
be clear that much of the material applies to other languages and to names of places and organizations. Case
studies will be used to illustrate problems and approaches to solutions. Arabic names illustrate many of the
issues encountered in multilingual name matching, among which are complex name structures and spelling
variation due to morphophonemic alternation and competing transliteration conventions.
1.1 Tutorial Outline
1. Name matching across languages, scripts, and cultures
? Survey of problems using Arabic case study
* Name parts and structure (titles, initials, particles, prefixes, suffixes, nicknames,
tribal names)
* Transliteration complications (segmentation, ambiguity, incompleteness, dialect
variation, acoustic mismatches, competing standards)
* Other difficulties presented by personal names
? Survey of approaches to solutions, advantages/disadvantages of each:
* SOUNDEX, generic string matching (Levenshtein, n-gram, Jaro-Winkler),
* Variant generation (pattern matching, dictionaries, gazetteers),
* Normalization (morphological analysis, rewriting, ?deep? structures)
* Intelligent-search algorithms that incorporate linguistic knowledge in selection of
string-similarity measures, parameters, and lists
? Matching across scripts
* Methods for data acquisition
* Transliteration
* Phonological interlingua
2. Evaluation of Name Search and Matching Systems
? Development of ground-truth sets
* Human adjudication
* Estimation techniques
? Case study: adjudication exercises
? Issues in establishing ground truth: different truth for different applications
? Metrics (precision, recall, F scores, others)
? Case study comparing matching systems for Romanized Arabic names (based on MITRE
evaluation of 9 name matching products)
? Inter-adjudicator agreement
? Performance and other considerations
299
1.2 Target Audience
This tutorial is intended for those with interest in information retrieval and entity extraction, identity reso-
lution, Arabic computational linguistics, and related language-processing applications. As a relatively un-
studied domain, name matching is a promising area for innovation and for researchers seeking new projects.
Keith J. Miller received his Ph.D. in Computational Linguistics from Georgetown University. He spent
several years working on various large-scale name matching systems. His current research activities cen-
ter around multicultural name matching, machine translation, embedded HLT systems, and component and
system-level evaluation of systems involving HLT components.
Sherri Condon received her Ph.D. in Linguistics from the University of Texas at Austin. In addition to
several years of work in multilingual name matching and cross script name matching, she is a researcher in
discourse/dialogue, entity extraction, and evaluation of machine translation and dialogue systems.
300
