Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 113?116,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploiting Variant Corpora for Machine Translation
Michael Paul?? and Eiichiro Sumita??
? National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
? ATR Spoken Language Communication Research Labs
Hikaridai 2-2-2, Keihanna Science City, 619-0288 Kyoto
{Michael.Paul,Eiichiro.Sumita}@{nict.go.jp,atr.jp}
Abstract
This paper proposes the usage of variant
corpora, i.e., parallel text corpora that are
equal in meaning but use different ways
to express content, in order to improve
corpus-based machine translation. The us-
age of multiple training corpora of the
same content with different sources results
in variant models that focus on specific
linguistic phenomena covered by the re-
spective corpus. The proposed method
applies each variant model separately re-
sulting in multiple translation hypotheses
which are selectively combined accord-
ing to statistical models. The proposed
method outperforms the conventional ap-
proach of merging all variants by reducing
translation ambiguities and exploiting the
strengths of each variant model.
1 Introduction
Corpus-based approaches to machine translation
(MT) have achieved much progress over the last
decades. Despite a high performance on average,
these approaches can often produce translations with
severe errors. Input sentences featuring linguistic
phenomena that are not sufficiently covered by the
utilized models cannot be translated accurately.
This paper proposes to use multiple variant cor-
pora, i.e., parallel text corpora that are equal in
meaning, but use different vocabulary and grammat-
ical constructions in order to express the same con-
tent. Using training corpora of the same content with
different sources result in translation models that fo-
cus on specific linguistic phenomena, thus reducing
translation ambiguities compared to models trained
on a larger corpus obtained by merging all variant
corpora. The proposed method applies each variant
model separately to an input sentence resulting in
multiple translation hypotheses. The best translation
is selected according to statistical models. We show
that the combination of variant translation models
is effective and outperforms not only all single vari-
ant models, but also is superior to translation models
trained on the union of all variant corpora.
In addition, we extend the proposed method to
multi-engine MT. Combining multiple MT engines
can boost the system performance further by exploit-
ing the strengths of each MT engine. For each vari-
ant, all MT engines are trained on the same corpus
and used in parallel to translate the input. We first
select the best translation hypotheses created by all
MT engines trained on the same variant and then
verify the translation quality of the translation hy-
potheses selected for each variant.
Variant
Corpora
MT
Engines
Hypothesis
Selection
Variant
Selection
(cf. Section 2) (cf. Section 3.1) (cf. Section 3.2)
BTEC V
BTEC O
E
CV
CO
translation
knowledge
acuisition
hyp 6
V
hyp 1
V
hyp 6
O
hyp 1
O
SELO
SELV
test
statistical
significant
difference
in 
statistical
scores
MT7
V
MT1
V
MT7
O
MT1
O
Figure 1: System outline
The outline of the proposed system is given in
Figure 1. For the experiments described in this pa-
per we are using two variants of a parallel text cor-
pus for Chinese (C) and English (E) from the travel
domain (cf. Section 2). These variant corpora are
used to acquire the translation knowledge for seven
corpus-based MT engines. The method to select the
best translation hypotheses of MT engines trained
on the same variant is described in Section 3.1. Fi-
nally, the selected translations of different variants
are combined according to a statistical significance
test as described in Section 3.2. The effectiveness
of the proposed method is verified in Section 4 for
113
the Chinese-English translation task of last year?s
IWSLT1 evaluation campaign.
2 Variant Corpora
The Basic Travel Expressions Corpus (BTEC) is a
collection of sentences that bilingual travel experts
consider useful for people going to or coming from
another country and cover utterances in travel situ-
ations (Kikui et al, 2003). The original Japanese-
English corpus consists of 500K of aligned sen-
tence pairs whereby the Japanese sentences were
also translated into Chinese.
In addition, parts of the original English corpus
were translated separately into Chinese resulting in a
variant corpus comprising 162K CE sentence pairs.
Details of both, the original (BTECO) and the variant
(BTECV ) corpus, are given in Table 1, where word
token refers to the number of words in the corpus
and word type refers to the vocabulary size.
Table 1: Statistics of variant corpora
corpus lang sentence count avg word word
total unique len tokens types
BTECO C 501,809 299,347 6.8 3,436,750 40,645
E 501,809 344,134 8.3 4,524,703 21,832
BTECV C 162,320 97,512 7.1 1,302,761 14,222
E 162,320 96,988 7.5 1,367,981 9,795
Only 4.8% of the sentences occured in both cor-
pora and only 68.1% of the BTECV vocabulary was
covered in the BTECO corpus.
The comparison of both corpora revealed fur-
ther that each variant closely reflects the linguistic
structure of the source language which was used to
produce the Chinese translations of the respective
data sets. The differences between the BTECO and
BTECV variants can be categorized into:
(1) literalness: BTECO sentences are translated on
the basis of their meaning and context resulting in
freer translations compared to the BTECV sentences
which are translated more literally;
(2) syntax: The degree of literalness also has an im-
pact on the syntactic structure like word order vari-
ations (CV sentences reflect closely the word order
of the corresponding English sentences) or the sen-
tence type (question vs. imperative);
(3) lexical choice: Alternations in lexical choice
1http://penance.is.cs.cmu.edu/iwslt2005
also contribute largely to variations between the cor-
pora. Moreover, most of the pronouns found in
the English sentences are translated explicitly in the
CV sentences, but are omitted in CO;
(4) orthography: Orthographic differences espe-
cially for proper nouns (Kanji vs. transliteration)
and numbers (numerals vs. spelling-out).
3 Corpus-based Machine Translation
The differences in variant corpora directly effect the
translation quality of corpus-based MT approaches.
Simply merging variant corpora for training in-
creases the coverage of linguistic phenomena by the
obtained translation model. However, due to an in-
crease in translation ambiguities, more erroneous
translations might be generated.
In contrast, the proposed method trains separately
MT engines on each variant focusing on linguistic
phenomena covered in the respective corpus. If spe-
cific linguistic phenomena are not covered by a vari-
ant corpus, the translation quality of the respective
output is expected to be significantly lower.
Therefore, we first judge the translation quality
of all translation hypotheses created by MT engines
trained on the same variant corpus by testing statis-
tical significant differences in the statistical scores
(cf. Section 3.1). Next, we compare the outcomes
of the statistical significance test between the trans-
lation hypotheses selected for each variant in order
to identify the variant that fits best the given input
sentence (cf. Section 3.2).
3.1 Hypothesis Selection
In order to select the best translation among outputs
generated by multiple MT systems, we employ an
SMT-based method that scores MT outputs by using
multiple language (LM) and translation model (TM)
pairs trained on different subsets of the training data.
It uses a statistical test to check whether the obtained
TM?LM scores of one MT output are significantly
higher than those of another MT output (Akiba et al,
2002). Given an input sentence, m translation hy-
potheses are produced by the element MT engines,
whereby n different TM?LM scores are assigned to
each hypothesis. In order to check whether the high-
est scored hypothesis is significantly better then the
other MT outputs, a multiple comparison test based
on the Kruskal-Wallis test is used. If one of the MT
outputs is significantly better, this output is selected.
114
Otherwise, the output of the MT engine that per-
forms best on a develop set is selected.
3.2 Variant Selection
In order to judge which variant should be selected
for the translation of a given input sentence, the out-
comes of the statistical significance test carried out
during the hypothesis selection are employed.
The hypothesis selection method is applied for
each variant separately, i.e., the BTECO corpus is
used to train multiple statistical model pairs (SELO)
and the best translation (MTOSEL) of the set of trans-
lation hypotheses created by the MT engines trained
on the BTECO corpus is selected. Accordingly, the
SELV models are trained on the BTECV corpus and
applied to select the best translation (MTVSEL) of the
MT outputs trained on the BTECV corpus. In addi-
tion, the SELO models were used in order to verify
whether a significant difference can be found for the
translation hypothesis MTVSEL, and, vice versa, the
SELV models were applied to MTOSEL.
The outcomes of the statistical significance tests
are then compared. If a significant difference be-
tween the statistical scores based on one variant, but
not for the other variant is obtained, the significantly
better hypothesis is selected as the output. However,
if a significant difference could be found for both or
none of the variants, the translation hypothesis pro-
duced by the MT engine that performs best on a de-
velop set is selected.
4 Experiments
The effectiveness of the proposed method is veri-
fied for the CE translation task (500 sentences) of
last year?s IWSLT evaluation campaign. For the ex-
periments, we used the four statistical (SMT) and
three example-based (EBMT) MT engines described
in detail in (Paul et al, 2005).
For evaluation, we used the BLEU metrics, which
calculates the geometric mean of n-gram precision
for the MT outputs found in reference translations
(Papineni et al, 2002). Higher BLEU scores indi-
cate better translations.
4.1 Performance of Element MT Engines
Table 2 summarizes the results of all element MT
engines trained on the BTECO and BTECV corpora.
The result show that the SMT engines outperform
Table 2: BLEU evaluation of element MT engines
SMT BTECO BTECV EBMT BTECO BTECV
MT1 0.4020 0.4633 MT5 0.2908 0.3445
MT2 0.4474 0.4595 MT6 0.2988 0.4100
MT3 0.5342 0.5110 MT7 0.0002 0.0074
MT4 0.3575 0.4460
the EBMT engines whereby the best performing sys-
tem is marked with bold-face.
However, depending on the variant corpus used
to train the MT engines, quite different system per-
formances are achieved. Most of the element MT
engines perform better when trained on the smaller
BTECV corpus indicating that the given test set is
not covered well by the BTECO corpus.
4.2 Effects of Hypothesis Selection
The performance of the hypothesis selection method
(SEL) is summarized in Table 3 whereby the ob-
tained gain relative to the best element MT engine
is given in parentheses. In addition, we performed
an ?oracle? translation experiment in order to inves-
tigate in an upper boundary for the method. Each
input sentence was translated by all element MT en-
gines and the translation hypothesis with the lowest
word error rate2 relative to the reference translations
was output as the translation, i.e., the ORACLE sys-
tem simulates an optimal selection method accord-
ing to an objective evaluation criterion.
Table 3: BLEU evaluation of hypothesis selection
MT engine BTECO BTECV
SEL 0.5409 (+ 0.7%) 0.5470 (+ 3.6%)
ORACLE 0.6385 (+10.4%) 0.6502 (+13.9%)
MT engine BTECO?V
SEL 0.4648 (?7.0%)
ORACLE 0.6969 (+16.3%)
The results show that the selection method is ef-
fective for both variant corpora whereby a larger
gain is achieved for BTECV . However, the ORA-
CLE results indicate that the method fails to tap the
full potential of the element MT engines.
In addition, we trained the statistical models of the
hypothesis selection method on the corpus obtained
2The word error rate (WER) is an objective evaluation mea-
sures that, in contrast to BLEU, can be applied on sentence-
level. It penalizes edit operations for the translation output
against reference translations.
115
by merging all variant corpora (BTECO?V ). Despite
the larger amount of training data, the BLEU score
decreases drastically which shows that an increase
in training data not necessarily leads to improved
translation quality. Moreover, the ORACLE selec-
tion applied to all translation hypotheses based on
the BTECO as well as the BTECV corpus indicates
that both variants can contribute significantly in or-
der to improve the overall system performance.
4.3 Effects of Variant Selection
The effects of combining selected variant hypothe-
ses by testing whether significant differences in sta-
tistical scores were obtained are summarized in Ta-
ble 4. The variant selection method is applied to
the translation outputs of each element MT engine
(MTOj ? MTVj ) as well as the selected translation hy-
potheses (MTOSEL ? MTVSEL). The gain of the pro-
posed variant selection method relative the best ele-
ment MT output based on a single variant corpus is
given in parentheses.
Table 4: BLEU evaluation of variant selection
MT engine BTECO ? BTECV
SMT MTO1 ? MTV1 0.5010 (+ 3.8%)
MTO2 ? MTV2 0.4847 (+ 2.5%)
MTO3 ? MTV3 0.5594 (+ 2.5%)
MTO4 ? MTV4 0.4733 (+ 2.7%)
EBMT MTO5 ? MTV5 0.3863 (+ 4.2%)
MTO6 ? MTV6 0.4338 (+ 2.4%)
MTO7 ? MTV7 0.0181 (+10.7%)
MTOSEL ? MTVSEL 0.5765 (+ 4.2%)
The results show that the variant selection method
is effective for all element MT engines. The high-
est BLEU score is achieved for MTOSEL ? MTVSEL
gaining 4.2% in BLEU score. Moreover, the pro-
posed method outperforms the hypothesis selection
method based on the merged corpus BTECO?V by
11.2% in BLEU score.
A comparison of the proposed method with
the best performing system (C-STAR data track,
BLEU=0.5279) of the IWSLT 2005 workshop
showed that our system outperforms the top-ranked
system gaining 4.8% in BLEU score.
5 Conclusion
This paper proposed the usage of variant corpora to
improve the translation quality of a multi-engine-
based approach to machine translation. The ele-
ment MT engines were used to translate the same
input whereby the best translation was selected ac-
cording to statistical models. A test on the signifi-
cance of differences between statistical scores judg-
ing the translation quality of a given hypothesis was
exploited to identify the model that fits the input sen-
tence best and the respective translation hypothesis
was selected as the translation output.
The proposed method was evaluated on the CE
translation task of the IWSLT 2005 workshop. The
results showed that the proposed method achieving a
BLEU score of 0.5765 outperformed not only all el-
ement MT engines (gaining 3.6% in BLEU score),
but also a selection method using a larger corpus
obtained from merging all variant corpora (gaining
11.2% in BLEU score) due to less ambiguity in the
utilized models. In addition, the proposed method
also outperformed the best MT system (C-STAR
data track) of the IWSLT 2005 workshop gaining
4.8% in BLEU score.
Further investigations should analyze the charac-
teristics of the variant corpora in more detail and fo-
cus on the automatic identification of specific lin-
guistic phenomena that could be helpful to measure
how good an input sentence is covered by a spe-
cific model. This would allow us to select the most
adequate variant beforehand, thus reducing com-
putational costs and improving the system perfor-
mance. This would also enable us to cluster very
large corpora according to specific linguistic phe-
nomena, thus breaking down the full training corpus
to consistent subsets that are easier to manage and
that could produce better results.
References
K. Papineni et al 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. of the 40th
ACL, pages 311?318.
Y. Akiba et al 2002. Using language and translation
models to select the best among outputs from multiple
MT systems. In Proc. of COLING, pages 8?14.
G. Kikui et al 2003. Creating corpora for speech-
to-speech translation. In Proc. of EUROSPEECH03,
pages 381?384.
M. Paul et al 2005. Nobody is Perfect: ATR?s Hybrid
Approach to Spoken Language Translation. In Proc.
of the IWSLT, pages 55?62.
116
