Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 101?104,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Accurate Parsing of the Proposition Bank
Gabriele Musillo
Depts of Linguistics and Computer Science
University of Geneva
2 Rue de Candolle
1211 Geneva 4 Switzerland
musillo4@etu.unige.ch
Paola Merlo
Department of Linguistics
University of Geneva
2 Rue de Candolle
1211 Geneva 4 Switzerland
merlo@lettres.unige.ch
Abstract
We integrate PropBank semantic role la-
bels to an existing statistical parsing
model producing richer output. We show
conclusive results on joint learning and in-
ference of syntactic and semantic repre-
sentations.
1 Introduction
Recent successes in statistical syntactic parsing
based on supervised techniques trained on a large
corpus of syntactic trees (Collins, 1999; Charniak,
2000; Henderson, 2003) have brought the hope that
the same approach could be applied to the more am-
bitious goal of recovering the propositional content
and the frame semantics of a sentence. Moving to-
wards a shallow semantic level of representation has
immediate applications in question-answering and
information extraction. For example, an automatic
flight reservation system processing the sentence I
want to book a flight from Geneva to New York will
need to know that from Geneva indicates the origin
of the flight and to New York the destination.
(Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002) define this shallow
semantic task as a classification problem where the
semantic role to be assigned to each constituent is
inferred on the basis of probability distributions of
syntactic features extracted from parse trees. They
use learning features such as phrase type, position,
voice, and parse tree path. Consider, for example,
a sentence such as The authority dropped at mid-
night Tuesday to $ 2.80 trillion (taken from section
00 of PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005)). The fact that
to $ 2.80 trillion receives a direction semantic label
is highly correlated to the fact that it is a Preposi-
tional Phrase (PP), that it follows the verb dropped,
a verb of change of state requiring an end point, that
the verb is in the active voice, and that the PP is in
a certain tree configuration with the governing verb.
All the recent systems proposed for semantic role la-
belling (SRL) follow this same assumption (CoNLL,
2005).
The assumption that syntactic distributions will
be predictive of semantic role assignments is based
on linking theory. Linking theory assumes the ex-
istence of a hierarchy of semantic roles which are
mapped by default on a hierarchy of syntactic po-
sitions. It also shows that regular mappings from
the semantic to the syntactic level can be posited
even for those verbs whose arguments can take sev-
eral syntactic positions, such as psychological verbs,
locatives, or datives, requiring a more complex the-
ory. (See (Hale and Keyser, 1993; Levin and Rappa-
port Hovav, 1995) among many others.) If the inter-
nal semantics of a predicate determines the syntactic
expressions of constituents bearing a semantic role,
it is then reasonable to expect that knowledge about
semantic roles in a sentence will be informative of its
syntactic structure, and that learning semantic role
labels at the same time as parsing will be beneficial
to parsing accuracy.
We present work to test the hypothesis that a cur-
rent statistical parser (Henderson, 2003) can output
rich information comprising both a parse tree and
semantic role labels robustly, that is without any sig-
nificant degradation of the parser?s accuracy on the
original parsing task. We achieve promising results
both on the simple parsing task, where the accuracy
of the parser is measured on the standard Parseval
measures, and also on the parsing task where more
101
complex labels comprising both syntactic labels and
semantic roles are taken into account.
These results have several consequences. First,
we show that it is possible to build a single inte-
grated system successfully. This is a meaningful
achievement, as a task combining semantic role la-
belling and parsing is more complex than simple
syntactic parsing. While the shallow semantics of
a constituent and its structural position are often
correlated, they sometimes diverge. For example,
some nominal temporal modifiers occupy an object
position without being objects, like Tuesday in the
Penn Treebank representation of the sentence above.
The indirectness of the relation is also confirmed by
the difficulty in exploiting semantic information for
parsing. Previous attempts have not been success-
ful. (Klein and Manning, 2003) report a reduction
in parsing accuracy of an unlexicalised PCFG from
77.8% to 72.9% in using Penn Treebank function la-
bels in training. The two existing systems that use
function labels sucessfully, either inherit Collins?
modelling of the notion of complement (Gabbard,
Kulick and Marcus, 2006) or model function labels
directly (Musillo and Merlo, 2005). Furthermore,
our results indicate that the proposed models are ro-
bust. To model our task accurately, additional pa-
rameters must be estimated. However, given the cur-
rent limited availability of annotated treebanks, this
more complex task will have to be solved with the
same overall amount of data, aggravating the diffi-
culty of estimating the model?s parameters due to
sparse data.
2 The Data and the Extended Parser
In this section we describe the augmentations to our
base parsing models necessary to tackle the joint
learning of parse tree and semantic role labels.
PropBank encodes propositional information by
adding a layer of argument structure annotation to
the syntactic structures of the Penn Treebank (Mar-
cus et al, 1993). Verbal predicates in the Penn Tree-
bank (PTB) receive a label REL and their arguments
are annotated with abstract semantic role labels A0-
A5 or AA for those complements of the predicative
verb that are considered arguments while those com-
plements of the verb labelled with a semantic func-
tional label in the original PTB receive the com-
posite semantic role label AM-X , where X stands
for labels such as LOC, TMP or ADV, for locative,
temporal and adverbial modifiers respectively. Prop-
Bank uses two levels of granularity in its annotation,
at least conceptually. Arguments receiving labels
A0-A5 or AA do not express consistent semantic
roles and are specific to a verb, while arguments re-
ceiving an AM-X label are supposed to be adjuncts,
and the roles they express are consistent across all
verbs.
To achieve the complex task of assigning seman-
tic role labels while parsing, we use a family of
state-of-the-art history-based statistical parsers, the
Simple Synchrony Network (SSN) parsers (Hender-
son, 2003), which use a form of left-corner parse
strategy to map parse trees to sequences of deriva-
tion steps. These parsers do not impose any a pri-
ori independence assumptions, but instead smooth
their parameters by means of the novel SSN neu-
ral network architecture. This architecture is ca-
pable of inducing a finite history representation of
an unbounded sequence of derivation steps, which
we denote h(d1, . . . , di?1). The representation
h(d1, . . . , di?1) is computed from a set f of hand-
crafted features of the derivation move di?1, and
from a finite set D of recent history representations
h(d1, . . . , dj), where j < i ? 1. Because the his-
tory representation computed for the move i ? 1
is included in the inputs to the computation of the
representation for the next move i, virtually any in-
formation about the derivation history could flow
from history representation to history representation
and be used to estimate the probability of a deriva-
tion move. In our experiments, the set D of ear-
lier history representations is modified to yield a
model that is sensitive to regularities in structurally
defined sequences of nodes bearing semantic role
labels, within and across constituents. For more
information on this technique to capture structural
domains, see (Musillo and Merlo, 2005) where the
technique was applied to function parsing. Given
the hidden history representation h(d1, ? ? ? , di?1) of
a derivation, a normalized exponential output func-
tion is computed by the SSNs to estimate a proba-
bility distribution over the possible next derivation
moves di.
To exploit the intuition that semantic role labels
are predictive of syntactic structure, we must pro-
102
vide semantic role information as early as possible
to the parser. Extending a technique presented in
(Klein and Manning, 2003) and adopted in (Merlo
and Musillo, 2005) for function labels with state-
of-the-art results, we split some part-of-speech tags
into tags marked with AM-X semantic role labels.
As a result, 240 new POS tags were introduced to
partition the original tag set which consisted of 45
tags. Our augmented model has a total of 613 non-
terminals to represent both the PTB and PropBank
labels, instead of the 33 of the original SSN parser.
The 580 newly introduced labels consist of a stan-
dard PTB label followed by one or more PropBank
semantic roles, such as PP-AM-TMP or NP-A0-A1.
These augmented tags and the new non-terminals
are included in the set f , and will influence bottom-
up projection of structure directly.
These newly introduced fine-grained labels frag-
ment our PropBank data. To alleviate this problem,
we enlarge the set f with two additional binary fea-
tures. One feature decides whether a given preter-
minal or nonterminal label is a semantic role label
belonging to the set comprising the labels A0-A5
and AA. The other feature indicates if a given la-
bel is a semantic role label of type AM-X , or oth-
erwise. These features allow the SSN to generalise
in several ways. All the constituents bearing an A0-
A5 and AA labels will have a common feature. The
same will be true for all nodes bearing an AM-X la-
bel. Thus, the SSN can generalise across these two
types of labels. Finally, all constituents that do not
bear any label will now constitute a class, the class
of the nodes for which these two features are false.
3 Experiments and Discussion
Our extended semantic role SSN parser was trained
on sections 2-21 and validated on section 24 from
the PropBank. Testing data are section 23 from the
CoNLL-2005 shared task (Carreras and Marquez,
2005).
We perform two different evaluations on our
model trained on PropBank data. We distinguish be-
tween two parsing tasks: the PropBank parsing task
and the PTB parsing task. To evaluate the former
parsing task, we compute the standard Parseval mea-
sures of labelled recall and precision of constituents,
taking into account not only the 33 original labels,
but also the newly introduced PropBank labels. This
evaluation gives us an indication of how accurately
and exhaustively we can recover this richer set of
non-terminal labels. The results, computed on the
testing data set from the PropBank, are shown in the
PropBank column of Table 1, first line. To evaluate
the PTB task, we ignore the set of PropBank seman-
tic role labels that our model assigns to constituents
(PTB column of Table 1, first line to be compared to
the third line of the same column).
To our knowledge, no results have yet been pub-
lished on parsing the PropBank.1 Accordingly, it
is not possible to draw a straightforward quantita-
tive comparison between our PropBank SSN parser
and other PropBank parsers. However, state-of-the-
art semantic role labelling systems (CoNLL, 2005)
use parse trees output by state-of-the-art parsers
(Collins, 1999; Charniak, 2000), both for training
and testing, and return partial trees annotated with
semantic role labels. An indirect way of compar-
ing our parser with semantic role labellers suggests
itself. 2 We merge the partial trees output by a se-
mantic role labeller with the output of the parser on
which it was trained, and compute PropBank parsing
performance measures on the resulting parse trees.
The third line, PropBank column of Table 1 reports
such measures summarised for the five best seman-
tic role labelling systems (Punyakanok et al, 2005b;
Haghighi et al, 2005; Pradhan et al, 2005; Mar-
quez et al, 2005; Surdeanu and Turmo, 2005) in
the CoNLL 2005 shared task. These systems all
use (Charniak, 2000)?s parse trees both for train-
ing and testing, as well as various other information
sources including sets of n-best parse trees, chunks,
or named entities. Thus, the partial trees output by
these systems were merged with the parse trees re-
turned by Charniak?s parser (second line, PropBank
column).3
These results jointly confirm our initial hypothe-
1(Shen and Joshi, 2005) use PropBank labels to extract
LTAG spinal trees to train an incremental LTAG parser, but they
do not parse PropBank. Their results on the PTB are not di-
rectly comparable to ours as calculated on dependecy relations
and obtained using gold POS.
2Current work aims at extending our parser to recovering the
argument structure for each verb, supporting a direct compari-
son to semantic role labellers.
3Because of differences in tokenisations, we retain only
2280 sentences out of the original 2416.
103
PTB PropBank
SSN+Roles model 89.0 82.8
CoNLL five best - 83.3?84.1
Henderson 03 SSN 89.1 -
Table 1: Percentage F-measure of our SSN parser on
PTB and PropBank parsing, compared to the origi-
nal SSN parser and to the best CoNLL 2005 SR la-
bellers.
sis. The performance on the parsing task (PTB col-
umn) does not appreciably deteriorate compared to
a current state-of-the-art parser, even if our learner
can output a much richer set of labels, and there-
fore solves a considerably more complex problem,
suggesting that the relationship between syntactic
PTB parsing and semantic PropBank parsing is strict
enough that an integrated approach to the problem
of semantic role labelling is beneficial. Moreover,
the results indicate that we can perform the more
complex PropBank parsing task at levels of accuracy
comparable to those achieved by the best seman-
tic role labellers (PropBank column). This indicates
that the model is robust, as it has been extended to a
richer set of labels successfully, without increase in
training data. In fact, the limited availability of data
is increased further by the high variability of the ar-
gumental labels A0-A5 whose semantics is specific
to a given verb or a given verb sense.
Methodologically, these initial results on a joint
solution to parsing and semantic role labelling pro-
vide the first direct test of whether parsing is neces-
sary for semantic role labelling (Gildea and Palmer,
2002; Punyakanok et al, 2005a). Comparing se-
mantic role labelling based on chunked input to the
better semantic role labels retrieved based on parsed
trees, (Gildea and Palmer, 2002) conclude that pars-
ing is necessary. In an extensive experimental in-
vestigation of the different learning stages usually
involved in semantic role labelling, (Punyakanok et
al., 2005a) find instead that sophisticated chunking
can achieve state-of-the-art results. Neither of these
pieces of work actually used a parser to do SRL.
Their investigation was therefore limited to estab-
lishing the usefulness of syntactic features for the
SRL task. Our results do not yet indicate that pars-
ing is beneficial to SRL, but they show that the joint
task can be performed successfully.
Acknowledgements We thank the Swiss NSF for sup-
porting this research under grant number 101411-105286/1,
James Henderson and Ivan Titov for sharing their SSN software,
and Xavier Carreras for providing the CoNLL-2005 data.
References
X. Carreras and L. Marquez. 2005. Introduction to the CoNLL-
2005 shared task: Semantic role labeling. Procs of CoNLL-
2005.
E. Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired parser.
Procs of NAACL?00, pages 132?139, Seattle, WA.
M. Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models for Natural
Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Pennsylvania.
CoNLL. 2005. Ninth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-2005), Ann Arbor, MI.
R. Gabbard, S. Kulick and M. Marcus 2006. Fully parsing the
Penn Treebank. Procs of NAACL?06, New York, NY.
D. Gildea and D. Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic labeling of seman-
tic roles. Computational Linguistics, 28(3):245?288.
D. Gildea and M. Palmer. 2002. The necessity of parsing for
predicate argument recognition. Procs of ACL 2002, 239?
246, Philadelphia, PA.
A. Haghighi, K. Toutanova, and C. Manning. 2005. A joint
model for semantic role labeling. Procs of CoNLL-2005,
Ann Arbor, MI.
K. Hale and J. Keyser. 1993. On argument structure and the
lexical representation of syntactic relations. In K. Hale and
J. Keyser, editors, The View from Building 20, 53?110. MIT
Press.
J. Henderson. 2003. Inducing history representations
for broad-coverage statistical parsing. Procs of NAACL-
HLT?03, 103?110, Edmonton, Canada.
D. Klein and C. Manning. 2003. Accurate unlexicalized pars-
ing. Procs of ACL?03, 423?430, Sapporo, Japan.
B. Levin and M. Rappaport Hovav. 1995. Unaccusativity. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M.A. Marcinkiewicz. 1993.
Building a large annotated corpus of English: the Penn Tree-
bank. Computational Linguistics, 19:313?330.
L. Marquez, P. Comas, J. Gimenez, and N. Catala. 2005. Se-
mantic role labeling as sequential tagging. Procs of CoNLL-
2005.
P. Merlo and G. Musillo. 2005. Accurate function parsing.
Procs of HLT/EMNLP 2005, 620?627, Vancouver, Canada.
G.Musillo and P. Merlo. 2005. Lexical and structural biases
for function parsing. Procs of IWPT?05, 83?92, Vancouver,
Canada.
M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The Proposition
Bank: An annotated corpus of semantic roles. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 31:71?105.
S. Pradhan, K. Hacioglu, W. Ward, J. Martin, and D. Jurafsky.
2005. Semantic role chunking combining complementary
syntactic views. Procs of CoNLL-2005.
V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, and W. Yih. 2005a. The necessity
of syntactic parsing for semantic role labeling. Procs of IJ-
CAI?05, Edinburgh, UK.
V. Punyakanok, P. Koomen, D. Roth, and W. Yih. 2005b. Gen-
eralized inference with multiple semantic role labeling sys-
tems. Procs of CoNLL-2005.
L.Shen and A. Joshi. 2005. Incremental LTAG parsing. Procs
of HLT/EMNLP 2005, Vancouver, Canada.
M. Surdeanu and J. Turmo. 2005. Semantic role labeling using
complete syntactic analysis. Procs of CoNLL-2005.
104
