Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 215?218,
New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Back-Pointers from Gesture
Jacob Eisenstein
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
77 Massachusetts Ave, MA 02139
jacobe@csail.mit.edu
1 Introduction
Although the natural-language processing commu-
nity has dedicated much of its focus to text, face-
to-face spoken language is ubiquitous, and offers
the potential for breakthrough applications in do-
mains such as meetings, lectures, and presentations.
Because spontaneous spoken language is typically
more disfluent and less structured than written text,
it may be critical to identify features from additional
modalities that can aid in language understanding.
However, due to the long-standing emphasis on text
datasets, there has been relatively little work on non-
textual features in unconstrained natural language
(prosody being the most studied non-textual modal-
ity, e.g. (Shriberg et al, 2000)).
There are many non-verbal modalities that may
contribute to face-to-face communication, includ-
ing body posture, hand gesture, facial expression,
prosody, and free-hand drawing. Hand gesture may
be more expressive than any non-verbal modality
besides drawing, since it serves as the foundation
for sign languages in hearing-disabled communi-
ties. While non-deaf speakers rarely use any such
systematized language as American Sign Language
(ASL) while gesturing, the existence of ASL speaks
to the potential of gesture for communicative expres-
sivity.
Hand gesture relates to spoken language in several
ways:
? Hand gesture communicates meaning. For ex-
ample, (Kopp et al, 2006) describe a model
of how hand gesture is used to convey spatial
properties of its referents when speakers give
navigational directions. This model both ex-
plains observed behavior of human speakers,
and serves as the basis for an implemented em-
bodied agent.
? Hand gesture communicates discourse struc-
ture. (Quek et al, 2002) and (McNeill, 1992)
describe how the structure of discourse is mir-
rored by the the structure of the gestures, when
speakers describe sequences of events in car-
toon narratives.
? Hand gesture segments in unison with speech,
suggesting possible applications to speech
recognition and syntactic processing. (Morrel-
Samuels and Krauss, 1992) show a strong cor-
relation between the onset and duration of ges-
tures, and their ?lexical affiliates? ? the phrase
that is thought to relate semantically to the ges-
ture. Also, (Chen et al, 2004) show that gesture
features may improve sentence segmentation.
These examples are a subset of a broad litera-
ture on gesture that suggests that this modality could
play an important role in improving the performance
of NLP systems on spontaneous spoken language.
However, the existence of significant relationships
between gesture and speech does not prove that
gesture will improve NLP; gesture features could
be redundant with existing textual features, or they
may be simply too noisy or speaker-dependant to be
useful. To test this, my thesis research will iden-
tify specific, objective NLP tasks, and attempt to
show that automatically-detected gestural features
improve performance beyond what is attainable us-
ing textual features.
The relationship between gesture and meaning is
particularly intriguing, since gesture seems to offer
a unique, spatial representation of meaning to sup-
215
plement verbal expression. However, the expression
of meaning through gesture is likely to be highly
variable and speaker dependent, as the set of pos-
sible mappings between meaning and gestural form
is large, if not infinite. For this reason, I take the
point of view that it is too difficult to attempt to de-
code individual gestures. A more feasible approach
is to identify similarities between pairs or groups
of gestures. If gestures do communicate semantics,
then similar gestures should predict semantic sim-
ilarity. Thus, gestures can help computers under-
stand speech by providing a set of ?back pointers?
between moments that are semantically related. Us-
ing this model, my dissertation will explore mea-
sures of gesture similarity and applications of ges-
ture similarity to NLP.
A set of semantic ?back pointers? decoded from
gestural features could be relevant to a number of
NLP benchmark problems. I will investigate two:
coreference resolution and disfluency detection. In
coreference resolution, we seek to identify whether
two noun phrases refer to the same semantic entity.
A similarity in the gestural features observed during
two different noun phrases might suggest a similar-
ity in meaning. This problem has the advantage of
permitting a quantitative evaluation of the relation-
ship between gesture and semantics, without requir-
ing the construction of a domain ontology.
Restarts are disfluencies that occur when a
speaker begins an utterance, and then stops and
starts over again. It is thought that the gesture
may return to its state at the beginning of the utter-
ance, providing a back-pointer to the restart inser-
tion point (Esposito et al, 2001). If so, then a similar
training procedure and set of gestural features can
be used for both coreference resolution and restart
correction. Both of these problems have objective,
quantifiable success measures, and both may play
an important role in bringing to spontaneous spoken
language useful NLP applications such as summa-
rization, segmentation, and question answering.
2 Current Status
My initial work involved hand annotation of ges-
ture, using the system proposed in (McNeill, 1992).
It was thought that hand annotation would identify
relevant features to be detected by computer vision
systems. However, in (Eisenstein and Davis, 2004),
we found that the gesture phrase type (e.g., deic-
tic, iconic, beat) could be predicted accurately by
lexical information alone, without regard to hand
movement. This suggests that this level of annota-
tion inherently captures a synthesis of gesture and
speech, rather than gesture alone. This conclusion
was strengthened by (Eisenstein and Davis, 2005),
where we found that hand-annotated gesture fea-
tures correlate well with sentence boundaries, but
that the gesture features were almost completely re-
dundant with information in the lexical features, and
did not improve overall performance.
The corpus used in my initial research was not
suitable for automatic extraction of gesture features
by computer vision, so a new corpus was gath-
ered, using a better-defined experimental protocol
and higher quality video and audio recording (Adler
et al, 2004). An articulated upper body tracker,
largely based on the work of (Deutscher et al, 2000),
was used to identify hand and arm positions, using
color and motion cues. All future work will be based
on this new corpus, which contains six videos each
from nine pairs of speakers. Each video is roughly
two to three minutes in length.
Each speaker was presented with three different
experimental conditions regarding how information
in the corpus was to be presented: a) a pre-printed
diagram was provided, b) the speaker was allowed
to draw a diagram using a tracked marker, c) no pre-
sentational aids were allowed. The first condition
was designed to be relevant to presentations involv-
ing pre-created presentation materials, such as Pow-
erpoint slides. The second condition was intended to
be similar to classroom lectures or design presenta-
tions. The third condition was aimed more at direct
one-on-one interaction.
My preliminary work has involved data from the
first condition, in which speakers gestured at pre-
printed diagrams. An empirical study on this part
of the corpus has identified several gesture features
that are relevant to coreference resolution (Eisen-
stein and Davis, 2006a). In particular, gesture sim-
ilarity can be measured by hand position and the
choice of the hand which makes the gesture; these
similarities correlate with the likelihood of coref-
erence. In addition, the likelihood of a gestural
hold ? where the hand rests in place for a period of
216
time ? acts as a meta-feature, indicating that gestural
cues are likely to be particularly important to disam-
biguate the meaning of the associated noun phrase.
In (Eisenstein and Davis, 2006b), these features are
combined with traditional textual features for coref-
erence resolution, with encouraging results. The
hand position gesture feature was found to be the
fifth most informative feature by Chi-squared anal-
ysis, and the inclusion of gesture features yielded a
statistically significant increase in performance over
the textual features.
3 Future Directions
The work on coreference can be considered prelimi-
nary, because it is focused on a subset of our corpus
in which speakers use pre-printed diagrams as an ex-
planatory aide. This changes their gestures (Eisen-
stein and Davis, 2003), increasing the proportion of
deictic gestures, in which hand position is the most
important feature (McNeill, 1992). Hand position
is assumed to be less useful in characterizing the
similarity of iconic gestures, which express meaning
through motion or handshape. Using the subsection
of the corpus in which no explanatory aids were pro-
vided, I will investigate how to assess the similarity
of such dynamic gestures, in the hope that corefer-
ence resolution can still benefit from gestural cues in
this more general case.
Disfluency repair is another plausible domain in
which gesture might improve performance. There
are at least two ways in which gesture could be rel-
evant to disfluency repair. Using the semantic back-
pointer model, restart repairs could be identified if
there is a strong gestural similarity between the orig-
inal start point and the restart. Alternatively, gesture
could play a pragmatic function, if there are char-
acteristic gestures that indicate restarts or other re-
pairs. In one case, we are looking for a similarity
between the disfluency and the repair point; in the
other case, we are looking for similarities across all
disfluencies, or across all repair points. It is hoped
that this research will not only improve processing
of spoken natural language, but also enhance our un-
derstanding of how speakers use gesture to structure
their discourse.
4 Related Work
The bulk of research on multimodality in the NLP
community relates to multimodal dialogue systems
(e.g., (Johnston and Bangalore, 2000)). This re-
search differs fundamentally from mine in that it ad-
dresses human-computer interaction, whereas I am
studying human-human interaction. Multimodal di-
alogue systems tackle many interesting challenges,
but the grammar, vocabulary, and recognized ges-
tures are often pre-specified, and dialogue is con-
trolled at least in part by the computer. In my data,
all of these things are unconstrained.
Another important area of research is the gen-
eration of multimodal communication in animated
agents (e.g., (Cassell et al, 2001; Kopp et al, 2006;
Nakano et al, 2003)). While the models devel-
oped in these papers are interesting and often well-
motivated by the psychological literature, it remains
to be seen whether they are both broad and precise
enough to apply to gesture recognition.
There is a substantial body of empirical work de-
scribing relationships between non-verbal and lin-
guistic phenomena, much of which suggests that
gesture could be used to improve the detection of
such phenomena. (Quek et al, 2002) describe ex-
amples in which gesture correlates with topic shifts
in the discourse structure, raising the possibility
that topic segmentation and summarization could be
aided by gesture features; Cassell et al (2001) make
a similar argument using body posture. (Nakano et
al., 2003) describes how head gestures and eye gaze
relate to turn taking and dialogue grounding. All
of the studies listed in this paragraph identify rel-
evant correlations between non-verbal communica-
tion and linguistic phenomena, but none construct a
predictive system that uses the non-verbal modali-
ties to improve performance beyond a text-only sys-
tem.
Prosody has been shown to improve performance
on several NLP problems, such as topic and sentence
segmentation (e.g., (Shriberg et al, 2000; Kim et
al., 2004)). The prosody literature demonstrates that
non-verbal features can improve performance on a
wide variety of NLP tasks. However, it also warns
that performance is often quite sensitive, both to the
representation of prosodic features, and how they are
integrated with other linguistic features.
217
The literature on prosody would suggest paral-
lels for gesture features, but little such work has
been reported. (Chen et al, 2004) shows that ges-
ture may improve sentence segmentation; however,
in this study, the improvement afforded by gesture is
not statistically significant, and evaluation was per-
formed on a subset of their original corpus that was
chosen to include only the three speakers who ges-
tured most frequently. Still, this work provides a
valuable starting point for the integration of gesture
feature into NLP systems.
5 Summary
Spontaneous spoken language poses difficult prob-
lems for natural language processing, but these diffi-
culties may be offset by the availability of additional
communicative modalities. Using a model of hand
gesture as providing a set of semantic back-pointers
to previous utterances, I am exploring whether ges-
ture can improve performance on quantitative NLP
benchmark tasks. Preliminary results on coreference
resolution are encouraging.
References
Aaron Adler, Jacob Eisenstein, Michael Oltmans, Lisa
Guttentag, and Randall Davis. 2004. Building the de-
sign studio of the future. In Making Pen-Based Inter-
action Intelligent and Natural, pages 1?7, Menlo Park,
California, October 21-24. AAAI Press.
Justine Cassell, Yukiko I. Nakano, Timothy W. Bick-
more, Candace L. Sidner, and Charles Rich. 2001.
Non-verbal cues for discourse structure. In Proc. of
ACL, pages 106?115.
Lei Chen, Yang Liu, Mary P. Harper, and Eliza-
beth Shriberg. 2004. Multimodal model integra-
tion for sentence unit detection. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces
(ICMI?04). ACM Press.
Jonathan Deutscher, Andrew Blake, and Ian Reid. 2000.
Articulated body motion capture by annealed particle
filtering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, volume 2, pages 126?133.
Jacob Eisenstein and Randall Davis. 2003. Natural ges-
ture in descriptive monologues. In UIST?03 Supple-
mental Proceedings, pages 69?70. ACM Press.
Jacob Eisenstein and Randall Davis. 2004. Visual and
linguistic information in gesture classification. In Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Multimodal
Interfaces(ICMI?04). ACM Press.
Jacob Eisenstein and Randall Davis. 2005. Gestural cues
for sentence segmentation. Technical Report AIM-
2005-014, MIT AI Memo.
Jacob Eisenstein and Randall Davis. 2006a. Gesture fea-
tures for coreference resolution. In Workshop on Mul-
timodal Interaction and Related Machine Learning Al-
gorithms.
Jacob Eisenstein and Randall Davis. 2006b. Gesture
improves coreference resolution. In Proceedings of
NAACL.
Anna Esposito, Karl E. McCullough, and Francis Quek.
2001. Disfluencies in gesture: Gestural correlates to
filled and unfilled speech pauses. In Proceedings of
IEEE Workshop on Cues in Communication.
Michael Johnston and Srinivas Bangalore. 2000. Finite-
state multimodal parsing and understanding,. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING-2000, pages 369?375.
Joungbum Kim, Sarah E. Schwarm, and Mari Osterdorf.
2004. Detecting structural metadata with decision
trees and transformation-based learning. In Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL?04. ACL Press.
Stefan Kopp, Paul Tepper, Kim Ferriman, and Justine
Cassell. 2006. Trading spaces: How humans and
humanoids use speech and gesture to give directions.
Spatial Cognition and Computation, In preparation.
David McNeill. 1992. Hand and Mind. The University
of Chicago Press.
P. Morrel-Samuels and R. M. Krauss. 1992. Word fa-
miliarity predicts temporal asynchrony of hand ges-
tures and speech. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18:615?623.
Yukiko Nakano, Gabe Reinstein, Tom Stocky, and Jus-
tine Cassell. 2003. Towards a model of face-to-face
grounding. In Proceedings of ACL?03.
Francis Quek, David McNeill, Robert Bryll, Susan Dun-
can, Xin-Feng Ma, Cemil Kirbas, Karl E. McCul-
lough, and Rashid Ansari. 2002. Multimodal human
discourse: gesture and speech. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), pages 171?
193.
Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas Stolcke, Dilek Hakkani-Tur,
and Gokhan Tur. 2000. Prosody-based automatic seg-
mentation of speech into sentences and topics. Speech
Communication, 32.
218
