Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 29?32,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Frames in Romanian Natural Language Processing Systems 
 
 
Diana Maria Trandab?? 
Faculty of Computer Science, ?Al.I.Cuza? University of Ia?i &  
Institute for Computer Science, Romanian Academy, Ia?i Branch 
16, Gen. Berthelot, 700483-Ia?i, Romania 
dtrandabat@info.uaic.ro 
 
Abstract 
Interests to realize semantic frames data-
bases as a stable starting point in develop-
ing semantic knowledge based systems 
exists in countries such as Germany (the 
Salsa project), England (the PropBank pro-
ject), United States (the FrameNet project), 
Spain, Japan, etc. I thus propose to create a 
semantic frame database for Romanian, 
similar to the FrameNet database. Since 
creating language resources demands many 
temporal, financial and human resources, a 
possible solution could be the import of 
standardized annotation of a resource de-
veloped for a specific language to other 
languages. This paper presents such a 
method for the importing of the FrameNet 
annotation from English to Romanian. 
1 Introduction 
The realization of human-computer interaction in 
natural language represents a major challenge in 
the context of aligning Romania to existing tech-
nologies. 
The proposed project aims to introduce the se-
mantic frames and contexts, which define a con-
cept?s sense according to its facultative or 
mandatory valences (Baker and Fillmore, 1998), to 
Romanian NLP systems. The behavior of the Ro-
manian clauses ? mainly the verbal group, around 
which all the other sentence complements gravi-
tates in a (more or less) specific order ? has been 
closely debated in the last years (Irimia, 1997; Do-
brovie-Sorin, 1994; Monachesi, 1998; Barbu, 
1999), creating a proper frame for the introduction 
of semantic roles.  
This paper presents the steps considered for the 
achievement of this project. Thus, Section 2 gives 
a very brief description of the frame semantics, and 
Section 3 presents the realization of a semantic 
structures database for the Romanian language, 
similar to those existing for English, German, or 
Spanish, containing detailed information about the 
relations between the semantic meaning and the 
syntax of the words. In the last section, some pos-
sible applications of the detection of semantic roles 
to written and spoken texts are mentioned (ques-
tion answering systems, summarization systems, 
prosody prediction systems), before drawing some 
final conclusions. 
2 Frame Semantics 
The FrameNet (FN) lexical-semantic resource is 
based on the principles of Frame Semantics (FS). 
From FS point of view, the semantic/syntactic fea-
tures of ?predicational words?1 (Curteanu, 2003-
2004) are defined in a particular semantic frame. 
The sentences are schematic representations of 
different situations, including different partici-
pants, objects or other conceptual roles. Being a 
linguistically transposed experience, a sentence 
represents an event scenario that is structured 
around a semantic head. The meaning of this head 
                                                          
1 Words, mostly verbs, but also several nouns and adjectives, 
bearing a predicational feature, viz. demanding a specific 
semantic argument structure in order to complete their mean-
ing. 
29
can be understood only by expressing the core 
frame elements and can, optionally, be enriched 
with other semantic features, by expressing some 
non-core frame elements. 
Fillmore (1968) divides the language representa-
tion into two structures: Surface Structure (the syn-
tactic knowledge) and Deep Structure (the 
semantic knowledge). The language process begins 
at the Deep Structure level with a non-verbal rep-
resentation (an idea or a thought) and ends in the 
Surface Structure, as we express ourselves.  
The Case Notions are representations at a se-
mantic level of the lexical arguments. This inven-
tory of cases comprises universal concepts, 
possible innate, sufficient for the classification of 
the verbs of a language and reusable in all lan-
guages. The list of Fillmore Cases, which will be 
considered for the project, includes: Agent, In-
strument, Dative, Experiencer, Locative, Object, 
etc. 
3 A Parallel Romanian/English FrameNet 
Using Annotation Import  
The first step in the realization of the Romanian 
corpus of annotated semantic frames was the man-
ual translation of 110 randomly selected sentences 
from the English FN. In order to align the Roma-
nian version with the English one, a larger corpus 
was needed, so the translation continued with the 
Event frame, summing up to 1094 sentences. This 
frame was selected due to its rich frame to frame 
relations (Inheritance ? Change_of_consistency, 
Process_start, etc., Subframe - Change_of_state_ 
scenario and Using - Process_end). After the se-
lection of the clauses and their translation, the Ro-
manian sentences were aligned with the English 
ones using the aligner developed by the Institute of 
Research in Artificial Intelligence (Tufi? et al, 
2005). The next step was the automatic import of 
the English annotation, followed by a manual veri-
fication, a detection of the mismatching cases and 
an optimization process which, based on inference 
rules, corrects the automatic annotation. 
3.1 Automatic annotation import 
The intuition behind the importing program 
(Trandab?? et al, 2005) is that most of the frames 
defined in the English FN are likely to be valid 
cross-linguistically, because semantic frames ex-
press conceptual structures, language independent 
at the deep structure level. The surface realization 
is realized according to each language syntactic 
constraints. 
The automatic importing program is based on 
the correlation of the semantic roles expressed in 
English with the translation equivalents in Roma-
nian of the words that realize a specific role. The 
automatic import is manually checked in order to 
establish the method efficiency. 
3.2 The algorithm 
The starting point for the German, Japanese and 
Spanish FN creation was the manual annotation at 
FE level of existing corpora for each language. For 
Romanian, I propose creating a corpus of semantic 
roles starting from the translation of (a part of) the 
English corpus of annotated sentences (see Figure 
1). 
 
Using the XML files of the annotated English 
sentences, and the alignment files where each Eng-
lish word is linked to its corresponding Romanian 
translation, I automatically created a set of XML 
files containing a corpus of FE annotated sentences 
for the Romanian language. An example of im-
ported annotation for the English lexical unit ?oc-
cur? is presented in figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. The architecture of the importing program 
Alignment files 
Frame Extractor 
Program 
Frame 
Files 
English 
XM L for the 
lexical units 
Romanian 
XM L for the 
lexical units 
Importing 
program 
FN.xml 
FN.align 
30
Figure 2. Example of annotation set for English 
The <annotationSet> tag indicates that a new sen-
tence is annotated. Inside this tag, the <layers> tag 
sets the annotation layer (FE - Frame Element, GF 
- Grammatical Function or PT - Phrase Type) and 
the <sentence> tag encloses the text. The labels are 
applied to the words in <text>, indexed by their 
character. For example, the tag: 
<label name="Event" ID="19909459" 
cDate="june 2006" start="0" end="9" 
/> 
indicates that the Event frame element is starting 
with the first character of the sentence an stops at 
the 9th, meaning that the Event FE corresponds to 
?Incidentul? (en. The incident).  
The general algorithm of the automatic import-
ing program focuses on: 
? reading of the input XML files; 
? labeling of each English word with the 
corresponding semantic role (FE) 
? converting the character indexes into a 
word level annotation; 
? mapping the English words with the 
aligned Romanian correspondences, hence 
with the respective semantic role; 
? writing an output XML file containing the 
Romanian annotated corpus. 
For example, the lexical unit ?occur.v? will ap-
pear in English and Romanian annotated as: 
[Incidental]Event A AP?RUT [dup? o disput? 
?ntre individ ?i persona]time/cause [la o 
filial? a B?ncii Irlandeze din Cahir]Place. 
The incident]Event OCCURRED [after a dis-
pute between the man and staff]time/cause [at 
a branch of the Bank of Ireland in Ca-
hir]Place  
3.3 Optimization 
My initial experiment has involved the translation 
of approx. 1000 sentences from English FN. The 
translations have been realized by professional 
translators, so the errors propagated in the corpus 
should be minimal. The reported problems during 
the translation relate mainly to the lack of the con-
text of English sentences, which generate different 
translation variants. However, if the English se-
mantic frame is considered, this problem is sur-
mountable. 
The alignment process was performed with the 
aligner developed by the Institute of Research in 
Artificial Intelligence (Tufi?, 2005), which is con-
sidered to have a precision of 87.17% and a recall 
of 70.25%. However, the aligner results were 
manually validated before entering the annotation 
import program. 
The assessment of the correctitude of the ob-
tained Romanian corpus is preformed manually. 
The first results of the annotation import show an 
overall accuracy of approx. 80%. The validation 
focuses on detecting the cases where the import 
has failed, trying to discover if the problems are 
due to the translation or to the semantic or syntac-
tic specificities of Romanian. Only few translation 
errors were found, and even then, the meaning has 
been kept and the semantic roles were correctly 
assigned. However, there were cases where the 
FEs are expressed in English, but are implicit in 
the Romanian translation, as in: 
[Blood]Undergoer had CONGEALED [thickly]Manner 
[on the end of the smashed fibula]Place . 
[S?ngele]Undergoer se ?NGRO?? [spre cap?tul 
fibulei zdrobite]Place . 
or not-expressed in English, but expressed in Ro-
manian, as the Protagonist role in : 
QUIT [smoking]Process . 
L?SA?I-[v?]Protagonist [de fumat]Process . 
The frame generation program based on the gener-
ated Romanian corpus is currently under develop-
ment. 
<annotationSet ID="1" status="AUTOMATIC"> 
 <layers> 
  <layer ID="6375447" name="FE"> 
   <labels> 
    <label name="Event" ID="19909459" 
cDate="june 2006" start="0" end="9" /> 
    <label name="Time" ID="19909462" 
cDate="june 2006" start="20" end="59" /> 
    <label name="Place" ID="19909465" 
cDate="june 2006" start="61" end="101" /> 
   </labels> 
  </layer> 
........... 
  <layer ID="6375452" name="Target"> 
   <labels> 
    <label name="Target" ID="19905041" 
cDate="june 2006" start="11" end="18" /> 
   </labels> 
  </layer> 
  <layer ID="6375453" name="Verb" /> 
 </layers> 
 <sentence ID="671" aPos="103724676"> 
  <text>Incidentul a ap?rut dup? o disput? 
?ntre individ ?i personal la o filial? a 
B?ncii Irlandeze din Cahir . 
  </text> 
 </sentence> 
</annotationSet> 
31
4 Conclusions  
In this paper, I have presented a fast method for 
the realization of a Romanian corpus annotated 
with semantic frame relations. The main purpose 
of creating a quick semantic annotated database is 
using it as training corpus for automatic labeled 
semantic frames detection. Nowadays, expensive 
linguistic resources demanding a lot of time, 
money and human resources are created for differ-
ent languages. After their utility is proved, those 
resources begin to be imported to other languages 
(see for instance the MultiSemCor project2). In this 
context, the realization of a Romanian FN is a 
challenging project in the frame of Romance FN. 
The import method was preferred to the ?classi-
cal? creation by hand of a manually annotated cor-
pus because of its possible automation. I 
investigate currently the possibility of using a 
translation engine for the most time consuming 
task, namely the translation of the English sen-
tences. The project will be further developed by 
adding to the automatic import program rules dis-
covered though the analysis of the mismatching 
cases.  
The lack of semantic information was very ob-
vious while working on the QA@CLEF competi-
tion3 (Question Answering task within the Cross 
Language Evaluation Forum Competition) last 
year (Pu?ca?u et al, 2006); having the semantic 
frames database (thus a semi-automatic role label-
ing system) can improve the precision of selecting 
an appropriate snippet for the desired answer, not 
to mention also the benefits for answer generation. 
Another application of the semantic frames I am 
interested in is prosody prediction. Within the In-
stitute of Computer Science, I have begin to work 
at a syntax-prosody interface for Romanian based 
on FDG trees of sentences and other syntactical 
information to discover the phonological entities 
underlying the written text and the topic/focus ar-
ticulation. The algorithm for finding sentence fo-
cus uses the semantic roles as a main component. 
References  
Baker, C., Fillmore, Ch., Lowe, J., The Berkeley Fra-
meNet project, in Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, 
Montreal, Canada, 1998 
                                                          
2 http://multisemcor.itc.it/ 
3 http://clef-qa.itc.it/2006bis/CLEF-2006.html 
Barbu, A-M, The Verbal Complex. Linguistic Studies 
and Enquires, L, no.1, Bucharest, p. 39-84 (In Roma-
nian). 1999 
Curteanu, N.: Contrastive Meanings of the Terms 
?Predicative? and ?Predicational? in Various Lin-
guistic Theories (I, II). Computer Science Journal of 
Moldova (R. Moldova), Vol. 11, No. 4, 2003 (I); 
Vol. 12, No. 1, 2004 (II) 
Curteanu, N., Trandab??, D., Moruz, M.: Substructures 
of the (Romanian) Predicate and Predication Using 
FX-bar Projection Functions on the Syntactic Inter-
face, in Proc. of the 4th European Conference on In-
telligent Systems and Technologies - ECIT2006, Ia?i, 
Romania, 2006. 
Dobrovie-Sorin, C, The syntax of Romanian. Compara-
tive Studies. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1994 
Fillmore, Ch., The case for case; in Bach and Harms 
(Eds.), Universals in Linguistic Theory, Ed. Holt, 
Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1968 
Husarciuc M, Trandab?? D., Lupu M., Inferring Rules in 
Importing Semantic Frames from English FrameNet 
onto Romanian FrameNet, 1st ROMANCE Frame-
Net Workshop, EUROLAN, Cluj, Romania 2005 
Irimia, D. The Morphosyntax of the Romanian Verb. Ed. 
of the ?Al. I. Cuza? Ia?i University (in Romanian). 
1997 
Monachesi, P., The Morphosyntax of Romanian Clitici-
zation. in: P. A. Coppen et al (Eds.), Proceedings of 
Computational Linguistics in The Netherlands, pp. 
99-118, Amsterdam-Atlanta: Rodopi. 1998 
Pu?ca?u, G., Iftene, A., Pistol, I.,  Trandab??, D., Tufi?, 
D., Ceau?u, A., ?tef?nescu, D., Ion, R., Or??an, C., 
Dornescu, I., Moruz, A., Cristea, D., Developing a 
Question Answering System for the Romanian-
English Track at CLEF 2006, CLEF 2006 Workshop, 
Alicante, Spain, to be published in LNCS 
Trandab??, D., Husarciuc, M., Lupu, M., Towards an 
automatic import of English FrameNet frames into 
the Romanian language, 1st ROMANCE FrameNet 
Workshop, EUROLAN, Cluj, Romania, 2005 
Tufi?, D., Ion R., Ceau?u, Al., Stef?nescu, D., Com-
bined Aligners in Proceeding of the ACL2005 Work-
shop on ?Building and Using Parallel Corpora: Data-
driven Machine Translation and Beyond?, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan, June, 2005 
32
