Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 428?435,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Building and Rening Rhetorical-Semantic Relation Models
Sasha Blair-Goldensohn and
Google, Inc.
76 Ninth Avenue
New York, NY
sasha@google.com
Kathleen R. McKeown? and Owen C. Rambow?
? Department of Computer Science
? Center for Computational Learning Systems
Columbia University
{kathy,rambow}@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
We report results of experiments which
build and refine models of rhetorical-
semantic relations such as Cause and Con-
trast. We adopt the approach of Marcu
and Echihabi (2002), using a small set of
patterns to build relation models, and ex-
tend their work by refining the training
and classification process using parame-
ter optimization, topic segmentation and
syntactic parsing. Using human-annotated
and automatically-extracted test sets, we
find that each of these techniques results in
improved relation classification accuracy.
1 Introduction
Relations such as Cause and Contrast, which we call
rhetorical-semantic relations (RSRs), may be sig-
naled in text by cue phrases like because or how-
ever which join clauses or sentences and explicitly
express the relation of constituents which they con-
nect (Example 1). In other cases the relation may be
implicitly expressed (2).1
Example 1 Because of the recent accounting scan-
dals, there have been a spate of executive resigna-
tions.
Example 2 The administration was once again be-
set by scandal. After several key resignations ...
1The authors would like to thank the four anonymous re-
viewers for helpful comments. This work was supported by the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under
Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
DARPA.
The first author performed most of the research reported in
this paper while at Columbia University.
In this paper, we examine the problem of detect-
ing such relations when they are not explicitly sig-
naled. We draw on and extend the work of Marcu
and Echihabi (2002). Our baseline model directly
implements Marcu and Echihabi?s approach, opti-
mizing a set of basic parameters such as smoothing
weights, vocabulary size and stoplisting. We then
focus on improving the quality of the automatically-
mined training examples, using topic segmenta-
tion and syntactic heuristics to filter out training
instances which may be wholly or partially in-
valid. We find that the parameter optimization and
segmentation-based filtering techniques achieve sig-
nificant improvements in classification performance.
2 Related Work
Rhetorical and discourse theory has a long tradition
in computational linguistics (Moore and Wiemer-
Hastings, 2003). While there are a number of differ-
ent relation taxonomies (Hobbs, 1979; McKeown,
1985; Mann and Thompson, 1988; Martin, 1992;
Knott and Sanders, 1998), many researchers have
found that, despite small differences, these theories
have wide agreement in terms of the core phenom-
ena for which they account (Hovy and Maier, 1993;
Moser and Moore, 1996).
Work on automatic detection of rhetorical and dis-
course relations falls into two categories. Marcu
and Echihabi (2002) use a pattern-based approach
in mining instances of RSRs such as Contrast and
Elaboration from large, unannotated corpora. We
discuss this work in detail in Section 3. Other
work uses human-annotated corpora, such as the
RST Bank (Carlson et al, 2001), used by Soricut
and Marcu (2003), the GraphBank (Wolf and Gib-
son, 2005), used by Wellner et al (2006), or ad-
hoc annotations, used by (Girju, 2003; Baldridge
and Lascarides, 2005). In the past year, the ini-
428
tial public release of the Penn Discourse TreeBank
(PDTB) (Prasad et al, 2006) has significantly ex-
panded the discourse-annotated corpora available to
researchers, using a comprehensive scheme for both
implicit and explicit relations.
Some work in RSR detection has enlisted syntac-
tic analysis as a tool. Marcu and Echihabi (2002) fil-
ter training instances based on Part-of-Speech (POS)
tags, and Soricut and Marcu (2003) use syntac-
tic features to identify sentence-internal RST struc-
ture. Lapata and Lascarides (2004) focus their
work syntactically, analyzing temporal links be-
tween main and subordinate clauses. Sporleder and
Lascarides (2005) extend Marcu and Echihabi?s ap-
proach with the addition of a number of features,
including syntactic features based on POS and ar-
gument structure, as well as lexical and other sur-
face features. They report that, when working with
sparse training data, this richer feature set, combined
with a boosting-based algorithm, achieves more ac-
curate classification than Marcu and Echihabi?s sim-
pler, word-pair based approach (we describe the lat-
ter in the next section).
3 The M&E Framework
We model two RSRs, Cause and Contrast, adopt-
ing the definitions of Marcu and Echihabi (2002)
(henceforth M&E) for their Cause-Explanation-
Evidence and Contrast relations, respectively. In
particular, we follow their intuition that in building
an automated model it is best to adopt a higher-level
view of relations (cf. (Hovy and Maier, 1993)),
collapsing the finer-grained distinctions that hold
within and across relation taxonomies.
M&E use a three-stage approach common in cor-
pus linguistics: collect a large set of class instances
(instance mining), analyze them to create a model
of differentiating features (model building), and use
this model as input to a classication step which
determines the most probable class of unknown in-
stances.
The intuition of the M&E model is to apply a set
of RSR-associated cue phrase patterns over a large
text corpus to compile a training set without the cost
of human annotation. For instance, Example 1 will
match the Cause-associated pattern ?Because of W1
, W2 .?, where W1 and W2 stand for non-empty
strings containing word tokens. In the aggregate,
such instances increase the prior belief that, e.g.,
a text span containing the word scandals and one
containing resignations are in a Cause relation. A
critical point is that the cue words themselves (e.g.,
because) are discarded before extracting these word
pairs; otherwise these cue phrases themselves would
likely be the most distinguishing features learned.
More formally, M&E build up their model
through the three stages mentioned above as fol-
lows: In instance mining, for each RSR r they com-
pile an instance set Ir of (W1,W2) spans which
match a set of patterns associated with r. In
model building, features are extracted from these in-
stances; M&E extract a single feature, namely the
frequency of token pairs derived from taking the
cartesian product of W1 = {w1...wn} ? W2 =
{wn+1...wm} = {(w1, wn+1)...(wn, wm)} over
each span pair instance (W1,W2) ? I; these pair
frequencies are tallied for each RSR into a frequency
table Fr. Then in classication, the most likely re-
lation r between two unknown-relation spans W1
and W2 can be determined by a na??ve Bayesian
classifier as argmaxr?R P (r|W1,W2), where the
probability P (r|W1,W2) is simplified by assum-
ing the independence of the individual token pairs
to: ?(wi,wj)?W1,W2 P ((wi, wj)|r). The frequencycounts Fr are used as maximum likelihood estima-
tors of P ((wi, wj)|r).
4 TextRels
TextRels is our implementation of the M&E frame-
work, and serves as our platform for the experiments
which follow.
For instance mining, we use a set of cue phrase
patterns derived from published lists (e.g., (Marcu,
1997; Prasad et al, 2006)) to mine the Gigaword
corpus of 4.7 million newswire documents2 for re-
lation instances. We mine instances of the Cause
and Contrast RSRs discussed earlier, as well as a
NoRel ?relation?. NoRel is proposed by M&E as
a default model of same-topic text across which no
specific RSR holds; instances are extracted by tak-
ing text span pairs which are simply sentences from
the same document separated by at least three inter-
vening sentences. Table 1 lists a sample of our ex-
2distributed by the Linguistic Data Consortium
429
Type Sample Patterns Instances Instances, M&E
Cause BOS Because W1 , W2 EOS
BOS W1 EOS BOS Therefore , W2 EOS.
926,654 889,946
Contrast BOS W1 , but W2 EOS
BOS W1 EOS BOS However , W2 EOS.
3,017,662 3,881,588
NoRel BOS W1 EOS (BOS EOS){3,} BOS W2 EOS 1,887,740 1,000,000
Table 1: RSR types, sample extraction patterns, number of training instances used in TextRels, and number
of training instances used by M&E. BOS and EOS are sentence beginning/end markers.
traction patterns and the total number of training in-
stances per relation; in addition, we hold out 10,000
instances of each type, which we divide evenly into
development and training sets.
For model building, we compile the training in-
stances into token-pair frequencies. We implement
several parameters which control the way these fre-
quencies are computed; we discuss these parameters
and their optimization in the next section.
For classication, we implement three binary
classifiers (for Cause vs Contrast, Cause vs NoRel
and Contrast vs NoRel) using the nai?ve Bayesian
framework of the M&E approach. We implement
several classification parameters, which we discuss
in the next section.
5 Parameter Optimization
Our first set of experiments examine the impact of
various parameter settings in TextRels, using classi-
fication accuracy on a development set as our heuris-
tic. We find that the following parameters have
strong impacts on classification:
? Tokenizing our training instances using stem-
ming slightly improves accuracy and also reduces
model size.
? Laplace smoothing is as accurate as Good-
Turing, but is simpler to implement. Our experi-
ments find peak performance with 0.25 ? value, i.e.
the frequency assumed for unseen pairs.
? Vocabulary size of 6,400 achieves peak perfor-
mance; tokens which are not in the most frequent
6,400 stems (computed over Gigaword) are replaced
by an UNK pseudo-token before F is computed.
? Stoplisting has a negative impact on accuracy;
we find that even the most frequent tokens contribute
useful information to the model; a stoplist size of
zero achieves peak performance.
? Minimum Frequency cutoff is imposed to dis-
card from F token pair counts with a frequency of
< 4; results degrade slightly below this value, and
discarding this long tail of rare pair counts signifi-
cantly shrinks model size.
Classif.
/
Pdtb Auto Auto-
S
M&E
TestSet Opt Seg Opt Seg Opt Seg
Cau/Con 59.1 61.1 69.8 69.7 70.3 70.6 87
Cau/NR 75.2 74.3 72.7 73.5 71.2 72.3 75
Con/NR 67.4 69.7 70.7 71.3 68.2 70.0 64
Table 2: Classifier accuracy across PDTB, Auto
and Auto-S test sets for the parameter-optimized
classifier (?Opt?) and the same classifier trained on
segment-constrained instances (?Seg?). Accuracy
from M&E is reported for reference, but we note that
they use a different test set so the comparison is not
exact. Baseline in all cases is 50%.
To evaluate the performance of our three binary
classifiers using these optimizations, we follow the
protocol of M&E. We present the classifier for, e.g.,
Cause vs NoRel with an equal number of span-pair
instances for each RSR (as in training, any pattern
text has been removed). We then determine the ac-
curacy of the classifier in predicting the actual RSR
of each instance; in all cases we use an equal num-
ber of input pairs for each RSR so random baseline
is 50 %. We carry out this evaluation over two dif-
ferent test sets.
The first set (?PDTB?) is derived from the Penn
Discourse TreeBank (Prasad et al, 2006). We ex-
tract ?Implicit? relations, i.e. text spans from adja-
cent sentences between which annotators have in-
ferred semantics not marked by any surface lexi-
cal item. To extract test instances for our Cause
RSR, we take all PDTB Implicit relations marked
with ?Cause? or ?Consequence? semantics (344 to-
tal instances); for our Contrast RSR, we take in-
stances marked with ?Contrast? semantics (293 to-
430
tal instances).3 PDTB marks the two ?Arguments?
of these relationship instances, i.e. the text spans to
which they apply; these are used as test (W1,W2)
span pairs for classification. We test the perfor-
mance on PDTB data using 280 randomly selected
instances each from the PDTB Cause and Contrast
sets, as well as 280 randomly selected instances
from our test set of automatically extracted NoRel
instances (while there is a NoRel relation included
in PDTB, it is too sparse to use in this testing, with
53 total examples).
The second test set (?Auto?) uses the 5,000 test
instances of each RSR type automatically extracted
in our instance mining process.
Table 2 lists the accuracy for the optimized
(?Opt?) classifier over the Auto and PDTB test sets4.
(The ?Seg? columns and ?Auto-S? test set are ex-
plained in the next section.)
We also list for reference the accuracy reported
by M&E; however, their training and test sets are
not the same so this comparison is inexact, al-
though their test set is extracted automatically in the
same manner as ours. In the Cause versus Contrast
case, their reported performance exceeds ours sig-
nificantly; however, in a subset of their experiments
which test Cause versus Contrast on instances from
the human annotated RSTBank corpus (Carlson et
al., 2001) where no cue phrase is present, they re-
port only 63% accuracy over a 56% baseline (the
baseline is > 50% because the number of input ex-
amples is unbalanced).
Since we also experience a drop in performance
from the automatically derived test set to the human-
annotated test set (the PDTB in our case), we fur-
ther examined this issue. Our goal was to see if the
lower accuracy on the PDTB examples is due to (1)
the inherent difficulty of identifying implicit rela-
tion spans or (2) something else, such as the corpus-
switching effect due to our model being trained and
3Note that we are using the initial PDTB release, in which
only three of 24 data sections have marked Implicit relations, so
that the number of such examples will presumably grow in the
next release.
4We do not provide pre-optimization baseline accuracy be-
cause this would be arbitrarily depend on how sub-optimally we
select values select parameter values. For instance, by using a
Vocabulary Size of 3,200 (rather than 6,400) and a Laplace ?
value of 1, the mean accuracy of the classifiers on the Auto test
set drops from 71.6 to 70.5; using a Stoplist size of 25 (rather
than 0) drops this number to 67.3.
tested on different corpora (Gigaword and PDTB,
respectively). To informally test this, we tested
against explicitly cue-phrase marked examples gath-
ered from PDTB. That is, we used the M&E-style
method for mining instances, but we gathered them
from the PDTB corpus. Interestingly, we found that
(1) appears to be the case: for the Cause vs. Contrast
(68.7%), Cause vs. NoRel (73.0%) and (Contrast vs.
NoRel (71.0%) classifiers, the performance patterns
with the Auto test set rather than the results from the
PDTB Implicit test set. This bolsters the argument
that ?synthetic? implicit relations, i.e. those created
by stripping of originally present cue phrases, can-
not be treated as fully equivalent to ?organic? ones
annotated by a human judge but which are not ex-
plicitly indicated by a cue phrase. Sporleder and
Lascarides (To Appear) recently investigated this is-
sue in greater detail, and indeed found that such syn-
thetic and organic instances appear to have impor-
tant differences.
6 Using Topic Segmentation
In our experiments with topic segmentation, we aug-
mented the instance mining process to take account
of topic segment boundaries. The intuition here is
that all sentence boundaries should not be treated
equally during RSR instance mining. That is, we
would like to make our patterns recognize that some
sentence boundaries indicate merely an orthographic
break without a switch in topic, while others can
separate quite distinct topics. Sometimes the latter
type are marked by paragraph boundaries, but these
are unreliable markers since they may be used quite
differently by different authors.
Instead, we take the approach of adding topic seg-
ment boundary markers to our corpus, which we can
then integrate into our RSR extraction patterns. In
the case of NoRel, our assumption in our original
patterns is that the presence of at least three inter-
vening sentences is a sufficient heuristic for finding
spans which are not joined by one of the other RSRs;
we add the constraint that sentences in a NoRel re-
lation be in distinct topical segments, we can in-
crease model quality. Conversely, for two-sentence
Cause and Contrast instances, we add the constraint
that there must not be an intervening topic segment
boundary between the two sentences.
431
Before applying these segment-augmented pat-
terns, we must add boundary markers to our cor-
pus. While the concept of a topic segment can
be defined at various granularities, we take a goal-
oriented view and aim to identify segments with a
mean length of approximately four sentences, rea-
soning that these will be long enough to exclude
some candidate NoRel instances, yet short enough to
exclude a non-trivial number of Contrasts and Cause
instances. We use an automatic topic segmentation
tool, LCSeg (Galley et al, 2003) setting parame-
ters so that the derived segments are of the approx-
imate desired length. Using these parameters, LC-
Seg produces topic segments with a mean length of
3.51 sentences over Gigaword, as opposed to 1.54
sentences for paragraph boundaries. Using a sim-
ple metric that assumes ?correct? segment bound-
aries always occur at paragraph boundaries, LCSeg
achieves 76% precision.
We rerun the instance mining step of TextRels
over the segmented training corpus, after adding the
segment-based constraints mentioned above to our
pattern set. Although our constraints reduce the
overall number of instances available in the corpus,
we extract for training the same number of instances
per RSR as listed in Table 1 (our non-segment-
constrained training set does not use all instances
in the corpus). Using the optimal parameter set-
tings determined in the previous section, we build
our models and classifiers based on these segment-
constrained instances.
To evaluate the classifiers built on the segment-
constrained instances, we can essentially follow the
same protocol as in our Parameter Optimization ex-
periments. However, we must choose whether to
use a held-out test set taken from the segment-
constrained instances (?Auto-S?) or the same test
set as used to evaluate our parameter optimization,
i.e. the (?Auto?) test set from unsegmented training
data. We decide to test on both. On the one hand,
segmentation is done automatically, so it is realistic
that given a ?real world? document, we can compute
segment boundaries to help our classification judg-
ments. On the other hand, testing on unsegmented
input allows us to compare more directly to the num-
bers from our previous section. Further, for tasks
which would apply RSR models outside of a single-
document context (e.g., for assessing coherence of
a synthesized abstract), a test on unsegmented input
may be more relevant. Table 2 shows the results for
the ?Seg? classifiers on both Auto test sets, as well
as the PDTB test set.
We observe that the performance of the classi-
fiers is indeed impacted by training on the segment-
constrained instances. On the PDTB test data, per-
formance using the segment-trained classifiers im-
proves in two of three cases, with a mean improve-
ment of 1.2%. However, because of the small size
of this set, this margin is not statistically significant.
On the automatically-extracted test data, the
segment-trained classifier is the best performer in
all three cases when using the segmented test data;
while the margin is not statistically significant for a
single classifier, the overall accurate-inaccurate im-
provement is significant (p < .05) using a Chi-
squared test. On the unsegmented test data, the
segment-trained classifiers are best in two of three
cases, but the overall accurate-inaccurate improve-
ment does not achieve statistical significance. We
conclude tentatively that a classifier trained on ex-
amples gleaned with topic-segment-augmented pat-
terns performs more accurately than our baseline
classifier.
7 Using Syntax
Whether or not we use topic segmentation to con-
strain our training instances, our patterns rely on
sentence boundaries and cue phrase anchors to de-
marcate the extents of the text spans which form
our RSR instances. However, an instance which
matches such a pattern often contains some amount
of text which is not relevant to the relation in ques-
tion. Consider:
Example 3 Wall Street investors, citing a drop in
oil prices because weakness in the automotive
sector, sold off shares in GM today.
In this case, a syntactically informed analysis
could be used to extract the constituents in the cause-
effect relationship from within the boldfaced nomi-
nal clause only, i.e. as ?a drop in oil prices? and
?weakness in the automotive sector.? However, the
output of our instance mining process simply splits
the string around the cue phrase ?because of? and
extracts the entire first and second parts of the sen-
tence as the constituents. Of course, this may be for
432
the best; in this case there is an implicit Cause rela-
tionship between the NP headed by drop and the sold
VP which our pattern-based rules inadvertently cap-
ture; our experiments here test whether such noise is
more helpful than hurtful.
Recognizing the potential complexity of using
syntactic phenomena, we reduce the dimensions of
the problem. First, we focus on single-sentence in-
stances; this means we analyze only Cause and Con-
trast patterns, since NoRel uses only multi-sentence
patterns. Second, within the Cause and Contrast in-
stances, we narrow our investigation to the most pro-
ductive pattern of each type (in terms of training in-
stances extracted), given that different syntactic phe-
nomena may be in play for different patterns. The
two patterns we use are ?W1 because W2? for Cause
(accounts for 54% of training instances) and ?W1
, but W2? for Contrast (accounts for 41% of train-
ing instances). Lastly, we limit the size of our train-
ing set because of parsing time demands. We use
the Collins parser (Collins, 1996) to parse 400,000
instances each of Cause and Contrast for our fi-
nal results. Compared with our other models, this
is approximately 43% of our total Cause instances
and 13% of our total Contrast instances. For the
NoRel model, we use a randomly selected subset of
400,000 instances from our training set. For all rela-
tions, we use the non-segment-constrained instance
set as the source of these instances.
7.1 Analyzing and Classifying Syntactic Errors
To analyze the possible syntactic bases for the type
of over-capturing behavior shown in Example 3, we
create a small development set of 100 examples each
from Cause and Contrast training examples which fit
the criteria just mentioned. We then manually iden-
tify and categorize any instances of over-capturing,
labeling the relation-relevant and irrelevant spans.
We find that 75% of Cause and 58% of Contrast
examples contain at least some over-capturing; we
observe several common reasons for over-capturing
that we characterize syntactically. For example, a
matrix clause with a verb of saying should not be
part of the RSR. Using automatic parses of these in-
stances created by we then design syntactic filtering
heuristics based on a manual examination of parse
trees of several examples from our development set.
For Contrast, we find that using the coordinat-
ing conjunction (CC) analysis of but, we can use a
straightforward rule which limits the extent of RSR
spans captured to the conjuncts/children of the CC
node, e.g. by capturing only the boldfaced clauses
in the following example:
Example 4 For the past six months, management
has been revamping positioning and strategy, but
also scaling back operations.
This heuristic successfully cuts out the irrelevant
temporal relative clause, retaining the relevant VPs
which are being contrasted. Note that the heuris-
tic is not perfect; ideally the adverb also would be
filtered here, but this is more difficult to generalize
since contentful adverbials, e.g. strategically should
not be filtered out.
For the because pattern, we capture the right-
hand span as any text in child(ren) nodes of the be-
cause IN node. We extend the left-hand span only
as far as the first phrasal (e.g. VP) or finite clause
(e.g. SBAR) node above the because node. Analyz-
ing Example 3, the heuristic correctly captures the
right-hand span; however, to the left of because, the
heuristic cuts too much, and misses the key noun
drop.
7.2 Error Analysis: Evaluating the Heuristics
The first question we ask is, how well do our
heuristics work in identifying the actual correct
RSR extents? We evaluate this against the Penn
Discourse TreeBank (PDTB), restricting ourselves
to discourse-annotated but and because sentences
which match the RSR patterns which are the sub-
ject of our syntactic filtering. Since the PDTB
is annotated on the same corpus as Penn Tree-
Bank (PTB), we separately evaluate the perfor-
mance of our heuristics using gold-standard PTB
parses (?PDTB-Gold?) versus the trees generated by
Collins? parser (?PDTB-Prs?). We extract our test
data from the PDTB data corresponding to section
23 of PTB, i.e. the standard testing section, so that
the difference between the gold-standard and real
parse trees is meaningful. Section 23 contains 60
annotated instances of but and 52 instances of be-
cause which we can use for this purpose. We define
the measurement of accuracy here in terms of word-
level precision/recall. That is, the set of words fil-
tered by our heuristics are compared to the ?correct?
433
Heuristic PDTB-Prs PDTB-Gold
Contrast 89.6 / 73.0 / 80.5 79.0 / 80.6 / 79.8
Cause 78.5 / 78.8 / 78.6 87.3 / 79.5 / 83.2
Table 3: Precision/Recall/F-measure of syntactic
heuristics under various data sets and settings as de-
scribed in Section 7.2.
words to cut, i.e. those which the annotated RSR ex-
tents exclude. The results of this analysis are shown
in Table 3.
We performed an analysis of our heuristics on
Section 24 of the PDTB. In that section, there are 74
relevant sentences: 20 sentences with because, and
54 sentences with but. Exactly half of all sentences
(37) have no problems in the application of the
heuristics (7 because sentences, 30 but sentences).
Among the remaining sentences, the main source of
problems is that our heuristics do not always remove
matrix clauses with verbs of saying (15 cases total, 8
of which are because sentences). For the but clauses,
our heuristics removed the subject in 12 cases where
the PDTB did not do so. Additionally, the heuristic
for but sentences does not correctly identify the sec-
ond conjunct in five cases (choosing instead a paren-
thetical, for instance).
In looking at our syntactic heuristics for the
Cause relationship, we see that they indeed elimi-
nate the most frequent source of discrepancies with
the PDTB, namely the false inclusion of a matrix
clause of saying, resulting in 15 out of 20 perfect
analyses.
We also evaluate the difference in performance
between the PDTB-Gold and PDTB-Prs perfor-
mance to determine to what extent using a parser
(as opposed to the Gold Standard) degrades the per-
formance of our heuristics. We find that in Sec-
tion 24, 13 out of 74 sentences contain a parsing
error in the relevant aspects, but the effects are typ-
ically small and result from well-known parser is-
sues, mainly attachment errors. As we can see in Ta-
ble 3, the heuristic performance using an automatic
parser degrades only slightly, and as such we can ex-
pect an automatic parser to contribute to improving
RSR classification (as indeed it does).
Pdtb Test Set Auto Test Set
U Syn P U Syn P
Cau/Con 59.6 60.5 54.5 66.3 65.8 60.8
Cau/NR 72.2 74.9 52.6 70.3 70.2 57.3
Con/NR 61.6 60.2 52.2 69.4 69.8 56.8
Table 4: Classifier accuracy for the Unfiltered (U),
Syntactically Filtered (Syn), and POS (P) models
described in Section 7.3, over PDTB and Auto test
sets. Baseline in all cases is 50%.
7.3 Classification Evaluation
We evaluate the impact of our syntactic heuristics on
classification over the Auto and PDTB test sets using
the same instance set of 400,000 training instances
per relation. However, each applies different filters
to the instances I before computing the frequencies
F (all other parameters use the same values; these
are set slightly differently than the optimized val-
ues discussed earlier because of the smaller train-
ing sets). In addition to an Unfiltered baseline, we
evaluate Filtered models obtained with our syntac-
tic heuristics for Cause and Contrast. To provide an
additional point of comparison, we also evaluate the
Part-of-Speech based filtering heuristic described by
Marcu and Echihabi, which retains only nouns and
verbs. Unlike the other filters, the POS-based filter-
ing is applied to the NoRel instances as well as the
Cause and Contrast instances. Table 4 summarizes
the results of the classifying the PDTB and Auto test
sets with these different models.
Before we examine the results, we note that the
syntactic heuristic cuts a large portion of training
data out. In terms of the total sum of frequencies in
Fcause, i.e. the word pairs extracted from all cause
instances, the syntactic filtering cuts out nearly half.
With this in mind, we see that while the syntac-
tic filtering achieves slightly lower mean accuracy as
compared to the Unfiltered baseline on the Auto test
set, the pairs it does keep appear to be used more ef-
ficiently (the differences are significant). Even with
this reduced training set, the syntactic heuristic im-
proves performance in two out of three cases on the
PDTB test set, including a 2.7 percent improvement
for the Cause vs NoRel classifier. However, due to
the small size of the PDTB test set, none of these
differences is statistically significant.
We posit that bias in the Auto set may cause this
434
difference in performance across training sets; spans
in the Auto set are not true arguments of the rela-
tion in the PDTB sense, but nonetheless occur reg-
ularly with the cue phrases used in instance mining
and thus are more likely to be present in the test set.
Lastly, we observe that the POS-based filtering
described by M&E performs uniformly poorly. We
have no explanation for this at present, given that
M&E?s results with this filter appear promising.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we analyzed the problem of learning a
model of rhetorical-semantic relations. Building on
the work of Marcu and Echihabi, we first optimized
several parameters of their model, which we found
to have significant impact on classification accuracy.
We then focused on the quality of the automatically-
mined training examples, analyzing two techniques
for data filtering. The first technique, based on au-
tomatic topic segmentation, added additional con-
straints on the instance mining patterns; the sec-
ond used syntactic heuristics to cut out irrelevant
portions of extracted training examples. While the
topic-segmentation filtering approach achieves sig-
nificant improvement and the best results overall,
our analysis of the syntactic filtering approach indi-
cates that refined heuristics and a larger set of parsed
data can further improve those results. We would
also like to experiment with combining the two ap-
proaches, i.e. by applying the syntactic heuristics
to an instance set extracted using topic segmenta-
tion constraints. We conclude that our experiments
show that these techniques can successfully refine
RSR models and improve our ability to classify un-
known relations.
References
Jason Baldridge and Alex Lascarides. 2005. Probabilistic head-
driven parsing for discourse structure. In CoNLL 2005.
L. Carlson, D. Marcu, and M.E. Okurowski. 2001. Building a
discourse-tagged corpus in the framework of rhetorical struc-
ture theory. In Eurospeech 2001 Workshops.
M. Collins. 1996. A new statistical parser based on bigram
lexical dependencies. In ACL 1996.
M. Galley, K.R. McKeown, E. Fosler-Lussier, and H. Jing.
2003. Discourse segmentation of multi-party conversation.
In ACL 2003.
R. Girju. 2003. Automatic detection of causal relations for
question answering. In ACL 2003 Workshops.
Jerry R. Hobbs. 1979. Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3(1):67?90.
E. Hovy and E. Maier. 1993. Parsimonious or profligate: How
many and which discourse structure relations? Unpublished
Manuscript.
A. Knott and T. Sanders. 1998. The classification of coherence
relations and their linguistic markers: An exploration of two
languages. Journal of Pragmatics, 30(2):135?175.
M. Lapata and A. Lascarides. 2004. Inferring sentence-internal
temporal relations. In HLT 2004.
W.C. Mann and S.A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical structure
theory: Towards a functional theory of text organization.
Text, 8(3):243?281.
D. Marcu and A. Echihabi. 2002. An unsupervised approach to
recognizing discourse relations. In ACL 2002.
D. Marcu. 1997. The Rhetorical Parsing, Summarization and
Generation of Natural Language Texts. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Toronto, Department of Computer Science.
J. Martin. 1992. English Text: System and Structure. John
Benjamins.
K.R. McKeown. 1985. Text generation: Using discourse
strategies and focus constraints to generate natural lan-
guage text. Cambridge University Press.
J.D. Moore and P. Wiemer-Hastings. 2003. Discourse in
computational linguistics and artificial intelligence. In
M.A. Gernbacher A.G. Graesser and S.R. Goldman, ed-
itors, Handbook of Discourse Processes, pages 439?487.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
M.G. Moser and J.D. Moore. 1996. Toward a synthesis of two
accounts of discourse structure. Computational Linguistics,
22(3):409?420.
R. Prasad, E. Miltsakaki, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi, and
B. Webber. 2006. The penn discourse treebank 1.0. anno-
tation manual. Technical Report IRCS-06-01, University of
Pennsylvania.
R. Soricut and D. Marcu. 2003. Sentence level discourse pars-
ing using syntactic and lexical information. In HLT-NAACL
2003.
C. Sporleder and A. Lascarides. 2005. Exploiting linguistic
cues to classify rhetorical relations. In RANLP 2005.
C. Sporleder and A. Lascarides. To Appear. Using automat-
ically labelled examples to classify rhetorical relations: An
assessment. Natural Language Engineering.
B. Wellner, J. Pustejovsky, C. Havasi, R. Sauri, and
A. Rumshisky. 2006. Classification of discourse coherence
relations: An exploratory study using multiple knowledge
sources. In SIGDial 2006.
F. Wolf and E. Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse coher-
ence: A corpus-based analysis. Computational Linguistics,
31(2):249?287.
435
