Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 33?36,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Combining Evidence for Improved Speech Retrieval
J. Scott Olsson
Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
olsson@math.umd.edu
Abstract
The goal of my dissertation research is
to investigate the combination of new ev-
idence sources for improving informa-
tion retrieval on speech collections. The
utility of these evidence sources is ex-
pected to vary depending on how well they
are matched to a collection?s domain. I
outline several new evidence sources for
speech retrieval, situate them in the con-
text of this domain dependency, and de-
tail several methods for their combination
with speech recognition output. Secondly,
I highlight completed and proposed work
for the production of this evidence.
1 Introduction and Goal
Early research in spoken document retrieval (SDR)
was spurred by a new way to overcome the high
cost of producing metadata (e.g., human assigned
topic labels) or manual transcripts for spoken doc-
uments: large vocabulary continuous speech recog-
nition. In this sense, SDR research has always been
about making do with the available evidence. With
the advent of automatic speech recognition (ASR),
this available evidence simply grew from being only
expensive human annotations to comparatively low-
cost machine producible transcripts.
But today even more evidence is available for re-
trieving speech: (1) Using ASR text as input fea-
tures, text classification can be applied to spoken
document collections to automatically produce topic
labels; (2) vocabulary independent spoken term de-
tection (STD) systems have been developed which
can search for query words falling outside of an
ASR system?s fixed vocabulary. These evidence
sources can be thought of as two bookends to the
spectrum of domain dependence and independence.
On one end, topic labels can significantly improve
retrieval performance but require the creation of
a (presumably domain-dependent) topic thesaurus
and training data. Furthermore, classification accu-
racy will be poor if the ASR system?s vocabulary is
badly matched to the collection?s speech (e.g., we
shouldn?t expect a classifier to sensibly hypothesize
automotive topics if the ASR system can not out-
put words about cars or driving). On the other end,
STD systems offer the most promise precisely when
the ASR system?s vocabulary is poorly matched to
the domain. If the ASR system?s vocabulary already
includes every word in the domain, after all, STD
can hardly be expected to help.
The primary goal of this dissertation is (1) to ex-
plore the combination of these new evidence sources
with the features available in ASR transcripts or
word lattices for SDR and (2) to determine their
suitability in various domain-matching conditions.
Secondarily, I?ll explore improving the production
of these new resources themselves (e.g., by classify-
ing with temporal domain knowledge or more robust
term detection methods).
Research in SDR has been inhibited by the ab-
sence of suitable test collections. The recently avail-
able MALACH collection of oral history data will,
in large part, make this dissertation research possible
(Oard et al, 2004). The MALACH test collection
33
contains about 1,000 hours of conversational speech
from 400 interviews with survivors of the Holo-
caust1. The interviews are segmented into 8,104
documents with topic labels manually assigned from
a thesaurus of roughly 40,000 descriptors. The
collection includes relevance assessments for more
than 100 topics and has been used for several years
in CLEF?s cross-language speech retrieval (CLSR)
track (Oard et al, 2006).
Participants in the CLEF CLSR evaluations have
already begun investigating evidence combination
for SDR, through the use of automatic topic labels?
although label texts are presently only used as an ad-
ditional field for indexing. In monolingual English
trials, this topic classification represents a significant
effort both in time and money (i.e., to produce train-
ing data), so that these evidence combination studies
have so far been rather domain dependent. Partici-
pants have also been using what are probably un-
naturally good ASR transcripts. The speech is emo-
tional, disfluent, heavily accented, and focused on a
somewhat rare topic, such that the ASR system re-
quired extensive tuning and adaptation to produce
the current word error rate of approximately 25%.
In this setting, we?d expect STD output and topic la-
bels to have low and high utility, respectively. To
investigate the domain mismatch case, I will apply
an off-the-shelf ASR system to produce new, com-
paratively poor, transcripts of the collection. In this
setting, we?d expect STD output and topic labels to
instead have high and low utility, respectively.
2 Proposed Combination Solutions
I will investigate improving SDR performance in
both the poorly and well matched domain conditions
through: (1) multiple approaches for utilizing auto-
matically produced topic labels and (2) the utiliza-
tion of STD output.
Throughout this paper, completed work will be
denoted with a ???, while proposed (non-complete,
future) work will be denoted with a ???.
1This is only a small subset of the entire MALACH col-
lection, which contains roughly 116,000 hours of speech from
52,000 interviews in 32 languages. This additional data also
provides training examples for classification.
2.1 Speech Classification for SDR
I outline three methods of incorporating evidence
from automatic classification for speech retrieval.
Creating Additional Indexable Text?
The simplest way to combine classification and
speech retrieval is to use the topic labels associ-
ated with the classes as indexable text. As a par-
ticipant on the MALACH project, I produced these
automatic topic labels (?keywords?) for the collec-
tion?s speech segments. These keywords were used
in this way in both years of the CLEF CLSR track.
For a top system in the track, using solely automat-
ically produced data (e.g., ASR transcripts and key-
word text), indexing keyword text gave a relative
improvement in mean average precision of 40.6%
over an identical run without keywords (Alzghool
and Inkpen, 2007).
Runtime Query Classification for SDR?
Simply using keyword text as an indexing field
is probably suboptimal because information seek-
ers don?t necessarily speak the same language as
the thesaurus constructors. An alternative is to clas-
sify the queries themselves at search time and to use
these label assignments to rank the documents. We
might expect this to be superior, insofar as infor-
mation seekers use language more like interviewees
(from which classification features are drawn) than
like thesaurus builders.
Class Guided Document Expansion?
A third option for using classification output is
as seed text for document expansion. The intuition
here is that ASR text may be a strong predictor for
a particular class label even if the ASR contains few
terms which a user might consider for a query. In
this sense, the class label text may represent a more
semantically dense representation of the segment?s
topical content. This denser representation may then
be a superior starting source for document centered
term expansion.
2.2 Unconstrained Term Detection for SDR?
It is not yet clear how best to combine a STD and
topical relevance IR system. One difficulty is that
IR systems count words (or putative occurrences of
words from an ASR system), while STD systems
34
report a score proportional to the confidence that a
word occurs in the audio. As a solution, I propose
normalizing the STD system?s score for OOV query
terms by a function of the STD system?s score on
putative occurrences of in-vocabulary terms. The
intuition here is that the ASR transcript is roughly
a ground truth representation of in-vocabulary term
occurrences and the score on OOV query terms
ought to reflect the STD system?s confidence in pre-
diction (which can be modeled from the STD sys-
tem?s score on ?ground truth? in-vocabulary term
occurrences). In this way, the presence or absence of
in-vocabulary terms and their associated STD confi-
dence scores can be used to learn a normalizer for
the STD system?s scores.
3 Producing the Evidence
In this section, I highlight both completed and pro-
posed work to improve the production of evidence
for combination.
3.1 Classifying with Temporal Evidence?
In spoken document collections, features beyond
merely the automatically transcribed words may ex-
ist. Consider, for example, the oral history data con-
tained in the MALACH collection. Each interview
in this collection can be thought of as a time ordered
set of spoken documents, produced by the guided
interview process. These documents naturally arise
in this context, and this temporal information can be
used to improve classification accuracy.
This work has so far focused on MALACH data,
although we expect the methods to be generally ap-
plicable to speech collections. For example, the top-
ical content of a television episode may often be
a good predictor of the subsequent episode?s topic.
Likewise, topics in radio, television, and podcasts
may tend to be seasonally dependent (based on Hol-
idays, recurring political or sporting events, etc.).
Time-shifted classification? One source of tem-
poral information in the MALACH data is the fea-
tures associated with temporally adjacent segments.
Terms may be class-predictive for not only their
own segment, but for the subsequent segments as
well. This intuition may be easily captured by a time
shifted classification (TSC) scheme. In TSC, each
training segment is labeled with the subsequent seg-
ment?s labels. During classification, each test seg-
ment is used to assign labels to its subsequent seg-
ment.
Temporal label weighting? We can also benefit
from non-local temporal information about a seg-
ment. For example, because interviewees were in-
structed to relate their story in chronological order,
we are more likely to find a discussion of childhood
at an interview?s beginning than at its end. We can
estimate the joint probability of labels and segment
times on held-out data and use this to bias new label
assignments. We call this approach temporal label
weighting (TLW).
In Olsson and Oard (2007), we showed that a
combined TSC and TLW approach on MALACH
data yields significant improvements on two sep-
arate label assignment tasks: conceptual and geo-
graphic thesaurus terms, with relative improvements
in mean average precision of 8.0% and 14.2% re-
spectively.
3.2 Classifying across languages?
In multilingual collections, training data for meta-
data creation may not be available for a particular
language?a good example of domain mismatch. If
however, training examples are available in a sec-
ond language, the metadata may still be produced
through cross-language text classification. In Ols-
son (2005), we used a probabilistic Czech-English
dictionary to transform Czech document vectors into
an English vector space before classifying them with
k-Nearest Neighbors and English training exam-
ples. In this study, the cross-language performance
achieved 73% of the monolingual English baseline
on conceptual topic assignment.
3.3 Vocabulary Independent Spoken Utterance
Retrieval?
In Olsson (2007), we examined a low resource ap-
proach to utterance retrieval using the expected pos-
terior count of n-grams in phonetic lattices as index-
ing units. A query?s phone subsequences are then
extracted and matched against the index to produce
a ranking on the lattices. Against a 1-best phone
sequence baseline, the approach was shown to sig-
nificantly improve the mean average precision of re-
trieved utterances on five human languages.
35
3.4 Improving Spoken Term Detection?
Phonetic lattices improve spoken term detection per-
formance by more accurately encoding the recog-
nizer?s uncertainty in prediction. Even so, a cor-
rect lattice may not always contain a path with
the query?s entire phone sequence. This is so not
only because of practical constraints on the size
(i.e., depth) of the lattice, but also because speak-
ers don?t always pronounce words with dictionary
precision. We?d like to allow approximate matching
of a query?s phone sequence with the phonetic lat-
tices, and to do this as quickly as possible. This time
requirement will prevent us from linearly scanning
through lattices for near matches. I am currently in-
vestigating two solutions to this problem: phonetic
query degradation and query expansion.
Phonetic query degradation? The idea in pho-
netic query degradation is to build an error model for
the phone recognition system and to then degrade
the query phone sequence such that it, hopefully,
will more closely resemble recognized sequences.
This approach incurs only a very slight cost in time
and is query independent (in the sense that any term
can be pushed through the degradation model?not,
for example, only terms for which we can find rec-
ognized examples).
Phonetic query expansion? The idea of phonetic
query expansion is, again, to transform the clean
phone sequence of the query into the degraded form
hypothesized by a recognizer. Instead of using a
degradation model however, we simply run a first
pass at STD with the non-degraded query term and
use the putative occurrences to learn new, alterna-
tive, degraded forms for a second search pass. This
can be thought of as blind relevance feedback or
query by (putative) example.
The advantage of this approach is that we are
not required to explicitly model the degradation pro-
cess. Disadvantages are that we (1) require exam-
ples which may not be available and (2) assume that
the degradation process is well represented by only
a few examples.
4 Contributions
This dissertation will significantly contribute to
speech retrieval research in several ways.
Can we improve SDR by evidence combination?
By exploring evidence combination, this dissertation
will advance the state of the art in speech retrieval
systems and their applicability to diverse domains. I
will investigate multiple methods for combining the
evidence presented by both STD and classification
systems with conventional ASR output (transcripts
or word lattices). This work will develop upon pre-
vious research which studied, in depth, the use of
only one evidence source, e.g., (Ng, 2000).
Can evidence combination decrease domain de-
pendency? I will investigate how combining evi-
dence sources can increase their applicability to new
content domains. This will include, for example, un-
derstanding how (vocabulary independent) STD sys-
tems can be paired with fixed vocabulary ASR.
How can these evidence sources be improved?
Lastly, I will explore how these new evidence
sources may themselves be improved. This will in-
clude utilizing temporal domain knowledge for clas-
sification and improving the robustness of phone-
based STD systems.
References
M. Alzghool and D. Inkpen. Experiments for the Cross
Language Spoken Retrieval Task at CLEF 2006. In
Not yet published.
K. Ng. 2000. Subword-based approaches for spoken
document retrieval. MIT dissertation.
D.W. Oard, et al Building an Information Retrieval Test
Collection for Spontaneous Conversational Speech. In
Proceedings of SIGIR?04.
D.W. Oard, et al 2006. Evaluation of Multilingual and
Multi-modal Information Retrieval. In Seventh Work-
shop of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, Ali-
cante, Spain. Selected Papers Series: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science.
J.S. Olsson and D.W. Oard. 2007. Improving Text Clas-
sification for Oral History Archives with Temporal Do-
main Knowledge. In Not yet published.
J.S. Olsson, et al Cross-language text classification. In
Proceedings of SIGIR?05.
J.S. Olsson, et al Fast Unconstrained Audio Search in
Numerous Human Languages. In ICASSP?07.
36
