Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 25?28,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dynamic Use of Ontologies in Dialogue Systems
Joana Paulo Pardal
Department of Information Systems and Computer Engineering
Instituto Superior Te?cnico, Technical University of Lisbon
Lisbon, Portugal
joana@l2f.inesc-id.pt
Abstract
Most dialogue systems are built with a sin-
gle task in mind. This makes the exten-
sion of an existing system one of the ma-
jor problems in the field as large parts of
the system have to be modified. Some re-
cent work has shown that ontologies have
a role on the domain knowledge represen-
tation as the knowledge collected in an on-
tology can be used in all the modules. This
work aims to follow the footsteps of the
use of ontologies in dialogue systems and
take it further as the current state of the art
only uses taxonomical knowledge.
1 Introduction
At the present time, the Spoken Language Sys-
tems Lab (L2F) integrates a project in the ?House
of the Future? at the Portuguese Communications
Foundation. The house has a spoken dialogue sys-
tem (Moura?o et al, 2004) based on TRIPS architec-
ture (Allen et al, 2005) where a virtual butler na-
med ?Ambro?sio? helps the user in daily tasks that
deal with devices and services, through speech com-
mands. Whenever clarification is needed, further di-
alogue is entailed. To act in response to the user, the
system needs to know which devices are connected,
which services are available and what actions can be
performed. Currently, this information is stored for
each service or device: the available operations, the
needed parameters and the possible values for each
one. This kind of architecture is very common in the
field. Nevertheless it?s still hard to extend an exis-
ting system because it?s always necessary to adapt
lots of features in the system.
Recent work from Filipe (2006) has enhanced the
access to the services and abstracted the database
view in order to create an Application Programming
Interface (API). The main contribution of that work
is a Domain Knowledge Manager (DKM) advisor
service, which suggests the best task-device pairs to
satisfy a request. Additionally, a DKM recognizer
service to identify the domain concepts from a natu-
ral language request is proposed. A hybrid approach
is used to design ubiquitous domain models to al-
low the dialogue system to recognize the available
devices and tasks they provide on-the-fly.
But more work is still needed to ease the dynamic
configuration of dialogue systems and to deal with
a set of arbitrary plug-and-play devices. The main
goal of this work is to pursue the work done by Fi-
lipe.
2 State of the art
This work encompasses knowledge and techniques
from two different areas: dialogue systems and on-
tologies. This work has to deal with the challenges
from all these areas.
2.1 Dialogue Systems
Since the 1980s, the Natural Language Processing
community has used spoken dialogue systems as a
case study (Colea et al, 1997). This option is ex-
plained by the simplicity that comes from the tre-
atment of restricted domains. The multidisciplina-
rity involved is one of the richnesses of this field as
25
it brings together people from several communities
like signal processing ? for speech recognition (Ju-
rafsky and Martin, 2000) and synthesis (Huang et
al., 2001); artificial intelligence ? for interpretation
of the spoken utterances (Allen, 1987); and software
engineering ? for more efficient architectures (Mc-
Tear, 2002). But the complexity of these systems
makes them expensive to develop (Allen et al, 2000)
and difficult to adapt to new types of users, servi-
ces, languages and scenarios (Turunen and Hakuli-
nen, 2003).
With the proliferation of databases, some work
has been done to take advantage of the knowledge
structure and organization to dynamically extend
existing systems to new domains, devices and ser-
vices.
2.2 Ontologies
Ontologies aim at capturing static domain kno-
wledge in a generic way and providing a commonly
agreed understanding of a given domain. The main
purpose is to share and reuse that knowledge across
applications. The field of Ontologies appeared in the
1990s (Gruber, 1993), but only lately has been per-
ceived as more valuable, as some effective results
are being achieved with their use, reuse and sharing.
Being so, an ontology is a formalized shared spe-
cification of a conceptualization. Mainly, a domain
ontology collects the relevant concepts of a domain
and the relations between them. An ontology usu-
ally also represents some formal restrictions verified
in the domain. Therefore, ontologies usually have
three types of entities: classes, relations, and axi-
oms.
Currently the main challenges in this area in-
clude the definition of a clear building process (Pinto
and Martins, 2004), automatic learning of ontolo-
gies (Maedche and Staab, 2004), transparent access
to information (Gil et al, 2005) and efficient infe-
rence based on the available knowledge (Baader et
al., 2003). Some work has been done where databa-
ses and other legacy knowledge sources are replaced
by ontologies in different types of domains with suc-
cess (Grau et al, 2005).
2.3 Use of Ontologies in Dialogue Systems
Separating the domain knowledge from the language
features of the spoken dialogue systems has pro-
ven to reduce the complexity of a dialogue system?s
components. Moreover, if the domain knowledge is
already available, reusing it is crucial to reduce the
effort needed to build a new dialogue system or to
extend an existing one into a new subject. Some re-
cent work has shown the advantages of the use of
Ontologies for these tasks.
Milward and Beveridge (2003) maintain that the
ontology-based dialogue system for home informa-
tion and control provides a dynamically reconfigu-
rable system were new devices can be added and
users can subscribe to new ones; asynchronous de-
vice input is allowed; unnatural scripted dialogues
are avoided; and a flexible multimodal interaction
for all users including the elderly and the disabled is
provided. Also, the recognition, interpretation, ge-
neration and dialogue management are more flexible
as the knowledge coded on the ontology can be used
dynamically.
Flycht-Eriksson (2004) argues that the separation
of the dialogue management from the domain kno-
wledge management is crucial to reduce the comple-
xity of the systems and enhance further extensions.
Both these works focus on the IS-A and PART-
OF relations to solve under/over specification. This
is helpful in medical-related dialogue systems that
need taxonomical knowledge of the domain. Using
more relations is still a challenge as the complexity
increases.
3 Main goals
The main goal of this project is to enhance spoken
dialogue systems to make them more general and
domain-independent. This means that knowledge
should be introduced in the system more easily and
transparently. To do this, the dialog management
should be separated from the domain knowledge
management. This should be done not only by as-
signing a system module to it (the service manager)
that has to be adapted to each domain, but, additi-
onaly, by defining the kind of domain knowledge
needed and creating an abstraction to represent it.
For example, the dialogue system needs to know the
possible words in the next expected response from
the user and that depends mainly on the domain.
This separation eases the creation of mechanisms to
treat the common dialogue phenomena. A library
26
for these phenomena should be reused in dialogue
systems across all domains.
Contributions from the ontologies field will be ex-
plored in regard to knowledge manipulation in a ge-
neric spoken dialogue system. As said before, some
work has been done in the field but, at least for
now, most of the work is reduced to the hierarchi-
cal knowledge (classes and IS-A relations) and un-
der/over specification (PART-OF relations) that usu-
ally are represented on the ontologies. The extra-
taxonomical knowledge is still being ignored but
should be considered as that is the main richness of
ontologies.
The most interesting topic is whether ontologies
can enrich a spoken dialogue system and be used
by it in such a way that the system can abstract the
knowledge source thus allowing the system to focus
only on dialogue phenomena and rather than the ar-
chitecture adaptation that has to be done in order to
include new domains.
The definition of the dialogue system as the ins-
tantiation of a spoken dialogue system will be ex-
plored after the existing dialogue systems and onto-
logies have been studied and categorized according
to the tasks they perform and the used knowledge
sources.
4 Completed Work
An ontology on the cooking domain has been
built (Ribeiro et al, 2006; Batista et al, 2006). This
ontology still hasn?t been used but it will be included
in our dialogue systems to provide help during the
execution of a recipe. Currently an undergraduate
student is enriching this ontology with a collection
of recipes automatically extracted from text.
Also, a first prototype version of a cooking butler
has been implemented. It lets the user choose from
a list of recipes one to be dictated to him. Forward
and rewind commands are available. This work is
still preliminary as it doesn?t use any ontology. It
was done by two undergraduate students as a proof
of concept that our current system can be extended
to a dictating task.
5 Future directions
Since the PhD is still on going, lots of work is yet to
be done. The next step to achieve the main goal of
this work is to study the existing dialogue systems
with emphasis on the performed tasks and the used
knowledge sources. Beyond the simple enumeration
of all the published systems, the aim is to create a
categorization of dialogue systems according to the
tasks they allow and to the type of knowledge they
use independent of the used knowledge representa-
tion primitives (classes, relations and axioms).
5.1 Tasks to be performed
? A survey on the existing ontologies according
to the coded information: classes, relations and
axioms.
? Exploratory work on how to manage the do-
main knowledge transparently, focusing on the
integration of ontologies in dialogue systems.
? Arrange the current architecture to consider not
only the TRIPS architectural proposal, but the
contributions coming from the ontological fi-
eld. The separation of the dialogue manager in
two modules should be considered here: one
module for the dialogue features independent
from the domain and other for the domain kno-
wledge management.
? Adapt the existing L2F?s spoken dialogue sys-
tem to the identified requirements in order to
use domain knowledge from an ontology.
? Use the proposed methodology to include a co-
oking ontology on the L2F?s dialogue system to
extend it to new domains.
? Include ontologies from different domains. An
entertainment (Theatre, Movies, etc) domain
ontology is being build.
5.2 Intelectual Contributions
? Classification of the existing dialogue systems
according to the type of information they need
and use;
? Classification of the used ontologies in dialo-
gue systems according to the information co-
ded and the used classes, relations and axioms;
? Propose an architecture where the contribution
of each module is clearer and where the infor-
mation flows both forward and backward;
27
? Propose a methodology for the integration of
ontologies into general dialogue systems accor-
ding to their classification;
? Integration of a cooking ontology into the exis-
ting dialogue system;
? Integration of another ontology into another di-
alogue system (from UoR).
References
James Allen, Donna Byron, Myroslava Dzikovska, Ge-
orge Ferguson, Lucian Galescu, and Amanda Stent.
2000. An architecture for a generic dialogue shell.
Natural Language Engineering, 6(3).
James Allen, George Ferguson, Mary Swift, Amanda
Stent, Scott Stoness, Lucian Galescu, Nathanael
Chambers, Ellen Campana, and Gregory Aist. 2005.
Two diverse systems built using generic components
for spoken dialogue (recent progress on TRIPS). In
Ann Arbor, editor, Proc. of the Interactive Poster and
Demonstration Sessions at the 43rd Annual Meeting of
ACL, pages 85?88, Michigan, USA.
James F. Allen. 1987. Natural Language Understanding.
Benjamin Cummings, 2nd edition.
Franz Baader, Diego Calvanese, Deborah McGuinness,
Daniele Nardi, and Peter Patel-Schneider, editors.
2003. The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Im-
plementation, and Applications. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Fernando Batista, Joana Paulo Pardal, Paula Vaz
Nuno Mamede, and Ricardo Ribeiro. 2006. Onto-
logy construction: cooking domain. Technical report,
INESC-ID, Lisboa, Portugal.
Ron Colea, Joseph Mariani, Hans Uszkoreit, Gio-
vanni Batista Varile, Annie Zaenen, Antonio Zampolli,
and Victor Zue (editors), editors. 1997. Survey of
the State of the Art in Human Language Technology.
CSLU, CMU, Pittsburgh, PA.
Porf??rio Pena Filipe and Nuno J. Mamede. 2006. A do-
main knowledge advisor for dialogue systems. In In-
ternational Joint Conference IBERAMIA/SBIA/SBRN
2006 ? 4th Workshop in Information and Human Lan-
guage Technology.
Annika Flycht-Eriksson. 2004. Design and Use of On-
tologies in Information-providing Dialogue Systems.
Ph.D. thesis, School of Engineering at Linko?ping Uni-
versity.
Yolanda Gil, Enrico Motta, Richard Benjamins, and
Mark Musen, editors. 2005. The Semantic Web ? 4th
ISWC, volume 3729 of LNCS. Springer, Ireland.
Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Ian Horrocks, Bijan Parsia, and
Peter Patel-Schneider, editors. 2005. What Have On-
tologies Ever Done For Us: Potential Applications at
a National Mapping Agency, volume 188.
Thomas R. Gruber. 1993. A translation approach to por-
table ontology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition,
5(2):199?220.
Xuedong Huang, Alex Acero, and Hsiao-Wuen Hon.
2001. Spoken Language Processing: A Guide to The-
ory, Algorithm, and System Development. Prentice
Hall.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2000. Speech
and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural
Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Com-
putational Linguistics. Prentice-Hall.
Alexander Maedche and Steffen Staab, 2004. Handbook
on Ontologies, chapter Ontology learning. Internatio-
nal Handbooks on Information Systems. Springer.
Michael McTear. 2002. Spoken dialogue technology:
enabling the conversational interface. ACM Compu-
ting Surveys, 34(1):90?169.
David Milward and Martin Beveridge. 2003. Ontology-
based dialogue systems. In 3rd Workshop on Kno-
wledge and Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems
? 18th IJCAI03.
Ma?rcio Moura?o, Renato Cassaca, and Nuno Mamede.
2004. An independent domain dialog system through
a service manager. In Proc. of 4th Intl. Conf. EsTAL,
pages 161?171. Springer-Verlag.
H. Sofia Pinto and Joa?o Pava?o Martins. 2004. Ontolo-
gies: How can they be built? Knowledge Information
System, 6(4):441?464.
Ricardo D. Ribeiro, Fernando Batista, Nuno J. Mamede
Joana Paulo Pardal, and H. Sofia Pinto. 2006. Coo-
king an ontology. In 12th Intl. Conf. on AI: Methodo-
logy, Systems, Applications, volume 4183, pages 213?
221, Berlin.
Markku Turunen and Jaakko Hakulinen. 2003. Jaspis2 -
an architecture for supporting distributed spoken dia-
logues. In Proc. of Eurospeech, pages 1913?1916.
28
