Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, Companion Volume, pages 29?32,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Fast Method for Parallel Document Identification
Jessica Enright and Grzegorz Kondrak
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E8, Canada
{enright,kondrak}@cs.ualberta.ca
Abstract
We present a fast method to identify
homogeneous parallel documents. The
method is based on collecting counts of
identical low-frequency words between
possibly parallel documents. The candi-
date with the most shared low-frequency
words is selected as the parallel document.
The method achieved 99.96% accuracy
when tested on the EUROPARL corpus
of parliamentary proceedings, failing only
in anomalous cases of truncated or oth-
erwise distorted documents. While other
work has shown similar performance on
this type of dataset, our approach pre-
sented here is faster and does not require
training. Apart from proposing an effi-
cient method for parallel document iden-
tification in a restricted domain, this pa-
per furnishes evidence that parliamentary
proceedings may be inappropriate for test-
ing parallel document identification sys-
tems in general.
1 Introduction
Parallel documents are documents that are mutual
translations. There are a number of reasons one
might want to either identify parallel documents, or
confirm that a pair of documents are in fact parallel.
Most prominently, one could use pairs of automat-
ically detected parallel documents to build parallel
corpora. Parallel corpora have many uses in natural
language processing, and their dearth has been iden-
tified as a major bottleneck (Diab, 2004). They have
been employed in word sense disambiguation (Diab
and Resnik, 2002), automatic construction of bilin-
gual dictionaries (McEwan et al, 2002), and induc-
ing statistical machine translation models (Koehn et
al., 2003). In addition to building parallel corpora,
one can envision other uses for parallel document
identification, such as cross-language information
retrieval (Chen and Nie, 2000).
Much work on identifying pairs of parallel doc-
uments focuses on the use of external features of
the documents, rather than content. Chen and Nie
(2000) describe PTMiner, a cross-language informa-
tion retrieval system. They consider a number of
factors in determining if a pair of documents are par-
allel, including document size, date, URL, and lan-
guage flag. For example, if a document is available
in both French and English, it is common for the
French document?s URL to contain .fr and the En-
glish to contain .en In addition to these measures,
they consider website structure.
McEwan et al (2002) find parallel documents
which they then use to automatically build a bilin-
gual dictionary. In their system, they first gener-
ate a set of candidate pairs based on manual selec-
tion, or advanced search engine use. They then filter
the pairs to remove non-parallel pairs. First, they
confirm that one of each pair is in each of the de-
sired languages using tuned lists of stop-words, then
they compare the documents based on length in to-
kens, and HTML markup. Resnik and Smith (2003)
use a similar idea of candidates and filters in their
STRAND system. STRAND filters the documents
based on aligning them by length in tokens and lo-
cation of HTML markup in the documents.
Apart form the work done on external metrics,
Patry and Langlais (2005) investigated a number of
content-based metrics. They consider several docu-
29
ment features, including the numbers, proper names
and punctuation contained within, as well as docu-
ment length, and alignment scores between candi-
date pairs. The features are then used to train an
Ada-Boost classifier, which makes decisions based
on edit-distance and cosine scores. They experi-
mented with several combinations of features, one
of which achieved 100% correctness when tested on
487 out of 488 parallel documents that constitute the
English-Spanish portion of the EUROPARL corpus.
They conclude that a bag-of-words approach is infe-
rior to one that considers feature order.
In this work, we demonstrate that a much sim-
pler approach can achieve equally good results. Our
method does not depend on hand-coded linguistic
knowledge and requires no training data, which may
be unavailable for some language pairs. In addition,
thanks to its simplicity, our method is very fast.
2 Parallel document identification
One can consider the parallel document identifica-
tion problem to be as follows:
Given one document dA in language A,
and a set of documents DB in language B,
identify exactly one document dB ? DB
that is the parallel, or translation, of dA.
We initially designed a cognate-based approach to
the problem, which employed a combination of or-
thographic word similarity measures to identify cog-
nates such as French nombres and English numbers
between documents. In order to make the method
computationally feasible, potential cognates were
filtered based on word order, location in the docu-
ment, frequency, and length. However, we found
that a faster and simpler procedure, which is de-
scribed below, performed extremely well, eliminat-
ing the need for a more sophisticated approach.
We propose to identify parallel documents by
counting the number of unique words that appear in
both documents. The documents are treated as bags
of words, that is, their word order is not considered.
From each document, we extract a set of words that
are at least 4 characters long and have frequency 1.
Given a document in language A, we select the doc-
ument in language B that shares the largest number
of these words. An implementation based on hash
tables ensures speed.
Since identical words of frequency 1 are almost
certainly cognates, this method can be seen as an
extremely conservative approach to cognate detec-
tion. In practice, most of unique identical words are
proper nouns.
3 Experimental setup
We performed experiments on two different par-
liamentary corpora. The English-French Canadian
Hansards from the 36th sitting of the Canadian
Parliament (Germann, 2001) was selected as the
development dataset. In testing on the Canadian
Hansards, English was used as the Language A, and
French as the Language B. Our approach correctly
identified all parallel documents.
In order to allow for a direct comparison with the
work of Patry and Langlais (2005), we adopted the
EUROPARL corpus of parliamentary proceedings
(Koehn, 2002) as our test dataset. However, rather
than focusing on a single language pair, we per-
formed tests on all 110 language pairs involving the
following 11 languages: German, English, Greek,
Finnish, Swedish, Dutch, French, Danish, Italian,
Spanish and Portuguese. Diacritics were stripped
from the documents of all languages. Since Greek
utilizes a different script from the rest of the docu-
ments. we used a straightforward context-free map-
ping to convert every Greek character to its nearest
roman equivalent.
Some of the 488 documents available in EU-
ROPARL were missing in Finnish, Swedish, Greek
and Danish. In particular, Greek had 392 docu-
ments, Danish had 487 documents, and Swedish and
Finnish had 433 each. In such cases, the parallels
of those missing documents were excluded from the
language A for that test.
The EUROPARL documents range in size from
114 tokens (13 lines) to 138,557 tokens (11,101
lines). The mean number of tokens is 59,387 (2,826
lines). Each orientation of each language pair was
tested. For example, for the language pair English-
Dutch, tests were run twice - once with English as
language A and Dutch as language B, and once
the other way around. The results for a given lan-
guage pair are not necessarily symmetric. Hence-
forth when referring to a language pair, we list the
language A as the first one.
30
For each document and each language pair, an in-
dividual test was run. An individual test consisted
of finding, for a given document in language A, its
parallel in the language B set. Since we did not take
advantage of the pigeon-hole constraint, the individ-
ual tests were independent from each other.
No changes were made to the approach once test-
ing on the EUROPARL corpus began, in order to
avoid adapting it to work on any particular data set.
4 Results
In total, only 20 of the 49872 tests did not pro-
duce the correct result (0.04% error rate). There
was one incorrect selection in the English-Spanish
language pair, one in the English-German pair, as
well as in each of 18 language pairs involving Dan-
ish or English as a Language A. All of the incorrect
results can be traced to mistranslation, or to miss-
ing/truncated documents. In particular, one of the
documents is severely truncated in Danish and En-
glish, one of the German documents missing a por-
tion of its text, and the Spanish version of one of the
documents contains a number of phrases and sen-
tences of English, apparently belonging to the En-
glish version of the text.
Effectively, when this method fails it is because
the input does not match the problem definition. Re-
call that the problem was defined as selecting a doc-
ument dB from a set of documents DB in language
B that is the correct parallel to dA, a document in
language A. Failure cases occurred because there
was no correct parallel to the dA in DB . In fact,
each of the ?incorrect? results is a manifestation of
an editorial error in the EUROPARL corpus. One
could see this approach being used as an aid to iden-
tifying fragmentary documents and mistranslations
in parallel corpora.
Encouraged by the excellent accuracy of our
method, we decided to try an even simpler approach,
which is based on words of frequency 1 in the entire
set of documents in a given language, rather than in
a single document. For every document from a lan-
guage A, we select as its parallel the document from
language B that shares the most of those words with
it. However, the results obtained with this method
were clearly inferior, with the error rates ranging
from 2.9% for Dutch to 27.3% for Finnish.
5 Discussion
The implications of this work are two-fold. First,
it shows a simple, fast, and effective method for
identifying parallel documents. Second, it calls into
question the usefulness of parliamentary proceed-
ings for the evaluation of parallel document identifi-
cation schemes.
The method described in this paper is sufficiently
simple as to be used as a baseline for comparison
with other methods. No information is shared be-
tween trials, no word similarity measures are used,
and word order is ignored. The method does not
incorporate any language-specific linguistic knowl-
edge, and it has shown itself to be robust across lan-
guages without any alterations. The only constraint
is that the languages must share an alphabet, or can
be converted into a common alphabet. Furthermore,
it requires no training phase, which would likely
have to be repeated for every pair of languages.
Our method achieves 99.9% accuracy on the
English-Spanish language pair, which roughly
matches the best result reported by Patry and
Langlais (2005) (who apparently removed one doc-
ument pair from the collection). However, their
method requires a training phase on aligned parallel
documents, making it time consuming and inconve-
nient to adapt their approach to a new language pair,
even in cases where such document-aligned corpora
are available. In addition, their top accuracy value
corresponds to only one of several combination of
features ? the results with classifiers based on other
combinations of features were lower.
We implemented our method using hash tables,
which store the words occurring in a document to-
gether with their frequencies. This makes the entire
search for a parallel document roughly linear in the
total number of words in all the documents. Average
total wall-clock time spent for one test with one lan-
guage A document and 488 language B documents
was 59.4 seconds. on a AMD Athlon(tm) 64 Proces-
sor 3500+. Profiling showed that on average 99.7%
of the wall-clock time was spent on I/O operations,
with the remainder taken by hash table lookups and
string equality checks. Clearly, little speed improve-
ment is possible. In contrast to the speed of our
approach, the approach used by Patry and Langlais
(2005) requires not only the time to train a classifier,
31
but also the time to compute edit distance between
many document pairs.
In addition to yielding a simple, accurate and fast
method for parallel document identification, our re-
sults suggest that relatively ?clean? collections of
parliamentary proceedings of the EUROPARL type
may be inappropriate for testing parallel document
identification schemes in general. If a very simple
approach can achieve near perfect accuracy in such
a domain, perhaps the task is too easy. Future gen-
eral parallel document identification systems should
be tested on more challenging datasets.
6 Future Work
While the approach presented here has been very
successful thus far, there are a number of extensions
that could be made to make it more applicable in
general. More work could allow it to deal with cases
of missing parallel documents, datasets with fewer
proper names, and even yield knowledge of the dif-
ficulty of the problem in general.
First, the problem definition could be expanded to
include cases where there is no valid parallel for a
given language A document in the language B doc-
ument set. This could take the form of establishing
a score or significance threshold. For example, if
there were no document in the language B set that
shared more than the minimum number of unique
words with the document dA in language A, then the
approach might return no parallel for that document.
Second, it might be revealing to run further tests
with this approach on other types of text than parlia-
mentary proceedings. What types of text would re-
quire a more sophisticated approach? The answer to
that question might have implications for the range
of text types that ought to be used to comprehen-
sively test parallel document identification systems.
The exact matching of words is a critical feature
of our approach, which enables it to perform quick
comparisons of documents by representing them as
sets of low-frequency words stored in hash tables.
However, it is also a limitation because many cross-
language cognates are not orthographically identi-
cal. A system relying on non-binary word similar-
ity measures rather than on total identity of words
would be more complex and slower, but also more
robust across different domains of text.
7 Conclusion
We have presented a viable, simple method for
identification of homogeneous parallel documents.
This method uses less resources and time than other
content-based methods, a valuable asset when many
languages lack linguistic resources. In addition to
showing the effectiveness of our approach, the re-
sults of the experiments suggest that parliamentary
proceedings may be inappropriate for parallel docu-
ment identification scheme testing.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Colin Cherry and other
members of the NLP research group at University of
Alberta for their helpful comments and suggestions.
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
Jiang Chen and Jian-Yun Nie. 2000. Parallel web text
mining for cross-language IR. In In Proc. of RIAO,
pages 62?77.
Mona Diab and Philip Resnik. 2002. An unsupervised
method for word sense tagging using parallel corpora.
In Proc. of ACL, pages 255?262.
Mona Diab. 2004. Relieving the data acquisition bottle-
neck for word sense disambiguation. In Proc. of ACL,
pages 303?310.
Ulrich Germann. 2001. Aligned Hansards of the
36th Parliament of Canada, Release 2001-1a. Avail-
able at http://www.isi.edu/natural-language/download/
hansard/.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proc.
of HLT-NAACL, pages 48?54.
Philipp Koehn. 2002. Europarl: A multilingual cor-
pus for evaluation of machine translation. Available
at http://people.csail.mit.edu/koehn/.
Craig J. A. McEwan, Iadh Ounis, and Ian Ruthven. 2002.
Building bilingual dictionaries from parallel web doc-
uments. In Proc. of ECIR, pages 303?323.
Alexandre Patry and Philippe Langlais. 2005. Auto-
matic identification of parallel documents with light or
without linguistic resources. In Proc. of Canadian AI,
pages 354?365.
Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web as a
parallel corpus. Comput. Linguist., 29(3):349?380.
32
