Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 1?4,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Query Expansion Using Domain Information in Compounds
Karin Friberg
Department of Swedish Language
Go?teborg University
Go?teborg, Sweden
karin.friberg@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
This paper describes a query expansion
strategy for domain specific information
retrieval. Components of compounds are
used selectively. Only parts belonging to
the same domain as the compound itself
will be used in expanded queries.
1 Introduction
Compounds are semantic units containing at least
two content-bearing morphemes. They function as
one word, and are, in many languages, written as one
word. In Swedish newspapers around 10% of the
words have been found to be compounds (Hedlund,
2002). Since a compound has at least two content-
bearing morphemes, a great part of the information
is contained in the compounds, information which
can be essential in retrieving relevant documents.
I will study medical compounds, examining pos-
sible ways to expand queries in information retrieval
using domain information. This information will
guide the decision of when to include compound
parts in search queries. The hypothesis is that com-
ponents from the same domain as the compound it-
self, in this case the medical domain, will increase
the effectiveness of the search, while components
from other domains or standard language will not.
2 Information Retrieval
Information retrieval is about storing and orga-
nizing documents so that they can be found and
retrieved when relevant to an information need
(Baeza-Yates, and Ribiero-Neto, 1999). The words
of the documents are stored in indexes. The user
poses a query to the system containing words de-
scribing the information need. Words in the queries
are matched against the indexed words. A ranking
function finally ranks the documents in order of cal-
culated relevance. The better the match, the higher a
document is ranked.
The goal of information retrieval is to retrieve as
many documents relevant to an information need as
possible, high recall, and to have as low proportion
of irrelevant documents in the output as possible,
high precision.
2.1 Query expansion
Query expansion is modification of a query to im-
prove retrieval effectiveness. This can be done by
changing or increasing the term content of a query.
In my work the strategy of expanding queries con-
taining compounds, with selected compound com-
ponents, is discussed. The strategy should result in
higher recall, since more documents are likely to be
retrieved. There is, however, a risk of lower preci-
sion, since irrelevant documents with certainty also
will be retrieved. To minimize the decrease of pre-
cision, only components from the same domain as
the compound itself will be used. Here, dealing with
medical compounds, the objective is to decide if the
components are from the medical domain.
3 Compounds
A compound is, as mentioned above, a semantic unit
with more than one content-bearing morpheme. In
Swedish, compounding is a very productive mor-
1
phological process. There is an infinite number of
possible compounds, so it is impossible to list them
all. They are also written as one word without the
boundary between the parts marked in any way.
3.1 Compositional/non-compositional
compounds
Occasional compounds, not lexicalized but con-
structed when needed, usually have a transparent
meaning, where the meaning can be derived from
the meaning of the parts. These are called composi-
tional compounds. Other compounds, with a mean-
ing that has strayed from the combined meaning
of the components, are called non-compositional
compounds (Hedlund, 2002). Non-compositional
compounds are often lexicalized with a fixed mean-
ing. An example of a lexicalized non-compositional
compound is tra?dga?rd ?tree yard?, Swedish for ?gar-
den?, not necessarily a garden containing trees.
In information retrieval, compositional and non-
compositional compounds are best treated in differ-
ent ways. Non-compositional compounds are often
found in dictionaries and can be processed as they
are. Using the components in queries would not ben-
efit the result. If a query contains a compositional
compound, the compound components might very
well be used to expand the query, since they build
up the meaning of the whole.
3.2 Decomposition not always beneficial
When expanding queries with compound compo-
nents, to increase recall, it is important to be aware
that this could result in lower precision. This might
be the case if the compound is non-compositional
or if the parts are too general or used in other do-
mains. In Ahlgren (2004) the author gives exam-
ples of when decomposition of compounds is use-
ful and when it is not. For a compound such as
fotboll ?foot ball? (soccer), expanding a query with
fot and boll would probably result in lower preci-
sion. On the other hand, expanding a query contain-
ing the compound narkotikapolitik ?drug politics?,
with narkotika and politik would probably be more
useful. Documents containing phrases like politik
mot narkotika ?politics against drugs? could be re-
trieved. Documents containing narkotika or politik
alone would also be found. Here one can speculate
that documents containing narkotika have a good
chance of being relevant, while the concept politik
is broader and could cause retrieval of many irrele-
vant documents.
My idea is to expand queries containing medi-
cal compounds by selecting components that also
belong to the medical domain. Take the com-
pound korsband ?cross band/tape? (cruciate liga-
ment). Both parts belong to standard language.
Including them would do more harm than good.
In the case of a?derbra?cksstrumpa ?varicose-veins
stocking? the component a?derbra?ck seems to be a
good candidate for query expansion, unlike strumpa,
which belongs to standard language.
4 The MeSH thesaurus
One way to determine which compound parts be-
long to the medical domain is to use a medical
thesaurus, a controlled vocabulary with words or-
ganized according to conceptual relations. I have
used the Swedish MeSH (Medical Subject Head-
ings) (Svensk MeSH, www), which is based on a
translation of the original American MeSH (MeSH,
www).
4.1 The MeSH tagger
A Swedish MeSH tagger (Kokkinakis, 2006) is be-
ing developed at Spra?kdata, Department of Swedish
Language, Go?teborg University. The tagger tags
maximal length strings from six subdomains of the
Swedish MeSH: A: Anatomy, B: Organisms, C: Dis-
eases, D: Chemicals and Drugs, E: Analytical, Diag-
nostic, and Therapeutic Techniques and Equipment,
and F: Psychiatry and Psychology. If a string is
tagged, the tagger will not mark a substring of this
string unless it is from another subdomain. The tag-
ger does not tag any substrings shorter than five let-
ters.
In the Swedish MeSH the compound kransarta?r
?wreath artery? (coronary artery) is not listed, thus it
is not tagged. On the other hand arta?r is found and
tagged accordingly. The word krans is not a medical
term. It is not included in MeSH and consequently
not tagged:
krans<mesh:A07>arta?r</mesh>
4.2 Expansion using MeSH
As mentioned above, one expansion strategy for
queries containing medical compounds is to add do-
2
main specific parts of the compounds to the query.
This should work with compositional compounds.
An example is patellaluxation ?patella dislocation?
(dislocation of the knee cap). Chances are that doc-
uments containing any or both of the simplex words
patella and luxation will be relevant to the needs of
a user including patellaluxation in a query.
Baseline query:
#sum(...patellaluxation...)
Expanded query:
#sum (...#syn(patellaluxation
patella luxation)...)
Expanding queries with components not from the
domain, especially those common in standard lan-
guage, will probably result in lower precision. In the
example kransarta?r the strategy would be to keep
the original compound, add arta?r which is found by
the MeSH tagger, but not krans which is not tagged.
Baseline query:
#sum(...kransarta?r...)
Expanded query:
#sum(...#syn(kransarta?r arta?r)...)
5 Experiments
To test the MeSH tagger, a run was made with
5205 compounds extracted from the on-line med-
ical lexicon Medlex (Kokkinakis, 2004), created
at Spra?kdata, Department of Swedish Language,
Go?teborg University. Medlex was created by adding
medical vocabulary to a learner?s dictionary, thus a
great part of the compounds in Medlex are from the
medical domain.
895 of the 5205 compounds were tagged. Among
compounds not tagged, around 10% were medical.
This figure should improve with a more comprehen-
sive tagger.
233 compounds which were not tagged as a
whole, had one or two components correctly tagged.
This is where the strategy described should be most
beneficial, suggesting that an expanded query con-
tain the compound itself and the tagged substring(s).
Examples of tagging which may improve effec-
tiveness in query expansion, are shown below:
<mesh:D22/D27>cellgift</mesh>sbehandling
?cell-poison treatment? (chemotherapy
treatment)
dotter<mesh:C04>tumo?r</mesh>
?daughter tumor?
fot<mesh:C17/C04/C02>va?rta</mesh>
?foot wart?
<mesh:D06/D12>insulin</mesh>chock
?insulin chock?
63 compounds had tagged components not used
in medical senses. Those strings were homonymic,
polysemic, or had several facets. Homonymy is
when a string represents different words that by
chance are alike. Polysemy is when one word has
several meanings. For example, the ?leg? of a person
and the ?leg? of a table. Facets are different aspects
of one concept. A ?person? has a body aspect as well
as a personality aspect (Croft and Cruse, 2004).
It is tagging of words that are homonymic, poly-
semic, or with medical and non-medical facets that
I predict will cause difficulties. An example is
ha?stansikte ?horse face?. Although ansikte is a med-
ical term, it is not used in a medical sense here. If
you say that a person has a ha?stansikte it is a com-
ment about looks, not health. The word ansikte has a
medical facet, but also a personal appearance facet.
Other examples of compounds with problematic
components are listed below:
do?d<mesh:A02>skalle</mesh>
?death skull? (skull referred to in a pirate
or scary sense)
femdygns<mesh:E01>prognos</mesh>
?five-days prognosis? (weather domain)
<mesh:A01>finger</mesh>borg
?finger castle? (thimble)
Only four compounds had spurious substrings
tagged. An example is ro?ntgen+apparat ?x-ray de-
vice?, tagged as below, nappar meaning ?pacifiers?:
ro?ntge<mesh:E07>nappar</mesh>at
5.1 A pre-decomposed run
As mentioned above, the MeSH tagger tags only
maximal length (sub)strings from each subdomain
of MeSH. The tagger also does not tag short strings
unless they are separate words. This entails that
3
short components will not be tagged unless decom-
position of the compound is done first.
In order to see how these features affect the out-
come of the tagger, I ran the Medlex list through the
tagger after decomposing the compounds.
This time, 1095 compounds had one or both com-
ponents tagged. 819 of these were used in the med-
ical sense. This is a number which should be com-
pared with 233 in the previous run.
276 compounds had components that were tagged
although not used in a medical sense. Only one com-
pound had a spurious substring tagged.
5.2 Standard language versus medical
language
One problem in decomposing compounds and using
the medically tagged components to expand queries,
is that many words that are medical in some meaning
or facet are common in standard language. Even if
we know that such a component is used in the med-
ical sense in a query, expanding the query with that
component would bring on irrelevant documents.
Examples of words with such properties are hand
?hand? and hja?rta ?heart?. Even though these words
are used in medical senses they are also common in
standard language, for example in lexicalized com-
pounds or in phrases.
In the tagger run with the decomposed list, most
of the 276 words that were tagged as medical,
though not used in the medical sense, had as a com-
ponent one of only 16 basic words. Below are a few
such compounds that have as a component a word
from that list, hand:
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> bok
?hand book?
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> broms
?hand brake?
<mesh:A01>hand</mesh> duk
?hand cloth? (towel)
6 Future work
I have presented a strategy of how to use domain
information to decide when parts of a compound
should be used in query expansion. Unfortunately
I have not been able to test the effectiveness of this
strategy. To get a true evaluation of the strategy,
a Swedish medical test collection is needed. At
present there is no such collection. However, my
research at the moment is concentrated on creating
a Swedish medical test collection, by the name of
MedEval.
The first step in my research is thus to create a
Swedish medical test collection, the second to test
query expansion strategies based on domain infor-
mation, such as the one described here. The strat-
egy described could be carried through not only in
queries, but also in indexes. That is, if a document
from the medical domain contains a medical com-
pound, the index could contain not only the com-
pound, but also its medical components. Still, a big
challenge will be to work out how to deal with poly-
semic and homonymic words and words with medi-
cal and non-medical facets.
References
Ahlgren, Per. 2004. The effects of indexing strategy-
query term combination on retrieval effectiveness in a
Swedish full text database. Publications from Valfrid,
nr 28. University College of Bora?s/Go?teborg Univer-
sity.
Baeza-Yates Ricardo and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 1999.
Modern information retrieval. ACM-press, New York,
NY.
Croft, William and D. Alan Cruse. 2004. Cognitive Lin-
gustics. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Hedlund, Turid. 2002. Compounds in dictionary-based
cross-language information retrieval. Information Re-
search, volume 7 No.2. 2002. Department of Informa-
tion Studies. University of Tampere, Finland.
Kokkinakis, Dimitrios. 2004. MEDLEX: Tech-
nical Report. Department of Swedish Lan-
guage, Spra?kdata, Go?teborg University. [www].
<http://demo.spraakdata.gu.se/svedk/pbl/MEDLEX
work2004.pdf> Retrieved January 9, 2007.
Kokkinakis, Dimitrios. 2006. Developing Resources for
Swedish Bio-Medical Text Mining. Proceedings of the
2nd International Symposium on Semantic Mining in
Biomedicine (SMBM). Jena, Germany.
MeSH. Medical Subject Headings. U.S. National
Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD. [www].
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/>. Retrieved January
9, 2007.
Svensk MeSH. MeSH-resurser vid KIB. Karolinska
Institutet Universitetsbiblioteket, Stockholm. [www].
<http://mesh.kib.ki.se/>. Retrieved January 9, 2007.
4
