NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 19?20,
Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
OMS-J: An Opinion Mining System for Japanese Weblog Reviews Using a
Combination of Supervised and Unsupervised Approaches
Guangwei Wang
Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology
Hokkaido University
Sapporo, Japan 060-0814
wgw@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp
Kenji Araki
Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology
Hokkaido University
Sapporo, Japan 060-0814
araki@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp
Abstract
We introduce a simple opinion mining
system for analyzing Japanese Weblog re-
views called OMS-J. OMS-J is designed
to provide an intuitive visual GUI of opin-
ion mining graphs for a comparison of
different products of the same type to
help a user make a quick purchase de-
cision. We first use an opinion mining
method using a combination of supervised
(a Naive Bayes Classifier) and unsuper-
vised (an improved SO-PMI: Semantic
Orientation Using Pointwise Mutual In-
formation) learning.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, there are numerous Web sites containing
personal opinions, e.g. customer reviews of prod-
ucts, forums, discussion groups, and blogs. Here,
we use the term Weblog for these sites. How to ex-
tract and analyze these opinions automatically, i.e.
?Opinion Mining?, has seen increasing attention in
recent years.
This paper presents a simple opinion mining sys-
tem (OMS-J) for analyzing Japanese Weblog re-
views automatically. The novelty of OMS-J is two-
fold: First, it provides a GUI using intuitive visual
mining graphs aimed at inexperienced users who
want to check opinions on the Weblog before pur-
chasing something. These graphs can help the user
to make a quick decision on which product is suit-
able. Secondly, this system combines a supervised
and an unsupervised approach to perform opinion
mining. In related work (Chaovalit, 2005; Tur-
ney, 2002), both supervised and unsupervised ap-
proaches have been shown to have their pros and
cons. Based on the merits of these approaches and
the characteristics of Japanese (Kobayashi, 2003),
we proposed an opinion mining method using a
Naive Bayes Classifier (supervised approach) and an
improved SO-PMI method (unsupervised approach)
to perform different parts of the classification task
(Wang, 2006).
OMS-J implements Weblog opinion mining by
the steps shown in Figure 1. In the next section, we
describe the proposed system in detail.
1. Information Search
2. Weblog Content Extraction
3. Opinion Mining
DB
4. Mining Grap s GUI
User
Search Engine (Google), Keyword
Lynx (Text Browser)
Cabocha (Structure Analyzer)
Template content extraction
Feature Classification
Supervised Approach (Na?ve Bayes)
P/N Classification
Unsupervised Approach (SO-PMI)
Figure 1: System Flow
2 Proposed System
2.1 Information Search
The first step is information search. We used the
Google search engine1 to get al the information on
one product category or one specific product in the
Japanese weblog on the Internet. The search key-
word is the product category name or the product
name. The URL range of the search is restricted by
the URL type (e.g. blog, bbs, review).
2.2 Weblog Content Extraction
The Content Extraction step first analyzes the We-
blog content using a dependency structure analyzer
for Japanese, Cabocha2. Based on the syntactic
characteristics of Japanese reviews and the results
1http://www.google.co.jp/
2http://www.chasen.org/?taku/software/cabocha/
19
of related work (Kobayashi, 2003; Taku, 2002), we
designed the following templates to extract opinion
phrases:
< noun + auxiliary word + adj / verb / noun >
< adj + noun / undefined / verb >
< noun + verb >
< noun + symbol + adj / verb / noun >
Except the above < adj >
2.3 Opinion Mining
Opinion mining methods can usually be divided into
two types: supervised and unsupervised approaches.
Supervised approaches are likely to provide more
accurate classification results but need a training cor-
pus. Unsupervised approaches on the other hand re-
quire no training data but tend to produce weaker
results.
We propose a combined opinion mining method
by performing feature classification and P/N classi-
fication (Wang, 2006). The purpose of these classifi-
cations is to know what the opinion expresses about
a certain product?s features. Feature means a prod-
uct?s attribute, i.e. price, design, function or battery
feature. Based on our previous study, it is easy to
create a feature corpus. Therefore feature classifica-
tion is performed by a supervised approach, a Naive
Bayes Classifier. P/N classification classifies repu-
tation expressions into positive or negative meaning
using an unsupervised approach, SO-PMI. The SO-
PMI approach measures the similarity of pairs of
words or phrases based on the mutual information
theory, in our case the closeness of an opinion and
words for ?good? or ?bad?.
No human effort is required when mining a new
product or category. Only inputting the name of the
product or category is needed. It does however re-
quire quite a lot of processing time, since the SO-
PMI approach using a search engine is very time
consuming. Adding new features requires manual
work, since a small hand labeled training corpus is
used. Similar categories of products, for instance
cameras and mp3 players, use the same features
though, so this is not done very often.
2.4 Mining Graphs GUI
Finally, OMS-J provides a GUI with mining graphs
showing the opinion mining data in the database, as
shown in Figure 2. These graphs show the distribu-
tion of positive and negative opinions of each feature
type such as ?design?, and for each product. The
distribution of positive opinions among the different
product choices are shown in a pie chart, as is the
same for negative opinions. This GUI can also show
graphs for a single product?s mining results, show-
ing the positive/negative opinion distribution of each
feature.
Figure 2: OMS-J?s GUI Screenshot for One Product Category
3 Demonstration
During the demonstration, we will show that OMS-
J is an intuitive opinion mining system that can help
people to make a quick decision on purchasing some
product. OMS-J?s trial version has been developed
and tested with three kinds of products: Electronic
Dictionaries, MP3 Players and Notebook PCs. The
experiment results were positive. We will show how
the system works when a user wants to buy a good
MP3 player or wants to get a feel for the general
opinions on a specific Notebook PC etc.
References
Pimwadee Chaovalit and Lina Zhou. 2005. Movie Review Min-
ing: a Comparison between Supervised and Unsupervised
Classification Approaches. Proceedings of the 38th Annual
HICSS.
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
Proceedings 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 417-424.
Nozomi Kobayashi, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsumoto, Kenji
Tateishi and Toshikazu Fukushima. 2003. Collecting eval-
uative expressions by a text mining technique. IPSJ SIG
NOTE, Vol.154, No.12.
Guangwei Wang and Kenji Araki. 2006. A Decision Support
System Using Text Mining Technology. IEICE SIG Notes
WI2-2006-6, pp. 55-56.
Taku Kudoh and Yuji Matsumoto. 2002. Applying Cascaded
Chunking to Japanese Dependency Structure Analysis. In-
formation Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ)Academic
Journals, Vol 43, No 6, pp. 1834-1842.
20
