Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2007 Doctoral Consortium, pages 9?12,
Rochester, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Creating a Knowledge Base From a Collaboratively Generated Encyclopedia
Simone Paolo Ponzetto
EML Research gGmbH
Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 33
69118 Heidelberg, Germany
http://www.eml-research.de/?ponzetto
Abstract
We present our work on using Wikipedia
as a knowledge source for Natural Lan-
guage Processing. We first describe our
previous work on computing semantic re-
latedness from Wikipedia, and its applica-
tion to a machine learning based corefer-
ence resolution system. Our results sug-
gest that Wikipedia represents a semantic
resource to be treasured for NLP applica-
tions, and accordingly present the work di-
rections to be explored in the future.
1 Introduction
The last decade has seen statistical techniques for
Natural Language Processing (NLP) gaining the
status of standard approaches to most NLP tasks.
While advances towards robust statistical inference
methods (cf. e.g. Domingos et al (2006) and Pun-
yakanok et al (2006)) will certainly improve the
computational modelling of natural language, we
believe that crucial advances will also come from re-
discovering the use of symbolic knowledge, i.e. the
deployment of large scale knowledge bases.
Arguments for the necessity of symbolically en-
coded knowledge for AI and NLP date back at least
to McCarthy (1959). Symbolic approaches using
knowledge bases, however, are expensive and time-
consuming to maintain. They also have a limited
and arbitrary coverage. In our work we try to over-
come such problems by relying on a wide coverage
on-line encyclopedia developed by a large amount of
users, namely Wikipedia. That is, we are interested
in whether and how Wikipedia can be integrated into
NLP applications as a knowledge base. The motiva-
tion comes from the necessity to overcome the brit-
tleness and knowledge acquisition bottlenecks that
NLP applications suffer.
2 Previous Work: WikiRelate! and
Semantic Knowledge Sources for
Coreference Resolution
Ponzetto & Strube (2006) and Strube & Ponzetto
(2006) aimed at showing that ?the encyclopedia that
anyone can edit? can be indeed used as a semantic
resource for research in NLP. In particular, we as-
sumed its category tree to represent a semantic net-
work modelling relations between concepts, and we
computed measures of semantic relatedness from it.
We did not show only that Wikipedia-based mea-
sures of semantic relatedness are competitive with
the ones computed from a widely used standard
resource such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), but
also that including semantic knowledge mined from
Wikipedia into an NLP system dealing with corefer-
ence resolution is in fact beneficial.
2.1 WikiRelate! Computing Semantic
Relatedness Using Wikipedia
Semantic relatedness measures have been proven to
be useful in many NLP applications such as word
sense disambiguation (Kohomban & Lee, 2005; Pat-
wardhan et al, 2005), information retrieval (Finkel-
stein et al, 2002), information extraction pattern
induction (Stevenson & Greenwood, 2005), inter-
pretation of noun compounds (Kim & Baldwin,
2005), paraphrase detection (Mihalcea et al, 2006)
and spelling correction (Budanitsky & Hirst, 2006).
Approaches to measuring semantic relatedness that
9
re
la
te
dn
es
s 
m
ea
su
re
(s)
 co
mp
uta
tio
n
search for a connecting path along the category networkpage query and retrieval, category extraction
"
Jo
hn
 Z
or
n"
 q
ue
ry
"
Fe
la
 K
ut
i" 
qu
er
y
Musicians
Composers
Jazz composers
Musical activists
page : John Zorn
page : Fela Kuti
Figure 1: Wikipedia-based semantic relatedness computation. First, target pages for the given queries are re-
trieved, possibly via disambiguation. Next, categories are extracted to provide an entry point to the category
network. Connecting paths are then searched along the category network using a depth-limited search. The
paths found are scored and the ones satisfying the measure definitions (i.e. the shortest one for path-length
measures, and the most informative one for information-content measures) are returned.
use lexical resources transform that resource into
a network or graph and compute relatedness us-
ing paths in it1. For instance, Rada et al (1989)
traverse MeSH, a term hierarchy for indexing arti-
cles in Medline, and compute semantic relatedness
as the edge distance between terms in the hierar-
chy. Jarmasz & Szpakowicz (2003) use the same
approach with Roget?s Thesaurus while Hirst & St-
Onge (1998) apply a similar strategy to WordNet.
The novel idea presented in Strube & Ponzetto
(2006) was to induce a semantic network from the
Wikipedia categorization graph to compute mea-
sures of semantic relatedness. Wikipedia, a multi-
lingual Web-based free-content encyclopedia, al-
lows for structured access by means of categories:
the encyclopedia articles can be assigned one or
more categories, which are further categorized to
provide a so-called ?category tree?. Though not de-
1An overview of lexical resource-based approaches to mea-
suring semantic relatedness is presented in Budanitsky & Hirst
(2006). Note that here we do not distinguish between seman-
tic similarity (computed using hyponymy/hyperonymy, i.e. is-
a, relations only) and semantic relatedness (using all relations
in the taxonomy, including antonymic, meronymic, functional
relations such as is-made-of, etc.), since the relations between
categories in Wikipedia are neither semantically typed nor show
a uniform semantics (see Section 3).
signed as a strict hierarchy or tree, the categories
form a graph which can be used as a taxonomy to
compute semantic relatedness. We showed (1) how
to retrieve Wikipedia articles from textual queries
and resolve ambiguous queries based on the arti-
cles? link structure; (2) compute semantic related-
ness as a function of the articles found and the paths
between them along the categorization graph (Fig-
ure 1). We evaluated the Wikipedia-based measures
against the ones computed from WordNet on bench-
marking datasets from the literature (e.g. Miller and
Charles? (1991) list of 30 noun pairs) and found
Wikipedia to be competitive with WordNet.
2.2 Semantic Knowledge Sources for
Coreference Resolution
Evaluating measures of semantic relatedness on
word pair datasets poses non-trivial problems, i.e.
all available datasets are small in size, and it is not
always clear which linguistic notion (i.e. similar-
ity vs. relatedness) underlies them. Accordingly, in
Ponzetto & Strube (2006) we used a machine learn-
ing based coreference resolution system to provide
an extrinsic evaluation of the utility of WordNet and
Wikipedia relatedness measures for NLP applica-
tions. We started with the machine learning based
10
WordNet
Wikipedia
Prince
Fela Kuti
The Minneapolis Genius
the pioneer of Afrobeat music
The artist formerly known as Prince
TAFKAP
The Artist
Raw text
he
Prince
Fela Kuti
the pioneer of Afrobeat music
The Minneapolis Genius
he
TAFKAP
The Artist
The artist formerly known as Prince
with coreference chains
Text annotated
Preprocessing
pipeline
PoS tagger
Chunker
NER
Baseline Feature Extractor
MaxEnt
classifier
Semantic Feature
extractor
SEMANTICS
(Soon et al, 2001)
Figure 2: Overview of the coreference system for extrinsic evaluation of WordNet and Wikipedia relatedness
measures. We start with a baseline system from Soon et al (2001). We then include at different times
features from WordNet and Wikipedia and register performance variations.
baseline system from Soon et al (2001), and an-
alyzed the performance variations given by includ-
ing the relatedness measures in the feature set (Fig-
ure 2). The results showed that coreference resolu-
tion benefits from information mined from seman-
tic knowledge sources and also, that using features
induced from Wikipedia gives a performance only
slightly worse than when using WordNet.
3 Future Work: Inducing an Ontology
from a Collaboratively Generated
Encyclopedia
Our results so far suggest that Wikipedia can be con-
sidered a semantic resource in its own right. Un-
fortunately, the Wikipedia categorization still suf-
fers from some limitations: it cannot be considered
an ontology, as the relations between categories are
not semantically-typed, i.e. the links between cate-
gories do not have an explicit semantics such as is-a,
part-of, etc. Work in the near future will accordingly
concentrate on automatically inducing the semantics
of the relations between Wikipedia categories. This
aims at transforming the unlabeled graph in Figure
3(a) into the semantic network in Figure 3(b), where
the links between categories are augmented with a
clearly defined semantics.
The availability of explicit semantic relations
would allow to compute semantic similarity rather
than semantic relatedness (Budanitsky & Hirst,
2006), which is more suitable for coreference res-
olution. That is, we assume that the availability
of hyponymic/hyperonymic relations will allow us
to compute lexical semantic measures which will
further increase the performance of our coreference
resolution system, as well as further bringing for-
ward Wikipedia as a direct competitor of manually-
designed resources such as WordNet.
In order to make the task feasible, we are currently
concentrating on inducing is-a vs. not-is-a semantic
relations. This simplifies the task, but still allows
us to compute measures of semantic similarity. As
we made limited use of the large amount of text in
Wikipedia, we are now trying to integrate text and
categorization. This includes extracting semantic re-
lations expressed in the encyclopedic definitions by
means of Hearst patterns (Hearst, 1992), detection
of semantic variations (Morin & Jacquemin, 1999)
between category labels, as well as using the cat-
egorized pages as bag-of-words to compute scores
of idf-based semantic overlap (Monz & de Rijke,
2001) between categories. Further work will then
concentrate on making this information available to
our coreference resolution system, e.g. via semantic
similarity computation.
Finally, since Wikipedia is available in many lan-
guages, we believe it is worth performing experi-
ments in a multilingual setting. Accordingly, we are
currently testing a website2 that will allow us to col-
lect word relatedness judgements from native speak-
2Available at http://www.eml-research.de/nlp/353-TC.
11
Cybernetics
Artificial Intelligence
Natural Language Processing
Artificial Intelligence applications Cognitive architecture
Computer Science
Computational Linguistics
Speech recognition
Cognition
Cognitive Science
Linguistics
Philosophy
Branches of philosophy
Ontology
MetaphysicsLogic
PataphysicsMathematical logic
Mathematics
Thought
Abstraction
Belief
(a) current category graph
Cybernetics
Artificial Intelligence
Natural Language Processing
 PART-OF
Artificial Intelligence applications Cognitive architecture
Computer Science
Computational Linguistics
 PART-OFSpeech recognition
 PART-OF IS-A
Cognition
Cognitive Science
Linguistics
 IS-A
Philosophy
Branches of philosophy
 IS-A
Ontology
 PART-OF
MetaphysicsLogic
 IS-A
Pataphysics
 IS-NOT
Mathematical logic
 IS-A
Mathematics
 PART-OF
Thought
Abstraction
Belief
(b) category graph augmented with semantic relations
Figure 3: Inducing explicit semantic relations between categories in Wikipedia
ers of German, French and Italian, in order to trans-
late the semantic relatedness dataset from Finkel-
stein et al (2002) and test our methodology with
languages other than English.
4 Conclusions
In this paper we presented our previous efforts on us-
ing Wikipedia as a semantic knowledge source. We
aim in the future to induce an ontology from its col-
laboratively generated categorization graph. We be-
lieve that our work opens up exciting new challenges
for the AI and NLP research community, e.g. how to
handle the noise included in such knowledge bases
and how to fully structure the information given in
the form of only partially structured text and rela-
tions between knowledge base entries.
Acknowledgements: This work has been funded
by the Klaus Tschira Foundation, Heidelberg, Ger-
many. The author has been supported by a KTF
grant (09.003.2004).
References
Budanitsky, A. & G. Hirst (2006). Evaluating WordNet-based
measures of semantic distance. Computational Linguistics,
32(1).
Domingos, P., S. Kok, H. Poon, M. Richardson & P. Singla
(2006). Unifying logical and statistical AI. In Proc. of AAAI-
06, pp. 2?7.
Fellbaum, C. (Ed.) (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Finkelstein, L., E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin, Z. Solan,
G. Wolfman & E. Ruppin (2002). Placing search in context:
The concept revisited. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 20(1):116?131.
Hearst, M. A. (1992). Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from
large text corpora. In Proc. of COLING-92, pp. 539?545.
Hirst, G. & D. St-Onge (1998). Lexical chains as repre-
sentations of context for the detection and correction of
malapropisms. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database, pp. 305?332. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Jarmasz, M. & S. Szpakowicz (2003). Roget?s Thesaurus and
semantic similarity. In Proc. of RANLP-03, pp. 212?219.
Kim, S. N. & T. Baldwin (2005). Automatic interpretation
of noun compounds using WordNet similarity. In Proc. of
IJCNLP-05, pp. 945?956.
Kohomban, U. S. & W. S. Lee (2005). Learning semantic
classes for word sense disambiguation. In Proc. of ACL-05,
pp. 34?41.
McCarthy, J. (1959). Programs with common sense. In Pro-
ceedings of the Teddington Conference on the Mechanization
of Thought Processes, pp. 75?91.
Mihalcea, R., C. Corley & C. Strapparava (2006). Corpus-based
and knowledge-based measures of text semantic similarity.
In Proc. of AAAI-06, pp. 775?780.
Miller, G. A. & W. G. Charles (1991). Contextual correlates
of semantic similarity. Language and Cognitive Processes,
6(1):1?28.
Monz, C. & M. de Rijke (2001). Light-weight entailment
checking for computational semantics. In Proc. of ICoS-3,
pp. 59?72.
Morin, E. & C. Jacquemin (1999). Projecting corpus-based se-
mantic links on a thesaurus. In Proc. of ACL-99, pp. 389?
396.
Patwardhan, S., S. Banerjee & T. Pedersen (2005). SenseRe-
late::TargetWord ? A generalized framework for word sense
disambiguation. In Proc. of AAAI-05.
Ponzetto, S. P. & M. Strube (2006). Exploiting semantic role
labeling, WordNet and Wikipedia for coreference resolution.
In Proc. of HLT-NAACL-06, pp. 192?199.
Punyakanok, V., D. Roth, W. Yih & D. Zimak (2006). Learning
and inference over constrained output. In Proc. of IJCAI-05,
pp. 1117?1123.
Rada, R., H. Mili, E. Bicknell & M. Blettner (1989). Devel-
opment and application of a metric to semantic nets. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 19(1):17?
30.
Soon, W. M., H. T. Ng & D. C. Y. Lim (2001). A machine
learning approach to coreference resolution of noun phrases.
Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521?544.
Stevenson, M. & M. Greenwood (2005). A semantic approach
to IE pattern induction. In Proc. of ACL-05, pp. 379?386.
Strube, M. & S. P. Ponzetto (2006). WikiRelate! Computing
semantic relatedness using Wikipedia. In Proc. of AAAI-06,
pp. 1419?1424.
12
