NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 27?28,
Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Hidden Information State Dialogue Manager:
A Real-World POMDP-Based System
Steve Young, Jost Schatzmann, Blaise Thomson, Karl Weilhammer, Hui Ye
Cambridge University Engineering Department
Trumpington Street, Cambridge, CB21PZ, United Kingdom
{sjy, js532, brmt2, kw278, hy216}@eng.cam.ac.uk
Abstract
The Hidden Information State (HIS)
Dialogue System is the first trainable
and scalable implementation of a spoken
dialog system based on the Partially-
Observable Markov-Decision-Process
(POMDP) model of dialogue. The system
responds to n-best output from the speech
recogniser, maintains multiple concurrent
dialogue state hypotheses, and provides
a visual display showing how competing
hypotheses are ranked. The demo is
a prototype application for the Tourist
Information Domain and achieved a task
completion rate of over 90% in a recent
user study.
1 Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes for Dialogue Systems
Recent work on statistical models for spoken di-
alogue systems has argued that Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) provide
a principled mathematical framework for modeling
the uncertainty inherent in human-machine dialogue
(Williams, 2006; Young, 2006; Williams and Young,
2007). Briefly speaking, POMDPs extend the tra-
ditional fully-observable Markov Decision Process
(MDP) framework by maintaining a belief state, ie.
a probability distribution over dialogue states. This
enables the dialogue manager to avoid and recover
from recognition errors by sharing and shifting prob-
ability mass between multiple hypotheses of the cur-
rent dialogue state. The framework also naturally
incorporates n-best lists of multiple recognition hy-
potheses coming from the speech recogniser.
Due to the vast number of possible dialogue states
and policies, the use of POMDPs in practical dia-
logue systems is far from straightforward. The size
of the belief state scales linearly with the number of
dialogue states and belief state updates at every turn
during a dialogue require all state probabilities to be
recomputed. This is too computationally intensive
to be practical with current technology. Worse than
that, the complexity involved in policy optimisation
grows exponentially with the number of states and
system actions and neither exact nor approximate al-
gorithms exist that provide a tractable solution for
systems with thousands of states.
2 The Hidden Information State (HIS)
Dialogue Manager
The Hidden Information State (HIS) dialogue man-
ager presented in this demonstration is the first train-
able and scalable dialogue system based on the
POMDP model. As described in (Young, 2006;
Young et al, 2007) it partitions the state space using
a tree-based representation of user goals so that only
a small set of partition beliefs needs to be updated
at every turn. In order to make policy optimisation
tractable, a much reduced summary space is main-
tained in addition to the master state space. Policies
are optimised in summary space and the selected
summary actions are then mapped back to master
space to form system actions. Apart from some very
simple ontology definitions, the dialog manager has
no application dependent heuristics.
The system uses a grid-based discretisation of the
27
Figure 1: The HIS Demo System is a Tourist Infor-
mation application for a fictitious town
state space and online -greedy policy optimisation.
While this offers the potential for online adaptation
with real users at a later stage, a simulated user is
needed to bootstrap the training process. A novel
agenda-based simulation technique was used for this
step, as described in (Schatzmann et al, 2007).
3 The HIS Demo System
The HIS demo system is a prototype application for
the Tourist Information domain. Users are assumed
to be visiting a fictitious town called ?Jasonville?
(see Fig. 1) and need to find a suitable hotel, bar
or restaurant subject to certain constraints. Exam-
ples of task scenarios are ?finding a cheap Chinese
restaurant near the post office in the centre of town?
or ?a wine bar with Jazz music on the riverside?.
Once a venue is found, users may request further in-
formation such as the phone number or the address.
At run-time, the system provides a visual display
(see Fig. 2) which shows how competing dialogue
state hypotheses are being ranked. This allows de-
velopers to gain a better understanding of the inter-
nal operation of the system.
4 Demo System Performance
In a recent user study the demo system was evalu-
ated by 40 human subjects. In total, 160 dialogues
were recorded with an average Word-Error-Rate of
29.8%. The performance of the system was mea-
sured based on the recommendation of a correct
venue and achieved a task completion rate of 90.6%
with an average number of 5.59 dialogue turns to
completion (Thomson et al, 2007).
Figure 2: A system screenshot showing the ranking
of competing dialogue state hypotheses
The results demonstrate that POMDPs facilitate
design and implementation of spoken dialogue sys-
tems, and that the implementation used in the HIS
dialogue manager can be scaled to handle real world
tasks. The user study results also show that a
simulated user can be successfully used to train a
POMDP dialogue policy that performs well in ex-
periments with real users.
5 Accompanying materials
The demo system and related materials are accessi-
ble online at our website
http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/research/dialogue/.
References
J. Schatzmann, B. Thomson, K. Weilhammer, H. Ye, and
S. Young. 2007. Agenda-Based User Simulation for Boot-
strapping a POMDP Dialogue System. In Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL, Rochester, NY.
B. Thomson, J. Schatzmann, K. Weilhammer, H. Ye, and
S. Young. 2007. Training a real-world POMDP-based Di-
alogue System. In Proceedings of Bridging the Gap: Aca-
demic and Industrial Research in Dialog Technology, Work-
shop at HLT/NAACL, Rochester, NY.
J. D. Williams and S. Young. 2007. Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes for Spoken Dialog Systems.
Computer Speech and Language, 21(2):231?422.
J. D. Williams. 2006. Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes for Spoken Dialogue Management. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge.
S. Young, J. Schatzmann, K. Weilhammer, and H. Ye. 2007.
The Hidden Information State Approach to Dialog Manage-
ment. In Proc. of ICASSP (forthcoming), Honolulu, Hawaii.
S. Young. 2006. Using POMDPs for Dialog Management. In
Proc. of IEEE/ACL SLT, Palm Beach, Aruba.
28
