Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 508?515,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Statistical Phrase-based Post-editing
Michel Simard Cyril Goutte
Interactive Language Technologies
National Research Council of Canada
Gatineau, Canada, K1A 0R6
FirstName.LastName@nrc.gc.ca
Pierre Isabelle
Abstract
We propose to use a statistical phrase-
based machine translation system in a
post-editing task: the system takes as in-
put raw machine translation output (from
a commercial rule-based MT system), and
produces post-edited target-language text.
We report on experiments that were per-
formed on data collected in precisely such
a setting: pairs of raw MT output and
their manually post-edited versions. In our
evaluation, the output of our automatic
post-editing (APE) system is not only bet-
ter quality than the rule-based MT (both
in terms of the BLEU and TER metrics),
it is also better than the output of a state-
of-the-art phrase-based MT system used
in standalone translation mode. These re-
sults indicate that automatic post-editing
constitutes a simple and efficient way of
combining rule-based and statistical MT
technologies.
1 Introduction
The quality of machine translation (MT) is gener-
ally considered insufficient for use in the field with-
out a significant amount of human correction. In the
translation world, the term post-editing is often used
to refer to the process of manually correcting MT
output. While the conventional wisdom is that post-
editing MT is usually not cost-efficient compared to
full human translation, there appear to be situations
where it is appropriate and even profitable. Unfortu-
nately, there are few reports in the literature about
such experiences (but see Allen (2004) for exam-
ples).
One of the characteristics of the post-editing task,
as opposed to the revision of human translation for
example, is its partly repetitive nature. Most MT
systems invariably produce the same output when
confronted with the same input; in particular, this
means that they tend to make the same mistakes over
and over again, which the post-editors must correct
repeatedly. Batch corrections are sometimes pos-
sible when multiple occurrences of the same mis-
take appear in the same document, but when it is
repeated over several documents, or equivalently,
when the output of the same machine translation
system is handled by multiple post-editors, then the
opportunities for factoring corrections become much
more complex. MT users typically try to reduce
the post-editing load by customizing their MT sys-
tems. However, in Rule-based Machine Translation
(RBMT), which still constitutes the bulk of the cur-
rent commercial offering, customization is usually
restricted to the development of ?user dictionaries?.
Not only is this time-consuming and expensive, it
can only fix a subset of the MT system?s problems.
The advent of Statistical Machine Translation,
and most recently phrase-based approaches (PBMT,
see Marcu and Wong (2002), Koehn et al (2003))
into the commercial arena seems to hold the promise
of a solution to this problem: because the MT sys-
tem learns directly from existing translations, it can
be automatically customized to new domains and
tasks. However, the success of this operation cru-
508
cially depends on the amount of training data avail-
able. Moreover, the current state of the technology
is still insufficient for consistently producing human
readable translations.
This state of affairs has prompted some to ex-
amine the possibility of automating the post-editing
process itself, at least as far as ?repetitive errors? are
concerned. Allen and Hogan (2000) sketch the out-
line of such an automated post-editing (APE) sys-
tem, which would automatically learn post-editing
rules from a tri-parallel corpus of source, raw MT
and post-edited text. Elming (2006) suggests using
tranformation-based learning to automatically ac-
quire error-correcting rules from such data; however,
the proposed method only applies to lexical choice
errors. Knight and Chander (1994) also argue in fa-
vor of using a separate APE module, which is then
portable across multiple MT systems and language
pairs, and suggest that the post-editing task could be
performed using statistical machine translation tech-
niques. To the best of our knowledge, however, this
idea has never been implemented.
In this paper, we explore the idea of using a
PBMT system as an automated post-editor. The un-
derlying intuition is simple: if we collect a paral-
lel corpus of raw machine-translation output, along
with its human-post-edited counterpart, we can train
the system to translate from the former into the lat-
ter. In section 2, we present the case study that mo-
tivates our work and the associated data. In section
3, we describe the phrase-based post-editing model
that we use for improving the output of the auto-
matic translation system. In section 4, we illus-
trate this on a dataset of moderate size containing
job ads and their translation. With less than 500k
words of training material, the phrase-based MT
system already outperforms the rule-based MT base-
line. However, a phrase-based post-editing model
trained on the output of that baseline outperforms
both by a fairly consistent margin. The resulting
BLEU score increases by up to 50% (relative) and
the TER is cut by one third.
2 Background
2.1 Context
The Canadian government?s department of Human
Resources and Social Development (HRSDC) main-
tains a web site called Job Bank,1 where poten-
tial employers can post ads for open positions in
Canada. Over one million ads are posted on Job
Bank every year, totalling more than 180 million
words. By virtue of Canada?s Official Language Act,
HRSDC is under legal obligation to post all ads in
both French and English. In practice, this means
that ads submitted in English must be translated into
French, and vice-versa.
To address this task, the department has put to-
gether a complex setup, involving text databases,
translation memories, machine translation and hu-
man post-editing. Employers submit ads to the Job
Bank website by means of HTML forms containing
?free text? data fields. Some employers do period-
ical postings of identical ads; the department there-
fore maintains a database of previously posted ads,
along with their translations, and new ads are sys-
tematically checked against this database. The trans-
lation of one third of all ads posted on the Job Bank
is actually recuperated this way. Also, employers
will often post ads which, while not entirely identi-
cal, still contain identical sentences. The department
therefore also maintains a translation memory of in-
dividual sentence pairs from previously posted ads;
another third of all text is typically found verbatim
in this way.
The remaining text is submitted to machine trans-
lation, and the output is post-edited by human ex-
perts. Overall, only a third of all submitted text re-
quires human intervention. This is nevertheless very
labour-intensive, as the department tries to ensure
that ads are posted at most 24 hours after submis-
sion. The Job Bank currently employs as many as
20 post-editors working full-time, most of whom are
junior translators.
2.2 The Data
HRSDC kindly provided us with a sample of data
from the Job Bank. This corpus consists in a collec-
tion of parallel ?blocks? of textual data. Each block
contains three parts: the source language text, as
submitted by the employer, its machine-translation,
produced by a commercial rule-based MT system,
and its final post-edited version, as posted on the
website.
1http://www.jobbank.gc.ca
509
The entire corpus contains less than one million
words in each language. This corresponds to the
data processed in less than a week by the Job Bank.
Basic statistics are given in Table 1 (see Section 4.1).
Most blocks contain only one sentence, but some
blocks may contain many sentences. The longest
block contains 401 tokens over several sentences.
Overall, blocks are quite short: the median number
of tokens per source block is only 9 for French-to-
English and 7 for English-to-French. As a conse-
quence, no effort was made to segment the blocks
further for processing.
We evaluated the quality of the Machine Transla-
tion contained in the corpus using the Translation
Edit Rate (TER, cf. Snover et al (2006)). The
TER counts the number of edit operations, including
phrasal shifts, needed to change a hypothesis trans-
lation into an adequate and fluent sentence, and nor-
malised by the length of the final sentence. Note
that this closely corresponds to the post-editing op-
eration performed on the Job Bank application. This
motivates the choice of TER as the main metric in
our case, although we also report BLEU scores in
our experiments. Note that the emphasis of our work
is on reducing the post-edition effort, which is well
estimated by TER. It is not directly on quality so the
question of which metric better estimates translation
quality is not so relevant here.
The global TER (over all blocks) are 58.77%
for French-to-English and 53.33% for English-to-
French. This means that more than half the words
have to be post-edited in some way (delete / substi-
tute / insert / shift). This apparently harsh result is
somewhat mitigated by two factors.
First, the distribution of the block-based TER2
shows a large disparity in performance, cf. Figure 1.
About 12% of blocks have a TER higher than 100%:
this is because the TER normalises on the length of
the references, and if the raw MT output is longer
than its post-edited counterpart, then the number of
edit operations may be larger than that length.3 At
the other end of the spectrum, it is also clear that
many blocks have low TER. In fact more than 10%
2Contrary to BLEU or NIST, the TER naturally decomposes
into block-based scores.
3A side effect of the normalisation is that larger TER are
measured on small sentences, e.g. 3 errors for 2 reference
words.
Histogram of TER for rule?based MT
TER for rule?based MT
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y
0 50 100 150
0
10
00
20
00
30
00
40
00
Figure 1: Distribution of TER on 39005 blocks from
the French-English corpus (thresholded at 150%).
have a TER of 0. The global score therefore hides a
large range of performance.
The second factor is that the TER measures the
distance to an adequate and uent result. A high
TER does not mean that the raw MT output is not
understandable. However, many edit operations may
be needed to make it fluent.
3 Phrase-based Post-editing
Translation post-editing can be viewed as a simple
transformation process, which takes as input raw
target-language text coming from a MT system, and
produces as output target-language text in which ?er-
rors? have been corrected. While the automation
of this process can be envisaged in many differ-
ent ways, the task is not conceptually very differ-
ent from the translation task itself. Therefore, there
doesn?t seem to be any good reason why a machine
translation system could not handle the post-editing
task. In particular, given such data as described in
Section 2.2, the idea of using a statistical MT system
for post-editing is appealing. Portage is precisely
such a system, which we describe here.
Portage is a phrase-based, statistical machine
translation system, developed at the National Re-
search Council of Canada (NRC) (Sadat et al,
510
2005). A version of the Portage system is made
available by the NRC to Canadian universities for
research and education purposes. Like other SMT
systems, it learns to translate from existing parallel
corpora.
The system translates text in three main phases:
preprocessing of raw data into tokens; decoding to
produce one or more translation hypotheses; and
error-driven rescoring to choose the best final hy-
pothesis. For languages such as French and English,
the first of these phases (tokenization) is mostly a
straightforward process; we do not describe it any
further here.
Decoding is the central phase in SMT, involv-
ing a search for the hypotheses t that have high-
est probabilities of being translations of the cur-
rent source sentence s according to a model for
P (t|s). Portage implements a dynamic program-
ming beam search decoding algorithm similar to that
of Koehn (2004), in which translation hypotheses
are constructed by combining in various ways the
target-language part of phrase pairs whose source-
language part matches the input. These phrase pairs
come from large phrase tables constructed by col-
lecting matching pairs of contiguous text segments
from word-aligned bilingual corpora.
Portage?s model for P (t|s) is a log-linear com-
bination of four main components: one or more n-
gram target-language models, one or more phrase
translation models, a distortion (word-reordering)
model, and a sentence-length feature. The phrase-
based translation model is similar to that of Koehn,
with the exception that phrase probability estimates
P (s?|t?) are smoothed using the Good-Turing tech-
nique (Foster et al, 2006). The distortion model is
also very similar to Koehn?s, with the exception of a
final cost to account for sentence endings.
Feature function weights in the loglinear model
are set using Och?s minium error rate algorithm
(Och, 2003). This is essentially an iterative two-step
process: for a given set of source sentences, generate
n-best translation hypotheses, that are representative
of the entire decoding search space; then, apply a
variant of Powell?s algorithm to find weights that op-
timize the BLEU score over these hypotheses, com-
pared to reference translations. This process is re-
peated until the set of translations stabilizes, i.e. no
new translations are produced at the decoding step.
To improve raw output from decoding, Portage re-
lies on a rescoring strategy: given a list of n-best
translations from the decoder, the system reorders
this list, this time using a more elaborate loglinear
model, incorporating more feature functions, in ad-
dition to those of the decoding model: these typ-
ically include IBM-1 and IBM-2 model probabili-
ties (Brown et al, 1993) and an IBM-1-based fea-
ture function designed to detect whether any word
in one language appears to have been left without
satisfactory translation in the other language; all of
these feature functions can be used in both language
directions, i.e. source-to-target and target-to-source.
In the experiments reported in the next section,
the Portage system is used both as a translation and
as an APE system. While we can think of a number
of modifications to such a system to better adapt it
to the post-editing task (some of which are discussed
later on), we have done no such modifications to the
system. In fact, whether the system is used for trans-
lation or post-editing, we have used exactly the same
translation model configuration and training proce-
dure.
4 Evaluation
4.1 Data and experimental setting
The corpus described in section 2.2 is available for
two language pairs: English-to-French and French-
to-English.4 In each direction, each block is avail-
able in three versions (or slices): the original text
(or source), the output of the commercial rule-based
MT system (or baseline) and the final, post-edited
version (or reference).
In each direction (French-to-English and English-
to-French), we held out two subsets of approxi-
mately 1000 randomly picked blocks. The valida-
tion set is used for testing the impact of various high-
level choices such as pre-processing, or for obtain-
ing preliminary results based on which we setup new
experiments. The test set is used only once, in order
to obtain the final experimental results reported here.
The rest of the data constitutes the training set,
which is split in two. We sampled a subset of
1000 blocks as train-2, which is used for optimiz-
4Note that, in a post-editing context, translation direction is
crucially important. It is not possible to use the same corpus in
both directions.
511
English-to-French French-to-English
Corpus words: words:
blocks source baseline reference blocks source baseline reference
train-1 28577 310k 382k 410k 36005 485k 501k 456k
train-2 1000 11k 14k 14k 1000 13k 14k 12k
validation 881 10k 13k 13k 966 13k 14k 12k
test 899 10k 12k 13k 953 13k 13k 12k
Table 1: Data and split used in our experiments, (in thousand words). ?baseline? is the output of the com-
mercial rule-based MT system and ?reference? is the final, post-edited text.
ing the log-linear model parameters used for decod-
ing and rescoring. The rest is the train-1 set, used
for estimating IBM translation models, constructing
phrasetables and estimating a target language model.
The composition of the various sets is detailed in
Table 1. All data was tokenized and lowercased;
all evaluations were performed independent of case.
Note that the validation and test sets were originally
made out of 1000 blocks sampled randomly from
the data. These sets turned out to contain blocks
identical to blocks from the training sets. Consider-
ing that these would normally have been handled by
the translation memory component (see the HRSDC
workflow description in Section 2.1), we removed
those blocks for which the source part was already
found in the training set (in either train-1 or train-2),
hence their smaller sizes.
In order to check the sensitivity of experimental
results to the choice of the train-2 set, we did a
run of preliminary experiments using different sub-
sets of 1000 blocks. The experimental results were
nearly identical and highly consistent, showing that
the choice of a particular train-2 subset has no in-
fluence on our conclusions. In the experiments re-
ported below, we therefore use a single identical
train-2 set.
We initially performed two sets of experiments
on this data. The first was intended to compare the
performance of the Portage PBMT system as an al-
ternative to the commercial rule-based MT system
on this type of data. In these experiments, English-
to-French and French-to-English translation systems
were trained on the source and reference (manually
post-edited target language) slices of the training set.
In addition to the target language model estimated
on the train-1 data, we used an external contribution,
Language TER BLEU
English-to-French
Baseline 53.5 32.9
Portage translation 53.7 36.0
Baseline + Portage APE 47.3 41.6
French-to-English
Baseline 59.3 31.2
Portage translation 43.9 41.0
Baseline + Portage APE 41.0 44.9
Table 2: Experimental Results: For TER, lower (er-
ror) is better, while for BLEU, higher (score) is bet-
ter. Best results are in bold.
a trigram target language model trained on a fairly
large quantity of data from the Canadian Hansard.
The goal of the second set of experiments was to
assess the potential of the Portage technology in au-
tomatic post-editing mode. Again, we built systems
for both language directions, but this time using the
existing rule-based MT output as source and the ref-
erence as target. Apart from the use of different
source data, the training procedure and system con-
figurations of the translation and post-editing sys-
tems were in all points identical.
4.2 Experimental results
The results of both experiments are presented in Ta-
ble 2. Results are reported both in terms of the TER
and BLEU metrics; Baseline refers to the commer-
cial rule-based MT output.
The first observation from these results is that,
while the performance of Portage in translation
mode is approximately equivalent to that of the base-
line system when translating into French, its perfor-
mance is much better than the baseline when trans-
lating into English. Two factors possibly contribute
512
to this result: first, the fact that the baseline system
itself performs better when translating into French;
second, and possibly more importantly, the fact that
we had access to less training data for English-to-
French translation.
The second observation is that when Portage is
used in automatic post-editing mode, on top of the
baseline MT system, it achieves better quality than
either of the two translation systems used on its own.
This appears to be true regardless of the translation
direction or metric. This is an extremely interesting
result, especially in light of how little data was actu-
ally available to train the post-editing system.
One aspect of statistical MT systems is that, con-
trary to rule-based systems, their performance (usu-
ally) increases as more training data is available. In
order to quantify this effect in our setting, we have
computed learning curves by training the Portage
translation and Portage APE systems on subsets of
the training data of increasing sizes. We start with
as little as 1000 blocks, which corresponds to around
10-15k words.
Figure 2 (next page) compares the learning rates
of the two competing approaches (Portage transla-
tion vs. Portage APE). Both approaches display very
steady learning rates (note the logarithmic scale for
training data size). These graphs strongly suggest
that both systems would continue to improve given
more training data. The most impressive aspect is
how little data is necessary to improve upon the
baseline, especially when translating into English:
as little as 8000 blocks (around 100k words) for di-
rect translation and 2000 blocks (around 25k words)
for automatic post-editing. This suggests that such
a post-editing setup might be worth implementing
even for specialized domains with very small vol-
umes of data.
4.3 Extensions
Given the encouraging results of the Portage APE
approach in the above experiments, we were curi-
ous to see whether a Portage+Portage combination
might be as successful: after all, if Portage was good
at correcting some other system?s output, could it
not manage to correct the output of another Portage
translator?
We tested this in two settings. First, we actu-
ally use the output of the Portage translation sys-
Language TER BLEU
English-to-French
Portage Job Bank 53.7 36.0
+ Portage APE 53.7 36.2
Portage Hansard 76.9 13.0
+ Portage APE 64.6 26.2
French-to-English
Portage Job Bank 43.9 41.0
+ Portage APE 43.9 41.4
Portage Hansard 80.1 14.0
+ Portage APE 57.7 28.6
Table 3: Portage translation - Portage APE system
combination experimental results.
tem obtained above, i.e. trained on the same data.
In our second experiment, we use the output of
a Portage translator trained on different domain
data (the Canadian Hansard), but with much larger
amounts of training material (over 85 million words
per language). In both sets of experiments, the
Portage APE system was trained as previously, but
using Portage translations of the Job Bank data as
input text.
The results of both experiments are presented in
Table 3. The first observation in these results is that
there is nothing to be gained from post-editing when
both the translation and APE systems are trained on
the same data sets (Portage Job Bank + Portage APE
experiments). In other words, the translation system
is apparently already making the best possible use of
the training data, and additional layers do not help
(but nor do they hurt, interestingly).
However, when the translation system has been
trained using distinct data (Portage Hansard +
Portage APE experiments), post-editing makes a
large difference, comparable to that observed with
the rule-based MT output provided with the Job
Bank data. In this case, however, the Portage trans-
lation system behaves very poorly in spite of the im-
portant size of the training set for this system, much
worse in fact than the ?baseline? system. This high-
lights the fact that both the Job Bank and Hansard
data are very much domain-specific, and that access
to appropriate training material is crucial for phrase-
based translation technology.
In this context, combining two phrase-based sys-
513
1000 2000 5000 10000 20000
40
45
50
55
60
TER learning curves
Training set size
TE
R
to English
to French
Post?edition
Translation
1000 2000 5000 10000 20000
0.
30
0.
35
0.
40
0.
45
BLEU learning curves
Training set size
BL
EU
to English
to French
Post?edition
Translation
Figure 2: TER and BLEU scores of the phrase-based post-editing models as the amount of training data
increases (log scale). The horizontal lines correspond to the performance of the baseline system (rule-based
translation).
tems as done here can be seen as a way of adapting
an existing MT system to a new text domain; the
APE system then acts as an ?adapter?, so to speak.
Note however that, in our experiments, this setup
doesn?t perform as well as a single Portage transla-
tion system, trained directly and exclusively on the
Job Bank data.
Such an adaptation strategy should be contrasted
with one in which the translation models of the
old and new domains are ?merged? to create a new
translation system. As mentioned earlier, Portage
allows using multiple phrase translation tables and
language models concurrently. For example, in the
current context, we can extract phrase tables and lan-
guage models from the Job Bank data, as when train-
ing the ?Portage Job Bank? translation system, and
then build a Portage translation model using both the
Hansard and Job Bank model components. Loglin-
ear model parameters are then optimized on the Job
Bank data, so as to find the model weights that best
fit the new domain.
In a straightforward implementation of this idea,
we obtained performances almost identical to those
of the Portage translation system trained solely on
Job Bank data. Upon closer examination of the
model parameters, we observed that Hansard model
components (language model, phrase tables, IBM
translation models) were systematically attributed
negligeable weights. Again, the amount of training
material for the new domain may be critical in chos-
ing between alternative adaptation mechanisms.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have proposed using a phrase-based MT sys-
tem to automatically post-edit the output of an-
other MT system, and have tested this idea with
the Portage MT system on the Job Bank data set, a
corpus of manually post-edited French-English ma-
chine translations. In our experiments, not only does
phrase-based APE significantly improve the quality
of the output translations, this approach outperforms
a standalone phrase-based translation system.
While these results are very encouraging, the
learning curves of Figure 2 suggest that the output
quality of the PBMT systems increases faster than
that of the APE systems as more data is used for
training. So while the combination strategy clearly
performs better with limited amounts of training
data, there is reason to believe that, given sufficient
training data, it would eventually be outperformed
514
by a direct phrase-based translation strategy. Of
course, this remains to be verified empirically, some-
thing which will obviously require more data than is
currently available to us. But this sort of behavior
is expectable: while both types of system improve
as more training data is used, inevitably some de-
tails of the source text will be lost by the front-end
MT system, which the APE system will never be
able to retrieve.5 Ultimately, the APE system will
be weighted down by the inherent limitations of the
front-end MT system.
One way around this problem would be to modify
the APE system so that it not only uses the base-
line MT output, but also the source-language input.
In the Portage system, this could be achieved, for
example, by introducing feature functions into the
log-linear model that relate target-language phrases
with the source-language text. This is one research
avenue that we are currently exploring.
Alternatively, we could combine these two in-
puts differently within Portage: for example, use
the source-language text as the primary input, and
use the raw MT output as a secondary source. In
this perspective, if we have multiple MT systems
available, nothing precludes using all of them as
providers of secondary inputs. In such a setting, the
phrase-based system becomes a sort of combination
MT system. We intend to explore such alternatives
in the near future as well.
Acknowledgements
The work reported here was part of a collaboration
between the National Research Council of Canada
and the department of Human Resources and Social
Development Canada. Special thanks go to Souad
Benayyoub, Jean-Fre?de?ric Hu?bsch and the rest of
the Job Bank team at HRSDC for preparing data that
was essential to this project.
References
Jeffrey Allen and Christofer Hogan. 2000. Towardthe development of a post-editing module for Ma-chine Translation raw output: a new productivity tool
for processing controlled language. In Third Inter-
5As a trivial example, imagine an MT system that ?deletes?
out-of-vocabulary words.
national Controlled Language Applications Workshop(CLAW2000), Washington, USA.
Jeffrey Allen. 2004. Case study: Implementing MT forthe translation of pre-sales marketing and post-salessoftware deployment documentation. In Proceedingsof AMTA-2004, pages 1?6, Washington, USA.
Peter F Brown, Stephen A Della Pietra, Vincent J DellaPietra, and Robert L Mercer. 1993. The Mathematicsof Statistical Machine Translation: Parameter Estima-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263?311.
Jakob Elming. 2006. Transformation-based correctionsof rule-based MT. In Proceedings of the EAMT 11thAnnual Conference, Oslo, Norway.
George Foster, Roland Kuhn, and Howard Johnson.
2006. Phrasetable Smoothing for Statistical MachineTranslation. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006, pages53?61, Sydney, Australia.
Kevin Knight and Ishwar Chander. 1994. Automated
Postediting of Documents. In Proceedings of NationalConference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 779?784,Seattle, USA.
Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Proceed-ings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pages 127?133, Edmonton,Canada.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a Beam Search De-
coder for Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Transla-tion Models. In Proceedings of AMTA 2004, pages115?124, Washington, USA.
Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A Phrase-
Based, Joint Probability Model for Statistical Ma-chine Translation. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2002,Philadelphia, USA.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate trainingin Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings ofACL-2003, pages 160?167, Sapporo, Japan.
Fatiha Sadat, Howard Johnson, Akakpo Agbago, George
Foster, Roland Kuhn, Joel Martin, and Aaron Tikuisis.2005. PORTAGE: A Phrase-Based Machine Trans-lation System. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshopon Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 129?132,
Ann Arbor, USA.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A Study
of Translation Edit Rate with Targeted Human An-notation. In Proceedings of AMTA-2006, Cambridge,USA.
515
