NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 11?12,
Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Cedit ? Semantic Networks Manual Annotation Tool
Va?clav Nova?k
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Charles University
Malostranske? na?m. 25, 11800 Praha, Czech Republic
novak@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
We present a demonstration of an annota-
tion tool designed to annotate texts into a
semantic network formalism called Multi-
Net. The tool is based on a Java Swing
GUI and allows the annotators to edit
nodes and relations in the network, as well
as links between the nodes in the network
and the nodes from the previous layer of
annotation. The data processed by the tool
in this presentation are from the English
version of the Wall Street Journal.
1 Introduction
Cedit is a part of a project to create a rich resource
of manually annotated semantic structures (Nova?k,
2007) as a new layer of the Prague Dependency
Treebank (Sgall et al, 2004). The new layer is
based on the MultiNet paradigm described in (Hel-
big, 2006).
1.1 Prague Dependency Treebank
The Prague Dependency Treebank is a language
resource containing a deep manual analysis of
text (Sgall et al, 2004). PDT contains three lay-
ers of annotation, namely morphological, analytical
(shallow dependency syntax) and tectogrammatical
(deep dependency syntax). The units of each annota-
tion level are linked to corresponding units from the
shallower level. The morphological units are linked
directly to the original text.
The theoretical basis of the treebank is described
by the Functional Generative Description of lan-
guage system (Sgall et al, 1986).
1.2 MultiNet
Multilayered Extended Semantic Networks (Multi-
Net), described in (Helbig, 2006), provide a univer-
sally applicable formalism for treatment of semantic
phenomena of natural language. They offer distinct
advantages over classical predicate calculus and its
derivatives. Moreover, semantic networks are con-
venient for manual annotation because they are more
intuitive.
MultiNet?s semantic representation of natural lan-
guage is independent of the language being anno-
tated. However, syntax obviously varies across lan-
guages. To bridge the gap between different lan-
guages we can the deep syntactico-semantic repre-
sentation available in the Functional Generative De-
scription framework.
2 Project Goals
The main goals of the project are:
? Test the completeness and intuitiveness of
MultiNet specification
? Measure differences in semantic networks of
parallel texts
? Enrich the Prague Dependency Treebank with
a new layer of annotation
? Provide data for supervised training of text-to-
semantic-network transformation
11
? Test the extensibility of MultiNet to other lan-
guages than German
3 Cedit
The presented tool has two key components de-
scribed in this section.
3.1 Input/Output processing
The input module of the tool loads XML files in
Prague Markup Language (PML) and creates an in-
ternal representation of the semantic network, tec-
togrammatical layer, analytical layer, and the surface
text (Pajas and S?te?pa?nek, 2005). There is also an op-
tion to use files with named entity annotations. The
sentences in this demo are all annotated with named
entities.
The XML schema for the semantic network is an
application of the Prague Markup Language.
3.2 Network GUI
The annotation GUI is implemented using Java
Swing (Elliott et al, 2002). The key features of the
tool presented in the demonstration are:
? Editing links between the semantic network
and the tectogrammatical layer
? Adding and removing nodes
? Connecting nodes with directed edges
? Connecting edges with directed edges (i.e., cre-
ating relations on the metalevel)
? Editing attributes of both nodes and edges
? Undoing and redoing operations
? Reusing concepts from previous sentences
4 Related Work
There are various tools for annotation of the Prague
Dependency Treebank. The Tred tool (Hajic? et
al., 2001), for example, allows users to edit many
PML applications, even those that have never been
seen before. This functionality is enabled by roles
in PML specification (Pajas and S?te?pa?nek, 2005).
MultiNet structures can be edited using MWR
tool (Gnrlich, 2000), but this tool is not primarily
intended for annotation; it serves more as an in-
terface to tools automatically transforming German
sentences into MultiNet.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by Czech Academy of Sci-
ence grant 1ET201120505 and Czech Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports project LC536. The
views expressed are not necessarily endorsed by the
sponsors.
References
James Elliott, Robert Eckstein, Marc Loy, David Wood,
and Brian Cole. 2002. Java Swing. O?Reilly.
Carsten Gnrlich. 2000. MultiNet/WR: A Knowledge En-
gineering Toolkit for Natural Language Information.
Technical Report 278, University Hagen, Hagen, Ger-
many.
Jan Hajic?, Barbora Vidova?-Hladka?, and Petr Pajas. 2001.
The Prague Dependency Treebank: Annotation Struc-
ture and Support. In Proceedings of the IRCS
Workshop on Linguistic Databases, pages 105?114,
Philadelphia, USA. University of Pennsylvania.
Hermann Helbig. 2006. Knowledge Representation and
the Semantics of Natural Language. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg.
Va?clav Nova?k. 2007. Large Semantic Network Man-
ual Annotation. In Proceedings of 7th International
Workshop on Computational Semantics, pages 355?
358, Tilburg, Netherlands.
Petr Pajas and Jan S?te?pa?nek. 2005. A Generic XML-
Based Format for Structured Linguistic Annotation
and Its Application to Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0. Technical Report 29, UFAL MFF UK, Praha.
Petr Sgall, Eva Hajic?ova?, and Jarmila Panevova?. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and Prag-
matic Aspects. D. Reidel Publishing company, Do-
drecht, Boston, London.
Petr Sgall, Jarmila Panevova?, and Eva Hajic?ova?. 2004.
Deep Syntactic Annotation: Tectogrammatical Repre-
sentation and Beyond. In A. Meyers, editor, Proceed-
ings of the HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers
in Corpus Annotation, pages 32?38, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
12
