Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 17?24,
Rochester, NY, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Avoiding and Resolving Initiative Conflicts in Dialogue?
Fan Yang and Peter A. Heeman
Center for Spoken Language Understanding
OGI School of Science & Engineering
Oregon Health & Science University
{fly,heeman}@cslu.ogi.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we report on an empirical study
on initiative conflicts in human-human conver-
sation. We examined these conflicts in two
corpora of task-oriented dialogues. The re-
sults show that conversants try to avoid initia-
tive conflicts, but when these conflicts occur,
they are efficiently resolved by linguistic de-
vices, such as volume.
1 Introduction
Current computer dialogue systems tend to be system-
initiative. Although there are some mixed-initiative sys-
tems that allow the user to make a request or state a goal,
such systems are limited in how they follow natural ini-
tiative behavior. An example is where the system always
releases the turn whenever the user barges in. However,
in a complex domain where the computer system and hu-
man user are collaborating on a task, the computer sys-
tem might need to interrupt the human user, or might
even need to fight with the human user over the turn.
Thus the next generation of computer dialogue systems
need a better model of initiative (Horvitz, 1999). In what
situations can the system try to take initiative from the
user? What devices can the system use to fight for ini-
tiative? We propose examining human-human conversa-
tion to answer these questions. Once we understand the
conventions people adopt in negotiating initiative, we can
implement them in a computer dialogue system to create
natural interactivity.
In this research work, we examined two corpora of
human-human conversation: the Trains corpus (Heeman
and Allen, 1995) and the MTD corpus (Heeman et al,
2005). The research purpose is to understand conver-
sants? behavior with initiative conflicts, which we define
a situation where both conversants try to direct the con-
versation at the same time, but one of them fails. We
?This work was funded by the National Science Foundation
under IIS-0326496.
found that (1) conversants try to avoid initiative con-
flicts; and (2) initiative conflicts, when they occur, are
efficiently resolved by linguistic devices, such as volume.
In Section 2, we review related research work on mod-
eling initiative and turn-taking. Dialogue initiative and
turn-taking are two intertwined research topics. When
conversants fight to show initiative, they are also fighting
for the turn to speak. In Section 3, we describe the two
corpora and their annotations. In Section 4, we define
initiative conflict and give an example. In Section 5, we
present the evidence that conversants try to avoid initia-
tive conflicts. In Section 6, we present evidence that ini-
tiative conflicts are efficiently resolved by linguistic de-
vices. We discuss our findings in Section 7 and future
work in Section 8.
2 Related Research
2.1 Initiative Models
Researchers have been investigating how people man-
age dialogue initiative in their conversation. Whittaker
and Stenton (1988) proposed rules for tracking initiative
based on utterance types; for example, statements, pro-
posals, and questions show initiative, while answers and
acknowledgements do not. Smith (1993) proposed four
different initiative strategies with differing amounts of
control by the system. Chu-Carrol and Brown (1998)
distinguished dialogue initiative from task initiative, and
proposed an evidential model of tracking both of them.
Cohen et al (1998) proposed presenting initiative in dif-
ferent strengths. Some researchers related initiative to
discourse structure. Walker and Whittaker (1990) found
a correlation between initiative switches and discourse
segments. Strayer et al (2003) proposed the restricted
initiative model in which the initiator of a discourse seg-
ment, who introduces the discourse segment purpose, is
in control of the segment and shows most of the initia-
tive. These models allowed the possibility that multiple
conversants will want to show initiative at the same time;
however, none of them addressed initiative conflicts.
Guinn (1998) studied another type of initiative, task
initiative, which is about directing the problem-solving
17
of a domain goal. Guinn proposed that the person who
is more capable of coordinating the current goal is the
person who should be leading the dialogue. Initiative
switches between conversants as goals get pushed and
popped from the problem-solving stack. However, be-
cause conversants only have incomplete information, ini-
tiative conflicts might occur when conversants overesti-
mate their own capability or underestimate the other?s.
Guinn proposed a negotiation model to resolve these con-
flicts of task initiative. Conversants negotiate by inform-
ing each other of positive and negative information of
their plans to achieve the goal. By comparing each other?s
plan, the conversant whose plan has the higher probabil-
ity of success takes initiative. Guinn?s research on con-
flicts of task initiative, however, has little bearing on con-
flicts of dialogue initiative. For dialogue initiative, very
often, one of the conversants just gives up the attempt
very quickly, without giving a justification. As stated by
Haller and Fossum (1999):?... conflicts are often simple
clashes that result from both participants trying to take
the initiative at the same time. Such conflicts do not nec-
essarily require complex negotiation to resolve. Often,
unwritten rules based on factors like social roles, personal
assertiveness, and the current locus of control play a part
in determining who will give away.? However, Haller and
Fossum did not further investigate how conversants effi-
ciently resolve conflicts of dialogue initiative.
2.2 Turn-Taking and Initiative
Turn-taking in conversation is highly related to initiative.
Conversants have to possess the turn in order to show ini-
tiative. When conversants are fighting for initiative, they
are also fighting for the turn to speak. Thus the mech-
anisms of turn-taking might share some similarity with
initiative. On the other hand, turn-taking is different from
initiative; for example, an answer takes a turn, but an-
swering does not show initiative.
Turn-taking in conversation has been discussed in lin-
guistics literature. Duncan (1974) examined cues (ges-
ture, acoustic, and linguistic) that conversants use to sig-
nal turn-taking or turn-releasing. A model based on these
signals was created to account for conversants? turn-
taking behavior. In this model, miscues are the cause of
overlapping speech: for example, the hearer misrecog-
nizes the speaker?s cue to keep the turn, or the speaker
fails to properly signal.
Sacks et al (1974) proposed a set of rules for turn-
taking: the current speaker can select somebody else to
speak; otherwise, hearers can self-select to speak; oth-
erwise, the speaker can self-select to speak. This model
suggested that overlapping speech results from either the
hearer waiting too long to speak, or the speaker not wait-
ing long enough.
Schegloff (2000) examined overlapping speech in de-
tail in human conversation. He concluded that (1) fights
for turn are often accompanied with sudden acoustic al-
teration, such as louder volume, higher pitch, and faster
or slower speaking rate; (2) the vast majority of fights for
turn are resolved very quickly; (3) fights for turn are re-
solved through an interactive procedure, e.g. syllable by
syllable negotiation, using devices such as volume, pitch,
and speaking rate. However, his analysis only consisted
of a few examples; no statistical evidence was given. It
is thus unclear whether his conclusions represent human
conventions of initiative conflict, or are occasional behav-
ior that would only occur under special circumstances.
3 Corpora and Annotations
To understand human behavior in initiative conflicts, we
examined two corpora, the Trains corpus and the MTD
corpus. These two corpora have very different domain se-
tups. The distinct behavior seen in each corpus will help
inform us how domain settings affect initiative, while the
common behavior will help inform us the cross-domain
human conventions.
3.1 The Trains Corpus
The Trains corpus is a collection of human-human task-
oriented dialogues, in which two participants work to-
gether to formulate a plan involving the manufacture and
transportation of goods. One participant, the user, has a
goal to solve; and the other participant, the system, knows
the detailed domain information including how long it
takes to ship and manufacture goods.
We annotated eight Trains dialogues totaling about
45 minutes using the tool DialogueView (Yang et al,
2007). We tagged each utterance with a simplified
DAMSL scheme (Core and Allen, 1997). Utterances
were tagged as forward or backward functions, stalls, or
non-contributions. Forward functions include statements,
questions, checks and suggestions. Backward functions
include agreements, answers, acknowledgments, repeti-
tions and completions. Examples of stalls are ?um? and
?let?s see?, used by a conversant to signal uncertainty of
what to say next or how to say it. Non-contributions in-
clude abandoned and ignored utterances. The flow of
the dialog would not change if non-contributions were
removed.
Hierarchical discourse structure was annotated follow-
ing Strayer et al (2003). To determine whether a group
of utterances form a discourse segment, we took into ac-
count whether there exists a shared goal introduced by
one of the conversants (cf. Grosz and Sidner, 1986).
3.2 The MTD Corpus
The MTD corpus contains dialogues in which a pair of
participants play two games via conversation: an ongoing
18
game that takes a relatively long time to finish and an
interruption game that can be done in a couple turns but
has a time constraint. Both games are done on computers.
Players are separated so that they cannot see each other.
In the ongoing game, the two players work together to
assemble a poker hand of a full house, flush, straight, or
four of a kind. Each player has three cards in hand, which
the other cannot see. Players take turns drawing an extra
card and then discarding one until they find a poker hand,
for which they earn 50 points. To discourage players from
simply rifling through the cards to look for a specific card
without talking, one point is deducted for each picked-up
card, and ten points for a missed or incorrect poker hand.
To complete this game, players converse to share card
information, and explore and establish strategies based
on the combined cards in their hands.
From time to time, the computer generates a prompt
for one player to start an interruption game to find out
whether the other player has a certain picture on the
screen. The interruption game has a time constraint of
10, 25, or 40 seconds, which is (pseudo) randomly deter-
mined. Players get five points for the interruption game
if the correct answer is given in time. Players are told to
earn as many points as possible.
We annotated six MTD dialogues totaling about 90
minutes. Utterances were segmented based on player?s
intention so that each utterance has only one dialogue
act that is to share information, explore strategies, sug-
gest strategies, or maintain an established strategy (Toh
et al, 2006). We applied the same simplified DAMSL
scheme on utterance tag annotations. Figure 1 shows an
annotated excerpt of an MTD dialogue. We grouped ut-
terances into blocks. Block b21 is a game block in which
conversants completed a poker hand. Blocks b22 and b23
are two card blocks in which conversants picked up a
new card, discussed what they had in hand, and chose
a card to discard. Block b24 is an interruption segment
in which conversants switched their conversation to the
interruption game. No claim is made that the game and
card blocks are discourse segments according to Grosz
and Sidner?s definition (1986).
4 Defining Initiative Conflicts
An initiative conflict occurs when a conversant?s attempt
to show initiative fails because someone else is show-
ing initiative at the same time. Following Whittaker
and Stenton (1988), we use utterance tags to determine
whether an utterance shows initiative: forward functions
show initiative while others do not. Non-contributions
are viewed as failed attempt to show initiative. Thus we
identify initiative conflicts as overlapping utterances that
involve either a forward function and a non-contribution
or two non-contributions.
Figure 2 gives an example of an initiative conflict from
Figure 1: An excerpt of an MTD dialogue
the MTD corpus. The top conversant says ?that?s pair of
threes and pair of fours?, which ends at time point A. Af-
ter a short pause, at time B, the bottom conversant asks
?how many threes do you have?, which is overlapped by
the top conversant?s second utterance ?I?ll drop? at time
C. The top conversant then abandons the attempt of show-
ing initiative at time D. Hence the bottom speaker is the
winner of this initiative conflict.
We use the term preceding-pause to refer to the time
interval between the end of the previous utterance and
the first utterance that is involved in the overlap (from A
to B in Figure 2). Offset refers to the interval between
the start times of the two overlapped utterances (from B
to C). Duration refers to the time interval from the begin-
ning of overlap till the end of overlap (from C to D).
In the Trains corpus, there are 142 cases of overlap-
ping speech, 28 of which are initiative conflicts. Of the
remaining, 96 cases involve a backward function (e.g. an
acknowledgment overlapping the end of an inform), and
10 cases involve a stall. The remaining 8 cases are other
types of overlap, such as a collaborative completion, or
conversants talking about the same thing: for example,
one saying ?we are a bit early? and the other saying ?we
are a little better?.
In the MTD corpus, there are 383 cases of overlapping
speech, 103 of which are initiative conflicts. Of the re-
maining, 182 cases involve a backward function, 21 cases
involve a stall, and 77 cases are others. Initiative conflicts
19
Figure 2: An illustration of an initiative conflict
are more frequent in the MTD corpus (103 cases in 90
min) than in the Trains corpus (28 cases in 45 min).
There are three cases in the Trains and thirteen cases in
the MTD corpus where the preceding-pause is negative,
i.e. the first overlapped utterance is started before the
other conversant finishes the previous utterance. Some-
times the hearer starts a little bit early to take the turn. If
the original speaker does not intend to release the turn,
a conflict arises. Because these cases involve three ut-
terances, we exclude them from our current analysis and
save them for future research.1 This leaves 25 cases in
the Trains corpus and 90 cases in the MTD corpus for
analyzing initiative conflicts.
5 Avoiding Initiative Conflicts
In this section, we show that conversants try to avoid ini-
tiative conflicts by examining both the offset of initiative
conflicts and the urgency levels.
5.1 Offset of Initiative Conflicts
The offset of an initiative conflict indicates where the
conflict happens. A short offset indicates that the conflict
happens at the beginning of an utterance, while a long
offset indicates an interruption in the middle.
Figure 3 shows the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) for offsets for both corpora individually. The mean
offset is 138ms for the Trains corpus, and 236ms for
the MTD corpus. In comparison to the average length
of forward utterances (2596ms in the Trains corpus and
1614ms in the MTD corpus), the offset is short. More-
over, in the Trains corpus, 88% of offsets are less than
300ms (and 80% less than 200ms); in the MTD corpus,
75% of offsets are less than 300ms. Thus most initiative
conflicts happen at the beginning of utterances.
1These cases of negative value preceding-pause are in fact
very interesting. They seem to contradict with Sacks et
al. (1974)?s model that the hearer has priority to self select to
speak. If Sacks et al is correct, the speaker should wait a cer-
tain amount of time in order not to overlap with the hearer, but
in these cases we see that the speaker self-selects to speak with-
out taking into account whether the hearer self-selects to speak
or not.
0 500 1000 15000
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Offset (ms)
Perc
enta
ge
A: Trains
0 500 1000 15000
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Offset (ms)
Perc
enta
ge
B: MTD
Figure 3: CDF plot for offsets of initiative conflicts
Few initiative conflicts have offsets longer than 500ms.
There is one instance in the Trains corpus and eleven in
the MTD corpus. Four cases are because the second con-
versant has something urgent to say. For example, when
an interruption game is timing out, conversants would in-
terrupt, sometimes in the middle of an utterance, which
results in a long offset. Another six cases are due to mis-
cues. Figure 4 shows an example. Conversant B said ?I
have two aces? with end-of-utterance intonation, paused
for about half a second, and then added ?and a seven?.
The ending intonation and the pause probably misled
conversant A to believe that B had finished, and thus A
started a new forward utterance, which overlapped with
B?s extension. A?s utterance was then quickly abandoned.
In these cases, it is ambiguous whether B?s utterance ?I
have two aces ... and a seven? should be further chopped
into two utterances. The final two cases are intrusions,
with an example shown in Figure 5. Conversant A cut in
probably because he was confident with his decision and
wanted to move on to the next card. In such cases, the
intruder might be perceived as being rude.
20
B: I have two aces and a seven
A: I have .
Figure 4: Long offset: miscue
B: well let?s just
A: it?s no help I think it goes away
Figure 5: Long offset: intrusion
The preponderance of short offsets provides evidence
that conversants try to avoid initiative conflicts. When A
detects that B is talking, A should not attempt to show
initiative until the end of B?s utterance in order to avoid
conflicts, unless there is an urgent reason. If conversants
did not take into account whether someone else is speak-
ing before attempting initiative, we would see a lot of in-
trusions in the middle of utterances, which in fact rarely
happen in the two corpora. As we have shown, initiative
conflicts tend to happen at the beginning of utterances.
Thus initiative conflicts occur mainly due to unintentional
collision, i.e. both conversants happen to start speaking
almost at the same time. The fact that the offset of most
initiative conflicts is within 300ms confirms this.2
5.2 Urgency Level and Initiative Conflicts
To further support the hypothesis that conversants avoid
initiative conflicts except for urgent reasons, we exam-
ined the MTD corpus for the correlation between the ur-
gency levels of the interruption game and initiative con-
flicts. For the urgency level of 10 seconds, conversants
started 33 interruption games, 8 of which were intro-
duced via initiative conflicts. For 25 seconds, conversants
started 36 interruption games, 5 introduced via initiative
conflicts. For 40 seconds, conversants started 33 interrup-
tion games, 3 introduced via initiative conflicts. Thus the
percentages of initiative conflicts for the three urgency
levels are 24% for 10 seconds, 14% for 25 seconds, and
9% for 40 seconds. The urgency level of 10 seconds
requires conversants to start the interruption game very
quickly in order to complete it in time. On the other hand,
the urgency level of 40 seconds allows conversants ample
time to wait for the best time to start the game (Heeman
et al, 2005). Thus we see the percentage of initiative
conflicts decreases as it becomes less urgent to the inter-
ruption game. These results suggest that conversants try
to avoid initiative conflicts if they can, unless there is an
urgent reason.
6 Resolving Initiative Conflicts
In this section, we present evidence that initiative con-
flicts, if they occur, are resolved very quickly using sim-
ple devices.
2This 300ms might be related to human reaction time.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 40000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Length(ms)
Perc
enta
ge
A: Trains
Duration of initiative conflictsLength of forward utterances
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 40000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Length(ms)
Perc
enta
ge
B: MTD
Duration of initiative conflictsLength of forward utterances
Figure 6: CDF plot for durations of initiative conflicts
together with lengths of forward utterances
6.1 Duration of Initiative Conflicts
The duration of an initiative conflict, as defined in Sec-
tion 4, indicates how quickly the conflict is resolved. Fig-
ure 6 shows the cumulative distribution function of dura-
tions of initiative conflicts and the lengths of forward ut-
terances in the two corpora. The mean duration is 328ms
in the Trains corpus and 427ms in the MTD corpus. From
Figure 6 we see that the duration is much shorter than the
length of forward utterances, which have the mean length
of 2596ms in the Trains corpus and 1614ms in the MTD
corpus. The difference between duration of initiative con-
flicts and length of forward utterances is statistically sig-
nificant (p < 10?5, ttest). On average, the duration of
initiative conflicts is about 1/8 the length of forward ut-
terances in the Trains corpus and about 1/4 in the MTD
corpus. The short durations suggest that initiative con-
flicts are resolved very quickly.
According to Crystal and House (1990), the average
length of CVC syllable is about 250ms. Thus on aver-
age, the length of initiative conflicts is about one to two
syllables.3 In fact, 96% of conflicts in the Trains corpus
and 73% in the MTD corpus are resolved within 500ms.
These observations are consistent with one of Schelogff?s
(2000) claims about turn-taking conflicts, that they usu-
ally last less than two syllables to resolve.
6.2 Resolution of Initiative Conflicts
From our definition of initiative conflict, at least one of
the speakers has to back off. For expository ease, we re-
3It would be interesting to examine the length of initiative
conflicts based on syllable. However currently we do not have
syllable-level alignment for the two corpora. We leave this for
future research.
21
fer to the person who gets the turn to contribute as the
winner, and the other who fails as the yielder. There are
two cases in the Trains corpus and three cases in the MTD
corpus in which both speakers abandoned their incom-
plete utterances, paused for a while, and then one of them
resumed talking. These five cases are treated as ties: no
winners or yielders, and are excluded from our analysis
here.
Given how quickly initiative conflicts are resolved, we
examined whether the resolution process might be depen-
dent on factors presented before the conflict even begins,
namely who was speaker in the previous utterance, and
who was interrupted. If we predict that the conversant
who spoke prior to the conflict (speaker of u262 in Fig-
ure 2) loses, we get 55% accuracy in the Trains corpus
and 61% accuracy in the MTD corpus. If we predict
the conversant who spoke first in the overlap (speaker of
u263 in Figure 2) wins, we get 60% accuracy in the Trains
corpus and 53% accuracy in the MTD corpus. These low
percentages suggest that they are not robust predictors.
We next examined how conversants resolve the con-
flicts using devices such as volume, pitch, and others.
6.2.1 Volume
For a stretch of speech, volume is calculated as the mean
energy of the spoken words. For each initiative conflict,
we calculated each conversant?s volume during the over-
lap, and then normalized it with respect to the conver-
sant?s volume throughout the whole conversation.4 We
refer to this as relative volume. In the Trains corpus, the
average relative volume of the winner is 1.06; the average
relative volume of the yielder is 0.93. The difference is
statistically significant (P < 0.01, anova). In the MTD
corpus, the average relative volume of the winner is 1.12;
the average relative volume of the yielder is 0.98. The dif-
ference is also statistically significant (p < 10?6, anova).
These results show that the winner is the one speaking at
a higher relative volume.
To strengthen our argument, we also calculated volume
ratio as the relative volume of the winner divided by the
yielder. The average volume ratio in the Trains corpus is
1.16 and in the MTD corpus is 1.18. If a classifier always
chooses the speaker with higher relative volume to be the
winner, we achieve about 79% accuracy in both corpora,
which is a 29% absolute improvement over random pre-
diction. These results further confirm that the conversant
who speaks at a higher relative volume wins the initiative
conflicts.
Given the importance of volume in the resolution pro-
cess, we examined whether it has an impact on the du-
ration of initiative conflicts. Figure 7 plots the relation
4Normalization is necessary particularly as conversants
heard each other via headsets, and the microphones were not
calibrated to have exactly the same gains.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 16000.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Duration of initiative conflicts (ms)
Volu
me 
ratio
 False prediction
Figure 7: Volume ratio and duration of conflicts
between volume ratio and duration of conflicts for all
the cases in the two corpora. For reference, the dot-
ted line divides the data points into two groups: under
the line are what volume ratio fails to predict the win-
ner, and above the line are success. If we look at the
points where volume ratio succeeds, we see that when
duration of initiative conflicts is long, volume ratio tends
to be small: in fact, the average volume ratio for initiative
conflicts shorter than 600ms is 1.27; for long than 600ms
is 1.13; and the difference is statistically significant (ttest,
p < 0.01).
To further understand how volume is used in the reso-
lution procedure, we examined how volume changes dur-
ing the overlap. For initiative conflicts whose duration is
longer than 600ms, we cut the overlapped speech evenly
in half, and calculated the relative volume for each half
individually. For the first half, the average relative vol-
ume of the winner is 1.03, and the yielder is 1.02. The
difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.93, paired
ttest). For the second half, the average relative volume of
the winner is 1.20, and the yielder is 1.02. The difference
is statistically significant (p < 0.001, paired ttest). The
fact that these long initiative conflicts are not resolved in
the first half is probably partially due to the close relative
volume.
We then calculated volume increment as subtracting the
relative volume of the first half from the second half. The
average volume increment of the winner is 0.17; the aver-
age volume increment of the yielder is 0. The difference
is statistically significant (p < 0.001, paired ttest). These
results show that the range of volume increment during
the overlap by the winner is larger than the yielder. The
behavior of increasing volume during overlap to win the
fight suggests that conversants use volume as a device to
resolve initiative conflicts.
22
6.2.2 Pitch
We used the tool WaveSurfer (Sjo?lander and Beskow,
2000) to extract the f0 from the audio files. We calcu-
lated relative pitch similarly as we did for volume.
In the Trains corpus, the average relative pitch of the
winner is 1.02; the average relative pitch of the yielder
is 0.96. The difference is not statistically significant
(P = 0.54, anova). In the MTD corpus, the average
relative pitch of the winner is 1.09; the average relative
pitch of the yielder is 0.98. The difference is statistically
significant (p < 0.001, anova). If we choose the speaker
with higher pitch to be the winner, we achieve about 65%
accuracy in the Trains corpus and 62% in the MTD cor-
pus. These results suggest that pitch alone is not robust
for predicting the winner of initiative conflicts, at least
not as predictive as volume, although we do see the ten-
dency of higher pitch by the winner.
We also examined pitch range in the window of 100ms
and 300ms respectively. We calculated the pitch range
of the overlapping speech and then normalized it with
respect to the conversant?s pitch range throughout the
whole conversation. We did not see a significant corre-
lation between pitch range and the winner of initiative
conflicts. Thus pitch does not seem to be a device for
resolving initiative conflicts.
6.2.3 Role of Conversants
Human-computer dialogues often have a user interact-
ing with a system, in which the two have very different
roles. Hence, we investigated whether the conversant?s
role has an effect in how initiative conflicts are resolved.
We focused on the Trains corpus due to both its rich dis-
course structure and the difference in the roles that the
system and the use have.
In the Trains corpus, if we predict that the initiator of
a discourse segment wins the conflicts, we get 65% ac-
curacy. In system-initiated segments, the system wins all
eight conflicts; however, in user-initiated segments, the
user only wins seven and system wins eight. The user
does not have an advantage during initiative conflicts in
its segments. Moreover, if the initiator had an advantage,
we would expect the system to have fought more strongly
in the user-initiated segments in order to win. However,
we do not see that the relative volume of the system win-
ning in user-initiated segments is statistically higher than
in system-initiated segments in this small sample size
(p = 0.9, ttest). The initiator does not seem to have a
privileged role in the resolution process.
From the above analysis, we see that the system wins
the conflicts 16 out of 23 times. Thus if we predict that
the system always wins the conflicts, we achieve 70%
accuracy. This is not surprising because the system has
all the domain information, and is more experienced in
solving goals. If the system and user want to speak at
the same time, both would know that the system proba-
bly has a more significant contribution. That the system
wins most of the initiative conflicts agrees with Guinn
(1998) that capability plays an important role in deter-
mining who to show initiative next.
7 Discussion
In this paper, we present our empirical study of human
behavior in initiative conflicts. Our first finding is that
conversants try to avoid initiative conflicts. The conse-
quence of initiative conflicts is that at least one of the
conversants would have to back off, which makes their
effort of contributing in vain. Moreover, the effort of
resolving initiative conflicts is overhead to the dialogue.
According to the theory of least collaborative effort by
Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986), it only makes sense for
conversants to interrupt when the loss of not interrupting
is higher than the cost of an initiative conflict. Thus the
theory of least collaborative effort is consistent with our
conclusion that most initiative conflicts are unintentional
collisions, except where conversants interrupt in the mid-
dle of an utterance for urgency reasons.
The second finding of our research is that initiative
conflicts, when they occur, are efficiently resolved. We
found that volume plays an important role: the louder
speaker wins. We also show how conversants change
their volume to resolve initiative conflicts. Conversants
probably identify their eagerness of speaking, confidence
in what they want to say, and capability of achieving the
current goal by means of volume, which resolves the ini-
tiative conflicts very quickly.
Domain settings obviously have an impact on conver-
sants? initiative behavior. There are more frequent initia-
tive conflicts in the MTD corpus than in the Trains cor-
pus. Moreover, the roles of the conversants also affect
their initiative behavior as we found that the system wins
more initiative conflicts in the Trains corpus. In a teacher-
student conversation, one would expect to see that the
teacher interrupts the student more often than vice versa,
but also that the teacher wins more initiative conflicts.
Capability, culture, and social relationship probably are
some underlying elements that influence when and under
what conditions conversants would seek initiative, while
volume is a device for resolving initiative conflicts.
8 Future Work
In this paper we focused on initiative conflicts in dialogue
where two conversants cannot see each other. In face-to-
face conversation, there might be other cues, such as eye-
contact, head-nodding, and hand gesture, that conversants
use in initiative conflicts. Moreover, in a multi-party con-
versation, a conversant might talk to different people on
different topics, and get interrupted from time to time,
23
which leads to an initiative conflict involving multiple
speakers. In our future work, we plan to examine ini-
tiative conflicts in face-to-face multi-party conversation,
such as the ICSI corpus (Shriberg et al, 2004).
Inspired by the findings on human behavior of initia-
tive conflicts, we speculate that conversants might also
have a mechanism to even minimize unintentional ini-
tiative conflicts, which probably includes devices such
as volume, pause, and other prosodic features. The
speaker uses these devices, as opposed to explicitly in-
forming each other of their knowledge to evaluate capa-
bility (Guinn, 1998), to implicitly signal his or her ea-
gerness, confidence and capability. The hearer then com-
pares his or her own eagerness with the speaker?s, and
decides whether to just make an acknowledgement (al-
lowing the speaker to continue the lead) or to take over
the initiative when taking the turn to speak. In our future
work, we plan to build an initiative model to capture this
negotiation process.
References
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Michael K. Brown. 1998. An
evidential model for tracking initiative in collabora-
tive dialogue interactions. User Modeling and User
Adapted Interaction, 8:215?253.
Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Re-
ferring as a collaborative process. Cognitive Science,
22:1?39.
Robin Cohen, C. Allaby, C. Cumbaa, M. Fitzgerald,
K. Ho, B. Hui, C. Latulipe, F. Lu, N. Moussa, D. Poo-
ley, A. Qian, and S. Siddiqi. 1998. What is initiative?
User Modeling and User Adapted Interaction, 8:171?
214.
Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding dia-
logues with the DAMSL annotation scheme. In Work-
ing Notes: AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative
Action in Humans and Machines, pages 28?35, Cam-
bridge.
Thomas H. Crystal and Arthur S. House. 1990. Articula-
tion rate and the duration of syllables and stress groups
in connected speech. Journal of Acoustical Society of
America, 88:101?112.
Starkey Duncan. 1974. On the structure of speaker-
auditor interaction during speaking turns. Language
in Society, 2:161?180.
Barbara J. Grosz and Candace L. Sidner. 1986. Atten-
tion, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Com-
putational Linguistics, 12(3):175?204.
Curry I. Guinn. 1998. An analysis of initiative selection
in collaborative task-oriented discourse. User Model-
ing and User Adapted Interaction, 8:255?314.
Susan Haller and Timothy Fossum. 1999. Using pro-
tocols to model mixed initiative interaction. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI Workshop on Mixed Initiative Intel-
ligence.
Peter A. Heeman and James F. Allen. 1995. The Trains
spoken dialogue corpus. CD-ROM, Linguistics Data
Consortium.
Peter A. Heeman, Fan Yang, Andrew L. Kun, and
Alexander Shyrokov. 2005. Conventions in human-
human multithreaded dialogues: A preliminary study.
In Proceedings of Intelligent User Interface (short pa-
per session), pages 293?295, San Diego CA.
Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of mixed-initiative user
interfaces. In Proceedings of CHI, pages 159?166,
Pittsburgh PA.
Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A. Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson.
1974. A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn-taking for conversation. Language, 50(4):696?
735.
Emanuel A. Schegloff. 2000. Overlapping talk and
the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Lan-
guage in Society, 29:1?63.
E. Shriberg, R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, J. Ang, and H. Carvey.
2004. The ICSI meeting recorder dialog act corpus. In
Proceedings of the 5th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse
and Dialogue.
Ka?re Sjo?lander and Jonas Beskow. 2000. WaveSurfer:
An open source speech tool. In Proceedings of ICSLP,
pages 4:464?467, Beijing China.
Ronnie W. Smith. 1993. Effective spoken natural lan-
guage dialogue requires variable initiative behavior:
an empirical study. In AAAI93 Fall Symposium On
Human-Computer Collaboration.
Susan E. Strayer, Peter A. Heeman, and Fan Yang. 2003.
Reconciling control and discourse structure. In J. Van
Kuppevelt and R. W. Smith, editors, Current and New
Directions in Discourse and Dialogue, chapter 14,
pages 305?323. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Siew Leng Toh, Fan Yang, and Peter A. Heeman. 2006.
An annotation scheme for agreement analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of INTERSPEECH, Pittsburgh PA.
Marilyn Walker and Steve Whittaker. 1990. Mixed ini-
tiative in dialogue: An investigation into discourse seg-
mentation. In Proceedings of 28th ACL.
Steve Whittaker and Phil Stenton. 1988. Cues and con-
trol in expert-client dialogue. In Proceedings of 28th
ACL, pages 123?130.
Fan Yang, Peter A. Heeman, Kristy Hollingshead, and
Susan E. Strayer. 2007. Dialogueview: Annotating
dialogues in multiple views with abstraction. Natural
Language Engineering. To appear.
24
