Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 137?140,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Taking into Account the Differences between Actively and Passively
Acquired Data: The Case of Active Learning with Support Vector Machines
for Imbalanced Datasets
Michael Bloodgood?
Human Language Technology
Center of Excellence
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211 USA
bloodgood@jhu.edu
K. Vijay-Shanker
Computer and Information
Sciences Department
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716 USA
vijay@cis.udel.edu
Abstract
Actively sampled data can have very different
characteristics than passively sampled data.
Therefore, it?s promising to investigate using
different inference procedures during AL than
are used during passive learning (PL). This
general idea is explored in detail for the fo-
cused case of AL with cost-weighted SVMs
for imbalanced data, a situation that arises for
many HLT tasks. The key idea behind the
proposed InitPA method for addressing im-
balance is to base cost models during AL on
an estimate of overall corpus imbalance com-
puted via a small unbiased sample rather than
the imbalance in the labeled training data,
which is the leading method used during PL.
1 Introduction
Recently there has been considerable interest in us-
ing active learning (AL) to reduce HLT annotation
burdens. Actively sampled data can have differ-
ent characteristics than passively sampled data and
therefore, this paper proposes modifying algorithms
used to infer models during AL. Since most AL re-
search assumes the same learning algorithms will be
used during AL as during passive learning1 (PL),
this paper opens up a new thread of AL research that
accounts for the differences between passively and
actively sampled data.
The specific case focused on in this paper is
that of AL with SVMs (AL-SVM) for imbalanced
?This research was conducted while the first author was a
PhD student at the University of Delaware.
1Passive learning refers to the typical supervised learning
setup where the learner does not actively select its training data.
datasets2. Collectively, the factors: interest in AL,
widespread class imbalance for many HLT tasks, in-
terest in using SVMs, and PL research showing that
SVM performance can be improved substantially by
addressing imbalance, indicate the importance of the
case of AL with SVMs with imbalanced data.
Extensive PL research has shown that learning
algorithms? performance degrades for imbalanced
datasets and techniques have been developed that
prevent this degradation. However, to date, rela-
tively little work has addressed imbalance during AL
(see Section 2). In contrast to previous work, this
paper advocates that the AL scenario brings out the
need to modify PL approaches to dealing with im-
balance. In particular, a new method is developed
for cost-weighted SVMs that estimates a cost model
based on overall corpus imbalance rather than the
imbalance in the so far labeled training data. Sec-
tion 2 discusses related work, Section 3 discusses
the experimental setup, Section 4 presents the new
method called InitPA, Section 5 evaluates InitPA,
and Section 6 concludes.
2 Related Work
A problem with imbalanced data is that the class
boundary (hyperplane) learned by SVMs can be too
close to the positive (pos) examples and then recall
suffers. Many approaches have been presented for
overcoming this problem in the PL setting. Many
require substantially longer training times or ex-
2This paper focuses on the fundamental case of binary clas-
sification where class imbalance arises because the positive ex-
amples are rarer than the negative examples, a situation that nat-
urally arises for many HLT tasks.
137
tra training data to tune parameters and thus are
not ideal for use during AL. Cost-weighted SVMs
(cwSVMs), on the other hand, are a promising ap-
proach for use with AL: they impose no extra train-
ing overhead. cwSVMs introduce unequal cost fac-
tors so the optimization problem solved becomes:
Minimize:
1
2?~w?
2 + C+
?
i:yi=+1
?i + C?
?
i:yi=?1
?i (1)
Subject to:
?k : yk [~w ? ~xk + b] ? 1? ?k, (2)
where (~w, b) represents the learned hyperplane, ~xk
is the feature vector for example k, yk is the label
for example k, ?k = max(0, 1 ? yk(~wk ? ~xk + b))
is the slack variable for example k, and C+ and C?
are user-defined cost factors.
The most important part for this paper are the cost
factors C+ and C?. The ratio C+C? quantifies the
importance of reducing slack error on pos train ex-
amples relative to reducing slack error on negative
(neg) train examples. The value of the ratio is cru-
cial for balancing the precision recall tradeoff well.
(Morik et al, 1999) showed that during PL, set-
ting C+C? = # of neg training examples# of pos training examples is an effec-
tive heuristic. Section 4 explores using this heuris-
tic during AL and explains a modified heuristic that
could work better during AL.
(Ertekin et al, 2007) propose using the balancing
of training data that occurs as a result of AL-SVM
to handle imbalance and do not use any further mea-
sures to address imbalance. (Zhu and Hovy, 2007)
used resampling to address imbalance and based the
amount of resampling, which is the analog of our
cost model, on the amount of imbalance in the cur-
rent set of labeled train data, as PL approaches do.
In contrast, the InitPA approach in Section 4 bases
its cost models on overall (unlabeled) corpus imbal-
ance rather than the amount of imbalance in the cur-
rent set of labeled data.
3 Experimental Setup
We use relation extraction (RE) and text classifica-
tion (TC) datasets and SVMlight (Joachims, 1999)
for training the SVMs. For RE, we use AImed,
previously used to train protein interaction extrac-
tion systems ((Giuliano et al, 2006)). As in previ-
ous work, we cast RE as a binary classification task
Figure 1: Hyperplane B was trained with a higher C+C?
ratio than hyperplane A was trained with.
(14.94% of the examples in AImed are positive). We
use the KGC kernel from (Giuliano et al, 2006), one
of the highest-performing systems on AImed to date
and perform 10-fold cross validation. For TC, we
use the Reuters-21578 ModApte split. Since a doc-
ument may belong to more than one category, each
category is treated as a separate binary classification
problem, as in (Joachims, 1998). As in (Joachims,
1998), we use the ten largest categories, which have
imbalances ranging from 1.88% to 29.96%.
4 AL-SVM Methods for Addressing Class
Imbalance
The key question when using cwSVMs is how to set
the ratio C+C? . Increasing it will typically shift the
learned hyperplane so recall is increased and preci-
sion is decreased (see Figure 1 for a hypothetical ex-
ample). Let PA= C+C? .3 How should the PA be set
during AL-SVM?
We propose two approaches: one sets the PA
based on the level of imbalance in the labeled train-
ing data and one aims to set the PA based on an es-
timate of overall corpus imbalance, which can dras-
tically differ from the level of imbalance in actively
sampled training data. The first method is called
CurrentPA, depicted in Figure 2. Note that in step
0 of the loop, PA is set based on the distribution of
positive and negative examples in the current set of
labeled data. However, observe that during AL the
ratio # neg labeled examples# pos labeled examples in the current set of la-
beled data gets skewed from the ratio in the entire
3PA stands for positive amplification and gives us a concise
way to denote the fraction C+C? , which doesn?t have a standard
name.
138
Input:
L = small initial set of labeled data
U = large pool of unlabeled data
Loop until stopping criterion is met:
0. Set PA = |{x?Labeled:f(x)=?1}||{x?L:f(x)=+1}|
where f is the function we desire to learn.
1. Train an SVM with C+ and C? set such
that C+C? = PA and obtain hyperplane h .4
2. batch? select k points from U that are
closest to h and request their labels.5
3. U = U ? batch .
4. L = L ? batch .
End Loop
Figure 2: The CurrentPA algorithm
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Empirical Evidence of CurrentPA creating a Skewed Distribution (Fold Avg)
Number of Points for which Annotations Have Been Requested
Ra
tio
 of
 # 
of 
Ne
ga
tiv
e t
o #
 of
 Po
sit
ive
 Po
int
s
 
 
Ratio with CurrentPA
Ratio with Entire Set
Figure 3: Illustration of AL skewing the distribution of
pos/neg points on AImed.
corpus because AL systematically selects the exam-
ples that are closest to the current model?s hyper-
plane and this tends to select more positive exam-
ples than random selection would select (see also
(Ertekin et al, 2007)).
Empirical evidence of this distribution skew is il-
lustrated in Figure 3. The trend toward balanced
datasets during AL could mislead and cause us to
underestimate the PA.
Therefore, our next algorithm aims to set the PA
based on the ratio of neg to pos instances in the en-
tire corpus. However, since we don?t have labels for
the entire corpus, we don?t know this ratio. But by
using a small initial sample of labeled data, we can
4We use SVMlight?s default value for C?.
5In our experiments, batch size is 20.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
AImed Average F Measure versus Number of Annotations
Number of Points for which Annotations Have Been Requested
Pe
rfo
rm
an
ce
 (F 
Me
asu
re)
 
 
InitPA
Oversampling(Zhu and Hovy,2007)
CurrentPA
EHG2007(Ertekin et al 2007)
Figure 4: AImed learning curves. y-axis is from 20% to
60%.
estimate this ratio with high confidence. This esti-
mate can then be used for setting the PA throughout
the AL process. We call this method of setting the
PA based on a small initial set of labeled data the
InitPA method. It is like CurrentPA except we move
Step 0 to be executed one time before the loop and
then use that same PA value on each iteration of the
AL loop.
To guide what size to make the initial set of la-
beled data, one can determine the sample size re-
quired to estimate the proportion of positives in a
finite population to within sampling error e with a
desired level of confidence using standard statisti-
cal techniques found in many college-level statistics
references such as (Berenson et al, 1988). For ex-
ample, carrying out the computations on the AImed
dataset shows that a size of 100 enables us to be
95% confident that our proportion estimate is within
0.0739 of the true proportion. In our experiments,
we used an initial labeled set of size 100.
5 Evaluation
In addition to InitPA and CurrentPA, we also imple-
mented the methods from (Ertekin et al, 2007; Zhu
and Hovy, 2007). We implemented oversampling by
duplicating points and by BootOS (Zhu and Hovy,
2007). To avoid cluttering the graphs, we only show
the highest-performing oversampling variant, which
was by duplicating points. Learning curves are pre-
sented in Figures 4 and 5.
Note InitPA is the highest-performing method for
all datasets, especially in the practically important
area of where the learning curves begin to plateau.
139
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
Reuters Average F Measure versus Number of Annotations
Number of Points for which Annotations Have Been Requested
Pe
rfo
rm
an
ce
 (F
 Me
asu
re)
 
 
InitPA
Oversampling(Zhu and Hovy,2007)
CurrentPA
EHG2007(Ertekin et al 2007)
Figure 5: Reuters learning curves. y-axis is from 76% to
83%.
This area is important because this is around where
we would want to stop AL (Bloodgood and Vijay-
Shanker, 2009).
Observe that the gains of InitPA over CurrentPA
are smaller for Reuters. For some Reuters cate-
gories, InitPA and CurrentPA have nearly identical
performance. Applying the models learned by Cur-
rentPA at each round of AL on the data used to
train the model reveals that the recall on the train-
ing data is nearly 100% for those categories where
InitPA/CurrentPA perform similarly. Increasing the
relative penalty for slack error on positive training
points will not have much impact if (nearly) all of
the pos train points are already classified correctly.
Thus, in situations where models are already achiev-
ing nearly 100% recall on their train data, InitPA is
not expected to outperform CurrentPA.
The hyperplanes learned during AL-SVM serve
two purposes: sampling - they govern which unla-
beled points will be selected for human annotation,
and predicting - when AL stops, the most recently
learned hyperplane is used for classifying test data.
Although all AL-SVM approaches we?re aware of
use the same hyperplane at each round of AL for
both of these purposes, this is not required. We com-
pared InitPA with hybrid approaches where hyper-
planes trained using an InitPA cost model are used
for sampling and hyperplanes trained using a Cur-
rentPA cost model are used for predicting, and vice-
versa, and found that InitPA performed better than
both of these hybrid approaches. This indicates that
the InitPA cost model yields hyperplanes that are
better for both sampling and predicting.
6 Conclusions
We?ve made the case for the importance of AL-SVM
for imbalanced datasets and showed that the AL sce-
nario calls for modifications to PL approaches to ad-
dressing imbalance. For AL-SVM, the key idea be-
hind InitPA is to base cost models on an estimate of
overall corpus imbalance rather than the class imbal-
ance in the so far labeled data. The practical utility
of the InitPA method was demonstrated empirically;
situations where InitPA won?t help that much were
made clear; and analysis showed that the sources of
InitPA?s gains were from both better sampling and
better predictive models.
InitPA is an instantiation of a more general idea
of not using the same inference algorithms during
AL as during PL but instead modifying inference al-
gorithms to suit esoteric characteristics of actively
sampled data. This is an idea that has seen relatively
little exploration and is ripe for further investigation.
References
Mark L. Berenson, David M. Levine, and David Rind-
skopf. 1988. Applied Statistics. Prentice-Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ.
Michael Bloodgood and K. Vijay-Shanker. 2009. A
method for stopping active learning based on stabiliz-
ing predictions and the need for user-adjustable stop-
ping. In CoNLL.
Seyda Ertekin, Jian Huang, Le?on Bottou, and C. Lee
Giles. 2007. Learning on the border: active learning
in imbalanced data classification. In CIKM.
Claudio Giuliano, Alberto Lavelli, and Lorenza Romano.
2006. Exploiting shallow linguistic information for re-
lation extraction from biomedical literature. In EACL.
Thorsten Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with su-
port vector machines: Learning with many relevant
features. In ECML, pages 137?142.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM
learning practical. In Advances in Kernel Methods ?
Support Vector Learning, pages 169?184.
Katharina Morik, Peter Brockhausen, and Thorsten
Joachims. 1999. Combining statistical learning with a
knowledge-based approach - a case study in intensive
care monitoring. In ICML, pages 268?277.
Jingbo Zhu and Eduard Hovy. 2007. Active learning for
word sense disambiguation with methods for address-
ing the class imbalance problem. In EMNLP-CoNLL.
140
