Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral Consortium, pages 19?24,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Sentence Realisation from Bag of Words with dependency constraints
Karthik Gali, Sriram Venkatapathy
Language Technologies Research Centre,
IIIT-Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
{karthikg@students,sriram@research}.iiit.ac.in
Abstract
In this paper, we present five models for sentence
realisation from a bag-of-words containing mini-
mal syntactic information. It has a large variety
of applications ranging from Machine Translation
to Dialogue systems. Our models employ simple
and efficient techniques based on n-gram Language
modeling.
We evaluated the models by comparing the syn-
thesized sentences with reference sentences using
the standard BLEU metric(Papineni et al, 2001).
We obtained higher results (BLEU score of 0.8156)
when compared to the state-of-art results. In fu-
ture, we plan to incorporate our sentence realiser in
Machine Translation and observe its effect on the
translation accuracies.
1 Introduction
In applications such as Machine Translation (MT)
and Dialogue Systems, sentence realisation is a ma-
jor step. Sentence realisation involves generating a
well-formed sentence from a bag of lexical items.
These lexical items may be syntactically related to
each other. The level of syntactic information at-
tached to the lexical items might vary with applica-
tion. In order to appeal to the wide range of applica-
tions that use sentence realisation, our experiments
assume only basic syntactic information, such as un-
labeled dependency relationships between the lexi-
cal items.
In this paper, we present different models for sen-
tence realisation. These models consider a bag of
words with unlabelled dependency relations as input
and apply simple n-gram language modeling tech-
niques to get a well-formed sentence.
We now present the role of a sentence realiser
in the task of MT. In transfer-based approaches for
MT1 (Lavie et al, 2003), the source sentence is
first analyzed by a parser (a phrase-structure or a
dependency-based parser). Then the source lexical
items are transferred to the target language using a
bi-lingual dictionary. The target language sentence
is finally realised by applying transfer-rules that map
the grammar of both the languages. Generally, these
transfer rules make use of rich analysis on the source
side such as dependency labels etc. The accuracy of
having such rich analysis (dependency labeling ) is
low and hence, might affect the performance of the
sentence realiser. Also, the approach of manually
constructing transfer rules is costly, especially for
divergent language pairs such as English and Hindi
or English and Japanese. Our models can be used
in this scenario, providing a robust alternative to the
transfer rules.
A sentence realiser can also be used in the frame-
work of a two-step statistical machine translation.
In the two-step framework, the semantic transfer
and sentence realisation are decoupled into indepen-
dent modules. This provides an opporunity to de-
velop simple and efficient modules for each of the
steps. The model for Global Lexical Selection and
Sentence Re-construction (Bangalore et al, 2007)
is one such approach. In this approach, discrimi-
native techniques are used to first transfer semantic
information of the source sentence by looking at the
source sentence globally, this obtaining a accurate
bag-of-words in the target language. The words in
the bag might be attached with mild syntactic infor-
mation (ie., the words they modify) (Venkatapathy
and Bangalore, 2007). We propose models that take
1http://www.isi.edu/natural-language/mteval/html/412.html
19
this information as input and produce the target sen-
tence. We can also use our sentence realiser as an
ordering module in other approaches such as (Quirk
et al, 2005), where the goal is to order an unordered
bag (of treelets in this case) with dependency links.
In Natural Language Generation applications
such as Dialogue systems etc, the set of concepts
and the dependencies between the concepts is ob-
tained first which is known as text planning. These
concepts are then realized into words resulting in a
bag of words with syntactic relations (Bangalore and
Rambow, 2000). This is known as sentence plan-
ning. In the end, the surface string can be obtained
by our models.
In this paper, we do not test our models with any
of the applications mentioned above. However, we
plan to test our models with these applications, es-
pecially on the two-stage statistical MT approach
using the bag-of-words obtained by Global Lexi-
cal Selection (Bangalore et al, 2007),(Venkatapathy
and Bangalore, 2007). Here, we test our models in-
dependent of any application, by beginning with a
given bag-of-words (with dependency links).
The structure of the paper is as follows. We give
an overview of the related work in section 2. In sec-
tion 3, we talk about the effect of dependency con-
straints and gives details of the experimental setup in
section 4. In section 5, we describe about the exper-
iments that have been conducted. In section 6, our
experimental results are presented. In section 7, we
talk about the possible future work and we conclude
with section 8.
2 Related Work
There have been approaches for sentence realisation
such as FUF/SURGE (Elhadad, 1991), OpenCCG
(White, 2004) and XLE (Crouch et al, 2007)
that apply hand-crafted grammars based on partic-
ular linguistic theories. These approaches expect
rich syntactic information as input in order to re-
alise the sentence. There are other approaches in
which the generation grammars are extracted semi-
automatically (Belz, 2007) or automatically (such as
HPSG (Nakanishi and Miyao, 2005), LFG (Cahill
and van Genabith, 2006; Hogan et al, 2007) and
CCG (White et al, 2007)). The limitation of these
approaches is that these cannot be incorporated into
a wide range of applications as they rely on rich
syntactic information for generation. On the con-
trary, we use simple n-gram models to realise (or lin-
earize) a bag-of-words where the only information
available is the presence of various links between the
words.
Our work is similar to a recently published work
by Guo (Guo et al, 2008). They use n-gram models
to realise sentences from the f-structures of HPSG
(equivalent to labeled dependency structure). Their
models rely heavily on the dependency relation la-
bels (also called grammatical roles) available in
HPSG. However, the dependency role information
(of any dependency formalism) is either not read-
ily available in a variety of applications in NLP. We
propose to explore the realisation of a sentence us-
ing minimal syntactic information. Apart from de-
pendency links, we also make use of part-of-speech
tags which are easily available and hence, our sen-
tence realiser can be plugged much easily into var-
ious applications. Guo (Guo et al, 2008) conduct
their experiments by considering gold data as input.
Apart from using gold data as input, we also con-
duct experiments by assuming noisy input data to
test the robustness of our models. The search al-
gorithm used by both Guo and us is locally greedy
i.e., we compute the best string at every node. Guo
uses the Viterbi algorithm to get best string whereas
we consider and score all permutations to obtain the
best string.
There has been burgeoning interest in the prob-
abilistic models for sentence realisation, especially
for realisation ranking in a two stage sentence real-
isation architecture where in the first stage a set of
sentence realisations are generated and then a real-
isation ranker will choose the best of them (Banga-
lore and Rambow, 2000).
One major observation in our experiments was
that the POS tags held immensely in the task of sen-
tence realisation.
3 Effect of Dependency Constraints
There is a major advantage in using dependency
constraints for sentence realisation. The search
space reduces drastically when the constraints are
applied. These constraints state that the realised sen-
tences should be projective with respect to the de-
20
pendency structure (unordered) of the input bag-of-
words ie.., any word and its children in the depen-
dency tree should project as a contiguous unit in the
realised sentence. This is a safe assumption to make
as the non-projectivity in English is only used to
account for Long-Distance Dependencies and such
cases are low in number (Guo et al, 2008).
is going
Ram to school
Figure 1: Bag of words with dependency constraints
and head marked
We now present an example to show how the de-
pendency constraints reduce the search space. For
example, consider an unordered dependency tree in
Figure 1, which has five words. If we don?t use the
constraints provided by the dependency tree then the
search space is 5! (120). But, if we use the con-
straints provided by the dependency tree then the
search space is 2! + 4! = 28. There is a huge reduc-
tion in the search space if we use the constraints pro-
vided by the dependency tree. Further, it has been
shown in (Chang and Toutanova, 2007) that apply-
ing the constraints also aids for the synthesis of bet-
ter constructed sentences.
4 Experimental Set-up
For the experiments, we use the WSJ portion of the
Penn tree bank (Marcus et al, 1993), using the stan-
dard train/development/test splits, viz 39,832 sen-
tences from 2-21 sections, 2416 sentences from sec-
tion 23 for testing and 1,700 sentences from sec-
tion 22 for development. The input to our sen-
tence realiser are bag of words with dependency
constraints which are automatically extracted from
the Penn treebank using head percolation rules used
in (Magerman, 1995), which do not contain any or-
der information. We also use the provided part-of-
speech tags in some experiments.
In a typical application, the input to the sentence
realiser is noisy. To test the robustness of our models
in such scenarios, we also conduct experiments with
noisy input data. We parse the test data with an un-
labelled projective dependency parser (Nivre et al,
2006) and drop the order information to obtain the
input to our sentence realiser. However we still use
the correct bag of words. We propose to test this as-
pect in future by plugging our sentence realiser in
Machine Translation.
Table 1 shows the number of nodes having a par-
ticular number of children in the test data.
Children countNodes Children countNodes
0 30219 5 1017
1 13649 6 685
2 5887 7 269
3 3207 8 106
4 1526 > 8 119
Table 1: The number of nodes having a particular
number of children in the test data
From Table 1, we can see that more than 96% of
the internal nodes of the trees contain five or less
children. It means that for almost all the nodes, the
reordering complexity is minimal. This makes this
approach very feasible if the order of a sub-tree is
computed after the order of the sub-trees of its chil-
dren is fixed. Hence, the approaches that we present
in the next section use bottom-up traversal of the
tree. During the traversal, the appropriate order of
every sub-tree is fixed.
5 Experiments
The task here is to realise a well formed sentence
from a bag of words with dependency constraints
(unordered dependency tree) for which we propose
five models using n-gram based Language modeling
techinque. We train the language models of order 3
using Good-Turning smoothing on the training data
of Penn Treebank.
5.1 Model 1 : Sentential Language Model
We traverse the tree in bottom up manner and find
the best phrase at each subtree. The best phrase cor-
responding to the subtree is assigned to the root node
of the sub-tree during the traversal.
Let the node n have N children represented as ci
(1 < i < N ). During the bottom up traversal, the
21
children ci are assigned best phrases before process-
ing node n. Let the best phrases corresponding to the
children be p(ci). The best phrase corresponding to
the node n is computed by exploring the permuta-
tions of n and the best phrases p(ci) corresponding
to the children ci. The total number of permutations
that are explored are (N+1)!. A sentential language
model is applied on each of the candidate phrases to
select the best phrase.
p(n) = bestPhrase ( perm (n, ? i p(ci)) o LM )
(1)
In Sentential Language Model, we used a LM that
is trained on complete sentences of the training cor-
pus to score the permutations.
5.2 Model 2 : Subtree-type based Language
Models(STLM)
The major problem with model 1 is that we are us-
ing a common sentential language model (trained on
complete sentences) to score phrases corresponding
to various sub-tree types. In this model, we build
different LMs for phrases corresponding to different
subtree-types.
To build STLMs, the training data is parsed first.
Each subtree in the parse structure is represented
by the part-of-speech tag of its head. Different lan-
guage models are created for each of the POS tags.
We have 44 different language models each corre-
sponding to a particular POS tag. For example, a
IN language model contains phrases like in hour, of
chaos, after crash, in futures, etc and VBD language
model contains phrases like were criticized, never
resumed while training.
So, in this model we realise a sentence from a
unordered dependency tree by traversing the depen-
dency tree in bottom-up manner as we did in model
1; but while scoring the permuted phrases we use
different language models for subtrees headed by
words of various pos tags.
p(n) = bestPhrase ( perm (n, ? i p(ci)) o LMPOS(n) )
(2)
Here, LMPOS(n) represents the language model
associated with the part-of-speech of the node n.
5.3 Model 3 : Head-word STLM
In the models presented earlier, a node and its chil-
dren are ordered using the best phrases of the chil-
dren. For example, the best phrase assigned to the
node ?was? is computed by taking of the permutation
of ?was? and its children ?The equity market?, ?illiq-
uid? and ?.? and then applying the language model.
In model 3, instead of considering best phrases while
ordering, the heads of the the children ci are consid-
ered. For example, the best phrase assigned to the
node ?was? is computed by first permuting the nodes
?was?, ?market?, ?illiquid? and ?.? and then apply-
ing the language models trained on the treelets (head
and children) and not on entire sub-trees.
The major advantage of using this model is that
order at a node is independent of the best phrases of
its descendants and also any mistakes in computa-
tion of best phrases of descendants doesn?t effect the
choice of reordering decision at a particular node.
5.4 Model 4 : POS based STLM
We now experiment by using Part-Of-Speech (POS)
tags of words for ordering the nodes. In the previ-
ous approaches, the language models were trained
on the words which were then used to compute the
best strings associated with various nodes. Here,
we order the node and its children using a language
model trained on POS tag sequences. The motiva-
tion behind buliding such kind of Language models
is that it deals with unseen words effectively. Hence,
in this model, the best phrase corresponding to the
node ?was? is obtained by permuting the POS tags
of the words ?was?, ?market?, ?illiquid and ?.? which
are ?VBZ?, ?NN?, ?NN? and ?.? respectively. As the
best POS tag sequence might correspond to several
orderings of the treelet, a word based STLM is ap-
plied to choose the correct ordering.
The major advantages of this model is that it is
more general and it deals with unseen words effec-
tively. Also, it is much faster than earlier models as
this model is a POS tag based model.
5.5 Model 5: Head-marked POS based STLM
In POS based STLM, the head of a particular node
isn?t marked while applying the language model.
Hence, all the nodes of the treelet are treated equally
while applying the LM. For example, in Figure 2, the
structures of treelets is not taken into account while
applying the head-POS based language model. Both
are treated in the same manner while applying TLM.
In this model, we experiment by marking the head
22
information for the POS of the head word which
treats the treelets in Figure 2 in a different manner to
obtain the best phrase. As the best POS tag sequence
might correspond to several orderings of the treelet,
we test various word-based approaches to choose the
best ordering among the many possibilities. The best
approach was the one where head-word of the treelet
had the POS tag attached to it.
VB
VBP NN
VBP
VB NN
Figure 2: Two different treelets which would have
same best POS tag sequence
6 Results and Discussion
To evaluate our models, we compare the system gen-
erated sentences with reference sentences and get
the BLEU score. As mentioned in section 4, We
evaluate our models on two different types of in-
put. In the first input type, we have bag of words
with dependency constraints extracted from tree-
bank and in the second input type, the dependency
constraints among the bag of words are extracted
from the parser which are noisy. Table 2 shows the
results of model 1-5.
Model Treebank(gold) Parser(noisy)
Model 1 0.5472 0.5514
Model 2 0.6886 0.6870
Model 3 0.7284 0.7227
Model 4 0.7890 0.7783
Model 5 0.8156 0.8027
Table 2: The results of Model 1-5
We can observe that in model 1, BLEU score of
the parser input is high when compared to Treebank
input. This might be because, the parser input is pro-
jective (as we used projective parsing) whereas the
treebank input might contain some non-projective
cases. In general, for all the models, the results with
noisy dependency links are comparable to the cases
where gold dependency links are used which is en-
couraging.
We have taken the Table-3 from (Guo et al,
2008), which shows the BLEU scores of different
Paper BLEU score
Langkilde(2002) 0.757
Nakanishi(2005) 0.705
Cahill(2006) 0.6651
Hogan(2007) 0.6882
White(2007) 0.5768
Guo(2008) 0.7440
Our Model 0.8156
Table 3: Comparsion of results for English WSJ sec-
tion 23
systems on section 23 of PTB. Its really difficult to
compare sentence realisers as the information con-
tained in the input vaires greatly between systems.
But, we can clearly see that the our system performs
better than all the systems. The main observations
from the results are, (1) Searching the entire space of
O(n!) helps, (2) Treelet LM capture characteristics
of phrases headed by various POS tags, in contrast to
sentential LM which is a general LM, (3) POS tags
can play an important role in ordering nodes of a de-
pendency structure, (4) The head models performed
better than the models that used all the nodes of the
sub-tree, and (5) Marking the head of a treelet pro-
vides vital clues to the language model for reorder-
ing.
7 Future Experiments
Although the results of the proposed models are
much higher when compared to other methods, the
major constraint with our models is the computa-
tional complexity, which is O(n!). However, our ap-
proach is still tractable because of the low values of
n. We plan to reduce the search space complexity by
using Viterbi search (Guo et al, 2008), and examine
the drop in results because of that.
The models proposed in paper, consider only the
locally best phrases (local to the sub-tree) at every
step. In order to retain the globally best possibilities
at every step, we plan to use beam search, where we
retain K-best best phrases for every sub-tree.
Also, the goal is to test the approach for
morphologically-rich languages such as Hindi.
Also, it would require us to expand our features set.
We also plan to test the factored models.
The most important experiment that we plan to
23
perform is to test our system in the context of MT,
where the input is more real and noisy.
To train more robust language models, we plan to
use the much larger data on a web scale.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we had experimented with five ngram
based models for sentence realisation from bag of
words with dependency constraints. We have evalu-
ated our models on two different types of input(gold
and noisy). From the results, we can conclude that
the model ?Marked Head-POS based LM? works
best in both cases.
Acknowledgments
The authors of this work were supported by ILMT
grant 11(10)/2006-HCC(TDIL) and EILMT grant
11(9)/2006HCC(TDIL). We would also like to thank
the four reviewers for their valuable reviews.
References
S. Bangalore and O. Rambow. 2000. Exploiting a proba-
bilistic hierarchical model for generation. Proceedings
of the 18th conference on Computational linguistics.
S. Bangalore, P. Haffner, and S. Kanthak. 2007. Statisti-
cal Machine Translation through Global Lexical Selec-
tion and Sentence Reconstruction. In Annual Meeting
- ACL, volume 45.
A. Belz. 2007. Probabilistic Generation of Weather
Forecast Texts. In Proceedings of NAACL HLT.
A. Cahill and J. van Genabith. 2006. Robust
PCFG-Based Generation Using Automatically Ac-
quired LFG Approximations. In ANNUAL MEETING-
ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUIS-
TICS, volume 44.
P.C. Chang and K. Toutanova. 2007. A Discriminative
Syntactic Word Order Model for Machine Translation.
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL.
D. Crouch, M. Dalrymple, R. Kaplan, T. King,
J. Maxwell, and P. Newman. 2007. XLE documen-
tation. Available on-line.
M. Elhadad. 1991. FUF: The universal unifier user man-
ual version 5.0. Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University. New York.
Y. Guo, J. van Genabith, and H. Wang. 2008.
Dependency-Based N-Gram Models for General Pur-
pose Sentence Realisation. Proceedings of the 22nd
conference on Computational linguistics.
D. Hogan, C. Cafferkey, A. Cahill, and J. van Gen-
abith. 2007. Exploiting Multi-Word Units in History-
Based Probabilistic Generation. In Proceedings of the
2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL).
A. Lavie, S. Vogel, L. Levin, E. Peterson, K. Probst,
A.F. Llitjo?s, R. Reynolds, J. Carbonell, and R. Cohen.
2003. Experiments with a Hindi-to-English transfer-
based MT system under a miserly data scenario. ACM-
TALIP, 2(2).
D.M. Magerman. 1995. Statistical decision-tree models
for parsing. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual meeting
on ACL. ACL Morristown, NJ, USA.
M.P. Marcus, M.A. Marcinkiewicz, and B. Santorini.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English:
the penn treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2).
H. Nakanishi and Y. Miyao. 2005. Probabilistic models
for disambiguation of an HPSG-based chart generator.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Pars-
ing Technology.
J. Nivre, J. Hall, J. Nilsson, G. Eryigit, and S. Marinov.
2006. Labeled pseudo-projective dependency parsing
with support vector machines. In Proceedings of the
Tenth CoNLL.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.J. Zhu. 2001.
BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting
on ACL.
C. Quirk, A. Menezes, and C. Cherry. 2005. De-
pendency treelet translation: syntactically informed
phrasal SMT. Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of ACL.
S. Venkatapathy and S. Bangalore. 2007. Three mod-
els for discriminative machine translation using Global
Lexical Selection and Sentence Reconstruction. In
Proceedings of SSST, NAACLHLT/AMTA Workshop on
Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages
152?159.
M. White, R. Rajkumar, and S. Martin. 2007. Towards
Broad Coverage Surface Realization with CCG. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Using Corpora for
NLG: Language Generation and Machine Translation
(UCNLG+ MT).
M. White. 2004. Reining in CCG Chart Realization.
LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE.
24
