Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral Consortium, pages 13?18,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Exploring Topic Continuation Follow-up Questions using Machine Learning
Manuel Kirschner
KRDB Center
Faculty of Computer Science
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
kirschner@inf.unibz.it
Raffaella Bernardi
KRDB Center
Faculty of Computer Science
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
bernardi@inf.unibz.it
Abstract
Some of the Follow-Up Questions (FU Q) that
an Interactive Question Answering (IQA) sys-
tem receives are not topic shifts, but rather
continuations of the previous topic. In this pa-
per, we propose an empirical framework to ex-
plore such questions, with two related goals in
mind: (1) modeling the different relations that
hold between the FU Q?s answer and either the
FU Q or the preceding dialogue, and (2) show-
ing how this model can be used to identify the
correct answer among several answer candi-
dates. For both cases, we use Logistic Regres-
sion Models that we learn from real IQA data
collected through a live system. We show that
by adding dialogue context features and fea-
tures based on sequences of domain-specific
actions that represent the questions and an-
swers, we obtain important additional predic-
tors for the model, and improve the accuracy
with which our system finds correct answers.
1 Introduction
Interactive Question Answering (IQA) can be de-
scribed as a fusion of the QA paradigm with di-
alogue system capabilities. While classical QA is
concerned with questions posed in isolation, its in-
teractive variant is intended to support the user in
finding the correct answer via natural-language dia-
logue. In an IQA setting, both the system and the
user can pose Follow-Up Questions (FU Q). In the
second case, whenever an IQA system receives an
additional user question (note that this is what we
call a Follow-Up Question throughout this work), it
can either interpret it as being thematically related to
a previous dialogue segment (topic continuation), or
as a shift to some new, unrelated topic (topic shift).
A definition of thematic relatedness of FU Qs might
rely on the elements of the attentional state, i.e., on
the objects, properties and relations that are salient
before and after processing the user question. Topic
continuation FU Qs should be interpreted within the
context, whereas topic shift FU Qs have to be treated
as first questions and can thus be processed with
standard QA technologies. Therefore, a first task
in IQA is to detect whether a FU Q is a topic shift or
a topic continuation (Yang et al, 2006).
To help answering topic continuation FU Qs, an
IQA system would need to fuse the FU Q with cer-
tain information from the dialogue context (cf. (van
Schooten et al, 2009)). Thus, a second task in IQA
is to understand which turns in the dialogue context
are possible locations of such information, and ex-
actly what kind of information should be considered.
Knowing that a FU Q concerns the same topic as the
previous question or answer, we thus want to study
in more detail the way the informational content of
questions and answers evolves before/after the FU Q
is asked. A model of these so-called informational
transitions would provide insights into what a user is
likely to ask about next in natural coherent human-
machine dialogue.
In order to tackle any of the two IQA tasks men-
tioned above we need IQA dialogues. Most current
work on IQA uses the TREC QA data; the TREC
QA tracks in 2001 and 2004 included series of con-
text questions, where FU Qs always depended on the
context set by an earlier question from the same se-
ries. However, these data were constructed artifi-
cially and are not representative of actual dialogues
from an IQA system (for instance, system answers
are not considered at all). Real IQA data yield chal-
13
lenges for an automatic processing approach (Yang
et al, 2006). Our work is based on collecting and
analyzing IQA dialogues from users of a deployed
system.
In this paper, we address the second task intro-
duced above, namely the study of common relations
between the answer to a topic continuation FU Q and
other turns in the dialogue context. Our collected di-
alogue data are from the ?library help desk? domain.
In many of the dialogues, library users request in-
formation about a specific library-related action; we
are thus dealing with task-oriented dialogues. This
work is based on two hypotheses regarding relations
holding between the FU Q?s answer and the dialogue
context. For studying such relations, we want to ex-
plore the usefulness of (1) a representation of the
library-related action underlying questions and an-
swers, and (2) a representation of the dialogue con-
text of the FU Q.
2 Background
In order to understand what part of the history of
the dialogue is important for processing FU Qs,
significant results come from Wizard-of-Oz stud-
ies, like (Dahlba?ck and Jo?nsson, 1989; Bertomeu
et al, 2006; Kirschner and Bernardi, 2007), from
which it seems that the immediate linguistic context
(i.e., the last user initiative plus the last system re-
sponse) provides the most information for resolving
any context-dependency of the FU Qs. These studies
analyzed one particular case of topic continuation
FU Q, namely those questions containing reference-
related discourse phenomena (ellipsis, definite de-
scription or anaphoric pronoun); we assume that the
results could be extended to fully specified ques-
tions, too.
Insights about the informational transitions within
a dialogue come from Natural Language Genera-
tion research. (McCoy and Cheng, 1991) provide
a list of informational transitions (they call them fo-
cus shifts) that we can interpret as transitions based
on certain thematic relations. Depending on the con-
versation?s current focus type, they list specific focus
shift candidates, i.e., the items that should get focus
as a coherent conversation moves along. Since we
are interested in methods for interpreting FU Qs au-
tomatically, we decided to restrict ourselves to use
Node type Informational transition targets
Action Actor, object, etc., of the action ?
any participant (Fillmore) role; pur-
pose (goal) of action, next action in
some sequence, subactions, special-
izations of the action
Table 1: Possible informational transition targets for ?ac-
tion? node type (McCoy and Cheng, 1991)
only the ?action? focus type to represent the focus
of questions and answers in IQA dialogues. We con-
jecture that actions form a suitable and robust basis
for describing the (informational) meaning of utter-
ances in our class of task-based ?help desk? IQA di-
alogues. Table 1 shows the focus shift candidates
for a current focus of type ?action?. In this work
we concentrate on the informational transitions in-
volving two actions (i.e., including one of the focus
targets listed in bold face in the table).
3 Exploring topic continuation FU Qs
using Machine Learning
We base our study of topic continuation FU Qs on
the two main results described in Section 2: We
study snippets of dialogues consisting of four turns,
viz. a user question (Q?1), the corresponding sys-
tem answer (A?1), the FU Q and its system answer
(A0); we use Logistic Regression Models to learn
from these snippets (1) which informational (action-
action) transitions hold between A0 and the FU Q
or the preceding dialogue, and (2) how to predict
whether a specific answer candidate A0 is correct for
a given dialogue snippet.
3.1 Machine learning framework: Logistic
Regression
Logistic regression models (Agresti, 2002) are gen-
eralized linear models that describe the relationship
between features (predictors) and a binary outcome
(in our case: answer correctness). We estimate the
model parameters (the beta coefficients ?1, . . . , ?k)
that represent the contribution of each feature to the
total answer correctness score using maximum like-
lihood estimation. Note that there is a close rela-
tionship to Maximum Entropy models, which have
performed well in many tasks. A major advantage
of using logistic regression as a supervised machine
14
learning framework (as opposed to other, possibly
better performing approaches) is that the learned co-
efficients are easy to interpret. The logistic regres-
sion equation which predicts the probability for a
particular answer candidate A0 being correct, de-
pending on the learned intercept ?0, the other beta
coefficients and the feature values x1, . . . , xk (which
themselves depend on a combination of Q?1, A?1,
FU Q or A0) is:
Prob{answerCorrect} = 11 + exp(?X??) , where
X?? = ?0 + (?1x1 + . . .+ ?kxk)
3.2 Dialogue data collection
We have been collecting English human-computer
dialogues using BoB, an IQA system which is pub-
licly accessible on the Library?s web-site of our
university1. We see the availability of dialogue
data from genuinely motivated visitors of the library
web-site as an interesting detail of our approach; our
data are less constrained and potentially more dif-
ficult to interpret than synthesized dialogues (e.g.,
TREC context track data), but should on the other
hand provide insights into the structure of actual
IQA dialogues that IQA systems might encounter.
We designed BoB as a simple chatbot-inspired ap-
plication that robustly matches user questions using
regular expression-based question patterns, and re-
turns an associated canned-text answer from a repos-
itory of 529. The question patterns and answers
have been developed by a team of librarians, and
cover a wide range of library information topics,
e.g., opening time, lending procedures and different
library services. In the context of this work, we use
BoB merely as a device for collecting real human-
computer IQA dialogues.
As a preliminary step towards automatically mod-
eling action-based informational transitions trig-
gered by FU Qs, we annotated each of the 529 an-
swers in our IQA system?s repository with the ?li-
brary action? that we considered to best represent
its (informational) meaning. For this, we had de-
vised a (flat) list of 25 library-related actions by an-
alyzing the answer repository (e.g.: access, borrow,
change, deliver). We also added synonymous verbs
1www.unibz.it/library
to our action list, like ?obtain? for ?borrow?. If we
did not find any action to represent a system an-
swer, we assigned it a special ?generic-information?
tag, e.g. for answers to questions like ?What are the
opening times??.
We base our current study on the dialogues col-
lected during the first four months of the IQA sys-
tem being accessible via the Library?s web site. Af-
ter a first pass of manually filtering out dialogues
that consisted only of a single question, or where the
question topics were only non-library-related, the
collected corpus consists of 948 user questions (first
or FU Qs) in 262 dialogue sessions (i.e., from differ-
ent web sessions). We hand-annotated the user FU
Qs in these dialogues as either ?topic continuation?
(248 questions), or ?topic shift? (150 questions).
The remaining FU Qs are user replies to system-
initiative clarification questions, which we do not
consider here. For each user question, we marked
whether the answer given by the IQA system was
correct; in the case of wrong answers, we asked our
library domain experts to provide the correct answer
that BoB should have returned. However, we only
corrected the system answer in those cases where
the user did not ask a further FU Q afterwards, as
we must not change on-going dialogues.
To get the actual training/test data, we had to fur-
ther constrain the set of 248 topic continuation FU
Qs. We removed all FU Qs that immediately follow
a system answer that we considered incorrect; this is
because any further FU Q is then uttered in a situa-
tion where the user is trying to react to the problem-
atic answer, which clearly influences the topic of the
FU Q. Of the then remaining 76 FU Qs, we keep the
following representation of the dialogue context: the
previous user question Q?1 and the previous system
answer A?1. We also keep the FU Q itself, and its
corresponding correct answer A0.
Finally, we automatically annotated each question
with one or more action tags. This was done by sim-
ply searching the stemmed question string for any
verb stem from our list of 25 actions (or one of their
synonyms); if no action stem is found, we assigned
the ?generic-information? tag to the question. Note
that this simple action detection algorithm for ques-
tions fails in case of context-dependent questions
where the verb is elided or if the question contains
still unknown action synonyms.
15
3.3 Features
In the machine learning framework introduced
above, the model is intended to predict the correct-
ness of a given system answer candidate, harnessing
information from the local dialogue context: Q?1,
A?1, FU Q and the particular answer candidate A0.
We now introduce different features that relate A0 to
either the FU Q or some other preceding turn of the
dialogue. The features describe specific aspects of
how the answer candidate relates to the current dia-
logue. Note that we do not list features relating Q?1
and A0, since our experiments showed no evidence
for including them in our models.
tfIdfSimilarityQA, tfIdfSimilarityAA: TF/IDF-
based proximity scores (ranging from 0 to 1) be-
tween two strings, namely FU Q and A0, or A?1
and A0, respectively. Based on vector similarity (us-
ing the cosine measure of angular similarity) over
dampened and discriminatively weighted term fre-
quencies. Definition of the TF/IDF distance: two
strings are more similar if they contain many of the
same tokens with the same relative number of occur-
rences of each. Tokens are weighted more heavily if
they occur in few documents2, hence we used a sub-
set of the UK English version of the Web-as-Corpus
data3 to train the IDF scores.
Features based on action sequences. To describe
the action-related informational transitions we ob-
serve between the FU Q and A0 and between A?1
and A0, we use two sets of features, both of which
are based on hand-annotated actions for answers
and automatically assigned actions for questions.
actionContinuityQA, actionContinuityAA: sim-
ple binary features indicating whether the same li-
brary action (or one of its synonyms) was identi-
fied between the FU Q and A0, or A?1 and A0, re-
spectively. lmProbQA, lmProbAA: encode Statis-
tical Language Model probabilities for action tag se-
quences, i.e., the probability for A0 having a certain
action, given the action associated with FU Q, or the
action of A?1, respectively. The underlying Statis-
tical Language Models are probability distributions
2Cf. Alias-i?s LingPipe documentation http:
//alias-i.com/lingpipe/demos/tutorial/
stringCompare/read-me.html
3http://wacky.sslmit.unibo.it
over action-action sequences that reflect how likely
certain action sequences occur in our IQA dialogues,
thus capturing properties of salient action sequences.
More technically, we use Witten-Bell smoothed 2-
gram statistical language models, which we trained
on our action-tagged FU Q data.
4 Results
For the evaluation of the logistic regression model,
we proceed as follows. Applying a cross-validation
scheme, we split our 76 FU Q training examples
randomly into five non-intersecting partitions of 15
(or 16) FU Q (with corresponding Q?1, A?1, and
correct A0) each. To train the logistic regression
model, we need training data consisting of a vec-
tor of independent variables (the various feature val-
ues), along with the binary dependent variable, i.e.,
?answer correct? or ?answer false?. We generate
these training data by ?multiplying out? each train-
ing partition?s 61 FU Qs (76 minus the held-out test
set of 15) with all 529 answer candidates; for each
FU Q dialogue snippet used for training, this results
in one positive training example (where A0 is the 1
correct out 529 answer candidates), and 528 nega-
tive training examples (for all other answer candi-
dates).
For each of the five training/test partitions, we
train a different model. We then evaluate each of
these models on their corresponding held-out test
set. Following the cross-validation idea through, we
also train separate Statistical Language Models on
sequences of action tags for each of the five training
splits; this ensures that the language model proba-
bilities were never trained on test data. We perform
the evaluation in terms of the mean rank that the cor-
rect answer A0 is assigned after ranking all 529 an-
swer candidates (by evaluating the logistic regres-
sion equation to yield answer scores).
In the following, we give details of different lo-
gistic regression models we experimented with. Ini-
tially, we chose a subset from the list of features
introduced above. Our goal was to retain as few
features as needed to explore our two hypotheses,
i.e., whether we can make use of (1) a representa-
tion of the FU Q?s underlying library action, and/or
(2) a representation of the immediate dialogue con-
text. By dropping uninformative features, the result-
16
ing models become simpler and easier to interpret.
With this goal in mind, we applied a fast backwards
elimination routine that drops uninformative predic-
tors (cf. (Baayen, 2008, p.204)) on the five training
data splits. In all five splits, both TF/IDF features
turned out to be important predictors; in four of the
splits, also lmProbQA was retained. lmProbAA was
dropped as superfluous in all but two splits, and ac-
tionSimilarityAA was retained only in one. With
these results, the set of features we retain for our
modeling experiments is: tfIdfSimilarityQA, tfIdf-
SimilarityAA and lmProbQA.
?Complete? model: tfIdfSimilarityQA, tfIdfSim-
ilarityAA and lmProbQA We estimated logistic
regression models on the five cross evaluation train-
ing sets using all three features as predictors. Table 2
shows the mean ranks of the correct answer for the
five evaluation runs, and an overall mean rank with
the average across the five splits.
To illustrate the contribution of each of the three
predictors towards the score of an answer candi-
date, we provide the (relevant linear part of) the
learned logistic regression equation for the ?com-
plete? model (trained on split 1 of the data). Note
that the ?answer ranker? evaluates this equation to
get a score for an answer candidate A0.
X?? = ?8.4 + (9.5 ? tfIdfSimilarityQA +
4.6 ? tfIdfSimilarityAA +
1.7 ? lmProbQA)
Reduced model 1: No representation of dialogue
context Only the features concerning the FU Q
and the answer A0 (tfIdfSimilarityQA, lmProbQA)
are used as predictors in building the logistic re-
gression model. The result is a model that treats
every FU Q as a stand-alone question. Across the
five models, the coefficient for tfIdfSimilarityQA is
roughly five times the size of that for lmProbQA.
Reduced model 2: No action sequences We
keep only the two TF/IDF features (tfIdfSimilari-
tyQA, tfIdfSimilarityAA). This model thus does not
use any features that depend on human annotation,
but only fully automatic features. The coefficient
learned for tfIdfSimilarityQA is generally twice as
large as that for tfIdfSimilarityAA.
Reduced model 3: No dialogue context, no action
sequences Considered as a baseline, this model
uses a single feature (tfIdfSimilarityQA) to predict
answer correctness, favoring those answer candi-
dates that have the highest lexical similarity wrt. the
FU Q.
5 Discussion
In order to better understand the relatively high
mean ranks of the correct answer candidates across
Table 2, we scrutinized the results of the answer
ranker (based on all tests on the ?complete? model).
The distribution of the ranks of correct answers is
clearly skewed; in around half of the 76 cases, the
correct answer was actually ranked among the top
20 of the 529 answer candidates. However, the mean
correct rank deteriorates badly due to the lowest-
ranking third of cases. Analyzing these lowest-
ranking cases, it appears that they are often instances
of two sub-classes of topic continuation FU Qs: (i)
the FU Q is context-dependent, i.e., underspecified
or exhibiting reference-related discourse phenom-
ena; (ii) the FU Q is a slight variation of the pre-
vious question (e.g. only the wh-phrase changes, or
only the object changes). This error analysis seems
to suggest that it should be worthwhile to distin-
guish between sub-classes of topic-continuation FU
Qs, and to improve specifically how answers for the
?difficult? sub-classes are ranked.
The relatively high mean ranks are also due to the
fact that in our approach of acquiring dialogue data,
for each FU Q we marked only one answer from the
whole repository as ?correct?. Again for the ?com-
plete? model, we checked the top 20 answer can-
didates that ranked higher than the actual ?correct?
one. We found that in over half of the cases an an-
swer that could be considered correct was among the
top 20.
Looking at the ranking results across the differ-
ent models in Table 2, the fact that the ?complete?
model seems to outperform each of the three re-
duced models (although no statistical significance
could be attained from comparing the rank num-
bers) confirms our two hypotheses proposed earlier.
Firstly, identifying the underlying actions of ques-
tions/answers and modeling action-based sequences
yield important information for identifying correct
17
Reduced m. 3 Reduced m. 2 Reduced m. 1 Complete model
Predictors tfIdfSimilarityQA tfIdfSimilarityQA, tfIdfSimilarityQA, tfIdfSimilarityQA,
in model tfIdfSimilarityAA tfIdfSimilarityAA,
lmProbQA lmProbQA
Split 1 141.2 108.4 112.5 96.2
Split 2 102.7 97.4 53.8 57.7
Split 3 56.7 63.7 50.5 52.7
Split 4 40.5 26.2 37.9 35.7
Split 5 153.1 105.3 129.6 89.1
Mean 98.8 80.2 76.7 66.3
Table 2: Mean ranks of correct A0 out of 529 answer candidates, across models and training/test splits
answers to topic continuation FU Qs. Secondly, as
for the role of the immediate dialogue context for
providing additional clues for identifying good an-
swers to FU Qs, our data show that a high lexical
similarity score between A?1 and A0 indicates a cor-
rect answer candidate. While (Yang et al, 2006)
point out the importance of Q?1 to provide context
information, in our experiments it was generally su-
perseded by A?1.
As for the two features relating the underlying
actions of A?1 and A0 (actionContinuityAA, lm-
ProbAA), the picture seems less clear; in our current
modeling experiments, we had not enough evidence
to keep these features. However, we plan to explore
the underlying idea of action-action sequences in the
future, and conjecture that such information should
come into its own for context-dependent FU Qs.
6 Future work
Besides annotating and using more dialogue data as
more people talk to our IQA system, we plan to
implement a state-of-the-art topic-shift detection al-
gorithm as proposed in (Yang et al, 2006), train-
ing and testing it on our own FU Q data. We will
attempt to improve this system by adding action-
based features, and then extend it to distinguish
three classes: topic shifts, (topic continuation) FU
Qs that are fully specified, and (topic continuation)
context-dependent FU Qs. We then plan to build
dedicated logistic regression models for the differ-
ent sub-classes of topic continuation FU Qs. If each
model uses a specific set of predictors, we hope to
improve the overall rank of correct answers across
the different classes of FU Qs. Also, from compar-
ing the different models, we are interested in study-
ing the specific properties of different FU Q types.
References
[Agresti2002] Alan Agresti. 2002. Categorical Data
Analysis. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
[Baayen2008] R. Harald Baayen. 2008. Analyzing Lin-
guistic Data. Cambridge University Press.
[Bertomeu et al2006] Nu?ria Bertomeu, Hans Uszkoreit,
Anette Frank, Hans-Ulrich Krieger, and Brigitte Jo?rg.
2006. Contextual phenomena and thematic relations
in database QA dialogues: results from a wizard-of-oz
experiment. In Proc. of the Interactive Question An-
swering Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 1?8,
New York, NY.
[Dahlba?ck and Jo?nsson1989] Nils Dahlba?ck and Arne
Jo?nsson. 1989. Empirical studies of discourse repre-
sentations for natural language interfaces. In Proc. of
the 4th Conference of the European Chapter of the
ACL (EACL?89), pages 291?298, Manchester, UK.
[Kirschner and Bernardi2007] Manuel Kirschner and
Raffaella Bernardi. 2007. An empirical view on
iqa follow-up questions. In Proc. of the 8th SIGdial
Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, Antwerp,
Belgium.
[McCoy and Cheng1991] Kathleen F. McCoy and Jean-
nette Cheng. 1991. Focus of attention: Constraining
what can be said next. In Cecile L. Paris, William R.
Swartout, and William C. Mann, editors, Natural Lan-
guage Generation in Artificial Intelligence and Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 103?124. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, Norwell, MA.
[van Schooten et al2009] Boris van Schooten, R. op den
Akker, R. Rosset, O. Galibert, A. Max, and G. Illouz.
2009. Follow-up question handling in the IMIX and
Ritel systems: A comparative study. Journal of Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 15(1):97?118.
[Yang et al2006] Fan Yang, Junlan Feng, and Giuseppe
Di Fabbrizio. 2006. A data driven approach to rele-
vancy recognition for contextual question answering.
In Proc. of the Interactive Question Answering Work-
shop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 33?40, New York
City, NY.
18
