Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 133?136,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Speech Understanding Framework
that Uses Multiple Language Models and Multiple Understanding Models
?Masaki Katsumaru, ?Mikio Nakano, ?Kazunori Komatani,
?Kotaro Funakoshi, ?Tetsuya Ogata, ?Hiroshi G. Okuno
?Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Hommachi, Sakyo, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan
{katumaru, komatani}@kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp
{ogata, okuno}@kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp
?Honda Research Institute Japan Co., Ltd.
8-1 Honcho, Wako, Saitama
351-0188, Japan
{nakano, funakoshi}@jp.honda-ri.com
Abstract
The optimal combination of language model
(LM) and language understanding model
(LUM) varies depending on available training
data and utterances to be handled. Usually, a
lot of effort and time are needed to find the op-
timal combination. Instead, we have designed
and developed a new framework that uses
multiple LMs and LUMs to improve speech
understanding accuracy under various situa-
tions. As one implementation of the frame-
work, we have developed a method for select-
ing the most appropriate speech understand-
ing result from several candidates. We use
two LMs and three LUMs, and thus obtain six
combinations of them. We empirically show
that our method improves speech understand-
ing accuracy. The performance of the oracle
selection suggests further potential improve-
ments in our system.
1 Introduction
The speech understanding component in a spoken
dialogue system consists of an automatic speech
recognition (ASR) component and a language un-
derstanding (LU) component. To develop a speech
understanding component, we need to prepare an
ASR language model (LM) and a language under-
standing model (LUM) for the dialogue domain
of the system. There are many types of LMs
such as finite-state grammars and N-grams, and
many types of LUMs such as finite-state transduc-
ers (FST), weighted finite-state transducers (WFST),
and keyphrase-extractors (extractor). Selecting a
suitable combination of LM and LUM is necessary
for robust speech understanding against various user
utterances.
Conventional studies of speech understanding
have investigated which LM and LUM give the best
performance by using fixed training and test data
such as the Air Travel Information System (ATIS)
corpus. However, in real system development, re-
sources such as training data for statistical models
and efforts to write finite-state grammars vary ac-
cording to the available human resources or budgets.
Domain-dependent training data are particularly dif-
ficult to obtain. Therefore, in conventional system
development, system developers determine the types
of LM and LUM by trial and error. Every LM and
LUM has some advantages and disadvantages, so it
is difficult for a single combination of LM and LUM
to gain high accuracy except in a situation involv-
ing a lot of training data and effort. Therefore, using
multiple speech understanding methods is a more ef-
fective approach.
In this paper, we propose a speech understand-
ing framework called ?Multiple Language models
and Multiple Understanding models (MLMU)?, in
which multiple LMs and LUMs are used, to achieve
better performance under the various development
situations. It selects the best speech understanding
result from the multiple results generated by arbi-
trary combinations of LMs and LUMs.
So far there have been several attempts to im-
prove ASR and speech understanding using mul-
tiple speech recognizers and speech understanding
modules. ROVER (Fiscus, 1997) tried to improve
ASR accuracy by integrating the outputs of multi-
ple ASRs with different acoustic and language mod-
133
LM 1utterance LM 2
LM n 
resultconfidenceintegrationcomponent
LUcomponent speechunderstandingresultsASRcomponent
LUM n LUM 2
LUM 1
LM: Language Model
LUM: Language Understanding Model
Figure 1: Flow of speech understanding in MLMU
els. The work is different from our study in the fol-
lowing two points: it does not deal with speech un-
derstanding, and it assumes that each ASR is well-
developed and achieves high accuracy for a variety
of speech inputs. Eckert et al (1996) used multiple
LMs to deal with both in-grammar utterances and
out-of-grammar utterances, but did not mention lan-
guage understanding. Hahn et al (2008) used mul-
tiple LUMs, but just a single language model.
2 Speech Understanding Framework
MLMU
MLMU is a framework by which system developers
can use multiple speech understanding methods by
preparing multiple LMs and multiple LUMs. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates the flow of speech understanding in
MLMU. System developers list available LMs and
LUMs for each system?s domain, and the system
understands utterances by using these models. The
framework selects one understanding result from
multiple results or calculates a confidence score of
the result by using the generated multiple under-
standing results.
MLMU can improve speech understanding for the
following reason. The performance of each speech
understanding (a combination of LM and LUM)
might not be very high when either training data for
the statistical model or available expertise and ef-
fort for writing grammar are insufficient. In such
cases, some utterances might not be covered by the
system?s finite-state grammar LM, and probability
estimation in the statistical models may not be very
good. Using multiple speech understanding mod-
els is expected to solve this problem because each
model has different specialities. For example, finite-
state grammar LMs and FST-based LUMs achieve
high accuracy in recognizing and understanding in-
grammar utterances, whereas out-of-grammar utter-
ances are covered by N-gram models and LUMs
based on WFST and keyphrase-extractors. There-
fore it is more possible that the understanding results
of MLMU will include the correct result than a case
when a single understanding model is used.
The understanding results of MLMU will be help-
ful in many ways. We used them to achieve better
understanding accuracy by selecting the most reli-
able one. This selection is based on features con-
cerning ASR results and language understanding re-
sults. It is also possible to delay the selection, hold-
ing multiple understanding result candidates that
will be disambiguated as the dialogue proceeds (Bo-
hus, 2004). Furthermore, confidence scores, which
enable an efficient dialogue management (Komatani
and Kawahara, 2000), can be calculated by ranking
these results or by voting on them, by using multi-
ple speech understanding results. The understanding
results can be used in the discourse understanding
module and the dialogue management module. They
can choose one of the understanding results depend-
ing on the dialogue situation.
3 Implementation
3.1 Available Language Models and Language
Understanding Models
We implemented MLMU as a library of RIME-
TK, which is a toolkit for building multi-domain
spoken dialogue systems (Nakano et al, 2008).
With the current implementation, developers can use
the following LMs:
1. A LM based on finite-state grammar (FSG)
2. A domain-dependent statistical N-gram model
(N-gram)
and the following LUMs:
1. Finite-state transducer (FST)
2. Weighted FST (WFST)
3. Keyphrase-extractor (extractor).
System developers can use multiple finite-state-
grammar-based LMs or N-gram-based LMs, and
134
also multiple FSTs and WFSTs. They can specify
the combination for each domain by preparing LMs
and LUMs. They can specify grammar models when
sufficient human labor is available for writing gram-
mar, and specify statistical models when a corpus for
training models is available.
3.2 Selecting Understanding Result based on
ASR and LU Features
We also implemented a mechanism for selecting one
of the understanding results as the best hypothesis.
The mechanism chooses the result with the highest
estimated probability of correctness. Probabilities
are estimated for each understanding result by using
logistic regression, which uses several ASR and LU
features.
We define Pi as the probability that speech under-
standing result i is correct, and we select one result
based on argmax
i
Pi. We denote each speech un-
derstanding result as i (i = 1,. . . ,6). We constructed
a logistic regression model for Pi. The regression
function can be written as:
Pi = 11 + exp(?(ai1Fi1 + . . . + aimFim + bi)) .(1)
The coefficients ai1, . . . , aim, bi were fitted us-
ing training data. The independent variables
Fi1, Fi2, ..., Fim are listed in Table 1. In the table,
n indicates the number of understanding results, that
is, n = 6 in this paper?s experiment. Here, we denote
the features as Fi1, Fi2, ..., Fim.
Features from Fi1 to Fi3 represent characteristics
of ASR results. The acoustic scores were normal-
ized by utterance durations in seconds. These fea-
tures are used for verifying its ASR result. Features
from Fi4 to Fi9 represent characteristics of LU re-
sults. Features from Fi4 to Fi6 are defined on the
basis of the concept-based confidence scores (Ko-
matani and Kawahara, 2000).
4 Preliminary Experiment
We conducted a preliminary experiment to show the
potential of the framework by using the two LMs
and three LUMs noted in Section 3.1.
Table 1: Features from speech understanding result i
Fi1: acoustic score of ASR
Fi2: difference between Fi1 and acoustic score
of ASR for utterance verification
Fi3: utterance duration [sec.]
Fi4: average confidence scores for concepts in i
Fi5: average of Fi4 ( 1n
?n
i Fi4)
Fi6: proportion of Fi4 (Fi4 /?ni Fi5)
Fi7: average # concepts ( 1n
?n
i #concepti)
Fi8: max. # concepts (max (#concepti) )
Fi9: min. # concepts (min (#concepti) )
4.1 Preparing LMs and LUMs
The finite-state grammar rules were written in sen-
tence units manually. A domain-dependent statisti-
cal N-gram model was trained on 10,000 sentences
randomly generated from the grammar. The vocab-
ulary sizes of the grammar LM and the domain-
dependent statistical LM were both 278. We
also used a domain-independent statistical N-gram
model for obtaining acoustic scores for utterance
verification, which was trained onWeb texts (Kawa-
hara et al, 2004). Its vocabulary size was 60,250.
The grammar used in the FST was the same as the
FSG used as one of the LMs, which was manually
written by a system developer. The WFST-based LU
was based on a method to estimate WFST parame-
ters with a small amount of data (Fukubayashi et al,
2008). Its parameters were estimated by using 105
utterances of just one user. The keyphrase extrac-
tor extracts as many concepts as possible from an
ASR result on the basis of a grammar while ignor-
ing words that do not match the grammar.
4.2 Target Data for Evaluation
We used 3,055 utterances in the rent-a-car reserva-
tion domain (Nakano et al, 2007). We used Julius
(ver. 4.0.2) as the speech recognizer and a 3000-
state phonetic tied-mixture (PTM) triphone model
as the acoustic model1. ASR accuracy in mora ac-
curacy when using the FSG and the N-gram model
were 71.9% and 75.5% respectively. We used con-
cept error rates (CERs) to represent the speech un-
derstanding accuracy, which is calculated as fol-
1http://julius.sourceforge.jp/
135
Table 2: CERs [%] for each speech understanding
method
speech understanding method
(LM + LUM) CER
(1) FSG + FST 26.9
(2) FSG + WFST 29.9
(3) FSG + extractor 27.1
(4) N-gram + FST 35.2
(5) N-gram + WFST 25.3
(6) N-gram + extractor 26.0
selection from (1) through (6) (our method) 22.7
oracle selection 13.5
lows:
CER = # error concepts#concepts in utterances . (2)
We manually annotated whether an understanding
result of each utterance was correct or not, and
used them as training data to fit the coefficients
ai1, . . . , aim, bi.
4.3 Evaluation in Concept Error Rates
We fitted the coefficients of regression functions and
selected understanding results with a 10-fold cross
validation. Table 2 lists the CERs based on combi-
nations of single LM and LUM and by our method.
Of all combinations of single LM and LUM, the best
accuracy was obtained with (5) (N-gram + WFST).
Our method improved by 2.6 points over (5). Al-
though we achieved a lower CER, we used a lot
of data to estimate logistic regression coefficients.
Such a large amount of data may not be available in a
real situation. We will conduct more experiments by
changing the amount of training data. Table 2 also
shows the accuracy of the oracle selection, which
selected the best speech understanding result man-
ually. The CER of the oracle selection was 13.5%,
a significant improvement compared to all combina-
tions of a LM and LUM. There is no combination of
a LM and LUM whose understanding results were
not selected at all in the oracle selection and our
method?s selection. These results show that using
multiple LMs and multiple LUMs can potentially
improve speech understanding accuracy.
5 Ongoing work
We will conduct more experiments in other domains
or with other resources to evaluate the effectiveness
of our framework. We plan to investigate the case
in which a smaller amount of the training data is
used to estimate the coefficients of the logistic re-
gressions. Furthermore, finding a way to calculate
confidence scores of speech understanding results is
on our agenda.
References
Dan Bohus. 2004. Error awareness and recovery in
task-oriented spoken dialogue systems. Ph.D. thesis,
Carnegie Mellon University.
Wieland Eckert, Florian Gallwitz, and Heinrich Nie-
mann. 1996. Combining stochastic and linguistic lan-
guage models for recognition of spontaneous speech.
In Proc. ICASSP, pages 423?426.
Jonathan G. Fiscus. 1997. A post-processing system
to yield reduced word error rates: Recognizer Out-
put Voting Error Reduction (ROVER). In Proc. ASRU,
pages 347?354.
Yuichiro Fukubayashi, Kazunori Komatani, Mikio
Nakano, Kotaro Funakoshi, Hiroshi Tsujino, Tetsuya
Ogata, and Hiroshi G. Okuno. 2008. Rapid prototyp-
ing of robust language understanding modules for spo-
ken dialogue systems. In Proc. IJCNLP, pages 210?
216.
Stefan Hahn, Patrick Lehnen, and Hermann Ney. 2008.
System combination for spoken language understand-
ing. In Proc. Interspeech, pages 236?239.
Tatsuya Kawahara, Akinobu Lee, Kazuya Takeda, Kat-
sunobu Itou, and Kiyohiro Shikano. 2004. Recent
progress of open-source LVCSR Engine Julius and
Japanese model repository. In Proc. ICSLP, pages
3069?3072.
Kazunori Komatani and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2000.
Flexible mixed-initiative dialogue management using
concept-level confidence measures of speech recog-
nizer output. In Proc. COLING, volume 1, pages 467?
473.
Mikio Nakano, Yuka Nagano, Kotaro Funakoshi, Toshi-
hiko Ito, Kenji Araki, Yuji Hasegawa, and Hiroshi Tsu-
jino. 2007. Analysis of user reactions to turn-taking
failures in spoken dialogue systems. In Proc. SIGdial,
pages 120?123.
Mikio Nakano, Kotaro Funakoshi, Yuji Hasegawa, and
Hiroshi Tsujino. 2008. A framework for building con-
versational agents based on a multi-expert model. In
Proc. SIGdial, pages 88?91.
136
