Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Tutorials, pages 11?12,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
OntoNotes: The 90% Solution
Sameer S. Pradhan and Nianwen Xue
OntoNotes is a five year multi-site collaboration between BBN Technologies, Information Sciences In-
stitute of University of Southern California, University of Colorado, University of Pennsylvania and Bran-
deis University. The goal of the OntoNotes project is to provide linguistic data annotated with a skeletal
representation of the literal meaning of sentences including syntactic parse, predicate-argument structure,
coreference, and word senses linked to an ontology, allowing a new generation of language understanding
technologies to be developed with new functional capabilities.
In its third year of existence, the OntoNotes project has generated a large amount of high quality data
covering various layers of linguistic annotation. This is probably the first time that data of such quality has
been available in large quantities covering multiple genres (newswire, broadcast news, broadcast conver-
sation and weblogs) and languages (English, Chinese and Arabic). The guiding principle has been to find
a ?sweet spot? in the space of inter-tagger agreement, productivity, and depth of representation. The most
effective use of this resource for research requires simultaneous access to multiple layers of annotation. This
has been made possible by representing the corpus with a relational database to accommodate the dense
connectedness of the data and ensure consistency across layers. In order to facilitate ease of understanding
and manipulability, the database has also been supplemented with a object-oriented Python API.
The tutorial consists of two parts. In the first part we will familiarize the user with this new resource,
describe the various layers of annotations in some detail and discuss the linguistic principles and some-
times practical considerations behind the important design decisions that shapes the corpus. We will also
describe the salient differences between the three languages at each layer of annotation and how linguistic
peculiarities of different languages were handled in the data.
In the second part, we will describe the data formats of each of the layers and talk about various design
decisions that went into the creation of the architecture of the database and the individual tables comprising
it, along with issues that came up during the representation process and compromises that were made
without sacrificing some primary objectives one of which being the independent existence of each layer
that is necessary to allow multi-site collaboration. We will explain how the database schema attempts to
interconnect all the layers. Then we will go into the details of the Python API that allows easy access to each
of the layers and show that by making the objects closely resemble database tables, the API allows for their
flexible integration. This will be followed by a hands-on working session.
1 Tutorial Outline
1. Annotation Layers
? Overview of OntoNotes
? Design principles
? Depth of annotation
? Consistency (ITA)
? Linguistics principles
? Potential applications
? Question Answering
? Machine Translation
? Layers of Annotation in English, Chinese and Arabic
? Treebank
? PropBank
? Word Sense
111
? Name
? Coreference
? Ontology
? Comparison with existing multi-layer annotation corpora
2. Data Access API
? Data
? File format
? Metadata specification
? Database schema representing each layer of annotation
? ER diagram
? Inter-connection between the annotation layers (database tables)
? Python Access API
? Introduction to the Python modules
? Correspondence between MySQL tables and Python classes
? Introduction to some frequently used module functionalities
? Extending the API to add a new layer of annotation
? Hands on Session
? Creating a sample OntoNotes database from MySQL dump file
? Loading it into memory
? Creating Python objects representing various annotation layers
? Performing cross-layer queries using a combination of API and database
? We will provide some sample queries
? Users can use their own experience to generate novel queries
? Manipulating the data as in Python world and MySQL world
? Writing the modified versions back to the database
2 Target Audience
This tutorial is designed for people interested in using one or more layers of OntoNotes in their research to
further language understanding through improved shallow semantic analysis. Detailed knowledge of any of
the layers is not necessary. Some familiarity with Python would be preferable.
Sameer Pradhan is a Research Scientist at BBN Technologies. His research interests include computational
semantics, question answering, application of machine learning to language understanding and annotation
science. He have been leading the data integration and coreference annotation effort in the DARPA funded
GALE OntoNotes project at BBN. In the past he was the technical lead on the AQUAINT project at BBN.
He serves on the ACL SIGANN committee and has been one of the organizers of the Linguistics Annotation
Workshops (LAW II and III) He has been on the programme committees of Workshop on UIMA for NLP,
and Conference on Global Interoperability of Language Resources (ICGL) He has also served on the guest
Editorial Board of Computational Linguistics: Special issue on Semantic Role Labeling. He got his PhD in
Computer Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Nianwen Xue is an Assistant Professor of Language & Linguistics and Computer Science at Brandeis Univer-
sity. His research interests include formal representation of linguistic structures and its impact on natural
language processing, aspects of syntax, computational linguistics, corpus linguistics and Chinese language
processing. He is currently leading the effort to expand the Chinese Treebank, Proposition Bank and word
sense annotation, funded by DARPA as part of the GALE OntoNotes project. He serves on the ACL SIGANN
committee. He is one of the organizers of the Linguistics Annotation Workshops (LAW II and III) and is also
on the organizing committee of the CoNLL Shared Task on Syntactic and Semantic Dependencies in Multiple
Languages. He has also served on the guest Editorial Board of Computational Linguistics: Special issue on
Semantic Role Labeling. He got his PhD in linguistics from University of Delaware.
212
