Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 197?200,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
The independence of dimensions in multidimensional dialogue act
annotation
Volha Petukhova and Harry Bunt
Tilburg Center for Creative Computing
Tilburg University, The Netherlands,
{v.petukhova,h.bunt}@uvt.nl
Abstract
This paper presents empirical evidence for the
orthogonality of the DIT++ multidimensional
dialogue act annotation scheme, showing that
the ten dimensions of communication which
underlie this scheme are addressed indepen-
dently in natural dialogue.
1 Introduction
Studies of human dialogue behaviour indicate that
natural dialogue utterances are very often multifunc-
tional. This observation has inspired the develop-
ment of multidimensional approaches to dialogue
analysis and annotation, e.g. (Allen & Core, 1997) ,
(Larsson, 1998), (Popescu-Belis, 2005), (Bunt,
2006). The most frequently used annotation scheme
that implements this approach is DAMSL (Allen
and Core, 1997), which allows multiple labels to be
assigned to utterances in four layers: Communica-
tive Status, Information Level, Forward-Looking
Function (FLF) and Backward-Looking Function
(BLF). The FLF layer is subdivided into five classes,
including (roughly) the classes of commissive and
directive functions, well known from speech act the-
ory. The BLF layer has four classes: Agreement,
Understanding, Answer, and Information Relation.
These nine classes, also referred to as ?dimensions?,
form mutually exclusive sets of tags; no further mo-
tivation is given for the particular choice of classes.
Popescu-Belis (2005) argues that dialogue act
tagsets should seek a multidimensional theoretical
grounding and defines the following aspects of ut-
terance function that could be relevant for choosing
dimensions (1) the traditional clustering of illocu-
tionary forces in speech act theory into five classes:
Representatives, Commissives, Directives, Expres-
sives and Declarations; (2) turn management; (3) ad-
jacency pairs; (4) topical organization in dialogue;
(5) politeness functions; and (6) rhetorical roles.
Structuring an annotation scheme by grouping re-
lated communicative functions into clusters makes
the structure of the schema more transparent. Such
clusters or ?dimensions? are usually defined as a
set of functions related to the same type of infor-
mation, such as Acknowledging, Signalling Under-
standing and Signalling Non-understanding, or Dia-
logue Opening and Dialogue Closing. Bunt (2006)
shows that this does not always lead to a notion of
dimension that has any conceptual and theoretical
significance, and argues that some of the function
classes of DAMSL do not constitute proper dimen-
sions.
In particular, a theoretically grounded multidi-
mensional schema should provide an account of the
possible multifunctionality of dialogue utterances.
In (Bunt, 2006); (Bunt and Girard, 2005) a dimen-
sion in dialogue act analysis is defined as an aspect
of participating in dialogue which can be addressed:
? by dialogue acts which have a function specifi-
cally for dealing with this aspect;
? independently of the other dimensions.
The independence of dimensions, required by this
definition, has the effect that an utterance may have
a function in one dimension independent of the func-
tions that it may have in other dimensions, and helps
to explain why utterances may have multiple func-
tions. Moreover, it leads to more manageable and
197
more adaptable annotation schemas (compared to,
for instance, DAMSL and its derivatives), since it al-
lows annotators to leave out certain dimensions that
they are not interested in, or to extend the schema
with additional dimensions; and it allows restricting
or modifying the set of tags in a particular dimension
without affecting the rest of the schema.
Based on the above definition and extensive theo-
retical and empirical studies, 10 dimensions are de-
fined in the DIT++ dialogue act annotation scheme1:
the domain or task/activity (Task); feedback on the
processing of previous utterances by the speaker
(Auto-feedback) or by other interlocutors (Allo-
feedback); managing difficulties in the speaker?s ut-
terance production (Own-Communication Manage-
ment, OCM) or that of other interlocutors (Partner
Communication Management, PCM); the speaker?s
need for time to continue the dialogue (Time Man-
agement); establishing and maintaining contact
(Contact Management); the allocation of the next
turn (Turn Management); the way the speaker is
planning to structure the dialogue (Dialogue Struc-
turing); and attention for social aspects of the inter-
action (Social Obligations Management, SOM).
This paper investigates the independence of these
ten dimensions. In Section 2 we discuss the notion
of independence of dimensions and how it can be
tested. Section 3 reports test results and Section 4
draws conclusions.
2 Independence of dimensions
We define two dimensions D1 and D2 in an anno-
tation scheme to be independent iff (1) an utterance
may be assigned a value in D1 regardless of whether
it is assigned a value in D2; and (2) it is not the case
that whenever an utterance has a value in D1, this
determines its value in D2.2
Dependences between dimensions can be de-
termined empirically by analyzing annotated dia-
logue data. Dimension tags which always co-occur
are nearly certainly dependent; zero co-occurrence
scores also suggest possible dependences. Besides
co-occurrence scores, we also provide a statistical
analysis using the phi coefficient as a measure of
1For more information about the scheme and its dimensions
please visit http://dit.uvt.nl/
2See Petukhova and Bunt (2009) for a more extensive dis-
cussion.
relatedness. The phi measure is related to the chi-
square statistic, used to test the independence of cat-
egorical variables, and is similar to the correlation
coefficient in its interpretation.
If a dimension is not independent from other di-
mensions, then there would be no utterances in the
data which address only that dimension. We there-
fore also investigate to which extent it happens that
an utterance addresses only one dimension. We also
investigate whether a dimension is addressed only in
reaction to a certain other dimension. For example,
the answer dimension as defined in DAMSL cannot
be seen as independent, because answers need ques-
tions in order to exist. The test here is to examine the
relative frequencies of pairs <dimension tag, previ-
ous dimension tag>.
To sum up, we performed four tests, examining:
1. the relative frequency of communicative func-
tion co-occurrences across dimensions;
2. the extent of relatedness between dimensions
measure with the phi coefficient;
3. for all dimensions whether there are utterances
addressing only that dimension;
4. the relative frequency of pairs of dimension and
previous dimension.
3 Test results
Since different types of dialogue may have differ-
ent tag distributions, three different dialogue corpora
have been examined:
? The DIAMOND corpus3 of two-party instruc-
tional human-human Dutch dialogues (1,408
utterances);
? The AMI corpus4 of task-oriented human-
human multi-party English dialogues (3,897 ut-
terances);
? The OVIS corpus5 of information-seeking
human-computer Dutch dialogues (3,942 utter-
ances).
All three corpora were manually segmented and
tagged according to the DIT++ annotation scheme.
3For more information see Geertzen, J., Girard, Y., and
Morante R. 2004. The DIAMOND project. Poster at CATA-
LOG 2004.
4Augmented Multi-party Interaction (http:
//www.amiproject.org/)
5Openbaar Vervoer Informatie System (Public Transport In-
formation System) http://www.let.rug.nl/v?annoord/Ovis/
198
Table 1: Co-occurrences of communicative functions across dimensions in AMI corpus expressed in relative frequency in %
implicated and entailed functions excluded and included (in brackets).
The test results presented in this section are similar
for all three corpora.
The co-occurrence results in Table 1 show no
dependences between dimensions, although some
combinations of dimensions occur frequently, e.g.
time and turn management acts often co-occur. A
speaker who wants to win some time to gather his
thoughts and uses Stalling acts mostly wants to con-
tinue in the sender role, and his stalling behaviour
may be intended to signal that as well (i.e., to be
interpreted as a Turn Keeping act). But stalling be-
haviour does not always have that function; espe-
cially an extensive amount of stallings accompanied
by relatively long pauses may be intended to elicit
support for completing an utterance.
It is also interesting to have a look at co-
occurrences of communicative functions taking im-
plicated and entailed functions into account (the cor-
pora were reannotated for this purpose). An impli-
cated function is for instance the positive feedback
(on understanding and evaluating the preceding ut-
terance(s) of the addressee) that is implied by an ex-
pression of thanks; examples of entailed functions
are the positive feedback on the preceding utterance
that is implied by answering a question, by accept-
ing an invitation, or by rejecting an offer.
Co-occurrence scores are higher when entailed
and implicated functions are taken into account (the
scores given in brackets in Table 1). For example,
questions, which mostly belong to the Task dimen-
sion, much of the time have an accompanying Turn
Management function, either releasing the turn or
assigning it to another dialogue participant, allow-
ing the question to be answered. Similarly, when
accepting a request the speaker needs to have the
turn, so communicative functions like Accept Re-
quest will often be accompanied by functions like
Turn Take or Turn Accept. Such cases contribute to
the co-occurrence score between the Task and Turn
Management dimensions.
Table 1 shows that some dimensions do not oc-
cur in combination. We do not find combinations of
Contact and Time Management, Contact and Part-
ner Communication Management, or Partner Com-
munication Management and Discourse Structuring,
for example. Close inspection of the definitions of
the tags in these pairs of dimensions does not re-
veal combination restrictions that would make one
of these dimensions depend on the others.
Table 2 presents the extent to which dimensions
are related when the corpus data are annotated with
or without taking implicated and entailed functions
into account, according to the calculated phi coeffi-
cient.
No strong positive (phi values from .7 to 1.0) or
negative (-.7 to -1.0) relations are observed. There
is a weak positive association (.6) between Turn
and Time Management (see co-occurrence analysis
above) and between OCM and Turn Management
(.4). Weak negative associations are observed be-
tween Task and Auto-feedback (-.5) when entailed
and implicated functions are not considered; be-
tween Task and Contact Management (-.6); and be-
tween Auto- and Allo-feedback (-.6) when entailed
and implicated functions are included in the analy-
sis. The weak negative association means that an
utterance does not often have communicative func-
tions in these two dimensions simultaneously. Some
negative associations become positive if we take en-
tailed and implicated functions into account, be-
cause, as already noted, dialogue acts like answers,
accepts and rejects, imply positive feedback.
199
Table 2: Extent of relation between dimensions for AMI corpus expressed in the Phi coefficient (implicated and entailed functions
excluded (white cells) and included (grey cells)).
The third independence test, mentioned above,
shows that each dimension may be addressed by
an utterance which does not address any other di-
mension. The Task dimension is independently ad-
dressed in 28.8% of the utterances; 14.2% of the ut-
terances have a function in the Auto-Feedback di-
mension only; for the other dimensions these fig-
ures are 0.7% - Allo-Feedback; 7.4% - Turn Man-
agement; 0.3% - Time Management; 0.1% - Contact
Management; 1.9% - Discourse Structuring; 0.5% -
OCM; 0.2% - PCM; and 0.3% - SOM.
Table 3: Overview of relative frequency (in%) of pairs of di-
mension and previous dimensions by previous utterances ob-
served in AMI data, per dimension, drawn from the set of 5
pairs from the dialogue history.
We finally investigated the occurrences of tags
given the tags of the previous utterances, taking five
previous utterances into account. Table 3 shows no
evidence of dependences across the dialogue his-
tory. There are some frequent patterns, for example,
retractions and self-corrections often follow hesita-
tions because the speaker, while monitoring his own
speech and noticing that part of it needs revision,
needs time to construct the corrected part.
4 Conclusions
In this paper we investigated the independence of
the dimensions defined in the DIT++ dialogue act
annotation scheme, using co-occurrences matrices
and the phi coefficient for measuring relatedness be-
tween dimensions.
The results show that, although some dimensions
are more related and co-occur more frequently than
others, on the whole the ten DIT++ dimensions
may be considered to be independent aspects of
communication.
Acknowledgments
This research was conducted as part of ISO project
24617-2: Semantic annotation framework, Part 2:
Dialogue acts, and sponsored by Tilburg University.
References
James F. Allen and Mark G. Core. 1997. Draft of
DAMSL: Dialog Act Markup in Several Layers.
Jens Allwood. 2000. An activity-based approach to prag-
matics. In Bunt, H., and Black, W. (eds.) Abduction,
Belief and Context in Dialogue; Studies in Computa-
tional Pragmatics, pp. 47?80. Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Harry Bunt and Yann Girard. 2005. Designing an open,
multidimensional dialogue act taxonomy. In Gardent,
C., and Gaiffe, B. (eds). Proc. 9th Workshop on the
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue, pp. 37?44.
Harry Bunt. 2006. Dimensions in dialogue annotation.
In Proceedings of LREC 2006.
Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding dia-
logues with the DAMSL annotation scheme. In Work-
ing Notes: AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative
Action in Humans and Machines, pp. 28?35.
Staffan Larsson. 1998. Coding Schemas for Dialogue
Moves. Technical report from the S-DIME project.
Volha Petukhova and Harry Bunt. 2009. Dimensions
in communication. TiCC Technical Report 2009-002,
Tilburg University.
Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2005. Dialogue Acts: One or
More Dimensions? ISSCO Working Paper 62, ISSCO.
200
