Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Demonstrations, pages 1?4,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Cross-document Temporal and Spatial Person Tracking  
System Demonstration 
 
Heng Ji Zheng Chen 
Queens College and the Graduate Center The Graduate Center 
The City University of New York 
New York, NY, 11367 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu zchen1@gc.cuny.edu 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Traditional Information Extraction (IE) sys-
tems identify many unconnected facts. The 
objective of this paper is to define a new 
cross-document information extraction task 
and demonstrate a system which can extract, 
rank and track events in two dimensions: tem-
poral and spatial. The system can automati-
cally label the person entities involved in 
significant events as 'centroid arguments', and 
then present the events involving the same 
centroid on a time line and on a geographical 
map. 
1 Introduction 
Information Extraction (IE) systems can identify 
?facts? (entities, relations and events) of particular 
types within individual documents, and so can 
unleash the knowledge embedded in texts for many 
domains, such as military monitoring, daily news, 
financial analysis and biomedical reports. However, 
most current IE systems focus on processing single 
documents and, except for coreference resolution, 
operate a sentence at a time. The result are large 
databases containing many unconnected, unranked, 
redundant (and some erroneous) facts. 
McNamara (2001) proved that a high-coherence 
text has fewer conceptual gaps and thus requires 
fewer inferences and less prior knowledge, render-
ing the text easier to understand. In our task text 
coherence is the extent to which the relationships 
between events in a text can be made explicit. We 
noted that linking all events in temporal and spatial 
directions for the entire corpus was not feasible 
because of the large number of event arguments. 
Grosz et al (1995) claimed that certain entities are 
more central than others and that this property im-
posed constraints on discourse coherence. There-
fore we have developed a system which can extract 
globally salient and novel arguments as centroid 
arguments, and link all events involving each cen-
troid argument on a time line and on a geographi-
cal map.    
Beyond extracting isolated facts from individual 
sentences, we provide coherent event chains so that 
the users can save time in connecting relevant 
events and conducting reasoning, such as tracking 
a person?s movement activities and an organiza-
tion?s personnel changes. This will provide a richer 
set of views than is possible with document clus-
tering for summarization or with topic tracking. In 
addition, such cross-document extraction results 
are indexed and allow a fast entity searching 
mechanism. Beyond traditional search, the system 
can correlate and organize information across dif-
ferent time series by temporal tracking, and deliver 
to users in different geographies by spatial tracking. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 presents the overall system architecture 
including the baseline system and the detailed ap-
proaches to extract event chains. Section 3 then 
presents the experimental results compared to tra-
ditional IE. Section 4 demonstrates the system out-
put. Section 5 compares our approach with related 
work and Section 6 then concludes the paper and 
sketches our future work. 
2 System Overview 
In this section we will present the overall proce-
dure of our system.  
 
 
 
1
2.1 Within-document IE 
We first apply a state-of-the-art English IE system 
(Ji and Grishman, 2008) to extract events from 
each single document. The IE system includes en-
tity extraction, time expression extraction and 
normalization, relation extraction and event extrac-
tion. Entities include persons, locations, organiza-
tions, facilities, vehicles and weapons; Events 
include the 33 distinct event types defined in 
Automatic Content Extraction (ACE05)1.  
The event extraction system combines pattern 
matching with statistical models. For every event 
instance in the ACE training corpus, patterns are 
constructed based on the sequences of constituent 
heads separating the trigger and arguments. In ad-
dition, a set of Maximum Entropy classifiers are 
trained: to distinguish events from non-events; to 
classify events by type and subtype; to distinguish 
arguments from non-arguments; to classify argu-
ments by argument role; and given a trigger, an 
event type, and a set of arguments, to determine 
whether there is a reportable event mention. In ad-
dition, the global evidence from related documents 
is combined with local decisions to conduct cross-
document inference for improving the extraction 
performance as described in (Ji and Grishman, 
2008). 
2.2 Centroid Argument Detection 
After we harvest a large repository of events we 
can label those important person entities which are 
involved frequently in events as ?centroid argu-
ments?. Not only are such arguments central to the 
information in a collection (high-frequency), they 
also should have higher accuracy (high-
confidence). In this project we exploit global con-
fidence metrics to reach both of these two goals. 
For an event mention, the within-document 
event classifiers produce the following local confi-
dences values: 
 
? LConf(trigger,etype): The probability of a 
string trigger indicating an event mention with 
type etype. 
? LConf(arg, etype): The probability that a men-
tion arg is an argument of some particular 
event type etype. 
                                                          
1 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/ 
? LConf(arg, etype, role): If arg is an argument 
with event type etype, the probability of arg 
having some particular role. 
 
We use the INDRI information retrieval system 
(Strohman et al, 2005) to obtain the top N related 
documents for each test document to form a topi-
cally-related cluster. The intuition is that if an ar-
gument appears frequently as well as with high 
extraction confidence in a cluster, it is more salient. 
For each argument arg we also added other person 
names coreferential with or bearing some ACE 
relation to the argument as argset.  
In addition we developed a cross-document per-
son name disambiguation component based on 
heuristic rules to resolve ambiguities among cen-
troid arguments. Then we define the following global 
metric weighted with the local confidence values to 
measure salience, and generate the top-ranked entities 
as centroid arguments. 
 
? Global-Confidence(arg): The frequency of 
argset appearing as an event argument in a 
cluster, weighted by local confidence values: 
LConf(trigger,etype)*LConf(arg, etype)*  
 LConf(arg, etype, role). 
2.3 Cross-document Event Aggregation and 
Global Time Discovery 
If two events involve the same centroid argument, 
we order them along a time line according to their 
time arguments and group them into specific geo-
graphical locations based on their place arguments. 
When ordering a pair of entity arguments, we re-
place pronouns with their coreferential names or 
nominals, and replace nominals with their corefer-
ential names, if applicable. If the normalized dates 
are the same for two events, we further compare 
them based on their time roles (e.g. ?time-end? 
should be ordered after ?time-beginning?).  
We start from aggregating events by merging 
coreferential event mentions using the within-
document coreference resolution component in the 
IE system. However, the degree of similarity 
among events contained in a group of topically-
related documents is much higher than within a 
document, as each document is apt to describe the 
main point as well as necessary shared background.
2
Relation Eventi Arguments Eventj Arguments Centroid Event Type Event Time
Coreference Entity[Ariel Sharon] 
Place [Jerusalem] 
Entity[Sharon] 
Place[Jerusalem] 
Powell Contact-
Meet 
2003-06-20
Subset Entity[Bush] Entity[Bush] 
Place[Camp David]
Blair Contact-
Meet 
2003-03-27
Subsumption Destination[Mideast] Destination[Egypt] Bush Movement-
Transport 
2003-06-02
 
Complement 
Sentence 
[nine-year jail] 
Crime[corruption] 
Adjudicator[court] 
Place[Malaysia] 
Sentence 
[nine-year prison] 
Anwar 
Ibrahim 
Justice- 
Sentence 
2003-04-18
 
Table 1. Cross-document Event Aggregation Examples 
 
Therefore in order to maximize diversity, we 
merge any pair of events that have the same event 
type and involve the same centroid argument, via 
one of the operations in Table 1.  
3 Experimental Results 
We used 10 newswire texts from ACE 2005 train-
ing corpora as our test. For each test text we re-
trieved 25 related texts from English Topic 
Detection and Tracking (TDT-5)2 corpus which in 
total consists of 278,108 texts. The IE system ex-
tracted 179 event mentions including 140 Name 
arguments. We define an argument is correctly 
extracted if its event type, offsets, and role match 
any of the reference argument mentions. 
We found that after ranking with the global con-
fidence metrics, the top-ranked event arguments 
are substantially more accurate than the arguments 
as a whole: the overall accuracy without ranking is 
about 53%; but after ranking the top 85 arguments 
(61% of total) get accuracy above 70% and the top 
116 arguments (83% of total) are above 60% accu-
racy. It suggests that aggregating and ranking 
events according to global evidence can enable 
users to access salient and accurate information 
rapidly.  
4 Demonstration 
In this section we will demonstrate the results on 
all the documents in the English TDT5 corpus. In 
total 7962 person entities are identified as centroid 
arguments. The offline processing takes about 
three hours on a single PC. The real time browsing 
only takes one second in a standard web browser. 
                                                          
2 http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/TDT5/ 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 present the temporal and 
spatial event chains involving the top 5 centroid 
arguments: ?Bush?, ?Arafat?, ?Taylor?, ?Saddam? 
and ?Abbas?. The events involving each centroid 
are ordered on a time line (Figure 1) and associated 
with their corresponding geographical codes in a 
map (Figure 2).  
The users can drag the timeline and map to 
browse the events. In addition, the aggregated 
event arguments are indexed and allow fast cen-
troid searching. Each argument is also labeled by 
its global confidence, language sources, and linked 
to its context sentences and other event chains it is 
involved. We omit these details in these screen-
shots. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Temporal Person Tracking 
 
3
 
Figure 2. Spatial Person Tracking 
5 Related Work 
Recently there has been heightened interest in dis-
covering temporal event chains. For example, 
Bethard and Martin (2008) applied supervised 
learning to classify temporal and causal relations 
simultaneously. Chambers and Jurafsky (2008) 
extracted narrative event chains based on common 
protagonists. In this paper we import these ideas 
into IE while take into account some major differ-
ences. Following the original idea of centering 
(Grosz et al, 1995) and the approach of centering 
events involving protagonists (Chambers and Ju-
rafsky, 2008), we introduce a new concept of ?cen-
troid arguments? to represent those entities which 
are involved in all kinds of salient events fre-
quently. We operate cross-document instead of 
within-document, which requires us to resolve 
more conflicts and ambiguities. In addition, we 
study the temporal and spatial linking task on top 
of IE results. In this way we extend the representa-
tion of each node in the chains to a structured ag-
gregated event including fine-grained information 
such as event types, arguments and their roles. 
6 Conclusion and Future Work  
In this paper we described several new modes for 
browsing and searching a large collection of news 
articles, and demonstrated a system implementing 
these modes. We introduced ranking methods into 
IE, so that the extracted events are connected into 
temporal and spatial chains and presented to the 
user in an order of salience. We believe these new 
forms of presentation are likely to be highly bene-
ficial, especially to users whose native language is 
not English, by distilling the information landscape 
contained in the large collection of daily news arti-
cles ? making more information sources accessible 
and useful to them.  
On the other hand, for the users searching news 
about particular person entities, our system can 
suggest a list of centroid event arguments as key 
words, and provide a brief story by presenting all 
connected events. We believe this will signifi-
cantly speed up text comprehension. In this paper 
we only demonstrated the results for person enti-
ties, but this system can be naturally extended to 
other entity types, such as company names to track 
their start/end/acquire/merge activities. In addition, 
we plan to automatically adjust cross-document 
event aggregation operations according to specific 
compression ratios provided by the users.  
Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported by the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency un-
der Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023 via 27-
001022, and the CUNY Research Enhancement 
Program and GRTI Program.  
References  
Steven Bethard and James H. Martin. 2008. Learning 
semantic links from a corpus of parallel temporal 
and causal relations. Proc. ACL-HLT 2008. 
Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008. Unsuper-
vised Learning of Narrative Event Chains. Proc. 
ACL 2008. 
Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott Weinstein. 
1995. Centering: A Framework for Modelling the 
Local Coherence of Discourse. Computational Lin-
guistics, 2(21), 1995. 
Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining Event 
Extraction Through Unsupervised Cross-document 
Inference. Proc. ACL 2008. 
Danielle S McNamara. 2001. Reading both High-
coherence and Low-coherence Texts: Effects of Text 
Sequence and Prior Knowledge. Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology. 
Trevor Strohman, Donald Metzler, Howard Turtle and 
W. Bruce Croft. 2005. Indri: A Language-model 
based Search Engine for Complex Queries (ex-
tended version). Technical Report IR-407, CIIR, 
Umass Amherst, US. 
4
