Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Short Papers, pages 273?276,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Chinese Abbreviation Generation Using Conditional Random
Field
Dong Yang, Yi-cheng Pan, and Sadaoki Furui
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo 152-8552 Japan
{raymond,thomas,furui}@furui.cs.titech.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper presents a new method for au-
tomatically generating abbreviations for Chi-
nese organization names. Abbreviations are
commonly used in spoken Chinese, especially
for organization names. The generation of
Chinese abbreviation is much more complex
than English abbreviations, most of which are
acronyms and truncations. The abbreviation
generation process is formulated as a character
tagging problem and the conditional random
field (CRF) is used as the tagging model. A
carefully selected group of features is used in
the CRF model. After generating a list of ab-
breviation candidates using the CRF, a length
model is incorporated to re-rank the candi-
dates. Finally the full-name and abbreviation
co-occurrence information from a web search
engine is utilized to further improve the per-
formance. We achieved top-10 coverage of
88.3% by the proposed method.
1 Introduction
Long named entities are frequently abbreviated in
oral Chinese language for efficiency and simplic-
ity. Therefore, abbreviation modeling is an impor-
tant building component for many systems that ac-
cept spoken input, such as directory assistance and
voice search systems.
While English abbreviations are usually formed
as acronyms, Chinese abbreviations are much more
complex, as shown in Figure 1. Most of the Chi-
nese abbreviations are formed by selecting several
characters from full-names, which are not necessar-
ily the first character of each word. Usually the orig-
inal character order in the full-name is preserved in
???? ?? T s i n g h u a U n i v e r s i t y
??????? ?? C h i n a c e n t r a l t e l e v i s i o n
F u l l ? n a m e  a b b r e v i a t i o n  E n g l i s h  e x p l a n a t i o n
?????? ?? ???? P e k i n g  U n i v e r s i t y  N o . 3  h o s p i t a l
Figure 1: Chinese abbreviation examples
the abbreviation. However, re-ordering of charac-
ters as shown in the third example in Figure 1 where
characters ?n? and ??? are swapped in the abbre-
viation, also happens.
There has been a considerable amount of research
on extracting full-name and abbreviation pairs in
the same document for obtaining abbreviations (Li
and Yarowsky, 2008; Sun et al, 2006; Fu et al,
2006). However, generation of abbreviations given
a full-name is still a non-trivial problem. Chang
and Lai (Chang and Lai, 2004) have proposed using
a hidden Markov model to generate abbreviations
from full-names. However, their method assumes
that there is no word-to-null mapping, which means
that every word in the full-name has to contribute at
least one character to the abbreviation. This assump-
tion does not hold for organizations? names which
have many word skips in the abbreviation genera-
tion.
The CRF was first introduced to natural language
processing (NLP) by (Lafferty et al, 2001) and has
been widely used in word segmentation, part-of-
speech (POS) tagging, and some other NLP tasks.
In this paper, we convert the Chinese abbreviation
generation process to a CRF tagging problem. The
key problem here is how to find a group of discrim-
273
inant and robust features. After using the CRF, we
get a list of abbreviation candidates with associate
probability scores. We also use the prior condi-
tional probability of the length of the abbreviations
given the length of the full-names to complement the
CRF probability scores. Such global information is
hard to include in the CRF model. In addition, we
apply the full-name and abbreviation candidate co-
occurrence statistics obtained on the web to increase
the correctness of the abbreviation candidates.
2 Chinese Abbreviation Introduction
Chinese abbreviations are generated by three meth-
ods (Lee, 2005): reduction, elimination, and gener-
alization.
Both in the reduction and elimination methods,
characters are selected from the full-name, and the
order of the characters is sometime changed. Note
that this paper does not cover the case when the or-
der is changed. The elimination means that one or
more words in the full-name are ignored completely,
while the reduction requires that at least one char-
acter is selected from each word. All the three ex-
amples in Figure 1 are produced by the elimination,
where at least one word is skipped.
Generalization, which is used to abbreviate a list
of similar terms, is usually composed of the number
of terms and a shared character across the terms. A
example is ?n? (three forces) for ?????
?? (land force, sea force, air force). This is the
most difficult scenario for the abbreviations and is
not considered in this paper.
3 CRF Model for Abbreviation Modeling
3.1 CRF model
A CRF is an undirected graphical model and assigns
the following probability to a label sequence L =
l1l2 . . . lT , given an input sequence C = c1c2 . . . cT ,
P (L|C) = 1Z(C)exp(
T?
t=1
?
k
?kfk(lt, lt?1, C, t))
(1)
Here, fk is the feature function for the k-th fea-
ture, ?k is the parameter which controls the weight
of the k-th feature in the model, and Z(C) is the nor-
malization term that makes the summation of the
probability of all label sequences to 1. CRF training
is usually performed through the typical L-BFGS al-
gorithm (Wallach, 2002) and decoding is performed
by Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi, 1967). In this paper,
we use an open source toolkit ?crf++?.
3.2 Abbreviation modeling as a tagging
problem
In order to use the CRF method in abbreviation gen-
eration, the abbreviation generation problem was
converted to a tagging problem. The character is
used as a tagging unit and each character in a full-
name is tagged by a binary variable with the values
of either Y or N: Y stands for a character used in the
abbreviation and N means not. An example is given
in Figure 2.
??????? ??
?/ N ?/ N ?/ N ?/ Y ?/ N ?/ Y ?/ N
Figure 2: Abbreviation in the CRF tagging format
3.3 Feature selection for the CRF
In the CRF method, feature function describes
a co-occurrence relation, and it is defined as
fk(lt, lt?1, C, t) (Eq. 1). fk is usually a binary func-
tion, and takes the value 1 when both observation ct
and transition lt?1 ? lt are observed. In our ab-
breviation generation model, we use the following
features:
1. Current character The character itself is the
most important feature for abbreviation as it will be
either retained or discarded. For example, ??? (bu-
reau) and ??? (institue), indicating a government
department, are very common characters used in ab-
breviations. When they appear in full-names, they
are likely to be kept in abbreviations.
2. Current word In the full name of ??I??
??? (China Agricultural university), the word ??
I? (China) is usually ignored in the abbreviation,
but the word ???? (agriculture) is usually kept.
The length (the number of characters) is also an im-
portant feature of the current word.
3. Position of the current character in the cur-
rent word Previous work (Chang and Lai, 2004)
showed that the first character of a word has high
possibility to form part of the abbreviation and this
is also true for the last character of a three-character
word.
4. Combination of feature 2. and 3. above
Combination of the features 2 and 3 is expected to
improve the performance, since the position infor-
274
mation affects the abbreviation along with the cur-
rent word. For example, ending character in ????
(university) and that in ???? (research institute)
have very different possibilities to be selected for ab-
breviations.
Besides the features above, we have examined
context information (previous word, previous char-
acter, next character, etc.) and other local features
like the length of the word, but these features did
not improve the performance. The reason may be
due to the sparseness of the training data.
4 Improvement by a Length Model and a
Web Search Engine
4.1 Length model
There is a strong correlation between the length of
organizations? full-names and their abbreviations.
We use the length modeling based on discrete prob-
ability of P (M |L), in which the variables M and
L are lengths of abbreviations and full-names, re-
spectively. Since it is difficult to incorporate length
information into the CRF model explicitly, we use
P (M |L) to rescore the output of the CRF.
In order to use the length information, we model
the abbreviation process with two steps:
? 1st step: evaluate the length in abbreviation ac-
cording to the length model P (M |L);
? 2nd step: choose the abbreviation, given the
length and full-name.
We assume the following approximation:
P (A|F ) ? P (M |L) ? P (A|M,F ) (2)
in which variable A is the abbreviation and F is the
full-name; P (M |L) is the length model, and the sec-
ond probability can be calculated according to the
Bayesian rule:
P (A|M,F ) = P (A,M |F )P (M |F )
= P (A,M |F )?
length(A?)=M P (A?,M |F )
(3)
It is obvious that P (A,M |F ) = P (A|F ) (as A
contains the information M implicitly) and P (A|F )
can be obtained from the output of the CRF.
4.2 Web search engine
Co-occurrence of a full-name and an abbreviation
candidate can be a clue of the correctness of the ab-
breviation. We use the ?abbreviation candidate?+
?full-name? as queries and input them to the most
popular Chinese search engine (www.baidu.com),
and then we use the number of hits as the metric
to perform re-ranking. The hits is theoretically re-
lated to the number of pages which contain both the
full-name and abbreviation. The bigger the value of
hits, the higher probability that the abbreviation is
correct.
We then simply multiply the previous probability
score, obtained from Eq. 2, by the number of hits
and re-rank the top-30 candidates accordingly.
There are some other ways to use information re-
trieval methods (Mandala et al, 2000). Our method
has an advantage that the access load to the web
search engine is relatively small.
5 Experiment
5.1 Data introduction
The corpus we use in this paper comes from two
sources: one is the book ?modern Chinese abbre-
viation dictionary? (Yuan and Ruan, 2002) and the
other is the wikipedia. Altogether we collected 1945
pairs of organization full-names and their abbrevia-
tions.
The data is randomly divided into two parts, a
training set with 1298 pairs and a test set with 647
pairs. Table 1 shows the length mapping statistics
of the training set. It can be seen that the average
length of full-names is about 7.29. We know that for
a full-name with length N, the number of abbrevia-
tion candidates is about 2N ? 2?N (exclude length
of 0, 1, and N) and we can conclude that the average
number of candidates for organization names in this
corpus is more than 100.
5.2 Results
The abbreviation method described is part of a
project to develop a voice-based search application.
For our name abbreviation system we plan to add 10
abbreviation candidates for each organization name
into the vocabulary of our voice search application,
hence here we consider top-10 coverage.
275
length of length of abbreviation
full-name 2 3 4 5 >5 sum
4 107 1 0 0 0 108
5 89 140 0 0 0 229
6 96 45 46 0 0 187
7 60 189 49 16 0 314
8 48 29 60 3 6 146
9 10 47 35 12 2 106
10 18 11 29 8 6 73
others 21 43 38 17 14 133
average length of the full-name 7.27
average length of the abbreviation 3.01
Table 1: Length statistics on the training set















7RS
FRYHUDJH

)HDWXUH
)HDWXUH
)HDWXUH
)HDWXUH
Figure 3: Contribution of features in CRF
Figure 3 shows the result for various combina-
tions of features introduced in Section 3.3.
Figure 4 displays the coverage results obtained
using the CRF method and the improvements gained
from the inclusion of the length feature and the web
search hits. As we can see the CRF gives a coverage
79.9%. Both length model and web search engine
show significant improvement over the CRF base-
line and the coverage increases to 88.3%.












7RS
FRYHUDJH

&5)
&5)/HQJWK
&5)/HQJWK:HE
Figure 4: Results of different methods
6 Conclusions and Future work
The CRF works well in generating abbreviations for
organization names, while both length model and
web search engine further improve the performance.
We are going to perform word clustering or char-
acter clustering to alleviate the data sparseness prob-
lem. Also we notice that multiple abbreviations for
single full-name is very common, such as ??I?

>?? (China central television) with abbrevi-
ations ?
?? and ??
?. We plan to collect
multiple abbreviations for reference. After that we
are going to combine the abbreviation modeling in
the voice search system to alleviate the weakness of
speech recognition for unknown abbreviation words,
which are unlikely to be correctly recognized due to
the out of vocabulary problem.
References
Jing-shin Chang and Yu-Tso Lai 2004. A Preliminary
Study on Probabilistic Models for Chinese Abbrevia-
tions. Proceedings of ACL SIGHAN Workshop 2004,
pages 9-16.
Guohong Fu, Kang-Kwong Luke, GuoDong Zhou and
Ruifeng Xu 2006. Automatic Expansion of Abbre-
viations in Chinese News Text. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, Washington, DC.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira
2001. Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic
Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data.,
In Proceedings of International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning 2001, pages 282-289
Hiu Wing Doris Lee 2005. A Study of Automatic Ex-
pansion of Chinese Abbreviations. MA Thesis, The
University of Hong Kong.
Zhifei Li and David Yarowsky. 2008. Unsupervised
Translation Induction for Chinese Abbreviations us-
ing Monolingual Corpora. Proceedings of ACL 2008,
pages 425-433.
Rila Mandala, Takenobu Tokunaga, and Hozumi Tanaka
2000. Query expansion using heterogeneous thesauri.,
In Information Processing and Management Volume
36 , Issue 3 2000,Pages 361 - 378
Xu Sun, Houfeng Wang and Yu Zhang 2006. Chi-
nese Abbreviation-Definition Identification: A SVM
Approach Using Context Information. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science,Volume 4182/2006, pages 530-
536.
Andrew J. Viterbi 1967. Error Bounds for Convolutional
Codes and an Asymptotically Optimum Decoding Al-
gorithm. in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
Volume IT-13, in April, 1967,pages 260-269,
Hanna Wallach 2002. Efficient Training of Conditional
Random Fields. M. Thesis, University of Edinburgh,
2002.
Hui Yuan and Xianzhong Ruan 2002. Modern Chinese
abbreviation dictionary. Yuwen press, Beijing, China.
276
