Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Tutorial Abstracts, pages 1?2,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Data-Intensive Text Processing with MapReduce
Jimmy Lin and Chris Dyer
University of Maryland, College Park
{jimmylin,redpony}@umd.edu
1. Overview
This half-day tutorial introduces participants to data-intensive text
processing with the MapReduce programming model [1], using the
open-source Hadoop implementation. The focus will be on scalability
and the tradeoffs associated with distributed processing of large
datasets. Content will include general discussions about algorithm
design, presentation of illustrative algorithms, case studies in HLT
applications, as well as practical advice in writing Hadoop programs
and running Hadoop clusters.
2. Intended Audience
The tutorial is targeted at any NLP researcher who is interested in
data-intensive processing and scalability issues in general. No
background in parallel or distributed computing is necessary, but a
prior knowledge of HLT is assumed.
3. Course Objectives
* Acquire understanding of the MapReduce programming model and how it
  relates to alternative approaches to concurrent programming.
* Acquire understanding of how data-intensive HLT problems (e.g., text
  retrieval, iterative optimization problems, and graph algorithms)
  can be solved using MapReduce.
* Acquire understanding of the tradeoffs involved in designing
  MapReduce algorithms and awareness of associated engineering issues.
4. Tutorial Topics
The following represents a tentative list of topics that will be covered:
* Introduction to parallel and distributed processing
* Introduction to MapReduce
* Tradeoffs and issues in algorithm design
* Simple counting applications (e.g., relative frequency estimation)
* Applications to inverted indexing and text retrieval
* Applications to graph algorithms
1
* Applications to iterative optimization algorithms (e.g., EM)
* Case study in machine translation
* Tips and tricks in writing Hadoop programs
* Practical issues in running Hadoop clusters
5. Instructor Bios
Jimmy Lin is an Associate Professor in the iSchool at the University
of Maryland, College Park. He joined the faculty in 2004 after
completing his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at
MIT. Dr Lin's research interests lie at the intersection of natural
language processing and information retrieval. He leads the University
of Maryland's effort in the Google/IBM Academic Cloud Computing
Initiative. Dr. Lin has taught two semester-long Hadoop courses and
has given numerous talks and tutorials about MapReduce to a wide
audience.
Chris Dyer is a Ph.D. student at the University of Maryland, College
Park, in the Department of Linguistics.  His current research
interests include statistical machine translation, machine learning,
and the relationship between artificial language processing systems
and the human linguistic processing system. He has served on program
committees for AMTA, ACL, COLING, EACL, EMNLP, NAACL, ISWLT, and the
ACL Workshops on Machine translation, and is one of the developers of
the Moses open source machine translation toolkit. He has practical
experience solving NLP problems with both the Hadoop MapReduce
framework and Google's MapReduce implementation, which was made
possible by an internship with Google Research in 2008.
References
[1] Dean, Jeffrey and Sanjay Ghemawat. MapReduce: Simplified Data
Processing on Large Clusters. Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on
Operating System Design and Implementation (OSDI 2004), p. 137-150,
2004, San Francisco, California.
[2] Jimmy Lin. Exploring Large-Data Issues in the Curriculum: A Case
Study with MapReduce. Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Issues in
Teaching Computational Linguistics (TeachCL-08) at ACL 2008, p. 54-61,
2008, Columbus, Ohio.
2
