T3: Arabic Dialect Processing Tutorial 
Mona Diab, Nizar Habash 
ABSTRACT
The existence of dialects for any language constitutes a challenge for NLP in general 
since it adds another set of variation dimensions from a known standard. The problem is 
particularly interesting and challenging in Arabic and its different dialects, where the 
diversion from the standard could, in some linguistic views, warrant a classification as 
different languages. This problem would not be as pronounced if Modern Standard 
Arabic (MSA) were the native language of some sub group of Arabic speakers, however 
it is not. Any realistic and practical approach to processing Arabic will have to account 
for dialectal usage since it is so pervasive. In this tutorial, we will attempt to highlight 
different dialectal phenomena, how they migrate from the standard and why they pose 
challenges to NLP. This area of research (dialects in general and Arabic dialects in 
particular) is gaining a lot of interest. For example, the DARPA-funded BOLT program 
starting this year will only consider dialectal varieties for its effort on Arabic. 
Furthermore, there was a workshop on dialect processing as part of EMNLP 2011. 
This tutorial has four different parts: First, we contextualize the question of Arabic 
dialects from a sociolinguistic and political perspective. Second, we present a 
discussion of issues in relevant to Arabic NLP; this includes generic issues common to 
MSA and dialects, and MSA specific issues. In the third part, we detail dialectal 
linguistic issues and contrast them to MSA issues. In the last part, we review the state-
of-the-art in Arabic dialect processing covering several enabling technologies and 
applications, e.g., dialect identification, speech recognition, morphological processing 
(analysis, disambiguation, tokenization, POS tagging), parsing, and machine translation. 
Throughout the presentation we will make references to the different resources 
available and draw contrastive links with standard Arabic and English. Moreover, we will 
discuss annotation standards as exemplified in the Treebank. We will provide links to 
recent publications and available toolkits/resources for all four sections. 
This tutorial is designed for computer scientists and linguists alike. No knowledge of 
Arabic is required (though, we recommend taking a look at Nizar Habash's Arabic NLP 
tutorialhttp://www1.ccls.columbia.edu/~cadim/presentations.html which will be reviewed 
as part of the tutorial.) 
OUTLINE
1. Introduction 
Introduction to the question of Arabic dialects from sociolinguistic and political 
perspectives (20 min) 
2. General (Standard/Dialectal) Arabic linguistic issues and their relevance to 
NLP 
Orthography, Phonology, Morphology, Syntax (60 min) 
3. Coffee Break 
(20 min) 
4. Generic dialect issues from an NLP perspective 
Orthography, Phonology, Morphology, Syntax (40 min) 
5. State-of-the-art in a sample of applications for Arabic dialects 
Speech recognition, Morphological processing, Parsing, Machine Translation (40 
min) 
BIOS
Mona Diab
850 Interchurch Center MC 7717 
475 Riverside Drive 
New York, NY 10115 
Office 212-870-1290, Fax 212-870-1285 
mdiab--AT--ccls.columbia.edu 
http://www1.ccls.columbia.edu/~mdiab/
Mona Diab received her PhD in 2003 in the Linguistics department and UMIACS, 
University of Maryland College Park. Her PhD work focused on lexical semantic issues 
and was titled Word Sense Disambiguation within a Multilingual Framework. Mona is 
currently a research scientist at the Center for Computational Learning Systems, 
Columbia University. Her research includes work on word sense disambiguation, 
automatic acquisition of natural language resources such as dictionaries and 
taxonomies, unsupervised learning methods, lexical semantics, cross language 
knowledge induction from both parallel and comparable corpora, Arabic NLP in general, 
tools for processing Arabic(s), computational modeling of Arabic dialects, Arabic 
syntactic and semantic parsing. 
Nizar Habash
850 Interchurch Center MC 7717 
475 Riverside Drive 
New York, NY 10115 
Office 212-870-1289, Fax 212-870-1285 
habash@ccls.columbia.edu 
http://www.nizarhabash.com
Nizar Habash received his PhD in 2003 from the Computer Science Department, 
University of Maryland College Park. His Ph.D. thesis is titled Generation-Heavy Hybrid 
Machine Translation. He is currently a research scientist at the Center for 
Computational Learning Systems in Columbia University. His research includes work on 
machine translation, natural language generation, lexical semantics, morphological 
analysis, generation and disambiguation, computational modeling of Arabic dialects, 
and Arabic dialect parsing. Nizar recently published a book entitled "Introduction to 
Arabic Natural Language Processing". 
