T4: Natural Language Processing in Watson 
ABSTRACT
Open domain Question Answering (QA) is a long standing research problem. Recently, 
IBM took on this challenge in the context of the Jeopardy! game. Jeopardy! is a well-
known TV quiz show that has been airing on television in the United States for more 
than 25 years. It pits three human contestants against one another in a competition that 
requires answering rich natural language questions over a very broad domain of topics. 
The development of a system able to compete to grand champions in the Jeopardy! 
challenge led to the design of the DeepQA architecture and the implementation of 
Watson. The DeepQA project shapes a grand challenge in Computer Science that aims 
to illustrate how the wide and growing accessibility of natural language content and the 
integration and advancement of Natural Language Processing, Information Retrieval, 
Machine Learning, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, and massively parallel 
computation can drive open-domain automatic Question Answering technology to a 
point where it clearly and consistently rivals the best human performance. Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) plays a crucial role in the overall Deep QA architecture. It 
allows to "make sense" of both question and unstructured knowledge contained in the 
large corpora where most of the answers are located. That's why we decided to focus 
this tutorial on the NLP technology adopted by Watson and on how it fits in the general 
Deep QA architecture. 
OUTLINE
The course is structured in two modules (1.5h each), described below. 
1. Module 1 An overview of the Deep QA project 
This lesson provides a general introduction to the Deep QA project, addressing 
the following topics 
1. Analysis of the Jeopardy Task 
2. The Deep QA architecture 
3. Development Cycle 
2. Module 2 Natural Language Processing in Watson 
This lesson focuses on the NLP technology implemented in Watson, highlighting 
the advancements with respect to state of the art techniques in Question 
Answering. In particular: 
1. Role of NLP in the Deep QA architecture 
2. UIMA 
3. Passage Scoring 
4. Prismatic 
BIOS
Instructors will be Research Staff Members from the Algorithms team developing 
Watson at IBM Research. Depending on availability for the specific day of the tutorial, 
they will be one or more from the following list: 
Alfio M. Gliozzo
19 Skyline Drive, Hawthorne, NY 10532 
phone: +1-917-744-4351 
gliozzo--AT--us.ibm.com 
https://researcher.ibm.com/researcher/view.php?person=us-gliozzo
Dr. Alfio Gliozzo is Research Staff Member at IBM Research, where he is part of the 
Deep QA team. His main research focus is Domain Adaptation of Question Answering 
systems using machine learning and knowledge acquisition. He is author of about 50 
publications in the areas of Computational Linguistics, Information Retrieval, and 
Semantic Web. 
Aditya Kalyanpur
19 Skyline Drive, Hawthorne, NY 10532 
adityakal--AT--us.ibm.com 
http://researcher.ibm.com/researcher/view.php?person=us-adityakal
Aditya Kalyanpur is a Research Staff Member at IBM Research. His research interests 
include knowledge representation & reasoning, ontologies, natural language 
processing, machine learning and statistical data mining. Aditya has been involved in 
the development of several core algorithms in Watson related to question analysis, 
evidence gathering and scoring, knowledge based inference, and answer merging and 
ranking. 
James Fan
19 Skyline Drive, Hawthorne, NY 10532 
fanj--AT--us.ibm.com 
https://researcher.ibm.com/researcher/view.php?person=us-fanj
James Fan is a research staff member at IBM Research. James has been working in 
the area of question answering since 2003, and has published on subjects in knowledge 
representation, reasoning, natural language processing and machine learning. James is 
currently working the DeepQA project. 
