T6: Processing modality and negation 
Roser Morante, CLiPS - University of Antwerp, Belgium 
ABSTRACT
1.1 Tutorial content 
Modality and negation are ubiquitous phenomena in language. Generally speaking, 
modality is a grammatical category that allows to express aspects related to the 
speaker's attitude towards her statements in terms of degree of certainty, reliability, and 
subjectivity. In this tutorial modality is understood in a broad sense, which involves 
related concepts like subjectivity, hedging, evidentiality, uncertainty, committed belief, 
and factuality. Negation is a grammatical category that allows to change the truth value 
of a proposition. Modality and negation are treated together because they are 
interrelated phenomena and are protypically expressed by linguistic devices that share 
some formal characteristics. For example, modality and negation cues function as 
operators that scope over certain parts of the sentence. 
From a natural language processing perspective, a very relevant aspect of modality and 
negation is that they encode extra-propositional aspects of meaning. While traditionally 
most research has focused on propositional aspects of meaning, the interest in 
processing extra-propositonal aspects has grown in recent years, as a natural 
consequence of the consolidation of areas that focus on the computational treatment of 
propositional aspects. Given a sentence, researchers aim at going beyond determining 
'who/what does what to whom/what where and when', which would be the goal of a 
typical semantic role labeling or event extraction task, and are interested in finding also 
features such as the source, certainty level, epistemological type, truth value, and 
subjective aspects of the statements contained in a text. Additionally, researchers are 
also interested in analysing discourse level phenomena such as finding contradictions 
and textual entailments or modelling how the status of events changes throughout a 
text. Modality and negation play a main role in these phenomena. 
That there is growing interest in these topics among the NLP community is reflected by 
a number of recent publications, the edition of the workshop 'Negation and Speculation 
in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP 2010)', as well as the popularity of the 
CoNLL 2010 shared task on 'Learning to detect hedges and their scope in natural 
language tex't and the future publication of a special issue of the journal Computational 
Linguistics. Research on modality and negation has also been stimulated by the release 
of a number of data sets annotated with various types of information related to these 
phenomena. 
This tutorial is divided in five modules. In Module 1, I will introduce modality and 
negation as devices that express extra-propositional aspects of meaning, I will define 
related concepts and I will show why it is interesting and complex to process them. In 
Module 2, I will present different categorisation schemes and annotation efforts, as well 
as an overview of existing resources. In Module 3, I will describe how several related 
tasks have been modelled and solved. I will present in detail the rule-based and 
machine learning approaches that have been used to solve the tasks. In Module 4, I will 
focus on applications that have incorporated the treatment of modality and negation, 
and on research that analyses the impact of processing these phenomena. The 
applications range from sentiment analysis to biomedical text mining. Finally, in Module 
5, I will summarize achievements and point out open problems. 
1.2 Relevance for the ACL community 
Processing modality and negation is relevant for the ACL community because of several 
reasons. First, the treatment of modality and negation is very relevant for all NLP 
applications that involve text understanding. This includes applications that need to 
discriminate between factual and non-factual information (uncertain facts, opinions, 
attitudes, emotions, and beliefs), like information extraction, opinion mining, sentiment 
analysis, (biomedical) text mining, or question answering, as well as other applications 
that process the meaning of texts, like recognizing textual entailment, paraphrasing, or 
summarization. Incorporating information about modality and negation has been shown 
to be useful for a number of applications, such as biomedical text processing (Friedman 
et al, 1994; Di Marco and Mercer, 2005; Mutalik et al, 2001; Chapman et al, 2001), 
opinion mining and sentiment analysis (Wilson et al, 2005a), recognizing textual 
entailment (Marneffe et al, 2006; Snow et al, 2006), and automatic style checking 
(Ganter and Strube, 2009). Hence this topic is of general importance to the NLP 
community as a whole, as evidenced by the fact that a number of researchers and 
groups are currently working on this phenomena. 
Second, this topic has received a noticeable boost from several recent events: the 
workshop Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP 
2010), which I co-organized in Uppsala just before ACL 2010; the CoNLL Shared Task 
2010 on Learning to detect hedges and their scope in natural language text, which 
attracted 51 submissions from 23 teams; and the publication of the Special Issue on 
Modality and Negation by the journal Computational Linguistics, that will appear at the 
end of 2011. This SI has received a considerable number of submissions, which shows 
that the community is active in treating these phenomena. Research on modality and 
negation is also supported by the fact that a number of data sets annotated with various 
aspects of modality and negation information have been made available, such as the 
MPQA Opinion Corpus (Wiebe et al, 2005), Rubin???s (2006; 2007) certainty corpus, 
the ACE 2008 corpus (Linguistic Data Consortium, 2008), and the FactBank corpus 
(2009), the BioScope corpus (Vincze et al, 2008). 
Given that there is clearly substantial interest in this topic from the ACL community and 
given that the research on this area is evolving quickly, I believe that the proposed 
tutorial will help attendees to keep up to date with recent advances in the field and 
discover new directions for future research. 
OUTLINE
1. Introduction: modality and negation as extra-propositional aspects of 
meaning 
1. Defining modality 
2. Concepts related to modality: hedging, evidentiality, uncertainty, factuality, 
subjectivity, non-committed belief 
3. Defining negation 
4. Negation versus negative polarity 
5. Why is it interesting to process modality and negation? 
6. Complex aspects of processing modality and negation 
2. Categorising and annotating negation and modality 
1. Annotation schemes 
2. Existing resources 
3. Future directions 
3. Tasks related to processing modality and negation 
1. Cue detection 
2. Detecting speculated sentences 
3. Scope resolution 
4. Finding negated/speculated events 
5. Modality tagging 
6. Belief categorisation 
7. Processing contradiction and contrast 
8. Incorporating negation/modality in parsers 
4. Modality and negation in applications 
1. Sentiment analysis 
2. Recognizing textual entailment 
3. Machine translation 
4. Text mining 
5. Open problems and discussion 
BIO
Roser Morante
Computational Linguistics and Psycholinguistics (CLiPS) Research Center  
University of Antwerp 
Email: roser.morante --AT-- ua dot ac dot be 
http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/~roser/
Dr. Roser Morante is a senior researcher at CLiPS, a research center associated with 
the Linguistics Department of the Faculty of Arts at the University of Antwerp, Belgium. 
She obtained her PhD in Computational Linguistics at the University of Tilburg, The 
Netherlands, where she also worked as a postdoctoral researcher. She is currently 
working on the Biograph project led by Professor Walter Daelemans, where she applies 
text mining techniques to extract biomedical relations from scientific texts. In the project 
she has worked extensively on both modality and negation. She proposed the first 
model of the scope finding task as a machine learning classification task and has 
developed systems for finding the scope of negation and hedge cues. The system that 
her team submitted to the CoNLL Shared Task 2010 scored first in Task 2 on finding the 
scope of hedge cues. She has co-oganized the Workshop on Negation and Speculation 
in Natural Language Processing (NeSp-NLP 2010) and she is currently a Guest Editor 
of the Special Issue on Modality and Negation for the journal Computational Linguistics. 
She has also been involved in the organization of the Workshop Advances on Bio Text 
Mining 2010, the SemEval 2010 shared task on Linking Events and Their Participants in 
Discourse, and the evaluation exercise Processing modality and negation for machine 
reading, a pilot task of the Question Answering for Machine Reading Evaluation at 
CLEF 2011. 
My research interests revolve around applying supervised machine learning techniques 
to semantics oriented natural language processing tasks at sentence and document 
level, like semantic role labeling, relation extraction, coreference resolution, 
paraphrasing, or textual entailment. In the past I have worked on machine translation, 
dialogue systems and semantic role labeling. At this moment I am working mostly on 
biomedical text mining: processing negation and modality, extraction of biomedical 
events, extraction of protein-protein interactions, semantic role labeling, and 
coreference resolution. 
