Specifying the Parameters of Centering Theory: a Corpus-Based
Evaluation using Text from Application-Oriented Domains
M. Poesio, H. Cheng, R. Henschel, J. Hitzeman,y R. Kibble,x and R. Stevenson
University of Edinburgh, ICCS and HCRC,
fpoesio,huac,henschelg@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
y The MITRE Corporation, hitz@linus.mitre.org
xUniversity of Brighton, ITRI, Rodger.Kibble@itri.bton.ac.uk
University of Durham, Psychology and HCRC, Rosemary.Stevenson@durham.ac.uk
Abstract
The definitions of the basic concepts,
rules, and constraints of centering the-
ory involve underspecified notions such
as ?previous utterance?, ?realization?,
and ?ranking?. We attempted to find the
best way of defining each such notion
among those that can be annotated reli-
ably, and using a corpus of texts in two
domains of practical interest. Our main
result is that trying to reduce the num-
ber of utterances without a backward-
looking center (CB) results in an in-
creased number of cases in which some
discourse entity, but not the CB, gets
pronominalized, and viceversa.
1 MOTIVATION
Centering Theory (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et
al., 1998b) is best characterized as a ?parametric?
theory: its key definitions and claims involve no-
tions such as ?utterance?, ?realization?, and ?rank-
ing? which are not completely specified; their pre-
cise definition is left as a matter for empirical re-
search, and may vary from language to language.
A first goal of the work presented in this paper
was to find which way of specifying these param-
eters, among the many proposed in the literature,
would make the claims of centering theory most
accurate as predictors of coherence and pronomi-
nalization for English. We did this by annotating
a corpus of English texts with the sort of informa-
tion required to implement some of the most pop-
ular variants of centering theory, and using this
corpus to automatically check two central claims
of the theory, the claim that all utterances have a
backward looking center (CB) (Constraint 1), and
the claim that if any discourse entity is pronomi-
nalized, the CB is (Rule 1). In doing this, we tried
to make sure we would only use information that
could be annotated reliably.
Our second goal was to evaluate the predic-
tions of the theory in domains of interest for real
applications?natural language generation, in our
case. For this reason, we used texts in two gen-
res not yet studied, but of interest to developers of
NLG systems: instructional texts and descriptions
of museum objects to be displayed on Web pages.
The paper is organized as follows. We first re-
view the basic notions of the theory. We then dis-
cuss the methods we used: our annotation method
and how the annotation was used. In Section 4 we
present the results of the study. A discussion of
these results follows.
2 FUNDAMENTALS OF CENTERING
THEORY
Centering theory (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et
al., 1998b) is an ?object-centered? theory of text
coherence: it attempts to characterize the texts
that can be considered coherent on the basis of
the way discourse entities are introduced and dis-
cussed.1 At the same time, it is also meant to
be a theory of salience: i.e., it attempts to pre-
dict which entities will be most salient at any
given time (which should be useful for a natural
language generator, since it is these entities that
are most typically pronominalized (Gundel et al,
1993)).
According to the theory, every UTTERANCE in
a spoken dialogue or written text introduces into
the discourse a number of FORWARD-LOOKING
CENTERS (CFs). CFs correspond more or less
1For a discussion of ?object-centered? vs. ?relation-
centered? notions of coherence, see (Stevenson et al, 2000).
to discourse entities in the sense of (Karttunen,
1976; Webber, 1978; Heim, 1982), and can be
linked to CFs introduced by previous or suc-
cessive utterances. Forward-looking centers are
RANKED, and because of this ranking, some CFs
acquire particular prominence. Among them, the
so-called BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER (CB),
defined as follows:
Backward Looking Center (CB) CB(U
i+1
), the
BACKWARD-LOOKING CENTER of utter-
ance U
i+1
, is the highest ranked element of
CF(U
i
) that is realized in U
i+1
.
Utterance U
i+1
is classified as a CONTINUE if
CB(U
i+1
) = CB(U
i
) and CB(U
i+1
) is the most
highly ranked CF of U
i+1
; as a RETAIN if the CB
remains the same, but it?s not any longer the most
highly-ranked CF; and as a SHIFT if CB(U
i+1
) 6=
CB(U
i
).
The main claims of the theory are articulated in
terms of constraints and rules on CFs and CB.
Constraint 1: All utterances of a segment except
for the 1st have exactly one CB.
Rule 1: if any CF is pronominalized, the CB is.
Rule 2: (sequences of) continuations are pre-
ferred over (sequences of) retains, which are
preferred over (sequences of) shifts
Constraint 1 and Rule 2 express a preference for
utterances in a text to talk about the same ob-
jects; Rule 1 is the main claim of the theory about
pronominalization. In this paper we concentrate
on Constraint 1 and Rule 1.
One of the most unusual features of centering
theory is that the notions of utterance, previous
utterance, ranking, and realization used in the def-
initions above are left unspecified, to be appropri-
ately defined on the basis of empirical evidence,
and possibly in a different way for each language.
As a result, centering theory is best viewed as a
cluster of theories, each of which specifies the
parameters in a different ways: e.g., ranking has
been claimed to depend on grammatical function
(Kameyama, 1985; Brennan et al, 1987), on the-
matic roles (Cote, 1998), and on the discourse sta-
tus of the CFs (Strube and Hahn, 1999); there are
at least two definitions of what counts as ?previ-
ous utterance? (Kameyama, 1998; Suri and Mc-
Coy, 1994); and ?realization? can be interpreted
either in a strict sense, i.e., by taking a CF to be
realized in an utterance only if an NP in that utter-
ance denotes that CF, or in a looser sense, by also
counting a CF as ?realized? if it is referred to in-
directly by means of a bridging reference (Clark,
1977), i.e., an anaphoric expression that refers to
an object which wasn?t mentioned before but is
somehow related to an object that already has, as
in the vase . . . the handle (see, e.g., the discussion
in (Grosz et al, 1995; Walker et al, 1998b)).
3 METHODS
The fact that so many basic notions of centering
theory do not have a completely specified def-
inition makes empirical verification of the the-
ory rather difficult. Because any attempt at di-
rectly annotating a corpus for ?utterances? and
their CBs is bound to force the annotators to adopt
some specification of the basic notions of the the-
ory, previous studies have tended to study a par-
ticular variant of the theory (Di Eugenio, 1998;
Kameyama, 1998; Passonneau, 1993; Strube and
Hahn, 1999; Walker, 1989). A notable exception
is (Tetreault, 1999), which used an annotated cor-
pus to compare the performance of two variants
of centering theory.
The work discussed here, like Tetreault?s, is an
attempt at using corpora to compare different ver-
sions of centering theory, but considering also pa-
rameters of centering theory not studied in this
earlier work. In particular, we looked at different
ways of defining the notion of utterance, we stud-
ied the definition of realization, and more gener-
ally the role of semantic information. We did this
by annotating a corpus with information that has
been claimed by one or the other version of cen-
tering theory to play a role in the definitions of
its basic notions - e.g., the grammatical function
of an NP, anaphoric relations (including infor-
mation about bridging references) and how sen-
tences break up into clauses and subclausal units?
and then tried to find out the best way of specify-
ing these notions automatically, by trying out dif-
ferent configurations of parameters, and counting
the number of violations of the constraints and
rules that would result by adopting a particular
parameter configuration.
The Data
The aim of our project, which is called
GNOME and whose home page is at
http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/ ~ gnome,
is to develop NP generation algorithms whose
generality is to be verified by incorporating
them in two distinct systems: the ILEX system
developed at the University of Edinburgh, that
generates Web pages describing museum objects
on the basis of the perceived status of its user?s
knowledge and of the objects she previously
looked at (Oberlander et al, 1998); and the
ICONOCLAST system, developed at the Univer-
sity of Brighton, that supports the creation of
patient information leaflets (Scott et al, 1998).
The corpus we collected includes texts from
both the domains we are studying. The texts
in the museum domain consist of descriptions
of museum objects and brief texts about the
artists that produced them; the texts in the
pharmaceutical domain are leaflets providing the
patients with the legally mandatory information
about their medicine. The total size of the corpus
is of about 6,000 NPs. For this study we used
about half of each subset, for a total number of
about 3,000 NPs, of which 103 are third person
pronouns (72 in the museum domain, 31 in the
pharmaceutical domain) and 61 are third-person
possessive pronouns (58 in the museum domain,
3 in the pharmaceutical domain).
Annotation
Previous empirical studies of centering theory
typically involved a single annotator annotat-
ing her corpus according to her own subjective
judgment (Passonneau, 1993; Kameyama, 1998;
Strube and Hahn, 1999). One of our goals was
to use for our study only information that could
be annotated reliably (Passonneau and Litman,
1993; Carletta, 1996), as we believe this will
make our results easier to replicate. The price
we paid to achieve replicability is that we could-
n?t test all hypotheses proposed in the literature,
especially about segmentation and about ranking.
We discuss some of the problems in what follows.
(The latest version of the annotation manual is
available from the GNOME project?s home page.)
We used eight annotators for the reliability study
and the annotation.
Utterances Kameyama (1998) noted that iden-
tifying utterances with sentences is problematic
in the case of multiclausal sentences: e.g., gram-
matical function ranking becomes difficult to
measure, as there may be more than one sub-
ject. She proposed to use all and only tensed
clauses instead of sentences as utterance units,
and then classified finite clauses into (i) utter-
ance units that constitute a ?permanent? update
of the local focus: these include coordinated
clauses and adjuncts) and (ii) utterance units that
result in updates that are then erased, much as
in the way the information provided by subor-
dinated discourse segments is erased when they
are popped. Kameyama called these EMBED-
DED utterance units, and proposed that clauses
that serve as verbal complements behave this way.
Suri and McCoy (1994) did a study that led them
to propose that some types of adjuncts?in particu-
lar, clauses headed by after and before?should be
treated as ?embedded? rather than as ?permanent
updates? as suggested by Kameyama; these re-
sults were subsequently confirmed by more con-
trolled experiments Pearson et al (2000). Nei-
ther Kameyama nor Suri and McCoy discuss par-
entheticals; Kameyama only briefly mentions rel-
ative clauses, but doesn?t analyze them in detail.
In order to evaluate these definitions of ut-
terance (sentences versus finite clauses), as well
as the different ways of defining ?previous utter-
ance?, we marked up in our corpus what we called
(DISCOURSE) UNITS. These include clauses, as
well as other sentence subconstituents which may
be treated as separate utterances, including paren-
theticals, preposed PPs, and (the second element
of) coordinated VPs. The instructions for mark-
ing up units were in part derived from (Marcu,
1999); for each unit, the following attributes were
marked:
 utype: whether the unit is a main clause,
a relative clause, appositive, a parenthetical,
etc.
 verbed: whether the unit contains a verb or
not.
 finite: for verbed units, whether the verb is
finite or not.
 subject: for verbed units, whether they have
a full subject, an empty subject (expletive,
as in there sentences), or no subject (e.g., for
infinitival clauses).
The agreement on identifying the boundaries of
units, using the  statistic discussed in (Carletta,
1996), was  = :9 (for two annotators and 500
units); the agreement on features(2 annotators
and at least 200 units) was follows:
Attribute  Value
utype .76
verbed .9
finite .81
subject .86
NPs Our instructions for identifying NP mark-
ables derive from those proposed in the MATE
project scheme for annotating anaphoric relations
(Poesio et al, 1999). We annotated attributes of
NPs which could be used to define their ranking,
including:
 The NP type, cat (pronoun, proper name,
etc.)
 A few other ?basic? syntactic features, num,
per, and gen, that could be used to identify
contexts in which the antecedent of a pro-
noun could be identified unambiguously;
 The grammatical function, gf;
 ani: whether the object denoted is animate
or inanimate
 deix: whether the object is a deictic refer-
ence or not
The agreement values for these attributes are as
follows:
Attribute  Value
ani .81
cat .9
deix .81
gen .89
gf .85
num .84
per .9
one of the features of NPs claimed to affect rank-
ing (Sidner, 1979; Cote, 1998) that we haven?t
so far been able to annotate because of failure
to reach acceptable agreement is thematic roles
( = :35).
Anaphoric information Finally, in order to
compute whether a CF from an utterance was re-
alized directly or indirectly in the following ut-
terance, we marked up anaphoric relations be-
tween NPs, again using a variant of the MATE
scheme. Theories of focusing such as (Sidner,
1979; Strube and Hahn, 1999), as well as our own
early experiments with centering, suggested that
indirect realization can play quite a crucial role in
maintaining the CB; however, previous work, par-
ticularly in the context of the MUC initiative, sug-
gested that while it?s fairly easy to achieve agree-
ment on identity relations, marking up bridging
references is quite hard; this was confirmed by,
e.g., Poesio and Vieira (1998). As a result we did
annotate this type of relations, but to achieve a
reasonable agreement, and to contain somehow
the annotators? work, we limited the types of re-
lations annotators were supposed to mark up, and
we specified priorities. Thus, besides identity
(IDENT) we only marked up three non-identity
(?bridging? (Clark, 1977)) relations, and only re-
lations between objects. The relations we mark
up are a subset of those proposed in the ?extended
relations? version of the MATE scheme (Poesio et
al., 1999) and include set membership (ELE-
MENT), subset (SUBSET), and ?generalized pos-
session? (POSS), which includes part-of relations
as well as more traditional ownership relations.
As expected, we achieved a rather good agree-
ment on identity relations. In our most recent
analysis (two annotators looking at the anaphoric
relations between 200 NPs) we observed no real
disagreements; 79.4% of these relations were
marked up by both annotators; 12.8% by only
one of them; and in 7.7% of the cases, one of
the annotators marked up a closer antecedent than
the other. Concerning bridges, limiting the re-
lations did limit the disagreements among an-
notators (only 4.8% of the relations are actually
marked differently) but only 22% of bridging ref-
erences were marked in the same way by both an-
notators; 73.17% of relations are marked by only
one or the other annotator. So reaching agreement
on this information involved several discussions
between annotators and more than one pass over
the corpus.
Segmentation Segmenting text in a reliable
fashion is still an open problem, and in addition
the relation between centering (i.e., local focus
shifts) and segmentation (i.e., global focus shifts)
is still not clear: some see them as independent
aspects of attentional structure, whereas other re-
searchers define centering transitions with respect
to segments (see, e.g., the discussion in the intro-
duction to (Walker et al, 1998b)). Our prelim-
inary experiments at annotating discourse struc-
ture didn?t give good results, either. Therefore,
we only used the layout structure of the texts
as a rough indication of discourse structure. In
the museum domain, each object description was
treated as a separate segment; in the pharmaceu-
tical domain, each subsection of a leaflet was
treated as a separate segment. We then identified
by hand those violations of Constraint 1 that ap-
peared to be motivated by too broad a segmenta-
tion of the text.2
Automatic computation of centering
information
The annotation thus produced was used to au-
tomatically compute utterances according to the
particular configuration of parameters chosen,
and then to compute the CFs and the CB (if any)
of each utterance on the basis of the anaphoric
information and according to the notion of rank-
ing specified. This information was the used to
find violations of Constraint 1 and Rule 1. The
behavior of the script that computes this informa-
tion depends on the following parameters:
utterance: whether sentences, finite clauses, or
verbed clauses should be treated as utter-
ances.
previous utterance: whether adjunct clauses
should be treated Kameyama-style or
Suri-style.
rank: whether CFs should be ranked according
to grammatical function or discourse status
in Strube and Hahn?s sense
2(Cristea et al, 2000) showed that it is indeed possible
to achieve good agreement on discourse segmentation, but
that it requires intensive training and repeated iterations; we
intend to take advantage of a corpus already annotated in this
way in future work.
realization: whether only direct realization
should be counted, or also indirect realiza-
tion via bridging references.
4 MAIN RESULTS
The principle we used to evaluate the different
configurations of the theory was that the best def-
inition of the parameters was the one that would
lead to the fewest violations of Constraint 1 and
Rule 1. We discuss the results for each principle.
Constraint 1: All utterances of a segment
except for the 1st have precisely one CB
Our first set of figures concerns Constraint 1:
how many utterances have a CB. This con-
straint can be used to evaluate how well cen-
tering theory predicts coherence, in the follow-
ing sense: assuming that all our texts are co-
herent, if centering were the only factor behind
coherence, all utterances should verify this con-
straint. The first table shows the results obtained
by choosing the configuration that comes clos-
est to the one suggested by Kameyama (1998):
utterance=finite, prev=kameyama, rank=gf, real-
ization=direct. The first column lists the number
of utterances that satisfy Constraint 1; the second
those that do not satisfy it, but are segment-initial;
the third those that do not satisfy it and are not
segment-initial.
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 132 35 245 412
Pharmacy 158 13 198 369
Total 290 48 443 791
The previous table shows that with this config-
uration of parameters, most utterances do not sat-
isfy Constraint 1 in the strict sense even if we take
into account text segmentation (admittedly, a very
rough one). If we take sentences as utterances,
instead of finite clauses, we get fewer violations,
although about 25% of the total number of utter-
ances are violations:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 120 22 85 227
Pharmacy 152 8 51 211
Total 272 30 136 438
Using Suri and McCoy?s definition of previous
utterance, instead of Kameyama?s (i.e., treating
adjuncts as embedded utterances) leads to a slight
improvement over Kameyama?s proposal but still
not as good as using sentences:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 140 35 237 412
Pharmacy 167 14 188 369
Total 307 49 425 791
What about the finite clause types not consid-
ered by Kameyama or Suri and McCoy? It turns
out that we get better results if we do not treat as
utterances relative clauses (which anyway always
have a CB, under standard syntactic assumptions
about the presence of traces referring to the modi-
fied noun phrase), parentheticals, clauses that oc-
cur in subject position; and if we treat as a single
utterance matrix clauses with empty subjects and
their complements (as in it is possible that John
will arrive tomorrow).
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 143 35 153 331
Pharmacy 161 14 159 334
Total 304 49 312 665
But by far the most significant improvement to the
percentage of utterances that satisfy Constraint 1
comes by adopting a looser definition of ?real-
izes?, i.e., by allowing a discourse entity to serve
as CB of an utterance even if it?s only referred to
indirectly in that utterance by means of a bridg-
ing reference, as originally proposed by Sidner
(1979) for her discourse focus. The following se-
quence of utterances explains why this could lead
to fewer violations of Constraint 1:
(1) (u1) These ?egg vases? are of exceptional
quality: (u2) basketwork bases support
egg-shaped bodies (u3) and bundles of straw
form the handles, (u4) while small eggs resting
in straw nests serve as the finial for each lid. (u5)
Each vase is decorated with inlaid decoration:
. . .
In (1), u1 is followed by four utterances. Only
the last of these directly refers to the set of egg
vases introduced in u1, while they all contain im-
plicit references to these objects. If we adopt this
looser notion of realization, the figures improve
dramatically, even with the rather restricted set of
relations on which our annotators agree. Now the
majority of utterances satisfy Constraint 1:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 225 35 71 331
Pharmacy 174 14 146 334
Total 399 49 217 665
And of course we get even better results by treat-
ing sentences as utterances:
CB Segment Initial NO CB Total Number
Museum 171 17 39 227
Pharmacy 168 7 36 211
Total 339 24 75 438
It is important, however, to notice that even un-
der the best configuration, at least 17% of utter-
ances violate the constraint. The (possibly, obvi-
ous) explanation is that although coherence is of-
ten achieved by means of links between objects,
this is not the only way to make texts coherent.
So, in the museum domain, we find utterances
that do not refer to any of the previous CFs be-
cause they express generic statements about the
class of objects of which the object under discus-
sion is an instance, or viceversa utterances that
make a generic point that will then be illustrated
by a specific object. In the following example,
the second utterance gives some background con-
cerning the decoration of a particular object.
(2) (u1) On the drawer above the door, gilt-bronze
military trophies flank a medallion portrait of
Louis XIV. (u2) In the Dutch Wars of 1672 -
1678, France fought simultaneously against the
Dutch, Spanish, and Imperial armies, defeating
them all. (u3) This cabinet celebrates the Treaty
of Nijmegen, which concluded the war.
Coherence can also be achieved by explicit
coherence relations, such as EXEMPLIFICA-
TION in the following example:
(3) (u1) Jewelry is often worn to signal membership
of a particular social group. (u2) The Beatles
brooch shown previously is another case in point:
Rule 1: if any NP is pronominalized, the CB is
In the previous section we saw that allowing
bridging references to maintain the CB leads to
fewer violations of Constraint 1. One should
not, however, immediately conclude that it would
be a good idea to replace the strict definition
of ?realizes? with a looser one, because there
is, unfortunately, a side effect: adopting an in-
direct notion of realizes leads to more viola-
tions of Rule 1. Figures are as follows. Us-
ing utterance=s, rank=gf, realizes=direct 22 pro-
nouns violating Rule 1 (9 museum, 13 pharmacy)
(13.4%), whereas with realizes=indirect we have
38 violations (25, 13) (23%); if we choose utter-
ance=finite, prev=suri, we have 23 violations of
rule 1 with realizes=direct (13 + 10) (14%), 32
with realizes=indirect (21 + 11) (19.5%). Using
functional centering (Strube and Hahn, 1999) to
rank the CFs led to no improvements, because of
the almost perfect correlation in our domain be-
tween subjecthood and being discourse-old. One
reason for these problems is illustrated by (4).
(4) (u1) A great refinement among armorial signets
was to reproduce not only the coat-of-arms but
the correct tinctures; (u2) they were repeated in
colour on the reverse side (u3) and the crystal
would then be set in the gold bezel.
They in u2 refers back to the correct tinctures (or,
possibly, the coat-of-arms), which however only
occurs in object position in a (non-finite) com-
plement clause in (u1), and therefore has lower
ranking than armorial signets, which is realized
in (u2) by the bridge the reverse side and there-
fore becomes the CB having higher rank in (u1),
but is not pronominalized.
In the pharmaceutical leaflets we found a num-
ber of violations of Rule 1 towards the end of
texts, when the product is referred to. A possi-
ble explanation is that after the product has been
mentioned sentence after sentence in the text, by
the end of the text it is salient enough that there
is no need to put it again in the local focus by
mentioning it explicitly. E.g., it in the following
example refers to the cream, not mentioned in any
of the previous two utterances.
(5) (u1) A child of 4 years needs about a third of
the adult amount. (u2) A course of treatment for
a child should not normally last more than five
days (u3) unless your doctor has told you to use
it for longer.
5 DISCUSSION
Our main result is that there seems to be a trade-
off between Constraint 1 and Rule 1. Allowing
for a definition of ?realizes? that makes the CB be-
have more like Sidner?s Discourse Focus (Sidner,
1979) leads to a very significant reduction in the
number of violations of Constraint 1.3 We also
noted, however, that interpreting ?realizes? in this
way results in more violations of Rule 1. (No
differences were found when functional center-
ing was used to rank CFs instead of grammati-
3Footnote 2, page 3 of the intro to (Walker et al, 1998b)
suggests a weaker interpretation for the Constraint: ?there is
no more than one CB for utterance?. This weaker form of
the Constraint does hold for most utterances, but it?s almost
vacuous, especially for grammatical function ranking, given
that utterances have at most one subject.
cal function.) The problem raised by these re-
sults is that whereas centering is intended as an
account of both coherence and local salience, dif-
ferent concepts may have to be used in Constraint
1 and Rule 1, as in Sidner?s theory. E.g., we might
have a ?Center of Coherence?, analogous to Sid-
ner?s discourse focus, and that can be realized in-
directly; and a ?Center of Salience?, similar to her
actor focus, and that can only be realized directly.
Constraint 1 would be about the Center of Coher-
ence, whereas Rule 1 would be about the Center
of Salience. Indeed, many versions of centering
theory have elevated the CP to the rank of a sec-
ond center.4
We also saw that texts can be coherent even
when Constraint 1 is violated, as coherence can
be ensured by other means (e.g., by rhetorical re-
lations). This, again, suggests possible revisions
to Constraint 1, requiring every utterance either
to have a center of coherence, or to be linked by a
rhetorical relation to the previous utterance.
Finally, we saw that we get fewer violations of
Constraint 1 by adopting sentences as our notion
of utterance; however, again, this results in more
violations of Rule 1. If finite clauses are used as
utterances, we found that certain types of finite
clauses not previously discussed, including rela-
tive clauses and matrix clauses with empty sub-
jects, are best not treated as utterances. We didn?t
find significant differences between Kameyama
and Suri and McCoy?s definition of ?previous ut-
terance?. We believe however more work is still
needed to identify a completely satisfactory way
of breaking up sentences in utterance units.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Kees van Deemter, Barbara di
Eugenio, Nikiforos Karamanis and Donia Scott
for comments and suggestions. Massimo Poesio
is supported by an EPSRC Advanced Fellowship.
Hua Cheng, Renate Henschel and Rodger Kib-
ble were in part supported by the EPSRC project
GNOME, GR/L51126/01. Janet Hitzeman was in
part supported by the EPSRC project SOLE.
4This separation among a ?center of coherence? and a
?center of salience? is independently motivated by consid-
erations about the division of labor between the text planner
and the sentence planner in a generation system; see, e.g.,
(Kibble, 1999).
References
S.E. Brennan, M.W. Friedman, and C.J. Pollard. 1987.
A centering approach to pronouns. In Proc. of the
25th ACL, pages 155?162, June.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):249?254.
H. H. Clark. 1977. Inferences in comprehension. In
D. Laberge and S. J. Samuels, editors, Basic Pro-
cess in Reading: Perception and Comprehension.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
S. Cote. 1998. Ranking forward-looking centers. In
M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors,
Centering Theory in Discourse, chapter 4, pages
55?70. Oxford.
D. Cristea, N. Ide, D. Marcu, and V. Tablan. 2000.
Discourse structure and co-reference: An empirical
study. In Proc. of COLING.
B. Di Eugenio. 1998. Centering in italian. In M. A.
Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors, Cen-
tering Theory in Discourse, chapter 7, pages 115?
138. Oxford.
B. J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995.
Centering: A framework for modeling the local co-
herence of discourse. Computational Linguistics,
21(2):202?225.
J. K. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993.
Cognitive status and the form of referring expres-
sions in discourse. Language, 69(2):274?307.
I. Heim. 1982. The Semantics of Definite and In-
definite Noun Phrases. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Massachusetts at Amherst.
M. Kameyama. 1985. Zero Anaphora: The case of
Japanese. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.
M. Kameyama. 1998. Intra-sentential centering: A
case study. In M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and
E. F. Prince, editors, Centering Theory in Dis-
course, chapter 6, pages 89?112. Oxford.
L. Karttunen. 1976. Discourse referents. In J. Mc-
Cawley, editor, Syntax and Semantics 7 - Notes from
the Linguistic Underground. Academic Press.
R. Kibble. 1999. Cb or not Cb? centering applied to
NLG. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on discourse
and reference.
D. Marcu. 1999. Instructions for manually annotat-
ing the discourse structures of texts. Unpublished
manuscript, USC/ISI, May.
J. Oberlander, M. O?Donnell, A. Knott, and C. Mel-
lish. 1998. Conversation in the museum: Exper-
iments in dynamic hypermedia with the intelligent
labelling explorer. New Review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, 4:11?32.
R. Passonneau and D. Litman. 1993. Feasibility of
automated discourse segmentation. In Proceedings
of 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL.
R. J. Passonneau. 1993. Getting and keeping the cen-
ter of attention. In M. Bates and R. M. Weischedel,
editors, Challenges in Natural Language Process-
ing, chapter 7, pages 179?227. Cambridge.
J. Pearson, R. Stevenson, and M. Poesio. 2000. Pro-
noun resolution in complex sentences. In Proc. of
AMLAP, Leiden.
M. Poesio and R. Vieira. 1998. A corpus-based inves-
tigation of definite description use. Computational
Linguistics, 24(2):183?216, June.
M. Poesio, F. Bruneseaux, and L. Romary. 1999. The
MATE meta-scheme for coreference in dialogues in
multiple languages. In M. Walker, editor, Proc. of
the ACL Workshop on Standards and Tools for Dis-
course Tagging, pages 65?74.
D. Scott, R. Power, and R. Evans. 1998. Generation
as a solution to its own problem. In Proc. of the
9th International Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, Niagara-on-the-Lake, CA.
C. L. Sidner. 1979. Towards a computational theory
of definite anaphora comprehension in English dis-
course. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
R. Stevenson, A. Knott, J. Oberlander, and S McDon-
ald. 2000. Interpreting pronouns and connectives.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15.
M. Strube and U. Hahn. 1999. Functional centering?
grounding referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309?
344.
L. Z. Suri and K. F. McCoy. 1994. RAFT/RAPR
and centering: A comparison and discussion of
problems related to processing complex sentences.
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):301?317.
J. R. Tetreault. 1999. Analysis of syntax-based pro-
noun resolution methods. In Proc. of the 37th ACL,
pages 602?605, University of Marylan, June. ACL.
M. A. Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors.
1998b. Centering Theory in Discourse. Oxford.
M. A. Walker. 1989. Evaluating discourse process-
ing algorithms. In Proc. ACL-89, pages 251?261,
Vancouver, CA, June.
B. L. Webber. 1978. A formal approach to discourse
anaphora. Report 3761, BBN, Cambridge, MA.
