METER: MEasuring TExt Reuse
Paul Clough and Robert Gaizauskas and Scott S.L. Piao and Yorick Wilks
Department of Computer Science
University of She?eld
Regent Court, 211 Portobello Street,
She?eld, England, S1 4DP
finitial.surname@dcs.shef.ac.ukg
Abstract
In this paper we present results from
the METER (MEasuring TExt Reuse)
project whose aim is to explore issues
pertaining to text reuse and derivation,
especially in the context of newspapers
using newswire sources. Although the
reuse of text by journalists has been
studied in linguistics, we are not aware
of any investigation using existing com-
putational methods for this particular
task. We investigate the classication
of newspaper articles according to their
degree of dependence upon, or deriva-
tion from, a newswire source using a
simple 3-level scheme designed by jour-
nalists. Three approaches to measur-
ing text similarity are considered: n-
gram overlap, Greedy String Tiling,
and sentence alignment. Measured
against a manually annotated corpus of
source and derived news text, we show
that a combined classier with fea-
tures automatically selected performs
best overall for the ternary classica-
tion achieving an average F
1
-measure
score of 0.664 across all three cate-
gories.
1 Introduction
A topic of considerable theoretical and practical
interest is that of text reuse: the reuse of existing
written sources in the creation of a new text. Of
course, reusing language is as old as the retelling
of stories, but current technologies for creating,
copying and disseminating electronic text, make
it easier than ever before to take some or all of
any number of existing text sources and reuse
them verbatim or with varying degrees of mod-
ication.
One form of unacceptable text reuse, plagia-
rism, has received considerable attention and
software for automatic plagiarism detection is
now available (see, e.g. (Clough, 2000) for a re-
cent review). But in this paper we present a
benign and acceptable form of text reuse that
is encountered virtually every day: the reuse of
news agency text (called copy) in the produc-
tion of daily newspapers. The question is not
just whether agency copy has been reused, but
to what extent and subject to what transforma-
tions. Using existing approaches from computa-
tional text analysis, we investigate their ability
to classify newspapers articles into categories in-
dicating their dependency on agency copy.
2 Journalistic reuse of a newswire
The process of gathering, editing and publish-
ing newspaper stories is a complex and spe-
cialised task often operating within specic pub-
lishing constraints such as: 1) short deadlines;
2) prescriptive writing practice (see, e.g. Evans
(1972)); 3) limits of physical size; 4) readability
and audience comprehension, e.g. a tabloid's
vocabulary limitations; 5) journalistic bias, e.g.
political and 6) a newspaper's house style. Of-
ten newsworkers, such as the reporter and edi-
tor, will rely upon news agency copy as the basis
of a news story or to verify facts and assess the
                Computational Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 152-159.
                         Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
importance of a story in the context of all those
appearing on the newswire. Because of the na-
ture of journalistic text reuse, dierences will
arise between reused news agency copy and the
original text. For example consider the follow-
ing:
Original (news agency) A drink-driver who
ran into the Queen Mother's o?cial Daim-
ler was ned $700 and banned from driving
for two years.
Rewrite (tabloid) A DRUNK driver who
ploughed into the Queen Mother's limo was
ned $700 and banned for two years yes-
terday.
This simple example illustrates the types of
rewrite that can occur even in a very short
sentence. The rewrite makes use of slang and
exaggeration to capture its readers' attention
(e.g. DRUNK, limo, ploughed). Deletion (e.g.
from driving) has also been used and the addi-
tion of yesterday indicates when the event oc-
curred. Many of the transformations we ob-
served between moving from news agency copy
to the newspaper version have also been re-
ported by the summarisation community (see,
e.g., McKeown and Jing (1999)).
Given the value of the information news agen-
cies supply, the ease with which text can be
reused and commercial pressures, it would be
benecial to be able to identify those news sto-
ries appearing in the newspapers that have relied
upon agency copy in their production. Potential
uses include: 1) monitoring take-up of agency
copy; 2) identifying the most reused stories ; 3)
determining customer dependency upon agency
copy and 4) new methods for charging customers
based upon the amount of copy reused. Given
the large volume of news agency copy output
each day, it would be infeasible to identify and
quantify reuse manually; therefore an automatic
method is required.
3 A conceptual framework
To begin to get a handle on measuring text
reuse, we have developed a document-level clas-
sication scheme, indicating the level at which
a newspaper story as a whole is derived from
agency copy, and a lexical-level classication
scheme, indicating the level at which individ-
ual word sequences within a newspaper story
are derived from agency copy. This framework
rests upon the intuitions of trained journalists
to judge text reuse, and not on an explicit lex-
ical/syntactic denition of reuse (which would
presuppose what we are setting out to discover).
At the document level, newspaper stories
are assigned to one of three possible categories
coarsely reecting the amount of text reused
from the news agency and the dependency of
the newspaper story upon news agency copy
for the provision of \facts". The categories in-
dicate whether a trained journalist can iden-
tify text rewritten from the news agency in
a candidate derived newspaper article. They
are: 1) wholly-derived (WD): all text in
the newspaper article is rewritten only from
news agency copy; 2) partially-derived (PD):
some text is derived from the news agency, but
other sources have also been used; and 3) non-
derived (ND): news agency has not been used
as the source of the article; although words may
still co-occur between the newspaper article and
news agency copy on the same topic, the jour-
nalist is condent the news agency has not been
used.
At the lexical or word sequence level, individ-
ual words and phrases within a newspaper story
are classied as to whether they are used to ex-
press the same information as words in news
agency copy (i.e. paraphrases) and or used to
express information not found in agency copy.
Once again, three categories are used, based on
the judgement of a trained journalist: 1) verba-
tim: text appearing word-for-word to express
the same information; 2) rewrite: text para-
phrased to create a dierent surface appearance,
but express the same information and 3) new:
text used to express information not appearing
in agency copy (can include verbatim/rewritten
text, but being used in a dierent context).
3.1 The METER corpus
Based on this conceptual framework, we have
constructed a small annotated corpus of news
texts using the UK Press Association (PA) as
the news agency source and nine British daily
newspapers
1
who subscribe to the PA as candi-
date reusers. The METER corpus (Gaizauskas
et al, 2001) is a collection of 1716 texts (over
500,000 words) carefully selected from a 12
month period from the areas of law and court
reporting (769 stories) and showbusiness (175
stories). 772 of these texts are PA copy and 944
from the nine newspapers. These texts cover 265
dierent stories from July 1999 to June 2000 and
all newspaper stories have been manually classi-
ed at the document-level. They include 300
wholly-derived, 438 partially-derived and 206
non-derived (i.e. 77% are thought to have used
PA in some way). In addition, 355 have been
classied according to the lexical-level scheme.
4 Approaches to measuring text
similarity
Many problems in computational text analy-
sis involve the measurement of similarity. For
example, the retrieval of documents to full a
user information need, clustering documents ac-
cording to some criterion, multi-document sum-
marisation, aligning sentences from one lan-
guage with those in another, detecting exact and
near duplicates of documents, plagiarism detec-
tion, routing documents according to their style
and identifying authorship attribution. Meth-
ods typically vary depending upon the match-
ing method, e.g. exact or partial, the degree
to which natural language processing techniques
are used and the type of problem, e.g. search-
ing, clustering, aligning etc. We have not had
time to investigate all of these techniques, nor
is there space here to review them. We have
concentrated on just three: ngram overlap mea-
sures, Greedy String Tiling, and sentence align-
ment. The rst was investigated because it of-
fers perhaps the simplest approach to the prob-
lem. The second was investigated because it has
been successfully used in plagiarism detection, a
problem which at least supercially is quite close
1
The newspapers include ve popular papers (e.g. The
Sun, The Daily Mail, Daily Star, Daily Mirror) and four
quality papers (e.g. Daily Telegraph, The Guardian, The
Independent and The Times).
to the text reuse issues we are investigating. Fi-
nally, alignment (treating the derived text as a
\translation" of the rst) seemed an intriguing
idea, and contrasts, certainly with the ngram ap-
proach, by focusing more on local, as opposed to
global measures of similarity.
4.1 Ngram Overlap
An initial, straightforward approach to assessing
the reuse between two texts is to measure the
number of shared word ngrams. This method
underlies many of the approaches used in copy
detection including the approach taken by Lyon
et al (2001).
They measure similarity using the set-
theoretic measures of containment and resem-
blance of shared trigrams to separate texts writ-
ten independently and those with su?cient sim-
ilarity to indicate some form of copying.
We treat each document as a set of overlap-
ping n-word sequences (initially considering only
n-word types) and compute a similarity score
from this. Given two sets of ngrams, we use
the set-theoretic containment score to measure
similarity between the documents for ngrams of
length 1 to 10 words. For a source text A and
a possibly derived text B represented by sets of
ngrams S
n
(A) and S
n
(B) respectively, the pro-
portion of ngrams in B also in A, the ngram con-
tainment C
n
(A;B), is given by:
C
n
(A;B) =
j S
n
(A) \ S
n
(B) j
j S
n
(B) j
(1)
Informally containment measures the number
of matches between the elements of ngram sets
S
n
(A) and S
n
(B), scaled by the size of S
n
(B).
In other words we measure the proportion of
unique n-grams in B that are found in A. The
score ranges from 0 to 1, indicating none to all
newspaper copy shared with PA respectively.
We also compare texts by counting only those
ngrams with low frequency, in particular those
occurring once. For 1-grams, this is the same as
comparing the hapax legomena which has been
shown to discriminate plagiarised texts from
those written independently even when lexical
overlap between the texts is already high (e.g.
70%) (Finlay, 1999). Unlike Finlay's work, we
nd that repetition in PA copy
2
drastically re-
duces the number of shared hapax legomena
thereby inhibiting classication of derived and
non-derived texts. Therefore we compute the
containment of hapax legomena (hapax contain-
ment) by comparing words occurring once in the
newspaper, i.e. those 1-grams in S
1
(B) that oc-
cur once with all 1-grams in PA copy, S
1
(A).
This containment score represents the number
of newspaper hapax legomena also appearing at
least once in PA copy.
4.2 Greedy String-Tiling
Greedy String-Tiling (GST) is a substring
matching algorithm which computes the degree
of similarity between two strings, for exam-
ple software code, free text or biological subse-
quences (Wise, 1996). Compared with previous
algorithms for computing string similarity, such
as the Longest Common Subsequence or
Levenshtein distance, GST is able to deal with
transposition of tokens (in earlier approaches
transposition is seen as a number of single inser-
tions/deletions rather than a single block move).
The GST algorithm performs a 1:1 matching
of tokens between two strings so that as much of
one token stream is covered with maximal length
substrings from the other (called tiles). In our
problem, we consider how much newspaper text
can be maximally covered by words from PA
copy. A minimum match length (MML) can be
used to avoid spurious matches (e.g. of 1 or
2 tokens) and the resulting similarity between
the strings can be expressed as a quantitative
similarity match or a qualitative list of common
substrings. Figure 1 shows the result of GST for
the example in Section 2.
Figure 1: Example GST results (MML=3)
2
As stories unfold, PA release copy with new, as well
as previous versions of the story
Given PA copy A, a newspaper text B and a
set of maximal matches, tiles, of a given length
between A and B, the similarity, gstsim(A,B),
is expressed as:
gstsim(A;B) =
P
i2tiles
length
i
j B j
(2)
4.3 Sentence alignment
In the past decade, various alignment algorithms
have been suggested for aligning multilingual
parallel corpora (Wu, 2000). These algorithms
have been used to map translation equivalents
across dierent languages. In this specic case,
we investigate whether alignment can map de-
rived texts (or parts of them) to their source
texts. PA copy may be subject to various
changes during text reuse, e.g. a single sen-
tence may derive from parts of several source
sentences. Therefore, strong correlations of sen-
tence length between the derived and source
sentences cannot be guaranteed. As a result,
sentence-length based statistical alignment al-
gorithms (Brown et al, 1991; Gale and Church,
1993) are not appropriate for this case. On the
other hand, cognate-based algorithms (Simard
et al, 1992; Melamed, 1999) are more e?cient
for coping with change of text format. There-
fore, a cognate-based approach is adopted for
the METER task. Here cognates are dened as
pairs of terms that are identical, share the same
stems, or are substitutable in the given context.
The algorithm consists of two principal com-
ponents: a comparison strategy and a scoring
function. In brief, the comparison works as fol-
lows (more details may be found in Piao (2001)).
For each sentence in the candidate derived text
DT the sentences in the candidate source text
ST are compared in order to nd the best match.
A DT sentence is allowed to match up to three
possibly non-consecutive ST sentences. The
candidate pair with the highest score (see be-
low) above a threshold is accepted as a true
alignment. If no such candidate is found, the
DT sentence is assumed to be independent of
the ST. Based on individual DT sentence align-
ments, the overall possibility of derivation for
the DT is estimated with a score ranging be-
tween 0 and 1. This score reects the propor-
tion of aligned sentences in the newspaper text.
Note that not only may multiple sentences in
the ST be aligned with a single sentence in the
DT, but also multiple sentences in the DT may
be aligned with one sentence in the ST.
Given a candidate derived sentence DS and
a proposed (set of) source sentence(s) SS, the
scoring function works as follows. Three basic
measures are computed for each pair of candi-
date DS and SS: SNG is the sum of lengths
of the maximum length non-overlapping shared
n-grams with n  2; SWD is the number of
matched words sharing stems not in an n-gram
guring in SNG; and SUB is the number of
substitutable terms (mainly synonyms) not g-
uring in SNG or SWD. Let L
1
be the length of
the candidate DS and L
2
the length of candidate
SS. Then, three scores PD, PS (Dice score) and
PV S are calculated as follows:
PSD =
SWD + SNG + SUB
L
1
PS =
2(SWD + SNG + SUB)
L
1
+ L
2
PSNG =
SNG
SWD + SNG + SUB
These three scores reect dierent aspects of
relations between the candidate DS and SS:
1. PSD: The proportion of the DS which is
shared material.
2. PS: The proportion of shared terms in DS
and SS. This measure prefers SS's which not
only contain many terms in the DS, but also
do not contain many additional terms.
3. PSNG: The proportion of matching n-
grams amongst the shared terms. This
measure captures the intuition that sen-
tences sharing not only words, but word se-
quences are more likely to be related.
These three scores are weighted and combined
together to provide an alignment metric WS
(weighted score), which is calculated as follows:
WS = ?
1
PSD+ ?
2
PS + ?
3
PSNG
where ?
1
+?
2
+?
3
= 1. The three weighting vari-
ables ?
i
(i = 1; 2; 3) have been determined empir-
ically and are currently set to: ?
1
= 0:85; ?
2
=
0:05; ?
3
= 0:1.
5 Reuse Classiers
To evaluate the previous approaches for measur-
ing text reuse at the document-level, we cast the
problem into one of a supervised learning task.
5.1 Experimental Setup
We used similarity scores as attributes for a ma-
chine learning algorithm and used the Weka 3.2
software (Witten and Frank, 2000). Because of
the small number of examples, we used tenfold
cross-validation repeated 10 times (i.e. 10 runs)
and combined this with stratication to ensure
approximately the same proportion of samples
from each class were used in each fold of the
cross-validation. All 769 newspaper texts from
the courts domain were used for evaluation and
randomly permuted to generate 10 sets. For
each newspaper text, we compared PA source
texts from the same story to create results in
the form: newspaper; class; score. These results
were ordered according to each set to create the
same 10 datasets for each approach thereby en-
abling comparison.
Using this data we rst trained ve single-
feature Naive Bayes classiers to do the ternary
classication task. The feature in each case was
a variant of one of the three similarity measures
described in Section 4, computed between the
two texts in the training set. The target classi-
cation value was the reuse classication category
from the corpus. A Naive Bayes classier was
used because of its success in previous classi-
cation tasks, however we are aware of its naive
assumptions that attributes are assumed inde-
pendent and data to be normally distributed.
We evaluated results using the F
1
-measure
(harmonic mean of precision and recall given
equal weighting). For each run, we calculated
the average F
1
score across the classes. The
overall average F
1
-measure scores were com-
puted from the 10 runs for each class (a single
accuracy measure would su?ce but the Weka
package outputs F
1
-measures). For the 10 runs,
the standard deviation of F
1
scores was com-
puted for each class and F
1
scores between all
approaches were tested for statistical signi-
cance using 1-way analysis of variance at a 99%
condence-level. Statistical dierences between
results were identied using Bonferroni analy-
sis
3
.
After examining the results of these single fea-
ture classiers, we also trained a \combined"
classier using a correlation-based lter ap-
proach (Hall and Smith, 1999) to select the com-
bination of features giving the highest classica-
tion score ( correlation-based ltering evaluates
all possible combinations of features). Feature
selection was carried for each fold during cross-
validation and features used in all 10 folds were
chosen as candidates. Those which occurred in
at least 5 of the 10 runs formed the nal selec-
tion.
We also tried splitting the training data into
various binary partitions (e.g. WD/PD vs. ND)
and training binary classiers, using feature se-
lection, to see how well binary classication
could be performed. Eskin and Bogosian (1998)
have observed that using cascaded binary clas-
siers, each of which splits the data well, may
work better on n-ary classication problems
than a single n-way classier. We then com-
puted how well such a cascaded classier should
perform using the best binary classier results.
5.2 Results
Table 1 shows the results of the single ternary
classiers. The baseline F
1
measure is based
upon the prior probability of a document falling
into one of the classes. The gures in parenthe-
sis are the standard deviations for the F
1
scores
across the ten evaluation runs. The nal row
shows the results for combining features selected
using the correlation-based lter.
Table 2 shows the result of training binary
classiers using feature selection to select the
most discriminating features for various binary
splits of the training data.
For both ternary and binary classiers feature
selection produced better results than using all
3
Using SPSS v10.0 for Windows.
Approach Category Avg F-measure
Baseline WD 0.340 (0.000)
PD 0.444 (0.000)
ND 0.216 (0.000)
total 0.333 (0.000)
3-gram WD 0.631 (0.004)
containment PD 0.624 (0.004)
ND 0.549 (0.005)
total 0.601 (0.003)
GST Sim WD 0.669 (0.004)
MML = 3 PD 0.633 (0.003)
ND 0.556 (0.004)
total 0.620 (0.002)
GST Sim WD 0.681 (0.003)
MML = 1 PD 0.634 (0.003)
ND 0.559 (0.008)
total 0.625 (0.004)
1-gram WD 0.718 (0.003)
containment PD 0.643 (0.003)
ND 0.551 (0.006)
total 0.638 (0.003)
Alignment WD 0.774 (0.003)
PD 0.624 (0.005)
ND 0.537 (0.007)
total 0.645 (0.004)
hapax WD 0.736 (0.003)
containment PD 0.654 (0.003)
ND 0.549 (0.010)
total 0.646 (0.004)
hapax cont. WD 0.756 (0.002)
1-gram cont. PD 0.599 (0.006)
alignment ND 0.629 (0.008)
(\combined") total 0.664 (0.004)
Table 1: A summary of classication results
possible features, with the one exception of the
binary classication between PD and ND.
5.3 Discussion
From Table 1, we nd that all classier results
are signicantly higher than the baseline (at
p < 0:01) and all dierences are signicant ex-
cept between hapax containment and alignment.
The highest F-measure for the 3-class problem
is 0.664 for the \combined" classier, which is
signicantly greater than 0.651 obtained with-
out. We notice that highest WD classication
is with alignment at 0.774, highest PD classi-
cation is 0.654 with hapax containment and
highest ND classication is 0.629 with combined
features. Using hapax containment gives higher
results than 1-gram containment alone and in
fact provides results as good as or better than
the more complex sentence alignment and GST
approaches.
Previous research by (Lyon et al, 2001) and
(Wise, 1996) had shown derived texts could be
distinguished using trigram overlap and tiling
with a match length of 3 or more, respectively.
Attributes Category Avg F
1
Correlation- alignment WD 0.942 (0.008)
based ND 0.909 (0.011)
lter total 0.926 (0.010)
alignment PD/ND 0.870 (0.003)
WD 0.770 (0.003)
total 0.820 (0.002)
alignment WD 0.778 (0.003)
PD 0.812 (0.002)
total 0.789 (0.002)
hapax cont. WD/PD 0.882 (0.002)
alignment ND 0.649 (0.007)
1-gram cont. total 0.763 (0.002)
1-gram PD 0.802 (0.002)
GST mml 3 ND 0.638 (0.007)
GST mml 1 total 0.720 (0.004)
alignment
GST mml 1 WD/ND 0.672 (0.002)
alignment PD 0.662 (0.003)
total 0.668 (0.003)
Table 2: Binary Classiers with feature selection
However, our results run counter to this be-
cause the highest classication scores are ob-
tained with 1-grams and an MML of 1, i.e. as
n or MML length increases, the F
1
scores de-
crease. We believe this results from two factors
which are characteristic of reuse in journalism.
First, since even ND texts are thematically sim-
ilar (same events being described) there is high
likelihood of coincidental overlap of ngrams of
length 3 or more (e.g. quoted speech). Secondly,
when journalists rewrite it is rare for them not
to vary the source.
For the intended application { helping the PA
to monitor text reuse { the cost of dierent mis-
classications is not equal. If the classier makes
a mistake, it is better that WD and ND texts are
mis-classied as PD, and PD as WD. Given the
dierence in distribution of documents across
classes where PD contains the most documents,
the classier will be biased towards this class
anyway as required. Table 3 shows the confu-
sion matrix for the combined ternary classier.
WD PD ND
WD 203 55 4
PD 79 192 70
ND 3 53 109
Table 3: Confusion matrix for combined ternary
classier
Although the overall F
1
-measure score is low
(0.664), mis-classication of both WD as ND
and ND as WD is also very low, as most mis-
classications are as PD. Note the high mis-
classication of PD as both WD and ND, re-
ecting the di?culty of separating this class.
From Table 2, we nd alignment is a selected
feature for each binary partition of the data.
The highest binary classication is achieved be-
tween the WD and ND classes using alignment
only, and the highest three scores show WD is
the easiest class to separate from the others.
The PD class is the hardest to isolate, reect-
ing the mis-classications seen in Table 3.
To predict how well a cascaded binary classi-
er will perform we can reason as follows. From
the preceding discussion we see that WD can
be separated most accurately; hence we choose
WD versus PD/ND as the rst binary classier.
This forces the second classier to be PD versus
ND. From the results in Table 2 and the follow-
ing equation to compute the F
1
measure for a
two-stage binary classier
WD + (PD=ND)(
PD+ND
2
)
2
we obtain an overall F
1
measure for ternary clas-
sication of 0.703, which is signicantly higher
than the best single stage ternary classier.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we have investigated text reuse in
the context of the reuse of news agency copy, an
area of theoretical and practical interest. We
present a conceptual framework in which we
measure reuse and based on which the METER
corpus has been constructed. We have presented
the results of using similarity scores, computed
using n-gram containment, Greedy String Tiling
and an alignment algorithm, as attributes for
a supervised learning algorithm faced with the
task of learning how to classify newspaper sto-
ries as to whether they are wholly, partially or
non-derived from a news agency source. We
show that the best single feature ternary clas-
sier uses either alignment or simple hapax con-
tainment measures and that a cascaded binary
classier using a combination of features can
outperform this.
The results are lower than one might like,
and reect the problems of measuring journalis-
tic reuse, stemming from complex editing trans-
formations and the high amount of verbatim
text overlapping as a result of thematic simi-
larity and \expected" similarity due to, e.g., di-
rect/indirect quotes. Given the relative close-
ness of results obtained by all approaches we
have considered, we speculate that any compar-
ison method based upon lexical similarity will
probably not improve classication results by
much. Perhaps improved performance at this
task may possible by using more advanced nat-
ural language processing techniques, e.g. better
modeling of the lexical variation and syntactic
transformation that goes on in journalistic reuse.
Nevertheless the results we have obtained are
strong enough in some cases (e.g. wholly derived
texts can be identied with > 80% accuracy) to
begin to be exploited.
In summary measuring text reuse is an excit-
ing new area that will have a number of appli-
cations, in particular, but not limited to, mon-
itoring and controlling the copy produced by a
newswire.
7 Future work
We are adapting the GST algorithm to deal with
simple rewrites (e.g. synonym substitution) and
to observe the eects of rewriting upon nding
longest common substrings. We are also experi-
menting using the more detailed METER corpus
lexical-level annotations to investigate how well
the GST and ngrams approaches can identify
reuse at this level.
A prototype browser-based demo of both the
GST algorithm and alignment program, allow-
ing users to test arbitrary text pairs for simi-
larity, is now available
4
and will continue to be
enhanced.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Re-
search Council for funding the METER project
(GR/M34041). Thanks also to Mark Hepple for
helpful comments on earlier drafts.
4
See http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/nlp/meter.
References
P.F. Brown, J.C. Lai, and R.L. Mercer. 1991. Aligning
sentences in parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the
29th Annual Meeting of the Assoc. for Computational
Linguistics, pages 169{176, Berkeley, CA, USA.
P Clough. 2000. Plagiarism in natural and programming
languages: An overview of current tools and technolo-
gies. Technical Report CS-00-05, Dept. of Computer
Science, University of She?eld, UK.
E. Eskin and M. Bogosian. 1998. Classifying text docu-
ments using modular categories and linguistically mo-
tivated indicators. In AAAI-98 Workshop on Learning
for Text Classication.
H. Evans. 1972. Essential English for Journalists, Edi-
tors and Writers. Pimlico, London.
S. Finlay. 1999. Copycatch. Master's thesis, Dept. of
English. University of Birmingham.
R. Gaizauskas, J. Foster, Y. Wilks, J. Arundel,
P. Clough, and S. Piao. 2001. The meter corpus:
A corpus for analysing journalistic text reuse. In Pro-
ceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2001 Conference,
pages 214|223.
W.A. Gale and K.W. Church. 1993. A program for align-
ing sentences in bilingual corpus. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19:75{102.
M.A. Hall and L.A. Smith. 1999. Feature selection for
machine learning: Comparing a correlation-based l-
ter approach to the wrapper. In Proceedings of the
Florida Articial Intelligence Symposium (FLAIRS-
99), pages 235{239.
C. Lyon, J. Malcolm, and B. Dickerson. 2001. Detecting
short passages of similar text in large document collec-
tions. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP2001), pages 118{125.
K. McKeown and H. Jing. 1999. The decomposition of
human-written summary sentences. In SIGIR 1999,
pages 129{136.
I. Dan Melamed. 1999. Bitext maps and alignment via
pattern recognition. Computational Linguistics, pages
107{130.
Scott S.L. Piao. 2001. Detecting and measuring text
reuse via aligning texts. Research Memorandum
CS-01-15, Dept. of Computer Science, University of
She?eld.
M. Simard, G. Foster, and P. Isabelle. 1992. Using
cognates to align sentences in bilingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the 4th Int. Conf. on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation, pages
67{81, Montreal, Canada.
M. Wise. 1996. Yap3: Improved detection of similarities
in computer programs and other texts. In Proceedings
of SIGCSE'96, pages 130{134, Philadelphia, USA.
I.H. Witten and E. Frank. 2000. Datamining - practi-
cal machine learning tools and techniques with Java
implementations. Morgan Kaufmann.
D. Wu. 2000. Alignment. In R. Dale and H. Moisl and
H. Somers (eds.), A Handbook of Natural Language
Processing, pages 415{458. New York: Marcel Dekker.
