Semantic classification of Chinese unknown words 
Huihsin Tseng 
 Linguistics 
University of Colorado  
at Boulder 
tseng@colorado.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a classifier that assigns se-
mantic thesaurus categories to unknown Chinese 
words (words not already in the CiLin thesaurus 
and the Chinese Electronic Dictionary, but in the 
Sinica Corpus). The focus of the paper differs in 
two ways from previous research in this particular 
area.  
Prior research in Chinese unknown words mostly 
focused on proper nouns (Lee 1993, Lee, Lee and 
Chen 1994, Huang, Hong and Chen 1994, Chen 
and Chen 2000).  This paper does not address 
proper nouns, focusing rather on common nouns, 
adjectives, and verbs. My analysis of the Sinica 
Corpus shows that contrary to expectation, most of 
unknown words in Chinese are common nouns, 
adjectives, and verbs rather than proper nouns. 
Other previous research has focused on features 
related to unknown word contexts (Caraballo 1999; 
Roark and Charniak 1998). While context is 
clearly an important feature, this paper focuses on 
non-contextual features, which may play a key role 
for unknown words that occur only once and hence 
have limited context. The feature I focus on, fol-
lowing Ciaramita (2002), is morphological similar-
ity to words whose semantic category is known. 
My nearest neighbor approach to lexical acquisi-
tion computes the distance between an unknown 
word and examples from the CiLin thesaurus based 
upon its morphological structure. The classifier 
improves on baseline semantic categorization per-
formance for adjectives and verbs, but not for 
nouns. 
1 Introduction 
The biggest problem for assigning semantic cate-
gories to words lies in the incompleteness of dic-
tionaries. It is impractical to construct a dictionary 
that will contain all words that may occur in some 
previously unseen corpora. This issue is particu-
larly problematic for natural language processing 
applications that work with Chinese texts. Specifi-
cally, for the Sinica Corpus1, Bai, Chen and Chen 
(1998) found that articles contain on average 
3.51% words that were not listed in the Chinese 
Electronic Dictionary2 of 80,000 words. Because 
novel words are created daily, it is impossible to 
collect them all. Furthermore, across most of the 
corpora, many of these newly coined words seem 
to be used only once, and thus they may not even 
be worth collecting. However, the occurrence of 
unknown words makes a number of NLP (Natural 
Language Processing) tasks such as segmentation 
and word sense disambiguation more difficult. 
Consequently, it would be valuable to have some 
means of automatically assigning meaning to un-
known words. This paper describes a classifier that 
assigns semantic thesaurus categories to unknown 
Chinese words.  
The Caraballo (1999)?s system adopted the contex-
tual information to assign nouns to their hyponyms. 
Roark and Charniak (1998) used the co-occurrence 
of words as features to classify nouns. While con-
text is clearly an important feature, this paper fo-
cuses on non-contextual features, which may play 
a key role for unknown words that occur only once 
                                                          
1 The Sinica Corpus is a balanced corpus contained five 
million part-of-speech words in Mandarin Chinese.  
2The Chinese Electronic Dictionary is from the 
Computational Linguistics Society of R.O.C. 
and hence have limited context. The feature I focus 
on, following Ciaramita (2002), is morphological 
similarity to words whose semantic category is 
known. Ciaramita (2002) boosted the lexical ac-
quisition system by simple morphological rules 
and found a significant improvement. Such a find-
ing suggests that a reliable source of semantic in-
formation lies in the morphology used to construct 
the unknown words.  
In Chinese morphology, the two ways to generate 
new words are compounding and affixation. 
Orthographically, such compounding and affixa-
tion is represented by combinations of characters, 
and as a result, the character combinations and the 
morpho-syntactic relationship used to link them 
together can be clues for classification. Further-
more, my analysis of the Sinica Corpus indicates 
that only 49.68% monosyllabic3 words have one 
word class, but 91.67% multisyallabic words have 
one word class in Table 1. Once characters merge 
together, only 8.33% words remain ambiguous. It 
implies that as characters are combined together, 
the degree of ambiguity tends to decrease. 
 
 
Word Class4 Monosyllabic Multisyllabic
1 49.68% 91.67% 
2 21.94% 7.30% 
3 10.94% 0.82% 
4 6.55% 0.15% 
more than 4 10.89% 0.06% 
Table 1 The ambiguity distribution of monosyllabic and 
multisyllabic words 
 
The remainder of this paper is organized in the fol-
lowing manner: section 2 introduces the CiLin the-
saurus, section 3 provides an analysis of unknown 
words in the Sinica Corpus, and section 4 details 
the algorithm used for the semantic classification 
and explains the results. 
 
                                                          
3 ?Monosyllabic word? means a word with only a char-
acter, and ?multisynllabic word? means a word with 
more than one character. 
4 ?Word Class? means the number of each word?s word 
class. 
2 The CiLin thesaurus 
The CiLin (Mei et al1986) is a thesaurus that con-
tains 12 main categories: A-human, B-object, C-
time and space, D-abstract, E-attribute, F-action, 
G-mental action, H-activity, I-state, J-association, 
K-auxiliary, and L-respect. The majority of words 
in the A-D categories are nouns, while the majority 
in the F-J categories are verbs. As shown in Figure 
1, the main categories are further subdivided into 
more specific subcategories in a three-tier hierar-
chy.  
B Object
0.1636 
Bn Building
0.0174 
Bm Material
0.0128 
Bl Excrement
0.0036 
Bk The whole 
body
0.0135 
Bj 
Microorganism
0.0013 
Bi Animal
0.0179 
Bh Plant
0.0064 
Bh07 Fruit
0.0003 
Bh06 
Vegetable
0.0003 
Bh01 Tree
0.0005 
Fanqie 
(tomato)
Hamigua 
(hami melon)
Word level
Concept level1
Concept level 2
Concept level 3
 
Figure 1 The taxonomy of the CiLin with the probabil-
ity (partial) 
 
 
 
3 Corpus analysis of Chinese unknown 
words 
3.1 Definition of unknown words 
Unknown words are the Sinica Corpus lexicons 
that are not listed in the Chinese Electronic Dic-
tionary of 80,000 lexicons and the CiLin. The 5 
million word Sinica Corpus contains 77,866 un-
known words consisting of 1.59% adjectives, 
33.73% common nouns, 25.18% proper nouns, 
12.48% location nouns, 2.98% time nouns, and 
24.04% verbs as shown in Table 2.  
The focus of most other Chinese unknown word 
research is on identification of proper nouns such 
as proper names (Lee 1993), personal names (Lee, 
Lee and Chen 1994), abbreviation (Huang, Hong 
and Chen 1994), and organization names (Chen & 
Chen 2000). Unknown words in categories outside 
the class of proper nouns are seldom mentioned. 
One of the few examples of multiple class word 
prediction is Chen, Bai and Chen?s 1997 work em-
ploying statistical methods based on the prefix-
category and suffix-category associations to pre-
dict the syntactic function of unknown words. Al-
though proper nouns may contain lots of useful and 
valuable information in a sentence, the majority of 
unknown words in Chinese are lexical words, and 
consequently, it is also important to classify lexical 
words. If not, the remaining 70% of unknown 
words5 will be an obstacle to Chinese NLP, where 
24.04% of verbs are unknown can be a major prob-
lem for parsers. 
 
Class Unknown words Corpus lexicons6
Adjective 1.59% 1.49% 
Common noun 33.73% 37.12% 
Proper noun7 25.18% 16.53% 
Location noun8 12.48% 10.38% 
Time noun9 2.98% 2.36% 
Verb 24.04% 32.11% 
Table 2 The distribution of unknown words and all lexi-
cons of the Sinica Corpus in 6 classes 
 
3.2 Types of unknown words 
In Chinese morphology, the two ways to generate 
new words are compounding and affixation.  
Compounds 
A compound is a word made up of other words. In 
general, Chinese compounds are made up of words 
                                                          
5 Part of location noun still contains some proper nouns 
like country names. 
6 It contains both known and unknown words. 
7 Proper noun contains two classes: 1) formal name, 
such as personal names, races, titles of magazines and 
so on. 2) Family name, such as Chen and Lee.  
8 Location noun contains 4 subclasses: 1) country names, 
such as China. 2) common location noun, such as??
/youju ?post office? and??/xuexiao ?school?. 3) noun 
+ position, such as??/haiwei ?oversea?. 4) direction 
noun, such as?/shang ?up? and?/xia ?down?.  
9 Time noun contains 3 classes: 1) historical event and 
recursive time noun, such as?/Qing dynasty and??
/yiyue ?January?. 2) noun + position, such as??
/wanjian ?in the evening?, 3) adverbial time noun, such 
as??/jianglai ?in the future?. 
that are linked together by morpho-syntactic rela-
tions such as modifier-head, verb-object, and so on 
(Chao 1968, Li and Thompson 1981). For example, 
???/guanghuanjue LIGHT-ILLUSION ?optical 
illusion?, consists of ?/guang ?light? and  ??
/huanjue ?illusion?, and the relation is modifier-
head. ???/ guangguomin LIGHT-ALLERGY 
?photosensitization? is made up of?/ guang ?light? 
and ?? / guomin ?allergy?, and the relation is 
modifier-head. 
Affixation 
A word is formed by affixation when a stem is 
combined with a prefix or a suffix morpheme. For 
example English suffixes such as -ian and -ist are 
used to create words referring to a person with a 
specialty, such as `musician' and `scientist'. Such 
suffixes can give very specific evidence for the 
semantic class of the word.  Chinese has suffixes 
with similar meanings to -ian or -ist, such as the 
Chinese suffix -jia. But the Chinese affix is a much 
weaker cue to the semantic category of the word 
than English -ist or -ian, because it is more am-
biguous. The suffix ?jia contains three major con-
cepts: 1) expert, such as ? ? ? /kexuejia 
SCIENCE-EXPERT ?scientist? and ? ? ? / 
yinyuejia MUSIC-EXPERT ?musician?, 2) family 
and home, such as ? ? /quanjia WHOLE-
FAMILY ?whole family? and ??? /fuguijia 
RICH-FAMILY ?rich family?, 3) house, such as ?
? /banjia MOVE-HOUSE ?to move house?. In 
English, the meaning of an unknown word with the 
suffix ?ian or ?ist is clear, but in Chinese an un-
known word with the suffix ?jia could have multi-
ple interpretations. Another example of ambiguous 
suffix, ?xing, has three main concepts: 1) gender, 
such as ??/nuxing FEMALE-SEX ?female?, 2) 
property, such as ? ? /yaoxing MEDICINE-
PROPERTY ?property of a medicine?, 3) a charac-
teristic, ???? /shishachengxing LIKE-KILL-
AS-HABIT ?a characteristic of being bloodthirsty?. 
Even though Chinese also has morphological suf-
fixes to generate unknown words, they do not de-
termine meaning and syntactic category as clearly 
as they do in English.  
 
 
 
4 Semantic classification 
For the task of classifying unknown words, two 
algorithms are evaluated. The first algorithm uses a 
simple heuristic where the semantic category of an 
unknown word is determined by the head of the 
unknown word. The second algorithm adopts a 
more sophisticated nearest neighbor approach such 
that the distance between an unknown word and 
examples from the CiLin thesaurus computed 
based upon its morphological structure. The first 
algorithm serves to provide a baseline against 
which the performance of the second can be evalu-
ated.  
 
4.1 Baseline 
The baseline method is to assign the semantic 
category of the morphological head to each word. 
4.2 An example-base semantic classification  
The algorithm for the nearest neighbor classifier is 
as follows: 
1) An unknown word is parsed by a morphological 
analyzer (Tseng and Chen 2002). The analyzer a) 
segments a word into a sequence of morphemes, b) 
tags the syntactic categories of morphemes, and c) 
predicts morpho-syntactic relationships between 
morphemes, such as modifier-head, verb-object 
and resultative verbs as shown as in Table 3. For 
example, if ??? /wudaojia DANCE-EXPERT 
?dancer? is an unknown word, the morphological 
segmentation is ??/wudao DANCE ?dance? and 
?/jia EXPERT ?expert?, and the relation is modi-
fier-head. 
2) The CiLin thesaurus is then searched for entries 
(examples) that are similar to the unknown word. 
A list of words sharing at least one morpheme with 
the unknown word, in the same position, is con-
structed. In the case of ???/wudaojia, such a 
list would include ? ? ? /gechangjia SING-
EXPERT ?singer?, ?? /huijia GO-HOME ?go 
home?, ???/fuguijia RICH-FAMILY ?rich fam-
ily? and so on.  
 
Word 
Class 
The morpho-syntactic relations 
Noun Modifier-head10 
??/lanqie  
BASKET-BALL `baseketball? 
Verb 1) Verb-object :  
??/chifan  
EAT-RICE ?to eat` 
2) Modifier-head:  
??/qinglie CLEAR-LIST ?clearly list? 
3) Resultative Verb 
??/chibao EAT-FULL ?to have eaten? 
4) Head-suffix: 
??/biancheng CHANG-TO ?become? 
5) Modifier-head (suffix): 
???/zidonghua  
AUTOMATIC-BECOME ?automatize? 
6) Directional resultative compound and 
reduplication 
???/paoshanglai  
RUN-UP-TO ?run up to? 
Adjective An: modifier-head 
???/zhongguoshi 
CHINESE-STYLE ?Chinese stylish? 
Av: verb-object and modifier-head 
??/yumin 
FOOL-PEOPLE ?keeping the people unin-
formed? 
Table 3 The morpho-syntactic relations 
 
3) The examples that do not have the same mor-
pho-syntactic relationships but shared morpheme 
belongs to the unknown word?s modifier are 
pruned away. If no examples are found, the system 
falls back to the baseline classification method. 
4) The semantic similarity metric used to compute 
the distance between the unknown word and the 
selected examples from the CiLin thesaurus is 
based upon a method first proposed by Chen and 
Chen (1997).  
They assume that similarity of two semantic cate-
gories is the information content of their parent?s 
                                                          
10There are still a very small number of coordinate rela-
tion compounds that is both of the morphemes in a 
compound are heads. Since either one of the morphemes 
can be the meaning of the whole compound, in order to 
simplify the system, words that have coordinate rela-
tions are categorized as modifier head relation. 
node.  For instance, the similarity of ???
/hamigua ?hami melon? (Bh07) and ?? /fanqie 
?tomato? (Bh06) is based on the information con-
tent of the node of their least common ancestor Bh.  
The CiLin thesaurus can be used as an information 
system, and the information content of each se-
mantic category is defined as  
category) manticEntropy(Sestem)Entropy(Sy ?  
The similarity of two words is the least common 
ancestor information content(IC), and hence, the 
higher the information content is, the more similar 
two the words are. The information content is 
normalized by Entropy(system) in order to keep 
the similarity between 0 and 1. To simplify the 
computation, the probabilities of all leaf nodes are 
assumed equal. For example, the probability of Bh 
is .0064 and the information content of Bh is ?
log(.0064). Hence, the similarity between???/ 
hamigua and ??/ fanqie is .61. 
( ) ( )( )
( )( )
( ) )1(             SystemEntropy 
Plog
SystemEntropy 
 IC Sim 2122121
WWWWWW III ?==  
 
fanqie) ofcategory  (the Bh06
  hamihua), ofcategory  (the Bh07
 CiLin,SystemLet  
2
1
=
=
=
W
W
 
( ) ( )( )
( )( )
( )
0.61
11.94
7.29
0.0026log-
0.0064log-
CiLinEntropy 
BhPlog
CiLinEntropy 
Bh06Bh07 ICBh06Bh07 Sim
2
2
2
===
?== II  
Resnik (1995, 1998 and 2000) and Lin (1998) also 
proposed information content algorithms for simi-
larity measurement. The Chen and Chen (1997) 
algorithm is a simplification of the Resnik algo-
rithm, which makes the simplifying assumption 
that the occurrence probability of each leaf node is 
equal. 
One problem for this algorithm is the insufficient 
coverage of the CiLin (CiLin may not cover all 
morphemes). The backup method is to run the clas-
sifier recursively to predict the possible categories 
of the unlisted morphemes. If a morpheme of an 
unknown word or of an unknown word?s example 
is not listed in the CiLin, the similarity measure-
ment will suspend measuring the similarity be-
tween the unknown word and the examples and run 
the classifier to predict he semantic category of the 
morpheme first. After the category of the mor-
pheme is known, the classifier will continue to 
measure the similarity between the unknown word 
and its examples. The probability of adopting this 
backup method in my experiment is on the average 
of 3%.  
Here is an example of the recursive semantic 
measurement. ??? /paomatou RUN-WHARF 
?wharf-worker? is an example of an unknown word
???/paohanchuan RUN-DRY BOAT ?folk ac-
tivities?. The morphological analyzer breaks the 
two words into ? ??/pao matou and ? ??
/pao hanchuan. The measurement function will 
compute the similarity between??/matou and?
?/hanchuan, but in this case, ??/hanchuan is 
not listed in the CiLin. The next approach is then 
to run the semantic classifier to guess the possible 
category of??/hanchuan. Based on the predicted 
category, it then goes on to compute the similarity 
for ??/matuo and ??/hanchuan. By applying 
this method, there will not be any words without a 
similarity measurement. 
5) After the distances from the unknown word to 
each of the selected examples from the CiLin the-
saurus are determined, the average distance to the 
K nearest neighbors from each semantic category 
is computed. The category with the lowest distance 
is assigned to the unknown word.  
The similarity of ??/wudao and ??/gechang 
is .87, of ??/wudao and ?/hui is .26, and of ?
? /wudao and ?? /fugui is 0. Thus, ???
/wudaojia is more similar to ??? /gechangjia 
than??/huijia or???/fuguijia. The category of 
???/wudaojia is thus most likely to be ???
/gechangjia.  
The semantic category is predicted as the category 
that gets the highest score in formula (2). The lexi-
cal similarity and frequency of examples of each 
category are considered as the most important fea-
tures to decide a category.  
In formula (2), RankScore(Ci) includes SS(Ci) and 
FS(Ci). The score of SS(Ci) is a lexical similarity 
score, which is from the maximum score of Simi-
larity (W1,W2) in the category of W2. FS(Ci) is a 
frequency score to show how many examples there 
are in a category. ? and (1-?) are respectively 
weights for the lexical similarity score and the fre-
quency score. 
 
)Taxonomy  nA...L(CiLi
CiLin   thein  definedcategory  semantic  whoseword
 wordunknownLet  1
=
=
=
i
W
W
i
 
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) ( )
( )
(4)                                                       
Freq
FreqFS
(3)                                           ,SimmaxargSS
2)(                                FS?1SS?Rankscore
L
Ai
1
A...Li
C
?
=
=
?
=
=
??+?=
i
i
i
i
CW
i
iii
C
CC
WWC
CCC
ii
 
 
5 Experiment 
5.1 Data 
There are 56,830 words in the CiLin. For experi-
ments, CiLin lexicons are divided into 2 sets: a 
training set of 80% CiLin words, a development 
set of 10% of CiLin words, and a test set of 10% 
CiLin words. All words in the test set are assumed 
to be unknown, which means the semantic catego-
ries in both sets are unknown. Nevertheless, the 
morphological structures of proper nouns are dif-
ferent from lexical words. Their identification 
methods are also different and will be out of the 
scope of this paper. The correct category of the 
unknown word is the semantic category in the 
CiLin, and if an unknown word is ambiguous, 
which means it contains more than one category, 
the system then chooses only one possible category. 
In evaluation, any one of the categories of an am-
biguous word is considered correct. 
5.2 Result 
On the test set, the baseline predicts 53.50% of 
adjectives, 70.84% of nouns and 47.19% of verbs 
correctly. The classifier reaches 64.20% in adjec-
tives, 71.77% in nouns and 53.47% in verbs, when 
? is 0.5 and K is five. 
Word class
Baseline
accuracy
Semantic classification 
accuracy 
Adjective 53.50% 64.20% 
Noun 70.84% 71.77% 
Verb 47.19% 53.47% 
Table 4 The accuracy of the baseline and semantic clas-
sification in the development set 
 
Word class
Baseline
accuracy
Semantic classification 
accuracy 
Adjective 52.92% 65.76% 
Noun 70.89% 71.39% 
Verb 44.10% 52.84% 
Table 5 The accuracy of the baseline and semantic clas-
sification in the test set 
 
Table 4 and table 5 show a comparison of the base-
line and the classifier. Generally, nouns are easier 
to predict than the other categories, because their 
morpho-syntactic relation is not as complex as 
verbs and adjectives. The classifier improves on 
baseline semantic categorization performance for 
adjectives and verbs, but not for nouns. The lack of 
a performance increase for nouns is most likely 
because nouns only have one kind of morpho-
syntactic relation. The advantage of the classifier is 
to filter out examples in different relations and to 
find out the most similar example in morphemes 
and morpho-syntactic relation. The classifier pre-
dicts better than the baseline in word classes with 
multiple relations, such as adjectives and verbs. 
For example, ??? /kaikuaiche OPEN-FAST 
CAR ?drive fast? is a verb-object verb. The base-
line wrongly predicted it due to the verb, ?/kai 
OPEN ?open?. However, the semantic classifier 
grouped it to the category of its similar example, 
???/kaiyeche OPEN-NIGHT CAR ?drive dur-
ing the night?. 
 
5.3 Error analysis 
Error sources can be grouped into two types: data 
errors and the classifier errors. The testing data is 
from the CiLin. Some of testing data are not se-
mantically transparent such as idioms, metaphors, 
and slang. The meaning of such words is different 
from the literal meaning. For instance, the literal 
meaning of ???/kanmengou WATCH-DOOR-
DOG is a door-watching dog, and in fact it refers 
to a person with the belittling meaning. ???
/mulaohu FEMALE-TIGER is a female tiger liter-
ally, and it refers to a mean woman. These words 
do not carry the meaning of their head anymore. 
An unknown word will be created such as ???
/kanmenmao WATCH-DOOR-CAT ?a door-
watching cat?, but it is impossible for unknown 
words to carry similar meaning of words as???
/kanmengou. 
The classifier errors are due primarily to three fac-
tors: a lack of examples, the preciseness of the 
similarity measurement, and the taxonomy of the 
CiLin.  
First, some errors occur when there are not enough 
examples in training data. For example, ???
/tielangan IRON-POLE ?iron pole` does not have 
any similar examples after the classifier filters out 
examples whose relations are different and whose 
shared morphemes are not head. ???/tielangan 
is segmented as ? /tie IRON ?iron? and ??
/langan POLE ?pole?. There are examples of the 
first morpheme, ?/tie, but no similar examples of 
the second,?? /langan. Since ??? /tielangan 
has modifier-head relation and ??/langan is the 
head of the compound, then the classifier filters out 
the examples of?/tie. There are hence not enough 
examples. Filtering examples in different structures 
is performed to make the remaining examples 
more similar since the similarity measurement may 
not be able to distinguish slight differences. How-
ever, the cost of this filtering of different structure 
examples is that sometimes this leaves no exam-
ples. 
Second, the similarity measurement is sometimes 
not powerful enough. ? ? ? /yundongchang 
SPORT-SPACE ?a sports ground` has a sufficient 
number of examples, but has problems with the 
similarity measurement. The head ?/chang is am-
biguous. ?/chang has two senses and both mean 
space. One of them means abstract space and the 
other means physical space. Hence, in the CiLin 
thesaurus ?/chang can be found in C (time and 
space) and D (abstract). Words in C such as ??
/shangchang BUSINESS-SPACE ?a market?, ??
? /tuzaichang BUTCHER-SPACE ?a slaughter 
house? , ?? /huichang MEETING-SPACE ?the 
place of a meeting?, and in D are ??/ qiuchang 
BALL-SPACE ?a court?, ? ? ? /tiyuchang 
PHYSICAL TRAINING-SPACE ?a stadium?. ??
?/yundongchang should be more similar to ??
?/tiyuchang than other space nouns, but the simi-
larity score does not show that they are related and 
C group has more examples. Thus, the system 
chooses C incorrectly. 
Third, the taxonomy of the thesaurus is ambiguous. 
For instance, ???/tichaofang GYMNASTICS?
ROOM ?gymnastics room? has similar examples in 
both B (object) and D (abstract). These two groups 
are very similar. Words in B group include ??
/xingfan PUNISHMENT-ROOM ?punishment 
room?, ??/shufan BOOK-ROOM ?study room?, 
??/anfan DARK-ROOM ?dark room?, and ??
/chufan KITCHEN-ROOM ?kitchen?. Words in D 
are such as ??/laofan PRISON-ROOM ?a jail? 
and ??? /danzifan BILLIARD-ROOM ?a bil-
liard room?. There are no obvious features to dis-
tinguish between these examples. According to the 
CiLin, ??? /tichaofang belongs to D, but the 
classifier predicts it as B class which does not ac-
tually differ much with D. Such problems may oc-
cur with any semantic taxonomy. 
 
6 Conclusion 
The paper presents an algorithm for classifying the 
unknown words semantically. The classifier adopts 
a nearest neighbor approach such that the distance 
between an unknown word and examples from the 
CiLin thesaurus is computed based upon its mor-
phological structure. The main contributions of the 
system are: first, it is the first attempt in adding 
semantic knowledge to Chinese unknown words. 
Since over 70% of unknown words are lexical 
words, the inability to resolve their meaning is a 
major obstacle to Chinese NLP such as semantic 
parsers. Second, without contextual information, 
the system can still successfully classify 65.76% of 
adjectives, 71.39% of nouns and 52.84% of verbs. 
Future work will explore the use of the contextual 
information of the unknown words and the contex-
tual information of the lexicons in the predicted 
category of the unknown words to boost predictive 
power.  
Acknowledgment  
Thanks to S. Bethard, D. Cer, K. J. Chen, D. Juraf-
sky and to the anonymous reviewers for many 
helpful suggestions. This research was partially 
supported by the NSF via a KDD extension to NSF 
IIS-9978025 (Dan Jurafsky, PI) and by the CKIP 
group, Institute of Information Science, Academia 
Sinica.  
References 
Bai, M. H., C.J. Chen, and K. J. Chen. 1998. ?????
???????? ? <????????????
???>??????????????????
? 47-60? 
Caraballo, S. 1999. Automatic acquisition of a 
hypemymlabeled noun hierarchy from text, in 
Proceedings of the 37th ACL. 
Ciaramita. M. 2002. Boosting automatic lexical acquisi-
tion with morphological information", in Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Unsupervised Lexical Acquisi-
tion, ACL-02. 
Chao, Y. R. 1968. A grammar of spoken Chinese. 
Berkeley:University of California Press. 
Chen, C. J., M. H. Bai and K. J. Chen. 1997. Category 
Guessing for Chinese Unknown Words, in Proceed-
ings of the Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim 
Symposium, 35-40. 
Lee, J. C. 1993. ????? ????????????
?????????????????????
?? 
Lee, J. C., Y. H. Lee and H. H. Chen. 1994. ?????
??????????????????????
???<??????????????>??
203-222? 
Chen. K. J. and C. J Chen. 1997. ??????????
<??????????????????>??
??????????????????????
????????? 283-305???????
?? 
Chen, K. J. and M. H. Bai. 1998. Unknown Word 
Detection for Chinese by a Corpus-based Learning 
Method, in Computational Linguistics and Chinese 
Language Processing vol3 no. 1, 27-44. 
Chen, C. J. and K. J. Chen. 2002. Knowledge Extraction 
for Identification of Chinese Organization Names, in 
Proceedings of the second Chinese Language Proc-
essing Workshop, 15-21. 
Huang, C. R., W. M. Hong and K. J. Chen.  1994.  An 
Introduction Based Lexical of Abbreviation, in Pro-
ceedings of the 2th Pacific Asia Conference on For-
mal and Computational Linguistics, 49-52. 
Huang, C. R. and K. J. Chen. 1995. ????  ??
?? ????????????????????
?? 
Li, C. and S. A. Thompson. 1981. Mandarin Chinese. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Lin, D.. 1998. An information-theoretic definition of 
similarity, in Proceedings 15th International Conf. on 
Machine Learning, p 296?304. 
Lin, D. and P. Pantel.. 2001. Induction of Semantic 
Classes from Natural Language Text, In Proceedings 
of ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining 2001, 317-322.  
Mei, J., Y. Zhu., Y. Gao, and H. Ying. 1986. ?????
?????????????1986???????
???????????? 
Resnik, P.. 1995. Using Information Content to Evalu-
ate Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy. Proceedings 
of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pp. 448-453. 
---. 1998. Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy: An In-
formation-Based Measure and its Application to 
Problems of Ambiguity in Natural Language, in 
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (11), 95-
130. 
Resnik, P. and M. Diab. 2000. Measuring Verbal Simi-
larity. Technical Report: LAMP-TR-047//UMIACS-
TR-2000-40/CS-TR-4149/MDA-9049-6C-1250. 
University of Maryland, College Park. 
Roark, B. and E. Charniak. 1998. Noun-phrase co-
occurrence statistics from semi-automatic semantic 
lexicon construction, in Proceedins of the 36th ACL. 
Tseng, H and K. J. Chen. 2002. Design of Chinese 
Morphological Analyzer. SigHan Workshop on Chi-
nese Language Processing, Taipei. 
 
