tRuEcasIng
Lucian Vlad Lita ?
Carnegie Mellon
llita@cs.cmu.edu
Abe Ittycheriah
IBM T.J. Watson
abei@us.ibm.com
Salim Roukos
IBM T.J. Watson
roukos@us.ibm.com
Nanda Kambhatla
IBM T.J. Watson
nanda@us.ibm.com
Abstract
Truecasing is the process of restoring
case information to badly-cased or non-
cased text. This paper explores truecas-
ing issues and proposes a statistical, lan-
guage modeling based truecaser which
achieves an accuracy of ?98% on news
articles. Task based evaluation shows a
26% F-measure improvement in named
entity recognition when using truecasing.
In the context of automatic content ex-
traction, mention detection on automatic
speech recognition text is also improved
by a factor of 8. Truecasing also en-
hances machine translation output legibil-
ity and yields a BLEU score improvement
of 80.2%. This paper argues for the use of
truecasing as a valuable component in text
processing applications.
1 Introduction
While it is true that large, high quality text corpora
are becoming a reality, it is also true that the digital
world is flooded with enormous collections of low
quality natural language text. Transcripts from var-
ious audio sources, automatic speech recognition,
optical character recognition, online messaging and
gaming, email, and the web are just a few exam-
ples of raw text sources with content often produced
in a hurry, containing misspellings, insertions, dele-
tions, grammatical errors, neologisms, jargon terms
? Work done at IBM TJ Watson Research Center
etc. We want to enhance the quality of such sources
in order to produce better rule-based systems and
sharper statistical models.
This paper focuses on truecasing, which is the
process of restoring case information to raw text.
Besides text rEaDaBILiTY, truecasing enhances the
quality of case-carrying data, brings into the pic-
ture new corpora originally considered too noisy for
various NLP tasks, and performs case normalization
across styles, sources, and genres.
Consider the following mildly ambiguous sen-
tence ?us rep. james pond showed up riding an it
and going to a now meeting?. The case-carrying al-
ternative ?US Rep. James Pond showed up riding an
IT and going to a NOW meeting? is arguably better
fit to be subjected to further processing.
Broadcast news transcripts contain casing errors
which reduce the performance of tasks such as
named entity tagging. Automatic speech recognition
produces non-cased text. Headlines, teasers, section
headers - which carry high information content - are
not properly cased for tasks such as question answer-
ing. Truecasing is an essential step in transforming
these types of data into cleaner sources to be used by
NLP applications.
?the president? and ?the President? are two viable
surface forms that correctly convey the same infor-
mation in the same context. Such discrepancies are
usually due to differences in news source, authors,
and stylistic choices. Truecasing can be used as a
normalization tool across corpora in order to pro-
duce consistent, context sensitive, case information;
it consistently reduces expressions to their statistical
canonical form.
In this paper, we attempt to show the benefits of
truecasing in general as a valuable building block
for NLP applications rather than promoting a spe-
cific implementation. We explore several truecasing
issues and propose a statistical, language modeling
based truecaser, showing its performance on news
articles. Then, we present a straight forward appli-
cation of truecasing on machine translation output.
Finally, we demonstrate the considerable benefits of
truecasing through task based evaluations on named
entity tagging and automatic content extraction.
1.1 Related Work
Truecasing can be viewed in a lexical ambiguity res-
olution framework (Yarowsky, 1994) as discriminat-
ing among several versions of a word, which hap-
pen to have different surface forms (casings). Word-
sense disambiguation is a broad scope problem that
has been tackled with fairly good results generally
due to the fact that context is a very good pre-
dictor when choosing the sense of a word. (Gale
et al, 1994) mention good results on limited case
restoration experiments on toy problems with 100
words. They also observe that real world problems
generally exhibit around 90% case restoration accu-
racy. (Mikheev, 1999) also approaches casing dis-
ambiguation but models only instances when capi-
talization is expected: first word in a sentence, after
a period, and after quotes. (Chieu and Ng, 2002)
attempted to extract named entities from non-cased
text by using a weaker classifier but without focus-
ing on regular text or case restoration.
Accents can be viewed as additional surface forms
or alternate word casings. From this perspective, ei-
ther accent identification can be extended to truecas-
ing or truecasing can be extended to incorporate ac-
cent restoration. (Yarowsky, 1994) reports good re-
sults with statistical methods for Spanish and French
accent restoration.
Truecasing is also a specialized method for
spelling correction by relaxing the notion of casing
to spelling variations. There is a vast literature on
spelling correction (Jones and Martin, 1997; Gold-
ing and Roth, 1996) using both linguistic and statis-
tical approaches. Also, (Brill and Moore, 2000) ap-
ply a noisy channel model, based on generic string
to string edits, to spelling correction.
2 Approach
In this paper we take a statistical approach to true-
casing. First we present the baseline: a simple,
straight forward unigram model which performs rea-
sonably well in most cases. Then, we propose a bet-
ter, more flexible statistical truecaser based on lan-
guage modeling.
From a truecasing perspective we observe four
general classes of words: all lowercase (LC), first
letter uppercase (UC), all letters uppercase (CA), and
mixed case word MC). The MC class could be fur-
ther refined into meaningful subclasses but for the
purpose of this paper it is sufficient to correctly iden-
tify specific true MC forms for each MC instance.
We are interested in correctly assigning case la-
bels to words (tokens) in natural language text. This
represents the ability to discriminate between class
labels for the same lexical item, taking into account
the surrounding words. We are interested in casing
word combinations observed during training as well
as new phrases. The model requires the ability to
generalize in order to recognize that even though the
possibly misspelled token ?lenon? has never been
seen before, words in the same context usually take
the UC form.
2.1 Baseline: The Unigram Model
The goal of this paper is to show the benefits of true-
casing in general. The unigram baseline (presented
below) is introduced in order to put task based eval-
uations in perspective and not to be used as a straw-
man baseline.
The vast majority of vocabulary items have only
one surface form. Hence, it is only natural to adopt
the unigram model as a baseline for truecasing. In
most situations, the unigram model is a simple and
efficient model for surface form restoration. This
method associates with each surface form a score
based on the frequency of occurrence. The decoding
is very simple: the true case of a token is predicted
by the most likely case of that token.
The unigram model?s upper bound on truecasing
performance is given by the percentage of tokens
that occur during decoding under their most frequent
case. Approximately 12% of the vocabulary items
have been observed under more than one surface
form. Hence it is inevitable for the unigram model
to fail on tokens such as ?new?. Due to the over-
whelming frequency of its LC form, ?new? will take
this particular form regardless of what token follows
it. For both ?information? and ?york? as subsequent
words, ?new? will be labeled as LC. For the latter
case, ?new? occurs under one of its less frequent sur-
face forms.
2.2 Truecaser
The truecasing strategy that we are proposing seeks
to capture local context and bootstrap it across a
sentence. The case of a token will depend on the
most likely meaning of the sentence - where local
meaning is approximated by n-grams observed dur-
ing training. However, the local context of a few
words alone is not enough for case disambiguation.
Our proposed method employs sentence level con-
text as well.
We capture local context through a trigram lan-
guage model, but the case label is decided at a sen-
tence level. A reasonable improvement over the un-
igram model would have been to decide the word
casing given the previous two lexical items and their
corresponding case content. However, this greedy
approach still disregards global cues. Our goal is
to maximize the probability of a larger text segment
(i.e. a sentence) occurring under a certain surface
form. Towards this goal, we first build a language
model that can provide local context statistics.
2.2.1 Building a Language Model
Language modeling provides features for a label-
ing scheme. These features are based on the prob-
ability of a lexical item and a case content condi-
tioned on the history of previous two lexical items
and their corresponding case content:
Pmodel(w3|w2, w1) = ?trigramP (w3|w2, w1)
+ ?bigramP (w3|w2)
+ ?unigramP (w3)
+ ?uniformP0 (1)
where trigram, bigram, unigram, and uniform prob-
abilities are scaled by individual ?is which are
learned by observing training examples. wi repre-
sents a word with a case tag treated as a unit for
probability estimation.
2.2.2 Sentence Level Decoding
Using the language model probabilities we de-
code the case information at a sentence level. We
construct a trellis (figure 1) which incorporates all
the sentence surface forms as well as the features
computed during training. A node in this trellis con-
sists of a lexical item, a position in the sentence, a
possible casing, as well as a history of the previous
two lexical items and their corresponding case con-
tent. Hence, for each token, all surface forms will
appear as nodes carrying additional context infor-
mation. In the trellis, thicker arrows indicate higher
transition probabilities.
Figure 1: Given individual histories, the decodings
delay and DeLay, are most probable - perhaps in the
context of ?time delay? and respectively ?Senator
Tom DeLay?
The trellis can be viewed as a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) computing the state sequence
which best explains the observations. The states
(q1, q2, ? ? ? , qn) of the HMM are combinations of
case and context information, the transition proba-
bilities are the language model (?) based features,
and the observations (O1O2 ? ? ?Ot) are lexical items.
During decoding, the Viterbi algorithm (Rabiner,
1989) is used to compute the highest probability
state sequence (q?? at sentence level) that yields the
desired case information:
q?? = argmaxqi1qi2???qitP (qi1qi2 ? ? ? qit|O1O2 ? ? ?Ot, ?)
(2)
where P (qi1qi2 ? ? ? qit|O1O2 ? ? ?Ot, ?) is the proba-
bility of a given sequence conditioned on the obser-
vation sequence and the model parameters. A more
sophisticated approach could be envisioned, where
either the observations or the states are more expres-
sive. These alternate design choices are not explored
in this paper.
Testing speed depends on the width and length of
the trellis and the overall decoding complexity is:
Cdecoding = O(SMH+1) where S is the sentence
size, M is the number of surface forms we are will-
ing to consider for each word, and H is the history
size (H = 3 in the trigram case).
2.3 Unknown Words
In order for truecasing to be generalizable it must
deal with unknown words ? words not seen during
training. For large training sets, an extreme assump-
tion is that most words and corresponding casings
possible in a language have been observed during
training. Hence, most new tokens seen during de-
coding are going to be either proper nouns or mis-
spellings. The simplest strategy is to consider all
unknown words as being of the UC form (i.e. peo-
ple?s names, places, organizations).
Another approach is to replace the less frequent
vocabulary items with case-carrying special tokens.
During training, the word mispeling is replaced with
by UNKNOWN LC and the word Lenon with UN-
KNOWN UC. This transformation is based on the
observation that similar types of infrequent words
will occur during decoding. This transformation cre-
ates the precedent of unknown words of a particular
format being observed in a certain context. When a
truly unknown word will be seen in the same con-
text, the most appropriate casing will be applied.
This was the method used in our experiments. A
similar method is to apply the case-carrying special
token transformation only to a small random sam-
ple of all tokens, thus capturing context regardless
of frequency of occurrence.
2.4 Mixed Casing
A reasonable truecasing strategy is to focus on to-
ken classification into three categories: LC, UC, and
CA. In most text corpora mixed case tokens such as
McCartney, CoOl, and TheBeatles occur with mod-
erate frequency. Some NLP tasks might prefer map-
ping MC tokens starting with an uppercase letter into
the UC surface form. This technique will reduce the
feature space and allow for sharper models. How-
ever, the decoding process can be generalized to in-
clude mixed cases in order to find a closer fit to the
true sentence. In a clean version of the AQUAINT
(ARDA) news stories corpus, ? 90% of the tokens
occurred under the most frequent surface form (fig-
ure 2).
Figure 2: News domain casing distribution
The expensive brute force approach will consider
all possible casings of a word. Even with the full
casing space covered, some mixed cases will not be
seen during training and the language model prob-
abilities for n-grams containing certain words will
back off to an unknown word strategy. A more fea-
sible method is to account only for the mixed case
items observed during training, relying on a large
enough training corpus. A variable beam decod-
ing will assign non-zero probabilities to all known
casings of each word. An n-best approximation is
somewhat faster and easier to implement and is the
approach employed in our experiments. During the
sentence-level decoding only the n-most-frequent
mixed casings seen during training are considered.
If the true capitalization is not among these n-best
versions, the decoding is not correct. Additional lex-
ical and morphological features might be needed if
identifying MC instances is critical.
2.5 First Word in the Sentence
The first word in a sentence is generally under the
UC form. This sentence-begin indicator is some-
times ambiguous even when paired with sentence-
end indicators such as the period. While sentence
splitting is not within the scope of this paper, we
want to emphasize the fact that many NLP tasks
would benefit from knowing the true case of the first
word in the sentence, thus avoiding having to learn
the fact that beginning of sentences are artificially
important. Since it is uneventful to convert the first
letter of a sentence to uppercase, a more interest-
ing problem from a truecasing perspective is to learn
how to predict the correct case of the first word in a
sentence (i.e. not always UC).
If the language model is built on clean sentences
accounting for sentence boundaries, the decoding
will most likely uppercase the first letter of any sen-
tence. On the other hand, if the language model
is trained on clean sentences disregarding sentence
boundaries, the model will be less accurate since dif-
ferent casings will be presented for the same context
and artificial n-grams will be seen when transition-
ing between sentences. One way to obtain the de-
sired effect is to discard the first n tokens in the train-
ing sentences in order to escape the sentence-begin
effect. The language model is then built on smoother
context. A similar effect can be obtained by initial-
izing the decoding with n-gram state probabilities so
that the boundary information is masked.
3 Evaluation
Both the unigram model and the language model
based truecaser were trained on the AQUAINT
(ARDA) and TREC (NIST) corpora, each consist-
ing of 500M token news stories from various news
agencies. The truecaser was built using IBM?s
ViaVoiceTMlanguage modeling tools. These tools
implement trigram language models using deleted
interpolation for backing off if the trigram is not
found in the training data. The resulting model?s
perplexity is 108.
Since there is no absolute truth when truecasing a
sentence, the experiments need to be built with some
reference in mind. Our assumption is that profes-
sionally written news articles are very close to an
intangible absolute truth in terms of casing. Fur-
thermore, we ignore the impact of diverging stylistic
forms, assuming the differences are minor.
Based on the above assumptions we judge the
truecasing methods on four different test sets. The
first test set (APR) consists of the August 25,
2002 ? top 20 news stories from Associated Press
and Reuters excluding titles, headlines, and sec-
tion headers which together form the second test set
(APR+). The third test set (ACE) consists of ear-
?Randomly chosen test date
Figure 3: LM truecaser vs. unigram baseline.
lier news stories from AP and New York Times be-
longing to the ACE dataset. The last test set (MT)
includes a set of machine translation references (i.e.
human translations) of news articles from the Xin-
hua agency. The sizes of the data sets are as follows:
APR - 12k tokens, ACE - 90k tokens, and MT - 63k
tokens. For both truecasing methods, we computed
the agreement with the original news story consid-
ered to be the ground truth.
3.1 Results
The language model based truecaser consistently
displayed a significant error reduction in case
restoration over the unigram model (figure 3). On
current news stories, the truecaser agreement with
the original articles is ? 98%.
Titles and headlines usually have a higher con-
centration of named entities than normal text. This
also means that they need a more complex model to
assign case information more accurately. The LM
based truecaser performs better in this environment
while the unigram model misses named entity com-
ponents which happen to have a less frequent surface
form.
3.2 Qualitative Analysis
The original reference articles are assumed to have
the absolute true form. However, differences from
these original articles and the truecased articles are
not always casing errors. The truecaser tends to
modify the first word in a quotation if it is not
proper name: ?There has been? becomes ?there has
been?. It also makes changes which could be con-
sidered a correction of the original article: ?Xinhua
BLEU Breakdown
System BLEU 1gr Precision 2gr Precision 3gr Precision 4gr Precision
all lowercase 0.1306 0.6016 0.2294 0.1040 0.0528
rule based 0.1466 0.6176 0.2479 0.1169 0.0627
1gr truecasing 0.2206 0.6948 0.3328 0.1722 0.0988
1gr truecasing+ 0.2261 0.6963 0.3372 0.1734 0.0997
lm truecasing 0.2596 0.7102 0.3635 0.2066 0.1303
lm truecasing+ 0.2642 0.7107 0.3667 0.2066 0.1302
Table 1: BLEU score for several truecasing strategies. (truecasing+ methods additionally employ the ?first
sentence letter uppercased? rule adjustment).
Baseline With Truecasing
Class Recall Precision F Recall Precision F
ENAMEX 48.46 36.04 41.34 59.02 52.65 55.66 (+34.64%)
NUMEX 64.61 72.02 68.11 70.37 79.51 74.66 (+9.62%)
TIMEX 47.68 52.26 49.87 61.98 75.99 68.27 (+36.90%)
Overall 52.50 44.84 48.37 62.01 60.42 61.20 (+26.52%)
Table 2: Named Entity Recognition performance with truecasing and without (baseline).
news agency? becomes ?Xinhua News Agency? and
?northern alliance? is truecased as ?Northern Al-
liance?. In more ambiguous cases both the original
version and the truecased fragment represent differ-
ent stylistic forms: ?prime minister Hekmatyar? be-
comes ?Prime Minister Hekmatyar?.
There are also cases where the truecaser described
in this paper makes errors. New movie names are
sometimes miss-cased: ?my big fat greek wedding?
or ?signs?. In conducive contexts, person names
are correctly cased: ?DeLay said in?. However, in
ambiguous, adverse contexts they are considered to
be common nouns: ?pond? or ?to delay that?. Un-
seen organization names which make perfectly nor-
mal phrases are erroneously cased as well: ?interna-
tional security assistance force?.
3.3 Application: Machine Translation
Post-Processing
We have applied truecasing as a post-processing step
to a state of the art machine translation system in or-
der to improve readability. For translation between
Chinese and English, or Japanese and English, there
is no transfer of case information. In these situations
the translation output has no case information and it
is beneficial to apply truecasing as a post-processing
step. This makes the output more legible and the
system performance increases if case information is
required.
We have applied truecasing to Chinese-to-English
translation output. The data source consists of news
stories (2500 sentences) from the Xinhua News
Agency. The news stories are first translated, then
subjected to truecasing. The translation output is
evaluated with BLEU (Papineni et al, 2001), which
is a robust, language independent automatic ma-
chine translation evaluation method. BLEU scores
are highly correlated to human judges scores, pro-
viding a way to perform frequent and accurate au-
tomated evaluations. BLEU uses a modified n-gram
precision metric and a weighting scheme that places
more emphasis on longer n-grams.
In table 1, both truecasing methods are applied to
machine translation output with and without upper-
casing the first letter in each sentence. The truecas-
ing methods are compared against the all letters low-
ercased version of the articles as well as against an
existing rule-based system which is aware of a lim-
ited number of entity casings such as dates, cities,
and countries. The LM based truecaser is very ef-
fective in increasing the readability of articles and
captures an important aspect that the BLEU score is
sensitive to. Truecasig the translation output yields
Baseline With Truecasing
Source Recall Precision F Recall Precision F
BNEWS ASR 23 3 5 56 39 46 (+820.00%)
BNEWS HUMAN 77 66 71 77 68 72 (+1.41%)
XINHUA 76 71 73 79 72 75 (+2.74%)
Table 3: Results of ACE mention detection with and without truecasing.
an improvement ? of 80.2% in BLEU score over the
existing rule base system.
3.4 Task Based Evaluation
Case restoration and normalization can be employed
for more complex tasks. We have successfully lever-
aged truecasing in improving named entity recogni-
tion and automatic content extraction.
3.4.1 Named Entity Tagging
In order to evaluate the effect of truecasing on ex-
tracting named entity labels, we tested an existing
named entity system on a test set that has signif-
icant case mismatch to the training of the system.
The base system is an HMM based tagger, similar
to (Bikel et al, 1997). The system has 31 semantic
categories which are extensions on the MUC cate-
gories. The tagger creates a lattice of decisions cor-
responding to tokenized words in the input stream.
When tagging a word wi in a sentence of words
w0...wN , two possibilities. If a tag begins:
p(tN1 |wN1 )i = p(ti|ti?1, wi?1)p?(wi|ti, wi?1)
If a tag continues:
p(tN1 |wN1 )i = p(wi|ti, wi?1)
The ? indicates that the distribution is formed from
words that are the first words of entities. The p? dis-
tribution predicts the probability of seeing that word
given the tag and the previous word instead of the
tag and previous tag. Each word has a set of fea-
tures, some of which indicate the casing and embed-
ded punctuation. These models have several levels
of back-off when the exact trigram has not been seen
in training. A trellis spanning the 31 futures is built
for each word in a sentence and the best path is de-
rived using the Viterbi algorithm.
?Truecasing improves legibility, not the translation itself
The performance of the system shown in table 2
indicate an overall 26.52% F-measure improvement
when using truecasing. The alternative to truecas-
ing text is to destroy case information in the train-
ing material 	 SNORIFY procedure in (Bikel et al,
1997). Case is an important feature in detecting
most named entities but particularly so for the title
of a work, an organization, or an ambiguous word
with two frequent cases. Truecasing the sentence is
essential in detecting that ?To Kill a Mockingbird? is
the name of a book, especially if the quotation marks
are left off.
3.4.2 Automatic Content Extraction
Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) is task fo-
cusing on the extraction of mentions of entities and
relations between them from textual data. The tex-
tual documents are from newswire, broadcast news
with text derived from automatic speech recognition
(ASR), and newspaper with text derived from optical
character recognition (OCR) sources. The mention
detection task (ace, 2001) comprises the extraction
of named (e.g. ?Mr. Isaac Asimov?), nominal (e.g.
?the complete author?), and pronominal (e.g. ?him?)
mentions of Persons, Organizations, Locations, Fa-
cilities, and Geo-Political Entities.
The automatically transcribed (using ASR) broad-
cast news documents and the translated Xinhua
News Agency (XINHUA) documents in the ACE
corpus do not contain any case information, while
human transcribed broadcast news documents con-
tain casing errors (e.g. ?George bush?). This prob-
lem occurs especially when the data source is noisy
or the articles are poorly written.
For all documents from broadcast news (human
transcribed and automatically transcribed) and XIN-
HUA sources, we extracted mentions before and af-
ter applying truecasing. The ASR transcribed broad-
cast news data comprised 86 documents containing
a total of 15,535 words, the human transcribed ver-
sion contained 15,131 words. There were only two
XINHUA documents in the ACE test set containing
a total of 601 words. None of this data or any ACE
data was used for training the truecasing models.
Table 3 shows the result of running our ACE par-
ticipating maximum entropy mention detection sys-
tem on the raw text, as well as on truecased text. For
ASR transcribed documents, we obtained an eight
fold improvement in mention detection from 5% F-
measure to 46% F-measure. The low baseline score
is mostly due to the fact that our system has been
trained on newswire stories available from previous
ACE evaluations, while the latest test data included
ASR output. It is very likely that the improvement
due to truecasing will be more modest for the next
ACE evaluation when our system will be trained on
ASR output as well.
4 Possible Improvements & Future Work
Although the statistical model we have considered
performs very well, further improvements must go
beyond language modeling, enhancing how expres-
sive the model is. Additional features are needed
during decoding to capture context outside of the
current lexical item, medium range context, as well
as discontinuous context. Another potentially help-
ful feature to consider would provide a distribu-
tion over similar lexical items, perhaps using an
edit/phonetic distance.
Truecasing can be extended to cover a more gen-
eral notion surface form to include accents. De-
pending on the context, words might take different
surface forms. Since punctuation is a notion exten-
sion to surface form, shallow punctuation restora-
tion (e.g. word followed by comma) can also be ad-
dressed through truecasing.
5 Conclusions
We have discussed truecasing, the process of restor-
ing case information to badly-cased or non-cased
text, and we have proposed a statistical, language
modeling based truecaser which has an agreement
of ?98% with professionally written news articles.
Although its most direct impact is improving legibil-
ity, truecasing is useful in case normalization across
styles, genres, and sources. Truecasing is a valu-
able component in further natural language process-
ing. Task based evaluation shows a 26% F-measure
improvement in named entity recognition when us-
ing truecasing. In the context of automatic content
extraction, mention detection on automatic speech
recognition text is improved by a factor of 8. True-
casing also enhances machine translation output leg-
ibility and yields a BLEU score improvement of
80.2% over the original system.
References
2001. Entity detection and tracking. ACE Pilot Study
Task Definition.
D. Bikel, S. Miller, R. Schwartz, and R. Weischedel.
1997. Nymble: A high-performance learning name
finder. pages 194?201.
E. Brill and R. C. Moore. 2000. An improved error
model for noisy channel spelling correction. ACL.
H.L. Chieu and H.T. Ng. 2002. Teaching a weaker clas-
sifier: Named entity recognition on upper case text.
William A. Gale, Kenneth W. Church, and David
Yarowsky. 1994. Discrimination decisions for
100,000-dimensional spaces. Current Issues in Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 429?450.
Andrew R. Golding and Dan Roth. 1996. Applying win-
now to context-sensitive spelling correction. ICML.
M. P. Jones and J. H. Martin. 1997. Contextual spelling
correction using latent semantic analysis. ANLP.
A. Mikheev. 1999. A knowledge-free method for capi-
talized word disambiguation.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and
Wei Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. IBM Research Re-
port.
L. R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on hidden markov models
and selected applications in speech recognition. Read-
ings in Speech Recognition, pages 267?295.
David Yarowsky. 1994. Decision lists for ambiguity res-
olution: Application to accent restoration in spanish
and french. ACL, pages 88?95.
