Constructivist Development of
Grounded Construction Grammars
Luc Steels
University of Brussels (VUB AI Lab)
SONY Computer Science Lab - Paris
6 Rue Amyot, 75005 Paris steels@arti.vub.ac.be
Abstract
The paper reports on progress in building com-
putational models of a constructivist approach to
language development. It introduces a formalism
for construction grammars and learning strategies
based on invention, abduction, and induction. Ex-
amples are drawn from experiments exercising the
model in situated language games played by embod-
ied artificial agents.
1 Introduction
The constructivist approach to language learning
proposes that ?children acquire linguistic compe-
tence (...) only gradually, beginning with more
concrete linguistic structures based on particular
words and morphemes, and then building up to
more abstract and productive structures based on
various types of linguistic categories, schemas, and
constructions.? (TomaselloBrooks, 1999), p. 161.
The approach furthermore assumes that language
development is (i) grounded in cognition because
prior to (or in a co-development with language)
there is an understanding and conceptualisation of
scenes in terms of events, objects, roles that objects
play in events, and perspectives on the event, and
(ii) grounded in communication because language
learning is intimately embedded in interactions with
specific communicative goals. In contrast to the
nativist position, defended, for example, by Pinker
(Pinker, 1998), the constructivist approach does not
assume that the semantic and syntactic categories
as well as the linking rules (specifying for example
that the agent of an action is linked to the subject
of a sentence) are universal and innate. Rather, se-
mantic and syntactic categories as well as the way
they are linked is built up in a gradual developmen-
tal process, starting from quite specific ?verb-island
constructions?.
Although the constructivist approach appears to
explain a lot of the known empirical data about child
language acquisition, there is so far no worked out
model that details how constructivist language de-
velopment works concretely, i.e. what kind of com-
putational mechanisms are implied and how they
work together to achieve adult (or even child) level
competence. Moreover only little work has been
done so far to build computational models for han-
dling the sort of ?construction grammars? assumed
by this approach. Both challenges inform the re-
search discussed in this paper.
2 Abductive Learning
In the constructivist literature, there is often the im-
plicit assumption that grammatical development is
the result of observational learning, and several re-
search efforts are going on to operationalise this ap-
proach for acquiring grounded lexicons and gram-
mars (see e.g. (Roy, 2001)). The agents are given
pairs with a real world situation, as perceived by the
sensori-motor apparatus, and a language utterance.
For example, an image of a ball is shown and at the
same time a stretch of speech containing the word
?ball?. Based on a generalisation process that uses
statistical pattern recognition algorithms or neural
networks, the learner then gradually extracts what
is common between the various situations in which
the same word or construction is used, thus progres-
sively building a grounded lexicon and grammar of
a language.
The observational learning approach has had
some success in learning words for objects and ac-
quiring simple grammatical constructions, but there
seem to be two inherent limitations. First, there is
the well known poverty of the stimulus argument,
widely accepted in linguistics, which says that there
is not enough data in the sentences normally avail-
able to the language learner to arrive at realistic
lexicons and grammars, let alne learn at the same
time the categorisations and conceptualisations of
the world implied by the language. This has lead
many linguists to adopt the nativist position men-
tioned earlier. The nativist position could in princi-
ple be integrated in an observational learning frame-
work by introducing strong biases on the generali-
sation process, incorporating the constraints of uni-
versal grammar, but it has been difficult to identify
and operationalise enough of these constraints to do
concrete experiments in realistic settings. Second,
observational learning assumes that the language
system (lexicon and grammar) exists as a fixed static
system. However, observations of language in use
shows that language users constantly align their lan-
guage conventions to suit the purposes of specific
conversations (ClarkBrennan, 1991). Natural lan-
guages therefore appear more to be like complex
adaptive systems, similar to living systems that con-
stantly adapt and evolve. This makes it difficult
to rely exclusively on statistical generalisation. It
does not capture the inherently creative nature of
language use.
This paper explores an alternative approach,
which assumes a much more active stance from lan-
guage users based on the Peircian notion of abduc-
tion (Fann, 1970). The speaker first attempts to
use constructions from his existing inventory to ex-
press whatever he wants to express. However when
that fails or is judged unsatisfactory, the speaker
may extend his existing repertoire by inventing new
constructions. These new constructions should be
such that there is a high chance that the hearer may
be able to guess their meaning. The hearer also
uses as much as possible constructions stored in
his own inventory to make sense of what is being
said. But when there are unknown constructions,
or the meanings do not fit with the situation being
talked about, the hearer makes an educated guess
about what the meaning of the unknown language
constructions could be, and adds them as new hy-
potheses to his own inventory. Abductive construc-
tivist learning hence relies crucially on the fact that
both agents have sufficient common ground, share
the same situation, have established joint attention,
and share communicative goals. Both speaker and
hearer use themselves as models of the other in or-
der to guess how the other one will interpret a sen-
tence or why the speaker says things in a particular
way.
Because both speaker and hearer are taking risks
making abductive leaps, a third activity is needed,
namely induction, not in the sense of statistical gen-
eralisation as in observational learning but in the
sense of Peirce (Fann, 1970): A hypothesis arrived
at by making educated guesses is tested against
further data coming from subsequent interactions.
When a construction leads to a successful interac-
tion, there is some evidence that this construction
is (or could become) part of the set of conventions
adopted by the group, and language users should
therefore prefer it in the future. When the construc-
tion fails, the language user should avoid it if alter-
natives are available.
Implementing these visions of language learn-
ing and use is obviously an enormous challenge for
computational linguistics. It requires not only cog-
nitive and communicative grounding, but also gram-
mar formalisms and associated parsing and produc-
tion algorithms which are extremely flexible, both
from the viewpoint of getting as far as possible
in the interpretation or production process despite
missing rules or incompatibilities in the inventories
of speaker and hearer, and from the viewpoint of
supporting continuous change.
3 Language Games
The research reported here uses a methodological
approach which is quite common in Artificial Life
research but still relatively novel in (computational)
linguistics: Rather than attempting to develop sim-
ulations that generate natural phenomena directly,
as one does when using Newton?s equations to sim-
ulate the trajectory of a ball falling from a tower,
we engage in computational simulations and robotic
experiments that create (new) artificial phenomena
that have some of the characteristics of natural phe-
nomena and hence are seen as explaining them.
Specifically, we implement artificial agents with
components modeling certain cognitive operations
(such as introducing a new syntactic category, com-
puting an analogy between two events, etc.), and
then see what language phenomena result if these
agents exercise these components in embodied situ-
ated language games. This way we can investigate
very precisely what causal factors may underly cer-
tain phenomena and can focus on certain aspects of
(grounded) language use without having to face the
vast full complexity of real human languages. A
survey of work which follows a similar methodol-
ogy is found in (CangelosiParisi, 2003).
The artificial agents used in the experiments driv-
ing our research observe real-world scenes through
their cameras. The scenes consist of interactions
between puppets, as shown in figure 1. These
scenes enact common events like movement of peo-
ple and objects, actions such as push or pull, give
or take, etc. In order to achieve the cognitive
grounding assumed in constructivist language learn-
ing, the scenes are processed by a battery of rela-
tively standard machine vision algorithms that seg-
ment objects based on color and movement, track
objects in real-time, and compute a stream of low-
level features indicating which objects are touch-
ing, in which direction objects are moving, etc.
These low-level features are input to an event-
recognition system that uses an inventory of hier-
archical event structures and matches them against
the data streaming in from low-level vision, similar
to the systems described in (SteelsBaillie, 2003).
Figure 1: Scene enacted with puppets so that typical
interactions between humans involving agency can
be perceived and described.
In order to achieve the communicative ground-
ing required for constructivist learning, agents go
through scripts in which they play various language
games, similar to the setups described in (Steels,
2003). These language games are deliberately quite
similar to the kind of scenes and interactions used in
a lot of child language research. A language game
is a routinised interaction between two agents about
a shared situation in the world that involves the ex-
change of symbols. Agents take turns playing the
role of speaker and hearer and give each other feed-
back about the outcome of the game. In the game
further used in this paper, one agent describes to
another agent an event that happened in the most
recently experienced scene. The game succeeds if
the hearer agrees that the event being described oc-
curred in the recent scene.
4 The Lexicon
Visual processing and event recognition results in
a world model in the form of a series of facts de-
scribing the scene. To play the description game, the
speaker selects one event as the topic and then seeks
a series of facts which discriminate this event and its
objects against the other events and objects in the
context. We use a standard predicate calculus-style
representation for meanings. A semantic structure
consists of a set of units where each unit has a ref-
erent, which is the object or event to which the unit
draws attention, and a meaning, which is a set of
clauses constraining the referent. A semantic struc-
ture with one unit is for example written down as
follows:
[1] unit1   ev1   fall(ev1,true), fall-1(ev1,obj1), ball(obj1)
where unit1 is the unit, ev1 the referent, and fall(ev1,
true), fall-1(ev1,obj1), ball(obj1) the meaning. The
different arguments of an event are decomposed
into different predicates. For example, for ?John
gives a book to Mary?, there would be four clauses:
give(ev1,true) for the event itself, give-1(ev1, John),
for the one who gives, give-2(ev1,book1), for the ob-
ject given, and give-3(ev1,Mary), for the recipient.
This representation is more flexible and makes it
possible to add new components (like the manner
of an event) at any time.
Syntactic structures mirror semantic structures.
They also consist of units and the name of units
are shared with semantic structures so that cross-
reference between them is straightforward. The
form aspects of the sentence are represented in a
declarative predicate calculus style, using the units
as arguments. For example, the following unit is
constrained as introducing the string ?fall?:
[2] unit1   string(unit1, ?fall?)
The rule formalism we have developed uses ideas
from several existing formalisms, particularly
unification grammars and is most similar to the
Embodied Construction Grammars proposed in
(BergenChang, 2003). Lexical rules link parts of
semantic structure with parts of syntactic structure.
All rules are reversable. When producing, the
left side of a rule is matched against the semantic
structure and, if there is a match, the right side is
unified with the syntactic structure. Conversely
when parsing, the right side is matched against the
syntactic structure and the left side unified with the
semantic structure. Here is a lexical entry for the
word ?fall?.
[3] ?unit   ?ev   fall(?ev,?state), fall-1(?ev,?obj)
 ?unit   string(?unit,?fall?)
It specifies that a unit whose meaning is
fall(?ev,?state), fall-1(?ev,?obj) is expressed with
the string ?fall?. Variables are written down with a
question mark in front. Their scope is restricted to
the structure or rule in which they appear and rule
application often implies the renaming of certain
variables to take care of the scope constraints. Here
is a lexical entry for ?ball?:
[4] ?unit   ?obj   ball(?obj)
 ?unit   string(?unit,?ball?)
Lexicon lookup attempts to find the minimal set
of rules that covers the total semantic structure.
New units may get introduced (both in the syntactic
and semantic structure) if the meaning of a unit
is broken down in the lexicon into more than one
word. Thus, the original semantic structure in [1]
results after the application of the two rules [3]
and [4] in the following syntactic and semantic
structures:
[5] unit1   ev1   fall(ev1,true), fall-1(ev1,obj1)
unit2   obj1   ball(obj1)
??
unit1   string(unit1, ?fall?)
unit2   string(unit2, ?ball?)
If this syntactic structure is rendered, it produces
the utterance ?fall ball?. No syntax is implied yet.
In the reverse direction, the parser starts with the
two units forming the syntactic structure in [5]
and application of the rules produces the following
semantic structure:
[6] unit1   ?ev   fall(?ev,?state), fall-1(?ev,?obj)
unit2   ?obj1   ball(?obj1)
The semantic structure in [6] now contains variables
for the referent of each unit and for the various
predicate-arguments in their meanings. The inter-
pretation process matches these variables against
the facts in the world model. If a single consistent
series of bindings can be found, then interpretation
is successful. For example, assume that the facts in
the meaning part of [1] are in the world model then
matching [6] against them results in the bindings:
[7] ?ev/ev1, ?state/true, ?obj/obj1, ?obj1/obj1
When the same word or the same meaning is
covered by more than one rule, a choice needs
to be made. Competing rules may develop if an
agent invented a new word for a particular meaning
but is later confronted with another word used by
somebody else for the same meaning. Every rule
has a score and in production and parsing, rules
with the highest score are preferred.
When the speaker performs lexicon lookup and
rules were found to cover the complete semantic
structure, no new rules are needed. But when some
part is uncovered, the speaker should create a new
rule. We have experimented so far with a simple
strategy where agents lump together the uncovered
facts in a unit and create a brand new word, consist-
ing of a randomly chosen configuration of syllables.
For example, if no word for ball(obj1) exists yet to
cover the semantic structure in [1], a new rule such
as [4] can be constructed by the speaker and subse-
quently used. If there is no word at all for the whole
semantic structure in [1], a single word covering the
whole meaning will be created, giving the effect of
holophrases.
The hearer first attempts to parse as far as pos-
sible the given sentence, and then interprets the re-
sulting semantic structure, possibly using joint at-
tention or other means that may help to find the in-
tended interpretation. If this results in a unique set
of bindings, the language game is deemed success-
ful. But if there were parts of the sentence which
were not covered by any rule, then the hearer can
use abductive learning. The first critical step is to
guess as well as possible the meaning of the un-
known word(s). Thus suppose the sentence is ?fall
ball?, resulting in the semantic structure:
[8] unit1   ?ev   fall(?ev,?state), fall-1(?ev,?obj)
If this structure is matched, bindings for ?ev and
?obj are found. The agent can now try to find the
possible meaning of the unknown word ?ball?. He
can assume that this meaning must somehow help
in the interpretation process. He therefore concep-
tualises the same way as if he would be the speaker
and constructs a distinctive description that draws
attention to the event in question, for example by
constraining the referent of ?obj with an additional
predicate. Although there are usually several ways
in which obj1 differs from other objects in the con-
text. There is a considerable chance that the pred-
icate ball is chosen and hence ball(?obj) is abduc-
tively inferred as the meaning of ?ball? resulting in
a rule like [4].
Agents use induction to test whether the rules
they created by invention and abduction have been
adopted by the group. Every rule has a score, which
is local to each agent. When the speaker or hearer
has success with a particular rule, its score is in-
creased and the score of competing rules is de-
creased, thus implementing lateral inhibition. When
there is a failure, the score of the rule that was used
is decreased. Because the agents prefer rules with
the highest score, there is a positive feedback in
the system. The more a word is used for a partic-
ular meaning, the more success that word will have.
Figure 2: Winner-take-all effect in words competing
for same meaning. The x-axis plots language games
and the y-axis the use frequency.
Scores rise in all the agents for these words and so
progressively we see a winner-take-all effect with
one word dominating for the expression of a par-
ticular meaning (see figure 2). Many experiments
have by now been performed showing that this kind
of lateral inhibition dynamics allows a population
of agents to negotiate a shared inventory of form-
meaning pairs for content words (Steels, 2003).
5 Syntactisation
The reader may have noticed that the semantic
structure in [6] resulting from parsing the sentence
?fall ball?, includes two variables which will both
get bound to the same object, namely ?obj, intro-
duced by the predicate fall-1(?ev,?obj), and ?obj1, in-
troduced by the predicate ball(?obj1). We say that in
this case ?obj and ?obj1 form an equality. Just from
parsing the two words, the hearer cannot know that
the object involved in the fall event is the same as
the object introduced by ball. He can only figure
this out when looking at the scene (i.e. the world
model). In fact, if there are several balls in the
scene and only one of them is falling, there is no
way to know which object is intended. And even if
the hearer can figure it out, it is still desirable that
the speaker should provide extra-information about
equalities to optimise the hearer?s interpretation ef-
forts.
A major thesis of the present paper is that resolv-
ing equivalences between variables is the main mo-
tor for the introduction of syntax. To achieve it, the
agents could, as a first approximation, use rules like
the following one, to be applied after all lexical rules
have been applied:
[9] ?unit1   ?ev1   fall-1(?ev1,?obj2)
?unit2   ?obj2   ball(?obj2)

?unit1   string(?unit1, ?fall?)
?unit2   string(?unit2, ?ball?)
This rule is formally equivalent to the lexical rules
discussed earlier in the sense that it links parts of
a semantic structure with parts of a syntactic struc-
ture. But now more than one unit is involved. Rule
[9] will do the job, because when unifying its right
side with the semantic structure (in parsing) ?obj2
unifies with the variables ?obj (supplied by ?fall?)
and ?obj1 (supplied by ?ball?) and this forces them
to be equivalent. Note that ?unit1 in [9] only con-
tains those parts of the original meaning that involve
the variables which need to be made equal.
The above rule works but is completely specific to
this case. It is an example of the ad hoc ?verb-island?
constructions reported in an early stage of child lan-
guage development. Obviously it is much more de-
sirable to have a more general rule, which can be
achieved by introducing syntactic and semantic cat-
egories. A semantic category (such as agent, perfec-
tive, countable, male) is a categorisation of a con-
ceptual relation, which is used to constrain the se-
mantic side of grammatical rules. A syntactic cate-
gory (such as noun, verb, nominative) is a categori-
sation of a word or a group of words, which can
be used to constrain the syntactic side of grammati-
cal rules. A rule using categories can be formed by
taking rule [9] above and turning all predicates or
content words into semantic or syntactic categories.
[10] ?unit1   ?ev1   semcat1(?ev1,?obj2)
?unit2   ?obj2   semcat2(?obj2)

?unit1   syncat1 (?unit1)
?unit2   syncat2(?unit2)
The agent then needs to create sem-rules to cate-
gorise a predicate as belonging to a semantic cate-
gory, as in:
[11] ?unit1   ?ev1   fall-1(?ev1,?obj2)


?unit1   ?ev1   semcat1(?ev1,?obj1)
and syn-rules to categorise a word as belonging to a
syntactic category, as in:
[12] ?unit1   string(?unit1,?fall?)


?unit1   ?ev1   syncat1(?unit1)
These rules have arrows going only in one direction
because they are only applied in one way.1 During
production, the sem-rules are applied first, then the
lexical rules, next the syn-rules and then the gram-
1Actually if word morphology is integrated, syn-rules need
to be bi-directional, but this topic is not discussed further here
due to space limitations.
matical rules. In parsing, the lexical rules are ap-
plied first (in reverse direction), then the syn-rules
and the sem-rules, and only then the grammatical
rules (in reverse direction). The complete syntactic
and semantic structures for example [9] look as fol-
lows:
[13] unit1   ?ev1   fall(?ev1,?state), fall-1(?ev1,?obj),
semcat1(?ev1,?obj)
unit2   ?obj1   ball(?obj1), semcat2(?obj1)
??
unit1   string(unit1, ?fall?), syncat-1(unit1)
unit2   string(unit2, ?ball?), syncat-2(unit2)
The right side of rule [10] matches with this syntac-
tic structure, and if the left side of rule [10] is unified
with the semantic structure in [13] the variable ?obj2
unifies with ?obj and ?obj1, thus resolving the equal-
ity before semantic interpretation (matching against
the world model) starts.
How can language users develop such rules? The
speaker can detect equalities that need to be re-
solved by re-entrance: Before rendering a sentence
and communicating it to the hearer, the speaker re-
parses his own sentence and interprets it against the
facts in his own world model. If the resulting set
of bindings contains variables that are bound to the
same object after interpretation, then these equali-
ties are candidates for the construction of a rule and
new syntactic and semantic categories are made as
a side effect. Note how the speaker uses himself as
a model of the hearer and fixes problems that the
hearer might otherwise encounter. The hearer can
detect equalities by first interpreting the sentence
based on the constructions that are already part of
his own inventory and the shared situation and prior
joint attention. These equalities are candidates for
new rules to be constructed by the hearer, and they
again involve the introduction of syntactic and se-
mantic categories. Note that syntactic and semantic
categories are always local to an agent. The same
lateral inhibition dynamics is used for grammatical
rules as for lexical rules, and so is also a positive
feedback loop leading to a winner-take-all effect for
grammatical rules.
6 Hierarchy
Natural languages heavily use categories to tighten
rule application, but they also introduce additional
syntactic markings, such as word order, function
words, affixes, morphological variation of word
forms, and stress or intonation patterns. These
markings are often used to signal to which category
certain words belong. They can be easily incorpo-
rated in the formalism developed so far by adding
additional descriptors of the units in the syntactic
structure. For example, rule [10] can be expanded
with word order constraints and the introduction of
a particle ?ba?:
[14] ?unit1   ?ev1   semcat1(?ev1,?obj2)
?unit2   ?obj2   semcat2(?obj2)

?unit1   syncat1 (?unit1)
?unit2   syncat2(?unit2)
?unit3   string (?unit3, ?ba?)
?unit4   syn-subunits (  ?unit1, ?unit2, ?unit3  ),
preceeds(?unit2, ?unit3)
Note that it was necessary to introduce a superunit
?unit4 in order to express the word order constraints
between the ba-particle and the unit that introduces
the object. Applying this rule as well as the syn-
rules and sem-rules discussed earlier to the seman-
tic structure in [5] yields:
[13] unit1   ev1   fall(ev1,true), fall-1(ev1,obj),
semcat1(ev1,obj)
unit2   obj1   ball(obj1), semcat2(obj1)
??
unit1   string(unit1, ?fall?), syncat-1(unit1)
unit2   string(unit2, ?ball?), syncat-2(unit2)
unit3   string(unit3, ?ba?)
unit4   syn-subunits(  unit1,unit2,unit3  ),
preceeds(unit2,unit3)
When this syntactic structure is rendered, it pro-
duces ?fall ball ba?, or equivalently ?ball ba fall?,
because only the order between ?ball? and ?ba? is
constrained.
Obviously the introduction of additional syntac-
tic features makes the learning of grammatical rules
more difficult. Natural languages appear to have
meta-level strategies for invention and abduction.
For example, a language (like Japanese) tends to use
particles for expressing the roles of objects in events
and this usage is a strategy both for inventing the ex-
pression of a new relation and for guessing what the
use of an unknown word in the sentence might be.
Another language (like Swahili) uses morphologi-
cal variations similar to Latin for the same purpose
and thus has ended up with a rich set of affixes. In
our experiments so far, we have implemented such
strategies directly, so that invention and abduction
is strongly constrained. We still need to work out
a formalism for describing these strategies as meta-
rules and research the associated learning mecha-
nisms.
Figure 3: The graph shows the dependency structure
as well as the phrase-structure emerging through the
application of multiple rules
When the same word participates in several
rules, we automatically get the emergence of
hierarchical structures. For example, suppose that
two predicates are used to draw attention to obj1 in
[5]: ball and red. If the lexicon has two separate
words for each predicate, then the initial semantic
structure would introduce different variables so that
the meaning after parsing ?fall ball ba red? would
be:
[15] fall(?ev,?state), fall-1(?ev,?obj), ball (?obj),
red(?obj2)
To resolve the equality between ?obj and ?obj2, the
speaker could create the following rule:
[14] ?unit1   ?obj   semcat3(?obj)
?unit2   ?obj   semcat4(?obj)

?unit1   syncat3(?unit1)
?unit2   syncat4(?unit2)
?unit3   syn-subunits (  unit1,unit2  ), pre-
ceeds(unit1,unit2)
The predicate ball is declared to belong to semcat4
and the word ?ball? to syncat4. The predicate red
belongs to semcat3 and the word ?red? to syncat3.
Rendering the syntactic structure after application
of this rule gives the sentence ?fall red ball ba?. A
hierarchical structure (figure 3) emerges because
?ball? participates in two rules.
7 Re-use
Agents obviously should not invent new conven-
tions from scratch every time they need one, but
rather use as much as possible existing categorisa-
tions and hence existing rules. This simple economy
principle quickly leads to the kind of syntagmatic
and paradigmatic regularities that one finds in natu-
ral grammars. For example, if the speaker wants to
express that a block is falling, no new semantic or
syntactic categories or linking rules are needed but
block can simply be declared to belong to semcat4
and ?block? to syncat3 and rule [14] applies.
Re-use should be driven by analogy. In one of
the largest experiments we have carried out so far,
agents had a way to compute the similarity between
two event-structures by pairing the primitive opera-
tions making up an event. For example, a pick-up
action is decomposed into: an object moving into
the direction of another stationary object, the first
object then touching the second object, and next the
two objects moving together in (roughly) the oppo-
site direction. A put-down action has similar sub-
events, except that their ordering is different. The
roles of the objects involved (the hand, the object
being picked up) are identical and so their gram-
matical marking could be re-used with very low risk
of being misunderstood. When a speaker reuses a
grammatical marking for a particular semantic cate-
gory, this gives a strong hint to the hearer what kind
of analogy is expected. By using these invention
and abduction strategies, semantic categories like
agent or patient gradually emerged in the artificial
grammars. Figure 4 visualises the result of this ex-
periment (after 700 games between 2 agents taking
turns). The x-axis (randomly) ranks the different
predicate-argument relations, the y-axis their mark-
ers. Without re-use, every argument would have its
own marker. Now several markers (such as ?va? or
?zu?) cover more than one relation.
Figure 4: More compact grammars result from re-
use based on semantic analogies.
8 Conclusions
The paper reports significant steps towards the com-
putational modeling of a constructivist approach to
language development. It has introduced aspects of
a construction grammar formalism that is designed
to handle the flexibility required for emergent de-
veloping grammars. It also proposed that invention,
abduction, and induction are necessary and suffi-
cient for language learning. Much more technical
work remains to be done but already significant ex-
perimental results have been obtained with embod-
ied agents playing situated language games. Most
of the open questions concern under what circum-
stances syntactic and semantic categories should be
re-used.
Research funded by Sony CSL with additional fund-
ing from ESF-OMLL program, EU FET-ECAgents and
CNRS OHLL.
References
Bergen, B.K. and N.C. Chang. 2003. Embod-
ied Construction Grammar in Simulation-Based
Language Understanding. TR 02-004, ICSI,
Berkeley.
Cangelosi, and D. Parisi 2003. Simulating the Evo-
lution of Language. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Clark, H. and S. Brennan 1991. Grounding in com-
munication. In: Resnick, L. J. Levine and S.
Teasley (eds.) Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition. APA Books, Washington. p. 127-149.
Fann, K.T. 1970. Peirce?s Theory of Abduction
Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
Roy, D. 2001. Learning Visually Grounded Words
and Syntax of Natural Spoken Language. Evolu-
tion of communication 4(1).
Pinker, S. 1998. Learnability and Cognition: The
acquisition of Argument Structure. The MIT
Press, Cambridge Ma.
Steels, L. 2003 Evolving grounded communication
for robots. Trends in Cognitive Science. Volume
7, Issue 7, July 2003 , pp. 308-312.
Steels, L. and J-C. Baillie 2003. Shared Ground-
ing of Event Descriptions by Autonomous Robots.
Journal of Robotics and Autonomous Systems
43, 2003, pp. 163-173.
Tomasello, M. and P.J. Brooks 1999. Early syntac-
tic development: A Construction Grammar ap-
proach In: Barrett, M. (ed.) (1999) The Develop-
ment of Language Psychology Press, London. pp.
161-190.
