Improving Pronoun Resolution by Incorporating Coreferential
Information of Candidates
Xiaofeng Yang?? Jian Su? Guodong Zhou? Chew Lim Tan?
?Institute for Infocomm Research
21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace,
Singapore, 119613
{xiaofengy,sujian,zhougd}
@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
? Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore,
Singapore, 117543
{yangxiao,tancl}@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Coreferential information of a candidate, such
as the properties of its antecedents, is important
for pronoun resolution because it reflects the
salience of the candidate in the local discourse.
Such information, however, is usually ignored in
previous learning-based systems. In this paper
we present a trainable model which incorporates
coreferential information of candidates into pro-
noun resolution. Preliminary experiments show
that our model will boost the resolution perfor-
mance given the right antecedents of the can-
didates. We further discuss how to apply our
model in real resolution where the antecedents
of the candidate are found by a separate noun
phrase resolution module. The experimental re-
sults show that our model still achieves better
performance than the baseline.
1 Introduction
In recent years, supervised machine learning ap-
proaches have been widely explored in refer-
ence resolution and achieved considerable suc-
cess (Ge et al, 1998; Soon et al, 2001; Ng and
Cardie, 2002; Strube and Muller, 2003; Yang et
al., 2003). Most learning-based pronoun res-
olution systems determine the reference rela-
tionship between an anaphor and its antecedent
candidate only from the properties of the pair.
The knowledge about the context of anaphor
and antecedent is nevertheless ignored. How-
ever, research in centering theory (Sidner, 1981;
Grosz et al, 1983; Grosz et al, 1995; Tetreault,
2001) has revealed that the local focusing (or
centering) also has a great effect on the pro-
cessing of pronominal expressions. The choices
of the antecedents of pronouns usually depend
on the center of attention throughout the local
discourse segment (Mitkov, 1999).
To determine the salience of a candidate
in the local context, we may need to check
the coreferential information of the candidate,
such as the existence and properties of its an-
tecedents. In fact, such information has been
used for pronoun resolution in many heuristic-
based systems. The S-List model (Strube,
1998), for example, assumes that a co-referring
candidate is a hearer-old discourse entity and
is preferred to other hearer-new candidates.
In the algorithms based on the centering the-
ory (Brennan et al, 1987; Grosz et al, 1995), if
a candidate and its antecedent are the backward-
looking centers of two subsequent utterances re-
spectively, the candidate would be the most pre-
ferred since the CONTINUE transition is al-
ways ranked higher than SHIFT or RETAIN.
In this paper, we present a supervised
learning-based pronoun resolution system which
incorporates coreferential information of candi-
dates in a trainable model. For each candi-
date, we take into consideration the properties
of its antecedents in terms of features (hence-
forth backward features), and use the supervised
learning method to explore their influences on
pronoun resolution. In the study, we start our
exploration on the capability of the model by
applying it in an ideal environment where the
antecedents of the candidates are correctly iden-
tified and the backward features are optimally
set. The experiments on MUC-6 (1995) and
MUC-7 (1998) corpora show that incorporating
coreferential information of candidates boosts
the system performance significantly. Further,
we apply our model in the real resolution where
the antecedents of the candidates are provided
by separate noun phrase resolution modules.
The experimental results show that our model
still outperforms the baseline, even with the low
recall of the non-pronoun resolution module.
The remaining of this paper is organized as
follows. Section 2 discusses the importance of
the coreferential information for candidate eval-
uation. Section 3 introduces the baseline learn-
ing framework. Section 4 presents and evaluates
the learning model which uses backward fea-
tures to capture coreferential information, while
Section 5 proposes how to apply the model in
real resolution. Section 6 describes related re-
search work. Finally, conclusion is given in Sec-
tion 7.
2 The Impact of Coreferential
Information on Pronoun
Resolution
In pronoun resolution, the center of attention
throughout the discourse segment is a very im-
portant factor for antecedent selection (Mitkov,
1999). If a candidate is the focus (or center)
of the local discourse, it would be selected as
the antecedent with a high possibility. See the
following example,
<s> Gitano1 has pulled off a clever illusion2
with its3 advertising4. <s>
<s> The campaign5 gives its6 clothes a
youthful and trendy image to lure consumers
into the store. <s>
Table 1: A text segment from MUC-6 data set
In the above text, the pronoun ?its6? has
several antecedent candidates, i.e., ?Gitano1?,
?a clever illusion2?, ?its3?, ?its advertising4?
and ?The campaign5?. Without looking back,
?The campaign5? would be probably selected
because of its syntactic role (Subject) and its
distance to the anaphor. However, given the
knowledge that the company Gitano is the fo-
cus of the local context and ?its3? refers to
?Gitano1?, it would be clear that the pronoun
?its6? should be resolved to ?its3? and thus
?Gitano1?, rather than other competitors.
To determine whether a candidate is the ?fo-
cus? entity, we should check how the status (e.g.
grammatical functions) of the entity alternates
in the local context. Therefore, it is necessary
to track the NPs in the coreferential chain of
the candidate. For example, the syntactic roles
(i.e., subject) of the antecedents of ?its3? would
indicate that ?its3? refers to the most salient
entity in the discourse segment.
In our study, we keep the properties of the an-
tecedents as features of the candidates, and use
the supervised learning method to explore their
influence on pronoun resolution. Actually, to
determine the local focus, we only need to check
the entities in a short discourse segment. That
is, for a candidate, the number of its adjacent
antecedents to be checked is limited. Therefore,
we could evaluate the salience of a candidate
by looking back only its closest antecedent in-
stead of each element in its coreferential chain,
with the assumption that the closest antecedent
is able to provide sufficient information for the
evaluation.
3 The Baseline Learning Framework
Our baseline system adopts the common
learning-based framework employed in the sys-
tem by Soon et al (2001).
In the learning framework, each training or
testing instance takes the form of i{ana, candi},
where ana is the possible anaphor and candi is
its antecedent candidate1. An instance is associ-
ated with a feature vector to describe their rela-
tionships. As listed in Table 2, we only consider
those knowledge-poor and domain-independent
features which, although superficial, have been
proved efficient for pronoun resolution in many
previous systems.
During training, for each anaphor in a given
text, a positive instance is created by paring
the anaphor and its closest antecedent. Also a
set of negative instances is formed by paring the
anaphor and each of the intervening candidates.
Based on the training instances, a binary classi-
fier is generated using C5.0 learning algorithm
(Quinlan, 1993). During resolution, each possi-
ble anaphor ana, is paired in turn with each pre-
ceding antecedent candidate, candi, from right
to left to form a testing instance. This instance
is presented to the classifier, which will then
return a positive or negative result indicating
whether or not they are co-referent. The pro-
cess terminates once an instance i{ana, candi}
is labelled as positive, and ana will be resolved
to candi in that case.
4 The Learning Model Incorporating
Coreferential Information
The learning procedure in our model is similar
to the above baseline method, except that for
each candidate, we take into consideration its
closest antecedent, if possible.
4.1 Instance Structure
During both training and testing, we adopt the
same instance selection strategy as in the base-
line model. The only difference, however, is the
structure of the training or testing instances.
Specifically, each instance in our model is com-
posed of three elements like below:
1In our study candidates are filtered by checking the
gender, number and animacy agreements in advance.
Features describing the candidate (candi)
1. candi DefNp 1 if candi is a definite NP; else 0
2. candi DemoNP 1 if candi is an indefinite NP; else 0
3. candi Pron 1 if candi is a pronoun; else 0
4. candi ProperNP 1 if candi is a proper name; else 0
5. candi NE Type 1 if candi is an ?organization? named-entity; 2 if ?person?, 3 if
other types, 0 if not a NE
6. candi Human the likelihood (0-100) that candi is a human entity (obtained
from WordNet)
7. candi FirstNPInSent 1 if candi is the first NP in the sentence where it occurs
8. candi Nearest 1 if candi is the candidate nearest to the anaphor; else 0
9. candi SubjNP 1 if candi is the subject of the sentence it occurs; else 0
Features describing the anaphor (ana):
10. ana Reflexive 1 if ana is a reflexive pronoun; else 0
11. ana Type 1 if ana is a third-person pronoun (he, she,. . . ); 2 if a single
neuter pronoun (it,. . . ); 3 if a plural neuter pronoun (they,. . . );
4 if other types
Features describing the relationships between candi and ana:
12. SentDist Distance between candi and ana in sentences
13. ParaDist Distance between candi and ana in paragraphs
14. CollPattern 1 if candi has an identical collocation pattern with ana; else 0
Table 2: Feature set for the baseline pronoun resolution system
i{ana, candi, ante-of-candi}
where ana and candi, similar to the defini-
tion in the baseline model, are the anaphor and
one of its candidates, respectively. The new
added element in the instance definition, ante-
of-candi, is the possible closest antecedent of
candi in its coreferential chain. The ante-of-
candi is set to NIL in the case when candi has
no antecedent.
Consider the example in Table 1 again. For
the pronoun ?it6?, three training instances will
be generated, namely, i{its6, The compaign5,
NIL}, i{its6, its advertising4, NIL}, and
i{its6, its3, Gitano1}.
4.2 Backward Features
In addition to the features adopted in the base-
line system, we introduce a set of backward fea-
tures to describe the element ante-of-candi. The
ten features (15-24) are listed in Table 3 with
their respective possible values.
Like feature 1-9, features 15-22 describe the
lexical, grammatical and semantic properties of
ante-of-candi. The inclusion of the two features
Apposition (23) and candi NoAntecedent (24) is
inspired by the work of Strube (1998). The
feature Apposition marks whether or not candi
and ante-of-candi occur in the same appositive
structure. The underlying purpose of this fea-
ture is to capture the pattern that proper names
are accompanied by an appositive. The entity
with such a pattern may often be related to the
hearers? knowledge and has low preference. The
feature candi NoAntecedent marks whether or
not a candidate has a valid antecedent in the
preceding text. As stipulated in Strube?s work,
co-referring expressions belong to hearer-old en-
tities and therefore have higher preference than
other candidates. When the feature is assigned
value 1, all the other backward features (15-23)
are set to 0.
4.3 Results and Discussions
In our study we used the standard MUC-
6 and MUC-7 coreference corpora. In each
data set, 30 ?dry-run? documents were anno-
tated for training as well as 20-30 documents
for testing. The raw documents were prepro-
cessed by a pipeline of automatic NLP com-
ponents (e.g. NP chunker, part-of-speech tag-
ger, named-entity recognizer) to determine the
boundary of the NPs, and to provide necessary
information for feature calculation.
In an attempt to investigate the capability of
our model, we evaluated the model in an opti-
mal environment where the closest antecedent
of each candidate is correctly identified. MUC-
6 and MUC-7 can serve this purpose quite well;
the annotated coreference information in the
data sets enables us to obtain the correct closest
Features describing the antecedent of the candidate (ante-of-candi):
15. ante-candi DefNp 1 if ante-of-candi is a definite NP; else 0
16. ante-candi IndefNp 1 if ante-of-candi is an indefinite NP; else 0
17. ante-candi Pron 1 if ante-of-candi is a pronoun; else 0
18. ante-candi Proper 1 if ante-of-candi is a proper name; else 0
19. ante-candi NE Type 1 if ante-of-candi is an ?organization? named-entity; 2 if ?per-
son?, 3 if other types, 0 if not a NE
20. ante-candi Human the likelihood (0-100) that ante-of-candi is a human entity
21. ante-candi FirstNPInSent 1 if ante-of-candi is the first NP in the sentence where it occurs
22. ante-candi SubjNP 1 if ante-of-candi is the subject of the sentence where it occurs
Features describing the relationships between the candidate (candi) and ante-of-candi :
23. Apposition 1 if ante-of-candi and candi are in an appositive structure
Features describing the candidate (candi):
24. candi NoAntecedent 1 if candi has no antecedent available; else 0
Table 3: Backward features used to capture the coreferential information of a candidate
antecedent for each candidate and accordingly
generate the training and testing instances. In
the next section we will further discuss how to
apply our model into the real resolution.
Table 4 shows the performance of different
systems for resolving the pronominal anaphors 2
in MUC-6 and MUC-7. Default learning param-
eters for C5.0 were used throughout the exper-
iments. In this table we evaluated the perfor-
mance based on two kinds of measurements:
? ?Recall-and-Precision?:
Recall = #positive instances classified correctly#positive instances
Precision = #positive instances classified correctly#instances classified as positive
The above metrics evaluate the capability
of the learned classifier in identifying posi-
tive instances3. F-measure is the harmonic
mean of the two measurements.
? ?Success?:
Success = #anaphors resolved correctly#total anaphors
The metric4 directly reflects the pronoun
resolution capability.
The first and second lines of Table 4 compare
the performance of the baseline system (Base-
2The first and second person pronouns are discarded
in our study.
3The testing instances are collected in the same ways
as the training instances.
4In the experiments, an anaphor is considered cor-
rectly resolved only if the found antecedent is in the same
coreferential chain of the anaphor.
ante-candi_SubjNP = 1: 1 (49/5)
ante-candi_SubjNP = 0:
:..candi_SubjNP = 1:
:..SentDist = 2: 0 (3)
: SentDist = 0:
: :..candi_Human > 0: 1 (39/2)
: : candi_Human <= 0:
: : :..candi_NoAntecedent = 0: 1 (8/3)
: : candi_NoAntecedent = 1: 0 (3)
: SentDist = 1:
: :..ante-candi_Human <= 50 : 0 (4)
: ante-candi_Human > 50 : 1 (10/2)
:
candi_SubjNP = 0:
:..candi_Pron = 1: 1 (32/7)
candi_Pron = 0:
:..candi_NoAntecedent = 1:
:..candi_FirstNPInSent = 1: 1 (6/2)
: candi_FirstNPInSent = 0: ...
candi_NoAntecedent = 0: ...
Figure 1: Top portion of the decision tree
learned on MUC-6 with the backward features
line) and our system (Optimal), where DTpron
and DTpron?opt are the classifiers learned in
the two systems, respectively. The results in-
dicate that our system outperforms the base-
line system significantly. Compared with Base-
line, Optimal achieves gains in both recall (6.4%
for MUC-6 and 4.1% for MUC-7) and precision
(1.3% for MUC-6 and 9.0% for MUC-7). For
Success, we also observe an apparent improve-
ment by 4.7% (MUC-6) and 3.5% (MUC-7).
Figure 1 shows the portion of the pruned deci-
sion tree learned for MUC-6 data set. It visual-
izes the importance of the backward features for
the pronoun resolution on the data set. From
Testing Backward feature MUC-6 MUC-7
Experiments classifier assigner* R P F S R P F S
Baseline DTpron NIL 77.2 83.4 80.2 70.0 71.9 68.6 70.2 59.0
Optimal DTpron?opt (Annotated) 83.6 84.7 84.1 74.7 76.0 77.6 76.8 62.5
RealResolve-1 DTpron?opt DTpron?opt 75.8 83.8 79.5 73.1 62.3 77.7 69.1 53.8
RealResolve-2 DTpron?opt DTpron 75.8 83.8 79.5 73.1 63.0 77.9 69.7 54.9
RealResolve-3 DT?pron DTpron 79.3 86.3 82.7 74.7 74.7 67.3 70.8 60.8
RealResolve-4 DT?pron DT
?
pron 79.3 86.3 82.7 74.7 74.7 67.3 70.8 60.8
Table 4: Results of different systems for pronoun resolution on MUC-6 and MUC-7
(*Here we only list backward feature assigner for pronominal candidates. In RealResolve-1 to
RealResolve-4, the backward features for non-pronominal candidates are all found by DTnon?pron.)
the tree we could find that:
1.) Feature ante-candi SubjNP is of the most
importance as the root feature of the tree.
The decision tree would first examine the
syntactic role of a candidate?s antecedent,
followed by that of the candidate. This
nicely proves our assumption that the prop-
erties of the antecedents of the candidates
provide very important information for the
candidate evaluation.
2.) Both features ante-candi SubjNP and
candi SubjNP rank top in the decision tree.
That is, for the reference determination,
the subject roles of the candidate?s referent
within a discourse segment will be checked
in the first place. This finding supports well
the suggestion in centering theory that the
grammatical relations should be used as the
key criteria to rank forward-looking centers
in the process of focus tracking (Brennan
et al, 1987; Grosz et al, 1995).
3.) candi Pron and candi NoAntecedent are
to be examined in the cases when the
subject-role checking fails, which confirms
the hypothesis in the S-List model by
Strube (1998) that co-refereing candidates
would have higher preference than other
candidates in the pronoun resolution.
5 Applying the Model in Real
Resolution
In Section 4 we explored the effectiveness of
the backward feature for pronoun resolution. In
those experiments our model was tested in an
ideal environment where the closest antecedent
of a candidate can be identified correctly when
generating the feature vector. However, during
real resolution such coreferential information is
not available, and thus a separate module has
algorithm PRON-RESOLVE
input:
DTnon?pron: classifier for resolving non-pronouns
DTpron: classifier for resolving pronouns
begin:
M1..n:= the valid markables in the given docu-
ment
Ante[1..n] := 0
for i = 1 to N
for j = i - 1 downto 0
if (Mi is a non-pron and
DTnon?pron(i{Mi,Mj}) == + )
or
(Mi is a pron and
DTpron(i{Mi,Mj , Ante[j]}) == +)
then
Ante[i] := Mj
break
return Ante
Figure 2: The pronoun resolution algorithm by
incorporating coreferential information of can-
didates
to be employed to obtain the closest antecedent
for a candidate. We describe the algorithm in
Figure 2.
The algorithm takes as input two classifiers,
one for the non-pronoun resolution and the
other for pronoun resolution. Given a testing
document, the antecedent of each NP is identi-
fied using one of these two classifiers, depending
on the type of NP. Although a separate non-
pronoun resolution module is required for the
pronoun resolution task, this is usually not a
big problem as these two modules are often in-
tegrated in coreference resolution systems. We
just use the results of the one module to improve
the performance of the other.
5.1 New Training and Testing
Procedures
For a pronominal candidate, its antecedent can
be obtained by simply using DTpron?opt. For
Training Procedure:
T1. Train a non-pronoun resolution clas-
sifier DTnon?pron and a pronoun resolution
classifier DTpron, using the baseline learning
framework (without backward features).
T2. Apply DTnon?pron and DTpron to iden-
tify the antecedent of each non-pronominal
and pronominal markable, respectively, in a
given document.
T3. Go through the document again. Gen-
erate instances with backward features as-
signed using the antecedent information ob-
tained in T2.
T4. Train a new pronoun resolution classifier
DT?pron on the instances generated in T3.
Testing Procedure:
R1. For each given document, do T2?T3.
R2. Resolve pronouns by applying DT?pron.
Table 5: New training and testing procedures
a non-pronominal candidate, we built a non-
pronoun resolution module to identify its an-
tecedent. The module is a duplicate of the
NP coreference resolution system by Soon et
al. (2001)5 , which uses the similar learn-
ing framework as described in Section 3. In
this way, we could do pronoun resolution
just by running PRON-RESOLVE(DTnon?pron,
DTpron?opt), where DTnon?pron is the classifier
of the non-pronoun resolution module.
One problem, however, is that DTpron?opt is
trained on the instances whose backward fea-
tures are correctly assigned. During real resolu-
tion, the antecedent of a candidate is found by
DTnon?pron or DTpron?opt, and the backward
feature values are not always correct. Indeed,
for most noun phrase resolution systems, the
recall is not very high. The antecedent some-
times can not be found, or is not the closest
one in the preceding coreferential chain. Con-
sequently, the classifier trained on the ?perfect?
feature vectors would probably fail to output
anticipated results on the noisy data during real
resolution.
Thus we modify the training and testing pro-
cedures of the system. For both training and
testing instances, we assign the backward fea-
ture values based on the results from separate
NP resolution modules. The detailed proce-
dures are described in Table 5.
5Details of the features can be found in Soon et al
(2001)
algorithm REFINE-CLASSIFIER
begin:
DT1pron := DT
?
pron
for i = 1 to ?
Use DTipron to update the antecedents of
pronominal candidates and the correspond-
ing backward features;
Train DTi+1pron based on the updated training
instances;
if DTi+1pron is not better than DTipron then
break;
return DTipron
Figure 3: The classifier refining algorithm
The idea behind our approach is to train
and test the pronoun resolution classifier on
instances with feature values set in a consis-
tent way. Here the purpose of DTpron and
DTnon?pron is to provide backward feature val-
ues for training and testing instances. From this
point of view, the two modules could be thought
of as a preprocessing component of our pronoun
resolution system.
5.2 Classifier Refining
If the classifier DT?pron outperforms DTpron
as expected, we can employ DT?pron in place
of DTpron to generate backward features for
pronominal candidates, and then train a clas-
sifier DT??pron based on the updated training in-
stances. Since DT?pron produces more correct
feature values than DTpron, we could expect
that DT??pron will not be worse, if not better,
than DT?pron. Such a process could be repeated
to refine the pronoun resolution classifier. The
algorithm is described in Figure 3.
In algorithm REFINE-CLASSIFIER, the it-
eration terminates when the new trained clas-
sifier DTi+1pron provides no further improvement
than DTipron. In this case, we can replace
DTi+1pron by DTipron during the i+1(th) testing
procedure. That means, by simply running
PRON-RESOLVE(DTnon?pron,DTipron), we can
use for both backward feature computation and
instance classification tasks, rather than apply-
ing DTpron and DT?pron subsequently.
5.3 Results and Discussions
In the experiments we evaluated the perfor-
mance of our model in real pronoun resolution.
The performance of our model depends on the
performance of the non-pronoun resolution clas-
sifier, DTnon?pron. Hence we first examined the
coreference resolution capability of DTnon?pron
based on the standard scoring scheme by Vi-
lain et al (1995). For MUC-6, the module ob-
tains 62.2% recall and 78.8% precision, while for
MUC-7, it obtains 50.1% recall and 75.4% pre-
cision. The poor recall and comparatively high
precision reflect the capability of the state-of-
the-art learning-based NP resolution systems.
The third block of Table 4 summarizes the
performance of the classifier DTpron?opt in real
resolution. In the systems RealResolve-1 and
RealResolve-2, the antecedents of pronominal
candidates are found by DTpron?opt and DTpron
respectively, while in both systems the an-
tecedents of non-pronominal candidates are by
DTnon?pron. As shown in the table, compared
with the Optimal where the backward features
of testing instances are optimally assigned, the
recall rates of two systems drop largely by 7.8%
for MUC-6 and by about 14% for MUC-7. The
scores of recall are even lower than those of
Baseline. As a result, in comparison with Op-
timal, we see the degrade of the F-measure and
the success rate, which confirms our hypothesis
that the classifier learned on perfect training in-
stances would probably not perform well on the
noisy testing instances.
The system RealResolve-3 listed in the fifth
line of the table uses the classifier trained
and tested on instances whose backward fea-
tures are assigned according to the results from
DTnon?pron and DTpron. From the table we can
find that: (1) Compared with Baseline, the sys-
tem produces gains in recall (2.1% for MUC-6
and 2.8% for MUC-7) with no significant loss
in precision. Overall, we observe the increase in
F-measure for both data sets. If measured by
Success, the improvement is more apparent by
4.7% (MUC-6) and 1.8% (MUC-7). (2) Com-
pared with RealResolve-1(2), the performance
decrease of RealResolve-3 against Optimal is
not so large. Especially for MUC-6, the system
obtains a success rate as high as Optimal.
The above results show that our model can
be successfully applied in the real pronoun res-
olution task, even given the low recall of the
current non-pronoun resolution module. This
should be owed to the fact that for a candidate,
its adjacent antecedents, even not the closest
one, could give clues to reflect its salience in
the local discourse. That is, the model prefers a
high precision to a high recall, which copes well
with the capability of the existing non-pronoun
resolution module.
In our experiments we also tested the clas-
sifier refining algorithm described in Figure 3.
We found that for both MUC-6 and MUC-7
data set, the algorithm terminated in the second
round. The comparison of DT2pron and DT1pron
(i.e. DT?pron) showed that these two trees were
exactly the same. The algorithm converges fast
probably because in the data set, most of the
antecedent candidates are non-pronouns (89.1%
for MUC-6 and 83.7% for MUC-7). Conse-
quently, the ratio of the training instances with
backward features changed may be not substan-
tial enough to affect the classifier generation.
Although the algorithm provided no further
refinement for DT?pron, we can use DT
?
pron, as
suggested in Section 5.2, to calculate back-
ward features and classify instances by running
PRON-RESOLVE(DTnon?pron, DT?pron). The
results of such a system, RealResolve-4, are
listed in the last line of Table 4. For both MUC-
6 and MUC-7, RealResolve-4 obtains exactly
the same performance as RealResolve-3.
6 Related Work
To our knowledge, our work is the first ef-
fort that systematically explores the influence of
coreferential information of candidates on pro-
noun resolution in learning-based ways. Iida et
al. (2003) also take into consideration the con-
textual clues in their coreference resolution sys-
tem, by using two features to reflect the ranking
order of a candidate in Salience Reference List
(SRL). However, similar to common centering
models, in their system the ranking of entities
in SRL is also heuristic-based.
The coreferential chain length of a candidate,
or its variants such as occurrence frequency and
TFIDF, has been used as a salience factor in
some learning-based reference resolution sys-
tems (Iida et al, 2003; Mitkov, 1998; Paul et
al., 1999; Strube and Muller, 2003). However,
for an entity, the coreferential length only re-
flects its global salience in the whole text(s), in-
stead of the local salience in a discourse segment
which is nevertheless more informative for pro-
noun resolution. Moreover, during resolution,
the found coreferential length of an entity is of-
ten incomplete, and thus the obtained length
value is usually inaccurate for the salience eval-
uation.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have proposed a model which
incorporates coreferential information of candi-
dates to improve pronoun resolution. When
evaluating a candidate, the model considers its
adjacent antecedent by describing its properties
in terms of backward features. We first exam-
ined the effectiveness of the model by applying
it in an optimal environment where the clos-
est antecedent of a candidate is obtained cor-
rectly. The experiments show that it boosts
the success rate of the baseline system for both
MUC-6 (4.7%) and MUC-7 (3.5%). Then we
proposed how to apply our model in the real res-
olution where the antecedent of a non-pronoun
is found by an additional non-pronoun resolu-
tion module. Our model can still produce Suc-
cess improvement (4.7% for MUC-6 and 1.8%
for MUC-7) against the baseline system, de-
spite the low recall of the non-pronoun resolu-
tion module.
In the current work we restrict our study only
to pronoun resolution. In fact, the coreferential
information of candidates is expected to be also
helpful for non-pronoun resolution. We would
like to investigate the influence of the coreferen-
tial factors on general NP reference resolution in
our future work.
References
S. Brennan, M. Friedman, and C. Pollard.
1987. A centering approach to pronouns. In
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Compuational Linguis-
tics, pages 155?162.
N. Ge, J. Hale, and E. Charniak. 1998. A
statistical approach to anaphora resolution.
In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Very
Large Corpora.
B. Grosz, A. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1983.
Providing a unified account of definite noun
phrases in discourse. In Proceedings of the
21st Annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 44?50.
B. Grosz, A. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995.
Centering: a framework for modeling the
local coherence of discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 21(2):203?225.
R. Iida, K. Inui, H. Takamura, and Y. Mat-
sumoto. 2003. Incorporating contextual cues
in trainable models for coreference resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the 10th Confer-
ence of EACL, Workshop ?The Computa-
tional Treatment of Anaphora?.
R. Mitkov. 1998. Robust pronoun resolution
with limited knowledge. In Proceedings of the
17th Int. Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 869?875.
R. Mitkov. 1999. Anaphora resolution: The
state of the art. Technical report, University
of Wolverhampton.
MUC-6. 1995. Proceedings of the Sixth Message
Understanding Conference. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers, San Francisco, CA.
MUC-7. 1998. Proceedings of the Seventh
Message Understanding Conference. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine
learning approaches to coreference resolution.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 104?111, Philadelphia.
M. Paul, K. Yamamoto, and E. Sumita. 1999.
Corpus-based anaphora resolution towards
antecedent preference. In Proceedings of
the 37th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Work-
shop ?Coreference and It?s Applications?,
pages 47?52.
J. R. Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for ma-
chine learning. Morgan Kaufmann Publish-
ers, San Francisco, CA.
C. Sidner. 1981. Focusing for interpretation
of pronouns. American Journal of Computa-
tional Linguistics, 7(4):217?231.
W. Soon, H. Ng, and D. Lim. 2001. A ma-
chine learning approach to coreference reso-
lution of noun phrases. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(4):521?544.
M. Strube and C. Muller. 2003. A machine
learning approach to pronoun resolution in
spoken dialogue. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 168?175, Japan.
M. Strube. 1998. Never look back: An alterna-
tive to centering. In Proceedings of the 17th
Int. Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and 36th Annual Meeting of ACL, pages
1251?1257.
J. R. Tetreault. 2001. A corpus-based eval-
uation of centering and pronoun resolution.
Computational Linguistics, 27(4):507?520.
M. Vilain, J. Burger, J. Aberdeen, D. Connolly,
and L. Hirschman. 1995. A model-theoretic
coreference scoring scheme. In Proceedings of
the Sixth Message understanding Conference
(MUC-6), pages 45?52, San Francisco, CA.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
X. Yang, G. Zhou, J. Su, and C. Tan.
2003. Coreference resolution using competi-
tion learning approach. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Japan.
