Hierarchy Extraction based on Inclusion of Appearance  
Eiko Yamamoto Kyoko Kanzaki Hitoshi Isahara 
Computational Linguistics Group, 
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
3-5 Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan. 
eiko@nict.go.jp kanzaki@nict.go.jp isahara@nict.go.jp 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we propose a method of auto-
matically extracting word hierarchies based on 
the inclusion relation of appearance patterns 
from corpora. We apply a complementary 
similarity measure to find a hierarchical word 
structure. This similarity measure was devel-
oped for the recognition of degraded machine-
printed text in the field and can be applied to 
estimate one-to-many relations. Our purpose is 
to extract word hierarchies from corpora 
automatically. As the initial task, we attempt 
to extract hierarchies of abstract nouns co-
occurring with adjectives in Japanese and 
compare with hierarchies in the EDR elec-
tronic dictionary.  
1 Introduction 
The hierarchical relations of words are useful as 
language resources. Hierarchical semantic lexical 
databases such as WordNet (Miller et al, 1990) 
and the EDR electronic dictionary (1995) are used 
for NLP research worldwide to fully understand a 
word meaning. In current thesauri in the form of 
hierarchical relations, words are categorized manu-
ally and classified in a top-down manner based on 
human intuition. This is a good way to make a 
lexical database for users having a specific purpose. 
However, word hierarchies based on human intui-
tion tend to vary greatly depending on the lexicog-
rapher. In addition, hierarchical relations based on 
various data may be needed depending on each 
user.  
Accordingly, we try to extract a hierarchical re-
lation of words automatically and statistically. In 
previous research, ways of extracting from defini-
tion sentences in dictionaries (Tsurumaru et al, 
1986; Shoutsu et al, 2003) or from a corpus by 
using patterns such as ?a part of?, ?is-a?, or ?and? 
(Berland and Charniak, 1999; Caraballo, 1999) 
have been proposed. Also, there is a method that 
uses the dependence relation between words taken 
from a corpus (Matsumoto et al, 1996). In contrast, 
we propose a method based on the inclusion rela-
tion of appearance patterns from corpora. 
In this paper, to verify the suitability of our 
method, we attempt to extract hierarchies of ab-
stract nouns co-occurring with adjectives in Japa-
nese. We select two similarity measures to estimate 
the inclusion relation between word appearance 
patterns. One is a complementary similarity meas-
ure; i.e., a similarity measure developed for the 
recognition of degraded machine-printed text in the 
field (Hagita and Sawaki, 1995). This measure can 
be used to estimate one-to-many relations such as 
superordinate?subordinate relations from appear-
ance patterns (Yamamoto and Umemura, 2002). 
The second similarity measure is the overlap coef-
ficient, which is a similarity measure to calculate 
the rate of overlap between two binary vectors. 
Using each measure, we extract hierarchies from a 
corpus. After that, we compare these with the EDR 
electronic dictionary. 
2 Experiment Corpus 
A good deal of linguistic research has focused on 
the syntactic and semantic functions of abstract 
nouns (Nemoto, 1969; Takahashi, 1975; Schmid, 
2000; Kanzaki et al, 2003). In the example, ?Yagi 
(goat) wa seishitsu (nature) ga otonashii (gentle) 
(The nature of goats is gentle).?, Takahashi (1975) 
recognized that the abstract noun ?seishitsu (na-
ture)? is a hypernym of the attribute that the predi-
cative adjective ?otonashi (gentle)? expresses. 
Kanzaki et al (2003) defined such abstract nouns 
that co-occur with adjectives as adjective hy-
pernyms, and extracted these co-occurrence rela-
tions between abstract nouns and adjectives from 
many corpora such as newspaper articles. In the 
linguistic data, there are sets of co-occurring 
adjectives for each abstract noun ? the total num-
ber of abstract noun types is 365 and the number of 
adjective types is 10,525. Some examples are as 
follows.  
OMOI  (feeling): ureshii (glad), kanashii (sad), 
shiawasena (happy), ? 
KANTEN (viewpoint): igakutekina (medical), 
rekishitekina (historical), ... 
3 Complementary Similarity Measure 
The complementary similarity measure (CSM) is 
used in a character recognition method for binary 
images which is robust against heavy noise or 
graphical designs (Sawaki and Hagita, 1996). Ya-
mamoto et al (2002) applied CSM to estimate one-
to-many relations between words. They estimated 
one-to-many relations from the inclusion relations 
between the appearance patterns of two words.  
The appearance pattern is expressed as an n-
dimensional binary feature vector. Now, let F = (f1, 
f2, ?, fn) and T = (t1, t2, ?, tn) (where fi, ti = 0 or 
1) be the feature vectors of the appearance patterns 
for a word and another word, respectively. The 
CSM of F to T is defined as 
dcban
tfdtfc
tfbtfa
dbca
bcadTFCSM
n
i ii
n
i ii
n
i ii
n
i ii
+++=
???=??=
??=?=
++
?=
??
??
==
==
,)1()1(,)1(
,)1(,
))((
),(
11
11
 
The CSM of F to T represents the degree to 
which F includes T; that is, the inclusion relation 
between the appearance patterns of two words.  
In our experiment, each ?word? is an abstract 
noun. Therefore, n is the number of adjectives in 
the corpus, a indicates the number of adjectives co-
occurring with both abstract nouns, b and c indi-
cate the number of adjectives co-occurring with 
either abstract noun, and d indicates the number of 
adjectives co-occurring with neither abstract noun. 
4 Overlap Coefficient 
The overlap coefficient (OVLP) is a similarity 
measure for binary vectors (Manning and Schutze, 
1999). OVLP is essentially a measure of inclusion. 
It has a value of 1.0 if every dimension with a non-
zero value for the first vector is also non-zero for 
the second vector or vice versa. In other words, the 
value is 1.0 when the first vector completely in-
cludes the second vector or vice versa. OVLP of F 
and T is defined as 
),(),(
),(
cabaMIN
a
TFMIN
TF
TFOVLP ++==
I
 
5 EDR hierarchy 
The EDR Electronic Dictionary (1995) was de-
veloped for advanced processing of natural lan-
guage by computers and is composed of eleven 
sub-dictionaries. The sub-dictionaries include a 
concept dictionary, word dictionaries, bilingual 
dictionaries, etc. We verify and analyse the hierar-
chies that are extracted based on a comparison with 
the EDR dictionary. However, the hierarchies in 
EDR consist of hypernymic concepts represented 
by sentences. On the other hand, our extracted hi-
erarchies consist of hypernyms such as abstract 
nouns. Therefore, we have to replace the concept 
composed of a sentence with the sequence of the 
words. We replace the description of concepts with 
entry words from the ?Word List by Semantic 
Principles? (1964) and add synonyms. We also add 
to abstract nouns in order to reduce any difference 
in representation. In this way, conceptual hierar-
chies of adjectives in the EDR dictionary are de-
fined by the sequence of words. 
6 Hierarchy Extraction Process 
The processes for hierarchy extraction from the 
corpus are as follows. ?TH? is a threshold value for 
each pair under consideration. If TH is low, we can 
obtain long hierarchies. However, if TH is too low, 
the number of word pairs taken into consideration 
increases overwhelmingly and the measurement 
reliability diminishes. In this experiment, we set 
0.2 as TH. 
1. Compute the similarity between appear-
ance patterns for each pair of words. The 
hierarchical relation between the two 
words in a pair is determined by the simi-
larity value. We express the pair as (X, Y), 
where X is a hypernym of Y and Y is a 
hyponym of X. 
2. Sort the pairs by the normalized similari-
ties and reduce the pairs where the simi-
larity is less than TH.  
3. For each abstract noun, 
A) Choose a pair (B, C) where word B is 
the hypernym with the highest value. 
The hierarchy between B and C is set 
to the initial hierarchy.  
B) Choose a pair (C, D) where hyponym 
D is not contained in the current hier-
archy and has the highest value in pairs 
where the last word of the current hier-
archy C is a hypernym. 
C) Connect hyponym D with the tail of 
the current hierarchy.  
D) While such a pair can be chosen, repeat 
B) and C). 
E) Choose a pair (A, B) where hypernym 
A is not contained in the current hier-
archy and has the highest value in pairs 
where the first word of the current hi-
erarchy B is a hypernym. 
F) Connect hypernym A with the head of 
the current hierarchy. 
G) While such a pair can be chosen, repeat 
E) and F). 
4. For the hierarchies that are built, 
A) If a short hierarchy is included in a 
longer hierarchy with the order of the 
words preserved, the short one is 
dropped from the list of hierarchies. 
B) If a hierarchy has only one or a few 
different words from another hierarchy, 
the two hierarchies are merged. 
7 Extracted Hierarchy 
Some extracted hierarchies are as follows. In our 
experiment, we get koto (matter) as the common 
hypernym.  
koto (matter) -- joutai (state) -- kankei (relation) 
-- kakawari (something to do with) -- tsukiai 
(have an acquaintance with) 
koto (matter) -- toki (when) -- yousu (aspect) -- 
omomochi (one?s face) -- manazashi (a look) -- 
iro (on one?s face) -- shisen (one?s eye) 
8 Comparison 
We analyse extracted hierarchies by using the 
number of nodes that agree with the EDR hierar-
chy. Specifically, we count the number of nodes 
(nouns) which agree with a word in the EDR hier-
archy, preserving the order of each hierarchy. Here, 
two hierarchies are ?A - B - C - D - E? and ?A - B 
- D - F - G.? They have three agreement nodes; ?A 
- B - D.?  
Table 1 shows the distribution of the depths of a 
CSM hierarchy, and the number of nodes that 
agree with the EDR hierarchy at each depth. Table 
2 shows the same for an OVLP one. ?Agreement 
Level? is the number of agreement nodes. The bold 
font represents the number of hierarchies com-
pletely included in the EDR hierarchy.  
8.1 Depth of Hierarchy 
The number of hierarchies made from the EDR 
dictionary (EDR hierarchy) is 932 and the deepest 
level is 14. The number of CSM hierarchies is 105 
and the depth is from 3 to 14 (Table 1). The num-
ber of OVLP hierarchies is 179 and the depth is 
from 2 to 9 (Table 2). These results show that 
CSM builds a deeper hierarchy than OVLP, though 
the number of hierarchies is less than OVLP. Also, 
the deepest level of CSM equals that of EDR. 
Therefore, comparison with the EDR dictionary is 
an appropriate way to verify the hierarchies that we 
have extracted.  
In both tables, we find most hierarchies have an 
agreement level from 2 to 4. The deepest agree-
ment level is 6. For an agreement level of 5 or bet-
ter, the OVLP hierarchy includes only two hierar-
chies while the CSM hierarchy includes nine hier-
archies. This means CSM can extract hierarchies 
having more nodes which agree with the EDR hi-
erarchy than is possible with OVLP.  
 
Depth of 
Hierarchy
Agreement Level 
  1        2        3       4       5       6  
3 1 4 1  
4 8 6 2 
5 9 8  1
6 8 9 4 1
7 2 6 1 1
8 1 5 2 2
9 3 2 3 1
10  1  2
11  4 1 
12  1  1
13  1  2
14    1
Table 1: Distribution of CSM hierarchy for each 
depth 
Depth of 
Hierarchy
Agreement Level 
1        2         3        4       5       6 
2 1   
3 2 8 1  
4 25 9 1 
5 24 13 7 
6 21 31 5 
7 5 12 1 1
8 3 5 2 1
9 1 3 1 
Table 2: Distribution of OVLP hierarchy for 
each depth 
Also, many abstract nouns agree with the hy-
peronymic concept around the top level. In current 
thesauri, the categorization of words is classified in 
a top-down manner based on human intuition. 
Therefore, we believe the hierarchy that we have 
built is consistent with human intuition, at least 
around the top level of hyperonymic concepts. 
9 Conclusion 
We have proposed a method of automatically ex-
tracting hierarchies based on an inclusion relation 
of appearance patterns from corpora. In this paper, 
we attempted to extract objective hierarchies of 
abstract nouns co-occurring with adjectives in 
Japanese. In our experiment, we showed that com-
plementary similarity measure can extract a kind of 
hierarchy from corpora, though it is a similarity 
measure developed for the recognition of degraded 
machine-printed text. Also, we can find interesting 
hierarchies which suit human intuition, though 
they are different from exact hierarchies. Kanzaki 
et al (2004) have applied our approach to verify 
classification of abstract nouns by using self-
organization map. We can look a suitability of our 
result at that work. 
In our future work, we will use our approach for 
other parts of speech and other types of word. 
Moreover, we will compare with current alterna-
tive approaches such as those based on sentence 
patterns.  
References  
Berland, M. and Charniak, E. 1999. Finding Parts 
in Very Large Corpora, In Proceedings of the 
37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp.57-64. 
Caraballo, S. A. 1999. Automatic Construction of a 
Hypernym-labeled Noun Hierarchy from Text, 
In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp.120-126. 
EDR Electronic Dictionary. 1995. 
 http://www2.nict.go.jp/kk/e416/EDR/index.html 
Hagita, N. and Sawaki, M. 1995. Robust Recogni-
tion of Degraded Machine-Printed Characters us-
ing Complementary Similarity Measure and Er-
ror-Correction Learning?In Proceedings of the 
SPIE ?The International Society for Optical En-
gineering, 2442: pp.236-244. 
Kanzaki, K., Ma, Q., Yamamoto, E., Murata, M., 
and Isahara, H. 2003. Adjectives and their Ab-
stract concepts --- Toward an objective thesaurus 
from Semantic Map. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond International Workshop on Generative Ap-
proaches to the Lexicon, pp.177-184. 
Kanzaki, K., Ma, Q., Yamamoto, E., Murata, M., 
and Isahara, H. 2004. Extraction of Hyperonymy 
of Adjectives from Large Corpora by using the 
Neural Network Model. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, Volume II, pp.423-
426. 
Kay, M. 1986. Parsing in Functional Unification 
Grammar. In ?Readings in Natural Language 
Processing?, Grosz, B. J., Spark Jones, K. and 
Webber, B. L., ed., pp.125-138, Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers, Los Altos, California. 
Manning, C. D. and Schutze, H. 1999. Foundations 
of Statistical Natural Language Processing, The 
MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 
Matsumoto, Y. and Sudo, S., Nakayama, T., and 
Hirao, T. 1996. Thesaurus Construction from 
Multiple Language Resources, In IPSJ SIG 
Notes NL-93, pp.23-28 (In Japanese). 
Miller, A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C., Gros, D., 
Millier, K., and Tengi, R. 1990. Five Papers on 
WordNet, Technical Report CSL Report 43, 
Cognitive Science Laboratory, Princeton Univer-
sity. 
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. 1964. Inference and 
Disputed Authorship: The Federalist. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts. 
Nemoto, K. 1969. The combination of the noun 
with ?ga-Case? and the adjective, Language re-
search2 for the computer, National Language 
Research Institute, pp.63-73 (In Japanese). 
Shmid, H-J. 2000. English Abstract Nouns as Con-
ceptual Shells, Mouton de Gruyter. 
Shoutsu, Y., Tokunaga, T., and Tanaka, H. 2003. 
The integration of Japanese dictionary and the-
saurus, In IPSJ SIG Notes NL-153, pp.141-146 
(In Japanese). 
Sparck Jones, K. 1972. A statistical interpretation 
of term specificity and its application in retrieval. 
Journal of Documentation, 28(1): pp.11-21. 
Takahashi, T. 1975. A various phase related to the 
part-whole relation investigated in the sentence, 
Studies in the Japanese language 103, The 
Society of Japanese Linguistics, pp.1-16 (In 
Japanese). 
Tsurumaru, H., Hitaka, T., and Yoshita, S. 1986. 
Automatic extraction of hierarchical relation be-
tween words, In IPSJ SIG Notes NL-83, pp.121-
128 (In Japanese). 
Yamamoto, E. and Umemura, K. 2002. A Similar-
ity Measure for Estimation of One?to-Many Re-
lationship in Corpus, In Journal of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pp.45-75 (In Japanese). 
Word List by Semantic Principles. 1964. National 
Language Research Institute Publications, Shuei 
Shuppan (In Japanese). 
