Question Answering using Constraint Satisfaction:                                       
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints  
John Prager  
T.J. Watson Research Ctr. 
Yorktown Heights 
N.Y. 10598 
jprager@us.ibm.com 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll 
T.J. Watson Research Ctr. 
Yorktown Heights  
N.Y. 10598 
jencc@us.ibm.com 
Krzysztof Czuba  
T.J. Watson Research Ctr. 
Yorktown Heights  
N.Y. 10598 
kczuba@us.ibm.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints is a new ap-
proach to Question Answering whereby candi-
date answers? confidences are adjusted by 
asking auxiliary questions whose answers con-
strain the original answers.  These constraints 
emerge naturally from the domain of interest, 
and enable application of real-world knowledge 
to QA.  We show that our approach signifi-
cantly improves system performance (75% rela-
tive improvement in F-measure on select 
question types) and can create a ?dossier? of in-
formation about the subject matter in the origi-
nal question. 
1 Introduction 
Traditionally, Question Answering (QA) has 
drawn on the fields of Information Retrieval, Natural 
Language Processing (NLP), Ontologies, Data Bases 
and Logical Inference, although it is at heart a prob-
lem of NLP.  These fields have been used to supply 
the technology with which QA components have 
been built.  We present here a new methodology 
which attempts to use QA holistically, along with 
constraint satisfaction, to better answer questions, 
without requiring any advances in the underlying 
fields. 
Because NLP is still very much an error-prone 
process, QA systems make many mistakes; accord-
ingly, a variety of methods have been developed to 
boost the accuracy of their answers.  Such methods 
include redundancy (getting the same answer from 
multiple documents, sources, or algorithms), deep 
parsing of questions and texts (hence improving the 
accuracy of confidence measures), inferencing 
(proving the answer from information in texts plus 
background knowledge) and sanity-checking (veri-
fying that answers are consistent with known facts).  
To our knowledge, however, no QA system deliber-
ately asks additional questions in order to derive 
constraints on the answers to the original questions.  
We have found empirically that when our own 
QA system?s (Prager et al, 2000; Chu-Carroll et al, 
2003) top answer is wrong, the correct answer is 
often present later in the ranked answer list.  In other 
words, the correct answer is in the passages re-
trieved by the search engine, but the system was un-
able to sufficiently promote the correct answer 
and/or deprecate the incorrect ones.  Our new ap-
proach of QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints (QDC) 
uses the answers to additional questions to provide 
more information that can be used in ranking candi-
date answers to the original question.  These auxil-
iary questions are selected such that natural 
constraints exist among the set of correct answers.  
After issuing both the original question and auxiliary 
questions, the system evaluates all possible combi-
nations of the candidate answers and scores them by 
a simple function of both the answers? intrinsic con-
fidences, and how well the combination satisfies the 
aforementioned constraints.  Thus we hope to im-
prove the accuracy of an essentially NLP task by 
making an end-run around some of the more diffi-
cult problems in the field. 
We describe QDC and experiments to evaluate its 
effectiveness. Our results show that on our test set, 
substantial improvement is achieved by using con-
straints, compared with our baseline system, using 
standard evaluation metrics. 
2 Related Work 
Logic and inferencing have been a part of Ques-
tion-Answering since its earliest days.  The first 
such systems employed natural-language interfaces 
to expert systems, e.g.  SHRDLU (Winograd, 1972), 
or to databases e.g. LUNAR (Woods, 1973) and 
LIFER/LADDER (Hendrix et al 1977).  CHAT-80 
(Warren & Pereira, 1982) was a DCG-based NL-
query system about world geography, entirely in 
Prolog.  In these systems, the NL question is trans-
formed into a semantic form, which is then proc-
essed further; the overall architecture and system 
operation is very different from today?s systems, 
however, primarily in that there is no text corpus to 
process. 
Inferencing is used in at least two of the more 
visible systems of the present day.  The LCC system 
(Moldovan & Rus, 2001) uses a Logic Prover to 
establish the connection between a candidate answer 
passage and the question.  Text terms are converted 
to logical forms, and the question is treated as a goal 
which is ?proven?, with real-world knowledge being 
provided by Extended WordNet.  The IBM system 
PIQUANT (Chu-Carroll et al, 2003) uses Cyc (Le-
nat, 1995) in answer verification.  Cyc can in some 
cases confirm or reject candidate answers based on 
its own store of instance information; in other cases, 
primarily of a numerical nature, Cyc can confirm 
whether candidates are within a reasonable range 
established for their subtype.   
At a more abstract level, the use of constraints 
discussed in this paper can be viewed as simply an 
example of finding support (or lack of it) for candi-
date answers.  Many current systems (see, e.g. 
(Clarke et al, 2001), (Prager et al, 2004)) employ 
redundancy as a significant feature of operation:  if 
the same answer appears multiple times in an inter-
nal top-n list, whether from multiple sources or mul-
tiple algorithms/agents, it is given a confidence 
boost, which will affect whether and how it gets re-
turned to the end-user. 
 Finally, our approach is somewhat reminiscent of 
the scripts introduced by Schank (Schank et al, 
1975, and see also Lehnert, 1978). In order to gener-
ate meaningful auxiliary questions and constraints, 
we need a model (?script?) of the situation the ques-
tion is about.  Among others, we have identified one 
such script modeling the human life cycle that seems 
common to different question types regarding peo-
ple.   
3 Introducing QDC 
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints is an extension 
of on-going work of ours called QA-by-Dossier 
(QbD) (Prager et al, 2004).  In the latter, defini-
tional questions of the form ?Who/What is X? are 
answered by asking a set of specific factoid ques-
tions about properties of X.  So if X is a person, for 
example, these auxiliary questions may be about 
important dates and events in the person?s life-cycle, 
as well as his/her achievement.  Likewise, question 
sets can be developed for other entities such as or-
ganizations, places and things.  
QbD employs the notion of follow-on questions.  
Given an answer to a first-round question, the sys-
tem can ask more specific questions based on that 
knowledge.  For example, on discovering a person?s 
profession, it can ask occupation-specific follow-on 
questions: if it finds that people are musicians, it can 
ask what they have composed, if it finds they are 
explorers, then what they have discovered, and so 
on. 
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints extends this ap-
proach by capitalizing on the fact that a set of an-
swers about a subject must be mutually consistent, 
with respect to constraints such as time and geogra-
phy.   The essence of the QDC approach is to ini-
tially return instead of the best answer to 
appropriately selected factoid questions, the top n 
answers (we use n=5), and to choose out of this top 
set the highest confidence answer combination that 
satisfies consistency constraints. 
We illustrate this idea by way of the example, 
?When did Leonardo da Vinci paint the Mona 
Lisa??.  Table 1 shows our system?s top answers to 
this question, with associated scores in the range    
0-1. 
 
 Score Painting Date 
1 .64 2000 
2 .43 1988 
3 .34 1911 
4 .31 1503 
5 .30 1490 
 
Table 1.  Answers for ?When did Leonardo da 
Vinci paint the Mona Lisa?? 
 
The correct answer is ?1503?, which is in 4th 
place, with a low confidence score.  Using QA-by-
Dossier, we ask two related questions ?When was 
Leonardo da Vinci born?? and ?When did Leonardo 
da Vinci die??  The answers to these auxiliary ques-
tions are shown in Table 2.   
Given common knowledge about a person?s life 
expectancy and that a painting must be produced 
while its author is alive, we observe that the best 
dates proposed in Table 2 consistent with one an-
other are that Leonardo da Vinci was born in 1452, 
died in 1519, and painted the Mona Lisa in 1503.  
[The painting date of 1490 also satisfies the con-
straints, but with a lower confidence.]  We will ex-
amine the exact constraints used a little later.  This 
example illustrates how the use of auxiliary ques-
tions helps constrain answers to the original ques-
tion, and promotes correct answers with initial low 
confidence scores.  As a side-effect, a short dossier 
is produced. 
 
 
 Score Born  Score Died 
1 .66 1452  .99 1519 
2 .12 1519  .98 1989 
3 .04 1920  .96 1452 
4 .04 1987  .60 1988 
5 .04 1501  .60 1990 
Table 2.  Answers for auxiliary questions ?When 
was Leonardo da Vinci born?? and ?When did Leo-
nardo da Vinci die??. 
3.1 Reciprocal Questions 
QDC also employs the notion of reciprocal ques-
tions.  These are a type of follow-on question used 
solely to provide constraints, and do not add to the 
dossier.  The idea is simply to double-check the an-
swer to a question by inverting it, substituting the 
first-round answer and hoping to get the original 
subject back.  For example, to double-check ?Sac-
ramento? as the answer to ?What is the capital of 
California?? we would ask ?Of what state is Sacra-
mento the capital??.  The reciprocal question would 
be asked of all of the candidate answers, and the 
confidences of the answers to the reciprocal ques-
tions would contribute to the selection of the opti-
mum answer.  We will discuss later how this 
reciprocation may be done automatically.  In a sepa-
rate study of reciprocal questions (Prager et al, 
2004), we demonstrated an increase in precision 
from .43 to .95, with only a 30% drop in recall. 
Although the reciprocal questions seem to be 
symmetrical and thus redundant, their power stems 
from the differences in the search for answers inher-
ent in our system. The search is primarily based on 
the expected answer type (STATE vs. CAPITAL in 
the above example). This results in different docu-
ment sets being passed to the answer selection mod-
ule. Subsequently, the answer selection module 
works with a different set of syntactic and semantic 
relationships, and the process of asking a reciprocal 
question ends up looking more like the process of 
asking an independent one. The only difference be-
tween this and the ?regular? QDC case is in the type 
of constraint applied to resolve the resulting answer 
set. 
3.2 Applying QDC 
In order to automatically apply QDC during ques-
tion answering, several problems need to be ad-
dressed.  First, criteria must be developed to 
determine when this process should be invoked.  
Second, we must identify the set of question types 
that would potentially benefit from such an ap-
proach, and, for each question type, develop a set of 
auxiliary questions and appropriate constraints 
among the answers.  Third, for each question type, 
we must determine how the results of applying con-
straints should be utilized.  
3.2.1 When to apply QDC 
To address these questions we must distinguish 
between ?planned? and ?ad-hoc? uses of QDC.  For 
answering definitional questions (?Who/what is 
X??) of the sort used in TREC2003, in which collec-
tions of facts can be gathered by QA-by-Dossier, we 
can assume that QDC is always appropriate.  By 
defining broad enough classes of entities for which 
these questions might be asked (e.g. people, places, 
organizations and things, or major subclasses of 
these), we can for each of these classes manually 
establish once and for all a set of auxiliary questions 
for QbD and constraints for QDC.  This is the ap-
proach we have taken in the experiments reported 
here.  We are currently working on automatically 
learning effective auxiliary questions for some of 
these classes. 
In a more ad-hoc situation, we might imagine that 
a simple variety of QDC will be invoked using 
solely reciprocal questions whenever the difference 
between the scores of the first and second answer is 
below a certain threshold.    
3.2.2 How to apply QDC 
We will posit three methods of generating auxil-
iary question sets: 
o By hand 
o Through a structured repository, such as a 
knowledge-base of real-world information 
o Through statistical techniques tied to a machine-
learning algorithm, and a text corpus. 
We think that all three methods are appropriate, 
but we initially concentrate on the first for practical 
reasons.  Most TREC-style factoid questions are 
about people, places, organizations, and things, and 
we can generate generic auxiliary question sets for 
each of these classes.  Moreover, the purpose of this 
paper is to explain the QDC methodology and to 
investigate its value.   
3.2.3 Constraint Networks 
The constraints that apply to a given situation can 
be naturally represented in a network, and we find it 
useful for visualization purposes to depict the con-
straints graphically.  In such a graph the entities and 
values are represented as nodes, and the constraints 
and questions as edges.   
It is not clear how possible, or desirable, it is to 
automatically develop such constraint networks 
(other than the simple one for reciprocal questions), 
since so much real-world knowledge seems to be 
required.  To illustrate, let us look at the constraints 
required for the earlier example.  A more complex 
constraint system is used in our experiments de-
scribed later.  For our Leonardo da Vinci example, 
the set of constraints applied can be expressed as 
follows1: 
 
Date(Died) <= Date(Born) + 100 
Date(Painting) >=  Date(Born) + 7 
Date(Painting) <=  Date(Died) 
 
The corresponding graphical representation is in 
Figure 1.  Although the numerical constants in these 
constraints betray a certain arbitrariness, we found it 
a useful practice to find a middle ground between 
absolute minima or maxima that the values can 
achieve and their likely values.  Furthermore, al-
though these constraints are manually derived for 
our prototype system, they are fairly general for the 
human life-cycle and can be easily reused for other, 
similar questions, or for more complex dossiers, as 
described below. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Constraint Network for Leonardo ex-
ample.  Dashed lines represent question-answer 
pairs, solid lines constraints between the answers. 
We also note that even though a constraint net-
work might have been inspired by and centered 
around a particular question, once the network is 
established, any question employed in it could be the 
end-user question that triggers it. 
There exists the (general) problem of when more 
than one set of answers satisfies our constraints.  
Our approach is to combine the first-round scores of 
the individual answers to provide a score for the 
dossier as a whole.  There are several ways to do 
this, and we found experimentally that it does not 
appear critical exactly how this is done.  In the ex-
ample in the evaluation we mention one particular 
combination algorithm. 
3.2.4 Kinds of constraint network 
There are an unlimited number of possible con-
straint networks that can be constructed.  We have 
experimented with the following: 
Timelines.  People and even artifacts have life-
cycles.  The examples in this paper exploit these. 
                                                        
1 Painting is only an example of an activity in these constraints. 
Any other achievement that is usually associated with adulthood 
can be used. 
Geographic (?Where is X?).  Neighboring entities 
are in the same part of the world.   
Kinship (?Who is married to X?).  Most kinship 
relationships have named reciprocals e.g. husband-
wife, parent-child, and cousin-cousin.  Even though 
these are not in practice one-one relationships, we 
can take advantage of sufficiency even if necessity is 
not entailed. 
Definitional (?What is X??, ?What does XYZ stand 
for??)   For good definitions, a term and its defini-
tion are interchangeable. 
Part-whole.  Sizes of parts are no bigger than sizes 
of wholes.  This fact can be used for populations, 
areas, etc. 
3.2.5 QDC potential 
We performed a manual examination of the 500 
TREC2002 questions2 to see for how many of these 
questions the QDC framework would apply.  Being 
a manual process, these numbers provide an upper 
bound on how well we might expect a future auto-
matic process to work.  
We noted that for 92 questions (18%) a non-
trivial constraint network of the above kinds would 
apply.  For a total of 454 questions (91%), a simple 
reciprocal constraint could be generated.  However, 
for 61 of those, the reciprocal question was suffi-
ciently non-specific that the sought reciprocal an-
swer was unlikely to be found in a reasonably-sized 
hit-list.  For example, the reciprocal question to 
?How did Mickey Mantle die?? would be ?Who died 
of cancer??  However, we can imagine using other 
facts in the dossier to craft the question, giving us 
?What famous baseball player (or Yankees player) 
died of cancer??, giving us a much better chance of 
success.  For the simple reciprocation, though, sub-
tracting these doubtful instances leaves 79% of the 
questions appearing to be good candidates for QDC. 
4 Experimental Setup 
4.1 Test set generation 
To evaluate QDC, we had our system develop 
dossiers of people in the creative arts, unseen in pre-
vious TREC questions.  However, we wanted to use 
the personalities in past TREC questions as inde-
pendent indicators of appropriate subject matter.  
Therefore we collected all of the ?creative? people 
in the TREC9 question set, and divided them up into 
classes by profession, so we had, for example, male 
singers Bob Marley, Ray Charles, Billy Joel and 
Alice Cooper; poets William Wordsworth and 
Langston Hughes; painters Picasso, Jackson Pollock 
                                                        
2 This set did not contain definition questions, which, by our 
inspection, lend themselves readily to reciprocation. 
Birthdate 
Deathdate 
Leonardo Painting 
and Vincent Van Gogh, etc. ? twelve such groupings 
in all.  For each set, we entered the individuals in the 
?Google Sets? interface 
(http://labs.google.com/sets), which finds ?similar? 
entities to the ones entered.  For example, from our 
set of male singers it found: Elton John, Sting, Garth 
Brooks, James Taylor, Phil Collins, Melissa 
Etheridge, Alanis Morissette, Annie Lennox, Jack-
son Browne, Bryan Adams, Frank Sinatra and Whit-
ney Houston. 
Altogether, we gathered 276 names of creative 
individuals this way, after removing duplicates, 
items that were not names of individuals, and names 
that did not occur in our test corpus (the AQUAINT 
corpus).  We then used our system manually to help 
us develop ?ground truth? for a randomly selected 
subset of 109 names.  This ground truth served both 
as training material and as an evaluation key.  We 
split the 109 names randomly into a set of 52 for 
training and 57 for testing.  The training process 
used a hill-climbing method to find optimal values 
for three internal rejection thresholds.  In developing 
the ground truth we might have missed some in-
stances of assertions we were looking for, so the 
reported recall (and hence F-measure) figures should 
be considered to be upper bounds, but we believe the 
calculated figures are not far from the truth. 
4.2 QDC Operation 
The system first asked three questions for each 
subject X: 
 
 In what year was X born? 
 In what year did X die? 
 What compositions did X have? 
 
The third of these triggers our named-entity type 
COMPOSITION that is used for all kinds of titled 
works ? books, films, poems, music, plays and so 
on, and also quotations.  Our named-entity recog-
nizer has rules to detect works of art by phrases that 
are in apposition to ?the film ? ? or the ?the book 
? ? etc., and also captures any short phrase in quotes 
beginning with a capital letter.  The particular ques-
tion phrasing we used does not commit us to any 
specific creative verb.  This is of particular impor-
tance since it very frequently happens in text that 
titled works are associated with their creators by 
means of a possessive or parenthetical construction, 
rather than subject-verb-object. 
The top five answers, with confidences, are re-
turned for the born and died questions (subject to 
also passing a confidence threshold test).  The com-
positions question is treated as a list question, mean-
ing that all answers that pass a certain threshold are 
returned.  For each such returned work Wi, two addi-
tional questions are asked: 
 What year did X have Wi? 
 Who had Wi? 
 
The top 5 answers to each of these are returned, 
again as long as they pass a confidence threshold.  
We added a sixth answer ?NIL? to each of the date 
sets, with a confidence equal to the rejection thresh-
old.  (NIL is the code used in TREC ever since 
TREC10 to indicate the assertion that there is no 
answer in the corpus.)  We used a two stage con-
straint-satisfaction process: 
Stage 1:  For each work Wi for subject X, we 
added together its original confidence to the confi-
dence of the answer X in the answer set of the recip-
rocal question (if it existed ? otherwise we added 
zero).  If the total did not exceed a learned threshold 
(.50) the work was rejected. 
Stage 2.  For each subject, with the remaining 
candidate works we generated all possible combina-
tions of the date answers.  We rejected any combina-
tion that did not satisfy the following constraints: 
 
 DIED >= BORN + 7 
 DIED <= BORN + 100 
 WORK >= BORN + 7 
 WORK <= BORN + 100 
 WORK <= DIED 
 DIED <= WORK + 100 
 
The apparent redundancy here is because of the 
potential NIL answers for some of the date slots.  
We also rejected combinations of works whose 
years spanned more than 100 years (in case there 
were no BORN or DIED dates).  In performing these 
constraint calculations, NIL satisfied every test by 
fiat.  The constraint network we used is depicted in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Constraint Network for evaluation ex-
ample.  Dashed lines represent question-answer 
pairs, solid lines constraints between the answers. 
We used as a test corpus the AQUAINT corpus 
used in TREC-QA since 2002.  Since this was not 
the same corpus from which the test questions were 
generated (the Web), we acknowledged that there 
might be some difference in the most common spell-
ing of certain names, but we made no attempt to cor-
rect for this.  Neither did we attempt to normalize, 
translate or aggregate names of the titled works that 
were returned, so that, for example, ?Well-
Birthdate of X 
Deathdate of X 
Work Wi 
Author X Date of Wi 
Xi = Author of Wi 
Tempered Klavier? and ?Well-Tempered Clavier? 
were treated as different.  Since only individuals 
were used in the question set, we did not have in-
stances of problems we saw in training, such as 
where an ensemble (such as The Beatles) created a 
certain piece, which in turn via the reciprocal ques-
tion was found to have been written by a single per-
son (Paul McCartney).  The reverse situation was 
still possible, but we did not handle it.  We foresee a 
future version of our system having knowledge of 
ensembles and their composition, thus removing this 
restriction.  In general, a variety of ontological rela-
tionships could occur between the original individ-
ual and the discovered performer(s) of the work. 
We generated answer keys by reading the pas-
sages that the system had retrieved and from which 
the answers were generated, to determine ?truth?.  In 
cases of absent information in these passages, we 
did our own corpus searches.  This of course made 
the issue of evaluation of recall only relative, since 
we were not able to guarantee we had found all ex-
isting instances. 
We encountered some grey areas, e.g., if a paint-
ing appeared in an exhibition or if a celebrity en-
dorsed a product, then should the exhibition?s or 
product?s name be considered an appropriate ?work? 
of the artist?  The general perspective adopted was 
that we were not establishing or validating the nature 
of the relationship between an individual and a crea-
tive work, but rather its existence.  We answered 
?yes? if we subjectively felt the association to be 
both very strong and with the individual?s participa-
tion ? for example, Pamela Anderson and Playboy.  
However, books/plays about a person or dates of 
performances of one?s work were considered incor-
rect.  As we shall see, these decisions would not 
have a big impact on the outcome.   
4.3 Effect of Constraints 
The answers collected from these two rounds of 
questions can be regarded as assertions about the 
subject X.  By applying constraints, two possible 
effects can occur to these assertions: 
1. Some works can get thrown out. 
2. An asserted date (which was the top candidate 
from its associated question) can get replaced by 
a candidate date originally in positions 2-6 
(where sixth place is NIL) 
Effect #1 is expected to increase precision at the 
risk of worsening recall; effect #2 can go either way.  
We note that NIL, which is only used for dates, can 
be the correct answer if the desired date assertion is 
absent from the corpus; NIL is considered a ?value? 
in this evaluation. 
By inspection, performances and other indirect 
works (discussed in the previous section) were usu-
ally associated with the correct artist, so our decision 
to remove them from consideration resulted in a de-
crease in both the numerator and denominator of the 
precision and recall calculations, resulting in a 
minimal effect. 
The results of applying QDC to the 57 test indi-
viduals are summarized in Table 3.  The baseline 
assertions for individual X were: 
o Top-ranking birthdate/NIL   
o Top-ranking deathdate/NIL   
o Set of works Wi that passed threshold 
o Top-ranking date for Wi /NIL 
 
The sets of baseline assertions (by individual) are 
in effect the results of QA-by-Dossier WITHOUT 
Constraints (QbD). 
 
  Assertions Micro-Average Macro-Average 
  Total Cor-
rect 
Tru-
th 
Prec Rec F Prec Rec F 
Base-
line 
1671 517 933 .309 .554 .396 .331 .520 .386 
QDC 1417 813 933 .573 .871 .691 .603 .865 .690 
 
Table 3.  Results of Performance Evaluation.  
Two calculations of P/R/F are made, depending on 
whether the averaging is done over the whole set, or 
first by individual; the results are very similar.   
The QDC assertions were the same as those for 
QbD, but reflecting the following effects: 
o Some {Wi, date} pairs were thrown out (3 out of 
14 on average) 
o Some dates in positions 2-6 moved up (applica-
ble to birth, death and work dates) 
The results show improvement in both precision 
and recall, in turn determining a 75-80% relative 
increase in F-measure. 
5 Discussion 
This exposition of QA-by-Dossier-with-
Constraints is very short and undoubtedly leaves 
may questions unanswered.  We have not presented 
a precise method for computing the QDC scores. 
One way to formalize this process would be to treat 
it as evidence gathering and interpret the results in a 
Bayesian-like fashion. The original system confi-
dences would represent prior probabilities reflecting 
the system?s belief that the answers are correct.  As 
more evidence is found, the confidences would be 
updated to reflect the changed likelihood that an an-
swer is correct.  
We do not know a priori how much ?slop? should 
be allowed in enforcing the constraints, since auxil-
iary questions are as likely to be answered incor-
rectly as the original ones.  A further problem is to 
determine the best metric for evaluating such ap-
proaches, which is a question for QA in general.   
The task of generating auxiliary questions and 
constraint sets is a matter of active research.  Even 
for simple questions like the ones considered here, 
the auxiliary questions and constraints we looked at 
were different and manually chosen. Hand-crafting a 
large number of such sets might not be feasible, but 
it is certainly possible to build a few for common 
situations, such as a person?s life-cycle. More gener-
ally, QDC could be applied to situations in which a 
certain structure is induced by natural temporal (our 
Leonardo example) and/or spatial constraints, or by 
properties of the relation mentioned in the question 
(evaluation example). Temporal and spatial con-
straints appear general to all relevant question types, 
and include relations of precedence, inclusion, etc. 
For certain relationships, there are naturally-
occurring reciprocals (if X is married to Y, then Y is 
married to X; if X is a child of Y then Y is a parent 
of X; compound-term to acronym and vice versa).  
Transitive relationships (e.g. greater-than, located-
in, etc.) offer the immediate possibility of con-
straints, but this avenue has not yet been explored. 
5.1 Automatic Generation of Reciprocal Ques-
tions 
While not done in the work reported here, we are 
looking at generating reciprocal questions automati-
cally.  Consider the following transformations: 
 
?What is the capital of California?? -> ?Of what 
state is <candidate> the capital?? 
 
?What is Frank Sinatra?s nickname?? -> 
?Whose (or what person?s) nickname is <can-
didate>?? 
 
?How deep is Crater Lake?? -> ?What (or what 
lake) is <candidate> deep?? 
 
?Who won the Oscar for best actor in 1970??  
-> ?In what year did <candidate> win the 
Oscar for best actor?? (and/or ?What award 
did <candidate> win in 1970??) 
 
These are precisely the transformations necessary 
to generate the auxiliary reciprocal questions from 
the given original questions and candidate answers 
to them.  Such a process requires identifying an en-
tity in the question that belongs to a known class, 
and substituting the class name for the entity.  This 
entity is made the subject of the question, the previ-
ous subject (or trace) being replaced by the candi-
date answer.  We are looking at parse-tree rather 
than string transformations to achieve this.  This 
work will be reported in a future paper.  
5.2 Final Thoughts 
Despite these open questions, initial trials with 
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints have been very 
encouraging, whether it is by correctly answering 
previously missed questions, or by improving confi-
dences of correct answers.  An interesting question 
is when it is appropriate to apply QDC.  Clearly, if 
the base QA system is too poor, then the answers to 
the auxiliary questions will be useless; if the base 
system is highly accurate, the increase in accuracy 
will be negligible.  Thus our approach seems most 
beneficial to middle-performance levels, which, by 
inspection of TREC results for the last 5 years, is 
where the leading systems currently lie. 
We had initially thought that use of constraints 
would obviate the need for much of the complexity 
inherent in NLP.  As mentioned earlier, with the 
case of ?The Beatles? being the reciprocal answer to 
the auxiliary composition question to ?Who is Paul 
McCartney??, we see that structured, ontological 
information would benefit QDC.  Identifying alter-
nate spellings and representations of the same name 
(e.g. Clavier/Klavier, but also taking care of varia-
tions in punctuation and completeness) is also nec-
essary.  When we asked ?Who is Ian Anderson??, 
having in mind the singer-flautist for the Jethro Tull 
rock band, we found that he is not only that, but also 
the community investment manager of the English 
conglomerate Whitbread, the executive director of 
the U.S. Figure Skating Association, a writer for 
New Scientist, an Australian medical advisor to the 
WHO, and the general sales manager of Houseman, 
a supplier of water treatment systems.  Thus the 
problem of word sense disambiguation has returned 
in a particularly nasty form.  To be fully effective, 
QDC must be configured not just to find a consistent 
set of properties, but a number of independent sets 
that together cover the highest-confidence returned 
answers3.  Altogether, we see that some of the very 
problems we aimed to skirt are still present and need 
to be addressed.  However, we have shown that even 
disregarding these issues, QDC was able to provide 
substantial improvement in accuracy. 
6 Summary 
We have presented a method to improve the accu-
racy of a QA system by asking auxiliary questions 
for which natural constraints exist.  Using these con-
straints, sets of mutually consistent answers can be 
generated.  We have explored questions in the bio-
graphical areas, and identified other areas of appli-
cability.  We have found that our methodology 
exhibits a double advantage:  not only can it im-
                                                        
3 Possibly the smallest number of sets that provide such cover-
age.   
prove QA accuracy, but it can return a set of mutu-
ally-supporting assertions about the topic of the 
original question.  We have identified many open 
questions and areas of future work, but despite these 
gaps, we have shown an example scenario where 
QA-by-Dossier-with-Constraints can improve the F-
measure by over 75%. 
7 Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank Dave Ferrucci, Elena Filatova 
and Sasha Blair-Goldensohn for helpful discussions.  
This work was supported in part by the Advanced 
Research and Development Activity (ARDA)'s Ad-
vanced Question Answering for Intelligence 
(AQUAINT) Program under contract number 
MDA904-01-C-0988. 
References 
Chu-Carroll, J., J. Prager, C. Welty, K. Czuba and 
D. Ferrucci.  ?A Multi-Strategy and Multi-Source 
Approach to Question Answering?, Proceedings 
of the 11th TREC,  2003. 
Clarke, C., Cormack, G., Kisman, D.. and Lynam, T.  
?Question answering by passage selection 
(Multitext experiments for TREC-9)? in Proceed-
ings of the 9th TREC, pp. 673-683, 2001. 
Hendrix, G., E. Sacerdoti, D. Sagalowicz, J. Slocum: 
Developing a Natural Language Interface to Com-
plex Data. VLDB 1977: 292  
Lehnert, W.  The Process of Question Answering. A 
Computer Simulation of Cognition. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, 1978.  
Lenat, D. 1995.  "Cyc: A Large-Scale Investment in 
Knowledge Infrastructure." Communications of 
the ACM 38, no. 11. 
Moldovan, D. and V. Rus, ?Logic Form Transfor-
mation of WordNet and its Applicability to Ques-
tion Answering?, Proceedings of the ACL, 2001. 
Prager, J., E. Brown, A. Coden, and D. Radev. 2000. 
"Question-Answering by Predictive Annotation?.  
In Proceedings of SIGIR 2000, pp. 184-191.  
Prager, J., J. Chu-Carroll and K. Czuba, "A Multi-
Agent Approach to using Redundancy and Rein-
forcement in Question Answering" in New Direc-
tions in Question-Answering, Maybury, M. (Ed.),  
to appear in 2004. 
Schank, R. and R. Abelson. ?Scripts, Plans and 
Knowledge?, Proceedings of IJCAI?75. 
Voorhees, E. ?Overview of the TREC 2002 Ques-
tion Answering Track?, Proceedings of the 11th 
TREC, 2003. 
Warren, D., and F. Pereira "An efficient easily 
adaptable system for interpreting natural language 
queries," Computational Linguistics, 8:3-4, 110-
122, 1982.  
Winograd, T. Procedures as a representation for data 
in a computer program for under-standing natural 
language. Cognitive Psychology, 3(1), 1972. 
Woods, W. Progress in natural language understand-
ing --- an application in lunar geology. Proceed-
ings of the 1973 National Computer Conference, 
AFIPS Conference Proceedings, Vol. 42, 441--
450, 1973. 
