Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 387?394,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Word Sense Disambiguation vs. Statistical Machine Translation
Marine CARPUAT Dekai WU1
marine@cs.ust.hk dekai@cs.ust.hk
Human Language Technology Center
HKUST
Department of Computer Science
University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Abstract
We directly investigate a subject of much
recent debate: do word sense disambiga-
tion models help statistical machine trans-
lation quality? We present empirical re-
sults casting doubt on this common, but
unproved, assumption. Using a state-of-
the-art Chinese word sense disambigua-
tion model to choose translation candi-
dates for a typical IBM statistical MT
system, we find that word sense disam-
biguation does not yield significantly bet-
ter translation quality than the statistical
machine translation system alone. Error
analysis suggests several key factors be-
hind this surprising finding, including in-
herent limitations of current statistical MT
architectures.
1 Introduction
Word sense disambiguation or WSD, the task of de-
termining the correct sense of a word in context, is
a much studied problem area with a long and hon-
orable history. Recent years have seen steady ac-
curacy gains in WSD models, driven in particular
by controlled evaluations such as the Senseval series
of workshops. Word sense disambiguation is often
assumed to be an intermediate task, which should
then help higher level applications such as machine
1The authors would like to thank the Hong Kong Re-
search Grants Council (RGC) for supporting this research
in part through grants RGC6083/99E, RGC6256/00E, and
DAG03/04.EG09, and several anonymous reviewers for in-
sights and suggestions.
translation or information retrieval. However, WSD
is usually performed and evaluated as a standalone
task, and to date there have been very few efforts to
integrate the learned WSD models into full statisti-
cal MT systems.
An energetically debated question at conferences
over the past year is whether even the new state-
of-the-art word sense disambiguation models actu-
ally have anything to offer to full statistical machine
translation systems. Among WSD circles, this can
sometimes elicit responses that border on implying
that even asking the question is heretical. In efforts
such as Senseval we tend to regard the construction
of WSD models as an obviously correct, if necessar-
ily simplified, approach that will eventually lead to
essential disambiguation components within larger
applications like machine translation.
There is no question that the word sense disam-
biguation perspective has led to numerous insights in
machine translation, even of the statistical variety. It
is often simply an unstated assumption that any full
translation system, to achieve full performance, will
sooner or later have to incorporate individual WSD
components.
However, in some translation architectures and
particularly in statistical machine translation (SMT),
the translation engine already implicitly factors in
many contextual features into lexical choice. From
this standpoint, SMT models can be seen as WSD
models in their own right, albeit with several major
caveats.
But typical statistical machine translation models
only rely on a local context to choose among lexical
translation candidates, as discussed in greater detail
later. It is therefore often assumed that dedicated
WSD-based lexical choice models, which can incor-
387
porate a wider variety of context features, can make
better predictions than the ?weaker? models implicit
in statistical MT, and that these predictions will help
the translation quality.
Nevertheless, this assumption has not been em-
pirically verified, and we should not simply assume
that WSD models can contribute more than what the
SMT models perform. It may behoove us to take
note of the sobering fact that, perhaps analogously,
WSD has yet to be conclusively shown to help in-
formation retrieval systems after many years of at-
tempts.
In this work, we propose to directly investigate
whether word sense disambiguation?at least as it is
typically currently formulated?is useful for statis-
tical machine translation. We tackle a real Chinese
to English translation task using a state-of-the-art su-
pervised WSD system and a typical SMT model. We
show that the unsupervised SMT model, trained on
parallel data without any manual sense annotation,
yields higher BLEU scores than the case where the
SMT model makes use of the lexical choice predic-
tions from the supervised WSD model, which are
more expensive to create. The reasons for the sur-
prising difficulty of improving over the translation
quality of the SMT model are then discussed and
analyzed.
2 Word sense disambiguation vs.
statistical machine translation
We begin by examining the respective strengths and
weaknesses of dedicated WSD models versus full
SMT models, that could be expected to be relevant
to improving lexical choice.
2.1 Features Unique to WSD
Dedicated WSD is typically cast as a classification
task with a predefined sense inventory. Sense dis-
tinctions and granularity are often manually prede-
fined, which means that they can be adapted to the
task at hand, but also that the translation candidates
are limited to an existing set.
To improve accuracy, dedicated WSD models typ-
ically employ features that are not limited to the lo-
cal context, and that include more linguistic infor-
mation than the surface form of words. This of-
ten requires several stages of preprocessing, such
as part-of-speech tagging and/or parsing. (Prepro-
cessor domain can be an issue, since WSD accu-
racy may suffer from domain mismatches between
the data the preprocessors were trained on, and the
data they are applied to.) For example, a typi-
cal dedicated WSD model might employ features
as described by Yarowsky and Florian (2002) in
their ?feature-enhanced naive Bayes model?, with
position-sensitive, syntactic, and local collocational
features. The feature set made available to the WSD
model to predict lexical choices is therefore much
richer than that used by a statistical MT model.
Also, dedicated WSD models can be supervised,
which yields significantly higher accuracies than un-
supervised. For the experiments described in this
study we employed supervised training, exploit-
ing the annotated corpus that was produced for the
Senseval-3 evaluation.
2.2 Features Unique to SMT
Unlike lexical sample WSD models, SMT models
simultaneously translate complete sentences rather
than isolated target words. The lexical choices are
made in a way that heavily prefers phrasal cohesion
in the output target sentence, as scored by the lan-
guage model. That is, the predictions benefit from
the sentential context of the target language. This
has the general effect of improving translation flu-
ency.
The WSD accuracy of the SMT model depends
critically on the phrasal cohesion of the target lan-
guage. As we shall see, this phrasal cohesion prop-
erty has strong implications for the utility of WSD.
In other work (forthcoming), we investigated
the inverse question of evaluating the Chinese-to-
English SMT model on word sense disambigua-
tion performance, using standard WSD evaluation
methodology and datasets from the Senseval-3 Chi-
nese lexical sample task. We showed the accuracy of
the SMT model to be significantly lower than that of
all the dedicated WSD models considered, even af-
ter adding the lexical sample data to the training set
for SMT to allow for a fair comparison. These re-
sults highlight the relative strength, and the potential
hoped-for advantage of dedicated supervised WSD
models.
388
3 The WSD system
The WSD system used for the experiments is based
on the model that achieved the best performance, by
a large margin, on the Senseval-3 Chinese lexical
sample task (Carpuat et al, 2004).
3.1 Classification model
The model consists of an ensemble of four voting
models combined by majority vote.
The first voting model is a naive Bayes model,
since Yarowsky and Florian (2002) found this model
to be the most accurate classifier in a comparative
study on a subset of Senseval-2 English lexical sam-
ple data.
The second voting model is a maximum entropy
model (Jaynes, 1978), since Klein and Manning
(2002) found that this model yielded higher accu-
racy than naive Bayes in a subsequent comparison
of WSD performance. (Note, however, that a differ-
ent subset of either Senseval-1 or Senseval-2 English
lexical sample data was used for their comparison.)
The third voting model is a boosting model (Fre-
und and Schapire, 1997), since has consistently
turned in very competitive scores on related tasks
such as named entity classification (Carreras et al,
2002) . Specifically, an AdaBoost.MH model was
used (Schapire and Singer, 2000), which is a multi-
class generalization of the original boosting algo-
rithm, with boosting on top of decision stump clas-
sifiers (i.e., decision trees of depth one).
The fourth voting model is a Kernel PCA-based
model (Wu et al, 2004). Kernel Principal Compo-
nent Analysis (KPCA) is a nonlinear kernel method
for extracting nonlinear principal components from
vector sets where, conceptually, the n-dimensional
input vectors are nonlinearly mapped from their
original space Rn to a high-dimensional feature
space F where linear PCA is performed, yielding a
transform by which the input vectors can be mapped
nonlinearly to a new set of vectors (Scho?lkopf et al,
1998). WSD can be performed by a Nearest Neigh-
bor Classifier in the high-dimensional KPCA feature
space. (Carpuat et al, 2004) showed that KPCA-
based WSD models achieve close accuracies to the
best individual WSD models, while having a signif-
icantly different bias.
All these classifiers have the ability to handle
large numbers of sparse features, many of which
may be irrelevant. Moreover, the maximum entropy
and boosting models are known to be well suited to
handling features that are highly interdependent.
The feature set used consists of position-sensitive,
syntactic, and local collocational features, as de-
scribed by Yarowsky and Florian (2002).
3.2 Lexical choice mapping model
Ideally, we would like the WSD model to predict En-
glish translations given Chinese target words in con-
text. Such a model requires Chinese training data
annotated with English senses, but such data is not
available. Instead, the WSD system was trained us-
ing the Senseval-3 Chinese lexical sample task data.
(This is suboptimal, but reflects the difficulties that
arise when considering a real translation task; we
cannot assume that sense-annotated data will always
be available for all language pairs.)
The Chinese lexical sample task includes 20 tar-
get words. For each word, several senses are defined
using the HowNet knowledge base. There are an av-
erage of 3.95 senses per target word type, ranging
from 2 to 8. Only about 37 training instances per
target word are available.
For the purpose of Chinese to English translation,
the WSD model should predict English translations
instead of HowNet senses. Fortunately, HowNet
provides English glosses. This allows us to map
each HowNet sense candidate to a set of English
translations, converting the monolingual Chinese
WSD system into a translation lexical choice model.
We further extended the mapping to include any sig-
nificant translation choice considered by the SMT
system but not in HowNet.
4 The SMT system
To build a representative baseline statistical machine
translation system, we restricted ourselves to mak-
ing use of freely available tools, since the potential
contribution of WSD should be easier to see against
this baseline. Note that our focus here is not on the
SMT model itself; our aim is to evaluate the impact
of WSD on a real Chinese to English statistical ma-
chine translation task.
389
Table 1: Example of the translation candidates before and after mapping for the target word ?4? (lu)
HowNet Sense ID HowNet glosses HowNet glosses + improved transla-
tions
56520 distance distance
56521 sort sort
56524 Lu Lu
56525, 56526, 56527, 56528 path, road, route, way path, road, route, way, circuit, roads
56530, 56531, 56532 line, means, sequence line, means, sequence, lines
56533, 56534 district, region district, region
4.1 Alignment model
The alignment model was trained with GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2003), which implements the most
typical IBM and HMM alignment models. Transla-
tion quality could be improved using more advanced
hybrid phrasal or tree models, but this would inter-
fere with the questions being investigated here. The
alignment model used is IBM-4, as required by our
decoder. The training scheme consists of IBM-1,
HMM, IBM-3 and IBM-4, following (Och and Ney,
2003).
The training corpus consists of about 1 million
sentences from the United Nations Chinese-English
parallel corpus from LDC. This corpus was automat-
ically sentence-aligned, so the training data does not
require as much manual annotation as for the WSD
model.
4.2 Language model
The English language model is a trigram model
trained on the Gigaword newswire data and on the
English side of the UN and Xinhua parallel corpora.
The language model is also trained using a publicly
available software, the CMU-Cambridge Statistical
Language Modeling Toolkit (Clarkson and Rosen-
feld, 1997).
4.3 Decoding
The ISI ReWrite decoder (Germann, 2003), which
implements an efficient greedy decoding algorithm,
is used to translate the Chinese sentences, using the
alignment model and language model previously de-
scribed.
Notice that very little contextual information is
available to the SMT models. Lexical choice dur-
ing decoding essentially depends on the translation
probabilities learned for the target word, and on the
English language model scores.
5 Experimental method
5.1 Test set selection
We extracted the Chinese sentences from the NIST
MTEval-04 test set that contain any of the 20 target
words from the Senseval-3 Chinese lexical sample
target set. For a couple of targets, no instances were
available from the test set. The resulting test set con-
tains a total of 175 sentences, which is smaller than
typical MT evaluation test sets, but slightly larger
than the one used for the Senseval Chinese lexical
sample task.
5.2 Integrating the WSD system predictions
with the SMT model
There are numerous possible ways to integrate the
WSD system predictions with the SMT model. We
choose two different straightforward approaches,
which will help analyze the effect of the different
components of the SMT system, as we will see in
Section 6.5.
5.2.1 Using WSD predictions for decoding
In the first approach, we use the WSD sense pre-
dictions to constrain the set of English sense candi-
dates considered by the decoder for each of the tar-
get words. Instead of allowing all the word transla-
tion candidates from the translation model, when we
use the WSD predictions we override the translation
model and force the decoder to choose the best trans-
lation from the predefined set of glosses that maps to
the HowNet sense predicted by the WSD model.
390
Table 2: Translation quality with and without the WSD model
Translation System BLEU score
SMT 0.1310
SMT + WSD for postprocessing 0.1253
SMT + WSD for decoding 0.1239
SMT + WSD for decoding with improved translation candidates 0.1232
5.2.2 Using WSD predictions for
postprocessing
In the second approach, we use the WSD predic-
tions to postprocess the output of the SMT system:
in each output sentence, the translation of the target
word chosen by the SMT model is directly replaced
by the WSD prediction. When the WSD system pre-
dicts more than one candidate, a unique translation
is randomly chosen among them. As discussed later,
this approach can be used to analyze the effect of the
language model on the output.
It would also be interesting to use the gold stan-
dard or correct sense of the target words instead of
the WSD model predictions in these experiments.
This would give an upper-bound on performance
and would quantify the effect of WSD errors. How-
ever, we do not have a corpus which contains both
sense annotation and multiple reference translations:
the MT evaluation corpus is not annotated with the
correct senses of Senseval target words, and the Sen-
seval corpus does not include English translations of
the sentences.
6 Results
6.1 Even state-of-the-art WSD does not help
BLEU score
Table 2 summarizes the translation quality scores
obtained with and without the WSD model. Using
our WSD model to constrain the translation candi-
dates given to the decoder hurts translation quality,
as measured by the automated BLEU metric (Pap-
ineni et al, 2002).
Note that we are evaluating on only difficult sen-
tences containing the problematic target words from
the lexical sample task, so BLEU scores can be ex-
pected to be on the low side.
6.2 WSD still does not help BLEU score with
improved translation candidates
One could argue that the translation candidates cho-
sen by the WSD models do not help because they
are only glosses obtained from the HowNet dictio-
nary. They consist of the root form of words only,
while the SMT model can learn many more transla-
tions for each target word, including inflected forms
and synonyms.
In order to avoid artificially penalizing the WSD
system by limiting its translation candidates to the
HowNet glosses, we expand the translation set us-
ing the bilexicon learned during translation model
training. For each target word, we consider the En-
glish words that are given a high translation prob-
ability, and manually map each of these English
words to the sense categories defined for the Sen-
seval model. At decoding time, the set of transla-
tion candidates considered by the language model is
therefore larger, and closer to that considered by the
pure SMT system.
The results in Table 2 show that the improved
translation candidates do not help BLEU score. The
translation quality obtained with SMT alone is still
better than when the improved WSD Model is used.
The simpler approach of using WSD predictions in
postprocessing yields better BLEU score than the
decoding approach, but still does not outperform the
SMT model.
6.3 WSD helps translation quality for very few
target words
If we break down the test set and evaluate the effect
of the WSD per target word, we find that for all but
two of the target words WSD either hurts the BLEU
score or does not help it, which shows that the de-
crease in BLEU is not only due to a few isolated tar-
get words for which the Senseval sense distinctions
391
are not helpful.
6.4 The ?language model effect?
Error analysis revealed some surprising effects. One
particularly dismaying effect is that even in cases
where the WSD model is able to predict a better tar-
get word translation than the SMT model, to use the
better target word translation surprisingly often still
leads to a lower BLEU score.
The phrasal coherence property can help explain
this surprising effect we observed. The translation
chosen by the SMT model will tend to be more likely
than the WSD prediction according to the language
model; otherwise, it would also have been predicted
by SMT. The translation with the higher language
model probability influences the translation of its
neighbors, thus potentially improving BLEU score,
while the WSD prediction may not have been seen
occurring within phrases often enough, thereby low-
ering BLEU score.
For example, we observe that the WSD model
sometimes correctly predicts ?impact? as a better
translation for ???? (chongji), where the SMT
model selects ?shock?. In these cases, some of
the reference translations also use ?impact?. How-
ever, even when the WSD model constrains the de-
coder to select ?impact? rather than ?shock?, the
resulting sentence translation yields a lower BLEU
score. This happens because the SMT model does
not know how to use ?impact? correctly (if it did, it
would likely have chosen ?impact? itself). Forcing
the lexical choice ?impact? simply causes the SMT
model to generate phrases such as ?against Japan for
peace constitution impact? instead of ?against Japan
for peace constitution shocks?. This actually lowers
BLEU score, because of the n-gram effects.
6.5 Using WSD predictions in postprocessing
does not help BLEU score either
In the postprocessing approach, decoding is done
before knowing the WSD predictions, which elim-
inates the ?language model effect?. Even in these
conditions, the SMT model alone is still the best per-
forming system.
The postprocessing approach also outperforms
the integrated decoding approach, which shows that
the language model is not able to make use of the
WSD predictions. One could expect that letting the
Table 3: BLEU scores per target word: WSD helps
for very few target words
Target word SMT SMT +
WSD
?? bawo 0.1482 0.1484
? bao 0.1891 0.1891
a? cailiao 0.0863 0.0863
?? chongji 0.1396 0.1491
?0 difang 0.1233 0.1083
I fengzi 0.1404 0.1402
?? huodong 0.1365 0.1465
? lao 0.1153 0.1136
4 lu 0.1322 0.1208
?u qilai 0.1104 0.1082
 qian 0.1948 0.1814
B? tuchu 0.0975 0.0989
?? yanjiu 0.1089 0.1089
?? zhengdong 0.1267 0.1251
 zhou 0.0825 0.0808
decoder choose among the WSD translations also
yields a better translation of the context. This is
indeed the case, but for very few examples only:
for instance the target word ??0? (difang) is bet-
ter used in the integrated decoding ouput ?the place
of local employment? , than in the postprocessing
output ?the place employment situation?. Instead,
the majority of cases follow the pattern illustrated
by the following example where the target word is
??? (lao): the SMT system produces the best output
(?the newly elected President will still face old prob-
lems?), the postprocessed output uses the fluent sen-
tence with a different translation (?the newly elected
President will still face outdated problems?), while
the translation is not used correctly with the decod-
ing approach (?the newly elected President will face
problems still to be outdated?).
6.6 BLEU score bias
The ?language model effect? highlights one of the
potential weaknesses of the BLEU score. BLEU pe-
nalizes for phrasal incoherence, which in the present
study means that it can sometimes sacrifice ade-
quacy for fluency.
However, the characteristics of BLEU are by
392
no means solely responsible for the problems with
WSD that we observed. To doublecheck that n-gram
effects were not unduly impacting our study, we also
evaluated using BLEU-1, which gave largely simi-
lar results as the standard BLEU-4 scores reported
above.
7 Related work
Most translation disambiguation tasks are defined
similarly to the Senseval Multilingual lexical sam-
ple tasks. In Senseval-3, the English to Hindi trans-
lation disambigation task was defined identically to
the English lexical sample task, except that the WSD
models are expected to predict Hindi translations in-
stead of WordNet senses. This differs from our ap-
proach which consists of producing the translation
of complete sentences, and not only of a predefined
set of target words.
Brown et al (1991) proposed a WSD algorithm to
disambiguate English translations of French target
words based on the single most informative context
feature. In a pilot study, they found that using this
WSD method in their French-English SMT system
helped translation quality, manually evaluated using
the number of acceptable translations. However, this
study is limited to the unrealistic case of words that
have exactly two senses in the other language.
Most previous work has focused on the distinct
problem of exploiting various bilingual resources
(e.g., parallel or comparable corpora, or even MT
systems) to help WSD. The goal is to achieve accu-
rate WSD with minimum amounts of annotated data.
Again, this differs from our objective which consists
of using WSD to improve performance on a full ma-
chine translation task, and is measured in terms of
translation quality.
For instance, Ng et al (2003) showed that it is
possible to use word aligned parallel corpora to train
accurate supervised WSD models. The objective is
different; it is not possible for us to use this method
to train our WSD model without undermining the
question we aim to investigate: we would need to
use the SMT model to word-align the parallel sen-
tences, which could too strongly bias the predic-
tions of the WSD model towards those of the SMT
model, instead of combining predictive information
from independent sources as we aim to study here.
Other work includes Li and Li (2002) who pro-
pose a bilingual bootstrapping method to learn a
translation disambiguation WSD model, and Diab
(2004) who exploited large amounts of automati-
cally generated noisy parallel data to learn WSD
models in an unsupervised bootstrapping scheme.
8 Conclusion
The empirical study presented here argues that we
can expect that it will be quite difficult, at the least,
to use standard WSD models to obtain significant
improvements to statistical MT systems, even when
supervised WSD models are used. This casts signif-
icant doubt on a commonly-held, but unproven, as-
sumption to the contrary. We have presented empiri-
cally based analysis of the reasons for this surprising
finding.
We have seen that one major factor is that the
statistical MT model is sufficiently accurate so that
within the training domain, even the state-of-the-art
dedicated WSD model is only able to improve on its
lexical choice predictions in a relatively small pro-
portion of cases.
A second major factor is that even when the ded-
icated WSD model makes better predictions, cur-
rent statistical MT models are unable to exploit this.
Under this interpretation of our results, the depen-
dence on the language model in current SMT ar-
chitectures is excessive. One could of course ar-
gue that drastically increasing the amount of train-
ing data for the language model might overcome the
problems from the language model effect. Given
combinatorial problems, however, there is no way at
present of telling whether the amount of data needed
to achieve this is realistic, particularly for translation
across many different domains. On the other hand, if
the SMT architecture cannot make use of WSD pre-
dictions, even when they are in fact better than the
SMT?s lexical choices, then perhaps some alterna-
tive model striking a different balance of adequacy
and fluency is called for. Ultimately, after all, WSD
is a method of compensating for sparse data. Thus
it may be that the present inability of WSD models
to help improve accuracy of SMT systems stems not
from an inherent weakness of dedicated WSD mod-
els, but rather from limitations of present-day SMT
architectures.
393
To further test this, our experiments could be
tried on other statistical MT models. For exam-
ple, the WSD model?s predictions could be em-
ployed in a Bracketing ITG translation model such
as Wu (1996) or Zens et al (2004), or alternatively
they could be incorporated as features for rerank-
ing in a maximum-entropy SMT model (Och and
Ney, 2002), instead of using them to constrain the
sentence translation hypotheses as done here. How-
ever, the preceding discussion argues that it is doubt-
ful that this would produce significantly different re-
sults, since the inherent problem from the ?language
model effect? would largely remain, causing sen-
tence translations that include the WSD?s preferred
lexical choices to be discounted. For similar rea-
sons, we suspect our findings may also hold even for
more sophisticated statistical MT models that rely
heavily on n-gram language models. A more gram-
matically structured statistical MT model that less n-
gram oriented, such as the ITG based ?grammatical
channel? translation model (Wu and Wong, 1998),
might make more effective use of the WSD model?s
predictions.
References
Peter Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della Pietra, and
Robert Mercer. Word-sense disambiguation using statistical
methods. In Proceedings of 29th meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 264?270, Berke-
ley, California, 1991.
Marine Carpuat, Weifeng Su, and Dekai Wu. Augmenting en-
semble classification for word sense disambiguation with a
Kernel PCA model. In Proceedings of Senseval-3, Third
International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Disam-
biguation Systems, Barcelona, July 2004. SIGLEX, Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Xavier Carreras, Llu??s Ma`rques, and Llu??s Padro?. Named en-
tity extraction using AdaBoost. In Dan Roth and Antal van
den Bosch, editors, Proceedings of CoNLL-2002, pages 167?
170, Taipei, Taiwan, 2002.
Philip Clarkson and Ronald Rosenfeld. Statistical language
modeling using the CMU-Cambridge toolkit. In Proceed-
ings of Eurospeech ?97, pages 2707?2710, Rhodes, Greece,
1997.
Mona Diab. Relieving the data acquisition bottleneck in word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2004.
Yoram Freund and Robert E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic
generalization of on-line learning and an application to
boosting. In Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
55(1), pages 119?139, 1997.
Ulrich Germann. Greeedy decoding for statistical machine
translation in almost linear time. In Proceedings of HLT-
NAACL-2003. Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2003.
E.T. Jaynes. Where do we Stand on Maximum Entropy? MIT
Press, Cambridge MA, 1978.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. Conditional structure
versus conditional estimation in NLP models. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP-2002, Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 9?16, Philadelphia,
July 2002. SIGDAT, Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Cong Li and Hang Li. Word translation disambiguation using
bilingual bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 343?351, 2002.
Hwee Tou Ng, Bin Wang, and Yee Seng Chan. Exploiting paral-
lel texts for word sense disambiguation: An empirical study.
In Proceedings of ACL-03, Sapporo, Japan, pages 455?462,
2003.
Franz Och and Hermann Ney. Discriminative training and max-
imum entropy models for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of ACL-02, Philadelphia, 2002.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computational Lin-
guistics, 29(1):19?52, 2003.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing
Zhu. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
Robert E. Schapire and Yoram Singer. BoosTexter: A boosting-
based system for text categorization. Machine Learning,
39(2):135?168, 2000.
Bernhard Scho?lkopf, Alexander Smola, and Klaus-Rober
Mu?ller. Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel eigenvalue
problem. Neural Computation, 10(5), 1998.
Dekai Wu and Hongsing Wong. Machine translation with a
stochastic grammatical channel. In Proceedings of COLING-
ACL?98, Montreal,Canada, August 1998.
Dekai Wu, Weifeng Su, and Marine Carpuat. A Kernel PCA
method for superior word sense disambiguation. In Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Barcelona, July 2004.
Dekai Wu. A polynomial-time algorithm for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of 34th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Santa Cruz, Cal-
ifornia, June 1996.
David Yarowsky and Radu Florian. Evaluating sense disam-
biguation across diverse parameter spaces. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 8(4):293?310, 2002.
Richard Zens, Hermann Ney, Taro Watanabe, and Eiichiro
Sumita. Reordering constraints for phrase-based statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of COLING-2004,
Geneva,Switzerland, August 2004.
394
