Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, pages 37?40,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Chinese Named Entity and Relation Identification System 
 
 
Tianfang Yao 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
Shanghai, 200030, China 
yao-tf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn 
Hans Uszkoreit 
Department of Computational Linguistics and 
Phonetics 
Saarland University 
Saarbr?cken, 66041, Germany 
uszkoreit@coli.uni-sb.de 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this interactive presentation, a Chinese 
named entity and relation identification 
system is demonstrated. The domain-
specific system has a three-stage pipeline 
architecture which includes word seg-
mentation and part-of-speech (POS) tag-
ging, named entity recognition, and 
named entity relation identitfication. The 
experimental results have shown that the 
average F-measure for word segmenta-
tion and POS tagging after correcting er-
rors achieves 92.86 and 90.01 separately. 
Moreover, the overall average F-measure 
for 6 kinds of name entities and 14 kinds 
of named entity relations is 83.08% and 
70.46% respectively. 
1 Introduction 
The investigation for Chinese information ex-
traction is one of the topics of the project COL-
LATE (DFKI, 2002) dedicated to building up the 
German Competence Center for Language Tech-
nology. The presented work aims at investigating 
automatic identification of Chinese named enti-
ties (NEs) and their relations in a specific domain.  
Information Extraction (IE) is an innovative 
language technology for accurately acquiring 
crucial information from documents. NE recog-
nition is a fundamental IE task, that detects some 
named constituents in sentences, for instance 
names of persons, places, organizations, dates, 
times, and so on. Based on NE recognition, the 
identification of Named Entity Relation (NER) 
can indicate the types of semantic relationships 
between identified NEs. e.g., relationships be-
tween person and employed organization; person 
and residing place; person and birthday; organi-
zation and seat, etc. The identified results for 
NEs and NERs can be provided as a resource for 
other application systems such as question-
answering system. Therefore, these two IE tasks 
are selected as our investigation emphases. 
Chinese has a very different structure from 
western languages. For example, it has a large 
character set involving more than 48,000 charac-
ters; there is no space between words in written 
texts; and Chinese words have fewer inflections, 
etc. In the past twenty years there have been sig-
nificant achievements in IE concerning western 
languages such as English. Comparing with that, 
the research on the relevant properties of Chinese 
for IE, especially for NER, is still insufficient. 
Our research focuses on domain-specific IE. 
We picked the sports domain, particularly, texts 
on soccer matches because the number and types 
of entities, relations and linguistic structures are 
representative for many applications. 
Based on the motivations above mentioned, 
our goals for the design and implementation of 
the prototype system called CHINERIS (Chinese 
Named Entity and Relation Identification System) 
are: 
? Establishing an IE computational model 
for Chinese web texts using hybrid tech-
nologies, which should to a great extent 
meet the requirements of IE for Chinese 
web texts; 
? Implementing a prototype system based 
on this IE computational model, which 
extracts information from Chinese web 
texts as accurately and quickly as possi-
ble; 
? Evaluating the performance of this sys-
tem in a specific domain. 
37
2 System Design 
In the model, the IE processing is divided into 
three stages: (i) word segmentation and part-of-
speech (POS) tagging; (ii) NE recognition; (iii) 
NER identification. Figure 1 demonstrates a Chi-
nese IE computational model comprised of these 
three stages. Each component in the system cor-
Figure 1. A three-s
responds to a stage. 
tage Chinese IE computa-
In general, the e first stage has 
co
e 
di
al., 2000). 
Th
ication performance for 
N
 defined a hierarchical tax-
on
mentation 
During the implementation, object-oriented de-
sign and programming methods are thoroughly 
tional model. 
 accuracy of th
nsiderable influence on the performance of the 
consequent two stages. It has been demonstrated 
by our experiments (Yao et al, 2002). In order to 
reduce unfavorable influence, we utilize a train-
able approach (Brill, 1995) to automatically gen-
erate effective rules, by which the first compo-
nent can repair different errors caused by word 
segmentation and POS tagging.  
At the second stage, there are two kinds of NE 
constructions to be processed (Yao et al, 2003). 
One is the NEs which involve trigger words; the 
other those without trigger words. For the former 
NEs, a shallow parsing mechanism, i.e., finite-
state cascades (FSC) (Abney, 1996) which are 
automatically constructed by sets of NE recogni-
tion rules, is adopted for reliably identifying dif-
ferent categories of NEs. For the latter NEs, 
however, some special strategies, such as the 
valence constraints of domain verbs, the con-
stituent analysis of NE candidates, the global 
context clues and the analysis for preposition 
objects etc., are designed for identifying them.  
After the recognition for NEs, NER identifica-
tion is performed in the last stage. Because of th
versity and complexity of NERs, at the same 
time, considering portability requirement in the 
identification, we suggest a novel supervised 
machine learning approach called positive and 
negative case-based learning (PNCBL) used in 
this stage (Yao and Uszkoreit, 2005).  
The learning in this approach is a variant of 
memory-based learning (Daelemans et 
e goal of that is to capture valuable informa-
tion from NER and non-NER patterns, which is 
implicated in different features. Because not all 
features we predefine are necessary for each 
NER or non-NER, we should select them by a 
reasonable measure mode. According to the se-
lection criterion we propose - self-similarity, 
which is a quantitative measure for the concen-
trative degree of the same kind of NERs or non-
NERs in the corresponding pattern library, the 
effective feature sets - General-Character Feature 
(GCF) sets for NERs and Individual-Character 
Feature (ICF) sets for non-NERs are built. More-
over, the GCF and ICF feature weighting serve 
as a proportion determination of feature?s degree 
of importance for identifying NERs against non-
NERs. Subsequently, identification thresholds 
can also be determined.  
Therefore, this approach pursues the im-
provement of the identif
ERs by simultaneously learning two opposite 
cases, automatically selecting effective multi-
level linguistic features from a predefined feature 
set for each NER and non-NER, and optimally 
making an identification tradeoff. Further, two 
other strategies, resolving relationship conflicts 
and inferring missing relationships, are also inte-
grated in this stage. 
Considering the actual requirements for do-
main knowledge, we
omy and constructed conceptual relationships 
among Object, Movement and Property concept 
categories under the taxonomy in a lexical sports 
ontology (Yao, 2005). Thus, this ontology can be 
used for the recognition of NEs with special con-
structions - without trigger words, the determina-
tion of NE boundaries, and the provision of fea-
ture values as well as the computation of the se-
mantic distance for two concepts during the iden-
tification of NERs. 
3 System Imple
Word Seg. and 
POS Tag. 
NE  
Recognition 
NER 
Identification 
Error Repair 
Resources 
Texts from Internet or Disk 
Word Seg. and 
POS Tag. 
Resources 
Texts with Word Seg. 
and POS Tags 
NER Identi-
fication  
Resources 
NE-Recognized Texts 
NE Recogni-
tion 
Resources
Lexical 
Ontology 
NER-Identified Texts 
38
used in the system development. In order to 
eriments for testing 
three components. Table 1 shows the experimen-
r f these compo-
avoid repeated development, we integrate other 
application system and resource, e.g., Modern 
Chinese Word Segmentation and POS Tagging 
System (Liu, 2000) and HowNet (Dong and 
Dong, 2000) into the system. Additionally, we 
utilize Prot?g?-2000 (version 1.9) (Stanford 
Medical Informatics, 2003) as a development 
environment for the implementation of lexical 
sports ontology. 
The prototype system CHINERIS has been 
implemented in Java. The system can automati-
cally identify 6 types of NEs1 and 14 types of 
NERs 2  in the sports domain. Furthermore, its 
run-time efficiency is acceptable and the system 
user interfaces are friendly. 
4 Testing and Evaluation 
We have finished three exp
tal esults for the performance o
nents.  
Stage Task (Total ) Ave. Rec. 
(Total) 
Ave. Pre. 
(Total) 
Ave. F-M
Word Seg. 95.08 90.74 92.86 
1st  
POS Tag. 92.39 87.75 90.01 
2nd N  E Ident. 83.38 82.79 83.08 
3rd  NER Ident. 78.50 63.92 70.46 
Table 1. Performance for the Sy  CHINERIS. 
In the first experiment, the training set consists 
of 94 texts including 3473 sentences collected 
                                                
stem
from the soccer matches of the Jie Fang Daily 
(http://www.jfdaily.com/) in 2001. During man-
ual error-correction, we adopted a double-person 
annotation method. After training, we obtain er-
ror repair rules. They can repair at least one error 
in the training corpus. The rules in the rule li-
brary are ranked according to the errors they cor-
rect. The testing set is a separate set that contains 
20 texts including 658 sentences. The texts in the 
 
entity identification which in-
cl
ing learning. They 
ha
1 Personal Name (PN); Date or Time (DT); Location Name 
(LN); Team Name (TN); Competition Title (CT); Personal 
Identity (PI). 
2 Person ? Team (PS_TM); Person ? Competition 
(PS_CP); Person ? City / Province / Country (PS_CPC); 
Person ? Identification (PS_ID); Home Team ? Visiting 
Team (HT_VT); Winning Team ? Losing Team (WT_LT); 
Draw Team ? Draw Team (DT_DT); Team ? Competi-
tion (TM_CP); Team ? City / Province / Country 
(TM_CPC); Identification ? Team (ID_TM); Competition 
? Date (CP_DA); Competition ? Time (CP_TI); Competi-
tion ? Location (CP_LOC); Location ? City / Province / 
Country (LOC_ CPC). 
testing set have been randomly chosen from the 
Jie Fang Daily from May 2002. In the testing, the 
usage of error repair rules with context con-
straints has priority over those without context 
constraints, and the usage of error repair rules for 
word segmentation has priority over those for 
POS tagging. Through experimental observation, 
this processing sequence can ensure that the rules 
repair many more errors. On the other hand, it 
can prevent new errors occurring during the re-
pair of existing errors. The results indicate that 
after the correction, the average F-measure of 
word segmentation has increased from 87.75 % 
to 92.86%; while that of POS tagging has even 
increased from 77.47% to 90.01%. That is to say, 
the performance of both processes has been dis-
tinctly enhanced. 
In the second experiment, we utilize the same 
testing set for the error repair component to 
check the named 
udes regular and special entity constructions. 
The rule sets provided for TN, CT, and PI recog-
nition have 35, 50, and 20 rules respectively. In 
lexical sports ontology, there are more than 350 
domain verbs used for the identification of TN 
with special constructions. Among six NEs, the 
average F-measure of DT, PI, and CT exceeds 
85%. Therefore, it specifies that the identifica-
tion performance of named entities after adding 
the special recognition strategies in this compo-
nent has reached a good level. 
In the third experiment, both pattern libraries 
are established in terms of the annotated texts 
and lexical sports ontology dur
ve 142 (534 NERs) and 98 (572 non-NERs) 
sentence groups respectively. To test the per-
formance of our approach, we randomly choose 
32 sentence groups from the Jie Fang Daily in 
2002 (these sentence groups are out of either 
NER or non-NER pattern library), which em-
body 117 different NER candidates. Table 1 
shows the total average recall, precision, and F-
measure for 14 different NERs by positive and 
negative case-based learning and identification. 
Among 14 types of NERs, the highest total aver-
age F-measure is 95.65 from the relation 
LOC_CPC and the lowest total average F-
measure is 34.09 from TM_CPC. The total aver-
age F-measure is 70.46. In addition, we also 
compared the performance between the total av-
erage recall, precision, and F-measure for all 
NERs only by positive and by positive and nega-
tive case-based learning and identification sepa-
rately. It shows the total average F-measure is 
enhanced from 63.61% to 70.46% as a whole, 
39
due to the adoption of both positive and negative 
cases.  
From the result, we also realize that the selec-
tion of relation features is critical. First, they 
should be selected from multiple linguistic levels, 
e.g
 
ap effective for Chinese named 
y cation in sports domain. 
wo
constraint 
sy
 
sit
Es, identi-
fic
 successful for the sample ap-
pl
 is a part of the COLLATE project un-
01B, which is supported 
ry for Education and Re-
search. 
g Workshop, pages 8-15. Prague, Czech Re-
 Transformation-Based Error-Driven 
W ans, A. Bosch, J. Zavrel, K. Van der Sloot, 
Netherlands. 
DF
Z. wNet. 
K.
T. . Ding, and G. Erbach. 2002. Correcting 
29-36. 
T. 
), 
T.
., morphology, syntax and semantics. Second, 
they should also embody the crucial information 
of Chinese language processing, such as word 
order, the context of words, and particles etc. 
Moreover, the proposed self-similarity is a rea-
sonable measure for selecting GCF and ICF for 
NERs and non-NERs identification respectively. 
5 Conclusion 
This three-stage IE prototype system CHINERIS
is propriate and 
entit  and relation identifi
In the first component, it is a beneficial explo-
ration to develop an error repairer which simul-
taneously enhances the performance of Chinese 
rd segmentation and POS tagging.  
In the second component, we theoretically ex-
tend the original definition of Finite State Auto-
mata (FSA), that is, we use complex 
mbols rather than atomic constraint symbols. 
With this extension, we improve the practicabil-
ity for the FSC mechanism. At the same time, the 
new issue for automatically constructing FSC 
also increases the flexibility of its maintenance. 
In order to improve the NE identification per-
formance, some special strategies for the identi-
fication of NEs without trigger words are added 
in this stage, which cannot be recognized by FSC.
In the third component, automatically select-
ing effectual multi-level linguistic features for 
each NER and non-NER and learning two oppo-
e types of cases simultaneously are two inno-
vative points in the PNCBL approach. 
The lexical sports ontology plays an important 
role in the identification of NEs and NERs, such 
as determination of the boundary of N
ation for NE with special constructons and 
calculation of similarity for the features (e.g. se-
mantic distance). 
The experimental results for the three compo-
nents in the prototype system show that the sys-
tem CHINERIS is
ication. 
Acknowledgement 
This work
der contract no. 01INA
by the German Minist
References 
S. Abney. 1996. Partial Parsing via Finite-State Cas-
cades. In Proceedings of the ESSLLI ?96 Robust 
Parsin
public. 
E. Brill. 1995.
Learning and Natural Language  Processing: A 
Case Study in Part of Speech Tagging. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 21(4): 543-565.  
. Daelem
and A. Vanden Bosch. 2000. TiMBL: Tilburg 
Memory Based Learner, Version 3.0, Reference 
Guide. Technical Report ILK-00-01, ILK, Tilburg 
University. Tilburg, The 
http://ilk.kub.nl/~ilk/papers/ilk0001.ps.gz. 
KI. 2002. COLLATE: Computational Linguistics 
and Language Technology for Real Life Applica-
tions. DFKI, Saarbr?cken, Germany. 
http://collate.dfki. de/. 
 Dong and Q. Dong. 2000. Ho
http://www.keenage.com/zhiwang/e_zhiwang.html. 
 Liu. 2000. Automatic Segmentation and Tagging 
for Chinese Text. The Commercial Press. Beijing, 
China. 
Stanford Medical Informatics. 2003. The Prot?g? On-
tology Editor and Knowledge Acquisition System. 
The School of Medicine, Stanford University. 
Stanford, USA. http://protege.stanford.edu/. 
 Yao, W
Word Segmentation and Part-of-Speech Tagging 
Errors for Chinese Named Entity Recognition. In G. 
Hommel and H. Sheng, editors, The Internet Chal-
lenge: Technology and Applications, pages 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. The Netherlands. 
Yao, W. Ding and G. Erbach. 2003. CHINERS: A 
Chinese Named Entity Recognition System for the 
Sports Domain. In: Proc. of the Second SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (ACL 
2003 Workshop), pages 55-62. Sapporo, Japan.  
T. Yao and H. Uszkoreit. 2005. A Novel Machine 
Learning Approach for the Identification of Named 
Entity Relations. In: Proc. of the Workshop on Fea-
ture Engineering for Machine Learning in Natural 
Language Processing (ACL 2005 Workshop
pages 1-8. Michigan, USA. 
 Yao. 2005. A Lexical Ontology for Chinese Infor-
mation Extraction. In M. Sun and Q. Chen, editors, 
Proc. of the 8th National Joint Symposium on 
Computational Linguistics (JSCL-2005), pages 
241-246. Nanjing, China. 
40
