Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 849?856,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discovering asymmetric entailment relations between verbs
using selectional preferences
Fabio Massimo Zanzotto
DISCo
University of Milano-Bicocca
Via Bicocca degli Arcimboldi 8, Milano, Italy
zanzotto@disco.unimib.it
Marco Pennacchiotti, Maria Teresa Pazienza
ART Group - DISP
University of Rome ?Tor Vergata?
Viale del Politecnico 1, Roma, Italy
{pennacchiotti, pazienza}@info.uniroma2.it
Abstract
In this paper we investigate a novel
method to detect asymmetric entailment
relations between verbs. Our starting point
is the idea that some point-wise verb selec-
tional preferences carry relevant seman-
tic information. Experiments using Word-
Net as a gold standard show promising re-
sults. Where applicable, our method, used
in combination with other approaches, sig-
nificantly increases the performance of en-
tailment detection. A combined approach
including our model improves the AROC
of 5% absolute points with respect to stan-
dard models.
1 Introduction
Natural Language Processing applications often
need to rely on large amount of lexical semantic
knowledge to achieve good performances. Asym-
metric verb relations are part of it. Consider for
example the question ?What college did Marcus
Camby play for??. A question answering (QA)
system could find the answer in the snippet ?Mar-
cus Camby won for Massachusetts? as the ques-
tion verb play is related to the verb win. The vice-
versa is not true. If the question is ?What college
did Marcus Camby won for??, the snippet ?Mar-
cus Camby played for Massachusetts? cannot be
used. Winnig entails playing but not vice-versa, as
the relation between win and play is asymmetric.
Recently, many automatically built verb lexical-
semantic resources have been proposed to sup-
port lexical inferences, such as (Resnik and Diab,
2000; Lin and Pantel, 2001; Glickman and Dagan,
2003). All these resources focus on symmetric
semantic relations, such as verb similarity. Yet,
not enough attention has been paid so far to the
study of asymmetric verb relations, that are often
the only way to produce correct inferences, as the
example above shows.
In this paper we propose a novel approach to
identify asymmetric relations between verbs. The
main idea is that asymmetric entailment relations
between verbs can be analysed in the context of
class-level and word-level selectional preferences
(Resnik, 1993). Selectional preferences indicate
an entailment relation between a verb and its ar-
guments. For example, the selectional preference
{human} win may be read as a smooth constraint:
if x is the subject of win then it is likely that x
is a human, i.e. win(x) ? human(x). It fol-
lows that selectional preferences like {player} win
may be read as suggesting the entailment relation
win(x) ? play(x).
Selectional preferences have been often used to
infer semantic relations among verbs and to build
symmetric semantic resources as in (Resnik and
Diab, 2000; Lin and Pantel, 2001; Glickman and
Dagan, 2003). However, in those cases these are
exploited in a different way. The assumption is
that verbs are semantically related if they share
similar selectional preferences. Then, according
to the Distributional Hypothesis (Harris, 1964),
verbs occurring in similar sentences are likely to
be semantically related.
The Distributional Hypothesis suggests a
generic equivalence between words. Related
methods can then only discover symmetric rela-
tions. These methods can incidentally find verb
pairs as (win,play) where an asymmetric entail-
ment relation holds, but they cannot state the di-
rection of entailment (e.g., win?play).
As we investigate the idea that a single rel-
evant verb selectional preference (as {player}
849
win) could produce an entailment relation between
verbs, our starting point can not be the Distribu-
tional Hypothesis. Our assumption is that some
point-wise assertions carry relevant semantic in-
formation (as in (Robison, 1970)). We do not de-
rive a semantic relation between verbs by compar-
ing their selectional preferences, but we use point-
wise corpus-induced selectional preferences.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
In Sec. 2 we discuss the intuition behind our re-
search. In Sec. 3 we describe different types of
verb entailment. In Sec. 4 we introduce our model
for detecting entailment relations among verbs . In
Sec. 5 we review related works that are used both
for comparison and for building combined meth-
ods. Finally, in Sec. 6 we present the results of our
experiments.
2 Selectional Preferences and Verb
Entailment
Selectional restrictions are strictly related to en-
tailment. When a verb or a noun expects a modi-
fier having a predefined property it means that the
truth value of the related sentences strongly de-
pends on the satisfiability of these expectations.
For example, ?X is blue? implies the expectation
that X has a colour. This expectation may be seen
as a sort of entailment between ?being a modi-
fier of that verb or noun? and ?having a property?.
If the sentence is ?The number three is blue?,
then the sentence is false as the underlying entail-
ment blue(x) ? has colour(x) does not hold (cf.
(Resnik, 1993)). In particular, this rule applies to
verb logical subjects: if a verb v has a selectional
restriction requiring its logical subjects to satisfy a
property c, it follows that the implication:
v(x) ? c(x)
should be verified for each logical subject x of the
verb v. The implication can also be read as: if x
has the property of doing the action v this implies
that x has the property c. For example, if the verb
is to eat, the selectional restrictions of to eat would
imply that its subjects have the property of being
animate.
Resnik (1993) introduced a smoothed version
of selectional restrictions called selectional pref-
erences. These preferences describe the desired
properties a modifier should have. The claim is
that if a selectional preference holds, it is more
probable that x has the property c given that it
modifies v rather than x has this property in the
general case, i.e.:
p(c(x)|v(x)) > p(c(x)) (1)
The probabilistic setting of selectional prefer-
ences also suggests an entailment: the implica-
tion v(x) ? c(x) holds with a given degree of
certainty. This definition is strictly related to the
probabilistic textual entailment setting in (Glick-
man et al, 2005).
We can use selectional preferences, intended
as probabilistic entailment rules, to induce entail-
ment relations among verbs. In our case, if a verb
vt expects that the subject ?has the property of do-
ing an action vh?, this may be used to induce that
the verb vt probably entails the verb vh, i.e.:
vt(x) ? vh(x) (2)
As for class-based selectional preference ac-
quisition, corpora can be used to estimate
these particular kinds of preferences. For ex-
ample, the sentence ?John McEnroe won the
match...? contributes to probability estimation of
the class-based selectional preference win(x) ?
human(x) (since John McEnroe is a human). In
particular contexts, it contributes also to the induc-
tion of the entailment relation between win and
play, as John McEnroe has the property of play-
ing. However, as the example shows, classes rele-
vant for acquiring selectional preferences (such as
human) are explicit, as they do not depend from
the context. On the contrary, properties such as
?having the property of doing an action? are less
explicit, as they depend more strongly on the con-
text of sentences. Thus, properties useful to derive
entailment relations among verbs are more diffi-
cult to find. For example, it is easier to derive that
John McEnroe is a human (as it is a stable prop-
erty) than that he has the property of playing. In-
deed, this latter property may be relevant only in
the context of the previous sentence.
However, there is a way to overcome this lim-
itation: agentive nouns such as runner make ex-
plicit this kind of property and often play subject
roles in sentences. Agentive nouns usually denote
the ?doer? or ?performer? of some action. This is
exactly what is needed to make clearer the relevant
property vh(x) of the noun playing the logical sub-
ject role. The action vh will be the one entailed by
the verb vt heading the sentence. As an example
in the sentence ?the player wins?, the action play
850
evocated by the agentive noun player is entailed
by win.
3 Verb entailment: a classification
The focus of our study is on verb entailment. A
brief review of the WordNet (Miller, 1995) verb
hierarchy (one of the main existing resources on
verb entailment relations) is useful to better ex-
plain the problem and to better understand the ap-
plicability of our hypothesis.
In WordNet, verbs are organized in synonymy
sets (synsets) and different kinds of seman-
tic relations can hold between two verbs (i.e.
two synsets): troponymy, causation, backward-
presupposition, and temporal inclusion. All these
relations are intended as specific types of lexical
entailment. According to the definition in (Miller,
1995) lexical entailment holds between two verbs
vt and vh when the sentence Someone vt entails
the sentence Someone vh (e.g. ?Someone wins?
entails ?Someone plays?). Lexical entailment is
then an asymmetric relation. The four types of
WordNet lexical entailment can be classified look-
ing at the temporal relation between the entailing
verb vt and the entailed verb vh.
Troponymy represents the hyponymy relation
between verbs. It stands when vt and vh are tem-
porally co-extensive, that is, when the actions de-
scribed by vt and vh begin and end at the same
times (e.g. limp?walk). The relation of temporal
inclusion captures those entailment pairs in which
the action of one verb is temporally included in the
action of the other (e.g. snore?sleep). Backward-
presupposition stands when the entailed verb vh
happens before the entailing verb vt and it is nec-
essary for vt. For example, win entails play via
backward-presupposition as it temporally follows
and presupposes play. Finally, in causation the
entailing verb vt necessarily causes vh. In this
case, the temporal relation is thus inverted with
respect to backward-presupposition, since vt pre-
cedes vh. In causation, vt is always a causative
verb of change, while vh is a resultative stative
verb (e.g. buy?own, and give?have).
As a final note, it is interesting to notice that the
Subject-Verb structure of vt is generally preserved
in vh for all forms of lexical entailment. The two
verbs have the same subject. The only exception is
causation: in this case the subject of the entailed
verb vh is usually the object of vt (e.g., X give Y
? Y have). In most cases the subject of vt carries
out an action that changes the state of the object of
vt, that is then described by vh.
The intuition described in Sec. 2 is then applica-
ble only for some kinds of verb entailments. First,
the causation relation can not be captured since
the two verbs should have the same subject (cf.
eq. (2)). Secondly, troponymy seems to be less
interesting than the other relations, since our fo-
cus is more on a logic type of entailment (i.e., vt
and vh express two different actions one depend-
ing from the other). We then focus our study and
our experiments on backward-presupposition and
temporal inclusion. These two relations are orga-
nized in WordNet in a single set (called ent) parted
from troponymy and causation pairs.
4 The method
Our method needs two steps. Firstly (Sec. 4.1),
we translate the verb selectional expectations
in specific Subject-Verb lexico-syntactic patterns
P(vt, vh). Secondly (Sec. 4.2), we define a statis-
tical measure S(vt, vh) that captures the verb pref-
erences. This measure describes how much the re-
lations between target verbs (vt, vh) are stable and
commonly agreed.
Our method to detect verb entailment relations
is based on the idea that some point-wise asser-
tions carry relevant semantic information. This
idea has been firstly used in (Robison, 1970) and
it has been explored for extracting semantic re-
lations between nouns in (Hearst, 1992), where
lexico-syntactic patterns are induced by corpora.
More recently this method has been applied for
structuring terminology in isa hierarchies (Morin,
1999) and for learning question-answering pat-
terns (Ravichandran and Hovy, 2002).
4.1 Nominalized textual entailment
lexico-syntactic patterns
The idea described in Sec. 2 can be applied to
generate Subject-Verb textual entailment lexico-
syntactic patterns. It often happens that verbs can
undergo an agentive nominalization, e.g., play vs.
player. The overall procedure to verify if an entail-
ment between two verbs (vt, vh) holds in a point-
wise assertion is: whenever it is possible to ap-
ply the agentive nominalization to the hypothesis
vh, scan the corpus to detect those expressions in
which the agentified hypothesis verb is the subject
of a clause governed by the text verb vt.
Given a verb pair (vt, vh) the assertion is for-
851
Lexico-syntactic patterns
nominalization
Pnom(vt, vh) = {?agent(vh)|num:sing vt|person:third,t:pres?,
?agent(vh)|num:plur vt|person:nothird,t:pres?,
?agent(vh)|num:sing vt|t:past?,
?agent(vh)|num:plur vt|t:past?}
happens-before
(Chklovski and Pantel, 2004)
Phb(vt, vh) = {?vh|t:inf and then vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:inf * and then vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:past and then vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:past * and then vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:inf and later vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:past and later vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:inf and subsequently vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:past and subsequently vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:inf and eventually vt|t:pres?,
?vh|t:past and eventually vt|t:pres?}
probabilistic entailment
(Glickman et al, 2005)
Ppe(vt, vh) = {?vh|person:third,t:pres? ? ?vt|person:third,t:pres?,
?vh|t:past? ? ?vt|t:past?,
?vh|t:pres cont? ? ?vt|t:pres cont?,
?vh|person:nothird,t:pres? ? ?vt|person:nothird,t:pres?}
additional sets
Fagent(v) = {?agent(v)|num:sing?, ?agent(v)|num:plur?}
F(v) = {?v|person:third,t:present?,
?v|person:nothird,t:present?, ?v|t:past?}
Fall(v) = {?v|person:third,t:pres?, ?v|t:pres cont,
?v|person:nothird,t:present?, ?v|t:past?}
Table 1: Nominalization and related textual entailment lexico-syntactic patterns
malized in a set of textual entailment lexico-
syntactic patterns, that we call nominalized pat-
terns Pnom(vt, vh). This set is described in Tab. 1.
agent(v) is the noun deriving from the agentifi-
cation of the verb v. Elements such as l|f1,...,fN
are the tokens generated from lemmas l by ap-
plying constraints expressed via the feature-value
pairs f1, ..., fN . For example, in the case of the
verbs play and win, the related set of textual en-
tailment expressions derived from the patterns are
Pnom(win, play) = {?player wins?, ?players
win?, ?player won?, ?players won?}. In the ex-
periments hereafter described, the required verbal
forms have been obtained using the publicly avail-
able morphological tools described in (Minnen et
al., 2001). Simple heuristics have been used to
produce the agentive nominalizations of verbs1.
Two more sets of expressions, Fagent(v) and
F(v) representing the single events in the pair,
are needed for the second step (Sec. 4.2).
This two additional sets are described in
Tab. 1. In the example, the derived expressions
are Fagent(play) = {?player?,?players?} and
F(win) = {?wins?,?won?}.
4.2 Measures to estimate the entailment
strength
The above textual entailment patterns define point-
wise entailment assertions. If pattern instances are
found in texts, the related verb-subject pairs sug-
gest but not confirm a verb selectional preference.
1Agentive nominalization has been obtained adding ?-er?
to the verb root taking into account possible special cases
such as verbs ending in ?-y?. A form is retained as a correct
nominalization if it is in WordNet.
The related entailment can not be considered com-
monly agreed. For example, the sentence ?Like a
writer composes a story, an artist must tell a good
story through their work.? suggests that compose
entails write. However, it may happen that these
correctly detected entailments are accidental, that
is, the detected relation is only valid for the given
text. For example, if the text fragment ?The writ-
ers take a simple idea and apply it to this task?
is taken in isolation, it suggests that take entails
write, but this could be questionable.
In order to get rid of these wrong verb pairs,
we perform a statistical analysis of the verb selec-
tional preferences over a corpus. This assessment
will validate point-wise entailment assertions.
Before introducing the statistical entailment in-
dicator, we provide some definitions. Given a cor-
pus C containing samples, we will refer to the ab-
solute frequency of a textual expression t in the
corpus C with fC(t). The definition can be easily
extended to a set of expressions T .
Given a pair vt and vh we define the fol-
lowing entailment strength indicator S(vt, vh).
Specifically, the measure Snom(vt, vh) is derived
from point-wise mutual information (Church and
Hanks, 1989):
Snom(vt, vh) = log
p(vt, vh|nom)
p(vt)p(vh|pers)
(3)
where nom is the event of having a nominalized
textual entailment pattern and pers is the event of
having an agentive nominalization of verbs. Prob-
abilities are estimated using maximum-likelihood:
p(vt, vh|nom) ?
fC(Pnom(vt, vh))
fC(
?
Pnom(v?t, v
?
h))
,
852
p(vt) ? fC(F(vt))/fC(
?
F(v)), and
p(vh|pers) ? fC(Fagent(vh))/fC(
?
Fagent(v)).
Counts are considered useful when they are
greater or equal to 3.
The measure Snom(vt, vh) indicates the relat-
edness between two elements composing a pair,
in line with (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004; Glick-
man et al, 2005) (see Sec. 5). Moreover, if
Snom(vt, vh) > 0 the verb selectional preference
property described in eq. (1) is satisfied.
5 Related ?non-distributional? methods
and integrated approaches
Our method is a ?non-distributional? approach for
detecting semantic relations between verbs. We
are interested in comparing and integrating our
method with similar approaches. We focus on two
methods proposed in (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004)
and (Glickman et al, 2005). We will shortly re-
view these approaches in light of what introduced
in the previous sections. We also present a simple
way to combine these different approaches.
The lexico-syntactic patterns introduced in
(Chklovski and Pantel, 2004) have been devel-
oped to detect six kinds of verb relations: similar-
ity, strength, antonymy, enablement, and happens-
before. Even if, as discussed in (Chklovski and
Pantel, 2004), these patterns are not specifically
defined as entailment detectors, they can be use-
ful for this purpose. In particular, some of these
patterns can be used to investigate the backward-
presupposition entailment. Verb pairs related by
backward-presupposition are not completely tem-
porally included one in the other (cf. Sec. 3):
the entailed verb vh precedes the entailing verb
vt. One set of lexical patterns in (Chklovski and
Pantel, 2004) seems to capture the same idea: the
happens-before (hb) patterns. These patterns are
used to detect not temporally overlapping verbs,
whose relation is semantically very similar to en-
tailment. As we will see in the experimental sec-
tion (Sec. 6), these patterns show a positive re-
lation with the entailment relation. Tab. 1 re-
ports the happens-before lexico-syntactic patterns
(Phb) as proposed in (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004).
In contrast to what is done in (Chklovski and
Pantel, 2004) we decided to directly count pat-
terns derived from different verbal forms and not
to use an estimation factor. As in our work,
also in (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004), a mutual-
information-related measure is used as statistical
indicator. The two methods are then fairly in line.
The other approach we experiment is the
?quasi-pattern? used in (Glickman et al, 2005) to
capture lexical entailment between two sentences.
The pattern has to be discussed in the more gen-
eral setting of the probabilistic entailment between
texts: the text T and the hypothesis H . The idea is
that the implication T ? H holds (with a degree
of truth) if the probability that H holds knowing
that T holds is higher that the probability that H
holds alone, i.e.:
p(H|T ) > p(H) (4)
This equation is similar to equation (1) in Sec. 2.
In (Glickman et al, 2005), words in H and T are
supposed to be mutually independent. The previ-
ous relation between H and T probabilities then
holds also for word pairs. A special case can be
applied to verb pairs:
p(vh|vt) > p(vh) (5)
Equation (5) can be interpreted as the result of
the following ?quasi-pattern?: the verbs vh and
vt should co-occur in the same document. It is
possible to formalize this idea in the probabilistic
entailment ?quasi-patterns? reported in Tab. 1 as
Ppe, where verb form variability is taken into con-
sideration. In (Glickman et al, 2005) point-wise
mutual information is also a relevant statistical in-
dicator for entailment, as it is strictly related to eq.
(5).
For both approaches, the strength indicator
Shb(vt, vh) and Spe(vt, vh) are computed as fol-
lows:
Sy(vt, vh) = log
p(vt, vh|y)
p(vt)p(vh)
(6)
where y is hb for the happens-before patterns and
pe for the probabilistic entailment patterns. Prob-
abilities are estimated as in the previous section.
Considering independent the probability spaces
where the three patterns lay (i.e., the space of
subject-verb pairs for nom, the space of coordi-
nated sentences for hb, and the space of docu-
ments for pe), the combined approaches are ob-
tained summing up Snom, Shb, and Spe. We will
then experiment with these combined approaches:
nom+pe, nom+hb, nom+hb+pe, and hb+pe.
6 Experimental Evaluation
The aim of the experimental evaluation is to es-
tablish if the nominalized pattern is useful to help
853
00.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Se(t)
1? Sp(t)
(a)
nom
hb
pe
hb + pe
hb + pe + nom
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Se(t)
1? Sp(t)
(b)
hb
hb + pe
hb + pe + n
hb + pe + n
Figure 1: ROC curves of the different methods
in detecting verb entailment. We experiment with
the method by itself or in combination with other
sets of patterns. We are then interested only in
verb pairs where the nominalized pattern is ap-
plicable. The best pattern or the best combined
method should be the one that gives the highest
values of S to verb pairs in entailment relation,
and the lowest value to other pairs.
We need a corpus C over which to estimate
probabilities, and two dataset, one of verb entail-
ment pairs, the True Set (TS), and another with
verbs not in entailment, the Control Set (CS). We
use the web as corpus C where to estimate Smi
and GoogleTM as a count estimator. The web has
been largely employed as a corpus (e.g., (Turney,
2001)). The findings described in (Keller and La-
pata, 2003) suggest that the count estimations we
need in our study over Subject-Verb bigrams are
highly correlated to corpus counts.
6.1 Experimental settings
Since we have a predefined (but not exhaustive)
set of verb pairs in entailment, i.e. ent in Word-
Net, we cannot replicate a natural distribution of
verb pairs that are or are not in entailment. Re-
call and precision lose sense. Then, the best way
to compare the patterns is to use the ROC curve
(Green and Swets, 1996) mixing sensitivity and
specificity. ROC analysis provides a natural means
to check and estimate how a statistical measure
is able to distinguish positive examples, the True
Set (TS), and negative examples, the Control Set
(CS). Given a threshold t, Se(t) is the probability
of a candidate pair (vh, vt) to belong to True Set if
the test is positive, while Sp(t) is the probability
of belonging to ControlSet if the test is negative,
i.e.:
Se(t) = p((vh, vt) ? TS|S(vh, vt) > t)
Sp(t) = p((vh, vt) ? CS|S(vh, vt) < t)
The ROC curve (Se(t) vs. 1 ? Sp(t)) natu-
rally follows (see Fig. 1). Better methods will
have ROC curves more similar to the step func-
tion f(1 ? Sp(t)) = 0 when 1 ? Sp(t) = 0 and
f(1? Sp(t)) = 1 when 0 < 1? Sp(t) ? 1.
The ROC analysis provides another useful eval-
uation tool: the AROC, i.e. the total area under
the ROC curve. Statistically, AROC represents
the probability that the method in evaluation will
rank a chosen positive example higher than a ran-
domly chosen negative instance. AROC is usually
used to better compare two methods that have sim-
ilar ROC curves. Better methods will have higher
AROCs.
As True Set (TS) we use the controlled verb en-
tailment pairs ent contained in WordNet. As de-
scribed in Sec. 3, the entailment relation is a se-
mantic relation defined at the synset level, stand-
ing in the verb sub-hierarchy. That is, each pair
of synsets (St, Sh) is an oriented entailment rela-
tion between St and Sh. WordNet contains 409
entailed synsets. These entailment relations are
consequently stated also at the lexical level. The
pair (St, Sh) naturally implies that vt entails vh
for each possible vt ? St and vh ? Sh. It is pos-
sible to derive from the 409 entailment synset a
test set of 2,233 verb pairs. As Control Set we
use two sets: random and ent. The random set
854
is randomly generated using verb in ent, taking
care of avoiding to capture pairs in entailment re-
lation. A pair is considered a control pair if it is
not in the True Set (the intersection between the
True Set and the Control Set is empty). The ent is
the set of pairs in ent with pairs in the reverse or-
der. These two Control Sets will give two possible
ways of evaluating the methods: a general and a
more complex task.
As a pre-processing step, we have to clean the
two sets from pairs in which the hypotheses can
not be nominalized, as our pattern Pnom is appli-
cable only in these cases. The pre-processing step
retains 1,323 entailment verb pairs. For compara-
tive purposes the random Control Set is kept with
the same cardinality of the True Set (in all, 1400
verb pairs).
S is then evaluated for each pattern over the
True Set and the Control Set, using equation (3)
for Pnom, and equation (6) for Ppe and Phb. The
best pattern or combined method is the one that
is able to most neatly split entailment pairs from
random pairs. That is, it should in average assign
higher S values to pairs in the True Set.
6.2 Results and analysis
In the first experiment we compared the perfor-
mances of the methods in dividing the ent test set
and the random control set. The compared meth-
ods are: (1) the set of patterns taken alone, i.e.
nom, hb, and pe; (2) some combined methods,
i.e. nom + pe, hb + pe, and nom + hb + pe. Re-
sults of this first experiment are reported in Tab. 2
and Fig. 1.(a). As Figure 1.(a) shows, our nom-
inalization pattern Pnom performs better than the
others. Only Phb seems to outperform nominal-
ization in some point of the ROC curve, where
Pnom presents a slight concavity, maybe due to a
consistent overlap between positive and negative
examples at specific values of the S threshold t.
In order to understand which of the two patterns
has the best discrimination power a comparison of
the AROC values is needed. As Table 2 shows,
Pnom has the best AROC value (59.94%) indi-
cating a more interesting behaviour with respect
to Phb and Ppe. It is respectively 2 and 3 abso-
lute percent point higher. Moreover, the combi-
nations nom + hb + pe and nom + pe that in-
cludes the Pnom pattern have a very high perfor-
mance considering the difficulty of the task, i.e.
66% and 64%. If compared with the combina-
AROC best accuracy
hb 56.00 57.11
pe 57.00 55.75
nom 59.94 59.86
nom+ pe 64.40 61.33
hb+ pe 61.44 58.98
hb+ nom+ pe 66.44 63.09
hb 61.64 62.73
hb+ pe 69.03 64.71
hb+ nom+ pe 70.82 66.07
Table 2: Performances in the general case: ent vs.
random
AROC best accuracy
hb 43.82 50.11
nom 54.91 54.94
hb 56.18 57.16
hb+ nom 49.35 51.73
hb+ nom 57.67 57.22
Table 3: Performances in the complex case: ent
vs. ent
tion hb+pe that excludes the Pnom pattern (61%),
the improvement in the AROC is of 5% and 3%.
Moreover, the shape of the nom + hb + pe ROC
curve in Fig. 1.(a) is above all the other in all the
points.
In the second experiment we compared methods
in the more complex task of dividing the ent set
from the ent set. In this case methods are asked
to determine if win ? play is a correct entail-
ment and play ? win is not. Results of these set
of experiments is presented in Tab. 3. The nom-
inalized pattern nom preserves its discriminative
power. Its AROC is over the chance line even
if, as expected, it is worse than the one obtained
in the general case. Surprisingly, the happens-
before (hb) set of patterns seems to be not cor-
related the entailment relation. The temporal re-
lation vh-happens-before-vt does not seem to be
captured by those patterns. But, if this evidence is
seen in a positive way, it seems that the patterns
are better capturing the entailment when used in
the reversed way (hb). This is confirmed by its
AROC value. If we observe for example one of
the implications in the True Set, reach ? go what
is happening may become clearer. Sample sen-
tences respectively for the hb case and the hb case
are ?The group therefore elected to go to Tyso and
then reach Anskaven? and ?striving to reach per-
sonal goals and then go beyond them?. It seems
that in the second case then assumes an enabling
role more than only a temporal role. After this sur-
855
prising result, as we expected, in this experiment
even the combined approach hb + nom behaves
better than hb + nom and better than hb, respec-
tively around 8% and 1.5% absolute points higher
(see Tab. 3).
The above results imposed the running of a third
experiment over the general case. We need to
compare the entailment indicators derived exploit-
ing the new use of hb, i.e. hb, with respect to the
methods used in the first experiment. Results are
reported in Tab. 2 and Fig. 1.(b). As Fig. 1.(b)
shows, the hb has a very interesting behaviour for
small values of 1 ? Sp(t). In this area it be-
haves extremely better than the combined method
nom+hb+pe. This is an advantage and the com-
bined method nom+hb+pe exploit it as both the
AROC and the shape of the ROC curve demon-
strate. Again the method nom + hb + pe that in-
cludes the Pnom pattern has 1,5% absolute points
with respect to the combined method hb + pe that
does not include this information.
7 Conclusions
In this paper we presented a method to discover
asymmetric entailment relations between verbs
and we empirically demonstrated interesting im-
provements when used in combination with simi-
lar approaches. The method is promising and there
is still some space for improvements. As implic-
itly experimented in (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004),
some beneficial effect can be obtained combining
these ?non-distributional? methods with the meth-
ods based on the Distributional Hypothesis.
References
Timoty Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. VerbO-
CEAN: Mining the web for fine-grained semantic
verb relations. In Proceedings of the 2004 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, Barcellona, Spain.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1989. Word
association norms, mutual information and lexicog-
raphy. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), Vancouver, Canada.
Oren Glickman and Ido Dagan. 2003. Identifying lex-
ical paraphrases from a single corpus: A case study
for verbs. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference Recent Advances of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (RANLP-2003), Borovets, Bulgaria.
Oren Glickman, Ido Dagan, and Moshe Koppel. 2005.
Web based probabilistic textual entailment. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Pascal Challenge Workshop,
Southampton, UK.
David M. Green and John A. Swets. 1996. Signal De-
tection Theory and Psychophysics. John Wiley and
Sons, New York, USA.
Zellig Harris. 1964. Distributional structure. In Jer-
rold J. Katz and Jerry A. Fodor, editors, The Philos-
ophy of Linguistics, New York. Oxford University
Press.
Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (CoLing-92), Nantes, France.
Frank Keller and Mirella Lapata. 2003. Using the web
to obtain frequencies for unseen bigrams. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(3), September.
Dekan Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT-discovery
of inference rules from text. In Proc. of the ACM
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing (KDD-01), San Francisco, CA.
George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical
database for English. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39?41, November.
Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.
Applied morphological processing of english. Nat-
ural Language Engineering, 7(3):207?223.
Emmanuel Morin. 1999. Extraction de liens
se?mantiques entre termes a` partir de corpus de
textes techniques. Ph.D. thesis, Univesite? de Nantes,
Faculte? des Sciences et de Techniques.
Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learn-
ing surface text patterns for a question answering
system. In Proceedings of the 40th ACL Meeting,
Philadelphia, Pennsilvania.
Philip Resnik and Mona Diab. 2000. Measuring verb
similarity. In Twenty Second Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (COGSCI2000), Philadel-
phia.
Philip Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information:
A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships.
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer and Informa-
tion Science, University of Pennsylvania.
Harold R. Robison. 1970. Computer-detectable se-
mantic structures. Information Storage and Re-
trieval, 6(3):273?288.
Peter D. Turney. 2001. Mining the web for synonyms:
Pmi-ir versus lsa on toefl. In Proc. of the 12th Eu-
ropean Conference on Machine Learning, Freiburg,
Germany.
856
