Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 827?834,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Infrastructure for standardization of Asian language resources
Tokunaga Takenobu
Tokyo Inst. of Tech.
Virach Sornlertlamvanich
TCL, NICT
Thatsanee Charoenporn
TCL, NICT
Nicoletta Calzolari
ILC/CNR
Monica Monachini
ILC/CNR
Claudia Soria
ILC/CNR
Chu-Ren Huang
Academia Sinica
Xia YingJu
Fujitsu R&D Center
Yu Hao
Fujitsu R&D Center
Laurent Prevot
Academia Sinica
Shirai Kiyoaki
JAIST
Abstract
As an area of great linguistic and cul-
tural diversity, Asian language resources
have received much less attention than
their western counterparts. Creating a
common standard for Asian language re-
sources that is compatible with an interna-
tional standard has at least three strong ad-
vantages: to increase the competitive edge
of Asian countries, to bring Asian coun-
tries to closer to their western counter-
parts, and to bring more cohesion among
Asian countries. To achieve this goal, we
have launched a two year project to create
a common standard for Asian language re-
sources. The project is comprised of four
research items, (1) building a description
framework of lexical entries, (2) building
sample lexicons, (3) building an upper-
layer ontology and (4) evaluating the pro-
posed framework through an application.
This paper outlines the project in terms of
its aim and approach.
1 Introduction
There is a long history of creating a standard
for western language resources. The human
language technology (HLT) society in Europe
has been particularly zealous for the standardiza-
tion, making a series of attempts such as EA-
GLES1, PAROLE/SIMPLE (Lenci et al, 2000),
ISLE/MILE (Calzolari et al, 2003) and LIRICS2.
These continuous efforts has been crystallized as
activities in ISO-TC37/SC4 which aims to make
an international standard for language resources.
1http://www.ilc.cnr.it/Eagles96/home.html
2lirics.loria.fr/documents.html
(1) Description 
framework of lexical 
entries
(2) Sample lexicons
(4) Evaluation 
through application
(3) Upper layer 
ontologyrefinement
description classification
refinement
evaluationevaluation
Figure 1: Relations among research items
On the other hand, since Asia has great lin-
guistic and cultural diversity, Asian language re-
sources have received much less attention than
their western counterparts. Creating a common
standard for Asian language resources that is com-
patible with an international standard has at least
three strong advantages: to increase the competi-
tive edge of Asian countries, to bring Asian coun-
tries to closer to their western counterparts, and to
bring more cohesion among Asian countries.
To achieve this goal, we have launched a two
year project to create a common standard for
Asian language resources. The project is com-
prised of the following four research items.
(1) building a description framework of lexical
entries
(2) building sample lexicons
(3) building an upper-layer ontology
(4) evaluating the proposed framework through
an application
Figure 1 illustrates the relations among these re-
search items.
Our main aim is the research item (1), building
a description framework of lexical entries which
827
fits with as many Asian languages as possible, and
contributing to the ISO-TC37/SC4 activities. As
a starting point, we employ an existing descrip-
tion framework, the MILE framework (Bertagna
et al, 2004a), to describe several lexical entries of
several Asian languages. Through building sam-
ple lexicons (research item (2)), we will find prob-
lems of the existing framework, and extend it so
as to fit with Asian languages. In this extension,
we need to be careful in keeping consistency with
the existing framework. We start with Chinese,
Japanese and Thai as target Asian languages and
plan to expand the coverage of languages. The re-
search items (2) and (3) also comprise the similar
feedback loop. Through building sample lexicons,
we refine an upper-layer ontology. An application
built in the research item (4) is dedicated to evalu-
ating the proposed framework. We plan to build an
information retrieval system using a lexicon built
by extending the sample lexicon.
In what follows, section 2 briefly reviews the
MILE framework which is a basis of our de-
scription framework. Since the MILE framework
is originally designed for European languages, it
does not always fit with Asian languages. We ex-
emplify some of the problems in section 3 and sug-
gest some directions to solve them. We expect
that further problems will come into clear view
through building sample lexicons. Section 4 de-
scribes a criteria to choose lexical entries in sam-
ple lexicons. Section 5 describes an approach
to build an upper-layer ontology which can be
sharable among languages. Section 6 describes
an application through which we evaluate the pro-
posed framework.
2 The MILE framework for
interoperability of lexicons
The ISLE (International Standards for Language
Engineering) Computational Lexicon Working
Group has consensually defined the MILE (Mul-
tilingual ISLE Lexical Entry) as a standardized
infrastructure to develop multilingual lexical re-
sources for HLT applications, with particular at-
tention toMachine Translation (MT) and Crosslin-
gual Information Retrieval (CLIR) application
systems.
The MILE is a general architecture devised
for the encoding of multilingual lexical informa-
tion, a meta-entry acting as a common representa-
tional layer for multilingual lexicons, by allowing
integration and interoperability between different
monolingual lexicons3.
This formal and standardized framework to en-
code MILE-conformant lexical entries is provided
to lexicon and application developers by the over-
all MILE Lexical Model (MLM). As concerns
the horizontal organization, the MLM consists of
two independent, but interlinked primary compo-
nents, the monolingual and the multilingual mod-
ules. The monolingual component, on the vertical
dimension, is organized over three different repre-
sentational layers which allow to describe differ-
ent dimensions of lexical entries, namely the mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic layers. More-
over, an intermediate module allows to define
mechanisms of linkage and mapping between the
syntactic and semantic layers. Within each layer, a
basic linguistic information unit is identified; basic
units are separated but still interlinked each other
across the different layers.
Within each of the MLM layers, different types
of lexical object are distinguished :
? the MILE Lexical Classes (MLC) represent
the main building blocks which formalize
the basic lexical notions. They can be seen
as a set of structural elements organized in
a layered fashion: they constitute an on-
tology of lexical objects as an abstraction
over different lexical models and architec-
tures. These elements are the backbone of
the structural model. In the MLM a defini-
tion of the classes is provided together with
their attributes and the way they relate to each
other. Classes represent notions like Inflec-
tionalParadigm, SyntacticFunction, Syntac-
ticPhrase, Predicate, Argument,
? the MILE Data Categories (MDC) which
constitute the attributes and values to adorn
the structural classes and allow concrete en-
tries to be instantiated. MDC can belong to
a shared repository or be user-defined. ?NP?
and ?VP? are data category instances of the
class SyntacticPhrase, whereas and ?subj?
and ?obj? are data category instances of the
class SyntacticFunction.
? lexical operations, which are special lexical
entities allowing the user to define multilin-
3MILE is based on the experience derived from exist-
ing computational lexicons (e.g. LE-PAROLE, SIMPLE, Eu-
roWordNet, etc.).
828
gual conditions and perform operations on
lexical entries.
Originally, in order to meet expectations placed
upon lexicons as critical resources for content pro-
cessing in the Semantic Web, the MILE syntactic
and semantic lexical objects have been formalized
in RDF(S), thus providing a web-based means to
implement the MILE architecture and allowing for
encoding individual lexical entries as instances of
the model (Ide et al, 2003; Bertagna et al, 2004b).
In the framework of our project, by situating our
work in the context of W3C standards and relying
on standardized technologies underlying this com-
munity, the original RDF schema for ISLE lexi-
cal entries has been made compliant to OWL. The
whole data model has been formalized in OWL by
using Prote?ge? 3.2 beta and has been extended to
cover the morphological component as well (see
Figure 2). Prote?ge? 3.2 beta has been also used as
a tool to instantiate the lexical entries of our sam-
ple monolingual lexicons, thus ensuring adherence
to the model, encoding coherence and inter- and
intra-lexicon consistency.
3 Existing problems with the MILE
framework for Asian languages
In this section, we will explain some problematic
phenomena of Asian languages and discuss pos-
sible extensions of the MILE framework to solve
them.
Inflection The MILE provides the powerful
framework to describe the information about in-
flection. InflectedForm class is devoted to de-
scribe inflected forms of a word, while Inflec-
tionalParadigm to define general inflection rules.
However, there is no inflection in several Asian
languages, such as Chinese and Thai. For these
languages, we do not use the Inflected Form and
Inflectional Paradigm.
Classifier Many Asian languages, such as
Japanese, Chinese, Thai and Korean, do not dis-
tinguish singularity and plurality of nouns, but use
classifiers to denote the number of objects. The
followings are examples of classifiers of Japanese.
? inu
(dog)
ni
(two)
hiki
(CL)
? ? ? two dogs
? hon
(book)
go
(five)
satsu
(CL)
? ? ? five books
?CL? stands for a classifier. They always follow
cardinal numbers in Japanese. Note that differ-
ent classifiers are used for different nouns. In the
above examples, classifier ?hiki? is used to count
noun ?inu (dog)?, while ?satsu? for ?hon (book)?.
The classifier is determined based on the semantic
type of the noun.
In the Thai language, classifiers are used in var-
ious situations (Sornlertlamvanich et al, 1994).
The classifier plays an important role in construc-
tion with noun to express ordinal, pronoun, for in-
stance. The classifier phrase is syntactically gener-
ated according to a specific pattern. Here are some
usages of classifiers and their syntactic patterns.
? Enumeration
(Noun/Verb)-(cardinal number)-(CL)
e.g. nakrian
(student)
3 khon
(CL)
? ? ? three students
? Ordinal
(Noun)-(CL)-/thi:/-(cardinal number)
e.g. kaew
(glass)
bai
(CL)
thi: 4
(4th)
? ? ? the 4th glass
? Determination
(Noun)-(CL)-(Determiner)
e.g. kruangkhidlek
(calculator)
kruang
(CL)
nii
(this)
? ? ? this calculator
Classifiers could be dealt as a class of the part-
of-speech. However, since classifiers depend on
the semantic type of nouns, we need to refer to
semantic features in the morphological layer, and
vice versa. Some mechanism to link between fea-
tures beyond layers needs to be introduced into the
current MILE framework.
Orthographic variants Many Chinese words
have orthographic variants. For instance, the con-
cept of rising can be represented by either char-
acter variants of sheng1: ? or ?. However,
the free variants become non-free in certain com-
pound forms. For instance, only? allowed for?
? ?liter?, and only? is allowed for?? ?to sub-
lime?. The interaction of lemmas and orthographic
variations is not yet represented in MILE.
Reduplication as a derivational process In
some Asian languages, reduplication of words de-
rives another word, and the derived word often has
a different part-of-speech. Here are some exam-
ples of reduplication in Chinese. Man4 ? ?to be
slow? is a state verb, while a reduplicated form
829
Inflectional
Paradigm
Lexical Entry SyntacticUnit
Form Lemmatized Form Stem
Inflected Form
Combiner
Calculator Mrophfeat
Operation Argument
Morph
DataCats
0..*
0..* 0..*
0..*
0..*
0..1
0..*
0..*
1..*
<LemmatizedForm rdf:ID="LFstar">
  <hasInflectedForm>
    <InflectedForm rdf:ID="stars">
      <hasMorphoFeat>
<MorphoFeat rdf:ID="pl">
  <number rdf:datatype="http://www.w3c.org/
2001/ XMLSchema#string">
    plural
  </number>
</MorphoFeat>
      </hasMorphoFeat>
    </InflectedForm>
  </hasInflectedForm>
  <hasInflectedForm>
    <InflectedForm rdf:ID="star">
      <hasMorphoFeat>
<MorphoFeat rdf:ID="sg">
  <number rdf:datatype="http://www.w3c.org/
2001/ XMLSchema#string">
    singular
  </number>
</MorphoFeat>
      </hasMorphoFeat>
    </InflectedForm>
  </hasInflectedForm>
</LemmatiedForm>
Figure 2: Formalization of the morphological layer and excerpt of a sample RDF instantiation
man4-man4 ?? is an adverb. Another example
of reduplication involves verbal aspect. Kan4 ?
?to look? is an activity verb, while the reduplica-
tive form kan4-kan4 ??, refers to the tentative
aspect, introducing either stage-like sub-division
or the event or tentativeness of the action of the
agent. This morphological process is not provided
for in the current MILE standard.
There are also various usages of reduplication in
Thai. Some words reduplicate themselves to add a
specific aspect to the original meaning. The redu-
plication can be grouped into 3 types according to
the tonal sound change of the original word.
? Word reduplication without sound change
e.g. /dek-dek/ ? ? ? (N) children, (ADV) child-
ishly, (ADJ) childish
/sa:w-sa:w/ ? ? ? (N) women
? Word reduplication with high tone on the first
word
e.g. /dam4-dam/ ? ? ? (ADJ) extremely black
/bo:i4-bo:i/ ? ? ? (ADV) really often
? Triple word reduplication with high tone on
the second word
e.g. /dern-dern4-dern/ ?? (V) intensively walk
/norn-norn4-norn/??(V) intensively sleep
In fact, only the reduplication of the same sound
is accepted in the written text, and a special sym-
bol, namely /mai-yamok/ is attached to the origi-
nal word to represent the reduplication. The redu-
plication occurs in many parts-of-speech, such as
noun, verb, adverb, classifier, adjective, preposi-
tion. Furthermore, various aspects can be added
to the original meaning of the word by reduplica-
tion, such as pluralization, emphasis, generaliza-
tion, and so on. These aspects should be instanti-
ated as features.
Change of parts-of-speech by affixes Af-
fixes change parts-of-speech of words in
Thai (Charoenporn et al, 1997). There are
three prefixes changing the part-of-speech of the
original word, namely /ka:n/, /khwa:m/, /ya:ng/.
They are used in the following cases.
? Nominalization
/ka:n/ is used to prefix an action verb and
/khwa:m/ is used to prefix a state verb
in nominalization such as /ka:n-tham-nga:n/
(working), /khwa:m-suk/ (happiness).
? Adverbialization
An adverb can be derived by using /ya:ng/ to
prefix a state verb such as /ya:ng-di:/ (well).
Note that these prefixes are also words, and form
multi-word expressions with the original word.
This phenomenon is similar to derivation which
is not handled in the current MILE framework.
Derivation is traditionally considered as a different
phenomenon from inflection, and current MILE
focuses on inflection. The MILE framework is al-
ready being extended to treat such linguistic phe-
nomenon, since it is important to European lan-
guages as well. It would be handled in either the
morphological layer or syntactic layer.
830
Function Type Function types of predicates
(verbs, adjectives etc.) might be handled in a
partially different way for Japanese. In the syn-
tactic layer of the MILE framework, Function-
Type class is prepared to denote subcategorization
frames of predicates, and they have function types
such as ?subj? and ?obj?. For example, the verb
?eat? has two FunctionType data categories of
?subj? and ?obj?. Function types basically stand
for positions of case filler nouns. In Japanese,
cases are usually marked by postpositions and case
filler positions themselves do not provide much in-
formation on case marking. For example, both of
the following sentences mean the same, ?She eats
a pizza.?
? kanojo
(she)
ga
(NOM)
piza
(pizza)
wo
(ACC)
taberu
(eat)
? piza
(pizza)
wo
(ACC)
kanojo
(she)
ga
(NOM)
taberu
(eat)
?Ga? and ?wo? are postpositions which mark
nominative and accusative cases respectively.
Note that two case filler nouns ?she? and ?pizza?
can be exchanged. That is, the number of slots is
important, but their order is not.
For Japanese, we might use the set of post-
positions as values of FunctionType instead of
conventional function types such as ?subj? and
?obj?. It might be an user defined data category or
language dependent data category. Furthermore,
it is preferable to prepare the mapping between
Japanese postpositions and conventional function
types. This is interesting because it seems more
a terminological difference, but the model can be
applied also to Japanese.
4 Building sample lexicons
4.1 Swadesh list and basic lexicon
The issue involved in defining a basic lexicon for a
given language is more complicated than one may
think (Zhang et al, 2004). The naive approach of
simply taking the most frequent words in a lan-
guage is flawed in many ways. First, all frequency
counts are corpus-based and hence inherit the bias
of corpus sampling. For instance, since it is eas-
ier to sample written formal texts, words used pre-
dominantly in informal contexts are usually under-
represented. Second, frequency of content words
is topic-dependent and may vary from corpus to
corpus. Last, and most crucially, frequency of a
word does not correlate to its conceptual necessity,
which should be an important, if not only, criteria
for core lexicon. The definition of a cross-lingual
basic lexicon is even more complicated. The first
issue involves determination of cross-lingual lexi-
cal equivalencies. That is, how to determine that
word a (and not a?) in language A really is word b
in language B. The second issue involves the deter-
mination of what is a basic word in a multilingual
context. In this case, not even the frequency of-
fers an easy answer since lexical frequency may
vary greatly among different languages. The third
issue involves lexical gaps. That is, if there is a
word that meets all criteria of being a basic word
in language A, yet it does not exist in language D
(though it may exist in languages B, and C). Is this
word still qualified to be included in the multilin-
gual basic lexicon?
It is clear not all the above issues can be un-
equivocally solved with the time frame of our
project. Fortunately, there is an empirical core lex-
icon that we can adopt as a starting point. The
Swadesh list was proposed by the historical lin-
guist Morris Swadesh (Swadesh, 1952), and has
been widely used by field and historical linguists
for languages over the world. The Swadesh list
was first proposed as lexico-statistical metrics.
That is, these are words that can be reliably ex-
pected to occur in all historical languages and can
be used as the metrics for quantifying language
variations and language distance. The Swadesh
list is also widely used by field linguists when
they encounter a new language, since almost all
of these terms can be expected to occur in any
language. Note that the Swadesh list consists of
terms that embody human direct experience, with
culture-specific terms avoided. Swadesh started
with a 215 items list, before cutting back to 200
items and then to 100 items. A standard list of
207 items is arrived at by unifying the 200 items
list and the 100 items list. We take the 207 terms
from the Swadesh list as the core of our basic lex-
icon. Inclusion of the Swadesh list also gives us
the possibility of covering many Asian languages
in which we do not have the resources to make a
full and fully annotated lexicon. For some of these
languages, a Swadesh lexicon for reference is pro-
vided by a collaborator.
4.2 Aligning multilingual lexical entries
Since our goal is to build a multilingual sample
lexicon, it is required to align words in several
831
Asian languages. In this subsection, we propose
a simple method to align words in different lan-
guages. The basic idea for multilingual alignment
is an intermediary by English. That is, first we
prepare word pairs between English and other lan-
guages, then combine them together to make cor-
respondence among words in several languages.
The multilingual alignment method currently we
consider is as follows:
1. Preparing the set of frequent words of each
language
Suppose that {Jw
i
}, {Cw
i
}, {Tw
i
} is the
set of frequent words of Japanese, Chinese
and Thai, respectively. Now we try to con-
struct a multilingual lexicon for these three
languages, however, our multilingual align-
ment method can be easily extended to han-
dle more languages.
2. Obtaining English translations
A word Xw
i
is translated into a set of En-
glish words EXw
ij
by referring to the bilin-
gual dictionary, where X denotes one of our
languages, J , C or T . We can obtain map-
pings as in (1).
Jw
1
: EJw
11
, EJw
12
, ? ? ?
Jw
2
: EJw
21
, EJw
22
, ? ? ?
...
Cw
1
: ECw
11
, ECw
12
, ? ? ?
Cw
2
: ECw
21
, ECw
22
, ? ? ?
...
Tw
1
: ETw
11
, ETw
12
, ? ? ?
Tw
2
: ETw
21
, ETw
22
, ? ? ?
...
(1)
Notice that this procedure is automatically
done and ambiguities would be left at this
stage.
3. Generating new mapping
From mappings in (1), a new mapping is gen-
erated by inverting the key. That is, in the
new mapping, a key is an English word Ew
i
and a correspondence for each key is sets
of translations XEw
ij
for 3 languages, as
shown in (2):
Ew
1
: (JEw
11
, JEw
12
, ? ? ?)
(CEw
11
, CEw
12
, ? ? ?)
(TEw
11
, TEw
12
, ? ? ?)
Ew
2
: (JEw
21
, JEw
22
, ? ? ?)
(CEw
21
, CEw
22
, ? ? ?)
(TEw
21
, TEw
22
, ? ? ?)
...
(2)
Notice that at this stage, correspondence be-
tween different languages is very loose, since
they are aligned on the basis of sharing only
a single English word.
4. Refinement of alignment
Groups of English words are constructed by
referring to the WordNet synset information.
For example, suppose that Ew
i
and Ew
j
be-
long to the same synset S
k
. We will make a
new alignment by making an intersection of
{XEw
i
} and {XEw
j
} as shown in (3).
Ew
i
: (JEw
i1
, ??) (CEw
i1
, ??) (TEw
i1
, ??)
Ew
j
: (JEw
j1
, ??)(CEw
j1
, ??)(TEw
j1
, ??)
? intersection
S
k
: (JEw?
k1
, ??)(CEw?
k1
, ??)(TEw?
k1
, ??)
(3)
In (3), the key is a synset S
k
, which is sup-
posed to be a conjunction of Ew
i
and Ew
j
,
and the counterpart is the intersection of set
of translations for each language. This oper-
ation would reduce the number of words of
each language. That means, we can expect
that the correspondence among words of dif-
ferent languages becomes more precise. This
new word alignment based on a synset is a
final result.
To evaluate the performance of this method,
we conducted a preliminary experiment using the
Swadesh list. Given the Swadesh list of Chi-
nese, Italian, Japanese and Thai as a gold stan-
dard, we tried to replicate these lists from the En-
glish Swadesh list and bilingual dictionaries be-
tween English and these languages. In this experi-
ment, we did not perform the refinement step with
WordNet. From 207 words in the Swadesh list,
we dropped 4 words (?at?, ?in?, ?with? and ?and?)
due to their too many ambiguities in translation.
As a result, we obtained 181 word groups
aligned across 5 languages (Chinese, English, Ital-
ian, Japanese and Thai) for 203 words. An
aligned word group was judged ?correct? when the
words of each language include only words in the
Swadesh list of that language. It was judged ?par-
tially correct? when the words of a language also
include the words which are not in the Swadesh
list. Based on the correct instances, we obtain
0.497 for precision and 0.443 for recall. These fig-
ures go up to 0.912 for precision and 0.813 for re-
call when based on the partially correct instances.
This is quite a promising result.
832
5 Upper-layer ontology
The empirical success of the Swadesh list poses
an interesting question that has not been explored
before. That is, does the Swadesh list instantiates a
shared, fundamental human conceptual structure?
And if there is such as a structure, can we discover
it?
In the project these fundamental issues are as-
sociated with our quest for cross-lingual interop-
erability. We must make sure that the items of
the basic lexicon are given the same interpreta-
tion. One measure taken to ensure this consists in
constructing an upper-ontology based on the ba-
sic lexicon. Our preliminary work of mapping the
Swadesh list items to SUMO (Suggested Upper
Merged Ontology) (Niles and Pease, 2001) has al-
ready been completed. We are in the process of
mapping the list to DOLCE (Descriptive Ontology
for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering) (Ma-
solo et al, 2003). After the initial mapping, we
carry on the work to restructure the mapped nodes
to form a genuine conceptual ontology based on
the language universal basic lexical items. How-
ever one important observation that we have made
so far is that the success of the Swadesh list is
partly due to its underspecification and to the lib-
erty it gives to compilers of the list in a new lan-
guage. If this idea of underspecification is essen-
tial for basic lexicon for human languages, then we
must resolve this apparent dilemma of specifying
them in a formal ontology that requires fully spec-
ified categories. For the time being, genuine ambi-
guities resulted in the introduction of each disam-
biguated sense in the ontology. We are currently
investigating another solution that allows the in-
clusion of underspecified elements in the ontology
without threatening its coherence. More specifi-
cally we introduce a underspecified relation in the
structure for linking the underspecified meaning
to the different specified meaning. The specified
meanings are included in the taxonomic hierarchy
in a traditional manner, while a hierarchy of un-
derspecified meanings can be derived thanks to the
new relation. An underspecified node only inherits
from the most specific common mother of its fully
specified terms. Such distinction avoids the clas-
sical misuse of the subsumption relation for rep-
resenting multiple meanings. This method does
not reflect a dubious collapse of the linguistic and
conceptual levels but the treatment of such under-
specifications as truly conceptual. Moreover we
Internet
Query
Local 
DB
User interest
 model
Topic
Feedback
Search
engine
Crawler
Retrieval
results
Figure 3: The system architecture
hope this proposal will provide a knowledge rep-
resentation framework for the multilingual align-
ment method presented in the previous section.
Finally, our ontology will not only play the role
of a structured interlingual index. It will also serve
as a common conceptual base for lexical expan-
sion, as well as for comparative studies of the lex-
ical differences of different languages.
6 Evaluation through an application
To evaluate the proposed framework, we are build-
ing an information retrieval system. Figure 3
shows the system architecture.
A user can input a topic to retrieve the docu-
ments related to that topic. A topic can consist
of keywords, website URL?s and documents which
describe the topic. From the topic information, the
system builds a user interest model. The system
then uses a search engine and a crawler to search
for information related to this topic in WWW and
stores the results in the local database. Generally,
the search results include many noises. To filter
out these noises, we build a query from the user
interest model and then use this query to retrieve
documents in the local database. Those documents
similar to the query are considered as more related
to the topic and the user?s interest, and are returned
to the user. When the user obtains these retrieval
results, he can evaluate these documents and give
the feedback to the system, which is used for the
further refinement of the user interest model.
Language resources can contribute to improv-
ing the system performance in various ways.
Query expansion is a well-known technique which
expands user?s query terms into a set of similar and
related terms by referring to ontologies. Our sys-
tem is based on the vector space model (VSM) and
traditional query expansion can be applicable us-
ing the ontology.
There has been less research on using lexical in-
833
formation for information retrieval systems. One
possibility we are considering is query expansion
by using predicate-argument structures of terms.
Suppose a user inputs two keywords, ?hockey?
and ?ticket? as a query. The conventional query
expansion technique expands these keywords to
a set of similar words based on an ontology. By
referring to predicate-argument structures in the
lexicon, we can derive actions and events as well
which take these words as arguments. In the above
example, by referring to the predicate-argument
structure of ?buy? or ?sell?, and knowing that
these verbs can take ?ticket? in their object role,
we can add ?buy? and ?sell? to the user?s query.
This new type of expansion requires rich lexical
information such as predicate argument structures,
and the information retrieval system would be a
good touchstone of the lexical information.
7 Concluding remarks
This paper outlined a new project for creating a
common standard for Asian language resources
in cooperation with other initiatives. We start
with three Asian languages, Chinese, Japanese
and Thai, on top of the existing framework which
was designed mainly for European languages.
We plan to distribute our draft to HLT soci-
eties of other Asian languages, requesting for
their feedback through various networks, such
as the Asian language resource committee net-
work under Asian Federation of Natural Language
Processing (AFNLP)4, and Asian Language Re-
source Network project5. We believe our ef-
forts contribute to international activities like ISO-
TC37/SC46 (Francopoulo et al, 2006) and to the
revision of the ISO Data Category Registry (ISO
12620), making it possible to come close to the
ideal international standard of language resources.
Acknowledgment
This research was carried out through financial
support provided under the NEDO International
Joint Research Grant Program (NEDO Grant).
References
F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, M. Monachini, and N. Calzo-
lari. 2004a. Content interoperability of lexical re-
sources, open issues and ?MILE? perspectives. In
4http://www.afnlp.org/
5http://www.language-resource.net/
6http://www.tc37sc4.org/
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC2004),
pages 131?134.
F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, M. Monachini, and N. Calzo-
lari. 2004b. The MILE lexical classes: Data cat-
egories for content interoperability among lexicons.
In A Registry of Linguistic Data Categories within
an Integrated Language Resources Repository Area
? LREC2004 Satellite Workshop, page 8.
N. Calzolari, F. Bertagna, A. Lenci, and M. Mona-
chini. 2003. Standards and best practice for mul-
tilingual computational lexicons. MILE (the mul-
tilingual ISLE lexical entry). ISLE Deliverable
D2.2&3.2.
T. Charoenporn, V. Sornlertlamvanich, and H. Isahara.
1997. Building a large Thai text corpus ? part-
of-speech tagged corpus: ORCHID?. In Proceed-
ings of the Natural LanguageProcessing Pacific Rim
Symposium.
G. Francopoulo, G. Monte, N. Calzolari, M. Mona-
chini, N. Bel, M. Pet, and C. Soria. 2006. Lex-
ical markup framework (LMF). In Proceedings of
LREC2006 (forthcoming).
N. Ide, A. Lenci, and N. Calzolari. 2003. RDF in-
stantiation of ISLE/MILE lexical entries. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Linguistic
Annotation: Getting the Model Right, pages 25?34.
A. Lenci, N. Bel, F. Busa, N. Calzolari, E. Gola,
M. Monachini, A. Ogonowsky, I. Peters, W. Peters,
N. Ruimy, M. Villegas, and A. Zampolli. 2000.
SIMPLE: A general framework for the development
of multilingual lexicons. International Journal of
Lexicography, Special Issue, Dictionaries, Thesauri
and Lexical-Semantic Relations, XIII(4):249?263.
C. Masolo, A. Borgo, S.; Gangemi, N. Guarino, and
A. Oltramari. 2003. Wonderweb deliverable d18
?ontology library (final)?. Technical report, Labo-
ratory for Applied Ontology, ISTC-CNR.
I. Niles and A Pease. 2001. Towards a standard upper
ontology. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Sys-
tems (FOIS-2001).
V. Sornlertlamvanich, W. Pantachat, and S. Mek-
navin. 1994. Classifier assignment by corpus-
based approach. In Proceedings of the 15th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-94), pages 556?561.
M. Swadesh. 1952. Lexico-statistical dating of pre-
historic ethnic contacts: With special reference to
north American Indians and Eskimos. In Proceed-
ings of the American Philo-sophical Society, vol-
ume 96, pages 452?463.
H. Zhang, C. Huang, and S. Yu. 2004. Distributional
consistency: A general method for defining a core
lexicon. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC2004), pages 1119?1222.
834
