Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 223?230,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Benefit of Stochastic PP Attachment to a Rule-Based Parser
Kilian A. Foth and Wolfgang Menzel
Department of Informatics
Hamburg University
D-22527 Hamburg
Germany
foth|menzel@nats.informatik.uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
To study PP attachment disambiguation as
a benchmark for empirical methods in nat-
ural language processing it has often been
reduced to a binary decision problem (be-
tween verb or noun attachment) in a par-
ticular syntactic configuration. A parser,
however, must solve the more general task
of deciding between more than two alter-
natives in many different contexts. We
combine the attachment predictions made
by a simple model of lexical attraction
with a full-fledged parser of German to de-
termine the actual benefit of the subtask
to parsing. We show that the combination
of data-driven and rule-based components
can reduce the number of all parsing errors
by 14% and raise the attachment accuracy
for dependency parsing of German to an
unprecedented 92%.
1 Introduction
Most NLP applications are either data-driven
(classification tasks are solved by comparing pos-
sible solutions to previous problems and their so-
lutions) or rule-based (general rules are formu-
lated which must be applicable to all cases that
might be encountered). Both methods face obvi-
ous problems: The data-driven approach is at the
mercy of its training set and cannot easily avoid
mistakes that result from biased or scarce data. On
the other hand, the rule-based approach depends
entirely on the ability of a computational linguist
to anticipate every construction that might ever oc-
cur. These handicaps are part of the reason why,
despite great advances, many tasks in computa-
tional linguistics still cannot be performed nearly
as well by computers as by human informants.
Applied to the subtask of syntax analysis, the di-
chotomy manifests itself in the existence of learnt
and handwritten grammars of natural languages.
A great many formalisms have been advanced that
fall into either of the two variants, but even the
best of them cannot be said to interpret arbitrary
input consistently in the same way that a human
reader would. Because the handicaps of differ-
ent methods are to some degree complementary,
it seems likely that a combination of approaches
could yield better results than either alone. We
therefore integrate a data-driven classifier for the
special task of PP attachment into an existing rule-
based parser and measure the effect that the addi-
tional information has on the overall accuracy.
2 Motivation
PP attachment disambiguation has often been
studied as a benchmark test for empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing. Prepositions
allow subordination to many different attachment
sites, and the choice between them is influenced
by factors from many different linguistic levels,
which are generally subject to preferential rather
than rigorous regularities. For this reason, PP at-
tachment is a comparatively difficult subtask for
rule-based syntax analysis and has often been at-
tacked by statistical methods.
Because probabilistic approaches solve PP at-
tachment as a natural subtask of parsing anyhow,
the obvious application of a PP attacher is to in-
tegrate it into a rule-based system. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, so far this has rarely been done. One
reason for this is that many rule-driven syntax an-
alyzers provide no obvious way to integrate un-
certain, statistical information into their decisions.
Another is the traditional emphasis on PP attach-
ment as a binary classification task; since (Hin-
dle and Rooth, 1991), research has concentrated
on resolving the ambiguity in the category pattern
?V+N+P+N?, i.e. predicting the PP attachment to
either the verb or the first noun. It is often assumed
that the correct attachment is always among these
223
two options, so that all problem instances can be
solved correctly despite the simplification. This
task is sufficient to measure the relative quality of
different probability models, but it is quite differ-
ent from what a parser must actually do: It is easier
because the set of possible answers is pre-filtered
so that only a binary decision remains, and the
baseline performance for pure guessing is already
50%. But it is harder because it does not pro-
vide the predictor with all the information needed
to solve many doubtful cases; (Hindle and Rooth,
1991) found that human arbiters consistently reach
a higher agreement when they are given the entire
sentence rather than just the four words concerned.
Instead of the accuracy of PP attachers in the
isolated decision between two words, we investi-
gate the problem of situated PP attachment. In this
task, all nouns and verbs in a sentence are potential
attachment points for a preposition; the computer
must find suitable attachments for one or more
prepositions in parallel, while building a globally
coherent syntax structure at the same time.
3 Methods
Statistical PP attachment is based on the obser-
vation that the identities of content words can be
used to predict which prepositional phrases mod-
ify which words, and achieve better-than-chance
accuracy. This is apparently because, as heads
of their respective phrases, they are representative
enough that they can serve as a crude approxima-
tion of the semantic structure that could be derived
from the phrases. Consider the following example
(the last sentence in our test set):
Die Firmen mu?ssen noch die Bedenken der EU-
Kommission gegen die Fusion ausra?umen. (The compa-
nies have yet to address the Commission?s concerns about
the merger.)
In this sentence, the preferred analysis will pair
the preposition ?gegen? (against, about, versus)
with the noun ?Bedenken? (concerns), since the
proposition is clearly that the concerns pertain to
the merger. A syntax tree of this interpretation is
shown in Figure 1. Note that there are at least
three different syntactically plausible attachment
sites for the preposition. In fact, there are even
more, since a parser can make no initial assump-
tions about the global structure of the syntax tree
that it will construct; for instance, the possibility
that ?gegen? attaches to the noun ?Firmen? (compa-
nies) cannot be ruled out when beginning to parse.
3.1 WCDG
For the following experiments, we used the de-
pendency parser of German described in (Foth et
al., 2005). This system is especially suited to
our goals for several reasons. Firstly, the parser
achieves the highest published dependency-based
accuracy on unrestricted written German input,
but still has a comparatively high error rate for
prepositions. In particular, it mis-attaches the
preposition ?gegen? in the example sentence. Sec-
ond, although rule-based in nature, it uses numer-
ical penalties to arbitrate between different disam-
biguation rules. It is therefore easy to add another
rule of varying strength, which depends on the
output of an external statistical predictor, to guide
the parser when it has no other means of making
an attachment decision. Finally, the parser and
grammar are freely available for use and modi-
fication (http://nats-www.informatik.
uni-hamburg.de/download).
Weighted Constraint Dependency Grammar
(Schro?der, 2002) models syntax structure as la-
belled dependency trees as shown in the exam-
ple. A grammar in this formalism is written as
a set of constraints that license well-formed par-
tial syntax structures. For instance, general projec-
tivity rules ensure that the dependency tree corre-
sponds to a properly nested syntax structure with-
out crossing brackets1 . Other constraints require
an auxiliary verb to be modified by a full verb, or
prescribe morphosyntactical agreement between a
determiner and its regent (the word modified by
the determiner). Although the Constraint Satisfac-
tion Problem that this formalism defines is, in the-
ory, infeasibly hard, it can nevertheless be solved
approximatively with heuristic solution methods,
and achieve competitive parsing accuracy.
To allow the resolution of true ambiguity (the
existence of different structures neither of which is
strictly ungrammatical), weighted constraints can
be written that the solution should satisfy, if this
is possible. The goal is then to build the struc-
ture that violates as few constraints as possible,
and preferentially violates weak rather than strong
constraints. This allows preferences to be ex-
pressed rather than hard rules. For instance, agree-
ment constraints could actually be declared as vio-
lable, since typing errors, reformulations, etc. can
1Some constructions of German actually violate this prop-
erty; exceptions in the projectivity constraints deal with these
cases.
224
AUX
PN
DET
PP
GMOD
DET
OBJA
DET
ADV
S
SUBJ
DET
die
the
Firmen
companies
m?ssen
have to
noch
yet
die
the
Bedenken
concerns
der
the
EU-Kommission
European commission
gegen
about
die
the
Fusion
merger
ausr?umen
address
.
Figure 1: Correct syntax analysis of the example sentence.
and do actually lead to mis-inflected phrases. In
this way robustness against many types of error
can be achieved while still preferring the correct
variant. For more about the WCDG parser, see
(Schro?der, 2002; Foth and Menzel, 2006) .
The grammar of German available for this
parser relies heavily on weighted constraints both
to cope with many kinds of imperfect input and
to resolve true ambiguities. For the example sen-
tence, it retrieves the desired dependencies ex-
cept for constructing the implausible dependency
?ausra?umen?+?gegen? (address against). Let us
briefly review the relevant constraints that cause
this error:
? General structural, valence and agreement
constraints determine the macro structure of
the sentence in the desired way. For in-
stance, the finite and the full verb must com-
bine to form an auxiliary phrase, because this
is the only way of accounting for all words
while satisfying valence and category con-
straints. For the same reasons both deter-
miners must be paired with their respective
nouns. Also, the prepositional phrase itself is
correctly predicted.
? General category constraints ensure that the
preposition can attach to nouns and verbs, but
not, say, to a determiner or to punctuation.
? A weak constraint on adjuncts says that ad-
juncts are usually close to their regent. The
penalty of this constraint varies according to
the length of the dependency that it is applied
to, so that shorter dependencies are generally
preferred.
? A slightly stronger constraint prefers attach-
ment of the preposition to the verb, since
overall verb attachment is more common than
noun attachment in German. Therefore, the
verb attachment leads to the globally best so-
lution for this sentence.
There are no lexicalized rules that capture the
particular plausibility of the phrase ?Bedenken
gegen? (concerns about). A constraint that de-
scribes this individual word pair would be trivial
to write, but it is not feasible to model the general
phenomenon in this way; thousands of constraints
would be needed just to reflect the more impor-
tant collocations in a language, and the exact set
of collocating words is impossible to predict ac-
curately. Data-driven information would be much
more suitable for curing this lexical blind spot.
3.2 The Collocation Measure
The usual way to retrieve the lexical preference of
a word such as ?Bedenken? for ?gegen? is to obtain
a large corpus and assume that it is representative
of the entire language; in particular, that colloca-
tions in this corpus are representative of colloca-
tions that will be encountered in future input. The
assumption is of course not entirely true, but it can
nevertheless be preferable to rely on such uncer-
tain knowledge rather than remain undecided, on
the reasonable assumption that it will lead to more
correct than wrong decisions. Note that the same
reasoning applies to many of the violable con-
straints in a WCDG: although they do not hold on
all possible structures, they hold more often than
they fail, and therefore can be useful for analysing
unknown input.
Different measures have been used to gauge the
strength of a lexical preference, but in general the
efficacy of the statistical approach depends more
on the suitability of the training corpus than on de-
tails of the collocation measure. Since our focus
225
is not on finding the best extraction method, but
on judging the benefit of statistical components to
parsing, we employ a collocation measure related
to the idea of mutual information: a collocation
between a word w and a preposition p is judged
more likely the more often it appears, and the less
often its component words appear. By normalizing
against the total number t of utterances we derive
a measure of Lexical Attraction for each possible
collocation:
LA(w, p) := fw+pt
/
(fw
t ?
fp
t
)
For instance, if we assume that the word ?Be-
denken? occurs in one out of 2,000 sentences of
German and the word ?gegen? occurs in one sen-
tence out of 31 (these figures were taken from
the unsupervised experiment described later), then
pure chance would make the two words co-occur
in one sentence out of 62,000. If the LA score
is higher than 1, i. e. we observe a much higher
frequency of co-occurrences in a large corpus, we
can assume that the two events are not statisti-
cally independent ? in other words, that there is a
positive correlation between the two words. Con-
versely, we would expect a much lower score for
the implausible collocation ?Bedenken?+?fu?r?, in-
dicating a dispreference for this attachment.
4 Experiments
4.1 Sources
To obtain the counts to base our estimates of at-
traction on, we first turned to the dependency tree-
bank that accompanies the WCDG parsing suite.
This corpus contains some 59,000 sentences with
1,000,000 words with complete syntactic annota-
tions, 61% of which are drawn from online tech-
nical newscasts, 33% from literature and 6% from
law texts. We used the entire corpus except for the
test set as a source for counting PP attachments di-
rectly. All verbs, nouns and prepositions were first
reduced to their base forms in order to reduce the
parameter space. Compound nouns were reduced
to their base nouns, so that ?EU-Kommission? is
treated the same as ?Kommission?, on the assump-
tion that the compound exerts similar attractions as
the base noun. In contrast, German verbs with pre-
fixes usually differ markedly in their preferences
from the base verb. Since forms of verbs such as
?ausra?umen? (address) can be split into two parts
(w, p) fw+p fw LA
?Firma?+?gegen? 72 76492 0.03
?Bedenken?+?gegen? 1529 9618 4.96
?Kommission?+?gegen? 223 52415 0.13
?ausra?umen?+?gegen? 130 2342 1.73
(where fp = 566068, t = 17657329)
Table 1: Example calculation of lexical attraction.
(?NP ra?umte NP aus?), such separated verbs were
reassembled before stemming.
Although the information retrieved from com-
plete syntax trees is valuable, it is clearly insuf-
ficient for estimating many valid collocations. In
particular, even for a comparatively strong collo-
cation such as ?Bedenken?+?gegen? we can expect
only very few instances. (There are, in fact, 4
such instances, well above chance level but still
a very small number.) Therefore we used the
archived text from 18 volumes of the newspaper
tageszeitung as a second source. This corpus con-
tains about 295,000,000 words and should allow
us to detect many more collocations. In fact, we
do find 2338 instances of ?Bedenken?+?gegen? in
the same sentence.
Of course, since we have no syntactic annota-
tions for this corpus (and it would be infeasible to
create them even by fully automatic parsing), not
all of these instances may indicate a syntactic de-
pendency. (Ratnaparkhi, 1998) solved this prob-
lem by regarding only prepositions in syntactically
unambiguous configurations. Unfortunately, his
patterns cannot directly be applied to German sen-
tences because of their freer word order. As an
approximation it would be possible to count only
pairs of adjacent content words and prepositions.
However, this would introduce systematic biases
into the counts, because nouns do in fact very often
occur adjacently to prepositions that modify them,
but many verbs do not. For instance, the phrase
?jmd. anklagen wegen etw.? (to sue s.o. for s.th.)
gives rise to a strong collocation between the verb
?anklagen? and the preposition ?wegen?; however,
in the predominant sentence types of German, the
two words are virtually never adjacent, because ei-
ther the preposition kernel or the direct object must
intervene. Therefore, we relax the adjacency con-
dition for verb attachment and also count prepo-
sitions that occur within a fixed distance of their
suspected regent.
Table 1 shows the detailed values when judg-
ing the example sentence according to the un-
parsed corpus. The strong collocation that we
would expect for ?Bedenken?+?gegen? is indeed
226
Value of i Recall for V for N overall
1 96.2% 39.8% 65.2%
2 96.2% 52.0% 71.9%
5 88.8% 66.3% 76.4%
8 80.0% 79.6% 79.8%
10 67.5% 82.7% 75.8%
Table 2: Influence of noun factor on solving isolated attach-
ment decisions.
observed, with a value of 4.96. However, the
verb attachment also has a score above 1, indicat-
ing that ?gegen?+?ausra?umen? (to address about)
are also positively correlated. This is almost cer-
tainly a misleading figure, since those two words
do not form a plausible verb phrase; it is much
more probable that the very strong, in fact id-
iomatic, correlation ?Bedenken ausra?umen? (to ad-
dress concerns) causes many co-occurrences of all
three words. Therefore our figures falsely suggest
that ?gegen? would often attach to ?ausra?umen?,
when it is in fact the direct object of that verb that
it is attracted to.
(Volk, 2002) already suggested that this count-
ing method introduced a general bias toward verb
attachment, and when comparing the results for
very frequent words (for which more reliable evi-
dence is available from the treebank) we find that
verb attachments are in fact systematically over-
estimated. We therefore adopted his approach and
artificially inflated all noun+preposition counts by
a constant factor i. To estimate an appropriate
value for this factor, we extracted 178 instances of
the standard verb+noun+preposition configuration
from our corpus, of which 80 were verb attach-
ments (V) and 98 were noun attachments (N).
Table 2 shows the performance of the predictor
for this binary decision task. Taken as it is, it re-
trieves most verb attachments, but less than half of
the noun attachments, while higher values of i can
improve the recall both for noun attachments and
overall. The performance achieved falls somewhat
short of the highest figures reported previously for
PP attachment for German (Volk, 2002); this is
at least in part due to our simple model that ig-
nores the kernel noun of the PP. However, it could
well be good enough to be integrated into a full
parser and provide a benefit to it. Also, the syntac-
tical configuration in this standard benchmark is
not the predominant one in complete German sen-
tences; in fact fewer than 10% of all prepositions
occur in this context. The best performance on the
triple task is therefore not guaranteed to be the best
choice for full parsing. In our experiments, we
1.0
0.8
1 3 5
weight
LA
Figure 2: Mapping lexical attraction values to penalties
used a value of i = 8, which seems to be suited
best to our grammar.
4.2 Integration Method
To add our simple collocation model to the parser,
it is sufficient to write a single variable-strength
constraint that judges each PP dependency by how
strong the lexical attraction between the regent and
the dependent is. The only question is how to map
our lexical attraction values to penalties for this
constraint. Their predicted relative order of plausi-
bility should of course be reflected, so that depen-
dencies with a high lexical attraction are preferred
over those with lower lexical attraction. At the
same time, the information should not be given too
much weight compared to the existing grammar
rules, since it is heuristic in nature and should cer-
tainly not override important principles such as va-
lence or agreement. The penalties of WCDG con-
straints range from 0.0 (hard constraint) through
1.0 (a constraint with this penalty has no effect
whatsoever and is only useful for debugging).
We chose an inverse mapping based on the log-
arithm of lexical attraction (cf. Figure 2):
p(w, p) = max(1,min(0.8,1?(2?log3(LA(w,p)))/50))?
where ? is a normalization constant that scales
the highest occurring value of LA to 1. For in-
stance, this mapping will interpret a strong lex-
ical attraction of 5 as the penalty 0.989 (almost
perfect) and a lexical attraction of only 0.5 as the
penalty 0.95 (somewhat dispreferred). The overall
range of PP attachment penalties is limited to the
interval [0.8 ? 1.0], which ensures that the judge-
ment of the statistical module will usually come
into play only when no other evidence is available;
preliminary experiments showed that a stronger
integration of the component yields no additional
advantage. In any case, the exact figure depends
closely on the valuation of the existing constraints
of the grammar and is of little importance as such.
227
Label occurred retrieved errors accuracy
PP 1892 1285 607 67.9%
ADV 1137 951 186 83.6%
OBJA 775 675 100 87.1%
APP 659 567 92 86.0%
SUBJ 1338 1251 87 93.5%
S 1098 1022 76 93.1%
KON 481 406 75 84.4%
REL 167 107 60 64.1%
overall 17719 16073 1646 90.7
Table 3: Performance of the original parser on the test set.
Besides adding the new constraint ?PP attach-
ment? to the grammar, we also disabled several
of the existing constraints that apply to preposi-
tions, since we assume that our lexicalized model
is superior to the unlexicalized assumptions that
the grammar writers had made so far. For instance,
the constraint mentioned in Section 3 that glob-
ally prefers verb attachment to noun attachment
is essentially a crude approximation of lexical at-
traction, whose task is now taken over entirely by
the statistical predictor. We also assume that lex-
ical preference exerts a stronger influence on at-
tachment than mere linear distance; therefore we
changed the distance constraint so that it exempts
prepositions from the normal distance penalties
imposed on adjuncts.
4.3 Corpus
For our parsing experiments, we used the first
1,000 sentences of technical newscasts from the
dependency treebank mentioned above. This test
set has an average sentence length of 17.7 words,
and from previous experiments we estimate that it
is comparable in difficulty to the NEGRA corpus
to within 1% of accuracy. Although online articles
and newspaper copy follow some different con-
ventions, we assume the two text types are similar
enough that collocations extracted from one can
be used to predict attachments in the other.
For parsing we used the heuristic trans-
formation-based search described in (Foth et al,
2000). Table 3 illustrates the structural accuracy2
of the unmodified system for various subordina-
tion types. For instance, of the 1892 dependency
edges with the label ?PP? in the gold standard,
1285 are attached correctly by the parser, while
607 receive an incorrect regent. We see that PP at-
tachment decisions are particularly prone to errors
2Note that the WCDG parser always succeeds in assign-
ing exactly one regent to each word, so that there is no dif-
ference between precision and recall. We refer to structural
accuracy as the ratio of words which have been attached cor-
rectly to all words.
Method PP accuracy overall accuracy
baseline 67.9% 90.7%
supervised 79.4% 91.9%
unsupervised 78.3% 91.9%
backed-off 78.9% 92.2%
Table 4: Structural accuracy of PP edges and all edges.
both in absolute and in relative terms.
4.4 Results
We trained the PP attachment predictor both with
the counts acquired from the dependency treebank
(supervised) and those from the newspaper cor-
pus (unsupervised). We also tested a mode of op-
eration that uses the more reliable data from the
treebank, but backs off to unsupervised counts if
the hypothetical regent was seen fewer than 1,000
times in training.
Table 4 shows the results when parsing with the
augmented grammar. Both the overall structural
accuracy and the accuracy of PP edges are given;
note that these figures result from the general sub-
ordination task, therefore they correspond to Ta-
ble 3 and not to Table 2. As expected, lexical-
ized preference information for prepositions yields
a large benefit to full parsing: the attachment error
rate is decreased by 34% for prepositions, and by
14% overall. In this experiment, where much more
unsupervised training data was available, super-
vised and unsupervised training achieved almost
the same level of performance (although many in-
dividual sentences were parsed differently).
A particular concern with corpus-based deci-
sion methods is their applicability beyond the
training corpus. In our case, the majority of the
material for supervised training was taken from
the same newscast collection as the test set. How-
ever, comparable results are also achieved when
applying the parser to the standard test set from the
NEGRA corpus of German, as used by (Schiehlen,
2004; Foth et al, 2005): adding the PP predic-
tor trained on our dependency treebank raises the
overall attachment accuracy from 89.3% to 90.6%.
This successful reuse indicates that lexical prefer-
ence between prepositions and function words is
largely independent of text type.
5 Related Work
(Hindle and Rooth, 1991) first proposed solving
the prepositional attachment task with the help of
statistical information, and also defined the preva-
lent formulation as a binary decision problem with
three words involved. (Ratnaparkhi et al, 1994)
228
extended the problem instances to quadruples by
also considering the kernel noun of the PP, and
used maximum entropy models to estimate the
preferences.
Both supervised and unsupervised training pro-
cedures for PP attachment have been investigated
and compared in a number of studies, with su-
pervised methods usually being slightly superior
(Ratnaparkhi, 1998; Pantel and Lin, 2000), with
the notable exception of (Volk, 2002), who ob-
tained a worse accuracy in the supervised case,
obviously caused by the limited size of the avail-
able treebank. Combining both methods can lead
to a further improvement (Volk, 2002; Kokkinakis,
2000), a finding confirmed by our experiments.
Supervised training methods already applied to
PP attachment range from stochastic maximum
likelihood (Collins and Brooks, 1995) or maxi-
mum entropy models (Ratnaparkhi et al, 1994)
to the induction of transformation rules (Brill and
Resnik, 1994), decision trees (Stetina and Nagao,
1997) and connectionist models (Sopena et al,
1998). The state-of-the-art is set by (Stetina and
Nagao, 1997) who generalize corpus observations
to semantically similar words as they can be de-
rived from the WordNet hierarchy.
The best result for German achieved so far is
the accuracy of 80.89% obtained by (Volk, 2002).
Note, however, that our goal was not to optimize
the performance of PP attachment in isolation but
to quantify the contribution it can make to the per-
formance of a full parser for unrestricted text.
The accuracy of PP attachment has rarely been
evaluated as a subtask of full parsing. (Merlo et al,
1997) evaluate the attachment of multiple preposi-
tions in the same sentence for English; 85.3% ac-
curacy is achieved for the first PP, 69.6% for the
second and 43.6% for the third. This is still rather
different from our setup, where PP attachment is
fully integrated into the parsing problem. Closer
to our evaluation scenario comes (Collins, 1999)
who reports 82.3%/81.51% recall/precision on PP
modifications for his lexicalized stochastic parser
of English. However, no analysis has been carried
out to determine which model components con-
tributed to this result.
A more application-oriented view has been
adopted by (Schwartz et al, 2003), who devised
an unsupervised method to extract positive and
negative lexical evidence for attachment prefer-
ences in English from a bilingual, aligned English-
Japanese corpus. They used this information to re-
attach PPs in a machine translation system, report-
ing an improvement in translation quality when
translating into Japanese (where PP attachment is
not ambiguous and therefore matters) and a de-
crease when translating into Spanish (where at-
tachment ambiguities are close to the original ones
and therefore need not be resolved).
Parsing results for German have been published
a number of times. Combining treebank transfor-
mation techniques with a suffix analysis, (Dubey,
2005) trained a probabilistic parser and reached a
labelled F-score of 76.3% on phrase structure an-
notations for a subset of the sentences used here
(with a maximum length of 40). For dependency
parsing a labelled accuracy of 87.34% and an un-
labelled one of 90.38% has been achieved by ap-
plying the dependency parser described in (Mc-
Donald et al, 2005) to German data. This system
is based on a procedure for online large margin
learning and considers a huge number of locally
available features, which allows it to determine
the optimal attachment fully deterministically. Us-
ing a stochastic variant of Constraint Dependency
Grammar (Wang and Harper, 2004) reached a
92.4% labelled F-score on the Penn Treebank,
which slightly outperforms (Collins, 1999) who
reports 92.0% on dependency structures automati-
cally derived from phrase structure results.
6 Conclusions and future work
Corpus-based data has been shown to provide a
significant benefit when used to guide a rule-based
dependency parser of German, reducing the er-
ror rate for situated PP attachment by one third.
Prepositions still remain the largest source of at-
tachment errors; many reasons can be tracked
down for individual errors, such as faulty POS
tagging, misinterpreted global sentence structure,
genuinely ambiguous constructions, failure of the
attraction heuristics, or simply lack of process-
ing time. However, considering that even human
arbiters often agree only on 90% of PP attach-
ments, the results appear promising. In particu-
lar, many attachment errors that strongly disagree
with human intuition (such as in the example sen-
tence) were in fact prevented. Thus, the addition
of a corpus-based knowledge source to the sys-
tem yielded a much greater benefit than could have
been achieved with the same effort by writing in-
dividual constraints.
229
One obvious further task is to improve our
simple-minded model of lexical attraction. For in-
stance, some remaining errors suggest that taking
the kernel noun into account would yield a higher
attachment precision; this will require a redesign
of the extraction tools to keep the parameter space
manageable. Also, other subordination types than
?PP? may benefit from similar knowledge; e.g., in
many German sentences the roles of subject and
object are syntactically ambiguous and can only
be understood correctly through world knowledge.
This is another area in which synergy between
lexical attraction estimates and general symbolic
rules appears possible.
References
E. Brill and P. Resnik. 1994. A rule-based approach to
prepositional phrase attachment disambiguation. In
Proc. 15th Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1198 ? 1204, Kyoto, Japan.
M. Collins and J. Brooks. 1995. Prepositional attach-
ment through a backed-off model. In Proc. of the
3rd Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 27?38,
Somerset, New Jersey.
M. Collins. 1999. Head-Driven Statistical Models for
Natural Language Parsing. Phd thesis, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadephia, PA.
A. Dubey. 2005. What to do when lexicalization fails:
parsing German with suffix analysis and smoothing.
In Proc. 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, Ann Ar-
bor, MI.
K. Foth and W. Menzel. 2006. Hybrid parsing: Us-
ing probabilistic models as predictors for a symbolic
parser. In Proc. 21st Int. Conf. on Computational
Linguistics, Coling-ACL-2006, Sydney.
K. Foth, W. Menzel, and I. Schro?der. 2000. A
Transformation-based Parsing Technique with Any-
time Properties. In 4th Int. Workshop on Parsing
Technologies, IWPT-2000, pages 89 ? 100.
K. Foth, M. Daum, and W. Menzel. 2005. Parsing un-
restricted German text with defeasible constraints.
In H. Christiansen, P. R. Skadhauge, and J. Vil-
ladsen, editors, Constraint Solving and Language
Processing, volume 3438 of LNAI, pages 140?157.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
D. Hindle and M. Rooth. 1991. Structural Ambiguity
and Lexical Relations. In Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 229?236.
D. Kokkinakis. 2000. Supervised pp-attachment dis-
ambiguation for swedish; (combining unsupervised
supervised training data). Nordic Journal of Lin-
guistics, 3.
R. McDonald, F. Pereira, K. Ribarov, and J. Hajic.
2005. Non-projective dependency parsing using
spanning tree algorithms. In Proc. Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference / Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
HLT/EMNLP-2005, Vancouver, B.C.
P. Merlo, M. Crocker, and C. Berthouzoz. 1997. At-
taching Multiple Prepositional Phrases: General-
ized Backed-off Estimation. In Proc. 2nd Conf. on
Empirical Methods in NLP, pages 149?155, Provi-
dence, R.I.
P. Pantel and D. Lin. 2000. An unsupervised approach
to prepositional phrase attachment using contextu-
ally similar words. In Proc. 38th Meeting of the
ACL, pages 101?108, Hong Kong.
A. Ratnaparkhi, J. Reynar, and S. Roukos. 1994. A
Maximum Entropy Model for Prepositional Phrase
Attachment. In Proc. ARPA Workshop on Human
Language Technology, pages 250 ?255.
A. Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Statistical models for unsu-
pervised prepositional phrase attachment. In Proc.
17th Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics, pages
1079?1085, Montreal.
M. Schiehlen. 2004. Annotation Strategies for Proba-
bilistic Parsing in German. In Proceedings of COL-
ING 2004, pages 390?396, Geneva, Switzerland,
Aug 23?Aug 27. COLING.
I. Schro?der. 2002. Natural Language Parsing with
Graded Constraints. Ph.D. thesis, Department of In-
formatics, Hamburg University, Hamburg, Germany.
L. Schwartz, T. Aikawa, and C. Quirk. 2003. Disam-
biguation of english PP-attachment using multilin-
gual aligned data. In Machine Translation Summit
IX, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
J. M. Sopena, A. LLoberas, and J. L. Moliner. 1998.
A connectionist approach to prepositional phrase at-
tachment for real world texts. In Proc. 17th Int.
Conf. on Computational Linguistics, pages 1233?
1237, Montreal.
J. Stetina and M. Nagao. 1997. Corpus based PP at-
tachment ambiguity resolution with a semantic dic-
tionary. In Jou Shou and Kenneth Church, editors,
Proc. 5th Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages
66?80, Hong Kong.
M. Volk. 2002. Combining Unsupervised and Super-
vised Methods for PP Attachment Disambiguation.
In Proc. of COLING-2002, Taipeh.
W. Wang and M. P. Harper. 2004. A statistical
constraint dependency grammar (CDG) parser. In
Proc. ACL Workshop Incremental Parsing: Bringing
Engineering and Cognition Together, pages 42?49,
Barcelona, Spain.
230
