Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 105?112,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Meaningful Clustering of Senses
Helps Boost Word Sense Disambiguation Performance
Roberto Navigli
Dipartimento di Informatica
Universita` di Roma ?La Sapienza?
Roma, Italy
navigli@di.uniroma1.it
Abstract
Fine-grained sense distinctions are one of
the major obstacles to successful Word
Sense Disambiguation. In this paper,
we present a method for reducing the
granularity of the WordNet sense inven-
tory based on the mapping to a manually
crafted dictionary encoding sense hierar-
chies, namely the Oxford Dictionary of
English. We assess the quality of the map-
ping and the induced clustering, and eval-
uate the performance of coarse WSD sys-
tems in the Senseval-3 English all-words
task.
1 Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is undoubt-
edly one of the hardest tasks in the field of Nat-
ural Language Processing. Even though some re-
cent studies report benefits in the use of WSD in
specific applications (e.g. Vickrey et al (2005)
and Stokoe (2005)), the present performance of
the best ranking WSD systems does not provide a
sufficient degree of accuracy to enable real-world,
language-aware applications.
Most of the disambiguation approaches adopt
the WordNet dictionary (Fellbaum, 1998) as a
sense inventory, thanks to its free availability, wide
coverage, and existence of a number of standard
test sets based on it. Unfortunately, WordNet is a
fine-grained resource, encoding sense distinctions
that are often difficult to recognize even for human
annotators (Edmonds and Kilgariff, 1998).
Recent estimations of the inter-annotator agree-
ment when using the WordNet inventory report
figures of 72.5% agreement in the preparation of
the English all-words test set at Senseval-3 (Sny-
der and Palmer, 2004) and 67.3% on the Open
Mind Word Expert annotation exercise (Chklovski
and Mihalcea, 2002). These numbers lead us to
believe that a credible upper bound for unrestricted
fine-grained WSD is around 70%, a figure that
state-of-the-art automatic systems find it difficult
to outperform. Furthermore, even if a system were
able to exceed such an upper bound, it would be
unclear how to interpret such a result.
It seems therefore that the major obstacle to ef-
fective WSD is the fine granularity of the Word-
Net sense inventory, rather than the performance
of the best disambiguation systems. Interestingly,
Ng et al (1999) show that, when a coarse-grained
sense inventory is adopted, the increase in inter-
annotator agreement is much higher than the re-
duction of the polysemy degree.
Following these observations, the main ques-
tion that we tackle in this paper is: can we pro-
duce and evaluate coarse-grained sense distinc-
tions and show that they help boost disambigua-
tion on standard test sets? We believe that this is
a crucial research topic in the field of WSD, that
could potentially benefit several application areas.
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First,
we provide a wide-coverage method for clustering
WordNet senses via a mapping to a coarse-grained
sense inventory, namely the Oxford Dictionary of
English (Soanes and Stevenson, 2003) (Section 2).
We show that this method is well-founded and ac-
curate with respect to manually-made clusterings
(Section 3). Second, we evaluate the performance
of WSD systems when using coarse-grained sense
inventories (Section 4). We conclude the paper
with an account of related work (Section 5), and
some final remarks (Section 6).
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
