Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 281?288,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Enhancing electronic dictionaries with an index based on associations 
 
Olivier Ferret 
CEA ?LIST/LIC2M 
18 Route du Panorama 
F-92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses 
ferreto@zoe.cea.fr 
Michael Zock1
LIF-CNRS 
163 Avenue de Luminy 
F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9 
michael.zock@lif.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract 
A good dictionary contains not only 
many entries and a lot of information 
concerning each one of them, but also 
adequate means to reveal the stored in-
formation. Information access depends 
crucially on the quality of the index. We 
will present here some ideas of how a 
dictionary could be enhanced to support a 
speaker/writer to find the word s/he is 
looking for. To this end we suggest to 
add to an existing electronic resource an 
index based on the notion of association. 
We will also present preliminary work of 
how a subset of such associations, for ex-
ample, topical associations, can be ac-
quired by filtering a network of lexical 
co-occurrences extracted from a corpus. 
1 Introduction 
A dictionary user typically pursues one of two 
goals (Humble, 2001): as a decoder (reading, 
listening), he may look for the definition or the 
translation of a specific target word, while as an 
encoder (speaker, writer) he may want to find a 
word that expresses well not only a given con-
cept, but is also appropriate in a given context.  
Obviously, readers and writers come to the 
dictionary with different mindsets, information 
and expectations concerning input and output. 
While the decoder can provide the word he wants 
additional information for, the encoder (language 
producer) provides the meaning of a word for 
which he lacks the corresponding form. In sum, 
users with different goals need access to different 
indexes, one that is based on form (decoding), 
 
1 In alphabetical order 
the other being based on meaning or meaning 
relations (encoding). 
Our concern here is more with the encoder, i.e. 
lexical access in language production, a feature 
largely neglected in lexicographical work. Yet, a 
good dictionary contains not only many entries 
and a lot of information concerning each one of 
them, but also efficient means to reveal the 
stored information. Because, what is a huge dic-
tionary good for, if one cannot access the infor-
mation it contains? 
2 Lexical access on the basis of what: 
concepts (i.e. meanings) or words?
Broadly speaking, there are two views concern-
ing lexicalization: the process is conceptually-
driven (meaning, or parts of it are the starting 
point) or lexically-driven2 : the target word is 
accessed via a source word. This is typically the 
case when we are looking for a synonym, anto-
nym, hypernym (paradigmatic associations), or 
any of its syntagmatic associates (red-rose, cof-
fee-black), the kind of association we will be 
concerned with here. 
Yet, besides conceptual knowledge, people 
seem also to know a lot of things concerning the 
lexical form (Brown and Mc Neill, 1966): num-
ber of syllables, beginning/ending of the target 
word, part of speech (noun, verb, adjective, etc.), 
origin (Greek or Latin), gender (Vigliocco et al, 
 
2 Of course, the input can also be hybrid, that is, it can be 
composed of a conceptual and a linguistic component. For 
example, in order to express the notion of intensity, MAGN in 
Mel?Auk?s theory (Mel?Auk et al, 1995), a speaker or writer 
has to use different words (very, seriously, high) depending 
on the form of the argument (ill, wounded, price), as he says 
very ill, seriously wounded, high price. In each case he ex-
presses the very same notion, but by using a different word. 
While he could use the adverb very for qualifying the state 
of somebody?s health (he is ill), he cannot do so when quali-
fying the words injury or price. Likewise, he cannot use this 
specific adverb to qualify the noun illness.
281
1997). While in principle, all this information 
could be used to constrain the search space, we 
will deal here only with one aspect, the words? 
relations to other concepts or words (associative 
knowledge). 
Suppose, you were looking for a word expressing 
the following ideas: domesticated animal, pro-
ducing milk suitable for making cheese. Suppose 
further that you knew that the target word was 
neither cow, buffalo nor sheep. While none of 
this information is sufficient to guarantee the 
access of the intended word goat, the information 
at hand (part of the definition) could certainly be 
used3. Besides this type of information, people 
often have other kinds of knowledge concerning 
the target word. In particular, they know how the 
latter relates to other words. For example, they 
know that goats and sheep are somehow con-
nected, sharing a great number of features, that 
both are animals (hypernym), that sheep are ap-
preciated for their wool and meat, that they tend 
to follow each other blindly, etc., while goats 
manage to survive, while hardly eating anything, 
etc. In sum, people have in their mind a huge 
lexico-conceptual network, with words 4 , con-
cepts or ideas being highly interconnected. 
Hence, any one of them can evoke the other. The 
likelihood for this to happen depends on such 
factors as frequency (associative strength), sali-
ency and distance (direct vs. indirect access). As 
one can see, associations are a very general and 
powerful mechanism. No matter what we hear, 
read or say, anything is likely to remind us of 
something else. This being so, we should make 
use of it. 
 
3 For some concrete proposals going in this direction, see 
dictionaries offering reverse lookup: http://www.ultralingua. 
net/ ,http://www.onelook.com/reverse-dictionary.shtml.
4 Of course, one can question the very fact that people store 
words in their mind. Rather than considering the human 
mind as a wordstore one might consider it as a wordfactory.
Indeed, by looking at some of the work done by psycholo-
gists who try to emulate the mental lexicon (Levelt et al, 
1999) one gets the impression that words are synthesized 
rather than located and call up. In this case one might con-
clude that rather than having words in our mind we have a 
set of highly distributed, more or less abstract information. 
By propagating energy rather than data ?(as there is no 
message passing, transformation or cumulation of informa-
tion, there is only activation spreading, that is, changes of 
energy levels, call it weights, electronic impulses, or what-
ever),? that we propagate signals, activating ultimately 
certain peripherical organs (larynx, tongue, mouth, lips, 
hands) in such a way as to produce movements or sounds, 
that, not knowing better, we call words. 
3 Accessing the target word by navigat-
ing in a huge associative network 
If one agrees with what we have just said, one 
could view the mental lexicon as a huge semantic 
network composed of nodes (words and con-
cepts) and links (associations), with either being 
able to activate the other5. Finding a word in-
volves entering the network and following the 
links leading from the source node (the first 
word that comes to your mind) to the target word 
(the one you are looking for). Suppose you 
wanted to find the word nurse (target word), yet 
the only token coming to your mind is hospital.
In this case the system would generate internally 
a graph with the source word at the center and all 
the associated words at the periphery. Put differ-
ently, the system would build internally a seman-
tic network with hospital in the center and all its 
associated words as satellites (see Figure 1, next 
page). 
Obviously, the greater the number of associa-
tions, the more complex the graph. Given the 
diversity of situations in which a given object 
may occur we are likely to build many associa-
tions. In other words, lexical graphs tend to be-
come complex, too complex to be a good repre-
sentation to support navigation. Readability is 
hampered by at least two factors: high connec-
tivity (the great number of links or associations 
emanating from each word), and distribution:
conceptually related nodes, that is, nodes acti-
vated by the same kind of association are scat-
tered around, that is, they do not necessarily oc-
cur next to each other, which is quite confusing 
for the user. In order to solve this problem, we 
suggest to display by category (chunks) all the 
words linked by the same kind of association to 
the source word (see Figure 2). Hence, rather 
than displaying all the connected words as a flat 
list, we suggest to present them in chunks to al-
low for categorial search. Having chosen a cate-
gory, the user will be presented a list of words or 
categories from which he must choose. If the 
target word is in the category chosen by the user 
(suppose he looked for a hypernym, hence he 
checked the ISA-bag), search stops, otherwise it 
continues. The user could choose either another 
category (e.g. AKO or TIORA), or a word in the 
current list, which would then become the new 
starting point. 
 
5 While the links in our brain may only be weighted, they 
need to be labelled to become interpretable for human be-
ings using them for navigational purposes in a lexicon. 
282
DENTIST
assistant
near-synonym
GYNECOLOGIST
PHYSICIAN
HEALTH
INSTITUTION
CLINIC
DOCTOR
SANATORIUM
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL
MILITARY HOSPITAL
ASYLUM
treat
A OK
take care of
treat
HOSPITAL
PATIENT
INMATE
TIORA
synonym
ISA A OK A OK
A OK
A OK
ISA
ISA ISA
ISA
ISA
TIORA
TIORA
nurse
Internal Representation
 
Figure 1: Search based on navigating in a network (internal representation) 
AKO: a kind of; ISA: subtype; TIORA: Typically Involved Object, Relation or Actor.
list of potential target words (LOPTW)
source word
link
link
link
link
link
LOPTW
LOPTW
list of potential target words (LOPTW)
...
Abstract representation of the search graph
hospital
TIORA
ISA
AKO clinic, sanatorium, ...
military hospital, psychiatric hospital
inmateSYNONYM
nurse
doctor, ...
patient
...
A concrete example
 
Figure 2: Proposed candidates, grouped by fam-
ily, i.e. according to the nature of the link 
As one can see, the fact that the links are labeled 
has some very important consequences:  
(a) While maintaining the power of a highly 
connected graph (possible cyclic navigation), 
it has at the interface level the simplicity of a 
tree: each node points only to data of the 
same type, i.e. to the same kind of associa-
tion.  
(b) With words being presented in clusters, 
navigation can be accomplished by clicking 
on the appropriate category.  
The assumption being that the user generally 
knows to which category the target word belongs 
(or at least, he can recognize within which of the 
listed categories it falls), and that categorical 
search is in principle faster than search in a huge 
list of unordered (or, alphabetically ordered) 
words6.
Obviously, in order to allow for this kind of 
access, the resource has to be built accordingly. 
This requires at least two things: (a) indexing 
words by the associations they evoke, (b) identi-
 
6 Even though very important, at this stage we shall not 
worry too much for the names given to the links. Indeed, 
one might question nearly all of them. What is important is 
the underlying rational: help users to navigate on the basis 
of symbolically qualified links. In reality a whole set of 
words (synonyms, of course, but not only) could amount to 
a link, i.e. be its conceptual equivalent. 
283
fying and labelling the most frequent/useful as-
sociations. This is precisely our goal. Actually, 
we propose to build an associative network by 
enriching an existing electronic dictionary (es-
sentially) with (syntagmatic) associations coming 
from a corpus, representing the average citizen?s 
shared, basic knowledge of the world (encyclo-
paedia). While some associations are too com-
plex to be extracted automatically by machine, 
others are clearly within reach. We will illustrate 
in the next section how this can be achieved. 
4 Automatic extraction of topical rela-
tions 
4.1 Definition of the problem 
We have argued in the previous sections that dic-
tionaries must contain many kinds of relations on 
the syntagmatic and paradigmatic axis to allow 
for natural and flexible access of words. Synon-
ymy, hypernymy or meronymy fall clearly in this 
latter category, and well known resources like 
WordNet (Miller, 1995), EuroWordNet (Vossen, 
1998) or MindNet (Richardson et al, 1998) con-
tain them. However, as various researchers have 
pointed out (Harabagiu et al, 1999), these net-
works lack information, in particular with regard 
to syntagmatic associations, which are generally 
unsystematic. These latter, called TIORA (Zock 
and Bilac, 2004) or topical relations (Ferret, 
2002) account for the fact that two words refer to 
the same topic, or take part in the same situation 
or scenario. Word-pairs like doctor?hospital,
burglar?policeman or plane?airport, are exam-
ples in case. The lack of such topical relations in 
resources like WordNet has been dubbed as the 
tennis problem (Roger Chaffin, cited in Fell-
baum, 1998). Some of these links have been in-
troduced more recently in WordNet via the do-
main relation. Yet their number remains still very 
small. For instance, WordNet 2.1 does not con-
tain any of the three associations mentioned here 
above, despite their high frequency. 
The lack of systematicity of these topical rela-
tions makes their extraction and typing very dif-
ficult on a large scale. This is why some re-
searchers have proposed to use automatic learn-
ing techniques to extend lexical networks like 
WordNet. In (Harabagiu & Moldovan, 1998), 
this was done by extracting topical relations from 
the glosses associated to the synsets. Other re-
searchers used external sources: Mandala et al 
(1999) integrated co-occurrences and a thesaurus 
to WordNet for query expansion; Agirre et al 
(2001) built topic signatures from texts in rela-
tion to synsets; Magnini and Cavagli? (2000) 
annotated the synsets with Subject Field Codes. 
This last idea has been taken up and extended by 
(Avancini et al, 2003) who expanded the do-
mains built from this annotation. 
Despite the improvements, all these ap-
proaches are limited by the fact that they rely too 
heavily on WordNet and some of its more so-
phisticated features (such as the definitions asso-
ciated with the synsets). While often being ex-
ploited by acquisition methods, these features are 
generally lacking in similar lexico-semantic net-
works. Moreover, these methods attempt to learn 
topical knowledge from a lexical network rather 
than topical relations. Since our goal is different, 
we have chosen not to rely on any significant 
resource, all the more as we would like our 
method to be applicable to a wide array of lan-
guages. In consequence, we took an incremental 
approach (Ferret, 2006): starting from a network 
of lexical co-occurrences7 collected from a large 
corpus, we used these latter to select potential 
topical relations by using a topical analyzer. 
4.2 From a network of co-occurrences to a 
set of Topical Units 
We start by extracting lexical co-occurrences 
from a corpus to build a network. To this end we 
follow the method introduced by (Church and 
Hanks, 1990), i.e. by sliding a window of a given 
size over some texts. The parameters of this ex-
traction were set in such a way as to catch the 
most obvious topical relations: the window was 
fairly large (20-words wide), and while it took 
text boundaries into account, it ignored the order 
of the co-occurrences. Like (Church and Hanks, 
1990), we used mutual information to measure 
the cohesion between two words. The finite size 
of the corpus allows us to normalize this measure 
in line with the maximal mutual information 
relative to the corpus.  
This network is used by TOPICOLL (Ferret, 
2002), a topic analyzer, which performs simulta-
neously three tasks, relevant for this goal: 
 it segments texts into topically homogene-
ous segments;  
 it selects in each segment the most repre-
sentative words of its topic; 
 
7 Such a network is only another view of a set of co-
occurrences: its nodes are the co-occurrent words and its 
edges are the co-occurrence relations. 
284
 it proposes a restricted set of words from 
the co-occurrence network to expand the 
selected words of the segment. 
These three tasks rely on a common mecha-
nism: a window is moved over the text to be ana-
lyzed in order to limit the focus space of the 
analysis. This latter contains a lemmatized ver-
sion of the text?s plain words. For each position 
of this window, we select only words of the co-
occurrence network that are linked to at least 
three other words of the window (see Figure 3). 
This leads to select both words that are in the 
window (first order co-occurrents) and words 
coming from the network (second order co-
occurrents). The number of links between the 
selected words of the network, called expansion 
words, and those of the window is a good indica-
tor of the topical coherence of the window?s con-
tent. Hence, when their number is small, a seg-
ment boundary can be assumed. This is the basic 
principle underlying our topic analyzer. 
 
0.14
0.21 0.10
0.18 0.13
0.17
w5w4w3w2w1
0.48 = pw3x0.18+pw4x0.13
+pw5x0.17
selected word from the co-occurrence network (with its weight)
1.0
word from text (with p its weight in the window, equal to 
0.21 link in the co-occurrence network (with its cohesion value)
1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
wi,
n1 n2
1.0 for all words of the window in this example)
0.48
Figure 3: Selection and weighting of words 
from the co-occurrence network 
The words selected for each position of the 
window are summed, to keep only those occur-
ring in 75% of the positions of the segment. This 
allows reducing the number of words selected 
from non-topical co-occurrences. Once a corpus 
has been processed by TOPICOLL, we obtain a 
set of segments and a set of expansion words for 
each one of them. The association of the selected 
words of a segment and its expansion words is 
called a Topical Unit. Since both sets of words 
are selected for reasons of topical homogeneity, 
their co-occurrence is more likely to be a topical 
relation than in our initial network. 
4.3 Filtering of Topical Units 
Before recording the co-occurrences in the Topi-
cal Units built in this way, the units are filtered 
twice. The first filter aims at discarding hetero-
geneous Topical Units, which can arise as a side 
effect of a document whose topics are so inter-
mingled that it is impossible to get a reliable lin-
ear segmentation of the text. We consider that 
this occurs when for a given text segment, no 
word can be selected as a representative of the 
topic of the segment. Moreover, we only keep 
the Topical Units that contain at least two words 
from their original segment. A topic is defined 
here as a configuration of words. Note that the 
identification of such a configuration cannot be 
based solely on a single word. 
 
Text words Expansion words 
surveillance 
(watch)
police_judiciaire 
(judiciary police)
t?l?phonique 
(telephone)
?crouer 
(to imprison)
juge 
(judge)
garde_?_vue 
(police custody)
policier 
(policeman)
?coute_t?l?phonique 
(phone tapping)
brigade 
(squad)
juge_d?instruction 
(examining judge)
enqu?te 
(investigation)
contr?le_judiciaire 
(judicial review)
placer 
(to put)
Table 1: Content of a filtered Topical Unit 
The second filter is applied to the expansion 
words of each Topical Unit to increase their topi-
cal homogeneity. The principle of the filtering of 
these words is the same as the principle of their 
selection described in Section 4.2: an expansion 
word is kept if it is linked in the co-occurrence 
network to at least three text words of the Topi-
cal Unit. Moreover, a selective threshold is ap-
plied to the frequency and the cohesion of the co-
occurrences supporting these links: only co-
occurrences whose frequency and cohesion are 
respectively higher or equal to 15 and 0.15 are 
used. For instance in Table 1, which shows an 
example of a Topical Unit after its filtering, 
?crouer (to imprison) is selected, because it is 
linked in the co-occurrence network to the fol-
lowing words of the text: 
juge (judge): 52 (frequency) ? 0.17 (cohesion) 
policier (policeman): 56 ? 0.17
enqu?te (investigation): 42 ? 0.16
285
word freq. word freq. word freq. word freq.
sc?ne 
(stage) 884 
th??tral 
(dramatic) 62 
cynique
(cynical) 26 
sc?nique 
(theatrical) 14
th??tre 
(theater) 679 
sc?nariste 
(scriptwriter) 51 
miss
(miss) 20 
Chabol 
(Chabol) 13
r?alisateur 
(director) 220 
comique 
(comic) 51 
parti_pris
(bias) 16 
Tchekov 
(Tchekov) 13
cin?aste 
(film-marker) 135 
oscar 
(oscar) 40 
monologue 
(monolog) 15 
allocataire
(beneficiary) 13
com?die 
(comedy) 104 
film_am?ricain 
(american film) 38 
revisiter
(to revisit) 14 
satirique
(satirical) 13
costumer 
(to dress up) 63 
hollywoodien 
(Hollywood) 30 
gros_plan 
(close-up) 14  
Table 2: Co-occurrents of the word acteur (actor) with a cohesion of 0.16  
(the co-occurrents removed by our filtering method are underlined) 
4.4 From Topical Units to a network of 
topical relations 
After the filtering, a Topical Unit gathers a set of 
words supposed to be strongly coherent from the 
topical point of view. Next, we record the co-
occurrences between these words for all the 
Topical Units remaining after filtering. Hence, 
we get a large set of topical co-occurrences, de-
spite the fact that a significant number of non-
topical co-occurrences remains, the filtering of 
Topical Units being an unsupervised process. 
The frequency of a co-occurrence in this case is 
given by the number of Topical Units containing 
both words simultaneously. No distinction con-
cerning the origin of the words of the Topical 
Units is made. 
The network of topical co-occurrences built 
from Topical Units is a subset of the initial net-
work. However, it also contains co-occurrences 
that are not part of it, i.e. co-occurrences that 
were not extracted from the corpus used for set-
ting the initial network or co-occurrences whose 
frequency in this corpus was too low. Only some 
of these ?new? co-occurrences are topical. Since 
it is difficult to estimate globally which ones are 
interesting, we have decided to focus our atten-
tion only on the co-occurrences of the topical 
network already present in the initial network. 
Thus, we only use the network of topical co-
occurrences as a filter for the initial co-
occurrence network. Before doing so, we filter 
the topical network in order to discard co-
occurrences whose frequency is too low, that is, 
co-occurrences that are unstable and not repre-
sentative. From the use of the final network by 
TOPICOLL (see Section 4.5), we set the thresh-
old experimentally to 5. Finally, the initial net-
work is filtered by keeping only co-occurrences 
present in the topical network. Their frequency 
and cohesion are taken from the initial network. 
While the frequencies given by the topical net-
work are potentially interesting for their topical 
significance, we do not use them because the 
results of the filtering of Topical Units are too 
hard to evaluate. 
4.5 Results and evaluation 
We applied the method described here to an ini-
tial co-occurrence network extracted from a cor-
pus of 24 months of Le Monde, a major French 
newspaper. The size of the corpus was around 39 
million words. The initial network contained 
18,958 words and 341,549 relations. The first run 
produced 382,208 Topical Units. After filtering, 
we kept 59% of them. The network built from 
these Topical Units was made of 11,674 words 
and 2,864,473 co-occurrences. 70% of these co-
occurrences were new with regard to the initial 
network and were discarded. Finally, we got a 
filtered network of 7,160 words and 183,074 re-
lations, which represents a cut of 46% of the ini-
tial network. A qualitative study showed that 
most of the discarded relations are non-topical. 
This is illustrated by Table 2, which gives the co-
occurrents of the word acteur (actor) that are 
filtered by our method among its co-occurrents 
with a high cohesion (equal to 0.16). For in-
stance, the words cynique (cynical) or allocataire 
(beneficiary) are cohesive co-occurrents of the 
286
word actor, even though they are not topically 
linked to it. These words are filtered out, while 
we keep words like gros_plan (close-up) or sc?-
nique (theatrical), which topically cohere with 
acteur (actor) despite their lower frequency than 
the discarded words. 
 
Recall8 Precision F1-measure
Error 
(Pk)9
initial (I) 0.85 0.79 0.82 0.20 
topical 
filtering 
(T) 
0.85 0.79 0.82 0.21 
frequency 
filtering 
(F) 
0.83 0.71 0.77 0.25 
Table 3: TOPICOLL?s results  
with different networks 
 
In order to evaluate more objectively our 
work, we compared the quantitative results of 
TOPICOLL with the initial network and its fil-
tered version. The evaluation showed that the 
performance of the segmenter remains stable, 
even if we use a topically filtered network (see 
Table 3). Moreover, it became obvious that a 
network filtered only by frequency and cohesion 
performs significantly less well, even with a 
comparable size. For testing the statistical sig-
nificance of these results, we applied to the Pk
values a one-side t-test with a null hypothesis of 
equal means. Levels lower or equal to 0.05 are 
considered as statistically significant: 
pval (I-T): 0.08 
pval (I-F): 0.02 
pval (T-F): 0.05 
These values confirm that the difference be-
tween the initial network (I) and the topically 
filtered one (T) is actually not significant, 
whereas the filtering based on co-occurrence fre-
quencies leads to significantly lower results, both 
compared to the initial network and the topically 
filtered one. Hence, one may conclude that our 
 
8 Precision is given by Nt / Nb and recall by Nt / D, with D
being the number of document breaks, Nb the number of 
boundaries found by TOPICOLL and Nt the number of 
boundaries that are document breaks (the boundary should 
not be farther than 9 plain words from the document break). 
9 Pk (Beeferman et al, 1999) evaluates the probability that a 
randomly chosen pair of words, separated by k words, is 
wrongly classified, i.e. they are found in the same segment 
by TOPICOLL, while they are actually in different ones (miss 
of a document break), or they are found in different seg-
ments, while they are actually in the same one (false alarm). 
method is an effective way of selecting topical 
relations by preference. 
5 Discussion and conclusion 
We have raised and partially answered the ques-
tion of how a dictionary should be indexed in 
order to support word access, a question initially 
addressed in (Zock, 2002) and (Zock and Bilac, 
2004). We were particularly concerned with the 
language producer, as his needs (and knowledge 
at the onset) are quite different from the ones of 
the language receiver (listener/reader). It seems 
that, in order to achieve our goal, we need to do 
two things: add to an existing electronic diction-
ary information that people tend to associate with 
a word, that is, build and enrich a semantic net-
work, and provide a tool to navigate in it. To this 
end we have suggested to label the links, as this 
would reduce the graph complexity and allow for 
type-based navigation. Actually our basic pro-
posal is to extend a resource like WordNet by 
adding certain links, in particular on the syntag-
matic axis. These links are associations, and their 
role consists in helping the encoder to find ideas 
(concepts/words) related to a given stimulus 
(brainstorming), or to find the word he is think-
ing of (word access). 
One problem that we are confronted with is to 
identify possible associations. Ideally we would 
need a complete list, but unfortunately, this does 
not exist. Yet, there is a lot of highly relevant 
information out there. For example, Mel?cuk?s 
lexical functions (Mel?cuk, 1995), Fillmore?s 
FRAMENET10, work on ontologies (CYC), thesau-
rus (Roget), WordNets (the original version from 
Princeton, various Euro-WordNets, BalkaNet), 
HowNet11, the work done by MICRA, the FACTO-
TUM project 12 , or the Wordsmyth diction-
ary/thesaurus13.
Since words are linked via associations, it is 
important to reveal these links. Once this is done, 
words can be accessed by following these links. 
We have presented here some preliminary work 
for extracting an important subset of such links 
from texts, topical associations, which are gener-
ally absent from dictionaries or resources like 
WordNet. An evaluation of the topic segmenta-
tion has shown that the relations extracted are 
sound from the topical point of view, and that 
they can be extracted automatically. However, 
 
10 http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~framenet/
11 http://www.keenage.com/html/e_index.html
12 http://humanities.uchicago.edu/homes/MICRA/
13 http://www.wordsmyth.com/
287
they still contain too much noise to be directly 
exploitable by an end user for accessing a word 
in a dictionary. One way of reducing the noise of 
the extracted relations would be to build from 
each text a representation of its topics and to re-
cord the co-occurrences in these representations 
rather than in the segments delimited by a topic 
segmenter. This is a hypothesis we are currently 
exploring. While we have focused here only on 
word access on the basis of (other) words, one 
should not forget that most of the time speakers 
or writers start from meanings. Hence, we shall 
consider this point more carefully in our future 
work, by taking a serious look at the proposals 
made by Bilac et al (2004); Durgar and Oflazer 
(2004), or Dutoit and Nugues (2002). 
References 
Eneko Agirre, Olatz Ansa, David Martinez and Edu-
ard Hovy. 2001. Enriching WordNet concepts with 
topic signatures. In NAACL?01 Workshop on 
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Applica-
tions, Extensions and Customizations.
Henri Avancini, Alberto Lavelli, Bernardo Magnini, 
Fabrizio Sebastiani and Roberto Zanoli. 2003. Ex-
panding Domain-Specific Lexicons by Term Cate-
gorization. In 18th ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing (SAC-03).
Doug Beeferman, Adam Berger and Lafferty. 1999. 
Statistical Models for Text Segmentation. Machine 
Learning, 34(1): 177-210. 
Slaven Bilac, Wataru Watanabe, Taiichi Hashimoto, 
Takenobu Tokunaga and Hozumi Tanaka. 2004. 
Dictionary search based on the target word descrip-
tion. In Tenth Annual Meeting of The Association 
for Natural Language Processing (NLP2004),
pages 556-559. 
Roger Brown and David McNeill. 1996. The tip of the 
tongue phenomenon. Journal of Verbal Learning 
and Verbal Behaviour, 5: 325-337. 
Kenneth Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word As-
sociation Norms, Mutual Information, And Lexi-
cography. Computational Linguistics, 16(1): 177-
210. 
Ilknur Durgar El-Kahlout and Kemal Oflazer. 2004. 
Use of Wordnet for Retrieving Words from Their 
Meanings, In 2nd Global WordNet Conference,
Brno 
Dominique Dutoit and Pierre Nugues. 2002. A lexical 
network and an algorithm to find words from defi-
nitions. In 15th European Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (ECAI 2002), Lyon, pages 450-454, 
IOS Press. 
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet - An Electronic 
Lexical Database, MIT Press. 
Olivier Ferret. 2006. Building a network of topical 
relations from a corpus. In LREC 2006.
Olivier Ferret. 2002. Using collocations for topic 
segmentation and link detection. In COLING 2002,
pages 260-266. 
Sanda M. Harabagiu, George A. Miller and Dan I. 
Moldovan. 1999. WordNet 2 - A Morphologically 
and Semantically Enhanced Resource. In ACL-
SIGLEX99: Standardizing Lexical Resources,
pages 1-8. 
Sanda M. Harabagiu and Dan I. Moldovan. 1998. 
Knowledge Processing on an Extended WordNet. 
In WordNet - An Electronic Lexical Database,
pages 379-405. 
Philip Humble. 2001. Dictionaries and Language 
Learners, Haag and Herchen. 
William Levelt, Ardi Roelofs and Antje Meyer. 1999. 
A theory of lexical access in speech production, 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22: 1-75. 
Bernardo Magnini and Gabriela Cavagli?. 2000. Inte-
grating Subject Field Codes into WordNet. In 
LREC 2000.
Rila Mandala, Takenobu Tokunaga and Hozumi 
Tanaka. 1999. Complementing WordNet with Ro-
get?s and Corpus-based Thesauri for Information 
Retrieval. In EACL 99.
Igor Mel?Auk, Arno Clas and Alain Polgu?re. 1995. 
Introduction ? la lexicologie explicative et combi-
natoire, Louvain, Duculot. 
George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A lexical Data-
base, Communications of the ACM. 38(11): 39-41. 
Stephen D. Richardson, William B. Dolan and Lucy 
Vanderwende. 1998. MindNet: Acquiring and 
Structuring Semantic Information from Text. In 
ACL-COLING?98, pages 1098-1102. 
Piek Vossen. 1998. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual 
Database with Lexical Semantic Networks. Kluwer 
Academic Publisher. 
Gabriella Vigliocco, Antonini, T., and Merryl Garrett. 
1997. Grammatical gender is on the tip of Italian 
tongues. Psychological Science, 8: 314-317. 
Michael Zock. 2002. Sorry, what was your name 
again, or how to overcome the tip-of-the tongue 
problem with the help of a computer? In SemaNet 
workshop, COLING 2002, Taipei. 
http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu /W/W02/W02-1118.pdf
Michael Zock and Slaven Bilac. 2004. Word lookup 
on the basis of associations: from an idea to a 
roadmap. In COLING 2004 workshop: Enhancing 
and using dictionaries, Geneva. 
http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu/ coling2004/W10/pdf/5.pdf
288
