Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 93?96,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generating Usable Formats for Metadata and
Annotations in a Large Meeting Corpus
Andrei Popescu-Belis and Paula Estrella
ISSCO/TIM/ETI, University of Geneva
40, bd. du Pont-d?Arve
1211 Geneva 4 - Switzerland
{andrei.popescu-belis, paula.estrella}@issco.unige.ch
Abstract
The AMI Meeting Corpus is now publicly
available, including manual annotation files
generated in the NXT XML format, but
lacking explicit metadata for the 171 meet-
ings of the corpus. To increase the usability
of this important resource, a representation
format based on relational databases is pro-
posed, which maximizes informativeness,
simplicity and reusability of the metadata
and annotations. The annotation files are
converted to a tabular format using an eas-
ily adaptable XSLT-based mechanism, and
their consistency is verified in the process.
Metadata files are generated directly in the
IMDI XML format from implicit informa-
tion, and converted to tabular format using
a similar procedure. The results and tools
will be freely available with the AMI Cor-
pus. Sharing the metadata using the Open
Archives network will contribute to increase
the visibility of the AMI Corpus.
1 Introduction
The AMI Meeting Corpus (Carletta and al., 2006)
is one of the largest and most extensively annotated
data sets of multimodal recordings of human interac-
tion. The corpus contains 171 meetings, in English,
for a total duration of ca. 100 hours. The meetings
either follow the remote control design scenario, or
are naturally occurring meetings. In both cases, they
have between 3 and 5 participants.
Perhaps the most valuable resources in this cor-
pus are the high quality annotations, which can be
used to train and test NLP tools. The existing anno-
tation dimensions include, beside transcripts, forced
temporal alignment, named entities, topic segmen-
tation, dialogue acts, abstractive and extractive sum-
maries, as well as hand and head movement and pos-
ture. However, these dimensions as well as the im-
plicit metadata for the corpus are difficult to exploit
by NLP tools due to their particular coding schemes.
This paper describes work on the generation of
annotation and metadata databases in order to in-
crease the usability of these components of the AMI
Corpus. In the following sections we describe the
problem, present the current solutions and give fu-
ture directions.
2 Description of the Problem
The AMI Meeting Corpus is publicly available at
http://corpus.amiproject.org and con-
tains the following media files: audio (headset mikes
plus lapel, array and mix), video (close up, wide
angle), slides capture, whiteboard and paper notes.
In addition, all annotations described in Section 1
are available in one large bundle. Annotators fol-
lowed dimension-specific guidelines and used the
NITE XML Toolkit (NXT) to support their task,
generating annotations in NXT format (Carletta and
al., 2003; Carletta and Kilgour, 2005). Using the
NXT/XML schema makes the annotations consis-
tent along the corpus but more difficult to use with-
out the NITE toolkit. A less developed aspect of
the corpus is the metadata encoding all auxiliary in-
formation about meetings in a more structured and
informative manner. At the moment, metadata is
spread implicitly along the corpus data, for example
93
it is encoded in the file or folder names or appears to
be split in several resource files.
We define here annotations as the time-dependent
information which is abstracted from the input me-
dia, i.e. ?higher-level? phenomena derived from
low-level mono- or multi-modal features. Con-
versely, metadata is defined as the static information
about a meeting that is not directly related to its con-
tent (see examples in Section 4). Therefore, though
not necessarily time-dependent, structural informa-
tion derived from meeting-related documents would
constitute an annotation and not metadata. These
definitions are not universally accepted, but they al-
low us to separate the two types of information.
The main goal of the present work is to facilitate
the use of the AMI Corpus metadata and annota-
tions as part of the larger objective of automating
the generation of annotation and metadata databases
to enhance search and browsing of meeting record-
ings. This goal can be achieved by providing plug-
and-play databases, which are much easier to ac-
cess than NXT files and provide declarative rather
than implicit metadata. One of the challenges in
the NXT-to-database conversion is the extraction of
relevant information, which is done here by solving
NXT pointers and discarding NXT-specific markup
to group all information for a phenomenon in only
one structure or table.
The following criteria were important when defin-
ing the conversion procedure and database tables:
? Simplicity: the structure of the tables should
be easy to understand, and should be close to
the annotation dimensions?ideally one table
per annotation. Some information can be du-
plicated in several tables to make them more
intelligible. This makes the update of this in-
formation more difficult, but as this concerns a
recorded corpus, changes are less likely to oc-
cur; if such changes do occur, they would first
be input in the annotation files, from which a
new set of tables can easily be generated.
? Reusability: the tools allow anyone to recreate
the tables from the official distribution of the
annotation files. Therefore, if the format of the
annotation files or folders changes, or if a dif-
ferent format is desired for the tables, it is quite
easy to change the tools to generate a new ver-
sion of the database tables.
? Applicability: the tables are ready to be loaded
into any SQL database, so that they can be im-
mediately used by a meeting browser plugged
into the database.
Although we report one solution here, there are
other approaches to the same problem relying, for
example, on different database structures using more
or fewer tables to represent this information.
3 Annotations: Generation of Tables
The first goal is to convert the NXT files from the
AMI Corpus into a compact tabular representation
(tab-separated text files), using a simple, declarative
and easily updatable conversion procedure.
The conversion principle is the following: for
each type of annotation, which is generally stored
in a specific folder of the data distribution, an XSLT
stylesheet converts the NXT XML file into a tab-
separated text file, possibly using information from
one or more annotations. The stylesheets resolve
most of the NXT pointers, by including redundant
information into the tables, in order to speed up
queries by avoiding frequent joins. A Perl script
applies the respective XSLT stylesheet to each an-
notation file according to its type, and generates the
global tab-separated files for each annotation. The
script also generates an SQL script that creates a re-
lational annotation database and populates it with
data from the tab-separated files. The Perl script
also summarizes the results into a log file named
<timestamp>.log.
The conversion process can be summarized as fol-
lows and can be repeated at will, in particular if the
NXT source files are updated:
1. Start with the official NXT release (or other
XML-based format) of the AMI annotations as
a reference version.
2. Apply the table generation mechanism to
XML annotation files, using XSLT stylesheets
called by the script, in order to generate tab-
ular files (TSV) and a table-creation script
(db loader.sql).
3. Create and populate the annotation database.
4. Adapt the XSLT stylesheets as needed for vari-
ous annotations and/or table formats.
94
4 Metadata: Generation of Explicit Files
and Conversion to Tabular Format
As mentioned in Section 2, metadata denotes here
any static information about a meeting, not di-
rectly related to its content. The main metadata
items are: date, time, location, scenario, partic-
ipants, participant-related information (codename,
age, gender, knowledge of English and other lan-
guages), relations to media-files (participants vs. au-
dio channels vs. files), and relations to other docu-
ments produced during the meeting (slides, individ-
ual and whiteboard notes).
This important information is spread in many
places, and can be found as attributes of a meeting
in the annotation files (e.g. start time) or obtained
by parsing file names (e.g. audio channel, camera).
The relations to media files are gathered from differ-
ent resource files: mainly the meetings.xml and
participants.xml files. An additional prob-
lem in reconstructing such relations (e.g. files gen-
erated by a specific participant) is that information
about the media resources must be obtained directly
from the AMI Corpus distribution web site, since
the media resources are not listed explicitly in the
annotation files. This implies using different strate-
gies to extract the metadata: for example, stylesheets
are the best option to deal with the above-mentioned
XML files, while a crawler script is used for HTTP
access to the distribution site. However, the solution
adopted for annotations in Section 3 can be reused
with one major extension and applied to the con-
struction of the metadata database.
The standard chosen for the explicit meta-
data files is the IMDI format, proposed by
the ISLE Meta Data Initiative (Wittenburg
et al, 2002; Broeder et al, 2004a) (see
http://www.mpi.nl/IMDI/tools), which
is precisely intended to describe multimedia
recordings of dialogues. This standard provides a
flexible and extensive schema to store the defined
metadata either in specific IMDI elements or as
additional key/value pairs. The metadata generated
for the AMI Corpus can be explored with the IMDI
BC-Browser (Broeder et al, 2004b), a tool that
is freely available and has useful features such as
search or metadata editing.
The process of extracting, structuring and storing
the metadata is as follows:
1. Crawl the AMI Corpus website and store re-
sulting metadata (related to media files) into an
XML auxiliary file.
2. Apply an XSLT stylesheet to the aux-
iliary XML file, using also the dis-
tribution files meetings.xml and
participants.xml, to obtain one IMDI
file per meeting.
3. Apply the table generation mechanism to each
IMDI file in order to generate tabular files
(TSV) and a table-creation script.
4. Create and populate metadata tables within
database.
5. Adapt the XSLT stylesheet as needed for vari-
ous table formats.
5 Results: Current State and Distribution
The 16 annotation dimensions from the public AMI
Corpus were processed following the procedure
described in Section 3. The main Perl script,
anno-xml2db.pl, applied the 16 stylesheets cor-
responding to each annotation dimension, which
generated one large tab-separated file each. The
script also generated the table-creation SQL script
db loader.sql. The number of lines of each ta-
ble, hence the number of ?elementary annotations?,
is shown in Table 1.
The application of the metadata extraction tools
described in Section 4 generated a first version of
the explicit metadata for the AMI Corpus, consist-
ing of 171 automatically generated IMDI files (one
per meeting). In addition, 85 manual files were
created in order to organize the metadata files into
IMDI corpus nodes, which form the skeleton of the
corpus metadata and allow its browsing with the
BC-Browser. The resources and tools for annota-
tion/metadata processing will be made soon avail-
able on the AMI Corpus website, along with a demo
access to the BC-Browser.
6 Discussion and Perspectives
The proposed solution for annotation conversion is
easy to understand, as it can be summarized as ?one
table per annotation dimension?. The tables pre-
serve only the relevant information from the NXT
95
Annotation dimension Nb. of entries
words (transcript) 1,207,769
named entities 14,230
speech segments 69,258
topics 1,879
dialogue acts 117,043
adjacency pairs 26,825
abstractive summaries 2,578
extractive summaries 19,216
abs/ext links 22,101
participant summaries 3,409
focus 31,271
hand gesture 1,453
head gesture 36,257
argument structures 6,920
argumentation relations 4,759
discussions 8,637
Table 1: Results of annotation conversion; dimen-
sions are grouped by conceptual similarity.
annotation files, and search is accelerated by avoid-
ing repeated joins between tables.
The process of metadata extraction and genera-
tion is very flexible and the obtained data can be eas-
ily stored in different file formats (e.g. tab-separated,
IMDI, XML, etc.) with no need to repeatedly parse
file names or analyse folders. Moreover, the ad-
vantage of creating IMDI files is that the metadata
is compliant with a widely used standard accompa-
nied by freely available tools such as the metadata
browser. These results will also help disseminating
the AMI Corpus.
As a by-product of the development of annotation
and metadata conversion tools, we performed a con-
sistency checking and reported a number of to the
corpus administrators. The automatic processing of
the entire annotation and metadata set enabled us to
test initial hypotheses about annotation structure.
In the future we plan to include the AMI Cor-
pus metadata in public catalogues, through the Open
(Language) Archives Initiatives network (Bird and
Simons, 2001), as well as through the IMDI network
(Wittenburg et al, 2004). The metadata repository
will be harvested by answering the OAI-PMH pro-
tocol, and the AMI Corpus website could become
itself a metadata provider.
Acknowledgments
The work presented here has been supported by
the Swiss National Science Foundation through the
NCCR IM2 on Interactive Multimodal Information
Management (http://www.im2.ch). The au-
thors would like to thank Jean Carletta, Jonathan
Kilgour and Mae?l Guillemot for their help in access-
ing the AMI Corpus.
References
Steven Bird and Gary Simons. 2001. Extending Dublin
Core metadata to support the description and discovery
of language resources. Computers and the Humani-
ties, 37(4):375?388.
Daan Broeder, Thierry Declerck, Laurent Romary,
Markus Uneson, Sven Stro?mqvist, and Peter Witten-
burg. 2004a. A large metadata domain of language
resources. In LREC 2004 (4th Int. Conf. on Language
Resources and Evaluation), pages 369?372, Lisbon.
Daan Broeder, Peter Wittenburg, and Onno Crasborn.
2004b. Using profiles for IMDI metadata creation. In
LREC 2004 (4th Int. Conf. on Language Resources and
Evaluation), pages 1317?1320, Lisbon.
Jean Carletta and al. 2006. The AMI Meeting Corpus:
A pre-announcement. In Steve Renals and Samy Ben-
gio, editors, Machine Learning for Multimodal Inter-
action II, LNCS 3869, pages 28?39. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin/Heidelberg.
Jean Carletta and Jonathan Kilgour. 2005. The NITE
XML Toolkit meets the ICSI Meeting Corpus: Import,
annotation, and browsing. In Samy Bengio and Herve?
Bourlard, editors, Machine Learning for Multimodal
Interaction, LNCS 3361, pages 111?121. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg.
Jean Carletta, Stefan Evert, Ulrich Heid, Jonathan Kil-
gour, Judy Robertson, and Holger Voormann. 2003.
The NITE XML Toolkit: flexible annotation for multi-
modal language data. In Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, special issue on Measur-
ing Behavior, 35(3), pages 353?363.
Peter Wittenburg, Wim Peters, and Daan Broeder. 2002.
Metadata proposals for corpora and lexica. In LREC
2002 (3rd Int. Conf. on Language Resources and Eval-
uation), pages 1321?1326, Las Palmas.
Peter Wittenburg, Daan Broeder, and Paul Buitelaar.
2004. Towards metadata interoperability. In NLPXML
2004 (4th Workshop on NLP and XML at ACL 2004),
pages 9?16, Barcelona.
96
