Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 85?88,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dictionary Definitions based Homograph Identification using a  
Generative Hierarchical Model 
 
 
Anagha Kulkarni Jamie Callan 
Language Technologies Institute 
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
{anaghak, callan}@cs.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
A solution to the problem of homograph 
(words with multiple distinct meanings) iden-
tification is proposed and evaluated in this pa-
per. It is demonstrated that a mixture model 
based framework is better suited for this task 
than the standard classification algorithms ? 
relative improvement of 7% in F1 measure 
and 14% in Cohen?s kappa score is observed.  
1 Introduction 
Lexical ambiguity resolution is an important re-
search problem for the fields of information re-
trieval and machine translation (Sanderson, 2000; 
Chan et al, 2007). However, making fine-grained 
sense distinctions for words with multiple closely-
related meanings is a subjective task (Jorgenson, 
1990; Palmer et al, 2005), which makes it difficult 
and error-prone.  Fine-grained sense distinctions 
aren?t necessary for many tasks, thus a possibly-
simpler alternative is lexical disambiguation at the 
level of homographs (Ide and Wilks, 2006).  
Homographs are a special case of semantically 
ambiguous words:  Words that can convey multi-
ple distinct meanings. For example, the word bark 
can imply two very different concepts ? ?outer 
layer of a tree trunk?, or, ?the sound made by a 
dog? and thus is a homograph. Ironically, the defi-
nition of the word ?homograph? is itself ambiguous 
and much debated; however, in this paper we con-
sistently use the above definition.  
If the goal is to do word-sense disambiguation 
of homographs in a very large corpus, a manually-
generated homograph inventory may be impracti-
cal. In this case, the first step is to determine which 
words in a lexicon are homographs.  This problem 
is the subject of this paper. 
2 Finding the Homographs in a Lexicon 
Our goal is to identify the homographs in a large 
lexicon.  We assume that manual labor is a scarce 
resource, but that online dictionaries are plentiful 
(as is the case on the web).  Given a word from the 
lexicon, definitions are obtained from eight dic-
tionaries: Cambridge Advanced Learners Diction-
ary (CALD), Compact Oxford English Dictionary, 
MSN Encarta, Longman Dictionary of Contempo-
rary English (LDOCE), The Online Plain Text 
English Dictionary, Wiktionary, WordNet and 
Wordsmyth. Using multiple dictionaries provides 
more evidence for the inferences to be made and 
also minimizes the risk of missing meanings be-
cause a particular dictionary did not include one or 
more meanings of a word (a surprisingly common 
situation). We can now rephrase the problem defi-
nition as that of determining which words in the 
lexicon are homographs given a set of dictionary 
definitions for each of the words.  
2.1 Features 
We use nine meta-features in our algorithm. In-
stead of directly using common lexical features 
such as n-grams we use meta-features which are 
functions defined on the lexical features. This ab-
85
straction is essential in this setup for the generality 
of the approach. For each word w to be classified 
each of the following meta-features are computed. 
 
1. Cohesiveness Score: Mean of the cosine simi-
larities between each pair of definitions of w. 
2. Average Number of Definitions: The average 
number of definitions per dictionary. 
3. Average Definition Length: The average 
length (in words) of definitions of w. 
4. Average Number of Null Similarities: The 
number of definition pairs that have zero co-
sine similarity score (no word overlap). 
5. Number of Tokens: The sum of the lengths 
(in words) of the definitions of w. 
6. Number of Types: The size of the vocabulary 
used by the set of definitions of w. 
7. Number of Definition Pairs with n Word 
Overlaps: The number of definition pairs that 
have more than n=2 words in common. 
8. Number of Definition Pairs with m Word 
Overlaps: The number of definition pairs that 
have more than m=4 words in common. 
9. Post Pruning Maximum Similarity: (below) 
 
The last feature sorts the pair-wise cosine similar-
ity scores in ascending order, prunes the top n% of 
the scores, and uses the maximum remaining score 
as the feature value.  This feature is less ad-hoc 
than it may seem.  The set of definitions is formed 
from eight dictionaries, so almost identical defini-
tions are a frequent phenomenon, which makes the 
maximum cosine similarity a useless feature. A 
pruned maximum turns out to be useful informa-
tion. In this work n=15 was found to be most in-
formative using a tuning dataset.  
Each of the above features provides some 
amount of discriminative power to the algorithm. 
For example, we hypothesized that on average the 
cohesiveness score will be lower for homographs 
than for non-homographs. Figure 1 provides an 
illustration. If empirical support was observed for 
such a hypothesis about a candidate feature then 
the feature was selected. This empirical evidence 
was derived from only the training portion of the 
data (Section 3.1).  
The above features are computed on definitions 
stemmed with the Porter Stemmer. Closed class 
words, such as articles and prepositions, and dic-
tionary-specific stopwords, such as ?transitive?, 
?intransitive?, and ?countable?, were also removed. 
Figure 1. Histogram of Cohesiveness scores for Homo-
graphs and Non-homographs. 
2.2 Models 
We formulate the homograph detection process as 
a generative hierarchical model. Figure 2 provides 
the plate notation of the graphical model. The la-
tent (unobserved) variable Z models the class in-
formation: homograph or non-homograph. Node X 
is the conditioned random vector (Z is the condi-
tioning variable) that models the feature vector. 
 
Figure 2.  Plate notation for the proposed model. 
 
This setup results in a mixture model with two 
components, one for each class. The Z is assumed 
to be Bernoulli distributed and thus parameterized 
by a single parameter p. We experiment with two 
continuous multivariate distributions, Dirichlet and 
Multivariate Normal (MVN), for the conditional 
distribution of X|Z. 
Z ~ Bernoulli (p) 
X|Z ~ Dirichlet (az)   
OR 
X|Z ~ MVN (muz, covz) 
We will refer to the parameters of the condi-
tional distribution as ?z. For the Dirichlet distribu-
tion, ?z is a ten-dimensional vector az = (az1, .., 
az10). For the MVN, ?z represents a nine-
dimensional mean vector muz = (muz1, .., muz9) 
N 
p Z 
X ? 
 
86
and a nine-by-nine-dimensional covariance matrix 
covz. We use maximum likelihood estimators 
(MLE) for estimating the parameters (p, ?z). The 
MLEs for Bernoulli and MVN parameters have 
analytical solutions. Dirichlet parameters were es-
timated using an estimation method proposed and 
implemented by Tom Minka1. 
We experiment with three model setups: Super-
vised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised. In the 
supervised setup we use the training data described 
in Section 3.1 for parameter estimation and then 
use thus fitted models to classify the tuning and 
test dataset. We refer to this as the Model I. In 
Model II, the semi-supervised setup, the training 
data is used to initialize the Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al, 
1977) and the unlabeled data, described in Section 
3.1, updates the initial estimates. The Viterbi 
(hard) EM algorithm was used in these experi-
ments. The E-step was modified to include only 
those unlabeled data-points for which the posterior 
probability was above certain threshold. As a re-
sult, the M-step operates only on these high poste-
rior data-points. The optimal threshold value was 
selected using a tuning set (Section 3.1). The unsu-
pervised setup, Model III, is similar to the semi-
supervised setup except that the EM algorithm is 
initialized using an informed guess by the authors. 
3 Data 
In this study, we concentrate on recognizing 
homographic nouns, because homographic ambi-
guity is much more common in nouns than in 
verbs, adverbs or adjectives. 
3.1 Gold Standard Data 
A set of potentially-homographic nouns was identi-
fied by selecting all words with at least two noun 
definitions in both CALD and LDOCE.  This set 
contained 3,348 words. 
225 words were selected for manual annotation 
as homograph or non-homograph by random sam-
pling of words that were on the above list and used 
in prior psycholinguistic studies of homographs 
(Twilley et al, 1994; Azuma, 1996) or on the Aca-
demic Word List (Coxhead, 2000). 
Four annotators at, the Qualitative Data Analysis 
Program at the University of Pittsburgh, were 
                                                          
1
 http://research.microsoft.com/~minka/software/fastfit/ 
trained to identify homographs using sets of dic-
tionary definitions.  After training, each of the 225 
words was annotated by each annotator. On aver-
age, annotators categorized each word in just 19 
seconds.  The inter-annotator agreement was 0.68, 
measured by Fleiss? Kappa. 
23 words on which annotators disagreed (2/2 
vote) were discarded, leaving a set of 202 words 
(the ?gold standard?) on which at least 3 of the 4 
annotators agreed. The best agreement between the 
gold standard and a human annotator was 0.87 
kappa, and the worst was 0.78. The class distribu-
tion (homographs and non-homographs) was 0.63, 
0.37. The set of 3,123 words that were not anno-
tated was the unlabeled data for the EM algorithm. 
4 Experiments and Results 
A stratified division of the gold standard data in 
the proportion of 0.75 and 0.25 was done in the 
first step. The smaller portion of this division was 
held out as the testing dataset. The bigger portion 
was further divided into two portions of 0.75 and 
0.25 for the training set and the tuning set, respec-
tively. The best and the worst kappa between a 
human annotator and the test set are 0.92 and 0.78. 
Each of the three models described in Section 
2.2 were experimented with both Dirichlet and 
MVN as the conditional. An additional experiment 
using two standard classification algorithms ? Ker-
nel Based Na?ve Bayes (NB) and Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) was performed. We refer to this 
as the baseline experiment. The Na?ve Bayes clas-
sifier outperformed SVM on the tuning as well as 
the test set and thus we report NB results only. A 
four-fold cross-validation was employed for the all 
the experiments on the tuning set. The results are 
summarized in Table 1. The reported precision, 
recall and F1 values are for the homograph class.  
The na?ve assumption of class conditional fea-
ture independence is common to simple Na?ve 
Bayes classifier, a kernel based NB classifier; 
however, unlike simple NB it is capable of model-
ing non-Gaussian distributions. Note that in spite 
of this advantage the kernel based NB is outper-
formed by the MVN based hierarchical model. Our 
nine features are by definition correlated and thus 
it was our hypothesis that a multivariate distribu-
tion such as MVN which can capture the covari-
ance amongst the features will be a better fit. The 
above finding confirms this hypothesis. 
87
 Table 1. Results for the six models and the baseline on the tuning and test set.
One of the known situations when mixture mod-
els out-perform standard classification algorithms 
is when the data comes from highly overlapping 
distributions. In such cases the classification algo-
rithms that try to place the decision boundary in a 
sparse area are prone to higher error-rates than 
mixture model based approach. We believe that 
this is explanations of the observed results. On the 
test set a relative improvement of 7% in F1 and 
14% in kappa statistic is obtained using the MVN 
mixture model. 
The results for the semi-supervised models are 
non-conclusive. Our post-experimental analysis 
reveals that the parameter updation process using 
the unlabeled data has an effect of overly separat-
ing the two overlapping distributions. This is trig-
gered by our threshold based EM methodology 
which includes only those data-points for which 
the model is highly confident; however such data-
points are invariable from the non-overlapping re-
gions of the distribution, which gives a false view 
to the learner that the distributions are less over-
lapping. We believe that the unsupervised models 
also suffer from the above problem in addition to 
the possibility of poor initializations. 
5 Conclusions 
We have demonstrated in this paper that the prob-
lem of homograph identification can be ap-
proached using dictionary definitions as the source 
of information about the word. Further more, using 
multiple dictionaries provides more evidence for 
the inferences to be made and also minimizes the 
risk of missing few meanings of the word.  
We can conclude that by modeling the underly-
ing data generation process as a mixture model, the 
problem of homograph identification can be per-
formed with reasonable accuracy.  
The capability of identifying homographs from 
non-homographs enables us to take on the next 
steps of sense-inventory generation and lexical 
ambiguity resolution. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Shay Cohen and Dr. Matthew Harrison for the 
helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by 
the Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center which is 
funded by the National Science Foundation, award 
number SBE-0354420.  
References  
A. Dempster, N. Laird, and D. Rubin. 1977. Maximum 
likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algo-
rithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series 
B, 39(1):1?38. 
A. Coxhead. 2000. A New Academic Word List. 
TESOL, Quarterly, 34(2): 213-238. 
J. Jorgenson. 1990. The psychological reality of word 
senses. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 19:167-
190. 
L. Twilley, P. Dixon, D. Taylor, and K. Clark. 1994. 
University of Alberta norms of relative meaning fre-
quency for 566 homographs. Memory and Cognition. 
22(1): 111-126. 
M. Sanderson. 2000. Retrieving with good sense. In-
formation Retrieval, 2(1): 49-69. 
M. Palmer, H. Dang, C. Fellbaum, 2005. Making fine-
grained and coarse-grained sense distinctions. Jour-
nal of Natural Language Engineering. 13: 137-163.  
N. Ide and Y. Wilks. 2006. Word Sense Disambigua-
tion, Algorithms and Applications. Springer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
T. Azuma. 1996. Familiarity and Relatedness of Word 
Meanings: Ratings for 110 Homographs. Behavior 
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers. 
28(1): 109-124. 
Y. Chan, H. Ng, and D. Chiang. 2007. Proceeding of 
Association for Computational Linguistics, Prague, 
Czech Republic. 
 Tuning Set Test Set 
 
Preci-
sion Recall F1 Kappa 
Preci-
sion Recall F1 Kappa 
Model I ? Dirichlet 0.84 0.74 0.78 0.47 0.81 0.62 0.70 0.34 
Model II ? Dirichlet 0.85 0.71 0.77 0.45 0.81 0.60 0.68 0.33 
Model III ? Dirichlet 0.78 0.74 0.76 0.37 0.82 0.56 0.67 0.32 
Model I ? MVN 0.70 0.75 0.78 0.32 0.80 0.73 0.76 0.41 
Model II ? MVN 0.74 0.82 0.78 0.34 0.71 0.79 0.74 0.25 
Model III ? MVN 0.69 0.89 0.77 0.22 0.64 0.84 0.72 0.22 
Baseline ? NB 0.82 0.73 0.77 0.43 0.82 0.63 0.71 0.36 
88
