Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 121?129,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Grounded Language Modeling for 
Automatic Speech Recognition of Sports Video  
Michael Fleischman 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Media Laboratory 
mbf@mit.edu 
Deb Roy 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Media Laboratory 
dkroy@media.mit.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Grounded language models represent the rela-
tionship between words and the non-linguistic 
context in which they are said.  This paper de-
scribes how they are learned from large cor-
pora of unlabeled video, and are applied to the 
task of automatic speech recognition of sports 
video.  Results show that grounded language 
models improve perplexity and word error 
rate over text based language models, and fur-
ther, support video information retrieval better 
than human generated speech transcriptions. 
1 Introduction 
Recognizing speech in broadcast video is a neces-
sary precursor to many multimodal applications 
such as video search and summarization (Snoek 
and Worring, 2005;).  Although performance is 
often reasonable in controlled environments (such 
as studio news rooms), automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR) systems have significant difficulty in 
noisier settings (such as those found in live sports 
broadcasts) (Wactlar et al, 1996).  While many 
researches have examined how to compensate for 
such noise using acoustic techniques, few have 
attempted to leverage information in the visual 
stream to improve speech recognition performance 
(for an exception see Murkherjee and Roy, 2003).   
In many types of video, however, visual context 
can provide valuable clues as to what has been 
said.  For example, in video of Major League 
Baseball games, the likelihood of the phrase ?home 
run? increases dramatically when a home run has 
actually been hit.  This paper describes a method 
for incorporating such visual information in an 
ASR system for sports video.  The method is based 
on the use of grounded language models to repre-
sent the relationship between words and the non-
linguistic context to which they refer (Fleischman 
and Roy, 2007).   
Grounded language models are based on re-
search from cognitive science on grounded models 
of meaning. (for a review see Roy, 2005, and Roy 
and Reiter, 2005).  In such models, the meaning of 
a word is defined by its relationship to representa-
tions of the language users? environment.  Thus, 
for a robot operating in a laboratory setting, words 
for colors and shapes may be grounded in the out-
puts of its computer vision system (Roy & Pent-
land, 2002); while for a simulated agent operating 
in a virtual world, words for actions and events 
may be mapped to representations of the agent?s 
plans or goals (Fleischman & Roy, 2005).   
This paper extends previous work on grounded 
models of meaning by learning a grounded lan-
guage model from naturalistic data collected from 
broadcast video of Major League Baseball games.  
A large corpus of unlabeled sports videos is col-
lected and paired with closed captioning transcrip-
tions of the announcers? speech. 1  This corpus is 
used to train the grounded language model, which 
like traditional language models encode the prior 
probability of words for an ASR system.  Unlike 
traditional language models, however, grounded 
language models represent the probability of a 
word conditioned not only on the previous word(s), 
but also on features of the non-linguistic context in 
which the word was uttered.   
Our approach to learning grounded language 
models operates in two phases.  In the first phase, 
events that occur in the video are represented using 
hierarchical temporal pattern automatically mined  
                                                          
1
 Closed captioning refers to human transcriptions of speech 
embedded in the video stream primarily for the hearing im-
paired.  Closed captioning is reasonably accurate (although not 
perfect) and available on some, but not all, video broadcasts. 
121
 Figure 1.  Representing events in video.  a) Events are represented by first abstracting the raw video into visual con-
text, camera motion, and audio context features.  b) Temporal data mining is then used to discover hierarchical tem-
poral patterns in the parallel streams of features.  c) Temporal patterns found significant in each iteration are stored 
in a codebook that is used to represent high level events in video. 
 
from low level features.  In the second phase, a 
conditional probability distribution is estimated 
that describes the probability that a word was ut-
tered given such event representations. In the fol-
lowing sections we describe these two aspects of 
our approach and evaluate the performance of our 
grounded language model on a speech recognition 
task using video highlights from Major League 
Baseball games.  Results indicate improved per-
formance using three metrics: perplexity, word 
error rate, and precision on an information retrieval 
task. 
2 Representing Events in Sports Video 
Recent work in video surveillance has demon-
strated the benefit of representing complex events 
as temporal relations between lower level sub-
events (Hongen et al, 2004).  Thus, to represent 
events in the sports domain, we would ideally first 
represent the basic sub events that occur in sports 
video (e.g., hitting, throwing, catching, running, 
etc.) and then build up complex events (such as 
home run) as a set of temporal relations between 
these basic events.  Unfortunately, due to the limi-
tations of computer vision techniques, reliably 
identifying such basic events in video is not feasi-
ble.  However, sports video does have characteris-
tics that can be exploited to effectively represent 
complex events. 
Like much broadcast video, sports video is 
highly produced, exploiting many different camera 
angles and a human director who selects which 
camera is most appropriate given what is happen-
ing on the field.  The styles that different directors 
employ are extremely consistent within a sport and 
make up a ?language of film? which the machine 
can take advantage of in order to represent the 
events taking place in the video. 
Thus, even though it is not easy to automati-
cally identify a player hitting a ball in video, it is 
easy to detect features that correlate with hitting, 
e.g., when a scene focusing on the pitching mound 
immediately jumps to one zooming in on the field 
(see Figure 1).  Although these correlations are not 
perfect, experiments have shown that baseball 
events can be classified using such features 
(Fleischman et al, 2007).   
We exploit the language of film to represent 
events in sports video in two phases.  First, low 
level features that correlate with basic events in 
sports are extracted from the video stream.  Then, 
temporal data mining is used to find patterns 
within this low level event stream.   
2.1 Feature Extraction 
We extract three types of features: visual con-
text features, camera motion features, and audio 
context features.   
122
Visual Context Features 
Visual context features encode general proper-
ties of the visual scene in a video segment.  Super-
vised classifiers are trained to identify these 
features, which are relatively simple to classify in 
comparison to high level events (like home runs) 
that require more training data and achieve lower 
accuracy.  The first step in classifying visual con-
text features is to segment the video into shots (or 
scenes) based on changes in the visual scene due to 
editing (e.g. jumping from a close up to a wide 
shot of the field).  Shot detection and segmentation 
is a well studied problem; in this work we use the 
method of Tardini et al (2005).   
After the video is segmented into shots, indi-
vidual frames (called key frames) are selected and 
represented as a vector of low level features that 
describe the key frame?s color distribution, en-
tropy, etc. (see Fleischman and Roy, 2007 for the 
full list of low level features used).  The WEKA 
machine learning package is used to train a boosted 
decision tree to classify these frames into one of 
three categories: pitching-scene, field-scene, other 
(Witten and Frank, 2005).  Those shots whose key 
frames are classified as field-scenes are then sub-
categorized (using boosted decision trees) into one 
of the following categories: infield, outfield, wall, 
base, running, and misc.  Performance of these 
classification tasks is approximately 96% and 90% 
accuracy respectively. 
Camera Motion Features 
In addition to visual context features, we also 
examine the camera motion that occurs within a 
video.  Unlike visual context features, which pro-
vide information about the global situation that is 
being observed, camera motion features represent 
more precise information about the actions occur-
ring in a video.  The intuition here is that the cam-
era is a stand in for a viewer?s focus of attention.  
As actions occur in a video, the camera moves to 
follow it; this camera motion thus mirrors the ac-
tions themselves, providing informative features 
for event representation.   
Like shot boundary detection, detecting the mo-
tion of the camera in a video (i.e., the amount it 
pans left to right, tilts up and down, and zooms in 
and out) is a well-studied problem.  We use the 
system of Bouthemy et al (1999) which computes 
the camera motion using the parameters of a two-
dimensional affine model to fit every pair of se-
quential frames in a video.  A 15 state 1st order 
Hidden Markov Model, implemented with the 
Graphical Modeling Toolkit,2 then converts the 
output of the Bouthemy system into a stream of 
clustered characteristic camera motions (e.g. state 
12 clusters together motions of zooming in fast 
while panning slightly left). 
Audio Context 
The audio stream of a video can also provide use-
ful information for representing non-linguistic con-
text.  We use boosted decision trees to classify 
audio into segments of speech, excited_speech, 
cheering, and music.  Classification operates on a 
sequence of overlapping 30 ms frames extracted 
from the audio stream. For each frame, a feature 
vector is computed using, MFCCs (often used in 
speaker identification and speech detection tasks), 
as well as energy, the number of zero crossings, 
spectral entropy, and relative power between dif-
ferent frequency bands.  The classifier is applied to 
each frame, producing a sequence of class labels. 
These labels are then smoothed using a dynamic 
programming cost minimization algorithm (similar 
to those used in Hidden Markov Models).  Per-
formance of this system achieves between 78% 
and 94% accuracy.   
2.2 Temporal Pattern Mining 
Given a set of low level features that correlate with 
the basic events in sports, we can now focus on 
building up representations of complex events.  
Unlike previous work (Hongen et al, 2005) in 
which representations of the temporal relations 
between low level events are built up by hand, we 
employ temporal data mining techniques to auto-
matically discover such relations from a large cor-
pus of unannotated video. 
As described above, ideal basic events (such as 
hitting and catching) cannot be identified easily in 
sports video. By finding temporal patterns between 
audio, visual and camera motion features, how-
ever, we can produce representations that are 
highly correlated with sports events.  Importantly, 
such temporal patterns are not strictly sequential, 
but rather, are composed of features that can occur 
                                                          
2
 http://ssli.ee.washington.edu/~bilmes/gmtk/ 
123
in complex and varied temporal relations to each 
other.   
To find such patterns automatically, we follow 
previous work in video content classification in 
which temporal data mining techniques are used to 
discover event patterns within streams of lower 
level features.  The algorithm we use is fully unsu-
pervised and proceeds by examining the relations 
that occur between features in multiple streams 
within a moving time window.  Any two features 
that occur within this window must be in one of 
seven temporal relations with each other (e.g. be-
fore, during, etc.) (Allen, 1984).  The algorithm 
keeps track of how often each of these relations is 
observed, and after the entire video corpus is ana-
lyzed, uses chi-square analyses to determine which 
relations are significant.  The algorithm iterates 
through the data, and relations between individual 
features that are found significant in one iteration 
(e.g. [OVERLAP, field-scene, cheer]), are them-
selves treated as individual features in the next.  
This allows the system to build up higher-order 
nested relations in each iteration (e.g. [BEFORE, 
[OVERLAP, field-scene, cheer], field scene]]).   
The temporal patterns found significant in this 
way make up a codebook which can then be used 
as a basis for representing a video.  The term code-
book is often used in image analysis to describe a 
set of features (stored in the codebook) that are 
used to encode raw data (images or video).  Such 
codebooks are used to represent raw video using 
features that are more easily processed by the 
computer.  
Our framework follows a similar approach in 
which raw video is encoded (using a codebook of 
temporal patterns) as follows.  First, the raw video 
is abstracted into the visual context, camera mo-
tion, and audio context feature streams (as de-
scribed in Section 2.1).  These feature streams are 
then scanned, looking for any temporal patterns 
(and nested sub-patterns) that match those found in 
the codebook.  For each pattern, the duration for 
which it occurs in the feature streams is treated as 
the value of an element in the vector representation 
for that video.   
Thus, a video is represented as an n length vec-
tor, where n is the total number of temporal pat-
terns in the codebook.  The value of each element 
of this vector is the duration for which the pattern 
associated with that element was observed in the 
video.  So, if a pattern was not observed in a video 
at all, it would have a value of 0, while if it was 
observed for the entire length of the video, it would 
have a value equal to the number of frames present 
in that video.   
Given this method for representing the non-
linguistic context of a video, we can now examine 
how to model the relationship between such con-
text and the words used to describe it.  
3 Linguistic Mapping 
Modeling the relationship between words and non-
linguistic context assumes that the speech uttered 
in a video refers consistently (although not exclu-
sively) to the events being represented by the tem-
poral pattern features.  We model this relationship, 
much like traditional language models, using con-
ditional probability distributions.  Unlike tradi-
tional language models, however, our grounded 
language models condition the probability of a 
word not only on the word(s) uttered before it, but 
also on the temporal pattern features that describe 
the non-linguistic context in which it was uttered.  
We estimate these conditional distributions using a 
framework similar that used for training acoustic 
models in ASR and translation models in Machine 
Translation (MT). 
We generate a training corpus of utterances 
paired with representations of the non-linguistic 
context in which they were uttered.  The first step 
in generating this corpus is to generate the low 
level features described in Section 2.1 for each 
video in our training set.  We then segment each 
video into a set of independent events based on the 
visual context features we have extracted.  We fol-
low previous work in sports video processing 
(Gong et al, 2004) and define an event in a base-
ball video as any sequence of shots starting with a 
pitching-scene and continuing for four subsequent 
shots.  This definition follows from the fact that the 
vast majority of events in baseball start with a 
pitch and do not last longer than four shots.  For 
each of these events in our corpus, a temporal pat-
tern feature vector is generated as described in sec-
tion 2.2.  These events are then paired with all the 
words from the closed captioning transcription that 
occur during each event (plus or minus 10 sec-
onds).  Because these transcriptions are not neces-
sarily time synched with the audio, we use the 
method described in Hauptmann and Witbrock 
124
(1998) to align the closed captioning to the an-
nouncers? speech.   
Previous work has examined applying models 
often used in MT to the paired corpus described 
above (Fleischman and Roy, 2006).  Recent work 
in automatic image annotation (Barnard et al, 
2003; Blei and Jordan, 2003) and natural language 
processing (Steyvers et al, 2004), however, have 
demonstrated the advantages of using hierarchical 
Bayesian models for related tasks.  In this work we 
follow closely the Author-Topic (AT) model (Stey-
vers et al, 2004) which is a generalization of La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al, 2005).3   
LDA is a technique that was developed to 
model the distribution of topics discussed in a large 
corpus of documents.  The model assumes that 
every document is made up of a mixture of topics, 
and that each word in a document is generated 
from a probability distribution associated with one 
of those topics.  The AT model generalizes LDA, 
saying that the mixture of topics is not dependent 
on the document itself, but rather on the authors 
who wrote it.  According to this model, for each 
word (or phrase) in a document, an author is cho-
sen uniformly from the set of the authors of the 
document.  Then, a topic is chosen from a distribu-
tion of topics associated with that particular author.  
Finally, the word is generated from the distribution 
associated with that chosen topic.  We can express 
the probability of the words in a document (W) 
given its authors (A) as: 
? ??
? ? ?
=
Wm Ax Tzd
xzpzmp
A
AWp )|()|(1)|(  (1) 
where T is the set of latent topics that are induced 
given a large set of training data.   
We use the AT model to estimate our grounded 
language model by making an analogy between 
documents and events in video.  In our framework, 
the words in a document correspond to the words 
in the closed captioning transcript associated with 
an event.  The authors of a document correspond to 
the temporal patterns representing the non- 
 
linguistic context of that event.  We modify the AT 
model slightly, such that, instead of selecting from 
                                                          
3
 In the discussion that follows, we describe a method for es-
timating unigram grounded language models.  Estimating 
bigram and trigram models can be done by processing on 
word pairs or triples, and performing normalization on the 
resulting conditional distributions. 
a uniform distribution (as is done with authors of 
documents), we select patterns from a multinomial 
distribution based upon the duration of the pattern.  
The intuition here is that patterns that occur for a 
longer duration are more salient and thus, should 
be given greater weight in the generative process.  
We can now rewrite (1) to give the probability of 
words during an event (W) given the vector of ob-
served temporal patterns (P) as: 
???
? ? ?
=
Wm Px Tz
xpxzpzmpPWp )()|()|()|(  (2) 
In the experiments described below we follow 
Steyver et al, (2004) and train our AT model using 
Gibbs sampling, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo 
technique for obtaining parameter estimates.  We 
run the sampler on a single chain for 200 iterations.  
We set the number of topics to 15, and normalize 
the pattern durations first by individual pattern 
across all events, and then for all patterns within an 
event.  The resulting parameter estimates are 
smoothed using a simple add N smoothing tech-
nique, where N=1 for the word by topic counts and 
N=.01 for the pattern by topic counts.   
4 Evaluation 
In order to evaluate our grounded language model-
ing approach, a parallel data set of 99 Major 
League Baseball games with corresponding closed 
captioning transcripts was recorded from live tele-
vision.  These games represent data totaling ap-
proximately 275 hours and 20,000 distinct events 
from 25 teams in 23 stadiums, broadcast on five 
different television stations.  From this set, six 
games were held out for testing (15 hours, 1200 
events, nine teams, four stations).  From this test 
set, baseball highlights (i.e., events which termi-
nate with the player either out or safe) were hand 
annotated for use in evaluation, and manually tran-
scribed in order to get clean text transcriptions for 
gold standard comparisons.  Of the 1200 events in 
the test set, 237 were highlights with a total word 
count of 12,626 (vocabulary of 1800 words). 
The remaining 93 unlabeled games are used to 
train unigram, bigram, and trigram grounded lan-
guage models.  Only unigrams, bigrams, and tri-
grams that are not proper names, appear greater 
than three times, and are not composed only of 
stop words were used.  These grounded language 
models are then combined in a backoff strategy 
125
with traditional unigram, bigram, and trigram lan-
guage models generated from a combination of the 
closed captioning transcripts of all training games 
and data from the switchboard corpus (see below).  
This backoff is necessary to account for the words 
not included in the grounded language model itself 
(i.e. stop words, proper names, low frequency 
words).  The traditional text-only language models 
(which are also used below as baseline compari-
sons) are generated with the SRI language model-
ing toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) using Chen and 
Goodman's modified Kneser-Ney discounting and 
interpolation (Chen and Goodman, 1998).  The 
backoff strategy we employ here is very simple: if 
the ngram appears in the GLM then it is used, oth-
erwise the traditional LM is used.  In future work 
we will examine more complex backoff strategies 
(Hsu, in review). 
We evaluate our grounded language modeling 
approach using 3 metrics: perplexity, word error 
rate, and precision on an information retrieval task. 
4.1 Perplexity 
Perplexity is an information theoretic measure of 
how well a model predicts a held out test set.  We 
use perplexity to compare our grounded language 
model to two baseline language models: a lan-
guage model generated from the switchboard cor-
pus, a commonly used corpus of spontaneous 
speech in the telephony domain (3.65M words; 27k 
vocab); and a language model that interpolates 
(with equal weight given to both) between the 
switchboard model and a language model trained 
only on the baseball-domain closed captioning 
(1.65M words; 17k vocab).  The results of calculat-
ing perplexity on the test set highlights for these 
three models is presented in Table 1 (lower is bet-
ter). 
Not surprisingly, the switchboard language 
model performs far worse than both the interpo-
lated text baseline and the grounded language 
model.  This is due to the large discrepancy be-
tween both the style and vocabulary of language 
about sports compared to the domain of telephony 
sampled by the switchboard corpus.  Of more in-
terest is the decrease in perplexity seen when using 
the grounded language model compared to the in-
terpolated model.  Note that these two language 
models are generated using the same speech tran-
scriptions, i.e. the closed captioning from the train-
ing games and the switchboard corpus.  However, 
whereas the baseline model remains the same for 
each of the 237 test highlights, the grounded lan-
guage model generates different word distributions 
for each highlight depending on the event features 
extracted from the highlight video. 
  
 Switchboard Interpolated 
(Switch+CC) 
Grounded 
ppl 1404 145.27 83.88 
 
Table 1.  Perplexity measures for three different lan-
guage models on a held out test set of baseball high-
lights (12,626 words).  We compare the grounded 
language model to two text based language models: one 
trained on the switchboard corpus alone; and interpo-
lated with one trained on closed captioning transcrip-
tions of baseball video.  
4.2 Word Accuracy and Error Rate 
Word error rate (WER) is a normalized measure of 
the number of word insertions, substitutions, and 
deletions required to transform the output tran-
scription of an ASR system to a human generated 
gold standard transcription of the same utterance.  
Word accuracy is simply the number of words in 
the gold standard that they system correctly recog-
nized.  Unlike perplexity which only evaluates the 
performance of language models, examining word 
accuracy and error rate requires running an entire 
ASR system, i.e. both the language and acoustic 
models.   
We use the Sphinx system to train baseball specific 
acoustic models using parallel acoustic/text data 
automatically mined from our training set.  Follow-
ing Jang and Hauptman (1999), we use an off the 
shelf acoustic model (the hub4 model) to generate 
an extremely noisy speech transcript of each game 
in our training set, and use dynamic programming 
to align these noisy outputs to the closed caption-
ing stream for those same games.  Given these two 
transcriptions, we then generate a paired acous-
tic/text corpus by sampling the audio at the time 
codes where the ASR transcription matches the 
closed captioning transcription.   
For example, if the ASR output contains the 
term sequence ?? and farther home run for David 
forty says?? and the closed captioning contains 
the sequence ??another home run for David 
Ortiz?,? the matched phrase ?home run for 
David? is assumed a correct transcription for the 
audio at the time codes given by the ASR system.  
Only looking at sequences of three words or more,  
126
76.6
80.3
89.6
70
75
80
85
90
95
switchboard interpolated grounded
W
o
rd
 
Er
ro
r 
R
at
e
 
(W
ER
)
31.3
25.4
15.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
switchboard interpolated grounded
W
o
rd
 
A
c
cu
ra
c
y 
(%
)
 
Figure 3.  Word accuracy and error rates for ASR sys-
tems using a grounded language model, a text based 
language model trained on the switchboard corpus, and 
the switchboard model interpolated with a text based 
model trained on baseball closed captions. 
 
we extract approximately 18 hours of clean paired 
data from our 275 hour training corpus.  A con-
tinuous acoustic model with 8 gaussians and 6000 
ties states is trained on this data using the Sphinx 
speech recognizer.4 
Figure 3 shows the WERs and accuracy for 
three ASR systems run using the Sphinx decoder 
with the acoustic model described above and either 
the grounded language model or the two baseline 
models described in section 4.1.  Note that per-
formance for all of these systems is very poor due 
to limited acoustic data and the large amount of 
background crowd noise present in sports video 
(and particularly in sports highlights).  Even with 
this noise, however, results indicate that the word 
accuracy and error rates when using the grounded 
language model is significantly better than both the 
switchboard model (absolute WER reduction of 
13%; absolute accuracy increase of 15.2%) and the 
switchboard interpolated with the baseball specific 
text based language model (absolute WER reduc-
tion of 3.7%; absolute accuracy increase of 5.9%).   
                                                          
4
 http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/html/cmusphinx.php 
Drawing conclusions about the usefulness of 
grounded language models using word accuracy or 
error rate alone is difficult.  As it is defined, these 
measures penalizes a system that mistakes ?a? for 
?uh? as much as one that mistakes ?run? for ?rum.?  
When using ASR to support multimedia applica-
tions (such as search), though, such substitutions 
are not of equal importance.  Further, while visual 
information may be useful for distinguishing the 
latter error, it is unlikely to assist with the former.  
Thus, in the next section we examine an extrinsic 
evaluation in which grounded language models are 
judged not directly on their effect on word accu-
racy or error rate, but based on their ability to sup-
port video information retrieval.  
4.3 Precision of Information Retrieval  
One of the most commonly used applications of 
ASR for video is to support information retrieval 
(IR).  Such video IR systems often use speech tran-
scriptions to index segments of video in much the 
same way that words are used to index text docu-
ments (Wactlar et al, 1996).  For example, in the 
domain of baseball, if a video IR system were is-
sued the query ?home run,? it would typically re-
turn a set of video clips by searching its database 
for events in which someone uttered the phrase 
?home run.?  Because such systems rely on ASR 
output to search video, the performance of a video 
IR system gives an indirect evaluation of the 
ASR?s quality.  Further, unlike the case with word 
accuracy or error rate, such evaluations highlight a 
systems ability to recognize the more relevant con-
tent words without being distracted by the more 
common stop words. 
Our metric for evaluation is the precision with 
which baseball highlights are returned in a video 
IR system.  We examine three systems: one that 
uses ASR with the grounded language model, a 
baseline system that uses ASR with the text only 
interpolated language model, and finally a system 
that uses human produced closed caption transcrip-
tions to index events. 
For each system, all 1200 events from the test 
set (not just the highlights) are indexed.  Queries 
are generated artificially using a method similar to 
Berger and Lafferty (1999) and used in Fleischman 
and Roy (2007).  First, each highlight is labeled 
with the event?s type (e.g. fly ball), the event?s lo-
cation (e.g. left field) and the event?s result (e.g. 
double play): 13 labels total.  Log likelihood ratios 
127
are then used to find the phrases (unigram, trigram, 
and bigram) most indicative of each label (e.g. ?fly 
ball? for category fly ball).  For each label, the 
three most indicative phrases are issued as queries 
to the system, which ranks its results using the lan-
guage modeling approach of Ponte and Croft 
(1998).  Precision is measured on how many of the 
top five returned events are of the correct category.   
Figure 4 shows the precision of the video IR 
systems based on ASR with the grounded language 
model, ASR with the text-only interpolated lan-
guage model, and closed captioning transcriptions.  
As with our previous evaluations, the IR results 
show that the system using ASR with the grounded 
language model performed better than the one us-
ing ASR with the text-only language model (5.1% 
absolute improvement).  More notably, though, 
Figure 4 shows that the system using the grounded 
language model performed better than the system 
using the hand generated closed captioning tran-
scriptions (4.6% absolute improvement).  Although 
this is somewhat counterintuitive given that hand 
transcriptions are typically considered gold stan-
dards, these results follow from a limitation of us-
ing text-based methods to index video.  
Unlike the case with text documents, the occur-
rence of a query term in a video is often not 
enough to assume the video?s relevance to that 
query.  For example, when searching through 
video of baseball games, returning all clips in 
which the phrase ?home run? occurs, results pri-
marily in video of events where a home run does 
not actually occur.  This follows from the fact that 
in sports, as in life, people often talk not about 
what is currently happening, but rather, they talk 
about what did, might, or will happen in the future.   
By taking into account non-linguistic context 
during speech recognition, the grounded language 
model system indirectly circumvents some of these 
false positive results.  This follows from the fact 
that an effect of using the grounded language 
model is that when an announcer utters a phrase 
(e.g., ?fly ball?), the system is more likely to rec-
ognize that phrase correctly if the event it refers to 
is actually occurring (e.g. if someone actually hit a 
fly ball).  Because the grounded language model 
system is biased to recognize phrases that describe 
what is currently happening, it returns fewer false 
positives and gets higher precision.  
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.29
0.3
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
ASR-LM CC ASR-GLM
Pr
ec
is
io
n
 
o
f T
o
p 
5
 
Figure 4. Precision of top five results of a video IR sys-
tem based on speech transcriptions.  Three different 
transcriptions are compared: ASR-LM uses ASR with a 
text-only interpolated language model (trained on base-
ball closed captioning and the switchboard corpus); 
ASR-GLM uses ASR with a grounded language model; 
CC uses human generated closed captioning transcrip-
tions (i.e., no ASR). 
5 Conclusions 
We have described a method for improving speech 
recognition in video.  The method uses grounded 
language modeling, an extension of tradition lan-
guage modeling in which the probability of a word 
is conditioned not only on the previous word(s) but 
also on the non-linguistic context in which the 
word is uttered.  Context is represented using hier-
archical temporal patterns of low level features 
which are mined automatically from a large unla-
beled video corpus.  Hierarchical Bayesian models 
are then used to map these representations to 
words.  Initial results show grounded language 
models improve performance on measures of per-
plexity, word accuracy and error rate, and preci-
sion on an information retrieval task. 
In future work, we will examine the ability of 
grounded language models to improve perform-
ance for other natural language tasks that exploit 
text based language models, such as Machine 
Translation.  Also, we are examining extending 
this approach to other sports domains such as 
American football.  In theory, however, our ap-
proach is applicable to any domain in which there 
is discussion of the here-and-now (e.g., cooking 
shows, etc.).  In future work, we will examine the 
strengths and limitations of grounded language 
modeling in these domains. 
128
References 
Allen, J.F. (1984). A General Model of Action and 
Time. Artificial Intelligence. 23(2). 
Barnard, K, Duygulu, P, de Freitas, N, Forsyth, D, Blei, 
D, and Jordan, M. (2003), Matching Words and 
Pictures, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
Vol 3. 
Berger, A. and Lafferty, J. (1999). Information 
Retrieval as Statistical Translation. In Proceed-
ings of SIGIR-99. 
Blei, D. and Jordan, M. (2003). Modeling annotated 
data. Proceedings of the 26th International Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval, ACM Press, 127?134.  
Blei, D. Ng, A., and Jordan, M (2003). ?Latent Dirichlet 
allocation.? Journal of Machine Learning Research 
3:993?1022.  
Bouthemy, P., Gelgon, M., Ganansia, F. (1999). A uni-
fied approach to shot change detection and cam-
era motion characterization. IEEE Trans. on 
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 
9(7). 
Chen, S. F. and Goodman, J., (1998). An Empirical 
Study of Smoothing Techniques for Language Mod-
eling, Tech. Report TR-10-98, Computer Science 
Group, Harvard U., Cambridge, MA. 
Fleischman M, Roy, D. (2007).  Situated Models of 
Meaning for Sports Video Retrieval.  HLT/NAACL. 
Rochester, NY. 
Fleischman, M. and Roy, D. (2007). Unsupervised Con-
tent-Based Indexing of Sports Video Retrieval.  9th 
ACM Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval 
(MIR). Augsburg, Germany. 
Fleischman, M. B. and Roy, D.  (2005)  Why Verbs are 
Harder to Learn than Nouns: Initial Insights from a 
Computational Model of Intention Recognition in 
Situated Word Learning.  27th Annual Meeting of the 
Cognitive Science Society, Stresa, Italy. 
Fleischman, M., DeCamp, P. Roy, D.  (2006). Mining 
Temporal Patterns of Movement for Video Content 
Classification.  ACM Workshop on Multimedia In-
formation Retrieval. 
Fleischman, M., Roy, B., and Roy, D. (2007).  Tempo-
ral Feature Induction for Sports Highlight Classifica-
tion.  In Proceedings of ACM Multimedia.  
Augsburg, Germany. 
Gong, Y., Han, M., Hua, W., Xu, W.  (2004). Maximum 
entropy model-based baseball highlight detection and 
classification.  Computer Vision and Image Un-
derstanding. 96(2). 
Hauptmann, A. , Witbrock, M., (1998) Story Segmenta-
tion and Detection of Commercials in Broadcast 
News Video, Advances in Digital Libraries. 
Hongen, S., Nevatia, R. Bremond, F. (2004). 
Video-based event recognition: activity repre-
sentation and probabilistic recognition methods.  
Computer Vision and Image Understanding. 
96(2). 
Hsu , Bo-June (Paul). (in review). Generalized Linear 
Interpolation of Language Models. 
Jang, P., Hauptmann, A. (1999).  Learning to Recognize 
Speech by Watching Television.  IEEE Intelligent 
Systems Magazine, 14(5), pp. 51-58.  
Mukherjee, N. and Roy, D.. (2003). A Visual Context-
Aware Multimodal System for Spoken Language 
Processing. Proc. Eurospeech, 4 pages.  
Ponte, J.M., and Croft, W.B. (1998). A Language Mod-
eling Approach to Information Retrieval. In Proc. of 
SIGIR?98.  
Roy, D. (2005). . Grounding Words in Perception and 
Action: Insights from Computational Models.  TICS. 
Roy, D. and Pentland, A. (2002).  Learning Words from 
Sights and Sounds: A Computational Model. Cogni-
tive Science, 26(1). 
Roy. D. and Reiter, E. (2005). . Connecting Language to 
the World. Artificial Intelligence, 167(1-2), 1-12. 
Snoek, C.G.M. and Worring, M.. (2005).  Multimodal 
video indexing: A review of the state-of-the-art. 
Multimedia Tools and Applications, 25(1):5-35. 
Steyvers, M., Smyth, P., Rosen-Zvi, M., & Griffiths, T. 
(2004). Probabilistic Author-Topic Models for In-
formation Discovery. The Tenth ACM SIGKDD In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining. Seattle, Washington. 
Stolcke, A., (2002). SRILM - An Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit, in Proc. Intl. Conf. Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, Denver, Colorado.  
Tardini, G. Grana C., Marchi, R., Cucchiara, R., (2005). 
Shot Detection and Motion Analysis for Automatic 
MPEG-7 Annotation of Sports Videos.  In 13th In-
ternational Conference on Image Analysis and Proc-
essing. 
Wactlar, H., Witbrock, M., Hauptmann, A., (1996 ). 
Informedia: News-on-Demand Experiments in 
Speech Recognition.  ARPA Speech Recognition 
Workshop, Arden House, Harriman, NY.  
Witten, I. and Frank, E. (2005).  Data Mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques.  2nd Edition, 
Morgan Kaufmann. San Francisco, CA. 
 
129
