Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 425?433,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Translation Induction for Chinese Abbreviations
using Monolingual Corpora
Zhifei Li and David Yarowsky
Department of Computer Science and Center for Language and Speech Processing
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
zhifei.work@gmail.com and yarowsky@cs.jhu.edu
Abstract
Chinese abbreviations are widely used in
modern Chinese texts. Compared with
English abbreviations (which are mostly
acronyms and truncations), the formation of
Chinese abbreviations is much more complex.
Due to the richness of Chinese abbreviations,
many of them may not appear in available par-
allel corpora, in which case current machine
translation systems simply treat them as un-
known words and leave them untranslated. In
this paper, we present a novel unsupervised
method that automatically extracts the relation
between a full-form phrase and its abbrevia-
tion from monolingual corpora, and induces
translation entries for the abbreviation by us-
ing its full-form as a bridge. Our method does
not require any additional annotated data other
than the data that a regular translation system
uses. We integrate our method into a state-of-
the-art baseline translation system and show
that it consistently improves the performance
of the baseline system on various NIST MT
test sets.
1 Introduction
The modern Chinese language is a highly abbrevi-
ated one due to the mixed use of ancient single-
character words with modern multi-character words
and compound words. According to Chang and Lai
(2004), approximately 20% of sentences in a typical
news article have abbreviated words in them. Ab-
breviations have become even more popular along
with the development of Internet media (e.g., online
chat, weblog, newsgroup, and so on). While En-
glish words are normally abbreviated by either their
Full-form Abbreviation Translation
&? ? ?? Hong Kong Governor
?\ ?/? ??? Security Council
Figure 1: Chinese Abbreviations Examples
first letters (i.e. acronyms) or via truncation, the for-
mation of Chinese abbreviations is much more com-
plex. Figure 1 shows two examples for Chinese ab-
breviations. Clearly, an abbreviated form of a word
can be obtained by selecting one or more characters
from this word, and the selected characters can be at
any position in the word. In an extreme case, there
are even re-ordering between a full-form phrase and
its abbreviation.
While the research in statistical machine trans-
lation (SMT) has made significant progress, most
SMT systems (Koehn et al, 2003; Chiang, 2007;
Galley et al, 2006) rely on parallel corpora to extract
translation entries. The richness and complexness
of Chinese abbreviations imposes challenges to the
SMT systems. In particular, many Chinese abbrevi-
ations may not appear in available parallel corpora,
in which case current SMT systems treat them as
unknown words and leave them untranslated. This
affects the translation quality significantly.
To be able to translate a Chinese abbreviation that
is unseen in available parallel corpora, one may an-
notate more parallel data. However, this is very
expensive as there are too many possible abbrevia-
tions and new abbreviations are constantly created.
Another approach is to transform the abbreviation
425
into its full-form for which the current SMT system
knows how to translate. For example, if the baseline
system knows that the translation for ?&??? is
?Hong Kong Governor?, and it also knows that ??
?? is an abbreviation of ?&? ?? , then it can
translate ???? to ?Hong Kong Governor?.
Even if an abbreviation has been seen in parallel
corpora, it may still be worth to consider its full-
form phrase as an additional alternative to the ab-
breviation since abbreviated words are normally se-
mantically ambiguous, while its full-form contains
more context information that helps the MT system
choose a right translation for the abbreviation.
Conceptually, the approach of translating an ab-
breviation by using its full-form as a bridge in-
volves four components: identifying abbreviations,
learning their full-forms, inducing their translations,
and integrating the abbreviation translations into the
baseline SMT system. None of these components is
trivial to realize. For example, for the first two com-
ponents, we may need manually annotated data that
tags an abbreviation with its full-form. We also need
to make sure that the baseline system has at least
one valid translation for the full-form phrase. On
the other hand, integrating an additional component
into a baseline SMT system is notoriously tricky as
evident in the research on integrating word sense
disambiguation (WSD) into SMT systems: different
ways of integration lead to conflicting conclusions
on whether WSD helps MT performance (Chan et
al., 2007; Carpuat and Wu, 2007).
In this paper, we present an unsupervised ap-
proach to translate Chinese abbreviations. Our ap-
proach exploits the data co-occurrence phenomena
and does not require any additional annotated data
except the parallel and monolingual corpora that the
baseline SMT system uses. Moreover, our approach
integrates the abbreviation translation component
into the baseline system in a natural way, and thus is
able to make use of the minimum-error-rate training
(Och, 2003) to automatically adjust the model pa-
rameters to reflect the change of the integrated sys-
tem over the baseline system. We carry out experi-
ments on a state-of-the-art SMT system, i.e., Moses
(Koehn et al, 2007), and show that the abbreviation
translations consistently improve the translation per-
formance (in terms of BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002))
on various NIST MT test sets.
2 Background: Chinese Abbreviations
In general, Chinese abbreviations are formed based
on three major methods: reduction, elimination and
generalization (Lee, 2005; Yin, 1999). Table 1
presents examples for each category.
Among the three methods, reduction is the most
popular one, which generates an abbreviation by
selecting one or more characters from each of the
words in the full-form phrase. The selected char-
acters can be at any position of the word. Table 1
presents examples to illustrate how characters at dif-
ferent positions are selected to generate abbrevia-
tions. While the abbreviations mostly originate from
noun phrases (in particular, named entities), other
general phrases are also abbreviatable. For example,
the second example ?Save Energy? is a verb phrase.
In an extreme case, reordering may happen between
an abbreviation and its full-form phrase. For exam-
ple, for the seventh example in Table 1, a monotone
abbreviation should be ?X??, however, ?X
?? is a more popular ordering in Chinese texts.
In elimination, one or more words of the origi-
nal full-form phrase are eliminated and the rest parts
remain as an abbreviation. For example, in the full-
form phrase ?8?L??, the word ?L?? is elim-
inated and the remaining word ?8?? alone be-
comes the abbreviation.
In generalization, an abbreviation is created
by generalizing parallel sub-parts of the full-form
phrase. For example, ??3 (three preventions)? in
Table 1 is an abbreviation for the phrase ?3?3
x3b//? (fire prevention, theft prevention,
and traffic accident prevention)?. The character ?3
(prevention)? is common to the three sub-parts of the
full-form, so it is being generalized.
3 Unsupervised Translation Induction for
Chinese Abbreviations
In this section, we describe an unsupervised method
to induce translation entries for Chinese abbrevia-
tions, even when these abbreviations never appear in
the Chinese side of the parallel corpora. Our basic
idea is to automatically extract the relation between
a full-form phrase and its abbreviation (we refer the
relation as full-abbreviation) from monolingual cor-
pora, and then induce translation entries for the ab-
breviation by using its full-form phrase as a bridge.
426
Category Full-form Abbreviation Translation
Reduction ?? L? ?L Peking University
?? ? ? Save Energy
&? ? ?? Hong Kong Governor
ib \? i? Foreign Minister
|? ?? ?? People?s Police
?\ ?/? ??? Security Council
? X ?? X? No.1 Nuclear Energy Power Plant
Elimination 8? L? 8? Tsinghua University
Generalization 3?3x3b//? ?3 Three Preventions
Table 1: Chinese Abbreviation: Categories and Examples
Our approach involves five major steps:
? Step-1: extract a list of English entities from
English monolingual corpora;
? Step-2: translate the list into Chinese using a
baseline translation system;
? Step-3: extract full-abbreviation relations from
Chinese monolingual corpora by treating the
Chinese translations obtained in Step-2 as full-
form phrases;
? Step-4: induce translation entries for Chinese
abbreviations by using their full-form phrases
as bridges;
? Step-5: augment the baseline system with
translation entries obtained in Step-4.
Clearly, the main purpose of Step-1 and -2 is to
obtain a list of Chinese entities, which will be treated
as full-form phrases in Step-3. One may use a named
entity tagger to obtain such a list. However, this re-
lies on the existence of a Chinese named entity tag-
ger with high-precision. Moreover, obtaining a list
using a dedicated tagger does not guarantee that the
baseline system knows how to translate the list. On
the contrary, in our approach, since the Chinese en-
tities are translation outputs for the English entities,
it is ensured that the baseline system has translations
for these Chinese entities.
Regarding the data resource used, Step-1, -2, and
-3 rely on the English monolingual corpora, paral-
lel corpora, and the Chinese monolingual corpora,
respectively. Clearly, our approach does not re-
quire any additional annotated data compared with
the baseline system. Moreover, our approach uti-
lizes both Chinese and English monolingual data
to help MT, while most SMT systems utilizes only
the English monolingual data to build a language
model. This is particularly interesting since we nor-
mally have enormous monolingual data, but a small
amount of parallel data. For example, in the transla-
tion task between Chinese and English, both the Chi-
nese and English Gigaword have billions of words,
but the parallel data has only about 30 million words.
Step-4 and -5 are natural ways to integrate the ab-
breviation translation component with the baseline
translation system. This is critical to make the ab-
breviation translation get performance gains over the
baseline system as will be clear later.
In the remainder of this section, we will present a
specific instantiation for each step.
3.1 English Entity Extraction from English
Monolingual Corpora
Though one can exploit a sophisticated named-entity
tagger to extract English entities, in this paper we
identify English entities based on the capitalization
information. Specifically, to be considered as an en-
tity, a continuous span of English words must satisfy
the following conditions:
? all words must start from a capital letter except
for function words ?of?, ?the?, and ?and?;
? each function word can appear only once;
? the number of words in the span must be
smaller than a threshold (e.g., 10);
? the occurrence count of this span must be
greater than a threshold (e.g., 1).
427
3.2 English Entity Translation
For the Chinese-English language pair, most MT re-
search is on translation from Chinese to English, but
here we need the reverse direction. However, since
most of statistical translation models (Koehn et al,
2003; Chiang, 2007; Galley et al, 2006) are sym-
metrical, it is relatively easy to train a translation
system to translate from English to Chinese, except
that we need to train a Chinese language model from
the Chinese monolingual data.
It is worth pointing out that the baseline system
may not be able to translate all the English enti-
ties. This is because the entities are extracted from
the English monolingual corpora, which has a much
larger vocabulary than the English side of the par-
allel corpora. Therefore, we should remove all the
Chinese translations that contain any untranslated
English words before proceeding to the next step.
Moreover, it is desirable to generate an n-best list
instead of a 1-best translation for the English entity.
3.3 Full-abbreviation Relation Extraction from
Chinese Monolingual Corpora
We treat the Chinese entities obtained in Section 3.2
as full-form phrases. To identify their abbreviations,
one can employ an HMM model (Chang and Teng,
2006). Here we propose a much simpler approach,
which is based on the data co-occurrence intuition.
3.3.1 Data Co-occurrence
In a monolingual corpus, relevant words tend to
appear together (i.e., co-occurrence). For example,
Bill Gates tends to appear together with Microsoft.
The co-occurrence may imply a relationship (e.g.,
Bill Gates is the founder of Microsoft). By inspec-
tion of the Chinese text, we found that the data
co-occurrence phenomena also applies to the full-
Title ?????*R?<??
Text c???2?9??(V?c?
?)?20?????{?*R?
h?-10?t8??????.
??t*y ?{??
Table 2: Data Co-occurrence Example for the Full-
abbreviation Relation (????,???) meaning
?winter olympics?
abbreviation relation. Table 2 shows an example,
where the abbreviation ????? appears in the title
while its full-form ?????? appears in the text
of the same document. In general, the occurrence
distance between an abbreviation and its full-form
varies. For example, they may appear in the same
sentence, or in the neighborhood sentences.
3.3.2 Full-abbreviation Relation Extraction
Algorithm
By exploiting the data co-occurrence phenom-
ena, we identify possible abbreviations for full-form
phrases. Figure 2 presents the pseudocode of the
full-abbreviation relation extraction algorithm.
Relation-Extraction(Corpus ,Full-list)
1 contexts ? NIL
2 for i ? 1 to length[Corpus]
3 sent1 ? Corpus[i ]
4 contexts ? UPDATE(contexts ,Corpus , i)
5 for full in sent1
6 if full in Full-list
7 for sent2 in contexts
8 for abbr in sent2
9 if RL(full , abbr ) = TRUE
10 Count[abbr , full]++
11 return Count
Figure 2: Full-abbreviation Relation Extraction
Given a monolingual corpus and a list of full-form
phrases (i.e., Full-list, which is obtained in Sec-
tion 3.2), the algorithm returns a Count that con-
tains full-abbreviation relations and their occurrence
counts. Specifically, the algorithm linearly scans
over the whole corpus as indicated by line 1. Along
the linear scan, the algorithm maintains contexts of
the current sentence (i.e., sent1), and the contexts
remember the sentences from where the algorithm
identifies possible abbreviations. In our implemen-
tation, the contexts include current sentence, the ti-
tle of current document, and previous and next sen-
tence in the document. Then, for each ngram (i.e.,
full) of the current sentence (i.e., sent1) and for each
ngram (i.e., abbr) of a context sentence (i.e., sent2),
the algorithm calls a function RL, which decides
whether the full-abbreviation relation holds between
full and abbr. If RL returns TRUE, the count table
428
(i.e., Count) is incremented by one for this relation.
Note that the filtering through the full-form phrases
list (i.e., Full-list) as shown in line 6 is the key to
make the algorithm efficient enough to run through
large-size monolingual corpora.
In function RL, we run a simple alignment algo-
rithm that links the characters in abbr with the words
in full. In the alignment, we assume that there is no
reordering between full and abbr. To be considered
as a valid full-abbreviation relation, full and abbr
must satisfy the following conditions:
? abbr must be shorter than full by a relative
threshold (e.g., 1.2);
? each character in abbr must be aligned to full;
? each word in full must have at least one charac-
ter aligned to abbr;
? abbr must not be a continuous sub-part of full;
Clearly, due to the above conditions, our approach
may not be able to handle all possible abbreviations
(e.g., the abbreviations formed by the generalization
method described in Section 2). One can modify
the conditions and the alignment algorithm to handle
more complex full-abbreviation relations.
With the count table Count, we can calculate the
relative frequency and get the following probability,
P (full|abbr) = Count[abbr, full]?Count[abbr, ?] (1)
3.4 Translation Induction for Chinese
Abbreviations
Given a Chinese abbreviation and its full-form, we
induce English translation entries for the abbrevia-
tion by using the full-form as a bridge. Specifically,
we first generate n-best translations for each full-
form Chinese phrase using the baseline system.1 We
then post-process the translation outputs such that
they have the same format (i.e., containing the same
set of model features) as a regular phrase entry in
1In our method, it is guaranteed that each Chinese full-form
phrase will have at least one English translation, i.e., the En-
glish entity that has been used to produce this full-form phrase.
However, it does not mean that this English entity is the best
translation that the baseline system has for the Chinese full-
form phrase. This is mainly due to the asymmetry introduced
by the different LMs in different translation directions.
the baseline phrase table. Once we get the transla-
tion entries for the full-form, we can replace the full-
form Chinese with its abbreviation to generate trans-
lation entries for the abbreviation. Moreover, to deal
with the case that an abbreviation may have several
candidate full-form phrases, we normalize the fea-
ture values using the following equation,
?j(e, abbr) = ?j(e, full)? P (full|abbr) (2)
where e is an English translation, and ?j is the j-th
model feature indexed as in the baseline system.
3.5 Integration with Baseline Translation
System
Since the obtained translation entries for abbrevia-
tions have the same format as the regular transla-
tion entries in the baseline phrase table, it is rela-
tively easy to add them into the baseline phrase ta-
ble. Specifically, if a translation entry (signatured by
its Chinese and English strings) to be added is not in
the baseline phrase table, we simply add the entry
into the baseline table. On the other hand, if the en-
try is already in the baseline phrase table, then we
merge the entries by enforcing the translation prob-
ability as we obtain the same translation entry from
two different knowledge sources (one is from par-
allel corpora and the other one is from the Chinese
monolingual corpora).
Once we obtain the augmented phrase table, we
should run the minimum-error-rate training (Och,
2003) with the augmented phrase table such that the
model parameters are properly adjusted. As will be
shown in the experimental results, this is critical to
obtain performance gain over the baseline system.
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Corpora
We compile a parallel dataset which consists of var-
ious corpora distributed by the Linguistic Data Con-
sortium (LDC) for NIST MT evaluation. The paral-
lel dataset has about 1M sentence pairs, and about
28M words. The monolingual data we use includes
the English Gigaword V2 (LDC2005T12) and the
Chinese Gigaword V2 (LDC2005T14).
4.2 Baseline System Training
Using the toolkit Moses (Koehn et al, 2007), we
built a phrase-based baseline system by following
429
the standard procedure: running GIZA++ (Och and
Ney, 2000) in both directions, applying refinement
rules to obtain a many-to-many word alignment, and
then extracting and scoring phrases using heuristics
(Och and Ney, 2004). The baseline system has eight
feature functions (see Table 8). The feature func-
tions are combined under a log-linear framework,
and the weights are tuned by the minimum-error-rate
training (Och, 2003) using BLEU (Papineni et al,
2002) as the optimization metric.
To handle different directions of translation be-
tween Chinese and English, we built two tri-
gram language models with modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing (Chen and Goodman, 1998) using the
SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002).
4.3 Statistics on Intermediate Steps
As described in Section 3, our approach involves
five major steps. Table 3 reports the statistics for
each intermediate step. While about 5M English en-
tities are extracted and 2-best Chinese translations
are generated for each English entity, we get only
4.7M Chinese entities. This is because many of the
English entities are untranslatable by the baseline
system. The number of full-abbreviation relations2
extracted from the Chinese monolingual corpora is
51K. For each full-form phrase we generate 5-best
English translations, however only 210k (<51K?5)
translation entries are obtained. This is because the
baseline system may have less than 5 unique trans-
lations for some of the full-form phrases. Lastly, the
number of translation entries added due to abbrevi-
ations is very small compared with the total number
of translation entries (i.e., 50M).
Measure Value
number of English entities 5M
number of Chinese entities 4.7M
number of full-abbreviation relations 51K
number of translation entries added 210K
total number of translation entries 50M
Table 3: Statistics on Intermediate Steps
2Note that many of the ?abbreviations? extracted by our al-
gorithm are not true abbreviations in the linguistic sense, instead
they are just continuous-span of words. This is analogous to the
concept of ?phrase? in phrase-based MT.
4.4 Precision on Full-abbreviation Relations
Table 4 reports the precision on the extracted full-
abbreviation relations. We classify the relations into
several classes based on their occurrence counts. In
the second column, we list the fraction of the rela-
tions in the given class among all the relations we
have extracted (i.e., 51K relations). For each class,
we randomly select 100 relations, manually tag them
as correct or wrong, and then calculate the precision.
Intuitively, a class that has a higher occurrence count
should have a higher precision, and this is generally
true as shown in the fourth column of Table 4. In
comparison, Chang and Teng (2006) reports a preci-
sion of 50% over relations between single-word full-
forms and single-character abbreviations. One can
imagine a much lower precision on general relations
(e.g., the relations between multi-word full-forms
and multi-character abbreviations) that we consider
here. Clearly, our results are very competitive3.
Count Fraction (%) Precision (%)Baseline Ours
(0, 1] 35.2 8.9 42.6
(1, 5] 33.8 7.8 54.4
(5, 10] 10.7 8.9 60.0
(10, 100] 16.5 7.6 55.9
(100,+?) 3.8 12.1 59.9
Average Precision (%) 8.4 51.3
Table 4: Full-abbreviation Relation Extraction Precision
To further show the advantage of our relation ex-
traction algorithm (see Section 3.3), in the third col-
umn of Table 4 we report the results on a simple
baseline. To create the baseline, we make use of the
dominant abbreviation patterns shown in Table 5,
which have been reported in Chang and Lai (2004).
The abbreviation pattern is represented using the
format ?(bit pattern|length)? where the bit pattern
encodes the information about how an abbreviated
form is obtained from its original full-form word,
and the length represents the number of characters in
the full-form word. In the bit pattern, a ?1? indicates
that the character at the corresponding position of
the full-form word is kept in the abbreviation, while
a ?0? means the character is deleted. Now we dis-
3However, it is not a strict comparison because the dataset is
different and the recall may also be different.
430
Pattern Fraction (%) Example
(1|1) 100 (?,?)
(10|2) 87 (??,?)
(101|3) 44 (?/?,??)
(1010|4) 56 (??=?,?=)
Table 5: Dominant Abbreviation Patterns reported in
Chang and Lai (2004)
cuss how to create the baseline. For each full-form
phrase in the randomly selected relations, we gener-
ate a baseline hypothesis (i.e., abbreviation) as fol-
lows. We first generate an abbreviated form for each
word in the full-form phrase by using the dominant
abbreviation pattern, and then concatenate these ab-
breviated words to form a baseline abbreviation for
the full-form phrase. As shown in Table 4, the base-
line performs significantly worse than our relation
extraction algorithm. Compared with the baseline,
our relation extraction algorithm allows arbitrary ab-
breviation patterns as long as they satisfy the align-
ment constraints. Moreover, our algorithm exploits
the data co-occurrence phenomena to generate and
rank hypothesis (i.e., abbreviation). The above two
reasons explain the large performance gain.
It is interesting to examine the statistics on abbre-
viation patterns over the relations automatically ex-
tracted by our algorithm. Table 6 reports the statis-
tics. We obtain the statistics on the relations that
are manually tagged as correct before, and there are
in total 263 unique words in the corresponding full-
form phrases. Note that the results here are highly
biased to our relation extraction algorithm (see Sec-
tion 3.3). For the statistics on manually collected
examples, please refer to Chang and Lai (2004).
4.5 Results on Translation Performance
4.5.1 Precision on Translations of Chinese
Full-form Phrases
For the relations manually tagged as correct in
Section 4.4, we manually look at the top-5 transla-
tions for the full-form phrases. If the top-5 transla-
tions contain at least one correct translation, we tag
it as correct, otherwise as wrong. We get a precision
of 97.5%. This precision is extremely high because
the BLEU score (precision with brevity penalty) that
one obtains for a Chinese sentence is normally be-
tween 30% to 50%. Two reasons explain such a high
Pattern Fraction (%) Example
(1|1) 100 (?,?)
(10|2) 74.3 (??,?)
(01|2) 7.6 (??,?)
(11|2) 18.1 ( j, j)
(100|3) 58.5 (n.,)
(010|3) 3.1 (qu?,u)
(001|3) 4.6 (???,?)
(110|3) 13.8 (???,??)
(101|3) 3.1 (?/?,??)
(111|3) 16.9 ()?,)?)
Table 6: Statistics on Abbreviation Patterns
precision. Firstly, the full-form phrase is short com-
pared with a regular Chinese sentence, and thus it is
easier to translate. Secondly, the full-form phrase it-
self contains enough context information that helps
the system choose a right translation for it. In fact,
this shows the importance of considering the full-
form phrase as an additional alternative to the ab-
breviation even if the baseline system already has
translation entries for the abbreviation.
4.5.2 BLEU on NIST MT Test Sets
We use MT02 as the development set4 for mini-
mum error rate training (MERT) (Och, 2003). The
MT performance is measured by lower-case 4-gram
BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002). Table 7 reports the re-
sults on various NIST MT test sets. As shown in the
table, our Abbreviation Augmented MT (AAMT)
systems perform consistently better than the base-
line system (described in Section 4.2).
Task Baseline AAMTNo MERT With MERT
MT02 29.87 29.96 30.46
MT03 29.03 29.23 29.71
MT04 29.05 29.88 30.55
Average Gain +0.52 +1.18
Table 7: MT Performance measured by BLEU Score
As clear in Table 7, it is important to re-run MERT
(on MT02 only) with the augmented phrase table
in order to get performance gains. Table 8 reports
4On the dev set, about 20K (among 210K) abbreviation
translation entries are matched in the Chinese side.
431
the MERT weights with different phrase tables. One
may notice the change of the weight in word penalty
feature. This is very intuitive in order to prevent the
hypothesis being too long due to the expansion of
the abbreviations into their full-forms.
Feature Baseline AAMT
language model 0.137 0.133
phrase translation 0.066 0.023
lexical translation 0.061 0.078
reverse phrase translation 0.059 0.103
reverse lexical translation 0.112 0.090
phrase penalty -0.150 -0.162
word penalty -0.327 -0.356
distortion model 0.089 0.055
Table 8: Weights obtained by MERT
5 Related Work
Though automatically extracting the relations be-
tween full-form Chinese phrases and their abbrevi-
ations is an interesting and important task for many
natural language processing applications (e.g., ma-
chine translation, question answering, information
retrieval, and so on), not much work is available
in the literature. Recently, Chang and Lai (2004),
Chang and Teng (2006), and Lee (2005) have in-
vestigated this task. Specifically, Chang and Lai
(2004) describes a hidden markov model (HMM) to
model the relationship between a full-form phrase
and its abbreviation, by treating the abbreviation as
the observation and the full-form words as states in
the model. Using a set of manually-created full-
abbreviation relations as training data, they report
experimental results on a recognition task (i.e., given
an abbreviation, the task is to obtain its full-form, or
the vice versa). Clearly, their method is supervised
because it requires the full-abbreviation relations as
training data.5 Chang and Teng (2006) extends the
work in Chang and Lai (2004) to automatically ex-
tract the relations between full-form phrases and
their abbreviations. However, they have only con-
sidered relations between single-word phrases and
single-character abbreviations. Moreover, the HMM
model is computationally-expensive and unable to
exploit the data co-occurrence phenomena that we
5However, the HMM model aligns the characters in the ab-
breviation to the words in the full-form in an unsupervised way.
have exploited efficiently in this paper. Lee (2005)
gives a summary about how Chinese abbreviations
are formed and presents many examples. Manual
rules are created to expand an abbreviation to its full-
form, however, no quantitative results are reported.
None of the above work has addressed the Chi-
nese abbreviation issue in the context of a machine
translation task, which is the primary goal in this
paper. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first to systematically model Chinese abbrevia-
tion expansion to improve machine translation.
The idea of using a bridge (i.e., full-form) to ob-
tain translation entries for unseen words (i.e., abbre-
viation) is similar to the idea of using paraphrases in
MT (see Callison-Burch et al (2006) and references
therein) as both are trying to introduce generaliza-
tion into MT. At last, the goal that we aim to exploit
monolingual corpora to help MT is in-spirit similar
to the goal of using non-parallel corpora to help MT
as aimed in a large amount of work (see Munteanu
and Marcu (2006) and references therein).
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we present a novel method that
automatically extracts relations between full-form
phrases and their abbreviations from monolingual
corpora, and induces translation entries for these ab-
breviations by using their full-form as a bridge. Our
method is scalable enough to handle large amount
of monolingual data, and is essentially unsupervised
as it does not require any additional annotated data
than the baseline translation system. Our method
exploits the data co-occurrence phenomena that is
very useful for relation extractions. We integrate our
method into a state-of-the-art phrase-based baseline
translation system, i.e., Moses (Koehn et al, 2007),
and show that the integrated system consistently im-
proves the performance of the baseline system on
various NIST machine translation test sets.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Yi Su, Sanjeev Khudan-
pur, Philip Resnik, Smaranda Muresan, Chris Dyer
and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful com-
ments. This work was partially supported by the De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency?s GALE
program via Contract No
?
HR0011-06-2-0001.
432
References
Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, and Miles Os-
borne, 2006. Improved Statistical Machine Translation
Using Paraphrases. In Proceedings of NAACL 2006,
pages 17-24.
Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving Statis-
tical Machine Translation using Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2007, pages 61-
72.
Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang. 2007.
Word Sense Disambiguation Improves Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of ACL 2007, pages
33-40.
Jing-Shin Chang and Yu-Tso Lai. 2004. A preliminary
study on probabilistic models for Chinese abbrevia-
tions. In Proceedings of the 3rd SIGHAN Workshop on
Chinese Language Processing, pages 9-16.
Jing-Shin Chang and Wei-Lun Teng. 2006. Mining
Atomic Chinese Abbreviation Pairs: A Probabilistic
Model for Single Character Word Recovery. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5rd SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese
Language Processing, pages 17-24.
Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1998. An empiri-
cal study of smoothing techniques for language mod-
eling. Technical Report TR-10-98, Harvard University
Center for Research in Computing Technology.
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201-228.
Michel Galley, Jonathan Graehl, Kevin Knight, Daniel
Marcu, Steve DeNeefe, Wei Wang, and Ignacio
Thayer. 2006. Scalable inference and training of
context-rich syntactic translation models. In Proceed-
ings of COLING/ACL 2006, pages 961-968.
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan,Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard
Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Con-
strantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, Demonstration Session, pages 177-180.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL 2003, pages 48-54.
H.W.D Lee. 2005. A study of automatic expansion of
Chinese abbreviations. MA Thesis, The University of
Hong Kong.
Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Ex-
tracting Parallel Sub-Sentential Fragments from Non-
Parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL 2006, pages
81-88.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL
2003, pages 160-167.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved
statistical alignment models. In Proceedings of ACL
2000, pages 440-447.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2004. The alignment
template approach to statistical machine translation.
Computational Linguistics, 30:417-449.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL
2002, pages 311-318.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, pages
901-904.
Z.P. Yin. 1999. Methodologies and principles of Chi-
nese abbreviation formation. In Language Teaching
and Study, 2:73-82.
433
