Proceedings of the ACL-08: HLT Demo Session (Companion Volume), pages 13?16,
Columbus, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Demonstration of the UAM CorpusTool for text and image annotation 
 
 
Mick O?Donnell 
Escuela Polit?cnica Superior 
Universidad Aut?noma de Madrid 
28049, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain 
michael.odonnell@uam.es 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper introduced the main features of the 
UAM CorpusTool, software for human and 
semi-automatic annotation of text and images. 
The demonstration will show how to set up an 
annotation project, how to annotate text files 
at multiple annotation levels, how to auto-
matically assign tags to segments matching 
lexical patterns, and how to perform cross-
layer searches of the corpus. 
1 Introduction 
In the last 20 years, a number of tools have been 
developed to facilitate the human annotation of 
text. These have been necessary where software for 
automatic annotation has not been available, e.g., 
for linguistic patterns which are not easily identi-
fied by machine, or for languages without suffi-
cient linguistic resources. 
The vast majority of these annotation tools have 
been developed for particular projects, and have 
thus not been readily adaptable to different annota-
tion problems. Often, the annotation scheme has 
been built into the software, or the software has 
been limited in that they allow only certain types 
of annotation to take place. 
A small number of systems have however been 
developed to be general purpose text annotation 
systems, e.g., MMAX-2 (M?ller and Strube 2006), 
GATE (Cunningham et al2002), WordFreak 
(Morton and LaCivita 2003) and Knowtator 
(Ogren 2006). 
With the exception of the last of these however, 
these systems are generally aimed at technically 
advanced users.  WordFreak, for instance, requires 
writing of Java code to adapt to a different annota-
tion scheme. Users of MMAX-2 need to edit XML 
by hand to provide annotation schemes. Gate al-
lows editing of annotation schemes within the tool, 
but it is a very complex system, and lacks clear 
documentation to help the novice user become 
competent. 
The UAM CorpusTool is a text annotation tool 
primarily aimed at the linguist or computational 
linguist who does not program, and would rather 
spend their time annotating text than learning how 
to use the system. The software is thus designed 
from the ground up to support typical user work-
flow, and everything the user needs to perform an-
notation tasks is included within the software. 
2 The Project Window 
In the majority of cases, the annotator is interested 
in annotating a range of texts, not just single texts. 
Additionally, in most cases annotation at multiple 
linguistic levels is desired (e.g., classifying the text 
as a whole, tagging sections of text by function 
(e.g., abstract, introduction, etc.), tagging sen-
tences/clauses, and tagging participants in clauses. 
To overcome the complexity of dealing with mul-
tiple source files annotated at multiple levels, the 
main window of the CorpusTool is thus a window 
for project management (see Figure 1). 
 
13
 Figure 1: The Project Window of UAM CorpusTool 
 
 
Figure 3: An annotation window for ?Participant? layer. 
 
<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?> 
<document> 
  <segments> 
    <segment id='1' start='158' end='176' 
             features='participant;human' state='active'/> 
    <segment id='2' start='207' end='214' 
               features='participant;organisation;company'  
               state='active'/> 
   ... 
  </segments> 
</document> 
Figure 4: Annotation Storage Example 
 
14
This window allows the user to add new annota-
tion layers to the project, and edit/extend the anno-
tation scheme for each layer (by clicking on the 
?edit? button shown with each layer panel). It also 
allows the user to add or delete source files to the 
project, and to open a specific file for annotation at 
a specific layer (each file has a button for each 
layer). 
3 Tag Hierarchy Editing 
Most of the current text annotation tools lack built-
in facilities for creating and editing the coding 
scheme (the tag set). UAM CorpusTool uses a hie-
rarchally organised tag scheme, allowing cross-
classification and multiple inheritance (both dis-
junctive and conjunctive). The scheme is edited 
graphically, adding, renaming, moving or deleting 
features, adding new sub-distinctions, etc. See Fig-
ure 3. 
An important feature of the tool is that any 
change to the coding scheme is automatically 
propagated throughout all files annotated at this 
layer. For instance, if a feature is renamed in the 
scheme editor, it is also renamed in all annotation 
files. 
The user can also associate a gloss with each 
tag, and during annotation, the gloss associated 
with each feature can be viewed to help the coder 
determine which tag to assign. 
participant
PARTICIPANTS-
TYPE
person
country
organisation ORGANISATION-TYPE
company
government
union
other-organisation
political-party
FORM
proper
common
pronominal
 
Figure 2: Graphical Editing of the Tag Hierarchy 
4 Annotation Windows 
When the user clicks on the button for a given text 
file/layer, an annotation window opens (see Figure 
3). This window shows the text in the top panel 
(with previously identified text segments indicated 
with underlining). When the user creates a new 
segment (by swiping text) or selects an existing 
segment, the space below the text window shows 
controls to select the tags to assign to this segment. 
Tags are drawn from the tag scheme for the current 
layer. Since the tag hierarchy allows cross-
classification, multiple tags are assigned to the 
segment. CorpusTool allows for partially overlap-
ping segments, and embedding of segments. 
Annotated texts are stored using stand-off XML, 
one file per source text and layer. See Figure 4 for 
a sample. The software does not currently input 
from or export to any of the various text encoding 
standards, but will be extended to do so as it be-
comes clear which standards users want supported. 
Currently the tool only supports assigning tags 
to text. Annotating structural relations between text 
segments (e.g., co-reference, constituency or rhe-
torical relations) is not currently supported, but is 
planned for later releases. 
5 Corpus Search 
A button on the main window opens a Corpus 
Search interface, which allows users to retrieve 
lists of segments matching a query. Queries can 
involve multiple layers, for instance, subject 
in passive-clause in english would 
retrieve all NPs tagged as subject in clauses tagged 
as passive-clause in texts tagged as ?english? (this 
is thus a search over 3 annotation layers). Searches 
can also retrieve segments ?containing? segments. 
One can also search for segments containing a 
string. 
Where a lexicon is provided (currently only 
English), users can search for segments containing 
lexical patterns, for instance, clause con-
taining ?be% @participle? would return 
all clause segments containing any inflection of 
?be? immediately followed by any participle verb 
(i.e. most of the passive clauses). Since dictionaries 
are used, the text does not need to be pre-tagged 
with a POS tagger, which may be unreliable on 
texts of a different nature to those on which the 
tagger was trained. Results are displayed in a 
KWIK table format. 
6 Automating Annotation 
Currently, automatic segmentation into sentences 
is provided. I am currently working on automatic 
NP segmentation.  
The search facility outlined above can also be 
used for semi-automatic tagging of text. To auto-
code segments as ?passive-clause?, one specifies a 
search pattern (i.e., clause containing 
15
?be% @participle?). The user is presented 
with all matches, with a check-box next to each. 
The user can then uncheck the hits which are false 
matches, and then click on the ?Store? button to 
tag all checked segments with the ?passive-clause? 
feature. A reasonable number of syntactic features 
can be identified in this way. 
7 Statistical processing 
The tool comes with a statistical analysis interface 
which allows for specified sub-sections of the cor-
pora (e.g., ?finite-clause in english? vs. ?finite-
clause in spanish?)  to be described or contrasted. 
Statistics can be of the text itself (e.g., lexical den-
sity, pronominal usage,  word and segment length, 
etc.), or relate to the frequency of annotations. 
These statistics can also be exported in tab-
delimited form for processing in more general sta-
tistical packages. 
8 Intercoder Reliability Testing 
Where several users have annotated files at the 
same layers, a separate tool is provided to compare 
each annotation document, showing only the dif-
ferences between coders, and also indicating total 
coder agreement. The software can also produce a 
?consensus? version of the annotations, taking the 
most popular coding where 3 or more coders have 
coded the document. In this way, each coder can 
be compared to the consensus (n comparisons), 
rather than comparing the n! pairs of documents.  
9 Annotating Images 
The tool can also be used to annotate images in-
stead of text files. In this context, one can swipe 
regions of the image to create a selection, and as-
sign features to the selection. Since stand-off anno-
tation is used for both text and image, much of the 
code-base is common between the two applica-
tions. The major differences are: i) a different an-
notation widget is used for text selection than for 
image selection; ii) segments in text are defined by 
a tuple: (startchar, endchar), while image segments 
are defined by a tuple of points ( (startx,starty), 
(endx,endy)), and iii) search in images is restricted 
to tag searching, while text can be searched for 
strings and lexical patterns. 
10 Conclusions 
UAM CorpusTool is perhaps the most user-
friendly of the annotation tools available, offering 
easy installation, an intuitive interface, yet power-
ful facilities for management of multiple docu-
ments annotated at multiple levels. 
The main limitation of the tool is that it cur-
rently deals only with feature tagging. Future work 
will add structural tagging, including co-reference 
linking, rhetorical structuring and syntactic struc-
turing. 
The use of the tool is rapidly spreading: in the 
first 15 months of availability, the tool has been 
downloaded 1700 times, to 1100 distinct CPUs 
(with only minimal advertisement). It is being used 
for various text annotation projects throughout the 
world, but mostly by individual linguists perform-
ing linguistic studies.   
UAM CorpusTool is free, available currently for 
Macintosh and Windows machines. It is not open 
source at present, delivered as a standalone execu-
table. It is implemented in Python, using TKinter . 
Acknowledgments 
The development of UAM CorpusTool was par-
tially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education 
and Science (MEC) under grant number 
HUM2005-01728/FILO (the WOSLAC project). 
References  
C. M?ller, and M. Strube. 2006. Multi-Level Annotation 
of Linguistic Data with MMAX2. In S. Braun, K. 
Kohn, J. Mukherjee (eds.) Corpus Technology 
and Language Pedagogy. New Resources, New 
Tools, New Methods (English Corpus Linguis-
tics, Vol.3). Frankfurt: Peter Lang. 197-214. 
H. Cunningham, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva and V. 
Tablan. 2002. GATE: A Framework and Graphi-
cal Development Environment for Robust NLP 
Tools and Applications. Proceedings of the 40th 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL'02). Philadelphia, July 2002. 
T.S. Morton and J. LaCivita. 2003. WordFreak: An 
Open Tool for Linguistic Annotation. Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL. 17-18. 
P.V. Ogren 2006. Knowtator: a plug-in for creating 
training and evaluation data sets for biomedical 
natural language systems. Proceedings of the 9th 
International Prot?g? Conference. 73?76. 
 
16
