Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 13?16,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dimensions of Subjectivity in Natural Language
Wei Chen
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
weichen@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Current research in automatic subjectivity
analysis deals with various kinds of subjec-
tive statements involving human attitudes and
emotions. While all of them are related to
subjectivity, these statements usually touch on
multiple dimensions such as non-objectivity1,
uncertainty, vagueness, non-objective measur-
ability, imprecision, and ambiguity, which are
inherently different. This paper discusses the
differences and relations of six dimensions of
subjectivity. Conceptual and linguistic char-
acteristics of each dimension will be demon-
strated under different contexts.
1 Introduction
Natural language involves statements that do not
contain complete, exact, and unbiased information.
Many of these are subjective, which share the com-
mon property described in narrative theory (Ban-
field, 1982) as ?(subjective statements) must all be
referred to the speaking subject for interpretation?.
Wiebe (1990) further adapted this definition of sub-
jectivity to be ?the linguistic expression of private
states (Quirk et al, 1985)?. So far, linguistic cues
have played an important role in research of sub-
jectivity recognition (e.g. (Wilson et al, 2006)),
sentiment analysis (e.g. (Wilson et al, 2005; Pang
and Lee, 2004)), and emotion studies (e.g. (Pen-
nebaker et al, 2001)). While most linguistic cues
1We use the term ?non-objectivity? to refer to the property
of creating a bias from a speaker?s point of view that is not sup-
ported by sufficient objective evidence. It is not identical to the
subjectivity that involves all the dimensions we discuss in this
paper.
are grouped under the general rubric of subjectiv-
ity, they are usually originated from different dimen-
sions, including:
? non-objectivity
? uncertainty
? vagueness
? non-objective measurability
? imprecision
? ambiguity
These dimensions all mingle in various applications
that deal with subjective statements. For example,
opinion extraction processes statements involving
non-objectivity and uncertainty. Evaluation and sen-
timent analysis deal with vague words, which of-
ten covers the issue of non-objective measurability
and imprecision. Ambiguity sometimes involves im-
plicit subjectivity that is hard to recognize from lin-
guistic patterns, which leads to great challenge of
identifying and understanding subjective statements.
Since multiple dimensions are involved in subjec-
tivity, discriminating them may be helpful in under-
standing subjectivity and related concepts. The fol-
lowing sections discuss characteristics and relations
of the six dimensions of subjectivity.
2 Dimensions of Subjective Statements
2.1 Non-objectivity
In this paper, we define non-objectivity as the prop-
erty of creating a bias according to personal beliefs,
judgments and emotions. This does not include the
kind of subjectivity originated from particular prop-
erties of linguistic units that lead to personal in-
terpretations. Non-objectivity exists in subjective
13
statements such as opinions, evaluations, and per-
suasive statements. Non-objectivity can be recog-
nized from linguistic patterns including words ex-
plicitly expressing thoughts, beliefs, speculations,
and postulations such as ?think?, ?believe?, ?hope?
and ?guess?. Although linguistic cues are found to
be reliable, there are cases of non-objectivity that
cannot be identified merely from lexical, syntactical
or morphological cues. For example, sentence (1)
and sentence (2) are very similar in linguistic struc-
tures, but only sentence (2) is non-objective.
(1) Living things cannot survive without water.
(2) He cannot survive without music.
Apart from linguistic patterns and conceptual
characteristics of non-objectivity, there are two
main issues in non-objectivity recognition. First,
non-objectivity cannot be clearly identified without
knowledge about its source (Wiebe et al, 2005).
For example, ?Bob says the red team is about to
win? is objective with respect to the position of the
speaker of the sentence, who objectively stated a
speech event. But the fragment ?the red team is
about to win? is an opinion of Bob. Hence, whether
a statement is an opinion depends on both the scope
of the statement and the source of that statement.
Second, non-objectivity always lies in a context,
which cannot be ignored (Wiebe, 1990). For ex-
ample, ?Pinocchio?s nose? is likely to be objective
when used within the context of the famous fairy
tale. But the same phrase can be used subjectively as
a metaphor in other contexts, where it may indicate
non-objectivity.
2.2 Uncertainty
Uncertainty can indicate either subjectivity or ob-
jectivity. Flagged by words such as ?probably?
and ?maybe?, statements expressing uncertainty are
usually considered subjective because ?being uncer-
tain? itself can be a subjective mental activity. How-
ever, uncertainty is not a subtype of subjectivity.
Consider the following sentences:
(3) Bob has probably already finished his home-
work.
(4) A poll of recent public opinions shows that Bob
is likely to win the nomination.
Sentence (3) is a subjective statement, where the
speaker expresses his/her postulation of ?Bob fin-
ished his homework? through the uncertainty indi-
cated by ?probably?. On the contrary, sentence (4)
is an objective statement, although uncertainty about
a future event exists. This sentence reports a conclu-
sion drawn from sufficient evident that Bob takes the
majority vote based on the survey, which does not
rely on a particular speaking subject for interpreta-
tion. In this case, uncertainty does not necessarily
imply subjectivity.
On the other hand, people sometimes explicitly
indicate uncertainty to avoid being subjective.
(5) It is possible that the red team will win.
(6) It is likely that the red team will win.
(7) The red team will win.
We could easily imagine a scenario where sentence
(5) is more objective than sentence (6) and (7). For
example, the speaker may believe that the red team
will lose, but in order to avoid personal bias, he/she
may instead say: ?It is possible that the red team
will win (but the blue team has a better chance).?
In general, explicitly showing uncertainty can imply
postulation, but it can also convey the intention of
being objective by not excluding other possibilities.
Uncertainty sometimes exists in statements where
no linguistic cues are present. For example, the lin-
guistic pattern of sentence (7) is similar to that of
?I will have an exam tomorrow?, but the later one
is usually used to describe an objective future event
while sentence (7) can be semantically identical to
sentence (6)2, although the indicator of uncertainty
in sentence (7) is not shown explicitly.
2.3 Vagueness, Non-objective Measurability,
and Imprecision
Vagueness refers to a property of the concepts that
have no precise definitions. For example, gradable
words such as ?small? and ?popular? are sometimes
treated as linguistic cues of vagueness, and they are
found to be good indicators of subjectivity (Hatzi-
vassiloglou and Wiebe, 2000).
Especially, gradable words are vague if there is no
well-defined frame of reference. This in some cases
2These two are identical as long as the game is not fixed.
14
leads to two issues: comparison class and bound-
ary. In the sentence ?Elephants are big?, the compar-
ison class of ?elephants? is unclear: we could com-
pare the size of elephants with either land animals
or all the animals including both land and aquatic
creatures3. Also, there is no clear boundary between
?being small? and ?not being small?. Different indi-
viduals usually have their own fuzzy boundaries for
vague concepts. As such, vague words are usually
treated as important cues for subjectivity. However,
learning which words are vague is non-trivial, be-
cause vagueness cannot be hard-coded into lexicons.
For example, the gradable word ?cold? is vague in
sentence (8) but not in sentence (9). The difference
between these two is the one in sentence (9) has a
known boundary which is the temperature for liquid
water to exist, and the one in sentence (8) simply
reflects personal perception.
(8) It is cold outside.
(9) It is too cold during the night on the moon for
liquid water to exist.
Vagueness is often a strong indicator of subjectiv-
ity because it involves personal explanation of a con-
cept. But there are exceptions. For example, the def-
inition of ?traditional education? can be vague, but
talking about ?traditional education? may not neces-
sarily imply subjectivity.
When speaking of qualities, there are two ma-
jor dimensions related to vagueness: non-objective
measurability and imprecision. Attributes like
height, length, weight, temperature, and time are
objectively measurable, whereas things like beauty
and wisdom are usually not objectively measur-
able. Vagueness exists at different levels for non-
objectively and objectively measurable qualities.
For non-objectively measurable qualities, vagueness
exists at the conceptual level, where it intersects with
non-objectivity. In the sentence ?He is not as charm-
ing as his brother?, the word ?charming? refers to
a quality whose interpretation may vary among dif-
ferent cultures and different individuals. For ob-
jectively measurable qualities, vagueness exists at
the boundary-setting level, where either subjectiv-
ity or common sense comes into play. Sentence
3Other comparison classes are also possible.
(10) shows an example of the objectively measur-
able quality ?long time? indicating an opinion that
the speaker is unsatisfied with someone?s work. On
the contrary, an objective meaning of ?long time? in
sentence (11) can be resolved by common sense.
(10) You finally finished the work, but it took you a
long time.
(11) Intelligent life took a long time to develop on
Earth.4
Statements involving objectively measurable
quantities often have an imprecision problem, where
vagueness is usually resolved from common agree-
ments on small variations of values. For example,
?Bob is six feet tall? usually implies that the height
is ?around? six feet5, with a commonly acceptable
precision of about an inch. Generally, specific preci-
sions are determined by variations tied to measure-
ment technologies for specific quantities: the preci-
sion for the size of a cell may be around a micron,
and the error tolerance for the distance between stars
can be on the order of light years. Imprecision can
also indicate subjectivity when used for subjective
estimation. For instance, ?Bob needs two days to
finish his homework? is usually not telling an exact
period of time, but a personal estimation.
2.4 Ambiguity
While vagueness exists at the conceptual level, am-
biguity lies at the level of linguistic expressions. In
other words, an ambiguous statement contains lin-
guistic expressions that can refer to multiple expla-
nations, whereas a vague statement carries a concept
with unclear or soft definition.
Previous studies have explored the relationship
between ambiguity and subjectivity. They have
shown that subjectivity annotations can be helpful
for word sense disambiguation when a word has dis-
tinct subjective senses and objective senses (Wiebe
and Mihalcea, 2006).
Lexical and syntactical ambiguity usually can be
resolved from contextual information and/or com-
mon consensus. But when ambiguity is used in-
tentionality, identifying and understanding the am-
biguity become creative and interactive procedures,
4Sentence fragment adapted from Astrobiology Magazine
(Dec 02, 2002).
5It could also mean ?at least six feet tall? in some cases.
15
which usually indicate subjectivity. The sentence
?I?d like to see more of you? is an example of this
kind, which could be used to indicate multiple mean-
ings under the same context 6.
3 Mixtures of Multiple Dimensions
In many cases, subjective statements involve mul-
tiple of the dimensions discussed in previous sec-
tions. For example, the subjectivity of the sentence
?It?s a nice car? comes from three dimensions: non-
objectivity, vagueness and ambiguity. First, ?a car
being nice? is usually a personal opinion which may
not be commonly acceptable. Second, the gradable
word ?nice? indicates vagueness, since there is no
clear boundary for ?being nice?. Third, the sentence
is also ambiguous because ?nice? could refer to ap-
pearance, acceleration, angle rate, and many other
metrics that might affect personal evaluations.
For information retrieval systems, processing nat-
ural queries such as ?find me the popular movies of
2007? requires proper understanding of the vague
word ?popular?. Besides, non-objectivity and am-
biguity also take part in the query: on the non-
objectivity side, the definition of ?popular? may dif-
fer according to different individuals; on the ambi-
guity side, the word ?popular? may refer to different
metrics related to the popularity of a movie such as
movie ratings and box office performance.
In applications requiring certain level of
language-understanding, things can get even
more complicated while different dimensions
weave together. As in sentence (5), the speaker
may bias towards the blue team while he/she
shows uncertainty towards the red team. Correctly
understanding this kind of subjective statements
would probably need some investigation in different
dimensions of subjectivity.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrated that subjectivity in
natural language is a complex phenomenon that con-
tains multiple dimensions including non-objectivity,
uncertainty, vagueness, non-objective measurability,
imprecision and ambiguity. These dimensions pat-
tern together in various kinds of subjective state-
6Kent Bach, Ambiguity. Routledge Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy, http://online.sfsu.edu/ kbach/ambguity.html
ments such as opinions, evaluations and natural
queries. Since these dimensions have different
behaviors in subjective statements, discriminating
them in both linguistic and psychological aspects
would be necessary in subjectivity analysis.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Scott Fahlman for
the original motivation of the idea and helpful dis-
cussions.
References
Ann Banfield. 1982. Unspeakable Sentences: Narration
and Representation in the Language of Fiction. Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, Boston.
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Ef-
fects of adjective orientation and gradability on sen-
tence subjectivity. In Proceedings of the 18th confer-
ence on Computational linguistics, pages 299?305.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental education:
Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the ACL,
pages 271?278.
James Pennebaker, Martha Francis, and Roger Booth.
2001. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count: LIWC.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah.
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech,
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar
of the English Language. Longman, New York.
JanyceWiebe and RadaMihalcea. 2006. Word sense and
subjectivity. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 1065?
1072.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. 2005.
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in
language. In Language Resources and Evaluation,
volume 39, pages 165?210.
Janyce Wiebe. 1990. Recognizing Subjective Sen-
tences: A Computational Investigation of Narrative
Text. Ph.D. thesis, SUNY Buffalo Dept. of Computer
Science.
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In HLT ?05: Proceedings of
the conference on Human Language Technology and
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 347?354.
Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa. 2006.
Recognizing strong and weak opinion clauses. Com-
putational Intelligence, 22(2):73?99.
16
