Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 261?264,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
From Extractive to Abstractive Meeting Summaries: Can It Be Done by
Sentence Compression?
Fei Liu and Yang Liu
Computer Science Department
The University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080, USA
{feiliu, yangl}@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
Most previous studies on meeting summariza-
tion have focused on extractive summariza-
tion. In this paper, we investigate if we can
apply sentence compression to extractive sum-
maries to generate abstractive summaries. We
use different compression algorithms, includ-
ing integer linear programming with an addi-
tional step of filler phrase detection, a noisy-
channel approach using Markovization for-
mulation of grammar rules, as well as hu-
man compressed sentences. Our experiments
on the ICSI meeting corpus show that when
compared to the abstractive summaries, using
sentence compression on the extractive sum-
maries improves their ROUGE scores; how-
ever, the best performance is still quite low,
suggesting the need of language generation for
abstractive summarization.
1 Introduction
Meeting summaries provide an efficient way for people
to browse through the lengthy recordings. Most cur-
rent research on meeting summarization has focused on
extractive summarization, that is, it extracts important
sentences (or dialogue acts) from speech transcripts, ei-
ther manual transcripts or automatic speech recogni-
tion (ASR) output. Various approaches to extractive
summarization have been evaluated recently. Popular
unsupervised approaches are maximum marginal rele-
vance (MMR), latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Mur-
ray et al, 2005a), and integer programming (Gillick et
al., 2009). Supervised methods include hidden Markov
model (HMM), maximum entropy, conditional ran-
dom fields (CRF), and support vector machines (SVM)
(Galley, 2006; Buist et al, 2005; Xie et al, 2008;
Maskey and Hirschberg, 2006). (Hori et al, 2003) used
a word based speech summarization approach that uti-
lized dynamic programming to obtain a set of words to
maximize a summarization score.
Most of these summarization approaches aim for
selecting the most informative sentences, while less
attempt has been made to generate abstractive sum-
maries, or compress the extracted sentences and merge
them into a concise summary. Simply concatenating
extracted sentences may not comprise a good sum-
mary, especially for spoken documents, since speech
transcripts often contain many disfluencies and are re-
dundant. The following example shows two extractive
summary sentences (they are from the same speaker),
and part of the abstractive summary that is related to
these two extractive summary sentences. This is an ex-
ample from the ICSI meeting corpus (see Section 2.1
for more information on the data).
Extractive summary sentences:
Sent1: um we have to refine the tasks more and more which
of course we haven?t done at all so far in order to avoid this
rephrasing
Sent2: and uh my suggestion is of course we we keep the
wizard because i think she did a wonderful job
Corresponding abstractive summary:
the group decided to hire the wizard and continue with the
refinement...
In this paper, our goal is to answer the question if
we can perform sentence compression on an extrac-
tive summary to improve its readability and make it
more like an abstractive summary. Compressing sen-
tences could be a first step toward our ultimate goal
of creating an abstract for spoken documents. Sen-
tence compression has been widely studied in language
processing. (Knight and Marcu, 2002; Cohn and Lap-
ata, 2009) learned rewriting rules that indicate which
words should be dropped in a given context. (Knight
and Marcu, 2002; Turner and Charniak, 2005) applied
the noisy-channel framework to predict the possibil-
ities of translating a sentence to a shorter word se-
quence. (Galley and McKeown, 2007) extended the
noisy-channel approach and proposed a head-driven
Markovization formulation of synchronous context-
free grammar (SCFG) deletion rules. Unlike these ap-
proaches that need a training corpus, (Clarke and La-
pata, 2008) encoded the language model and a variety
of linguistic constraints as linear inequalities, and em-
ployed the integer programming approach to find a sub-
set of words that maximize an objective function.
Our focus in this paper is not on new compression al-
gorithms, but rather on using compression to bridge the
gap of extractive and abstractive summarization. We
use different automatic compression algorithms. The
first one is the integer programming (IP) framework,
where we also introduce a filler phrase (FP) detection
261
module based on the Web resources. The second one
uses the SCFG that considers the grammaticality of the
compressed sentences. Finally, as a comparison, we
also use human compression. All of these compressed
sentences are compared to abstractive summaries. Our
experiments using the ICSI meeting corpus show that
compressing extractive summaries can improve human
readability and the ROUGE scores against the refer-
ence abstractive summaries.
2 Sentence Compression of Extractive
Summaries
2.1 Corpus
We used the ICSI meeting corpus (Janin et al, 2003),
which contains naturally occurring meetings, each
about an hour long. All the meetings have been tran-
scribed and annotated with dialogue acts (DAs), top-
ics, abstractive and extractive summaries (Shriberg et
al., 2004; Murray et al, 2005b). In this study, we use
the extractive and abstractive summaries of 6 meetings
from this corpus. These 6 meetings were chosen be-
cause they have been used previously in other related
studies, such as summarization and keyword extraction
(Murray et al, 2005a). On average, an extractive sum-
mary contains 76 sentences
1
(1252 words), and an ab-
stractive summary contains 5 sentences (111 words).
2.2 Compression Approaches
2.2.1 Human Compression
The data annotation was conducted via Amazon Me-
chanical Turk
2
. Human annotators were asked to gen-
erate condensed version for each of the DAs in the ex-
tractive summaries. The compression guideline is sim-
ilar to (Clarke and Lapata, 2008). The annotators were
asked to only remove words from the original sentence
while preserving most of the important meanings, and
make the compressed sentence as grammatical as pos-
sible. The annotators can leave the sentence uncom-
pressed if they think no words need to be deleted; how-
ever, they were not allowed to delete the entire sen-
tence. Since the meeting transcripts are not as readable
as other text genres, we may need a better compression
guideline for human annotators. Currently we let the
annotators make their own judgment what is an appro-
priate compression for a spoken sentence.
We split each extractive meeting summary sequen-
tially into groups of 10 sentences, and asked 6 to 10
online workers to compress each group. Then from
these results, another human subject selected the best
annotation for each sentence. We also asked this hu-
man judge to select the 4-best compressions. However,
in this study, we only use the 1-best annotation result.
We would like to do more analysis on the 4-best results
in the future.
1
The extractive units are DAs. We use DAs and sentences
interchangeably in this paper when there is no ambiguity.
2
http://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
2.2.2 Filler Phrase Detection
We define filler phrases (FPs) as the combination of
two or more words, which could be discourse markers
(e.g., I mean, you know), editing terms, as well as some
terms that are commonly used by human but without
critical meaning, such as, ?for example?, ?of course?,
and ?sort of?. Removing these fillers barely causes any
information loss. We propose to use web information
to automatically generate a list of filler phrases and fil-
ter them out in compression.
For each extracted summary sentence of the 6 meet-
ings, we use it as a query to Google and examine the top
N returned snippets (N is 400 in our experiments). The
snippets may not contain all the words in a sentence
query, but often contain frequently occurring phrases.
For example, ?of course? can be found with high fre-
quency in the snippets. We collect all the phrases that
appear in both the extracted summary sentences and the
snippets with a frequency higher than three. Then we
calculate the inverse sentence frequency (ISF) for these
phrases using the entire ICSI meeting corpus. The ISF
score of a phrase i is:
isf
i
=
N
N
i
where N is the total number of sentences and N
i
is the
number of sentences containing this phrase. Phrases
with low ISF scores mean that they appear in many oc-
casions and are not domain- or topic-indicative. These
are the filler phrases we want to remove to compress
a sentence. The three phrases we found with the low-
est ISF scores are ?you know?, ?i mean? and ?i think?,
consistent with our intuition.
We also noticed that not all the phrases with low
ISF scores can be taken as FPs (?we are? would be a
counter example). We therefore gave the ranked list of
FPs (based on ISF values) to a human subject to select
the proper ones. The human annotator crossed out the
phrases that may not be removable for sentence com-
pression, and also generated simple rules to shorten
some phrases (such as turning ?a little bit? into ?a bit?).
This resulted in 50 final FPs and about a hundred sim-
plification rules. Examples of the final FPs are: ?you
know?, ?and I think?, ?some of?, ?I mean?, ?so far?, ?it
seems like?, ?more or less?, ?of course?, ?sort of?, ?so
forth?, ?I guess?, ?for example?. When using this list
of FPs and rules for sentence compression, we also re-
quire that an FP candidate in the sentence is considered
as a phrase in the returned snippets by the search en-
gine, and its frequency in the snippets is higher than a
pre-defined threshold.
2.2.3 Compression Using Integer Programming
We employ the integer programming (IP) approach in
the same way as (Clarke and Lapata, 2008). Given an
utterance S = w
1
, w
2
, ..., w
n
, the IP approach forms a
compression of this utterance only by dropping words
and preserving the word sequence that maximizes an
objective function, defined as the sum of the signifi-
262
cance scores of the consisting words and n-gram prob-
abilities from a language model:
max ? ?
n
?
i=1
y
i
? Sig(w
i
)
+ (1 ? ?) ?
n?2
?
i=0
n?1
?
j=i+1
n
?
k=j+1
x
ijk
? P (w
k
|w
i
, w
j
)
where y
i
and x
ijk
are two binary variables: y
i
= 1
represents that word w
i
is in the compressed sentence;
x
ijk
= 1 represents that the sequence w
i
, w
j
, w
k
is in the compressed sentence. A trade-off parameter
? is used to balance the contribution from the signif-
icance scores for individual words and the language
model scores. Because of space limitation, we omit-
ted the special sentence beginning and ending symbols
in the formula above. More details can be found in
(Clarke and Lapata, 2008). We only used linear con-
straints defined on the variables, without any linguistic
constraints.
We use the lp solve toolkit.
3
The significance score
for each word is its TF-IDF value (term frequency ?
inverse document frequency). We trained a language
model using SRILM
4
on broadcast news data to gen-
erate the trigram probabilities. We empirically set ? as
0.7, which gives more weight to the word significance
scores. This IP compression method is applied to the
sentences after filler phrases (FPs) are filtered out. We
refer to the output from this approach as ?FP + IP?.
2.2.4 Compression Using Lexicalized Markov
Grammars
The last sentence compression method we use is the
lexicalized Markov grammar-based approach (Galley
and McKeown, 2007) with edit word detection (Char-
niak and Johnson, 2001). Two outputs were generated
using this method with different compression rates (de-
fined as the number of words preserved in the com-
pression divided by the total number of words in the
original sentence).
5
We name them ?Markov (S1)? and
?Markov (S2)? respectively.
3 Experiments
First we perform human evaluation for the compressed
sentences. Again we use the Amazon Mechanical Turk
for the subjective evaluation process. For each extrac-
tive summary sentence, we asked 10 human subjects to
rate the compressed sentences from the three systems,
as well as the human compression. This evaluation was
conducted on three meetings, containing 244 sentences
in total. Participants were asked to read the original
sentence and assign scores to each of the compressed
sentences for its informativeness and grammaticality
respectively using a 1 to 5 scale. An overall score is
calculated as the average of the informativeness and
grammaticality scores. Results are shown in Table 1.
3
http://www.geocities.com/lpsolve
4
http://www.speech.sri.com/projects/srilm/
5
Thanks to Michel Galley to help generate these output.
For a comparison, we also include the ROUGE-1 F-
scores (Lin, 2004) of each system output against the
human compressed sentences.
Approach Info. Gram. Overall R-1 F (%)
Human 4.35 4.38 4.37 -
Markov (S1) 3.64 3.79 3.72 88.76
Markov (S2) 2.89 2.76 2.83 62.99
FP + IP 3.70 3.95 3.82 85.83
Table 1: Human evaluation results. Also shown is the
ROUGE-1 (unigram match) F-score of different sys-
tems compared to human compression.
We can see from the table that as expected, the hu-
man compression yields the best performance on both
informativeness and grammaticality. ?FP + IP? and
?Markov (S1)? approaches also achieve satisfying per-
formance under both evaluation metrics. The relatively
low scores for ?Markov (S2)? output are partly due to
its low compression rate (see Table 2 for the length in-
formation). As an example, we show below the com-
pressed sentences from human and systems for the first
sentence in the example in Sec 1.
Human: we have to refine the tasks in order to avoid
rephrasing
Markov (S1): we have to refine the tasks more and more
which we haven?t done in order to avoid this rephrasing
Markov (S2): we have to refine the tasks which we haven?t
done order to avoid this rephrasing
FP + IP: we have to refine the tasks more and more which
we haven?t done to avoid this rephrasing
Since our goal is to answer the question if we can
use sentence compression to generate abstractive sum-
maries, we compare the compressed summaries, as
well as the original extractive summaries, against the
reference abstractive summaries. The ROUGE-1 re-
sults along with the word compression ratio for each
compression approach are shown in Table 2. We can
see that all of the compression algorithms yield bet-
ter ROUGE score than the original extractive sum-
maries. Take Markov (S2) as an example. The recall
rate dropped only 8% (from the original 66% to 58%)
when only 53% words in the extractive summaries are
preserved. This demonstrates that it is possible for the
current sentence compression systems to greatly con-
dense the extractive summaries while preserving the
desirable information, and thus yield summaries that
are more like abstractive summaries. However, since
the abstractive summaries are much shorter than the ex-
tractive summaries (even after compression), it is not
surprising to see the low precision results as shown in
Table 2. We also observe some different patterns be-
tween the ROUGE scores and the human evaluation
results in Table 1. For example, Markov (S2) has the
highest ROUGE result, but worse human evaluation
score than other methods.
To evaluate the length impact and to further make
263
All Sent. Top Sent.
Approach Word ratio (%) P(%) R(%) F(%) P(%) R(%) F(%)
Original extractive summary 100 7.58 66.06 12.99 29.98 34.29 31.83
Human compression 65.58 10.43 63.00 16.95 34.35 37.39 35.79
Markov (S1) 67.67 10.15 61.98 16.41 34.24 36.88 35.46
Markov (S2) 53.28 11.90 58.14 18.37 32.23 34.96 33.49
FP + IP 76.38 9.11 59.85 14.78 31.82 35.62 33.57
Table 2: Compression ratio of different systems and ROUGE-1 scores compared to human abstractive summaries.
the extractive summaries more like abstractive sum-
maries, we conduct an oracle experiment: we compute
the ROUGE score for each of the extractive summary
sentences (the original sentence or the compressed sen-
tence) against the abstract, and select the sentences
with the highest scores until the number of selected
words is about the same as that in the abstract.
6
The
ROUGE results using these selected top sentences are
shown in the right part of Table 2. There is some dif-
ference using all the sentences vs. the top sentences
regarding the ranking of different compression algo-
rithms (comparing the two blocks in Table 2).
From Table 2, we notice significant performance im-
provement when using the selected sentences to form a
summary. These results indicate that, it may be possi-
ble to convert extractive summaries to abstractive sum-
maries. On the other hand, this is an oracle result since
we compare the extractive summaries to the abstract for
sentence selection. In the real scenario, we will need
other methods to rank sentences. Moreover, the current
ROUGE score is not very high. This suggests that there
is a limit using extractive summarization and sentence
compression to form abstractive summaries, and that
sophisticated language generation is still needed.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we attempt to bridge the gap between ex-
tractive and abstractive summaries by performing sen-
tence compression. Several compression approaches
are employed, including an integer programming based
framework, where we also introduced a filler phrase de-
tection module, the lexicalized Markov grammar-based
approach, as well as human compression. Results show
that, while sentence compression provides a promising
way of moving from extractive summaries toward ab-
stracts, there is also a potential limit along this direc-
tion. This study uses human annotated extractive sum-
maries. In our future work, we will evaluate using auto-
matic extractive summaries. Furthermore, we will ex-
plore the possibility of merging compressed extractive
sentences to generate more unified summaries.
References
A. Buist, W. Kraaij, and S. Raaijmakers. 2005. Automatic
summarization of meeting data: A feasibility study. In
Proc. of CLIN.
6
Thanks to Shasha Xie for generating these results.
E. Charniak and M. Johnson. 2001. Edit detection and pars-
ing for transcribed speech. In Proc. of NAACL.
J. Clarke and M. Lapata. 2008. Global inference for sentence
compression: An integer linear programming approach.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 31:399?429.
T. Cohn and M. Lapata. 2009. Sentence compression as tree
transduction. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research.
M. Galley and K. McKeown. 2007. Lexicalized markov
grammars for sentence compression. In Proc. of
NAACL/HLT.
M. Galley. 2006. A skip-chain conditional random field
for ranking meeting utterances by importance. In Proc.
of EMNLP.
D. Gillick, K. Riedhammer, B. Favre, and D. Hakkani-Tur.
2009. A global optimization framework for meeting sum-
marization. In Proc. of ICASSP.
C. Hori, S. Furui, R. Malkin, H. Yu, and A. Waibel. 2003.
A statistical approach to automatic speech summarization.
Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 2003:128?139.
A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, G. Gelbart, N. Mor-
gan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, and
C. Wooters. 2003. The ICSI meeting corpus. In Proc.
of ICASSP.
K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2002. Summarization beyond
sentence extraction: A probabilistic approach to sentence
compression. Artificial Intelligence, 139:91?107.
C. Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation
of summaries. In Proc. of ACL Workshop on Text Summa-
rization Branches Out.
S. Maskey and J. Hirschberg. 2006. Summarizing speech
without text using hidden markov models. In Proc. of
HLT/NAACL.
G. Murray, S. Renals, and J. Carletta. 2005a. Extractive
summarization of meeting recordings. In Proc. of INTER-
SPEECH.
G. Murray, S. Renals, J. Carletta, and J. Moore. 2005b. Eval-
uating automatic summaries of meeting recordings. In
Proc. of ACL 2005 MTSE Workshop.
E. Shriberg, R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, J. Ang, and H. Carvey.
2004. The ICSI meeting recorder dialog act (MRDA)
corpus. In Proc. of SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and
Dialogue.
J. Turner and E. Charniak. 2005. Supervised and unsuper-
vised learning for sentence compression. In Proc. of ACL.
S. Xie, Y. Liu, and H. Lin. 2008. Evaluating the effective-
ness of features and sampling in extractive meeting sum-
marization. In Proc. of IEEE Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Technology.
264
