Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 225?228,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
A Beam-Search Extraction Algorithm for Comparable Data
Christoph Tillmann
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 10598
ctill@us.ibm.com
Abstract
This paper extends previous work on ex-
tracting parallel sentence pairs from com-
parable data (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005).
For a given source sentence S, a max-
imum entropy (ME) classifier is applied
to a large set of candidate target transla-
tions . A beam-search algorithm is used
to abandon target sentences as non-parallel
early on during classification if they fall
outside the beam. This way, our novel
algorithm avoids any document-level pre-
filtering step. The algorithm increases the
number of extracted parallel sentence pairs
significantly, which leads to a BLEU im-
provement of about 1 % on our Spanish-
English data.
1 Introduction
The paper presents a novel algorithm for ex-
tracting parallel sentence pairs from comparable
monolingual news data. We select source-target
sentence pairs (S, T ) based on a ME classifier
(Munteanu and Marcu, 2005). Because the set of
target sentences T considered can be huge, pre-
vious work (Fung and Cheung, 2004; Resnik and
Smith, 2003; Snover et al, 2008; Munteanu and
Marcu, 2005) pre-selects target sentences T at the
document level . We have re-implemented a par-
ticular filtering scheme based on BM25 (Quirk et
al., 2007; Utiyama and Isahara, 2003; Robertson
et al, 1995). In this paper, we demonstrate a dif-
ferent strategy . We compute the ME score in-
crementally at the word level and apply a beam-
search algorithm to a large number of sentences.
We abandon target sentences early on during clas-
sification if they fall outside the beam. For com-
parison purposes, we run our novel extraction al-
gorithm with and without the document-level pre-
filtering step. The results in Section 4 show that
the number of extracted sentence pairs is more
than doubled which also leads to an increase in
BLEU by about 1 % on the Spanish-English data.
The classification probability is defined as fol-
lows:
p(c|S, T ) =
exp( w
T
? f(c, S, T ) )
Z(S, T )
, (1)
where S = sJ
1
is a source sentence of length J and
T = t
I
1
is a target sentence of length I . c ? {0, 1}
is a binary variable . p(c|S, T ) ? [0, 1] is a proba-
bility where a value p(c = 1|S, T ) close to 1.0 in-
dicates that S and T are translations of each other.
w ? R
n is a weight vector obtained during train-
ing. f(c, S, T ) is a feature vector where the fea-
tures are co-indexed with respect to the alignment
variable c. Finally, Z(S, T ) is an appropriately
chosen normalization constant.
Section 2 summarizes the use of the binary clas-
sifier. Section 3 presents the beam-search algo-
rithm. In Section 4, we show experimental results.
Finally, Section 5 discusses the novel algorithm.
2 Classifier Training
The classifier in Eq. 1 is based on several real-
valued feature functions f
i
. Their computation
is based on the so-called IBM Model-1 (Brown et
al., 1993). The Model-1 is trained on some paral-
lel data available for a language pair, i.e. the data
used to train the baseline systems in Section 4.
p(s|T ) is the Model-1 probability assigned to a
source word s given the target sentence T , p(t|S)
is defined accordingly. p(s|t) and p(t|s) are word
translation probabilities obtained by two parallel
Model-1 training steps on the same data, but swap-
ping the role of source and target language. To
compute these values efficiently, the implementa-
tion techniques in (Tillmann and Xu, 2009) are
used. Coverage and fertility features are defined
based on the Model-1 Viterbi alignment: a source
225
word s is said to be covered if there is a target
word t ? T such that its probability is above a
threshold ?: p(s|t) > ? . We define the fertility
of a source word s as the number of target words
t ? T for which p(s|t) > ?. Target word cover-
age and fertility are defined accordingly. A large
number of ?uncovered? source and target positions
as well as a large number of high fertility words
indicate non-parallelism. We use the following
N = 7 features: 1,2) lexical Model-1 weight-
ing:
?
s
?log( p(s|T ) ) and
?
t
?log( p(t|S) ),
3,4) number of uncovered source and target po-
sitions, 5,6) sum of source and target fertilities,
7) number of covered source and target positions
. These features are defined in a way that they
can be computed incrementally at the word level.
Some thresholding is applied, e.g. a sequence of
uncovered positions has to be at least 3 positions
long to generate a non-zero feature value . In the
feature vector f(c, S, T ), each feature f
i
occurs
potentially twice, once for each class c ? {0, 1}.
For the feature vector f(c = 1, S, T ), all the fea-
ture values corresponding to class c = 0 are set
to 0, and vice versa. This particular way of defin-
ing the feature vector is needed for the search in
Section 3: the contribution of the ?negative? fea-
tures for c = 0 is only computed when Eq. 1 is
evaluated for the highest scoring final hypothesis
in the beam. To train the classifier, we have manu-
ally annotated a collection of 524 sentence pairs .
A sentence pair is considered parallel if at least
75 % of source and target words have a corre-
sponding translation in the other sentence, other-
wise it is labeled as non-parallel. A weight vector
w ? R
2?N is trained with respect to classification
accuracy using the on-line maxent training algo-
rithm in (Tillmann and Zhang, 2007).
3 Beam Search Algorithm
We process the comparable data at the sentence
level: sentences are indexed based on their publi-
cation date. For each source sentence S, a match-
ing score is computed over all the target sentences
T
m
? ? that have a publication date which differs
less than 7 days from the publication date of the
source sentence 1. We are aiming at finding the ?T
with the highest probability p(c = 1|S, ?T ), but we
cannot compute that probability for all sentence
1In addition, the sentence length filter in (Munteanu and
Marcu, 2005) is used: the length ratio max(J, I)/min(J, I)
of source and target sentence has to be smaller than 2.
pairs (S, T
m
) since |?| can be in tens of thousands
of sentences . Instead, we use a beam-search algo-
rithm to search for the sentence pair (S, ?T ) with
the highest matching score wT ? f(1, S, ?T ) 2. The
?light-weight? features defined in Section 2 are
such that the matching score can be computed in-
crementally while processing the source and target
sentence positions in some order. To that end, we
maintain a stack of matching hypotheses for each
source position j. Each hypothesis is assigned a
partial matching score based on the source and tar-
get positions processed so far. Whenever a partial
matching score is low compared to partial match-
ing scores of other target sentence candidates, that
translation pair can be discarded by carrying out
a beam-search pruning step. The search is orga-
nized in a single left-to-right run over the source
positions 1? j ? J and all active partial hypothe-
ses match the same portion of that source sentence.
There is at most a single active hypothesis for each
different target sentence T
i
, and search states are
defined as follows:
[ m , j , u
j
, u
i
; d ] .
Here, m ? {1, ? ? ? , |?|} is a target sentence in-
dex. j is a position in the source sentence, u
j
and
u
i
are the number of uncovered source and target
positions to the left of source position j and tar-
get position i (coverage computation is explained
above), and d is the partial matching score . The
target position i corresponding to the source posi-
tion j is computed deterministically as follows:
i = ?I ?
j
J
? , (2)
where the sentence lengths I and J are known
for a sentence pair (S, T ). Covering an additional
source position leads to covering additional target
positions as well, and source and target features
are computed accordingly. The search is initial-
ized by adding a single hypothesis for each target
sentence T
m
? ? to the stack for j = 1:
[ m , j = 1 , u
j
= 0 , u
i
= 0 ; 0 ] .
During the left-to-right search , state transitions of
the following type occur:
[ m , j , u
j
, u
i
; d ] ?
[ m , j + 1 , u
?
j
, u
?
i
; d
?
] ,
2This is similar to standard phrase-based SMT decoding,
where a set of real-valued features is used and any sentence-
level normalization is ignored during decoding. We assume
the effect of this approximation to be small.
226
where the partial score is updated as: d? = d +
w
T
? f(1, j, i) . Here, f(1, j, i) is a partial fea-
ture vector computed for all the additional source
and target positions processed in the last extension
step. The number of uncovered source and target
positions u? is updated as well. The beam-search
algorithm is carried out until all source positions j
have been processed. We extract the highest scor-
ing partial hypothesis from the final stack j = J
. For that hypothesis, we compute a global feature
vector f(1, S, T ) by adding all the local f(1, j, i)?s
component-wise. The ?negative? feature vector
f(0, S, T ) is computed from f(1, S, T ) by copy-
ing its feature values. We then use Eq. 1 to com-
pute the probability p(1|S, T ) and apply a thresh-
old of ? = 0.75 to extract parallel sentence pairs.
We have adjusted beam-search pruning techniques
taken from regular SMT decoding (Tillmann et al,
1997; Koehn, 2004) to reduce the number of hy-
potheses after each extension step. Currently, only
histogram pruning is employed to reduce the num-
ber of hypotheses in each stack.
The resulting beam-search algorithm is similar
to a monotone decoder for SMT: rather then in-
crementally generating a target translation, the de-
coder is used to select entire target sentences out of
a pre-defined list. That way, our beam search algo-
rithm is similar to algorithms in large-scale speech
recognition (Ney, 1984; Vintsyuk, 1971), where
an acoustic signal is matched to a pre-assigned list
of words in the recognizer vocabulary.
4 Experiments
The parallel sentence extraction algorithm pre-
sented in this paper is tested in detail on all of the
large-scale Spanish-English Gigaword data (Graff,
2006; Graff, 2007) as well as on some smaller
Portuguese-English news data . For the Spanish-
English data , matching sentence pairs come from
the same news feed. Table 1 shows the size of
the comparable data, and Table 2 shows the ef-
fect of including the additional sentence pairs into
the training of a phrase-based SMT system. Here,
both languages use a test set with a single ref-
erence. The test data comes from Spanish and
Portuguese news web pages that have been trans-
lated into English. Including about 1.35 million
sentence pairs extracted from the Gigaword data,
we obtain a statistically significant improvement
from 42.3 to 45.7 in BLEU. The baseline system
has been trained on about 1.8 million sentence
Table 1: Corpus statistics for comparable data.
Spanish English
Sentences 19.4 million 47.9 million
Words 601.5 million 1.36 billion
Portuguese English
Sentences 366.0 thousand 5.3 million
Words 11.6 million 171.1 million
pairs from Europarl and FBIS parallel data. We
also present results for a Portuguese-English sys-
tem: the baseline has been trained on Europarl and
JRC data. Parallel sentence pairs are extracted
from comparable news data published in 2006.
For this data, no document-level information was
available. To gauge the effect of the document-
level pre-filtering step, we have re-implemented
an IR technique based on BM25 (Robertson et al,
1995). This type of pre-filtering has also been used
in (Quirk et al, 2007; Utiyama and Isahara, 2003).
We split the Spanish data into documents. Each
Spanish document is translated into a bag of En-
glish words using Model-1 lexicon probabilities
trained on the baseline data. Each of these English
bag-of-words is then issued as a query against all
the English documents that have been published
within a 7 day window of the source document.
We select the 20 highest scoring English docu-
ments for each source document . These 20 docu-
ments provide a restricted set of target sentence
candidates. The sentence-level beam-search al-
gorithm without the document-level filtering step
searches through close to 1 trillion sentence pairs.
For the data obtained by the BM25-based filtering
step, we still use the same beam-search algorithm
but on a much smaller candidate set of only 25.4
billion sentence pairs. The probability selection
threshold ? is determined on some development
set in terms of precision and recall (based on the
definitions in (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005)). The
classifier obtains an F-measure classifications per-
formance of about 85 %. The BM25 filtering step
leads to a significantly more complex processing
pipeline since sentences have to be indexed with
respect to document boundaries and publication
date. The document-level pre-filtering reduces the
overall processing time by about 40 % (from 4 to
2.5 days on a 100-CPU cluster). However, the ex-
haustive sentence-level search improves the BLEU
score by about 1 % on the Spanish-English data.
227
Table 2: Spanish-English and Portuguese-English
extraction results. Extraction threshold is ? =
0.75 for both language pairs. # cands reports the
size of the overall search space in terms of sen-
tence pairs processed .
Data Source # cands # pairs Bleu
Baseline - 1.826 M 42.3
+ Giga 999.3 B 1.357 M 45.7
+ Giga (BM25) 25.4 B 0.609 M 44.8
Baseline - 2.222 M 45.3
+ News Data 2006 77.8 B 56 K 47.2
5 Future Work and Discussion
In this paper, we have presented a novel beam-
search algorithm to extract sentence pairs from
comparable data . It can avoid any pre-filtering
at the document level (Resnik and Smith, 2003;
Snover et al, 2008; Utiyama and Isahara, 2003;
Munteanu and Marcu, 2005; Fung and Cheung,
2004). The novel algorithm is successfully eval-
uated on news data for two language pairs. A
related approach that also avoids any document-
level pre-filtering has been presented in (Tillmann
and Xu, 2009). The efficient implementation tech-
niques in that paper are extended for the ME clas-
sifier and beam search algorithm in the current pa-
per, i.e. feature function values are cached along
with Model-1 probabilities.
The search-driven extraction algorithm presented
in this paper might also be applicable to other
NLP extraction task, e.g. named entity extraction.
Rather then employing a cascade of filtering steps,
a one-stage search with a specially adopted feature
set and search space organization might be carried
out . Such a search-driven approach makes less
assumptions about the data and may increase the
number of extracted entities, i.e. increase recall.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thanks the anonymous reviewers
for their valuable remarks.
References
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A.
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The
Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation: Pa-
rameter Estimation. CL, 19(2):263?311.
Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004. Mining Very-
Non-Parallel Corpora: Parallel Sentence and Lexi-
con Extraction via Bootstrapping and EM. In Proc,
of EMNLP 2004, pages 57?63, Barcelona, Spain,
July.
Dave Graff. 2006. LDC2006T12: Spanish Gigaword
Corpus First Edition. LDC.
Dave Graff. 2007. LDC2007T07: English Gigaword
Corpus Third Edition. LDC.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a Beam Search De-
coder for Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Transla-
tion Models. In Proceedings of AMTA?04, Washing-
ton DC, September-October.
Dragos S. Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving Machine Translation Performance by Ex-
ploiting Non-Parallel Corpora. CL, 31(4):477?504.
H. Ney. 1984. The Use of a One-stage Dynamic Pro-
gramming Algorithm for Connected Word Recogni-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing, 32(2):263?271.
Chris Quirk, Raghavendra Udupa, and Arul Menezes.
2007. Generative Models of Noisy Translations
with Applications to Parallel Fragment Extraction.
In Proc. of the MT Summit XI, pages 321?327,
Copenhagen,Demark, September.
Philip Resnik and Noah Smith. 2003. The Web as
Parallel Corpus. CL, 29(3):349?380.
S E Robertson, S Walker, M M Beaulieu, and M Gat-
ford. 1995. Okapi at TREC-4. In Proc. of the 4th
Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-4), pages 73?96.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, and Richard Schwartz.
2008. Language and Translation Model Adaptation
using Comparable Corpora. In Proc. of EMNLP08,
pages 856?865, Honolulu, Hawaii, October.
Christoph Tillmann and Jian-Ming Xu. 2009. A Sim-
ple Sentence-Level Extraction Algorithm for Com-
parable Data. In Companion Vol. of NAACL HLT
09, pages 93?96, Boulder, Colorado, June.
Christoph Tillmann and Tong Zhang. 2007. A Block
Bigram Prediction Model for Statistical Machine
Translation. ACM-TSLP, 4(6):1?31, July.
Christoph Tillmann, Stefan Vogel, Hermann Ney, and
Alex Zubiaga. 1997. A DP-based Search Using
Monotone Alignments in Statistical Translation. In
Proc. of ACL 97, pages 289?296, Madrid,Spain,
July.
Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Reliable
Measures for Aligning Japanese-English News Arti-
cles and Sentences. In Proc. of ACL03, pages 72?79,
Sapporo, Japan, July.
T.K. Vintsyuk. 1971. Element-Wise Recognition of
Continuous Speech Consisting of Words From a
Specified Vocabulary. Cybernetics (Kibernetica),
(2):133?143, March-April.
228
