Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 209?212,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Play the Language: Play Coreference
Barbora Hladk
?
a and Ji
?
r?? M??rovsk?y and Pavel Schlesinger
Charles University in Prague
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
e-mail: {hladka, mirovsky, schlesinger@ufal.mff.cuni.cz}
Abstract
We propose the PlayCoref game, whose
purpose is to obtain substantial amount of
text data with the coreference annotation.
We provide a description of the game de-
sign that covers the strategy, the instruc-
tions for the players, the input texts selec-
tion and preparation, and the score evalua-
tion.
1 Introduction
A collection of high quality data is resource-
demanding regardless of the area of research and
type of the data. This fact has encouraged a
formulation of an alternative way of data col-
lection, ?Games With a Purpose? methodology
(GWAP), (van Ahn and Dabbish, 2008). The
GWAP methodology exploits the capacity of Inter-
net users who like to play on-line games. The on-
line games are being designed to generate data for
applications that either have not been implemented
yet, or have already been implemented with a per-
formance lower than human. Moreover, the play-
ers work simply by playing the game - the data are
generated as a by-product of the game. If the game
is enjoyable, it brings human resources and saves
financial resources. The game popularity brings
more game sessions and thus more annotated data.
The GWAP methodology was formulated in
parallel with design and implementation of the
on-line games with images (van Ahn and Dab-
bish, 2004) and subsequently with tunes (Law
et al, 2007),
1
in which the players try to agree
on a caption of the image/tune. The popularity of
the games is enormous so the authors have suc-
ceeded in the basic requirement that the annota-
tion is generated in a substantial amount. Then
the Onto games appeared (Siorpaes and Hepp,
1
www.gwap.org
2008), bringing a new type of input data to GWAP,
namely video and text.
2
The situation with text seems to be slightly dif-
ferent. One has to read a text in order to identify
its topics, which takes more time than observing
images, and the longer text, the worse. Since the
game must be of a dynamic character, it is unimag-
inable that the players will spend minutes reading
an input text. Therefore, the text must be opened
to the players ?part? by ?part?.
So far, besides the Onto games, two more games
with texts have been designed: What did Shan-
non say?
3
, the goal of which is to help the speech
recognizer with difficult-to-recognize words, and
Phrase Detectives
4
(Kruschwitz, Chamberlain,
Poesio, 2009), the goal of which is to identify re-
lationships between words and phrases in a text.
Motivated by the GWAP portal, the LGame por-
tal
5
has been established. Seven key properties
that any game on the LGame portal will satisfy
were formulated ? see Table 1.
The LGame portal has been opened with the
Shannon game, a game of intentionally hidden
words in the sentence, where players guess them,
and the Place the Space game, a game of word
segmentation.
Within a systematic framework established at
the LGame portal, the games PlayCoref, PlayNE,
PlayDoc devoted to the linguistic phenomena
dealing with the contents of documents, namely
coreference, named-entitites, and document la-
bels, respectively, are being designed in parallel
but implemented subsequently since the GWAPs
are open-ended stories the success of which is hard
to estimate in advance. These games are designed
for Czech and English by default. However, the
game rules are language independent.
2
www.ontogame.org
3
lingo.clsp.jhu.edushannongame.html
4
www.phrasedetectives.org
5
www.lgame.cz
209
1. During the game, the data are collected for the natural
language processing tasks that computers cannot solve
at all or not well enough.
2. Playing the game only requires a basic knowledge
of the grammar of the language of the game. No extra
linguistic knowledge is required.
3. The game rules are designed independently of the
language of the game.
4. The game is designed for Czech and English by de-
fault.
5. During the game, the players have at least a general
idea of what their opponent(s) do.
6. The game is designed for at least two players (also a
computer can be an opponent).
7. The game offers several levels of difficulty (to fit a
vast range of players).
Table 1: Key properties of the games on the LGame portal.
We have decided to implement the PlayCoref
first. Coreference crosses the sentence boundaries
and playing coreference offers a great opportunity
to test players? willingness to read a text part by
part, e.g. sentence by sentence. In this paper, we
discuss various aspects of the PlayCoref design.
2 Coreference
Coreference occurs when several referring expres-
sions in a text refer to the same entity (e.g. per-
son, thing, reality). A coreferential pair is marked
between subsequent pairs of the referring expres-
sions. A sequence of coreferential pairs referring
to the same entity in a text forms a coreference
chain.
Various projects on the coreference annotation
by linguists are running. We mention two of
them ? the Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0 and
the coreference task for the sixth Message Under-
standing Conference.
Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0 (PDT 2.0)
6
is the only corpus establishing the coreference
annotation on a layer of meaning, so-called tec-
togrammatical layer (t-layer). The annotation in-
cludes grammatical and textual coreference. Ex-
tended textual coreference (covering additional
categories) is being annotated in PDT 2.0 in an on-
going project (Nedoluzhko, 2007).
Sixth Message Understanding Conference ? the
coreference task (MUC-6)
7
operates on a sur-
face layer. The coreferential pairs are marked be-
tween pairs of the categories nouns, noun phrases,
and pronouns.
6
ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0
7
cs.nyu.edu/faculty/grishman/muc6.html
3 The PlayCoref Game
Motivation The PDT 2.0 coreference annota-
tion (including the annotation scheme design,
training of the annotators, technical and linguistic
support, and annotation corrections) spanned the
period from summer 2002 till autumn 2004. Each
of two annotators annotated one half out of 3,165
documents. We are aware that coreferential pairs
marked in the PlayCoref sessions may differ from
the PDT 2.0 coreference annotation. However,
the following estimates reinforce our motivation
to use the GWAP technology on texts: assuming
that (1) the PlayCoref is designed as a two-player
game, (2) at least one document is being present
in each session, (3) the session lasts up to 5 min-
utes and (4) the players play half an hour a day,
then at least 6 documents will be processed a day
by two players. This means that 3,165 documents
will be annotated by two players in 528 days, by
eight players in 132 days, by 32 players in 33 days
etc., and by 128 players in 9 days.
Strategy The game is designed for two players.
The game starts with several first sentences of the
document displayed in the players? sentence win-
dow. According to the restrictions put on the mem-
bers of the coreferential pairs, parts of the text are
unlocked while the other parts are locked. Only
unlocked parts of the text are allowed to become
a member of the coreferential pair. In our case,
only nouns and selected pronouns are unlocked.
8
In Table 2, we provide a list of the locked pro-
noun?s sub-part-of-speech classes (as designed in
the Czech positional tag system). Pronouns of
the other sub-part-of-speech classes are unlocked.
The selection of the locked pronoun?s sub-part-of-
speech classes is based on the fact that some types
of pronouns usually corefer with parts of the text
larger than one word. This type of coreference
cannot be annotated without a linguistic knowl-
edge and without training. Therefore it must be
omitted for the purposes of the PlayCoref game.
The players mark coreferential pairs between
the unlocked words in the text (no phrases are al-
lowed). They mark the coreferential pairs as undi-
rected links.
9
After the session, the coreference
8
A tagging procedure is used to get the part-of-speech
classes of the words.
9
This strategy differs from the general conception of
coreference being understood as either the anaphoric or cat-
aphoric relation depending on ?direction? of the link in the
text. We believe that the players will benefit from this sim-
210
Locked pronouns: subPOS and its description
D Demonstrative (?ten?, ?onen?, ..., lit. ?this?, ?that?, ?that?, ...
?over there?, ... )
E Relative ?co?z? (corresponding to English which in subordinate
clauses referring to a part of the preceding text)
L Indefinite ?v?sechen?, ?s?am? (lit. ?all?, ?alone?)
O ?sv?uj?, ?nesv?uj?, ?tentam? alone (lit. ?own self?, ?not-in-mood?,
?gone?)
Q Relative/interrogative ?co?, ?copak?, ?co?zpak? (lit. ?what?, ?isn?t-
it-true-that?)
W Negative (?nic?, ?nikdo?, ?nijak?y?, ??z?adn?y?, ..., lit. ?nothing?,
?nobody?, ?not-worth-mentioning?, ?no?/?none?)
Y Relative/interrogative ?co? as an enclitic (after a preposition)
(?o?c?, ?na?c?, ?za?c?, lit. ?about what?, ?on?/?onto? ?what?, ?af-
ter?/?for what?)
Z Indefinite (?n?ejak?y?, ?n?ekter?y?, ??c??koli?, ?cosi?, ..., lit. ?some?,
?some?, ?anybody?s?, ?something?)
Table 2: List of the pronoun?s sub-part-of-speech classes in
the Czech positional tag system locked for the PlayCoref.
chains are automatically reconstructed from the
coreferential pairs marked.
During the session, the number of words the
opponent has linked into the coreferential pairs is
displayed to the player. The number of sentences
with at least one coreferential pair marked by the
opponent is displayed to the player as well. Re-
vealing more information about the opponent?s ac-
tions would affect the independency of the play-
ers? decisions.
If the player finishes pairing all the related
words in a visible part of the document (visible
to him), he asks for the next sentence of the docu-
ment. It appears at the bottom of his sentence win-
dow. The player can remove pairs created before
at any time and can make new pairs in the sen-
tences read so far. The session goes on this way
until the end of the session time.
Instructions for the Players Instructions for the
players must be as comprehensible and concise as
possible. To mark a coreferential pair, no linguis-
tic knowledge is required. It is all about the text
comprehension ability.
Input Texts In the first stage of the project, doc-
uments from PDT 2.0 and MUC-6 will be used in
the sessions, so that the quality of the game data
can be evaluated against the manual coreference
annotation.
Since the PDT 2.0 coreference annotation oper-
ates on the tectogrammatical layer and PlayCoref
on the surface layer, the coreferential pairs of the t-
layer must be projected to the surface first. The ba-
sic steps of the projection are depicted in Figure 1.
Going from the t-layer, some of the coreferential
plification and that the quality of the game data will not be
decreased.
pairs get lost because their members do not have
their counterparts on surface.
10
From the remain-
ing coreferential pairs, those between nouns and
unlocked pronouns are selected. In the final game
documents, the difference between the grammat-
ical, textual and extended textual coreference is
omitted, because the players will not be asked to
distinguish them. Table 3 shows the number of
coreferential pairs in various stages of the projec-
tion.
DEEPSURFGRAM DEEPSURFTEXT
DEEPSURFGRAM DEEPSURFTEXT DEEPSURF
EX TT EE XN TD
PDT 2.0 PDT 2.0+ ext. textualcoreference surfacesubset
GRAMSURFunlockedTEXTSURFunlockedEXTENDTEXTSURFunlocked
PlayCorefdatalockedunlockedG  SR  UA  RM  F lockedunlockedT  SE  UX  RT  F lockedunlockedE    T  SE  UX  RT  F
Figure 1: Projection of the PDT coreference annotation to
the surface layer. The first step depicts the annotation of the
extended textual coreference. Pairs that have no surface coun-
terparts are marked DEEP, pairs with surface counterparts
are marked SURF. Pairs suitable for the game are marked un-
locked.
Data from the coreference task on the sixth
Message Understanding Conference can be used
in a much more straightforward way. Coreference
is annotated on the surface and no projection is
needed. The links with noun phrases are disre-
garded.
PDT 2.0 PDT 2.0 surface PlayCoref
+ ext. subset
# coref. pairs 45 96 70 33
Table 3: Number of coreferential pairs (in thousands) in
various stages of projection. Counts in the second, third and
fourth columns are extrapolated on the basis of data anno-
tated so far, which is about 200 thousand word tokens in 12
thousand sentences (out of 833 thousand tokens in 49 thou-
sand sentences in PDT 2.0). Type of the coreferential pairs,
either grammatical or textual one, is not distinguished.
Scoring The players get points for their coref-
erential pairs according to the equation pts
A
=
w
1
?ICA(A, acr)+w
2
?ICA(A,B) where A and
B are the players, acr is an automatic coreference
resolution procedure, weights 0 ? w
1
, w
2
? 1,
w
1
, w
2
? R are set empirically, and ICA stands for
the inter-coder agreement that we can simultane-
ously express either by the F-measure or Krippen-
10
Czech is a ?pro-drop? language, in which the subject pro-
noun on ?he? has a zero form (also in feminine, plural, etc.).
211
D E P
Figure 2: Player ?1? pairs (A,C) ? the dotted curve; player
?2? pairs (A,B) and (B,C) ? the solid lines; player ?3? pairs
(A,B) and (A,C) ? the dashed curves. Although players ?1?
and ?2? do not agree on the coreferential pairs at all, ?1? and
?3? agree only on (A,C) and ?2? and ?3? agree only on (A,B),
for the purposes of the coreference chains reconstruction, the
players? agreement is higher: players ?1? and ?2? agree on two
members of the coreferential chain: A and C, players ?1? and
?3? agree on A and C as well, and players ?2? and ?3? achieved
agreement even on all three members: A, B, and C.
dorff?s ? (Artstein and Poesio, 2008). The score
is calculated at the end of the session and no run-
ning score is being presented during the session.
Otherwise, the players might adjust their decisions
according to the changes in the score. Obviously,
it is undesirable.
Assigning a score to the players deals with the
coreferential pairs. However, motivated by (Pas-
sonneau, 2004) and others, the evaluation handles
the coreferential pairs in a way demonstrated in
Figure 2.
PlayCoref vs. PhraseDetectives At least to
our knowledge, there are no other GWAPs deal-
ing with the relationship among words in a text
like PhraseDetectives and PlayCoref. Neverthe-
less, there are many differences between these two
games ? the main ones are enumerated in Table 4.
PlayCoref PhraseDetectives
detection of coreference
chains
anaphora resolution
two-player game one-player game
a document presented sen-
tence by sentence
a paragraph presented at
once
? checking the pairs marked
in the previous sessions
pairing not restricted to the
position in the text
the closest antecedent
simple instructions players training
scoring with respect to the
automatic coreference reso-
lution and to the opponent?s
pairs
scoring with respect to the
players that play with the
same document before
coreferential pairs correc-
tion
no corrections allowed
Table 4: PlayCoref vs. PhraseDetectives.
4 Conclusion
We propose the PlayCoref game, a concept of a
GWAP with texts that aims at getting the docu-
ments with the coreference annotation in substan-
tially larger volume than can be obtained from
experts. In the proposed game, we introduce
coreference to the players in a way that no lin-
guistic knowledge is required from them. We
present the game rules design, the preparation of
the game documents and the evaluation of the
players? score. A short comparison with a simi-
lar project is also provided.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
Czech Ministry of Education (grants MSM-
0021620838 and LC536), the Czech Grant
Agency (grant 405/09/0729), and the Grant
Agency of Charles University in Prague (project
GAUK 138309).
References
Ron Artstein, Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder Agree-
ment for Computational Linguistics. Computational Lin-
guistics, December 2008, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 555?596.
Udo Kruschwitz, Jon Chamberlain, Massimo Poesio. 2009.
(Linguistic) Science Through Web Collaboration in the
ANAWIKI project. In Proceedings of the WebSci?09: So-
ciety On-Line, Athens, Greece, in press.
Lucie Ku?cov?a, Eva Haji?cov?a. 2005. Coreferential Relations
in the Prague Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Discourse Anaphora
and Anaphor Resolution, San Miguel, Azores, pp. 97?102.
Edith. L. M. Law et al 2007. Tagatune: A game for music
and sound annotation. In Proceedings of the Music In-
formation Retrieval Conference, Austrian Computer Soc.,
pp. 361?364.
Anna Nedoluzhko. 2007. Zpr?ava k anotov?an?? roz?s???ren?e
textov?e koreference a bridging vztah?u v Pra?zsk?em
z?avoslostn??m korpusu (Annotating extended coreference
and bridging relations in PDT). Technical Report, UFAL,
MFF UK, Prague, Czech Republic.
Rebecca J. Passonneau. 2004. Computing Reliability for
Coreference. Proceedings of LREC, vol. 4, pp. 1503?
1506, Lisbon.
Katharina Siorpaes and Martin Hepp. 2008. Games with a
purpose for the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems
Vol. 23, number 3, pp. 50?60.
Luis van Ahn and Laura Dabbish. 2004. Labelling images
with a computer game. In Proceedings of the SIGHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM
Press, New York, pp. 319?326.
Luis van Ahn and Laura Dabbish. 2008. Designing Games
with a Purpose. Communications of the ACM, vol. 51,
No. 8, pp. 58?67.
212
