Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 719?727,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
A Graph-based Semi-Supervised Learning for Question-Answering
Asli Celikyilmaz
EECS Department
University of California
at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94720
asli@berkeley.edu
Marcus Thint
Intelligent Systems Research Centre
British Telecom (BT Americas)
Jacksonville, FL 32256, USA
marcus.2.thint@bt.com
Zhiheng Huang
EECS Department
University of California
at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94720
zhiheng@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
We present a graph-based semi-supervised
learning for the question-answering (QA)
task for ranking candidate sentences. Us-
ing textual entailment analysis, we obtain
entailment scores between a natural lan-
guage question posed by the user and the
candidate sentences returned from search
engine. The textual entailment between
two sentences is assessed via features rep-
resenting high-level attributes of the en-
tailment problem such as sentence struc-
ture matching, question-type named-entity
matching based on a question-classifier,
etc. We implement a semi-supervised
learning (SSL) approach to demonstrate
that utilization of more unlabeled data
points can improve the answer-ranking
task of QA. We create a graph for labeled
and unlabeled data using match-scores of
textual entailment features as similarity
weights between data points. We apply
a summarization method on the graph to
make the computations feasible on large
datasets. With a new representation of
graph-based SSL on QA datasets using
only a handful of features, and under lim-
ited amounts of labeled data, we show im-
provement in generalization performance
over state-of-the-art QA models.
1 Introduction
Open domain natural language question answer-
ing (QA) is a process of automatically finding an-
swers to questions searching collections of text
files. There are intensive research in this area
fostered by evaluation-based conferences, such as
the Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) (Voorhees,
2004), etc. One of the focus of these research, as
well as our work, is on factoid questions in En-
glish, whereby the answer is a short string that in-
dicates a fact, usually a named entity.
A typical QA system has a pipeline structure
starting from extraction of candidate sentences
to ranking true answers. In order to improve
QA systems? performance many research focus
on different structures such as question process-
ing (Huang et al, 2008), information retrieval
(Clarke et al, 2006), information extraction (Sag-
gion and Gaizauskas, 2006), textual entailment
(TE) (Harabagiu and Hickl, 2006) for ranking, an-
swer extraction, etc. Our QA system has a sim-
ilar pipeline structure and implements a new TE
module for information extraction phase of the QA
task. TE is a task of determining if the truth of a
text entails the truth of another text (hypothesis).
Harabagui and Hickl (2006) has shown that using
TE for filtering or ranking answers can enhance
the accuracy of current QA systems, where the an-
swer of a question must be entailed by the text that
supports the correctness of this answer.
We derive information from pair of texts, i.e.,
question as hypothesis and candidate sentence
as the text, potentially indicating containment of
true answer, and cast the inference recognition
as classification problem to determine if a ques-
tion text follows candidate text. One of the chal-
lenges we face with is that we have very lim-
ited amount of labeled data, i.e., correctly labeled
(true/false entailment) sentences. Recent research
indicates that using labeled and unlabeled data in
semi-supervised learning (SSL) environment, with
an emphasis on graph-based methods, can im-
prove the performance of information extraction
from data for tasks such as question classifica-
tion (Tri et al, 2006), web classification (Liu et
al., 2006), relation extraction (Chen et al, 2006),
passage-retrieval (Otterbacher et al, 2009), vari-
ous natural language processing tasks such as part-
of-speech tagging, and named-entity recognition
(Suzuki and Isozaki, 2008), word-sense disam-
719
biguation (Niu et al, 2005), etc.
We consider situations where there are much
more unlabeled data, XU , than labeled data, XL,
i.e., nL  nU . We construct a textual entail-
ment (TE) module by extracting features from
each paired question and answer sentence and de-
signing a classifier with a novel yet feasible graph-
based SSL method. The main contributions are:
? construction of a TE module to extract match-
ing structures between question and answer sen-
tences, i.e., q/a pairs. Our focus is on identifying
good matching features from q/a pairs, concerning
different sentence structures in section 2,
? representation of our linguistic system by a
form of a special graph that uses TE scores in de-
signing a novel affinity matrix in section 3,
? application of a graph-summarization method
to enable learning from a very large unlabeled and
rather small labeled data, which would not have
been feasible for most sophisticated learning tools
in section 4. Finally we demonstrate the results of
experiments with real datasets in section 5.
2 Feature Extraction for Entailment
Implementation of different TE models has pre-
viously shown to improve the QA task using su-
pervised learning methods (Harabagiu and Hickl,
2006). We present our recent work on the task of
QA, wherein systems aim at determining if a text
returned by a search engine contains the correct
answer to the question posed by the user. The ma-
jor categories of information extraction produced
by our QA system characterizes features for our
TE model based on analysis of q/a pairs. Here we
give brief descriptions of only the major modules
of our QA due to space limitations.
2.1 Pre-Processing for Feature Extraction
We build the following pre-processing modules
for feature extraction to be applied prior to our tex-
tual entailment analysis.
Question-Type Classifier (QC): QC is the task
of identifying the type of a given question among
a predefined set of question types. The type of
a question is used as a clue to narrow down the
search space to extract the answer. We used our
QC system presented in (Huang et al, 2008),
which classifies each question into 6-coarse cat-
egories (i.e., abbr., entity, human, location, num-
ber, description) as well as 50-fine categories (i.e.,
color, food, sport, manner, etc.) with almost
90% accuracy. For instance, for question ?How
many states are there in US??, the question-type
would be ?NUMBER? as course category, and
?Count? for the finer category, represented jointly
as NUM:Count. The QC model is trained via sup-
port vector machines (SVM) (Vapnik, 1995) con-
sidering different features such as semantic head-
word feature based on variation of Collins rules,
hypernym extraction via Lesk word disambigua-
tion (Lesk, 1988), regular expressions for wh-
word indicators, n-grams, word-shapes(capitals),
etc. Extracted question-type is used in connection
with our Named-Entity-Recognizer, to formulate
question-type matching feature, explained next.
Named-Entity Recognizer (NER): This com-
ponent identifies and classifies basic entities such
as proper names of person, organization, prod-
uct, location; time and numerical expressions such
as year, day, month; various measurements such
as weight, money, percentage; contact information
like address, web-page, phone-number, etc. This
is one of the fundamental layers of information
extraction of our QA system. The NER module
is based on a combination of user defined rules
based on Lesk word disambiguation (Lesk, 1988),
WordNet (Miller, 1995) lookups, and many user-
defined dictionary lookups, e.g. renown places,
people, job types, organization names, etc. During
the NER extraction, we also employ phrase analy-
sis based on our phrase utility extraction method
using Standford dependency parser ((Klein and
Manning, 2003)). We can categorize entities up
to 6 coarse and 50 fine categories to match them
with the NER types from QC module.
Phrase Identification(PI): Our PI module un-
dertakes basic syntactic analysis (shallow pars-
ing) and establishes simple, un-embedded linguis-
tic structures such as noun-phrases (NN), basic
prepositional phrases (PP) or verb groups (VG).
In particular PI module is based on 56 different
semantic structures identified in Standford depen-
dency parser in order to extract meaningful com-
pound words from sentences, e.g., ?They heard
high pitched cries.?. Each phrase is identified with
a head-word (cries) and modifiers (high pitched).
Questions in Affirmative Form: To derive lin-
guistic information from pair of texts (statements),
we parse the question and turn into affirmative
form by replacing the wh-word with a place-
holder and associating the question word with the
question-type from the QC module. For example:
720
?What is the capital of France?? is written in af-
firmative form as ?[X]LOC:City is the capital of
FranceLOC:Country.?. Here X is the answer text
of LOC:City NER-type, that we seek.
Sentence Semantic Component Analysis: Us-
ing shallow semantics, we decode the underlying
dependency trees that embody linguistic relation-
ships such as head-subject (H-S), head-modifier
(complement) (H-M), head-object (H-O), etc. For
instance, the sentence ?Bank of America acquired
Merrill Lynch in 2008.? is partitioned as:
? Head (H): acquired
? Subject (S): Bank of America[Human:group]
? Object (O): Merrill Lynch[Human:group]
? Modifier (M): 2008[Num:Date]
These are used as features to match components of
questions like ?Who purchased Merrill Lynch??.
Sentence Structure Analysis: In our question
analysis, we observed that 98% of affirmed ques-
tions did not contain any object and they are also
in copula (linking) sentence form that is, they
are only formed by subject and information about
the subject as: {subject + linking-verb + subject-
info.}. Thus, we investigate such affirmed ques-
tions different than the rest and call them copula
sentences and the rest as non-copula sentences. 1
For instance our system recognizes affirmed ques-
tion ? Fred Durst?s group name is [X]DESC:Def?.
as copula-sentence, which consists of subject (un-
derlined) and some information about it.
2.2 Features from Paired Sentence Analysis
We extract the TE features based on the above lex-
ical, syntactic and semantic analysis of q/a pairs
and cast the QA task as a classification problem.
Among many syntactic and semantic features we
considered, here we present only the major ones:
(1) (QTCF) Question-Type-Candidate Sen-
tence NER match feature: Takes on the value
?1? when the candidate sentence contains the fine
NER of the question-type, ?0.5? if it contains the
coarse NER or ?0? if no NER match is found.
(2) (QComp) Question component match fea-
tures: The sentence component analysis is applied
on both the affirmed question and the candidate
sentence pairs to characterize their semantic com-
ponents including subject(S), object(O), head (H)
and modifiers(M). We match each semantic com-
ponent of a question to the best matching com-
1One option would have been to leave out the non-copula
questions and build the model for only copula questions.
ponent of a candidate sentence. For example for
the given question, ?When did Nixon die??, when
the following candidate sentence, i.e., ?Richard
Nixon, 37th President of USA, passed away of
stroke on April 22, 1994.? is considered, we ex-
tract the following component match features:
? Head-Match: die?pass away
? Subject-Match: Nixon?Richard Nixon
? Object-Match: ?
? Modifier-Match: [X]?April 22, 1994
In our experiments we observed that converted
questions have at most one subject, head, object
and a few modifiers. Thus, we used one feature for
each and up to three for M-Match features. The
feature values vary based on matching type, i.e.,
exact match, containment, synonym match, etc.
For example, the S-Match feature will be ?1.0?
due to head-match of the noun-phrase.
(3) (LexSem) Lexico-Syntactic Alignment
Features: They range from the ratio of consecu-
tive word overlap between converted question (Q)
and candidate sentence (S) including
?Unigram/Bigram, selecting individual/pair of ad-
jacent tokens in Q matching with the S
?Noun and verb counts in common, separately.
?When words don?t match we attempt matching
synonyms in WordNet for most common senses.
?Verb match statistics using WordNet?s cause and
entailment relations.
As a result, each q/a pair is represented as a fea-
ture vector xi ? <d characterizing the entailment
information between them.
3 Graph Based Semi-Supervised
Learning for Entailment Ranking
We formulate semi-supervised entailment rank
scores as follows. Let each data point in
X = {x1, ..., xn}, xi ? <d represents infor-
mation about a question and candidate sentence
pair and Y = {y1, ..., yn} be their output la-
bels. The labeled part of X is represented with
XL = {x1, ..., xl} with associated labels YL =
{y1, ..., yl}
T . For ease of presentation we concen-
trate on binary classification, where yi can take
on either of {?1,+1} representing entailment or
non-entailment. X has also unlabeled part, XU =
{x1, ..., xu}, i.e., X = XL ? XU . The aim is to
predict labels for XU . There are also other testing
points, XTe, which has the same properties as X .
Each node V in graph g = (V,E) represents a
feature vector, xi ? <d of a q/a pair, characteriz-
721
ing their entailment relation information. When all
components of a hypothesis (affirmative question)
have high similarity with components of text (can-
didate sentence), then entailment score between
them would be high. Another pair of q/a sentences
with similar structures would also have high en-
tailment scores as well. So similarity between two
q/a pairs xi, xj , is represented with wij ? <n?n,
i.e., edge weights, and is measured as:
wij = 1?
d?
q=1
|xiq?xjq |
d (1)
As total entailment scores get closer, the larger
their edge weights would be. Based on our sen-
tence structure analysis in section 2, given dataset
can be further separated into two, i.e., Xcp con-
taining q/a pairs in which affirmed questions are
copula-type, and Xncp containing q/a pairs with
non-copula-type affirmed questions. Since cop-
ula and non-copula sentences have different struc-
tures, e.g., copula sentences does not usually have
objects, we used different sets of features for each
type. Thus, we modify edge weights in (1) as fol-
lows:
w?ij =
?
??????
??????
0 xi ? Xcp, xj ? Xncp
1?
dcp?
q=1
|xiq?xjq |
dcp
xi, xj ? Xcp
1?
dncp?
q=1
|xiq?xjq |
dncp
xi, xj ? Xncp
(2)
The diagonal degree matrix D is defined for graph
g by D=
?
j w?ij . In general graph-based SSL, a
function over the graph is estimated such that it
satisfies two conditions: 1) close to the observed
labels , and 2) be smooth on the whole graph by:
argminf
?
i?L
(fi ? yi)
2+?
?
i,j?L?U
w?ij(fi ? fj)
2
(3)
The second term is a regularizer to represent the
label smoothness, fTLf , where L = D?W is the
graph Laplacian. To satisfy the local and global
consistency (Zhou et al, 2004), normalized com-
binatorial Laplacian is used such that the second
term in (3) is replaced with normalized Laplacian,
L = D?1/2LD?1/2, as follows:
?
i,j?L?U
wij(
fi?
di
? fj?
dj
)2 = fTLf (4)
Setting gradient of loss function to zero, optimum
f?, where Y = {YL ? YU} , YU =
{
ynl+1 = 0
}
;
f? = (1+ ? (1? L))?1 Y (5)
Most graph-based SSLs are transductive, i.e., not
easily expendable to new test points outside L?U .
In (Delalleau et al, 2005) an induction scheme is
proposed to classify a new point xTe by
f?(xTe) =
?
i?L?U wxifi?
i?L?U wxi
(6)
Thus, we use induction, where we can, to avoid
re-construction of the graph for new test points.
4 Graph Summarization
Research on graph-based SSL algorithms point
out their effectiveness on real applications, e.g.,
(Zhu et al, 2003), (Zhou and Scho?lkopf, 2004),
(Sindhwani et al, 2007). However, there is still
a need for fast and efficient SSL methods to deal
with vast amount of data to extract useful informa-
tion. It was shown in (Delalleau et al, 2006) that
the convergence rate of the propagation algorithms
of SSL methods isO(kn2), which mainly depends
on the form of eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian
(k is the number of nearest neighbors). As the
weight matrix gets denser, meaning there will be
more data points with connected weighted edges,
the more it takes to learn the classifier function via
graph. Thus, the question is, how can one reduce
the data points so that weight matrix is sparse, and
it takes less time to learn?
Our idea of summarization is to create repre-
sentative vertices of data points that are very close
to each other in terms of edge weights. Suffice to
say that similar data points are likely to represent
denser regions in the hyper-space and are likely to
have same labels. If these points are close enough,
we can characterize the boundaries of these group
of similar data points with respect to graph and
then capture their summary information by new
representative vertices. We replace each data point
within the boundary with their representative ver-
tex, to form a summary graph.
4.1 Graph Summarization Algorithm
Let each selected dataset be denoted as Xs =
{xsi} , i = 1...m, s = 1, ..., q, where m is the
number of data points in the sample dataset and
q is the number of sample datasets drawn from
X . The labeled data points, i.e., XL, are ap-
pended to each of these selected Xs datasets,
Xs =
{
xs1, ...x
s
m?l
}
? XL. Using a separate
learner, e.g., SVM (Vapnik, 1995), we obtain pre-
dicted outputs, Y? s =
(
y?s1, ..., y?
s
m?l
)
ofXs and ap-
pend observed labels Y? s = Y? s ? YL.
722
Figure 1: Graph Summarization. (a) Actual data point with predicted class labels, (b) magnified view of
a single node (black) and its boundaries (c) calculated representative vertex, (d) summary dataset.
We define the weight W s and degree Ds ma-
trices of Xs using (1). Diagonal elements of Ds
is converted into a column vector and is sorted to
find the high degree vertices that are surrounded
with large number of close neighbors.
The algorithm starts from the highest degree
node xsi ? X
s, where initial neighbor nodes have
assumably the same labels. This is shown in Fig-
ure 1-(b) with the inner square around the mid-
dle black node, corresponding high degree node.
If its immediate k neighbors, dark blue colored
nodes, have the same label, the algorithm contin-
ues to search for the secondary k neighbors, the
light blue colored nodes, i.e., the neighbors of the
neighbors, to find out if there are any opposite la-
beled nodes around. For instance, for the corre-
sponding node (black) in Figure 1-(b) we can only
go up to two neighbors, because in the third level,
there are a few opposite labeled nodes, in red. This
indicates boundary Bsi for a corresponding node
and unique nearest neighbors of same labels.
Bsi =
{
xsi ?
{
xsj
}nm
j=1
}
(7)
In (7), nm denotes the maximum number of nodes
of aBsi and ?x
s
j , x
s
j? ? B
s
i , y
s
j = y
s
j? = yBsi , where
yBsi is the label of the selected boundary B
s
i .
We identify the edge weights wsij between each
node in the boundary Bsi via (1), thus the bound-
ary is connected. We calculate the weighted av-
erage of the vertices to obtain the representative
summary node of Bsi as shown in Figure 1-(c);
X
s
Bi =
?nm
i 6=j=1
1
2w
s
ij(x
s
i + x
s
j)
?nm
i 6=j=1w
s
ij
(8)
The boundaries of some nodes may only con-
tain themselves because their immediate neigh-
bors may have opposite class labels. Similarly
some may have only k + 1 nodes, meaning only
immediate neighbor nodes have the same labels.
For instance in Fig. 1 the boundary is drawn af-
ter the secondary neighbors are identified (dashed
outer boundary). This is an important indication
that some representative data points are better indi-
cators of class labels than the others due to the fact
that they represent a denser region of same labeled
points. We represent this information with the lo-
cal density constraints. Each new vertex is asso-
ciated with a local density constraint, 0 ? ?j ? 1,
which is equal to the total number of neighbor-
ing nodes used to construct it. We use the nor-
malized density constraints for ease of calcula-
tions. Thus, for a each sample summary dataset,
a local density constraint vector is identified as
?s = {?s1, ..., ?
s
nb}
T . The local density constraints
become crucial for inference where summarized
labeled data are used instead of overall dataset.
Algorithm 1 Graph Summary of Large Dataset
1: Given X = {x1, ..., xn} , X = XL ?XU
2: Set q ? max number of subsets
3: for s? 1, ..., q do
4: Choose a random subset with repetitions
5: Xs = {xs1, ..., x
s
m?l, xm?l+1, ..., xm}
6: Summarize Xs to obtain X
s
in (9)
7: end for
8: Obtain summary datasetX =
{
X
s}q
s=1
=
{
Xi
}p
i=1
and
local density constrains, ? = {?i}
p
i=1.
After all data points are evaluated, the sample
dataset Xs can now be represented with the sum-
mary representative vertices as
X
s
=
{
X
s
B1 , ..., X
s
Bnb
}
. (9)
and corresponding local density constraints as,
?s = {?s1, ..., ?
s
nb}
T , 0 < ?si ? 1 (10)
723
The summarization algorithm is repeated for each
random subset Xs, s = 1, ..., q of very large
dataset X = XL ? XU , see Algorithm 1. As
a result q number of summary datasets X
s
each
of which with nb labeled data points are com-
bined to form a representative sample of X , X =
{
X
s}q
s=1 reducing the number of data from n to
a much smaller number of data, p = q ? nb  n.
So the new summary of the X can be represented
with X =
{
Xi
}p
i=1. For example, an origi-
nal dataset with 1M data points can be divided
up to q = 50 random samples of m = 5000
data points each. Then using graph summariza-
tion each summarized dataset may be represented
with nb ?= 500 data points. After merging sum-
marized data, final summarized samples compile
to 500 ? 50 ?= 25K  1M data points, reduced to
1/40 of its original size. Each representative data
point in the summarized dataset X is associated
with a local density constraints, a p = q ? nb
dimensional row vector as ? = {?i}
p
i=1.
We can summarize a graph separately for dif-
ferent sentence structures, i.e., copula and non-
copula sentences. Then representative data points
from each summary dataset are merged to form fi-
nal summary dataset. The Hybrid graph summary
models in the experiments follow such approach.
4.2 Prediction of New Testing Dataset
Instead of using large dataset, we now use sum-
mary dataset with predicted labels, and local den-
sity constraints to learn the class labels of nte
number of unseen data points, i.e., testing data
points, XTe = {x1, ..., xnte}. Using graph-based
SSL method on the new representative dataset,
X ? = X ? XTe, which is comprised of sum-
marized dataset, X =
{
Xi
}p
i=1, as labeled data
points, and the testing dataset, XTe as unlabeled
data points. Since we do not know estimated lo-
cal density constraints of unlabeled data points, we
use constants to construct local density constraint
column vector for X ? dataset as follows:
?? = {1 + ?i}
p
i=1 ? [1 ... 1]
T ? <nte (11)
0 < ?i ? 1. To embed the local density con-
straints, the second term in (3) is replaced with the
constrained normalized Laplacian, Lc = ?TL?,
?
i,j?L?T
wij(
fi
?
??i ? di
?
fj
?
??j ? dj
)2 = fTLcf
(12)
If any testing vector has an edge between a labeled
vector, then with the usage of the local density
constraints, the edge weights will not not only be
affected by that labeled node, but also how dense
that node is within that part of the graph.
5 Experiments
We demonstrate the results from three sets of ex-
periments to explore how our graph representa-
tion, which encodes textual entailment informa-
tion, can be used to improve the performance of
the QA systems. We show that as we increase
the number of unlabeled data, with our graph-
summarization, it is feasible to extract information
that can improve the performance of QA models.
We performed experiments on a set of 1449
questions from TREC-99-03. Using the search en-
gine 2, we retrieved around 5 top-ranked candi-
date sentences from a large newswire corpus for
each question to compile around 7200 q/a pairs.
We manually labeled each candidate sentence as
true or false entailment depending on the contain-
ment of the true answer string and soundness of
the entailment to compile quality training set. We
also used a set of 340 QA-type sentence pairs from
RTE02-03 and 195 pairs from RTE04 by convert-
ing the hypothesis sentences into question form to
create additional set of q/a pairs. In total, we cre-
ated labeled training dataset XL of around 7600
q/a pairs . We evaluated the performance of graph-
based QA system using a set of 202 questions from
the TREC04 as testing dataset (Voorhees, 2003),
(Prager et al, 2000). We retrieved around 20 can-
didate sentences for each of the 202 test questions
and manually labeled each q/a pair as true/false en-
tailment to compile 4037 test data.
To obtain more unlabeled training data XU,
we extracted around 100,000 document headlines
from a large newswire corpus. Instead of match-
ing headline and first sentence of the document as
in (Harabagiu and Hickl, 2006), we followed a dif-
ferent approach. Using each headline as a query,
we retrieved around 20 top-ranked sentences from
search engine. For each headline, we picked the
1st and the 20th retrieved sentences. Our assump-
tion is that the first retrieved sentence may have
higher probability to entail the headline, whereas
the last one may have lower probability. Each of
these headline-candidate sentence pairs is used as
additional unlabeled q/a pair. Since each head-
2http://lucene.apache.org/java/
724
Features Model MRR Top1 Top5
Baseline ? 42.3% 32.7% 54.5%
QTCF SVM 51.9% 44.6% 63.4%
SSL 49.5% 43.1% 60.9%
LexSem SVM 48.2% 40.6% 61.4%
SSL 47.9% 40.1% 58.4%
QComp SVM 54.2% 47.5% 64.3%
SSL 51.9% 45.5% 62.4%
Table 1: MRR for different features and methods.
line represents a converted question, in order to
extract the question-type feature, we use a match-
ing NER-type between the headline and candidate
sentence to set question-type NER match feature.
We applied pre-processing and feature extrac-
tion steps of section 2 to compile labeled and un-
labeled training and labeled testing datasets. We
use the rank scores obtained from the search en-
gine as baseline of our system. We present the
performance of the models using Mean Recipro-
cal Rank (MRR), top 1 (Top1) and top 5 predic-
tion accuracies (Top5) as they are the most com-
monly used performance measures of QA systems
(Voorhees, 2004). We performed manual iterative
parameter optimization during training based on
prediction accuracy to find the best k-nearest pa-
rameter for SSL, i.e., k = {3, 5, 10, 20, 50} , and
best C =
{
10?2, .., 102
}
and ? =
{
2?2, .., 23
}
for RBF kernel SVM. Next we describe three dif-
ferent experiments and present individual results.
Graph summarization makes it feasible to exe-
cute SSL on very large unlabeled datasets, which
was otherwise impossible. This paper has no as-
sumptions on the performance of the method in
comparison to other SSL methods.
Experiment 1. Here we test individual con-
tribution of each set of features on our QA sys-
tem. We applied SVM and our graph based SSL
method with no summarization to learn models
using labeled training and testing datasets. For
SSL we used the training as labeled and testing
as unlabeled dataset in transductive way to pre-
dict the entailment scores. The results are shown
in Table 1. From section 2.2, QTCF represents
question-type NER match feature, LexSem is the
bundle of lexico-semantic features and QComp is
the matching features of subject, head, object, and
three complements. In comparison to the baseline,
QComp have a significant effect on the accuracy
of the QA system. In addition, QTCF has shown
to improve the MRR performance by about 22%.
Although the LexSem features have minimal se-
mantic properties, they can improve MRR perfor-
mance by 14%.
Experiment 2. To evaluate the performance of
graph summarization we performed two separate
experiments. In the first part, we randomly se-
lected subsets of labeled training dataset XiL ?
XL with different sample sizes, niL ={1% ? nL,
5% ? nL, 10% ? nL, 25% ? nL, 50% ? nL,
100% ? nL}, where nL represents the sample size
of XL. At each random selection, the rest of the
labeled dataset is hypothetically used as unlabeled
data to verify the performance of our SSL using
different sizes of labeled data. Table 2 reports
the MRR performance of QA system on testing
dataset using SVM and our graph-summary SSL
(gSum SSL) method using the similarity function
in (1). In the second part of the experiment, we
applied graph summarization on copula and non-
copula questions separately and merged obtained
representative points to create labeled summary
dataset. Then using similarity function in (2) we
applied SSL on labeled summary and unlabeled
testing via transduction. We call these models as
Hybrid gSum SSL. To build SVM models in the
same way, we separated the training dataset into
two based on copula and non-copula questions,
Xcp, Xncp and re-run the SVM method separately.
The testing dataset is divided into two accordingly.
Predicted models from copula sentence datasets
are applied on copula sentences of testing dataset
and vice versa for non- copula sentences. The pre-
dicted scores are combined to measure overall per-
formance of Hybrid SVM models. We repeated
the experiments five times with different random
samples and averaged the results.
Note from Table 2 that, when the number of
labeled data is small (niL < 10% ? nL), graph
based SSL, gSum SSL, has a better performance
compared to SVM. As the percentage of labeled
points in training data increase, the SVM perfor-
mance increases, however graph summary SSL is
still comparable with SVM. On the other hand,
when we build separate models for copula and
non-copula questions with different features, the
performance of the overall model significantly in-
creases in both methods. Especially in Hybrid
graph-Summary SSL, Hybrid gSum SSL, when
the number of labeled data is small (niL < 25% ?
nL) performance improvement is better than rest
725
% SVM gSum SSL Hybrid SVM Hybrid gSum SSL
#Labeled MRR Top1 Top5 MRR Top1 Top5 MRR Top1 Top5 MRR Top1 Top5
1% 45.2 33.2 65.8 56.1 44.6 72.8 51.6 40.1 70.8 59.7 47.0 75.2
5% 56.5 45.1 73.0 57.3 46.0 73.7 54.2 40.6 72.3 60.3 48.5 76.7
10% 59.3 47.5 76.7 57.9 46.5 74.2 57.7 47.0 74.2 60.4 48.5 77.2
25% 59.8 49.0 78.7 58.4 45.0 79.2 61.4 49.5 78.2 60.6 49.0 76.7
50% 60.9 48.0 80.7 58.9 45.5 79.2 62.2 51.0 79.7 61.3 50.0 77.2
100% 63.5 55.4 77.7 59.7 47.5 79.7 67.6 58.0 82.2 61.9 51.5 78.2
Table 2: The MRR (%) results of graph-summary SSL (gSum SSL) and SVM as well as Hybrid gSum
SSL and Hybrid SVM with different sizes of labeled data.
#Unlabeled MRR Top1 Top5
25K 62.1% 52.0% 76.7%
50K 62.5% 52.5% 77.2%
100K 63.3% 54.0% 77.2%
Table 3: The effect of number of unlabeled data
on MRR from Hybrid graph Summarization SSL.
of the models. As more labeled data is introduced,
Hybrid SVM models? performance increase dras-
tically, even outperforming the state-of-the art
MRR performance on TREC04 datasets presented
in (Shen and Klakow, 2006) i.e., MRR=67.0%,
Top1=62.0%, Top5=74.0%. This is due to the fact
that we establish two seperate entailment models
for copula and non-copula q/a sentence pairs that
enables extracting useful information and better
representation of the specific data.
Experiment 3. Although SSL methods are ca-
pable of exploiting information from unlabeled
data, learning becomes infeasible as the number
of data points gets very large. There are vari-
ous research on SLL to overcome the usage of
large number of unlabeled dataset challenge (De-
lalleau et al, 2006). Our graph summarization
method, Hybrid gsum SSL, has a different ap-
proach. which can summarize very large datasets
into representative data points and embed the orig-
inal spatial information of data points, namely lo-
cal density constraints, within the SSL summa-
rization schema. We demonstrate that as more la-
beled data is used, we would have a richer sum-
mary dataset with additional spatial information
that would help to improve the the performance
of the graph summary models. We gradually in-
crease the number of unlabeled data samples as
shown in Table 3 to demonstrate the effects on the
performance of testing dataset. The results show
that the number of unlabeled data has positive ef-
fect on performance of graph summarization SSL.
6 Conclusions and Discussions
In this paper, we applied a graph-based SSL al-
gorithm to improve the performance of QA task
by exploiting unlabeled entailment relations be-
tween affirmed question and candidate sentence
pairs. Our semantic and syntactic features for tex-
tual entailment analysis has individually shown to
improve the performance of the QA compared to
the baseline. We proposed a new graph repre-
sentation for SSL that can represent textual en-
tailment relations while embedding different ques-
tion structures. We demonstrated that summariza-
tion on graph-based SSL can improve the QA task
performance when more unlabeled data is used to
learn the classifier model.
There are several directions to improve our
work: (1) The results of our graph summarization
on very large unlabeled data is slightly less than
best SVM results. This is largely due to using
headlines instead of affirmed questions, wherein
headlines does not contain question-type and some
of them are not in proper sentence form. This ad-
versely effects the named entity match of question-
type and the candidate sentence named entities as
well as semantic match component feature extrac-
tion. We will investigate experiment 3 by using
real questions from different sources and construct
different test datasets. (2) We will use other dis-
tance measures to better explain entailment be-
tween q/a pairs and compare with other semi-
supervised and transductive approaches.
726
References
Jinxiu Chen, Donghong Ji, C. Lim Tan, and Zhengyu
Niu. 2006. Relation extraction using label propaga-
tion based semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings
of the ACL-2006.
Charles L.A. Clarke, Gordon V. Cormack, R. Thomas
Lynam, and Egidio L. Terra. 2006. Question an-
swering by passage selection. In In: Advances in
open domain question answering, Strzalkowski, and
Harabagiu (Eds.), pages 259?283. Springer.
Oliver Delalleau, Yoshua Bengio, and Nicolas Le
Roux. 2005. Efficient non-parametric function in-
duction in semi-supervised learning. In Proceedings
of AISTAT-2005.
Oliver Delalleau, Yoshua Bengio, and Nicolas Le
Roux. 2006. Large-scale algorithms. In In: Semi-
Supervised Learning, pages 333?341. MIT Press.
Sandra Harabagiu and Andrew Hickl. 2006. Methods
for using textual entailment in open-domain ques-
tion answering. In In Proc. of ACL-2006, pages
905?912.
Zhiheng Huang, Marcus Thint, and Zengchang Qin.
2008. Question classification using headwords and
their hypernyms. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-08), pages 927?936.
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Meeting of the ACL-2003, pages 423?430.
Michael Lesk. 1988. They said true things, but called
them by wrong names - vocabulary problems in re-
trieval systems. In In Proc. 4th Annual Conference
of the University of Waterloo Centre for the New
OED.
Rong Liu, Jianzhong Zhou, and Ming Liu. 2006. A
graph-based semi-supervised learning algorithm for
web page classification. In Proc. Sixth Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications.
George Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database for
english. In Communications of the ACL-1995.
Zheng-Yu Niu, Dong-Hong Ji, and Chew-Lim Tan.
2005. Word sense disambiguation using labeled
propagation based semi-supervised learning. In
Proceedings of the ACL-2005.
Jahna Otterbacher, Gunes Erkan, and R. Radev
Dragomir. 2009. Biased lexrank:passage retrieval
using random walks with question-based priors. In-
formation Processing and Management, 45:42?54.
Eric W. Prager, John M.and Brown, Dragomir Radev,
and Krzysztof Czuba. 2000. One search engine or
two for question-answering. In Proc. 9th Text RE-
trieval conference.
Horacio Saggion and Robert Gaizauskas. 2006. Ex-
periments in passage selection and answer extrac-
tion for question answering. In Advances in natural
language processing, pages 291?302. Springer.
Dan Shen and Dietrich Klakow. 2006. Exploring cor-
relation of dependency relation paths for answer ex-
traction. In Proceedings of ACL-2006.
Vikas Sindhwani, Wei Chu, and S. Sathiya Keerthi.
2007. Semi-supervised gaussian process classifiers.
In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-07), pages 1059?
1064.
Jun Suzuki and Hideki Isozaki. 2008. Semi-supervised
sequential labeling and segmentation using giga-
word scale unlabeled data. In Proceedings of the
ACL-2008.
Nguyen Thanh Tri, Nguyen Minh Le, and Akira Shi-
mazu. 2006. Using semi-supervised learning for
question classification. In ICCPOL, pages 31?41.
LNCS 4285.
Vilademir Vapnik. 1995. The nature of statistical
learning theory. In Springer-Verlag, New York.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003. Overview of the trec 2003
question answering track. In Proc. 12th Text RE-
trieval conference.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview of trec2004 ques-
tion answering track.
Dengyong Zhou and Bernhard Scho?lkopf. 2004.
Learning from labeled and unlabeled data using ran-
dom walks. In Proceedings of the 26th DAGM Sym-
posium, (Eds.) Rasmussen, C.E., H.H. Blthoff, M.A.
Giese and B. Schlkopf, pages 237?244, Berlin, Ger-
many. Springer.
Dengyong Zhou, Olivier Bousquet, Thomas N. Lal, Ja-
son Weston, and Bernhard Scho?lkopf. 2004. Learn-
ing with local and global consistency. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 16:321?
328.
Xiaojin Zhu, John Lafferty, and Zoubin Ghahramani.
2003. Semi-supervised learning: From Gaus-
sian Fields to Gaussian processes. Technical Re-
port CMU-CS-03-175, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh.
727
