Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 81?84,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Realistic Grammar Error Simulation using Markov Logic 
 
Sungjin Lee 
Pohang University of Science and 
Technology 
Pohang, Korea 
junion@postech.ac.kr  
Gary Geunbae Lee 
Pohang University of Science and 
Technology 
Pohang, Korea 
gblee@postech.ac.kr 
 
  
 
Abstract 
The development of Dialog-Based Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (DB-CALL) sys-
tems requires research on the simulation of 
language learners. This paper presents a new 
method for generation of grammar errors, an 
important part of the language learner simula-
tor. Realistic errors are generated via Markov 
Logic, which provides an effective way to 
merge a statistical approach with expert know-
ledge about the grammar error characteristics 
of language learners. Results suggest that the 
distribution of simulated grammar errors gen-
erated by the proposed model is similar to that 
of real learners. Human judges also gave con-
sistently close judgments on the quality of the 
real and simulated grammar errors. 
1 Introduction 
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) researchers 
have claimed that feedback provided during con-
versational interaction facilitates the acquisition 
process. Thus, interest in developing Dialog-
Based Computer Assisted Language Learning 
(DB-CALL) systems is rapidly increasing. How-
ever, developing DB-CALL systems takes a long 
time and entails a high cost in collecting learnerV? 
data. Also, evaluating the systems is not a trivial 
task because it requires numerous language 
learners with a wide range of proficiency levels 
as subjects.  
While previous studies have considered user 
simulation in the development and evaluation of 
spoken dialog systems (Schatzmann et al, 2006), 
they have not yet simulated grammar errors be-
cause those systems were assumed to be used by 
native speakers, who normally produce few 
grammar errors in utterances. However, as tele-
phone-based information access systems become 
more commonly available to the general public, 
the inability to deal with non-native speakers is 
becoming a serious limitation since, at least for 
some applications, (e.g. tourist information, le-
gal/social advice) non-native speakers represent 
a significant portion of the everyday user popula-
tion. Thus, (Raux and Eskenazi, 2004) conducted 
a study on adaptation of spoken dialog systems 
to non-native users. In particular, DB-CALL sys-
tems should obviously deal with grammar errors 
because language learners naturally commit nu-
merous grammar errors. Thus grammar error si-
mulation should be embedded in the user simula-
tion for the development and evaluation of such 
systems. 
In Foster?s (2007) pioneering work, she de-
scribed a procedure which automatically intro-
duces frequently occurring grammatical errors 
into sentences to make ungrammatical training 
data for a robust parser. However the algorithm 
cannot be directly applied to grammar error gen-
eration for language learner simulation for sever-
al reasons. First, it either introduces one error per 
sentence or none, regardless of how many words 
of the sentence are likely to generate errors. 
Second, it determines which type of error it will 
create only by relying on the relative frequencies 
of error types and their relevant parts of speech. 
This, however, can result in unrealistic errors. As 
exemplified in Table 1, when the algorithm tries 
to create an error by deleting a word, it would 
probably omit the word ?go? because verb is one 
of the most frequent parts of speech omitted re-
sulting in an unrealistic error like the first simu-
lated output. However, Korean/Japanese lan-
guage learners of English tend to make subject-
verb agreement errors, omission errors of the 
preposition of prepositional verbs, and omission 
errors of articles because their first language 
does not have similar grammar rules so that they 
may be slow on the uptake of such constructs. 
Thus, they often commit errors like the second 
simulated output.  
81
This paper develops an approach to statistical 
grammar error simulation that can incorporate 
this type of knowledge about language learners? 
error characteristics and shows that it does in-
deed result in realistic grammar errors. The ap-
proach is based on Markov logic, a representa-
tion language that combines probabilistic graphi-
cal models and first-order logic (Richardson and 
Domingos, 2006). Markov logic enables concise 
specification of very complex models. Efficient 
open-source Markov logic learning and inference 
algorithms were used to implement our solution.  
We begin by describing the overall process of 
grammar error simulation and then briefly re-
viewing the necessary background in Markov 
logic. We then describe our Markov Logic Net-
work (MLN) for grammar error simulation. Fi-
nally, we present our experiments and results. 
2 Overall process of grammar error si-
mulation 
The task of grammar error simulation is to gen-
erate an ill-formed sentence when given a well-
formed input sentence. The generation procedure 
involves three steps: 1) Generating probability 
over error types for each word of the well-
formed input sentence through MLN inference 2) 
Determining an error type by sampling the gen-
erated probability for each word 3) Creating an 
ill-formed output sentence by realizing the cho-
sen error types (Figure 1).  
3 Markov Logic 
Markov logic is a probabilistic extension of finite 
first-order logic (Richardson and Domingos, 
2006). An MLN is a set of weighted first-order 
clauses. Together with a set of constants, it de-
fines a Markov network with one node per 
ground atom and one feature per ground clause. 
The weight of a feature is the weight of the first-
order clause that originated it. The probability of 
a state x in such a network is given by ?(?)  =
 (1/?) ??? (? ?? ?? (?)? ), where ?  is a normali-
zation constant, ??  is the weight of the ?th clause, ??  =  1 if the ?th clause is true, and ??  =  0 oth-
erwise.  
Markov logic makes it possible to compactly 
specify probability distributions over complex 
relational domains. We used the learning and 
inference algorithms provided in the open-source 
Alchemy package (Kok et al, 2006).  In particu-
lar, we performed inference using the belief 
propagation algorithm (Pearl, 1988), and genera-
tive weight learning. 
4 An MLN for Grammar Error Simula-
tion 
This section presents our MLN implementation 
which consists of three components: 1) Basic 
formulas based on parts of speech, which are 
comparable to Foster?s method 2) Analytic for-
mulas drawn from expert knowledge obtained by 
error analysis on a learner corpus 3) Error limit-
ing formulas that penalize statistical model?s 
over-generation of nonsense errors.  
4.1 Basic formulas 
Error patterns obtained by error analysis, which 
might capture a lack or an over-generalization of 
knowledge of a particular construction, cannot 
explain every error that learners commit. Be-
cause an error can take the form of a perfor-
mance slip which can randomly occur due to 
carelessness or tiredness, more general formulas 
are needed as a default case. The basic formulas 
are represented by the simple rule: 
y ????????, ?, +??? ? ?)?????????, ?, +??) 
where all free variables are implicitly universally 
quantified. The ?+??, +??? notation signifies 
that the MLN contains an instance of this rule for 
each (part of speech, error type) pair. The evi-
Input sentence 
He wants to go to a movie theater 
Unrealistic simulated output 
He wants to to a movie theater 
Realistic simulated output 
He want go to movie theater 
Table 1: Examples of simulated outputs  
Figure 1: An example process of grammar error simulation 
82
dence predicate in this case is ??)?????, ?, ??), 
which is true iff the ?th position of the sentence ? 
has the part of speech ??. The query predicate is ?)?????????, ?, ??). It is true iff the ?th position 
of the sentence ? has the error type ??, and infer-
ring it returns the probability that the word at 
position ? would commit an error of type ??.  
4.2 Analytic formulas 
On top of the basic formulas, analytic formulas 
add concrete knowledge of realistic error charac-
teristics of language learners. Error analysis and 
linguistic differences between the first language 
and the second language can identify various 
error sources for each error type. We roughly 
categorize the error sources into three groups for 
explanation: 1) Over-generalization of the rules 
of the second language 2) Lack of knowledge of 
some rules of the second language 3) Applying 
rules and forms of the first language into the 
second language. 
Often, English learners commit pluralization 
error with irregular nouns. This is because they 
over-generalize the pluralization rule, i.e. attach-
ing ?s/es?, so that they apply the rule even to ir-
regular  nouns such  as ?fish? and ?feet? etc. This 
characteristic is captured by the simple formula: 
y ?????????????????????, ?? ? ????????, ?, ???? 
? ?)?????????, ?, ?_?????_?) 
where ?????????????????????, ?? is true iff the ?th word of the sentence ? is an irregular plural 
and N_NUM_SUB is the abbreviation for substi-
tution by noun number error.  
One trivial error caused by a lack of know-
ledge of the second language is using the singu-
lar noun form for weekly events: 
y ??????, ? ? 1, ???  ? ?????????, ??? ????????, ?, ????? ?)?????????, ?, ?_?????_?) 
where ??????, ? ? 1, ??? is true iff the ? ? 1th 
word is ?on? and ?????????, ?? is true iff the ?th word of the sentence ? is a noun describing 
day like Sunday(s). Another example is use of 
plurals behind ?every? due to the ignorance that a 
noun modified by ?every? should be singular: 
y ??????, ??, ?????? ? ???????????????, ??, ??? 
? ?)?????????, ??, ?_?????_?) 
where ???????????????, ??, ???  is true iff the ??th word is the determiner of the ??th word. 
An example of errors by applying the rules of 
the first language is that Korean/Japanese often 
allows omission of the subject of a sentence; thus, 
they easily commit the subject omission error. 
The following formula is for the case: 
y ?????????, ??? ?)?????????, ?,?_???_???) 
where ?????????, ?? is true iff the ?th word is the 
subject and N_LXC_DEL is the abbreviation for 
deletion by noun lexis error.1 
4.3 Error limiting formulas 
A number of elementary formulas explicitly 
stated as hard formulas prevent the MLN from 
generating improbable errors that might result 
from over-generations of the statistical model. 
For example, a verb complement error should not 
have a probability at the words that are not com-
plements of a verb: 
y ! ????????????????, ??, ??? 
? ! ?)?????????, ??, ?_???_???). 
where ?!? denotes logically ?not? and ?.? at the 
end signifies that it is a hard formula. Hard formu-
las are given maximum weight during inference. ????????????????, ??, ???  is true iff the ?? th 
word is a complement of the verb at the ??th po-
sition and V_CMP_SUB is the abbreviation for 
substitution by verb complement error. 
5 Experiments  
Experiments used the NICT JLE Corpus, which 
is speech samples from an English oral profi-
ciency interview test, the ACTFL-ALC Standard 
Speaking Test (SST). 167 of the files are error 
annotated. The error tagset consists of 47 tags 
that are described in Izumi (2005). We appended 
structural type of errors (substitution, addition, 
deletion) to the original error types because 
structural type should be determined when creat-
ing an error. For example, V_TNS_SUB consists 
of the original error type V_TNS (verb tense) and 
structural type SUB (substitution).  Level-
specific language learner simulation was accom-
plished by dividing the 167 error annotated files 
into 3 level groups: Beginner(level1-4), Interme-
diate(level5-6), Advanced(level7-9).  
The grammar error simulation was compared 
with real learnerV? errors and the baseline model 
using only basic formulas comparable to Foster?s 
algorithm, with 10-fold cross validations per-
formed for each group. The validation results 
were added together across the rounds to com-
pare the number of simulated errors with the 
number of real errors. Error types that occurred 
less than 20 times were excluded to improve re-
liability. Result graphs suggest that the distribu-
tion of simulated grammar errors generated by 
the proposed model using all formulas is similar 
to that of real learners for all level groups and the 
                                                 
1
 Because space is limited, all formulas can be found at 
http://isoft.postech.ac.kr/ges/grm_err_sim.mln 
83
proposed model outperforms the baseline model 
using only the basic formulas. The Kullback-
Leibler divergences, a measure of the difference 
between two probability distributions, were also 
measured for quantitative comparison. For all 
level groups, the Kullback-Leibler divergence of 
the proposed model from the real is less than that 
of the baseline model (Figure 2). 
Two human judges verified the overall realism 
of the simulated errors. They evaluated 100 ran-
domly chosen sentences consisting of 50 sen-
tences each from the real and simulated data. The 
sequence of the test sentences was mixed so that 
the human judges did not know whether the 
source of the sentence was real or simulated. 
They evaluated sentences with a two-level scale 
(0: Unrealistic, 1: Realistic). The result shows 
that the inter evaluator agreement (kappa) is 
moderate and that both judges gave relatively 
close judgments on the quality of the real and 
simulated data (Table 2). 
6 Summary and Future Work  
This paper introduced a somewhat new research 
topic, grammar error simulation. Expert know-
ledge of error characteristics was imported to 
statistical modeling using Markov logic, which 
provides a theoretically sound way of encoding 
knowledge into probabilistic first order logic. 
Results indicate that our method can make an 
error distribution more similar to the real error 
distribution than the baseline and that the quality 
of simulated sentences is relatively close to that 
of real sentences in the judgment of human eva-
luators. Our future work includes adding more 
expert knowledge through error analysis to in-
crementally improve the performance. Further-
more, actual development and evaluation of a 
DB-CALL system will be arranged so that we 
may investigate how much the cost of collecting 
data and evaluation would be reduced by using 
language learner simulation. 
Acknowledgement  
This research was supported by the MKE (Ministry of 
Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the ITRC (In-
formation Technology Research Center) support pro-
gram supervised by the IITA (Institute for Informa-
tion Technology Advancement) (IITA-2009-C1090-
0902-0045). 
References  
Foster, J. 2007. Treebanks Gone Bad: Parser evalua-
tion and retraining using a treebank of ungrammat-
ical sentences. IJDAR, 10(3-4), 129-145. 
Izumi, E et al 2005. Error Annotation for Corpus of 
Japanese Learner English. In Proc. International 
Workshop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora  
Kok, S. et al 2006. The Alchemy system for statistic-
al relational AI. http://alchemy.cs.washington.edu/. 
Pearl, J. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent 
Systems Morgan Kaufmann. 
Raux, A. and Eskenazi, M. 2004. Non-Native Users in 
the Let's Go!! Spoken Dialogue System: Dealing 
with Linguistic Mismatch, HLT/NAACL. 
Richardson, M. and Domingos, P. 2006. Markov logic 
networks. Machine Learning, 62(1):107-136. 
Schatzmann, J. et al 2006. A survey of statistical user 
simulation techniques for reinforcement-learning 
of dialogue management strategies, The Know-
ledge Engineering ReviewVol?  
 
Advanced Level:  
DKL (Real || Proposed)=0.068, DKL (Real || Baseline)=0.122 
 
Intermediate Level: 
DKL (Real || Proposed)=0.075, DKL (Real || Baseline)=0.142 
Beginner Level: 
DKL (Real || Proposed)=0.075, DKL (Real || Baseline)=0.092 
Figure 2: Comparison between the distributions of the 
real and simulated data 
 Human 1 Human 2 Average Kappa 
Real 0.84 0.8 0.82 0.46 
Simulated 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.5 
Table 2: Human evaluation results 
84
