Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 450?458,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Extracting Lexical Reference Rules from Wikipedia
Eyal Shnarch
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
shey@cs.biu.ac.il
Libby Barak
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada M5S 1A4
libbyb@cs.toronto.edu
Ido Dagan
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
dagan@cs.biu.ac.il
Abstract
This paper describes the extraction from
Wikipedia of lexical reference rules, iden-
tifying references to term meanings trig-
gered by other terms. We present extrac-
tion methods geared to cover the broad
range of the lexical reference relation and
analyze them extensively. Most extrac-
tion methods yield high precision levels,
and our rule-base is shown to perform bet-
ter than other automatically constructed
baselines in a couple of lexical expan-
sion and matching tasks. Our rule-base
yields comparable performance to Word-
Net while providing largely complemen-
tary information.
1 Introduction
A most common need in applied semantic infer-
ence is to infer the meaning of a target term from
other terms in a text. For example, a Question An-
swering system may infer the answer to a ques-
tion regarding luxury cars from a text mentioning
Bentley, which provides a concrete reference to the
sought meaning.
Aiming to capture such lexical inferences we
followed (Glickman et al, 2006), which coined
the term lexical reference (LR) to denote refer-
ences in text to the specific meaning of a target
term. They further analyzed the dataset of the First
Recognizing Textual Entailment Challenge (Da-
gan et al, 2006), which includes examples drawn
from seven different application scenarios. It was
found that an entailing text indeed includes a con-
crete reference to practically every term in the en-
tailed (inferred) sentence.
The lexical reference relation between two
terms may be viewed as a lexical inference rule,
denoted LHS? RHS. Such rule indicates that the
left-hand-side term would generate a reference, in
some texts, to a possible meaning of the right hand
side term, as the Bentley? luxury car example.
In the above example the LHS is a hyponym of
the RHS. Indeed, the commonly used hyponymy,
synonymy and some cases of the meronymy rela-
tions are special cases of lexical reference. How-
ever, lexical reference is a broader relation. For
instance, the LR rule physician ? medicine may
be useful to infer the topic medicine in a text cate-
gorization setting, while an information extraction
system may utilize the rule Margaret Thatcher
? United Kingdom to infer a UK announcement
from the text ?Margaret Thatcher announced?.
To perform such inferences, systems need large
scale knowledge bases of LR rules. A prominent
available resource is WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998),
from which classical relations such as synonyms,
hyponyms and some cases of meronyms may be
used as LR rules. An extension to WordNet was
presented by (Snow et al, 2006). Yet, available
resources do not cover the full scope of lexical ref-
erence.
This paper presents the extraction of a large-
scale rule base from Wikipedia designed to cover
a wide scope of the lexical reference relation. As
a starting point we examine the potential of defi-
nition sentences as a source for LR rules (Ide and
Jean, 1993; Chodorow et al, 1985; Moldovan and
Rus, 2001). When writing a concept definition,
one aims to formulate a concise text that includes
the most characteristic aspects of the defined con-
cept. Therefore, a definition is a promising source
for LR relations between the defined concept and
the definition terms.
In addition, we extract LR rules from Wikipedia
redirect and hyperlink relations. As a guide-
line, we focused on developing simple extrac-
tion methods that may be applicable for other
Web knowledge resources, rather than focusing
on Wikipedia-specific attributes. Overall, our rule
base contains about 8 million candidate lexical ref-
450
erence rules. 1
Extensive analysis estimated that 66% of our
rules are correct, while different portions of the
rule base provide varying recall-precision trade-
offs. Following further error analysis we intro-
duce rule filtering which improves inference per-
formance. The rule base utility was evaluated
within two lexical expansion applications, yield-
ing better results than other automatically con-
structed baselines and comparable results to Word-
Net. A combination with WordNet achieved the
best performance, indicating the significant mar-
ginal contribution of our rule base.
2 Background
Many works on machine readable dictionaries uti-
lized definitions to identify semantic relations be-
tween words (Ide and Jean, 1993). Chodorow et
al. (1985) observed that the head of the defining
phrase is a genus term that describes the defined
concept and suggested simple heuristics to find it.
Other methods use a specialized parser or a set of
regular expressions tuned to a particular dictionary
(Wilks et al, 1996).
Some works utilized Wikipedia to build an on-
tology. Ponzetto and Strube (2007) identified
the subsumption (IS-A) relation from Wikipedia?s
category tags, while in Yago (Suchanek et al,
2007) these tags, redirect links and WordNet were
used to identify instances of 14 predefined spe-
cific semantic relations. These methods depend
on Wikipedia?s category system. The lexical refer-
ence relation we address subsumes most relations
found in these works, while our extractions are not
limited to a fixed set of predefined relations.
Several works examined Wikipedia texts, rather
than just its structured features. Kazama and Tori-
sawa (2007) explores the first sentence of an ar-
ticle and identifies the first noun phrase following
the verb be as a label for the article title. We repro-
duce this part of their work as one of our baselines.
Toral and Mun?oz (2007) uses all nouns in the first
sentence. Gabrilovich and Markovitch (2007) uti-
lized Wikipedia-based concepts as the basis for a
high-dimensional meaning representation space.
Hearst (1992) utilized a list of patterns indica-
tive for the hyponym relation in general texts.
Snow et al (2006) use syntactic path patterns as
features for supervised hyponymy and synonymy
1For download see Textual Entailment Resource Pool at
the ACL-wiki (http://aclweb.org/aclwiki)
classifiers, whose training examples are derived
automatically from WordNet. They use these clas-
sifiers to suggest extensions to the WordNet hierar-
chy, the largest one consisting of 400K new links.
Their automatically created resource is regarded in
our paper as a primary baseline for comparison.
Many works addressed the more general notion
of lexical associations, or association rules (e.g.
(Ruge, 1992; Rapp, 2002)). For example, The
Beatles, Abbey Road and Sgt. Pepper would all
be considered lexically associated. However this
is a rather loose notion, which only indicates that
terms are semantically ?related? and are likely to
co-occur with each other. On the other hand, lex-
ical reference is a special case of lexical associa-
tion, which specifies concretely that a reference to
the meaning of one term may be inferred from the
other. For example, Abbey Road provides a con-
crete reference to The Beatles, enabling to infer a
sentence like ?I listened to The Beatles? from ?I
listened to Abbey Road?, while it does not refer
specifically to Sgt. Pepper.
3 Extracting Rules from Wikipedia
Our goal is to utilize the broad knowledge of
Wikipedia to extract a knowledge base of lexical
reference rules. Each Wikipedia article provides
a definition for the concept denoted by the title
of the article. As the most concise definition we
take the first sentence of each article, following
(Kazama and Torisawa, 2007). Our preliminary
evaluations showed that taking the entire first para-
graph as the definition rarely introduces new valid
rules while harming extraction precision signifi-
cantly.
Since a concept definition usually employs
more general terms than the defined concept (Ide
and Jean, 1993), the concept title is more likely
to refer to terms in its definition rather than vice
versa. Therefore the title is taken as the LHS of
the constructed rule while the extracted definition
term is taken as its RHS. As Wikipedia?s titles are
mostly noun phrases, the terms we extract as RHSs
are the nouns and noun phrases in the definition.
The remainder of this section describes our meth-
ods for extracting rules from the definition sen-
tence and from additional Wikipedia information.
Be-Comp Following the general idea in
(Kazama and Torisawa, 2007), we identify the IS-
A pattern in the definition sentence by extract-
ing nominal complements of the verb ?be?, taking
451
No. Extraction Rule
James Eugene ?Jim? Carrey is a Canadian-American actor
and comedian
1 Be-Comp Jim Carrey? Canadian-American actor
2 Be-Comp Jim Carrey? actor
3 Be-Comp Jim Carrey? comedian
Abbey Road is an album released by The Beatles
4 All-N Abbey Road? The Beatles
5 Parenthesis Graph? mathematics
6 Parenthesis Graph? data structure
7 Redirect CPU? Central processing unit
8 Redirect Receptors IgG? Antibody
9 Redirect Hypertension? Elevated blood-pressure
10 Link pet? Domesticated Animal
11 Link Gestaltist? Gestalt psychology
Table 1: Examples of rule extraction methods
them as the RHS of a rule whose LHS is the article
title. While Kazama and Torisawa used a chun-
ker, we parsed the definition sentence using Mini-
par (Lin, 1998b). Our initial experiments showed
that parse-based extraction is more accurate than
chunk-based extraction. It also enables us extract-
ing additional rules by splitting conjoined noun
phrases and by taking both the head noun and the
complete base noun phrase as the RHS for sepa-
rate rules (examples 1?3 in Table 1).
All-N The Be-Comp extraction method yields
mostly hypernym relations, which do not exploit
the full range of lexical references within the con-
cept definition. Therefore, we further create rules
for all head nouns and base noun phrases within
the definition (example 4). An unsupervised reli-
ability score for rules extracted by this method is
investigated in Section 4.3.
Title Parenthesis A common convention in
Wikipedia to disambiguate ambiguous titles is
adding a descriptive term in parenthesis at the end
of the title, as in The Siren (Musical), The Siren
(sculpture) and Siren (amphibian). From such ti-
tles we extract rules in which the descriptive term
inside the parenthesis is the RHS and the rest of
the title is the LHS (examples 5?6).
Redirect As any dictionary and encyclopedia,
Wikipedia contains Redirect links that direct dif-
ferent search queries to the same article, which has
a canonical title. For instance, there are 86 differ-
ent queries that redirect the user to United States
(e.g. U.S.A., America, Yankee land). Redirect
links are hand coded, specifying that both terms
refer to the same concept. We therefore generate a
bidirectional entailment rule for each redirect link
(examples 7?9).
Link Wikipedia texts contain hyper links to ar-
ticles. For each link we generate a rule whose LHS
is the linking text and RHS is the title of the linked
article (examples 10?11). In this case we gener-
ate a directional rule since links do not necessarily
connect semantically equivalent entities.
We note that the last three extraction methods
should not be considered as Wikipedia specific,
since many Web-like knowledge bases contain
redirects, hyper-links and disambiguation means.
Wikipedia has additional structural features such
as category tags, structured summary tablets for
specific semantic classes, and articles containing
lists which were exploited in prior work as re-
viewed in Section 2.
As shown next, the different extraction meth-
ods yield different precision levels. This may al-
low an application to utilize only a portion of the
rule base whose precision is above a desired level,
and thus choose between several possible recall-
precision tradeoffs.
4 Extraction Methods Analysis
We applied our rule extraction methods over a
version of Wikipedia available in a database con-
structed by (Zesch et al, 2007)2. The extraction
yielded about 8 million rules altogether, with over
2.4 million distinct RHSs and 2.8 million distinct
LHSs. As expected, the extracted rules involve
mostly named entities and specific concepts, typi-
cally covered in encyclopedias.
4.1 Judging Rule Correctness
Following the spirit of the fine-grained human
evaluation in (Snow et al, 2006), we randomly
sampled 800 rules from our rule-base and pre-
sented them to an annotator who judged them for
correctness, according to the lexical reference no-
tion specified above. In cases which were too dif-
ficult to judge the annotator was allowed to ab-
stain, which happened for 20 rules. 66% of the re-
maining rules were annotated as correct. 200 rules
from the sample were judged by another annotator
for agreement measurement. The resulting Kappa
score was 0.7 (substantial agreement (Landis and
2English version from February 2007, containing 1.6 mil-
lion articles. www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/software/JWPL
452
Extraction Per Method Accumulated
Method P Est. #Rules P %obtained
Redirect 0.87 1,851,384 0.87 31
Be-Comp 0.78 1,618,913 0.82 60
Parenthesis 0.71 94,155 0.82 60
Link 0.7 485,528 0.80 68
All-N 0.49 1,580,574 0.66 100
Table 2: Manual analysis: precision and estimated number
of correct rules per extraction method, and precision and %
of correct rules obtained of rule-sets accumulated by method.
Koch, 1997)), either when considering all the ab-
stained rules as correct or as incorrect.
The middle columns of Table 2 present, for each
extraction method, the obtained percentage of cor-
rect rules (precision) and their estimated absolute
number. This number is estimated by multiplying
the number of annotated correct rules for the ex-
traction method by the sampling proportion. In to-
tal, we estimate that our resource contains 5.6 mil-
lion correct rules. For comparison, Snow?s pub-
lished extension to WordNet3, which covers simi-
lar types of terms but is restricted to synonyms and
hyponyms, includes 400,000 relations.
The right part of Table 2 shows the perfor-
mance figures for accumulated rule bases, created
by adding the extraction methods one at a time in
order of their precision. % obtained is the per-
centage of correct rules in each rule base out of
the total number of correct rules extracted jointly
by all methods (the union set).
We can see that excluding the All-N method
all extraction methods reach quite high precision
levels of 0.7-0.87, with accumulated precision of
0.84. By selecting only a subset of the extrac-
tion methods, according to their precision, one can
choose different recall-precision tradeoff points
that suit application preferences.
The less accurate All-N method may be used
when high recall is important, accounting for 32%
of the correct rules. An examination of the paths
in All-N reveals, beyond standard hyponymy and
synonymy, various semantic relations that satisfy
lexical reference, such as Location, Occupation
and Creation, as illustrated in Table 3. Typical re-
lations covered by Redirect and Link rules include
3http://ai.stanford.edu/?rion/swn/
4As a non-comparable reference, Snow?s fine-grained
evaluation showed a precision of 0.84 on 10K rules and 0.68
on 20K rules; however, they were interested only in the hy-
ponym relation while we evaluate our rules according to the
broader LR relation.
synonyms (NY State Trooper ? New York State
Police), morphological derivations (irritate ? ir-
ritation), different spellings or naming (Pytagoras
? Pythagoras) and acronyms (AIS? Alarm Indi-
cation Signal).
4.2 Error Analysis
We sampled 100 rules which were annotated as in-
correct and examined the causes of errors. Figure
1 shows the distribution of error types.
Wrong NP part - The most common error
(35% of the errors) is taking an inappropriate part
of a noun phrase (NP) as the rule right hand side
(RHS). As described in Section 3, we create two
rules from each extracted NP, by taking both the
head noun and the complete base NP as RHSs.
While both rules are usually correct, there are
cases in which the left hand side (LHS) refers to
the NP as a whole but not to part of it. For ex-
ample, Margaret Thatcher refers to United King-
dom but not to Kingdom. In Section 5 we suggest
a filtering method which addresses some of these
errors. Future research may exploit methods for
detecting multi-words expressions.
All-N pa
ttern er
rors
13%Tra
nsparen
t head 11%
Wrong N
P part 35%
Technic
al error
s
10%
Dates a
nd Plac
es
5% Link err
ors 5% Redirec
t errors 5%
Related
 
but not Referrin
g 16%
Figure 1: Error analysis: type of incorrect rules
Related but not Referring - Although all terms
in a definition are highly related to the defined con-
cept, not all are referred by it. For example the
origin of a person (*The Beatles? Liverpool5) or
family ties such as ?daughter of? or ?sire of?.
All-N errors - Some of the articles start with a
long sentence which may include information that
is not directly referred by the title of the article.
For instance, consider *Interstate 80 ? Califor-
nia from ?Interstate 80 runs from California to
New Jersey?. In Section 4.3 we further analyze
this type of error and point at a possible direction
for addressing it.
Transparent head - This is the phenomenon in
which the syntactic head of a noun phrase does
5The asterisk denotes an incorrect rule
453
Relation Rule Path Pattern
Location Lovek? Cambodia Lovek city in Cambodia
Occupation Thomas H. Cormen? computer science Thomas H. Cormen professor of computer science
Creation Genocidal Healer? James White Genocidal Healer novel by James White
Origin Willem van Aelst? Dutch Willem van Aelst Dutch artist
Alias Dean Moriarty? Benjamin Linus Dean Moriarty is an alias of Benjamin Linus on Lost.
Spelling Egushawa? Agushaway Egushawa, also spelled Agushaway...
Table 3: All-N rules exemplifying various types of LR relations
not bear its primary meaning, while it has a mod-
ifier which serves as the semantic head (Fillmore
et al, 2002; Grishman et al, 1986). Since parsers
identify the syntactic head, we extract an incorrect
rule in such cases. For instance, deriving *Prince
William ? member instead of Prince William ?
British Royal Family from ?Prince William is a
member of the British Royal Family?. Even though
we implemented the common solution of using a
list of typical transparent heads, this solution is
partial since there is no closed set of such phrases.
Technical errors - Technical extraction errors
were mainly due to erroneous identification of the
title in the definition sentence or mishandling non-
English texts.
Dates and Places - Dates and places where a
certain person was born at, lived in or worked at
often appear in definitions but do not comply to
the lexical reference notion (*Galileo Galilei ?
15 February 1564).
Link errors - These are usually the result of
wrong assignment of the reference direction. Such
errors mostly occur when a general term, e.g. rev-
olution, links to a more specific albeit typical con-
cept, e.g. French Revolution.
Redirect errors - These may occur in some
cases in which the extracted rule is not bidirec-
tional. E.g. *Anti-globalization ? Movement of
Movements is wrong but the opposite entailment
direction is correct, as Movement of Movements is
a popular term in Italy for Anti-globalization.
4.3 Scoring All-N Rules
We observed that the likelihood of nouns men-
tioned in a definition to be referred by the con-
cept title depends greatly on the syntactic path
connecting them (which was exploited also in
(Snow et al, 2006)). For instance, the path pro-
duced by Minipar for example 4 in Table 1 is title
subj
??album vrel??released by?subj?? bypcomp?n?? noun.
In order to estimate the likelihood that a syn-
tactic path indicates lexical reference we collected
from Wikipedia all paths connecting a title to a
noun phrase in the definition sentence. We note
that since there is no available resource which cov-
ers the full breadth of lexical reference we could
not obtain sufficiently broad supervised training
data for learning which paths correspond to cor-
rect references. This is in contrast to (Snow et al,
2005) which focused only on hyponymy and syn-
onymy relations and could therefore extract posi-
tive and negative examples from WordNet.
We therefore propose the following unsuper-
vised reference likelihood score for a syntactic
path p within a definition, based on two counts:
the number of times p connects an article title with
a noun in its definition, denoted by Ct(p), and the
total number of p?s occurrences in Wikipedia de-
finitions, C(p). The score of a path is then de-
fined as Ct(p)C(p) . The rational for this score is that
C(p)? Ct(p) corresponds to the number of times
in which the path connects two nouns within the
definition, none of which is the title. These in-
stances are likely to be non-referring, since a con-
cise definition typically does not contain terms that
can be inferred from each other. Thus our score
may be seen as an approximation for the probabil-
ity that the two nouns connected by an arbitrary
occurrence of the path would satisfy the reference
relation. For instance, the path of example 4 ob-
tained a score of 0.98.
We used this score to sort the set of rules ex-
tracted by the All-N method and split the sorted list
into 3 thirds: top, middle and bottom. As shown in
Table 4, this obtained reasonably high precision
for the top third of these rules, relative to the other
two thirds. This precision difference indicates that
our unsupervised path score provides useful infor-
mation about rule reliability.
It is worth noting that in our sample 57% of All-
N errors, 62% of Related but not Referring incor-
rect rules and all incorrect rules of type Dates and
454
Extraction Per Method Accumulated
Method P Est. #Rules P %obtained
All-Ntop 0.60 684,238 0.76 83
All-Nmiddle 0.46 380,572 0.72 90
All-Nbottom 0.41 515,764 0.66 100
Table 4: Splitting All-N extraction method into 3 sub-types.
These three rows replace the last row of Table 2
Places were extracted by the All-Nbottom method
and thus may be identified as less reliable. How-
ever, this split was not observed to improve per-
formance in the application oriented evaluations
of Section 6. Further research is thus needed to
fully exploit the potential of the syntactic path as
an indicator for rule correctness.
5 Filtering Rules
Following our error analysis, future research is
needed for addressing each specific type of error.
However, during the analysis we observed that all
types of erroneous rules tend to relate terms that
are rather unlikely to co-occur together. We there-
fore suggest, as an optional filter, to recognize
such rules by their co-occurrence statistics using
the common Dice coefficient:
2 ? C(LHS,RHS)
C(LHS) + C(RHS)
where C(x) is the number of articles in Wikipedia
in which all words of x appear.
In order to partially overcome the Wrong NP
part error, identified in Section 4.2 to be the most
common error, we adjust the Dice equation for
rules whose RHS is also part of a larger noun
phrase (NP):
2 ? (C(LHS,RHS)? C(LHS,NPRHS))
C(LHS) + C(RHS)
where NPRHS is the complete NP whose part
is the RHS. This adjustment counts only co-
occurrences in which the LHS appears with the
RHS alone and not with the larger NP. This sub-
stantially reduces the Dice score for those cases in
which the LHS co-occurs mainly with the full NP.
Given the Dice score rules whose score does not
exceed a threshold may be filtered. For example,
the incorrect rule *aerial tramway? car was fil-
tered, where the correct RHS for this LHS is the
complete NP cable car. Another filtered rule is
magic? cryptography which is correct only for a
very idiosyncratic meaning.6
We also examined another filtering score, the
cosine similarity between the vectors representing
the two rule sides in LSA (Latent Semantic Analy-
sis) space (Deerwester et al, 1990). However, as
the results with this filter resemble those for Dice
we present results only for the simpler Dice filter.
6 Application Oriented Evaluations
Our primary application oriented evaluation is
within an unsupervised lexical expansion scenario
applied to a text categorization data set (Section
6.1). Additionally, we evaluate the utility of our
rule base as a lexical resource for recognizing tex-
tual entailment (Section 6.2).
6.1 Unsupervised Text Categorization
Our categorization setting resembles typical query
expansion in information retrieval (IR), where the
category name is considered as the query. The ad-
vantage of using a text categorization test set is
that it includes exhaustive annotation for all doc-
uments. Typical IR datasets, on the other hand,
are partially annotated through a pooling proce-
dure. Thus, some of our valid lexical expansions
might retrieve non-annotated documents that were
missed by the previously pooled systems.
6.1.1 Experimental Setting
Our categorization experiment follows a typical
keywords-based text categorization scheme (Mc-
Callum and Nigam, 1999; Liu et al, 2004). Tak-
ing a lexical reference perspective, we assume that
the characteristic expansion terms for a category
should refer to the term (or terms) denoting the
category name. Accordingly, we construct the cat-
egory?s feature vector by taking first the category
name itself, and then expanding it with all left-
hand sides of lexical reference rules whose right-
hand side is the category name. For example, the
category ?Cars? is expanded by rules such as Fer-
rari F50? car. During classification cosine sim-
ilarity is measured between the feature vector of
the classified document and the expanded vectors
of all categories. The document is assigned to
the category which yields the highest similarity
score, following a single-class classification ap-
proach (Liu et al, 2004).
6Magic was the United States codename for intelligence
derived from cryptanalysis during World War II.
455
Rule Base R P F1
Baselines:
No Expansion 0.19 0.54 0.28
WikiBL 0.19 0.53 0.28
Snow400K 0.19 0.54 0.28
Lin 0.25 0.39 0.30
WordNet 0.30 0.47 0.37
Extraction Methods from Wikipedia:
Redirect + Be-Comp 0.22 0.55 0.31
All rules 0.31 0.38 0.34
All rules + Dice filter 0.31 0.49 0.38
Union:
WordNet + WikiAll rules+Dice 0.35 0.47 0.40
Table 5: Results of different rule bases for 20 newsgroups
category name expansion
It should be noted that keyword-based text
categorization systems employ various additional
steps, such as bootstrapping, which generalize to
multi-class settings and further improve perfor-
mance. Our basic implementation suffices to eval-
uate comparatively the direct impact of different
expansion resources on the initial classification.
For evaluation we used the test set of the
?bydate? version of the 20-News Groups collec-
tion,7 which contains 18,846 documents parti-
tioned (nearly) evenly over the 20 categories8.
6.1.2 Baselines Results
We compare the quality of our rule base expan-
sions to 5 baselines (Table 5). The first avoids any
expansion, classifying documents based on cosine
similarity with category names only. As expected,
it yields relatively high precision but low recall,
indicating the need for lexical expansion.
The second baseline is our implementation of
the relevant part of the Wikipedia extraction in
(Kazama and Torisawa, 2007), taking the first
noun after a be verb in the definition sentence, de-
noted as WikiBL. This baseline does not improve
performance at all over no expansion.
The next two baselines employ state-of-the-art
lexical resources. One uses Snow?s extension to
WordNet which was mentioned earlier. This re-
source did not yield a noticeable improvement, ei-
7www.ai.mit.edu/people/jrennie/20Newsgroups.
8The keywords used as category names are: athe-
ism; graphic; microsoft windows; ibm,pc,hardware;
mac,hardware; x11,x-windows; sale; car; motorcycle;
baseball; hockey; cryptography; electronics; medicine; outer
space; christian(noun & adj); gun; mideast,middle east;
politics; religion
ther over the No Expansion baseline or over Word-
Net when joined with its expansions. The sec-
ond uses Lin dependency similarity, a syntactic-
dependency based distributional word similarity
resource described in (Lin, 1998a)9. We used var-
ious thresholds on the length of the expansion list
derived from this resource. The best result, re-
ported here, provides only a minor F1 improve-
ment over No Expansion, with modest recall in-
crease and significant precision drop, as can be ex-
pected from such distributional method.
The last baseline uses WordNet for expansion.
First we expand all the senses of each category
name by their derivations and synonyms. Each ob-
tained term is then expanded by its hyponyms, or
by its meronyms if it has no hyponyms. Finally,
the results are further expanded by their deriva-
tions and synonyms.10 WordNet expansions im-
prove substantially both Recall and F1 relative to
No Expansion, while decreasing precision.
6.1.3 Wikipedia Results
We then used for expansion different subsets
of our rule base, producing alternative recall-
precision tradeoffs. Table 5 presents the most in-
teresting results. Using any subset of the rules
yields better performance than any of the other
automatically constructed baselines (Lin, Snow
and WikiBL). Utilizing the most precise extrac-
tion methods of Redirect and Be-Comp yields the
highest precision, comparable to No Expansion,
but just a small recall increase. Using the entire
rule base yields the highest recall, while filtering
rules by the Dice coefficient (with 0.1 threshold)
substantially increases precision without harming
recall. With this configuration our automatically-
constructed resource achieves comparable perfor-
mance to the manually built WordNet.
Finally, since a dictionary and an encyclopedia
are complementary in nature, we applied the union
of WordNet and the filtered Wikipedia expansions.
This configuration yields the best results: it main-
tains WordNet?s precision and adds nearly 50% to
the recall increase of WordNet over No Expansion,
indicating the substantial marginal contribution of
Wikipedia. Furthermore, with the fast growth of
Wikipedia the recall of our resource is expected to
increase while maintaining its precision.
9Downloaded from www.cs.ualberta.ca/lindek/demos.htm
10We also tried expanding by the entire hyponym hierarchy
and considering only the first sense of each synset, but the
method described above achieved the best performance.
456
Category Name Expanding Terms
Politics opposition, coalition, whip(a)
Cryptography adversary, cryptosystem, key
Mac PowerBook, Radius(b), Grab(c)
Religion heaven, creation, belief, missionary
Medicine doctor, physician, treatment, clinical
Computer Graphics radiosity(d), rendering, siggraph(e)
Table 6: Some Wikipedia rules not in WordNet, which con-
tributed to text categorization. (a) a legislator who enforce
leadership desire (b) a hardware firm specializing in Macin-
tosh equipment (c) a Macintosh screen capture software (d)
an illumination algorithm (e) a computer graphics conference
Configuration Accuracy Accuracy Drop
WordNet + Wikipedia 60.0 % -
Without WordNet 57.7 % 2.3 %
Without Wikipedia 58.9 % 1.1 %
Table 7: RTE accuracy results for ablation tests.
Table 6 illustrates few examples of useful rules
that were found in Wikipedia but not in WordNet.
We conjecture that in other application settings
the rules extracted from Wikipedia might show
even greater marginal contribution, particularly in
specialized domains not covered well by Word-
Net. Another advantage of a resource based on
Wikipedia is that it is available in many more lan-
guages than WordNet.
6.2 Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE)
As a second application-oriented evaluation we
measured the contributions of our (filtered)
Wikipedia resource and WordNet to RTE infer-
ence (Giampiccolo et al, 2007). To that end, we
incorporated both resources within a typical basic
RTE system architecture (Bar-Haim et al, 2008).
This system determines whether a text entails an-
other sentence based on various matching crite-
ria that detect syntactic, logical and lexical cor-
respondences (or mismatches). Most relevant for
our evaluation, lexical matches are detected when
a Wikipedia rule?s LHS appears in the text and
its RHS in the hypothesis, or similarly when pairs
of WordNet synonyms, hyponyms-hypernyms and
derivations appear across the text and hypothesis.
The system?s weights were trained on the devel-
opment set of RTE-3 and tested on RTE-4 (which
included this year only a test set).
To measure the marginal contribution of the two
resources we performed ablation tests, comparing
the accuracy of the full system to that achieved
when removing either resource. Table 7 presents
the results, which are similar in nature to those ob-
tained for text categorization. Wikipedia obtained
a marginal contribution of 1.1%, about half of the
analogous contribution of WordNet?s manually-
constructed information. We note that for current
RTE technology it is very typical to gain just a
few percents in accuracy thanks to external knowl-
edge resources, while individual resources usually
contribute around 0.5?2% (Iftene and Balahur-
Dobrescu, 2007; Dinu and Wang, 2009). Some
Wikipedia rules not in WordNet which contributed
to RTE inference are Jurassic Park ? Michael
Crichton, GCC? Gulf Cooperation Council.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We presented construction of a large-scale re-
source of lexical reference rules, as useful in ap-
plied lexical inference. Extensive rule-level analy-
sis showed that different recall-precision tradeoffs
can be obtained by utilizing different extraction
methods. It also identified major reasons for er-
rors, pointing at potential future improvements.
We further suggested a filtering method which sig-
nificantly improved performance.
Even though the resource was constructed by
quite simple extraction methods, it was proven to
be beneficial within two different application set-
ting. While being an automatically built resource,
extracted from a knowledge-base created for hu-
man consumption, it showed comparable perfor-
mance to WordNet, which was manually created
for computational purposes. Most importantly, it
also provides complementary knowledge to Word-
Net, with unique lexical reference rules.
Future research is needed to improve resource?s
precision, especially for the All-N method. As
a first step, we investigated a novel unsupervised
score for rules extracted from definition sentences.
We also intend to consider the rule base as a di-
rected graph and exploit the graph structure for
further rule extraction and validation.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Idan Szpektor
for valuable advices. This work was partially
supported by the NEGEV project (www.negev-
initiative.org), the PASCAL-2 Network of Excel-
lence of the European Community FP7-ICT-2007-
1-216886 and by the Israel Science Foundation
grant 1112/08.
457
References
Roy Bar-Haim, Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Iddo
Greental, Shachar Mirkin, Eyal Shnarch, and Idan
Szpektor. 2008. Efficient semantic deduction and
approximate matching over compact parse forests.
In Proceedings of TAC.
Martin S. Chodorow, Roy J. Byrd, and George E. Hei-
dorn. 1985. Extracting semantic hierarchies from a
large on-line dictionary. In Proceedings of ACL.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
volume 3944, pages 177?190.
Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas,
Thomas K. Landauer, and Richard Harshman. 1990.
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 41:391?
407.
Georgiana Dinu and Rui Wang. 2009. Inference rules
for recognizing textual entailment. In Proceedings
of the IWCS.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and
Communication). The MIT Press.
Charles J. Fillmore, Collin F. Baker, and Hiroaki Sato.
2002. Seeing arguments through transparent struc-
tures. In Proceedings of LREC.
Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007.
Computing semantic relatedness using wikipedia-
based explicit semantic analysis. In Proceedings of
IJCAI.
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third pascal recogniz-
ing textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of
ACL-WTEP Workshop.
Oren Glickman, Eyal Shnarch, and Ido Dagan. 2006.
Lexical reference: a semantic matching subtask. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.
Ralph Grishman, Lynette Hirschman, and Ngo Thanh
Nhan. 1986. Discovery procedures for sublanguage
selectional patterns: Initial experiments. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 12(3):205?215.
Marti Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In Proceedings of
COLING.
Nancy Ide and Ve?ronis Jean. 1993. Extracting
knowledge bases from machine-readable dictionar-
ies: Have we wasted our time? In Proceedings of
KB & KS Workshop.
Adrian Iftene and Alexandra Balahur-Dobrescu. 2007.
Hypothesis transformation and semantic variability
rules used in recognizing textual entailment. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing.
Jun?ichi Kazama and Kentaro Torisawa. 2007. Ex-
ploiting Wikipedia as external knowledge for named
entity recognition. In Proceedings of EMNLP-
CoNLL.
J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1997. The
measurements of observer agreement for categorical
data. In Biometrics, pages 33:159?174.
Dekang Lin. 1998a. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL.
Dekang Lin. 1998b. Dependency-based evaluation of
MINIPAR. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Eval-
uation of Parsing Systems at LREC.
Bing Liu, Xiaoli Li, Wee Sun Lee, and Philip S. Yu.
2004. Text classification by labeling words. In Pro-
ceedings of AAAI.
Andrew McCallum and Kamal Nigam. 1999. Text
classification by bootstrapping with keywords, EM
and shrinkage. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop for
unsupervised Learning in NLP.
Dan Moldovan and Vasile Rus. 2001. Logic form
transformation of wordnet and its applicability to
question answering. In Proceedings of ACL.
Simone P. Ponzetto and Michael Strube. 2007. De-
riving a large scale taxonomy from wikipedia. In
Proceedings of AAAI.
Reinhard Rapp. 2002. The computation of word asso-
ciations: comparing syntagmatic and paradigmatic
approaches. In Proceedings of COLING.
Gerda Ruge. 1992. Experiment on linguistically-based
term associations. Information Processing & Man-
agement, 28(3):317?332.
Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2005.
Learning syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym
discovery. In NIPS.
Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2006.
Semantic taxonomy induction from heterogenous
evidence. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL.
Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard
Weikum. 2007. Yago: A core of semantic knowl-
edge - unifying wordnet and wikipedia. In Proceed-
ings of WWW.
Antonio Toral and Rafael Mun?oz. 2007. A proposal
to automatically build and maintain gazetteers for
named entity recognition by using wikipedia. In
Proceedings of NAACL/HLT.
Yorick A. Wilks, Brian M. Slator, and Louise M.
Guthrie. 1996. Electric words: dictionaries, com-
puters, and meanings. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
Torsten Zesch, Iryna Gurevych, and Max Mu?hlha?user.
2007. Analyzing and accessing wikipedia as a lex-
ical semantic resource. In Data Structures for Lin-
guistic Resources and Applications, pages 197?205.
458
