Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 153?156,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Extracting Comparative Sentences from Korean Text Documents Us-
ing Comparative Lexical Patterns and Machine Learning Techniques 
 
Seon Yang 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Dong-A University,  
840 Hadan 2-dong, Saha-gu, 
Busan 604-714 Korea 
syang@donga.ac.kr 
Youngjoong Ko 
Department of Computer Engineering, 
Dong-A University,  
840 Hadan 2-dong, Saha-gu,  
Busan 604-714 Korea 
yjko@dau.ac.kr 
  
Abstract 
 
This paper proposes how to automatically 
identify Korean comparative sentences from 
text documents. This paper first investigates 
many comparative sentences referring to pre-
vious studies and then defines a set of compar-
ative keywords from them. A sentence which 
contains one or more elements of the keyword 
set is called a comparative-sentence candidate. 
Finally, we use machine learning techniques to 
eliminate non-comparative sentences from the 
candidates. As a result, we achieved signifi-
cant performance, an F1-score of 88.54%, in 
our experiments using various web documents. 
 
1 Introduction 
Comparing one entity with other entities is one 
of the most convincing ways of evaluation (Jin-
dal and Liu, 2006). A comparative sentence for-
mulates an ordering relation between two entities 
and that relation is very useful for many applica-
tion areas. One key area is for the customers. For 
example, a customer can make a decision on 
his/her final choice about a digital camera after 
reading other customers' product reviews, e.g., 
?Digital Camera X is much cheaper than Y 
though it functions as good as Y!? Another one 
is for manufacturers. All the manufacturers have 
an interest in the articles saying how their prod-
ucts are compared with competitors? ones.  
Comparative sentences often contain some 
comparative keywords. A sentence may express 
some comparison if it contains any comparative 
keywords such as ??? ([bo-da]: than)?, ??? 
([ga-jang]: most)?, ??? ([da-reu]: different)?, 
?? ([gat]: same)?. But many sentences also ex-
press comparison without those keywords.  Simi-
larly, although some sentences contain some 
keywords, they cannot be comparative sentences. 
By these reasons, extracting comparative sen-
tences is not a simple or easy problem. It needs 
more complicated and challenging processes 
than only searching out some keywords for ex-
tracting comparative sentences. 
Jindal and Liu (2006) previously studied to 
identify English comparative sentences. But the 
mechanism of Korean as an agglutinative lan-
guage and that of English as an inflecting lan-
guage have seriously different aspects. One of 
the greatest differences related to our work is that 
there are Part-of-Speech (POS) Tags for compar-
ative and superlative in English1, whereas, unfor-
tunately, the POS tagger of Korean does not pro-
vide any comparative and superlative tags be-
cause the analysis of Korean comparative is 
much more difficult than that of English. The 
major challenge of our work is therefore to iden-
tify comparative sentences without comparative 
and superlative POS Tags. 
We first survey previous studies about the Ko-
rean comparative syntax and collect the corpus 
of Korean comparative sentences from the Web. 
As we refer to previous studies and investigate 
real comparative sentences form the collected 
corpus, we can construct the set of comparative 
keywords and extract comparative-sentence can-
didates; the sentences which contain one or more 
element of the keyword set are called compara-
tive-sentence candidates. Then we use some ma-
chine learning techniques to eliminate non-
comparative sentences from those candidates. 
The final experimental results in 5-fold cross 
                                                 
1 JJR: adjective and comparative, JJS: adjective and superla-
tive, RBR: adverb and comparative, and RBS: adverb and 
superlative 
153
validation show the overall precision of 88.68% 
and the overall recall of 88.40%. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes the related work. In 
section 3, we explain comparative keywords and 
comparative-sentence candidates. In section 4, 
we describe how to eliminate non-comparative 
sentences from the candidates extracted in pre-
ceding section. Section 5 presents the experimen-
tal results. Finally, we discuss conclusions and 
future work in section 6 
 
2 Related Work 
We have not found any direct work on automati-
cally extracting Korean comparative sentences. 
There is only one study by Jindal and Liu (2006) 
that is related to English. They used comparative 
and superlative POS tags and additional some 
keywords to search English comparative sen-
tences. Then they used Class Sequential Rules 
and Na?ve Bayesian learning method. Their ex-
periment showed a precision of 79% and recall 
of 81%.  
Our research is closely related to linguistics. 
Ha (1999) described Korean comparative con-
structions with a linguistic view. Oh (2003) dis-
cussed the gradability of comparatives. Jeong 
(2000) classified the adjective superlative by the 
type of measures. 
Opinion mining is also related to our work. 
Many comparative sentences also contain the 
speaker?s opinions and especially comparison is 
one of the most powerful tools for evaluation. 
We have surveyed many studies about opinion 
mining (Lee et al, 2008; Kim and Hovy, 2006; 
Wilson and Wiebe, 2003; Riloff and Wiebe, 
2003; Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006).  
Maximum Entropy Model is used in our tech-
nique. Berger et al (1996) described Maximum 
Entropy approach to National Language 
Processing. In our experiments, we used Zhang?s 
Maximum Entropy Model Toolkit (2004). Na?ve 
Bayesian classifier is used to prove the perfor-
mance of MEM (McCallum and Nigam (1998)). 
 
3 Extracting Comparative-sentence 
Candidates 
In this section, we define comparative keywords 
and extract comparative-sentence candidates by 
using those keywords.  
3.1 Comparative keyword 
First of all, we classify comparative sentences 
into six types and then we extract single compar-
ative keywords from each type as follows: 
 
Table 1. The six types of comparative sentences 
 Type Single-keyword Examples 
1 Equality ??  ([gat]: same)? 
2 Similarity ????  ([bi-seut-ha]: similar)?
3 Difference ???  ([da-reu]: different)? 
4 Greater or 
lesser 
??? ([bo-da]: than)? 
5 Superlative ???  ([ga-jang]: most)? 
6 Predicative No single-keywords 
 
We can easily find such keywords from the vari-
ous sentences in first five types, while we cannot 
find any single keyword in the sentences of type 
6.  
 
Ex1) ?X?? ???? ????????, Y ?? 
??????.? ([X-gum-eui won-jae-ryo-neun 
cho-san-vi-nil-su-ji-in-de, Y-gum-eun cheon-
yeon-chi-kl-i-da]: Raw material of gum X is po-
lyvinyl acetate, but that of Y is natural chicle.)2 
 
And we can find many non-comparative sen-
tences which contain some keywords. The fol-
lowing example (Ex2) shows non-comparative 
though it contains ?? ([gat]: It means 'same', but 
it sometimes means 'think?)?. 
 
Ex2) ?? ??? ?? ?? ? ? ???.? ([Nae 
sang-gak-en nae-il bi-ga ol geot gat-a-yo]: I 
think it will rain tomorrow.) 
 
Thus all the sentences can be divided into four 
categories as follows: 
 
Table 2.  The four categories of the sentences 
Single-keyword Contain  Not contain  
Comparative  
Sentences  
S1 S2 
Non-comparative 
Sentences 
S3 S4 (unconcerned 
group) 
 
                                                 
2 In fact, type 6 can be sorted as non-comparative from lin-
guistic view. But the speaker is probably saying that Y is 
better than X. This is very important comparative data as an 
opinion. Therefore, we also regard the sentences containing 
implicit comparison as comparative sentences 
154
Our final goal is to find an effective method to 
extract S1 and S2, but single-keyword searching 
just outputs S1 and S3. In order to capture S2, we 
added long-distance-words sequences to the set 
of single-keywords. For example, we could ex-
tract ?<? [neun], ?? [in-de], ? [eun], ?? [i-
da]>? as a long-distance-words sequence from 
Ex1-sentence. It means that the sentence is 
formed as < S V but S V> in English (S: subject 
phrase, V: verb phrase). Thus we defined com-
parative keyword in this paper as follows: 
 
Definition (comparative keyword): A compara-
tive keyword is formed as a word or a phrase or 
a long-distance-words sequence. When a com-
parative keyword is contained in any sentence, 
the sentence is most likely to be a comparative 
sentence. (We will use an abbreviation ?CK?.) 
 
3.2 Comparative-sentence Candidates 
We finally set up a total of 177 CKs by human 
efforts. In the previous work, Jindal and Liu 
(2006) defined 83 keywords and key phrases in-
cluding comparative or superlative POS tags in 
English; they did not use any long-distance-
words sequence.  
Keyword searching process can detect most of 
comparative sentences (S1, S2 and S3)3  from 
original text documents. That is, the recall is high 
but the precision is low. We here defined a com-
parative-sentence candidate as a sentence which 
contains one or more elements of the set of CKs. 
Now we need to eliminate the incorrect sen-
tences (S3) from those captured sentences. First, 
we divided the set of CKs into two subsets de-
noted by CKL1 and CKL2 according to the pre-
cision of each keyword; we used 90% of the pre-
cision as a threshold value. The average preci-
sion of comparative-sentence candidates with a 
CKL1 keyword is 97.44% and they do not re-
quire any additional process. But that of compar-
ative-sentence candidates with a CKL2 keyword 
is 29.34% and we decide to eliminate non-
comparative sentences only from comparative 
sentence candidates with a CKL2 keyword. 
 
4 Eliminating Non-comparative Sen-
tences from the Candidates  
 
                                                 
3 As you can see in the experiment section, keyword search-
ing captures 95.96% comparative sentences.  
To effectively eliminate non-comparative sen-
tences from comparative sentence candidates 
with a CKL2 keyword, we employ machine 
learning techniques (MEM and Na?ve Bayes). 
For feature extraction from each comparative-
sentence candidate, we use continuous words 
sequence within the radius of 3 (the window size 
of 7) of each keyword in the sentence; we expe-
rimented with radius options of 2, 3, and 4 and 
we achieved the best performance in the radius 
of 3. After determining the radius, we replace 
each word with its POS tag; in order to reflect 
various expressions of each sentence, POS tags 
are more proper than lexical information of ac-
tual words. However, since CKs play the most 
important role to discriminate comparative sen-
tences, they are represented as a combination of 
their actual keyword and POS tag. Thus our fea-
ture is formed as ?X ? y?. (?X? means a se-
quence and ?y? means a class; y1 denotes com-
parative and y2 denotes non-comparative). For 
instance,  ?<pv etm nbn ?/pa ep ef sf >4? y2? is 
one of the features from the sentence of Ex2 in 
section 3.1. 
5 Experimental Results  
Three trained human annotators compiled a cor-
pus of 277 online documents from various do-
mains. They discussed their disagreements and 
they finally annotated 7,384 sentences. Table 3 
shows the number of comparative sentences and 
non-comparative sentences in our corpus. 
 
Table 3. The numbers of annotated sentences 
Total Comparative Non-comparative 
7,384 2,383 (32%) 5,001 (68%) 
 
Before evaluating our proposed method, we 
conducted some experiments by machine learn-
ing techniques with all the unigrams of total ac-
tual words as baseline systems; they do not use 
any CKs. The precision, recall and F1-score of 
the baseline systems are shown at Table 4. 
 
Table 4. The results of baseline systems (%) 
Baseline
System 
Precision Recall F1-score 
NB 35.98 91.62 51.66 
MEM 78.17 63.34 69.94 
 
The final overall results using the 5-fold cross 
validation are shown in Table 5 and Figure 1. 
                                                 
4 The labels such as ?pv?, ?etm?, ?nbn?, etc. are Korean POS 
Tags 
155
 
Table 5. The results of our proposed method (%) 
Method Preci-
sion 
Recall F1-score 
CKs only 68.39 95.96 79.87 
CKs + NB 85.42 88.59 86.67 
CKs + MEM 88.68 88.40 88.54 
 
 
Fig. 1 The results of our proposed method (%) 
 
As shown in Table 5 and Figure 1, both of MEM 
and NB is shown good performance but the F1-
score of MEM is little higher than that of NB. By 
applying machine learning technique to our me-
thod, we can achieve high precision while we 
can preserve high recall. 
 
6 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper, we have presented how to extract 
comparative sentences from Korean text docu-
ments by keyword searching process and ma-
chine learning techniques. Our experimental re-
sults showed that our proposed method can be 
effectively used to identify comparative sen-
tences. Since the research of comparison mining 
is currently in the beginning step in the world, 
our proposed techniques can contribute much to 
text mining and opinion mining research. 
In our future work, we plan to classify com-
parative types and to extract comparative rela-
tions from identified comparative sentences.  
 
Acknowledgement  
This paper was supported by the Korean Re-
search Foundation Grant funded by the Korean 
Government (KRF-2008-331-D00553) 
 
References  
Adam L. Berger et al 1996. A Maximum Entropy 
Approach to Natural Language Processing. Com-
putational Linguistics, 22(1):39-71. 
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Deter-
mining Term Subjectivity and Term Orientation for 
Opinion Mining. European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 193-200. 
 Andrew McCallum and Kamal Nigam. 1998. A 
Comparison of Event Models for Na?ve Bayes Text 
Classification. Association for Advancement of Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 41-48. 
Dong-joo Lee et al 2008. Opinion Mining of Cus-
tomer Feedback Data on the Web. International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Information Manage-
ment and Community, 247-252. 
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning Ex-
traction Patterns for Subjective Expressions. Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 
Gil-jong Ha. 1999. Korean Modern Comparative Syn-
tax, Pijbook Press, Seoul, Korea. 
Gil-jong Ha. 1999. Research on Korean Equality 
Comparative Syntax, Association for Korean Lin-
guistics, 5:229-265. 
In-su Jeong. 2000. Research on Korean Adjective 
Superlative Comparative Syntax. Korean Han-min-
jok Eo-mun-hak, 36:61-86. 
Kyeong-sook Oh. 2004. The Difference between 
?Man-kum? Comparative and ?Cheo-rum? Compar-
ative. Society of Korean Semantics, 14:197-221. 
 Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. 2006. Identifying Com-
parative Sentences in Text Documents, Association 
for Computing Machinery/Special Interest Group 
on Information Retrieval, 244-251. 
Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. 2006. Mining Comparative 
Sentences and Relations, Association for Ad-
vancement of Artificial Intelligence, 1331-1336. 
Soomin Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Automatic De-
tection of Opinion Bearing Words and Sentences. 
Computational Linguistics/Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. 
Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Annotating 
Opinions in the World Press. Special Interest 
Group in Discourse and Dialoque/Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Zhang Le. 2004. Maximum Entropy Modeling Toolkit 
for Python and C++. http://homepages.inf.ed.ac. 
uk/s0450736/maxent_toolkit.html. 
156
