Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers, pages 205?208,
Suntec, Singapore, 4 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Automatic Compilation of Travel Information                                                                
from Automatically Identified Travel Blogs 
 
Hidetsugu anba 
Graduate School of Information 
Sciences, Hiroshima City University 
nanba@hiroshima-cu.ac.jp 
Haruka Taguma 
School of Information Sciences,  
Hiroshima City University 
 
Takahiro Ozaki 
School of Information Sciences,  
Hiroshima City University 
 
Daisuke Kobayashi 
Graduate School of Information Sciences, 
Hiroshima City University 
kobayashi@ls.info.hiroshima-
cu.ac.jp 
Aya Ishino 
Graduate School of Information 
Sciences, Hiroshima City University 
ishino@ls.info.hiroshima-
cu.ac.jp 
Toshiyuki Takezawa 
Graduate School of Information Sciences, 
Hiroshima City University 
takezawa@hiroshima-cu.ac.jp 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we propose a method for compiling 
travel information automatically. For the compi-
lation, we focus on travel blogs, which are de-
fined as travel journals written by bloggers in 
diary form. We consider that travel blogs are a 
useful information source for obtaining travel 
information, because many bloggers' travel expe-
riences are written in this form. Therefore, we 
identified travel blogs in a blog database and ex-
tracted travel information from them. We have 
confirmed the effectiveness of our method by 
experiment. For the identification of travel blogs, 
we obtained scores of 38.1% for Recall and 
86.7% for Precision. In the extraction of travel 
information from travel blogs, we obtained 
74.0% for Precision at the top 100 extracted local 
products, thereby confirming that travel blogs are 
a useful source of travel information. 
1 Introduction 
Travel guidebooks and portal sites provided by 
tour companies and governmental tourist boards 
are useful sources of information about travel. 
However, it is costly and time consuming to 
compile travel information for all tourist spots 
and to keep them up to date manually. Therefore 
we have studied the automatic compilation of 
travel information. 
For the compilation, we focused on travel 
blogs, which are defined as travel journals writ-
ten by bloggers in diary form. Travel blogs are 
considered a useful information source for ob-
taining travel information, because many blog-
gers' travel experiences are written in this form. 
Therefore, we identified travel blogs in a blog 
database, and extracted travel information from 
them. 
Travel information in travel blogs is also use-
ful for recommending information that is 
matched to the each traveler. Recently, several 
methods that identify bloggers' attributes such as 
residential area (Yasuda et al, 2006), gender, 
and age (Ikeda et al, 2008, Schler et al, 2006), 
have been proposed. By combining this research 
with travel information extracted from travel 
blogs, it is possible to recommend a local prod-
uct that is popular among females, for example, 
or a travel spot, where young people often visit. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 describes related work. Sec-
tion 3 describes our method. To investigate the 
effectiveness of our method, we conducted some 
experiments, and Section 4 reports the experi-
mental results. We present some conclusions in 
Section 5. 
2 Related Work 
Both 'www.travelblog.org' and 
'travel.blogmura.com' are portal sites for travel 
blogs. At these sites, travel blogs are manually 
registered by bloggers themselves, and the blogs 
are classified by their destinations. However, 
there are many more travel blogs in the blogos-
205
phere. Aiming to construct an exhaustive data-
base of travel blogs, we have studied the auto-
matic identification of travel blogs.  
GeoCLEF 1  is the cross-language geographic 
retrieval track run as part of the Cross Language 
Evaluation Forum (CLEF), and has been operat-
ing since 2005 (Gey et al, 2005). The goal of 
this task was to retrieve news articles relevant to 
particular aspects of geographic information, 
such as 'wine regions around the rivers in Eu-
rope'. In our work, we focused on travel blogs 
instead of news articles, because bloggers' travel 
experiences tend to be written in travel blogs. 
3 Automatic Compilation of Travel In-
formation 
The task of compiling travel information is di-
vided into two steps: (1) identification of travel 
blogs and (2) extraction of travel information 
from them. We explain these steps in Sections 
3.1 and 3.2. 
3.1 Identification of Travel Blogs 
Blog entries that contain cue phrases, such as 
'travel', 'sightseeing', or 'tour', have a high degree 
of probability of being travel blogs. However, 
not every travel blog contains such cue phrases. 
For example, if a blogger writes his/her journey 
to Norway in multiple blog entries, it might state 
'We traveled to Norway' in the first entry, while 
only writing 'We ate wild sheep!' in the second 
entry. In this case, because the second entry does 
not contain any expressions related to travel, it is 
difficult to identify that the second entry is a tra-
vel blog. Therefore, we focus not only on each 
entry but also on its surrounding entries for the 
identification of travel blogs.  
We formulated the identification of travel 
blogs as a sequence-labeling problem, and solved 
it using machine learning. For the machine learn-
ing method, we examined the Conditional Ran-
dom Fields (CRF) method, whose empirical suc-
cess has been reported recently in the field of 
natural language processing. The CRF-based me-
thod identifies the class of each entry. Features 
and tags are given in the CRF method as follows: 
(1) the k tags occur before a target entry, (2) k 
features occur before a target entry, and (3) k 
features follow a target entry (see Figure 1). We 
used the value of k=4, which was determined in a 
pilot study. Here, we used the following features 
for machine learning: whether an entry contains 
                                                 
1 http://ir.shef.ac.uk/geoclef/ 
each 416 cue phrase, such as '?? (travel)', '?
??  (tour)', and '??  (departure)', and the 
number of location names in each entry2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
tag 0 0 1     
[cue phrase] (416 in total) 
1: contain, 0:not contain      
travel 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 
tour 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 
departure 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 
train 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 
visited 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 
 
 
Figure 1: Features and tags given to the CRF 
3.2 Extraction of Travel Information from 
Blogs 
We extracted pairs comprising a location name 
and a local product from travel blogs, which 
were identified in the previous step. For the effi-
cient extraction of travel information, we em-
ployed a bootstrapping method. Firstly, we pre-
pared 482 location-name/and local-product pairs 
as seeds for the bootstrapping. These pairs were 
obtained automatically from a 'Web Japanese N-
gram' database 3  provided by Google, Inc. The 
database comprises N-grams (N=1?7) extracted 
from 20 billion of Japanese sentences on the web. 
We applied a pattern '[??]???[??]? ' 
([slot of 'location name'] local product ?[slot of 
'local product name']?) to the database, and ex-
tracted location names and local products from 
each corresponding slot, thereby obtaining the 
482 pairs. 
Secondly, we applied a machine learning-
based information extraction technique to the 
travel blogs identified in the previous step, and 
obtained new pairs. In this step, we prepared 
                                                 
2 We used CaboCha software for the identification of 
locations. 
http://chasen.org/~taku/software/cabocha/ 
3 http://www.gsk.or.jp/catalog/GSK2007-
C/catalog.html 
return 
 travel 
 travel 
 departure 
 
blog entries 
k 
parsing direction 
target 
206
training data for the machine learning in the fol-
lowing three steps. 
1. Select 200 sentences that contain both a lo-
cation name and a local product from the 
482 pairs. Then automatically create 200 
tagged sentences, to which 'location' and 
'product' tags are assigned. 
2. Prepare another 200 sentences that contain 
only a location name. 4  Then create 200 
tagged sentences, to which the 'location' tag 
is assigned. 
3. Apply machine learning to the 400 tagged 
sentences, and obtain a system that automat-
ically annotates 'location' and 'product' tags 
to given sentences. 
As a machine learning method, we used the CRF. 
In the same way as in the previous step, the 
CRF-based method identifies the class of each 
word in a given sentence. Features and tags are 
given in the CRF method as follows: (1) the k 
tags occur before a target word, (2) k features 
occur before a target word, and (3) k features 
follow a target word. We used the value of k=2, 
which was determined in a pilot study. We use 
the following six features for machine learning. 
 A word. 
 Its part of speech5. 
 Whether the word is a quotation mark. 
 Whether the word is a cue word, such as '?
? ', '?? ', '?? ' (local product), '?? ' 
(famous confection), or '??' (souvenir). 
 Whether the word is a surface case. 
 Whether the word is frequently used in the 
names of local products or souvenirs, such 
as 'cake' or 'noodle'. 
4 Experiments 
We conducted two experiments: (1) identifica-
tion of travel blogs, and (2) extraction of travel 
information from blogs. We reported on them in 
Sections 4.1 and 4.2. 
4.1 Identification of Travel Blogs 
Data sets and experimental settings 
                                                 
4 In our pilot study, we did not use these negative cas-
es in machine learning at first, and obtained low pre-
cision values, because our system attempted to extract 
local products from all sentences containing location 
names in travel blogs. 
5 In this step, we also identified location names auto-
matically using the CaboCha software. 
We randomly selected 4,914 blog entries written 
by 317 authors from about 1,100,000 entries 
written in Japanese. Then we manually identified 
travel blogs in 4,914 entries. As a result, 420 en-
tries were identified as travel blogs. Then we 
performed a four-fold cross-validation test. For 
the machine-learning package, we used CRF++6 
software. For evaluation measures, we used Re-
call and Precision scores. 
Alternatives 
In order to confirm the validity of our sequence 
labeling-based approach, we also examined 
another method, which identifies travel blogs 
using features in each blog entry only (without 
using features in its surrounding entries). 
Results and discussions 
Table 1 shows the experimental results. As 
shown in the table, our method improved the 
Precision value by 26.2%, while decreasing the 
Recall value by 13.0%. In our research, Precision 
is more important than Recall, because low Pre-
cision in this step causes low Precision in the 
next step. 
 Recall Precision 
our method 38.1 86.7 
baseline method 51.1 60.5 
Table 1: Identification of travel blogs 
Our method could not identify 266 of the tra-
vel blogs. We randomly selected 50 entries from 
these 266, and analysed the errors. Among the 50 
errors, 25 cases (50%) were caused by the lack of 
cue phrases. For the machine learning, we used 
manually selected cue phrases. To increase the 
number of cue phrases, a statistical approach will 
be required. For example, applying n-grams to 
automatically identified travel blogs is one such 
approach. Among the 50 errors, 5 entries (10%) 
were too short (fewer than four sentences) to be 
identified by our method. 
Our method mistakenly identified 26 entries as 
travel blogs. A typical error is that bloggers 
wrote non-travel entries among a series of travel 
blogs. In this case, the non-travel entries were 
identified as travel blogs. 
4.2 Extraction of Travel Information from 
Blogs 
Data sets and experimental settings 
To confirm that travel blogs are a useful informa-
tion source for the extraction of travel informa-
tion, we extracted travel information using the 
following three information sources. 
                                                 
6 http://www.chasen.org/~taku/software/CRF++/ 
207
 Travel blogs (our method): 80,000 sen-
tences in 17,268 travel blogs, which were 
automatically identified from 1,100,000 en-
tries using the method described in Section 
3.1. 
 Generic blogs: 80,000 sentences from 
1,100,000 blog entries. 
 Generic webs: 80,000 sentences from 
470M web sentences (Kawahara and Kuro-
hashi, 2006). 
We extracted travel information (location-
name/local-product pairs) from each information 
source, and ranked them by their frequencies. 
Evaluation 
We used the Precision value for the top-ranked 
travel information defined by the following equa-
tion as the evaluation measure. We calculated 
Precision values from the top 5 to the top 100 at 
intervals of 5. 
Precision=
The number of correctly extracted 
location-name / local-product
pairs
 
The number of extracted
location-name / local-product
pairs
 
Results and discussions 
Figure 2 shows the experimental results. As 
shown in the figure, the generic blog method ob-
tained higher Precision values than the generic 
web method, especially at higher ranks. Our me-
thod (travel blog) was much better than the ge-
neric blog method, which indicates that travel 
blogs are a useful information source for the ex-
traction of travel information.  
 
Figure 2: Precision values at top n for the extraction 
of travel information 
Table 2 shows the number of local products, 
which were not contained in a list of products 
from the Google N-gram database. As shown in 
the table, 41 local products were newly extracted 
from travel blogs, while 15 and 7 were extracted 
from generic blogs and generic webs, respective-
ly. These results also indicate the effectiveness of 
travel blogs as a source for travel information. 
A typical error among the top 100 results for 
our method was that store names were mistaken-
ly extracted. Here, most of these stores sell local 
products. To ameliorate this problem, extraction 
of pairs of local products and the stores that sell 
them is also required. 
travel blog (our method) 41 
generic blog 15 
generic web 7 
Table 2: The number of local products that each me-
thod newly extracted 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we proposed a method for identify-
ing travel blogs from a blog database, and ex-
tracting travel information from them. In the 
identification of travel blogs, we obtained of 
38.1% for Recall and 86.7% for Precision. In the 
extraction of travel information from travel blogs, 
we obtained 74.0% for Precision with the top 
100 extracted local products.  
References  
Fredric C. Gey, Ray R. Larson, Mark Sanderson, Hi-
deo Joho, Paul Clough, and Vivien Petras. 2005. 
GeoCLEF: The CLEF 2005 Cross-Language Geo-
graphic Information Retrieval Track Overview. 
Lecture otes in Computer Science, LNCS4022, 
pp.908-919. 
Daisuke Ikeda, Hiroya Takamura, and Manabu Oku-
mura. 2008. Semi-Supervised Learning for Blog 
Classification. Proceedings of the 23rd AAAI Confe-
rence on Artificial Intelligence, pp.1156-1161.  
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi. 2006. A 
Fully-Lexicalized Probabilistic Model for Japanese 
Syntactic and Case Structure Analysis. Proceedings 
of the Human Language Technology Conference of 
the orth American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, pp.176-183. 
Jonathan Schler, Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon,  
and James Pennebaker. 2006. Effects of age and 
gender on blogging. Proceedings of AAAI Sympo-
sium on Computational Approaches for Analyzing 
Weblogs, pp.199-205. 
Norihito Yasuda, Tsutomu Hirao, Jun Suzuki, and 
Hideki Isozaki. 2006. Identifying bloggers' residen-
tial areas. Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium 
on Computational Approaches for Analyzing Web-
logs, pp.231-236. 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Top n
travel blog generic blog
generic web
208
