Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2010, page 1,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Wide-coverage NLP with Linguistically Expressive Grammars
Julia Hockenmaier
Department of Computer Science,
University of Illinois
juliahmr@illinois.edu
Yusuke Miyao
National Institute of Informatics
yusuke@nii.ac.jp
Josef van Genabith
Centre for Next Generation Localisation,
School of Computing,
Dublin City University
josef@computing.dcu.ie
1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a lot of research
on wide-coverage statistical natural language
processing with linguistically expressive gram-
mars such as Combinatory Categorial Grammars
(CCG), Head-driven Phrase-Structure Grammars
(HPSG), Lexical-Functional Grammars (LFG)
and Tree-Adjoining Grammars (TAG). But al-
though many young researchers in natural lan-
guage processing are very well trained in machine
learning and statistical methods, they often lack
the necessary background to understand the lin-
guistic motivation behind these formalisms. Fur-
thermore, in many linguistics departments, syntax
is still taught from a purely Chomskian perspec-
tive. Additionally, research on these formalisms
often takes place within tightly-knit, formalism-
specific subcommunities. It is therefore often dif-
ficult for outsiders as well as experts to grasp the
commonalities of and differences between these
formalisms.
2 Content Overview
This tutorial overviews basic ideas of TAG/
CCG/LFG/HPSG, and provides attendees with a
comparison of these formalisms from a linguis-
tic and computational point of view. We start
from stating the motivation behind using these ex-
pressive grammar formalisms for NLP, contrast-
ing them with shallow formalisms like context-
free grammars. We introduce a common set of
examples illustrating various linguistic construc-
tions that elude context-free grammars, and reuse
them when introducing each formalism: bounded
and unbounded non-local dependencies that arise
through extraction and coordination, scrambling,
mappings to meaning representations, etc. In the
second half of the tutorial, we explain two key
technologies for wide-coverage NLP with these
grammar formalisms: grammar acquisition and
parsing models. Finally, we show NLP applica-
tions where these expressive grammar formalisms
provide additional benefits.
3 Tutorial Outline
1. Introduction: Why expressive grammars
2. Introduction to TAG
3. Introduction to CCG
4. Introduction to LFG
5. Introduction to HPSG
6. Inducing expressive grammars from corpora
7. Wide-coverage parsing with expressive
grammars
8. Applications
9. Summary
References
Aoife Cahill, Michael Burke, Ruth O?Donovan, Stefan
Riezler, Josef van Genabith and Andy Way. 2008.
Wide-Coverage Deep Statistical Parsing using Au-
tomatic Dependency Structure Annotation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(1). pp.81-124, MIT Press.
Yusuke Miyao and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature For-
est Models for Probabilistic HPSG Parsing. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(1). pp.35-80, MIT Press.
Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2007. CCG-
bank: A Corpus of CCG Derivations and Depen-
dency Structures Extracted from the Penn Treebank.
Computational Linguistics, 33(3). pp.355-396, MIT
Press.
1
