Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2012, page 4,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multilingual Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis
Rada Mihalcea
University of North Texas
Denton, Tx
rada@cs.unt.edu
Carmen Banea
University of North Texas
Denton, Tx
carmenbanea@my.unt.edu
Janyce Wiebe
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pa
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
Subjectivity and sentiment analysis focuses on
the automatic identification of private states,
such as opinions, emotions, sentiments, evalu-
ations, beliefs, and speculations in natural lan-
guage. While subjectivity classification labels
text as either subjective or objective, sentiment
classification adds an additional level of gran-
ularity, by further classifying subjective text as
either positive, negative or neutral.
While much of the research work in this
area has been applied to English, research
on other languages is growing, including
Japanese, Chinese, German, Spanish, Ro-
manian. While most of the researchers in
the field are familiar with the methods ap-
plied on English, few of them have closely
looked at the original research carried out in
other languages. For example, in languages
such as Chinese, researchers have been look-
ing at the ability of characters to carry sen-
timent information (Ku et al, 2005; Xiang,
2011). In Romanian, due to markers of po-
liteness and additional verbal modes embed-
ded in the language, experiments have hinted
that subjectivity detection may be easier to
achieve (Banea et al, 2008). These addi-
tional sources of information may not be avail-
able across all languages, yet, various arti-
cles have pointed out that by investigating a
synergistic approach for detecting subjectiv-
ity and sentiment in multiple languages at the
same time, improvements can be achieved not
only in other languages, but in English as
well. The development and interest in these
methods is also highly motivated by the fact
that only 27% of Internet users speak En-
glish (www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm,
Oct 11, 2011), and that number diminishes
further every year, as more people across the
globe gain Internet access.
The aim of this tutorial is to familiarize the
attendees with the subjectivity and sentiment
research carried out on languages other than
English in order to enable and promote cross-
fertilization. Specifically, we will review work
along three main directions. First, we will
present methods where the resources and tools
have been specifically developed for a given
target language. In this category, we will
also briefly overview the main methods that
have been proposed for English, but which can
be easily ported to other languages. Second,
we will describe cross-lingual approaches, in-
cluding several methods that have been pro-
posed to leverage on the resources and tools
available in English by using cross-lingual
projections. Finally, third, we will show how
the expression of opinions and polarity per-
vades language boundaries, and thus methods
that holistically explore multiple languages at
the same time can be effectively considered.
References
C. Banea, R. Mihalcea, and J. Wiebe. 2008. A Boot-
strapping method for building subjectivity lexicons for
languages with scarce resources. In Proceedings of
LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.
L. W. Ku, T. H. Wu, L. Y. Lee, and H. H. Chen. 2005.
Construction of an Evaluation Corpus for Opinion Ex-
traction. In Proceedings of NTCIR-5, Tokyo, Japan.
L. Xiang. 2011. Ideogram Based Chinese Sentiment
Word Orientation Computation. Computing Research
Repository, page 4, October.
4
