Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, page 1,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Visual Features for Linguists:
Basic image analysis techniques for multimodally-curious NLPers
Elia Bruni
University of Trento
elia.bruni@unitn.it
Marco Baroni
University of Trento
marco.baroni@unitn.it
Description
Features automatically extracted from images con-
stitute a new and rich source of semantic knowl-
edge that can complement information extracted
from text. The convergence between vision- and
text-based information can be exploited in scenar-
ios where the two modalities must be combined
to solve a target task (e.g., generating verbal de-
scriptions of images, or finding the right images
to illustrate a story). However, the potential ap-
plications for integrated visual features go beyond
mixed-media scenarios: Because of their comple-
mentary nature with respect to language, visual
features might provide perceptually grounded se-
mantic information that can be exploited in purely
linguistic domains.
The tutorial will first introduce basic techniques
to encode image contents in terms of low-level fea-
tures, such as the widely adopted SIFT descriptors.
We will then show how these low-level descriptors
are used to induce more abstract features, focus-
ing on the well-established bags-of-visual-words
method to represent images, but also briefly in-
troducing more recent developments, that include
capturing spatial information with pyramid repre-
sentations, soft visual word clustering via Fisher
encoding and attribute-based image representa-
tion. Next, we will discuss some example appli-
cations, and we will conclude with a brief practi-
cal illustration of visual feature extraction using a
software package we developed.
The tutorial is addressed to computational lin-
guists without any background in computer vi-
sion. It provides enough background material to
understand the vision-and-language literature and
the less technical articles on image analysis. After
the tutorial, the participants should also be able to
autonomously incorporate visual features in their
NLP pipelines using off-the-shelf tools.
Outline
1. Why image analysis?
? The grounding problem
? Multimodal datasets (Pascal, SUN, Im-
ageNet and ESP-Game)
2. Extraction of low-level features from images
? Challenges (viewpoint, illumination,
scale, occlusion, etc.)
? Feature detectors
? Feature descriptors
3. Visual words for higher-level representation
of visual information
? Constructing a vocabulary of visual
words
? Classic Bags-of-visual-words represen-
tation
? Recent advances
? Computer vision applications: Object
recognition and emotion analysis
4. Going multimodal: Example applications of
visual features in NLP
? Generating image descriptions
? Semantic relatedness
? Modeling selectional preference
1
