Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7?8,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Robust Automated Natural Language Processing
with Multiword Expressions and Collocations
Valia Kordoni and Markus Egg
Humboldt-Universita?t zu Berlin (Germany)
kordonie@anglistik.hu-berlin.de,
markus.egg@anglistik.hu-berlin.de
1 Introduction
This tutorial aims to provide attendees with a clear
notion of the linguistic and distributional charac-
teristics of multiword expressions (MWEs), their
relevance for robust automated natural language
processing and language technology, what meth-
ods and resources are available to support their
use, and what more could be done in the future.
Our target audience are researchers and practition-
ers in language technology, not necessarily experts
in MWEs, who are interested in tasks that involve
or could benefit from considering MWEs as a per-
vasive phenomenon in human language and com-
munication.
2 Topic Overview
Multiword expressions (MWEs) like break down,
bus stop and make ends meet, are expressions con-
sisting of two or more lexical units that correspond
to some conventional way of saying things (Sag et
al., 2001). They range over linguistic construc-
tions such as fixed phrases (per se, by and large),
noun compounds (telephone booth, cable car),
compound verbs (give a presentation), idioms (a
frog in the throat, kill some time), etc. They are
also widely known as collocations, for the frequent
co-occurrence of their components (Manning and
Schu?tze, 2001).
From a natural language processing perspective,
the interest in MWEs comes from the very im-
portant role they play forming a large part of hu-
man language, which involves the use of linguistic
routines or prefabricated sequences in any kind of
text or speech, from the terminology of a specific
domain (parietal cortex, substantia nigra, splice
up) to the more colloquial vocabulary (freak out,
make out, mess up) and the language of the social
media (hash tag, fail whale, blackbird pie). New
MWEs are constantly being introduced in the lan-
guage (cloud services, social networking site, se-
curity apps), and knowing how they are used re-
flects the ability to successfully understand and
generate language.
While easily mastered by native speakers, their
treatment and interpretation involves consider-
able effort for computational systems (and non-
native speakers), due to their idiosyncratic, flexi-
ble and heterogeneous nature (Rayson et al, 2010;
Ramisch et al, to appear). First of all, there is
the task of identifying whether a given sequence
of words is an MWE or not (e.g. give a gift vs.
a presentation) (Pecina, 2008; Green et al, 2013;
Seretan, 2012). For a given MWE, there is also the
problem of determining whether it forms a com-
positional (take away the dishes), semi-idiomatic
(boil up the beans) or idiomatic combination (roll
up your sleeves) (Kim and Nakov, 2011; Shutova
et al, 2013). Furthermore, MWEs may also be
polysemous: bring up as carrying (bring up the
bags), raising (bring up the children) and men-
tioning (bring up the subject). Unfortunately, so-
lutions that are successfully employed for treating
similar problems in the context of simplex works
may not be adequate for MWEs, given the com-
plex interactions between their component words
(e.g. the idiomatic use of spill in spilling beans
as revealing secrets vs. its literal usage in spilling
lentils).
3 Content Overview
This tutorial consists of four parts. Part I starts
with a thorough introduction to different types of
MWEs and collocations, their linguistic dimen-
sions (idiomaticity, syntactic and semantic fixed-
ness, specificity, etc.), as well as their statisti-
cal characteristics (variability, recurrence, associa-
tion, etc.). This part concludes with an overview of
linguistic and psycholinguistic theories of MWEs
to date.
For MWEs to be useful for language tech-
nology, they must be recognisable automatically.
7
Hence, Part II surveys computational approaches
for MWEs recognition, both manually-authored
approaches and using machine learning tech-
niques, and for modeling syntactic and semantic
variability. We will also review token identifica-
tion and disambiguation of MWEs in context (e.g.
bus stop in Does the bus stop here? vs. The bus
stop is here) and methods for the automatic detec-
tion of the degree of compositionality of MWEs
and their interpretation. Part II finishes with a dis-
cussion of evaluation for MWE tasks.
Part III of the tutorial describes resources made
available for a wide range of languages as well
as MWE-related multi-level annotation platforms
and examples of where MWEs treatment can con-
tribute to language technology tasks and appli-
cations such as parsing, word sense disambigua-
tion, machine translation, information extraction
and information retrieval. Part IV concludes with
a list of future possibilities and open challenges in
the computational treatment of MWEs in current
NLP models and techniques.
4 Tutorial Outline
1. PART I ? General overview:
(a) Introduction
(b) Types and examples of MWEs and collocations
(c) Linguistic dimensions of MWEs: idiomaticity,
syntactic and semantic fixedness, specificity, etc.
(d) Statistical dimensions of MWEs: variability, re-
currence, association, etc.
(e) Linguistic and psycholinguistic theories of
MWEs
2. PART II ? Computational methods
(a) Recognising the elements of MWEs: type iden-
tification
(b) Recognising how elements of MWEs are com-
bined: syntactic and semantic variability
(c) Token identification and disambiguation of
MWEs
(d) Compositionality and Interpretation of MWEs
(e) Evaluation of MWE tasks
3. PART III ? Resources, tasks and applications:
(a) MWEs in resources: corpora, lexica and ontolo-
gies (e.g. Wordnet and Genia)
(b) Tools for MWE identification and annotation
(e.g. NSP, mwetoolkit, UCS and jMWE)
(c) MWEs and Collocations in NLP tasks: Pars-
ing, POS-tagging, Word Sense Disambiguation
(WSD)
(d) MWes and Collocations in Language Technol-
ogy applications: Information Retrieval (IR), In-
formation Extraction (IE), Machine Translation
(MT)
4. PART IV ? Future challenges and open prob-
lems
References
Spence Green, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2013. Parsing models for identify-
ing multiword expressions. Computational Linguistics,
39(1):195?227.
Su Nam Kim and Preslav Nakov. 2011. Large-scale noun
compound interpretation using bootstrapping and the web
as a corpus. In EMNLP, pages 648?658.
Ioannis Korkontzelos and Suresh Manandhar. 2010. Can
recognising multiword expressions improve shallow pars-
ing? In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 636?644, Los
Angeles, California, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze. 2001. Foun-
dations of statistical natural language processing. MIT
Press.
Pavel Pecina. 2008. A machine learning approach to mul-
tiword expression extraction. In Nicole Gre?goire, Ste-
fan Evert, and Brigitte Krenn, editors, Proceedings of the
LREC Workshop Towards a Shared Task for Multiword
Expressions (MWE 2008), pages 54?57.
Carlos Ramisch, Paulo Schreiner, Marco Idiart, and Aline
Villavicencio. 2008. An evaluation of methods for the
extraction of multiword expressions. In Nicole Gre?goire,
Stefan Evert, and Brigitte Krenn, editors, Proceedings of
the LREC Workshop Towards a Shared Task for Multiword
Expressions (MWE 2008), pages 50?53.
Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Valia Kordoni. to
appear. Special Issue on Multiword Expressions. ACM
TSLP.
Paul Rayson, Scott Songlin Piao, Serge Sharoff, Stefan Evert,
and Begon?a Villada Moiro?n. 2010. Multiword expres-
sions: hard going or plain sailing? Language Resources
and Evaluation, 44(1-2):1?5.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword expressions:
A pain in the neck for NLP. In Proc. of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Com-
putational Linguistics (CICLing-2002, pages 1?15.
Violeta Seretan. 2012. Syntax-Based Collocation Extrac-
tion, volume 44, Text, Speech and Language Technology.
Springer.
Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korhonen.
2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Comput. Linguist.,
39(2):301?353, June.
Aline Villavicencio, Francis Bond, Anna Korhonen, and Di-
ana McCarthy. 2005. Introduction to the special issue
on multiword expressions: Having a crack at a hard nut.
Computer Speech & Language, 19(4):365?377.
Aline Villavicencio, Valia Kordoni, Yi Zhang, Marco Idiart,
and Carlos Ramisch. 2007. Validation and evaluation of
automatically acquired multiword expressions for gram-
mar engineering. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 1034?1043, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
8
