Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, page 2,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic Parsing with Combinatory Categorial Grammars
Yoav Artzi, Nicholas FitzGerald and Luke Zettlemoyer
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{yoav,nfitz,lsz}@cs.washington.edu
1 Abstract
Semantic parsers map natural language sentences
to formal representations of their underlying
meaning. Building accurate semantic parsers
without prohibitive engineering costs is a long-
standing, open research problem.
The tutorial will describe general principles for
building semantic parsers. The presentation will
be divided into two main parts: modeling and
learning. The modeling section will include best
practices for grammar design and choice of se-
mantic representation. The discussion will be
guided by examples from several domains. To il-
lustrate the choices to be made and show how they
can be approached within a real-life representation
language, we will use ?-calculus meaning repre-
sentations. In the learning part, we will describe
a unified approach for learning Combinatory Cat-
egorial Grammar (CCG) semantic parsers, that in-
duces both a CCG lexicon and the parameters of
a parsing model. The approach learns from data
with labeled meaning representations, as well as
from more easily gathered weak supervision. It
also enables grounded learning where the seman-
tic parser is used in an interactive environment, for
example to read and execute instructions.
The ideas we will discuss are widely appli-
cable. The semantic modeling approach, while
implemented in ?-calculus, could be applied to
many other formal languages. Similarly, the al-
gorithms for inducing CCGs focus on tasks that
are formalism independent, learning the meaning
of words and estimating parsing parameters. No
prior knowledge of CCGs is required. The tuto-
rial will be backed by implementation and exper-
iments in the University of Washington Semantic
Parsing Framework (UW SPF).1
1http://yoavartzi.com/spf
2 Outline
1. Introduction to CCGs
2. Modeling
(a) Questions for database queries
(b) Plurality and determiner resolution in
grounded applications
(c) Event semantics and imperatives in in-
structional language
3. Learning
(a) A unified learning algorithm
(b) Learning with supervised data
i. Lexical induction with templates
ii. Unification-based learning
(c) Weakly supervised learning without la-
beled meaning representations
3 Instructors
Yoav Artzi is a Ph.D. candidate in the Computer
Science & Engineering department at the Univer-
sity of Washington. His research studies the acqui-
sition of grounded natural language understanding
within interactive systems. His work focuses on
modeling semantic representations and designing
weakly supervised learning algorithms. He is a re-
cipient of the 2012 Yahoo KSC award.
Nicholas FitzGerald is a Ph.D. student at the
University of Washington. His research interests
are grounded natural language understanding and
generation. He is a recipient of an Intel Science
and Technology Center Fellowship and an NSERC
Postgraduate Scholarship.
Luke Zettlemoyer is an Assistant Professor in
the Computer Science & Engineering department
at the University of Washington. His research in-
terests are in the intersections of natural language
processing, machine learning and decision mak-
ing under uncertainty. Honors include best paper
awards at UAI 2005 and ACL 2009, selection to
the DARPA CSSG, and an NSF CAREER Award.
2
