Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 9?10,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Variational Inference for Structured NLP Models
David Burkett and Dan Klein
Computer Science Division
University of California, Berkeley
{dburkett,klein}@cs.berkeley.edu
Description
Historically, key breakthroughs in structured NLP
models, such as chain CRFs or PCFGs, have re-
lied on imposing careful constraints on the local-
ity of features in order to permit efficient dynamic
programming for computing expectations or find-
ing the highest-scoring structures. However, as
modern structured models become more complex
and seek to incorporate longer-range features, it is
more and more often the case that performing ex-
act inference is impossible (or at least impractical)
and it is necessary to resort to some sort of approx-
imation technique, such as beam search, pruning,
or sampling. In the NLP community, one increas-
ingly popular approach is the use of variational
methods for computing approximate distributions.
The goal of the tutorial is to provide an intro-
duction to variational methods for approximate in-
ference, particularly mean field approximation and
belief propagation. The intuition behind the math-
ematical derivation of variational methods is fairly
simple: instead of trying to directly compute the
distribution of interest, first consider some effi-
ciently computable approximation of the original
inference problem, then find the solution of the ap-
proximate inference problem that minimizes the
distance to the true distribution. Though the full
derivations can be somewhat tedious, the resulting
procedures are quite straightforward, and typically
consist of an iterative process of individually up-
dating specific components of the model, condi-
tioned on the rest. Although we will provide some
theoretical background, the main goal of the tu-
torial is to provide a concrete procedural guide to
using these approximate inference techniques, il-
lustrated with detailed walkthroughs of examples
from recent NLP literature.
Once both variational inference procedures
have been described in detail, we?ll provide a sum-
mary comparison of the two, along with some in-
tuition about which approach is appropriate when.
We?ll also provide a guide to further exploration of
the topic, briefly discussing other variational tech-
niques, such as expectation propagation and con-
vex relaxations, but concentrating mainly on pro-
viding pointers to additional resources for those
who wish to learn more.
Outline
1. Structured Models and Factor Graphs
? Factor graph notation
? Example structured NLP models
? Inference
2. Mean Field
? Warmup (iterated conditional modes)
? Mean field procedure
? Derivation of mean field update
? Example
3. Structured Mean Field
? Structured approximation
? Computing structured updates
? Example: Joint parsing and alignment
4. Belief Propagation
? Intro
? Messages and beliefs
? Loopy BP
5. Structured Belief Propagation
? Warmup (efficient products for mes-
sages)
? Example: Word alignment
? Example: Dependency parsing
6. Wrap-Up
? Mean field vs BP
? Other approximation techniques
9
Presenter Bios
David Burkett is a postdoctoral researcher in the
Computer Science Division at the University of
California, Berkeley. The main focus of his re-
search is on modeling syntactic agreement in bilin-
gual corpora. His interests are diverse, though, and
he has worked on parsing, phrase alignment, lan-
guage evolution, coreference resolution, and even
video game AI. He has worked as an instructional
assistant for multiple AI courses at Berkeley and
won multiple Outstanding Graduate Student In-
structor awards.
Dan Klein is an Associate Professor of Com-
puter Science at the University of California,
Berkeley. His research includes many areas of
statistical natural language processing, includ-
ing grammar induction, parsing, machine trans-
lation, information extraction, document summa-
rization, historical linguistics, and speech recog-
nition. His academic awards include a Sloan Fel-
lowship, a Microsoft Faculty Fellowship, an NSF
CAREER Award, the ACM Grace Murray Hop-
per Award, Best Paper Awards at ACL, EMNLP
and NAACL, and the UC Berkeley Distinguished
Teaching Award.
10
