Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 11?13,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
The mathematics of language learning
Andra?s Kornai
Computer and Automation Research Institute
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
andras@kornai.com
Gerald Penn
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
gpenn@cs.utoronto.edu
James Rogers
Computer Science Department
Earlham College
jrogers@cs.earlham.edu
Anssi Yli-Jyra?
Department of Modern Languages
University of Helsinki
anssi.yli-jyra@helsinki.fi
Over the past decade, attention has gradu-
ally shifted from the estimation of parameters to
the learning of linguistic structure (for a survey
see Smith 2011). The Mathematics of Language
(MOL) SIG put together this tutorial, composed of
three lectures, to highlight some alternative learn-
ing paradigms in speech, syntax, and semantics in
the hopes of accelerating this trend.
Compounding the enormous variety of formal
models one may consider is the bewildering range
of ML techniques one may bring to bear. In addi-
tion to the surprisingly useful classical techniques
inherited from multivariate statistics such as Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA, Pearson 1901)
and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA, Fisher
1936), computational linguists have experimented
with a broad range of neural net, nearest neighbor,
maxent, genetic/evolutionary, decision tree, max
margin, boost, simulated annealing, and graphical
model learners. While many of these learners be-
came standard in various domains of ML, within
CL the basic HMM approach proved surprisingly
resilient, and it is only very recently that deep
learning techniques from neural computing are be-
coming competitive not just in speech, but also
in OCR, paraphrase, sentiment analysis, parsing
and vector-based semantic representations. The
first lecture will provide a mathematical introduc-
tion to some of the fundamental techniques that
lie beneath these linguistic applications of neural
networks, such as: BFGS optimization, finite dif-
ference approximations of Hessians and Hessian-
free optimization, contrastive divergence and vari-
ational inference.
Lecture 1: The mathematics of
neural computing ? Penn
Recent results in acoustic modeling, OCR, para-
phrase, sentiment analysis, parsing and vector-
based semantic representations have shown that
natural language processing, like so many other
corners of artificial intelligence, needs to pay more
attention to neural computing.
I Gaussian Mixture Models
? Lagrange?s theorem
? Stochastic gradient descent
? typical acoustic models using GMMs and
HMMs
II Optimization theory
? Hessian matrices
? Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno theory
? finite difference approximations of Hessians
? Hessian-free optimization
? Krylov methods
III Application: Product models
? products of Gaussians vs. GMMs
? products of ?experts?
? Gibbs sampling and Markov-chain Monte
Carlo
? contrastive divergence
IV Experimentation: Deep NNs for acoustic
modeling
? intersecting product models with Boltzmann
machines
? ?generative pre-training?
? acoustic modeling with Deep Belief Networks
? why DBNs work well
V Variational inference
? variational Bayes for HMMs
In spite of the enormous progress brought by
ML techniques, there remains a rather significant
range of tasks where automated learners cannot
yet get near human performance. One such is the
unsupervised learning of word structure addressed
by MorphoChallenge, another is the textual entail-
ment task addressed by RTE.
The second lecture recasts these and similar
problems in terms of learning weighted edges in a
sparse graph, and presents learning techniques that
seem to have some potential to better find spare fi-
nite state and near-FS models than EM. We will
provide a mathematical introduction to the Min-
imum Description Length (MDL) paradigm and
11
spectral learning, and relate these to the better-
known techniques based on (convex) optimization
and (data-oriented) memorization.
Lecture 2: Lexical structure
detection ? Kornai
While modern syntactic theory focuses almost en-
tirely on productive, rule-like regularities with
compositional semantics, the vast bulk of the infor-
mation conveyed by natural language, over 85%,
is encoded by improductive, irregular, and non-
compositional means, primarily by lexical mean-
ing. Morphology and the lexicon provide a rich
testing ground for comparing structure learning
techniques, especially as inferences need to be
based on very few examples, often just one.
I Motivation
? Why study structure?
? Why study lexical structure?
II Lexical structure
? Function words, content words
? Basic vocabulary (Ogden 1930, Swadesh 1950,
Yasseri et al2012)
? Estimation style
III Formal models of lexical semantics
? Associative (Findler 1979, Dumais 2005, CVS
models)
? Combinatorial (FrameNet)
? Algebraic (Kornai 2010)
IV Spectral learning
? Case frames and valency
? Spectral learning as data cleaning (Ng 2001)
? Brew and Schulte im Walde 2002 (German),
Nemeskey et al(Hungarian)
? Optionality in case frames
V Models with zeros
? Relating ungrammaticality and low probabil-
ity (Pereira 2000, Stefanowitsch 2006)
? Estimation errors, language distances (Kornai
1998, 2011)
? Quantization error
VI Minimum description length
? Kolmogorov complexity and universal gram-
mar (Clark 1994)
? MDL in morphology (Goldsmith 2000, Creutz
and Lagus 2002, 2005,...)
? MDL for weighted languages
? Ambiguity
? Discarding data ? yes, you can!
? Collapsing categories
VII New directions
? Spectral learning of HMMs (Hsu et al2009,
2012)
? of weighted automata (Balle and Mohri 2012)
? Feature selection, LASSO (Pajkossy 2013)
? Long Short-Term Memory (Monner and Reg-
gia 2012)
? Representation learning (Bengio et al2013)
Given the broad range of competing formal
models such as templates in speech, PCFGs and
various MCS models in syntax, logic-based and
association-based models in semantics, it is some-
what surprising that the bulk of the applied work
is still performed by HMMs. A particularly signifi-
cant case in point is provided by PCFGs, which
have not proved competitive with straight tri-
gram models. Undergirding the practical failure
of PCFGs is a more subtle theoretical problem,
that the nonterminals in better PCFGs cannot be
identified with the kind of nonterminal labels that
grammarians assume, and conversely, PCFGs em-
bodying some form of grammatical knowledge tend
not to outperform flatly initialized models that
make no use of such knowledge. A natural response
to this outcome is to retrench and use less power-
ful formal models, and the last lecture will be spent
in the subregular space of formal models even less
powerful than finite state automata.
Lecture 3: Subregular Languages
and Their Linguistic Relevance ?
Rogers and Yli-Jyra?
The difficulty of learning a regular or context-free
language in the limit from positive data gives a
motivation for studying non-Chomskyan language
classes. The lecture gives an overview of the tax-
onomy of the most important subregular classes of
languages and motivate their linguistic relevance
in phonology and syntax.
I Motivation
? Some classes of (sub)regular languages
? Learning (finite descriptions of) languages
? Identification in the limit from positive data
? Lattice leaners
II Finer subregular language classes
? The dot-depth hierarchy and the local and
piecewise hierarchies
? k-Local and k-Piecewise Sets
III Relevance to phonology
? Stress patterns
? Classifying subregular constraints
IV Probabilistic models of language
? Strictly Piecewise Distributions (Heinz and
Rogers 2010)
V Relevance to syntax
? Beyond the inadequate right-linear grammars
? Parsing via intersection and inverse morphism
12
? Subregular constraints on the structure anno-
tations
? Notions of (parameterized) locality in syntax.
The relevance of some parameterized subregular
language classes is shown through machine learn-
ing and typological arguments. Typological results
on a large set of languages (Heinz 2007, Heinz et al
2011) relate language types to the theory of sub-
regular language classes.
There are finite-state approaches to syn-
tax showing subregular properties. Although
structure-assigning syntax differs from phonotac-
tical constraints, the inadequacy of right-linear
grammars does not generalize to all finite-state
representations of syntax. The linguistic relevance
and descriptive adequacy are discussed, in particu-
lar, in the context of intersection parsing and con-
junctive representations of syntax.
Instructors
Anssi Yli-Jyra? is Academy Research Fellow of the
Academy of Finland and Visiting Fellow at Clare
Hall, Cambridge. His research focuses on finite-
state technology in phonology, morphology and
syntax. He is interested in weighted logic, depen-
dency complexity and machine learning.
James Rogers is Professor of Computer Science at
Earlham College, currently on sabbatical at the
Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science,
University of Delaware. His primary research in-
terests are in formal models of language and for-
mal language theory, particularly model-theoretic
approaches to these, and in cognitive science.
Gerald Penn teaches computer science at the Uni-
versity of Toronto, and is a Senior Member of
the IEEE. His research interests are in spoken
language processing, human-computer interaction,
and mathematical linguistics.
Andra?s Kornai teaches at the Algebra Depart-
ment of the Budapest Institute of Technology,
and leads the HLT group at the Computer and
Automation Research Institute of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences. He is interested in ev-
erything in the intersection of mathematics and
linguistics. For a list of his publications see
http://kornai.com/pub.html.
Online resources
Slides for the tutorial:
http://molweb.org/acl13tutorial.pdf
Bibliography:
http://molweb.org/acl13refs.pdf
Software:
http://molweb.org/acl13sw.pdf
13
