Plans, Inference, and Indirect Speech Acts I 
James F. Allen 
Computer Science Department 
University of Rochester 
Rochester, NY Iq627 
C. Raymond Perrault 
Computer Science Department 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada MSS IA7 
Introduction 
One of the central concerns of a theory of 
pra~at ics  is to explain what actions language users 
perform by making ut terances .  This concern i s  a lso 
re levant  to  the des igners  o f  conversat iona l  language 
unders tand ing  systems, espec ia l ly  those intended to  
cooperate  w i th  a user in the execut ion  o f  some task  
(e .g . ,  the Computer Consu l tant  task  d iscussed in Walker 
\[1978\]). 
All actions have effects on the world, and may have 
preconditions which must obtain for them to be 
successfully executed. For actions whose execution 
causes the generation of linguistic utterances (or 
s~eeqh acts), the preconditions may include the 
speaker/wrlter holding certain beliefs about the world, 
and hav ing certain intentions as to how it should change 
(\[Austin, 1962\], \[Searle, 1969\]). 
In Cohen \[1978\]  and Cohen and Perrault \ [1979\]  i t  is 
suggested that speech acts a? be defined in the context 
of a plannln~ s~stam (e.g., STRIPS of Fikes and Nllsson 
\[1971\]) i.e., as a class of parameterlzed procedures 
called operators, whose execution can modify the world. 
Each operator is labelled with formulas stating its 
preconditions and effects. 
The major problem of a theory of speech acts is 
relating the form of utterances to the acts which are 
performed by uttering them. Several syntactic devices 
can be used to indicate the speech act being performed: 
the most obvious are explicit performative verbs, mood, 
and in tonat ion .  But no combinat ion o f  these prov ides  a 
clear, single-valued function from form to illocutionary 
force. For example, (1.a)-(1.e) and even (1.f) can be 
requests to pass the salt. 
1.a) I want you to pass the sa l t .  
1.b) Do you have the  sa l t?  
1.c) Is  the sa l t  near you? 
1.d) I want the sa l t .  
1.e) Can you pass the sa l t?  
1 . f )  John asked me to ask you to  pass the sa l t .  
Furthermore, all these utterances can also be intended 
literally in some contexts. For example, a parent  
leav ing  a ch i ld  at the t ra in  s ta t ion  may ask "Do you 
know when the t ra in  leaves?"  expect ing  a yes /no answer 
as a conf i rmat ion .  
? This research was supported in part by the National 
Research Counci l  o f  Canada under Operat ing Grant A9285. 
ee Unless otherwise i nd icated ,  we take "speech act" to 
be synon~nnous with "illocutionary act." 
The object of this paper is to discuss, at an 
intuitive level, an extension to the work in Cohen 
\[1978\] to account for indirect speech acts. Because of 
space constraints, we will need to depend explicitly on 
the intuitive meanings of various terms such as p lan ,  
ac t ion ,  be l ieve ,  and goa l .  Those in teres ted  in a more 
r igorous  presentat ion  should see \ [A l len ,  1979\] or  
\[Perrault and Allen, forthcoming\]. The solution 
proposed here is based on the following slmple and 
independently motivated hypotheses: 
(2.a) Language users are ra t iona l  agents and thus 
speech acts  are purposefu l .  In par t i cu la r ,  they  
are a means by which one agent can a l te r  the 
be l ie fs  and goals  o f  another .  
(2 .b )  Rat iona l  agents are f requent ly  capable o f  
ident i fy ing  act ions  being performed by o thers  
and goals  being sought .  An essent ia l  par t  o f  
he lp fu l  behav ior  is  the adopt ion  by one agent o f  
a goal  o f  another ,  fo l lowed by an at tempt  to  
ach ieve i t .  For example, fo r  a s tore  c le rk  to  
rep ly  "How many do you want?" to  a customer who 
has asked "Where are the steaks? e, the c le rk  
must have in fer red  that  the customer wants 
s teaks ,  and then he must have decided to  get  
them himself. This might have occurred even if 
the clerk knew that the custamer had intended to 
get the steaks himself. Cooperative behavior 
must be accounted for independently of speech 
acts, for it often occurs without the use of 
language. 
(2.c) In order for a speaker to successfully perform a 
speech act, he must i n tend  that the hearer 
recogn ize  h i s  in tent ion  to  ach ieve cer ta in  
(per locut ionary)  e f fec ts ,  and must be l ieve  i t  i s  
l i ke ly  that  the hearer  w i l l  be able to  do so. 
This i s  the foundat ion  the account o f  
i l l oout ionary  acts proposed by Strawson \ [196q\ ]  
and Sear le  \ [1969\ ] ,  based on Gr ice \ [1957\ ] .  
(2 .d )  Language users know that  o thers  are capable o f  
ach iev ing  goa ls ,  o f  recogn iz ing  act ions ,  and o f  
cooperat ive  behav ior .  Fur thermore ,  they  know 
that others know they know, etc. Thus, a 
speaker may in tend  not  on ly  that  h i s  ac t ions  be 
recognized but a lso that  h i s  goa ls  be in /e r red ,  
and that  the hearer  be cooperat ive .  
(2.e) Thus a speaker can perform one speech act  A by 
per forming  another  speech act  B i f  he in tends  
that  the hearer  recogn ize  not  on ly  that  B was 
performed but  a l so  that  through cooperat ive  
behav ior  by the hearer ,  in tended by the speaker ,  
the e f fec ts  o f  A should be ach ieved.  
85 
Th__~e Speech Act Model 
In the sp i r i t  of  Sear le \ [1975\] ;  Gordon and Lakof f  
\ [1975\] ,  and Horgan \[1978\] .  we propose an account o f  
speech acts wi th  the fo l low ing  const i tuents :  
( \ ] .a )  For each language user S. a model o f  the be l ie fs  
and plans of  other  language users A with which 
s/he is  coenun icat ing .  Inc lud ing  a model o f  A 's  
model o f  S's be l ie fs  and p lans,  e tc ,  
(3 .b)  Two sets o f  operators  fo r  speech acts :  a set  o f  
sur face leve l  operators  which are rea l i zed  by 
utterances having specific syntactic and 
semantic features (e.g.. mood), and a set of 
l l l ocut ionary  leve l  operators  whlch are 
performed by per foming  sur face leve l  ones. The 
t l l ocut ionary  acts model the in tent  o f  the 
speaker Independent of  the form of  the 
u t terance .  
(3 .c)  A set  o f  p laus ib le  In ference ru les  wi th  which 
language users construct and reco~nlze plans. 
It Is convenient to view the  rules as either 
simple or augmented: A couple of examples of 
simple plan recognition rules are: 
fAction-Effect Znference\] 
"If agent S believes that agent A wants to 
do act ion  ACT then it is p laus ib le  that  3 
be l ieves  that  A wants to  achieve the 
effects of  ACT." 
\[Know-Positive Znferenoe\]  
"Zf S believes A wants to know whether a 
proposition P is true. then it is plausible 
that S believes that A wants to achieve P." 
Of course, given the conditions in the second 
inference above. S might also infer that A ham a 
goal of achieving not P. This is another 
possible inference. Which applies in a given 
setting is detemlned by the rating heuristics 
(see 3.d below). 
Simple ru les  can be augmented by adding the 
cond i t ion  that  the recogn izer  be l ieves  that  the 
o ther  agent intended him to  per fom the 
in fe rence .  An example of  an augmented 
recogn i t ion  ru le  i s :  
" I f  S be l ieves  that  A wants S to  re.=ognize 
A's  in tent ion  to do ACT.  then i t  i s  
plausible that  S believes that  A wants S to 
recognize A 's  in tent ion  to  achieve the 
e f fec ts  of  ACT." 
Not ice that the augmented rule is obta ined 
by intrc~uclng "S believes A wants" In the 
antecedent and consequent of  the s imple ru le .  
and by in terpret ing  "S recognizes A's  in tent ion"  
as "S comes to  be l ieve  that  A wants."  Theme 
rules can be constructed from the simple ones by 
assuming that language users share a model of 
the const ruct ion  and recogn i t ion  processes.  
(3.d)  A set  o f  heur i s t i cs  to  guide plan recogn i t ion  by 
ra t ing  the p laus ib i l i ty  o f  the outcomes. One o f  
the heuristics iS: "Decrease the plausibility 
of  an outcome in which an agent Is be l ieved to  
be execut ing an act ion  whose e f fec ts  he a l ready  
be l ieves  to  be t rue . "  Sor ip l~-der ived 
expectat ions  a lso prov ide  s~e o f  the cont ro l  o f  
the recogn i t ion  process.  
(3.e)  A set of  heuristics to  identify the obstacles in 
the recognized plan. These are the goals that 
the speaker cannot eas i ly  achieve w i thout  
ass is tance .  I f  we assume that  the hearer  i s  
cooperat ing with the speaker,  the  hearer  w i l l  
usua l ly  attempt to help achieve these goals  in 
his response. 
With these const i tuents ,  we have a model o f  he lp fu l  
behav ior :  an agent S hears an ut terance  from some other  
agent A. and then Ident i f ies  the sur face speech act .  
From th is .  S app l ies  the in fe rence  ru les  to  reconst ruct  
A's plan that  produced the u t terance .  S can then 
examine th i s  plan fo r  obstan les  and g ive  s he lp fu l  
response based on them. However, some o f  the in fe rence  
ru les  may have been augmented by the recogn i t ion  o f  
in tent ion  cond i t ion .  Thus. some obstac les  may have been 
intended to  be communicated by the speaker.  These 
spec i fy  whet t l l oout ionary  act  the speaker performed.  
an Example 
This may become c learer  i f  we cons ider  an example. 
Consider the plan that  must be  deduced In o rder  to  
answer (4 .e )  with ( . .b ) :  
(~.a)  A: Do you know when the Windsor t ra in  leaves? 
(4.b)  S: Yes, a t  3 :15.  
The seal  deduced from the l i te ra l  In terpretat ion  i s  that  
(4 .o )  A wants to  know whether S knows the depar ture  
time. 
From th is  goa l .  3 may in fer  that  A in  fac t  wants (4 .d)  
by the Know-Posi t ive Znference:  
( . .d )  A wants S to  know the depar ture  t ime 
from which S may in fer  that  
(q .e)  A wants $ to  inform Aot  the depar ture  t ime 
by the precond i t ion -act ion  In ference  (not  shown). S can 
then in fer ,  using the ac t ion -e f fec t  in fe rence ,  that  
(4 . f )  A wants to  know the depar ture  t ime. 
S'S response  (~.b)  ind icates  that  ha be l ieved  that  both 
(~.c)  and (4 . f )  were obstac les  that  S could overcome In 
th i s  response. 
However. a sentence such as (4 .a )  could o f ten  be 
ut tered  in a context  where the l i te ra l  goal  i s  not an 
obstacle. For instance. A might already know that $ 
knows the departure time. Met still utter (4.a). Xn 
such cases. A's goals are the same as If ha had uttered 
the request 
(4.g) When does the Windsor train leave? 
Hence (~.a) is often referred to as an indirect request. 
Thus we have descr ibed two d i f fe rent  
in terpretat ions  o f  (q .a ) :  
a) A said (q .a )  merely  expect ing a yes/no answer, 
but  $ answered wlth the ext ra  in fo rmat ion  in 
order  to  be he lp fu l ;  
b) A said (4 .a )  Intending that  S deduce h is  plan 
and rea l i ze  that  A rea l ly  wants to ~now the 
depar ture  t ime.  
86 
Theoretically, these are very different: (a) describes 
a yes/no question, while (b) describes an (indirect) 
request for the departure time. But the distinction is 
also IMportant for practical reasons. For instance, 
assume S is not able to tell A the departure time for 
some reason. With interpretation (a), S can simply 
answer the question, whereas with interpretation (b), S 
is obliged to glve a reason for not answering with the 
departure time. 
The distinction between these two cases is simply 
that in the latter, S believes that A intended S to make 
the inferences above and deduce the goal (q , f ) .  Thus 
the in ferences appl ied above were ac tua l ly  augmented 
in ferences  as described prev ious ly .  In the former 
interpretation, S does not be l ieve  A intended S to  make 
the in ferences ,  but did anyway in order to be he lp fu l .  
Concludln~ Remarks 
This speech act model was implemented as part of a 
program which plays the role of a clerk at a train 
station information booth \[Allen, 1979\]. The main 
results are the following: 
(5.a)  
(5.b) 
It accounts for a wide class of indirect forms 
of requests, assertions, and questions, 
including the examples in (I). This includes 
idiomatic forms such as (1.a)  and non-idlomatlc 
ones such as (1 . f ) .  I t  does so using on ly  a few 
independently necessary mechanisms. 
It maintains a distinction between t l l ocut tonary  
and per locut ionary  acts .  In par t i cu la r ,  i t  
accounts fo r  how a given response by one 
par t i c ipant  B to an ut terance by A may be the 
resu l t  o f  d i f fe rent  chains o f  in ferences made by 
B: e i ther  B bel ieved the response given was 
intended by A, or  8 bel ieved that  the response 
was he lp fu l  ( i .e . ,  non- intended) .  I t  a lso shows 
some ways in which the conversat iona l  context  
can favor  some in terpretat ions  over o thers .  
The main objective of our work is to simplify the 
syntactic and semantic components as much as possible by 
restricting their domain to literal meanings. The 
i nd i rec t  meanings are then handled at the plan leve l .  
There remain several  open problems In a theory o f  
speech acts which we be l ieve  to be la rge ly  independent 
o f  the issue o f  ind i rec t ion ,  notably  ident i fy ing  the 
features of a text which determine literal t l l ocut lonary  
force, as well as constructing representations adequate 
to express the relation between several lllocutionary 
force ind icators  which may be present in one sentence  
(see \ [Lakof f ,  197q\] and \[Morgan, 1973\]).  
Bibliography 
Al len ,  J.F. A Plan-Based Approach to  Speech Ac_tt 
Recognit ion.  Ph.D. thes i s ,  Computer Science 
Department, Un ivers i ty  o f  Toronto,  1979. 
Aust in,  J .L. How To Do Thln~s With Words. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1962. 
Brown, G.P. An Approach to Processing Task-Oriented 
Dialogue, unpublished ms, MIT, 1978. 
Cohen, P.R. On Znowin 6 What to Say: Plannin~ Speech 
Acts, TR 118, Computer Science Department, 
Un ivers i ty  o f  Toronto,  January 1978. 
Cohen, P.R. and Per rau l t ,  C.N. Elements o f  a Plan 
Based Theory of Speech Acts, forthcoming. 
Cole, P. and Morgan, J .L.  Syntax and Semantics, Vol 3: 
Speech Acts. New York, Academic Press, 1975. 
F lkes,  R.E. and Nl lsson,  N.J. STRIPS: A New Approach 
to the App l i ca t ion  o f  Theorem Proving to Problem 
Solv ing.  Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l i~ence  2, 189-205, 1971. 
Gordon, D. and Lakof f ,  G. Conversat ional  Postu lates ,  
in Cole and Morgan (ads) ,  1975. 
Grice,  H.H. Meaning. Ph i l .  Rev. 66, 377-388, 1957. 
Lakof f ,  O. Syntact ic  Amalgams. CL__SS 10, 321-3qU, 197q. 
Morgan, J .L.  Sentence F ra~ents  and the Notion 
'Sentence,' in B.B. Kachru et  al. (ads), Issues 
in Lln~uistics. Urbana, Un ivers i ty  of Illinois 
Press, 1973. 
Morgan, J.L. Towards a Rat ional  Model of Discourse 
Comprehension, in Proceedin~s __2nd Conf. 
Theoret i ca l  Issues in Natural  Language Procesain 6, 
Champaign-Urbana, 1978. 
Per rau l t ,  C.R. and A l len ,  J.F. A 'P lan-Based Analys is  
o f  Ind i rec t  Speech Acts, in p reparat ion .  
Sear le,  J.R. Speech Acts. New York, Cambridge 
University Press, 1969. 
Searle,  J.R. Ind i rec t  Speech Acts, in Cole and Morgan 
(eda),  1975. 
Strawson, P.F. Intention and Convention in Speech Acts.  
Phi l .  Rev. 73, q, q39-~60, 196~. 
Walker, D.E. Understandin~ Spoken Language. New York, 
North Hol land, 1978. 
87 

