UNGRAMHATICALITY AND EXTRA-GRAMMATICALITY IN NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING SYSTEMS 
Stan C. Kwasny as 
The Ohio State Univers i ty  
Columbus, Ohio 
1. Int roduct ion 
Among the components included in Natural Language 
Understanding (NLU) systems is a grammar which spec i f ies  
much of  the l ingu is t i c  s t ructure  of  the utterances that  
can be expected. However, i t  is  cer ta in  that inputs 
that are ill-formed with respect to the grammar will be 
received, both because people regularly form 
ungra=cmatical utterances and because there are a variety 
of forms that cannot be readily included in current 
grammatical models and are hence "extra-grammatical". 
These might be rejected, but as Wilks stresses, 
"...understanding requires, at the very least, ... some 
attempt to interpret, rather than merely reject, what 
seem to be ill-formed utterances." \[WIL76\] 
This paper invest igates  several language phenomena 
commonly considered ungrammatical or extra-grammatical 
and proposes techniques directed at in tegrat ing  them as 
much as possible into the conventional grammatical 
processing performed by NLU systems through Augmented 
Transition Network (ATN) grammars. For each NLU system, 
a "normative" grammar is assumed which specifies the 
structure of well-formed inputs. Rules that are both 
manually added to the original grammar or automatically 
constructed during parsing analyze the ill-formed input. 
The ill-formedness is shown at the completion of a parse 
by deviance from fully grammatical structures. We have 
been able to do th is  processing while preserving the 
structural characteristics of the original grammar and 
i t s  inherent e f f i c iency .  
Some of the phenomena discussed have been 
considered previously in par t i cu la r  NLU systems, see for  
example the e l l ips i s  handling in LIFER \[HEN??\]. Some 
techniques similar to ours have been used for parsing, 
see for example the conjunction mechanism in LUNAR 
\[WOO?3). On the l ingu is t i c  side, Chomsky \[CHO6q\] and 
Katz \[KAT6q\], among others have considered the treatment 
of ungrammatlcality in Transformational Grammar 
theories. The study closest to ours is that of 
Weischedel and Black \[WEI?9\]. The present study is 
distinguished by the range of phenomena considered, i t s  
s t ruc tura l  and e f f i c iency  goals, and the inclusion of  
the techniques proposed with in one implementation. 
This paper looks at these problems, proposes 
mechanisms aimed at solving the problems, and describes 
how these mechanisms are used. At the end, some 
extensions are suggested. Unless otherwise noted, all 
ideas have been tested through implementation. A more 
deta i led and extended discussion of a l l  points may be 
found in Kwasny \[KWA?9\]. 
I I .  Language Phenomena 
Success in handling ungrammatical and 
extra-grammatical input depends on two factors .  The 
first is the identification of types of ill-formednese 
and the patterns they fo l low.  The second is the 
re la t ing  of  i l l - fo rmed input to the parsing path of  a 
grammatical input the user intends. This section 
introduces the types o f  i l l - formedness we have studied, 
ee Current Address: 
Computer Science Department 
Indiana Univers i ty  
Bloomington, Indiana 
By 
Norman K. Sondheimer 
Sperry Univac 
Blue Bell, Pennsylvania 
and discusses their relationship 
structures in terms of ATN grammars. 
to grammatical 
II.I Co-Occurrence Violations 
Our first class of errors can be connected to 
co-occurrence restrictions within a sentence. There are 
many occassions in a sentence where two parts or more 
must agree (= indicates an i l l - fo rmed or ungrammatical 
sentence): 
=Draw a circles. 
"I wi l l  stay from now under midnight. 
The errors in the above involve coordination between the 
underlined words. The first example illustrates simple 
agreement problems. The second involves a complicated 
re la t ion  between at least  the three underlined terms. 
Such phenomena do occur natura l ly .  For example, 
Shore ($H077\] analyzes fifty-six freshman English papers 
wr i t ten  by Black col lege students and reveals patterns 
o f  nonstandard usage ranging from uninf lected p lu ra l s ,  
possessives, and th i rd  person s ingulars to 
over in f lec t ion  (use of  inappropr iate endings.) 
For co-occurrence v io la t ions ,  the blocks that  keep 
inputs from being parsed as the user intended ar ise from 
a fa i lu re  o f  a tes t  on an arc or the fa i lu re  to sa t i s fy  
an arc type res t r i c t ion ,  e .g . ,  fa i lu re  o f  a word to be 
in the correct  category. The essent ia l  block in the 
f i r s t  example would l i ke ly  occur on an agreement test  on 
an arc accepting a noun, The essent ia l  blockage in the 
second example is likely to come from fa i lu re  of the arc 
testing the final preposition. 
11.2 Ellipsis and Extraneous Terms 
In handling e l l ips i s ,  the most re levant d i s t inc t ion  
to make is between contextual  and telegraphic e l l ips i s .  
Contextual e l l ips i s  occurs when a form only makes 
proper sense in the context o f  other sentences. For 
example, the form 
ePresident Carter has. 
seems ungrammatical without the preceding question form 
Who has a daughter named Amy? 
President Carter has. 
Telegraphic ellipsis, on the other hand, occurs 
when a form only makes proper sense in a particular 
s i tuat ion .  For example, the tome 
3 chairs no wait ing (sign in barber shop) 
Yanks sp l i t  (headline in sports sect ion) 
P ro f i t  margins for  each product 
(query submitted to a NLU system) 
19 
are cases of telegraphic ellipsis with the situation 
noted In parentheses. The final example Is from an 
exper imenta l  study of NLU for management in fo rmat ion  
which ind icated  that  such forms must be considered 
\[MAL75\]. 
Another type of unarammaticality related to 
ellipsis occurs when the user puts unnecessary words or 
phrases In an utterance. The reason for an extra word 
may be a change of intention In the middle of an 
utterance, an oversight, or simply for emphasis. For 
example, 
? Draw a llne with from here to there. 
"L i s t  p r i ces  o f  s ing le  un i t  p r i ces  fo r  72 and 73. 
The second example comes from Malhotra \[MALT5\]. 
The best way to see the errors In terms of the ATN 
is to think of the user as trylng to complete a path 
through the grammar, but having produced an input that 
has too many or too few forms necessary to traverse all 
arcs, 
II.3 Conjunct ion 
Conjunct ion i s  an extremely  common phenomenon, but 
i t  i s  seldom d i rec t ly  t reated  in 8 grammar. We have 
considered severa l  typos o f  con junct ion .  
Simple forms o f  con junct ion  occur most f requent ly ,  
as in 
John loves  Mary and hates Sue. 
Gapping occurs when in terna l  segments o f  the second 
con junct  are miss ina,  as in 
John loves  Mary and Wary John.  
The l i s t  form o f  con junct ion  occurs when more than two 
elements are jo ined  in a s ing le  phrase, as in 
John loves Wary. Sue, Nancy. end B i l l .  
Correlative con junct ion  occurs in sentences to 
coordinate the Joining of constituents, as in 
John both loves and hates Sue. 
The reason conJuncts are genera l ly  le f t  out  o f  
grammars is  that  they can appear in  so many p laces that  
inc lus ion  would dramat ica l ly  increase the s ize  o f  the 
grammar. The same argument applies to  the ungrammatical 
phenomena. Since they a l low so much var ia t ion  compared 
to grammatical forms, inc lud ing  them with  ex is t ing  
techniques would dramatically increase the size oF a 
gram~aar. Further  there  is  a rea l  d i s t inc t ion  in  terms 
of completeness and clarity of intent between 
grammatical and ungrammatical forms. Hence we fee l  
justified In suggesting speciai techniques fo r  their 
treatment. 
I I I .  Proposed Mechanisms and How They Apply 
The fo l low ing  presentat ion  o f  our  techniques 
assumes an understanding o f  the ATN model. The 
techniques are appl ied to the langumae phenomena 
discussed ~n the prev ious section. 
20 
I I I . l  Re laxat ion  Techniques 
The f i r s t  two methods descr ibed are re laxat ion  
methods which a l low the successfu l  t raversa l  o f  ATN arcs 
that  miaht not o therwise  be t raversed .  Durin8 pars ina ,  
whenever an arc cannot be taken,  a check i s  made to see 
i f  some form o f  re laxat ion  can apply .  I f  i t  can. then a 
backtrack  po in t  i s  created which inc ludes  the re laxed  
vers ion  o f  the arc .  These a l te rnat ives  are not 
considered unt i l  a f te r  a l l  poss ib le  8rammatlcsl  paths 
have been attempted thereby insur tn8  that  8rammaticel  
inputs  are s t i l l  handled cor rect ly .  Re laxat ion  o f  
p rev ious ly  re laxed  arcs is  a lso  poss ib le .  Two methods 
o f  re laxat ion  have been Invest igated .  
Our f i r s t  method invo lves  re lax ln8  a tes t  on an 
arc ,  s imi la r  to the method used by Weisohedel in  
\[WEI79\]. Test re laxat ion  occurs when the tes t  por t ion  
of an arc contains a relaxable predicate and the test 
fa i l s .  Two methods o f  tes t  re laxat ion  have been 
ident i f ied  and implemented based on pred icate  type.  
Predicates can be desianated by the grammar writer as 
either absolutely violable in which case the opposite 
value of the predicate (determined by the LISP function 
NOT applied to the predicate) Is substituted for the 
predicate during relaxation or conditionally violable in 
which case s substitute predicate is provided. For 
example, consider the following to be a test that fails: 
(AND 
(INFLECTING V) 
(INTRAN3 V)) 
I f  the pred icate  INFLECTING was dec lared abso lu te ly  
v io lab le  and i t s  use in  th i s  tes t  re turned the va lue 
NIL, then the negat ion o f  (INFLECTING Y) would rep lace  
It in the test creating a new arc with the test: 
(AND 
T 
(INTRANS V)) 
I f  INTRANS were cond i t iona l ly  v io lab le  with the 
substitute predicate TRANS, then the following test 
would appear on the new arc :  
(AND 
(INFLECTING V) 
(TRANS V)) 
Whenever more than one tes t  in a fa i l ing  arc i s  
v io lab le ,  a l l  poss ib le  s ing le  re laxat ions  are attempted 
independent ly .  Abso lu te ly  v io lab le  pred icates  can be 
permitted in cases where the test describes some 
super f i c ia l  cons is tency  checking or where the tes t ' s  
fa i lu re  or  success doesn ' t  have a d i rec t  a f fec t  on 
meaning, wh i le  cond i t iona l ly  v io lab le  pred icates  apply  
to  pred icates  which must be re laxed caut ious ly  or  e lse  
loss of  meaning may result. 
ChomsMy discusses the not ion  o f  o rgan iz ing  word 
categor ies  h ie rarch ica l ly  in deve lop ing his ideas on 
degrees of grammaticalness.  We have app l ied  and 
extended these ideas In our second method o f  re laxat ion  
ca l led  catesory  re laxat ion .  In th i s  method, the 8rammar 
wr i te r  produces, along with the grammar, a h ie rarchy  
descr ib ing  the re la t ionsh ip  amen8 words, ca tegor ies ,  and 
phrase types which i s  u t i l i zed  by the re laxat ion  
mechanism to const ruct  re laxed  vers ions  o f  arcs that  
h ive fa i led .  When an arc fa i l s  because o f  an arc type 
failure (i.e., because a particular word, category, or 
phrase was not found) a new arc (or  arcs)  may be created 
according to the descr ip t ion  o f  the word, ca tegory ,  or  
phrase in the h ie rarchy .  Typ ica l ly .  PUSH arcs w i l l  
relax to PUSH arcs, CAT arcs to CAT or PUSH arcs, and 
WRD or HEM arcs to CAT arcs .  Consider .  fo r  example, the 
syntact i c  cateaory  h ie rarchy  fo r  pronouns shown in 
F igure 1. For th i s  example, the cateaory  re laxat ion  
mechanism would allow the relaxation of PERSONAL 
pronouns to include the category PRONOUN. The arc 
produced from category relaxation of PERSONAL pronouns 
a lso  inc ludes  the subcategor ies  REFLEXIVE and 
DEMONSTRATIVE in o rder  to  expand the scope o f  terms 
during relaxation. As with test relaxation, successive 
relaxations could occur. 
For both methods of relaxation, "deviance notes" 
are generated which describe the nature of the 
relaxation in each case. Where multiple types or 
multiple levels of relaxation occur, a note is generated 
for each of these. The entire list of deviance notes 
accompanies the final structure produced by the parser. 
In this way, the final structure is marked as deviant 
and the nature of the deviance is available for use by 
other components of the understanding system. 
In our implementation, test relaxation has been 
fu l ly  implemented, wh i le  category  re laxat ion  has been 
implemented fo r  a l l  cases except  those invo lv ing  PUSH 
arcs. Such an implementation is anticipated, but 
requires a modification to our backtracking algorithm. 
I I I .2  Co-Occurrence and Re laxat ion  
The solution being proposed to handled forms that 
are deviant because of co-occurrence violations centers 
around the use of relaxation methods. Where simple 
tests exist within a grammar to filter out unacceptable 
forms of the type noted above, these tests may be 
relaxed to allow the acceptance of these forms. This 
doesn't eliminate the need for such tests since these 
tests help in disambiguation and provide a means by 
which sentences are marked as having violated certain 
rules. 
For co-occurrence violations, the point in the 
grammar where parsing becomes blocked is often exactly 
where the test or category violation occurs. An arc at 
that point is being attempted and fails due to a failure 
of the co-occurrence test or categorization 
requirements. Relaxation is then applied and an 
alternative generated which may be explored at a later 
point via backtracking. For example, the sentence: 
WJohn love  Mary 
shows a disagreement between the subject (John) and the 
verb (love). Most probably this would show up during 
parsing when an arc is attempted which is expecting the 
verb of the sentence. The test would fall and the 
traversal would not be allowed. At that point, an 
ungrammatical alternative is created for later 
backtracking to consider. 
III.) Patterns and the Pattern Arc 
In this section, relaxation techniques, as app l ied  
to the grammar itself, are introduced through the use of  
patterns and pattern-matching algorithms. Other systems 
have used patterns for parsing. We have devised a 
powerful method of integrating, within the ATN 
formalism, patterns which are flexible and useful. 
In our current formulation, which we have 
implemented and are now tes t ing ,  a pat tern  i s  a l inear  
sequence of ATN arcs which is matched against the input 
string. A pattern arc (PAT) has been added to the ATN 
formalism whose form is similar to that of other arcs: 
(PAT <pat apec> <test> <act> a <term>) 
The pattern specification (<pat spec>) is defined as: 
<pat spec> ::: (<pat t> <mode> a) 
21 
<part> ::= (<p arc>*) 
<pat name> 
<mode> : := UNANCHOR 
OPTIONAL 
SKIP 
<p arc> : :=  <arc> 
> <arc> 
<pat name> ::= user-assiGned pattern name 
> 
The pattern (<part>) is either the name of a pattern, a 
">", or a list of ATN arcs, each of which may be 
preceded by the symbol ">", while the pattern mode 
(<mode>) can be any of the keywords, UNANCHOR, OPTIONAL, 
or SKIP. These are discussed below. To refer to 
patterns by name, a dictionary of patterns is supported. 
A dictionary of arcs is also supported, allowing the 
referencing of arcs by name as well. Further, named 
arcs are defined as macros, allowing the dictionary and 
the grammar to be substantially reduced in size. 
THE PATTERN MATCHER 
Pattern matching proceeds by matching each arc in 
the pattern against the input string, but is affected by 
the chosen "mode" of matching. Since the individual 
component arcs are ,  in a sense, complex pat terns ,  the 
ATN in terpreter  can be cons idered par t  o f  the matching 
a lgor i thm as we l l .  In ares w i th in  pat terns ,  exp l i c i t  
t rans fer  to  a new s ta te  i s  ignored and the next  arc 
at tempted on success i s  the one fo l low ing  in  the 
pat tern .  An are in  a pat tern  prefaced by ">"  can be 
cons idered opt iona l ,  i f  the OPTIONAL mode has been 
se lec ted  to  ac t ivate  th i s  feature .  When th i s  is  done, 
the matching a lgor i thm s t i l l  a t tempts  to  match opt iona l  
area,  but  may ignore  them. A pat tern  unanchor ing 
capab i l i ty  is  ac t ivated  by spec i fy ing  the mode UNANCHOR. 
In this mode, patterns are permitted to skip words prior 
to matching. Finally, selection of the SKIP mode 
results in words being ignored between matches of the 
arcs within a pattern. This is a generalization of the 
UNANCHOR mode. 
Pat tern  matching again resu l ts  in dev iance notes .  
For pat terns ,  they  conta in  in fo rmat ion  necessary to  
determine how matching succeeded. 
SOURCE OF PATTERNS 
An automat ic  pat tern  generat ion  mechanism has been 
implemented us ing the t race  o f  the cur rent  execut ion  
path to  produce a pat tern .  This i s  invoked by us ing a 
">" as the pat tern  name. Pat terns  produced in th i s  
fash ion  conta in  on ly  those arcs t raversed  at  the cur rent  
leve l  o f  recurs ion  in the network ,  a l though we are 
p lann ing  to implement a genera l i za t ion  o? th i s  in which 
PUSH arcs can be automatically replaced by their 
subnet~ork paths .  Each are in an automat ic  pat tern  i s  
marked as opt iona l .  Pat terns  can a lso  be const ructed  
dynamica l ly  in  prec ise ly  the same way grammatical  
structures are built using BUILDQ. The vehicle by which 
this is accomplished is discussed next. 
AUTOMATIC PRODUCTION OF ARCS 
Pat tern  arcs enter  the grammar in  two ways. They 
are manua l ly  wr i t ten  in to  the grammar in  those cases 
where the ungrammat ica l i t ies  are common and they  are 
added to the grammar automat ica l ly  in  those cases where 
the ungrammat ica l i ty  i s  dependent on context .  Pat tern  
arcs produced dynamica l ly  enter  the grammar through one 
o f  two dev ices .  They may be const ructed  as needed by 
special macro arcs or they may be constructed for future 
use through an expectation mechanism. 
As the expectatlon-based parsing efforts clearly 
show, syntactic elements especially words conta in  
important  c lues  on process ing.  Indeed. we a lso  have 
found It useful to make the ATN mechanism more "active" 
by allowing it to produce new arcs based on such clues. 
TO achieve th i s ,  the CAT, MEM, TBT, and WRD arcs have 
been genera l i zed  and four new "macro" arcs ,  known as 
CAT e. HEM e, TST a, and WRD e. have been added to the ATN 
formalism. These are similar In every way to their 
counterpar ts ,  except that  as a f ina l  ac t ion ,  instead of 
indicating the state to which the traversal leads, a new 
arc i s  oonst ructed dynamica l ly  and immediately executed.  
The d i f fe rence  in the form that  the new arc takes i s  
seen in  the fo l low ing  pa i r  where <crest  act> Is  used to 
de f ine  the dynamic arc :  
(CAT <cat> <test> <act> a <term >) 
(CAT e <cat> <test> <act> a <creat  act>) 
Arcs computed by macro arcs can be of any type permitted 
by the ATN, but one of the most useful arcs to compute 
in this manner is the PAT arc discussed above. 
EXPECTATIONS 
The macro arc forces immediate execution of an arc. 
Arcs may also be computed and temporarily added to the 
grammar for l a te r  execution through an "expectat ion"  
mechanism. Expectat ions  are performed as ac t ions  w i th in  
arcs (analogous to the HOLD act ion  fo r  pars ing 
structures) or as actions elsewhere In the MLU system 
(e.g., during generation when particular types of 
responses can be fo reseen) .  Two forms are a l lowed:  
(EXPECT <crest act> <state>) 
(EXPECT <crest act> ) 
In the first case, the arc created is bound to a state 
as specified. When later processing leads to that 
s ta te ,  the expected arc will be attempted as one 
alternative at that state. In the second case, where no 
state is specified, the effect is to attempt the arc at 
every state visited dur ing the parse. 
The range of an expectat ion  produced dur ing pars ing 
is ordinarily l im i ted  to  a single sentence, with the arc 
disappearing after it has been used; however, the start 
state, S e, is reserved for expectations intended to be 
active at the beginning of the next sentence. These 
wi l l  d isappear  in turn  at  the end- -~prooess ing  fo r  that  
sentence. 
IIZ.q Patterns t Elllpsls~ and Extraneous Forms 
The Pattern arc i s  proposed as the pr imary 
mechanism for  handl ing e l l ips i s  and extraneous forms. A 
Pat tern  arc can be seen as captur ing  a s ing le  path 
through a netWOrk. The matcher g ives  some freedom In 
how that  path re la tes  to a s t r ing .  We propose that  the 
appropr ia te  pars ing path through a network re la tes  to an 
e l l ip t i ca l  sentence or  one with ext ra  words in the same 
way. With contextua l  e l l ips i s ,  the re la t ionsh ip  w i l l  be 
in having some o f  the arcs on the cor rect  path not  
satisfied. In Pattern arcs, these will be represented 
by arcs marked as opt iona l .  With contextua l  e l l ips i s ,  
d ia logue context  w i l l  p rov ide  the de fau l ts  for  the 
missing components. With Pattern arcs ,  the deviance 
notes will show what was left out and the other 
components in the ~U system will be responsible for 
supplying the values. 
The source of patterns for contextual ellipsis is 
important .  In L i fe r  \[HEN77\], the prev ious  user input  
can be seen as a pattern for elliptical processing of 
the current input. The automatic pattern generator 
developed here, along with the expectat ion  mechanism, 
w i l l  capture th i s  leve l  o f  process ing .  But with the 
ab i l i ty  to const ruct  a rb i t ra ry  pat terns  and to add them 
to the grammar from other  components of the MLU system, 
our approach can acccomplish much more. For example, a 
quest ion  generat ion  rout ine  could add an expectat ion  o f  
a yes/no answer in f ront  o f  a t ransformed rephras ing  o f  
a quest ion ,  as in 
Did Amy klas anyone? 
Yes, J ismy was kissed. 
Patterns for telegraphic ellipsis will have to be 
added to the grammar manually. Generally, patterns of 
usage must be identified, say in a study like that of 
Malhotra, so that appropriate patterns can be 
constructed. Patterns for extraneous forms will also be 
added In advance. These w i l l  e i ther  use the unachor 
opt ion  In o rder  to sk ip  fa l se  s tar ts ,  or  dynamica l ly  
produced pat terns  to catch repet i t ions  fo r  emphasis. In 
genera l ,  on ly  a l im i ted  number o f  these pat terns  should 
be requ i red .  The value o f  the pat tern  mechanism here,  
espec ia l l y  In the case of te legraph ic  e l l ips i s ,  w i l l  be 
in connect ing the ungrammatical to grammatical  forms. 
III.5 Conjunct ion and Macro Arcs 
Pat tern  arcs are a l so  proposed as the pr imary  
mechanism for  handl ing  con junct ion .  The ra t iona le  fo r  
th i s  i s  the o f ten  noted connect ion between con junct ion  
and e l l ips i s ,  see fo r  example Ha l l tday  and Haman 
\[HAL75\]. This i s  c lear  wi th  gapping,  as in the 
fo l low ing  where the parentheses show the missing 
component 
John loves Mary and Mary ( loves)  John. 
BUt i t  a l so  can be seen wi th  o ther  forms, as in 
John loves  Mary and (John) hates Sue. 
John loves  Hary, (John loves)  Sue, (John loves)  
Mancy, and (John loves)  B i l l .  
Whenever a con junct ion  i s  seen, a pat tern  i s  developed 
from the a l ready  ident i f ied  elements and matched aga ins t  
the remaining segments of i nput .  The heur i s t i cs  for 
dec id ing from which leve l  to produce the pat tern  fo rce  
the most genera l  in terpretat ion  in order  to encourage an 
e l l ip t i ca l  read ing .  
A l l  o f  the forms o f  con junct ion  descr ibed above are 
t reated  through a g loba l ly  def ined set  o f  "con junct ion  
arcs"  (Some res t r i c ted  cases, such as "and" fo l low ing  
"between",  have the con junct ion  bu i l t  in to  the grammar). 
In genera l ,  th i s  set  w i l l  be made up o f  macro arcs which 
compute Pat tern  arcs .  The automatic  pat tern  mechanism 
is  heav i ly  used. With simple con junct ions ,  the 
r ightmost  elements in the pat terns  are matched. 
In terna l  elements In pat terns  are skipped wi th  gapping.  
The l l s t  form o f  con junct ion  can a lso  be handled through 
the care fu l  const ruct ion  o f  dynamic pat terns  which are 
then expected at  a la ter  po in t .  Cor re la t ives  are 
treated similarly, with expectations based on the 
dynamic building of patterns. 
There are a number o f  deta i l s  in our proposal  which 
w i l l  not be presented.  There are a lso  v i s ib le  l im i ts .  
i t  i s  ins t ruct ive  to  compare the proposal  to the SYSCONj 
facility of Woods \[W0073\]. It treats conjunction as 
22 
showing alternative ways of continuing a sentence. This 
allows for sentences such as 
He drove his car through and broke a plate glass 
window. 
which at best we will accept with a misleading deviance 
note.  However, i t  can not handle the obvious e l l ip t i ca l  
cases, such gapping, or the t ight ly  constra ined cases, 
such as correlatives. We expect to continue 
investigating the pattern approach. 
I I I .6  Interaction of Techniques 
As grammatical processing proceeds, ungrammatical 
possibilities are continually being suggested from the 
various mechanisms we have implemented. To coordinate 
all of these activities, the backtracking mechanism has 
been improved to keep track of the:le alternatives. All 
paths in the original grammar are attempted first. Only 
when these all fail are the conjunction alternatives and 
the manually added and dynamical ly  produced 
ungrammatical alternatives tried. All of the 
alternatives of these sorts connected with a single 
state can be thought of as a single possibility. A 
selection mechanism is used to determine which backtrack 
point among the many potential alternatives is worth 
exploring next. Currently, we use a method also used by 
Welschedel and Black \[WEI79\] of selecting the 
alternative with the longest path length. 
IV. Conclusion and Open Questions 
These results are significant, we believe, because 
they extend the state of the art in several ways. Most 
obvious are the following: 
The use of the category hierarchy  to handle arc 
type failures; 
The use of the pattern mechanism to allow for 
contextual ellipsis and gapping; 
More generally, the use of patterns to allow for 
many sorts of ellipsis and conjunctions; and 
Finally, the orchestration of all of the techniques 
in one coherent system, where because all 
grammatical alternatives are tried first and no 
modifications are made to the original grammar, its 
inherent efficiency and structure are preserved. 
IV.1 Open Problems 
Various questions for further research have arisen 
during the course of this work. The most important of 
these are discussed here. 
Better control must be exercised over the selection 
of viable alternatives when ungrammatical possibilities 
are being attempted. The longest-path heuristic is 
somewhat weak. The process that decides this would need 
to take into consideration, among other things, whether 
to allow relaxation of a criteria applied to the subject 
or to the verb in a case where the subject and verb do 
not agree. The current path length heuristic would 
always relax the verb which is clearly not always 
correct. 
No consideration has been given to the possible 
connection of one error wlth another. In some cases, 
one error can lead to or affect another. 
Several other types of ill-formedness have not been 
considered in th i s  study, fo r  example, idioms, 
metaphors, incor rect  word order ,  run together  sentences, 
incor rect  punctuat ion,  misspe l l ing ,  and presuppos i t iona l  
fa i lu re .  E i ther  l i t t le  i s  known about these processes 
or they have been studied elsewhere independent ly .  In 
e i ther  case, work remains to be done. 
V. Acknowledgments 
We wish to acknowledge the comments of Ralph 
Weischedel and Marc Fogel on previous drafts of this 
paper. Although we would like to blame them, any 
shortcomings are clearly our own fault. 
VI. Bibliography 
\[CHO6q\] 
\[FOD64\] 
\[HAL76\] 
(HEN77\] 
\[KAT643 
\[KWA793 
\[MAL75\] 
\[SHO77\] 
\[WEI79\] 
\[ WIL76 \] 
\[wo0733 
Chomsky, N., "Degrees o f  Grammaticalness," in 
\[FOD6~\], 38q-389. 
Fodor, J. A. and J. J. Katz, The Structure of 
Language: Readings in the Phi losophy o f  
Language, P rent ice -Ha l l ,  Englewood C l i f f s ,  New 
Jersey, 196q. 
Ha l l iday ,  M.A.K. and R. Hasan, Cohesion in 
Engl ish,  Longman, London, 1976. 
Hendrlx,  G. G., "The LIFER Manual," Technical  
Note 138, Artificial Intelligence Center, 
Stanford Research Ins t i tu te ,  Menlo Park, 
Ca l i fo rn ia ,  February, 1977. 
Katz, J . J . ,  "Semi-Sentences," in \[FOD64\], 
qoo-q16. 
Kwasny, S., "Treatment o f  Ungrammatical and 
Extragrammatical Phenomena in Natura l  Language 
Understanding Systems," PhD dissertation 
(forthcoming), Ohio State University, 1979. 
Malhotra, A., "Design Criteria for a 
Knowledge-Based English Language System for 
Management: An Experimental Analysis," MAC 
TR-I~6, M. I .T . ,  Cambridge, Ha, February, 1975. 
Shores, D .L . ,  "Black Engl ish and Black 
At t i tudes , "  in Papers in Language Var ia t ion .  
D .L .  Shores and C. PT-Hines (Ed--~. \] ~e  
Un ivers i ty  of Alabama Press, Un ivers i ty ,  
Alabama, 1977. 
Weischedel, R. M., and J. Black, "Responding to 
Potentially Unparseable Sentences," manuscript, 
Department of Computer and Information 
Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, 
Delaware, 1979. 
Wilka, Y., "Natural Language Understanding 
Systems Within the A.I. Paradigm: A Survey," 
American Journal of Computational Lin~uistlcs, 
~h~-#-~ 1T 1976. 
Woods, W. A2 "An Experimental Parsing System 
for Transition Network Grammars," in Natural 
Language Processing, R. Muslin (Ed . ) ,  
Algorithmlcs Press, 1973. 
PRONOUN 
REFLEXIVE /;o i 
he she . . .  yourse l f  . . .  th i s  that  . . .  
F igure 1. A Category Hierarchy 
23 

