DIKSIGN FOR I)IALOGUE COMPREHENSION 
William C. Mann 
USC Information Sciences Institute 
Marina del Rey, CA 
April, 1979 
This paper describes aspects of the design of a dialogue 
comprehension system, DCS, currently being Implemented. It 
concent ra tes  on a few design innovat ions rather than the 
descr ip t ion  of the who le  system. The three areas of 
innovation discussed are: 
1. The re lat ion of the DCS design to Speech Act theory 
and Dialogue Game theory,  
Z. Design assumpt ions about how to ident i fy  the "best" 
interpretat ion among several alternatives, and a 
method, called Preeminence Scheduling, fo r  
implement ing those assumptions, 
3. A now control  structure, tlearsay-3, that extends 
the control  structure of l learsay-l\[ and makes 
Preeminence Scheduling fa i r l y  straightforward. 
I. Dialogue Games, Speech Acts and DCS -- Examinat ion 
of actua l  human dia logue reveals s t ructure  xtend ing over 
? ~overal tu rns  and corresponding to part lcular  issues that  the 
participants raise and resolve. Our past work  on dialogue has 
led to an account  of this structure,  Dialogue Game theory  
fLor in  & Moore 1978; Moore, l ,evlu & Mann 1977\]. This 
theory  claims that dialogues (and other language uses as 
we l l )  are comprehensible only because the participants are 
making avai lable to each other the knowledge of  the goals 
they  are pursuing, at ~he p~omcnt, Patterns of these goals 
recur ,  represent ing  language conventions: their  theoret ical  
representat ions  are cal led Dialogue Games. 
If  a speaker  employs a part icular  Dialogue Game, that  
fact  must  be recognized by the hearer if  the speaker is to 
ach ieve  the desired effect. In other words, Dialogue Game 
recogn i t ion  is an essential  part of dialogue comprehension. 
Invok ing  a game is an act, and terminat ing the ongoing use 
of a game is also an act. 
Dialogue game theory has recent ly  boon extended 
\ [Mann 1079\]  in a way makes these game-related acts 
expl ic i t  Acts of  Bidding a game, Accepting a bid, and Bidding 
te rminat ion  are fo rmal ly  defined as speech acts, comparable 
to o thers  In speech act theory.  So, for example, in the 
d ia logue  f ragment  below, 
Ct "Morn, l 'm hungry . "  
M." "Did you do a good Job on your  Geography 
homework?"  
the f i r s t  tu rn  bids a game called the Permission Seeking 
game,  and the second turn  refuses that bid and bids the 
In fo rmat ion  5cak ing  game. 
DCS is designed to recognize people's use of d ia logue 
/~.ames in transcripts. For each utterance, it bui lds a 
h ie rarch la l  s t ruc ture  represent ing how the utterance 
per fo rms certa in acts, the goals that the acts serve, end thn 
goal s t ructure  that makes the combination of acts coherent. 
(The data structure holding this information is described 
ho low in the discussion of l learsay-3.) 
II. P reeminence Schedul ing --  It seems inevi tab le  that  
any  system capable of forming the "correct" interpretat ion of
most  natura l  langua~,e usage w i l l  usua l ly  be able to f ind 
severa l  o ther  interpretat ions,  g iven enough opportunity.  It 
is also inev i tab le  that  choices bo made, imp l i c i t l y  or 
exp l i c i t l y ,  among interpretat ions.  The choices w i l l  
correspond to some Internal  notion of qual i ty ,  also possibly 
imp l i c i t .  The notion of qua l i ty  may vary.  but the necessity 
of makin/' ,  such  choices does not rest on the part icu lar  not ion 
of qua l i ty  we  use. Clearly, it is also important o avoid 
choos ing  a s ing le  interpretat ion when there are several  
near ly  equa l ly  a t t ract ive  ones. 
What  methods do we have for mak ing  such choices? 
Consider three approaches. 
I .  First-f ind.. The f i rst  Interpretat ion discovered 
wh ich  satisfies wel l - formcdness  i  chosen. The 
e f fect iveness  of f i r s t - f ind  depends on hav ing  
wel l - in fo rmed,  selective processes at every choice 
point,  and is only reasonable i f  one's expectations 
about what  might be said are very good. Even then, 
th i s  method w i l l  select incorrect interpretat ions.  
Z. Bounded search and ranked choice. Interpretat ions 
are generated by a bounded-effort  search, each is 
assigned an individual quality .score of some sort, 
and the best is chosen. Whi le  th is  w i l l  not miss 
good but  unexpected interpretat ions missed by 
f i r s t - f ind ,  i t  is wrong in at least two ways:  a) it 
se lects an interpretat ion (and discards others) when 
the  qua l i ty  d i f ference between interpretat ions i  
insignificant, and b) it expends unnecessary 
resources mak ing  absolute qua l i ty  Judgments 
where  on ly  re lat ive Judgments are needed. These 
defects uggest  an lmprovemenh 
3. P reeminence selection= perform a bounded-effort  
search for interpretat ions,  and then select as beat 
the one ( i f  any) hav ing  a certain threshold amount  
of demonstrable  preferabi l i ty  over its competitors. 
The key  to corre::t choice is determinat ion that such 
a thresho ld  d i f ference in qua l i ty  exists. DCS is 
designed to ident i fy  preeminent  interpretat ions.  
Consider the in format ion content in the fact that the 
best two  interpretat ions  have a qua l i ty  di f ference xceeding 
a f i xed  threshold.  This fact is suf f ic ient  to choose an 
in terpreta t ion ,  and yet  it carr ies less in format ion than is 
car r ied  in a set of qua l i ty  scores for the same set of 
in terpretat ions .  C~omputaUonal ef f ic iencies are avai lable 
because the work  of creat ing the excess informat ion can be 
avoided by proper design. 
83 
Given s tentative quality scoring of one's alternatives, 
several kinds of computations can be avoided. For the 
highest-ranked interpretation, it is pointless to perform 
computations whose only effect is to confirm or support he 
interpretation, (even thongh we expect that for correct 
interpretat ions the ways to show confirmation wil l  be 
numerous),  since these wil l  only drive its score higher. 
For interpretations wi th  inferior ranks, it is l ikewise 
pointless to perform computations that refute them 
(although we expect hat refutations of poor interpretations 
wi l l  be numerous), since these wil l  only drive their scores 
lower.  Neither of these is relevant to demonstrating 
preeminence. 
Given effect ive controls, computation can concentrate 
on refut ing good interpretation? and supporting weak ones. 
(Of" course, such computations wil l  sometimes move 8 new 
interpretat ion i to the role of highe?t-renked. They may 
also destroy an eppsrent preeminence.) If the gap in quality 
rat ing between the highest ranked interpretation end the 
next  one rams/no significant, then proem/nonce has been 
demonstrated. 
Further efficlencles are possible provided that the 
maximum quality r ?t ing improvement front untr/ed support 
computation?  can be predicted, since it is then posstblo to 
f ind case? for wh ich  the m?ximum support of ? low-ranked 
interpretat ion would not eliminate an existing preeminence. 
Similar eff iclencies can arise from predicting the max/mum 
loss 6f qual ity available from untr/ed refuter/one. This 
approach ls being implemented in DCS, 
IIL Control Structure --  ? new AI programming 
envi ronment  called Hearsey-3 is being implemented at ISI for 
use in development of several systems. It is an augmentation 
and major revision of some of the control and data structure 
ideas found in He?rsey-l l  \[Lesser & Erman 19773, but it is 
independent of the speech-understandlng task. Hecruy-3 
retains lnterprecess communicetion by means of global 
"blackboards," end it represents its process knowledge in 
many specialized "knowledge source" (KS) processes, which 
nominate themselves at appropriate t/rues bY looking at the 
blackboard, and then are opportunistically scheduled for 
execution. Blackbcerds are divided into "levels" that 
typical ly contain distinct kinds of state knowledge, the 
dist inct ions being ~jed as a gross f i lter on which future KS 
computation?  ere considered. 
Hearsay-3 rets i , s  the idea of a domain-knowledge 
blackboard (BB), and it adds a knowledge source scheduling 
blackboard (SBB) as well. Items on the SBB are opportunities 
to exercise particular scheduling speclslists celled 
Schedulln~ Knowledge Sources (SKS). 
The SBB Is ?n ideal data structure For implementin~ 
Prominence  scheduling. In DCS the SBB has four levels, 
called Refutation, Support, Evaluation and 
Ordinary-consequence. These correspond to a factoring of 
the domain K5 into four groups according to their effects. 
Knowledge sources in each of these groups nominata 
themselves onto a different level of the SBB. The 
schedul ing-knowledge sources (SKS) perform preeminence 
schedul ing (when a suitable range of alternatives ls 
available) by selecting available Refutation level 
opportunit ies for the highest-ranked interpretation and 
Support level opportunities for inferior ones. (The SBB and 
SKS Features of HearMy-3 ?re only two of its many 
innovation? .  ) 
The DCS B8 has 6 levels, named Text. Word-sense?, 
Syntax,  Proposition?, Speech-acts ?nd Goals. Goals and goal 
structures,  wh ich  ?re required in any successful analysis, 
only arise as explanations of speech acts. The KS used for 
der iv ing speech acts from utterances ?re seperete from those 
der iv ing goals from speech acts. The hierarchic data 
s t ructure  representing an interpretation of ?n utterance 
consists of units at vsrtou~ level? on the He?rsey-3 
blackboard. 
USING DCS 
These Innovations and sever?l others wil l  be 
tested in DCS in ?ttempts to comprehend human dialogue 
~athered from non-laboratory situ?tton?. (One of these L5 
Apollo astronaut o ground communication.) Transertpis of 
actual interpersonal dialogue? ?re p?rtlcularly advantageous 
as s tudy materiel, because they show the effects of ongoin~ 
communicat ion ? d because they are free of the bieses and 
nar row v iew?  inev/table in made-up example?. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work  reported here was supported by NSF Grant 
MCS-70-07332. 
R EFER ENCES 
Lessor, V. R., and L. D. Ermsn, "A Retrospective View of the 
HEARSAY-II Architecture," Fl\[t~ Int~n~lovt~ Joint 
Con \[trtnct on Arti \[icl~ Intctlif~ct. Cambridge, MA, 
1977. 
Lenin, J. A., and J. A. Moore, "Dialogue Gamosz 
Meta-communication Structures for Natural Language 
Interaction," Coenitive Science. 1,4, 1978. 
Moore, J. A., J. A. Levin, ?nd W. C. Mann, "A Goal-oriented 
Model of Human INalot~ue," flmerlcan Journal of 
Computational Lin?uistics. microfiche #67, 1977. 
Mann, W. C., "Dialogue Games," in MODELS OF pI4qLOGUE. 
K. Hlntlkka, st ~! (ads.) North Holland Press, 1979. 
84 
