PI~OSI'ECTS FOR COMI'UTER- 
ASSISTED DIALECT A1)APTION 
David J. Weber 
UCI,A and Summer Inst i tute  of L inguist ics 
Wi l l iam C. Mann 
USC Informat ion Sciences Inst i tute 
When a document is to appear ill several dialects or 
closely related langu-Res, there are many practical reasons 
for  adapt ing  It from one to another rather than preparing 
separate translations. I Iowever, manual adaptlon can be 
tedious, errorful, and requires a bidialectal adaptor (often 
unavailable) and/or qual i f ied linguist (if available, very  
expens ive) .  Computer-aided adaption might  be an 
a l te rnat ive ,  but Is it feasible to wr i te  a computer program 
which  contributes enough to be worth the bother and cost? 
For the source dialect ($D) is provided a root d ic t ionary  
and a su f f i x  d ict ionary;  each entry  contains the s t r ing  of 
characters by which that morpheme is recognized, 
morphological category, morphophonemic properties .... and 
for  roots, the "0 for,n. For each target dialect (TD) is 
provided a su f f i x  dictionary, a list of the regular sound 
changes (RSC's) which when applied to a "O root w i l l  yield 
the  correct  TI} ref lex,  and a l ist of pairs of roots not cognate 
in the  SD and TD, 
This  paper describes an exper iment  in computattonal ly  
ass i s t ing  t i le adapt;on of text from one dialect of central  
Peruv ian  Quechua (a polysynthet ic ,  al :glut inat ive.  American 
Ind ian language)  to ~everal others. The overal l  results are 
ext remely  encouraging:  computer-aided dialect adaptton is 
feas ib le  and has important  advantages over ent i re ly  manual  
methods. 
Bolow we describe the dialect s ituation, the data and 
processes of the exper imenta l  program, and a field test of 
text  produced by the program. 
Six dialects d i f fe r ing  phonological ly,  l ex ica l ly ,  and 
l ; ran |n |a t l ca l l y  were  involved. The rich d lvcrs i ty  of 
d i f fe rences  are dominated by a few kinds of systemat ic  
d i f fe rence.  The program treats these classes of d i f ference 
separate ly  ra ther  than by a s ingle method (such as str ing 
subst i tu t ion) :  th is  requires a detai led analysis of the source 
d ia lect  text .  
Examples  of the k inds of d l f ferences involved: 
Phonolog.icah the reflexes of four proto-Ouechua ('O) 
phonemes  ('/~/'l~/'fMf/fl/) --in the government-mandated 
orthography--  are: Panao: tr ch II Ji. Huallaga: ch  ch \]I if. 
Dos-de-Mayo:  ch  t~ I n. l,lata: ch s I n. Yanahuanca: t, xr t ss I n. 
and Junln: tr ch I n. 
I , -x lcah 'to ~et we l l / recover  from an illnes~' i~ 
ex-pressed w i th  the root a l lchaka:-  in I iual laga, a l iya:-  in 
l,lata, and kachaka: -  In Jun in .  
Gran|mat lcah 1 ) Morphologicah a su f f ix  may be present 
In one dialect  and absent in another; the forms or properties 
of cor responding suf f ixes  may d i f ier  across dialects; there 
are d i f fe rent  syMems of lndtcatlnf', p lura l i ty  with in  the 
verb., in some dialects there are 3-5 dist inct  plural lzers 
occur r ing  in d i f fe rent  "slots" and conditioned by what  other  
su f f i xes  occur in the word;  In others there is on ly  one 
p lura l i zor  wh ich  has a f ixed posit/on; ~-) Syntactic: the 
complements  of phasal verbs ('begin', 'finish'...) are 
subordlnatod as adverbial clauses in some dialects but as 
infinitival (object)clauses in others. 
A TD root d ic t ionary  Is computat lonal ly  der ived by I)  
app ly ing  the RSC's to the "Q form of each $D root and ~-) 
subst i tu t ing  the TD root for non-cognate root pairs. 
Tc, xt is adapted word by word, f irst analyz ing SD words 
and then synthes iz ing  TI) words. (An ear ly penct l -and- lmper 
, ,xper i ;nent  sul%~,ested that for Ouechua, word -by -word  
methods  could effect approx imate ly  95% of the required 
ehange,~.) After or thographic  adjustments,  a simple. 
recursivc, exhaustive search attempts to decompose each 
word  Into a root and zero or more suf f ixes  by match ing  the 
word 's  characters  to the str ings of characters of d ict ionary 
ent r ies  sub ject  to constra ints  of a bu i l t - in  morphology. Tests 
are appl ied 1) dur ing  the search to teat  the su i tab i l i ty  of a 
match ing  su f f i x  as the immediate succe~or  to what  
precedes, and 2) after  all the word is matched to morphemes 
to test the. overa l l  su i tab i l i ty  of that sequence of morphemes. 
Th-sc  tests constra in  possible decomposit ions to w i th in  
managab le  l tnl i ts .  Word decomposltioq is complicated by 
var ious  morphophonemic  processes. 
P lura l i zat ion di f ferences are accommodated by 1) 
tagg ing  as p lura l  each decomposit ion wh ich  contains a p lura l  
morpheme,  2) de let ing that p lural  morpheme, and 3) 
inser t ing  the appropr iate plural ize! for the TD word. 
,Synthesis of a TD word proceeds by 1) subst i tu t ing  the 
SD root by the corresponding TD root from the 
( :o iuputat ionai ly  der ived TI} root d ict im|ary,  Z) select ing for 
each morpheme the correct al lomorph, 3) concatenation of
the  a l lomorphs,  and 4) orthographic  adjustment.  Examples  
are shown in F igure 1. 
Many words  have mul t ip le  decompositions but th is  is 
to lerab le  because synthes is  of a l ternat ive decomposit ions of 
one 5D word  usua l ly  yield identical  TD words. Nonidentical  
a l te rnat ives  for one SD word are left to the choice of the 
human ed i to r /checker .  
About 40 pages of text  were adapted into each of 5 
target  d ia lects  for use in the field test. Sampling indicates 
that  the computer  correct ly changed about 760 morphemes 
per 1000 words  of text;  in the worst  case nat ive speakers 
109 
SO orlhogriphi? form: ( l)  lywarkaykan 
The word  analyzer produces, in succession: 
length converted: (2) aywarkaykan 
$egmentatlon: (3) aywa-rka-yka-n 
morphophonemic form: (4) saywa-RKA-YKA:-3 
DlurJdify handled: (5) (taywa-YKA:-3).t4=L 
The word synthesizer  produces, in succession: 
r e-plu,alizalion: (6) IIywi-YKA:-YA:-3 
allomorph selection: (7) aywa-yka:-ye-n 
TD or'thoQf'aphic form: (8) aywaykasyan 
'lhey are joins" 
Figure I 
suggested about 190 additional changes per |000  words. The 
computer  converted text wh ich  otherwise would have been 
at best only  marginal ly  lntellit~lble to a speaker of another 
dialect into - -w i th  a few exceptions-- fu l ly  comprehensible 
text .  Thus  the program brings a text being adapted close 
enough to the TD that it can be edited/corrected by a native 
speaker of the TD w i thout  much coaching or reference to the 
3D text.  
Since Inevitably there is a non-tr ivial  residue of 
changes  Infeasible for the computer, its output requires 
subsequent  manual  correcting/editing. Therefore, rather 
than  str ive to make the program do everything imaginable, it
is w ise  to do the overwhelming number of systemic, "low 
level" changing and not unduly  complicate the prol~ram to 
accommodate oo much.  The test identified many relatively 
in f requent  changes not handled by the present program. For 
most of them, computational daptlon is not feasible. These 
are discus.sod in a version of this paper wh ich  has been 
publ ished by Note~ ~.  Linguistics. $IL. It is available from 
The Internat ional  Linguistics Center, 7500 Camp Wisdom 
Road, Dallas TX 75236 for  $.75 , as Special Publ ication 1, 
Prospects fo r  Compttter-Assistod Dialect Adeption. 
Conclusion: A computer can contribute s ignif icantly to 
adaption between dialects or closely related languages. 
(9) lywirk|arinanp|q 
(10) lywirks:rin|npsa 
(l i) lyWl-rka-:ri-na-n-p|Cl 
(l 2) saywi-RKU-:RI-NA-3P-PAQ 
(13) (eaywa-RKU-NA-3P-PAO).(.PL 
(| 4) eaywa-RKU-YA:-NA-3P-PAO 
(15) lyws-rku-ya:-nl-n-paq 
(i6) sywsrkuyaananpaQ 
'in order that they 8o' 
110 
