An Experiment in Machine Trans la t ion  
INTRODUCTION 
Although funding for Machine Translation (MT) research 
virtua11y ended in the U.S. with the release of the 
ALPAC report \[1\] in 1966, there has been a continuing 
interest in this f ie ld.  Rapid evolution of science and 
technology, coupled with increased world-wlde exposure 
of their products, demands more and more speed in trans- 
lation (e.g., in the case of operation and maintenance 
manuals). Unfortunately, this rapid evolution has made 
translation an even more d i f f i cu l t  and time-consuming 
task. The large surplus of (presumably qualified) 
translators cited by the ALPAC report simply does not 
ex is t  in many techn ica l  areas;  the cur rent  s ta te  of  
a f fa i r s  Finds instead a c r i t i ca l  shortage.  In add i t ion ,  
the propor t ion  of  sc ient i f i c  and techn ica l  l i te ra ture  ? 
publ ished in Engl ish  is d imin ish ing .  As qua l i f ied  human 
t rans la tors  become more scarce and costs of  human t rans -  
la t ion  r i se  wh i le  costs of  purchase and operat ion  of  
powerful  computer systems fa l l ,  there must come a time 
when, i f  MT is feas ib le  at  a l l ,  i t  w i l l  be cos t -e f fec -  
t i ve .  I t  is appropr ia te ,  then,  to invest igate  the 
state-of-the-art in MT with respect to two central ques- 
tions: is high-quality MT Feaslble (and in what sense); 
and i f  feasible, is i t  cost-effectlve? 
Thls paper repor ts  the resu l ts  of  an exper iment in 
h lgh ly  automat ic ,  h igh-qua l i ty  machine t rans la t ion .  The 
LRC's MT system, METAL ( fo r  Mechanical T rans la t ion  and 
Ana lys i s  of  Languages), is an advanced, ' th i rd  genera- 
t ion '  system incorporat ing  proven Natura l  Language Pro- 
cessing (NLP) techniques,  both syntact i c  and semantic,  
and stands at the fo re f ront  of  the MT research F ront ie r .  
In the exper iment ,  METAL was employed in the t rans la t ion  
of  a 50-page taxt  From German in to  Engi lsh  in order  to 
determine whether the system as i t  ex i s ts  can be e f fec -  
t i ve ly  app l ied  to cur rent  t rans ia t lon  needs, e f fec t ive -  
ness to be determined by some ob ject ive  measure of  the 
qua l i ty  and cost  of  machine ( i .e . ,  METAL) vs.  human 
t rans la t ion .  
EARLIER MT EFFORTS 
Since Bruderer  \[2\] has recent ly  publ ished a complete 
survey of  MT pro jec ts ,  and Hutchins \[3\]  reviews the 
most important developments through 1977, we wi l l  men- 
tion only a few of the major efforts.  The f i r s t  popular 
demonstration of the possibi l i t ies in MT was provided by 
IBM and the Georgetown University group in 19S4 \[4\]. 
With a vocabulary of about 250 words and a grammar com- 
prising some six rules in what was called an "operation- 
al syntax", the system demonstrated some rudimentary 
capability in Russian to English translation. This in- 
stlgated a massive government funding ef for t  over the 
next decade, and some 20 mill ion dollars was invested in 
17 different projects. By 1965 the Mark II Russian- 
English system \[5\] had been installed at the Foreign 
Technology Division of the U.S. Air Force at Wright- 
Patterson AFB, and the Georgetown system had been deli- 
vered to the Atomic Energy Commission at Oak Ridge Na- 
tlonal Laboratory and to EURATOM in Ispra, I taly.  Re- 
viewing MT systems such as these at the request of the 
National Science Foundation, the Automatic Language Pro- 
cessing Advisory Committee (ALPAC) reported in 1966 that 
MT was slower, less accurate, and more expensive than 
human translation; further, that there was no predlcta- 
ble prospect of improvement in MT capability. Though 
strongly and perhaps just i f iab ly  cr it ic ized \[6\], this 
report soon resulted in the virtual elimination of MT 
funding in the U.S., and a sizeable reduction in fo~ign 
efforts as well. 
Jonathan Slocum 
I . ingu is t i cs  Research Center 
The Un ivers i ty  o f  Texas 
Peter  Toma, who was respons ib le  fo r  the ins ta l la t ions  at  
Oak Ridge and Ispra c i ted  above, soon began pr ivate  e f -  
fo r ts  at  improving the Georgetown system. This cu lmina-  
ted in SYSTRAN \ [7 \ ] ,  which replaced Mark I I  at  WPAFB in 
1970 and the Georgetown system at EURATOM in 1976. 
SYSTRAN was a lso  used by NASA dur ing  the Apo l lo -Soyuz  
miss ion .  In 1976 the Commission of  European Communities 
adopted SYSTRAN for  Eng l i sh  to French t rans la t ion ;  how- 
ever ,  an eva luat ion  of  i t s  t rans la t ions  by the EEC post -  
ed i to rs  in Brussels  found the resu l ts  to be fa r  from sat -  
i s fac tory :  "a l l  the rev isors  had exhausted the i r  pat ience  
before  the end" \ [8 \ ] .  Despi te  i t s  genera l ly  low t rans la -  
t ion  qua l i ty ,  SYSTRAN is the most w ide ly  used MT system 
to date.  i t s  ch ie f  commercial compet i to r ,  LOGOS \ [9 \ ] ,  is 
another  example o f  a "d i rec t "  MT system. As in SYSTRAN, 
the ana lys i s  and synthes is  components are separated but 
the l ingu is t i c  procedures are designed fo r  a spec i f i c  
source- language (SL) and target - language (TL) pa i r .  In 
an eva luat ion  by S lna iko  and K lare \ [10 \ ] ,  LOGOS d ld  not 
fare  we l l .  8ruderer  \[2\]  repor ts  fu r ther  development fo r  
t rans la t ion  in to  Russian, and exper iments on French, Ger- 
man and Spanish,  but prov ides  few deta i l s .  
In an e f fo r t  to cor rect  the obvious inadequacies of  
these and other  ' f i r s t  generat ion '  systems, which essen- 
t ia l i y  t rans la te  word- fo r -word  w i th  no at tempt  at  a un i -  
f ied  ana lys i s  at  the sentence leve l ,  and which were de- 
veloped ab in i t io  fo r  a spec i f i c  SL-TL pa i r ,  researchers  
began to invest igate  methods of  ana lyz ing  sentences in to  
s t ructures  from which in theory  any TL could be genera- 
ted.  There are two broad types of  such 'second genera-  
t ion '  systems. One type produces analyses in a "neut ra l "  
s t ructure ,  or  ' in ter l ingua~;  the o ther  produces SL syn- 
tac t i c  s t ructures  which are t ransformed v ia  a process 
ca l led  ' t rans fer '  in to  a syntact i c  s t ructure  fo r  the TL 
sentence.  One example of  the former approach is the 
system produced by the Centre d '~tudes  pour la Traduc- 
t lon  Automatique (CETA) at  the Un ivers i ty  o f  Grenoble 
\ [11 \ ] .  During the per iod  from 1961 to 1971 th i s  group 
developed a Russian to French MT system. An eva luat ion  
at  the end of  that  per iod  revealed that  on ly  42~ o f  the 
sentences were being cor rect ly  t rans la ted .  Some fa i l -  
ures were due to e r rors  in the input ,  but  the major i ty  
were due to programming er rors ,  fa i lu re  to produce a 
lex ica l  ana lys i s  of  a word or  a syntact i c  ana lys i s  of  a 
sentence, inefficiencies in the parser causing it  to ap- 
ply too many rules, etc. The Traduction Automatique de 
l'Universit~ de MontrEal (TAUM) project \[12\] is an exam- 
ple of the transfer approach. There are flve grammars 
called "q-systems" to effect morphological and syntactic 
analysis of English, then transfer, then syntactic and 
morphological synthesis of French. Each such stage con- 
sists of a series of generalized tree-structure transfoP 
mations. The significance of TAUM is that, of the sec- 
ond-generation systems, i t  is the nearest to operational 
implementation: i t  is to be applied to the translation 
of a i rcraf t  maintenance manuals. 
in 1978 the European project EUROTRA was init iated, ap- 
parently adopting the newer Grenoble system ARIANE, in 
order to produce an advanced, second generation MT sys- 
tem for the eventual replacement of the f i r s t  genera- 
tion system (SYSTRAN) currently in use \[8\]. The Greno- 
ble group, now t i t \ ]ed Groupe d'Etudes pour la Traduc- 
tion Automatlque (GETA), abando'ed their earl ier ap- 
proach in light of its deficiencies and produced a sys- 
tem to translate in s ix  passes: morphological analysis, 
multi-level (syntactic and semantic) analysis, lexical 
transfer, structural transfer, syntactic generation, and 
morphological generation. Multi-level analysis, struc- 
tural transfer, and syntactic generation are all  effec- 
ted ~.a a general tree-to-tree transducer program, some- 
163 
what less powerfu; but merhaps more eff ic ient than the Q- 
systems transduce r in TAUM; the other components have Spe- 
cial programs suited to their function. The emphasis in 
this project is apparently twofold: increased efficiency 
and re l iab i l i ty  through adoption of components with the 
minimum necessary power, and decreased sensit iv i ty to 
fai)ure in individual stages through the expedient of in- 
suring that every component has some output, even i f  
such output is nothing more than the or ig ina l  input.  I f  
we have in terpreted  the VauQuois mimeo \[8\] p roper ly ,  this 
must be ~e largest  and most comprehensive MT pro jec t  yet 
undertaken. 
DESCRIPTION OF METAL 
There are two different classifications of "generations" 
in MT systems. The f i r s t  posits three generations (cur- 
rently) according to the following cr i ter ia:  (I) trans- 
lation is word-for-word, with no significant syntactic 
analysis; (2) translation proceeds after obtaining a 
complete syntactic analysis of an input, with no s ign i f i -  
cant semantic analysis; (3) translation proceeds after 
obtaining a complete semantic analysis of an input. The 
definit ion of ' third generation' says nothing about ex- 
tra-sentential information, and one might posit a 
'fourth generation' which employs such information. The 
other classif ication proceeds according to the following 
cr i ter ia:  (l) translation proceeds "d i rect ly"  from the 
SL to the TL, and the SL is analyzed only to the minimum 
extent necessary to generate TL equivalents; (2) trans- 
lation proceeds " indirect ly"  by deriving a more-or-less 
standard analysis of the input, independent of the TL in- 
volved (but not necessarily of the SL), and then genera- 
ting TL output based on the standard analysis. Within 
this definit ion of 'second generation', as noted above, 
there are the 'transfer' vs. ' interl ingua' approaches. 
We prefer to characterize METAL as a ' third generation' 
system according to the f i r s t  c lass i f i ca t ion  given above 
because th is  makes i t  c lear  that METAL der ives a sub- 
s tant ia l  semantic ana lys i s ,  whereas the second def in i t ion  
of 'second generat ion '  does not necessar i l y  imply that 
semantic ana lys is  of  any kind is performed. 
METAL comprises two d is t inc t  components: the l ingu is t i c  
and the computat ional .  The l ingu is t i c  component con- 
s i s ts  o f  lex icons ,  phrase-s t ructure  grammar ru les ,  case 
frames and t rans format ions .  SL and TL lex ica l  ent r ies  
include feature -va lue  pairs  encoding syntact i c  and sem- 
ant i c  in format ion such as grammatical category,  in f lec -  
t iona l  c lass ,  semantic type, and case in format ion (see 
Figure \ ] ) .  T ransfer  lex ica l  ent r ies  ind icate  how and 
under what condi t ions  words or idioms in one language 
t rans la te  into  words or idioms in another (see Figure 
2). The phrase-s t ructure  rules may be augmented wi th  
procedures to determine the i r  app l i ca t ion  v ia  feature /  
value tes ts ,  to add or copy features and values in the 
in terpretat ion  being constructed,  to invoke case-frame 
rout ines ,  and to invoke spec i f i c  or general t ransforma- 
t ions .  Case-frame rout ines determine semantic case re-  
la t ionsh ips  between verbs and nouns on the basis o f  syn- 
tac t i c  and semantic features ,  and produce the i r  output 
in the form of  p ropos i t iona l  t rees.  T rans format io ' -  are 
pat tern -pa i rs  that spec i fy  old and new tree s t ruc tures ;  
when invoked, a t ransformat ion attempts to match i ts  
"o ld"  side against the current  s t ruc tura l  descr ip tor ,  
and i f  successful converts it  into one matching its 
"new" side. In the process, features and values may be 
tested and set arb i t rar i}y.  This provides the grammar. 
with v i r tua l ly  unlimite~ -ontext sensi t iv i ty ,  but since 
no interpretation can affect the operation of the parser 
i t  s t i l l  enjoys the advantages of context-free opera- 
tion. Finally, there is a method for scoring, or rating, 
interpretations; this allows the system to determine the 
"best" interpretation for translation, and also provides 
another mechanism for rejecting the application of any 
rule, viz, a score below cutoff. Figure 3 i l lustrates a 
typical grammar ule. 
~ CAT (PREP) 
ALO (!n) ( i )  
GC (A D~ (0) 
CN {S) (M) 
PLC (WI) (WI NF) % 
RO (TMP TOP LOC DST TAR EQU)) 
IN CAT (PREP) 
ALO ( in)  
RO (DST LOC) 
PO (PRE) 
ON (VO)) 
INTO CAT (PREP) 
ALO ( in to )  
RO (OST LOC) 
PO (PRE) 
ON (VO)) 
Figure 1 
German Preposition " in"  and Two 
Corresponding English Prepositions 
CAT - grammatical category 
PREP - p repos i t ion  
ALO - a l l  omorph 
' in '  - the s t r ing  " in" 
' i '  (as in the string "im") 
GC - grammatical case 
A - accusative 
D - dative 
CN - contracted \[with\] 
S - (as in "ins") 
M - (as in "im") 
PLC - placement 
WI - word- in i t ia l  
WF - word - f ina l  
RO - semantic ro le  
TMP - temporal 
TOP - top ic  
LOC - locat ive  
DST - des t inat ion  
TAR - target  
EQU - equat ive 
PO - pos i t ion  
PRE - pre-posed 
ON - onset Sound 
VO - voca l i c  
(INTO (IN) PREP (GC A)) 
(IN (IN) PREP (GC O)) 
Figure 2 
Transfer Entries for 
the German Preposition " in" 
The German PREPosition " in" (in parentheses) may trans- 
late into the English PREPosition " into" i f  the Gramma- 
tical Case of the German PP is 'Accusative'; i t  may tran- 
slate into the English PREPosition " in" i f  the Grammati- 
cal Case of the German PP is 'Dative'. Arbitrary numbers 
and types of conditions may be specified in transfer 
entries. 
The computational component, written in LISP, consists 
of the parser, the case-frame routines, the transforma- 
tion pattern-marcher, the transfer program, the genera- 
tor, and other procedures needed to drive and support 
the t rans la t ion  process. The parser is a h igh ly  e f f i -  
c ient  implementation of  the Cocke-Kasami-Younger a lgo-  
164 
