Metaphor  Comprehens ion  - A special  mode of language process ing?  
(Extended Abstract)  
Jon M. Slack 
Open Univers i ty ,  U.K. 
The paper  addresses  the quest ion  of whether  a 
complete  language unders tand ing  system requires 
specia l  p rocedures  in order  to comprehend 
metaphor ica l  language. To answer  this quest ion  
it is necessary  to de l ineate  the processes  
invo lved in metaphor  comprehens ion  and to det-  
ermine the un iqueness  of such processes  in the 
context  of ex is t ing  language unders tand ing  
systems. 
I. DEF IN ING THE PROBLEM 
For the purposes  of this paper  a metaphor  i s  
de f ined as a l ingu is t ic  input conta in ing  
e lements  which  resu l t  in a mismatch  at the 
semant ic  level  wh ich  the language unders tand ing  
system at tempts  to interpret.  For  example,  the 
sentence 
B i l lboards  are warts  on the landscape . 1 
resu l ts  in a semant ic  mismatch  represented  by 
the sentence 
B i l lboards  are not a member  
of the category  warts  .... 2 
wh ich  is encountered  when the under ly ing  concep- 
tua l . s t ruc ture  is bui l t  for the sentence. 
However,  the mismatch  need not be rest r ic ted  
to e lements  of the sa/ne sentence. Even though 
the e lements  of a par t i cu la r  sentence may not 
resul t  in a semant ic  mismatch,  the whole  sent-  
ence i tsel f  can be metaphor ica l  w i th  respect  to 
its l ingu is t ic  context.  In this case the seman- 
tic mismatch  is encountered  when the in terpret -  
er has d i f f i cu l ty  connect ing  the conceptua l  
representat ion  of the sentence to the ex is t ing  
st ructure represent ing  the context.  
Metaphor  comprehens ion  is def ined as the proc-  
ess of mapping  input metaphors  onto connected  
conceptua l  representat ions .  
A model  of metaphor  comprehens ion  is de f ined 
as the set of processes  requ i red to in terpret  
e lements  of l ingu is t ic  input which  semant ica l ly  
mismatch  their  l ingu is t ic  context.  The mis-  
match ing  e lements  are re fer red to as the 
veh ic le  of the metaphor ,  whi le  the l ingu is t ic  
context  is known as the top ic  of the metaphor .  
2. BU ILDING A MODEL OF METAPHOR COMPREHENSION 
For the purposes  of descr ib ing  the model  on ly  
sentences which  conta in  both the veh ic le  and 
topic e lements  of the metaphor  are cons idered.  
However,  the comprehens ion  processes  descr ibed  
should apply  to al l  c lasses  of metaphor ,  inc lud-  
ing copula  form (e.g. The wor ld  is a chessboard~ 
and verb -based  metaphors  (e.g. His words were 
dr ied  by the sun). The model  to be out l ined  
is based on the ana lys is  of a large sample of 
paraphrases  produced by twenty subjects  for a 
co l lec t ion  of over  f i f ty  metaphors .  
It is necessary  to d i s t ingu ish  between d i f fe r -  
ent types of comprehens ion  task. A l though the 
comprehens ion  processes  are genera l ly  app l i c -  
able, whether  the metaphor ica l  input is in 
i so la t ion  or part  of a larger  l ingu is t ic  input 
g reat ly  in f luences  the cho ice  of comprehens ion  
strategy. 
In l lne w i th  most  language comprehens ion  sys- 
tems, the goal  of metaphor  comprehens ion  is to 
bu i ld  an in tegrated conceptua l  s t ructure  but 
from mismatch ing  components .  The model  is 
based on the not ion  that the ex is tence  of the 
semant ic  mismatch  makes  it necessary  to bu i ld  
a conceptua l  s t ructure  which  embodies  al l  the 
sa l ient  knowledge s t ructures  assoc ia ted  wi th  
the veh ic le  element.  This  process  is re fer red  
to as veh ic le  expansion.  
Br ief ly ,  the comprehens ion  process  proceeds  as 
fol lows: 
The e lements  of the sentence are mapped onto 
the i r  d ic t ionary  entr ies  and in a t tempt ing  to 
bui ld  a conceptua l  s t ructure  a semant ic  
res t r i c t ion  v io la t ion  (semantic mismatch)  is 
encountered  - the subject,  or object,  or both 
do not conform to the semant ic  res t r i c t ions  
assoc ia ted  wi th  the verb. The dec is ion  of 
wh ich  e lement  represents  the topic  and which  
the veh ic le  of the metaphor  is usua l ly  deter -  
mined  by the ext ra -sentent ia l  context.  However, 
for i so lated metaphors  the veh ic le  is usua l ly  
the e lement  which  has the min imal  match  with 
the other  e lements.  The knowledge st ructures  
wh ich  const i tu te  the veh ic le  e lement  concept  
are temporar i l y  bu i l t  into the conceptua l  
s t ructure  represent ing  the mean ing  of the 
sentence. This  generated  conceptua l  s t ructure 
(C~S) is also connected  to the topic knowledge 
s t ructures  (TKS). Comprehens ion  is complete  
when the GCS and TKS are in tegrated into a 
s ingle conceptua l  structure.  Veh ic le  expans ion  
generates  a re la t ive ly  large conceptua l  st ruct -  
ure wh ich  is pruned by means  of the processes  
which  integrate  the GCS and TKS. For example,  
those knowledge st ructures  which  gave r ise to 
the semant ic  mismatch  are de le ted  from the 
conceptua l  s t ructure  because they cont rad ic t  
what  is known about  the topic. Metaphor  
comprehens ion  invo lves  in terpret ing  the GCS in 
terms of the TKS. This  is ach ieved by means of 
a match ing  process  and the comprehens ion  
s t rateg ies  descr ibed  below." 
The match ing  process  searches for match ing  know- 
ledge st ructures  in the GCS and TKS. Var ious  
forms of the process  are cons idered  - fuzzy 
match ing  procedures,  a spreading act ivat ion  
process.  The outcome of the process  is typic-  
al ly, (a) an e lement  of the GCS matches  a low- 
sa l iency TKS element,  (b) an e lement  of the GCS 
cont rad ic ts  a TKS element,  or (c) a GCS e lement  
matches  nor cont rad ic ts  any TKS element.  Out -  
come (b) prunes the GCS; outcomes (a) and (c) 
connect  it to the TKS. 
23 
In addition, certain input metaphors require 
other comprehension strategies to be invoked, 
such as context construction or recursive meta- 
phor interpretation. 
Context construction - in some cases, although 
the matching procedure has constructed a number 
of important connections between the GCS and 
the TKS, it is necessary to search for addition- 
al knowledge structures which represent context 
information which was missing in the original 
input. The goal of the context construction 
procedure is to provide a context information 
in which the GCS-TKS connections are fully 
interpreted, that is, more fully integrated. 
The paper discusses the conditions necessary 
for the strategy to be employed. 
Recursive metaphor interpretation - many of 
the elements of the GCS are themselves metap~s 
in that they contain implicit semantic mis- 
matches. These metaphoric elements are inter- 
preted as metaphor inputs thereby making the 
comprehension process recursive. 
Due to the limited processing capacity and 
memory constraints of language understanding 
systems, the metaphor comprehension process 
requires a complex control structure. This 
control structure governs the use of the comp- 
rehension strategies and orders the vehicle 
expansion and matching processes. 
3. COMPARISON WITH OTHER THE?RIES 
The paper compares the model of metaphor comp- 
rehension with established theories of metaphor 
within l inguistics and psychology. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
The final part of the paper examines the 
relationship between metaphor comprehension 
and existing language comprehension systems. 
The processes which constitute the model of 
metaphor comprehension are common to many 
language understanding systems (Schank, Wilks, 
L)IR group, etc.). The comprehension of metaphor 
does not require a special set of processes to 
be developed, although the comprehension 
strategies may be specific to the comprehension 
task. Rather, a metaphor input forces the 
comprehension system to invoke a complex 
control structure to cope with the larger and 
richer knowledge domains which have to be 
handled. The main conclusion of the paper is 
that the notions of processing capacity, 
memory constraints and control structure are 
the most salient constructs in sLmulation 
metaphor comprehension. 
24 
