PROSPECTS mOR PRACTICAL NATURAL LANGUAGE SYSTEMS 
Larry R. Harris 
Arti f icial  Intel l igence Corporat ion 
Newton Centre, ~ass. 02159 
As the author of a "practical" NL data base 
query system, one of the suggested topics for 
this panel is of part icular interest to me. 
The issue of what hurdles remain before NL 
systems become practical  strikes part iculary 
close to home. %s someone with a more 
pragmatic view of NL processing, my feeling 
is, not surprisingly, that we already have the 
capabi l i ty to construct practical  ~:L systems. 
Signif icant enhancement of exist ing man- 
machine communicat ion is possible within the 
current NL techno logy  if we set our sights 
appropriately and are wil l ing to take the 
addit ional effort to craft systems actual ly 
worthy of being used. The missing link isn't 
a utopian parsing algor i thm yet to be 
discovered. The hurdles to practical  NL 
systems are of a much more conventional  
variety that require, as Edison said, more 
perspirat ion than inspiration. 
It should be clear that none of my remarks 
confl ict with the obvious fact that NL 
research has miles to go and that there are 
innumerable unresolved issues that wil l  
continue to require research beyond the 
foreseeable future. Our understanding of NL 
has merely scratched the surface, and it is 
fair to say that we don't even understand what 
all the problems are, muchless their solution. 
But by using the powerful techniques that have 
already resulted from NL research in extremely 
restr icted micro-wor lds it is possible to 
attain a high enough level of performance to 
be of practical value to a signif icant user 
community. It is these highly special ized 
systems that can be made practical  using the 
exist ing technology. 
I wil l  not speculate on when a general NL 
capabil i ty wil l  become practical, nor wil l  I 
speculate on whether the creation of practical  
special ized systems wil l  contribute to the 
creation of a more general capabil ity. The 
fact that there is a clear need for improved 
man-machine communicat ion and that current 
special ized systems can be bui lt  to meet that 
need, is reason enough to construct them. 
The issue of whether pract ical  special ized NL 
systems can now be bui lt  is, in my opinion, 
not a debatable issue. Those of us on this 
panel and other researchers in the field, 
simply don't have the right to determine 
whether a system is practical. Only the users 
of such a system can make that determination. 
Only a user can decide whether the NL 
capabi l i ty constitutes suff ic ient added value 
to be deemed practical. Only a user can 
decide if the system's frequency of 
inappropriate response is suff ic ient ly low to 
be deemed practical. Only a user can decide 
whether the overal l  NL interaction, taken in 
toto, offers enough benefits over alternative 
formal interactions to be deemed practical. 
If we accept my point that pract ical i ty  is in 
the eyes of the user, then we are led to the 
inescapable conclusion that pract ical  NL 
systems can now be built, because several 
commercial users of such a system \[Pruitt, 
O'Donnel\] have gone on record stating that the 
NL capabi l i ty within the confines of data base 
query is of s ignif icant practical  value in 
their environment. These statements plus the 
fact that a substantial  body of users employ 
NL data base query in dai ly productive use 
clearly meets the spir it  of a "practical" NL 
system. 
The main point of my remarks is not to debate 
the semantics of practical ity,  but to point 
out that whatever level of ut i l i ty has been 
achieved, is due only in small part to the 
sophist icat ion of the NL component. The 
ut i l i ty comes pr imari ly from a custom fitt ing 
of the NL component to the exact requirements 
of the domain; and from the painstaking 
craft ing of the lexicon and grammar to achieve 
tha necessary density of l inguist ic coverage. 
In a sense, pract ical i ty  is derived from a 
pragmatic approach that emphasizes proper 
performance on the vast bulk of rather 
uninterest ing dialog, rather than focusing on 
the much smaller port ion of intel lectual ly 
chal lenging input. A NL system that is 
extrememly robust within wel l -def ined 
l imitations is far more practical  than a 
system of greater sophist icat ion that has 
large qaps in the coveraqe. 
~ttaining this required level of robustness 
and density of l inguistic coverage is not 
necessari ly as intel lectual ly chal lenging as 
basic research, nor is it necessari ly even 
worthy of publ ication. But let's not kid 
ourselves -- it is absolutely necessary to 
achieve a practical  capabil ity! It has never 
been clear to me that members of the ACL were 
interested in pract ical  NL systems, nor is it 
clear that they should be. But I think that it 
is fair to say that there aren't many 
pract ical  NL systems because there aren't very 
many people trying to build them! I would 
estimate, on the basis of my experience, that 
it takes an absolute minimum of 2 years, and 
probably more like 3 years, to bring a 
successful research prototype NL system to the 
level of practical ity. This "development" 
process is well  known in virtual ly all 
scientif ic and engineering discipl ines. It is 
only our naivete of software engineering that 
causes us to underest imate the magnitude of 
this process. I 'm afraid the prospects for 
pract ical  NL systems look bleak as long as we 
have many NL researchers and few NL 
developers. 
Pruitt, J., "~ user's experience with ROBOT," 
Proceedings of the Fourth Annual ADABAS 
rJser's Meeting, April, 1977. 
O'Donnell,  J., "Experience with ROBOT at 
DuPont," Natural Computer Conference Panel, 
May, 1980. 
129 

