A Linear-time Model of Language Production: some psychological implications 
(extended abstract) 
David D. McDonald 
MIT Artif icial Intel l igence Laboratory 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Traditional psycholinguistic studies of language 
product ion ,  us ing evidence from natural ly  occurr ing 
er rors  in speech \ [1 \ ] \ [2 \ ]  and from real - t ime studies of 
hes i ta t ions  and react ion t ime \[3\] \ [4\]  have resulted in 
mode ls  of the  levels at wh ich  d i f ferent  l inguist ic uni ts  
are  represented  and the constra ints  on their  scope. 
This  k ind  of ev idence by itself, however ,  can tell us 
noth ing  about  the character  of the process that  
man ipu la tes  these units,  as there are many a prior i  
a l te rnat ive  computat iona l  devices that  are equal ly 
capable  of  imp lement ing  the observed behavior. It w i l l  
be the  thes is  of this paper that  if principled, non-  
t r i v ia l  models  of the language product ion process are 
to be const ructed ,  they  must be informed by 
computat iona l ly  mot ivated constraints.  In particular. 
the  des ign under ly ing  the l inguist ic component I have 
deve loped  ("MUMBLE . . . .  prev ious ly  reported in \ [5\ ] \ [6\ ] )  
is being investigated as a candidate set of such 
const ra in ts .  
Any  computat iona l  theory  of product ion that  is to 
be interesting as a psycholinguistic model must meet 
certain minimal criteria: 
(1)  P roduc ing  ut terances incremental ly,  in thei r  
normal  le f t - to - r ight  order, and w i th  a we l l -  
de f ined "po in t -o f -no - re turn"  since words  
once said can not be invisibly taken back~ 
(2) Mak ing  the transition from the non- 
linguistic "message"-level representation to 
the utterance via a linguistically structured 
buffer of only" limited size: people are not 
capable of linguistic precognition and can 
I. This report describes research done at the Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. Support for the laboratory's artificial 
intelligence research is provided in part by the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defence 
under Office of Naval Research cont ract  
N00014-75-C-0643. 
55 
readily "talk themselves into a corner ''z 
(3) Grammatical robustness: people make very 
few grammatical errors as compared with 
lexical selection or planning errors ("false 
s tar ts" )  \[7\].  
Theor ies  wh ich  incorporate these propert ies as an 
inev i tab le  consequence of independent ly  mot ivated 
s t ruc tura l  proper t ies  wi l l  be more highly valued than 
those  wh ich  on ly  st ipulate them. 
The design incorporated in MUMBLE has all of 
these properties~ they follow from two key 
intertwined stipulations--hypotheses--motivated by 
intrinsic differences in the kinds of decisions made 
dur ing language production and by the need for an 
efficient representation of the information on wh ich  
the decisions depend (see \[8\] for elaboration). 
(i) 
(~) 
The execut ion  t ime of the process is l inear in 
the number of  elemenzs in ~he input 
message, i.e. the realization decision for each 
element is made only once and may not be 
revised. 
The representation for pending realization 
decisions and planned linguistic actions (the 
results of earlier decisions) is a surface-level 
syntactic phrase structure augmented by 
explicit labelings for its constituent 
positions (hereafter referred to as the tree). 3 
This working-structure is used 
simultaniously for control (determining 
what  action to take next), for specifying 
constraints (what  choices of actions are 
Z. In addition, one inescapable conclusion of the research 
on speech-errors is that the linguistic representation(s) 
used during the production process must be capable of 
representing positions independently of the units (lexical or 
phonetic) that occupy them. This is a serious problem for 
ATN-b~sed theories of production since they have no 
representation for linguistic structures that is independent 
front their representation f the state of the process. 
3. The leaves of this tree initially contain to-be-realized 
message elements. These are replaced by syntactic/lexical 
structures as the tree is refined in a top-down, 
left-to-right traversaL Words are produced as they are 
reached at (new) leaves, and grammatical actions are taken 
as directed by the annotation on the traversed regions. 
ruled out because of earlier decisions), for 
the representation of linguistic context, and 
for the implementation of actions motivated 
only by grammatical convention (e.g. 
agreement ,  word -ordar  w i th in  the clause, 
morphological  specializations; see \[6\]). 
The requ i rement  of l inear time rules out any 
dec is ion -mak ing  techniques that would require 
a rb i t ra ry  scanning of e i ther message or tree. Its 
coro l la ry ,  "Indelibi l i ty", 4 requires that message be 
real ized incrementa l ly  according to the relat ive 
impor tance  of the speaker's intentions. The paper wi l l  
d iscuss  how as a consequence of these propert ies 
dec is ion -mak ing  is forced to take place w i th in  a kind 
of  blinders: restr ic t ions  on the information available 
fo r  dec ia lon-making and on the possibtUtias for 
mon i to r ing  and for invis ible self-repair, all describable 
in te rms of the usual l inguist ic vocabulary. A fur ther  
consequence  is the adoption of a "lexicalist" position on 
t rans format ions  (see \[9\]), i.e. once a syntact ic  
const ruct ion  has been instantiated in the tree, the 
re la t ive  posi t ion of its const i tuents cannot be modified; 
there fore  any "transformations" that apply must do so 
at the moment the construction is instantiatad and on 
the  basis of on ly  the information available at that time. 
This is because the tree is not buffer of objects, but a 
program of  scheduled events.  
Noticed regular i t ies in speech-errors have 
counter -par ts  in MUMBLE's design 5 which,  to the 
extent  that  it is Independent ly  motivated, may provide 
an exp lanat ion  for them. One example is the 
4. I.e. decisions are not subJeCt to backup-="they are 
~rritten in indelible ink". This is also a property of 
Marcus's "deterministic" parser. It is intriguing to 
speculate that indelibility may be a key characteristic of 
psychologically plausible performance theories of natural 
language. 
5. MUMBLE produces text.  not speech. Consequently it 
has no Knowledge of syllable structure or intonation and 
can make no specific contribution= to the explanation of 
errors at that level. 
phenomena of combined-form errors: word-exchange 
errors where functional morphemes such as plural or 
tense are "stranded" at their ori~inal positions, e.g. 
"My loca ls  are  more  var iab le  than that."  
I n tended-  " . . .var iables are more  local"  
"Why don't we  Eo to the 24hr. Star Marked and 
you can see my friend check in E cashes." 
I n tended:  "...cashing checks." 
One of  the th ings  to be explained about these errors is 
why  the  two  classes of morphemes are d ist inguished--  
why  does the "exchanging mechanism" effect the one 
and not  the other?  The form of the answer  to this 
quest ion  is genera l ly  agreed upon: two independent 
representat ions  are being manipulated and the 
mechan ism applies to only one of them. MUMBLE 
a l ready  employs two  representat ions of roughly the 
cor rec t  d is t r ibut ion ,  namely the phrase st ructure tree 
(de f in ing  posit ions and grammatical properties) and 
the  message (whose  elements occupy the positions and 
prompt  the  select ion of words).  By incorporat ing 
spec i f ic  ev idence from speech-errors into MUMBLE's 
f ramework  (such as whether  the quanti f ier all 
par t i c ipates  in exchanges),  it is possible to perform 
synthet i c  exper iments  to explore the impact of such a 
hypothes is  on other  aspects of the design. The 
in teract ion  w i th  psychol inguist ios thus becomes a 
two-way  street. 
The fu l l  paper 6 w i l l  develop the notion of a 
l inear - t ime production process: how it is accomplished 
and the specif ic l imitat ions that it imposes, and wi l l  
exp lo re  its impl icat ions as a potential explanation for 
cer ta in  classes of speech-errors,  certain hesitation and 
se l f - cor rec t ion  data. and certain l inguistic onstra_nts. 
6. Regretably, the completion of this paper has been 
delayed in order for the author to give priority to his 
dissertatlon. 
56 
References 
\[I\] Garrett. M.F. (1979) "Levels of Processing in 
Sentence Production", in Butterworth ed. 
Language Production Vo lume I, Academic Press. 
\[2\] Shattuck Hufnagel, S. (1975) Speech Errors and 
Sentence Production Ph .D .  Dissertation, 
Department of Psycholog~v, MIT. 
\['3\] Ford. M. & Holmes V.M. (1978) "Planning units and 
syntax in sentence production", Cognition 6, 35- 
63. 
\['4\] Ford M. (1979) "Sentence Planning Units: 
Implications for the speaker's representation of 
meaningful relations underlying sentences", 
Occasional Paper 2, Center for Cognitive Science, 
MIT. 
\['5\] McDonald, D,D. (1978) "Making subsequent 
references., syntactic and rhetorical constraints", 
TINLAP-g. University of Illinois. 
\[6\] (1978) "Language generation: 
Automatic Control of Grammatical Detail", COLING- 
78. Bergen. Norway. 
\['7\] Fay, D. (1977) "Transformational Errors". 
International Congress of Linguistics. Vienna, 
Austria. 
\[8\] McDonald D.D. (in preparation) Natural Language 
Production as a Process of Decision-making 
Under  ConsU'alnt Ph.D. Dissertation, Department 
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
MIT. 
\[9\] Bresnan, J. (1978) "Toward a realistic theory of 
grammar", in Bresnan. Miller, & Halle ads. 
Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality Mrr 
Press. 
57 

