NATURAL I.~IGUAGE INTERACTION WITH MACHINES :
A PA~SING FAD? 
0R 
THE WAY OF THE FU~"JRE? 
A. Michael  Nol l  
American Telephone and Te legraph Company 
Basking R idge,  New Je rsey  07920 
People communicate primarily by two medea: acoustic 
-- the spoken word; and visual N the written word. 
It is therefore natural chac people would expect 
their com--,nications with machines Co likewise use 
Chess two modes. 
To a cons iderab le  extent ,  speech i s  p robab ly  the most 
natura l  o f  the natura l - language modes. ~ence,  a 
fasc inat ion  ex is ts  w i th  machines thac  respond to 
spoken commands w i th  synthet ic  speech responses  to 
create a natural-language interactive discourse. 
However, a l though vast  amounts of  research  and 
development e f fo r t  have been expended in  the search  
fo r  systems that  unders tand  human speech and respond 
w i th  synthet ic  speech,  the goa l  of  the per fec t  system 
remains  a~ e lus ive  as ever .  Syste  ms fo r  p roduc ing  
natura l - sound ing  speech fo r  la rge  vocabu lar ies  w i th  
unrest r i c ted  gr - -w . - t i ca l  s t ruc tures  and fo r  recog-  
n i z ing  spoken speech fo r  la rge  vocabu lar ies  w i th  
unlimited gr -~-Cica l  structures and any humber of 
talkers are still beyond the scats of linguistics and 
computer science and technology. 
Given the problems in  the speech domain, ic  i s  not  
surpr i s ing  Chat most in teract ions  between people and 
machines are  in the v i sua l  mode f requent ly  us ing  
a lphanumer ic  keyboards  as input  and textua l  d i sp lay  
as output .  Such visual terminals are already in 
fairly widespread use in industry and are used for a 
variety of applications including computer 
progr-n~ing, text editing, and data-base access. 
The te lephone a l lows  speech ce lecoa~nicat ions  over  
d i s tance  between peop le .  Future  v i sua l  te rmina ls  fo r  
the home and bus inesses  w i l l  a l low textua l  
ce lecom- - ,n icac ions  between peop le .  These v i sua l  
te rmina ls  cou ld  a l so  be used co te lecommunicate  w i th  
machines in a way Chat is presently difficult using 
the telephone and speech. 
ViewdaCa, o r  v ideocex ,  systems are  promised soon fo r  
the home and w i l l  a l low data -base  access  and 
transactions with  machines and textual messages 
between people .  Some viewdata systems use elaborate 
tree searches Co reach the desired frame of 
information. Some people believe that tree searches 
will be "unnatural" for many users and some other 
mere-natural language will be ueeded to search and 
access these  data -base  sysCeme. 
One conc lus ion  is  Chac the fu ture  w i l l  see mere 
cho ices  in mode fo r  te leco~manicac ions  between people 
and w i th  machines .  The cho ice  of  which a l te rnate  
made will probably  be dependent  upon the specific 
application. For example, textual messages might be 
both easier to enter by keyboard and Co read on a CRT 
screen than speaking to a recording machine and 
listening Co a recorded message. However, social 
chatting might be best over the telephone. However, 
arranging a dace with a stranger might be less 
revealing if done in the textual mode. Considerable 
opportunities exist for basic research to explore the 
suitability of these alternate modes for different 
co~nicac ions  applications. 
The fascination of technologists with speech-syuchesis 
chips is about to result in a variety of stand-alone 
appliances Chat speak. Ovens chat scare when the 
roast is done, washing machines thac call for the 
addition of fabric softeners, automobiles chat inform 
the driver thaC the door is open, and many ocher 
applications will soon abound in the marketplace. In 
most of chess applications, synthetic speech will 
substitute for a lamp or ocher form of visual 
display. The environment will be polluted with the 
noise of buzzy synthetic speech. Many of these 
applications will undoubtedly be little mere than 
passing fads. 
BuC in some c i rcumstances  ynthet ic  speech w i l l  
become the way of  the fu ture .  One example would be 
synthet ic -speech  announcements of f loors  in an 
e levator  thereby  e l iminat in  S crooked necks~ 
Most of  the preced ing  examples are  very  res t r i c ted  in  
terms of  the language used fo r  the in teract ion  w i th  
mach ines .  The problem wi th  unrest r i c ted  natura l  
language fo r  cor -un icac ion  w i th  machines i s  chaC no 
automat ic  way has yec beeu d iscovered  Co ext ract  
meaning in e i ther  the speech or  textua l  mode. The 
textua l  mode does e l iminate  the ueed fo r  acoust i c  
ana lys i s  and hence has been more extens ive ly  used in  
most systems for restricted, specialized applica- 
tions. However, even if either mode were equally 
near perfect, questions would still arise about user 
pre ference  fo r  one mode over  the o ther .  
Thus, in  the end the fu ture  w i l l  be dec ided by the 
votes  of  consumers in the marketp lace  as they choose 
from the many opt ions  presented  by techno logy .  The 
shrewd enCerpreneur  will use consumer pre ference  and 
needs Co he lp  i l luminate  in  advance the des i res  and 
needs of  the marketp lace .  Basic research  in  
l ingu is t i cs ,  human behav iour ,  natura l  language,  and 
ocher ancillary fields will have an important role in 
deve lop ing  so lu t ions  and in  unders tand ing  peop le ' s  
needs and behav iour .  
137 

