WORD, PHRASE AND SENTENCE 
Kob't F. Sinnnons 
Univ. of Texas, Austin 
Among the relative verities of natural language 
processing are the facts that morphemes and words are 
primary semantic units, and that their co-ocurrence in 
phrases and sentences provides cues for selecting sense 
meanings. In this session, two psycholinguistic 
s tud ies  show some aspects  of how human sub jec ts  process  
words wh i le  read ing .  A study of medical  vocabu lary  
shows that  medical  words are h igh ly  assoc ia ted  by 
co-occurrance in  medical  de f in i t ions .  Another repor t  
shews the e f fec t iveness  of keyword ident i f i ca t ion  and 
se lec t ion  of prominent sentences  to o rgan ize  abst rac ts  
for  re t r ieva l .  
A f i f th  study argues that  ana lys i s  of ex i s t ing  natura l  
language d ic t ionar ies  can be expected to cont r ibute  
impor tant ly  to what i s  needed for  text  unders tand ing  
programs. The f ina l  study i s  an exper iment w i th  a 
sentence leve l  t rans la tor  app l ied  to a la rge  
German-Engl ish t rans la t ion  task .  These two s tud ies  are 
pr imar i l y  concerned wi th  ana lys i s  of language a t  the 
sentence leve l .  
The most glamourous areas  of natura l  language research  
are  at  leve ls  above the sentence,  concerned wi th  
d ia logues  and d i scourse ,  f requent ly  d i sda in fu l  of 
morpho log ica l  or even grammatical  ana lys i s  in  the i r  
search for  e f fec t ive  s t ruc tures  for  unders tand ing  what 
the d i scourse  i s  about.  Scr ip ts ,  f rames,  s te reotypes ,  
schemas are a l l  s tud ied  in  these areas ;  and o f ten  
morpholog ica l  and gra~nat ica l  ana lys i s  i s  bypassed in  
favor  of keyword scanning to ext rac t  some smal l  
re levant  por t ion  of the text  to be bound as va lues  for  
s lo ts  in  these la rger  data forms. 
This sess ion  reminds us that  much can be accompl ished 
wi th  vocabu lary  ana lys i s ,  wi th  keyword scanning and 
statistical treatment of text and with semantic 
analysis at the single sentence level. Yet, with 
regard to most of the topics in this and other 
sessions, there is a stronK sense of de~a vu; the 
earliest natural language studies featured automatic 
extracting and information retrieval based on 
statistical, lexical and associational properties of 
keywords. Mechanical translation of sentences without 
regard for larger contexts marked the late sixties high 
point of MT research amid contemporaneous studies of 
the English dictionary and thesaurus. Competition 
among sentence parsing algorithms is an ACL tradition 
celebrated annually, while psycholinguistics has 
traditionally applied chronometric studies, and 
recordings of eye movements to measure this or that 
aspect of human linguistic processing throughout the 
per iod .  
This is not to suggest that nothing new is happening; 
actually, the continued emphasis on these topics 
reveals that, though introduced early, they are still 
imperfectly understood. Z believe science progresses 
in spirals; initial studies are accomplished and 
published supporting more advanced studies that build 
upon the findings of the earlier work. Superstructures 
of theory are constructed and more work is undertaken 
in this framework. Finally the initial studies are 
l os t  in  years  of accumulated l i te ra ture ,  and perhaps 
some of the w i ldes t  theor ies  begin to co l lapse .  Then 
the f ie ld  may suddenly show renewed in teres t  in  i t s  
beginnings and repeat its early studies with the added 
sophistication gained by experience. At this time the 
line of history spirals past the points it reached on 
earlier cycles. Hopefully, as in this session, the 
experience gained between cycles insures an upward 
progression rather than a profitless loop. 
145 

